Anglo-Russian  Literary 
Society 

Proceedings 

no.  71  (19U) 


Presented  to  the 
LIBRARY  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 

MAYOR  COLLEGE 
(PECM  RBD) 


[No.    71 
THE 

ANGLO-RUSSIAN 

ITERARY  SOCIETY 

(FOUNDED  IN  1893) 
(THE  IMPERIAL  INSTITUTE,  LONDON,  S.W.) 


PROCEEDINGS 

OCTOBER,  NOVEMBER  AND  DECEMBER,  1914 

u^Cj 


PRINTED    FOR    THE    SOCIETY 


MUCCCUXIV. 

ENTERED    AT   STATIONERS*    HALL 
ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED. 


[No.  71 
THE 

ANGLO-RUSSIAN 
LITERARY   SOCIETY 

(FOUNDED  IN  1893) 
(THE  IMPERIAL  INSTITUTE,  LONDON,  S.W.) 


PROCEEDINGS 


October,  November  and  December,  1914. 


PRINTED    FOR    THE    SOCIETY 


MDCCCCXIV. 

ENTERED   AT  STATIONERS'    HAU, 

ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED. 

A 


LONDON : 

THE   ARMY    AND    NAVY   CO-OPERATIVE    SOCIETY,    LIMITED, 
105,   VICTORIA   STREET,    WESTMINSTER,   S.W. 


THE   ANGLO-RUSSIAN   LITERARY  SOCIETY 


prcstNrnt  an&  fton.  Sec. 
EDWARD    A.   CAZALET. 


Committee 

JOHN   POLLEN,  C.I.E.,  V.D.,  B.A.,  LL.D.,  LT.-COL. 
B.V.R.  (ret.) 

REVEREND  W.  H.  LANGHORNE,  M.A. 
REVEREND  A.  M.  CAZALET,  M.A. 
FRANCIS  P.  MARCHANT. 


THE  ANGLO-RUSSIAN  LITERARY  SOCIETY 

THE  IMPERIAL  INSTITUTE 

IMPERIAL   INSTITUTE   ROAD,    LONDON,    S.W. 


OBJECTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY. 
1 . — To  promote  the  study  of  the  Russian  Language  and  Literature. 

2. — To  form  a  Library  of  Russian  books  and  other  works,  especially 
interesting  from  an  Anglo-Russian  point  of  view. 

3. — To  take  in  Russian  Periodicals  and  Newspapers. 

4. — To  hold  monthly  meetings  periodically,  for  the  reading  and 
discussion  of  suitable  papers,  writing  and  speaking  in  English  or 
Russian  being  alike  admissible. 

5. — To  promote  friendly  relations  between  Great  Britain  and 
Russia. 

A2 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

PRESIDENT  AND  COMMITTEE 1 

OBJECTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY      1 

RULES ...  4 

EUROPEAN  UNITY  LEAGUE — MAJOR  C.  F.  MURRAY        5 

NOTES  ON  PERSIA — PAST  AND  PRESENT — E.  A.  CAZALET          ...  19 

LIFE  AND  WORK  OF  A.  S.  HOMIAKOV — F.  P.  MARCHANT        ...  36 

REVIEWS   OF   BOOKS,  ETC.:— 

ENGLISH  CHURCH  WAYS — W.  H.  FRERE,  D.D 53 

ANGLICAN  AND  EASTERN-ORTHODOX  CHURCH  UNION          ...  54 

COUNT  LORIS-MELIKHOV'S  CONSTITUTION        55 

ARMY  STORIES  AND  SKETCHES — EGOR  EGOROV         57 

LA  RUSSIE  INTELLECTUELLE — Louis  LEGER 58 

AN  ECONOMIC  HISTORY  OF  RUSSIA — J.  MAVOR        61 

A  NEST  OF  HEREDITARY  LEGISLATORS — F.  M.  DAVIS        ...  65 

THE  REMAKING  OF  CHINA — A.  S.  WALEY     66 

THE  WHITE  VAMPIRE — A.  M.  JUDD 68 

WITH  POOR  IMMIGRANTS  TO  AMERICA— S.  GRAHAM...         ...  69 

LETTERS  OF  FYODOR  DOSTOEVSKY— E.  C.  MAYNE 71 

JEWISH  LIFE  IN  MODERN  TIMES — I.  COHEN 73 

THE  RUSSIAN  ARMY  FROM  WITHIN — W.  B.  STEVENI          ...  74 

FAIR  LADIES  OF  THE  WINTER  PALACE — A.  S.  RAPPOPORT...  76 

SHIFTING  SANDS — ALICE  BIRKHEAD     ...         ...  77 

JAPANESE  WAR,  ETC. — F.  R.  SEDGWICK       79 

Russo-TuRKiSH  WAR,  1877 — F.  MAURICE 80 

THROUGH  SIBERIA — NANSEN  AND  CHATER      ...  81 

THROUGH  SPAIN— D.  DICKINSON         83 

UNDER  THE  WAR  CLOUD— F.  W.  WARSEY 85 

NOTICES  OF  PERIODICALS,  ETC.:— 

COTTON  IN  EGYPT  AND  RUSSIA— LORD  KITCHENER,  ETC.    ...  87 

RUSSIE  ET  BELGIQUE — M.  LAUWICK   ...         ...        ...         ...  88 

EVERYMAN — DR.  SAROLKA        N,S 

Do.       — A.MAUDE 89 

NEW  WEEKLY — H.  DE  WINDT...  90 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

FROM  THE  RUSSIAN:— 

1.  CRIME  IN  RUSSIA       91 

2.  ARTIST  WITH  A  NEW  IDEA 91 

3.  MONKS  FROM  MOUNT  ATHOS 92 

4.  GENERAL  SCHOGOLEV'S  FUNERAL 92 

5.  MAHOMEDANS  IN  RUSSIA       93 

6.  ANTIQUITY  OF  Moscow         94 

7.  NAVIGATION  BETWEEN  EUROPE  AND  SIBERIA        94 

RUSSIA — PSYCHOLOGY  OF  A  NATION— P.  VINOGRADOFF  ...  94 

"GOSPEL  IN  RUSSIA" — R.  S.  LATIMER,  ETC 95 

OBITUARY— MAJOR  P.  A.  CHARRIER 96 

POETRY — KREMLOV— W.  HOLLOW  AY  AND  Dr.  POLLEN          ...  100 

SHORT  NOTICES  AND  NOTES,  SUNDRIES:—              ...  97 

FUTURE  LECTURES      106 

LIST  OF  MEMBERS       107 

FINANCIAL  STATEMENT  FOR  1914                           112 


RULES 

1.— That  the  management  of  the  Society  be  vested  in  a  Committee 
consisting  of  a  President,  Honorary  Secretary  and  Treasurer,  and 
five  other  members,  and  that  of  this  Committee  three  shall  form  a 
quorum. 

2.— That  vacancies  on  the  Committee  be  filled  up  by  the  unanimous 
vote  of  the  Committee. 

3. — That  applications  for  membership  be  made  to  the  Committee. 
Members  will  be  admitted  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  the 
Committee. 

4. — That  members  residing  in  or  within  fifteen  miles  of  London 
shall  pay  an  annual  subscription  of  one  guinea,  and  that  those 
residing  beyond  that  distance,  or  abroad,  shall  pay  an  annual  sub- 
scription of  half-a-guinea.  Members  residing  in  Russia  may  pay  five 
roubles. 

5. — That  all  subscriptions  be  payable  in  advance. 

6. — That  ladies  may  become  members  and  take  part  in  the  debates. 

7. — That  honorary  members  and  correspondents  may  be  elected 
by  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  Committee. 

8. — That  visitors  may  be  introduced,  and  take  part  in  the  proceed- 
ings on  the  proposition  of  two  members,  and  with  the  sanction  of  the 
Committee.  Visitors'  names  will  be  entered  in  a  special  book. 

9. — That  Annual  Meetings  shall  be  summoned  and  provision  made 
for  special  meetings,  if  necessary. 

10. — That  members  or  others  wishing  to  open  debates,  read  papers, 
or  give  lectures  before  the  Society,  be  requested  to  give  notice  to  the 
Committee,  allowing  time  to  prepare  the  programme  for  each  quarter 
in  advance. 

11. — That  any  questions  of  procedure  not  determined  by  these  rules 
shall  be  dealt  with  by  the  Committee. 


5 

OCTOBER  TTH,  1914. 
THE  PRESIDENT,  MR.  E.  A.  CAZALET,  IN  THE  CHAIR. 


I. 

THE   EUROPEAN   UNITY   LEAGUE 
IN  THE   PAST    BEFORE  THE   WAR. 

By  MAJOR  C.  FREEMAN  MURRAY. 

SIR  MAX  WAECHTER,  the  founder  of  the  European  Unity 
League,  has  for  many  years  devoted  his  chief  attention  to 
the  difficult,  almost  insuperable  problem  of  how  such  a 
fearful  calamity  as  the  present  general  European  War  could 
be  avoided.  He  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  only  way 
in  which  such  a  war  could  possibly  be  avoided  was  by 
bringing  the  two  opposed  camps  of  the  Triple  Alliance  and 
Triple  Entente  together  in  amity,  not  as  enemies  but  as 
allies,  on  the  basis  of  the  fundamental  unity  of  their  deepest 
economic  interests;  that  is  to  say,  the  fundamental  unity  of 
their  financial,  commercial,  and  labour  interests,  all  of  which 
were  threatened  with  something  like  ruin  by  the  occurrence 
of  such  a  war. 

In  pursuance  of  this  idea  he  visited  all  the  sovereigns  of 
Europe  and  interviewed  the  principal  statesmen  of  the 
countries  concerned,  and,  to  put  the  matter  shortly,  was 
everywhere  informed  that  they  would  help  in  every  way 
to  bring  about  so  desirable  a  consummation,  IF  and  when 
public  opinion  in  the  various  nations  could  be  that  way 
inclined.  With  such  assurances  from  all  the  highest 
quarters,  the  matter  manifestly  resolved  itself  into  a  question 
of  the  education  of  public  opinion  in  the  direction  of 


6 

European  unity.  At  first  sight  this  might  seem  a  hopeless 
task;  but  recollect  that  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  were 
favourable  to  the  idea,  and  that  the  financial,  the  com- 
mercial classes,  and  the  labour  classes  could  also  be  depended 
upon  if  their  opinion  could  only  be  organised.  It  was,  at 
least,  well  worth  trying. 

So  Sir  Max  Waechter  founded  the  European  Unity 
League,  its  official  object  being  described  as :  "  To  bring 
about  a  good  understanding  amongst  the  Great  Powers  of 
Europe." 

The  League  began  active  operations  in  April,  1914.  It 
started  then  with  the  idea  of  firmly  establishing  itself  dur- 
ing 1914  in  Great  Britain,  and  then  in  1915  establishing 

O  '  O 

branches  in  every  country  of  Europe.  The  League  started 
to  form  a  strong  Advisory  Committee  for  the  British 
Branch,  in  which  it  made  wonderful  progress,  and  in  four 
months'  work  had  obtained  a  Committee  of  400  members  of 
all  classes,  every  one  of  whom  was  a  proved  man  of  affairs, 
with  not  a  single  unknown  or  unrepresentative  man  amongst 
them.  The  Council  included,  for  example,  no  less  than  100 
well-known  admirals  and  generals.  This  would  have  been 
gradually  extended  so  as  to  embrace  400  prominent  peers, 
M.P.'s  and  public  servants,  400  prominent  capitalists,  and 
400  prominent  Labour  leaders  by  the  end  of  1914.  Every 
day  saw  the  adhesion  of  new  members  of  importance.  Then 
suddenly,  like  a  bolt  from  the  blue,  came  the  sudden  out- 
burst of  the  present  catastrophic  European  War,  shattering 
at  one  blow  the  fair  hope  of  the  League.  But  it  is  only 
for  a  time.  Behind  the  clouds  of  War  the  sun  of  Peace  is 
still  shining,  and  when  those  clouds  eventually  roll  away 
from  a  sorely  stricken  Europe,  the  League  will  resume  its 
efforts,  this  time  with,  not  the  hope,  but  the  certainty  of 
final  success. 


II. 

THE    EUROPEAN    UNITY   LEAGUE 
DURING   THE    PRESENT    WAR    TIME. 

THE  difference  in  the  work  of  the  League  before  the 
war  and  after  the  war  will  be  very  great.  Before  the 
war  it  had  to  address  itself  to  a  public  strangely  apathetic 
and  disposed  to  dub  as  ';  alarmists "  those  who  stated 
unpleasant  truths  or  prophesied  events  unpleasant  to  think 
of.  This  was  a  great  and  very  real  obstacle  to  progress. 
It  will  exist  no  more.  After  the  war  the  League  will 
address  itself  to  a  public  every  individual  of  whom  will 
have  been  converted  to  the  views  of  the  League  by  the 
terrible  logic  of  events.  In  this  connection  I  will  quote 
a  short  extract  from  an  admirable  article  in  the  September 
number  of  The  Round  Table  called  "  Lombard  Street  in 
War  " :— 

There  is  no  banker,  no  merchant,  no  trader,  no  shopkeeper  in  the 
civilised  world  whose  business  has  not  been  affected.  There  are  few 
civilised  countries  in  which  a  moratorium,  or  something  equivalent  to 
it,  is  not  now  in  force.  In  the  Continental  countries  of  Europe  actually 
at  war,  industry  is  to  a  large  extent  at  a  standstill.  The  result  on 
these  great  industrial  nations  cannot  but  be  tremendous.  Their 
foreign  trade  alone  (in  peace)  totals  about  £2,400,000,000. 

If  we  estimate  roughly  that  14,000,000  men  are  under  arms,  and 
that  one  man  can  produce  £100  of  wealth  in  a  year,  we  have  at  once 
a  direct  loss  of  £1,400,000,000,  apart  altogether  from  any  indirect  loss 
due  to  the  dislocation  of  trade  and  finance  and  the  enormous  number 
of  men  thrown  out  of  work  indirectly  by  the  war. 

Let  no  country  (neutral  or  otherwise)  suppose  that  it  is  going  to 
escape  the  consequences  of  this  great  cataclysm.  The  purchasing 
power  of  the  world  will  have  been  very  seriously  diminished,  and  it 
cannot  be  long  before  the  enormous  loss  of  capital  will  make  itself 
felt.  There  is  then  likely  to  be  a  prolonged  period  of  very  great 
depression. 

I  need  say  nothing  more  about  the  war,  except  that 
when  it  is  over  all  men  will  say,  "  Never  again  !  "  and  will 
unite  to  translate  that  universal  dictum  into  concerted 
action. 


The  League  is  of  course  at  present,  during  the  war,  in  a 
state  of  waiting.  It  must  remain  so  until  peace  is  in  sight. 
But  it  adheres  to  the  object  and  to  the  programme  with 
which  it  started.  These  are  set  forth  in  the  two  documents 
which  I  will  now  read  to  you  :-- 

(1)  The  Post-bellum  Object  of  the  League, 

(2)  The  Programme  of  the  League, 

printed  forms  of  which  are  herewith  attached. 


THE  POST-BELLUM  OBJECT  OF  THE  LEAGUE. 

TO  PROMOTE   A    FRIENDLY    UNDERSTANDING   BETWEEN  THE 

six  GREAT  POWERS  or  EUROPE. 


Extract  from    the    Dispatch   of  the    Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs  to  the  British  Embassy  in  Berlin. 


No.  101. 

Sir  EDWARD  GREY  to  Sir  E.  GOSCHEN, 

FOREIGN  OFFICE,  July  30th,  1914. 

And  I  will  say  this :  If  the  Peace  of  Europe  can  be  preserved, 
and  the  present  crisis  safely  passed,  my  own  endeavour  will  be  to 
promote  some  arrangement  to  which  Germany  could  be  a  party,  by 
which  she  could  be  assured  that  no  aggressive  or  hostile  policy 
would  be  pursued  against  her  or  her  allies  by  France,  Russia,  and 
ourselves,  jointly  or  separately.  I  have  desired  this  and  worked  for 
it,  as  far  as  I  could,  through  the  last  Balkan  crisis,  and,  Germany 
having  a  corresponding  object,  our  relations  sensibly  improved.  This 
idea  has  hitherto  been  too  Utopian  to  form  the  subject  of  definite 
proposals,  but  if  this  present  crisis,  so  much  more  acute  than  any 
that  Europe  has  gone  through  for  generations,  be  safely  passed,  I 
am  hopeful  that  the  RELIEF  AND  REACTION  WHICH  WILL  FOLLOW  MAY 

MAKE    POSSIBLE     SOME     MORE    DEFINITE     RAPPROCHEMENT    BETWEEN     THE 
POWERS  THAN   HAS   BEEN   POSSIBLE   HITHERTO. 


It  is  desired  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that 
the  "  hope  "  herein  expressed  by  the  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs  exactly  coincides  with  the  "  Object "  of  the 
European  Unity  League.  The  bitterness  of  feeling  which 
will  follow  the  war  will  be  very  great,  and  the  consequent 
possibility  of  further  war  of  revenge  is  one  against  which 
every  possible  organized  effort  should  be  directed.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  reaction  after  the  war  in  favour  of 
some  permanent  international  guarantee  against  a 
repetition  of  such  stupendous  calamities  will  afford  a  most 
fruitful  ground  for  the  successful  propaganda  of  our 
Object,  provided  that  we  are  ready  and  strong  enough  to 
properly  utilise  it.  We  now  know  officially  that  the 
':  hope "  of  our  Foreign  Office  is  identical  with  the  post- 
bellum  Object  of  our  League,  and  we  intend  to  do  our 
utmost,  directly  the  war  is  over,  to  prepare  public  opinion 
in  every  country  of  Europe  for  the  realisation  of  the 
rapprochement  hoped  for  by  Sir  Edward  Grey.  We 
therefore  think  it  desirable  to  continue  the  activity  of 
the  League  during  the  war  so  far  as  is  possible.  We 
shah1  endeavour  during  the  war  to  build  up  the  League 
on  the  firmest  foundation  and  to  the  greatest  strength 
possible,  in  order  that  directly  the  war  is  over  we  may 
be  in  a  position  to  take  effective  action  to  prepare  public 
opinion  in  every  country  towards  the  desired  end. 

Towards  this  aim  your  consideration  and  assistance  is 
earnestly  requested. 

ORGANIZING  SECRETARY. 


The  desire  of  the  League  is  to  pei'haps  resume  modified 
operations  in  the  direction  of  strengthening  still  further 
the  Advisory  Council  on  the  representative  lines  previously 
explained,  as  soon  as  circumstances  permit  and  the  time 


10 

becomes  propitious.  When  that  psychological  moment  will 
arrive  it  is  at  present  impossible  to  say.  At  present  it  is  not 
possible  for  men  in  Great  Britain  to  think  of  anything,  or 
do  anything,  other  than  that  which  will  conduce  to  the 
success  of  our  arms.  This  will  continue  to  be  the  case  as 
long  as  there  is  any  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  the 
enemy.  It  will  continue  until  the  enemy  has  been  forced  to 
abandon  all  hope  of  victory,  and  is  obviously  merely  con- 
tinuing the  contest  with  their  last  resources  in  order  to 
obtain  better  terms  of  peace.  When  that  period  arrives, 
when  peace  appears  in  sight  once  more,  the  League  proposes 
to  resume  its  operations.  Its  object  in  doing  so  will  be  that 
it  may  become  sufficiently  strong  before  the  actual  end  of 
the  war  to  be  able  to  take  effective  international  action 
directly  peace  is  declared.  That  is  our  desire  and  our  hope. 
In  the  meantime  we  must  wait. 


III. 

THE  LEAGUE  IN  THE  FUTUKE,  AFTER 
THE  WAE. 

AFTER  the  war  the  League  will  endeavour  to  carry  out 
as  quickly  and  completely  as  possible  the  programme  which 
I  have  already  read  out  to  you. 

I  will  not  here  embark  on  any  foolish  prophecies  of 
what  the  post-bellum  settlement  of  Europe  will  be,  for  at 
present  any  such  attempt  would  be  the  merest  guess-work. 
Of  one  thing  only  we  can  be  sure,  and  that  is  that  it  will  be 
of  such  a  nature  as  to  preclude  a  repetition  of  the  present 
war  of  desolation  and  ruin.  If  the  peace  of  Europe  cannot 
by  politics  alone  be  assured  for  ever,  at  least  it  will  be 
assured  for  many  years  to  come  as  far  as  the  utmost  efforts 
of  diplomatists  and  statesmen  can  go. 


11 

In  addition  to,  and  beyond  and  above  and  below  the 
victual  political  post-bellum  re-settlement  of  European 
nations  and  boundaries  and  power,  there  will  be  an 
enormous  concensus  of  public  opinion  that  a  general 
European  war  must  NEVER  occur  again,  as  too  ruinous 
to  the  most  fundamental  economic  interests  and  to  the 
economic  life  of  Europe.  To  this  great  concensus  of 
public  opinion  the  European  Unity  League  will  address 
itself,  and  strive  to  produce  concerted  action  on  the  various 
nations  of  Europe  on  the  lines  laid  down  in  our  programme 
which  is  before  you. 

In  this  programme  you  will  observe  that  the  League 
does  not  include  political  action  or  propaganda  or  discus- 
sion, as  too  argumentative,  heating  and  disruptive.  The 
League  proposes  to  confine  its  action  to  emphasising  and 
intensifying  the  sense  of  the  economic  unity  of  Europe, 
the  unity  of  the  most  fundamental  financial,  commercial  and 
labour  interests  throughout  all  the  nations  of  the  European 
family.  It  is  hoped  that  the  League  will  thus  be  able  to 
-do  most  valuable  work  and,  by  preparing  public  opinion, 
prepare  the  ground  for  further  political  action  eventually  in 
the  direction  of  political  unity. 

After  the  war  there  will  remain  a  terrible  legacy  of 
national  and  racial  bitterness,  which  it  should  be  the  busi- 
ness of  all  friends  of  European  unity  to  minimise  and 
smooth  away  as  far  as  possible.  This  will  be  one  of  the 
chief  objects  of  the  European  Unity  League,  though,  as  it 
has  not  yet  been  put  before  our  Council,  it  is  not  at  present 
possible  to  say  what  curative  measures  the  League  will 
attempt. 

At  this  moment,  whilst  the  critical  period  of  the  war  is 
still  in  progress,  there  is  little  more  that  can  at  present  be 
said  about  the  European  Unity  League.  At  present  we 
•can  think  of  the  war  and  the  war  only.  When  peace  is 


12 

once  more  in  sight,  when  the  right  psychological  moment 
arrives,  the  League  will  resume  its  efforts  on  the  lines  which  I 
have  endeavoured  to  lay  before  you,  and  which  are  outlined 
in  our  printed  programme.  Meantime  we  must  wait  until 
the  storm  of  death  and  ruin  and  desolation  which  is  passing 
over  Europe  shall  have  passed  away. 

As  this  paper  is  being  read  before  the  Anglo-Russian 
Society,  I  should  like  to  make  one  suggestion  for  discussion 
on  my  own  account,  not  on  account  of  the  League.  It  is 
this.  That  one  of  the  best  means  of  minimising  the  racial 
bitterness  which  will  be  left  behind  by  the  war  will  be  the 
better  education  of  the  public  in  the  elements  of  European 
anthropology.  Racial  enthusiasts  require  to  be  taught  that 
there  are  no  such  things  as  pure  races.  People  require  to- 
be  taught  that  all  the  nations  of  Europe  are  merely  diverse 
"  blends  "  in  varying  proportions  of  the  same  three  original 
strains — Mediterranean,  Nordic  or  Teutonic,  Alpine  or  Celto- 
Slavonic.  For  instance,  one  hears  so  much  of  the  struggle 
between  Slav  and  Teuton.  But  the  typical  German  is  really 
a  mixture  of  Teuton  and  Slav,  of  Teutonic-Slavonic  blood, 
the  Slav  characteristic  elements,  if  anything,  predominating 
in  the  majority  (vide  Deniker,  "  The  Races  of  Man").  So 
that  all  the  talk  of  Slav  and  German  being  of  naturally  hostile 
races  is  false  anthropology  and  false  history.  This,  no  doubt, 
sounds  to  you  a  truism.  So  it  is,  partly,  but  not  wholly. 
To  many  people  it  is  not  a  truism.  I  think  that  much 
valuable  work  might  be  done,  from  a  political  standpoint,. 
by  educating  the  people  to  understand  the  racial  unity  of 
Europe.  And  the  chief  factor  in  this  racial  unity  lies  in 
the  intermixture  of  Celto-Slavonic  blood  common  to  us  all 
— Russians,  Germans,  French,  Italians,  British.  The  more 
this  fact  can  be  substantiated  and  popularised,  the  les& 
we  shall  hear  of  racial  antagonism,  and  the  more  we  shall 
hear  of  the  racial  unity  of  Europe,  which  again  will  be  a 


13 

help  to  the  economic  unity  of  Europe,  and  the  two  together 
to  the  political  unity  of  Europe. 

THE   DISCUSSION. 

The  PRESIDENT  spoke  in  high  terms  of  Sir  Max 
Waechter's  noble  ideals  of  peace  consolidation,  and  re- 
called his  own  old  schoolmaster's  words  uttered  more  than 
half-a-century  ago : — 

When  one  man  kills  another  he  is  a  murderer,  and  when  many 
men  kill  many  others  they  are  all  heroes. 

Mr.  CAZALET  spoke  also  of  the  Hague  Peace  Conference, 
in  which  great  and  good  men  had  taken  part.  Among  them 
were :  M.  Leon  Bourgeois,  the  representative  of  France, 
and  Mr.  Andrew  Dickson  White,  who  told  us  in  his"  Auto- 
biography "  that  the  German  Emperor  appeared  to  favour 
arbitration,  but  Count  Monster  was  against  it.  The 
speaker  drew  attention  to  the  "  Peace  Year  Book  of  1914/' 
which  contained  the  names  of  hundreds  of  peace  societies 
all  over  the  world.  These  numerous  societies  should  all 
join  hands  under  the  leadership  of  the  European  Unity 
League,  uniting  their  forces  to  attain  the  same  good  end, 
for  blessed  are  the  peace-makers.  In  thanking  Major 
Murray  for  his  excellent  lecture,  the  President  said  it  was 
an  ingenious  idea,  which  suggested  that  all  nations — even 
Slavs  and  Germans — came  of  the  same  stock,  and  should, 
therefore,  be  brothers  and  friends  ! 

There  is,  however,  an  old  Russian  saying,  attributed  to 
the  time  of  Ivan  the  Terrible : — 

A  German,  be  he  even  a  good  man,  it  is  always  better  to  hang  him. 

It  may  be  added  that  in  vulgar  Russian  every  foreigner 
was  called  a  German  (Niemetz,  i.e.  the  dumb  man). 


Mme.  DE  PERROT  regretted  the  constant  abuse  of  our 
German    enemies,  and  recommended  more  moderation  and 


14 

less  expression  of  passionate  resentment  during  the  sad  and 
trying  period  through  which  we  were  now  passing. 


Mr.  W.  ENSOM  explained  that  he  attended  as  a  visitor, 
being  a  member  of  the  European  Unity  League.  He  said  he 
and  his  wife  (who  was  present)  were  old  residents  of  New 
Zealand,  and  had  been  long  interested  in  all  movements  that 
had  for  their  object  the  abolition  of  war  and  the  substitution 
of  arbitration  for  the  present  methods. 

Referring  to  the  paper  which  had  just  been  read,  the 
general  tenor  of  which  he  endorsed,  he  said  he  agreed  with 
the  gentleman  who  had  opened  the  debate,  that  the  Unity 
League  should  not  remain  inactive  during  the  present  crisis, 
but  on  the  contrary,  now  that  the  public  mind  was  so  much 
agitated  on  the  question  of  international  relations,  it  was 
time  to  press  forward  the  advocacy  of  a  policy  of  con- 
ciliation and  international  good  will. 

What  was  needed  was  a  strong  effort  to  counteract  a 
tendency  observable  in  the  Press  of  this  country  to  magnify 
and  give  prominence  to  those  matters  and  incidents  likely 
to  stir  up  hatred  and  bitterness,  and  in  some  cases  circulating 
false  news  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  enemy.  All  wars  were 
awful,  and  incidents  occurred  in  the  heat  of  conflict  that 
were  inexcusable.  What  was  needed  was  a  spirit  of  fairness 
and  forbearance  towards  those  we  were  opposing,  which 
could  only  lay  a  secure  foundation  for  some  permanent  and 
fair  settlement,  and  also  help  forward  the  idea  of  the  Unity 
League. 


Dr.  COUNSEL,  having  dealt  with  the  lecture,  expressed 
the  hope  that  by  the  time  this  war  \vas  over  Sir  Max 
Waechter's  League  might  well  become  a  World  Unity 
League  of  all  the  civilized  nations,  in  the  interest  of 


civilization  and  freedom  and  against  war  under  modern 
conditions. 

That  at  long  last  the  Russian  and  English  Empires  are 
standing  together,  with  France  and  glorious  little  Belgium, 
one  in  this  desperate  struggle,  in  a  war  such  as  the  world 
has  never  yet  seen,  in  defence  of  small  nationalities,  of  free 
democratic  government  and  of  civilization,  must  be  a  source 
of  great  satisfaction  to  Mr.  Cazalet  and  those  who  have 
been  working  with  him  in  this  Anglo-Russian  Society  for 
the  promotion  of  better  relations  between  the  nations. 

And  surely  it  promises  well  for  the  future  of  Russia  and 
the  peoples  within  her  Empire  that  her  first-declared  object 
in  this  war  is  to  free  the  Polish  provinces  from  the  yoke  of 
Prussia  and  Austria,  and  give  Poland  once  more  a  place 
amongst  the  free  nations  of  the  world. 


Rev.  R.  S.  LATIMEK,  in  moving  a  cordial  vote  of  thanks 
to  the  author  and  the  reader  of  the  paper,  reminded  the 
meeting  of  the  great  and  constant  service  rendered  for  many 
years  to  the  cause  of  international  peace  by  the  witness 
of  the  Society  of  Friends.  He  believed  that  the  present 
European  War,  calling  forth  as  it  did  the  warmest  of 
friendships  between  the  allied  nations  and  evoking  the 
heartiest  expressions  of  goodwill,  was  laying  sure  founda- 
tions for  enduring  peace  hereafter.  Such  societies  as  theirs, 
too,  cultivating  as  they  did  an  appreciation  of  the  literature 
of  the  mutual  nations,  played  no  inconsiderable  part  in  the 
same  direction. 


In  seconding  the  vote  of  thanks  Dr.  POLLEN  said  he 
thought  it  was  hardly  necessary  to  say  anything  to  com- 
mend it  to  the  meeting.  They  were  all  very  grateful  to 


16 

Major  Murray,  and  appreciated  the  objects  of  the  "  Unity  " 
ihe  advocated. 

As  to  what  the  lady  speaker  had  said  of  the  constant 
abuse  of  our  German  enemies,  Dr.  Pollen  reminded  his 
.audience  that  the  great  Duke  of  Wellington  never  lost  an 
English  gun  and  never  spoke  against  a  foe-  He  had,  how- 
•ever,  some  very  nasty  things  to  say  of  his  allies,  the 
Germans,  and  their  thieving  and  slaughtering  propen- 
sities, and  their  desire  to  sack  Paris  after  the  Battle  of 
Waterloo. 

As  to  war  :  no  one  deplored  it  more  than  he  (Dr.  Pollen) 
•did,  but  it  was  hard  to  say  whether  war  was  a  cause  or  a 
•consequence.  He  looked  upon  all  nationalities — Slav, 
Teuton,  Celt — as  friends  and  brother  souls,  and  he  wished 
that  wars  might  cease.  But  the  first  step  to  ensuring  that 
•was  to  control  human  passions,  and  put  down  pride,  am- 
bition, jealousy,  and  fear.  And  the  next  best  step  was  to 
get  the  peoples  to  understand  the  peoples,  and  this  could  be 
best  achieved  by  the  spread  of  an  international  language ; 
.and  being  connected  with  an  association  for  the  spread  of 
.such  a  language*  he  was  in  close  accord  with  the  society 
which  Major  Murray  represented.  With  regard  to  what 
the  lecturer  had  said  about  Russia,  Dr.  Pollen  read  the 
following  lines,  written  by  him  in  1891,  which  he  said  had 
in  them  somewhat  of  prophetic  strain :  — 

ENGLAND,  RUSSIA  AND  INDIA. 

Russia,  farewell !  ere  leaving  thee 

I  learned  to  love  thy  much-wronged  race, 
Thy  mis-read  past  aright  to  see, 

Thy  glorious  destiny  to  trace, 
To  know  thee  as  thou  truly  art 

(Whate'er  thy  slanderous  foes  may  bawl), 
A  people  great,  with  kindly  heart, 

Helping  the  hurt,  forgiving  all. 

*  Esperanto. 


17 


Alone  against  Napoleon's  pride, 

When  Europe  groaned  beneath  his  sway, 
Did'st  thou  arise  and  roll  the  tide 

Of  conquest  back,  and  hold  thy  way 
Till  thy  victorious  banners  flew 

Across  the  sunny  vines  of  France, 
And  well  the  streets  of  Paris  knew 

Thy  Cossacks'  and  thy  Uhlans'  lance. 
Thou  for  the  faith  of  Christendom 

Stood'st  ever  firm  against  the  Turk, 
And  many  a  rescued  Christian  home 

Doth  bless  to-day  thy  holy  work. 
When  jealous  Europe  'gainst  thee  strove, 

How  nobly  did'st  thou  stand  at  bay  ! 
And  Sebastopol's  heights  can  prove 

How  brave  thou  wast  in  trial's  day  ! 
And  all  that  woe  against  thee  wrought 

Thou  hast  in  full  forgiven,  forgot  ; 
The  foes  who  then  against  thee  fought 

As  foes  are  now  regarded  not. 

Then,  England,  pause,  know  friend  from  foe  ! 

Where,  when,  has  Russia  crossed  thy  path  ? 
That  she  doth  ever  greater  grow 

This  seems  the  greatest  fault  she  hath. 
In  truth,  the  "  Teuton  "  is  thy  foe  ! 

Thy  rival  he,  in  every  field  ; 
His  power  thy  Court — thy  councils — know, 

Thy  commerce  naught  from  him  can  shield  ; 
His  princes  lead  thy  daughters  forth 

Dowered  deep  in  dowers  of  English  gold ; 
His  merchant  vessels  sweep  thy  north  ; 

Thy  ''-silver  streak  "  his  warships  hold. 
He  threatens  thee  on  every  side  ; 

While  thou  dost  bend  to  him  and  yield, 
Surrendering  to  his  growing  pride 

The  best  of  thy  colonial  field. 
He  stirs  the  Russ  against  thy  power — 

Pointing  to  plains  of  Hindustan — 
Hoping  to  stay  the  dreaded  hour 

When  France  will  meet  him,  man  to  man. 

But  why  should  England  cross  the  Russ? 
Our  friend  of  old — our  Ally  true ! 


18 

Asia  is  wide  ;  for  him,  for  us, 

There's  space  to  spare  and  work  to  do. 
Redeem  the  cradle  of  our  race — 

Let  commerce  circle  everywhere — 
Let  love  regain  its  pride  of  place  — 

Let  Eden  once  more  blossom  there ! 
Let  "  great  white  Czar,"  let  "  great  white  Queen  " 

Stretch  forth  o'er  Asia  healing  hands, 
Touching  the  sere  leaf  into  green, 

Blessing  with  bloom  the  barren  lands ! 

England  and  Russia — friendly  Powers  ! 

India  secure,  and  strong  and  free- 
Over  the  West  no  war-cloud  lowers — 
The  East  regains  its  liberty. 

J,  POLLEN. 
St.  Leonards,  1891. 


19 

NOVEMBER  3RD,  1914. 
DR.  POLLEN,  C.I.E.,   IN  THE  CHAIR. 


NOTES    ON 
PERSIA— PAST  AND  PRESENT. 

By  E.  A.  CAZALET. 

Ax  old  authority  tells  us  that  the  early  history  of  Persia 
is  lost  in  remote  antiquity,  and  for  authentic  accounts  the 
uncertain  gleanings  of  oral  tradition,  or  the  fictions  of  poets, 
have  been  substituted.  Anyhow,  it  is  a  sad  and  sanguinary 
story.  The  Shahnameh  of  Firdousi,  the  Homer  of  Persia, 
is  a  legendary  history  of  the  kings.  From  this  and  similar 
authorities,  Sir  John  Malcolm  compiled  the  early  annals 
of  Persia. 

Cyrus  the  Elder,  whose  name  as  a  world  conqueror  is 
popularly  linked  with  those  of  Alexander  the  Great,  of 
Csesar,  of  Gengis  Khan  and  Napoleon,  conquered  Babylon, 
and  on  its  ruins  founded  Persia.  Greek  historians  call  him 
the  hardy  chief  of  a  pastoral  horde,  who  vanquished  his 
wealthy  and  luxurious  neighbours. 

It  is  needless  to  weary  you  with  legendary  descriptions 
of  the  fabulous  high  deeds  of  Cyrus  the  Younger,  of  Darius, 
who  was  conquered  by  Alexander  the  Great,  Xerxes  and  the 
Artaxerxes.  The  old  story  is  unfortunately  ever  new  : — 

Those  take  who  can.  and  those  keep  who  have  the  power. 

The  Romans,  and,  later,  the  Arabian  tribes,  under  the 
standard  of  Mahomet,  subverted  in  one  common  ruin  the 
manners  and  most  sacred  institutions  of  the  country. 

In  A.D.  1072  Mulik  Shah's  dominion  extended  from 
the  Mediterranean  to  the  Wall  of  China.  From  the  decline 
of  his  dynasty  to  the  conquest  by  the  son  of  the  mighty 


20 

Genghis  Khan,  Persia  was  distracted  by  the  contests  of 
rival  chiefs,  known  as  the  Atabaks. 

In  the  seventeenth  century  Persia  flourished  under  the 
great  Shah  Abbas.  His  successors  were  vanquished  by 
Mahmud  Ghilzy,  who  entered  Persia  at  the  head  of  25,000 
Afghans  and  became  the  king  of  the  country  in  1722.  But 
Russian  and  Turkish  armies  invaded  Persia,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Kazvin  rose  in  insurrection  and  expelled  the 
Afghan  garrison  from  the  place.  Mahmud  was  seriously 
alarmed,  and  conceived  the  horrible  design  of  exterminating 
the  conquered  people  of  Persia.  Nadir-Kuli,  a  well-known 
Persian  chief,  finally  expelled  the  Afghans,  who  had 
devastated  Persia  for  seven  years. 

Nadir  Shah,  as  he  was  now  called,  defeated  the  Turks, 
subdued  Afghanistan,  and  his  triumphant  legions  entered 
India  and  reached  Delhi,  which  made  no  resistance.  But 
the  glory  of  foreign  conquest  was  tarnished  by  domestic 
tyranny.  Nadir  was  wounded  by  an  assassin,  who  fired  on 
him  from  a  wood.  His  suspicion  fell  on  his  own  son  Riza, 
whom  he  caused  to  be  deprived  of  eyesight. 

The  death  of  Nadir  involved  the  country  in  the  greatest 
distraction.  Karim  Khan,  a  sagacious  and  courageous  chief, 
finally  became  the  ruler.  The  generous  confidence  with 
which  he  treated  those  whom  he  forgave  never  failed  to  attach 
them  to  his  person. 

Agha  Muhammad  Khan  was  a  strong  but  intensely  cruel 
Shah.  His  nephew,  Fath  Ali  Shah,  drifted  into  war  with 
Russia,  which  was  to  his  detriment.  Later  on,  encouraged 
by  Russia,  he  marched  on  Herat,  contrary  to  British  interests  ; 
he  also  allowed  Russia  to  have  complete  supremacy  in  the 
Caspian  Sea.  After  various  intrigues  and  complicated 
negotiations  the  Persians  finished  by  seizing  Herat.  England 
then  declared  war  on  Persia,  and  General  Outram,  whom  the 
Indian  Government  placed  in  supreme  command,  sailed  from 


21 

Bombay,  on  the  16th  of  January,  1857,  for  the  Persian  Gulf. 
The  superior  numbers  of  the  Persians  were  totally  defeated. 
So  severe  was  the  lesson  that  even  the  disasters  of  the  Indian 
revolt  could  not  induce  the  Shah  to  venture  once  more  on  a 
rupture  with  England. 

I  may  now  refer  to  my  late  dear  old  friend  the  Baron  de 
Bode,  whose  "  Travels  in  Luristan  and  Arabistan  "  appeared 
in  London  during  the  middle  of  the  last  century.*  When 
residing  in  Persia  he  was  much  appreciated  by  the  King  of 
the  day,  Muhammed  Shah,  who  said  he  valued  Baron  de 
Bode  because  he  always  spoke  the  truth,  an  exceptional 
virtue  in  the  East,  and  even  in  the  North,  South  and 
West. 

The  Baron,  whose  hobby  was  travel,  decided  to  explore 
the  route  of  Alexander  the  Great,  which  extends  along;  the 

O 

northern  shore  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  He  considered  himself 
fortunate  in  having  obtained  letters  from  the  Shah  to  pass 
through  the  territory  of  the  great  Bakhtiyari  chief,  whose 
unruly  subjects  were  freebooters. 

But  what  was  the  Baron's  astonishment  when  among  the 

o 

persons  of  the  Chief's  entourage  he  recognized  a  man  in 
native  attire  who  whispered  to  him  in  English  :  "  Don't 
betray  me,  I  am  here  as  a  hakim,"  i.e.  doctor.  This 
mysterious  personage  was  no  other  than  Layard,  then  a 
young  man  and  afterwards  the  famous  explorer  of  Nineveh 
and  our  Ambassador  at  Constantinople.  The  Baron  assisted 
him  and  lent  him  money.  This  I  learnt  much  later  from 
the  Baron  and  from  Sir  Henry  Austin  Layardf  himself, 

*  In  1829  the  Russian  Envoy  and  the  whole  Mission  at  Teheran  were 
massacred.  In  1836  it  was  the  Baron's  first  duty  to  have  his  countrymen's 
mortal  remains  dug  up  and  removed  to  a  Christian  burial  ground. 

t  In  reference  to  Layard,  I  may  say  that  shortly  before  his  death, 
more  than  20  years  ago,  he  encouraged  me  in  my  idea,  which  was  also 
approved  by  Lord  Salisbury,  to  build  a  railway  from  the  Persian  Gulf  to 
Mohamarrah  in  Persia.  The  project  was  not  realized  because  the 
British  Government  would  grant  no  guarantee. 


22 

who  spoke  in  grateful  terms  of  my  friend's  kindness.  This 
story  shows  the  marvellous  energy  of  Layard,  who,  without 
letters  from  the  Shah  or  other  assistance,  had  penetrated 
into  the  unruly  land  of  the  Bakhtiyaris,  which  no  European 
had  yet  accomplished. 

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  pages  of  de  Bode's  learned 
work,  in  which  he  first  explored  and  explained  the  antiqui- 
ties and  curiosities  of  Persia,  are  consecrated  to  a  description 
of  the  famous  ruins  of  Persepolis — a  host  in  itself.  He 

says  : — 

I  moved  from  one  group  of  ruins  to  another  like  one  under  the 
influence  of  wine  ;  my  head  felt  quite  giddy.  Not  that  each  separate 
monument  was  a  masterpiece  by  itself :  it  was  the  tout  ensemble  which 
kept  the  mind  and  the  imagination  in  a  continued  state  of  excitement. 
But  these  feelings,  however  delicious  and  grateful  they  might  be  to 
oneself,  were  yet  so  vague,  so  undefined,  so  confused  even,  that  it 
would  be  impossible  to  bring  them  into  any  tangible  form,  for  words 
are  inadequate  to  give  them  expression. 

I  can  only  point  out  the  elements  which  served  to  give  birth  to 
those  feelings.  It  was  the  originality  of  the  scene  before  me,  so 
totally  different  from  everything  one  is  daily  accustomed  to  meet ;  the 
chaste  simplicity  of  the  monuments,  beautifully  harmonizing  with  their 
gigantic  proportions ;  the  titanic  rocks  of  marble  and  granite,  evi- 
dently piled  up  with  the  presumptuous  thought  of  struggling  with 
Time  as  to  who  should  have  the  mastery ;  and  although  nearly 
vanquished  by  the  latter,  the  lofty  columns  still  rearing  their  proud 
heads  towards  the  skies. 

The  mystery  attached  to  the  origin  and  design  of  Persepolis ; 
the  isolated  position  it  now  occupies ;  the  awful  silence  that  it 
breathes  around  it ;  the  generations  of  men  and  empires  which  have 
rolled  over  its  head  and  sunk  into  oblivion  ;  the  events  it  has  wit- 
nessed ;  the  vicissitudes  it  has  undergone ;  the  noise  and  hustle  of 
which  once  it  must  have  been  the  centre,  compared  with  the  un- 
earthly quiet  which  at  present  pervades  its  clustered  pillars,  were 
all  fit  subjects  for  meditation  and  capable  of  raising  the  soul  above 
its  ordinary  level  of  indifference  and  apathy.  Nor  could  the  eye, 
while  gazing  on  these  memorials  of  past  grandeur,  help  casting  a 
look  upward  to  the  Throne  of  Omnipotence,  where  all  was  immutable 
and  eternal.  The  pure,  bright  sky  of  the  East,  which  had  smiled 
upon  the  birth  of  Persepolis  and  witnessed  its  pristine  glory,  was 
the  same  which  now  looked  down  on  its  fallen  grandeur — still  pure, 
bright,  and  serene  as  the  spirit  which  dwells  there  ! 


23 

The  author  then  enumerates  the  names  of  the  learned 
travellers  who  visited  Persepolis  and  observed  the  gradual 
destruction  of  the  beautiful  columns.  In  1621  Pietro  de 
la  Valle  found  twenty-five  columns  standing,  and  in  1811 
Sir  W.  Ouseley  met  only  with  fifteen  columns. 

The  Baron  refers  to  that  marvellous  work,  "The  History 
of  the  Caliph  Vathek,"  due  to  the  genius  of  Beckford,  in 
which  the  mysterious  subterranean  passages  of  Takhti- 
Jemshid  are  described.  The  wonder  is  that  Beckford 
himself  never  visited  Persia,  and  that  his  marvellous  tale, 
so  true  to  life  and  to  local  scenery,  was  the  brilliant 
creation  of  his  own  imagination  and  was  actually  written 
in  a  couple  of  nights. 

"  '  Vathek/  "  says  Lord  Byron,  "  was  one  of  the  tales  I 
had  a  very  early  admiration  of — for  correctness  of  costume, 
beauty  of  description,  and  power  of  imagination,  it  far 
surpasses  all  European  imitations,  and  bears  such  marks  of 
originality  that  those  who  have  visited  the  East  will  find 
some  difficulty  in  believing  it  to  be  more  than  a  translation. 
As  an  Eastern  tale  even  Rasselas  must  bow  before  it; 
his  '  Happy  Valley '  will  not  bear  a  comparison  with  the 
Hall  of  Eblis."* 

While  taking  leave  of  the  Baron's  book  we  shall  not 
part  from  him,  for  the  following  stray  extracts  from  my 
diary  testify  that  he  and  I  travelled  together  : — 


*  William  Beckford,  the  author  of  "  Vathek,"  was  one  of  the  most  re- 
markable men  of  modern  times.  He  was  the  son  of  Alderman  Beckford, 
of  London,  who  bequeathed  him  property  said  to  amount  to  upwards  of 
£100,000  per  annum.  In  a  very  few  years  he  spent  the  enormous  sum  of 
£273,000  in  erecting  the  much-talked-of  Fonthill  Abbey.  An  excellent 
scholar  and  possessed  of  a  fine  taste  in  almost  every  branch  of  art, 
he  collected  in  the  fantastic  but  costly  "Abbey"  one  of  the  finest  and 
most  extensive  libraries  in  England,  and  his  pictures  and  curiosities  were 
almost  unequalled.  His  vast  expenses  and  the  loss  of  a  large  portion  of 
his  West  Indian  property  rendered  it  necessary  to  sell  his  ' '  Abbey " 
and  collections  in  1822.  They  fetched  fabulous  prices.  Even  catalogues 
were  sold  at  a  guinea  each.  He  also  wrote  "  Memoirs  of  Extraordinary 
Painters,"  and  other  works. 


24 
FROM  RUSSIA  TO   PERSIA   FIFTY  YEARS   AGO. 

Now  that  Russia,  Turkey  and  Persia  are  endowed  with  would-be 
or  so-called  constitutions,  old  notes  of  Oriental  travel  may  perhaps 
have  a  semi -historical  interest. 

When  residing  at  Tiflis  and  Bakou,  in  Transcaucasia,  I  went  on 
two  occasions  to  Persia  with  men  who,  in  their  younger  days,  had  been 
prominent  and  popular  diplomats  in  the  Near  East.  Thanks  to  my 
travelling  companions  and  to  unbounded  Russian  hospitality  and  good 
nature  I  was  received,  both  in  Transcaucasia  and  in  Persia,  with  every 
kindness  by  Russian  as  well  as  by  English  officials. 

In  the  autumn  of  1858  we  started  in  a  tarantass  from  Bakou,  where 
raw  naphtha  was  abundant  but  refined  petroleum  was  yet  unknown. 
We  started  for  Lenkoran,  near  the  River  Astara.  There  we  were 
provided  with  riding  horses,  as  post-roads  did  not  exist.  Besides  a 
Persian  guide  we  had  two  Persian  servants  and  two  fine  Cossacks. 
The  weather  was  perfect,  and  as  we  ambled  along  the  crisp,  fine  sand 
on  the  shore  of  the  Caspian — with  the  sea  on  one  side  and  beautiful 
forests  on  the  other — I  thought  this  mode  of  travelling  approached  as 
near  perfection  as  anything  my  then  youthful  mind  could  imagine ;  I 
rather  congratulated  myself  that  there  were  no  railways  or  even 
carriage-roads  in  Persia.  Further  on,  however,  we  were  warned  to 
look  out  for  quick-sands,  in  which  some  travellers  had  lately  dis- 
appeared. We  spent  the  night  in  a  Persian  hut,  sleeping  on  carpets 
spread  on  the  clay  floor.  From  an  open  fire-place,  with  no  chimney, 
the  smoke  issued  through  the  room  and  escaped  by  a  hole  in  the  roof. 
There  was  no  lack  of  rice,  fowls,  mutton  and  melons.  Pomegranates, 
which  grow  in  the  surrounding  woods,  afforded  pleasant  drink  instead 
of  lemonade. 

We  soon  reached  Peri-Bazar  and  Enzeli,  the  harbour  of  Resht,  in 
the  Persian  province  of  Ghilan.  I  have  a  vivid  recollection  of  a  road 
near  Enzeli,  which  consisted  of  small  ridges,  with  deep  ruts  on  either 
side,  formed  by  the  hoofs  of  the  numerous  horses  which  had  carried 
on  pack-saddles  the  goods  required  by  that  locality.  If  your  horse 
stepped  on  the  hillock  instead  of  the  rut  you  might  come  down,  horse 
and  all. 

Another  two  days  of  riding  on  wretched  post-horses,  some  of 
which  had  wounds  on  their  backs,  brought  us  to  some  half-built  and 
half -ruined  Oriental  so-called  palaces.  (Every  new  Shah  builds  new 
palaces,  and  does  not  finish  those  which  his  predecessors  had  com- 
menced, for  it  is  considered  unlucky  to  do  so.)  Finally  we  reached 
the  capital,  whose  streets  were  flanked  with  bare  walls,  as  the  windows 
looked  out  on  interior  courtyards  or  gardens,  but  some  mosques  and 
Government  buildings  could  claim  more  pretension  to  architecture. 
The  Russian  Ambassador  and  his  attaches  came  on  horseback  to  meet 


25 

my  friend,  and  took  us  to  their  summer  residence,  called  Zergende, 
whore,  among  shady  trees  and  a  running  stream,  we  were  comfortably 
installed  in  a  sort  of  bungalow. 

The  Ambassador,  Air.  Anichkoff,  was  a  clever  diplomatist  and  a 
most  entertaining  and  hospitable  host,  full  of  wit  and  humour,  but  a 
,i;Tr;it  imilade-imaginaire.  One  of  the  younger  attaches,  Mr.  Zinoviev,* 
was  so  light-haired  that  he  looked  almost  like  an  albino.  In  later  years 
he  was  himself  the  Russian  Envoy  in  Persia,  and  concluded  a  treaty, 
which  was  much  to  the  advantage  of  Russia.  When  Director  of  the 
Asiatic  Department  at  St.  Petersburg  he  signed,  together  with  Sir 
West  Ridgeway,  the  agreement  about  the  frontier  line  after  the 
Pendjeh  incident.  At  the  British  Embassy  Mr.  Dorio  (descendant  of 
the  Genoa  Dorios)  was  at  that  time  the  Charge  d' Affaires,  but  he  was 
laid  up  suffering  from  fever.  With  Mr.  Thomson  (later  Sir  Roland 
Thomson)  and  with  the  young,  athletic  doctor  of  the  Embassy, 
Mr.  Tollemache,  I  remember  having  a  sharp  ride  along  the  stony 
country  which  surrounds  Teheran. 

Mr.  Stevens,  the  Consul,  was  considered  by  the  Russians  as  the 
moving  spirit  of  the  British  Mission,  and  was  suspected  by  the  Russians 
of  having  brought  about  the  war  between  England  and  Persia  con- 
cerning Herat. 

In  Persia,  as  elsewhere,  the  country  people,  or  rather  the  in- 
habitants of  the  mountains,  are  less  corrupt  and  of  a  finer  physique 
than  the  townspeople.  Our  guide,  for  instance,  who  had  met  us  at  the 
Russian  frontier,  was  a  mountaineer,  and  a  finer  looking  man  I  have 
seldom  seen. 

The  Persians  are  justly  styled  the  Frenchmen  of  the  East,  as  they 
are  quick-witted  and  polite  in  their  speech,  apt  to  see  the  comical  side 
of  things,  and  desirous  to  turn  people  into  ridicule.  In  the  first  half  of 
the  last  century,  Sir  John  McNeil,  after  having  been  the  physician  of 
the  British  Embassy  at  Teheran,  returned  home  and  came  back  again 
as  Minister  to  replace  Sir  John  Campbell.  The  Persian  Master  of  the 
Ceremonies,  before  presenting  the  new  Minister  to  the  Shah,  tried  to 
make  fun  of  the  latter  in  the  presenc-*  of  the  other  foreign  ambassadors 
by  calling  McNeil  doctor,  not  ambassador,  and  asking  him  to  look  at 
his  tongue,  etc.  But  Sir  John  was  equal  to  the  occasion !  After 
feeling  the  Khan's  pulse  the  ex-physician  told  him,  in  the  presence  of 
the  assembled  diplomatists,  that  if  he  (the  Khan)  still  persisted  to  drink 
rum  at  night  it  would  ruin  his  health.  To  suggest  that  a  Mussulman 
drank  alcohol  was  to  compromise  his  social  position,  and  therefore  no 
more  efforts  were  made  to  make  Sir  John  McNeil  appear  ridiculous. 

In  the  way  of  books  on  Persia  in  those  days,  the  travels  of  Jonas 
Hanway  and  Morier's  "  Hadji  Baba  of  Ispahan  "  were  among  the  most 
useful  and  entertaining. 

*  Later  the  Russian  Ambassador  at  Constantinople. 


26 

My  presentation  to  the  Shah  (the  grandfather  of  the  ex-Shah),  who 
was  then  a  handsome  man  of  about  26  years  of  age,  was  on  this  wise  :  — 

Having  no  uniform,  I  put  on  a  black  frock  coat  (a  dress-coat, 
being  open  in  front,  is  considered  bad  form  in  Persia)  and  wore  an 
improvised  white  cap  with  a  silver  band.  After  walking  through 
several  courtyards  or  gardens  with  rose  trees  and  fountains,  and 
passing  ante-rooms,  some  of  which  were  decorated  with  theatrical 
representations  of  the  Lion  and  the  Sun,  etc.,  we  arrived  at  the  door  of 
the  royal  chamber,  where  the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  an  old  Khan 
in  a  flowing  silk  dressing-gown  and  red  leggings  or  stockings,  told  us 
to  take  off  our  over-shoes,*  and  to  follow  him.  We  saluted  his 
Majesty  three  times  with  a  military  salute. 

On  another  occasion  we  saw  the  Shah  at  Hamadan,  the  ancient 
Ekbatana,  which  is  renowned  for  the  tomb  of  the  Biblical  Mordecai, 
the  Jew.  We  then  walked  through  a  field  of  narcissi.  His  Majesty  was 
in  a  small  square  tent,  one  side  of  which  was  open.  Some  scrolls,  and 
what  looked  like  plans,  were  lying  on  the  table.  My  old  friend  and 
myself  were  introduced  by  His  Majesty's  aide-de-camp,  an  Armenian, 
called  Malkom  Khan.  It  was  said  that  this  gentleman  had  influenced 
the  Shah  to  become  a  Freemason,  which  was  a  bond  of  union  between 
them.  This  young  Armenian,  Malkom  Khan,  whom  I  met  many  years 
later  in  London,  where  he  was  the  Persian  Ambassador,  translated  into 
perfect  French  the  questions  which  his  royal  master  addressed  to  us, 
and  which  referred  to  the  former  career  of  my  friend  and  to  a  com- 
mercial enterprise  which  he  wished  to  introduce  in  Persia.  A  comical 
side  of  this  presentation  was  the  appearance  of  Persian  servants, 
among  whom  was  a  negro,  all  peeping  out  at  us  from  behind  the  tent. 

We  presented  a  rifle  and  a  watch  to  His  Majesty,  which  were 
graciously  accepted  and  acknowledged  later  on  by  conferring  on  us 
some  decorations  of  the  Lion  and  the  Sun. 

The  presence  of  soldiers  and  other  display  of  royal  importance 
were  theatrical  and  picturesque.  On  closer  inspection  most  things, 
however,  looked  squalid,  showing  Oriental  ignorance,  mismanagement 
and  official  corruption. 

Occasionally  you  saw  a  small  group  of  gaudily-dressed  horsemen 
with  falcons  and  other  Eastern  attributes  of  sport  and  luxury  belonging 
to  the  colonel  of  a  regiment  and  his  staff.  At  some  distance  you 
descried  a  few  hundred  men,  some  in  uniform,  others  tattered  and 
torn,  followed  by  numerous  stragglers — that  represented  a  Persian 
regiment. 

As  regards  trade,  it  may  here  be  added  that  Russian,  and  especially 
German  goods,  were  at  that  time  few  and  far  between  in  Persia,  whereas 

*  Europeans,  according  to  treaties,  wear  over-shoes,  and  slip  them 
off,  while  natives  take  off  their  shoes  or  leggings,  and  enter  the  Shah's 
presence  in  their  stockings. 


27 

calicoes,  cutlery,  sugar  and  other  current  articles  of  English  manu- 
facture predominated  in  all  the  bazaars  of  Persia.  Sic  transit  ylnria 
mn>nli !  Now  there  are  many  more  Russian  and  German  than  English 
goods  in  Persian  bazaars. 

In  order  to  return  to  Tiflis  we  took  another  route,  via  Tabriz  (or 
Tauris),  the  commercial  capital  of  Persia,  and  the  river  Araxes,  which 
is  the  frontier  between  Persia  and  Russia.  We  travelled  slowly  on  our 
own  riding  horses,  purchased  at  Teheran,  with  no  small  difficulty,  as  all 
the  world  had  bought  horses  and  followed  the  Shah  to  Hamadan. 

At  Tabriz,  Mr.  Tchernayev,  the  humorous  Russian  Consul,  related 
an  incident  about  an  Armenian  or  Persian  trader  who  had  signed  a  bill 
of  exchange,  but  would  not  pay  the  money  when  it  fell  due.  The 
Consul  asked  him  :  Is  that  your  signature  V  Yes.  Do  you  owe  the 
money  to  that  man  V  Yes.  Have  you  the  means  to  pay  'i  Yes.  Then 
why  don't  you  honour  your  draft  V  Bear  with  me,  it  does  not  pay  me  ! 

To  describe  Tabriz,  the  commercial  capital  of  Persia,  would  be 
a  work  of  supererogation,  because,  like  every  town  in  the  East,  it 
conveys  the  usual  idea  of  a  mass  of  heterogeneous  structures,  half- 
ruined,  half-unfinished,  with  long  bazaars,  dirty  eating  and  barbers' 
shops,  mosques  and  baths.  All  life,  as  well  as  the  countenances  and 
dresses  of  the  natives,  are  painfully  uniform  and  monotonous.  An 
appalling  sight,  which  distresses  a  traveller  on  coming  in  or  going 
out  of  a  town,  is  the  sight  of  miserable  beings — probably  lepers, 
covered  with  the  most  ghastly  sores.  They  live  in  secluded  mud 
huts  and  run  after  your  horses,  begging  for  alms. 

Once  again  in  Transcaucasia,  we  felt  safer  and  more  comfortable. 

We  left  our  riding  horses  and  proceeded  in  a  tarantass,  swinging 
on  long  poles  instead  of  springs.  The  post-stations  had  stoves, 
chairs,  tables  and  more  or  less  satisfactory  food.  At  Erivan,  which 
Field- Marshal  Paskevitch  (styled  Prince  Erivanski)  had  taken  from 
the  Turks  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  we  were  lodged  in 
the  house  of  the  Governor,  General  Koulubakin,  as  the  latter  had 
been  a  school-fellow  of  my  fellow-traveller. 

The  General  was  an  energetic  man  and  a  most  original 
character.  He  was  hot-headed,  which  had  formerly  brought  him 
into  collision  with  his  chiefs. 

On  this  journey  our  tarantass  stuck  in  the  snow,  which  lay  in  heavy 
masses  near  Mount  Ararat  and  Lake  Gokchi,  where  the  Armenian 
Monastery  of  Etchmiazin  is  situated.  Men  and  horses  could  not  assist 
us,  but  fortunately  a  village,  inhabited  by  a  sect  called  Molokaue, 
whose  religious  teaching  is  not  unlike  that  of  the  Quakers,  was  in  the 
neigh bourbood.  After  waiting  patiently  in  the  snow  we  saw  a  dozen 
stalwart  men  with  large  beards  and  broad  wooden  spades  arrive  on  the 
scene.  "  Now  we  are  all  right,"  said  my  experienced  friend,  who  knew 
the  sterling  qualities  of  these  respectable  peasants,  and  true  enough 


28 

we  were  soon  dug  out  of  the  deep  snow  and  again  on  the  smooth  road. 
This  incident  reminds  me  of  what  happened  to  us  on  another  occasion 
at  a  post-station  in  Central  Russia  when  we  could  not  proceed  for 
want  of  post-horses — a  common  dilemma  when  no  railways  existed. 
The  obliging  old  post-master  supplied  us  with  tea  and  fish.  Soon  an 
open  carriage  drove  up  and  out  stepped  a  captain  of  the  Imperial 
Navy.  He  looked  very  red  and  self-important.  In  a  commanding 
tone  he  ordered  horses.  The  post-master  informed  him  that  none 
were  left  in  the  stables.  The  excited  traveller  used  hard  names,  with 
which  the  Russian  vocabulary  abounds,  and  wound  np  by  stating  that 
on  the  next  day  he  would  have  the  old  post-master  dismissed.  Then 
turning  to  us  he  cried  out :  "  And  you,  gentlemen,  support  this  old 
rascal  by  drinking  his  tea  and  eating  his  fish  while  he  pretends  to  be 
short  of  horses."  My  companion  turned  round  and  said  :  "  When  there 
are  no  horses,  of  which  I  have  convinced  myself  by  looking  in  the 
stables,  it  is  wiser  to  drink  tea  than  to  make  a  disturbance."  The 
officer  now  ordered  in  a  peremptory  tone  that  special  horses  should  be 
procured  from  the  peasants  of  the  neighbouring  village,  adding  that  in 
a  fortnight  the  post-master  would  be  dismissed.  Upon  this  the  old 
man,  knowing  that  he  could  only  be  dismissed  by  his  own  postal 
authorities,  looked  at  us  and  said  :  "  Observe,  gentlemen,  he  has  given  me 
a  reprieve  of  a  whole  fortnight."  The  post-master  afterwards  told  us 
that  this  captain  was  one  of  the  late  so-called  heroes  of  Sevastopol, 
who  had  lately  been  appointed  Governor  (gorodnichi)  of  the  adjacent 
town  of  Efremoff. 

After  leaving  the  Caucasus  and  returning  to  Russia  we  were 
forcibly  reminded  that  the  country  was  as  flat  as  the  hand,  consisting 
of  plains,  steppes,  forests,  and  swamps,  and  that  only  the  extremities 
and  frontiers  of  the  vast  Empire  were  mountainous  and  picturesque, 
viz. :  the  Crimea,  Transcaucasia,  Finland,  Podolia,  parts  of  Poland,  of 
Siberia,  the  Ourals,  and  Central  Asia. 

About  a  dozen  years  after  ray  journey  Mr.  Augustus 
Mounsey,  a  Secretary  of  His  British  Majesty's  Embassy, 
described  the  state  of  Persia  much  in  the  same  dark  colours 
as  I  have  done.  Bribery  and  corruption  were  as  rampant 
as  before.  Persian  morals  had  not  improved. 

Later,  Dr.  Wills,  one  of  the  officers  of  His  Majesty's 
Telegraph  Department,  gave  us  his  experiences  as  a  physician 
in  his  book, "  The  Land  of  the  Lion  and  the  Sun."  Modakel 
is  the  Persian  word  for  perquisite  or  bribe.  It  is  hopeless  to 
fight  against  this  system.  The  Persians  from"  the  king 


29 

downwai-ds,  all  speak  of  my  modakel.  The  governor  of  a 
province  buys  his  appointment.  I  buy  a  horse,  a  carpet, 
or  a  pound  of  sugar,  ten  per  cent,  is  added  to  my  bill  and 
paid  to  my  servant.  But  more  than  ten  per  cent.  is- 
considered  robbery. 

Mr.  Wills  describes  what  he  saw  in  the  Persian  capital : — 
When  we  were  in  Teheran  a  number  of  Russian  officers  were- 
engaged  in  forming  so-called  Cossack  regiments.  They  engaged 
horsemen,  whom  they  regularly  paid,  and  seemed  to  be  teaching  these 
men  their  drill  successfully.  These  so-called  Cossacks  were  the  Shah's 
favourite  toy  of  the  moment  and  he  was  never  tired  of  reviewing  them. 
They  were  well  but  plainly  dressed,  well  horsed  and  well  armed,  and 
the  Russian  officers  were  very  popular  both  with  Shah  and  soldiers. 

A  large  contingent  of  Austrian  officers  had  also  arrived  to  instruct 
the  infantry  and  artillery.  .  .  .  The  capital  was  ever  a  rather  rowdy 
place  ;  murders  and  burglaries  were  common.  .  .  .  The  police  were  so 
mercenary  that  the  townspeople  preferred  being  robbed  to  complaining' 
to  them,  on  the  principle  of  two  evils  to  choose  the  less. 

The  principal  difficulty  that  the  English  merchant  has 
to  contend  against  is  the  difficulty  he  has  as  an  Englishman 
to  recover  debts. 

We  want  English  consuls  to  protect  us  and  our  trade, 
say  the  merchants,  and  then  the  opening  of  the  Kerun 
river.  Without  these  Persia  as  a  mart  is  closed  to  English 
enterprise.  We  hope  the  Anglo-Russian  entente  has  modified 
this  state  of  things. 

And  now  we  come  to  the  recent  Anglo-Russian  entente, 
dividing  Persia  into  spheres  of  influence,  which  gave 
Russia  more  than  a  free  hand  in  Persiaf,  where  a  nominal 
constitution  was  proclaimed  in  1907.  The  Shah  fled  from 
Teheran  to  Odessa,  where,  it  is  said,  he  was  allowed  a 
pension  of  some  twelve  hundred  pounds  by  Anglo-Russian 
arrangement. 

The  curious  part  of  the  business  was  that   during  the 


t  The  larger  and  more  important  half,  bordering  on  the  Caspian, 
is  Russia's  sphere,  and  the  smaller,  the  southern  half,  touching  the 
Persian  Gulf,  is  England's  sphere  ot  influence. 


30 

insurrection  in  the  streets  of  Teheran,  the  Shah  (so  he 
declared  to  a  Russian  newspaper  correspondent)  was  left  at 
the  mercy  of  the  insurgents  by  his  own  Cossack  body-guard, 
commanded  by  a  Cossack  officer,  who  remained  passive. 

After  his  flight  the  Shah's  son,  a  minor,  was  placed  on 
the  tottering  throne  under  Russian  tutelage,  and  the  Shah 
himself  was  later  heard  of  in  a  European  watering-place. 

Under  the  new  dispensation  the  Persian  Parliament 
requested  the  Government  of  the  U.S.A.  to  recommend 
them  an  able  financier  to  act  as  their  Treasurer-General. 

The  activity  of  Mr.  Morgan  Sinister,  who  obtained  this 
post,  and  the  result  of  his  endeavours,  are  the  subject  of 
an  American  book,  entitled,  "The  Strangling  of  Persia,"  in 
which  the  American  financier  vindicates  his  conduct. 

Says  Mr.  Shuster  :  — 

The  Mejilis  (or  Parliament)  was  remarkably  expeditious  in 
transacting  business.  It  showed  heated  partisanship  on  some  occasions, 
but  older  legislative  institutions  have  not  been  free  from  this  defect. 
While  the  Mejilis  was  not  ideally  representative  in  the  political  sense 
— that  is,  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  population  had  participated  in 
the  election  of  its  members — it  more  truly  represented  the  best 
aspirations  of  the  Persians  than  any  other  body  that  had  ever  existed 
in  that  country. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  contemporary  critic  observes  : — 

It  is  interesting  to  know  that  the  Russian  Envoy  offered 
Mr.  Shuster  Russian  support  if  he  would  take  office  under  the 
exiled  Mahomet  Ali,  and  it  lends  considerable  colour  to  the  idea  that 
the  Russian  Government  were  not  altogether  ignorant  of  the  movements 
of  that  ex-potentate.  .  .  .  It  is  useless  in  the  circumstances  to 
emphasize  the  rather  too  obvious  fact  that  our  cynical  indifference  to 
the  fate  of  Persia  is  not  likely  to  endear  the  British  rule  to  our 
Mahommedan  subjects  elsewhere  ! 

Mr.  Shuster  has  been  reproached  with  want  of  tact,  but 
he  did  his  best  to  protect  Persian  interests  in  an  American 
business-like  manner,  which  was  not  always  pleasing  to 
foreign  diplomats,  who  desired  that  their  Persian  proteges 
should  not  be  dunned  to  pay  up  taxes.  There  were  also 


31 

grasping  Khans,  who,  instead  of  paying  wages  to  soldiers, 
converted  State  money  to  their  personal  use. 

The  gendarmerie  were  wanted  to  protect  the  Treasury 
and  the  collection  of  taxes;  therefore,  a  reliable  English 
gentleman  like  Major  Stokes,  to  whom,  it  was  said,*Russian 
officials  objected,  was  really  necessary  to  command  that 
corps.  But  he  resigned. 

Mr.  Shuster  thus  concludes  his  denunciations  against 
"  The  Strangling  of  Persia": — 

Persia's  sole  chance  for  self -redemption  lay  with  the  reform  of  her 
broken  finances. 

The  Persians  themselves  realised  this,  and  with  the  exception  of 
the  corrupt  grandees  and  dishonest  public  servants,  all  desired  that  we 
should  succeed.  Russia  became  aware  of  this  feeling  and  unwittingly 
paid  its  the  compliment  of  fearing  that  we  would  not  succeed  in  our  ta*k. 
That  she  never  intended  to  allow ;  all  the  rest  of  the  controversy  was 
detail. 

Mr.  Shuster  shows  Eastern  women  in  a  new  and  heroic 
light. 

With  the  dark  days  when  doubts  came  to  be  whispered  as  to 
whether  the  Mejilis  (or  Parliament)  would  stand  firm,  the  Persian  women, 
in  their  zeal  for  liberty  and  their  ardent  love  for  their  country,  threw 
down  the  last  barriers  which  distinguished  their  sex  and  gave  evidence 
of  their  patriotic  courage.  .  .  . 

The  President  of  the  Mejilis  consented  to  receive  a.  deputation  of 
300  women.  In  his  reception-hall  they  confronted  him,  and,  lest  he 
and  his  colleagues  should  doubt  their  meaning,  these  cloistered  Persian 
mot'iers.  wives  and  daughters  exhibited  threateningly  their  revolvers, 
tore  aside  their  veils,  and  confessed  their  decision  to  kill  their  own  hus- 
bands and  sons,  and  leave  behind  their  own  dead  bodies,  if  the  Deputies 
wavered  in  their  duty  to  uphold  the  liberty  and  dignity  of  the  Persian 
people  and  nation. 

Though  the  Mejilis  was  destroyed  by  a  coup  d'e'tat  executed  by 
Russian  hirelings  a  week  or  two  later,  it  passed  out  of  being  stainless 
of  having  sold  its  country's  birthright. 

Mr.  Shuster  was  succeeded  by  a  Belgian  Treasurer- 
General,  who  has  also  been  relieved  of  his  functions  by 
Russo-Persian  arrangement. 

As  regards  the  actual  situation  of  Persia,  the  following 

B 


32 

declaration  of  the  Russian  Ambassador  at  Teheran,  as 
reproduced  by  the  Westminster  Gazette  of  18th  March  of 
this  year,  represents  Russian  policy. 

(FROM  OUR  OWN  CORRESPONDENT.) 

BERLIN,  March  16. — The  Moscow  Russkoe  Slovo  prints  a  long  inter- 
view given  to  its  Teheran  correspondent  by  M.  Korostovetz,  the  new 
Russian  Minister.  He  develops  a  whole  programme  of  policy  as 
regards  the  Persian  Constitution,  armed  forces,  finances  and  railways ; 
and  also  as  regards  the  partial  Russian  occupation  of  the  northern 
provinces;  and  he  describes  this  policy  as  that  of  the  Imperial 
Government,  and  not  merely  his  own  view  of  what  is  desirable. 

M.  Korostovetz  says  that  Russia  is  friendly  to  the  Constitution, 
and  regards  it  as  the  only  safeguard  against  anarchy  and  the  only 
guarantee  of  the  pushing  through  of  reforms  of  the  administration. 
Even  in  Russia's  own  interests  the  Constitution  is  essential.  The 
British  Government,  the  Minister  makes  out,  is  not  so  firm  in  the 
faith.  Originally,  he  says,  it  stood  for  the  Constitution,  "  but  now, 
after  experience,  its  attitude  towards  the  Constitution  is  less  optimistic, 
and  it  has  ceased  to  be  a  warm  supporter  of  the  Constitution." 
Russian  agents  in  Persia,  says  M.  Korostovetz,  have  been  ordered  not 
to  meddle  in  the  Mejilis  elections;  but  he  adds  further  on  that  "the 
victory  of  the  Left  elements  at  the  elections  must  not  be  tolerated, 
as  a  revolutionary  Mejilis,  unfriendly  to  the  policy  of  Russia  and 
England,  might  ruin  the  country  and  call  forth  a  new  catastrophe." 
The  first  two  Mejilis  did  harm.  "  If  the  Left  elements  attempt  again 
to  play  the  leading  role,  Russia  will  intervene."  A  revision  of  the 
Constitution  will  probably  be  needed.  The  Cabinet  must  be  given 
authority  and  solidarity. 

He  says  that  the  position  in  Azerbeidjan  is  abnormal ;  but  it  is 
wrong  to  call  the  Governor,  Sudja  Dowla,  a  Russian  tool.  The 
Governor's  merit  is  that  he  understood  how  to  restore  order,  and 
realised  that  he  could  only  do  that  by  working  with  Russia.  The 
people  of  Azerbeidjan  do  not  want  the  Constitution ;  they  will  boycott 
the  elections  ;  and  Russia  does  not  intend  to  force  the  Constitution  on 
them.  This  will  not  prevent  the  convocation  of  the  Mejilis.  There 
is  no  possibility  of  the  anti-Constitutionalist  population  wanting  to 
secede.  M.  Korostovetz  praises  the  Anglo-Russian  agreement  about 
Persia ;  and  says  that  without  it  there  would  be  no  Persia  to-day. 

M.  Korostovetz  denies  that  Russia  desires  Persian  territory ;  and 
persists  that  the  military  occupation  was  "called  forth  by  circum- 
stances, not  by  the  will  of  the  Russian  Government."  A  policy  of 
complete  evacuation  is  still  the  Russian  ideal ;  and  it  will  be  realised 
as  soon  as  security  is  restored.  On  this  point  the  Czar,  the  higher 


33 

administration,  and  the  Viceroy  of  the  Caucasus  are  at  one.  It  is 
untrue  that  the  Russian  troops  will  make  elections  impossible. 
"  After  the  meeting  of  the  Mejilis  and  the  Shah's  Coronation  it  will  be 
best  to  evacuate  Persia  altogether." 

The  development  taken  by  the  Persian  gendarmery  is,  says  the 
Minister,  causing  anxiety  to  Russia.  "  Instead  of  protecting  the 
routes,  the  gendarmery  is  becoming  a  real  active  army."  This  does 
not  accord  with  Russia's  interests.  Russia  will  enter  into  negotiations 
with  the  Persian  and  British  Governments  in  order  to  put  precise 
limits  to  the  development  of  the  gendarmery.  Russia  has  nothing  to 
say  against  the  increase  of  the  gendarmery  in  the  south ;  but  in  the 
north  the  role  of  gendarme  had  best  be  left  to  the  Persian  Cossack 
Brigade;  and  the  Persian  Government  must  increase  the  number  of 
Russian  instructors  iii  the  brigade  and  increase  the  brigade's  strength. 
Russia  also  desires  that  the  police  in  the  northern  towns  be  reorganised 
by  Russian  instead  of  by  Swedish  instructors. 

About  the  Trans-Persian  railway  he  expresses  doubt ;  but  in  both 
Russian  and  Persian  interests  he  favours  the  building  of  the  proposed 
Astara-Teheran  line.  It  is  untrue,  concludes  M.  Korostovetz,  that 
Russia  is  unfriendly  to  the  Persian  Treasury  and  the  Belgian  officials, 
and  it  is  untrue  that  the  Russian  immigrants  in  the  north  are  being 
settled  there  with  political  aims. 

Such  was  the  report  of  the  Westminster  Gazette's 
correspondent  at  Berlin. 

The  grant  of  a  Constitution  to  Persia  called  attention  to 
that  country,  and  Sir  Mortimer  Durand,  formerly  his 
Majesty's  representative  at  Teheran,  gave,  some  years  ago 
(1907),  an  address  in  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society. 

He  concluded  by  saying  Persia  was  a  country  of  great  latent 
resources,  with  a  quick-witted  population,  and  she  might  yet  again  be 
a  respectable  Power  with  a  voice  in  the  councils  of  the  world. 

Recent  Russian  correspondents,  writing  from  Persia, 
complain  of  German  Consuls'  overbearing  preponderance, 
both  in  politics  and  trade,  in  the  principal  centres  of  Persia. 


Dr.  POLLEN  apologised  for  his  late  arrival,  but  he  was 
detained  on  the  road  to  the  meeting  ;  otherwise  he  should 
have  been  there  to  have  had  the  honour  of  presenting 
Mr.  Cazalet  as  the  lecturer.  In  that  case  he  could  only 

B2 


34 

have  repeated  what  he  had  often  said  as  to  the  debt  of 
gratitude  the  Society  owed  their  President.  They  were 
on  this  occasion  especially  obliged  to  him  for  the  manner 
in  which  he  had  prepared  his  most  interesting  paper. 
Mr.  Cazalet  had  given  them  some  vivid  descriptions  of  his 
own  personal  experience  in  journeying  through  Persia  in 
the  tarantass  and  on  the  ambling  nag.  Dr.  Pollen  himself 
had  some  experience  of  that  mode  of  travel  and  could 
certify  as  to  the  merits  of  locomotion  on  an  ambling  nag, 
to  which  our  forefathers  were  so  much  devoted.  In  India, 
and  especially  in  Sind,  they  trained  steeds  to  adopt  this 
pace  by  tying  their  legs  together.  Dr.  Pollen  then  gave 
some  of  his  own  personal  experiences  of  Persia,  and  told 
some  tales  about  the  King  of  Kings  who  declined  to  go  to 
the  Derby  because  he  always  knew  that  "  one  horse  could 
run  faster  than  another,"  and  who  dressed  up  the  ladies  of 
his  harem  on  his  return  from  London  in  ballet  girls'  dresses 
with  bare  legs  and  baby  socks,  and  thus  set  a  new  fashion 
in  Persia.  The  Persian  woman,  although  she  had  a  very 
narrow  life  behind  the  purdah,  had  more  influence  on  public 
affairs  in  Persia  than  people  imagined,  as  was  proved  by 
the  fact  mentioned  by  their  President  that  when  the  purdah 
fell  the  Persian  ladies  could  out-suffragette  the  British 
suffragette !  The  latter  had  not  yet  got  to  the  stage  of 
appearing  before  Parliament  and  producing  revolvers  and 
swords,  and  threatening  to  destroy  their  sons  and  husbands 
if  they  dared  to  sacrifice  the  true  interests  of  their  native 
land.  Persia,  said  Dr.  Pollen,  had  had  a  glorious  past,  and 
in  spite  of  her  miserable  present  there  was  no  reason  why 
she  should  not  have  a  prosperous  future.  With  reference 
to  Mr.  Cazalet's  allusion  to  Persepolis,  it  was  interesting 
to  note  that  recent  excavations,  carried  out  under  the 
patronage  of  Mr.  Ratan  Tata  of  Bombay,  revealed  the  fact 
that  600  years  before  Christ,  Persian  influence  extended  to 


35 

the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  and  under  the  modern  city  of 
Patna  were  to  be  found  traces  of  the  Palace  of  Chundra 
Gupta,  which  showed  that  it  had  been  designed  as  an 
exact  copy  of  the  Palace  and  famous  Audience  Hall  of 
Darius  and  his  son  Xerxes.  Dr.  Pollen  then  went  on 
to  hope  that  Persia  would  not  become  the  victim  of  German 
culture,  but  the  Emperor  William  had  certainly  designs  on 
the  Persian  Gulf.  Dr.  Pollen  recalled  how  he  had,  many 
years  ago,  written  to  the  Daily  Mail  pointing  out  that  the 
Kaiser's  ambition  really  was  to  re-establish  a  Roman- 
German  Empire,  stretching  from  Holland  through  Vienna, 
Constantinople  and  Asia  Minor  to  the  shores  of  the  Persian 
Gulf.  England  and  Russia  were  bound  to  prevent  the 
realization  of  this  ambitious  scheme  of  world  pre- 
dominance. Dr.  Pollen  begged  to  move  a  very  hearty  vote 
of  thanks  to  Mr.  Cazalet  for  all  the  trouble  he  constantly 
took  for  the  good  of  the  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society, 
and  especially  for  his  paper  that  evening. 

Dr.  COUNSEL,  in  seconding  the  vote  of  thanks,  con- 
gratulated the  President  and  the  Society  upon  his  very 
interesting  lecture,  and  his  account  of  his  personal  travels. 
He  reminded  Members  that  Mr.  Cazalet's  distinguished 
uncle,  Baron  de  Bode,  was  one  of  the  authorities  on  Persian 
life  and  history,  and  that  the  published  record  of  his  travels, 
illustrated  from  his  own  sketches,  is  a  work  of  great  interest 
and  of  value  as  a  work  of  reference.  Dr.  Counsel  was  able 
through  the  kindness  of  Miss  Shippard  to  exhibit  at  the 
meeting  a  number  of  these  original  sketches  in  water-colour 
by  Baron  de  Bode,  as  well  as  slippers  and  other  interesting 
souvenirs  of  Persia,  which  he  had  presented  to  her  family. 

The  vote  of  thanks  was  carried  by  acclamation. 


36 
DECEMBER  IST,  1914.         THE  PRESIDENT  IN  THE  CHAIR. 


LIFE  AND  WORK  OF  A.  S.  HOMIAKOV. 

By  FRANCIS  P.  MARCHANT. 

Read  by  SKEETE  WORKMAN. 

IN  the  eighteenth  century  Kiril  Ivanovitch  Homiakov,   of 

advanced  years,  possessed  vast  property  consisting  of  the 

village  Boutcharovo,  in  Tula  government,  estates  in  Riazan, 

and  a  house  at  St.  Petersburg.     Concerned  lest  his  wealth 

should  pass  into  wrong  hands  after  his  death,  he  invited  the 

mir  to  elect  a  successor,  stipulating  that  he  should  be  a 

member  of  the  Homiakov  family.     A  young  sergeant  of  the 

Guards,  Fedor  Stepanovitch  Homiakov,  was  elected  with 

the  approval  of   Kiril  Ivanovitch,  and  his  management  of 

the  estate  proved  excellent.     When  in  1787  the   Tsaritsa 

Elizabeth   passed  through    Tula  she    advised  the  nobility 

to  open  a  bank,  but  they  said  this  was  unnecessary  as  Fedor 

Stepanovitch  was  virtually  the  banker.      His  son  Alexander 

dissipated   the    estates,  and    his  grandson    Stepan    further 

embarrassed  them  by  gaming,  and  transferred  them  to  his 

wife  ('nee   Maria   Kireievska).      Their  second  son,  Alexis, 

the  subject  of  this  study,  was  born  at  Moscow  on  May  1st, 

1804.    During  the  stormy  times  of  1812-13  the  family  took 

keen  part  and  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  country  and  its 

activities,  showing  greater  zeal  than  many  other  families  of 

good  position.     An  ancestor,  Peter  Semenovitch,  had  been 

a  falconer  to  the  Tsar  Alexis  Mikhailovitch,  and  the  family 

archives  contained  letters  from  the  Tsar. 

The  young  Alexis  was  a  diligent  learner  of  German, 
French,    English,  and  Latin,  passing  afterwards  to  Greek 


37 

and  Sanscrit.  Discovering  a  misprint  in  a  copy  of  a  Papal 
bull  printed  in  a  book,  he  proceeded  to  express  doubts  of 
Papal  infallibility  to  his  tutor,  Abbe  Boivin,  and  was 
chastised  for  this  precocity.  Alexis  and  his  brother 
dreamed  of  fighting  Napoleon,  and  on  hearing  of  Waterloo 
Fedor  asked,  "  Whom  shall  we  fight  now?"  Alexis  declared 
"  I  will  stir  up  the  Slavs."  The  dramatist  Gendre,  a  friend 
of  Griboiedov,  was  their  tutor  for  Russian  literature ; 
Dr.  Glagolev  taught  them  and  Dmitri  and  Alexis  Venevitinov 
philosophy ;  mathematics  was  learnt  from  Professor 
Shtshepkin.  At  fifteen,  Alexis  Homiakov  translated  the 
"Germania"  of  Tacitus,  his  work  appearing  in  the  Trans- 
actions of  the  Society  of  Lovers  of  Russian  Literature.  The 
War  of  Greek  Independence  fired  the  ardour  of  the  youthful 
Alexis,  whose  family  were  friends  with  Count  Capo  d'Istria. 
Providing  himself  with  a  false  passport,  a  knife,  and  fifty 
roubles,  he  set  out  from  home  one  evening;  his  father 
organised  pursuit  and  he  was  brought  back  but  not  punished, 
while  Fedor  was  reprimanded  for  not  restraining  his  junior 
brother.  In  due  course  Alexis  enlisted  in  the  Cuirassiers 
and  afterwards  in  the  Horse  Guards.  Among  his  friends  of 
youth  were  his  cousin  V.  S.  Kireievsky,  I.  V.  Kireievsky, 
A.  A.  Mukhanov,  and  A.  I.  Koshelev,  and  Dmitri  Venevitinov 
was  the  centre  of  the  group.  The  bonds  of  union  of  the 
friends  were  German  philosophy  and  Western  ideals,  but 
young  Homiakov  and  P.  V.  Kireievsky  were  united  in  zeal 
for  the  development  of  an  independent  Russia. 

The  young  cornet  of  Guards  came  in  touch  with  the 
Dekabristi,  and  argued  with  Ryleiev  that  forces  armed  for 
the  defence  of  the  nation  had  no  right  to  settle  the  destinies 
of  the  nation  at  their  will.  Fedor  Stepanovitch  being 
eno-aged  at  the  Paris  Embassy,  Alexis  obtained  permission 
to  visit  him  there,  but  meanwhile  his  brother  was  transferred 
to  St.  Petersburg.  He  stayed  in  Paris  for  a  year  and  a  half. 


38 

Being  short  of  money  temporarily,  Alexis  painted  a  picture 
for  a  Roman  Catholic  church — an  uncongenial  task  for  a 
Slav — which  he  relinquished  on  receiving  a  remittance  from 
home.  From  Paris  he  proceeded  to  Switzerland,  Northern 
Italy,  and  through  Western  Slav  countries  to  Russia. 
Architecture  attracted  his  attention,  and  he  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  its  source  was  religion  and  that  its  beginning 
was  to  be  sought  for  in  the  East — in  India  and  Egypt 
— and  not  among  the  imitators  of  the  Romans. 
Alexis  returned  to  Russia  at  the  end  of  1826,  and 
pursued  his  artistic  activities  at  the  Hermitage.  Fedor 
Homiakov,  on  the  outbreak  of  war  with  Turkey,  was 
attached  to  the  staff  of  Paskievitch  in  the  Caucasus  and 
soon  died  there.  Alexis  went  to  the  Danube  and  served  as 
adjutant  to  General  Prince  Madatov,  and  was  decorated  for 
valour  at  Shumla  and  Bazardzhik.  After  the  war  he 
returned  to  Moscow.  Rejoining  his  former  circle  of  friends, 
he  became  an  ardent  partisan  of  an  independent  Russia  as 
against  the  Schelling  and  Hegel  groups,  but  his  voice 
appeared  as  if  crying  in  the  wilderness.  His  uncle, 
S.  A.  Kireievsky,  sickened  and  died  in  1836,  and  in  that 
year  Alexis  became  engaged  to  Katerina  Mikhailovna 
Yazikova,  sister  of  the  poet  N.  M.  Yazikov,  the  bridegroom 
being  thirty-two  and  the  bride  eighteen.  Thanks  to  the 
high  moral  standard  instilled  into  him  by  his  mother,  Alexis 
proved  an  excellent  husband  and  father.  Two  sons  were  born 
but  soon  died,  but  later  they  had  five  daughters  and  two  sons 
in  all.  The  life  was  divided  between  Moscow  and  the 
country  estates  which,  as  a  sportsman,  Alexis  liked  to  visit 
in  spring  and  autumn.  His  mother,  with  advancing  years, 
became  rather  a  trial,  with  incessant  grief  for  her  eldest 
son,  needless  reproaches  about  mismanagement,  and  Alexis' 
—to  her  mind — Liberal  and  Protestant  tendencies.  She 
died  in  July,  1857.  In  1847,  Alexis  Homiakov,  with  his 


39 

wife  and  two  eldest  children,  set  out  for  foreign  travel, 
visiting  Germany,  England,  France,  and  Bohemia.  At 
Prague,  soon  to  be  the  centre  of  the  Slavic  Congress  and 
a  national  movement,  he  met  Hanka,  librarian  and  man 
of  letters,  famous  in  connection  with  the  Kralodvorsky 
manuscripts.  Of  England,  he  said  that  he  arrived  there 
with  cheerful  astonishment,  and  left  with  a  melancholy 
love. 

Homiakov  and  his  friends  came  to  be  known  as 
Slavianophils,  and  he  wrote  that  this  name,  given  derisively, 
founded  on  foreign  analogy,  which  in  Russian  ought  to  be 
Slavianoliubtsy  (lovers  of  the  Slavs)  was  quite  acceptable  to 
them.  Every  Russian  should  be  a  Slavophil.  Evidence 
could  be  found  among  Russian  soldiers  in  the  Turkish  war 
or  on  the  Moscow  Gostirmy  dvor,  where  Frenchmen, 
Germans,  and  Italians  were  regarded  as  foreigners,  while 
Serbs,  Dalmatians,  and  Bulgars  were  brethren.  Count 
S.  G.  Stroganov  was  not  in  favour  of  the  Slavophils,  and  all 
kinds  of  restrictions  were  set  up  against  them.  The 
wearing  of  beards  and  distinctively  Russian  dress  provoked 
persecution,  and  many  sympathisers  held  aloof.  'The 
Clergy,  generally  speaking,  including  the  Metropolitan 
Philaret,  regarded  the  movement  doubtfully,  as  Homiakov 
found  when  he  attempted  to  further  relations  between  the 
Orthodox  and  Anglican  Churches.  After  the  death  of  the 
Tsar  Nicholas,  the  Slavophils  breathed  more  freely. 

The  activities  of  Alexis  Stepanovitch  were  many-sided. 
He  was  a  landed  proprietor,  artist,  sportsman,  and  man  of 
letters ;  he  devised  a  successful  remedy  for  cholera,  sent  a 
rifle  to  the  Ministry  of  War,  and  a  steam-engine  to  a 
London  exhibition,  which  he  called  the  Moskowka  Rotatory 
Steam-engine.  The  emancipation  problem  engaged  his 
attention.  S.  T.  Aksakov  said:  "Out  of  Homiakov  could 
be  made  ten  men,  each  one  better  than  he."  With  all  his 


40 

industry  he  had  a  reputation  for  laziness.  He  enjoyed  good 
health,  except  for  attacks  of  eye-trouble  and  typhus.  This 
latter  complaint  carried  off  his  beloved  wife  at  Moscow  in 
January,  1852,  a  calamity  which  he  considered  as  a  call  to 
sustained  and  serious  work.  In  his  grief  the  dying 
Zhukovsky  sent  Alexis  his  blessing.  The  death  of  Gogol 
was  a  heavy  blow,  as  was  that  of  the  philosopher  I.  V. 
Kireievsky,  and  gradually  the  circle  dwindled.  On  Sep- 
tember 23rd,  1860,  at  Ivanovskoye,  his  Riazan  estate,  Alexis 
Stepanovitch  passed  away  through  cholera,  attended  by  his 
friend  L.  M.  Muromtsev.  "  I  have  cured  many  and  cannot 
cure  myself,"  were  his  words  of  Christian  resignation  to  the 
last  summons.  Homiakov  reposes  in  the  Danilov  monastery 
at  Moscow  by  the  side  of  his  wife,  and  on  monuments 
around  are  the  names  of  Prince  Tsherkassky,  Gogol,  Yazikov, 
Valuev,  Samarin,  and  other  friends.  His  biography,  with  a 
summary  of  his  views,  has  been  written  by  Mr.  Valerian 
Liaskovsky,  and  we  are  much  indebted  to  this  work  for  the 
foregoing  facts. 

The  works  of  A.  S.  Homiakov  have  been  published  in 
four  volumes,  of  which  the  second  edition  is  before  us. 
The  first  volume,  consisting  of  numerous  articles,  was  edited 
after  his  death  by  J.  S.  Aksakov  in  1861.  It  is  quite 
impracticable  to  examine  all  in  detail,  but  we  shall 
endeavour  to  furnish  as  complete  an  idea  as  possible  of  the 
workings  of  that  cultured,  catholic  mind.  In  the  first 
article,  on  views  of  foreigners  about  Russia,  he  shows  how  a 
Russian  traveller  retui'ning  home  tells  his  stay-at-home 

friends  what  a  wonderful  book  Lord ,  Marquis , 

bookseller ,  Dr.  -    — ,  has  written  about  Russia  ;  though 

there  is  much  nonsense  there  is  great  truth.  The  stay- 
at-home  buys  the  wonderful  work  and  finds  how  full  of 
ignorance  and  prejudice  it  is.  "It  is  strange  that  Russia 
alone  has,  as  it  were,  the  privilege  of  arousing  the  worst 


41 

feelings  of  the  European  heart."  We  do  not  know  Russia ; 
a  man  cannot  know  his  own  face  without  a  mirror,  and 
he  has  not  invented  a  mental  mirror  to  reveal  his  spiritual 
and  moral  physiognomy ;  it  is  equally  difficult  for  a  nation 
to  know  itself.  He  considers  West  European  nations  as 
being  under  formalism — cold  calculation — with  a  tincture  of 
national  and  personal  pride  lightly  modified  by  some  "  half- 
vicious  virtues,"  including  England  in  her  external  policy. 

But  not  internal  England,  full  of  spiritual  life  and  power,  full  of 
reason  and  love  ;  not  England  of  election  majorities,  but  of  harmony  in 
judgment  of  men  bound  by  oath ;  not  savage  England  covered  with 
baronial  castles,  but  spiritual  England,  which  does  not  allow  bishops  to 
fortify  their  dwellings ;  not  England  of  the  East  India  Company,  but 
England  of  the  missionaries ;  not  England  of  the  Pitts  but  of  the 
Wilberforces,  England  wherein  there  is  still  tradition,  poetry,  sanctity 
of  home  life,  warmth  of  heart,  and  Dickens,  younger  brother  of  our 
Gogol ;  in  fact,  Shakespeare's  merry  old  England. 

The  vices  of  the  French  language  have  belonged  to 
all  European  languages  more  or  less,  but  the  great  Russian 
nation  speaks  its  own  literary  language  and  perhaps  even 
better  than  its  literature.  In  the  second  article,  on  views  of 
Russians  about  foreigners,  he  gives  with  approval  a  shrewd 
French  observation  : — 

Vous  autres  Russes,  vous  me  paraissez  un  singulier  peuple  ;  enfans 
de  noble  race,  vous  vous  amusez  a  jouer  le  role  d'enfans  trouves. 

He  also  approves  of  d'Israeli's  remark,  "  English 
manners  save  England  from  English  laws."  To  be  a 
Russian  ("  On  the  possibility  of  a  Russian  artistic  school ") 
it  is  not  enough  to  know  Russian  grammatically,  statistics, 
and  to  study  literary  memorials;  in  that  way  one  could  be 
a  respectable  Russist  (like  a  Hellenist,  Latinist,  &c.),  but 
never  a  living  Russian  man.  Perhaps  love  of  Russia  exists 
among  us,  says  Homiakov,  but  it  is  like  the  good  English- 
men's love  for  negroes,  Hottentots  and  Indians,  with  a 
conviction  of  mental  and  moral  superiority  and  the  hope  of  a 
role  of  future  if  not  present  benefactors.  However,  the  fine 


42 

invisible  cords  uniting  the  Russian  soul  to  his  country  and 
nation  are  not  subject  to  reasoning  analysis.  A  Russian 
song  cannot  be  proved  to  be  better  than  an  Italian  barcarolle 
or  tarantella,  but  it  appeals  more  deeply  to  the  Russian 
heart  and  ear.  An  attack  on  Russian  dress  is  an  attack  on 
freedom  of  taste  and  feeling,  and  rejection  of  Russian 
garments  as  Russian  seems  strange  and  somewhat  of  an 
insult. 

Of  especial  interest  to  us  all  must  be  his  "  Letter  on 
England,"  visited  in  1847,  when  Gogol  saw  him  off  at 
Ostend,  "  You'll  like  our  old  England,"  said  one  of  the 
steamer  crew,  an  exact  prophecy.  The  quiet  of  the  English 
Sunday  greatly  impressed  our  traveller,  who  had  no  patience 
with  those  who  disliked  and  misunderstood  it.  He  extols 
our  hospitality,  and  if  we  do  not  readily  open  our  doors  we 
treat  the  guest  well.  "The  soul  wearied  of  the  serious 
materialism  of  Germany  and  the  smiling  materialism  of 
France  breathes  freely  in  England,  and  at  the  same  time 
permits  itself  to  laugh  at  her  Dombeys  and  at  the  travellers 
who  can  see  nothing  but  Dombeys  there."  Every  English- 
man is  in  fact  a  Tory  at  heart.  "  English  history  is  not  a 
thing  of  the  past  for  the  modern  Englishman :  it  lives 
throughout  his  life,  in  all  his  customs,  in  almost  every 
detail  of  his  life."  The  Englishman  wanders  in  Westmin- 
ster Abbey  with  a  deep,  sincere,  and  ennobling  love,  and 
esteems  the  law,  because  the  English  law  is  so  completely 
English.  Homiakov's  remarks  on  Oxford  and  Cambridge 
and  their  place  in  English  life  evince  keen  insight.  Oxford 
is  more  charming  than  Venice,  with  its  luxury  and  delicacy, 
for  over  Oxford  hovers  a  severe  and  resplendent  soul.  The 
chief  basis  of  English  life  is  certainly  religion,  as  hundreds 
of  missionaries  and  preachers  are  the  outward  expression  of 
a  common  spirit  and  tendency.  Reverent  worshippers  in 
churches,  street  crowds  listening  to  a  poor  old  man 


43 

expounding  (if  feebly)  texts  of  Scripture,  and  knots  of  work- 
men engaged  in  theological  arguments  on  Sunday,  remind  him 
of  holy,  devout  Russia.  (We  cannot  help  wondering  what 
Homiakov  would  have  made  of  cultured  and  not  irreverent 
scepticism,  represented  by  Matthew  Arnold,  Lecky,  and 
Huxley.)  The  Englishman  recalls  the  Russian  in  a  pro- 
found and  real  distrust  of  human  reason.  He  had  an 
amusing  chat  with  a  lawyer,  who  said :  "  We  are,  sir, 
the  plague  of  our  country,  and  in  studying  our  history 
I  cannot  blame  Cade  and  Tyler  for  hanging  us."  Among 
Englishmen,  ignorance  of  the  simplest  facts  is  united  with 
a  sound  and  lofty  comprehension  of  spiritual  principles. 
Outside  England,  Tory  principles  are  represented  in  Russia 
by  the  Kremlin,  the  caves  of  Kiev,  the  Solovetsky  Mon- 
astery, sanctity  of  family  life,  and  predominant  Orthodoxy. 
In  conclusion,  he  says  that  England  will  not  perish,  which 
has  done  so  much  for  Christianity,  but  he  fears  the 
"  Protestant  axe,"  and  demands  a  new  spiritual  principle  to 
save  us.  To  have  read  no  more  than  this  magnificent  letter 
is  to  lay  us  under  a  great  obligation  to  A.  S.  Homiakov. 

In  an  essay  on  "  Aristotle  and  a  Universal  Exhibition," 
he  says  that  Peter  the  Great  performed  no  little  service  to 
the  country,  and  became  the  Russian  Aristotle ;  but  the 
country  should  free  itself  from  the  occidental  life  which  he 
introduced  and  give  up  the  magister  dixit.  There  is  more 
admiration  of  England  in  this  essay,  and  of  her  love  of 
antiquity,  while  Homiakov  is  struck  with  the  Crystal 
Palace.  At  the  same  time  he  finds  nothing  more  amusing 
than  a  Russian  Anglornaniac.  In  criticising  an  article  of 
I.  V.  Kireievsky  on  European  and  Russian  culture,  he 
disagrees  with  the  view  that  Christian  doctrine  was  ex- 
pressed in  nil  its  fullness  and  purity  in  the  public  and 
private  life  of  Ancient  Russia,  and  asks  when  this  occurred. 
In  spite  of  his  love  for  his  country  he  could  not  make  such 


44 

an  assertion,  for  with  Christianity  began  the  development 
of  Russian  life.  All  the  Western  nations  stood  in  a  far 
worse  relation  to  Christianity  than  Russia,  which  had  one 
source  of  enlightenment — Faith.  The  Metropolitan  Alexis 
and  St.  Sergius  did  more  for  the  unity  of  the  Russian  land 
than  the  cunning  policy  of  Simeons,  Dmitris,  and  loanns. 
Writing  on  modern  philosophical  phenomena,  Homiakov 
calls  Hegel  the  fullest  and  even  the  only  rationalist  in 
the  world.  In  an  argument  on  personal  evidence  of 
the  existence  of  St.  Peter's,  he  reduces  Hegel  to  this 
reductio  ad  absurdwm,  "  for  him  Prussia  is  the  actual 
cause  of  Egyptian  or  Greek  history,  and  by  no  means  in 
a  teleological  sense."  In  the  essay  on  "  The  Old  and  the 
New,"  Homiakov  has  no  sympathy  with  those  who  lament 
the  "  good  old  times ;  "  we  know  contemporary  Russia,  but 
must  guess  out  old  Russia.  There  is  a  good  summary  of 
Peter  the  Great's  activity,  who  came  as  a  terrible  and  yet 
beneficent  shock  to  his  countrymen,  disturbing  robber- 
judges,  nobles  who  thought  of  their  rank  and  not  of  the 
country,  monks  who  sought  personal  salvation  in  cells  and 
collections  in  cities  and  forgot  the  Church,  humanity  and 
Christian  brotherhood.  There  are  accounts  of  Ivan  the 
Terrible,  a  stranger  to  human  love,  and  his  son  Feodor, 
whose  reign  was  one  of  happiness  to  Russia,  he  says,  while 
too  much  credit  is  given  for  good  results  to  the  wisdom 
of  Boris  Godunov.  The  Orthodox  world  (Glinka's  "  Life 
for  the  Tsar ")  is  one  of  song,  and  discourse  itself  in 
songs  is  most  natural.  Literature  and  music  have  grand 
exemplars  in  Gogol  and  Glinka. 

The  sportsman  conies  out  in  an  article  on  sport  and 
hunting.  The  learned  and  sedate  Germans  cannot  under- 
stand the  English  love  of  sport,  and  that  a  wise  nation  can 
indulge  in  such  triviality.  He  quotes  newspaper  accounts 
of  hunting  performances  by  Lords  Fitzhardinge  and  Gifford, 


45 

and  goes  on  to  discuss  breeds  of  dogs.  Homiakov's  opinion 
of  the  Norman  Conquest  and  its  effects  on  the  Anglo-Saxon 
world  (instead  of  a  preface  to  Valuer's  writings)  is  scarcely 
just,  and  though  there  may  be  reasons  for  deploring  this 
important  fact  in  our  history,  the  Normans  were  not  as 
inhuman  and  depraved  as  he  seems  to  think.  "  The  Slavonic 
world  holds  for  humanity,  if  not  the  germ,  then  the  possibility 
of  regeneration."  His  historical  writings  brought  him  into 
conflict  with  Professor  Granovsky.  He  does  not  like  our 
erratic  English  alphabet,  while  Cyrillic  is  a  reasonable  one. 
';  A  Chat  at  Podmoskovna  "  of  two  ladies  and  two  gentlemen 
is  full  of  interesting  reflections.  Tulnev  is  not  altogether 
correct  when  he  says  that  there  is  no  question  of  nationality 
in  England  or  France  since  there  are  no  foreign  elements 
there :  admitting  the  latter  fact,  "  home  rule  "  aspirations, 
especially  with  ourselves,  must  not  be  overlooked.  Zaputin 
truthfully  says — of  the  Russian  of  those  days  at  all  events  — 
that  "  we  belong  far  less  to  our  nationality  than  educated 
Englishmen,  French,  or  Germans  to  their  own."  Homiakov 
writes  in  glowing  terms  of  Lord  Metcalfe,  Governor- 
General  of  East  India,  Jamaica,  and  Canada,  "  a  pre- 
eminently Christian  official."  who  brought  honour  to 
his  country  and  who  belongs  to  the  whole  of  humanity. 
"  Such  men  as  Wellington,  Collingwood,  Bentinck,  and 
Metcalfe  are  the  strength  of  England."  We  seem  to  hear 
L.  N.  Tolstoy  in  Homiakov's  letter  to  T.  I.  Philippov,  when, 
in  a  discussion  of  family  love,  he  says  that  for  some  men 
natural  and  necessarily  limited  family  love  would  militate 
against  love  of  humanity  in  general.  "  That  which  elevates 
average  people  might  be  an  occasion  of  falling  to  the 
highest.  The  family  itself  would  be  a  hindrance  to  their  love 
of  humanity."  Such  considerations,  which  have  influenced 
saints  of  many  religions,  obviously  do  not  appeal  to  the  vast 
majority  of  Christians,  and  Alexis  Stepanovitch  was  a  model 


46 

husband  and  father,  while  not  unmindful  of  the  duty  to  love 
his  neighbour  as  himself.  It  is  remarkable  to  find  a  eulogy 
of  Voltaire,  "  more  of  a  Christian  than  his  antagonists,"  e.</., 
in  the  Galas  and  other  affairs.  "  Voltaire  employed  against 
false  Christianity  of  his  time  a  weapon  derived  from  Christian 
truth."  Writing  on  juridical  questions,  he  says,  "  to  us,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  has  been  granted  Christianity  in  all  its 
purity,  in  all  its  reality  of  brotherly  love.  .  .  .  Russia 
must  be  either  the  most  moral,  i.e.,  the  most  Christian,  of  all 
human  societies,  or  nothing  at  all."  Finally,  for  we  must 
refrain  from  further  citations,  a  speech  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Society  of  the  Lovers  of  Literature,  in  1859,  is  a  magnificent 
tribute  to  the  influence  of  Moscow  in  Russia.  "  The  Moscow 
word  has  become  the  common  Russian  word.  .  .  .  There, 
we  may  say,  is  constantly  worked  out  the  thought  of  Russian 
society  of  to-morrow  ...  we  may  say  of  thought  in  Moscow 
what  Dante  says  about  the  eyes  of  one  of  the  heroic  figures 
of  his  poem  :  gli  occhi  nel  muover  onesti  e  tardi,  Such  eyes 
and  such  movement  of  thought  please  me."  It  was  only 
right  and  proper,  he  thought,  that  such  a  society  should  be 
formed  at  Moscow. 

The  second  volume,  with  a  portrait  of  A.  S.  Homiakov 
for  frontispiece,  is  taken  up  with  theological  writings,  with 
a  preface  by  Y.  F.  Samarin  written  in  1 867.  He  says  that 
these  are  the  most  important,  most  complete,  and  yet  the 
least  known  of  his  works.  A  remark  of  Homiakov  quoted  is 
that  "  for  science  is  necessary  not  only  freedom  of  opinion 
but  also  freedom  of  doubt."  Science,  says  Samarin,  i& 
related  more  directly  with  Latin  and  Protestant  Christianity 
than  with  Orthodoxy.  Homiakov  was  one  of  the  lights 
of  the  rich  Pushkin  Pleiades,  but  he  lacked  artistic  talent. 
He  was  theologian,  mechanician,  philosopher,  engineer, 
philologist,  doctor — a  master,  connoisseur,  and  inventor,  said 
his  friends,  though  opponents  called  him  a  dilettante  ia 


47 

everything.  4-  He  lived  in  the  Church,"  says  Samarin,  and 
proceeds  to  explain  what  is  meant :  .the  Church  is  the- 
manifestation  on  earth  of  unadulterated  truth  and 
inviolable  right.  Wherever  he  was,  Homiakov  observed 
the  fasts.  He  thought  that  tradition  ought  not  to  fetter  the 
progress  of  science — a  recurrent  problem  for  the  earnest 
inquirer.  "  Homiakov  first  looked  upon  Latinism  and 
Protestantism  from  within  the  Church,  consequently  from 
above"  His  one  theme  is,  ';  the  Church  as  a  living  organism 
of  truth  entrusted  to  mutual  love  ;  or,  as  freedom  in  unity 
and  unity  in  freedom;  or,  as  freedom  in  the  harmony  of  its 
manifestations.''  Samarin  concludes — Homiakov  is  a 
teacher  of  the  Church. 

To  analyse  the  series  of  essays  is  beyond  our  power. 
Homiakov  thoroughly  understands  the  points  of  view  of  all 
branches  of  the  Christian  Church,  whether  those  of  highly 
developed  systems  of  doctrine  and  ritual,  or  those  of 
primitive  and  simple  ideals.  He  examined  the  writings  of 
Vinet,  a  learned  French  Protestant,  the  Biblical  labours 
of  Bunsen,  the  Jansenist  Looss,  and  the  Jesuit  Father 
Gagarin.  His  signature  for  theological  articles  was 
"  Ignotus."  We  may  gather  fine  gems  of  thought :  "  Love 
is  the  crown  and  glory  of  the  Church";  "  Contempt  for  the 
body  is  the  sin  of  spiritual  pride."  The  name  Pravoslavia 
will  disappear  when  all  branches  of  the  Church  are  united  in 
truth.  Homiakov  does  not  approve  of  Anglicanism,  and 
thinks  it  will  follow  Gallicanism.  He  had  a  loner  corres- 

O 

pondence  in  English  with  the  Rev.  W,  Palmer  and 
the  Rev.  G.  Williams.  The  former  translated  some  of 
Homiakov's  verses,  which  led  to  friendly  relations.  In  one 
of  his  letters  to  Palmer  he  refers  to  the  death  of  his  wife, 
who  asked  if  they  could  praise  God  in  the  same  Church  with 
Palmer  and  Williams.  He  was  familiar  with  the  Gorham 
controversy  and  judgment.  Translations  of  Pauline 
epistles  are  included  in  this  volume. 


48 

The  third  volume  contains  writings  on  universal  history, 
with  a  preface  by  the  eminent  scholar  and  traveller, 
A.  F.  Hilferding,  dated  March,  1872,  who  says  that 
Homiakov  was  apparently  desirous  of  composing  some 
magnificent  and  solid  work  of  erudition  besides  poems  and 
articles.  One  day  Gogol  surprised  him  writing,  caught 
sight  of  the  name  of  Semiramis,  and  spread  it  about  that 
Alexis  Stepanovitch  was  writing  a  Semiramide.  Friends 
began  to  ask  when  the  Semiramide  would  be  ready,  and 
he  replied:  "Not  in  my  lifetime;  after  my  death  perhaps 
some  one  will  issue  it."  This  is  what  actually  happened, 
and  these  chapters  form  the  "  Semiramide,"  which  he  began 
about  1838.  The  author  had  not  arranged  his  materials  into 
form,  and  his  editor  had  great  difficulty  in  devising  some 
kind  of  system,  since  all  depended  on  Homiakov's  wide 
reading  and  prodigious  memory,  without  notes  or  references 
to  originals  and  authorities.  It  is  not,  says  Hilferding, 
a  narrative  universal  history,  but  a  scheme  of  how  history 
should  be  related.  Homiakov  never  discussed  it  with  his 
friends,  as  was  his  usual  habit  when  he  had  literary  work  in 
hand.  He  was  at  a  disadvantage  in  that  knowledge  of 
Slavonic  antiquities,  the  scientific  study  of  which  had  not 
long  begun,  had  been  mingled  with  fantastic  theories.  For 
example,  Shafarik's  famous  work  opened  up  a  wide  and 
interesting  field,  but  {Collar's  poems  were  those  of  an  ardent 
dreamer.  In  consequence,  Homiakov  held  exaggerated 
views  of  the  importance  and  extent  of  the  ancient  Slav. 
We  glance  through  page  after  page  of  antiquities,  history, 
mythology,  and  philology,  but  since  Homiakov  studied  and 
wrote  much  has  been  abandoned  and  knowledge  has  been 
entirely  recast.  These  remarks  apply  to  the  fourth  volume 
of  Homiakov's  works,  which  Hilferding  did  not  live  to  see 
published.  Notes  "  by  the  editor  "  prove  the  conscientious 
care  with  which  a  busy  scholar  arranged  the  manuscript 


41) 

of  a  beloved  teacher,  and,  as  a  brief  foreword  explains, 
the  edition  serves  as  a  memorial  of  both. 

There  remains  the  poetry  of  the  great  Slavophil,  some 
of  which  has  been  rendered  into  English.*  His  first 
effusion  was  "  Desire  for  Quiet,"  written  at  Petrograd  in 
1824.  in  which  the  bard  felt  the  call  in  the  blood,  the 
enthusiasms  to  ripen  into  thought  and  action.  In  "  Youth  " 
he  is  like  a  future  Titan  who  would  seize  Nature  in  a 
passionate  embrace,  though  in  "  Two  Hours  "  he  refers  to 
the  poet's  dark  hour,  when  inspiration  is  lacking,  no  rays 
shine  through  the  gloom,  and  Phoebus  is  mean.  There  is 
a  prophetic  ring  about  "  Approaching  Sleep,"  a  prayer  that 
when  the  Angel  of  Death  comes  Homiakov  might  receiA'e 
him  as  a  long-expected  guest,  with  fearless  eye,  and  soul 
released  from  mist  and  gloom  to  enjoy  a  brilliant  flight.  In 
"An  Ode  "  Homiakov  evokes  maledictions  of  the  future  on 
him  whose  voice  commanded  him  to  serve  against  Slavs 
(i.e.,  the  Poles,  in  the  troubles  of  1830),  and  on  past 
traditions,  vanished  deceits,  and  stories  of  vengeance  and 
suffering ;  the  inspired  bard  sees  the  Slav  eagles  arise  and 
break  into  broad,  daring  flight,  but  bowing  before  the  oldest 
— the  Eagle  of  the  North.  "  The  Eagle  "  is  a  magnificent 
expression  of  the  Slav  idea ;  the  eagle  flying  in  the  heavens 
must  not  forget  his  little  brothers  of  the  Danube,  Alps, 
Carpathians  and  Balkans.  Like  other  young  men  of  his 
time,  Homiakov  was  taken  with  Mdlle.  A.  O.  Rossetti,  but 
when  he  talked  to  her  of  Russia  and  endeavoured  to  interest 
her  in  national  songs  he  met  with  chilling  indifference.  In 
"To  my  Children"  he  commemorates  two  sons  of  feeble 
health,  lost  in  1838.  Moreover,  Homiakov  was  a  writer  of 
deep,  spiritual  poetry,  as,  for  example,  the  verses  on  the  duty 

*An  earlier  number  of  our  Proceedings  contained  the  lecturer's  version 
of  "To  the  Slav  Cities."  Dr.  J.  Pollen's  "Russia  Repentant"  appears 
in  No.  70,  p.  92. 


50 

of  a  singer-pastor  whose  warfare  is  not  with  carnal  but 
spiritual  weapons,  not  with  the  armour  and  sword  of  Saul 
but  with  the  Word  of  God ;  other  verses  are  in  the  nature 
of  a  warning  against  spiritual  pride  :  God  is  not  with  those 
who  cry,  "  We  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  pillars  of  the 
Temple,  the  shield  and  sword  of  God."  A  call  for  the 
slumbering  brother  f;o  midnight  prayer  breathes  a  devotional 
spirit.  In  "  Russia"  the  poet  sings  of  her  glorious  destiny; 
where  are  Rome  and  the  Mongols?  Pride  must  not  be 
indulged  in,  although  God  has  blessed  Russia  and  intended 
her  for  an  example  to  other  nations.  Homiakov's  sense  of 
brotherhood  and  appeals  to  the  fraternal  spirit  shine  through 
the  verses  on  Easter  morning  service  at  the  Kremlin.  The 
Crimean  War  could  not  fail  to  exercise  the  patriotic  Muse, 
but  one  effusion — a  call  to  humility  and  repentance — 
rendered  him  unpopular  in  Moscow7.  Indeed,  no  preacher 
who  indicates  weakness  and  faults  can  expect  to  escape 
hostility. 

We  take  leave  of  Alexis  Stepanovitch  Homiakov  by  a 
rendering  of  the  album  verse  written  at  Prague  for  Vaclav 
Hanka,  the  man  of  letters  and  librarian  celebrated  in  the 
Kralodvorsky  (Koniginhof)  manuscripts  controversy,  wrhose 
Slavonic  zeal  probably  outran  his  discretion : — 

At  one  time  I  prayed  God  about  Russia,  and  said  : — 
Remove  from  her  all  slavish  duluess, 

Preserve  her  from  a  pride  that's  blind, 
Infuse  in  her  a  living  fullness 

To  cheer  a  dying,  doubting  mind  ! 

This  is  my  prayer  for  all  the  Slavs.  As  long  as  no  doubt  is  ours  there 
will  be  success.  There  is  power  in  us  as  long  as  brotherhood  is  not 
forgotten.  It  will  always  be  a  sincere  happiness  for  me  to  remember 
that  I  was  enabled  to  write  this  in  your  book. 


THE  CHAIRMAN  proposed  a  very  hearty  vote  of  thanks 
to  the  author    and  to    the  reader  of   the    excellent    paper. 


51 

He  commended  Mr.  Marchant's  ability,  industry  and  whole- 
hearted devotion  to  the  A.R.L.S.  Mr.  Cazalet  likewise 
observed  that  Mr.  A.  S.  Homiakov  was  not  only  a  great 
Slavophil  and  a  poet  who  raised  the  ideals  of  morality  and 
patriotism  among  his  countrymen  but  he  was  also  an 
Anglophil,  for  he  sympathised  with  our  British  institutions. 

What  further  endeared  his  memory  to  the  A.R.L.S. 
was  that  Mr.  Homiakov's  worthy  son,  an  ex-President 
of  the  Duma,  was  a  distinguished  Member  of  our  Society 
for  the  last  20  years.  Mr.  Cazalet  recommended  the 
members  of  the  A.R.L.S.  to  read  once  more  in  our 
Proceedings  Dr.  Pollen's  translations  of  Homiakov  and 
other  Russian  poets.  Dr.  Pollen  was  himself  a  poet, 
and  sometimes  even  improved  on  the  originals.  This  was 
not  a  compliment  but  a  fact. 

DR.  POLLEN,  in  seconding  the  vote  of  thanks  to 
Mr.  Marchant  and  to  Mr.  Workman,  said  the  paper  had 
been  well  composed  and  beautifully  and  clearly  read.  It 
was  a  pleasure  to  listen  to  it,  and  he  felt  the  vote  of  thanks 
was  carried  already. 

Dr.  Pollen  drew  attention  to  the  appeal,  in  a  recent 
leading  article  in  the  Morning  Post,  to  all  those  who  knew 
and  understood  Russia  to  come  forward  and  enlighten  the 
British  public  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  Russian  people 
and  the  Russian  administration. 

Russia  was  once  more  rendering  heroic  services  to  the 
Western  World  and  to  the  cause  of  civilization.  Homiakov 
had  celebrated  Russia  as  "Russia  Repentant,"  after  the 
Crimean  War,  and  Mr.  Cazalet  had  alluded  in  the  most 
gratifying  manner  to  his  (Dr.  Pollen's)  translation  of  that 
poem.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  Homiakov  was  a 
very  able  and  very  far-seeing  man,  and  he  foretold  the 
coming  greatness  of  his  Fatherland.  He  made  some  mistakes 
in  estimating  foreign  nations,  and  he  was  certainly  wrong 


52 

in  thinking  the  English  were  at  heart  Tories.  "  Tories,"  as 
they  knew,  were  originally  a  tribe  of  Irish  robbers  who 
posed  as  Government  officials  and  plundered  with  impunity. 
Mr.  Marchant  apparently  gave  Homiakov  credit  for  under- 
standing all  Christian  Churches.  If  Homiakov  really  did 
do  this,  he  must  have  been  a  very  clever  man  indeed. 

He,  no  doubt,  understood  the  Russian  people  and  their 
marvellous  faith,  their  realising  sense  of  the  unseen,  and 
their  consequent  devotion  to  their  religion.  They  were  a 
most  religious  people,  and  would  remain  religious  to  the 
end.  Some  said  they  were  superstitious,  but  better  to  be 
that  than  have  no  religion  at  all. 

As  to  what  Homiakov  said  about  lawyers  being  a  plague, 
Dr.  Pollen  thought  Homiakov  was  about  right. 

Although,  in  point  of  fact,  a  lawyer  himself,  Dr.  Pollen 
thought  that  the  less  people  had  to  do  with  lawyers  the 
better.  The  Lords,  the  Lawyers,  and  the  Levites  often 
proved  too  much  for  any  man,  and  they  were  certainly  a 
most  dangerous  combination.  The  three  "  L's  "  proved 
too  much  even  for  Cromwell,  but  the  most  formidable  of 
the  L's  were  undoubtedly  the  lawyers.  Dr.  Pollen  had 
much  pleasure  in  seconding  the  vote  of  thanks  which 
Mr.  Cazalet  had  so  ably  proposed. 

The  vote  was  carried  unanimously  by  the  appreciative 
audience. 


53 
REVIEWS  OF  BOOKS,  ETC. 


ENGLISH  CHURCH  WAYS. 
By  W.  H.  FRERE,  D.D.  (Murray,  1914.) 

THE  objects  of  these  lectures,  which  are  connected  with 
the  Anglican  and  Eastern-Orthodox  Churches  and  the 
Russian  Society  for  promoting  a  rapprochement,  have  found 
an  eloquent  exponent  in  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Frere,  who 
addressed  a  mixed  audience  of  Russians  and  English 
residents  at  St.  Petersburg. 

The  lectures  were  translated,  sentence  by  sentence,  into 
Russian  by  Mr.  N.  Lodygensky,  who,  together  with  Mme. 
Alexeieff  and  Mr.  P.  Mansouroff,  is  the  heart  and  centre 
of  the  Russian  movement,  to  advance  the  Union  of  the 
Churches. 

These  efforts  are  especially  interesting  at  the  present 
time,  for  from  the  St.  Petersburg  Press  and  other  sources 
of  information  we  learn  that  the  Eastern  Church  is  in  a 
state  of  transition.  Russians  of  various  classes  and  for 
different  reasons  criticise  the  organization  of  their  Mother 
Church.  Another  vexed  question  is  whether  only  monks  and 
not  priests  are  to  be  raised  to  bishoprics.  Among  the 
Intelligenzia  and  others  agnosticism  is  on  the  increase.  The 
Anglican  Church  could  scarcely  be  understood  antl  apprecia- 
ted by  the  rank  and  file  of  the  Russian  nation. 

Undenominational  evangelisation,  as  practised  by  English 
Baptists  and  their  friends  in  Russia,  has  met  with  consider- 
able success,  for  among  the  peasantry  there  is  a  craving  for 
the  religion  of  the  heart  to  replace  the  formalism  of  the 
official  Church  ! 

The  number  of  dissenters  and  sects  is  a  proof  in  point, 
and  some  are  the  best  representatives  of  the  Slav  race. 


54 

A  Russian  priest  in  London  approved  of  the  projected 
union,  but  suggested  that  the  Anglican  Church  should  be 
annexed  by  the  Eastern-Orthodox  Church ! 

In  religious  matters  and  in  social  questions  an  important 
factor  is  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  people's  character- 
istics. From  Trufanoff,  alias  Hiliodare  Rasputin,  the 
Siberian,  down  to  the  so-called  Saint  Innocent  of  Balta 
(see  A.R.L.S.'s  No.  69),  many  exploit  the  credulity  of  men 
and  women,  high  and  low,  and  continue  to  exercise  a 
certain  influence  on  the  masses  in  Russia. 

Under  these  circumstances,  while  admiring  the  noble  aim 
and  the  eloquent  pleading  of  the  Reverend  author,  we  fear 
that  the  practical  realisation  of  his  religious  scheme  can 
scarcely  be  achieved.  It  may,  however,  dissolve  some 
Russian  misunderstandings  about  "  our  bustling  English 
ways  in  religion,"  as  the  author  puts  it.  A.  S.  Homiakov, 
as  may  be  seen  from  the  lecture  earlier  in  this  number, 
thoroughly  knew  all  aspects  of  the  question. 


We,  subjoin  a  Notice  of  the 

ANGLICAN    AND    EASTERN-ORTHODOX    CHURCHES 
UNION. 

This  Union  was  founded  in  1906  to  promote  the  cause  of  better 
relations  and  ultimately  of  the  restoration  of  Intercommunion  between 
the  Anglican  and  Eastern-Orthodox  Churches,  of  which  the  Russian  is 
chief  in  point  of  numbers  and  power.  It  works  by  means  of  mutual 
intercourse  and  co-operation,  and  by  methods  of  bringing  about  a 
better  mutual  understanding,  such  as  lectures,  visits  and  literature.  Its 
work  is  thus  in  the  religious  world  parallel  to  that  of  the  Anglo-Russian 
Literary  Society,  and  will  appeal  to  many  of  the  members  of  the  latter. 

The  Orthodox  President  is  the  eminent  Archbishop  Agathangel  of 
Yaroslaff,  and  it  has  among  its  members  Archbishop  Evlogie  of  Volhynia. 
It  numbers  now  about  2,060  members  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  has 
a  powerful  branch  in  the  United  States.  A  striking  advance  was  the 
formation  in  1912  of  the  sister  Society  with  similar  objects  in  Russia, 
under  the  sanction  of  the  Holy  Synod,  of  which  Archbishop  Sergie  of 


56 

Viborg  is  President.  Many  lectures  are  given  on  the  Orthodox  Church 
in  England,  and  two  lecturers,  English  Priests,  have  visited  Petrograd 
-at  the  invitation  of  the  Russian  Society,  to  give  lectures  on  the  English 
•Church  doctrine  and  life. 

The  General  Secretary,  the  Rev.  H.  J.  Fyues-Cliaton,  27,  Finsbury 
Square,  E.G.,  would  be  glad  to  give  further  particulars  of  the  Society. 


COUNT    LORIS-MELIKHOV'S     CONSTITUTION 
AND    HIS    PRIVATE    LETTERS. 

(!N  RUSSIAN.) 
(H.  Steinetz,  Berlin.) 

LORIS-MELIKHOV  was  an  able  Russian  general  and  an 
•enlightened  statesman,  about  whose  remarkable  career  little 
is  known  in  England.  An  Armenian  by  origin,  his  younger 
days  were  spent  in  successful  warfare  in  the  Caucasus  against 
the  Circassians,  and  with  Turkey.  Later  he  occupied 
various  high  administrative  posts  (Governor-General  of 
Kharkov,  &c.),  and  was  so  much  appreciated  by  Alexander  II. 
that  he  became  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  practically 
dictator. 

The  Count's  draft  of  a  constitution  would  have  been 
adopted  had  the  best  of  Czars  not  been  murdered.  A 
constitution  might  have  prevented  the  outbreak  of  the 
smouldering  revolution.  It  was  calculated  to  re-organise 
the  civil  and  military  administration,  to  expand  local 
government,  to  improve  education,  to  give  freedom  to  the 
press,  and  to  grant  the  people  the  right  to  participate  in 
the  control  of  the  country. 

After  Loris-Melikhov's  death,  which  occurred  in  Paris, 
a  secretary  of  the  Russian  Embassy  affixed  seals  on  his 
documents  and  letters,  but  copies  of  these  papers  had  been 
•confided  to  a  friend,  who  is  now  deceased. 


56 

The  Russian  book  under  our  consideration  also  refers 
to  the  Count's  earlier  career.  When  in  1877-8  he  defeated 
the  Turks  at  Kars,  the  Imperial  Viceroy  of  the  Caucasus,, 
prompted  by  jealous  satellites,  came  to  the  seat  of  war  in 
order  to  let  them  reap  the  credit  of  the  campaign,  and 
conferred  the  St.  George's  Cross  (corresponding  to  our 
V.C.)  on  a  member  of  his  own  staff  who  had  taken  no 
part  in  the  military  operations. 

The  question  of  a  constitution  was  a  natural  sequence 
of  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs  in  1862.  It  had  long  been 
sur  le  tapis,  for  there  was  seething  discontent  in  the 
nihilistic  iritelligenzia,  and  poverty  among  the  ignorant 
peasantry,  partly  in  consequence  of  the  dishonesty  and 
maladministration  of  officials,  all  of  which  caused  anxiety 
to  the  benevolent  monarch. 

On  the  untimely  death  of  Alexander  II.,  a  majority  of 
two  votes  in  the  Council  of  Ministers  disapproved  of  Loris- 
Melikhov's  Constitution,  and  it  was  abandoned,  to  the 
satisfaction  of  Alexander  III.,  who  is  said  to  have  observed 
to  his  brother  the  Grand  Duke  Vladimir,  "  a  mountain  off 
my  shoulders." 

Although  Alexander  III.  followed  the  counsels  of 
Pobedonostsev  to  leave  matters  in  statu  quo,  suggestions 
about  constitutional  changes  came  from  vai'ious  quarters : 
the  old  Emperor  of  Germany,  the  head  of  the  French 
police,  Monsieur  Andrieu,  the  pseudo-liberal  professor  of 
Moscow  University,  Mr.  Chicherin,  and  others,  in  various 
walks  of  life,  volunteered  their  advice,  but  nothing  came  of 
it  all. 

Suspicions  were  aroused  by  Katkov,  the  editor  of  the 
Moscow  Vedomeste,  against  the  loyalty  of  personages  in  high 
positions,  including  the  Grand  Duke  Constantino,  the  uncle 
of  the  Czar.  A  character  sketch  by  Prince  G.  Volhonsky 


57 

precedes  some  extracts  from  Count  Loris-Melikhov's  private 
letters,  addressed  to  a  person  whose  name  is  not  given  : 

They  (his  enemies)  want  to  catch  some  trivial  gossip  and  to  expand 
it  in  order  to  make  political  capital.  A  sorry  and  a  silly  game. 

His  private  fortune  was  meagre,  for  public  business  had 
absorbed  all  his  attention. 

In  one  of  the  letters  the  Count,  writing  about  current 
politics,  expresses  regret  at  the  murder  of  Cavendish  and 
Burke  in  Phoenix  Park,  and  praises  Gladstone  for  being 
well  disposed  to  Russia. 


ARMY    STORIES    AND    SKETCHES.      (RUSSIAN.) 
By  EGOR  EGOKOV.      (Berisovski,  St.  Petersburg.) 

THE  author  exposes  the  short-comings  of  the  Army  through 
the  medium  of  short  stories. 

This  modus  operandi  was  mostly  used  by  writers  of  the 
last  century,  when  censors  were  more  repressive  than  now. 

Some  of  the  scenes  and  conversations  are  amusing,  but 
the  triviality  ascribed  to  officers  is  scarcely  credible.  The 
French  word  niaiserie  might  best  define  their  talk  and 
actions.  In  some  cases  the  officers'  wives  are  the  ruling 
spirits  of  the  regiment,  while  reckless  expenditure  brings 
ruin  to  many.  Abuses  in  hospitals  form  the  subject  of  not 
a  few  anecdotes.  The  outward  smartness  of  an  empty- 
headed  lieutenant  is  often  more  valued  than  an  intelligent 
and  studious  subaltern.  Drink,  gambling,  and  coarse  dissipa- 
tion are  of  frequent  occurrence.  The  pay  is  miserable,  and 
poverty-stricken  officers  are  captains  at  the  advanced  age  of 
forty-five,  while  those  who  have  interest  are  sometimes 
generals  at  thirty-five.  Probably  the  author  describes  his 
•own  sad  experiences  in  the  Army  as  distinct  from  the 


Guards,  which,  however,  form  only  about  one  fiftieth  parl 
of  the  whole  Army.  An  ideal  general  is  the  subject  of 
another  episode.  He  finds  that  real  work  is  more  important 
than  endless  written  reports  which  are  still  the  order  of  the 
day.  The  good  general  tries  to  counteract  the  evils  of 
routine,  but  he  is  maligned  at  head-quarters. 

Mr.  Egorov's  strictures  remind  us  of  a  characteristic 
chestnut  anecdote  which  we  heard  many  years  ago  about 
bribery,  but  we  trust  that  it  does  not  apply  to  the  present 
times.  An  official  of  the  Commissariat  was  sent  from 
St.  Petersburg  to  the  South  of  Russia — a  distance  of  some 
2,000  miles — when  no  railways  or  telegraphs  were  extant. 
He  was  entrusted  with  the  building  of  wooden  store-houses, 
the  purchase  of  grain  and  cattle,  which  was  to  be  fattened, 
killed  and  salted. 

The  official  wrote  frequent  and  regular  reports  to  his 
authorities  about  the  purchase  of  timber,  grain,  cattle,  of 
the  hire  of  pasturage  and  of  the  salting  of  the  meat.  But 
his  very  last  report  stated  that  by  the  will  of  God  the 
store-houses  and  all  in  them  had  been  destroyed  by  fire. 

He  had  done  nothing,  had  pocketed  the  money,-  but 
on  paper  he  was  all  right. 

The  present  achievements  of  the  valiant  Russian  Army 
disprove  the  strictures  of  M.  Egorov. 


LA  RUSSIE  INTELLECTUELLE. 

PAR  Louis  LEGER,  Membre  de  1'Institut,  Professeur  an 
College  de  France  (Maisonneuve,  3  rue  du  Sabot, 
Paris,  1914). 

The  author  is  a  specialist  in  Russian  literature,  as 
testified  by  a  long  list  of  works.  We  remember  reading 
some  of  his  productions  in  the  "  Bibliotheque  Univcrselle." 


We  should  explain  that  intellectual  does  not  mean  the 
intelligenzia  of  Russia,  that  latest  excrescence  of  Slav 
civilization. 

M.  Leger  has  had  access  to  new  and  original  sources 
of  information,  unknown  to  Western  readers. 

Under  his  dexterous  pen,  Russia  reveals  novel  attrac- 
tions of  national  lore. 

The  first  part  of  the  book  contains  a  historical  account 
of  Russia,  amplified  by  the  chronicles  of  monks  and  by 
popular  legends.  The  conversion  of  Russia  to  Christianity, 
the  Tartar  bondage,  the  defeat  of  the  Tartars  by  Dmitry 
of  the  Don  and  the  final  destruction  of  their  power, 
turning  them  into  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water, 
are  picturesquely  described. 

En  1486  la  Horde  d'Or  cessa  d'exister.  Ou  sait  comment  Ivan 
le  Terrible,  par  la  conquete  de  Kazan  et  d' Astrakhan  (1551-1554), 
assura  a  la  Russie  le  cours  entier  du  Volga  ;  comment  la  seconde 
moitie  du  XVIII.  siecle,  Catherine  conquit  la  Crimee.  Maitresse  de  la 
Mer  Noire  et  de  la  Caspienne  oil  debouchent  ses  grandes  fleuves,  la 
Russie  pouvait  a  son  tour  prendre  1'offensive  contre  TAsie  et 
pousser  ses  armees  victorieuses  jusqu'au  littoral  de  1'Ocean  Pacifique. 

The  artificial  splendour  of  Catherine's  reign,  with  its 
glamour  of  literature  and  philosophy,  form  the  subject  of 
the  next  picture.  Derjavin's  adulatory  poetry  and  von 
Vizin's  critical  plays  added  lustre  to  the  policy  of  the 
Empress  and  to  her  desire  to  pose  as  an  author  and  a 
friend  of  Voltaire  and  Grimm. 

Monsieur  Leger  introduces  several  personages  who 
fio-ured  in  Russia  but  have  not  been  brought  forward  like 

O  <-? 

the  more  hackneyed  representatives  of  Russian  literature, 
whose  names  have  become  familiar  to  our  quasi  reading 
public. 

"  Un  hornme  d'etat  Russe  du  Temps  passe  "  is  Count 
Paul  Strogonov,  a  descendant  of  the  great  merchants  in 
the  Ourals,  whose  adventurous  servant,  the  rebel  Cossack 


60 

Ermak,  conquered  Siberia.  One  of  the  Strogonovs  was  a 
famous  soldier,  and  an  able  diplomatist  as  Russian 
Ambassador  in  London. 

The  historical  researches  of  the  Grand  Duke  Nicolas 
Mikhailovitch  have  assisted  M.  Leger  in  this  study. 

"  Les  Amours  d'un  Idealiste  "  is  the  story  of  the  poet 
Joukovsky,  the  translator  of  Schiller,  and  the  author  of 
some  famous  sentimental  poetry. 

"  Le  Poete  National  de  la  Petite  Russie "  is  Tara.- 
Schevchenko,  the  sou  of  a  cobbler  and  the  figurehead  of  the 
Malo- Russians.  After  some  official  opposition  a  monument 
is  to  be  erected  to  his  memory  at  Kiev.  His  exile  to  Siberia 
had  endeared  him  to  his  own  countrymen  in  the  Ukraine. 

"  Un  Poete  Russe  "  is  Koltsov,  the  son  of  a  cattle  dealer, 
whose  poetry  reminds  one  of  Burns  and  has  an  everlasting- 
charm. 

"  Le  Roman  d'une  etudiante  Russe "  is  based  on  the 
"Journal  d'une  femme  Russe,"  by  Elizabeth  Diakonov, 
concerning  her  existence  in  Russia  and  in  Paris.  It  reminds 
one  of  Marie  Bashkirtzev's  well-known  Diary,  so  much 
admired  by  Mr.  Gladstone.  Miss  Diakonov  is  an  interesting, 
typical,  superior  specimen  of  a  talented  but  painfully  neurotic- 
Slav  young  lady,  who  died  an  early  death,  worn  out  by  over- 
wrought excitability  but  full  of  noble  aspirations  and 
charitable  schemes  for  the  good  of  misguided  humanity. 

"  L'autre  Tolstoi  "  is  perhaps  as  great  an  author  as  his 
relative,  the  more  renowned  Count  Leo  Tolstoy.  The 
former  was  connected  with  the  highest  families  of  the  realm, 
and  was  a  playmate  of  the  Czar-Liberator  Alexander  II. 
Some  twenty  years  ago  his  great  novel,  the  "  Silver  Prince," 
descriptive  of  the  horrors  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  was  trans- 
lated into  English.  Count  Alexis  Tolstoy  (his  cousin  spelt 
his  own  name  Tolstoy  in  English)  was  a  prolific  author. 
His  poetical  productions  are  varied,  beautiful  in  form,  and 
abounding  in  wit  and  kindly  criticism. 


61 

Last  but  not  least  we  come  to  "  Alexanclre  Ostrovsky," 
whose  comedies  of  Moscow  merchant  life  were  as  popular 
in  Russian  theatres  as  Gogol's  exposure  of  the  officials — 
the  chinovniks. 

We  have  pointed  out  the  headings  of  M.  Leger's 
most  recent  work — the  fruit  of  study,  experience  and  love 
of  Russia.  It  merits  to  be  widely  known,  and  the  up-to- 
date,  masterly  French  is  an  additional  attraction. 


AN    ECONOMIC    HISTORY  OF   RUSSIA. 

By  JAMES  MAYOR,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Political  Economy 
in  the  History  of  Toronto.  Vol.  I :  The  Rise  and  Fall 
of  Bondage  Right ;  Vol.  II :  Industry  and  Revo- 
lution. (London  :  Dent.  New  York  :  Dutton.) 

Noticed  by  F.  P.  MARCHANT. 

THIS  important  work  is  far  wider  than  its  title  indicates,  as 
the  industrious  author  incorporates  a  vast  mass  of  political 
and  general  history  and  legal  discussion  into  his  narrative. 
He  acknowledges  indebtedness  to  the  Imperial  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  other  State  departments,  Zemstvo  authorities, 
Columbia  University,  Professors  Sviatlovsky,  Kaufman, 
Odarchenko,  Den,  and  other  Russian  friends.  He  also 
makes  considerable  use  of  the  history  by  the  late  Professor 
V.  Kluchevsky,  of  which  the  successive  volumes  of  Mr. 
Hogarth's  translation  have  been  noticed  in  our  Proceedings. 
The  above  will  suffice  to  show  that  Dr.  Mavor  has  gone  to 
Russia  itself  for  materials,  and  to  unimpeachable  sources. 

The  tirst  volume  starts  with  the  Eastern  Slavs  of  the 
Carpathians,  the  trading  towns  and  petty  principalities,  and 
the  ultimate  organised  groups. 

The  conflicts  between  local  autonomy  and  imperial  autocracy 
which  were  waged  in  Europe  throughout  and  after  the  Middle  Ages, 


62 

had  their  counterparts  in  the  struggles  between  the  Russian  free  towns 
and  rural  principalities  on  the  one  side  and  the  Moscow  princedom  on 
the  other.  In  Europe  the  imperial  idea  gave  way  before  the  idea  of 
nationality ;  but  in  Russia  the  imperial  idea  was  victorious,  town  after 
town,  principality  after  principality  passed  under  the  control  of  Moscow 
and  came  to  be  welded  into  one  political  whole. 

Referring  to  Peter's  reforms,  Dr.  Mavor  finds  that  the 
-extension  of  education  among  people  who  did  not  welcome 
it  was  not  always  happy.  With  cadet  corps,  academies,  and 
gymnasia,  "  the  products  of  this  artificially  forced  system 
were  the  '  green  young  men '  of  Griboyedov's  comedies." 
He  finds  parallels  to  this  state  of  affairs  among  young 
Chinamen  half  educated  in  America,  and  in  India  unions: 

7  O 

students  of  Western  European  culture.  A  parallel  to  Russia 
under  the  Empress  Anne,  when  eyes  were  turned  to  Europe 
in  search  of  a  new  political  system,  is  found  in  modern 
Japan,  which  looked  to  European  forms  of  government  for 
guidance.  The  European  attitude  towards  eighteenth- 
century  Russia,  says  our  author,  resembled  that  of  the 
Powers  towards  nineteenth-century  China.  Peter,  alive  to 
this,  said :  "  Europe  is  necessary  to  us  for  some  decades,  and 
afterwards  we  will  show  it  our  back." 

The  peasant  problem  in  all  its  bearings  occupies  succes- 
sive chapters.  There  is  the  unique  position  of  the  dvorovie 
liudi*  in  the  eighteenth  century,  from  among  whom  came 
talented  actors  and  musicians,  many  of  eminence  but  still 
serfs.  Compulsory  education  was  resented  ;  as  a  natural 
consequence  there  was  dissatisfaction  with  bondage  without 
chances  of  improvement.  The-  revolt  of  Pugatshov  is 
traced  out  as  a  consequence  of  Peter  the  Great's  reforms. 
Peter  treated  the  nobility  with  the  contempt  which  they 
showed  to  their  peasants,  and  when  the  nobility  were  re- 
leased from  obligatory  service  later  the  peasants  looked  for 
relief  from  obligations  to  their  lords.  Here  is  a  tribute  to 


*Serf  house  servants. 


63 

the   dogged  endurance   of    the  Russian  peasantry  in   the 
account  of  the  Mountain  Works*  troubles  : — 

They  were  vanquished  continuously,  and  yet  the  survivors  con- 
tinued the  struggle.  What  the  peasants  of  the  Mountain  Works  did 
in  the  fifties  and  sixties  of  the  eighteenth  century  is  simply  what  the 
Slav  peoples  have  been  doing  always.  They  may  only  be  finally  con- 
quered by  extermination,  and  they  are  too  fecund  to  be  exterminated. 

The  dislike  of  the  peasants  for  the  factory  system  and 
its  productions  forms  interesting  reading,  and  the  author 
notes  that  contempt  for  shop  goods  exists  among  French- 
Canadian  habitants.  The  goods  produced  at  home  were 
durable  and  often  beautiful,  while  factory  goods  were 
associated  with  waste  and  immorality. 

The  first  volume  closes  with  valuable  appendices  on  the 
orography,  climatology  and  hydrography  of  the  country, 
and  an  ethnographical  sketch  of  the  Russian  people,  with 
statistics  of  the  peasant  population. 

In  the  introduction  to  the  second  volume  Dr.  Mavor 
discusses  the  phenomenon  of  violence  in  revolution,  due 
largely  to  the  operation  of  deadly  logic.  Indeed,  our 
readers  will  readily  recall  examples  of  sturdy  martyrdom 
not  confined  to  one  party  or  class.  "  Disregard  of  conse- 
quences has  indeed  been  elevated  in  Russia  to  the  dignity 
of  a  principle  of  morals."  An  important  factor  in  revolu- 
tions, of  which  historical  instances  are  given  outside 
Russia,  is  the  youth  of  revolutionaiy  leaders,  e.g.,  in  the 
French  Revolution.  Tolstoy's  condemnation  of  all  violence, 
sometimes  impossible  to  avoid,  "partly  because  of  the 
incompatibility  of  meekness  and  government,"  is  based 
upon  profound  knowledge  of  Russian  traits.  Cossacks  and 
peasants,  who  differed  materially  in  experiences  and  ways  of 
thought,  looked  for  wonderful  pronouncements  from  the 
Crown  which  should  confer  freedom  and  wealth  in  an 

*  i.e.,  in  factories  and  mines. 


64 

instant,  and  were  often  victimised  by  sham  edicts  and 
designing  upstarts.  Besides  Pugatshov  there  were  four 
other  personators  of  Peter  III.  Following  the  influence  of 
the  French  .Revolution  and  the  Dckabristi  episode,  many 
pages  are  devoted  to  Marx,  Owen,  Chartism  and  the  story 
of  social  revolt,  in  which  Russia  is  necessarily  lost  sight  of 
at  times,  after  which  the  v  Narod,  Narodnaya  Volia  and 
Social  Democratic  movements  are  described. 

This  comment  on  England  and  Russia  in  the  Far  East 
is  important : — 

The  attitude  of  Russia  towards  Asiatic  peoples  and  the  rule  by  her 
of  subject  races  in  Asia  are  less  humane,  conscientious  and  educative 
than  the  attitude  of  England  and  the  rule  by  her  of  Asiatic  subject 
races ;  but  the  Russians  who  exercise  the  administrative  functions  in 
the  East  are  naturally  more  affable  than  the  English.  Both,  no  doubt, 
have  the  faults  of  their  qualities ;  but  the  Russians  are  habitually  more 
indifferent  than  the  English,  and  when  hostile,  much  more  hostile  to 
moral  and  religious  propagandas  which  disturb  the  settled  course  of 
Asiatic  life  and  affect  profoundly  the  social  structure. 

In  a  footnote,  Dr.  Mavor  hints  that  the  fact  that  the 
Orthodox  Church  does  not  proselytise  spares  Russia  from 
friction  elsewhere,  due  to  missionary  effort  to  influence 
Asiatic  life,  the  cause  of  occasional  diplomatic  difficulties. 

We  must  reluctantly  draw  to  a  close.  There  is  a  brief 
but  informational  chapter  on  particularism,  and  the  ex- 
aminations of  the  present  conditions  and  the  factory  system 
are  exhaustive.  The  expression  intelligensia — said  to  be 
due  to  P.  D.  Boborikin  as  Nihilist  has  been  traced  to 
I.  Turgeniev's  "  Father  and  Sons " — is  the  subject  of  a 
comparison  of  the  educated  classes  in  Russia  and  Western 
Europe.  Useful  and  condensed  biographies  of  prominent 
Russians  are  frequently  given  in  the  form  of  footnotes. 
e.g.,  Prince  Mestshersky,  Bakunin,  Stepniak,  Herzen  and 
Dostoievsky.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  serious  student  has 
here  a  rich  mine  of  study,  in  which  his  difficulties  have 
been  anticipated  and  elucidated  for  him. 


65 

Professor  Mavor's  transliteration  of  Russian  names  is 
unfamiliar  and  not  always  exact,  as  in  such  forms  as 
Goletsin,  Melutin,  Tsherbatov,  Metshersky  and  Seytch 
(Cossack  Republic).  There  are  some  repetitions,  and  we 
read  three  times  about  the  Little  Russian  nickname  for  the 
Great  Russians,  "goats."  The  age  of  Bielinsky  at  death  is 
given  as  "  forty-eight,"  almost  in  the  same  place  as  his  years 
1810-1848. 

A  NEST  OF   HEREDITARY  LEGISLATORS. 

By  IVAN  TURGUENIEFF.     Translated  by  Francis  M.  Davis 
(8,  Rusthall  Park,  Tunbridge  Wells). 

RALSTON  and  others  have  translated  Turgenev's  * 
"Dvoryanskoe  Gnezdo "  under  various  names,  and  now 
we  hail  this  old  friend  under  a  new  title.  Generations 
of  Russian  gentry  pass  before  us,  but  none  are  worthy  the 
name  of  legislators. 

When  Turgenev,  after  a  long  absence  in  foreign  lands, 
revisited  Moscow  for  the  last  time,  his  countrymen  gave 
him  a  cold  reception.  His  Liberalism  and  criticism  of  the 
futile  existence  of  the  petite  noblesse  wounded  the  vanity  of 
his  peers. 

A  Moscow  professor,  who  tactfully  counteracted  the 
painful  impression  of  the  reception,  repeated  to  us  what 
Turgenev  had  once  said,  that  "  thoughts  assumed  the  form 
of  pictures  in  his  mind's  eye."  We  may  add  :  Turgenev 
was  so  great  a  linguist  that  the  style  of  his  French  works 
is  as  splendid  as  his  racy  Russian  prose. 

Mr.  Davis,  the  able  translator,  has  pointed  out  in  his 
Foreword  that: — 

When  the  simplicity  and  naturalness  of  the  language  of  Turgeuieff 

*  We  adhere  to  Professor  MorfilTs  plan  of  shortening  the  spelling  of 
Russian  names. 

c2 


66 

are  reproduced  in  English  translations  of  his  writings,  he  will  become 
at  least  as  great  a  favourite  with  English  readers  as  George  Eliot  is,  to 
whose  art  the  art  of  Turgenieff  bears  a  strong  resemblance. 

On  another  occasion  Mr.  Davis  wrote  : — 

The  humanising  value  of  international  classical  literature  is  not 
yet  generally  appreciated  as  it  ought  to  be. 

\Ve  may  quote  an  additional  fact :  the  characters  in  the 
best  Russian  novels  are  more  life-like  than  those  in  most 
English  novels.  Those  who  venture  to  criticise  the  great 
artist,  admit  his  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  but  they 
think  that  Turgenev's  literary  pictures  are  rather  copies  of 
life  models  than  creations  of  a  powerful  imagination  !  They 
also  aver  that  his  altercation  with  Tolstoy  was  not  more 
dignified  than  the  quarrel  between  Thackeray  and  Dickens. 
Literary  genius  has  weaknesses  in  common  with  all  frail 
humanity  ! 

The  disintegration  of  the  Russian  nobility,  its  incapacity 
for  practical  action,  its  estrangement  from  real  life,  the 
failure  of  its  best  ideals,  and  the  advance  of  democracy  are 
the  ground-work  of  Turgenev's  novels,  which  deal  with 
Russia  from  the  forties  to  the  seventies  of  the  last  century. 

The  beauty  of  the  grand  writer's  prose,  now  rendered 
into  popular  English,  will  scarcely  ever  be  surpassed  by  any 
other  Russian  author ! 


"THE   RE-MAKING   OF    CHINA." 
By  ADOLF  S.  WALEY.         (Constable  &  Co.,  Ltd.) 

THE  author's  preface  informs  us  that  this  work  is  the 
outcome  of  close  study  of  the  problems  which  the  recent 
changes  in  China  have  brought  into  prominence. 

The  European  relations  with  China  are  an  interesting 
part  of  the  work  : — 

In    1897,     as    compensation    for    the    murder    of    two   German 


67 

missionaries,  Germany  demanded  and  obtained  from  China  the 
cession  of  Kiochau.* 

The  culminating  point  of  the  aggression  was  reached  in  1898, 
when  Russia,  who  three  years  previously  had  taken  the  lead  in 
forcing  Japan  to  restore  Port  Arthur  to  China,  compelled  China 
to  retrocede  that  port  to  the  Russian  Empire.  The  result  of 
this  move  on  the  part  of  Russia  was  to  force  the  necessity  upon 
Great  Britain  to  demand  the  lease  of  Wei-hai-wei.f 

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that,  seeing  his  country  threatened 
on  all  sides,  the  Emperor  Kwanghsu  became  more  and  more  con- 
vinced that,  to  save  it  from  disruption,  it  would  be  expedient  for 
him  to  adopt  Western  methods  of  government  and  to  organise 
both  his  army  and  navy  on  modern  lines. 

With  reference  to  the  Chinese  revolution  and  Yuan 
Shih-Kai,  the  strong  man,  who  became  President,  we  learn 
many  interesting  details.  The  revolutionary  leaders  thought 
to  weaken  the  President's  position  by  securing  the  re- 
jection by  the  new  Parliament  of  the  Russo-Chinese 
agreement  respecting  Outer- Mongolia,  which  had  practically 
placed  itself  under  the  protection  of  Russia.  But,  contrary 
to  their  expectations,  the  revolutionary  move  really 
improved  the  relations  between  Yuan  Shih-Kai  and  the 
Russian  Government. 

The  author  favours  us  with  several  pertinent  observa- 
tions and  suggestions  : — 

Many  people  hold  the  view  that  the  revolution  in  China,  far 
from  promoting  her  regeneration  as  a  united  nation,  is  likely  to 
result  in  her  being  divided  into  small  independent  States,  thereby 
lessening  her  power  in  the  eyes  of  the  world. 

The  past  history  of  China  does  not  favour  this  belief.     .     .     . 

The  Confucian  religion  has  been  the  guiding  star,  the  greatest 
spiritual  and  moral  force  in  the  life  of  the  Chinese  nation  in  the 
past,  as  it  is  in  the  present,  and  will  be  in  the  future. 

The  doctrine  it  teaches  is  that  the  Chinese  nation  is  one  great 
family,  held  together  by  the  fervour  of  patriotism.  The  spread  of 
Western  education  is  likely  to  strengthen  that  patriotism,  and  will 
therefore  still  further  uphold  the  teachings  of  Confucius. 

*  History  repeats  itself,  and  the  "mailed  fist"  has  reappeared  to 
disturb  Europe. 

t  When  two  men  rob  a  stranger,  a  third  man  is  bound,  in  self -protec- 
tion, to  follow  their  example  ! 


68 

The  concluding  words  of  "  The  Re-Making  of  China  " 
sum  up  the  situation  and  the  prospects  of  the  Celestial 
Empire  in  glowing  terms  : — 

Upon  Yuan  Shih-Kai,  if  he,  as  all  well-wishers  of  China  must 
hope,  continues  to  be  the  arbiter  of  her  destinies,  will  devolve  the  task 
of  giving  her  a  constitution  which  will  satisfy  the  moderate  reformers 
whilst  retaining  in  his  own  hands  the  supreme  power  of  government. 

He  will  also  in  all  sincerity  constitute  himself  the  Defeuder  of  the 
Confucian  Faith,  and  thereby  combine  for  his  country's  benefit  the 
advantages  of  a  modern  constitution  with  the  precepts  of  the  sages. 

We  observe  that  the  author,  who  admires  Confucius, 
does  not  refer  to  the  probability  or  possibility  of  China 
being  converted  to  Christianity,  as  suggested  by  English 
missionaries,  nor  to  the  great  rebellion  in  the  time  of 
Li  Hung  Chang,  which  was  put  down  by  the  prowess  of 
our  noble  Gordon  Pasha. 


"THE   WHITE  VAMPIRE." 
By  A.  M.  JUDD.          (John  Long.) 

READERS  who  revel  in  mystery,  conspiracy  and  complicated 
love  affairs  will  appreciate  the  author's  ingenuity  in  describ- 
ing the  sensational  intrigues  of  a  revolutionary  lady,  who 
is  not  unaptly  styled  "  The  White  Vampire,"  an  imaginary 
or  fabled  demon,  said  to  be  a  person  who,  after  death, 
returns  nightly  to  suck  the  blood  of  the  living,  as  the 
dictionary  has  it ! 

St.   Petersburg,  where   the   plots    are    hatched,   is    thus 
described  : — 

A   city  of  contrasts.      Magnificent  palaces,   mean  hovels,  stately 
cathedrals,  broad  promenades,  squalid  streets,  all  go  to  make  its  com- 
ponent parts.     It  is  in  the  small  houses  and  mean  streets  where  most  of 
the  treasonable  plots  are  hatched  and  plans  formed  that,  when  put  into 
execution,  startle  the  whole  civilized  world. 

To  lend  local  colour,  we  are  initiated  in  the  details  of  the 
Russian  cuisine  : — 

There  was  salt  cod  from  the  distant  coast  of  Archangel ;  there  was 


69 

yellow  caviar,  which  is  as  tough  as  gutta-percha,  very  unlike  the  expen- 
sive grey  "  pearl "  caviar  of  the  sturgeon,  which  only  the  rich  can 
afford;  there  was  salted  meat  and  sour  cream,  flanked  by  some  bottles 
of  beer,  and  that  indispensable  article  in  Russian  houses,  high  or  low, 
the  "Samovar,"  or  self-boiler,  the  Russian  tea-urn,  with  the  tumblers 
and  spoons,  and  lemon  cut  in  slices  for  the  due  consumption  of  the 
favourite  beverage. 

Some  of  the  intricate  incidents  of  the  story  refer  to 
treacherous  crimes  on  the  lines  of  Azev,  who  ran  with  the 
fox  and  hunted  with  the  hounds  by  pretending  to  be  a 
revolutionary  while  acting  as  a  police  spy. 

Russians  and  Russian  Jews  abroad  come  in  for  a  share 
of  attention,  for  they  are  numerous  in  the  Zurich  University, 
and  are  even  founding  their  own  university  in  Switzerland, 
where  revolutionary  ideals  are  not  tabooed. 

Bombs  and  Siberia  are  not  overlooked  in  order  to  add 
dramatic  interest  to  the  exciting  romance. 

Real  and  imaginary  denunciations  against  the  powers 
that  be  are  eloquent : — 

There  are  girls,  young,  tenderly  nurtured,  well-bred  as  you  are, 
who  have  joined  the  ranks  of  the  oppressed,  who  have  undergone 
incredible  hardships  in  the  cause  of  liberty  and  freedom,  who  are 
striving  for  the  emancipation  of  the  down-trodden  and  crushed 
masses  who  are  kept  under,  robbed,  murdered  and  ruined  by  men  who, 
with  all  their  pretence  of  religion,  can  order  their  fellow-beings  to  be 
starved,  flogged  and  tortured,  who  can  order  delicate  women  to  be  in- 
carcerated for  no  other  reason  than  that  they  dared  to  raise  their 
voices  in  the  sacred  cause  of  liberty. 


WITH  POOR  IMMIGRANTS  TO  AMERICA. 
By  STEPHEN  GRAHAM.         (Macmillan  &  Co.) 

Mr.  GRAHAM  has  extended  his  horizon  from  the  Old  World 
to  the  New/ 

Everything  he  has  told  us  about  Russia  has  been  true 
jind  interesting,  showing  his  sympathy  for  the  people  and  his 


70 

love  of  their  country.  Now  he  takes  us  to  the  United 
States  and  also  displays  judicious  appreciation  of  American 
idiosyncrasies. 

The  prologue  opens  with  a  comparison  between  the  t\vo 
countries  : 

From  Russia  to  America ;  from  the  most  backward  to  the  most 
forward  country  in  the  world  ;  from  the  place  where  machinery  is 
merely  imported  or  applied,  to  the  place  where  it  is  invented  ;  from  the 
land  of  Tolstoy  to  the  land  of  Edison ;  from  the  most  mystical  to  the 
most  material ;  from  the  religion  of  suffering  to  the  religion  of  philan- 
thropy. .  .  Russia  is  the  living  East ;  America  is  the  living  West — a* 
India  is  the  dead  East  and  Britain  is  the  dying  West  (?)  Siberia  will 
no  doubt  be  the  West  of  the  future  (?) 

A  remarkable  feature  of  our  author's  genius  is  the 
ingenuity  with  which  he  brings  out  important  and  instruc- 
tive national  traits  of  character  by  means  of  apparently  trivial 
conversations  and  passing  incidents  as  he  tramps  along 
Russia  and  America.  Here  is  an  example  of  a  Russian 
immigrant  going  to  the  United  States : 

Alexey  was  a  tine,  tall,  healthy-looking  peasant  workman  in  a  black 
sheepskin.  .  .  You  see  all  I've  got  is  just  what  I  stand  up  in. 

Both  he  and  his  friend  (a  broad  faced  Gorky-like  tramp)  took  com- 
munion before  leaving  Astrakhan.  I  asked  Alexey  whether  he  thought 
he  was  going  to  break  his  faith  as  the  other  Russians  had  said  to  a 
Jew.  How  was  he  going  to  live  without  his  Czar  aud  his  Church  ? 

He  struck  his  breast  and  said :  "There,  that  is  where  my  Church 
is  !  However  far  I  go  I  am  no  farther  from  God  !  "  Would  he  go  back 
to  Russia.  He  would  go  back  to  die  there. 

"  Tell  me,  said  he,  do  they  burn  dead  bodies  in  America  ?  I  would 
not  like  my  body  to  be  burned.  It  was  made  of  earth,  and  should 
return  to  the  earth." 

In  a  chapter  entitled  "American  Hospitality,"  Mr.  Graham 
throws  new  light  on  an  old  subject. 

It  is  possible  to  distinguish  two  sorts  of  hospitality,  one  which  is 
given  to  a  person  because  of  his  introductions,  and  the  other  which  is 
given  to  the  person  who  has  no  introductions — the  one  given  on  the 
the  strength  of  a  man's  importance,  the  other  on  the  strength  of  the 
common  love  of  mankind.  America  is  rich  in  one  specifts,  she  is  not  so 
rich  in  the  other.  .  .  New  York  seemed  to  me  more  friendly  and 
hospitable  than  any  other  great  city  1  have  lived  in.  ... 

But  when  I  shed  respectability  and  the  cheap  fame  of  having  one's 


71 

portrait  and  pages  of  "  write-up  "  in  the  papers  and  put  pack  on  back, 
and  sallied  forth  merely  as  a  man,  I  found  that  the  other  and  more 
precious  kind  of  hospitality  was  not  easily  come  by.  Little  is  given 
anonymously  in  the  United  States. 

There  is  an  amusing  chapter  on  "  The  American 
Language  "  and  other  interesting  subjects,  which  did  not 
strike  Charles  Dickens  and  more  recent  writers  and  travel- 
lers. The  present  writer  has  never  crossed  the  Atlantic, 
and  has  learnt  and  enjoyed  much,  thanks  to  Mr.  Stephen 
Oraham's  graphic  pages. 


LETTERS  OF  FYODOR  DOSTOEVSKY 
To  His  FAMILY  AND  FRIENDS. 

Translated  by  ETHEL  COLBURN  MAYNE. 
(Chatto   &   Windus.) 

THE  frontispiece  is  an  excellent  likeness  of  Dostoevsky, 
just  as  we  saw  him  at  St.  Petersburg  on  his  return  from 
Siberia.  Among  his  letters  some  are  addressed  to  his  brother 
Michel  and  Apollon  Maikov,  whom  we  also  met  at  the  house 
of  our  old  Russian  teacher,  A.  P.  Milukov*.  The  latter 
wrote  "  Recollections  of  Dostoevsky "  as  far  back  as 
1848-1849.  Always  unpractical  and  in  trouble  about  money 
matters,  the  Russian  mystical  idealist  was  ever  under  the 
influence  of  noble  and  humanitarian  aspirations,  so  much 
in  harmony  with  his  genius.  His  faith  in  Orthodoxy  and 
in  Russian  religious  sentiments,  was  unbounded.  He  even 
imagined  that  they  would  regenerate  the  whole  world. 

The  newspaper  which  the  brothers  Dostoevsky   started 
proved  a  dead  loss.     Michel  was  the  better  editor  of  the  two, 

*  We  write  Milukov  and  not    Milyukov   a*   in  the   text,    because 
the  Russian  letter  K>  is  pronounced  exactly  as  our  U . 


72 

as  A.  P.  Milukov  once  told  us,   but  with  all  their  talents, 
they  had  no  idea  of  business.     Debts  created  enemies,  and 
they  had  a  bad  time  of  it. 

Among  interesting  letters,  we  must  name  those  which 
are  addressed  to  literary  men  like  Maikov.  We  were  not> 
however,  aware  that  Dostoevsky  got  himself  transferred 
from  the  military  to  the  civil  service  through  the  intercession 
of  General  Todleben,  the  great  engineer  of  Sevastopol 
fame. 

The  following  inmost  thoughts,  written  by  Dostoevsky 
to  Maikov,  are  very  characteristic.  He  writes  from 
Florence,  pursued  by  creditors  and  tormented  by  illness  : 

These  cursed  creditors  will  kill  me  to  a  certainty.  It  was  stupid  of 
me  to  run  away  to  foreign  lands  ;  assuredly  'twere  better  to  have  stayed 
at  home  and  let  myself  be  put  in  the  debtor's  prison.  .  .  .  Now,, 
here  is  what  I  propose  : 

A  long  novel  entitled  "  Atheism  "  ;  before  I  attack  it  I  shall  have  to 
read  a  whole  library  of  atheistic  works  by  Catholic  and  Orthodox-Greek 
writers.  Even  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances  I  can't  be  ready  in 
two  years.  1  have  my  principal  figure  ready  in  my  mind  : 

A  Russian  of  our  class,  getting  on  in  years,  not  particularly 
culturud,  though  not  uncultured  either,  and  of  a  certain  degree  of 
social  importance,  loses  quite  suddenly,  in  ripe  years,  his  belief  in  God. 
His  whole  life  long  he  has  been  wholly  taken  up  by  his  work,  has  never 
dreamed  of  escaping  from  the  rut,  and  up  to  his  forty-fifth  year  has 
distinguished  himself  in  no  wise.  (The  working-out  will  be  pure 
psychology :  profound  in  feeling,  human,  and  thoroughly  Russian.) 
The  loss  of  faith  has  a  colossal  effect  on  him,  .  .  .  He  tries  to 
attach  himself  to  the  younger  generation — the  atheists,  Slavs,  Occi- 
dentalists,  the  Russian  sectarians  and  anchorites,  the  mystics: 
amongst  others  he  comes  across  a  Polish  Jesuit ;  thence  he  descends  to 
the  abysses  of  the  Chlysty-Sect*  ;  and  finds  at  last  salvation  in  Russian 
soil,  the  Russian  Saviour,  and  the  Russian  God.  .  .  . 

My  dear  friend,  I  have  a  totally  different  conception  of  truth  and 
realism  from  that  of  our  "  realists  "  and  critics.  My  God !  if  one  could 
but  tell  categorically  all  that  we  Russians  have  gone  through  during  the 
last  ten  years  in  the  way  of  spiritual  development,  all  the  realists 
would  shriek  that  it  was  pure  fantasy !  And  yet  it  would  be  pure 
realism. 

*Flagellants. 


73 

This  excerpt  may,  perhaps,  afford  more  insight  into  the 
heart  and  mind  of  the  original  author  than  pages  of  his 
ordinary  letters  and  writings. 

In  rendering  Dostoevsky  into  English  the  translator 
has  probably  been  assisted  by  French  and  German  transla- 
tions, of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  Preface. 

The  present  volume  derives  chiefly  from  the  book  by  Tchechichin  : 
"Dostoevsky  in  the  Reminiscences  of  his  Contemporaries  and  in  his 
Letters  and  Memoranda."  (Moscow,  191'2.) 

We  conclude  by  expressing  our  gratitude,  in  the  name 
of  all  lovers  of  Russian  literature,  to  Miss  Mayne  for  her 
excellent  translation  of  a  most  original  author,  whose 
reputation  has  been  growing  by  leaps  and  bounds  in  his 
native  land  and  whose  genius  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently 
understood  among  English-speaking  people. 


JEWISH    LIFE    IN    MODERN    TIMES. 
By  ISRAEL  COHEN.  (Methuen  &  Co.) 

A    COMPREHENSIVE    description    of   the  Jewish    people  is, 

perhaps,  a  novelty  for  our  public. 

As  the  Preface  states,  the  work  presents  : — 
A   General   Survey,  showing  the   dispersion  and  distribution   of 

Jewry  in  its  countless  manifestations,  its  diversity  of  composition  in 

political   and  spiritual   respects,   and   the   solidarity  that  unifies  its 

disparate  elements. 

The  extraordinary  ability  displayed  by  Jews  in  Art, 
Science,  and  especially  in  Business,  as  well  as  the  generosity 
exercised  by  some  of  their  merchant  princes,  are  certainly 
worthy  of  the  admiration  and  appreciation  of  all  fair-minded 
and  impartial  persons. 

The  author  observes  that  the  sufferings  of  the  Jews  in 
Russia  and  Rumania  have  been  more  galling  and  desperate 
than  those  of  the  Jews  in  certain  Oriental  lands.  He  savs  •  — 

* 

The  bondage  of  the  Jews  in  Russia  consists  in  a  multitude  of  laws 


74 

which  rob  them  of  all  liberty  in  the  choice  of  domicile  and  occupation, 
which  cripple  their  opportunities  of  education,  limit  their  right  to  own 
property,  exclude  them  from  State  and  municipal  service,  and  impose 
heavy  burdens  upon  them  in  regard  to  military  duty 

The  plight  of  the  quarter  of  a  million  Jews  in  Rumania  is  in 
several  respects  even  worse  than  that  of  their  brethren  in  Russia.  .  . 

The  material  position  of  the  great  majority  of  Jewry  defies 
description.  Only  a  small  portion  of  those  settled  in  Western 
countries  enjoy  the  wealth  that  is  commonly  attributed  to  the  entire 
race ;  but  in  the  regions  containing  more  than  two-thirds  of  the 
world's  Jewry — Eastern  Europe,  Western  Asia,  and  Northern  Africa — 
there  is  a  depressing  spectacle  of  widespread  poverty  and  misery. 

All  matters  explaining  the  position  and  condition  of 
Jews  all  over  the  world  are  worked  out  with  great  industry 
and  detail. 

In  the  chapter  on  "  Zionism "  we  were,  however, 
surprised  not  to  see  the  name  of  the  late  Mr.  Edward 
Cazalet,*  of  Fairlawne,  Kent,  for  he  had  been  very  active  in 
his  desire  to  improve  the  condition  of  the  Jews  by  their 
colonization  in  Palestine. 

In  fact,  it  was  only  his  untimely  death,  which  occurred 
at  Constantinople,  whither  he  had  gone  to  obtain  the 
concession  of  the  Euphrates  Valley  Railway,  some  thirty 
years  ago,  which  arrested  the  execution  of  his  plan  to- 
colonize  the  Jews  in  Palestine. 

Mr.  Cohen's  work  requires  not  only  to  be  read,  but  also 
studied,  for  it  contains  a  fund  of  special  information  which 
should  be  more  known  by  all  civilized  people. 


"THE   RUSSIAN    ARMY   FROM   WITHIN." 
By  WM.  BARNES    STEVENI.     (Hodder  &  Stoughton.) 

Mr.  STEVENI  knows  all  about  the  Russians,  and  his  book 
contains  even  more  general  information  about  Russia  than 
the  title  conveys. 


*A  cousin  and  namesake  of  the  President  of  the  A.R.L.S. 
See  "Palestine  and  War,"  page  98. 


75 

The  author  thus  introduces  his  subject : — 

It  is  now  a  thousand  years  ago  since  the  Slavonian  chieftains  of 
the  ancient  city  of  Novgorod  sent  a  deputation  to  the  Varangian  Rus 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Baltic,  begging  them  to  come  and  rule  over 
them,  for,  said  they,  their  country  was  great  and  vast,  but  there  was  no 
order. 

Mr.  Steveni  does  not  share  the  opinion  of  many  cynical 
critics  that  the  Russian  Army  is  always  more  numerous  on 
paper  than  in  reality,  for4ie  writes : — 

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  effective  fighting  force  is  even 
greater  than  is  officially  announced. 

The  Russian  Army  is  recruited  principally  from  the  peasant  class, 
and  from  various  nomadic  races  inhabiting  the  eastern  provinces.  .  .  . 

Their  physique  is  very  fine  as  compared  with  that  of  other 
European  races.  .  .  . 

If  the  mortality  is  enormous,  however,  the  birth-rate  is  astonishing. 

When  we  take  into  consideration  the  inexhaustible  resources  in  men, 
money,  and  material  which  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment, it  is  difficult  not  to  believe  that  Russia  will  emerge  victorious 
from  the  terrible  racial  and  political  struggle  against  the  combined 
forces  of  Austria  and  Germany,  provided  that  her  officers  and  generals 
are  on  a  line  with  her  brave  and  hardy  soldiers,  and  that  the  alien 
races  subject  to  her  sway  remain  loyal  during  the  war. 

The  chapters  on  "  Uniform,  Arms,  and  Artillery,"  on 
the  "Japanese  War  and  its  Lessons,"  and  "The  Cossacks  " 
furnish  much  interesting  information  of  which  the  British 
reader  is  ignorant. 

Justice  is  done  to  General  Kuropatkine,  who  was  handi- 
capped by  those  who  were  above  him,  although  it  was  no 
secret  that  his  former  chief.  General  Scobolev,  reproached 
him  with  want  of  decision. 

Mr.  Steveni  spent  much  time  in  the  company  of  Russian 
officers,  and  relates  particulars  which  could  not  be  obtained 
otherwise  than  by  personal  intercourse. 

An  evident  error  is  committed  by  spelling  the  name 
of  the  present  Minister  of  War,  General  Suchomlinoff — 
Suchomiloff  ! 

The  author  does  not  criticize  the  military  schools,  which 


76 

are,  however,  not  perfect  as  regards  physical  development 
and  general  health.  Out-of-door  games,  like  in  our  public 
schools,  are  not  the  order  of  the  day. 

As  regards  Russia's  offensive  power,  we  must  not  omit 
to  repeat  the  author's  telling  remark  :  — 

It  entirely  depends  on  the  internal  political  state  of  the  country ; 
and  on  this  depends  essentially  her  success  in  the  terrible  struggle. 

A  Russian  writer,  whose  name'is  not  given,  says  : — 

In  truth,  the  whole  world  now  beholds  what  terrific  proportions 
modern  warfare  can  attain,  and  one  involuntarily  asks  the  question, 
What  is  going  to  happen  next,  if  we  proceed  still  further — in  our 
Christian  era, — in  perfecting  the  implements  of  mutual  destruction  ? 
There  can  only  be  one  answer  to  this  question  :  Humanity  is  marching 
towards  self-destruction.  War  will  thus  become  an  absurdity,  since  all 
the  belligerents  will  become  mutual  exterminators  of  one  another; 
and  the  word  "  victor"  will  bear  the  same  meaning  for  all — Ruin. 


"THE  FAIR  LADIES  OF  THE  WINTER  PALACE." 

By  Dr.  A.  S.  RAPPOPORT, 

Author  of  "  Love  Affairs  of  the  Vatican." 

(Holden  <fe  Harding-ham.) 

THE  author  appears  to  have  a  leaning  to  the  seamy  side  of 
history,  in  which  Popes  and  Tsars,  and  more  or  less  fascinating 
representatives  of  the  fair  sex.  are  exposed,  with  all  their 
human  frailties. 

Woman's  lot  in  Russia  before  the  iconoclastic  Peter 
the  Great  and  down  to  the  fair  mysterious  pretender — 
Princess  Tarakanoff,  whom  Prince  Bariatinsky,  the  husband 
of  the  popular  actress,  very  lately  described  in  one  of  our 
periodicals — forms  the  subject  of  more  than  300  pages,  and 
20  illustrations  of  the  principal  personages. 


77 

Peter  the  Great,  in  his  complicated  matrimonial  arrange- 
ments, was  quite  worthy  of  our  Henry  VIII,  and  his  many 
love-affairs  and  liaisons  might  bear  comparison  with  the 
voluptuous  proceedings  of  Louis  XIV,  h  grand  monarque. 

Peter's  execution  of  his  Swedish  mistress  and  of  his  son 
Alexis  is  related  with  ghastly  minuteness.  Catherine  I, 
Elizabeth  I,  Peter  II,  Catherine  II,  form  a  sanguinary 
galaxy  in  which  dramatic  love  affairs  and  crimes  of  every 
degree  are  told  with  details. 

The  author  does  not  entirely  condemn  the  reforms 
of  Peter  the  Great  concerning  women  as  some  Slavophils 
have  done: — 

The  Tsar  gave  women  the  possibility  and  opportunity  to  abandon  the 
former  life  of  Byzantine  piety  and  austerity,  and  to  become  less  faithful 
to  their  conjugal  duties  than  they  even  had  been  before.  But,  on  the 
whole,  Russian  women  owed  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Tsar  Peter.  .  .  . 

The  freedom,  therefore,  which  Peter  the  Great  had  granted  the 
women  of  Russia,  although  at  first  instrumental  in  fostering  a  laxity  of 
morals,  in  the  course  of  time  helped  to  develop  the  energy  of  the  former 
slave,  and  enabled  her  to  regain  her  independence  in  general  life.  The 
influence  and  power  of  women  soon  became  paramount.  The  former 
slaves  began  to  rule,  not  only  as  Tzaritzas,  but  as  frequent  advisers  of 
either  their  husbands  or  lovers,  aud  Catherine  I  was  not  the  only  woman 
who  exercised  a  political  influence  during  the  eighteenth  century. 


"SHIFTING    SANDS." 
By  ALICE  BIRKHEAD.         (John  Lane.) 

THE  accomplished  lady-author  has  not  only  written  novels — 
"  The  Master-Knot,"  etc. — but  has  made  a  study  of  various 
phases  of  Russian  history.  Her  lecture  on  Peter  the 
Great,  which  was  delivered  before  the  Anglo-Russian 
Literary  Society,  is  printed  in  our  last  issue,  No.  70,  and 


78 

contains  valuable  and  interesting  information.  "  Shifting 
Sands "  is  dedicated  "  To  N.R.H.,  in  Memory  of  Devon 
Days." 

We  think  of  Charles  Kingsley  when  we  read  the 
opening  lines  of  the  romance  :  — 

The  violence  of  early  spring  dashed  the  Atlantic  waves  against 
the  coast  of  Westward  Ho  !  There  was  the  strange  shriek  caused 
by  the  fury  of  the  tide  upon  the  Pebble  Ridge,  the  splendid  murmur 
of  the  deep  cauldrons  that  lie  below  the  cliffs  of  Abbotsham. 

There  is  nothing  trite  or  commonplace  in  the  descrip- 
tions which  flow  from  Miss  Birkhead's  pen,  nor  in  the 
characters  created  by  her  imagination.  There  are  subtle 
and  delicate  shadows  in  the  delineations  of  her  dramatis 
personse. 

Here  is  another  passage  which  took  our  fancy  : — 

The  dirty,  picturesque  streets  of  Appledore  were  crowded  with 
seafaring  men,  bold  girls  with  comely  faces,  and  happy,  red-haired 
children.  An  artist  stood  by  the  custom-house  sketching  the  quay 
and  the  white,  distant  gleam  of  Instow.  A  boat  was  dawdling  across 
the  ferry,  rowed  by  boys  with  muscles  strained,  though  their  exertion 
did  not  seem  to  make  much  headway.  An  old  sailor  with  a  knowing 
eye  looked  approvingly  at  Gabrielle  as  she  turned  the  corner  of  the 
ship-building  yard  with  the  swinging  step  that  revealed  her  strength 
and  spirit.  "A  bonny  Devon  lass,"  he  said  to  himself,  though  she  had 
none  of  the  ruddy  plumpness  that  is  associated  with  the  country. 

We  are  introduced  to  the  heroes  and  heroines  of  the 
novel  when  they  are  children  and  follow  them  through  life, 
which  increases  our  interest  in  their  careers.  They  get 
restless  and  want  to  do  something — a  very  common  and 
natural  wish.  As  the  narrative  advances  we  follow  the 
development  of  various  characters  as  they  are  moulded  by 
the  author. 

We  will  not  spoil  the  pleasure  which  is  in  store  for 
intelligent  readers  by  prematurely  revealing  the  plot  and 
details  of  an  ingenious  and  thoughtful  story. 


79 

THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE  WAR,  FIRST  PERIOD— 
THE  CONCENTRATION. 

SPECIAL   CAMPAIGN   SERIES. 

By  Capt.  F.  R.  SEDGWICK,  R.F.A.          (Geo.  Allen  &  Co.) 
Notice  by  W.  F.  HARVEY. 

IN  the  tenth  volume  of  "  Special  Campaign  Series,"  Capt. 
F.  R.  Sedgwick  begins  with  a  masterly  summary  of  the 
political  events  that  led  up  to  the  war  with  Japan,  and 
points  out  lucidly  that  for  the  latter  country  the  issues 
were  not  only  political  and  economical,  but  also  moral. 
Hitherto,  the  onward  inarch  of  the  Europeans  across  the 
Continent  of  Asia  had  met  with  effete  governments  and 
nations  whose  opposition  was  easily  overcome.  The  Chinese 
being  a  commercial  race  and  the  Japanese  a  race  of  sailors 
and  warriors,  the  latter  were  naturally  the  fittest  of  the 
Mongols  to  try  conclusions  with  the  white  aggressors. 
"  There  is  no  doubt,"  writes  Capt.  Sedgwick,  "  as  to  which 
of  the  two  great  Mongol  races  stands  highest  in  the  estima- 
tion of  the  world  to-day.  .  .  .  That  position  has  been  won 
by  the  sword,  and  must  be  kept  by  the  sword.  Is  it  not 
possible  that  there  may  be  some  lesson  in  this  for  the  British 
people  ?  "  The  italics  are  ours,  and,  in  the  light  of  present 
events,  for  which  we  have  chiefly  our  slackness  to  thank, 
these  words,  written  six  years  ago,  have  a  prophetic  value. 
The  first  operations  began  in  February,  1904,  when  the 
Japanese  despatched  a  squadron  to  Chemulpo  and  another 
to  Port  Arthur.  This  volume  concludes  with  comments 
on  the  strategy  of  the  belligerents  up  to  the  end  of 
July,  and  some  notes  on  the  tactics  of  both  sides.  In 
compiling  this  sketch,  the  author  has  availed  himself  of  all 
published  sources  of  information.  Twelve  maps  enclosed  in 


80 

the  pocket  will  prove  of  the  utmost  assistance  to  students 
preparing  for  competitive  examinations  for  the  Army ; 
indeed,  for  such  it  would  be  hardly  possible  to  exaggerate 
the  value  of  this  text-book. 


"THE   RUSSO-TURKISH  WAR,  1877." 

(SPECIAL  CAMPAIGN  SERIES.) 

By  Major  F.  MAURICE.     (London:  George  Allen  &  Unwin.) 
Notice  by  W.  F.  HARVEY. 

AT  the  present  moment,  when  Turkey,  acting  under  strong 
German  pressure,  has  without  provocation  entered  on 
hostilities  with  Russia,  "The  Russo-Turkish  War,  1877," 
by  Major  F.  Maurice,  will  be  read  with  renewed  interest  as 
much  by  intelligent  students  of  modern  history  as,  perhaps, 
by  candidates  preparing  for  admission  to  the  Staff  College. 
Apart  from  its  great  value  as  a  text  book  it  is  by  no  means 
dull  reading,  especially  in  that  portion  which  deals  with 
what  is  known  as  the  "  Eastern  Question."  The  learned 
author  has  availed  himself  of  all  generally  available  sources 
of  information,  as  is  shown  by  the  list  of  books — German, 
French  and  English — given  in  the  preface.  Three  maps  are 
enclosed  in  the  pocket  of  the  volume,  viz.,  of  Turkey  in 
Europe,  of  the  country  between  the  Danube  and  the  Maritza, 
and,  lastly,  of  Plevna's  neighbourhood,  respectively.  The 
maps  and  plans  are  extremely  clear,  and  all  unnecessary 
detail  is  omitted.  This  unpretentious  book  gives  a  complete 
history  of  the  campaign,  though  the  final  phases  of  it  after 
the  fall  of  Plevna  are  summarised.  As  a  strategical  account 
of  the  war  it  has  no  rival. 


81 

"THROUGH  SIBERIA." 

THE  LAND  OF  THE  FUTURE. 

By  FRIDTJOF  NANSEN,  etc.,  etc. 

Translated  by  ARTHUR  G.  CHATER.         (Heinemann.) 

Two  Poles  wrote  books  on  Russia :  Tegoborski,  the  author 
of  "  Les  Forces  Procluctives  de  la  Russie,"  said  that  Russia, 
as  regards  natural  produce,  was  the  richest  country,  while 
Wolowski,  a  Senator  under  Napoleon  III,  wrote  on  the  same 
subject,  asserting  that  Russia  was  the  poorest  country  in  the 
world. 

The  famous  explorer,  Dr.  Nansen,  appears  to  take  a 
favourable  view  of  Siberia's  productive  powers,  and  probably 
hits  off  the  happy  mean  between  the  two  Poles. 

We  have  stated  elsewhere  that  if  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment had  admitted  English  goods  free  of  duty  into  Siberia 
via  the  Kara  Sea  route,  opened  out  by  Captain  Wiggins,  a 
member  of  the  A.R.L.S.,  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  every- 
body would  have  been  the  better  for  it.  The  great  rivers, 
the  Yenisei  and  the  Obi,  would  have  distributed  the  goods 
broadcast  over  Siberia  and  brought  return  cargoes  of  grain, 
etc.,  to  Europe. 

Practically  nobody  would  have  been  the  worse  for  the 
innovation,  not  even  the  Moscow  manufacturers,  whose 
produce  has  to  be  transported  thousands  of  miles  to  Siberia 
at  exorbitant  rates  of  carriage.  We  are  glad  that, 
in  substance,  Dr.  Nansen  agrees  with  us. 

The  volume  which  lies  before  us  is  of  ponderous  dimen- 
sions, counting  near  500  pages,  and  is  supplied  with  maps 
and  illustrations  which  are  most  interesting  and  helpful. 

The  adventures  and  hardships  of  the  sea-voyage  are  a 
realitv  and  a  romance. 


82 

The  Samoyedes,  Ostiaks  and  other  native  races,  which 
we  supposed  were  dying  out  under  the  combined  influence 
of  vodka  and  other  adjuncts  of  so-called  civilization, 
are  presented  under  new  colours  not  bereft  of  redeeming 
qualities. 

Dr.  Nansen  mentions  the  Russo-German  Professor 
Middendorff,  who  said  that  he  could  leave  kegs  and  bottles 
of  spirits  on  the  tundra  without  any  protection  and  conceal- 
ment, and  they  were  never  touched  by  the  Samoyedes — 
drunkards  as  they  were. 

The  author  makes  some  touching  references  to  an  institu- 
tion which,  we  hope,  has  now  been  relegated  to  the  past. 
He  describes  a  prominent  exile. 

He  was  a  big  fellow  of  over  six  feet,  with  a  powerful  face,  a  fair 
moustache,  blue  eyes  capable  of  being  either  keen  or  gentle,  either 
very  much  on  the  spot  or  dreamy  and  far  away  ;  a  well-developed, 
powerful  chin  and  a  straight  nose.  He  might  have  been  about  thirty.  .  .  . 

He  had  served  his  time  of  exile,  and  had  been  free  for  the  last 
three  years  ;  but  he  still  lived  on  here  alone,  summer  and  winter.  .  .  . 

'When  he  spoke  of  Russia  and  of  his  native  place,  Kharkov,  tears 
came  into  his  eyes.  His  wife  had  died  a  year  or  two  after  he  went 
to  Siberia,  and  he  had  no  children.  .  •  .  . 

He  had  not  seen  a  newspaper  for  several  years,  and  such  things  as 
the  Balkan  War  were  entirely  new  to  him 

With  reference  to  the  colonization  and  development  of 
Siberia  Dr.  Nansen  quotes  a  Russian  author,  who  says  that : — 

The  melancholy  history  of  the  country  confirms  in  a  certain  degree 
the  opinion  entertained  of  Russia  by  several  foreign  enquirers — that  she 
understands  well  enough  how  to  conquer  new  countries  but  not  how 
to  colonize  them 

Further  on  Dr.  Nansen  adds  : — 

The  reason  for  the  slow  development  of  the  great  and  rich  territories 
in  Asia  is  doubtless  partly  to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that  until  recently 
the  desirability  of  encouraging  and  colonizing  them  was  little  under- 
stood in  Russia  ;  indeed,  they  were  even  looked  upon  as  rivals  which 
it  was  undesirable  to  encourage,  but  which  were  rather  to  be  exploited 
for  what  they  were  worth.  In  addition  to  this  there  were  many  other 
factors.  .  . . 

It  is  remarkable  that  while  Russia  had  these  vast  territories  lying 


83 

more  or  less  idle  she  sent  every  year  great  numbers  of  emigrants  across 
the  ocean  to  America !  .  .  .  . 

Siberia  has  other  mineral  wealth  besides  gold.  Iron  is  abundant 
but  imperfectly  exploited ;  there  are  also  copper,  silver,  lead,  etc.,  etc.  .  . 

The  policy  of  the  present  Governor-General  in  the  Ussuri  Region 
is  to  drive  the  yellow  population,  especially  the  Chinese,  out  of  the 
whole  of  the  Eastern  government,  as  he  foresees  danger  in  an  inunda- 
tion of  them. 

The  chapters  on  the  Amur  and  Transbaikalia  are  fraught 
with  interest,  but  we  fear  that  as  reviewers  we  have  already 
made  too  many  excerpts. 

Dr.  Nansen's  fine  book,  and  Mr.  Chater's  excellent  trans- 
lation, should  not  only  be  read  but  studied  fay  the  man  in 
the  street,  and  also  by  his  betters. 

Dr.  Nansen  thus  bids  farewell  to  Siberia  :  — 

I  have  a  feeling  of  sadness  on  parting  from  these  great,  melancholy 
forests  and  this  solemn  scenery,  with  its  broad,  simple  lines,  free  from 
all  petty  details.  I  have  come  to  love  it,  this  boundless  land,  mighty 
as  the  ocean  itself,  with  its  infinite  plains  and  mountains,  its  frozen 
Arctic  coast,  its  free  and  desolate  tundra,  its  deep,  mysterious  taiga,, 
from  the  Ural  to  the  Pacific,  its  grass-grown,  rolling  steppes,  its. 
purple,  wooded  hills,  and  its  scattered  patches  of  human  life. 


"THROUGH    SPAIN/' 
By  DUNCAN  DICKINSON.      (Methuen.) 

THIS  book  is  well  calculated  to  afford  one  all  necessary 
information,  founded  on  experience,  how  to  travel  with 
pleasure  and  advantage  in  Spain. 

Starting  from  Petrograd,  the  first  capital  in  Europe 
which  has  changed  its  name  in  imitation  of  Tokio  in  Japan, 
the  author  travels  across  the  continent  to  Spain.  We  envy 
him,  for  the  site  of  the  Peninsular  War  is  a  part  of  Europe 
which  we  have  not  visited. 

Northern  and   Southern  Russia  are  as  flat  as  the  hand. 


84 

In  the  north  forests  and  bogs  abound,  and  in  the  south, 
between  Odessa  and  the  Sea  of  Azov,  all  is  level  and  dreary, 
with  the  exception  of  a  picturesque  corner  of  the  Crimea. 

From  the  Russian  frontier  to  Berlin  the  railway  run.s 
through  monotonous  surroundings.  Says  the  author:  — 

The  wild,  unkempt  appearance  of  Russian  scenery,  with  its  endless 
forests  of  birch  and  pine,  and  its  squalid  peasant  cabins,  is  gone,  and 
its  place  is  taken  by  the  trim  and  tidy  German  landscape,  with  neat 
brick  houses,  and  undulating  fields  and  downs.  Trees  disappear 
almost  entirely,  or,  where  they  exist,  serve  only  to  mark  the  long, 
straight  roads.  Later  on  the  trees  returned,  but  the  air  of  neatness 
and  method  remained.  Personally.  I  found  the  Russian  landscape  more 
to  my  taste,  but  it  may  have  been  that  long  acquaintance,  and  familiarity 
with  its  salient  features,  endeared  it  to  me. 

After  crossing  Germany  and  France,  the  traveller  reached 
the  Pyrenees  :— 

The  scenery  here  closely  resembles  that  of  Northern  Russia,  so 
numerous  are  the  fir-trees.  The  trunks  of  these  trees  are  all  scored, 
and  the  resin  which  exudes  is  caught  in  little  cups.  .  .  . 

Near  Biarritz,  the  sea  came  into  sight,  looking  exquisitely  calm  and 
•blue  in  the  early  morning  sun. 

Madrid  produced  a  depressing  effect  on  Mr.  Dickinson, 
especially  the  Escorial. 

Its  associations  with  the  past,  present  and  future  Kings  of  Spain 
-are  in  no  way  calculated  to  raise  the  spirits  of  the  sightseer. 

The  historical  monuments  which  the  Moors  have  left  in 
Spain  are  a  source  of  great  interest. 

I  could  see  nothing  about  Granada  to  imply  either  ruin  or  decay  ; 
on  the  contrary,  the  main  thoroughfares,  with  their  .electric  trams  and 
up-to-date  shops,  suggested  a  certain  prosperity.  .  . 

But  the  piece  de  resistance  is,  of  course,  the  Alhambra. 

It  probably  owes  its  fame  to-day,  and  perhaps  even  its  preservation, 
to  its  chronicler,  Washington  Irving,  and  it  may  be  that  this  is  the 
reason  why  it  is  so  much  better  known  to  transatlantic  visitors  than  to 
our  own  countrymen. 

Washington  Irving  and  a  Russian  friend,  of  whom 
little  is  told,  and  who  was  soon  called  away,  were  actually 
lodged  in  the  Governor's  apartment  in  the  Alhambra. 


85 

Our  author  visited  Castille  and  the  arid  desert  of 
La  Mancha,  teeming  with  memories  of  Don  Quixote.  On 
returning-  to  Madrid  the  traveller  also  saw  some  of  the 
Basques,  fine  looking  fellows,  who  bear  themselves  with 
dignity,  being  the  oldest  race  in  the  world. 

We  must  not  omit  to  make  honourable  mention  of  the 
thirty  illustrations  which  give  a  familiar  insight  into  the 
life  and  appearance  of  Spain,  with  its  beauty  and 
originality. 

Bull-fighting,  that  murderous  amusement  not  worthy 
of  the  name  of  sport,  is  graphically  and  minutely 
described,  and  saves  us  the  trouble  of  going  to  look  at  it. 

The  conclusion  at  which  Mr.  Dickinson  arrives  is  worthy 
of  a  good  Englishman,  who  cannot  grow  accustomed  to  bull 
fights,  like  some  foreign  residents  in  Spain  have  done. 

"For  my  own  part,"  he  says,  "as  I  left  the  Plaza  de 
Toros,  I  felt  that  nothing  would  persuade  me  ever  to  see 
such  a  performance  again." 

The  author  retains,  however,  favourable  recollection* 
of  Spain  : — 

The  memories  I  carried  away  with  me  were  only  pleasant  ones. 


"UNDER  THE  WAR  CLOUD/' 
Sermons  by  the  Rev.  T.  W.  WARSEY,  M.A.      (Skeffington.) 

THE  author  preached  nine  sermons  on  the  war.  He 
considers  that  the  present  is  "  a  war  against  war,"  and  that 
we  are  bound  to  protect  justice  and  humanity  against 
aggression  and  barbarous  violence. 

Mr.  John  Stanhope  Arkxvright,  D.L.,  has  written  a 
Foreword,  in  which  he  says  : — 

A  whole  host  of  writers  have  deliberately  preached  the  doctrine 
that  Might  is  Right,  and  so  prepared  Germany  for  a  policy  which  tears 


86 

up  treaties  and  violates  every  honourable  understanding  among  nations. 
.     Before  long  Europe  will  realise  plainly  that  no  peace  can  be 
concluded   which   does   not   take   into  account    condign    punishment 
for  such  defiance  of  the  laws  of  -God  and  man.     .     .     . 

There  must  be  no  faltering  in  the  great  task,  such  as  would  bring 
shame  on  our  living  or  dishonour  on  our  dead. 

The  preacher's  last  sermon  says  : — 

Let  us  remember  that  the  Prince  of  Peace  goes  forth  in  this  war  to 
conquer  the  enemy  of  peace,  and  let  us  take  heart  as  we  see  the  nations 
one  after  another  nocking  to  his  banner.  Their  mission  is  that  of 
peacemakers,  their  work  to  remove  the  hindrances  and  obstacles  to 
universal  unity.  .  .  .  •'  He  that  loseth  his  life  for  My  sake  shall 
find  it." 


87 
NOTICES    OF    PERIODICALS. 


COTTON    IN    EGYPT    AND    RUSSIA. 

WHEN  presiding  at  the  Congress  of  Tropical  Agriculture  in 
the  Imperial  Institute  on  the  29th  of  June,  Lord  Kitchener 
said  : — 

The  successful  development  of  the  cotton  industry  in  Egypt 
depends  on  most  serious  attention  being  paid  to  the  following 
points : — 

(1)  The  renewal,  by  purer  strains,  of  the  cotton  seed  in  the 
country,  which  is  liable  to  deterioration  every  seven  years ;  (2)  the 
regulation  and  improvement  of  irrigation  and  drainage  ;  (3)  the 
proper  cultivation  and  manuring  of  the  land  and  the  rotation  of  crops  ; 
and  (4)  an  incessant  war  that  has  to  be  waged  against  insect  pests. 

A  scientific  system  of  irrigation  has  been  laid  out  on  the  land  at  a 
cost  of  £10  an  acre,*  and  it  was  then  handed  over  to  the  fellaheen  in 
five-acre  plots  for  cultivation  (with  benefit  to  all  concerned). 

Cotton  is  now,  therefore,  being  satisfactorily  grown  on  a  fair 
proportion  of  the  area,  and  it  is  hoped  will  bring  from  .£15  to  £20  an 
acre.  When  we  consider  that  there  are  about  1,500,000  acres  of 
equally  waste  salt  land  in  the  delta  waiting  for  development  by 
drainage,  the  value  of  this  experiment  can,  I  think,  be  appreciated. 

When  travelling  in  Southern  Russia,  where  every  year 
(and  not  only  a  rainy  year)  would  give  a  good  harvest  if 
there  existed  some  reasonable  system  of  artificial  irrigation, 
we  were  astonished  that  nothing  was  done  in  this  con- 
nection, either  by  the  State  or  by  individual  initiative. 

As  regards  growing  cotton  in  Central  Asia,  things  are 
even  less  advanced  than  in  Russia.  We  therefore  quote 
Lord  Kitchener's  practical  remarks  in  the  hope  that  his 
experience  may  be  turned  to  account  in  Russia  as  well  as 
in  Egypt. 

*  For  Russian  Central  Asia,  say,  200  roubles  per  dessiatine, 


"RUSSIE  ET  BELGIQUE."  . 

THIS  Belgian  periodical  follows  up,  step  by  step,  what  is 
being  done,  or  mostly  contemplated,  in  Russia  by  official 
commissions,  congresses,  etc.,  to  modify  and  alter  legislation 
in  commercial  and  industrial  matters.  Experience  lias 
shown  to  older  nations  that  less  state  interference  and  red 
tape  is  beneficial  to  trade.  In  this  respect  it  is  desirable 
that  Russia  should  follow  the  good  example  set  by  Western 
countries. 

Our  attention  is  drawn  to  a  new  and  more  complete 
edition  of  the  standard  work,  "  Histoire  de  la  Russie  depuis 
les  origines  jusqu'a,  nos  jours,"  par  Alfred  Rambaud, 
6e  edition,  revue  et  completee  jusqu'a  1913,  par  Ernile 
Haumont,  6  francs  (Hachette  &  Co.,  Paris).  The  latest 
additions  comprise  the  conflict  with  Japan,  the  internal 
troubles  of  1905,  the  manifest  of  1905,  the  first  Duma, 
political  parties,  Oriental  politics,  etc.  These  additions  are 
due  to  the  pen  of  M.  Emile  Haumont  and  are  written  in  an 
impartial  spirit. 

Another  useful  book  of  reference  for  capitalists  and 
business  men  is,  "  Seizieme  rapport  annuel  de  1'Association 
pour  la  defense  des  detenteurs  de  fonds  publics,"  published 
at  Antwerp.  Price  3J  francs. 

It  treats  of  various  complicated  and  difficult  questions 
which  have  influenced  the  money  market,  including  the 
Mexican  revolution  and  the  war  in  the  Balkans. 


"  EVERYMAN." 

DR.    CHARLES    SAROLEA'S    "  Thoughts    on    the    Russian 
Language"'  reproduce  Prince  Bismarck's  idea  that  the  study 
of  Russian  might  supersede   Latin  or  Greek  !     The  editor 
of  Everyman  boldly  announces  in  his  paper  of  1  7th  July  : — 
I  confidently  prophesy  that  before  the  schoolboy  of  to-day  will 


89 

have  attained  to  mature  age  the  study  of  Russian  will  take  the  place 
of  Greek  in  the  schools  of  Europe. 

We  hope  if  Russian  is  universally  adopted  that  that  rich 
language  will  no  more  be  disfigured  by  the  wanton  introduc- 
tion of  foreign  words  as  seen  in  the  Russian  press  of  the 
day.  We  give  a  couple  of  quotations  with  which  we  can 
scarcely  agree  :  — 

It  is  strange  that  reforming  Russian  despots  like  Peter  and 
Catherine  the  Great,  although  German  princes  by  origin,  should  have 
realised  the  importance  of  the  Russian  language  as  a  great  moral  and 
political  force,  and  that  they  should  have  encouraged  its  study  at  a 
time  when  even  German  rulers  like  Frederick  the  Great  professed 
nothing  but  contempt  for  their  national  German  tongue. 

We  quite  admit  that  Peter  the  Great  and  Catherine  the 
Great  realised  the  importance  of  the  Russian  language. 
AVe  also  know  that  Catherine  was  entirely  German  by 
origin,  but  it  is  news  for  us  that  Peter  the  Great  was 
anything  but  purely  Russian  by  descent ! 

We  were  also  rather  astonished  at  what  a  Russian 
author  told  Mr.  Sarolea  : — 

I  remember  Maxim  Gorky  telling  me  once  that,  in  his  opinion, 
there  were  only  three  men  in  the  whole  history  of  Russian  literature 
who  had  perfect  control  of  their  instrument,  namely  ;  Pushkin, 
Turgenev,  and  Chekhov. 

And  how  about  Krylov,  Ostrovsky,  Tolstoy,  and  even 
Goncharov,  etc."? 


"  EVERYMAN  "  (No.  97,  Vol.  IV). 

MK.  AYLMER  MAUDE  returns  once  more  to  his  hero — 
Leo  Tolstoy,  whose  novel,  "  War  and  Peace,"  "  exhibits 
most  truthfully  the  various  phases  of  a  soldier's  experience." 

Some  passages  might  refer  to  the  wicked,  devastating 
war  of  the  present  time.  History  repeats  itself. 

On  the  12th  June,  1812,  the  armies  of  Western  Europe  crossed  the 
frontier  and  the  war  began.  That  is,  an  event  took  place  contrary  to 
all  human  reason  and  all  human  nature.  Millions  of  men  committed 


90 

against  one  another  so  great  a  mass  of  crime — fraud,  cheating,  robbing, 
forging,  plunder,  arson  and  murder — that  the  annals  of  all  the  criminal 
courts  of  the  world  do  not  muster  such  a  sum  of  wickedness  in  whole 
centuries,  though  those  who  committed  these  deeds  did  not  at  the  time 
regard  them  as  crimes. 

The  commentator  tells  us  that  Tolstoy's  abhorrence  of 
war  became  still  more  intensified  as  a  result  of  the  religious 
outlook  on  life  he  then  adopted. 

His  condemnation  of  war  was,  no  doubt,  carried  to  an  extreme; 
but  ttiere  is  great  virtue  in  the  bold  challenge  of  accepted  opinions, 
and  his  unmeasured  denunciation  of  war,  no  less  than  his  wonderfully 
truthful  and  unbiased  descriptions  of  war,  may  help  on  that  readjust- 
ment of  public  feeling  and  opinion  which  must  come  if  the  world  is 
ever  to  reach  a  method  of  settling  its  international  policies  without 
continually  endangering  the  very  existence  of  civilization  itself. 


"THE  NEW  WEEKLY." 

THE  famous  traveller,  Mr.  Harry  de  Windt,  wrote  about 
"  Arctic  Siberia "  on  the  18th  of  July,  says  The  New 
Weekly. 

From  Irkutsk  he  went  in  a  sleigh  by  the  frozen  river 
Lena  to  Yakutsk — a  month  of  continuous  travel  "  through 
a  howling  waste  of  storm-swept  ice  and  snow." 

With  the  exception  of  great  hospitality  received  from  the 
Chief  of  Police  and  other  notabilities  of  the  old  wooden 
houses  at  Yakutsk,  his  reminiscences  of  this  journey  are  of 
a  depressing  character. 

There  was  luxury  and  dissipation,  but  little  culture  and 
reading.  There  were  only  twenty  political  exiles,  who  were 
free  to  move  about.  The  traveller  saw  a  few  who  had 
become  insane  !  He  concludes  : — 

The  great  crowd  which  had  assembled  outside  Zuyeff's  (the 
Policemaster's)  house  regarded  us  as  harmless  lunatics  rather  than  as 
possible  pioneers  of  a  great  railway  which  might  one  day  encircle  the 
world.  Soon  after  the  lights  of  Yakutsk  had  faded  on  the  horizon,  and 
I  had  bidden  farewell  to  a  civilisation  which  was  only  regained  six 
months  later  at  a  gold-mining  town  in  Alaska — Nome  City. 


91 
FROM  THE  RUSSIAN  PRESS. 


1.     CRIME  IN  RUSSIA. 

AT  Rilsk,  in  the  Government  of  Kursk,  a  band  of  thieves, 
consisting  of  schoolboys,  has  been  discovered.  The  lads, 
who  belong  to  the  local  schools  or  gymnasia,  had  carried 
on  their  nefarious  practices  for  several  months  without  let 
or  hindrance.  In  the  first  instance,  they  robbed  the  public 
library  and  the  physical  cabinet  of  scientific  instruments. 
As  their  guilt  was  not  discovered,  they  became  bolder. 
They  procured  firearms,  ammunition,  daggers  and  masks  ; 
they  stole  money  out  of  churches,  and  robbed  a  widow 
named  Mme.  Orlov,  who  was  alone  at  home  with  her 
fourteen-year-old  son.  Finally  they  were  all  arrested,  but 
we  have  not  heard  any  more  about  them. 

At  Novocherkask  in  South  Russia,  an  official  (zasedatel) 
called  Ivanov  was  condemned  to  serve  five  years  in  a 
convict  regiment  (Arestauskaia  rota). 

He  was  found  guilty  of  sixty  crimes  committed  during  a 
period  of  two  years  in  the  district  of  Salsk. 

He  had  levied  regular  charges  of  five  roubles  from  every 
trader.  In  some  cases  he  forced  rich  horse-breeders  to  pay 
him  a  thousand  roubles. 

The  patience  of  the  inhabitants  being  exhausted,  they 
presented  a  complaint  to  the  Government  procurator.  Ivanov, 
however,  interviewed  the  complainants,  one  by  one,  and  even 
threatened  them  with  death,  if  they  did  not  take  back  their 
complaint. 

2.     AN  ARTIST  WITH  A  NEW  IDEA. 

MANY  Russians  lament  the  early  death  of  Mr.  L.  L. 
Tatischev,  an  artist  and  a  poet,  who  passed  away  at 
St.  Petersburg,  in  the  spring  of  this  year. 


92 

A  soldier  by  profession,  he  resigned  his  commission  on 
account  of  health. 

He  loved  precious  stones,  saying  they  possessed  an 
attractive  power  for  him.  He  even  learned  the  jeweller's 
art,  and  created  a  special  workshop,  where  artistic  perfection 
was  attained.  His  productions  had  an  individual  beauty. 
The  director  of  the  Luxemburg  Museum  in  Paris  said : 
"  C'est  pour  la  premiere  fois  queje  vois  une  idee  dans  un  bijou."' 

The  deceased  was  also  a  poet  of  no  mean  talent,  although 
he  was  seldom  seen  in  print,  but  some  of  his  poetry  was  put 
to  music.  His  last  verses,  "  A  Soul,"  were  published  by  the 
military  newspaper,  The  Invalid.  The  idea  and  the  form 
of  the  poetry  was  touching  and  beautiful. 


3.     MONKS  FROM  MOUNT  ATHOS. 

IN  the  Office  of  the  Most  Holy  Synod,  and  with  the 
concurrence  of  the  Metropolitan  and  other  dignitaries  of 
the  Church,  several  monks,  accused  of  being  recalcitrant  in 
their  religious  views,  were  admonished  by  the  Assembly  met 
in  Conclave.  The  monks  declared  that  they  believed  and 
would  believe  as  required  by  the  dogmas  of  the  Orthodox 
Church  and  the  orders  of  the  Most  Holy  Synod.  They 
were  invited  to  kiss  the  Cross  and  the  Gospels,  and  after 
the  Church  Service  the  Metropolitan  Macarius  blessed 
them.  A  protocol  was  signed,  and  the  monks  were  drafted 
into  various  Russian  monasteries. 


4.  FUNERAL  OF  GENERAL  A.  P.  SCHOGOLEV. 

THE  Russian  Press  mentions  this  event,  which  took  place 
on  the  8th  of  May  at  Moscow,  and  states  that : — 

The  Lieutenant-General  was  82  years  of  age.     In  1853-54,  during- 
the  Crimean  War,  he  showed  marvellous  bravery.     When  the  combined 


93 

Anglo-French  Fleet  bombarded  Odessa,  the  young  lieutenant  com- 
manded a  battery  with  four  guns — the  only  defence  of  Odessa.  At  the 
end  of  the  fray  only  one  gun  remained  intact.  Schogolev  blew  up 
the  rest  and  removed  his  men.  The  same  day  the  Allied  Fleet  left 
Odessa. 

The  young  officer  was  decorated  with  the  St.  George's  Cross.  In 
Odessa  a  street  bears  his  name  and  a  monument  in  the  form  of 
St.  George's  Cross  is  placed  to  his  memory  on  the  spot  of  the  battery. 

From  official  sources  we  know  that  the  Allies  never 
intended  to  bombard  Odessa,  because  it  was  considered 
an  unfortified  town.  It  was  a  mistake  to  fire  on  them. 


5.    MAHOMEDANS  IN  RUSSIA. 

MUSSULMAN  members  of  the  Duma  were  authorised  by  the 
Minister  of  the  Interior  to  hold  a  special  meeting  in  order 
to  consult  about  contemplated  laws  concerning  their  religion. 
Thirty  persons  were  present.  After  exposing  the  mis- 
management of  successive  administrations  of  the  Caucasus, 
during  the  last  century,  Mr.  Djafarov  summed  up  the 
situation  by  saying  that  the  spiritual  existence  of  a  people  is 
its  most  intimate  life  and  should  not  be  exposed  to  the 
tender  mercies  of  local  authorities. 

It  appears  that  the  Mohammedans  at  the  Congress  were 
a  very  mixed  crew  —  representing  Tartars,  Bashkirs, 
Kalmuks  and  various  tribes  of  the  Caucasus. 

Mohammedan  women  in  Russia  vied  with  our  professors 
of  eugenics  bv  asking  that  certificates  of  health  should  be 

*  o 

provided  both  for  men  and  women  before  marriage,  and 
that  medical  inspections  should  be  available  if  necessary. 
If  "  conjugal  conditions  "  are  not  complied  with,  either  party 
should  have  a  right  to  a  divorce. 

As  regards  medical  inspection  the  Congress  could  not 
meet  the  ladies'  wishes,  for  there  were  no  doctors  available ! 


94 

6.    THE  ANTIQUITY  OF  MOSCOW. 

WHEN  the  question  was  raised  of  striking  a  medal  (by  the 
Zabelin  Library)  to  commemorate  the  foundation  of  Moscow, 
the  exact  date  was  disputed.  On  the  medal  880  is  the  year, 
but  in  history  it  is  1147.  On  the  site  where  St.  Saviour's 
Church  at  Moscow  was  erected  in  recent  years,  two  Arabic 
coins  were  discovered,  bearing  the  dates  862  and  86(5. 

Moscow  was  the  connecting  link  between  North  and 
South  and  a  resting-place  for  merchants.  Its  very  name 
originates  from  the  old  word  mostakva^i.e.,  the  bridge  joining 
North  and  South.  History  points  out  that  according  to 
legend,  Oleg  founded  Moscow  in  the  ninth  century,  and 
the  legend  is  gradually  being  turned  into  a  fact. 


7.    NAVIGATION   BETWEEN   EUROPE  AND 
SIBERIA.* 

A  RUSSIAN  correspondent  writing  from  Siberia  reports  that 
nine  vessels,  including  some  steamers,  arrived  from  Newcastle 
and  Tronse  in  Norway  in  eight  days,  via  the  Kara  Sea,  to 
the  Bay  of  Varnek. 

These  ships,  purchased  of  Hamburg  Jews,  were  laden 
with  various  European  goods.  Meeting  with  no  accidents 
they  worked  their  way,  with  the  assistance  of  barges,  along 
the  great  rivers  Obi  and  Yenisei,  which  are  the  arteries 
connecting  the  whole  of  Siberia. 


RUSSIA— THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  A  NATION. 

AMONG   Oxford  Pamphlets  we  find  a  reproduction  of  an 
article  addressed  to   TJie   Times  by  Paul  Vinogradoff,  the 


*  "  Through  Siberia,"  by  Nansen,  is  reviewed  on  another  page  ;  also 
de  Windt's  "Arctic  Siberia." 


95 

Liberal  Russian  Professor,  who  protests  against  German 
pretensions  to  consider  German  culture  superior  to  Russian 
culture. 

His  apologia  of  Russia  gives  a  galaxy  of  his  country's 
philosophers,  authors  and  artists,  who  surpass  the  Germans. 
The  cruel  and  barbarous  modus  operandi  of  the  Teutons  is 
branded. 

The  Slavs  must  have  their  chance  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and 
the  date  of  their  coming  of  age  will  mark  a  new  departure  in  the 
growth  of  civilization. 


"THE   GOSPEL   IN  RUSSIA." 

THIS  is  an  interesting  and  beneficent  periodical,  in  which 
our  member,  the  Rev.  R.  S.  Latimer,  and  his  friend,  Pastor 
Fetler,  take  an  active  part.  The  latter  relates  a  touching 
story  how  a  man  who  sold  vodka  became  converted  and 
finished  by  selling  Bibles  to  his  customers  who  had  become 
teetotallers. 

Principal  A.  McCaig,  B.A.,  LL.D.,  the  co-editor  of  this 
magazine,  writes  : — 

Russia  compares  favourably  with  Prussia,  and  German  •'  culture" 
seems  little  removed  from  the  most  repulsive  barbarism.  May  we  not 
hope  that  through  Russia's  closer  relations  with  the  Western  powers  of 
France  and  Britain  she  may  imbibe  more  of  the  spirit  of  true  freedom 
and  take  a  more  advanced  place  in  the  line  of  true  civilization.  .  .  . 
Her  chivalrous  defence  of  her  weak  kinsfolk  of  Serbia  wins  admiration. 
Her  generous  and  politic  proclamation  concerning  Poland 
commands  approval  and  raises  the  hope  that  something  of  the  spirit 
therein  shown  may  steal  into  her  dealings  with  the  oppressed  within  her 
borders.  Her  stern  prohibition  of  strong  drink  by  her  soldiers  and 
her  people,  by  which  she  has  sent  a  teetotal  army  into  the  field  ami 
practically  abolished  crime  among  her  civil  population,  might  well  be 
imitated  by  other  more  civilised  nations. 


96 
OBITUARY. 


MAJOR  P.  A.  CHARRIER. 

THIS  splendid  officer,  who  lectured  before  the  A.R.L.8., 
was  a  Member  of  our  Committee,  and  we  greatly  lament 
his  untimely  end,  for  he  was  killed  on  September  3rd  while 
magnificently  leading  the  Royal  Munster  Fusiliers.  The 
Munsters  were  cut  off  owing  to  a  message  failing  to  reach 
them.  The  Germans,  with  overwhelming  numbers,  worked 
round  the  rear  of  the  British  battalion  and  cut  it  off 
completely,  their  position  being  a  loopholed  house. 

Although  twice  wounded,  Major  C harrier  continued 
the  direction  of  the  action  till  after  sunset,  six  hours  of 
intermittent  fighting.  He  was  shot  a  third  time  and  fell 
mortally  wounded. 

In  spite  of  the  appalling  disaster  he  retained  the  entire 
trust  and  confidence  of  all  ranks  to  the  last,  which  is  the 
highest  praise  attainable  by  a  commanding  officer. 

We  regret  that  beyond  a  letter  printed  in  the  daily 
press  we  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  particulars  about 
his  early  career,  for  he  was  an  officer  who  loved  his 
profession  and  was  an  expert  in  military  history  and  science. 


NOTES  AND  NOTICES. 


1— VODKA;    2— SANITATION  ;  AND  3— TRADE. 

1.  During  the  last  twenty  years  the  A.R.L.S.  has 
repeated,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  that  the  vodka  monopoly 
was  the  curse  of  Russia.  It  is  satisfactory  that  teetotalism  is 
now  the  order  of  the  day,  and  that  the  peasantry  sympathise 
with  this  wholesome  innovation. 

'2.  We  again  express  the  earnest  hope  that  sanitation 
and  ventilation  may  likewise  merit  the  attention  of  the 
powers  that  be  Epidemics,  increased  by  war,  cases  of  cholera 
and  plague  are  rampant ;  ignorance  and  absence  of  elementary 
sanitation  and  ventilation  are  at  the  root  of  the  evil. 

3.  The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Morning  Post 
of  16th  October,  1914:— 

ENGLAND  AND  THE  RUSSIAN  MARKET. 

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  Morning  Post. 

SIR, — Letters  from  Petrograd  inform  me  that  the  Russians  are 
doing  their  utmost  to  substitute  German  goods  by  British,  and  that  now 
is  the  time  for  English  manufacturers  to  enter  the  Russian  market.  As 
an  instance,  I  may  say,  that  at  a  meeting  of  the  Russian  Red  Cross 
Society,  it  was  stated  that  various  drugs  and  surgical  instruments  have 
of  late  years  been  exclusively  obtained  from  Germany,  which  also 
supplies  Western  Europe.  This  applies  to  other  industries  which  British 
manufacturers  have  lost  or  have  never  captured.  Example  proves  that 
some  valuable  medicines  may  now  be  prepared  from  neu-  materials 
coming  from  South  America,  &c.  English  specialists-and  manufacturers 
should  turn  their  attention  to  these  matters  and  strike  the  iron  while 
it  is  hot. 

Yours,  &c., 

ED.  A.  CAZALET, 

President  of  the  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society. 
Imperial  Institute,  S.W.,  Oct.  15. 


1)8 

POLITICAL  TESTAMENTS  OF  PETER  THE 
GREAT  AND  FREDERICK  THE  GREAT. 

PETER'S  legendary  will  was  supposed  to  forecast  the 
conquest  of  Western  Europe,  and  it  is  suspected  that 
Napoleon  I.  invented  the  existence  of  this  document  to 
excite  the  world  against  Russia.  German  commentators 
have  suggested  that  the  Czar's  policy  was  specially  directed 
against  Germany.  The  present  Kaiser,  in  a  speech  at 
Breslau,  mentioned  an  ancient  political  testament  of  the 
Hohenzollerns,  evidently  favourable  to  Poland  !  Now,  it  is 
recorded  that  Frederick  II.  wrote  a  will  in  1752,  which 
he  entrusted  to  the  care  of  his  friend  Prince  Charles  of 
Brunswick  and  relegated  to  his  archive.  A  second  political 
testament  of  1768  was  preserved  in  the  archives  of  Berlin. 
Presumably  both  testaments  advise  war  and  conquest — hence 
the  Kaiser's  reference  to  them. 


PALESTINE    AND    THE    WAR. 

GREAT  Britain  had  always  protected  Turkey,  which  has 
now  declared  war !  Why  not  occupy  the  Holy  Land,  for 
it  is  a  scandal  to  leave  it  in  Moslem  custody  *?  Perhaps 
Catholic  and  Orthodox  people,  who  fought  about  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  in  the  Crimean  War,  would  now  not  object  to 
have  it  in  Christian  hands  rather  than  at  the  mercy  of 
Turkish  cavasses.  There  is  a  railway  from  Jaffa  to 
Jerusalem,  which  is  easily  reached. 


RUSSIAN  IN  ENGLAND. 

Mr.  H.  E.  WELLS  visited  Russia  and  returned  with  the 
bright  idea  that  Russian  should  be  taught  in  England  on  a 
par  with  French  and  German.  We  have  recommended 
teachers  for  the  purpose. 


99 
CONSTANTINOPLE. 

NICHOLAS  I.  was  honestly  well  disposed  to  England 
and  desirous  to  avoid  the  Crimean  War.  His  idea  was 
to  make  Constantinople  a  free-town  under  the  protection  of 
the  Powers.  Lord  Salisbury  truly  said  :  "  we  put  our 
money  on  the  wrong  horse." 


ITEMS  FROM  THE  RUSSIAN  PRESS. 

(a)  The  Government  of  Chernigov  now  rejoices  in 
teetotalisrn.  The  money  formerly  spent  on  vodka  in  one 
district  was  six  times  more  than  the  land  taxes.  Health 
and  money  are  now  saved. 

(6)  In  the  province  of  Kutais,  in  the  Caucasus,  there 
are  rich  beds  of  manganese,  which  are  the  property  of  a 
German  company. 

A  Caucasian  newspaper  estimates  that  during  last  year 
the  Austrian  and  German  armies  have  been  supplied  with 
millions  of  tons  (!)  of  manganese  from  the  Caucasus  for 
purposes  of  war. 


AN    OFFICER'S    WARNING. 

COLONEL  C.  P.  LYNDEN-BELL,  a  distinguished  linguist, 
since  he  is  an  interpreter  in  Russian  and  several  other 
languages,  delivered  in  1903  a  lecture,  which  was  printed, 
on  the  coming  war.  It  was  prophetic.  In  1909  he  repeated 
that  we  were  unprepared  for  war. 

A  German  told  him  :  "  There  will  be  no  fight ;  it  will  be 
a  walk-over  for  Germany"  Another  German  regretted  that 
our  homes  were  so  soon  to  be  broken  into. 

Colonel  Lynden-Bell's  concluding  remark  was:  "It  is 
the  courage  of  the  politician  and  not  that  of  the  people 
which  is  at  fault." 


100 
POETRY. 


TO     THE    MEMORY    OF    LERMONTOV. 

From  the  Russian  of  ANATOLE  KREML&V. 

Translated  by  WILLIAM  HOLLOWAY. 

(2/14  October,  1814—2/15  October,  1914.) 

•'  To  the  West,  to  the  West  would  I  go 
'•  Where  flourish  the  fields  of  my  ancestors, 
"  Where  in  a  castle  on  foggy  mountains 
"  Their  unforgotten  ashes  rest." 

(From  Lermontov.) 
A  pall  lay  heavy  o'er  the  land  : 

Great  Russia  mourned  her  dead, 
Pushkin  the  loved,  whose. magic  hand 

The  light  of  song  had  shed. 
'Twas  yesterday  he  struck  the  lyre 

That  freedom  loves  so  well, 
And  Russia  caught  the  sacred  fire 

And  felt  the  magic  spell. 
And  now  'tis  mute,  the  flame  is  chilled : 

His  night  shall  know  no  morn. 
His  blood  a  heartless  blow  hath  stilled ; 

The  heavenly  strings  are  torn. 
Then,  'mid  the  people's  stony  tears, 

A  younger  voice  was  heard, 
A  rushing  torrent  in  their  ears, 

A  voice  that  thrilled  and  stirred. 
"  Oh  !  hearken  !  now  that  Pushkin's  fire 

"  And  Pushkin's  heart  are  cold, 
"  For  you  I  string  a  newer  lyre, 

"  A  younger  world  unfold. 
"  To  Pushkin's  harp  I'll  tune  my  lyre 

"  With  music  from  his  shrine, 
"  Till  Pushkin's  soul  and  Pushkin's  fire 

"  Shall  wake  again  in  mine." 

The  chords  of  passion  tb  robbed  and  beat, 

They  owned  the  master's  art. 
His  was  the  true  Promethean  heat 

That  kindles  in  the  heart. 
On  Lermontov,  heav'n's  favoured  child, 

Here  on  our  narrow  shore 


101 

The  world  of  youth  and  passion  smiled, 

And  heaped  its  golden  ore. 
The  world  of  fancy,  Shakespeare's  own, 

That  tortured  Byron  knew, 
Where  sightless  Milton  mused  alone, 

There  was  his  kingdom  too. 
'Twas  there  he  sought  and  found  his  soul, 

And  sat  among  his  peers. 
He  paid  the  price,  the  bitter  toll 

Of  misery  and  tears. 
His  were  the  prophet's  glow  and  heat. 

He  watched  the  billows  flow, 
The  waves  of  evil  and  deceit, 

They  left  him  white  as  snow. 
From  time  to  time  if  life's  poor  flask 

Grew  bitter,  he  would  drain 
The  cup,  nor  take  the  gods  to  task. 

He  only  moaned  in  pain. 

His  anguish  pierced  us.     Lake  the  blest 

It  taught  us  how  to  weep, 
Like  children  on  their  mother's  breast 

Ere  they  are  lulled  to  sleep. 
His  tears  were  dry  in  their  stony  bed 

When  he  felt  pain's  cruel  brand — 
'Twas  then  he  recalled  the  days  long  dead, 

And  the  voice  of  his  father's  land. 
For  theirs  was  a  land  where  men  are  men, 

Not  chattels  bought  and  sold, 
Where  chains  ne'er  clank,  and  each  Scottish  glen 

Breeds  clansmen  free  and  bold. 
Far  from  the  home  of  his  sires  he  was  born* 

On  a  distant  and  colder  strand. 
But  his  soul  was  heavy,  his  heart  was  torn 

For  the  sons  of  his  native  land. 
That  laden  soul,  its  grief  and  tears 

Was  a  gift  from  the  angels  of  light. 
Those  dreams  that  dwell  beyond  the  spheres 

He  sought  through  this  earthly  night. 
But  could  the  music  of  our  earth 

Recall  the  songs  of  the  blest  ? 
Peace  flew  to  the  heaven  that  gave  it  birth. 

His  soul  could  find  no  rest. 


Lermontov's  ancestors— the  Leannonts— were  Scotch,  but  he  was  born  in  Kussia. 


102 

Short  was  the  purgatory  here. 

Martyr  to  grief  and  pain, 
Strong,  passionate,  it  knew  no  fear 

But  only  proud  disdain. 
The  world  of  mean  and  little  men 

Darkened  its  virgin  light, 
And  lying  breath  and  rancorous  pen 

Poisoned  with  deadly  blight. 
Black  ruin  had  no  fears  for  him  : 

Death  was  an  honored  guest. 
On  Transcaucasia's  mountain  grim 

He  lies  in  endless  rest. 
The  mountain  felt  the  mortal  stroke, 

The  torrents  burst  their  bed. 
Bed  lightning  flashed,  and  thunder  broke 

Above  the  honored  dead.:;: 

Translated  by  WILLIAM  HOLLOWAY,  B.A.  (Oxon), 
author  of  "  The  New  Dunciad,"  etc.,  etc. 


THE  SISTER  OF  MERCY. 

(Literally  translated  from  the  Russian  of  Anatole  Kremlov 
by  JOHN  POLLEN.) 

Along  the  heavy  thorn- strewn  way 

So  good,  so  pure,  so  full  of  love 
Thou  seem'st,  with  what  a  holy  ray 

By  halo  crowned,  to  move ! 

Amidst  the  sufferings  and  the  woes, 

Mid  pains  of  body,  pangs  of  mind, 
Relieving  these  and  soothing  those, 

How  sweet  thy  care — caress  how  kind  ! 


*  1. — Lermontov  died  on  the  15/27  of  July,  1841.  His  death  was  announced  from 
Piatisorsk  (a  spa  in  the  Caucasus)  in  the  following  terms: — "On  the  15th  of  July,  at 
5  p.m.,  there  was  an  awful  storm,  with  lightning  and  thunder;  at  the  same  time, 
between  the  mountains  of  Mashukand  Beshtan,  Lermontov  breathed  his  last  at  Piatigorsk, 
where  he  was  undergoing  a  cure." 

2. — The  poetry  by  A.  Kreml6v,  "  To  the  Memory  of  T.ermontov,"  is  written  in  the 
same  metre  as  Lermontov's  verses.  At  the  end  of  the  second  part  the  author  adapts 
some  of  his  lines  to  Lermontov's  "Angel." — "Through  the  midnight  heavens  an 
angel  flew." 

IS".  B.— Lermontov  w  as  killed  in  a  duel  by  an  officer  called  Martinov,  whom  he  had 
ridiculed.    We  knew  the  niece  of  Martinov. 


103 

The  laud  War  plunges  into  blood, 
The  people  perish  in  the  war — 

Through  thy  deep  love,  so  pure,  so  good, 
Their  sufferings  sore  assuaged  are  ! 

With  one  sweet  look,  one  gentle  word, 
Thou  caii'st  their  pain  at  once  suppress. 

To  hopeless  torture  balm  accord, 
To  suffering  martyrs  bring  redress ! 

Thy  gentle  glance  of  sympathy, 
Of  love,  alarm,  and  tender  care, 

How  much  it  gives  of  ecstacy  ! 

How  loss  of  strength  it  doth  repair  ! 

Believe  me,  when  thy  hours  are  sad, 
All  those  to  whom  thy  glance  gave  life, 

Whom  thy  sweet  words  have  made  so  glad, 
With  burning  love  for  thee  are  rife. 

They  bring  thee  grateful  thanks  and  high 
For  all  the  gifts  thou  did'st  bestow. 

Their  prayers  with  pleadings  fill  the  sky 
For  happy  days  and  peace  below. 

All  blessed  is  this  life  of  thine, 

And  in  the  name  of  Right  and  Good — 

Holy  to  every  thought  of  mine 
Sister,  of  Mercy's  Sisterhood! 

J.  POLLEN. 


Literally  translated  from  the  Russian  of  Anatole  Kremlov 
by  JOHN  POLLEN. 

-.;:  *  * 

Stifling !     The  scorching  air 

Breathes  only  fire  and  gleam. 
Tired  Nature  doth  appear 

Bewitched,  as  in  a  dream. 

Exhausted  all  things  stand 

Of  joy,  of  hope  bereft — 
All  wait  while  o'er  the  land 

The  thunder-clouds  are  reft.  .  .  . 

Down  pours  the  gracious  rain  ; 

The  air  grows  cool  and  gay : 
Throughout  vast  Nature — pain 

Floats,  like  a  dream,  away. 


104 

Ah  !  could  our  people's  griefs 
By  such  rain-bursts  be  stayed, 

And  drowned  in  stormy  gulfs 
Of  nation's  tears  be  laid. 


J.  POLLEN. 


SISTER. 
(From  the  Russian  by  JOHN  POLLEN.) 

Unknown — a  Stranger  drawing  near  — 

Beside  the  soldier's  stretcher  now — 
To  all  so  near,  to  all  so  dear — 

Sister  of  Mercy,  standest  thou. 
It  may  be,  thou'rt  of  noble  birth, 

It  may  be,  of  a  class  unknown — 
To  wounded  soldier,  in  his  dearth, 

Thou  com'st  like  sister  of  his  own. 
Where  from  the  foeman's  fierce  attack 

The  blood  is  bursting  forth  in  flood, 
"Where  iron  balls  the  bosom  rack, 

With  cross  uplifted,  hast  thou  stood. 
A  ray  of  light — with  cheering  sounds 

To  soothe  the  pain  hast  thou  essayed  ; 
And  gentle  hands  on  ghastly  wounds 

With  woman's  tenderness  were  laid. 
It  was  distress  that  gave  you  birth 

Amongst  the  rich,  amongst  the  poor, 
Ye  Daughters  of  our  native  earth, 

Ye  are  our  sisters,  true  and  pure ! 
These  wounds  of  ours  are  wounds  of  yours ; 

This  blood  that  flows — your  very  own  ; 
For  you,  for  us,  the  Heed  endures  ; 

To  us,  to  all,  one  love  is  shown. 
Our  Mother  Riissia  from  the  foe. 

Our  cruel  neighbour,  we'll  set  free  ! 
And  Russia's  victory  all  shall  know 

By  steel,  and  Cross  of  Calvary. 
Unknown — a  stranger  drawing  near — 

Beside  the  soldier's  stretcher  now, 
To  all  so  near — to  all  so  dear — 

Sister  of  Mercy,  standest  thou  ! 

J.    POLIJEN. 


105 

FROM  THE  PERSIAN  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM. 

(Quatrains  translated  line  foi1  line  from  the  original  Persian.) 

In  heart — desire  for  maiden  dear — 
In  hand — the  wine  cup  all  the  year  ; 
Men  say,  "  May  God  to  you  shrift  grant !  " 
Avaunt !  of  such  I  feel  no  want ! 

In  Inns  there's  one  Lustration — Wine ! 
A  tarnished  name  no  more  can  shine ; 
So  torn  our  temperance-veil  is  here 
It  can't  be  mended !     So  !  good  cheer ! 

I  saw  a  man  on  Palace  roof 

Who  trampled  clay  without  behoof ; 

The  Clay  in  mystic  accents  said— 

"  Cease !     You'll  be  trampled  when  you're  dead  !  '' 

Sweet  day — wind  neither  hot  nor  cold — 

Down  rose's  cheek  the  rain  hath  rolled; 

The  nightingale  to  yellow  rose 

Cries,  "  Wine  !  drink  wine  till  time  shall  close ! " 

Ere  Fate  attacks  thy  drooping  brow 
Let  rosy  wine  be  ordered  now  ; 
No  gold  art  thou  that — witless  swain — 
Men  bury  and  bring  forth,  again ! 

Friends !  stay  me  with  the  wine-cup  !  do ! 
To  amber  face  give  ruby  hue ; 
Wash  me  in  wine,  and  when  I  die, 
Let  me  in  vine-planked  coffin  lie. 

King !     Heaven  decreed  thy  kingdom's  course, 
And  saddled  for  thee  Empire's  horse ; 
And  when  thy  Charger  golden-shod 
Touched  dust — gilded  become  the  sod. 

No  worth  has  Love  that's  insincere — 
No  warmth  give  dying  embers  here ; 
No  peace — no  food — no  sleep — no  cheer, 
Knows  Lover  true,  day,  month,  or  year ! 

"  Forever's  "  secrets  none  hath  solved ; 
Nor  from  his  orbit  fixed  revolved ; 
Tyro  and  Teacher,  all  can  see, 
Alike  in  impotence  agree. 

J.  POLLEN. 

NOTE.— The  quatrains  of  Omar  Khayyam  are  like  sonnets,  complete  in  themselves. 
They  hive  no  connection  one  with  the  other,  although  they  are  mainly  concerned 
with  praise  of  Love  and  Wine— or,  as  the  Sufis  pretend,  with  Devotion  to  tlie  Deity 
and  celestial  enjoyments.— J.P. 


106 
FUTURE    LECTURES. 

Paper  to  be  read  on  the  first  Tuesday  of  the  following 
month,  at  three  (3)  p.m. : — 

1915. 

February  2nd. —  "ADAM  MIOKIEWICZ  "  (the  National  Poet 
of  Poland),  by  Miss  M.  AsHURST-BiGGS,  translator  of 
his  works. 


March  2nd. — "  REMINISCENCES  or  THE  RUSSIAN  ARMY 
AND  ITS  GENERALS,"  by  W.  BARNES  STEVENI,  author 
of  many  works  on  Russia. 


April  6th. — Mr.  ARNOLD  WHITE  will  lecture  if  possible. 


No  Meetings  in  January,  August  and  September. 

These  Lectures  are  also  announced  in  the  leading  daily 
papers. 


107 


HER   ROYAL   AND   IMPERIAL   HIGHNESS  THE   DUCHESS   OF  SAXE- 
COBURG-GOTHA  AND  EDINBURGH. 

LIST   OF   MEMBERS. 

(Up  to  the  31st  December,  1914.) 

NOTE. — The  numbers  correspond  to  those  on  Members'  cards. 

(H.M.)  means  Honorary  Member. 

(L.M.)  means  Life  Member,  who  has  compounded,  i-e-,  paid  £10  once  for  all. 

His  IMPERIAL   HIGHNESS   THE   GRAND   DUKE   PAUL. 
His  IMPERIAL  HIGHNESS  THE  GRAND  DUKE  MICHAEL. 


637  Abercorn,  Duke  of 

194  Abrikossoff,  N.  A. 

360  Adams,  F.  E..  R.N. 

645  Adye,  Lt.-Col.  D.  R. 

475  Alford,  A.  C. 

565  Anderson,  A.  C. 

328  Antonini,  M. 

325  Armstrong,  Major., RE.  (L.M.) 

114  Arsenieff,  Admiral 

255  Aschkenasy,  S.  E. 

528  Ashby,  H.  D. 

350  Atherton,  Mrs.  G.  F. 

474  Baer,  I. 

331  Baldwin,  Miss  M. 

490  Ballard,  Lt.-Col.  C.R, 

659  Barnes,  Major  E.  (L  M.) 

514  Beaumont,  S.  J. 

35  Beck,  Miss  (L.M.) 

535  Beer,  Mrs.  (L.M.) 

583  Bennett,  F.  C. 

545  Bennett,  Capt.  J.  H. 

461  Benson,  J. 

499  Biddulph,  General  Sir  Robert 
(H.M.) 

286  Bigg-Wither,  Rev.  R.  F. 

466  Bilibine,  J. 


671  Bill,  J.  H.  H.,  I.C.S.  (L.M.) 

217  Bingham,  Capt.  W.  H. 

512  Binsteed,  G.  C. 

164  Birkbeck,  W.  J.  (L.M.) 

525  Blackwood,  Capt.  A.  P. 

507  Blessig,  J.  P. 

519  Bobrinsky,  Countess  B. 

345  Bobrinsky,  Count  V.  A. 

294  Bode,  Baron 

568  Bode,  Baroness  Elise 

478  Bohac.  C. 

710  Boileau,  Major  E.  A.  P. 

523  Bolton,  Mrs.  A.  W. 

698  Bonar,  Henry,  Consul 

588  Bone,  Capt.  A.  F. 
662  Boome,  Lt.-Col.  E.  H. 
627  Borozdin,  A.  K. 

558  Bosanquet,  V.  H.  C. 

238  Boutenoff,  Count 
Chreptovitcb 

366  Brennan,  Hugh 

89  Bridge,  Major  W.  Cyprian 

404  Britten,  Lt.-Col.  T.  H. 

451  Browne,  Capt.  B.  S. 

560  Browning,  Capt.  E.  R.  L. 

589  Bruce,  Miss  A. 

654  Buchanan,  Sir  George  W. 


108 


419     Burge,  M. 

401     Bushby,  Miss 

500    Busk,  Sir  Edward  H.  (H.M.) 


434  Cahen,  L. 

370  Carter,  Lieut.  H.  F.  G. 

487  Caruana,  E.  W. 

410  Cazalet,  Miss 

37  Cazalet,  Rev.  A.  M. 

51  Cazalet,  E.  A. 

614  Cazalet,  F.  A. 

24  Cazalet,  W.  L. 

16  Charnock,  C.  J.  (L.M.) 

695  Charnock,  H.  H. 

45  Chevallier,  Capt.  F.  E.  de  C. 
(L.M. 

564  Churchill,  Capt.  W.  M. 

436  Clark,  Arthur  H. 

205  Clarke,  Major  F.  Stanley 

539  Clarke,  Capt.  N.  P. 
399  Clarke,  F.  Seymour 
291  Clayton,  Lieut.  E. 
113  Clemow,  Dr.  F. 
563  Cobban,  Capt.  C.  L. 

540  Collum,  Capt.  J.  A. 
590  Congress,  Library  of 

402  Coolidge,  A.  C. 
705  Cotter,  A. 

380  Crane,  C.  R.  (L.M.) 

237  Creighton,  Mrs.  Mandell 

573  Cumberland,  Miss  A. 

711  Dalrymple,  Capt.  E.  A. 

9  Daniel,  Major  E.  Y. 

363  Daniel,  Com.  O.  H.,  R.N. 

446  Davis,  F.  M. 

746  Davison,  J.  W. 

125  Delavoye,  Colonel 

91  Dewrance,  John  (L.M.) 

403  Digby,  Capt.  K    (L.M.) 
498  Disbrowe,  Miss 


308  Dobson,  G. 

431  Dunsterville,  Col.  L.  C. 

171  Eady,  G.  G.  (L.M.) 

109  Eastmead,  Major  C.  S. 

353  Enchevich,  General  M. 

375  Evreinow,  Senator  G.  A. 

195  Fairholme,  G.  F. 

338  Feneran,  Capt.  F.  E. 

682  Fitz-Hugh,Capt.  I.  C.  (L.M. 

456  Forbes,  N.,  Ph.D. 

438  Fortescue,  Rev.  Dr.  A. 

745  Fraser,  J.  F. 

716  French,  Major  F.  I.  F 

653  Frere,  Miss  Tudor 

97  Freshfield,  W.  Douglas 

191  Fuller,  Captain  C.  F. 


585  Gagarine,  Princess  D. 

726  Galante,  Mrs.  O. 

519  Gale,  Miss 

126  Galkine-Vraskoy,  M.  N. 

395  Gaylord,  F.  A. 

467  Gearing,  J.  J.  H. 

105  Geddes,  Lt.-Col. 

486  Genge,  Miss 

604  Gibson,  A.  J. 

683  Gibson,  Capt.  R.  R. 

578  Good,  Miss  E.  C. 

572  Good,  Miss  R.  A. 

223  Gordon,  Major  N.  W. 

576  Graham,  S. 

391  Grant,  Lt.-Col.  A.  G.  W. 

235  Greig,  C.  A. 

493  Grenfell,  Field-Marshal 
Lord 

664  Grey,  Earl  (H.M.) 

641  Grimshaw,  Major  E.  W. 

411  Gros,  Dr.  (Mayor  of  Prague) 

569  Guchkoff,  N.  I. 


109 


593  Halpert,  R.,  R.N. 

599  Hammond,  J.  Hays 

174  Hanks,  Capt.,  R.A. 

482  Harris,  E.  Legh 

312  Harris.  Capt.  H.  T.  H. 

302  Hartley,  H. 

270  Hartley,  W. 

251  Haslam,  Capt.  B.  J. 

731  Hastie,  Miss  J.  A.  (L.M.) 

307  Hausch,  A.  (L.M.) 

108  Havelock,  H.,  M.A. 

146  Hay,  Major  A. 

192  Heath,  R.  L.  G. 

241  Henderson,  Major  E.  G. 

261  Henderson,  Dr.  G. 

371  Henderson-Scott,  A.  M. 

505  Hill,  Miss  F.  Davenport 

450  Hilliard,  R.  (L.M.) 

225  Hirsh,  H.  A. 

533  Hobden,  H. 

460  Hobhouse,  Miss  E. 

Io8  Holloway,  W. 

8  Homiakoff,  N. 

488  Hope,  Miss  G. 

537  Hudson,  Major  A.  R.  Ross 

233  Ilovaiski,  Mrs. 

5  llyin,  General  A.  A. 

580  Johnstone,  Miss  C.  L. 

421  Jones,  Teague 

518  Kell,  Capt.  V. 

666  Kemball,  Lieut.-Col.  C.  A. 

418  Kennard,  Dr.  H.  P. 

497  Kenny,  Capt.  W.  G.  S. 

510  Kenrick,  C.  C. 

713  Kingston,  Major  T.  A. 

470  Kirby.  Mrs.  J. 

687  Klingenberg,  R. 

315  Knox,  Major  A. 

512  Koebel,  Capt.  F.  E. 


228  Koni.  Senator  A.  F. 

214  Koulakovsky,  Professor 

179  Kovalevsky,  V.  1. 

102  Kremlov,  A. 

135  Kiihl.  C.  (L.M.) 

342  Kuliabko,  Professor  A. 

489  Lane-Poole,  Capt.  H.,R.  M.A. 

506  Lane-Poole,    Stanley,   M.A., 
Litt.  D. 

472  Langhorne,  Rev.  W.  H. 

442  Latimer,  Rev.  R.  S. 

494  Lawtoii,  Lancelot 

122  Leger.  Professor  L. 

524  Lepkovvsky,  J.  de 

321  Leslie,  Lieut.  W. 

454  Lewellyn-Jones,  F. 

642  Lewis,  Colonel  D.  S. 

686  Lindsay,  Lt.-Col.  A.  B. 

143  Lomas,  J. 

501  London,  Bishop  of  (H.M.) 

481  Long,  R.  C. 

248  Lowry,  Colonel  W.  H. 

153  Ltitzow,  Count 

367  Lynden-Bell.  Col.  C.  P. 

G75  Lyne,  Major  C.  V.  N. 

697  Lyons,  Capt.  G. 

273  Macaulay,  Major  Deazil 

282  Makovsky,  S.  K. 

543  Maly,  Dr. 

492  Masterman,  E.  A.,  R.N. 

389  Macdonald,  Col.  F.  W.  P. 

96  Machin,  Miss  M. 

577  McLaren,  Mrs. 

714  McNeile,  Major  D.  H. 

428  Macready,  W. 

551  Maguire,  T.  Miller,  LL.D. 

242  Mappin,  Major  G.  F. 

92  Marchant,  F.  P. 

658  Marsh,  Major  F.  G.  (L.M.) 

587  Massey,  W.  H.  (L.M.) 

717  Meakin,  Miss  A.  (L.M.) 


110 


393  Mears,  A.,  Major  I.S.C. 
202  Meiklejohn,  K. 

185  Milbank,  Lady 

22  Mirrielees,  A.  (M.) 

74  Morgan,  C. 

565  Morgan,  Capt.  M.  H.  L. 

329  Muir,  Mrs. 

332  Muir,  A.  H. 

598  Murray,  Capt.  Erskine,  R.A. 

440  Narischkine,  B.  G. 

453  Neilson,  Captain  T.  F. 

355  Newberry  Library  of  Cbicago 

250  Newcombe,  Capt.  G.  H. 

468  New  English  Club. 

618  Newman,  Miss  C, 

372  New  York  Public  Library 

394  Nicholas,     Ex-Russian     Arch 

bishop  (H.M.) 

1 10  Nightingale,  Major  M.  R. 

582  Noyes,  Prof.  G.  R. 

439  O'Dwyer,  Sir  M.  F. 

161  O'Leary,  Col.  W.  E. 

98  Osten-Sacken,      Baron     Fred 
(L.M.) 

247  Ostroukhoff,  I.  S.  (M.) 

430  Otter-Barry,  Capt. 

326  Owen,  S. 

381  Owsiankin,  A.  W. 

365  Parish,  Miss  M.  J. 

405  Patrick,  R.  M.  F. 

471  Paul,  Colonel,  R.E. 

526  Paul,  E.  M.,  Consul 

31  Perowne,  Lt.-Col.  J.  Woolrych 

426  Perry-Ay scough,  H.  G.  C. 

47  Peterson,  Col.  F,  H. 

562  Phayre,  R.  B. 

581  Phelps,  Prof.  W.  L. 

349  Phibbs,  Miss  H. 

23  Philip,  W. 

613  Phillips,  Sir  Lionel,  Bt.(L.M. 

509  Phipson,  M.  H. 


473  Playne,  Miss  C.  E. 

462  Pogson,  F.  Vere 

52  Pollen,  Dr.  John 

39  Poole,  Major  F.  G.,  D.S.O. 

18  Poutiatine,  Countess 

350  Prague  English  Club 

207  Prendergast,  Col.  (L.M.) 

348  Preston,  E.  D.  (L.M.) 

448  Purcell,  Miss 

409  Pyper,  W.  J.  Stanton 

323  Raffi,  A. 

561  Ragovin,  V. 

595  Eason,  Capt.,  R.N. 

343  Raymond,  Major  H.  E. 

476  Redl,  Major 

359  Regnart,  Capt.  C.  H. 

407  Reinhold,  Capt.  H.  E. 

420  Rendall.  H.  E.,  R.N. 

631  Reval  Russian  Literary  Circle 

54G  Richardson,  Lt.-Col.  C. 

445  Richmond,  R.  S. 

62  Riddle,  J.  W. ,  ex  Ambassador 

368  Riga  Russian  I  iterary  Circle 

311  Ritchie,  Rev.  A. 

579  Ritchie,  A.  J. 

412  Robinson,  Miss 

151  Robson,  Lt.-Col.  C.  G. 

559  Roerich,  N.  C. 

306  Root,  N. 

571  Rostovtsof,  Count  I.  N. 
(L.M.) 

552  Rowlandson,  Capt.  H.  W. 
316  Rowlandson,  Capt.  M.  G. 
621  Ruffmann,  D.  A.  (L.M.) 
400  Ryle,  Miss  M.  C. 

362  Sansey,  Count  N.  E. 

594  Saunders,  Capt.  M. 

553  Scheviakoff ,  Professor  V.  T . 
495  Schishmareff,  Capt. 

459  Scott,  A.  Maccallum,  M.P. 


Ill 


322  Searight.  Lieut.  K. 

159  Sevier,  Dr.  A. 

377  Shepherd,  Miss  G. 

720  Shetaloff,  Dr.  N.  I. 

608  Shishkoff.  N.  A. 

425  Shlehover,  A.  C. 

218  Simpson,  A.  F. 

385  Simpson,  Miss  T. 

422  Simpson,  W.  E.  D. 

397  Sinclair,  W. 

269  Siricius,  E.,  Consul 

453  Skaife,  Capt.  E.  O. 

231  Smith,  Capt.  Kowland 
678  Snowdon,  I. 

301  Souter,  Major  A.  B. 

435  Spiers,  Miss  F. 

54  Stebbing,  Rev.  Thomas  R.  R. 

415  Steel,  H.  C. 

15  Stern,  W.  (L.M.) 

741  Steveni,  W.  Barnes 

406  Strogonoff,  Count 

556  Studsen,  Capt.  A.  Ross 

232  Swayne.  Colonel  H.,  R.F 

60  Sykes,  Arthur  A. 

180  Talbot,  S.  C. 

458  Taylor,  Miss  T.  M. 

12  Tchihatcheff,  Admiral 

139  Tchihatcheff,  D.  N.  (V.) 

657  Tennant,  Major  E. 

355  Thesiger,  The  Hon.  W.,  Consu 

480  Thompson,  H. 

173  Thomson,  Mrs.  H. 

61  Thornton,  Mrs.  (L.M.) 

64  Thornton,  Capt.  W.  (L.M.) 

29  Timiriazeff,  Professor  C. 
(H.M.) 

78  Timiriazeff,  V.  I. 

137  Tollemache,   Hon.   Mrs.  L. 
(L.M.) 

44  Tolstoy,  Count  M.  M. 

167  Tornauw,  Baroness 

369  Tornauw,  Baron  N. 


304  Trabotti,  A. 

305  Trabotti,  Mrs. 
384  Trautmann,  Miss 
354  Travers,  Miss  R. 
352  Trevor,  Roy 

4  Trotter-Cranstoun,  J.  Y. 

59  Tyrrell,  Lieut. -General  F.  H 

87  Tyszkiewicz,  Countess  A. 

597  Van  der  Vliet,  Mrs. 

603  Van  der  Vliet,  W. 

715  Van  Someren,  Capt.  W.  W., 
D.S.O. 

706  Venning,  Miss 

596  Voiekoff,  Prof.  A.  J. 

644  Vostrotin,  S.  V. 

449  Waley,  A. 

259  Walker,  Major  F.  H. 

65  Wallace,     Sir      Donald 

Mackenzie 

281  Wallis,  H.  J. 

298  Wardell,  Major  W.  (L.M.) 

340  Wardrop,  O. 

206  Waterhouse,  Capt.  Claude 

317  Watson,  Major  L.  A.  (L.M.) 

477  Watson,  Capt.  H.  D. 

536  Watts,  E.  Ponsonby 

364  While,  Miss  M. 

575  White,  The  Hon.  Andrew  D. 

386  White,  Arnold 

491  Whitten,  Capt  J.  E. 

227  Williamson,  Dr.  G. 

432  Wilson,  Mrs.  E. 

427  Wilson,  L.  S.  (L.M.) 

80  Wolley,  Clive  Phillipps 

591  Wolseley,  Sir  Capel,  Bt. 

274  Woodhouse,  A.  W.,  Consul 

413  Wright,  Capt.  C.  E.  Sykes, 

R.M. 

211  Yaroslav  117th  Inf.  Regt. 

72  Yeames,  W.  F..R.A.   (L.M.) 

517  York,  Archbishop  of 

336  Younghusband,  Sir  Frank 

341  Zypaloff,  A.  de 

E 


112 


•       «O     O       O       OS       i—  (       O                           i—  1                      OS 

~                  i-H                                i-H        rH                                 i-l                          ^ 

00     «O        •*        i-H        (N        <N                                •*»< 
2     —.  i        —i        _  i        rH                                             i—i 

a 

•^                                                                                 co 

o 

«ff        O     C5        <N        CO        "*        CO                                                              J* 

M 

^                                                                     •*      '                   ^ 

O 

SO        00 

S 

•       0       <N 

w" 

o 

~ 

B 
H 

_ 

T3 

o> 

• 

o)   bsd    « 

1—  1 

:       :         :       1         :         :      -S 

S     •    § 

tf 

fi                               F                   Q 

1                              ^            |    « 

°      '    5 

O 

"e  U  I-H 

10                 '     >.     'g        S3                  >>      *® 

^    «  02 

CO 

pq 

2      .S      13                 fl      '? 

.  ^            (»       :     o     cs       : 
:  g     ^     ft      •    •%    m 

_,        •      9              •*=     r^ 
°      jl      o     CO 

^  0  pq 
• 

.2 

S     oT     "  •             •*=       o 

a 

"^^ 

'*&     ^      QD              113       c     rh 

s 

^"S 

x 

[^ 

J§|    §"    -,g           >H    "a    .3      : 

I—  -, 

•S     -    i           3     &    S 

PHri| 

05       to         O                      >-l          m 

EH 

01   •*      9             S      S      S     ,cj 

c8      0        "                   ft       S      -2        » 

PC, 

a;    o     PH             g      o      *      as 
H   W     ;              M     Q    «     0 

o 

,^CO                    OOOCOO3                                               t-l 

W 

-jt-               eo-*Ot~f-i                                   -* 

—  i                                               rH                                                   rH 

i 

M^Ol                      -*CDOOCO                                                   t- 
CO                      C»J         »O             d            rH             T^                                                   rH 

F£] 

"*                                                                                        IO                                                  *T 

EH 

'  S  • 

^^ 

_o 

H 
CQ 

:              :       :     .  °        :                                      '' 

En 

2  -§ 

pq        p5 

h™i 

^  >->                                       • 

r5                U 

^^ 

*       •      •  PH         • 

F-H    P5           ^ 

^"~M 

Q                                         '     fl     . 

HH 

o 

H                                                 O  o 
>                                                            rr|  H          -u 
M                                                            W       .          ^J                                                                  ; 

ta  O        *^ 

3  w     s 

Jz; 
53 

1         :     ..      '    ^  1^      ri- 

<3    O      .    .- 

si  K  K  ^ 
•<  <5  W   co 

fc 

i—  i 

ft 

=    1      I    I  |1     |                                 ; 

°^^S 

1W-21 

05     a     a      f    CD'S                                             «s 

W    t5    Hi    P4 

•2           ^  S  "*       » 

5     ^i    a     S    ®  S      ^                                   *"* 

J2     'g            o^s^                                   3 

*    3                     fi      -*° 

u     s     o                      S                                    w 

§     °5    PH       -     -                                                 § 

eg                                                        g                                                        c3 

PG 

2011 
A6 
no.  71 


Anglo-Russian  Literary 
Society 

Proceedings 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


