A ES 


CONSTANCE GARNE 


Be 


Ss 


REDWOOD LIBRARY 


Wit TAWn 


7 


esther 
rh eee 


gfe? 


: #, 
Wi» 


5 


fis 
Fai 


THE TALES OF CHEKHOV 


VOL. IV 


THE PARTY 
AND OTHER STORIES 


eine Oo 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
NEW YORK - BOSTON - CHICAGO - DALLAS 
ATLANTA **SAN FRANCISCO 


MACMILLAN & CO., Limrrzp 
LONDON + BOMBAY - CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Lrp, 
TORONTO 


FHE PARTY 


- AND OTHER STORIES 


BY 
ANTON CHEKHOV 


FROM THE RUSSIAN 
By CONSTANCE GARNETT 


REDWCOP LIBRARY, 
NEWFORT, R. |. 


Nem York 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
1917 


All rights reserved 


sFe 16 i197 
34857 


CoPpyRIGHT,; 1917 
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


Set up and electrotyped. Published, September, 1917. 


CONTENTS 


MrCPEARTY 26 8S eos 
TERROR 

A WoMan’s KINGDOM 

A ProBLeM 

THE Kiss. . 

“ ANNA ON THE NEcK”’. 

“Tue TEACHER OF LITERATURE 
Not WANTED 

‘Typuus 

A MiIsrorTUNE 


A TRIFLE FROM LIFE 


THE PARTY 
AND OTHER STORIES 


THE PARTY 
I 


AFTER the festive dinner with its eight courses and 
its endless conversation, Olga, Mihalovna, whose 
husband’s name-day was being celebrated, went out 
into the garden. The duty of smiling and talking 
incessantly, the clatter of the crockery, the stupidity 
of the servants, the long intervals between the 
courses, and the stays she had put on to conceal her 
condition from the visitors, wearied her to exhaus- 
tion. She longed to get away from the house, to 
sit in the shade and rest her heart with thoughts of 
the baby which was to be born to her in another two 
months. She was used to these thoughts coming to 
her as she turned to the left out of the big avenue 
into the narrow path. Here in the thick shade of 
the plums and cherry-trees the dry branches used 
to scratch her neck and shoulders; a spider’s web 
would settle on her face, and there would rise up in 
3 


4 The Party and Other Stories 


her mind the image of a little creature of undeter- 
mined sex and undefined features, and it began to 
seem as though it were not the spider’s web that 
tickled her face and neck caressingly, but that little 
creature. When, at the end of the path, a thin 
wicker hurdle came into sight, and behind it podgy 
beehives with tiled roofs; when in the motionless, 
stagnant air there came a smell of hay and honey, 
and a soft buzzing of bees was audible, then the 
little creature would take complete possession of 
Olga Mihalovna. She used to sit down on a bench 
near the shanty woven of branches, and fall to 
thinking. 

This time, too, she went on as far as the seat, sat 
down, and began thinking; but instead of the little 
creature there rose up in her imagination the figures 
of the grown-up people whom she had just left. 
She felt dreadfully uneasy that she, the hostess, had 
deserted her guests, and she remembered how her 
husband, Pyotr Dmitritch, and her uncle, Nikolay 
Nikolaitch, had argued at dinner about trial by jury, 
about the press, and about the higher education of 
women. Her husband, as usual, argued in order 
to show off his Conservative ideas before his visitors 
— and still more in order to disagree with her uncle, 
whom he disliked. Her uncle contradicted him and 
wrangled over every word he uttered, so as to show 
the company that he, Uncle Nikolay Nikolaitch, still 


The Party 5 


retained his youthful freshness of spirit and free- 
thinking in spite of his fifty-nine years. And to- 
wards the end of dinner even Olga Mihalovna her- 
self could not resist taking part and unskilfully 
attempting to defend university education for women 
— not that that education stood in need of her de- 
fence, but simply because she wanted to annoy her 
husband, who to her mind was unfair. The guests 
were wearied by this discussion, but they all thought 
it necessary to take part in it, and talked a great 
deal, although none of them took any interest in 
trial by jury or the higher education of women. .. . 
Olga Mihalovna was sitting on the nearest side 
of the hurdle near the shanty. The sun was hidden 
behind the clouds. The trees and the air were over- 
cast as before rain, but in spite of that it was hot 
and stifling. ‘The hay cut under the trees on the 
previous day was lying ungathered, looking melan- 
choly, with here and there a patch of colour from 
the faded flowers, and from it came a heavy, sickly 
scent. It was still. The other side of the hurdle 
there was a monotonous hum of bees. . . . 
Suddenly she heard footsteps and voices; some 
one was coming along the path towards the bee- 
house. 
“How stifling it is!” said a feminine voice. 
“ What do you think — is it going to rain, or not?” 
“Tt is going to rain, my charmer, but not before 


6 The Party and Other Stories 


night,” a very familiar male voice answered 
languidly. ‘‘ There will be a good rain.” 

Olga Mihalovna calculated that if she made haste 
to hide in the shanty they would pass by without 
seeing her, and she would not have to talk and to 
force herself to smile. She picked up her skirts, 
bent down and crept into the shanty. At once she 
felt upon her face, her neck, her arms, the hot air as 
heavy as steam. If it had not been for the stuffiness 
and the close smell of rye bread, fennel, and brush- 
wood, which prevented her from breathing freely, it 
would have been delightful to hide from her visitors 
here under the thatched roof in the dusk, and to think 
about the little creature. It was cosy and quiet. 

‘What a pretty spot!” said a feminine voice. 
“Let us sit here, Pyotr Dmitritch.” 

Olga Mihalovna began peeping through a crack 
between two branches. She saw her husband, Pyotr 
Dmitritch, and Lubotchka Sheller, a girl of seven- 
teen who had not long left boarding-school. Pyotr 
Dmitritch, with his hat on the back of his head, 
languid and indolent from having drunk so much at 
dinner, slouched by the hurdle and raked the hay into 
a heap with his foot; Lubotchka, pink with the heat 
and pretty as ever, stood with her hands behind her, 
watching the lazy movements of his big handsome 
person. 

Olga Mihalovna knew that her husband was at- 


The Party 7 


tractive to women, and did not like to see him with 
them. ‘There was nothing out of the way in Pyotr 
Dmitritch’s lazily raking together the hay in order 
to sit down on it with Lubotchka and chatter to her 
of trivialities; there was nothing out of the way, 
either, in pretty Lubotchka’s looking at him with her 
soft eyes; but yet Olga Mihalovna felt vexed with 
her husband and frightened and pleased that she 
could listen to them. 

“Sit down, enchantress,” said Pyotr Dmitritch, 
sinking down on the hay and stretching. ‘“ That’s 
right. Come, tell me something.” 

“What next! If I begin telling you anything you 
will go to sleep.” 

‘““Me go to sleep? Allah forbid! Can I go to 
sleep while eyes like yours are watching me?” 

In her husband’s words, and in the fact that he 
was lolling with his hat on the back of his head 
in the presence of a lady, there was nothing out of 
the way either. He was spoilt by women, knew 
that they found him attractive, and had adopted with 
them a special tone which every one said suited 
him. With Lubotchka he behaved as with all 
women. But, all the same, Olga Mihalovna was 


jealous. 
“‘ Tell me, please,” said Lubotchka, after a brief 
silence —‘‘ is it true that you are to be tried for 


something? ”’ 


8 The Party and Other Stories 


“I>? Yes, I am... numbered among the 
transgressors, my charmer.” 

“But what for?” 

“For nothing, but just . . . it’s chiefly a question 
of politics,’ yawned Pyotr Dmitritch —“ the antag- 
onisms of Left and Right. I, an obscurantist and 
reactionary, ventured in an official paper to make 
use of an expression offensive in the eyes of such im- 
maculate Gladstones as Vladimir Pavlovitch Vladi- 
mirov and our local justice of the peace — Kuzma 
Grigoritch Vostryakoy.” 

Pytor Dmitritch yawned again and went on: 

‘* And it is the way with us that you may express 
disapproval of the sun or the moon, or anything you 
like, but God preserve you from touching the Lib- 
erals! Heaven forbid! A Liberal is like the 
poisonous dry fungus which covers you with a cloud 
of dust if you accidentally touch it with your finger.” 

‘‘' What happened to you?” 

“Nothing particular. The whole flare-up started 
from the merest trifle. A teacher, a detestable per- 
son of clerical associations, hands to Vostryakov a 
petition against a tavern-keeper, charging him with 
insulting language and behaviour in a public place. 
Everything showed that both the teacher and the 
tavern-keeper were drunk as cobblers, and that they 
behaved equally badly. If there had been insulting 
behaviour, the insult had anyway been mutual. 


The Party 9 


Vostryakov ought to have fined them both for a 
breach of the peace and have turned them out of the 
court —thatisall. But that’s not our way of doing 
things. With us what stands first is not the person 
— not the fact itself, but the trade-mark and label. 
However great a rascal a teacher may be, he is 
always in the right because he is a teacher; a tavern- 
keeper is always in the wrong because he is a tavern- 
keeper and a money-grubber. Vostryakov placed 
the tavern-keeper under arrest. The man appealed 
to the Circuit Court; the Circuit Court triumphantly 
upheld Vostryakov’s decision. Well, I stuck to my 
own opinion. . . . Got a little hot. . . . That was 
all? 

Pyotr Dmitritch spoke calmly with careless irony. 
In reality the trial that was hanging over him wor- 
ried him extremely. Olga Mihalovna remembered 
how on his return from the unfortunate session he 
had tried to conceal from his household how troubled 
he was, and how dissatisfied with himself. As an 
intelligent man he could not help feeling that he had 
gone too far in expressing his disagreement; and how 
much lying had been needful to conceal that feeling 
from himself and from others! How many un- 
necessary conversations there had been! How 
much grumbling and insincere laughter at what was 
not laughable! When he learned that he was to be 
brought up before the Court, he seemed at once 


10 The Party and Other Stories 


harassed and depressed; he began to sleep badly, 
stood oftener than ever at the windows, drumming 
on the panes with his fingers. And he was ashamed 
to let his wife see that he was worried, and it vexed 
her: 

‘““They say you have been in the province of - 
Poltava?’’ Lubotchka questioned him. 

“Yes,” answered Pyotr Dmitritch. “I came 
back the day before yesterday.” 

‘‘T expect it is very nice there.” 

“Yes, it is very nice, very nice indeed; in fact, I 
arrived just in time for the haymaking, I must tell 
you, and in the Ukraine the haymaking is the most 
poetical moment of the year. Here we have a big 
house, a big garden, a lot of servants, and a lot 
going on, so that you don’t see the haymaking; here 
it all passes unnoticed. There, at the farm, I have 
a meadow of forty-five acres as flat as my hand. 
You can see the men mowing from any window you 
stand at. They are mowing in the meadow, they 
are mowing in the garden. ‘There are no visitors, 
no fuss nor hurry either, so that you can’t help seeing, 
feeling, hearing nothing but the haymaking. There 
is a smell of hay indoors and outdoors. There’s the - 
sound of the scythes from sunrise to sunset. Alto- 
gether Little Russia is a charming country. Would 
you believe it, when I was drinking water from the 
rustic wells and filthy vodka in some Jew’s tavern, 


The Party 11 


when on quiet evenings the strains of the Little Rus- 
sian fiddle and the tambourines reached me, I was 
tempted by a fascinating idea — to settle down on my 
place and live there as long as I chose, far away from 
Circuit Courts, intellectual conversations, philoso- 
phizing women, long dinners. . . .” 

Pyotr Dmitritch was not lying. He was unhappy 
and really longed to rest. And he had visited his 
Poltava property simply to avoid seeing his study, 
his servants, his acquaintances, and everything that 
could remind him of his wounded vanity and his 
mistakes. 

Lubotchka suddenly jumped up and waved her 
hands about in horror. 

‘Onl! A bee, a‘bee!”’ she-shriecked. ‘It will 
sting!” 

** Nonsense; it won’t sting,” said Pyotr Dmitritch. 
‘What a coward you are!” 

“No, no, no,” cried Lubotchka; and looking 
round at the bees, she walked rapidly back. 

Pyotr Dmitritch walked away after her, looking 
at her with a softened and melancholy face. He 
was probably thinking, as he looked at her, of his 
farm, of solitude, and — who knows? — perhaps he 
was even thinking how snug and cosy life would be 
at the farm if his wife had been this girl — young, 
pure, fresh, not corrupted by higher education, not 
ewath-child, ..'. 


12 The Party and Other Stories 


When the sound of their footsteps had died away, 
Olga Mihalovna came out of the shanty and turned 
towards the house. She wanted to cry. She was 
by now acutely jealous. She could understand that 
her husband was worried, dissatisfied with himself 
and ashamed, and when people are ashamed they 
hold aloof, above all from those nearest to them, and 
are unreserved wtih strangers; she could understand, 
also, that she had nothing to fear from Lubotchka 
or from those women who were now drinking coffee 
indoors. But everything in general was terrible, 
incomprehensible, and it already seemed to Olga 
Mihalovna that Pyotr Dmitritch only half belonged 
to wCtme a. 

“He has no right to do it!” she muttered, trying 
to formulate her jealousy and her vexation with her 
husband. ‘“ He has no right at all. I will tell him 
so plainly!” 

She made up her mind to find her husband at once 
and tell him all about it: it was disgusting, absolutely 
disgusting, that he was attractive to other women 
and sought their admiration as though it were some 
heavenly manna; it was unjust and dishonourable 
that he should give to others what belonged by right 
to his wife, that he should hide his soul and his con- 
science from his wife to reveal them to the first pretty 
face he came across. What harm had his wife done 
him? How was she to blame? Long ago she had 


The Party 13 


been sickened by his lying: he was for ever posing, 
flirting, saying what he did not think, and trying to 
seem different from what he was and what he ought 
tobe. Why this falsity? Was it seemly in a decent 
man? If he lied he was demeaning himself and 
those to whom he lied, and slighting what he lied 
about. Could he not understand that if he swag- 
gered and posed at the judicial table, or held forth 
at dinner on the prerogatives of Government, that 
he, simply to provoke her uncle, was showing thereby 
that he had not a ha’p’orth of respect for the Court, 
or himself, or any of the people who were listening 
and looking at him? 

Coming out into the big avenue, Olga Mihalovna 
assumed an expression of face as though she had just 
gone away to look after some domestic matter. In 
the verandah the gentlemen were drinking liqueur 
and eating strawberries: one of them, the Examining 
Magistrate — a stout elderly man, blagueur and wit 
— must have been telling some rather free anecdote, 
for, seeing their hostess, he suddenly clapped his 
hands over his fat lips, rolled his eyes, and sat down. 
Olga Mihalovna did not like the local officials. She 
did not care for their clumsy, ceremonious wives, 
their scandal-mongering, their frequent visits, their 
flattery of her husband, whom they all hated. Now, 
when they were drinking, were replete with food and 
_showed no signs of going away, she felt their pres- 


14 The Party and Other Stories 


ence an agonizing weariness; but not to appear im- 
polite, she smiled cordially to the Magistrate, and 
shook her finger at him. She walked across the 
dining-room and drawing-room smiling, and looking 
as though she had gone to give some order and make 
some arrangement. ‘‘ God grant no one stops me,” 
she thought, but she forced herself to stop in the 
drawing-room to listen from politeness to a young 
man who was sitting at the piano playing: after 
standing for a minute, she cried, ‘‘ Bravo, bravo, M. 
Georges!” and clapping her hands twice, she went 
on. 

She found her husband in his study. He was 
sitting at the table, thinking of something. His face 
looked stern, thoughtful, and guilty. This was not 
the same Pyotr Dmitritch who had been arguing at 
dinner and whom his guests knew, but a different 
man — wearied, feeling guilty and dissatisfied with 
himself, whom nobody knew but his wife. He must 
have come to the study to get cigarettes. Before 
him lay an open cigarette-case full of cigarettes, and 
one of his hands was in the table drawer; he had 
paused and sunk into thought as he was taking the 
cigarettes. 

Olga Mihalovna felt sorry for him. It was as 
clear as day that this man was harassed, could find 
no rest, and was perhaps struggling with himself. 
Olga Mihalovna went up to the table in silence: 


The Party 15 


wanting to show that she had forgotten the argument 
at dinner and was not cross, she shut the cigarette- 
case and put it in her husband’s coat pocket. 

“What should I say to him?” she wondered; “ I 
shall say that lying is like a forest — the further one 
goes into it the more difficult it is to get out of it. I 
will say to him, ‘ You have been carried away by 
the false part you are playing; you have insulted 
people who were attached to you and have done you 
noharm. Go and apologize to them, laugh at your- 
self, and you will feel better. And if you want 
peace and solitude, let us go away together.’ ” 

Meeting his wife’s gaze, Pyotr Dmitritch’s face 
immediately assumed the expression it had worn at 
dinner and in the garden — indifferent and slightly 
ironical. He yawned and got up. 

“Tt’s past five,” he said, looking at his watch. 
‘“‘ Tf our visitors are merciful and leave us at eleven, 
even then we have another six hours of it. It’s a 
cheerful prospect, there’s no denying! ”’ 

And whistling something, he walked slowly out of 
the study with his usual dignified gait. She could 
hear him with dignified firmness cross the dining- 
room, then the drawing-room, laugh with dignified 
assurance, and say to the young man who was play- 
ing, ‘Bravo! bravo!’’ Soon his footsteps died 
away: he must have gone out into the garden. And 
now not jealousy, not vexation, but real hatred of 


16 The Party and Other Stories 


his footsteps, his insincere laugh and voice, took pos- 
session of Olga Mihalovna. She went to the win- — 
dow and looked out into the garden. Pyotr Dmi- 
tritch was already walking along the avenue. Put- 
ting one hand in his pocket and snapping the 
fingers of the other, he walked with confident swing- 
ing steps, throwing his head back a little, and look- 
ing as though he were very well satisfied with him- 
self, with his dinner, with his digestion, and with 
natuter, < -. 

Two little schoolboys, the children of Madame 
Tchizhevsky, who had only just arrived, made their 
appearance in the avenue, accompanied by their 
tutor, a student wearing a white tunic and very nar- 
row trousers. When they reached Pyotr Dmitritch, 
the boys and the student stopped, and probably con- 
gratulated him on his name-day. With a graceful 
swing of his shoulders, he patted the children on 
their cheeks, and carelessly offered the student his 
hand without looking at him. The student must 
have praised the weather and compared it with the 
climate of Petersburg, for Pyotr Dmitritch said in 
a loud voice, in a tone as though he were not speak- 
ing to a guest, but to an usher of the court or a 
witness: 

“What! It’s cold in Petersburg? And here, 
my good sir, we have a salubrious atmosphere and 
the fruits of the earth in abundance. Eh? What?” 


The Party 17 


And thrusting one hand in his pocket and snap- 
ping the fingers of the other, he walked on. Till 
he had disappeared behind the nut bushes, Olga 
Mihalovna watched the back of his head in per- 
plexity. How had this man of thirty-four come by 
the dignified deportment of a general? How had 
he come by that impressive, elegant manner? 
‘Where had he got that vibration of authority in his 
voice? Where had he got these ‘‘ what’s,” “ to be 
sure’s,”’ and “‘ my good sir’s””? 

Olga Mihalovna remembered how in the first 
months of her marriage she had felt dreary at home 
alone and had driven into the town to the Circuit 
Court, at which Pyotr Dmitritch had sometimes pre- 
sided in place of her godfather, Count Alexey Petro- 
vitch. In the presidential chair, wearing his uni- 
form and a chain on his breast, he was completely 
changed. Stately gestures, a voice of thunder, 
‘‘ what,” “to be sure,” careless tones. . . . Every- 
thing, all that was ordinary and human, all that was 
individual and personal to himself that Olga Miha- 
lovna was accustomed to seeing in him at home, 
vanished in grandeur, and in the presidential chair 
there sat not Pyotr Dmitritch, but another man 
whom every one called Mr. President. This con- 
sciousness of power prevented him from sitting still 
in his place, and he seized every opportunity to 
ring his bell, to glance sternly at the public, to 


18 The Party and Other Stories 


shout. . . . Where had he got his short-sight and 
his deafness when he suddenly began to see and hear 
with difficulty, and, frowning majestically, insisted 
on people speaking louder and coming closer to the 
table? From the height of his grandeur he could 
hardly distinguish faces or sounds, so that it seemed 
that if Olga Mihalovna herself had gone up to him 
he would have shouted even to her, ‘‘ Your name?” 
Peasant witnesses he addressed familiarly, he 
shouted at the public so that his voice could be heard 
even in the street, and behaved incredibly with the 
lawyers. If a lawyer had to speak to him, Pyotr 
Dmitritch, turning a little away from him, looked 
with half-closed eyes at the ceiling, meaning to sig- 
nify thereby that the lawyer was utterly superfluous 
and that he was neither recognizing him nor listen- 
ing to him; if a badly-dressed lawyer spoke, Pyotr 
Dmitritch pricked up his ears and looked the man up 
and down with a sarcastic, annihilating stare as 
though to say: ‘‘ Queer sort of lawyers nowa- 
days!” 

‘““What do you mean by that?” he would inter- 
rupt. 

If a would-be eloquent lawyer mispronounced a 
foreign word, saying, for instance, ‘“ factitious ” 
instead of “ fictitious,” Pyotr Dmitritch brightened 
up at once and asked, “‘ What? How? Factitious? 
What does that mean?” and then observed impres- 


The Party 19 


sively: ‘ Don’t make use of words you do not un- 
derstand.” And the lawyer, finishing his speech, 
would walk away from the table, red and perspiring, 
while Pyotr Dmitritch, with a self-satisfied smile, 
would lean back in his chair triumphant. In his 
manner with the lawyers he imitated Count Alexey 
Petrovitch a little, but when the latter said, for in- 
stance, “ Counsel for the defence, you keep quiet 
for a little!” it sounded paternally good-natured and 
natural, while the same words in Pyotr Dmitritch’s 
mouth were rude and artificial. 


II 


There were sounds of applause. The young man 
had finished playing. Olga Mihalovna remembered 
her guests and hurried into the drawing-room. 

‘“*T have so enjoyed your playing,” she said, going 
up to the piano. “I have so enjoyed it. You have 
a wonderful talent! But don’t you think our piano’s 
out of tune?” 

At that moment the two schoolboys walked into 
the room, accompanied by the student. 

“ My goodness! Mitya and Kolya,” Olga Miha- 
lovna drawled joyfully, going to meet them: 
“ How big they have grown! One would not know 
you! But where is your mamma?” 

“IT congratulate you on the name-day,”’ the stu- 


20 The Party and Other Stories 


dent began in a free-and-easy tone, “ and I wish you 
all happiness. Ekaterina Andreyevna sends her con- 
gratulations and begs you to excuse her. She is not 
very well.” 

“How unkind of her! I have been expecting her 
all day. Is it long since you left Petersburg?” Olga 
Mihalovna asked the student. ‘“‘ What kind of 
weather have you there now?”’ And without wait- 
ing for an answer, she looked cordially at the school- 
boys and repeated: 

“ How tall they have grown! It is not long since 
they used to come with their nurse, and they are at 
school already! The old grow older while the 
young grow up. . . . Have you had dinner?” 

‘Oh, please don’t trouble!” said the student. 

‘““ Why, you have not had dinner? ”’ 

‘“ For goodness’ sake, don’t trouble! ” 

‘But I suppose you are hungry?” Olga Miha- 
lovna said it in a harsh, rude voice, with impatience 
and vexation — it escaped her unawares, but at once 
she coughed, smiled, and flushed crimson. ‘‘ How 
tall they have grown! ”’ she said softly. 

“Please don’t trouble!” the student said once 
more. 

The student begged her not to trouble; the boys 
said nothing; obviously all three of them were hun- 
_ gry. Olga Mihalovna took them into the dining- 
room and told Vassily to lay the table. 


The Party ohh 


“How unkind of your mamma!” she said as she 
made them sit down. “She has quite forgotten me. 
Unkind, unkind, unkind . . . you must tell her so. 
What are you studying?” she asked the stu- 
dent. 

‘’ Medicine.” 

“Well, I have a weakness for doctors, only fancy. 
I am very sorry my husband is not a doctor. What 
courage any one must have to perform an opera- 
tion or dissect a corpse, for instance! Horrible! 
Aren’t you frightened? I believe I should die of 
terror! Of course, you drink vodka?” 

* Please don’t trouble.” 

“ After your journey you must have something to 
drink. Though I am a woman, even I drink some- 
times. And Mitya and Kolya will drink Malaga. 
It’s not a strong wine; you need not be afraid of it. 
What fine fellows they are, really! They'll be 
thinking of getting married next.” 

Olga Mihalovna talked without ceasing; she knew 
by experience that when she had guests to entertain 
it was far easier and more comfortable to talk than 
to listen. When you talk there is no need to strain 
your attention to think of answers to questions, and 
to change your expression of face. But unawares 
she asked the student a serious question; the stu- 
dent began a lengthy speech and she was forced to 
listen. The student knew that she had once been 


22 The Party and Other Stories 


at the University, and so tried to seem a serious per- 
son as he talked to her. 

‘““ What subject are you studying? ” she asked, for- 
- getting that she had already put that question to 
him. 

“* Medicine.” 

Olga Mihaloyna now remembered that she had 
been away from the ladies for a long while. 

‘“Yes? Then I suppose you are going to be a 
doctor?’’ she said, getting up. ‘‘ That’s splendid. 
I am sorry I did not go in for medicine myself. So 
you will finish your dinner here, gentlemen, and then 
come into the garden. I will introduce you to the 
young ladies.” 

She went out and glanced at her watch: it was 
five minutes to six. And she wondered that the time 
had gone so slowly, and thought with horror that 
there were six more hours before midnight, when the 
party would break up. How could she get through 
those six hours? What phrases could she utter? 
How should she behave to her husband? 

There was not a soul in the drawing-room or on 
the verandah. All the guests were sauntering about 
the garden. 

‘“T shall have to suggest a walk in the birch- 
wood before tea, or else a row in the boats,” thought 
Olga Mihalovna, hurrying to the croquet ground, 
from which came the sounds of voices and laughter. 


The Party 23 


” 


“And sit the old people down to vint.... 
She met Grigory the footman coming from the 
croquet ground with empty bottles. 

“Where are the ladies? ”’ she asked. 

“Among the raspberry-bushes. The master’s 
there, too.” 

““Oh, good heavens!” some one on the croquet 
lawn shouted with exasperation. ‘I have told you 
a thousand times over! To know the Bulgarians 
you must see them! You can’t judge from the 
papers!” 

Either because of the outburst or for some other 
reason, Olga Mihalovna was suddenly aware of a 
terrible weakness all over, especially in her legs and 
in her shoulders. She felt she could not bear to 
speak, to listen, or to move. 

“Grigory,” she said faintly and with an effort, 
“‘when you have to serve tea or anything, please 
don’t appeal to me, don’t ask me anything, don’t 
speak of anything. . . . Doitall yourself, and... 
and don’t make a noise with your feet, I entreat 
veurerenc. | calvt, because, <2” 

Without finishing, she walked on towards the 
croquet lawn, but on the way she thought of the 
ladies, and turned towards the raspberry-bushes. 
The sky, the air, and the trees looked gloomy again 
and threatened rain; it was hot and stifling. An im- 
mense flock of crows, foreseeing a storm, flew caw- 


24. The Party and Other Stories 


ing over the garden. The paths: were more over- 
grown, darker, and narrower as they got nearer the 
kitchen garden. In one of them, buried in a thick 
tangle of wild pear, crab-apple, sorrel, young oaks, 
and hopbine, clouds of tiny black flies swarmed round 
Olga Mihalovna. She covered her face with her 
hands and began forcing herself to think of the little 
creature. . . . There floated through her imagina- 
tion the figures of Grigory, Mitya, Kolya, the faces 
of the peasants who had come in the morning to 
present their congratulations. .. . 

She heard footsteps, and she opened her eyes. 
Uncle Nikolay Nikolaitch was coming rapidly 
towards her. 

“It’s you, dear? I am very glad .. .” he be- 
gan, breathless. ‘‘ A couple of words... .”’ He 
mopped with his handkerchief his red shaven chin, 
then suddenly stepped back a pace, flung up his 
hands and opened his eyes wide. ‘‘ My dear girl, 
how long is this going on?” he said rapidly, splut- 
tering. “I ask you: is there no limit to it? I say 
nothing of the demoralizing effect of his martinet 
views on all around him, of the way he insults all that 
is sacred and best in me and in every honest think- 
ing man—TI will say nothing about that, but he 
might at least behave decently! Why, he shouts, he 
bellows, gives himself airs, poses as a sort of Bona- 
parte, does not let one say a word. . . . I don't 


The Party 25 


know what the devil’s the matter with him! These 
lordly gestures, this condescending tone; and laugh- 
ing like a general! Who is he, allow me to ask you? 
I ask you, who is he? The husband of his wife, 
with a few paltry acres and the rank of a titular 
who has had the luck to marry an heiress! An up- 
start and a junker, like so many others! A type out 
of Shtchedrin! Upon my word, it’s either that he’s 
suffering from megalomania, or that old rat in his 
dotage, Count Alexey Petrovitch, is right when he 
says that children and young people are a long time 
growing up nowadays, and go on playing they are 
cabmen and generals till they are forty! ” 

“That’s true, that’s true,” Olga Mihalovna as- 


sented. ‘‘ Let me pass.” 
“* Now just consider: what is it leading to?” her 
uncle went on, barring her way. ‘“‘ How will this 


playing at being a general and a Conservative end? 
Already he has got into trouble! Yes, to stand his 
trial! I amvery glad of it! ‘That’s what his noise 
and shouting has brought him to —to stand in the 
prisoner’s dock. And it’s not as though it were 
the Circuit Court or something: it’s the Central 
Court! Nothing worse could be imagined, I think! 
And then he has quarrelled with every one! He is 
celebrating his name-day, and look, Vostryakov’s not 
here, nor Yahontoy, nor Vladimirov, nor Shevud, 
nor the Count... . There is no one, I imagine, 


26 The Party and Other Stories 


more Conservative than Count Alexey Petrovitch, 
yet even he has not come. And he never will come 
again. He won’t come, you will see!” 

‘““ My God! but what has it to do with me?” asked 
Olga Mihalovna. 

‘‘ What has it to do with you? Why, you are 
his wife! You are clever, you have had a univer- 
sity education, and it was in your power to make him 
an honest worker!” 

“At the lectures I went to they did not teach us 
how to influence tiresome people. It seems as 
though I should have to apologize to all of you for 
having been at the University,” said Olga Mihalovna 
sharply. ‘‘Listen, uncle. If people played the 
same scales over and over again the whole day long 
in your hearing, you wouldn’t be able to sit still and 
listen, but would run away. I hear the same thing 
over again for days together all the year round. 
You must have pity on me at last.” 

Her uncle pulled a very long face, then looked at 
her searchingly and twisted his lips into a mocking 
smile. 

‘So that’s how it is,” he piped in a voice like an 
old woman’s. “I beg your pardon!” he said, and 
made a ceremonious bow. ‘If you have fallen 
under his influence yourself, and have abandoned 
your convictions, you should have said so before. I 
beg your pardon! ”’ 


The Party 27 


“Yes, I have abandoned my convictions,” she 
cried. “‘ There; make the most of it!” 

“1 beg your pardon! ”’ 

Her uncle for the last time made her a cere- 
monious bow, a little on one side, and, shrinking 
into himself, made a scrape with his foot and walked 
back. 

‘“Tdiot!”’ thought Olga Mihalovna. “I hope he 
will go home.” 

She found the ladies and the young people among 
the raspberries in the kitchen garden. Some were 
eating raspberries; others, tired of eating raspber- 
ries, were strolling about the strawberry beds or 
foraging among the sugar-peas. A little on one 
side of the raspberry bed, near a branching apple- 
tree propped up by posts which had been pulled out 
of an old fence, Pyotr Dmitritch was mowing the 
grass. His hair was falling over his forehead, his 
cravat was untied. His watch-chain was hanging 
loose. Every step and every swing of the scythe 
showed skill and the possession of immense physical 
strength. Near him were standing Lubotchka and 
the daughters of a neighbour, Colonel Bukryeev — 
two anaemic and unhealthily stout fair girls, Natalya 
and Valentina, or, as they were always called, Nata 
and Vata, both wearing white frocks and strikingly 
like each other. Pyotr Dmitritch was teaching them 
to mow. 


28 The Party and Other Stories 


““Tt’s very simple,” he said. ‘‘ You have only to 
know how to hold the scythe and not to get too hot 
over it — that is, not to use more force than is neces- 
sary! Like this. . . . Wouldn’t you like to try?” 
he said, offering the scythe to Lubotchka. 
Comets 

Lubotchka took the scythe clumsily, blushed crim- 
son, and laughed. 

“ Don’t be afraid, Lubov Alexandrovna!”’ cried 
Olga Mihalovna, loud enough for all the ladies to 
hear that she was with them. ‘‘ Don’t be afraid! 
You must learn! If you marry a Tolstoyan he will 
make you mow.” 

Lubotchka raised the scythe, but began laughing 
again, and, helpless with laughter, let go of it at 
once. She was ashamed and pleased at being talked 
to as though grown up. Nata, with a cold, serious 
face, with no trace of smiling or shyness, took the 
scythe, swung it and caught it in the grass; Vata, 
also without a smile, as cold and serious as her sister, 
took the scythe, and silently thrust it into the earth. 
Having done this, the two sisters linked arms and 
walked in silence to the raspberries. 

Pyotr Dmitritch laughed and played about like a 
boy, and this childish, frolicsome mood in which he 
became exceedingly good-natured suited him far bet- 
ter than any other. Olga Mihalovna loved him 
when he was like that. But his boyishness did not 


fEhes arty. 29 


usually last long. It did not this time; after playing 
with the scythe, he for some reason thought it neces- 
sary to take a serious tone about it. 

“When I am mowing, I feel, do you know, 
healthier and more normal,” he said. ‘If I were 
forced to confine myself to an intellectual life I be- 
lieve I should go out of my mind. _ I feel that I was 
not born to be a man of culture! I ought to mow, 
plough, sow, drive out the horses.” 

And Pyotr Dmitritch began a conversation with 
the ladies about the advantages of physical labour, 
about culture, and then about the pernicious effects 
of money, of property. Listening to her husband, 
Olga Mihalovna, for some reason, thought of her 
dowry. 

‘* And the time will come, I suppose,”’ she thought, 
‘‘ when he will not forgive me for being richer than 
he. He is proud and vain. Maybe he will hate 
me because he owes so much to me.” 

She stopped near Colonel Bukryeev, who was 
eating raspberries and also taking part in the con- 
versation. 

“Come,” he said, making room for Olga Miha- 
lovna and Pyotr Dmitritch. ‘‘The ripest are 
here. .. . And so, according to Proudhon,” he 
went on, raising his voice, ‘‘ property is robbery. 
But I must confess I don’t believe in Proudhon, and 
don’t consider him a philosopher. The French are 


30 The Party and Other Stories 


not authorities, to my thinking — God bless them!” 

‘““Well, as for Proudhons and Buckles and the 
rest of them, I am weak in that department,” said 
Pyotr Dmitritch. ‘‘ For philosophy you must apply 
to my wife. She has been at University lectures and 
knows all your Schopenhauers and Proudhons by 
Hearteeecre 

Olga Mihalovna felt bored again. She walked 
again along a little path by apple and pear trees, 
and looked again as though she was on some very 
important errand. She reached the gardener’s cot- 
tage. Inthe doorway the gardener’s wife, Varvara, 
was sitting together with her four little children with 
big shaven heads. Varvara, too, was with child and 
expecting to be confined on Elijah’s Day. After 
greeting her, Olga Mihalovna looked at her and the 
children in silence and asked: 

“Well, how do you feel?” 

ot) enabler onto: Gea 

A silence followed. The two women seemed to 
understand each other without words. 

“It’s dreadful having one’s first baby,” said Olga 
Mihalovna after a moment’s thought. ‘I keep 
feeling as though I shall not get through it, as 
though I shall die.” 

‘“T fancied that, too, but here I am alive. ... 
One has all sorts of fancies.” 

Varvara, who was just going to have her fifth, 


The Party 31 


looked down a little on her mistress from the height 
of her experience and spoke in a rather didactic tone, 
and Olga Mihalovna could not help feeling her au- 
thority; she would have liked to have talked of her 
fears, of the child, of her sensations, but she was 
afraid it might strike Varvara as naive and trivial. 
And she waited in silence for Varvara to say some- 
thing herself. 

‘““Olya, we are going indoors,” Pyotr Dmitritch 
called from the raspberries. 

Olga Mihalovna liked being silent, waiting and 
watching Varvara. She would have been ready to 
stay like that till night without speaking or having 
any duty to perform. But she had to go. She had 
hardly left the cottage when Lubotchka, Nata, and 
Vata came running to meet her. The sisters 
stopped short abruptly a couple of yards away; 
Lubotchka ran right up to her and flung herself on 
her neck. 

“You dear, darling, precious,” she said, kissing 
her face and her neck. “ Let us go and have tea 
on the island!” 

‘On the island, on the island! ”’ said the precisely 
similar Nata and Vata, both at once, without a smile. 

“ But it’s going to rain, my dears.”’ 

‘“Tt’s not, it’s not,’”? cried Lubotchka with a woe- 
begone face. ‘‘ They’ve all agreed to go. Dear! 

darling!” 


32 The Party and Other Stories 


“They are all getting ready to have tea on the 
island,” said Pyotr Dmitritch, coming up. “See to 
arranging things. . . . We will all go in the boats, 
and the samovars and all the rest of it must be sent 
in the carriage with the servants.” 

He walked beside his wife and gave her his arm. 
Olga Mihalovna had a desire to say something dis- 
agreeable to her husband, something biting, even 
about her dowry perhaps — the crueller the better, 
she felt. She thought a little, and said: 

‘“ Why is it Count Alexey Petrovitcli hasn’t come? 
What a pity!” 

“IT am very glad he hasn’t come,” said Pyotr 
Dmitritch, lying. ‘I’m sick to death of that old 
lunatic.” 

‘“But yet before dinner you were expecting him 
so eagerly!” 


III 


Half an hour later all the guests were crowding 
on the bank near the pile to which the boats were 
fastened. They were all talking and laughing, and 
were in such excitement and commotion that they 
could hardly get into the boats. Three boats were 
crammed with passengers, while two stood empty. 
The keys for unfastening these two boats had been 
somehow mislaid, and messengers were continually 


The Party 33 


running from the river to the house to look for 
them. Some said Grigory had the keys, others that 
the bailiff had them, while others suggested sending 
for a blacksmith and breaking the padlocks. And 
all talked at once, interrupting and shouting one an- 
other down. Pyotr Dmitritch paced impatiently to 
and fro on the bank, shouting: 

“What the devil’s the meaning of it! The keys 
ought always to be lying in the hall window! Who 
has dared to take them away? The bailiff can get 
a boat of his own if he wants one! ” 

At last the keys were found. Then it appeared 
that two oars were missing. Again there was a 
great hullabaloo. Pyotr Dmitritch, who was weary 
of pacing about the bank, jumped into a long, narrow 
boat hollowed out of the trunk of a poplar, and, 
lurching from side to side and almost falling into 
the water, pushed off from the bank. The other 
boats followed him one after another, amid loud 
laughter and the shrieks of the young ladies. 

The white cloudy sky, the trees on the riverside, 
the boats with the people in them, and the oars, 
were reflected in the water as in a mirror; under 
the boats, far away below in the bottomless depths, 
was a second sky with the birds flying across it. 
The bank on which the house and gardens stood 
was high, steep, and covered with trees; on the other, 
which was sloping, stretched broad green water- 


34 The Party and Other Stories 


meadows with sheets of water glistening in them. 
The boats had floated a hundred yards when, behind 
the mournfully drooping willows on the sloping 
banks, huts and a herd of cows came into sight; they 
began to hear songs, drunken shouts, and the strains 
of a concertina. 

Here and there on the river fishing-boats were 
scattered about, setting their nets for the night. In 
one of these boats was the festive party, playing on 
home-made violins and violoncellos. 

Olga Mihalovna was sitting at the rudder; she 
was smiling affably and talking a great deal to enter- 
tain her visitors, while she glanced stealthily at her 
husband. He was ahead of them all, standing up 
punting with one oar. The light sharp-nosed canoe, 
which all the guests called the “* death-trap ’°— while 
Pyotr Dmitritch, for some reason, called it Pende- 
raklia — flew along quickly; it had a brisk, crafty 
expression, as though it hated its heavy occupant and 
was looking out for a favourable moment to glide 
away from under his feet. Olga Mihalovna kept 
looking at her husband, and she loathed his good 
looks which attracted every one, the back of his 
head, his attitude, his familiar manner with women; 
she hated all the women sitting in the boat with her, 
was jealous, and at the same time was trembling 
every minute in terror that the frail craft would up- 
set and cause an accident. 


The Party 35 


“Take care, Pyotr!” she cried, while her heart 
fluttered with terror. ‘Sit down! We believe in 
your courage without all that!” 

She was worried, too, by the people who were 
in the boat with her. They were all ordinary good 
sort of people like thousands of others, but now each 
one of them struck her as exceptional and evil. In 
each one of them she saw nothing but falsity. 
“That young man,” she thought, ‘ rowing, in gold- 
rimmed spectacles, with chestnut hair and a nice- 
looking beard: he is a mamma’s darling, rich, and 
well-fed, and always fortunate, and every one con- 
siders him an honourable, free-thinking, advanced 
man. It’s not a year since he left the University 
and came to live in the district, but he already talks 
of himself as ‘ we active members of the Zemstvo.’ 
But in another year he will be bored like so many 
others and go off to Petersburg, and to justify run- 
ning away, will tell every one that the Zemstvos 
are good-for-nothing, and that he has been deceived 
in them. While from the other boat his young wife 
keeps her eyes fixed on him, and believes that he is 
“an active member of the Zemstvo,’ just as in a 
year she will believe that the Zemstvo is good-for- 
nothing. And that stout, carefully shaven gentle- 
man in the straw hat with the broad ribbon, with 
an expensive cigar in his mouth: he is fond of say- 
ing, ‘ It is time to put away dreams and set to work! ’ 


36 The Party and Other Stories 


He has Yorkshire pigs, Butler’s hives, rape-seed, 
pine-apples, a dairy, a cheese factory, Italian book- 
keeping by double entry; but every summer he sells 
his timber and mortgages part of his land to spend 
the autumn with his mistress in the Crimea. And 
there’s Uncle Nikolay Nikolaitch, who has quar- 
relled with Pyotr Dmitritch, and yet for some rea- 
son does not go home.” 

Olga Mihalovna looked at the other boats, and 
there, too, she saw only uninteresting, queer crea- 
tures, affected or stupid people. She thought of 
all the people she knew in the district, and could 
not remember one person of whom one could say 
or think anything good. They all seemed to her 
mediocre, insipid, unintelligent, narrow, false, heart- 
less; they all said what they did not think, and did 
what they did not want to. Dreariness and despair 
were stifling her; she longed to leave off smiling, to 
leap up and cry out, “I am sick of you,” and then 
jump out and swim to the bank. 

‘IT say, let’s take Pyotr Dmitritch in tow!’ some 
one shouted. 

‘In tow, in tow!” the others chimed in. ‘ Olga 
Mihalovna, take your husband in tow.” 

To take him in tow, Olga Mihalovna, who was 
steering, had to seize the right moment and to catch 


hold of his boat by the chain at the beak. When 


‘The Party BF 


she bent over to the chain Pyotr Dmitritch frowned 
and looked at her in alarm. 

‘““T hope you won’t catch cold,” he said. 

“If you are uneasy about me and the child, why 
do you torment me?” thought Olga Mihalovna. 

Pyotr Dmitritch acknowledged himself van- 
quished, and, not caring to be towed, jumped from 
the Penderaklia into the boat which was overful al- 
ready, and jumped so carelessly that the boat lurched 
violently, and every one cried out in terror. 

““ He did that to please the ladies,” thought Olga 
Mihalovna; “‘ he knows it’s charming.”’ Her hands 
and feet began trembling, as she supposed, from 
boredom, vexation from the strain of smiling and 
the discomfort she felt all over her body. And to 
conceal this trembling from her guests, she tried to 
talk more loudly, to laugh, to move. 

“Tf I suddenly begin to cry,” she thought, “I 
shall say I have toothache. .. .” 

But at last the boats reached the “‘ Island of Good 
Hope,” as they called the peninsula formed by a 
bend in the river at an acute angle, covered with a 
copse of old birch-trees, oaks, willows, and poplars. 
The tables were already laid under the trees; the 
samovars were smoking, and Vassily and Grigory, 
in their swallow-tails and white knitted gloves, were 
already busy with the tea-things. On the other 


38 The Party and Other Stories 


bank, opposite the ‘‘ Island of Good Hope,” there 
stood the carriages which had come with the pro- 
visions. The baskets and parcels of provisions 
were carried across to the island in a little boat like 
the Penderaklia. The footmen, the coachmen, and 
even the peasant who was sitting in the boat, had 
the solemn expression befitting a name-day such as 
one only sees in children and servants. 

While Olga Mihalovna was making the tea and 
pouring out the first glasses, the visitors were busy 
with the liqueurs and sweet things. Then there 
was the general commotion usual at picnics over 
drinking tea, very wearisome and exhausting for the 
hostess. Grigory and Vassily had hardly had time 
to take the glasses round before hands were being 
stretched out to Olga Mihalovna with empty glasses. 
One asked for no sugar, another wanted it stronger, 
another weak, a fourth declined another glass. And 
all this Olga Mihalovna had to remember, and then 
to call, “Ivan Petrovitch, is it without sugar for 
you?” or, “Gentlemen, which of you wanted it 
weak?’ But the guest who had asked for weak 
tea, or no sugar, had by now forgotten it, and, ab- 
sorbed in agreeable conversation, took the first glass 
that came. Depressed-looking figures wandered like 
shadows at a little distance from the table, pretend- 
ing to look for mushrooms in the grass, or reading 
the labels on the boxes — these were those for whom 


The Party 39 


there were not glasses enough. ‘“ Have you had 
tea?’’ Olga Mihalovna kept asking, and the guest 
so addressed begged her not to trouble, and said, 
“IT will wait,” though it would have suited her 
better for the visitors not to wait but to make 
haste. 

Some, absorbed in conversation, drank their tea 
slowly, keeping their glasses for half an hour; others, 
especially some who had drunk a good deal at din- 
ner, would not leave the table, and kept on drink- 
ing glass after glass, so that Olga Mihalovna 
scarcely had time to fill them. One jocular young 
man sipped his tea through a lump of sugar, and 
kept saying, ‘‘ Sinful man that I am, I love to in- 
dulge myself with the Chinese herb.” He kept 
asking with a heavy sigh: “‘ Another tiny dish of 
tea more, if you please.” He drank a great deal, 
nibbled his sugar, and thought it all very amusing 
and original, and imagined that he was doing a 
clever imitation of a Russian merchant. None of 
them understood that these trifles were agonizing 
to their hostess, and, indeed, it was hard to under- 
stand it, as Olga Mihalovna went on all the time 
smiling affably and talking nonsense. 

But she felt ill. . . . She was irritated by the 
crowd of people, the laughter, the questions, the 
jocular young man, the footmen harassed and run 
off their legs, the children who hung round the 


40 The Party and Other Stories 


table; she was irritated at Vata’s being like Nata, 
at Kolya’s being like Mitya, so that one could not 
tell which of them had had tea and which of them 
had not. She felt that her smile of forced affa- 
bility was passing into an expression of anger, and 
she felt every minute as though she would burst into 
tears. 

“‘ Rain, my friends,” cried some one. 

Every one looked at the sky. 

“Yes, it really is rain . . .”’ Pyotr Dmitritch as- 
sented, and wiped his cheek. 

Only a few drops were falling from the sky — the 
real rain had not begun yet; but the company aban- 
doned their tea and made haste to get off. At first 
they all wanted to drive home in the carriages, but 
changed their minds and made for the boats. On 
the pretext that she had to hasten home to give di- 
rections about the supper, Olga Mihalovna asked to 
be excused for leaving the others, and went home 
in the carriage. 

When she got into the carriage, she first of all 
let her face rest from smiling. With an angry 
face she drove through the village, and with an 
angry face acknowledged the bows of the peasants 
she met. When she got home, she went to the 
bedroom by the back way and lay down on her hus- 
band’s bed. 


“ Merciful God!” she whispered. ‘ What is all 


The Party 41 


this hard labour for? Why do all these people 
hustle each other here and pretend that they are 
enjoying themselves? Why do I smile and lie? I 
don’t understand it.” 

She heard steps and voices. The visitors had 
come back. 

“Let them come,” thought Olga Mihalovna; ‘I 
shall lie a little longer.” 

But a maid-servant came and said: 

“Marya Grigoryevna is going, madam.” 

Olga Mihalovna jumped up, tidied her hair and 
hurried out of the room. 

“Marya Grigoryevna, what is the meaning of 
this?” she began in an injured voice, going to meet 
Marya Grigoryevna. “Why are you in such a 
hurry?” 

“T can’t help it, darling! Ive stayed too long 
as it is; my children are expecting me home.” 

““Tt’s too bad of you! Why didn’t you bring your 
children with you?” 

“Tf you will let me, dear, I will bring them on 
some ordinary day, but to-day .. .” 

“Oh, please do,” Olga Mihalovna interrupted; 
“I shall be delighted! Your children are so sweet! 
Kiss them all for me. . . . But, really, I am of- 
fended with you! I don’t understand why you are 
in such a hurry!” 

““T really must, I really must. . . . Good-bye, 


42 The Party and Other Stories 


dear. Take care of yourself. In your condition, 
you know...” 

And the ladies kissed each other. After seeing 
the departing guest to her carriage, Olga Mihalovna 
went in to the ladies in the drawing-room. ‘There 
the lamps were already lighted and the gentlemen 
were sitting down to cards. 


IV 


The party broke up after supper about a quarter 
past twelve. Seeing her visitors off, Olga Miha- 
lovna stood at the door and said: 

“You really ought to take a shawl! It’s turn- 
ing a little chilly. Please God, you don’t catch 
cold!” 

‘“* Don’t trouble, Olga Mihalovna,” the ladies an- 
swered as they got into the carriage. ‘* Well, 
good-bye. Mind now, we are expecting you; don’t 
play us false!” 

‘““'Wo-o-o!” the coachman checked the horses. 

“Ready, Denis! Good-bye, Olga Mihalovna!” 

* Kiss the children for me! ” 

The carriage started and immediately disappeared 
into the darkness. In the red circle of light cast 
by the lamp in the road, a fresh pair or trio of 
impatient horses, and the silhouette of a coachman 
with his hands held out stiffly before him, would 


The Party | 43 


come into view. Again there began kisses, re- 
proaches, and entreaties to come again or to take 
a shawl. Pyotr Dmitritch kept running out and 
helping the ladies into their carriages. 

“You go now by Efremovyshtchina,” he directed 
the coachman; “it’s nearer through Mankino, but 
the road is worse that way. You might have an 
upset. . . . Good-bye, my charmer. Mille compli- 
ments to your artist!” 

“Good-bye, Olga Mihalovna, darling! Go in- 
doors, or you will catch cold! It’s damp!” 

‘““'Wo-o-o! you rascal!” 

“What horses have you got here?” Pyotr Dmit- 
ritch asked. 

“ They were bought from Haidoroy, in Lent,” an- 
swered the coachman. 

“Capital horses. .. . 

And Pyotr Dmitritch patted the trace horse on 
the haunch. 

“Well, you can start! God give you good 
luck!” 

The last visitor was gone at last; the red circle on 
the road quivered, moved aside, contracted and 
went out, as:Vassily carried away the lamp from 
the entrance. On previous occasions when they had 
seen off their visitors, Pyotr Dmitritch and Olga 
Mihalovna had begun dancing about the drawing- 
room, facing each other, clapping their hands and 


” 


44. The Party and Other Stories 


singing: “They've gone! They’ve gone!” But 
now Olga Mihalovna was not equal to that. She 
went to her bedroom, undressed, and got into bed. 
She fancied she would fall asleep at once and 
sleep soundly. Her legs and her shoulders ached 
painfully, her head was heavy from the strain of | 
talking, and she was conscious, as before, of dis- 
comfort all over her body. Covering her head over, 
she lay still for three or four minutes, then peeped 
out from under the bed-clothes at the lamp before 
the ikon, listened to the silence, and smiled. 

“It’s nice, it’s nice,” she whispered, curling up 
her legs, which felt as if they had grown longer from 
so much walking. “Sleep, sleep. . . .” 

Her legs would not get into a comfortable po- 
sition; she felt uneasy all over, and she turned on 
the other side. A big fly blew buzzing about the 
bedroom and thumped against the ceiling. She 
could hear, too, Grigory and Vassily stepping cau- 
tiously about the drawing-room, putting the chairs 
back in their places; it seemed to Olga Mihaloyna 
that she could not go to sleep, nor be comfortable 
till those sounds were hushed. And again she 
turned over on the other side impatiently. 

She heard her husband’s voice in the drawing- 
room. Some one must be staying the night, as 
Pyotr Dmitritch was addressing some one and 
speaking loudly: 


‘The -Party 45 


“IT don’t say that Count Alexey Petrovitch is an 
impostor. But he can’t help seeming to be one, 
because all of you gentlemen attempt to sce in him 
something different from what he really is. His 
craziness is looked upon as originality, his familiar 
manners as good-nature, and his complete absence 
of opinions as Conservatism. Even granted that he 
is a Conservative of the stamp of ’84, what after 
all is Conservatism? ” 

Pyotr Dmitritch, angry with Count Alexey Petro- 
vitch, his visitors, and himself, was relieving his 
heart. He abused both the Count and his visitors, 
and in his vexation with himself was ready to speak 
out and to hold forth upon anything. After seeing 
his guest to his room, he walked up and down the 
drawing-room, walked through the dining-room, 
down the corridor, then into his study, then again 
went into the drawing-room, and came into the bed- 
room. Olga Mihalovna was lying on her back, with 
the bed-clothes only to her waist (by now she felt 
hot), and with an angry face, watched the fly that 
was thumping against the ceiling. 

‘Is some one staying the night?” she asked. 

“ Yegorov.” 

Pyotr Dmitritch undressed and got into his bed. 
Without speaking, he lighted a cigarette, and he, too, 
fell to watching the fly. There was an uneasy and 
forbidding look in his eyes. Olga Mihalovna 


46 The Party and Other Stories 


looked at his handsome profile for five minutes in 
silence. It seemed to her for some reason that if 
her husband were suddenly to turn facing her, and 
to say, “ Olga, I am unhappy,” she would cry or 
laugh, and she would be at ease. She fancied that 
her legs were aching and her body was uncomfort- 
able all over because of the strain on her feelings. 

‘Pyotr, what are you thinking of?” she said. 

“Oh, nothing . . .” her husband answered. 

“You have taken to having secrets from me of 
late: that’s not right.” 

“ Why is it not right?” answered Pyotr Dmitritch 
drily and not at once. ‘‘ We all have our personal 
life, every one of us, and we are bound to have our 
secrets.” 

‘“* Personal life, our secrets . . . that’s all words! 
Understand you are wounding me!” said Olga 
Mihalovna, sitting up in bed. “If you have a load 
on your heart, why do you hide it from me? And 
why do you find it more suitable to open your heart 
to women who are nothing to you, instead of to 
your wife? I overheard your outpourings to Lu- 
botchka by the bee-house to-day.” 

“Well, I congratulate you. I am glad you did 
overhear it.” 

This meant “ Leave me alone and let me think.” 
Olga Mihalovna was indignant. Vexation, hatred, 
and wrath, which had been accumulating within her 


The Party 47 


during the whole day, suddenly boiled over; she 
wanted at once to speak out, to hurt her husband 
without putting it off till to-morrow, to wound him, 
to punish him. . . . Making an effort to control 
herself and not to scream, she said: 

“Let me tell you, then, that it’s all loathsome, 
loathsome, loathsome! I’ve been hating you all 
day; you see what you’ve done.” 

Pyotr Dmitritch, too, got up and sat on the bed. 

“It’s loathsome, loathsome, loathsome,” Olga 
Mihalovna went on, beginning to tremble all over. 
“ There’s no need to congratulate me; you had bet- 
ter congratulate yourself! It’s a shame, a disgrace. 
You have wrapped yourself in lies till you are 
ashamed to be alone in the room with your wife! 
You are a deceitful man! I see through you and 
understand every step you take! ” 

“Olya, I wish you would please warn me when 
you are out of humour. Then I will sleep in the 
study.” 

Saying this, Pyotr Dmitritch picked up his pillow 
and walked out of the bedroom. Olga Mihalovna 
had not foreseen this. For some minutes she re- 
mained silent with her mouth open, trembling all 
over and looking at the door by which her husband 
had gone out, and trying to understand what it 
meant. Was this one of the devices to which de- 
ceitful people have recourse when they are in the 


48 The Party and Other Stories 


wrong, or was it a deliberate insult aimed at her 
pride? How was she to take it? Olga Mihalovna 
remembered her cousin, a lively young officer, who 
often used to tell her, laughing, that when “his 
spouse nagged at him” at night, he usually picked 
up his pillow and went whistling to spend the night 
in his study, leaving his wife in a foolish and ridicu- 
lous position. ‘This officer was married to a rich, 
capricious, and foolish woman whom he did not re- 
spect but simply put up with. 

Olga Mihalovna jumped out of bed. To her 
mind there was only one thing left for her to do 
now; to dress with all possible haste and to leave 
the house forever. The house was her own, but 
so much the worse for Pyotr Dmitritch. Without 
pausing to consider whether this was necessary or 
not, she went quickly to the study to inform her 
husband of her intention (“ Feminine logic!” 
flashed through her mind), and to say something 
wounding and sarcastic at parting. ... 

Pyotr Dmitritch was lying on the sofa and pre- 
tending to read a newspaper. ‘There was a candle 
burning on a chair near him. His face could not 
be seen behind the newspaper. 

‘Be so kind as to tell me what this means? I 
am asking you.” 

“Be so kind...’ Pyotr Dmitritch mimicked 
her, not showing his face. “It’s sickening, Olga! 


The Party ~ AQ 


See my honour, I am exhausted and not uD to 
it. . Let us do our quarrelling to-morrow.” 

3 ‘No, I understand you perfectly! ’? Olga Miha- 
lovna went on. “You hate me! Yes, yes! You 
hate me because I am richer than you! You will 
never forgive me for that, and will always be lying 
tome!” (“Feminine logic!” flashed through her 
“mind again.) ‘‘ You are laughing at me now... . 
I am convinced, in fact, that you only married me 
in order to have property qualifications and those 
wretched horses. . . . Oh, I am miserable! ”’ 

Pyotr Dmitritch dropped the newspaper and got 
up. The unexpected insult overwhelmed him. 
With a childishly helpless smile he looked desper- 
ately at his wife, and holding out his hands to her 
as though to ward off blows, he said imploringly: 

“cc Olya! ” 

And expecting her to say something else awful, 
he leaned back in his chair, and his huge figure 
seemed as helplessly childish as his smile. 

“‘Olya, how could you say it?’ he whispered. 

Olga Mihalovna came to herself. She was sud- 
denly aware of her passionate love for this man, 
remembered that he was her husband, Pyotr Dmit- 
ritch, without whom she could not live for a day, 
and who loved her passionately, too. She burst 
into loud sobs that sounded strange and unlike her, 

and ran back to her bedroom. 


50 The Party and Other Stories 


She fell on the bed, and short hysterical sobs, 
choking her and making her arms and legs twitch, 
filled the bedroom. Remembering there was a vis- 
itor sleeping three or four rooms away, she buried 
her head under the pillow to stifle her sobs, but the 
pillow rolled on to the floor, and she almost fell on 
the floor herself when she stooped to pick it up. 
She pulled the quilt up to her face, but her hands 
would not obey her, but tore convulsively at every- 
thing she clutched. 

She thought that everything was lost, that the 
falsehood she had told to wound her husband had 
shattered her life into fragments. Her husband 
would not forgive her. The insult she had hurled 
at him was not one that could be effaced by any 
caresses, by any vows. . . . How could she con- 
vince her husband that she did not believe what she 
had said? 

“It’s all over, it’s all over!” she cried, not no- 
ticing that the pillow had slipped on to the floor 
again. ‘‘ For God’s sake, for God’s sake!” 

Probably roused by her cries, the guest and the 
servants were now awake; next day all the neigh- 
bourhood would know that she had been in hysterics 
and would blame Pyotr Dmitritch. She made an 
effort to restrain herself, but her sobs grew louder 
and louder every minute. 

“For God's sake,” she cried in a voice not like 


The Party eA 


her own, and not knowing why she cried it. ‘ For 
God’s sake!” 

She felt as though the bed were heaving under 
her and her feet were entangled in the bed-clothes. 
Pyotr Dmitritch, in his dressing-gown, with a can- 
dle in his hand, came into the bedroom. 

“ Olya, hush!” he said. 

She raised herself, and kneeling up in bed, screw- 
ing up her eyes at the light, articulated through her 
sobs: 

Sewmauerstand =. .-understand!.... . 

She wanted to tell him that she was tired to death 
by the party, by his falsity, by her own falsity, that 
it had all worked together, but she could only articu- 
late: 

“Understand . . . understand!” 

‘““Come, drink!” he said, handing her some wa- 
ter, 

She took the glass obediently and began drinking, 
but the water splashed over and was spilt on her 
arms, her throat and knees. 

“‘T must look horribly unseemly,” she thought. 

Pyotr Dmitritch put her back in bed without a 
word, and covered her with the quilt, then he took 
the candle and went out. 

“For God’s sake! ’? Olga Mihalovna cried again. 
“‘ Pyotr, understand, understand! ” 

Suddenly something gripped her in the lower 


” 


52. The Party and Other Stories 


part of her body and back with such violence that 
her wailing was cut short, and she bit the pillow 
from the pain. But the pain let her go again at 
once, and she began sobbing again. 

The maid came in, and arranging the quilt over 
her, asked in alarm: 

‘‘ Mistress, darling, what is the matter?” 

“Go out of the room,” said Pyotr Dmitritch 
sternly, going up to the bed. 

“Understand . . . understand! .. .” Olga Mi- 
halovna began. 

‘“‘Olya, I entreat you, calm yourself,” he said. 
‘*T did not mean to hurt you. I would not have gone 
out of the room if I had known it would have hurt 
you so much; I simply felt depressed. I tell you, 
on my honour. . .” 

“Understand! . . . You were lying, I was ly- 


Inge ees 

‘‘T understand. . . . Come, come, that’s enough! 
I understand,” said Pyotr Dmitritch tenderly, sitting 
down on her bed. “ You said that in anger; I quite 


understand. I swear to God I love you beyond any- 
thing on earth, and when I married you I never once 
thought of your being rich. I loved you immensely, 
and that’s all . . . Lassure you. I have never been 
in want of money or felt the value of it, and so I 
cannot feel the difference between your fortune and 


The Party 53 


mine. It always seemed to me we were equally well 
off. And that I have been deceitful in little things, 
that . . . of course, is true. My life has hitherto 
been arranged in such a frivolous way that it has 
somehow been impossible to get on without paltry 
lying. It weighs on me, too, now... . Let us 
leave off talking about it, for goodness’ sake! ” 

Olga Mihalovna again felt in acute pain, and 
clutched her husband by the sleeve. 

“Tam in pain, in pain, in pain . . .” she said rap- 
idly. ‘‘ Oh, what pain!” 

“Damnation take those visitors!’ muttered 
Pyotr Dmitritch, getting up. ‘“‘ You ought not to 
have gone to the island to-day!” he cried. ‘‘ What 
an idiot I was not to prevent you! Oh, my God!” 

He scratched his head in vexation, and, with a 
wave of his hand, walked out of the room. 

Then he came into the room several times, sat 
down on the bed beside her, and talked a great deal, 
sometimes tenderly, sometimes angrily, but she 
hardly heard him. Her sobs were continually inter- 
rupted by fearful attacks of pain, and each time the 
pain was more acute and prolonged. At first she 
held her breath and bit the pillow during*the pain, 
but then she began screaming on an unseemly pierc- 
ing note. Once seeing her husband near her, she 
remembered that she had insulted him, and without 


f 


54 The Party and Other Stories 


pausing to think whether it were really Pyotr Dmit- 
ritch or whether she were in delirium, clutched his 
hand in both hers and began kissing it. 

“You were lying, I was lying . . .” she began 
justifying herself. ‘‘ Understand, understand. .. . 
They have exhausted me, driven me out of all pa- 
tience.”’ 

‘“‘Olya, we are not alone,” said Pyotr Dmitritch. 

Olga Mihalovna raised her head and saw Var- 
vara, who was kneeling by the chest of drawers 
and pulling out the bottom drawer. ‘The top draw- 
ers were already open. Then Varvara got up, red 
from the strained position, and with a cold, solemn 
face began trying to unlock a box. 

‘“* Marya, I can’t unlock it!” she said in a whisper. 
* You unlock it, won’t you?” 

Marya, the maid, was digging a candle end out 
of the candlestick with a pair of scissors, so as to 
put in a new candle; she went up to Varvara and 
helped her to unlock the box. 

“There should be nothing locked .. .” whis- 
pered Varvara. ‘‘ Unlock this basket, too, my good 
girl. Master,” she said, ‘“‘ you should send to Fa- 
ther Mihail to unlock the holy gates! You must!” 

““ Do what you like,” said Pyotr Dmitritch, breath- 
ing hard, ‘“‘ only, for God's sake, make haste and 
fetch the doctor or the midwife! Has Vassily gone? 
Send some one else. Send your husband! ” 


” 


The Party as 


“Tt’s the birth,’ Olga Mihalovna thought. 
“Varvara,” she moaned, “but he won’t be born 
alive!” 

“It’s all right, it’s all right, mistress,’ whispered 
Varvara. ‘“‘ Please God, he will be alive! he will 
be alive!” 

When Olga Mihalovna came to herself again 
after a pain she was no longer sobbing nor tossing 
from side to side, but moaning. She could not re- 
frain from moaning even in the intervals between 
the pains. ‘The candles were still burning, but the 
morning light was coming through the blinds. It 
was probably about five o’clock in the morning. 
At the round table there was sitting some unknown 
woman with a very discreet air, wearing a white 
apron. From her whole appearance it was evident 
she had been sitting there a long time. Olga Mi- 
halovna guessed that she was the midwife. 

* Will it soon be over?’’ she asked, and in her 
voice she heard a peculiar and unfamiliar note which 
had never been there before. ‘I must be dying 
in childbirth,” she thought. 

Pyotr Dmitritch came cautiously into the bed- 
room, dressed for the day, and stood at the win- 
dow with his back to his wife. He lifted the blind 
and looked out of window. 

‘What rain!” he said. 

“What time is it?’’ asked Olga Mihalovna, in 


56 The Party and Other Stories 


order to hear the unfamiliar note in her voice again. 

‘A quarter to six,” answered the midwife. 

“And what if I really am dying?” thought Olga 
Mihalovna, looking at her husband’s head and the 
window-panes on which the rain was beating. 
‘How will he live without me? With whom will 
he have tea and dinner, talk in the evenings, sleep?” 

And he seemed to her like a forlorn child; she 
felt sorry for him and wanted to say something 
nice, caressing and consolatory. She remembered 
how in the spring he had meant to buy himself some 
harriers, and she, thinking it a cruel and dangerous 
sport, had prevented him from doing it. 

“Pyotr, buy yourself harriers,”’ she moaned. 

He dropped the blind and went up to the bed, and 
would have said something; but at that moment the 
pain came back, and Olga Mihalovna uttered an un- 
seemly, piercing scream. 

The pain and the constant screaming and moan- 
ing stupefied her. She heard, saw, and sometimes 
spoke, but hardly understood anything, and was 
only conscious that she was in pain or was just go- 
ing to be in pain. It seemed to her that the name- 
day party had been long, long ago — not yesterday, 
but a year ago perhaps; and that her new life of 
agony had lasted longer than her childhood, her 
school-days, her time at the University, and her 
marriage, and would go on for a long, long time, 


The Party ae 


endlessly. She saw them bring tea to the midwife, 
and summon her at midday to lunch and afterwards 
to dinner; she saw Pyotr Dmitritch grow used to 
coming in, standing for long intervals by the win- 
dow, and going out again; saw strange men, the 
maid, Varvara, come in as though they were at 
home. . . . Varvara said nothing but, ‘He will, 
he will,” and was angry when any one closed the 
drawers and the chest. Olga Mihalovna saw the 
light change in the room and in the windows: at one 
time it was twilight, then thick like fog, then bright 
daylight as it had been at dinner-time the day before, 
then again twilight . . . and each of these changes 
lasted as long as her childhood, her school-days, her 
life at the University. . . . 
In the evening two doctors — one bony, bald, with 
a big red beard; the other with a swarthy Jewish 
face and cheap spectacles — performed some sort 
of operation on Olga Mihalovna. To these un- 
known men touching her body she felt utterly in- 
different. By now she had no feeling of shame, no 
will, and any one might do what he would with her. 
If any one had rushed at her with a knife, or had 
insulted Pyotr Dmitritch, or had robbed her of her 
right to the little creature, she would not have said 
a word. 
They gave her chloroform during the operation. 
When she came to again, the pain was still there 


58 The Party and Other Stories 


and insufferable. It was night. And Olga Miha- 
lovna remembered that there had been just such a 
night with the stillness, the lamp, with the midwife 
sitting motionless by the bed, with the drawers of 
the chest pulled out, with Pyotr Dmitritch standing 
by the window, but some time very, very long 
ALTON es 


V. 


“Tam not dead. . .”’ thought Olga Mihaloyna 
when she began to understand her surroundings 
again, and when the pain was over. 

A bright summer day looked in at the widely 
open windows; in the garden below the windows, 
the sparrows and the magpies never ceased chat- 
tering for one instant. 

The drawers were shut now, her husband’s bed 
had been made. There was no sign of the mid- 
wife or of the maid, or of Varvara in the room, 
only Pyotr Dmitritch was standing, as before, mo- 
tionless by the window looking into the garden. 
There was no sound of a child’s crying, no one was 
congratulating her or rejoicing, it was evident that 
the little creature had not been born alive. 

Pyotr 122 

Olga Mihaloyna called to her husband. 

Pyotr Dmitritch looked round. It seemed as 


oe 


The Party 59 


though a long time must have passed since the 
last guest had departed and Olga Mihalovna had 
insulted her husband, for Pyotr Dmitritch was per- 
ceptibly thinner and hollow-eyed. 

“What is it?” he asked, coming up to the bed. 

He looked away, moved his lips and smiled with 
childlike helplessness. 

‘Ts it all over?” asked Olga Mihalovna. 

Pyotr Dmitritch tried to make some answer, but 
his lips quivered and his mouth worked like a tooth- 
less old man’s, like Uncle Nikolay Nikolaitch’s. 

““Olya,” he said, wringing his hands; big tears 
suddenly dropping from his eyes. ‘“‘ Olya, I don’t 
care about your property qualification, nor the Cir- 
cuit Courts . . .” (he gave a sob) ‘“‘nor particular 
views, nor those visitors, nor your fortune... . I 
don’t care about anything! Why didn’t we take 
care of our child? Oh, it’s no good talking! ” 

With a despairing gesture he went out of the bed- 
room. 

But nothing mattered to Olga Mihalovna now, 
there was a mistiness in her brain from the chloro- 
form, an emptiness in her soul. . . . The dull in- 
difference to life which had overcome her when the 
two doctors were performing the operation still had 
possession of her. 


¥ 


Se dee 2h Se 
TE ee Se ere ee ry 


(@ERROR 
' My FRienp’s Story 


Doirrt Petrovitcu SILin had taken his degree and 
entered the government service in Petersburg, but 
at thirty he gave up his post and went in for agricul- 
ture. His farming was fairly successful, and yet 
it always seemed to me that he was not in his proper 
place, and that he would do well to go back to Peters- 
burg. When sunburnt, grey with dust, exhausted 
with toil, he met me near the gates or at the en- 
trance, and then at supper struggled with sleepiness 
and his wife took him off to bed as though he were 
a baby; or when, overcoming his sleepiness, he be- 
gan in his soft, cordial, almost imploring voice, to 
talk about his really excellent ideas, I saw him not 
as a farmer nor an agriculturist, but only as a wor- 
ried and exhausted man, and it was clear to me that 
he did not really care for farming, but that all he 
wanted was for the day to be over and ‘‘ Thank God 
for it.” 

I liked to be with him, and I used to stay on 
his farm for two or three days at a time. I liked 
his house, and his park, and his big fruit garden, 

63 


64 The Party and Other Stories 


and the river — and his philosophy, which was clear, 
though rather spiritless and rhetorical. I suppose 
I was fond of him on his own account, though I 
can’t say that for certain, as I have not up to now 
succeeded in analysing my feelings at that time. He 
was an intelligent, kind-hearted, genuine man, and . 
not a bore, but I remember that when he confided 
to me his most treasured secrets and spoke of our 
relation to each other as friendship, it disturbed me 
unpleasantly, and I was conscious of awkwardness. 
In his affection for me there was something inappro- 
priate, tiresome, and I should have greatly preferred 
commonplace friendly relations. 

The fact is that I was extremely, attracted by his 
wife, Marya Sergeyevna. I was not in love with 
her, but I was attracted by her face, her eyes, her 
voice, her walk. I missed her when I did not see 
her for a long time, and my imagination pictured no 
one at that time so eagerly as that young, beautiful, 
elegant woman. I had no definite designs in regard 
to her, and did not dream of anything of the sort, 
yet for some reason, whenever we were left alone, 
I remembered that her husband looked upon me as 
his friend, and I felt awkward. When she played 
my favourite pieces on the piano or told me some- 
thing interesting, I listened with pleasure, and yet 
at the same time for some reason the reflection that 
she loved her husband, that he was my friend, and 


Terror 65 


that she herself looked upon me as his friend, ob- 
truded themselves upon me, my spirits flagged, and 
I became listless, awkward, and dull. She noticed 
this change and would usually say: 

“You are dull without your friend. We must 
send out to the fields for him.” 

And when Dmitri Petrovitch came in, she would 
‘say: 

“Well, here is your friend now. Rejoice.” 

So passed a year and a half. 

It somehow happened one July Sunday that 
Dmitri Petrovitch and I, having nothing to do, 
drove to the big village of Klushino to buy things 
for supper. While we were going from one shop 
to another the sun set and the evening came on — 
the evening which I shall probably never forget 
in my life. After buying cheese that smelt like 
soap, and petrified sausages that smelt of tar, we 
went to the tavern to ask whether they had any beer. 
Our coachman went off to the blacksmith to get our 
horses shod, and we told him we would wait for him 
near the church. We walked, talked, laughed over 
our purchases, while a man who was known in the 
district by a very strange nickname, “ Forty Mar- 
tyrs,” followed us all the while in silence with a 
mysterious air like a detective. This Forty Mar- 
tyrs was no other than Gavril Syeverov, or more 
simply Gavryushka, who had been for a short time 


66 The Party and Other Stories 


in my service as a footman and had been dismissed 
by me for drunkenness. He had been in Dmitri 
Petrovitch’s service, too, and by him had been dis- 
missed for the same vice. He was an inveterate 
drunkard, and indeed his whole life was as drunk and 
disorderly as himself. His father had been a priest 
and his mother of noble rank, so by birth he be- 
longed to the privileged class; but however care- 
fully I scrutinized his exhausted, respectful, and al- 
ways perspiring face, his red beard now turning grey, 
his pitifully torn reefer jacket and his red shirt, 
I could not discover in him the faintest trace of 
anything we associate with privilege. He spoke of 
himself as a man of education, and used to say that 
he had been in a clerical school, but had not finished 
his studies there, as he had been expelled for smok- 
ing; then he had sung in the bishop’s choir and lived 
for two years in a monastery, from which he was 
also expelled, but this time not for smoking but for 
“his weakness.” He had walked all over two prov- 
inces, had presented petitions to the Consistory, and 
to various government offices, and had been four 
times on his trial. At last, being stranded in our 
district, he had served as a footman, as a forester, 
as a kennelman, as a sexton, had married a cook who 
was a widow and rather a loose character, and had 
so hopelessly sunk into a menial position, and had 
grown so used to filth and dirt, that he even spoke 


Terror 67 


of his privileged origin with a certain scepticism, 
as of some myth. At the time I am describing, he 
was hanging about without a job, calling himself 
a carrier and a huntsman, and his wife had dis- 
appeared and made no sign. 

From the tavern we went to the church and sat 
in the porch, waiting for the coachman. Forty 
Martyrs stood a little way off and put his hand 
before his mouth in order to cough in it respect- 
fully if need be. By now it was dark; there was 
a strong smell of evening dampness, and the moon 
was on the point of rising. There were only two 
clouds in the clear starry sky exactly over our heads: 
one big one and one smaller; alone in the sky they 
were racing after one another like mother and child, 
in the direction where the sunset was glowing. 

‘“‘ What a glorious day!” said Dmitri Petrovitch. 

“In the extreme . . .”’ Forty Martyrs assented, 
and he coughed respectfully into his hand. ‘‘ How 
was it, Dmitri Petrovitch, you thought to visit these 
parts?”’ he asked in an ingratiating voice, evidently 
anxious to get up a conversation. 

Dmitri Petrovitch made no answer. Forty Mar- 
tyrs heaved.a deep sigh and said softly, not looking 
at us: 

‘“‘T suffer solely through a cause to which I must 
answer to Almighty God. No doubt about it, I am 
a hopeless and incompetent man; but believe me, on 


— 


68 The Party and Other Stories 


my conscience, I am without a crust of bread and 
worse off than a dog. . . . Forgive me, Dmitri Pet- 
rovitch.”’ 

Silin was not listening, but sat musing with his 
head propped on his fists. The church stood at 
‘the end of the street on the high river-bank, and 
through the trellis gate of the enclosure we could 
see the river, the water-meadows on the near side 
of it, and the crimson glare of a camp fire about 
which black figures of men and horses were moving. 
And beyond the fire, further away, there were other 
lights, where there was a little village. They were 
singing there. On the river, and here and there on 
the meadows, a mist was rising. High narrow coils 
of mist, thick and white as milk, were trailing over 
the river, hiding the reflection of the stars and hover- 
ing over the willows. Every minute they changed 
their form, and it seemed as though some were em- 
bracing, others were bowing, others lifting up their 
arms to heaven with wide sleeves like priests, as 
though they were praying. . . . Probably they re- 
minded Dmitri Petrovitch of ghosts and of the dead, 
for he turned facing me and asked with a mournful 
smile: 

‘Tell me, my dear fellow, why is it that when we 
want to tell some terrible, mysterious, and fantastic 
story, we draw our material, not from life, but in- 


a 


Terror 69 


variably from the mond of ghosts ie of the shad- 
ows beyond the grave.” 

“We are frightened of what we don’t under- 
stand.” 

“And do you understand life? Tell me: do you 
understand life better than the world beyond the 
grave?” 

Dmitri Petrovitch was sitting quite close to me, 
so that I felt his breath upon my cheek. In the 
evening twilight his pale, lean face seemed paler 
than ever and his lark beard was black as soot. 
His eyes were sad, truthful, and a little frightened, 
as though he were about to tell me something hor- 
rible. He looked into my eyes and went on in his 
habitual imploring voice: 

“Our life and the life beyond the grave are 
equally incomprehensible and horrible. If any one 
is afraid of ghosts he ought to be afraid, too, of 
me, and of those lights and of the sky, seeing that, 
if you come to reflect, all that is no less fantastic 
and beyond our grasp than apparitions from the 
other world. Prince Hamlet did not kill himself 
because he was afraid of the visions that might 
haunt his dreams after death. I like that famous 
soliloquy of his, but, to be candid, it never touched 
my soul. I will confess to you as a friend that in 
moments of depression I have sometimes pictured 


70 ‘The Party and Other Stories 


to myself the hour of my death. My fancy invented 
thousands of the gloomiest visions, and I have suc- 
ceeded in working myself up to an agonizing exalta- 
tion, to a state of nightmare, and I assure you that 
that did not seem to me more terrible than reality. 
What I mean is, apparitions are terrible, but life 
is terrible, too. I don’t understand life and I am 
afraid of it, my dear boy; I don’t know. Perhaps 
I am a morbid person, unhinged. It seems to a 
sound, healthy man that he understands everything 
he sees and hears, but that ‘ seeming’ is lost to me, 
and from day to day I am poisoning myself with ter- 
ror. ‘There is a disease, the fear of open spaces, 
but my disease is the fear of life. When I lie on 
the grass and watch a little beetle which was born 
yesterday and understands nothing, it seems to me 
that its life consists of nothing else but fear, and in 
it I see myself.” 

“What is it exactly you are frightened of?” I 
asked. 

‘‘T am afraid of everything. I am not by nature 
a profound thinker, and I take little interest in such 
questions as the life beyond the grave, the destiny 
of humanity, and, in fact, I am rarely carried away 
to the heights. What chiefly frightens me is the 
common routine of life from which none of us can 
escape. I am incapable of distinguishing what is 


pee Ie Ty 


Terror val 


true and what is false in my actions, and they worry 
me. I recognize that education and the conditions 
of life have imprisoned me in a narrow circle of 
falsity, that my whole life is nothing else than a 
daily effort to deceive myself and other people, and 
to avoid noticing it; and I am frightened at the 
thought that to the day of my death I shall not es- 
‘cape from this falsity. To-day I do something and 
to-morrow I do not understand why I did it. I en- 
tered the service in Petersburg and took fright; I 
came here to work on the land, and here, too, I am 
frightened. . . . I see that we know very little and 
so make mistakes every day. We are unjust, we 
slander one another and spoil each other’s lives, 
we waste all our powers on trash which we do not 
need and which hinders us from living; and that 
frightens me, because I don’t understand why and 
for whom it is necessary. I don’t understand men, 
my dear fellow, and I am afraid of them. It fright- 
ens me to look at the peasants, and I don’t know 
for what higher objects they are suffering and what 
they are living for. If life is an enjoyment, then 
they are unnecessary, superfluous people; if the ob- 
ject and meaning of life is to be found in poverty 
and unending, hopeless ignorance, I can’t understand 
for whom and what this torture is necessary. I un- 
destand no one and nothing. Kindly try to under- 


72. The Party and Other Stories 


stand this specimen, for instance,’ said Dmitri Pet- 
rovitch, pointing to Forty Martyrs. “ Think of 
him!” 

Noticing that we were looking at him, Forty Mar- 
tyrs coughed deferentially into his fist and said: 

‘“‘T was always a faithful servant with good mas- 
ters, but the great trouble has been spirituous liquor. 
If a poor fellow like me were shown consideration 
and given a place, I would kiss the ikon. My 
word’s my bond.” 

The sexton walked by, looked at us in amazement, 
and began pulling the rope. The bell, abruptly 
breaking upon the stillness of the evening, struck ten 
with a slow and prolonged note. 

“It’s ten o’clock, though,” said Dmitri Petro- 
vitch. “It’s time we were going. Yes, my dear 
fellow,” he sighed, “if only you knew how afraid 
I am of my ordinary everyday thoughts, in which 
one would have thought there should be nothing 
dreadful. To prevent myself thinking I distract my 
mind with work and try to tire myself out that I may 
sleep sound at night. Children, a wife —all that 
seems ordinary with other people; but how that 
weighs upon me, my dear fellow! ” 

He rubbed his face with his hands, cleared his 
throat, and laughed. 

‘If I could only tell you how I have played the 
fool in my life!” he said. ‘‘ They all tell me that I 


Terror nie 


have a sweet wife, charming children, and that I am 
a good husband and father. They think I am very 
happy and envy me. But since it has come to that, 
I will tell you in secret: my happy family life is only 
a grievous misunderstanding, and I am afraid of it.” 

His pale face was distorted by a wry smile. He 
put his arm round my waist and went on in an under- 
tone: 

“You are my true friend; I believe in you and 
have a deep respect for you. Heaven gave us 
friendship that we may open our hearts and escape 
from the secrets that weigh upon us. Let me take 
advantage of your friendly feeling for me and tell 
you the whole truth. My home life, which seems to 
you so enchanting, is my chief misery and my chief 
terror. I got married in a strange and stupid way. 
I must tell you that I was madly in love with Masha 
before I married her, and was courting her for two 
years. I asked her to marry me five times, and she 
refused me because she did not care for me in the 
least. The sixth, when burning with passion I 
crawled on my knees before her and implored her to 
take a beggar and marry me, she consented... . 
What she said to me was: ‘I don’t love you, but I 
will be true to you. .. .’ I accepted that condition 
with rapture. At the time I understood what that 
meant, but I swear to God I don’t understand it now. 
‘I don’t love you, but I will be true to you.’ What 


74 The Party and Other Stories 


does that mean? It’s a fog, a darkness. I love her 
now as intensely as I did the day we were married, 
while she, I believe, is as indifferent as ever, and I 
believe she is glad when I go away from home. I 
don’t know for certain whether she cares for me or 
not —I don’t know, I don’t know; but, as you see, 
we live under the same roof, call each other ‘ thou,’ 
sleep together, have children, our property is in com- 
mon. . . . What does it mean, what does it mean? 
What is the object of it? And do you understand it 
at all, my dear fellow? It’scrueltorture! Because 
I don’t understand our relations, I hate, sometimes 
her, sometimes myself, sometimes both at once. 
Everything is in a tangle in my brain; I torment my- 
self and grow stupid. And as though to spite me, 
she grows more beautiful every day, she is getting 
more wonderful. . . . I fancy her hair is marvel- 
lous, and her smile is like no other woman’s. I 
love her, and I know that my love is hopeless. 
Hopeless love for a woman by whom one has two 
children! Is that intelligible? And isn’t it ter- 
rible? Isn’t it more terrible than ghosts?” 

He was in the mood to have talked on a good deal 
longer, but luckily we heard the coachman’s voice. 
Our horses had arrived. We got into the carriage, 
and Forty Martyrs, taking off his cap, helped us 
both into the carriage with an expression that sug- 
gested that he had long been waiting for an oppor- 


Terror 75 


tunity to come in contact with our precious persons. 

‘Dmitri Petrovitch, let me come to you,” he said, 
blinking furiously and tilting his head on one side. 
‘Show divine mercy! I am dying of hunger! ” 

“Very well,” said Silin. ‘ Come, you shall stay 
three days, and then we shall see.” 

“Certainly, sir,’ said Forty Martyrs, overjoyed. 
“ [ll come today, sir.” 

It was a five miles’ drive home. Dmitri Petro- 

vitch, glad that he had at last opened his heart to 
his friend, kept his arm round my waist. all the way; 
and speaking now, not with bitterness and not with 
apprehension, but quite cheerfully, told me that if 
everything had been satisfactory in his home life, he 
should have returned to Petersburg and taken up 
scientific work there. The movement which had 
driven so many gifted young men into the country 
was, he said, a deplorable movement. We had 
plenty of rye and wheat in Russia, but absolutely no 
cultured people. The strong and gifted among the 
young ought to take up science, art, and politics; to 
act otherwise meant being wasteful. He general- 
ized with pleasure and expressed regret that he 
would be parting from me early next morning, as he 
had to go to a sale of timber. 

And I felt awkward and depressed, and it seemed 
to me that I was deceiving the man. And at the 
same time it was pleasant to me. I gazed at the 


76 The Party and Other Stories 


immense crimson moon which was rising, and pic- 
tured the tall, graceful, fair woman, with her pale 
face, always well-dressed and fragrant with some 
special scent, rather like musk, and for some reason 
it pleased me to think she did not love her husband. 

On reaching home, we sat down to supper. 
Marya Sergeyevna, laughing, regaled us with our 
purchases, and I thought that she certainly had won- 
derful hair and that her smile was unlike any other 
woman’s. I watched her, and I wanted to detect in 
every look and movement that she did not love her 
husband, and I fancied that I did see it. 

Dmitri Petrovitch was soon struggling with sleep. 
After supper he sat with us for ten minutes and said: 

“Do as you please, my friends, but I have to be 
up at three o’clock tomorrow morning. Excuse my 
leaving you.” 

He kissed his wife tenderly, pressed my hand 
with warmth and gratitude, and made me promise 
that I would certainly come the following week. 
That he might not oversleep next morning, he went 
to spend the night in the lodge. 

Marya Sergeyevna always sat up late, in the 
Petersburg fashion, and for some reason on this occa- 
sion I was glad of it. 

“And now,” I began when we were left alone, 
“and now you'll be kind and play me something.” 

I felt no desire for music, but I did not know how 


Terror a 


to begin the conversation. She sat down to the 
piano and played, I don’t remember what. I sat 
down beside her and looked at her plump white 
hands and tried to read something on her cold, in- 
different face. Then she smiled at something and 
looked at me. 

‘You are dull without your friend,” she said. 

I laughed. 

“It would be enough for friendship to be here 
once a month, but I turn up oftener than once a 
week.” 

Saying this, I got up and walked from one end of 
the room to the other. She too got up and walked 
away to the fireplace. 

‘What do you mean to say by that?”’ she said, 
raising her large, clear eyes and looking at me. 

I made no answer. 

‘“‘ What you say is not true,”’ she went on, after 
a moment’s thought. ‘“‘ You only come here on 
account of Dmitri Petrovitch. Well, I am very 
glad. One does not often see such friendships now- 
adays.”’ 

‘“‘ Aha!’ I thought, and, not knowing what to say, 
I asked: ‘‘ Would you care for a turn in the 
garden?” 

66 No.” 

I went out upon the verandah. Nervous shud- 
ders were running over my head and IJ felt chilly 


78 The Party and Other Stories 


with excitement. I was convinced now that our con- 
versation would be utterly trivial, and that there was 
nothing particular we should be able to say to one 
another, but that, that night, what I did not dare to 
dream of was bound to happen — that it was bound 
to be that night or never. 

‘“* What lovely weather! ” I said aloud. 

“‘TIt makes absolutely no difference to me,” she 
answered. 

I went into the drawing-room. Marya Serge- 
yevna was standing, as before, near the fireplace, 
with her hands behind her back, looking away and 
thinking of something. 

‘“Why does it make no difference to you?” I 
asked. 

““ Because Iam bored. You are only bored with- 
out your friend, but I am always bored. However 

. . that is of no interest to you.” 

I sat down to the piano and struck a few chords, 
waiting to hear what she would say. 

‘ Please don’t stand on ceremony,” she said, look- 
ing angrily at me, and she seemed as though on the 
point of crying with vexation. “If you are sleepy, 
go to bed. Because you are Dmitri Petrovitch’s 
friend, you are not in duty bound to be bored with 
his wife’s company. I don’t want a. sacrifice. 
Please go.” 

I did not, of course, go to bed. She went out on 


Terror 79 


the verandah while I remained in the drawing-room 
and spent five minutes turning over the music. 
Then I went out, too. We stood close together in 
the shadow of the curtains, and below us were the 
steps bathed in moonlight. The black shadows of 
the trees stretched across the flower beds and the 
yellow sand of the paths. 

“TI shall have to go away tomorrow, too,” I said. 

“ Of course, if my husband’s not at home you can’t 
stay here,” she said sarcastically. ‘‘I can imagine 
how miserable you would be if you were in love with 
me! Wait a bit: one day I shall throw myself on 
your neck. . . . I shall see with what horror you 
will run away from me. ‘That would be interesting.” 

Her words and her pale face were angry, but her 
eyes were full of tender passionate love. I already 
looked upon this lovely creature as my property, and 
then for the first time I noticed that she had golden 
eyebrows, exquisite eyebrows. I had never seen such 
eyebrows before. The thought that I might at once 
press her to my heart, caress her, touch her wonder- 
ful hair, seemed to me such a miracle that I laughed 
and shut my eyes. 

“Tt’s bed-time now. . . . A peaceful night,” she 
said. 

“‘T don’t want a peaceful night,” I said, laughing, 
following her into the drawing-room. “I shall 
curse this night if it is a peaceful one.” 


80 The Party and Other Stories 


Pressing her hand, and escorting her to the door, 
I saw by her face that she understood me, and was 
glad that I understood her, too. 

I went tomy room. Near the books on the table 

\ lay Dmitri Petrovitch’s cap, and that reminded me 
of his affection for me. I took my stick and went 
out into the garden. The mist had risen here, too, 
and the same tall, narrow, ghostly shapes which I 
had seen earlier on the river were trailing round the 
trees and bushes and wrapping about them. What 
a pity I could not talk to them! 

In the extraordinarily transparent air, each leaf, 
each drop of dew stood out distinctly; it was all 
smiling at me in the stillness half asleep, and as I 
passed the green seats I recalled the words in some 
play of Shakespeare’s: ‘“‘ How sweetly falls the 
moonlight on yon seat!” 

There was a mound in the garden; I went up it and 
sat down. I was tormented by a delicious feeling. 
I knew for certain that in a moment I should hold in 
my arms, should press to my heart her magnificent 
body, should kiss her golden eyebrows; and I wanted 
to disbelieve it, to tantalize myself, and was sorry 
that she had cost me so little trouble and had yielded 
sO soon. 

But suddenly I heard heavy footsteps. A man of 
medium height appeared in the avenue, and I recog- 
nized him at once as Forty Martyrs. He sat down 


Terror 81 


on the bench and heaved a deep sigh, then crossed 
himself three times and lay down. A minute later 
he got up and lay on the other side. The gnats and 
the dampness of the night prevented his sleeping. 

“Oh, life!” he said. ‘‘ Wretched, bitter life!” 

Looking at his bent, wasted body and hearing his | 
heavy, noisy sighs, I thought of an unhappy, bitter 
life of which the confession had been made to me 
that day, and I felt uneasy and frightened at my 
blissful mood. I came down the knoll and went to 
the house. 

“Life, as he thinks, is terrible,” I thought, “so 
don’t stand on ceremony with it, bend it to your will, 
and until it crushes you, snatch all you can wring 
from it.” 

Marya Sergeyevna was standing on the verandah. 
I put my arms round her without a word, and began 
greedily kissing her eyebrows, her temples, her 
OC Me ea. ts 

In my room she told me she had loved me for a 
long time, more than a year. She vowed eternal 
love, cried and begged me to take her away with me. 
I repeatedly took her to the window to look at her 
face in the moonlight, and she seemed to me a lovely 
dream, and I made haste to hold her tight to con- 
vince myself of the truth of it. It was long since I 
had known such raptures. . . . Yet somewhere far 
away at the bottom of my heart I felt an awkward- 


82. The Party and Other Stories 


ness, and I was ill at ease. In her love for me there 
was something incongruous and burdensome, just as 
in Dmitri Petrovitch’s friendship. It was a great, 
serious passion with tears and vows, and I wanted 
nothing serious in it — no tears, no vows, no talk of 
the future. Let that moonlight night flash through 
our lives like a meteor and — basta! 

At three o’clock she went out of my room, and, 
while I was standing in the doorway, looking after 
her, at the end of the corridor Dmitri Petrovitch 
suddenly made his appearance; she started and stood 
aside to let him pass, and her whole figure was ex- 
pressive of repulsion. He gave a strange smile, 
coughed, and came into my room. 

“IT forgot my cap here yesterday,” he said without 
looking at me. 

He found it and, holding it in both hands, put it 
on his head; then he looked at my confused face, at 
my slippers, and said in a strange, husky voice unlike 
his own: 

“I suppose it must be my fate that I should under- 
stand nothing. . . . If you understand anything, I 
congratulate you. It’s all darkness before my eyes.” 

And he went out, clearing his throat. After- 
wards from the window I saw him by the stable, 
harnessing the horses with his own hands. His 
hands were trembling, he was in nervous haste and 
kept looking round at the house; probably he was 


Terror 83 


feeling terror. Then he got into the gig, and, with 
a strange expression as though afraid of being pur- 
sued, lashed the horses. 

Shortly afterwards I set off, too. The sun was 
already rising, and the mist of the previous day clung 
timidly to the bushes and the hillocks. On the box 
of the carriage was sitting Forty Martyrs; he had 
already succeeded in getting drunk and was mutter- 
ing tipsy nonsense. 

““T am a free man,” he shouted to the horses. 
** Ah, my honeys, I am a nobleman in my own right, 
if you care to know!” 

The terror of Dmitri Petrovitch, the thought of 
whom I could not get out of my head, infected me. 
I thought of what had happened and could make 
nothing of it. I looked at the rooks, and it seemed 
so strange and terrible that they were flying. 

‘Why have I done this?’ I kept asking myself in 
bewilderment and despair. ‘‘ Why has it turned out 
like this and not differently? To whom and for 
what was it necessary that she should love me in 
earnest, and that he should come into my room to 
fetch his cap? What had a cap to do with it?” 

I set off for Petersburg that day, and I have not 
seen Dmitri Petrovitch nor his wife since. Iam told 
that they are still living together. 


os 
*j 


: 
ey 


i 


A WOMAN’S KINGDOM 


A WOMAN'S KINGDOM 


I 
CHRISTMAS Eve 


Here was a thick roll of notes. It came from the 
bailiff at the forest villa; he wrote that he was send- 
ing fifteen hundred roubles, which he had been 
awarded as damages, having won an appeal. Anna 
Akimovna disliked and feared such words as 
“awarded damages” and ‘won the suit.’’ She 
knew that it was impossible to do without the law, 
but for some reason, whenever Nazaritch, the man- 
ager of the factory, or the bailiff of her villa in the 
country, both of whom frequently went to law, used 
to win lawsuits of some sort for her benefit, she 
always felt uneasy and, as it were, ashamed. On 
this occasion, too, she felt uneasy and awkward, and 
wanted to put that fifteen hundred roubles further 
away that it might be out of her sight. 

She thought with vexation that other girls of her 
age — she was in her twenty-sixth year — were now 
busy looking after their households, were weary and 
would sleep sound, and would wake up tomorrow 

87 


88 The Party and Other Stories 


morning in holiday mood; many of them had long 
been married and had children. Only she, for some 
reason, was compelled to sit like an old woman over 
these letters, to make notes upon them, to write 
answers, then to do nothing the whole evening till 
midnight, but wait till she was sleepy; and tomorrow 
they would all day long be coming with Christmas 
greetings and asking for favours; and the day after 
tomorrow there would certainly be some scandal at 
the factory — some one would be beaten or would 
die of drinking too much vodka, and she would be 
fretted by pangs of conscience; and after the holidays 
Nazaritch would turn off some twenty of the work- 
people for absence from work, and all of the twenty 
would hang about at the front door, without their 
caps on, and she would be ashamed to go out to 
them, and they would be driven away like dogs. 
And all her acquaintances would say behind her back, 
and write to her in anonymous letters, that she was 
a millionaire and exploiter — that she was devour- 
ing other men’s lives and sucking the blood of the 
workers. 

Here there lay a heap of letters read through and 
laid aside already. They were all begging letters. 
They were from people who were hungry, drunken, 
dragged down by large families, sick, degraded, de- 
spised. . . . Anna Akimoyna had already noted on 
each letter, three roubles to be paid to one, five to 


A Woman’s Kingdom 89 


another; these letters would go the same day to the 
office, and next the distribution of assistance would 
take place, or, as the clerks used to say, the beasts 
would be fed. 

They would distribute also in small sums four hun- 
dred and seventy roubles — the interest on a sum be- 
queathed by the late Akim Ivanovitch for the relief 
of the poor and needy. There would be a hideous 
crush. From the gates to the doors of the office 
there would stretch a long file of strange people with 
brutal faces, in rags, numb with cold, hungry and 
already drunk, in husky voices calling down blessings 
upon Anna Akimovyna, their benefactress, and her 
parents: those at the back would press upon those in 
front, and those in front would abuse them with bad 
language. The clerk would get tired of the noise, 
the swearing, and the sing-song whining and bless- 
ing; would fly out and give some one a box on the 
ear to the delight of all. And her own people, the 
factory hands, who received nothing at Christmas 
but their wages, and had already spent every farthing 
of it, would stand in the middle of the yard, looking 
on and laughing — some enviously, others ironically. 

‘‘ Merchants, and still more their wives, are fon- 
der of beggars than they are of their own work- 
people,” thought Anna Akimoyna. “It’s always 
so.” 

Her eye fell upon the roll of money. It would 


go ‘The Party and Other Stories 


be nice to distribute that hateful, useless money 
among the workpeople tomorrow, but it did not do 
to give the workpeople anything for nothing, or they 
would demand it again next time. And what would 
be the good of fifteen hundred roubles when there 
were eighteen hundred workmen in the factory be- 
sides their wives and children? Or she might, per- 
haps, pick out one of the writers of those begging 
letters — some luckless man who had long ago lost 
all hope of anything better, and give him the fifteen 
hundred. The money would come upon the poor 
creature like a thunder-clap, and perhaps for the first 
time in his life he would feel happy. This idea 
struck Anna Akimovna as original and amusing, and 
it fascinated her. She took one letter at random out 
of the pile and read it. Some petty official called 
Tchalikov had long been out of a situation, was ill, 
and living in Gushtchin’s Buildings; his wife was in 
consumption, and he had five little girls. Anna 
Akimovna knew well the four-storeyed house, Gusht- 
chin’s Buildings, in which Tchalikov lived. Oh, it 
was a horrid, foul, unhealthy house! 

‘Well, I will give it to that Tchalikoy,” she de- 
cided. ‘I won’t send it; I had better take it myself 
to prevent unnecessary talk. Yes,” she reflected, as 
she put the fifteen hundred roubles in her pocket, 
‘and Pll have a look at them, and perhaps I can do 
something for the little girls.” 


A Woman’s Kingdom G1 


She felt light-hearted; she rang the bell and or- 
dered the horses to be brought round. 

When she got into the sledge it was past six o’clock 
in the evening. The windows in all the blocks of 
buildings were brightly lighted up, and that made 
the huge courtyard seem very dark: at the gates, 
and at the far end of the yard near the warehouses 
-and the workpeople’s barracks, electric lamps were 
gleaming. 

Anna Akimovna disliked and feared those huge 
dark buildings, warehouses, and barracks where the 
workmen lived. She had only once been in the main 
building since her father’s death. The high ceilings 
with iron girders; the multitude of huge, rapidly 
turning wheels, connecting straps and levers; the 
shrill hissing; the clank of steel; the rattle of the 
trolleys; the harsh puffing of steam; the faces — 
pale, crimson, or black with coal-dust; the shirts 
soaked with sweat; the gleam of steel, of copper, 
and of fire; the smell of oil and coal; and the 
draught, at times very hot and at times very cold — 
gave her an impression of hell. It seemed to her as 
though the wheels, the levers, and the hot hissing 
cylinders were trying to tear themselves away from 
their fastenings to crush the men, while the men, not 
hearing one another, ran about with anxious faces, 
and busied themselves about the machines, trying to 
stop their terrible movement. They showed Anna 


92 The Party and Other Stories 


Akimovna something and respectfully explained it to 
her. She remembered how in the forge a piece of 
red-hot iron was pulled out of the furnace; and how 
an old man with a strap round his head, and another, 
a young man in a blue shirt with a chain on his breast, 
and an angry face, probably one of the foremen, 
struck the piece of iron with hammers; and how the 
golden sparks had been scattered in all directions; 
and how, a little afterwards, they had dragged out a 
huge piece of sheet-iron with a clang. The old man 
had stood erect and smiled, while the young man had 
wiped his face with his sleeve and explained some- 
thing to her. And she remembered, too, how in 
another department an old man with one eye had 
been filing a piece of iron, and how the iron filings 
were scattered about; and how a red-haired man in 
black spectacles, with holes in his shirt, had been 
working at a lathe, making something out of a piece 
of steel: the lathe roared and hissed and squeaked, 
and Anna Akimovna felt sick at the sound, and it 
seemed as though they were boring into her ears. 
She looked, listened, did not understand, smiled gra- 
ciously, and felt ashamed. To get hundreds of 
thousands of roubles from a business which one does 
not understand and cannot like — how strange it is! 

And she had not once been in the workpeople’s 
barracks. There, she was told, it was damp; there 
were bugs, debauchery, anarchy. It was an aston- 


A Woman’s Kingdom 93 


_ ishing thing: a thousand roubles were spent annually 
on keeping the barracks in good order, yet, if she 
were to believe the anonymous letters, the condition 
of the workpeople was growing worse and worse 
every year. 

“There was more order in my father’s day,” 
thought Anna Akimovna, as she drove out of the 
yard, ‘‘ because he had been a workman himself. I 
know nothing about it and only do silly things.” 

She felt depressed again, and was no longer glad 
that she had come, and the thought of the lucky man 
upon whom fifteen hundred roubles would drop from 
heaven no longer struck her as original and amusing. 
To go to some Tchalikov or other, when at home a 
business worth a million was gradually going to 
pieces and being ruined, and the workpeople in the 
barracks were living worse than convicts, meant 
doing something silly and cheating her conscience. 
Along the highroad and across the fields near it, 
workpeople from the neighbouring cotton and paper 
factories were walking towards the lights of the 
town. There was the sound of talk and laughter in 
the frosty air. Anna Akimovna looked at the 
women and young people, and she suddenly felt a 
longing for a plain rough life among a crowd. She 
recalled vividly that far-away time when she used to 
be called Anyutka, when she was a little girl and used 

to lie under the same quilt with her mother, while a 


94. The Party and Other Stories 


washerwoman who lodged with them used to wash 
clothes in the next room; while through the thin walls 
there came from the neighbouring flats sounds of 
laughter, swearing, children’s crying, the accordion, 
and the whirr of carpenters’ lathes and sewing-ma- 
chines; while her father, Akim Ivanovitch, who was 
clever at almost every craft, would be soldering 
something near the stove, or drawing or planing, 
taking no notice whatever of the noise and stuffiness. 
And she longed to wash, to iron, to run to the shop 
and the tavern as she used to do every day when she 
lived with her mother. She ought to have been a 
work-girl and not the factory owner! Her big 
house with its chandeliers and pictures; her footman 
Mishenka, with his glossy moustache and swallow- 
tail coat; the devout and dignified Varvarushka, and 
smooth-tongued Agafyushka; and the young people 
of both sexes who came almost every day to ask her 
for money, and with whom she always for some rea- 
son felt guilty; and the clerks, the doctors, and the 
ladies who were charitable at her expense, who flat- 
tered her and secretly despised her for her humble 
origin — how wearisome and alien it all was to her! 

Here was the railway crossing and the city gate; 
then came houses alternating with kitchen gardens; 
and at last the broad street where stood the re- 
nowned Gushtchin’s Buildings. The street, usually 
quiet, was now on Christmas Eve full of life and 


A Woman’s Kingdom 95 


movement. The eating-houses and beer-shops were 
noisy. If some one who did not belong to that 
quarter but lived in the centre of the town had driven 
through the street now, he would have noticed noth- 
ing but dirty, drunken, and abusive people; but Anna - 
Akimovna, who had lived in those parts all her life, | 
was constantly recognizing in the crowd her own 
father or mother or uncle. Her father was a soft 
fluid character, a little fantastical, frivolous, and 
irresponsible. He did not care for money, respect- 
ability, or power; he used to say that a working man 
had no time to keep the holy-days and go to church; 
and if it had not been for his wife, he would probably 
never have gone to confession, taken the sacrament 
or kept the fasts. While her uncle, Ivan Ivano- 
vitch, on the contrary, was like flint; in everything 
relating to religion, politics, and morality, he was 
harsh and relentless, and kept a strict watch, not only 
over himself, but also over all his servants and ac- 
quaintances. God forbid that one should go into his 
room without crossing oneself before the ikon! 
The luxurious mansion in which Anna Akimovna 
now lived he had always kept locked up, and only 
opened it on great holidays for important visitors, 
while he lived himself in the office, in a little room 
covered with ikons. He had leanings towards the 
Old Believers, and was continually entertaining 

priests and bishops of the old ritual, though he had 


96 The Party and Other Stories 


been christened, and married, and had buried his 
wife in accordance with the Orthodox rites. He 
disliked Akim, his only brother and his heir, for his 
frivolity, which he called simpleness and folly, and 
for his indifference to religion. He treated him as 
an inferior, kept him in the position of a workman, 
paid him sixteen roubles a month. Akim addressed 
his brother with formal respect, and on the days of 
asking forgiveness, he and his wife and daughter 
bowed down to the ground before him. But three 
years before his death Ivan Ivanovitch had drawn 
closer to his brother, forgave his shortcomings, and 
ordered him to get a governess for Anyutka. 

There was a dark, deep, evil-smelling archway un- 
der Gushtchin’s Buildings; there was a sound of men 
coughing near the walls. Leaving the sledge in the 
street, Anna Akimovna went in at the gate and there 
inquired how to get to No. 46 to see a clerk called 
Tchalikov. She was directed to the furthest door 
on the right in the third story. And in the court- 
yard and near the outer door, and even on the stairs, 
there was still the same loathsome smell as under the 
archway. In Anna Akimoyna’s childhood, when her 
father was a simple workman, she used to live in a 
building like that, and afterwards, when their cir- 
cumstances were different, she had often visited them 
in the character of a Lady Bountiful. The narrow 


A Woman’s Kingdom 97 


_ stone staircase with its steep dirty steps, with land- 
ings at every story; the greasy swinging lanterns; 
the stench; the troughs, pots, and rags on the land- 
ings near the doors,— all this had been familiar to 
her long ago. . . . One door was open, and within { 
could be seen Need tailors in caps, sewing. Anna‘ 
Akimovna met people on the stairs, but it never 
entered her head that people might be rude to her. 
She was no more afraid of peasants or workpeople, 
drunk or sober, than of her acquaintances of the ed- 
ucated class. 

There was no entry at No. 46; the door opened 
straight into the kitchen. Asa rule the dwellings of 
workmen and mechanics smell of varnish, tar, hides, 
smoke, according to the occupation of the tenant; 
the dwellings of persons of noble or official class who 
have come to poverty may be known by a peculiar 
rancid, sour smell. This disgusting smell enveloped 
Anna Akimovyna on all sides, and as yet she was only 
on the threshold. A man in a black coat, no doubt 
Tchalikov himself, was sitting in a corner at the 
table with his back to the door, and with him were 
five little girls. The eldest, a broad-faced thin girl 
with a comb in her hair, looked about fifteen, while 
the youngest, a chubby child with hair that stood up 
like a hedge-hog, was not more than three. All the 
six were eating. Near the stove stood a very thin 


98 The Party and Other Stories 


little woman with a yellow face, far gone in preg- 
nancy. She was wearing a skirt and a white blouse, 
and had an oven fork in her hand. 

‘I did not expect you to be so disobedient, Liza,” 
the man was saying reproachfully. ‘Fie, fie, for 
shame! Do you want papa to whip you — eh?” 

Seeing an unknown lady in the doorway, the thin 
woman started, and put down the fork. 

‘‘ Vassily Nikititch!”’ she cried, after a pause, in 
a hollow voice, as though she could not believe her 
eyes. 

The man looked round and jumped up. He was 
a flat-chested, bony man with narrow shoulders and 
sunken temples. His eyes were small and hollow 
with dark rings round them, he had a wide mouth, 
and a long nose like a bird’s beak —a little bit bent 
to the right. His beard was parted in the mid- 
dle, his moustache was shaven, and this made him 
look more like a hired footman than a government 
clerk. 

“Does Mr. Tchalikov live here?” asked Anna 
Akimoyna. 

‘Yes, madam,” Tchalikov answered severely, but 
immediately recognizing Anna Akimoyna, he cried: 
‘““Anna Akimovna!” and all at once he gasped and 
clasped his hands as though in terrible alarm. 
“ Benefactress! ” 

With a moan he ran to her, grunting inarticulately 


& BS tet te OY, a we Eh TLEY ED Dy 


NEWFPCRT. R- I. 
A Woman’s Kingdom 99 


as though he were paralyzed — there was cabbage 
on his beard and he smelt of vodka — pressed his 
forehead to her muff, and seemed as though he were 
in a swoon. 

“Your hand, your holy hand!” he brought out 
breathlessly. ‘It’s a dream, a glorious dream! 
Children, awaken me! ”’ 

He turned towards the table and said in a sobbing 
voice, shaking his fists: 

“Providence has heard us! Our saviour, our 
angel, has come! We are saved! Children, down 
on your knees! on your knees!” 

MadameTchalikov and the little girls, except the 
youngest one, began for some reason rapidly clearing 
the table. 

“You wrote that your wife was very ill,” said 
Anna Akimovna, and she felt ashamed and an- 
noyed. “J am not going to give them the fifteen 
hundred,” she thought. 

“ Here she is, my wife,” said Tchalikov in a thin 
feminine voice, as though his tears had gone to his 
head. ‘“‘ Here she is, unhappy creature! With one 
foot inthe grave! But we do not complain, madam. 
Better death than such a life. Better die, unhappy 
woman!” 

‘‘ Why is he playing these antics?’ thought Anna 
Akimovna with annoyance. ‘One can see at once 

he is used to dealing with merchants.” 


100 The Party and Other Stories 


x Speak to me like a human being,” she said. “I> 
don’t care for farces.” 

“Yes, madam; five bereaved children round their 
mother’s coffin with funeral candles—that’s a 
farce? Eh?” said Tchalikoy bitterly, and turned 
away. 

‘“* Hold your tongue,” whispered his wife, and she 
pulled at his sleeve. ‘‘ The place has not been tidied 
up, madam,” she said, addressing Anna Akimoyna; 
‘“‘ please excuse it . . . you know what it is where 
there are children. A crowded hearth, but har- 
mony.” 

‘““T am not going to give them the fifteen hun- 
dred,” Anna Akimoyna thought again. 

And to escape as soon as possible from these 
people and from the sour smell, she brought out her 
purse and made up her mind to leave them twenty- 
five roubles, not more; but she suddenly felt ashamed 
that she had come so far and disturbed people for 
so little. 

‘‘ If you give me paper and ink, I will write at once 
to a doctor who is a friend of mine to come and see 
you,” she said, flushing red. “He is a very good 
doctor. And I will leave you some money for med- 
icine.” 

Madame Tchalikov was hastening to wipe the 
table. 

‘It’s messy here! What are you doing?” hissed 


A Woman’s Kingdom 101 


Tchalikov, looking at her wrathfully. ‘“ Take her 
to the lodger’s room! I make bold to ask you, 
madam, to step into the lodger’s room,” he said, 
addressing Anna Akimoyna. ‘It’s clean there.” 

“ Osip Llyitch told us not to go into his room! ” 
said one of the little girls, sternly. 

But they had already led Anna Akimovna out of 
the kitchen, through a narrow passage room between 
two bedsteads: it was evident from the arrangement 
of the beds that in one two slept lengthwise, and in 
the other three slept across the bed. In the lodger’s 
room, that came next, it really was clean. A neat- 
looking bed with a red woollen quilt, a pillow in a 
white pillow-case, even a slipper for the watch, a 
table covered with a hempen cloth and on it, an ink- 
stand of milky-looking glass, pens, paper, photo- 
graphs in frames — everything as it ought to be; and 
another table for rough work, on which lay tidily 
arranged a watchmaker’s tools and watches taken 
to pieces. On the walls hung hammers, pliers, awls, 
chisels, nippers, and so on, and there were three 
hanging clocks which were ticking; one was a big 
clock with thick weights, such as one sees in eating- 
houses. 

As she sat down to write the letter, Anna Aki- 
movna saw facing her on the table the photographs 
of her father and of herself. That surprised 

her. 


102 The Party and Other Stories 


‘Who lives here with you?” she asked. 

‘“‘Our lodger, madam, Pimenov. He works in 
your factory.” 

‘Oh, I thought he must be a watchmaker.” 

‘“‘He repairs watches privately, in his leisure 
hours. He is an amateur.” 

After a brief silence during which nothing could 
be heard but the ticking of the clocks and the scratch- 
ing of the pen on the paper, Tchalikov heaved a sigh 
and said ironically, with indignation: 

‘Tt’s a true saying: gentle birth and a grade in the 
service won’t put a coat on your back. A cockade 
in your cap and a noble title, but nothing to eat. To 
my thinking, if any one of humble class helps the 
poor he is much more of a gentleman than any 
Tchalikov who has sunk into poverty and vice.” 

To flatter Anna Akimoyna, he uttered a few more 
disparaging phrases about his gentle birth, and it was 
evident that he was humbling himself because he con- 
sidered himself superior to her. Meanwhile she 
had finished her letter and had sealed it up. The 
letter would be thrown away and the money would 
not be spent on medicine — that she knew, but she 
put twenty-five roubles on the table all the same, and 
after a moment’s thought, added two more red notes. 
She saw the wasted, yellow hand of Madame Tchali- 
koy, like the claw of a hen, dart out and clutch the 
money tight. 


A Woman’s Kingdom 103 


“You have graciously given this for medicine,” 
said Tchalikov in a quivering voice, “‘ but hold out 
a helping hand to me also . . . and the children!” 
he added with a sob. “ My unhappy children! I 
am not afraid for myself; it is for my daughters I 
fear! It’s the hydra of vice that I fear!” 

Trying to open her purse, the catch of which had 
-gone wrong, Anna Akimovna was confused and 
turned red. She felt ashamed that people should be 
standing before her, looking at her hands and wait- 
ing, and most likely at the bottom of their hearts 
laughing at her. At that instant some one came 
into the kitchen and stamped his feet, knocking the 
snow off. 

“The lodger has come in,” said Madame Tchal- 
ikov. 

Anna Akimoyna grew even more confused. She 
did not want any one from the factory to find her in 
this ridiculous position. As ill-luck would have it, 
the lodger came in at the very moment when, having 
broken the catch at last, she was giving Tchalikov 
some notes, and Tchalikov, grunting as though he 
were paraylzed, was feeling about with his lips where 
he could kiss her. In the lodger she recognized the 
workman who had once clanked the sheet-iron before 
her in the forge, and had explained things to her. 
Evidently he had come in straight from the factory; 

his face looked dark and grimy, and on one cheek 


104 The Party and Other Stories 


near his nose was a smudge of soot. His hands 
were perfectly black, and his unbelted shirt shone 
with oil and grease. He was a man of thirty, of 
medium height, with black hair and broad shoulders, 
and a look of great physical strength. At the first 
glance Anna Akimovna perceived that he must be a 
foreman, who must be receiving at least thirty-five 
roubles a month, and a stern, loud-voiced man who 
struck the workmen in the face; all this was evident 
from his manner of standing, from the attitude he 
involuntarily assumed at once on seeing a lady in his 
room, and most of all from the fact that he did not 
wear top-boots, that he had breast pockets, and a 
pointed, picturesquely clipped beard. Her father, 
Akim Ivanovitch, had been the brother of the fac- 
tory owner, and yet he had been afraid of foremen 
like this lodger and had tried to win their favour. 

“Excuse me for having come in here in your 
absence,” said Anna Akimovna. 

The workman looked at her in surprise, smiled in 
confusion and did not speak. 

“You must speak a little louder, madam. . .” 
said Tchalikov softly. ‘‘ When Mr. Pimenov comes 
home from the factory in the evenings he is a little 
hard of hearing.” 

But Anna Akimovna was by now relieved that 
there was nothing more for her to do here; she 


A Woman’s Kingdom 105 


nodded to them and went rapidly out of the room. 
Pimenov went to see her out. 

‘Have you been long in our employment?” she 
asked in a loud voice, without turning to him. 

“From nine years old. I entered the factory in 
your uncle’s time.” 

‘“That’s a long while! My uncle and my father 
knew all the workpeople, and I know hardly any of 
them. I had seen you before, but I did not know 
your name was Pimenov.” 

Anna Akimovna felt a desire to justify herself 
before him, to pretend that she had just given the 
money not seriously, but as a joke. 

‘* Oh, this poverty,” she sighed. ‘‘ We give char- 
ity on holidays and working days, and still there is 
no sense in it. I believe it is useless to help such 
people as this Tchalikoy.” 

“ Of course it is useless,” he agreed. ‘‘ However 
much you give him, he will drink it all away. And 
now the husband and wife will be snatching it from 
one another and fighting all night,” he added with a 
laugh. 

‘Yes, one must admit that our philanthropy is 
useless, boring, and absurd. But still, you must 
agree, one can’t sit with one’s hand in one’s lap; one 
must do something. What’s to be done with the 
Tchalikovs, for instance? ” 


106 The Party and Other Stories 


She turned to Pimenov and stopped, expecting 
an answer from him; he, too, stopped and slowly, 
without speaking, shrugged his shoulders. Obvi- 
ously he knew what to do with the Tchalikovs, but 
the treatment would have been so coarse and inhu- 
man that he did not venture to put it into words. 
And the Tchalikovs were to him so utterly uninter- 
esting and worthless, that a moment later he had for- 
gotten them; looking into Anna Akimoyna’s eyes, he 
smiled with pleasure, and his face wore an expres- 
sion as though he were dreaming about something 
very pleasant. Only, now standing close to him, 
Anna Akimovna saw from his face, and especially 
from his eyes, how exhausted and sleepy he was. 

“Here, I ought to give him the fifteen hundred 
roubles!’ she thought, but for some reason this 
idea seemed to her incongruous and insulting to 
Pimenoy. 

“Tam sure you are aching all over after your 
work, and you come to the door with me,” she said 
as they went down the stairs. ‘‘ Go home.” 

But he did not catch her words. When they 
came out into the street, he ran on ahead, unfastened 
the cover of the sledge, and helping Anna Akimoyna ' 
in, said: 

‘“T wish you a happy Christmas! ” 


A Woman’s Kingdom 107 


II 


CurRIstTMAS MORNING 


“They have left off ringing ever so long! It’s 
dreadful; you won’t be there before the service is 
over! Get up!” ? 

“Two horses are racing, racing . . .”’ said Anna 
Akimoyna, and she woke up; before her, candle in 
hand, stood her maid, red-haired Masha. ‘ Well, 
what is it?” 

“Service is over already,” said Masha with de- 
spair. “I have called you three times! Sleep till 
evening for me, but you told me yourself to call 
you!” 

Anna Akimoyna raised herself on her elbow and 
glanced towards the window. It was still quite dark 
outside, and only the lower edge of the window- 
frame was white with snow. She could hear a low, 
mellow chime of bells; it was not the parish church, 
but somewhere further away. [he watch on the 
little table showed three minutes past six. 

“ Very well, Masha. ...In three minutes... 
said Anna Akimoyna in an imploring voice, and she 
snuggled under the bed-clothes. 

She imagined the snow at the front door, the 
sledge, the dark sky, the crowd in the church, and 


” 


108 The Party and Other Stories 


the smell of juniper, and she felt dread at the 
thought; but all the same, she made up her mind 
that she would get up at once and go to early service. 
And while she was warm in bed and struggling with 
sleep — which seems, as though to spite one, partic- 
ularly sweet when one ought to get up — and while 
she had visions of an immense garden on a mountain 
and then Gushtchin’s Buildings, she was worried all 
the time by the thought that she ought to get up that 
very minute and go to church. 

But when she got up it was quite light, and it 
turned out to be half-past nine. There had been a 
heavy fall of snow in the night; the trees were 
clothed in white, and the air was particularly light, 
transparent, and tender, so that when Anna Akim- 
ovna looked out of the window her first impulse was 
to draw a deep, deep breath. And when she had 
washed, a relic of far-away childish feelings — joy 
that today was Christmas — suddenly stirred within 
her; after that she felt light-hearted, free and pure 
in soul, as though her soul, too, had been washed or 
plunged in the white snow. Masha came in, dressed 
up and tightly laced, and wished her a happy Christ- 


‘ 


mas; then she spent a long time combing her mis- ' 


tress’s hair and helping her to dress. The fragrance 
and feeling of the new, gorgeous, splendid dress, its 
faint rustle, and the smell of fresh scent, excited 
Anna Akimoyna. 


A Woman’s Kingdom 109 


“Well, it’s Christmas,” she said gaily to Masha. 
““ Now we will try our fortunes.” 

“Last year, I was to marry an old man. It 
turned up three times the same.” 

** Well, God is merciful.” 

“Well, Anna Akimoyna, what I think is, rather 
than neither one thing nor the other, I’d marry an 
_ old man,” said Masha mournfully, and she heaved a 
sigh. “I am turned twenty; it’s no joke.” 

Every one in the house knew that red-haired 
Masha was in love with Mishenka, the footman, and 
this genuine, passionate, hopeless love had already 
lasted three years. 

“Come, don’t talk nonsense,’ Anna Akimovna 
consoled her. ‘I am going on for thirty, but I am 
still meaning to marry a young man.” 

While his mistress was dressing, Mishenka, in a 
new swallow-tail and polished boots, walked about 
the hall and drawing-room and waited for her to 
come out, to wish her a happy Christmas. He had 
a peculiar walk, stepping softly and delicately; look- 
ing at his feet, his hands, and the bend of his head, 
it might be imagined that he was not simply walking, 
but learning to dance the first figure of a quadrille. 
In spite of his fine velvety moustache and handsome, 
rather flashy appearance, he was steady, prudent, 
‘and devout as an old man. He said his prayers, 
bowing down to the ground, and liked burning in- 


110 The Party and Other Stories 


cense in his room. He respected people of wealth 
and rank and had a reverence for them; he despised 
poor people, and all who came to ask favours of any 
kind, with all the strength of his cleanly flunkey soul. 
Under his starched shirt he wore a flannel, winter 
and summer alike, being very careful of his health; 
his ears were plugged with cotton-wool. 

When Anna Akimovna crossed the hall with 
Masha, he bent his head downwards a little and said 
in his agreeable, honeyed voice: 

“I have the honour to congratulate you, Anna 
Akimovna, on the most solemn feast of the birth of 
our Lord.” 

Anna Akimovna gave him five roubles, while poor 
Masha was numb with ecstasy. His holiday get-up, 
his attitude, his voice, and what he said, impressed 
her by their beauty and elegance; as she followed her 
mistress she could think of nothing, could see noth- 
ing, she could only smile, first blissfully and then bit- 
terly. The upper story of the house was called the 
best or visitors’ half, while the name of the business 
part — old people’s or simply women’s part — was 
given to the rooms on the lower story where Aunt 
Tatyana Ivanovna kept house. In the upper part 
the gentry and educated visitors were entertained; in 
the lower story, simpler folk and the aunt’s personal 
friends. Handsome, plump, and healthy, still 
young and fresh, and feeling she had on a magnifi- 


A Woman’s Kingdom 111 


cent dress which seemed to her to diffuse a sort of 
radiance all about her, Anna Akimovna went down 
to the lower story. Here she was met with re- 
proaches for forgetting God now that she was so 
highly educated, for sleeping too late for the service, 
and for not coming downstairs to break the fast, and 
they all clasped their hands and exclaimed with per- 
_ fect sincerity that she was lovely, wonderful; and she 
believed it, laughed, kissed them, gave one a rouble, 
another three or five according to their position. 
She liked being downstairs. Wherever one looked 
there were shrines, ikons, little lamps, portraits of 
ecclesiastical personages—the place smelt of 
monks; there was a rattle of knives in the kitchen, 
and already a smell of something savoury, exceed- 
ingly appetizing, was pervading all the rooms. The 
yellow-painted floors shone, and from the doors 
narrow rugs with bright blue stripes ran like little 
paths to the ikon corner, and the sunshine was simply 
pouring in at the windows. 

In the dining-room some old women, strangers, 
were sitting; in Varvarushka’s room, too, there were 
old women, and with them a deaf and dumb girl, who 
seemed abashed about something and kept saying, 
“ Bli, bli! ... Two skinny-looking little girls 
who had been brought out of the orphanage for 
Christmas came up to kiss Anna Akimovna’s hand, 
and stood before her transfixed with admiration of 


112 The Party and Other Stories 


her splendid dress; she noticed that one of the girls - 
squinted, and in the midst of her light-hearted holi- 
day mood she felt a sick pang at her heart at the 
thought that young men would despise the girl, and 
that she would never marry. In the cook Agafya’s 
room, five huge peasants in new shirts were sitting 
round the samovar; these were not workmen from 
the factory, but relations of the cook. Seeing Anna 
Akimovna, all the peasants jumped up from their 
seats, and from regard for decorum, ceased munch- 
ing, though their mouths were full. The cook 
Stepan, in a white cap, with a knife in his hand, came 
into the room and gave her his greetings; porters in 
high felt boots came in, and they, too, offered their 
greetings. The water-carrier peeped in with icicles 
on his beard, but did not venture to come in. 

Anna Akimovna walked through the rooms fol- 
lowed by her retinue—the aunt, Varvarushka, 
Nikandrovna, the sewing-maid Marfa Petroyna, 
and the downstairs Masha. Varvarushka —a tall, 
thin, slender woman, taller than any one in the 
house, dressed all in black, smelling of cypress and 
coffee — crossed herself in each room before the 
ikon, bowing down from the waist. And whenever 
one looked at her one was reminded that she had 
already prepared her shroud and that lottery tickets 
were hidden away by her in the same box. 

‘“Anyutinka, be merciful at Christmas,” she said, 


A Woman’s Kingdom rakes 


opening the door into the kitchen. ‘“ Forgive him, 
bless the man! Have done with it!” 

The coachman Panteley, who had been dismissed 
for drunkenness in November, was on his knees in 
the middle of the kitchen. He was a good-natured 
man, but he used to be unruly when he was drunk, 
and could not go to sleep, but persisted in wandering 
about the buildings and shouting in a threatening 
voice, “ I know all about it!’ Now from his beefy 
and bloated face and from his bloodshot eyes it could 
be seen that he had been drinking continually from 
November till Christmas. 

“ Forgive me, Anna Akimovyna,” he brought out 
in a hoarse voice, striking his forehead on the floor 
and showing his bull-like neck. 

“‘ It was Auntie dismissed you; ask her.” 

“ What about auntie?” said her aunt, walking 
into the kitchen, breathing heavily; she was very 
stout, and on her bosom one might have stood a 
tray of teacups and a samovar. “ What about 
auntie now? You are mistress here, give your own 
orders; though these rascals might be all dead for 
all I care. Come, get up, you hog!” she shouted 
at Panteley, losing patience. ‘‘ Get out of my sight! 
It’s the last time I forgive you, but if you transgress 
again — don’t ask for mercy!” 

Then they went into the dining-room to coffee. 
But they had hardly sat down, when the downstairs 


114. The Party and Other Stories 


Masha rushed headlong in, saying with horror, 
“The singers!” And ran back again. They 
heard some one blowing his nose, a low bass cough, 
and footsteps that sounded like horses’ iron-shod 
hoofs tramping about the entry near the hall. For 
half a minute all was hushed. . . . The singers 
burst out so suddenly and loudly that every one 
started. While they were singing, the priest from 
the almshouses with the deacon and the sexton ar- 
rived. Putting on the stole, the priest slowly said 
that when they were ringing for matins it was snow- 
ing and not cold, but that the frost was sharper to- 
wards morning, God bless it! and now there must 
be twenty degrees of frost. 

‘“Many people maintain, though, that winter is 
healthier than summer,” said the deacon; then im- 
mediately assumed an austere expression and 
chanted after the priest. “Thy Birth, O Christ 
OUT Orda 

Soon the priest from the workmen’s hospital came 
with the deacon, then the Sisters from the hospital, 
children from the orphanage, and then singing could 
be heard almost uninterruptedly. ‘They sang, had 
lunch, and went away. 

About twenty men from the factory came to offer 
their Christmas greetings. They were only the 
foremen, mechanicians, and their assistants, the pat- 
tern-makers, the accountant, and so on — all of good 


A Woman’s Kingdom 115 


appearance, in new black coats. They were all first- 
rate men, as it were picked men; each one knew his 
value — that is, knew that if he lost his berth to- 
day, people would be glad to take him on at another 
factory. Evidently they liked Auntie, as they be- 
haved freely in her presence and even smoked, and 
when they had all trooped in to have something to 
eat, the accountant put his arm round her immense 
waist. They were free-and-easy, perhaps, partly 
also because Varvarushka, who under the old mas- 
ters had wielded great power and had kept watch 
over the morals of the clerks, had now no authority 
whatever in the house; and perhaps because many of 
them still remembered the time when Auntie Tat- 
yana Ivanovna, whose brothers kept a strict hand 
over her, had been dressed like a simple peasant 
woman like Agafya, and when Anna Akimovna used 
to run about the yard near the factory buildings and 
every one used to call her Anyutya. 

The foremen ate, talked, and kept looking with 
amazement at Anna Akimovna, how she had grown 
up and how handsome she had become! But this 
elegant girl, educated by governesses and teachers, 
was a stranger to them; they could not understand 
her, and they instinctively kept closer to ‘‘ Auntie,” 
who called them by their names, continually pressed 
them to eat and drink, and, clinking glasses with 
them, had already drunk two wineglasses of rowan- 


116 The Party and Other Stories 


berry wine with them. Anna Akimovna was always. 
afraid of their thinking her proud, an upstart, or a 
crow in peacock’s feathers; and now while the fore- 
men were crowding round the food, she did not 
leave the dining-room, but took part in the conver- 
sation. She asked Pimenov, her acquaintance of 
the previous day: 

‘“‘ Why have you so many clocks in your room?” 

“TI mend clocks,’ he answered. ‘“‘I take the 
work up between times, on holidays, or when I can’t 
sleep.” 

“So if my watch goes wrong I can bring it to 
you to be repaired?’ Anna Akimoyna asked, laugh- 
ing. 

“To be sure, I will do it with pleasure,” said 
Pimenoy, and there was an expression of tender 
devotion in his face, when, not herself knowing 
why, she unfastened her magnificent watch from 
its chain and handed it to him; he looked at it 
in silence and gave it back. “To be sure, I will 
do it with pleasure,” he repeated. ‘‘I don’t mend 
watches now. My eyes are weak, and the doctors 
have forbidden me to do fine work. But for you 
I can make an exception.” 

‘Doctors talk nonsense,” said the accountant. 
They all laughed. ‘“ Don’t you believe them,” he 
went on, flattered by the laughing; “last year a 
tooth flew out of a cylinder and hit old Kalmykoy 


A Woman’s Kingdom re 


such a crack on the head that you could see his 
brains, and the doctor said he would die; but he is 
alive and working to this day, only he has taken 
to stammering since that mishap.” 

“Doctors do talk nonsense, they do, but not so 


much,” sighed Auntie. “ Pyotr Andreyitch, poor ' 


dear, lost his sight. Just like you, he used to work 
_ day in day out at the factory near the hot furnace, 
and he went blind. The eyes don’t like heat. But 
what are we talking about?” she said, rousing her- 
self. ‘‘ Come and have a drink. My best wishes 
for Christmas, my dears. I never drink with any 
one else, but I drink with you, sinful woman as I 
am. Please God!” 

Anna Akimovna fancied that after yesterday Pi- 
menoy despised her as a philanthropist, but was 
fascinated by her as a woman. She looked at him 
and thought that he behaved very charmingly and 
was nicely dressed. It is true that the sleeves of 
his coat were not quite long enough, and the coat 
itself seemed short-waisted, and his trousers were 
not wide and fashionable, but his tie was tied care- 
lessly and with taste and was not as gaudy as the 
others’. And he seemed to be a good-natured man, 
for he ate submissively whatever Auntie put on his 
plate. She remembered how black he had been the 
day before, and how sleepy, and the thought of it for 
some reason touched her. 


_— 


118 The Party and Other Stories 


When the men were preparing to go, Anna Aki- 
movna put out her hand to Pimenov. She wanted 
to ask him to come in sometimes to see her, with- 
out ceremony, but she did not know how to — her 
tongue would not obey her; and that they might not 
think she was attracted by Pimenoy, she shook hands 
with his companions, too. 

Then the boys from the school of which she was 
a patroness came. ‘They all had their heads closely 
cropped and all wore grey blouses of the same pat- 
tern. ‘The teacher —a tall, beardless young man 
with patches of red on his face — was visibly agi- 
tated as he formed the boys into rows; the boys 
sang in tune, but with harsh, disagreeable voices. 
The manager of the factory, Nazaritch, a bald, 
sharp-eyed Old Believer, could never get on with 
the teachers, but the one who was now anxiously 
waving his hands he despised and hated, though 
he could not have said why. He behaved rudely 
and condescendingly to the young man, kept back 
his salary, meddled with the teaching, and had finally 
tried to dislodge him by appointing, a fortnight be- 
fore Christmas, as porter to the school a drunken 
peasant, a distant relation of his wife’s, who dis- 
obeyed the teacher and said rude things to him be- 
fore the boys. 

Anna Akimovna was aware of all this, but she 
could be of no help, for she was afraid of Nazaritch 


A Woman’s Kingdom 119 


herself. Now she wanted at least to be very nice 
to the schoolmaster, to tell him she was very much 
pleased with him; but when after the singing he 
began apologizing for something in great confusion, 
and Auntie began to address him familiarly as she 
drew him without ceremony to the table, she felt, 
for some reason, bored and awkward, and giving 
- orders that the children should be given sweets, went 
upstairs. 

“In reality there is something cruel in these 
Christmas customs,” she said a little while after- 
wards, as it were to herself, looking out of window 
at the boys, who were flocking from the house to 
the gates and shivering with cold, putting their 
coats on as they ran. “At Christmas one wants 
to rest, to sit at home with one’s own people, and 
the poor boys, the teacher, and the clerks and fore- 
men, are obliged for some reason to go through the 
frost, then to offer their greetings, show their re- 
spect, be put to confusion . . .” 

Mishenka, who was standing at the door of the 
drawing-room and overheard this, said: 

“Tt has not come from us, and it will not end 
with us. Of course, I am not an educated man, 
Anna Akimovna, but I do understand that the poor 
must always respect the rich. It is well said, ‘God 
marks the rogue.’ In prisons, night refuges, and 
pot-houses you never see any but the poor, while 


120 The Party and Other Stories 


decent people, you may notice, are always rich. It 
has been said of the rich, ‘ Deep calls to deep.’ ” 

‘‘ You always express yourself so tediously and in- 
comprehensibly,” said Anna Akimovna, and she 
walked to the other end of the big drawing-room. 

It was only just past eleven. ‘The stillness of the 
big room, only broken by the singing that floated up 
from below, made her yawn. The bronzes, the 
albums, and the pictures on the walls, representing 
a ship at sea, cows in a meadow, and views of the 
Rhine, were so absolutely stale that her eyes simply 
glided over them without observing them. The 
holiday mood was already growing tedious. As be- 
fore, Anna Akimovna felt that she was beautiful, 
good-natured, and wonderful, but now it seemed to 
her that that was of no use to any one; it seemed to 
her that she did not know for whom and for what 
she had put on this expensive dress, too, and, as al- 
ways happened on all holidays, she began to be 
fretted by loneliness and the persistent thought that 
her beauty, her health, and her wealth, were a mere 
cheat, since she was not wanted, was of no use to 
any one, and nobody loved her. She walked through 
all the rooms, humming and looking out of window; 
stopping in the drawing-room, she could not resist 
beginning to talk to Mishenka. 

‘I don’t know what you think of yourself, 


A Woman’s Kingdom 121 


Misha,” she said, and heaved a sigh. “Really, 
God might punish you for it.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“You know what I mean. Excuse my meddling 
in your affairs. But it seems you are spoiling your 
own life out of obstinacy. You'll admit that it is 
high time you got married, and she is an excellent 
and deserving girl. You will never find any one 
better. She’s a beauty, clever, gentle, and devoted. 
. . . And her appearance! . . . If she belonged to 
our circle or a higher one, people would be falling in 
love with her for her red hair alone. See how beau- 
tifully her hair goes with her complexion. Oh, 
goodness! You don’t understand anything, and 
don’t know what you want,” Anna Akimovna said 
bitterly, and tears came into her eyes. ‘“‘ Poor girl, 
I am so sorry for her! I know you want a wife 
with money, but I have told you already I will give 
Masha a dowry.” 

Mishenka could not picture his future spouse in 
his imagination except as a tall, plump, substantial, 
pious woman, stepping like a peacock, and, for some 
reason, with a long shawl over her shoulders; while 
Masha was thin, slender, tightly laced, and walked 
with little steps, and, worst of all, she was too fasci- 
nating and at times extremely attractive to Mishenka, 
and that, in his opinion, was incongruous with matri- 


122 The Party and Other Stories 


mony and only in keeping with loose behaviour. 
When Anna Akimoyna had promised to give Masha 
a dowry, he had hesitated for a time; but once a poor 
student in a brown overcoat over his uniform, com- 
ing with a letter for Anna Akimovna, was fascinated 
by Masha, and could not resist embracing her near 
the hat-stand, and she had uttered a faint shriek; 
Mishenka, standing on the stairs above, had seen 
this, and from that time had begun to cherish a 
feeling of disgust for Masha. A poor student! 
Who knows, if she had been embraced by a rich 
student or an officer the consequences might have 
been different. 

“Why don’t you wish it?”? Anna Akimoyna 
asked. ‘* What more do you want?” 

Mishenka was silent and looked at the arm-chair 
fixedly, and raised his eyebrows. 

“Do you love some one else? ”’ 

Silence. The red-haired Masha came in with let- 
ters and visiting cards onatray. Guessing that they 
were talking about her, she blushed to tears. 

‘The postmen have come,” she muttered. ‘ And 
there is a clerk called [Tchalikov waiting below. He 
says you told him to come to-day for something.”’ 

‘“* What insolence! ” said Anna Akimovna, moved 
to anger. ‘‘I gave him no orders. Tell him to 
take himself off; say I am not at home! ”’ 

A ring was heard. It was the priests from her 


A Woman’s Kingdom 123 


parish. They were always shown into the aristo- 
cratic part of the house — that is, upstairs. After 
the priests, Nazaritch, the manager of the factory, 
came to pay his visit, and then the factory doctor; 
then Mishenka announced the inspector of the ele- 
mentary schools. Visitors kept arriving. 

When there was a moment free, Anna Akimovna 
sat down in a deep arm-chair in the drawing-room, 
_and shutting her eyes, thought that her loneliness was 
quite natural because she had not married and never 
would marry. ... But that was not her fault. 
Fate itself had flung her out of the simple working- 
class surroundings in which, if she could trust her 
memory, she had felt so snug and at home, into these 
immense rooms, where she could never think what 
to do with herself, and could not understand why so 
many people kept passing before her eyes. What 
was happening now seemed to her trivial, useless, 
since it did not and could not give her happiness for 
one minute. 

“Tf I could fall in love,” she thought, stretch- 
ing; the very thought of this sent a rush of warmth 
to her heart. ‘And if I could escape from the 
factory . .».”’ she mused, imagining how the weight 
of those factory buildings, barracks, and schools 
would roll off her conscience, roll off her mind... . 
Then she remembered her father, and thought if 
he had lived longer he would certainly have married 


124 Tha Party and Other Stories 


her to a working man — to Pimenoy, for instance. 
He would have told her to marry, and that would 
have been all about it. And it would have been a 
good thing; then the factory would have passed into 
capable hands. 

She pictured his curly head, his bold profile, his 
delicate, ironical lips and the strength, the tremen- 
dous strength, in his shoulders, in his arms, in his 
chest, and the tenderness with which he had looked 
at her watch that day. 

“Well,” she said, ‘‘ it would have been all right. 
. . . [would have married him.” 

‘““ Anna Akimovna,” said Mishenka, coming noise- 
lessly into the drawing-room. 

‘How you frightened me!” she said, trembling 
all over. “ What do you want?” 

“Anna Akimovna,” he said, laying his hand on 
his heart and raising his eyebrows, “you are my 
mistress and my benefactress, and no one but you 
can tell me what I ought to do about marriage, 
for you are as good as a mother to me. . . . But 
kindly forbid them to laugh and jeer at me down- 
stairs. [hey won't let me pass without it.” 

“‘ How do they jeer at you?” 

“They call me Mashenka’s Mishenka.” 

‘Pooh, what nonsense!” cried Anna Akimovna 
indignantly. “ How stupid you all are! What a 


A Woman’s Kingdom 125 


stupid you are, Misha! How sick I am of you! I 
can’t bear the sight of you.” 


III 
DINNER 


Just as the year before, the last to pay her visits 
were Krylin, an actual civil councillor, and Lyse- 
vitch, a well-known barrister. It was already dark 
when they arrived. Krylin, a man of sixty, with a 
wide mouth and with grey whiskers close to his ears, 
with a face like a lynx, was wearing a uniform with 
an Anna ribbon, and white trousers. He held Anna 
Akimoyna’s hand in both of his for a long while, 
looked intently in her face, moved his lips, and at 
last said, drawling upon one note: 

““T used to respect your uncle . . . and your fa- 
ther, and enjoyed the privilege of their friendship. 
Now | feel it an agreeable duty, as you see, to pre- 
sent my Christmas wishes to their honoured heiress 

. in spite of my infirmities and the distance I 
have to come. . . . And I am very glad to see you 
in good health.” 

The lawyer Lysevitch, a tall, handsome fair man, 
with a slight sprinkling of grey on his temples and 
beard, was distinguished by exceptionally elegant 


126 The Party and Other Stories 


manners; he walked with a swaying step, bowed as 
it were reluctantly, and shrugged his shoulders as 
he talked, and all this with an indolent grace, like 
a spoiled horse fresh from the stable. He was well 
fed, extremely healthy, and very well off; on one 
occasion he had won forty thousand roubles, but con- 
cealed the fact from his friends. He was fond of 
good fare, especially cheese, truffles, and grated rad- 
ish with hemp oil; while in Paris he had eaten, so he 
said, baked but unwashed guts. He spoke smoothly, 
fluently, without hesitation, and only occasionally, 
for the sake of effect, permitted himself to hesitate 
and snap his fingers as if picking up a word. He 
had long ceased to believe in anything he had to say 
in the law courts, or perhaps he did believe in it, but 
attached no kind of significance to it; it had all so 
long been familiar, stale, ordinary. . . . He be- 
lieved in nothing but what was original and unusual. 
A copy-book moral in an original form would move 
him to tears. Both his notebooks were filled with 
extraordinary expressions which he had read in va- 
rious authors; and when he needed to look up any 
expression, he would search nervously in both books, 
and usually failed to find it. Anna Akimoyna’s fa- 
ther had in a good-humoured moment ostentatiously 
appointed him legal adviser in matters concerning the 
factory, and had assigned him a salary of twelve 
thousand roubles. The legal business of the factory 


A Woman’s Kingdom 127 


had been confined to two or three trivial actions for 
recovering debts, which Lysevitch handed to his as- 
sistants. 

Anna Akimovna knew that he had nothing to do 
at the factory, but she could not dismiss him — she 
had not the moral courage; and besides, she was used 
to him. He used to call himself her legal adviser, 
_ and his salary, which he invariably sent for on the 
first of the month punctually, he used to call “ stern 
prose.” Anna Akimoyna knew that when, after her 
father’s death, the timber of her forest was sold for 
railway sleepers, Lysevitch had made more than fif- 
teen thousand out of the transaction, and had shared 
it with Nazaritch. When first she found out they 
had cheated her she had wept bitterly, but after- 
wards she had grown used to it. 

Wishing her a happy Christmas, and kissing both 
her hands, he looked her up and down, and frowned. 

“ You mustn’t,” he said with genuine disappoint- 
ment. ‘I have told you, my dear, you mustn’t! ”’ 

“What do you mean, Viktor Nikolaitch?” 

“‘T have told you you mustn’t get fat. All your 
family have an unfortunate tendency to grow fat. 
You mustn't,” he repeated in an imploring voice, and 
kissed her hand. ‘‘ You are so handsome! You 
are so splendid! Here, your Excellency, let me in- 
troduce the one woman in the world whom I have 
ever seriously loved.” 


128 — The SParty cand Other Stories 


‘There is nothing surprising in that. To know 
Anna Akimovyna at your age and not to be in love 
with her, that would be impossible.” 

‘“‘T adore her,” the lawyer continued with perfect 
sincerity, but with his usual indolent grace. “I love 
her, but not because I am a man and she is a woman. . 
When I am with her I always feel as though she be- 
longs to some third sex, and I to a fourth, and we 
float away together into the domain of the subtlest 
shades, and there we blend into the spectrum. Le- 
conte de Lisle defines such relations better than any 
one. He has a superb passage, a marvellous pas- 
Sage cro 

Lysevitch rummaged in one notebook, then in the 
other, and, not finding the quotation, subsided. 
They began talking of the weather, of the opera, of 
the arrival, expected shortly, of Duse. Anna Aki- 
movna remembered that the year before Lysevitch 
and, she fancied, Krylin had dined with her, and 
now when they were getting ready to go away, she 
began with perfect sincerity pointing out to them in 
an imploring voice that as they had no more visits 
to pay, they ought to remain to dinner with her. 
After some hesitation the visitors agreed. 

In addition to the family dinner, consisting of 
cabbage soup, sucking pig, goose with apples, and 
so on, a so-called ‘‘ French” or ‘‘ chef’s”’ dinner 


A Woman’s Kingdom 129 


used to be prepared in the kitchen on great holidays, 
in case any visitor in the upper story wanted a meal. 
When they heard the clatter of crockery in the dining- 
room, Lysevitch began to betray a noticeable excite- 
ment; he rubbed his hands, shrugged his shoulders, 
screwed up his eyes, and described with feeling what 
dinners her father and uncle used to give at one 
time, and a marvellous matelote of turbots the cook 
here could make: it was not a matelote, but a veri- 
table revelation! He was already gloating over the 
dinner, already eating it in imagination and enjoying 
it. When Anna Akimovna took his arm and led 
him to the dining-room, he tossed off a glass of vodka 
and put a piece of salmon in his mouth; he positively 
purred with pleasure. He munched loudly, disgust- 
ingly, emitting sounds from his nose, while his eyes 
grew oily and rapacious. 

The hors d’wuvres were superb; among other 
things, there were fresh white mushrooms stewed 
in cream, and sauce provencale made of fried oys- 
ters and crayfish, strongly flavoured with some bitter 
pickles. The dinner, consisting of elaborate holiday 
dishes, was excellent, and so were the wines. Mi- 
shenka waited at table with enthusiasm. When he 
laid some new dish on the table and lifted the shin- 
ing cover, or poured out the wine, he did it with 
the solemnity of a professor of black magic, and, 


130 The Party and Other Stories 


looking at his face and his movements suggesting 
the first figure of a quadrille, the lawyer thought 
several times, ‘‘ What a fool!” 

After the third course Lysevitch said, turning to 
Anna Akimoyna: 

“The fin de siécle woman — I mean when she is 
young, and of course wealthy — must be independ- 
ent, clever, elegant, intellectual, bold, and a little 
depraved. Depraved within limits, a little; for ex- 
cess, you know, is wearisome. You ought not to 
vegetate, my dear; you ought not to live like every 
one else, but to get the full savour of life, and a 
slight flavour of depravity is the sauce of life. 
Revel among flowers of intoxicating fragrance, 
breathe the perfume of musk, eat hashish, and best 
of all, love, love, love. . . . To begin with, in your 
place I would set up seven lovers — one for each day 
of the week; and one I would call Monday, one 
Tuesday, the third Wednesday, and so on, so that 
each might know his day.” 

This conversation troubled Anna Akimoyna; she 
ate nothing and only drank a glass of wine. 

‘Let me speak at last,” she said. ‘‘ For myself 
personally, I can’t conceive of love without family 
life. I am lonely, lonely as the moon in the sky, 
and a waning moon, too; and whatever you may say, 
I am convinced, I feel that this waning can only be 
restored by love in its ordinary sense. It seems to 


A Woman’s Kingdom 134 


me that such love would define my duties, my work, 
make clear my conception of life. I want from love 
peace of soul, tranquillity; I want the very opposite 
of musk, and spiritualism, and fin de siécle . . . in 
short ’— she grew embarrassed —‘‘ a husband and 
children.” 

“You want to be married? Well, you can do 
that, too,” Lysevitch assented. ‘‘ You ought to 
have all experiences: marriage, and jealousy, and 
the sweetness of the first infidelity, and even chil- 
dren. . . . But make haste and live — make haste, 
my dear: time is passing; it won’t wait.” 

“ Yes, I'll go and get married!” she said, looking 
angrily at his well-fed, satisfied face. ‘I will marry 
in the simplest, most ordinary way and be radiant 
with happiness. And, would you believe it, I will 
marry some plain working man, some mechanic or 
draughtsman.” 

‘““ There is no harm in that, either. The Duchess 
Josiana loved Gwinplin, and that was permissible 
for her because she was a grand duchess. Every- 
thing is permissible for you, too, because you are 
an exceptional woman: if, my dear, you want to 
love a negro or an Arab, don’t scruple; send for a \ 
negro. Don’t deny yourself anything. You ought 
to be as bold as your desires; don’t fall short of 
them.” 

“Can it be so hard to understand me?’”’ Anna 


132 The Party and Other Stories 


Akimovna asked with amazement, and her eyes were 
bright with tears. ‘“* Understand, I have an immense 
business on my hands — two thousand workmen, for 
whom I must answer before God. The men who 
work for me grow blind and deaf. I am afraid to 
go on like this; I am afraid! I am wretched, and 
you have the cruelty to talk to me of negroes and 

. and you smile!” Anna Akimovna brought 
her fist down on the table. ‘‘ To go on living the 
life I am living now, or to marry some one as idle 
and incompetent as myself, would be a crime. I 
can’t go on living like this,” she said hotly, “I can- 
not!” 

““How handsome she is!” said Lysevitch, fasci- 
nated by her. ‘‘ My God, how handsome she is! 
But why are you angry, my dear? Perhaps I am 
wrong; but surely you don’t imagine that if, for the 
sake of ideas for which I have the deepest respect, 
you renounce the joys of life and lead a dreary exist- 
ence, your workmen will be any the better for it? 
Not ascrap! No, frivolity, frivolity! ’’ he said de- 
cisively. “It’s essential for you; it’s your duty to 
be frivolous and depraved! Ponder that, my dear, 
ponder it.” 

Anna Akimovna was glad she had spoken out, 
and her spirits rose. She was pleased she had 
spoken so well, and that her ideas were so fine and- 
just, and she was already convinced that if Pimenov, 


A Woman’s Kingdom 133 


for instance, loved her, she would marry him with 
pleasure. 

Mishenka began to pour out champagne. 

“You make me angry, Viktor Nikolaitch,” she 
said, clinking glasses with the lawyer. “It seems 
to me you give advice and know nothing of life your- 
self. According to you, if a man be a mechanic or 
a draughtsman, he is bound to be a peasant and an 
ignoramus! But they are the cleverest people! 
Extraordinary people! ” 

“Your uncle and father . . . I knew them and 
respected them . . .” Krylin said, pausing for em- 
phasis (he had been sitting upright as a post, and 
had been eating steadily the whole time), ‘‘ were 
people of considerable intelligence and . . . of lofty 
spiritual qualities.” 

“Oh, to be sure, we know all about their quali- 
ties,” the lawyer muttered, and asked permission to 
smoke. 

When dinner was over Krylin was led away for 
a nap. Lysevitch finished his cigar, and, stagger- 
ing from repletion, followed Anna Akimovna into 
her study. Cosy corners with photographs and 
fans on the walls, and the inevitable pink or pale 
blue lanterns in the middle of the ceiling, he did 
not like, as the expression of an insipid and unorig- 
inal character; besides, the memory of certain of 
his love affairs of which he was now ashamed was 


— 


134. The Party and Other Stories 


associated with such lanterns. Anna Akimovna’s 
study with its bare walls and tasteless furniture 
pleased him exceedingly. It was snug and comfort- 
able for him to sit on a Turkish divan and look at 
Anna Akimoyna, who usually sat on the rug before 
the fire, clasping her knees and looking into the fire 
and thinking of something; and at such moments it 
seemed to him that her peasant Old Believer blood 
was stirring within her. 

Every time after dinner when coffee and liqueurs 
were handed, he grew livelier and began telling her 
various bits of literary gossip. He spoke with elo- 
quence and inspiration, and was carried away by his 
own stories; and she listened to him and thought 
every time that for such enjoyment it was worth 
paying not only twelve thousand, but three times 
that sum, and forgave him everything she disliked 
in him. He sometimes told her the story of some 
tale or novel he had been reading, and then two or 
three hours passed unnoticed like a minute. Now 
he began rather dolefully in a failing voice with his 
eyes shut. 

“Tt’s ages, my dear, since I have read anything,” 
he said when she asked him to tell her something. 
“Though I do sometimes read Jules Verne.” 

“I was expecting you to tell me something new.” 

“Hm! .. . new,” Lysevitch muttered sleepily, 
and he settled himself further back in the corner 


A Woman’s Kingdom 135 


of the sofa. ‘“ None of the new literature, my dear, 
is any use for you or me. Of course, it is bound 
to be such as it is, and to refuse to recognize it is 
to refuse to recognize — would mean refusing to 
recognize the natural order of things, and I do 
recognize it, but . . .” Lysevitch seemed to have 
fallen asleep. But a minute later his voice was 
heard again: 

“All the new literature moans and howls like 
the autumn wind in the chimney. ‘Ah, unhappy 
wretch! Ah, your life may be likened to a prison! 
Ah, how damp and dark it is in your prison! Ah, 
you will certainly come to ruin, and there is no chance 
of escape for you!’ ‘That’s very fine, but I should 
prefer a literature that would tell us how to escape 
from prison. Of all contemporary writers, how- 
ever, I prefer Maupassant.” Lysevitch opened his 
eyes. “A fine writer, a perfect writer!” Lysevitch 
shifted in his seat. “‘ A wonderful artist! A ter- 
rible, prodigious, supernatural artist!’’ Lysevitch 
got up from the sofa and raised his right arm. 
‘“‘Maupassant!’’ he said rapturously. “ My dear, 
read Maupassant! one page of his gives you more 
than all the riches of the earth! Every line is a 
new horizon. The softest, tenderest impulses of 
the soul alternate with violent tempestuous sensa- 
tions; your soul, as though under the weight of forty 
thousand atmospheres, is transformed into the most 


136 The Party and Other Stories 


insignificant little bit of some great thing of an un- 
defined rosy hue which I fancy, if one could put it 
on one’s tongue, would yield a pungent, voluptuous 
taste. What a fury of transitions, of motives, of 
melodies! You rest peacefully on the lilies and the 
roses, and suddenly a thought —a terrible, splen- 
did, irresistible thought — swoops down upon you 
like a locomotive, and bathes you in hot steam and 
deafens you with its whistle. Read Maupassant, 
dear girl; I insist on it.” 

Lysevitch waved his arms and paced from cor- 
ner to corner in violent excitement. 

‘Yes, it is inconceivable,” he pronounced, as 
though in despair; “his last thing overwhelmed 
me, intoxicated me! But I am afraid you will not 
care for it. To be carried away by it you must 
savour it, slowly suck the juice from each line, drink 
tin, x eens OU-MuUst-drink itn fle... 

After a long introduction, containing many words 
such as demonic sensuality, a network of the most 
delicate nerves, simoom, crystal, and so on, he be- 
gan at last telling the story of the novel. He did 
not tell the story so whimsically, but told it in minute 
detail, quoting from memory whole descriptions and 
conversations; the characters of the novel fascinated 
him, and to describe them he threw himself into atti- 
tudes, changed the expression of his face and voice 
like a real actor. He laughed with delight at one 


A Woman’s Kingdom 137 


moment in a deep bass, and at another, on a high 
shrill note, clasped his hands and clutched at his 
head with an expression which suggested that it was 
just going to burst. Anna Akimovna listened en- 
thralled, though she had already read the novel, 
and it seemed to her ever so much finer and more 
subtle in the lawyer’s version than in the book it- 
self. He drew her attention to various subtleties, 
_and emphasized the felicitous expressions and the 
profound thoughts, but she saw in it, only life, life, 
life and herself, as though she had been a character 
in the novel. Her spirits rose, and she, too, laugh- 
ing and clasping her hands, thought that she could 
not go on living such a life, that there was no need 
to have a wretched life when one might have a splen- 
did one. She remembered her words and thoughts 
at dinner, and was proud of them; and when Pi- 
menoy suddenly rose up in her imagination, she felt 
happy and longed for him to love her. 

When he had finished the story, Lysevitch sat 
down on the sofa, exhausted. 

‘How splendid you are! How handsome!”’ he 
began, a little while afterwards in a faint voice as if 
he were ill.. ‘I am happy near you, dear girl, but 
why am I forty-two instead of thirty? Your tastes 
and mine do not coincide: you ought to be depraved, 
and I have long passed that phase, and want a love 
as delicate and immaterial as a ray of sunshine — 


138 The Party and Other Stories 


that is, from the point of view of a woman of your 
age, I am of no earthly use.” 

In his own words, he loved Turgenev, the singer 
of virginal love and purity, of youth, and of the 
melancholy Russian landscape; but he loved vir- 
ginal love, not from knowledge but from hearsay, 
as something abstract, existing outside real life. 
Now he assured himself that he loved Anna Aki- 
movna platonically, ideally, though he did not know 
what those words meant. But he felt comfortable, 
snug, warm. Anna Akimoyna seemed to him en- 
chanting, original, and he imagined that the pleasant 
sensation that was aroused in him by these surround- 
ings was the very thing that was called platonic love. 

He laid his cheek on her hand and said in the tone 
commonly used in coaxing little children: 

‘““ My precious, why have you punished me?” 

“How? When?” 

‘“T have had no Christmas present from you.” 

Anna Akimoyna had never heard before of their 
sending a Christmas box to the lawyer, and now 
she was at a loss how much to give him. But she 
must give him something, for he was expecting it, 
though he looked at her with eyes full of love. 

‘““T suppose Nazaritch forgot it,’ she said, “ but 
it is not too late to set it right.” 

She suddenly remembered the fifteen hundred she 
had received the day before, which was now lying 


A Woman’s Kingdom 139 


in the toilet drawer in her bedroom. And when she 
brought that ungrateful money and gave it to the 
lawyer, and he put it in his coat pocket with indolent 
grace, the whole incident passed off charmingly and 
naturally. The sudden reminder of a Christmas box 
and this fifteen hundred was not unbecoming in 
Lysevitch. 

““ Merci,” he said, and kissed her finger. 

Krylin came in with blissful, sleepy face, but with- 
out his decorations. 

Lysevitch and he stayed a little longer and drank 
a glass of tea each, and began to get ready to go. 
Anna Akimovna was a little embarrassed. . . . She 
had utterly forgotten in what department Krylin 
served, and whether she had to give him money or 
not; and if she had to, whether to give it now or send 
it afterwards in an envelope. 

“Where does he serve?’ she whispered to Lyse- 
vitch. 

‘“‘Goodness knows,” muttered Lysevitch, yawn- 
ing. 

She reflected that if Krylin used to visit her fa- 
ther and her uncle and respected them, it was prob- 
ably not for nothing: apparently he had been chari- 
table at their expense, serving in some charitable 
institution. As she said good-bye she slipped three 
hundred roubles into his hand; he seemed taken 
aback, and looked at her for a minute in silence with 


140 The Party and Other Stories 


his pewtery eyes, but then seemed to understand and 
said: . 

“The receipt, honoured Anna Akimoyna, you can 
only receive on the New Year.” 

Lysevitch had become utterly limp and heavy, 
and he staggered when Mishenka put on his over- 
coat. 

As he went downstairs ke looked like a man in 
the last stage of exhaustion, and it was evident that 
he would drop asleep as soon as he got into his 
sledge. 

““Your Excellency,” he said languidly to Krylin, 
stopping in the middle of the staircase, “has it 
ever happened to you to experience a feeling as 
though some unseen force were drawing you out 
longer and longer? You are drawn out and turn 
into the finest wire. Subjectively this finds expres- 
sion in a curious voluptuous feeling which is impos- 
sibe to compare with anything.” 

Anna Akimovyna, standing at the top of the stairs, 
saw each of them give Mishenka a note. 

‘Good-bye! Come again!”’ she called to them, 
and ran into her bedroom. 

She quickly threw off her dress, that she was weary 
of already, put on a dressing-gown, and ran down- 
stairs; and as she ran downstairs she laughed and 
thumped with her feet like a school-boy; she had a 
great desire for mischief. 


A Woman’s Kingdom 141 


IV. 
EVENING 


Auntie, in a loose print blouse, Varvarushka 
and two old women, were sitting in the dining- 
room having supper. A big piece of salt meat, a 
ham, and various savouries, were lying on the table 
before them, and clouds of steam were rising from 
the meat, which looked particularly fat and appe- 
tizing. Wine was not served on the lower story, 
but they made up for it with a great number of 
spirits and home-made liqueurs. Agafyushka, the 
fat, white-skinned, well-fed cook, was standing with 
her arms crossed in the doorway and talking to the 
old women, and the dishes were being handed by 
the downstairs Masha, a dark girl with a crimson 
ribbon in her hair. The old women had had enough 
to eat before the morning was over, and an hour 
before supper had had tea and buns, and so they 
were now eating with effort— as it were, from a 
sense of duty. 

‘““Oh, my girl!” sighed Auntie, as Anna Aki- 
moyna ran into the dining-room and sat down be- 
side her. ‘“‘ You’ve frightened me to death!” 

Every one in the house was pleased when Anna 
Akimovna was in good spirits and played pranks; 
this always reminded them that the old men were 


142 The Party and Other Stories 


dead and that the old women had no authority in 
the house, and any one could do as he liked without 
any fear of being sharply called to account for it. 
Only the two old women glanced askance at Anna 
_ Akimovna with amazement: she was humming, and 
it was a sin to sing at table. 

‘Our mistress, our beauty, our picture,” Agaf- 
yushka began chanting with sugary sweetness. 
‘Our precious jewel! ‘The people, the people that 
have come to-day to look at our queen. Lord have 
mercy upon us! Generals, and officers and gentle- 
men. . . . I kept looking out of window and count- 
ing and counting till I gave it up.” 

‘“T’d as soon they did not come at all,” said 
Auntie; she looked sadly at her niece and added: 
‘““They only waste the time for my poor orphan 
girl,” 

Anna Akimovna felt hungry, as she had eaten 
nothing since the morning. ‘They poured her out 
some very bitter liqueur; she drank it off, and tasted 
the salt meat with mustard, and thought it extraor- 
dinarily nice. Then the downstairs Masha brought 
in the turkey, the pickled apples and the gooseberries. 
And that pleased her, too. There was only one 
thing that was disagreeable: there was a draught of 
hot air from the tiled stove; it was stiflingly close 
and every one’s cheeks were burning. After sup- 


A Woman’s Kingdom 143 


per the cloth was taken off and plates of peppermint 
biscuits, walnuts, and raisins were brought in. 

“You sit down, too ...no need to stand 
there!” said Auntie to the cook. 

Agafyushka sighed and sat down to the table; 
Masha set a wineglass of liqueur before her, too, 
and Anna Akimoyna began to feel as though Agaf- 
yushka’s white neck were giving out heat like the 
stove. They were all talking of how difficult it was 
nowadays to get married, and saying that in old 
days, if men did not court beauty, they paid atten- 
tion to money, but now there was no making out 
what they wanted; and while hunchbacks and crip- 
ples used to be left old maids, nowadays men would 
not have even the beautiful and wealthy. Auntie 
began to set this down to immorality, and said that 
people had no fear of God, but she suddenly re- 
membered that Ivan Ivanitch, her brother, and Var- 
varushka — both people of holy life — had feared 
God, but all the same had had children on the sly, 
and had sent them to the Foundling Asylum. She 
pulled herself up and changed the conversation, tell- 
ing them about a suitor she had once had, a factory 
hand, and how she had loved him, but her brothers 
had forced her to marry a widower, an ikon-painter, 
who, thank God, had died two years after. The 
downstairs Masha sat down to the table, too, and 


144 The Party and Other Stories 


told them with a mysterious air that for the last week 
some unknown man with a black moustache, in a 
great-coat with an astrachan collar, had made his 
appearance every morning in the yard, had stared 
at the windows of the big house, and had gone on 
| further — to the buildings; the man was all right, 
nice-looking. . . . 

All this conversation made Anna Akimovna sud- 
denly long to be married — long intensely, painfully; 
she felt as though she would give half her life and 
all her fortune only to know that upstairs there was 
a man who was closer to her than any one in the 
world, that he loved her warmly and was missing 
her; and the thought of such closeness, ecstatic and 
inexpressible in words, troubled her soul. And the 
instinct of youth and health flattered her with lying 
assurances that the real poetry of life was not over 
but still to come, and she believed it, and leaning 
back in her chair (her hair fell down as she did so), 
she began laughing, and, looking at her, the others 
laughed, too. And it was a long time before this 
causeless laughter died down in the dining-room. 

She was informed that the Stinging Beetle had 
come. ‘This was a pilgrim woman called Pasha or 
Spiridonovna —a thin little woman of fifty, in a 
black dress with a white kerchief, with keen eyes, 
sharp nose, and a sharp chin; she had sly, viperish 
eyes and she looked as though she could see right 


A Woman’s Kingdom 145 


through every one. Her lips were shaped like a 
heart. Her viperishness and hostility to every one 
had earned her the nickname of the Stinging Beetle. 

Going into the dining-room without looking at 
any one, she made for the ikons and chanted in a 


high voice “‘ Thy Holy Birth,” then she sang ‘‘ The \ 


Virgin today gives birth to the Son,” then “ Christ 
is born,” then she turned round and bent a piercing 
gaze upon all of them. 

‘““A happy Christmas,” she said, and she kissed 
Anna Akimovna on the shoulder. “It’s all I could 
do, all I could do to get to you, my kind friends.” 
She kissed Auntie on the shoulder. ‘I should have 
come to you this morning, but I went in to some good 
people to rest on the way. ‘Stay, Spiridonovna, 
stay, they said, and I did not notice that evening 
was coming on.” 

As she did not eat meat, they gave her salmon 
and caviare. She ate looking from under her eye- 
lids at the company, and drank three glasses of 
vodka. When she had finished she said a prayer 
and bowed down to Anna Akimovyna’s feet. 

They began to play a game of “kings,” as they 
had done the year before, and the year before 
that, and all the servants in both stories crowded 
in at the doors to watch the game. Anna Akimoyna 
fancied she caught a glimpse once or twice of Mi- 
shenka, with a patronizing smile on his face, among 


- 


146 The Party and Other Stories 


the crowd of peasant men and women. The first 
to be king was Stinging Beetle, and Anna Akimovna 
as the soldier paid her tribute; and then Auntie was 
king and Anna Akimoyna was peasant, which ex- 
cited general delight, and Agafyushka was prince, 
and was quite abashed with pleasure. Another 
game was got up at the other end of the table — 
played by the two Mashas, Varvarushka, and the 
sewing-maid Marfa Ptrovna, who was waked on 
purpose to play ‘‘ kings,” and whose face looked 
cross and sleepy. 

While they were playing they talked of men, 
and of how difficult it was to get a good husband 
nowadays, and which state was to be preferred — 
that of an old maid or a widow. 

“You are a handsome, healthy, sturdy lass,” said 
Stinging Beetle to Anna Akimoyna. “ But I can’t 
make out for whose sake you are holding back.” 

“* What’s to be done if nobody will have me?” 

“Or maybe you have taken a vow to remain 
a maid?’’ Stinging Beetle went on, as though she 
did not hear. ‘“* Well, that’s a good deed. . . . Re- 
main one,” she repeated, looking intently and ma- 
liciously at her cards. ‘All right, my dear, remain 
one. ... Yes... only maids, these saintly maids, 
are not all alike.” She heaved a sigh and played the 
king. ‘‘Oh, no, my girl, they are not all alike! 
Some really watch over themselves like nuns, and 


A Woman’s Kingdom 147 


butter would not melt in their mouths; and if such 
a one does sin in an hour of weakness, she is worried 
to death, poor thing! so it would be a sin to condemn 
her. While others will go dressed in black and sew 
their shroud, and yet love rich old men on the sly. 
Yes, y-es, my canary birds, some hussies will bewitch 
an old man and rule over him, my doves, rule over 
him and turn his head; and when they’ve saved up 
money and lottery tickets enough, they will bewitch 
him to his death.” 

Varvarushka’s only response to these hints was 
to heave a sigh and look towards the ikons. ‘There 
was an expression of Christian meekness on her 
countenance. 

‘“‘T know a maid like that, my. bitterest enemy,” 
Stinging Beetle went on, looking round at every one 
in triumph; “she is always sighing, too, and look- 
ing at the ikons, the she-devil. When she used to 
rule in a certain old man’s house, if one went to 
her she would give one a crust, and bid one bow 
down to the ikons while she would sing: ‘ In con- 
ception Thou dost abide a Virgin. . .!’ On holli- 
days she will give one a bite, and on working days 
she will reproach one for it. But nowadays I will 
make merry over her! I will make as merry as I 
please, my jewel.” 

Varvarushka glanced at the ikons again and 
crossed herself. 


148 The Party and Other Stories 


“But no one will have me, Spiridonovna,”’ said 


Anna Akimovna to change the conversation. 
‘““What’s to be done?” 

“Tt’s your own fault. You keep waiting for 
highly educated gentlemen, but you ought to marry 
one of your own sort, a merchant.” 

“We don’t want a merchant,” said Auntie, all 
in a flutter. ‘‘ Queen of Heaven, preserve us! A 
gentleman will spend your money, but then he will 
be kind to you, you poor little fool. But a merchant 
will be so strict that you won’t feel at home in your 
own house. You'll be wanting to fondle him and 
he will be counting his money, and when you sit down 
to meals with him, he’ll grudge you every mouthful, 
though it’s your own, the lout! . . . Marry a gen- 
tleman.” : 

They all talked at once, loudly interrupting one 
another, and Auntie tapped on the table with the 
nutcrackers and said, flushed and angry: 

‘We won't have a merchant; we won’t have one! 
If you choose a merchant I shall go to an almshouse.” 

“Sh... Sh! ... Hush!” cried Stinging Bee- 
tle; when all were silent she screwed up one eye and 
said: ‘Do you know what, Annushka, my bir- 
die ...? There is no need for you to get mar- 
ried really like every one else. You're rich and 
free, you are your own mistress; but yet, my child, 
it doesn’t seem the right thing for you to be an old 


A Woman’s Kingdom — 149 


maid. Tl find you, you know, some trumpery and 
simple-witted man. You'll marry him for appear- 
ances and then have your fling, bonny lass! You 
can hand him five thousand or ten maybe, and pack 
him off where he came from, and you will be mis- 
tress in your own house — you can love whom you 
like and no one can say anything to you. And then 
you can love your highly educated gentleman. 
You'll have a jolly time!” Stinging Beetle snapped 
her fingers and gave a whistle. 

“It’s sinful,” said Auntie. 

‘Oh, sinful,” laughed Stinging Beetle. ‘‘ She is 
educated, she understands. To cut some one’s 
throat or bewitch an old man — that’s a sin, that’s 
true; but to love some charming young friend is 
not a sin at all. And what is there in it, really? 
There’s no sin in it at all! The old pilgrim women 
have invented all that to make fools of simple folk. 
I, too, say everywhere it’s a sin; I don’t know my- 
self why it’s a sin.” Stinging Beetle emptied her 
glass and cleared her throat. ‘‘ Have your fling, 
bonny lass,” this time evidently addressing herself. 
‘For thirty years, wenches, I have thought of noth- 
ing but sins and been afraid, but now I see I have 
wasted my time, I’ve let it slip by like a ninny! Ah, 
I have been a fool, a fool!’ She sighed. “A 
woman’s time is short and every day is precious. 
You are handsome, Annushka, and very rich; but as 


150 The Party and Other Stories 


soon as thirty-five or forty strikes for you your time 
is up. Don’t listen to any one, my girl; live, have 
your fling till you are forty, and then you will have 
time to pray forgiveness — there will be plenty of 
time to bow down and to sew your shroud. A can- 
dle to God and a poker to the devil! You can do 
both at once! Well, how is it to be? Will you 
make some little man happy?” 

‘“‘T will,’ laughed Anna Akimovna. “I don’t 
care now; I would marry a working man.” 

“Well, that would do all right! Oh, what a 
fine fellow you would choose then!” Stinging 
Beetle screwed up her eyes and shook her head. 
‘“O—o— oh!” 

“I tell her myself,” said Auntie, “it’s no good 
waiting for a gentleman, so she had better marry, 
not a gentleman, but some one humbler; anyway 
we should have a man in the house to look after 
things. And there are lots of good men. She 
might have some one out of the factory. They 
are all sober, steady men. . . .” 

“IT should think so,” Stinging Beetle agreed. 
““They are capital fellows. If you like, Aunt, I 
will make a match for her with Vassily Lebedin- 
sky?” 

‘Oh, Vasya’s legs are so long,” said Auntie seri- 
ously. ‘ He isso lanky. He has no looks.” 

There was laughter in the crowd by the door. 


“a 


A Woman’s Kingdom 151 


“Well, Pimenov? Would you like to marry Pi- 
menov?” Stinging Beetle asked Anna Akimoyna. 

“Very good. Make a match for me with Pi- 
menov.” 

Really?” 

‘Yes, do! ’? Anna Akimovna said resolutely, and 
she struck her fist on the table. ‘‘ On my honour, 
-I will marry him.” 

** Really?” 

Anna Akimoyna suddenly felt ashamed that her 
cheeks were burning and that every one was looking 
at her; she flung the cards together on the table and 
ran out of the room. As she ran up the stairs and, 
reaching the upper story, sat down to the piano 
in the drawing-room, a murmur of sound reached 
her from below like the roar of the sea; most likely 
they were talking of her and of Pimenoy, and per- 
haps Stinging Beetle was taking advantage of her 
absence to insult Varvarushka and was putting no 
check on her language. 

The lamp in the big room was the only light 
burning in the upper story, and it sent a glimmer 
through the door into the dark drawing-room. It 
was between nine and ten, not later. Anna Aki- 
movna played a waltz, then another, then a third; 
she went on playing without stopping. She looked 
into the dark corner beyond the piano, smiled, and 
inwardly called to it, and the idea occurred to her 


152 The Party and Other Stories 


that she might drive off to the town to see some one, 
Lysevitch for instance, and tell him what was pass- 
ing in her heart. She wanted to talk without ceas- 
ing, to laugh, to play the fool, but the dark corner 
was sullenly silent, and all round in all the rooms 
of the upper story it was still and desolate. 

She was fond of sentimental songs, but she had 
a harsh, untrained voice, and so she only played 
the accompaniment and sang hardly audibly, just 
above her breath. She sang in a whisper one song 
after another, for the most part about love, separa- 
tion, and frustrated hopes, and she imagined how 
she would hold out her hands to him and say with 
entreaty, with tears, “ Pimenov, take this burden 
from me!” And then, just as though her sins had 
been forgiven, there would be joy and comfort in 
her soul, and perhaps a free, happy life would be- 
gin. Inan anguish of anticipation she leant over the 
keys, with a passionate longing for the change in her 
life to come at once without delay, and was terrified 
at the thought that her old life would go on for some 
time longer. Then she played again and sang 
hardly above her breath, and all was stillness about 
her. There was no noise coming from downstairs 
now, they must have gone to bed. It had struck 
ten some time before. A long, solitary, wearisome 
night was approaching. 

Anna Akimovna walked through all the rooms, 


A Woman’s Kingdom rss 


lay down for a while on the sofa, and read in her 
study the letters that had come that evening; there 
were twelve letters of Christmas greetings and three 
anonymous letters. In one of them some workman 
complained in a horrible, almost illegible handwrit- 
ing that Lenten oil sold in the factory shop was ran- 
cid and smelt of paraffin; in another, some one re- 
spectfully informed her that over a purchase of iron 
Nazaritch had lately taken a bribe of a thousand 
roubles from some one; in a third she was abused 
for her inhumanity. 

The excitement of Christmas was passing off, and 
to keep it up Anna Akimovna sat down at the piano 
again and softly played one of the new waltzes, then 
she remembered how cleverly and creditably she had 
spoken at dinner today. She looked round at the 
dark windows, at the walls with the pictures, at the 
faint light that came from the big room, and all at 
once she began suddenly crying, and she felt vexed 
that she was so lonely, and that she had no one to 
talk to and consult. To cheer herself she tried to 
picture Pimenovy in her imagination, but it was un- 
successful. 

It struck twelve. Mishenka, no longer wearing 
his swallowtail but in his reefer jacket, came in, 
and without speaking lighted two candles; then he 
went out and returned a minute later with a cup of 
tea on a tray. 


154 The Party and Other Stories 


“What are you laughing at?” she asked, noticing 
a smile on his face. 

‘‘T was downstairs and heard the jokes you were 
making about Pimenov . . .” he said, and put his 
hand before his laughing mouth. “If he were sat 
down to dinner today with Viktor Nikolaevitch and 
the general, he’d have died of fright.”” Mishenka’s 
shoulders were shaking with laughter. ‘‘ He doesn’t 
know even how to hold his fork, I bet.” 

The footman’s laughter and words, his reefer 
jacket and moustache, gave Anna Akimoyna a feel- 
ing of uncleanness. She shut her eyes to avoid see- 
ing him, and, against her own will, imagined Pimenoy 
dining with Lysevitch and Krylin, and his timid, un- 
intellectual figure seemed to her pitiful and helpless, 
and she felt repelled by it. And only now, for the 
first time in the whole day, she realized clearly that 
all she had said and thought about Pimenoy and mar- 
rying a workman was nonsense, folly, and wilful- 
ness. ‘To convince herself of the opposite, to over- 
come her repulsion, she tried to recall what she had 
said at dinner, but now she could not see anything 
in it: shame at her own thoughts and actions, and 
the fear that she had said something improper dur- 
ing the day, and disgust at her own lack of spirit, 
overwhelmed her completely. She took up a candle 
and, as rapidly as if some one were pursuing her, 
ran downstairs, woke Spiridonoyna, and began as- 


A Woman’s Kingdom 155 


suring her she had been joking. Then she went to 
_ her bedroom. Red-haired Masha, who was dozing 
in an arm-chair near the bed, jumped up and began 
shaking up the pillows. Her face was exhausted 
and sleepy, and her magnificent hair had fallen on 
one side. 

“Tchalikov came again this evening,” she said, 
yawning, “but I did not dare to announce him; 
he was very drunk. He says he will come again 
tomorrow.” 

“What does he want with me?” said Anna Aki- 
moyna, and she flung her comb on the floor. ‘I 
won't see him, I won’t.” 

She made up her mind she had no one left in 
life but this Ichalikov, that he would never leave 
off persecuting her, and would remind her every day 
how uninteresting and absurd her life was. So all 
she was fit for was to help the poor. Oh, how 
stupid it was! ; 

She lay down without undressing, and sobbed 
with shame and depression: what seemed to her 
most vexatious and stupid of all was that her 
dreams that day about Pimenov had been right, 
lofty, honourable, but at the same time she felt that 
Lysevitch and even Krylin were nearer to her than 
Pimenov and all the workpeople taken together. 
She thought that if the long day she had just spent 
could have been represented in a picture, all that 


156 The Party and Other Stories 


had been bad and vulgar —as, for instance, the 
dinner, the lawyer’s talk, the game of “ kings ’— 
would have been true, while her dreams and talk 
about Pimenov would have stood out from the whole 
as something false, as out of drawing; and she 
thought, too, that it was too late to dream of happi- 
ness, that everything was over for her, and it was 
impossible to go back to the life when she had slept 
under the same quilt with her mother, or to devise 
some new special sort of life. 

Red-haired Masha was kneeling before the bed, 
gazing at her in mournful perplexity; then she, too, 
began crying, and laid her face against her mis- 
tress’s arm, and without words it was clear why she 
was so wretched. 

“We are fools!” said Anna Akimoyna, laugh- 
ing and crying. ‘‘ We are fools! Oh, what fools 
we are!” 


ee 


A PROBLEM 


THE strictest measures were taken that the Us- 
kovs’ family secret might not leak out and become 
generally known. WHalf of the servants were sent 
off to the theatre or the circus; the other half were 
sitting in the kitchen and not allowed to leave it. 
Orders were given that no one was to be admitted. 
The wife of the Colonel, her sister, and the gover- 
ness, though they had been initiated into the secret, 
kept up a pretence of knowing nothing; they sat in 
the dining-room and did not show themselves in the 
drawing-room or the hall. 

Sasha Uskov, the young man of twenty-five who 
was the cause of all the commotion, had arrived 
some time before, and by the advice of kind-hearted 
Ivan Markovitch, his uncle, who was taking his part, 
he sat meekly in the hall by the door leading to the 
study, and prepared himself to make an open, can- 
did explanation. 

The other side of the door, in the study, a family 
council was being held. The subject under discus- 
sion was an exceedingly disagreeable and delicate 
one. Sasha Uskov had cashed at one of the banks 

159 


\ 


160 The Party and Other Stories 


a false promissory note, and it had become due tor 
payment three days before, and now his two paternal 
uncles and Ivan Markovitch, the brother of his dead 
mother, were deciding the question whether they 
should pay the money and save the family honour, 
or wash their hands of it and leave the case to go 
for trial. 

To outsiders who have no personal interest in the 
matter such questions seem simple; for those who are 
so unfortunate as to have to decide them in earnest 
they are extremely difficult. The uncles had been 
talking for a long time, but the problem seemed no 
nearer decision. 

‘““ My friends!” said the uncle who was a colonel, 
and there was a note of exhaustion and bitterness 
in his voice. ‘‘ Who says that family honour is a 
mere convention? I don’t say that at all. I am 
only warning you against a false view; I am point- 
ing out the possibility of an unpardonable mistake. 
How can you fail to see it? I am not speaking 
Chinese; I am speaking Russian! ” 

‘“My dear fellow, we do understand,’ Ivan 
Markovitch protested mildly. 

‘“ How can you understand if you say that I don’t 
believe in family honour? I repeat once more: fa- 
mil-y ho-nour fal-sely un-der-stood is a prejudice! 
Falsely understood! ‘That's what I say: whatever 
may be the motives for screening a scoundrel, who- 


A Problem 161 


ever he may be, and helping him to escape punish- 
ment, it is contrary to law and unworthy of a gentle- 
man. It’s not saving the family honour; it’s civic 
cowardice! Take the army, for instance. . . . The 
honour of the army is more precious to us than any 
other honour, yet we don’t screen our guilty mem- 
bers, but condemn them. And does the honour of 
the army suffer in consequence? Quite the oppo- 
site!” 

The other paternal uncle, an official in the Treas- 
ury, a taciturn, dull-witted, and rheumatic man, sat 
silent, or spoke only of the fact that the Uskovs’ 
name would get into the newspapers if the case went 
for trial. His opinion was that the case ought to 
be hushed up from the first and not become public 
property; but, apart from publicity in the newspa- 
pers, he advanced no other argument in support of 
this opinion. 

The maternal uncle, kind-hearted Ivan Marko- 
vitch, spoke smoothly, softly, and with a tremor in 
his voice. He began with saying that youth has 
its rights and its peculiar temptations. Which of 
us has not, been young, and who has not been led 
astray? To say nothing of ordinary mortals, even 
great men have not escaped errors and mistakes in 
their youth. Take, for instance, the biography of 
great writers. Did not every one of them gamble, 
drink, and draw down upon himself the anger of 


162 The Party and Other Stories 


right-thinking people in his young days? If Sasha’s 
error bordered upon crime, they must remember that 
Sasha had received practically no education; he had 
been expelled from the high school in the fifth class; 
he had lost his parents in early childhood, and so 
had been left at the tenderest age without guidance 
and good, benevolent influences. He was nervous, 
excitable, had no firm ground under his feet, and, 
above all, he had been unlucky. Even if he were 
guilty, anyway he deserved indulgence and the sym- 
pathy of all compassionate souls. He ought, of 
course, to be punished, but he was punished as it 
was by his conscience and the agonies he was en- 
during now while awaiting the sentence of his rela- 
tions. The comparison with the army made by the 
Colonel was delightful, and did credit to his lofty 
intelligence; his appeal to their feeling of public 
duty spoke for the chivalry of his soul, but they 
must not forget that in each individual the citizen 
is closely linked with the Christian. . 

‘Shall we be false to civic duty,” Ivan Marko- 
vitch exclaimed passionately, “if instead of punish- 
ing an erring boy we hoid out to him a helping 
hand?” 

Ivan Markovitch talked further of family honour. 
He had not the honour to belong to the Uskoy fam- 
ily himself, but he knew their distinguished family 
went back to the thirteenth century; he did not forget 


A Problem 163 


for a minute, either, that his precious, beloved sister 

-had been the wife of one of the representatives of 
that name. In short, the family was dear to him 
for many reasons, and he refused to admit the idea 
that, for the sake of a paltry fifteen hundred roubles, 
a blot should be cast on the escutcheon that was be- 
yond all price. If all the motives he had brought 
forward were not sufficiently convincing, he, Ivan 
Markovitch, in conclusion, begged his listeners to 
ask themselves what was meant by crime? Crime 
is an immoral act founded upon ill-will. But is the 
will of man free? Philosophy has not yet given a 
positive answer to that question. Different views 
were held by the learned. The latest school of Lom- 
broso, for instance, denies the freedom of the will, 
and considers every crime as the product of the 
purely anatomical peculiarities of the individual. 

Tyan Markovitch,” said the Colonel, in a voice 
of entreaty, ‘‘ we are talking seriously about an im- 
portant matter, and you bring in Lombroso, you 
clever fellow. Think a little, what are you saying 
all this for? Can you imagine that all your thun- 
derings and rhetoric will furnish an answer to the 
question? ”’ 

Sasha Uskov sat at the door and listened. He 
felt neither terror, shame, nor depression, but only 
weariness and inward emptiness. It seemed to him 
that it made absolutely no difference to him whether 


164 The Party and Other Stories 


they forgave him or not; he had come here to hear 
his sentence and to explain himself simply because 
kind-hearted Ivan Markovitch had begged him to 
do so. He was not afraid of the future. - It made 
no difference to him where he was: here in the hall, 
in prison, or in Siberia. 

“Tf Siberia, then let it be Siberia, damn it all! ” 

He was sick of life and found it insufferably hard. 
He was inextricably involved in debt; he had not 
a farthing in his pocket; his family had become de- 
testable to him; he would have to part from his 
friends and his women sooner or later, as they had 
begun to be too contemptuous of his sponging on 
them. ‘The future looked black. 

Sasha was indifferent, and was only disturbed by 
one circumstance; the other side of the door they 
were calling him a scoundrel and a criminal. Every 
minute he was on the point of jumping up, bursting 
into the study and shouting in answer to the detest- 
able metallic voice of the Colonel: 

‘You are lying!” 

“Criminal” is a dreadful word — that is what 
murderers, thieves, robbers are; in fact, wicked and 
morally hopeless people. And Sasha was very far 
from being all that. . . . It was true he owed a 
great deal and did not pay his debts. But debt is 
not a crime, and it is unusual for a man not to be 


A Problem 105 


in debt. The Colonel and Ivan Markovitch were 
both in debt... . 

‘What have I done wrong besides? ’’ Sasha won- 
dered. 

He had discounted a forged note. But all the 
young men he knew did the same. MHandrikov and 
Von Burst always forged IOU’s from their parents 
or friends when their allowances were not paid at 
the regular time, and then when they got their 
money from home they redeemed them before they 
became due. Sasha had done the same, but had not 
redeemed the IOU because he had not got the money 
which Handrikov had promised to lend him. He 
was not to blame; it was the fault of circumstances. 
It was true that the use of another person’s signa- 
ture was considered reprehensible; but, still, it was 
not a crime but a generally accepted dodge, an ugly 
formality which injured no one and was quite harm- 
less, for in forging the Colonel’s signature Sasha had 
had no intention of causing anybody damage or loss. 

“No, it doesn’t mean that I ama criminal .. .” 
thought Sasha. ‘And it’s not in my character to 
bring myself to commit a crime. I am soft, emo- 
tional. . . . When I have the money I help the 
yrs (ep rs ake ae 

Sasha was musing after this fashion while they 
went on talking the other side of the door. 


166 The Party and Other Stories 


‘But, my friends, this is endless,” the Colonel 
declared, getting excited. ‘* Suppose we were to for- 
give him and pay the money. You know he would 
not give up leading a dissipated life, squandering 
money, making debts, going to our tailors and order- 
ing suits in our names! Can you guarantee that 
this will be his last prank? As far as I am con- 
cerned, I have no faith whatever in his reforming!” 

The official of the Treasury muttered something 
in reply; after him Ivan Markovitch began talking 
blandly and suavely again. The Colonel moved his 
chair impatiently and drowned the other’s words with 
his detestable metallic voice. At last the door 
opened and Ivan Markovitch came out of the study; 
there were patches of red on his lean shaven face. 

““ Come along,” he said, taking Sasha by the hand. 
** Come and speak frankly from your heart. With- 
out pride, my dear boy, humbly and from your 
heart.” 

Sasha went into the study. The official of the 
Treasury was sitting down; the Colonel was stand- 
ing before the table with one hand in his pocket and 
one knee on a chair. It was smoky and stifling 
in the study. Sasha did not look at the official or 
the Colonel; he felt suddenly ashamed and uncom- 
fortable. He looked uneasily at Ivan Markovitch 
and muttered: 

' Dl paycit ya. teins taba nae 


A Problem 167 


“What did you expect when you discounted the 
IOU?” he heard a metallic voice. 

“IT... Handrikov promised to lend me the 
money before now.” 

Sasha could say no more. He went out of the 
study and sat down again on the chair near the door. 
He would have been glad to go away altogether at 
once, but he was choking with hatred and he awfully 
wanted to remain, to tear the Colonel to pieces, to 
say something rude to him. He sat trying to think 
of something violent and effective to say to his hated 
uncle, and at that moment a woman’s figure, shrouded 
in the twilight, appeared at the drawing-room door. 
It was the Colonel’s wife. She beckoned Sasha to 
her, and, wringing her hands, said, weeping: 

“ Alexandre, 1 know you don’t like me, but... 
listen to me; listen, I beg you. . . . But, my dear, 
how can this have happened? Why, it’s awful, aw- 
ful! For goodness’ sake, beg them, defend your- 
self, entreat them.” 

Sasha looked at her quivering shoulders, at the 
big tears that were rolling down her cheeks, heard 
behind his back the hollow, nervous voices of wor- 
ried and exhausted people, and shrugged his shoul- 
ders. He had not in the least expected that his 
aristocratic relations would raise such a tempest over 
a paltry fifteen hundred roubles! He could not un- 
derstand her tears nor the quiver of their voices. 


168 The Party and Other Stories 


An hour later he heard that the Colonel was get- 
ting the best of it; the uncles were finally inclining 
to let the case go for trial. 

““The matter’s settled,” said the Colonel, sigh- 
ing. “ Enough.” 

After this decision all the uncles, even the em- 
phatic Colonel, became noticeably depressed. A si- 
lence followed. 

“ Merciful Heavens!” sighed Ivan Markovitch. 
“* My poor sister!” 

And he began saying in a subdued voice that most 
likely his sister, Sasha’s mother, was present unseen 
in the study at that moment. He felt in his soul 
how the unhappy, saintly woman was weeping, griev- 
ing, and begging for her boy. For the sake of her 
peace beyond the grave, they ought to spare Sasha. 

The sound of a muffled sob was heard. Ivan 
Markovitch was weeping and muttering something 
which it was impossible to catch through the door. 
The Colonel got up and paced from corner to corner. 
The long conversation began over again. 

But then the clock in the drawing-room struck 
two. The family council was over. To avoid see- 
ing the person who had moved him to such wrath, 
the Colonel went from the study, not into the hall, 
but into the vestibule. . . . Ivan Markovitch came 
out into the hall. . . . He was agitated and rubbing 
his hands joyfully. His tear-stained eyes looked 


A Problem 169 


good-humoured and his mouth was twisted into a 
smile. 

-“ Capital,” he said to Sasha. ‘Thank God! 
You can go home, my dear, and sleep tranquilly. 
We have decided to pay the sum, but on condition 
that you repent and come with me tomorrow into 
the country and set to work.” 

A minute later Ivan Markovitch and Sasha in 
their great-coats and caps were going down the 
stairs. The uncle was muttering something edify- 
ing. Sasha did not listen, but felt as though some 
uneasy weight were gradually slipping off his shoul- 
ders. They had forgiven him; he was free! A 
gust of joy sprang up within him and sent a sweet 
chill to his heart. He longed to breathe, to move 
swiftly, to live! Glancing at the street lamps and 
the black sky, he remembered that Von Burst was 
celebrating his name-day that evening at the “ Bear,” 
and again a rush of joy flooded his soul. . . . 

“IT am going! ” he decided. 

But then he remembered he had not a farthing, 
that the companions he was going to would despise 
him at once for his empty pockets. He must get 
hold of some money, come what may! 

“Uncle, lend me a hundred roubles,” he said to 
Ivan Markovitch. 

His uncle, surprised, looked into his face and 
backed against a lamp-post. 


170 The Party and Other Stories 


‘“‘ Give it to me,” said Sasha, shifting impatiently 
from one foot to the other and beginning to pant. 
“Uncle, I entreat you, give me a hundred roubles.” 

His face worked; he trembled, and seemed on the 
point of attacking his uncle... . 

‘Won't you?”’ he kept asking, seeing that his 
uncle was still amazed and did not understand. 
‘Listen. If you don’t, I'll give myself up tomor- 
row! I won't let you pay the LOU! (I'll present 
another false note tomorrow!” © 

Petrified, muttering something incoherent in his 
horror, Ivan Markovitch took a hundred-rouble note 
out of his pocket-book and gave it to Sasha. The 
young man took it and walked rapidly away from 
WT ares 3 

Taking a sledge, Sasha grew calmer, and felt a 
rush of joy within him again. The “rights of 
youth ” of which kind-hearted Ivan Markovitch had 
spoken at the family council woke up and asserted 
themselves. Sasha pictured the drinking-party be- 
fore him, and, among the bottles, the women, and his 
friends, the thought flashed through his mind: 

““Now I see that I am a criminal; yes, I am a 
criminal.” 


THE KISS 


AT eight o’clock on the evening of the twentieth 
of May all the six batteries of the N Reserve 
Artillery Brigade halted for the night in the village 
of Myestetchki on their way to camp. When the 
general commotion was at its height, while some 
officers were busily occupied around the guns, while 
others, gathered together in the square near the 
church enclosure, were listening to the quartermas- 
ters, a man in civilian dress, riding a strange horse, 
came into sight round the church. The little dun- 
coloured horse with a good neck and a short tail 
came, moving not straight forward, but as it were 
sideways, with a sort of dance step, as though it 
were being lashed about the legs. When he reached 
the officers the man on the horse took off his hat and 
said: 

“His Excellency Lieutenant-General von Rabbek 
invites the gentlemen to drink tea with him this min- 


” 
. 


ute... 
The horse turned, danced, and retired sideways; 
the messenger raised his hat once more, and in an 
instant disappeared with his strange horse behind 


the church. 
173 


174. The Party and Other Stories 


“‘ What the devil does it mean?” grumbled some 
of the officers, dispersing to their quarters. ‘“‘ One 
is sleepy, and here this Von Rabbek with his tea! 
We know what tea means.” 

The officers of all the six batteries remembered 
vividly an incident of the previous year, when dur- 
ing manceuvres they, together with the officers of a 
Cossack regiment, were in the same way inyited to 
tea by a count who had an estate in the neighbour- 
hood and was a retired army officer: the hospitable 
and genial count made much of them, fed them, and 
gave them drink, refused to let them go to their 
quarters in the village and made them stay the night. 
All that, of course, was very nice — nothing better 
could be desired, but the worst of it was, the old 
army officer was so carried away by the pleasure of 
the young men’s company that till sunrise he was tell- 
ing the officers anecdotes of his glorious past, tak- 
ing them over the house, showing them expensive 
pictures, old engravings, rare guns, reading them 
autograph letters from great people, while the weary 
and exhausted officers looked and listened, longing 
for their beds and yawning in their sleeves; when 
at last their host let them go, it was too late for 
sleep. 

Might not this Von Rabbek be just such another ? 
Whether he were or not, there was no help for it. 
The officers changed their uniforms, brushed them- 


The Kiss 175 


selves, and went all together in search of the gen- 
tleman’s house. In the square by the church they 
were told they could get to His Excellency’s by the 
lower path — going down behind the church to the 
river, going along the bank to the garden, and there 
an avenue would taken them to the house; or by the 
upper way — straight from the church by the road 
which, half a mile from the village, led right up to 
His Excellency’s granaries. The officers decided to 
go by the upper way. 

“What Von Rabbek is it? ” they wondered on the 
way. “Surely not the one who was in command 
of the N cavalry division at Plevna?” 

““No, that was not Von Rabbek, but simply 
Rabbe and no ‘ von.’ ” 

“What lovely weather! ”’ 

At the first of the granaries the road divided in 
two: one branch went straight on and vanished in 
the evening darkness, the other led to the owner’s 
house on the right. The officers turned to the right 
and began to speak more softly. . . . On both sides 
of the road stretched stone granaries with red roofs, 
heavy and sullen-looking, very much like barracks 
of a district town. Ahead of them gleamed the 
windows of the manor-house. 

‘““A good omen, gentlemen,” said one of the ofh- 
cers. ‘‘ Our setter is the foremost of all; no doubt 
he scents game ahead of us! .. .” 


176 The Party and Other Stories 


Lieutenant Lobytko, who was walking in front, 
a tall and stalwart fellow, though entirely without 
moustache (he was over five-and-twenty, yet for 
some reason there was no sign of hair on his round, 
well-fed face), renowned in the brigade for his pe- 
culiar faculty for divining the presence of women at 
a distance, turned round and said: 

‘Yes, there must be women here; I feel that by 
instinct.” 

On the threshold the officers were met by Von 
Rabbek himself, a comely-looking man of sixty in 
civilian dress. Shaking hands with his guests, he 
said that he was very glad and happy to see them, 
but begged them earnestly for God’s sake to excuse 
him for not asking them to stay the night; two sisters 
with their children, some brothers, and some neigh- 
bours, had come on a visit to him, so that he had not 
one spare room left. 

The General shook hands with every one, made 
his apologies, and smiled, but it was evident by his 
face that he was by no means so delighted as their 
last year’s count, and that he had invited the officers 
simply because, in his opinion, it was a social obliga- 
tion to do so. And the officers themselves, as they 
walked up the softly carpeted stairs, as they lis- 
tened to him, felt that they had been invited to this 
house simply because it would have been awkward 
not to invite them; and at the sight of the footmen, 


The Kiss 177 


who hastened to light the lamps in the entrance be- 
low and in the anteroom above, they began to feel 
as though they had brought uneasiness and discom- 
fort into the house with them. In a house in which 
two sisters and their children, brothers, and neigh- 
bours were gathered together, probabty on account 
of some family festivity, or event, how could the 
presence of nineteen unknown officers possibly be 
welcome? 

At the entrance to the drawing-room the officers 
were met by a tall, graceful old lady with black 
eyebrows and a long face, very much like the Em- 
press Eugénie. Smiling graciously and majestically, 
she said she was glad and happy to see her guests, 
and apologized that her husband and she were on 
this occasion unable to invite messieurs les officiers 
to stay the night. From her beautiful majestic 
smile, which instantly vanished from her face every 
time she turned away from her guests, it was evi- 
dent that she had seen numbers of officers in her day, 
that she was in no humour for them now, and if she 
invited them to her house and apologized for not 
doing more, it was only because her breeding and 
position in society required it of her. 

When the officers went into the big dining-room, 
there were about a dozen people, men and ladies, 
young and old, sitting at tea at the end of a long 
table. A group of men was dimly visible behind 


178 The Party and Other Stories 


their chairs, wrapped in a haze of cigar smoke; and | 
in the midst of them stood a lanky young man with 
red whiskers, talking loudly, with a lisp, in English. 
Through a door beyond the group could be seen a 
light room with pale blue furniture. 

‘Gentlemen, there are so many of you that it is 
impossible to introduce you all!” said the General 
in a loud voice, trying to sound very cheerful. 
‘“‘ Make each other’s acquaintance, gentlemen, with- 
out any ceremony!” 

The officers — some with very serious and even 
stern faces, others with forced smiles, and all feel- 
ing extremely awkward— somehow made their 
bows and sat down to tea. 

The most ill at ease of them all was Ryabovitch — 
a little officer in spectacles, with sloping shoulders, 
and whiskers like a lynx’s. While some of his 
comrades assumed a serious expression, while others 
wore forced smiles, his face, his lynx-like whiskers, 
and spectacles seemed to say: “I am the shyest, 
most modest, and most undistinguished officer in the 
whole brigade!’’ At first, on going into the room 
and sitting down to the table, he could not fix his 
attention on any one face or object. The faces, the 
dresses, the cut-glass decanters of brandy, the steam 
from the glasses, the moulded cornices — all blended 
in one general impression that inspired in Ryabo- 
vitch alarm and a desire to hide his head. Like a 


The Kiss 179 


lecturer making his first appearance before the pub- 
lic, he saw everything that was before his eyes, but 
apparently only had a dim understanding of it 
(among physiologists this condition, when the sub- 
ject sees but does not understand, is called psychical 
blindness). After a little while, growing accus- 
tomed to his surroundings, Ryabovitch saw clearly 
and began to observe. As a shy man, unused to so- 
ciety, what struck him first was that in which he had 
always been deficient — namely, the extraordinary 
boldness of his new acquaintances. Von Rabbek, 
his wife, two elderly ladies, a young lady in a lilac 
dress, and the young man with the red whiskers, 
who was, it appeared, a younger son of Von Rab- 
bek, very cleverly, as though they had rehearsed it 
beforehand, took seats between the officers, and at 
once got up a heated discussion in which the visitors 
could not help taking part. The lilac young lady 
hotly asserted that the artillery had a much better 
time than the cavalry and the infantry, while Von 
Rabbek and the elderly ladies maintained the oppo- 
site. A brisk interchange of talk followed. Ryabo- 
vitch watched the lilac young lady who argued so 
hotly about what was unfamiliar and utterly unin- 
teresting to her, and watched artificial smiles come 
and go on her face. 

Von Rabbek and his family skilfully drew the offi- 
cers into the discussion, and meanwhile kept a sharp 


180 The Party and Other Stories 


lookout over their glasses and mouths, to see whether 
all of them were drinking, whether all had enough 
sugar, why some one was not eating cakes or not 
drinking brandy. And the longer Ryabovitch 
watched and listened, the more he was attracted by 
this insincere but splendidly disciplined family. 

After tea the officers went into the drawing-room. 
Lieutenant Lobytko’s instinct had not deceived him. 
There were a great number of girls and young mar- 
ried ladies. The “setter” lieutenant was soon 
standing by a very young, fair girl in a black dress, 
and, bending down to her jauntily, as though leaning 
on an unseen sword, smiled and shrugged his shoul- 
ders coquettishly. He probably talked very inter- 
esting nonsense, for the fair girl looked at his 
well-fed face condescendingly and asked indiffer- 
ently, “Really?” And from that uninterested 
“ Really?” the setter, had he been intelligent, might 
have concluded that she would never call him to 
heel. 

The piano struck up; the melancholy strains of 
a valse floated out of the wide open windows, and 
every one, for some reason, remembered that it was 
spring, a May evening. Every one was conscious 
of the fragrance of roses, of lilac, and of the young 
leaves of the poplar. Ryabovitch, in whom the 
brandy he had drunk made itself felt, under the in- 
fluence of the music stole a glance towards the win- 


The Kiss 181 


dow, smiled, and began watching the movements of 
the women, and it seemed to him that the smell of 
roses, of poplars, and lilac came not from the gar- 
den, but from the ladies’ faces and dresses. | 

Von Rabbek’s son invited a scraggy-looking young 
lady to dance, and waltzed round the room twice 
with her. Lobytko, gliding over the parquet floor, 
_ flew up to the lilac young lady and whirled her away. 
Dancing began. . . . Ryabovitch stood near the 
door among those who were not dancing and looked 
on. He had never once danced in his whole life, 
and he had never once in his life put his arm round 
the waist of a respectable woman. He was highly 
delighted that a man should in the sight of all take 
a girl he did not know round the waist and offer her 
his shoulder to put her hand on, but he could not 
imagine himself in the position of such a man. 
There were times when he envied the boldness and 
swagger of his companions and was inwardly 
wretched; the consciousness that he was timid, that 
he was round-shouldered and uninteresting, that 
he had a long waist and lynx-like whiskers, had 
deeply mortified him, but with years he had grown 
used to this feeling, and now, looking at his com- 
rades dancing or loudly talking, he no longer envied 
them, but only felt touched and mournful. 

When the quadrille began, young Von Rabbek 
came up to those who were not dancing and invited 


\ 


182 The Party and Other Stories 


two officers to have a game at billiards. The off- 
cers accepted and went with him out of the drawing- 
room. Ryabovitch, having nothing to do and wish- 
ing to take part in the general movement, slouched 
after them. From the big drawing-room they went 
into the little drawing-room, then into a narrow cor- 
ridor with a glass roof, and thence into a room in 
which on their entrance three sleepy-looking footmen 
jumped up quickly from the sofa. At last, after 
passing through a long succession of rooms, young 
Von Rabbek and the officers came into a small room 
where there was a billiard-table. They began to 
play. 

Ryabovitch, who had never played any game but 
cards, stood near the billiard-table and looked in- 
differently at the players, while they in unbuttoned 
coats, with cues in their hands, stepped about, made 
puns, and kept shouting out unintelligible words. 

The players took no notice of him, and only now 
and then one of them, shoving him with his elbow 
or accidentally touching him with the end of his cue, 
would turn round and say “ Pardon!” Before the 
first game was over he was weary of it, and began 
to feel he was not wanted and in the way. . . . He 
felt disposed to return to the drawing-room, and he 
went out. 

On his way back he met with a little adventure. 
When he had gone half-way he noticed he had taken 


The Kiss 183 


a wrong turning. He distinctly remembered that 
he ought to meet three sleepy footmen on his way, 
but he had passed five or six rooms, and those sleepy 
figures seemed to have vanished into the earth. No- 
ticing his mistake, he walked back a little way and 
turned to the right; he found himself in a little dark 
room which he had not seen on his way to the bil- 
-liard-room. After standing there a little while, he 
resolutely opened the first door that met his eyes and 
walked into an absolutely dark room. Straight in 
front could be seen the crack in the doorway through 
which there was a gleam of vivid light; from the 
other side of the door came the muffled sound of a 
melancholy mazurka. Here, too, as in the draw- 
ing-room, the windows were wide open and there was 
a smell of poplars, lilac and roses... . 

Ryabovitch stood still in hesitation. . . . At that 
moment, to his surprise, he heard hurried footsteps 
and the rustling of a dress, a breathless feminine 
voice whispered “ At last!” And two soft, fra- 
grant, unmistakably feminine arms were clasped 
about his neck; a warm cheek was pressed to his 
cheek, and simultaneously there was the sound of a 
kiss. But at once the bestower of the kiss uttered 
a faint shriek and skipped back from him, as it 
seemed to Ryabovitch, with aversion. He, too, al- 
most shrieked and rushed towards the gleam of light 
at the door. ... < 


184. The Party and Other Stories 


When he went back into the drawing-room his ~ 
heart was beating and his hands were trembling so 
noticeably that he made haste to hide them behind 
his back. At first he was tormented by shame and 
dread that the whole drawing-room knew that he 
had just been kissed and embraced by a woman. 
He shrank into himself and looked uneasily about 
him, but as he became convinced that people were 
dancing and talking as calmly as ever, he gave him- 
self up entirely to the new sensation which he had 
never experienced before in his life. Something 
strange was happening to him. . . . His neck, round 
which soft, fragrant arms had so lately been clasped, 
seemed to him to be anointed with oil; on his left 
cheek near his moustache where the unknown had 
kissed him there was a faint chilly tingling sensation 
as from peppermint drops, and the more he rubbed 
the place the more distinct was the chilly sensation; 
all over, from head to foot, he was full of a strange 
new feeling which grew stronger and stronger. . . . 
He wanted to dance, to talk, to run into the garden, 
to laugh aloud. . . . He quite forgot that he was 
round-shouldered and uninteresting, that he had 
lynx-like whiskers and an “ undistinguished appear- 
ance’ (that was how his appearance had been de- 
scribed by some ladies whose conversation he had 
accidentally overheard). When Von Rabbek’s wife 
happened to pass by him, he gave her such a broad 


The Kiss 185 


and friendly smile that she stood still and looked 
at him inquiringly. 

“I like your house immensely!” he said, setting 
his spectacles straight. 

The General’s wife smiled and said that the house 
had belonged to her father; then she asked whether 
his parents were living, whether he had long been 
in the army, why he was so thin, and so on... . 
After receiving answers to her questions, she went 
on, and after his conversation with her his smiles 
were more friendly than ever, and he thought he was 
surrounded by splendid people... . 

At supper Ryabovitch ate mechanically every- 
thing offered him, drank, and without listening to 
anything, tried to understand what had just hap- 
pened to him. . . . The adventure was of a mys- 
terious and romantic character, but it was not dif_i- 
cult to explain it. No doubt some girl or young 
married lady had arranged a tryst with some one in 
the dark room; had waited a long time, and being 
nervous and excited had taken Ryabovitch for her 
hero; this was the more probable as Ryabovitch had 
stood still hesitating in the dark room, so that he, 
too, had seemed like a person expecting something. 
. . . This was how Ryabovitch explained to himself 
the kiss he had received. 

** And who is she?’ he wondered, looking round 
at the women’s faces. ‘‘She must be young, for 


186 The Party and Other Stories 


elderly ladies don’t give rendezvous. “That she was 
a lady, one could tell by the rustle of her dress, her 
perfume, het voice...” 

His eyes rested on the lilac young lady, and he 
thought her very attractive; she had beautiful shoul- 
ders and arms, a clever face, and a delightful voice. 
Ryabovitch, looking at her, hoped that she and no 
one else was his unknown. . . . But she laughed 
somehow artificially and wrinkled up her long nose, 
which seemed to him to make her look old. Then 
he turned his eyes upon the fair girl in a black dress. 
She was younger, simpler, and more genuine, had 
a charming brow, and drank very daintily out of her 
wineglass. Ryabovitch now hoped that it was she. 
But soon he began to think her face flat, and fixed 
his eyes upon the one next her. 

“It’s difficult to guess,” he thought, musing. “ If 
one takes the shoulders and arms of the lilac one 
only, adds the brow of the fair one and the eyes of 
the one on the left of Lobytko, then . . .” 

He made a combination of these things in his mind 
and so formed the image of the girl who had kissed 
_him, the image that he wanted her to have, but could 

not find at the table. . . . 

After supper, replete and exhilarated, the officers 
began to take leave and say thank you. Von Rab- 
bek and his wife began again apologizing that they 
could not ask them to stay the night. 


The Kiss 187 


“Very, very glad to have met you, gentlemen,” 
said Von Rabbek, and this time sincerely (probably 
because people are far more sincere and good- 
humoured at speeding their parting guests than on 
meeting them). ‘Delighted. I hope you will 
come on your way back! Don’t stand on ceremony! 
Where are you going? Do you want to go by the 
_ upper way? No, go across the garden; it’s nearer 
here by the lower way.” 

The officers went out into the garden. After 
the bright light and the noise the garden seemed 
very dark and quiet. They walked in silence all 
the way to the gate. They were a little drunk, 
pleased, and in good spirits, but the darkness and 
silence made them thoughtful for a minute. Prob- 
ably the same idea occurred to each one of them as 
to Ryabovitch: would there ever come a time for 
them when, like Von Rabbek, they would have a 
large house, a family, a garden — when they, too, 
would be able to welcome people, even though in- 
sincerely, feed them, make them drunk and con- 
tented? 

Going out of the garden gate, they all began talk- 
ing at once and laughing loudly about nothing. 
They were walking now along the little path that 
led down to the river, and then ran along the water’s 
edge, winding round the bushes on the bank, the 
pools, and the willows that overhung the water. 


188 The Party and Other Stories 


The bank and the path were scarcely visible, and 
the other bank was entirely plunged in darkness. 
Stars were reflected here and there on the dark 
water; they quivered and were broken up on the sur- 
face — and from that alone it could be seen that the 
river was flowing rapidly. It was still. Drowsy 
curlews cried plaintively on the further bank, and 
in one of the bushes on the nearest side a nightingale 
was trilling loudly, taking no notice of the crowd of 
officers. The officers stood round the bush, touched 
it, but the nightingale went on singing. 

‘What a fellow!” they exclaimed approvingly. 
‘We stand beside him and he takes not a bit of no- 
tice! What a rascal!” 

At the end of the way the path went uphill, and, 
skirting the church enclosure, turned into the road. 
Here the officers, tired with walking uphill, sat down 
and lighted their cigarettes. On the other side of 
the river a murky red fire came into sight, and hay- 
ing nothing better to do, they spent a long time in 
discussing whether it was a camp fire or a light in a 
window, or something else. . . . Ryabovitch, too, 
looked at the light, and he fancied that the light 
looked and winked at him, as though it knew about 
the kiss. 

On reaching his quarters, Ryabovitch undressed as 
quickly as possible and got into bed. Lobytko and 


The Kiss 189 


Lieutenant Merzlyakov —a peaceable, silent fel- 
low, who was considered in his own circle a highly 
educated officer, and was always, whenever it was 
possible, reading the ‘‘ Vyestnik Evropi,” which he 
carried about with him everywhere — were quar- 
tered in the same hut with Ryabovitch. Lobytko 
undressed, walked up and down the room for a long 
while with the air of a man who has not been satis- 
fied, and sent his orderly for beer. Merzlyakov 
got into bed, put a candle by his pillow and plunged 
into reading the “‘ Vyestnik Evropi.” 

“Who was she?”’ Ryabovitch wondered, looking 
at the smoky ceiling. 

His neck still felt as though he had been anointed 
with oil, and there was still the chilly sensation near 
his mouth as though from peppermint drops. ‘The 
shoulders and arms of the young lady in lilac, the 
brow and the truthful eyes of the fair girl in black, 
waists, dresses, and brooches, floated through his 
imagination. He tried to fix his attention on these 
images, but they danced about, broke up and flick- 
ered.. When these images vanished altogether from 
the broad dark background which every man sees 
when he closes his eyes, he began to hear hurried 
footsteps, the rustle of skirts, the sound of a kiss and 
— an intense groundless joy took possession of him. 
. . . Abandoning himself to this joy, he heard the 


190 The Party and Other Stories 


orderly return and announce that there was no beer.. 
Lobytko was terribly indignant, and began pacing up 
and down again. 

“Well, isn’t he an idiot?” he kept saying, stop- 
ping first before Ryabovitch and then before Merz- 
lyakov. ‘‘ What a fool and a dummy a man must 
be not to get hold of any beer! Eh? Isn’t he a 
scoundrel?” 

‘Of course you can’t get beer here,” said Merz- 
lyakoy, not removing his eyes from the “ Vyestnik 
Evropi.” 

‘‘Oh! Is that your opinion? ” Lobytko persisted. 
‘Lord have mercy upon us, if you dropped me on 
the moon I'd find you beer and women directly! 
I'll go and find some at once. . . . You may call me 
an impostor if I don’t!” 

He spent a long time in dressing and pulling on 
his high boots, then finished smoking his cigarette in 
silence and went out. 

‘“Rabbek, Grabbek, Labbek,” he muttered, stop- 
ping in the outer room. “I don’t care to go alone, 
damn it all! Ryabovitch, wouldn’t you like to go 
fora walk? Eh?” 

Receiving no answer, he returned, slowly un- 
dressed and got into bed. Merzlyakov sighed, put 
the ‘‘ Vyestnik Evropi”’ away, and put out the light. 

“Hm! .. .”” muttered Lobytko, lighting a ciga- 
rette in the dark. 


The Kiss 191 


Ryabovitch pulled the bed-clothes over his head, 
curled himself up in bed, and tried to gather together 
the floating images in his mind and to combine them 
into one whole. But nothing came of it. He soon 
fell asleep, and his last thought was that some one 
had caressed him and made him happy — that some- 
thing extraordinary, foolish, but joyful and delight- 
ful, had come into his life. The thought did not 
leave him even in his sleep. 

When he woke up the sensations of oil on his neck 
and the chill of peppermint about his lips had gone, . 
but joy flooded his heart just as the day before. He 
looked enthusiastically at the window-frames, gilded 
by the light of the rising sun, and listened to the 
movement of the passers-by in the street. People 
were talking loudly close to the window. Lebedet- 
sky, the commander of Ryabovitch’s battery, who 
had only just overtaken the brigade, was talking to 
his sergeant at the top of his voice, being always 
accustomed to shout. 

‘What else?’ shouted the commander. 

“When they were shoeing yesterday, your high 
nobility, they drove a nail into Pigeon’s hoof. ‘The 
vet. put on clay and vinegar; they are leading him 
apart now. And also, your honour, Artemyev got 
drunk yesterday, and the lieutenant ordered him to 
be put in the limber of a spare gun-carriage.” 

The sergeant reported that Karpov had forgotten 


192 The Party and Other Stories 


the new cords for the trumpets and the rings for the 
tents, and that their honours, the officers, had spent 
the previous evening visiting General Von Rabbek. 
In the middle of this conversation the red-bearded 
face of Lebedetsky appeared in the window. He 
screwed up his short-sighted eyes, looking at the - 
sleepy faces of the officers, and said good-morning to 
them. 

‘Ts everything all right?” he asked. 

“* One of the horses has a sore neck from the new 
collar,” answered Lobytko, yawning. 

The commander sighed, thought a moment, and 
said in a loud voice: 

“IT am thinking of going to see Alexandra Yev- 
grafovna. I must call onher. Well, good-bye. I 
shall catch you up in the evening.” 

A quarter of an hour later the brigade set off on 
its way. When it was moving along the road by the 
granaries, Ryabovitch looked at the house on the 
right. The blinds were down in all the windows. 
Evidently the household was still asleep. The one 
who had kissed Ryabovitch the day before was 
asleep, too. He tried *o imagine her asleep. The 
wide-open windows of the bedroom, the green 
branches peeping in, the morning freshness, the scent 
of the poplars, lilac, and roses, the bed, a chair, and 
on it the skirts that had rustled the day before, the 
little slippers, the little watch on the table — all this 


The Kiss 193 


he pictured to himself clearly and distinctly, but the 
features of the face, the sweet sleepy smile, just what 
was characteristic and important, slipped through 
his imagination like quicksilver through the fingers. 
When he had ridden on half a mile, he looked back: 
the yellow church, the house, and the river, were all 
bathed in light; the river with its bright green banks, 
- with the blue sky reflected in it and glints of silver 
in the sunshine here and there, was very beautiful. 
Ryabovitch gazed for the last time at Myestetchki, 
and he felt as sad as though he were parting with 
something very near and dear to him. 

And before him on the road lay nothing but long 
familiar, uninteresting pictures. . . . To right and 
to left, fields of young rye and buckwheat with rooks 
hopping about in them. If one looked ahead, one 
saw dust and the backs of men’s heads; if one looked 
back, one saw the same dust and faces. . . . Fore- 
most of all marched four men with sabres — this 
was the vanguard. Next, behind, the crowd of 
singers, and behind them the trumpeters on horse- 
back. ‘The vanguard and the chorus of singers, like 
torch-bearers in a funeral procession, often forgot 
to keep the regulation distance and pushed a long 
way ahead. . . . Ryabovitch was with the first can- 
non of the fifth battery. He could see all the four 
batteries moving in front of him. For any one not 
a military man this long tedious procession of a 


194 The Party and Other Stories 


moving brigade seems an intricate and unintelligible 
muddle; one cannot understand why there are so 
many people round one cannon, and why it is drawn 
by so many horses in such a strange network of har- 
ness, as though it really were so terrible and heavy. 
To Ryabovitch it was all perfectly comprehensible 
and therefore uninteresting. He had known for 
ever so long why at the head of each battery there 
rode a stalwart bombardier, and why he was called 
a bombardier; immediately behind this bombardier 
could be seen the horsemen of the first and then of 
the middle units. Ryabovitch knew that the horses 
on which they rode, those on the left, were called one 
name, while those on the right were called another 
—it was extremely uninteresting. Behind the 
horsemen came two shaft-horses. On one of them 
sat a rider with the dust of yesterday on his back and 
a clumsy and funny-looking piece of wood on his leg. 
Ryabovitch knew the object of this piece of wood, 
and did not think it funny. All the riders waved 
their whips mechanically and shouted from time to 
time. The cannon itself was ugly. On the fore 
part lay sacks of oats covered with canvas, and the 
cannon itself was hung all over with kettles, soldiers’ - 
knapsacks, bags, and looked like some small harm- 
less animal surrounded for some unknown reason by 
men and horses. To the leeward of it marched six 
men, the gunners, swinging their arms. After the 


The Kiss 195 


cannon there came again more bombardiers, riders, 
shaft-horses, and behind them another cannon, as 
ugly and unimpressive as the first. After the second 
followed a third, a fourth; near the fourth an officer, 
and so on. ‘There were six batteries in all in the 


brigade, and four cannons in each battery. The | 


procession covered half a mile; it ended in a string 
_ of wagons near which an extremely attractive 
creature — the ass, Magar, brought by a battery 
commander from Turkey — paced pensively with 
his long-eared head drooping. 

Ryabovitch looked indifferently before and behind, 
at the backs of heads and at faces; at any other 
time he would have been half asleep, but now he 
was entirely absorbed in his new agreeable thoughts. 
At first when the brigade was setting off on the 
march he tried to persuade himself that the incident 
of the kiss could only be interesting as a mysterious 
little adventure, that it was in reality trivial, and to 
think of it seriously, to say the least of it, was stupid; 
but now he bade farewell to logic and gave himself 
up to dreams. .. . At one moment he imagined 
himself in Von Rabbek’s drawing-room beside a girl 
who was like the young lady in lilac and the fair 
girl in black; then he would close his eyes and see 
himself with another, entirely unknown girl, whose 
features were very vague. In his imagination he 
talked, caressed her, leaned on her shoulder, pic- 


196 The Party and Other Stories 


tured war, separation, then meeting again, supper 
with his wife, children. .. . 

“ Brakes on!” the word of command rang out 
every time they went downhill. 

He, too, shouted “‘ Brakes on!” and was afraid 
this shout would disturb his reverie and bring him 
back to reality. ... 

As they passed by some landowner’s estate Ryabo- 
vitch looked over the fence into the garden. A long 
avenue, straight as a ruler, strewn with yellow sand 
and bordered with young birch-trees, met his eyes. 
. .. With the eagerness of a man given up to 
dreaming, he pictured to himself little feminine feet 
tripping along yellow sand, and quite unexpectedly 
had a clear vision in his imagination of the girl who 
had kissed him and whom he had succeeded in pic- 
turing to himself the evening before at supper. 
This image remained in his brain and did not desert 
him again. 

At midday there was a shout in the rear near the 
string of wagons: 

“Rasy! Eyes to the left! Officers!” 

The general of the brigade drove by in a carriage 
with a pair of white horses. He stopped near the 
second battery, and shouted something which no one 
understood. Several officers, among them Ryabo- 
vitch, galloped up to them. 


The Kiss 197 


“Well?” asked the general, blinking his red 
eyes Are there any: sick?’ 

Receiving an answer, the general, a little skinny 
man, chewed, thought for a moment and said, ad- 
dressing one of the officers: 

“One of your drivers of the third cannon has 
taken off his leg-guard and hung it on the fore part 
_of the cannon, the rascal. Reprimand him.” 

He raised his eyes to Ryabovitch and went on: 

““ It seems to me your front strap is too long.” 

Making a few other tedious remarks, the general 
looked at Lobytko and grinned. 

“You look very melancholy today, Lieutenant 
Lobytko,” he said. “Are you pining for Madame 
Lopuhov? Eh? Gentlemen, he is pining for 
Madame Lopuhoy.” 

The lady in question was a very stout and tall per- 
son who had long passed her fortieth year. The 
general, who had a predilection for solid ladies, 
whatever their ages, suspected a similar taste in his 
officers. The officers smiled respectfully. The gen- 
eral, delighted at having said something very amus- 
ing and biting, laughed loudly, touched his coach- 
man’s back, and saluted. The carriage rolled 
Onset 
“* All Iam dreaming about now which seems to me 
so impossible and unearthly is really quite an ordi- 


a) 


198 The Party and Other Stories 


nary thing,’ thought Ryabovitch, looking at the 
clouds of dust racing after the general’s carriage. 
“It’s all very ordinary, and every one goes through 
it. . . . That general, for instance, has once been in 
love; now he is married and has children. Captain 
Vahter, too, is married and beloved, though the nape 
of his neck is very red and ugly and he has no waist. 
. . - Salmanov is coarse and very Tatar, but he has 
had a:love affair that has ended in marriage. . . . I 
am the same as every one else, and I, too, shall have 
the same experience as every one else, sooner or 
laterareco.: 

And the thought that he was an ordinary person, 
and that his life was ordinary, delighted him and 
gave him courage. He pictured her and his happi- 
ness as he pleased, and put no rein on his imagina- 
tion. ne. 

When the brigade reached their halting-place in 
the evening, and the officers were resting in their 
tents, Ryabovitch, Merzlyakov, and Lobytko were 
sitting round a box having supper. Merzlyakov ate 
without haste, and, as he munched deliberately, read 
the “ Vyestnik Evropi,” which he held on his knees. 
Lobytko talked incessantly and kept filling up his 
glass with beer, and Ryabovitch, whose head was 
confused from dreaming all day long, drank and said 
nothing. After three glasses he got a little drunk, 


The Kiss 199 


felt weak, and had an irresistible desire to impart his 
new sensations to his comrades. 

‘A strange thing happened to me at those Von 
Rabbeks’,” he began, trying to put an indifferent 
and ironical tone into his voice. ‘‘ You know I 
went into the billiard-room. . . .” 

He began describing very minutely the incident of 
the kiss, and a moment later relapsed into silence. 
. . . Inthe course of that moment he had told every- 
thing, and it surprised him dreadfully to find how 
short a time it took him to tell it. He had imagined 
that he could have been telling the story of the kiss 
till next morning. Listening to him, Lobytko, who 
was a great liar and consequently believed no one, 
looked at him sceptically and laughed. Merzlyakov 
twitched his eyebrows and, without removing his 
eyes from the “‘ Vyestnik Evropi,” said: 

“That’s an odd thing! How strange! ... 
throws herself on a man’s neck, without addressing 
him by name. . . . She must be some sort of hys- 
terical neurotic.” 

“* Yes, she must,” Ryabovitch agreed. 

‘‘A similar thing once happened to me,” said 
Lobytko, assuming a scared expression. “I was 
going last year to Kovno. . . . I took a second-class 
ticket. The train was crammed, and it was impos- 
sible to sleep. I gave the guard half a rouble; he 


200 The Party and Other Stories 


took my luggage and led me to another compart- 
ment. . . . I lay down and covered myself with a 
rug. . . . It. was dark, you understand. Suddenly 
I felt some one touch me on the shoulder and breathe 
in my face. I made a movement with my hand and 
felt somebody’s elbow. . . . I opened my eyes and 
only imagine —a woman. Black eyes, lips red as a 
prime salmon, nostrils breathing passionately — a 
bosom like a buffer. . . .” 

‘““Excuse me,’ Merzlyakov interrupted calmly, 
‘“‘T understand about the bosom, but how could you 
see the lips if it was dark?” 

Lobytko began trying to put himself right and 
laughing at Merzlyakov’s unimaginativeness. It 
made Ryabovitch wince. He walked away from the 
box, got into bed, and vowed never to confide again. 

Camp life began. . . . The days flowed by, one 
very much like another. All those days Ryabovitch 
felt, thought, and behaved as though he were in 
love. Every morning when his orderly handed him 
water to wash with, and he sluiced his head with cold 
water, he thought there was something warm and 
delightful in his life. 

In the evenings when his comrades began talking 
of love and women, he would listen, and draw up 
closer; and he wore the expression of a soldier when 
he hears the description of a battle in which he has 
taken part. And on the evenings when the officers, 


The Kiss 201 


out on the spree with the setter — Lobytko — at 
their head, made Don Juan excursions to the 
“suburb,” and Ryabovitch took part in such excur- 
sions, he always was sad, felt profoundly guilty, and 
inwardly begged her forgiveness. . . . In hours of 
leisure or on sleepless nights, when he felt moved 
to recall his childhood, his father and mother — 
everything near and dear, in fact, he invariably 
‘thought of Myestetchki, the strange horse, Von 
Rabbek, his wife who was like the Empress 
Eugenie, the dark room, the crack of light at the 
d0otee 

On the thirty-first of August he went back from the 
camp, not with the whole brigade, but with only two 
batteries of it. He was dreaming and excited all the 
way, as though he were going back to his native 
place. He had an intense longing to see again the 
strange horse, the church, the insincere family of the 
Von Rabbeks, the dark room. ‘The “ inner voice,” 
which so often deceives lovers, whispered to him for 
some reason that he would be sure to see her... 
and he was tortured by the questions, How he should 
meet her? What he would talk to her about? 
Whether she had forgotten the kiss? If the worst 
came to the worst, he thought, even if he did not 
meet her, it would be a pleasure to him merely to 
go through the dark room and recall the past... . 

Towards evening there appeared on the horizon 


202 The Party and Other Stories 


the familiar church and white granaries. Ryabo- 
vitch’s heart beat. . . . He did not hear the officer 
who was riding beside him and saying something to 
him, he forgot everything, and looked eagerly at the 
river shining in the distance, at the roof of the 
house, at the dovecote round which the pigeons were 
circling in the light of the setting sun. 

When they reached the church and were listening 
to the billeting orders, he expected every second that 
a man on horseback would come round the church 
enclosure and invite the officers to tea, but . . . the 
billeting orders were read, the officers were in haste 
to go on to the village, and the man on horseback did 
not appear. 

“ Von Rabbek will hear at once from the peasants 
that we have come and will send for us,” thought 
Ryabovitch, as he went into the hut, unable to un- 
derstand why a comrade was lighting a candle and 
why the orderlies were hurriedly setting samo- 
Varese ves 

A painful uneasiness took possession of him. He 
lay down, then got up and looked out of the window 
to see whether the messenger were coming. But 
there was no sign of him. 

He lay down again, but half an hour later he got 
up, and, unable to restrain his uneasiness, went into 
the street and strode towards the church. It was 
dark and deserted in the square near the church... . 


The Kiss 203 


Three soldiers were standing silent in a row where 
the road began to go downhill. Seeing Ryabovitch, 
they roused themselves and saluted. He returned 
the salute and began to go down the familiar path. 

On the further side of the river the whole sky was 
flooded with crimson: the moon was rising; two 
peasant women, talking loudly, were picking cabbage 
in the kitchen garden; behind the kitchen garden 
there were some dark huts. . . . And everything on 
the near side of the river was just as it had been in 
May: the path, the bushes, the willows overhanging 
the water . . . but there was no sound of the brave 
nightingale, and no scent of poplar and fresh grass. 

Reaching the garden, Ryabovitch looked in at the 
gate. The garden was dark and still. ... He 
could see nothing but the white stems of the nearest 
birch-trees and a little bit of the avenue; all the rest 
melted together into a dark blur. Ryabovitch 
looked and listened eagerly, but after waiting for a 
quarter of an hour without hearing a sound or catch- 
ing a glimpse of a light, he trudged back... . 

He went down to the river. The General’s bath- 
house and the bath-sheets on the rail of the little 
bridge showed white before him. . . . He went on 
to the bridge, stood a little, and, quite unnecessarily, 
touched the sheets. They felt rough and cold. He 
looked down at the water. . . . The river ran rap- 
idly and with a faintly audible gurgle round the piles 


204. The Party and Other Stories 


of the bath-house. The red moon was reflected near 
the left bank; little ripples ran over the reflection, 
stretching it out, breaking it into bits, and seemed 
trying to carry it away. ... 

‘“‘ How stupid, how stupid!’ thought Ryabovitch, 
looking at the running water. “ How unintelligent 
it allis!” 

Now that he expected nothing, the incident of the 
kiss, his impatience, his vague hopes and disappoint- 
ment, presented themselves in a clear light. It no 
longer seemed to him strange that he had not seen 
the General’s messenger, and that he would never see 
the girl who had accidentally kissed him instead of 
some one else; on the contrary, it would have been 
strange if he had seen her. . . 

The water was running, he knew not where or 
why, just as it did in May. In May it had flowed 
into the great river, from the great river into the 
sea; then it had risen in vapour, turned into rain, 
and perhaps the very same water was running now 
before Ryaboyvitch’s eyes again. . . . What for? 
Why? 

And the whole world, the whole of life, seemed 
to Ryabovitch an unintelligible, aimless jest. . . 
And turning his eyes from the water and looking at 
the sky, he remembered again how fate in the person 
of an unknown woman had by chance caressed him, 
he remembered his summer dreams and fancies, and 


The Kiss 205 


his life struck him as extraordinarily meagre, pov- 
erty-stricken, and colourless. . . . 

When he went back to his hut he did not find one 
of his comrades. ‘The orderly informed him that 
they had all gone to ‘‘ General von Rabbek’s, who 
had sent a messenger on horseback to invite 
ENEIN tenant: 

For an instant there was a flash of joy in Ryabo- 
vitch’s heart, but he quenched it at once, got into bed, 
and in his wrath with his fate, as though to spite it, 
did not go to the General’s. 


eo ay 


“ANNA ON THE NECK” 


“ANNA ON THE NECK” 


I 


AFTER the wedding they had not even light refresh- 
_ ments; the happy pair simply drank a glass of cham- 
pagne, changed into their travelling things, and 
drove to the station. Instead of a gay wedding ball 
and supper, instead of music and dancing, they went 
on a journey to pray at a shrine a hundred and fifty 
miles away. Many people commended this, saying 
that Modest Alexeitch was a man high up in the 
service and no longer young, and that a noisy wed- 
ding might not have seemed quite suitable; and music 
is apt to sound dreary when a government official of 
fifty-two marries a girl who is only just eighteen. 
People said, too, that Modest Alexeitch, being a 
man of principle, had arranged this visit to the mon- 
astery expressly in order to make his young bride 
realize that even in marriage he put religion and 
morality above everything. 

The happy pair were seen off at the station. The 
crowd of relations and colleagues in the service 
stood, with glasses in their hands, waiting for the 
train to start to shout ‘‘ Hurrah!” and the bride’s 

209 


210 The Party and Other Stories 


father, Pyotr Leontyitch, wearing a top-hat and the 
uniform of a teacher, already drunk and very pale, 
kept craning towards the window, glass in hand and 
saying in an imploring voice: 

‘“Anyuta! Anya, Anya! one word!” 

Anna bent out of the window to him, and he whis- 
pered something to her, enveloping her in a stale 
smell of alcohol, blew into her ear — she could make 
out nothing — and made the sign of the cross over 
her face, her bosom, and her hands; meanwhile he 
was breathing in gasps and tears were shining in his 
eyes. And the schoolboys, Anna’s brothers, Petya 
and Andrusha, pulled at his coat from behind, whis- 
pering in confusion: 

“Father, hush! ... Father, that’s enough. . . .” 

When the train started, Anna saw her father run 
a little way after the train, staggering and spilling 
his wine, and what a kind, guilty, pitiful face he had: 

“ Hurra — ah!” he shouted. 

The happy pair were left alone. Modest Alexe- 
itch looked about the compartment, arranged their 
things on the shelves, and sat down, smiling, opposite 
his young wife. He was an official of medium 
height, rather stout and puffy, who looked exceed- 
ingly well nourished, with long whiskers and no 
moustache. His clean-shaven, round, sharply de- 
fined chin looked like the heel of a foot. The most 
characteristic point in his face was the absence of 


“Anna on the Neck” 25 beh 


moustache, the bare, freshly shaven place, which 
gradually passed into the fat cheeks, quivering like 
jelly. His deportment was dignified, his movements 
were deliberate, his manner was soft. 

“I cannot help remembering now one circum- 
stance,’ he said, smiling. ‘‘ When, five years ago, 
Kosorotov received the order of St. Anna of the 
second grade, and went to thank His Excellency, His 
Excellency expressed himself as follows: ‘So now 
you have three Annas: one in your buttonhole and 
two on your neck.’ And it must be explained that 
at that time Kosorotov’s wife, a quarrelsome and 
frivolous person, had just returned to him, and that 
her name was Anna. I trust that when I receive 
the Anna of the second grade His Excellency will 
not have occasion to say the same thing to me.” 

He smiled with his little eyes. And she, too, 
smiled, troubled at the thought that at any moment 
this man might kiss her with his thick damp lips, 
and that she had no right to prevent his doing so. 
The soft movements of his fat person frightened 
her; she felt both fear and disgust. He got up, 
without haste took off the order from his neck, took 
off his coat and waistcoat, and put on his dressing- 
gown. 

“That’s better,” he said, sitting down beside 
Anna. 

Anna remembered what agony the wedding had 


212 The Party and Other Stories 


been, when it had seemed to her that the priest, and 
the guests, and every one in church had been looking 
at her sorrowfully and asking why, why was she, 
such a sweet, nice girl, marrying such an elderly, 
uninteresting gentleman. Only that morning she 
was delighted that everything had been satisfactorily , 
arranged, but at the time of the wedding, and now 
in the railway carriage, she felt cheated, guilty, and 
ridiculous. Here she had married a rich man and 
yet she had no money, her wedding-dress had been 
bought on credit, and when her father and brothers 
had been saying good-bye, she could see from their 
faces that they had not a farthing. Would they 
have any supper that day? And tomorrow? And 
for some reason it seemed to her that her father and 
the boys were sitting tonight hungry without her, 
and feeling the same misery as they had the day after 
their mother’s funeral. 

‘Oh, how unhappy I am!” she thought. ‘‘ Why 
am I so unhappy?” 

With the awkwardness of a man with settled hab- 
its, unaccustomed to deal with women, Modest 
Alexeitch touched her on the waist and patted her on 
the shoulder, while she went on thinking about 
money, about her mother and her mother’s death. 
When her mother died, her father, Pyotr Leontyitch, 
a teacher of drawing and writing in the high school, 
had taken to drink, impoverishment had followed, 


“Anna on the Neck” pals 


the boys had not had boots or goloshes, their father 
had been hauled up before the magistrate, the war- 
rant officer had come and made an inventory of the 
furniture. . . . What a disgrace! Anna had had 
to look after her drunken father, darn her brothers’ 
stockings, go to market, and when she was compli- 
mented on her youth, her beauty, and her elegant 
manners, it seemed to her that every one was looking 
at her cheap hat and the holes in her boots that were 
inked over. And at night there had been tears and 
a haunting dread that her father would soon, very 
soon, be dismissed from the school for his weakness, - 
and that he would not survive it, but would die, too, 
like their mother. But ladies of their acquaintance 
had taken the matter in hand and looked about for a 
good match for Anna. This Modest Alexevitch, 
who was neither young nor good-looking but had 
money, was soon found. He had a hundred thou- 
sand in the bank and the family estate, which he had 
let on lease. He was a man of principle and stood 
well with His Excellency; it would be nothing to him, 
so they told Anna, to get a note from His Excellency 
to the directors of the high school, or even to the 
Education Commissioner, to prevent Pyotr Leon- 
tyitch from being dismissed. 

While she was recalling these details, she sud- 
denly heard strains of music which floated in at the 
window, together with the sound of voices. The 


214 The Party and Other Stories 


train was stopping at a station. In the crowd be- 
yond the platform an accordion and a cheap squeaky 
fiddle were being briskly played, and the sound of a 
military band came from beyond the villas and the 
tall birches and poplars that lay bathed in the moon- 
light; there must have been a dance in the place. 
Summer visitors and townspeople, who used to come 
out here by train in fine weather for a breath of fresh 
air, were parading up and down on the platform. 
Among them was the wealthy. owner of all the sum- 
mer villas —a tall, stout, dark man called Artynov. 
He had prominent eyes and looked like an Armenian. 
He wore a strange costume; his shirt was unbut- 
toned, showing his chest; he wore high boots with 
spurs, and a black cloak hung from his shoulders and 
dragged on the ground like a train. Two boar- 
hounds followed him with their sharp noses to the 
ground. 

Tears were still shining in Anna’s eyes, but she 
was not thinking now of her mother, nor of money, 
nor of her marriage; but shaking hands with school- 
boys and officers she knew, she laughed gaily and 
said quickly: 

“How do youdo? Howare you?” 

She went out on to the platform between the car- 
riages into the moonlight, and stood so that they 
could all see her in her new splendid dress and hat. 

‘““ Why are we stopping here?” she asked. 


° 


at ok a> ial 


“Anna on the Neck” PRS 


“This is a junction. They are waiting for the 
mail train to pass.” 

Seeing that Artynov was looking at her, she 
screwed up her eyes coquettishly and began talking 
aloud in French; and because her voice sounded so 
pleasant, and because she heard music and the moon 
was reflected in the pond, and because Artynov, the 

notorious Don Juan and spoiled child of fortune, was 

looking at her eagerly and with curiosity, and be- 
cause every one was in good spirits — she suddenly 
felt joyful, and when the train started and the off- 
cers of her acquaintance saluted her, she was hum- 
ming the polka the strains of which reached her from 
the military band playing beyond the trees; and she 
returned to her compartment feeling as though it 
had been proved to her at the station that she would 
certainly be happy in spite of everything. 

The happy pair spent two days at the monastery, 
then went back to town. They lived in a rent-free 
flat. When Modest Alexevitch had gone to the 
office, Anna played the piano, or shed tears of de- 
pression, or lay down on a couch and read novels or 
looked through fashion papers. At dinner Modest 
Alexevitch ate a great deal and talked about polli- 
tics, about appointments, transfers, and promotions 
in the service, about the necessity of hard work, and 
said that, family life not being a pleasure but a duty, 
if you took care of the kopecks the roubles would 


216 The Party and Other Stories 


take care of themselves, and that he put religion and 
morality before everything else in the world. And 
holding his knife in his fist as though it were a sword, 
he would say: 

“* Every one ought to have his duties! ” 

And Anna listened to him, was frightened, and 
could not eat, and she usually got up from the table 
hungry. After dinner her husband lay down for a 
nap and snored loudly, while Anna went to see her 
own people. Her father and the boys looked at her 
in a peculiar way, as though just before she came in 
they had been blaming her for having married for 
money a tedious, wearisome man she did not love; 
her rustling skirts, her bracelets, and her general air 
of a married lady, offended them and made them un- 
comfortable. In her presence they felt a little em- 
barrassed and did not know what to talk to her 
about; but yet they still loved her as before, and were 
not used to having dinner without her. She sat 
down with them to cabbage soup, porridge, and fried 
potatoes, smelling of mutton dripping. Pyotr 
Leontyitch filled his glass from the decanter with a 
trembling hand and drank it off hurriedly, greedily, 
with repulsion, then poured out'a second glass and 
then a third. Petya and Andrusha, thin, pale boys 
with big eyes, would take the decanter and say des- 
perately: 

“You mustn’t, father. . . . Enough, father. . . .” 


“Anna on the Neck” Boiky) 


And Anna, too, was troubled and entreated him to 
drink no more; and he would suddenly fly into a rage 
and beat the table with his fists: 

‘I won’t allow any one to dictate to me!” he 
would shout. “ Wretched boys! wretched girl! 
Pll turn you all out!” 

But there was a note of weakness, of good-nature 
in his voice, and no one was afraid of him. After 
dinner he usually dressed in his best. Pale, with a 
cut on his chin from shaving, craning his thin neck, 
he would stand for half an hour before the glass, 
prinking, combing his hair, twisting his black mous- 
tache, sprinkling himself with scent, tying his cravat 
in a bow; then he would put on his gloves and his top- 
hat, and go off to give his private lessons. Or if it 
was a holiday he would stay at home and paint, or 
play the harmonium, which wheezed and growled; 
he would try to wrest from it pure harmonious 
sounds and would sing to it; or would storm at the 
boys: 

““Wretches! Good-for-nothing boys! You have 
spoiled the instrument! ” 

In the evening Anna’s husband played cards with 
his colleagues, who lived under the same roof in the 
government quarters. The wives of these gentle- 
men would come in—ugly, tastelessly dressed 
women, as coarse as cooks — and gossip would begin 
in the flat as tasteless and unattractive as the ladies 


218 The Party and Other Stories 


themselves. Sometimes Modest Alexevitch would 
take Anna to the theatre. In the intervals he would 
never let her stir a step from his side, but walked 
about arm in arm with her through the corridors and 
the foyer. When he bowed to some one, he imme- 
diately whispered to Anna: ‘A civil councillor 

. visits at His Excellency’s”; or, “A man of 
means . . . has a house of his own.” When they 
passed the buffet Anna had a great longing for some- 
thing sweet; she was fond of chocolate and apple 
cakes, but she had no money, and she did not like to 
ask her husband. He would take a pear, pinch it 
with his fingers, and ask uncertainly: 

“ How much?” 

“ Twenty-five kopecks! ”’ 

“IT say!” he would reply, and put it down; but 
as it was awkward to leave the buffet without buying 
anything, he would order some seltzer-water and 
drink the whole bottle himself, and tears would come 
into his eyes. And Anna hated him at such times. 

And suddenly flushing crimson, he would say to 
her rapidly: 

“Bow to that old lady!” 

‘But I don’t know her.” 

“No matter. That’s the wife of the director of 
the local treasury! Bow, I tell you,” he would 
grumble insistently. ‘‘ Your head won’t drop off.” 

Anna bowed and her head certainly did not drop 


“Anna on the Neck” 219 


off, but it was agonizing. She did everything her 
husband wanted her to, and was furious with her- 
self for having let him deceive her like the veriest 
idiot. She had only married him for his money, and 
yet she had less money now than before her mar- 
riage. In old days her father would sometimes give 
her twenty kopecks, but now she had not a farthing. 
To take money by stealth or ask for it, she could not; 
she was afraid of her husband, she trembled before 
him. She felt as though she had been afraid of him 
for years. In her childhood the director of the 
high school had always seemed the most impressive 
and terrifying force in the world, sweeping down 
like a thunderstorm or a steam-engine ready to crush 
her; another similar force of which the whole family 
talked, and of which they were for some reason 
afraid, was His Excellency; then there were a dozen 
others, less formidable, and among them the teachers 
at the high school, with shaven upper lips, stern, 
implacable; and now finally, there was Modest 
Alexeitch, a man of principle, who even resembled 
the director in the face. And in Anna’s imagina- 
tion all these forces blended together into one, and, 
in the form of a terrible, huge white bear, menaced 
the weak and erring such as her father. And she 
was afraid to say anything in opposition to her hus- 
band, and gave a forced smile, and tried to make a 
show of pleasure when she was coarsely caressed 


220 The Party and Other Stories 


and defiled by embraces that excited her terror. 

Only once Pyotr Leontyitch had the temerity to 
ask for a loan of fifty roubles in order to pay some 
_ very irksome debt, but what an agony it had been! 

“Very good; I'll give it to you,” said Modest 
Alexeitch after a moment’s thought; “ but I warn 
you I won’t help you again till you give up drink- 
ing. Such a failing is disgraceful in a man in the 
government service! I must remind you of the well- 
known fact that many capable people have been 
ruined by that passion, though they might possibly, 
with temperance, have risen in time to a very high 
position.” 

And long-winded phrases followed: “ inasmuch 
as ..., “‘ following upon which proposition . . .,” 
‘“in view of the aforesaid contention ...”; and 
Pyotr Leontyitch was in agonies of humiliation and 
felt an intense craving for alcohol. 

And when the boys came to visit Anna, generally 
in broken boots and threadbare trousers, they, too, 
had to listen to sermons. 

“Every man ought to have his duties!” Mod- 
est Alexeitch would say to them. 

And he did not give them money. But he did 
give Anna bracelets, rings, and brooches, saying 
that these things would come in useful for a rainy 
day. And he often unlocked her drawer and made 
an inspection to see whether they were all safe. 


“Anna on the Neck” 234 


II 


Meanwhile winter came on. Long before Christ- 
mas there was an announcement in the local papers 
that the usual winter ball would take place on the 
twenty-ninth of December in the Hall of Nobility. 
Every evening after cards Modest Alexeitch was 
excitedly whispering with his colleagues’ wives and 
glancing at Anna, and then paced up and down the 
room for a long while, thinking. At last, late one 
evening, he stood still, facing Anna, and said: 

“You ought to get yourself a ball dress. Do 
you understand? Only please consult Marya Gri- 
goryevna and Natalya Kuzminishna.” 

And he gave her a hundred roubles. She took 
the money, but she did not consult any one when 
she ordered the ball dress; she spoke to no one but 
her father, and tried to imagine how her mother 
would have dressed for a ball. Her mother had 
always dressed in the latest fashion and had always 
taken trouble over Anna, dressing her elegantly 
like a doll, and had taught her to speak French 
and dance the mazurka superbly (she had been a 
governess for five years before her marriage). 
Like her mother, Anna could make a new dress out 
of an old one, clean gloves with benzine, hire jew- 
els; and, like her mother, she knew how to screw 
up her eyes, lisp, assume graceful attitudes, fly into 


222 The Party and Other Stories 


raptures when necessary, and throw a mournful and 
enigmatic look into her eyes. And from her fa- 
ther she had inherited the dark colour of her hair 
and eyes, her highly-strung nerves, and the habit of 
always making herself look her best. 

When, half an hour before setting off for the ball, 
. Modest Alexeitch went into her room without his 
coat on, to put his order round his neck before her 
pier-glass, dazzled by her beauty and the splendour 
of her fresh, ethereal dress, he combed his whiskers 
complacently and said: 

‘So that’s what my wife can look like . . . so 
that’s what you can look like! Anyuta!” he went 
on, dropping into a tone of solemnity, “‘ I have made 
your fortune, and now I beg you to do something for 
mine. I beg you to get introduced to the wife of 
His Excellency! For God’s sake, do! Through 
her I may get the post of senior reporting clerk!” 

They went to the ball. They reached the Hall 
of Nobility, the entrance with the hall porter. They 
came to the vestibule with the hat-stands, the fur 
coats; footmen scurrying about, and ladies with low 
necks putting up their fans to screen themselves from 
the draughts. ‘There was a smell of gas and of 
soldiers. When Anna, walking upstairs on her hus- 
band’s arm, heard the music and saw herself full 
length in the looking-glass in the full glow of the 
lights, there was a rush of joy in her héart, and she 


“Anna on the Neck” 229 


felt the same presentiment of happiness as in the 
moonlight at the station. She walked in proudly, 
confidently, for the first time feeling herself not a 
girl but a lady, and unconsciously imitating her 
mother in her walk and in her manner. And for the 

first time in her life she felt rich and free. Even ' 
her husband’s presence did not oppress her, for as 
she crossed the threshold of the hall she had guessed 
instinctively that the proximity of an old husband did 
not detract from her in the least, but, on the con- 
trary, gave her that shade of piquant mystery that 
is so attractive to men. ‘The orchestra was already 
playing and the dances had begun. After their flat 
Anna was overwhelmed by the lights, the bright col- 
ours, the music, the noise, and looking round the 
room, thought, “Oh, how lovely!”’ She at once 
distinguished in the crowd all her acquaintances, 
every one she had met before at parties or on picnics 
— all the officers, the teachers, the lawyers, the offi- 
cials, the landowners, His Excellency, Artynov, and 
the ladies of the highest standing, dressed up and 
very décolletées, handsome and ugly, who had al- 
ready taken up their positions in the stalls and pa- 
vilions of the charity bazaar, to begin selling things © 
for the benefit of the poor. A huge officer in epau- 
lettes — she had been introduced to him in Staro- 
Kievsky Street when she was a schoolgirl, but now 
she could not remember his name— seemed to 


224 The Party and Other Stories 


spring from out of the ground, begging her for a 
waltz, and she flew away from her husband, feeling 
as though she were floating away in a sailing-boat 
in a violent storm, while her husband was left far 
away on the shore. She danced passionately, with 
fervour, a waltz, then a polka and a quadrille, being 
snatched by one partner as soon as she was left by 
another, dizzy with music and the noise, mixing 
Russian with French, lisping, laughing, and with no 
thought of her husband or anything else. She ex- 
cited great admiration among the men — that was 
evident, and indeed it could not have been otherwise; 
she was breathless with excitement, felt thirsty, and 
convulsively clutched her fan. Pyotr Leontyitch, 
her father, in a crumpled dress-coat that smelt of 
benzine, came up to her, offering her a plate of pink 
ice. 

‘You are enchanting this evening,” he said, look- 
ing at her rapturously, ‘and I have never so much 
regretted that you were in such a hurry to get mar- 
ried. . . . What was it for? I know you did it for 
our sake, but . . .”. With a shaking hand he drew 
out a roll of notes and said: ‘I got the money for 
my lessons today, and can pay your husband what I 
owe him.” 

She put the plate back into his hand, and was 
pounced upon by some one and borne off to a dis- 
tance. She caught a glimpse over her partner’s 


“Anna on the Neck” 225 


shoulder of her father gliding over the floor, putting 
his arm round a lady and whirling down the ball- 
room with her. 

“How sweet he is when he is sober!” she 
thought. 

She danced the mazurka with the same huge of_i- 
_ cer; he moved gravely, as heavily as a dead carcase 
in a uniform, twitched his shoulders and his chest, 
stamped his feet very languidly — he felt fearfully 
disinclined to dance. She fluttered round him, pro- 
voking him by her beauty, her bare neck; her eyes 
glowed defiantly, her movements were passionate, 
while he became more and more indifferent, and held 
out his hands to her as graciously as a king. 

“Bravo, bravo!” said people watching them. 

But little by little the huge officer, too, broke 
out; he grew lively, excited, and, overcome by her 
fascination, was carried away and danced lightly, 
youthfully, while she merely moved her shoulders 
and looked slyly at him as though she were now 
the queen and he were her slave; and at that mo- 
ment it seemed to her that the whole room was 
looking at them, and that everybody was thrilled 
and envied them. The huge officer had hardly had 
time to thank her for the dance, when the crowd 
suddenly parted and the men drew themselves up 
in a strange way, with their hands at their sides. 
His Excellency, with two stars on his dress-coat, was 


226 The Party and Other Stories 


walking up to her. Yes, His Excellency was walk- 
ing straight towards her, for he was staring directly 
at her with a sugary smile, while he licked his lips 
as he always did when he saw a pretty woman. 

“Delighted, delighted . . .” he began. “I shall 
order your husband to be clapped in a lock-up for 
keeping such a treasure hidden from us till now. 
I’ve come to you with a message from my wife,” he 
went on, offering her his arm. “ You must help 
us... . M-m-yes. . . . We ought to give you the 
prize for beauty as they do in America... . 
M-m-yes. .. . The Americans. .. . My wife is 
expecting you impatiently.” 

He led her to a stall and presented her to a mid- 
dle-aged lady, the lower part of whose face was dis- 
proportionately large, so that she looked as though 
she were holding a big stone in her mouth. 

“You must help us,”’ she said through her nose 
in a sing-song voice. ‘‘ All the pretty women are 
working for our charity bazaar, and you are the 
only one enjoying yourself. Why won’t you help 
‘ us? ” 

She went away, and Anna took her place by the 
cups and the silver samovar. She was soon doing 
a lively trade. Anna asked no less than a rouble 
for a cup of tea, and made the huge officer drink 
three cups. Artynoy, the rich man with prominent 
eyes, who suffered from asthma, came up, too; he 


“Anna on the Neck” CBG, 


was not dressed in the strange costume in which 
Anna had seen him in the summer at the station, but 
wore a dress-coat like every one else. Keeping his 
eyes fixed on Anna, he drank a glass of champagne 
and paid a hundred roubles for it, then drank some 
tea and gave another hundred —all this without 
saying a word, as he was short of breath through 
asthma. . . . Anna invited purchasers and got 
money out of them, firmly convinced by now that her 
smiles and glances could not fail to afford these peo- 
ple great pleasure. She realized now that she was 
created exclusively for this noisy, brilliant, laughing 
life, with its music, its dancers, its adorers, and her 
old terror of a force that was sweeping down upon 
her and menacing to crush her seemed to her ridicu- 
lous: she was afraid of no one now, and only re- 
gretted that her mother could not be there to rejoice 
at her success. 

Pyotr Leontyitch, pale by now but still steady 
on his legs, came up to the stall and asked for a 
glass of brandy. Anna turned crimson, expecting 
him to say something inappropriate (she was al- 
ready ashamed of having such a poor and ordinary 
father) ; but he emptied his glass, took ten roubles 
out of his roll of notes, flung it down, and walked 
away with dignity without uttering a word. A 
little later she saw him dancing in the grand chain, 
“and by now he was staggering and kept shouting 


228 The Party and Other Stories 


something, to the great confusion of his partner; 
and Anna remembered how at the ball three years 
before he had staggered and shouted in the same 
way, and it had ended in the police-sergeant’s tak- 
ing him home to bed, and next day the director had 
threatened to dismiss him from his post. How in- 
appropriate that memory was! 

When the samovars were put out in the stalls 
and the exhausted ladies handed over their takings 
to the middle-aged lady with the stone in her mouth, 
Artynov took Anna on his arm to the hall where 
supper was served to all who had assisted at the 
bazaar. There were some twenty people at supper, 
not more, but it was very noisy. His Excellency 
proposed a toast: 

‘Tn this magnificent dining-room it will be appro- 
priate to drink to the success of the cheap dining- 
rooms, which are the object of today’s bazaar.” 

The brigadier-general proposed the toast: ‘To 
the power by which even the artillery is vanquished,” 
and all the company clinked glasses with the ladies. 
It was very, very gay. 

When Anna was escorted home it was daylight 
and the cooks were going to market. Joyful, in- 
toxicated, full of new sensations, exhausted, she 
undressed, dropped into bed, and at once fell 
asleepasceie 

It was past one in the afternoon when the sery- 


“Anna on the Neck” 229 


ant waked her and announced that M. Artynov had 
called. She dressed quickly and went down into 
the drawing-room. Soon after Artynov, His Ex- 
cellency called to thank her for her assistance in the 
bazaar. With a sugary smile, chewing his lips, he 
kissed her hand, and asking her permission to come 
again, took his leave, while she remained standing 
in the middle of the drawing-room, amazed, en- 
chanted, unable to believe that this change in her 
life, this marvellous change, had taken place so 
quickly; and at that moment Modest Alexeitch 
walked in . . . and he, too, stood before her now 
with the same ingratiating, sugary, cringingly re- 
spectful expression which she was accustomed to see 
on his face in the presence of the great and powerful; 
and with rapture, with indignation, with contempt, 
convinced that no harm would come to her from it, 
she said, articulating distinctly each word: 

“ Be off, you blockhead! ” 

From this time forward Anna never had one day 
free, as she was always taking part in picnics, expe- 
ditions, performances. She returned home every 
day after midnight, and went to bed on the floor in 
the drawing-room, and afterwards used to tell every 
one, touchingly, how she slept under flowers. She 
needed a very great deal of money, but she was no 
longer afraid of Modest Alexeitch, and spent his 
“money as though it were her own; and she did not 


230 The Party and Other Stories 


ask, did not demand it, simply sent him in the bills. 
‘Give bearer two hundred roubles,” or ‘“‘ Pay one 
hundred roubles at once.” 

At Easter Modest Alexeitch received the Anna 
of the second grade. When he went to offer his 
thanks, His Excellency put aside the paper he was 
reading and settled himself more comfortably in his 
chair. 

‘So now you have three Annas,” he said, scru- 
tinizing his white hands and pink nails —“ one on 
your buttonhole and two on your neck.” 

Modest Alexeitch put two fingers to his lips as a 
precaution against laughing too loud and said: 

““ Now I have only to look forward to the arrival 
of a little Vladimir. I make bold to beg your Ex- 
cellency to stand godfather.” 

He was alluding to Vladimir of the fourth grade, 
and was already imagining how he would tell every- 
where the story of this pun, so happy in its readi- 
ness and audacity, and he wanted to say something 
equally happy, but His Excellency was buried again 
in his newspaper, and merely gave him a nod. 

And Anna went on driving about with three 
horses, going out hunting with Artynov, playing in 
one-act dramas, going out to supper, and was more 
and more rarely with her own family; they dined 
now alone. Pyotr Leontyitch was drinking more 
heavily than ever; there was no money, and the har- 


“Anna on the Neck” 20 


monium had been sold long ago for debt. The boys 
did not let him go out alone in the street now, but 
looked after him for fear he might fall down; and 
whenever they met Anna driving in Staro-Kievsky 
Street with a pair of horses and Artynov on the 
box instead of a coachman, Pyotr Leontyitch took 
off his top-hat, and was about to shout to her, but 
Petya and Andrusha took him by the arm, and said 
imploringly : 
‘You mustn’t, father. Hush, father!” 


THE TEACHER OF LITERATURE 


= 


THE TEACHER OF LITERATURE 
I 


THERE was the thud of horses’ hoofs on the wooden 
floor; they brought out of the stable the black horse, 
Count Nulin; then the white, Giant; then his sister 
Maika. They were all magnificent, expensive 
horses. Old Shelestov saddled Giant and said, ad- 
dressing his daughter Masha: 

“Well, Marie Godefroi, come, get on! Hopla!” 

Masha Shelestoy was the youngest of the family; 
she was eighteen, but her family could not get used 
to thinking that she was not a little girl, and so they 
still called her Manya and Manyusa; and after there 
had been a circus in the town which she had eagerly 
visited, every one began to call her Marie Gode- 
froi. 

“‘ Hop-la!” she cried, mounting Giant. Her sis- 
ter Varya got on Maika, Nikitin on Count Nulin, 
the officers on their horses, and the long picturesque 
cavalcade, with the officers in white tunics and the 
ladies in their riding habits, moved at a walking 
pace out of the yard. 

Nikitin noticed that when they were mounting 

235 


236 The Party and Other Stories 


the horses and afterwards riding out into the street, 
Masha for some reason paid attention to no one 
but himself. She looked anxiously at him and at 
Count Nulin and said: 

“You must hold him all the time on the curb, 
Sergey Vassilitch. Don’t let him shy. He’s pre- © 
tending.” 

And either because her Giant was very friendly 
with Count Nulin, or perhaps by chance, she rode 
all the time beside Nikitin, as she had done the 
day before, and the day before that. And he 
looked at her graceful little figure sitting on the 
proud white beast, at her delicate profile, at the 
chimney-pot hat, which did not suit her at all and 
made her look older than her age — looked at her 
with joy, with tenderness, with rapture; listened to 
her, taking in little of what she said, and thought: 

‘“T promise on my honour, I swear to God, I 
won't be afraid and I'll speak to her today.” 

It was seven o'clock in the evening —the time 
when the scent of white acacia and lilac is so strong 
that the air and the very trees seem heavy with the 
fragrance. ‘The band was already playing in the 
town gardens. ‘The horses made a resounding thud 
on the pavement, on all sides there were sounds of 
laughter, talk, and the banging of gates. The sol- 
diers they met saluted the officers, the schoolboys 
bowed to Nikitin, and all the people who were 


The Teacher of Literature 237 


hurrying to the gardens to hear the band were 
pleased at the sight of the party. And how warm 
it was! How soft-looking were the clouds scat- 
tered carelessly about the sky, how kindly and com- 
forting the shadows of the poplars and the acacias, 
which stretched across the street and reached as far 
as the balconies and second stories of the houses on 
_ the other side. 

They rode on out of the town and set off at a 
trot along the highroad. MHere there was no scent 
of lilac and acacia, no music of the band, but there 
was the fragrance of the fields, there was the green 
of young rye and wheat, the marmots were squeak- 
ing, the rooks were cawing. Wherever one looked 
it was green, with only here and there black patches 
of bare ground, and far away to the left in the ceme- 
tery a white streak of apple-blossom. 

They passed the slaughter-houses, then the brew- 
ery, and overtook a military band hastening to the 
suburban gardens. 

** Polyansky has a very fine horse, I don’t deny 
that,” Masha said to Nikitin, with a glance towards 
the officer who was riding beside Varya. ‘But it 
has blemishes. That white patch on its left leg 
ought not to be there, and, look, it tosses its head. 
You can’t train it not to now; it will toss its head till 
the end of its days.” 

Masha was as passionate a lover of horses as her 


238 The Party and Other Stories 


father. She felt a pang when she saw other people 
with fine horses, and was pleased when she saw de- 
fects in them. Nikitin knew nothing about horses; 
it made absolutely no difference to him whether he 
held his horse on the bridle or on the curb, whether 
he trotted or galloped; he only felt that his position 
was strained and unnatural, and that consequently 
the officers who knew how to sit in their saddles 
must please Masha more than he could. And he 
was jealous of the officers. 

As they rode by the suburban gardens some one 
suggested their going in and getting some seltzer- 
water. They went in. There were no trees but 
oaks in the gardens; they had: only just come into 
leaf, so that through the young foliage the whole 
garden could still be seen with its platform, little 
tables, and swings, and the crows’ nests were visible, 
looking like big hats. The party dismounted near 
a table and asked for seltzer-water. People they 
knew, walking about the garden, came up to them. 
Among them the army doctor in high boots, and 
the conductor of the band, waiting for the musicians. 
The doctor must have taken Nikitin for a student, 
for he asked: 

‘‘ Have you come for the summer holidays? ” 

““ No, I am here permanently,” answered Nikitin. 
“I am a teacher at the school.” 

“You don’t say so?” said the doctor, with 


‘The Teacher of Literature 239 


surprise. “So young and already a teacher?” 

“Young, indeed! My goodness, I’m twenty- 
six!” 

“You have a beard and moustache, but yet one 
would never guess you were more than twenty-two 
or twenty-three. How young-looking you are! ” 

“What a beast!” thought Nikitin. ‘He, too, 
takes me for a whipper-snapper! ” 

He disliked it extremely when people referred 
to his youth, especially in the presence of women 
or the schoolboys. Ever since he had come to the 
town as a master in the school he had detested his 
own youthful appearance. The schoolboys were not 
afraid of him, old people called him “* young man,” 
ladies preferred dancing with him to listening to 
his long arguments, and he would have given a great 
deal to be ten years older. 

From the garden they went on to the Shelestovs’ 
farm. There they stopped at the gate and asked 
the bailifi’s wife, Praskovya, to bring some new 
milk. Nobody drank the milk; they all looked at 
one another, laughed, and galloped back. As they 
rode back the band was playing in the suburban gar- 
den; the sun was setting behind the cemetery, and 
half the sky was crimson from the sunset. 

Masha again rode beside Nikitin. He wanted 
to tell her how passionately he loved her, but he 
was afraid he would be overheard by the officers 


240 The Party and Other Stories 


and Varya, and he was silent. Masha was silent, 
too, and he felt why she was silent and why she 
was riding beside him, and was so happy that the 
earth, the sky, the lights of the town, the black 
outline of the brewery —all blended for him into 
something very pleasant and comforting, and it 
seemed to him as though Count Nulin were stepping 
on air and would climb up into the crimson sky. 

They arrived home. The samovar was already 
boiling on the table, old Shelestov was sitting with 
his friends, officials in the Circuit Court, and as 
usual he was criticizing something. 

“Tt’s loutishness!”’ he said. ‘“ Loutishness and 
nothing more. Yes!” 

Since Nikitin had been in love with Masha, every- 
thing at the Shelestovs’ pleased him: the house, the 
garden, and the evening tea, and the wickerwork 
chairs, and the old nurse, and even the word “ lout- 
ishness,” which the old man was fond of using. 
The only thing he did not like was the number of 
cats and dogs and the Egyptian pigeons, who moaned 
disconsolately in a big cage in the verandah. There 
were so many house-dogs and yard-dogs that he had 
only learnt to recognize two of them in the course of 
his acquaintance with the Shelestovs: Mushka and 
Som. Mushka was a little mangy dog with a shaggy 
face, spiteful and spoiled. She hated Nikitin: when 
she saw him she put her head on one side, showed 


The Teacher of Literature 241 


her teeth, and began: “Rrr... nga-nga-nga 
. trr...!” Then she would get under his 
ieee and when he would try to drive her away she 
would go off into piercing yaps, and the family would 
say: “Don’t be frightened. She doesn’t bite. 
She is a good dog.” 
Som was a tall black dog with long legs and a 
_ tail as hard asa stick. At dinner and tea he usually 
moved about under the table, and thumped on peo- 
ple’s boots and on the legs of the table with his tail. 
He was a good-natured, stupid dog, but Nikitin could 
not endure him because he had the habit of putting 
his head on people’s knees at dinner and messing 
their trousers with saliva. Nikitin had more than 
once tried to hit him on his head with a knife-handle, 
to flip him on the nose, had abused him, had com- 
plained of him, but nothing saved his trousers. 
After their ride the tea, jam, rusks, and butter 
seemed very nice. They all drank their first glass 
in silence and with great relish; over the second 
they began an argument. It was always Varya who 
started the arguments at tea; she was good-looking, 
handsomer than Masha, and was considered the 
cleverest and most cultured person in the house, and 
she behaved with dignity and severity, as an eldest 
daughter should who has taken the place of her dead 
mother in the house. As the mistress of the house, 
she felt herself entitled to wear a dressing-gown 


242 The Party and Other Stories 


in the presence of her guests, and to call the officers’ 
by their surnames; she looked on Masha as a little 
girl, and talked to her as though she were a school- 
mistress. She used to speak of herself as an old 
maid — so she was certain she would marry. 

Every conversation, even about the weather, she 
invariably turned into an argument. She had a pas- 
sion for catching at words, pouncing on contradic- 
tions, quibbling over phrases. You would begin 
talking to her, and she would stare at you and sud- 
denly interrupt: ‘‘ Excuse me, excuse me, Petrov, 
the other day you said the very opposite!” 

Or she would smile ironically and say: “I no- 
tice, though, you begin to advocate the principles 
of the secret police. I congratulate you.” 

If you jested or made a pun, you would hear her 
voice at once: “ That’s stale,” ‘“ That’s pointless.” 
If an officer ventured on a joke, she would make a 
contemptuous grimace and say, “An army joke!” 

And she rolled the r so impressively that Mushka 
invariably answered from under a chair, “‘ Rrr . . . 
nga-nga-nga... 1” 

On this occasion at tea the argument began with 
Nikitin’s mentioning the school examinations. 

“Excuse me, Sergey Vassilitch,” Varya inter- 
rupted him. “ You say it’s difficult for the boys. 
And whose fault is that, let me ask you? For in- 
stance, you set the boys in the eighth class an essay 


The Teacher of Literature 243 


on ‘Pushkin as a Psychologist.’ To begin with, 
you shouldn’t set such a difficult subject; and, sec- 
ondly, Pushkin was not a psychologist. Shtchedrin 
now, or Dostoevsky let us say, is a different matter, 
but Pushkin is a great poet and nothing more.” . 

“Shtchedrin is one thing, and Pushkin is an-' 
other,”’ Nikitin answered sulkily. 

“IT know you don’t think much of Shtchedrin at 
the high school, but that’s not the point. Tell me, 
in what sense is Pushkin a psychologist? ” 

“Why, do you mean to say he was not a psy- 
chologist? If you like, I’ll give you examples.” 

And Nikitin recited several passages from “‘ On- 
yegin”’ and then from ‘“‘ Boris Godunov.” 

“T see no psychology in that.’ Varya sighed. 
“The psychologist is the man who describes the 
recesses of the human soul, and that’s fine poetry 
and nothing more.” 

‘“‘T know the sort of psychology you want,” said 
Nikitin, offended. ‘‘ You want some one to saw 
my finger with a blunt saw while I howl at the top 
of my voice —that’s what you mean by psychol- 
ogy.” 

“That’s poor! But still you haven’t shown me 
in what sense Pushkin is a psychologist? ”’ 

When Nikitin had to argue against anything that 
seemed to him narrow, conventional, or something 
of that kind, he usually leaped up from his seat, 


244 The Party and Other Stories 


clutched at his head with both hands, and began with 
a moan, running from one end of the room to an- 
other. And it was the same now: he jumped up, 
clutched his head in his hands, and with a moan 
walked round the table, then he sat down a little way 
off. 

The officers took his part. Captain Polyansky 
began assuring Varya that Pushkin really was a psy- 
chologist, and to prove it quoted two lines from 
Lermontov; Lieutenant Gernet said that if Pushkin 
had not been a psychologist they would not have 
erected a monument to him in Moscow. 

‘“That’s loutishness!” was heard from the other 
end of the table. “I said as much to the governor: 
‘It’s loutishness, your Excellency,’ I said.” 

‘“‘T won’t argue any more,” cried Nikitin. ‘“ It’s 
unending. . . . Enough! Ach, get away, you nasty 
dog!” he cried to Som, who laid his head and paw 
on his knee. 

“Rrr . . . nga-nga-nga!’’ came from under the 
table. 

“Admit that you are wrong!” cried Varya. 
“Own up!” 

But some young ladies came in, and the argument 
dropped of itself. They all went into the drawing- 
room. Warya sat down at the piano and began 
playing dances. They danced first a waltz, then a 
polka, then a quadrille with a grand chain which 


The Teacher of Literature 245 


Captain Polyansky led through all the rooms, then 
a waltz again. 

During the dancing the old men sat in the draw- 
ing-room, smoking and looking at the young peo- 
ple. Among them was Shebaldin, the director of 
the municipal bank, who was famed for his love of 
literature and dramatic art. He had founded the 
local Musical and Dramatic Society, and took part 
in the performances himself, confining himself, for 
some reason, to playing comic footmen or to read- 
ing in a sing-song voice ‘“‘ The Woman who was a 
Sinner.” His nickname in the town was “ the 
Mummy,” as he was tall, very lean and scraggy, 
and always had a solemn air and a fixed, lustreless 
eye. He was so devoted to the dramatic art that 
he even shaved his moustache and beard, and this 
made him still more like a mummy. 

After the grand chain, he shuffled up to Nikitin 
sideways, coughed, and said: 

‘“‘T had the pleasure of being present during the 
argument at tea. I fully share your opinion. We 
are of one mind, and it would be a great pleasure 
to me to talk to you. Have you read Lessing on 
the dramatic art of Hamburg?” 

“No, I haven't.” 

Shebaldin was horrified, and waved his hands as 
though he had burnt his fingers, and saying nothing 
more, staggered back from Nikitin. Shebaldin’s 


246 The Party and Other Stories 


appearance, his question, and his surprise, struck 
Nikitin as funny, but he thought none the less: 

“Tt really is awkward. Iam a teacher of litera- 
ture, and to this day I’ve not read Lessing. 1 must 
read him.” 

Before supper the whole company, old and young, 
sat down to play “fate.” They took two packs 
of cards: one pack was dealt round to the company, 
the other was laid on the table face downwards. 

“The one who has this card in his hand,” old 
Shelestov began solemnly, lifting the top card of 
the second pa “is fated to go into the nursery 
and kiss nurse.’ 

The pleasure of kissing the nurse fell to the lot 
of Shebaldin. They all crowded round him, took 
him to the nursery, and laughing and clapping their 
hands, made him kiss the nurse. There was a great 
uproar and shouting. 

“Not so ardently!” cried Shelestov with tears 
of laughter. ‘“‘ Not so ardently!” 

It was Nikitin’s “ fate”? to hear. the confessions 
of all. He sat on a chair in the middle of the 
drawing-room. A shawl was brought and put over 
his head. ‘The first who came to confess to him was 
Varya. 

‘“T know your sins,” Nikitin began, looking in the 
darkness at her stern profile. ‘‘ Tell me, madam, 
how do you explain your walking with Polyansky 


The Teacher of Literature 247 


every day? Oh, it’s not for nothing she walks with 
an hussar! ” 

“ That’s poor,” said Varya, and walked away. 

Then under the shawl he saw the shine of big 
motionless eyes, caught the lines of a dear profile 
in the dark, together with a familiar, precious fra- 
grance which reminded Nikitin of Masha’s room. 

*“ Marie Godefroi,”’ he said, and did not know 
his own voice, it was so soft and tender, ‘‘ what are 
your sins?” 

Masha screwed up her eyes and put out the tip 
of her tongue at him, then she laughed and went 
away. And a minute later she was standing in the 
middle of the room, clapping her hands and crying: 

‘“‘ Supper, supper, supper!” 

And they all streamed into the dining-room. At 
supper Varya had another argument, and this time 
with her father. Polyansky ate stolidly, drank red 
wine, and described to Nikitin how once in a winter 
campaign he had stood all night up to his knees in 
a bog; the enemy was so near that they were not 
allowed to speak or smoke, the night was cold and 
dark, a piercing wind was blowing. Nikitin listened 
and stole side-glances at Masha. She was gazing at 
him immovably, without blinking, as though she was 
pondering something or was lost in a reverie... . 
It was pleasure and agony to him both at once. 

“Why does she look at me like that?” was the 


248 The Party and Other Stories 


question that fretted him. ‘“‘ It’s awkward. People 
may notice it. Oh, how young, how naive she is!” 

The party broke up at midnight. When Nikitin 
went out at the gate, a window opened on the first- 
floor, and Masha showed herself at it. 

“Sergey Vassilitch! ” she called. 

‘What is it?” 

““T tell you what ...” said Masha, evidently 
thinking of something to say. “I tell you what. 
. . . Polyansky said he would come in a day or 
two with his camera and take us all. We must meet 
here.” 

‘Very well.” 

Masha vanished, the window was slammed, and 
some one immediately began playing the piano in 
the house. 

“Well, it is a house!” thought Nikitin while he 
crossed the street. ‘‘ A house in which there is no 
moaning except from Egyptian pigeons, and they 
only do it because they have no other means of ex- 
pressing their joy!” 

But the Shelestovs were not the only festive house- 
hold. Nikitin had not gone two hundred paces be- 
fore he heard the strains of a piano from another 
house. A little further he met a peasant playing 
the balalaika at the gate. In the gardens the band 
struck up a potpourri of Russian songs. 


The Teacher of Literature 249 


Nikitin lived nearly half a mile from the Sheles- 
tovs’ in a flat of eight rooms at the rent of three 
hundred roubles a year, which he shared with his 
colleague Ippolit Ippolititch, a teacher of geography 
and history. When Nikitin went in this Ippolit 
Ippolititch, a snub-nosed, middle-aged man with a 
reddish beard, with a coarse, good-natured, unintel- 
lectual face like a workman’s, was sitting at the table 
correcting his pupils’ maps. He considered that the 
most important and necessary part of the study of 
geeography was the drawing of maps, and of the 
study of history the learning of dates: he would sit 
for nights together correcting in blue pencil the maps 
drawn by the boys and girls he taught, or making 
chronological tables. 

‘What a lovely day it has been!” said Nikitin, 
going into him. “I wonder at you — how can you 
sit indoors?” 

Ippolit Ippolititch was not a talkative person; he 
either remained silent or talked of things which 
everybody knew already. Now what he answered 
was: 

‘“‘ Yes, very fine weather. It’s May now; we soon 
shall have real summer. And summer’s a very dif- 
ferent thing from winter. In the winter you have 
to heat the stoves, but in summer you can keep warm 
without. In summer you have your window open 


250 The Party and Other Stories 


at night and still are warm, and in winter you are 
cold even with the double frames in.” 

Nikitin had not sat at the table for more than 
one minute before he was bored. 

“* Good-night!”’ he said, getting up and yawning. 
‘““T wanted to tell you something romantic concern- 
ing myself, but you are — geography! If one talks 
to you of love, you will ask one at once, ‘ What was 
the date of the Battle of Kalka?’ Confound you, 
with your battles and your capes in Siberia! ” 

‘* What are you cross about?” 

‘Why, it is vexatious! ” 

And vexed that he had not spoken to Masha, and 
that he had no one to talk to of his love, he went to 
his study and lay down upon the sofa. It was dark 
and still in the study. Lying gazing into the dark- 
ness, Nikitin for some reason began thinking how 
in two or three years he would go to Petersburg, 
how Masha would see him off at the station and 
would cry; in Petersburg he would get a long letter 
from her in which she would entreat him to come 
home as quickly as possible. And he would write 
to her. . . . He would begin his letter like that: 
** My dear little rat!” 

“Yes, my dear little rat!” he said, and he 
laughed. 

He was lying in an uncomfortable position. He 
put his arms under his head and put his left leg over 


~The Teacher of Literature 251 


the back of the sofa. He felt more comfortable. 
Meanwhile a pale light was more and more per- 
ceptible at the windows, sleepy cocks crowed in the 
yard. Nikitin went on thinking how he would come 
back from Petersburg, how Masha would meet him 
at the station, and with a shriek of delight would 
fling herself on his neck; or, better still, he would 
cheat her and come home by stealth late at night: 
the cook would open the door, then he would go on 
tiptoe to the bedroom, undress noiselessly, and jump 
into bed! And she would wake up and be overjoyed. 

It was beginning to get quite light. By now there 
were no windows, no study. On the steps of the 
brewery by which they had ridden that day Masha 
was sitting, saying something. Then she took Niki- 
tin by the arm and went with him to the suburban 
garden. There he saw the oaks and the crows’ 
nests like hats. One of the nests rocked; out of it 
peeped Shebaldin, shouting loudly: ‘“‘ You have not 
read Lessing!” 

Nikitin shuddered all over and opened his eyes. 
Ippolit Ippolititch was standing before the sofa, and 
throwing back his head, was putting on his cravat. 

‘Get up; it’s time for school,” he said. “ You 
shouldn’t sleep in your clothes; it spoils your clothes. 
You should sleep in your bed, undressed.” 

And as usual he began slowly and emphatically 
saying what everybody knew. 


252 The Party and Other Stories 


Nikitin’s first lesson was on Russian language in 
the second class. When at nine o'clock punctually 
he went into the classroom, he saw written on the 
blackboard two large letters—M. S. That, no 
doubt, meant Masha Shelestov. 

“ They’ve scented it out already, the rascals . . .” 
thought Nikitin. ‘‘ How is it they know every- 
thing?” 

The second lesson was in the fifth class. And 
there two letters, M. S., were written on the black- 
board; and when he went out of the classroom at 
the end of the lesson, he heard the shout behind him 
as though from a theatre gallery: 

‘‘ Hurrah for Masha Shelestov! ” 

His head was heavy from sleeping in his clothes, 
his limbs were weighted down with inertia. The 
boys, who were expecting every day to break up 
before the examinations, did nothing, were restless, 
and so bored that they got into mischief. Nikitin, 
too, was restless, did not notice their pranks, and 
was continually going to the window. He could see 
the street brilliantly lighted up with the sun; above 
the houses the blue limpid sky, the birds, and far, 
far away, beyond the gardens and the houses, vast 
indefinite distance, the forests in the blue haze, the 
smoke from a passing train. .. . 

Here two officers in white tunics, playing with 
their whips, passed in the street in the shade of 


The Teacher of Literature 253 


the acacias. Here a lot of Jews, with grey beards, 
and caps on, drove past in a waggonette. . . . The 
governess walked by with the director’s granddaugh- 
ter. Som ran by in the company of two other dogs. 
. . » And then Varya, wearing a simple grey dress 
and red stockings, carrying the ‘‘ Vyestnik Evropi ” 
in her hand, passed by. She must have been to the 
town library... . 

And it would be a long time before lessons were 
over at three o'clock! And after school he could 
not go home nor to the Shelestovs’, but must go to 
give a lesson at Wolf’s. ‘This Wolf, a wealthy Jew 
who had turned Lutheran, did not send his children 
to the high school, but had them taught at home by 
the high-school masters, and paid five roubles a les- 
son. 
He was bored, bored, bored. 

At three o’clock he went to Wolf’s and spent 
there, as it seemed to him, an eternity. He left 
there at five o’clock, and before seven he had to 
be at the high school again to a meeting of the mas- 
ters — to draw up the plan for the viva voce exami- 
nation of the fourth and sixth classes. 

When late in the evening he left the high school 
and went to the Shelestovs’, his heart was beating 
and his face was flushed. A month before, even 
a week before, he had, every time that he made up 
his mind to speak to her, prepared a whole speech, 


254 The Party and Other Stories 


with an introduction and a conclusion. Now he 
had not one word ready; everything was in a mud- 
dle in his head, and all he knew was that today he 
would certainly declare himself, and that it was ut- 
terly impossible to wait any longer. 

“T will ask her to come to the garden,” he 
thought; “‘ we'll walk about a little and I'll speak.” 

There was not a soul in the hall; he went into 
the dining-room and then into the drawing-room. 
. . . There was no one there either. He could hear 
Varya arguing with some one upstairs and the clink 
of the dressmaker’s scissors in the nursery. 

There was a little room in the house which had 
three names: the little room, the passage room, and 
the dark room. There was a big cupboard in it 
where they kept medicines, gunpowder, and their 
hunting gear. Leading from this room to the first 
floor was a narrow wooden staircase where cats were 
always asleep. There were two doors in it — one 
leading to the nursery, one to the drawing-room. 
When Nikitin went into this room to go upstairs, 
the door from the nursery opened and shut with such 
a bang that it made the stairs and the cupboard trem- 
ble; Masha, in a dark dress, ran in with a piece of 
blue material in her hand, and, not noticing Nikitin, 
darted towards the stairs. 

“Stay . . .” said Nikitin, stopping her. ‘ Good- 
evening, Godefroi. . . . Allowme... .” 


-The Teacher of Literature 255 


_ He gasped, he did not know what to say; with 
one hand he held her hand and with the other the 
blue material. And she was half frightened, half 
surprised, and looked at him with big eyes. 

“Allow me...” Nikitin went on, afraid she 
would go away. “ There’s something I must say to 
you. ... Only . .. it’sinconvenient here. I can- 
not, I am incapable. . . . Understand, Godefroi, I 
can’t —that’s all... .” 

The blue material slipped on to the floor, and 
Nikitin took Masha by the other hand. She turned 
pale, moved her lips, then stepped back from Niki- 
tin and found herself in the corner between the wall 
and the cupboard. 

“On my honour, I assure you...” he said 
softly. ‘‘ Masha, on my honour. .. .” 

She threw back her head and he kissed her lips, 
and that the kiss might last longer he put his fin- 
gers to her cheeks; and it somehow happened that 
he found himself in the corner between the cupboard 
and the wall, and she put her arms round his neck 
and pressed her head against his chin. 

Then they both ran into the garden. The Sheles- 
tovs had a garden of nine acres. ‘There were about 
twenty old maples and lime-trees in it; there was one 
fir-tree, and all the rest were fruit-trees: cherries, 
apples, pears, horse-chestnuts, silvery olive-trees. 
. . - There were heaps of flowers, too. 


256 The Party and Other Stories 


Nikitin and Masha ran along the avenues in si- 
lence, laughed, asked each other from time to time 
disconnected questions which they did not answer. 
A crescent moon was shining over the garden, and 
drowsy tulips and irises were stretching up from the 
dark grass in its faint light, as though entreating - 
for words of love for them, too. 

When Nikitin and Masha went back to the house, 
the officers and the young ladies were already as- 
sembled and dancing the mazurka. Again Polyan- 
sky led the grand chain through all the rooms, again 
after dancing they played “fate.” Before supper, 
when the visitors had gone into the dining-room, 
Masha, left alone with Nikitin, pressed close to him 
and said: 

‘You must speak to papa and Varya yourself; I 
am ashamed.” 

After supper he talked to the old father. After 
listening to him, Shelestov thought a little and said: 

“IT am very grateful for the honour you do me 
and my daughter, but let me speak to you as a friend. 
I will speak to you, not as a father, but as one gen- 
tleman to another. Tell me, why do you want to 
be married so young? Only peasants are married 
so young, and that, of course, is loutishness. But 
why should you? Where’s the satisfaction of put- 
ting on the fetters at your age?” 


The Teacher of Literature 257 


‘Tam not young!” said Nikitin, offended. “I 
am in my twenty-seventh year.” 

‘‘ Papa, the farrier has come!” cried Varya from 
the other room. 

And the conversation broke off. Varya, Masha, 
and Polyansky saw Nikitin home. When they 
reached his gate, Varya said: 

“Why is it your mysterious Metropolit Metro- 
_polititch never shows himself anywhere? He might 
come and see us.” 

The mysterious Ippolit Ippolititch was sitting on 
his bed, taking off his trousers, when Nikitin went 
in to him. 

““ Don’t go to bed, my dear fellow,” said Nikitin 
breathlessly. ‘‘ Stop a minute; don’t go to bed!” 

Ippolit Ippolititch put on his trousers hurriedly 
and asked in a flutter: 

“ What is it?” 

‘“*T am going to be married.” 

Nikitin sat down beside his companion, and look- 
ing at him wonderingly, as though surprised at him- 
self, said: 

“Only fancy, I am going to be married! To 
Masha Shelestov! I made an offer today.” 

“Well? She seems a good sort of girl. Only 
she is very young.” 

‘“‘ Yes, she is young,”’ sighed Nikitin, and shrugged 


258 The Party and Other Stories 


his shoulders with a careworn air. ‘‘ Very, very 
young!” 

‘“‘She was my pupil at the high school. I know 
her. She wasn’t bad at geography, but she was 
no good at history. And she was inattentive in 
class, too.” 

Nikitin for some reason felt suddenly sorry for 
his companion, and longed to say something kind 
and comforting to him. 

“My dear fellow, why don’t you get married?” 
he asked. ‘‘ Why don’t you marry Varya, for in- 
stance? She is a splendid, first-rate girl! It’s true 
she is very fond of arguing, but a heart . . . what 
a heart! She was just asking about you. Marry 
her, my dear boy! Eh?” 

He knew perfectly well that Varya would not 
marry this dull, snub-nosed man, but still persuaded 
him to marry her — why? 

‘“ Marriage is a serious step,” said Ippolit Ippo- 
lititch after a moment’s thought. ‘“‘ One has to look 
at it all round and weigh things thoroughly; it’s 
not to be done rashly. Prudence is always a good 
thing, and especially in marriage, when a man, ceas- 
ing to be a bachelor, begins a new life.” 

And he talked of what every one has known for 
ages. Nikitin did not stay to listen, said good- 
night, and went to his own room. He undressed 
quickly and quickly got into bed, in order to be 


The Teacher of Literature 259 


able to think the sooner of his happiness, of Masha, 
of the future; he smiled, then suddenly recalled 
that he had not read Lessing. 

“JT must read him,” he thought. ‘ Though, 
after all, why should I? Bother him!” 

And exhausted by his happiness, he fell asleep | 
at once and went on smiling till the morning. 

He dreamed of the thud of horses’ hoofs on a 
wooden floor; he dreamed of the black horse Count 
Nulin, then of the white Giant and its sister Maika, 
being led out of the stable. 


I 


“Tt was very crowded and noisy in the church, 
and once some one cried out, and fhe head priest, 
who was marrying Masha and me, looked through 
his spectacles at the crowd, and said severely: 
‘Don’t move about the church, and don’t make a 
noise, but stand quietly and pray. You should have 
the fear of God in your hearts.’ 

“My best men were two of my colleagues, and 
Masha’s best men were Captain Polyansky and 
Lieutenant Gernet. The bishop’s choir sang su- ‘ 
perbly. The sputtering of the candles, the bril- 
liant light, the gorgeous dresses, the officers, the 
numbers of gay, happy faces, and a special ethereal 
look in Masha, everything together — the surround- 


260 The Party and Other Stories 


ings and the words of the wedding prayers — moved 
me to tears and filled me with triumph. I thought 
how my life had blossomed, how poetically it was 
shaping itself! Two years ago I was still a student, 
I was living in cheap furnished rooms, without 
‘ money, without relations, and, as I fancied then, 
with nothing to look forward to. Now I am a 
teacher in the high school in one of the best pro- 
vincial towns, with a secure income, loved, spoiled. 
It is for my sake, I thought, this crowd is collected, 
for my sake three candelabra have been lighted, the 
deacon is booming, the choir is doing its best; and 
it’s for my sake that this young creature, whom I 
soon shall call my wife, is so young, so elegant, and 
so joyful. I recalled our first meetings, our rides 
into the country, my declaration of love and the 
weather, which, as though expressly, was so exqui- 
sitely fine all the summer; and the happiness which 
at one time in my old rooms seemed to me possible 
only in novels and stories, I was now experiencing 
in reality —I was now, as it were, holding it in 
my hands. 

‘After the ceremony they all crowded in dis- 
order round Masha and me, expressed their genuine 
pleasure, congratulated us and wished us joy. The 
brigadier-general, an old man of seventy, confined 
himself to congratulating Masha, and said to her 


The Teacher of Literature 261 


in a squeaky, aged voice, so loud that it could be 
heard all over the church: 

“*J hope that even after you are married you 
may remain the rose you are now, my dear.’ 

“The officers, the director, and all the teachers 
smiled from politeness, and I was conscious of an 
agreeable artificial smile on my face, too. Dear 
Ippolit Ippolititch, the teacher of history and geog- 
raphy, who always says what every one has heard 
before, pressed my hand warmly and said with feel- 
ing: 

“* Hitherto you have been unmarried and have 
lived alone, and now you are married and no longer 
single.’ 

‘“From the church we went to a two-storied 
house which I am receiving as part of the dowry. 
Besides that house Masha is bringing me twenty 
thousand roubles, as well as a piece of waste land 
with a shanty on it, where I am told there are num- 
bers of hens and ducks which are not looked after 
and are turning wild. When I got home from the 
church, I stretched myself at full length on the low 
sofa in my new study and began to smoke; I felt 
snug, cosy, and comfortable, as f never had in my 
life before. And meanwhile the wedding party 
were shouting ‘ Hurrah!’ while a wretched band in 
the hall played flourishes and all sorts of trash. 


262 The Party and Other Stories 


Varya, Masha’s sister, ran into the study with a 
wineglass in her hand, and with a queer, strained 
expression, as though her mouth were full of water; 
apparently she had meant to go on further, but she 
suddenly burst out laughing and sobbing, and the 
wineglass crashed on the floor. We took her by the 
arms and led her away. 

‘** Nobody can understand!’ she muttered after- 
wards, lying on the old nurse’s bed in a back room. 
‘Nobody, nobody! My God, nobody can under- 
stand!’ 

“But every one understood very well that she 
was four years older than her sister Masha, and still 
unmarried, and that she was crying, not from envy, 
but from the melancholy consciousness that her time 
was passing, and perhaps had passed. When they 
danced the quadrille, she was back in the drawing- 
room with a tear-stained and heavily powdered face, 
and I saw Captain Polyansky holding a plate of ice 
before her while she ate it with a spoon. 

“It is past five o’clock in the morning. I took 
up my diary to describe my complete and perfect 
happiness, and thought I would write a good six 
pages, and read it tomorrow to Masha; but, strange 
to say, everything is muddled in my head and as 
misty as a dream, and I can remember vividly noth- 
ing but that episode with Varya, and I want to 
write, ‘Poor Varya!’ I could go on sitting here 


The Teacher of Literature 263 


and writing ‘Poor Varya!’ By the way, the trees 
have begun rustling; it will rain. The crows are 
cawing, and my Masha, who has just gone to sleep, 
has for some reason a sorrowful face.”’ 

For a long while afterwards Nikitin did not write 
his diary. At the beginning of August he had the 
school examinations, and after the fifteenth the 
classes began. Asa rule he set off for school before 
nine in the morning, and before ten o’clock he was 
looking at his watch and pining for his Masha and 
his new house. In the lower forms he would set 
some boy to dictate, and while the boys were writ- 
ing, would sit in the window with his eyes shut, 
dreaming; whether he dreamed of the future or re- 
called the past, everything seemed to him equally de- 
lightful, like a fairy tale. In the senior classes they 
were reading aloud Gogol or Pushkin’s prose works, 
and that made him sleepy; people, trees, fields, 
horses, rose before his imagination, and he would 
say with a sigh, as though fascinated by the author: 

“ How lovely!” 

At the midday recess Masha used to send him 
lunch in a snow-white napkin, and he would eat it 
slowly, with pauses, to prolong the enjoyment of 
it; and Ippolit Ippolititch, whose lunch as a rule 
consisted of nothing but bread, looked at him with 
respect and envy, and gave expression to some fa- 
miliar fact, such as: 


264. The Party and Other Stories 


‘Men cannot live without food.” 

After school Nikitin went straight to give his pri- 
vate lessons, and when at last by six o’clock he got 
home, he felt excited and anxious, as though he had 
been away for a year. He would run upstairs 
breathless, find Masha, throw his arms round her, 
and kiss her and swear that he loved her, that he 
could not live without her, declare that he had missed 
her fearfully, and ask her in trepidation how she was 
and why she looked so depressed. Then they would 
dine together. After dinner he would lie on the 
sofa in his study and smoke, while she sat beside 
him and talked in a low voice. 

His happiest days now were Sundays and holi- 
days, when he was at home from morning till eve- 
nine. On those days he took part in the naive but 
extraordinarily pleasant life which reminded him of 
a pastoral idyl. He was never weary of watching 
how his sensible and practical Masha was arranging 
her nest, and anxious to show that he was of some 
use in the house, he would do something useless — 
for instance, bring the chaise out of the stable and 
look at it from every side. Masha had installed 
a regular dairy with three cows, and in her cellar 
she had many jugs of milk and pots of sour cream, 
and she kept it all for butter. Sometimes, by way of 
a joke, Nikitin would ask her for a glass of milk, 
and she would be quite upset because it was against 


The Teacher of Literature 265 


her rules; but he would laugh and throw his arms 
round her, saying: 

_ “There, there; I was joking, my darling! I was 
joking!” 

Or he would laugh at her strictness when, find- 
ing in the cupboard some stale bit of cheese or 
sausage ds hard as a stone, she would say seriously: 

‘They will eat that in the kitchen.” 

He would observe that such a scrap was only 
fit for a mousetrap, and she would reply warmly 
that men knew nothing about housekeeping, and 
that it was just the same to the servants if you were 
to send down a hundredweight of savouries to the 
kitchen. He would agree, and embrace her enthu- 
siastically. Everything that was just in what she 
said seemed to him extraordinary and amazing; and 
what did not fit in with his convictions seemed to 
‘him naive and touching. 

Sometimes he was in a philosophical mood, and 
he would begin to discuss some abstract subject 
while she listened and looked at his face with curt- 
Osity. 

“‘T am immensely happy with you, my joy,” he 
used to say, playing with her fingers or plaiting and 
unplaiting her hair. ‘‘ But I don’t look upon this 
happiness of mine as something that has come to me 
by chance, as though it had dropped from heaven. 
This happiness is a perfectly natural, consistent, log- 


266 The Party and Other Stories 


ical consequence. I believe that man is the creator 
of his own happiness, and now I am enjoying just 
what I have myself created. Yes, I speak without 
false modesty: I have created this happiness myself 
and I have a right to it. You know my past. My 
unhappy childhood, without father or mother; my 
depressing youth, poverty — all this was a struggle, 
all this was the path by which I made my way to 
happiness. . . .” 

In October the school sustained a heavy loss: 
Ippolit Ippolititch was taken ill with erysipelas on 
the head and died. For two days before his death 
he was unconscious and delirious, but even in his 
delirium he said nothing that was not perfectly well 
known to every one. 

“The Volga flows into the Caspian Sea... . 
Horses eat oats and hay. . . .” 

There were no lessons at the high school on the 
day of his funeral. His colleagues and pupils were 
the coffin-bearers, and the school choir sang all the 
way to the grave the anthem “‘ Holy God.” Three 
priests, two deacons, all his pupils and the staff of 
the boys’ high school, and the bishop’s choir in 
their best kaftans, took part in the procession. 
And passers-by who met the solemn procession, 
crossed themselves and said: 

“God grant us all such a death.” 

Returning home from the cemetery much moyed, 


The Teacher of Literature 267 


- Nikitin got out his diary from the table and wrote: 

“We have just consigned to the tomb Ippolit 
Ippolititch Ryzhitsky. Peace to your ashes, mod- 
est worker! Masha, Varya, and all the women at 
the funeral, wept from genuine feeling, perhaps be- 
_ cause they knew this uninteresting, humble man had 
never been loved by a woman. I wanted to say a 
warm word at my colleague’s grave, but I was 
warned that this might displease the director, as he 
did not like our poor friend. I believe that this is 
the first day since my marriage that my heart has 
been heavy.” 

There was no other event of note in the scholastic 
year. 

The winter was mild, with wet snow and no frost; 
on Epiphany Eve, for instance, the wind howled all 
night as though it were autumn, and water trickled 
. off the roofs; and in the morning, at the ceremony of 

the blessing of the water, the police allowed no one 
to go on the river, because they said the ice was 
swelling up and looked dark. But in spite of bad 
weather Nikitin’s life was as happy as in summer. 
And, indeed, he acquired another source of pleasure; 
he learned to play vint. Only one thing troubled 
him, moved him to anger, and seemed to prevent him 
from being perfectly happy: the cats and dogs which 
formed part of his wife’s dowry. The rooms, 
especially in the morning, always smelt like a 


268 The Party and Other Stories 


menagerie, and nothing could destroy the odour; the 
cats frequently fought with the dogs. The spiteful 
beast Mushka was fed a dozen times a day; she still 
refused to recognize Nikitin and growled at him: 
“Rrr .. . nga-nga-nga!”’ 

One night in Lent he was returning home from the 
club where he had been playing cards. It was dark, 
raining, and muddy. Nikitin had an unpleasant 
feeling at the bottom of his heart and could not ac- 
count for it. He did not know whether it was be- 
cause he had lost twelve roubles at cards, or whether 
because one of the players, when they were settling 
up, had said that of course Nikitin had pots of 
money, with obvious reference to his wife’s portion. 
He did not regret the twelve roubles, and there was 
nothing offensive in what had been said; but, still, 
there was the unpleasant feeling. He did not even 
feel a desire to go home. 

“Foo, how horrid!” he said, standing still at a 
lamp-post. 

It occurred to him that he did not regret the twelve 
roubles because he got them for nothing. If he had 
been a working man he would have known the value 
of every farthing, and would not have been so care- 
less whether he lost or won. And his good-fortune 
had all, he reflected, come to him by chance, for noth- 
ing, and really was as superfluous for him as medicine 
for the healthy. If, like the vast majority of people, 


The Teacher of Literature 269 


_ he had been harassed by anxiety for his daily bread, 
had been struggling for existence, if his back and 
chest had ached from work, then supper, a warm 
snug home, and domestic happiness, would have been 
the necessity, the compensation, the crown of his life; 
as it was, all this had a strange, indefinite significance . 
for him. 

“Foo, how horrid!” he repeated, knowing per- 
fectly well that these reflections were in themselves 
a bad sign. 

When he got home Masha wes in bed: she was 
breathing evenly and smiling, and was evidently 
sleeping with great enjoyment. Near her the white 
cat lay curled up, purring. While Nikitin lit the 
candle and lighted his cigarette, Masha woke up and 
greedily drank a glass of water. 

““T ate too many sweets,” she said, and laughed. 
' “ Have you been home? ”’ she asked after a pause. 

66 No.” 

Nikitin knew already that Captain Polyansky, on 
whom Varya had been building great hopes of late, 
was being transferred to one of the western prov- 
inces, and was already making his farewell visits in 
the town, and so it was depressing at his father-in- 
law’s. 

“Varya looked in this evening,” said Masha, 
sitting up. ‘‘ She did not say anything, but one could 
-see from her face how wretched she is, poor darling! 


270 The Party and Other Stories 


I can’t bear Polyansky. He is fat and bloated, and 
when he walks or dances his cheeks shake. . . . He 
is not a man I would choose. But, still, I did think 
he was a decent person.” 
“I think he is a decent person now,” said Nikitin. 
‘“‘ Then why has he treated Varya so badly?” 
“Why badly?” asked Nikitin, beginning to feel 
irritation against the white cat, who was stretching 
and arching its back. “As far as I know, he has 
made no proposal and has given her no promises.” 
‘Then why was he so often at the house? If he 
didn’t mean to marry her, he oughtn’t to have come.” 
Nikitin put out the candle and got into bed. But 
he felt disinclined to lie down and to sleep. He felt 
as though his head were immense and empty as a 
barn, and that new, peculiar thoughts were wander- 
ing about in it like tall shadows. He thought that, 
apart from the soft light of the ikon lamp, that 
beamed upon their quiet domestic happiness, that 
apart from this little world in which he and this cat 
lived so peacefully and happily, there was another 
world. .. . And he had a passionate, poignant 
longing to be in that other world, to work himself at 
some factory or big workshop, to address big audi- 
ences, to write, to publish, to raise a stir, to exhaust 
himself, to suffer. . . . He wanted something that 
would engross him till he forgot himself, ceased to 
care for the personal happiness which yielded him 


The Teacher of Literature a 


only sensations so monotonous. And suddenly there 
rose vividly before his imagination the figure of 
Shebaldin with his clean-shaven face, saying to him 
with horror: ‘You haven’t even read Lessing! 
You are quite behind the times! How you have 
gone to seed!” 

Masha woke up and again drank some water. 
He glanced at her neck, at her plump shoulders and 
throat, and remembered the word the brigadier- 
general had used in church —“ rose.” 

“ Rose,” he muttered, and laughed. 

His laugh was answered by a sleepy growl 
from Mushka under the bed: “Rrr.. . nga-nga- 
Weiss.” 

A heavy anger sank like a cold weight on his 
heart, and he felt tempted to say something rude 
to Masha, and even to jump up and hit her; his heart 
began throbbing. 

‘So then,” he asked, restraining himself, “ since 
I went to your house, I was bound in duty to marry 
your” 

“Of course. You know that very well.” 

“That’s nice.’ And a minute later he repeated: 
bel hats /nices’’ 

To relieve the throbbing of his heart, and to avoid 
saying too much, Nikitin went to his study and lay 
down on the sofa, without a pillow; then he lay on 
. the floor on the carpet. 


272 The Party and Other Stories 


|“ What nonsense it is!’ he said to reassure him- 
self. ‘‘ You are a teacher, you are working in the 
noblest of callings. . . . What need have you of any 
other world? What rubbish! ” 

But almost immediately he told himself with con- 
viction that he was not a real teacher, but simply a 
government employé, as commonplace and mediocre 
as the Czech who taught Greek. He had never had 
a vocation for teaching, he knew nothing of the the- 
ory of teaching, and never had been interested in the 
subject; he did not know how to treat children; he 
did not understand the significance of what he taught, 
and perhaps did not teach the right things. Poor 
Ippolit Ippolititch had been frankly stupid, and all 
the boys, as well as his colleagues, knew what he was 
and what to expect from him; but he, Nikitin, like 
the Czech, knew how to conceal his stupidity and 
cleverly deceived every one by pretending that, thank 
God, his teaching was a success. ‘These new ideas 
frightened Nikitin; he rejected them, called them stu- 
pid, and believed that all this was due to his nerves, 
that he would laugh at himself. 

And he did, in fact, by the morning laugh at 
himself and call himself an old woman; but it was 
clear to him that his peace of mind was lost, perhaps, 
for ever, and that in that little two-story house hap- 
piness was henceforth impossible for him. He real- 
ized that the illusion had evaporated, and that a new 


‘The Teacher of Literature 273 


life of unrest and clear sight was beginning which 
was incompatible with peace and personal happiness. 

Next day, which was Sunday, he was at the school 

chapel, and there met his colleagues and the director. 
It seemed to him that they were entirely preoccupied 
with concealing their ignorance and discontent with \ 
life, and he, too, to conceal his uneasiness, smiled 
aftably and talked of trivialities. Then he went to 
the station and saw the mail train come in and go 
out, and it was agreeable to him to be alone and not 
_ to have to talk to any one. 
At home he found Varya and his father-in-law, 
who had come to dinner. Varya’s eyes were red 
with crying, and she complained of a headache, while 
Shelestov ate a great deal, saying that young men 
nowadays were unreliable, and that there was very 
little gentlemanly feeling among them. 

‘It’s loutishness!”’ he said. “I shall tell him so 
to his face: ‘ It’s loutishness, sir,’ I shall say.” 

Nikitin smiled affably and helped Masha to look 
after their guests, but after dinner he went to his 
study and shut the door. 

The March sun was shining’ brightly in at the 
windows and shedding its warm rays on the table. 
It was only the twentieth of the month, but already 
the cabmen were driving with wheels, and the star- 
lings were noisy in the garden. It was just the 
- weather in which Masha would come in, put one arm 


274. The Party and Other Stories 


round his neck, tell him the horses were saddled or 
the chaise was at the door, and ask him what she 
should put on to keep warm. Spring was beginning 
as exquisitely as last spring, and it promised the same 
joys. . . . But Nikitin was thinking that it would be 
nice to take a holiday and go to Moscow, and stay 
at his old lodgings there. In the next-room they 
were drinking coffee and talking of Captain Poly- 
ansky, while he tried not to listen and wrote in his 
diary: ‘‘ Where am I, my God? Iam surrounded 
by vulgarity and vulgarity. Wearisome, insignifi- 
cant people, pots of sour cream, jugs of milk, cock- 
roaches, stupid women. . . . There is nothing more 
terrible, mortifying, and distressing than vulgarity. 
I must escape from here, I must escape today, or I 
shall go out of my mind!” 


WANTED 


NOT WANTED 


BETWEEN six and seven o’clock on a July evening, 
a crowd of summer visitors — mostly fathers of 
families — burdened with parcels, portfolios, and 
ladies’ hat-boxes, was trailing along from the little 
station of Helkovo, in the direction of the summer 
villas. They all looked exhausted, hungry, and ill- 
humoured, as though the sun were not shining and the 
grass were not green for them. 

Trudging along among the others was Pavel 
Matveyitch Zaikin, a member of the Circuit Court, 
a tall, stooping man, in a cheap cotton dust-coat and 
with a cockade on his faded cap. He was perspir- 
ing, red in the face, and gloomy. .. . 

““Do you come out to your holiday home every 
day?” said a summer visitor, in ginger-coloured 
trousers, addressing him. 

“No, not every day,’’ Zaikin answered sullenly. 
‘““My wife and son are staying here all the while, 
and I come down two or three times a week. I 
haven’t time to come every day; besides, it is ex- 
pensive.” 

“ You’re right there; it is expensive,” sighed he 

277 


278 The Party and Other Stories 


of the ginger trousers. ‘‘ In town you can’t walk to 
the station, you have to take a cab; and then, the 
ticket costs forty-two kopecks; you buy a paper for 
the journey; one is tempted to drink a glass of vodka. 
It’s all petty expenditure not worth considering, but, 
mind you, in the course of the summer it will run up 
to some two hundred roubles. Of course, to be in 
the lap of Nature is worth any money —I don’t dis- 
pute it . . < idyllic and all the rest of it; but of 
course, with the salary an official gets, as you know 
yourself, every farthing has to be considered. If 
you waste a halfpenny you lie awake all night. . . . 
Yes ... I receive, my dear sir—TI haven’t the 
honour of knowing your name —I receive a salary 
of very nearly two thousand roubles a year. I am 
a civil councillor, I smoke second-rate tobacco, and 
I haven’t a rouble to spare to buy Vichy water, pre- 
scribed me by the doctor for gall-stones.” 

“It’s altogether abominable,” said Zaikin after a 
brief silence. ‘‘I maintain, sir, that summer holi- 
days are the invention of the devil and of woman. 
The devil was actuated in the present instance by 
malice, woman by excessive frivolity. Mercy on 
us, it is not life at all; it is hard labour, it is hell! 
It’s hot and stifling, you can hardly breathe, and you 
wander about like a lost soul and can find no refuge. 
In town there is no furniture, no servants... 
everything has been carried off to the villa: you eat 


Not Wanted 279 


what you can get; you go without your tea because 
there is no one to heat the samovar; you can’t wash 
yourself; and when you come down here into this 
‘lap of Nature’ you have to walk, if you please, 
through the dust and heat... . Phew! Are you 
married?” 

“Yes... three children,” sighs Ginger Trousers. 

“It’s abominable altogether. . . . It’s a wonder 
we are still alive.” 

At last the summer visitors reached their destina- 
tion. Zaikin said good-bye to Ginger Trousers and 
went into his villa. He found a death-like silence in 
the house. He could hear nothing but the buzzing 
of the gnats, and the prayer for help of a fly destined 
for the dinner of a spider. The windows were hung 
with muslin curtains, through which the faded flow- 
ers of the geraniums showed red. On the unpainted 
wooden walls near the oleographs flies were slum- 
bering. There was not a soul in the passage, the 
kitchen, or the dining-room. In the room which 
was called indifferently the parlour or the drawing- 
room, Zaikin found his son Petya, a little boy of six. 
Petya was sitting at the table, and breathing loudly 
with his lower lip stuck out, was engaged in cutting 
out the figure of a knave of diamonds from a card. 

“Oh, that’s you, father! ’’ he said, without turn- 
ing round. ‘‘ Good-evening.”’ 

“ Good-evening. . . . And where is mother?” 


280 The Party and Other Stories 


“Mother? She is gone with Olga Kirillovna to 
a rehearsal of the play. The day after tomorrow 
they will have a performance. And they will take 
me, too. . . . And will you go?” 

“H’m! . . . When is she coming back?” 

‘¢ She said she would be back in the evening.” 

** And where is Natalya?” 

“* Mamma took Natalya with her to help her dress 
for the performance, and Akulina has gone to the 
wood to get mushrooms. Father, why is it that 
when gnats bite you their stomachs get red?” 

“IT don’t know. . . . Because they suck blood. 
So there is no one in the house, then? ”’ 

““No one; I am all alone in the house.” 

Zaikin sat down in an easy-chair, and for a mo- 
ment gazed blankly at the window. 

“Who is going to get our dinner?” he asked. 

“They haven’t cooked any dinner today, father. 
Mamma thought you were not coming today, and did 
not order any dinner. She is going to have dinner 
with Olga Kirillovna at the rehearsal.” 

‘Oh, thank you very much; and you, what have 
you to eat?” 

“T’ve had some milk. They bought me six 
kopecks’ worth of milk. And, father, why do gnats 
suck blood? ” 

Zaikin suddenly felt as though something heavy 
were rolling down on his liver and beginning to gnaw 


Not Wanted 281 


it. He felt so vexed, so aggrieved, and so bitter, 
that he was choking and tremulous; he wanted to 
jump up, to bang something on the floor, and to burst 
into loud abuse; but then he remembered that his doc- 
tor had absolutely forbidden him all excitement, so 
he got up, and making an effort to control himself, 
began whistling a tune from “ Les Huguenots.” 

“Father, can you act in plays?’ he heard Petya’s 
voice. 

“Oh, don’t worry me with stupid questions! ” said 
Zaikin, getting angry. ‘‘ He sticks to one like a leaf 
in the bath! Here you are, six years old, and just 
as silly as you were three years ago. . . . Stupid, 
neglected child! Why are you spoiling those cards, 
for instance? How dare you spoil them?” 

“These cards aren’t yours,” said Petya, turning 
round. ‘“‘ Natalya gave them me.” 

“You are telling fibs, you are telling fibs, you 
horrid boy!” said Zaikin, growing more and more 
irritated. ‘“‘ You are always telling fibs! You want 
a whipping, you horrid little pig! I will pull your 
ears!” 

Petya leapt up, and craning his-neck, stared fixedly 
at his father’s red and wrathful face. His big eyes 
first began blinking, then were dimmed with mois- 
ture, and the boy’s face began working. 

“But why are you scolding?” squealed Petya. 

‘Why do you attack me, you stupid?’ I am not 


282 The Party and Other Stories 


interfering with anybody; I am not naughty; I do 
what I am told, and yet . . . you are cross! Why 
are you scolding me?”’ 

The boy spoke with conviction, and wept so bit- 
terly that Zaikin felt conscience-stricken. 

“Yes, really, why am I falling foul of him?” he 
thought. ‘“ Come, come,” he said, touching the boy 
on the shoulder. ‘‘I am sorry, Petya .. . forgive 
me. You are my good boy, my nice boy, I love 
you.” 

Petya wiped his eyes with his sleeve, sat down, 
with a sigh, in the same place and began cutting out 
the queen. Zaikin went off to his own room. He 
stretched himself on the sofa, and putting his hands 
behind his head, sank into thought. The boy’s tears 
had softened his anger, and by degrees the oppres- 
sion on his liver grew less. He felt nothing but 
exhaustion and hunger. 

“‘ Father,” he heard on the other side of the door, 
‘* shall I show you my collection of insects?” 

“Yes, show me.” 

Petya came into the study and handed his father a 
long green box. Before raising it to his ear Zaikin 
could hear a despairing buzz and the scratching of 
claws on the sides of the box. Opening the lid, he 
saw a number of butterflies, beetles, grasshoppers, 
and flies fastened to the bottom of the box with pins. 


Not Wanted 283 


All except two or three butterflies were still alive 
and moving. 

“Why, the grasshopper is still alive!’ said Petya 
in surprise. “I caught him yesterday morning, and 
he is still alive! ” 

“Who taught you to pin them in this way?” 

“ Olga Kirillovna.” 

“ Olga Kirillovna ought to be pinned down like 
that herself!” said Zaikin with repulsion. ‘‘ Take 
them away! It’s shameful to torture animals.” 

““My God! How horribly he is being brought 
up!” he thought, as Petya went out. 

Pavel Matveyitch forgot his exhaustion and hun- 
ger, and thought of nothing but his boy’s future. 
Meanwhile, outside the light was gradually fading. 

. He could hear the summer visitors trooping 
back from the evening bathe. Some one was stop- 
ping near the open dining-room window and shout- 
ing: “Do you want any mushrooms?’ And get- 
ting no answer, shuffled on with bare feet. . . . But 
at last, when the dusk was so thick that the outlines 
of the geraniums behind the muslin curtain were lost, 
and whiffs of the freshness of evening were coming 
in at the window, the door of the passage was thrown 
open noisily, and there came a sound of rapid foot- 
steps, talk, and laughter... . 

‘* Mamma!” shrieked Petya. 


284. The Party and Other Stories 


Zaikin peeped out of his study and saw his wife, 
Nadyezhda Stepanova, healthy and rosy as ever; 
with her he saw Olga Kirillovna, a spare woman 
with fair hair and heavy freckles, and two unknown 
men: one a lanky young man with curly red hair 
and a big Adam’s apple; the other, a short stubby 
man with a shaven face like an actor’s and a bluish 
crooked chin. 

‘Natalya, set the samovar,” cried Nadyezhda 
Stepanovna, with a loud rustle of her skirts. “I 
hear Pavel Matveyitch is come. Pavel, where are 
you? Good-evening, Pavel!” she said, running into 
the study breathlessly. ‘‘So you’ve come. Iam so 
glad. ..... Two of our amateurs have come with 
me. . . . Come, I'll introduce you. . . . Here, the 
taller one is Koromyslov . . . he sings splendidly; 
and the other, the little one . . . is called Smerka- 
lov: he is a real actor . . . he recites magnificently. 
Oh, how tired I am! We have just had a re- 
hearsal. . . . It goes splendidly. We are acting 
‘ The Lodger with the Trombone’ and ‘ Waiting for 
Him.’ . . . The performance is the day after to- 
IMOFrOW\es ee 

‘“ Why did you bring them?” asked Zaikin. 

‘‘T couldn’t help it, Poppet; after tea we must 
rehearse our parts and sing something. . . . I am 
to sing a duet with Koromysloy. . . . Oh, yes, I was 
almost forgetting! Darling, send Natalya to get 


Not Wanted 285 


some sardines, vodka, cheese, and something else. 
They will most likely stay to supper. . . . Oh, how 
tired I am!” 

““H’m!  T’ve no money.” 

“You must, Poppet! It would be awkward! 
Don’t make me blush.” 

Half an hour later Natalya was sent for vodka 
and savouries; Zaikin, after drinking tea and eating 
a whole French loaf, went to his bedroom and lay 
down on the bed, while Nadyezhda Stepanovna and 
her visitors, with much noise and laughter, set to 
work to rehearse their parts. Fora long time Pavel 
Matveyitch heard Koromyslov’s nasal reciting and 
Smerkalov’s theatrical exclamations. . . . The re- 
hearsal was followed by a long conversation, inter- 
rupted by the shrill laughter of Olga Kirillovna. 
Smerkaloy, as a real actor, explained the parts with 
aplomb and heat... . 

Then followed the duet, and after the duet there 
was the clatter of crockery. ... Through his 
drowsiness Zaikin heard them persuading Smerka- 
lov to read ‘‘ The Woman who was.a Sinner,” and 
heard him, after affecting to refuse, begin to recite. 
He hissed, beat himself on the breast, wept, laughed 
in a husky bass. . . . Zaikin scowled and hid his 
head under the quilt. 

“It’s a long way for you to go, and it’s dark,” he 
heard Nadyezhda Stepanovna’s voice an hour later. 


286 The Party and Other Stories 


“Why shouldn’t you stay the night here? Koromy- 
slov can sleep here in the drawing-room on the sofa, 
and you, Smerkalov, in Petya’s bed. . . . I can put 
Petya in my husband’s study. . . . Do stay, really!” 

At last when the clock was striking two, all was 
hushed, the bedroom door opened, and Nadyezhda 
Stepanovna appeared. 

‘* Pavel, are you asleep?” she whispered. 

“No; why?” 

‘* Go into your study, darling, and lie on the sofa. 
I am going to put Olga Kirillovna here, in your bed. 
Do go, dear! I would put her to sleep in the study, 
but she is afraid to sleep alone. . . . Do get up!” 

Zaikin got up, threw on his dressing-gown, and 
taking his pillow, crept wearily to the study. ... 
Feeling his way to his sofa, he lighted a match, and 
saw Petya lying on the sofa. The boy was not 
asleep, and, looking at the match with wide-open 
eyes: 

‘Father, why is it gnats don’t go to sleep at 
night? ”’ he asked. 

“Because . . . because . . . you and [ are not 
wanted. . . . We have nowhere to sleep even.” 

“Father, and why is it Olga Kirillovna has 
freckles on her face?” 

“Oh, shut up! Iam tired of you.” 

After a moment’s thought, Zaikin dressed and 
went out into the street for a breath of air... . 


Not Wanted 287 


He looked at the grey morning sky, at the motion- 
less'clouds, heard the lazy call of the drowsy corn- 
crake, and began dreaming of the next day, when 
he would go to town, and coming back from the court 
would tumble into bed. . . . Suddenly the figure of 
a man appeared round the corner. 

““ A watchman, no doubt,” thought Zaikin. 

But going nearer and looking more closely he 
recognized in the figure the summer visitor in the 
ginger trousers. 

“You're not asleep?” he asked. 

““No, I can’t sleep,” sighed Ginger Trousers. 
“IT am enjoying Nature. . . . A welcome visitor, 
my wife’s mother, arrived by the night train, you 
know. She brought with her our nieces . . . splen- 
did girls! I was delighted to see them, although 

. it’s very damp! And you, too, are enjoying 
Nature?” 

“Yes,” grunted Zaikin, ‘“‘I am enjoying it, too. 
. . - Do you know whether there is any sort of 
tavern or restaurant in the neighbourhood?” 

Ginger Trousers raised his eyes to heaven and 
meditated profoundly. 


TYPHUS 


A yYounG lieutenant called Klimov was travelling 
from Petersburg to Moscow in a smoking carriage 
of the mail train. Opposite him was sitting an 
elderly man with a shaven face like a sea captain’s, 
by all appearances a well-to-do Finn or Swede. He 
pulled at his pipe the whole journey and kept talking 
about the same subject: 

“Ha, you are an officer! I have a brother an 
officer too, only he is a naval officer... . He is a 
naval officer, and he is stationed at Kronstadt. 
Why are you going to Moscow?” 

‘“‘T am serving there.” 

“Ha! And are you a family man?” 

No, I live with my sister and aunt.” 

“My brother’s an officer, only he is a naval 
officer; he has a wife and three children. Ha!” 

The Finn’ seemed continually ‘surprised at some- 
thing, and gave a broad idiotic grin when he ex- 
claimed “‘ Ha!” and continually puffed at his stink- 
ing pipe. Klimov, who for some reason did not feel 
well, and found it burdensome to answer questions, 
hated him with all his heart. He dreamed of how 

201 


292 The Party and Other Stories 


nice it would be to snatch the wheezing pipe out of 
his hand and fling it under the seat, and drive the 
Finn himself into another compartment. 

“‘ Detestable people these Finns and . . . Greeks,” 
he thought. ‘‘ Absolutely superfluous, useless, de- 
testable people. They simply fill up space on the 
earthly globe. What are they for?” 

And the thought of Finns and Greeks produced a 
feeling akin to sickness all over his body. For the 
sake of comparison he tried to think of the French, 
of the Italians, but his efforts to think of these 
people evoked in his mind, for some reason, nothing 
but images of organ-grinders, naked women, and the 
foreign oleographs which hung over the chest of 
drawers at home, at his aunt’s. 

Altogether the officer felt in an abnormal state. 
He could not arrange his arms and legs comfortably 
on the seat, though he had the whole seat to him- 
self. His mouth felt dry and sticky; there was a 
heavy fog in his brain; his thoughts seemed to be 
straying, not only within his head, but outside his 
skull, among the seats and the people that were 
shrouded in the darkness of night. Through the 
mist in his brain, as through a dream, he heard the 
murmur of voices, the rumble of wheels, the slam- 
ming of doors. The sounds of the bells, the 
whistles, the guards, the running to and fro of pas- 
sengers on the platforms, seemed more frequent 


Typhus 293 


than usual. The time flew by rapidly, impercept- 
ibly, and so it seemed as though the train were stop- 
ping at stations every minute, and metallic voices 
crying continually: 

“Ts the mail ready? ” 

“Yes!” was repeatedly coming from outside. 

It seemed as though the man in charge of the 
heating came in too often to look at the thermometer, 
that the noise of trains going in the opposite direc- 
tion and the rumble of the wheels over the bridges 
was incessant. The noise, the whistles, the Finn, 
the tobacco smoke —all this mingling with the 
menace and flickering of the misty images in his 
brain, the shape and character of which a man in 
health can never recall, weighed upon Klimov like 
an unbearable nightmare. In horrible misery he 
lifted his heavy head, looked at the lamp in the rays 
of which shadows and misty blurs seemed to be danc- 
ing. He wanted to ask for water, but his parched 
tongue would hardly move, and he scarcely had 
strength to answer the Finn’s questions. He tried 
to lie down more comfortably and go to sleep, but 
he could not succeed. The Finn several times fell 
asleep, woke up again, lighted his pipe, addressed 
him with his ‘‘ Ha!” and went to sleep again; and 
still the lieutenant’s legs could not get into a com- 
fortable position, and still the menacing images stood 
facing him. 


294 The Party and Other Stories 


At Spirovo he went out into the station for a 
drink of water. He saw people sitting at the table 
and hurriedly eating. 

‘* And how can they eat!” he thought, trying not 
to sniff the air, that smelt of roast meat, and not to 
look at the munching mouths — they both seemed to 
him sickeningly disgusting. 

A good-looking lady was conversing loudly with 
a military man in a red cap, and showing magnificent 
white teeth as she smiled; and the smile, and the 
teeth, and the lady herself made on Klimov the 
same revolting impression as the ham and the ris- 
soles. He could not understand how it was the 
military man in the red cap was not ill at ease, sit- 
ting beside her and looking at her healthy, smiling 
face. 

When after drinking some water he went back to 
his carriage, the Finn was sitting smoking; his pipe 
was wheezing and squelching like a golosh with holes 
in it in wet weather. 

“Hal” he said, surprised; ‘‘ what station is 
this?” 

‘“T don’t know,” answered Klimoy, lying down 
and shutting his mouth that he might not breathe the 
acrid tobacco smoke, 

“And when shall we reach Tver?” 

““T don’t know. Excuse me, I...I1 can’t 
answer. ITamill. I caught cold today.” 


Typhus 295 


The Finn knocked his pipe against the window- 
frame and began talking of his brother, the naval 
oficer. Klimov no longer heard him; he was think- 
ing miserably of his soft, comfortable bed, of a bot- 
tle of cold water, of his sister Katya, who was so 
good at making one comfortable, soothing, giving 
one water. He even smiled when the vision of his 
orderly Pavel, taking off his heavy stifling boots and 
putting water on the little table, flitted through his 
imagination. He fancied that if he could only get 
into his bed, have a drink of water, his nightmare 
would give place to sound healthy sleep. 

“Is the mail ready?” a hollow voice reached him 
from the distance. 

*“ Yes,’’ answered a bass voice almost at the win- 
dow. 

It was already the second or third station from 
Spirovo. 

The time was flying rapidly in ees and bounds, 
and it seemed as though the bells, whistles, and stop- 
pings would never end. Ia despair Klimov buried 
his face in the corner of the seat, clutched his head 
in his hands, and began again thinking of his sister 
Katya and his orderly Pavel, but his sister and his 
orderly were mixed up with the misty images in his 
brain, whirled round, and disappeared. His burn- 
ing breath, reflected from the back of the seat, 
seemed to scald his face; his legs were uncomfort- 


296 The Party and Other Stories 


able; there was a draught from the window on his 
back; but, however wretched he was, he did not 
want to change his position. . . . A heavy night- 
marish lethargy gradually gained possession of him 
and fettered his limbs. 

When he brought himself to raise his head, it was 
already light in the carriage. ‘The passengers were 
putting on their fur coats and moving about. The 
train was stopping. Porters in white aprons and 
with discs on their breasts were bustling among the 
passengers and snatching up their boxes. Klimov 
put on his great-coat, mechanically followed the 
other passengers out of the carriage, and it seemed 
to him that not he, but some one else was moving, 
and he felt that his fever, his thirst, and the menac- 
ing images which had not let him sleep all night, 
came out of the carriage with him. Mechanically 
he took his luggage and engaged a sledge-driver. 
The man asked him for a rouble and a quarter to 
drive to Povarsky Street, but he did not haggle, 
and without protest got submissively into the sledge. 
He still understood the difference of numbers, but 
money had ceased to have any value to him. 

At home Klimov was met by his aunt and his sister _ 
Katya, a girl of eighteen. When Katya greeted him 
she had a pencil and exercise book in her hand, and 
he remembered that she was preparing for an exam- 
ination asateacher. Gasping with fever, he walked 


Typhus 207 


aimlessly through all the rooms without answering 
their questions or greetings, and when he reached his 
bed he sank down on the pillow. The Finn, the red 
cap, the lady with the white teeth, the smell of roast 
meat, the flickering blurs, filled his consciousness, and 
by now he did not know where he was and did not 
hear the agitated voices. 

_ When he recovered consciousness he found him- 
self in bed, undressed, saw a bottle of water and 
Pavel, but it was no cooler, nor softer, nor more 
comfortable for that. His arms and legs, as before, 
refused to lie comfortably; his tongue stuck to the 
roof of his mouth, and he heard the wheezing of the 
Finn’s pipe. . . . A stalwart, black-bearded doctor 
was busy doing something beside the bed, brushing 
against Pavel with his broad back. 

“Tt’s all right, it’s all right, young man,” 
he muttered. ‘‘ Excellent, excellent . . . goo-od, 
“gies [one comes ed 

The doctor called Klimov “young man,” said 
‘“500-0d”” instead of “ good” and “ so-o”’ instead 
Oin+:SO,. 

50-0 ee SO-01. . . $0-0,-~ he ‘murmured. 
‘““Goo-od, goo-od... ! Excellent, young man. 
. . « You mustn’t lose heart!” 

The doctor’s rapid, careless talk, his well-fed 
countenance, and condescending ‘‘ young man,” irri- 
tated Klimov. 


298 The Party and Other Stories 


“Why do you call me ‘young man’?” he 
moaned. ‘“ What familiarity! Damn it all!” 

And he was frightened by his own voice. The 
voice was so dried up, so weak and peevish, that he 
would not have known it. 

“Excellent, excellent!’ muttered the doctor, not 
in the least offended. . . . ‘‘ You mustn’t get angry, 
$0-0, SO-0, S0-0. . . .” 

And the time flew by at home with the same 
startling swiftness as in the railway carriage... . 
The daylight was continually being replaced by the 
dusk of evening. The doctor seemed never to leave 
his bedside, and he heard at every moment his “‘ so-o, 
so-o, so-o.”” A continual succession of people was in- 
cessantly crossing the bedroom. Among them were: 
Pavel, the Finn, Captain Yaroshevitch, Lance- 
Corporal Maximenko, the red cap, the lady with the 
white teeth, the doctor. They were all talking and 
waving their arms, smoking and eating. Once by 
daylight Klimov saw the chaplain of the regiment, 
Father Alexandr, who was standing before the bed, 
wearing a stole and with a prayer-book in his hand. 
He was muttering something with a grave face such 
as Klimov had never seen in him before. The lieu- ‘ 
tenant remembered that Father Alexandr used in a 
friendly way to call all the Catholic officers “ Poles,”’ 
and wanting to amuse him, he cried: 


Typhus 299 


“Father, Yaroshevitch the Pole has climbed up 
a pole!” 

But Father Alexandr, a light-hearted man who 
loved a joke, did not smile, but became graver than 
ever, and made the sign of the cross over Klimov. 
At night-time by turn two shadows came noiselessly 
in and out; they were his aunt and sister. His sis- 
ter’s shadow knelt down and prayed; she bowed 
down to the ikon, and her grey shadow on the wall 
bowed down too, so that two shadows were praying. 
The whole time there was a smell of roast meat and 
the Finn’s pipe, but once Klimov smelt the strong 
smell of incense. He felt so sick he could not lie 
still, and began shouting: 

“The incense! Take away the incense! ” 

There was no answer. He could only hear the 
subdued singing of the priest somewhere and some 
_ one running upstairs. 

When Klimov came to himself there was not a 
soul in his bedroom. The morning sun was stream- 
ing in at the window through the lower blind, and 
a quivering sunbeam, bright and keen as the sword’s 
edge, was flashing on the glass bottle. He heard 
the rattle of wheels — so there was no snow now in 
the street. The lieutenant looked at the ray, at 
the familiar furniture, at the door, and the first 
thing he did was to laugh. His chest and stomach 


300 The Party and Other Stories 


heaved with delicious, happy, tickling laughter. 
His whole body from head to foot was overcome 
by a sensation of infinite happiness and joy in life, 
such as the first man must have felt when he was 
created and first saw the world. Klimoy felt a pas- 
sionate desire for movement, people, talk. His body ~ 
lay a motionless block; only his hands stirred, but 
that he hardly noticed, and his whole attention was 
concentrated on trifles. He rejoiced in his breath- 
ing, in his laughter, rejoiced in the existence of the 
water-bottle, the ceiling, the sunshine, the tape on 
the curtains. God’s world, even in the narrow space 
of his bedroom, seemed beautiful, varied, grand. 
When the doctor made his appearance, the lieutenant 
was thinking what a delicious thing medicine was, 
how charming and pleasant the doctor was, and how 
nice and interesting people were in general. 

‘*.So-0, so, so... . Excellent, excellent! . .. 
Now we are well again. . . . Goo-od, goo-od! ” the 
doctor pattered. 

The lieutenant listened and laughed joyously; 
he remembered the Finn, the lady with the white 
teeth, the train, and he longed to smoke, to eat. 

‘“‘ Doctor,” he said, ‘‘ tell them to give me a crust ' 
of rye bread and salt, and . . . and sardines.” 

The doctor refused; Pavel did not obey the order, 
and did not go for the bread. The lieutenant could 
not bear this and began crying like a naughty child. 


Typhus 301 


“ Baby!” laughed the doctor. ‘“ Mammy, bye- 
bye!” 

Klimov laughed, too, and when the doctor went 
away he fell into a sound sleep. He woke up with 
the same joyfulness and sensation of happiness. 
His aunt was sitting near the bed. 

“Well, aunt,” he said joyfully. ‘“‘ What has been 
the matter? ” 

“ Spotted typhus.” 

“Really. But now I am well, quite well! 
Where is Katya?” 

““She is not at home. I suppose she has gone 
somewhere from her examination.” 

The old lady said this and looked at her stocking; 
her lips began quivering, she turned away, and sud- 
denly broke into sobs. Forgetting the doctor’s pro- 
hibition in her despair, she said: 

“Ah, Katya, Katya! Our angel is gone! Is 
gone!” 

She dropped her stocking and bent down to it, 
and as she did so her cap fell off her head. Looking 
at her grey head and understanding nothing, Kli- 
mov was frightened for Katya, and asked: 

‘Where is she, aunt? ” 

The old woman, who had forgotten Klimoy and 
was thinking only of her sorrow, said: 

“She caught typhus from you, and is dead. She 
was buried the day before yesterday.” 


302 The Party and Other Stories 


This terrible, unexpected news was fully grasped 
by Klimov’s consciousness; but terrible and star- 
tling as it was, it could not overcome the animal 
joy that filled the convalescent. He cried and 
laughed, and soon began scolding because they would 
not let him eat. 

Only a week later when, leaning on Pavel, he went 
in his dressing-gown to the window, looked at the 
overcast spring sky and listened to the unpleasant 
clang of the old iron rails which were being carted 
by, his heart ached, he burst into tears, and leaned 
his forehead against the window-frame. 

‘“How miserable I am!” he muttered. ‘* My 
God, how miserable! ” 

And joy gave way to the boredom of everyday 
life and the feeling of his irrevocable loss. 


A MISFORTUNE 


A MISFORTUNE 


Sorya PErrovna, the wife of Lubyantsev the no- 
tary, a handsome young woman of five-and-twenty, 
was walking slowly along a track that had been 
cleared in the wood, with Ilyin, a lawyer who was 
spending the summer in the neighbourhood. It was 
five o’clock in the evening. Feathery-white masses 
of cloud stood overhead; patches of bright blue sky 
peeped out between them. The clouds stood mo- 
tionless, as though they had caught in the tops of the 
tall old pine-trees. It was still and sultry. 

Farther on, the track was crossed by a low rail- 
way embankment on which a sentinel with a gun was 
for some reason pacing up and down. Just beyond 
the embankment there was a large white church with 
six domes and a rusty roof. 

‘“‘T did not expect to meet you here,” said Sofya 
Petrovyna, looking at the ground and prodding at 
the last year’s leaves with the tip of her parasol, 
‘Cand now I am glad we have met. I want to speak 
to you seriously and once for all. I beg you, Ivan 
Mihalovitch, if you really love and respect me, 
please make an end of this pursuit of me! You fol- 
-low me about like a shadow, you are continually 
305 


’ 


306 The Party and Other Stories 


looking at me not in a nice way, making love to me, 
writing me strange letters, and . .. and I don't 
know where it’s all going to end! Why, what can 
come of it?” 

Ilyin said nothing. Sofya Petrovna walked on a 
few steps and continued: 

‘““And this complete transformation in you all 
came about in the course of two or three weeks, 
after five years’ friendship. I don’t know you, Ivan 
Mihalovitch! ” 

Sofya Petrovna stole a glance at her companion. 
Screwing up his eyes, he was looking intently at 
the fluffy clouds. His face looked angry, ill-hu- 
moured, and preoccupied, like that of a man in pain 
forced to listen to nonsense. 

‘“T wonder you don’t see it yourself,” Madame 
Lubyantsev went on, shrugging her shoulders. 
‘You ought to realize that it’s not a very nice part 
you are playing. J am married; I love and respect 
my husband. ...I have a daughter. ... Can 
you think all that means nothing? Besides, as an 
old friend you know my attitude to family life and 
my views as to the sanctity of marriage.” 

Ilyin cleared his throat angrily and heaved a sigh. 


‘“Sanctity of marriage . . .” he muttered. ‘‘ Oh, 
Lord!” 
‘Yes, yes. . . . I love my husband, I respect 


him; and in any case I value the peace of my home. 


A Misfortune 307 


I would rather let myself be killed than be a cause 
of unhappiness to Andrey and his daughter. .. . 
And I beg you, Ivan Mihalovitch, for God’s sake, 
leave me in peace! Let us be as good, true friends 
as we used to be, and give up these sighs and groans, 
which really don’t suit you. It’s settled and over! 
Not a word more about it. Let us talk of something 
else: 

Sofya Petrovna again stole a glance at Ilyin’s 
face. Ilyin was looking up; he was pale, and was 
angrily biting his quivering lips. She could not un- 
derstand why he was angry and why he was indig- 
nant, but his pallor touched her. 

“Don’t be angry; let us be friends,” she said 
affectionately. ‘‘ Agreed? Here’s my hand.” 

Ilyin took her plump little hand in both of his, 
squeezed it, and slowly raised it to his lips. 

‘‘T am not a schoolboy,” he muttered. “I am 
not in the least tempted by friendship with the woman 
I love.” 

“Enough, enough! It’s settled and done with. 
We have reached the seat; let us sit down.” 

Sofya Petrovna’s soul was filled with a sweet 
sense of relief: the most difficult and delicate thing 
had been said, the painful question was settled and 
done with. Now she could breathe freely and look 
Ilyin straight in the face. She looked at him, and 
the egoistic feeling of the superiority of the woman 


308 The Party and Other Stories 


over the man who loves her, agreeably flattered her. 
It pleased her to see this huge, strong man, with his 
manly, angry face and his big black beard — clever, 
cultivated, and, people said, talented —sit down 
obediently beside her and bow his head dejectedly. 
For two or three minutes they sat without speaking. 

“ Nothing is settled or done with,” began Lyin. 
‘““You repeat copy-book maxims to me. ‘I love 
and respect my husband . . . the sanctity of mar- 
riage. ...’ I know all that without your help, 
and I could tell you more, too. I tell you truthfully 
and honestly that I consider the way I am behaving 
as criminal and immoral. What more can one say 
than that? But what’s the good of saying what 
everybody knows? Instead of feeding nightingales 
with paltry words, you had much better tell me what 
I am to do.” 

““Tve told you already — go away.” 

‘“ As you know perfectly well, I have gone away 
five times, and every time I turned back on the way. 
I can show you my through tickets — I’ve kept them 
all. I have not will enough to run away from you! 
I am struggling. Jam struggling horribly; but what 
the devil am I good for if I have no backbone, if 
I am weak, cowardly! I can’t struggle with Na- 
ture! Do you understand? I cannot! I run 
away from here, and she holds on to me and pulls 
me back. Contemptible, loathsome weakness! ” 


A Misfortune 309 


Ilyin flushed crimson, got up, and walked up and 
down by the seat. 

‘‘T feel as cross as a dog,” he muttered, clench- 
ing his fists. “I hate and despise myself! My 
God! like some depraved schoolboy, I am making 
love to another man’s wife, writing idiotic letters, 
degrading myself . . . ugh!” 

Ilyin clutched at his head, grunted, and sat down. 

““And then your insincerity!’ he went on bit- 
terly. ‘If you do dislike my disgusting behaviour, 
why have you come here? What drew you here? 
In my letters I only ask you for a direct, definite an- 
swer — yes or no; but instead of a direct answer, 
you contrive every day these ‘ chance’ meetings with 
me and regale me with copy-book maxims! ” 

Madame Lubyantsev was frightened and flushed. 
She suddenly felt the awkwardness which a decent 
woman feels when she is accidentally discovered un- 
dressed. 

“You seem to suspect I am playing with you,” 
she muttered. ‘‘I have always given you a direct 
answer, and . . . only today I’ve begged you. . .” 

‘“Ough! as though one begged in such cases! If 
you were to say straight out ‘Get away,’ I should 
have been gone long ago; but you’ve never said that. 
You’ve never once given me a direct answer. 
Strange indecision! Yes, indeed; either you are 


playing with me, or else . . .” 


310 ‘The Party and Other Stories 


Ilyin leaned his head on his fists without finish- 
ing. Sofya Petrovna began going over in her own 
mind the way she had behaved from beginning to _ 
end. She remembered that not only in her actions, 
but even in her secret thoughts, she had always been 
opposed to Ilyin’s love-making; but yet she felt 
there was a grain of truth in the lawyer’s words. 
But not knowing exactly what the truth was, she 
could not find answers to make to Ilyin’s complaint, 
however hard she thought. It was awkward to be 
silent, and, shrugging her shoulders, she said: 

‘*So I am to blame, it appears.” 

‘“‘T don’t blame you for your insincerity,” sighed 
Ilyin. “I did not mean that when I spoke of it. 
. . . Your insincerity is natural and in the order of 
things. If people agreed together and suddenly 
became sincere, everything would go to the devil.” 

Sofya Petrovna was in no mood for philosophical 
reflections, but she was glad of a chance to change 
the conversation, and asked: 

“But why?” 

‘“‘ Because only savage women and animals are sin- 
cere. Once civilization has introduced a demand 
for such comforts as, for instance, feminine virtue, 
sincerity is out of place. . . .” 

Ilyin jabbed his stick angrily into the sand. Ma- 
dame Lubyantsev listened to him and liked his con- 
versation, though a great deal of it she did not un- 


A Misfortune a0 


derstand. What gratified her most was that she, an 
ordinary woman, was talked to by a talented man on 
“intellectual” subjects; it afforded her great pleas- 
ure, too, to watch the working of his mobile, young 
face, which was still pale and angry. She failed 
to understand a great deal that he said, but what 
_was clear to her in his words was the attractive bold- 
ness with which the modern man without hesitation 
or doubt decides great questions and draws conclu- 
sive deductions. 

She suddenly realized that she was admiring him, 
and was alarmed. 

“‘ Forgive me, but I don’t understand,” she said 
hurriedly. “ What makes you talk of insincerity? 
I repeat my request again: be my good, true friend; 
let me alone! I beg you most earnestly!” 

“ Very good; I'll try again,” sighed Ilyin. ‘“ Glad 
to do my best. . . . Only I doubt whether anything 
will come of my efforts. Either I shall put a bullet 
through my brains or take to drink in an idiotic way. 
I shall come toa bad end! ‘There’s a limit to every- 
thing —to struggles with Nature, too. Tell me, 
how can one struggle against madness? If you 
drink wine, how are you to struggle against intoxi- 
cation? What am I to do if your image has grown 
into my soul, and day and night stands persistently 
before my eyes, like that pine there at this moment ? 
- Come, tell me, what hard and difficult thing can I 


312 The Party and Other Stories 


do to get free from this abominable, miserable con- 
dition, in which all my thoughts, desires, and dreams 
are no longer my own, but belong to some demon 
who has taken possession of me? I love you, love 
you so much that I am completely thrown out of 
gear; I’ve given up my work and all who are dear 
to me; I’ve forgotten my God! I’ve never been in 
love like this in my life.” 

Sofya Petrovna, who had not expected such a 
turn to their conversation, drew away from [lyin 
and looked into his face in dismay. Tears came 
into his eyes, his lips were quivering, and there was 
an imploring, hungry expression in his face. 

‘“‘T love you! ” he muttered, bringing his eyes near 
her big, frightened eyes. ‘‘ You are so beautiful! 
I am in agony now, but I swear I would sit here all 
my life, suffering and looking in your eyes. But 
. . . be silent, I implore you! ” 

Sofya Petrovna, feeling utterly disconcerted, tried 
to think as quickly as possible of something to say 
to stop him. “I'll go away,” she decided, but be- 
fore she had time to make a movement to get up, 
Ilyin was on his knees before her. . . . He was 
clasping her knees, gazing into her face and speak- 
ing passionately, hotly, eloquently. In her terror 
and confusion she did not hear his words; for some 
reason now, at this dangerous moment, while her 


A Misfortune Buk 


knees were being agreeably squeezed and felt as 
though they were in a warm bath, she was trying, 
with a sort of angry spite, to interpret her own sen- 
sations. She was angry that instead of brimming 
over with protesting virtue, she was entirely over- 
whelmed with weakness, apathy, and emptiness, like 
a drunken man utterly reckless; only at the bottom 
of her soul a remote bit of herself was malignantly 
taunting her: ‘‘ Why don’t you go? Is this as it 
should be? Yes?” 

Seeking for some explanation, she could not un- 
derstand how it was she did not pull away the hand 
to which [lyin was clinging like a leech, and why, 
like Ilyin, she hastily glanced to right and to left to 
see whether any one was looking. The clouds and 
the pines stood motionless, looking at them severely, 
like old ushers seeing mischief, but bribed not to tell 
the school authorities. The sentry stood like a post 
on the embankment and seemed to be looking at 
the seat. 

“ Let him look,” thought Sofya Petrovna. 

“But ... but listen,” she said at last, with de- 
spair in her voice. ‘What can come of this? 
What will be the end of this?” 

“‘T don’t know, I don’t know,” he whispered, 
waving off the disagreeable questions. 

They heard the hoarse, discordant whistle of the 


314 The Party and Other Stories 


train. This cold, irrelevant sound from the every- 
day world of prose made Sofya Petroyna rouse her- 
self. 

“T can’t stay . . . it’s time I was at home,” she 
said, getting up quickly. ‘“‘ The train is coming in. 
. . . Andrey is coming by it! He will want his 
dinner.” 

Sofya Petrovna turned towards the embankment 
with a burning face. The engine slowly crawled by, 
then came the carriages. It was not the local train, 
as she had supposed, but a goods train. The trucks 
filed by against the background of the white church 
in a long string like the days of a man’s life, and it 
seemed as though it would never end. 

But at last the train passed, and the last carriage 
with the guard and a light in it had disappeared 
behind the trees. Sofya Petrovna turned round 
sharply, and without looking at Ilyin, walked rap- 
idly back along the track. She had regained her 
self-possession. Crimson with shame, humiliated 
not by Ilyin — no, but by her own cowardice, by the 
shamelessness with which she, a chaste and high- 
principled woman, had allowed a man, not her hus- 
band, to hug her knees — she had only one thought 
now: to get home as quickly as possible to her villa, 
to her family. The lawyer could hardly keep pace 
with her. Turning from the clearing into a narrow 
path, she turned round and glanced at him so quickly 


A Misfortune 315 


that she saw nothing but the sand on his knees, and 
waved to him to drop behind. 

Reaching home, Sofya Petrovna stood in the mid- 
dle of her room for five minutes without moving, 
and looked first at the window and then at her writ- 
ing-table. 

“You low creature!” she said, upbraiding her- 
self. “‘ You low creature! ”’ 

To spite herself, she recalled in precise detail, 
keeping nothing back—she recalled that though 
all this time she had been opposed to Ilyin’s love- 
making, something had impelled her to seek an in- 
terview with him; and what was more, when he 
was at her feet she had enjoyed it enormously. She 
recalled it all without sparing herself, and now, 
breathless with shame, she would have liked to slap 
herself in the face. 

“Poor Andrey!” she said to herself, trying as 
she thought of her husband to put into her face as 
tender an expression as she could. “ Varya, my 
poor little girl, doesn’t know what a mother she 
has! Forgive me, my dear ones! I love you so 
jth (o Cr aeted Lap ests Col si eg 

And anxious to prove to herself that she was still 
a good wife and mother, and that corruption had 
not yet touched that “sanctity of marriage” of 
which she had spoken to Ilyin, Sofya Petrovna ran 
to the kitchen and abused the cook for not having 


316 The Party and Other Stories 


yet laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She tried to 
picture her husband’s hungry and exhausted appear- 
ance, commiserated him aloud, and laid the table 
for him with her own hands, which she had never 
done before. Then she found her daughter Varya, 
picked her up in her arms and hugged her warmly; 
the child seemed to her cold and heavy, but she was 
unwilling to acknowledge this to herself, and she be- 
gan explaining to the child how good, kind, and 
honourable her papa was. 

But when Andrey Ilyitch arrived soon afterwards 
she hardly greeted him. The rush of false feeling 
had already passed off without proving anything to 
her, only irritating and exasperating her by its 
falsity. She was sitting by the window, feeling 
miserable and cross. It is only by being in trouble 
that people can understand how far from easy it 
is to be the master of one’s feelings and thoughts. 
Sofya Petroyna said afterwards that there was a 
tangle within her which it was as difficult to unravel 
as to count a flock of sparrows rapidly flying by. 
From the fact that she was not overjoyed to see her 
husband, that she did not like his manner at dinner, 
she concluded all of a sudden that she was beginning 
to hate her husband. 

Andrey Ilyitch, languid with hunger and exhaus- 
tion, fell upon the sausage while waiting for the 


A Misfortune By 


soup to be brought in, and ate it greedily, munching 
noisily and moving his temples. 

‘““My goodness!” thought Sofya Petrovna. “JI 
love and respect him, but . . . why does he munch 
so repulsively? ” 

The disorder in her thoughts was no less than the 
disorder in her feelings. Like all persons inexpe- 
rienced in combating unpleasant ideas, Madame Lu- 
byantsev did her utmost not to think of her trouble, 
and the harder she tried the more vividly Ilyin, the 
sand on his knees, the fluffy clouds, the train, stood 
out in her imagination. 

“ And why did I go there this afternoon like a 
fool?’ she thought, tormenting herself. ‘‘ And 
am I really so weak that I cannot depend upon my- 
self?” 

Fear magnifies danger. By the time Andrey 
Ilyitch was finishing the last course, she had firmly 
made up her mind to tell her husband everything 
and to flee from danger! 

“I’ve something serious to say to you, An- 
drey,”’ she began after dinner while her husband was 
taking off his coat and boots to lie down for a nap. 

6e Well? ” 

“Let us leave this place!” 

“Hm! ... Where shall we go? It’s too soon 
to go back to town.” 


318 The Party and Other Stories 


“No; for a tour or something of that sort. . . .” 


“For a tour .. .” repeated the notary, stretch- 
ing. ‘I dream of that myself, but where are we 
to get the money, and to whom am I to leave the 
office?” 

And thinking a little he added: 

‘‘Of course, you must be bored. Go by your- 
self if you like.” 

Sofya Petrovna agreed, but at once reflected that 
Ilyin would be delighted with the opportunity, and 
would go with her in the same train, in the same com- 
partment. . . . She thought and looked at her hus- 
band, now satisfied but still languid. For some rea- 
son her eyes rested on his feet — miniature, almost 
feminine feet, clad in striped socks; there was a 
thread standing out at the tip of each sock. 

Behind the blind a bumble-bee was beating itself 
against the window-pane and buzzing. Sofya Pe- 
trovna looked at the threads on the socks, listened to 
the bee, and pictured how she would set off. . . . 
Vis-a-vis Ilyin would sit, day and night, never taking 
his eyes off her, wrathful at his own weakness and 
pale with spiritual agony. He would call himself 
an immoral schoolboy, would abuse her, tear his 
hair, but when darkness came on and the passengers 
were asleep or got out at a station, he would seize 
the opportunity to kneel before her and embrace her 
knees as he had at the seat in the wood. .. . 


A Misfortune 319 


She caught herself indulging in this day-dream. 

“Listen. I won’t go alone,” she said. ‘ You 
must come with me.” 

“Nonsense, Sofotchka!” sighed Lubyantsev. 
““One must be sensible and not want the impossi- 
ble.” 

“You will come when you know all about it,” 
thought Sofya Petrovna. 

Making up her mind to go at all costs, she felt 
that she was out of danger. Little by little her 
ideas grew clearer; her spirits rose and she allowed 
herself to think about it all, feeling that however 
much she thought, however much she dreamed, she 
would go away. While her husband was asleep, 
the evening gradually came on. She sat in the 
drawing-room and played the piano. The greater 
liveliness out of doors, the sound of music, but above 
all the thought that she was a sensible person, that 
she had surmounted her difficulties, completely re- 
stored her spirits. Other women, her appeased con- 
science told her, would probably have been carried 
off their feet in her position, and would have lost 
their balance, while she had almost died of shame, 
had been miserable, and was now running out of the 
danger which perhaps did not exist! She was so 
touched by her own virtue and determination that 
she even looked at herself two or three times in the 
~ looking-glass. 


320 The Party and Other Stories 


When it got dark, visitors arrived. The men 
sat down in the dining-room to play cards; the ladies 
remained in the drawing-room and the verandah. 
The last to arrive was Ilyin. He was gloomy, 
morose, and looked ill. He sat down in the corner 
of the sofa and did not move the whole evening. 
Usually good-humoured and talkative, this time he 
remained silent, frowned, and rubbed his eyebrows. 
When he had to answer some question, he gave a 
forced smile with his upper lip only, and answered 
jerkily and irritably. Four or five times he made 
some jest, but his jests sounded harsh and cutting. 
It seemed to Sofya Petrovna that he was on the verge 
of hysterics. Only now, sitting at the piano, she 
recognized fully for the first time that this unhappy 
man was in deadly earnest, that his soul was sick, 
and that he could find no rest. For her sake he 
was wasting the best days of his youth and his 
career, spending the last of his money on a summer 
villa, abandoning his mother and sisters, and, worst 
of all, wearing himself out in an agonizing struggle 
with himself. From mere common humanity he 
ought to be treated seriously. 

She recognized all this clearly till it made her 
heart ache, and if at that moment she had gone up 
to him and said to him, ‘‘ No,” there would have 
been a force in her voice hard to disobey. But 
she did not go up to him and did not speak — in- 


A Misfortune 321 


deed, never thought of doing so. The pettiness and 
egoism of youth had never been more patent in her 
than that evening. She realized that Ilyin was un- 
happy, and that he was sitting on the sofa as though 
he were on hot coals; she felt sorry for him, but at 
the same time the presence of a man who loved her 
to distraction, filled her soul with triumph and a 
_ sense of her own power. She felt her youth, her 
beauty, and her unassailable virtue, and, since she 
had decided to go away, gave herself full licence for 
that evening. She flirted, laughed incessantly, sang 
with peculiar feeling and gusto. Everything de- 
lighted and amused her. She was amused at the 
memory of what had happened at the seat in the 
wood, of the sentinel who had looked on. She was 
amused by her guests, by Ilyin’s cutting jests, by the 
pin in his cravat, which she had never noticed before. 
There was a red snake with diamond eyes on the 
pin; this snake struck her as so amusing that she 
could have kissed it on the spot. 

Sofya Petrovna sang nervously, with defiant 
recklessness as though half intoxicated, and she 
chose sad, mournful songs which dealt with wasted 
hopes, the past, old age, as though in mockery of 
another’s grief. ‘‘‘ And old age comes nearer and 
nearer’... she sang. And what was old age to 
her? 

“Tt seems as though there is something going 


322 The Party and Other Stories 


wrong with me,” she thought from time to time 
through her laughter and singing. 

The party broke up at twelve o’clock. Lyin was 
the last to leave. Sofya Petrovna was still reckless 
enough to accompany him to the bottom step of the 
Verandah. She wanted to tell him that she was 
going away with her husband, and to watch the effect 
this news would produce on him. 

The moon was hidden behind the clouds, but it 
was light enough for Sofya Petrovna to see how 
the wind played with the skirts of his overcoat and 
with the awning of the verandah. She could see, 
too, how white Ilyin was, and how he twisted his 
upper lip in the effort to smile. 

“Sonia, Sonitchka ... my darling woman!” 
he muttered, preventing her from speaking. ‘‘ My 
dear! my sweet!” 

In a rush of tenderness, with tears in his voice, 
he showered caressing words upon her, that grew 
tenderer and tenderer, and even called her “ thou,” 
as though she were his wife or mistress. Quite 
unexpectedly he put one arm round her waist and 
with the othef hand took hold of her elbow. 

‘“‘ My precious! my delight!’ he whispered, kiss- 
ing the nape of her neck; “‘ be sincere; come to me 
at once!” 

She slipped out of his arms and raised her head 
to give vent to her indignation and anger, but the 


A Misfortune 308 


indignation did not come off, and all her vaunted 
virtue and chastity was only sufficient to enable her 
to utter the phrase used by all ordinary women on 
such occasions: 

“You must be mad.” 

“Come, let us go,” Ilyin continued. “TI felt just 
now, as well as at the seat in the wood, that you are 
as helpless as I am, Sonia. . . . You are in the same 
plight! You love me and are fruitlessly trying to 
appease your conscience. . . .” 

Seeing that she was moving away, he caught her 
by her lace cuff and said rapidly: 

“If not today, then tomorrow you will have to 
give in! Why, then, this waste of time? My pre- 
cious, darling Sonia, the sentence is passed; why put 
off the execution? Why deceive yourself?” 

Sofya Petrovna tore herself from him and darted 
in at the door. Returning to the drawing-room, she 
mechanically shut the piano, looked for a long time 
at the music-stand, and sat down. She could not 
stand up nor think. All that was left of her excite- 
ment and recklessness was a fearful weakness, 
apathy, and dreariness. Her conscience whispered 
to her that she had behaved badly, foolishly, that 
evening, like some madcap girl — that she had just 
been embraced on the verandah, and still had an un- 
easy feeling in her waist and her elbow. There was 
- not a soul in the drawing-room; there was only one 


\ 


- 


324 The Party and Other Stories — 


candle burning. Madame Lubyantsev sat on the 
round stool before the piano, motionless, as though 
expecting something. And as though taking advan- 
tage of the darkness and her extreme lassitude, an 
oppressive, overpowering desire began to assail her. 
Like a boa-constrictor it gripped her limbs and her 
soul, and grew stronger every second, and no longer 
menaced her as it had done, but stood clear before 
her in all its nakedness. 

She sat for half an hour without stirring, not re- 
straining herself from thinking of Ilyin, then she got 
up languidly and dragged herself to her bedroom. 
Andrey Ilyitch was already in bed. She sat down 
by the open window and gave herself up to desire. 
There was no “tangle” now in her head; all her 
thoughts and feelings were bent with one accord 
upon a single aim. She tried to struggle against it, 
but instantly gave it up. . . . She understood now 
how strong and relentless was the foe. Strength 
and fortitude were needed to combat him, and her 
birth, her education, and her life had given her noth- 
ing to fall back upon. 

‘“Immoral wretch! Low creature!” she nagged 
at herself for her weakness. ‘‘ So that’s what you're 
like!” 

Her outraged sense of propriety was moved to 
such indignation by this weakness that she lavished 
upon herself every term of abuse she knew, and 


A Misfortune Coys 


told herself many offensive and humiliating truths. 
So, for instance, she told herself that she never had 
been moral, that she had not come to grief before 
simply because she had had no opportunity, that her 
inward conflict during that day had all been a 
farpesner ss; 

““And even if I have struggled,” she thought, 
‘““what sort of struggle was it? Even the woman 
who sells herself struggles before she brings herself 
to it, and yet she sells herself. A fine struggle! 
Like milk, I’ve turned in a day! In one day!” 

She convicted herself of being tempted, not by 
feeling, not by [lyin personally, but by sensations 
which awaited her . . . an idle lady, having her 
fling in the summer holidays, like so many! 

“* Like an unfledged bird when the mother has 
been slain,’”’ sang a husky tenor outside the win- 
dow. 

“If I am to go, it’s time,’”’ thought Sofya Pe- 
trovna. Her heart suddenly began beating vio- 
lently. 

“‘ Andrey!” she almost shrieked. ‘“ Listen! we 

. . we are going? Yes?” 

“‘ Yes, I’ve told you already: you go alone.” 

‘But listen,” she began. ‘If you don’t go with 
me, you are in danger of losing me. I believe I 
am... in love already.” 

“With whom?” asked Andrey Ilyitch. 


sae 


326 The Party and Other Stories 


“Tt can’t make any difference to you who it is!” 
cried Sofya Petrovna. 

Andrey Ilyitch sat up with his feet out of bed and 
looked wonderingly at his wife’s dark figure. 

“Tt’s a fancy!’ he yawned. 

He did not believe her, but yet he was frightened. 
After thinking a little and asking his wife several 
unimportant questions, he delivered himself of his 
opinions on the family, on infidelity . . . spoke list- 
lessly for about ten minutes and got into bed again. 
His moralizing produced no effect. There are a 
great many opinions in the world, and a good half 
of them are held by people who have never been in 
trouble! 

In spite of the late hour, summer visitors were 
still walking outside. Sofya Petrovna put on a light 
cape, stood a little, thought a little. . . . She still 
had resolution enough to say to her sleeping hus- 
band: 

‘““Are you asleep? Iam going for a walk... . 
Will you come with me?” 

That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, 
she went out. . . . It was fresh and windy. She 
was conscious neither of the wind nor the darkness, 
but went on and on. . . . An overmastering force 
drove her on, and it seemed as though, if she had 
stopped, it would have pushed her in the back. 


A Misfortune 327 


“Immoral creature!’ she muttered mechanically. 
** Low wretch! ” 

She was breathless, hot with shame, did not feel 
her legs under her, but what drove her on was 
stronger than shame, reason, or fear. 


os 


A TRIFLE FROM LIFE 


A TRIFLE FROM LIFE 


A WELL-FED, red-cheeked young man called Niko- 
lay Ilyitch Belyaev, of thirty-two, who was an owner 
of house property in Petersburg, and a devotee of the 
race-course, went one evening to see Olga Ivanovna 
Irnin, with whom he was living, or, to use his own 
expression, was dragging out a long, wearisome ro- 
mance. And, indeed, the first interesting and en- 
thusiastic pages of this romance had long been 
perused; now the pages dragged on, and still dragged 
on, without presenting anything new or of interest. 

Not finding Olga Ivanovna at home, my hero lay 
down on the lounge chair and proceeded to wait for 
her in the drawing-room. 
~ ‘Good-evening, Nikolay Ilyitch!” he heard a 
child’s voice. ‘‘ Mother will be here directly. She 
has gone with Sonia to the dressmaker’s.”’ 

Olga Ivanovna’s son, Alyosha —a boy of eight 
who looked graceful and very well cared for, who 
was dressed like a picture, in a black velvet jacket 
and long black stockings — was lying on the sofa 
in the same room. He was lying on a satin cushion 
and, evidently imitating an acrobat he had lately 
seen at the circus, stuck up in the air first one leg 

331 


332 The Party and Other Stories 


and then the other. When his elegant legs were 
exhausted, he brought his arms into play or jumped 
up impulsively and went on all fours, trying to stand 
with his legs in the air. All this he was doing with 
the utmost gravity, gasping and groaning painfully 
as though he regretted that God had given him such 
a restless body. 

“Ah, good-evening, my boy,” said Belyaev. 
“It’s you! I did not notice you. Is your mother 
well?” 

Alyosha, taking hold of the tip of his left toe with 
his right hand and falling into the most unnatural 
attitude, turned over, jumped up, and peeped at Bel- 
yaev from behind the big fluffy lampshade. 

‘* What shall I say?” he said, shrugging his shoul- 
ders. ‘‘In reality mother’s never well. You see, 
she is a woman, and women, Nikolay Ilyitch, have 
always something the matter with them.” 

Belyaev, having nothing better to do, began watch- 
ing Alyosha’s face. He had never before during 
the whole of his intimacy with Olga Ivanovna paid 
any attention to the boy, and had completely ignored 
his existence; the boy had been before his eyes, but 
he had not cared to think why he was there and what 
part he was playing. 

In the twilight of the evening, Alyosha’s face, 
with his white forehead and black, unblinking eyes, 
unexpectedly reminded Belyaev of Olga Ivanoyna 


A Trifle from Life 333 


as she had been during the first pages of their ro- 
mance. And he felt disposed to be friendly to the 
boy. 

““Come here, insect,”’ he said; “let me have a 
closer look at you.” 

The boy jumped off the sofa and skipped up to 
Belyaev. 

“Well,” began Nikolay Llyitch, putting a hand 
on the boy’s thin shoulder. ‘ How are you getting 
on?” 

‘““ How shall I say! We used to get on a great 
deal better.” 

oc Why? ” 

“Tt’s very simple. Sonia and I used only to 
learn music and reading, and now they give us 
French poetry to learn. Have you been shaved 


lately?” 

(a9 Yes.” 

“Yes, I see you have. Your beard is shorter. 
Let me touch it. . . . Does that hurt?” 

“cc No.” 


‘““Why is it that if you pull one hair it hurts, 
but if you pull a lot at once it doesn’t hurt a bit? 
Ha, ha! And, you know, it’s a pity you don’t have 
whiskers. Here ought to be shaved . . . but here 
at the sides the hair ought to be left. . . .” 

The boy nestled up to Belyaev and began playing 
vith his watch-chain. 


334 The Party and Other Stories 


“ When I go to the high-school,” he said, ‘‘ mother 
is going to buy me a watch. [I shall ask her to buy 
me a watch-chain like this. . . . Wh— at a loc— 
ket! Father’s got a locket like that, only yours has 
little bars on it and his has letters. . . . There’s 
mother’s portrait in the middle of his. Father has 
a different sort of chain now, not made with rings, 
but like ribbon. . . .” 

“How do you know? Do you see your fa- 
ther?” 

Bat RCS Loa Deane RS Ee 

Alyosha blushed, and in great confusion, feeling 
caught in a lie, began zealously scratching the locket 
with his nail. . . . Belyaev looked steadily into his 
face and asked: 

‘* Do you see your father?” 

66 N-no! ” 

“Come, speak frankly, on your honour... . I 
see from your face you are telling a fib. Once 
you’ve let a thing slip out it’s no good wriggling 
about it. ‘Tell me, do you see him? Come, as a 
friend.” 

Alyosha hesitated. 

‘“* You won’t tell mother? ”’ he said. 

** As though I should!” 

“On your honour? ” 

“On my honour.” 


A Trifle from Life sighs 


“Do you swear?” 

“Ah, you provoking boy! What do you take 
me for?” 

Alyosha looked round him, then with wide-open 
eyes, whispered to him: 

“Only, for goodness’ sake, don’t tell mother. 
. . - Don’t tell any one at all, for it is a secret. 
I hope to goodness mother won’t find out, or we 
should all catch it— Sonia, and I, and Pelagea. 
« «~ Well, listen... . Sonia and I see father 
every Tuesday and Friday. When Pelagea takes 
us for a walk before dinner we go to the Apfel 
Restaurant, and there is father waiting for us... . 
He is always sitting in a room apart, where you 
know there’s a marble table and an ash-tray in the 
shape of a goose without a back... .” 

“* What do you do there?” 

“Nothing! First we say how-do-you-do, then 
we all sit round the table, and father treats us with 
coffee and pies. You know Sonia eats the meat- 
pies, but I can’t endure meat-pies! I like the pies 
made of cabbage and eggs. We eat such a lot that 
we have to try hard to eat as much as we can at din- 
ner, for fear mother should notice.” 

‘“‘ What do you talk about?” 

“With father? About anything. He kisses us, 
he hugs us, tells us all sorts of amusing jokes. Do 


336 The Party and Other Stories 


you know, he says when we are grown up he is 
going to take us to live with him. Sonia does not 
want to go, but I agree. Of course, I should miss 
mother; but, then, I should write her letters! It’s 
a queer idea, but we could come and visit her on 
holidays — couldn’t we? Father says, too, that he 
will buy me a horse. He’s an awfully kind man! 
I can’t understand why mother does not ask him 
to come and live with us, and why she forbids us to 
see him. You know he loves mother very much. 
He is always asking us how she is and what she is 
doing. When she was ill he clutched his head like 
this, and . . . and kept running about. He always 
tells us to be obedient and respectful to her. Listen. 
Is it true that we are unfortunate?” 

SSE less Re 

‘That's what father says. ‘You are unhappy 
children,’ he says. It’s strange to hear him, really. 
‘You are unhappy,’ he says, ‘I am unhappy, and 
mother’s unhappy. You must pray to God,’ he says; 
‘for yourselves and for her.’ ” 

Alyosha let his eyes rest on a stuffed bird and 
sank into thought. 

“So...” growled Belyaev. ‘So that’s how 
you are going on. You arrange meetings at restau- 
rants. And mother does not know?” 

‘“No-o. . . . How should she know? Pelagea 
would not tell her for anything, you know. The day 


A Trifle from Life 837 


before yesterday he gave us some pears. As sweet 
as jam! I ate two.” 

Sra Ml eereWellgandlisay:. . -.- Listens Did 
father say anything about me?” 

‘About you? What shall I say?” 

Alyosha looked searchingly into Belyaev’s face 
and shrugged his shoulders. 

“He didn’t say anything particular.” 

“For instance, what did he say?” 

“You won't be offended? ” 

“What next? Why, does he abuse me?” 

“He doesn’t abuse you, but you know he is angry 
with you. He says mother’s unhappy owing to you 

. and that you have ruined mother. You know 
he is so queer! I explain to him that you are kind, 
that you never scold mother; but he only shakes his 
head.” 

‘So he says I have ruined her?” 

“Yes; you mustn’t be offended, Nikolay Ilyitch.” 

Belyaev got up, stood still a moment, and walked 
up and down the drawing-room. 

“That’s strange and .. . ridiculous!”’ he mut- 
tered, shrugging his shoulders aad smiling sarcastic- 
ally. ‘‘ He’s entirely to blame, and I have ruined 
her, eh? An innocent lamb, I must say. So he 
told you I ruined your mother? ” 

“Yes, but . . . you said you would not be of- 


fended, you know.” 


338 The Party and Other Stories 


“T am not offended, and .. . and it’s not your 
business. Why, it’s . . . why, it’s positively ridic- 
ulous! I have been thrust into it like a chicken in 
the broth, and now it seems I’m to blame!” 

A ring was heard. The boy sprang up from his 
place and ran out. A minute later a lady came into 
the room with a little girl; this was Olga Ivanovna, 
Alyosha’s mother. Alyosha followed them in, skip- 
ping and jumping, humming aloud and waving his 
hands. Belyaev nodded, and went on walking up 
and down. 

‘““ Of course, whose fault is it if not mine?” he 
muttered with a snort. “He is right! He is an 
injured husband.” 

‘What are you talking about?” asked Olga Iva- 
noyna. 

“What about? . . . Why, just listen to the tales 
your lawful spouse is spreading now! It appears 
that I am a scoundrel and a villain, that I have 
ruined you and the children. All of you are un- 
happy, and I am the only happy one! Wonderfully, 
wonderfully happy!” 

‘“‘T don’t understand, Nikolay. What’s the mat- 
tert: 

‘Why, listen to this young gentleman! ” said Bel- 
yaev, pointing to Alyosha. 

Alyosha flushed crimson, then turned pale, and 
his whole face began working with terror. 


A Trifle from Life 339 


‘‘ Nikolay Ilyitch,” he said in a loud whisper. 
** Sh-sh |” 

Olga Ivanovna looked in surprise at Alyosha, 
then at Belyaev, then at Alyosha again. 

“* Just ask him,” Belyaey went on. ‘“ Your Pela- 
gea, like a regular fool, takes them about to restau- 
rants and arranges meetings with their papa. But 
- that’s not the point: the point is that their dear papa 
is a victim, while I’m a wretch who has broken up 
both your lives. . . .” 

“Nikolay Ilyitch,” moaned Alyosha. ‘ Why, 
you promised on your word of honour! ”’ 

“Oh, get away!” said Belyaev, waving him off. 
“This is more important than any word of honour. 
It’s the hypocrisy revolts me, the lying! . . .” 

“*T don’t understand it,” said Olga Ivanoyna, and 
tears glistened in her eyes. “Tell me, Alyosha,” 
she turned to her son. ‘‘ Do you see your father?” 

Alyosha did not hear her; he was looking with 
horror at Belyaev. 

‘It’s impossible,” said his mother; “I will go 
and question Pelagea.” 

Olga Ivanovna went out. 

‘“‘T say, you promised on your word of honour!” 
said Alyosha, trembling all over. 

Belyaev dismissed him with a wave of his hand, 
and went on walking up and down. He was ab- 
sorbed in his grievance and was oblivious of the 


340 The Party and Other Stories 


boy’s presence, as he always had been. He, a grown- 
up, serious person, had no thought to spare for boys. 
And Alyosha sat down in the corner and told Sonia 
with horror how he had been deceived. He was 
trembling, stammering, and crying. It was the first 
time in his life that he had been brought into such 
coarse contact with lying; till then he had not known 
that there are in the world, besides sweet pears, pies, 
and expensive watches, a great many things for which 
the language of children has no expression. 


THE END 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERIOA 


HE following pages contain advertisements of books 


by the same author or on kindred subjects. 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR 
THE LADY WITH THE DOG 


Cloth, 12mo, $1.50 


“The Lady with the Dog” by Anton Chekhov is the third 
volume in the new series of Chekhov’s tales translated from the 
Russian by Constance Garnett. The two titles previously pub- 
lished are “The Duel and Other Stories” and “The Darling 
and Other Stories.” 


“The Lady with the Dog” contains nine stories in all, as fol- 
lows: “A Doctor’s Visit,” “An Upheaval,” “TIonitch,” “The 
-Head of the Family,” “The Black Monk,” “Volodya,” “An 
Anonymous Story” and “The Husband.” 


This new series of Russian translations is proving deservedly 
popular. Here is a typical comment on it taken from the San 
Francisco Bulletin: “Chekhov’s tales possess a wide variety of 
scene, subject and situation. He is a realist in the full sense of 
the word, but at the same time has the poetic sensitiveness to 
beauty. He lacks the cynical touch of de Maupassant, with 
whom he has been compared, and looks upon his fellow men 
with a charitable eye. Humour and tenderness, passion and mel- 
ancholy are most artistically blended in these stories.” 


The Detroit Free Press says of these books: “Chekhov is re- 
garded as a master of the short story in Russia and as trans- 
lated by Mrs. Constance Garnett seems to prove his claim to 
American suffrages.” 


“Chekhov, though he has been dead more than half a cen- 
tury now, is one of the greatest of the masters of the Russian 
short story, almost on a level with Tolstoy in fiction. His 
clear, limpid style, his crisp action and his dramatic simplicity 
of incident have long since given him the name abroad of the 
Russian de Maupassant. But Chekhov has practically never, un- 
til just now, been available to English readers. He will be 
vastly enjoyed by them.”—Brooklyn Daily Eagle, 


“Tntense realism as to living circumstance which marks all of 
\Chekhov’s tales, combined with that faculty for putting himself 
in another’s place which gives this wiiter an almost uncanny 
power to present and interpret states of mind.”—New York 
W orld, 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


THE DUEL 
$1.50 


“ Chekhov has a keen and satirical pen, a deep insight into the 
heart of the peasant, and marvel of marvels, a sense of humour. 
This last is what makes his stories so remarkable. The gloom 
and pessimism usual in Russian tales are present upon occasion, 
but Chekhov can be happy, droll and fantastic, when he pleases.” 


Of the translator the Post-Standard writes: “Mrs. Garnett is 
the most able translator of Russian literature in the country. 
Her translations of Turgeney and Dostoevski are recognized as 
standard. It is well that she is turning her attention to Chekhoy.” 


“Chekhov has looked down into the depths and beyond into 
the souls of men, and he has given us of their inmost thoughts; 
he has shown us the way and the life-posts whereby the human 
creature travels.’— Bookseller, Newsdealers and Stationer. 


“Striking stories, grimly rich in Russian colour.”— Boston 
Daily Advertiser. 


“The Duel’ is a wonderful story in its realism and its fidelity 
to character. ... It is life, of that fact there can be no ques- 
tion .. . all too brief."— San Francisco Chronicle. 


“The story, like a thrilling personal experience, is something to 
ponder for a lifetime.”— North American Review, 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


THE TALES OF ANTON CHEKHOV 


TRANSLATED BY CONSTANCE GARNETT, WITH &@ 
GENERAL INTRODUCTION BY EDWARD GARNETT 


Attractive decorated green cloth bindings, printed in large type 
on good paper. 


Mrs. Garnett, whose excellence in translating the works of 
Turgenev and Dostoevski has been acclaimed universally by the 
critics, is now rendering the tales of Anton Pavlovich Chekhov 
into English. This is to be the only complete edition of his 
works in English, collecting in uniform style and in the best 
possible translations all of his works. As Chekhov is declared 
to be the greatest master of the short story since Maupassant, 
this series will be a valuable addition to literature. 


THE DARLING AND OTHER STORIES. P 
1.50 


“Tn spite of its exquisite gay humor, I at least cannot read 
without tears some passages of this wonderful story.’— Tolstoy. 


“ Chekhov’s sympathy with imagination and his hatred for com- 
monplace folk who stupidly try to repress its manifestations are 
shown again and again in his tales... he is eternally at war 
with the practical, with the narrow-minded, with the common- 
place ... he was indeed an exquisite artist. He is a faithful 
interpreter of Russian life, and although his art was objective, 
one cannot help feeling the essential goodness of the man behind 
his work, and loving him for it.”—Wutt1am Lyon PHELPS; 
Essays on Russian Novelists. 


“An unflinching realist... with a poet’s sensitiveness to 
beauty.”— Edward Garnett. 


Other Volumes in Preparation. 


The other volumes in this series will pepe nenee from time 
to time as rapidly as they are translated and ready for the press. 
A number of volumes are already in preparation. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


THE ETERNAL HUSBAND 


BY FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY | 
Translated from the Russian by Constance Garnett = 


Cloth, 12mo, $1.50 


The eighth volume in Constance Garnett’s series of new trans- 
lations of Dostoevsky’s work is “The Eternal Husband,” con- 
taining also two other stories, “The Gentle Spirit” and “The 
Double.” 


{ 

“The Eternal Husband” deals with an abnormal character in * 
abnormal circumstances. “It is,” says William Lyon Phelps in 
his chapter on Dostoevsky in his book, “Essays on Russian 
Novelists,” “a quite original variation of the triangle theme. It 
has genuine humour and the conclusion leaves one in a muse.” 


Of “The Gentle Spirit,” The London Times says, “ This story 
is written from start to finish with a power which for the time 
being turns everything we can put beside it into the palest com- 
monplace.” 


“The Eternal Husband” promises to be one of the most in- 
teresting of the Dostoevsky books with which the English read- 
ing public has yet been made familiar. 


As in other Dostoevsky tales, so in these three the outstand- 
ing quantity is the marvellously keen sight into the minds of the 
persons presented. A reader sees almost literally the brains in 
action of the people of whom he reads. This effect is accom- 
plished too along with that of a fine graphic completeness in 
narration— New York World. 


“Such stories, however fantastic the problems of the soul, get 
deeply into us. We cannot ignore them, we cannot take them 
irresponsibly. We cannot read them for amusement, or even 
in detachment, as we can our classics. We forget our categories, 
our standards, our notions of human nature. All we feel is that 
we are tracing the current of life itself. Dostoevsky is so much 
in his stories that we get no sense of his attitude toward his 
characters or of his criticism of life. Yet the after-impression 
is one of rich kindness, born of suffering and imperfection, and 
of a truly religious reverence for all living experience. Man 
as a being with his feet in the mud and his gaze turned towards 
the stars, yet always indissolubly one in feet and eyes and heart 
and brain! If we are strong enough to hear him, this is the de- 
mae force we need on our American creative outlook.”— The 

ial, 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


THE WORKS OF 
FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
Translated by CONSTANCE GARNETT 


“Writers who speak with real knowledge of the topic have 
termed Dostoevsky one of the two great masters of Russian 
literature, . . . a unique product, a more startling revelation and 
embodiment of genius, a greater elemental force, than Tolstoy or 
any other Russian writer of fiction.’—The Nation. 


The novels of Dostoevsky are all of such consistent greatness 
that to claim supremacy for one over another is impossible. Of 
“The Brothers Karamazov’ George Moore has said, “It is the 
greatest work of fiction ever written, a work so extraordinary 
that everything else seems insignificant,” while Robert Stevenson 
once spoke of “Crime and Punishment” as “the greatest book I 
have read in ten years.” The New York World calls “The 
Possessed” “a monument of realism and a marvel of narrative 
detail.” Each new translation is greeted with equal enthusiasm; 
the London Times finds them especially welcome “because of the 
great merit of Mrs. Garnett’s rendering,” while the Westminster 
Gazette speaks of “Mrs, Garnett’s wonderful translations.” 


Volumes now ready in uniform attractive bindings. Each, 
Cloth, 12mo, $1.50. Leather, $2.00. 


‘A RAW YOUTH 
THE INSULTED AND INJURED 
THE IDIOT 
THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV; 
THE POSSESSED 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


RUSSIAN CRITICISM AND BIOGRAPHY 


DOSTOEVSKY: HIS LIFE AND LITERARY ACTIVITY. 
By Euceni Sowoview. $1.75. 

'A peculiarly penetrating and important study of Dostoevsky’s 
character and career in their bearing upon his literary work 
While doing full justice to Dostoevsky’s genius, the author of 
the study seeks to correct more than one popular misconception 
on the subject, and to supply, in a balanced review of Dostoev- 
sky’s life and influence, a wholesome corrective to the fantastic 
views put forward by certain Russian and other critics of the 
great writer. 


THE LETTERS OF FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY. 
Translated by ErHEL CoLBURNE-MAYNE. $2.00. 
“The letters are as intimate a revelation of a great man’s char- 
acter and soul as any volume of letters that has ever appeared.” 
_ London Daily News. 


ESSAYS ON RUSSIAN NOVELISTS. 
By Wriu1am Lyon Puetrs. Ill. $2.50. 
“In his broad portraiture of the disclosure of the Russian 
genius, Mr. Phelps has written a book of authoritative racial 
interpretation.”—The Outlook, 


“The author of ‘Essays on Russian Novelists’ gives such evi- 
dence of a real grasp of the Russian character that he must be 
imbued with the spirit of love and sympathy which he ascribes 
to Russians, .. The book is written in a fluent style, the 
interest never flags, and it contains much excellent material.”"— 
‘London Athenaeum, 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


THE WORKS OF 
IVAN TURGENEV 


Translated by CONSTANCE GARNETT 


———oO 


“Turgenev represents realism at its best. In reading him we 
_ feel that what he says is true. It is life indeed, but we also feel 
an inexpressible charm. It is the mysterious charm of music that 
makes our hearts swell and our eyes swim. To read Turgenev is 
not only to be mentally stimulated; it is to be purified and 
ennobled.”—William Lyon Phelps: Essays on Russian Novelists. 


“There is something prodigious in Turgenev’s insight into, and 
his inexhaustible richness, truthfulness and freshness in the ren- 
dering of those emotions which have been the theme of all poets 
and novelists for two thousand years.”—Sergius Stepniak. 


“He seems to give one the results of personal experience not 
personal observation.... Turgenev’s supreme gift is that of 
vivifying character....In each portrait there is a bit of our 
own nature, and our sympathy is peculiarly personal.”—Chicago 
Post. 


New Pocket Edition, $1.00 each. 


I. Rudin. 
II. A House of Gentlefolk. 
III. On the Eve. 
IV. Father and Children. 
V. Smoke. 
VI. & VII. Virgin Soil. 
VIII. & IX. Sportsman’s Sketches. 
X. Dream Tales and Prose Poems. 
XI. The Torrents of Spring, Etc. 
XII. A Lear of the Steppes. 
XIII. A Diary of a Superfluous Man. 
XIV. A Desperate Character. 
XV. The Jew, Etc. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. 
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 


Redmond Library 


SELECTIONS FROM THE RULES 


|. Three volumes may be taken at a time | 
and only three on one share. Two unbound 
~ numbers of a monthly and three numbers of a 
weekly publication are counted as a volume. 


2. Books other than 7-day and 14-day ones 


on be kept out 28 days. Books cannot be 8 
renewed or transferred. 


3. Books overdue are subject to a fine of one | _ 
cent a day for fourteen days, and five centsa | 
day for each day thereafter. io 


4. Neglect to pay the fine will debar from ~ 
the use of the Library. 


Pa 5. No book is to be lent out of be house of 
ed the person to whom it is charged. 


6. Any person who shall soil (deface) or 
damage or lose a book belonging to the Library ~ 
shall be liable to such fine as the Directors may 
impose; or shall pay the value of the sbook or of , 
the set, if it be a part of a set, as thé.Directors » * 
. may elect. All scribbling or any marking or}. 
a writing whatever, folding or turning down the 
leaves, as well as cutting or tearing any matter 
from a book belonging to the Library, .will be con- 
sidered defacement and damage. 


DEC 22 144 
ace 31 1818 

yeN SE i918 
72 6 191e 
BcER QF i9ye 
HAUG 22 iMia 


JAN : 


