160078 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  APRIL  1988 


Foreign 

Broadcast 

Information 

Service 


JPRS  Report — 


•  1  0 l"  '■  i  mu  cl 


Soviet  Union 

AVIATION  &  COSMONAUTICS 

No  10,  October  1987 


19980601  138 

_ J 

[imC  QUALITY  mSPEUTBD  3 


REPRODUCED BY 

US  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 
NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 
SPRINGFIELD,  VA  22161 


(0 

35 


Soviet  Union 

AVIATION  AND  COSMONAUTICS 

No  10,  October  1987 


JPRS-  UA  C-88-004  CONTENTS  28  APRIL  1988 


[The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  Russian-language  monthly  journal,  AVIATSIYA  I  KOSMONAVTIKA 
published  in  Moscow.  Refer  to  the  Table  of  Contents  for  a  listing  of  any  articles  not  translated.] 

Cosmonautics  History  Reviewed  [ G .  Titov ;  pp  1-3]  . 1 

Stress  on  Preventive  Work  in  Flight  Safety  [P.  Kirsanov;  pp  4-5]  . 4 

Improving  Methods  of  Grading  Tactical  Flight  Training  [L  Petrakov;  pp  6-7]  . 7 

Energiya  Booster  Rocket  Ground  Support  Complex  Described  [V.  Karashtin;  pp  16-17]  . 10 

Having  Mental  Flight  Image  Improves  Flying  Skills  [N.  Kryukov,  A.  Vorona;  pp  18-19]  . 12 

Factors  in  Decision  to  Land  Damaged  Aircraft  [F.  Ganiyev;  pp  20-21]  . 16 

Flight  Safety  Service  Inspector’s  Work  [V.  Grishchenkov;  pp  30-31]  . 20 

Flight  Safety  Tips  for  Technical  Maintenance  Personnel  [A.  Mikhaylov;  pp  31-33]  . 21 

Warsaw  Pact  Military  Doctrine,  Force  Reductions  [B.  Lytov;  pp  39-41]  . 23 

Air  Defense  Penetration  Aids  [V,  Dubrov;  pp  46-47]  . 26 

Publication  Data  . 28 

Articles  not  translated  from  AVIATSIYA  I  KOSMONAVTIKA  No  10,  October  1987  .  28 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


1 


AVIATION  AND  COSMONAUTICS 

Cosmonautics  History  Reviewed 

91440064a  Moscow  AVI ATSIY A  I KOSMONAVTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  1-3 

[Article  by  Lt  Gen  Avn  G.  Titov,  HSU,  USSR  Pilot- 
Cosmonaut:  “Land  of  October:  Motherland  of  Cosmo¬ 
nautics”] 

[Text]  The  Great  October,  which  opened  a  up  new  era  in 
world  history,  an  era  of  revolutionary  renewal  of  the 
world,  also  made  a  path  to  mankind’s  space  future.  Just 
four  decades  separate  the  launch  of  the  first  artificial 
earth  satellite  from  the  Great  October  Socialist  Revolu¬ 
tion.  In  this  short  segment  of  time,  a  backward  Russia 
developed  into  a  powerful  industrial  state  with  a  high 
level  of  science  and  technology. 

In  May  1919  a  letter  was  received  in  V.  I.  Lenin’s 
secretariat  from  chemical  engineer  N.  L  Tikhomirov. 
Tikhomirov’s  suggestion  for  creating  a  rocket  projectile 
might  appear  strange,  to  put  it  mildly,  at  that  difficult 
timd  and  conventional  arms.  Nevertheless,  it  was  exam¬ 
ined  and  approved  by  the  Inventions  Committee  and  the 
Artillery  Committee. 

In  1921  Tikhomirov  was  assigned  a  house  on  Tikhvins¬ 
kaya  ulitsa  in  Moscow  as  a  laboratory.  Seven  years  later 
came  the  first  launch  of  a  rocket  using  smokeless  powder. 
The  laboratory  was  expanded  and  transferred  to  Lenin¬ 
grad  nearer  the  range.  It  also  received  a  new  name,  the 
Gas  Dynamics  Laboratory  (GDL).  That  was  the  origin  of 
the  first  organization  in  our  country  to  mark  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  development  of  an  indigenous  industry  for 
creating  rocket  and  space  technology. 

During  those  same  years  in  quiet,  provincial  Kaluga  not 
far  from  the  capital  schoolteacher  K.  E.  Tsiolkovskiy 
continued  to  develop  ideas  of  studying  outer  space.  The 
Great  October,  which  provided  the  foundation  for  a  new 
socialist  life  and  for  the  progress  of  science,  technology 
and  culture,  also  did  not  ignore  the  solitary  scientists. 
The  person  who  not  very  long  before  was  called  a 
“somewhat  eccentric  dreamer”  became  a  scientist  with  a 
world  name  under  Soviet  power. 

Now  life  gained  specific  meaning  for  Konstantin  Eduar¬ 
dovich:  to  work  for  the  good  of  the  young  Soviet  Repub¬ 
lic  and  be  a  useful  member  of  it.  Tsiolkovskiy’s  contri¬ 
bution  to  the  development  of  cosmonautics  theory  is 
enormous.  This  remarkable  person  also  performed  a 
great  service  in  shaping  the  views  of  pioneers  of  Soviet 
rocket  building.  They  often  turned  to  the  forefather  of 
cosmonautics  in  search  of  organizational  forms,  and  he 
invariably  would  respond  and  help  them  with  advice. 

M.  K.  Tikhonravov,  a  prominent  Soviet  designer  of 
rocket  and  space  technology,  called  F.  A.  Tsander,  the 
centennial  of  whose  birth  was  celebrated  by  our  country 


this  year,  the  first  space  engineer.  In  addition  to  devel¬ 
oping  a  theory  of  interplanetary  flight,  Tsander  was  first 
among  enthusiasts  to  begin  designing  and  creating  rock¬ 
ets  and  rocket  engines. 

Yu.  V.  Kondratyuk  passed  through  the  sky  of  cosmonau¬ 
tics  like  a  meteor.  Back  in  the  1920’s  he  examined  many 
principles  of  manned  flight  in  the  manuscript  “Tern,  kto 
budet  chitat,  chtoby  stroit”  [For  Those  Who  Will  Read 
in  Order  to  Build]. 

Daring  ideas  on  interplanetary  flight  harmoniously  com¬ 
bined  with  the  people’s  enthusiasm.  Pioneers  of  cosmo¬ 
nautics  for  the  first  time  felt  the  joy  of  creativity,  and  this 
lent  them  wings,  inspired  them,  and  forced  them  to  work 
without  thought  of  bonuses  or  days  off.  They  were 
creators  who  did  not  betray  the  dream  throughout  their 
lives. 

The  Society  for  the  Study  of  Interplanetary  Travel  was 
organized  in  Moscow  in  May  1924.  It  took  a  serious  step 
in  unifying  the  efforts  of  many  scientists,  engineers  and 
designers  who  were  dreaming  of  space  flight.  Its  experi¬ 
ence  was  used  subsequently  in  establishing  the  Group  for 
the  Study  of  Jet  Propulsion  (GIRD)  under  Osoaviakhim 
[Society  for  Assistance  to  Defense  and  Aviation-Chem¬ 
ical  Construction  of  the  USSR]  in  Moscow,  Leningrad, 
Tbilisi,  Baku,  Orenburg,  Arkhangelsk  and  other  cities. 

The  Moscow  group  led  by  S.  P.  Korolev  was  highly 
successful.  The  first  Soviet  liquid-propellant  rockets 
were  created  and  tested  at  Nakhabino  near  Moscow,  and 
enthusiasts  in  Leningrad  designed  the  first  solid-propel¬ 
lant  rockets  literally  in  a  year’s  time.  Professor  N.  A. 
Rynin  of  the  Leningrad  Institute  of  Railways,  a  well- 
known  pedagog  who  left  a  noticeable  imprint  on  the 
history  of  cosmonautics  by  publishing  the  first  encyclo¬ 
pedia  “Mezhplanetnyye  soobshcheniya”  [Interplanetary 
Travel],  was  a  member  of  the  presidium  of  the  Leningrad 
Group  for  the  Study  of  Jet  Propulsion. 

Successes  of  the  Gas  Dynamics  Laboratory  and  the 
Moscow  Group  for  the  Study  of  Jet  Propulsion  pro¬ 
moted  a  further  improvement  in  work  on  rocket  tech¬ 
nology.  By  decree  of  the  Labor  and  Defense  Council  the 
world’s  first  Scientific  Research  Institute  of  Jet  Propul¬ 
sion  (RNII)  was  established  in  the  fall  of  1933.  Promi¬ 
nent  state  figures  K.  Ye.  Voroshilov,  G.  K.  Ordzhoni¬ 
kidze  and  M.  N.  Tukhachevskiy  worked  on  setting  it  up. 

The  great  romantics  and  pioneers  of  Soviet  cosmonau¬ 
tics  also  were  great  realists.  Fascism  was  crawling  across 
Europe  like  a  cancerous  tumor  and  there  was  no  more 
important  task  for  associates  of  the  new  organization 
than  that  obligating  them  to  work  on  weapons  to  defend 
the  Motherland.  The  first  rocket  projectiles  they  devel¬ 
oped  appeared  on  warplanes.  Pilots  of  militarist  Japan 
felt  their  power  in  1939.  But  the  Scientific  Research 
Institute  of  Jet  Propulsion  made  the  greatest  contribu¬ 
tion  to  national  defense  by  creating  the  legendary  Kat¬ 
yushas. 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


2 


Work  went  on  in  parallel  in  the  Institute  on  liquid- 
propellant  and  winged  rockets.  Under  the  direction  of  V. 
P.  Glushko,  several  tens  of  ZhRD  [liquid-fuel  rocket 
engines]  were  created  in  those  years.  The  ORM-65 
engine  became  the  best  domestic  engine  of  its  time.  In 
February  1940  pilot  V.  P.  Fedorov  flew  for  110  seconds 
in  the  SK-9  glider  designed  by  Korolev  with  the  RDA- 
1-150  liquid-fuel  rocket  engine.  The  “604”  ballistic 
rocket  with  a  20  km  radius  of  action  also  appeared  in 
that  same  year.  And  who  knows  how  things  would  have 
gone  in  this  direction  in  the  Scientific  Research  Institute 
of  Jet  Propulsion  had  it  not  been  for  the  war. 

State  tests  of  the  first  ground  rocket  launchers  had  taken 
place  on  the  eve  of  fascist  Germany’s  treacherous  attack 
on  our  country.  On  14  July  1941  the  first  seven  Kat¬ 
yushas  commanded  by  Capt  I.  A.  Flerov  launched  112 
projectiles  which  came  down  on  the  enemy  with  incin¬ 
erating  fire.  That  day  became  the  birthday  of  Soviet 
rocket  artillery.  On  15  May  1942  test  pilot  G.  Ya. 
Bakhchivandzhi  took  up  the  first  domestic  interceptor 
aircraft,  the  BI- 1  with  a  liquid-fuel  rocket  engine  created 
by  A.  Ya.  Bereznyak  and  A.  M.  Isayev  in  V.  F.  Bolkho¬ 
vitinov’s  KB  [design  bureau]. 

Neither  of  these  events  seemingly  has  any  direct  relation¬ 
ship  to  the  history  of  cosmonautics,  but  they  help  trace 
how  ideas  of  jet  propulsion  had  seized  the  minds  of 
scientists  and  how  tests  were  made  on  the  ground  and  in 
the  air,  bringing  us  closer  to  the  space  era  step  by  step. 

World  War  II  died  away,  but  things  did  not  become 
calmer  on  the  planet.  Ruling  circles  of  the  United  States 
and  Great  Britain  followed  a  policy  of  aggravating  the 
international  situation  and  took  the  path  of  preparing  for 
war  against  the  Soviet  Union.  These  plans  of  imperial¬ 
ism  had  to  be  disrupted. 

Sagaciously  evaluating  the  capabilities  and  prospects  of 
rocket  technology,  the  Communist  Party  and  Soviet 
government  assigned  scientists  the  task  of  creating  a 
reliable  nuclear  missile  shield.  S.  P.  Korolev  was 
appointed  Chief  Designer  of  Long-Range  Ballistic  Mis¬ 
siles.  Intensive  developments  of  nuclear  weapons  were 
carried  out  under  the  direction  of  I.  V.  Kurchatov. 

The  first  domestic  missile  system  with  R-l  guided  bal¬ 
listic  missiles  underwent  tests  in  the  fall  of  1948.  A  year 
later  tests  began  of  the  R-2  missile  with  a  separating 
re-entry  vehicle.  The  first  strategic  missile,  the  R-5,  was 
created  in  1953  and  the  first  intercontinental  missile  was 
launched  in  August  1957. 

Successes  of  the  Land  of  Soviets  in  creating  a  nuclear 
missile  shield  extinguished  for  a  long  while  the  flame  of 
a  new  war  which  had  been  about  to  flare  up,  and  the 
launch  of  the  first  artificial  earth  satellite  which  followed 
right  after  the  launch  of  the  intercontinental  missile 
spread  confusion  in  the  camp  of  our  enemies. 


Creation  of  the  first  satellite  demonstrated  the  level  of 
development  of  industry  and  transport  and  the  capacity 
of  the  entire  USSR  national  economy.  The  fact  is  that 
only  countries  with  developed  technology  and  possessing 
a  high  industrial  potential  were  capable  of  accomplishing 
space  research  tasks,  and  our  Motherland  became  the 
first  among  them.  At  2228  hours  Moscow  time  on  4 
October  1957  she  opened  up  a  new  era  for  mankind,  this 
time  a  space  era. 

The  Soviet  people  are  rightly  proud  of  achievements  in 
the  field  of  cosmonautics.  They  are  also  proud  of  the 
glorious  sons  of  the  homeland  whose  utter  dedication  to 
their  job  made  it  possible  to  open  up  the  space  era. 
Korolev  and  M.  V.  Keldysh  became  the  generators  of 
new  ideas  in  the  science  and  technology  of  space  flights 
and  immediate  participants  in  their  implementation. 
They  were  the  ones  who  laid  down  and  developed 
scientific,  engineering  and  organizational  principles  of 
practical  Soviet  cosmonautics.  We  also  pay  a  tribute  of 
respect  to  their  closest  companions-in-arms  M.  K. 
Yangel,  V.  N.  Chelomey,  V.  P.  Glushko,  N.  A.  Pilyugin, 
V.  P.  Barmin,  V.  I.  Kuznetsov,  M.  S.  Ryazanskiy,  G.  N. 
Babakin  and  A.  M.  Isayev,  who  made  a  great  contribu¬ 
tion  to  the  establishment  and  development  of  our  rocket 
and  space  technology. 

Thirty  years  have  gone  by  from  the  moment  the  first 
satellite  was  launched.  Now  more  than  120  states  are 
following  directly  or  indirectly  behind  the  Soviet  Union, 
pioneer  of  space  development,  taking  advantage  of  the 
results  of  practical  cosmonautics  in  the  interests  of 
economy,  science,  education  and  culture.  Far-flung 
space  systems  with  a  varying  specific  purpose  and  mul¬ 
tifunctional  gear  have  come  to  replace  individual  satel¬ 
lites. 

A  new  phase  in  development  of  rocket  and  space  tech¬ 
nology  was  opened  in  the  year  of  the  70th  anniversary  of 
the  Great  October:  on  1 5  May  flight-design  tests  began  of 
the  powerful  Energiya  general-purpose  delivery  vehicle 
intended  for  placing  both  reusable  orbital  craft  as  well  as 
large  spacecraft  for  scientific  and  national  economic 
purposes  into  near-earth  orbits. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  Soviet  Union  is  rejecting  the 
reliable  Kosmos,  Soyuz,  Molniya  and  Proton  boosters 
that  have  given  a  good  account  of  themselves.  An  opti¬ 
mum  combination  of  different  classes  of  delivery  vehi¬ 
cles,  spacecraft,  interorbital  tow  vehicles  and  other  space 
technology  will  permit  establishing  a  highly  efficient 
Earth-Space-Earth  transport  bridge. 

The  appearance  and  make-up  of  space  flight  support 
services  have  changed  beyond  recognition  during  these 
years.  Spacecraft  no  longer  are  launched  just  from  Bay- 
konur,  but  from  three  cosmodromes  in  the  Soviet  Union. 
Simulator  systems  have  come  to  replace  individual 
stands  and  simulators  in  the  Cosmonaut  Training  Center 
imeni  Yu.  A.  Gagarin.  The  network  of  command  and 
measurement  points  with  flight  control  centers  also  has 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


3 


expanded.  The  “star  flotilla”  (vessels  providing  control 
of  the  spacecraft  and  reception  of  data  from  them) 
headed  by  the  flagship,  the  vessel  “Kosmonavt  Yuriy 
Gagarin,”  has  been  supplemented.  The  scale  of  tasks 
now  being  accomplished  has  grown  so  much  that  hun¬ 
dreds  of  different  organizations  take  part  in  implement¬ 
ing  them. 

Continuously  stimulated  by  requirements  for  its  appli¬ 
cation  in  various  fields  of  science,  economics  and  cul¬ 
ture,  the  development  of  cosmonautics  is  called  upon  to 
play  an  even  more  important  role  in  the  future  in 
resolving  such  pressing  problems  as  food,  raw  materials, 
energy  and  ecology. 

Cosmonautics  today  can  be  viewed  as  a  field  of  new 
technology  which  can  serve  as  an  example  for  all  sectors 
of  the  national  economy. 

Speaking  in  May  of  this  year  to  representatives  of  labor 
collectives  of  the  city  of  Leninsk  at  Baykonur,  Comrade 
M.  S.  Gorbachev  said:  “Here  in  the  boundless  steppe  of 
Kazakhstan  one  senses  a  feeling  of  pride  in  the  intelli¬ 
gence  and  accomplishments  of  Soviet  citizens  and  in  our 
Soviet  homeland.  Here  one  senses  more  strongly  the 
majesty  and  might  of  the  country  of  October  and  its 
enormous  achievements  which  crown  the  70-year  path  of 
peoples  of  our  great  multinational  state  following  the 
October  Socialist  Revolution.” 

The  example  is  indicative  especially  in  the  present 
period  when,  in  implementing  resolutions  of  the  27th 
CPSU  Congress,  Soviet  society  has  set  a  course  toward 
restructuring  and  has  risen  up  to  accomplish  new  tasks 
which  are  impossible  to  cope  with  by  old  methods.  The 
experience  of  cosmonautics  persuades  us  and  inspires 
confidence  that  Soviet  citizens  are  capable  of  the  gran¬ 
diose  plans  of  revolutionary  restructuring  outlined  by 
our  party. 

Radio  communications  is  the  most  developed  field  of 
practical  application  of  space  technology:  radio  broad¬ 
casting,  television,  telephone  and  telegraph  traffic  and 
facsimile  images.  The  task  of  covering  USSR  territory 
with  two-program  television  essentially  has  been 
resolved  with  the  help  of  Molniya,  Raduga,  Ekran  and 
Gorizont  series  satellites;  television  programs  are  being 
broadcast  in  five  zones  with  consideration  of  local  time. 
The  Intersputnik  system  has  been  solidly  serving  peoples 
of  socialist  countries  for  more  than  15  years  now.  Now 
not  only  residents  of  populated  points,  but  also  mobile 
groups — geologists,  builders,  seafarers — have  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  watch  Central  Television  broadcasts.  Small 
receivers  contribute  to  this.  Satellite  communications 
with  the  transmission  of  photocopies  of  central  newspa¬ 
pers  for  publication  simultaneous  with  Moscow  in  cities 
spread  out  over  eight  time  zones  has  become  widespread. 

Meteorologists  are  making  a  substantial  contribution 
toward  the  accomplishment  of  national  economic  tasks, 
and  the  Food  Program  above  all,  USSR  Gidromettsentr 


[Hydrometeorological  Scientific  Research  Center]  fore¬ 
casts  (data  from  Meteor  satellites  also  are  used  in  their 
compilation)  permit  giving  advance  warning  to  agricul¬ 
tural  workers  about  weather  changes  and  devastating 
atmospheric  phenomena,  enabling  necessary  measures 
of  protection  to  be  taken  promptly.  Data  from  these 
satellites  help  the  navigation  and  aviation  operations 
service  to  select  or  update  optimal  safe  routes  for  vessels 
and  aircraft. 

The  study  of  the  Earth’s  natural  resources  from  space  is 
acquiring  more  and  more  practical  significance  for 
development  of  the  economy.  Space  data  help  to  accom¬ 
plish  tasks  of  geological  exploration,  to  create  maps  for 
various  purposes,  to  evaluate  the  condition  of  natural 
lands  and  inventory  them,  to  select  routes  for  running 
high-voltage  power  lines  and  main  transport  lines  in 
areas  difficult  of  access,  and  to  perform  effective  moni¬ 
toring  of  the  status  of  reservoirs  and  the  air  basin  and 
search  for  areas  of  increased  biological  productivity  of 
seas  and  oceans.  A  space  geological  map  of  the  USSR  at 
a  scale  of  1:2,500,000  has  been  compiled  using  space 
resources.  More  than  500  areas  in  Central  Asia,  Kazakh¬ 
stan  and  Yakutiya  which  show  promise  for  the  presence 
of  minerals  were  identified  and  passed  on  for  prospect¬ 
ing  based  on  data  of  space  observations. 

Space  navigation  systems  designed  for  determining  the 
position  of  vessels  of  the  Soviet  Union’s  maritime  and 
fishing  fleet  at  any  point  in  the  ocean  find  wide  use 
today.  Because  of  its  global,  prompt  and  highly  accurate 
nature,  navigation  position  finding  with  the  help  of 
satellites  improves  navigation  safety,  reduces  running 
time  and  fuel  consumption,  and  improves  the  efficiency 
of  the  fishing  fleet.  Satellite  navigation  systems  also  are 
used  in  the  interests  of  oceanography  and  geophysics,  in 
oil  production  operations  in  shelf  areas,  and  in  measur¬ 
ing  ice  drift. 

Manned  cosmonautics  has  taken  strides  from  the  108 
minutes  of  Yuriy  Gagarin  to  the  237  days  of  Leonid 
Kizim,  Vladimir  Solovyev  and  Oleg  Atkov,  and  from  the 
Vostok  spacecraft-satellite  to  the  Mir  multipurpose 
orbital  scientific  complex.  Here  are  a  few  figures  which 
provide  a  graphic  impression  of  the  strides  of  manned 
cosmonautics.  Cosmonauts  flew  around  1 5  days  aboard 
the  Vostoks,  637  days  aboard  the  Soyuzes,  and  1,029 
days  aboard  the  Soyuz  T’s.  The  Soyuz  dynasty  was 
continued  by  the  Soyuz  TM  craft.  The  orbital  watch  of 
Soviet  cosmonauts,  who  made  an  enormous  contribu¬ 
tion  to  the  cause  of  world  space  development,  has  lasted 
more  than  four  years  overall. 

Soviet  cosmonautics  achieved  major  results  in  the  study 
of  the  Moon  and  planets  of  the  solar  system.  Fifty-seven 
automatic  stations  of  different  types  were  created  and 
launched  in  the  Soviet  Union  in  these  years.  Studies 
performed  with  their  help  substantially  broadened 
mankind’s  understanding  of  the  surrounding  world  and 
of  processes  occurring  on  Earth  and  became  the  basis  for 
a  new  science,  comparative  planetology. 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


4 


The  development  of  outer  space  is  a  far  from  simple 
matter.  It  demands  an  extraordinary  intensity  of  effort 
and  highly  developed  scientific  and  technical  potential. 
This  is  why  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  space  era  the 
Soviet  Union  came  out  resolutely  in  favor  of  and  still 
favors  a  unification  of  efforts  and  the  cooperation  of  all 
states  in  use  of  outer  space. 

For  more  than  two  decades  the  USSR  has  been  partici¬ 
pating  in  programs  of  international  cooperation  to 
develop  outer  space.  A  number  of  agreements  have  been 
concluded  at  its  initiative  among  countries  of  the  social¬ 
ist  community,  which  in  April  of  this  year  celebrated  the 
20th  anniversary  of  joint  activities  in  this  direction. 

Within  the  framework  of  the  program  of  fraternal  coun¬ 
tries  23  Interkosmos  series  satellites,  1 1  Vertikal  high- 
altitude  rockets  and  hundreds  of  meteorological  rockets 
have  been  launched.  Results  of  these  studies  became  the 
property  of  all  partners.  The  collaboration  of  socialist 
countries  is  constantly  expanding.  Representatives  of  the 
CSSR,  Polish  People’s  Republic,  GDR,  People’s  Repub¬ 
lic  of  Bulgaria,  Hungarian  People’s  Republic,  SRV, 
Mongolian  People’s  Republic,  Cuba  and  the  Socialist 
Republic  of  Romania  made  space  flights  together  with 
Soviet  cosmonauts  during  1978-1981.  They  performed 
some  1 50  scientific-technical  experiments  and  studies. 

The  Soviet  Union  cooperates  with  other  countries  in  this 
important  field  of  human  endeavor  both  on  the  basis  of 
bilateral  agreements  and  on  a  multilateral  basis.  Exam¬ 
ples  of  this  are  the  joint  Soviet-American  Apollo-Soyuz 
Test  Project  in  1975  and  flights  of  Soviet-French  (1982) 
and  Soviet-Indnm  (1984)  crews  aboard  Soviet  space 
equipment.  The  flight  of  a  Soviet-Syrian  crew  is  a  recent 
example  of  our  country’s  good  will.  The  KOSPAS- 
SARSAT  satellite  system  intended  for  determining  the 
position  of  vessels  and  aircraft  in  distress  is  functioning 
successfully  on  a  multilateral  basis. 

True  to  its  traditions  of  developing  international  coop¬ 
eration  in  the  field  of  space  development,  the  Soviet 
Union  has  been  working  out  a  widescale  program  with 
other  countries  for  the  peaceful  study  of  outer  space  over 
the  next  few  years  and  over  the  long  term.  For  example, 
joint  flights  are  planned  for  cosmonauts  of  the  USSR  and 
Bulgaria,  USSR  and  France,  USSR  and  Afghanistan,  and 
USSR  and  Austria.  An  Indian  satellite  and  Soviet  Gra- 
nat  satellite  with  the  French  Sigma  gamma-ray  telescope 
installed  on  it  will  be  launched  from  the  Baykonur 
Cosmodrome.  It  is  also  planned  to  lauch  two  spacecraft 
for  studying  distant  space  objects  in  the  Phobos  Project, 
in  which  specialists  of  1 1  countries  and  of  the  European 
Space  Agency  are  participating.  We  thereby  are  setting 
an  actual  vivid  example  of  the  possibility  of  studying  and 
using  space  exclusively  for  peaceful  purposes  through 
joint  efforts  of  states  for  the  good  of  peoples. 

Today  our  country  proposes  to  create  an  international 
center  with  the  help  of  leading  space  powers  for  research 
and  development  of  models  of  space  equipment  based 


on  orders  of  developing  countries  in  which  there  would 
be  a  school  for  training  specialists  from  developing 
countries,  including  cosmonauts,  as  well  as  a  cosmo¬ 
drome  for  launching  space  objects. 

The  Soviet  Union  attaches  great  significance  to  the  idea 
advanced  in  this  program  for  instituting  a  world  space 
organization  which  would  help  elevate  international 
cooperation  in  the  peaceful  development  of  space  to  a 
qualitatively  new  and  higher  level.  The  intent  is  to  carry 
out  international  projects  in  various  fields  of  space 
science  and  applied  cosmonautics  under  the  aegis  of  this 
organization. 

The  27th  CPSU  Congress  gave  special  attention  to 
ensure  that  outer  space  does  not  become  an  arena  of 
military  rivalry  or  a  source  of  death  and  destruction. 
Soviet  foreign  policy  initiatives  are  designed  to  ensure 
that  mankind  greets  the  new  age  under  a  peaceful  sky. 
We  are  countering  “star  wars”  with  “star  peace”  and 
with  broad  cooperation  of  peoples  in  the  peaceful  devel¬ 
opment  of  outer  space. 

Peaceful  reason  must  win.  All  honest  people  of  the  planet 
for  whom  the  concept  “Earth,”  “space,”  and  “peace”  are 
indivisible  believe  this. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 


Stress  on  Preventive  Work  in  Flight  Safety 

91440064b  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 

PP  4-5 

[Article  by  Mar  Avn  P.  Kirsanov,  chief  of  USSR  Armed 
Forces  Central  Flight  Safety  Inspectorate,  under  rubric 
“Flight  Safety:  Experience,  Analysis,  Problems”:  “Make 
Prevention  Highly  Effective”] 

[Text]  The  combat  training  of  military  aviators  has 
entered  the  final  phase  in  the  jubilee  year.  The  majority 
of  units  and  subunits  achieved  good  results  in  various 
kinds  of  combat  training  by  ensuring  accident  free  flight 
operations.  Guided  by  the  requirements  of  governing 
documents  and  making  a  principled  assessment  of  the 
effectiveness  of  measures  to  prevent  flying  incidents  and 
their  preconditions,  commanders  and  political  officers 
organize  and  conduct  flight  sections  with  the  guaranteed 
exclusion  of  dangerous  situations  in  the  air  through  the 
personnel’s  fault.  That  is  just  how  matters  stand  in  the 
air  regiments  where  Gds  Lt  Col  V.  Zuzlov,  Capt  Yu. 
Zinchenko  and  others  serve. 

Meanwhile  some  collectives  unfortunately  still  make 
mistakes  leading  to  flying  incidents,  which  are  a  heavy 
burden  on  all  aspects  of  the  personnel’s  life  and  work. 
The  precise,  adjusted  rhythm  of  combat  training  is 
thrown  off  and  the  people’s  activeness  drops. 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


5 


An  entire  set  of  measures  of  a  directive,  organizational, 
methods,  and  research  nature  serves  to  prevent  accidents 
in  air  units  and  subunits.  A  significant  portion  of  the 
functional  duties  of  commanders,  political  officers  and 
the  officers  of  staffs  and  services  also  is  directed  toward 
preventing  accidents.  Measures  ensuring  flight  safety  are 
generalized  annually  in  organizational  instructions  with 
consideration  for  the  specifics  of  different  air  arms  and 
are  invariably  reflected  in  a  special  section  of  each  unit’s 
annual  combat  training  plan.  Information  on  deficien¬ 
cies  in  flight  operations  uncovered  during  inspections  of 
aviators’  combat  training  is  provided  along  with  an 
accounting  and  analysis  of  the  deficiencies..  This  is  one 
of  the  basic  duties  of  officers  of  authorized  flight  safety 
services.  There  is  an  objective  discussion  of  the  above 
issues  at  special  sessions  and  conferences  of  leadership 
personnel  and  at  periodic  assemblies  and  practical  sci¬ 
ence  conferences. 

Just  why  are  the  end  results  of  the  prevention  of  flying 
incidents  and  their  preconditions  not  always  high 
despite  such  considerable  efforts? 

Experience  indicates  that  in  a  number  of  cases  the 
insufficient  effectiveness  of  this  work  is  explained  by  one 
and  the  same  omissions.  The  most  widespread  omissions 
are  an  oversimplified  impression  of  the  causality  of 
accidents  in  contemporary  aviation  and  formalism  in 
planning  and  conducting  measures  to  prevent  all  possi¬ 
ble  mistakes  on  the  ground  and  in  the  air. 

Such  an  approach  to  the  cause  and  effect  relationships  of 
accidents  cannot  of  course  reveal  their  complex  nature 
fully  enough.  The  fact  is  that  essentially  every  flying 
incident  today  occurs  not  for  one  reason,  as  is  sometimes 
stated,  but  as  a  result  of  the  sum  of  several  miscalcula¬ 
tions  and  infractions  by  specialists  of  various  services. 

There  is  no  question  that  a  “single  cause’’  considerably 
simplifies  the  course  of  investigations,  determining  cul¬ 
prits  and  working  up  summary  documents  on  the  inci¬ 
dent.  But  then  other  original  causes  usually  lying  on  the 
surface  and  relating  not  only  to  actions  of  pilot  and  crew 
but  also  to  the  organization  and  support  of  flights, 
control  of  flights,  accepted  training  methodology  and 
reliability  of  equipment  go  unidentified  and  so  are  not 
eliminated.  With  an  unfavorable  confluence  of  circum¬ 
stances,  they  are  what  can  lead  to  the  appearance  and 
development  of  emergency  situations  over  and  over 
again. 

Unfortunately  formalism  took  root  in  many  elements  of 
preventive  work,  undermining  its  primary  purpose  of 
preventing  a  recurrence  of  the  most  typical  and  most 
likely  incidents  for  given  conditions  and  content  of  flight 
training.  It  is  most  often  manifested  in  the  form  of  an 
extreme  narrowing  and  limiting  of  the  base  of  analysis — 
that  volume  of  statistics  based  on  which  an  assessment  of 
the  local  state  of  affairs  is  made  and  a  plan  of  preventive 
measures  is  formed. 


Another  very  widespread  element  is  the  choice  and 
planning  of  preventive  measures  themselves.  It  should 
be  admitted  that  in  some  units  these  plans  do  not  attain 
the  desired  objective  and  have  turned  into  “accounting 
documents.”  This  is  all  because,  like  the  leaders  who 
approved  them,  their  “developers”  put  little  thought 
into  the  reality  of  fulfilling  the  measures  they  contain. 
They  often  do  not  reflect  the  true  status  of  flight  safety 
with  consideration  of  missions  being  accomplished  by 
the  aviators  and  they  are  not  coordinated  by  time  with 
other  conditions  as  well. 


The  time  has  come  to  resolutely  reject  the  accumulation 
of  dozens  of  empty  paragraphs  often  rewritten  from 
document  to  document.  Commanders  and  other  officials 
have  no  right  to  ignore  such  formalism  in  examining 
draft  plans  supporting  flight  safety.  This  is  especially 
necessary  now  when  documentation  for  the  new  training 
year  has  begun  to  be  worked  up.  Elaboration  of  such  a 
plan  must  begin  without  fail  with  an  evaluation  of  the 
effectiveness  of  its  predecessor,  the  plan  for  the  year 
which  has  ended.  With  no  specific  answer  to  the  question 
of  whether  or  not  that  plan  influenced  an  improvement 
in  flight  safety  for  the  period  in  which  it  was  in  force,  the 
comrades  who  do  the  planning  reduce  their  work,  like  it 
or  not,  to  a  formal  selection  of  contrived  measures. 


And  finally  the  very  practice  of  daily  preventive  work  in 
the  unit  and  subunit  requires  the  most  fundamental 
elimination  of  formalism.  Having  absorbed  the  afore¬ 
mentioned  deficiencies  of  analyzing  the  status  of  flight 
safety  and  then  deficiencies  of  planning  the  activities 
supporting  flight  safety,  this  work  often  is  done  not  so 
much  to  improve  the  personnel’s  actual  knowledge  and 
skills  in  preventing  accidents  as  for  a  primitively  under¬ 
stood  execution  and  accountability:  We  did  it;  it  is 
marked  “done.” 


By  the  way,  representatives  of  higher  staffs  and  of 
various  commissions  also  contribute  to  the  tenacity  of 
such  a  bureaucratic  approach  when  after  arriving  in  the 
unit  they  focus  efforts  only  on  accountability  and  a 
review  of  documentation  without  even  getting  down  to 
lively  contact  with  flight  and  engineering-technical  per¬ 
sonnel  and  without  appearing  at  the  airfield,  at  equip¬ 
ment  preparation  positions,  or  at  flight  control  points. 


Where  formalism  leads  in  questions  of  flight  safety  is 
apparent  just  from  the  following  example.  Recently  it 
was  learned  that  pilots  in  some  units  are  passively  using 
automated  devices  and  systems  specially  designed  for 
guaranteed  assurance  of  flight  safety,  and  in  its  respon¬ 
sible  areas  above  all.  These  are  various  warning  devices 
(lights,  signal  panels,  bells,  buzzers  and  even  spoken 
messages)  which  are  triggered  by  a  descent  to  a  given 
flight  altitude,  a  reduction  in  engine  power  settings,  or  a 
dangerous  approach  to  another  aircraft  in  flight,  as  well 
as  devices  which  automatically  maintain  a  given  altitude 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


6 


and  other  flight  parameters  right  up  to  giving  active 
resistance  to  the  pilot  on  the  controls  when  the  aircraft 
approaches  an  established  restriction  or  dangerous 
regime. 

Nothing  would  seem  simpler:  use  existing  “intelligent” 
equipment  as  prescribed  and  it  will  prompt  you  on 
necessary  actions  in  the  most  important  sector  of  the 
flight.  Nevertheless,  several  incidents  occurred  where 
pilots  either  did  not  switch  on  such  devices  at  all  or  did 
not  react  to  a  warning  signal  which  was  clearly  registered 
both  on  the  flight  recorder  tape  and  on  a  tape  recorder. 
There  were  similar  infractions  in  these  units  before,  but 
none  of  the  commanders  genuinely  reacted  to  them.  It 
was  no  accident  that  the  plans  for  flight  safety  measures 
here  did  not  reflect  the  flyers’  mastery  of  such  devices 
and  the  methodology  of  their  most  rational  use  in 
various  stages  of  flight. 

A  special  role  is  played  by  two  categories  of  aviators 
among  appointed  persons  who  have  an  opportunity  to 
influence  flight  safety.  On  the  one  hand  they  are  the 
leaders  of  the  air  unit,  and  its  commander  above  all,  and 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  pilot  himself  who  makes  the 
flight,  no  matter  what  position  he  holds  and  no  matter 
what  type  of  aircraft  he  flies.  Experience  shows  that  it  is 
these  categories  of  aviators  who  far  from  always  make 
full  use  of  their  opportunities  to  prevent  flying  incidents. 
At  the  same  time  they  are  the  ones  for  whom  the  most 
optimal  conditions  must  be  created  for  performing  their 
duties.  It  is  of  course  not  a  question  of  creating  some 
kind  of  hothouse  conditions  or  a  situation  of  oversim¬ 
plification,  but  of  the  inadmissibility  of  petty  coddling  or 
separating  them  from  performing  urgent  tasks,  let  alone 
constant  dressings-down,  including  in  the  period  of 
flights. 

In  organizing  the  personnel’s  work  in  all  basic  elements 
of  combat  training,  discipline  and  order,  the  regimental 
commander  must  clearly  realize  that  the  state  of  affairs 
involving  flight  safety  will  depend  very  directly  on  his 
personal  attitude  toward  this  matter:  principled  or  for¬ 
mal,  thorough  or  superficial. 

The  organization  of  prevention  of  flying  incidents  and 
immediate  personal  participation  in  such  prevention 
represents  another  very  important  direction  in  the  regi¬ 
mental  commander’s  work  in  the  interests  of  having  no 
accidents.  The  forms  of  prevention  themselves  are  diffi¬ 
cult  for  many  officer  leaders  in  this  matter.  In  fact  the 
tasks,  objectives  and  principles  of  prevention  are 
described  in  sufficient  detail,  but  the  majority  of  direc¬ 
tions  and  elaborations  mention  the  practical  aspect  of 
this  matter  basically  in  a  general  form — perform  preven¬ 
tive  work  persistently — with  no  specific  recommenda¬ 
tions  on  just  what  methods  to  use. 

The  best  air  units  conduct  such  prevention  using  those 
forms  which  reflect  the  content  of  combat  training  and 
political  indoctrination  work.  These  include  all  kinds  of 
classes  and  checks  of  knowledge,  practice  sessions  on 


aviation  equipment  and  simulators,  special  flights  to 
practice  specific  skills  in  actions  in  special  instances,  as 
well  as  disciplinary  practice  concerning  violators  of 
flying  laws.  But  these  customary  forms  too  are  redistrib¬ 
uted  within  the  rigid  time  limit  of  the  “training-flights- 
flight  critique-command  training”  work  cycle  in  the 
interests  of  preventing  the  incidents  most  likely  to  occur 
in  a  given  period  of  flights. 

The  activities  which  are  primarily  prepared  and  con¬ 
ducted  are  those  which  on  the  one  hand  are  most  needed 
right  now  based  on  an  analysis  of  the  actual  flight  safety 
situation  and,  on  the  other  hand,  which  are  most  advis¬ 
able  based  on  real  capabilities  existing  in  the  air  regi¬ 
ment  at  the  given  moment.  The  fact  is  that  even  an 
interruption  or  temporary  suspension  of  flights  (which 
unquestionably  is  one  of  the  extreme  preventive  mea¬ 
sures)  sometimes  may  be  advisable  and  even  necessary 
in  a  specific  situation  which  the  commander  who  makes 
the  decision  must  evaluate. 

The  regimental  commander’s  personal  participation  in 
preventive  measures  is  of  great  importance  for  the  effec¬ 
tiveness  of  prevention.  The  benefit  will  be  obvious  if  for 
example  prior  to  mastering  flights  at  extremely  low 
altitude  he  himself  holds  a  well  prepared  class  on  the 
procedure  for  calculating  and  maintaining  a  safe  altitude 
and  on  comprehensive  use  of  altimeters  having  a  varying 
principle  of  action,  backing  up  what  is  said  with  one  or 
two  examples  of  the  consequences  of  mistakes  in  reading 
altitude. 

A  commander’s  critique  of  infractions  identified  from 
the  SOK  [objective  monitoring  equipment]  for  previous 
flight  sections  and,  if  necessary,  even  a  strict  suggestion 
to  pilots  who  have  had  a  recurrence  of  such  deviations 
will  be  no  less  effective  prior  to  advanced  flying  activi¬ 
ties.  It  is  only  necessary  that  the  commander’s  objectiv¬ 
ity  and  lack  of  bias  are  without  question  both  for  the 
violators  and  for  the  remaining  flight  personnel. 

One  other  necessary  condition  for  an  air  commander’s 
effective  influence  on  flight  safety  is  his  personal  exam¬ 
ple  in  complying  with  flying  laws.  Not  even  the  sternest 
dressings-down  of  violators  of  flight  discipline  will  be 
genuinely  effective  if  the  commander  does  not  set  the 
example  in  complying  with  flying  rules,  to  put  it  mildly. 
The  gap  between  word  and  deed  here  is  especially 
inadmissible. 

The  pilot  and  crew  commander  is  the  other  very  impor¬ 
tant  figure  on  whom  the  prevention  of  flying  incidents 
depends  to  an  enormous  extent.  Combining  within  him¬ 
self  the  need  for  precise  fulfillment  of  the  flight  assign¬ 
ment  with  the  requirement  for  safety  of  its  completion,  it 
is  he  who  keeps  (or  does  not  keep)  himself  from  getting 
into  a  dangerous  situation  and  takes  (or  does  not  take)  all 
necessary  steps  to  localize  it  if  it  nevertheless  occurs  in 
the  air. 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


7 


Experience  indicates  that  the  majority  of  deficiencies 
can  be  localized  especially  at  their  inception  by  a  trained, 
composed  pilot  with  initiative,  beginning  with  his  per¬ 
sonal  decision  for  the  sortie  and  ending  with  timely 
abandonment  of  an  aircraft  in  trouble.  But  that  level  of 
preventive  training  does  not  come  of  itself;  it  is  the  result 
of  extensive  work  and  constant  improvement  of  flight 
proficiency,  which  some  pilots  unfortunately  lack. 

Professional  alertness  based  on  a  profound  and,  no  less 
important,  systematically  maintained  level  of  knowledge 
and  skills  repeatedly  allowed  combat  pilots  both  during 
the  Great  Patriotic  War  and  in  our  time  not  only  to  come 
out  the  winners  from  the  most  difficult  situations,  but 
also  not  to  fall  into  them  through  their  own  mistakes. 

The  work  of  ensuring  flight  safety  brooks  no  stereotypes. 
Life  experience  shows  that  aviators’  uniform  repetition 
of  one  and  the  same  requirements  of  guidance  docu¬ 
ments  (and  often  only  an  enumeration  of  their  names 
and  numbers)  does  not  produce  the  desired  effect.  The 
time  obviously  has  come  to  combine  such  work  with  a 
differentiated  approach  to  various  personnel  categories 
and  with  the  assignment  of  flight  safety  tasks  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  personnel’s  abilities. 

Thus  it  is  hardly  advisable  to  formulate  a  flight  safety 
task  for  the  year  using  an  identical  wording  for  the 
command  element  of  an  air  unit  and  for  rank-and-file 
pilots.  A  different  approach  to  this  will  permit  the 
regimental  commander  and  squadron  commander  to 
comply  with  flight  safety  requirements  and  will  allow 
those  who  evaluate  flight  safety  in  the  regiment  to  get 
away  from  a  primitive  comparison  of  the  number  of 
preconditions  committed. 

It  also  may  turn  out  to  be  advisable  (for  directly  influ¬ 
encing  flight  personnel)  to  analyze  flying  incidents  not 
only  to  correlate  the  proportion  of  their  causes  (such- 
and-such  a  percentage  representing  deficiencies  of  orga¬ 
nization  and  leadership  and  such-and-such  a  percentage 
errors  in  flying  techniques),  but  also  to  examine  typical 
kinds  of  flying  incidents  themselves  which  are  most 
specific  for  each  air  arm:  stalling  in  flight;  collision  with 
terrain;  flying  incidents  at  take-off,  in  the  landing  and  so 
on.  As  was  stated,  there  are  several  reasons  comprising 
the  basis  of  each  of  them.  Therefore  any  appointed 
person  has  to  see  his  opportunity  of  preventing  a  dan¬ 
gerous  situation  and  the  pilot  or  crew  has  to  see  all  the 
dynamics  of  its  development,  from  external  factors 
(errors  of  other  persons  and  equipment  malfunctions)  to 
his  own  actions  which  parry  them.  It  is  an  examination 
of  such  “models”  of  flying  incidents  in  combination  with 
requirements  of  the  NPP  [Flight  Procedures  Manual] 
and  RLE  [Flight  Operations  Manual]  that  can  liven  up 
practical  prevention  and  reduce  the  recurrence  of  iden¬ 
tical  flying  incidents. 

Research  organizations  and  flight  safety  services  where 
both  statistics  and  suggestions  from  the  troops  are  con¬ 
centrated  should  make  a  more  active  search  for  new 


approaches  to  an  analysis  of  flight  safety  with  the  objec¬ 
tive  of  producing  measures  that  are  not  simply  effective 
but  above  all  practically  realistic  and  at  the  same  time 
sufficiently  prompt  and  that  could  lead  to  a  reduction  in 
the  accident  rate  not  only  in  the  future,  but  also  over  the 
short  term. 

Resolute  rejection  of  obsolete  methods  and  a  search  for 
nontraditional  ways  of  improving  flight  safety  will 
ensure  Air  Forces  units  and  subunits  with  a  further 
increase  in  combat  readiness  along  with  an  improvement 
in  the  organization  of  their  training.  This  will  be  a 
practical  contribution  to  the  job  of  restructuring,  the 
need  for  which  is  understood  and  sincerely  supported  by 
every  military  aviator. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 

Improving  Methods  of  Grading  Tactical  Flight 
Training 

91440064c  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10 ,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  6-7 

[Article  by  Maj  I.  Petrakov,  1st  Class  military  pilot, 
under  rubric  “For  High  Combat  Readiness”:  “Hues  of  a 
Good  Grade”] 

[Text]  During  a  tactical  flying  exercise  the  squadron 
headed  by  Maj  A.  Cherevko  was  assigned  a  mission  of 
delivering  two  strikes  against  an  “enemy”  airfield:  one  at 
night  and  the  other  during  the  day.  The  night  strike 
presented  no  special  difficulties.  A  flow  of  aircraft  was 
supposed  to  hit  targets  illuminated  from  the  ground.  The 
daytime  sortie  was  another  matter.  It  was  planned  to 
have  several  groups  make  a  strike  from  different  direc¬ 
tions,  then  a  make  repeat  pass  at  the  target  with  different 
headings.  The  tactical  situation  did  not  shape  up  to  be 
simple.  Powerful  air  defense  weapons  were  located  along 
the  route,  especially  on  the  approach  to  the  air  base,  and 
so  the  assignment  had  to  be  performed  under  a  rigid 
shortage  of  time. 

This  left  an  imprint  on  the  aviators’  preparation  for  the 
flights.  The  pilots  tried  to  make  a  comprehensive  study 
of  the  tactical  and  air  situation  in  the  given  quadrant, 
they  looked  for  the  most  optimum  methods  of  penetrat¬ 
ing  the  air  defense,  and  they  practiced  different  kinds  of 
maneuvering  and  methods  of  coordination.  Preliminary 
preparation  was  saturated  with  difficult  and  unexpected 
narrative  problems  by  which  Maj  Cherevko  tried  to 
bring  the  simulated  situations  as  close  as  possible  to 
those  of  combat.  It  seemed  everything  had  been  consid¬ 
ered  down  to  trivial  details. 

When  the  tactical  flying  exercise  ended  it  was  learned 
that  the  crews  had  performed  advanced  bombing  against 
the  airfield  during  the  day  excellenty.  The  subordinates 
of  flight  commanders  captains  F.  Volya,  A.  Gerasimov 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


8 


and  A.  Kedrov  hit  the  targets  in  sniperlike  fashion  using 
an  effective  maneuver  requiring  high  pilot  training.  It 
was  quite  natural  that  the  squadron  received  an  out¬ 
standing  grade  for  this  sortie. 

But  results  of  the  night  group  flight  pleased  neither  the 
commander  nor  the  pilots  themselves,  who  barely  kept 
within  a  satisfactory  norm.  The  fact  that  all  attention 
had  been  given  to  the  daytime  exercise  in  preparing  for 
the  LTU  [tactical  flying  exercise]  and  the  nighttime 
exercise  was  regarded  as  simpler  was  the  reason  for  the 
failure.  Retribution  came  immediately. 

Nevertheless,  despite  the  obvious  failure,  the  aviators 
did  not  reproach  themselves  for  it  very  strongly.  The 
subunit  was  given  an  overall  good  grade  for  the  exercise. 
But  let  us  ask  the  question:  Just  what  was  the  quality  of 
this  grade  of  four?  To  what  extent  does  it  reflect  the  flight 
personnel’s  real  training?  It  would  appear  that  an  aver¬ 
aged  grade  for  aviator  actions  in  a  tactical  flying  exercise 
is  far  from  always  rightful. 

I  am  deeply  convinced  that  the  work  of  crews  should  be 
graded  only  by  the  yardstick  of  real  combat,  without  any 
indulgences.  The  fact  is  that  had  Maj  Cherevko’s  subor¬ 
dinates  acted  in  a  combat  situation,  serious  losses  would 
have  been  inevitable  and  the  mission  might  not  have 
been  executed.  So  did  we  rightfully  receive  a  four  for  the 
exercise?  I  think  the  answer  is  obvious. 

How  is  an  averaged  grade  of  aviator  actions  in  a  tactical 
flying  exercise  harmful?  Above  all  for  the  fact  that  it  does 
not  permit  clearly  seeing  the  real  state  of  affairs  in  a 
collective.  Moreover,  it  promotes  a  glossing  over  of 
deficiencies  and  acute  problems  and  generates  an  illu¬ 
sion  of  well-being.  This  in  turn  contributes  to  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  self-complacency  in  a  certain  portion  of  the 
people  and  dulls  their  keenness  in  perceiving  deficiencies 
in  the  work.  It  is  no  secret  that  at  times  these  “gener¬ 
alized”  fours  are  earned  for  the  subunit  by  a  group  of 
strong  pilots  demonstrating  outstanding  results  in  tacti¬ 
cal  application  while  the  so-called  “average”  persons  get 
by  with  threes  behind  the  backs  of  the  leaders.  Hence  the 
unjustifiably  slow  growth  of  some  subunits’  combat 
readiness. 

Meanwhile  there  are  enough  unresolved  problems  and 
unused  reserves  in  the  process  of  daily  training.  For 
example,  the  efficiency  of  flight  sections  in  our  squadron 
is  low  for  now,  which  is  shown  if  only  by  the  following 
fact. 

At  the  range  it  is  required  that  1st  Class  pilots  attack 
targets  with  the  first  pass  and  perform  subsequent 
attacks  with  a  change  in  weapon  variant.  Inasmuch  as 
the  load  on  the  range  is  high  we  have  an  opportunity  of 
making  a  maximum  of  three  passes.  And  so  it  is  through¬ 
out  the  year.  As  a  result,  training  in  holding  the  aiming 
mark  on  a  target  in  a  real  flight  is  poor,  and  the  fact  is 
that  the  quality  of  tactical  application  depends  largely  on 
these  skills. 


At  one  time  I  had  occasion  to  take  part  in  an  interesting 
flying  experiment.  Pilots  were  allowed  to  fly  for  tactical 
application  if  their  error  in  holding  the  aiming  mark  on 
a  target  was  no  more  than  two  one-thousandths.  I  admit 
that  in  order  to  achieve  such  indicators  it  was  necessary 
to  make  five  flights  each  with  a  camera  gun,  and  on  each 
flight  10-12  attacks  were  practiced  against  ground  tar¬ 
gets.  My  average  points  for  tactical  application  at  that 
time  were  4.7.  Now,  unfortunately,  that  result  is  gone 
inasmuch  as  one  of  the  main  ways  to  improve  results  and 
effectiveness  of  tactical  application  has  been  closed  by 
the  control  barrier  of  the  range  mess. 

One  other  example  indicates  the  need  for  such  flights. 
We  usually  have  to  operate  against  ground  targets  in 
pairs  and  flights.  Many  years  of  observation  show  that 
results  of  hitting  targets  in  solo  flights  are  lower  for 
wingmen  than  for  leaders.  This  is  explained  best  by  the 
specifics  of  the  wingman’s  attention  allocation  between 
the  position  of  the  lead  aircraft  and  the  target.  These 
specifics  subsequently  also  affect  actions  during  solo 
attacks  on  targets.  Accustomed  to  copy  leaders,  wingmen 
are  unable  to  maintain  flight  parameters  precisely  on 
their  own  and  they  make  more  mistakes  in  constructing 
maneuvers  and  on  the  bombing  run. 

To  the  question  of  how  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of 
tactical  application,  1st  Class  Military  Pilot  and  Squad¬ 
ron  Commander  Maj  A.  Gorlenko  responded: 

“By  compiling  a  planning  table  for  the  flight  section  I  try 
to  take  account  of  subordinates’  training,  interruptions 
in  flights  for  tactical  application,  and  previous  results 
demonstrated  by  the  pilots.  True,  this  is  not  always 
successful.  The  fact  is  that  we  often  have  to  fly  in  groups. 
We  rarely  go  alone  to  the  range,  and  this  affects  wing- 
men’s  tactical  application  in  less  than  the  best  manner 
although  many  of  them  are  highly  rated  pilots.” 

This  results  in  a  paradox:  the  most  stable  indicators  in 
tactical  application  in  the  squadron  are  with  Capt  M. 
Lopatin’s  youthful  flight.  Everything  is  explained  quite 
simply.  During  the  year  the  young  pilots  were  preparing 
to  take  tests  for  a  class  rating.  Naturally,  more  attention 
was  given  to  the  quality  of  their  preparation  for  solo 
flights,  hence  the  high  indicators. 

We  can  boldly  include  incomplete  work  in  generalizing 
and  disseminating  the  experience  of  socialist  competi¬ 
tion  leaders  as  well  as  low  validity  of  data  on  tactical 
application  coming  from  the  range  among  the  unused 
reserves  for  improving  crew  training.  Here  is  the  opinion 
of  Maj  V.  Dmitriyev,  senior  navigator  of  the  regiment 
and  a  1st  Class  military  pilot,  on  this  score: 

“I  often  have  occasion  to  direct  flights  at  the  range.  An 
analysis  of  tactical  application  shows  that  stable  results 
are  achieved  by  pilots  majors  Buravtsev,  Koporin, 
Yagodzinskiy  and  Shelegeda  and  captains  Gorbunov 
and  Chistyak,  but  there  are  pilots  for  whom  the  average 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


9 


bombing  grade  is  very  low  for  now.  These  are  captains 
Kochetkov,  Demin,  Sharshin,  Ignatyev  and  Malyshev. 
The  fact  is,  however,  that  their  class  rating  is  the  very 
same  as  for  the  leaders!” 

Also  troubling  is  the  fact  that  while  greatly  outstripping 
their  comrades  in  proficiency,  the  outstanding  persons 
do  not  always  share  experience  with  them.  It  is  obviously 
high  time  for  both  the  regimental  command  element  and 
the  party  committee  to  think  about  this.  Everything  new, 
foremost  and  progressive  in  the  preparation  of  the  best 
pilots  for  flights  must  be  assembled  bit  by  bit  and  made 
the  property  of  all  crews  without  delay. 

I  am  convinced  that  the  most  dangerous  thing  in  flight 
work  is  indifference.  Sad  as  it  may  be,  we  do  have 
officers  who  have  little  interest  in  the  results  of  their 
work.  I  would  like  to  place  Flight  Commander  Capt  A, 
Gerasimov  as  an  example  for  them.  He  analyzes  in  a 
most  thorough  manner  not  only  those  flights  in  which 
subordinates  make  mistakes,  but  also  those  for  which 
they  receive  outstanding  marks  and  takes  note  of  the 
slightest  inaccuracies  in  the  pilots’  actions.  What  does 
this  provide?  Above  all  it  permits  preventing  serious 
mistakes.  For  now,  however,  no  one  has  worked  on 
generalizing  his  experience. 

I  also  cannot  fail  to  mention  that  great  moral  damage  is 
done  by  lack  of  objectivity  of  grades  given  at  one  of  our 
ranges.  Intersections  of  ammunition  impact  points  are 
made  there  very,  very  approximately  and  no  time  is 
allocated  for  inspection  of  targets  due  to  the  high  inten¬ 
sity  of  flights.  Such  criticism  has  been  repeatedly  entered 
in  the  log  of  range  preparation  for  flights,  but  it  is  still  the 
same  old  story,  as  the  saying  goes.  This  leads  to  a 
situation  where  pilots  fly  to  this  range  without  any 
particular  desire  or  effort,  knowing  in  advance  that 
grades  will  be  exaggerated. 

In  addition,  advanced  tactical  assignments  are  rarely 
practiced  during  daily  flights,  and  so  it  happens  that 
some  crews  begin  to  make  mistakes  as  soon  as  the 
situation  becomes  complicated  in  a  tactical  flying  exer¬ 
cise.  It  is  all  because  their  tactical  thinking  lags  behind 
today’s  demands. 

Maj  V.  Balabko,  the  regiment’s  engineer  for  PRNK 
[sighting-navigation  system],  says:  “I  consider  purpose¬ 
ful  work  to  maintain  given  accuracy  characteristics  of 
the  sighting  and  navigation  system  to  be  an  important 
direction  for  improving  the  effectiveness  of  tactical 
application.  But  here  is  where  many  problems  arise  for 
us.  Some  of  them  again  are  connected  with  deficiencies 
at  the  range,  as  already  mentioned,  but  there  are  also 
others.  We  still  have  many  complaints  about  the  quality 
of  expendable  material  coming  into  the  unit.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  the  condition  of  film  used  in  photo  monitoring 
instruments  is  such  that  we  can  more  or  less  accurately 


determine  that  the  aiming  mark  was  held  on  the  target  in 
one  flight  out  of  three,  and  the  photo  monitoring  instru¬ 
ment  itself  is  far  from  perfect  and  became  obsolete  long 
ago. 

“But  it  is  not  just  objective  reasons  that  hamper  us. 
Unfortunately  not  all  specialists  try  to  achieve  high 
effectiveness  of  tactical  application.  It  is  not  just  a 
matter  of  unconscientiousness  here.  Let’s  look  into 
which  of  the  IAS  [aviation  engineering  service]  represen¬ 
tatives  is  responsible  for  what.  Bombing  results  concern 
the  aircraft  technician  little.  The  important  thing  for  him 
is  that  the  engine  and  aircraft  systems  function  reliably. 
The  armament  specialists  are  concerned  only  with  ensur¬ 
ing  that  no  ammunition  is  brought  back  through  their 
fault.  Specialists  of  the  sighting-navigation  system  group 
are  interested  basically  in  serviceability  of  the  sight  and 
not  where  bombs  or  projectiles  fall. 

“And  so  it  turns  out,”  concludes  Officer  Balabko,  “that 
only  the  regimental  navigator,  chief  of  VOTP  [not  fur¬ 
ther  identified],  and  engineer  for  the  sighting-navigation 
system  have  to  work  on  solving  the  problem.  With  that 
approach  to  an  important  and  complicated  matter  can 
we  really  move  it  from  dead  center?  No.  We  have  to  have 
what  is  called  the  vital  interest  of  all  specialists  in  the  end 
result  of  the  entire  collective’s  work.  And  that  is  what  I 
consider  tactical  application  to  be.” 

It  is  impossible  not  to  agree  with  Maj  Balabko’s  opinion. 
The  following  incident  persuades  one  of  the  correctness 
of  his  words.  On  the  eve  of  the  tactical  flying  exercise  one 
of  the  units  in  the  sighting-navigation  system  was 
replaced  aboard  the  aircraft  of  Maj  N.  Malinkin,  a  1  st 
Class  military  pilot,  after  which  it  was  necessary  to  align 
the  aircraft  without  fail.  But  Sr  Lt  A.  Gravin,  chief  of  the 
sighting-navigation  system  group,  referred  to  a  lack  of 
time  and  did  not  do  this. 

The  pilot  took  off  for  three  flight  sections  in  a  row, 
performing  assignments  under  the  tactical  flying  exercise 
plan.  As  a  result  several  twos  appeared  in  his  flight  log 
inasmuch  as  he  could  not  hit  the  target  through  Sr  Lt 
Gravin’s  fault.  The  large  amount  of  material  resources 
essentially  cast  to  the  wind  and  the  moral  damage  done 
to  the  pilot  generally  are  impossible  to  evaluate.  This  is 
the  price  of  irresponsibility! 

I  also  cannot  skirt  the  following  problem.  One  of  the 
indicators  for  fulfilling  the  annual  plan  continues  to  be 
the  number  and  not  quality  of  bombings.  Because  of  this 
not  one  pilot  was  removed  from  flying  during  the  year 
for  poor  indicators  in  tactical  application.  And  so  from 
section  to  section  untrained  crews  uselessly  shake  the  air 
at  the  range  with  explosions  although  after  the  very  first 
failure  there  should  have  been  a  detailed  examination  of 
its  causes  and  the  aviators  should  have  been  helped  to 
remedy  mistakes.  If  the  equipment  was  at  fault  it  should 
have  been  placed  in  order.  Do  we  really  have  the  right  to 
take  such  a  wasteful  attitude  toward  state  resources? 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


10 


It  cannot  be  said  that  our  collective  is  not  fighting  the 
deficiencies.  The  subunits  are  doing  much  to  get  rid  of 
them.  For  example,  lately  the  materials  of  objective 
monitoring  equipment  have  been  used  more  and  more  in 
the  training  process.  We  do  the  following  in  particular. 
We  take  a  few  test  graphs  of  flights  and  make  copies  from 
them  of  those  sectors  depicting  the  maneuver  against  the 
target  and  the  attack.  A  graphic  picture  is  obtained  of 
how  optimal  parameters  of  a  flight  for  tactical  applica¬ 
tion  are  maintained. 

Or  take  another  example.  We  make  photographs  from 
the  film  of  photo  monitors  on  which  the  position  of  the 
mark  relative  to  the  target  is  registered.  For  greater 
instructiveness  we  glue  to  the  photographs  charts  of  the 
pilot’s  improvement  in  holding  the  aiming  mark,  provid¬ 
ing  commentary  on  them  with  appropriate  text  contain¬ 
ing  specific  recommendations.  In  order  to  get  specialists 
interested  in  maintaining  accuracy  characteristics  we 
concluded  that  the  only  aircraft  which  should  be  consid¬ 
ered  outstanding  is  the  one  on  which  results  of  bombing 
and  firing  conform  to  performance  data  of  the  sighting- 
navigation  system.  There  are  other  valuable  suggestions 
as  well. 

Nevertheless,  this  would  not  appear  to  be  enough.  In  my 
view  a  need  has  matured  to  revise  the  system  for 
evaluating  results  of  tactical  application.  It  seems  to  me 
that  in  a  tactical  flying  exercise,  especially  when  group 
flights  are  being  conducted,  it  is  advisable  to  give  an 
overall  grade  based  on  the  minimum  indicator.  In  that 
case  problems  existing  in  the  collective  will  begin  to 
show  up  more  sharply,  which  means  there  will  be  more 
attention  paid  them.  A  good  grade  must  not  have  dark 
hues. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 

Energiya  Booster  Rocket  Ground  Support 
Complex  Described 

91440064d  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  16-17 

[Article  by  V.  Karashtin,  doctor  of  technical  sciences, 
professor,  under  rubric  “Space  Flight  Support”: 
“  ‘Energiya’  on  the  Launch  Pad”] 

[Text]  The  Soviet  Union  began  design-flight  tests  of  the 
Energiya  general-purpose  booster  rocket  in  the  year  of  the 
70th  anniversary  of  the  Great  October .  Its  first  launch  was 
at  2130  hours  Moscow  time  on  15  May. 

The  new  Energiya  booster  rocket  is  intended  for  placing 
both  reusable  manned  spacecraft  as  well  as  automatic 
craft  of  different  sizes  into  space.  With  a  launch  weight 
on  the  same  order  as  the  American  Space  Shuttle,  it 
carries  a  considerably  larger  payload.  This  was  achieved 
by  a  more  rational  booster  configuration  and  by  the 


throw  weight.  While  the  weight  itself  of  the  American 
Space  Shuttle  is  a  component  part  of  the  overall  weight 
of  the  load  placed  into  space,  the  payload  in  the  Soviet 
design  is  removed  from  the  booster  weight;  it  is  essen¬ 
tially  a  third  stage.  That  approach  permits  not  only 
gaining  in  throw  weight,  but  also  making  the  payload’s 
final-acceleration  engine  simpler  and  more  reliable. 

Like  the  first  Soviet  Sputnik  booster  rocket,  the  Energiya 
is  made  in  “packet”  form:  four  side  units  are  the  first 
stage  and  a  central  unit  is  the  second  stage.  The  booster 
is  60  m  high,  maximum  transverse  dimension  is  around 
20  m,  and  second  stage  diameter  is  8  m.  Each  first  stage 
unit  has  the  world’s  most  powerful  liquid-fuel  rocket 
engines,  each  with  a  thrust  of  800  tons  and  operating  on 
oxygen-hydrogen  fuel.  The  thrust  of  each  of  the  four 
second  stage  oxygen-hydrogen  engines  is  200  tons. 

Collectives  of  many  research,  design,  production,  and 
construction-installation  organizations  and  enterprises 
as  well  as  military  specialists  took  part  in  the  creation 
and  tests  of  the  booster  rocket  and  the  unique  launch 
complex. 

The  article  being  presented  to  the  readers  tells  about  the 
unique  launch  complex  and  preparation  of  the  Energiya 
booster  rocket  for  launch  at  Baykonur. 

The  structure  of  ground  support  complexes  for  the 
preparation  and  launch  of  rocket  boosters  was  developed 
throughout  the  period  of  development  of  space  technol¬ 
ogy  and  it  was  optimized  by  the  trial-and-error  method 
in  all  countries  which  had  this  equipment.  The  com¬ 
plexes  presently  consist  of  a  number  of  facilities  spread 
out  over  a  large  area,  which  was  dictated  by  require¬ 
ments  of  their  mutual  safety  in  case  of  possible  non¬ 
standard  situations  both  within  the  facilities  themselves 
as  well  as  outside  during  a  rocket  accident  at  launch. 

A  similar  layout  scheme  was  made  the  basis  of  the 
complex  from  which  the  heavy  general-purpose  Energiya 
booster  rocket  was  launched.  But  the  dimensions  and 
weight  of  the  booster  rocket,  power  of  the  engines,  and 
requirement  for  ensuring  high  insertion  accuracy  and 
operating  reliability  placed  unbelievably  higher  demands 
on  the  design  and  technological  solution  of  every  system 
and  every  piece  of  hardware  of  the  ground  complex. 

Storage  areas  for  fuel  components — liquid  hydrogen  and 
oxygen — are  spherical  tanks  with  shielded  vacuum  insu¬ 
lation.  Considering  their  special  explosion  hazard,  the 
tanks  were  placed  a  considerable  distance  away  from  the 
launch  facility  where  the  rocket  stands.  Less  dangerous 
components  and  compressed  gases  are  located  relatively 
close  to  the  launch  facility.  Servicing  is  from  a  mobile 
tower  which  is  “rolled”  to  the  booster  rocket;  its  special 
platforms  provide  access  to  essentially  any  assembly, 
including  the  payload  assembly.  This  tower  is  removed 
to  a  safe  distance  before  beginning  the  process  of  fueling 
the  booster  rocket. 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


11 


All  pneumatic-hydraulic  and  electrical  connections  of 
ground  equipment  with  the  booster  rocket  are  made 
through  the  rocket  base  and  lateral  surface  by  means  of  a 
fueling-drainage  mast  with  movable  platforms  along 
which  lines  for  fueling  and  drainage  as  well  as  “ground- 
rocket”  electrical  communications  cables  are  run.  These 
platforms  are  removed  in  turn  in  accordance  with  the 
technological  chart,  and  the  last  one  (where  the  oxygen 
drain  line  runs)  is  removed  after  engines  start  up  and  the 
rocket  begins  moving.  It  weighs  over  20  tons  and 
requires  several  seconds  for  removal,  but  all  the  diffi¬ 
culty  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  these  several  seconds  this 
weight  has  to  be  slowed  and  smoothly  stopped.  This 
problem  was  solved  after  a  serious  engineering  study  and 
a  large  amount  of  experimental  work. 

The  launch  facility  on  which  the  booster  rocket  stands 
and  from  which  it  starts  is  a  reinforced  concrete  struc¬ 
ture  containing  mechanisms  for  holding  the  booster 
rocket  and  facilities  for  running  the  pneumohydraulic 
and  electrical  connections  to  it.  Beneath  it  is  a  deepened 
single-slope  trough  for  diverting  gas  from  engine  units 
when  the  booster  rocket  is  launched.  A  portion  of  the  gas 
diversion  channel  is  closed  with  a  special  sliding  floor 
providing  safety  for  service  personnel  and  access  to  the 
booster  rocket  base  during  preparatory  work.  In  order  to 
picture  the  grandeur  of  the  complex,  suffice  it  to  say  that 
an  average  city  block  with  12-story  buildings  can  be 
accommodated  in  the  trough. 

Especially  complicated  technical  problems  had  to  be 
solved  in  creating  the  fueling  systems.  Over  4,000  actua¬ 
tors  allow  simultaneous  fueling  of  all  ten  booster  rocket 
tanks.  It  is  necessary  to  have  a  mean  temperature  of 
supercooled  liquid  hydrogen  with  an  accuracy  greater 
than  IK.  Deviations  in  each  tank’s  fueling  level  must  not 
exceed  10  mm,  and  this  with  the  gigantic  dimensions  of 
the  booster  rocket  tanks. 


The  principle  of  cryogenic  cooling  to  increase  metal 
strength  was  used  to  reduce  the  weight  proper  of  the 
booster  rocket  and  its  systems.  As  always  you  gain  in 
some  areas  and  lose  in  others.  For  example,  filling  a 
number  of  onboard  cylinders  with  gases  is  permissible  in 
this  case  only  after  the  level  of  the  liquid  cryogenic 
component  is  higher  than  the  cylinders.  Consequently 
the  cryogenic  component  can  be  discharged  only  after 
gas  is  discharged  from  these  cylinders.  There  is  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  such  “little  knots”  even  in  a  standard  technolog¬ 
ical  process  and  so  it  became  clear  from  the  very  begin¬ 
ning  that  the  prelaunch  preparation  process  must  be 
automated  to  the  maximum. 


The  high  degree  of  automation  and  use  of  the  most 
up-to-date  mathematical  methods  for  formalizing  tech¬ 
nological  processes  of  preparation  and  launch  represent 
one  of  the  primary  features  of  the  Energiya  booster 
rocket  ground  complex. 


The  launch  complex  automated  control  system  is  built 
according  to  the  hierarchic  principle  and  has  three  levels 
with  an  overall  total  of  more  than  100,000  commands 
issued  and  signals  received.  The  first  level  directly 
involves  the  rocket  and  acts  as  a  “conductor”  with 
respect  to  systems  of  the  second  level  and  in  some  cases 
also  the  third  level.  Not  one  process  can  begin  in  lower 
level  systems  without  a  command  or  authorization  of  the 
higher  level,  and  only  it  can  issue  commands  to  the 
rocket’s  actuators  up  to  the  moment  for  beginning  start¬ 
up  of  engines. 

The  complexity  of  creating  an  automated  control  com¬ 
plex  lay  in  its  development  in  parallel  with  the  booster 
rocket  and  launch  complex.  As  previous  experience 
suggested,  the  technology  of  booster  rocket  and  launch 
complex  operation  changes  in  the  course  of  tests.  Con¬ 
sidering  these  features,  it  was  deemed  irrational  to  use 
traditional  programming  principles. 

As  a  result  of  tests  we  found  a  fundamentally  new 
approach  to  software  and  to  the  structure  for  building 
automated  systems  for  prelaunch  preparation.  This 
approach  consists  of  representing  the  process  for  man¬ 
aging  tasks  of  various  classes  in  the  form  of  a  model  of  a 
discrete  automatic  device  over  time.  This  permitted  not 
only  designing  the  required  gear  in  advance,  but  also 
making  a  quality  leap  in  efficient  control  of  the  ground 
complex. 

The  rejection  of  traditional  programming  and  the  tran¬ 
sition  to  a  declarative  representation  of  knowledge  of  the 
technological  process  of  launch  preparation  permitted 
excluding  the  programmer  as  a  middleman  between  the 
controlling  computer  and  the  tasker,  the  process  engi¬ 
neer.  Data  is  input  directly  to  the  computer  in  the  form 
of  graphic  models. 

Inasmuch  as  the  rules  of  functioning  are  uniform  for  all 
models,  then  using  the  controlling  computers  we  man¬ 
aged  to  create  a  general-purpose  automatic  device  which 
provides  full  automated  control  of  the  booster  rocket’s 
preparation  for  launch  based  on  readings  of  the  current 
state  of  sensors,  booster  rocket  actuators  and  commands 
of  second  level  systems. 

Realization  of  this  approach  sharply  increased  reliability 
of  control  and  provided  an  opportunity  for  making 
prompt  changes  to  it.  Productivity  of  stages  of  the  new 
process  compared  with  traditional  ones  used  for  comput¬ 
ers  rose  10-100  times. 

The  law  of  prelaunch  preparation  control  also  takes  into 
account  many  nonstandard  situations.  It  not  only  regis¬ 
ters  them,  but  also  suggests  how  to  get  out  of  them.  Over 
500  nonstandard  situations  at  the  very  least  were  trans¬ 
formed  into  standard  built-in  situations. 

Upper  level  control  operators  are  located  at  consoles 
with  three  color  displays  and,  if  there  have  been  delays  in 
individual  operations  in  second  and  third  level  systems, 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


12 


they  issue  no  more  than  3-5  commands  for  going  on  to 
the  next  process.  At  all  other  times  they  are  monitoring 
progress  of  the  technological  process  based  on  data  on 
the  displays. 

A  person  who  is  involved  in  space  technology  knows  that 
there  are  no  simple  launches.  Each  one  is  connected  with 
specific  emotions,  uneasiness  and  anxieties.  Therefore 
one  can  understand  the  state  which  gripped  all  partici¬ 
pants  in  the  launch  of  the  Energiya  general-purpose 
booster  rocket  when  the  State  Commission  made  the 
decision  for  its  launch  on  15  May  1987.  The  report  on 
the  readiness  of  the  ground  complex  and  booster  rocket 
for  launch  on  12  May  was  made  to  Comrade  M.  S. 
Gorbachev,  who  was  at  Baykonur  at  that  time.  The 
CPSU  Central  Committee  general  secretary  had  given 
special  attention  to  the  new  space  system  and  expressed 
certain  criticism.  Now  it  was  necessary  to  show  by  action 
that  the  developers  and  testers  had  taken  additional 
steps  and  checked  the  correctness  of  technical  solutions 
they  had  adopted. 

The  prelaunch  preparation  and  the  launch  went  precisely 
and  efficiently.  The  operators  practiced  repeatedly  in 
advance,  studied  operational  documentation  well  and 
took  account  of  the  experience  of  working  with  preced¬ 
ing  experimental  booster  rockets. 

The  technological  schedule  for  prelaunch  preparation 
always  provides  a  certain  amount  of  reserve  time  to 
remedy  possible  faults.  Such  reserve  time  also  was  con¬ 
tained  in  the  Energiya  launch  schedule.  It  happened  that 
we  were  forced  to  use  it. 

In  the  process  of  cooling  a  tank  with  gaseous  hydrogen 
one  of  the  actuators  “stuck”  in  an  intermediate  state  and 
ceased  to  react  to  control  commands.  It  was  at  this 
moment  that  the  flexibility  built  into  the  automated 
control  system  was  needed.  Without  interrupting  all 
other  processes  for  the  nine  remaining  tanks  and  other 
parallel  operations,  we  identified  the  sector  of  the  tech¬ 
nological  process  connected  with  the  “stuck”  actuator. 

Under  a  special  program  compiled  by  the  technical 
leadership  we  performed  a  diagnostic  test  to  determine 
the  true  position  of  this  actuator  and  then  it  was  placed 
in  the  necessary  position  by  specific  commands.  Several 
additional  commands  were  issued  during  delivery  of 
liquid  hydrogen  to  the  tank  and  it  reacted  to  them 
precisely.  It  functioned  just  as  precisely  subsequently  as 
well. 

The  time  reserve  built  into  the  schedule  was  more  than 
that  spent  to  remedy  this  nonstandard  situation,  and  so 
launch  preparation  ended  early.  The  entire  ground  com¬ 
plex  and  booster  rocket  stood  in  full  readiness  for  several 
tens  of  minutes. 

The  launch  was  made  exactly  at  the  designated  time.  The 
command  post,  where  reports  on  the  progress  of  the 
automatic  launch  preparation  process  had  just  been 


sounding,  fell  silent.  When  the  measuring  post  which  was 
processing  telemetry  in  real  time  flashed  on  the  screen 
“Booster  rocket  second  stage  engine  switched  on  at 
prescribed  time.  Payload  separated,”  all  command  post 
rooms  erupted  in  a  thunder  of  applause. 

The  first  step  of  a  qualitatively  new  development  of 
space  has  been  taken,  but  a  great  amount  of  difficult 
work  lies  ahead. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 

Having  Mental  Flight  Image  Improves  Flying 
Skills 

91440064e  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  1 KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  18-19 

[Article  by  Lt  Gen  Avn  N.  Kryukov,  Honored  Military 
Pilot  of  the  USSR;  and  Lt  Col  Med  Serv  A.  Vorona, 
candidate  of  medical  sciences,  under  the  rubric  “Flying 
and  Psychology”:  “A  Feel  for  Flying”] 

[Text]  Such  expressions  as  “a  bird’s  sense,”  “an  eye  for 
flying,”  “sense  of  the  controls,”  “sense  of  the  machine” 
and  others  approximately  identical  in  meaning  have  long 
existed  in  flying  practice.  Over  time  some  of  them  have 
been  transformed  into  the  concepts  of  a  “flying  sense” 
and  a  “sense  of  the  aircraft.” 

When  there  were  hardly  any  instruments  in  aircraft  the 
meaning  of  a  flying  sense  was  absolutized  to  such  an 
extent  that  a  pilot  who  did  not  have  it  was  considered  an 
“imaginary  value.”  As  aircraft  became  saturated  with 
instrumentation,  as  the  theory  of  instrument  flying 
developed,  as  instances  of  the  appearance  of  illusions 
recurred  and  with  the  broad  introduction  of  automated 
control  systems  (SAU),  the  importance  of  the  flying 
sense  for  piloting  was  downgraded  and  at  times  entirely 
disclaimed. 

But  experience  showed  that  the  visual  detection  and 
identification  of  enemy  aircraft  and  maneuverable  aerial 
combat  with  power  maneuvering  remained  the  impor¬ 
tant  things  for  a  fighter  pilot  despite  the  “omnipresence” 
of  electronics.  It  turned  out  that  along  with  an  ability  to 
use  various  instrument  data,  he  has  to  possess  an  ability 
to  directly  reflect  the  aircraft’s  spatial  displacement  in 
the  air.  Subjectively  this  is  experienced  as  a  sense  of  the 
spatial  position  of  his  aircraft  and  its  power  and  the 
ability  to  react  almost  instantaneously  to  various  flight 
situations. 

From  the  standpoint  of  modern  science  a  flying  sense 
represents  the  pilot’s  ability  to  make  use  of  noninstru¬ 
ment  signals  for  flying:  the  position  of  the  aircraft’s 
visible  parts  relative  to  natural  reference  points,  angular 
and  linear  accelerations,  engine  noise,  and  vibrations, 
which  for  the  experienced  pilot  are  filled  with  important 


1 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


13 


flight  information.  Experiments  and  scientific  observa¬ 
tions  have  confirmed  that  with  modem  training  meth¬ 
odology  such  an  ability  comes  to  a  pilot  after  1,000  or 
more  flying  hours.  But  even  after  this  even  highly  rated 
pilots  spend  95-98  percent  of  the  time  monitoring  instru¬ 
ment  readings  even  during  visual  flying. 

Thus  purposefully  forming  a  flying  sense  today  becomes 
an  urgent  and  acute  problem  which  can  be  solved  only 
with  a  clear  understanding  of  processes  occurring  in  the 
mind  of  the  pilot  flying  the  aircraft. 

Studies  have  established  that  a  person’s  conscious 
actions  are  governed  by  a  mental  image  which  permits 
getting  oriented  in  the  external  environment  and  expe¬ 
diently  organizing  one’s  behavior.  That  image  is  not 
simply  an  imprint  or  snapshot  of  an  external  situation, 
but  a  model  of  surrounding  activity  which  a  person 
builds  on  the  basis  of  active  cognitive  actions  in  the 
process  of  mastering  the  trade.  This  model  permits  him 
to  refrain  from  forming  a  new  image  in  any  situation  and 
to  draw  from  memory  a  ready-made,  standard  image, 
updating  its  specific  differences  and  discrepancies  by 
means  of  incoming  signals.  The  process  of  cognition 
through  comparison  of  current  data  with  standards  of 
memory  has  been  given  the  name  “comparison.”  A 
characteristic  feature  of  the  act  of  comparison  is  the 
speed  and  seeming  ease  of  putting  diverse  information 
together  into  integral  impressions  of  objects  or  current 
situations,  but  for  this  it  is  necessary  that  the  standards 
formed  conform  to  actual  reality  to  the  maximum. 

The  flight  image  serves  as  a  concentrated  expression  of 
mental  images  governing  a  pilot’s  actions  in  the  air.  Its 
base  component  consists  of  visual  impressions  of  aircraft 
movement  and  spatial  position.  A  well  developed  base 
component  permits  understanding  and  correctly  using 
the  sum  total  of  data  coming  to  the  pilot  in  flight.  The 
data  are  divided  into  instrument  (instrument  readings) 
and  noninstrument  (one’s  own  sensations  and  percep¬ 
tions  of  the  position  of  visible  parts  of  the  aircraft 
relative  to  natural  reference  points,  forces  on  controls, 
load  factors,  noises,  vibrations  and  so  on).  In  order  to 
identify  a  flight  situation  by  the  comparison  method  the 
pilot  must  have  in  his  memory  standard  images  of 
instrument  readings  and  noninstrument  signals  in  the 
form  of  sensory  impressions  of  the  nature  of  visual 
perceptions  and  vestibular,  muscular  and  tactile  sensa¬ 
tions  for  various  parameters  of  the  aircraft’s  spatial 
displacement.  It  is  their  totality  that  is  the  basis  of  flying 
sense. 

Here  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  concepts  of  “flying 
sense”  and  “sense  of  the  aircraft,”  often  used  as  syn¬ 
onyms.  A  flying  sense  is  the  pilot’s  capability  for  sensory 
reflection  of  spatial  displacement  as  a  whole,  the  basis 
being  the  entire  system  of  various  sensory  impressions.  A 
sense  of  the  aircraft  is  the  actuating  component  part  of 
flying  sense.  It  is  connected  with  impressions  of  muscu¬ 
lar  and  tactile  sensations  when  flying  a  specific  aircraft 


and  is  dictated  by  the  aircraft’s  stability  and  controlla¬ 
bility.  A  flying  sense  gives  the  flight  image  the  features  of 
a  system,  since  because  of  it  the  reflection  of  the  air¬ 
craft’s  position  in  space  acquires  an  integral  character 
and  becomes  comprehended.  Therefore  it  is  difficult  to 
solve  the  problem  of  effectively  forming  a  flight  image 
without  the  systematic  and  conscious  development  of  a 
flying  sense. 


Meanwhile  there  are  at  the  very  least  three  interrelated 
factors  which  if  ignored  in  flight  training  at  the  present 
time  make  the  formation  of  a  flying  sense  (which  means 
the  formation  of  an  integral  flight  image)  in  pilots 
spontaneous  and  ineffective. 


Modem  psychology  has  proven  that  visual  images  are  a 
mental  form  of  the  existence  of  concepts.  In  pilot  activ¬ 
ities  they  are  characterized  by  the  creation  of  three-di¬ 
mensional  visual  structures  concerning  the  aircraft’s 
spatial  displacement,  which  in  itself  is  a  complex  task 
giving  rise  to  major  subjective  difficulties.  On  the  one 
hand,  visual  impressions  differ  noticeably  in  different 
people  in  vividness,  distinctness  and  controllability.  It  is 
easy  to  see  this  if  we  ask  several  persons  to  describe  one 
and  the  same  object  very  familiar  to  them.  Therefore  in 
reading  one  and  the  same  texts  and  with  one  and  the 
same  explanation  from  the  flight  instructor,  cadets  may 
form  different  subjective  images  of  the  aircraft’s  spatial 
positions  on  a  given  leg  of  the  flight  and  different 
concepts  of  instrument  readings  and  the  nature  of  nonin¬ 
strument  signals  corresponding  to  them. 

Further,  demands  placed  on  cadets  often  are  limited  only 
to  the  presence  of  knowledge  about  flight  parameters 
reflected  in  instrument  readings,  which  is  largely  facili¬ 
tated  by  the  methodology  of  simulator  classes  held 
before  the  beginning  of  introductory  flights,  a  method¬ 
ology  without  real  scientific  substantiation.  As  a  result 
conditions  are  not  created  for  forming  integral  impres¬ 
sions  of  the  information  signs  reflecting  the  aircraft’s 
spatial  displacement,  which  substantially  hampers 
“seeing”  and  “sensing”  the  real  flight  situation. 


And  here  is  one  other  point.  Up  to  the  present  time 
various  texts  on  flying  techniques  (and  accordingly  the 
explanations  of  flight  instructors)  gave  negligibly  little 
attention  to  the  possibility  and  necessity  of  using  nonin¬ 
strument  signals  for  control  in  visual  flight.  Strange  as  it 
may  seem,  much  time  in  training  cadets  is  given  to 
purely  instrument  flying.  In  particular,  circuit  flying  is 
replaced  by  flying  with  two  180  degree  turns.  Adherents 
of  this  method  refer  to  the  fact  that  on  the  one  hand 
airfield  radiotechnical  equipment  allows  making  such  a 
landing  approach  and  on  the  other  hand  this  allegedly 
creates  favorable  opportunities  for  teaching  cadets  to 
land.  They  do  not  take  account  of  the  fact  that  under 
combat  conditions  the  likelihood  that  airfield  navigation 
systems  will  be  out  of  order  substantially  increases.  And 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


14 


they  forget  entirely  that  this  method  of  approach  pro¬ 
vides  no  opportunity  to  use  various  no^ instrument  sig¬ 
nals  and  consequently  no  opportunity  to  develop  a  flying 
sense. 

All  this  hampers  the  formation  of  an  integral  system  of 
mental  expression  (a  standard  flight  image),  leaving  the 
accumulation  of  extensive  flight  experience,  i.e.,  the 
method  of  trials  and  errors,  as  the  only  way  to  acquire  it. 
As  a  result  development  of  a  flying  sense  stretches  out 
over  long  years  and  many  pilots  cannot  describe  or 
explain  in  detail  how  they  finally  learned  this  because  of 
the  unawareness  of  using  noninstrument  signals. 

The  methodology  of  reference  points  permits  effective 
development  of  a  flying  sense  during  training  and 
because  of  this  accelerating  the  process  of  forming  a 
flight  image.  Its  essence  is  that  all  flying  figures  are 
divided  into  elementary  standard  sectors  (reference 
points).  For  example,  the  sector  before  entry,  entry  into 
a  360  degree  banked  turn,  a  360  degree  steady  banked 
turn,  and  exit  from  the  turn;  the  sector  ahead  of  entry 
into  a  half-roll,  entry  into  the  half-roll,  the  inverted 
position  and  so  on.  Several  dozen  such  typical  flight 
“templates”  are  gathered.  Trainees  form  clear  and  pre¬ 
cise  impressions  of  the  aircraft’s  spatial  position,  corre¬ 
sponding  instrument  readings  and  sensations  during 
ground  training  with  the  use  of  simple  technical  equip¬ 
ment  (slide  projector,  slides  showing  instrument  read¬ 
ings  and  a  view  of  the  aircraft’s  visible  parts  relative  to 
natural  reference  points  in  a  specific  sector  of  a  flying 
figure,  and  aircraft  models).  Under  a  teacher’s  supervi¬ 
sion,  after  a  slide  is  shown  the  cadet  places  the  aircraft 
model  in  the  necessary  spatial  position  relative  to  the  x, 
y  and  z  axes  and  gives  a  detailed  verbal  description  of 
sensations  and  perceptions  arising  in  flight  at  the  given 
moment.  He  simultaneously  announces  what  move¬ 
ments  of  controls  are  necessary  to  place  the  aircraft  in 
the  next  sector  of  the  figure.  After  this  he  is  shown  the 
next  slide. 

After  confident  assimilation  of  all  reference  points  in  a 
strict  sequence,  the  slides  are  shown  in  random  order. 
The  trainee  has  to  quickly  interpret  instrument  readings, 
place  the  aircraft  model  in  the  appropriate  position  and 
report  the  nature  of  sensations  which  will  accompany 
this  situation.  The  time  for  showing  the  slides  is  gradu¬ 
ally  shortened  to  one  second  and  less.  That  is  how  an 
ability  is  developed  to  precisely  translate  instrument 
data  into  visual  impressions  of  an  aircraft’s  spatial 
position. 

The  slides  are  shown  with  deviations  in  the  final  phase  of 
such  training.  The  trainee  not  only  has  to  detect  them, 
but  also  announce  how  they  are  reflected  in  sensation 
and  perception. 

In  a  real  flight  the  impressions  formed  by  using  the 
noninstrument  signals  most  informative  at  the  given 
moment  while  monitoring  the  instruments  are  filled  with 


specific  live  content  (a  subjective  assessment  of  the 
dynamics  of  the  load  factor  and  forces  on  controls,  the 
position  of  visible  parts  of  the  aircraft  relative  to  natural 
reference  points  and  so  on).  By  commands  over  the  SPU 
[aircraft  intercom  system],  the  trainee’s  attention  is 
specially  directed  to  opportunities  for  sensory  reflection 
of  spatial  displacement  by  rational  use  of  noninstrument 
signals  coming  through  various  sense  organs  for  regulat¬ 
ing  actions.  Instrument  data  are  “connected”  to  flying 
only  where  objectively  necessary  and  where  they  are 
irreplaceable:  in  transitional  regimes,  to  monitor  accu¬ 
racy  of  flying,  or  to  check  operation  of  the  power  plant, 
fuel  system  and  life  support  systems. 

The  most  powerful  methods  charge  for  such  training  is 
contained  in  aerobatics  flying  when  the  aircraft’s  spatial 
position  is  constantly  changing  and  the  noninstrument 
signals  corresponding  to  each  section  of  the  figure  are 
well  perceived  and  fixed  in  memory  against  the  back¬ 
ground  of  the  visual  picture  of  the  displacement  of 
visible  parts  of  the  aircraft  relative  to  the  natural  hori¬ 
zon.  Therefore  constant  pilot  training  in  aerobatics  is  a 
necessary  condition  for  developing  and  maintaining  a 
flying  sense. 

Practical  training  performed  with  instructor  pilots  under 
the  proposed  methodology  substantially  increased  their 
capability  for  sensory  reflection  when  flying  an  aircraft, 
which  attests  to  the  possibility  of  developing  a  flying 
sense  even  by  experienced  aviators  in  the  course  of 
specially  organized  training. 

To  prove  that  this  was  achieved  by  purposeful  formation 
of  a  flight  image  and  in  particular  of  its  base  component, 
the  image  of  the  aircraft’s  spatial  position  in  aerobatics, 
experiments  were  performed  in  taking  an  aircraft  out  of 
a  difficult  position  with  cockpit  blacked  out.  In  all  cases 
the  reliability  of  spatial  orientation  even  in  instrument 
flying  was  higher  by  several  times  for  pilots  of  the 
experimental  group  with  a  better  developed  flying  sense. 

This  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  in  traditional 
training  a  flight  image  is  formed  without  active  partici¬ 
pation  of  the  consciousness,  which  by  the  way  also 
effectively  influences  sensory  impressions  about  sensa¬ 
tions  during  flying.  As  a  result  pilots  do  not  clearly 
realize  what  information  their  sensations  carry  about 
parameters  of  spatial  displacement  in  the  air.  In  visual 
flying  this  hinders  use  of  noninstrument  signals  for 
regulating  flying  actions.  In  instrument  flying  an  insuf¬ 
ficiently  developed  flight  image  leads  to  relatively  low 
reliability  of  spatial  orientation  and  a  relatively  large 
amount  of  time  spent  “reading  the  dials.” 

Purposeful  formation  of  a  flight  image  in  pilots  of  the 
experimental  group  led  to  the  ability  to  “read”  one’s  own 
sensations  during  flying  just  as  in  reading  instruments. 
Thanks  to  the  methodology  of  reference  points,  different 
displacements  in  the  air  were  reduced  for  them  to  several 
tens  of  typical  flight  situations.  The  presence  in  the 


4 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


15 


pilots’  minds  of  their  integral  standard  images  substan¬ 
tially  narrows  the  range  of  unforeseen  surprises  in  the 
air.  As  a  result,  in  visual  flight  the  pilot  confidently 
senses  his  spatial  position  and  can  devote  more  attention 
to  performing  combat  missions.  Under  adverse  weather 
conditions  a  consciously  formed  flight  image  makes  it 
possible  to  unfold  the  entire  flight  situation  in  the 
awareness  from  its  individual  signs,  which  improves 
reliability  of  spatial  orientation. 


Thoughtful,  planned  and  systematic  formation  of  a  fly¬ 
ing  sense  and  its  constant  improvement  is  an  uncompro¬ 
mising  demand  of  the  scientific  organization  of  flight 
training.  It  contains  a  great  deal:  an  improvement  in  the 
quality  of  flying,  success  in  combat,  and  flight  safety. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


16 


Factors  in  Decision  to  Land  Damaged  Aircraft 

9 ] 440064 f  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA  in 
Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87)  pp 
20-21 

[Article  by  Col  F.  Ganiyev,  doctor  of  technical  sciences, 
professor  under  rubric  “For  the  Pilot’s  Arsenal”:  “If  the 
Aircraft  is  Damaged”] 


[Text]  The  airfoils  of  an  aircraft  nay  be  damaged  in  the  course  of  operation 
or  combat  actions.  This  will  cause  a  change  in  aerodynamic  characteristics. 
In  such  a  situation  a  pilot  has  to  resolve  two  problems  at  the  very  least:  Is 
it  possible  to  continue  flying  and  hov;  can  the  damaged  aircraft  be  handled? 

Studies  show  that  the  symmetry  of  aircraft  flow-around  is  disturbed  above  all 
with  damages  to  airfoils.  The  picture  of  the  distribution  of  aerodynamic 
forces  changes  and  consequently  the  cumulative  forces,  especially  moments, 
also  change.  These  changes  are  a  function  both  of  the  aircraft's 
configuration  and  of  the  area  and  location  of  airfoil  damage. 

Damages  to  the  horizontal  tail  and  the  tip  of  an  aircraft's  swept  or  delta 
wings  lead  to  perceptible  changes  in  pitching  moment  and  position  of  the 
aerodynamic  center  (Fig.  1).  Damage  to  five  or  more  percent  of  wing  area 
usually  causes  a  loss  in  the  aircraft's  longitudinal  stability.  The  changes 
of  forces  and  moments  are  not  that  substantial,  although  the  appearance  of 
perceptible  rolling  moments  is  quite  possible. 

In  horizontal  flight  the  gravity  force  of  the  aircraft  is  balanced  by 
its  lift  (G=Yj|eB+Ynp)  •  Asymmetry  creates  a  difference  of  forces  on  the 
right  and  left  and  generates  a  rolling  moment  which  remains  almost 
unchanged,  since  lift  is  constant  in  horizontal  flight,  which  means  the 
value  also  is  preserved.  The  rolling  moment  can  be 

represented  in  the  following  form: 

Mx=mx(pV2/2)Sl, 

where  p  is  air  density; 

V  is  flight  speed; 

S  and  1  are  wing  area  and  wing  span  respectively. 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


17 


The  velocity  head  drops  with  a  decrease  in  speed  and  it  will  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  increase  the  angle  of  attack  to  maintain  horizontal  flight.  In 
so  doing  there  will  be  an  increase  in  the  rolling  moment  coefficient  mx. 

The  rolling  arising  in  a  damaged  aircraft  is  eliminated  by  the  controls 
MX=MX3.  This  equality  through  the  coefficients  has  the  form:  mx=m|3  63, 
where  m^3  describes  the  effectiveness  of  ailerons.  Inasmuch  as  the 
value  of  m^3  changes  weakly  at  low  flight  speeds  and  moderate  angles  of 
attack,  then  compensating  for  the  growing  value  of  mx  will  require 
greater  aileron  angles  63. 

Thus  the  maximum  angle  of  attack  a*  at  which  one  is  still  able  to  over¬ 
come  the  roll  arising  because  of  aircraft  damage  is  determined  by  the 
maximum  aileron  angle  (or  angle  of  remaining  aileron),  i.e.,  by  the 
available  rolling  moment. 

This  angle  of  attack  a*  limits  the  reduction  in  velocity  head — it  dic¬ 
tates  the  minimum  flight  speed  of  a  damaged  aircraft.  It  is  apparent 
that  angle  of  attack  also  will  increase  with  an  increase  in  normal  load 
factor  and  flight  altitude  at  constant  speed*  It  follows  from  this  that 
with  airfoil  damage  additional  limitations  of  regimes  appear  in  an  air¬ 
craft,  above  all  for  minimum  flight  speed  and  the  the  normal  load  factor 
value. 

Greatest  difficulties  in  flying  a  damaged  aircraft  await  the  pilot  in  the 
landing.  The  danger  is  that  a  damaged  aircraft  can  perform  horizontal  flight 
and  even  a  maneuver  with  limitations  in  the  load  factor,  but  in  the  landing  it 
is  suddenly  discovered  that  the  rolling  moment  which  has  appeared  is  so  great 
(because  of  the  increase  in  angle  of  attack)  that  one  cannot  compensate  for  it 
through  the  controls.  The  situation  also  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the 
pilot  lacks  time  to  analyze  the  phenomenon,  make  a  decision  and  correct 
possible  errors.  An  abrupt  decrease  in  responsiveness  suddenly  appears  in  an 
aircraft  which  in  previous  flight  regimes  had  acceptable  stability  and 
controllability  characteristics,  albeit  limited.  In  addition,  in  this  phase 
the  possibility  of  correcting  a  dangerous  situation  which  has  appeared  is 
considerably  reduced. 

Therefore  if  a  rolling  moment  suddenly  appears  in  flight  it  is  necessary  to 
reduce  speed  without  changing  altitude.  An  increase  in  the  rolling  moment 
here  is  a  sign  of  the  presence  of  asymmetric  airfoil  damage.  Then  one  should 
evaluate  whether  or  not  the  aircraft  can  be  landed.  To  do  this  gradually 
reduce  flight  speed  at  a  safe  (but  lowest  possible)  altitude.  The  lowest 
speed  at  which  rolling  moments  which  arise  still  can  be  compensated  by  using 
the  controls  is  the  primary  argument  for  a  decision  about  the  possibility  of 
landing  a  damaged  aircraft.  Then  if  necessary  one  can  try  to  lower  the  flaps 
and  clarify  the  configuration  in  which  the  landing  will  be  made.  If  one  of 
the  flaps  has  been  torn  off  or  damaged  the  rolling  moment  may  change  very 
perceptibly. 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


18 


Let  us  examine  corresponding  graphs  to  familiarize  ourselves  with 
changes  in  an  aircrafts  aerodynamic  characteristics  arising  in  the 
presence  of  airfoil  damage.  Fig.  2  shows  the  possibility  of  compensa¬ 
ting  for  a  rolling  moment  with  one  right  aileron  as  the  angle  of  attack 
increases  with  different  relative  areas  of  damage  S^S^/S  to  the  left 
wingtip.  For  an  aircraft  with  ten-percent  damage  in  wingtip  area  Sn-0.1 
at  H=0  and  M=0.2  horizontal  flight  is  possible  only  at  angles  of  attack 
a<7°.  An  increase  in  the  load  factor  of  a  damaged  aircraft  at  the  very 
same  speed  and  flight  altitude  to  compensate  for  the  rolling  moment 
requires  a  greater  aileron  angle.  An  increase  in  flight  altitude  at  the 
very  same  true  speed  also  leads  to  this. 

Consequently,  to  compensate  for  the  rolling  moment  arising  in  a  damaged 
aircraft  the  aileron  travel  changes  according  to  speed,  altitude  and  normal 
load  factor. 

Fig.  3  depicts  aileron  angles  required  for  countering  rolling  moments  in 
creating  a  unit  normal  load  factor  of  a  damaged  aircraft  <5^  as  a  func¬ 
tion  of  Mach  number  and  flight  altitude. 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


19 


We  can  recommend  the  following  logic  scheme  for  analysis  and  evaluation  of  the 
possibility  of  continuing  a  flight  with  unusual  aircraft  behavior.  If  a  roll 
suddenly  appears  which  does  not  conform  to  the  position  of  the  ailerons 

(phenomenon) ,  then  an  increase  in  rolling  moment  with  an  increase  in  angle  of 
attack  (dominant  sign)  provides  grounds  for  concluding  damage  to  the  aircraft 
airfoil  (cause).  To  select  the  variant  of  further  actions  and  evaluate  the 
possibility  of  making  a  landing,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  in  advance  the 
precise  value  of  minimum  flight  speed  at  which  acceptable  lateral  stability 
and  controllability  characteristics  are  still  maintained.  A  final  decision  to 
land  can  be  developed  by  comparing  this  minimum  speed  with  the  value  of 
maximum  landing  speed,  limited  by  other  factors  (runway  length,  energy 
capacity  of  the  aircraft  braking  system,  and  so  on). 

A  damaged  aircraft  is  not  yet  a  lost  combat  machine,  but  the  struggle  for  its 
survival  demands  serious  professional  competence  and  high  moral  and  mental 
staunchness  of  the  pilot. 

COPYRIGHT:  "Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika" ,  1987. 


6904 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


20 


Flight  Safety  Service  Inspector’s  Work 

91440064g  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I  KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  30-31 

[Article  by  Col  V.  Grishchenkov  under  rubric  “The 
Leaders”:  “The  Inspector’s  Weighty  Word”] 

[Text]  Flights  were  coming  to  an  end  when  something 
unforeseen  occurred.  In  making  a  landing  approach  Maj 
V.  Lugin  shifted  the  landing  gear  cock  for  lowering.  The 
main  legs  locked,  but  the  front  leg  did  not  lower. 
Attempts  to  lower  it  by  the  emergency  method  were 
unsuccessful. 

This  occurred  during  a  phase  of  mastering  a  heavy 
missile-armed  aircraft  in  a  line  unit.  That  had  never 
before  happened  on  an  aircraft  of  that  type.  What  should 
be  done?  In  such  situations  OKB  [Experimental  Design 
Bureau]  specialists  recommend  landing  the  aircraft  with 
the  front  leg  not  lowered,  but  in  this  way  it  is  impossible 
to  avoid  damaging  the  aircraft.  Moreover  such  a  landing 
requires  a  pilot  to  have  special  proficiency,  but  did  Lugin 
have  enough  ability?  And  if  he  didn’t  cope  with  handling 
the  aircraft?  Then  a  serious  flying  incident  could  not  be 
avoided. 

Col  A.  Karpov,  senior  inspector-pilot  of  the  Air  Forces 
flight  safety  service  who  was  at  the  control  tower,  came 
to  the  crew’s  help.  Quickly  assessing  the  situation  and 
making  necessary  calculations,  he  advised  switching  off 
the  g-limiter  and  trying  to  lower  the  leg  by  creating  the 
maximum  permissible  g’s  for  an  aircraft  of  this  type. 

The  flight  operations  officer  gave  the  pilot  the  appropri¬ 
ate  command  and  the  aircraft  departed  for  a  second 
circuit.  The  front  landing  gear  leg  fell  into  place  when  the 
additional  load  factor  was  created  and  the  flight  ended 
safely.  Later  it  was  learned  that  the  precondition 
occurred  through  the  fault  of  IAS  [aviation  engineering 
service]  specialists. 

Col  Karpov  assumed  great  responsibility  and  proved  to 
be  up  to  the  mark.  Of  course  in  the  given  instance  the 
word  of  the  Air  Forces  inspector  had  special  weight,  but 
even  in  the  course  of  daily  combat  training  his  instruc¬ 
tions  on  organizing  flight  duty,  working  out  planning 
tables  and  keeping  flight  documentation  are  received  for 
strict  fulfillment  in  units  large  and  small. 

Inspectors  of  the  Air  Forces  central  staff  have  restless, 
interesting  and  very  responsible  jobs.  By  constantly 
studying  the  state  of  affairs  locally,  promptly  noting 
positive  experience  and  deficiencies,  and  demandingly 
evaluating  what  has  been  achieved,  they  mobilize  avia¬ 
tors  to  further  build  up  quality  indicators  in  mastering 
flying  techniques  and  in  the  tactical  employment  of 
aircraft;  they  strive  for  precise  fulfillment  of  the  require¬ 
ments  of  documents  governing  flight  operations;  and 
they  take  vigorous  steps  to  stop  violations  and  immedi¬ 
ately  remedy  the  deficiencies  uncovered.  In  order  to  be  a 


kind  of  impulse  of  initiative  and  of  direction  toward  a 
search  for  new  and  more  effective  ways  of  accomplishing 
the  missions  facing  those  being  inspected,  every  inspec¬ 
tor  must  set  an  example  of  principle,  an  innovative 
approach  to  the  job,  professional  competence  and  objec¬ 
tivity. 

Col  Karpov,  Honored  Military  Pilot  of  the  USSR,  per¬ 
forms  his  duties  with  a  maximum  output  of  effort  and 
with  supreme  responsibility.  He  was  one  of  the  first  in 
the  Air  Forces  to  master  a  third-generation  supersonic 
missile-armed  aircraft.  His  opinion  often  is  deciding  in 
matters  of  the  organization  and  methodology  of  flight 
training  in  Long-Range  Aviation  aircraft,  especially  for 
the  most  advanced  kinds  of  training.  He  is  heeded  at  all 
levels. 

The  mastery  and  combat  employment  of  new  aviation 
equipment  always  involves  many  difficulties.  It  was  also 
a  great  credit  to  Aleksandr  Nikolayevich  for  the  fact  that 
there  were  no  flying  incidents  over  a  ten-year  period  in 
the  aircraft  for  whom  Karpov  was  the  leading  pilot  in  the 
Air  Forces.  He  participated  in  practically  all  major 
exercises  of  recent  times  and  has  flown  some  4,000 
hours. 

What  is  the  important  factor  in  this  officer’s  work? 
Above  all  it  is  the  study  and  analysis  of  data  coming  from 
units  and  the  development  of  specific  suggestions  aimed 
at  successful  accomplishment  of  combat  training  mis¬ 
sions  and  prevention  of  flying  incidents.  While  he  is 
among  the  troops  Col  Karpov  delves  into  the  situation  in 
detail;  thoroughly  studies  mistakes  and  preconditions  for 
flying  incidents,  especially  the  correctness  of  their  clas¬ 
sification,  system  of  analysis  and  effectiveness  of  steps 
taken;  and  pays  attention  to  the  training  and  placement 
in  formation  of  young  flight  personnel,  the  status  of 
flight-methods  training  of  instructors,  and  conformity  of 
the  aviators’  training  level  to  the  complexity  of  missions 
being  accomplished.  The  experienced  pilot  holds  classes 
in  which  he  thoroughly  critiques  dangerous  precondi¬ 
tions  for  flying  incidents  and  offers  recommendations 
for  preventing  them. 

I  will  cite  the  following  example.  Operation  of  a  heavy 
missile-armed  aircraft  in  the  second  (unfavorable)  flight 
regime  characterized  by  low  speeds,  large  angles  of  attack 
and  a  decrease  in  aircraft  stability  presents  certain  diffi¬ 
culties  for  pilots.  In  order  to  understand  the  essence  of 
what  is  occurring  and  give  recommendations  to  flight 
personnel  Col  Karpov  obtained  authorization  from  the 
General  Designer  for  a  test  flight  with  an  Experimental 
Design  Bureau  test  pilot.  After  studying  the  aircraft’s 
behavior  at  minimum  speeds  the  inspector  held  classes 
with  the  pilots  in  which  he  explained  the  physical  essence 
of  what  was  occurring,  gave  recommendations  for  pre¬ 
cluding  instances  where  the  aircraft  entered  the  second 
regime  and,  most  important,  taught  them  in  training 
flights  the  proper  actions  with  an  unintentional  reduc¬ 
tion  in  speed  below  that  permitted  by  the  instructions. 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


21 


This  played  a  positive  role:  there  were  no  such  precon¬ 
ditions  bordering  on  flying  incidents  aboard  aircraft  of 
the  given  type  in  the  Air  Forces. 

The  analysis,  conclusions  and  instructions  of  represen¬ 
tative  of  the  higher  body  helps  aviators  perceive  mis¬ 
takes  more  clearly,  become  reoriented,  and  change  their 
work  style. 

While  he  was  in  one  of  the  units  Col  Karpov  learned  that 
young  aircraft  commanders  had  flown  rarely  in  the  past 
training  year.  It  is  common  knowledge  that  low  flying 
hours  and  large  interruptions  hamper  the  formation  of 
flying  skill  in  aviators  who  are  insufficiently  strong  in  the 
professional  sense  and  give  rise  to  a  number  of  typical 
mistakes.  People  in  the  unit  attempted  to  justify  all  this 
by  referring  to  a  campaign  for  accidentfree  flight  opera¬ 
tions.  The  recently  appointed  regimental  commander 
also  gave  other  reasons:  unfavorable  weather  conditions 
and  the  people’s  heavy  workload  from  various  additional 
assignments. 

Life  and  flying  experience  permitted  Col  Karpov  to 
determine  the  true  causes  of  omissions  in  the  organiza¬ 
tion  of  flight  training.  Based  on  the  fact  that  it  is 
impossible  to  create  even  an  appearance  of  high  results 
by  reducing  exactingness  and  simplifying  the  norms, 
Officer  Karpov  pointed  out  unused  reserves  to  the 
commander. 

The  regimental  commander  and  other  officer  leaders 
drew  the  proper  conclusion  that  today  it  is  impossible  to 
organize  combat  training  in  the  old  way;  one  must  look 
for  ways  of  intensifying  it,  reject  stereotypes  and  fight 
against  all  possible  indulgences  and  lack  of  grading 
objectivity.  At  the  present  moment  Aleksandr  Nikolaye¬ 
vich  is  keeping  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  regiment  under 
close  watch  and  the  situation  here  is  changing  for  the 
better. 

If  the  inspector  sees  that  resolution  of  specific  problems 
of  ensuring  flight  safety  goes  beyond  the  bounds  of  a 
commander’s  competence  he  makes  the  problems  known 
to  higher  chiefs  and  appropriate  steps  are  taken.  It  is 
another  matter  when  one  has  occasion  to  encounter  a 
conscious  infraction  of  flight  safety  measures  as  was  the 
case  in  the  regiment  headed  at  one  time  by  Lt  Col  V. 
Knyazev.  People  undertook  to  violate  requirements  of 
documents  governing  accidentfree  flight  operations  in 
pursuit  of  the  plan.  The  inspector  reported  the  state  of 
affairs  to  the  Air  Forces  command  authority,  the  regi¬ 
ment  was  prohibited  from  flying  and  Lt  Col  Knyazev 
was  relieved  of  his  position. 

In  working  with  pilots  and  trying  to  help  them  correct 
the  situation  Aleksandr  Nikolayevich  explains  mistakes 
and  infractions  calmly  and  in  detail.  He  considers  indus¬ 
triousness  and  honesty  to  be  among  the  chief  qualities. 
Being  a  quiet,  kind  person  by  nature,  he  becomes  strict 
and  irreconcilable  on  encountering  malicious  violators 
of  flying  laws  who  declaim  for  restructuring  in  words  but 


who  in  fact  do  not  give  up  old  habits.  For  example,  on 
learning  that  one  of  the  leaders  of  an  aviation  subunit 
was  inclined  to  use  alcohol,  Karpov  not  only  removed 
him  from  flying,  but  also  insisted  that  he  be  released 
from  the  Air  Forces  to  the  reserve. 

And  so  by  thoroughly  analyzing  the  state  of  affairs  in 
units  and  strictly  monitoring  precise  fulfillment  of  the 
rules  of  flight  operations,  Col  A.  Karpov,  senior  inspec¬ 
tor-pilot  of  the  Air  Forces  flight  safety  service,  stands  on 
guard  over  flying  laws  and  makes  a  substantial  contribu¬ 
tion  toward  an  improvement  in  combat  readiness  of  Air 
Forces  units  and  subunits  and  the  assurance  of  flight 
safety. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 

Flight  Safety  Tips  for  Technical  Maintenance 
Personnel 

91440064k  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  31-33 

[Article  by  Gds  Sr  Lt  A.  Mikhaylov,  senior  technician  of 
aircraft  periodic  technical  servicing  group,  under  rubric 
“Flight  Safety:  Experience,  Analysis,  Problems”:  “Check 
Seven  Times  (Discussion  of  the  Article  ‘The  Sky  Does 
Not  Forgive  Errors’)”] 

[Text]  I  was  prompted  to  take  part  in  the  discussion  of  Lt 
Col  V.  Antyufeyev’s  article  by  the  atmosphere  of  busi¬ 
nesslike  activeness  and  principled  exactingness  estab¬ 
lished  in  our  technical  maintenance  unit.  This  is  under¬ 
standable,  for  that  is  the  demand  of  the  time!  That  is  just 
how  the  question  was  posed  at  the  June  1987  CPSU 
Central  Committee  Plenum:  increase  each  person’s 
responsibility  for  the  state  of  affairs  in  his  own  work 
sector. 

Specific  changes  in  the  work  of  our  subunit’s  engineer¬ 
ing-technical  personnel  are  quite  obvious.  The  collective 
is  working  rhythmically  and  the  aviation  specialists’ 
technical  culture,  efficiency  and  discipline  noticeably 
improved.  Most  important,  however,  probably  is  the  fact 
that  the  attitude  toward  the  job  changed.  I  recall  how 
much  we  spoke  previously  about  quality  performance  of 
periodic  technical  servicing!  We  persuaded  and 
appealed,  but  we  sometimes  forgot  about  the  specialists 
themselves  and  their  working  conditions.  Now  it  is  a 
different  matter.  The  focus  of  attention  of  commanders, 
political  officers,  and  party  and  Komsomol  organiza¬ 
tions  is  on  the  people  and  their  interests,  concerns  and 
needs.  This  is  when  the  human  factor  genuinely  became 
a  powerful  motivator  of  the  collective’s  labor  achieve¬ 
ments. 

Our  priority  concern  is  operating  reliability  of  aircraft. 
Flight  safety  and  the  air  unit’s  combat  readiness  depend 
on  that  to  a  considerable  extent.  Very  high  demands  are 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


22 


placed  on  ensuring  operational  reliability.  These 
demands  are  generally  known.  Nonfulfillment  of  just  one 
of  them  leads  to  a  reduction  in  this  reliability,  which  is 
fraught  with  preconditions  for  flying  incidents. 

Many  aircraft  come  to  our  technical  maintenance  unit 
for  periodic  technical  servicing,  and  in  order  to  place 
them  in  operation  promptly  we  had  to  switch  over  to 
two-shift  working  conditions.  The  fact  is,  however,  that 
anything  can  happen  in  life.  Let  us  say  one  of  the 
aviation  specialists  got  sick,  left  on  TDY  or  went  on  a 
daily  detail.  In  order  not  to  get  shoved  out  of  the  rigid 
technological  schedule,  the  others  have  to  perform  an 
enormously  larger  amount  of  work  and  have  to  work 
both  for  themselves  and  for  the  temporarily  absent 
comrade.  Here  is  where  the  knowledge  of  related  opera¬ 
tions  and  innovation  came  in  handy  for  our  personnel. 

Precisely  adjusted  operation-by-operation  monitoring 
also  plays  an  important  role  in  improving  the  quality  of 
periodic  technical  servicing  and  of  flight  safety. 

What  else  is  noteworthy  in  our  periodic  technical  servic¬ 
ing  group?  You  sometimes  look  at  your  comrades  and 
admire  their  work.  Guards  warrant  officers  [praporsh- 
chik]  A.  Voronin,  A.  Aruyev  and  I.  Artemov  and  Gds  Pvt 
V.  Kulik  can  successfully  perform  periodic  technical 
servicing  from  many  route  charts,  inspect  various  assem¬ 
blies,  units  and  systems,  and  perform  diverse  installation 
and  dismantling  operations.  In  short,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  of  the  high  professional  expertise  and  firm  skills  of 
our  foremost  personnel.  They  are  able  to  organize  their 
work  so  that  it  is  useless  to  look  for  flaws.  But  that  is  the 
way  it  is  in  aviation:  it  is  better  to  check  everything  seven 
times  and  be  sure  of  precise  fulfillment  of  a  particular 
operation  so  as  later  to  be  sure  that  the  equipment  will 
not  let  the  pilot  down  in  the  air. 

I  could  name  many  more  of  my  colleagues  who  set 
examples  of  compliance  with  the  norms  of  technical 
culture  and  diligence,  but  let  us  think  in  a  new  way:  see 
each  person  behind  the  majority  and  draw  up  laggards  to 
the  level  of  the  leaders.  This  is  required  by  the  interests 
of  combat  readiness  and  flight  safety. 

As  with  any  other  combat  equipment,  an  aircraft  is  a 
collective  weapon.  The  blunder  or  carelessness  of  one 
specialist  threatens  serious  consequences.  It  is  very 
important  not  to  lose  sight  of  anyone  here,  just  as  we  did 
not. 

Young  mechanics  who  had  yet  to  completely  understand 
the  need  for  a  self-check  and  mutual  check  in  working  on 
the  equipment  were  given  a  graphic  lesson:  experienced 
specialists  showed  in  practice  where  laxity,  inattentive¬ 
ness  and  scorn  of  operation-by-operation  control  in 
working  on  the  equipment  could  lead.  Before  trying  out 
an  engine  on  an  aircraft  they  deliberately  did  not  cotter 
one  of  the  nuts  located  in  a  zone  of  increased  vibration. 
They  started  the  engine  and  the  nut  unscrewed  by  itself 
several  tens  of  seconds  later.  It  was  seen  that  this  lesson 


was  more  convincing  and  effective  for  the  young  special¬ 
ists  than  theoretical  discourse  and  calls  to  work  consci¬ 
entiously  and  not  allow  defects. 

The  “sore  spots”  and  operations  subject  to  mandatory 
control  are  determined  in  the  process  of  operating  avia¬ 
tion  equipment.  The  process  chart  precisely  reflects  who 
monitors  what  and  when.  It  remains  for  aviation  engi¬ 
neering  service  specialists  only  to  quickly  fulfill  the 
prescribed  points. 

It  has  become  the  rule  for  us  to  check  not  only  the  end 
result  of  work,  but  also  fulfillment  of  intermediate  oper¬ 
ations.  This  is  done  because  when  an  assembly  has  been 
put  together  it  is  already  impossible  to  find  out  whether 
or  not  components  have  been  installed  correctly.  Let  us 
say  a  mechanic  is  assembling  the  landing  gear.  If  he 
places  the  bearing  oil  seals  in  the  seat  the  wrong  way 
around  and  no  one  notices  this  the  bearing  can  fail  when 
the  aircraft  lands.  The  fact  is  that  when  the  wheel  is 
assembled  it  is  of  course  already  impossible  to  determine 
correctness  of  oil  seal  installation. 

Two-shift  work  requires  full  exertion  of  effort  from  each 
of  us.  It  is  common  knowledge  that  at  night  more 
thorough  operation-by-operation  control  is  necessary: 
fatigue  sets  in  faster  at  night,  vigilance  dulls  and  the 
absence  of  daylight  also  has  an  effect.  Under  such 
conditions  the  likelihood  of  errors  appearing  increases, 
which  in  turn  requires  a  more  careful  check  of  the  quality 
of  work  performed  on  aircraft. 

It  stands  to  reason  that  there  are  different  kinds  of 
control,  but  the  basis  of  the  flight  safety  campaign  is  not 
only  strict  compliance  with  the  processing  method,  but 
also  high  awareness,  conscientiousness,  composure  and 
discipline  of  aviation  specialists  and  an  intolerance  for 
any  kind  of  deficiencies.  These  are  the  qualities  which  we 
try  to  instil  in  subordinates  in  the  course  of  their  train¬ 
ing. 

I  would  like  to  mention  one  thing  more.  It  will  be  about 
the  technical  culture  of  aviation  specialists.  In  our  time  it 
is  seemingly  awkward  to  speak  about  cleanliness  at  the 
work  station.  This  should  go  without  saying,  but  it  has  to 
be  mentioned  because  there  are  still  specialists  who 
erroneously  assume  that  a  parallel  cannot  be  drawn 
between  technical  culture  and  esthetics  of  military  labor 
on  the  one  hand  and  matters  of  ensuring  flight  safety  on 
the  other.  If  we  think  well  about  it,  however,  it  will 
become  clear  to  everyone  that  there  is  a  very  close 
relationship  between  these  concepts.  It  is  common 
knowledge  that  where  there  is  dirt,  look  for  a  defect 
which  can  lead  to  serious  consequences.  An  aviation 
mechanic  who  is  able  to  rationally  organize  his  work 
station  and  lay  out  tools  and  inspection-test  gear  so  that 
they  are  always  at  hand  spends  enormously  less  time  on 
unnecessary  searches  for  the  required  device  or  instru¬ 
ment. 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


23 


It  is  a  real  pleasure,  for  example,  to  observe  how  Gds 
WO  A.  Voronin  and  Soviet  Army  Employee  I.  Zhilin 
work  on  the  equipment.  They  will  prepare  the  necessary 
tools  and  expendable  supplies  before  beginning  perfor¬ 
mance  of  operations  on  the  aircraft.  They  essentially  do 
not  make  a  single  superfluous  movement.  As  a  rule,  the 
quality  of  their  work  is  high. 

But  a  specialist  who  works  in  a  slipshod  manner,  as  they 
say,  is  immediately  apparent  in  the  collective.  He  is 
given  away  by  his  personal  lack  of  organization  and  the 
inability  or  lack  of  desire  to  strictly  regulate  his  work  on 
the  aircraft.  I  would  like  to  touch  on  the  following 
question  in  connection  with  this.  For  some  reason  the 
concept  of  high  technical  culture  is  associated  by  some 
only  with  detailed  technical  knowledge.  It  is  self-evident 
that  this  is  the  first  condition  in  working  on  modem 
aviation  equipment  and  the  motto  “An  engineer’s 
knowledge  for  every  technician”  is  not  a  fashion,  but  a 
demand  of  the  times.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more 
difficult  to  get  by  without  such  a  voluminous  store  of 
knowledge.  The  problem  is  posed  as  follows;  an  aircraft 
technician  not  only  has  to  know  the  design  of  the  aircraft 
and  engine  to  perfection,  but  also  have  sufficient  infor¬ 
mation  about  its  equipment  and  armament  and  know 
the  list  of  jobs  on  them,  i.e.,  the  technician  is  obligated  to 
be  a  specialist  of  a  broad  profile. 

I  have  had  more  than  one  occasion  to  observe  how 
knowledgeable  and  conscientious  specialists  suddenly 
became  culprits  of  preconditions  for  flying  incidents.  In 
fact  if  there  is  no  strict  sequence  or  specific  system  in 
your  actions  and  if  you  do  not  have  the  ability  for 
self-control,  no  one  ever  can  guarantee  you  against 
mistakes  leading  to  flying  incidents  and  preconditions 
therefor  even  if  you  were  a  Solomon. 

Unfortunately  slovenliness  and  lack  of  organization  in 
working  on  equipment  do  not  yet  always  receive  a  proper 
evaluation.  It  also  sometimes  happens  that  a  first-rate 
specialist  who  is  a  person  of  high  technical  culture  with 
detailed  knowledge  will  not  make  a  critical  comment  to 
a  comrade  who  by  his  attitude  toward  the  job  just 
out-and-out  insults  that  specialist’s  professional  pride. 
Such  tolerance,  it  seems  to  me,  generates  irresponsible 
specialists  through  whose  fault  preconditions  for  flying 
incidents  sometimes  arise. 

Our  technical  maintenance  unit  bears  the  title  of  out¬ 
standing.  On  joining  in  socialist  competition  under  the 
motto  “We  will  fulfill  resolutions  of  the  27th  CPSU 
Congress  and  celebrate  the  70th  anniversary  of  the  Great 
October  with  selfless  military  labor!”  we  do  not  intend  to 
surrender  the  positions  we  won.  One  of  the  main  points 
of  our  collective  socialist  pledges  is  to  ensure  accidentf- 
ree  flight  operations. 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 


Warsaw  Pact  Military  Doctrine,  Force  Reductions 

9 1440064 j  Moscow  A  VIATSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA  in 
Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  39-41 

[Article  by  Col  B.  Lytov,  candidate  of  historical  sciences, 
under  rubric  “70th  Anniversary  of  USSR  Armed 
Forces”:  “Doctrine  of  Peace  and  Security”] 

[Text]  It  was  January  1918,  the  time  when  the  Red  Army 
was  originating  and  the  working  masses  were  forming 
their  attitude  toward  it.  From  the  first  days  of  the  new 
Army’s  creation  simple  people  saw  it  as  their  defender. 
As  confirmation  of  this,  speaking  at  the  3d  All-Russian 
Congress  of  Soviets,  V.  I.  Lenin  quoted  the  words  of  an 
old  Finnish  woman  which  he  overheard  in  a  car  on  the 
Finnish  Railroad:  Now  one  doesn’t  have  to  fear  a  person 
with  a  gun,  since  when  she  met  him  in  the  forest  he  not 
only  didn’t  take  the  brushwood  from  her,  but  even  added 
more  and  helped  her  take  it  home. 

“When  I  heard  this,”  remarked  Vladimir  Ilich,  “I  said  to 
myself:  let  hundreds  of  newspapers,  no  matter  what  they 
are  called  there — socialist,  almost-socialist  and  so  on — 
and  let  hundreds  of  extremely  loud  voices  shout  at  us: 
‘dictators,’  ‘tyrants’  and  similar  words.  We  know  that  a 
different  voice  now  is  being  raised  among  the  popular 
masses.  They  are  saying  to  themselves  that  one  doesn’t 
have  to  fear  a  person  with  a  gun  because  he  is  defending 
the  workers  and  will  be  merciless  in  crushing  the  domi¬ 
nation  of  exploiters.” 

The  organization  and  technical  outfitting  of  the  Soviet 
Armed  Forces  have  changed  radically  over  the  past 
years.  The  children  and  grandchildren  of  those  who 
stormed  the  Winter  Palace  and  defended  the  socialist 
homeland  in  the  menacing  years  of  the  Civil  and  Great 
Patriotic  wars  now  are  in  their  formation.  But  the 
essence  of  the  Army  born  of  the  Great  October  Socialist 
Revolution  remains  the  same:  express  the  people’s  fun¬ 
damental  interests  and  stand  guard  over  the  peace  and 
labor  of  Soviet  citizens. 

Under  present-day  conditions  the  USSR  Armed  Forces 
are  a  reliable  bulwark  for  those  whom  history  has 
assigned  a  mission  of  exceptional  importance:  to  defend 
the  cause  of  peace  and  safeguard  mankind  against 
nuclear  catastrophe. 

Countries  of  socialism  act  as  the  principal  force  in  the 
campaign  for  peace  and  international  security.  The  eco¬ 
nomic  foundation  for  waging  unjust,  predatory  wars — 
private  ownership  of  the  means  of  production — has  been 
destroyed  forever  in  them  and  there  are  no  classes  or 
social  layers  interested  in  wars.  Socialism  and  peace  are 
indivisible. 

The  military  doctrine  of  socialist  states  adopted  at  a 
session  of  the  Political  Consultative  Committee  of  War¬ 
saw  Pact  Member  States  in  Berlin  in  May  of  this  year  is 
vivid  confirmation  of  the  genuinely  peaceable  nature  of 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


24 


their  politics.  The  open  proclamation  of  objectives  and 
tasks  in  the  military  area  by  countries  of  the  socialist 
community  and  parties  to  the  Treaty  was  taken  by  the 
world  public  as  the  aspiration  of  the  USSR  and  its  allies 
for  international  trust,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to 
form  an  all-encompassing  system  of  equal  security  for 
all. 

The  basis  of  the  military  doctrine  of  the  USSR  and  other 
socialist  states  is  a  new  political  thinking  which  permits 
realistically  seeing  the  contradictions  of  the  present-day 
world,  the  interrelationship  and  interdependence  of 
security  of  all  states,  and  their  common  responsibility  for 
mankind’s  future.  With  the  objective  of  preserving 
peace,  at  its  27th  congress  our  party  advanced  the  idea  of 
creating  an  all-encompassing  system  of  international 
security  and  spelled  out  the  strictly  defensive  nature  of 
Soviet  military  doctrine.  All  activities  of  other  socialist 
states  in  the  military  area  also  carry  bear  a  strictly 
defensive  character. 

It  was  reaffirmed  at  the  session  of  the  Political  Consul¬ 
tative  Committee  of  Warsaw  Pact  Member  States  that 
their  military  doctrine  bears  a  defensive  character  and 
proceeds  from  the  need  for  maintaining  a  balance  of 
military  forces  at  the  lowest  possible  level  and  the 
advisability  of  reducing  military  potentials  to  limits  of 
sufficiency  necessary  for  defense. 

That  approach  to  defining  objectives  and  tasks  in  the 
military  area  is  profoundly  realistic  and  genuinely  inno¬ 
vative. 

First  of  all,  the  military  doctrine  of  the  USSR  and  other 
socialist  states  reflects  concern  not  only  for  their  own 
security,  but  for  universal  security  as  well.  Thus  the 
age-long  egotism  inherent  to  countries  belonging  to 
antagonistic  formations  has  been  overcome.  The  nucle¬ 
ar-space  era  dictates  a  different  approach  to  ensuring 
security.  Comrade  M.  S.  Gorbachev  noted  that  under 
present-day  conditions  the  supreme  wisdom  does  not  lie 
in  being  concerned  exclusively  about  oneself,  especially 
to  the  detriment  of  another  party.  It  is  necessary  for 
everyone  to  feel  that  they  have  equal  security,  since  the 
fears  and  alarms  of  the  nuclear  age  give  rise  to  unpredic¬ 
tability  in  politics  and  in  specific  actions.  Based  on  this 
the  document  adopted  at  the  Political  Consultative 
Committee  session  states  that  socialist  states  do  not  lay 
claim  to  greater  security  than  other  countries,  but  also 
will  not  accept  lesser  security. 

Secondly,  Warsaw  Pact  countries  also  took  a  new 
approach  to  defining  the  essence  of  their  defensive 
measures.  Their  efforts  are  aimed  not  simply  at  creating 
an  effective  defense,  about  which  much  also  has  been 
said  in  the  past,  but  chiefly  at  the  prevention  of  world 
war.  That  approach  is  dictated  by  the  catastrophic  con¬ 
sequences  of  any  worldwide  armed  conflict  both  with  or 
without  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons.  The  document  states 
that  the  world  has  become  too  fragile  for  war  and  power 
politics  in  the  nuclear-space  era. 


Thirdly,  the  military  doctrine  of  socialist  states  also 
clearly  defines  the  main  ways  to  ensure  reliable  security: 
reducing  the  level  of  military  opposition,  stopping  the 
arms  race,  and  directing  funds  removed  from  military 
budgets  as  a  result  of  their  reduction  to  the  needs  of 
economic  and  social  development  of  their  own  states  and 
to  assist  liberated  countries.  All  this  reflects  the  excep¬ 
tional  humaneness  of  the  military  doctrine  of  the  USSR 
and  all  countries  of  socialism. 

As  noted  in  the  document  adopted  at  the  Political 
Consultative  Committee  session,  the  essence  of  this 
military  doctrine  is  that  countries  of  the  socialist  com¬ 
munity  never  will  be  first  to  begin  military  actions  nor 
will  they  be  first  to  employ  nuclear  weapons.  They  have 
no  territorial  claims  of  any  sort  on  other  states,  an  image 
representation  of  the  enemy  in  the  person  of  other 
countries  is  absolutely  alien  to  them,  and  they  are 
building  all  their  international  relations  on  the  basis  of 
principles  of  respect  for  independence,  national  sover¬ 
eignty,  nonuse  of  force  or  threat  of  force,  inviolability  of 
borders  and  territorial  integrity,  conflict  resolution  by 
peaceful  means,  nonintervention  in  internal  affairs,  legal 
equality,  and  other  principles  and  objectives  provided  by 
the  rules  of  international  law. 

The  military  doctrine  adopted  by  the  allied  socialist 
states  is  not  limited  to  proclaiming  their  political  objec¬ 
tives  and  tasks  or  declaring  their  love  of  peace.  Many 
assurances  of  a  desire  for  peace  also  are  found  in 
declarations  by  political  circles  of  capitalist  states.  The 
effectiveness  of  the  military  doctrine  of  the  USSR  and 
other  countries  of  the  socialist  community  lies  in  the  fact 
that  it  contains  specific  proposals  aimed  at  strengthening 
peace  and  international  security.  In  particular  it  is  pro¬ 
posed  to  totally  eliminate  nuclear  weapons,  not  allow  the 
arms  race  to  spread  to  outer  space,  ban  and  eliminate 
chemical  weapons  and  other  kinds  of  weapons  of  mass 
destruction,  reduce  armed  forces  and  armaments  to  a 
level  precluding  a  surprise  attack  and  the  capability  of 
conducting  offensive  operations,  and  provide  for  verifi¬ 
cation  of  disarmament  measures  using  all  accessible 
means  including  an  exchange  of  military  information 
and  on-site  inspections. 

The  military  doctrine  gives  great  attention  to  imple¬ 
menting  confidence-building  measures  among  countries 
belonging  to  different  military-political  alliances.  Among 
these  measures,  which  could  be  implemented  in  the  very 
immediate  future  on  the  basis  of  a  mutual  agreement,  are 
the  establishment  of  zones  free  of  nuclear  and  chemical 
weapons  and  zones  of  reduced  concentration  of  arms 
and  increased  trust;  rejection  of  the  use  of  military  force; 
and  pledges  to  maintain  peaceful  relations. 

With  a  growth  in  confidence  in  each  other  it  would  also 
be  possible  to  agree  on  taking  such  steps  as  eliminating 
military  bases  on  the  territories  of  other  states,  drawing 
troops  back  behind  national  borders,  mutually  removing 
the  most  dangerous  kinds  of  arms  from  a  zone  of 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


25 


immediate  contact  of  two  military  alliances,  and  reduc¬ 
ing  the  concentration  of  armed  forces  and  arms  in  this 
zone  to  an  agreed-upon  minimum  level. 

The  Warsaw  Pact  countries  propose  to  go  even  further 
than  these  important  but  still  partial  steps  for  ensuring 
international  security.  They  regard  the  continuing  split 
of  Europe  into  opposing  military  blocs  as  abnormal  and 
favor  the  simultaneous  dissolution  of  the  North  Atlantic 
Alliance  and  Warsaw  Pact,  and  elimination  of  their 
military  organizations  as  a  first  step.  Implementation  of 
this  proposal  would  lead  to  a  radical  normalization  of 
the  international  situation  and  a  strengthening  of  peace 
and  would  permit  realizing  in  fact  the  idea  of  creating  an 
all-encompassing  international  security  system 
advanced  by  the  27th  CPSU  Congress. 

That  is  the  political  essence  of  the  military  doctrine  of 
allied  socialist  states.  The  military-technical  aspect  of  the 
doctrine,  which  specifies  the  purpose  and  direction  of 
organizational  development  and  training  of  the  armed 
forces,  also  is  in  dialectical  unity  with  it. 

According  to  its  purpose  the  army  always  has  been 
considered  a  tool  for  implementing  state  policy  and  an 
instrument  for  making  war,  but  the  USSR  and  allied 
socialist  countries  believe  that  it  is  inadmissible  to  use 
the  military  path  for  resolving  existing  contradictions. 
They  intend  to  use  their  armed  forces  to  preserve  the 
peace  and  protect  the  socialist  achievements  of  their 
peoples. 

The  presently  existing  international  situation  and  the 
positive  trend  it  contains  also  determine  the  direction  of 
organizational  development  of  the  armed  forces  of 
socialist  states.  Under  conditions  where  the  world  situ¬ 
ation  remains  very  complex  and  strained,  they  are  being 
kept  at  that  level  which  would  allow  them  to  repel  any 
attack  from  without.  In  case  of  success  in  disarmament 
talks  with  NATO  countries  the  armed  forces  of  the  two 
opposing  military-political  groupings  can  undergo  seri¬ 
ous  reorganization.  Strategic  nuclear  forces  and  offen¬ 
sive  kinds  of  arms  can  be  reduced  and  removed  from 
their  order  of  battle  and  the  grouping  and  stationing  of 
troops  can  be  radically  changed.  For  example,  the  allied 
socialist  states  favor  a  50-percent  reduction  in  strategic 
offensive  arms  of  the  USSR  and  United  States  over  a 
five-year  period  and  talks  on  their  subsequent  reduc¬ 
tions.  Countries  of  socialism  propose  to  destroy  nuclear 
weapons  entirely  by  a  phased  reduction  in  nuclear  arms. 

It  is  proposed  to  reduce  conventional  arms  by  25  percent 
in  the  early  1990’s.  By  following  the  path  of  limiting  and 
reducing  nuclear  and  conventional  arms,  Warsaw  Pact 
and  NATO  countries  could  create  armed  forces  within 
the  framework  of  the  existing  military-political  alliances 
which  by  their  size,  order  of  battle  and  grouping  would 
be  capable  of  conducting  only  defensive  combat  actions. 
Thus  the  threat  of  unleashing  wars  or  major  armed 
conflicts  would  be  precluded. 


The  defensive  nature  of  the  military  doctrine  adopted  by 
Warsaw  Pact  member  states  also  specifies  a  new 
approach  to  troop  combat  training.  The  chief  factor  in 
training  army  and  navy  forces  today  consists  of  their 
retaliatory  defensive  actions  to  repel  enemy  aggression. 
They  train  for  combat  actions  to  defeat  an  aggressor 
vigorously  and  resolutely.  The  principle  of  teaching 
troops  what  will  be  necessary  in  a  combat  situation 
remains  the  basis  of  their  combat  training. 

Military  doctrine  also  places  high  demands  on  combat 
readiness  of  armed  forces.  The  growth  in  imperialism’s 
aggressiveness,  the  continuing  arms  race  and  the  absence 
of  actual  agreements  in  the  military  area  between  the 
USSR  and  the  United  States  and  other  NATO  countries 
make  the  world  situation  exceptionally  tense.  As  noted 
by  USSR  Minister  of  Defense  Army  Gen  D.  T.  Yazov, 
under  these  conditions  our  Armed  Forces  are  kept  in  a 
state  of  combat  readiness  sufficient  to  keep  from  being 
caught  unawares,  and  if  nevertheless  an  attack  is  made 
on  us,  they  will  give  the  aggressor  a  crushing  rebuff. 

That  is  the  essence  of  the  approach  by  the  USSR  and 
other  socialist  states  to  the  very  important  issues  of 
organizational  development  and  strengthening  of  the 
armed  forces. 

Promulgation  of  the  military  doctrine  by  Warsaw  Pact 
member  states  is  of  great  significance.  Glasnost  makes  it 
possible  for  peaceloving  forces  of  capitalist  countries  to 
compare  military  doctrines  of  the  USSR  and  United 
States  and  of  Warsaw  Pact  and  NATO  countries,  to 
campaign  against  the  aggressive  essence  of  the  politics  of 
imperialism,  and  to  consistently  defend  the  cause  of 
peace.  Adoption  of  the  military  doctrine  document  at  the 
Political  Consultative  Committee  session  also  is  impor¬ 
tant  for  further  cohesiveness  of  socialist  countries  on 
tested  principles  of  Marxism-Leninsm. 

In  fervently  approving  party  policy  and  the  document  on 
the  military  doctrine  of  Warsaw  Pact  member  states 
adopted  in  Berlin,  Armed  Forces  personnel  including 
military  aviators  realize  their  high  responsibility  for  the 
Motherland’s  security  and  the  Soviet  people’s  peaceful, 
creative  labor.  In  heading  toward  the  glorious  jubilee,  the 
70th  anniversary  of  the  USSR  Armed  Forces,  they  are 
constantly  improving  their  combat  proficiency,  strength¬ 
ening  efficiency,  order  and  discipline,  persistently  strug¬ 
gling  to  fulfill  their  socialist  pledges,  and  are  always 
ready  to  defend  peace  and  socialism.  Comrade  M.  S. 
Gorbachev  said  at  the  June  1987  CPSU  Central  Com¬ 
mittee  Plenum:  “I  firmly  declare  on  behalf  of  the  Polit¬ 
buro  and  Defense  Council  that  neither  the  party  nor  the 
people  should  have  any  doubts  as  to  the  ability  of  the 
USSR  Armed  Forces  to  defend  the  country.” 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


26 


Air  Defense  Penetration  Aids 

91440064k  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 
pp  46-47 

[Part  1  of  article  based  on  foreign  press  materials  by  Col 
(Res)  V.  Dubrov  under  rubric  “Weapons  of  Aggression 
and  Brigandage”:  “Means  and  Methods  of  Penetrating 
Air  Defense”] 

[Text]  The  term  “air  defense  penetration”  appeared  for 
the  first  time  in  U.S.  Air  Force  regulations  after  experi¬ 
ence  was  gained  in  combat  actions  in  the  sky  of  Vietnam. 
The  American  journal  ORDNANCE  wrote  that  the 
combination  of  air  defense  weapons  defending  Hanoi 
and  Haiphong  differed  from  all  those  previously  known. 
New  means  of  combating  aircraft  in  the  air  were  com¬ 
bined  with  old  ones  and  had  high  density  in  a  limited 
area.  Under  these  conditions  it  was  difficult  to  employ 
the  traditional  tactics  of  air  strike  forces  designed  for 
bypassing  danger  zones  and  the  procedures  for  evading 
antiaircraft  fire  over  the  target.  It  was  necessary  to 
penetrate  directly  head-on  to  the  strike  objective  inas¬ 
much  as  there  was  no  other  way.  This  active  method  of 
overcoming  air  defense  was  called  the  “penetration.” 

The  very  first  attempts  at  penetration  demonstrated  its 
negative  and  positive  aspects.  Foreign  military  special¬ 
ists  included  among  deficiencies  that  the  aircraft  were 
constantly  in  the  impact  zone  of  surface-to-air  missile 
systems  (or  of  AAA)  and  as  a  consequence  there  were 
heavy  losses.  An  advantage  was  considered  to  be  flying 
to  the  target  over  the  shortest  distance,  i.e.,  the  approach 
to  the  target  in  minimum  time.  This  gave  the  hope  of 
achieving  surprise  and  reducing  the  opposition  of  inter¬ 
ceptors,  which  had  a  relatively  slow  reaction  time  (com¬ 
pared  to  ground  air  defense  weapons)  when  taking  off 
from  a  base  airfield.  Thus  this  method  of  overcoming  air 
defense  was  employed  under  conditions  of  the  most 
active  opposition  of  enemy  air  defense  weapons. 

Inasmuch  as  the  procedures  of  “evasion”  and 
“avoidance”  in  a  zone  of  solid  air  defense  fire  produced 
no  effect,  maneuvering  too  could  no  longer  be  the  basic 
means  of  protection  for  strike  groups.  More  effective 
methods  of  combating  air  defense  were  needed.  The  first 
conclusion  was  obvious:  with  a  limited  arsenal  of  proce¬ 
dures  a  tactic  of  “fighting  fire  with  fire”  was  needed,  i.e., 
air-to-surface  weapons  should  be  used  that  were  specially 
designed  to  destroy  air  defense  targets.  Antiradar  mis¬ 
siles  such  as  the  Shrike  with  passive  homing  on  the  beam 
of  a  locked-on  radar  appeared  on  some  American  fighter- 
bombers  taking  part  in  the  air  aggression  in  Vietnam. 

The  first  experience  in  using  the  Shrike  antiradar  missile 
was  not  very  comforting,  but  experiments  continued 
under  combat  conditions.  It  was  necessary  to  solve  many 
problems  in  short  time  periods.  In  order  to  arrive  at  the 
attack  line  and  launch  the  antiradar  missile  it  was 
necessary  first  of  all  to  obtain  the  coordinates  (even  if 
only  approximate)  of  the  strike  objective — the  ground 


radar;  secondly,  to  maintain  parameters  of  the 
“standard”  maneuver  in  altitude  and  range  up  to  the 
target;  and  thirdly,  to  have  a  guarantee  of  the  invulner¬ 
ability  of  an  aircraft  forced  to  encroach  on  an  area  of 
aimed  ground  fire. 

Initially  the  American  antiradar  missile-carrying  aircraft 
worked  together  with  support  groups  which  included 
ELINT  aircraft  and  jammers  as  well  as  with  strike  groups 
(equipped  with  conventional  munitions),  which  used  the 
launches  and  bursts  of  the  Shrike  antiradar  missiles  as  a 
means  of  target  designation. 

Foreign  military  specialists  noted  that  updating  of  the 
penetration  aids  led  to  an  answering  reaction — a  swift 
improvement  in  the  air  defense  system.  Therefore  the 
number  of  aircraft  penetrating  to  the  target  did  not 
increase  and  combat  losses  of  U.S.  aviation  in  perform¬ 
ing  so-called  “strike  operations”  did  not  drop.  The 
numerous  support  groups  suffered  considerable  losses. 
This  made  it  necessary  to  combine  the  functions  of 
ELINT,  jamming  and  fire  engagement  of  air  defense 
weapons  in  one  special  aircraft.  The  program  for  creating 
such  an  aircraft  in  the  U.S.  Air  Force  was  called  Wild 
Weasel. 

The  first  Wild  Weasel  squadron  included  two-seat 
F-105F  aircraft  converted  from  F-105  fighter-bombers. 
In  1 970  they  were  replaced  by  the  F-4  Phantom,  which  is 
of  sad  repute  from  the  local  wars  in  Southeast  Asia  and 
the  Near  East  and  which  has  been  in  these  squadrons  up 
to  the  present  time  (they  were  designated  F-4G  after 
modernization).  To  identify  and  engage  air  defense 
weapons  crews  of  the  penetration  aircraft  acting  in  the 
interests  of  strike  groups  used  ELINT  gear,  a  warning  set, 
jammers,  chaff  dispensers,  and  antiradar  missiles  (the 
Shrike  and  later  the  Standard  ARM). 

One  of  the  features  of  penetration  tactics  consists  of 
acting  according  to  the  principle  of  “each  against  his  own 
target”  (primarily  single  attacks  by  antiradar  missile¬ 
carrying  aircraft)  within  rigid  time  frames  in  a  desig¬ 
nated  area.  Considerations  of  one’s  own  safety  and 
assurance  of  swift  entry  of  the  strike  group  into  the 
penetration  corridor  created  rather  difficult  conditions 
for  aircraft  crews,  especially  in  the  zone  of  unsuppressed 
air  defense.  The  workload  of  pilot  and  operator  involv¬ 
ing  the  ELINT,  ECM,  weapons  and  sighting  systems 
came  into  contradiction  with  the  mandatory  immediate 
reaction  to  frequent  situation  changes,  and  so  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  reducing  vulnerabilitiy  arose  acutely  for  Wild 
Weasel  subunits. 

The  journal  AIR  INTERNATIONAL  wrote  that  the  U.S. 
Air  Force  was  modernizing  the  forces  intended  for 
neutralizing  air  defense  weapons  with  consideration  of 
the  experience  of  the  wars  in  Vietnam  and  the  Near  East. 
The  basis  of  the  system  is  the  very  same  F-4G  refitted 
from  the  F-4E  (a  total  of  1 1 6  aircraft).  Special  equipment 
is  installed  in  containers  beneath  the  forward  fuselage  in 
place  of  the  Vulcan  cannon  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


27 


fin,  and  the  aircraft  has  52  additional  antennas.  In  flight 
the  navigator-operator  receives  data  on  a  target  location 
at  the  range  of  radar  line  of  sight.  A  “library”  of  threats, 
which  can  change  (on  the  ground)  after  new  reconnais¬ 
sance  data  are  received,  is  entered  in  the  on-board  digital 
computer. 

Plan  position  indicators,  panoramic  analysis  indicator 
(lower  hemisphere)  and  homing  system  indicator  are 
installed  in  the  aircraft’s  rear  cockpit.  Data  on  range  and 
azimuth  to  a  threat  target,  the  antiaircraft  batteries  and 
missile  systems  (after  an  emission  of  the  radars  included 
in  them  is  analyzed),  are  presented  on  the  plan  position 
indicator  (there  is  also  one  in  the  front  cockpit).  The 
highest  priority  threat  is  denoted  by  a  triangular  symbol. 
The  pilot’s  optical  sight  has  a  red  reticle  showing  the 
direction  to  a  threat  and  a  green  line  with  shifting 
crosshair  showing  the  aircraft’s  path.  The  pilot  can 
perform  instrument  bombing  (when  performing  a  mis¬ 
sion  as  a  fighter-bomber)  by  lining  up  both  crosshairs  (by 
maneuvering  the  aircraft).  The  crew  conducts  defensive 
aerial  combat  using  medium-range  Sparrow  AIM-7 
guided  missiles  and  short-range  Sidewinder  AIM-9L 
missiles.  An  active  jammer  as  well  as  a  built-in  passive 
jamming  device  are  used  to  defend  against  ground 
threats. 

The  APR-38  warning  receiver  is  used  to  neutralize  air 
defense  weapons  in  the  designated  area.  It  performs 
direction-finding  on  a  source  of  emission  in  a  zone  which 
the  aircraft  is  entering.  The  direction  to  it  lights  up  on 
the  indicator  and  the  digital  computer  connected  with 
the  indicator  identifies  the  type  of  emitter  based  on  data 
stored  in  memory  and  outputs  data  to  an  illuminated 
display.  After  the  emitter  to  be  neutralized  has  been 
selected  (automatically  or  manually)  the  ALQ-1 19  jam¬ 
mer,  which  uses  traveling  wave  tubes  covering  three 
bands,  begins  operating.  There  is  the  capability  of  put¬ 
ting  out  masking  noise  jamming  and  repeater  deception 
jamming,  and  there  are  antiradar  and  thermal  decoys 
fired  automatically  (after  receipt  of  a  signal  warning  of  a 
missile  launch)  or  manually  to  disrupt  the  attack  of 
enemy  interceptors  or  deflect  surface-to-air  missiles 
from  the  pursuit  trajectory. 

After  reading  the  heading  from  the  warning  receiver 
indicator  the  pilot  flies  in  the  indicated  direction.  The 
operator  superimposes  an  electronic  marker  on  the 
selected  radar;  then,  pressing  a  button  to  transmit  data  to 
the  missile,  he  inputs  data  on  direction  to  the  target  and 
its  emission  frequency.  After  radar  lock-on  and  launch 
the  missile  homing  head  antenna  (a  round  parabolic 
scanning  reflector)  determines  the  target  azimuth  and 
elevation.  A  series  of  pulses  being  received  is  modulated 
in  amplitude  and  if  the  target  is  not  in  an  equisignal 
direction  it  produces  an  error  signal  proportional  to  the 
amount  of  deviation  and  forms  control  commands  for 
automatic  guidance  of  the  antiradar  missile  to  the  target. 
An  influence  fuze  detonates  the  fragmentation  warhead 
above  the  target  (if  guidance  has  not  been  disrupted 
because  of  radar  switch-off). 


The  foreign  press  reports  that  the  Shrike  and  Standard 
ARM  antiradar  missiles  created  in  the  1960’s  are  to  be 
replaced  by  the  HARM  antiradar  missile.  Guided  weap¬ 
ons  for  air  defense  neutralization  which  were  tested  in 
local  wars  have  substantial  deficiencies,  among  which 
specialists  include  low  speed  (because  of  this  the  flight 
time  to  the  target  after  launch  is  lengthy),  limited 
destructive  capabilities,  poor  homing  head  selective 
capability,  and  unsatisfactory  reliability  (frequent  sys¬ 
tem  failures).  But  the  chief  deficiency  which  could  not  be 
overcome  during  combat  actions  is  considered  to  be  the 
short  range  of  permissible  launch  (14-16  km)  and  in 
connection  with  this  the  need  to  move  to  medium 
altitude  (2,500-3,500  m),  which  does  not  provide  for 
required  survivability  of  the  platform  aircraft.  In  addi¬ 
tion,  if  the  target  radar  ceased  operation  the  homing 
head  became  disoriented  after  the  missile’s  launch. 

A  more  powerful  motor  (smokeless  solid  fuel)  giving  the 
missile  greater  speed  and  flight  range  was  installed  in  the 
HARM  antiradar  missile  with  the  retention  of  weight 
and  geometric  characteristics  (weight  354  kg(f),  length 
4.2  m).  The  missile  has  a  passive  homing  head  with  a 
broad  working  frequency  band  for  engaging  various 
radars. 

The  ALQ-1 31  set — a  self-contained  device  uniting  a 
jammer,  ELINT  receiver,  digital  minicomputer  and  elec¬ 
tric  power  source — is  coming  to  replace  the  ALQ-1 19 
jammer  aboard  Wild  Weasel  aircraft.  The  journal  AVI¬ 
ATION  WEEK  notes  that  the  five  frequency  bands  of 
the  jammers  can  cover  the  frequency  range  of  all  existing 
air  defense  radars.  There  are  provisions  for  a  rebroadcast 
mode  to  disrupt  the  operation  of  an  enemy  radar  track¬ 
ing  the  aircraft  in  azimuth,  a  spot  noise  jamming  mode 
to  hamper  determination  of  the  aircraft’s  range  and 
speed,  and  a  repeater-pulse  jamming  mode.  A  computer 
joined  with  the  warning  receiver  by  design  participates 
in  the  latter  mode.  From  intercepted  signals  the  com¬ 
puter  forms  commands  for  time  delay,  kind  of  modula¬ 
tion,  power  and  frequency  of  repeater  jamming  to  be 
broadcast  by  the  transmitter,  which  creates  a  false  air¬ 
craft  marker  on  the  enemy  radar  screen. 

The  ALQ-1 31  is  housed  in  a  pod  and  is  also  included  in 
the  authorized  set  of  equipment  for  F- 1 5  fighter  aircraft. 

The  U.S.  Air  Force  has  been  developing  the  PLSS 
integrated  automated  system  which  should  permit  a 
continuous  search,  detection,  identification,  and  deter¬ 
mination  of  type  and  coordinates  of  ground  radars  as 
well  as  guide  attack  aircraft  (including  Wild  Weasel 
aircraft)  to  them  with  high  accuracy.  It  is  proposed  to  use 
the  TR-1  high-altitude  subsonic  reconnaissance  aircraft 
built  on  the  basis  of  the  familiar  U-2R  “airborne  spy”  in 
the  PLSS  system  as  an  ELINT  and  signal  relay  aircraft. 
Three  TR-1  aircraft  (the  air-based  echelon)  perform 
radio  intercept  from  duty  zones  with  on-board  equip¬ 
ment  and  transmit  data  to  a  ground  control  center,  where 
precise  coordinates  of  radars  which  have  begun  opera¬ 
tion  are  determined  by  the  triangulation  method.  The 


JPRS-UAC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


28 


high  flight  altitude  (15-20  km)  of  the  TR- 1  aircraft  allows 
extending  the  reconnaissance  information  field  up  to 
200  km  into  enemy  territory. 

Replacement  of  the  F-4G  Phantom  aircraft  by  the  more 
advanced  F-16  Wild  Weasel  aircraft  also  is  expected. 
Foreign  specialists  include  among  the  latter’s  advantages 
the  almost  two  times  less  radar  cross  section  (providing 
better  radar  camouflage  of  the  flight)  as  well  as  the  lesser 
thermal  emission  level,  leading  to  a  decrease  in  the 
aircraft’s  vulnerability  in  the  system  coverage  of  low- 
altitude  missile  systems  with  IR  guidance  or  from  the 
threat  of  attack  by  an  interceptor  equipped  with  short- 
range  heat-seaking  missiles.  The  higher  maneuverability 
of  the  F-16  aircraft  also  is  considered  a  positive  factor.  A 
new  receiver  with  antennas  located  in  pods  fastened  to 
the  panels  in  place  of  Sidewinder  air-to-air  missiles 
(provides  for  360  degree  intercept  of  signals)  will  be  used 
in  the  system  which  warns  that  the  aircraft  is  being 
irradiated.  ECM  equipment  is  accommodated  in  pods 
suspended  beneath  the  fuselage. 

And  so  efforts  of  the  Wild  Weasel  system’s  creators  are 
aimed  basically  at  reducing  aircraft  vulnerability.  The 
possibility  of  using  drones  (BPLA)  to  combat  surface-to- 
air  weapons  of  air  defense  is  being  examined  in  this 
plane. 

It  is  common  knowledge  that  drones  already  have  been 
used  under  combat  conditions  as  reconnaissance  craft 
and  target  designators.  Within  the  framework  of  the  new 
mission  the  search  should  end  not  simply  with  the 
transmission  of  data  to  a  control  point,  but  with  an 
attack  on  the  detected  target.  The  United  States  has 
developed  the  small  Pave  Tiger  expendable  drone  for 
destroying  electronic  emitters  which  are  part  of  surface- 
to-air  and  artillery  systems.  Its  airframe  (weight  1 1 5 
kg(f),  length  2.13  m,  wingspan  2.59  m)  is  made  of 
composition  materials,  which  provides  a  low  level  of 
reflection  of  radar  signals.  The  ground  launch  complex 
includes  a  device  holding  1 5  launch  containers  with  one 
drone  (wings  folded)  in  each,  power  generators  and  guide 
rail.  After  the  launch  signal  is  given  the  drone  moves  out 
along  the  rail,  the  wing  straightens  and  the  solid-propel¬ 
lent  booster  starts.  It  makes  the  flight  to  the  given  area  on 
its  own  according  to  the  programmed  route  at  a  speed  of 
1 85  km/hr.  When  the  drone  enters  the  radar  illumination 
zone  the  passive  heads  turns  in  the  radar’s  direction  and 
homing  occurs.  The  Pave  Tiger  has  no  communications 
with  the  control  point.  With  fuel  consumption  of  the 
piston  engine  with  four-bladed  propeller  of  3.9  liters  per 
hour,  there  is  enough  fuel  for  8-10  hours  of  flight. 
According  to  the  American  press,  if  a  lot  of  2,000  is 
made  the  cost  of  one  series-produced  expendable  drone 
will  be  around  $50,000. 

(To  be  concluded.) 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 


Publication  Data 

91440064m  Moscow  A  V1ATSIYA  1 KOSMONA  VTIKA 
in  Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87) 

[Text]  English  title:  AVIATION  AND  COSMONAU¬ 
TICS 

Russian  title:  AVIATSIYA  I  KOSMONAVTIKA 

Editor:  O.  A.  Nazarov 

Publishing  house:  Voyenizdat 

Place  of  publication:  Moscow 

Date  of  publication:  October  1987 

Signed  to  press:  2  September  1987 

COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

6904 


Articles  not  translated  from  AVIATSIYA  I 
KOSMONAVTIKA  No  10,  October  1987 

914400641  Moscow  A  VIA  TSIYA  I  KOSMONA  VTIKA  in 
Russian  No  10,  Oct  87  (signed  to  press  2  Sep  87)  p  48 

[Text]  Ukase  of  the  USSR  Supreme  Soviet  Presidium 
Conferring  Honorary  Titles  “Honored  Military  Pilot 
USSR”  and  “Honored  Military  Navigator  USSR”  on 
Pilots  and  Navigators  of  USSR  Armed  Forces  Aviation 
(p  3)  (Unattributed) 

Powerful  Tool  of  People’s  Sovereignty  (A.  Fedurin)(pp 
8-9) 

USSR-Syria:  Flight  to  Mir  Complex  (G.  Glabay)  (p  9) 

Herald  of  the  Space  Era  (V.  Gorkov)  (pp  10-11) 

Path  to  the  First  Launch  (G.  Durov,  N.  Narovlyanskiy) 
(PP  12-13) 

At  the  Start  of  the  Path  (A.  Zakharov)  (pp  13-14) 

Space  Scout  (G.  Smirnov)  (p  1 5) 

Pilot-Internationalist  (V.  Goloveshkin)  (pp  22-23) 

Constant  Readiness  (A.  Fatkhullin)  (pp  24-25; 

Brighter  than  a  Legend  (G.  Kuvitanov)  (pp  26-27) 

The  Main  Direction  (N.  Minakov,  V.  Spirin  et  al)  (pp 
28-29) 

Not  Resting  on  Laurels  (I.  Kalinichenko)  (pp  32-33) 
Strategy  of  Exploration  (V.  Dolgishev)  (pp  34-35) 


JPRS-U  AC-88-004 
28  April  1988 


29 


Vigilance  is  Our  Weapon  (F.  Seyranyan)  (pp  37-38)  COPYRIGHT:  “Aviatsiya  i  kosmonavtika”,  1987. 

What  Should  a  Seminar  Be  Like?  (P.  Fedorov)  (pp  40-4 1 )  6904 

Fearless  Red  Military  Pilots  (S.  Lisitskiy)  (pp  42-43) 

Computers  at  the  Service  of  Health  (Ye.  Spirin)  (p  44)  END 


