21  December  i960 


FOREIGN  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  MACHINE  TMNSIATION 
AND  INFORMATION  PROCESSING 


-  USSR  - 


Distribution  Unlimited 


Distributed  by; 


OFFICE  CF  TECHNICAL  SERVICES 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 
WASHII\5GTON  25^  D,  C. 

20000707  013 


U.  S7  JOINT  PUBLICATIONS  RESEARCH  SERVICE 
1636  CONNECTICUT  AVENUE,  N.  W, 
WASHINGTON  25,  D.  C. 


Reproduced  by  the 

CLEARINGHOUSE 
for  Federal  Scientific  &  Technical 
Information  Springfield  Va.  22151 


w  y rynT 'I  TTv  A 


Reproduced  From 
Best  Available  Copy 


¥ 


F  0  R  E  M  0  P  r 


J.!  1.1.5  .i->ubi;;,catlOi7,  >;a.s  prepared  ander  cor.t.ract 
oy  -d'K*  UMIaFli  S^iAKS  JGDIT  PUiiLICATTOKS 
’-W,  ,..,.1,  c-r.-rivlCi;;.  a  federal  QC’/erfmanr,  ovgxnl- 
'.....orj  C.i  fra." 3i'v ti OP, 

i'ieca.?  of  the  variou?  r.o'.'eri.'.uaent 

ClCpaj'  # 


t 


.m 


JERS :  641)-5 

cso:  3901-D/36 

FCREIGW  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  MACHINE  TRANSLATION 
AND  INFORMATION  PROCESSING 
-  USSR  - 
FOREWORD 

This  translation  series  presents  information  from  foreign- 
language  literature  on  developments  in  the  following  fields  of  lan¬ 
guage  data  processing.  Machine  translation  stud?'es;  questions  on 
st3ructural  linguistics,  phonological  theory,  investigation  of  mor¬ 
phological  models,  development  of  sjmtactic  structures  and  trans¬ 
form  analysis;  theory  cf  language  conimunication;  logical  and  lin¬ 
guistic  problems  of  constaructing  information  machines  and  informa¬ 
tion  languages;  logical  semantics;  mathematical  and  applied  lin¬ 
guistics;  automatic  programming;  organization,  storage  and  re¬ 
trieval  of  information;  automatic  indexing  and  abstracting;  char¬ 
acter  and  pattern  recognition;  automatic  speech  input;  documenta¬ 
tion,  etc.  The  series  is  published  as  an  aid  to  U,  S.  Government 
research. 

Previously  issued  JFRS  reports  on  this  subject  include; 

JPRS;  68,  241,  319,  355  ,  379,  387,  487,  621,  646,  662,  705,  729, 

863,  893,  925,  991,  992,  1006,  1029,  1130,  1131,  1132,  1133,  3225, 

3300,  3356,  3433,  3474,  3502,  3532,  3570,  3597,  3598,  3599,  3613, 
3629,  3731,  3758,  3796,  3797,  3948,  6094,  6135,  6152,  6236,  6239, 
6240  and  6347. 


Table 

Of  Contents 

^ge 

I. 

Conference  on  Speech  Statistics 

1 

II. 

On  Linguistic  Probability 

7 

III. 

Symposium  on  Problems  of  Speech  Discrimination 

15 

IV. 

On  the  Development  cf  Structural  and  Ifethematical 
Ifethods  of  language  Research 

18 

^  Q,  “• 


V 


I.  COHFERENGE  ON  SPEECH  SIIATISTICS 

following  is  a  translation  of  an  article  ty  V,  A. 

Uspenskiy  in  the  Russian-language  periodical  Voprosy 
yazykoz nanlya  (Problems  of  Linguistics );  Moscow^ 

No*  1,  1958,  pages  170-173^ 

Gibe  conference,  called  by  the  Speech  Section  of ^ the  Acoustic 
Commission  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  USSR  and  the  Leningrad  Uni¬ 
versity,  held,  from  1  through  h  October  1957  Leningrad,  was  de-' 
voted  to  the  subject  of  speech  statistics®  Participants  included 
representatives  of  the  Moscow  State  University,  KGPIiya,  the  Nil 
of  the  Ministry  of  the  Radio  Engineering  Industry,  the  Institutes 
of  Physiology  and  Linguistics  of  the  AS  USSR,  the  Laboratories  of 
Electronic  Computing  VINITI  of  the  AS  USSR,  the  A«  E«  Mozhayskiy 
Air  Force  Academy,  and  several  other  organizations® 

Ihe  conference  was  opened  with  an  infcrod.uction  by  L.  R« 
Zinder*  Attention  at  the  conference  was  focused  on  two  fxindamental 
problem  areas:  l)  Application  of  statistical  research  of  speech 
and  writing  for  solving  problems  raised  in  those  realms  of  con¬ 
temporary  technology  which  involve  in  one  way  or  another  the  stor¬ 
age,  treatment,  and  transmission  of  information,  and  2)  the  relation 
of  structural  and  statistical  methods  in  linguistics. 

The  report  "The  Meaning  of  Statistical  Research  for  Tech¬ 
nology"  was  given  by  L.  A.  Varshavskiy,  who  pointed  out  the  funda¬ 
mental  directions  in  the  study  of  speech,  the  development  of  which 
are  essential  for  telephony  (wire  and  wireless ) .  The  first  among 
such  directions  is  the  study  (including  statistical  study)  of  the 
physical  characteristics  of  sound  and  electrical  signals  which 
transmit  speech.  In  this  connection  it  is  expedient  to  develop 
the  general  theory  of  signals,  as  pointed  out  by  N.  A,  Zhelezov  in 
his  report,  "Power  Characteristics  of  Correction  In^e^^ls  of 
Elecin^ical  Signals,  in  Particular,  Speech  Signals. 

Another  problem  area,  pointed  out  by  L.  A»  Varshavskiy,  con¬ 
cerns  the  perception  of  speech  transmitted  tbrouC  a  communication 
channel.  Channel  quality  is  measured  by  its  articulation  which  in 
communications  engineering  is  the  percent  correct  perceptions  of 
sound  units  transmitted  through  the  channel.  To  determine  articu¬ 
lation,  special  sound  combinations  are  transmitted  ov^  the  chan 
nel.  When  tables  of  such  sound  combinations  are  compiled,  statis- 
tical  relations  must  be  accounted  for*  Eut  the  greatest  interest 
is  in  the  connections  between  the  articulations  of  sound  iinits  of 
different  orders:  separate  sounds,  syllables,  morphemes,  words, 
etc.  Here  the  deciding  role  is  played  by  the  effect  of  the 
ception  of  adjacent  sounds  on  the  perception  of  a  given  80^^^ 

This  effect  is  caused  by  the  probability  dependence  (correlation) 
occurring  between  neighboring  sounds. 


1 


The  report  of  L,  R,  Zirder,  "Linguistic  Probability^"  was 
devoted  to  the  study  of  such  correlation  between  neighboring  ele¬ 
ments  of  speech  (i.e,,  sounds  following  each  other,  words,  etc.). 

As  noted  in  the  report,  each  element  of  speech  carries  specific  in¬ 
formation  (in  many  Cases  a  great  deal)  on  the  element  immediately 
follovring  it.  Zero  order  linguistic  probabilities  (i.e,,  absolute 
probability  of  the  incidence  of  certain  elements),  as  a  rule,  do 
not  coincide  with  linguistic  probabilities  of  the  first  order  (con¬ 
ditional  probabilities  of  certain  elements  occurring  after  others). 
Zero  and  higher  order  linguistic  probabilities  are  divided  into 
lexical  (the  probability  of  occurrence  of  certain  lexemes),  gram¬ 
matical  (the  probability  of  occtirrence  of  certain  sound  units), 
and  sonic  (the  probability  of  occurrence  of  certain  sound  units). 
Linguistic  probabilities  have  a  significant  influence  on  perception 
and,  in  the  final  analysis,  on  understanding  of  speech  (this  refers 
in  a  larger  degree  to  grammatical  and  to  a  lesser  degree  to  gram¬ 
matical  and  to  a  lesser  degree  to  sonic  probabilities),  L,  R,  Zin- 
der's  report  was  accompanied  by  a  demonstration  of  three  tables  of 
first  order  sound  probabilities  for  the  Russian  language.  Tables 
which  were  prepared  on  the  basis  of  a  statistical  study  of  a  text 
of  approximately  90^000  phonemes  were  shown.  These  were  individual 
tables  showing  sound  combinations  within  words  and  at  the  j^ctures 
of  words,  and  there  was  a  summary  table, 

Ye..V,  Padxichevaya’s  report,  "Statistical  Study  of  Syllable 
Structure  (3ii  Connection  with  the  Use  of  Information  Theory  Meth¬ 
ods),"  was  devoted  to  the  comparative  analysis  of  phoneme  combina¬ 
tions  within  words  and  at  word  junctures.  In  this  reportei-'s  opin¬ 
ion,  only  phoneme  combinations  within  a  syllable  can  be  a  subject 
of  phonological  study;  combinations  at  syllable  junctures  is  more 
appropriately  the  consequence  of  word  formation.  It  is  nat\iral  to 
expect  tha,t  the  limitations  to  the  combining  capability  of  phonemes 
within  a  syllable  will  be  weaker  at  syllable  junctures.  At  the 
same  time,  as  this  reporter  showed  with  an  example  from  Spanish,  a 
simple  division  of  phoneme  combinations  into  possible  and  impossi¬ 
ble  ones  is  insufficient;  probability  concepts  lead  to  much  more 
satisfactory  results  (for  Russian), 

The  most  important  problems  of  those  enumerated  in  the  re¬ 
port  by  Lc  A,  Varshavskiy  concern  compression  for  the  most  effec¬ 
tive  use  of  communication  channels.  One  of  the  means  of  improving 
the  carrying  capacity  of  a  channel  is  the  shortening  of  the  time 
required  to  transmit  one  sound.  The  question  arises  as  to  what 
limit  a  sound  can  be  shortened.  As  M,  F«  Derkach  shewed  in  his 
repocts  "Statistical  Duration  of  Voiceless  Consonants  and  Their 
Comprehension"  and  "Statistics  of  Characteristic  Sound  Portions  of 
Vowels  in  Russian,"  the  acoustical  structure  of  sounds  is  non-uni¬ 
form  in  time.  Therefore,  if  from  a  time  interval  during  which  a 
sound  is  mads  a  smaller  interval  is  extracted,  comprehension  may 


be  lost.  Participants  at  the  conference  had  the  opportunity  of 
listening  to  a  tape  recording  of  the  syllable  ta  •which  was  arti¬ 
ficially  derived  from  the  syllable  sa  by  clipping  the  beginning 
of  the  sound  s_  (but  clipping  the  end  of  the  sound  s_  in  the  sylla¬ 
ble  as^  does  not  destroy  comprehension). 

A  mere  radical  way,  of  improving  the  transmission  capacity 
of  a  channel  would  be  the  extraction  of  the  minimum  information 
necessary  to  differentiate  units  of  speech  (phonemes ^  for  example) 
and  -transmission  of  only  this  minimum  inf ormation .  (The  leading 
impor-fcance  of  studies  to  determine  the  semantic  burden  of  speech 
■units ^  primarily  phonological  studies^  is  ob'viouso)  It  is  envis¬ 
aged  to  place  at  the  transmitting  end  of  the  communication  line  an 
analyzer  capable  of  differentiating  phonemes  and  transforming  them 
into  discre-te  signals,  and  to  ha-ve  at  the  receiving  end  a  synthe¬ 
sizer  capable  of  transforming  the  signals  received  into  sounds, 
fundamentally  more  complicated  is  the  construction  of  a  differenti¬ 
ator.  Che  of  the  possible  designs  of  such  a  unit  -would  be  a  de- 
■vice  capable  of  determining  the  phonetic  affiliation  of  a  sound  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  spectrogram. 

A, new  method,  differing  from  that  usually  applied  to  formant 
analysis,  -was  advanced  by  L.  A,  Chistovich  in  her  report  "Applica¬ 
tion  of  Statistical  Methods  to  Determination  of  Phonetic  Affilia¬ 
tion  of  an  Individual  Vowel  Sound."  She  declined  to  venture  into 
speebrograms  of  invariants ,  which  would  permit  exact  de -termination 
of  the  phonetic  affiliation  of  a  sound;  her  idea  is  that  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  phonetic  affiliation  of  so\md  can  be  answered  not  cate¬ 
gorically,  but  with  a  certain  probability.  Spectrogram  envelopes 
of  various  so-unds  spoken  by  different  persons  were  examined.  The 
envelopes  for  each  sound  (different  for  different  persons)  are 
averaged,  and  the  result  is  a  basic  curve  for  the  given  sound. 

This  basic  ctirve  is  considered  to  be  the  sigaal,  while  the  real 
envelope  (of  a  speaker)  is  considered  to  be  the  signal  disterted 
by  some  noise  introduced  by  the  speaker.  In  oruen  to  determine 
the  phonetic  affiliation  of  a  real  spoken  sound,  the  envelope  of 
its  spectrogram  is  taken  and  its  deviation  from  the  basic  curve 
is  determined.  Probabilities  are  calculated  of  whether  a  given ^ 
real  envelope  is  a  distortion  of  one  of  the  basic  curves  or,  which 
amounts  to  the  same  thing,  whether  a  given  real  sound  is  -iiie  sound 
a.  Of  u,  etc.  Chistovich’s  method  can  be  used  without  change  to 
determine  the  phonetic  affiliation  of  sounds  in  connected  speech, 
accounting  for  the  effect  on  their  comprehension  by  the  comprehen¬ 
sion  of  neighboring  sounds.  , 

In,  his  report,  "Use  of  Statistical  Methods  in  Experimental 
Phonetic  and  Psychological  S-tudy  of  Speech,"  V.  A.  Artempv  described 
the  work  being  conducted  at  the  laboratory  of  Experimental  Pho¬ 
netics  of  the  MGPIKa, 


-  3  - 


Highly  important  in  telephony  (wire  and  wireless)  is  the 
statistical  study  of  writing,  especially  calculation  of  the  en¬ 
tropy  of  the  distribution  of  letter  combinations o  As  described  in 
their  report,  "Statistics  of  Three -Letter  Combinations  in  Russian 
Printed  Te:st, "  by  V.  A«  Garmash  and  Do  S«  Lebedev,  the  Laboratory 
of  the  AS  USSR  for  the  solution  of  scientific  problems  in  wire  com¬ 
munications  computed  the  frequency  of  three -letter  combinations  in 
a  portion  of  text  from  Tolstoy’s  War  and  Peace,,  The  length  of  the 
text  was  30,000  letters  (the  spaces  beWeen  words  were  counted  as 
letters  and  were  designated  by  hyphens).  Frequencies  of  several 
combinations  were  given  in  the  report,  Kie  most  frequent  were  com¬ 
binations  of  "-  i  (frequency  82  x  10"^)  and  "-  ne"  (frequency 
71  X  10"^),  Calculation  of  the  corresponding  entropy  shovred  that 
for  suitable  coding  of  three -letter  combinations  the  quantity  of 
text  can  be  decreased  by  about  5/3  times. 

The  role  of  statistical  methods  in  linguistics  is  not  deter¬ 
mined  exclusively  by  the  requirements  of  technical  applications. 

In  the  report  "Relation  of  Structural  and  Statistical  Methods  in 
Linguistics"  I,  lo  Revzin  pointed  out  that  it  would  be  q\iite  errone¬ 
ous  to  underestimate  the  value  of  probability  and  statistical  con¬ 
cepts  for  the  development  of  linguistic  theory  itself  (if  only,  in 
the  speaker’s  opinion,  because  the  structirre  of  language,  as  a  code, 
is  greatly  burdened  with  language  redundancy.;  this  redundancy  is 
imposed  by  the  necessity  for  speech  to  be  resistant  to  noise).  As 
Revzin  pointed  out,  the  usual  linguistic  methods  must  be  comple¬ 
mented  by  statistical  ones. 

In  the  report  "Sequential  and  Functional  Relations  of  the 
Vietnamese  Verb,"  by  Yu,  K,  Lekomtsev,  it  was  sho's-m  that  in  Viet¬ 
namese,  after  segregating  certain  full  verbs,  auxiliary  verbs  can 
be  identified  on  the  basis  of  purely  statistical  counts  of  their 
combinations  with  full  verbs. 

Statistical  methods  are  also  successfully  applied  in  achiev¬ 
ing  new  linguistic  advances.  For  examfple,  I,  A,  Mel’chuk  proved  in 
hi* a  report  "Application  of  Statistics  to  the  Rroblem  of  the  Cate¬ 
gory  of  Gender  in  French  and  Spanish"  that  in  French  the  grammati¬ 
cal  category  of  gender  is  formally  expressed  by  the  noun  ending. 

The  author  offered  the  following  statistical  criteria  for  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  category  of  gender:  the  category  of  gender  is  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  given  language  if  there  are  rules,  not  too  many  (r>ot 
exceeding,  let  us  say,  the  number  of  similar  rules  in  Spanish,  where 
the  expression  of  gender  is  usually  not  subject  to  doubt),  which 
permit  recognition  of  gender  by  noun  endings  and  encompassing  no 
less  than  of  the  nouns  of  the  language  (these  rules  include 
over  S&fo  of  the  nouns  in  Spanish), 

As  noted  at  the  conference,  statistics  can  be  used  in  text- 
olo^  to  determine  authorship. 


In  the  repcrt,  "Erobability  Determination  of  Linguistic  Time 
(In  Connection  With  the  Problem  of  Using  Statistical  Methods  in 
Comparative -His tcarical  Linguistics),"  VyaCho  Vs,  Ivanov  demonstrated 
the  possibility  of  using  statistical  methods  in  internal  reconstruc¬ 
tion,  Analyzing  the  state  of  a  language  at  a  given  moment  it  is 
possible  to  establish  the  direction  of  linguistic  time.  For^  exam¬ 
ple,  linguistic  units  frequently  occurring  in  texts  have  the  ten¬ 
dency  of  occurring  in  subsequent  states  of  the  language  if  their 
degree  of  isolation  in  the  system  is  slight j  however,  if  these  fre¬ 
quent  units  have  a  high  degree  of  isolation,  then  they  are  charac¬ 
teristic  of  preceding  states.  Frequency  of  occm'rence  and  degree 
of  isolation  are  determined  statistically.  Another  method  of  re¬ 
construction  and  prediction  is  connected  with  statistical  study  of 
linguistic  styles.  The  kinship  of  languages  is  most  reliably  de- 
termined  in  terms  of  isomorphism  of  the  systems  being  reconstructed. 
With  reference  to  coincidence  counts  frequently  used  to  establish 
the  degree  of  kinship  between  languages,  as  the  reporter  pointed 
out,  a  rigorous  probability  analysis  is  needed  (since  the  proba- 
biliiy  of  random  coincidence  can  be  high,  but  meaningless). 

I.  I,  Revzin  pointed  out  in  his  report  the  need  to  develop 
the  special  branch  of  linguistics  —  statistical  linguistics.  Re¬ 
lations  have  already  been  found  in  statistical  linguistics  for  such 
values  as;  word  frequency,  word  rank  (sequential  number  in  fre¬ 
quency  dictionary),  word  length,  etc,  which  shed  light  on  the  theo¬ 
retical-informational  nature  of  language  as  a  code.  This  subject 
was  covered  by  R.  G,  Piotrovskiy  in  his  report  "Certain  Problems 
in  the  Statistical  Study  of  Lexical  Groups 

I.  I.  Revzin  explained  in  his  report  the  two-sided  character 
of  the  relation  between  structural  and  statistical  methods.  Sta¬ 
tistics  not  only  helps  to  better  understand  the  structure  of  a  lan¬ 
guage,  but  the  vinits  themselves  which  are  counted  require  an  accu¬ 
rate  structural  determination.  Thus,  in  the  author’s  opinion,  a 
deficiency  in  glotto -chronology  is  the  lack  of  a  precise  determina¬ 
tion  of  cognate  words.  (V.  V.  Ivanov  indicated  in  his  report  that 
there  was  not  enou^  motivation  In  even  the  selection  of  the  basic 
glossary.)  It  is  evident  that  statistical  study  of  syllable  struc¬ 
ture  cannot  be  done  without  a  precise  definition  of  the  term  sylla¬ 
ble"  (in  the  first  part  of  her  report  E,  V,  Paducheva  gave  such  a 
definition  for  a  Spanish  syllable,  which,  apparently,  makes  it 
possible  to  divide  a  word  precisely  into  syllables).  The  impor¬ 
tance  of  structural  categories  is  revealed  in  statistical  studies, 
which  have  direct  practical  application.  In  order  to  establish  the 
optimum  rules  for  machine  translation,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a 
statistical  study  of  the  languages  of  the  individual  sciences.  In 
the  report  "The  Statistical  Vocabulary  of  Russian  Mathematical 
Texts,"  I,  A,  Mel’chuk,  T,  H.  Moloshnaya,  A.  L.  Shumilina,  Z,  M. 
Volotskaya  and  I,  N,  Shelimova  presented  the  results  of  a  statisti¬ 
cal  study  of  the  language  of  mathematical  literature.  In  the  study 


-  5  - 


it  was  necessary  to  define  precisely  such  concepts  as  ”s3mtagm," 
"syntagm  type,”  "word  relations  in  a  sentence,”  etc. 

Without  doubt,  this  Leningrad  .conference  was  extremely  im¬ 
portant  and  not  limited  to  the  problems  indicated  in  its  title. 

TiiTO  situations  were  clearly  delineated  at  the  conference, 

1,  The  penetration  of  mathematical,  particularly  statisti¬ 
cal,  methods  into  linguistics  is  clearly  fruitful.  These  methods 
can  play  a  very  important,  though  subordinate,  role  in  the  solution 
of  linguistic  problems.  Complete  formalization  of  a  real  language 
according  to  some  mathematical  system,  apparently,  can  never  be 
achieved;  hcx-rever,  there  is  a  possibility  of  some  approximate  for¬ 
malizations  of  a  real  language.  The  deviations  betoeen  the  real 
language  and  the  approximation  must  be  evaluated  statistically, 

2,  Linguistic  studies  are  acquiring  ever  greater  practical 
meaning,  net  limited,  as  earlier,  to  school  grammars  and  ortho¬ 
graphic  rules .  This  does  not  mean  that  linguistic  study  is  losing 
its  theo3.'’etical  profile.  On  the  contrary,  with  the  development  of 
technology  it  happens  that  the  finest  theoretical  constmetions  are 
the  mest  impertant  in  application.  The  status  of  matters  in  lin¬ 
guistics  in  this  regard  is  comparable  to  that  in  mathematics,  where 
theoretical  offshoots  (such  as  mathematical  logic )  have  recently 
acquired  special  importance  in  application. 

Especially  rewarding  was  the  variety  of  specializations  rep¬ 
resented  at  the  conference,  from  radio  engineering  to  physiology. 
The  conference  demonstrated  the  necessity  and  further  coordination 
of  the  work  of  the  representatives  of  various  sciences  in  the  realm 
of  applied  linguistics. 


^  II,  ON  LfflGUISTIC  mOBABILITY 

following  is  a  translation  of  an  article  by  L,  R, 

Zinder  in  the  Russian-language  periodical  Voprosy 

yazykoznaniya  (Problems  of  Linguistics Moscow, 

Ho.  2,  1958,  pages  IZI-I23J 

/note;  Superscribed  numbers  refer  to  notes  appended  to  this 
article^ 

To  know  a  language  means  to  have  in  one’s  memory  its  words 
and  its  grammatical  models  as  determined  by  its  grammatical  struc¬ 
ture.  Words  are  retained  in  the  memory  as  sound  images,  while 
literate  people  retain  them  in  the  form  of  visual  images.  The  lat¬ 
ter  are  correlated  with  sound  images  if  we  are  dealing  with  lan¬ 
guages  written  with  letters,  or  are  not  correlated  with  them  if 
dealing  with  languages  written  with  hieroglyphics.  The  sound  as¬ 
pect  of  individual  words  consists  of  a  certain  number  of  repeat¬ 
ing  elemerrbs  in  various  combinations.  These  elements  are  called 
the  sounds  of  speech  or  phonemes,  and  in  each  language  comprise  a 
unique  system. 

Since  individual  words  can  consist  of  various  numbers  of 
phonemes,  sometimes  a  large  number  of  them,  and  though  limited  in 
every  language^  the  comb inability  of  phonemes  is  still  quite  large, 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  words  can  be  formed  in  a  language  from  a 
few  dozen  phonemes .  The  same  can  be  said  of  the  written  form  of 
a  language  and  its  system  of  letters, 

'  Grammatical  models,  including  not  only  models  of  sentences, 
word  combinations,  and  word  changes,  but  also  word  facmation  models 
do  not  exist  in  language  separate  from  words;  they  exist  in  some 
form  of  word  (i.e,,  in  the  variations  of  their  sound  patterns),  in 
combination  with  so-called  "auxiliary"  words  (prepositions,  con¬ 
junctions,  etc.),  or  in  some  arrangement  of  words j  Furthermore, 
grammatical  models  are  abstracted  from  words  in  language  and  exist 
in  the  foi'm  of  rules  somewhat  independent  of  words.  Correspond¬ 
ingly,  thc;y  are  retained  in  the  memory  in  an  abstracted,  "sche¬ 
matic"  form. 

Perception  or  understanding^  of  speech  consists  of  percep¬ 
tion  of  sound  signals  in  oral  speech  or  visual  signals  in  the  case 
of  vrritten  matter  and  their  identification  with  the  sound  or  visual 
word  images  reposing  in  the  memory, 3  The  richer  the  memory  of  an 
auditor  in  such  images,  the  more  rapid  and  easier  his  comprehension 
of  speech.  An  individual’s  active  vocabulary,  tlmt  is,  the  number 
of  words  used  by  him,  is  relatively  small.  The  number  hardly  ex¬ 
ceeds  IC^  cf  the  words  in  a  given  language  (at  least  of  the  highly 
developed  languages).  An  individual’s  passive  vocabulary,  i.e,, 
the  number  of  words  the  meanings  of  which  are  known,  is  considera¬ 
bly  larger  than  the  active  vocabulary,  but  even  this  fund  of  words 
is  undoubtedly  far  from  all  of  the  words  in  the  language,^ 

-  7  - 


It  should  he  noted  that  because  of  word  formation  patterns 
in  the  memory  there  are  more  "understandable"  words  in  the  memory 
than  words#  For_example,  the  meaning  on  first  hearing  of  the  word 
"Miolodil-nik"  /refrigerator^  becomes  clear  from  the  suffix  -il-nik 
(model;  "kipyatil’nik"  /kettle/) <>  The  approximate  meaning  of  the 
word  "vertolet"  /helicopter/  is  recognized  from  the  model  "samolet" 
/airplane/,  etc.  A  certain  number  of  unlcnCTra  words,  therefore,  can 
be  deciphered  by  a  hearer.  Ecwever,  in  speech  words  occxir  which 
remain,  not  tinderstoodo  The  development  of  an  individual’s  vocabu¬ 
lary  necessarily  passes  through  the  stage  of  conversion  of  unknown 
words  into  known  words. 

Ail  of  the  discussion  above  permits  us  to  distinguish  be¬ 
tween  perception  and  understanding.  The  former  consists  of  recog¬ 
nizing  the  sound  image  of  a  word,  the  latter  consists  of  connecting 
this  imjage  with  meaning.  Perception,  as  we  have  seen,  precedes 
understanding . 

The  possibility  of  perceiving  individual  words  (but  by  no 
means  speech  as  a  whole)  without  understanding  them  resiilts  from 
the  fact  that  there  reposes  in  the  memory  of  the  hearer,  abstracted 
from  the  words,  system  of  sound  elements  (phonemes)  of  the  language 
The  recognition  of  the  sound  image  of  a  word  occurs  through  these 
elements . 

The  distinction  between  perception  and  understanding  serves 
as  the  basis  for  the  long-used  system  of  syllabic  articulation  in 
telephony  in  which  meaningless  syllables,  the  perception  of  which 
as  proved  in  practice  are  not  subject  to  any  doubt,  are  used  to 
test  communications  lines.  Further,  despite  the  fact  that  under¬ 
standing  is  excluded  here,  the  perception  of  sounds  (phonemes )  com¬ 
prising  such  sound  combinations,  is  substantia3.1y  different  from 
perception  of  any  other  sounds  in  nature ,5  This  can  be  explained 
by  the  fact  that  the  composition  of  language  phonem.es,  which  inde¬ 
pendently  do  not  have  meaning,  in  the  final  analysis  is  determined 
by  the  meaningful  relations  existing  in  the  given  language.  There¬ 
fore  we  can  say  that  although  perception  of  speecxi  sounds,  pho¬ 
nemes,  and  their  combinations  is  possible  without  understanding, 
the  two  are  connected. 

Understanding  noticeably  affects  perception,  makes  it  easier 
and  more  likely  for  the  hearer.  This  capability  of  understanding 
to  give  additional  information  on  the  m;aterial  being  transmitted 
(whether  a  sentence,  word,  or  morpheme),  together  with  the  proba¬ 
bility  limitations  in  the  language,  determine  what  in  information 
theory  is  called  "redundancy,"®  Redundancy,  as  M,  P.  Dolukhanov 
writes,  "shows  the  relative  qxiantity  of  excess  information,  which 
is  determined  by  the  structure  of  the  language  and  is  known  on  the 
receiving  end  from  statistical  data,"’^ 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  general  redundancy  is  the  same  as 
the  "psychological  factor"  or  "guess  factor,"  which  was  spoken  of 


earlier  in  telephony .2,  Seeking  data  on  "pvire  perception"  during 
aco\xstic  testing  an  effort  was  made  to  exclude  this  factor,  and 
this  was  the  reason  for  using  meaningless  sound  combinations o  In¬ 
formation  theory,  consequently,  has  not  discovered  the  phenomenon 
itself,  but  it  first  defined  its  essence  and  second  provided  a 
unit  for  measuring  it. 

It  is  perfectly  obvious  that  measurement  of  the  effect  of 
the  psychological  factor  is  impossible,  because  it  is  a  subjective 
factor.  An  individual's  ability  to  guess  depends  upon  his  educa¬ 
tion,  psychic  state,  degree  of  fatigue,  etc.  However,  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  guessing  is  determined  objectively  by  regularities  in¬ 
herent  in  a  given  language, 

Ihe  quantity  of  redundant  informtion  which  facilitates 
guessing,  and  thereby  understanding  and  perception  of  speech,  is 
determined  by  the  degree  of  probability  of  redundancy  in  the  given 
language. 

Hrcbability  limitations  characterizing  a  language  are  con¬ 
veniently  called  the  linguistic  probability®  This  term  encompasses 
a  variety  of  phenomena:  the  probability  in  speech  of  individual 
elements  (words  phonemes ) ,  the  probability  in  speech  of  grammatical 
models;  the  probability  of  sound  combinations  and  word  combina¬ 
tions;  in  other  wcrds  the  probability  of  certain  sounds  following 
other  sounds,  and  certain  words  following  certain  others.  All  of 
this  is  evident  to  one  degree  or  another  in  the  so-called  statisti¬ 
cal  structure  of  the  language. 

The  probability  of  word  combination  is  subject  to  two  dif¬ 
ferent  regularities;  consequently  we  can  speak  of  lexical  and  gram¬ 
matical  probabilities  of  word  combinations.  Lexical  probability 
concerns  the  combination  of  words  depending  on  their  meaning.  This 
dependence,  strictly  speaking,  is  not  linguistic;  it  is  determined 
objectively,  by  social  conditions,  and  is  therefore  quite  variable 
both  geographically  and  in  time.  For  example,  the  word  combination 
"sidet*  na  kryshe"  fitting  on  the  roo^  under  conditions  of  life 
in  the  European  part  of  the  USSR  is  immeasurably  less  ^obable  than 
the  combination  "sidet*  v  sadu"  /pitting  in  the  garden/;  in  central 
Asia,  however,  the  probability  of  the  first  combination  increases 
considerably.  In  the  same  manner  the  word  combination  "steklyan- 
naya  skovorodka"  /glass  skilletj  was  almost  improbable  twenty  years 
ago,  but  now  it  is  used  quite  widely,®  Thus,  lexical  probability 
is  a  purely  statistical  regularity  independent  of  the  grammatical 
formation  of  the  language, 

Grammatical  probability  can  be  of  two  types.  The  first  type 
is  the  probability  of  a  certain  part  of  speech  following  a  certain 
word;  the  second  is  the  probability  of  a  certain  grammatical  form 
following  a  given  grammatical  form.  The  first  type  is  especially 
important  in  langxiages  with  rigid  word  order  (English,  for  exam¬ 
ple),  in  which  a  purely  grammatical  regularity,  a  definite  gram¬ 
matical  rule,  operates  in  this  fashion.  It  also  plays  a  certain 


"  9  - 


role  in  languages  having  less  rigid  word  order  Russian,  for  exam¬ 
ple).  Thus,,  the  combination  "kholodnaya  ziira"  ^old  wintei/,  in 
which  the  noun  directly  follovrs  its  modifierJLs  more  probable  than 
the  word  sequence  "kholodnaya  nynche  zima"  /cold  winter  new/,,  where 
th*  noun  and  the  modifier  are  separated  by  a  third  word,  the  ad¬ 
verb.  The  probability  in  this  case  is  determined  not  only  gram¬ 
matically  but  also  statisticaU.y« 

The  second  type  of  grammatical  probability  is  especially 
important  in  languages  having  a  developed  flexional  system  (Rus¬ 
sian,  fer  example)  in  which  rules  of  agreement  and  government  de¬ 
termine  the  occurrence  of  appropriate  grammatical  forms.  In  the 
case  of  agreement,  a  purely  grammatical  rule  operates :  the  word 
"kholcdnaya"  //j'ld/^  can  only  be  followed  by  a  singular  feminine 
nominative.  In  the  case  of  government,  statistical  rules  can  also 
appear  if  government  oscillates,  as  a  rule  the  words  "ne  chital" 
/did  not  read/  will  be  follcvxed  by  the  genitive  ("ne  chital  knigi" 
/did  not  read  a  bool/),  but  the  accusative  ("ne  chital  knigu")  is 
not  impossible. 

The  quantity  of  redundant  Information  resulting  from  gram¬ 
matical  probability  is  in  general  very  large,  especially  in  cases 
in  which  we  deal  with  agreement,  and  partly  also  with  government. 
Each  of  the  words  in  agreement  carries  information  concerning  the 
grammatic  form  of  the  other  word,  that  is,  information  on  the  gram¬ 
matical  model  of  toe  entire  combination,  *It  is  sufficient  to  hear 
the  word  "deti"  /children/’  to  know  th^t  the  predicate  will  be  in 
the  3rd  person  plural;  hearing  the  attributive  "bol’shogo"  /^ge/, 
we  know  that  the  qualified  word  is  a  masculine  or  neuter  singular 
noun.  If  for  example  the  word  "uvidel"  /saw/  precedes  this  at¬ 
tributive,  we  obtain  still  more  information  on  the  qualified  word, 
which  in  the  given  case  will  almost  necessarily  be  a  masculine  noun 
(and  denol-,ing  an  animate  object)  in  the  accusative  case  and  func¬ 
tioning  as  an  object.  It  should  be  noted  that  toe  quantity  of  re¬ 
dundant  infermation  will  be  all  the  greater  the  more  universal  the 
pertinent  grammatical  rule. 

The  quantity  of  redundant  information  resulting  from  lexical 
probability  is  much  more  varied  because  it  depends  entirely  on  the 
statistical  structure  of  the  language.  In  the  word  combination 
"krasnyy  flag"  ^ed  flag/,  for  example,  the  word  "krasnyy"  [re^ 
in  some  measure  contains  the  information  that  the  word  following 
it  is  "flag."  Furthermore,  the  quantity  of  redundant  information, 
as  mentioned  above,  is  determined  by  the  probability  of  occurrence 
of  the  combination  "krasnyy  flag,"  as  compared  with  the  probabili¬ 
ties  of  combinations  "krasnyy  tsvet"  /red  flcwe^,  "krasnyy  mak" 
^ed  popp^,  etco  Increase  in  the  number  of  words  in  the  word  com¬ 
bination  increases  the  quantity  of  redundant  information.  For 
example,  in  the  word  combination  "na  balkone  visel  krasnyy  flag" 

/a  red  flag  hung  on  the  balcony/  the  probability  of  occurrence  of 


10  - 


the  word  "flag"  after  "krasnyy”  naturally,  is  much  greater  than 
in  the  combination  "krasnyy  flag,"  beca\;ise  after  the  words  "na 
balkone  visel"  it  is  impossible  to  have  the  combinations  "krasnyy 
tsvet,"  "krasny^r  pol"  Aed  floorT",  "krasnyy  shtab"  ^red  staf^, 
"krasnyy  nos"  /red  nos^,  etc»  Corresponding  to  this,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  redundant  information  contained  in  the  word  "krasnyy"  in 
the  first  combination  is  c03asiderably  greater  than  in  the  second* 
!I5ie  forms  of  linguistic  probability  examined  are  connected 
with  understanding  of  speech,  which  assumes  that  some  elements  of 
speech  (wOrds  or  combinations)  are  correctly  heard  and  understood* 
Equally  with  this,  perception  itself,  which,  as  shown  above,  breaks 
down  in  the  final  analysis  to  the  perception  of  individual  sound 
units,  phonemes,  is  facilitated  by  linguistic  probability.  In  the 
given  case  we  are  speaking  of  probabilities  of  compatible  sound 
combinations;  the  probabilities  that  a  certain  phoneme  will  follow 
a  given  one,'  This  probability,  which  could  be  called  sound  proba¬ 
bility,  is  .determined  in  two  ways;  first,  by  the  phonetic  rules  of 
a  given  language  (in  Russian,  for  example,  a  voiced  consonant  can 
be  followed  only  by  a  vowel  or  a  voiced  consonant),  second,  purely 
statistically,  as  with  lexical  probability. 

Since  sound  probability  does  not  directly  affect  understand¬ 
ing,  its  impcjrtance  as  a  source  of  redundancy  is  not  as  obvious  as 
that  of  lexical  probability,  Nevertheless,  sound  probability, 
which  exerts  a  real  influence  on  perception,  must  also  be  recog¬ 
nized  as  a  source  of  redundant  information.  To  illustrate  this 
circumstance  we  can  cite  the  following  fact.  As  a  result  of  spe¬ 
cial  tests  conducted  in  19^9  i't  was  found  that  the  articulation  of 
the  consonants  "f,"  "k,"  "s"  in  the  sound  combinations  "fs"  and 
"sk"  is  greater  than  the  articulation  of  these  same  consonants  not 
in  consonance  (i.e,,  in  combination  with  other  consonants).  In 
one  test  with  a  distortion  channel  the  articulation  of  s^  out  of 
conscsnance  was  66,^,  in  combination  with  "f "  it  was  89,8/0  and  in 
combination  with  "k"  it  was  9^ ,7^ ,5  , 

The  divergence  between  articulation  of  consonants  in  and 
out  of  consonance  was  explained  earlier  by  the  general  phonetic 
position  that  the  acoustic  characteristic  of  an  individual  conso¬ 
nant  and  the  same  consonant  in  consonance  must  be  different.  How¬ 
ever,  it  was  not  clear  why  the  articulation  of  a  consonant  in  con¬ 
sonance  was  always  greater  than  under  other  conditions.  This  can 
be  argued,  obviously,  only  from  the  standpoint  of  information 
theory;  namely,  in  the  sense  that  a  neighboring  consonant  in  Rus¬ 
sian  contains  more  redundant  information  on  a  given  consonant  than 
a  neighboring  vowel.  With  regard  to  consonance  combinations  "fs" 
and  "sk,"  they  have  relatively  high  probability  as  compared  with 
other  consonantal  combinations.  This  can  be  used  to  explain  the 
sharp  increase  in  their-  articulation  observed  in  the  tests  men¬ 
tioned. 


11  - 


In  the  same  manrer  as  in  lexical  probability,  the  increase 
in  the  number  of  sound  combinations  is  accompanied  by  an  increase 
in  the  quantity  of  redundant  information  relative  to  each  of  the 
sounds  in  the  combination.  It  is  perfectly  clear,  for  exaniple, 
that  the  occurrence  of."r"  after  "ost"  is  much  more  probable  than 
after  ‘'s"  and  even  after  "st,”  Consequently  "ost"  contains  much 
more  redundant  information  relative  to  "r"  than  "st,"  and  "st"  in 
turn,  more  than  "s."  Thus  we  can  differentiate  sotrad  probability 
of  the  "first  order"  when  combinations  of  two  sounds  are  considered, 
of  the  "second  order"  when  combinations  of  three  sounds  are  con¬ 
sidered,  etc, 

A  project  was  carried  cut  in  1956  at  the  Chair  of  Phonetics 
at  the  A,  A,  Zhdanov  Leningrad  University  to  determine  the  sound 
probability  of  the  "first  order"  in  Russian »  Raw  material,  in  the 
light  of  the  ideas  discussed  above,  was  gathered  by  taking  arti¬ 
cles  from  current  newspapers  as  well  as  works  of  contemporary  So¬ 
viet  authors  (Gorbatov,  Gaidar,  Tendryakov,  Paustovskii,  Panova, 
etc,).  The  total  material  consisted  of  88,538  phonemes.  After 
phonetic  transcription  of  all  texts,  a  count  was  made  of  each  com¬ 
bination  possible  in  Russian,  and  then  the  probability  of  each  com¬ 
bination  was  calculated. 

The  sound  probability  within  words  is  determined  by  their 
frequency  of  use  and  their  morphological  structure;  at  word  junc¬ 
tures  it  is  determined  by  the  combining  ability  of  words  and  by 
syntactic  rules,  i.e.,  by  lexical  and- grammatical  probability# 

As  a  result,  two  tables  were  prepared. 

In  addition  to  the  forms  of  sound  probability  indicated,  a 
determination  was  made  of  the  sequential  probability  of  individual 
groups  of  sounds  following  each  other  within  words :  vowels  and 
consonants,  stop  consonants  and  sonants,  plosives  and  fricatives, 
nasals  and  liquids.  It  was  found  that  the  probability  of  occurrence 
of  a  vovrel  after  a  consonant  is  Oc7^^9,  whereas  the  probability  cf 
a  consonant  following  a  corisonant  is  0.2551j  the  probability  of  a 
vowel  following  a  vowel  is  0,0017,  and  a  consonant  following  a  varel 
is  0.9983, 

The  accompanying  tables  show  the  sequential  probability  of 
different  groups  of  consonants .  The  unit  for  the  first  table  is 
"consonant  +  consonant,"  and  for  the  second  a  coiBbination  of  "con¬ 
sonant  +  any  sound  (vowel  or  consonant),"  (The  letters  in  the 
tables  are  identified  as  foUcviS :  C,  consonant;  M,  voiced  conso¬ 
nant;  S,  sonant;  E,  plosive;  P,  fricative  and  affricative;  W, 
nasal;  L,  liquid  (including  j)») 


-  12 


a^ABn:  1 

Jolljtwins.i 


Preceding 

wiMt— juign^  J-'  n 

C 

M 

E  .  . 

,  ,  E: 

N 

L 

c 

1,0000 

0.5695 

0.4305 

0.3385 

0.2310 

0,1800 

0.2505 

M  - 

0,7850 

0,4278 

0.3572 

0,2732 

0.1546 

0.1161 

0,2411 

S 

0,2150 

0,1417 

0.0733 

0,0653 

0,0764 

0,0639 

0.0094 

E 

0.3303 

0.0981 

0.2322 

0.0350 

0.0631 

0.0420 

0,1902 

F 

0,4547 

0.3297 

0.1250 

0,2382 

0.0915 

0,0741 

0.0509 

N 

0.0878 

0.0471 

0,0407 

0.0230 

0.0241 

0,0358 

0.0049 

L 

0.1272 

0.0946 

0,0326 

0,0423 

0.0523 

0.0281 

0.0045 

31ABLE  2 

Rpeceding 

M 

Following 

S  E 

mum 

F 

N 

mm 

L 

C  • 

0,2551 

0.1453 

0.1098 

0.0864 

0.0589 

0.0459 

0,0639 

M 

0,2003 

0.1092 

0.0911 

0.0697 

0.0395 

0.0296 

0,0615 

S 

0.0548 

0,0361 

0,0187 

0.0167 

0,0194 

0.0163 

0.0024 

E 

0.0842 

0.0250 

0.0592 

0.0089 

0,0161 

0.0107 

0.0485 

F 

0.1161 

0,0842 

0.0319 

0.0608 

0,0234 

0.0189 

0.0130 

M 

0.0224 

0.0120 

0.0104 

0,0059 

0.0061 

0.0091 

0.0013 

L 

0.0324 

0.0241 

0,0083 

0,0108 

0,0133 

0,0072 

0.0011 

KOTES 

1.  In  Russian,  for  example,  voiceless  consonants  cannot 
combine  with  voiced  consonants  in  the  same  word,  hard  consonants 
cannot  precede  the  vowel  "i,"  etce 

2,  It  will  be  shown  that  these  two  concepts  are  net  identi 
cal,  although  in  the  narrowest  sense  they  are  interconnected* 


-  13  - 


3»  Inasmich  as  for  the  purposes  of  this  paper  the  -written 
and  spoken  forms  of  speech  are  completely  analogous,  subsequent 
discussion  -will  be  confined  to  oral  speecho 

4,  With  regard  to  active  vocabulary  there  are  a  few  pub¬ 
lished  data*  They  concern  the  number  of  -words  used  in  the  works 
of  such  authors  as  Shakespeare,  Pushkin,  etco  As  for  passive  vo¬ 
cabulary,  there  is  no  reliable  method  for  evaluating  it* 

5»  L*  E«  Zinder,  "Specific  Features  of  the  Perception  of 
Speech  Sounds,"  sb,,  Vospriyatiye  zvukovykh  signalov  v  razlichnykh 
akusticheskildi  usloviyakn  Symposium;  Perception  of  Sound  Signals 
Under  Various  Acoustic  ConditionsT",  Moscow,  1956,  page  69® 

6»  See  M,  P.  Dolukhanov,  Vvedeniye  -v  teoriyu  peredachi  in- 
formatsii  po  elektricheskim  kana3am  svyazi  /Introduction  to  the 
Theory  of  ICransmission  of  Information  Over  Electrical  Comjirrunica- 
tions  Channels^,^  Moscow,  1955 J  A»  A,  Kharkevich,  Ocherki  cbshchey 
teorii  s-yyazi  ^Essays  on  the  General  Theory  of  Communication/ , 
Moscot,  1955 J  S.  Goldman,  Teoriya  Informatsli  /information  IheoryT"* 
translated  from  the  English,  Moscow,  1957;  Q®  Ao  Miller,  Language 
and  Communication,  New  York,  1951® 

”7,  M.  P<,  Dolukhanov,  op«  cit-,,  page  30,  The  term  "re¬ 
dundancy"  should  be  taken  with  qualifications,  because  if  noise  is 
present  it  can  be  impossible  to  obtain  even  the  minimum  information 
if  there  is  no  redundancy.. 

8»  This  statement  necessitates  the  conclusion  that  lexical 
probability  should  be  determined  for  a  more  or  less  definite  inter¬ 
val  of  time.  Word  combinations  occurring  in  the  works  of  authors 
of  the  3.9fch  cent’jry  speak  nothing  for  the  3-exical  probabilities  in 
present-day  Russian.  The  same,  of  course,  applies  also  to  the 
probability  of  the  occurrence  of  certain  words,  as  well  as  indi¬ 
vidual  phonemes. 

9.  L.  R.  Zinder,  "Russian  Articulation  Tables,"  Trudy 
Voyennoy  krasnoznamennoy  akademll  s-vyazl  im.  S «  M,  Budennogo 
/Proceedings  of  the  Military  "Red  Banner"  Academy  of  CoDmuni cations 
imeni  S.  M,  Budennyj^,  Vol,  29-30^  Leningrad,  1951^  pages  37-38.. 


-  14  - 


III.  SWOSIUM  ON  mOBIEl®  OF  SPEEGH.D'ISCRlMIimTION 

Renewing  is  a  translation  of  an  article  by  L,  R, 

Zincer  in  the  Russian-langmge  periodical  Voprosy 
yazykoznaniya  (Problems  of  Linguistics),  Moscow, 

No"^  5,  1958#  pages  151-152^ 

A  Byurposium  was  held  in  Moscow  from  26  through  30  May  1958 
on  problems  a£  speech  discrimination.  The  symposiiim  was  sponsored 
by  the  Acoustics  Commission  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  USSR,  Par¬ 
ticipants  in  the  S3raiposium  were  Soviet  and  Czechoslovak  scien¬ 
tists  —  physicists,  communications  engineers,  and  linguists.  Two 
problems  were  discussed;  l)  the  feasibility  of  using  test  tables 
consisting  of  meaningless  sound  combinations  (syllables),  and  2) 
the  types  of  sound  combinations  (syllables)  included  in  test  tables. 
After  an  introduction  by  Academician  No  N.  Andreyev,  the 
following  reports  dealing  with  the  first  problem  were  heard:  from 
Czechoslovakia  —  I.  Slavik  (physicist)  and  I,,  Vakhek  (linguist), 
"Hew  Methods  of  Testing  Speech  Discrimination”;  from  the  Soviet 
Union  —  L,  Ro  Zinder  (linguist),  "Linguistic  Principles  for  Com¬ 
posing  Articulation  Tables,"  B.  I.  Frid  (communications  engineer), 
"Relations  Between  Syllabic  and  Word  Discrimination,"  and  le,  Yu, 
Gurbanov  (communications  engineer),  "Problems  in  the  Practical  Ap¬ 
plication  of  Articulation  Tables," 

In  their  report  I.  Slavic  and  I,  Vakhek  criticized  the  gen¬ 
erally  accepted  method  for  testing  communications  channels  by  using 
meaningless  syllables,  Eroceding  from  the  fact  that  this  meth¬ 
odology  does  not  account  for  conditions  prevailing  for  actual  tele¬ 
phone  conversations,  and  basing  themselves  on  the  fact  that  "the 
essence  of  language  is  the  extremely  close  connection  bet^'j'een  the 
form  of  the  sound  and  meaningful  content,"  the  authors  suggest  re¬ 
pudiation  of  the  traditional  methodology.  Instead,  they  recommend 
a  new,  coniplex  method.  Fundamental  to  this  method  is  testing  with 
word  tables.  In  the  authors*  opinion  such  tables  iriake  it  possible 
to  evaluate  equally  the  quality  of  transmission  and  sound  form  and  , 
meaning.  Further,  the  complex  method  allows  for  tests  using  con¬ 
versations  on  given  subjects,  and  for  special  cases  (for  deter¬ 
mination  of  transmittability  of  individual  sounds),  tests  using 
meaningless  syllables, 

Jh.  his  report  L,  R.  Zinder  defended  the  opposite  point  of 
view.  In  his  opinion  testing  with  meaningless  syllables  is  com¬ 
pletely  permissible  from  the  linguistic  point  cf  view  for  the  fol¬ 
lowing  reasons;  l)  the  sound  portion  of  language  (phonemes)  is 
abstracted  from  the  meaning  portion,  forming  a  special  system  having 
a  certain  independence;  2)  perception  of  the  sound  form  precedes 
understanding;  3)  articulation  tests  must  give  an  objective  measure 
of  the  qtiality  of  a  channel,  i.e,,  its  capability  of  transmitting 


-  15  - 


a  spoken  sound  form;  k)  insofar  as  a  channel  transmits  only  a  sound 
f<2rm  and  not  meaning,  the  testing  tables  must  therefore  contain 
sound  material  in  a  form  most  free  from  redundancy  (in  the  informa¬ 
tion  theory)® 

B.  I.  Frid  reported  the  results  of  experiments  which  show 
that  articulation  (ioe®,  percent  correctly  received)  of  syllables, 
articulation  of  words,  and  articulation  of  phrases  have  the  same 
dependence.  For  example,  if  syllables  are  transmitted  better 
through  channel  A  than  channel  B,  then  in  the  same  measure  both 
words  and  phrases  will  be  transmitted  better  throu^i  channel  A 
than  through  channel  B, 

Ye®  Xuo  Gurbanov  spoke  first  on  the  theoretical  advantages 
of  testing  with  meaningless  syllables,  which  are  the  most  free  from 
redundancies,  from  the  information  theory  point  of  view;  second  on 
the  great  accuracy  of  results  achieved  by  this  method,  especially 
when  high-quality  channels  are  being  tested;  and  third  on  the 
greater  economy  of  using  meaningless  syllables  as  compared  with 
other  methods® 

In  the  discussions,  participated  in  by  I®  I'^rkhaut  and 
V.  Klimesh  of  Czechoslovakia  and  V.  A,  Artemov,  Yu,  S®  Bykov, 

L,  A,  Varshavskii,  I,  M®  Sitvak,  N.  B®  Pokrovskii,  A,  A®  Reformat- 
skiy,  M.  A,  Sapozhkov,  V®  N®  Fedorovich,  and  A®  G®  El’snits  of  the 
Soviet  Union,  it  was  brought  out  first  that  it  was  necessary  to 
distinguish  between  discrimination,  i,e«,  the  capability  of  identi¬ 
fying  language  elements  the  sound  form  of  which  is  not  connected 
with  meaningful  content  (sounds  and  syllables),  and  intelligibility, 
etc®,  the  capability  of  identifying  language  elements  the  sovind 
form  of  which  is  inseparably  joined  with  the  meaningful  content 
(words  and  plxrases,  for  example). 

It  was  brou^t  out  further  that  discrimination  is  not  a  di¬ 
rect  measure  of  intelligibiJlty,  but  there  is  a  direct  dependence 
between  them®  This  made  it  possible  for  all  participants  of  the 
symposium  to  reach  the  following  agreement®  "Upon  ascertaining  that 
for  the  given  language  the  various  forms  of  discrimination  and  in¬ 
telligibility  are  interdependent,  it  is  not  necessary  to  measure 
the  various  forms  of  discrimination  and  intelligibility  when  deter¬ 
mining  tne  quality  of  a  channel®  It  is  sufficient  to  measure  one 
of  the  indicated  forms,  preferably  the  one  which  is  least  difficult 
to  measure®  The  results  of  such  measurement  provides  data  on  other 
forms  of  discrimination  and  intelligibility®" 

The  following  reports  were  read  on  the  second  problem: 

I®  Vakhek,  "Discussion  of  a  Method  of  Compiling  Articulation  Tables," 
Yu,  S,  Bykov,  "Comparison  of  the  Effectiveness  of  Various  Systems 
of  Articulation  Measvirements,"  I®  Vakhek  in  his  report  criticized 
the  VKIAS  syllable  articulation  tables  for  the  absence  in  them  of 
open  syllables,  unstressed  vcsrels,  and  combinations  of  three  con¬ 
sonants,  which  are  characteristic  in  Russian®  Yu®  S,  Bykov  spoke 


-  16  - 


of  tlie  reed  for  compiling  syllable  tables  from  arttcuiation '  of 
continuous  speech »  . 

L.  A*  Varshavskiy,  Ye«  Yue  Gurbanov,  L,  E,;  Zihde'fjj  and 
A ,  A .  Ref ormatskiy  participated  in  the  discussions . 


4 


-  IT  - 


IV.  OK  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  STHUCTURAL 

AND  MATHEMAOMCAL  METHODS  OF  LANGUAGE  RESEARCH 

following  is  a  translation  of  an  unsigned  article 
in  the  Russian-langijiage  periodical  Vestnik  Akademii 
nauk  SSSR  (Bulletin  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences 
USSR)7~^bcow,  No.  7^  I960,  page 

Structural  and  mathematical  methods  of  language  research 
(structural  and  mathematical  linguistics)  are  the  theoretical  basis 
for  solving  applied  linguistic  problems  in  contemporary  cybernetics 
(automatic  oral  control  of  production  units,  automation  of  informa¬ 
tion  service,  machine  translation  and  abstracting  of  scientific  and 
technical  literature,  construction  of  inf ormation -logic  machines, 
construction  of  automatic  stenographic  recorders,  increasing  the 
carrying  capacity  of  communications  channels,  etc.).  The  applica¬ 
tion  of  these  methods  is  of  considerable  value  also  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  theoretical  linguistics,  _ 

However,  as  noted  in  the  resolution  of  the  Presidium  ^of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  USSrT",  scientific  research  in  this  area  has  not 
received  the  attention  that  it  merits.  Insufficient  development 
of  structural  and  mathematical  methods  by  linguistic  departments 
is  hindering  practical  important  work  on  the  theory  and  practice  of 
machine  translation,  on  construction  of  information  languages  and 
information  machines,  logical  semantics,  and  cybernetic  applica¬ 
tions  of  linguistics. 

The  Presidium  adopted  a  numiber  of  measures  to  eliminate  this 
situation.  It  was  decided  to  reorganize  the  applied  linguistics 
sector  of  the  Institute  of  Linguistics  and  in  the  structure  of  the 
Leningrad  division  of  the  Institute  to  create  a  group  for  the  mathe¬ 
matical  study  of  language  and  a  group  for  the  structural-typological 
study  of  languages,  A  secf.or  of  structural  linguistics  is  being 
organized  in  the  Russian  Language  Institute  and  a  sector  of  struc¬ 
tural  typology  of  Slavic  languages  in  the  Institute  of  Slavic 
Studies,  A  group  for  structural  typology  of  Eastern  languages  is 
being  created  in  the  Institute  of  Far  Eastern  Studies,  and  in  the 
Institute  of  Chinese  Studies,  a  group  for  structxaral-typological 
study  of  the  Chinese  language,  and  in  the  Institu.te  of  Ethnography, 
a  group  for  structural  signalization,  calligraphy,  and  decipher¬ 
ment,  The  special  attention  of  the  reorganized  and  newly  created 
sectors  and  groups  is  directed  to  the  statistical  study  of  the  Rus¬ 
sian  language  and  other  languages  of  the  peoples  of  the  USSR, 

Coordination  of  the  work  in  the  area  of  structural  and  mathe¬ 
matical  methods  of  linguistic  research  in  the  institutes  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  USSR  is  ms.de  the  responsibility  of  the  Scien¬ 
tific  Soviet  on  Cybernetics, 


6030 


El® 

-  18  - 


