HCV 


AD-A284  823 


L 


JPRS:  10256 


DTIC  QUALH-Y  Il'ierECTED  3  1  October  I96I 


00 

CMS 

Sh 


PROBLEMS  OF  ANTI- BACTERIOLOGICAL  DEFENSE: 
ACCORDING  TO  DATA  PROM  FOREIGN  LITERATURE 


by  P.  F.  Zdrodovskiy 


-USSR- 


DTIC 

ELECTE 

jUL2  9'99^ 

F 


Distributed  by: 

OFFICE  OF  TECHNICAL  SERVICES 
U,  S.  DEPARIMENT  OF  COMMERCE 
WASHINGTON  25,  D.  C. 


U.  S.  JOINT  PUBLICATIONS  RESEARCH  SERVICE 
-1656  CONNECTICUT  AVENUE,  N.  W. , 
WASHINGTON  25,  D.  C. 

94  7  I  S  0^-8 

•'I'-'a 


Best 

Available 

Copy 


FOREWORJ^ 

This  publication  vaa  prepared  under  contract 
by  the  UNTTED  STATES  JOINT  PUBLICATIONS  RE¬ 
SEARCH  SERVICE,  a  federal  government  organi¬ 
zation  established  to  service  the  translation 
and  research  needs  of  the  various  government 
departments . 


JPHS:  102^6 
C  S  0:  6427-N 


PUOQLKMS  OK  ANTI-BACTKRIOLOGICAL  DEKcN'^E: 
ACCORDING  TO  DATA  FROM  FOREIGN  LITERATURE 


j/  Following  is  a  translation  of  a  book  under 
joint  authorship  and  edited  by  P.  F.  Zdrodov- 


skiy  entitled  Voprosy  Prot i vo-Dakter iolo gj - 
cheskoy  Zashctiity  (En<rlish  version  abovcT, 
Mo  sc  o  w ,  i960,  pp  1  -  320.  "7 


ANNOTATION 


i 

I 

f 


i 


This  monograph  is  a  generalization  of  information 
which  has  been  published  abroad  in  tiie  literature  treat¬ 
ing  the  pj oblem  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  and  de¬ 
fense  meastires  against  it. 

The  book  is  aimed  at  acquainting  medical  workers 
wi tJi  the  characteristics  of  the  bacteriological veapon, 
as  well  as  the  means  and  methods  of  providing  defense 
against  it. 

This  book  sets  forth  the  princijfles  of  organizing 


both  individual  and  collective  anti-bacteriological 
defense,  as  found  in  tlie  foreign  literature. 


'*We  share  the  concern  of  scientists  who  correctly] 
point  out  that  the  employment  of  this  weapon  can  entail  j 
consequences  that  are  not  less  horrible  than  those  | 
produced  by  the  use  of  atomic  and  hydrogen  weapons.  It  i 
was  not  merely  by  chance  that  the  cliemical  and  bacterio-i 
logical  weapons  were  outlawed  for  warfare  by  the  deci-  { 
sion  of  the  nations,  as  expressed  in  international  I 


T 


agreement  in  the  Gen  Protocol  in  1925* 

The  USSR  is,  .t  is  well  known^  a  decidedly 
strong  advocate  of  prohibition  of  all  forms  of  weapons 
of  mass  destruction,  including  both  nuclear  and  tl.e 
chemical  and  bacteriological  weapons*  We  are  of  the 
opinion  that  their  use  violates  the  principles  of 
humanity,  the  standards  of  international  law  and  the 
conscience  of  the  peoples* 

N*  S.  Krushchev 


(Excerpt  from  a  message 
conference  in  August  1959* 


sent  to  the  Pugwash  scientific 

) 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Preface  ••.*•.  .  ••• 

Chapter  I.  Brief  Historical  Sketch. 
Lebedinskiy,  V.A.  •.••*•• 


page 

4 


6 


) 


Chapter  IZ*  Information  on  the  Bacteriological 
Weapon*  Gapochko,  K.  G*;  Garin,  N.  S.;  Lebe¬ 
dinskiy,  V.A.{  Fillppenko,  A.  I.  .  ■  *  *  35 


Chapter  III.  Some  Problems  in  the  Mass  Procure¬ 
ment  of  Biological  Agents*  Fillppenko,  A.  I  . 


74 


Chapter  IV*  Principles  of  Selection  and  Possible 

Agents  of  Bacteriological  Warfare.  Garin,  N.S*  117 

Chapter  V,  Basic  Means  of  Anti-Bacteriological 

Defense.  .......  .  18? 


Organization  of  Anti-Bacteriological  Civil 


Defense  in  the  United  States  of  America. 

Gapochko,  K.G*  * .  187 

Principles  of  Detecting  the  Biological 

Infectious  Agents.  Lebedinskiy,  V.A.  .  •  200 


Individual  Protection  against  the  Bacterio-  ! 

logical  Weapon*  Bturgasoy^  P*N.;  Gapochko  .K.G.  253  | 


2 


309 


Means  of  Individual  and  Collective  Non¬ 
specific  Defense*  Pilippenko,  A.  I.  •  * 

Several  Modern  Means  and  Methods  of  Dis¬ 
infection.  Pilippenko,  A.  I.  •  .  •  •  •  319 

Or^AQlzation  of  Anti-Bacteriological 

Defense  Measures*  Gapochko,  K.  G.  •  •  3^0 


!  vv  • 


3 


i 


PPEFAGH 


We  are  experiencing  an  international  situation 
where,  because  we  are  not  pursuing  the  arms  race  of  the 
capitalistic  countrieia-,  we  are  forced  to  concentrate  on 
the  problem  of  defending  ourselves  from  toe  bacteriologica 
weapon,  the  possible  application  of  which  has  been  stated 
repeatedly  and  vigorously  for  the  last  decade  in  the  peri¬ 
odical  literature  of  some  capitalistic  countries.  As  evi- 
ience  of  this  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  an  article 
oublished  in  the  "Public  Health  Eeports",  in  the 

irSA  during  1957,  where  It  was  stated,  inter  alia," ...  .work 
3n  the  study  and  development  of  the  biological  weapon  con¬ 
tinues  even  to  this  day;  the  Department  of  Defense  is  of- 
[■icially  engaged  in  it.  The  responsibility  for  the  ful¬ 
fillment  of  the  program  on  the  biological  weapon  is  put  on 
;he  Chemical  Warfare  Service.  The  scientific  investiga- 
live  work  on  the  biological  weapon  is  primarily  centra¬ 
lized  at  Fort  Detrick  (Frederick,  Maryland).  In  addition, 
i  close  link  is  sustained  with  other  federal  organizations 
committed  to  expedite  the  consolidation  of  defense  re- 
50urces. 

"The  fact  that  the  work  on  the  study  and  develop- 
:Qent  of  the  biological  weapon  is  conducted  in  institutes 


created  especially  for  this  purpose  caa,be  considered  an 
indication  of  the  might  of  this  weapon"  .  It  must  be 
pointed  out  that  the  author  of  the  cited  article  is  LeRoy 
Fothergill,  a  scientific  consultant  with  this  same  Chemi¬ 
cal  ’warfare  Service,  the  staff  of  which  is  engaged  in  a 
study  and  preparation  of  the  biological  (bacteriological) 
weapon. 

The  appearance  of  such  statements  in  the  literature 
of  the  capitalistic  countries  stimulates  the  study  and 
systematization  of  all  the  material  published  abroad  on 
bacteriological  warfare  in  order  to  form  a  definite  idea 
about  this  problem  in  all  of  its  aspects. 

Consequently,  a  voluminous  amount  of  literary  ma¬ 
terial,  which  thoroughly  exposed  the  problem  of  bacterio-  ^ 
logical  warfare  and  measures  of  defense  against  it,  was 
collected  and  studied.  The  book,  which  is  called  to  the 
attention  of  tne  reader,  is  oust  a  literary  dierest  of  the 
indicated  data. 

There  is  scarcely  a  need  to  prove  the  indispensabil 
ity  and  the  timely  publication  of  this  book,  because  the 
Soviet  medical  profession  must  certainly  become  acquainted^ 
in  detail  with  the  current  concept  of  the  question  of  bac¬ 
teriological  warfare  and  defense  against  the  bacteriolog¬ 
ical  weapon  abroad,  all  the  more  so  since  there  are  no 
similar  publications  in  our  own  medical  literature. 


P.  Zdrodovskiy 
Active  member  of 
Academy  of  Medical  Sciences 


USSR 


Fothergill,  LeP.oy  D.,  "Biological  Vmrfare  and  Its 
)efense".  Public  Health  Reports,  1957,  72,  10,  865  -  S71. 


HISTOi 


-■n 


I 

I 

i 

( 


Tr.'C  'oacterioloi:.lc-' 1  ”'eapoiis  are  com^rieed  or  •^-ac.L- 
o;:enl?,  ’:nlc-*'OGr;?an.isms',  t;cxic  '•'roducts  of  their  iiie  ao- 
Gt.vitiea  (toxins.;,  insect  pests,  and  so-te  synf-'eaf,  J  c  s'.:.b- 
‘stanoes  (so-called  antlPc r-mories  or  herbicides)  meant  ic?.- 
agricultural  aaiuals,  grains,  and  crocs  of  bne  adversary, 
ai’d  also  the  agents  of  cheir  a' :  ilcai:;.  :ri. 

:'’rie  application  of  tne  enmaerated  infective  apents 
for  the  achieve  sent  of  'rilitary  purposes  is  terrf'ed  ''cac- 
eriolopical  tvarfare''. 

The  terms  "bacteriological  weapon"  and  "bacterio- 
Icgical  v-arfare",  as  it  alreavdy  appears  frcn  the  termi.noi 
bpy  itself,  now  have  to  be  conceded  as  somewhat  out-dated 


'OU 


r'  0*'  'Z.' 


^.ctually,  if  orijiinall.y  the  infective  agents  corisi! 
for  use  were  only  laicroorganisms  oelcnging  to  the 
pf  bacteria  (glanders  and  anthrax  bacteria),  tnea 
nt ,  judging  by  the  svaiiable  literary  data  on  bacteri.  o- 
oyical  warfare,  sore  other  microorganisms,  x.articuiT.r'ly 
icKettsiae,  viruses,  and  fungi,  could  find  npT licyttion. 


6 


f 


The  meanint?  of  these  terms  becomes  very  inaccurate  when 
they  are  e  tended  to  insect  pests,  which  can  also  be  used 
for  the  contamination  of  agricultural  plants. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  more  precise  terms  and 
ones,  which  more  clearly  reflect  the  contents  of  the  ?pe-  | 
cific  ob;]ect,  are  "biological  weapon"  and  "biological 
warfare",  and  nowadays  these  have  supplanted  the  terms 
"bacteriological  weapon"  and  bacteriological  warfare"  in 
the  literature  and  official  manuals  of  foreign  countries. 
However,  even  they  are  not  clear  enough,  since  herbicides, 
which  at  present  refer  to  the  biological  weapon,  are 
synthetic  chemical  substances. 

In  spite  of  the  sentiments  expressed  above  about 
the  fallacy  of  the  existing  terminology,  in  further  com¬ 
ments  we  will  nevertheless  be  forced  to  use  the  term  "bac¬ 
teriological  weapon",  since  it  is  retained  in  the  litera¬ 
ture  even  at  the  present  time. 

♦  « 

i 

I 

A  study  of  the  history  of  warfare  both  in  ancient  I 
times  and  in  the  not  so  distant  past  shows  that  military  I 
activities,  as  a  rule,  were  accompanied  by  epidemics,  '^'he 
losses,  which  armies  have  borne  from  infectious  diseases,  1 
are  often  considerably  higher  than  those  due  to  the  effect | 
of  weapons.  | 

Smallpox  cut  down  the  troops  of  Alexander  of  r.iace-  j 
donia  returning  from  a  campaign  in  India,  annihilated  the  I 
Abyssian  army  laying  siege  on  Mecca  in  571 »  and  infected  ' 
the  Crusaders  at  the  time  of  the  Crusades  in  the  !!»  to  13^ 
centuries  (1). 

Armies  suffered  not  much  less  in  losses  due  to  ep¬ 
idemics  even  at  a  later  time.  During  the  siege  of  Grenada 
in  1489  17,000  persons  in  the  Spanish  army  succumbed  to 
typhus  -  almost  six  times  more  than  were  killed  in  the 
battle  with  the  -loors.  Typhus  wiped  out  30,000  French 
soldiers  laying  siege  to  Neapoli  in  1528,  and  the  rest  of 
the  army,  raising  the  siege,  were  compelled  to  retreat  (2) 

In  the  period  of  the  Crimean  campaign  of  1854  - 
1856  epidemics  of  cholera,  typhoid  fever,  and  typhus  took 
on  such  a  dangerous  character  that  the  fighting  efficiency 
of  the  armies  was  notably  lov/ered.  In  the  British  army 
for  ev«ry  100  persons  dying  on  the  field  of  battle  there 
were  380  persons  dying  from  infectious  diseases.  In  t;he 
French  armies  this  ratio  was  correspondingly  expressed  in 
bhe  figures  100:371,  and  in  the  Russian  -  100:219.  The 
rench  land  forces  even  befojre  arriving  in  Crimea  lost 


10%  cf  the  personriel  (■;■  ,000  sick.,  5,000  de,?.:];  froti  choleraj. 
For  three  months  in  the  imsli-sh  arc.y,  operating  in  the  vi-j 
ciriity  of  Yarns,  2,615  cersons  (^7%  of  the  personnel)  oe-  i 
came  sick  with  cholera.  The  small  oardinian  army  lost  j 
1,'>50  persons  from  cholera  vdiiie  12  persons  in  all  ieli 
on  the  battlefield  (5). 

The  high  figures  for  infectious  diseases  a  L.a',:  -.Pa-r-; 
acterice  the  more  recent  wars  at  tne  end  of  tne  19*^  nan  . 
aeginning  cf  the  20»  century .  The  incidence  of  t.vphoi.c  f’e-j 
•ver  and  malaria  was  extremely  high  in  the  armios  of  I't-e  I 
United  States  of  America  in  the  ceriod  of  the  Civil  ar  > 
of  1861  -  1865;  typhoid  fever  afflicted  more  than  30%  of  ; 
the  personnel  (4),  and  the  number  of  malaria  cases  ex¬ 
ceeded  1,200,000  (5).  ! 

But,  in  general,  in  the  second  half  of  the  19» 
century  from  10  to  40%  of  the  personnel  in  the  fighting 
armies  was  put  out  of  commission  from  typhoid  fever  (6). 

Advancement  in  prophylactic  and  therapeutic  meac- 
ures  of  infectious  diseases  along  with  a  higher  level  cf  ; 
the  general  sanitary-hygienic  state  of  the  troops  oc¬ 
casioned  some  decrease  in  morbidity  in  the  armies,  i.,ven  i 
in  the  First  World  War  the  importance  of  losses  from  in-  J 
fectious  diseases  had  significantly  lessened,  which,  how-  j 
ever,  could  be  partially  attributed  to  the  greater  effec-  j 
tiveness  of  the  lethal  force  of  the  weapon,  because  mor-  j 
bidity  in  armies  from  typhoid  fever,  typhus,  dysentery,  j 
and  malaria,  especiallj’’  in  certain  theaters  of  military 
action,  continued  to  remain  at  a  relatively  high  level.  i 
In  the  Russian  army  in  the  European  theater  about  16  cases; 
of  dysentery  were  reported  for  every  1,000  persons,  in 
Germany  -  about  24,  in  the  English  army  in  Messorotamia  -  | 
109,  in  the  Dardanelles  -  255,  in  Eastern  Africa  -  277.  | 

Thus,  in  certain  fighting  armies  dysentery  afflicted  2S  -  j 
27%  of  the  personnel  (?)•  ! 

The  Serbian  and  Turkish  armies  suffered  acutely  I 
from  typhus  in  the  pieriod  of  tne  First  World  War.  I 

Malaria  was  also  widespread  in  the  fighting  armies. j 
Thus,  of  120,000  persons  in  the  French  armies,  located  in 
the  Balkans,  o0%  were  hospitalized  with  malaria.  The  Eng¬ 
lish  army,  operating  in  the  ITear  East  and  in  Eastern  Afr.l- 
ca,  also  core  enormous  losses  from  malaria.  For  example, 
in  V.essopotamia  every  tenth  soldier  was  sick  with  malaria, 
in  Oalliroli  and  Eastern  Africa  -  every  fourth  soldier. 

A  pandemic  of  viral  grippe,  breaking  out  at  the 
end  cf  the  war,  afflicted  net  only  the  population  but  the  i 
troops  as  'Aell.  In  the  French  army,  even  according  to  far 
froj.  ccm];lete  data,  the  number  of  afflicted  during  the 


'bourse  o:.  a  year  sonsisced  of  ,  10'.^  persons  ol'  anoD  racre 
:.!.an  :i>C,COO  died.  r'.'vea  iii  the  Swiss  array,  'Ahich  does  not 
ent^,aki:e  in  military  activities  and  therefore  is  in  a  more 
favorable  situation  than  the  fi^ntinK  armies,  aoout  66 c  of 
the  personnel  were  ill  (6). 

The  Second  Acrid  Aar  also  oifers  examples  of  a hat 
dimensions  outbreaks  of  sickness  can  assume  in  armies, 
which  seriously  complicate  their  military  action.  Thus, 
the  high  morbidity  rate  of  tsutsugamushi  fever  among  tne 
English  and  American  troops  showed  an  unfavoraole  influ¬ 
ence  on  the  course  of  military  operations  in  the  Pacific 
theater  of  action.  Some  divisions  were  literally  para¬ 
lyzed.  For  example,  6-12  days  after  debarkation  of  one 
of  the  American  regiments  on  the  island  of  Sansapor 
persons  became  ill  with  tsutsugamushi  fever.  During  the 
second  week  morbidity  reached  900  cases  per  annum  for  ev¬ 
ery  1,000  soldiers.  A  high  percent  of  morbidity  with 
tsutsugamushi  fever  was  also  noted  among  the  English 
troops  located  in  Burma.  The  number  of  afflicted  in  some 
sections  ran  to  one-fifth  of  the  total  personnel.  So  in 
the  armies  of  the  English-Aaerican  alliance  in  the  lacific 
theater,  according  to  incomplete  data,  there  were  recorded 
in  all  about  20,000  afflicted  (9)i 

Profound  complications  arose  a  iring  the  military 
operations  of  the  alliance  in  19''+2  in  Northern  Africa  be¬ 
cause  of  epidemic  typhus  and  dysentery  which  raged  in 
these  districts. 

Large  outoreaks  of  typhus  were  prominent  in  the 
German  armies  operating  on  the  Eastern  front.  These  oit- 
oreaks  were  one  of  the  results  of  a  lack  of  providing  the 
Hitler  army  with  elementary  agents  of  anti-epidemic  de¬ 
fense  and  the  absence  of  a  systematic  anti -epidemic  ser¬ 
vice.  At  the  end  of  19't2  in  some  German  armies  the  num¬ 
ber  of  sick,  which  was  estimated  in  tne  thousands,  equalled 
tire  number  of  wounded  (10). 

According  to  tne  data  of  English  authors  a  high 
orbidity  rate  from  dysentery  was  noted  among  the  Italian 
troops  in  Libyia. 

Numerous  examples  are  also  knccwn  from  the  history 
f  war  of  how  the  aT-pearance  of  epidemics  in  armies  leads 
to  the  collapse  of  certain  operations  and  sometimes  even 
of  whole  campaigns. 

Thus,  at  the  time  of  the  Iranian-Turkish  War  a  choi 
ra  epidemic  brought  about  a  loss  of  fighting  efficiency 
in  the  combat  armies,  and  the  battle  came  to  a  stop.  Out- 
reaks  of  cholera  have  repeatedly  brought  collapse' to  the 
English  campaigns  in  India  and  the  French  ones  in  Northern 


t 


Africa.  During  the  Crimean  war  one  French  division,  at¬ 
tacking  in  the  district  of  7ar  a,  lost  about  2,000  per¬ 
sons  from  cholera  in  less  than  one  month.  In  this  divis¬ 
ion  all  of  the  personnel  were  affected,  as  a  result  of 
which  the  French  had  to  give  up  the  offensive  operation  i 
and  return  to  the  original  position,  not  coming  into  con¬ 
tact  with  the  Russian  soldiers  (3). 

In  1859  ia  Algiers  from  a  French  detachment  of  fif¬ 
teen  thousand  10,000  -  12,000  were  afflicted  with  cholera, 
which  led  to  the  collapse  of  military  actions. 

Malaria,  infecting  the  English  and  French  troops 
operating  in  Macedonia  during  the  First  World  .<ar,  actual¬ 
ly  led  to  the  downfall  of  the  Balkan  operation  of  the  Al¬ 
liance.  The  morbidity  took  on  catastrophic  dimensions: 
merely  from  July  to  December  1916  malaria  infected  more 
than  60,000  persons.  In  some  battalions  located  in  ialon- 
ica  malaria  cases  were  reported  in  95%  of  the  personnel. 

The  cited  examp  s,  the  number  of  which  could  be 
considerably  increased,  obviously  proves  the  point  that 
epidemics  arising  in  armies  during  their  conduction  of 
military  activities  did  impressively  complicate  and  somo- 
tiies  also  completely  disrupted  operations. 

Epidemics,  originating  in  war  time  at  the  rear  a- 
mong  the  civilian  population  and  disorganizing  the  activ¬ 
ities  of  industry,  transportation,  and  government,  create 
serious  events.  During  the  First  World  War  typhus  epidem¬ 
ics  flared  up  in  Serbia  -  less  than  six  months  afterward 
150,000  persons  were  dead  (11).  At  the  end  of  the  iirst 
World  War  the  most  severe  pandemic  of  viral  grippe  envel¬ 
oped  all  of  the  fighting  countries  and  many  of  the  neutral 
[ones.  In  ]  1/2  years  500  million  people  had  been  taken 
sick;  20  million  of  them  died,  v/hich  was  four  times  the 
number  killed  in  the  years  of  the  First  World  '.Var. 

From  all  that  has  been  said,  however,  the  conclus¬ 
ion  must  not  be  made  that  epidemic  catastrophes  are  abso¬ 
lutely  a  compulsory  companion  of  each  war.  A  well-defined 
and  thorough  system  of  prophylactic  measures  accompanied 
by  sufficient  material  facilities,  high  qualifications  and 
selflessness  of  workers  of  the  army  medical  service  and 
public  health  organs  are  those  factors  which  can  play  a 
decisive  role  in  the  realm  of  preventing  outbreaks  of  in¬ 
fectious  diseases,  their  localization,  and  salvage  of  the 
aftermach.  •’^'he  fallacy  of  maintaining  the  inevitability 
of  an  epidemic  in  war  time  is  more  drama tical3-y  proved  cy 
the  experience  of  the  Great  Patriotic  War,  during  v/hich 
neither  in  our  armies  nor  among  the  population  at  the 
rear,  in  spite  of  the  extraordinary  intricacy  of  the  epi- 


8 


demioiogical  situation,  was  there  any  kind  of  notable 
spread  of  infectious  diseases  which  would  in  any  way  pre¬ 
vent  the  successful  conduction  of  military  operations  or 
complicate  the  work  at  the  rear.  In  an  article  about  bac¬ 
teriological  warfare  some  foreign  authors  have  tried  to 
convince  the  reader  that  the  application  of  the  bacterio¬ 
logical  weapon  without  fail  provokes  some  repercussions 
which  are  "catastrophic".  As  it  is  seen  from  the  foreign 
publications,  this  assertion  does  not  imply  that  the  bac¬ 
teriological  weapon  does  not  represent  a  serious  danger 
with  proper  preparation  and  excellent  organization  of  an 
anti-epidemic  service.  In  regard  to  the  threatening 
spread  of  some  infections  by  the  airborne  route,  one  gen¬ 
eral  sanitary  and  anti-epidemic  measure  to  clear  away  the 
after  effect  of  the  application  of  the  bacteriological 
weapon,  without  a  doubt,  is  not  enough.  Experience  has 
taught  that  when  the  spread  of  a  number  of  infections 
(intestinal,  cutaneous)  can  be  fairly  easily  suppressed 
by  performing  general  sanitary  steps  and  common  anti-epi¬ 
demic  measures,  this  may  not  be  attributed  to  airborne  in¬ 
fections  -  for  example,  grippe.  It  is  not  difficult  to 
see  that  the  tremendous  successes  in  sanitary  and  anti-ep¬ 
idemic  matters  achieved  in  recent  years  hardly  in  any  way 
influences  the  spread  of  this  disease. 

The  military  and  economical  potential  of  the  bellig 
erent  countries  can  be  weakened  not  only  be  epidemics  a- 
mong  the  troops  and  population.  A  few  examples  are  known 
of  how  disaster  can  bring  widespread  disease  to  agricul¬ 
tural  animals  and  plants.  As  an  illustration  of  this,  it 
is  sufficient  to  become  acquainted  with  some  figures  on 
cattle  plague  dui;ing  individual  epizootic  cases.  Thus,  in 
Rhodesia  in  one  year  (1897  -  1898)  1.5  million  head  of 
large  cattle  fell,  in  the  Transvaal  in  the  same  period  -  ! 

one  million,  in  Bechuanaland  -  1,250»000.  At  the  time  of  i 
the  epizooty,  which  raged  in  the  Philippines  from  1917  to 
1927,  almost  all  the  cattle  died,  as  a  result  of  which  the 
country  was  in  a  very  serious  economical  state. 

And  an  epiphytotic  state  causes  no  less  destruction 
In  1845  -  1847  a  potato  blight  appeared  in  almost  all  the 
western  European  countries.  The  destruction  caused  by 
this  disease  was  especially  high  in  economically  backward 
Ireland  where  the  potato  is  one  of  the  principal  food 
products.  The  loss  in  the  potato  crop  for  two  years  in  a 
row  brought  about  famine,  as  a  result  of  which  about  one 
million  inhabitants  of  Ireland  died  and  1.5  million  were 
forced  to  emigrate  (12). 

Other  similar  facts  are  also  known.  An  outbreak  of 


a  viral  disease  (dwarf isoi)  in  rice,  which  originated  in 
lyd.i  on  one  of  the  islands  of  Japan,  led  to  tJie  death  oi 
12,000  persons  froai  starvation. 

Extreme  complications  in  supplying  the  population 
and  army  induced  an  epiphytic  state  of  potato  blight  dur¬ 
ing  the  First  World  War*  in  Germany.  In  1917  Pbytophtora 
destroyed  about  one-third  of  the  entire  potato  crop  con¬ 
sisting  at  that  time  of  the  greater  share  of  the  military 
ration  of  the  Germans.  The  worsening  of  tne  already  poor 
nutrition  reflected  markedly  on  the  moral  and  physical 
state  of  the  nation. 

The  widespread  occurrence  of  plant  diseases  is  not 
only  an  attribute  of  nistory.  Today  plant  diseases  also 
cause  great  and  sometimes  even  enormous  damage  to  various 
agricultural  seedlings  and  to  the  industry  connected  with 
the  produce.  Different  forms  of  mildew,  root  rot  of 
sprouts  and  seedlings,  and  also  other  diseases  of  cereal 
grains  (wheat,  corn,  barley,  oats)  in  the  United  States  of 
America  are  the  causes  of  arrears  in  the  amount  of  grain 
v/hich  would  be  enough  to  guarantee  a  supply  to  approximate 
ly  20  million  people  for  a  year  (13).  infection,  of  the 
sugar  beet  with  curly  top  virus  in  a  nunber  of  stricken 
areas  of  the  USA  was  responsible  for  the  fact  that  the 
sugar  industry  there  completely  declined  in  1931.  In 
1935  epiphytic  stem  rot  of  wheat  in  the  state  of  Minnesota 
was  the  reason  for  the  loss  of  60%  of  the  wheat  harvest 
(14).  Devastation  no  less  in  scale  was  also  brought  to 
oung  plants  by  insects  -  sgricultural  pests. 

The  presented  facts  allov/  us  to  conclude  that  the 
appearance  in  war  time  of  epidemics  in  the  armies  and  a- 
mong  the  civilian  population  at  the  rear,  especially  if 
epizooty  and  epiphytoty  are  associated  with  them,  can  to 
a  marked  degree  undermine  the  military  and  economical  po¬ 
tential  of  the  country,  as  this  has  been  repeatedly  shown 
in  past  wars. 

These  facts  a  long  time  ago  attracted  some  military 
xecialists  to  the  idea  of  the  artificial  spread  of  infec¬ 
tious  diseases  for  the  purpose  of  achieving  victory  over 
the  adversary. 

The  first  such  attempts  relate  to  ancient  times. 

It  is  known  that  before  our  era  daring  a  war  the  corpses 
of  persons  who  had  died  from  plague  or  cholera  were  passeo 
over  the  walls  of  besieged  cities  for  this  purpose.  Tne  ' 
ninterred  corpses  were  left  where  the  enemy  was  supposed  j 
to  pass,  or  they  were  used  to  contaminate  the  water  source 

During  tne  campaign  of  Alexander  of  Macedonia  in 
Middle  Asia  the  inhabitants,  trying  to  stop  the  invasion 


of  the  foreign  arny,  threw  aniiaal  cornses  iato  v/eils  aiorus 
i Ds  route  ( 15) • 

The  Tatars,  who  were  surrcundiaa;  tae  fortress  at 
Kaffa  (at  the  site  of  the  present  Theodosia),  used  one 
such  method  outside  the  city  of  Tana  (nowadays  Azov). 

They  threw  over  the  wall  corpses  of  their  soldiers  who  had 
died  from  the  plague.  An  epidemic  flared  up  among  the 
guards  of  the  fortress,  forcing  them  to  give  up  and  flee 
on  ships  to  Italy.  Plague  was  brought  into  the  ports  cf 
Italy  and  Marseille  from  where  it  penetrated  into  the 
countries  of  Central  Europe  «»nd  eventually  across  iroland 
into  Russia  (16). 

At  the  beginning  of  the  l6w  century  suggestions  of 
ways  and  means  to  spread  infectious  diseases  in  the  armies 
of  the  enemy  could  already  be  found  in  some  tactical  hand¬ 
books.  Such  data  were  discovered,  for  example,  in  Tiora- 
kenti  di  Honcnia's  tactics,  relevant  to  the  l6tt  century, 
and  in  the  book  "Method  of  Combat"  written  by  the  Litovian 
author,  Ziminovich  in  1850  (17). 

In  1763  the  English  colonists  deliberately  spread 
smallpox  among  the  Indian  tribes  who  inhabited  Canada. 

It  is  obvious  from  tne  extant  documents  that  on  the  in¬ 
structions  of  Governor  General  Amherst  Capital  Scuyer  of 
Colonel  Bouquet's  command  at  Port  Pitt  transmitted  to  tv.o 
Indian  chiefs  two  blankets  and  a  handerchief  which  pre¬ 
viously  had  been  used  by  smallpox  patients.  As  a  result, 
a  smallpox  epidemic  broke  out  among  the  Indians  (18,  19). 
According  to  Waksman  (20),  the  conquerors  of  1 izarro  did 
the  same  thing. 

Bullene  (21)  attributes  to  Napoleon  the  deliberate 
flooding  of  the  approaches  to  the  surrounded  fortress  of 
Mantua,  anticipating  that  malaria  would  hasten  the  capitu¬ 
lation  of  the  Italians. 

However,  the  enumerated  cases  of  the  use  of  infec¬ 
tious  diseases  to  combat  the  enemy  are  only  isolated  at¬ 
tempts.  The  more  or  less  systematic  treatment  of  ques¬ 
tions  relating  to  the  creation  of  a  bacteriological  weapon 
could  begin  and  begin  only  on  the  attainment  of  a  certain 
level  of  knowledge  about  microorganisms  and  the  routes  of 
their  dispersion.  According  to  our  available  data  the 
very  first  beginnings  in  this  direction  originated  at  the 
start  of  the  20» century  in  Germany  under  the  Kaiser.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  First  V/orld  War  Germany  made  a  series  of  attempts 
of  the  military  use  of  bacterial  agents,  not  going,  how¬ 
ever,  outside  the  framework  of  sabotage,  French  General 
Marsenac  (22),  the  head  of  the  army  veterinary  service 
during  the  First  World  War,  reported  one  such  case  based 


10 


on  authentic  facts  drawn  froi  official  sources.  In  1916 
the  German  mission  in  Bucharest  received  oy  diplomatic 
mail  a  parcel  which  later  inadvertently  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Roumanian  military  powers.  An  examination  of 
its  contents,  done  by  the  well-known  Roumanian  bacteriol¬ 
ogist,  Babes,  revealed  that  ampules  found  there  contained 
cultures  of  anthrax  and  glanders.  The  instructions  at¬ 
tached  to  the  ampules  indicated  oeyond  a  doubt  that  the 
cultures  were  meant  for  sabotage  infection  of  large  cat¬ 
tle  and  horses.  It  read:  '*In  tne  package  there  is  one 
ampule  for  horses  and  four  for  large  cattle.  Use  as  direc 
ted.  Each  ampule  is  calculated  for  the  infection  of  100 
animals.  Infect  the  animals  directly  through  the  mouth 
or,  if  not  possible,  mix  the  contents  with  the  feeding'*. 

There  is  also  widely  known  the  facts  about  German 
saboteurs  infecting  with  anthrax- and  glanders  the  cattle 
purchased  by  the  Allied  lowers  in  countries  of  Latin  Amer¬ 
ica.  Following  this  in  1918  the  exportation  of  cattle 
from  Argentina  to  France  was  completely  halted. 

In  1917  the  German  agents  successfully  infected 
with  glanders  4,500  mules  shipped  by  the  Allied  armies 
from  Messopotamia. 

A  number  of  attempts  to  use  bacteriological  agents 
directly  at  the  front  are  also  known.  Thus,  on  the  vVest- 
ern  fron  at  the  location  of  the  French  troops  a  German 
agent  was  captured,  and  upon  searching  him  he  was  found  to 
be  in  possession  of  a  culture  of  glanders  organisms.  At 
tne  order  of  the  Oomuiander-in-Chief  of  the  French  Army  No. 
4576  on  26  March  1917  there  was  reported  to  this  effect: 
'*In  the  pre-frontal  zone  a  German  agent  was  apprehended  on 
whom  suspicious  material  was  found.  He  was  forced  to  con¬ 
fess  that  he  had  been  assigned  the  mission  of  inducing  an 
;epidemic  of  glanders  among  the  horses  of  the  French  army. 

A  metal  tube  was  found  on  the  man  who  was  arrested,  and  in 
it  there  was  a  long  glass  bottle  containing  a  nutrient 
medium  with  a  glanders  culture.  A  brush  was  attached  to 
the  tube  on  an  iron  wire.  The  German  agent  had  received 
instructions  to  use  the  culture  by  two  methods  -  to 
sprinkle  it  on  the  feeding  intended  for  the  norses  or  to 
instill  it  into  the  nasal  orifice  by  means  of  the  brush'*. 
Three  months  later  the  Commander- in-Ghief  reported  a  re¬ 
petition  of  the  episode  (23). 

An  attempt  was  also  made  to  circulate  hoof  and 
mouth  disease  on  French  territory.  However,  soon  after 
cases  of  sickness  appeared  even  on  the  territory  of  the 
opposite  side  from  where  this  infection  had  been  seeded 
(24). 


The  German  command  evidently  did  not  propose  to  be 
.  liaiited  to  trivi-l  sabotage  and  rlanned  the  military  ap- 


' plication  of  bscterial  agents  on  a  larger  scale.  Tr.is 
has  been  confirmed  by  innumerable  evidence  detected  on 
some  sections  oi  the  front  abandoned  by  retreating  German 
divisions,  that  is,  a  large  numoer  of  ampules  v.'ith  viru¬ 
lent  cultures.  A  high  officer  of  the  Kaiser's  military- 
naval  fleet,  Klotz  (25) »  in  the  book  "The  Hew  German  V.ar"  , 
alludes  tc  the  bacteriological  attack  made  in  1918  against 
the  Allied  Armies  on  tne  western  front.  This  experizaent, 
the  consequences  of  which  would  have  been  infinite,  .vas 
only  interrupted  on  10  Novemoer  1916.  "'^e  recall",  he 

wrote,  "the  experiment  undertaken  by  the  army  of  tie  for¬ 
mer  German  Crown  Prince  on  the  ?/est9rn  front.  An  armis¬ 
tice  put  an  end  to  this  repulsive  crime". 

Attempts  to  spread  infectious  diseases^by  Gerinan 
saboteurs  were  also  made  in  Russia.  In  1915  -Kussian 
counterespionage  apprehended  a  German  agent,  Gregorsen, 
who  brought  cultures  of  plague  bacteria  into  Arkhaagel' sk 
via  the  United  States  of  America.  As  be  disclosed  on 
questioning,  these  cultures  were  meant  to  spread  plague 
among  the  population  of  Jetrograd.  7.1. th  the  arrest  of 
another  German  saboteur  a  plan  of  the  assignments  to  in¬ 
fect  and  poison  the  water,  water  sources,  and  fora.ge  was 
confiscated  (26).  | 

Liepmann  (2?)  reports  that  at  the  end  of  the  First 
World  '.Var  German  fliers  discarded  contaminated  food  pro¬ 
ducts  over  Roumanian  cities. 

Marsenac  (22),  r^erring  to  an  article  of  the 
Swedisc  Doctor  Voker  tJ/  ,  also  confirms  that  at 

the  end  of  ti'e  war  the  Germans’ made  attempts  to  spread 
cholera  among  the  population  of  tae  countries  oppossing 
Germany. 

In  spite  of  defeat  in  the  First  World  v'/ar  German 
militarists  did  not  give  up  the  idea  of  using  the  bacter¬ 
iological  weapon  in  future  wars  which  the  vindicative  cir¬ 
cles  planned. 

In  193^  the  well-known  English  journalist,  Steed 
(26),  published  fortuitously  obtained  secret  documents  of 
the  steps  in  an  aerial  chemical  attack  of  the  German  mili¬ 
tary  ministry,  and  these  contained  data  on  experiments 
conducted  on  the  dissemination  of  bacteria  through  the  air 
This  material  particularly  mentioned  exp'eriments  performed 
oy  German  agents  in  Paris  and  London.  The  excerpts  pre-  ! 
seated  by  Steed  substantiate  the  fact  that  these  exueri-  | 
ments  vrere  for  the  purpose  of  revealing  the  possible  in-  I 
feet  ion  of  the  population  of  these  cities  by  means  of  j 
dlatributins  the.  microarganiamR  bv  thR..alrhf)rnp  systeja - 1 


iO'3ai!i  was 


u  sed 


:  +•  .-i  ! . 


A  cult  are  ci  :■ .  pro''i  I  •:  losuiii  was  used  as  tbs  tesi.  era'?- 
Tse  recovered  deca  ■•v'-c  vc-rif’.ed  cvencaai  1  y  ju 
HaEiburiE.  Several  ex'seriisent s  on.  tde  arroo.crie  :iis- 
of  t.Lcrc'or '■•anisins  v,’ere  conducted  trie  sii.)ur.js  of  ]  ci-i' 


'am 


]  CI'IS  . 


i  In  tre  cG's,  accordin  ,  to  the  evidence  of  blCiC 

a  raiciber  c.f  inveritioas  were  ra tented  in  Geraary 
wnirch  could  be  arpiied  for  the  acuieveaent  of  a  oactcrfc'- 
Ictcicsl  attack.  Spec i .Tiically .  Yuakers,  unn^^r  tse  inne-' 
cent  title,  ’’.fpr.a.ys  iced  to  coroat  insect  pests",  pats'ce- 
a  aietiiod  which  could  be  succsssfull.y  used  for  the  st.ra-'in- 
of  poisonous  suostances  and  ratho-^enic  Dacoerio  froti  an 
airplane . 

[  at  the  beyinnin;!  o.f  the  Second  horld  bar  thor-  v?ac 

ja  v.hoie  yrour  of  scientif ic-research  institutes  in  Gert-tni 
jh’orkinic  on  typ-es  of  the  baccericlo.yical  weapon,  and  t,'ie 
jlar.rest  in  the  country  was  the  bacteriological  institute 
iof  hoDert  Koch,  which  from  the  moment  of  '^■^irlsr's  rise  to 
jpowei’’  went  under  the  control  of  tne  War  Ministry  ( S7,  I'?, 
loO),.  A  large  i.sborqtory  near  Berlin  worked  on  the  oroo- 
•lem  of  dispersing  the  pathogenic  bacteria.  T'.uera,  in  tar 
jficular,  v;ere  mace  models  of  bacterio logioai  aviation 
ibetibs  holding  from  30  .g  to  fiv'e  kg  of  bacterial  suscensio/ 
I (  BO-xC.alled  " baby  bomb "  )  , 

:  That  the  C-erman  corojnand  planned  to  use  the  bnctc-;r;i- 

{o j.o-.:;ical  weapon  in  imminent  war  actions  was  affirmed  b.y 
the  fact  that  for  sever.al  months  before  the  occupation,  o.;' 
Ih.r  Holland,  and  France  b.y  the  Germans,  as  this  ha 
oee.u  rei' erted  :i.,a  sn  edited  statement  of  an  Fnrlisi:!  pha 
maceutical  oournal  (.il),  they  had  purchased  .abroad  the 
nece.1sa.r7  materiai  for  b.ne  preparaticn  of  tne  nutrient 
media  rhe  size  of  the  ourcii-ases  proved  that  ar:  esti"f.'ce 
had  tseen  made  for  rr..as3  nroauction.  Another  article,  v/nic* 
had  been  oouaht  in  unusually  large  quanti.ties,  ’.vas  .lyco- 
pedium.  T'he  author,  v/ho  cited  these  r-icts,  expressed  ti-: 


bel.m3f  that  t.he  lycopodium  might  have  oee.n  used  as  an  ah- 
&ur:,>r.nt  oi  the  bacteri.'-:«  intended  for  airborne  dissemi.aa- 
t  u..  o  r.i , 

Duriny  military  actions  on  the  Faste.rri  front  the 
German  .Pas'-ist  command  ti’ied  several  times  to  install  oac- 
tericioyicai  sabotage.  Although  these  attempts  were  rcl.a' 
tively  primitive ,  nevertheless  they  proved  that  tre  3ovie‘ 
armies  wore  encounterin.r  an  enemy  who  was  ready  to  apniy 
any  means.  The  first  sabotage  was  exposed  in  the  winter 
of  I9df  when  the  escape  of  a  group;  of  Fed  jirmp'  scJ.diers, 
iou se-inf ested  and  sick  with  typhus,  was  especially  or- 
i.garri.cert.  frora  a  .Fascist  concentration  camp  for  military 
icri-oners.  They  escaped  unchallenged  and  passed  thro^y-h 


ht  ^0 


the  front  lines  to  the  territory  occupied  dy  our  divis-  j 
ions.  These  people  were  quickly  detected  and  hosnita  1  L.'edj 
but  in  their  wake  there  sprang  up  several  cases  cl  ::ick-  ! 
ness  aiaong  the  personnel  coming  in  contact  with  them 

Another  b- cteriological  sabotage  was  planned  by  r.'LC' 
Cierman  Fascist  command  on  quite  a  broader  scale.  In 
the  attacking  division  on  one  of  the  Belorussian  .t rents 
discovered  near  the  toivn  of  Ozarichi  in  poless-^aya  Ofala.st, 
not  far  from  the  front  border  of  the  German  side,  terse  j 
concentration  camps  where  about  .55,000  persons  were  held  j 
under  horrible  conditions.  A  typhus  epidemic  raged  aaocy  i 
the  imprisoned.  It  was  established  b.y  the  High  Inquiry  0/'‘| 
the  government  commission  (53)  that  these  '>  amps  had  been 
erected  for  the  purpose  of  spreadinp;  typhus  among  rhe  per¬ 
sonnel  of  the  Soviet  army  and  the  civilian  population. 
Typhus  patients  were  carried  from  various  dlscricts  of 
lole«Hk;a>8i,  Gomel '  skaya,  Jinskaya,  and  other  temporarily  oc¬ 
cupied  oblasts  of  BSSR  into  the  camps  and  delioer^tely 
mixed  v;ith  the  healthy  prisoners.  The  plan  evolve..!  from 
the  fact  that  tiie  movement  irora  camps  in  rear  districts  oi’ 
patients,  who  we®  evacuated  with  olie  advance  of  the  Soviet 
army,  caused  the  emergence  there  of  a  typhus  epidetme.  and 
t}..e  direct  contact  of  our  personnel  with  them  brought 
bout  the  infection  of  the  fighting  contingents.  Ho'vever, 
the  tinely  applied  procedures  of  medical  service  of  ! 

tl'e  Soviet  army  helped  us  to  prevent  the  wide  spread  of 
typhus  in  the  armies  as  well  as  among  the  civilian  popula¬ 
tion. 

There  are  also  data  on  the  preraration  of  t.he  Ger- 
m-'n-r  ascist  command  to  apply  the  oacterl ciogical  weuT  on 
on  the  .vestern  front,  too.  The  Office  of  Strate-'ic  er- 
vices  of  the  Anglo-American  Alliance  in  19+5  reported 
that  the  bomuardment  of  the  British  Isles  was  planned  by 
rocket  missiles  oearing  bacterial  agents  (3++;. 

The  screen  of  strict  secrecy,  wr.ich  covered  t.ue 
preparations  of  Hitler  Germany  for  bacteriological  '.vsr- 
fare,  was  raised  a  little  at  the  Kuremburg  Trials  by  the 
testimony  of  a  former  chief  of  the  medical  service  of  tne 
German  army,  yajor  General  Schreiber  (33)»  As  it  arrears 
from  his  testimony,  the  drastic  intensification  in  the  j 
preparations  for  applying  the  bacteriological  weapon  per-  i 
tained  to  the  period  of  defeat  of  the  Fascist  armies  near  | 
Stalingrad,  when  the  German  command  tried  desperately  tc 
explore  some  new  way  of  carrying  on  warfare  which  tney 
hop'ed  would  help  decide  the  outcome  of  the  war  in  favor  of 
Germany. 

In  19^3  the  chief  of  staff  of  the  general  office  of 

thift-4*ejaan  military  f ogees,  galled  a  - 


which  he  announced  as  a  resalt:  of 


fairs  it  was  necessar.y  to  consider  tre  ar s  Iirat^.on  of 
bacterioiof  ical  wear  on.  At  the  cit-g  of  the  cc'nl: ‘^o  tvnce 
a  srecial  co.r.ndtte.:  was  ointea  to  r.andle  ail  toe  ac¬ 
tivities  in  the  si.here  of  bacter i-ological  '.'Hrfaro-,  e*-  i 
bers  of  the  co  :  .ittoe  included  rer.resenr.ac  i.ves  oi  ti  c- 
scientific  sections  of  ti.c  ndiil-arj  pirouna  lorces,  t-ct  ci- 
visicn  of  arias  ana  researon,  (L-ilitar,y-3arii  tar.v  ana  /.■dii- 
tar.y-veterinar.y  control,  staff  officers  of  tne  fni^itarj 
air  force,  and  so-ae  civilian  experts  (zocloriats  ana  oot- 
anists;.  For-ier  beruty  Onief  31ort  oi  the  Irterial  '.-di  cal 
‘-'■.rvice  v;as  appointed  director  cf  ti.e  oreration. 

In  addition  to  the  already  existing  ornanicat i one , 
in  ioznan  still  another  institute  was  created  v-here  ex-cr- 
irnents  were  perfcr.ned  on  the  dissemination  cf  pa  ric:  ionic 
micrcorjcanisms  by  plane,  and  investigations  were  aaso  C  'r‘- 
ried  out  on  ti^e  potential  use  of  pests  of  apricuitural 
plants  for  military  purposes. 

In  19'f5»  v/nen  the  advancing  sector  of  the  doviet 
army  was  approaching  ^oznan,  the  institute  was  liquidated, 
and  its  persoruiel,  part  of  the  equiT'-ment ,  and  cuitares 
were  evacuated  to  Turingen  whore  the  interrurted  activi¬ 
ties  were  corxtinued  in  hastily  constructed  bui idin'p.- . 

The  Iburerburg  Tricunal  also  produced  evidence  at¬ 
testing  to  the  fact  t-nat  active  operations  on  the  bacter¬ 
iological  weapon  were  also  in  proc;ress  in  Germany  during 
the  Second  world  Par  in  an  institute  located  not  far  from 
Saxonburg.  One  f  the  iri’Cary  j.-robleus  under  considera¬ 
tion  was  the  mass  cultivation  of  plague  bacteria.  The 
president  of  the  Aobert  Koch  Institute,  rrofessor  i'illde- 
maester,  airected  tne  propram. 

inere  was  no  douot  that  on  the  eve  of  defeat  the 
Fascist  leaders,  trying  at  any  cost  to  remain  in  power, 
would  not  stop  oefore  applying  the  bacteriological  weapon 
on  a  broad  scale,  in  spite  oi  ti;e  fact  that  tF.is  ;vas  a 
danger  to  which  in  this  instance  the  population  of  Germany 
itself  miprht  be  subjected.  Foy/ever,  the  headlong  advance 
of  the  Soviet  army  warded  off  the  horriole  catastrophe 
prepared  for  the  peoples  of  Europe. 

intensive  developraent  of  the  bacteriological  weapon 
was  also  carried  on  by  imperialistic  Japan  in  the  period 
of  the  30’ s  and  40' s. 

'Ae  gathered  the  data  presented  in  this  section 
from  tiie  proceedings  of  tne  Khaoarovsk  trials  concerning 
the  former  officer  of  the  Japanese  array  who  was  charged 
iwith  the  preparat.on  and  application  of  the  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  weapon  (36)  and  also  from  the  book  by  the  former  rail- 


itary  ofiicer  of  the  Japanese  army,  Akiyaiaa  Klrosi  (3?) 
who  served  in  19^-5  in  one  of  the  Japanese  instituries 
(detachment  no.  731)  which  was  engaged  in  preparation  for 
oacteriological  warfare. 

T‘*e  idea  of  using  pathogenic  microorganis;ns  as  a 
weapon  was  first  revealed  in  Japan  by  Ishii  i=»hiro,  a  bac¬ 
teriology  instructor  in  a  military  medical  academy,  and 
it  found  active  support  among  the  general  staff  of  the 
Japanese  army. 

After  the  capture  of  Manchuria  and  its  conversion 
into  headquarters  for  an  attack  on  the  Soviet  Union,  on 
its  territory  in  1932  -  1933  a  special  bacteriological 
laboratory  was  added  to  a  contingent  of  the  Kuomintang 
army,  and  it  received  the  code  name  of  "detachment  Togo". 
Ishii  Shiro  was  placed  in  charge  of  it.  In  the  following 
years  (1935  -  1936)  this  laboratory  upon  the  secret  man¬ 
date  of  the  Emperor  of  Japan  developed  the  bacteriological 
weapon  in  a  large  plant  which  even  at  that  time  was 
staffed  by  as  many  as  1,300  scientific  colleagues  and  sub¬ 
ordinate  personnel.  In  19^0  the  staff  was  appreciably  in¬ 
creased  and  brought  up  to  5,000  persons.  As  a  cover  for 
the  true  status  of  the  activities  in  operation  the  plant 
jhad  assumed  the  name,  "Administration  of  Water  Works  and 
Iprophylaxis  of  Divisions  of  the  Kuomintang  Army" ,  and 
later  it  was  called  "detachment  No.  731”.  Created  as  a 
laboratory,  the  plant  was  supposed  not  only  to  explore 
ways  and  mans  of  carrying  out  bacteriological  warfare  but 
also  to  manufacture  bacteriological  weapons  in  numbers 
sufficient  to  supply  the  combat  activities  of  the  Japanese 
army.  In  the  manufacturing  units  the  agents  of  plague, 
cholera,  typhoid  and  paratyphoid  fever,  and  anthrax  were 
cultivated  en  masse  and  also  fleas,  which  subsequently  wer 
implanted  with  plague  bacteria.  The  productive  capacity 
was  calculated  on  a  yield  of  300  kg  per  month  of  a  oacter- 
ial  mass  of  the  plague  agent  concentrated  to  a  sour  cream¬ 
like  consistency,  or  500  -  600  kg  of  the  anthrax  agent, 
or  1,000  kg  of  the  cholera  vibrio.  Units,  working  on  the 
propagation  of  fleas,  could  deliver  about  45  kg  of  live 
mass  per  cycle,  which  lasted  3-4  months.  In  May  19^ 
the  military  ministry  of  Japan  demanded  an  increase  in 
the  productive  capacity.  The  yield  of  fleas  in  particu¬ 
lar  was  reputed  to  have  increased  up  to  200  kg  per  month. 

At  the  start  of  this  program  a  unit  was  located  in 
Harbin  but  later  the  main  part  of  it  was  relocated  in  a 
special  military  sector  in  the  district  of  Pin^fan 
station.  The  unit  was  made  up  of  eight  sections.  The 
duties  of  the  first  (investigative)  section  were  to  ex- 


16 


explore  and  study  infectious  biological  a^-ents  and  to  de¬ 
velop  methods  for  their  mass  cultivation.  The  second  sec¬ 
tion  t^expe-^imental)  was  engaged  in  the  laboratory  and 
field  testing  of  tne  selected  agents,,  the  development  of 
models  of  bacteriological  munitions  and  sprays,  and  xe  t 
propagation  of  fleas  and  their  infection  witn  the  plague 
agent.  The  activity  of  the  third  section,  located  in  Har¬ 
bin,  was  confined  to  aspects  of  the  v/ater  supply  and  w9g 
a  mask  for  the  true  nature  of  the  unit,  out  in  its  exper¬ 
imental  workshops  shells  were  manufactured  fcr  the  bacter¬ 
iological  bombs  by  the  "Ishii”  system.  The  fourth  section 
(production)  was  reserved  for  the  productive  cultivation 
of  the  bacteria.  In  the  fifth  section  ( so-called  train¬ 
ing  interval)  a  corps  of  officers  and  noncommissioned 
were  instructed  in  the  application  of  the  bacteriological 
weapon  under  comDat  conditions.  .  Apart  from  these  ti-e 
staff  of  the  unit  included  clinical,  supply,  and  general 
sec  cions.  The  unit  also  laid  out  a  firing  ground  at  the 
Anta  station  and  a  special  aviation  section. 

In  the  detachment  there  was  a  special  laii,  and  its 
prisoners  were  used  by  members  of  the  detachment  who, 
having  lost  any  resemblance  to  human  beings,  pe.i  formed 
crimin'--*!  experiments  to  test  the  effectiveness  of  i:v? 
oacteriological  weapon  under  laboratory  and  fiel'i  condi¬ 
tions.  It  has  been  documented  that  not  less  than  bCC  per¬ 
sons  were  exterminated  annuallj'  by  detachment  ■:o.  751, 
and  from  19^0  until  the  day  of  capitulation  of  the  Japa¬ 
nese  rymy  the  lives  of  not  less  than  d,000  persons  /ere  ; 
forfe'j  ted.  ! 

In  19'^0  four  related  aetaennents  were  fermea  wrich  j 
■were  located  in  the  line  of  the  main  attacks  ilanned  c.t  r 
the  J33)ane3e  operational  plan  of  warfare  against  the  Cov-  : 
iet  Union  (in  the  cities  of  Sun 'yu  and  Hallar  | 

and  at  Hailing  and  Li akoy  ! 

stations).  The  branch  units  wei'C  fitted  out  with  indus-  | 
trial  equipment  for  the  mass  cultivation  of  pathogenic  j 
bacteria  and  fleas  and  were  cooiont  divisions  designed  to  ! 
apply  the  bacteriological  weapon.  The  plan  of  cper-’t.ion  | 
for  combat  stipulated  the  subordinat :i.on  of  the  branch  uri-  j 
its  directly  to  the  commander  of  cue  armies  and  fronts  of  J 
the  Kuantung  forces.  The  staff  of  each  branch  numbered  I 
30c  persons. 

In  1936j concomitant  with  the  fonaation  of  the  ac- 
cailed  "Department  of  Later  Supply  and  iropbylaxis",  st" 11 
another  institute  of  the  .same  kind  was  created  on  han- 
churian  territory  and  at  first  received  the  name  (Fippo- 
enizootic  Division  of  the  Kuantung  Army"  and  later  on  j 


17 


"detachment  No.  IGO".  Tirje  detachment  was  located  in  the 
villa  .re  of  Molsatong  ,  located  ten  km  south  of 

Chan  chun  ,  and  like  detach;:ent  No.  731»  it 

had  several  oranch  units.  ffaKamatstt  Yudziro  (Jiro  vVaKa- 
matsu?),  a  major  general  in  the  veterinarj  service,  was 
appointed  head  of  the  detachment.  The  bacteriological 
weapon  designed  to  infect  agricultural  animals  and  planes 
Was  developed  in  the  laboratories  of  the  detachment, 
tossessing  a  great  productive  potential,  detachment  No. 
100  cultivated  anthrax  and  glanders  bacteria  and  micro¬ 
organisms  which  would  infect  grains.  The  staff  of  the 
detachment  numba-red  600  persons.  Bacteriologists,  botan¬ 
ists,  veterinarians,  and  chemists  worked  in  its  labora¬ 
tories. 

The  number  of  divisions  of  the  Japanese  army,  which 
was  assigned  to  the  development  and  application  of  the 
bacteriological  weapon,  was  not  restricted  to  the  Manchur¬ 
ian  detacuments  of  the  Kuantung  army.  There  were  similar 
units  on  the  occupied  territory  of  China  and  even  in  Japan 
itself.  In  1939  in  Canton  the  detachment,  "Nami"  3604, 
was  formed  which  also  had  the  same  job  as  detachment  "o. 
731.  In  that  very  year  the  same  division  began  tc  oper¬ 
ate  in  Nanking  ("detachment;  A.'*  1644).  The  personnel  of 
the  Nanking  detachment  numbered  only  a  few  less  than  that 
of  detachment  No.  731 »  amounting  to  1,5C0  persons.  The 
creator  and  coramander-in-chief  of  the  detachment  was  also 
Ishii  Shiro. 

The  Japanese  militarists  not  otaly  forcefully  devel-; 
oped  and  produced  one  badtei’iological  weapon;  they  even 
applied  it  on  tneaters  of  military  action. 

The  bacteri-ological  weapon  was  first  used  under 
combat  conditions'  by  the  Japanese  army  in  1939  at  the 
time  of  an  attack  on  the  'Mongolian  Peoples  Republic  in  th- 
region  of  the  Khalkhin-Gol  River  •  While 

withdrawing  to  the  rear  of  the  Japanese  troops,  which  Vvere 
devastated  by  the  joint  actions  of  the  Soviet  and  •..■ongol- 
ian  divisions,  special  detachments  of  the  so-called  "deat 
divisions"  contaminated  the  water  supplies  with  agents  of 
acute  gastro-intestinal  diseases. 

The  bacteriological  weapon  wgs  also  repeatedly 
used  during  combat  activities  in  ^hina.  In  19^  a  specia 
expedition  of  detachioent  No.  731,  headed  by  Ishii  himself, 
was  sent  to  Central  China.  Tr.e  expedition  dispersed  flea 
infected  with  plague  bacteria  from  a  plane  in  the  district 
of  the  ta»m  of  Ninbo.  This  operation  resulted  in  an  out¬ 
break  of  plague  among  the  population. 

The  second  expedition  into  China  was  organized  by 


de:;a 


\  M  :  •  T  ' 


de:;aolv:erT:  :c.  ''-U  ‘de  a.,.-.r,ei’  ui"  .r  -  -  '•■.-r.  | 

'T' ■  ■■'3"''V  t/ S  !T  j:*  r.  C  *' i-  ^;X*  ''■'U'i  r_  C  '  V;/' I- . .  ■ .  j.  ■*'  ' 

C  0 ‘i  T' :'■:£?  U "  C-t  0;.0  CO  -"'..uri-LOci  t  i  C-  ■  ;  ''^  C  ■  ■  ^  '  .  | 

iiniortant  jarcrioa  r.r  v,l:Lch  ^vas  i.c-.;  ‘.C’.-aj  o'*  ■  '  i 

tr.io  pur  ose  iai'ecred  i'leau  7;e- e  a?;a’ r.  u:au-.’.f:  -v.^r  •■'.  ^ 

toun  acd  o::ner  ropvilat  i  oa  puint:^  ia  tve  L  d-jas- i 


'ting 

Hu  lake  and 

caused  an 

C'  vi 

toreak  o 

f  '.  I&kU''^  ic  to.- 

''  J  " 

!  n.c'  se 

arriS'S  and 

a  on. O'  tbs 

lo 

c.ai  roou 

la  0 1  on  * 

} 

Tne  tniv* 

d  e.Xi  ed;. t 

■:'!  '''• 

of  detac 

ror'onc  N  .  Vfl  . 

ntv 

./  '..  A..,  J 

1  a  !.  '\y  r  1 X  no.  ^ 

or  p.nii  red 

at 

tns  1 1.  .e 

'''•  f'  7.  ‘\f  '  j'k-  r  t'-c.  t;  • 

0  t  ■■  ;  r 

•r 

!  J  ^  '  ‘:i 

nose  -aruy , 

consider  a 

i'urp'.asse 

d  ohc  I  'il'St  t  r  ./ 

i 

Isooo 

e  and  >as  r 

ianned  by 

Coe 

JaTiane,: 

p  .  "0  T:  ■  •  ^  ^3  \  r  t'  r  : 

il?':nd.i.au  dt^  tacnuent: ,  ”A"  lb4d-,  a-UC  d'-ok  a(;uv'V;;'  .r 

ta-  cperat  'or..  a  saeciailjf  or^anizea  k-vi.oi'./U  a.  a.;  ;;v : :  a  :■  ■■■  , 
i-ed  Cije  .vai.tr  3urpl;T  on  tde  temtory  a oat^i^aied  .-v  ;,;u-  : 

j2irano:..e  arnj'.  In  some  piiscrer-of-vwar  rarpn  rLe  ui  iC'-.  j--  | 
\.ert  icjeuroi  and  later  released  I'or  liv-t  •  u.r‘;.o.vt  .r'  | 

IsL.reaaiae  tbe  disease.  la  aoandoned  ooni- .uni tits  v,  ..v -  ; 

iuece.-  provisions  were  Itl'l.  In  add.i  t  .0  ruo-'i.n-v:  ,  ;o  ' 

idltHS  a^d  sprays  ol'  oacterlai  aus^oasioar  v.ore  u:s; 
d'ic,.  ai-tpiants,  litor  tke  end  of  the  operati  :vi  ,'s  .i  r, - 
iiiciailp  dtciarod  at  a  '’oafereiioo  v;f  i;i.^  aiiecr.o:'v  o:.  v',.;.: 
ids  taoxibent  fo.  7ol  ti-ar  tie  aupiicati  cn  oi'  tno  lacto'  :o- 
jla.;,i  val  weapon  in  Ode  t  *nn^  die  trio  t  aad  piver  inr  "vl.  vv.  ’ 
Ir’ceaitsj ,  prcjaotiaK  auaerous  ootareoAS  of  iuj'cctiwor  tie- 
ItuioXL  i^o)  .  nki,ye::.i.i.  liroal  aiso  repvn-ted  :r  a  t  v.  it- 
!t;yo,.  enc;  practi'-ea  i..e  oo-cailsd  eitouioi cas  irtr:  -j 

p:....  V -.  .i  ..-li/VtrUz'  1  01'  ti-t  _ O  i  ‘.  >0.0  i.  it  ;l  t  .i.  '  i.  O.i  -c.  ^V  o  ••  ■ 

jiiiLoetvd  ...  .  ..  .  ■ 

j  '.’t  oai'a  -  - o ij  o .i  c y 0  vj .s r  •  o..  .‘a  a-  >1  ’ 'ii't  ..f ;  ..  v  *  ; 

jiii  t'..' ly  activ.ito:i  ai  vcr  toe  ti-tao;.-ro is  attao^'.  of:  .•^rr.:v;d.  ; 

jG^^^ri-any  on  ti.^r  oovitt  dr;,lon.  enen  tite  ooriti-:  iii:  o.r-.e 

;ci  i_,p.;.viuiis tic  Japan  vaiited  for  tat  opf^orture  tsorent  ! 

linvaet  til  :bjviet  lar  .ast, 

^  .  ... 

J  Inis  period  was  asooc:.a::ea  oito  toe  coiwanu  c,;  ; 

!K:..litar;y  iiinistry  of  Japan  concerning  a  notrdlo  '.te;"..;-  -—I 

productive  capacity  of  tie  detacancnto  and  tutir  ' 

jorarches  and  a  reviOdeiinp  ei'  tie  producinp  Jvvinlcno  ''•.■">•  j 
d-ectou  v  itc'.  then,  a  route  icr  special  reocnand  ssea-' e 
jtjrouno  into  nistilcts  ocrderiap;  tne  Soviet  ■■nioii  to  i  j.  no  I 

ioul  if  tne  bacterioia^ical  v.eapon  could  be  v...ed»  aiiu  a  ; 

lowucex  of  ora.er  anaert akiaps ,  vv-aiciu  positiveir  de. lonet.  o-i  t-| 
.  nnat  not  oy  far  would  tUe  last  role  ia  the  u ians  f  or  . 

jccaid  ctin.^  vmri'arc  apgainst  the  Soviet  Union  be  piven  no  . 

Iti.e  .-.'ac teriological  vveat^on. 

I  ris  it  became  known  fron;  tba  testiior.,^  of  tne  ru;-  ’ 

fccaed.  and  t  ve  wltnocses  at  tne  trials  of  tne  ior.vir  ver- 


vieenen  of  the  Jaoa-n.03e  array,  -'.'r-o  v;ere  j  for  t  h- 

preparaticn  arid  apulioation  of  ti.e  DHCCt-ri  ve^i  c; 

in  accordance  wi  th  instractiona  fro  ::  Dt  e  ..'tr.!'.; ral  aiat  f  a 
plan  of  dacterioioiJical  attacK  on  cur  Far  r.a.'tejrr,  ’ r:  j  : 
KhabarovsK,  Vorosi.ilov,  Bla>roveshci;ensk ,  arva  u.lt.-i  - 
would  be  developed  o.y  the  staff  of  the  K^antun  arr-.y. 

As  a  part  of  the  "Kan-Toky-A"  plan  (Ian  O'  or u ra¬ 


tion  of  tro  Kuantuap^  army  for  an  ati 


iCf'. 


on  the  ■■■ovlo 


o  - 


■:  r.  e 

a 


ion.,  set  for  i9'+l)  especially  prepared  courses  we:  e 
.;?anized  b.y  detachments  ho.  d?i  and  lOe  for  officers 
unde.r  officers  who  were  assigned  to  :J50  the  baett-’d 
cal  wear  on. 

The  branch  units  of  detach  sent  IIo.  'nil,  es  ■: 
called  in  war  tire,  were  under  the  jurrsdi  ct ic.n  of 
cormn.anders  of  fronts  and  armies,  and  in  e.cch  ar''\v  t 
were  for.Tied  the  so-called  anti-epizootic  units  ranaed  by 
eo'cercs  from  detach-Tient  !Jo,  100.  The  r.eaa  of  detachment 
No,  731  again  was  designated  General  Ishii. 

The  enumerated  undertakings  condiicted  in  the  ’'■01,1- 
od  from  IS-t^l  -  19^5  pointed  to  the  fact  that  tne  •teranese 
{army  v/as  ready  to  accomplish  a  bacteiiological  attacK  aiiC 
was  only  waiting  for  a  signal.  However,  these  de3i-:;ns 
v;ere  disrupted.  The  Soviet  government,  in  view  of  t. i*e 
openly  hostile  policy  of  Japan  and  true  to  its  resronsiDi i|- 
ji'ty  to  its  allies,  in  order  to  hasten  the  end  of  the  ‘.Sec¬ 
ond  vVorld  War,  which  was  invoking  cruel  hardships  on  '-.ary 
nil..!  ions  of  people,  denounced  the  neutrality  r.acr;  and  i  s- 
isued  an  order  to  its  a,rmed  forces  to  destroy  the  Krunoun-r 
army  -  the  shock  force  of  the  Japanese  aggressor  in  ti.c 
Far  Fast.  In  the  briefest  i  eriod  of  ti  re  chi  3  order  .cs 
fulfilled,  and  tne  J-naaese  armed  forces  c.a::  iculated . 
ffhe  dynamic  advance  of  the  Soviet  arm.v  stunned  and  <ie'^cr- 
alized  the  Japanese  troops  and  did  not  allow  the.m  to 
the  bacteriological  weapon. 

Just  before  the  surrender  of  tne  Ja]'  cece  :c 

[order  to  conceal  the  crimes  which  had  been  oonmitted,  chs 
buildings,  equipment,  .and  gre  ter  r;art  of  the  dociire.atc 
of  tne  ..etachraents  and  their  branch  units  were  destre.  ,  ; 

land  cho  personnel  w^ere  ordered  to  evacuate  to  S  utl:  Korea.! 
Before  the  departure  of  the  personnel  an  order  vas  isruoi  i 
I'which  stated  that  in  the  event  of  tne  capture  of  ae'coers  • 


lof  tne  detachments  the  secrets  of  detachment  No.  751 


I 


whould  remain  undisclosed  without  fail.  Fver.yone  v.as  0:- 
jdered  to  destroy  personal  identification  and  other  oarers 
lT.roving  their  participation  in  the  detachment.  Alt.  ouph 
ci^ey  v/ere  far  from  being  ail  criminals,  who  developeu  a:;..; 
applied  the  bacteriological  weapon  ana  conducted  felonious! 


20 


lexperimeats  on  people,  thej  were  successful  in  ^retting  a- 
wa.T  from  deserved  punishment,  but  some  of  then;,  particular - 
Ij  Ishii  bhiro,  Jiro  »vataniatsu,  and  others,  fled  to  Seoul 
and  were  taKeii  prisoners  b.y  the  American  armj .  In  soite 
of  the  fact  that  tiie.y  were  the  persons  vjho  should  primari-j^-"'^ 
Ij  had  had  to  answer  to  the  verdict  of  the  nation  for  of¬ 
fenses  to  humanity,  the  American  powers  chose  to  shield 
them  from  deserved  punisiimeat  so  that  tnej  could  use  tnem 
in  the  future  in  their  own  interests. 

Activities  on  the  ere- tion  of  the  oacteriolot^ical 
weapon  had  also  been  carried  on  for  a  lonf?  time  in  other 
countries  of  the  imperialistic  camp,  particularly  in  the 
United  States  of  America. 

The  first  development  of  the  bacteriological  weapon 
in  the  USA  dates,  according  to  official  opinion,  from  19^1. 
In  the  fall  of  19^1  Secretary  of  War  Stimson  recommended 
to  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  that  a  special  commit¬ 
tee  be  appointed  to  appraise  the  possibility  and  expedien¬ 
cy  of  using  pathogenic  microorganisms  for  military  pur¬ 
poses.  After  a  detailed  study  the  co^-onittee  conduced 
that  the  bacteriological  weapon  could  be  used  in  combat 
and  urged  that  speedy  measures  be  adopted.  Cn  the  report 
of  the  Secretary  of  War  it  vms  decided  to  form  a  special 
civilian  agency  which  would  direct  all  activities  on  bac- 
;teriological  warfare  which  were  being  conducted  in  the 
country.  Such  an  organization  was  organized  under  the 
Federal  Security  Agency  and  received  the  name  ”'A’ar  Research 
Service'*,  Merck  (36),  whose  official  rerort  we  have  used 
for  our  data  reported  below,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  it. 
The  war  Research  Service,  in  the  interests  of  efficiency, 
economy,  and  secrecy,  was  in  size  a  small  interdepartmen¬ 
tal  agency  and  confined  its  activities  to  coordination  of 
the  projects,  using  for  this  purpose  the  scientists,  work¬ 
ing  facilities,  and  experiments  of  various  government  and 
private  institutions.  The  suggestions  coming  from  this 
organization  were  vested  in  the  form  of  orders  and  direc¬ 
tives  issued  by  various  military  departments,  particularly 
the  army  medical  service  and  chemical  corps. 

Apart  from  the  armed  forces,  the  organization  had  a 
connection  with  the  Departments  of  Health,  Agricult.ire, 
and  Interior.  The  necessary  information  was  furnished  by 
all  possible  avenues:  Army  and  Navy  Intelligence,  Stra¬ 
tegic  Services,  and  Federal  Bureau  of  Investit^aticn. 

The  National  Academy  of  Sciences  and  the  Research 
Council. of  the  USA  formed  their  own  special  committee, 
which  included  many  well-known  scientists,  as  an  advisory 
organ  for  problems  of  bacteriological  warfare. 


21 


The  'var  Hesoaioh  'ervice  Gr«raxil.zed  an  excnan-'e  of  j 
ioTormation  on  questions  of  bacuerioloi'ical  -varfare  be-  | 
jtween  tx e  USA,  England,  and  Oanada.  la  aidition  to  this,  i 
[reciprocity  of  the  experts  was  widely  used  to  coordiaate  j 
jthe  v/ork.  ; 

i  The  jaost  outstandin?  achieveneat  of  the  ar  j 

(search  Service,  accordin-^  to  "erck,  w-.o  headed  it,  was 
ithe  execution  of  a  program  designed  to  exoand  the  fori.at  j 
of  the  existing-  knovxiedge  concerning  tne  use  of  pathogen¬ 
ic  agents  as  a  weapon.  The  aicr  t  authoritative  T>eople  in  | 
jtnis  field  of  science,  particularly  Rosebury  and  nis  as- 
jsociates,  conducted  a  careful  study  and  deletion  of  all 
•the  familiar  pathogenic  microorganisms  in  order  to  deter- 
jmine  the  advisability  of  using  them  for  teso  purposes. 

[The  disease-producing  microbes,  v/hich  were  chosen,  re 
'Subjected  to  a  further  stu-y  in  research  laooratories  of 
ia  number  of  universities  and  private  instit-ations . 

!  The  scope  of  the  expanding  investigations  scon  re- 

jquired  a  change  in  the  structure  of  the  administration  and 
jtbe  routine  of  conducting  the  work.  The  far  Pesearch  fer- 
!\/ice  requested  that  the  Ohemical  vV-^rfare  Service  take  ever 
[the  ex;  ansion  of  the  research  prograrr.  and  the  creation  of 
ja  powerful  pilot-plant  for  its  acconpliahuent .  Tije  site 
sseiected  for  the  erection  of  such  a  center  v/as  Uamp  De- 
jtric,  located  not  far  frer..  Frederick,  Maryland.  The  con- 
(struction  v/erk,  berun  in  April  19^5,  was  compieLed  aread 
'of  schedule.  The  direct  supervistion  of  the  activities 
[performed  in  this  center  was  given  over  to  t'ne  Gherp-ical 
(Warfare  Service.  Ti.e  far  Pesearcr.  ;r.ervice  continued  tc  | 
.coordinate  th.e  achievements  on  txe  bacteriological  j 

land  defense  fro;.,  it  on  a  nation-wide  basis  and  also  to  | 
provide  Camp  SetriCK  v/ith  equirment  and  a  scientific  i 

(staff.  i 

!  In  19^^  it  was  decided  to  pursue  ti:e  investi.':atioas| 

(under  way  by  every  possible  means  and  especially  to  solve  j 
itne  problem  of  the  protection  of  the  army,  since  the  in-  j 
iteilii-rence  service  sad  reported  to  the  joint  chiefs  of  j 
(staff  that  tnere  were  indications  that  the  German  cor,'r.'.nd  | 
[was  T.reparing  to  use  the  bacteriological  weapon.  In  vie/  j 
iof  this  a  larger  nart  of  the  responsibility  for  the  lul-  ■ 
fillment  of  tne  overall  pro.rram  on  problems  of  bacteric-  j 
logical  warfare  was  rlaced  upon  the  .var  Department.  To  j 
direct  these  divisions  of  work  an  advisory  organ,  the  j 
"United  htates  Biological  .Varfare  Committee",  was  formed 
in  the  ; ar  Derartment,  The  committee  inciuced  rerresenta- 
tives  of  the  Chemical  Service,  Army  and  Uavy  yiedical  Ser¬ 
vices,  n..mmunitions  Service,  ar.-ny  Supplies  d ervice,  Army 


Air  iorce,  a  division  of 
Soccial  iervi:as  of  'Utie 
3t:rategic 

War  Research  Service,  was 


be  nevl.y  forii-ed 
Der-artiT.em 


ar 


ax’taie  fit  of 


j.nteiii -a-  noe  , 


a  p.r 


ervices.  ;',;ercK,  who  v;as  the  airecoor  of  fre 


named  chairniou  of  che  Co  . t  :eo  . 
'Jecause  of  the  transference  of  autiiorit;/  for  toe  prepara¬ 
tion  for  bacteriological  warfare  into  tne  rands  of  the 
Ivar  Department,  the  par  Pesearch  Service  was  liquidated. 

Ti  ’iational  Academj  of  Sciences  of  the  DG.t.  and  tne 
Research  and  Development  Department  of  the  USA,  .as  an  ad- 
visorj  organ  under  the  War  Department,  also  organized  a 
special  -agency,  the  so-called  DEP  Ocmniittee  (59). 

Direct  supervision  of  the  projects  was  done  by  t:;-? 
‘Special  Projects  Division,  which  was  a  part  of  the  Chor- 
ical  Warfare  Service. 


I  The  Army  ‘i-edica.i.  Service  v/as  entrusted  with  -obe  un- 
Idertakings  on  the  defense  of  the  trooT..s  from  the  bacterio¬ 
logical  v;eauon. 


1  During  this  period  the  staffs  of  tre  inscltutes, 

which  were  occupied  with  the  development  of  the  bacterio- 
iogical  ‘eavon  and  the  means  of  defense  from  it,  were  ap¬ 
preciably  expanded.  At  the  disposal  of  the  Sfecial  i re¬ 
jects  Division  were  about  3 >900  workers,  of  whom  nearly 
2,300  were  Army  personnel,  1,000  itavy,  and  about  IOC  civil 
ian  personnel.  The  number  of  persons  engaged  in  pro.^ects 
on  the  bacteriological  wveapon  were  far  from  being  confined 
to  the  staff  members  of  institutes  subordinated  to  the 
dheaical  warfare  Service.  As  one  of  its  directors,  Briga¬ 
dier  General  Greas.y  (40),  indicated,  a  system  of  liaison 
Was  so  extensively  used  that  the  development  of  certain 
aspects  v;ere  entrusted  to  university  laboratories  ana  pri¬ 
vate  firms  which  possessed  the  facilities  for  their  re¬ 
liable  solution  with  subsequent  remuneration  from  funds 
released  by  the  War  Department.  One  can  get  an  idea  of 
the  extent  of  such  contacts  from  the  fact  that,  in.  Greasy’ 
woi*ds  (40),  "many  millions"  were  expended  in  payment  of 
them,  while  the  entire  cost  of  the  research-developmental 
work  in  the  field  of  bacteriological  warfare  curing  the 
Second  World  War  consisted  of  about  SO  million  dollars  (34 
The  variety  of  agents  with  which  the  American  ex¬ 
perts  worked  for  the  purpose  of  using  them  as  a  bacterio¬ 
logical  weapon  was  quite  impressive  even  at  that  time. 
Perhaps  one  can  get  an  idea  of  this  from  the-  incidents  of 
sickness  among  the  fersonnel  of  Camp  Detrick  which  ap¬ 
peared  as  a  result  of  interlaboratory  infections.  For  on¬ 
ly  three  years  (1943  -  1946),  according  to  the  data  of 
Peiner  (41),  there  were  recorded  23  cases  of  anthrax,  19 
of  brucellosis,  7  of  tularemia,  6  of  glanders,  and  one  of 


:23 


psittacosis.  In  addition*  judging  by  the  projects  con- 
pleted  at  Gamp  Detrick  and  the  publications  after  the  end 
of  the  war*  experiments  were  also  conducted  with  melioi¬ 
dosis  and  botulinus  bacteria  and  several  species  of  fungi. 
It  has  been  said  that  even  the  plague  agent  v/as  subjected  i 
to  study.  lisctensive  work  was  performed  on  the  recovery  of 
antihormones  intended  for  the  destruction  of  plants. 

In  19^,  besides  the  pilot  research-developmental 
center  at  Camp  Detrick,  the  Special  Projects  Division  had 
at  its  disposal  still  more  centers  of  the  same  sort.  Spe- 
ifically  under  its  auspices  were  the  research-developmen¬ 
tal  centers  for  field  testing  -  the  proving  ground  at  Dug- 
way*  located  southwest  of  Salt  Lake  City  (Utah),  the  one 
on  Horn  Island  near  Pascagoula  (Mississippi),  and 

another  at  the  army  chemical  center  in  Camp  Detrick,  kt 
the  beginning  of  19^  the  construction  of  a  building  for 
the  manufacture  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  was  comple¬ 
ted  in  Vigo  (Indian^  )  (38). 

Besides  the  War  Department  and  administratively 
independent  of  it, a  study  of  aspects  of  the  bacteriologica 
v/eapon  was  undertaken  as  well  by  tt.e  Navy  Department  of 
the  USA,  which  set  up  a  number  of  research-developmental 
centers.  One  of  them  was  the  Navy  Medical  Re’=iearch  C‘^n- 
ter  No.  1.  which  was  affiliated  with  the  bacteriology  de¬ 
partment  of  the  University  of  California.  From  an  offic-  | 
ial  release  of  the  Navy  Department,  the  contents  of  which 
were  published  in  the  newspaper,  "The  New  York  Times"*  of 
5  January  19^  (^^2),  it  is  not  difficult  to  grasp  that 
they^rincipal  subject  of  the  investigation  was  the  plague 
bacterium.  At  the  same  tine  work  was  also  being  per¬ 
formed  on  several  pathogenic  viruses  (43).  Primary  atten¬ 
tion  was  given  to  the  development  of  methods  of  making 
bacterial  and  viral  aerosols.  The  Navy  Department  in 
1946  i'^sued  a  statement  that  the  activities  of  the  divis¬ 
ions  would  continue  in  the  future  in  accordance  with  a  un¬ 
ified  program  of  the  Army  and  Navy  on  bacterioloarical  war- 
are. 

Vhe  great  scope  of  research-developmental  projects 
helped  ijhe  United  States  of  America  to  achieve  certain  re¬ 
sults  even  by  the  end  of  the  Second  Norld  War  in  this 
ield.  According  to  Merck*  the  USA  strikingly  outdis¬ 
tanced  Germany  and  Japan  in  this  respect. 

Tn  spite  of  the  repeated  claims  of  official  circles 
in  the  USA  that  the  necessity  of  the  expanded  operations 
on  problems  related  to  the  bacteriological  v/ear on  was  cre- 
ted  only  by  the  threat  of  its  application  by  Germany  and 
Japan*  investigations  in  this  field  not  only  were  not 


24 


stocped 


the  conclusion  of  the  Second  World  War, 


thej  received  still  more  eaiphasis. 

The  Chemical  Corps  centers  systematically  expanded 
and  increased  the  volume  of  the  conducted  invescigations. 
In  1955  Secretary  of  the  Army,  Brucker  ordered 

a  new  expansion  and  reorganisation  of  the  Corps.  In  the 
order  it  was  reconinended  tPat  the  projects  be  conducted  in 
the  realm  of  creating  ''new  types  of  bacteriological  and 
chemical  weapons  to  such  an  extent  as  only  the  human  brain 
can  visualize  (44).  According  to  well-informed  sources, 
the  Indian  newspaper,  "Blitz*',  reported  that  in  1956  the 
National  Security  Council  of  the  USA  haa  cgain  decided  on 
a  further  expansion  of  the  Chemical  Cor^s,  accelerated 
production  of  the  bacteriological  weapon,  and  intensifica¬ 
tion  of  the  research-development  programs  in  tnis  area. 

An  increase  in  the  defense  budget  for  195?  of  approximatel; 
three  million  dollars  as  compared  with  1956,  in.  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  some  weli-ini o-imed  observers,  was  rriiiarily  due  to 
the  appropriation  of  large  sums  for  the  needs  of  the  Cheiti- 
ical  Corps.  The  number  of  proving  grounds  for  the  test  in-: 
of  the  bacteriological  weapon  v/as  increased.  In  cdditiou 
to  the  proving  grounds  already  at  the  disposal  of  the  Cc^r;.! 
it  was  planned  to  assign  400,000  acres  for  a  proving 
ground  in  Vvendover.  New  bases  for  field  testings  v/ere  sur- 
jgested  for  construction  on  the  island  of  Okinowa  in  the 
^'larshall  Islands  (75). 

f  Biffiul  taneously  a  staff  of  experts  was  trained  in 

the  use  oi  tne  bacteriological  weapon.  According  r,o  a  re¬ 
port  in,  the  American  newspaper,  "Navy  Times",  such  a  cen¬ 
ter  was  located  at  Camp  Lejeune  (North  Carolina)  -  oilitar, 
School  of  the  i^arine  Corps.  The  program  of  ins-oructior  of 
the  officers'  division  of  this  school  was  pri-uarily  devot¬ 
ed  to  a  study  of  the  principles  of  atonic,  bacteriological 
and  chemical  warfare.  Similar  schools  were  also  organised 
in  the  American  occupation  zones  in  Vvestern  Germany.  In 
partic-ilar,  a  school  of  chemical,  biological,  a.nd  radio¬ 
logical  warfare,  accoraing  to  the  Austrian  newspaper, 
l'’0£terreichische  Volkstimme"  C'^),  was  not  far  from  the 
Icity  of  Weyerb  orst  (Nhina  Palatinate)  • 


According  to  a  report  in  "Newsweek"  (47)  in  the 
all  of  1954  at  Camp  Carson  and  dike's  Peak  (Colorado)  it 
was  surmised  that  manoeuvers  of  the  armed  forces  of  the 
JSA  included  a  demonstration  of  the  use  of  the  b.acterio~ 
logical  weapon  under  conditions  similar  to  combat. 

A  large  number  of  the  research-developmental  insti¬ 
tutions  of  lestern  Germany  were  attracted  to  the  exploita¬ 
tion  of  the  bacteriological  weapon.  According  to  the  data 


of  PInobicch  (26;,  activities  of  t*. is  nature  ^ere  ''■er— 
fornetJ  at  tne  iiocrt  Irsritute  in  hi-5.:''.burirT ,  ti  .?  HTf?ier.ic 
Institute  of  toe  I»G-.  fiirbeti  I r:du5'tr..e!-:-  in  iu'  ertaJ  ,  tie 
2tate  V.edical  fteso&ron  Laboratory  in  Lupne  bur-^,  t;  .-. 

State  Hesearcb  Labcrato.r.y'  in  Fi’ej.bury-,  ocheeeicn  !  Ir 

atitute  in  T^ibingen,  tbe  Hygienic  Inncltate  of  tbt,  3n->^r/r  ! 
slant  in  Leverlrifien,  and  sone  otter  oente-s.  So  e  r  '  -o  ,  t 
occupational  troops  of  tne  USA  Pave  al.-O  v/orked  on  '  ro*  1 

bacteriological  weapon  in  Ivesterc.  Germany:  tLe  irniv  •  | 

search  Institute  in  iunicii,  a  nuwber  of  sv-ecial  :.abcra-  | 
cones  relocated  in  the  area  oi  the  Go-'Cailed  "sr.rat c lic  ! 


trj.auga.6  m  tile  Pftlatinate  (Kaiaerslaut'^pii’-Ie'if? ■•t'l'hT 
"nd  others  where  Ger’^ar  expert?  v/ere  extensively  ^ 

InvestiiTatioas  in  the  field  of  the  baoterioicr  - o^l  | 
have  also  been  broadly  carried  on  In  .cnglanci  and  Cacauu.  I 
fhese  procedures  were  star’ted  quite  a  b.it  sooner  in  i.nj-'*- 
land  khan  in  the  United  States  of  Anierica.  In  an  cfiiciai  ' 
release  of  tae  inglist  goveranent  (48)  it  was  iadicatod 
that  as  early  as  1936  a  special  agency  was  created  in  tie  ( 
iDofense  Goraraittee  in  Great  Bri  t'  in  v/hose  tasks  included  a  !. 
btady  of  probleias  related  to  bacteriological  warfare*  j 
these  inventigatioas  acquired  especially  great  'i;ropo’'-i.  io.:G  j 
jduriiig  vhe  Second  iorid  War  when  cne  services  of  a  laiie  [ 
group  of  highly  qualified  specialists  were  inlir.tod  t"  \ 
.wjrii  on  theiii,  and  a  huge  research-developnentai  center  v.-.as  i 
jestabiishod  in  lorton  (49,  50).  In  1942' special  retrest'O- 1- 
jtatives  wers  ap'vointed  in  the  USA  and  Canada  to  estaMi?:h  ; 
;a  liaison  on  tcricc  having  tc  do  with  the  devclopr-'ent  ci  | 
jtae  0;5,cteriologicai  wea' on.  Ti' ring  the  entire  wei-  a  co*:i-  | 
piete  exchance  of  information  was  exercised  on.  cne  a-  | 

phi  eved  results,  and  there  was  a  reciprocity  of  specialist;'! 

“^ugiish  govarnient  created  a  special  orgscioation  -  \ 

jthe  Civision  of  Lic'r'obiological  Investigations,  whici  was  | 
^  part  of  the  0epart2>ent  of  Oheraical  Pefensc  Investi  p.-  { 

itions  (91)  ~  to  supervise  the  studies.  i 

i  fhe  Tjrojects  were  not  stopped  even  after  the  ena  ol  1 

[tne  Secono  World  War  and  are  carried  oiit  at  proserd.  on  a  | 
jiarge  scale.  In  recont  years  field  testing  of  the  oaotcr-! 
ioiogical  ’.veapon  has  been  done  repeatedly.  Sanai;:,  i- r  i 
-inister  ci  lurchases  in  i^nnl-^nd,  told  of  one  of  .n.er-  in  j 
iarch  ly54  ?2).  as  it  anoearc  from  his  stnt.enenc,  in  j 

19;t4  re  ;uiar  testiUi.'S  of  the  bacteriological  we-i  .  on  -.'ere  i 
advccated  in  the  area  of  the  Jaharrx  Islands,  wnico  v;- | 
riave  been  a  continuation  c.f  previous  testings  on  toe  ; 

shores  of  Scotland.  One  of  the  factors  to  be  considered  ; 
in  toe  future  testings  was  a  study  of  the  effectiveness  of  | 
a  bacteriological  attack  on  the  naval  fleet.  | 

lanada  also  has  seven  researcb-deveiCT'ciental  c'.n-  ! 


26 


i civo i 1  ons  coruiac  ted 


i  >  d'v-' 
ey  the 

and  Canada  are  an  integration  of  a  unifieo 
igraiu  of  rre paredaesa  of  these  co:.ntries  for 


'iia  hi.  n,6t 


ters  vinx':h  ere  en.’^aaea  in  vronects  oo 
bacteriological  .veanonn.  One  of  them  is  lo-  ateu 


tyi’cs  of 

in  .Suf- 


field  and  covers 

T 
X 


a  suri&ce  o.t  aboa 


n  s  c  p  c  1" 

r  i 


t  O  , 
04,  On  a  in'-' a 
reri'-ral  ’"-ro 
t;  e  a  n  i  i  c  a 


tio-n  of  bacteriological  warfare.  Special  conferences  are 
[held  for  choir  coordination,  and  an  exchange  of  siceczalio' 
is  practiced  (i^)-  At  a  later  tine  representatives  of  t-.e 
federation  of  the  Gerraan  rfepublic  were  drawn  into  rarticj  - 
patinn  in  these  conferences.  One  such  conference  inCi.id- 


iag  the  western  Geroisn  specialists,  which  took 
.  asnington  in  19‘^'d-,  the  newspaper,  "Huaanite"  (  -t; 


|notr>d,  referring  .c  Cne  Anierican  .jourunl, 
jwas  proposed  t;,  it  the  German  experts  also 
[V/ith  the  experi ntal  work  at  Camp  Detrick. 
The  pre-  ..ted  facts  assuredly  prove 


■’he?.' 3  week ' 
he''':.' "e  f’  " 


Iteriological  Wiriron  occutiies  a  far  frorr 
arsenal  of  armaments  of  the  imcerialis ti? 


► ,  i-  -  f  '  P  . 

L.1  si.  h*  V  i 

•  St  place 
states . 


■  ’.1^  ' 


I  :l 


The  Paris  agreements  specified  tnat  bao 


:ajcy  All 


count: 


f  •.  Q  /-I 

L»iC«s  U  O.  O  Js  t 

lino  re  as  e 


h: articinants  in  the  .-’estern  £aro’'ean  11 
■.vculd  .make  preparations  for  ciiemicai  arid,  bacteri olonica.l 
warfare  and  would  store  up  supplies  of  cbemic.al  ar.  '  c  ic- 
iteriological  weapons  and  Aouid  outfit  tnoir  armies  v.ib;. 

It  hem. 

.  In  Protocol  III  of  the  Pai-is  .a.greerr.en in  about  the 

|formation  of  the  "'ft'eatern  European  Alliance",  it  indicator 
jthnfc  members  of  tne  block  would  build  reserves  of  C;:.:--  c-hem 
jical  and  bacteriological  weapon  along  with  stores  ol  tre 
iratoinic  weapon.  These  reserves  would  iucluae,  as  nil  oriel 

jin  Appendix  II  ..■!  t.  i?  Protocol,  devices  ana  a' raratus 
prepared  especially'  for  milita.ry  use  of  insect  rr 

jother  living  and  dead  organisms  or  their  toxic  T;r.:iucts, 
i  Protocol  IV  of  tne  Paris  agreerencs  about  tr.e  fer- 

of  the  "'/.'estern  iLaropean  Alliance"  rn'rovided  foe  an 
in  these  reserves  in  accordance  v:' ci:  the  r  .r'.cs: 
ief  troops  of  tne  state  -  tiie  meiioer  oi  tize  block  -  by  a 
isj-stem  of  -'iass  rroduction  of  the  che':''ijcal  and  bacte.ri.ologi 
jcal  weapon  on  the  territory  of  the  particular  count and 
[by  Tuarchacing  and  receiving  from  abroad  the  so— called  "ex- 
jternal  help  of  military  materials"  (57)  • 

I  Pret'aration  of  tne  countries  of  tue  imrerialistic 

camp  for  bacteriological  warfare  has  been  carried  on  in 
sv'ite  of  tne  fact  that  the  application  of  the  bacteriolog¬ 
ical  weapon  blatantly  breaks  the  rules  and  principles  of 
conducting  warfare  and  the  universally  acknowledged  stan¬ 
dards  of  international  law. 

Prohibition  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  was  e.c- 


27 


sal  and  oacterioio^i cal  warfare"  and  at  the  same  time  to 
secure  new  appropriations  for  its  preparation  (iC;. 

fjia.ior  General  W.  Greasj,  (Ret.),  former  Gnief  of 
the  Chemical  Corps,  appeared  at  a  session  of  cne  United 
States  Congress  in  June  lt?59  with  similar  assertions  (Gl). 

A  systematic  strueptle  to  pronioic  tne  use  of  apents 
of  mass  destruction,  including  the  oaCttuTiological  v-eapon, 
has  taken  place,  and  the  Soviet  Union  has  led  and  is  still 
leading  it.  Joining  in  the  Geneva  protocol  of  19^5, 

Soviet  government  proposed  to  establasn  "a  very  snort  per¬ 
iod  for  its  ratification  by  ail  the  staces"  and  control  (f 
its  execution. 

In  the  foilo^ving  years  the  Soviet  Union,  at  ‘session.-, 
of  foe  Committee  on  Disarmament  of  the  League  of  Nations 
and  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Uations ,  re-  | 
peatedly  iias  raised  the  question  about  taking  effective  [ 
measures  to  prohibit  agents  of  mass  destruction.  I 

In  September  1959  during  the  visit  to  the  USA  of 
N.S.  Khrushchev,  Chairman  of  the  Soviet  Ministry  of  the  ■ 
USSR,  the  government  of  the  Soviet  Union  introauced  fcr 
the  ccrsideratioQ  of  the  United  Nations  a  declaration  a- 
bout  universal  and  complete  disarmament  with  concrete  pro¬ 
posals  on  this  question.  One  of  the  proposals  pertained 
to  questions  of  the  chemical  and  bacteriological  weapon. 
■'The  reserves  of  chemical  and  bacteriological  agents  for 
conducting  war  which  nave  been  accumulated  by  -Home  states,  ' 
the  declaration  stressed,  "the  poisonous,  asphyxiating 
substances,  cultures  of  deadly  bacteria  -  potential  foci 
of  serious  epidemic  diseases  -  all  of  this  will  be  de¬ 
stroyed  decisively,  without  a  trace,  and  forever.". 

The  proposed  program  of  universal  and  complete  dis¬ 
armament  in  its  third  stage  provided,  among  other  things, 
for  the  inspection  of  industries  for  the  production,  nos- 
session,  and  storing  of  agents  of  chemical  and  bacterio¬ 
logical  warf.are.  all  of  the  existing  reserves  in  the 
states  of  the  chemical  and  bacteriological  weapon  would  be 
confiscated  and  destroyed  under  international  control  (62) 

All  of  prop;ressive  world  society  supported  the  | 

struggle  of  the  Soviet  Union.  The  International  Red  Cross  | 
v/hieh  was  organized  in  1952,  directed  an  appeal  to  all 
staiies  to  ooserve  the  Geneva  convention.  Even  the  i:inglish  : 
medical  association  joined  in  this  appeal.  Before  that, 
in  June  the  IV  International  Congress  of  P.icrobiolo- 

gists,  convening  in  Copenhagen,  in  its  resolution  directed 
against  the  bacteriological  weapon,  characterized  it  as 
"barbarian"  and  "completely  unworthy  of  civilized  society.  ' 
A  very  similar  resolution  was  taken  by  the  Intiernatiorril 
Congress  of  Cytologists. 


.29 


i:iiportani:  ster 


the 


&tra-'.’;le  cf 

■ 


.'.or Id  pro¬ 
gressive  societ.y  for  the  orohioitioQ  of  tne  oacteriolos-i- 
oal  weapon  was  the  pugwashCNova  Scotia)  later na*io«ai 
tific  Gomniission  ueetin^-,  which  ..as  held  at  toe  end  of 
hLUgust  1959  at  the  es'tace  of  Cyrus  oa ton,  a  pronirn-nt 
A.nierican  industrialist  and  a  supporter  of  '.vorld  coexis¬ 
tence  of  countries  -with  different  social  and  poliricai 
structures.  In  the  work;  of  the  conference  there  r-rv. :.ci- 
pated  26  scientists  from  the  U5S?,  US4,  vGs.cr  ia,  Kn/iar.d, 
France,  India,  Sweden,  and  I»en:2.rrd.  The  staff  ci  ti  c  L'  - 
dele;’:ation  included  Ac-demician.  h.Vi.  Dubinin,  Corresponding 
Member  of  the  Acadeioy  of  Sciences  of  t.ce  JSnh,  A 
IfiiShenetskiy ,  and  corresponding  meRftier  of  tie 
lledioal  Sciences  of  the  USoh,  A. A.  Sacrodinusev .  A  : 
the  do  locates  there  were  hiKh-rankinp:  foreign  sc  lent' 
and  specialists:  T.  Pcsebur.v  and  Gh.  T.eaJc  (; 

|K.  Dolaan  and  5,.  Aatson-'./.yatt  (G-anada),  D.  Hotnoioed 
Stoker  (hn^laud),  r.  Tibeau 


Vinaia),  Sven  Card  (Sweden), 


(France), 

ovtin  u'cAxu.  i.  o ..euwii/ ,  and  i  .  ’..aknus  (Oeiirarh). 

•:?he  scientists  gathering  in  Pugwash  .joined 

in  one  general  plea  -  to  use  tne  high  achieve aonts  of  ;on- 
te.Mporarjy  science  and  industr.7  for  the  advant'if';e  cf  fruiian- 
ity  ami  not  for  the  creation  of  new  agents  of  nass  iestruc 
t  ion, 

It  se-aions  of  the  conference  reports  were  hc-'^rd 
and  d.''scus3ed  on  the  T.-erfidious  nrocerties  cf  cue  cceni.t.i 
and  bacteriological  v;ea]  on. 

The  oessage  of  the  nead  of  the  Soviet  govemrent , 
Krushchev,  to  !r,e:r:bers  of  the  conference  once  itore 

tne  entire  -.orld  tl'.e  firm  ncsiticn  of  tic 
tne  matter  of  r.rohioition  of  all  tyes  o: 


demonstrated  to 
Soviet  Union  in 
weapons  of  tass  destruction  -  nuclear,  ci.emi.tal, 
teriological . 

I' he  iugwash 
Idir'ected  a;-'’ainst  t 


ac- 


conference  'cuolis.ted  ,an 


.e  r’-cduc.tion  and  a' pli cati  o.u  of  c:  o  ;.u. 
jteriological  and  czieniical  ■.'•eapon.  Tie  orposim  su^iid  .vas 
jthat  this  type  of  weapon  is  increnuran  than  otrer  agents  o: 
(“warfare,  out  the  scientists  enme  forv/ard  in  favor  of  t:.-- 
jprohibition  of  the  application  of  tne  bacteriological  and 
jcnemical  weapon  of  mass  destruction  and  rejection  of  se¬ 
crecy  in  investigations  leading  to  its  crest ion  and  adar— 
tation.  In  a  declaration  it  was  stressed  that  "onl.y  cue 
absolute  prevention  of  war  will  pre'serve  tne  life  of  tre 
reople  and  civilization  from  the  cnemical,  bacterioloyl cal j, 
and  nuclear  v.eapon'’  (64,  63,  66). 

VJorld  public  opinion  is  extremely  averse  to  preoar- 
a liens  for  bacterioloKical  warfare.  The  official  cir 


les 


the  UFA  will  oe  forced  to  recognize  this.  In  a 


dO 


[u  ti.-,'  Oiv:  Liari  ^dvisorv  Oc:nRit,tee^  qr '  roved  fo  l>ov 
‘jL  ■)'j  o,y  z'Lic  .".ecretary  oi'  uefense  ore  USA,  it  V05. 
Iti’iat  cr.o^iical,  DiolCr;icpl,  a;ia  rad ^.o .:i  •  •  1  ::eano: 
L\re  tat  in  t-neir  prcrer  i-iace  .in  .iKer i .'-.an  ziliia-rry 
tie  sa'i'.c  time  tr.e  autdor  01  toe  cercj't  acrinoale 
Ithafc  the  T'rer.  arauion  ol  cnerjiieal,  D  :C ueri.o 1 , 
dioiogical  v.ariare  incited  everywhc-re ,  incl  ioiri;*  i 
cea  States,  aversion  and  a^dtation.  ''A  a;ooa  rart 


ctivities  of 


dor'',  s 


is  said 


her 

» ■  rj.  0 

r.  0 1  s  Q 

.ns  of 

war 

•fry  r 

i  . 

•,v]  ' 

CO 

•^1,  9 

!-.j  ra- 

the 

Js-l- 

.r  t  0  i 

n  the 

ac- 

. «  1  vJ.  di 

Ci  eih:,: 

ic  i  1 

i'cary 

count,  "is  concidered  apialling  in  cnaracter,  ana  l  eisi.ai 

it  Vw3.ll  not  encounter  any  kind  of  support .  inilicary 

circles  .suaily  use  every  means  to  avoid  discu . sioii  of  the 
chemical  and  bacteriological  weapon,  partly  from  the  ^ :  ::k 
of  int'^rnational  and  domestic  psyclologicai  reac 1 1  o.as  '  (C? 
ihe  negative  position  of  ]vaolic  ct  inion  is  al^50  i  :  :o ■■nisei 
by  the  American  radio  comnencator,  ren-iing,  who  a 

rauio  incerviev.-  with  General  B'ullene,  chief  of  tt  e  Army 
Ghem-ical  Corps  on  questions  of  bacteriological  warfare: 

"A  great  part  of  tne  population  of  our  country  reacts  neg¬ 
atively  to  the  badteriologicai  weapon,"  General  Bullene 
was  forced  to  -admit  (21). 


The  presented  facts  prove  that  the  bacteriological 
weapon  nfc  present  occupies  a  strong  place  in  the  arsenal 
of  some  capitalistic  states.  This  arbitrarily  dictates  ? 
urgent  necessity  to  cur  medical  'vvorkers  to  oe  well  in- 
forraed  on  questions  of  defense  from  this  v.eapon  axid  to 
know  its  basic  properties. 


SISLIOGf.APr'Y 

1.  iUorozcv,  -...A.,  Solcv^v,  VJfe.,  "SrEallpox" , 

State  I^blisninf:  Eouae  of  ifedical  Liborsture,  19^0. 

2.  Zinsser,  h.,  ’’Rats,  Lice,  and  History”,  Boston, 
Little,  oroAn  and  Go.,  1933. 

5*  Rczhdestven -kiy ,  V.id.,  "The  jpxrerience  cf  Sov¬ 
iet  fv'edicine  in  the  Great  Patriotic  v/ar  of  19+1  -  19+9", 
1933,  32,  III,  69. 

+  .  Karpov,  'A.K.,  "The  experience  of  Soviet  i.edicin< 
in  the  Great  Patriotic  V.ar  of  19+1  -  19+5",  ivlosco/^,  1955, 

32,  I,  110. 

5.  Kashina,  i«.G.,  "The  hicperience  of  Soviet  i.ledic  1; le 
in  the  Great  Patriotic  .ar  of  19+1  -  19+5",  Hosco.-  ,  1955, 

32,  I,  135.  i 

6.  Besprozvannjyj  M.  L.  In  the  book.:  "Ivlilitary 

.Ipide.T.iology " ,  edited  by  1. 1.  Ko{5ozin  and  V.D.  Belyakov.  ! 
liiblisbed  by  the  ..ili bary-Medical  Order  of  Lenin  Acadenay  1 
ia?.eni  ,3.M.  Kirov,  1957.  ^ 

7.  Besoi-ozvann^,  M.L.  ,  Siroko,  .4.L.  In  tne  oook; 
"liilirary  Spidemiolorvy" ,  edited  by  1. 1.  Rogozin  and  V.D. 
Belyakov.  Published  by  the  kilitary-Iviedical  Order  of  Len¬ 
in  Academy  imeni  S.Ii.  Kirov,  1957. 

8.  Bashenin,  V.A.  ,  "Coarse  of  Specialized  n.p'ide^d- 
ology",  State  Publishing  House  of  Medical  Literature,  1955 

9.  Smedeil,  D.  In  the  book:  "Viral  and  Ricketn- 
sii^l  Infections  of  Man".  Pdited  oy  T.  R5vers.  Poreipn 
Literature  luolishing  House,  1955,  715* 

10.  Boldyrev,  T.  "The  Pxperience  of  Soviet  .».edi- 
ciae  in  the  Great  Patriotic  7.ar  of  19+1  ~  19+5”,  Mosco?.’, 
1955,  wosco-v,  32,  I.  35. 

11.  Snyder,  J.  In  book;  "Viral  and  Rickettsial  In¬ 
fections  of  Man".  R'dited  bv  T.  Rivers,  foreign  Litera¬ 
ture  Publishing  House,  1950,  6+6. 

12.  food,  j,,  "Plant  Diseases".  Yearbook  cf  Derar 
meat  of  Agriculture  of  the  USA.  foreign  Literature  Publi 
iug  House,  1956,  15. 

13.  Doonan,  "Plant  Diseases".  Yearbook  of 

Department  of  Agriculture  of  the  USA.  Foreign  Literature 
Publishing  House,  1956,  5  (Preface). 

1+.  Bennett,  "Plane  Diseases",  Yearbook  of  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Agriculture  of  USA".  Foreign  Literature  Publish¬ 
ing  House,  1956,  2+. 

15.  Filonov,  G. ,  "Sailors  of  the  USSR  Navy",  1939, 

12,  29. 

16.  Bashenin,  V.A.,  "Course  of  Specialized  Ppidemi- 
olof>:y".  State  Publishing  House  of  Medical  Literature, 

1955,  389.  ■ 


i.:'  0  } 


17.  Voizara,  "Le  Pro^res  iled.'*,  1936,  16,  655. 

:;it€d  in  "Journal  of  r^edical  L’pideiniolojj.-.y  and  Infection" 

1936,  17,  4,  637. 

18.  Nichol,  "Evolution  of  Infectious  Diseas¬ 

es".  State  Publisbin.^  House  of  Biological  i.'.edical  Liter-\- 
ture,  1937. 

19.  Steam,  E.V*.  and  Steam,  P.A.,  "The  /  fleet  of 
Smallpox  on  the  Destiny  of  American  Indians".  Bruce  Hum¬ 
phries,  Inc.,  Boston,  1945. 

20.  rtsksman,  S.A.,  "Bulletin  of  America's  Town 
Meeting  of  the  Air",  1946,  f.iay,  12,  3. 

21.  3V/-Radio  Interview  with  General  Bullene,  ’.F. 
Armed  Forces  Ch^m.  J. ,  1994,  8,  2,  16. 

22.  hiaroenac,  "Revue  Vet.  Med.",  1934,  Sept.  30. 

23.  Komieu,  "Revue  des  Deux  Mondes',  1934,  Sent.,!, 

41. 

24.  sarkisov,  I.Z.,  "Bacterial  .Varfare",  Dcstov-on- 
the-Don,  1940. 

25.  Klotz,  H. ,  "The  Hew  German  War",  Paris,  1957. 

j  26.  Knobloch,  K.,  "The  Bacteriological  .ar",  Berlini 

'1995. 

27.  Liermann,  II.,  "Death  from  the  okies",  London, 

1937. 

28.  steed,  Vv'.,  "The  Nineteenth  Century  and  After'. 
Cited  oy  inooloch,  E.  (265. 

29. Kapustin,  A.K.,  "Chemistry  and  Defense",  1959i 
June,  22.  1 

30.  Azar'/ev,  v,  ,  "i:*iilitary  Philosophy",  193B,  12, 

97. 

31.  "Bacteria  as  leapons  of  V.ar".  Pharmaceutical 
Journal,  1946,  196,  40. 

32.  Bol’yfev,  T,  .,  Rlkin,  I. I.,  "The  Experience  of 
Soviet  i.iedicine  in  tne  Great  Patriotic  war  of  1941  -  1945" 
WIoscov/,  1999 J  32,  I,  94. 

33.  Collection  of  reports  of  ^igh  State  Commission 
on  the  villainous  German-Fascist  Usurpers.  State  lublish- 
ing  Rouse  of  -  oliticai  Literature,  1946,  183. 

34.  Shallett,  S.  "Collier's",  19'<^,  June,  I5. 

39.  Nuremburg  Trials.  Collection  of  racers.  Edi¬ 
ted  b.v  K.P.  Go’^snenin  et  al.  Vol  2,  :».oscov;,  1994. 

36.  evidence  of  Court  Trials  Pertainin,"  to  Servici- 
len  of  the  Japanese  Army  Charged.  v;ith  the  rreparat.-' on  and 
A' 'Mication  of  the  oacteriological  -Veapen.  State  Publish¬ 
ing  House  of  Political  Literature,  1996. 

57.  "Akiya.ia  Hirosi,  Serial  o.  731",  Foreign  Lit¬ 
erature  lublishing  House,  .loscov/,  195c>. 

3o.  Merck,  G.7/.,  "V-ilibnry  Sur  >:eon",  19-'-*6>,  io,  5, 

273. 


oj  ri 


39*  "Ariny  Crdn-jnce  ' ,  19^,  .larch  -  April,  ??b. 

40.  Creaay,  vV.?.!.,  ''Ar  ied  Forces  Oheiiiis^ry  Jouranl", 

'yb-,  5,  3,  16. 

41.  Feiaer,  J.  ,  ’’Harper's  Magazine",  l’::*4c;,  ?.:a,7. 

42.  "Nev.  York  ‘rimes",  1946,  January  5- 

43.  Snaw,  0.,  "U.S.  Arned  Forces  l.ed.  Jour.’’,  1330, 
1,  10,  13  ;9 

44.  "Fravda",  1953,  9,  11. 

45.  "Navy  Ti-nec",  1954,  15,  51,  17. 

46.  'Csterre Ichiscne  Volkstim.T.e'’ ,  .l933,  14,  6. 

47.  "L'Haiiianite  ' ,  1954,  22,  5. 

46.  'iriiariTiaceucxcal  Journal",  1946,  5,  1,  Voi  196. 
46'.  Jewell,  1-.,  "Daily  *;ork.er",  1954.  26,4-. 

50.  i-inci.er,  0.,  "Dail.y  Fxpresa",  1951,  30,  . 

51.  iincher,  C.  "Discovery",  1950,  !-• 

59.  "Daily  'Vorker",  1954,  12,3. 

53.  'ouricher  Zeiuung",  1954,  15,  5. 

6^4.  xaltber,  K.  ,  "Ger'xar.  Health",  1959,  7,  93. 

55.  "Iravda",  1955,  5,  9. 

55.  "L' Humanite " ,  1954,  5,  4. 

57.  "Iravda  ’ .  1955,  14,  1. 

68.  "Go ilectioa  of  Hxistinp  Tre-;bies,  .&.yree;r!?n  ;i" , 
a.^d  laci'.s  01'  foreign  Otaces".  Voi.  5.  Publtcac io.’  of 
ireopls's  viinisjry  of  6crei.-u  Affairs,  1930,  3. 

59.  Hozhnyatovski.y ,  T.,  Zhultovskiy,  K.  ,  "Biolo-  *- 
1  warfare.  Irreat  and  Heal  ity’’ .  Foreign  Literature 
oiirjx.'ina-  Rouse,  ’loscow,  1950. 

60.  Zukcv,  y. ,  "Pravda",  1659,  94,  9* 

61.  I.eoDt'yev,  Al.,  "Kra.‘5naya  Zvezda",  1959,  IS,  6. 

62.  "Pravda",  1959,  19,9. 

63.  "Bacteriological  V/arfare",  "Lancet",  1952,  27, 
12,  GCLYIII,  6746,  1270. 

64.  Dubinin,  .vl.,  "Pravda",  1959,  24,  9, 

65-  "Pravda",  1959,  26,  8. 

66.  "Pravda",  1959,  31,  8. 

67.  "Pravda",  1955,  9,  11. 

"Izvestiya",  1957,  24,  3. 


OK  TH^  5A0T::  :AAOI:OGI  IT 


*  A.  0  j 


Lt-HOt' 'Ti''L'1Ao  Ai'i G'"' '.v:>  lA'A  .6.AC'I’i’K.:.C,''TA")Gl^'-L 


One  of  the  cuief  rroperties  of  the  oacberi.olo 
wearoa,  as  nauy  auti.ors  will  verify,  is  its 
nirfi  efficacy  due  pri.uarily  co  the  fact  that  patsa  'e 
ri’.icroorgariisnis  and  their  toxins  induce  infeccioa,  ac 
on  the  susoectiDle  host  in  negligibiy  s^aali  araouats. 

ihiis,  accorcing  no  r.eriat's  reocrt  (i),  Lafr.arin 
colleague  at  Garup  Detrich,  recovered  a  octulinus  t:->: 
Che  lethal  dose  of  wnici!  for  ..:an  consioced  o"’  amrox 
U.ld  Y.  Still  more  active  'Aas  a  irecarai^ion  receive 
tr.e  same  center  by  a  meraoer  of  Aora^K  n  grouc.  .-.coot 
to  the  calculation,  although  very  avu'rox Imnte ,  one  .? 
this  ccxin  contaixied  about  six  taillion  lethal  doses 
nan.  Live  biolog-ical  agreuts  have  a  still  greater  ie; 
tive  potency.  hocebury  (1)  -inde  toe  follOv.in  ■:  calco 
tions;  white  mice  cuccumbed  to  a  suucutanecus  inrec 
of  a  single  pair  of  pneuiiiococci .  It  is  not  difiicuL 
eorapuce  tx-e  vveight  of  tnese  lethal  doses  if  one  acce 
ttiat  the  pneumococcus  unit,  a  diolococcus  surroundc', 


capsule,  has  tne  form  of  a  spnere  v.-ito  a  diarjetsr  of^chree 
i.  The  volume  of  such  a  sphere  vvould  arount  to  14  vr  . 

Since  the  densitj'  of  ail  livin;^  niatter  js  very  close  to 
that  of  ■■.ater,  we  can  assume  that  one  U’^  will  wei^^h  ap¬ 
proximately  one  milliard  part  of  a  milli-..rac: .  It  fellows 
that  one  mg  of  pneucococcal  substance  v.'ould  contain  70C 
million  killing  doses  for  the  mouse,  i.e,,  50  ti":ec  af'ain 
a?  many  s  are  contained  in  one  mg  of  oocuiinus  toxin  oie- 
pared  by  Abrams.  A  still  more  striding  exam’^le  is  v.it;.  tn< 
agent  of  tularemia,  a  mouse  dies  wnen  injected  under  the 
skin  with  one  tularemia  organism.  The  size  of  to is  micro¬ 
organism  is  still  smaller  than  the  pneumococcus  -  0,5u 
long  a^jd  0.5  p,  in  diameter i.e. ,  its  volume  consists  of 
0.02  u' .  londuGting  similar  calculations,  it  is  not  dif¬ 
ficult  to  be  convinced  that  tx'.is  microorganism  acts  on 
mice  70'C  times  more  potently  than  tne  pneumococcus  and 
15»OCO  times  more  strongly  tnan  botulinus  toxin. 

if  it  were  possible  to  perform  similar  computations 
with  viral  agents,  we  could  probably  obtain  still  more 
astonishing  figures. 

3ut  it  must  always  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  figures 
cited  above,  obtained  by  means  of  rather  primitive  and  ar¬ 
bitrary  computations,  were  constructeo  on  the  basis  of  ex¬ 
periments  of  parental  injections  of  microorganisms  and  tox 
ins  into  the  animals,  i.e.,  under  laboratory  conditions. 

But  in  vivo  the  ratio  is  different.  Rosebury  has  shown 
that  Witt;  tne  entry  of  toxins  or  live  agents  into  the  body 
through  inhalation  or  swallowing  the  potency  of  the  dose 
rises  strikingly.  And  these  are  the  most  probable  routes 
of  entry  of  the  microbes  into  the  body,  as  it  will  be  seen 
from  further  accounts,  with  tne  use  of  microorganisms  as 
the  bacteriological  weapon.  Therefore,  considerably  more 
interest  is  taken  in  attempts  to  determine  the  magnitude 
of  the  infecting  dose  by  analyzing  incer laboratory  infec¬ 
tions  wnere  the  infection  of  man  occurs  by  the  airborne 
route.  Rosebury  recalled  two  cases  where  attempts  were 
made  to  determine  the  dosage  causing  human  infection.  One 
of  them  pertained  to  a  case  of  streptococcus  tonsillitus 
of  a  laboratory  worker.  Since  tue  lengtn  of  time  she  had 
[been  exposed  and  tne  number  of  streptococci  in  tne  air  si;e 
reathed  were  known,  it  was  possible  to  estimate  that  she 
ad  inhaled  about  1,  2bG  organisms.  By  means  of  further 
alculatioris  it  was  found  tnat  one  gram  of  this  culture 
oatained  about  700  million  airborne  infective  doses. 

^he  second  case  of  accidental  infection,  caused  by 
the  psittacosis  virus,  occurred  in  one  of  the  laboratories 
at  Camp  Detrick.  A  laboratory  worker,  holding  in  his 
and  an  amoule  containing  a  suspension  of  tne  psittacosis 


36 


virus,  oecame  av/are  tnat  it  was  lea*<iiig'.  A  fine  Hfraj 
iell  on  his  palai,  and  tv^elve  davs  later  he  oecatne  ill. 
Later  on  tne  probable  amount  of  spilled  material  was  de¬ 
termined  experimentally.  Further  calculations  showed  tnat 
every  milliliter  of  suSi'cnsion  contained  not  less  than  IS 
million  infecting  human  doses. 

Tne  figures  obtained  in  the  analysis  of  these  tv;o 
incidents  are  considerably  closer  to  actuality  than  the 
figures  ootained  with  a  single  theoretical  calculation  and 
pertaining  to  an  animal.  However,  even  here  it  must  be 
remembered  that  they  refer  -to  a  specific,  given  situation 
and  are  not  applicable  outside  of  the  laboratory.  '’It  is 
one  thing,"  says  Rosebury,  "to  say  that  an  ounce  or'  quart 
of  any  agent  contains  enough  germs  to  infect  so  many  men 
and  another  thing  to  put  this  into  practice,"  In  refer¬ 
ence  to  this  Pox  (3)  says  that  "it  is  rather  easy  to  es¬ 
timate  the  lethal  dose  of  a  toxin,  but  it  is  not  so  easy 
to  calculate  the  losses  which  tne  bacteriological  wearon 
may  bring  about."  Hov^ever,  one  tning  is  ceruain:  biolog¬ 
ical  agents  do  have  an  infecting  action  in  very  rriilitig 
doses  in  v;bich  none  of  the  known  chemical  poisons  are  ac¬ 
tive  . 

dpecific  interest  is  shown  in  information  on  how 
much  of  an  agent  can  be  introduced  into  the  body  by  a  car¬ 
rier,  Actual  experiments  have  been  conducted  by  Chamber¬ 
lain,  Rissling,  and  Sikes  to  decide  this  question  (''■*■). The 
authors  determined  the  amount  of  virus  of  American  Eastern 
equine  encephalomyelitis  which  the  mosquito  Aedes  aegypti, 
infected  with  this  agent,  can  introduce  wd  th  a  bite.  It 
was  established  that  the  amount  of  the  virus  entering  tr*e 
body  with  a  mosquito  bite  consisted  of  from  100  to  100,000 
LLcq  for  mice.  One  mosquito  bite  was  sufficient  to  proouc 
a  ratal  course  of  infection  in  horses. 

Another  factor,  dependent  on  the  supposedly  hu'gh 
infecting  potency  of.  the  bacteriological  weapon,  is  the 
ability  of  some  sicknesses  to  be  transmitted  from  a  sick 
person  to  a  healthy  one.  Thus,  with  the  use  cf  agents  of 
contagious  diseases  the  number  cf  infected  can  increase 
‘or  a  long  time  after  the  bacteriolocgical  attack,  ihere- 
re,  the  theoreticians  of  bacteriological  warfare  main¬ 
tain  that  a  single  bacteriological  attack  on  a  confined 
rea  and  with  limited  agents  can  create  an  infeetious  in- 
luence  which  goes  outside  of  the  main  infected  area  and 
infects  signif icantly  more  people  than  those  who  are  sub¬ 
jected  to  the  direct  action  of  the  bacteriological  weapon. 
It  is  not  by  chance,  therefore,  that  some  foreign  specia¬ 
lists  consider  high  coramunicability  of  diseases  one  of  the 
ost  important  conditions  in  an  evaluation  of  the  practi- 


3.7 


cabiiity  of  1  ai’ectiiouo  as  a  .  earen.  (?,  5»  6,  7,  -). 

The  ability  of  no  ■■q  riiccaoes  uo  be  trans;ait.  lea  fro-::  a  ra- 
tieat  to  aealtay  contacts  is  one  of  clit  factor"  cachin’ 
the  follov.ini^  cnaracteristic  feat  ure  of  o  'e  oacteriolo.ei- 
cal  vAoaron  noted  by  for-:i-:n  eyserue,  naael;;,  .  e  duiati.on 
of  ios  action  (iO*  lpidei:iice ,  v.iJch  av '.ear  as  a  reeuit  of 
the  application  of  oioloaicaiiy  infective  a’:ents,  can,  -.e- 
oeniin;-,'  on  the  circumstances,  subsist  for  a  lon/r  ti-:e. 

Thus,  tl period  of  action  cf  the  bacteri olo-aical  v.eatcn 
can  vary  by  .■.c-ako  ana  months. 

On  the  other  l;ar.d,  as  ‘•oseoury  has  pointed  cut 
the  duration  of  the  action  of  the  bacterloiorical  .fTtuon 
is  a  result  of  the  fact  txiat  some  Tiicroor:;anis'Ts  can  .ain- 
tairi  their  life  activities  for  a  cc-rsider  <ble  ti'-.-.:  in  tnc 
external  environment.  I'hus,  the  apents  of  t.yr .  oid-paraty- 
fhoid  illnesses  are  jrcr.'ervea  in  water  for  severHi  v.a--k3, 
a.'-d  ti.e  cholera  vibrio  for  a  'aonth.  Spora-f ormiir-;  ricro- 
orcanisas  can  exi  ;t  under  extremely  unfavoraole  condi Lions 
for  a  very  Iona  period.  In  the  literature,  for  exa'cle, 
'cc.ere  is  evidence  tnat  the  anthrax  rovd  keeps  alive  in  tr:e 

soil  for  15  years,  and  in  stagnant  soils,  wnich  contain 

many  ijutrescent  organic  substances,  ti.is  agent  can  exist 
for  an  ini,fiaito  len.;;  of  time  and  even  accumulate  as  its 
repjro.uc bion  proceeds. 

Prolonged  action  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  is 
possible  with  the  dissemination  of  biological,  infective 
agents  by  means  of  vectors.  This  is  provided,  on  the  one 
hand,  by  the  fact  that  toe  vectors  can  manifest  tneir  ac¬ 
tivity  under  favorable  conditions  when  tuey  are  strev-n  on 

an  area.  On  the  otxier  hand,  the  agents,  -.vith  v.hich  they 
are  infected,  are  also  r.ain'^ained  for  a  long  tire  in  tiueir 
organism.  This  concerns  agents  of  a  bacterial  nature  as 
well  as  viruses  and  rickettsiae.  Thus,  for  exax.ule,  the 
agent  of  y  fever  is  capable  of  living  in  Ornitrodorus  mcu- 
ioata  ticks  for  l,d'p6  days  (10),  wnile  the  virulence  cf  the 
jagent,  according  to  tne  data  of  bavis  (11),  is  not;  di.jdn- 
jished.  Orni thodv:>rus  parceri  ticks,  infected  v.ith  ricxett- 
jsiae  of  Pocky  ..lOuntain  spotted  fever,  according  to  bavis’ 
jobservations  (15),  rroved  capaole  of  keeidng  alive  and 
itransmitted  the  agent  in  a  bite  for  a  year. 

Slanc  and  d'-lta.z.ard  (15)  showed  that  toe  a'^;:ejit  of 
melioidosis  is  maintained'  in  ttxe  organism  of  inf ec tea  rat 
fleas  for  24  hours,  ana  the  fleas  are  capaole  of  trans¬ 
ferring  tie  infection  to  guinea  pigs  through  a  oite.  j 

Or.  amber  lain  ana  3adia  (l'+)  established  t;  at  bulex 
tsrsalis  mosquitoes  wept  alive  tr.e  agents  cf  eastern  and  1 
eotern  equine  encer haiomyelitis  and  Sf.  Louis  encephaliti: 
or  practically  their  entire  life,  and  during  the  course  o 


38 


i-  : 

o  .. 


^e:ix.s  ar  filled  o  *■  rr-ar.p  ci  vectors  is 
?jr.aa  of  t;se  vector,  however,  ior  some 


easui’oo  : 
scecies 


^  ::itire  vericd  u'.e^  are  able  to  trar..  ;/,ii  iofoctica 

Itc  aai-nals .  The  certain,/  of  transfer  ol  i;ifect'on  ros 
roen  est- olisned  oy  the  authors  in  e>n  ori.-:  ents  oa  rat-. 

Thus,  tie  lonrivet,/  of  ti.c  action  oi  bicloa’io  ii  h- 

y  the  lioe 

C  I  V  C  C  01'  C 

jef  infections  diseases  Sticks)  tee  '(.ossioilit  /  has  oeen 
(estaolished  of  transovarian  transfer  of  asrents  to  toe  or 
t^ro/eay.  'i't.ese  vectors,  fiaain;T  favorable  conditions  icr 
tneir  existence,  can  coJonir.e  a  locality  and  cause  tre  dor- 
Imation  of  a  Ions  existirn^  focus  of  infection. 

The  essential  characteristic  of  the  bactexiolosioal 
jv-earon  is  the  oresence  of  a  latent  ceriod  of  its  action, 
i.e.,  the  reriod  occurring  fron  the  ti;iie  of  application  ur 
jto  the  manifestation  of  tne  infectinc^  action.  iris  r-eried 
Jof  tine,  darin-g  which  the  exposed  can  maintain  a  routi-ne 
jand  fulfill  their  duties,  will  priioariiy  be  deter.ained  by  j 
the  lenctn  of  the  incuoation  period  of  the  illness,  the  i 
la, rent  of  which  was  used  as  a  biological,  infecting  age-n.,.  i 
jib  is  jfcc.nowa  that  any  infectious  disease,  caused  oy  an  at-  | 
Itack  on  the  ood.y  of  live  agents  as  well  as  c.f  their  to>:- 
-iio,  is  charactericed  by  the  necessary  i-resence  of  the  in¬ 
cubation  period.  Ihe  incabaticn  period  can  be  shortened 
or  lengthened,  de^oending  on  a  nuiiber  of  factors  (reaction 
of  the  body,  dose  of  the  infection,  dtc),  but  regardless 
of  how  v.iany  microorganisms  or  now  much  toxin  attacks  the 
bod.y,  the  effect  is  never  manifested  immediately  after  ex- 
Ipcsure  or  incoxication. 

The  average  length  of  the  incuoation  period  ct  an 
illness,  agents  of  which  can  bw  applied  for  a  bacterioieg- 
cal  attack,  fluctuates  within  broad  ranges.  Ihus,  the 
incubation  period  of  botulism  consists  of  aoouc  11  -  14 
•hours  while  that  of  </  fever  can  be  dela.yed  ut:  to  4C  days 
in  some  cases.  In  virtue  of  these  factors  tne  after  ef¬ 
fect  of  a  bacteriological  attack  is  not  manifested  rimht 


away  but  only  after  a  certain  period  of  time  (Table  1). 

Another  characteristic  feature  of  the  bacl-erioloyi- 
ical  weapon  is  the  difficulty  of  its  detection.  Biological 
linfecting  agents  do  not  have  any  external  signs  (color, 
jsmell).  They  can  be  detected  only  my  means  of  relatively 
prolonged  and  intricate  laboratory  analyses.  .>ome  spec¬ 
ialists  (2,  15)  suggest  that  the  bacteriological  attack 
in  most  cases  will  be  suspected  only  when  the  first  cases 
of  sickness  appear.  However,  even  in  this  case  it  vJ  II 
require  a  great  effort  to  establish  whether  it  is  a  tar¬ 
get  of  a  bacteriological  attack  or  ’whether  an  outbreak  i.a? 
arisen  naturally,  especially  v/here  the  oacteriologi  cal 
weapon  is  applied  against  an  epidemiologically  unfavorable 


locality.  , 

Characterizing  the  combat  qualities  of  the  bacter-  f 
iologlcal  weapon,  foreign  military  specialists  note  the 
selectiveness  of  its  action.  In  contrast  to  the  weapon  of 


,  — - - -  - 

p  fcJ  P  P  P  P  »-•  P  y  P 

HH-P  h"H»PHP  PO  PMP  e+ 

S 

MOiC+e+P  H-H*P  P  HOQ  P  O  p* 
OPPrK^POO.pppHPn 

*|SPpPC^^*P<+»iPPHP 

O 

►*(»  ohh-clhpp  bhm 

H> 

M,opO  c+OP»i  H>0 

U 

p  Bp  h>p«<<  pp 

■c^  <+  C  ►*  p  H* 

H 

p  <<  p  p  p  P 

TO 

P  'P  P 

P 

P  H- 

P 

P 

TO 

P 

P 

H  H 

P  H 

vj40(>\ON-Pfov>»->»-*Hfovj4vnro 

H  P  p 

P  H  p 

1  1  i  1  i  1  i  1  1  i  1  1  I  1 

H  P 

H  H  »-■  H  4s-  H  45* 

pi  O  O' 

fO  45-  COVJl  fO  4S-VJ1  V>l  vn  VO  -q  vji  VjJ 

P  P*  P 

'<{'•<+ 
TO  H 

O 
P 

bdwotjsjasw  <  se;  w^-a 

OpO'POl^OPOPHiOH 

c+POH'OI-^BPBPPOO 

i 

p  c+  O  Pi  H>  <+<<}  P  ef  WP 

P 

H'OH'P  PNPPPVJH' 

H'»P  P-B  P  «^HP  H  O 

O 

P  HH'H'P  P  ►■►P  H>P  SP 

K 

ppOCPiHcfHc+  OH 

PPH  HHPHW  p 

W 

B  piO^  BPPPPiO  pi-b 

H 

c+0040«<{  SS  e+P 

XJi 

OPPHP  P  H  P< 

P 

M  H  HW  c+  H>  P  P  HP 

P 

Hppnapp  O  P  PH 

V> 

P  P  <J  P 

P 

Pi  P  *0  P  TO 

H  H  P*  P  “P  P* 

TO  POOP 

P  H  P  c+  P 

p  I  p  H-cn 

TO  0*0  0 

p  p  Pi  p 

H 

1 

hJ  M 

H  H  H 

H  P  P 

5U  COO  O  H  WVJi  ro  45*  ON  45“ 

P  H  o 

o 

H  P 

p  1  1  1  i  1  1  1  1  1  1 

pi  O  P 

H  rOWH  H  to 

P  Pi  P 

4s-  00  -p:*  to  O  <Cn\J1  H  -J  U1 

'•i-  cf 
TO  H 

O 

P 

M 

tJ 

o 

0 

o' 

P 

c+ 

I-- 

O 

P 

CD 

h“ 

O 

P- 

O 

H» 

M 

O 

9 

CD 


fe- 

P  H> 
H*  P 

9  o 

P  c+ 
H  P* 
CO  o 

p 

CO 


P 

O' 

H 

P 


U 

h* 

P 

P 

P 

03 

P 

P 

O 

H 

is! 

P 

P 

S 


ai  we 

ap 

on 

•3 

u 

'a 

ac 

<s 

on 

ir 

is  cm 

ar 

ac 

te 

r 

i 

s  c 

ic 

in 

fe 

a  ticri 

0 

,<o 

L 

i. 

s 

t; 

r 

ckon 

on 

t 

s 

ei 

i' 

peon 

le 

— » 

n 

n 

d 

t 

hey 

0 

i.  e 

on  as 

It 

id 

c  o 

1 

rr 

• 

e  bar 

te 

T’'  ^ 

ol 

0 

i  c 

al 

we 

•I  T' 

U*  *- 

on 

iscs  the  ideologue oS  ia  the 
if'ent  of  mass  disease,  for  they  r- 


is  also  manifested  in  the  fact  that  the  effect  of  one  dis¬ 
ease-producing  agent  is  directed  only  against  ha-r-an  beings 
anotlier  only  against  animals,  and  a  third  cnl.y  against 
plants.  Only  a  fev;  agents  have  a  cenpiete  action. 

...any  authors  note  a-iong  the  properties  snd  features 
of  the  bacteriological  weapon  its  enormous  psychological 
effect,  which  will  oe  very  strongly  demonstrated  whin  it  i 
is  applied  against  an  unprepared  adversary  (7,  O',  ly). 

Ihe  appearance  of  an  outbreak:  of  a  severe  and  lif e-threat- : 
ening  disease,  wnicn  spreads  very  rapidly,  under  certain 
conditions  can  evohe  a  striking  psychological  reaction.  : 
kn  example  of  this  is  the  panic  in  "-'ew  York  in  19'+?  which 
'.va  caused  by  a  small  outbreak  of  smallpox  (1.9  cases  in 
all  V'-ere  reported),  wany  thousands  of  people  stood  in 
line  for  days  in  order  to  get  vaccinated. 

Some  foreign  military  specialists  consider  the  esy- 
chological  effect  the  most  important  feature  of  the  bac¬ 
teriological  weapon.  Franklin  Cooper  (8),  discussin--"  the 
potentiality  of  the  bacteriological  weapon,  expressed  the 
opinion  that  tne  complete  demoralisation  of  the  civilian 
population  would  probably  be  the  most  serious  outcome  of 
an  unexpected  bacteriological  attack,  and  .veissman  (7), 
criaracteriziiig  the  methods  and  jmrposes  of  bacteriological 
warfare,  indicsted  that  bacteria  will  be  used  wt:ere  ic  is 
necessary  to  produce  a  sustained  general  panic  aaa  dis¬ 
order  . 

I'iscussiog  the  advantage  of  the  bacteriological 
pon,  foreign  specialists  note  the  relcitive  cheapness  of 
Its  ;.;anufacture  (9)  -  most  of  the  microorganisms  ox  a  bac¬ 
terial  nature  can  be  cultivated  in  synthetic  nutrient;  med¬ 
ia  ■ repared  from  comparatively  inexpensive  and  first-quui- 
jity  ingredients.  be  snail  try  to  clarify  some  aspects  of 
jehe  problem  of  macs  procurement  of  bioagenb?  under  inc.us- 
[trial  conditions  in  the  following  sections. 


AGdMTS 


.  OF  BIOIOGiakL  DIShAGh-P’-'C  O  ^  ’1 


ratnogenic  agents  can  penetrate  into  the  organism 
mail  cr  ani:cal  by  different  routesi  through  the  mucous 


'+1 


vieMoranes ,  injured  skin,  respiratory  tract,  and  also  as  a 
result  oi‘  bites  of  infected  blood-suckinc  i: cects  and  tick' 

Of  all  the  possioie  routes  of  transmission  of  in¬ 
fection  the  most  effective  for  purposes  of  bacter iologi  al 
warfare,  in  the  opinion  of  most  of  the  foreip^n  specialist-:, 
is  the  airborne  route.  This  requires  a  simple  mechanism 
of  infection;  the  capability  of  the  agents  suspended  in 
the  air  to  disperse  at  decisive  intervals  and  to  induce  in 
a  brief  period  the  mass  affliction  of  the  population  (d,  6, 
tt,  17 »  19,  20)  and  also  the  complications  of  defense  frcm 
airborne  infection.  It  must  be  remembered  that  not  only 
agents  of  airborne  infections  can  be  passed  on  through  the 
air  but  also  microorganisms  which  normally  are  not  spread 
by  this  route  (21). 

At  present  because  of  the  voluminous  oDservaCions , 
which  have  been  compiled,  it  has  been  established  t;  at 
most  infectious  agents  are  capable  of  penetrating  and 
causing  sickness  in  the  organism  of  man  or  animal  b.^  the 
airborne  route.  In  bacteriology  laboratories  typhus  and 
other  rickettsial  diseases  quite  often  arpear,  although 
normally  these  diseases  are  transmitted,  as  a  rule,  only 
tnrough  bites  of  the  vectors.  Similar  facts  have  been  00- 
served  also  in  the  work  with  viral  infections.  In  view  of 
this  a  certain  interest  is  takeu  in.  an  analysis  of  routes 
in  cases  of  laboratory  infections. 

At  the  present  time  there  are  quite  impressive  data 
confirming  that  most  interlaboratory  infections  occur  oy 
the  airborne  route. 

As  a  result  of  extensive  experimental  invest iaaf’ ons 
executed  at  a  high  technical  level,  it  has  been  shown  that 
almost  ail  manipulations  in  microbiological  laboratories 
cause  the  formation  of  aerosols  which  contaminate  the  air 
and  surrounding  environment . 

Keitman  and  rhillips  (22)  have  shov/n  that  even  the 
most  simple  movements  with  a  bacteriological  loop  give 
rise  to  the  formation  of  aerosols.  Thus,  putting  the  loop 
into  a  test  tube  or  on  a  plate,  placing  the  inoculum  on 
agar  with  the  loop,  the  shaking  of  the  loop,  and  so  on 
form  tiny  aerosols  containing  from  0.1  to  8.7  microorga¬ 
nisms  (average  from  ten  experiments)  into  a  specific  vol¬ 
ume  of  tested  air.  The  aerosol  was  especially  forcefully 
formed  when  a  hot  loop  was  placed  in  a  dish  containing  a 
bouillon  culture. 

The  aerosol  was  no  less  intensely  formed  with  lab¬ 
oratory  procedures  connected  with  the  centrifugation  of 
bacterial  cultures. 

The  results  of  the  authors’  experiments  i roved 
that  even  with  the  simplest  manipulations  of  the  bacterio- 


2 


Ofe^ical  Ico;;  the  routine  steps  in  tne  cenT:riiugation  of 
acte^i^l  suspensions  caused  the  formation  of  aerosols, 
ne  bacterial  aerosols  v.ere  especially  intensified  vnen 
be  bacterial  inass  v<as  resuspended  and  cbe  cultural  con- 
ents  of  the  test  tuoe  were  discuroed. 

From  the  presented  fiadin£i*s  obtained  b ;  experitien- 
al  means  a  very  definite  conclusion  can  be  made  tiiat  dur- 
ng  laboratory  procedures  with  oouillon  cultures  an  aero- 
ol  is  constantly  being  formed  from  the  resj  ec. cive  micro- 
rganisis.  The  intensity  of  tbe  aerosol  formation  deoends 
n  the  nature  of  the  performed  manipulations. 

It  is  very  evident  that  in  many  laboratory  func- 
ions  not  examined  by  Feitman  and  Phillips  by  the  experi- 
entai  means  aerosols  also  may  be  formed. 

But  aerosol  formation  is  especially  intense  in  the 
entrifugation  of  cultures,  and  this  has  also  been  con- 
rmed  by  Langmuir  (ill)  in  an  analysis  of  incidents  of 
terlaooratory  infections. 

Thus,  in  laboratory  procedures  with  bouillon  cul¬ 
tures  and  different  bacterial  suspensions  it  is  always  pos 
sible  to  become  infected  through  the  air  if  protective 
neasures  are  not  applied. 

The  conditions  are  still  less  favorable  in  this  re¬ 
spect  in  procedures  with  dessicated  cultures.  Heitman, 
...oss,  Harstad,  Algand,  and  Stress  (?5)  carried  on  exten¬ 
sive  exreriraental  investigations  on  aerosol  formation  with 
lypholized  cultures.  A  culture  of  Sporotrichum  indicum, 
dried  by  the  lypholization  method,  was  used  for  the  exper¬ 
iments. 

Aerosol  formation  was  studied  with  the  following 
manipulations  7/ith  ampules  containing  lypholized  cultures: 

1,  Opening  the  ampule  with  a  file  and  then  break¬ 
ing  the  top  off. 

2. Pouring  the  culture  from  the  amnale  into  the  test 


tube . 


3.  Dropping  the  ampule  on  the  laboratory  floor. 

Air  samples  were  collected  v/itn  the  use  of  a  specia 
apparatus  three  minutes  after  each  manipulation  and  were 
placed  on  agar. 

These  experiments  snowed  that  even  such  simple  and 
constantly  performed  manipulations  in  the  laboratory  as 
the  opening  of  ampules  brought  about  the  formation  of  aer¬ 
osols.  The  intensity  of  the  aerosol  formation  depended  on 
the  way  the  live  organisms  were  dried  and  concentrated  in 


the  amp.ule. 

When  the  dessicated  cultures  were  seeded  in  the 
test  tubes  containing  the  bouillon,  aerosol  formation  oc¬ 
curred.  The  intensity  of  contaminated  air  depended  on  thej 


t3. 


rj'ing  metfcod  and  the  tBChnique  of  seeding  the  dessicated 
ulture.  It  is  not  -Aithout  interest  to  mention  tnat  after 
he  experiment  on  the  seeding  of  the  dessicated  culture  of 
indicum  the  microorganisms  v/ere  often  isolated  from 
he  hands  and  nose  of  the  laboratory  technicians  v.ho  had 
erformed  the  v/ork. 

Considering  that  the  glass  ampules  containing  the 
ultures  are  dropped  rather  often  in  laboratories,  Reitman 
t  al  (23)  investigated  this  aspect  of  aerosol  formation. 
The  experiments,  which  were  conducted,  helped  sub¬ 
stantially  to  form  very  definite  conclusions:  when  an  am- 
ule  was  dropped  in  the  room,  an  aerosol  was  formed  which 
ould  remain  in  the  air  for  an  hour.  The  intensity' of  the 
erosol  formation  and  tne  length  of  its  detection  in  the 
ir  depended  primarily  on  the  type  of  drying  method  used 
or  lypholization  of  the  cultures. 

The  presented  experimental  data  very  clearly  proves 
hat  during  the  procedures  with  the  concentrated  fluids 
nd  even  more  with  the  dessicated  cultures,  aerosols  v;ere 
onstantly  being  formed  in  tne  laooratory  which  contamina¬ 
ted  the  air  of  the  room.  Ther*'fore,  the  aerosol  route  of 
infection  is  one  of  the  most  probable  under  laboratory  con 
iitions. 

It  is  now  well  recognized  that  a  large  percent  of 
the  recorded  and  studied  incidents  of  interlaboratory  in¬ 
fection  consists  of  cases  of  infection  through  the  air. 

The  most  extensive  literature  is  available  on  airborne  ill 
nesses  transmitted  under  natural  conditions.  Cases  of  air 
borne  infection  have  unquestionably  been  proved  in  the 
work  with  the  pla^pie  agent.  Interlaboratory  infections 
transmitted  through  the  air  have  repeatedly  been  described 
in  trhe  work  with  the  agents  of  tularemia  and  w  fever  (5)* 

Of  snecial  interest  are  incidents  of  interlabora¬ 
tory  infections  by  the  airborne  method  in  work  with  agents 
the  spread  of  which  under  normal  conditions  have  not  been 
reported  by  this  route. 

It  is  generally  known  that  brucella  infection  in 
nan  and  animals  occurs  by  the  alimentary  route  and  also 
through  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  eyes  and  the  naso¬ 
pharynx.  Isolated  incidents  pointing  to  the  possibility  o 
the  airborne  route  of  infection  under  normal  conditions 
save  still  not  received  recognition  since  they  have  not 
been  proved  by  the  necessary  factual  data.  However,  cases 
bf  interlaboratory  infections  assuredly  affirm  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  airborne  infection  in  man  with  brucella  agents. 

In  the  last  few  years  reports  have  periodically  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  literature  concerning  the  infection  of  lab¬ 
oratory  workers  through  tne  air  with  brucella  cultures. 


44 


case 

;eila 


/■/•ich  formed  fro"-  r.t:b  cent.rif age  in  ''•otion4 
,  cases  of  infection,  occurred  fro;',  the  d  st  in 


Thus^  .ie.ver  n.td  -ddie  anci.vKinr  tne 

:ories  of  7^  inter'laborator.7  infections  witi;  bru 
fihov^ed  tiiat  infection  prinari  took  place  tl  ro-.-::'  t;.c  in¬ 
halation  by  the  individuals  oi  aerosols  of  a  irucell.a  a^l- 
Lteasis  cult are 
In  ad.xiti 

■^ene  for  sneep  .suffering  from  orucellosis. 

Lang-jui.r  (^1)  reported  on  the  sickness  of  a  :.io.ir  o 
scientific  workers,  who  were  v;orkinp  in  the  iabo’ar.or.y  v.it 
3r.  meiitensis,’ in  a  college  in  N'jichigan  (US4).  Altn^-etn- 
sr  45  Dsrsons  uere  affected.  In  an  analysis  of  the  .infec¬ 
tion  route  it  was  established  that  the  infection  occurred 
through  the  bactei'ial  aerosol  formed  oy  tne  centrifuge  in 
action. 

The  minimal  infecting  dose  of  the  brucella 
in  airoorne  infection  of  man 
is  rroved  by  the  infections  c 
single,  brief  visits  tc  the  laboratory  (25). 

ke  could  go  on  listing  reports  of  the  possible  oru- 
seiia  ififection  by  the  airborne  route.  Hov;ever,  even  t-.e 
cited  a.uta  reniesent  sufficiently  ample  material  (11^'*  in- 
teriaboratory  infections)  suptortiag  the  fact  tnat.  unaer 
certain  conditions  the  airborne  route  of  inf«otio.n  op  '..ru- 
ceila  arents  sugmests  an  extreme  danger. 

s.hile  the  airborne  route  of  orucella  infectiou  i:a- 
der  natal  al  conditions  is  not  excluded,  for  some  othe.r  di.s 
jeases  it  has  been  estaolisned  cnl''/  in  cases  of  intcrinoor- 
fatory  infection.  This  primarily  apolys  to  the  greur  of  com-: 


dose  of  the  brucella  agent  j‘ 
evidently  is  very  srr.ail,  v,hicl| 
lontractea  by  individual  v.  itn 


I: 


uaunicabie  infections  vvhicn  under  natural  conditions 
transmitted  exclusively  through  vectors: 


yellov;  fever  and 


OvV  lev- 


[\''erteaaeiian  equine  encephalomyelitis. 

the  present  ti.r.e  the  epide  .liolopgy  of  yellow 
fer  n.as  been  studied  rather  exhaustively.  It  has  been 
itablished  that  the  only  possioie  route  of  the  transfer  of 
the  virus  is  through  the  bite  of  the  Aedes  aegypti  moacui- 
jto  and  some  other  srecies  which  are  carriers  of  the  di.aeas 
jageat.  However,  cases  of  interlaboratoz-y  iofections  have 
lunquestucnably  conflirDied  the  possible  transfer  of  ti^e  vir- 
|u3  by  the  airborne  route. 

i  Thus,  3erry  and  Kitchen  (26)  described  seven  eases 


jof  illness  in  tfie  laboratory ,wnich  were  caused 
iiovv  fever  virus,  ana  tney  corariled  a  revievv  of 


0  .7  1 0 
54  inter- 


,vel~ 


labora^jory  infections  with  fatal  outcomes  in  five  cases. 
3o:^e  of  the  illness  were  linked  to  infected  Tnosopui toes  but 
faast  of  the  cases  arose  without  any  connection  \vitn  moa- 
Iquitoes.  Some  oases  of  infection  viere  observed  in  persons 
•who  were  actively  engaged  in  dessicating  the  virus. 
iwas  one  es'pecially  interesting  case  where  the  person 


45 


In  the  iaborator:f  only  one  day  ana  assistea  in  the  work 
^'ith  the  infectious  laaterial  for  only  a  few  inonients,  which 
shows  tre  exceptionally  high  inf eccivicy  of  the  virus  oy 
tne  airborne  route  of  infection. 

On  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  factual  :n:.  terial  of 
nterlaooratory  infections  Hosebury  and  Kabat  (5)  and  j^r- 
nagnac  (20)  quite  definitely  demonctrated  possible  infec¬ 
tion  by  the  yellow  fever  virus  by  the  airborne  route. 

Thus,  the  experience  with  interlaboratory  infection 
with  yellov;  fever  as  an  example  convincingly  shows  that  a 
virus  illness,  transferred  under  natur-al  conditions  only 
throuvgh  the  bites  of  mosquito  carriers,  can  also  under 
certain  conditions  infect  people  through  tne  air. 

There  are  also  similar  data  about  a  number  of  otter 
iseases,  which  are  spread  under  natural  conditions  exclu¬ 
sively  by  the  transmissible  route,  particularly  Venzuelean 
quine  encephalomyelitis. 

Thus,  from  the  experience  with  interlaboratory  in- 
ections  and  a  study  of  the  possibility  of  becoming  infec- 
ed  in  the  work  with  infectious  material,  it  can  be  con- 
luded  that  human  infection  through  the  air  occurs  not  on- 
y  with  illnesses  transmitted  normally  by  the  airborne 
oute  but  also  with  tnose  in  which"  this  route  of  the  trans 
"er  of  the  agent  is  not  described  or  is  observed  very  rare 
• 

Another  possible  w-ay  of  spreading  the  agent  under 
onditions  of  bacteriological  wariio'e,  in  the  opinion  of 
oreign  specialists,  is  by  the  tri  nsmissible  route.  In 
heir  opinion  the  spread  of  infec tfi  carriers  has  its  pos- 
tive  and  negative  aspects.  The  possibility  of  creating 
stable  focus  of  infection  is  considered  a  positive  fea- 
ure  but  the  negative  side  is  the  complication  associated 
ith  the  biology  of  the  vectors  and  the  accumulation  in 
hem  of  the  agent  (5).  Thus,  for  example,  the  vectors  of 
ellow  fever,  Japanese  encephalitis,  and  dengue  fever  can- 
ot  exist  in  moderate  climatic  zones  and,  consequently, 
annot  be  spreaders  of  infection  in  these  areas.  On  the 
bher  hand,  a  very  complex  mechanism  of  the  transfer  of 
he  infectious  agent  is  cnaracteristic  of  some  ubiquitous, 
ransmissible  infections.  This  situation  is  well  illus- 
rated  by  the  example  of  typhus.  For  the  transmission  of 
he  typhus  virus  it  is  necessary  for  louse  feces  to  drop 
nto  abraded  skin  resulting  from  a  bite  which  itched  and 
as  scratched.  Still  more  complicated  is  the  transmission 
oute  to  man  of  the  bubonic  form  of  plague.  As  it  is 
newn,  plague  is  a  typical  zoonosis  which  attacks  rodents 
hiefly.  Man  is  included  in  the  epidemiological  chain  as 


46 


he  secondary  link.  ilnder  natural  conditions  vectors  of 
lague  are  various  species  of  fleas.  Xenopsylla  cheopsis 
a  rat  flea  which  is  found  in  hot,  clinuit  ic  zones  -  is  cf 
vbe  greatest  epideniological  significance.  The  transmis¬ 
sion  of  plague  from  rodent  to  man  requires  a  series  of  de¬ 
finite  conditions  related  to  peculiarities  in  the  ecolog;/ 
of  rodents  and  vectors.  Man  is  not  a  permanent  host  for 
rat  fleas,  and  they  can  only  pass  over  to  him  and  infect 
him  with  their  bites  sporadically.  Because  of  tne  existic 
interrelationship  between  host  and  vector  the  nlague  agent 
Can  circulate  in  nature  for  a  long  time  (years)  as  a  cr.pln; 
rodent  -  flea  -  rodent  —  and  man’s  inclusion  In  this  cnaii 
is  only  a  rai'ity.  The  complex  meci;anisn  of  transmission 
also  is  the  apparent  reason  why  many  foreign  specialists 
very  mildly  speak  out  in  respect  to  the  possible  utiliza¬ 
tion  of  vectors  of  transmissible  infections  as  a  oacterio- 
logical  weapon.  On  this  basis  Rosebury  entirely  excludes 
the  bubonic  form,  which  is  transmitted  by  fleas,  from  po¬ 
tential  agents  of  tne  bacteriological  v/eapon.  Besides 
these  factors  the  presence  of  nighly  effective,  completely 
synthetic  insecticides  and  repellent  insect  substances 
nave  to  be  considered. 

however,  in  spite  of  these  complexities,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  application  the  transmissible  route  of 
infection  has  not  been  rejected  by  foreign  investigators. 

It  is  assumed  that  under  some  conditions  it  can  rrobahlv 
prove  effective.  Many  foreign  experts  hold  this  viewpoint 
evidently  mindful  of  the  barbarian  exT^eriments  of  Japanese 
bacteriologists  on  the  circulation  of  plague-infected  flea 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Chinese  town  of  Ningpo(2b). 

As  it  is  seen  from  the  evidence  of  the  Khabarovsk  trials 
the  experts  in  detachment  Mo.  7^1  attached  great  impor¬ 
tance  to  sabotage  methods  of  dispersing  the  bacteriologi- 
jcal  weapon  by  using  vectors. 

!  The  data  of  recent  years  nave  shown  that  it  is  pos- 

{sibie  to  develop  a  breed  of  insects  which  have  considera- 
i'Dle  resistance  to  DDT  preparation,  Tr.is  fact  also  cannot 
ibe  understimated  in  the  plan  for  aatibacteriological  de- 
jfense , 

Apart  from  the  considered  routes  of  dissemination, 
trie  s  -ecialists  believe  that  in  bacteriological  warfare 
ae  water  route  is  important,  and  also  the  transfer  of  the 
gent  through  oontaminat ed  food  products  (l^^  2C).  Kcw- 
ver,  some  autnors  (2)  doubt  tiie  rcssibility  of  obtaining 
significantly  damaging  effect  with  infection  through  the 
water,  considering  the  dependability  of  decontamination  in 
odern  systems  of  centralized  water  -works.  On  this  basis 
he  water  route  is  given  a  minor  role,  and  the  possioiliby 


47 


Df  its  use  is  coasidered  limited  (30). 

lacluded  in  a  consideration  of  possible  artificial 
routes  of  transrnissj  on  of  iaiectious  diseases  t'nere  must 
be  remembered  still  anotner  portal  -  the  entry  of  tnicrc- 
organisms  througa  wounds.  In  the  opinion  of  sene  foreign 
specialists  (3)  this  route  can  scarcely  play  a  substancia^ 
role  in  the  artificial  dispersion  of  agents.  However,  in 
the  Japanese  detachment  Ho.  751  they  considered  it  possi¬ 
ble  to  spread  some  resistant  microorganisms  by  such  a 
route,  particularly  spores  of  anthrax  and  gas  gangrene  ( ?8 
It  must  be  empnacized  teat  most  foreign  specialists 
put  the  airborne  route  of  spreading  agents  in  first  Place 
in  the  premeditated  use  of  them  for  purposes  of  warfare. 
The  possible  transmission  by  such  a  route  of  even  agents 
of  transmissible  infections  is  especially  stressed  in 
Rosebury's  ov;n  works  (2,  5)  and  in  that  of  Armagnac  (20). 
In  their  opinions  the  removal  of  vectors  from  the  chain  of 
usual  transfer  of  infection  might  allow,  first  of  ail,  tee 
dispersion  route  to  be  greatly  simplified  and,  secondly, 
the  use  of  agents  of  transmissible  diseases  even  in  those 
climatic  zones  where  tne  respeccive  vectors  cannot  exist. 

In  respect  to  this  it  is  necessary  to  analyze  in 
sreat  detail  the  proolems  related  to  the  formation  and  ac¬ 
tion  of  bacterial  aerosols. 


baot>:t?ial  :\.!?f.chcls 

Dispersing  systems  with  a  gaseous  atmosphere  and 
a  solid  or  liquid  dispersing  phase  are  termed  aerosols. 

It  is  customary  to  term  aerosols  With  liquid  parti¬ 
cles  as  clouds,  and  aero-dispersinm  syscems  -Aith  solid  par¬ 
ticles  -  depending  on  the  mechanism  of  their  formation  - 
as  dusts  or  vapors. 

.^ccerding  to  the  mechanism  of  formation  of  the  aer¬ 
osols  they  can  be  classified  as  dispersing  and  condensing. 

'Ihe  first  is  formed  with  the  dispersion  (dusting, 
pulverizing)  of  solid  and  liquid  particles,  and  the  second 
as  a  result  of  the  condensation  of  supersaturated  vapors 
or  gaseous  reactions  .which  produce  nonvolatile  products. 

The  term,  bacterial  aerosol,  refers  to  aero-dispers¬ 
ing  systems,  the  liquid  or  dry  particles  of  which  bear 
nicroorganisms . 

In  the  opinion  of  forein  specialists  either  bacter¬ 
ial  clouds,  w’here  the  liquid  culture  is  sprayed,  can  be 
sade  for  the  application  of  biologically  infected  agents 
or  dry  preparations  -  bacterial  dusts  -  can  be  used.  A.c- 
cording  to  the  mechanism  of  formation  the  artificial  bac- 


4b 


erial  aaronols  tJ.o  t  irally  '.vlll  alv.avB  be  d  i  ^srepfsabie .  Cn. 
he  basis  of  the  juateria  1  existia-  in  t.r:e  ^'creir^a  xitera- 
ture  it  is  possible  to  assert  that  the  pata o^-enl o  aotivlty 
of  the  bacterial  aerosol  in  the  final  analysis  iepe^aa  on 
the  kind  of  irioroor^anisms  ar^plieu.,  their  concea': j-o c  ■  oc  i:' 
the  air,  and  also  on  the  dispersintr  ability  of  the  syst-,  i. 
The  relation  of  the  potency  of  the  patLogenic  action  of 
the  bacterial  aerosol  to  the  qualities  of  tne  ap^er.t  3uo- 
^ected  to  spraying  does  cot  deiaand  special  expls  cat  io:_. 

In  adaition,  the  pathogenic  potency  of  the  aerosol  io 
found  in  direct  relationship  to  its  concehtraticr ,  .  e  .  . 


number  of  microorganisms  in  a  unit  volume  of 


i-ow  then  is  the  concentration  of  microorpaoiinii 
Iterniined  in  a  bacterial  cloud  apart  from  their  n.utDO'--' 
ftto  original  dispersing  products?  'Phere  is  voluoincu.^ 


U  C  -  f 


iiteraturo  on  this  question  from  abroad. 


ich  helps  us  to  make  some  generaiizat  i. 
e  bacter'ial  aerosol  repi-esents  a  syste 

>*i.ii.Ch  is  (^.eteriTii  ned  nv  hh»»  1  ijvjq  r.f 


an 


anaxy 
1  i  r  1 


!ot’  >*!,ii,ch  13  determined  oy 
py  bic logical  principle 
p^ver  to  the  posed  question 
tehorough  acquaintance  with 
rc/oerfcies  of  the  aerosol. 
The  behavior  of  the 


t '  ’A 

the  lav^s  of  ohyclct;  at  we 
In  cnnection  with  this, 
can  be  obtained  only 
the  physical  and 


■> 


1  O  J.  0 


f 

xoar 
1  ai 
,  an  ac¬ 
tor  a 
v’al 


jwStein 


aerosol  as  a  physical  s_ 
a  muaber  of  factors  and  particularly  on  the 
particles  and  the  kinetics  of  the  gaseous 


id  €  pends  on 
^3:se  of  its 
{phase . 

i  _  The  size  of  the  particles  in  aerosols  fluctuates 
iwithir-  very  broad  ranges  -  from  1  mm  to  0.01  pi,  Ti'O 
jshift  from  the  lower  range  to  tne  upper  is  accompanied  not 
jonly  by  quantitative  changes  of  almost  all  the  'oroperties 
the  aerosol  but  also  by  variations  in  the  nature  of  the 
rinciples  supporting  these  changes.  Thus,  the  rate  of 
jsettling  of  the  particles  of  the  aerosol  is  clearly  re- 
llated  to  the  evcluticn  of  its  liqixid  or  solid  phase.  ;'’ris 
I  n  be  illustrated  by  data  borrowed  from  FrsnkVc  tePl'^ 

K Table  2). 


bf 


I 

i 


iameter  of  particles 
ia  microns 
Rate  of  settling 
(»  in  cm/sec 
Character  of  seed- 


ettled  at  uniform 


(i)  AMMCTp  «UCT«I  » 
naKpotttx 

&  Caopo^  occjUMM* 
•  cM/cea 

Xapamp  oceu 

HMfl 


lOOO  100  10  i  O.I 

4001  30  0.3  lo.OQSslo.OOQO 


MOi  30  10.3  10,0085}  0.000035  0 

C  ROCTOMHOO 

^  onpoeiMO  1^10 

I  .Wl 


Moving  like 
gaseous  mol 
ecules 


0  i  0 

iRNcyrca  noAoO- 
Ko  rawBWM  MO 
.iMyiffMM 


Theoretically  the  lower  limit  of  the  size  of  the 
articles  of  the  bacterial  aerosols  apparently  withjn  the 
ange  of  1  -  5  Further  reduction  in  their  size  is  lim¬ 
ited  by  the  size  of  the  bacterial  cell  as  well  as  by  the 
ossible  disintegration  of  the  suspensions  and  dusts.  Tne 
pper  boundary  of  the  size  of  the  particles  is  determined 
by  the  stability  of  the  system.  In  systems  with  staole 
gaseous  acmosphere  the  particles  with  a  radius  of  several 
hundred  microns  settle  very  quickly.  There  is  a  high  sed¬ 
imentation  rate  also  in  particles  with  a  diameter  of  10  - 
100  p  (0.3  ~  30  cm/sec),  but  it  must  be  remembered  at 
these  indices  pertain  to  systems  v/ith  a  stable  atmosrhere. 
Turbulence  in  the  atmosphere  noticeably  slows  down  the 
sedimentation  rate  of  particles  suspended  in  the  air. 
Sedi’-'entation  even  of  such  huge  particles  as  those  30  u  in 
size  takes  place  in  tne  open  atmcspiiere  not  due  to  tne 
force  of  gravity  but  because  they  are  brought  to  earth 
like  molecules  of  a  gaseous  cloud.  The  latter  and  are 
brought  to  the  ground  due  to  turbulent  diffusion.  Next  to 
the  ground  the  layer  of  air  is  more  or  less  immovaoie,  and 
the  particles  permeate  through  it  virtually  by  settling, 
hot  all  the  particles  settle  by  any  means,  which  are  ad¬ 
jacent  to  tne  ground,  and  some  are  again  snatcned  up  by 
rising  air  currents  and  move  on  (Johnston,  Vfinch  and 
Smith  (31)). 

From  v/hat  has  been  said  one  has  to  conclude  tnat 


50 


ne  befcavior  of  the  aerosol  cloud  is  determined  not  only 
y  its  dispersing  ability  but  also  by  the  kinetics  of  the 
aseous  phase. 

t'.'valuating  tiie  influence  of  these  factors  on  the 
fficacy  of  oacterial  aerosols  formed  in  the  application 
f  the  bacteriological  v/eapon,  Fothergill  (35),  a  consul- 
ant  at  Gamp  Detrick,  emphacizes  the  importance  of  meteor¬ 
ological  conditions,  he  indicates  that  tne  aerosol  can  ex 
ibit  an  optimal  damaging  effect  only  with  certain  micro- 
ueteoroiogical  conditions.  fee  rriiicii>al  iaeterooloRical 
actors,  whicij  determine  the  direction,  of  movement  of  tne 
erosol  cloud  and  its  diffusion,  are  the  force  and  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  wind  and  the  extent  of  vertical  resistance  of 
the  air.  The  greater  the  force  of  the  wind,  the  faster 
the  aerosol  is  dispersed  and  tne  concentration  of  the  agen 
is  reduced. 

The  vertical  resistance  of  the  air  is  charac oerized 
by  the  temrerature  gradient,  i.e.,  the  difference  oet-.veen 
he  temoerature  of  the  air  measured  at  a  height  of  50  and 
150  cm  from  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Three  classes  of 
vertical  resistance  around  the  ground  layer  of  air  are  aic 
inguisned  -  inversion,  convection,  and  isothermal. 

Inversion  (gradient  is  less  than  0  degrees)  is  ob- 
erved  at  night  tia;e  with  a  cloudless  sky  and  a  mild  wind 
vnich  does  not  exceed  4  m  per  second.  v7ith  inversion 
there  are  no  rising  air  currents,  ana  therefore  the  aero¬ 
sol  cloud  will  disperse  slowly  and  hang  over  low  places 
nd  forest  masses  for  a  long  time. 

-itb  convection  (gradient  is  greater  than  0  de- 
rees)  there  is  a  rising  air  current  which  favors  rapid 
iffusion  of  tue  aerosol  cloud.  This  state  is  observed  in 
clear  weather  and  with  little  cloudiness. 

with  an  isothermal  condition  the  temperature  of  che 
upper  and  lower  layers  of  air  around  the  ground  is  almost 
the  same  (gradient  is  within  ranges  of  -0.2  to  +0.2  de¬ 
grees),  as  a  result  of  which  there  are  no  vertic.al  air 
currents,  and  the  aerosol  cloud  will  disseminate  slowly. 
Inversion  is  observed  for  short  intervals  in  the  Ea.m.r.er 
time,  longer  with  cloudiness,  and  for  a  long  time  in  the 
winter  with  dense  cloudiness. 

Fotnergill  (32)  considers  tnat  the  aprlivcat  ion  of 
the  bacteriological  weapon,  designed  to  contaminate  sur¬ 
face  layers  of  air,  is  expedient  only  with  meteorological 
conditicas  of  the  isothermic  or  inversion  type.  Vvitn  a 
positive  gradient  the  cloud  will  rise.  Disintegration  cf 
tne  bacterial  aerosol  as  a  result  of  the  settling  of  tie 
particles  does  not  cause  the  biological  age.ats  to  lose 
their  pathogenic  ootency.  Settled  niicroorg--'nisras  contami- 


51 


# 


late  the  soil,  water  worics,  combat  equipment,  clotLing, 
ind  other  things  found  in  the  path  of  movement  of  tre  aer- 
Dsol  bacterial  cloud.  This  can  be  an  additional  source  of 
infection  for  people  who  are  present  on  the  contaminated 
territory,  either  as  a  result  of  contact  with  the  contami¬ 
nated  objects  or  with  the  consumption  of  contaminated  food 
and  water,  and  also  as  a  result  of  the  inhalation  of  the 
restored  aerosol  ('?)  which  comes  about  through  the  repeac- 
ed  rising  of  the  settled  microorganisms  into  the  air  with 
iust . 

An  infection  zone  can  be  formed  in  this  area  as  a 
consequence  of  the  settling  of  the  microbes  on  the  ground, 
and  its  effectiveness  will  be  determined  by  the  resistance 
of  the  biological  agent,  and  again  by  the  meteorological 
conditions,  and  by  the  character  of  the  locality  (relief,  i 
soil,  vegetation).  Vjith  the  formation  of  a  stable  focus 
of  infection  the  use  of  st ore  forms  of  microorganisms, 
particularly  anthrax,  is  more  probable  (2,  29,  55). 

The  fate  of  the  bacterial  aerosol  depends  on  a  num¬ 
ber  of  other  factors  which  show  an  influence  on  the  survi¬ 
val  of  the  microorganisms.  Fothergill  (32)  primarily  Bt.ec- 
ifys  solar  radiation,  wi  ich  quickly  inactivates  microorga¬ 
nisms  suspended  in  the  air,  relative  humidity,  and  temper- 
r-ture.  Tne  biological  peculiarities  of  the  raicroorganic 
iust  and  the  met nods  of  pulverization  are  very  important 
too.  Thus,  spore  forms  of  microorganisms  are  very  well 
preserved  in  an  aerosol,  and  vegetative  ones  die  quickly. 

In  experiments  conducted  by  Rosebury  (3^)  and  bis  col¬ 
leagues  it  was  shown  that  while  the  percent  of  restoration 
of  B.  prodigiosum  from  the  aerosol  did  not  exceed  7.5> 
this  value  consisted  of  73*^  %  for  the  spore-forming  micro¬ 
organism,  Bac,  globigii. 

Processes  causing  the  decay  of  microorganisms  de¬ 
velop  even  as  the  aerosol  is  being  developed.  To  what  ex¬ 
tent  these  take  place  depends,  as  has  been  shown  by  Pose- 
bury,  on  the  construction  of  the  sprayer.  In  the  first 
place  there  is  the  injurious  effect  on  the  microbial  cells 
of  the  force  of  air  v;itb  discharge  from  the  sprayer. 

In  the  cloud  foriaers,  the  construction  feature  of  1 
wnich  is  the  presence  of  a  deflecting  shield,  ghe  damaging  ; 
factor  is  the  impact  of  the  particles  against  the  stiield. 

lith  the  use  of  a  generator  type  of  aerosol  cloud  • 
former  the  destructive  effect  on  the  microorganisms  can 
also  be  produced  hy  an  increased  concentration  of  salts  in! 
the  suspension  in  the  vaporization  process. 

The  processes,  which  destroy  the  microorganisms  and 
which  are  connected  with  the  mixing  of  fluids  in  the  res- 
e-rvoir  of  the  percussion  sprayer,  have  been  carefully 


52 


rs  at  i  or  ten  (.'55,  •3'o ,  37). 

,  this  factor-  is  cnaructeris- 
d  is  not  a  loat-jne  ci'  d'rv'cc 
tlie  tank  is  in  a  static  stare 

aca  reveal  tr.at  tre  drc.ay  of 
the  air  bet-^ins  frer  ti  e  i-c'v^'nt 
and  derenls  on  tin?  constrsc- 
HS  on  the  routine  cf  the  crer- 

anisns  trees  on  at  a  later  ti-  e 


ations  conducted  oy  Dunklin 
establish  that  ti’e  death  of 
ension  defends  to  so -e  jerree 
in.:r  processes.  Cne  ai.va.ys 
d  as  a  result  cl  it  a  lai  'e 
during  the  first  3  -  a in- 


tuQ^in.:^  the  inrortance  of  relative  huicidi'G.y,  did  not  con- 
ider  the  influence  of  otner  factor's  Ich  activated  the 

nierrelationshl'i,-  • 

A  careful  control  of  humidity  and  tern  er^- tare  con¬ 
it  ions  along  with  standarized  metncds  of  aerosol  for'na- 
ion,  a  sample  intake  and  determination  in  it  of  t-e  con- 
entratlon  of  viable  organisms  helped  Dunklin  and  fuck  (5 5 
to  explain  many  of  the  differences.  In  the  conduction  of 
xperim.ents  with  -Dneumococci  sprayed  from  a  bouillon  suo- 
ension  with  different  indices  of  relative  nuaidity  (from 
to  PjO%)  and  different  temneratures  (1^,  hr,  and  53  ie~ 
ees),  they  established  an  extremely  interesting  fact  - 
the  most  intensive  deatn  of  microorganisms  occurred  in  a 
arrow  range  of  relative  humidity  (around  .  vvith  low- 
r  and  higner  indices  thei^neumococci  survived  for  a  con¬ 
siderably  longer  time.  The  same,  but  somewhat  less  ex- 
ressed  regularity,  was  also  demonstrated  in  experinents 
ith  staphylococci  and  streptococci. 

An  exTclanaticn  of  the  mecnanism  of  accelerated  de¬ 
traction  of  micrborganisics  in  the  first  minutes  after- 
raying  into  the  air  with  average  indices  of  relative  hu- 
dity,  in  tne  opinion  of  the  author >  must  be  sought  in 
he  processes  arising  in  the  droplets  of  fluid  falling  in- 
0  an  atmosphere  which  unsaturated  by  water  varers.  Fvao- 
ration  of  water  from  such  droplets  at  first  leads  to  an 
ncrease  in  the  concentration  of  substances  dissolved  in 
he  liquid  surrounding  the  microorganisms;  some  of  then 
an  be  toxic  for  bacterial  cells.  The  bacterial  cell  it- 
elf  at  this  time  also  loses  the  water  present  in  it  and 
ith  intense  drying  becomes  resistant  to  different  kinds 
pf  unfavorable  chemical  and  physical  actions,  and  therefor 
the  destructive  effect  of  substances  contained  in  the  drop 
[let  of  fluid  surrounding  the  bacterial  cell,  the  concen- 
(tration  of  which  increases  as  a  result  of  evaporation, 
becomes  significantly  lower, 

!  The  amount  of  water  lost  by  tne  cell  is  clearly  re¬ 

lated  to  the  relative  humidity  of  the  air.  .vi  th  very  lo* 
indices  of  humidity  dehydration  proceeds  so  rapidly  tnat 
Ithe  microorganisms  become  resistant  to  unfavorable  effects 
pot  having  time  to  be  exposed  to  the  destructive  influence 
f  the  rising  concentration  of  salt  dissolved  in  the  fluid 
rops. 

The  excellent  preservation  of  microorganisms  in  the 
erosol  with  high  indices  of  relative  humidity  has  to  be 
xplained  by  the  fact  that  both  in  the  cell  itself  as  well 
s  in  the  drop  of  fluid  surrounding  it  there  remains  a 
ufficient  amount  of  water,  and  the  concentration  of  sal  us 
issolved  in  it  does  not  rise  again  or  rises  negligibly. 


54 


vapor 
e  tem 
n  the 


es  in  the  svirvival  rate  of  bacteria  in  an  aerosol  at  0 
;rees  and  10  degrees.  If  with  a  temperature  of  0  degrees 
lowest  decay  rate  for  all  species  of  the  bacteria  un¬ 
consideration  (B.  coli,  Acbromobacter ,  Pseudomonas) 
registered  at  a  relative  humidity  of  70%y  then  at  10 
:rees  this  value  corresponded  to  the  maxi;“al  decay  of 
romobacter.  ■i^ith  a  tem;.erature  of  10  degrees  and  a 
ering  of  the  relative  humidity  below  60/o  a  sbar  in- 
ase  in  the  decay  rate  of  B.  coli  and  Pseudomonas  was 
ed, 

Ketnloy,  Pincher,  and  Gow-n  ('+8),  studying  the  in- 
ence  of  temperature  in  a  range  of  from  -40  to  -5?  de¬ 
es  on  the  survival  of  B.  prodigiosum  in  an  aerosol^  al- 
established  that  with  various  temperatures  the  relative 
iidity  exhibited  a  varying  influence  on  the  survival  of 


55 


jouillon  susx ension,iri  which  it  was  established  that  the 
acre  iotense  dying  out  took  place  in  aerosols  with  large 
irops. 

The  presented  data  reveal  that  the  first  process, 
causing  the  destruction  of  microorganisms  in  the  aerosol 
and  happening  in  the  first  minutes  of  its  activity,  is 
connected  with  changes  in  the  osmotic  and  chemical  activity] 
of  the  cells  and  is  the  result  of  drying.  The  intensity 
of  the  dying  out  of  the  sprayed  microorganisms  depends  on 
those  states  where  dehydration  occurs*  Dunklin  and  Tuck 
consider  that  this  same  principle  is  at  the  base  of  the 
lypholization  process  which  is  used  for  the  preparation  of 
dried,  viable  cultures  of  microorganisms. 

An  analagous  point  of  view  on  the  nature  of  the  de¬ 
cay  process  of  microorganisras  in  aerosols  is  upheld  also 
by  Rosebury  (3^)^  who  assumes  that  the  evaporation  of 
water  from  the  drops  of  spray  is  the  reason  for  the  death 
of  the  vegetative  microorganisms.  This  supports  his  the¬ 
ory  that  the  selection  of  the  suspending  medium  favors  an 
increased  survival  of  bacteria  in  the  aerosol.  The  exper¬ 
iments  conducted  by  him  and  his  associates  substantiated 
the  accuracy  of  this  deduction.  It  has  been  shown  that 
with  the  spraying  of  B.  prodigiosum  suspended  in  distilled 
water  the  restoration  index  averaged  0.9^^,  while  in  the 
spraying  of  a  culture  suspended  in  a  gelatin  solution,  it 
rose  to  14-.1%.  It  7/as  also  established  that  in  a  certain 
range  of  nhe  concentration  of  the  solution  of  bhis  prepar¬ 
ation  an  influence  was  shown  on  survival. 

Similar  data  have  also  been  recovered  with  other 
test  agents.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  best  sus¬ 
pending  media  for  the  agents  of  glanders  and  melioidosis 
are  glycerin  and- bouillon,  for  the  agent  of  orucellcsis  - 
a  mixture  of  dextrin  a/ad  one  of  the  products  of  protein 
breakdown  (2).  ! 

These  experiments  are  tr-e  bpsis  for  recocriending 
that  a  different  t,>'p>fe  of  stabilizing  supplement  be  added 
to  the  culture  which  is  intended  for  sv.raying  (Rosebury  - 
3^+). 

The  se-cond  nrocess  mu'-.t  be  dwelt  on  briefly  which 
causes  the  decay  ox  fnicroorganisms  in  the  aerosol  and 
which  rroceeds  for  a  longer  time  than  the  first  and  incle- 
nendeiifc  of  it.  This  rrocess  compares  qualitatively  with 
the  decay  of  microorganisms  in  dried  t reparations.  In  the 
ooinion  of  Ferry  and  Aiarle  (39)  it  is  related  to  slow  oxi¬ 
dation.  Its  intensity  depends  on  the  species  of  microorga¬ 
nism,  the  suspending  mediur.,  and  the  relative  humidity 
(49,  50,  51,  52). 


56 


i::F;^TrioN  by  bactepial  aerof.oig 


BOME  ASI'EG?S  C? 


With  its  occurrence  in  a  oacterial  cloud  infection 
can  take  place  through  various  portals  of  entry.  These 
may  be  exposed  parts  of  the  body  with  damaged  skin  (wounds' 
■;;astro-iatestinal  tract,  conjunctiva,  and  respiratory  or- 
Jtans.  Inasmuch  as  infection  through  the  skin  and  the  di¬ 
gestive  tract  is  not  common  for  airborne  infection  alone, 
30cie  feabures  of  infection  will  be  considered  in  this  sec¬ 
tion  only  by  the  inhalation  route,  whicn  is  specific  and 
the  most  important  ^1ust  for  airborne  infection. 

Certainly  the  most  important  in  the  application  of 
the  bacteriological  agent  is  inhalation  infection  which 
arises  as  a  result  of  the  penetration  of  tne  agent  into 
the  body  through  the  respiratory  organs. 

According  to  tne  data  established  at  the  present 
time  C3^,  53),  i;he  character  and  features  of  zhe  action  ot 
the  bacterial  aerosol  on  the  body  in  general  (not  oonsic- 
ering  the  state  of  the  microorganism)  is  determined  by; 

the  biological  and  physical-chemical  nature  of  the 
aerosol; 

the  amount  of  biologically  active  particles  re¬ 
tained  in  the  body,  i.e.,  clie  dose  of  infection; 

the  initial  distribution  of  these  particles  in  the 

cody ; 

the  future  fate  of  the  retained  particles  (removal, j 
re-distributioa,  resorption,  etc).  ' 

The  number  of  microorganisms,  which  enter  t'.;e  body  j 
from  the  bacterial  aerosol  thi’ough  the  respiratory  tract,  | 
is  determined  by  three  basic  factors:  the  concentraclon  j 
of  the  aerosol,  exposure  (length  of  inhalation),  and  the  j 
extent  of  pulmonary  ventilation.  The  inhaled  dose  of  the  ! 
infecting  agent  is  calculated  by  the  formula; 

D  =  ctv. 

I  w 

! 

Where  B  =  dose  of  infecting  agent;  c  =  concentration  of 
biologically  active  (live)  microorganisms;  t  =  exT->osure; 

-  extent  of  pulmonary  veaoilation. 

The  indicated  method  of  calculation  is  not  suffic¬ 
iently  accurate  and  even  under  conditions  of  experimental 
!vork  in  an  aerosol  chamber  gives  errors  reaching  55  - 

The  difficulty  in  determining  the  inhaled  dose  is 
lue  to  the  common  intricacies  of  calculating  a  pure  con¬ 
centration  of  aerosol  and  the  extensive  individual  flue-  j 
tuations  in  the  respiratory  volurae  of  the  subjects.  In  I 


ddition,  ti-e  correct  esti.riation  of  retaimient  of  th 
aled  aerosol  in  the  body  is  of  essential  importance 
his  will  be  discussed  below. 

The  dose  of  the  infecting  agent  is  decidely  i 
tant  in  the  development  of  a  disease.  As  tne  invest 
ions  of  Rosebur.y  (3^)  have  demonstrated,  tne  inhala 
nfecting  doses  and  letr.al  doses  vary  with  different 
eases  in  the  first  place,  and  secondly,  they  soneti;: 
overshadow  corresronding  doses  in  subcutaneous  and  o 
modes  of  infection  (Taole  3). 

Tebl 

^Comparative  data  on  infectivity  of  biological  agents 
different  routes  of  infection  (Roseoury) 


e  in- 
,  and 

rnpor- 
i  -na¬ 
tion 
di  s- 
es 

ther 
e  3 

,vith 


Agent  [Brucel-  Melioi- Glandera  Tularemia 
jlosis  dosis  f 


(Number  of  organisms  in  ID-50) 


1 sittacosi s 
(doses  in 
intracereb¬ 
ral  units 
ID-50) 


\  guinea  mouse  hamster  jhain-  mouse 
ethodX 

Of  1  I  i 


nhalation  130  100  70  TlSO 

atrapeEttofia*.  6  I5  20 

ubcutaneoufa  6  7  15  20 

ntracerebral  -  ■  -  »  _ 

ntravenous  -  - j  „ 

ntracutaneous  10  15  « 

utaneous 

( scarifLcaticn)  .  i  _ 


mouse  imouse 


15  1660i  20 
251  124 

i-25000  *1350 

-  1*1 

h  •“ 

u  . ;  . 


erosol  Retention  in  the  Body.  it  is  known  that  with  the 
nhalation  of  an  aerosol,  including  the  bacterial  one, only 
^art  of  the  inhaled  particles  is  retained  in.  the  body  sine; 
ute  rest  escape  into  tne  external  environment  with  breath- 
ing.  Consequently,  the  degree  of  entrapment  of  the  in¬ 
haled  aerosol  will  to  a  sign.! f leant  extent  influence  the 
lose  of  the  infecting  agent  which  the  body  receives. 


58 


The  settling  and  entrapment  of  aerosol  r  art  ides  in 
the  respiratory  tract  a.-'e  causea  by  three  fundamental  fa"!- 
tors:  force  of  gravity,  strong  inertia,  and  Brownian 

movement.  With  this  the  force  of  gravit,/  determines  the 
sedimentation  (settling)  process;  inertia  causes  tie  im¬ 
pingement  of  rectilinear  (with  the  air)  moving  particles 
against  the  surface  of  the  respiratory  tract  where  there 
are  curves,  narrowing,  or  roughness;  Brownian  movement  of 
very  tiny  particles  also  brings  about  their  attachment  to 
nucous  membranes  (53). 

The  primary  characteristic  determining  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  gravity,  inertia,  and  Brownian  movement  of  the  c.er 
osol  particles  is  their  mass,  i.e.,  the  size  of  these  rar- 
ticles.  Therefore,  the  dispersion  capacity  of  tne  aerosoi 
is  the  most  important  factor  determining  the  extent  of  its 
entrapment . 

Important,  but  not  decisive,  points  in  this  process 
also  are:  the  concentration  of  the  innaled  aerosol,  the 
depth  and  frequency  of  respiration  (extent  of  pulmonary 
ventilation,  the  type  of  respiration  (nose  or  mouth), 

and  the  state  of  the  respiratory  organ"^. 

The  electrical  charge  of  the  particles,  their  hy¬ 
groscopic  nature,  and  other  physical-chemical  properties 
show  a  certain  influence  on  the  extent  of  entrapment  (53). 

There  are  extensive,  diverse  data  in  the  literature 
on  the  aspect  of  the  degree  of  entrapment  of  dry  '*nd  li- 
'  ould  aerosols  In  the  body.  However,  in  summary,  consider¬ 
ing  first  of  all  recent  investigations  w’ith  tne  use  of  the 
cost  modern  methods  and  apparatus,  it  is  possible  to  gen- 
sralize  them  in  the  following  manner  (53,  5-4-). 
i 


Bejurama  ^aemu  «  w  1  It  I  : 

^KpoNax . ^>0  I  3.2H>.8-I.f,  «y|o.32 


POIKMT  suepxxji 


100 


80—100 


61  -»»■  l')-48  1 T-IJ 19  - 


1)  Size  of  particles  in  microns 

2)  10  and  more 

3}  percont  of  entrapment 


I  : 

I  - 

i 

i 

«  i 

I 

A  cross-section  and  other  anatoinical-pysiological  | 

characteristics  of  the  respiratory  tract  are  discussed  ! 

yith  application  to  man.  j 


59 


From  the  presented  data  it  follows  ti-at  the  largest 
articles  are  chiefly  influenced  by  the  force  of  gravity 
nd  inertia,  as  a  result  of  which  they  settle  principally 
n  the  upper  respiratory  tract:.  With  a  decrease  in  dis- 
ersion  the  influence  of  gravity  and  inertia  abates,  and 
n  the  whole  these  particles  are  held  back  and  penetrate 
nto  the  oeeper  parts  of  the  lungs.  Particles  Q,j>  -  0.4  u 
n  size  have  little  gravity  and  inertia  with  practically 
nexpressed  Brownian  movement;  as  a  result,  the  percent  of 
etention  of  this  fraction  is  the  smallest,  and  those  0.3 
4  p  in  size  do  the  least  settling.  With  even  smaller 
articles  the  influence  of  tne  force  of  gravity  and  inert! 
s  also  decreased,  out  Btownian  movement  is  significantly 
eightened,  which  Again  causes  greater  retention. 

The  concentration  of  the  inhaled  aerosol  also  in- 
luences  the  extent  of  retention  in  the  body  The 

pinion  originally  existed  that  an  increase  in  the  concen- 
ration  caused  less  retention  of  the  particles.  This 
dea,  however,  was  later  disproved,  and  (the  fact  was  es- 
ablished  of  a  direct  relationship  between  these  sizes: 
ith  increase"*  concentration  of  the  inhaled  aerosol  the 
xtent  of  particle  retention  rose  in  the  ocdy. 

The  amount  of  pulmonary  ventilation  also  shows  an 
nflueace  on  the  extent  of  retention,  but  an  estimation  of 
t  is  controversial.  Thus,  Owens  (56)  established  that 
rith  tne  inhalation  of  an  aerosol  with  a  concentration  of 
560  particles  in  1  cru^  (dispersion  capacity  0.85  ~ 
shift  from  a  quiet  type  of  respiration  to  deep  caused  an 
increase  of  26  -  26  td'79%  in  the  retention.  These  data 
rere  not  later  confirmed  by  Brown  (55)  and  other  authors 
ho,  on  the  other  hand,  concluded  that  the  T.^crcent  of  re¬ 
tention  was  inversely  proportional  to  the  extent  of  pul- 
onary  ventilation, 

,  The  type  of  respiration  -  nose  or  mouth  -  suostan- 

jtiaily  influences  the  extent  of  retention  of  the  innaled 
erosol. 

It  has  been  established  by  numerous  investigations 
(55,  57,  58)  that  the  percent  of  aerosol  retention  with  a 
asal  type  of  respiration  notably  surpasses  that  with  the 
oath  type.  The  reason  for  this  phenomenon,  in  the  opin- 
on  of  the  author,  is  found  in  the  air  vortexes  and  the 
OSS  of  speed  of  the  particles  with  their  passing  from 
arrow  passages  of  the  respiratory  tract  to  wider  ones. 

The  difference  in  the  degree  of  retention  with  var- 
ous  types  of  respiration  is  manifested  the  most  for  pan¬ 
icles  1  -  5  U  in  size,  since  this  fraction  alone  is  held 
ack  mainly  in  the  nose.  In  addition,  it  is  known  that 
he  type  of  respiration  does  not  show  any  essential  influ- 


60 


sncti  on  tre  retention  of  tne  coarseoi;  lisr.t3r?ed  ■  art’, 
and  the  sjuall  disper:-:ea  ouss:  a  ocax-se  aarcpol  la 
retained  with  month  as  welJ  as  with  nose  breath  in-',  j 
the  most  highly  dispersed  rarti  lee  settle  rc'.rlv  i' 
resciratioa  ooth  through  the  nose  and  tee  isoivth. 

The  electrical  chax'-xe  of  the  t  .articles  causes 
higher  oercent  of  retention  in  the  body,  dcbsibi-./  a 
charge  favors  an  im/fiediate  sectlin?:  of  ti.e  p-rticlee 
resriratcry  tract  and  tnus  insures  a  more  staoie  scat 
the  aerosol  and’  a  longer  time  for  the  oreservation  of 
original  ccncentration. 

Other  prorerties  of  the  particles,  like  theif' 
cific  rravit.v,  hys^roscor ic  nature,  abilit.y  to  forc'.  co 


cific  gravity,  hygroscopic  nature,  abilit;/  to 
glorerates  and  flakes  also  influence  the  exte 


con- 


retention  in  the  body,  hut  their  role  nar  not  seen  cuffi: 
icntly  studied. 

Thus,  the  prinary  factors  deternining  tnc-  inr.ala- 
tion  dose  of  the  infecting  agent  are  the  concentrat ion  o; 
the  aerosol,  exposure  of  its  inhalation,  and  extent  of 
pulmonary  ventilation.  The  main  factor  iufluencihr  ti.e 
extent  of  retention  of  tne  aerosol  particles  in  tne  reuT:; 
atory  organs  is  the  dispersion  nature  of  these  particle:., 

Distrioucion  of  /  etai ned  Particles  in  the  Be.cpiratory  Cr- 
gans .  The  dose  of  the  inf ecting  ge.ct  undoubtedly  plays 
decisive  role  in  the  development  of  tne  ind'ectio-s  dis¬ 
ease.  Along  with  this  a  .material  influence  cn  the  pntLo- 
genesis  of  the  disease  is  shown  by  the  infection  routes 
vutich  often  are  determined  by  the  sites  of  the  pri  r-ary  a: 
plication  of  the  agent.  vMth  airbor.ne  i.cfection,  when  t; 
inhalation  route  of  infection  takes  place,  the  microoryc- 
nisres  can  be  iioplanted  in  the  oody  along  the  entire  cour; 
cf  the  respiratory  tract  oeginning  with  the  nasal  orificu 
and  ending  with  the  alveoli.  If  there  ;s  added  to  tnir 


ico.mes  still  ;ncre  understandable  (.32,  60,  61,  62). 

'  It  hus  been  estaoiished  that  the  oasic  fcctcr  dc- 

[termining  not  only  the  extent  of  retention  of  inhaicd  wa: 
it  ides  but  also  their  r.ri:.ary  distribution  in  the  resper- 
jatory  system  is  their  dispersion  nature  (35»  37,  3^. 

jS-P,  65). 

■t  summary  of  results  of  numerous  investircat  ■  or:e  i.>i 
hhe  distribution  in  the  respii-atory  organs  of  ae.ro:-?ol  ■•a; 
tides,  denending  on  their  size,  allows  us  to  conclude 
jthat  parricles  more  than  50  u  in  size  are  retained  chief: 
in  the  upper  respiratory  tract  (nose,  mouth,  nasopharynx 


61 


62 


&xaaple,  tee  total  a'uourit  of  retrained  tarticies-,  yield  to 
a  second  course  before  such  biological  properties  of  toe 
given  microorgat^isia  as  virulence  and  a  -'Si veness ,  v.i.ich 
frequently  deterud  ne  toe  nature  of  tbe  infect;  icas  rrocese 
and  tne  fate  of  the  organisn  introduced  in'o  tr.e  oody. 
Nevertheless,  sore  general  rules,  Vrell-kno'.vr.  In  respect  t'j 
inert  particles,  are  com, non  to  particles  of  bacterial  aero¬ 
sols;  a  preseivtation  of  'cner  v.-iil  help!  us  zo  advanc,,'  citrs-  ■ 
ly  toe  fu.rtrer  behaviour  of  these  rarticles  in  the  body. 

The  fate  of  the  carticles  of  the  bacterial  aer.;s:j, 
wr.ich  penetrates  into  the  respiratory  organ  and  setrles 
there  is  not  the  same:  one  escapes  froa  the  cody  into  cho 
external  environment,  another  penetrates  into  the  oastre- 
intestinal  tract  anci ,  lastly,  a  third  undergoes  resori.t on , 
■elatively  coarse,  dispersed  particles  escape  nain- 
iy  from  the  oody  and  settle  principally  in  tne  urper  re¬ 
spiratory  tract.  Due  to  the  activity  of  ciliated  -pithel- 
ium  these  particles  move  toward  an  outside  opening  and  er- 
cape  along  with  the  secretions  froru  the  nose  and  nasophar¬ 
ynx  in  coughing,  sneecing,  and  bloAiny  the  nose.  Tnus, 
altiiourh  the  large  particles  are  well  retained  in  the  re- 
sniratory  tract,  nevertheless  they  are  rapidly  ana  aost 
coiipletsly  removed  from  them  (20,  21). 

Small  and  minute  particles,  a  certain  perce'drsyr'  of 
wi'ich  penetrate  into  the  deep  sections  of  the  resy. iratory 
tract,  are  also  retained  in  the  alveoli,  escarinr  to  a 
significantly  lesser  degree,  bub  this  process  still  does 
take  place.  At  first  phagocytosis  of  these  bacterial  par¬ 
ticles  uy  the  leukocytes  and  hystocytes  occurs  and  then 
they  are  removed  from  the  body  through  the  bronchi  uy  a 
current  of  air  (?-,  75 )• 


Penetration  into  the  Gastro-Intestinal  Tract  occurs 
ingested  particles  of  tne  aerosol  which  have  settle 
the  nose,  nasopharynx  (nasal  type  of  resr iration) , 
mouth  (iQouth  type  of  respiration).  Vvith  the  inhala 
coarsely  dispersed  aerosols,  when  the  percent  of  re 
in  the  upper  respiratory  tract  is  high,  the  nurber 
tides  impinging  against  the  gaatro-intcstcaal  trao 
be  especially  high,  markedly  surpassing  the  number 
pinging  directly  onto  the  lu»^gs  (5?»  53,  ?1,  ?4' 

Inasmuch  as  the  genesis  of  disease  is  nor 
for  airborne  infections  by  alimentary  routes,  the  f 
behavior  of  organisms  in  the  gastro-iatestinal  trac 
not  be  considered. 

Resorption  of  particles  of  the  bacterial  aer 
can  occur  from  nil  surfaces  of  tne  respiratory  trac 
ganisras  penetrate  through  the  barrier  of  mucous  mem 


d  in 
and 

lion  of 
tent  ion 
of  par- 
u  c: 
iiri- 

5ci.f  ic 
art her 
t  v.ill 


t.  Or- 
b  ranee 


63 


tiie  respiratory  tract  and  alveolar  epitbeliuir  like  bio- 
lo.e;ically  active  particles  suspended  in  'iiucous  secretiorxs, 
iJunierous  experiments  with  inert  and  poisonous 
(strychnine,  curare,  -die)  substances  have  shown  that  tL  e 
absorbing  capacity  of  the  respiratory  apparatus  is  ex¬ 
tremely  high;  its  absorption  often  exceeds  the  rate  of  re¬ 
sorption  with  other  mucous  membranes,  particularly  of  the 
gastro-intestinal  tract.  Such  an  intensive  resorption  is 
explained  by  the  properties  of  the  mucous  membranes  of  tne 
respiratory  tract  and  alveolar  epithelium  as  well  as  oy 
their  enormous  surfaces  (75,  76). 

These  data  have  also  been;erified  by  recent  inves¬ 
tigations  of  American  authors;-  they  have  specifically  es- 
cablished  tiiat  for  botulinus  toxin  a  minimal  lethal  dose 
with  airborne  infection  is  several  thousand  times  less 
than  with  alimentary  infection  (32). 

It  is  also  known  that  through  the  respiratory  tract 
there  occurs  a  more  active  resorption  of  substances  which 
are  poorly  absorbed  through  tne  digestive  organs  (75). 

However,  the  intensity  of  absorption  for  various_ 
parts  of  the  respiratory  tract  is  the  same.  Heubner  (77) 
established  that  resorption  proceeds  more  energetically 
through  mucous  membranes  covered  by  ciliated  epithelium 
(respiratory  tract)  while  it  takes  place  less  w'ell  th.rouQrh 
aiucous  membranes  covered  with  many  layers  of  flat  epithel¬ 
ium  (moutii,  tnroat,  esophagus,  opening  to  the  larynx). 

In  general,  it  can  be  concluded  that  absorption  proceeds 
from  all  s'arfaces  of  tne  respiratory  tract,  out 
sity  gradually  increases  from  the  nasal  orifice 
deep  parts  of  the  organs,  reaching  a  raaximun  in 
The  nschanism  of  periceation  of  r.he  organ 
the  barrier  of  raucous  membranes  and  alveolar  epicheliuTi  has 
not  been  adequately  studied.  It  is  necessary,  riowever,  to 
keep  in  mind  that  in  many  infectious  diseases  the  penetra¬ 
tion  of  microorganisms  occurs  on  a  backgreond  of  more  or 
less  manifested  local  inf la:;i-r:atory  changes  in  the  resj  ira- 
tory  tract  or  lands,  which,  as  a  rule,  combine  with  the 
general  action  of  tne  agent,  on  the  body.  Undoubtedly  the 
destruction  of  epithelium  local  vascular  d: sturbances ,  and 
innervation  disturbances,  like  a  weakening  of  defense  me- 
3hanisffis  -  particularly  phagocytosis  -  aid  tn  the  penetra¬ 
tion  of  organisms.  The  properties  of  the  organism  play  a 
large  role  in  the  process:  its  morphology,  virulence,  ag¬ 
gressiveness,  etc. 

"Microorganisms  xenetrate  through  the  mucous  mem¬ 
branes  or  alveolar  epithelium  directly 
ing  previously  subjected  to  phagocyto 

result,  passing  tnrough  the  mucous  membranes  directly  or 


its  inten- 
to  the 
the  alveoli, 
S!:;s  throurii 


or  indirectly,  be- 
sis  (77,  78).  As  a 


64 


throL'.^^h  s]--?g.3J.  gaps,  tne  nicroor'^aMsms  i-r;- 

pinr'e  on  t^.e  s  lo  av:  .‘iv/cr  of  tLe  conaeot^ive  tissue. 

Later  o’"  ti.e.7  elir.or  eiitcr'  tne  ol.ood  capillaries  of  the 
lungs  direculy  ar.u  aic  carried  along  tiien  throughout  the 


entire  body,  o. 


enter  the  lyirphatic  ves'el; 


frorc  there  toe  regional  i.yrpnatic  glands,  and  then  they 
penetrate  tre  rnoracic  au :t  and  the  venous  blood  (79). 

Depeniin--  on  tr.e  oatore  of  the  pathogenesis  of  tj.e 
illness  anc  of  the  tode  of  infection  by  the  bacterial  aer¬ 
osol  (dispersing  c.ar.acit  /  and  prixary  distribut’cn  of  par¬ 
ticles),  the  i  ann'ul  organisQs  will  p'roceed  in  tee  body  a- 
long  the  course  of  Ci  e  v.hole  respiratory  tract  beginning 
with  the  nasal  oriaioe  aid  ending  with  the  alveoli. 

The  best  condi tiois  'with  this  for  surmounting  toe 
natural  physi oiorgical  barriers  are  created  right  in  the 
alveoli  and  deep  rants  of  the  organs  (35). 

ICxperinental  o.-servat ions  and  clinical  experience 
have  shown  that,  depending  on  the  site  of  settling  of  the 
pathogenic  agent,  various  forms  of  sickness  can  develop 
with  characteristic  patt.ogenesis  .  Thus,  v;ith  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  tne  tularense  organism  to  the  tonsil  area  tnere 
develops  a  tonsixlar-bubonic  form  of  tularemia,  while  the 
impingement  of  the  agent  against  the  deep  parts  of  the 
lungs  induces  a  pulmonary  form  of  illness.  Infection  with 
the  plague  organism  tc.rcupn  waldeyer's  ring  can  cause  bac¬ 
teremia  and  the  developiuent  of  a  secondary  pulmonary  form 
of  plague;  along  with  this,  Che  deep  inhalation  of  the 
agent  produces  plague  as  a  primary  disease.  ixarap''es  of 
such  a  kind  are  very  numeroas  (80,  81,  32). 

A  Eur.Tar;/  01  data,  devoted  to  the  question  of  air- 
porne  infection  and  publisned  in  the  foreign  literature, 
permits  us  to  make  tne  foliov/ing  conclusion, 

1  An  inhalation  do.?e  of  the  infecting  agent,  being 

^derived  fro’  the  ccncentration,  exposure,  and  volume  of 
bulmonary  ventilatJ  on,  oroves  to  be  the  most  important  i  \c.- 
jtor  deters. ihg  t;;e  onset  and  course  of  infection.  The 
extent  of  r-?tc  nr  ion  v-i  - aorosol  particles  in  the'  body  vviph 
breathing  •’onsider:  .bl,/  inlluences .  the  na-gnitude  of  the  in¬ 
halation  dcse,  ar^d  tais  depends  first  of  all  on  the  dis¬ 
persing  ta- nc  it  ■'  of  tr.e  aerosol;  large-si sed  particles  are 
etained  in  tie  res; iratory  organs  to  quite  a  greater  per- 
ent  than  sr.all  ones.  In  addition,  the  degree  of  reten¬ 
on  is  directly  proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the 
erosol  and  the  electric  cnarge  of  its  particles;  the 
asal  type  of  rcsoirat ion  increases  the  percent  of  reten- 
on. 

The  priiV'.ary  distriuution  of  particles  in  the  respir- 
tory  organs  plays  an  important  role  in  the  pathogenesis 


63 


5f  airborne  infection,  the  nature  of  which  is  also  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  fractional  dispersing  makeup  of  the  aerosol. 
Larger  particles  settle  in  the  upper  respiratory  tract 
arhile  the  small  and  minute  ones  penetrate  and  are  retained 
Ln  .the  deep  parts  of  the  bronchial  tree  and  in  the  alveoli. 
Phe  greatest  retention  of  particles  with  this  in  respect 
bo  weight  occurs  in  the  upper  respiratory  tract. 

Later  on  the  particles  retained  in  the  respiratory 
tract  may  be  eliminated  from  the  body  (particularly  the 
larger  ones),  be  ingested  in  tne  gastro-i ntestinal  tract 
(also  the  coarser  fraction),  or  be  so  to  resorp¬ 

tion  (absorption). 

The  respiratory  system  has  especially  favorable  con- 
tit  ions  for  absorption.  The  imi^lantation  of  organisms 
through  the  epithelium  of  the  respiratory  tract  and  alveoJi 
can  occur  along  their  entire  course  bnt  the  most  intensive 
fresorption  takes  place  in  deep  parts  of  the  respiratory 
tract,  especially  in  the  alveoli. 

It  must  be  considered  that  the  invasion  of  orga- 
aisms  into  the  body  very  often  occurs  on  a  background  of 
acre  or  less  expressed  local  pathological  changes  in  the 
respiratory  organs,  which  break  the  natural  barrier  func¬ 
tions  of  the  mucosa  and  promote  the  penetretion  of  orga¬ 
nisms  into  the  body  at  any  point. 

Depending  on  the  site  of  invasion  of  the  .agent,  the 
pathogenesis  and  clinical  pictiire  of  the  disease  can  es- 
sentially  change,  which  allows  us  to  conclude  th.at  the 
primary  application  of  the  infecting  agent  ( distr 
of  aerosol  particles)  shows  an  influence  on  the  course  of 
the  infectious  process. 

Serious  consideration  is  given  abroad  to  the  siudy 
of  the  nature  of  infection  by  bacterial  aerosols,  and  es¬ 
pecially  in  the  USA  at  the  present  time  this  probien  is 
the  center  of  attention  of  American  sx]:ierts  on  the  bacter- 
[iclogic.!^.!  weapon. 


I 

bPOBABI.f  CBJIiUTS  AND  FUFhOSES  CF  A 


34GTS'P.I0TCGICAL  ATTACK 


Acquaintance  v/ith  American  and  English  li terat.a,re 
devoted  to  the  application  of  the  bacteriological  weapon 
allows  us  to  presume  that  different  authors  do  not  have  a 
single  point  of  view. 

Some  authors  assume  that  tne  bacteriological  weapon 
can  be  applied  for  the  infliction  of  a  blow  only  along  the 
deep  rear  of  the  enemy;  others  consider  that  it  is  univer¬ 
sal  and  can  be  used  for  the  contamination  of  objects  both 


.  66 


In  the  rear  as  well  as  on  the  field  of  battle. 

In  Anri-erican  official  directives  (9)  it  is  pointed 
Dut  that  the  most  probable  objects  of  a  bac teriol ogical 
attack  will  be  mobilization  and  embarkation  centers,  larcre 
concentrations  of  troops  in  front  ano.  rear  lines,  iricas- 
brial  cexiters,  and  also  the  agrucaltural  excnomy  and  lar-:e 
expanses  of  agricultural  plants. 

#trmagnac  (90)  considers  that  the  bacteriological 
weapon  is  a  strategic  one  and  can  be  used  for  dicrupclon 
of  the  work  of  rear  objects:  military  structures  and  othe 
commercial  enterprises,  transportation  systems  and  elec¬ 
trical  stations.  Analagous  opinions  are  held  also  by 
iViesman  (7)  and  S'othergill  (32). 

Rosebury  (3))  analyzing  this  aspect,  also  puts  tnc 
strategic  goal  in  first  place.  In  his  opinion  the  most 
expedient  use  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  is  to  resolve 
the  following  problems: 

—  attack  of  insular,  sea  and  air  basins  vjhich  are 
not  considered  to  be  occupied  by  armies  of  the  side  usinc; 
the  bacteriological  weaponi 

—  submission  of  surrounded  urban  fortresses; 

—  disorganization  of  industrial  districts  at  toe 
rear  of  the  enemy; 

—  infection,  of  army  camps  and  centers  of  troon 
training; 

—  infection  of  abandoned  territory  upon  strategic 
withdrawal; 

—  infection  of  animals  on  cattle  ranches  auii  of 
agr.lcultural  crops. 

Application  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  during 
nilitary  action  when  troops  of  the  belligerent  side  are  in 
3lose  contact,  Rosebury  (5)  considers  hardly  probable  but 
still  possible. 

The  authors,  assuming  that  the  bacteriological  v-ea- 
on  cannot  be  used  for  a  resolution  of  tactical  problem;?, 
ase  their  point  of  view  on  the  danger  from  the  retroac- 
|tive  effect.  The  term,  retroactivity,  is  based  on  the 
possible  infection  by  the  bacteriological  weapon  of  troops 
f  the  side  using  this  weapon.  The  retroactive  effect  cau 
ise  eith-^r  with  the  application  of  the  agent  of  contact 
iseases,  an  outbreak  of  which  will  spread  even  among  the 
rmies  of  the  side  using  it,  or  with  the  contamination,  of 
errains  by  stable  biological  agents  with  the  subseque.at 
dvancement  of  troops  along  this  territory  (5)* 

Discussing  the  problem  of  the  retroactive  effect, 
artori  (83)  cites  an  example  from  the  time  of  the  Fir.st^ 
orld  War  when  the  Germans  made  an tempt  to  infect  cattle 
.  France  with  hoof  and  mouth  disease.  This  attemot  was 


67 


ucceasful  -  an  epizooty  arose,  but  it  srread  to  Germany, 
o,  where  uven  more  cattle  died  cr.an  in  France. 

The  possible  application  of  biologically  contamina- 
ed  agents  for  an  infliction  of  a  blow  at  tropps,  who  are 
ctively,  engaged  in  military  operations,  is  limited  to  the 
resence  in  the  bacteriological  weapon  of  a  latent  period 
f  action,  during  which  time  the  exposed  can  maintain  tiei 
oucine.  Under  conditions  of  a  rapidly  cijanging  setup 
his  fact  to  a  knov/n  degree  will  lessen  the  value  of  the 
ilitary  effectiveness  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  (?). 
The  authors,  indicating  tne  possibility  of  using 
the  bacteriological  weapon  to  resolve  not  only  strategic 
ut  also  tactical  problems,  ?£sume  that  the  danger  of  tne 
etroactive  effect  can  be  significantly  lessened  if  a  ser¬ 
ies  of  precautionary  measures  are  taken  by  troops  of  the 
ide  applying  this  weapon.  Among  them  are  incluaed; 
hoice  of  those  biologically  infecting  agents  v.-Lich  v/ould 
either  cause  the  emergence  of  an  epidemic  nor  permanent 
ontamination  of  a  terrain,  immunisation  of  personnel  and 
heir  provision  with  agents  of  individual  defense,  etc  (p) 


ECeilGAL  AGFIn^S  OF  AFPLIOATION 

Many  foreign  specialists  in  works  devoted  to  ques¬ 
tions  of  bacteriological  warfare  are  presenting  t. eir 
lews  on  the  possibility  of  using  various  technical  agents 
or  the  gjplicati  on  of^the  bacteriological  weapon,  ?^ost  of 
hem  consider  that  there  can  be  used  for  this  purpose  spec 
ially  constructed  containers,  pouring  and  spraying  avia¬ 
tion  devices,  aviabombs,  mines,  artillery  si' ells,  etc 
(5,  5,  8,  17,  84), 

_In  the  opinion  of  foreign  specialists  the  oacterio- 
logicai  bombs  and  anells  should  be  small  in  .size  .vi^:!'!  rel¬ 
atively  small-sized  explosive  shells  and  easily  destroyed 
casings.  In  accordance  with  American  views  S'ach  small 
^munition  will  not  be  applied  by  means  of  single  explos¬ 
ions  but  in  a  series  similar  to  the  incendiary  bombs 
thrown  down  in  packets  (9). 

Light  metal,  earthenware,  glass,  or  plostlc  can 
serve  as  material  for  bacteriological  shells  ;9).  Thus, 
for  example,  earthenware  casings  for  the  bod;/  of  the  oac- 
teriological  bombs  were  developed  in  the  Japanese  detac:-- 
ment  no.  751*  This  bomb  was  prepared  from  a  special  kind 
of  clay  by  means  of  drying  it  in  a  plaster  form  and  firing 
lit  in  a  special  kiln.  The  length  of  the  bomb  was  from  70 
'to  dO  cm,  the  diameter  wa«.  20  cm.  The  body  of  the  bomb 
|was  filled  with  small  flasks  of  plague-infested  fleas,  and 


66 


G.  s.i:a-Li  a :  cunt  oi  exi:  loa:.ve*  auc  -t  itnac  C'ns  v^a:.  led  _r 

sE?i  eclil  channels  located  ici  the  -.allc  o.i  the  .  0^.).  In 

jSdd^tj.on,  a  remote  control  tute  *--3  ]  laceu  in  c  t:.ecieL 
oi'onia?,'  undornoath  tne  oomb.  '.>ucn  ooitba  ..ore  ■:’,-•?/ I  t.^  h.-' 
in  too  or  i.-ion  of  cccii-  crco.tcrs,  t.  r-u.vn  rron  an  eJ  rn-l^ne 
and  xoloded.  ovei-  cne  yrrounc; .  Ver.;  little  en:  Ic^-r  vt  su.j- 
jr.tancQ  v.'as  required  to  exclode  the  cer'amic  oonr>.  ’7' 
jinsured  the  oreHeu'vat xoa  of  tto  fleas  v.ith  t);'^  exrlcnicn 
;(h8)  en.^ure  1), 


Fig.  1. 


Ceramic  Casing  for 
the  lahii  Bomb 


i  In  tneopinioc.  of  forsifcn  snecialists  tee  bacteri'il 

laipcnts  can  be  applied  also  in  splinter  shells,  mines,  gre¬ 
nades,  and  other  am  luni  tion.  in  the  opinion  of  hoseori',/ 
there  can  be  used  v.ith  the  greatest  effect  in  these  ai'ciu- 
nitioriB  stable  forms  of  inicrotes,  v;hich  are  capaoie  of 
forming  stores  -  for  ex-otiplo,  agents  of  anthrax,  :otar.a  , 
and  '  as  infection. 

Aorial  bombs  can.  be  tr.rov.n  from  a  T'lane  directlv  onto 
the  ground  ,  or  tney  can  be  dropped  in  special  ;  araci.u e  , , 
besides  the  bomb,  shell,  bine,  and  ooricainei-  v-arious  STra.:' 
ing  devices  or  pouring  tanks  mounted  on  planes  can  be  used 
to  distrioute  the  bacteria  or  infected  vectors  (9,  85). 
i  I'oreign  sreciaiists  do  not  excli'.ae  the  ’■  c.'n: '  .'r 

‘application  of  bacterial  agents  by  saboteurs,  dore  tlan 
jthat,  American  military  specialists  recognize  this  as  an 
lideal  weapon  for  va.ri  ous  kinds  of  sabotage  (57). 

'  As  it  aprieared  from  the  evidence  of  the  Kiuibarovsk 

■trials,  the  Japanese  at  the  time  of  tne  war  in  China  de¬ 
veloped  and  tested  on  Chinese  servicemen  spra.yers  of  nla.Tu 
linfected  fleas  in  the  form  of  fountain  pens  and  'Oanes. 

[rhis  type  of  spvrayer  was  reserved  for  saboteurs,  in  ad- 
[dition,  the  saboteurs  ccuid  attempt  to  contaminate  v/ater 
[basins  with  agent.s  of  infectious  diseases.  For  this  rur- 
Iposs,  as  nosebury  has  indicated,  it  is  possible  to  use 
thin-v;alled  glass  amrules.  The  ampviles  upon  falling  into 
the  water  eitl^er  broke  under  the  effect  of  ti  eir  own 
weignt  or  under  the  influence  of  gas  forming  witn  corndcr 


69 


Df  tbe  certain  eiefrieat,  v.it;  tue  ■.vn:;er.  AnotiuiP  r\oJli'ion- 
tion  of  ti'.e  cont,alri6r  i'oi  agents  or  ncxins  co  iveyec  ny 
A.'ater  -  for  exariiole,  ootulinus  toxin  -  could  oe  a  pace:; 
filter  made  frorr.  a  carton  or  norous  paper  and  int.x  ernatei 
Ritn  sabscances  soluble  in  water  (li). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1.  Wendt,  G. ,  "Science  Illustrated’’,  19^ »  October 

2.  Rosebury,  T.E. ,  "Peace  or  Pestilence",  Whittle¬ 
sey  House,  19^9. 

3.  Pox,  L.A.,  ’'Mil.  Surg.  ',  19^2,  90,  5,  563. 

4.  Charaberlain,  R.W.,  Kissling,  R.E. ,  Sikes,  R.K. , 
"Am.  J.  Hyg.",  195^,  60,  286. 

5.  Rosebury,  T.E.,  Rabat,  E.A. ,  Boldt,  M.H. ,  "J. 
lauunol.",  1947,  56,  7 . 

6.  Vannevar,  Bush,  "Modern  Arms  and  Free  Men", 
London,  1950. 

7.  ’Mesmann,  E.E.,  "Mil.  Rev.",  1950,  30,  1,  106. 
S.  Cooper,  P.S.,  in  bookt  Baldwin,  K.W, ,  "The 

Price  of  Power",  New  York,  1948,  340, 

9*  "Handbook  of  the  Hospital  Corps',  United  Stater 
Navy,  1953. 


10.  Weyer,  F. ,  "Handbook  of  Tropical  Medicin©  and 


pParasitology" ,  1953 »  4, 

34^K 

11.  Davis,  G.E,, 

"Pub.  Health 

Rep . " 

,  1943.  58,  26, 

984. 

12.  Dnris,  t-.E.  , 

"Public  Health 

.  ■%  53,  2?| 

1016. 

1 

f 

1 

13.  c.r:v  ,  T.,  B 

alfcazard,  M>, 

d.iLto  ract*uji",[ 

!68,  4 

-  6,  232. 

4f 

1 

: 

14,  Chamberlain, 

E.W.,  -ud-a. 

W.D. , 

"Am.  J.  Hyg.",  F 

!i957, 

66,  2,  151. 

i 

•  15.  Ecntover,  M.d.,  "U.S.  Armed  Forces  Med,  J,", 

;1951,  12,  1795. 

!  16.  Phair,  J.,  "Armed  Forces  J*  %  8,  i, 

jl4. 

1?.  BW-Radio  Interview  witu  Gentral 
"Armed  Forces  Chem.  J.",  1954,  8,  2,  16. 

18.  Waitt,  Alden  H,,  "The  Infantry  Jouranl",  Second 
jEdition,  1944. 

19.  Creasy,  W.M. ,  "Armed  Forces  Chem,  J.",  1952, 

5»  3»  16. 

20.  Armagnac,  A.P. ,  "Popular  Science,  1947»  151»  2, 

_ _ _ 


70 


21.  Langmuir,  A»D.,  Andrews,  J.U.,  "Am.  J.  Pub. 
Kealth",  1952,  ^2,  5. 

22.  Seitman,  U. ,  Fillips,  D.B. ,  ”Am.  J.  Med.  Tech- 
aol.",  1956,  22,  1,  12. 

25.  Peitman,  M.,  Moss,  M.L. ,  Harstad,  J.B.,  Algand, 
R.L.,  Stross,  N.H.,  "J.  Bact.'’,  195^,  68,  5,  5^. 

24.  Meyer,  K.F. ,  Eddie,  B. ,  reference  from  T.E. 
Rosebury,  E.A.  Kabat,  M.H.  Boidt,  “J.  Immunol.”,  1947,  56, 

7* 

25.  Newteet,  Komma,  Kundacuxt,  reference  from  T.E. 
Rosebury,  "Peace  or  Pestilence",  Whittlesey  House,  1949. 

26.  Berry,  G.P.,  Kitchen,  S.P.,  "Am.  J.  Prop.  Med.” 

1931,  11. 

27.  Lennete,  E.H. ,  Koprowski,  H.J.,  "A.M.A.”,  1943, 

123,  1088  -  1095. 

28.  Material  from  the  trial  of  the  case  of  former 
servicemen  of  the  Japanes  Army  charged  with  the  prepara¬ 
tion  and  application  of  the  bacteriological  weapon.  State 
Publishing  House  of  Political  Literature,  1950. 

29.  Berger,  B.B.,  Stevenson,  A.H. ,  "J.  Am.  Water 
forks  Assn.",  1955,  47,  2,  101. 

30.  "Bacteria  as  Weapons  of  War",  Pharmaceut.  J., 

1946,  19  1. 

31.  "Chemical  Reviews" ,1949,  44,  2. 

32.  Pothergill,  D.,  "Pub.  Health  Rep.",  1957,  72, 
10,  865. 

33.  Luffour,  J.J.,  "Bordeaux  Medicine",  1957. 

54.  Rosebury,  T.E.,  "Experimental  Air-borne  Infec¬ 
tion",  Baltimore,  1947. 

35.  Ledingham,  J.C.,  reference  from  T.E.  Rosebury, 
"Experimental  Air-borne  Infection",  Baltimore,  194?. 

36.  Smith,  A.M. ,  Venzke,  C.E. ,  reference  from  T.E. 
Roseoury,  "Experimental  Air-borne  Infection",  Baltimore, 

1947. 

37.  Venske,  C.E,,  reference  from  T.E.  Rosebury,  "Ex 
perimental  Air-borne  Infection",  Baltimore,  1947. 

38.  Dunklin,  E. ,  Fuck,  T.J.,  "Exp.  Med.",  1948,  87, 

2,  87. 

39.  Perry,  R.M.,  Marie,  T.G.,  "J.  Infect.  Dis.", 
1954,  95,  2,  142. 

40.  Williamson,  A.E.,  Gotaas,  H.B.,  "Ind.  Med.", 
1942,  3,  40. 

41.  Edwards,  D.G.,  Elford,  W.J.,  Laldlow,  P.J., 
"Hyg.",  1945,  43,  1. 

42.  Loosli,  C.G.,  Lemon,  H.M.,  Robertson,  O.H., 
Appel,  E. ,  "Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.",  1943,  53,  205. 

43.  De  Oae,  K.B. ,  "Am.  J.  Hyg.",  1944,  40,  239. 

44.  Wells,  W.P.,  Zanpasodi,  R.,  "Science",  1942, 

96t  277^ - - - 


45.  Brown,  I.D.,  "Austral.  J.  Biol.  Scl.",  1953,  6, 

»63. 

46.  Brown,  A.D.,  "Austral.  J.  Biol.  Sci.",  1953,  6, 

%70. 

4?.  Brown,  A  D.,  "Austral.  J.  Biol.  Sci.",  1953,  7, 

444 

48.  Ketlilsy,  T.W.,  Finohsr,  E.L. ,  Cown,  W.li.,  "J. 
Infect.  Dis.",  1957.  100,  1,  97. 

49.  Stamp.  L.J.,  "Gen.  Microb.",  1947,  1,  252. 

50. ProQm,H.,  Hemmons,  L.M. ,  "J.  Gen.  Uicrob.",  1949^ 

3,7. 

51.  Fry,  R.M. ,  Greaves,  R.J.,  "H.J.  Hyg.",  1951,  i 

49,  220. 

52.  Lindwell,  O.M.,  Lowbury,  J.,  "J.  Hyg.",  1950, 

48,  20. 

53.  Altshuler,  S.,  Vormur,  L. ,  Palmes,  £.D. ,  Nelson 
N.,  "Arch.  Industr.  Health",  1957,  15.  4,  283. 

54.  Pindeieen,  W.  "Pfliigers  Arch.",  1935.  256,  367. 

55.  Brown,  C.E. ,  "J.  Industr.  Hyg.",  1932,  8. 

56.  Owens,  J.S.,  "Trans.  Med.  Soc.",  1923,  45,  79, 
(London). 

57. Lsmann,  G. ,  "Arbeitphysiol.",  1933,  7.  2, 

58.  Lemann,  G.,  " Arbeit sphysiol. " ,  1934,  8,  3. 

59.  Fothergill,  L.D.,  "Bact.  Rev.",  1957,  21,  249. 

60.  aonJdn,  L.S.,  "Am.  J.  Hyg.",  1951.  53,  337. 

61  Bmett,  H.A.,  Henderson,  D.W.  et  Al,  "Am.  J. 

Hyg.",  1956.  54,  49. 

62.  Lunge,  B.  "Bact.  »nd  Exp.  Ther.”,  1928,  9. 

63.  Abramson,  "Dis.  Chest",  1950,  18,  5.  ^35* 

64.  Tech,  C.,  "Acta.  Radiol.  Cancer  Bohemoslovenien' 
1954,  5,  3  -  4,  45. 

65.  Rooks,  "Am.J.  Hyg.",  1939.  30,  1,  7- 

66. Wotkin8-Pit8hlord,  W. ,  Moizy,  A.,  "South  Afr. 
Inst.  Med.  Res.  Publ.",  N.  7.  Johannesburg,  Sept.,  1916. 

67.  Mavrogordato,  "South  Afr.  Inst.  Med.  Res.  Publ. 
No.  7,  Johannesbxirg,  Aug.,  1923. 

68.  Bedford,  T.,  "Brit.  J.  Industr.  Med.",  1950, 

7.  187. 

69.  Faber,  O.M.,  "H-3  Powder",  1936. 

70.  Hilding,  A.,  "An.  Physiol.",  1952,  100. 

71.  Saito,  "Arch,  of  Hyg.",  1912,  75.  134. 

72.  Dreser,  reference  from  Staehelin.Bethe* s  "Hand¬ 
book  of  Normal  and  Pathological  Physiology",  1925.  2,  515* 

73.  Beitzke,  reference  from  Staehelin,Bethe' s  "Hand 
book  of’ Normal  and  Pathological  Physiology",  1925.  2,  515. 

74.  Goldberg,  L.G. ,  "Science",  1950.  112,  2907. 

75.  Heubner,  "Bethe's  Handbook  of  Normal  and  Path- 


72 


Dlogical  Physiology",  1925 ♦  2,  475. 

76.  Wasbutsky,  rafareace  from  Heubaar  in  "Batha's 
Handbook  of  Normal  and  Pathological  Physiology",  1925,  2, 

473. 

77*  Fild,  Drinker,  "ijn.  J.  Physiol.",  1936,  116, 

597. 

78.  Drinker,  Hardanber,  "J,  Erp.  Med.",  1947,  36, 

1,  7. 

79-  Arnold,  "Dust  Inhalation  and  Dust  Pathogenesis" 
Leipzig,  1885. 

30.  Strong,  Taaque,  "J.  Scl.  Sect."  1912,  192,  7»  3 

137. 

81.  Fu;jnami,  "Manchuria  Plague  Prevention  Service", 
Report  of  1923  -  1924,  Volume  IV  of  series. 

82.  Wulien-Theiartmar,  "  "Prevention  Service  Re¬ 
port",  1924,  5,  1. 

83.  Sartori,  A.  Sartori,  R. ,  "Bacteriological  War¬ 
fare",  Military  Publishing  House,  1936. 

84.  Kliewe,  H.,  "Civil  Air  Defense",  1934,  7-3, 

171. 

85.  "Civil.  Defense  Against  Bacteriological  Warfare" 
D.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  1953. 


86,  Creasy,  W.M. ,  "Ordnance",  1958,  XLII,  228,  962. 


75 


t 


CHAPTER  Ill 


SOME  PROBLEMS  IN  THE  HASS  PROCURQIENT 
07  BIOLOCICAI.  AaiMTS. 


According  to  the  current  views  of  foreign  specia¬ 
lists  the  demands  of  bacteriological  warfare  can  be  satis¬ 
fied  only  by  the  mass  procurement  of  microbial  material  on 
an  industrial  scale  (2;.  In  view  of  industry's  success  in 
the  production  of  antibiotics  it  has  been  demonstrated 
that  it  is  Indeed  possible  to  accomplish  a  similar  feat  in 
cultivating  pathogenic  bacteriological  agents  in  huge  quan¬ 
tities.  In  the  United  States  of  America  in  the  state  of 
Indiana  an  experimental  plant  is  in  operation  which  was 
constructed  for  these  purposes  and  was  created  as  long  ago 
as  the  beginning  of  19^  (!)•  In  the  opinion  of  American 
scientists  (2,  3i  and  others)  the  principles  of  mass  ob- 
tainment  of  organisms  under  modern  Industrial  conditions 
is  general  for  all  microorganisms,  for  pathogenic  as  well 
as  for  those  producing  antibiotics,  some  vitamins,  and 
other  products  of  current  fermentative  production.  The 
system  exidting  in  business  for  the  production  of  antibi¬ 
otics  and  in  laboratories  developing  vaccines,  as  Rose- 
bury  indicates,  can  be  shifted  over  to  the  manufacture  of 


74 


he  bacteriological  weapon  without  any  special  changes, 
be  cultivation  technique  of  the  microorganisms  is  also 
imilar. 

In  conteinporarj  microbiological  industries  the  cul¬ 
tivation  of  microbial  cultures  for  diverse  purposes  is 
ccomplished  in  a  cultivation  apparatus  (or  fermeni;ors,  re 
ctors)  in  liquid  nutrient  media.  The  capacity  of  the 
odern  cultivators  is  measured  in  tens  of  thousands  of 
liters  (^1-). 

The  culture  of  pathogenic  microorganism  grown  in 
the  apparatus,  in  accordance  with  the  opinioo  of  Rcsebury, 
ay  be  the  starting  point  for  outfitting  special  coutiain- 
rs  and  the  later  application  for  the  affliction  of  people 
r  animals.  However,  considering  the  negligible  durabili- 
y  of  liquid  cultures  with  storage,  the  American  specia- 
ists,  as  it  has  already  been  noted,  consider  it  worthwhil 
o  preserve  the  bacterial  cultures  in  the  dessicated  state 
nd  to  use  them  in  that  same  form  (!>).  Therefore,  the 
echnology  of  procuring  bacteriological  agents  under  in- 
ustrial  conditions  also  provides  for  the  preparation  of 
Tied  microbial  cultures. 

The  available  foreign  literature  on  the  problem  of 
e  mass  cultivation  of  microorganisms  allows  us  to  con¬ 
clude  that  the  principal  plan  of  industrial  procurement  of 
organisms  consists  of  the  following  basic  steps: 

1.  Preparation  of  nutrient  media  for  caltivaticn. 

2.  Cultivation  in  a  fermentation  apparatus. 

:5.  Preparation  of  fluid  and  dried  biological  cul¬ 
tures  . 

Let  us  turn  now  co  a  consideration  of  individual 
aspects  of  the  technology  of  industrial  procurement  of 
[flic ro organisms . 

la  reference  to  the  coxmon  opinion  about  a  single 
principle  of  the  industrial  procurement  of  microorganisir.s, 
dti  the  present  chapter  a  general  theory  will  be  star.ed 
[concerning  the  mass  cultivation  of  pathogenic  as  well  as 
pf  nonpathogenic  microorganisms  in  the  light  of  the  cur¬ 
rent  foreign  literature. 


cur- 


PEI-APJT'iON  0?  ITUTRISNT  MEDIA 


j  One  of  the  fundamental  proolems  determining  the 

possibility  of  mass  procurement  of  microbial  material  is 
fehe  industrial  requirement  for  a  sufficient  amount  of  the 
pecessary  nutrient  media.  The  need  of  pathogenic  orga- 
pisms  for  nutrition  is  very  striking,  and  the  mass  prepar- 
jatian  of  biological  agents  inescapably  entails  a  large 
tetock  of  raw  materials. 


75 


For  growth  and  development  the  microbial  cell 
hould  receive  from  the  nutrient  medium  all  of  the  eleisent 
ontained  in  it  in  the  right  amounts.  In  connecoioc  with 
his  it  is  relevant  to  dwell  briefly  on  the  chief  ques- 
ions  related  to  the  nutrition  of  microbial  cells. 

The  growth  and  development  of  microorganisms  are  as 
ociated  first  of  all  with  the  synthesis  of  protein,  the 
ost  important  element  of  the  cell.  Pathogenic  organisms, 
eing  typical  heterotrophs,  are  capable  of  assimilating 
itrogen  only  in  the  form  of  amino  compounds  from  high  rao- 
ecular  nitrogenous  substances  which  are  products  of  pro¬ 
tein  breakdown.  These  include  peptones,  pol;^eptone8, 
nd  amino  acids.  Protein  substances  are  easily  assimilate 
y  the  bacteria  after  preliminary  splitting  into  amino  ac- 
.  The  process  of  the  splitting  of  protein  molecules 
ccurs  under  the  influence  of  proteolytic  enzymes  liber- 
ted  by  the  microbial  cells.  However,  the  proteolytic  ac- 
ivity  of  bacteria  is  extremely  varied.  Thus,  for  exam- 
le,  it  ie  sharply  manifested  in  the  agent  of  an  anaerobic 
nfeotion  and  very  weakly  expressed  in  the  plague  agent, 
n  connection  with  this  the  assimilability  by  the  cells  of 
arious  products  of  protein  decomposition  depends  on  the 
ntenslty  of  the  splitting  of  the  protein  substances  enter 
ng  into  the  composition  of  the  nutrient  medium. 

In  addition,  for  the  growth  and  development  of  mi- 
robial  cells  certain  organic  compounds  are  necessary  whic 
annot  be  synthesized  by  the  organisms  from  the  surround- 
ng  environment  and  have  to  be  supplied  to  the  cells  in  a 
sable  form,  i.e.,  they  have  to  be  in  the  nutrient  medium, 
hese  ihclude  some  amino  acids  and  also  purine  and  pyrial- 
ine  rings.  These  compounds  enter  into  th«5  composition  of 
jthe  cytoplasm.  As  Werkman  and  Wilson  have  shown  (6),  "all 
the  cells,  whatever  their  origin,  contain  protein  which 
hith  hydrolysis  gives  a  mixture  of  the  ssoiie  18  amino  acid 
tin  different  proportions'*. 

I  Innate  to  each  species  of  microorganism  is  its  quan 

Ititatlve  requirement  of  the  indicated  cimino  acids  in  the 
utrient  medium. 

There  exist  organisms  which  require  2-5  amino  ac- 
ds,  but  for  some  of  them  the  number  of  essential  amino  ac 
ds  is  about  18.  There  has  not  been  found  a  need  for  more 
han  16  amino  acids  in  a  single  microorganism  (6). 

A  study  of  the  amino  acid  requirement  in  B.  anthrax 
as  shown  that  these  microorganisms  grow  well  on  a  mixture 
f  amino  acids,  among  which  are  leucine,  isoleucine,  and 
aline  (7).  For  the  growth  of  the  plague  organism, accord¬ 
ing  to  the  data  of  fiao  (8),  the  necessary  amino  acids  are 
henylalanine ,  cystine,  and  proline.  Although  it  is  not 


»ss®nt:ial,  the  amino  acid,  glycocoll,  stimulates  gro7/th. 
pSowever,  this  view  is  not  shared  by  some  AnericaQ  authors, 
who  maintain  that  only  a  medium  containing  all  of  the  a- 
mino  acids  which  make  up  casein  secures  the  growth  of  all 
strains  of  the  plague  organism  (9). 

Of  the  mineral  ions  needed  for  the  full  develop¬ 
ment  of  organisms  K+,  Mg++,  Mn++,  and  ?•-*-+  are  necessary, 
and  some  require  Ca++,  Zn++,  and  Cu++  (10,  11).  In  addi¬ 
tion,  the  growing  microorganisms  have  to  have  sulphur  and 
phosphorus  (12).  The  requirement  in  the  nutrient  media  of 
the  indicated  ions  is  dictated  not  only  by  the  fact  theat 
they  determine  the  extent  of  osmotic  pressure  and  the  ion¬ 
ic  state  of  the  medium  but  also  by  the  important  role  of 
some  ions  in  various  functional  processes  of  the  organisms 

However,  even  in  the  presence  of  all  these  sub¬ 
stances  the  growth  of  bacteria  is  impossible  if  the  corre¬ 
sponding  physical-chemical  conditions  favorable  for  growth 
are  not  formed. 

An  iir.portant  factor  supporting  the  growth  of  cul¬ 
tures  is  the  reaction  of  the  medium  (pH).  For  each  spec¬ 
ies  of  organism  there  exist  certain  ranges  of  pH,  and  only 
in  tnese  ranges  does  the  normal  growth  of  the  microbial 
population  occiir.  Besides  these  oonditions  the  correspon¬ 
ding  temperature  and  partial  oxygen  pressure  are  necessary 
and  the  presence  of  growth  factors  -  vitamins,  belonging 
chiefly  to  the  B  group  (15,  14,  15,  16,  17) » 

The  basic  nutrient  media,  with  which  until  recent 
times  the  work  has  been  performed  in  microbiological  lab¬ 
oratories,  are  those  prepared  in  meat  bouillon  with  the 
Addition  of  various  peptones  obtained  by  the  ensymatic 
hydrolysis  of  protein  products.  Peptones  aie  a  mixture  of 
jalbumose,  polypeptides,  and  amino  acids,  and  they  are  un- 
istabla  and  fluctuate  depending  on  the  raw  material  and  the 
juethod  of  hydrolysis.  Waste  products  from  the  meat  indus¬ 
try  (blood,  fibrin,  parts  of  the  stomach  of  cattle,  and 
other  protein  products)  are  used  as  the  raw  material  for 
|the  recovery  of  peptones.  Protein  hydrolysis  is  accom¬ 
plished  with  the  help  of  proteolytic  enzymes:  pepsin, 
trypsin,  and  pancreatin.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how 
jenormous  amounts  of  these  costly  substances  could  be  con- 
jsumed  to  meet  the  needs  of  microbiological  production  on  a 
{large  scale.  In  addition,  the  process  of  enzymatic  hy¬ 
drolysis  itself  is  sufficiently  complicated  and  compre- 
pensive  in  the  sejise  of  the  technology  and  standardization 
pf  the  obtained  products.  Therefore,  the  analytical  brain 
pas  for  a  long  time  worked  on  the  simplication  and  lOT/ered 
cost  of  production, first  of  all  along  the  direction  of 
BUDstitution  of  costly  raw  materials  by  cheaper  and  more 


77 


vai labia  sources. 

In  recent  years  in  vacciae  production  the  prepara- 
ion  of  nutrient  inedia  has  expanded  still  further  by  the 
etbod  of  acid  (and  also  in  some  instances  by  alkaline) 
ydrolysis  of  protein  products.  The  recovered  protein  hy- 
rolysates  are  aqueous  solutions  of  various  amino  acids 
hich  are  formed  with  the  extensive  decomposition  of  the 
riginal  protein  products  as  a  result  of  their  treatment 
ith  sulfur  or  an  acid  salt.  The  method  of  acid  hydroly- 
is  has  greatly ■ simplified  and  made  cheaper  the  prepara- 
ion  cf  nutrient  media,  since  instead  of  deficient 
pepsin,  trypsin,  pancreatin)  accessible  acids  have  come 
0  be  used.  Various  wastes  of  biological  plants,  canning 
actories,  defense  and  similar  plants  may  serve  as  the 
aw  material  for  acid  hydrolysis.  By  the  process  of  acid 
ydrolysis  it  is  possible  to  work  out  and  achieve  in  this 
ay  the  specified  decomposition  of  protein  products  in 
he  nutrient  medium  which  is  to  be  used  for  the  cuitiva- 
ion  of  any  microorganisia.  Considerable  success  in  the 
development  of  nutrient  media  with  the  use  of  the  method 
f  acid  hyfrolyais  of  protein  has  been  accomplished  by 
ny  authors.  As  the  starting  nroducts  for  hydrolysis 


78 


sicid  hydrolysate  of  casein  from  an  excess  amount  of  chlor¬ 
ine  ions  and  humous  substances.  As  a  result  of  purifica¬ 
tion  the  hydrolysate  became  cnlorless  ^nd  transparent.  The 
:hlorine  content  in  it  dropped  from  8.2  to  0.15  mg/ral. 

It  is  possible  to  extract  the  necessary  amino  acids 
from  the  hydrolysates  by  a  similar  method.  Heraoval  of  the 
unino  acid  mixture  in  the  protein  hydrolysates  with  the 
aelp  of  ion-exchange  resins  can  be  used  in  industry  for 
the  procureiaent  of  purified  amino  acids  and  peptides,  wbic'r 
are  needed  for  the  preparation  of  high  quality  and  effec¬ 
tive  nutrient  media  for  microorganisms,  as  the  investiga¬ 
tions  of  Partridge  and  Brialey  (’^6),  Consden,  Gordon,  and 
lartin  (27),  Paulson  and  Deatherage  (28)  and  other  authors 
iave  shown. 

Lessening  the  cost  of  the  nutrient  media  for  micro¬ 
organisms  has  also  branched  into  the  use  of  plant  proteins 
in  their  preparation.  Some  plant  proteins,  according  to 
their  content  of  indispensable  amino  acids  -  arginine, 
pistidine,  lysine  -  are  similar  to  proteins  of  animal  ori¬ 
gin.  Bean  plants  (soy,  peanut,  pea;  are  especially  rich 
pn  first-class  proteins.  In  contrast  to  animal  products 
tehe  plant  products  contain  somewhat  more  carbohydrates  and 
[less  protein  and  fat. 

The  first  attempt  at  cultivating  pathogenic  bacter¬ 
ia  on  nutrient  media  was  proved  by  Tsenkov  as  early  as 
1877*  Later  Pawlowsky  (29),  Sander  (50)  conducted  exten¬ 
sive  investigations  on  the  cultivation  of  tubercle  bacilli 
on  vegetative  media,  especially  potato  medium.  On  the 
basis  of  comparative  experiments  Sander  decided  on  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  vegetative  media  over  meat.  Hook  and  Fabian 
held  the  same  opinion  (51).  According  to  their  data  nu¬ 
trient  media,  prepared  from  vegetative  wastes,  best  favors 
the  growth  of  bacteria . 

Attempts  are  also  described  in  the  literature  to 
use  asparagus  for  the  cultivation  of  fungi  to  be  used  for  , 
jantibiotics  (52)  and  also  soy  (55)  and  bean-like  lupine  j 
plants  (54,  35)  to  prepare  nutrient  media  for  bacteria, 
i  Repeated  attempts  have  also  been  undertaken  to  pre- 

jpare  nutrient  media  by  the  method  of  acid  hydrolysis  of 
protein  products  of  vegetative  origin. 

I  There  must  be  mentioned  still  another  raw  material 


which  is  used  to  prepare  nutrient  media,  namely,  yeasts. 
Yeasts  are  a  valuable  nutrient  substrare,  very  similar  to 
meat.  Thay  have  a  high  content  of  nutrient  substances  and 
vitamins. 

For  the  preparation  of  nutrient  media  yeasts  are 
first  autolyzed  with  the  help  of  the  protease  contained 
in  them  (pepsinase,  tryptase,  eriptase) ,  Y' ast  media  are 


sed  in  epidemiological  practice  in  the  preparation  of 
acciaea  (56). 

In  recent  jears  the  attention  of  investigators  has 
urned  more  and  more  to  the  possibility  of  using  corn  ex- 
racts  for  the  preparation  of  nutrient  media.  As  Kennedy, 
peck,  and  Aurand  (37)  have  reported,  corn  extract  con- 
ains  a  mixture  of  amino  acids  and  a  substance  (Corn-Steep 
actor)  which  stimulates  the  growth  of  bacterial  cells. 

In  addition,  it  promotes  the  developoient  of  pencilliua  by 
the  fungi  producents  (38) >  and  in  relation  to  this  corn 
extract  medi  has  been  used  in  the  pencillin  industry  for 
a  long  time  (4,  40,  etc).  The  possibility  of  using  other 
herbaceous  plants  for  nutrient  media  has  been  shovm  by 
ivioyer  and  Coghill  (41). 

Thus,  by  numerous  works  on  the  use  of  various  pro¬ 
tein  substances  as  basic  components  of  nutrient  media 
there  has  been  established  a  real  possibility  of  replacing 
products  deficient  in  high-quality  meat  substances  with 
more  available  and  cheaper  ones.  It  is  even  more  impor¬ 
tant  to  stress  this  because,  in  the  opinion  of  foreign 
specialists  (2),  under  war  time  conditions  foods,  espec¬ 
ially  meats,  become  “strategic  material",  and  their  use 
for  other  needs,  apart  from  the  feeding  of  the  population, 
is  scarcely  possible. 

The  requirement  of  microorganisms  for  nutrient  sub¬ 
stances  has  been  extensively  enough  studied  by  now.  It 
has  been  established  that  for  tbe  growth  and  development 
of  many  organisms,  including  the  pathogenic  ones  as  v»ell, 
the  prsence  of  protein  in  the  medium  is  not  needed;  it  is 
enough  to  have  only  some  amino  acids  and  mineral  salts, 

Phe  most  important  point  with  this  is  the  proportion  and 
concentration  of  amino  acids  in  the  medium  (42).  This 
fact  serves  as  the  springboard  for  the  obvelopiiient  of  a  new 
itrend  in  microbiology  -  the  preparation  of  synthetic  nu- 
[trient  media  of  a  certain  composition  in  relation  to  the 
iaogram  for  the  cultivation  of  microorganisms.  In  many 
odern  microbiological  laboratories  they  now  prefer  to 
jwork  with  synthetic  media.  The  possibility  of  changing 
{the  makeup  of  the  medium  in  the  necessary  direction  by 
caving  out  or  adding  different  amino  acids  and  other  in- 
redients  in  exact  quantitative  proportions  allows  the  in- 
esti^itors  to  comprehensively  study  some  aspects  of  the 
hysioiogy  of  the  microorganisms. 

The  basic  principles  presented  in  this  section  on 
he  preparation  of  synthetic  nutrient  media  pertain  ex- 
lusively  to  microorganisms  of  a  bacterial  nature. 

The  cultivation  of  viruses  and  rickettsiae  differs 
strikingly  in  concept  from  that  of  bacteria  and  occupies 


80 


ft  special  place. 

In  contrast  to  bacteria,  viruses  and  rickettsiae 
io  not  Multiply  when  placed  on  artificial  medium.  They 
5an  be  oiltivated  only  in  the  presence  of  living  ceils.  At 
present  there  are  two  fundamental  methods  with  different 
Modifications  for  the  cultivation  of  viruses  and  ricketsia< 
infection  of  the  chick  embryo  and  cultivation  on  animal 
tissue. 

Most  of  the  pathogenic-  viruses  and  ricketsiae  known 
now  are  cultivated  with  success  in  the  chick  embryo,  its 
membranes,  the  chorionic  membranes,  or  the  extra-embryonic 
fluid.  An  impressive  amotint  of  virus  material  is  obtained 
with  this.  Therefore,  the  given  method  more  and  more  finds 
extensive  application  in  investigative  work  and  in  the 
preparation  of  diagnostic  antigens  and  vaccines.  ! 

EtabMbs  of  other  domestic  birds  (duck,  turkey)  are 
also  used  ror  the  cultivation  of  viruses  and  rickettsiae 
besides  the  chick  embryos,  but  the  latter  are  the  most 
practicable  because  of  the  shorter  incubation  period  as  i' 

compared  with  other  embryos,  a  higher  susceptibility  to  1: 

most  viruses  and  ricketssiae,  and  also  their  low  cost  (^5)1 


Figure  2.  Mass  preparation  of  chick  embryos 


}  In  our  survey  there  is  no  necessity  to  analyze  in 

hetail  all  the  techniques  concerning  the  infection  of  em¬ 
bryos  with  viruses.  These  techniques  have  been  exposed  at 
length  in  a  number  of  textbooks  and  manuals  on  virology. 

Pbe  use  of  the  given  Method  for  the  marketing  of  vaccines 
and  diagnostic  preparations  in  modern  industrial  enter¬ 
prises  makes  it  possible  to  acquire  viruses  and  rickettsiae 


la  mass  amounts.  And  this,  aft  Boseburj  has  indicatsd,  can, 
it  neoassarj,  satisfy  the  requirement  completely  in  the 
production  of  viruses  and  rickettsiae  for  the  purposes  of  | 
warfare . 

In  renent  years  in  viral  laboratories  the  use  of 
the  method  of  viral  and  rickettsial  cultiv ration  in  growing 
cultures  of  vsirious  animal  tissues  has  been  put  into  prac¬ 
tice  on  an  increasingly  extensive  scale  (44).  Uany  kinds 
of  tissue  can  be  used  for  this  p\irpose,  either  of  the  em¬ 
bryos  or  adult  animals,  most  often  of  birds  and  mammals. 
The  chief  ingredients  of  such  cultures  are  living  cells 
obtained  from  the  corresponding  animal  and  physiological 
solution. 

There  are  several  formulas  for  salt  solutions  for 
tissue  culture.  The  most  generally  used  are  Tyrode's  and 
Ringer's  solutions. 

The  minced  tissue  from  different  embryos  te^bryonic 
extracts")  is  usually  added  to  the  medium  as  a  nutrient 
substrate. 

The  llaitlands,  and  later  Lee  and  Rivers  (43)  es¬ 
tablished  that  the  vaccinia  virus  of  smallpox  multiplied 
favorably  on  a  meditim  composed  of  pieces  of  tissue  in  Ty- 
rode’a  solution.  The  method  of  tissue  cultures  developed 
by  Lee  and  Rivers  is  the  simplest  of  all  the  provioualy 
jused  ones  and  is  widely  used  at  the  present  time  in  scien¬ 
tific-investigative  laboratories  for  the  cultivation  of 
hriruses  and  rickettsiae. 


SUBMERGED  CULTIVATION  OF  ORGANISMS  IN  INDUSTRIAL  APPARATUS 


The  interest  in  the  problem  of  cultivating  microor 


gamisms  on  a  large  scale  under  Industrial  conditions  has 
become  especially  noted  abroad  in  the  last  15  -  20  years. 
The  development  and  organization  of  antibiotic  production 
is  one  of  the  chief  reasons  for  this. 

The  basis  of  the  current  productive  acquirement  of 
microbial  material  is  cultivation  accomplished  in  a  fermen¬ 
tation  apparatus  (cultivator)  by  the  method  of  submerged 
cultivation.  At  the  present  time  examples  of  fermentators 
of  Various  capacities  intended  for  the  cultivation  of  non- 
pathogenic  and  pathogenic  microorganisms  have  been  worked 
out  and  described  in  the  literature  (40,  45,  46,  47,  etc). 

All  foreign  authors  have  arrived  at  the  single  opin¬ 
ion  that,  irregardless  of  construction,  the  apparatus 
should  answer  a  definite  requirement,  providing  the  sub¬ 
merged  cultivation  of  organisms  with  aeration  of  the  med- 


lutt’.  The  general  requireaents  of  an  apparatus  intended 
for  the  cultivation  of  nonpathogcnic  and  pathogenic  orga¬ 
nisms  have  been  formulated  in  the  work  of  Malmgren  and 
Heden  (43)  and  consist  chiefly  of  the  following:  the  ap¬ 
paratus  should  be  airtight  in  order  to  excliide  possible 
contamination  by  extraneous  mlcroflora  from  the  surround¬ 
ing  enviromeeat  and  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  cult ares 
into  the  external  environment  for  the  safety  of  the  person¬ 
nel*  Therefore,  in  the  planning  of  cultivators  special 
attention  is  given  to  the  construction  of  various  valves, 
joints,  and  gaskets.  Thread  packings,  and  so  on 

are  used  only  in  extreme  cases  are  are  replaced  by  welded 
joints  with  flat  seams  at  the  elbow  to  facilitate  exhaust¬ 
ing.  All  the  supply  lines  and  fixtures  are  made  with  this f 
in  mind  so  that  they  will  be  suitable  for  steam  3teri3iz-i-f 
tion  under  pressure  (3).  ! 

Along  with  the  need  for  an  airtight  condition  the  | 
authors  indicate  that  the  cultivator  apparatus  should  pro-  j! 
vide  at  the  same  time  excellent  aeration  of  the  nutrient  [ 
aedium,  i.e,,  its  saturation  with  oxygen,  A  sufficient  i 
flow  of  oxygen  to  the  gowing  culture  is  one  of  the  most  f 
important  prerequisites  for  the  method  of  submerged  culti-  | 
vation  and  for  the  large  volumes  of  liquid  nutrient  media.  I 
I  The  fact  has  long  been  known  of  the  growth  stimu-  j 

iLation  of  micro organisms  with  agitation  and  mixing  (or 
jshaking)  of  the  growing  culture,  so  that  the  medium  becomes 
pore  intensely  saturated  with  oxygen  (49,  50,  51,  etc). 

I  The  most  complete  aeration  can  be  accomplished  by 

peans  of  bubbling  or  blowing  air  (oxygen)  through  the  med- 
iiuiD,  and  this  also  depends  on  the  plan  of  conutruct  j  on  of 
modern  industrial  cultivators  or  ferae ntors. 

Using  both  principles  of  aeration  in  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  brucella  in  a  laboratory  type  of  cultivator,  BroAn 
;(S2)  recovered  a  yield  of  50  -  30  milliard,  of  viable  or¬ 
ganisms  in  one  ml  of  cultui*e.  With  this,  depending  on  the 
^ount  of  air  blown  through,  cultivation  was  reduced  from 
iuO  to  2  1/2  hours.  These  and  other  similar  experiments 
iconvince  us  that  the  culture  yield  occu.rs  in  a  direct  ratic 
to  the  extent  of  aeration  (55,  54,  55)*  ■ 

I  Chain  and  associates  (46)  have  shown  that  effective 

peration  is  one  of  the  prixnary  requirements  in  the  technol-’ 
pgy  of  submerged  cultivation  of  saicroorganisms. 

I  In  modern  industrial  cultivators  the  mediu.^i  is  aer¬ 


ated  by  means  of  blowing  through  air  wdth  the  help  of 
bubblers  of  various  construction  and  also  by  mixing  the 
aedium  with  the  use  of  special  devices  -  stirrers.  This 
insures  the  breaking  up  of  air  bubbles  into  smaller  ones 
and  the  additional  mixing  of  the  air  bubbles  with  ail  the 


85 


liquid  particles.  As  a  result,  the  oxyp:en  is  intensively 
iif fused,  and  the  length  of  the  phase  during  which  the  air 
and  liquid  are  in  contact  is  prolonged.  Dunninp,  and  Trues 
iale  (56)  have  demonstrated  that  the  coefficient  of  oxygen 
diffusion  in  the  medium  is  increased  with  an  accelerated 
Pate  of  mixing.  There  are  indications  that  the  preliminar, 
humidifying  of  the  air  going  into  the  apparatus  greatly 
influences  the  effectiveness  of  aeration  and  that  this 
snables  better  diffusion  in  the  liquid  and  the  most  com¬ 
plete  absorption  by  the  microorganisms. 

However,  intensive  mixing  and  aeration  favor  the 
formation  of  a  large  quantity  of  foam  in  the  cultivator. 
Poster  (4)  showed  that  the  formation  of  froth  evidently  is 
associated  with  the  synthesis  of  fatty  acids,  which  in  an 
alkaline  reaction  resemble  soap  and  make  a  stable  foam  in 
the  protein.  The  foam,  which  has  formed,  exhioics  a  neg¬ 
ative  reaction  on  the  course  of  the  cultivation,  signifi¬ 
cantly  decreases  the  optimal  capacity  of  cultivation, 
narkedly  reduces  aeration,  clogs  up  the  pipe-lines  and 
gaskets,  and  can  disrupt  the  technological  process  (46,  5? 
58,  etc).  Therefore,  special  fixtures  to  combat  foam  for- 
aation  are  considered  in  the  construction  of  the  arparatua 

An  important  condition  of  submerged  cultivation  in 
the  apparatus,  according  to  the  comments  of  Malmgren  and 
Heden  (48),  is  an  assurance  of  a  stable  state  for  the  cul¬ 
tivation  process.  It  is  important  that  the  nutrient  med¬ 
ium  and  the  culture  are  not  subjected  to  any  unmanageable 
influences  which  might  affect  the  growth  of  the  bacteria. 
Do  guarantee  uniform  operational  conditions  in  the  appara¬ 
tus  it  is  outfitted  with  fixtures  that  record  and  regulate 
the  individual  parts  of  the  technological  process.  The 
fixtures  allow  the  temperature  in  the  apparatus  always  to 
be  kept  at  the  necessary  level,  also  record  the  amount  of 
oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide  in  the  gaseous  mixture  which  is 
used  for  aeration,  and  constantly  maintain  the  flow  rate 
of  the  gaseous  mixture.  The  hydrogen  ion  concentration 
of  the  culture  must  be  watched  continually,  and  it  must 
be  adjusted  by  the  addition  of  the  respective  reagents. 

It  is  also  desirable  to  have  a  device  which  will  automati¬ 
cally  register  the  turbidity  of  the  culture  as  an  indirect 
indicator  of  growth  (48). 

The  construction  features  of  the  cultivation  appar¬ 
atus,  according  to  Ferret  (59) »  apeirt  from  the  enumerated 
requirements,  may  be  contingent  on  the  pathogenicity  of 
the  cultivated  organism,  its  means  of  nutrition,  and  the 
growth  rate. 

We  will  present  a  short  description  of  a  cultiva¬ 
tor  of  standard  construction  which  is  similar  to  the  one 


referred  to  in  the  work  of  Chain  (46). 

The  cultivator  is  cyllindrical  and  is  made  of  rust¬ 
proof  steel.  To  insure  effective  sterilization  of  the 
cultivator  itself  as  well  as  of  the  aedium  put  into  it, 
the  apparatus  is  furnished  with  a  steam  jacket  (3,  4). 

The  inside  surface  of  the  cultivator  is  smooth  with 
no  rough  places.  All  of  the  interior  details  are  assem¬ 
bled  and  fastened  to  the  cultivator  cover  which  is  freely 
attached  to  the  body  with  the  help  of  bolts  or  "autoclave" 
locks  (47)  securing  airtightness  at  the  joining  surfaces. 
In  modern  apparatus  of  large  capacity  they  do  hOt  hake  a 
cover;  the  apparatus  Is  maniifactured  in  the  form  of  a  cvl- 
linder  with  spherical  bottoms  welded  to  it.  The  oyllinder 
stands  vertically,  and  all  the  mountings  are  arranged  on 
the  upper  base;  running  through  it  are  the  agitator  sh'jfts 
and  pipes  which  supply  and  discharge  the  air  for  aeration, 
the  tubes  for  the  introduction  of  seeded  material  and  nec¬ 
essary  supplements  d’oring  fermentation,  the  tube  for  the 
sample  intake,  and  some  recording  devices. 


t 


Picure  3.  Standard  type  of  300  liter  cultivator  for  non- 
pathogenlc  microorganisms. 


In  the  very  upper  part  of  the  apparatus  there  is 
located  an  inspection  Aindow  and  a  trap  door  enclosed  by 
a  hermetic  lid  which  is  used  for  the  cleaning  of  the  ap¬ 
paratus.  The  agitator  shaft  goes  through  the  center  of 
of  the  upper  foundation.  The  outside  of  the  shaft  is  sup¬ 
ported  by  ball  bearings,  and  they  are  connected  by  pul¬ 
leys  or  reductors  to  a  motor.  The  stirring  appliance  can 
be  of  various  constructions:  propeller,  turbine,  or  in 
the  form  of  a  cone.  It  is  recomsended  that  all  of  these 
details,  as  well  as  the  agitator  shaft,  be  made  cf  rust¬ 
proof  steel  (5). 

The  delivery  of  air  to  the  fermentor  for  aeratioo 
is  accomplished  through  dispersers  of  various  constructions 
la  the  literature  there  are  described  ring,  square,  spiral! 
and  other  agitators  with  openings  differing  according  to 
their  size  and  number  (from  one  to  several  hundred)  for 
the  discharge  of  air  (46).  Air,  escaping  under  pressure 
from  the  agitator  through  the  tiny  openings  is  further 
broken  up  into  particles  by  the  action  of  the  agitator 
(Figure  6). 

A  high  degree  of  air  dispersion  can  be  obtained 
with  the  use  of  an  ejector  type  of  mixer  or  by  special 
adapters  which  provide  a  greater  velocity  of  air  flow  (4?) 

In  the  fermentor  of  Garibaldi  and  Feeney  (45>)  the 
air  bubbles  coming  out  of  the  disperser  were  additionally 
broken  up  by  means  of  a  four-blade  propeller  located  di¬ 
rectly  over  the  ring-shaped  disperser.  For  better  mixing 


i 


I 

! 

I 

j 

I 

J 


86 


tar 


II 


m 

I 


igure  4.  Cross-section  of  300-liter  cultivator  with  sta¬ 
tionary  receptacles  for  supplements. 

1  -  Air  inflow;  2  -  valves  for  introduction  of  supplements: 
5  -  drain  pipe;  4  -  brackets  for  fixing  lid  to  body;  5  - 
socket  Joints;  6  —  outer  jackets  'j?  ^  jacket  cover;  8  — 
lass  wool  for  heat  insulation 


87 


f  the  nedluiB  blades,  called  cutters,  are  placed  in  the 
pparatus,  and  they  form  a  vortex  and  promote  better  tur- 
ulence  of  the  liquid. 

However,  some  authors  (46)  consider  that  more  ad¬ 
vantageous  conditions  for  the  aeration  of  growing  cultures 
are  obtained  by  the  formation  of  a  whirpool  or  eddying 
(vortex)  with  the  rotary  motion  of  the  stirrer  in  the  ap¬ 
paratus  without  the  blades  (vortex  system.  The  authors 
believe  that  with  this  the  air  is  dispersed  in  very  tiny 
bubbles  at  the  top  of  the  whirlpool.  At  the  same  time  the 
vortex  system  is  more  economical  in  the  sense  of  energy 
consumption  since  here,  in  order  to  support  the  movement 
of  the  liquid,  there  is  needed  only  energy  to  maintain  the 
whirlpoel  against  the  static  condition  of  the  surface  of 
the  liquid.  No  less  important  an  advantage  of  the  vortex 
system, in  Chain's  opinion,  is  the  almost  complete  absence 
of  foam  formation  even  when  there  is  a  large  quantity  of 
the  substances  which  produce  this. 


igure  5»  Details  of  interior  fixtures  of  laboratory  type 
f  cultivator. 

-  Cone  of  foam  extinguisher;  2  -  plate  of  foam  extingu¬ 
isher;  3  -  body  of  cultivator;  4-  turbine  of  agitator;  5  - 
blade  openings;  6  -  agitator  cone;  7  -  blade;  8  -  agitator 
jhaft;  9  -  gasket;  10  -  filter  for  incoming  air;  11  -  tube 


88 


For  a  long  time  the  development  of  antibiotic  pro¬ 
duction  was  delayed  by  the  problem  of  sterilization  of 
huge  volumes  of  air  which  was  bubbled  through  the  nutrient 
nediuM  at  high  velocity  under  pressure  (4). 

This  problem  has  now  been  successfully  resolved. 

The  air,  which  goes  into  the  cultivator,  is  released  from 
the  microorganisms  by  passing  through  special  filters 
containing  glass  cotton  and  activated  charcoal  (5).  In 
addition,  large-sized  porcelain  filters  with  large  pores 
of  1.5  p  are  used  (40).  The  air  is  conveyed  onto  the  fil¬ 
ter  by  compressors  under  pressure.  Even  in  the  compres¬ 
sion  process,  as  a  result  of  strong  thermal  action  on  the 
air,  the  bacterial  contamination  in  it  is  impressively 
reduced  (4-);  thus,  the  air  passes  from  the  compressor  onto 
the  filter  considerably  purified.  The  filters  are  period¬ 
ically  sterilized  with  steam. 

Air  sterilized  in  such  a  manner  is  bubbled  through, 
the  fermentor  and  Is  discharged  through  the  drain  pipe. 

In  work  with  pathogenic  microorganisms  the  exhausted  air 
is  passed  through  heat  where  it  is  decontaminated  before 
it  is  discharged  into  the  atmosphere  (60). 

The  rest  of  the  fixings  of  the  cultivator  consist 
of  appliances  which  record  the  temperature,  pR  of  the  med¬ 
ium,  turbidity,  amount  of  bubbled  air,  level  of  medium  in 
the  apparatus,  and  level  of  foam  formation. 

{  Modern  fermentors  are  equipped  with  devices  which 

{not  only  assist  in  recording  but  also  in  automatically 


regulating  the  basic  criteria  of  the  technological  process, 
and  this  facilitates  stability  in  cultivation  conditions 
and,  consequently,  a  uniform  yield  of  microbial  material. 

Mechanical  foam  extinguishers  are  used  to  prevent 
excessive  formation,  or  substances  are  added  which  check 
it.  In  the  opinion  of  investigators,  the  mechanical  meth¬ 
od  is  the  more  desirable. 

Of  makes  which  have  been  exhibited  the  foam  extin¬ 
guisher  described  by  Humfeld  is  effective  (61).  It  ap¬ 
pears  as  a  disc  with  blades  arranged  radially  and  a  cone 
built  into  the  shaft  of  the  mixer.  With  excessive  forma¬ 
tion  the  foam  rises  to  the  level  of  the  extln^lsher,  is 
caught  by  the  blades  and  thrown  in  the  direction  of  the 
walla  along  which  it  again  trickles  into  the  liquid.  The 
foam,  which  rises  to  the  level  of  the  blades,  is  forced  to 
the  bottom  of  the  rotating  cone.  This  foam  extin^isher, 
according  to  the  data  of  Heden  and  associates  (4-7),  is  ef¬ 
fective  even  with  the  excessive  foaming  which  occurs  in 
penicillin  cultures  (Figure  5). 

In  antibiotic  production  substances  are  often  added  j 
which  prevent  foam  (castor  oil,  sunflower  oil,  soybean  oil^ 


f” . '■■■■  - 

jlard,  and  other  products).  Oily  substances,  wtich  are 
kdied  to  the  apparatus,  foriD  a  filn  on  the  surface  of  the 
nutrient  medium  which  also  prevents  foam  formation,  re- 
vices  have  been  developed  which  allow  automatic  addition 
to  the  cultivator  ox  the  aensioued  substances  when  there 
is  extreme  foam  formation.  Similar  devices  have  be>"a  des¬ 
cribed  in  the  work  of  Echevarria  (62).  The  essence  of 
the  device  consists  of  the  fact  that  the  foam  brings  the 
electrodes  in  the  electrical  circuit  together,  as  a  re¬ 
sult  of  which  the  device  goes  into  action,  providing  the 
foam  extinguisher  in  a  dispersing  state  to  the  cultivator. 

As  it  has  already  been  mentioned,  to  reduce  possible 
Icontauiinat  j  on  in  the  cultivator  screw  connections, 
iers,  etc  are  used  only  in  extreme  cases,  and  welded  con¬ 
nections  are  used  instead.  However,  the  principal  sources' 
of  contamination,  as  Poster  has  shown  (4)  are  the  various  i. 
subcompartroents,  gaskets,  and  recording  devices  which  are  ^ 
difficult  to  completely  sterilize  by  steam.  This  pertains? 
first  of  ail  to  the  most  susceptible  connection  -  the  gas- i! 
let  of  the  agitator.  f 

The  manufacture  of  gasket  packings,  which  are  im¬ 
pervious  to  bacteria,  for  the  rotating  shaft  is  one  of  the 
most  difficult  problems  to  solve. 

!  Of  the  existing  makes  the  best  is  thought  to  be  the 

jgasket  with  the  steam  shut-off  and  graphite-rubbed  sur- 
if  ace  (47). 

i  Because  of  the  double  steam-proof  surfaces  between  . 

jthe  grapnite  and  rustproof  steel  and  the  possibility  of  | 
ikeeping  optimum  pressure  in  the  trap  of  the  gasket  during  ? 
•‘the  entire  cultivation  period,  the  probability  cf  contami-  I 
hation  of  the  contents  of  the  fermentor  and  the  spread  of  | 
ibacteria  into  the  neighboring  area  is  practically  elimi-  > 
jnated.  I 

!  The  most  de;endable  from  the  point  of  view  of  air-  ' 

tightness  is  considered  to  be  the  cultivator  constructed  t 
jwith  enclosed  electric  motors,  which  allows  a  system  to  be j 


jformed  that  is  completely  isolated  from  the  external  en-  jj 
|Vironment.  Not  long  ago  the  English  Minister  of  Supply  | 
[told  of  such  a  type  of  patented  apparatus  for  the  sti^dy  of  j; 
kicrobioiogical  processes  (63).  I 

In  this  apparatus  the  rotor  of  the  electric  motor  j 
is  located  on  the  shaft  of  the  agitator  and  is  covered  by  J 
a  cyllinaer  of  rustproof  steel.  The  winding  of  the  stator! 
is  put  on  the  outside  of  the  cyllinder.  Aeration  is  ac¬ 
complished  also  along  a  closed  system  by  means  of  the  con¬ 
tinuous  circultation  cf  gas  through  the  medium.  Such  an 
apparatus  completely  eliminates  contact  with  the  outside 
atmosphere  and,  consequently,  also  removes  the  danger  of 


contamination  from  without  or  the  escape  of  microbial  ma¬ 
terial  into  the  outer  atmosphere. 

For  greater  assurance  from  possible  contamination 
of  the  cultivator  air  conditioning,  wnich  is  free  from 
bacterial  contamination,  is  recoauended  for  buildings  of 
industrial  enterprises  dealing-  ^tth  microbiological  prob¬ 
lems  (4).  This  is  achieved  by  making  the  structures  air¬ 
tight  and  outfitting  them  with  filter-ventilating  systems. 

In  doing  tbis,  according  to  Grenfell,  Legge,  and  White  (64' , 
special  care  must  be  given  to  the  room  where  the  initial 
sowing  of  the  original  culture  is  prepared.  The  "seeding" 
room,  like  the  viral  laboratory,  must  be  equipped  w,lfch 
compartments  for  the  work.  The  air,  which  goes  into  the 
room,  is  preliminarily  purified  in  the  filter-ventilating 
installations,  and  in  the  room  itself  it  is  disinfected  > 
with  the  help  of  ultraviolet  lamps.  f 

The  technology  of  submerged  cultivation  in  an  sp-  ii 
paratus  is  composed  of  several  stages  (3»  40,  46).  f 

The  first  stage  includes  the  preparation  of  the  ■ 
seeded  material  by  cultivating  the  original  culture  on  I 
flates  or  in  bottles.  Simultaneously  the  small  (seed)  f«r4 
mehtor  is  prepared:  sterilisation  of  the  nutrient  medium  | 
and  the  apparatus  itself.  I 

The  second  stage  provides  for  the  cultivation  of  i 
the  seeded  portion  of  the  organism  in  the  small  fermentor.  f 
From  the  small  seed  fermentor  the  culture,  when  it  reaches  I 
the  logarithmic  phase  of  growth,  is  trai^sferred  along  the  I 
pipe-line  into  the  intermediate  cultivator  or  directly  in- 
ftjo  the  main  recovery  cultivator,  vshere  further  cultivation  | 
[takes  place  but  now  in  rather  larger  volumes,  and  this  is  | 
|the  third  and  last  stage  of  cultivation  (Figure  6).  } 


Figure  6.  View  of  cultivation  department  of  Indus i rial 
{microbiological  research. 

1 _ _ _ 


91 


I  The  most  important  factor,  which  provides  rapid 

jand  maximal  growth,  is  the  amount  of  culture  seeded  in  the 
iapparatus  or  the  magnitude  of  the  seeded  dose. 

In  accordance  with  the  data  of  Jacobs,  Wright,  and 
Hildebrandt  (3),  the  seeded  dose  of  the  culture  usually 
consists  of  5  “  10%  the  volume  of  the  cultivator.  Using 
these  figures,  the  necessary  number  of  fermentors  can  be 
calculated  and  also  the  likely  number  of  stages  in  the 
technological  process  in  the  cultivation  department  of 
industrial  concerns. 

An  approximate  scheme  of  biomycin  production  is 
illustrated  in  Figure  7. 

The  duration  of  the  cultivation  cycle  is  dependent 
on  the  properties  of  the  microorganisms  and  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  conditions  (nutrient  medium,  aeration,  etc). 

At  the  end  of  the  cultivation  the  finished  product 
is  poured  into  containers  and  proceeds  along  its  way,  and 
the  apparatus  is  sterilized  and  filled  with  medium;  after 
the  seed  culture  is  placed  in  it  a  now  cultivation  cycle 
begins. 


I 

». 

1. 


95 


Fig.  7,  ISY: 


i  1)  nutrient  medium 
!  2j  foam  extinguisher 
I  3)  glucose 

4)  peptone 

5)  neat  extract 

6)  tank;  of  nutrient  medium 

7)  tank  of  foam  extinguisher 

8)  sterilizer  for  foam  extinguisher 

9)  steam 

10)  foam  extlngulshier 

11)  seeding  H2O 
j  12)  air 

*  13)  steam  H2O 

i  14)  fermenter 
j  15)  culture  outlet 
j  16 )  air 
I  17)  steam  or  H2O 
1  18)  H20  outlet 

I  19)  air  or  CO2 
,  20)  steam  or  H2O 

I  21)  fermenter 
j  22)  H2O  culture  outlet 

23)  tahir  for  intermediate  product 
!  24)  steam  or  H2O 

25)  fermenter 

26)  air 

27)  filter 

28)  compressor 

29)  cooler 

30)  filter 

31)  sterilized  air 


i  «««’**«« 

t 

1 


93a 


METHOl  .  CONTINUOUS  CULTIVATION  OF  MICROORGANISMS 


In  the  opinion  of  the  foreign  specialists  (59»  60), 
cyclic  cultivation  of  organisms  under  industrial  condition! 
has  a  number  of  disadvantages.  This  primarily  is  connec¬ 
ted  with  the  limited  obtainment  by  the  growing  culture  of  j 
nutrient  aubstanceSf  since  the  nutrient  medium  in  the  cul-i 
tivator  is  not  renewed  during  the  entire  cultivation  cycle, 
Metabolic  products  gradually  accumulate  in  the  medium,  and 
they  inhibit  growth  and  development  of  the  culture  (91). 
Cyclic  cultivation,  in  addition,  encumbers  the  activities 
of  the  entire  busir^  - .  since  some  delays  in  production 
may  be  created  as  -r:\t  of  "intermittent"  returns  in 
production. 

Since  the  20' s  .f  the  present  century  individual 
authors  have  tried  to  solve  the  question  about  replacing  i 
static  methods  of  cultivation  with  dynamic  ones  in  order 
to  maximally  exploit  the  ability  of  microorganisms  for 
nultiplication.  In  recent  years  this  idea  has  taken  roots, 
ionod  (49),  Novick  and  Szilard  (65),  Maxon  (66),  and  other 
authors  have  worked  out  theoretical  bases  for  the  contin- 
lous  cultivation  of  microorganisms  and  have  constructed 
a  number  of  units  for  this  purpose. 

The  substance  of  the  continuous  cultivation  method 
Is  that  fresh  nutrient  medium  is  constantly  being  added  to 
the  growing  culture,  and  a  definite  amount  of  the  culture 
is  continually  being  removed  from  the  apparatus.  This  j 
cakes  cultivation  possible  without  subculturing  for  a  long 
time.  In  the  continuous  cultivation  process  a  dynamic 
equilibrium  between  the  amount  of  inflowing  medium  and  the 
amount  of  cultivated  culture  can  be  established  by  the  de¬ 
cree  of  inflow  of  a  certain  amount  of  nutrient  medium  into 
{the  fermentor.  This  equilibrium  is  maintained  at  a  con¬ 
stant  level  as  a  result  of  the  addition  of  fresh  medium  to 
the  fermentor  and  the  removal  of  an  equal  volume  of  the  de- 
ire  loped  culture. 

By  providing  the  necessary  rate  of  inflow  of  nutri- 
snt  substances  it  is  possible  to  keep  the  multiplication 
5f  organisms  at  a  constant  level  -  for  example,  in  the  lo¬ 
garithmic  phase  of  growth  -  and  by  such  a  means  to  contin- 
lously  obtain  the  most  useful  growing  "young"  culture. 

Phe  most  important  theoretical  basis  to  prove  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  continuous  cultivation  was  established  by  Monod  (49)1 
le  showed  that  the  dynamic  equilibrium,  which  is  estab¬ 
lished  between  the  inflow  of  fresh  medium  and  the  multi¬ 
plication  of  organisms,  has  a  stability  and  is  automatical¬ 
ly  renewed  if  for  any  reason  there  occurs  a  temporary  var- 


jLation  in  tnc*  esnaclizhe-l  rat«  of  inflow.  Thr-refore ,  Moa- 
jod  has  ceiled  such  an  equilibr'iujn  a  stable  state  oi  the 
Culture . 

i  Later  on  tnese  concepts  were  deveicped  in  tt.e 

jworks  of  Herbert,  HiSi^orth,  Tailing  (60),  and  others,  'f’h* 
Authors  demonstrated  that  a  stable  state  of  t:he  deveioi. lag 
nicrobial  culture  was  possible  within  a  broad  range  >^1  tne 
inflow  rate.  The  producing  capacity  of  the  fern  enter, 
which  would  be  equal  to  the  bacterial  conceotrabior  at  tb* 
flow  I'ate,  rose  witn  an  accelerated  rate  of  flow;  however, 
this  increase  was  not  limitless.  ?/ith.  the  attainment  of  a 
critical  flow  rate  the  concentration  of  organisms  in  tre 
jeuiture  fell  sharply.  Thus,  for  a  stable  state  of  the  efi 
jtiirs  a  certain  relationship  was  necessary  between  tb-: 
p;rovfth  rate  of  the  microorgauisns  and  the  flow  rate, 

(the  inflow  of  fresh  nutrient  medium  in  a  known  range  oi 
doviaticn  to  either  aide.  But  if  tne  culture  was  diluted 
^gain  with  iaccaiing  medium  at  a  speed  exceeding  the  possi” 
hie  rate  of  growth  of  the  bacteria,  then  they  were  fina.ily 
Plashed  out"  of  the  culture  tank.  A  mathematic*^ i  rala- 
!tionship  was  established  between  the  basic  factors  oc.u>irg 
ithe  process  of  ccutiauoua  cultivation. 

I  Foreign  investigators,  working  xn  the  field  of  cen- 

tieuous  cultivation  of  microorganisms,  txave  reported  s. 
number  of  advantages  of  sthis  method  ever  the  cyclic,  par- 
iticuiarly  the  possibility  of  accurately  regulating  bh« 
[tivation  conditions.  As  Maxon  has  shown,  it  is  pcssi ‘jI;- 
jto  obtain  large  volumes  of  a  uniform  culture  in.  tic  uecAa- 
bary  concentration.  Growth  with. continuous  cultivatloh 
lias  s.  greater  homogeneity  than  with  the  cyclic. 

-  By  culturing  with  the  flow  method  thfi  probr.l  1 :  vi; 

microbial  mutation  is  reduced  to  a  miniEium,  since  cui  .dva- 
Jt^ion  tekes  place  in  a  constantly  renewed  merliu.sa  ana  ^  .ih 
the  regular  removal  of  the  ing  culture,  Theref  oi  c 

even  if  a  muteut  does  appear,  most  of  the  changed  c'»li.s 
will  be  removed  before  hhey  can  multiply  (60).  However, 
this  position  has  been  disputed  by  some  authors  (65,  69, 
■70,  etc). 

A  second  advantage  of  the  continuous  method  cens ) Sw 
bf  the  fact  that  such  a  process  is  somewhat  easier  to 
ha.te  automatic,  which  is  even  facilitated  by  the  tsbll.-vij  o 
jtihe  culture  for  self -regulation  (71).  Finally,  the  yield 
bf  the  continuous  method  of  cultivation  is  iacousparably 
higher  than  that  of  the  cyclic.  Tbus,  for  example,  B.a.rnca 
land  Dewey  (51),  cultivating  a  virulent  strain  of  Fley.nrr 
jdysentary  by  the  continuous  method,  recovered  in  2  1/1  - 
5  hours  a  concentration  surpassing  by  8  -  10  times  t.hat  o' 
bn  identical  culture  grown  under  the  usual  conditions  in 


zi:c  uecACi- 
ivati on 


95 


8-24  hours.  However,  such  an  unhellevable  increase  in 
he  jield  in  a  short  period  of  cultivation  leaves  one  un- 
ertain  as  to  the  validity  of  these  data. 

Continuous  cultivation  is  time-saving  due  to  the 
limination  of  nonproductive  aperations  which  are  so  num- 
jerous  in  the  cyclic  method  (sterilization  of  the  apparatus 
pouring  of  the  medium,  refrigeration,  etc).  Therefore, 
continuous  cultivation,  is  now  being  extensively  used  in 
'he  fermenting  industries.  It  is  especially  widely  used 
in  the  yeast  industry  (72). 

In  Rosebury's  book,  “Peace  or  Pestilence”  (2),  he 
mentions  units  of  continuous  cultivation  developed  at 
[Jamp  Detrick  in  which  it  was  possible  to  produce  about  a 
pint  (0.568  liter)  of  brucella  culture  every  eight  hours. 

As  negative  aspects  of  continuous  cultivation  of 
microorganisms,  some  authors  have  pointed  out  the  insta¬ 
bility  of  the  cultivated  strain  with  prolonged  cultivation 
(51)  and  also  the  danger  of  contamination.  Maxon  (66) 
maintains  that  if  with  the  cyclic  method  contamination 
results  in  a  less,  let  us  assume,  of  one  batch  (fermentor) 
then  in  continuous  flow  the  losses  may  be  considerably 
greater  and  may  even  lead  to  a  suspension  of  the  entire 
operation.  However,  it  will  not  be  superfluous  to  mention 
that  a  unit  of  the  industrial  type  of  Herbert,  Blssvortfi  . 
and  Telling’  (60)  worked  for  four  months  continually 
without  contamination. 

Let  us  dwell  briefly  on  the  basic  elements  of  con¬ 
struction  of  appliances  and  units  for  continuous  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  microorganisms  (according  to  the  data  of  the  for¬ 
eign  literature. 

Felton  and  Dougherty  (73)  in  1924  studied  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  growth  rate  on  virulence  with  the  cultivation 
of  a  pneumococcus  strain  in  a  semi-continuous  unit.  The 
unit  consisted  of  a  tank  for  the  nutrient  medium,  a  hold¬ 
ing  tank  for  the  culture,  and  a  tank  for  the  final  product 
be  nutrient  medium  flowed  into  the  holding  tank  by  (hops 
nder  the  control  of  an  electromagnetic  relay.  When  the 
utrient  medium  with  the  growing  culture  reached  a  certain 
level  in  the  tank,  it  flowed  into  a  tank  for  the  finished 
roduct . 

This  elementary  unit  was  improved  later  on,  but  the 
rinciple  on  which  it  was  based  has  remained  the  same, 
he  improvement  resulted  in  better  aeration  of  the  culture 
a  revision  of  the  device  which  regulated  the  cultlva- 

ion  process.  ,  „  ^ 

In  units  proposed  by  Novick  and  Szilard  (65) »  Rot- 
(74),  Kubitschek  (75) t  Fox  and  Szilard  (76),  and  oth- 
.  aeration  was  accomplished  by  bubbling  air,  which  was 


96 


aupplied  from  underneath,  throagh  the  culture  tube.  In  j 
the  unit  of  Barnes  and  DeA’sy  (3i),  along  with  the  supply  oi 
air  to  the  culture  flasks  they  were  conscantly  ahaken  to 
provide  better  aeration.  In  trie  apparatus  of  '^cnod  (49) 
aeration  was  accomplished  by  rotating  the  culture  contain-  | 
er-  With  this  type  of  aeration  foam  formation  was  exclud-  ! 
ed.  As  an  improvement  in  the  unit  llonod  exhibited  the  ap- j 
paratus  of  the  Swedish  investigators  Heden,  Koln,  and  I 
iialmgrea  (77) »  which  pirovided  the  recovery  of  large  vol¬ 
umes  of  microbial  material  with  sterile  conditions  of  the 
cultivation  process.  A  general  disadvantage  of  all  these 
units,  as  the  authors  themselves  nave  admitted,  was  the 
difficulty  in  regulating  the  cultivation  process,  since  tn^ 
growth  rate  here  was  determined  only  by  the  speed  of  the  i 
media  supply  without  a  clear  accounting  and  control  cf  the  ! 
bacterial  concentration  in  the  culture.  i 

In  the  more  modern  units  of  Anderson  (?8),  Northrop! 
(70),  and  Mitchell  and  Plummer  (79)  automatic,  regulation  | 
of  the  process  has  been  realized.  The  action  of  the  regu-  | 
lating  devices  is  '^sased  on  the  principle  of  a  photcelec-  | 
trio  colorimeter,  which  constantly  maintains  the  culture  it: 
the  apparatus  in  the  logarithmic  phase  of  growth,  iSiti.  ; 
the  achievement  of  the  necessary  concentration  cf  organismt| 
a  certain  amount  of  nutrient  medium  is  automatically  fed  ? 
into  the  cultivator,  and  a  corresponding  amount  of  culture 
is  removed.  The  disbursement  of  the  medium  ia  controlled 
and  regulated  by  a  special  auxograph.  | 

Finally,  we  will  briefly  describe  the  unit  of  Her-  [ 
bert,  Elsworfch,  and  Telling  (60),  who  have  already  had  ex- | 
perimental  production  (Figure  &),  i 

The  unit  consists  of  a  reactor,  two  tanks  for  nut:ri-| 
ent  media,  and  a  tank  for  the  discharge  of  the  finished  i 

Imicrobial  culture.  The  entire  unit  is  made  of  rustproof  I 

isteel.  The  working  capacity  of  the  fermeafcor  id  20  l:i  ter, 
iand  it  is  of  serial  construction.  Agitation  and  aeration 
jare  accomplished  by  a  plate  stirrer  with  blades,  and  the 
japrons  and  sparger  for  the  air  are  located  directly  under  i 
;the  stirrer,  i.e.,  exactly  as  in  Chain's  unit  (46)  and 
iotners.  i; 


'  The  tanks  for  the  nutrient  medium  are  parallel  to  [ 

bne  another  and  are  connected,  and  they  are  used  alternate-!- 
ly  for  feeding  the  medium  into  the  reactor  (07),  The 
working  capacity  of  eadh  tank  is  300  liter.  Sterilization 
of  the  me3.ium  xs  accomplished  in  them. 

The  air  entering  into  the  reactor  and  the  exhaust 
air  are  sterilized  by  heat.  The  inflow  rate  of  the  medium! 
and  the  rate  of  the  air  current  is  regulated  by  rotameters! 
and  controlled  by  special  stopcocks.  The  culture  enters  \ 


the  measuring  tanka  M2  end  IS2  »  which  P  parallel  to  one 
another  and  connected;  a  second  check  of  the  flo'.v  rate  is 
made  in  thenit  From  the  measurin'*,  tar.lcs  the  culture  Roea 
into  the  main  tank  K, 


Fig.  8.  Scheme  tcT  continuous  cultivation  in  unit  of 
Herbert,  Elsworth,  and  Telling* 

1-Sterllized  air;  2-Nutrient  medium;  3-Air  exhaust 


>Atti 


98 


The  poiat  AP  on  the  diagran  signifiea  tue  place  1 
(There  the  seeded  material  and  the  foam  extinguieher  are  in-| 
fcroduced;  SP,,  SP^*  SF^  -  taps  for  sampling.  The  tempera- j 
tura  in  the  lermentor  Is  regulated  by  heated  water  flowing 
through  the  coils  of  the  reactor  (not  shocira  on  the  dia¬ 
gram)  . 

In  the  fermentation  industries  it  is  sometimes  de¬ 
sirable  to  accomplish  continuous  fermentation  with  the  use 
of  several  units  ^joined  in  a  series.  In  this  case  part  of 
the  culture  from  the  last  unit  is  used  as  a  seediiig  dose 
which  is  fed  to  the  first  unit.  The  use  of  several  units 
in  the  diagram  is  continuous  cultivation  as  Maxon  has  de- 
aonstrated  it  (66)  and  permits  the  producing  capacity  of 
the  unit  to  be  increased. 

♦  ♦ 


Some  aspects  in  the  present  sectioo  on  the  mass  re-  ; 
covery  of  microbial  material  refer  to  common  bacterial 
forms  of  microorganisms  and  fungi.  The  production  of  mi- 
proorganisms  and  products  of  microbial  fermentation  in  re¬ 
pent  years  has  noticeably  expanded  in  many  countries  pri- 
Inarily  due  to  an  increase  in  the  manufacture  of  antibio- 
Itics.  Thus,  according  to  the  data  of  Perlman  and  Tempel 
080),  in  1952  the  productive  output  of  businesses  of  the 
pSA,  who  were  sarketing  Chloromycetin,  terraraycin,  and  aur- 
jeomycin,  was  estimated  to  be  24  tons. 

j  Hecently  reports  have  appeared  in  the  foreign  lit-  | 

eraturs  about  the  possible  cultivation  of  viruses  and  ric-  | 
^etsiae  by  the  submerged  method  in  an  apparatus.  A  liquid  | 
nutrient  medium  consisting  of  tissue  cultures  ie  used  for  { 
this.  The  investigations  of  SJcLimans,  Davis,  Glover,  and  I 
jRake  (81)  have  shown  that  in  the  cultivation  of  cells  of 
liiauiUiais  the  .iells  easily  proliferate  in  five  liter  volumes 
jof  serous  nutrient  medium  in  standard  fermenters  with  the 
agitation  of  the  cultures,  Analagous  data  on  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  mouse  fibroblasts  were  obtained  by  Shannon  Danes 
(82)  in  a  specially  constioicted  apparatus  with  a  capacity 
of  290  ml.  Very  recently  Ziegler,  Davis,  Thomas,  and 
icLimans  (83)  reported  on  the  successful  cultivation  of 
sells  of  mammals  in  20-liter  steel  fermentors.  i 

The  authors  have  shown  the  potentiality  of  sub-  ' 
aerged  cultivation  methods  for  the  receipt  of  high  concen¬ 
trations  of  virus  material  for  vaccine  production.  Thus 
the  principle  of  submerged  cultivation  can  also  be  applied 
bo  the  cultivation  of  viruses  and  rickettsiae  in  mass  quan¬ 
tities. 


ROBLiilj.  OF  DSSSIOATION  OF  MIGROOIhGAKISMS 


Analyzing  the  principles  of  selection  of  potential 
biological  agents  of  warfare,  Rosebury  gave  special  atten¬ 
tion  to  preserving  the  activity  of  organisns  which  can  be 
used  as  a  bacteriological  weapon.  It  is  not  accidental 
that  most  of  the  pathogenic  microorganisms,  as  it  is 
known,  belong  to  the  category  of  nonresistant  biological 
agents.  It  is  especially  difficult  to  preserve  microorga¬ 
nisms  for  a  long  time  outside  the  body,  i.e.,  under  inad¬ 
equate  conditions  which  differ  sharply  from  natural  exis¬ 
tence. 

Organisms  are  especially  sensitive  to  maintainance 
in  liquid  media.  This  is  due  to  the  influence  of  electro¬ 
lytes  on  the  cells  and  also  to  changes  in  the  media  as  a 
result  of  the  metabolic  process  of  the  organisms. 

The  most  effective  method  of  long-term  maintainance 
of  biological  preparations,  particularly  microorganisms, 
as  experience  of  the  last  decades  has  shown,  is  drying  un¬ 
der  special  conditions,  and  it  is  called  lypphiltzed  nryir.! 

Like  all  biological  agents,  microorganisms  are  ex¬ 
tremely  sensitive  to  drying,  i.e.,  the  loss  of  intracel¬ 
lular  moisture  which  makes  up  more  than  90%  of  the  con¬ 
tents  of  any  cell.  Especially  sensitive  to  drying  are  the 
vegetative  forms  of  organisms;  the  more  resistant  are  some 
rickettsiae,  viruses,  and  spore-forming  microorganisms. 
Under  the  influence  of  sunlight  many  microorganisms,  sus¬ 
pended  in  the  air,  are  killed  in  a  few  minutes.  The  rapid 
death  of  the  organisms  is  caused,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the 
bacteriacidal  influence  of  ultraviolet  radiation  on  the 
cells  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  intensive  evaporation 
of  cellular  moisture  due  to  the  thermal  effect  of  irradia¬ 
tion. 

A  decrease  in  the  moisture  content  of  plasma  cells 
causes  an  increase  in  the  concentration  of  salts,  and  this 
favors  the  formation  of  conglomerates  of  the  protein  mole¬ 
cules.  According  to  the  extent  of  the  rise  in  the  salt 
concentration  the  protein  molecules  are  subjected  to  ir- 
'reversible  aggregation  (denaturing)  (84).  This  is  why  the 
iattempts  at  simple  drying  of  organisms  and  other  protein 
substrates,  which  many  authors  have  undertaken,  have  ter- 
inated  in  failixre  as  a  rule.  These  attempts  result  in 
icrobial  cultures  being  dried  in  a  dessicator  over  chem¬ 
ical  absorbers  (PoOci  KOH)  or  in  drying  cabinets  with 
at.  Favorable  results  are  obtained  in  this  way  only 
ith  the  drying  of  spore  forms. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  ao»  century  Shakell  (1909) 


100 


I - 

coolii'g  io  act;  a  oorrpletely  harsiless  net.  for  t.heiL.  Sooie  j 
[bucceria  are  hig;' ly  sensitive  to  shart>  fluctuations  in  I 

■tsEiceratui'e .  Thus,  for  exaiiiple,  in  the  experimftnt;s  (..f  ! 

jHegnrty  and  Weeks  (86)  a  sudden  chilling  oH  tre  {^rov/inf>;  ! 
jouiture  of  intestinal  bacilli  frooi  y?  to  0  degrot-a  lou  ’,c  ! 
|the  death  of  the  cells,  and  '-he  number  of  dead  cella  in 
jthe  culture  was  greater  tnan  the  number  of  deveDopin-.-  cr'es 
jNai  ,  Erayasi,  Sato,  Okhara,  and  Kakagava  (87)  coiisidei- 
'that  rapid  cooling  usually  causes  marked  damage  to  tbo 
jceilB.  This  phenomenon,  referred  to  as  temper ’.tiire  pnock, 
jis  observed  in  most  cells  of  vegetative  and  animal  origin 
j(B8).  Temperature  shock  is  also  observed  with  the  ci.illin.f 
to  low  temperatures  of  0  to  -70  degrees  (89).  T>e  rcHsoa 
for  its  occuri'ence  rias  not  been  precisely  established. 

Smith  and  Krueger  (90)  associate  the  appearance  of  lenpar- ; 
ature  .ock  with  changes  in  osmotic  pressure  in  the  cells  | 
as  a  result  of  freezing.  The  most  widespread  theory  ex-  | 
plaining  tbs  mechanism  of  the  emergence  of  temperature  ' 
sncck  is  that  damage  to  the  cells  results  froin  tne  forma-  ' 
tioa  of  ice  crystals  with  freesing  (91,  92,  95.  9-^,  99, etc.; 
licwever,  this  hypothesis  does  not  explain  the  mechanism  of , 
itemperature  shock  with  the  rapid  chilling  of  cell-  to  0  ; 

idegrees  without  freezing.  : 

i  The  intracellular  formation  of  ice  crystals  oocurr  : 

jdif ferently .  It  is  usually  considered  that  clow  free-  ing  | 
rls  accompanied  by  the  formation  of  large  crystals  w.ich 
'cause  a  mechanical  injury  to  the  cells.  With  repid  freez-: 
ling  -iny  i ;e  crystals  form,  and  trauma  to  the  cells  it  j 
Lsenov/hut.  less  with  this..  Finally,  cr.ystailizat i  oii  can  oe  ’ 
jred'.iced  v.itb  exti'a  fast  chilling  and  free?ing. 

I  Luyet  (9i)  introduced  a  hypothesis  by  wiiich  tra.un^  ■ 

‘to  the  cells  can  ba  avoided  wi  th  their  freer  Inr;.  The  i.,.- 


are  highly 


Ipothesis  is  founded  on  the  works  of  Tamiaan  and  can  be 
:erally  outlined  in  the  following  manner.  With  the  uruEu,  | 
'freezing  water  goes  from  a  liquid  state  into  a  solid  ciya-i' 
itailine  one,  which  is  the  cause  for  the  mechanical  darage  [ 
,to  the  cellular  structure  of  organisms  or  viruses,  low-  [ 
pver,  under  certain  definite  conditions  water  or  liquid  ■ 
can  freeze  in  the  form  of  an  amorphous,  glassy  mass  vvitn-  ; 
lout  the  formation  of  crystals.  This  is  the  so-called  | 

Ivitrefaction  phase.  ' 

i  The  crystallization  process,  according  to  Tamman,  ! 

occurs  only  with  a  freezing  temperature  or  close  to  it.  j 

With  temperatures  ranging  below  this,  in  a  relatively  nax'- 
rov.  zone,  crystallization  is  impossible.  This  a.opears  a  | 
decisive  factor  in  the  ultimate  glassiness  of  the  liquid. 
Therefore,  Luyet  considers  that  the  death  of  the  cellc  doer 
not  occur  with  low  temperatures  if  the  protoplasm  of  the 


102 


bells  is  successfully  converted  inco  a  glassy  stet.'?  and 
jthsn  again  Into  liquid  without  the  forraatioo  of  cj.-ysv,als 
witiin  the  cells.  To  achieve  thj.s  Liyeb  reocmmends  tlrr.t 
the  bioagent,  which  is  to  be  dried,  be  cooled  ^vith  naxinx;! 
speed.  By  such  a  means  it  is  possible  to  ‘’slip  by”  the 
critical  temperature  zone  in  which  the  crystallizaticn  rate 
is  maximal. 

At  present  most  investigators  adhere  to  the  point  oi 
view  of  Luyet. 

However,  as  Fry  and  Greaves  properly  point  ouo,  it 
is  cot  always  possible  to  freeze  material  rapidly,  especi- 
jaily  in  a  lerge  quantity.  To  do  this  it  is  necessary  for 
Ithe  mass  of  frozen  substrate  to  have  excellent  contact 
[with  the  freezing  agent  ,  and  the  temperature  in  the  cl:o:i“ 
fber  must  reach  a  very  low  figure.  An  excellent  drying 
quqlity  is  achieved  if  the  material  is  frozen  at  a  temper- 
iature  below  the  eutectic  (9^). 

I  Pi^eservation  of  the  organisms  during  the  drying  orc- 

icess  and  after  it  primarily  dpaads  on.  the  nature  of  r.  ne 
microorganism.  Thus,  for  example,  the  poliomyelitis  virus 
iacGording  to  the  data  of  Pollard  (96),  is  extremely  sensi- 
itive  to  sublimation  drying  and  with  this  ureatnsent  lObCs 
(both  pathogenic  as  well  as  antigenic  properties.  On  the 
(Other  hand,  Elser,  Thomas,  and  Steffen  (97)  have  preserve'! 
{tetanus  toxin ‘dried  by  this  method  for  seven  years,  and 
jneningococci  and  gonococci  for  18  years. 

I  la  the  opinion  of  a  number  of  investigator  s,  ap  -rt 

if.rotn  individual  properties  and  peculiarities  of  the  rc.icro- 
iorganisias,  great  importance  is  given  ir  drying  to  external 
Ifactors,  particularly  the  influence  of  the  drying  mediu.’  . 
jage  of  the  culture,  concentration  of  the  microbial  susner- 
jslon  to  be  dried,  ebying  regirae,  and  residual  moisture  (-■'*). 
U  satisfactory  adoption  of  these  factors  can  insure  ex- 
icellent  survival  during  and  after  dessicatioa  of  even  the 
imost  fastidious  and  sensitive  microorganisiiis  . 

In  most  works  published  in  the  last  ^0  years  snec- 
aal  reference  has  been  made  to  protective  colloids  as  a 
Isuspension  medium  for  drying.  Bouillon,  serum,  blood, 

Imilk  are  the  agents  most  used  (9^)*  Naylor  and  Bitiith  ('’9) 
noted  the  protective  role  of  gelatin  and  thiourea,  and 
Fry  and  Greaves  successfully  used  glucose  and  lactose  as 
a  suspension  medium  for  drying. 

Annear  (100,  101)  reported  on  favorable  results 
with  his  dessication  of  bacteria  in  a  peptone  medium 

also  in  cellulose  and  sodium  alginate.  Harris  conlirmea 
that  a  medium  rich  in  protein  is  necessary  tor  the  effec¬ 
tive  d.rying  of  viruses.  However,  the  mechanism  of  action 
of  the  protective  colloids  has  not  yet  been  established 


105 


j  For  better  preservation  some  authors  recomniaend 

.that  filtrates  of  old  microbial  cultures  be  added  to  r.be 
jcultures  to  be  dried  (before  drying).  Bergmann,  Balleck,  i 
jand  Mecbalas  verify  the  data  of  Hatton  and  Tierey,  Keccord,- 
land  Taylor  about  the  presence  of  old  incubated  cultures  in S 
Ithe  filtrates  as  a  factor  which  aids  in  protecting  tne  lyo-f 
Iphilized  cells. 

I  Survival  of  the  organisms  in  the  drying  process  ds- 

ipends  also  on  the  concentration  of  the  bacterial  suspen- 
jsion.  Stamp  (103)  observed  that  with  a  lowered  concentra¬ 
tion  of  cells  in  the  suspension  the  survival  rate  rose. 

Cultures  of  microorganisms  in  the  logarithmic  phase 
of  growth  give  the  best  results  with  dessication^  but  they 
should  not  be  too  young  (99,  94,  100).  Finally,  the  dry-  [ 
ing  routine  and  the  conditions  of  subsequent  storage  in-  r 


fluence  the  survival  of  microorganisms.  The  available  ( 
data  confirm  the  unfavorable  action  of  too  rapid  drying.  I 
The  maximal  death  of  the  organisms  is  encountered  during 
the  first  few  hours  of  drying  when  the  most  rapid  removal  [ 
of  water  takes  place  (Pry  and  Greaves).  | 

It  is  recommended  that  the  dessicated  cultures  be  [ 
stored  without  access  to  air.  The  optimal  condition  for  [ 
this  is  storage  in  a  vacuum,  as  experience  in  vaccine  pro-  I 
duction  confirms.  \ 

According  to  the  data  existing  in  the  literature  [ 
(89)  oxygen  shows  soa  unfavorable  action  on  stored  cultures J 
Moisture  in  the  air  also  acts  negatively  on  dessicated  j 
microbial  cultures,  causing  their  "humidification"  and  | 

death  of  the  cells  (98).  | 

The  influence  of  residual  moisture  on  the  survival  | 
of  dried  bacteria  and  viruses  has  been  insufficiently  \ 
studied,  Beckett  (104)  believes  that  for  the  successful  I 
[preservation  of  viruses  there  should  be  less  residual  | 
[moisture  than  for  bacteria.  It  must  be  stressed  that  for  i 
ithe  optimal  preservation  of  dried  biological  material  re-  I 
isidual  moisture  must  be  kept  at  a  minim\im,  but  the  cul-  f 
jtures  should  not  dry  out  completely  because  organisms,  5 

jin  Greave's  opinion(84),  will  survive  best  if  they  are  not  ij 
[overdried.  P 


104 


, - 

OTARATUS  FOR  DESSIOATION 

MaDj  methods  ana  devices  exist  for  the  drying  of 
microorganisms  from  the  frozen,  staoe.  Laboratory  apr.ara- 
tus  have  been  described  in  a  number  of  review  articles 
and  monographs  (105,  106,  89,  85,  etc),  so  we  will  not 
dwell  on  their  features. 

Modern  apparatus  for  lyophilized  drying  from  the 
point  of  view  of  construction  are  divided  into  two  cl-nbEer: 
collector  and  ciiambor.  The  first  are  used  in  vaccine  rro- 
duction,  Tjhe  second  in  antibiotic  manufacture. 

The  principle  of  action  of  the  collector  dryer  con> 
sists  of  the  following;  the  material  to  be  sao.ieoted  bo 
drying  is  packed  in  sterile  ampules  and  undergoes  prel\ir:i-i; 
nary  freezing  with  the  use  of  different  kinds  of  chilling  j 
mixtures.  The  ampules  with  the  frozen  material  are  at¬ 
tached  to  the  collector  apparatus;,  which  is  a  pipe-line  i 
with  branch  pipes  for  contact  with  the  amuules.  Drying  ■ 

is  achieved  under  high  vacuum  (50  -  100  u)  which  is  ; 

reached  by  evacuation  of  tne  air  from  the  apparatus  w; th  a  ' 
vacuum  pump,  .  Water  vapor  from  the  material  to  be  dried 
is  absorbed  by  chemical  absorbers  (phosphorus  pentoxide, 
gypsum),  or  precipitates  on  condensers  chilled  by  various 
Irefrigerants  (Freon,  ammonia,  solid  carbon  dioxide),  o.r, 
(lastly,  it  is  removed  in  the  atmosphere. 

I  The  advantage  of  the  collector  apparatus  is  depen¬ 

dability  in  the  sense  of  maintaining  sterility  ia  the 
jwork.  However,  their  productivity  is  very  limited,  and  it 
jis  extremely  difficult  to  dry  large  amounts  of  'oiologicaj, 
material  on  them.  Therefore,  chamber  drying  units  ire 
more  often  used  for  industrial  purposes.  The  modfern  in¬ 
dustrial  vacuum-dryer  (59)  is  a  hermetically  sealed  cb'-s!:-  j 
‘berof  a  cyllindrical  or  rectangular  shape  (c.abinet).  The  ■ 
linside  area  of  the  cabinet  is  completely  filled  with  j 

'Shelves.  Over  them  are  installed  coils  along  whi'  the  I 
Irefrigerant  circulates.  Receptacles  with  the  material  to  | 
;be  d.ried  are  placed  on  the  shelves.  The  clamber  is  f 

closed,  and  the  air  is  evacuated  with  a  vacuum  pump  to  thef 
-necessary  point.  The  material  is  frozen  at  a  low  tempera-  ‘ 
Iture,  and  sublimation  is  begun  with  the  gradual  heating  | 
iup  of  the  chamber  by  turning  on  the  steam  under  the  jacket ■ 
jor  by  especially  built  heaters  (Figure  9)*  t 


Figure  9«  Type  of  chamber  sublimation  dryer. 

The  control  for  the  temperature  in  the  chamber  and 
in  the  material  to  be  dried  is  taken  care  of  by  thermo¬ 
meters  and  thermoelements,  sind  the  residual  pressure  is 
regulated  by  vacuum  gages.  The  moisture  vapor  drawn  off 
by  the  vacuum  pump  is.  collected  by  condensers  of  various 
types  and  is  periodically  removed. 

The  chamber  dryers  have  great  productive  capacity, 
but  their  essential  defect  is  the  periodic  action  and  in¬ 
complete  automatic  operation  in  the  drying  process*  The 
loading  and  unloading  of  the  drying  material  is  done  man- 
ally  through  the  open  door  of  the  chamber.  With  this 
the  vacuum  is  naturally  broken,  and  the  hygroscopic  nature 
of  the  dried  material  is  sharply  reduced.  The  wetting  of 
the  dried  biological  material  markedly  cuts  the  length  of 
storage  and  causes  intensive  decay  of  the  microorganisms. 
In  addition,  this  manipulation  of  the  dried  microbial  ma¬ 
terial  r  as  it  has  repeatedly  been  observed  in  the  foreign 
literature,  often  oontributes  to  the  formation  in  the 
room  of  a  bacterial  aerosol  of  such  sizable  concentrations 
as  to  represent  a  great  danger  to  the  personnel. 


106 


>ectiveness»  the  given  method  is  rather  simpler  than  the 
jublimation  and  is  more  advantageous  economicelly. 


Thus,  modern  microbiological  science  and  practice 
ffer  enormous  potentials  for  the  mass  production  of  micro* 
rganisms  and 


109 


2J 


igure  11,  Scheme  of  construction  of  dryer  of  continuous 
ction  and  accessory  parts. 

-  Alphatron  vacuum  meter;  2  -  recorder  for  registering 
acuum;  3  -  feeder;  4  -  container  with  frozen  material; 

-  speed  control;  6  -  filter-dryer;  7  -  filter  with  fiber 
lass;  8  -  filter  with  sulfuric  acid;  9  -  thermometer; 

-  refrigeration  receptable;  11  -  regulator;  12  -  coil; 

-  heater  and  heat  reflector;  14  -  container  of  organic 
lass;  15  -  vibrator;  16  -  nutrient  trough;  17  -  loading 
evice;  18  -  reflating  plate;  19  ~  heater;  20  -  thermome¬ 
ter;  21  -  plastic  framework;  22  -  mesh  belt;  23  -  pulley 
for  conducting  belt;  24  -  vibrator;  25  -  unloading  trough 

f  finished  material;  26  -  heat  reflector;  27  -  panel 
card  for  heater;  28  -  filter;  29  -  collector;  30  vacuum 
jgaugs  of  drying  chamber;  31  -  connecting  piece;  32  -  con- 
jdenser;  33  -  auxiliary  vacuiua  pump;  54  -  main  vacuum  pump; 
|35  "•  panel  board;  36  -  Brown  circulation  pump. 


110 


products  of  Eicrobial  fermentation.  In  recent  years  tnore 
has  been  extensive  development  in  the  production  of  anti¬ 
biotics  »  vitamins,  yeasts,  and  some  microbial  enzymes. 

Thus,  for  example,  only  in  the  United  States  of 
America,  according  to  a  report  of  the  Commerce  Department 
of  the  USA  (111),  did  the  production  of  some  products  of 
microbial  fermentations  in  195^  -  1955  command  the  follow- 
jing  figures  (Table  4). 

Tab 


5'TlewimuuiiiH  N  ero  cans 

S)CTpenTOM«mim 

^ilMtHAPOCTpenTOMilUHR 

(pHeoMRUKH  R  ero  coJim 

(ivCkrranbHtie  *kth0hotkxr 

'  »  AHTHf^ROTRICR  JUIR  nOAXOpmCH 
*  BOTMUX 

OfSiuee  xonRttecTBo  juir  npRMeneHix 
B  MeAMUHMe  H  BCTepRHapKM 
(7ipPRdo<{ui3BRH  JIXX  npMMeHeHHR  B  UC- 
ARUHHC  R  BerrepHHBpHR 
f^^^RTBMHH  Bit 


Fermentation  product 


iPeniciliin  and  its  salts  (p 
istrept  omycin  (S) 
to  1  hydro  8 1  r  op  t  omy  c  i  n  (5? 
fieomycin  and  its  saltsC?) 
jother  aatibiotics(3> 
lAntibiotics  for  animal 
fodder<2^ 

petal  amount  for  medical*^ 
and  veterinary  application 
fRiboflavin  for  medical  and 
veterinary  application  @ 
[Vitamin  B^2(3) 


1  e 

4 

p 

1 

{mMJK:iaojcT»o 

1  a 

1 

~  i 

CTJlKMOCTi,  i 

•  aojij«p«i  I 

I9r>4 

6.^1  000 

■  ■  t 

ri.3a%oof>  [ 

4.55000 

43980000  • 

1954 

HI  0(¥) 

54970(X»  i 

1955 

154  000 

,512?0(X)  1 

1954 

446  000 

19476000  I; 

1955 

369000 

16318000  1 

1954 

15000 

4  56.30X)  ! 

1955 

15000 

.5  222000  i 

1954 

.597000 

157  278  000 

19^ 

579000 

171  745000  1 

19M 

479000 

25871000  \ 

1955 

520000 

26105000  1 

1954 

1  837000 

240  128000  1 

1955 

1572000 

242  372000  1 

1954 

278000 

6  100000 

1955 

136000 

3549000  { 

1954 

422 

18894000 

1955 

488 

20  614  000  ' 

®Year 

'^b:oduction‘'^ost  in 
in  pounds'*’  dollars 

One  American  pound  is  eq^l  to  0.453  kg  (A.F.) 


ill 


i^ven  in  1953  there  was  an  overproduction  of  peni- 
jillin  and  streptomycin  in  the  USA.  Therefore,  a  signifi- 
5ant  part  of  antioiotic  production  was  switched  over  to 
1  supply  of  antibiotics  for  the  use  of  animal  fodder  (60). 

"*he  presented  data  illustrate  to  some  degree  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  modern  microbiological  production.  Taking  in- 
;o  consideration  the  viewpoints  and  statements  of  foreign 
investigators,  it  can  be  ai^sumed  that  the  principles  on 
yhich  this  kind  of  production  is  based  may  be  used  by  the 
iggressive  military  circles  of  the  imperialistic  countries 
:o  build  plants  for  the  manufacture  of  the  bacteriological 
weapon. 


LITEPATUf^E 


1.  Merck,  G.W. ,  "Mil.  Surg.",  1946,  98,  257- 

2.  f?o3ebury,  T.fi.,  "Peace  or  Pestilence”,  Whittle¬ 
sey  House,  New  York,  1949. 

3.  JacoDs,  W.S.,  Wright,  R.K.,  Hildebrandt,  F.M., 
"Ind.  Eng.  Chem.",  1948,  40,  4,  759. 

4.  Poster,  D.,  "Chemical  Activity  of  Fungi”,  ’for¬ 
eign  literature  publication,  Moscow,  1950. 

5.  Cooper,  F.S.,  in  the  book  of  H.W.  Baldwin,  "The 
Price  of  Power",  New  York,  1948,  540. 

6.  Werk  an,  C.H.,  Wilson,  P.W.,  "Bacterial  Physiol¬ 
ogy",  1951. 

7.  Gladstone,  G.P.,  "J.  Exp.  Path.",  1939»  20,189. 

8.  Rao,  M.S.,  "Indian  J.  Med.  Res.",  1940,  27,835. 

9.  Rockenmacher,  M.,  James,  H.A.,  Elberg,  S.S., 

"J.  Bact.",  1952,  63,  6,  789. 

10.  Elvedem,  "J.  Biol.  Chem.",  1931,  90,  111. 

11.  Rogosa,  M.,  "J.  Biol.  Chem.",  1944,  154,  507. 

12.  Sobell,  C.E.,  Meyer,  K.P.,  "J.  Infect.  Dis.", 
1932,  51,  2,  91. 

I  13.  Schopfer,  reference  from  the  book  of  N.D.Ieru- 

'salimskiy,  "Nitrogenous  and  Vitamin  Nutrition  of  Microb.es^^ 
published  by  Academy  of  Sciences  of  USSR,  1949. 

14.  Yensen,  reference  from  the  book  of  N.D.  leru- 
salimskiy,  "Nitrogenous  and  Vitamin  Nutrition  of  Microbes" 
puDlished  by  Academy  of  Sciences  of  USSR,  1949. 

15.  Knight,  B.C.  "Biochemistry",  1946,  11,  2,  72. 

16.  Snell,  E.,  "Ann.  Rev.  Microbl",  1949,  3,  97. 

17.  Lorr,  J.A.,  Burrows,  W.J.,  "Infect.  Dis.", 

1942,  71,  1,  b9. 

18.  Gladstone,  G.P. ,  Fiiodes,  P. ,  "Brit.  J.  Exp. 
ath.",  1940,  21,  4,  161. 

19.  Lorentz,  F.,  "Joxirnal  of  Bacteriology",  abstrac 


112 


of  original,  1950,  186,  1/2,  108. 

20.  v.olf,  P.A.,  "J.  Bact.*’,  19^+5,  ^9,  463. 

21.  ficManon,  ''J.  Bact.",  1944,  4S,  4,  *'+01. 

22.  Fischer,  A.,  "Lectures  on  Bacteriology",  1903. 

23.  Cxibbi,  W. J. ,  Nicholes,  B.S.,  Ta^^iura,  J.T.  Po- 
shay»  L. ,  "J.  Bact.",  1948,  55,  6. 

24.  Tamura,  J.T.,  Gibbi,  J.’//. ,  "J.  Bact.",  1944, 

45,  4. 

25.  Khimuro,  "Neference  Journal  of  Biology",  1957, 

2,  5038. 

26.  i^artridge,  S.M.,  Brimley,  R.C.,  "Biochern.  J.‘‘, 
1951,  49,  153. 

2?.  Consden,  Gordon,  Martin,  "Biocberi.  J.",  1946, 

42,  443. 

26.  Paulson,  ff.C.,  Deatherage,  P.P. ,  "Reference 
Jcurnal  of  Biochemistry",  1956,  9,  13. 

29.  Pawlowsky,  A.D.,  "Ann.  Inst,  Past.',  1686,  2, 

303 . 

30.  Sander,  D.,  "Arch,  of  Hygiene",  1695. 

31.  Hook,  A.E. ,  Fabian,  P.W.,  "J.  Bact.",  1941,  41, 

'1,  30. 

32.  fiumfeld,  H.  Feustel,  J.C. ,  "Proc.  Soc. 

Biol,  and  Med.",  1943-  54,  2,  232. 

33.  McManon,  V.B.,  ’’J.  Bact.",  1944  ,  46  ,  4  ,  40i. 

34.  Bettmann,  2.0. ,  "Arch.  Science  and  Prac.  Veter¬ 
inary  Medicine",  1940,  76,  2,  139. 

35.  Heim,  L. ,  "Textbook  of  Bacteriology".  Stuttgart 

1906,  10?. 

56.  Moore,  T.,  Mitchell,  C.A.,  "J.  Am.  Vet.  t^^ed. 
Assn.",  1945 X  108,  825,  226. 

37.  Kennedy,  H.  Speck,  M.  Aurand,  L. ,  "J.  Bac*.", 
1955,  70,  1,  70. 

36.  Moyer,  A.J.,  reference  from  Foster  (4). 

39.  i’nderkof ler ,  L.A.,  Hickey,  R.J,,  "Industrial 
Fernientations" ,  New  York,  1954. 

40.  Gordon,  J.J.,  Grenfell,  E. ,  McAllister,  ’^hite, 
T.,  "J.  Gen.  Microb.",  1947,  1,  2. 

41.  Moyer,  A*J.,  Coghill,  R.D.,  "J.  Bact.",  1946, 

54,  1,  57,  79. 

42.  Hitzraan,  D.O.,  Halvorson,  H.O.,  Ukita,  T., 

"J.  Bact.",  1957,  74,  1,  1. 

43.  Rivers,  T.,  "Viral  and  Rickettsial  Infections 
of  Man",  Foreign  Literature  Publishing  Bouse,  1955. 

44.  Weller,  T.H.,  "Medicine",  1955»  54,  1,1. 

45.  Garibaldi,  J.A.,  Feeney,  R.E.,  "Ind,  Eng.  Cbern.1 


1949,  41,  2,  432. 

46.  Chain,  E.B.,  Paladino,  S.,  Ugolini,  Callow,  D. 
S.,  "First  Internat.  Symposium  on  Cheia.  Microbiol.",  Gene 


va,  1952,  73. 

47.  Heden,  O.G.,  MaliDgren,  B. ,  Sundstro.Ti,  K.E., 
rornquist,  3.,  ”Acta  Path,  and  Micr.  Scand.",  1952,  30, 

284. 

48.  Malmgren,  3.,  Heden,  C.,  "G.  Acta  Path,  and 
i/iicr.  Scand.",  1952,  30,  2,  223. 

49.  Monod,  J.,  "Ann,  Inst.  Pastern",  1950,  79,590. 

50.  Sanders,  2.,  Huddleson,  F.,  "Amer.  J.  Vet. 

1950,  58,  70. 

51.  Barnes,  F.W.,  Dewey,  J.M.,  "J.  Bact.'*,  1947,  53. 

759. 

52.  Braun,  W. ,  reference  from  book:  '•Brucellosie'’ , 

[\Aaryland,  1950,  9  -  25.  . 

55.  Siiiith,  C.G.,  Jonson,  K.J.,  '*J,  Bact.”,  195 » , 

6b,  5,  346. 

54.  Glenwcod,  B.H. ,  Schwab,  J.L. ,  ’^Science"’,  194B, 

7  9  355. 

55.  Landgren,  D.G.,  "Appl.  Microb.",  1956,  4,  1,  51.' 

56.  Dunning  and  Truesdale,  reference  fro^u  3.  Beescbi: 

3.  Shull,  “Ind.  Eng.  Ghem.'*,  1956  ,  46  ,  9,  11,  15b5.  j 

57.  Eroll,  C.L. ,  Eormanek,  S.  et  al,  '’Ind.  Eng. 
Ihem.,  1956,  48,  12,  2190, 

58.  Nelson,  B.A.,  Haxon,  W.Di;  Blferdlnk,  , 

'•Ind.  Eng.  Chem.»,  1956  ,  48,  12  ,  2183. 

59.  Ferret,  0. J. ,  "J.  Gen.  Microb.'*,  1957 »  16,  1, 

250. 

6C.  Herbert,  D.,  Elsworth,  P. ,  Telling,  P.C.,  "J. 
3en.  Microb.”,  1956,  14,  3,  601. 

61.  Humfeld,  H.,  ”J.  Bact.",  1947,  54,  6,  669. 

62.  Echevarria,  "J.  Ghem,  Eng.'*,  1955,  62,  212. 

63.  Referativnyy  Zhurnal  Khimiya , 

i  (Eeference  Journal  of  Chemistry),  1957.  14, 

49335. 

64.  Grenfell,  E. ,  Legge,  B.J.,  White,  T.,  "J.  Gen. 
Mcrob.”,  1947,  1,  2. 

65.  Novick,  A.  Szilard,  L. ,  ’’Science”,  1950,  112,  ' 

^15.  ; 

66.  Maxon,  W.D. ,  ”Appl.  Microb.",  1955,  5,  2,  110, 

67.  Moser,  H.,  "Proc.  Nation.  Acad.  Sci.,  USA”, 

1957,  43,  222. 

68.  Powell,  S.J.,  "Gen.  Microb.”,  1958,  18,  1,  259. 

69.  Bryson,  V.,  "Congresso  Intern.  Microgiologia 
Soma”,  1955,  1,  396,  804. 

70.  Northrop,  J.K,,  "J.  Gen.  Physiol.”,  1954,  38, 

1,  105. 

71.  Malek,  ”Microbiology” ,  1956,  25,  6. 

_ 72.  Fiechter,  "Swiss  Brewery  Review”,  1957,  68,2,15. 


114 


^’xp.  .V-ed.'' 


73.  Felton,  L.D.  >  Douwiiert.v ,  "J. 

JI934,  34,  i,  13'.^- 

7^r.  Hotiran,  B. ,  "C  .  Bact,",  1957 »  ?0 ,  -i-a:; .  f 

75.  KubitacheK.,  F.,  “J.  Bact.",  195  +  ,  67.  9  ..  -  ! 

76.  B'ox.  iUS.,  Szilard,  L.  ,  “J.  Gon.  ;.:icroo.'\ 

139,  2,  261.  '  I 

77.  Reden,  O.G.,  Hoiia,  T.,  iial^Firen,  B.  ,  "iota  ^a.P.  i 

[and  kicrcb.  Scand.",  1955,  37,  1,  ^7.  | 

78.  Anderson,  F.A. ,  "J*.  Gen.  rbysiol .  ” ,  1953,  36,  < 

!6,  733.  j 

79.  fjiitchell,  G.A.,  PluiEiner,  P.J.G.,  ''oiol. 

195+ ,  2d,  8.  I 

::0,  Perlinari,  D.,  Terapel,  A.S.,  ‘'iad.  R'nt<,  o,e  | 

1953,  45,  9,  1944.  [ 

81.  u^cLi.nans,  V/.F.,  Davis,  F.V.,  Glover,  .■•'.1.,,  ; 

Rake,  G.7.,  "J.  In..auno  1 . ,  1957,  79,  5,  428.  | 

82.  Shannon  Banes,  E,,  ’’Exp.  Gtll.  Ees,”,  i 

12,  1,  169.  I 

83 .  Ziegler ,  D .  W . ,  Davi 3 ,  E . 7 .  ,  Thoicar, ,  '.v .  J .  ,  i; 

iicLimans,  I'.F.,  "Appl.  ^.icrou,”,  1956,  6,  5,  305-  r 

64.  Greaves,  'R.J.K,,  “Canad,  J.  Mir.rcb.*’,  1944,  f 

j3,  365.  ! 

I  85*  Flosdorf,  E.vV.,  Mudd,  S.,  ’'J.  Iaj.Tiun.oU’,  19>5, 

bq  ^  3«9 , 

!  '  "  a5a.  HecEley,  H.,  "J.  ImraunoU%  194?,  55,  1,  41. 

86.  Kejzarty,  C.P.,  Weeks,  O.B.,  ” J .  Saot.*’,  iv+G, 

39,  475. 

87.  Nai,  Rtiayasi,  Sato,  Okkara,  clakagava,  "Pel'..:- 
ence  Journal  of  Biology”,  1957,  20,  ?3. 

88.  Sjnith,  0.,  reference  from  Harris  (89). 

89.  Harris,  H.,  ’’Biological  Applications  of  j 

ing  and  Drying” ,’ New  York,  1954.  I 

90.  Smith,  L.S.,  Krueger,  A.P. ,  "Proc.  Soc,  Rxp.  j 

.  <*  TQcp.  81.  psa.  [ 


Biol,  and  Lied.”,  1952,  81,  254, 

I  91.  Luyet,  B,J.,  ‘’J.  Pbys.  GhejU.  ” ,  1939,  '-'3,  v, 

I  92.  Luyet,  B.J.,  '-Ghysical  Rev.”,  193 v,  56,  1  \  I '■'H 

I  93.  Wood,  'f.H.,  ”Adv.  Biol,  and  ivied,  llys.''.  '■  L^:y-  ^ 

lYork,  1956,  il9  -  185*  i; 

94.  Fry,  R.M.  Greaves,  M.D.,  ”J.  Hyg*",  ^951-  +4  1; 

12/5,  220.  : 

95*  Beckett,  L.G.  Edwards,  W.J,,  ”3ci.  loetri/r .  ' ,  | 

1951*  1,  London. 

96.  Pollard,  M.,  -'Texas  Kept.  Biol,  and  “.el  ",  V 

,  749 .  i 

97-  Elser,  W.J.,  Thomas,  R.A.,  Steffen,  G.J.,  -j, 
jiiiriiunol.  ” ,  1935.  28,  5,  433. 

98.  Fry,  R.  reference  fron  Harris  (39). 

99.  Naylor,  li.B.  ,  Smith,  P.A.,  ”J.  Bact.”,  16*46,  di-: 


5  5€r5  * 

100.  Annear,  D.J.,  '’0.  hy^:.  ',  19%,  5*, 

101.  Aanear,  D.J.,  "Nature”,  19'?-*-,  l/^,  >  5p9. 

102.  oergaian.,  D.E.,  Halisck,  1.  S.,  yecnaiis,  3,^. 
Tenuey,  H.J.,  "j.  Bact.',  1957,  7^»  1,  ICl. 

103.  Btaat),  L.  ,  "J .  Gen.  NClcrob.”,  1,  '’‘•1. 

104.  Beckett,  L.G.,  reference  froTi  arris 

105.  Neumann,  E.  ,  "Esseatiais  of  Dry  Ereez-ing" , 
Gotr,  in2:en,  1952. 

106.  Neumann,  K.  ,  '’Chem.  Eng.  Tectnol,  ”,  9? 

207. 

1  10?.  Eixari,  i? .  ,  Conley,  vV.  ,  /jail,  S.r..  ,  'Cher, 

[ong.  rrogr.'',  1957.  53>  5,  110,  112,  115,  lib. 


i  103.  Hnian.  M.  ,  Mai.ster,  :  .G 

ikiorcb.",  1957,  5,  5,  32.3. 

109.  .'iSaister,  H.G.,  Heger,  S 
"Ind.  Eng.  Chem.",  195b,  50,  4,  625 

110.  >.laxur,  P.  ,  V^eston,  W.H. 


71, 


25? 


•  y 

.N 


> 


t  <  i '  1  y 
^  y  f 


ill. 
^9,  9 


Beescii,  S.C.,  Shull,  G.M. 
(.2),  1491. 


Hutton,  P.3.,  "Appl. 
.  ,  Bogart,  '^.V. 

"J.  Bact.”,  195c, 

,  "ind.  Eng.  Crem.”, 


i 

t 


I 


\ 

I 


* 


\ 

i 

\ 


CJIAPTEK  IV 


PRINCIPLES  OR  SELECTION  AND  POSSIBLE  AGENTS 
OP  BACTERIOLOGICAL  «AHPARE 


EQUIREMEKTS  OP  AGENTS  OP  INPECTIOUS  DISEASES  OF  MAN  AND 
NDdALS  WHICH  CAN  BE  USED  AS  A  BACTSRIOI/)GICAL  WEAPON 


In  the  1950*8  in  the  foreign  literature,  devoted 
to  the  probleixi  of  bacteriological  warfare,  isolated  state¬ 
ments  began  to  appesir  concerning  the  requirements  made  of 
its  possible  agents. 

It  was  very  evident  that  among  the  colossal  number 
of  microorganisms  found  in  nature  the  attention  of  specia¬ 
lists  turned  only  to  those  which  had  pathogenic  properties 
or  ^»au,  animals,  and  plants. 

In  the  opinion  of  all  foreign  authors  who  have  dis- 
ussed  this  question,  the  basic  requirement  made  of  possi- 
le  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare  is  the  ability  to 
ause  infectious  disease,  i.e.,  pathogenicity. 

If  the  concept  oJppathogenicity  Is  to  a  certain  ez- 
ent  sufficient  for  the  demonstration  of  disease-producing 
organims,  then  the  presence  of  pathogenicity  does  not  sat¬ 
isfy  the  ^a^io  requirement  in  the  determination  of  possibl 


117 


gents  of  the  bacteriological  weapon. 

For  potential  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare,  in 
the  opinion  of  foreign  authors,  the  salient  criterion  is  i 
the  degree  of  pathogenicity  of  microorganisms,  i.e.,  viru¬ 
lence.  Therefore,  the  presence  In  the  agent  of  highly 
manifested  virulence  is  a  necessary  requirement  made  of  it 
as  a  possible  agent  of  bacteriological  warfare.  In  this 
respect  we  have  the  many  observations  cf  foreign  experts. 
Even  in  the  40' s  many  foreign  authors,  discussing  the  list 
of  requirements  made  of  possible  agents  of  bacteriological 
warfare,  wrote  of  the  necessity  of  using  strains  of  micro¬ 
organisms  with  high  virulence  (1,  2,  3,  etc).  In  recent 
years  this  opinion  has  been  more  and  more  accepted,  and  an 
account  of  the  requirements  of  agents  of  bacteriological 
warfare  usually  begins  abroad  with  a  consideration  of 
questions  of  virulence  of  the  agent  (3,  4,  6). 

Worthy  of  attention  is  progress  abroad  in  the  field  ; 
of  bacterial  genetics,  directed  at  the  artificial  change  1. 
in  virulence  and  in  other  properties  of  microorganisms.  i 
Data  of  rebent  years  in  the  field  of  selection  and  j, 
the  biochemistry  of  microorganisms  confirm  that,  in  addi-  [ 
tion  to  avirulent,  vaccine  strains  of  pathogenic  micrcor- 
ganisms,  strains  can  be  obtained  which  have  increased  vir¬ 
ulence.  Thus,  Zelle,  Lincoln,  eind  Young  (?)  reported  in  ' 
1946  on  obtaining  a  method  of  selection  of  a  highly  patho¬ 
genic  strain  of  the  anthrax  agent, 

Knight  (8),  studying  cultures  of  the  tobacco  mosaic 
[virus,  established  that  these  strains  differed  by  their 
[varying  content  of  16  out  of  19  amino  acids  present.  The 
il4DI  mutant,  obtained  by  Knight  from  a  strain  of  the  tobac- 
bo  mosaic  virus,  was  distinguished  from  the  original  strai: 
py  other  constituents  of  valine,  lysine,  and  glutamic  acid, 
and  at  the  same  time  it  also  differed  sharply  in  virulence, 
[in  contrast  to  the  original  virus,  strain  14DI  killed 
{young  plants  of  Turkish  tobacco  and  tomatoes, 
r  Using  the  principle  of  transformation,  Griffith  (9) 

[converted  the  noncapsulated  and  avirulent  strain  of  pneu- 
toococcus  into  a  virulent,  oapsulated  one. 
i  Investigations  on  transformation  received  a  scien- 

jtific  foundation  with  the  establishment  of  Avery,  Mac  Leod, 
[and  Mac  Carty  (10)  of  the  chemical  nature  of  the  transfor- 
ion  source,  which  proved  to  be  desoxyribonucleic  acid 
NA). 

In  experiments  with  pneumococci  it  was  established 
hat  the  frequency  of  transformation  depended  not  only  on 
he  presence  and  influence  of  DBA  but  also  on  the  physio- 
ogical  state  of  the  bacterial  cell  in  relation  to  the  cul 
ivation  conditions. 


118 


At  a  later  tice  still  another  phenomenon,  called 
fcransduction,  was  described  which  verifys  the  i:portance  o 
pNA.  The  essence  of  the  phenomenon  is  contained  in  the 
ability  of  some  phage  strains  to  transmit  new  properties 
to  bacteria. 

Developing  the  phenomenon  of  transduction,  Freeman 
and  Groa^a  (11)  used  a  phage  isolated  from  a  lysogenic  cui 
ture  to  convert  non-toxic  strains  of  diphtheria  bacilli  in 
to  toxic  ones. 

At  the  present  time  the  mechanism  of  action  of  D?iA 
on  the  microbial  population  has  been  extensively  developed 

Braun  and  Whallon(12)  established  that  the  greatest 
number  of  changes  in  the  population  arose  only  if  a  homoge 
nous  strain  were  cultivated"  in  a  medium  containing  DNA  iso-f 
lated  from  a  heterogenous  strain. 

Schaeffer  (13)  showed  that  there  was  possible  trana 
formation  between  strains  of  one  origin  (homo,transforma- 
tion),  between  different  strains  of  the  same  species  (iso- 
transformation),  and  between  strains  of  different  species 
(heterotransformation) ,  although  the  latter  is  observed 
very  rarely. 

Braun,  Pirshein,  and  Whallon  Cl5)>  studying  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  desoxyribonuo lease  on  bouillon  cultures  of  brucell 
containing  DNA,  established  that  with  the  addition  of  an 
enzyme  there  occijurred  a  rapid  change  in  the  population  and 
a  transfer  of  the  M-  and  S-fonos  into  the  virulent  S-forms 

Results  of  the  experiment  showed  that  the  break¬ 
down  products  of  DNA  depressed  growth  or  destroyed  the 
cells,  which  did  not  occur  in  the  S-form.  A  similar  selec 
tive  action  was  shown  by  a  compound  with  the  chemical  stru 
ture  —  6-furfuryl8uainopurine  or  kinetin  -  a  division  fac¬ 
tor  of  the  plant*  As  for  DNA  and  desoxyribonuo lease,  then 
they,  as  investigations  have  shown,  not  only  promote  the 
i  formation  of  virulent  cells  in  vitro  but  also  show  an  in- 
jfluence  on  the  virulence  of  the  S-forms  of  some  organisms 
in  vivo. 

The  American  virologist,  Fraenkel-Conrat  (16), 
successfully  divided  the  tobacco  mosaic  virus  into  its  con* 
stituent  parts  -  protein  and  nucleic  acid  -  and  then  again 
combined  them,  receiving  a  substance  which  had  all  the 
properties  innate  to  the  given  virus. 

Although  the  actual  possibility  of  synthesis  of 
microorganisms  is  still  very  remote,  nevertheless  the  ar-  i 
tificial  s.ynthesis  of  protein  substances  may  perhaps  be  I 
used  to  obtain  various  components  of  microbial  cells  and  | 
also  new  toxic  substances  unkown  at  present.  I 

In  recent  works  of  Praenkel-Conrat  (16)  it  is  ! 

hown  that  viral  fragments  also  have  infectious  capabili-  ; 


119 


ties. 

la  addition,  in  recent  years  a  number  of  papers 
have  appeared  in  the  foreign  literature  on  the  recovery  of 
microorganisms  by  mutagenesis  which  have  increase  d  resis¬ 
tance  to  antibiotics. 

Hotchkiss  (17)  grew  out  a  strain  of  penicillin-sen¬ 
sitive  pneumococcus  on  extracts  containing  DNA  isolated 
from  a  strain  of  pneumococcus  resistant  to  penicillin. 

His  new  pneumococcus  variant  was  resistant  to  penicillin. 

It  is  characteristic  that  this  conversion  was  per¬ 
formed  in  the  absence  of  an  antibiotic  in  the  medium,  aud 
resistance  is  a  hereditary  adjunct. 

The  presented  data  show  the  great  possibili-cies 
revealed  to  investigators  in  the  realm  of  variabilities’  of 
microorganisms  in  connection  with  the  exposure  of  genetic 
processes. 

On  the  basis  of  the  stated  facts  Bosebury's  (18) 
statement  becomes  more  definitive  that  for  purposes  of  ba:- 
terioiogical  warfare  microorganisms  can  be  used  with  ar- 
fificially  changed  properties,  for  example,  with  increased 
virulence. 

This  is  accompanied  by  a  number  of  comments  by  for¬ 
eign  specialists,  which  confirm  that  many  raicroorganinms 
that  are  pathogenic  for  man  and  animals  and  have  high  vir¬ 
ulence,  ail  the  same  do  not  satisfy  the  requirements  made 
of  them  as  agents  of  T:he  bacteriological  weapon,  because 
the  diseases  caused  by  them  are  characterized,  by  a  com¬ 
paratively  mild  course  (2,  18).  Thus,  for  example,  in  the 

E  pinion  of  foreign  authors,  the  agents  of  food-berae  sal- 
one  Ila  infection,  which  does  indeed  possess  high  viru- 
jlence,  could  sc.'ircely  be  used  as  a  bacteriological  we-apoa, 


because  the  sicknesses  caused  by  them  progress  ratier 
mildly,  are  of  short  duration,  very  rarely  terminate  fatal- 
jly,  and  do  not  actuate  invalidism.  A  similar  opinion  has 
been  expressed  as  well  in  respect  to  the  virus  of  lymphocy¬ 
tic  choriomeningitis,  Friedlander* s  bacillus,  and  some  oth¬ 
er  microorganisms  (2). 

j  Consequently,  along  with  virulence,  in  the  opinion 

‘pf  foreign  specialists,  the  factor  defining  the  potential 
use  of  microorganisms  as  a  bacteriological  weapon  is  the 
^ture  of  the  disease  caused  by  them  or,  as  Rosebury  and 
Rabat  (2)  determined,  the  effectiveness  of  action  of  she 
gent;  by  this  is  understood  the  duration  of  the  incubatioi 
eriod,  severity  and  length  of  the  course  of  illness  and 
onvalescence,  and  mortality.  For  very  obvious  reasons 
ost  foreign  authors  prefer  in  this  respect  microorganisms 
hich  cause  severe  diseases  with  high  fatality  (4  and  oth- 
rs.  In  addition,  some  military  specialists  in  the  USA  do 


120 


2ot  reject  those  agents  which  cause  diseases  with  negligi¬ 
ble  fatality  but  which  are  characterized  by  a  prolonged 
bourse  and  incapacitation  of  the  patients.  In  reference  t 
this  General  flullene  (20)  stated  the  fbllowing;  "The 
choice  of  bacteria  which  can  be  used  during  biological  war 
fare  depends  on  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  used.  If  the 
objective  is  to  kill  a  large  number  of  people,  then  use 
the  agents  of  such  diseases  as  plague,  typhus,  cholera, 
smallpox,  etc.  But  if  the  intention  is  only  to  make 
people  sick  and  not  to  kill  them,  then  the  agents  of  tular 
emia  and  brucellosis  are  more  suitable .Attacking  op¬ 
tionally  can  be  aimed  at  the  annihilation  of  people,  but 
if  this  provokes  disease,  it  will  be  quite  enough  to  de¬ 
prive  people  of  fighting  efficiency  and  working  ability. 

It  will  also  help  to  increase  the  man-hours  and  to  over¬ 
flow  the  hospitals.” 

In  an  appraisal  of  the  agents  of  infectious  diseas¬ 
es  as  possible  agents  of  the  bacteriological  T;eapon  much 
attention  is  given  in  the  foreign  literature  to  the  com¬ 
municability  of  the  illnesses  caused  by  it,  i.e.,  the  abil-j 
ity  for  epidemic  spread.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  view-  | 
points  are  by  no  means  unified.  Some  foreign  authors  as-  ? 
bribe  special  importance  to  commuijicability,  seeing  in  it  [ 
the  basic  feature  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  (19),  and 
others,  on  the  other  hand,  consider  that  communicable  dis¬ 
eases  cannot  be  anticipated  In  bacteriological  warfare 
since  they  have  a  pronounced  retroactive  effect  (2).  Thus, 
the  character  of  the  illness  caused  by  the  agent  or  the  ef¬ 
fectiveness  of  its  action  is  an  extremely  important  re¬ 
quirement  made  of  the  possible  agents  of  the  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  weapon. 

Another  necessary  requirement,  broadly  discusvsed  in 
foreign  literature,  is  the  feasibility  of  cultivating  the 
agents  in  large  quantities.  Let  us  assume  that  the  micro- 
jorganisms  have  the  predisposition  to  cause  severe  infec¬ 
tious  diseases  with  high  mortality,  but  if  methods  have  ! 
not  been  developed  for  their  mass  production,,  they  will  not 
satisfy  the  requirement  made  of  possible  agents  of  the  bac- 
jteriological  weapon  (4,  6,  18).  j! 

{  This  is  the  ultimate  requirement,  in  the  opinion  of 

foreign  authors,  because  agents  can  be  used  as  a  means  of 
bacteriological  warfare  only  if  it  is  possible  to  procure 
them  in  large  quantities.  The  agents,  which  are  difficult 
to  cultivate  and  which  may  not  be  obtained  in  large  amounts . 
cannot,  in  their  opinions,  be  potential  agents  of  the  bac¬ 
teriological  weapon. 

Along  with  the  enumerated  requirements,  great  im- 
ortance  is  given  to  the  degree  of  resistance  of  the  agenis. 


the  storage  of  the  prepared  material  as  well  as  after  ap¬ 
plication.  It  is  well  known  that  many  vegetative  forms 
of  bacteria  have  negligible  stability  and  perish  very 
quickly  with  unfavorable  cultivation  conditions.  In  the 
opinion  of  Rosebury  (2)*  Wiesmann  (19) »  and  other  authors 
a  preference  will  be  given  to  those  agents  whl^h  are  able 
to  preserve  their  viability  for  a  long  time.  On  the  one 
hand)  this  facilitates  the  building  of  reserves  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  locality  where  these  agents  are  appliec 
will  be  hazardous  for  a  long  time  in  the  sense  of  infec¬ 
ting  man  and  animals. 

Stable  forms  of  organisms  are  also  more  resistant 
to  the  effect  of  various  disinfecting  agents,  which  (in 
the  opinion  of  the  indicated  authors)  might  greatly  hamper 
the  conduction  of  defense  measures. 

Therefore,  in  a  consideration  of  these  questions  in 
the  foreign  literature  it  is  not  incidental  that  vast 
space  is  given  to  spore  forms  of  organisms  and  particular¬ 
ly  to  the  anthrax  agent  (2,  5*  19) • 

In  the  opinion  of  fooreign  specialists,  of  special 
interest  as  possible  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare  are 
those  against  which  there  are  no  effective  means  of  specif¬ 
ic  prophylaxis  and  therapy,  which  will  significantly  hin¬ 
der  defense  procedures.  Thus,  for  example,  Kliewe  (4)  has 
written:  "As  a  bacteriological  weapon  there  will  primari¬ 
ly  be  used  agents  against  which  there  are  no  or  insuffic¬ 
iently  effective  means  of  immunization  and  treatment.” 
Similar  views  have  also  been  expressed  by  Phair  (5)  and 
other  foreign  experts.  On  the  basis  of  the  presented  the¬ 
ory,  special  consideration  has  been  given  in  the  foreign 
literature  in  a  comtemplation  of  possible  types  of  the  bac¬ 
teriological  weapon  to  the  agents  of  glanders  and  melioido¬ 
sis,  against  which  until  the  present  time  neither  a  vac¬ 
cine  nor  sufficiently  effective  means  of  specific  therapy 
has  been  developed. 

Difficulty  in  the  identification  of  the  applied  a- 
kents  and  also  in  the  clinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis  of 
{the  illnesses  caused  by  them  acquire,  according  to  the 
views  of  foreign  authors,  not  a  little  significance  in  the 
selection  of  potential  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare, 
perious  handicaps  in  the  early  recognition  of  the  illness- 
8  do  not  prevent  timely  measures  from  being  taken  to  com¬ 
at  them  (2,  5)»  Some  foreign  authors  consider  that  the 
est  results  can  be  rendered  by  agents  of  diseases  not  en- 
ountered  or  rarely  encountered  in  a  given  locality  and, 
onsequently,  are  not  known  to  a  wide  circle  of  doctors. 

With  the  emergence  of  such  diseases  it  is  not  pos- 
ible  to  render  t-he  necessary  means  of  specific  prophylaxis 


122 


therapy,  and  diagnoscic  methods.  In  addition^  iraJn^2nity  is 
usually  absent,  or  else  there  is  a  very  low  natorai  immun¬ 
ity,  in  man  and  animals  to  the  infecticas  diseases  exotic 
for  the  given  locality  (22).  In  virtue  of  these  lensoni.^ 
fchere  can  arise  serious  difficulties  in  the  recOf^niticn , 
prophylaxis,  and  treatment  of  similar  diseases.  Fc.v  cou- 
firmation  of  this  opinion  it  is  cus:;oaary  to  refer  to  the 
pistory  of  epidemic  measles.  In  those  localities  where 

Eeasles  was  never  encountered  and  first  appeared,  it  has 
Iways  led  to  sizable  epidemics  among  both  children  and 
dults. 

However,  not  ail  foreign  specialists  share  the  oriin- 
ion  about  the  advantages  of  agents  of  infectious  diseases 
which  are  exotic  for  a  given  locality.  Repeatedly  sx-  I 
pressed  views  are  that  for  purpose  of  the  covert  arvljca-  j 
tioa  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  agents  of  diseases  will  ; 
be  used  which  are  common  or  even  endemic  to  the  giveT-.  lo-  ! 
cality,  since  the  appearance  of  unusual,  exotic  ilinetsi;';  ! 
will  immediately  provoke  serious  suspicion.  | 

Briefly  summarizing  the  comprehensive  requirements 
iiscussed  in  the  foreign  literature  for  various  agents  oi  \ 
Infectious  diseases  as  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare,  | 
the  following  basic  points  can  be  delineated:  1 

j 

I.  Pathogenicity  of  agent 
1.  Virulence 

2.  Infecting  dose  I 

II.  Brief  characteristics  of  the  induced 
i.  Incubation  period 

2.  Severity 

3.  Duration  I 

4,  Fatality  j 

5.  Invalidism  j 

6.  Communicability  f 

III.  Methods  of  cultivation  of  agents  \ 

IV.  Stability  of  agent  p 

V.  Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy  | 

VI.  Laboratory  and  clinical  diagnosis  | 

Later  on  this  scheme  wj.Il  be  used  in  a  presentation!' 
of  brief  characteristics  of  individual  agents  of  infectious,' 
diseases  reported  by  foreign  authors  as  possible  agents  efi 
bacteriological  warfare.  I 


123 


5RIEP  CHARACTEPiSC 


OF  AGFfrrS  0?  lUFFCTIOJS  DISFASEB  CF 


IAN  and  ANI&JALS  WRIOHt  IN  THE  DATA  OF  THji  POR^hTGN  LTTFRA- 
HJRE»  GAN  BE  USED  A^  AGENTS  OF  BACTERI0TX5GICAL  WARFARE 


At  present  there  is  extensive  foreign  literature  de 
voted  to  proving  the  possibility  of  the  use  oi  various  nj.- 
crocrganisins  as  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare. 

First  of  all  it  is  noted  that  agents,  which  com¬ 
pletely  satisfy  all  the  requirements  presented  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  section,  do  not  exist.  One  microorganism,  as,  for 
example,  the  plague  agent,  is  capable  of  inducing  a  severe 
illness  with  high  fatality  and  communicability,  but  it  has 
little  resistance  to  influences  of  the  external  environ- 
meiit;  others,  like,  for  example,  anthrax  spores,  display 
extreme  resistance  and  produce  a  serious  illness  but  they 
are  not  prone,  however,  to  epidemic  spread. 

In  view  of  such  a  situation  various  foreign  authors 
prefer  that  each  agent,  depending  first  upon  the  objec¬ 
tive,  be  considered  for  each  specific  case.  It  is  certain 
that  the  greatest  attention  is  attracted  to  the  microorga¬ 
nisms  which  maximally  satisfy  the  presented  requirements. 
Not  stopping  with  the  literature  of  the  20*  s  and 
50’ s,  which  now  represents  only  historical  interest,  it 
is  necessary  to  familiarize  the  readers  with  the  basic 
considerations,  published  in  foreign  print  of  the  last. 

15  -  17  hears,  on  the  possible  use  of  individual  agents 
as  a  bacteriological  weapon.  It  seems,  to  us  that  a  formu¬ 
lation  of  the  existing  data  of  foreign  literature  in  a 
table  will  help  more  graphically  to  demonstrate  the  signif 
icance  of  certain  microorganisms  as  possible  agents  of  tne 
bacteriological  weapon  (Table  5). 

Let  us  analyze  the  ntberial  presented  in  tiie  Table 
according  to  groups  of  infections. 

Bacterial  Infections.  In  this  group  the  greatest  atten¬ 
tion  of  foreign  specialists  is  given  to  the  agents  of 
plague,  anthrax,  glanders,  melioidosis,  brucellosis,  and 
[tularemia.  In  connection  with  this  in  the  following  rre- 
isentation  the  enumerated  microorganisms  and  the  diseases 
[caused  by  them  will  receive  a  more  complete ‘description, 
omewhat  less  attention  will  be  given  to  the  agents  of 
holera  and  icterohenorrhagic  fever. 

The  agents  of  typhoid,  paratyphoid  A  and  B,  bacter¬ 
ial  dysentery,  and  food-borne  salmonella  in  particular, 
re  much  less  frequently  mentioned  as  possible  agents  of 
the  bacteriological  weapon.  Besides,  many  foreign  authors 
generally  consider  the  use  of  these  agents  for  such  pur- 
as  remotiely  possible.  Thus,  for  example.  Fox  (1) 


124 


concluded  that  agents  of  the  intestinal  group  of  infec¬ 
tions  are  very  doubtful  in  this  situation. 

Conducting  a  thorough  and  exhaustive  study  of  the 
basic  properties  of  the  agents  of  infectious  diseases, 
Rosebury  and  Rabat  (2)  have  presented  two  lists  of  dis¬ 
eases;  the  first  contains  the  naiaes  of  diseases,  the  f.:  gents 
of  which,  in  the  opinion  of  these  authors,  can  be  used  as 
possible  agents  of  biological  wsirfare,  and  the  second  list 
enumerates  diseases  whose  agents  have  not  been  subjected 
to  a  study  for  these  purposes.  It  is  not  without  interest 
to  note  that  the  agents  of  typhoid,  paratyphoid,  salmonellv, 
and  even  cholera  were  excluded  by  them  in  the  second  list. 


}, 


i 

I 


125 


Table  5a 

List 

Diseases,  agents  of  whloti  have  been  named  as  possible  agents 

of  bacteriological  warfao^e 

(according  to  data  of  foreign  authors  for  period  from  1942  -  195 


SS^I  •<•»*» 

H|M*0  ■ 

+4-++  4-4-+  + 

^  *lnl  *■•»<'< 

+  44- 

4-  4-4- 

(^►361 

e 

• 

4-44-44- +-f 

MSI  '*$** 

4444-  4444  4  4 

1 

rraiSiK 

flfi 

4  444 

earn  nMMMx 

§  4*444  444  -*--♦■4 

o 

mil 

• 

i 

^^^1  ‘MwmSv 

«• 

n 

•^41  1  1 

f*4  - 

j  /*•« 

MMM  ■ 

-g.  4  I  44444  1  1  4  1  1  4  1 

mi  •»«■«* 

fUMMUMItN 

inuMMMV 

<9 

4» 

1  44i  1  1  1 

• 

^  <MI  *»»♦ 

ce 

-Hi  4  44- 

‘Author,  (literary  source^ 
Hame''of''il^ 

- 

:  ;  :  ;  ;  j§ 
. : 

. 1 

•  a  ■  •  ■  •' 

lllallf. 

•  n  . 

►nil  ■  •  ■?  • 
i?i-2  I 

nAk :  :(5  : 

■t  2  sp  S  ^  c  ^ 

R  £  K  2  .  .  Ri  A 

iii 

4- 


•  + 

CM 


I 

I 


-  126a  - 


Toxins 


i  1)  Pox,  1942 

’  2)  English  pharmaceutical  journal,  1946 
I  3)  Rosebury  and  Kabat,  194? 
j  4)  Armaguao,  1947 
;  5)  Cooper,  1943 
I  6)  Wlesraan,  1950 
7)  American  magazine  "Life”,  1951 
1  3)  Phalr,  1954 

9)  Cleve,  1954 

10)  Bullene,  1954 

11)  Creasy,  1955 

12)  Berger  and  Stevenson,  1955 

13)  Plague 

14)  Cholera 
is)  Anthrax 

16)  Glanders 

17)  Melioidosis 

18)  Brucellosis 

19)  Tularemia 

20 )  Tjrphoid  and  paratyphoid  fever 

21)  Bacillary  dysentery 

22)  Cerebralspinal  meningitis 

23)  Ictero-hemorrhagic  leptospirosis 
(Vasll’y®v-)ireil' s  disease) 

24)  Diphtheria 

25)  Tetanus 

26)  Gas  gangrene 

27 )  Pneumococcus  pneumonia 
23)  Salmonella 

29)  Botulism 


126b 


Bupycnmt  un^tnnm 


.Q 

in 


•++++  +  -1+++  ++++  ++++ 

+  + 

+  ++'♦"  +  +  4--H  +  +  ++  +  +  ++ 


+  4-  + 


127a 


■f-  MOXer  6MTb  HCnOAbBOSaH;  ±  HMIMbSObaHHt*  COMHHTeAbHO;  —  MCIKWIbSOBaime 


Viral  iofectloDB 


KBY  to  Table  5b 


@ 

m 


elfl 


CO 

0 

O 

•H 

•P 

s 

•ri 

•H 

CO 

*> 

49 

« 

M 

o 

•H 


3 

o 

•H 

P 

O 

O 


« 

o 

ca 

o 

p 

o 


Pi  Pc  Pc 
CO  O  O  «_ 

•H  Q  ► 

CO  d  O  ®  © 

^  O  O  «( 

«  cd  •  •  i  R*®' 

AP  d  d  O  r-C  r-l 
P,P-H  S)r-CH  10 
•rl  •rl  d  d  *H  d  C# 

U  a  O  n  ®  , 

OPtNiPHCQai: 


« 

► 

« 

•d 

5® 

fii> 

a  ® 

d^ 
•H*H 
CO^ 
P  Q 

<N®  I  I 

?s-l 

s  Sl^p 
e^g§ 


» 

® 

m 

d 

® 

a 


CD 

d 

o 


VO 


iTk 


Eco^w&c  a&i&i 


^  & 
J5©5 

Q  d  d 
d-H  d 
•H  CD  00 

a 

^  o  B'd 

0  CO  CD 

o  d  o 

SiHtC 

g'-S 

die  p| 


ID  a 


! 

•H  •H/cjw  ® 

d  d*^TC 

o  o  d  d 

•CJ  8-H  O 
•H  d  d  p 

o  d  o  b 

•H  «*c  •vc  a 

10  dllp  o 

•H  O  hP 
O  P  CD  d 
o  d  p  d 
O  -H  OiH 

ontem 


-  127b 


SvmbolB:  ♦  can  be  used  j  ♦  use  doubtful;  -  use  very .  doubtful 


Although  oacillary  dysentery  is  also  included  in 


the  first  list,  it  is  pointed  out  ”  that  the  agent  of 
this  disease  presents  very  li  lited  possibilities  for  its 
application  for  military  purposes.” 

A  similar  point  of  view  on  the  possible  use  of 
agents  of  intestinal  infections  for  the  bacteriological 
weapon  have  also  been  held  by  Armagnac  (5)  and  a  number  of 
other  foreign  specialists. 

Such  opinions  about  the  agents  of  intestinal  infec¬ 
tions  are  compiled  in  the  foreign  literature  in  respect  to 
some  of  their  characteristics. 

The  absence  of  optimal  experimental  evidence  on 
these  Infections  to  some  degree  complicates  a  clarifica¬ 
tion  of  the  likelihood  of  infection  with  various  methods 
of  application  of  the  virus,  particularly  by  the  airborne 
route.  In  the  opinion  of  a  number  of  authors,  airborne 
infection  with  intestinal  infections  is  not  very  proba¬ 
ble  (1  and  others). 

In  connection  with  this,  even  individual  advocates 
of  agents  of  intestinal  infections  as  a  bacteriological 
weapon  indicate  only  the  alimentary  route  of  infection, 
particularly  through  water  (6,  19). 

A  fact  that  acquires  no  little  importance  is  that 
in  the  last  10  -  15  years  the  character  of  the  clinical 
course  of  many  intestinal  infections  has  changed  to  quite 
an  extent.  Subclinical,  atypical,  and  abortive  forms, 
which  proceed  rather  mildly,  occupy  a  very  large  place, 
is  for  the  salmonellas,  they  are  always  referred  to  as 
relatively  mild  illnesses  which  advance  primarily  as  a 
bype  of  food  poisoning. 

The  presented  data,  so  it  seems  to  us,  more  or  less 
explain  the  restraint,  which  foreign  specialists  show,  in 
regard  to  agents  of  some  intestinal  infections  in  an  eval- 
lation  of  possible  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare. 

Even  more  rarely  mentioned  than  the  agents  of  ty¬ 
phoid,  paratyphoid,  dysentery,  and  salmonella  as  possible 
igents  of  bacteriological  warfare  are  those  of  wound  in¬ 
fections  -  tetanus  and  gas  gangrene  -  since  there  are  ef¬ 
fective  ways  and  means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy 
.n  these  illnesses  (2,  3). 

In  the  order  of  elimination  individual  opinions  are 
jxpressed  about  the  possible  use  of  agents  of  diphtheria, 
spinal  meningitis,  and  pneumonia  as  a  bacteriological  wea¬ 
pon.  However,  most  authors  do  not  attach  serious  impor- 
:ance  to  these  illnesses. 

Thus,  summarizing  the  material  on  the  given  group 
of  diseases,  it  can  be  concluded  that,  in  the  opinion  of 


!  foreign  authors,  of  the  number  of  bacterial  infections 
|the  most  probable  agents  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  can 
be  the  ones  of  plague,  anthrax,  glanders,  melioidosis, 
prucellosis,  tularemia,  cholera,  and  ictero-hemorrhagic 
leptospirosis . 

In  reference  to  this  we  must  stop  more  in  detail  on 
bhe  enumerated  microorganisms  and  the  d:.seases  caused  by 
them  and  give  a  brief  character  sketch  from  the  point  of 
i^iew  of  the  requirements  made  of  possiole  agents  of  the> 
aacteriologicai  weapon. 

Doxins.  Of  ail  the  known  toxins  the  one,  which  receives 
she  most  attention  in  the  foreign  literature  as  a  possible 
agent  of  bacteriological  warfare  is  the  strongest  poison 
>f  a  biological  nature  -  botulinus  toxin  (2),  and  it  will 
36  briefly  characterized.  Other  toxins  have  not  been  con¬ 
sidered  in  the  literature  as  an  agent  of  the  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  weapon. 

/"iral  Infections.  ’',i03t  foreign  specialists  '’oasider  chat 
3f  Che  viral  infections  the  most  probable  agents  cf  cacte;  - 
iolcgical  warfare  are  the  viruses  of  grippe,  psittacosis, 
smallpox,  equine  encephalomyelitis,  and  dengue  fever. 
Sometimes  there  are  mentioned  the  viruses  of  yellow  fever, 
fleasles,  and  hoof  and  mouth  disease,  P.osebury  and  Rabat 
[2)  consider  that  ’’yellow  fever  answers  all  the  require- 
aents  established  for  the  selection  of  agents  of  oacterio- 


virus  of 


ogical  warfare,"  Besides  dissemination  by  infected  nos- 
uitoes  -  vectors  of  tr.e  virus  -  the  airborne  route  of  in- 
ection  is  also  possible  in  yellow  fever,  whjch  imparts  to 
his  infection  special  importance  (25). 

The  measles  virus  attracts  some  attention  of  the 
oreign  specialists  primarily  because  of  the  well-defined 
o  imunicability  of  the  disease  (2,  22). 

The  same  thing  can  be  said  also  about  the  virus  of 
nfectious  parotitis  (mumps),  which  is  mentioned  as  a 
ossible  agent  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  even  more 
arely  than  the  measles  virus.  The  virus  of  hoof  and 
outh  disease,  in  the  opinion  of  Rosebui'y  and  Rabat  (.2), 
annot  be  considered  as  a  potential  agent  of  bacteriologi- 
al  warfare  against  man,  since  the  infecting  activity  of 
his  virus  is  very  low  for  man.  Therefore,  the  virus  of 
oof  and  mouth  disease,  in  their  opinion,  even  if  it  can 
e  used  as  a  bacteriological  weapon,  it  will  only  be  a- 
ainst  farm  animals  (large  cattle,  sheep,  swine). 

The  virus  of  Rift  valley  fever,  although  put  in  the 
ategory  of  agents  which  can  be  used  in  bacteriological 
ax-fare  by  a  number  of  authors  (2,  5)  i  nevertheless  has 
ot  brought  about  serious  arguments  in  respect  to  this. 


Thus,  from  the  presented  data  it  is  seen  that  of  the 
group  of  viral  infections  the  most  emphasis  is  given  by 
foreign  authors  to  viruses  of  grippe,  psittacosis,  small¬ 
pox,  equine  encephalomyelitis,  dengue  fever,  and  yellow 
fever.  We  will  elaborate  later  on  the  characteristics  of 
the  enumerated  infections. 

Bickettsial  Infections.  Of  the  n\amber  of  infectious  dis¬ 
eases  of  rickettsial  etiology  the  foreign  specialists  con¬ 
sider  the  typhus  agent  the  most’  likely  one  for  the  bacter¬ 
iological  weapon  (2,  5).  Moreover,  in  recent  years  separ¬ 
ate  communications  have  appeared  in  the  literature  verify¬ 
ing  the  possible  use  for  these  purposes  of  the  agents  of 
Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever,  tsutaugamushi  fever,  and  Q 
fever  (5)«  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  become  familiar 
ith  this  group  of  diseases  in  more  detail, 
rotozoal  Infections.  Of  the  protozoal  diseases  the  agent 
of  malaria  is  most  often  mentioned  in  the  foreign  litera¬ 
ture.  But  it  is  noted  that  the  use  of  the  malaria  plas- 
odlum  as  an  agent  of  the  bacteriological  weapon  is  couplec 
th  extreme  difficulties  which  stem  from  the  complex  meth- 
f  of  derivation  of  the  plasmodia  in  large  numbers  as  well 
as  by  the  limited  possibilities  of  their  application. 

ost  foreign  authors  consider  that  the  only  possible  meth¬ 
od  of  application  of  the  malaria  agent  as  the  bacteriolog¬ 
ical  weapon  is  by  the  spread  of  corresponding  types  of  in¬ 
fected  mosquitoes  Into  areas  with  favorable  conditions  for 
their  existence,  multiplication,  and  transmission  of  the 
plasmodia  to  man.  All  of  this  places,  in  their  opinion, 
^der  serious  doubts  the  possibility  of  use  of  malaria 
plasmodia  as  a  bacteriological  weapon.  For  these  ssune 
reasons,  according  to  the  viewpoints  of  foreign  specia- 
piists,  the  use  for  military  purposes  of  such  protozoal  in¬ 
fections  as  amoebic  dysentery,  trypanosomiasis,  and  toxo¬ 
plasmosis  is  still  less  probable,  although  they  are  men¬ 
tioned  by  individual  authors  as  possible  agents  of  the 
bacteriological  weapon  but  without  any  basis.  Therefore, 
jbhere  is  no  need  to  dwell  in  greater  detail  on  separate 
Representatives  of  this  group  of  infections. 

Fungous  Diseases.  In  recent  years  in  many  foreign  coun- 
bries  interest  has  risen  considerably  in  agents  of  various 
fungous  diseases,  especially  the  deep  mycoses,  and  this  is 
evidently  explained  by  the  relatively  severe  clinical  pic- 
Liure  of  these  diseases  as  well  as  by  the  absence  of  de¬ 
veloped  measures  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  Be- 
>au8e  of  this  we  must  go  more  into  detail  on  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  the  deep  mycoses  with  the  most  severe  course 
•  eoccidloidosls  and  nocardiosis. 


130 


151 


p  fu  cf  ct 
H  et  (P  o'  p* 


tongue  is  covered  with  a  thick,  greiyish-white  coating 
"furred  tongue")*  There  is  a  distinct  tachycardia.  Later 
the  liver  becoaies  enlarged.  The  peripheral  blood  reveals 
a  neutrophilic  leukocytosis  with  an  expressed  degenerate- 
regenerate  shift  of  the  neutrophils.  The  disease  advances 
with  a  serious  condition  of  the  patient  and  a  high  fever. 

In  the  bubonic  form  severe  pain  is  felt  from  the 
first  day  of  illness  at  the  site  where  a  bubo  eventually 
develops,  on  the  2nd  day  the  bubo  is  already  palpable, 
and  on  the  3  -  5th  day  is  is  completely  developed.  They 
are  localized  in  the  groin,  over  the  axillae,  on  the  neck 
and  vary  in  size  from  a  tiny  induration  to  a  lump  the  size 
of  a  large  apple.  The  plague  bubo  is  characterised  by 
rapid  development,  sharp  pain,  pronounced  periadenitis, 
jrapid  suppuration,  and  adherence  to  the  skin  and  surround¬ 
ing  tissue. 

In  untreated  cases  fatality  in  bubonic  plague 
jranges  from  40  to  90%  and  averages  60%. 

Frequently  the  bubonic  form  of  plague  is  complica¬ 
ted  by  secondary  plague  pneumonia. 

The  primary  pulmonary  form  of  plague  develops  like 
a  type  of  extremely  severe  hemorrhagic  pneumonia  ^ith  a 
rapid  deterioration  of  the  general  condition  of  the  pa¬ 
tient  and  with  a  high  fever  (40  degrees  or  higher) .  An 
early  impairment  of  consciousness  is  characteristic  of  the 
lisease  with  manifestations  of  agitation,  an  increasing 
tachycardia  and  dyspnea,  coughing  with  bloody  sputum,  . 
There  are  often  noted  pleurisy  pains,  blood-tinged  vomi- 
tus,  and  signs  of  sepsis  (peticheal  rash,  secondary  bubos) 
The  illness  terminates  with  loss  of  consciousness,  pros- 
cation,  and  coma  followed  by  death. 

In  the  absence  of  therapy  the  pulmonary  form  of 
plague  terminates  fatally  in  5  -  6  days. 

The  septic  form  of  plague  is  characterized  by 'the 
absence  of  definite  focal  lesions,  the  presence  of  severe 
Intoxication,  and  the  (fevelopment  of  numerous  hemorrhages 
:>n  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes.  In  the  absence  of  specif 
tic  therapy  death  follows  on  the  2  -  3rd  dsiy. 

In  the  intestinal  form,  the  existence  of  which  is 
challenged  by  most  authors,  along  with  the  general  toxic 
manifestations  there  are  frequently  bloody,  mucuous  stools 
}he  illness  usually  terminates  fatally. 

The  cutaneous  form  of  plague  is  observed  very  in¬ 
frequently. 

In  this  form  of  the  disease  pock- tike  pustules  or 
>ttboes  with  cloudy  contents  develop  on  the  skin.  Vert  of- 
;en  the  cutaneous  form  changes  to  Whoes. 


152 


The  presented  clinical  characteristics  of  plague 
pertain  to  cases  of  the  disease  which  are  not  treated  with 
antibiotics  or  sulfauilamides.  With  treatment  the  clini¬ 
cal  picture  of  plague,  especially  the  pulmonary  form,  is 
significantly  changed.  Thus,  in  particular,  in  primary 
pulmonary  plague  there  may  be  no  bloody  sputum,  and  the 
temperature  can  acquire  an  erratic  character,  etc. 

Flague  is  one  of  the  very  contagious  diseases. 

|The  pulmonary  form  is  especially  dangerous.  2ven  a  brief 
contact  of  a  healthy  person  with  a  patient  with  the  pul¬ 
monary  form  usually  leads  to  illness. 

Erldemlos  of  plague  in  the  absence  of  the  necessary 
{combative  measures  and  prophylaxis  results  in  a  rapid 
spread. 

I  Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  plague 

bacilli  grow  rapidly  on  the  usual  nutrient  media  and  can 
be  obtained  in  large  quantities. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  plague  agent  does  not 
have  a  pronounced  .resistance  to  the  effects  of  various 
factors  of  the  external  environment.  It  is  quickly  killed 
under  the  influence  of  sunlight,  high  temperatures,  and 
disinfecting  agents.  Elevated  temperatures  have  an  advers* 
effect  on  the  preservation  of  the  plague  agent.  A  tem¬ 
perature  of  55  degrees  kills  Pasteizrella  pestis  in  five 
minutes.  With  minus  temperatures  P,  pestis  is  preserved 
much  better. 

Jeans  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  L’’ ve 
vaccines  prepared  from  avirulent  kV  and  other  strains  are 
used  for  specific  prophylaxis.  A  single  subcutaneous, 
Lntracutaneous,  or  cutaneous  vaccination  is  performed;  a 
Dooster  shot  is  given  in  a  year.  The  live  vaccine  has 
peen  shown  to  give  adequate  protection  experimentally  to 
mnimals  as  w^ll  as  epidemilogically  when  the  bubonic  form 
^ises. 


Due  to  some  disadvantages  of  the  live  vaccines, 
lUnerican  authors  are  continuing  their  search  for  a  suitabl<» 
chemical  anti-plage  vaccine. 

In  1952,  under  the  sponsorship  of  the  epidemiologi- 
;al  division  of  the  United  States  Army  at  an  official  com¬ 
mittee  for  the  World  Health  Organization,  a  report  of 
yieyer  was  given  on  the  subject:  "Latest  Investigations  on 
;he  Immunogenic  Properties  of  Various  Jtnti-Plage  Vaccines." 

The  report  specified  that  after  special  treatment 
}f  the  dead  plague  cultures  antigenic  fractions  could  be 
recovered  which  had  high  immunogenic  properties. 

One  of  the  fractions,  called  "fraction  I",  (repre¬ 
senting  a  toxic  protein  substance  soluble  in  water  and  ob- 


133 


tained  from  plague  cultiures  treated  with  acetone)  in  a 
dosage  of  0.1  mg  safely  protected  mice  from  plague  Infec¬ 
tion.  Immunization  of  monkeys  with  "fraction  I"  protec¬ 
ted  60^  from  subsequent  Infection  with  a  massive  dose  of 
F.  pestis. 

In  1956  Silverman,  Kyoshi  Niguchi,  and  Ed.  Meyer 
(26)  reported  on  the  recovery  of  an  antigen  from  the 
plague  organism  on  a  synthetic  nutrient  medium  containing 
pure  amino  acids  and  some  other  ingredients;  this  antigen 
had  high  Immunogenic  properties  for  white  mice. 

In  1955  Enrenkranz  and  Meyer  (2?)  published  a  work 
in  which  they  reported  the  results  of  the  ttestlng  of  three 
types  of  anti-plage  vaccina  on  Macacus  rhesus  monkeys:  a 
live  one  from  the  avirulent  strain  "EV-76'*,  a  formalized 
chemical  vaccine  from  strain  "Irek",  and  one  called  "frac¬ 
tion  I". 

The  chemical  vaccine  was  prepared  from  an  extract 
recovered  from  plague  bacteria  of  the  strain  "Irek", 
killed  with  acetone  and  lyophilized.  The  extract  was  pre¬ 
cipitated  and  crystallized  by  Baker's  technique. 

The  immunogenic  properties  of  all  the  tested  vac¬ 
cines  were  about  the  same,  but  nevertheless  a  preference 
was  shown  for  "fraction  I".  The  authors  considered  that 
the  immunogenic  properties  of  all  the  vaccines  tested  by 
them  depended  on  their  content  of  "fraction  I". 

Efforts  to  further  develop  a  chemical  anti-plague 
yaccine  have  vigorously  continued  in  the  USA.. 

Streptomycin  has  been  successfully  administered  as 
means  of  specific  plague  therapy,  and  in  the  bubonic 
orm  of  the  disease  it  gives  completely  satisfactory  re- 
ults;  treatment  of  the  primary  pulmonary  and  septic  forms 
s  effective  only  with  the  early  (1  -  2nd  day  of  Illness) 
tart  of  therapy. 

A  certain  effect  is  obtained  in  the  treatment  of 
ubonic  forms  with  sulfanilamides.  Satisfactory  results 
ve  been  received  with  the  administration  of  aureomycin, 
hloramphenicol ,  and  terramycin,  idilch  are  reconumended  in 
omblnatlon  with  streptomycin  therapy.  Penicillin  is  re- 
ommended  to  cobat  supparative  complications.  Serum  ther- 
py  at  present  has  almost  completely  lost  its  value. 

Laboratory  and  clin^al  diagnosis.  The  laboratory 
iagnosis  of  pla^e  consists  primarily  oT  a  smear  examina- 
ion  and  Isolation  of  the  agent. 

A  preliminary  presiamptive  answer  can  be  given  on 
he  basis  of  the  smear  examination  of  the  sputum  or  the 
ontents  of  the  bubo  in  con;)unotlon  with  the  clinical  and 
pidemiologloal  findings. 


134 


The  final  diagnosis  is  reached  in  2  -  3  days  after 
the  agent  has  been  isolated  by  directly  planting  the  spu¬ 
tum  or  bubo  contents  on  a  Petria  dish  and  identified  in 
pure  culture.  In  isolated  cases  more  time  is  required. 

Considering  the  high  commicability  of  plague,  a 
jbattery  of  antiepidemic  measures  should  be  set  up  without 
^waiting  for  the  final  bacteriological  diagnosis,  and  they 


are  governed  by  the  results  of  the  smear  examination  and 
the  clinical  and  epidemiological  findings. 

In  the  clinical  diagnosis  of  plague  there  is  con¬ 
siderable  difficulty  in  recognizing  the  primary  pulmonary 
form  which  has  to  be  differentiated  from  lobar  and  grippe 
pneumonia  and  also  from  the  pulmonary  forms  of  anthrax, 
tularemia,  glanders,  and  psittacosis. 

Therefore,  in  this  situation  it  is  necessary  to 
give  special  attention  to  an  analysis  of  the  clinical-ep¬ 
idemiological  and  clinical-laboratory  data,  i.e.,  a  com¬ 
bination  of  definite  epidemiological,  clinical,  and  lab¬ 
oratory  findings  which  will  help  to  establish  the  diagnosis 

*  * 


Almost  all  the  foreign  authors,  who  have  taken 
part  in  solving  the  problems  of  bacteriological  warfare, 
consider  that  the  plague  agent  best  satisfys  the  require¬ 
ments  made  of  possible  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare; 
they  believe  that  the  application  of  P,  pestis  can  be  af¬ 
fected  by  two  methods;  through  infected  fleas  and  by  the 
dispersion  of  pathogenic  material  from  various  ammunitions 
sand  devices. 

Foreign  authors  are  impressed  by  the  strongly  mani¬ 
fested  retroactive  quality  of  plague.  Thus,  for  example, 
^oseb\iry  and  Rabat  (2)  consider  that  "the  difficulty  en¬ 
tails  not  how  to  cause  the  epidemic  but  how  to  cope  with 
it  if  it  starts.”  In  the  opinion  of  Pox  (11)  the  use  of 
the  plague  agent  against  troops  on  the  battle  field  is 
scarcely  probable  because  of  the  impossibility  of  protec¬ 
ting  their  own  men  from  an  epidemic.  Therefore,  the  opin¬ 
ion  exists  (2)  that  the  plague  agent  can  be  used  at  the 
fronts  only  for  attack  on  completely  isolated,  fortified 
Doints;  for  example,  naval  or  air  bases  which  are  located 
jn  islands.  In  view  of  the  strong  retroactive  quality  the 
Dlague  agent  is  considered  abroad  as  a  weapon  of  strategic 
Importance  meant  for  the  infection  of  the  civilian  popula- 

;,lan.-Cl 


However,  contradictory  viewpoints  also  exist.  Thus 
for  example,  the  Kwantung  Army  Comuand  in  yenchuria  in¬ 
tended  to  spread  plague  not  only  to  infect  the  rear  but 
also  the  front  operations,  and  it  was  specifically  pro¬ 
posed  to  spread  plague-infected  fleas  upon  the  retreat  of 
the  Japvanese  Army.  j 


Anthrax 

Anthrax  is  an  aacute  infectious  disease  of  zoonotic 

origin. 

Pathogenicity  of  agent.  The  anthrax  bacillus  has 
very  highly  expressed  infective  activity  in  respect  to 
man  and  many  species  of  warmblooded  animals.  Rosebury  and 
Rabat  (2)  consider  that  "only  a  few  species  of  microorga¬ 
nisms  surpass  the  anthrax  agent  in  virulence  for  animals, 
Infection  of  man  and  animals  can  occur  through  the  respir¬ 
atory  tract,  the  gastro-intestinal  tract,  and  with  contact 
of  the  agent  on  the  superficial  skin  and  mucous  membranes. 

In  addition  to  man  anthrax  afflicts  various  species 
of  animals.  The  most  susceptible  are  sheep,  goats,  cows, 
orses,  deer,  buffalos,  camels,  swine,  and  many  other 
carniverous,  wild  animals. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period  av- 
rages  2  -  b  Aays. 

The  disease  is  distinguished  by  an  extremely  severe 
ourse  and  high  mortality. 

Depending  on  the  route  of  infection,  three  clinical 
orms  of  the  disease  are  differentiated:  pulmonary,  in- 
estinal,  and  cutaneous.  A  primary  septic  form  is  also 
bserved. 

The  pulmonary  form  of  anthrax  proceeds  like  an  ex- 
remely  severe  hemorrhagic  pneumonia.  With  an  onset  of 
evere  intoxication,  high  fever,  and  catarrhal  manifesta- 
ions  affecting  the  conjunctivae  and  upper  respiratory 
ract  there  develop  dyspnea,  cyanosis,  and  coughing  with 
he  discharge  of  watery,  foamy  sputum  which  is  tinged  with 
lood  and  then  often  coagulates,  resembling  jelly.  The 
nthrax  bacilli  can  be  detected  in  i:he  sputum.  Pneumonia 
s  usually  accompanied  by  a  dry  and  then  an  oozing  pleuri- 
.  After  2-3  days  a  large  percent  of  the  cases  succumb 
ith  manifestations  of  collapse. 

The  intestinal  form  of  anthrax  is  characterized  by 
harp  pains  in  the  stomach,  bloody  vomitus,  and  diarrhea 
ccompnied  by  a  highly  acute  anthrax  sepsis.  An  ulcera- 
ive  process  develops  in  the  intestines,  usually  in  the _ 


136 


small  latestlne. 

The  disease  is  accompanied  by  high  fever  and  severe 
intoxication.  The  patient  expires  after  3  -  '+  ^  eys  with 
manifestations  of  deep  collapse. 

The  cutaneous  form  progresses  less  severely,  but  ' 
manifestations  of  intoxication  are  also  pronounced  in  it. 
The  length  of  its  course  is  2  -  3  weeks,  end  mortality 
reaches  15%* 

Convalescence  with  anthrax  is  drawn  out  for  1-2 

months. 

Communicability  of  the  cutaneous  form  is  not  high, 
but  patients  with  the  pulmonary  form  evidently  can  infect 
the  community,  liberating  the  agent  v;ith  sputum. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  anthrax 
agent  multiplies  rapidly  on  the  usual  nutrient  media  and 
can  be  obtained  in  large  amounts. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  characteristic  pro¬ 
perty  of  the  anthrax  agent  is  the  exceptionally  high  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  spore  to  various  influences  of  the  exter¬ 
nal  environment.  They  survive  boiling  in  water  for  30 
minutes  and  dry  heat  with  a  temperature  of  120  degrees  for 
two  hours.  The  spores  are  also  highly  resistant  to  the 
action  of  various  disinfecting  suostances.  In  a  5%  solu¬ 
tion  of  phenol  they  are  not  killed  for  40  days,  in  a  10% 
chloramine  solution  they  survive  for  10  hours,  and  in  a 
10%  caustic  soda  solution  €uad  a  2%  formalin  solution  for 
several  hours.  In  the  presence  of  organic  substances  and 
wj,th  lowered  temperatures  the  sporicidal  action  of  disin¬ 
fecting  substances  becomes  still  less  effective.  Anthrax 
spores  stay  alive  in  the  soil  for  ten  years. 

However,  in  spite  of  such  high  resistance  of  the 
anthrax  spores  there  are  at  present  effective  means  of  de¬ 
contamination  for  this  disease  including;  methods  of  wet 
disinfection  with  the  use  of  highly  concentrated  solutions 
(20%)  of  bleaching  powder  and  chloramine,  lye  in  a  2f;i>  solu¬ 
tion  of  sodium  carbonate  for  an  hour,  and  also  methods  of 
chamber  disinfection  by  steam  and  formaldehyde  vapor  with 
extended  exposure. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  Live 
vaccines  prepared  from 'irulent  strains  are  usea  for  speci¬ 
fic  prophylaxis  of  anthrax.  With  subcutaneous  injection 
the  live  anti-anthrax  vaccine  creates  a  sufficiently  poten 
immunity  in  animals. 

In  the  USA  chemical  anti-anthrax  vaccines  are  ac¬ 
tively  being  developed  for  the  immunization  of  people  and 
agricultural  animals. 

In  1954  Wright,  Nearburg,  and  Slain  (28)  reported  on 


137 


the  recovery  of  an  anthrax  from  cultures  grown  on  a  syn¬ 
thetic  protein-free  medium  containing  17  amino  acids  and 
some  other  ingredients.  The  high  efficacy  of  this  vaccine 
was  established  with  the  testing  of  rabbits  and  monkeys: 
the  animals  usually  survived  after  ihoculation  with  200 
lethal  doses. 

In  this  same  year  Aright  and  associates  conducted 
extensive  experiments  on  Macacus  rhesus  monkeys,  using  an 
anthrax  antigen  precipitated  with  alum.  A.  year  after  im¬ 
munization  with  a  two-stage  vacciziation  with  the  alum  an- 
|tigen  (0.5  and  1  ml  subcutaneously)  the  monkeys  survived 
intracutaneous  injection  of  a  dose  of  50,00  -  100,000  vir¬ 
ulent  spores. 

The  monkeys,  immunized  twice  subcutaneously  with 
1  ml  of  the  alum  antigen  for  each  injection  survived  air- 
iborne  infection  with  890,000  -  3*000,000  virulent  spores. 

The  anthrax  antigen  precipitated  with  alum  was  also 
tested  on  people  (three-stage  subcutaneously  in  a  dosage 
of  0.5  -  0.5  -  0.5  ml);  5t  proved  harmless  and  slightly 
reactive. 

Penicillin  in  combination  with  hyperemic  blood  ser¬ 
um  is  used  in  ftie  treatment  of  the  cutaneous  form. 

Excellent  results  have  been  received  by  the  admin¬ 
istration  of  large  doses  of  penicillin  and  aureomycin,  A 
positive  effect  has  been  obtained  with  terramycin  sad  strep 
tomycin  .  Serum  therapy  in  the  cutaneous  form  of  anthrax 
has  been  discontinued  because  of  the  results  of  antibiotic 
treatment.  There  have  been  no  conclusive  findings  on  ±e 
efficacy  of  antibiotics  in  the  pulmonary  and  intestinal 
forms,  TT’eatment  of  anthrax  meningitis  (secondary)  has 
proved  unsuccessful  with  penicillin.  A  preliminary  pre¬ 
sumptive  answer  can  be  given  after  smear  examination  of 
he  pathological  material.  The  final  diagnosis  is  reached 
-  2  days  after  isolation  of  the  culture. 

^boratory  and  clinical  diagnosis.  The  laboratory 
iagnosis  of  anthrax  is  relatively  simple . 

The  clinical  diagnosis  of  the  cutaneous  form  of  an- 
hrax  does  not  present  great  complications,  but  the  early 
ecognition  of  the  pulmonary  and  intestinal  forms  of  the 
isease  is  extremely  involved.  The  pulmonary  form  of  an- 
hrax  has  to  be  differentiated  from  the  pulmonary  form  of 
lague,  tularemia,  glanders,  psittacosis  and  grippe  pneu- 


I 


158 


In  conclusion  it  should  be  noted  that  in  the  for¬ 
eign  literature  the  anthrax  agent  has  a  foremost  place  as 
an  agent  of  bacteriological  warfare.  Many  foreign  specia¬ 
lists  consider  that  anthrax  spores  best  satisfy  all  the 
requirements  made  of  potential  agents  of  the  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  weapon  (  4  and  others). 

Rosebury  and  Kabat  (2)  hypothesize  that  the  anthrax 
agent  can  be  used  in  bacteriological  warfare  by  iwo  basic 
methods:  wounds  -  with  the  use  of  shell  splinters,  and 
air-borne  -  through  infected  air. 

Wiesmann  (19)  et  al  do  not  exclude  the  possibility 
of  using  anthrax  spores  for  alimentary  and  contact  infec¬ 
tion  of  people  and  farm  animals. 

Emphasis  is  placed  on  the  high  resistance  of  an¬ 
thrax  spores,  which  permits  targets  with  an  extended  per¬ 
iod  of  action  and  notebly  hampers  decontamination  (2). 

The  testimonials  at  the  Khabarov  trial  (29)  con¬ 
clusively  proved  that  the  Japanese  military  criminals 
tried  to  use  anthrax  bacteria  as  a  means  of  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  warfare. 


Glanders 


Glanfers  a  severe  infectious  disease  of  horses 
and  other  solia--iOofed  animals;  under  natural  conditions 
it  is  rather  rarely  encountered  in  man. 

Pathogenicity  of  agent.  The  glanders  agent  is  one 
of  the  group  of  microorganisms  which  has  a  pronounced  in¬ 
fective  activity »in  respect  to  man.  Many  cases  of  infec¬ 
tion  have  been  defscribed  in  laboratories  in  spite  of  pre¬ 
cautionary  measures.  Topley  and  Wilson  (50)  consider 
that  this  agent  is  one  of  the  most  dangerous  organisms  for 
laboratory  workers.  It  is  believed  that  in  intralabora¬ 
tory  infections  the  airborne  route  is  of  primary  impor¬ 
tance  . 

Infection  of  man  and  aniaals  can  transpire  through 
the  respiratory  tract,  the  gastro-intestihal  tract,  and 


Imucous  membranes. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period  conj- 
sists  of  2  -  3  days,  rarely  mere.  In  man  glanders  pro¬ 
ceeds  most  often  as  an  acute,  septic  disease  with  in¬ 
volvement  of  the  skin,  muscles,  bones,  and  internal  or¬ 
gans.  The  disease  is  characterized  by  great  varjaitions  in 
the  clinical  picture.  The  most  classical  symptoms  are  a 
rash  in  the  form  of  single  blisters,  ulcerative  lesions 
of  M  the,  naaopbaryax ,  ■aigPfttiag  ^Iwropasumoaia  a»oeapaaied 


,139. 


by  coughing  with  bloody  sputum,  abscesses  in  the  muscles, 
cones,  and  joints,  and  also  debilitating  dyarrbea.  The 
onset  of  the  disease  is  sudden,  and  the  condition  of  the 
patients  is  very  serious. 

In  the  acute  form  of  glanders  fatality  is  100%, 
and  in  the  chronic  form,  which  is  observed  in  man  very 
rarely,  it  reaches  50%. 

The  duration  of  trie  disease  in  the  acute  form  is 
up  to  three  weeks,  in  the  chronic  form  up  to  a  year  or 
more.  Glanders  is  very  reu:>ely  transmitted  from  person  to 
person  although  isolated  contacts  with  the  infection  are 
dangerous • 

I  Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  glanders 

Ibacilli  are  easily  cuiiivated  on  the  usual  nutrient  media 
|and  can  be  obtained  in  large  amounts. 

1  Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  glanders  rod  is  one 

of  the  slightly  resistant  organisms.  It  tolerates  ele¬ 
vated  temperatures  very  poorly.  With  heating  to  55  de¬ 
grees  it  is  killed  in  10  minutes.  It  bears  low  tempera¬ 
tures  relatively  well.  Dessicated  cultures  maintain  via¬ 
bility  for  3  -  ^  weeks  (2). 

The  glanders  bacillus  survives  for  a  comparatively 
short  time  on  objects  of  the  external  environment.  In 
manure  it  dies  in  12  -  15  days,  in  excretions  from  ulcers 
and  the  nasal  raucous  it  drys  up  and  dies  after  7-15 
days. 

411  of  the  common  disinfecting  substances  quickly 
kill  the  glanders  bacillus. 

Means  of  specific  propbyl^is  and  therapy.  There 
are  no  vaccines  for  glanders.  There  are  observations  that 

Enimals,  which  have  recovered  from  the  disease,  do  not 
orm  a  high  degree  of  immunity,  in  viev.-  of  which  specific 
rophylaxls  at  present  is  a  problem  that  is  difficult  to 
solve. 

Specific  methods  of  treating  glanders  have  not  been 
ieveloped.  In  the  USA  six  cases  of  acute  glanders  in  man 
were  treated  with  sulfadiazine  (51).  In  addition,  there 
iata  about  the  positive  effect  of  serum  therapy.  However, 
bhe  indicated  means  require  broader  approbation  before  a 
final  decision  is  made. 

Laboratory  and  clinical  diamosis.  The  laboratory 
iiagnosis  of  glanders  consists  of  the  isolation  of  the 
igent  by  planting  on  glycerin  agar  or  determination  of  the 
presence  of  the  organism  in  the  test  material  with  the  use 
>f  the  Straus  reaction  in  guinea  pigs.  These  methods  of 
Laboratory  diagnosis  usually  take  2-5  days.  Chronic 
slanders  in  eziiraals  is  diagnosed  by  means  of  the  allergic 


eaction  with,  malleln  (ophthalmic  reaction). 

The  early  clinical  diagnosis  of  glanders  presents 
ertain  difficulties.  It  is  perplexing  to  differentiate 
cute  glanders  from  the  pulmonary  forms  of  plague  and  an- 
hrax.  The  clinical  picture  of  glanders  and  melioidosis 
s  especially  confusing. 


The  glanders  agent  more  and  more  impresses  the  for- 
ign  specialists  as  a  potential  agent  of  bacteriological 
arfare,  and  this  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  glan> 
ers  bacillus,  ffrom  their  point  of  view,  quite  adequately 
atisfys  the  requirement  of  these  agents:  this  disease  is 
haracterized  by  a  short  incubation  period  and  a  very  se- 
ere  course  with  high  mortality;  there  is  no  means  of  spe- 
ific  prophylaxis  and  therapy. 

Rosebury  and  Kabat  (2)  and  Wiesmann  (19)  consider 
hat  the  most  likely  use  of  the  glanders  agent  is  in  the 
orm  of  an  aerosol  for  airborne  infection. 


elioidosis  (pseudo->glanders) 

Melioidosis  is  a  rarely  encountered,  extremely  pro- 
ressive  disease  which  is  endemic  for  countries  of  South- 
astern  Asia. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  a^ent.  The  melioidosis  bacil- 
us  has  pronounced  pathogenicity  in  respect  to  man  and 
ome  rodents  (wild  rats  and  mice),  which  are  the  primary 
eservoirs  of  the  agent  in  nature.  Along  with  this  there 
s  described  a  spontaneous  infection  in  cats,  dogs,  horses 
nd  cows. 

Infection  of  man  and  animals  can  occur  through  the 
espiratory  tract,  the  gastro-intestinal  tract,  and  mucous 
embranes.  The  melioidosis  agent  can  penetrate  into  the 
ody  of  man  through  in;}ured  integument.  Vaucel  (32)  des- 
ibed  three  cases  of  melioidosis  due  to  the  contact  of  con 
aminated  earth  with  a  wound  in  an  automobile  accident. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  length  of  the  incuba- 
ion  period  in  melioidosis  has  not  been  clearly  establishe 
robably  the  authors  are  very  neaurly  correct  in  saying  it 
s  several  days  (53) • 

The  course  of  melioidosis  in  man  most  nearly  re- 
embles  an  acute,  septic  disease,  which  is  characterized  b 
rapid  and  stormy  clinical  picture  accompanied  by  fever 
40  -  41  degrees),  severe  headache,  tachycardia,  dyspnea, 


141. 


Aiarrhea  aad  vomiting.  Lobar  pnaumonia  develops.  By  the 
pad  of  the  lllneea  purulent  pustules  have  often  formed  on 
:he  akin  and  abscesses  in  the  muscles.  The  peripheral 
dlood  reveals  a  marked  neutrophilic  leukocytosis.  Death 
snsues  on  the  2  -  3th  day  of  illness. 

Less  often  melioidosis  occurs  in  the  form  of  a  sub- 
leute  septic  illness.  This  form  is  characterized  by  the 
levelopment  of  suppurative  processes  in  various  organs 
[lungs,  muscles,  liver,  spleen,  kidneys,  epididymis,  etc). 
Subacute  melioidosis  lasts  for  3  ~  ^  weeks  and  terminates 
Ln  death. 

Chronic  melioidosis  is  encountered  very  rarely  and 
is  manifested  by  a  chronic  course  of  suppurative  processes 
of  various  localizations.  The  illness  is  long  drawn  out 
(from  several  months  to  several  years),  bringing  the  pa¬ 
tient  to  cachexis  and  death. 

Person-to-person  incidents  of  infection  have  not 
>een  'escribed.  The  disease  is  considered  noncontagious. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  melioido¬ 
sis  agent  is  easily  cultivated  on  the  usual  nutrient  media , 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  melioidosis  bacillus 
Ls  distXn^ished  by  a  relative  resistance  to  the  external 
mvironment.  The  organism  survives  in  defecation  and  in 
;he  soil  for  not  less  than  27  days,  and  in  drinking  water 
for  44  days.  Preserved  well  in  the  external  environment 
Linder  favorable  temperature  conditions,  the  agent  quickly  ' 
lies  with  elevated  as  well  as  with  lowered  temperatures, 
leating  of  a  microbial  suspension  to  36  degrees  inactivates 
it  even  after  a  few  minutes.  The  resistance  of  the  orga¬ 
nism  is  low  also  to  the  action  of  the  common  disinfecting 
solutions  of  bleaching  powder,  corrosive  sublimate,  etc. 
Jowever,  it  is  noteworthy  that  lysol  and  phenol  have  lit¬ 
tle  effect  (34). 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  euad  therapy.  There 
are  no  vaccines  for  melioidosis.  Effective  means  of  spe¬ 
cific  therapy  have  not  been  developed. 

In  recent  years  cases  have  been  reported  of  the 
successful  treatment  of  melioidosis  with  chloramphenicol 
and  also  with  massive  doses  of  sulfanilamide  preparations 
in  combination  with  penicillin  therapy.  Where  the  strains 
are  not  sensitive  to  Chloromycetin,  it  is  recommended  that 
a  combination  be  used:  Chloromycetin  and  aureomycin,  or 
Chloromycetin  and  terramycin  (34,  35)* 

Laboratory  and  clinical  diajgnosis.  Because  of  the 
variety  of  symptoms  ^he  clinical  diagnosis  of  melioidosis 
is  very  complicated.  In  most  of  the  cases  in  the  litera¬ 
ture  it  is  not  established  while  the  patient  is  alive. 

In  acute  melioidosis  a  differential  diagnosis  has  to  be 


142 


sonsidered  with  the  pulmonary  and  septic  forms  of  plague, 
icute  glanders,  tularemia,  comatose  malaria,  and  typhoid 
fever.  The  chronic  form  of  melioidosis  can  simulate  chron¬ 
ic  glanders,  brucellosis,  tertiary  syphilis,  actinomycosis, 
aocardiosis,  and  several  other  illnesses. 

The  final  diagnosis  of  melioidosis  is  established 
sxclusively  on  the  basis  of  laboratory  tests  which  consist 
primarily  of  the  isolation  of  the  agent  and  its  differen¬ 
tiation  from  the  glanders  bacillus. 

The  agglutination  reaction  and  the  complement  fixa¬ 
tion  test  do  not  have  practical  value.  In  some  cases  the 
Vhitemore  allergic  test  is  resorted  to  (preparation  simi¬ 
lar  to  mallein). 

•  * 

* 

Foreign  specialists  have  repeatedly  indicated  the 
igent  of  melioidosis  as  a  potential  agent  of  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  warfare  (2  and  others)  because  they  think  that  it. 

Like  the  glanders  bacillus',  satisfys  many  of  the  prerequi¬ 
sites,  Rosebury  and  Kaba*'  (2)  observe  that  the  most 
probable  use  of  the  melioidosis  agent  is  in  the  form  of  an 
ierosol  for  airborne  infection. 

brucellosis 

Brucellosis  is  a  generalized  infectious-allergic  dis¬ 
ease  occurring  most  often  as  a  cnronic  sepsis  with  involve- 
nent  of  the  locomotive  system. 

Pathogenic  ity  of  the  agent.  Brucellosis  is  caused 
In  man  by  three  forms  of  the  agent;  melitensis,  abortus, 
and  suis.  Iiiielitensis  is  the  most  pathogenic  for  man. 

The  agent  of  brucellosis  has  a  very  pronounced  in¬ 
fective  activity.  Due  to  this,  intralaboratory  infections 
are  encountered  rather  often  in  which  the  airborne  route 
Df  infection  apparently  has  primary  significance  (2). 

Ideyer  and  Eddy  (56),  analyzing  the  data  from  7^  cases  of 
intrlaboratory  illnesses,  have  shown  that  infection  occurs 
bhrough  dust,  sheep  pens,  and  aerosol  cultures  forming 
from  the  centrifuge  in  operation. 

The  minimal  infecting  dose  of  the  brucella  agent  is 
svidently  very  small  for  man,  proof  of  which  are  the  in¬ 
fections  of  individuals  following  single,  brief  visits  to 
the  laboratory  (37)« 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  Brucellosis  is  classified 
according  to  the  severity  of  the  course  into  the  f  ollowing 
forms:  mild,  moderately  severe,  and  severe. _ 


145 


I  ,  period  averages  fro®  2-5  weeks. 

The  clinical  pictxire  of  brucellosis  is  very  variable  and 
occurs  in  two  basic  clinical-pathogenic  fores;  acute  sep¬ 
tic  and  chronic  migratory. 

The  acute  septic  form  is  marked  by  a  prolonged 
course,  undulating  fever  with  remissions,  enlarged  liver, 
spleen,  and  lymph  glands  (micropolyadenitis)  and  is  not 
accompanied  by  an  expressed  intoxication. 

The  chronic  migratory  form  is  differentiated  from 
the  acute  septic  and  is  characterized  by  migrating  mani¬ 
festations  which  appear  primarily  in  the  musculoskeletal, 
nervous,  and  reproductive  systems.  The  illness  can  also 
start  directly  with  migratory  developments  accompanied  by 
a  fever.  The  blood  reveals  a  leukopenia,  neutropenia,  and 
a  minor  lymphocytosis.  The  duration  of  the  illness  ranges 
from  several  weeks  to  several  years. 

Involvement  of  the  bones  and  joints  is  of  special 
importance  in  the  prognosis  of  occupational  capabilities. 

Ivlortality  is  not  high  in  brucellosis  and  in  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  chemotherapy  ranges  from  1  to  5%»  and  most  fatal 
2ases  occur  in  the  chrv»nic  form  with  a  severe  course  in- 
ff'olving  the  cardiovascular  and  nervous  systems. 

In  the  overall  morbidity  with  brucellosis  the  mild 
and  latent  clinical  forms  are  very  important.  The  latent 
(asymptomatic)  form  comprises  15  to  25%  of  the  entire  mor¬ 
bidity  rate. 

The  mild  forms  either  generally  do  not  disable  man 
or  disable  for  a  very  negligiole  interval  or  time. 

At  the  present  time  there  is  no  satisfactory  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  possible  transmission  of  brucellosis  from  a 
patient  to  a  healthy  person.  Therefore,  the  illness  is 
ractically  considered  noncontagious , 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  All  of  the 
rucella  agents  are  easily  cultivated  on  enriched  nutrient 
media  and  can  be  obtained  in  large  quantities. 

I  ^^esistance  of  the  agent.  The  agents  of  brucellosis 

lare  capable  of  living  bn  various  objects  of  the  external 
jenvironment  for  a  rather  long  time,  Br.  melitensis  is 
preserved  in  the  dried  state  for  60  -  80  days  and  survives 
in  water  for  50  days  (28), 

Disinfecting  agents,  direct  sunlight,  and  high  tem¬ 
peratures  kill  brucella.  However,  in  comparison  with  ot 
(regetative  forms  of  organisms  they  have  a  rather  pronouneeq 
resistance. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  There 
are  live'  vaccines  prepared  from  avirulent  strains  of  Br. 
abortus  bovis  and  suis.  The  vaccines  are  intended  for  a 
single  administration.  It  has  been  satisfactorily  shown 


144 


Ln  experiMBnts  that  the  immvinity  created  by  live  vaccines 
Is  dependent  both  on  the  potency  of  the  vaccine  as  well 
is  on  the  duration  of  its  action. 

Projects  on  the  preparation  of  chemical  vaccines 
are  being  intensively  developed  in  the  USA. 

The  specific  methods  of  treatment  in  brucellcsis  ar^ 
considered  to  be  vaccine  and  antibiotic  therapy  (aureomy- 
cin,  chloramphenicol,  streptomycin).  The  best  results 
are  obtained  with  a  combination  of  both  methods  and  the 
joint  adjjilni  strati  on  of  several  antibiotics. 

Nevertheless  the  effectiveness  of  the  treatment 
of  brucellosis,  especially  of  the  chronic  cases,  must  be 
considered  inadequate  because  it  does  not  guarantee  that 
relapses  will  not  occur. 

Laboratory  and  clinical  diagnosis.  In  view  of  the 
jreat  variety  of  symptoms  an^  the  presence  of  different 
forms  of  the  disease,  the  clinical  diagnosis  presents 
serious  difficulties.  Therefore,  the  final  diagnosis  can 
established  from  the  use  of  laboratory  methods.  The 
agglutination  reactions  have  the  most  practical  signifi¬ 
cance  (Wright  and  Huddleston  reactions)  and  the  allergic 
Lntradermal  test  (Burn  reaction).  More  infrequently  de¬ 
terminations  of  the  opsonic-phagocytic  Index  are  used. 

It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  vaccinated  persons  can 
also  have  positive  immunological  reactions. 

Isolation  of  the  agent  from  the  patients  involves 
certain  probleras  and  requires  considerable  time  and  spec¬ 
ial  procedures  in  the  laboratory. 

The  agent  of  brucellosis  has  been  given  an  essentia 
status  abroad  as  a  possible  agent  of  the  bacteriological 
weapon.  The  airborne  route  of  infection  attracts  the 
greatest  attention. 

Discussing  the  question  of  thepossible  use  of  the 
brucella  agent  as  a  bacteriological  weapon,  Hosebury  and 
katat  (2)  wrote;  "The  assumption  cited  in  the  preceding 
sections  (indicating  the  possibility  of  airborne  infection 
by  the  culture)  may  appear  decisive  in  the  possible  use 
pf  brucella  as  a  bacteriological  weapon.  It  must  also  be 
cknowledged  that  all  the  other  aspects  indicate  brucella 
f  the  melitensis  type  as  one  of  the  most  promising  im- 
lements  that  can  be  used  for  this  purpose."  Phair  (5)» 
reasy  (21),  and  others  arrived  at  the  same  conclusions. 
^Notwithstanding,  some  foreign  authors,  commenting  on  the 
ow  mortality  rate  with  brucellosis,  consider  this  fact  a 
egative  quality  of  the  agent  as  a  type  of  bacteriological 
eapon.  However,  along  with  this  they  state  that  "attack- 
ng  optionally  should  not  always  try  for  the  annihilation 
f  people;  it  can  make  them  sick.  And  this  will  be  enough 


1  ,145 


JO  deprive  people  both  of  militairy  efficiency  and  working 
ibility.  This  also  increases  the  man-hours  and  overflows 
jhe  hospitals."  To  fulfill  this  task  the  agents  of  bru¬ 
cellosis  were  named  as  possible  types  of  a  bacteriological 
reapon  (20,  21). 


Dularemia 

! 

Tularemia  is  an  acute  disease  cf  a  septicemic  char¬ 
acter  with  common  involvement  of  the  lymphatic  system. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  tularemia  agent 
bas  highly  expressed  injectivity  in  respect  to  man  and 
some  kinds  of  rodents  (mice,  water  rats,  etc).  Just  as 
with  brucella,  the  work  with  tularense  organisms  often 
leads  to  ihtralaboratory  infections,  Rosebiiry  and  Kabat 
(2)  consider  that  the  “agent  of  tularemia  is  one  of  the 
most  infectious  for  man." 

Infection  in  man  occurs  through  the  respiratory 
tract,  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  eyes,  and  the  digestive 
bract.  The  organism  can  pentrate  through  the  injured  skin. 

There  are  no  data  given  in  the  literature  on  the 
size  of  the  minimal  infecting  doses  for  sbi.  However,,  on 
the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  described  cases  of  intralabor¬ 
atory  infections  it  must  be  assumed  that,  as  for  brucello¬ 
sis,  these  doses  are  very  small. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease .  The  incubation  period 
averages  5  -  ^  days  and  is  so'metimes  shortened  to  several 
hours.  Pour  basic  forms  of  the  disease  are  distinguished: 
bubonic,  abdominal,  generalized  (typhoidal),  and  pulmonary, 
Regardless  of  what  form  it  will  take,  tularemia  in  man  be¬ 
gins  suddenly  and  acutely. 

There  is  Marked  elevation  of  temperture,  and  clear Ij 
expressed  manifestations  of  intoxication  develop.  The 
patient  complains  of  head  and  muscular  pains;  face,  con- 
junctivae,  and  throat  become  hyperemic. 

The  bubonic  and  ulcerative  forms  of  tularemia  are 
marked  by  the  development  on  the  2  -  3rd  day  of  illness  of 
mild  soreness  at  the  site  of  the  future  bubo,  from  the  3  - 
6th  day  the  bubo  becomes  palpable,  and  on  the  6  -  7th  day 
it  reaches  full  development.  Tularemia  bubos  differ  from 
plague  ones  by  slower  development,  mild  tenderness,  ab¬ 
sence  of  skin  changes  over  them,  and  periadenitis.  The 
bubo  ranges  in  size  from  a  walnut  to  a  chicken  egg.  In¬ 
fection  occurs  through  the  skin  (including  bites)  with  the 
possible  development  of  ulcers  in  the  regions  of  the  orig¬ 
inal  portals  of  infection. 

Clinical  variants  of  the  bubonic  form  of  tularemia 
are  fche  eve  bubo  and  the  tonsillar  bubonic  form  ' 


U6 _ 


The  aodomtaal  form  of  tularemia  ia  marked  by  severe 
laains  in  the  stomach  accompanied  by  high  fever  and  manifes- 
itations  of  intoxication.  Inflammatory  changes  in  the  mes¬ 
enteric  lymphatic  glands  are  the  primary  site  of  the  ill¬ 
ness.  Infection  occurs  through  the  alim<»ntary  route, 
i  The  generalized  (typhoidal)  form  diifcis  by  the  de¬ 

velopment  of  severe  manifestations  of  intoxication  and 
[high  fever  which  appear  in  the  absence  of  any  other  changes 
The  febrile  period  lasts  for  several  weeks  (usually 
jabout  three  weeks)  and  is  accompanied  by  varying  kinds  of 
jakin  eruptions  (erythematous,  hemorrhagic).  The  develop¬ 
ment  of  secondary  bubos  is  possible. 

i  The  pulmonary  or  bronchopneumonia  form  of  tularemia, 

arising  as  a  result  of  inhaled  infection,  has  its  course 
jin  pneumonic  and  bronchial  variants. 


In  the  pneumonic  variant  tularemia  pneujjonia  devel¬ 
ops  which  is  characterized  by  a  weak  and  prolonged  course, 
tendency  for  suppuration  (abscesses,  gangrene),  and  also 
by  late  percussion  and  auscultatory  manifestations. 

In  Europe  tularemia  mortality  does  not  exceed  0.5  " 
1%;  in  the  United  States  of  America  it  is  somewhat  higher 
and  reaches  4-5  and  even  7%. 

Tularemia  is  not  transmitted  from  person  to  person, 
80  it  belongs  to  the  group  of  noncontagious  diseases. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  Cultivation 
of  the  tularemia  organism  presents  certain  difficulties 
since  it  does  not  grow  on  simple  niitrient  media.  The  tul¬ 
aremia  agent  is  usually  grown  for  3-4  days  on  blood  agar 
containing  glucose  and  cystine. 

Thus,  to  obtain  cultures  of  the  tularemia  gent  in 
large  quantities  is  somewhat  complicated  and  presents  more 
of  a  problem  than  procurement  of  a  culture  of  agents  of 
[anthrax,  plague,  glanders,  melioidosis,  and  brucella. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  tularemia  agent  dis¬ 
plays  considerable  resistance  to  thhe  effect  of  various  fac* 
itors  of  the  external  environment.  With  a  temperature  of 
]60  degrees  it  is  killed  after  only  5-10  minutes.  The 
organims  has  very  little  sensitivity  to  the  action  of  low 
temperatures,  and  in  frozen  meat  it  can  be  preserved  for 
three  months. 

French  (63)  established  that  tularense  bacteria  maiij 
taj.n  their  virulence  if  they  subsist  in  the  organs  of  in¬ 
fected  animals  or  are  immersed  in  undiluted  glycerin  (a 
virus  tool)*  for  a  month  at  room  temperature  (18  -  20  de¬ 
grees),  for  six  months  at  10  degrees,  and  for  10  years  or 
more  at  a  temperature  of  -14  degrees. 

The  tularemia  organism  displays  a  high  degree  of 
resistance  to  dessication.  Thus.  In  skins  removed  from 


rodents  sick  with  tularemia  and  stored  at  room  temperature, 
It  is  possible  to  maintian  their  viability  for  1  1/2 
nonths. 

Disinfecting  substances  kill  the  tularense  organism 
father  quickly:  1%  solution  of  ere sol  in  two  minutes, 

3.1%  formalin  solution  after  24  hours  (2). 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  There 
Is  a  live  vaccine  for  a  single  cutaneous  Injection.  In  th€ 
JSa  a  chemical  vaccine  has  been  developed  with  a  two-ghree- 
Btage  inoculation.  The  Effectiveness  of  immunization  is 
Satisfactory. 

Treatment  with  antibiotics  gives  excellent  results: 
streptomycin,  Chloromycetin,  aureomycin,  and  terramycin. 

Laboratory  and  clinical  diagnosis.  The  clinical 
symptoms  of  tularemia  are  very  varied.  In  the  diagnostic 
vorkup  of  the  disease  a  differential  diagnosis  from  plague, 
snthrax,  typhoid  fever,  and  brucellosis  has  to  be  made. 
Sspecially  important  is  the  eiufly  differential  diagnosis 
sf  tularemia  from  the  bubonic  form  of  plague.  Incidents 
of  tularemia  with  bubo  development  has  repeatedly  resulted 
abroad  in  confusing  wi  with  the  bubonic  form  of  plague. 

Et  is  imperative  to  distinguish  tularemia  pneumonia  from 
Dlague  and  anthrax  pneumonia  as  soon  as  pcssibel,  and  this 
Is  very  difficult,  especially  in  the  first  days  of  illness. 
In  conncection  with  this  it  is  very  perplexing  to  estab¬ 
lish  a  diagnosis  of  tularemia  only  on  the  basis  of  clini- 
oal  signs. 

The  laboratory  methods  of  diagnosis  are  of  decis¬ 
ive  iniportancV«  Isolation  of  the  agent  from  patients  is 
involved  and  requires  considerable  time  (5-7  days). 

The  intradermal  allergic  test  with  tularin  is  of 
the  greatest  practical  value  in  the  diagnosis  of  tularemia . 
It  is  possible  to  establish  a  diagnosis  of  tularemia  in 
nan  by  this  reaction  in  3  -  6  days  from  the  onset  of  the 
jillaess.  The  agglutination  reaction  is  also  used  along 
jwith  the  intradermal  test.  For  practical  purposes  the 
slide  agglutination  test  with  a  drop  of  blood  is  the  most 
convenient. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  the  immuno¬ 
logical  reactions  and  the  tularin  skin  test  can  be  posi¬ 
tive  in  vaccinated  persons, 

* 

Almost  all  of  the  foreign  specialists,  who  confi¬ 
dently  avow  in  print  the  possible  use  of  individual  types 
of  microorganisms  as  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare, 

WAna-L/fA-n  hhah  aganh  nf  feiilgT'ornia  ig  aeftep.. 


•P  O  CQ 


aanife stations  of  a  mild  enteritis  with  soft  or  liquid 
stools  4-10  times  in  a  day.  In  some  patients  the  disease 
nay  change  to  the  next  stage. 

Cholerine  (or,  more  precisely,  cholera  gastroenter¬ 
itis)  has  a  distinctive  syndrome:  vomiting,  diarrhea,  and 
sramps.  The  condition  and  state  of  health  of  the  patient 
Is  serious. 

The  next,  still  more  severe  form  of  the  illness  is 
the  algid  which  is  characterized  by  hypothermia,  dehydra¬ 
tion,  and  collapse.  In  this  stage  a  fatal  outcome  can  re¬ 
sult  . 

"Dry"  cholera  (cholera  sicca)  proceeds  without  di¬ 
arrhea  and  vomiting,  and  the  patient  expires  from  intoxi¬ 
cation  even  before  the  development  of  enteritis  symptoms. 

"Fulminating"  cholera  terminates  in  death  a  few 
hours  after  the  onset  of  the  disease.  i 

The  duration  of  theillness  in  the  usual  course  is  | 
from  two  days  to  two  weeks.  Complicated  by  cholera  ty-  I 
phoid,  recovery  is  delayed,  and  the  mortality  rate  rises. 
The  average  mortality  is  about  50%  in  cholera.  Patients 
with  all  forms  of  cholera  are  contagious  from  the  iirst 
day  of  illness  through  the  entire  course.  Because  of  this 
they  must  be  kept  in  isolation  with  special  antiepidemic 
regime , 

In  1  -  of  the  recovered  cases  a  carrier  state 
is  observed  for  one  or , rarely , three  months. 

Cholera  is  included  in  the  diseases  which  are 
marked  by  highly  expressed  contagiousness,  which  explains 
its  rapid  epidemic  spread. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  cholera 
viorio  is  easily  cultivated  on  the  usual  nutrient  media 
and  can  be  obtained  in  large  quantities.  However,  during 
cultivation  the  agent  often  undergoes  considerable  muta¬ 
tion,  including  a  change  in  pathogenic  properties  down  to 
a  complete  loss  of  pathogenicity. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  Outside  the  body  of  man 
the  cholera  vibrio  displays  little  resistance  to  various 
factors  of  the  external  environment.  i>irect  sunlight 
kills  the  vibrio  in  several  hours.  They  have  very  little  I 
resistance  to  drying  and  high  temperatures.  With  a  tem¬ 
perature  of  100  degrees  the  cholera  vibrios  are  killed  in¬ 
stantly,  with  80  aegrees  after  five  minutes,  and  at  56  de¬ 
grees  after  25  to  30  minutes. 

Many  disinfecting  agents  possess  high  bactericidal 
action  against  the  cholera  vibrio.  Corrosive  sublimate  in 
a  dilution  of  1:1000  kills  the  vibrios  in  15  seconds,  1% 
phenol  after  five  minutes. 

It  should  be  mentioned  that  low  temperatures  show 


150 


noticeable  protective  influence  on  the  maintainance  of 
e  cholera  viorios* 

There  is  extensive  literature  devoted  to  the  preser- 
ation  of  cholera  vibrios  in  patients'  feces,  linen,  soil, 
ater,  and  food  products,  fhe  preservation  of  the  cholera 
brios  in  these  objects  extends  froii  several  hours  to  3<-v- 
ral  months. 

These  conflicting  findings  on  the  preservation  of 
holera  vibrios  is  probably  explained  by  different  temper- 
tares  of  the  environment,  the  reaction  of  tne  medium,  the 
hemical  constituency  of  the  substrate  on  which  the  vibrio 
ere  maintained  in  the  investigations,  and  also  the  quan- 
itative  and  qualitative  extraneous  microflora  which  ex- 
ibited  an  antagonistic  effect  on  them. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  There 
re  bacterial  vaccines  (heated  or  formalizealj  snf  sldo 
accines  prepared  from  "complete  antigens".  The  effective 
ess  of  these  preparations  is  approximately  the  same  as 
hat  of  the  typhoid-paratyphoid  vaccines.  Oral  immuniza- 
ion  with  tablet  vaccines  has  little  effect.  Bacterio- 
hages  are  aliso  employed  as  a  means  of  specific  prophylax 
• 

The  earlier  treatment  is  started,  the  more  effectiv 
is.  A  cholera  bacteriophage  is  widely  used  in  therany 
hich  gives  excellent  results  at  the  onset  of  the  illness 
nd  in  mild  forms  (enteritis).  For  the  treatment  of  cnol- 
rine  and  the  algid  for:!  an  intravenous  infusion  of  h.yper- 
onic  solutions,  plasma,  or  blood  are  used,  and  symptomat¬ 
ic  agents  are  also  administered.  The  application  of  heat 
is  very  important.  The  effect  of  antibiotics  and  sulfanil 
amides  is  still  insufficiently  studied.  There  is  evidence 
the  value  of  the  application  of  the  poorly  soluble  sul¬ 
fanilamide  preparations  of  the  sulfaguanidine  type  and  al¬ 
so  of  terramycin,  which  aids  in  vibrio  excretion. 

Laboratory  and  clinical  diagnosis.  In  typical  case 
the  clinical  diagnosis  of  cholera  does  not  present  any  dif 
ficulty  since  the  symptom  complex  of  cholera  gastroenter¬ 
itis,  algid,  and  typhoid  is  defined  clearly  enough.  In 
some  cases  a  differential  diagnosis  has  to  be  made  from 
ood  poisoning  infections,  different  poisons  (toxins  ox 
usiirooms,  ticks,  arsenic,  methyl  alcohol,  corrosive  sub- 
imate,  etc),  and  cholera-like  forms  of  malaria. 

Results  of  the  bacteriological  investigation  are 
ecisive  in  the  diagnosis.  It  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  that 
very  case  of  illness  suspected  of  being  cholera  should  be 
xamined  bacteriologically  in  the  most  careful  manner  with 
ut  regard  as  to  whether  the  clinical  picture  corresponds 
o  these  findings..  A  preliminary  bacteriological  diagno- 


151 


3is  can  be  established  on  the  basis  of  the  smear  exaiaiua- 
5ion  of  the  pathological  material  in  several  minutes  and 
the  culture  method  in  8  -  10  hours.  However,  the  re¬ 
sults  of  the  agglutination  reaction,  which  helps  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  unknown  organism  from  the  cholera  agent,  is 
3oaclusive  in  the  differentiation  of  true  cholera  vibrios 
from  choler-like  forms.  Therefore,  a  definite  answer  can 
be  cbtained  from  the  laboratory  in  2  -  3  days. 

»  « 

* 

In  a  consideration  of  aspects  of  bacteriological 
warfare  in  the  foreign  literature  of  the  1920* s  and  1030* s  | 
the  most  emphasis  was  placed  on  agents  of  intestinal  in¬ 
fections,  particularly  cholera.  However,  in  the  following 
years  the  viewpoints  on  the  possible  use  of  these  agents 
Cor  warfare  purposes  have  changed.  Fox  (1),  Rosebury  and 
Cabat  (2),  Armagnac  (3),  and  other  foreign  authors  already 
in  the  1940‘ s  were  expressing  very  definite  opinions  about 
the  low  potentiality  of  the  cholera  vibrio  as  an  agent  of 
bacteriological  warfare. 

In  the  foreign  literature  of  recent  years  the  chol¬ 
era  vibrio  has  again  been  mentioned  as  a  possible  type  of 
bacteriological  weapon  (6,  19).  However,  no  facts  have 
been  offered  to  substantiate  the  expressed  points  of  view. 

The  evidence  of  the  Khabarov  trials  (29)  convincing¬ 
ly  demonstrates  that  the  cholera  vibrio  was  not  ignored 
by  the  armies  of  the  capitalistic  states  as  a  possible 
agent  of  bacteriological  warfare. 


lEctero-hemorrhagic  leptospirosis 

» 

! 

I  Leptospiral  Jaundice  is  an  acute  infectious  disease 

pharacterized  by  intermittent  fever,  hemorrhagic  and  liver- 
jfeidney  syndromes. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  agent  of  the  dis¬ 
ease  apparently  has  high  inf ectivity  for  man  and  also  for 
rats  -  the  source  of  leptospira  under  natural  conditions. 

Numerous  incidents  of  sickness  in  laboratories 
prove  the  marked  infectiousness  of  leptospira. 

The  infection  in  man  occurs  through  the  mucous  mem¬ 
branes  of  the  mouth,  respiratory  tract,  eyes,  and  gastro¬ 
intestinal  tract. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period 
lasts  for  6-1$  days,  ^he  onset  of  the  illness  is  sudden 
with  ehi Iris  cuad- fever  up— 39  to  ^lO  degrees  ■ — From  the-  - 


15$ 


rery  first  day  the  general  condition  becomes  serious  and 
sonsciousness  dinmed.  An  intermittent  fever  and  capillary 
lemorrhages  on  the  con^junctivae,  the  skin  of  the  chest  and 
bhe  extremities  are  characteristic.  On  the  5  •  6th  day 
of  illness  jaundice  appears,  the  liver  is  tender  and  ex¬ 
tends  beyond  the  costal  rib.  Very  often  the  kidneys  show 
involvement,  which  is  manifested  in  nephritis. 

The  illness  usually  lasts  for  3-3  1/2  weeks, 
sometimes  up  to  1  1/2  months.'  The  prognosis  is  largely  de 
termined  by  the  age  of  the  patient;  the  mortality  rate  is 
especially  high  among  patients  older  than  50.  Fatality 
varys  in  different  countries  in  rather  broad  range sr  -tn 
Japan  16.9  -  29*9%,  in  Holland  8.5%»  in  England  15%,  in 
the  USA  30%,  in  Sweden  15%. 

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  patients  with  leptospiral 
jaundice  excrete  the  agent  in  the  urine,  there  is  no  record 
in  the  literature  of  illness  arising  as  a  result  of  infec¬ 
tion  from  a  patient.  Therefore,  leptospiral  jaundice  has 
to  be  considered  practically  as  a  non-contact  disease. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  leptospira  is  not  much  of  a  problem,  Leptosnira 
are  not  fastidious  concerning  the  composition  of  the  nu¬ 
trient  media  and  are  successfully  grown  on  common  tap  wate 
vith  an  additive  of  a  trifling  amount  of  protein  (5  -  10% 
alood  serum).  Noguchi  (64)  proposed  a  method  of  mass  cul¬ 
tivation  of  leptospira  in  large  flasks  of  semisolid  medium 
L  -  cm  deep.  He  reported  that  after  2-3  weeks  the  oon 
entration  of  leptospira  came  up  to  16  milliard  In  1  cm* 
f  medium,  Leptospira  are  also  successfully  propagated  in 
he  chorioallantoic  membrane  of  chick  embryos. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  Leptospira  die  quickly 
th  heating  and/ under  the  influence  of  disinfecting  solu- 
ions.  They  are  especially  sensitive  to  even  insignifi- 
ant  concentrations  of  acids  and  salts. 

With  heating  to  50  degrees  the  leptospira  die  in 
-  30  minutes.  Direct  sunlight  kills  during  the  first 
our  of  exposure.  Drying  also  causes  their  rapid  death, 
ctive  chlorine  in  a  dose  of  2  mg/liter  kills  leptospira 
n  several  hours,  a  0,5%  phenol  solution  in  20  minutes. 

At  the  same  time  leptospira  tolerate  freezing  well, 
en  prolonged  freezing  with  subsequent  thawing  does  not 
produce  death. 

Leptospira  are  capable  of  surviving  for  a  long  tine 
Ln  water  in  natural  basins.  Experimental  data  and  epidem¬ 
iological  observations  have  established  that  this  period  i 
5-4  weeks. 

Me^s  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  theranv.  Specif¬ 
ic  prophylaxis  is  accomplished  by  vaccination.  Two  vac-  , 


153 


cines  are  known:  a  killed  one  and  one  prepared  from  atte 
uated  leptospira. 

Penicillin  and  specific  Leptospira  anti-serura  are 
used  with  success  for  treatment.  Therapy  is  especially 
effective  if  it  is  started  before  the  fifth  day  of  illness}. 

Laboratory  ^d  clinical  diagnosis.  The  clinical  di- 
agnosis  of  leptospiral  jaundice  is  not  very  difficult. 
However,  in  some  instances  a  differential  diagnosis  be¬ 
tween  it  and  jaundice  of  other  etiologies.  I+-  must  be 
kept  in  mind  that  sometimes  ictero-hemorrhagic  leptospiro¬ 
sis  can  occur  without  jaundice. 

The  laboratory  diagnosis  is  made  on  the  basis  of  a 
blood  culture  (before  the  5  -  6th  day  of  illness)  and  a 
urine  culture  (after  the  12  -  15th  day  of  illness). 

Growth  of  the  leptospira  starts  between  the  7th  and  10th 
day  but  it  may  be  considerably  delayed.  Therefore,  for 
practical  purposes  the  cultiire  method  is  of  little  use. 

The  most  acceptable  is  the  direct  microscopy  of  blood  and 
urine*,  this  method  is  very  simple  and  easily  done. 

Starting  with  the  6  -  8th  day  of  illness  the  blood 
sera  of  patients  reveal  agglutins,  lysine,  and  complement 
fixing  antibodies  which  can  be  debermined  by  the  proper 
immunological  reactions. 


During  the  19^7  -  1955  period  the  question  about 
the  possible  use  of  the  agent  of  leptospiral  jaundice  as 
an  instrument  of  bacteriological  warfare  was  repeatedly 
discussed  in  the  foreign  literature  (2,  5,  6).  Actually, 
the  cited  authors  did  not  argue  the  point  but  merely  con¬ 
fined  themselves  to  accepting  this  microorgsmism  on  the 
list  of  potential  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare.  Rose 
ury  and  Kabat  (2)  undertook  experiments  to  substantlsbe 
their  point  of  view.  However,  analyzing  the  possible  me- 
hanisms  of  infection  of  man,  they  decided  that  "the  use 
of  this  agent  as  a  means  of  attack  would  of  necessity  be 
limited  to  the  contamination  of  food  and  especially  of 
ater."  Nevertheless,  in  the  chapters  of  their  monograph 
evoted  to  the  possible  use  of  agents  of  intestinal  infec- 
ions  for  these  purposes,  these  same  authors  were  in  doubt 
bout  the  effectiveness  of  the  water  factor  in  bacterio- 
ogical  warfare. 


TOXINS 

Botulism 

Botulism  is  a  severe  iatoxication  caused  by  bacter¬ 
ial  toxins  of  the  botulinus  microorgamism. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  ^eat«  The  botulinus  toxin  is 
apparenbly  the  mosb  potent  biological  poison  for  man.  The 
minimal  lethal  dose  of  the  botulinus  toxin  is  trivial  in 
amount  for  man.  Thus,  Cixon  (40)  reported  case  histories 
where  death  was  caused  merely  by  tasting  contaminated  food 
without  swallowing  an  appreciable  amount  of  it.  Data  on 
many  outbreaks  of  botulism  in  man  indicate  that  with  a 
rare  exception  all  of  the  people  who  partook  of  the  food 
containing  the  toxin  became  ill.  This  fact  convinces  us 
that  the  percentage  rate  of  poisoning  is  almost  100. 

Summer  (41)  deteimined  the  minimal  lethal  dose  of 
the  toxin  for  white  mice  with  subcutaneous  in;)ection  of 
0.000000^  gram  per  one  kg  body  weight  of  the  animal. Rose- 
bury  sad  Kabat  (2),  assuming  a  similar  sensitivity  of  rr^n 
and  mice  to  the  toxin,  consider  that  t^'e  minimal  lethal 
dose  of  the  toxin  for  man  can  be  set  at  0.00002  gram. 

Ducca  and  Wood  (14)  found  that  the  lethal  dose  of  the  tox¬ 
in  for  Macacus  rhesus  monkeys  with  oral  introduction  was 
lower  than  the  weight  equivalent  of  the  minimal  lethal 
dose  for  mice  with  intraperitoneal  administration.  There¬ 
fore,  Rosebury  and  Kabat  suggested  that  the  actual  mini¬ 
mal  lethal  dose  for  man  with  oral  introduction  was  per¬ 
haps  not  far  from  the  cited  value. 

Botulism  occurs  as  a  result  of  the  entry  of  the 
toxin  into  the  digestive  tract.  An  equally  potential 
method  of  infection  is  also  the  airborne  route  (2). 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period  is 
short  -  from  several  hours  bo  2  -  5  days.  The  length  of 
the  incubation  period  usually  is  an  indicator  of  the  se¬ 
verity  of  the  illness.  The  illness  develops  quickly.  At 
first  there  are  signs  of  extreme  weakness,  depression,  and 
loss  of  appetite.  Sometimes  there  is  headache,  pain  in 
the  stonach,  nausea  and  vomiting,  increased  salivation 
changing  to  dryness  in  the  mouth.  A  specific  diagnostic 
sign  is  the  so-called  symptomology:  blurred  vision,  di¬ 
plopia,  absence  of  reaction  to  light,  mydriasis,  ptosis, 
strabismus,  and  ophthalmoplegia.  Bulbar  manifestations 
develop  after  the  "eye  symptoms":  dysphagia,  disphonia, 
and  respiratory  disturbance.  The  temperature  usually  (in 
the  absence  of  complications)  is  normal  or  subnormal. 

The  severity  of  the  patient’s  condition  rapidly  increases, 
and  in  fatal  cases  death  sets  in  from  paralysis  of  the 


155 


respiratory  oeiiter  with  complete  i&aintainance  of  conscious 
ness.  I^tients,  who  survive  the  first  10  days,  usually 
recover.  However,  convalescence  proceeds  slowly  for  weeks 
or  even  months. 

The  occupational  capacity  of  those  who  suffer  the 
illness  reimlns  sharply  curtailed  for  some  months.  Hapid 
exhaustion,  ^spnea,  and  palpitations  result  from  even 
the  nost  insignificant  physical  exertions. 

Mortality  is  high  in  botulism;  during  some  out> 
breaks  it  has  reached  60  -  83%* 

The  illness  is  noncontagious . 

Methods  of  cultivation.  Recovery  of  the  botulinus 
toxin  even  in  large  quantities,  in  the  opinion  of  foreign 
specialists,  does  not  present  serious  difficulties.  As 
long  ago  as  the  19^' 8  Summer  (40)  developed  a  technique 
of  preparing  relatively  large  amounts  of  active  botulinus 
toxin.  Very  simple  facilities  and  reagents  are  needed  for 
this  technique. 

Resistance.  The  botulinus  toxin  exhibits  some  de¬ 
gree  of  resistiance  to  the  influence  of  various  factors  of 
the  external  environment.  It  tolerates  heating  fairly 
well  and  is  destroyed  at  a  temperature  of  75  degrees  after 
10  minutes,  at  80  degrees  after  six  minutes. 

The  toxin  can  be  preserved  at  room  temperature  for 
several  months.  It  is  extremely  resistant  to  cold  and  to 
freezing  with  subsequent  thawing  (2). 

Means  of  specific  prophyl^ls  and  therapy.  Botu¬ 
linus  anai;oxins  can  be  employea  for  the  specific  prophy¬ 
laxis  of  botulism. 

It  is  recommended  that  botulinus  anti-serum  be 
used  as  a  basic  means  of  special  prophylaxis. 

Therapeutic  botulinus  anti-serum  is  also  adminis¬ 
tered  for  the  treatment  of  poisoning  by  the  botulinus  tox¬ 
in.  Serum  therapy  in  the  early  stages  is  an  effective 
method  of  treatment  but  it  does  not  help  appreciably  in 
reducing  fatality.  However,  a  later  start  of  treatment 
(two  days  or  more)  makes  this  method  of  therapy  almost 
useless. 

Clinical  yid  laboratory  Magnosis.  The  symptom 
complex  of  botulism  in  classic9.'  ^se's  is  so  dbaracteris- 
tic  that  the  establishment  of  th  diagnosis  does  not  com- 
J)rise  great  difficulty,  but  mild  and  masked  cases  are 
very  complicated  to  recognize.  In  the  differential  diag¬ 
nosis  it  is  primrily  necessary  to  exclude  food  poisoning 
infections,  poisoning  (atromine,  methyl  alcohol,  mush¬ 
rooms)  and  encephalitis. 

Proof  of  the  clinical  diagnosis  is  the  finding  of 


156 


the  toxin  in  the  stomach  contents,  gastric  lavage,  blood 
of  patients,  and  also  at  autopsy.  The  toxin  may  be  de¬ 
tected  in  food  products,  water,  and  other  things  as  well. 

The  most  rap»id  met'  od  of  identification  of  the  tox¬ 
in  in  material  to  be  tested  is  the  injection  of  white  mice! 
with  the  biological  specimen. 

The  laboratory  diagnosis  usually  takes  1  -  ?  days 
although  a  preliminary  result  can  be  obtained  in  several 
hours  after  the  appearance  of  specific  symptoms  in  the  in¬ 
fected  white  mice. 

«  * 


Considering  the  problem  of  using  the  botuiinus  tox~| 
in  in  bacteriological  warfare,  many  foreign  specialists  \ 
rate  it  very  highly  in  this  respect  (1,  19,  and  othrs).  \ 
In  defending  their  viewpoints  they  start  first  with  the  I 
extremely  high  infective  property  of  the  botuliiiua  toxin 
for  man. 

I  The  question  about  the  possible  use  of  the  toxin  of 

botulism  as  an  agent  of  bacteidological  warfare  has  been 
open  to  discussion  in  the  foreign  literature •>  at  the  same 
time  some  concrete  ideas  about  probable  methods  of  its 
application  have  been  expressed.  Thus,  Rosebury  and  Kabat 
(2)  consider  that  the  botuiinus  toxin  can  be  used  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  bacteriological  warfare  by  the  following  methods: 
dispersion  from  a  plane  to  contaminate  various  water  (bas¬ 
ins  with  drinking  water  and  dissemination  of  a  dry  powder 
toxin  through  the  air.  The  idea  has  also  been  projected 
about  the  potential  use  of  the  botuiinus  bacilli  to  con¬ 
taminate  food  products,  especially  canned  goods  in  canned  j 
goods  factories,  and  this  is  a  method  for  saboteurs.  How¬ 
ever,  Rosebury  and  Kabat  think  this  method  unlikely. 


VIRAL  IKF -EOT IONS 

Grippe  | 

Grippe  is  an  acute  infectious  illness  of  nan,  prone 
to  rapid  epidemic  spread  with  a  shift  under  certain  ccn-  ! 
bit ions  to  a  pandemic,  i 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  grippe  virus  has  j 
high  infect ivity  for  man.  Minimal  infecting  doses  for  i 
people  apparently  are  very  saall,  which  indicate  frequent  ; 
infections  even  after  brief  contact  with  patients.  Only 


the  viruses  found  in  drops  of  raucous,  saliva,  and  sputum 
of  patients  are  dangerous  for  man.  The  grippe  virus,  is¬ 
olated  from  a  patient  and  adapted  to  the  chick  erabryo  or 
laboratory  animals,  at  first  partially  loses  its  patho¬ 
genicity  for  man  and  then  completly. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period  is 
brief  and  often  consists  of  1  -  2,  rarely  3  ^  days.  The] 

onset  is  acute:  chills,  headache,  general  rualaise  and 
feeling  of  breakdovm,  temperature  elevation  to  39  0  40  de-j 
grees.  Sone  cases  develop  catarrhal  manifestations,  head 
cold,  and  coughing.  Pains  in  the  superciliary  arch  are 
tjrpical  and  a  feeling  of  stuffiness  in  the  chest  (trache¬ 
itis)  .  The  temperature  remains  elevated  for  3-5  days 
after  which  it  returns  bo  normal,  and  recovery  sets  in. 
Weakness  and  general  malaise  continue  for  several  days 
after  recovery  from  the  illness. 

Grippe  -can  occur  in  a  severe  form  with  the  develop 
ment  of  hemorrhagic  pneumonia  often  resulting  in  death. 

In  addition,  during  an  epidemic  there  are  often  mild,  de¬ 
bilitating,  and  asymptomatic  forms. 

Grippe  is  one  of  the  group  of  highly  contagious 
illnesses  transmitted  by  the  airborne  route.  Epidemic 
grippe  can  take  on  extensive  proportions  after  a  fairly 
short  time  and  in  some  places  envelop  more  than  40%  of 
the  population.  Periodically  a  huge  epidemic  springs  up 
which  sometimes  acquires  a  pandemic  distribution. 

Patients  must  be  isolated  for  effective  prophylaxisj, 
which,  however,  is  difficult  to  manage  in  mass  sickness, 

MetLhods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  gript'e 
virus  is  virell  cultival;ed'"oh  fertilized  chick  embryos  with 
inoculation  of  the  amniotic  or  allantoic  sac,  in  the  lung 
tissue  of  mice  with  their  intranasal  infection,  and  also 
in  tissue  cultures. 

Cultures  of  the  virus  obtained  by  the  enumerated 
methods,  as  has  already  been  indicated  above,  appreciably 
and  sometinv.  s  completely  lose  pathogenicity  for  man. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  grippe  virus  dis¬ 
plays  Ix'ttle  resistance  to  various  factors  of  the  external] 
environment .  In  a  5%  suspension  of  mouse  lung  the  virus 
is  inactivated  at  a  temperature  of  60  degrees  in.  30  min¬ 
utes.  The  virus  is  preserved  at  refrigerator  temperature 
in  glycerin  for  three  months,  at  a  temperature  of  -20  de¬ 
grees  for  many  months. 

Sunlight  rapidly  inactivates  the  grippe  virus.  It 
tolerates  drying  in  the  air  poorly.  The  sprayed  virus  is 
quickly  inactivated.  However,  drying  in  the  frozen  state 
( lyophilization)  does  not  destroy  the  virus. 


At  the  present  time  there  has  been  shown  a  high 
sensitivity  of  the  grippe  virus  to  the  application  in 
practice  of  disinfecting  agents:  -phenol,  corrosive  sub¬ 
limate,  bleaching  lime,  and  chloramine,  etc. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  Active 
immunization  is  per  ' ”  with  anti-grippe  vaccines.  The 
most  widely  used  at  ,-^ut  is  the  live  vaccine  prepared 
from  a  strain  of  low  virulence.  The  vaccine  is  introduced 
into  the  nasal  orifice  by  meeuis  of  drops  or  a  spray.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  preliminary  data,  morbidity  in  an  epidemic  per¬ 
iod  is  successfully  reduced  about  1  1/2  times  by  vaccina¬ 
tion. 

As  prophylactic  agents  during  a  grippe  outbreak 
there  is  used  an  anci-grippe  serum  with  insufflation,  and 
a3  so  e  c  m  o  1  i  n,  acrichine  (quinacrlne) ,  et  alia. 

The  efficacy  of  these  agents  isjhot^i^.  j 

Specific  anti-grippe  sefaiare  useS  to  treat  grippe, 
and  antibiotics  are  adminlsterd  to  combat  secondary  infec¬ 
tions  (terramycin,  penicillin,  and  ecmolin)  as  well  as 
chemotherapeutic  agents, 

^boratory  and  clinical  diagnosis.  In  an  epidemic 
period  the  estatllsliment  of  a  clinical  diagnosis  of  viral 
grippe  does  not  constitue  a  great  difficulty.  In  between 
epidemic  periods  the  diagnosis  of  grippe  is  not  easy,  and 
it  is  necessary  to  perform  a  differential  diagnosis  with 
acute  catarrhs  of  the  upper  respiratory  tract  produced  by 
adenoviruses,  typhoid  fever,  Q  fever,  psittacosis,  water 
fever,  pappataci >  fever,  and  other  illnesses. 

Of  the  diagnostic  laboratory  methods  for  grippe 
[emphasis  is  placed  on  the  hemagglutination-inhili^ion  reac- 
[tion  and  on  routine  blood  tests.  However,  the  methods  of 
specific  diagnosis  of  the  illness  during  the  early  period 
jof  its  development  have  still  not  been  developed, 

♦  * 

« 

I'lumerous  foreign  specialists  are  in  favor  of  the 
possible  use  of  the  grippe  virus  for  purposes  of  bacterio¬ 
logical  warfare  (5i  6,  22,  etc). 

Rosebury  and  Kabat  (2)  consider  that  the  grippe 
virus  can  be  used  independently  as  well  as  in  combination 
with  other  bacterial  and  viral  agents.  However,  they  ad¬ 
ditionally  note  that  "the  suitability  of  a  virus  as  an 
agent  of  bacteriological  warfare  and  the  military  use  of 
this  virus  are  questions  which  can  only  be  satisfactorily 
resolved  after  further  study."  _ _ 


Psittacosis 

Psittacosis  is  an  acute  infectious  illness  of  man 
and  birds,  occurring  in  man  with  specific  involvement  of 
the  lungs. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  infectivity  of  the 
virus  is  very  liigh  for  man,  as  a  large  number  of  intra¬ 
laboratory  infections  indicate.  Infection  takes  place  in 
the  work  with  Infected  birds  as  well  as  with  virus  cul¬ 
tures.  Much  interest  has  been  shown  in  the  incidence  of 
sickness  among  laboratory  workers  not  directly  engaged  in 
ithe  viral  study -but  only  visiting  the  room  where  the  work 
was  being  performed  (2). 

Infection  of  man  occurs  by  the  air-droplet  and  air- 
dust  routes  through  the  respiratory  organs. 

Sympt oms  of  the  di sease .  The  Incubation  period  in 
psittacosis  lasts  from  7  to  days  and  averages  10  days. 
The  onset  usually  is  acute  and  sudden,  and  the  temperature 
rapidly  becomes  elevated  (39  0  40  degrees),  and  a  specific 
psittacosis  pneumonia  develops. 

The  duration  of  the  illness  if  2  -  3  weeks,  and 
sometimes  even  longer.  Convalescence  often  progresses 
very  slowly  and  frequently  is  interrupted  by  relapses.  j 

Before  the  administration  of  antibiotics  fatality 
with  psittacosis  ranged  from  11  to  20%  and  sometimes 
reached  30%.  Since  the  introduction  into  medical  prac¬ 
tice  of  antibiotic  therapy  the  prognosis  in  this  disease 
has  become  more  favorable.  With  a  timely  start  and  the 
correct  conduction  of  therapy  mortality  in  psittacosis  is 
reduced  to  2%. 

Psittecosits  belongs  to  the  group  of  contagious  dis¬ 
eases.  Infect iod  is  possible  by  contact  with  the  patient 
during  the  febrile  phase  of  sickness,  especially  when 
couching  takes  place.  Therefore,  isolation  facilities 
snouxu  ue  devised  for  the  recovery  of  patients  with  psit¬ 
tacosis  with  a  consideration  of  a  special  antiepidemic 
routine.  However,  it  should  be  stressed  that  human  psit¬ 
tacosis  is  considerably  less  contagious  than  psittacosis 
in  birds,  and  transmission  of  the  illness  from  person  to 
person,  even  in  caring  for  the  patients,  transpires  rather 
rarely. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  virus  is 
well  cultivated  without  a  reduction  of  pathogenic  proper¬ 
ties  on  fertilized  chick  embryos  infected  through  the 
chorioallantoic  membrane  and  the  yolk  sac,  and  also  on 
media  with  fresh  tissue,  and  in  tissue  cultures. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  virus  is  relatively 


160 


resiatant  to  heating  and  to  the  effect  of  disinfecting 
solutions.  With  a  temperatiire  of  60  degrees  the  viral  sua 
pension  is  completel^r  inactivated  in  10  minutes;  a  0.1% 
formalin  solution  and  a  0.3%  phenol  solution  exhibit  a 
destructive  action  after  24  -  36  hours. 

In  the  frozen  state  the  virus  can  maintain  its  ac~  | 
tivitjr  for  two  years,  and  with  a  temperature  of  four  de¬ 
grees  concentrated  suspensions  do  not  lose  the  infective  j 
capacity  for  10  -  20  days.  The  virus  is  preserved  in  an 
active  state  for  several  months  with  lyophilized  drying 
with  subsequent  storage  at  low  temperatures.  ! 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  Methods 
of  vaccination  against  palijtacoeis  have  definitely  not  ! 
been  developed.  In  the  United  States  of  Americal  attempts  i 
are  under  way  to  produce  a  dead  psittacosis  vaccine. 

Specific  therapy  is  accomplished  with  antibiotics; 
aureomycin,  chloramphenicol  -  and  in  the  absence  of  a  re¬ 
sponse  -  pencillin.  The  length  of  virus  treatment  with 
antibiotics  is  10  days. 

Clinical  and  laboratory  dli^nosls.  The  clinical 
diagnosis  of  psittacosis,  especially  in  the  Irst  days  of 
illness,  is  very  complex.  In  the  differential  diagnosis 
it  is  necessary  to  exclude  lobar  pneumonia,  influenza  pneu' 
monia,  grippe,  Q  fever,  the  pulmonary  form  of  plague,  ty¬ 
phus,  and  typnoid  fever. 

Final  confirmation  of  the  clinical  diagnosis  is  se- 
ured  by  laboratory  findings.  It  includes  the  isolation 
and  identification  of  the  virus,  determination  of  the  com¬ 
plement  fixation  reaction  with  the  patien’s  blood  serum, 
and  intradernd.  tests. 

The  isolation  of  the  virus  is  done  by  means  of  in¬ 
fecting  white  mice.  The  material  for  inoculation  is  the 
^patient’s  blood  taken  during  the  first  7-8  days  of  ill- 
hess,  and  also  sputum,  pleural  fluid,  and  pharyngeal  wash¬ 
ings  in  which  the  virus  can  be  detected  from  the  first  day 
until  the  end  of  the  illness. 

I  The  microscopic  examination  of  the  sputum  has  a 

iefinite  value  in  toe  diagnosis.  Viral  elementary  bodies 
3an  be  (femonstratad  in  smears  stained  with  Romanovsky- 
jiemsa  stain. 

Complement  fixing  antibodies  appear  in  the  aerum  of 
patients  startinf  from  the  4  -  8th  day  of  illness.  In 
rigorous  therapy  with  antibiotics  the  appearance  of  anti- 
aodies  is  maintained  for  20-40  days. 

The  skin  test  becomes  positive  on  the  3  -4th  day 
5f  illness,  but  it  gives  sharper  results  at  the  end  of 
ihe  second  week. 


161 


In  the  papers  of  Ellewe  (4),  Phair  (5),  arid  other 
foreign  authors  the  pslttacossis  virus  is  mentioned  time 
and  again  as  a  potential  agent  of  bacteriological  warfare. 

In  no  Instance  in  the  foreign  literature  devoted  to 
bacteriological  warfare  has  there  been  a  rejection  of  the 
possible  use  of  the  psittacosis  virus  for  military  pur¬ 
poses. 

Posebury  and  Kabat  (2)  believe  that  "the  psittaco¬ 
sis  virus  is  one  of  the  most  practical  agents  for  the  con¬ 
duction  of  bacteriological  warfare  since  it  has  great  in-  I 
fecting  capacity  for  man,  is  easily  transmitted  through 
the  air,  and  can  be  obtained  in  large  quantities." 


Smallpox 

Smallpox  is  a  derious,  highly  contagious  illness 
for  which  there  is  a  characteristic  nodular-vesicular  e- 
ruption  on  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes  and  a  typical 
fever. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent..  Man  is  very  suscepti¬ 
ble  to  smallpox.  jSpidemiologIcal  practice  shows  that  in¬ 
fection  can  occur  after  a  very  short  contact.  | 

Infection  occurs  through  the  respiratory  tract  by 
the  air-droplet  and  air-dust  methods  and  also  by  means  of  < 
contact . 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period 
averages  14  days .  At  the  end  of  the  incubation  period  the 
illness  starts  up  suddenly.  It  differs  in  severity  by; 
average  severity  variola  vera,  severe  or  black  small¬ 
pox  -  variola  nigra,  and  mild  -  variola  minor. 

The  duration  of  the  illness  in  uncomplicated  cases 
is  5  -  6  weeks.  Mortality  reaches  25  t  30%,  and  death  en¬ 
sues  at  the  end  of  the  second  week. 

Smallpox. is  extremely  contagious  and  is  marked  by 
the  ability  for  epidemic  spread;  the  patient  is  infective 
from  the  first  day  of  the  prodomal  period  right  up  to  the 
falling  off  of  the  scabs  (40  days).  Patients  require  com¬ 
pulsory  hospitalization.  In  isolation  luoiits  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  observe  a  rigid  anti epidemic  regime  to  prevent 
the  infection  of  personnel. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  smallpox 
virus  can  be  cultivated  on  fe^»^^lized  chick  embryos  and 


In  tissue  culture. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  resistance  of  the 
smallpox  virus,  in  contrast  bo  the  vaccinia  virus  which 
is  similar  to  it,  has  been  insufficiently  studied  yet. 
Epidemiological  experience  indicates  that  the  virus  reveal 
a  high  degree  of  resistance  to  various  factors  of  the  ex¬ 
ternal  environment. 

The  smallpox  virus  tolerates  drying  well  by  various 
methods  and  particularly  by  the  method  of  lyophilization. 

Means  of  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  A  live  smallpox 
vaccine,  which  creaces  a  high  degree  of  non-susceptibility 
in  man,  is  used  for  specific  prophylaxis.  The  vaccine 
against  smallpox  is  generally  considered  one  of  the  most 
effective  developed  at  the  present  time .  Vaccination 
with  a  single  inoculation  is  followed  by  revaccination. 

Vaccination  performed  at  the  onset  of  the  illness 
cannot  deter  it  or  moderate  its  course. 

The  matter  of  specific  therapy  of  smallpox  is  dif¬ 
ferent.  As  yet  there  are  no  specific  therapeutic  agents, 
and  all  therapeutic  assistance  to  the  smallpox  patient  is 
derived  from  symptomatic  treatment. 

Olinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  The  diagnosis 
of  smallpox  during  an  epidemic  is  relatively  simple.  How¬ 
ever,  in  the  recognition  of  the  first  case  of  illness  the 
clinical  diagnosis  of  smallpox  often  presents  great  diffi¬ 
culty,  especially  at  the  onset  of  the  disease  before  the 
ppearance  of  the  rash,  since  the  initial  stage  resembles 
he  prodomal  stage  of  many  infectious  diseases. 

Very  often  there  are  errors  in  the  different 5d.  diag 
nosis  of  smallpox  in  children  from  chickenpox  and  measles. 

Of  the  laboratory  diagnostic  methods  two  receive 
the  most  emphasis:  the  Paul  test  in  rabbit  cornea  and 
Paschen's  v^ral  inclusion  bodies.  In  recent  years  a  num¬ 
ber  of  new  methods  have  been  introduced:  isolation  of 
the  virus  by  means  of  cultivation  on  the  chorioallantoic 
membrane  of  chick  embryos  and  the  complement  fixation  re¬ 
action,  which  can  be  used  for  early  (detection  of  antigen) 
as  well  as  for  retrospective  diagnosis  (detection  of  anti- 
oody) .  The  method  is  rendered  by  detection  of  the  virus 
jrf-th  fluorescent  sera. 


The  question  is  repeatedly  posed  in  the  foreign 
Literature  about  the  possible  use  of  the  smallpox  virus 
IS  an  agent  of  bacteriological  warfare  (5»  6t  etc).  In 


165 


favor  of  this  there  are  cited  the  basic  characteristic 
features  of  smallpox:  severity  of  the  disease,  high  fa¬ 
tality,  exceptional  contagiousness  and,  consequently,  the 
tendency  toward  a  rapid  epidemic  spread. 

At  the  same  tiine  some  foreign  authors  have  ex¬ 
pressed  grave  doubts  about  the  potential  use  of  the  small¬ 
pox  virus  for  purposes  of  bacteriological  warfare,  and 
sometimes  they  'have  even  rejected  such  a  possibility  alto¬ 
gether  (27,  q-V  The  basic  arguments  of  this  viewpoint  are 
the  presence  of  a  highly  effective  vaccine  and  the  wide 
conduction  of  specific  prophylaxis  of  smallpox. 


Epidemic  Equine  Encephalomyelits 

Many  forms  of  epidemic  equine  encephalomyelitis  are 
now  known.  However,  only  a  few  of  them  represent  a  dan¬ 
ger  to  man.  Among  these  encephalomyelitis  strains  be¬ 
long:  American  eastern  equine  encephalomyelits,  American 
western  equine  encephalomyelitis,  and  Venezuelan  equine 
enc  ephalomye litis. 

As  possible  types  of  a  bacteriological  weapon  most 
attention  abroad  is  turned  to  agents  of  American  equine 
encephalomyelitis  (2,  4,  etc). 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  viruses  of  American 
equine  encepm lomyeiitis  display  a  comparatively  high  pa¬ 
thogenicity  for  humans;  however,  the  agent  of  eastern 
encephalomyelitis  is  still  more  pathogenic  to  man. 

Along  with  the  passage  of  the  virus  by  the  trans¬ 
missible  route  through  bites  of  infected  mosquitos  and 
ticks,  cases  have  been  reported  in  the  literature  of  intra 
laooratory  infections  (42,  43,  etc).  Infection  in  labor¬ 
atories  occurs  by  the  air-droplet  route  in  work  with  the 
material  containing  the  virus. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease .  The  incubation  period  of 
iwesterh  encephalomyelitis  is  $  -  10  days;  it  has  not  been 
jestablished  for  eastern. 

The  onset  is  sudden,  the  temperature  quickly  rises 
to  40  -  41  degrees;  a  disturbance  of  the  central  nervous 
system,  severe  headache,,  insomnia,  and  vomiting  are  exper¬ 
ienced.  Eastern  encephalomyelitis  is  especially  severe 
[With  the  development  of  convulsions,  rigidity  of  the  neck 
muscles,  and  paralysis  of  the  extremities.  The  acute 
isymptoms  of  the  illness  last  from  several  days  to  three 
weeks. 

8  -  20%'^^*  mortality. rate  in  western  encephalomyelitis  is 

*  in  eastern  it  reaches 


Very  often  various  residual  't:anif estat ions  are 
sustained  in  convalescents  ratifying  from  emotional  insta¬ 
bility  to  different  types  of  paralysis  and  mental  dis¬ 
turbance. 

The  disease  is  noncontagio  is.  i 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  viruses  I 
grow  well  on' developing  cLick  embryos  and  in  tissue  cul¬ 
ture.  A  method  has  been  described  of  the  cultivation  of 
the  virus  of  eastern  encephalomyelitis  on  the  embryos  of 
jmosquito-f ish  (44). 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  viruses  of  American 
equine  encephalomyelitis  have  pronounced  resistance.  Thus 
|for  example,  the  virus  of  western  encephalomyelitis  can  ! 
be  maintained  for  a  long  time  in  a  0.5%  phenol  solution 
and  in  a  0.05%  corrosive  sublimate  solution,  and  it  is 
preserved  well  in  the  cold  with  a  50%  glycerin  buffer  with 
a  pH  =  7.4  -  7*5  and  in  the  frozen  state  as  Tvell,  In 
media  with  a  pK  oelow  6.5  the  virus  is  rapidly  inactivated 

The  viruses  tolerate  high  temperatures  poorly  and 
are  destroyed  at  a  temperature  of  60  degrees  in  10  min¬ 
utes. 

>vieans  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  For 
specific  prophylaxis  in  horses  there  is  now  used  in  the 
USA  a  formalized  vaccine  prepared  from  a  virus  cultivated 
on  chick  embryos.  The  vaccine  has  also  been  tested  in 
people.  After  a  two-stage  intravenous  vaccination  specif¬ 
ic  antibodies  have  been  detected  in  the  immunized  indivu- 
als.  The  general  reaction  from  the  injection  of  phe  va'^- 
cine  has  been  moderate. 

A  prophylactic  bivalent  formalized  vaccine  for 
western  and  eastern  encepnalomyelitis  is  now  being  made 
in  the  USA  (45).  However,  an  appraisal  of  the  effective¬ 
ness  of  the  vaccine  for  human  immunization  requires  more 
testing  under  epidemiological  conditions,  which  is  pointed 
out  in  the  foreign  literature. 

Foreign  authors  have  this  to  say  about  the  treatmen 
of  the  disease.  The  administration  of  hyperimmune  serum 
has  not  given  satisfactory  results.  Sulfanilamide  pre¬ 
parations  are  ineffective.  There  is  no  information  about 
therapy  with  antibiotics  in  the  foreign  literature. 

jlinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  To  establish 
the  clinical  diagnosis  of  American  equine  encephalomyeli¬ 
tis,  excluding  encephalitis  of  other  etiology,  particular¬ 
ly  St.  Louis  encephalitis,  Japanese,  tick,  and  others, 
presents  quite  a  problem.  In  connection  with  this,  the 
diagnosis  of  the  two  forms  of  American  encephalomyelitis 
can  positively  only  be  established  by  means  of  laboratory 


165 


« 


mflthods  directed  at  the  isolation  of  the  virus  and  serol- 
logical  analysis. 

The  moat  suitable  method  of  isolation  of  the  virus  , 
from  man  is  by  the  intracerebral  injection  of  white  mice.  , 
The  best  period  for  the  isolation  of  the  virus  from  the 
patient's  blood  is  from  the  3rd  to  the  7th  day  of  the  ill¬ 
ness.  At  a  later  time  and  at  the  onset  of  the  illness 
the  virus  cannot  be  isolated  from  the  patient's  blood  as 
a  rule . 

Detection  of  specific  antibodies  is  accomplished  by 
two  methods:  the  complement  fixation  and  neutralization 
reactions.  Complement  fixing  antibodies  appear  at  the 
end  of  the  first  week  of  illness  and  viral  neutralizing 
ones  after  a  month. 

Prom  the  presented  data  it  is  seen,  that  the  labor¬ 
atory  and  clinical  diagnosis  of  American  equine  encepljalo- 
myelitis  presents  great  difficulty. 

*  '  « 


Encephalitis  and  encephalomyelitis  of  viral  etiol- 
ogy  attract  a  great  deal  of  attention  abroad  as  potential 
means  of  bacteriological  warfare.  Some  authors  (h,  6)  do 
not  elaborate  what  types  of  encephalitis  they  have  in 
mind,  and  others  express  themselves  more  explicitly,  giv¬ 
ing  preference  in  this  situation  to  American  equine  en¬ 
cephalomyelitis  (2). 


fellow  Pever 

Yellow  fever  is  an  acute  (endemic)  infectious  dis¬ 
ease  transmitted  under  natural  conditions  by  mosquitos  of 
the  genus  Aedes  aegypti  and  characterized  by  high  mortal¬ 
ity. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  virus  has  high 
pathogenicity  for  man^  Under  natural  conditions  the  only 
carriers  of  the  virus  are  mosquitos.  However,  the  virus 
can  also  be  transmitted  ?n.thout  the  insect  carriers,  and  j 
numerous  publications  of  foreign  authors  refer  to  this. 
Berry  and  Kitchen  (25)  have  described  seven  incidents  of 
laboratory  infection  connected  with  the  yellow  fever  virus 
and  they  have  made  a  resume  of  3^  laboratory  infections 
with  five  fatal  outcomes.  Some  of  these  cases  were  caused 
cy  infected  mosquitos,  but  a  larger  part  arose  without 


166 


any  conncecbion  with  mosquitos.  A  few  cases  of  infection 
have  been  observed  in  persons  engaged  with  the  active  dry¬ 
ing  of  the  virus.  A  very  interesting  case  was  one  where 
the  subject  was  Ax  the  laboratory  for  only  one  day  and  merely 
helped  in  the  work  with  the  infected  material  for  a  few 
minutes. 

On  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  the  factual  material 
on  intra- laboratory  infect ionb  Sosebury  and  Kabat  (2) 
have  expressed  a  very  definite  opinion  about  the  possible 
transmission  of  the  yellow  fever  virus  by  the  airborne 
route. 

Symptons  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period 
usually  consists  of^ 3  -  6  days.  The  onset  is  abrupt. 

The  febrile  curve  has  a  typical  '’saddleback'*  form;  the 
first  wave  with  a  temperature  of  39  -  40  degrees  lasts 
[for  3-4  days  and  then  a  remission  follows  lasting  from 
'several  hours  to  2  days  and  is  replaced  by  a  high  temper¬ 
ature  again  lasting  3-4  days. 

The  condition  of  the  patient  is  extremely  serious, 

A  severe  headache  and  pains  in  the  muscles  and  bones  de¬ 
velop.  The  illness  is  marked  by  the  development  of  jaun- 
icie  and  hemorrhagic  diathesis  with  profound  intoxication^ 
and  this  is  manifested  by  a  yellow  discoloration  of  the 
skin,  mucosas,  and  sclera,  bleeding  from  the  nose  and 
gums,  "black  vomit",  and  tarry  bloody  stools.  The  urine 
reveals  pronounced  albuminuria,  the  pulse  indicates  ex¬ 
treme  bradycardia. 

In  addition  to  the  severe  forms  of  yellow  fever 
there  are  also  encountered  mild,  abortive  forms. 

The  mortality  in  yellow  fever  averages  5  -  10%, 
rising  in  a  severe  epidemic  to  20  -  25%.  Death  most  often 
comes  between  the  and  9th  day  of  illness. 

Complications  are  r€U?ely  observed  in  yellow  fever. 

The  period  of  convalescence  is  of  short  duration 
as  a  rule  and  ends  with  complete  recovery. 

The  sick  person  does  not  present  a  danger  to  the 
community.  However,  during  the  first  6-7  days  of  fever 
the  patient  should  be  in  a  room  which  is  inaccessible  to 
mosquitos. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  virus 
grows  well  on  fertilized  chick  embryos  wii:h  infection  in 
the  amniotic  sac  or  chorioallantoic  membrane,  and  in 
tissue  cultures.  However,  strains  of  the  virus,  which  do 
not  adapt  to  chick  embryos,  are  capable  of  producing  in¬ 
fection  in  them  only  with  the  introduction  of  large  doses 
of  the  agent.  While  the  virus  is  being  subjected  to  ex¬ 
tended  passages  both  in  chick  embryos  as  well  as  in  tls- 


8ue  culture,  it  partially  loses  its  virulence  and  its 
pantotropde  affinity. 

Resistance  of  the  a^nt.  The  vimis  is  very  labile: 
it  is  easily  inactivated  at  kigh  temperatures  and  with  the 
dommon  antiseptics.  The  heating  of  liquid  cultures  to  60  ! 
degrees  renders  them  harmless  in  10  minutes.  Disinfecting 
solutions  rapidly  kill  the  virus. 

In  the  dried  state  the  virus  has  considerably 
greater  thermal  resistance,  and  it  withstands  low  temper¬ 
atures  well  also.  The  material  containing  the  virus  pre¬ 
serves  its  activity  in  50%  glycerin  for  100  days  at  a 
temperature  of  0  degrees. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  Active, 
specific  prophylaxis  in  yellow  fever  is  accomplished  by 
means  of  immunization  with  live  vaccines.  At  the  present 
time  two  attentuated  strains  -  French  neurotorpic  ('’Dakar” 
and  the  American  strain  17D  -  are  used  in  the  preparation 
of  the  vaccines. 

Available  data  indicate  the  high  effectiveness  of 
the  administration  of  a  vaccine  for  yellow  fever.  The 
mass  vaccinations,  which  have  been  conducted  abroad,  have 
given  completely  satisfactory  results. 

Specific  therapy  for  yellow  fever  has  not  been  de¬ 
veloped.  The  application  of  all  known  therapeutic  prepar-j 
at ions  has  not  been  successful. 

Clinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  The  early  clin-l 
ical  diagnosis  of  yellow  presents  some  difficulties.  It 
is  necessary  to  perform  a  differential  diagnosis  from 
acute  yellow  atrophy  of  the  liver,  ictero-hemorrhagic  lep¬ 
tospirosis,  epidemic  hepatitis,  malaira,  relapsing  typhus, 
hemorrhagic  fevers,  and  especially  dengue  fever. 

For  laboratory  confirmation  of  the  diagnosis  of  yel: 
low  fever  three  methods  are  used  primarily:  1)  isolation 
of  the  viius;  2)  detection  of  viral  neutralizing  anti-  ! 
bodies  in  the  patient’s  blood;  3)  patho-hist ©logical  ex-  j 
amination  of  the  liver  in  case  of  a  fatal  outcome. 

For  isolation  of  the  virus  white  mice  are  injected 
intracerebrally  with  the  patient’s  blood  taken  up  to  the 
5th  day  of  illness.  The  neutralization  reaction  gives 
positive  results  beginning  with  the  second  week  of  the 
illness  and  can  be  used  only  for  retrospective  diagnosis. 

The  complement  fixation  reaction,  due  to  negligible 
sensitivity,  is  not  widely  used. 

*  * 

* 

_ Many  foreign  specialists  consider  the  yellow  fever 


virus  the  most  promising  type  of  bacteriological  weapon, 
answering  many  of  the  requirements  rnade  of  agents  of  bac¬ 
teriological  warfare  (2,  19).  Dissemination  of  the  virus 
by  the  airborne  route  has  attracted  special  attention. 

The  possible  transmission  of  the  yellow  fever  virus  tbroug 
infected  mosquito  carriers  has  not  been  ignored. 


Dengue  Fever 


Dengue  fever  is  an  acute  viral  disease  transmitted 
under  natural  conditions  by  mosquitos  and  characterized 
by  febrile  episodes,  severe  pains  in  the  ;5oints  and  mus¬ 
cles,  an  eruption,  and  letikopenia. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  infectivity  of 
the  virus  apparently  is  very  nigh^  since  during  epidemic 
outbreaks  in  several  areas  from  75  to  100%  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  were  affliated. 

Under  natural  conditions  dengue  fever  is  transmitted! 
only  through  bites  of  mosquitos.  An  attempt  to  transmit  | 
the  virus  to  man  by  means  of  rubbing  the  infectious  ma-  ! 
terial  into  scarified  skin  and  th6  mucous  membrane  of  the 
nose  gave  negative  results  (2). 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period 
usually  lasts  for  5  -  days,  rarely  up  to  15  days.  In 
approximately  half  the  cases  a  prodoinal  period  precedes 
the  illness,  and  in  the  other  half  it  begins  suddenly  by 
a  rapid  elevation  in  temperature  and  chills.  The  temrer- 
ature  reaches  59  -  ^0  degrees  on  the  very  first  day  and 
stays  there  for  4-5  days.  After  1-2  days  of  remission 
fche  temperature  again  rises.  The  second  episode  lasts  for 
E  -  3  days.  Prognosis  of  the  illness  if  favorable,  com¬ 
plications  are  very  rarely  encountered.  Fatality  even  in 
:he  period  of  large  epidemics  does  not  exceed  0.5%.  It 
should  be  mentioned  that  very  frequently  a  lingering  con- 
T^alescence  is  encountered  in  which  there  is  observed  a 
narked  weakness. 

Thus,  dengue  fever  belongs  to  the  group  of  compar- 
itively  mild  illnesses.  The  sickness  is  not  transferred 
Trom  a  patient  to  a  healthy  person. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  virus  of 


engue  fever  grows  poorly.  On  chorioallantoic  membrane  of 
ertilized  chick  embryos  there  are  cultivated  only  strains 
hich  are  adapted  to  mice.  Therefore,  recovery  of  the 
virus  in  large  quantities  obviously  presents  a  serious 
roblern. 


Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  virus  possesses  con- 
siderable  resistance.  Ultraviolet  radiation  for  30  min¬ 
utes  and  the  action  of  a  0,1%  formalin  solution  for  five 
hours  does  not  inactivate  it  completely.  With  a  tempera¬ 
ture  of  -70  degrees  or  in  the  dried  state  the  virus  c  an  be 
preserved  for  five  years,  with  a  temperature  of  4  degrees 
-  for  several  weeks,  in  blood  serum  of  the  patient  at 
room  temperature  -  two  months. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  An  et~ 
fective  vaccine  against  dengue  fever  has  not  yet  been  de¬ 
veloped.  In  recent  years  abroad  some  attempts  have  been 
made  to  prepare  a  live  vaccine  from  mouse  brain  infected 
with  an  adapted  strain  of  virus,  but  it  seemed  that  1 
gave  short-term  immunity  and  therfore  until  now  has  not 
been  widely  used. 

Specific  therapy  for  dengue  fever  has  not  been  de¬ 
veloped. 

Clinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  Tne  diagnosis 
of  dengue  fever  ai:  the  peak  of  an  epidemic  is  not  very  in¬ 
volved  and  is  established  by  a  sudden  onset  of  the  ill¬ 
ness,  marked  muscular  and  joint  pains,  a  two-phase  tem¬ 
perature  curve.  It  is  considerably  more  difficult  to 
correctly  determine  dengue  fever  in  sporadic,  atypical, 
and  primary  cases.  In  the  establishment  of  a  diagnosis 
here  it  is  necessary  to  have  in  mind  malaria,  relapsing 
typhus,  measles,  pappataci  fever,  grippe,  and  yellow  fever 
in  particular. 

•The  laboratory  diagnosis  of  dengue  fever  is  insuf¬ 
ficiently  developed  and  has  not  found  wide  practical  ap¬ 
plication  yet.  Isolation  of  the  virus  from  the  patientSs 
blood  by  means  of  the  intracerebral  injection  of  suckling 
mice  is  possible  only  in  the  first  2-5  days  of  the  fe¬ 
brile  period. 

The  complement  fixation  reaction,  neutralization 
reaction  with  sera  taken  from  patients  in  the  febrile  and 
convalescent  periods,  and  skin  tests  have  been  developed 
in  recent  years. 

*  * 


Many  foreign  experts  consider  that  the  dengue  fever 
virus  satisfies  manv  of  the  requirements  of  bacteriological 
warfare. (2,  5,  etc).  In  addition,  it  has  repeatedly  been 
observed  abroad  that  the  complexity  of  cultivation  of 
this  virus  considerably  hampers  its  possible  application. 


1  SuBimariziag  fciie  question  aoout  the  use  of  the  denc^? 

fever  virus  for  irposes  of  bacteriological  warfare, 
iRosebury  and  Kaba"  (2)  wrote:  “Apart  from  the  unsolved 
question  about  the  possibility  of  obtaining  a  sufficient 
amount  of  the  dengue  virus  for  its  use  in  bacteriological 
warfare,  the  properties  of  this  agent  characterize  in  as 
one  of  the  suitable  bacteriological  agents.  The  practical 
lvalue  of  this  agent  must  oe  determined  by  further  experi¬ 
mental  studies,  particularly  experiments  determining  the 
possibility  of  preserving  the  virus  in  a  virulent  state 
and  a  study  of  the  means  of  protection  of  the  armies  us¬ 
ing  this  virus  as  a  means  of  attack.  The  existing  data 
compel  us  to  assume  that  both  of  these  problems  can  oe 
favorably  resolved." 


'RIGKSTTSIAL  INTEGTIONS 

t 

j 

[Typhus 


Epidemic  typhus  is  an  acute  infectious  disease 
characterized  chiefly  by  involvement  of  the  vascular  sys¬ 
tem  and  disposed  to  a  rapid  epidemic  spread  in  uhe  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  louse  vector*. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  Infection  with  typhus 
under  natural  conditions  occurs  as  a  result  of  rubbing 
the  excrement  from  infected  lice  into  the  abraded  skin  at 
the  site  of  their  bites.  However,  the  illness  can  appar¬ 
ently  arise  as  a  result  of  the  contact  of  infectious  ma¬ 
terial  with  the  conjunccivae  and  the  respiratory  tract. 

Minimal  infecting  doses  of  the  agent  are  not 
known  for  man,  but  epidemiological  practice  has  reason  to 
believe  that  they  are  trifling. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period 
lasis  for  iO  -  days  witH  fluctuations  from  6-23  days. 
The  illness  begins  suddenly.  The  temperature  quickly 
rises  (38.4  -  40.5  degrees)  and  remains  at  this  level  un¬ 
til  the  end  of  the  illness;  the  temperature  subsides  by 
rapid  lysis.  The  general  condition  of  the  patient  is  of¬ 
ten  serious,  and  during  the  entire  period  of  illness  the 
patient  requires  careful  nursing  care.  At  the  onset  of 
the  illness  there  is  noted  hyperemia  and  puffiness  of  t>ie 
face,  injection  of  the  vessels  of  the  sclera  and  conjunc- 
t ivae . 

The  illness  lasts  for  10  -  14  days  and  is  followed 
by  a  period  of  convalescence  lasting  about  10  days  Earing 


171 


wiiich  the  abierit  is  incapable  ol'  .sorhin-';.  'lonsec'irrntly, 
even  in  the  absence  oi  connlications  tyi  bus  incapnci taues 
tile  patient  I'or  a  lony  tiae. 

With  a  timely  start  of  srecific  anti oi otic  tuerany 
the  leugth  of  the  febrile  period  is  shortened,  but  tie  j 
date  of  discharne  (1?  days  after  the  temperature  zeturns 
to  noriLal)  remains  as  befoie. 

Before  the  discovery  of  antibiotics  t.yi/hus  mortali¬ 
ty,  derendintr  on  tiie  are  of  the  patient,  ranged  from  10  to 
bO  7. 

The  application  of  modern  ;7etr  oa;:.  oi;  treatment 
wltb  antibiotics  almost  excludes  fatal  outcomes. 


In  the  absence  of  vectors  the  disease  is  nob  tians- 
laitled  fro!:i  peison  to  person,  but  in  the  rz’csence  of  llco 
typhus  is  prone  to  epidemic  spread. 

■j.ethods  of  cultivation,  of  the  ape  at.  Pi.ckettsiae 
are  vvelT  cultivated  on  fertilized  chick  e''jb,r.yos  witi'Ou.t 
loss  of  pathogenic  properties.  Tnerefcre,  the  recovery  of 
cultures  in  large  ardouncs  is  not  difficult. 

Resistance  of  the  agent,  fne  rickettsiae  of  t.vuhuh 
exhibi.t  comparatively  little  resistance  to  various  factor? 
of  the  external  environment.  In  heatinr  a  suspensiori  at 
36  degrees  tne  rickettsiae  ai^e  ren.e.red  harmless  in  50  inin 
utes.  In  liquid  suspensions  at  room  temperature  the  agent 
dies  in  o  day. 

■Vith  low  te’iijieratures  and  humidity  the  ri  ckettsi  ae 
in  some  substrares  (excreta  of  lice)  can  be  ru'eserved  for 
several  days.  Typhus  rickettsiae  are  well  preserved  with 
dessicat'.on  froti  th-e  fro-en  state  and  can  oe  stored  for  o 
long  tii-o  under  vacuum.  The  typhus  agent  dies  quickly 
with  the  action  of  disinf ectinr:  substances. 

I'eans  of  specif ic  propd-ylaxi s  and  therary.  deverai 
vaccines  are  availaTHTe  for  typhus  prerr-yiaxis^  The  most 
effective  is  one  prepared  from!  the  yolk  sac  of  infected 
chick  emoryos.  Vaccination  does  not  prevent  the  illness 
but  it  ameliorates  its  course  appreciably.  Persons  wio 
lave  been  vaccinated  usually  recover. 

In  recent  years  a  new  live  vaccine  has  been  aevel- 
ooed  abroad  from  the  avirulent  strain  K,  and  it  has  proved 
uite  effective. 

Antibiotics  are  used  as  a  means  of  specific  trerary 
ureonycin  (  oio.o.ycin) ,  levomycetin  ( cnloramrheni  col)  ,  and 
syntomyc ir , 

Laboratory  and  clinical  diagnosis.  The  clinical 
iawnosis  of  tynhus'Tn'  t'h’er  first  three  days  of  illness  is 
ery  difficult.  A  tyi'ical  rasl.  appears  on  the  4th  -  fen 
ay  of  illness,  and  this  facilitates  a  diagnosis. 


172 


The  laboratory  tests  do  not  aid  in  an  early  diag¬ 
nosis. 

Diagnosis  by  means  of  serological  reactions  can  be 
established  only  from  the  end  of  the  2nd  week  of  illness. 
iiSthods  of  isolation  of  the  agenc  are  laborious  and  re¬ 
quire  a  long  time  ~  20  -  25  days. 

The  opinions  of  foreign  specialists  about  the  pos¬ 
sible  use  of  the  typhus  agent  as  a  means  of  the  bacterio¬ 
logical  weapon  are  very  controversial.  Sosebury  and  Ka- 
bat  (1947)  (14)  put  typhus  in  the  group  of  infections 


t  ted 
of 

er  i- 


r 

ion  in 
nfecte 
bility 
n 
i 


lasts  on  an  average  o: 


'173 


vary  from  2  -  3  to  14  days*  There  is  no  initial  reaction 
at  the  site  of  the  recent  tick  bite  in  the  absence  of 
other  tick  rickettsiae.  Usually  the  illness  beslas  sud¬ 
denly,  The  temperature  quickly  rises  to  40  -  41  degrees 
and  remains  elevated  for  an  average  of  2  -  3  weeks.  The 
patient  develops  very  severe  headache,  vomiting,  insomnia, 
disturbance  of  consciousness.  Convulsions,  pathological 
reflexes,  paralysis  of  the  ci^anial  nerves,  para-  and  hemi- 
plagia  are  manifested.  From  the  3  -  4th  day  of  Illness 
the  spleen  can  be  palpated. 

On  the  2  -  4th  day  of  illness  (sometimes  on  the 
5  -  6th)  an  eruption  appears,  manifested  at  first  as  a 
rose  rash,  then  a  maculo-papular ,  and  in  serious  cases  - 
hemorrhagic.  At  first  it  appears  on  the  ankles  and  wristsi 
but  it  soon  covers  the  skin  of  the  hands,  legs,  chest,  and' 
sometimes  the  face  and  hair.  The  skin  of  the  abdomen  is  ' 
affected  least  of  all.  The  illness  is  often  complicated  I 
by  thrombophlebitis,  necrosis  of  the  integument,  weaken¬ 
ing  of  eyesight  and  hearing,  and  paralysis. 

Mortality  ranges  from  5  -  IQ  to  80%.  The  introduc¬ 
tion  into  practice  of  antibiotics  has  significantly  re¬ 
duced  these  figures. 

Transmission  of  the  agent  from  person  to  person  haa 
not  been  observed,  and  therefore  the  patient  does  not  re¬ 
present  a  danger  to  the  community. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  agent , 
like  other  members  of  the  rickettsial  group,  does  not 
row  on  synthetic  nutrient  media  without  the  presence  of 
iving  tissue,  but  it  is  well  cultivated  on  fresh  and 
transplanted  tissues,  especially  on  the  yolk  sac  of  devel¬ 
oping  chick  embryos. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  resistance  of  rickett 
siae  of  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever  to  the  effect  of  un¬ 
favorable  conditions  of  the  external  environment  is  not 
high.  They  die  within  a  few  minutes  in  a  moist  environ¬ 
ment  at  a  temperature  of  50  degrees  or  with  the  action  of 
iisinfecting  substances.  Dried  rickettsiae  die  in  several 
hoars  at  room  temperature. 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy.  Two 
forms  of  Killed  vaccine  are  offered  for  vac cinat: ion  agains 
Rock^  ountain  spotted  fever:  one  is  prepared  from  the 
tissue  of  infected  ticks,  the  other  from  rickettsiae 
jrown  on  the  yolk  sac  of  fertilized  chick  embryos. 

Vaccination  is  performed  subcutaneously  in  three 
steps  with  later  revgccination. 

Vaccination  usually  insures  complete  protection 
from  slightly  virulent  strains  but  is  rather  less  effec- 


.174 


tive  in  respect  to  strains  with  high  virulence.  However, 
even  in  these  cases  it  significantly  moderates  the  severi¬ 
ty  of  the  course  and  reduces  the  number  of  fatal  cases  to 
zero. 

In  the  USA  an  avirulent  rickettsial  strain  was  ob¬ 
tained  as  a  result  of  prolonged  passages  on  chick  embryos. 
It  is  possible  that  in  the  future  it  can  be  used  in  the 
preparation  of  a  vaccine. 

Specific  therapy  of  the  illness  is  accomplished  by 
antibiotics:  aureomycin  and  tterramycin.  The  course  of 
treatment  with  antibiotics  is  5  -  6  days.  However,  clini¬ 
cal  improvement  is  observed  after  twenty-four  hours  and  a 
drop  in  temperature  after  60  -  70  hours. 

Olinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  The  clinical 
diagnosis  of  l?ocky  Mountain  spotted  fever,  notwithstanding 
the  prevailing  opinion,  often  is  not  simple.  The  diagnos¬ 
is  is  especially  complicated  in  those  areas  where  rat  ty¬ 
phus  and  other  rickettsial  diseases,  which  have  many  fea¬ 
tures  in  common  with  the  given  illness,  are  encountered 
along  with  spotted  fever. 

AS  in  typhus,  the  laboratory  diagnosis  does  not  as¬ 
sist  in  early  recognition  of  the  illness. 

Isolation  of  the  agent  by  intraperitoneal  injection 
of  male  guinea  pigs  consumes  much  time. 

The  Weil-Pelix  reaction  has  non-specific  importance 
since  it  only  indicates  that  the  illness  belongs  to  the 
ickettsial  group.  Specific  tests  are  the  complement  fix- 
tion  and  the  neutralization  reactions  which  aid  in  the 
identification  of  the  illness  and  have  great  value  for 
retrospective  diagnosis. 

In  late  years  the  use  of  the  complement  fixation 
eaction  with  the  application  of  a  standard  specific  anti- 
en  of  rickettsiae  has  been  satisfactorly  instituted  for 
he  serological  diagnosis  of  spotted  fever. 


Recently  isolated  reports  have  appeared  in  the  for- 
}ign  literature  concerning  the  potential  use  of  rickettsial 
)f  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever  as  a  oadteriological  wea¬ 
pon  (2,  5,  6). 

Rosebury  and  Kabat  (2)  believe  that  the  basic  meth- 
>d  of  dissemination  of  the  spotted  fever  agent  in  bacteri-; 
)logical  warfare  will  be  the  use  of  infected  ticks  of  Der-i 
lacentor  andersoni  species.  The  possible  application  of 


.175. 


other  species  of  tick  vectors  -  Rhipicephalus  and  Haem- 
physalis  -  has  not  been  excluded.  These  same  authors  have 
expressed  the  opinion  that  an  area,  lahich  is  suboected  to 
attack  for  a  long  time,  will  be  dangerous  in  the  sense  of 
infection  resulting  from  the  presence  of  infected  ticks. 


Tsutsugamushi  Fever 

Tsutsugamushi  fever,  or  Japanese  river  if  ever,  is  an 
acute  infectious  disease,  spread  under  natural  conditions 
through  the  bites  of  larvae  of  some  types  of  the  trombicu- 
lid  mite,  and  characterized  by  a  natural  focus. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  Rickettsiae  of  itsutsu- 
gamushi  fever  possess  a  high  pathogenic  ity  for  man.  The 
agent  is  transmitted  to  man  normally  only  through  the 
bites  of  larvae  of  some  species  of  the  trombiliculid 
ites.  Cases  have  been  described  in  the  literature  of  in¬ 
tra-laboratory  infections  of  tsutsugamushi  fever  due  to 
the  contact  of  infectious  material  on  the  conjunctiva  (^7) 
Symptoms  of  the  disease .  The  incubation  period  is  j 
generally  10  -  12  days".  The  disease  begins  suddenly,  the  j 
temperature  reaches  maximal  figures  (40  -  40.5  degrees)  j 
by  the  end  of  the  ffirst  week  of  illness  and  remains  at  ' 
this  level  for  2-3  weeks.  The  classical  symptoms  are 
the  primary  reaction  at  the  site  of  the  bite  of  the  vec¬ 
tor  and  generalized  lymphadenitis.  Between  the  5th  and 
3th  day  of  illness  a  rash  appears  which  at  first  has  a 
nacular  and  then  a  maculo-papular  character.  It  appears 
on  the  chest  and  abdomen  and  then  spreads  all  over  the 
trunk  and  extremities,  and  sometinsss  to  the  face  also. 

Poci  of  pneumonitis  develop  in  many  patients.  The  ill¬ 
ness  is  accompanied  by  severe  headache,  and  in  severe  cas¬ 
es  manifestations  of  meningoencephalitis  develop.  At  the 
onset  of  the  illness  the  peripheral  blood  reveals  a  noted 
Leukopenia  and  lymphocytosis. 

Convalescence  starts  at  the  end  of  the  second  or 
beginning  of  the  third  week.  The  period  of  convalescence 
Ls  usually  rather  prolonged. 

Prognosis  in  the  illness  varies  markedly,  mortali- 
;y  can  fluctuate  in  very  broad  ranges  -  from  1  to  60%. 

?hese  deviations  are  related  to  the  singularities  of  die 
jpidemic  focus  as  well  as  to  the  age  of  the  patient,  A 
ligh  mortality  rate  is  noted  among  elderly  patients, 

)eath  usually  sets  in  at  the  end  of  the  second  week  of  ill- 
ess 


All  of  these  facts  pertain  to  that  period  when 
ithere  were  no  specific  preparations  for  treatment.  With 
[the  introduction  into  practice  of  antibiotics  the  progno¬ 
sis  has  significantly  changed,  and  fatality  amounts  to  j 
'practically  zero. 

A  patient  with  tsutsugamushi  fever  is  not  a  danger  j 
to  the  community,  and  the  illness  is  noncontagious. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  Rickettsiae 
are  well  cultivated  on  fertilized  chiCK  embryos  with  in¬ 
fection  in  the  chorioallantoic  membrane  or  the  yolk  sac. 

In  addition,  the  rickettsiae  of  tsutsugamushi  fever  can 
also  grow  on  Zinser's  tissue-agar  medium  (48). 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  Rickettsiae  are  charac¬ 
ter!  zednSjT’greatTaBIlZ^iyanSr’low  resistance  to  the  exter¬ 
nal  environment.  Heating  to  50  degrees  inactivates  them 
in  10  minutes.  Rapid  destruction  occurs  in  a  0.1%  forma¬ 
lin  solution  and  a  0.596  phenol  solution.  The  agent  can  be 
preserved  for  a  long  time  at  a  temperature  of  -70  degrees. 
Lyophilized  drying,  even  with  careful  adherence  to  all  the 
requirements,  results  in  an  appreciable  lowering  of  the  in¬ 
fective  titer  (49). 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  and  tberany.  Attempt! 
to  devise  effective  vaccines  have  not  yet  been  successful. 
In  the  USA  two  types  of  dead  vaccines  have  been  prepared  - 
from  tissue-agar  cultures  and  from  the  lungs  and  spleens 
of  infected  white  rats.  Both  vaccines  have  proved  ineffec¬ 
tive  in  epidemiological  experiments  (50).  Then  a  method 
of  vaccination  has  been  tried  with  a  live  strain  accompan¬ 
ied  by  the  administration  of  Chloromycetin  (48).  It  is 
very  obvious  that  because  of  the  complexity  and  inefficacy 
this  method  can  be  applied  only  under  special  circumstan¬ 
ces. 

To  prevent  the  emergence  of  tsutsugamushi  fever 
smadel  and  other  authors  (48)  have  suggested  using  chemo¬ 
prophylaxis  by  the  administration  of  Chloromycetin.  An¬ 
tibiotics  have  been  used  with  great  success  in  the  treat- 
nent  of  the  disease:  aureomycin,  terramycin,  chloramphen¬ 
icol. 

Patients,  who  respond  to  the  antibiotics,  recover 
luickly  and  by  the  10th  -  14th  day  following  the  end  of 
:he  febrile  period  can  return  to  work  if  they  do  not  at¬ 
tempt  undue  physical  exertion. 

Clinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  The  clinical 
iiagnosis  of  tsutsugamushi  fever  often  presents  quite  a 
croblem. because  such  symptoms  as  headache,  relative  brady- 
it-*dia,  and  absence  of  leukocytosis  can  be  encountered 
iffith  a  number  of  other  illnesses  which  are  found  in  the 


177. 


very  same  localities  -  dengue  fever,  malaria,  typhoid  fev¬ 
er,  and  other  rickettsial  diseases. 

The  most  accurate  method  of  laboratory  diagnosis 
is  the  isolation  of  the  agent  from  the  patient’s  blood 
during  the  febrile  period  by  means  of  intraperitoneal  in- 
fedtion  of  white  mice.  In  the  presence  of  tsutsugamushi 
fever  rickettsiae  in  the  test  material  the  mice  die  on 
the  10  -  18th  day  after  injection. 

The  serological  diagnosis  consists  of  the  Weil-Fel- 
ix  reaction  using  the  3.  proteus  X,  antigen.  Antibody  in 
the  patient’s  blood  serum  appears  oy  the  end  of  the  second 
week  of  illness. 

The  complement  fixation  reaction  with  rickettsial 
antigen  is  not  used  because  of  the  serological  variations 
in  the  agent  of  the  given  species. 

Thus,  as  in  other  rickettsial  diseases,  the  cli^ii- 
cal  and  laboratory  diagnosis  of  tsutsugamuchi  fever 
sents  a  certain  difficulty  which  to  quite  an  extent  limits 
the  possibility  of  early  recognition  of  the  illness. 

«  « 

1 

1  0 

i 

The  agent  of  tsutsugamushi  fever  was  not  mentioned 
in  the  foreign  literature  of  the  50' s  and  40' s  as  a  pos¬ 
sible  agent  of  bacteriological  warfare,  and  it  also  was 
not  considered  in  the  well-known  investigations  of  Rose- 
bury  and  Kabat  (2).  However,  in  recent  papers  abroad  de¬ 
voted  to  questions  of  bacteriological  .varfare  the  rickett¬ 
siae  of  tsutsugamushi  fever  have  repeatedly  been  discussed 
as  a  potential  type  of  bacteriological  weapon  (6). 


^  Fever 

Q  fever  is  an  acute  febtile  illness  marked  by  the 
involvement  of  the  vascular  and  reticulo-endothelial  sys¬ 
tems. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  Infectivity  of  0  fever 
rickettsiae  is  very  high  for  man,  and  this  is  indicated  by 
the  numerous  cases  of  intralaboratory  infections.  Dwyer 
■lad  associates  (51)  observed  an  outbreak  of  Q  fever  in  one 
Df  the  buildings  of  the  National  Institue  in  the  USA  where 
the  possible  transmission  of  the  agent  through  the  s ir  was 
established. 

Infection  in  man  can  occur  by  the  alimentary  route  in 


i 

i 


t 


iddition  to  tie  airborne  route. 

Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incuoation  averai^es 
5  -  20  days .  1?here  is"  no  pri'iiry  reaction.  The  onset  of 
;he  illness  is  acute.  The  temperature  quickly  rises  (58  - 
■0  degrees).  The  febrile  period  usually  continues  for  1  - 
2  weeks,  sometimes  three  weeks.  The  principal  cornpaints 
ire  severe  headaches  and  musculaar  pains.  The  characteris- 
:ic  symptom  of  the  illness,  especially  with  the  airborne 
•cute  of  infection,  is  the  specific  involvement  of  the 
■ungs  in  the  form  of  rickettsial  penumonia.  With  a  timely 
start  of  antibiotic  therapy  the  temperature  drops  to  nor- 
nal  in  3  -  4  days.  A  larger  number  of  patients  require 
lospitallzation  for  10  -  15  days. 

Complications  of  any  kind,  as  a  rule,  are  not  ob¬ 
served  in  Q  fever.  Mortality  in  this  illness  is  negligibl 
and  is  noted  only  among  patients  of  the  older  age  groups. 

Q  fever  belongs  to  the  group  of  noncontagious  ill- 
lesses,  and  sick  people  do  not  present  a  danger  to  the  sur 
roundings . 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  Q  fever  Tic¬ 
ket  tsiae''’are~eaiTIjr'cuTn/vate3~Tn’~cETckembryos  with  in- 
Tection  in  the  yolk  sac.  The  agent  can  also  be  success- 
Tully  propagated  in  vitro  on  media  with  transplanted  tis¬ 
sue. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  Rickettsiae  of  Q  fever 
ire  preserved  very  well  ana  for  a  long  time  in  the  exter- 
lai  environment ,  and  also  in  moist  as  well  as  in  dry  sub¬ 
strates. 

Thus,  the  blood  of  infected  guinea  pigs,  overlaid 
vith  a  mixture  of  vaseline  and  oil,  preserves  its  infec- 
tivity  for  animals  for  more  than  nine  months  (52).  With 
storage  in  the  refrigerator  the  rickettsiae  remain  viable 
for  41  days  in  butter  me^de  from  the  milk  of  infected  cows 

^53)* 

I  The  agent  of  Q  fever  survives  drying.  Thus,  the 

dry  defecation  of  infected  mites  with  its  maintainance  at 
room  temperature  exhibits  infectivity  for  guinea  pigs  for 
^86  days  (54).  In  addition,  the  dried  urine  and  blood  of 
jinfefected  animals  can  maintain  virulence  for  several 
ks • 

Means  of  specific  prophylaxis  yid  therapy.  A  dead  ( 
vaccine,  prepared  from  egg  (cultures  of  rickettsiae ,  has 
5een  developed  for  the  specific  prophylaxis  of  Q,  fever. 

It  is  recommended  that  a  three-stage  vaccination  be  used 
with  additional  booster  shot  after  4-5  months  (5b»  56;. 

Aureomycin  and  levomycetin  are  effective  agents  for 
specific  therapy. 

Clinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis.  The  extremely 


179 


diversified  clinical  forms  of  Q  fever  make  it  very  diffi¬ 
cult  to  establisii  an  early  clinical  diagnosis,  therefore, 
the  laboratory  diagnosis  assumes  special  importance  and 
includes  basically  two  methods:  the  isolation  of  tne  a- 
gent  and  the  establishment  of  the  serological  reactions . 

The  isolation  of  the  rickettsiae  is  accomplished 
by  means  of  intraperitoneal  infection  of  guinea  pigs  with 
the  patient's  blood  taken  during  the  febrile  periold 

The  serological  diagnosis  is  performed  with  specif¬ 
ic  antigen  prep^ired  from  egg  cultures  of  the  rickettsiae. 

Agglutins  appear  in  the  patient's  blood  by  the  end 
of  the  first  week  of  illness.  Complement  fixing  antibody 
is  detected  from  the  7th  to  30th  day  following  onset  of 
the  illness. 

From  the  cited  data  it  is  seen  that  the  laooratory 
methods  do  not  help  to  establish  the  nature  of  the  ill¬ 
ness  in  the  early  period. 


Rosebury  and  Kabat  (2)  consider  that  "ricket fcsieo 
of  Q  fever  apparently  can  be  applied  for  bacteriological 
[Warfare  but  with  some  limitations.” 

j  Similar  viev/s  have  also  been  expressed  in  recent 

years  by  Phair  (5)>  Berger  and  Stevenson  (6)  and  other 
foreign  authors. 


FUNGOUS  DISEASES 


CJoccidioides  1 

Ooccidioides  is  a  deep  mycosis  of  man;  it  is  cause< 
by  the  yeast  fungus,  Ooccidioides  immitis  and  is  charac¬ 
terized  by  a  great  variety  of  clinical  forms. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent .  The  fungus  has  high  in.- 
fectivity  for  mani,  shich.  is  proved  by  the  numerous  labora¬ 
tory  infections  and  also  by  the  fact  that  in  endemic  areas 
almost  100%  of  the  inhabitants  are  infected  with  coccidioi- 
ies  (57)*  The  infection  of  new  arrivals  in  endemic  areas 
also  occurs  easily.  During  the  Second  World  War  among  the 
personnel  of  the  armed  foi'ces  of  the  USA, located  in  endem¬ 
ic  areas  of  ooccidioides,  several  thousand  clinically  man¬ 
ifested  Cases  were  recorded  (38).  j 

Under  natural  conditions  the  reservoir  of  the  fun-  | 
5US  in  nature,  according  to  Emmons  (59) »  is  rodents.  The  1 
Tungus  is  projected  into  the  external  environment  with  the' 


excretions  of  patients  in  the  form  of  chlamydospores  and  . 
arthospores  which  evidently  ripen  in  the  ground  and  are 
lifted  into  the  air  along  with  dust.  An  opinion  exists 
that  the  intermediate  host  of  the  fungus,  which  gives  rise 
to  the  transition  into  the  mycelial  stage,  may  be  plants 
(60). 

A  person  is  usually  infected  by  inhaling  the  ripene 
chlamydospores  and  arthospores.  Sooe  authors  also  recog¬ 
nize  the  possibility  of  infecliion  through  the  integviment 
(6C).  Infection  through  the  digestive  tract  is  not  ex¬ 
cluded. 

Synptoms  of  the  disease.  The  incubation  period  av¬ 
erages  lO  -  l4  days.  6n  the  ^asis  of  the  clinical  course 
of  coccidioides  it  is  customary  to  divide  it  into  three 
principal  forms:  asymptomatic  primary  infection,  or  sub- 
clinical  form;  manifested  primary  infection,  resembling 
grippe  or  pneumonia;  progressive  disseminated  coccidioides 
or  coccidioidal  granulematosis. 

The  asymptomatic  primary  infection  makes  up  60)o  of 
all  the  cases  of  coccidioides. 

The  manifested  primary  infection  begins  suddenly* 
the  temperature  quickly  reaches  40  degrees  and  remains  at 
bhis  level  for  several  weeks.  The  prognosis  of  this  form 
is  favorable  on  the  whole. 

Progressive  disseminated  coccidioides  comprises  ap¬ 
proximately  0*2%  of  all  the  cases.  In  this  form" the  fungi 
from  the  primary  focus  are  conveyed  with  the  blood  and 
lymph  throughout  the  whole  system,  and  wherever  the  fungus 
settles,  secondary  granulomatous  growths  develop.  Mortal! 
by  in  this  form  averages  50^* 

The  illness  is  slightly  contagious  and  is  not  trans 
nitted  directly  ^rom  person  to  person. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  The  fungus  is 
easily  cult ivate'd  bn '  ordinary  nutrient  med  la . 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  The  fungus  is  rather  re- 
istant  to  unfavorable  conaitlons  of  the  external  environ- 
ent,  and  chlamydospores  and  arthospores  tolerate  drying 
ell  and  preserve  viability  for  a  long  time  in  the  dried 
state  (6i) . 

Means  of  specific  prophyi^is  and  therapy.  Vaccine 
ave  not  been  developed  for  coccidioides.  Effective  means 
f  specific  therapy  have  not  yet  been  offered. 

Clinical  and  laboratory  diagnoBis.  The  clinical 
iagnosl’s  of  coccidioides.  Because  of  the  great  variety  of 
ymptoms,  is  very  involved.  Many  cases  remain  undiagnosed 
The  most  reliable  identification  of  the  illness  is 
he  isolation  of  the  fungus,  which  is  very  easily  done  in 
he  disseminated  form  from  the  pus,  sputum,  and  pleural  fl 


181, 


id  of  the  patients.  Of  the  other  nathods  of  diagnosis  the 
skin  test  with  coccidioidin,  which  is  widely  used  at  prestnc , 
has  the  most  practical  value.  Sensitization  to  the  organism 
is  detected  from  the  2  -  20th  day  after  the  onset  of  the  ill¬ 
ness  and  is  present  in  almost  all  patients  even  with  asymp¬ 
tomatic  forms  of  the  infection. 

In  most  patients  with  coccidioidosis  precipitins  and 
complement  fixing  antibodies  are  formed.  However,  these  an¬ 
tibodies  appear  with  the  greatest  regularity  only  in  severe 
forms  of  the  disease. 


Nocardiosis 

j 

Nocardiosis  is  a  deep  mycosis  of  man  which  is  caused  | 
by  the  fungus,  Nocardia  asteroides,  and  progresses  with 
principal  involvement  of  the  lungs. 

Pathogenicity  of  the  agent.  The  fungus  has  except' on-; 
ally  high  pathogenic i by  for  man.  Human  infection  with  no-  I 
cardiosis  occurs  by  a  twofold  route;  either  airborne  or  | 

through  the  danuaged  integument.  In  the  latter  case  the  ill-  j 
ness  is  characterized  by  the  development  of  purulent  process-  1 
es  enveloping  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  muscles,  and  bones.  | 
Symptoms  of  the  disease.  The  length  of  the  incuba-  j 
tion  period  has  not  been  established  since  exposure  to  the 
infection  can  never  be  accurately  ascertained,  i 

Nocardiosis  most  often  occurs  in  the  pulmonary  form. 
|The  symptoms  of  pulmonary  nocardiosis  often  resemble  those 
I  of  pulmonary  tuberculosis.  The  illness  usually  starts  erad- 
lually  with  general  malaise,  weakness,  emaciation. 

The  duration  of  the  disease  ranges  from  2-5  months 
to  1  1/2  years.  The  prognosis  in  pulr'ionary  nocardiosis  is 
very  unfavorable  and  always  terminates  in  death  in  untreated 
cases.  Incidents  of  intrahospital  infection  have  not  been 
described,  and  patients  apparently  are  not  a  source  of  dan¬ 
ger  in  the  community. 

Methods  of  cultivation  of  the  agent.  N.  asteroides, 
like  other  representatives  of  the  nocardia  genus,  are  easily 
cultivated  on  simple  nutrient  media,  liquid  and  solid.  There¬ 
fore,  the  recovery  of  the  agent  in  large  amounts  does  not 
represent  a  serious  problem. 

Resistance  of  the  agent.  There  are  no  explicit  fac¬ 
tual  data  on  the  resistance  of  the  fungus  to  various  in¬ 
fluences  of  the  external  environment  in  the  literature  avail- 
aole  to  us.  However,  considering  that  in  biological  proper¬ 
ties  the  nocardia  stands  very  close  to  the  act inomycetes 
and  the  agent  of  tuberculosis,  its  relatively  high  degree  of 
■resistance  has  tote  assumed. _ ! _ _ _ _ 


1S2 


:  •.leans  of  specific  prophylaxis  aad  therapy.  Vaccines  I 

Iiave  not  yet 'been  developed.  SulphaniTanide  prerarations  j 
(sulfadiazine,  sulfamerazine)  in  lar-pe  dosages  are  success¬ 
fully  used  as  a  oaeans  of  srecific  therapy.  Ti:e  course  of 
treatir.ent  is  long  —  2-5  and  soir.eti  es  even  five  rr.onths 
(62). 

Clinical  and  laooratory  dii-nosis.  The  clinical  di- 
agnosis  of 'nocardiosis'  is  extredely  difficult.  In  most  of 
the  cases  described  in  the  literature  the  diagnosisB  was  es¬ 
tablished  only  in  the  terminal  stage  or  even  at  autousy. 

The  clinical  signs  of  the  illness  are  very  similar  to 
ituberculosis.  The  laboratory  diagnosis  of  nocardiosis  de¬ 
pends  chiefly  on  the  isolation  and  identification  of  the  fun¬ 
gal  agent. 

In  the  examination  of  slides  under  the  microscorie  it 
has  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  in  sputum  li,  asteroides  can  break 
up  into  bacillary  elements  which  can  simulate  tubercle  ba¬ 
cilli  because  of  their  adid-fastness,  ! 


♦ 


I  •* 

In  the  foreign  literature  of  the  19''<-0*s  on  questions 
of  bacteriological  warfare  the  agents  of  fungal  diseases 
were  not  considered  as  possible  forms  of  the  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  weapon.  Rosebury  and  Kabat  (2)  even  expressed  the  6pin- 
ion  about  their  uselessness  in  this  respect  because  of  the 
apparent  lack  of  pathogenicity  for  man. 

However,  in  recent  years  this  opinion  has  evidently 
been  revised.  Such  specialists  as  Phair  (5),  and  Berger  and 
Stevenson  (6)  consider  it  quite  possible  to  use  agents  of 
fungal  diseases  as  a  means  of  bacteriological  warfare,  and 
special  emphasis  is  given  to  the  deep  mycoses,  particularly 
nocardiosis  and  coccidioidosis. 

*  * 

♦ 

We  do  not  presume  to  an  exhaustive  presentation  of 
aspects  of  this  chapter,  but  we  have  tried  to  generalize  the 
fundamental  views  of  foreign  specialists,  which  are  known  to 
us  from  the  published  foreign  literature,  about  the  reasons 
for  the  ielection  of  microorganisms  for  purposes  of  bacterio- 
logical  warfare,  and  also  about  the  requirements  made  of _ 


183 


[them  as  potential  agents  of  bacteriological  warfare. 

On  the  basis  of  the  opinions  of  foreign  authors  we 
have  made  an  attempt  to  compile  a  list  of  microorganisms 
which  best  satisfy,  from  their  point  of  view,  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  bacteriological  weapon.  In  addition,  some  of 
the  characteristics  of  these  agents  and  the  diseases  caused 
by  them  have  been  presented. 

In  the  rendition  of  these  aspects  v/e  have  not  made 
an  attempt  to  give  a  complete  description  of  every  disease, 
but  we  have  tried  somewhat  more  in  detail  to  delineate 
those  features  of  the  microorganisms  and  their  diseases 
which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  foreign  specialists,  will  de¬ 
termine  them  as  potential  agents  of  bacteriological  war¬ 
fare. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1.  Fox,  L.A.,  "Mil.  Surg.",  19^2,  72,  5»  9. 

2.  Rosebury,  T.E.,  Kabat,  S.A.,  Boldt,  M.H.,  "J. 
Immunol.”,  194?,  56,  7. 

3.Armagnac,  A.P.,  ''Popular  Science",  1947,  2,  84. 

4.  Kliewe,  H.,  "Civil  Air  Defense",  1954,  7  -8,  171. 

5.  Phair,  J.,  "Armed  Forces  Chem.  J.",  1954,  8,  1, 

14. 

6.  Berger,  B.B.,  Stevenson,  A.H. ,  "J.  Am.  Water  Works 
Assn.",  1955,  47,  2,  101. 

7*  Zelle,  M.K.,  Lincoln,  K.E. ,  Young,  G.A.,  "J.  In¬ 
fect.  Dis.",  1946,  79,  247. 

8.  Knight,  G.A.,  "J,  Biol.  Chem.",  1947,  171,  297- 

9.  Griffiths.  Cited  by  V.D.  Timakov  and  D.M.  Gol'd- 
farb.  "Fundamentals  of  Experimental  Medical  Bacteriology", 
Moscow,  1956. 

10.  Avery,  O.T.,  Me  Leod,  C.M.,  Me  Carty,  M.,  "J. 

Exp.  Med.",  1944,  79,  137. 

11.  Freeman  and  Groman.  Cited  by  V.D.  Timakov  and 
D.M.  Gol’dfarb.  "Fundamentals  of  Experimental  Medical  Bac¬ 
teriology",  Moscow,  1958. 

12.  Braun,  W. ,  Whallon,  "J.  Proc,  Nat.  Acad.  Sci. 

USA"  1954  40  5  7. 

13.  'schaef fer ,  P. ,  "Ann.  Inst.  Pasteur",  1956,  91,  2, 

192. 

14.  Duca,  Wood,  "J.  Infect.  Dis.",  1928,  42,  209. 

15.  Braun,  W.  ,  Firshein,  W’. ,  Whallon,  G.,  "Science", 
1957,  125,  3245,  445. 

16.  "Smaller  Virus  Fl.eces  Discovered",  Science  News 
Letter,  *1957,  71,  3,  37. 

17.  Hotchkiss,  R.D.  In  the  book. by  Braun,  "Bacterial 
Genetics",  Philadelphia,  London,  1953. 

18.  Roseouty,  T.E.,  "Peace  or  Pestilence",  Whittlesey 

House «  1949 . _  — : 


184 


19.  Wiesmann,  E.,  "Mil.  Rev.",  1950,  30,  1,  106. 

20.  BW-..Radio  Interview  with  General  Bullene,  E.F., 

"Armed  Forces  Chem,  J.",  1954,  8,  2,  16. 

21.  Creasy,  W.M.,  "Army  taformation  Digest",  1955 »  10, 

1,  2, 

22.  Cooper,  P.S.,  "Biological  Warfare".  In  the  book  of 
H.W.  Baldwin,  "The  Price  of  Power",  1948,  340. 

23.  "Bacteria  as  Weapons  of  War",  Pharmaceutical  J. , 
1946,  19,  1. 

24.  "Biological  Warfare",  Life,  1951,  11,  8,  21. 

25.  Berry,  G.P.,  Kitchen,  S.F..  Cited  by  T.E,  Rose- 
bury,  E.A.  Rabat,  M.H.  Boldt  in  "J.  Immunol.",  1947  56,  ?. 

26.  Silverman,  A.  et  al,  "Proc.  Soc.  Exd.  Biol,  and 
Med.",  1954,  186. 

27.  Ehrenkranz,  .v;eyer,  "J.  Infect.  Dis.",  195“^,  96,  2. 

28.  Wright  et  al,  "J.  Immunol."  1954,  73,  6. 

29.  Data  on  the  trial  of  the  case  of  former  servicemen 
of  the  Japanese  Army  charged  with  the  manufacture  and  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  bacteriological  weapon.  State  Publishing  House 
of  Political  Literature,  1950. 

30.  Topley  and  'Wilson.  Cited  by  T.E.  Rosebury,  E.A. 
Kabat,  M.H,  Boldt,  "J.  Immunol.",  1947,  56,7. 

31.  Howe,  C.,  Miller,  W,E.,..."Ann.  Int.  -ed.",  1947, 

26,  1,  93, 

32.  Vaucel,  M.,  "Tropical  Medicine",  Paris,  1952. 

33.  Puge,  R.,  Muhleus,  P, ,  Fletcher,  W. ,  "Diseases 
and  Hygiene  of  Hot  Climates",  Leipzig,  1938. 

34.  Miller,  W.R.,  Pannell,L. ,  Ingalls,  .^i.S.,  "Am.  J. 
Hyg.",  1948,  47,  2,  205. 

35-  Chambon,  IS.,  Lajudie,  P.  Fournier,!.,  "Bull,  Soc. 
Path,  and  Exot.",  1954,  47,  139. 

36.  Meyer  and  Eddy.  Cited  by  T.E.  Rosebury,  E.A.  Kab^>t, 
M.H.  Boldt,  "J.  Immunol.",  1947,  56,  7* 

37.  ITauntith,  Coppa  and  Hundakumst.  Cited  by  T.E.  Rose¬ 
bury,  E.A.  Kabat,  M.H.  Boldt  in  "J.  Immunol.",  1947,  56,  1,  7* 

38.  Strong.  Cited  by  T.E. .Rosebury ,  E.A.  Kabat,  M.H. 
Boldt  in  "J.  Immunol.",  1947,  56,  1,  7. 

59. 

40.  Dixon,  Cited  tjy  T.E,  Rosebury,  E.A.  Kabat,  M.H. 
Boldt  in  "J.  Immunol.",  1947,  56,  1,  7. 

41.  Summer.  Cited  by  T.E.  Rosebury,  E.A.  Kabat,  M.H. 
Boldt  in  "J.  Immunol.",  1947,  56,  1,  7. 

42.  Olitsky,  P.K. ,  Morgan,  I.  M. ,  "Proc.  Exp.  Biol,  and 
Med.",  1939,  41,  212. 

43.  Eammon,  W.M.,  "J.A.M.A.,"  1943,  121,  360. 


185 


'14-.  Soret,  Sanders,  iu.,  "rioc.  ::)C.  Zxr^.  Biol, 

and  67,  3,  526. 


45.  jeard,  J.V/.,  Beard,  D.  ,  Finkelscfe-’ u,  F., 


T-iununo  1 ,  ” ,  1940 ,  3-'^- ,  117 . 


'4-6.  S'-eicer,  P.F.,  Parker,  ''‘.P.,  "Lab.  ’'1x11.",  3',' 
1  aP ,  t '0 . 

47 •  Chao  Shu-hsttan;  Had  Chao'-k'uei;  Chao  Ch' un-f  ang; 
^ang  Shu-lng;  tfu  Chi-wen.  Wei  shen-  wu  hsileh  pao, 
1958,  2,  257-263.  Citation  in  Ref.  Zhur .  Biologiya 
(Reference  Journal  of  Biology),  1955,  No.  3,  p »  4 5 • 


’ ,  I 


4-^.  S_'adei,  J.  "f-cruo  TrnPup'’.  In  tie  boa-:: 
or.d  :  cKet  t  al  al  Infections  of  i  ip".  oi  ladeli  iia  iov  •/ 

F.3.,  Bnadel,  J.,  "A.,  j .  1QBI 

. '  ^  X.  • 

50.  Berge,  "^.C.,  Gauld,  R.L.  ,  K’.taok-:,  ..  "  n- ,  j 
Hyn.".  1949,  90,  yj?. 

■•■in--,  rj.H.,  3enntson.  ’'I.!. 


'f''  1 

.  Over,  L 

U'‘  1 

Pc;  ■*  It 

c;  t: 

.  Aonbie?- 

CU ,  D 

0  i*  -1.  • 

rnt . 

",  1950, 

P  0 

- 1  /  • 

55 

.  Jeili.sc 

n,  Vi. 

1550, 

65, 

5b5. 

•  .  It 


54.  Philip,  0.,  "J.  JarasitoTF',  194,.,  54,  -r.., 

<5-  Siiadel,  J.3.,  Snyder,  Robbins,  F.O,.  "v,.  j. 

'■Jyg;.”,  1943,  47^  .71.  ,  .  u. 

56.  I/ennete,  F3.  Cited  07  1. .P.  narodcvskv 
Golir.evicb.  "Study  of  Rickettsial  Diseases",  "orco”,  v.-- 

1940,  50,  906. 

e in.  kv. 


ki:- . Sre.ldok .  Cited  oy  G.I.  Lasenov  ar.d  V.a. 

’J  *  ^  T  •?  -  r-j  y.  '‘r  I  y,  •  ^  ”*  -  -  — 

.  .  4.  ..  .  rl.'  '  .9 


il  Joarnai",  1957, 


59.  'noons,  C.  "Trans.  R.Y.  Acad.  Science",  1954,  17. 

No.  2,  157  ^ 

''O*  Gonber.  Ci.ted  oy  G.,., .  Lnoexo\/  and  V.A.  T^e  e  iinnky. 
■’-ilDSar-  f;ea7C'-.i  J  urnal",  l^b?,  5,  55. 

c,:..  .,;aac  ,  K,  J.  ,  "A!,:.  Vet.  As.n.".  ,lyb4.  19u.,  "-•9",  --50, 
6^.  Ccnnet  et  al.  Cined  by  G.j.  Lahenc-v  aii’v.a.’ 

[ t; neo ,1. n.'.’ky ,  'Funnous  ■Oicas.-eG'' ,  "li  j. ;i tnny  edi  c  -i]_  Jour--^  '  ' 


0-‘i 


, 


63.  Francis,  S.U.  S.  Publ.  Health  Rep.,  I923,  58,  1391 

64.  Hoguchi,  I.  Exper.  Medic.,  1917,  25,  755 


«  *  # 


.86 


CHAPTER  V 


BASIC  MEANS  OP  ANTI-BACTERIOLOGICAL 
DEFENSE 


ORGANIZATION  Of  ANTIBACTERIOLOGICAL  CIVIL  DEFENSE  IN 
THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


Along  with  the  means  and  methods  of  actively 
engaging  in  bacteriological  warfare,  the  problem  of 
defense  against  the  bacterioligcal  weapon  is  being  inten 
sively  worked  out  in  the  United  States  of  America*  It 
is  being  solved  both  through  instituting  new,  more 
improved  means  of  defense  and  along  the  line  of  develop¬ 
ing  its  organizational  and  tactical  foundations.  During 
the  past  few  years,  along  with  numerous  articles  in  l^our 
nals  and  separate  monographs  devoted  to  problems  of 
bacteriological  warfare  (1,  2,  3,  4,  5»  etc.),  several 
official  instructional  handbooks  and  manuals  have  appear 
ed  in  the  United  States  of  America,  in  which  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  defense  against  bacteriological  warfare  are 
explained  and  data  on  its  organization  in  the  United 
States  are  presented  (6,  7). 

According  to  American  literature,  providing  that 
proper  reorganization  is  enacted,  the  United  States 
presently  has  sufficient  means  at  its  disposal  to 
defend  itself  successfully  against  bacterological  attack 
The  United  States  system  of  anti-bacteriological  defense 
(ABO)  is  based  on  the  p  e acetime  structure  of  Civil 
Defense  agencies,  as  well  as  on  the  Departments  of  Publi 
Health  and  Agricblture,  which  found  their  anti-bacterio- 
logical  defense  activities  on  the  peacetime  antiepidemic 
sanitation  and  hygienic,  antiepizootic  and  other  measure 

diseases.  However 


according  to  th«  unanimous  opinion  of  the  American 


specialists,  under  ^  itions  of  bacteriologic  var  these  measures  will 
be  insufficient,  an^  .aerefore  they  need  substantial  reinforcement  and 
improvement. 

The  defense  of  population  against  bacteriologic  warfare  rests  on 
the  U.S.A.  Civil  Defense  agencies,  which  direct  the  defense  of  the 
population  of  the  CQuntry  against  all  kinds  of  warfare.  U.S.A.  Civil 
Defense  is  directed  by  the  Federal  Administration,  idilch  includes  Medical 
Service  Administration,  supervising  '  -  ''he  problems  of  medical  protectloi 
of  the  country  under  conditions  of  -  ttack  with  any  kind  of  weapon. 

Hsdical  Service  Administration  includes  4  sect ions t  medlcal>8vacuationaI, 

[ 

I  sanitary-hygienic,  medical  supply  service  and  the  service  of  defense 
I  against  special  kinds  of  weapons  (atomic,  chemical,  bacteriologic).  This 
last  aervlce  includes,  along  with  the  divisions  of  Atomic  and  Chraical 
Warfare  Defense,  also  the  division  of  Antibactariologlc  Defense* 

One  of  the  basic  duties  of  the  Federal  Civil  Defense  Admi?ilitratior 


in  the  time  of  peace  'is  the  preparation  of  mobilization  and  operation 
plans  "so  that  everyone  would  know  his  duties  when  an  unusual  situation 
arises"  (6).  Federal  plan  of  organization  of  Medical  Service  in  the 
sphere  of  defense  against  special  weapons  has  already  been  worked  out 
and  it  provides  for  3  stages:  1)  preparation  of  the  country  In  peacetime; 
2)  measures  to  be  taken  daring  the  use  of  special  weapons;  3)  elimination 
of  the  effects  of  the  attack  (6). 


188 


The  federal  adaiinietration  is  responsible  for  the  | 
formation  and  personnel  traininif  of  civil  defense,  the 
publication  of  manuals,  Instructions  and  directions,  the 
construction  of  shelters  and  auxiliary  structures,  the 
outfitting  of  laboratories  and  medical  institutions,  the 
provision  of  supplies  required  in  case  of  war,  etc. 

During  and  after  the  employment  of  special  weapons,  the 
federal  government  asstxmes  general  direction  of  defendinj; 
population,  domestic  animals  and  crops;  it  is  responsiblr 
for  performing  measures  required  after  attack.  Among 
the  fxmctions  of  the  anti»bacteriological  defense  divi¬ 
sion  are  the  planning  and  direction  of  all  civil  de¬ 
fense  operations  in  the  field  of  anti-bact ^iriological 
defense,  as  well  as  the  coordination  of  parallel  work 
carried  out  by  the  Departments  of  Public  Health  and 
Agriculture,  and  other  departments.  The  special  duties 
of  the  anti-bacteriological  defense  division  are:  the 
detection  and  identification  of  the  bacteriological  agent 
used,  performing  sanitation  and  antiepidemic  work  and 
decontamination  (6,  7). 

Seven  civil  defense  regions  were  formed  in  the 
Unitbd  States  during  1953 t  which  coincide  with  the 
area  of  the  military  districts.  The  civil  defense 
administration  of  these  regions  direct  the  civil  defense 
services  of  the  constituent  states. 

There  is  no  uniform  structure  of  State  Civil  Defense  in  the  U.S.l, 
It  is  adapted  to  the  conditions  and  peculiarities  of  each  State  of  the 
country.  Generally,  however,  this  structinre  resembles  the  organization 
of  the  Federal  Civil  Defense  Administration.  The  States  have  special 
Health  Departments,  which  include  Divisions  of  defense  against  special 
weapons,  with  subdivisions  of  antibacteriologic  defense.  The  State  Health 
Commissioner  has  a  Permanent  Advisory  Council  of  physicians,  nurses, 
veterinaries,  pharmacists,  sanitation  engineers  and  administrators. 
The  functions  of  the  Council  include  creation  and  corrections  of  the  | 


189 


imobilizacion  program  of  the  State  Civil  Defense  Health  Department,  as  | 

well  as  assisting  the  Civil  Defense  Coosnissioner  in  the  problems  of 
rational  use  of  available  resources,  coordination  of  local  Civil  Defense 

I 

plans,  keeping  in  liaison  with  Federal  Civil  Defense  Administration  and  j 

i 

with  the  State  Commissioner  of  Agriculture  (6).  | 

I 

Organization  of  ant Ibacterlo logic  defense  within  the  Civil  Defense 

t 

system  can  be  demonstrated  on  the  example  of  the  State  of  Maine,  where  ‘ 

it  took  3  years  (1950-1953)  to  build  up  its  present  structure,  which  i 

i 

is  recommended  by  the  Federal  Administration  as  an  example  for  other  ! 

states  (8).  .  v  < 


General  directions  of  Ant ibacterlo logic  Defense  of  the  State  of  I 

i  ■'  * 

I  Maine  rests  on  the  Division  of  Special  Warfare  Defense,  which  is  a  part  | 

of  the  State  Civil  Defense  Medical  Service  and  Includes  the  A,B.D.  division^ 

I 

The  Director  of  the  State  A.B.D.  Service  has  an  advisory  committee  | 

I 

;of  physicians  (microbiologists,  parasitologists)  and  representatives  of  | 

i  ! 

j  the  Departments  of  Agriculture  and  River,  Sea  and  Shore  Fishing.  The  duty  > 

\  I 

of  the  conmlttee  is  to  assist  4|he  Director  in  organizing  the  antlbacteriologic 

defense  of  the  State,  and  in  particular,  in  supervising  the  organization  and 

i 

training  of  the  local  commands  of  bacteriologic  detection.  | 

The  State  is  divided  into  6  districts,  each  of  them  having  its  own 
District  Diagnostic  Laboratory,  created  at  some  scientific  Institution  or 

i 

a  hospital.  Each  District  Laboratory  has  two  flying  squads,  the  duty  of  | 
which  is  the  collection  of  samples  and  performance  of  the  simplest  analyses ! 


190 


in  order  to  Identify  the  bacteriologic  agent  and  to  direct  the  samples  to 
the  laboratory.  The  squad  consists  of  one  senior  bacteriologist  and  three 
laboratory  technicians  (voluntary).  In  addition,  the  Health  Service  of 
the  State  organizes  two  mobile  laboratories  for  the  purpose  of  identification 
of  bacteriologic  and  chemical  weapons. 

Along  with  the  Mobile  Laboratories  performing  the  simplest  duties 
of  recognition  of  the  bacterlologfc  weapon  used,  the  State  of  Maine  has 
a  Central  Diagnostic  Laboratory  (City  of  Augusti|  to  carry  out  the  more 
complex  bacteriologic  investigations. 

In  addition  to  the  duties  of  recognition  of  a  bacteriologic  weapon,  - 
all  these  Civil  Defense  Laboratories  and  Health  organs  are  to  take  care 
of  the  wounded  and  the  sick,  and  to  conduct  the  sanitary-hygienic  analyses. 

Such  scheme  of  the  structural  organization  of  the  antlbacteriologic 
defense  of  the  State  of  Maine  is  approved  by  the  U.S.  Federal  Civil  Defense 
Administration. 

In  American  cities  and  settlements,  local  Civil  Defense  has  been 
organized.  It  includes  Medical  Service,  the  specialists  of  which  enter 
into  Mobile  Support  lAiits.  The  Chief  Medical  Service  Officer  has  also 
a  ciMoslttee  of  advisors,  recruited  from  the  local  medical  workers.  In 
addition.  Local  Civil  Service  Includes  the  Services  of  Reconnaissance 
apd  Information,  evacuation,  liaison,  aid  to  the  hit  population,  registratiof 


and  Information,  as  well  as  the  Welfare,  Fire  and  Police  Services.  Basic 
functional*  subdivisions  of  Local  Civil  Defense  are  specialized  detachment's 
and  self-defense  groups,  recruited  from  urban  and  riiral  population. 


191 


During  the  ciiue  of  peace,  the  self-defense  groups  study  the  rudiments 


of  civil  defense  and  train  the  voluntaries.  During  and  after  the  attack 
ou  a  city  (settlement)  they  take  part  in  the  defense  and  evacuation 
of  the  population,  supply  first  aid  and  dispose  of  the  consequeaces  of  the 
attack  (6,  9). 

Cities,  industrial  areas  and  certain  districts  of  major  strategic 

importance  are  designated  as  target  and  special  target  areas.  At  present, 

there  are  in  the  U.S.A.  123  target  and  70  special  target  areas,  with  a 

population  of  67  million  (10).  ^ 

Basic  tactical  units  of  the  Civil  Defense  are  Mobile  Support  Units, 

created  locally;  one  of  their  functions  is  carrying  help  to  the  attacked 

district.  Such  Units  include  both  medical  service  and  First  Aid  Stations, 

Surgical  and  Special  Divisions  and  radiologic  and  bacteriologic  survey 

; services.  Upon  arrival  into  a  stricken  district,  the  medical  service  units 


report  at  the  Medical  Service  Center  and  remain  at  its  disposal  (9). 

An  overwhelming  majority  of  the  ample  manpower  of  the  Civil  Defense 
Medical  Service  is  composed  of  citizens,  who  enter  the  Civil  Defense  ranks 
voluntarily.  Certain  number  of  posts,  however,  is  filled  in  by  the 
administration.  Thus,  particularly  the  Medical  Service  Directors  arc 


appointed  from  among  the  responsible  workers  of  the  Public  Health  organs  (6,  9 

! 

Where  the  problems  of  antibacteriologic  defense  are  conceriied, 

U. S.  Civil  Defense  Service  works  in  close  contact  with  the  Health  Service 
and  its  organs,  which  carry  the  responsibility  for  the  defense  of  population 
against  bacteriologic  warfare.  Health  Service  Central  Antiepidemic  Department 

i 


192 


r 


T 


^3  re»fJonsible  for  the  detection  and  identification  oi  bactcriologic  weaponci, 
organization  of  measures  to  prevent  the  infection  of  people  and  the 
spreading  of  disease  and  organization  of  treatment  of  the  infected  per''ons 

(U). 

All  the  States  have  Departments  of  Health,  which  cooperate  with  the 
State  Civil  Defense,  lijcal  Health  Service  divisions  function  in  collabcracion 
with  medical  institutions  and  laboratories.  They  also  remain  in  contdCu, 
collaborate  with,  and  carry  out  orders  of,  the  local  Civil  Defense  Service 
(4).  In  addition  to  this,  in  16  states  181  U, S.  Health  Service  District 
Divisions  have  been  organized,  which  in  the  case  of  destruction  of  tne 
central  system  can  be  used  as  provisional  administrative  centers  of  the 

State  Civil  Defense  Medical  Service,  , 

State  Health  agencies  and  local  Health  divisions,  at  the  time  of 

peace,  supervise  the  sanitary  and  antiepidemic  measures,  assure  medical 
help  and  laboratory  diagnosis  service.  In  case  of  natural  disaster, 
epidemic  or  bacteriologic  attack  their  duties  are  as  follows: 
a)  Fight  against  infectious  diseases,  including: 

-  epidemiologic  detection  to  determine  the  source  of  the  infection j 
*•  organization  of  isolation  and  quarantine  for  persons  in  need 

of  them; 

-  carrying  out  immunization  of  the  population; 

-  carrying  out  disinfecting  and  disinsecting  measures; 

-  cooperation  with  the  local  authorities  in  supplying  medical 


193 


h«lp  cad  ccrc  to  the  clek*  | 

•  protecting  the  work  of  cpoclcl  Icborcterlcc. 
b)  Scaitcry  Mc«nrcs»  providing: 

•  ccturcaco  of  c  scfo  voter  ctqiplyi 

•  acenrenea  of  food  end  ■odieino  ci^ly; 

-  control  of  oovego  end  roaovel  of  lir^nrltios; 

•  deetrvetion  of  iaeoets  end  rodentc  (5»  II). 

The  Batlonel  Xnetltnte  of  Microbiology  Msploye  scientific  nethods 
in  directing  the  entibecteriologic  defense,  as  does  the  gnited  State  i 

Institute  o£  Health*  To  provide  an  epidosiiologic  dctectict 
service  on  a  national  scale,  a  special  center  for  hygiene 
and  infectious  diseases  has  been  established.  The  pub¬ 
lication  of  data  on  the  occurrence  of  infectious  diseases 
is  a  duty  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Bli'th  and  Death 
Statistics  (11)* 

The  protection  of  productive  animals  and  agricul- 
tiiral  plants  aginst  bacteriological  warfare  is  also 
carried  out  by  the  United  States  Civil  Defense  Administ¬ 
ration,  jointly  with  the  Department  of  Agriculture* 
Problems  related  to  the  defense  of  animals  are  super¬ 
vised  by  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Animal  Husbandry,  while 
those  of  plant  defense  are  covered  by  the  Bureau  of 
Entomology  and  Plant  Protection  and  the  Bureau  of  Plant 
Production  (6,  7)* 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  subversive  methods  of 
bacteriological  attack  are  considered  very  plausible  in 
the  United  States,  the  Federal  Biureau  of  Investigation 
is  included  in  the  system  of  anti-bacterioiogicai  defen¬ 
se;  its  task  consists  in  combating  subversive  agents 

(6,  7»  9). 

It  is  assumed  that  troops  of  the  United  States 
armed  forces  will  also  participate  in  civil  defense  (12)« 
Thus  the  Civil  Defmaae  Information  and  Observation  Ser¬ 
vice  is  closeXy  interrelated  with  the  detection  and 
interception  system  of  the  United  States  Air  Force  anti¬ 
aircraft  defense-.  The  support  of  the  army  will  also  be 
counted  on  in  organizing  anti-bacteriological  defense 
procedxires  both  during  and  after  attack*  It  is  consid¬ 
ered  tl^t  in  order  to  strengthen  the  defense  of _ 


194 


«ap«clally  ioporcanc  raglona  and  objactivea,  military  groups 


in  site  o£  not  more  than  a  brigade  will  be  created  with  the  object  of 
perforadzig ground  and  air  exploration,  organization  or  welfare  and 
restoration  operations,  fight  against  fires,  provision  of  water  and 
removal  of  obetructions. 

In  the  U.S.A.  particular  attention  is  given  to  the  problt^m 
of  preparation  of  the  ranks  of  specialists  in  the  Civil  Defense  in  general 
and  defense  against  bacteriologlc  warfare  in  particular. 

According  to  data  presented  at  the  annual  report  of  Federal  Civil 
I  Defense  Adalnistratlon  for  the  year  1954,  a  Civil  Defense  Staff  Comnand 

i 

College  was  opamlin  April  1951  to  train  the  chief  workers  of  the  adminisc 

rative  and  operative  agencies  of  civil  defense.  By 
December  195^ i  over  10,000  persons  graduated  from  it.  At 
this  college,  in  addition  to  training  personnel,  the 
oi'ganiza tional  foundatiom  of  civil  defense  are  being 
elaborated  together  with  teaching  aids  on  this  problem. 

In  1951  and  1952,  respectively,  the  Western  (State  of  California) 
and  the  Eastern  (Stat^  of  Pennsylvania)  schools  of  technical  prepar<xion 
were  organized  for  the  purpese  of  preparation  of  personnel  to  work  in 
the  States  and  on  locations,  with  a  uniform  program  of  instruction.  The 
parsons  who  have  taken  a  course  of  instruction  in  these  centers  are  to 
prepare  the  personnel  and  instructors  of  the  Afense  groups  at  the  state 
level.  These  iaatructors,  in  turn,  train  local  volunteers. 

In  addition  to  this,  at  the  Staff  Command  College  in  1954  there 
were  organized  travailing  courses  in  Civil  Defense,  which  carry  their  work 
at  the  universities  in  the  different  States.  Civil  Defense  program  is 


studied  in  American  high  schools  and  colleges.  I 

The  peraonnnl  training  program  i  n  civil  defense  includes 

general  as  well  as  special  preparation.  General  preparation  comprehends 

studies  of  basic  problems  of  Civil  Defense:  principles  of  its  organization 

and  duties  in  peace  and  war,  first  aid,  conducting  of  the  stipulated 

"operations"  to  rescue  the  victims,  etc.  Special  preparation  is  given  in 

Che  fields  of  antlatomlc,  antichemical  and  antibacteriologic  defense. 

A  system  of  special  educational  institutions  is  planned  for  the 

preparation  of  Civil  Defense  Medical  Service  personnel.  Before  their 

creation,  Federal  Civil  Defense  Administration  had  to  organize,  for 

training  in  the  defense  against  bacteriologic  warfare,  three  types  of 

courses:  for  the  administrative  personnel  of  the  State  Health  organs 

(general  course  of  lectures),  for  physicians-speciallsts  (special  course 

of  lectures)  and  for  the  personnel  of  the  State  Health  laboratories 

(technical  course  of  lectures).  On  top  of  this,  Che  Bureau  of  Animal 

Husbandry  organized  a  course  of  lectures  for  outlying  veterinarians  , 
and  Federal  Civil  Administration  -  a  course  of  lectures  on  the  subject  of 

defense  of  crops  against  bacteriologic  warfare,  for  agricultural  workers. 

All  the  personnel  of  medical  institutions  in  the  U. S.A.  is  also 

included  in  the  Civil  Defense  preparation  system;  instruction  is 

carried  out  under  the  general  supervision  of  the  local  Defense  Director, 

and  under  a  direct  supervision  of  Hospital  Directors. 

It  is  proposed  that  all  persons  Joining  the  ranks  of  Civil  Defense 

Medical  Service  should  undergo  local  courses  of  instruction  in  the 


196 


probleiBa  of  antiatomic,  antlchamlcal  and  ant ibacterio logic  defanae,  know  j 
how  to  admlnlstar  first  aid  to  the  wounded  and  the  sick,  know  the  general  ! 

i 

principles  of  treatment  of  burns  and  wounds,  as  well  as  be  acquainted 

with  general  problems  of  the  organisation  and  administration  of  Civil  Defense, 

the  study  of  which  represents  SOX  of  the  total  instruction  time. 

American  Red  Cross  takes  active  part  in  instructing  the  members  of 
Civil  Defense  Sanitary  Service*  It  conducts  the  preparation  of  the  nurses 
and  Instructs  the -general  population  in  the  principles  of  First  Aid  (10). 

In  1954,  Civil  Derenso  in  America  had  4.5  million  volunteers,  among 
them  200,000  specially  trained  Instructors  and  over  10,000  directing  workers. 

Preparation  of  the  U.S.A.  to  bacterlologlc  warfare  defense  Is  carried 
out  according  to  special  programs  of  people  defense  and  animal,  plants 
and  crop  defense,  which  have  been  worked  out  by  the  Civil  Defense  Authorities! 

.  i 

I 

together  with  the  Departments  of  Health  and  Agriculture.  These  programs 

f 

include  the  principles  of  antibacteriologic  defense,  as  officially  accepted  • 
in  the  U.S.A.  (7). 

Thus  the  acquaintance  with  the  literature  proves  tbst  during  recent 

years  in  U.S.A.  the  problem  of  organization  of  the  defense  of  population 
against  bacterlologlc  warfare  has  been  intensively  worked  upon;  at  the 

same  time,  the  basic  attention  within  this  problem  has  been  directed 

towards  a  rational  organization  of  the  State  Civil  Defense  Service, 

of  methodical,  scientific  direction,  planning  and  unification  of  anti- 

bacterlologlc  defense  measures,  as  well  as  the  preparation  of  the 

e 

personnel. 


-  r 

In  conclusion,  Ic  should  be  noted  that  this  review  does  not  pretend  | 

to  give  a  full  and  thorough  treatment  of  the  subject,  sirxe  it  was  not  i 

i 


possible  to  find  more  exhaustive  information  (especially  concerning  j 

the  last  2-3  years)  on  the  state  of  A.B.D.  in  the  U.  S*A. ,  in  the  litsr  ^tur'-: 
available. 

i 

I 

Fundaments  of  antibacteriologlc  defense  organization  contain  a  - 

series  of  general  directive  principles.  Above  all,  it  is  considered  that:  ^ 
at  present  the  U.S.A,  possesses  effective  means  of  prevention,  liritntion 
and  elimination  of  infectious  diseases  which  could  ba  caused  by  bacr.eriolu 
warfare.  It  is  further  assumed  that  the  whole  A.B.D.  system  should  be 
constructed  on  the  basis  of  the  principles  of  antiepidemic  and  saninary-  i 
hygienic  protection,  existing  at  the  tirae  of  peace,  as  well  as  on  tne 
basis  of  existing  medical  institutions.  It  is  admitted,  however,  that  ! 

f 

these  principles  should  be  supplemented  and  the  institutions  extended  and  ; 
fortified.  It  is  believed  that  the  whole  A.B.D.  system  should  be  constructed 
on  the  consideration  that  the  eneti^'  power  will  be  able  to  use  only  the  ag 
of  presently  known  infectious  diseases.  At  the  same  time,  the  necessity 
cf  preparation  for  the  defense  against  all  possible  kinds  and  cornb  mat  ions 
of  bacterlologic  warfare  is  being  stressed.  i 

It  is  admitted  that  the  enemy  will  use  agents  of  diseases  not  found 
under  natural  conditions  in  a  given  location.  It  is  supposed  that  the  agents 

of  non-contagious  diseases  will  be  most  extensively  applied  as  bacteriologii: 

weapoia  For  this  reason,  utmost  attention  should  be  given  to  the  deierse 

of  people  who  will  be  the  direct  object  of  the  bacteriologic  attack  (2,  3, 


4,  5,  6,  7). 


198 


It  is  considered  that  the  most  probable  and  effective  method  of 
application  of  bacteriologic  warfare  will  be  the  aerogenic  method,  for 
which  reason  the  defense  against  bacterial  aerosols  occupies  one  of  the 
leading  places  in  the  A.B.D.  system.  Very  serious  attention  is  also  given 
to  the  defense  against  the  subversive  methods  of  water  and  food  contamination. 

According  to  the  official  Instructions  published  in  the  U.S.A,,  the 
antibacteriologic  defense  consists  of:  1)  detection  and  recognition  of  the 
bacteriologic  weapon  (indication);  2)  individual  defense  of  the  population; 

3)  collective  defense  of  the  population  and  4)  decontaminating  measures. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1.  Rosebury  T.  E..  Boldt  M.  H..  Olson  F.  R..  Aaron  J..  Cour- 

n  o  y  e  r  N.  G..  C  a  m  e  r  o  n  O.  R^  R  o  s  e  n  w  a  I  d  A..  F  r  a  n  a  e  n  C, 
O'Bryon  C.  E..  Neff  E.  P-,  Kress  H..  Kehn  D.  >1.  Espetimen- 
tal  Air-borne  Infection.  Williams  and  W'ilkins  Company.  Baltintore.  IWt. 

2.  Rosebury  T.  E..  Kabat  E.  A,  Boldt  M.  H.  J.  Immunol,  1947. 

56  1  7 

3.  Rosebury  T.  E.  Peace  or  Pestilence.  Whittlesey  House,  1949. 

4.  Ph  a  i  r.  J.  Armed  Forces  Chem.  J..  1954,  8.  I.  14. 

5.  F  o  I  h  e  r  g  i  1 1  L.  0.  Pub.  Health  Rep..  I%7.  72,  10.  865. 

6.  Health  Services  And  Special  W’eaporw  DeleiKe.  U.  S.  Goverrunent  Prin¬ 

ting  Officie,  1950  (Repr.  I9SS).  ^  ^  . 

7.  Civil  Defence  Against  Biological  Warfare,  U.  S.  Government  Pnnting 

Office,  1953.  .  .  .  o-  .  ■  i 

8;  Plans  lor  Sp^al  Weapons  Defence.  Part  I.  Defense  Against  Biological 
Warfare  Agents.  J.  A.  M.  A..  1M3.  153.  9.  K9. 

9.  United  States  Civil  Defence.  U.  S.  Gwemment  Printing  Offic^  1950. 

10.  Annual  Rmrt.  Federal  civil  Defence  Administration.  U.  S.  Government 

Printing  Office.  1954.  ^  ,,  , .  ^ 

It.  Langmuir  A.  D..  Andrews  J.  M.  .Am.  J.  Pub.  Health.  1962,  42. 
3.  ^ 

12.  Forrests  I  R.  B.  Mil.  Rev,  I9S0,  30.  4.  89. 


199 - 


FRINCIPLSS  OP  DETECTING  THE  BIOLOGICAL  INFECTIOUS  AGENTS. 


The  detection  of  biological  infectious  agents 
consists  of  a  set  of  measures  aimed  at  determining  the 
fact  that  a  bacteriologic  weapon  has  been  employed  and 
at  recognizing  the  kind  of  agent  used. 

Exact  and  timely  ascertaining  of  the  moment  of 
employment  of  a  bacteriologic  weapon  and  the  kind  of 
agent  used  determines  to  a  considerable  degree  the 
character  and  the  specific  direction  of  antiepidemic 
measures  aiming  at  clearing  up  the  consequences  of  the 
bacteriologic  attack.  This  circumstance  makes  foreign 
specialists  stress  everywhere  that  the  success  of  all 
the  measures  of  antibacteriologic  defense  will  depend 
largely  on  the  perfection  of  detecting  methods  and  on 
making  the  detection  within  the  shortest  time  possible. 

Methods  of  detection  of  biological  infectious 
agents  can  be  divided,  according  to  their  object,  into 
two  general  groups: 

-  nonspecific  detection  methods  (or  physical 
detection  methods)  aimed  only  at  establishing,  by  any 
signs,  the  fact  that  a  bacteriologic  weapon  has  been 
used; 

-  specific  detection  methods  Cor  biological 
detection  methods),  aimed  not  only  at  discovery  of 
bacteriologic  attack,  but  also  at  recognizing  the  kind 
of  agent  used. 


NONSPECIFIC  DETECTION  METHODS. 


The  simplest,  the  fastest,  but  also  the  least 


200 


reliable  method  of  nonspecific  detection  is  visual 
observation.  Dacteriolcglc  attack  can  be  suspected  from 
the  appearance,  after  ammunition  explosion,  of  a  cloud 
moving  with  the  wind,  from  discovery  in  the  site  of 
explosion  of  powderiike  substances  or  drops  of  liquid 
when  no  poisoning  or  radioactive  substances  are  present 
in  the  place  or  in  the  air.  Finding  of  unexploded  special 
ammunition  or  its  characteristic  parts  (remnants  of 
atomizers,  etc.),  of  masses  of  insects,  ticks  and 
instruments  for  their  release  (containers  and  other 
special  carrier  equipment)  can  also  arouse  suspicion 
of  a  bacteriologlc  weapon  having  been  used.  | 

Visual  detection  of  a  bacteriologlc  weapon  is 
possible  only  through  regular  observation  of  ail  the 
territory  of  the  country.  However,  as  the  authors  of 
"Civil  Defense  Against  Biological  Warfare"  (1)  point  out, 
the  organization  of  such  observation  is  at  presW^t  irapos.?- 
ible.  Only  the  continuous  observation  of  comparatively 
small,  but  most  important,  regions  of  the  country  is 
feasible. 

Speaking  of  visual  observation  as  a  method  of 
nonspecific  detection  we  must  stress  that  at  its  best  it 
can  provide  basis  for  a  suoposition  that  a  bacteriologlc 
attack  has  taken  place.  In  a  number  of  cases,  especially 
when  the  bacteriologlc  weapon  is  employed  at  night  or  in 
visibility  limiting  weather  conditions  (fog,  etc.), 
visual  observatjion  can  become  an  incompetent  method  of 
detection, 

extreme  sifcjectivity  of  visual  observation  as  a 
detection  method  dictates  the  necessity  of  critical 
evaluation  of  the  data  obtained  through  it  and  requires 
their  careful  verification  by  objective  methods  before 
reaching  decision  to  carry  out  the  measures  of  anti- 
bacteriologic  defense,  except  the  most  basic  ones  (donning 
of  gas-masks  smd  protective  clothing,  using  shelters). 

An  indispensable  complement  of  visual  observation 
is  the  determination  of  the  quantity  and  extent  of 
particles  suspended  in  the  air.  The  discovery  of  numerous 
airborne  particles  of  determined  dimensions  following  the 
appearance  of  enemy  planes,  bombing  or  artillery  raid, 
permits  drawing  a  much  more  definite  conclusion  than 
visual  observation  alone,  regarding  the  employment  of  i 


bacteriologic  weapon  by  the  enemy. 

A  whole  series  of  instruments  have  been  devised 
to  date,  permitting  a  rapid  determination  of  the  quantity 
and  dimensions  of  airborne  particles.  Among  them  of 
particular  interest  are  the  impactors. 

These  instruments  act  on  the  principle  of 
mechanical  settling  of  aerosol  particles  on  pistes  and 
their  subsequent  visual  or  microscopic  examination. 

One  of  the  first  instruments  based  upon  this 
principle  was  the  impactor  constructed  by  Hagemann  (2), 
in  which  a  circular  air  flow  was  directed  towards  an  in¬ 
tercepting  plate.  The  constructor,  however,  did  not 
consider  the  necessity  to  observe  the  isokinetic 
conditions  of  the  sample  taking,  so  that  considerable 
losses  of  large  particles  were  noted  during  the  operation 

Much  more  perfect  is  May's  impactor  (3).  which  has 
not  one  intercepting  stage( cascade),  but  four  (Fig.  12). 

As  can  be  seen  from  the  figtirea  preaenteci.  May's 
cascade  impactor  consists  of  a  system  of  4  jets  and 
corresponding  intercepting  platea  .  The  diameter 

of  the  jet  nozzles  decreases  progressively  from  cascade 
to  cascade,  so  that  speed  and,  consequently,  also 
effectiveness  of  the  particle  impact  increases  from 
plate  to  plate.  The  result  is  a  sorting  of  particles 
according  to  their  size,  which  greatly  facilitates  sub¬ 
sequent  analysis  of  the  samples.  May's  instrument  is 
portable  (weight  280  grams),  reliable  for  work  in  field 
conditions  and  can  be  used  for  collecting  any  aerosol 
samples  in  which  the  dimension  of  the  particles  exceeds 
1  }x,  Por  work  in  field  conditions  the  instrument  is 
suspended  from  a  stand,  as  shown  in  Fig.  13. 


Fig  .  12.  Diagram  of  May's  Fig.  13.  May's  impactor  I 

4-cascade  impactor.  suspended.  | 

l-noz2le  one ; 2  -nozzle  two; 

3-nozzle  three; 4 -nozzle  four;  ..  | 

5-intercepting  plat©  ;  6-pnntp 

pipe.  ‘  I 

I 

Owing  to  a  vane,  the  inlet  of  the  instrument  is  i 
always  directed  against  the  air  flow. A  portable  injector,  | 
working  on  compressed  air,  is  used  for  air  suction.  ! 

The  optimal  air  suction  volume  is  17.5  liters  per  mimite.  j 

Preliminary  treatment  of  the  intercepting  plates  ! 
depends  on  the  character  of  the  aerosol  particles  to  be  i 
investigated.  For  collection  of  samples  containing  solid  | 
particles,  the  plates  of  the  impactor  are  covered  with 
a  sticky,  non-drying  film.  Particularly  effective  is  a 
mixture  of  castor  oil  and  well  purified  tar. • 

Samples  containing  liquid  particles  are  susceptible 
to  evaporation;  because  of  this,  microscopic  analysis  | 
should  take  place  either  before  the  process  of  evaporation  ! 
has  started,  or  a  sp-^cial  kind  of  indicator  must  be  used 
to  preserve  the  drop  form  for  a  long  time., The  first 
method  is  anplied  only  for  the  investigation  of  mists  of 
oils  or  other  low  volatility  liquids.  For  determination 
of  the  quantity  and  dimensions  of  the  drops  of  rapidly 
evaporating  liquids,  the  intercepting  plates 


can  be  treated  with  a  mixture  of  light  mineral  oil  and 
vaseline  and  covered  with  a  layer  of  soot,  (preferably  of 
magnesium  oxide  -  blackened  over  flaming  magnesium 
shavings)  and  some  other  substances. 

Analysis  of  samples  is  carried  out  under  microscope 
with  an  ocular  micrometer.  However,  as  May  points  out, 
an  experienced  operator  can  easily  determine  the  degree 
of  dispersion  of  a  sample,  and  consequently  with  even 
more  ease,  the  change  in  quantity  of  particles  in 
comparison  with  previous  investigations,  without  the  help 
of  a  microscope.  Thus  the  presence  of  slight  precipitatior 
pattern  on  the  first  plate  .,  some  precipitation  pattern 
on  the  second  and  thick  precipitation  on  the  third  and 
fourth  indicate  that  the  aerosol  under  investigation 
is  highly  dispersive  with  predominance  of  particles  from 
1  to  10  ■ 

The  determination  of  quantity  and  dimensions  of 
the  particles  can  be  effected  by  means  of  other  instru¬ 
ments,  working  on  different  principles,  especially 
electronic  methods.  Guyton  (4)  presents  in  his  work  two 
ways  of  using  such  methods.  First  of  them  is  as  follows: 
two  electrostatic  laminae  are  placed  on  the  edges  of  the 
aerosol  chamber,  which  in  turn  is  placed  under  an  ultra¬ 
microscope.  After  alternately  charging  the  plates 
positively  and  negatively  ,  the  chargea  aerosol 
particles  are  set  in  a  vibrating  motion.  Dimensions  of 
the  particles  can  be  determined  with  considerable  exact¬ 
itude  by  photographing  the  vibrating  motion. 

Another  method  is  based  on  the  ionization  of  the 
particles  by  means  of  high  voltage  discharge.  Charged 
particles  are  drawn  towards  metal  plates  having  the 
opposite  charge.  At  the  same  time  a  flow  of  air 
forces  them  aside.  Since  the  smaller  particles  receive 
greater  charge  per  mass  unit,  they  settle  with  less 
displacement  to  the  side  from  the  ionizing  electrode 
than  larger  particles.  The  side  displacement  of  the 
'■  particles  is  a  mathematical  function  of  their  density 
8uid  diameter  and  permits  exact  calculation  of  their 
dimensions. 

,  A  serious  drawback  of  those  instruments  is  their  ^ 
inability  to  determine,  in  addition  to  the  dimensions, 
also  the  number  of  particles  in  the  aerosol.  This  draw- 


back  is  eliminated  in  the  electrostatic  counter,  construc¬ 
ted  at  Camp  Oetrick  by  Guyton  (4).  This  instrument 
works  on  the  principle  of  electric  pulses  being  produced 
by  particles  striking  a  copper  filament. 

The  air  being  studied  is  sucked  in  at  high  speed 
through  a  vacuum  pump  nozzle  toward  the  filament.  The 
impact  of  the  particles  against  the  filament  causes 
electric  pulses  in  it.  The  electric  circuit  amplifies 
and  fixes  the  pulses.  The  pulse  is  directed  to  a  t 

triatron  tube  for  calculation,  whose  discharge  is  I 

amplified  in  txirn  through  a  triode  and  induces  a  current 
in  the  electr  omagnet  of  a  mechanical  counter.  The 
determination  of  particle  size  is  based  on  prevalent 
dependence  of  the  voltage  on  the  square  of  particle 
diameter.  The  following  formula  is  based  on  this 
relation: 

Particle  diameter  (in  microns) 

pulse  voltage  (in  microvolts) 

3*04 

The  instrument  used  by  the  author  could  count 
about  2000  particles  per  second,  which,  however,  was  not 
nearly  a  final  value.  The  smallest  dry  and  liquid  parti¬ 
cles  which  this  instrument  was  able  to  register  were 
in  the  order  of  two  to  throe  microns,  but  according  to 

Guyton's  calculations,  improTeiasnts  in  the  construction 
of  the  instrument  could  lower  this  limit  to  0.3-1  )i. 
Guyton's  counter  is  portable  and  can  be  built  into  a 
medium-sized  suitcase,  which  makes  it  easy  to  carry 
around. 

Another  instrument  of  a  similar  type  is  the 
photoelectric  counter,  constructed  by  Gucker,  O'Konski, 
lickard  and  Pitts  (5,  6).  Its  action  -  to  count  the 
particles  but  not  to  determine  their  size  -  is  based  on 
light  diffusion  by  aerosol  particles.  A  narrow  stream 
of  the  aerosol  is  intensely  lighted  against  a  dark  back¬ 
ground,  The  direct  light  diffusion  observed  during  this 
operation  is  registered  by  means  of  a  photoelement.  The 
light  diffused  by  each  particle  0.6  )i  or  more  in  diameter, 
hitting  the  photoelement  creates  electric  impulse  which, 
after  suitable  amplification, becomes  sufficiently 
strong  to  set  off  a  mechanical  counter.  Particle  counting 
progresses  at  the  rate  of  1000  readings  per  minute. 


205 


A  general  diagraij  of  the  Instrument  is  presented  on  Pig, 
14.  This  instrument  was  deaigned  and  first  utilized  as  a 
penetrometer  to  test  gas  filters  with  the  help  of  oil 
vr^ior,  later  however  it  was  successfully  used  for  the 
counting  of  particles  In  bacterial  aerosols. 

Recently  this  instrument  has  been  improved  by 
O'Konski  (7).  The  new  model  has  a  higher  countln,^  speed 
and  a  differential  pulse  ' collector  within  the 

determined  voltage  limits.  Introduction  of  the  differen¬ 
tial  collector  permitted  to  determine  the  dispersion  of 
the  aerosol  under  investigation. 

3y  now,  judging  by  the  reports  published  in  Army 
Information  Digest  (8)  and  Military  Review  (9),  the  work 
conducted  at  Gamp  Detrick  has  been  concluded  and  a  model 
aerosolscope  has  been  constructed,  which, 

according  to  the  authors  of  the  notice,  evidently  will 
find  a  wide  application  in  nonspecific  detection  of 
biological  infectious  agents,  ffe  do  not  have  data  on 
the  actual  construction  of  this  instrument,  sines  its 


Flg«  14.  Diagram  of  photoelectric  particle 
counter. 


1-lamp;  2-lenses;  3-photocell;  4  -  amplifier ; 

5  -  cut-in  circuit;  6  -  registering  and  recording 
device;  7  -  porwer  .source;  8  -  air;  9 -aerosol. 


assume  that  its  action  is  based  on  one  of  the  above  ; 

described  principles.  The  instrument  counts  the  aerosol  | 
particles  and  determines  their  dimensions;  it  can  also  to  | 
used  for  the  detection  of  not  only  biological  agents,  but  | 
radioactive  particles  as  well. 

The  mothods  of  nonspecific  detection  of  bacterial  j 
contamination  will  evidently  be  used  not  only  to  discover  * 
bacteriologic  attack  by  means  of  aerosols,  but  also  to  i 
detect  biological  infectious  agents  introduced  into  the  | 
water  works.  As  has  been  shown  above,  the  American  j 

authors  consider  the  water  supply  system  as  one  of  the 
effective  ways  of  spreading  pathogenic  microorganisTs  i 
and  toxins  ^0).  Diseases  can  be  spread  especially  widely  ( 
If  biological  infectious  agents  are  introduced  into  the  i 
distributing  system,  from  which  water  goes  to  the  consomeij 
without  any  purification.  Their  timely  detection  will  t 
permit  shutting  off  water  and  thus  averting  the  | 

possibility  of  infection.  Present  measures  of  bacterio-  j 
logical  safety  of  the  water  (coli-titer,  microbial  count)  j 
cannot  give  a  timely  warning  signal,  if  only  because  of 
considerable  lapse  of  time  between  the  sample  taking  and 
obtainment  of  the  results. 

This  indicates  an  urgent  need  for  the  development 
of  nonspecific  detection  methods,  which  would  permit 
immediate  discovery  of  microorganisms  or  poisons  in  the 
water  system.  This  last  problem  -  rapid  discovery  of 
poisons  -  is  very  complex  and  there  are  no  literature 
data  on  the  possibility  of  its  solution,  but  ways  of  a 
quick  discovery  of  microorganisms  in  water  have  already 
been  found.  As  shown  by  Berger  and  Stevenson  (lo),  the 
solution  of  this  problem  was  attempted  by  the  workers  of 
the  Division  of  Physics  at  Camp  Detrick.  Results  of  the 
investigation  have  indicated  that  in  principle  this  can 
be  done  by  means  of  instruments  with  action  based  on  the 
determination  of  light  diffusion  by  bacterial  particles 
(microphotometers);  their  exactitude,  however,  is  very 
low  and  differs  little  from  the  exactness  of  general 
visual  investigation. 

In  connection  with  this,  the  use  of  indirect 
method  of  detection  of  biological  infectious  agents  in 
running  water  was  considered  to  be  promising.  The  gist 
of  it  is  a  constant  control  of  residual  chlorine  con¬ 
centration.  For  this  purpose,  installation  of  instruments 
in  key  positions  of  the  water  system  is  proposed,  in 
order  to  assure  an  uninterrupted  automatic  determination 


207 


of  residual  chlorine  content  in  the  water  passed  on  to 
the  consumer.  These  instruments  must  be  connected  with  a 
signal  system  and  automatic  equipment  to  collect  samples 
for  determination  of  bacterial  contamination. 

Although  a  drop  in  the  water’s  residual  chlorine 
content  can  be  caused  not  only  by  the  introduction  of 
biological  infectious  agents,  but  by  a  series  of  other 
things  (disturbance  of  the  water-treatment  process, 
unforeseen  contamination  of  any  part  of  the  water  system) 
as  well,  any  of  these  reasons  for  the  drop  in  chlorine 
concentration  requires  immediate  discontinuation  of  the 
water  supply,  regardless  of  whether  or  notwbacteriological 
weapon  has  been  used. 

A  direct  microbial  count  in  running  water  can  also 
give  definite  results.  An  increase  in  the  number  of  mioBobcii 
will  signal  the  danger  of  infection  to  the  consumers. 
Collins  and  Kipling  (11)  developed  a  method  of  direct 
determination  of  microbial  count  in  water,  the  application 
of  which  permits  to  obtain  results  2  hours  after  sampling, 
i.a.  much  earlier  than  the  generally  accepted  method 
involving  inoculation  on  nutritional  media.  The  essence 
of  the  method  consists  in  coloring  the  microorganisms 
contained  in  the  water  with  0.1^  solution  of  gentian 
violet  in  a  mixture  of  distilled  water  and  glycerine,  and 
subsequent  concentration  of  the  microbes  through  water 
evaporation. The  resulting  concentrate,  a  suspension  of 
microorganisms  in  glycerine,  is  pumped  into  capillary 
tubes  of  determined  diameter,  in  which  the  count  is 
effected  under  a  microscope. 

The  increase  of  bacterial  concentration  in  the  air 
and  running  water  can  be  determined  not  only  through 
count  of  the  particles  suspended  in  them,  but  also  by  i 
determining  the  protein  concentration,  since  protein 
discovered  in  the  air  is  in  the  majority  of  cases  genetic¬ 
ally  connected  with  microorganisms. 

Stickland's  work  (12)  shows  the  possibility  of 
application  of  biuret  reaction  to  determine  the  number 
of  bacteria.  The  essence  of  his  proposed  method  boils 
down  to  the  addition  of  sodium  hydroxide  and  copper 
sulfate  to  a  bacterial  suspension.  The  intensity  of  the 
purple  color  appearing  as  the  result  and  measured  by 
means  of  photoelectroscopic  absorption  meter,  is 
proportional  to  the  number  of  bacteria.  Certain  groups  of 
organisms,  particularly  staphylococci,  require  preliminary 


208 


r 

i 

i 

i 

I 

* 

I 

i 

! 

I 

1 

t 


i 

heating  of  the  suspension  with  sodium  hydroxide,  at 

100°  for  a  few  m'nutes,  with  subssnuont  aduitioa  of  | 

copper  sulfate. 

The  drawback  of  Stickland's  method  is  its 
insufficient  sensitivity.  Optimal  quantity  of  protein 
determinable  by  it  is  0.5  mg.,  which  corresponds 
aporoximately  to  5  mg.  of  dried  microbial  bodies.  Lesser 
protein  content  in  the  sample  leads  to  still  lower 
exactitude  of  tiie  method.  ; 

This  exactitude  can  be  increased  chrough  the 
introduction  of  certain  changes  (13). 

American  journal  "Science  News  Letter"  published  I 
vl958)  a  report  on  the  possibility  of  applying  the  pyro¬ 
lytic  reaction  to  determine  the  presence  of  baccerial 
nrotein  in  the  air.  The  method  is  based  on  the  fact  that 
when  the  microorganisms  collected  from  the  air  are  heated 
to  515-482<5^  protein  decomposition  is  caused,  and  one  of 
the  products  obtained  Is  prussic  acid,  which  is  easily 
determinable  by  a  number  of  methods.  This  procedure, 
developed  on  contract  for  the  Anjiy  at  Southern  Scientific  j 
Investigation.  Institute  in  Birmingham  (Alabama),  is  simplel 
fast  and  highly  sensitive.  It  permits  to  discover  as  [ 

little  as  a”few  micrograms  of  bacterial  protein  in  a  liter 
of  air. 


SPECIAL  DSTSCTION  METHODS.  | 

Special  detection  ol  oiologlcai  infectious  agents 
consists  of  three  basic  stages; 

-  collection  of  samples; 

-  accumulaiion  of  the  a-.ents  present  in  the 
samples  under  analysis; 

-  separation  and  identification  of  the  micro¬ 
organisms  nrssent  in  the  sample. 

I  *  J 

Collection  of  samples . 

"  "'""Samples  are  collected  in  the  region  of  presumed 
si.e  of  employment  of  the  bacteriological  weapon.  The 
collection  has  two  objects;  supply  of  material  to  the 
laboratory  for  isolation  of  the  agent  used  and  recognition 


209 


and  limitation  of  tha  infected  zones. 

The  following  are  inv-^stigated:  air,  watar,  food, 
washings  from  different  kinds  of  surfaces,  fragments  of 
aerial  bombs  and  instruments,  spraying  apparatus  used  and 
various  kinds  of  smaller  objects  (such  as  leaves,  stones, 
fragments  of  instruments,  etc.)* 

During  sample  collection  it  must  be  remembered  that 
laboratory  analysis  is  a  complex  and  laborious  process; 
consequently,  samples  should  be  taken  very  selectively, 
taking  into  consideration  the  maximal  probability  of 
isolating  an  agent  and  always  limiting  the  number  of 
samples  submitted  to  the  laboratory. 

The  problem  of  a  best  method  for  air  sample  coils 
ion  has  not  yet  been  settled. 

Abroad,  a  whole  series  of  instruments  has  been 
created  to  date,  none  of  which,  however,  can  be  conside 
fully  satisfactory.  This  is  proven  by  the  fact  that  in 
special  American  Instructions  on  bacteriologic  weapon 
defense,  ths  most  varied  devices,  down  to  the  simplest, 
are  recommended  for  sample  collecting.  According  to  their 
action,  the  instruments  currently  used  for  collection  of 
air  samples  can  be  divided  into  two  basic  types,  as 
follows: 

-  sedimentation; 

-  aspiration. 

Large  number  of  instruments  proposed  for  collect¬ 
ion  of  a..r  samples  makes  detailed  description  of  each 
model  impossible  and  limits  the  review  only  to  those 
recommended  for  use  by  foreign,  and  especially  American, 
instructions  on  bacteriologic  weapons  def.  ise,  or  those 
developed  at  scientific  centers  conducting  studies  on 
bacteriologic  weapons  (Camp  B.etrick  »  Porton)  and  in 
institutions  connected  with  them  by  contracts. 

The  method  of  bacterial  air  pollution  investigation 
by  means  of  a  Petr’,  dish  with  solid  nutritional  medium, 
which  is  an  example  of  a  sedimentative  device,  apparently 
has  not  yet  lost  its  significance,  in  spite  of  its 
simplicity  and  grossly  insufficient  exactitude.  This  is 
borne  out  by  the  fact  that  in  "State  of  Kaine  Medical 
Citil  Defense  Plan"  (^';),  set  forth  as  a  model  for  the 
organization  of  similar  plans  in  other  states,  it  is 
specified  that  Petri  dishes  be  included  among  the  equip¬ 
ment  of  Civil  Defense  Corps.  Open  dishes  are  to  be  placed 


for  a  definite  period  of  time  both  on  the  roofs  of  hi^^ri  i 
buildings  and  on  the  ground.  ! 

After  such  exposition,  the  dishes  are  shipred  to  a  | 
suitable  laboratory  for  incubation  and  further  invest!-  | 
gation.  I 

This  method,  however,  has  among  a  whole  series  of  | 
drawbacks  the  most  essential  one,  which  makes  doubtful  the  j 
possibility  of  its  use  for  bacteriologic  weapon  detection. 
It  is  a  fact  that  by  means  of  the  plate  method  only  those 
microorganisms  which  are  attached  to  the  largest  aerosol 
particles  can  be  intercepted;  this  makes  it  unsuitable 
for  the  investigation  of  fine-dispersion  aerosols. 

Among  the  instruments  recommended  for  use  is  the  I 

one  proposed  by  Hollaender  and  Della  Valle,  back  in  19?9.  j 
Its  action  is  based  on  the  principle  of  collision  of  the  i 
particles  with  the  surface  of  agar.  The  instrument,  basic 
diagram  of  which  is  shown  on  ill.  15,  is  simple  and  easy  1 
to  handle.  f 

Air  samples  are  collected  by  means  of  an  ordinary 
pump,  connected  to  an  air  flow  speedometer.  Recently,  the 
Petri  dish  with  solid  nutritional  medium  has  been  replaced 
in  the  Hollaender  and  Della  Valle  instrument  by  special 
filters,  impregnated  with  nutritional  medium,  proposed  by 
the  U.S.  Health  Service.  j 

Du  Buy  and  Cripps  (17)  instrument  with  a  screen  ! 
disc  has  also  been  recommended  for  use.  As  in  many  otner  j 
devices,  Petri  dish  is  used  for  particle  interception.  i 
Air  flow  is- directed  towards  the  surface  of  the  agar 
through  perforations  in  the  disc,  which  is  located  close 
to  the  said  surface. 

The  instrument  consists  of  a  round  body  with  an 
air  outlet,  a  Petri  dish  and  a  brass  cover-disc  with  300 
perforations.  The  cover  snugly  closes  the  body,  to  which 
it  is  attached  by  means  of  two  surface  clamps.  The  air 
enters  the  instrument  through  the  perforation  in  th.;  cover 
disc,  hits  the  surface  of  agar,  then  glides  on  the  medium 
surface  and  is  forced  out  through  the  outlet  at  the  bottom 
of  the  case. 


’  211 


FM.  15.  Hollaender  and  Della  Valle  instrument  for 
collection  of  air  samples. 

1 -glass  funnel; 2 -rubber  plug;  3 -pump  flue; 
k  -body  of  the  instrument;  5 -Petri  dish. 

In  the  U.S.  Army  Chemical  Corps  laboratory, 

Andersen  (18)  constructed  a  more  perfect  rariation  of 
the  Du  Buy  and  Cripps  instrument.  This  model  distinguishes 
itself  by  a  greater  intercepting  effectiveness  because  of 
the  cascade  impactor  principle  used  in  it.  The  instrument 
is  composed  of  6  elements,  one  placed  above  the  other,  < 
Bach  element  consists  of  a  Petri  dish  with  agar,  over 
which  a  perforated  disc  is  placed.  The  diameter  of  the 
perforationsdecreases  from  the  top  disc  to  the  bottom  one, 
which  results  in  increasing  speed  of  the  air  flow  from 
one  cascade  to  another  and,  along  with  it,  increasing 
impact  effectiveness  -  larger  particles  settle  on  the  top 
plates,  while  smaller  do  so  on  the  bottom  ones.  Thus 
Andersen’s  instrument  not  only  assures  a  more  effective 
interception  of  the  aerosol  particles,  but  also  permits 
to  determine  which  aerosol  fractions  carry  the  pathogenic 
microorganisms.  Diagram  of  the  instrument  and  its  general 
appearance  are  presented  on  16  and  17. 


3d 


lor 

this 


C  i  -3  S 


'/arious  models  of  "slot"  instruments  can  also  he  us 
collection  of  air  samples.  One  of  the  first  models 
kind  was  a  "slot"  instrument  for  collecting  air  sam 
and  counting  bacteria,  ororosed  as  early  as  in  1941 
Bourdillon,  Lidwell  and  Thoma  (19)» 
built  in  the  form  of  a  cylinder, 
covered  at  the,  top  with  a  lid, 
provided  with  a  V-shaped  slot. 

A  Petri  dish  with  medium  is  placed 
under  the  cover.  An  electric  motor 
draws  in  air  through  the  cover  slot 
and  assures  a  uniform  rotation  of 
the  plate.  Passing  through  the  slot, 
the  air  hits  with  a  great  force  the 
surface  of  the  medium  and  inseminates 
It  with  microflora. 

Later  Bourdillon,  uidwell  and 
Shuster  (20)  perfected  the  'felot" 
instruments  by  equipping  it  with  a 
device  to  register  the  temporary 
changes  of  microbial  concentration 
in  the  air  being  investigated. 

Shuster  (21)  constructed  a 
"slot"  instrument  which  takes  samples 
automatically. 

In  recent  years  this  instru¬ 
ment  has  undergone  further 
perfecticn,  which  resulted  in  the 
construction  of  a  portable  model 
capable  of  protracted  air  sample 
taking  (22). 

It  can  take  air  samples  for 
12  hours  at  a  speed  of  28,3  l.per  minute.  A  study  of 
effectiveness  in  taking  samples  of  bacterial  aerosols  was 
conducted  by  Kuehns  'Sc  Decker  (?3)  at  Camp  Den-ick  and 
showed  that  it  possessed  numerous  advantages  over  the 
standard  models  in  existence.  Its  particular  value  is  that 
it  permits  to  carry  out  air  analyses  over  a  long  period  of 
time  and  provides  constantly  a  high  ef f ectiveness  at  a 
minimal  input  of  work.  | 

Air  samples  can  also  bs  taken  by  instrum.nts  of  the  | 
vVells'  centrifuge  type  (24).  Wells’  air  centrifuge 
of  a  glass  container,  electric  motor  and  a  case.  A  stream 
of  air  is  sucked  into  the  openingof  a  rapidly  turning  l 


jneral 


of 


Fig, 16. 

V  i  e  > 

Andersen's  instrumerJ 
for  air  sample 
collections. 


213 


214 


Fig  .18.  Diagram  of  collector  tube 
of  electrostatic  precipitator  with 
agar. 

l-high  voltage  electrode;  2-grounded 
agar  layer;  3-glass  tube;  % -rubber 
stopper; 5  -opening  for  air  exhaust; 

6-contact  on  agar;  7. -grounding 
contact. 

The  principle  of  precipitation  in  electrostatic 
field  is  particularly  put  to  work  in  the  electroprecipit' 
ator  constructed  by  Luckiesch,Taylor  eurid  Halladay  (25V 
In  this  instrument  two  Petri  dishes  are  used,  in  which 
the  medium  is  placed  directly  on  the  electrode  plates. 
Precipitation  of  particles  on  the  medium's  surface  takes 
place  as  an  electrostatic  field  is  produced  on  the 
electrodes  when  8000  volts  are  supplied. 

Another  instrument  working  on  the  same  principle 


Fifr  19.  Agar 
collector  tube  with 
B.  prodigiosum  col¬ 
onies  after  their 
electrostatic 
settlement  at  10  kV 


215 


was  proposed  by  Maissonnet  (26). 

Houwink  and  Rolvink  (27)  constructed  two  new  models 
of  alectroprecipitators.  The  first  of  them  is  an  instrument 
the  main  part  of  which  is  a  glass  tube,  covered  inside 
with  a  layer  of  nutritional  agar.  A  high  tension  electrode 
is  fastened  in  the  center  of  the  cylindrical  collector.  The 
agar  layer  is  grounded,  while  positive  charge  is  given  to 
the  central  electrode  (Pig.  18).  The  microorganisms  are 
sucked  from  the  air  through  the  tube  and  precipitate  on 
agar  covering  the  walls  of  the  glass  tube.  The  tubes  are 
then  placed  in  incubator  for  subsequent  culturing,  Fic.  20 
shows  an  agar  tubs  with  B.  prodigiosum  colonies  aftsr 
electrostatic  precipitation  and  subsequent  incubation. 

The  second  model  of  precipitator  has  a  water-film 
collector,  permitting  a  prolonged  admission  of  aerosol 
samples.  Diagram  of  this  collector  is  presented  on  Pig.  20. 

A  film  of* water  flowing  down  the  inside  walls  of  a 
vertical  cylindrical  tube  is  the  negative  electrode.  A  lead 
in  the  center  of  the  same  tube  is  the  positive  electrods 
of  high  voltage.  Particles  are  caught  in  the  liquid,  which 
is  subsequently  analyzed. 

Along  with  the  electroprecipitators,  thermoprecipit¬ 
ators  can  be  used,  in  which  precipitation  of  the  particles 
occurs  as  the  result  of  temperature  differences  between 
the  walls  of  a  chamber  through  which  passes  the  aerosol 
under  investigation.  In  the  recent  years,  a  group  of 
scientists  (28,  29,  30)  at  Georgia  State  Institute  of 
Technology,  working  under  contract  with  the  U.S.  Army 
Chemical  corps,  carried  out  the  construction  of  thermo- 
precipitators  and  investigated  their  effectiveness. 

As  a  result,  a  model  instrument  was  constructed,  serial 
production  of  which  has  been  undertaken  by  a  manufacturing 
company.  The  precipitator  constructed  by  the  above  authors 
has  three  basic  parts:  a  lower  cooled  plate,  an  isolating 
i  layer  and  an  upper  heated  plate.  Heat  is  supplied  by  the 
usual  electrical  elements,  and  the  cooling  effect  is 
obtained  through  the  circulation  of  running  water.  For 
investigation  of  bacterial  aerosols  the  temperature 
gradient  should  not  exceed  100°  (heating  to  .125°,  cooling 
to  25°).  The  air  is  pumped  through  an  inlet  in  tne  center 
of  the  upper  plate  and  passed  in  radial  streams  between 
the  heated  and  cooled  surfaces,  the  distance  between  which 
is  0.038  cm.  Any  particle  contained  in  the  air  pas-ing 
through  the  thermal  field  settles  on  the  cooled  surface 


or  on  the  substrate  covering  it.  As  substrate  the  authors 
used  filter  paper  impregnated  with  a  nutritional  medium 
(agar  with  various  additives)  on  which  culturing  was  then 
continued. 


In  many  instruments  for  collect-  w  I 

ion  of  air  samples  the  microorganisms 
are  intercepted  by  means  of  various 
liquids  in  form  of  foam,  bubbles  or 
drop  aerosols.  The  first  is  used  in  the  I 

instruments  developed  by  Robertson,  Brigg,  ^  ^  ^ 

Miller,  Baker  (31;t  Wheller,  Poly,  Jones  l^T  I  A©  ' 

(32),  Lemon  (33).  which  are  variations  of*  >  I  ; 

the  well  known  Instrument  of  ->■*-  J  ; 

D’yakonov  and  of  the  "capillary  impinger"  |  ' 

of  Rosebury  (34)  and  many  others.  ^  ^  1  : 

Moulton's  instrument  makes  use  of  the  Jt»-  "j*  “ 

principle  of  interception  of  the  if  I  ^ 

investigated  aerosol  particles  with  n  I  h 

minute  drops  of  liquid  medium,  dispersed  E 

by  a  flow  of  pumped  in  air,  .  H  i  (T1  jpH 

Instruments  using  liquids  for  ja  a 

purposes  of  interception  of  the  air 
microorganisms  give  much  more  accurate 
results  than  the  ones  using  soli4 
nutritional  media  or  membrane  filter.  j 

The  main  reason  for  it  is  that  on  "4^  I 

solid  nutritional  medium  an  aerosol  L../ 

particle  originates  only  one  colony,  f/ 

no  matter  how  many  microorganisms  are  rnoo-rai 

in  It.  In  the  instruments  using  liquid,  of  coll«tor®tu 
however,  division  of  conglomerates  ^  eleotrostati 

takes  place.  precipitator  wi 

Together  with  this  very  water-film, 

important  advantage,  which  is  more  1-high  voltage 

valuable  for  investigational  work  electrode; 2-col 

than  for  detection,  the  atomizers  tor  tube;  3-ai 

possess  a  substantial  drawback,  supply ; 4- wotar 

which  greatly  limits  the  possibility  5-air  suid  water 
'•of  their  use  outside  the  framework  of  outlet;  6 -casin 

experimental  investigations.  The  for  the  water-f 

majority  of  proposed  models  of  atom-  formation;  7- 
izers  are  not  meant  to  process  great  electrode  insul 

volumes  of  air.  Thus  Moulton’s  atom-  tor. 

izer  can  process  not  more  than  4.5  1. 

of  air  during  10-15  minutes,  while  Rosebury’s  "capillary 


Fig  20.  Diagram 
of  collector  tube 
of  electrostatic 
precipitator  with 
water-film. 

1-high  voltage 
electrode ; 2-colleo 
tor  tube;  3-air ‘ 
supply ; 

5-air  sold  water 
outlet;  6 -casing 
for  the  water-film 
formation;  7- 
electrode  insula¬ 
tor. 


217 


irapinger”  can  handle,  2-3  1.  per  minute.  Robertson's 
instrument  is  somewhat  more  productive  (5-10  1.  per  minute). 
The  U.S.  Health  Service  developed  it  into  a  twelve-flask 
sample  collector,  which  is  planned  for  use  by  the  Civil 
Defense  Service.  The  twelve-flask  collector  is  built  in 
such  a  way  as  to  assure  a  continuity  of  sample  taking. 
Through  each  flask,  filled  with  nutri tional* medium,  air  is 
purapued  for  20  minutes;  thus  it  can  take  samples  for  4 
hours  without  interruption  and  without  recharge. 

Judging  by  extant  data  it  seems  that  the  instruments 
in  which  the  most  varied  filtering  materials  are  used  for 
interception  of  the  microorganisms,  will  find  a  wide 
application.  A  simpler  instrument  of  this  type  is  the 
"cotton  impinger",  which  is  described,  and  instruction  for 
its  use  given,  in  the  work  of  Hantover  (35).  "Cotton" 
impinger  is  very  simple  and  can  be  used  in  any  conditions. 
It  has  the  form  of  a  truncated  glass  cone  containing 
cotton  balls.  A  hand  pump  is  attached  to  its  narrow  end, 
and  a  small  glass  tube  is  inserted  into  its  wide  end. 

Metal  net  is  placed  before  the  cotton  balls  for  a  mors 
uniform  distribution  of  particles  ovei  the  cotton. 

After  collection  of  the  air  samples  the  instrument 
is  placed  in  a  protective  case  and  sent  to  the  laboratory, 
where  the  particles  caught  on  the  cotton  are  eluated 
and  culture  made  wi th  the  suspension  obtained. 

Membrane  fil  ers  can  also  be  used  for  isolation 
of  microoiganisms  from  the  air;  their  application  is 
recommended  by  many  special  manuals.  Continuous  sample 
taking  instruments  have  been  constructed  using  membrane 
filters  as  interceptive  material.  Detailed  description  of 
one  model  of  a  similar  instrument  is  given  in  the  work  of 
Crist,  Gurney  &  Hansen  (36).  The  instrument  contains 
Siveral  filter  holders,  connected  to  an  air  pump.  A  special 
device  opens,  at  the  proper  time,  a  filter  holder  valve, 
thus  assuring  the  pumping  of  the  necessary  quantity  of  air 
through  the  filte.',  and  then  closes  it,  directing  the 
air  towards  the  next  filter. 

?or  investigation  of  aerosols  special  membrane  ' 

filters  are  used;  they  differ  from  the  filters  used  for 
hydrosols  in  that  their  pores  are  larger. 

There  is  a  great  diversity  of  opinion  concerning 
the  performance  of  nitrocellulose  membrane  filters  in 
intercepting  microorganisms  from  the  air.  3ome  authors  say 


218  _ 


the  method  is  "ideal  ',  others  (27)  point  out  that  -nembrane 
filters  tried  by  them  gave  completely  unsatisfactory 
results  in  the  investigation  of  aerosols  for  vegetative 
forms  of  microorganisms,  since  among  the  intercepted  ceies 
the  number  of  viable  ones  did  not  exceed  10,5. 

Recently  filters  made  of  soluble  materials, 
especially  dry  gelatine,  gained  wide  acceptance.  I'he 
technic  of  preparation  of  these  filters  was  worked  out  by 
Mitchell,  Timmons  and  Dorris  (37).  The  foam  for  the  filters 
is  prepared  from  40;5  gelatine  solution  in  distilled  water, 
containing  4/5  glycerine,  ihis  solution  is  poured  into 
rectangular  forms  made  of  wax  paper  ,  which  are  then  placed 
in  vacuum  dessicator  with  calc Lum'  chloride.  The  air  is 
extracted  from  the  dessicator  by  means  of  a  pump,  until 
the  disappearance  of  all  bubbles  and  lormation  of  a  foam 
layer.  Drying  under  vacuum  is  continued  for  3  day's.  Towards 
the  and  of  this  period,  the  gelatine  foam  dries,  becomes 
porous  and  sufficiently  stretch-resistant.  In  this  form 
it  is  suitable  for  preparation  of  the  filters.  At  present, 
foam  gelatins  is  industrially  manufactured  by  an  American 
company. 

The  size  of  the  pores  can  be  controlled  by  varying 
the  thickness  of  the  gelatine  layer  at  the  time  of  pouring 
it  into  the  forms.  Thin  layer  has  smaller  pores  than  a 
thick  one. 

The  process  of  preparation  of  the  filter  out  of  a 
gelatine  block  is  described  in  detail  in  th  ■  work  of 
Mitche-1.1,  Fulton  and  Eilingson  (3B),  The  filters  are  cut 
out  of  the  blocks  with  the  help  of  special  paetern  with  a 
!  cutting  edge  and  a  circular  knife  (T'ig,  21). 


The  form  and  dimensions  of  a  ready  fii  er  are 
present  ed  on  Fig  .  22. 

Filters  are  sterilized  with  a  mixture  of  ethylene 
oxide  and  carbon  dioxide  ('tarboxide" )  •  However,  certain 
authors  point  out  that  this  treatment  of  the  gelatine 
filters  with  ethylene  oxide  lowers  their  solubility,  and 
for  this  reason  they  suggest  that  non-sterile  fillers 
should  be  used,  disregarding  the  insignii icant  number  of 
microoru’anisms  that  could  invode  them  during  preparation 
(39). 

Finished  filters  are  placed  in  a  paper  envelope, 
both  sides  of  which  have  circular  openings  in  the  center; 
the  convex  part  of  the  filter  fits  into  one  of  the 
openings.  To  protect  them  from  impurities,  the  filter 


is  packed,  together  with  the  envelope,  into  several  wraps 

(  Fig,  23). 

Fig,  24  shows  the  instrument  for  collection  of  air 
samples,  in  which  a  foam  gelatine  filter  is  used.  It 
consists  of  a  suction  tube  with  rheometer,  a  filter  holder 
and  a  closing  device-sample  taking  tube,  connected  with 
the  source  of  negative  pressure. 

Before  taking  an  air 
sample,  the  filter,  recently 
unwrapped  from  all  the 
protective  wrappers  (except 
the  envelope-container),  is 
inserted  into  the  filter- 
holder  and  pressed  snugly 


u. 


r 

n 

I 

4 

in  with  the  lower,  mobile 


Fig.  21.  Knives  for  cutting 
out  filters  from  gelatine 
blocks. 


part  towards  the  higher,  in- 
mobile  one.  After  the  air  has 
been  sucked  through,  the 
filter  is  removed,  placed  in 
a  sterile  envelope  and  sent 
to  the  laboratory.  Before 
examination,  the  filter  is 
dissolved  and  the  microorgan¬ 
isms  contained  therein 
suspended  in  water. 


Comparative  invest i gat-^ 

ion  01  performance  of  the  gelatine  filters,  membrane 
filters  and  c-rtain  interceptors  of  bacteria,  carried  out 
by  Mitchell,  Fulton  and  Sllingson  (38)  showed  that  gelatine 
filters  have  the  best  intercepting  ability.  They  also  have 
many  further  advantages.  In  particular,  they  can  be  success^ 


fully  used  for  collection  of  air  samples  at  low  tempera¬ 
tures,  when  the  instruments  using  liquid  media  or  media 
with  agar  for  interception  of  microorganisms  are  useless 
because  they  freeze.  Also,  any  instrument  requiring 
nutritional  medium  is  not  very  suitable  for  use  under 
field  conditions,  since  it  is  very  difficult  to  protect 
nutritional  broth  or  agar  form  contamination  during 
transport. 

Another  material  which  can  be  used  for  the 
preparation  of  soluble  bacterial  filters  is  sodium  alginate, 
which  is  a  fibrous  material,  similar  to  cotton  in  appear¬ 
ance.  It  is  easily  soluble  in  water  (down  to  1  part  per 
10  parts  of  water)  and  tolerates  sterilization  at  125°. 


Fig. 22.  Gelatin  filter; 
actual  size. 


Fig.  23.  Packing  of  gelatin 
filters  (letters  indicate  the 
sequence  of  the  wrappings). 


^  Fig.  24.  Instrument  for 
collection  of  air  samples, 
using  gelatine  filters. 

The  instrument  presented  by  Richards  (40),  In 
which  sodium  alginate  is  used  as  interceptive  material, 
is  both  simple  and  easy  to  operate.  It  has  the  form  of  a 
metal  tube  75  mm. long  and  12  mm.  in  diameter.  One  end  of 
the  tube  is  open,  the  other  -  joined  to  a  pump.  Inside  the 
tube  is  a  plug  made  of  sodium  alginate  fibers.  After  the 
necessary  quantity  of  air  has  been  drawn  through  it,  the 
plug  is  placed  in  sterile  water,  which  after  the  complete 
dissolution  of  sodium  alginate  undergoes  further  investiga 
tion.  Checking  of  the  effectiveness  of  these  filters 
always  showed  the  air  that  passed  through  them  to  be  steri 
le;  i.e.  all  airborne  microorganisms  remained  on  the 
filter. 

Among  the  materials  suitable  for  preparation  of 
soluble  filters,  we  should  mention  also  sodium  glutiiraate, 
recommended  by  Japanese  authors  (41). 

Concluding  the  review  of  instruments  and  methods 
for  sample  collection,  we  must  note  that  their  division 
into  those  provided  for  non-specific  detection  and  those 
for  specific  detection,  as  made  at  the  presentation  of  the 
material,  is  doubly  conditional.  Certain  instruments  meant 
for  determination  of  number  and  size  of  aerosol  particles, 
can  also  be  successfully  used  for  collection  of  samples 
destined  for  bacteriologic  investigation  in  order  to 
determine  the  genus  of  the  microorganisms  contained  in  the 


air.  Inus  Sonkin  ^.42)  successfully  used  May's  cascade 
impactor  for  collection  of  air  sanplas  in  order  to  isolate  i 
streptococci  and  pneumococci  fron  the  air.  The  method 
he  used  permitted  not  only  to  count  ^articles  ir,  aerosols 
and  determine  their  size,  but  also  to  culture  the  micro¬ 
organisms  which  settled  on  the  intercepting  plates  of  the 
impactor. 

Also,  apnearance  of  an  unusually  great  number  of  | 
colonies  on  Petri  dishes,  inoculated  by  means  of  "slot.", 
screen  disc,  or  similar  instruments,  or  on  the  membrane 
filters  through  which  the  air  under  investigar ion  is 
drawn,  permits  to  suspect  that  a  bacteriologic  attack  is 
under  wayjeven  before  the  identification  of  pathogenic 
microorganisms,  evidently,  American  scientists  value  highly 
this  characteristic.  In  connection  with  the  fact  that 


during  systematic  investigation  of  air  the  laboratory 
personnel  will  have  to  count  colonies  on  a  great  number  c 
dishes,  recently ‘at tempts  have  been  made  to  construct 
instruments  which  wou-d  permit  to  speed  up  gr:atly  this 
process.  Such  investigations  were  especially  carried  out, 
on  assignment  from  U.S.  Chemical  Qorps,  at  Du  Mont 
laboratoi' ies.  The  construction  of  such  an  instrument  was 
presented  by  Mansberg  (43).  It  is  based  on  the  principle 
of  television  camera  action.  General  apnearance  of  this 
instrument  is  shown  in  Ifig .  25. 

Petri  dishes  with  developed  colonies 
are  placed  in  a  counting  chamber,  where  a 
cathode  tube  and  an  optical  system  are  usee 
to  divide  their  surface  into  strips. 


strios. 


Fig.  25.  G  eneral  appearance 
of  the  instruments  for 
counting  colonies  on  plates. 


26.  Diagram  of  the 
optical  section  of  the 
instrument  for  counting 
colonies  on  plates. 
1-electron  beam  tube;  2- 
objective  lens;  3-niirror; 


223 


4  -searching  device;  5 -screen; 

6  -condenser  lenses;  7 -mirror; 

8  -photoelectric  multiplier. 

A  diagram  of  the  optical  system  is  presented  in  Fig. 

26. 

The  analyzing  light  spot  produced  by  the  cathode 
lamp  is  directed  by  means  of  the  objective  lenses  to  the 
surface  of  nutritional  medium.  Light  from  this  moving  spot, 
passing  thrrugh  the  thickness  of  the  nutritional  medium 
and  the  plate  walls,  is  intercepted  by  the  condensing 
lenses  and  forms  an  Illuminated  segment  on  the  photocathod( 
of  the  intensifying  photocell.  Every  time  the 

analyzing  light  spot  is  darkened  by  a  non-transparent  or 
semi-transparent  colony,  the  photocell  produces  a  pulse. 
When  a  great  number  of  the  analyzing  strips  are  used, 
the  number  of  pulses  will  be  proportional  to  the  number  oi 
colonies  and  their  sizes.  If  the  diameter  of  all  the 
colonies  were  almost  equal,  then,  starting  with  the  inter¬ 
cepted  number  of  pulses  and'  their  duration,  it  would  be 
very  easy  to  determine  the  number  of  colonies.  However,  the 
size  of  these  colonies  can  vary  considerably,  and  thus, 
when  the  surface  of  the  medium  is  divided  into  strips,  the 
ray  can  hit  the  same  colony  several  times,  and  this  colony 
can  originate  not  one,  but  several  pulses.  To  avoid 
counting  the  same  colony  more  than  once,  the  instrument 
has  a  special  '’remembering  device",  which  excludes  this 
possibility.  The  "remembering  device"  acts  in  sucii  a  way 
that  reading  does  occur  only  when  the  light  spot  hits  the 
colony  for  the  first  time;  when  it  happens  again,  the 
■  pulse  is  weakened  and  extinguished  before  reaching  the 
reader. 

The  instrument  for  automatic  colony  counting  has 
been  successfully  tried  out  in  many  laboratories.  To  count 
the  colonies  on  one  Petri  dish,  not  more  than  2  seconds 
are  necessary.  Undei  ideal  conditions  the  count  is  100^ 
accurate;  under  usual  conditions  it  is  somewhat  leas  so, 
but  still  not  inferior  to  the  visual  method. 

A  modified  model  of  the  instrument  permits  counting 
colonies  growing  on  membrane  filters. 

As  we  have  mentioned  before,  upon  application  of 
a  bacteViological  weapon,  not  only  air  can  be  the  source 


224 


of  infection  for  man,  but  also  water,  soli  and  other  outsUie  I 
objects.  This  circumstance  makes  it  necessa¬ 
ry  to  investigate  samples  of  water,  earth,  foodstuffs  and 
other  objects,  for  presence  of  biological  infectious 
agents.  The  great  attention  devoted  in  this  work  to  the 
collection  of  .air  samples  does  not  in  any  way  imply  lesserj 
importance  of  investigation  of  other  objects  for  purposes  [ 
of ' detection,  but  only  the  greater  complexity  of  air 
sampling  and  an  insufficient  development  of  this  problem. 

In  reality,  the  investigation  of  earth,  wter  and 
other  samples  can  in  many  cases  give  much  more  accurate 
indications  that  a  bacteriological  weapon  has  been  used. 
This  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  catching  volatile 
aerosol  ,  especially  during  high  speeds  of  air  streams, 
is  quite  a  complicated  task.  It  is  much  simpler  to  detect 
the  microorganisms  settled  on  the  soil,  tree  leaves,  walls 
of  buildings  and  other  objects. 

The  necessity  for  water  investigation  is  dictated 
by  the  fact  that  water  supply  sources  serve  themselves  as 
an  object  of  bacteriologic  attack.  The  methods  of  non¬ 
specific  detection  of  the  biological  infectious  agents  in 
water  system  has  already  been  briefly  mentioned  above. 

Collection  of  water  samples  for  isolation  and 
subsequent  identification  of  the  microorganisms  used  as 
bacteriologic  weapon  does  not  significantly  differ  from 
the  generally  used  methods. 

The  State  of  Maine  Defense  Plan  (15)  contains  the 
following  instructions  on  the  collection  of  water  samples: 

1.  Prom  a  tap  of  undamaged  water  system . 

a)  Turn  the  tap  on  and  let  the  first  portions  of 
the  water  run  off. 

b)  Remove  the  closure  from  a  standard  container 
iif  none  is  available,  a  jar  with  screw-on  top  may  be 
used);  place  the  container  under  the  tap  without  touching 
the  edge,  fill  it  with  water  almost  to  the  brim,  put  on 

the  lid  and  wrap  it  up"  in  a  piece  of  fabric.  If  a  jar  is 
used,  put  on  a  gasket  before  screwing  tjt)©  on* 

2.  Taking  water  samples  from  rivers,  ponds  and  reservoirs . 

a)  Before  sample  taking,  wash  hands  thoroughly  with 
soap  and  water  to  remove  bacteria. 

b)  Take  off  the  fabric  cover  and  remove  the  stopper 
from  the  container  for  transportation  of  the  material. 


c)  Put  hand  as  far  out  as  possible,  dovm- 
stream,  immerse  bottle  about  40  cm.  deep  in  water,  with 
the  mouth  against  the  stream  and  fill  it  with  water. 

d)  Close  the  bottle. 

The  instructions  for  taking  water  samples  from 
wells,  springs  and  similar  sources  are  analogous. 

Acquaintance  with  them  shows  that  the  methods  and 
equipment  for  collection  of  water  samples  are  the  same  as 
those  generally  used  for  raicrobiologic  analyses.  It  only 
should  be  pointed  out  that  the  already  cited  work  of  Sergei 
and  Stevenson  (10)  mentions  the  instruments  to  oe  installec 
in  the  water  system,  for  automatic  collection  of  sa.mplos. 
These  instruments  are  connected  with  the  apparatus  for 
non-specific  detection  of  biological  agents  in  the  water 
system  and  work  upon  receiving  signal  from  it. 

It  seems  that  membrane  filters  will  be  widely  used 
for  purposes  of  concentration  of  microorganisms  in  water 
samples.  Recently  appeared  reports  state,  however,  that 
diatomite  filters  (diatomite  suspension  on  cotton  tissue) 
are  more  effective  than  the  membrane  ones.  According  to 
Lyutov's  data  (t4),  they  have  much  better  filtering 
ability.  A  diatomite  filter  can  process  up  to  100  1.  of 
water  in  35  minutes.  The  author  was  able  to  detect  Sal.mo- 
nellae  in  water  present  there  in  very  small  numbers  (5-6 
organisms  per  25  liters). 

When  a  bacteriologic  attack  is  sisoected  to  have 
occurred,  it  is  also  necessary  to  take  samples  from  the 
soil,  especially  in  the  place  of  explosion,  from  tree 
leaves  and  washings  from  buildings,  road  surfaces  and 
clothing  of  people  who  got  into  tne  way  of  an  aerosol 
cloud. 

As  shown  by  American  special  instructions,  sample 
taking  from  su-'faces  has  two  objects:  to  identify  the  kind 
of  agent  employed  and  to  define  the  infected  area, 
xlelatively  smooth,  clean  surf-ces  such  as  metal,  glass, 
concrete,  asphalt  or  finished  wood  are  best  for  sample 
taking.  Samples  snould  be  tc.ken  from  the  surfaces  perpend¬ 
icular  to  the  air  stream.  If  the  direction  of  the  wind 
is  unknown,  samples  should  be  taken  from  all  4  possible 
directions.  Taking  samples  from  horizontal  surfaces 
is  also  permissible;  moreover,  in  this  case  the 
direction  of  the  air  movement  does  not  have  a 


226 


great  influence. 

Sample  taking  from  the  outside  surfaces  should  be 
accompanied  by  making  corresponding  a  notations  on  the 
map  (45).  This  not  only  facilitates  subsequent  marking  of 
the  infected  regions,  but  also  simplifies  the  work  of 
laboratories,  which  can  refuse  to  analyze  specimens  collect- 
ed  too  far  from  the  infected  places. 

Inside  buildings  samples  should  be  taken  both  from 
horizontal  and  vertical  surfaces.  If  there  is  air 
conditioning,  it  is  sufficient  to  collect  samples  from  the 
surfaces  in  Vne  proximity  of  the  "in"  and  "out"  openings. 

The  method  of  sample  collection  from  surfaces  is 
relatively  simple:  it  consists  of  wiping  them  with  a  moist 
cotton  wad.  In  place  of  these,  some  authors  (46)  propose 
the  use  of  tampons  of  soluble  materials,  especially 
calcium  alginate,  which  assure  a  higher  percentage  of 
microbial  restoration. 

Along  with  the  surface  samples  Hantover  (35) 
recommends  taking,  for  investigational  purposes,  smears 
from  nostrils,  throats,  ears,  mouths,  conjunctival  cavity 
and  skin  of  people  in  suspected  areas.  According  to  Hant¬ 
over,  experiments  have  shown  that  the  most  accurate  results 
are  produced  by  smears  from  the  oral  cavity. 

Various  objects  (leaves,  stones,  munition  fragments, 
remnants  of  atomizers)  as  well  as  small  dead  animals  and 
carriers  from  the  region  supposedly  attacked  by  bacterio- 
logic  weapons,  should  also  be  sent  to  laboratory  for 
investigation. 

The  U.S.  Array  has  special  kits  for  the  collection 
of  samples  in  field  conditions,  provided  for  taking 
samples  of  air,  water  and  other  objects  which  can  be 
infected  (45). 

An  air  sample  is  collected  by  means  of  drawing  the 
air  with  a  hand  pump  through  the  impinger,  filled  with 
special  intercepting  liquid,  included  in  the  kit. 

Later  the  sorptive  liquid  is  passed  through  a 
membrane  filter,  which  undergoes  further  investigation. 

For  collection  of  samples  from  surfaces,  special 
packaged  tampons  are  included  in  the  kit.  A  sample  is 
taken  by  rubbing  the  surface  suspected  of  Infection  with 
moist  tampon. 


To  eluats  the  infectious  agents  from  the  tampons, 
gelatin  solution  is  used.  The  eluate  is  passed  through  a 
membrane  filter. 

The  kit  also  contains  small  polyethylene  bags,  in 
which  to  put  the  different  objects  to  be  sent  to  laboratory 
(ammunition  fragments,  leaves,  stones,  small  dead  animals, 
etc. ) . 

The  used  membrane  filters  are  sent  to  the  laboratory 
in  a  special  hermetically  sealed  box,  inside  which  they 
are  placed  on  nutritional  medium.  Boxes  containing  the 
filters  are  then  placed  in  a  waist-incubator,  the 
description  of  which  follows  below. 

A  general  view  of  the  kit  is  presented  In 
Fig.  27,  28. 

Rapid  accumulation  of  microorganisms  in  samples. 

After  the  collection  of  samples,  the  next  step  of 
specific  detection  of  biological  infectious  agents  is  the 
accumulation  (growing)  of  the  microorganism  contained  in 
them  and  the  isolation  of  a  pure  culture. 

As  is  well  known,  the  process  of  growing  micro¬ 
organisms,  especially  viruses  and  rickettsiae,  requires 
considerable  time,  For  this  reason  investigators  working 
in  this  field  have  made  attempts  to  shorten  as  much  as 
possible  the  time  necessary  for  the  growth.  Up  to  date, 
several  ways  to  solve  this  problem  have  been  found. 

The  first’ of  them  consists  in  a  maximal  cutting  dotn 
the  time  elapsed  between  the  moment  of  collection 
of  the  sample  and  the  start  of  incubation.  In  case  of 
bacteria,  this  can  be  achieved  by  immediately  placing  the 
collected  sample  in  the  thermal  conditions  in  which  the 
intercepted  microorganisms  start  to  develop  already  during 
the  transport  to  laboratory.  American  instructions  advise 
the  warmth  of  the  human  body  for  this  purpose.  Thus,  filtei 
used  in  the  apparatus  of  Hollaender  and  Della  Valle, 
according  to  the  instructions  given  in  the  already 
frequently  mentioned  Defense  Plan  of  the  State  of  Maine, 
should  be  placed  on  special  pads  saturated  with  the 
medium,  wrapped  up  in  polyfilm  and  put  in  an  inside 
pocket  of  the  man  transporting  the  filters  to  the  laborat¬ 
ory. 


228 


Fij^  27.  Field  kit  for  collection  of 

samples. 


Fig  28.  Field  kit  for  collection  of 

samples. 


x.aubusch( 47,  48)  proposed  a  special  vest  (Fig.  29 j 
for  the  cultivation  of  microorganisins  on  'ns’nbran^  filters, 
using  the  warmth  of  a  human  body.  The  used  -nembrane  filter 
is  placed  on  a  pad  saturated  with  medium  and  then  in  a 
flat  box,  hermetically  sealed.  The  boxes  are  carried  in 
one  of  the  inside  pockets  of  the  vest. 

To  speed  up  the  growth  process  of  the  investigated 
microorganisms  developing  on  an  artificial  m  dium,  the 
method  of  culturing  them  in  continuously  changing  nutri¬ 
tional  medium  can  be  used. 

This  method  assures  uninterrupted  removal  of  tne 
products  of  microbial  metabolism,  thus  speeding  up  the 
microbes'  growth. 

Harris  and  Powell  (49)  of  the  British  Scientific- 
Investigational  Center  in  Porton,  proposed  the  construct¬ 
ion  of  a  special-  chamber,  which 
would  permit  continuous  change  - 

of  the  nutritional  medium. 

Using  this  chamber  the  authors 
were  able,  according  to  their 
ovm  information,  to  shorten 
the  whole  process  of 
identification  of  the  isolated 
microorganisms  (inoculation, 
growth,  morphological  study, 
reaction  with  immune  sera)  to 
5-6  hours. 

The  chamber  operates  on 
the  principle  of  culturing 
microorganisms  on  the  surface 

of  cellophane  membrane,  under  Fig .  29.  Vest  incubator, 
which  the  nutritional  medium 

is  continuously  exchanged.  The  chamber  is  mounted  on  a 
metallxirgic  microscope,  due  to  which  the  observation  is 
carried  out  in  reflected  light. 

Fig  .  30  shows  a  basic  diagram  of  the  chamber.  Its 
body  has  the  form  of  a  stainless  steel  cylinder,  with  a 
depression  on  one  side  (1.5  mm.).  Cellophane  is  pulled 
over  this  depression  and  fastened  by  means  of  a  washer 
and  a  screw-on  clamp.  Two  openings  connect  the  depression 
with  the  tubes  supplying  and  removing  nutritional  medium. 
To  decrease  the  dispersion  of  light  hindering 
observation,  the  bottom  of  the  depression  is  covered  with 
dark,  dull  enamel. 


-h' 

cor.tain  e  r 
T.  i  c  ro  s  c  0  < 


coay 

Kig. 

S  t  &  6  • 


0  I 
1 


the  cnaTiOJ!'  is  pj-acea  i 
■■  hich  in,  ^urn  is  fas i 


'i  X  i 

0  n  ; 


saoniy  air  tax 


vx 


.: 

V  , 


un"  3r  sari  ace 


ceilop-.an^  Tia.aoran 
of  tne  ho  la  or  is  c 


- » 

3 


a 


-  0 
rn 

a  tubs,  C'Uixt  into  its  toay,  'AMtn  a  staii  air  punp  or 
a  cylinder  witn  cotprec.soc  aii'  or  other  gas  ;e.  g.  nitro¬ 
gen,  irr^isr  nsabie  for  anaerocic  cultures;  (i'ig.  ;h-; ; . 


Th 


ton  of 


ths  chamber  is  clos- 


•i  1 


s  c  r  e  w  -  o 


>.  -X  .  t  . 


lid,  equipoed 


'A'itn  an  ocening  for  the 
oscope.  .i.ss3:obled  instrument  is  sh 

The  chamber,  t 
Tiicrosco’^e,  is  rlacsd 


eyepiece  of 

th  3 

own  in  Fig. 

y  • 

j^tethor  will 

1  t  ’c 

ir  a 


37^. 


Fig,  30.  Cross- 
section  of  the 
cha.rfcer. 

Top-view  from 
above.  Bottom- 
a  cross-section. 

1 - cellophane ; 

2- opening  for 
supply  of 
nutritional 
medium;  3- tubes 
for  supcly  of 
nutritional  me¬ 
dium;  4-comiec- 
tornut;  5-screw 
on  clamp. 


To  assure  continuous  sur.'ly  of 
the  nutritional  medium  under  ths  cello¬ 
phane  membrane,  tee  authors  proposed  a 
special  device,  made  of  glass  (Fig  34). 

It  works  as  follows:  the  res. rvoir  3  ic 
half  filled  -‘/i th*  medium  and  plugged  with 
cotton.  Filtsrsd  air  slowly  passes  througi 
tube  C,  raises  in  bubbles  up  sleeve  D  and 
goes  out  through  the  stopper.  The  medium, 
raised  up  by  the  air  bubbles  and  carried 
into  the  reservoir,  assures  the  passage 
of  a  weak  stream  of  medium  through  tubes 
A  a.nd  A]_  into  the  c'na.mber.  Valve  3  allows 
for  exchange  of  the  meaium.  Air  supoiy 
is  regulatvc  by  a  clamp  or  valve  at  the 
entrance  of  tube  C.  f 

t 

Kanz  constructed  a  similar  instru-i 
ment  for  culturing  microorganisms  in  ■ 

continuously  changing  nutritional  medium.! 
It  is  based  on  a  Petri  dish  with  cello- 
onane  pulled  over  it  and  a  device  assurln.^ 
the  circulation  of  the  medium. 

The  third  direction  taken  by  the 
work  on  discovering  ways  and  methods  of 
speeding  up  the  microbial  growth  process 
is  ths  preparation  of  nutritional  media, 
causing  a  more  vigorous  development  of 
the  microorganisms.  A  number  of  reports 
Droves  the  possibility  of  creating  such 


231 


media  by  means  of  addition  of  various  kinds  of  substances 
stimulating  growth  and  multipi Lcation  of  the  microorgan¬ 
isms.  Girard  and  Gallut  (51)  showed  that  tne  addition  of 
filtrates  of  liquid  Pasteurella  pestis  cultures  to  nutri¬ 
tional  broth  not  only  considerably  sp  eds  up  the  growth  of 
this  microbe,  but  also  makes  it  poS'Oible  to  use  a  lower 
inoculation  dose.  On  the  basis  of  the  experiments  effected 
the  authors  recommend  the  use  of  media  with  culture  filtr¬ 
ates  in  order  to  speed  up  bacteriologic  diagnosis. 

Gom  extract  has  also  been  suggested  as  a  stimulant 
of  growth  in  certain  microorganisms  (5?,  53,  54). 

Certain  other  substances  also  possess  a  pronounced 
stimulating  action.  Japanese  authors  snow  stimulating 
action  of  bamboo  sho:)ts  (55)  and  bone 
marrow  of  bovines  (56).  hara  (57, 

58)  observed  that  passing  electric 
current  through  a  medium  increases 
-the  growth  of  the  microorganisms. 

This  manifestation,  according  to 
the  author's  data,  is  connected 
with  the  accumulation  of  small 
quantities  of  NaClO  in  the  medium 
under  the  influence  of  the  current. 

This  substance  produces  a  pronounced 
therapeutic  effect. 

Identification  methods . 

Cultivation  of  the  micro¬ 
organisms  found  in  a  sample  is  not 
an  indispensable  stage  in  the  process  Fig.  31.  Chamber 
of  their  identification.  Application  holder, 
of  certain  methods  permits  to  A-gas  supply  tube; 

determine  the  kind  of  microorgan-  B-groove  for  gas 

ism  directly  in  the  infected  material,  distribution, 
which  shortens  significantly  the  time 
necessary  for  identification. 


0 


B 


Fig.  32.  Chamber  cover.  Top: 
cross  section.  Bottom:  view 
from  below. 

B-groove  for  direction  of 
gas  under  cellophane  membrane. 


I 


cJL 


Fig.  33.  General 
appearance  of  the 
chamber. 
0-obJective. 


This,  in  reality,  applies  first  of  ail  to  the 
investigation  of  the  presence  of  bacterial  toxins.  Along 
with  apolication  of  the  method  requiring  introduction  of 
the  material  to  experimental  animals,  followed  by 
observation  of  clinical  form  of  the  disease  developed  and 
setting  ut)  defense  experiments  with  specific  antitoxic 
sera,  some  other  methods,  using  no  experimental  animals, 
can  be  applied  for  the  detection  of  bacterial  toxins. 

Thus,  Soroff  and  Fitzgerald  (59)  found  out  that  botulinum 
toxin  starts  to  fluoresce  upon  activation  by  ultraviolet 
rays  of  aete mined  wave  length,  Extinction  maximum  is 

observed  during  radiation  by  waves 
287  and  360  m]i  long.  Addition  of 
specific  antitoxic  serum  v/eakens  : 
the  fluorescence  of  the  toxin, 
while  normal  serum  does  not  produce 
CSee  next  page]  such  effects.  Consequently,  a 

decrease  in  intensity  of  fluor¬ 
escence  indicates  that  specific 
toxin-antitoxin  reaction  is  taking 
place. 

Identification  of  micro¬ 
organisms  isolated  in  pure  cultures 


34.  Device  for  supplying 

the  medium  to  the  chamber 
(explanation  may  be  found 
in  the  text) . 


I 


can  be  exfected  by  various 
mothods  -  inoculation  of 
expsrirnental  anioials, 
investigation  of  morpho- 
j-ogical,  bioche’oical  and  serO’' 
logical  properties  of  the 
microorganisms,  specific 

bacteriophage  tests  and  many  others.  According  to  data 
in  the  cited  foreign  literature,  the  most  valuable  ones 
are  those  which  are  rot  only  reliable,  bat  also  highly 
sensitive,  accurate,  simple  and  fast. 

foreign  investigators  working  on  poblems  of  detect¬ 
ion  01  biological  infectious  agents  accord  particular 
attention  to  the  methods  of  identification  of  microorgan¬ 
isms  by  means  of  fluorescent  antibodies  and  infrared 
spectrophotometry.  The  extent  of  importance  attached  to 
these  methods  is  proven  by  the  numerous  works  conducted 
at  Came  L  etrick  and  Porton,  as  well  as  in  a  number  of 
other  institutions,  connected  with  them  by  a  system  of 
contracts. 

Evaluating  the  prospects  for  use  of  these  detection 
methods,  Berger  and  Ludwig  (60)  write  in  a  report 
published  in  the  Armed  Forces'  Chemical  Joirnal:  "Intensive 
w'ork  on  identification  *  bacteria  by  means  of  study  of 
their  assimilation  of  infrared  radiation  is  now  in  full 
swing  at  the  dobert  A.  I  t  Sanitary  TechnicilCenter,  with 
the  collaboration  of  Camp  L^etrick  personnel.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  this  method  will  soon  become  a  powerful  weapon 
of  the  microbiologist".  They  value  equally  highly  the 
method  based  on  use  of  fluorescent  antibodies,  the 
successful  development  of  which,  once  it  is  concluded, 
will,  according  to  them,  permit  identification  of  micro¬ 
organisms  within  an  hour  and  possibly  even  less. 

The  essence  of  this  method  is  the  fact  that  when 
an  antibody  united  with  fluoro chrome  is  brought  in 
contact  with  the  creparation  containing  specific  antigen 
(tissue  section,  smear-print,  ordinary  smear),  it  becomes 
attached  to  it,  and  at  the  point  of  its  presence  a 
fluorescent  pigment  is  fixed.  Observation  of  such  pre¬ 
carat  ions  under  luminescent  microscope#  allcn/s  on o  to  determine 
ihe  location  of  the  antigen  and  draw  a  conclusion  regarding 
its  conformity  with  the  serum  used. 

Methods  of  obtaining  and  acplying  the  fluorescent 
sera  were  first  develoced  at  Coons'  laboratory  (61). 
Fluorescent  immune  sera  are  obtained  by  means  of  uniting 


235 


f luorochrome  and  globulin  or  garma  globulin 
fraction  of  the  imoiune  serum.  As  f luorochrome,  fluorescein 
isocyanate  ,  pos-oessing  a  bright  yellow-green  fluorescence, 
is  most  frequently  used. 

The  method  of  application  of  fluorescent  sera 
consists  of  the  following  basic  steps: 

-getting  ready  the  preparation  from  the  material 
containing  the  agents  (tissue  sections  are  usually 
prepared  from  quick-frozen,  nonfixed  tissue); 

-staining  the  preparation  with  a  drop  of  conjugate 
placed  on  the  tissue  section,  followed  by  washing  with 
buffer  salt  solution  to  remove  the  non: ixed  serum; 

-study  of  the  preparation  in  ultraviolet  light 
(ultraviolet  microscope,  opaque  illuminator); 

-control  investigations  to  determine  the 
soecificity  of  the  reaction  observed  (suppression  of  fluor¬ 
escence  after  preliminary  treatment  of  the  preparation 
with  unmarked  innune  serum,  absence  of  fluorescence  during 
treatment  of  a  smear  from  the  same  material  but  containing 
no  agent,  absence  of  fluorescence  during  treatment  of  the 
investigated  preparation  with  marked  non-immune  or 
heterologous  serum) , 

A  number  of  authors  successfully  used  fluorescent 
antibodies  for  the  detection  of  virus  in  tissue  cultures. 
Thus,  Weller  and  Goons  (62)  detected  by  this  method  the 
virus  of  chicken  pox,  herpes,  shingles  and  poliomyelitis. 
Buckley,  Whitney  and  Kapp  (63)  obtained  the  same  results 
with  psittacosis  virus,  Buckley  (64)  -  witn  polio  virus; 
Cohen,  Gordon,  napp,  Macauley,  Buckley  (65)  -  with  measles 
virus.  These  authors  apolied  the  so  called  indirect 
method:  they  first  treated  the  preparation  under  study 
with  human  serum  containing  specific  antibodies  to  the 
agent  in  question,  and  then  stained  it  with  serum  marked 
with  fluorochrome  containing  the  antibodies  to  human  gamma 
globulin.  The  reason  for  resorting  to  such  double  layer 
of  antibodies  to  the  antigen  is  that,  in  case  of  certain 
viruses,  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  serum  of  sufficiently 
high  titer  by  means  of  immunization  oi  animals.  This 
makes  it  necessary  to  use  the  serum  of  convalescents, 
whose  antibody  titer  is  sufficiently  high.  When  specific 
sera  with  sufficiently  high  titers  obtained  through 
immunization  of  the  auiimals  are  available,  the  "direct" 
method  may  be  successfully  used  for  purposes  of  detection 
and  identification  of  viruses  in  tissue  cultures.  This 
method  eliminates  the  necessity  of  preliminary  treatnent 


with  human  serum,  as  shown  by  the  work  of  ’A'atson  (66)  on 
the  example  of  mumps  virus. 

Many  authors  have  also  shown  the  possibility  of 
using  fluorescent  antibodies  for  detection  and  identifi¬ 
cation  of  viruses  in  developing  chicken  embryo,  uiu,  Eaton 
and  Heyl  (37)  were  able  to  establish  the  presence  of 
influenza  virus  in  embryos  as  soon  as  24  hours  after 
their  infection.  Similar  investigations  were  carried  out 
by  Liu  (68)  with  atypical  pneumonia  virus. 


Viruses  and  rickettsiae  can  be  equally  successfully 
detected  and  Identified  in-organs  and  tissues  of  the  in¬ 
fected  experimental  animals.  As  an  example,  we  can  present 
,  the  work  of  Coons,  Snyder,  Sheever  and  Murray  (69),  who 
j  with  the  help  of  fluorescent  antibodies  were  detecting, 
i  and  determining  the  specificity  of,  rickettsia  of  epidemic 
t  typhus  and  i^ocky  Mountains  spotted  fever  In  exudate  smears! 
I  and  tissue  sections  from  the  organs  of  infected  cotton  ; 
I  rats.  Epidemic  typhus  rickettsia  was  also  identified  in  • 
smears  prepared  from  internal  organs  of  infected  lice.  j 

Pluorescent  antibodies  are  also  used  for  speedier  j 
identification  of  bacteria,  by  means  of  treatment  of  ; 

smears  prepared  from  cultures  or,  which  is  even  more 
valuable,  directly  from  the  material  under  investigation. 
Very  interesting  in  this  respect  is  the  work  of  Moody, 
Goldman  and  Thomason  (70),  The  authors  treated  the  smears, 
prepared  in  the  usual  way  from  24  hour  old  Malleomyces 
j  Pseudomallei  cultures  with  rabbit  gamma  globulin,  specific 
for  this  agent,  conjugated  with  f luorochrome.  Smears  of 
the  same  culture,  treated  with  normal  marked  rabbit  gamma 
globulin  served  as  control.  The  experiments  showed  that 
after  being  treated  with  horaologdos  antibodies,  the  M. 
pseudomallei  cells  start  to  fluoresce  brightly,  while  the 
bacterial  bodies  in  the  smears  stained  with  normal 
*  globulin  have  the  appearance  of  pale  shadows.  Specificity 
of  the  fluorescence  was  checked  by  means  of  treatment  of 
smears  from  55  cultures  of  various  bacterial  strains  with 
marked  gamma  globulin  specific  for  M,  pseudomallei  and 
marked  normal  gamma  globulin.  All  the  33  experimental 
j-.  strains  of  M.  pseudomallei,  as  well  as  3  strains  of  M. 
mallei,  produced  bright  fluorescence  after  treatment  with 
homologic  antibodies,  while  no  other  bacteria  produced 
I  this  phenomenon.  Also, in  the  smears  treated  with  marked 
I  normal  gamma  globulin  no  fluorescence  was  observed. 

To  prove  the  specificity  of  fluorescence,  the  authors 
[  tried,  for  12  hours  and  at  the  temperature  of  5-10®,  to 


exhaust  the  xarked  hcno  legoua  ga’s'na  gioejiiri  rite  iarge 
quantities  of  live  M.  ps-3udoT.aIiei  ceils,  rreati’ent  '>f 
;  smears  from  culture  of  tins  agent  vnta  such  exhaestec 

gamma  giobulin  no  longer  produced  f luorescenc- .  rnh:t  n::)r;| 
of  f  luorescc-nce  also  followed  when  M.  psiudomai  iei  smeara 
W3re  treated  with  unmark ec  gamma  globulin  before  tein.:  ! 

stained  witn  marked  specific  gamma  globulin. 

It  was  proven  later  ,71)  that  owing  to  its  high 
sensitivity  this  reaction  could  he  used  for  bad  r.  el  i 

ident  if  ication  not  only  in  pure  cultures,  b^.!  also  in  i 

mixed  ones.  The  high  degree  of  sensitivity  of  this 
is  proven  by  the  fact  that  specifically  stained  f  r- -scit,-.  | 
ceils  can  be  discovered  in  smears  prepared  from  auarnnsiceitl 
containing  only  2PG  microorganisms  in  1  ml.  Sx,.  -  rimenh^  ! 
wlih  mix'ures  of  microorganisms  showed  that  tne  :u’er;i  of  ! 
rnyeloidosis  could  be  regularly  detected  in  scoakiler;  contain- j 
ing  200  or  more  :ells  per  1  ml,  regardless  of  the  ratio  ! 
of  the  number  of  homologous  cells  to  that  of  the  hetero-  | 
loiifctus  ones.  For  instance,  during  the  study  of  M.  ps---udo-  ; 
mallei  and  Pseudo monae  aeruginosa  mixture,  this  ratio  was  1 
j  1:10,000,000  respectively. 

:  Also  successful  were  the  experiments  on  detscrion 

of  M.  pseudomallei  in  soil  samples" containing  a  vast 
number  of  additional  microorganisms.  The  best  results  were 
obtained  from  investigation  of  smears  prepared  by  ailutingl 
the  samplewS  in  physiologic  soluti'j.n.  then  passing  them  j 
through  Watman  filters  and  centrifug iing.  In  tiV3  j 

preparations  thus  obtained,  M.  pseuaomaliei  could  bo  ; 

detected  in  soil  samples  containing  as  few  as  20,000  collri 
of  the  microbe  in  1  Gm.  of  the  investigated  soil.  ! 

! 

Using  the  method  worked  out  by  the  authors,  it  is 
pos-ible  to  identify  M.  pseuuomallei  in  smears  taken  from 
the  surfaces  infected  with  aerosol  containing  this  agent. 
The  method,  of  experiments  was  very  simple.  Leaves  treated  ! 
with  the  aerosol  were  wio-ed  with  cotton  moistened  with  | 

O.G5-.;fc  physiologic  solution.  The  cotton  was  then  pass-’-d  i 

over  the  surface  of  a  microscope  slide.  The  smear,  dried  j 
I  and  fixed  by  warming  up,  was  stained  with  marked  specific 
globulin.  The  experiments  showed  that  it  is  pos.uirjle  for 
this  method  to  detect  M.  pseudomallei  on  surfaces  tr|ated 
with  aerosol  containing  only  20,000  microbes  per  1  m-'. 

The  possibility  of  application  of  fluorescent  anti-j 
todies  for  identification  of  agents  belonging  to  the 
Salmonella  group  is  shown  in  the  work  of  Thomasen,  Cherry 


- 238  - 


and  Moody  (72). 

The  possibility  of  apllcation  of  the  "indirect" 
method  of  fluorescent  microscopy  for  purposes  of 
identification  of  3r.  suis,  P.  tularensis,  Vibrio  cholerae i 
asiaticae,  P.  pestis  in  smears  is  shown  in  the  work  of 
Carter  and  Leise  (73).  These  authors  obtained  sera  specific 
for  these  ar;^ents  through  immunization  of  rabbits.  Anti¬ 
globulin  was  obtained  from  blood  serum  of  a  goat,  immunized 
with  normal  rabbit  globulin.  The  method  of  smear  staining 
consisted  of  the  following  consecutive  operations:  the 
smear  was  covered  with  specific  rabbit  serum  (diluted  or 
not)  for  5-10  minutes,  then  washed  with  buffered  physio¬ 
logic  solution  (pH  8)  and  dried  in  the  air,  after  which 
the  staining  was  supplemented  with  fluorescent  rabbit 
globulin.  10  minutes  later  the  smear  was  again  washed, 
dried  in  the  air  and  examined  under  a  microscope  in  ultra- | 
violet  rays. 

« 

Comparison  of  the  results  of  microorganism 
identification  in  smears  from  both  pure  cultures  and  their 
mixtures,  by  "direct"  and  "indirect"  methods,  showed  them 
to  be  the  same*  ' 

At  the  same  time.  Carter  and  Leise  determined  that 
upon  application  of  high  titer  specific  sera,  cross  react¬ 
ions  are  observed  (anti-3r.  suis  serum  reacted  easily  with 
F,  tularensis,  the  sorum  against  ?.  pestis  -  with  B.  pseu¬ 
dotuberculosis  rodentii);  for  this  reason  the  authors 
recommend  using  low  titer  sera  for  the  identification 
process,  since  then  no  cross  reactions  are  observed. 

Detection  of  unknown  material  can  be  carried  out  on 
one  smear,  treated  consecutively  with  ail  the  specific 
sera  available,  and  adding  each  time  fluorescent  anti¬ 
globulin. 

The  method  proposed  by  Carter  and  Leise  is 
sufficiently  sensitive:  in  cases  when  a  smear  contains 
about  25  bacteria  per  1  mm^  ,  the  discovery  of  fluor¬ 
escent  cells  under  the  microscope  presents  no  great 
difficulty.  Concentration  of  3-5  ceils  per  1  mm2  of  the 
smear  requires  more  thorough  examination, 

Fluorescent  antibodies  can  find  application  also  for 
speeding  up  the  diagnosis  of  a  disease. 

Liu  (74)  observed  that  when  smears  prepared  from 
the  nasal  mucosa  discharge  of  skunks  infected  with 
influenza  virus  are  stained  with  specific  fluorescent 


seruTi,  some  of  them  produce  a  bright  yellow-green  fluor¬ 
escence,  while  other  -  only  a  greyish-bluish  light  (auto¬ 
fluorescence).  The  process  of  staining  witn  fxuorescent 
serum  was  slowed  down  if  the  smears  had  been  preliminarily 
treated  with  unmarked  immune  serum,  which  points  out  the 
specificity  of  histochemical  staining  of  virus  stricken 
cells.  The  presence  of  fluorescent  cells  in  animal  nasal 
washings  coincided  with  the  ooourrence  of  a 
febrile  reaction.  This  method  was  also  used  for  diagnosis 
of  influenza  in  people  (75)* 

During  recent  years  the  method  of  infrared 
spectrophotometry  has  been  carefully  studied  with  the 
object  of  using  it  for  speeding  up  '  the  microorganism 
identification.  The  possibility  of  application  of  this 
method  is  based  on  the  fact  tJiat  every  organic  compound 
has  its  own  characteristic,  individual  spectrum,  which  can 
be  used  for  Its  identification.  All  things  considered,  th 
difference  among  microorganisms  is  based  on  the  diffsrenc 
in  their  chemical  structure;  this  is  why  every  genus,  and 
in  certain  cases  even  every  strain,  has  its  own  individual 
spectrum  of  absorption  of  infrared  rays.  By  comparing  the 
spectrum  of  a  microbe  to  be  identified  with  a  standard 
spectrum,  we  can  determine  to  what  genus  the  isolated 
agent  belongs. 

The  possibility  of  application  of  infrared  spectro¬ 
photometry  in  the  investigation  of  biological  materials 
is  shown  in  the  works  of  Barer,  Cole  and  Thompson  (76), 
Wood  (77),  Blout  and  Mellors  (78),  etc. 

In  1952,  Stevenson  and  Bolduan  (79)  from  Camp 
D  e  trick  published  their  work,  in  which  they  show  the 
prospects  for  employing  this  method  in  the  field  of 
detection.  The  authors  conducted  a  study  of  the  spectra 
of  infrared  ray  absorption  by  intact  bacterial  cells, 
and  determined  that  in  spite  of  quantitative  differences, 
caused  by  thickness  and  homogeneity  of  the  investigated 
microbial  smears,  the  microorganisms  can  be  differentiated 
one  from  another  by  the  character  of  their  spectrum.  They 
were  even  able  to  distinguish  among  the  various  strains  ! 
of  P.  tularensis. 

Stevenson  and  Bolduan  (79)  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  "the  use  of  infrared  absorption  spectra  is  very 
promising  for  purposes  of  microorganism  identification. 

A  necessary  condition  for  such  identification  is  the 
composition  of  a  catalog  of  spectra  of  microorganisms". 


(P  IXt 


British  investigators  in  Porton  iBO)  later  arrived  ' 
at  the  sane  conclusion.  They  showed  snarp  srecificity  of  the 
absorption  spectra  In  various  organisns.  .t  was  found 
possible  to  differentiate  between  the  strains  of  B.  coii, 

3.  pestis  and  5ven  strains  of  3alra.  typhi,  which  were  v^ry 
difficult  to  tell  apart  by  the  methods  of  classic  bacterio¬ 
logy.  The  method  of  investigation  recommended  by  the 
authors  was  not  very  complex.'  Ihe  microorganisms  to  te 
investigated  were  grown  on  peptone  agar  for  iS-24  hours, 
after  which  the  culture  was  washed  off.  This,  according  to  j 
the  authors,  must  be  dons  very  carefully,  in  order  not  to 
wash  off,  along  with  the  culture,  pieces  of  t.he  medlu-n.  I 
The  microbial  suspension  should  be  removed  from  agar  as 
early  as  possible,  in  order  to  avoid  passing  the  soluble 
comoonents  of  the  medium  into  it.  inactivation  of  the 
microbial  suspension  was  achieved  by  heating  or  autoclaving 
(for  snoruiatlng  forms).  This  stage  is  necessary  as  a 
safety  precaution  for  the  investigator-  in  carrying  out  tue 
subseouenc  manipulati  ons.  i’he  cultures  can  also  be  groAr. 
on  liquid  nutriant  media,  with  subsequent  sedimeiitation 
and  washing  off  the  Tiicrab..al  ce^is  by  centrifugation. 

The  smears  are  prepar-ed  on  ooiish-ed  silver  chloride  suides; 
gxasu  and  quartz  cannot  be  used  because  of  their  hlr-l-i 
degree  of  absorption  of  infrar-vd  rays. 


I 


The  microbes  are  speciro.hotooetricaily  examii.ed  in 
a  dry  state,  which  is  also  connected  with  the  water 
absorption  of  infrared  rays.  The  authors  stress  that  the 
microbial  suspension  should  be  dried  very  carefully,  since 
too  prolonged  drying  is  followed  by  a  cloango  in  spectrum. 

Chocking  of  the  constancy  of  spectra  ootained  for 
the  same  strain  has  shown  that  their  reproduction  depends 
largely  on  the  culture  meaium.  Phis  is  particularly 
illustrated  \:y  the  diversity  of  spectra  depending  on 
whether  the  microorganism  has  been  cu..tured  on  peptone  agar 
or  on  peptone  water.  The  length  of  cultivation  aiso  nas 
a  definite  bearing,  which  is  especially  clearly  evident  in 
some  strains.  I 


the  spectrogram  changes,  depending  on  the 
composition  of  the  nedium  and  the  cultivation  time,  are 
fuily  understandable  and  occur  in  connection  with  the 
diversity  in  ohemical  structure  of  the  miCi oorganisms, 
caused  by  difference  in  the  culturing  process. 


One  of  the  factors  influencing  the  reproducibiii  ty  ojf 
th«  spectrum  is  t  'e  accuracy  of  the  instru-nent  (infiared  ( 


241 


c  ha  r ?  c  t  e  r 1 s  t  i  c  s 


spectrophotometer)  used  for  taking  down  the 
of  the  microorganism  under  investigation. 

Infrared  spectrophotometry  can  be  used  not  only  for 
study  of  whole  cells,  but  also  for  that  of  various  extracts 
prepared  from  them.  Stevenson  and  Levin  (51,  82,  3?) 
developed  the  method  of  extraction  and  carried  out  ihe 
first  srectrophotometric  studies  of  microbial  extract's, 
Schneider  and  Laughiin  (84)  showed  the  possibility  of 
differentiation  of  Leptospiras  into  serogroups  on  the  crisis 
of  absorption  spectrum  differences  among  the  extracts 
prepared  from  them.  Landall  and  Smith  (85)  measured  the 
absorption  spectra  of  methyl  chloroform  lipid  extracts 
of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  cells  and  discovered  spectro- 
scootc  discrepancy  between  the  hominis  and  bovis  types. 

Detailed  investigation  regarding  the  pos-ibili.ty  of 
applying  the  method  of  infrared  specti ophotometry  of 
microbial  extracts  and  developmant  of  a  simple  and  stencard 
method  for  agent  identification  were  carried  out  by 
O'Connor,  McCall  and  Dupre  (86)  of  the  New  OrleansScientif ic 
Investigation  Laboratory  of  the  region,  under  contract 

from  Camp  D  etrick. 

The  method  developed  by  these  authors  consisted  of 
several  steps: 

1)  cultivation  on  agar  media  for  13  hours; 

2)  disintegration  of  ceils  by  means  of  ti-eatnent  in 
a  special  homogsnizer  with  finely  ground  glass; 

p)  acetone  extraction  of  tns  disintegrated  cell 
mass  at  50^-60*^  for  one  hour,  with  subsequent  centrifuging 
and  evaporation  of  the  centrifugate  over  a  water  bath.  Ih  ’; 
evaporation  is  continued  until  only  a  few  drops  of  the 
centrifugate  remain; 

4)  preparation  of  smears  on  silver  cnicride  plates 
and  drying  them  by  means  of  infrared  radiation; 

5)  measuring  infrared  absorption  spectra  in  trie 
spectrophotometer,  at  various  wave  lengths  (5-15  p).  The 
necessity  to  use  various  wave  lengths  is  dictated  by  the 
fact  that,  as  oointed  out  by  Levine,  Stevenson,  Chambers 
and  Kenner  (57).  the  absorption  zones  in  the  range  of 
6.5-6.45  ji  are  mainly  associated  with  peptide  chains  of 
microbial  protein,  the  absorption  zones  in  the  range  of 
6-8.1  p  -  with  nucleic  acids  and  the  absorption  zones  in 
the  range  of  3.6-10  p  with  carbohydrates  and  nucleic  acids, 
fhus,  the  use  of  different  wave  lengths  permits 

a  fuller  understanding  of  the  microbial  structure  and 
shows  the  diff.erences  among  microorganisms  more  clearly. 


6)  comparing  spectra  of  the  extracts  of  the  1 

investigated  microorganisms  with  those  that  are  already  | 

known.  | 

( 

Comparing  the  method  of  investigating  the  extracts  j 
with  the  method  of  spectrophotometry  of  intact  bacterial  j 
cells,  the  authors  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  former  | 
is  more  promislng^f or  it  it to  differentiate  betv.’een  i 

microorganisms  possessing  very  close  or  even  identical  I 
infrared  absorption  spectra,  obtained  by  spectrophotometry 
of  the  intact  cells. 

However,  it  must  be  noted  that  for  certain  bacteria 
acetone  is  inconvenient  as  an  extracting  substance,  and 
has  to  be  replaced  by  some  other  solvent.  If  acetone 
extracts  one  or  more  compounds  which  are  not  common  to 
the  microorganisms  to  be  differentiated,  or  if  it  extracts  j 
the  substance  common  t  o  these  two  microorganisms,  but  | 
present  in  one  of  them  in  a  higher  concentration,  then  it  I 
is  relatively  easy  to  tell  these  microorganisms  apart  by 
their  spectra.  However,  in  the  case  when  acetone  extracts 
only  substances  which  are  present  in  both  microorganisms 
under  study  in  equal  proportion,  the  infrared  absorption 
spectra  will  be  identical.  This  circumstance  made  it 
necessary  to  abandon  the  extract  spectroscopy  method,  since 
the  necessity  of  solvent  selection  greatly  complicatc-s  the 
process  of  analysis  and  requires  a  great  number  of  microb¬ 
ial  cells,  the  recovery  of  which  will  considerably 
protract  the  time  of  analysis. 

The  infrared  spectrophotometry  method  can,  evidently, 
be  used  also  for  identification  of  microbial  toxins,  the 
principal  possibility  of  which  is  shown  by  the  investigat¬ 
ions  of  Levi,  Matheson  and  Tatcher  i,66).  The  virus  problem 
is  more  complicated.  Pollard,  Lngley,  Redmond,  Chinn  and 
Mitchell  (89)  studied  the  infrared  absorption  spectra  of 
meningopneumonitjs  ornithosis,  mumps  and  Newcastle  virus. 
Chorionallantoic  fluid  of  infected  chick  embryos  served  as 
material  for  investigation.  Comparison  of  the  spectra 
showed  that  mumps  and  Newcastle  virus  are  easy  to  differ¬ 
entiate  both  from  one  another  and  from  meningopneumoni 
and  urnithosis  virus.  The  last  two,  however,  have  very 
similar  spectra,  which  greatly  complicates  their  differ¬ 
entiation.  This  is  explained  by  antigen  affinity  of  both  of 
these  agents. 

Further  investigations  of  this  problem  uncovered 
many  more  difficulties  in  virus  identiHcation  with  the 
help  of  infrared  spectrophotometry.  Benedict,  Pollard  and 


Engley  (90)  tried  to  use  this  method  for  differentiation 
among  the  viruses  of  influenza  A  and  B,  mumps,  rasningo- 
pneumonitla  Newcastle  disease  and  psittacosis.  These 
experiments,  like  the  previous  ones,  were  carried  out  on 
chorionallantoic  fluid  of  infected  chick  embryos,  which  was 
previously  subjected  to  three  cycles  of  differential 
centrifugation.  On  the  basis  of  these  investigations,  the 
authors  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  use  of  untreated 
fractions  for  virus  identification  by  the  method  of 
comparing  infrared  absorption  spectra  is  greatly  complicated 
by  the  presence  of  extraneous  material  in  the  investigated 
substrate;  however,  the  three  cycle  treatment  permitted  to 
obtain  clear  and  reproducible  results  for  the  meningo- 
pneumorttls  and  Newcastle  virus,  but  the  spectra  of  influenza 
A  and  B  and  parotitis  virus  as  well  as  of  noraal  chorion- 
allajitoic  fluid  were  found  to  be  identical  even  after  the 
differential  centrifugation. 

Afterwards  Benedict  (9)  showed  that  for  different¬ 
iation  of  related  viruses  it  is  necessary  to  combine 
centrifugation  with  extraction,  for  which  the  solvent  has 
to  be  individually  selected  in  each  case.  However,  the 
3-cycle  centrifugation  is  sufficient  to  determine  to 
which  virus  group  the  agent  in  question  belongs.  The 
viruses  studied  by  the  author  -  influenza  strains  A,  ki  and 
B,  Newcastle  disease,  parotitis,  psittacosis,  lympho¬ 
granuloma  venereum,  feline  pneumonitis,  mouse  pneumonitis, 
vaccinia  and  fowl-pox  -  fall  into  4  groups,  according  to 
the  infrared  absorption  of  the  preparations  obtained  from 
them:  group  I  -  viruses  of  influenza  A,  Aq  and  B  and 
parotitis;  group  II  -  Newcastle  disease  virus;  group  HI  - 
psittacosis,  lymphogranuloma  venereum,  feline  pneumonitis, 
mouse  pneumonitis;  group  IV  -  vaccinia  and  fowl-pox, 

A  study  of  the  problem  of  using  infrared  spectro- 
photo  letry  for  identification  of  microorganisms  was  taken  j 
up  by  Riddle,  Kabler,  Kenner,  Bordner,  Hochwood  and 
Stevenson  (92)  on  contract  with  Camp  D  etrick.  Their  object 
was  to  develop  a  method  of  producing  infrared  absorption! 
spectra  (of  the  microorganisms  unaer  study),  possessing  a  j 
very  high  order  of  quantitative  reproducibility,  and  to 
study  the  possibility  of  coding  standard  spectra  on 
punched  cards  for  subsequent  processing  in  electromechani¬ 
cal  and  electronic  equipment. 

Through  standardization  of  the  bacterial  culturing 
conditions,  exact  spectrophotometer  adjusting  and  using  the 
method  of  preparation  of  films  of  necessary  thickness  from 
bacterial  suspensi^'ns,  the  authors  were  able  to  eliminate 


the  discrepancies  from  spectra  of  one  and  the  same  culture. 
The  differences  between  the  reproduced  spectra  die  not 
e^xesed  *  0.  2,3^. 

I  As  the  result  of  repeated  adjustments  of  different 

!  parts  of  the  spectrum,  the  discrepancies  among  the  spectra 
of  various  strains  of  the  same  microbial  species  were 
reduced  to  a  minimum, 

The  most  favorable  wave  range  (7-12.1  pi),  in  which 
the  best  reproduction  could  be  achieved,  was  also  determ¬ 
ined. 

The  results  of  investigation  of  a  great  nuir.Der  of 
different  microbial  species  showed  that  the  spectra  of 
many  of  them  differ  considerably  and  that  this  fact  can  be 
used  for  identification  purposes.  Some  microoriranisms, 
however,  have  such  similar  spectra,  that  their  different 
tion  cannot  be  achieved  with  the  help  of  only  spectropho 
metric  analysis. 

The  code  system  developed  by  the  above  authors 
it  poRsihle  to  record  rapidly  and  easily  a  bacterial 
spectrum  on  card®,  together  with  morphological  and 
tinctorial  properties,  culture  conditions  and  many  other 
data.  'The  use  of  such  cards  allows  the  use  of  electro¬ 
mechanical  and  electronic  equipment,  with  the  he^p  of  rhich 
a  great  quantity  of  standard  spectra  and  other  di •  ferent ia.L | 
data  related  to  them  can  be  sorted  out,  investigated  and  ! 
compared.  i 

The  code-cards  developed  during  the  course  of  the  ! 
work  and  accepted  as  standard,  formed  the  nucleus  of  the 
future  catalog  of  standard  spectra. 

The  authors  visualize  the  following  order  of 
identification  of  microbes  with  the  help  of  infrared 
spectrophotometry.  The  microbe  to  be  identified  is 
inoculated  on  several  plates  with  various  media  used  for 
cui-turss  of  bacteria,  the  standard  spectra  of  which  are 
in  the  catalog.  The  microorganisms  for  investigation  are 
gathered  from  the  plate  which  has  produced  the  most 
abundant  growth.  At  the  same  time  a  Gram  stained  smear  is 
prepared.  For  comparison  with  the  investigated  microbe 
only  these  cards  are  removed  from  the  catalog,  which 
contain  spectra  of  microbes  having  the  same  stain  and 
morphology  and  grown  on  the  same  medium.  The  cards  are 
placed  in  a  sorting  machine,  which  effects  the  comparison 
of  sp*ectra.  Electronic  equipment  gives  the  best  sorting 
performance.  ! 

^  *  ■  III— I  i-.i—  I...  I  — .  . .  .  .  . . . i 


According  to  the  calculations  of  'Villiams  and 
Ingraham  (93),  th3  whole  process  of  detection,  starting  | 
from  the  moment  of  sample  collection,  until  the  species  of  i 
the  microorganisms  present  in  it  are  identified,  will  take  j 
not  more  than  30  hours  with  the  use  of  infrared  spectro-  | 
photometry.  Membrane  filters,  on  which  the  early  growth  j 
takes  place  for  10-20  hours,  are  recommended  by  the  authors i 
for  use  during  the  course  of  the  investigation.  Suspicious  j 
colonies  are  transferred  to  a  plate  with  standard  medium.  i 

The  indispensable  time  of  its  incubation  does  not  exceed  ! 

6-8  hours,  since  a  very  minute  quantity  of  bacteria  is  j 

sufficient  for  spectrophotometric  analysis  (1  mg.,  and  ! 

possibly  0.1  or  even  0.01  mg.,  as  shown  by  the  most  recent  j 
investigations).  j 

Evaluating  the  performance  of  the  biological  ! 

infectious  agent  detection  methods  developed  to-date, 
American  specialists  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that,  in 
spite  of  the  kno^m  achievements  in  this  field,  it  will  not 
nearly  always  be  possible  to  count  on  a  timely  answer  to 
the  question  of  whether  a  bacteriological  weapon  has  been 
employed  and  which  agent  has  been., used  by  the  enemy.  While 
there  already  exist  methods  which,  if  correctly  applied, 
wiu.1  permit  the  timely  (i.e.  before  the  appearance  of 
the  disease)  detection  in  the  objects  of  external  surround¬ 
ings  of  a  number  of  bacterial  agents  such  as  P.  pestis, 

P.  tularensis,  3r.  meiitens''S,  there  is  no  such  possibility 
for  viruses  and  rickettsiae.  Consequently,  diseases  caused 
by  the  apolication  of  a  bacteriological  weapon  can  appear 
before  the  agent  is  identified  (,941. 

Certain  biological  infectious  agents  cause  diseases 
with  a  very  short  incubation  period,  which  makes  it 
difficult  to  rely  on  the  possibility  to  effect  detection 
in  such  a  short  time.  Thus,  upon  application  of  the  rus 
of  Venezuelan  equine  encephalomyelitis,  some  cases  appear 
within  24  hours;  upon  employment  of  botulism  toxin  - 
within  8-12  hours.  Consequently,  in  certain  cases  the 
appearance  of  disease  wixl  be  tne  first  sign  of  the 
employment  of  a  bacteriological  weapon.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  the  special  American  manual  "Civil  Defense 
against  Biological  Warfare"  (1)  points  out  simply:  "Until 
the  moment  of  development  of  reliable  physical  or  biologic¬ 
al  methods  for  determination  of  contamination  of  the 
environment,  man  will  remain  the  most  dependable  detector 
of  the  biological  agents  directed  against  him". 


246 


Organization  of  the  detect ijn  system  in  the  U.S.A . 

Present  organization  of  the  system  of  detsction  of  j 
biological  agents  in  the  U.S.A.  has  the  followin;':  i 

structure  (95):  | 

The  most  important  districts  of  the  country  are 
under  continuous  observation  by  the  Air  Force  Anti-Aircraft 
Defense  and  Civil  Defense  Observation  Posts.  Civil  Defense 
Voluntary  Ground  Observation  Corps  was  created  in  1950. 

In  1952  -t  counted  145*000  men  and  supplied  day  and  night 
service  at  14,000  observation  points.  According  to 
specialists,  in  order  to  carry  out  a  succssafui  observatkn 
service,  manpower  of  the  Ground  Observation  Corns  should 
reach  the  500,000  figure.  The  Observation  Posts  are 
equip  ed  with  simpler  of  the  instruments  for  air  sample 
collection,  which  they  use  whenever  a  suspicion  of  bacterlo 
logic  attack  arises. 

Bactericlogic  exploration  is  also  carried  out  by 
State  Health  Department's  Mobile  Laboratories  and  by 
Special  Plying  Units,  which  belong  to  the  Civil  Defense 
District  Diagnostic  Laboratories.  Tne  function  of  Mobile 
Laboratories  Flying  Units  is  the  collection  of  samples 
and  effectuation  of  simpler  analyses.  They  consist  of  one 
physician-bacteriologist  and  three  laboratory  technicians. 
The  task  of  sample  collection  also  rests  on  the  local 
commands  of  bacteri ologic  exploration,  organized  from  j 
volunteers  in  each  ooinmxinlty* 

The  investi --at ion  of  samples  coxlected  is  carried 
out  ataState  Central  Laboratory,  which  is  connected  witii 
the  Civil  Defense,  at  local  Health  Department  bacterio-  j 
logic  laboratories  in  the  cities,  and  in  the  laboratories  j 
of  hospitals,  clinics  and  other  medical  inst i tut i ons.  When  | 
necessary,  laboratories  of  the  Center  for  Hygiene  and 
Infectious  Diseases,  National  Institute  of  Microbiology 
and  other  scientific  research  institutions  and  universities 
are  also  expected  to  take  part  in  the  work.  In  addition, 
i  each  state  plans  the  creation  of  a  specialized  laboratory 
for  the  detection  of  rare  and  insuf f ic W;ntly  known 
infections. 

It  is  believed  that  Civil  Defense  District  Lab¬ 
oratories,  as  well  as  State  Health  Department's  local 
laboratories  will  provide  only  a  preliminary  answer  about 
an  analysis.  More  reliable  laboratories,  which  possess  the 
special  equipment  and  staffs  of  qualified  bacteriologists, 
will  be  called  upon  for  final  identification  of  the  agent. 


247 


The  latter  institutions  include  State  Central  Diagnostic 
Laboratories,  laboratories  of  the  Center  for  Hygiene  and 
Infectious  Diseases  and  the  National  Institute  of  Micro¬ 
biology,  as  well  as  the  laboratories  of  other  scientific 
research  institutes,  universities  and  clinics. 

Since  the  appearance  of  disease  is  considarud  as 
one  of  the  first  signs  of  employment  of  a  bacterioiogic 
weapon,  a  great  attention  is  paid  in  the  U.S.A.  to  the 
diagnosis  and  registration  of  all  appearing  cases  of 
infection.  A  whole  series  of  articles  devoted  to  this 
problem,  as  well  as  special  manuals  and  instructions 
stress  that  not  only  employees  of  the  Health  Service 
organs,  but  also  administrative  workers,  teachers  and 
other  persons,  whose  nature  of  employment  brings  then 
in  contact  with  organized  collective  groups,  should  take 
active  part  in  reporting  the  sick. 

3ecause  the  discovery  and  diagnosis  of  infectious 
diseases  represent  one  of  the  more  important  methods  of 
detection  of  biological  infectious  agents  in  the  bacterio¬ 
logical  defense  system,  the  method  of  information  about 
the  movement  of  Infectious  morbidity  in  the  D.S.A.  acquires 
special  importance.  Federal  Civil  Defense  Administration 
and  a  number  of  Government  Departments  (Health,  Agriculture, 
Social  Security),  together  with  the  National  Bureau  of 
Birth  and  Death  Statistics,  came  to  an  agreement  regard¬ 
ing  the  creation  of  a  system  of  organs,  the  duty  of  which 
would  be  to  observe  the  appearance  and  movement  of  human, 
animal  and  plant  infectious  diseases.  At  the  Central  ilnti- 
spidemic  Administration  of  the  Department  of  Health,  a 
special  antiepidsmic  service  has  been  created,  its  duties 
including  the  publication  of  data  on  infectious  diseases, 
familiarization  of  interested  persons  with  the  problems 
involved  and  popuiari zation  of  the  information  about  ar.ti- 
spidemic  measures  to  be  taken. 

The  organization  of  a  system  for  decaction  and 
identification  of  the  biological  agents  used  requires 
the  training  of  qualified  bacteriologists  and  epidemiolo¬ 
gists  possessing  up-to-date  information  and  know-how'. 
Consequently,  in  1950  the  Federal  Civil  Defense 
Administration  undertook  the  training  of  numerous  labor¬ 
atory  personnel  in  the  methods  of  detection. 

The  preparation  of  epidemiologists  has  been 
entrusted  to  the  Antiepidemic  Information  Service  of  the 
Central  Antiepidemic  Administration,  which  started  this 
work  In  1951.  The  epidemiologists  attended  a  comprehensive 


courss  in  epideTtioiogy,  biostatistics  and  health  or.^an— 
i2!ation,  followed  by  field  practice,  xhs  persons  who 
finished  this  preparatory  course  could  continue  working 
as  epideniologists  or  be  employed  in  any  other  capacity. 

It  must  be  assumed  that  a  part  of  these  specialists 
returned  to  their  particular  jobs  or  to  work  at  scientific 
institutions  or  clinics. 

It  is  understood,  however,  that  at  the  time  oi  j 

they  will  be  called  up  again  as  Health  Service  epidemic-  , 
legists  and  directed  to  work  in  the  districts  of  stiat.giC 
importance. 


BIBLIO(il<APHY 


1.  Civil  Defence  Against  Biological  Warfare.  U.  S.  Government  Printin,; 

Office.  1953. 

2.  Hagemann  V.  Gerl.  Beiter.  z.  Geophis..  1936,  46.  261. 

3.  May  K.  R.  J.  Scient.  Instruments.  1945,  22.  10.  187. 

4.  G  u  y  t  o  n  A.  C.  J.  Int.  Hvg.  Tox.,  1946,  23.  13.3. 

5.  Gucker  F.  T.,  OKonski  C.  T..  Pickard  H.  B..  Pitts  J.  N  J 

Am.  Chem.  Soc.,  1947,  69.  2422. 

6.  Gucker  F.  T.  OKonski  C.  T.  Chem.  Rev.,  1949.  44,  2.  373. 

7.  0-Konski  C.  T.  Uht.  no  Gucker  F.  T.,  Science,  1949,  110,  28,  2856. 

372. 

8.  New  Aids  for  Chemical  Corps.  .\rmv  Information  Digest,  1955,  10, 

7. 

9.  Microscopic  Germ  Counter,  Mil.  Rev.,  1955,  35,  4,  65. 

10.  Berger  B.  B.,  Stevenson  A.  H.  J.  Am.  Water  Works  .4ssn.,  1955, 
47.  2.  101. 

11.  Collins  W.,  Kipling  C.  J.  Appl.  Bad.,  1957,  20,  2,  257. 

12.  S  t  i  c  k  1  a  n  d  L.  H.  J.  Gen.  Microo..  1951,  5.  4.  698. 

13.  L o wr  y  O.  H.,  Rosebr  ou h  N.  J.,  Fa  r  r  A.  L.,  R  a  n  d  a  1 1  R  1 
J.  Biol.  Chem.,  1951,  193,  1.  265. 

14.  Germ  Detection,  Semee  News  Letter,  1958,  74,  16,  246. 

15.  Plar.s  for  Special  Weapons  Defense.  Part  I.  Defense  Against  Biologi¬ 
cal.  Warfare  Agents.  J.  A.  M.  A.,  1953,  153.  9,  859. 

16.  H  o  1 1  a  e  n  d  e  r  A.,  Da  11a  Valle  J.  M.  Pub.  Health  Rep.,  1939.  51. 
14.  574, 

17.  Du  Buy  H.  G.  Pub.  Health  Rep..  1944,  59.  26.  829. 

18.  Andersen  A.  A.  J.  Bact..  1958,  76.  5.  471. 

19.  B  ou  r  d  i  I  Ion  R.  B..  Lid  well  O.  M..  Thoma  J.  C.  J.  Hyg.,  1941. 
41.  197 

20.  Bourdillon  R.  B..  Lid  well  O.  M.,  S  ch  u  ster  E.  Studies  in 
Air  Hygiene.  Medical  Research  Council.  Special  Report  Series.  1948. 
262,  12. 


249 


26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 


42. 
i  43. 


I  55. 


1 


Schu5ter  E.  Studies  in  Air  Hygiene.  Medical  Research  Council.  Spe¬ 
cial  Report  Series.  1948,  262.  24. 

Decker  H.  M.,  Wilson  M.  E.  Appl.  Microb.,  1954.  2.  5.  267. 
Kuehne  R.  W.,  Decker  H.  M.  Appl.  Microb.,  1957.  5.  5,  321. 

W  e  1 1  s  W.  F.  Am.  J.  Pub.  Health.  1933.  23.  56. 

Luckiesch  M..  Taylor  A.  M.,  Halladey  L  L.  J.  Bact..  1946, 
52.  1.  55. 

Maisonnet  M.  Rev.  Hyg.  et.  Med.,  1956,  4.  3.  228. 

H  o  u  w  i  n  k  E.  H..’  R  o  I  v  i  n  k  W.  J.  Hyg..  1957,  55,  4.  544. 

Kethiey  T.  W.  Gordon  M.  T.,  Orr  C.  Science.  1952,  116,  368. 
Gordon  M.  T..  Orr  C.  Air  Repair,  1954,  4,  1—4,  39. 

Orr  C,  Gordon  M.  T..  Kordeki  M.  C.  Appl.  Microb.,  1956.  4. 
3,  116. 

O.  H..  Brigg  E..  Miller  B.  F,  Baker  Z.  Science. 
1941.  93.  2409.  213. 

W  Heller  S.  M..  Foly  G.  £.,  Jones  T.  D.  Science,  1941.  94, 
2445,  445. 

Lemon  H.  M.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  a.  Med.,  1943,  54,  3,  298. 
Rosebury  T.,  B o  1  d I  M.  H.,  O I s on  F.  R.  a.  oth.,  Experimental 
Airborne  Infection.  Williams  and  Wilkins  Co.,  Baltimore.  1947. 
Hantover  M.  J.  1).  S.  Armed  Forces  Med.  J.,  1951,  12,  1795. 

Cnst  S..  Gurney  C.,  Hansen  W.  J.  Lab.  Clin.  Med.,  1955,  4. 

Mitchell  R.  B.,  Timmons  D.  E.,  Dorris  H.  W.  J.  Aviat.  med , 
1951  22  3  214 

Mitchell  R.  B.,  Fulton  J.  D.,  £  I  li  n  g  s  on  H.  V’,  Am.  J.  Pub. 
Health,  1954,  44.  10.  1334. 

N  o  i  I  e  r  E..  S  p  e  n  d  I  o  V  e  J.  C.  Appl.  Microb.,  1956,  4,  6,  300. 
Richards  M.  Nature.  1955,  176.  4481,  559. 

Kajiawara  S.,  Samori  N.  Med.  J.  Osaka  L'niv.,  1954,  5,  4,  587. 
Umt  no  Biol.  Abstracts,  1956,  October.  24366. 

S  o  n  k  I  n  L.  S.  Am.  J.  Hyg.,  1950,  51.  3.  31S. 

Mansberg  H.  P.  Science,  1957,  126.  3278,  823 
L  y  u  t  o  V  V.  Acta  Path,  et  Microb.,  Scand.,  1954.  35,  4.  370.  _ 

Passive  Defense.  Prepared  by  Bureau  of  Naval  Personnel,  1957. 
Higgins  M.  Monthly  Bulletin  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  the 
Public  Health  Laboratory  Service,  1950,  9. 

L  a  u  b  u  s  c  h  E.  J.,  G  e  I  d  r  e  i  c  h  E.  E.,  Jeter  H.  L.  Pub.  Health  Rep  , 
1953,  68.  11,  1118. 

Laubusch  E.  J.  Mil.  Med..  1955,  116.  3.  187. 

Harris  N.  K.  Powell  E.  O.  J.  Roy.  Microscop.  Soc.,  19ol,  71,  4, 
^7. 

Kanz  E.  Arch.  Hyg.  u.  Bact.,  1956,  140,  1-— 2,  106. 

Girard  G.,  G  a  1 1  u  t  J.  Ann.  Inst.  Pasteur,  1953,  85,  3,  3(2. 
Winslein  W.  A..  Eigen  E.  J.  Biol.  Chem.,  1949,  181,  109. 
Picken  J.  C..  Bauriede!  W.  R.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  a.  Med, 
P>.50  75  511 

Kennedy  H.  E..  Speck  M  L.  Awrand  L.  W.  J.  Bact.,  1955,  70. 

1.  70.  -  . 

Ni^Rainuzra  ‘  Shikoku  Acta  meu  ,  1954,  5.  5,  314,  Cited  in  Ref•^• 

Zhur.Bioiogiyoj  1956j»  4,  49 


250 


56.  Esida,  Utiwa.  bhikoku  Ada  >\c<l  1954.  5.  5.  18.  Cited  in 

58.SiarrfN«.»W*™d.V^%.5.6r..Cited  in  Ref.Ahur. 

50  B^on  TfuWt’.'h  Z.rc.  .03*  .*.,  45.. J5, 

W.  B?rser  B.  B..  Lidwig  H.  F.  Armed  Forces  Chera.  1.  .9d6.  .0, 

6..  Co?os  A.  H..  Creech  H.  J.,  Jor.es  B.  N,  Ber.lnger  E.  J  .m- 

62,  We".K  r'H^  T?’cii?«  A.  H.  Proc.  Soc  Esp.  Biol,  o  Med  ,  1954,  85. 

63,  B  0?k  I  .  y  S,  M„  W  h  i  t  n  e  y  E,,  R  a  P  P  F.  Proc,  Soc  Exp,  Biol,  a  Med 

19S5,  90,  1,  226.  «c  i  caa 

64,  B  u  c  k  I  e  y  S.  M.  Fed.  Proc..  19M.  U  ^  a  u  j  e  v  J.  C  .  Buck 

66.  Wasson  B  K.  j  bJu  N  Y  Acad.  Med.!  19K.  32.  2. 

67.  L  i  u  C..  F  a  1 0  n  M.  D..  H  e  y  J  J.  » • 

68.  lIu  C.  Bad.  Proc..  Society  of  American  Bacteriologists.  1935. 

(A  Coons  A.  H,  Snyder  J.  Sheever  F.  S;  Murrey  E  J  tip 
Med.  MSO.  «.  SI  , 

70  Meed^M.  0,.  Coldman  M.  Thomeeun  B  M  J  B»«t.  W56. 

71  Theeiapee  B.  M.  Moody  M.  0.  Ooldnen  M  J  Bxt  I46B. 

7X  1.  «  .  _ 

72  Thoei**on  B.  M.  Cherry  W  B  Moody  M  D  J  Beet.  IS57 
74.  4.  1» 

7%  Carter  C.  H.  Lelie  Y  M.  i  Bact.  fSSB  74.  Z  iSa 

74.  Lie  C  J  Exp.  .Med.  1465.  lOi.  6.  656 

75.  Liu  C  Proc  Soc.  Exp  Biol,  a  Med..  1466.  42.  aft) 

76  Barer  B.  Cole  A.  B  H..  Thompson  K  W  Natiee.  1949  IS). 

14ft. 

77  Wood  D  L.  Scicaoa.  1461.  114.  36 

74  Bloat  t  B.  .Mcliors  B  C  Science.  (449.  1(0.  137 
79  Stevensoo  H.  J  B^  Bolduan  O.  E.  .V  ScKUce.  (432.  Kt  IK. 
go  Thonas  L  C-  Greenstreet  J.  E.  Spectrodiemira  .teta.  1954.  6. 

4.  .IQS. 

111.  Stevenson  H.  J.  B.  Levine  S.  Soetice.  I95S.  116.  7(6 

42-  Levine  S.  Stevenson  H.  J.  R.  Science.  196.).  lift  141 

ft).  Levine  S.  Stevenson  H.  J.  R,  Tabor  E.  C  J  Bad.  1453.  66. 

664. 

94  Schneider  .M.  D.  Lauehlin  .M.  J.  J.  Bact.,  1966.  70.  I.  $7 
as  Randall  H  M.  Smith  D  W.  J.  Opt  Soc.  Aiaer..  (4S3.  43. 

im. 

66  OConnor  R  F,  McCall  E  P.  Dupre  E  J  Bad,  1957.  73.  ). 

608 

87  Levine  S..  Stevenson  H.  J  R.  Chambers  L.  A,  Ken¬ 
ner  B  A.  J.  Bact.  1463.  66.  I.  10 

aa  L.cvi  L..  .Matheson  B.  H.  Tatcher  F.  S  Science.  1456.  123. 

3165.  64 

14  Pol  la  rd  .M.  Engl  ey  F.  B..  Redmond  F.  R.  Chinn  H  L. 

Mitchell  P.  B.  Proc  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  a.  Med.  1452.  781.  i. 

10. 

90  Benedict  A.  A..  Pollard  M.,  Englcy  F.  B  Te.xas  Pea  Biol. 

a  .Med  .  1964.  12.  I.  21. 

41.  Benedict  A.  A.  J.  Bact.,  1466.  69.  264. 


251 


*■  ^  •-  »Ofd«*r  a.  M. 

t*ciiw««4  $.  W,  StCTcasoa  H.  i.  B.  J  Bart,  I96S.  n.  5. 


*  ^‘[tS***  ®  l•«rahaal  S.  C.  Pi*.  HeaMh  Bay,  196«.  71. 
••  ^  ®'  Aa^rew*  J.  M.  Aia.  i.  Pi*.  Health.  |«B.  42, 

«  Phair  J.  Asmt4.  Farm  Omw,  J,  1964.  C.  1.  H. 


INDIVIDUAL  PROTECTION  AGAINST  THE  BACTERIOLOGICAL  KTEAPON | 


According  to  American  direction  and  supervision  (1,2),  means  of 
specific  prophylaxis  and  therapy  of  infectious  diseases  (vaccines, 
therapeutic  sera,  antibiotics)  as  well  as  nonspecific  means  of  pro¬ 
tection  (gas  mask  and  protective  clothes)  pertain  to  individual  means 
of  protection  of  the  population  against  bacteriological  warfare. 


Specific  means  of  protection 

Vaccines  j 


Vaccines  are  considered  in  the  USA  as  a  powerful  means  of  anti¬ 
bacterial  protection,  which  when  applied  in  time,  along  with  immuni¬ 
zation,  in  case  of  epidemic  indications,  can,  to  a  considerable  extent, 
prevent,  limit  the  distribution  and  alleviate  the  course  of  infectious  , 
diseases,  arising  as  a  result  of  a  bacteriological  attack.  Therefore,  ! 
the  problem  of  vaccine  prophylaxis  is  the  center  of  attention  and  Is 
studied  earnestly  along  the  line  of  working  out  a  rational  plan  of  , 
Immunization  of  the  armed  forces  and  of  the  population  with  the  purpose 
of  establishing  in  them  a  "basic  immunity",  as  well  as  for  discovering 
new  vaccines  and  improving  existing  vaccine  preparations  against  in-  I 
fections,  the  causative  agents  of  which  might  be  applied  as  bacteri- 
ologic  weapons.  (3,4) 

However,  as  admitted  by  American  specialists,  the  USA  at  the 
present  time  does  not  have  at  its  disposal  vaccines  against  all  the 
diseases,  the  causative  agents  of  which  might  be  used  in  bacteriologi¬ 
cal  warfare  (5,6).  Moreover,  the  opinion  is  expressed  that  many  of 
the  existing  vaccines  will  not  be  able  to  secure  protection  of  the 
population  in  case  of  massive  doses  of  the  infective  agent  and  of 
unusual  ways  of  Infection,  i.e.,  under  conditions  which  can  take  place 
in  times  of  bacteriologlc  warfare.  Finally,  the  absence  of  associated 
vaccine  preparations,  the  creation  of  which  was  started  relatively 
recently  in  the  USA  (4,6),  and  the  lack  of  qualified  personnel  for 
carrying  out  vaccinations  can  significantly  impede  the  execution  of 
mass-immunization  in  short  periods  of  time.  The  circumstances,  men¬ 
tioned  above,  as  well  as  fear  of  causing  discontent  among  the  popula¬ 
tion  do  not  permit,  at  the  present  time,  carrying  out,  in  the  USA, 
the  program  of  mass  •'immunization  of  the  population  and  armed  forces 
against  infections,  which  is  urgent  from  the  standpoint  of  bacteri- 
ologic  war.tare.  Therefore,  fn  the  USA  at  the  present  time,  the  at¬ 
tention  of  public  health  agencies  is  called  only  to  the  problem  of 
Increasing  the  work  of  immunization  of  the  population  against  "natural" 


253 


infectious  morbidity  (natural  smallpox,  tetanus,  typhoid  fever  and 
paratyphoid  rever,  diphtheria,  whooping  cough),  which  will  make  It  pos¬ 
sible  to  produce  an  innune  stratum  and  secure  a  decrease  of  morbidity 
of  these  forms  during  the  war,  when  the  general  material  and  sanitary- 
hygienic  level  of  the  population  will  be  significantly  decreased.  How¬ 
ever,  it  is  supposed  that,  side  by  side  with  these  measures,  under 
conditions  of  war,  by  establishing  the  species  of  the  applied  causa¬ 
tive  agent,  the  population  of  the  affected  area,  or  even  of  the  whole 
country,  will  be  subjected  to  active  immunization  against  the  infec¬ 
tion,  the  causative  agent  of  which  has  been  used  by  the  enemy.  The 
offices  of  Civil  Defense  are  made  responsible  for  carrying  out  these 
measures  (7). 

American  research  institutions,  simultaneously,  work  intensively 
on  improving  the  existing  preparations  and  on  developing  new  highly  ef¬ 
fective  ones,  against  all  infections,  the  causative  agent  of  which 
might  be  used  as  a  bacteriological  weapon;  wide  research  is  being 
carried  out  for  creation  of  chemical  and  associated  vaccines  (4). 

In  the  present  chapter,  the  system  adopted  in  the  USA  and  many 
other  capitalistic  countries,  of  active  immunization  of  the  armed 
forces  and  of  the  population,  is  described  briefly,  the  characteris¬ 
tics  of  vaccine  preparations  used  there  are  presented,  and  directions  ! 
are  also  elucidated,  in  which  the  improvement  of  old  vaccines  and  the 
creation  of  new  ones  representing  interest  from  the  standpoint  of  I 

antibacterial  protection  is  carried  out. 

I 

In  the  USA  as  well  as  in  most  other  countires,  protective  vac¬ 
cinations  can  be  divided  into  planned  vaccinations,  carried  out  sys¬ 
tematically,  and  vaccinations  organized  on  epidemic  indica cions.  ; 

In  the  armed  forces  of  the  USA,  the  planned  vaccinations  ere. 
carried  out  against  natural  small-pox,  typhoid  and  paratyphoid  iever  A 
and  B,  tetanus,  and  diphteria.  In  case  of  epidemic  indications,  vac¬ 
cination  is  provided  against  yellow  fever,  exanthematous  fever, 
cholera,  plague  and  influenza.  Rocky  Fountain  spotted  fever,  Q-tever, 
and  a  series  of  less  frequent  infections;  psittacosis,  equine  en- 
i  cephalomyellcis,  Japanese  encephalomyelitis,  etc.  (1,2,4), 

There  is  no  law  for  compulsory,  planned  vaccinations  of  the  civil 
population  in  the  USA  at  the  present  time,  and  vaccine-prophylaxis  is  | 
carried  out  by  the  population  at  their  own  wish,  according  to  the 
recommendations  of  the  public  health  agencies.  | 

As  planned  vaccinations  for  the  population  are  recommended:  | 

-  vaccinations  against  natural  small-pox  for  the  whole  poulation,  | 
eapeciallv  prior  to  a  trip  abroad; 


254 


-  vaccinations  against  typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  fl 
for  persons  living  in  unsanitary  conditions  and  in  endemic  foci; 

-  vaccinations  against  tetanus  for  the  whole  population,  starting 
with  childhood; 

-  vaccinations  against  diphtheria  for  the  whole  population,  start* 
ing  with  childhood  and  continuing  to  the  age  of  35,  until  the  Schick 
reaction  becomes  negative;  this  vaccination  especially  Is  recommended 

in  case  of  trips  to  Europe  and  to  the  Mediterranean  coast;  , 


of  5; 


-  vaccinations  against  whoop in^. 


children  up  to  the  age 


vaccinations  for  children  against  poliocayelitis. 


In  case  of  epidemic  indications  the  population  of  the  USA  is  im¬ 
munized  against  the  same  infections  as  the  armed  forces  (8). 

Recently  the  public  health  agencies  in  the  USA  have  widely  dis¬ 
cussed  thf  cjuestion  on  Che  introduction  of  compulsory  vaccinations 
against  certain  infections.  In  mny  states  (Arkansas,  Maine,  New 
Mexico,  West  Virginia)  laws  have  been  adopted  for  compulsory  vacci¬ 
nation  of  children  against  sroa.ll-pox  and  also  for  immunizing  them 
against  diphtheria  (Maine,  West  Virginia)  (9). 

The  system  of  planned  vaccination,  and  also  vaccination  in  ccsc. 
of  epidemic  indications,  adopted  in  French  Army  and  Navy,  dc  not  diiferj 
from  those  in  the  USA. 

j 

The  whole  civil  population  in  France,  starting  from  chllclnocd,  Ij,  1 
subjected  to  compulsory  and  planned  immunizatioa  (legalized  by  coirc-  j 
spending  goverjiroentai  resolutions)  against  the  same  infections  as  the  I 
population  la  the  USA,  In  case  of  epidemic  indications,  vaccinations 
are  carried  out  against  the  same  infections  as  in  the  army. 

'  Fut thcr  in  this  presentation  the  characteristics  of  vaccine  pre¬ 
parations  used  for  planned  immunization  and  also  of  vaccines  having  ! 

essential  significance  as  means  of  specific  protection  against  bac-  j 

teriologic  weapons  are  given.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  all  measures  | 
for  antibacterial  protection,  including  immunoprophylaxis,  are  con-  I 
structed  on  the  basis  of  systems  of  anti-epidemic  protection  existing  | 
in  peace  time,  the  presentation  of  the  material  is  written  up,  not  in 
order  of  the  importance  of  the  infection  as  a  bacteriologic  weapon,  j 
but  beginning  with  the  characteristics  of  the  vaccine  preparations  j 
used  in  the  planned  immunization.  | 


255 


!  As  it  follows  from  the  above  statements,  vaccines  against  natural  j 

small^pox,  typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  E,  tetanus  and 
diphtheria  are  used  for  planned  vaccinations  tn  the  USA. 

1  Natural  small-pox.  The  causative  agent  of  natural  small-pox  Is 

j  acknowledged  as  one  of  most  probable  agents  in  the  bacteriolo,;ic  war. 
i  Since  effective  therapeutical  means  for  this  disease  have  not  been 
I  worked  out  up  to  the  present  time,  and  the  lethality  and  contagious- 
I  ness  of  natural  small-pox  is  very  high,  vaccine-prophylaxis  of  small* 

! pox  takes  the  loading  place  in  the  combat  with  this  disease  (see  i 

I  chapter  IV) .  j 

I  i 

The  high  efficiency  of  active  insBunization  against  natural  small-  i 
pox  according  to  the  method  of  Jenner  is  well  known  (8,i0).  Ihnaks  | 
CO  its  application,  significantly  more  human  lives  were  saved  and  more  i 
Illness  was  prevented  than  from  carrying  out  all  remaining  vaccina-  [ 
j  tions  taking  together.  Systematic  vaccination  against  small-pcx  has  j 

•secured  the  liquidation  of  small-pox  in  most  countries  of  the  world  and j 
has  also  brought  about  conditions  for  extinction  of  epidemics  and  | 

pandeinic.s  of  this  disease.  [ 

i 

j  Vaccination  gave  good  results  during  the  war  in  Korea,  wiicre  small-' 
pox  appeared  to  be  endemic.  Preliminary  data  on  the  American  arniy,  tae 
personnel  of  which  was  vaccinated,  show  that  out  of  every  100,000  men 
in  the  infantry,  there  were  A  cases  of  the  disease;  in  the  marines,  7  cat 
es  were  registered,  and  in  the  navy  and  military  air  force,  one  man 
got  sick.  Among  the  war  prisoners,  (also  vaccinated)  out  ct  every 
100,000  men,  5  were  sick.  At  the  same  time,  among  the  Korean  civilians, 
not  vaccinated  against  small-pox,  epidemics  took  place;  in  the  winter  j 
of  1952,  especially,  an  epidemic  among  children  was  observed,  includ¬ 
ing  300  persons  (8). 

Observations  in  regard  to  natural  small-pox  during  recent  years 

prove  convincingly  the  high  efficiency  of  vaccinations,  and  also  the 

I  necessity  for  carrying  out  routine  specific  revaccinatious .  Under- 

j  estimation  of  this  requiretneut  creates  conditions  for  the  appearance 

and  spread  of  the  disease.  Thus,  in  1947  in  New  York,  where,  as  in 

>  ttie  whole  coiincry,  vaccination  is  not  required  by  law,  an  outbreak  j 

j o£  smaii-pox  developed  including  8  people  (11).  One  of  the  reasons  i 

[for  its  appearance  seemed  to  be  the  irregularity  of  vaccinacion  and  I 

I  revaccination,  which  caused  a  decrease  of  the  level  of  vaccination  | 

I  immunity  in  the  population  of  the  city.  In  a  short  period  of  time,  ! 

I  about  5  million  people  were  subjected  to  vaccination.  Mass  immuno-  ( 

i prophylaxis,  carried  out  together  with  other  anti- epidemic  measures,  ma® 

I  it  -possible  to  check  further  spread  of  the  disease  and  to  liquidate 

;  :;ne  outbreak. 

* 


256 


In  1954-1955  in  France  (Bretagne)  an  epidemic,  including  approxi-  i 
macely  200  people  appeared,  simultaneously,  individual  cases  of  the 
disease  were  recorded  in  the  American  forces  in  France  (12,13,14). 

It  was  established  that  the  disease  appeared  and  took  the  most 
severe  course  in  persons  not  vaccinated  against  small-pox  (evaded 
compulsory  vaccination)  or  who  were  vaccinated  more  than  10  years  ago. 

I 

Small-pox  vaccine,  produced  in  the  USA  is  standardized  by  the 
National  Institute  of  Hygiene  and  represents  a  suspension  of  the  cow's 
small-pox  virus  in  glycerin,  grown  on  scarified  calf's  skin.  The  pre¬ 
paration  is  released  in  a  liquid  form  and  is  kept  without  losing  ac¬ 
tivity  at  a  temperature  below  0®  for  3  months.  Vaccination  is  per¬ 
formed  by  the  method  of  scarification  (1  drop).  Tne  duration  of  the 
immunity  is  4-5  years;  revacclnatlon  is  carried  out  after  every  4 
years  and,  in  addition  to  this,  in  case  of  epidemic  indications.  The 
reaction  to  stnall-pox  vaccine  is  usually  insignificant,  however,  during! 
mass -immunization  of  the  population  of  New  York  in  1947  (5  million  | 

people)in  45  persons  the  phenomenon  of  post-vaccine  encephalitis  ■ 

was  observed  (15,16),  \ 

! 

Within  the  past  few  years  in  the  USA,  a  dry  small-pox  viccine  \ 

has  been  experimentally  worked  out  and  tested  on  huraans;  it  was  pre-  j 

pared  from  the  membrane  of  chick  embryos  Infected  v/ith  standard  small-  i 
pox  virus  from  calf's  lymph.  The  preparation  has  a  high  effectivity  j 

and  may  be  kept  in  an  active  condition  for  a  long  time.  Steps  are  i 

taken  at  the  present  time  for  Introducing  this  new  preparation  into  j 
anti- epidemic  practice  (17,18,19).  ! 

In  England,  small-pox  vaccine  is  released  in  a  dry  form,  witn  j 
storage  time  up  tol2  months  (storage  in  dark,  at  temperature  below  | 

0°)  (20) .  I 

In  Switzerland  three  types  of  vaccines  against  natural  small-pox 
are  prepared:  1)  lymphovaccine,  treated  with  glycerin  (analogous  to 
the  vaccine  released  in  the  USA);  2)  lymphovaccine  in  chemically  pure 
lanolin,  resistant  to  high  temperature,  applied  in  the  tropics;  3)  dry 
1  lymphovaccine,  applied  in  the  tropics;  this  can  be  stored  even  better  | 
at  a  high  temperature  (21).  | 

Vaccines  against  small-pox,  in  general,  are  made  in  most  of  the  I 
capitalistic  countries  and  are  used  for  planned  immunizaticn  of  the  j 
population  and  armed  forces.  In  certain  countries  associated  pre-  • 

parations  have  been  obtained  against  small-pox  and  typhoid  fever  , 

(Japan),  small-pox  and  yellow  fever  (USA)  (22,23,24).  The  vaccination  ! 
secures  the  development  of  intense  Immunization,  which  successfully 
protects  from  disease  in  case  of  natural  infection. 


257 


The  questloa  of  the  ability  of  the  enall-pox  vaccine  to  protect  th^ 
human  body,  contaminated  by  means  of  aerogenlc  infection  with  a  massive 
dose  of  virus,  is  open. 

Typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B.  The  causative  agents 
of  typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  as  agents  of  bacteriolog- 
ic  war  are  of  slight  significance  in  the  opinion  of  American  investi¬ 
gators:  therefore  planned  ioanunization  of  armed  forces  and  of  the 
population  against  these  infections  is  carried  out  only  to  combat 
natural  morbidity  (see  chapter  IV). 

In  the  USA  army  compulsory  vaccination  against  typhoid  fever  and 
paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  was  inc-roduced  since  1911  (2).  Immunization 
among  the  population  is  recommended  for  persons  living  and  temporarily 
staying  in  endemic  areas,  as  well  as  for  persons  in  danger  of  infec¬ 
tion  because  of  their  profession  (8).  Also,  persons  being  in  contact 
with  diseased  persons  are  vaccinated. 

An  associated  vaccine  representing  a  suspension  of  killed  acetone- 
dehydrated  microbes  is  adopted  as  a  vaccine  preparation  against  | 

typhoid  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  for  supplying  public  health 
agencies  and  the  armed  forces  in  the  USA  (15,16,25).  For  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  the  vaccines  the  Panama  strainSS,  and  the  English  strain  Ty^are 
used.  The  vaccines  are  supplied  in  ampules  of  50  ml.;  1  ml,  contains 
1  billion  typhoid  and  250  million  paratyphoid  microbes  A  and  B.  By 
using  acetone  for  the  treatment  of  a  microbial  mass  with  subsequent 
lyophilization,  American  authors  have  accomplaished  the  preservation 
of  Vi-antigen  (as  well  as  of  H-  and  O-antigenq)  important  from  the 
immunologic  point  of  view-. 

The  course  of  immunization,  adopted  in  the  USA,  provides  for 
three  subcutaneous  injections  of  the  vaccine  of  0.5  ml.  each,  at  in¬ 
tervals  of  7  to  28  days  (8).  Tufts  recommends  an  "alternative  method": 
three  intradennal  injections  of  0.1,  0.2  and  0.2  mi.  each.  Among  the 
civilian  population,  a  revaccination  according  to  this  scheme  is 
carried  out  after  4  years,  but  in  the  army  -  after  3  years;  for  persons 
living  in  areas  endemic  with  regard  to  typhoid  fever,  as  well  as  for 
medical  personnel  and  workers  in  food  industries  and  laundries,  annual 
revaccination  of  0.5  ml.  subcutaneously,  or  of  0.1  ml.  intradermally 
is  recomnended.  The  vaccination  is  accompanied  by  general  and  local 
reactions;  however,  they  take  a  light  course.  In  intradermal  immuni¬ 
zation,  reaction  to  the  vaccine  is  insignificant.  The  duration  of  the 
immunity  produced  is  not  determined  exactly;  however,  it  lasts  not 
less  than  a  year. 

• 

The  introduction  of  compulsory  imaunization  against  typhoid  and 
paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  in  the  armed  forces  of  the  USAues  accompanied 


258 


by  a  sharp  decrease  in  the  morbidity  from  these  infections.  Ihus, 
already  during  World  War  I,  the  average  morbidity  from  typhoid  fever 
in  the  Aster  lean  army  was  0.37  cases  per  1000  people,  while  In  the 


French  army,  where  Innunlzatlon  had  not  yet  been  introduced,  the 
morbidity  reached  14.86  per  1000  people  (26)^.  During  World  War  II, 


only  677  cases  of  typhoid  fever  were  registered  In  the  American  anuy.  j 


Experiences  with  ioDiunlzatlon  of  the  armed  forces  of  the  LSA 
against  typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever,  during  the  war  in  Korea  I 

are  indicative  of  the  relatively  high  efficiency  of  the  vaccine  pre-  | 

parations  applied.  According  to  the  preliminary  data,  out  of  every 
100,000  men  in  the  land  forces,  only  one  case  of  the  disease  was  ! 

registered,  and  out  of  every  100,000  marines  -  2  cases;  no  morbidity 
was  registered  in  the  military  air  force  nor  in  the  navy  (8).  • 

However,  in  the  opinion  of  many  American  authors,  the  imp roven.ent  | 
of  the  typhoid  fever  vaccine  (treatment  of  microbes  with  acetone,  | 

securing  the  preservation  of  Vi-  antigen),  nevertheless  did  not  juat: 
the  hopes  set  upon  this.  The  decrease  in  the  annual  morbidity  frosn  | 

typhoid  fever  in  the  country  to  2250  cases  they  are  inclined  to  be  I 

connected  rather  with  the  improvenent  of  sanitary-hygenic  conditions  , 
than  with  the  high  efficiency  of  vaccination.  In  order  to  confirm  j 

this  point  of  view,  we  can  mention  Miller's  data  on  two  outbreaks  of  >; 

typhoid  fever  In  Suez  among  English  pilots  in  whom,  in  spite  of  gen-  j 

eral  vaccination  with  a  vaccine  prepared  according  to  the  method  adopce^i 
in  the  USA,  a  morbidity  of  30-40X  of  the  army  personnel  was  registered,! 
whereupon  the  lethality  constituted  iO-ilZ  (27).  j 

Further  irrprovement  of  immunoprophylaxis  against  typhoid  and  j 

paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  is  carried  out  with  the  use  of  purified  Vi- 
and  0-  antigens  as  typhoid  fever  vaccines.  Working  with  these  anri -  ; 

gens,  isolated  from  S.  typhosa  0-901  and  Escherichia  coli  5396/35  } 

respectively,  Landy  (1949)  estahJished  that  a  single  subcutaneous  j 

introduction  of  20  ugm.  0-antiget.  and  40  ugm.  Vi-antlgen  secures  the 
accumulation  of  a  higher  leve'  of  antibodies  in  the  blood  of  the  im¬ 
munized  person  than  a  full  couise  of  vaccination  (three  iniecclons) 
with  a  heated  or  acetone-dehydrated  vaccine.  Another  advantage  of 
the  new  preparation  is  its  lower  tendency  to  cause  reactions  (28,29). 
According  to  the  report  by  Edsall  (3),  the  American  vaccine  of  purified 
Vi-  and  O-antigens  was  tested  in  an  epidemiologic  trial  in  1954  and 
1955  in  Yugoslavia,  whereupon  the  preliminary  results  were  found  quite 
satisfactory  (4). 


^  In  comparing  these  figures,  it  is  also  necessary  to  consider  that, 
during  the  war,  the  French  army  was  under  more  difficult  epidemi¬ 
ologic  conditions. 


In  England,  for  prophylaxis  against  typhoid  and  paratyphoid  fever, | 
trivaccine  TAB,  prepared  from  microbes  (strain  Ty2)  which  are  killed 
by  heating  as  well  as  by  treatment  with  ethanol,  is  used  at  the  present 
time.  The  treatment  with  alcohol,  according  to  English  authors,  makes 
it  possible  to  better  preserve  the  antigenic  properties  of  the  microbes  , 
The  vaccine  contains  1  billion  typhoid  and  500-750  million  paratyphoid 
microbes  A  and  B  per  1  ml.  The  preparation  is  applied  subcutaneously 
twice  in  doses  of  0.25  and  0.5  ml.  (alcohol  vaccine)  with  an  interval 
of  7-28  days.  The  vaccine  killed  by  heating,  is  introduced  in  the  same 
way,  but  in  doses  of  0.5  and  1  ml.  A  booster  shot  is  recommended  after 
6  months.  Immunity  is  maintained  for  1-3  years.  The  injections  are 
accompanied  by  a  moderate  Local  and  systemic  reaction.  Prophylacticall ^ 
the  English  vaccine  corresponds  approximately  to  the  American  vaccine. 
The  vaccination  lowers  the  morbidity  frcwn  typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid 
fever  A  and  B,  but  does  not  guarantee  against  the  possibility  of  diseasje 
which,  however,  takes  a  lighter  course  than  usual  (20).  | 


In  France,  along  with  other  associated  preparations  a  vaccine 
against  typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  is  supplied;  it  ie 
prepared  from  microbes  killed  by  heating.  One  ml.  of  the  preparation 
contains  750  million  typhoid,  250  million  paratyphoid  A,  and  500 
million  paratyphoid  B  microbes.  Immunization  is  carried  out  with 
three  subcutaneous  injections  of  0.5,  1  and  1  ml.  at  intervals  of  7-10 
days.  Revaccination  is  carried  out  after  2  years  with  a  dose  of  1.5 
ml.  Further,  the  revaccination  should  be  repeated  every  4-5  years. 

The  vaccine  gives  a  low  local  and  systemic  reaction. 


Vaccinations  against  typhoid  fever  with  a  monovaccine  has  been 
carried  out  in  France  since  World  War  I;  since  1931  compulsory  immu¬ 
nization  of  the  armed  forces  with  an  associated  vaccine  against  ty¬ 
phoid  fever,  paratyphoid  fever  and  diphtheria  was  introduced;  since 
1936  vaccination  against  tetanus  has  been  added  to  the  immunization 
system  -  the  tetanus  component  is  Introduced  into  the  vaccine.  During 
World  War  II  in  Algiers  an  associated  vaccine  against  typhoid  fever, 
paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B,  diphtheria,  tetanus  and  exanthematous  fever 
was  prepared  (30) . 

In  conclusion,  it  is  necessary  to  mention  that  a  vaccine  against 
typhoid  fever  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  is  produced  in  most 
foreign  countries  and  is  supplied  either  in  the  form  of  trivaccine 
(TAB),  or  in  the  form  of  more  complex  preparations.  An  ordinance  for 
immunization  against  typhoid -para typhoid  diseases  at  the  present  time 
exists  in  most  foreign  armies  and  Is  carried  out,  in  addition  to  the 
above  mentioned  countries,  in  Italy  (starting  with  1939),  in  Canada 
(since  World  War  II),  Brazil,  Portugal,  Turkey  and  other  countries. 

In  Japan  for  imnmnization  of  "safety  forces",  starting  with  1949,  a 
polyvaccine  against  typhoid-paratyphoid  fevers  and  dysentery  has  been 


applied;  even  earlier,  the  application  of  an  experimental  vaccine  was 
begun  against  typhoid  fever  and  natural  satall-pox. 


Summary  data,  characterizing  the  epidemiologic  efficiency  of  vac¬ 
cines  against  typhoid  fever,  are  presented  by  Edsall  in  a  form  of 
table  (A)  (table  6). 


Table  6 


Year 

Number 

vaccinated 

Number 

non-vacclnated 

Morbidity  indications  (in  7.) 

Among  the 
vaccinated 

1  Among  the 

[  non-vaccina ted 

1913 

10,378 

8,936 

0.54 

1 

1 

3.2 

1915 

-- 

Ml  m 

0.095 

1.03 

1943 

4,000  ! 

800 

1.4 

7.0 

1944 

531 

4.7 

11.6 

1946 

194 

0.5 

8.7 

1 

Tetanus «  Although  the  probability  of  application  of  tetanus  tox¬ 
in  as  a  bacteriologic  weapon,  in  the  opinion  of  American  specialists, 
is  quite  doubtful,  a  planned  im&unoprophylaxis  against  this  disease 
has  great  defensive  significance,  since  tetanus  appears  as  a  typical 
wound  Infection  in  war  time  (see  chapter  IV). 

Tetanus  anatoxin  appears  to  be  one  of  the  most  effective  prophy¬ 
lactic  preparations  and  is  successfully  used  for  routine  vaccination 
in  most  foreign  armies.  In  the  USA  and  England,  vaccinations  are 
carried  out  with  tetanus  anatoxin.  In  France,  Italy,  Canada,  Switzer¬ 
land,  Portugal,  Brazil  and  Turkey,  tetanus  anatoxin  is  Included  in 
associated  vaccines,  containing,  besides,  components  against  typhoid- 
paratyphoid  fevers. 

Experience  during  World  War  II  showed  convincingly  that  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  tetanus  anatoxin  in  the  armed  forces  in  many  bllligerenc 
countries  secured  a  significant  decrease  in  morbidity  from  tetanus  in 
comparison  with  World  War  I,  when  the  wounded,  at  best  received  serum 
only  for  prophylactic  purposes.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  English 
army,  the  mortality  from  tetanus  decreased  from  1.5  to  0.06  of  1000 
wounded.  In  the  American  army,  during  World  War  II,  only  12  cases  of 
disease  were  registered  out  of  10  million  mobilized  men,  whereupon  6 
of  these  were  not  vaccinated.  It  should  be  emphasized  especially  that 
ser;im  prophylaxis  was  not  carried  out  on  the  wounded,  subjected  to 
previous  vaccination  with  anatoxin.  In  the  Australian  army,  only  13 
cases  of  tetanus  were  registered,  and  only  one  case  ended  fatally  (the 
army  -  587,000  people).  In  the  Canadian  array,  3  cases  of  disease  were 
registered  with  one  fatal  outcome.  In  the  French  army,  during  the 
campaign  of  1939-1940,  as  well  as  in  the  Brazilian  corps  during  the 


261 


c«ii7>algn  In  Italy,  not  a  single  case  of  this  disease  was  registered.  j 

t 

At  the  same  time  in  the  German  army,  where  vaccination  against  | 
tetanus  was  not  carried  out,  and  only  serum  was  injected  into  the  wounded 
for  prophylaxis,  in  the  operations  in  Normandy  alone  (194^),  80  cases 
of  tetanus  were  registered.  In  Manila,  during  the  war  operations,  400 
cases  of  tetanus  among  the  nonvaccinated  civilians  were  registered. 

Tetanus  was  observed  In  the  Japanese  army,  where  vaccination  was 
not  carried  out. 

In  connection  with  the  high  prophylactic  efficiency  of  tetanus 
anatoxin  in  many  countries  after  WW  II  (USA,  France)  laws  of  compulsory 
vaccination  of  the  civilian  population,  starting  with  childhood,  have 
been  introduced  (31,32). 

In  the  USA,  for  iniDunization  against  tetanus,  a  tetanus  anatoxin 
precipitated  with  alum,  as  well  as  a  native  tetanus  anatoxin  is  used. 

The  precipitated  anatoxin  is  introduced  intramuscularly  in  the  amount 
of  0.5  ml.  twice  with  an  interval  of  1  month  (better  after  2-3  months): 
the  native  anatoxin  is  applied  three  times,  with  the  same  interval  in 
a  dose  of  0.5  ml.  subcutaneously  or  Intramuscularly.  Revaccination 
is  carried  out  after  a  year  with  a  dose  of  0,5  ml.;  afterwards,  vac¬ 
cinations  are  repeated  after  every  4  years  (each  time  0,3  ml.  of  the 
deposited  preparation  is  used  intramuscularly  or  0.1  ml.  Intradermally) . 
Revacclnatlon  is  also  indicated  in  case  of  large  and  tom  wounds,  ani¬ 
mal  bites,  burns  and  other  contaminated  injuries,  as  well  as  in  any 
work  where  danger  of  contamination  with  tetanus  spores  exists. 

Persons,  who  have  not  had  primaxy  vaccination  and  are  in  need  of 
extra  serum  prophylaxis,  are  simultaneously  subjected  both  to  active 
and  to  passive  immunization  (in  different  parts  of  the  body!) 

Serum  prophylaxis  against  tetanus  in  vaccinated  persons  is  recom¬ 
mended  only  in  cases  of  large  wounds  or  when  first  aid  was  rendered 
I  too  late  (after  24  hours  or  later);  in  such  cases,  simultaneously  with 
anatoxin,  10,000  AU  of  serum  are  Introduced.  If,  however,  prophylaxis 
can  be  Initiated  immediately,  it  is  considered  to  be  sufficient  to  in¬ 
troduce  a  revaccination  dose  of  anatoxin. 

At  the  present  time,  work  is  being  carried  out  in  the  USA  for  the 
creation  of  complex  preparations  against  tetanus,  diphtheria  and 
whooping  cough  (8,15,16,33,34,35). 

Diphtheria.  The  causative  agent  of  diphtheria  and  its  toxin,  iust 
as  the  causative  agents  of  typhoid  and  paratyphoid  fever,  and  tetanus, 
does  not  belong  to  the  probable  agents  of  bacterlologlc  warfare.  Theref 


£or«,  liBBiunlzatlon  against  diphtheria  pursues  only  the  object  of  coa- 
bating  “natural"  aorbidity  (sec  chapter  IV).  | 

In  the  USA,  routine  iimnunization  against  diphtheria  is  cootpulsory 
in  the  armed  forces  and  is  recotnoended  for  the  whole  civilian  popu¬ 
lation,  starting  with  childhood  and  continuing  up  to  the  age  of  35, 
in  case  of  a  positive  Schick  reaction.  Innunizatioa  is  carried  out 
with  deposited  diphtheria  anatoxin  (adsorbed  on  aluminum  hydroxide, 
precipitated  with  aluminum  phosphate  or  with  alum)  after  a  preliminary 
application  of  Schick's  test.  If  the  reaction  is  weak,  anatoxin  is 
introduced  subcutaneously  in  doses  of  0.1,  0.5,  1  and  1  ml.;  in  case 
of  moderate  reactions,  4  injections  are  carried  out:  0.1,  0.3,  0.5 
and  1  ml.;  the  second  dose  is  introduced  48  hours  after  the  first  one, 
but  the  following  doses  -  after  3-4  week  intervals.  A  very  def inice 
Schick’s  reaction  is  a  counterindication  for  vaccination.  The  dura¬ 
tion  of  the  preservation  of  insnunity  is  not  definite;  however,  it  Is 
measured  in  terms  of  several  years.  Revaccination  is  recoinnended  to  be 
carried  out  every  4  years  by  means  of  subcutaneous  injection  of  0.1 
ml.  anatoxin;  it  is  also  recommended  to  apply  some  associated  pre¬ 
parations  consisting  of  2-3  components  (tetanus  and  diphtheria;  teta¬ 
nus,  whooping  cough  and  diphtheria)  which  secure  an  increase  of  the 
immunizing  properties  of  diphtheria  anatoxin  (1,2,8,25). 

I 

Such,  briefly,  are  the  characteristics  of  bacterial  preparations 
which  are  used  in  the  USA,  and  certain  other  countries,  for  carrying 
out  routine  immunization  of  the  armed  forces  and  of  the  population. 

As  was  indicated,  vaccinations  against  other  infectious  diseases  are 
carried  out  in  case  of  epidemic  indications.  Below  are  listed  data 
on  immunoprophylaxis  of  only  those  Infections,  the  causative  agents 
of  which,  according  to  data  of  American  authors,  can  be  used  as 
bacteriologic  weapons. 

Plague.  According  to  the  unanimous  opinion  of  American  special¬ 
ists,  the  causative  agent  of  plague  appears  to  be  one  of  the  most 
probable,  and,  very  likely,  most  dangerous  agents  in  bacteriological 
war  (see  above).  In  view  of  the  extreme  contagiousness  and  high 
fatality  of  plague  (especially  in  th^ulmonary  and  septic  forms)  even 
if  the  most  modern  methods  of  specific  therapy  are  applied,  vaccine- 
prophylaxis  of  this  disease  under  conditions  of  bacteriologic  war 
acquires  primary  significance.  Naturally,  the  preparation  selected 
for  this  purpose  must  be  highly  effective;  in  particular,  the  problem 
is  raised  concerning  its  ability  to  protect  against  aerogenic  infec¬ 
tion  with  massive  doses  of  virulent  cultures  of  plague. 

Vaccinations  against  plague  in  the  USA  are  adopted  for  the  armed 
forces  as  well  as  for  the  civilian  public  health  system  (1,2,8).  Im¬ 
munization  is  Indicated,  above  all,  in  cases  of  trips  to  areas  of 
endemic  (enzootic)  plague  or  upon  the  appearance  of  epidemics  or  I 


263 


enzootics.  It  is  assumed  that  vaccination  against  plague  will  also  be 
carried  out  under  conditions  of  bacteriological  warfare  by  using  the  | 
causative  agent  of  this  disease.  For  active,  specific  prophylaxis  in 
the  armed  forces  in  the  USA  a  vaccine,  killed  with  fonnaline  is  used; 

1  ml.  of  the  preparation  contains  2  billion  microbial  cells.  The 
course  of  vaccination  consists  of  2  subcutaneous  injections  of  1  ml. 
each  at  Intervals  of  7-10  days.  Immunization  secures  the  creation  of 
relative  immunity^  for  a  period  of  4-6  months.  Revaccination  is  carriec 
out  in  case  of  epidemic  indications  after  every  4-6  months.  The 
storage  period  of  the  preparation  is  12  months.  The  adopted  vaccine 
exerts  moderate  systemic  and  local  reactions  and  is  protecting  16-467. 
guinea  pigs,  infected  subcutaneously  with  a  virulent  culture  (96-1007. 
of  the  control  animals  died).  The  vaccine  precipitated  with  alum  is 
protecting  80-100Z  guinea  pigs  under  the  same  conditions.  By  increas¬ 
ing  the  dosage  and  number  of  injections,  the  results  are  Improved. 

When  the  vaccination  dose  is  Increased  to  8-12  billion  microbial  cells, 
the  efficiency  of  the  vaccination  is  increased;  the  results  appeared 
to  be  even  better  upon  revaccinatlon  (8,15,16,36,37). 

Further  research  upon  improvement  of  anti-plague  vaccine  in  the 
USA  is  being  carried  out  for  obtaining  the  most  effective  antigens, 
representing  individual  fractions  of  killed  cultures  of  the  plague 
bacilli.  It  is  assumed  that  a  relatively  low  reactivity  of  these  pre¬ 
parations  with  high  iimnunogenity  will  make  it  possible  to  change  to  I 
multiple  vaccination,  which  in  turn  will  secure  a  strong  immunity,  j 
preventing  disease  from  aerogenic  contamination.  | 

Meyer  succeeded  in  Isolating  7  antigens  from  the  plague  bacillus, j 
three  of  which  possess,  according  to  his  data,  important  immunologic 
significance.  Fraction  I  (F-1),  representing  water  soluble  protein 
fraction  obtained  from  plague  cultures,  treated  with  acetone  plays  the 
most  important  part  in  creating  itanunity  against  plague;  this  fraction 
can  be  obtained  in  a  crystailinic  form. 

Fraction  I,  in  a  dose  of  0.1  mg.,  protects  white  mice  from  100 
lethal  doses  of  a  virulent  culture  and  possesses  immunologic  proper¬ 
ties  for  rats,  rabbits  and  monkeys.  The  immunogenic  properties  of 
F-l  become  apparent  in  the  formation  of  antibodies  (agglutinins,  | 

hemagglutinins,  complement-fixing,  neutralizing).  A  twofold  immuni¬ 
zation  of  a  person  with  3  mg.  of  the  preparation  secures  the 
appearance  and  significant  increase  of  antibodies  in  man;  0.5  ml. 
serum  of  the  immunized  person  protects  the  white  mouse  against  100 
lethal  doses  of  the  virulent  plague  culture. 

Meyer  assumes  that  a  condition  necessary  for  the  efficiency  of 
I  any  anti-plague  vaccine,  independent  of  whether  the  vaccine  is  live 
I  or  killed,  seems  to  be  the  presence  in  it  of  a  sufficient  amount  of  j 
j  fraction  I.  In  his  opinion,  strain  EV  contains  comparatively  little  | 


264 


fraction  I  and,  therefore,  appears  as  a  relatively  weak  antigen;  how-  j 
ever  Its  Innunogenlc  prdperties  can  be  Increased  by  increasing  the  lum¬ 
ber  of  vaccinations.  Meyer  calculates  that  any  anti-plague  vaccine, 
live  or  killed,  but  containing  2-3  ng.  of  fraction  I,  will  cause  im¬ 
munity  in  50%' of  the  persons  vaccinated;  to  increase  the  intensity  of 
immunity,  revaccination  after  3-6  months  is  necessary;  the  efficiency 
of  vaccination  is  increased  when  the  preparation  is  used  in  a  water-oil 
emulsion. 

In  addition  to  fraction  I,  Meyer  has  isolated  a  second,  toxic 
fraction  representing  a  protein,  but  has  not  obtained  it  in  a  pure 
state.  Upon  parenteral  administration  of  the  toxic  fraction  in  animals 
shock  reactions  develop,  and  dea^h  occurs  in  mice  and  guinea  pigs;  this 
fraction  causes  the  formation  of  an  antitoxin  in  blood  which,  however, 
does  not  protect  other  animals  from  the  action  of  the  toxin.  The  toxic 
fraction,  according  to  Meyer,  is  contained  in  significant  amounts  in 
strain  EV,  causing  its  reactivity  (38). 

In  March-April  1955  Ehrenkranz  and  Meyer  (30)  announced  their 
comparative  studies  of  three  imnunlzing  preparations  for  protection 
from  the  pulmonary  form  of  plague.  Authors  of  experiments  with  mon¬ 
keys  compared  live  (strain  EV-76)  and  killed  formalinized  vaccines 
(strain  Irek),  and  also  fraction  I  which  was  extracted  from  plague 
microbes,  strain  Irek,  killed  with  acetone  and  dried;  afterwards  this 
extract  was  precipitated  and  crystallized  by  the  method  of  Beiker. 
Finally,  in  the  observations  carried  out  it  was  established  that,  with 
a  preliminary  immunization  of  monkeys  with  three  preparations  in  doses 
adopted  for  humans,  a  weak  protection  is  created  against  aerogenic 
contamination  with  10300  1100  virulent  plague  microbes.  By  increas¬ 

ing  Che  itomunlzing  dose  of  vaccines,  the  survival  percentage  of  con¬ 
taminated  monkeys  increases,  but  insignificantly.  Much  better  re¬ 
sults  were  obtained  by  inoninlzatlon  with  moderate  as  well  as  with 
massive  doses  of  the  vaccine,  administered  in  manifold  injections  over 
a  longer  period  of  time.  In  these  cases,  iimnunizatlon  by  any  of  the 
three  vaccines  secured  100%  protection  of  monkeys  from  aerogenic  con¬ 
tamination  by  10300  +  1100  virulent  plague  microbes.  Any  difference 
in  the  quality  of  the  preparations  testedwas  not  observed.  It  should 
be  emphasized,  especially,  that  the  application  of  massive  doses  of 
antigen  appeared  to  be  possible  only  on  condition  of  its  thorough 
purification  and  concentration  (30) . 

Silverman,  ICaioshi,  Kigushi  and  Meyers  (40),  obtained  in  1954,  a 
protective  antigen  against  the  plague  microbe  grown  on  a  synthetic 
nutrient  medium,  consisting  of  pure  amino  acids  and  other  ingredients. 
The  filtrate  of  the  plague  culture  obtained,  in  which  fraction  I  and 
other  antigens  were  found,  after  being  treated  with  alum,  was  repeatedly 
introduced  into  white  mice  (the  total  amount  of  antigen  Introduced 
reached  5-10  ml.  As  a  result,  60-100%  of  Immunized  animals  were  found 


265 


resistant  to  100  lethal  doses  of  a  virulent  plague  culture,  adclDls-  i 
tered  subcutaneously.  ; 

i 

In  England,  as  well  as  In  the  USA,  vaccination  against  plague  is  j 
perionsed  on  epidotlc  Indications,  whereupon,  tor  this  purpose  a  | 

killed  vaccine  la  supplied,  containing  2  billion  nicrobial  cells  per  i 
ml.  The  dose  is  0.5-1  ml.  subcutaneously,  with  an  interval  from  1-3  | 

weeks.  The  duration  of  imnunity  is  3  to  12  months;  revaccination  is  | 
also  carried  out  upon  epidemic  indications  after  6  months  with  a 
single  Injection  of  the  preparation  (1  ml.)  (20). 

f 

I 

In  Switzerland  a  killed  anti-plague  vaccine  is  used  (1  ml.  contaiusj 
2  billion  microbial  cells);  twofold  subcutaneous  vaccinations  in  a  dosej 
of  0.5  ml.  with  an  interval  of  8  weeks;  revaccination  after  6  months  ; 
with  the  same  dose  (21).  i 

In  France,  for  immunization  of  the  personnel  of  the  armed  forces  ; 
and  of  the  population,  a  killed  fomallnized  vaccine  is  also  used  (2  ^ 
bili-'.on  microbial  cells  per  1  ml.),  it  is  introduced  subcutaneously  ! 

three  times  (in  case  of  severe  epidemics)  In  doses  of  2-2-4  ml.  with  t 
3-5  day  intervals  (30),  | 

I 

For  immunization  of  the  population  in  Madagascar,  Senegal,  Congo,  j 
and  South  Africa,  as  well  as  in  Tunisia  and  Algiers,  a  live  vaccine  * 

from  an  attenuated  strain  £V  (Girard,  Robik)  is  prepared  in  France  1 

(Pasteur  Institute).  This  vaccine  is  applied  once,  and  it  is  not 
inferior  in  its  immunologic  efficiency  to  the  killed  vaccines,  but, 
in  the  opinion  of  many  authors,  excells  them;  at  the  present  time,  it  I 
is  prepared  in  the  dry  state  which  significantly  increases  its  storage  j 
time  (37,41).  ‘ 

According  to  data  of  Andrews,  live  vaccines  lower  morbidity  ia  e.n-  ; 
derate  foci,  amounting  to  as  much  as  4-5  fold  in  times  of  epidemics. 
Otten,  Girard  and  Robik  (37)  consider  that  vaccinations  with  a  live  . 
vaccine  in  areas  of  epidemics,  without  carrying  out  other  anti-plague 
measures,  have  lowered  morbidity  from  plague  8-10  fold.  Nevertheless, 
a  live  vaccine  from  strain  EV,  as  well  as  other  live  vaccines,  because  j 
of  the  danger  of  strain  reversion,  insufficient  efficiency  in  pulmonary 
j  infection,  and  significant  reactivity,  has  not  been  applied  either  in 
European  countries  or  in  America. 

In  the  opinion  of  many  specialists,  the  existing  live  and  killed 
anti-plague  vaccines  do  not  create  sufficiently  strong  immunity 
against  the  pulmonary  form  of  plague,  i.e.,  they  do  not  protect  from 
aerogenic  contamination,  and  consequently,  do  not  satisfy  the  demands 
required  of  the  preparations  intended  for  protection  from  a  bacterj.- 
ologlc  weapon.  However,  vaccination  in  case  of  epidemics  is  consid¬ 
ered  compulsory,  since,  by  decreasing  morbidity  from  bubonic  plague, 


_ 266 


I  it  decreases  at  the  same  time  the  number  of  cases  of  secondary-pul-  | 
!  monary  plague,  which  decreases  the  possibility  of  the  developr.'.ent  of 
I  epidemics  of  the  pulmonary  form  of  tne  disease  (37).  , 

■  Tularemia.  The  causative  agent  of  tularemia,  like  that  of  the 

plague  microbe,  belongs  to  the  probable  agents  of  bacteriologic  war-  ■ 

fare.  Although  fatality  from  tularemia  is  not  high,  and  there  are  ! 

highly  effective  therapeutic  remedies  securing  the  successful  treat-  ’ 
ment  of  this  disease,  immunization  against  tularemia,  reliably  prevent-^ 
ing  the  disease,  might  find  a  wide  application  under  conditions  of  I 
bacteriologic  war  (see  chapter  IV). 

i 

In  "Tlie  Control  of  Communicable  Diseases  in  Man",  published  in  > 
1953  by  the  American  Public  Health  Association,  it  is  indicated  that  i 
immunization  against  tularemia  In  the  USA  is  not  carried  out  (42);  [ 

also  there  are  no  data  in  regard  to  vaccination  of  the  personnel  of  ' 
the  armed  forces  against  this  infection.  However,  according  to  otner  j 
sources,  there  is  in  the  USA  a  so-called  Foshay  vaccine,  applied  upon  i 
epidemic  indication^  for  prophylaxis  from  tularemia  (43).  f 

i 

This  vaccine  represents  a  tularemia  culture,  treated  with  nitric  ; 
acid,  washed,  and  suspended  in  a  0,57.  solution  of  phenol.  The  pre-  i 
i  paration  contains  up  to  24  billion  micrdbial  cells  per  ml.  and  is  ; 

injected  three  times  at  1  day  intervals;  the  duration  of  the  effectiv-; 
j  ity  of  the  vaccine  is  one  year,  at  a  temperature  of  4“ ,  According  to  s 
j  general  data,  vaccination  of  2145  people  (from  1932  to  1941)  did  not  I 
guarantee  against  disease,  but  somewhat  decreased  the  number  of  i 

diseased  and  contributed  to  lighter  course  of  disease  (26).  j 

! 

In  1950,  Kadull  et  al.  (44)  announced  the  production  of  a  phenol- i 
treated  and  acetone-extracted  vaccine,  as  well  as  the  vaccination  of  j 
809  persons  with  these  preparations.  In  207.  of  the  vaccinated  per-  i 
sons  within  a  period  of  2months,  a  positive  allergic  reaction  ! 

appeared,  and  in  48  persons,  out  of  207  examined,  agglutinins  in  the  i 
blood  were  detected.  Out  of  72  vaccinated,  who  worked  every  day  j 

with  virulent  tularemia  cultures,  22  persons  became  sick.  The  j 

authors  assxane  that  persons  working  with  this  infection  should  be  j 
!  immunized  against  tularemia.  i 

Within  the  past  5-6  years  in  the  USA  a  series  of  experimental  | 
works  on  obtaining  different  soluble  antigen  fractions  from  tularemia 
cultures  (chemical  vaccine)  has  been  published.  By  immunizing  white 
mice  with  a  soluble  antigen,  a  specific  resistance  appears  in  them, 
apparent  already  24  hours  after  immunization  and  not  accompanied  by 
j  an  accumulation  of  specific  antibodies  (45).  j 

i  i 

j  Indications  of  the  application  of  live  vaccines  against  tularemiaj, 

in  the  USA,  as  well  as  data  on  the  availability  of  analogous  i 


267 


preparations  in  other  countries^  cannot  be  found  in  the  published 
literature. 

Brucellosis.  According  to  the  opinion  of  American  specialists, 
the  causative  agent  of  brucellosis  can  be  applied  with  great  probabil*- 
Ity  as  a  bacteriologic  weapon  (see  chapter  IV).  Considering  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  highly  effective  remedies  for  treatment  of  brucellosis,  it 
can  be  assumed  that  vaccine  prophylaxis  night  play  an  important  role 
in  combating  this  disease  In  peace  time,  as  well  as,  particularly, 
under  conditions  of  bacteriologic  war.  However,  in  the  USA,  vaccina¬ 
tion  of  the  people  against  brucellosis  is  not  carried  out  and  Is 
considered  "impractical".  No  data  on  anti-brucellosis  vaccine,  appllec 
for  prophylaxis  against  this  disease  in  humans,  could  be  found  in  the 
official  manuals  available.  However,  in  the  special  literature,  there 
are  some  indications  of  attempts  to  make,  in  the  USA,  a  live  vaccine 
against  brucellosis.  In  1953  there  was  obtained  a  vaccine  strain,  Br. 
melitensls  (having  dependence  on  streptomycin),  producing  a  rather 
intensive  immunity  in  white  mice  toward  experimental  infection  (46). 

Along  with  this,  in  veterinary  practice  in  the  USA,  active  immu¬ 
nization  with  live  vaccines  is  used  with  a  dry  vaccine  prepared  from 
bovine  strain  No.  19,  with  which  calves  are  vaccinated  (47). 

According  to  the  data  of  American  manuals,  killed  vaccines  do  not 
give  positive  results  for  prophylaxis  of  animals  against  brucellosis 
(48). 

Nevertheless,  anti-brucellosis  vaccines  are  still  used  in  medical 
practice  in  the  USA,  not  for  prophylactic,  but  rather  for  therapeutic 
purposes. 

For  this  purpose,  a  bivalent  or  monovalent  killed  vaccine  from 
microbes  of  the  bovine,  caprine,  or  porcine  type  is  applied. 

The  wide  experience  in  the  USSR  with  the  successful  vaccination 
of  humans  with  a  live  vaccine  made  from  bovine  strain  No.  19  is  elu¬ 
cidated  in  foreign  literature. 

Anthrax.  Along  with  the  plague  microbe,  the  causative  agent  of 
anthrax  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most  probable  agents  in  bacteriolo* 
gic  warfare.  The  excremely  high  fatality  observed  in  the  pulmonary 
and  septic  forms  of  the  disease,  determines  the  leading  role  of 
prophylactic  measures  in  the  general  preventive  system  against  anthrax. 
In  connection  with  this,  vaccination  against  anthrax,  securing  pro¬ 
tection  of  humans  against  aerogenlc  contamination,  might  appear  as  an 
important  measure  for  protection  in  bacteriologic  warfare.  Neverthe-  j 
less,  vaccines  against  anthrax  are  finding  a  wide  application  only  in 
veterinary  practice  at  the  present  time  in  the  USA.  | 


268 


lasaunization  of  animals  In  the  USA  is  accomplished: 

>  with  "bacteil.i  against  anthrax*',  representing  a  suspension  of 
killed  bacilli  in  formalin  solution;  it  is  recomended  for  vaccination 
of  horses,  large  and  small  livestock; 

-  with  spore  vaccine  No.  3  -  live  attenuated  spore  culture, 
treated  with  saponin;  it  is  recommended  for  vaccination  of  large 
livestock; 

-  with  a  "spore  vaccine  No.  4",  which  is  prepared  from  a  live  cul¬ 
ture  of  a  Bact.  anthracis  strain  with  a  proved  antigenity;  the  washings 
from  agar  cultures  are  suspended  in  a  buffer  solution; 

-  with  a  "special  spore  vaccine  No.  4"  which  is  applied,  together 
with  immune  serum,  for  a  fast  liquidation  of  infection  in  outbreaks  of 
anthrax  (47). 

In  recent  years,  in  connection  with  working  out  problems  of  anti- 
bacterlologic  protection  in  the  USA,  work  has  been  started  for  the 
creation  of  an  anthrax  vaccine  for  people,  preventive  against  aerogenic 
contamination.  The  working  out  of  the  new  vaccine  is  based  on  obtain¬ 
ing  anthrax  antigens  from  edematous  tissues  of  the  infected  animals  or 
from  cultures  of  the  causative  agent  grown  on  special  media. 

A  special  synthetic,  nonprotein  medium  was  developed  for  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  the  anthrax  bacillus  and  for  obtaining  antigens  from  It.  This 
medium  consists  of  17  aminoacids,  inorganic  salts,  guanine,  uracil, 
thiamine,  glutamine,  glucose  and  sodium  bicarbonate.  As  a  specific 
anthrax  antigen  (protective  antigen"),  the  filtrate  from  the  culture 
of  the  causative  agent  cultivated  for  20  hours  at  a  temperature  of  37^ 
on  the  medium  indicated  above,  is  used;  it  is  filtered  through  ultra- 
porous  glass  filters.  The  lyophllized  preparation  is  preserved  for 
several  months.  The  concentration  of  antigen  is  attained  by  precipi¬ 
tation  with  aluminum  potassium  alum,  which  is  done  inmediately  after 
filtration. 

The  immunologic  efficiency  of  the  preparation  was  first  tried  out 
on  rabbits  and  guinea  pigs,  later  -  on  monkeys. 

It  was  established  that,  in  rabbits,  the  antigen  produces  strong 
immunity,  protecting  them  against  100  LO^q  and  maintaining  this  on  a 
high  level  for  more  than  3  months.  Experiments  on  immunization  of 
guinea  pigs  showed  that  2-3  fold  vaccination  secures  survival  of  ani¬ 
mals  after  Intradermal  inoculation  with  200  LD^q. 

In  experiments  with  monkeys  it  was  established  that  immunization  with 
two  injections  (subcutaneous)  in  doses  of  0.5  and  1  ml.  with  an  interval 


269 


j  of  2  weeks,  creates  strong  immunity,  protecting  monkeys  from  intra¬ 
muscular  infection  with  50,000  to  100,000  spores.  Eight  monkeys  were  ! 
immunized  subcutaneously  twice  with  a  dose  of  i  ml.  of  the  preparation,! 
I  with  an  interval  of  16  days.  Six  days  after  the  second  injection,  u  ' 
I  iinmuntzed  and  4  control  monkeys  were  cerogeneticaily  infected  with  | 
39,000-82,000  anthrax  spores.  The  control  animals  died  from  sysremic  I 
infection,  whereas  the  immunized  ones  survived;  vaccinated  monXey!,  j 
tolerated  aerogenic  infection  even  with  890,000-3,000,000  anthrax 
spores.  In  this  way  the  validity  of  the  preparation  for  prn(.ett.,o  .  ^ 

against  aerogenic  infection  was  brought  to  light  ‘'49,50,51).  ' 

j  ! 

1  Alter  this,  tests  were  tried  out  on  humans.  A  .^roup  oi  55  vo„uri-  i 

}  teers  received  2  injections  each  at  a  dose  of  0.5  mi.  basic  hi  • 

i  «  -k  *'1 

with  an  interval  of  2  weeks.  No  significant  systemic  reactions  ■•■.'i.ro  j 
observed,  and  only  in  3  persons  a  slight  painfulness  appeared  ?r  -he  ; 
site  of  injection  after  24  hours.  | 

Afterwards,  the  iirmunization  program  was  broadened  to  cr'-nr., -'ii  ■ 
a  Large  group.  Vaccination  was  carried  out:  three  times  wii.lt  ,i  d.se  ■■■!  ' 

0.5  ml.  each  with  an  inter'val  of  2  weeks;  revaccination  was  carried  5 

out  after  6  months  with  a  dose  of  0.25  ml.  A  total  of  1936  injection?  | 
were  made  in  660  persons,  whereupon  systeinic  react ionv?  were  observad  ! 
in  0.7%  of  the  cases  and  significant  local  reactions  -  in  2,4%;  on  r^.-  | 
vaccination  of  445  persons,  the  number  of  reactions  increased  corre-  \ 
spondingly  to  1.3  and  2.7X.  , 

t 

I  In  general  it  was  established  chat  humans  tolerate  the  adn-ini'--  | 

I  tration  of  antigen  well;  serious  reactions  are  absent,  and  modeiete  | 

i  local  reactions  are  observed  seldoK.  i 

_  I 

(  Cholera.  The  causative  agent  of  cholera  is  regarded  as  a  possibl^ 

j  agent  in  bacteriologic  warfare  (see  chapter  IV).  Tae  vaccine  afopteri  | 

I  in  the  USA  against  cholera  represents  a  suspension  of  billed,  heatnd  j 
cholera  vibrios,  contai.ning  8  billion  microorganisms  per  1  ttI.;  chn 
>  preparation  can  be  kept  for  18  months.  The  basic  course  of  icx'pjni- 

I  zation  consists  of  two  subcutaneous  injections  -  0.5  and  1  mi.  esch, 

i  with  an  interval  of  7-28  days.  According  to  the  data  cf  tbs  Incc-.r- 

national 'ittrantine  Commission,  immunity  against  cholera  devetopb  • 

i  already  6  days  after  the  first  injection;  however,  it  appears  i:o  b.? 
j  relative;  the  duration  fluctuates  from  6  to  12  months.  The  reactiviryj 
!  of  the  vaccines  Is  insignificant  and  severe  reactions  are  not  observed] 

I  P.evaccination  is  carried  out  every  6  months  in  a  dose  of  I  nl. .;  it  is  | 

I  calculated  that  it  is  effective  if  it  is  carried  out  for  4  yeara  ac-  | 

j  cording  to  the  basic  course  of  inanunizarioa.  ! 

I  ! 

i  i 

j  Vaccinations  against  cholera  are  carried  out  In  the  anty  and 

j  among  the  civilian  population,  on  epidemic  indications,  especially  ir  ; 
j  case  of  trips  to  areas,  where  the  morbidity  is  endemic,  or  in  erse  ct  i 


an  epidemic. 


Also  the  application  of  the  causative  c£  cliolera  hv  ft  en-  ! 

emy,  as  a  bacteriologic  weapon  appears  as  an  indication  cot  tnr.ss 
immunization  (2,8).  j 

t 

The  causative  agents  of  rickettslosis  -  epidemic  ex?n*.iiemai;ous 
fever,  Q-fever,  P,ocky  Mountain  spotty  fever  and  tsutsvigcuiushi  cevtr,  j 
according  to  tcie  data  of  /anerican  authors,  may  be  used  as  bRcteri.cl0g2.ci 
weapons.  i 

Therefore  immunization  against  these  infections  aloiVt,  vitn  pre-  ! 
vention  o.f  "natural"  morbidity  may  pursue,  the  goal  of  protection  01 
the  population  and  the  armed  forces  from  ’jacteriol tgic  sttucr.  ’ 

i 

£2<antheniatous  fever.  Exanthematous  fever  in  the  iT-;-.  >nio  ;t  re.  ■ 
Che  category  of  infectious  diseases,  active  iuuEunrlzatioc  -u-ai  .r';  i-r  r.n; 
is  carried  out  on  epidemic  indications.  These  intiicaci*''").s,  .at  :.,e  j 
present  time,  are  mostly  trips  to  countries  where  exanthec'aroi.i,  few-:.  ! 
is  endemic.  Epidemic  disturbances  inside  a  country,  arising  rr^r:  ■  i 
"natural"  epidemic  or  bacteriologic  attack,  are  also  cons  Idoreu  .i.^  ■.:i- 
dications  for  carrying  out  vaccinations.  These  indicacion.s  slfr:  appT>  , 
the  per.sonael  of  the  armed  forces  in  toe  USA.  | 

Cox  ionnaj.dchyde-kilied  vaccine,  adopted  in  tne  UdA,  represents  a! 
auspet'.sion  o.f  killed  Sicketesia  promazeki,  cultivated  on  d^vsior .U'..  ; 

chick  embryos  (1,2,3,15,16),  I 

i 

< 

The  course  of  imniunization  consists  of  two  L  ml.  inicrvions  wn:-.  ' 
an  interval  of  7~10  days.  As  a  result,  a  relative  iuTnunity  i.i  ere-  * 

ated  which  remains  from  6  to  8  months,  reaching  ics  maximum  afser  3  | 

months.  Revaccination  is  carried  out  after  every  6  months,  a.>  well  ■ 

as  in  case  of  epidemic  indications.  It  is  proved  that  stingle  i.'.’iiiuui-  { 
zation,  carried  out  even  5  years  after  inanunization,  causes  sufficiertj 
accvjroulation  of  antibodies  in  vaccinated  persons.  The  vaccine  des-  I 
cribed  is  not  preventive  against  endemic  or  murine  typhus  (tabardillc)! 

*  tsutsugamushi  fever  and  other  r ickettsioses .  The  preparation  is  validj 
1  for  12  months,  ; 

I  Exact  evaluation  of  the  epidemiologic  efficiency  of  the  vcccine  ! 

S  is  not  gi'^'en;  however,  in  general,  it  is  admitted  that  it  decreases  ! 

I  morbidity  and  al.1.eviates  the  course  of  exanthematous  fever.  Itjrlng 
!  World  Mar  II,  64  cases  of  exanthematous  fever  were  registered  in  the.  i 
I  Anierican  army;  they  all  took  a  light  course  without  fatalities  *.■32).  i 

j  The  disadvantages  of  Cox  vaccine  (it  does  not  guarantee  from  in-  ; 

i  fection)  prompted  American  scientists  to  find  more  effective,  pro-  : 

I  phylactic  preparations  against  exanthematous  fever.  At  the  present 


i  time  In  the  USA  the  working  out  of  a  dry,  live  anti-exanChematous  j 

fever  vaccine  from  strain  E  has  been  successfully  completed.  i 

The  Spaniards,  Clavero  and  Gallardo  (33, 54^  in  1943,  by  trans- 
fering  Fromazek's  rickettsia  on  chick  embryos,  observed  an  accidental 
change  of  its  properties:  the  strain  sharply  decreased  in  virulence. 

The  authors  designated  this  as  strain  £  (in  honor  of  Spain  -  Sspanha) . 
Working  in  Spain,  they  carried  out  extensive  Investigations  on  the 
harmlessness  and  immunogen icy  of  this  strain.  They  vaccinated  2242 
volunteers.  However,  in  the  light  of  contemporary  data,  Che  results 
obtained  have  comparative  significance,  because  too  low  a  dose  (less 
than  one  minimal  infective  dose)  was  used  for  inmunization.  Further 
investigations,  since  1946,  were- carried  out  jointly  with  Fox  (USA). 

In  1951,  work  was  started  with  volunteers  in  the  USA,  including  approx- 
imately  200  persons.  As  a  result  of  these  investigations,  the  tninlmal 
vaccination  dose  of  strain  B  rickettsia  for  humans  was  determined 
(3.5  >  4  log  BID)  and  the  direct  relationship  between  the  maximal 
serologic  response  (reaction  of  complement  binding,  neutralization 
reaction)  and  the  immunizing  dose  was  established;  it  was  shown  that 
an  immune  response  in  vaccination  was  caused  by  doses  equal  to  log 
BID  of  4  or  more;  thereby  a  sufficiently  strong  immunity,  protecting 
the  vaccinated  persons  against  a  virulent  culture  of  Fromazek's 
rickettsia,  is  maintained  for  at  least  2  years  after  a  single  injection. 
The  authors  established  also  Chat  the  most  effective  method  of  in¬ 
jection  is  the  intradermal  or  intramuscular  (subcutaneous  -  is  worse). 

Although  immunity,  caused  by  vaccine  E  with  a  single  injection  is 
weaker  than  natural  immunity  developing  after  disease,  however,  com¬ 
pared  with  imnunity  caused  by  Cox  vaccine,  it  appears  to  be  much 
stronger.  This  was  proved  in  volunteers  on  the  basis  of  serologic 
reactions  as  well  as  in  direct  infection  experiments  with  a  virulent  ; 
culture  of  Fromazek's  rickettsia. 

The  reactivity  of  the  new  vaccine  depends  on  the  dosage.  Strong 
reactions,  according  to  authors,  were  not  observed;  however,  moderate 
reactions  (local  and  systemic)  were  obseirved  rather  constantly. 

Beginning  with  1953,  studies  on  the  vaccine  were  carried  o\^er  in¬ 
to  a  wide  epidemiologic  experiment  in  an  area  in  Peru  endemic  in  re¬ 
gard  to  exanthematous  fever;  19,000  persons  were  under  observation. 
These  trials  basically  confirmed  the  data  obtained  in  the  USA.  How- 
'  ever,  it  is  necessary  to  indicate,  that  although  the  authors  noted  a 
relatively  low  reactivity  of  the  vaccine  according  to  their  own  data, 
in  1%  of  all  vaccinated  persons  reactions  were  observed,  representing 
a  true  disease  with  exanthematous  fever;  it  is  characteristic  that  in 
the  group  of  vaccinated  persons  older  than  30  years,  the  percentage 
of  such  disease  reached  4-5.  It  was  also  established  that  the  lyophi]|- 
ized  vaccine  obtained  can  be  successfully  preserved  for  8  months  | 


272  _ 


(period  of  observation)  (53,54,55,56,57) 


I 

The  epidenio logic  experimentation  was  continued  in  1955  in  Peru 
(Andina  area)  on  10,000  volunteers.  Results  of  this  trial  will  aiaKe  it 
possible  to  answer  the  question  concerning  the  qiideniologic  efficiency 
of  the  new  vaccine. 

In  England  and  Switzerland,  a  complex  vaccine  against  epidemic 
end  murine  exanthematous  fever,  prepared  on  chick  embryos  and  repre-  j 
sentlng  a  suspension  of  killed  (with  formalin)  Pronazex's  and  Mooser’s  ! 
rlckettslae  is  supplied.  The  primary  vaccination  is  carried  out  with 
a  three-fold  injection  of  1  ml.  each  with  intervals  of  8-10  days.  Re- 
vaccination  is  done  with  1  ml.  of  the  preparation  after  a  year;  in 
case  of  unfavorable  epidemiologic  conditions,  revaccination  is  done 
after  3-6  months  (20,21).  { 

J 

In  France,  contrary  to  other  countries,  a  formalin  killed  vaccine  | 
is  used,  prepared  according  to  the  method  of  Durand  and  Giraud  from  I 
light-weight  white  mice.  The  primary  vaccination  is  done  with  three  | 
injections  of  1  ml.  each,  after  8  days  and  revaccination  -  after  a  { 
year  with  1  ml.  Along  with  this,  the  exanthematous  component  is  in-  | 
eluded  in  the  associated  vaccine  developed  in  France,  against  typho-  'j 
paratyphoid  fevers  (TAB),  diphtheria  and  tetanus.  j 

Q  fever,  A  highly  effective  vaccine  against  Q-fever  has  been 
developed  and  released  in  the  USA;  the  preparation  secures  the  cre¬ 
ation  of  strong  immunity  in  vaccinated  persons,  and  is  overcome  only 
with  a  veiry  high  Infectious  dose;  it  is  characteristic  that  the  dis¬ 
ease  in  such  case  takes  a  light  course. 

The  vaccine  is  produced  on  egg-yolk  sacs  of  developing  chick  em¬ 
bryos;  the  suspension  is  inactivated  with  a  0.25%  solution  cC  formalin. 
Tliree  subcutaneous  injections  of  1  ml.  each  are  given  at  an  interval 
of  one  week.  Revaccination  of  0.5  ml.  is  done  every  4  months.  Two 
to  three  months  after  revaccination  the  complement  binding  reaccion 
titre  increases  from  1:20  to  1:40.  Immunization  is  carried  out  upon 
epidemic  indications  (58,59). 

Recently,  in  the  USA,  soluble  rickettsia  antigens  were  investi¬ 
gated.  To  these  belong  rickettsia  antigens  of  epidemic  and  murine 
exanthematous  fever.  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever,  Marseille  fever, 
and  rickettsialpox.  In  1956,  publication  of  Colter,  Brown  et  al.  (60) 
appeared  on  soluble  antigen  bound  with  the  causative  agent  of  Q-fever, 
which  can  be  separated  from  rlckettslae  by  means  of  ultra  sound  vibra¬ 
tions.  The  authors  prove  that  solutions,  containing  antigen,  cause  a  | 
formation  of  antibodies  in  guinea  pigs  and  create  In  the  animals  a  t 
relative  immunity  against  infection  with  a  virulent  strain. 


I  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever.  Two  vaccines  against  Rocky  Mountain! 

spotted  fever  are  used  in  the  USA;  one  is  prepared  irom  phenolized  | 
tissues  of  infected  ticks  (D.  andersoni) ,  the  ocher  -  from  rickettsiae, j 
cultivated  on  chick  embryos.  Both  vaccines  are  prepared  in  a  iabora-  j 
1  tory  located  in  the  state  of  Montana,  and  appear  to  be  rather  effective! 
I  preparations.  The  Immunization  scheme  is:  three  injections,  1  ml. 

I  each,  subcutaneously  or  intramuscularly  after  7-10  days  with  revacci- 
I  nation  after  one  year. 

!  i 

In  children,  a  definite  immunity  against  the  most  virulent  strainsi 
is  created.  In  adults,  the  strength  of  immunity  is  not  as  great;  j 

morbidity  among  vaccinated  persons  is  observed;  however,  the  clinical 
course  of  the  disease  is  alleviated  and  fatality  is  decreased.  ; 

Vaccinations  are  carried  out  upon  epidemic  indications  (61, 62, 53). i 

i 

Tsutsugamuahi  fever.  It  is  established  in  the  USA  that  vaccina-  | 
tion  against  tsutsugamushi  creates  a  weaker  inanunity  than  having  the  . 
disease.  Immunization  with  killed  vaccines  gives  unsatisfaclo  ry  ra-  ! 
suits,  whereupon  only  a  comparative  type-specific  immunity  cowards  a  > 
given  strain  is  produced.  American  authors,  at  present,  consider  the  | 
making  and  application  of  a  polyvalent  vaccine  a  difficult  task.  | 

In  view  of  the  lack  of  an  effective  vaccine  under  especially  un¬ 
favorable  conditions  (endemic  areas),  the  use  of  the'tainimal  infection 
method",  by  an  intradermal  injection  of  a  minimal  infective  dose  of 
the  virulent  rickettsiae  followed  by  chemoprophylaxis  with  chloramphen¬ 
icol,  is  recommended.  After  10-12  days,  an  increase  in  temperature  is 
observed  in  the  persons  vaccinated;  if  the  duration  of  temperature 
reaches  36-48  hours,  antibiotic  treatment  is  carried  cut. 

I 

This  prophylactic  method  secures  immunity  from  1-2  months  up  to  j 
one  year  (62,64,65,66).  i 

j 

Causative  agents  of  virus  diseases  -  yellow  fever,  psittaccosis, 
j  equine  and  Japanese  encephalomyelitis,  are  considered  by  American  j 
!  specialists  as  probable  agents  of  bacteriologic  warfare  (see  chapter 
I  IV) .  The  role  of  vaccine-prophylaxis  in  the  general  system  of  combat¬ 
ing  these  diseases  is  especially  great  in  connection  with  the  fact  that 
an  effective  treatment  of  these  infections  (except  psittacosis)  has  not 
been  developed,  and  fatality  is  rather  high. 

Yellow  fever.  Yellow  fever  in  the  USA  and  European  countries  be¬ 
longs  to  the  diseases  against  which  immunity  is  carried  out  on  epidemic 
indications,  especially  in  case  of  trips  to  endemic  foci.  The  follow¬ 
ing  countries  in  Central  America  are  considered  by  the  USA  to  be  en¬ 
demic  areas  of  yellow  fever:  Costa  Rica,  Cuba,  Nicaragua,  Panama,  i 


274 


Trinidad,  and  also  the  Bermuda  Islands;  in  South  America  all  coun-  | 
tries,  except  Argentina,  Chile,  Paraguay  and  Uruguay;  in  Africa  -  a 
significant  part  of  the  territory  (mainly  Western  and  Central  Africa), 
Vaccination  is  given  12  days  before  arrival  to  the  area,  and  after 
returning  to  the  USA.  besides,  in  many  countries  -  as  India,  Ceylon, 
Pakistan,  although  yellow  fever  Is  not  observed,  all  conditions  exist 
for  dissemination  of  this  disease  because  of  the  presence  of  che  mos¬ 
quito  -  carrier.  Therefore,  the  above  mentioned  countries  observe  a 
strict  quarantine,  and  compulsory  vaccination  against  yellow  fever  is 
required  from  all  who  enter  (8) . 

Naturally,  that  the  possibility  of  the  application  of  a  yellow- 
fever  virus  as  a  bacterlologic  weapon  is  also  considered  as  indication 
for  mass  inaounization. 

For  vaccination  against  yellow  fever  in  the  USA,  a  highly  effect¬ 
ive  live  vaccine,  strain  17D,  developed  and  proposed  by  Teylor,  is 
used.  The  preparation  is  made  fr<xn  an  attenuated  virus  strain  of  yel¬ 
low  fever,  obtained  by  means  of  prolonged  cultivation  in  tissue  cul¬ 
tures.  Accumulation  of  the  vaccine  strain  takes  place  in  developing 
chick  embryos  with  subsequent  drying  and  keeping  in  a  dry  state  at  a 
temperature  below  zero  until  it  is  used.  This  preparation  can  be  kept 
for  two  years. 

After  immunization,  the  organism  is  protected  for  at  least  6  years. 
Work  is  being  carried  on  for  improving  the  vaccine  in  order  to  increase 
the  duration  of  immunity  after  vaccination  for  9  years. 

Vaccination  is  carried  out  with  a  single  subcutaneous  administration 
of  0.5  ml.  of  the  preparation,  diluted  1:10.  In  endemic  areas,  revac¬ 
cination  is  performed  after  6  years  with  a  subcutaneous  Injection  of 
0.5  ml.  of  the  vaccine  (8,15,16,24). 

In  the  past  few  years  in  the  USA,  a  combined  live  vaccine  against 
yellow  fever  and  natural  small-pox  has  been  developed;  it  is  introducec 
into  the  organism  by  means  of  skin  scrapings.  Investigation  of  this 
vaccine  showed  that  Immunity  against  yellow  fever  develops  in  the  vac¬ 
cinated  persons  slower  than  against  small-pox,  but  after  several 
months  it  developes  in  92-95.67.  of  the  persons  subjected  to  vaccinatioti. 
Furthermore,  however,  it  was  established,  that  subcutaneous  vaccinatioi. 
against  yellow  fever  produces  stronger  immunity,  than  cutaneous  admin¬ 
istration.  This,  seems  to  be  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  fact  that,  at 
present,  vaccinations  against  small-pox  and  yellow  fever  in  the  USA  arc 
carried  oul  separately,  at  an  interval  of  3  weeks.  However,  in  Africa, 
under  definite  conditions  (epidemics),  successful  immunization  of  the 
local  population  has  been  performed  with  an  associated  vaccine  (24,67), 


In  England,  same  as  in  the  USA,  live  vaccine  from  strain  17D  is 


275 


produced  in  chick  embryos.  Experimental  immunization  with  this  vaccine 
secures  the  protection  o£  animals  against  SOO  LD^q.  The  immunity  is 
produced  in  10  days  and  is  maintained  for  6  years.  Injections  are 
carried  out  subcutaneously  and  reactivity  is  Insignificant.  The  vac¬ 
cine  Is  kept  in  the  dark  at  a  temperature  of  1-2^  for  3  months:  at  a 
lower  temperature,  the  storage  period  may  be  increased.  At  20°  the 
vaccine  loses  its  activity  in  a  period  of  few  days.  In  England,  at  the 
present  time,  preparations  have  been  developed,  which  can  be  stored  for 
12  months  (20) . 


In  France  and  its  African  colonies,  along  with  vaccines  from  atrai 
17D,  a  live  vaccine  from  the  attenuated  neurotropic  strain  "Dakar"  has 
been  developed  and  used;  the  virus  for  production  of  the  vaccine  is  ac¬ 
cumulated  in  the  brain  of  white  mice.  This  vaccine.  It  appears,  is 
distinguished  by  a  greater  immunogenlty ;  however,  it  produces  reactions. 
Upon  immunization  of  the  population  of  Eastern  Nigeria  with  the  neuro- 
tropic  strain,  3-A  persona  out  of  every  1000  vaccinated  (mainly  chl3.d- 
ren)  became  sick  with  encephalitis,  which  ended  fatally  in  407.  cases 
(24,68,69). 

Psittacosis.  In  the  USA  there  is  a  vaccine  against  psittacosis; 
it  does  not  appear  on  the  market  and  is  produced  in  small  amounts  for 
special  purposes.  It  is  prepared  from  egg  yolk  sacs  of  infected  chick 
embryos;  the  emulsion  of  the  sacs  is  treated  with  formalin  and  after¬ 
wards  extracted  with  ether.  There  are  no  convincing  data  at  the  pres¬ 
ent  time  on  the  effectivity  of  the  vaccination  in  infections  with  dif¬ 
ferent  strains  of  the  virus. 

Vaccination  is  carried  out  three  times  with  1  ml.,  with  a  one  week 
interval,  and  revaccination  -  with  0.5  ml.  after  every  5  months.  In¬ 
jections  are  carried  out  in  case  of  epidemic  indications. 

Eastern  and  western  equine  encephalomyelltides.  In  the  USA,  for 
veterinary  purposes,  vaccines  against  eastern  and  western  equine  en- 
cephalomyelitides  are  developed  and  applied.  These  vaccines  represent 
forroallnized  tissue  extracts  from  chick  embryos,  infected  with  the 
virus  of  encephalomyelitis  (47). 

The  vaccines  proved  to  be  extremely  effective  in  imunizing  horse; 
justifying  their  use  also  in  humans.  For  this  purpose,  in  the  USA  a 
bivalent  vaccine  against  eastern  and  western  encephalomyelltides  was 
prepared.  It  was  made  by  means  of  a  separate  cultivation  of  viruses 
of  eastern  and  western  encephalomyelltides  on  chorioallantois  mem¬ 
branes  of  chick  embryos,  followed  by  Inactivation  with  formalin.  The 
monovaccines  obtained  in  this  way,  were  afterwards  mixed  in  equal 
amounts,  and  a  bivalent  vaccine  was  obtained.  The  Infectivity  of  the 
extracts  before  treatment  with  formalin  was  10'^  for  the  eastern  strain 
and  10'^  for  the  western. 


276 


Upon  approval  the  vaccine  was  administered  to  humans  (100  persons! 
two  times  Intramuscularly  at  a  dose  of  2  ml.  at  ao  Interval  of  1  week! 
Systemic  and  local  reactions  were  very  weak;  the  vaccine  caused  an  in¬ 
tensive  production  of  virus -neutralizing  antibodies,  whereupon  the 
rainnogenity  of  the  western  strain  appeared  to  be  higher;  high  antitodyj 
titers  appeared  after  7  days  from  immunization  with  western  variant, 
and  after  2  weeks  from  Im&unizatlon  with  the  eastern  variant. 

The  authors  reconanend  vaccine  against  equine  encepiialcmeyiitides 
for  immunization  of  humans  who  are  "often  subjected  to  the  action  of 
virus  under  laboratory  or  field  conditions"  (62,71,72), 

Venezuelan  equine  encephalomyelitis.  According  to  data  of  Ameri¬ 
can  authors,  active  Inmunlzation  against  this  disease  seems  to  be  an 
effective  means  of  prophylaxis  for  persons  subjected  to  danger  of  in¬ 
fection,  In  the  USA  the  vaccine  is  supplied  for  the  army  and  is  pre¬ 
pared  from  a  culture,  gro«m  on  chick  embryos. 

Vaccination  is  carried  out  with  two  injections,  1  ml.  each,  at 
an  interval  of  one  week;  revaccination  -  after  every  6  months.  Immuni¬ 
zation  is  carried  out  on  epidemic  indications  (62,73). 

! 

Japanese  encephalitis.  In  the  USA,  army  vaccination  against  Jap¬ 
anese  encephalitis  Is  applied  on  epidemic  indications  (trips  to  enderaije 
areas).  The  vaccine  is  made  from  a  virus,  cultivated  on  developing  j 
chick  embryos  and  representing  a  suspension  of  homogenized  chick  em-  [ 
bryos.  The  vaccine  is  very  unstable  and  must  therefore  be  kept  in  & 
dry  state  until  the  time  of  application. 

The  development  of  the  vaccine  is  not  yet  completed,  and  there  ! 
are  no  basic  data  as  yet  on  its  efficiency.  | 

i 

During  the  war  in  Korea,  vaccination  was  carried  out  In  1951  onl)  , 
later  on  it  was  abolished  because  of  inefficiency  (62,74,75). 

Botulism.  Botulism  toxin,  along  with  the  causative  agents  of 
plague,  anthrax  and  many  other  diseases,  is  considered  as  the  most 
probable  agent  of  bacteriologic  war.  Taking  into  account  the  extreBie- 
ly  high  fatality  from  botulism  and  the  absence  of  effective  antibi¬ 
otics  and  chemotherapeutic  agents  for  treatment  of  this  disea.se,  as 
well  as  the  very  strong  Inmiunity,  which  is  created  in  vaccinated  per¬ 
sons,  it  must  be  admitted  that  immunoprophylaxis  appears  to  be  the 
basic  means  of  combating  mass-morbidity  from  botulism  in  case  of 
bacteriologic  warfare.  Thereby  it  is  necessary  to  emphasize  that  a 
systematic  vaccination  and  revaccination  against  botulism  makes  it 
possible  to  produce  in  the  human  and  animal  body  a  "protective"  level 
of  antibodies,  preventing  massive  infection  with  the  toxin,  making  j 
it  possible,  principally,  by  means  of  planned  immunization,  to  protect 


277 


the  armed  forces  and  the  population  from  this  form  of  bacteriologic  | 
weapon.  ; 

In  France,  polyanatoxins  of  type  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  E  are  produced,  | 

representing  a  filtrate  of  broth  cultures,  treated  with  forinaiin.  j 

i 

! 

The  preparation  is  usually  used  therapeutically  three  times,  in 
doses  of  2  ml,  subcutaneously  at  intervals  of  8  days;  before  the  basic 
course  of  treatment,  preliminary  0.1  ml.  injection  of  the  anatoxin  is  j 
given  to  determine  sensitivity;  in  case  of  a  strong  local  reaction,  witt 
a  tendency  toward  necrosis,  issnunization  Is  not  carried  out. 

Indications  for  such  a  treatment  may  be  light  forms  of  botulism, 
continuing  for  several  days  without  the  appearance  of  the  main  symptom^, 
the  same  method  can  be  used  also  in  severe  cases. 

Vaccine-prophylaxis,  in  this  case.  Is  combined,  as  a  rule,  with 
serumtreatment  (30). 

In  the  USA,  a  combined  anatoxin  of  type  A  and  B  is  used  for  immu¬ 
nization  of  laboratory  workers;  one  ml.  of  the  preparation  is  intro¬ 
duced  three  times,  subcutaneously,  at  four  week  intervals.  After  Im¬ 
munization,  in  90%  of  all  vaccinated  persons,  0.02  AU  is  detected  in 
one  mi.  blood,  but  in  30%  -  the  antibody  titer  exceeds  O.l  AU.  Guinea 
pigs  with  a  titre  of  0.02  AU  or  more  tolerate  200,000  Dim  of  the  toxin; 
a  content  of  0.1-0, 5  AU  in  the  blood  prevents  the  animals  from 
1,000,000  Dim.  After  6  months,  the  immunity  decreases;  therefore  re¬ 
vaccination  with  1  ml.  is  necessary  (76,77). 

Associated  vaccines.  The  presence  of  a  significant  number  of  cau¬ 
sative  agents,  which  might  be  used  as  bacteriologic  weapons,  necessi¬ 
tates  the  creation  of  numerable  vaccine  preparations  for  prophylaxis  1 
of  each  of  the  infections  and  significant  broadening  of  the  scheme  for  j 
routine  vaccinations  of  the  armed  forces  and  population.  However,  the  j 
utilization  of  monovaccines  for  this  purpose  can  extremely  complicate 
the  complete  scheme  of  vaccination  and  make  it  practically  impossible 
from  the  medical  as  well  as  from  the  purely  organizational  standpoint. 

J  A  rational  way  out  of  this  situation  is  the  application  of  effective 
associated  vaccines,  which  make  it  possible,  with  a  minimai  expenditure 
of  work,  to  carry  out  mass  immunization  simultaneously  against  several 
infections.  Naturally,  that  associated  vaccines  must  possess  a  primary 
significance  as  a  means  of  specific  protection  against  bacteriologic  | 

weapons  (4, 5) .  ' 

) 

According  to  data  published  in  foreign  literature,  systematic  workj 
I  fcr  developing  associated  vaccines  in  the  USA  was  not  started  until  ! 

I  1955,  after  a  preparation  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  was  produced,  j 


278 


For  routine  ImDunlzatlon  of  the  personnel  of  the  armed  forces  and 
of  certain  categories  of  the  civilian  population  in  the  USA,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  is  adopted: 


(1,4); 


a  complex  vaccine  against  typhoid  and  paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B 


-  a  complex  anatoxin  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  (1); 

-  an  associated  vaccine  against  typhoid  fever,  paratyphoid  fever 

A  and  B,  and  tetanus;  the  preparation  contains  per  ml.,  1  dose  of  teta¬ 
nus  anatoxin,  1  billion  typhoid  and  500  million  paratyphoid  microbes; 
injections  are  made  three  times:-  0.5  -  1  -  1  ml .  at  intervals  of  4 
weeks,  and  revacclnatlon  after  one  year  (19); 

-  botulln  anatoxin  of  type  A  and  B  (see  chapter  IV). 

Besides,  in  pediatric  practice,  the  following  vaccines  are 
applied: 

-  against  diphtheria  and  whooping  cough  (for  children  under  10) 


To  the  associated  vaccines  used  in  the  USA  on  epidemic  indica¬ 
tions,  the  following belong: 

-  a  vaccine  against  natural  small-pox  and  yellow  fever  (24,67); 

-  a  vaccine  against'  eastern  and  western  equine  encephalomyelitl- 
des  (62,71,72). 

Besides,  recently  an  associated  vaccine  against  yellow  fever  and 
dengue  fever,  prepared  from  attenuated  strains  of  viruses  has  been 
developed  and  approved  for  humans  (78).  Preliminary  positive  results 
have  been  obtained  with  a  test  of  an  associated  vaccine  against  diph¬ 
theria,  whooping  cough,  tetanus  and  poliomyelitis  (19). 

From  the  associated  vaccines  prepared  in  England,  besides  vac¬ 
cines  against  diphtheria  and  tetanus,  diphtheria,  tetanus  and  vdiooplng 
cough,  diphtheria  and  whooping  cough  and  against  typhopara typhoid 
.  fevers  (TAB)  and  tetanus,  a  complex  vaccine  against  typhoid  fever, 
paratyphoid  fever  A  and  B  and  Asiatic  cholera  deserves  attention; 
Injections  are  performed  twice,  at  a  dose  of  0.5  and  1  ml.  respectively 
at  an  interval  of  7-28  days  (20). 

* 

Original  associated  preparations,  released  in  France,  ere: 

a  vaccine  against  typhopara typhoid  diseases  (TAB),  tetanus  and 


diphtheria,  adopted  for  routine  vaccination  in  the  army  ani  navy;  j 

-  a  vaccine  against  typhoparatyphoid  diseases  (TAB),  tetanus,  j 

diphtheria  and  exanthematous  fever,  intended  for  vaccinations  on  j 

epidemic  indications; 

i  I 

[  -  a  vaccine  against  natural  small-pox  and  yellow  fever;  I 

-  a  botulin  polyanatoxln  (types  A,  B,  C,  D,  E)  (30).  i 

>  i 

In  Switzerland,  vaccines  adopted  everywhere  abroad,  are  produced  | 
(TAB  -  tetanus,  diphtheria,  TAB  -  tetanus  -  diphtheria,  TAB  -  choi-ra)  i 
(21,79).  I 

f 

The  problem  of  mass  immunization  of  the  population  is  solved  ’o 
the  USA  and  certain  other  countries,  not  only  by  producing  cempiux 
vaccines,  but  also  by  the  improvement  of  the  technical  means  ter  i 

carrying  cut  the  vaccinations  themselves.  In  receuf.  vears.,  in  :h'.  J 
a  hclf-autoBiatic  injector  (spurting  injector  with  many  do?eS  '  was  c  .o-  i 
structed,  which  is  intended  for  introducing  liquid  vaccines,  antibi-  \ 

otics  and  other  therapeutic-prophylactic  preparations  under  hir;!i  ! 

sure  (without  a  iiaedie)  through  the  unbroken  skin.  In  the  begi.unj.au,  j 
I  the  injector  is  loaded  with  ciie  necessary  amount  of  the  preparation  endj 
I  after  the  first  injection,  it  loads  itself  automatically.  The  te-ting  i 
of  this  new  device  In  the  experiiaental  stJ^ee  and  on  humans  showed  the  | 
possibility  of  applying  it  for  administration  (into  the  human  body)  of  ! 
insulin,  pituitrin,  antibiotics  and  other  preparations,  difterent  doses, 
of  which  may  be  a.s  much  as  1  ml.  or  more.  The  tests  with  the  spurting  \ 
injector  for  mass  immunization  of  anti-typhoid  trivaccine,  carried  oui 
in  the  army  of  the  USA,  confirmed  its  superiority  over  the  usual  in¬ 
jector  in  regard  to  less  painful  injection,  as  well  as  to  speed  of  ; 
execution.  The  trial  showed  that  by  means  of  the  device,  more  than  j 
500-600  injections  can  be  made  in  one  hour.  To  dl sadvantages  of.  tbt-.  I 

injector  are;  a  slight  trauma  at  the  site  of  administration  ot  the  ’ 

preparation,  and  also  the  impossibility  of  carrying  out  intramuscular 
j  injections  and  the  introduction  of  viscous  and  oily  suspension  (18,80). 

A  review  of  the  given  materials  makes  it  possible  to  draw  ni- .ly 
conclusions  on  the  status  of  vaccine-prophylaxis  as  means  of  specific  j 
protection  against  bacterlologic  weapons.  The  system  of  planned  vac-  j 
cination,  adopted  at  the  present  time  in  the  USA  and  other  capitalistic} 
countries,  predicts  the  prophylaxis  of  ’’natural"  infectious  disease;  ( 
this,  however,  does  not  secure  the  protection  of  the  armed  forces  and  • 
of  the  population  against  infections,  the  causative  agents  of  which  ! 
might  be  used  as  bacterlologic  weapons.  j 

It  is  assumed  that  active  immunization  against  infections,  urgent  i 
from  the  military  point  of  view,  will  be  carried  out  on  epidemic  indi-  ' 


280 


cations,  l.e.,  after  its  application  by  the  enemy  as  a  bacteriologic  j 
weapon.  For  this  purpose,  in  the  USA,  there  are  vaccines  against 
plague,  cholera,  natural  smallpox,  epidemic  exanthematous  fever,  Rocky  i 
Mountain  spotted  fever,  Q-fever,  yelLow  fever,  equine  eucephalomyelicis|, 
psittacosis  and  botulism  of  the  types  A  and  B.  ; 


i  In  connection  with  this,  in  recent  years  in  the  USA,  inLenstve 

I  work  has  been  developed  for  the  creation  of  new  and  improvement  of  j 

I  existing  vaccines  controlled  by  the  Ministry  of  Defense  and  Federal  | 

j  Agency  for  Civil  Defense.  As  a  result  of  these  investigations,  the  ■ 
production  of  highly  prospective  chemical  vaccines  against  anthrax, 
plague  and  typhoid  fever,  as  well  as  the  successful  development  of  a  ^ 
liquid  vaccine  against  exanthematous  fever  of  strain  £,  appeared.  Ex-  < 
tensive  research  in  the  field  of  vaccine-prophylaxis  is  in  progress  at  :• 
the  present  time. 


j 

BIBLIOGRAPHY  i 

* 


I.  Handbooti  of  (he  HospilaJ  Corps.  United  States  Navy,  1!>53, 

2  .Military  Mvilical  Manual.  The  Military  Publishinc  C'lnnpany.  Harrisburc.  i 

Pennsylvania,  I9fi2,  ! 

3  Ed  sail  0,  .Ann.  Rev.  .Microbiol..  IfiSS.  9.  34T  * 

4  Edsall  G.  Mil.  Med,.  1955.  117,  4.  ,329. 

5.  Civil  Defense  Againsl  Biolo^ral  Warlara.  1953.  U  S.  Government 
Prinline  Office. 

6.  Phait  J.  Armed  Forces  Chem.  J..  1954.  8.  1.  14  • 

7  Health  Services  and  Special  Weapons  Defense'.  1950  (repr  1952).  | 

U.  S.  Government  Printing  Office,  i 

8  1.0  ve  J..  Shaul  J.  F..  Margileth  A.  Marie  lie  R.  .Med  Clin  ' 

N.  Ameriea,  1954.  September.  1493.  | 

9  E  Hot  J.  W.  Pub.  flealth  Rep.  1955.  70.  9.  *22  I 

10.  Pick  ford  .M,  J.  Med.  Press.  1954.  231.  10.  217 

11  Weinstein  5.  Am.  I  Pub.  Health.  1947.  .37.  11,  1376 

12  l.e  Rnurdcll^s  B..  Berger  .M..  Rodallec  M.  Viguie  M,  ( 

B  e  1 1  ec  R.  Presse  Mid..  1^5.  62.  1247  ! 

13  l.e>  Bourdellis  B.  Rev.  d.  PracUcien.  1956.  6.  12.  1299  | 

14  1  eroux.  Amphoux.  bouiltand  et  Autres.  1955  Pre.sse  Med,  i 

•31.  639. 

1.5.  Modern  Drug  Encyclopedia  and  Therapeatic  Index  By  Howard  M  E. 

Drug  Publications.  New  York,  1M6. 

16  New  and  Nonoffici.il  Remedies.  J.  B,  Lippincoll  romp.iny,  Pliilaiic.lphia. 

1956. 

17.  J  a  c  k  a  o  n'  E.  B..  Lev  A  C,  S  i  n  n  L.  N  ,  S  m  a  d  e  I  J.  E,  J.  Immu¬ 
nol..  1956,  77.  5.  332.  ( 

♦ 

1 


18.  titslxTK  B  L.  MiCttwii  J.  M.,  S  m  a  d  c  I  J.  H  J.  Immunol. 

77.  5.  34. 

19.  Parish  H.  J.  PractitiomT.  1957.  179.  1072.  450. 

20.  British  Pliarmaooutica!  Codex,  Pharmaceutical  Press.  London,  19.>4 

21.  «Vadomecum»  Products  Berna,  Institut  Scrothcrapique  ct  Viccinal  Suis¬ 
se  Berne.  1954. 

22.  Ramon  Q.  Rev.  Immunol,  et  Thcr.  .Antitnicrob..  1953,  17,  6.  293 

23.  Dick  G.  \V.  .A..  H  o  r  d  o  n  E.  S.  J.  Hyg..  1952,  50.  376. 

24.  Yellow  Fever.  Edited  by  Strode  G.  K..  .^\cGraw•HiH  Book  Compa¬ 
ny.  1951. 

25.  Top  F.  H.  and  Collaborators.  Communicable  Diseases.  St.  (.outs 
.'\osby.  1955. 

26.  Dub  us  Rene  .1.  Bacterial  and  Mycotic  Infections  of  .Man.  J.  B.  lip- 
pincott  Company.  Philadelphia.  1952. 

27.  .Miller  W.  S..  ('lark  O.  L..  D  I  e  r  k  h  i  s  i  n  g  O.  ('.  .Am.  J.  .Med , 

1951.  31,  535. 

28.  Landy  M.  .Am.  J.  Hyg..  1954.  60,  1,  52. 

29.  L  a  n  d  y  .M.  .Am.  J1  Pub.  Health,  1954.  44.  12.  1572 

30.  Instructions  Sur  Le  Mode  d’Emploi  Des  Serums.  Vaccines  et  Antigens 
Destines,  a  La  Medicine  Humaine.  1954. 

31.  Lung  .A.  P.,  S  art  we  11  P.  E.  Bull.  U.  S.  .Arn.‘  Med.  Dept.,  1947, 
7,  37t. 

32.  Long  A  P.  Am  J.  Pub.  Health.  1943.  33.  53. 

33.  North  E,  A.,  Patterson  K.  W.  Med.  J.  Australia,  1953,  I,  797 

34.  Long  A.  P.  Industrial  Medicine  and  Surgery,  1954,  23,  6.  275. 

35.  Scheibel  I.  Bull.  World  Health  Org..  1955,  13.  3,  381. 

36.  Advances  in  Military  Medicine,  Edit^  by  E.  C.  Andrus.  Little,  Brown 
and  Company.  Boston,_i948. 

37.  OtteiXi  Girard  and  Robik.  Cited  by  Pollitzer,  R. 
Plague.  World  Health  Organization,  Geneva,  195^ 

38.  Meyer  K7F.  Bull.  World  Health  Org..  1953.  9.  5,  619. 

39.  E  n  r  e  n  k  r  a  n  z  N.  J.,  Mever  K.  F.  1.  Infect.  Dis..  1955,  96,  2. 
138. 

40.  S  i  I  V  e  r  m  a  n  S.  J..  K  i  v  o  s  h  i.  H  i  g  u  c  h  i.  Meyers  E.,  Proc.  Sue. 
E.\p.  Biol.  a.  Med.,  1954,' 86.  1.  112. 

41.  (jirard  G.  Bull.  Soc.  Path.  Exot.,  1954,  47.  475. 

42.  The  Control  of  Communicable  Diseases  in  Man.  The  American  Public 

Health  .Association.  New  A'ork,  1953. 

43.  S  m  i  1 1  i  e  W.  G.  Preventive  Medicine  and  Public  Health,  MacMillan 
Company,  New  York,  1953. 

44.  K  a  d  u 1 1  P.  J.,  Rea  me s  H.  R.  a.  oth.  J.  Immunol.,  1950,  65,  4. 
425. 

4.5.  L  a  r  s  o  n  C.  1..,  Bell  .1.  F.,  Owen  C.  R.  J.  Immunol..  1954.  73. 

221. 

46.  Elberg  S.  S..  .Meyer  K.  F.  Bact..  1953.  66.  5.  600. 

47.  Veterinary  Drug  Encyclopedia  and  Therapeutic  Index,  1954. 

48.  Burrws  W.  Textbook  of  Bacteriology,  W.  B.  Saunders  W.  B.  Compa¬ 
ny,  Philadelphia,  1949. 

49.  Puziss  M..  Wright  G.  J.  Bact.,  1954.  64.  4.  474. 

50.  Wright  G.  G.,  Hcdberg  M.  A.,  Slein  J.  B.  J.  Immunol,  1951. 


51.  72.  4,  263. 


Wright  G.  G.,  Green  T.  W.,  Kan  ode  R.  G.  J.  Immunol.,  1954  7) 
6  387 

Science  News  Letter.  1954,  66.  18.  280. 

E  V  e  r  r  i  1 1  M.  G.,  B  h  a  1 1  P.  N.,  Fox  J.  P.  .\m.  J.  Hyg.,  1954.  59, 

I,  60. 

Fox  J.  P.,  Everritt  M.  G.,  Robinson  T.  A..  Con  we  1 1  D  P 
Am.  J.  Hyg..  1954,  59,  1,  74. 

Fo  X  J.  P.,  Jo  r  d  a  n  M.  E.,  Con  we  1 5  D.  P..  R  ob  i  n  son  T  A  \m 

J.  Hyg..  1955,  61.  2.  174. 

I- ox  J.  P.,  Montoya  J.  A..  Everritt  M,  J,  Espinosa  M.  Am. 
J.  Hyg  ,  1955,  61.  2.  183. 

Pub.  Health  Rep..  19.55,  70.  2.  205. 

M  e  i  k  1  e  j  o  h  n  G.,  1.  e  n  n  c  1 1  e  E.  .\m.  J.  Hyg.,  1950,  52,  1 ,  54. 
Anderson  G.  W.,  Am  stein  M.  G.  Communicable  Disease  Control 
MacMillan  Company,  New  York,  19.5.3. 

(' o  1 1  0  r  J.  S.,  Brown  R.  A..  Bird  H.  H.,  Cox  H.  R.  J.  Immunol., 
1956.  76.  4,  270. 

S  h  e  p  a  r  d  C.  C.  N.  Y.  Slate  J.  Med  .  1947,  47.  14.  1589. 

Viral  and  Rickettsial  Infections  of  Man,  Edited  by  Rivers  T.  .Vt., 
J.  B.  Lippincott  Company,  Philadelphia,  1952. 

Larson  C.  L...4m.  J.  Nurs.,  1955.  55,  6,  716. 

Jackson  E.  B.,  Smadel  J.  E.  Am.  J.  Hvg.,  1951,  53,  326. 

S  m  a  d  e  I  J.  E.  a.  oth.  Am.  J.  Hyg..  1951,  53,'  317. 

Smadel  J.  E.  a.  oth.  .Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.,  1952,  1.  1,  87. 

Hahn  R.  Am.  J.  Hyg.,  1951.  54,  I,  50. 

Husson  R.  A..  Koerber  R.  Ann.  Inst.  Past.,  1953,  85,  6,  735. 
Wagner  J.  V.,  M  c  i  k  I  e  j  o  h  n  G..  K  i  n  g  s  I  a  n  d  L.  C.,  H  i  c- 
kish  H.  W.  J.  Immunol.,  1946,  54.  1,  35. 

Carter  C.  F..  Smith  .\.  L.  Microbiology  and  Pathology,  St.  Louis, 
Mosby  Companv,  1953. 

Randall  R,  Mills  J..  Engel  L.  L.  J.  Immunol.,  1947,  55.  !, 
41. 

Ferraro  A.  J.  I^eurol.,  Pathol,  a.  Exp.  Neurol.,  1950,  9,  1,  18. 
Randall  R.  a.  oth.  J.  Immunol..  1949,  63,  3,  313. 

Sabin  A.  B.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Med.  a.  Biol.,  1947,  65,  I.  123. 

Smadel  J.  E..  Randall  R.,  Warren  J.  Bull.  V.  S.  Army  Med. 
Dept.,  1947,  7,  II.  963. 

Nigg  C.  a.  oth.  J.  Immunol.,  1947,  55,  3,  245. 

R  e  a  m  e  s  H.  R.  a.  oth.  J.  Immunol.,  1947,  55,  4.  309. 

Schlesinger  R.  W.  a.  oth.  J.  Immunol..  1956.  77,  5,  352. 

Parish  H  Proc.  royal  Soc.  Med..  1954,  47.  5.  351. 

Warren  J.,  Ziherl  F.  A.  a.  oth  J.  A.  M.  A.,  19oo,  157,  633. 


I 

TBi-.fJi?£LTIC  SERh.  I 


In  cormt'C'tion  vith  the  wicespreaa  iiitrouuction  intc  iriecicf-i 
practice  of  entibiotics  am  ch*:  '  '.al  preparations  possessing  a  hj.j^h 
therapeutic  effectiTeness  wit’  .  to  a  considerable  murxer  of 

bacterial  and  rickettsial  inf:-,  .^or  ,the  area  of  application  of  specific 
therapeutic  sere,  has  shrunk  consi  .-rabiy  during  the  last  few  years. 
Presently, however, serotherapy  and  ser^.i  prophylaxis  prsaei-^re  their 
significance  in  the  struggle  with  toxico-infectious  |.botulisn, teUnuc, 
gaseous  gangrene, diphteria j, and  virus  [aoasles, encephalitis]  diseasct:. 

, Serotherapy  did  not  loose  its  significance  iu  the  treataient  of  aerioxis 
forms  of  the  plague  and.  malignant  anthrax  as  well  as  for  the  propoy- 
laxle  of  these  diseases. 

At  the  present  time,  specific  therapeutic  sera  are  ionoicerec,  I 
therefore, as  an  effective  means  in  the  fight  against  certain  irfec- 
jticus  diseases, and  are  includec  in  the  arsenal  of  special  defense 
jagents  against  bacteriological  weapons.  From  this  point  of  view, 
h’derspeutic  sera  against  the  plague, mail  grant  anthrax,  tetemis^encepha- 
.Htis,ana  particularly  botulism, for  the  treatment  anc  special  prophy- 
itjcis  of  Which  there  are  currently  no  other  effective  iQeens,deser%'e 
j special  attention. 

The  importance  of  seroprophylaxis  and  serotherapy  can  increase 
sigrdficently  in  cases  in  which  the  pathogenes  of  infectious  diseases 
prove  to  be  resistent  to  the  normally  applied  antibiotics  and  chemical 
preparations  •  this  can  occvir  unaer  conditions  of  bacteriologicel 
warfare. 

I  A  short  chare.cterization  of  thexaipeutic  sere  manuftactured  by 

jfinris  of  the  main  capitalist  countries  tthe  USA, ihgianu, France, end 
othersj  as  veil  as  elucication  of  basic  principles  regarding,  their 
therapeutic  ana  prophylactic  application  abroad  is  presented  in  the 
current  section, 

ANTITOXIC  SJiHIM  a&AINST  BOTUUSM.  At  the  present  time,8  con¬ 
centrated  anti-botulin  serum, available  both  in  the  native  as  wreli  as 
in  concentrated  forms, is  manufactured  in  the  USA, England, ena  Fiance, 


^^ereupon  ifi  the  Ub>i  «nc  ijigj.anc,£.  Divelfcnv  j.it'pe.rt- tion  tcrx  Bjy 

anci  iu  FrtiiCe^a  pent^vaariit  ont  tjves  KjL’>,G,i  ,.,n^  i-.j  are  proa’acr^. 

Tne  sere  are  preperea  Dy  dyper-iiuaunii&liou  of  norses  -r-ith  t/.e  uppi-o-  | 
priete  type  of  the  bot\*lin  tni. toxin.  The  titei'  of  cuuectij'  Uiai:uf6cr_-  ■ 
red  pTep>art.tion3  is  not  reporteh.  ! 

\ 

The  medicinal  antitoxic  serum  against  botulism  is  arplle^i  ( 

abroad  both  for  therapeutic  as  well  as  for  ^ropnyiECiac  purposes.  Il  :5j 
eochasized  that  its  utilization  is  of  great  value  prior  to  tjr.e  aai.r.  fv"  -  ; 
tation  of  the  cisease' s  si-uptoms.  Tne  se-i-uPi's  therapeutic  eife-.-.t.iV'-T>  cs  i 
decreases  vhesi  the  eppearance  ana  oevelopment  of  th  e  clinicai  | 
pdcture  of  botulism  have  already  set  in.  j 

! 

In  the  USi^,2,500  aK  of  the  biveler-t  [A  .no  Bj  senr:  Llj  ' 

edrlnistered  subcutaneously  for  prophyatxis.  In  Engipnc  intranvociLlM-  i 
introduction  of  the  preparetion  in  e  coae  of  11-31  lul  is  recoitr.<r  red.  1 
It  should  be  mentioned  that  in  Lnglana,®  series  of  theitpeutlc-prophy-  i 
lactic  centers  ftinctions,vhere  at  any  time  of  the  day  one  can  obttir;  | 
anti-botulin  senm  i2j.  > 

j 

In  France, vhen  p'Oisonirg  from  pork  meat  is  suspectec,f '>r  i.  iu,hy4 
i.axlSjonly  type  £  serum  in  the  amount  of  2u  ml  is  applied,  When  infec-  j 
ticn  through  other  foocstuffs  and  cannec  foods  is  suspected,  A,B,auc  C  | 
sera  in  various  closes  are  utiiizea  •  vher.  infection  from  fish  pro-  j 
ducts  is  suspectea,  E  type  serum  is  incorvorated.  Inasmuch  as  ir.  FiMictj 
I  no  esses  of  type  h  botulism  disease  were  observed,  a  Eimilai*  iiicu  of  i 
j  serum  is  acuainii:  terec  onuy  vhen  specific  inaicatioiis  are  ;V>ai.ifested  [.fj 


j  rtnti-botxrlir.  serum  is  the  sole  effective  meer.s  for  the  tre:*- 

jmert  of  botulism.  The  effectiveness  of  serotherapy  cepenos  olo5e.iy cn  ho 
soon  after  contraction  of  tne  disease  tisatdDents  are  begun:  the  ea:  J.Ier 


serum  is  aoiuird. stereo, the  higner  the  therapeutic  ef 
intravenous  inti'ouuctior)  cl  me  t-ivauenu  i.s  ana 
10,d0v)  aL  i.ii  is  recojmienc,ed ,  in  tee  aot-ence  of  an 


feet, 
ef  fee 


In  tne  Ubp, 
in  »  uooe  of 
t,t.he  Sfci'w; 


t 

i 

iwi 

I 

i 

{ 

I 

» 

i 

f 


*  Aojjiiristrf.tion  is  rej^eutea,  consioers  it  s.s  iiu>yei”.tivff  u:-  j 

j increase  tne  single  therapeutic  cose  to  ut  least  50,. vU  and  to  | 

:  introduce  it  intrsmuscularlyu  In  xriglanc-jfor  i-reatiicut  oi  notuiism,  * 
intrasiusc'ul&.r  introduction  of  e  10-^0  mi  Divalent  Scium  Gose,£,nu  itpetli- 
ticn  of  such  injections  in  tfjt  absence  of  an  effect  u’iThir.  t-il  hours  ; 
is  I ecoraended ,  In  Frajiee,wnsn  t&Ken  ill  oy  tr.e  cisease  a^  'o:iat.ec  i 
vith  fooo  consomp-tion  of  pork, for  the  performance  of  baotcriolopfcai  I 
die  gnosis, 40  ml  of  type  B  serum  ti'e  introduced  daily  up  to  the  n-aicfes-i 


tation  of  the  clinical  effect.  In  infections  associated  v:- tn  other  ; 
foodstuffs, e  polyvalent  seriim  of  types  A,B,G  and  E, contairir.g  aO  nl  o^'  j 
each,  i.e,  a  totel  of  IbO  ml  is  administered.  In  the  first  injec;:.cn, 
one  half  of  the  serum  dose  is  introduced  intremuscularly, virile  the 


285 


other  half  Is  adminietered  eubcutaoeouBly  ;  later  on, the  senan  le  Injec¬ 
ted  only  subcuteneouely  [4J.  Prophylactic  and  therapeutic  serum  doses 
are  presented  in  table  7. 


Table  7 


the  entire 
[course  of 
’treatment 


USA 

France 

Prophylactic  oose 

2,500  AE 
[A  and  Bj 

10-20  ml 
[A  and  Bj 

20-80  ml 
[A,B,C,E, j 

Therapeutic 

dose 

laily  dose 
[first  few 
daysj 

20,000- 
100,000"  AE 
[A  ana  Bj 

b0-15o  ml 
[A  end  B] 

160  ml 

IA,3,C,F,] 

lose  for 

Until  an  effect  is  produced 


In  the  opinion  of  American  authors  (.5], the  anti-bo tulin  serum, 
although  effective  against  all  five  varieties  of  botulism, is  neverthe¬ 
less  usually  administered  too  late  for  manifestation  of  a  therapeutic  | 
effect  j  as  a  resiilt, botulism*  s  mortality  rate, until  now  has  comprised  i 
65%. 

ANTIP/GTEPIAI.  SETOK  AGAINST  THE  PUGUr.  A  therapeutic  anti¬ 
bacterial  serum  against  the  plague  is  made  in  the  USA, England, France, 
and  other  countries;  it  is  produced  initially  by  hyper-immxmi aation  of 
horses  with  anti-pestilential  vaccine,and  afterwards  by  the  virulent 
B.pestis  cultui-e.  It  finds  application  both  for  prophylaxis  and  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  plague. 

In  the  opinion  of  iaaerican  authors  [6], persons  coming  in  con¬ 
tact  with  patients  sixffering  only  from  the  pulmonary  l Primary  and  secon¬ 
dary]  form  of  the  plague  shoiild  be  subjected  to  ae  prophylaxis]  persons 
coming  in  conttict  with  patients  suffering  from  the  bubonic  form  are  not 
subject  to  seroprophylaxis.  For  prophylaxis, the  serum  is  introduced 
intramuscularly  in  a  cose  of  10-20  ml,  Such  a  aosage  vas  also  adopted 
'in  France,  Wu  Lien-te  td^ed  by  Politzer  (6)]  recoiamends  intramuscular 
administration  of  100  ml  of  serum  for  those  coming  in  contact  with 
patients  suffering  from  the  pulmonar-y  form  of  the  plague,increasing  this 
dose  to  200  ml  for  those  in  great  danger  of  infection  \  and  according 
to  his  ddta, administration  of  40-50  ml  of  serum  is  sufficient  for  the 
early  performance  of  seroprophylaxis. 


286 


[  In  spite  of  the  damoiQstrRted  effectdveriess,seroprophylbxie^ut  j 

the  present  time,  doev*?  not  fijixi  vice  application  ir  the  fight  against  ! 
the  plague  in  endemic  disease  centers  abi-oad.  The  reasons  foj-  thin  3:;a-i 
ts  of  affairs  appear  to  be, first  of  ell, the  high  price  of  the 
secondly, serum  reactions  i,6j.  Departing  from  this, and  taking  into  acco.4- 
also  the  prophylactic  effecti-seuess  of  tulfeE.iiaaiideB,ar.n  in  /low  of  j 
their  relatively  low  price  as  well  as  length  of  presarvaticn, the  inter- 1 
national  coismittee  of  experts  on  plague  control  of  tne  j 

Vorlc  OrgwdLwttlon  in  Care  of  PuojLic  Health  j.  seconc  section  of  ; 

congress  in  hombayj, recommends  the  application  of  sulffcnilemiuf.s  j 
Lsulfacifizine, sulfa thlaaole, end  othersj  in  a  3  grani  dose  f>.r  cuy  | 

for  six  days  for  plague  prophylaxis  for  persons  cociing  in  contactj 
with  patients  suffering  both  from  the  pulmoriar>’  as  well  es  the  bubonic.  | 
fonas  0?  the  oisease.  | 

In  spite  of  the  high  prophylactic  effect  of  antibiotics  tstrep-j 
tomycin  at  the  rate  of  1  gram  per  day  in.  the  course  of  five  clays],  [ 
speclsl  mass  prophylaxis  of  the  plague  with  these  compcxu.nds  is  not  ucir^ 
performed  in  ccloaial  covmtriea,in  view  of  their  relatively  high  cost  ; 

16).  I 

For  treatment  of  the  plague, the  anti-plague  seium  v.6S  r 

firfct  app.i.led  by  Yersin  in  1896.  It  remained  for  a  long  time  the  iscj.v.  I 
specific  therapy  for  th3.s  disease, giving  a  positive  effect  in  the  [ 

1  rat  Till ent  of  buboidc  plague,  j 

bubs c;..,uently, sulfanilamic.es  were  succes.sfully  applied  in  11,-=:  | 

therapy  of  this  form  of  the  disease.  At  the  present  time  the  most 
tive  means  for  treatment  of  all  foms  of  the  disease  is  ackriovlecigeo 
to  be  streptomycin  which  has  pushed  bactc  into  the  baclgroiirG  both 
sulfenilarcices  as  veil  as  the  sertar.. 

Opinions  regarding  the  serum.’ s  ‘^f.fectivenesa  and  ir-aicarions  j 
for  its  application  differ  widely  at  Vr-  present  tifpt*.  Thus  the  Irdi/.n ! 
CoiuiUlssion  on  Plague  Cent  jr  o  1  i>cints  o..it  SiUit  the  di'.h.l- 
pl  a  g  u  e  senn  produces  an  effect, but  it  if  liower  than  that  cf 
antitoxin  sera  ifor  instance, of  anti-aiphterlal  serumj.  In  tl-e  cpirion 
of  SoKjchei,a  daily  dose  of  vO  iiu.  [20  .nil  intravenously  and  f,Q  Uil  intra-- 
muEc;u.larly,iJi  the  course  of  five  days  appears  to  be  suff.i.ci  ent  in  tiie 
treatment  of  serious  cases  of  bubonic  plague,  Le  daiJ  enc:  Pol-ittzer  ^6 
recommend  a  daily  administration  of  4O-6O  mi  within  a  <4  hour  period. 
Other  authors  Increase  the  daily  dose  for  adults  to  110  for 

chiloren  to  50  mi,  Gon_cu2Tently  an  opinion  is  prevalent  that  in  very 
rare  cases, eerotheraphy  can  save  even  patients  afflioi-eci  the 
primary  puimonaj’y  form  of  plague, a  fact  about  which  Le  Maura  ana  a 
nxaaber  of  other  authors  have  reported.  Two  cases  of  curing  the  septic 
form  of  plague  with  serum  bciteb  by  Poiiitaer  -  6j  are  also  desciibed 
in  foreign  world  literature. 


Vheu  serotherapy  is  combined  vith  siiliar-ilemice  '  tsulfeaiezi 
siilfethiezole]  treatoierl, the  effect  of  treating  tne  bubonic  fora  of 
plague  l£  enhanced. 

Coccluaive  aata  on  curing  by  this  mear.e  a  consioei^cle  nu-i 
of  patients  afflicteo  vith  the  primari’’  pujjiiorajy  form  of  plague 
is  available. 


In  genei'al, experience  of  several  years  stanaing  regtraing  j 
the  ajjplication  of  anti-pl  ague  serun  irolcatee  that  a  positive  j 
therapeutic  effect  results  only  in  the  treatment  of  the  buDonic  form 
of  plague  unaer  conaitions  of  early  inii-ial  start  of  therapy,  i^frun 
tieatiTient  of  the  pulmor.arj'^  and  septic  forms  of  the  ciEe£Se,es  a  n:le, 
prove  tc'  be  unsuccessful 

AriTIBi-'OTrfliX  fthliliW  ilGiOLNST  i“!ALIGlV'jiKT  i-ijlhib'l’,  Therfc;eiitic 
senan  egairst  malignarit  a-nthrax  is  obtained  by  the  hyper-iumuriisation 
of  horses  or  bulls  [in  Svitaerland^with  Beet,  anthr^icls  cultures, 
vhereby  at  the  begitming  of  the  i-rjnainiz&tion  a  vaccine  strain  is 
applied, foil oved  by  a  virulent  one.  In  the  majority  of  foreign 
countries  [the  USA, Fjngland, France]  tlie  serum  is  produced  both  in  the 
native  as  well  es  in  the  fonn  of  a  purified  and  concentrated  prepa- 
rtitiop  i.3j,  " 

In  view  of  the  rarity  of  cases  among  people  taken  ill  by 
malignant  anthrax, prophyltjcis  is  very  seloom  applied.  It  was  esta- 
biishec, however, that  serum  Sjt.piied  in  appropriate  doses  is  reU  inc-d  ir 
the  organism  of  experdmentel  animals  for  1-10  days  thus 

creating  persistent  iimnunity.  In  £nglero,et  the  present  ^ime, there 
f\u:ctions  a  ruzmoer  of  centers  where  at  any  time  of  the  day  one  can 
obtain  serum  for  prophylaxis  £i.na  treatment  of  mslignart  anthrax  i,2j. 

In  SvltEeriar.Cjenti-anthraor  serum  for  prophylaxis  is  adc. ini  stereo 
subcutaneously  in  a  aose  of  20  ju  4.3, . 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  cutaneous  form  of  malignant 
anthrax  is  treateo  successlulxy  with  antibiotics  tpeniciilin,  aureo- 
mycirijjSerotherapy  is  recommenced  only  in  serious  forms  of  the  oiseas  ;, 
in  conjunction  with  antibiotics,  Accoraiiig  to  oata  of  american  authors 
serum  in  conjunction  with  antibiotics  is  ouiainlstered  jo  patients  at 
a  Gaily  rate  of  5^-100  ml  intrajtiuscularly  until  an  effect  is  obttineci 
1.9].  English  authors  recommend  an  initial  intravenous  serum  intro¬ 
duction  of  40  ml  to  anthrax  patients, end  suDse;^uently,eccorcilng  to 
necessity, to  repeat  the  administration  of  same  several  times  per  cay. 

In  serious  cases  serum  is  introduced  at  a  daily  rate  of  5d0  ml  for 
five  days  [3]»  In  France  serum  is  applied  in  a  complex  vith  sulfa- 
nilamides  and  antibiotics  or  without  than  in  a  dose  of  bO  ml  admi¬ 
nistered  subcut6neouaiy,with  subsequent  injections  repeated  daily  j 


288 


until  the  effect  is  piouuced  iiccoruint  to  aett  of  Swiss 

tuthorSjSerotr.er-ti  y  is  not  effective  in  tne  tnir^neous  fora  of  tiic  di- 
setse.  The  sertE!  is  tppiiec  repee.tealy  either  intraveuousx.r  ,incrs~ 
£r.usculfcriy,or  £ubcutt.reously  at  a  uose  of  tf;l  entil  e  cljnjct.l 

effect  is  proouced.  in  serious  coses, seruK  is  intracueed  in  coL-et-  of 
1oO-2jO  mi  in  con;;  unction  with  enti  bio  tics  idj.  iiiaerictn  authois 
emphasixe  tli&t  3.n  tnthi’sy, produced  by  a  pathoecn  resisU-nt  to  iUitu- 
bioti os, serum  therapy  viil  undoubtedly  play  e  substtntjjii  role  in  th--- 
complex  of  medicinal  metsures  i7j.  Therapeutic  ceiun  dcsaies, adopted 
in  some  countries, are  presented  in  table  8. 


Table  8  ! 


USA 

England 

_  - 

France  |  Svd  ixt  rk^nrij 

Prophilactic  dose 

■I 

_ 

20  ml 

-  j - 

jLaily  dose 
|t first  few 
i  days] 

^-100  ml 
Lwitn  anti¬ 
biotics. 

40-300  ml 

60  ml 

100-200  mi 
twith  £.nti- 
bioUcS;  j 

Lose  jbose  for 

jthe  entire 
i  course  of 

1  treatment 

Until  an 
effect  is 
pioouced 

Up  to 

1,500  ml 

Until 
an  ef¬ 
fect  is 
procucfec 

Until  an 
effect  is 

pX*OOUC6G 

PUKLfiCiiXIOl*  i^ib  CONCiijTFATICN  OF  SEfJl,  kz  is  well  Knovn, 
eminiEi  seitE!  ;.fax>ducecl  by  horsesj  cor ta ins  b-9^  protein  in  which 
albunlns  comprise  3-4^» cuslobuiins  i-';>>s-nG  pseuaoelob'aiins 
It  was  esteoiished  tir^at  in  therapeutic  antitoxic  sera  the  main 
canriers  of  protective  properties  appear  to  be  pseuao globulins, vtuich 
are  theraostable  glcbulins, containing  up  tc  70-8o>  of  the  antitoxin. 

Furification  and  concentration  of  antitoxic  sera  is  cssec  on 
the  r^soval  of  inactive  inert  proteins  such  as;  euglobulins, albumins, 
end  the  inactive  portion  of  pseudoglobuiins. 

Abroaa,et  the  present  time, purification  am-  concentrcr  inn  of 
antitoxic  sera  consists, on  the  whole, in  the  application  of  the  eniiy- 
matic  hydrolysis  method, in  conjunction  with  thencal  coagulfetion, based 
on  the  previous  splitting  of  scnan’e  protein  molecules  with  pepsin 
Lor  trypsin]  with  the  subsequent  isolation  of  the  thermo stfcbl.=^  frac¬ 
tion  of  globulins  associated  with  tne  antitoxins.  As  a  result  of  the 
breakdown  of  protein  molecules, horse  seia  purified  in  this  marcier 


! 

i 


loose  their  specificity  es  protein  antigens  ana  ure  elir.ost  ce^rlvt^d  of 
enaphylectic  properties;  in  eaaition  tc  that>&  considerebie  concentre- 
ticn  of  the  entltoxin  per  vui'-  of  serun  voluiie  iii  attainac;  this  perclt 
voii'une  rediiction  of  the  edminlsteteG  prepart  t ion  into  the  crt,ati;i  sru  li. 
connection  vdth  thi.s,it  is  necesearj  tc  mention  that  in  the  lict  ticri 
8  certtin  ^:!ortion  of  tne  serum' e  antitoxins  is  lost.  The  cciti toxin 
losses, fluctuating  from  icO  to  50  per  cent  [I7j,aepena  on  the  t-arii'i ca¬ 
tion  method. 

The  enzymatic  hydrolysis  metboa, subject  to  various  mouifi ri^tions 
is  applied  abroad. 

In  henmarkjet  tne  State  Institute  of  Sera  l Copenhagen j , the  han-  { 
aeu  iLethod  is  adopted  il2t  l4j.  It  involves  the  preliininary  I'eaiov&I  of 
fibrin  and  the  antiprotesjlytic  enzyme  from  the  plasma  vdth  ensuing  pep¬ 
tic  digestion,  k  selective  absorption  ^on  alimiinum  hydrioxioe  gelj  ana 
removsl  of  non-specific  proteins  is  perfoimed  subsequently,  After  ultra| 
filtration  through  collodion  covered  candles, the  specific  globulins 
are  salted  out  by  the  adaition  of  aiamonium  sulfate  followed  by  ctblysis 
in  cellopiiane  bags. 

The  concentrttion  coefficient  aepenos  to  a  large  extent  on  the 
initial  serum  titers, the  average  value  of  which  is  e..ual  to  5;  tlis  anti 
toxin  yiei-d  comprises  71-80%, 

In  spite  of  the  Mgh  yiei€;,the  metnoc  is  very  inefficient  ar»a 
not  suitable  for  the  processing  of  large  serum  volumes;  ^.besicies  .tsn- 
mar^j  it  is  not  aaoptea  in  other  countries  tI3,  l4j . 

In  France, at  the  raatevir  Institute  tharisj  tne  Am.cunoux  u.’.-thoc 
1.15J  is  applied.  It. involves  the  peptic  oigestion  of  the  scru;. 
proteins  foiloveu  by  selective  coagulation  wilii  emmonitm  s\iifete  at 
a  temperature-,  of  5^''«h-57®;  the.  con-specific  coeguia tt-u  ..ro are 
removed  suosepaently  by  filtration.  The  French  metboc  is  characteri¬ 
zed  by  the  depigmeintation  df  the  serum  with  kaolin  ano  oarbori 
•fvillowed  oy  filtration.  The  specific  globulirs  a  e  subst.  .uentiy  pre- 
cli'.it8t«‘C  with  sifoiouium  sxiifate  ana  subjected  to  aislysis  for  a  >0 
j  hour  perioojsfter  which  a  sterilizing  filtration  is  perfo;’Visd. 


(: 


For  an  anti-cdphterial  seruii‘i,tbe  yield  of  antitoxins  compri¬ 
ses  5^-55>, while  the  protein  content  at  an  initial  1,000  aE  titer  is 
8-1.1%;  for  an  anti-botulin  serm,the  yieio  is  equal  to  40-/.5%.»wnile 
the  protein  content  at  an  1,500  AL  titer  comprises  5-8%.  ilectropho- 
retlcfclly,a  single  fraction  is  detemlned  in  the  purified  serum  l14,15]{ 

In  England,£t  the  Vellcome Laboratory,  the  Harsis  method  is 
applied  tlbj.  It  involves  likewise  the  digestion  ol  the  serum  proteiri 


290 


in  conjunction  vith  tnexual  troeWiritt  at  >0'^  Lnu  cul 
a^rjudiiuii  Cui. i 


-Cii  i  r.titoy: 


V  C 

(..Id 


ou  s#  t.*i 

the  inert,  proteina, vrdch  -irv  renovuc.  07  tiiut 


t'.or . 


«.  ^it.z  rer  aii  in. 


SO 


XU.  U  A  .  i 


tforeu, 


;i._«ir.  VI  ch  tu'  ,t:  on  aullfatej  tiicj  tii  t  t^i»ei.  .b '.c •.  b? 

-  lOi.^cQ  c  ..  ill  fc  o'.reu.!i  ji  .  i.  1  :.j.^  til  t 

arc  T-ciilizii^  liltruliun  are  r-ii';-  uuL.r-.-,.  i 

.'t-'Icr.  cocf I  ici ►.!. c.  ...•.jimta  a 
1^'if.  CM.  rises  t; 


j.  ^  i'C  f. --uiv 

,i  t.nc  u-e  !ua>luuiS  (.iter  ia  .i.j,.. 


: .  .t 
i  ■ 


1 


j. 


-  Or  ,  a  I 


rie  .“I  Cm.  i.fi  Si; 


ura  qi«e 


■  lit.^  o  .*  Cf'I 


te  .'.  1  iJ  Li- .0 

cenoa  is  ivu^OuKl.  i-i  Dtion  witn,  .t:i  e::. i.' . j  : 

waicii  iheir-a.i  cent,  tu ration  of  the  ^.roitii  o  u  u  'C' 
ji;.  j  orforiito  tr.ie  is  foiiovec  oy  tt*e  ,  leciolLai-ion  -i  xie  .  ; 
'■•-.in  a.t.iniw’i  ouLfi-te  iheir  sub;  e-^uert  re.i..^vti.  *iie  r.eN',  : 
’’.■.Sivvi-  lirt'.'f  preclpi  U:  tl  on  :rji!  rer-ovto  t.  rou.^n  fii  mv..' 
jiA-rii.  i-eiiairin-  in  aoic-tion. 


inu  i.oo..ctfcd  litiboxic  f^i.obc,iir-S  err  .-ubjecr'-c  «.,;  .li.’ 
'.■rr.oea’v&'r.lor.jfcno  aepijriea-fcci  t.;on  i.by  oiur.S;  ,tl  te r  vrii.'h  tn  *  sn 
cct,l:i.t;ntotioa  of  ariti  tcxir.s  vlth  aiijainiu:?  auiffete  i.s  .ui.i-:  i-i'.  ■  n 
v'ir.;?  f  iitrt  tiori,ur>'intj, sulf!i.te  reiiiovul  i,by  a  areof  j  ,...r.o 
j  I 'trij :  iii.o  filtrctioit  is  perfcnr.oc  ci-v.. 

5 

'  Ihertaeutic  sen.  ibiocid^j.^i-ti-cu ivrl’;  in  an;_i{.:.o,o '■•.  ■... 

-i-'t.  b>th  in  tue  ii-riio  uS  well  as  ii-  the  cxy  I'oru;,  I.'i  ;u-Ii..  nr*.: 
!  Lave  a  yell'.'V  or  /crilow-cirj:io::.cn  coicriition.  6oivti'.>ns  :  f  ..■.r; 
jiT;::  conc<::.traled  sen-  are  usi.io.i.lv  aijcost  coicrit-ss,  Iran.- .are!  1 
jib-ft  ^vit.h  Ire  exception  of  the  ..roservat ive' s  ooor,  ,  o-’.'ics- .  . 


Lovever,  t.i:.-y  c.' x'l  ro:..ve  ye;  lov-citirerrcr, 


. r  :  r»  sn- VEi;  ic’ .'i  1 ; 


.  Si’.f. 


!  tion.s.  liy  ^:re>-o.nt  io:i£  tie  vuite  or  y'.-  iioulsh-vhi  oe  j.iv.  i  rr . 


(Hi. live  sera  vrries  fr-j.Ti  7,.J'  Xic  d.f  ^ce.  er'dr,_  o;:  <re 
;  ..)•£.  :.i.vn  >f  ciOi.i'C.oncteSj  ,  t;  e  ^-h  of  ^-'urifieo  Ua-ci  car.! 
It,  iiai  to  'o,0-7.'o.  both  r.t'ive  as  vtj*  -jc  -niii'iiu  ti 


i.ti  a  ’  • 


-.'Oruiure  01 


Vfe 


,  cars '  a  t 


Oe;.. 


■ri  t 


j,r;ar»vJ.e  Sera  00  xiot  -i,..!orfc  ....'re  tatj.  r>  oi  the  *.rw  ^ 

1  v_ m ,  /  t  r.iy.i'.er  ttiiii.eza  it  reS,  tue  oetenioratioii  te  t-i  i.;.e  ^.■ 
;ri;o.'-':  :..t  i  7®  tor  oiie  year,  it  i.tt-Mr.s  ..o"^'— 

i-'  .  ir  j  o.-i;'.  li  e  jvi'vltv  ■varl-s 


-  ,j 


I  I 


oerK  ^uriliet  r.y  en ..yiTie tic  hyerQo,.’S-.s  aie  ^rCi--.Tv..,  • 
t  a;...  el  o  wire  >7  ajci'-iai  fiCtivi  t;.  io.is  ic  v-.,-  i.'-..'  ■ 

..t  ;S  a;.'-.  oJ'^  it  ao'.-s  not  uy-ceec  3  aiio  i./*>  *  es^  c  ctivt  :  •■  -  , 

,  n*-.  er:  t i a.ris  loose  anmu  liy  froa  ±0  .  0^  of  uirii  .rctivi  ^;. 


oreoars  tioxis 


e  fFCVi^rvec.  even  cett 


wC.*  •  V  ■  . 


tv. 0 'r- tely  cry  connitions  ct  a  tecij-erature  beiov  .''esuito  ir. 
’ .  ;  :.y  no  ahari^ie  in  their  activity  ^  eiev<vtio.M  cf  .-rlciru'^  i  oi;:,. ei 


291 


to  20*  causes  a  vei^  insignificant  io’-erii-e  of  sctivii./  i.3j*  j 

Ua.*ii'is-ui.Oi>ii  al'it .  far  tne  last  iO-i>  yaurs  t^aziair.-gicruiir.,  i 
1  reperec  froii  biunac  nlcocjhas  rfrc^ivtc  wi^ies^-i'cao  tfcv:.  ir.  t 

proi-hyleals  ano  traa/Unwit  of  certaii.'  vinis  tr.o  bac*>;riai  ir.iectior.K,.  j 
u.^jna-^lotuiin  represents  a  bioco  protein  fmotjon  wnich  a^..per  :s  t:  | 

be  the  ix.ir>  carrier  of  anti-virus  nnc  -.Jiti-oecteritl  iLu.ruj:o.i.ocict'.l  i 
•  roterties  cf  tht^rt-rei’ti c  sert,ano  ciflers  irox  otner  term  ;rott.ir.  j 
fractions  by  its  electro^-horetic  cnaracteri sties  tiete  ci'  i-.igratJcn  j 
ir"!  KD  electrical  fielOj.  ■ 

I 

I 

I 

iiovever,tne  cirect  isolation  of  ttnxt-giobiuins  by  vap  cf  ! 
preparative  electrophoresis  can  not  be  realised  on  a  large  scc-Le.  i 
iierefore,in  oraar  to  obtain  gauiEiE-glcbulin  uncer  itanuitctuiin,.  con-  i 
alti  ens, other  net.hoda,especjelly  the  fractionation  inetned  oi  teiui.  j 
pro tains  thro  lev  teeperature  precipitation  with  alcohol  one  ■  npic-' 
yec,  Ihis  t-cthed  is  practised  on  the  largest  scale  abrocc.  i 

i 

At  the  present  time, gamma-globulins  are  applied  successfully  J 
for  treatment, mainly  for  special  skin  prophyifxiR, poliomyelitis,  1 

Botkin's  cisease, scarlet  fever, epicisii'-c  paroti tis, Genian  xtaoltE,  ! 
infectious  mononucleosis, ;,s  well  as  sinallpoy.  Considering  that  in  j 

r.acy  of  the  enumerated  diseases, population  is  gotten  over  with  in  j 

chllchooc,and  that  effective  and  systtaratic  vaccination  against  i 

sa;eilpcy  is  prev6lert,it  is  assated,that  blood  serum]  popuiatior.  | 
possesses  to  a  considerable  extent  protective  properties  against  j 
thane  iniec'-ious  diseases,  Lepurting  from  this  point  of  view, for  i 

i.ro,hylaxis  ano  treati-.ent  cf  the  above  ersumeratec  infe,ctioii8,gsiriiia-  | 
globviiin  prepared  from  nonriai  serum  of  aoults  is  applied,  moreover,  | 
each  batch  of  the  preparation  is  pret.arec  fr^m  plasma  or  si-rvui,  j 

cerivea  iron:  people  5»10,11, 11 , .  i 

The  maiti  aoventego  of  gamma- globulin, in  cojaparison  with  otnu'  I 
a.. pears  to  be  the  consiaerably  bigner  concentration  or  protective  j 

antibocies  per  lUTiit  volume  ...na  removaj.  Irom  the  preparation  of  ttie  j 

uie^or  portion  of  inert  substances  contained  in  the  serum.  Tnar-r.:-.  to  I 
tntSjthe  piophylactic  or  thera,.eutic  aose  ol  antibocies  is  inlr-cuu-  1 

■:eo  in'to  the  organism  in  a  consi.GeiT.fcly  xeaucea  vclicne  ;.by  i.O  .jt  i.eue  i 

tiiiics,, thus  stcuririg  a  lowering  or  complete  absence  of  reactivity 
tuu  iriu.phylacto^ewis  of  the  preparation  liOj,  ’ 

The  stated  oats  is  presentee  only  ss  a  general  charactcclra- 
tion  of  gsiuma-glcbiilin, because  pathogens  of  the  6Kih,poliopjyfcl itls,  : 
ano  BotKin’s  disease  are  rot  regarnted  by  foreign  specialists  as  | 

,.ossible  bacteriological  warfare  agents.  In  this  respect, foreign  cata  ; 

concerning  experiments  with  gaunma-glcbullns  for  special  prophyleyis 
of  smallpox  is  of  much  greater  interest.  Initial  observations 


regaixiing  the  prophylactic  efrectivenese  of  gacuiife-globulin  at  the  time 
of  H  smallpox  outbreak  were  obtained  in  Indie.  Later  works  by  Americuri; 
authors  t^t  tlrie  University  of  Celifomiaj  perfoiised  in  1^^^3-1954  havt 
established,  that  gamma- gXobulij3,aerived  from  persons, vaccinated  agalrsi' 
smallpox, contained  many  virus-neutralizing  antlbooies.  Subse-uently, 
epidemiological  observations  vere  conducted.  At  the  tinie  of  two  saaJ.l- 
pox  outbreaks  in  India, ell  the  persons  who  came  in  contact  with  pa¬ 
tients  were  vaccinated  in  the  usual  manner  against  smallr.'oy.  VivLin 
i>.-24  hours  after  w'scci nation, gamma- globulin, Immune  to  virus  of  smail- 
pcy  blood, inthe  amount  of  0,06  ml  per  kg  of  weight  was  adminisUred  to 
some  of  them  ;  the  gamme  globulin  vas  obtt  ined  from  blooa  ooiiors  vho 
w’’ere  vaccinated,  against  smellpox  1-2  months  prior  to  blood  vithdravei 
from  then  and  who  displayed  a  positive  reaction.  Out  of  a  total  of  75 
people  who  were  only  vacclriated  in  the  normal  manner, nine  were  taken 
ill  with  smal.lpox.  Among  54  people  to  whom  gamne-globulin  was  adminis¬ 
tered, there  was  not  even  a  single  case  of  cisease  contraction . 

It  is  asavuRec.  that  normal  smallpox  \TsCcination  performea 
2-3  days  after  infection, does  not  protect  a  person  from  get.tii;W 
sicii..  Gaiotria-globulin, containing  antibodies  t.gairiSt  smallpox  viius,h8s 
in  this  iespect  a  considerable  acvaiita.ge  i.l7j. 

In  this  way  the  problem  of  proaucing  imiauno logical  gaicma- 
glcbulins  from  human  serum  of  persons  suffering  irom  certain  diseases 
or  who  are  vaccinateu  against  them  is  solved  at  the  present  time. 

However, in  conjunction  with  this, the  principal  possibility  of 
preparing  iDuruno logical  gamma- globulins  from  hyper- iuacunologicai 
theia^eutlc  sera  derived,  from  animals  was  uei,ionstrated  during  the 
last  few  yeais.  i-jiti-p  1  a  gu  e  g,amma-giobulins  are  e'jpeciailj  so 
produced. 

In  this  way, substantial  development  of  a  nxuaber  of  sera  agains  : 
virus  and  bacterirl  infections  which  at  the  present  time  can  not  bt 
considered  as  sufficiently  effective  i.plague,enthjax,season8l  ence¬ 
phalitis, end  others J  has  emerged. 


293 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


^  ■'^'’s^»«'!l1S^  “•  "“'*  »'•"»  ub,,. 

S  Bhiith  Pharmactvli^l  Codci,  PhanuMmUcal  PrM>  t  _  mr. 
lXrUir,  v  i  |«  .M«»dnr  HumaJfH-  IftsT  rt  Aniigen* 


5.  Current  Tln-rapy.  Ldiled  by  Cairn  H.  F..  Saunders  Company,  Phiiadt)- 
phia.  195b. 

6  P o I li  t  z  r  r  R.  Plajue  World  Health  Organization.  Gene\a.  1954. 

7  UubosRcncJ.  Bacterial  and  Mycotic  Infections  of  Man.  Li^tncotl 
Company,  Philadelphia.  19.52. 

6  Vademecum  Products  ^rna.  Instiiut  Serotherapique  et  Vaccinal  Suisse 
Dcrnc,  I9W. 

9  Welch  H..  Lewis  C.  Antibiotic  Therapy.  Medical  Encyclopedia.  New 
York.  195.5 

10.  Handbook  of  Ihe  Hospital  f.orps.  United  States  Navy.  1953. 

1 1  New  and  Nonofficiai  Remedies.  Lippincott  Company.  Philadelphia. 
1956. 

12.  Immune  Serum  (llobulin  in  the  Prophylaxis  oi  Paralylic  Poliooneliiis. 
.Measles,  infectious  Hepatitis,  Hypogammaglobulinefliia.  Pub.  ffealth 
Rep.,  1953.  6S.  7.  6.59 

13.  Hansen  A.  Acta  Path,  et  Microb..  Scand..  1948,  2^.  460. 

14  Delsai  J  L..  Chamjy  H.  M  Rev.  Dlmmunol.  *t  de  Ther,  Anti- 
oiicrob.,  I9S1.  7,  3.  ItO 

15.  Amouroux  (i.,  Yeu  F.  .Ann.  Inst.  Pasteur,  1951,  80.  165. 

16.  Harms  A.  J.  Biochein..  J..  I948L  42.  390. 

17.  Use  of  Modern  Health  Methods  in  India,  Japan  and  Korea.  Pub  Health 
Rep ,  1954.  69.  2.  16S. 


294 


1 


AKIIiilOa'ICb. 


Antibiotlcgjts  veil  as  vtccjnes  and  tnerai-eutdc  sera  belong  to 
series  of  specific  agents  of  ir.oivicual  prutectior.  against  bac-f-triojo- 1 
^ictJL  veapons.  Their  tiain  significance  lies  in  c.he  treftoent  of  infectioA 
iseates  which  oar  lotnifest  themseives  after  a  bncterioio-j  cai  att-s-cx.  f 
‘he  f-resence-  of  effective  prepai^itions  with  re^&rc-  to  a  consioertibie 
^i-Tiber  of  infections, the  agents  of  which  can  be  eSiplcyec  in  the  urse- 
■al  of  bacteriologicel  weapons  j.  plague, t,ivlare3:ia,znf,j.iE.T.ant  f-nthrex, 
j"i ckett£ifc,psitUcosis,f.i>a  partly  bn-iceliosis]  persiit  us  to  rely  ox:  the  j 
'act  that  vS,:.ecilic  therapy  can  reouce  significantly  the  :criortality  rate  i 
...onp  the  sick  as  w^fell  as  ease  the  course  of  the  ciseases  and  snorter.  ! 
-neii  perioa  of  6uri',tion,  ’ 

i 

accoT-ding  to  official  views  ^9,10,13 ,llj ,fntibiotlce  ar'd  cher;o-  ! 
prej-ia rations  under  conditions  of  Dacterioiogical  varfere  will  fine  appli-j 
i-ation  not  only  for  specific  therapy  of  infectious  diseteeE,but  also  j 
for  special  prophylaxis.  Underlying  this  fact  is  the  creation  in  the  j 
already  infected  organisti  of  a  therapeutic  concentre. tion  of  the  neoic:-  i 
jiel  preparation  which  will  prevent  the  disease' s  development  or  f;  ciii-  j 


ate  its  course.  It  is  assumea  that  c.ntibioticE  and  chenoprep>arations 
11.1  be  cnplojea  lor  this  purpose  as  soon  as  possible  after  appLlcatiun 
^  bacteriologicfcl  \'ee,..ons. 

Inclvision  of  special 


bv  medicinally  stable 


rophyiaxis  by  antibiotics  into  ti,e  anti- 
IJacteriologi cal  defense  system  has  led  iipiexicex;  specialists  to  point  ju: 
St  the  same  time  a  series  of  shortcoinings  of  this  methoa.  Xc  begrn  wich, 
it  can  not  be  ai.pliec  for  infections  for  v/hich  there  are  no  eiiective 
t  r.ti.biotics  t.s  veil  as  for  diseases  prooucec 
s  tra; 
c  ourses 

lion  of  side  pheixomena-  in  a  consic^eble  number  of  persons  sub^ect.ec  to 
^  roj-hylaxis.  tinaxlyjin  the  thirct  place, in  the  opinion  of  UtA  specie  ilsi 
special  prophylaxis  oy  antibiotics  can  be  beguii  only  after  cscerttirii/en" 
of  the  kind  of  bacteriological  weapon  employee.,!,  e.  at  t  ^.fter  time 


I  ins;  *  secondly,  execution  of  lengthy  anc  I'epea  tea.  prophylactic 
■s  procuces  sensitisation  towards  the  preparations  and  maxxil'esta- 


r 


295 


when  its  effectiveness  is  reduced  considersbly. 

The  inaiceteci  circumetencee  narrow  cown  cometiaes  the  nethod' s 
significance  and  permit  one  to  recoiataend  it  for  the  prevention  of 
diseases  among  confined  troop  contingents  and  the  population  i.i'unctio- 
ning  military  enterprises  and  so  forthj  i?,llj. 

It  emergiss  from  various  foreign  literature  data  that  antibio¬ 
tics  and  chemoprepara lions, employed  for  special  mass  prophylaxis, can 
be  effective  by  causing  a  considerable  moibidity  reduction, by  bein,^ 
capable  of  lowering  the  death  rate  and  by  facilitating  the  clinicsl 
course  of  the  disease. 

Abroad, especially  in  the  lioa,the  most  effective  ano.  uicely 
applied  antibiotics  for  the  treataient  of  infectious  uiseeses  tie 
penicillin,  s"-reptoi(iycin,  chioramphenicoi,aureoinycir,  tc-r  ramycln,ar:r: 
tetracycline.  These  antibiotics  are  of  greatest  importance  for  therapy 
and  special  prophylaxis  of  infectious  diseases, tfie  agent  of  vnieh 
can  be  applied  in  the  form  of  bacterioJogicfuL  weapons . 

In  tne  Uda,moreover,during  the  last  few  years, antibiotics 
such  as  bscitracin,^volyij.yxin, erythromycin, c&rbomycin, thyrotnricin, 
nisin, neomycin, viomycin, furaagillin, rii.ioci.dirB*itc.  j  ar  e  oevelOi  cc  in 
smail  amounts,  however, they  are  employee  mainly  in  surgicci, theia- 
peu tic, urological  ana  other  diseases, ana  j..l6y  a  consicerably 
role  in  the  treatment  of  infectious  aiseases. 

PhiJCILLlN.  The  most  studied  ano  viaely  appliaci  antibiotic 
in  medicine  is  penicillin  vhich,on  tie  whole, is  manufacturec.  incus- 
triaily  in  the  ISA  in  the  foim  of  oenayli^enicillin  ana  its  prep-ara- 
tlor.s,  Penicillin  is  of  interest  as  a  preparation  against  malignant 
anthrax  ana  psittacosis  ana  is  indicated  for  special  prophylactic 
purposes  against  ges  gangrene  er.a  tetanus. 

Although  penicillin' .s  chemical  i^tructvre  is  well  xnowTi,its 
synthetic  manufacture  is  still  not  aevelopedj  the  antibiotic  is 
produced  biosynthetically.  In  its  dry  form  when  stored  under  refrige- 
retion,tne  preparation  preserves  its  activity  for  one  year. 

In  the  USA  penicillin  is  manufactured  in  t-ie  form  of  various 
prepe rations, in tenaea  mainly  for  parenteral  (.intramuscular, subcuta¬ 
neous,  intravenous  j  introQuction,as  veil  as  for  internal  tablets, 
suspensions j, end  external  a^^plication  ;.ointt!ient6, pastes, mixtures, 
powaers,etc. j . 

Penicillin  enters  the  blooa  stream  vitnin  30  minutes  after 
intramuscular  aoministration  end  is  excieted  from  the  organism  maiidy 


296 


thir.'ugh  the  rcxeneys.  i>;orfcover,  the  therspeutic  pen.’ ciliir.  eoriCtT'tiri.ticn! 
ii?  Ir.ti  iii6c  in  the  blood  fjT  e.  totfcl  peilod  xi  oiily  1-3  hourE,vf;  Lch 
eppesrs  to  be  a  shcricaning  of  the  pr«{)eratioc].  ir  coniit^cthoii  v.j  i.h  this, 
numerous  prepar&tionfi,so-ctllea  peniciliin  activity  scslt-iners  vei-; 
cref-t.eG|  in  p&^ ticnuar, sx^nificant  succestts  i:;  this  area  ctiti- 

nec  by  deriving  vtiious  suspensions  of  penlcjiiin  .  rootint- 

salt.  For  the  last  fev  years  the  pre^^t-ration  of  biciitii.  or  bentc-na-  ! 
cil  representing  tne  penicillin  sattt  vitn  h,N’ -caberiyit ti.yltntaiaElce 
oesenveb  special  attention.  V.nen  loO,j.)j  biclxxin  units  ore  injertec  i 
intrtiuuscularly ithe  prepare t ion  is  aetecraslc  in  tae  blcoc  S'leut;  ! 
a  ^-triod  of  one  vtakij  Dy  raising  Uie  oose  to  ,b'hO>-''lo'  units, rj-.e 

ctn  Cc  cetccteG  in  tne  bloou  uitei  x;;  guo'S.  1‘--  ::onc^  ; 
trations  in  the  blooo  are, houever, relatively  iov, tnertiore  blciliir 
es^-ecieiiy  recoiomencec  for  treatifient  cf  nisef  ses  causea  oy  tiu-  j.czt 
G en si  tive  microbes  towarcis  ^..enAciilin. 


An  tnaxogous  preparation  vuth  rcj^era  hi  its  .^rjicngto  t.ction, 
ur.Der  the  naiae  of  benettic  is  oeing  offered  in  F.ngianu. 

Far  treatiiient  of  pulir.onary,p.leuritic,aria  cronchiai  f.ist-asi.s, 
^-eniciiJin  esters  in  the  foroi  of  vater  sus^.ensir.';is,acur.irist<.-ie:'  ii  trt- 
jTi'aSOTlarly,e.re  anplcyecj  these  prei.>arations  ensure  the  craxtion  if 
hipher  .enicillin  concentrations  in  the  lunf^s  and  produce  r.ust:;i- 
reo  activity. 


In  trds  v.ay  the  i-robleia  regaidinp  ..  enici  liin’ s  •justaincc. 
action  is  solved  to  t.  certain  extent  through  the  ^•roduction  of 
cillin  uric  bicirlin  procaine  3a;.its  as  veli  as  throuch  tne  rreatio' 
of  penicillin  osiers,  :;ovever,in  the  opinion  of  .-.ueri  c.o n  .'-utaors,  i  t. 
acute  cases, intrernusculer  cccainistration  of  penicillin  per  ev’cry 
hour.-3  jo  necfcssarp'yc  fact  vaich  izaicates  the  re^.ative3.y  lev  pu-^l'-,' 
of  tne  a';ustainir.£;  pr-epar?  tions . 

Pfen;l.ci;<.ljr  vnen  taxer:  by  -izouth  is  rethcr  ^uici:.iy  iractivatco 
b'.’  pastilc  juice  aoiuity.  zhere^ore"^  it  xs  tauxCi*  xr.'  jeizo.  ui  '* 

the  fora  of  table  to,  t.nus  .  rutect^ng  the  ;.rtvaratj  on  ii  oni  the 
c estructive  action.  In  oicer  to  raise  the  tn-.rapeutic  tf  1  ect,c!,jdhii:- 
tration  cf  xarptr  uosee  of  tne  antibiotic  c-r.a  its  appixice tion  over  c 
proiorigec  perioo  of  zLr.e  is  nv-Cessary.  Ihe  acid-stabxe, biosyntneti - 
cfiJly  prooucec  ..eniciilit:  t.hienoxy,v.ethylpeni  c:- xiii.j  ir  ii:tT‘i:deu  I'  or 
oral  administration* 


Coifipiex  ^-re^.^a.ratio:rs  of  penicjilin  vitn  other  antibiotics  t-a; 
tizerui-eutic  substances  have  found  viaespx'eaa  ^  rvipa^ation  it:  the  u.u. 
For  instance, the  foliovlnG  pzrepsrations  vern  proGucea;  penicillin  ♦- 
sureptoiuycin  j  perricillin  t  pulrtinej  penicillin  t  emetine p  eniciilir 
in  conjunction  with  s''’nic tor, ratio  agents, anc.  aifexiv  others  ii,4.. 


AccordixifT  to  date,  of  ^jnerican  authors,  for  treetraent  cf 
nant  bnthrax' &  cutaneous  fonJi,aeily  ir.traiuuscular  eiii/ilriistratior  s  .  f 

i. JO,JOO  to  5'^0,000  ^jeniciilirt  units  is  i ecoaumtndeo  until  Le-uptraliir e 
reduction  anc  reversible  oevelopflient  of  local  pheno-iiena  ^usuaxlv 
vitnin  5-^  caysj  is  effected.  In  serious  cases, the  aaiiy  peiiicixJln 
cose  is  raised  to  4,300,lvl0  units.  In  the  treatiiient  of  inaiit,nar.t 
anthrax's  cutaneous  foivi, penicillin  effor\2s  xJJ>  recovery j  in  tde 
opinion  of  nruericar.  authors, tnerefore,tiifcre  is  no  neoessiuy  in  the 
application  of  serothera^;,y  4.(0, ioj.  Trec.ur.ent  of  arjthrr.''  riCi.irr j. ti r  x:  r 
.yeniciilin  c  oes  not  yieic  an  effect  in  s^.i. tc  of  a^.yplyir'£i  mrept  .-  j-lu  s 
of  the.  prHuyaration. 

in  the  treatiiient  of  psitta-cosis  pe:;ioxxiin  is  it e 

uoSfc'S.  Iritraoiuscular  aonini  strati  on  of  130,  JJO  units  per  evetp  taref; 
hours  c.urir-£  a  jiinijiua  periou  of  ten  atjS  is  rtcor.naehacc..  Co::.^;..e>: 
therapy  of  penicillin  vlth  aureoiaycin, chlcrthi-nenicol  or  terr;.. 
is  not  recoiiiiuenc ec  4.7i. 

feniciilin  is  an  antibiotic  aevolo  of  si^nificart  t-)xic  pi'o-  ( 

j. erties, anc.  in  connection  with  this, it  can  oe  ap-pliea  in  lart_-f:  Cijsps 
for  a  pjolonged  perioc  of  tinte. 

STruil'Th'ilCIN  -  ranks  as  the  second  anti;>iotic  j. after  .":r.niciiii 
according  to  the  extent  of  ^.roduction  ar.c  investigation;  it  is  u?  nu- 
factui'ec  inciustrleily  in  uie  Uba  in  the  form  of  pure  strepteiTiycin  ;  nc 
its  c'inycrootreptoicycin  aorivative.  The  latter  is  a  more  stable  .  re- 
.'sration  and, in  the  opinion  of  a  number  of  authors,^. o.^s esses  lover 
n  euro  tori  city, 

c  treptomycin' s  chemical  structure  has  been  stuuiea  thor!Wfc-hly. 
I.',  the  dry  form  at  rooci  ttanperavarfc,t.he  preparatior.  can  be  prectirec 
in  its  active  state  for  a  perioo  of  tvo  years.  The  er.tihiotic  is  pi-.,i- 
c.ucod  by  fermentatiop.  c’treptomycin,of  interest  as  c,h  antib.loric  :s 
effective  against  the  plague, and  renders  a  hign  therapeutic  effect  ir. 
tul-areala.  It  cun  be  apprieo.  in  i-ne  treatment  of  jiaiignai  *.  ar  irx; 
in  conjunction  with  therapeutic  seruTi. 

In  view  oi  the  poor  absoroabiuity  in  tne  gestro-i.ntesainal 
tract, streptomycin  and  ainycrostrepto»j.ycah  aie  manufacturea  mainly  as 
pre^.art  tions  for  parenteral  aGuiinlstration  in  the  foioa  of  tr.e  loiJo- 
wiiig  water  soiuDUe  salts;  tne  sulfate  ana  hyu rochxoiiue  f?s  well  as 
in  trie  form  of  the  calcium  chiorice  complex  wnich  can  oc-  ap^ilita 
i  ntraiunibarry . 

In  parenteral  4,  in  traauscuiar,  subcutaneous ,  introouction ,  do  tn 
streptomycin  anc.  aihyorostreptoiaycin  enter  the  blood  stream  j  efter  a 
l4  hour  period,  60-80^  of  the  preparation  is  excreted  by  the  itiuneys. 


298 


Lfikcn  ts  taL'i.tts  onl;-  li:  U'.:<5c  1:. 

vir.ich  ioCcI  i.ct-ior.  of  tht  ov.  t..c 

gts  c:x)-ii.tt3tini;i.  ..ccetitiy.  Ihuc  in  tnc  ti  ei-i  ..'.  r.L  .;•  nc^t 

ri>x  cyser.Lc-ry  ir.  caiicrui,  tne  li.iyci;.. 

in  Ci'-e  f.^rr.  of  toblttsr  oi-  m.  itr  sr.soenrfi on-o, re^  i 'rOt.-nn^  ‘  t..  •'■i'-. 

..lyoii:  t-i...  y'v.!  ionic  in  cii.e  rt:Co;L.*^'o— ' . 

In  oiter'ixi  t:;o  ioTir.fatior.  o*.'  to.;  ycl: -inirlsu,. o, 

onifjni;  of  afc.ctKrii,ntv-  salts  i-.rci  oei i  t'ati  vt;s  of  Lhe  i.ntip:  o  lie  .  : 
cm'ifcnt.iy  Deiiiij  yi-ociuora  J  ..ntse  ctiianoe  i  ro  ic  ..  ooraiiLio- 

oic  ci-torn.  cy  tnt  stre^it-orayciu  si&it  ,  streptomycin  ''raskate", 
manufactiored  in  the  United  States, 

Int.  I't-cei-tiy  yrotiucea  streptoi&yeir  o-i.tuce  is  tix^c 

the  eulfi:  tee  of  stre^v-to-iycin  ch'..  Qihyf.i'o.'st2  fcyt<onycir  ,i  nc  :  s  ..lorv  ..I  n.  • 
ly  trlLionateQ  iroo-  the  blooc  stream. 

In  hacitior.  to  t.his,i  nuiaber  of  com  pie?  ahti  oiotic  yt  r  lurc  tJ..  >4- 
a :  t  currentiy  being  uicrRifactured:  strty  tomycin  r  ^  eniciii. j n)  i,_ro."  ro- 
strcotciiyclr.  +  yeniciiiin  for  parentc-rt  i  ;  co.drictration  j  ."ti  ey,  t:-y,  oir. 

+•  baciti-t.cin  in  tne  foii;  of  U-biftt, 

In  conclusion  it  is  necessery  to  note  that  at  the  yresti.t  tin 
tht  issorthier.t  of  s tre^.-toir;ycin  therapeutic  foms  is  ILiit-U  on:.  ;c 
far  frv>ni  satisfying  fully  clinical  ueatned 


anericun  auxaors  I'-leierj  x-ecooiCienu  to  carry  out  i.l.f  treat..; 
of  the  piagiio  puiaonary  anc.  septic  fonris  vi.th  a  pitm  Laily 

of  strep to.iycin  ir.  cor.; bi nation  vith  auieonycin  ^  chiorar.  pher.icoi  01 
ter Tcuiycir.j  tuKen  at  a  naxly  cose  of  k-i,  grtaus.  inere  are  inuicf. ti 
that  serotherapy  supplementation  uc  the  aoove  cescrioec  ^.Itai 
v.ositive  results  ^Uj.  v\elcli  i.Oj  ^.loposes  treat.iet  t  oi  tne  pia-ut 
oubor.ie  anc  piuu.'onary  for..is  aocoreir-g  to  tao  foiio'-i.'p  plan;  ..  ^r.i 
strei.tomyoin  dose  of  <,-4g,a(j;niijisterec  intiao.usouia rxy  •  suxfaoiac.' 
given  at  an  initial  siioCK  uost.  .>l'  4.e,,ioxxoveu  oy  a  cose  eve 

H  nou rs ,  taiifch  mternaxjty  ^oi'  xt. tiaVc;t.o..LOX  j. 


t-M 

ao£i 

or  3 


-“v 
e  , 

-i 


■*  w  c..  U.  I  .. 


il 


proveo:t,nt  sets  in  ..urint,  this  ti:i.e, sti t;.. to.cy 
G..i scontii-Utro ^ ofjX j tree t.T.ei  t  uxen  sua.taoxai-.ine  xs  con c...j.uev. 


If. 


1  t; ep toicyoin  is  ne;-y.rcieG  as  the  ..i-ost  ci:iCT..ive  ..re..t.r' tior.  It 
the  t.r'=au.Lent  of  tuiare.oia.  lor  therapy,  of  tat 

ratioi’  is  recor-u'ier.uec.  J  treatment  is  coutinucu  for  7  aa.  s,t  ouily 
aose  -if  tne  j^reparation  being  aiixir-isttrec  .Intri.iuscuaaix  / 

In  the  tree  t;..ent  of  xiaiig,:.ar.t  authrao's  cuU  neoi.s^  foi:: ,  sti  ep - 
*o.i.y  cir.  is  applied  iXitieoiuscularly  at  a  rate  of  Jop  tvict 

until  a  therapeutic  effect  is  attairec  ^uisa.-pearance  :.'f  eaena, 


299 


reduction  of  t taper?. ti.rf  to  nor3ii.?.l,ario  j.oSii  oi  ■uixic.Lt.y  pyinptoias) 
In  serious  ousts, it  is  necessary  t-o  coabir.t  strtpt.Mj,  cir.  tnert ;.y  vi 
serum  treetment  [at  the  rate  of  IJ-IJO  ml  per  cuvj.  I?;  r. r, 

exithrax,  streptomycir..  snoulo  be  ^xppiiec  o.ily  x*.  L/.e  ■-.■I 

effect  resulting  from  penicillin  or  aurtom/cin  tifuu..c.rt. 

i'treptofflycin  is  relatively  non- toxic j  riuvever,cui-jr p,  it.:.-  , 

Cfction  sice  reactions  can  be  noted.  Its  toxi-C  activity  cux 
itself  mairm.y  through  allergic  reactions  josnes, pains  in 

fever,cieTti-.atitisj  ana  function  iirjpaiiment  of  the  ntaiin^  nervc  ;.vis 
bxilar  oisorners, hearing  impair  jaentj  l^I* 

Ohio  ram 'heiiicrol  ^en  anoloc^ue  of  loviex.  levomyce  tii-^  is 
antibiotic  vitr.  a  tnoroughly  investigated  cna-'-icni  stro. f 
aianufcOtuied  ayntneticaiiy.  The  preparation  possesses  u  bionc  -.v  -c- 
trum  of  activity  ano  yieias  u  therapeutic  eiiect  .ur  the  tiea  I;  .:;  t  ri 
tularemiu, typnoid  fever  ano  parivtypnoic,acute  bacteriai  cyscrtery, 
typhus, enc  other  rickettsial  ciseus.es*  it  is  also  effective  in  t-.e 
treatment  of  brucellosis  and  melioaiosis.  It  is  re  com?,  a  nee  a  ir  co.ibi- 
natior.  vith  streptomycin  for  treatment  anu  specia.t  ,;jLague  propnyrnro.. 

Ch-coramphenicol  is  vtjf.i  a^bsorbeo  from  the  gestre— iniei-. 
tract,ensurirg  a  therapeutic  concentration  in  the  blooo  Icr  a  peric-a 
of  u-C  hours.  In  connection  with  this, the  antibiotic  is  eiiifloy-'c  f,r 
the  most  part  internally.  It  is  applied  peroral ly  in  the  fora  ,jt 
cepsul.C'S,  tablets, end  suspensions.  It  is  used  in  the  USa  for  triX;ti..cr.i 
in  ohiiaren  in  the  paimitete- ester  fona,eontuining  of  the 

biotic.  This  ..reparation  coes  not  have  a  bitter  taste  ana  er.si.res  u 
piciongf-o  action,  for  parenteral  introauctionjonioramphenlcol 
oe  cissolvtd  in  K,N' -air.ethylucetamice  or  aimethylfoimH’riicij  . 

in  tne  treatment  of  tuiaremi a, chloramphenicol  is  a^.pij  eo. 
inteimiaiiy  at  a  caiiy  aoso  of  2g  for  o-h  days;  for  tne  entire  coeree 
of  treatment, iJ-llg  of  the  preparation  are  ie;uireo 


'.h 


1,7.. 


Oiii.or£..‘)pnenicoi  spptai-s  to  oe  a  tetter  therapeutic 
ti-eatment  of  typhoia  fever  ana  paraty;..ii<ria.  Ine  initial  oaiJy  go.-: 
consists  of  per  liig  of  patient's  weight.  ouDSe-.pa.:-.iit  uose.^'  :■ 

hCiiiir'i  stereo  at  a  rate  of  J.  7cg  per  every  six  hours  or  ig  (.er  sVv. 
eight  hours,  tuch  treatment  is  continuea  uxitil  lowering  ol  T.ne 
ruture  to  zae  normal  levei  is  attained.  Ihis  naviiij  teen  iccomp.!..! 
tne  cose  is  reouced  O.^g  with  an  intaice  every  six  nours.  fh-  c 
of  treaurent  witn  chioi-tuaijnexiicox  is  continuea  for 


la  thfe 


— ^  U-  ^ 


.7.. 


Cnloramj,:henicol  i.s  effective  against  bacterial  ayssnt.ery,. 
tne  tr?-ati,:.ent  of  vi;ich  aiixericun  eutnors  reconir-e-na  a  short  couri  e 
foifovs;  an  initial  snoeb  cose  of  kg, followed  by  lour  intexes  to. 


.•V.I'St: 


c- 

ine 


300 


rate  of  every  exx  rioiirs.  I 

» 

For  trie  treetiTiert  oi  rht  tv^>nus,cniJir,:.pr,e;.;.coi  i i  1:.  | 

Ou^iKUj. tB  ot'  i'  ujsfc  ol  J  •  vg,  ^jc.r  tVcij  Si>.  iiouX'cj  j  tx^e  C  t  uoBt  •;  o  j,  .-  • 

^■X  i  ieS  .  -  XX^LuiT!  OOBe  Xa  O^J.  in  tXJc  i..c: ^  O I X al  Cc  Bca  I  !.c  Xr.  .— | 

oeri-turt  fiiii-  vitnin  'h.  nours.  ixet.wi.t  ia  eitcai,>-ja  -lur*:.!.  .x  r.  : 

t-f'Xrr  tiX-c  iBxx  of  tfcirwereLti.ie  is  elfecte-a  _7,a.Oj.  I 

Iiefeu.'.eiit  wxti'i  aureo..iycin,nov,’e'VeT,l?.  rioie  eiJcCXive. 

I 

Gruor\ ..ajnenicoi  provea  to  be  eifective  fos.u^  .-.junta ir.  | 

ajottfo  fever.  The  initial  daily  aose  is  au-iinisterec  iritertaliy )  it 
is  fixeo  at  J.05^  pet'  oi  patient's  vei^htj  tx-e  pjepfei’ation  is 
eubsc 'uentxy  alter  every  eight  or  four  hours  at  a  cose  of  i  anc 
respectively.  Therapy  is  continuea  tmtii  xowerirxg  of  tcmpc-rattre  ar.c 
esteblishiaent  of  nomial  values  vithin  k4-4b  houis  is  efioctcc.  r.nexi 
the  patient  li  in  t  state  of  coma, chlo ran. jneni col  is  ii.traducac  int::- 
venously  at  a  dose  of  J.5g  per  every  six  hours j  for  this  purpose 
cnioromycetin  hycrochlorioe  is  cissolved  in  a  glucose  or  a  pnysio- 
logical  solution  !.'7,lDj. 

t 

Cnloreaphenicol  is  highly  elfective  in  tsutsugamuehi  feva',: 
The  initial  shock  dose  is  e'^ual  to  36»S  fter  which  the  preparation  is 
enployeo  in  e  cose  of  0.5g  p^^r  every  six  hours,  Norjitily  the  tempera¬ 
ture  fails  curing,  the  first  days  of  treaticent,  Xherapy  is  continued 
for  hours.  Vihen  treahtent  is  started  early  ^between  tite  4-fcth 

day  of  the  disease  and  soonerj,in.  most  of  tne  patients  relapses  aaatxe 
their  appearance  )  however, they  ere  easily  cured  by  a  short  xepetteu 
therapy  course  tr-pgj  or  they  can  be  preventec  through  a  single  intexte 
of  chloraxiipncnicol  ^j>gj  on  the  sixth  day  after  coap.’.etion  of  the  first 
course  of  treali.ent  i.8j. 

Ine  effectiveness  oi  chioranphenicox  ixi  .t  fever  is  lower  as 
compared  with  aureomycin  ana  terramycin,  Xxie  ^lepxiration  is  a^.pli€}a, 
therefore, onxy  in  these  cases  when  aureomycin  or  teri'aaycin  have  not 
produced  any  cesirahle  lesults  curing  five  days  ol  urea  tax  ent.  dixior- 
ampnexuool  is  introduced  in  a  cos©  of  2-4g  per  day  until  the  clinical 
effect  is  attained  followed  by  an  aacitional  three  cays  after  loveriiig 
of  the  temper;- ture  | 

Reports  ere  available  concerning  the  fact  that  chlorexipnenicul 
is  effective  In  the  treatment  of  brucellosis, el though  it  is  less  effi¬ 
cient  than  aureoxaycln  itself  or  aureoiaycln  in  conjunction  with  streptox- 
mycini  the  perfomned  course  of  treatsment  does  not  guarantee  the  meni- 
festatiop  of  setbacks.  Treatment  is  continued  for  2-3  weei£s,a  daily 
dose  of  the  preparation  being  given  to  the  patients.  In  order  to  pre-  | 
vent  the  recurrence  of  relapses, it  is  necessary  to  repeat  from  time  | 


301 


to  tjiiifc  tile  course  of  trfei.u;:er.t  tOj.  1 

i 

.-•-CCoi  "int  t»o  sCi.Ltei t‘-  luvoit.o  uf  ortreh  i.i  tiiiiT-  ixr. 

Chj.nt,  o'iuortui^-iiciiic'oi  £i-t»ct-  in  t..^  trtc.  v  :  o--:  i; . 

iht  c-osu  -.Ui  c  _ r  : 

oouist  of  trct.U..i.i:t  io  coo: at'.- 

lls-’i;  iO""*--.  1.  t.e  1  C — T.*.e  e-i..  cCtSSf  Ui  ^  0  Uru  ■  L  .el 

...eiiouiosl  t?  c:'ioifu..^.hfrnicoi,t.u.ito.-;  cjri,c..  1.  teiic:.  ”cir.  i. 

vineii  uooes  F  ve-  .ar.^.irdstt  rtc , >-rx  c-urin.  .Toio "..r;  t  •  I  L-  ^ 

(::ttion,C(Uor!>jVh^‘'''i*^'-‘  ?  tnoer  t  toxic  effect  on  tne  or^i  ’  i  i...  .  iUe  ! 

toxic  re-iictiori  lesiutir^  ircjt  an  Ir-terr.i  1  inttitr-  c-y^..;  f  s.ses  its-exf  I 
Lii  inly  os  nj.uKtH.,  vc.r.itir'^,uiej  jht.e,c.£,  ’  i.s  in  .-ne  outoi  tiic  i 

tj.iei£,ic  lesiies  er-f.  Ci.fin^eE  in  ti.e  -.ucous  f-tits  of  tiit  jZc.  i  covit^  | 

i  rx  f>ey  o'^t-ns,  ciooc  cneai^es  i.untn!ia,cx-‘c<  ti-se  in  tne  l  uiobar  of  cor-  i 
yu.^olesj  ceservf,  curtieuxtr  t  ttenilon.  I 

1 

i-.u:  eao;ycin  t^cji  t.ro.loyue  of  Sovoet  biOi  i.-cin^  is  t.i.  -rnti  slot;  o 
vitn  e  fcrotic  .syec+noo  cf  activity,Oeinji  effective  oeinst  ricr.e'‘.tr.in,  I 
ysittucosi8,rieliyni  nt  anthii.y,t,uli.rerilt>tyyhoia  fever  eiic  ^ex-c  tjj..l-.ji<'.  , 
belHo  relftiveli  offrctive  in  the  tre£T4.-tnt  of  .t:\iceii.oEir..  It  lo 
recor:T)enc<-c'  foi  the  treutinert  of  playte-dn  conjiuaction  vith  streyto- 
L".yciu. 

Aureomycin's  cheifixcei  structure  nas  been  veil  stuejed)  hovevei 
its  synthetic  procuction  hts  not  as  yet  been  mastered  j  tiie  untibioi  ic 
if  i  x.rrafi  cttirec  by  ier-ienU  tion. 

aaraoEycin  is  veil  '.osoibec  from  tne  if..stro-i2itef tine]  tit.ct, 
er.isurir.^  u  theru^eutio  concentietior.  of  the  pieperetior.  in  the  blooo 
ior  <3  p'roioiioec.  period  of  tir.e  tucout  six  ncuiSj,  Ihtreiort  '•.orto-.,  ci.., 
for  tne  nost  part, i  s  used  ij'. ■-ernaxup'.  ^c.  tne  box-  i.t  is  .;anv.f c  •;■  tu j  eu  iir 
Ccip'SciC's  ^ xn  cooSE  01  i'd , is.*0 , cC It-  tv^j,arj(i  m  the  forxi  cf  soxiioxe 
tt  oir'ts  i_in  Cioses  -of  iO  luj^  of  the  antibi oti Cj  ,as  vieil  c.s  in  the  forr. 
of  preparations  foi-  intravex-ous  anc  iocEj  a^- p.i.i  cetioris. 

i  I'he  preparation  for  IntiavenouS  application  repieserits  a  or;- 

np*c..rocnioiice  sa  it,bufJ  eu  ec  vich  socivo!  j^xvclr.ate.  lie  preptra '-ioi  is 
I  i-anufi  ctureo  for  locaj  f.--plication  in  tne  foroi  of  oindfients,  tooth 
pastes, lozer.g,es,s-3it'ticns, and  powaerc  l3>4j. 

xiureomycin  is  consicered  as  the  must  effective  antioiotic 
against  ric^ettsia.  For  txie  treatiaent  cf  epioenical  ano  rat  typnus,a 
osiiy  intemfcx  intake  of  ig  nose  until  clinical  impro- 

vea^ent  end  loviering  of  teiaperature  to  normal  is  recoxicienaed.  'ii  eet- 
xent  IS  ciscontinuec  or.  the  second  dey  after-  estaclishEent  of  nor.:x-i 
tempera tAire.  Vihen  the  patient  is  in  e  state  of  co3ia,the  tjatlbio+ic  is 


302 


applied  intravenously  at  a  uoae  ol  j.tc,  fcVi.*ry  cie^nt  houib  c3  xor'* 
as  tne  patient  is  unabie  .u  sva;..iov  i.7,ibj. 

For  treatment  ol  Kocicy  .‘iowitalriS  s^ctt^  fevcr^i  c.a*.wy  i  Mst  cf 
O.Ol^-O.OSg  per  l  &g  patient' a  wai^nt, taxon  it  ternaLay  <•  lu 

luant  of  a  tncra  >e;utio  eftfot,,is  ^.-rescribcc.  jrantirent  _s  slo 
within  1-*;  nape  after  est<;.Dj.i£iijicnt  of  noi.far  ncLtporntva  t.  in 
tent  vomiting  or  in  a  stj  te  of  ooTia,aurfcoii‘,;'Cin  is  K^rJ nisnoi  eo.  intra¬ 
venously  t7,i6j. 

Aureomycin  is  hi;_nly  effective  agoinst  tsutsugamunhi  fever, 
Tne  preparation  is  applieja  c.ccoi'uint  to  tne  plaii  ao.o^neo;  f'^r  ci-i 
henicol 

Aureomycin  is  recommenueb  'ey  Pinerjoan  auU.ors  at  r.fic  ..ost 
'-Iff ctive therapeutic  agent  (.together  with  terran.yc.inj  ata.;.iir-  ■'evri. 
The  preparation  is  taken  internally  at  a  c.aia.y  uose  of  i-cg.  The  iri- 
ii£i  dose  shouic  bt  twice  rs  Itrge  ts  ary  of  the  subst'^uent  cues 
LShucK  aoSfcj,  After  reduction  of  teEperature  to  nomai^treatcenl  ie 
Ov'.ntinued  for  tn  aocdtlonfil  three  cays,  'when  it  is  impossible  to  Uxe 
eureciiivcin  ir.t*;mally,  the  j..reparation  is  prescriced  intravenously, tee 
oose  oeing  0,5g  to  be  acmirdsterec  2^'J  times  nor  day  j.7,ibj. 

aureoraycin  is  the  most  effective  prSpOaration  for  the  treetu-nt 
of  j  sittacosis.  It  i.s  prescribed  in  a  cose  of  i.ig  to  be  te.-cn  internalj 
ly  per  eveiy  six  hours  for  a  periou  of  ten  days.  .Foi'  patitsits  unablf- 
to  taj^e  tureomycin  inteir.ally,it  is  prescriDru  intravenousx/, the  dose 
bein£  0.5'd  p«Jr  every  i<.  hours 

/-.urecioycin  serves  as  t  t'^oc.  a^ent  for  treat.n-id.  of  muii gran', 
■..r.thic.x' 3  cutaneous  fuitt.  Tne  preparation  is  applied  Irdernally,  dv: 
dose  being  0,  7;g  per  every  fou;-  nours  uiitii  ciirdcai  Liprovex-cnt  is 
a^.pai-ent, 

in  ^enerau  the  course  of  tieatinent  is  continueti  foo  about  six 
cays, the  avei'a^e  uose  for  the  erdii-t  owar&e  bten^  arouna  PJg  itj* 

Although  aureoiaycin  is  xv^ss  effective  than  stre.itomyci  n  ii  tn-,- 
treatuent  of  tuxtrwidajit  can  txso  be  applie-G  In  tue  erfeatrent  cf  tr.is 
ulscase.  Xreatiuent  is  continueo  for  a  perioc  of  ;-b  (u.,i,the  c.!-:j.y  cosej 
being  eg  i.7j. 

In  the  ti-eatment  of  Drucfej.iosis,aureomyci.’i  is  prescricet!  5^ 
a  perioa  of  1-3  veeics,the  aaixy  dose  being  Ig.  XTeatinent  cots  not 
..:,uarcnteo  the  onset  of  tne  diset.se' s  relapses  J  in  oruer  to  pi  event 
setbacks, it  is  necessary  to  repeat  the  course  of  the  aureomycin 


therapy  ■.? 


i.  *  J  • 


303 


.-ure a  is  ir>i't-rj  nr  to  i.icoi  i.s  t  I'.fti.ai-j  o‘ 

trctati  r.^  V,\:noi<.  fcvei'  (jiG  •  rovevc:  ,j  t  a^,-...'-  vic-ics  .  osili- 


■  -  ■-  ’ '  ■-‘•1  '  j . 

T.  e?.t.r.t-nt  of  tcate  Dtctoriaj.  u^SciiXt::;'  i.-.  '  ■ 

^  erfoifieu  tccoirlirf:.  to  tl;,e  ^.‘XcO  j  c;oat,t;o  ;  oi  o.  t.  .;  i. 

tt-.’ xam^'clr 

ihe  t.iors  :.o  reitt.ivexr  ron- toxic, ^.ru.  one  cii-;.v  oi 

tj  t  Jits  OnCiL',J‘t-.S  uTkrC  St.  SI  «i  OtiO  jf  0  XV  •  HOXc'Vtl,.X;:  t  ai.«. ,' I  V 

ocs,i  oei;  the  antibisitio  is  ith-tai  xi''tfcrp-tiJ^-,tne  loxl;v.  ::!c;  t,  ,  ■ :  c  it-- 
c.ctioi'S  ctuscd  by  tne  f.£.5tro-iiitfe.ssii;>vi  ui.  -ot.  Cc  t  be  ocst  rvto;  i,-  i.. 
ci £  x'rhtc' , iy.stric  Uj'Stt,';atteorit.in,mxr)itestc  tior.  oi'  irsiie;'.  cau  i.aufii 
like  xebloiiS  in  tae  ort.x  cavity.  Anr.j  of  tne  .  eficriocc  recciior..  ;c 
so  j rsienifio.tra  tnat  ti.ey  c;;r-  tx-.  oisreti rc.ec  ^3,.  iu^re  i  it  ir.cico 
tions  tte  oeveloytant  .if  turor.oo^iriieci'i.is  '..t.cr!  cuit..;  , 

:i>:  ei;.^:l-,'yec  if  trtvc-c.ouf  iy. 

Terre- :V'oi li, £  s  ccii  t.s  ci'tLcrw.voieniovl  ^  m.  :  vlr ,  •  •  ,: 

'  brotc  syeetr^c;  -.t  eevivity, j  t  seobiing  in  utiticuii  r  <  iire-c.r-vi . 
ocoibj  £1;;,  ■"o  its  triers.;  <nv t  ic  f:-rf‘-'‘Ct 


■it;  re  ,:ycir.  cis 


u  e ii  yovtlo  ectior  ir:  fiiv  i  :■ 


i-jt-nt  c .t  /o  Civ ett-s ic j.  c. ,i St c. tvs*  es;-xc" c.j. iy  iv  ,  t  wVtr-Xj  .ivio  . 
five  (.:'fect  in  t.i,*  trei-iyy  of  cools,  to  i;  '  n  cm  : 

cr.tiirfy‘s  oiitsaeous  'Oiti  enc  cteterixi  cys.;-;  t-i  ry, -.h..’ ter  li  fv., 
tutr’or-s  consicer  it  ts  Tte  ;.o£t  efiectivo-  .  ri-lD,io‘ic  ic.j  t.vet. i: . 
cyser ‘.ery.Tsi-rao.ycin  iiivts  rexativciy  posit.jve  resul  Is  ii.  i.c  iitv.o- 
xruccilocii  ohorteiiS  ti  c  xe.'.yits  "evbti-i.  ir. 

cnolertj  it  oio.  also  be  aoolieo  it:  cot.  ^  unction  v .  ch  v  oi -v  bt  y:.>ir;  j  e: 
trCh  Jft  of  .  i., -uv- 


eor  r.ict  of  tot  i iU-OfOut-.v 


::  c  i?  ^  .1 


•  •  1 


UCC  ci.lt.  ^-*1  Ti-  X.i-O^  ■  'i-T  t.x'iO  L  t'  T<h  >i:  t  j.. x  L  lit-  '  'T  ■ 

oj  VxOl'io  j  v4 i/i'i  ..i.  cnjidc'  j  i  t  L<.  -  — 

Lee  Vxien  a  OeJiv  c-jsf:  ji’  C'-7.i,v  f\,r  1 1  ^ 

cco 

xeirsorycin  c.s  wexx  as  tbe  ...H^oriTg  ot  ctner  r.ncibi.'tiis  :  o 
..umuffcctur eo  by  fermenU  tion.  It  is  ebtoroec.  froi:.  tiic 

in test ir.t;,l  ti-act,  it  is  yrooiict'c  ubt^'aci  ^in  tne  chief.Vy  i£:  tin- 

r-.>rt  of  thfcr!--.^<‘.utic  ,-.recf  ri.tions,c  e.«ignt.tea  for  irternhi  .it. tear, 
j. capsules, es  veil  as  tablets, suspensions, crops, iueoiciries j .  bit  ir  iru" 
verous  jr'trouuct3on,te.Trei.iyoin  xs  ^.lonuceo  ir.  the  for",  oi  its  j.yci  .o- 
chlorice  salt,buffe.-^  j-ec  vi  tn  soeiitn  elycxpate  vnich  unin 'o  it.s  nu-  -i 
of  on  o.;ueous  terrt  rc.ycln  solution  exose  to  that  cf  cicoc.  (.y^.  ?o: 
in -.reir.uscx.lc.i  s^.plice  tion,  ttrre-xycan.  is  .ouruf?  r-tureci  .ij;  the  fou:  -  •?’  i 
iT.y  hyc  ro.cnIor3ce,ir.J  greg.j.up  cnxorl<:.e,enc  pr.jcaine  hycroch.:  •  r i o c  i  i  f  j .  I 


304 


I  i  Oi.:-.,  ^  c*!:,  _  l-:  ■  i, 

.  V  V  A  ^  U  .■  i,i  •  V  X  *  *■  •  .  I  ■'.  v'  . »  ••'  V  »  t-*  *■  •  .*  i  -■'  i  .  1  L.  .  ,  V  a  ^  ^  ^  * 

Vx;:y  ..ucr.  .  ^.L  ^  ■ 

-  . t.  *-  ■- 

h^.;^  )'ef-.vi-u  i.'i  L  f-L<,  j  f'lii.  OuTJ:..;  U  C’l-  J.  . 


;rv  '4  :■•{  L  j.s;l;  '.:;t  :i. 


‘j.:  < .  i  -I  *-  i  J. 


'.V'y.  ;..  cuiT.'ir.-  1  jt*',  or  iT^  4:r '  i,  i  "■  >1:^  ;,-:c  ':  ,.i 

'.‘i  T^,: !  t- . 

I  wH- t  i  -  .-iv:  :a;..':t-.rec;  ^4..  in  r.;>. 

■  I  T..  :.^c;'3  jf;^orLL  t  'n  tniot-r.s  .1  ^  J,,.!.‘ 

I'-t-r-f;!  w;.o>‘  '.^.:i.  LK  in  oj’tjvfs 

:.Ui.;i  i  IV:  .i£Ci;lnr  in  In  jrtxnvc  ' iv.';  .0..,.,;  n- f  : 

'.hf:  _;.ncini.rntic'in' .rA.yivvv.  canaertretlon  the  oi I.- 
I  I'tt-i  Jilt;  nai.:r,v*-!i  jf  ir  ii.Li.T'n'- 1  inU^  c  ^  .>:  4.. .  r  .  , 

..-v  It;-  uyoif-tjon  rriuu  fu;  orhtnlvir:  i-  ‘-f : i,-  . 

‘ tr.  i.  noij.v  i,;.erh^..  eutic  40!£e  corr>  '•  i  . ’■ '  '  ■'' 

;..nr  c:-:n.',''C  Ir.  i.x.n  teri4u!.;’clr.,bi;:  n,;  net-r^ ‘ir'v.w.  4-  .  ;:...• 

:  ■  .•>;■  i  t  ; :  .’  .-h 

^  **  *-(  .  7  %  .  •  i  I  ,  I  ^  ‘i  .  *>  .  I  ^  l  •  X.  • 


'  '  e  ih.n::  Llcr  "ioi  5;.  t.' cn  t -tr.  ‘ 

‘  T'l  1  ^  C -1  .' ■n.T'  W ■  .'i  V  e  (.  ;  t.i'ii...  I,  t”-‘ ''C  I  '  •  v’  .  .*  lyV-,  : 

.  n.v'.it  i'  .J  :  ■  i- ,  '..  '.  iv ‘I  ine  7.. 

ni- ■  i,- r  ir  vct-'-rj  wnev.  i  :  .n.-h  v  ^  =  i. 


■•'  '■  ■•■■  ■'  -n  •  *•' ->  ■•  '■  / 

-  .  t,  ■,-  ;  i  .  „  .1  f:'  1-,  -.V  1.  4-  , 


'vril'bi'.  '.i.e  •’ -S-  Ti"  r  <r!"i  n>i . ..'.  ‘‘.a  •.  oi 

>..^,  i-nt  vni-^nt  ' 

j  .irtj  nnt.c  *.,■:•  r  ol  w.rr.'.cn‘v  .cC.rr  *....  .■  • 

•  n',1  ■;  c<  rv‘-c  'll!':..',  ..•.■uTr  dit-nr  ft"'  r*-  l'.  ..  i 

•'•*,•”;•  a;;  ronc.:^^"  u  ths  noa.  itthi  ..n  ran  te’V.n  ■ 

:  •:  :.r  .in  ri  vv!\  ..Jt  not.^o 'i-vic  ui.  t, -nli^  Vrexr  vi,4.-rv  , 

r  rt.;^  •.r-.r  in  tix  v  4.  vacit  nn  iiaeoiiiycir  e-Tie  .  lax  ■ .  ii. 

nr.  ^n'any:;i.n  u.rjcJnj  _ac.  cni;;n;.ycin  -a;  rn  ' 

2'*- Cflven  ciioul*. ■'._lc>Xi  in  thex'c-..., ‘rjti,';  ;c^  ''  w1 

4^niir  .vTut  i.n V  i yi^c*2'ir*«  iric  i-Cbivi  "oy  r.  .m  e  i  nt. 

4  ten;;..;  c  £■  rnricinliu'  io;  the  iiuft  pnx't .  thei  eihre,  tntv  lirt. 

-Ic  nnrgicn^,  thern^ientj  rid  other  niteeees,v'ieree5  in  ir  ie't-i 
rn,i  \:.-c-ct..' they  t.ie  of  Jittj.e  elyniMoniiCe,  ir  cn  i-enr.A-ir.,  ■ 
r,  '.';ir. ’  >  ;:.iiL  .oe.' h  j-,.  vein’ n  C'rre.etiveriec7.e  njjninnt  psitteohi  t  ce 
r.Pta.r  n tt.entior:  ^l^j. 


vie  e  j ; . 


305 


.■iu>;ut..cti;re:  t-r.  in  t-ne  Lw^t,  Intn  ret,uTc 

sn*  j  tiotics  inou^try  in  Ulin  '•t-.l  c.s  In  .;'n,  .:.<.  nn ,  . 'f-r-  ivny, 
r  rc  nccj  biiov  s  tr.u  t  i-rvx  notin."  is  nf.rri?t.  nut.  t/  trx  i.jt.'^.orsion  -  • 


The  nartlr^ujut  .'r^naucti 'r  'i.stimc  in  ::n.cn  iiinrt  ..jrnin 
the  cyclical  o;!e,M'-c\  aitnovijn  the  iuttev  i:n  i-eiri^  ocvflCi.-U;  - 
f  .'’  rn  laili.l  aov  wioei-rrofeC  incus  trial  ;•  yplic  t.tior. . 


iiccorcing  to  ueta  of  the  Aj.ericar.  pre.ss  cu:. 

cuction  rite  of  tnlibictics  in  +ne  USa  oceee.i  centre,  'ii.it 


thf  firs^t  instance  tv. 


Lr:  tnci  strep  tor>yci  r. 


In  ]JM,inS,CoO  Kj,  of  ar.tiV  of  r.ii  Vc'.Ttti-s 

ffctureu  in  the  USn.  This;  yiai.tity  coinprinec.  :  •.  of  ;v;n. 

salts, Ifci  ,10J  hj,  of  stie.;'toa.ycIr.  arc  Its  c-orivatj  vfcs;,E.nc.  l-ti 

of  other  entlbiotics.  In  auc.itiviii  tc  tnat, .^07, JoO  K^s  of  in  ...stii_-.l.:y 
larufactureti  a:.itii.'ic.tias  v  =  re  cesifyiatta  fri  aniv.ai  f-ecii-t.  ur..  ot-.e 
a£ri  C'v it.uri^  r  r.eecs . 


Darjr.t  i9i<^  the  irenstriai  ptoeXvOtien  of  s.ntib;  o ti 
U’’  a  certoir.  e.xtent.  Tne  penic-ij.xin  ecxv.  ctrti,'U'u.ycin  ^roancto  >*:-  | 

sr.ovx  tea  to  4L.ic’,JuJ  h^,  a.-c,  j.7:  tot)v>,oJj  ar.c.  bITiio!-  ..ntn-j,! 

ref-vt'cti  vfeiy,  t 

«  V  I 

I 

I 

'The  ^.rociuction  of  tnree  antioio''ic£  vitn  a  urosc.  | 

activity  ^ caic:ait..nericoi,&ureo-.ycin,an<'.  lerrariycii. j  con;.ri--cc  j 

i 21.  ya.j  of  r7i'i,vMcn, Vilen  caicuiatea  for  the  entire  \  ear,o.;uio  ‘ 
yiflc  2o8,cJ0  ho*  i 

Jvtrproouction  of  penieiJiin  ana  sti ept.oitjyci,r.  Ln  the  'Jha  t;  ‘ 
Cc.v.aet  h  large  eoctent  through  reauction  of  theii  cx.  or'i.  T:.--  .' 

aicount  of  eoporteo  peni.ciilin  fell  in  I'i-of)  iron  71;»  ^of  trx.  s. . 't  T  S 

outtu-'.j}  to  i.I>  in  J  i  sit-il&r  sitvatior  exit-tec  Svi£.->  ’  .  (n  it-ti. ' 

t./  sireptoci can.  j 

A  uecrease  in  antitiotic  exports  froa  the  ItSh  -.i  s  c-uroc  s  | 
r  result  .if  the  oeveiepaent  of  antibiotic  ircustry  in  otr.-.-r  c.--uri  -  ; 

tr'  ss.  Thus, Fr.'.r.ce, for  ir..stf.ncc,bas  oj  scon tir.uec  at  tr.e  '.reton'. 
chv  iaport  o:  aritii::oti-?&  ;.in  i.7ol#Frenf  h  jiiants  insuiuf-iot-..  rv.u  1..-' 
tillion  ur.'iis  of  penicillin  t.nu  about  x,4-’0  Kg  of  strer  tooycir  ^ .  l:i  i 
Japan  streptoaycin  proouction  rose  in  Itoia  t<;  1,1^0  .--e  tit  ! 

arouiitec  to  lit  hgj  while  that  of  penicillin  rose  to  i'r;.,cbO  till ''  on  1 
units  ^in  19>l,7,y)0  billii’r  unita  were  procuced  .  a  vt-ilf  I-..-:  (  -t'  ; 

incicetes  that  there  c-.re  at  .itast  45  penicillin  atiO  5  ;  t,.-v  .v-toi,  y  .•. . ..  i 

piiints  currently  operating  in  us  pan.  The  output  of  antibiotics  iSj 
considerable  in  England- Six  concerns  arc  sngnged  in  th-.-  r‘-nu:ac  ‘  -i 
re  of  peniciijir.  there. 

■  '  '  '  11  ■  III  iiiii  ■*  — W  I  I  I  'll  ■!  . . Ml  11' —  miwg. 


306 


ACC3iriiDci  to  08t,£.  of  fesiei'ictoii  on thorbjbr.T-ibict.:  cs  ‘:;in  \ich%i- 
;.ix>cuct‘  of  ye^ne  inuuytr;’  'ire  utilieeo.  soocessf'oLiv  os  iunii'-.io.  fete. 
The  ejruiuai  cost  of  ontibi otics  utliiaec  it:  c-.^ricolture  .f  the 
coffii^riees  opi-'roxiaiately  .cJ  jiiilion  ciolit-rs.  Aureooycir.,  terrssiycin  j 
bQclir4c:ln,&nu  certeir  peniciillr;  stlt,&  are  utilizea  for  these  i-or^o- 
st-s.  It  is  assumed  that  tne  quantity  of  antibioti ce  consumed  as  ar:- 
mel  feoc  has  to  exceed  the  emo'-trit  of  preparations  utilized  for  ttrio- 
pcotic  purposes. 

It  snoulc  he  mentioned  in  nonclnsion  that  the  ub^-.  nau  c  x.u::r'l,_ 
uevelopeu  ijitibiotics  inrtustry, surpsssiii£;  botn  in  output  anc  in  p’-:- 
cuevion  aHSortmerit  tJfie  inaustrial  capacity  of  any  othf-r  cap.  ■  tails  tl . 
Cvuntrp'.  Tne  U3A  ..manufactures  f-  variety  of  •jutihioti cs  whicn  prcvi;, 
specific  treuttcert  for  the  sajority  of  infectious  ciser  ses ,  the  a~ 
gents  of  vtich  car  be  appiieu  in  the  form  of  br^cterio.Iopl  .ui.i.  vea;.:--,'. 
Effective  specific  h^.8nt6  are  available  aga^Lnst  tre  plUt,ue,  tuiart  •*: -> 
malignant  anthrax,  typhoiu  fever  ano  pui‘c>typh.;ic.5,  baettrioi  ayser.u,;.rpu 
r:  Ci<ettsis., us  wtil  aS  psittacosis. 

Tne  ct.,ecii.y  of  the  UbA*  s  antibxoti-cs  ir'uuztry  ii-  very  . 

ft  the  preai;nt  time  tne  Uoa' s  incvustilau  ou;;.i..ut  oi  ai;T.ioicti  ce  c>c< 
uemancjthe  result  oeing  that  a  consiuei-auie  portion  of  t.ct  piouiit:,n; 
is  being,  eop.ort.eci. 


BIBJ.10fihAPHY 

1,  Penicillin,  A  Collection  of  Translated  Articles,  ed. 
Z,V,  Yermol’yeva.  Publishing  House  of  Foreign  Litera- 
tuie,  Moscow,  1948, 

2,  Streptoipycin  and  New  Antibiotics,  Collection  of 
Translated  Articles.  Edited  by  Z.V,  ^erraol * yeva .  Publ, 
House  of  Foreign  Literature,  Moscow,  1953* 

3,  Aureotnycin  and  Terramycin.  Collection  of  Translated 
Articles,  Edited  by  Z.V»  f ermol * yeva ,  Publ,  House  of 
Foreign  Literature,  Moscow,  1953. 


4,  Lazreva,  Ye.  N.:  In  the  anthology:  Antibiotics,  1954 
4,  19  (survey  of  foreign  literature). 


3o7 


5  Perlman  D.  Tempel  A.  Brown  W.  In<l  Eng..  Chem..  IWs.  45. 

•*.  I '>14 

6.  Welch  II.  Antibiotic  Tt«/apy.  Now  York.  14M 

7  C.urrent  Tltvr.ii'V.  by  II  T.  l.onn  SjumKrs  Compjny.  I'hiladcl 

I'liia. 

8  Smart  el  J  I  Scrub  Typhus  Viral  and  Rickettsial  Inieciions  of 
Man  fdilivi  by  Rivers  T  At.  l.tppincoH  <'ompar«y.  Philadflphia. 

Itlsi 

9  Civil  Defcn.se  Against  BioloKka!  Warfare  U  S.  Governmen!  Pr:;it:!Hj 
(Tlluc.  l*iS3 

10.  Handbook  ul  the  Hospital  Corps.  Unded  States  Navy.  1W3 
II  Rnsfbiirv  T  IVaie  nr  Pestilence  Whittlesey  House.  1849 
12.  1‘hair  J  Arnu'd  i-orccs  t'.hem .  ,1.  I9S1.  8.  I.  U. 

13  FiikIisIi  a..  Plan  S.  a.  oth.  Aniibiot  a  Chemother.  19SI.  4.  4. 

411. 

14.  Furer,  N.M.;  Kaverina,  N.V.:  in  the  anthology: 
Antibiotics,  195:>,  2,  52  (survey  of  foreign  liters 
ture ) . 

15.  Lazareva,  Ye.N«:  in  the  anthology:  Antibiotics, 
1956,  5,  51  (survey  of  foreign  literature). 

16.  Valentine,  F.  Practitioner,  1956,  176,  10,  62. 


30d 


iViEANS  OF  INDIVIDUAL  AND  COLLECTIVE 
N0N5T=5:CIFIC  DEPF^. 

In  the  opinion  of  foreign  military  experts  (1,2,3) 
the  effect  of  bacteriological  warfare  agents  has  some 
common  features  with  that  of  chemical  poisons . 

Bacteriological  agents,  as  v/ell  as  chemical 
poisons,  can  be  disseminated  in  the  air  and  shift  with 
the  winds  (3)- 

According  to  the  official  view  of  the  American 
Civil  Defense  Administration  (4,5),  one  of  the  basic 
effects  of  a  bacteriological  attack  is  contamination  of 
surface  air  by  means  of  bacterial  aerosols  formed 

above  towns  and  settled  areas .  As  pointed  out  in  the 
manual  of  the  medical  service  of  the  U.S.Navy  (3),  the 
bacteriological  agents  can  cause  disease  by  penetration 
into  respiratory  organs,  as  well  as  Infection  of  clothes, 
equipment,  food  products  and  water  supply,  which  in  turn 
become  sources  of  contamination  of  people  and  animals. 

•Therefore,  the  main  purpose  of  nonspecific  defense 
against  bacteriological  as  well  as  chemical  and  radio¬ 
logical  warfare  agents  is  the  prevention  of  penetration 
of  the  agent  into  the  human  body  and  decontamination  of 
the  warfare  agents  on  infected  objects  and  areas  (6). 
Therefore,  the  means  of  defense  are  also  common  to  all 
the  enumerated  warfare  agents . 

According  to  American  Instructions  and  manuals 
the  means  to  prevent  the  penetration  of 
microbes  into  the  organism  are  similar  to  those  used  for 
defense  against  chemical  warfare .  They  are  divided  into 
individual  and  collective  defense  measures.  The  means 
used  for  Individual  defense  include  gas  masks,  protective 


309 


Fig.  35  Latest  American  gas  masks. 

A.  Light-duty  gas  mask  13*  Field  gas  mask 


clothes  impermeable  to  biological  agents,  and  also  dis¬ 
infectants  for  individual  use;  the  collective  means  are 
shelters  and  dug-outs  of  various  types  and  constructions 
intended  for  many  people . 

The  principal  means  of  individual  defense  is  the 
gas  mask.  It  protects  the  face,  the  eyes  and  the  respira- 
toi-y  organs  from  penetration  of  aerosol  particles.  The 
anti-smoke  filter  located  in  the  gas  mask  container  keeps 
off  the  solid  and  liquid  particles  of  the  bacterial 
aerosol  and  purifies  the  inhaled  air.  The  mask  protects 
the  face  from  warfare  agents  that  hit  the  skin  and  the 
mucuous  membrane.  In  the  latest.  Model  M-9,  American 
gas  mask,  used  by  the  Armed  Forces,  a  small  mask  container 
is  attached  to  the  front  part  of  the  mask  near  the  cheek 
(see  fig.  35)*  It  is  recommended  to  use  cotton-gauze 
bandages  and  goggles  if  masks  are  unavailable  or  in 
baccerla-infected  areas. 


310 


important  individual  means  for  protection  of  the! 
skin  is  a  special  protective  apparel  used  for  defense 
against  particles  of  aerosol.  As  protective  apparel, 
the  American  manuals  (6,9)  indicate  overalls  with  an 
attached  hood  made  of  a  special  material  which  is  imper¬ 
meable  to  chemical  vapors,  radioactive  particles  and 
bacteriological  agents  (fig.  36).  Rubber  boots  and  gloves 


Fig.  36.  An  imperrceaiie  protective  garment 


are  part  of  the  apparel.  In  addition  to  the  impermeable 
overalls,  American  military  experts  (6)  recoramerid  im¬ 
pregnated  outfits  of  a  special  cut  which  prevent  the 
access  to  the  body  of  radioactive  particles  and  toxic 
vapors  and  impedes  the  penetration  of  particles  of 
bacterial  aerosol  (fig.  37). 


The  imperm^eable  outfit  makes  the  evaporation  of 


I 

\ 

i 


perspiration  difficult.  The  thermoregulatory  disorders 
can  lead  to  overheating  of  the  organism.  With  the  rise 
of  temperature  in  the  surrounding  area,  the  overheating 
of  persons  dressed  in  impermeable  outfits  increases. 
Therefore,  very  strict  time  limits,  oepenoing  on 
temperature,  are  prescribed  for  use  of  prote.,tive  apparel 


t 

I 

% 

t 


Accoraing  to  American  standards  [6], 
crotective  apparel  at  a  temperature  of  32^^ 
e>.oeea  15  minutes,  at  25-32  -  no  mere  than 

at  25-29^  -  no  more  than  one  hour,  at  21-2o 
hou;  .  at  10-15°  -  up  to  3  hours,  at  1-10‘-' 
ur;t  protective  apparel  can  be  used  up 


the 

shcii 


lO  not 

iitiU  ,0 
<  p  0  ;■ 

t  o  ' 

r  -  !''  ■  '  v-»  f  j 


1  To  increase  the  duration  of  wearing  the  protecti'/e 

!  garment,  the  American  army  uses  a  so-called  cooling  nress 
on  top  of  the  overalls , 

This  dress  (M~l)  is  composed  of  a  .jacket,  pajao.o- 
like  trousers,  and  a  hood  made  of  '''sv;addling'’  cloth.  Ire 
trousers  are  fitted  out  v/ith  suspenders  and  clasps  for 
I  adjustment  of  the  cuffs.  The  sleeves  and  the  back  of  tr.o 
I  jacket  as  well  as  the  hood  are  made  of  tv;o  layers  to 


312 


increase  the  cooling  effect,  | 

The  cooling  garment  is  periodically  moistened  v/ith 
water.  The  evaporation  of  water  cools  the  protective 
garment  and  permits  its  longer  use  in  warm  weather  (6). 

Various  kinds  of  shelters  and  dug-outs  are  used  as 
collective  means  of  defense  against  bacteriological, 
chemical  and  radiological  warfare  agents.  As  mentioned 
before,  aerosols  can  penetrate  with  the  air  currents  into 
non-hermetic  installations,  buildings,  cracks,  mud -huts, 
etc,  (10,11)  and  infect  unprotected  people.  It  is 
therefore  required  that  shelters  from  chemical,  radio¬ 
logical  and  bacteriological  warfare  agents  should  be 
completely  airproof. 

Taking  into  account  the  high  destructive  power  of 
contemporary  weapons,  foreign  experts  attach  great  sig¬ 
nificance  to  protection  of  shelters  from  impact  as  well 
as  from  a  direct  hit.  Building  shelters  against 
modern  weapons  does  not  present  nev;  problems,  since  many 
countries  have  had  considerable  experience  in  this  matter.  | 
Therefore,  this  section  will  present  only  a  short  resujiie  j 
of  the  material  contained  in  recent  American  instructions 
and  manuals  6,7#8,9,12  ). 

It  is  customary  to  divide  shelters  into  field 
shelters  and  permanent  shelters,  both  of  which  can  be  of 
the  ventilated  and  the  non-ventilated  kinds.  Any  avail¬ 
able  installations  and  material  at  hand  are  used  in 
constructing  the  field  shelters,  while  in  building  of 
permanent  shelters  provision  must  be  made  for  a  reliable  j 
protection  against  all  types  of  weapons.  It  is  j 

especially  recominended  to  build  permanent  shelters  near 
important  installations.  According  to  American  Instructior 
and  manuals,  such  installation  in  a  mdlitary  base  are 
lines  of  communication,  command  posts,  hospitals,  etc., 
i.e.  installations  on  which  the  uninterrupted  functioning 
of  the  base  during  military  operation  depends , 

In  building  and  equipment  of  shelters  provision 
must  be  made  to  enable  the  people  inside  the  shelter  to 
carry  out  all  functions.  In  order  to  ensure  such  proper 
functioning,  it  is  recommended  to  have  underground 
shelters  built  of  ferroconcrete.  The  shelters  must  be 
equipped  with  filter-ventilating  installations  and 
provide  facilities  for  prolonged  stays. 


313 


The  American  military  experts  attach  great  impor- 
i  tance  to  the  choice  of  proper  sites  for  building  of 
'  shelters .  Consideration  is  given  to  a  large  variety  of 
,  possibilities  that  can  be  instrumental  in  providing 
I  greater  security  to  people  in  the  shelter.  Thus  it  is 
recommended,  in  choosing  sites  for  shelters,  to  take  into 
consideration  the  direction  of  winds  and  the  topography  of 
the  area.  A  shelter  built  on  the  lee  side  of  a  slope  is 
considered  to  be  less  affected  by  bacterial  aerosol  than 
one  built  facing  the  wind. 

Building  of  shelters,  is  not  recommended  in  places 
where  aerosol  clouds  are  likely  to  remain  at  a  standstill. 
In  choosing  a  site,  consideration  should  be  given  to  the 
possibility  of  building  horizontal  or  ascending  entrances 
to  the  shdter.  Ihls  will  prevent  penetration  of  aerosol 
and  provide  good  drainage .  The  nature  of  the  soil  must 
also  be  taken  into  consideration.  Most  suitable  is  hard 
soil  with  good  drainage.  It  is  not  recommended  to  build 
shelters  in  low-lying  or  swampy  areas  which  will  facilitate 
the  penetration  of  bacteriological  agents  through  soaking 
or  by  means  of  mud  stuck  to  shoes  or  clothes . 

If  existing  buildings  should  be  used  for  shelters, 
it  is  essential  to  choose  solid  constructions,  for 
example  buildings  with  ferroconcrete  frames,  underground 
pillboxes  or  similar  explosion-proof  installations. 

Special  attention  must  be  given  to  the  construction 
of  entrances  to  the  shelter.  Impacts  and  splinters  from 
explosions  can  dislocate  or  destroy  doors  and  lobbies 
and  open  the  way  for  penetration  of  bacterial  or 
chemical  aerosols  into  the  shelter. 

To  prevent  this,  the  American  experts  recommend 
either  to  have  entrances  with  a  deflection  angle  of  90° 
or  to  build  in  front  of  the  entrances  sturdy  partitions 
with  side  passages  as  impact-dampers . 

Building  of  lobbies  for  shelters  is  obligatory. 

Their  purpose  is  to  hinder  a  possible  penetration  of 
aerosol  into  the  shlter  on  entering  or  leaving  it  and  to 
avert  the  collapse  of  the  door  brace  into  the  shelter  on 
opening  the  door.  The  lobbies  must  have  metal  doors  or 
lermetlc  curtains  made  of  impermeable  material.  The  doors 
are  to  be  lined  with  rubber  so  as  to  make  them  airtight. 


314 


The  shelters  may  have  several  connected  lobbies . 

Specially  constructed  shelters,  or  underground 
constructions  converted  into  shelters,  are  kept  airtight 
by  means  of  hermetic  doors  only. 

The  planning  and  equipment  of  shelters  depends  on 
their  size  and  the  purposes  to  be  served.  But,  according 
to  regulations,  every  shelter  must  be  planned  to  provide  ! 
satisfactory  conditions.  It  must  be  equipped  with  sitting 
and  sleeping  facilities  as  well  as  with  a  medical  unit. 

If  water  pipes  or  sewerage  are  not  available,  closed 
containers  should  be  used  for  disposal  of  eliminations . 

An  isolated  area  must  be  provided  for  people  having  or 
suspected  of  having  contagious  diseases.  According  to 
American  regulations  every  shelter,  irrespective  of  its 
construction,  should  have  adequate  space  and  be  equipped  i 
with  a  disinfection  room,  an  entrance  connected  with  ! 

one  or  two  lobbies,  and  an  emergency  exit. 

It  is  required  to  have  at  least  one  emergency  exit, 
and  if  possible  more  than  one,  in 'the  event  the  main 
entrance  is  blocked  by  debris.  The  emergency  exits  should 
be  at  a  distance  from  one  another  and  easy  to  open  from 
the  Inside, 

Each  shelter  must  have  a  reserve  of  water  even  if 
it  has  water  installation.  It  must  be  provided  with 
emergency  food  reserves,  medicaments  and  a  certain  quanti¬ 
ty  of  degassing  and  disinfecting  remedies.  It  is  ad¬ 
visable  to  have  a  supply  of  entrencKLng  tools.  If  electric 
current  is  available,  the  shelter  should  be  provided 
with  electric  light.  Etaergency  storage -battery  instal¬ 
lation  should  also  be  available.  It  is  not  recommended 
to  bum  oil  lamps  or  candles  in  non-ventllated  shelters 
because  of  oxygen  consumption. 

It  is  also  recommended  to  have  a  telephone  in¬ 
stalled  in  the  shelters  for  communications  with  the 
outside  world. 

As  a  rule,  ventilated  shelters  are  equipped  with 
fllter-ventilaUng  Installations  to  purify  the  incoming 
air  from  chemical  and  biological  agents .  Such  an  in¬ 
stallation,  especially  if  powered  by  a  gasoline  engine, 
is  placed  in  a  separate  room.  If  there  is  no  such  room, 
it  should  be  Installed  outside  of  the  shelter.  In  that 


315 


aystem  used  by  the  U.  S.  Anned  Forces  la  army  installation  j 
M-6  producing  8,5  air  per  minute.  The  InstallatJ on  la  ; 
conQJosed  of  suction  and  filtration  systems  (Fig.  3?)'  j 

has  the  following  dimensions:  86.4  cm.  long,  ol  cm.  wiae  j 
and  99  cm,  in  height.  Total  shipping  weight  3^4  kg.  The 
filter-ventilation  Installation  contains  a  filter-absorber, 
a  fan,  a  motor,  and  air  inlet  and  outlet  bases.  The 
filter-absorber  is  composed  of  seven  detachable  parallel 
sections;  three  alr-distributlrtg  sections,  two  anti-smoke 
filters,  and  two  charging  sections.  The  sections  are  lined 
with  neoprene  rubber.  j 

The  pliable,  rubberized  outlet  base  is  equipped  at  j 
the  end  with  a  net  to  prevent  penetration  of  debris, 
rodents,  etc.  The  hose  Is  6  m,  long  and  12.7  cm.  in 
diameter . 

( 

I 

A  shelter  planned  for  extended  stays  is  equipped 
with  one  or  more  filter-ventilating  installations, 
depending  on  air-consumption. 

» 

American  engineers  have  developed  filter-ventilating  | 
equipment  of  a  capacity  range  of  17>3^»70  and  140  per  j 
J  minute .  j 

I  If  properly  constructed  and  operated,  ventilated 

shelters  provide  a  dependable  protection  from  biological 
warfare  agents . 

In  large  permanent  shelters  it  is  recommended  to 
set  up  sanitation  wards  for  persons  affected  by  aerosol 
clouds .  lliese  should  be  regular  wards  located  at  the  ! 

entrance  to  the  shelter.  The  sctaae  in  Fig.  39  sViows  a  i 

practical/for  a  sanitation  ward  in  a  shelter.  j 

layout  1 

The  holding  capacity  of  shelters, especially  of  the  j 
non-ventilated  type,  must  be  strictly  controlled.  j 

The  number  of  persons  that  can  be  admitted  to  the  i 
shelter  for  a  given  period  of  time  depends  on  the  volume  j 
of  air  in  the  shelter.  j 

Experience  has  shown  that  in  a  relaxed  condition  | 
a  person  consumes  O.O85  ra3  air  per  minute.  It  is  I 

reconanended  to  use  these  figures  and  to  take  into  account  j 
the  amount  of  warmth  given  off  by  the  human  body,  in  | 

determining  the  holding  capacity  of  shelters .  ! 


— :  317 


Fig4  39.  Arrangement  of  Sanitation  Area 
for  the  Shelter 

li  entrance!  2)  pressure  regulation 
vent;  3)  air  pressure  regulator  with 
baffle;  4)  outside  vestibule;  5) 
inside  vestibule;  6)  contaminated  cloth¬ 
ing;  7)  sanitary  treatment  area;  8) 
dressing  area;  9)  first  aid;  10)  shelter] 
11)  extinguishers. 


Among  collective  measures  of  defense,  mention  must 
be  made  of  degassing  units  for  disinfection  of  persons 
caught  in  a  cloud  of  a  chemical,  radioactive  or  bacterial 
aerosol.  There  .are  field  and  stationary  degassing  units. 

It  is  recommended  to  set  up  a  field  degassing  unit 
near  a  water  source  at  a  safe  distance  from  other  field 
institutions.  The  degassing  unit  is  constructed  and 
equipped  similar  to  an  ordinary  sanitation  ward.  It 
contains  a  platform  for  disinfection  of  clothes  and 
;  personal  effects,  a  shower  and  a  special  dressing  area 
(tents,  etc.)  for  distribution  of  fresh  clothes. 

Degassing  units  of  the  stationary  type  are  placed 
either  in  buildings  or  Installations  used  for  shelters, 
or  in  special  constructions  erected  for  this  purpose. 
These  locations,  equipped  with  filter- ventilating  instal¬ 
lations,  can  be  used  as  shelters  against  every  kind  of 
modern  weapon  (6). 


316 


Sg7Eaa.L  M0DE3N  M2AN3  AND  METHdDS  0?  DISINTliCTION 

Tl:il3  section,  compiled  from  .'onerlcan  manuals  and 
instructions  published  abroad  in  recent  years,  contains 
information  of  the  latest  achievements  and  experiences 
in  the  field  of  disinfection.  Special  attention  will  be 
devoted  here  to  the  description  of  new  means  and  method? 
recommended  by  American  disinfection  experts  for  the 
elimination  of  after-effects  of  a  bacteriological  attack. 


I 


I 


\ 

i 

I 


As  pointed  out  earlier,  bacteriological  attacks  ; 
may  cause  contamination  of  vast  areas,  including  all  the  | 
objects  contained  therein.  The  modern  microbiological  j 
science,  however,  has  not  yet  developed  any  methods  or  » 
instriiments  for  a  quick  determination  of  the  nature  of 
the  biological  warfare  agents.  It  is  even  more  difficult, 
if  at  all  possible,  to  define  the  confines  of  the  conta¬ 
minated  area.  Considering  the  great  expenditure  involved 
in  a  l.arge-scale  disinfection  operation,  it  is  reccmmendeci 
in  the  American  instructions  (6)  that  a  thorough  evalu¬ 
ation  be  made  of  the  situation  in  order  to  determine 
whether  it  is  practical  to  carry  out  the  operation.  I 

According  to  Ajnerican  sources  of  information,  it  is  not  : 
yet  possible  to  establish  standards  for  definition  of  i 
cases  requiring  disinfection.  It  all  depends  on  the  | 

degree  of  importance  of  the  contaminated  objects  for  the 
war  effort  and  the  degree  of  resistance  of  the  micro¬ 
organism  used  in  the  attack,  since  on  discovery  of  the 
biological  attack,  which  is  usually  made  on  appearance  of 
the  first  symptoms  in  humans  (or  a.nlmals  ),  a  ’’natural” 
disinfection  may  take  place  and  make  additional  inter¬ 
ventions  unnecessary.  • 


Taking  into  consideration  the  difficulties  in 
establishing  the  presence  of  contamination  and  deter- 
!  mining  its  duration,  the  American  experts  recommend  the 
j  evaluation  of  the  need  for  disinfection  in  each  partlcu- 
I  lar  case  on  the  basis  of  its  importance  to  the  war  effort, 
i  The  most  practical  is  the  method  that  will  reduce  contami¬ 
nation  to  the  point  that  it  presents  no  danger,  at  a 
minimum  expense  of  energy  and  materials,  and  in  the 
shortest  oossible  time.  (6) 

i 

• 

When  a  suspicion  arises  that  the  enemy  Is  applying  j 
bacteriological  warfare,  it  is  recommended  first  of  all  j 
i  to  disinfect  the  objects  with  which  the  people  have  j 


319 


direct  contact.  Undex*  actual  co.-nbat  conditions  tiiis 
applies  to  weapons,  combat  outfits,  as  well  as  military 
equipment  and  important  installations . 

Disinfection  should  be  applied  to  an  area  of 
tactical  importance,  while  the  rest  of  the  affected 
territory  should  be  left  to  "natural”  decontaminatj on. 
Entrance  to  this  territory  must  be  restricted  and  signs 
posted  to  this  effect  (?)• 


DISINFECTION  MEANS  i 

Since  chemical  and  bacteriological  warfare  agents  j 
have  common  characteristics,  it  was  possible  for  foreign 
experts  to  develop  identical  disinfection  methods  i 

applicable  to  both.  For  example,  the  standard  remedies  i 
developed  by  the  Army  for  degassing  of  chemical  contami- 
nators  are  also  used  as  disinfectants  (6).  Once  common 
means  and  methods  were  found  for  disinfection  and  de-  \ 

gassing,  the  two  techniques  were  combined  into  one  de-  ! 
I  contamination  operation.  In  the  opinion  of  American  1 

j  experts  (8 )  who  consider  this  combination  of  chemical 
‘  and  bacteriological  methods  practical,  the  application 
i  of  one  antidote  to  contaminated  objects  will  be  effective 
against  both  warfare  agents.  Needless  to  say  that  de- 
gassifiers  are  not  recommended  as  a  final  solution  to 
the  entire  problem  of  decontamination,  because  both 
chemical  and  bacteriological  agents  have  many  specific 
characteristics  and  therefore  require  specific  methods  | 
of  decontamination.  i 

j 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  individual  disinfectants  ^  I 
which  are  the  standard  means  used  by  the  American  Army (6).  j 

I  Substance  STB  -  settled  calcium  hypochlorlde  I 

I  mixture,  or  bleaching  pov/der,  containing  30%  of  active  j 
;  chlorine .  It  is  distinguished  from  ordinazy  bleaching  j 
.  powder  by  a  high  content  of  unslaked  lime  (up  to  13^)  and  j 
a  low  rate  of  moisture.  It  can  be  used  both  for  de-  ! 

gassification  and  for  crude  disinfection,  in  liquid  j 

suspension  form,  or  in  a  dry  form  mixed  with, neutral  j 

substances, (such  as  soil,  sand,  etc.)  at  the  rate  of  2:3  i 
by  volume .  ' 

J 

i 

It  is  recommended  to  use  in  degassing  installations  ! 
suspension  matter  at  the  rate  of  40  parts  STB  to  60  parts 
of  water  by  weight.  In  order  to  reduce  the  hardening 


320 


and  increase  the  fluidity  of  the  suspension  matter, 
citric  acid  or  sugar  are  added  at  the  rate  of  0,5  kg.  to 
100  kg.  of  STB.  Because  of  the  high  cost  of  STB,  de- 
gassification  and  disinfection  by  this  method  should  be 
restricted  to  relatively  small  areas. 

The  approximate  consumption  of  lime  for  degassi- 
fication  or  disinfection  is  about  0.5  icg-  per  1  m^  of 
space . 


In  order  to  conceal  the  color  of  lime,  ordinary 
lamp  black  at  the  rate  of  1  kg.  per  100  kg.  of  lime  is 
added  to  the  suspension. 

For  milder  disinfections,  chloramine  T  and  di¬ 
chloramine  T  can  be  used. 

It  is  also  recommended  to  use  for  disinfection  the 
degassing  solution  aVNC  (decontaminating  agent  non- 
corrosive  ),  which  is  a  solution  of  the  solid  organic 
substance  H-195,  one  of  the  chloramine  compounds  in 
te tra chi oroe thane .  Substance  H-195  is  a  white  or  cream- 
colored  powder,  of  chlorine  odor,  which  gradually  de¬ 
composes  when  stored.  Among  its  shortcomings  ai’e 
toxicity,  a  softening  effect  on  rubber  and  plastic 
materials  and  the  generation  of  hydrochloric  acid  on 
contact  with  humidity.  It  softens  and  destroys  color, 
resulting  in  discoloration  of  painted  surfaces  and 
formation  of  spots.  It  has  a  mild  corroding  effect  on 
I  metals.  In  view  of  these  effects  it  is  rccoraraended  to 
I  use  it  with  caution  and  to  wa^wlth  water  the  contaminated 
I  areas  after  application  of  this  substance.  Solution 
;  DANC  is  fluctuating  when  stored  and  should  therefore  be 
j  prepared  in  accordance  with  the  quantities  needed .  The 
;  vapors  of  tetrachloroe thane  are  poisonous  and  therefore 
I  gloves  and  gasmasks  should  be  worn  when  using  DANC. 

In  addition  to  the  abovementioned  substances, 
American  instructions  list  a  number  of  widely  known  dis¬ 
infectants,  such  as:  phenol,  cresol,  potassiiim  permanga¬ 
nate,  also  the  lately  popular  iodoforms,  which  contain 
iodine  and  substances  that  lower  surface  tension,  there¬ 
by  increasing  the  disinfectant  effect.  These  substances 
are  mainly  used  as  liquid  disinfectants. 

Gas  disinfectants  become  increasingly  popular 
abroad,  primarily  ethylene  oxide  and  mixtures  of 


321  - 


ethylene  oxide  with  other  gas  compounds. 


Ethylene  oxide  is  a  slightly  odorous  liquid.  Its 
I  specific  gravity  is  0.9  at  0^  centi^^eand  its  boiling 
point  is  +10.7®  centigrade  .  It  dissolves  easily  in  water 
and  in  organic  solvents.  Ethylene  oxide  is  widely  used 
in  the  chemical  industry  because  of  adequate  supply 
of  this  substance  and  its  considerable  chemical  activity. 
As  mentioned,  it  has  a  bactericidal  effect  especially  on 
vegetative  forms  of  microorganisms. 

Among  the  shortcomings  of  ethylene  oxide  as  a  dis¬ 
infectant  are  its  relatively  high  toxicity  and  its 
explosive  capacity  when  mixed  with  air. 

To  safeguard  it  from  explosion,  a  mixture  of 
ethylene  oxide  with  carbon  dioxide,  the  so-called  carb- 
oxlde,  is  used.  Carboxide  contains  lOJ^  of  ethylene 
oxide  and  90$^  of  carbon  dioxide  and  has  the  same  effect 
as  ethylene  oxide.  Carboxide  is  am  effective  disin¬ 
fectant  and  is  used  in  decontamination  of  enclosed  areas, 
military  equipment  and  ammunition.  Carboxide  is  a 
standaxHi  part  of  equipment  in  the  American  Army  (3,6).  A 
similar  disinfectant  is  Freoxide,  which  is  a  mixture  of 
ethylene  oxide  with  freon.  All  gas  disinfectants  are 
supplied  in  cylinders  of  various  capacities  and  also 
in  containers. 

In  addition  to  the  enumerated  disinfectants, 
American  civil  and  military  health  organizations  also 
use  formalin  and*  methyl  bromide  for  disinfection. 

In  surveying  the  means  of  disinfection  used 
abroad,  mention  should  be  made  of  various  detergents 
which,  even  though  not  assuring  protection  against  bio¬ 
logical  warfare  agents,  contribute  considerably  to  dis¬ 
infecting  processes .  Ihe  detergents  remove  the  chemical 
and  biological  toxic  agents  from  the  soiled  and  greasy 
surfaces  and  act  to  a  certain  degree  as  dissolvents  of 
organic  compounds;  the  toxic  agents  are  removed  together 
with  the  organic  compounds.  i 

i 

llie  U.  S.  Air  Force  uses  the  so-called  emulsifying 
detergent  MyL-C-25179j  also  called  GUNK,  for  treatment 
of  aircraft  and  other  types  of  combat  equipment.  This 
substance  is  a  mixture  of  alcohol,  turpentine,  soap, 
naphta  and  sulfurlzed  castor  oil.  aiils  detergent  is 


322 


mixed  with  kerosene  (1:9).  'Tirie  mixture  is  spread  over  ti 
contaminated  area  by  means  of  sprayers  ana  after  a  v;;  lie 
is  washed  off  with  a  strong  water  streain  cut  of  a  hose. 
The  effect  of  water  on  the  detergent  produces  an  .lou 

which  washes  off  tr.e  biological  and  chemical  toxic  a^ontc 
together  with  the  dirt  and  grease.  Tne  emulsifying  deter- 
^^gent  GIR'IK  is  a  standard  degasaifier  in  the  militar?/  laulp 
,;ment  of  the  United  States  .ilr  Force,  fae  U.S.  Air-  Force 
iuses  in  a  similar  manner  another  detergent,  p3-753.i  wnich 


,is  also  ef 
‘.which  have 


fective  in  degassing  of  chemical  ..oxio  a, 
a  neuroparalytic  effect.  Tliis  detergen 


gents 
t  ib 


a  mixture  of  phosphates,  silicates,  caustic  soda,  por.as- 
siirni  and  soap.  Unlike  UUNK,  the  PS-Y5i  compound  Is  used 
in  a  5-lU?o  water  suspension  or  with  steam.  The  suspended 
matter  applied  to  the  contaminated  surface  is  lelt  for 


30  minutes  and  la  thoroughly  w'ashed  off  with  water  stream 
to  prevent  corrosion  of  metal  parts,  “wnen  properly  used, 
the  detergents  can  remove  as  much  as  90^  of  infectious 
matter  from  contaminated  surfaces  (6 ) . 


Fig.  he  Decontaminating 
equipment  M-1 


Fig.  4,1  Decontaminating 
e-^juipment  M-2 


DISINFECTING  TSCHNIQUc^ 


I  The  U.  S.  Ainny  uses  for  diainfection  portable  and 

i  conveyable  equipment  which  can  also  be  used  for  de- 
^assification  (6).  The- conati'uction  of  portable  de- 
gassifying  equipment  M-1  and  M-2  (fig.  ^0  and  bi  )  in  base 
on  the  principle  of  automatic  now  (M-1  }  and  manual 
(M-2)  and  they  are  used  for  the  treatment  of  combat 
equipment  and  liquid  disinfection  of  buildings  arid  cf 
limited  open  areas  (M-1 )  (1,2, IC) 

The  capacity  of  M-1  is  11.^  liters,  that  of  M-2  - 
1.4  liters, 

I  An  area  of  about  40  can  be  treated  with  D!;e 

I  load  of  M-1. 

I  For  large-scale  degassjfication  (disinfection  )  the 

i  U.S,  Army  uses  special  degassing  machines.  Tney  are 
1  used  for  treatment  of  localities,  roads,  airfields,  com- 
i  bat  equipment,  as  well  as  for  the  exteriors  of  bulid.ir4.?s 
i  Infected  with  chemical  or  biological  warfare  agents.  One 
I  specimen  of  an  American  conveyable  degas  si  ng  equipment 
!  is  the  MZA  machine  (6).  It  is  a  steel  tank  of  IpOO 
I  liters  capacity  mounted  on  the  chassis  of  a  truck.  Tne 
j  tank  contains  rotary  mixers  for  mixing  of  disinfecting 
I  solutions  (suspended  matter).  The  machine  Is  also 
•  equipped  with  a  three -cylinder  piston  pump  for  pressure 
I  sprinkling  and  wiuh  sprayers  at  the  front.  The  pump  e,.nd 
I  the  mixers  are  set  in  motion  by  the  truck  engine . 


! 


\ 


1 

I 


I 


I 


i 


( 

I 


} 


I 

i 


The  emptying  time  of  tank  is  20  minutes  at  a 
working  pressure  of  28  kg/c^i*^.  Ihe  main  disinfectant 
used  is  a  suspension  of  calcium  hypochlorite .  Eight 
hundred  and  fifty  liter's  of  water  and  390  kg.  of  calcium 
hypochlorate  are  needed  to  fill  up  the  tank  (Fig.  <i2). 


I 

I 

i 

\ 

1 

i 

r 

I 


It  is  pointed  out  in  the  manuals  that,  in  ■ 
addition  to  degassification,  these  machines  can  also  be  j 
used  for  water  carrying,  fire  extinguishing  and  as  field  j 
sprinklers .  I 

i 

1 

A  modified  type  of  a  degassing  machine  Is  a  trailer! 
spraying  machine  MV-1,  which  is  a  standard  technical  j 
equipment  of  the  U.S,  Air  Force  (6).  The  equipment  is  1 
composed  of  a  tank  of  1900  liters  capacity,  a  pump,  and  ; 
a  gasoline  engine,  all  mounted  on  a  trailer.  The  v/atex’- 


324 


T 

I 


\ 


} 


i 

s 

( 

I 

I 


Fig.  42.  Degassing  machine  MZA 


t 


i 

! 

I 

i 


i 


i 

! 


! 


I 


I 


!  i 

j  ing  system  is  equipped  with  front  and  rear  sprayers  with  a  j 

I  discharge  capacity  of  19  to  132  liters  per  minute.  A  ; 

powerful  high  pressure  pump  supplies  water  et  the  rate  of  j 

75  liters  per  minute.  It  is  also  equipped  with  two  hoses  ; 

of  30  ra.  each  (rig.43).  | 


Tlie  purpose  of  this  equipment  is  identical  with 
that  of  MZA.  It  can  be  used  for  treatment  of  objects 
17  m.  high  from  a  distance  of  6  m.  It  can  also  be  uet-O 
for  sprinkling  infected  areas  with  so-called  sirppras- 
sing  substances. 


j 

i 

» 

\ 

t 

{ 

i 

\ 


A  portable  water  heater  M-1  is  used  for  hot  v^jater 
supply  to  the  degassing  machines,  installations  and  other 
‘degassing  equipment.  It  is  a  continuous -motion  apparatus 
‘V'flth  a  capacity  for  warming  up  2300  liters  of  ’water  tc 

I - 


I*  Suppressing  substances  are  water  and  oil  products  used 
■  for  sprinkling  of  infected  surfaces  ixi  order  to  preven: 
!a  secondary  formation  of  aerosols,  rnis  is  achieved  by 
I  sprinkling  of  the  soil  or  by  creating  of  an  organic 
:  coating  over  the  infected  area. 


325 


I 


Fig.  43.  Trailer  spraying  machine  MV-1. 


40°  within  one  hour.  The  water  heater  contains  a  steel 
fuel  tank,  a  liquid-fuel  burner,  a  fuel  pump  serving  also 
the  heating  element  which  is  composed  of  two  colls  and  a 
water  tank. 

The  water  is  supplied  to  the  heater  by  an  intake 
hose  from  an  elevated  tank  or  by  a  pump.  In  addition  to 
water  heaters,  the  U.  S,  Army  also  uses  steam  producing 
apparatus ,  Their  working  principle  is  very  simple ; 
i  Water  is  pumped  into  a  heated  coll  and  evaporates .  The 
i  apparatus  is  equipped  with  a  tank  for  the  detergent 
(PS-751).  The  ejected  steam  is  mixed  with  the  dissolved 
..detergent  and  is  applied  to  the  affected  area. 

For  treatment  of  elevated  objects,  the  U.S.  Army 
uses  a  so-called  elevator  car  MV-3.  The  elevator  has  the 
form  of.  a  platform  which  is  mounted  on  a  chassis  of  a 
truck.  It  can  be  lifted  up  to  15  m.  A  1900-liter 
capacity  tank  for  disinfectants  with  a  hose  and  sprayer 


326 


are  also  mounted  on  the  truck.  Tlie  entire  equipment  is  j 
operated  hydromechanical ly  with  an  independent  motor.  It  I 
is  used  for  treatment  of  airplanes.  ITie  danger  of  in-  ; 
j  faction  to  persons  operating  this  equipment  is  reduced  to  j 
a  minimum,  since  the  treatment  is  done  from  above  and  the 
detergent  Is  sprayed  downwards,  so  that  the  sprinklers 
and  the  washed  off  liquid  cannot  hit  the  operators.  Need-  ' 
less  to  say  that  persons  working  on  any  kind  of  degassing 
or  disinfecting  equipment  must  use  protective  apparel  and 
gas  masks . 


METHODS  OF  DISINFECTION 

According  to  i\merican  instructions  on  defense  (6,9),  • 
army  personnel  caught  in  a  bacterial  aerosol  cloud  must  be  , 
treated  without  any  delay.  They  must  take  a  hot  shower  i 

with  soap.  In  the  field,  treatment  is  given  in  showers  ! 

of  various  types  and  constructions;  under  stationary 
condltinns,  however,  this  is  done  in  sanitary  v;ards  and  I 
in  bath  houses  .  t 


'  *  i 

!  Before  undressing,  the  soldier *s  outfit  is  moistened i 

jwith  water  (to  prevent  a  secondary  aerosol),  and  is  dis-  j 
infected  by  any  available  means  (3i8)  followed  by  mechanical 
laundering. 

Woollen  clothes  and  leather  shoes  are  disinfected 
with  methyl  bromide  or  freoxide  steam  in  special  vapcr- 
jproof  bags  similar  to  those  used  for  extermination  of 
insects.  In  view  of  the  toxicity  of  the  fumigants  and  to 
avoid  contamination,  it  is  not  recommended  to  carry  cut 
the  disinfection  in  enclosed  areas.  Two  sets  of  clothes 
can  be  processed  in  one  bag.  Five  ampules  of  metiiyl 
bromide  or  a  0,36  litre  contalner-dispergator  of  freoxide  ' 
are  put  into  the  bag.  Ihe  bag  is  hermetically  sealed  and 
the  ampules  are  crushed.  If  freoxide  is  used,  the 
helical  valve  of  the  container  is  opened.  Then  the  bags 
are  rolled  on  the  ground  for  5  minutes  for  a  thorough 
penetration  of  the  fumigants  into  the  clothes.  After 
12  hours  of  fumigation,  the  clothes  and  the  shoes  are 
thoroughly  alrec^ut  until  the  smell  of  the  fumigant 
completely  disappears . 

The  same  treatment  is  recommended  for  aifcicles  of 
personal  use  (gas  masks,  mess -kits,  eating  utensils, 
leather  and  rubber  articles,  as  well  as  precision 


appliances  and  Instrtimentq/. 

The  manuals  indicate  a  variety  of  ways  for  dis¬ 
infection  of  combat  equipment.  The  mildest  is  the  gas 
disinfecting  method  which  eliminates  corrosion  of  metal 
surfaces .  Its  shortcoming  is  the  need  for  a  prolonged 
period  of  exposure  and  it  is  therefore  recommended  to 
use  liquid  disinfectants  whenever  possible.  In  gas  dis- 
disinfection  of  combat  equipment  ethylene  oxide  is  most 
frequently  used.  The  equipment  (guns,  tanks,  motor 
vehicles,  etc.)  is  covered  with  a  gas-proof  tarpaulin 
with  edges  covered  up  with  earth  to  prevent  the  escape 
of  gas .  A  hose  is  placed  under  the  tarpaulin  and  lets 
in  the  ethylene  oxide  which  la  fed  frcan  a  cylinder.  An 


A'.  A 


Fig,  44.  Disinfection  of  a  loaded  truck 
with  ethylene  oxide . 

1  -  Edge  of  tarpaulin  covered  up  with 
earth;  2-  gas-proof  tarpaulin; 

3  -  outlet  hose;  4  -  barrel  containing 
hot  water; 5  -  cylinder  containing 
ethylene  oxide;  6  -  inlet  hose. 


air  outlet  hose  emerges  from  under  the  tarpaulin(Pfi-n^  The 
ethylene  oxide  fills  up  all  the  space  under  the  tarpaulin 
and  pushes  out  the  air  through  the  outlet  hose .  As  soon 


are  also  mounted  on  the  truck.  Tne  entire  equipment  is  ; 
operated  hydromechanical ly  with  an  Independent  motor.  It  i 
is  used  for  treatment  of  airplanes.  The  danger  of  In- 
!  fectlon  to  persons  operating  this  equipment  is  recucea  lo 
I  a  minimum,  since  the  treatment  is  done  from  above  and  the 
i  detergent  is  sprayed  downwards,  so  that  the  sprinklers 
land  the  washed  off  liquid  cannot  hit  the  operators.  .Need¬ 
less  to  say  that  persons  working  on  any  kind  of  degassing, 

I  cr  disinfecting  equipment  must  use  protective  apparel  and 
j  gas  masks . 


METHODS  OF  DISINFECTION 

According  to  American  Instructions  on  defense 
army  personnel  caught  in  a  bacterial  aerosol  cloud  must  be  . 
treated  without  any  delay.  They  must  take  a  hot  shower  i 
with  soap.  In  the  field,  treatment  is  given  in  showers 
of  various  types  and  constructions;  under  stationary/ 
condltinns,  however,  this  is  done  in  sanitary  wards  and  ! 
in  bath  houses . 

j  Before  undressing,  the  soldler^s  outfit  is  moistened  i 

iwlth  water  (to  prevent  a  secondary  aerosol),  and  is  dls-  | 
jinfected  by  any  available  means  (3>S)  followed  by  mechanical 
laundering .  ! 

I 

Woollen  clothes  and  leather  shoes  are  disinfected  | 

with  methyl  bromide  or  freoxlde  steam  in  special  vapor-  i 

proof  bags  similar  to  those  used  for  extermination  of  i 

Insects.  In  view  of  the  toxicity  of  the  fumigants  and  to  i 
avoid  contaimlnation,  it  is  not  recommended  to  carry  out  | 
the  disinfection  in  enclosed  areas.  Two  sets  of  clotnes  ' 

can  be  processed  in  one  bag.  Five  ampules  of  methyl  | 

bromide  or  a  0.36  litre  cor.talner-dispergator  of  freoxlde  ! 
are  put  into  the  bag.  Th.e  bag  is  hermetically  sealed  and  i 

the  ampules  are  crushed.  If  freoxlde  is  used,  the  i 

I  helical  valve  of  the  container  is  opened.  Then  the  bags 
are  rolled  on  the  ground  for  5  minutes  for  a  thorough 
penetration  of  the  fumigants  into  the  clothes.  After 
12  hours  of  fumigation,  the  clothes  and  the  shoes  are 
thoroughly  airec^Wt  until  the  smell  of  the  fumigant 
completely  disappears .  i 

The  same  treatment  is  recommended  for  aifcicles  of  ! 
personal  use  (gas  masks,  mess-kits,  eating  utensils,  I 

leather  and  rubber  articles,  as  well  as  precision  I 


327 


appliances  and  Instrument^/. 

The  manuals  indicate  a  variety  of  ways  for  dis¬ 
infection  of  combat  equipment.  'Dne  mildest  is  the  gas 
disinfecting  method  which  eliminates  corrosion  of  metal 
surfaces.  Its  shortcoming  is  the  need  for  a  prolonged 
period  of  exposure  and  it  Is  therefore  recommended  to 
use  liquid  disinfectants  whenever  possible.  In  gas  dis- 
dlslnfection  of  combat  equipment  ethylene  oxide  is  most 
frequently  used.  The  equipment  (guns,  tanks,  motor 
vehicles,  etc.)  is  covered  with  a  gas-proof  tarpaulin 
with  edges  covered  up  with  earth  to  prevent  the  escape 
of  gas.  A  hose  is  placed  under  the  tarpaulin  and  lets 
in  the  ethylene  oxide  which  is  fed  from  a  cylinder.  An 


'  {  I  *  ^ 

i  l—. — •.!  y—  ■ 


Fig.  44.  Disinfection  of  a  loaded  truck 
with  ethylene  oxide. 

1  -  Edge  of  tarpaulin  covered  up  with 
earth;  2-  gas-proof  tarpaulin; 

3  -  outlet  hose;  4  -  barrel  containing 
hot  water; 5  -  cylinder  containing 
ethylene  oxide;  6  -  inlet  hose. 


air  outlet  hose  emerges  from  under  the  tarpaulin^-n^  The 
ethylene  oxide  fills  up  all  the  space  under  the  tarpaulin 
and  pushes  out  the  air  through  the  outlet  hose .  As  soon 


328 


a3  the  smell  of  gas  appears  at  the  outlet  hose,  the  outlet 
Is  closed  with  a  stopper  while  the  inlet  of  gas  is  inter¬ 
rupted.  The  object  is  left  under  the  tarpaulin  for  24 
hours.  In  order  to  establish  the  gas  consumption,  the 
cylinders  are  weighed.  Etiiylene  oxide  is  poisonous  and 
explosive,  and  it  is  therefore  recommended  to  wear  gas 
masks  and  keep  the  gas  clear  of  fire  and  sparks . 


Fig.  45,  Disinfection  of  alrorafc  interiors.  i 

i 

i 

Etnylene  oxide  can  be  applied  to  tents  and  buil<41n 
The  consumption  of  gas  in  treatment  of  a  space  of  56  m-*  a 
a  temperature  of  21^  and  above  is  27  kg.  If  the  tempera-  j 
ture  drops  to  10®,  the  quantity  of  gas  should  be  double;!..  } 
I  The  disinfecting  action  of  ethylene  oxide  slows  down  at  j 
ih.igh  humidity. 

j 

I  Since  ethylene  oxide  is  a  very  effective  decontaml- 

nator  and  has  no  corrosive  effect  on  metal  surfaces,  it  is  i 
'recommended  to  use  it  for  machineryj  precision  appliances ^  i 
iinstrioments,  ammunition,  uniforms,  etc.  treated  in  a  j 

!gas -proof  chamber  at  a  minimum  exposure  of  8  hours .  i 

I  i 

I  Disinfection  with  carboxide  is  treated  in  a  similar  ! 


f  C 


mariner  ouc  "Wj.ce  Tne  ci  era:, 


One  of  the  qualir:lc“3  of  cheee 
hlgii  dejjsree  of  tlieii'  peneorabliiny .  xi: 
vlsabls  to  use  them  In  treutirent  of  tlrtitf}/  uu 
al& .  If  ■  sea  for  ■■•oom  disinfection,  tre  room  ; 
rilied  to  oxcobs  so  that  the  fumigant  it  icily 


fine  high  penetx‘a.biiity  of  ethyler:o  ouu; 
^nrhoxidOi  -^cni!:' ’ ’■:ed  their  bactericide^-  ^r: 

qualifies  them  for  treatment  of  tne  • 

ateamert  ,  and  defense  instaj  iations ,  vh  j  r, 
to  herjtetio  sealing  (fig.  43;. 

In  treatment  of  buiicfir.gs  ohece  o;-r...-.'C.".a 
cf  gas  is  likely.,  it  is  recoiiunenhec  to  use  ft;-, 
which  is  one  of  the  best  gas  cici ni'ector. to  > 
v-f  forma Ideiiyue  is  quite  simple  since  it  As  .!;..o 
c-o  Seal  tr;£  building  heitieticaliy .  Hov'Cs/er,  t' 
does  net  penetrate  into  tlmntly  packec  n.an'-rroj 


=  ig.  47.  Id: 


^  ^  ‘•  's  cr  i 
r?  j  »/xi  » 


Todt  and  Tockhelm  sprayers  are  used  for  dispersion  j 
of  formaldehyde  (fig.  4b}.  The  Todt  sprayer  can  discharge 
15  liters  of  fomaldehyde  in  3  -  10  minutes  (6).  Ihe 
sprayer  is  mounted  on  a  truck  and  the  formaldehyde  is 
dispersed  with  a  hose  directly  from  the  truck.  Barrels 
of  water  and  formalin  can  be  loaded  on  the  truck  and  in 
this  manner  many  buildings  can  be  treated  in  a  short  time .  j 

! 

In  treatment  of  outside  surfaces  of  walls  and 
buildings,  of  auxllliary  machines,  cars,  ammunition  and 
of  similar  objects,  v\rhich  to  a  certain  degree  are 
corrosion-resistant,  it  is  recommended  to  apply  liquid  j 
disinfection  and  calcium  hypochlorite  mixture,  solution 
of  DANG,  phenol,  cresol  and  other  disinfectants,  also  hot 
water  and  steam.  After  treatment,  the  disinfectants  should 
be  washed  off  vflth  soap  and  water,  while  metal  surfaces 
should  be  greased  in  order  to  prevent  corrosion. 


Area  Decontamination.  j 

I 

The  treatment  of  open  areas  requires  large  quanti-  ] 
ties  of  disinfectants  and  considerable  manpower.  Or.  the 
other  hand,  as  it  was  pointed  out  earlier,  due  to  | 

difficulties  in  discovering  a  biological  attack,  a  | 

"natural”  disinfection  by  meteorological  factors  may  take 
place,  making  additional  interventions  unnecessary.  Hence, 
the  American  manuals  recommend  first  of  all  to  take  ad¬ 
vantage  of  natural  disinfectants  and  not  to  apply  any 
additional  treatment.  Special  signposts  should  be  put  up 
to  Indicate  that  the  area  is  infected,  and  entrance  into 
the  area  should  be  restricted  or  temporarily  suspended . 
However,  if  admittance  to  the  area  cannot  be  stopped  or 
limited,  and  if  the  sun  radiation  or  the  meteorological 
factors  do  not  disinfect  the  area  in  time,  it  is 
recommended  to  treat  with  disinfectants  such  parts  of  the 
area  as  are  operatively  essential,  e.g,,  roads,  airstrips 
and  airfields,  military  storage  areas  and  other  essential 
objects.  It  is  recommended  to  use  for  disinfection  the 
least  expensive  and  the  most  readily  available  means,  such 
as  washing  off  the  biological  agents,  preferably  with  hot 
water,  and  burning  or  steaming  the  Infected  area  (3,6,9)- 
If  necessary,  chlorine  containing  preparations  (calcium 
hypochlorite  mixture )  and  substances  neutralizing 
secondary  aerosols,  should  be  used.  Any  moistening 
substance  can  be  \ised  as  a  neutralizer,  provided  the 
moisture  remains  on  the  surface  for  a  considerable  time . 


331 


In  hot  areas,  therefore,  frequent  sprinkling  Is 
recoBimendeci.  If  water  Is  used,  the  moisture  will  last 
longer  by  adding  a  soluble  oil  to  the  water. 

However,  of  all  neutralizing  substances^  preference  | 
should  be  given  to  petroleum  products  {kerosene,  mazut,  ‘ 
diesel  oil,  waste  oil,  etc.).  For  spraying  of  areas  with  j 
neutralizing  substances,  as  well  as  with  chlorine-  ! 

containing  solutions  and  suspended  matter,  use  can  be  made  j 
of  the  abovenentloned  disinfecting  machines  and  tariks . 

In  case  of  flowage,  the  liquid  must  be  disinfected  at  the 
places  where  flowage  occurs  in  order  to  prevent  the 
spreading  of  infection.  | 

♦ 

i 

DISEASE- CARRIER  CONTROL  i 

(INSECTICIDES  AND  REPELLENTS)  i 

In  the  opinion  of  foreign  experts,  one  of  the  I 

likely  means  of  a  bacteriological  attack,  as  pointed  ou;:  | 
earlier,  is  the  occurrence  of  infection  carriers.  For  ! 

examination  of  environmental  disease  carriers,  DDT  pre-  i 
paratlons  and  hexachloran,  as  well  as  their  recently 
synthesized  derivatives,  are  widely  used  abroad  (13).  The 
recommended  DDT  derivatives  are  me thoxy chlorine  and  the 
so-called  TDE  (1,1-dlchlor  -  2,2  bis  ^arachloropheny^^ 
ethane ). 

The  structural  formula  of  me thoxy chlorine  is  as 
follows : 


! 


It  is  used  against  mosquito  larvae  and  it  is  less  toxic 
than  DDT. 


i 


A  recoramended  hexachlorane derivative  is  a  gamma- 
Isomer,  referred  to  in  foreign  literature  as  gamma  benzene 
bexachlorlde .  Lindane  is  cn  American  preparation  containing 
at  least  99^  of  gamma  benzene  hexa chloride. 

The  advantages  of  this  preparation,  as  compared  to 
hexachlorans ,  are  its  greater  effect  on  Insects  and  its 
less  offensive  odor.  Lindane  is  widely  used  in  practical 
epldemldogy  and  is  manufactured  in  the  U.  S,  as  a  con¬ 
centrate  containing  20^  lindant,  7.55^  emulsifier,  up  to 
Isofloronp,  and  32, 55^  alkylated  naphthalene.  It  is  a 
standard  preparation  used  by  the  U.  S.  Armed  Forces  (13)* 

In  addition  to  the  mentioned  substances,  foreign 
sources  refer  to  synthetic  insecticides,  such  as:  chlor- 
dana.  dleldrin  and  derivatives  of  pyrethrin  alkaloids 
obtained  from  pellitory  of  Spain. 

In  the  U.S.A.,  organic  phosphcsus  compounds  (para- 
thlon,  malathlon,  diazlnon,  etc.)  are  used  for  pest 
control  {13}* 

C3ilordane  (Cio^6Cl3  ),  also  known  as  octachlorlne , 
was  synthetized  in  1945.  Chlordanais  a  viscous,  amber 
colored  liquid,  boiling  point  157° » and  is  easily  dis¬ 
solved  in  organic  solutions.  Its  structural  form-  .a  is: 


Similar* to  lindane  chlordanals  produced  in  the  U.S.  as  a 
concentrate  of  20$^  chlordamln  refined  keroaaae. 


333 


I 


Dleldrin  (GipH^O-),  and  a  similar  preparation, 
aldrin  ,  were  synthetlzecf  in  19^8.  They  are  highly 
poisonous  for  Insects  and  not  without  danger  to  man. 
Their  structurauL  formula  is : 


/H\  XK 

/IK  I  I 

0/  CHaj  CCIa^ 

X  '  “  I  )ci 

\H/\  I 

\CJ/ 


Cl 


I 

I 


I 

i 

I 


Dieldrln  is  manufactured  as  a  concentrate  containing 
of  the  preparation  mixed  with  refined  oil  products ,  It 
is  used  for  disinfestation  of  areas,  roads,  etc.  Dlei- 
drin  is  a  standard  insecticide  in  the  use  of  the  U.  S. 
Armed  Forces , 

.* 

i 

I  Fyrethrin  and  its  alkaloid  derivative  -  allettxrin, 

I  synthetized  in  19^9>  are  regarded  highly  as  insecticides 
I  by  foreign  experts. 

I  Allettrin  is  a  dl-2-allyl-4  hydroxy-3  methyl-2- 

i  cyclopentene  monomer  that  as  esterified  with  a  mixture  of 
I  cis-and  trans-dl-chrysantnemlnicacids .  It  is  also  called 
I  an  allyl  homolog  of  cinerin  1  and  synthetic  pyrethrins. 
The  effect  of  allethrin  is  slower  as  compared  to  pyrethrin. 


) 


The  value  of  these  preparations  lies  in  their 
high  toxicity,  their  quick  effect  on  Insects  and  their 
safety  factor.  Therefore,  the  American  experts  attach 
great  importance  to  alletrin  as  an  insect  killer  and  have 
i  stepped  up  its  production. 

Pyrethrin  and  alleUrin  are  frequently  used  in 
mixtures  with  certain  substances  that  increase  their 
poisonous  effect.  It  has  been  established  that  such 
substances,  in  themselves  insufficiently  poisonous  to 
insects,  attain  a  high  toxicity  by  addition  of  pyrethrins. 
This  quality  has  been  first  discovered  in  sesame  oil  and 
later  in  a  number  of  piperonyl  compounds .  They  were 
nciraed  synergists  or  activators.  The  most  practical  of 
them  is  piperonyl  butoxide. 


334 - 


For  treatment  of  living  areas,  the  American  manuals  ! 
recommend  a  solution  of  pyrethrln,  plperonyl  butoxide  and  j 
DDT,  while  for  open  areas  alletttf*in  is  used  Instead  of  ! 

pyrethrin.  The  addition  of  pyrethrlns  to  the  basic 
i  chemical  insecticide  -  DDT-  increases  by  several  times 
the  exterroinatlng  effect  of  the  preparation.  Thus,  j 

according  to  American  sources,  lice  lose  their  blood-  i 

sucking  property  within  10  minutes  after  application  of  ! 
the  combined  insecticide,  whereas  the  affect  of  a  10$^  | 

dust  starts  after  1-2  hours.  Special  significance  is  | 

attached  to  the  addition  of  pyrethrlns  to  the  DDT  pre-  | 
parations  (0.2-0. 3^)  used  for  extermination  of  insects  j 
resistant  to  DDT  (13).  ? 

An  extract  of  pyrethrum  is  manxifact\ired  in  the  | 

U.S.A.  as  a  20^  concentrate  in  kerosene. 

All  the  enumerated  substances  are  basic  insecti¬ 
cides  used  abroad  against  disease  carriers  and  pest. 

Side  by  side  with  insecticides.  Increased  use  has 
been  made  lately  of  repellents.  The  U.S.  Armed  Forces 
are  provided  with  dimethylphthalate,  2-ethyl-l,3-hexane- 
diol,  indalone,  dimethylcarbamate,  benzyl-benzoate,  buty- 
lacetanillde  and  others;  they  are  used  either  independent¬ 
ly  or  in  various  combinations  with  each  other. 

According  to  American  researchers,  identical 
repellents  have  different  effects  on  different  Insects. 
Attempts  were  therefore  made  to  establish  a  mixture  of 
such  substances  so  as  to  produce  the  widest  possible  range 
of  application  against  a  variety  of  arthropoda.  As  a 
result  of  a  study  of  various  combinations  of  repellents, 
a  standard  mixture,  known  in  the  U.S.  as  "6-2-2"  was 
selected.  This  mixture  contains  6  parts  of  dimethyl- 
phttalate,  2  parts  of  2-ethyl-l,3  hexanedlol  and  2  parts 
of  indalone.  lately,  propyl sue c inornate  and  dimethyl¬ 
carbamate  have  been  used  Instead  of  indalone . 

During  the  Korean  war,  the  American  Army  used  as 
a  repellent  the  mixture  M-I96O,  which  is  composed  of 
N-butylacetanlllde,  benzylbenzoate ,  2-buty3:2-ethyl-l,3- 
propanedlol  and  an  emulgator-*-  (13). 

I  There  is  no  information  on  the  proportions  of  the 
ingredients  in  this  preparation. 


335 


When  applied  to  clothes,  this  mixture  preserved 
its  pro_tectlv0  properties  during  a  full  week  of  uninter¬ 
rupted  wearing  in  a  dry,  rainless  weather.  It  was 
further  established  that  some  of  the  repellents,  such  as 
benzylbenzoate  and  diphenylcarbamate,  preserve  their 
protective  properties  even  after  several  washings  of  the 
treated  linen.  According  to  recently  expressed  views  of 
the  American  military  experts,  treatment  of  clothes  with 
repellents  is  the  most  practical  method  of  direct  pro¬ 
tection  of  armed  forces  in  the  field. 

Sprayers  of  different  systems  and  constructions  are 
used  in  the  treatment  of  surface  clothes,  linen,  etc.  with 
insecticides  and  repellents .For  treatment  of  clothes,  bed 
linen  and  living  quarters,  dusters  (hand  piston  sprayers } 
and  aerosol  bombs  are  used.  Dust  containing  insecticides 
is  either  blown  under  the  collar,  between  the  body  and 
the  underwear,  or  is  applied  to  the  inner  side  of  linen 
and  clothes.  The  dust  is  made  of  IO56  DDT  or  1%  lindane 
on  pyrophyillte  or  talc,  with  the  addition  of  0,2^  pyro- 
petrine,  1^  piperonyl  butoxlde  and  0.25%  isopropyl -ores ol . 
In  the  army,  DDT  dust  is  primarily  applied  against  lice. 

In  order  to  form  aerosols,  a  mixture  of  insecti¬ 
cides  with  freon  Is  used  in  aerosol  bombs.  For  treatment 
of  small  areas,  portable  sprayers  equipped  with  a  hand 
pump  are  also  used  in  the  American  army.  A  solution  of 
the  insecticide  in  an  organic  solvent  or  in  water  emulsion 
is  poured  into  the  tank  of  the  sprayer.  Of  great  practical 
value  are  "wetting"  powders,  prepared  by  mixing  of  the 
insecticide  with  easily  moistened  inert  powders.  When 
mixed  with  water,  these  powders  produce  suspended  matter 
which  is  introduced  into  the  sprayers. 

There  are  on  sale  in  the  U.S.A.  wetting  powders 
containing  between  50-75^  of  industrial  DDT,  The  main 
advantage  of  using  wetting  powders  for  disinfection, 
as  compared  with  the  use  of  emulsified  concentrate  and 
oil  solutions,  indicated  in  the  American  manuals  (13 )>  is 
that  of  the  active  ingredients  of  the  former  which  are 
more  concentrated  and  can  be  carried  in  dry  form,  Ihey 
are  fire-resistant  and  present  no  problems  with  regard  to 
solvents,  since  water  is  usually  readily  available.  They 
can  also  be  mixed  with  a  dry  base  and,  if  necessary,  can 
be  used  in  dust  form.  Among  the  disadvantages  of  weticlng 
povKJtt's,  one  is  the  necessity  of  frequent  mixing  so  as  to 


336 


preserve  the  uniformity  of  suspended  matter,  and  another 
disadvantage  is  the  rubbing  off  of  pinions  in  the  pimip  of 
the  mechanic  sprayer. 

In  addition  to  hand  sprayers,  the  American  Army 
also  uses  powerful  motor-driven  spraying  equipment.  Such 
equipment  is  used  primarily  in  treatment  of  settled  aieas, 
roads  and  large  installations.  A  traveling  hydraulic 
sprayer,  which  is  a  standard  equipment  in  the  use  of  the 
American  Army,  is  mounted  on  a  trailer  and  is  equipped  with 
a  piston  pump  driven  by  an  air-cooled  gasoline  engine.  The 
sprinkling  mechanism  is  equipped  with  four  disks  with 
openings  of  1.6  to  2-7  mm.  in  diameter.  The  feeding  of 
the  spraying  substance  is  carried  out  through  a  suction 
pipe  19  mni,  in  diameter.  *1116  pump  discharge  is  no  less 
than  6  liters  per  minute  at  a  pressure  of  21  kg/cm^.  At 
this  pressure  the  droplets  that  come  out  of  the  sprayer 
are  smashed  into  very  fine  particles  which  are  airborne 
for  a  short  while.  Under  favorable  weather  condl+'lons, 
the  spray  can  attain  a  width  of  18O  m.(l3). 

According  to  calculations  of  a  Florida  laboratory., 
spraying  at  this  width  at  a  pvsap  discharge  of  6  liters  per 
minute  of  55t  solution  of  disinfectant,  will  provide  distri¬ 
bution  of  130  g.  of  insecticide  per  1  hectare  at  a  speed 
of  18  km.  per  hour.  If  necessary,  the  dosage  can  be  in¬ 
creased  or  reduced  by  regulating  the  speed  of  the  vehicle. 

Motor  driven  hydraulic  sprayers  are  also  used  for 
spraying  of  orchards,  trees  and  sowing  areas. 

Besides  the  hydraulic  sprayers,  there  are  in  use 
in  the  U.S.A.  motor  driven  pneumatic  sprayers  equipped 
with  air  compressors  which  provide  the  pressure  for 
ejection  of  the  liquid.  One  of  such  sprayers  is  the 
apparatus  constructed  by  Hasman.  Its  capacity  is  0.25 
per  minute  at  a  pressure  of  1.4  kg/cm^.  The  compressor, 
equipped  with  a  rubber  hose,  is  connected  to  a  19  liter 
capacity  tank  containing  the  insecticide  (13). 

The  tank  is  equipped  with  a  hose,  a  rising  pipe 
extending  down  to  the  bottom  and  a  regulating  valve.  The 
pressure  lo  controlled  by  a  manometer  built  into  the  tamk 
cover.  The  sprayer  head  has  six  openings  and  is  attached 
to  a  copper  tube  which  la  the  nozzle  of  the  hose. 

Certain  insecticide  sprayers  used  in  the  U.S.A.  are 


337 


built  on  the  principle  of  heat  generators.  The  spraying 
solution  is  either  warmed  up  in  these  generators  and 
evaporates  in  the  same  manner  as  gas  disinfectants,  or 
is  carried  by  the  fast  moving  stream  of  hot  air,  mixes 
with  it  and  disperses  in  the  open  air.  It  is  also 
recommended  to  use  for  such  purposes  the  exhaust  gas 
of  the  engine.  A  Venturi  tube  is  attached  to  the  exhaust 
pipe .  The  insecticide  flows  into  the  narrow  part  of  the 
pipe  where  it  is  warned  up,  then  disperses  as  it  expands 
on  crossing  the  widened  part  of  the  pipe.  The  droplets 
that  are  formed  in  spraying  with  heat  generators  are 
very  small,  and  therefore  the  mist  which  is  created, 
stays  long  in  the  air. 

For  treatment  of  large  areas  the  most  practical 
method  is  the  use  of  airplanes  and  helicopters.  The 
airplanes  are  equipped  with  special  Installations  similar 
to  those  used  for  sprinkling  of  toxic  substances. 

The  American  manuals  on  disinsection  contain  a 
description  of  a  so-called  longeron  installation  for 
spraying  of  insecticide  solutions  from  airplanes .  Holes 
are  bored  through  the  longerons  and  tubes,  connected  with 
tanks  of  different  capacities,  are  inserted.  The  liquid 
flows  from  the  tanks  under  pressure  Into  the  tubes  and 
disperses  with  the  air  currents.  Surplus  pressure  in  the 
tanks  is  generated  by  a  pump  which  is  Installed  under  the 
fuselage  and  is  activated  by  the  wind  (13)* 

Thus,  considerable  attention  is  given  in  the  U.S. 
to  the  problems  of  extermination  of  harml'ul  insects. 
According  to  American  experts,  all  the  insecticides  and 
"pellents  mentioned  in  this  section  can  also  be  used 
against  warfare  agents  of  the  disease-carrier  type. 


338 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


I.  Creasy  W.  M.  Armed  Forces  Chcoi..  X.  1962.  S,  3.  I& 

1  Creasy  W.  M.  Ordnance.  mB.  XLII.  228.  90. 

3.  Handbook  of  the  Hospital  Corps,  United  ^tes  Navy.  1963. 

4.  LangmairA.  D..  AndrevrsJ  M.  Am.  J.  iSib.  BHiHb;  1963:  42. 
3.  236. 

Sl  D.  Fotheritin.  Pub.  Health  Rep„  1967.  T2.  10.  866. 

&  Delense  BW.CW  Dccontamiaalton  .HamiaL  Department  of  Air  Force. 
1966. 

7.  Civil  Defense  .Against  Biologtcai  Warfare.  U.  S.  Government  PTintmit 
Ollice,  1963. 

8.  Plant  tor  Special  Weapons  Defense.  Part  I.  Defense  Against  Biotogicai 
Warfare  Agents.  J.  A.  M.  A.,  1953.  153.  9.  859. 

9.  Passive  Defense.  Prepared  by  Bureau  of  Naval  PersoimeL  1957. 

10.  Rosebury  T.  E.-nare  or  Pestilence.  Whittlesey  Honse.  1919. 

It.  Cooper  F.  S.  B  km.;  H.  W.  Baldwin.  The  Prke  of  Power.  New  York. 

12.  Health  Services  and  Special  W’eapons  Defense.  U.  S.  Government 
Printing  Office.  1950. 

13.  tnsecticides  and  Repellents  for  Insects  of  Medical  Importance  to  the 
Armed  Forces.  Circ.  U.  S.  Department  of  Agric.  1955. 


339 


ORGANIZATION  OF  ANTI-BACT  '.BIOLOGICAL 


DEFENSE  MEASURES 


In  preceding  sections,  data  from  foreign  litera¬ 
ture  was  cited  on  the  role  and  significance  of  a  number 
of  fundamental  measures  (detection,  individual  and  collec 
tive  defense  methods  and  disinfection)  which  have  been 
adopted  in  the  United  States  of  America.  In  the  present 
chapter  a  specific  analysis  is  made  of  an  entire  complex 
of  more  important  defense  measures  which  have  been  recom¬ 
mended,  beginning  at  the  moment  the  bacteriological  weap¬ 
ons  have  been  used  by  the  enemy  and  concluding  with  the 
eradication  oi  the  results  of  the  attack. 

One  must  make  the  reservation  that  many  extremely 
significant  organization  problems  relating  to  anti- 
bacteriological  defense  are  not  cleared  up  in  this  sec¬ 
tion;  this  is  due  to  the  absence  or  extreme  scantiness  of 
concrete  data  on  these  problems  in  the  American  press. 

The  basic  foreign  data  in  the  literature  are  cited  below. 

Inasmuch  as  bacteriological,  atomic  and  chemical 
Weapons  can  most  probably  be  applied  from  the  air  (in  the 
form  of  bombs,  shells,  containers,  etc.),  it  is  assumed 
that  in  the  majority  of  instances  the  moment  wb  a  they 
are  applied  will  be  preceded  by  an  alert  signal  supplied 
by  information  of  airforce  antiaircraft  defense  facili¬ 
ties.  After  this  alert  is  sounded,  the  population  of 
the  cities  (inhabited  centers)  will  be  required  to 
leave  their  apartments  and  to  take  cover  in  the  shelters. 

The  fact  that  bacteriological  weapons  are  employed 
by  an  adversary  can  be  detected  by  observation  posts  of 
the  civil  defense  ground-spotter  corps  on  the  basis  of 
visual  sightings  (for  signs  of  bacteriological  weapons 
having  been  used,  see  Chapter  V).  Pull  confirmation  of 
such  suspicion  can  be  obtained  only  through  a  laboratory 
study  Qf  air  and  water  samples,  as  well  as  other  objects 
occurring  in  the  surrounding  environment.  The  task  of 
gathering  and  collecting  samples  rests  with  the  local 


CD;rjnf nfE  of  tho  btotjcriolojict  1  rccci.nt^ii-'-'tnce  frcii  aiionr 

voKj'^tec-r  r-.aibtrs  of  the  ci''.’!!  oei'trce  serviot^  i..«  '..c:  1  vj, *r 
cborK tori i-ii  of  the  Stt.te  rutlic  Servi  rrc  ?:■•.  specie  1  rco:- 

eetrchaents  co;lot^^:!u£  ai<^trict  3t.i^;  .I'ib; o tto;  l*-o>  -f  in'. 

civil  oeferse  service.  The  cuties  of  tnesc  o.obiic  -hooic  coiifs  i;.c 
cctt.,c;iTtentc  cor.sj  et,fciorig  vith  tre  coilectioi  of  5to.;.ic;:,cO  i?o  ir.  the 
exe  cution  of  the  S-vriplcst,  enc  ftscest  es^ieoit.Lly  i-t  tt.e 

of  non-s_;  ocific  irioication  auo  in  the  routing  of  .st,";oic£  t:>  r.ne  | 

nearest  stttior.ary  iaboictoiy.  ri’rther  lebort.iory  otv.aies  et  j 

icentifyiii^  the  ii.cucer  are  j.ierfoxiiiec  ir.  cittr^ct  o.-ie^nostic  xu''!:-..-  j 
ooiits  L'''-.icre  ^leii.ninHry  oats  is  obte.uieUj ,ir.  tae  St-te  ccrti.-l  ! 
ieharstoziesjir.  local  hsctt-riolo^ica.i  iaboratoiie?  of  the  otate  j 

Puoiic  Hfcslth  L'ervice,in  hosoi'ai  Jahoiatorics^ec  wexx  &&  ir.  cli:  ;  :•£  { 
ar*u  XfcSearch-scientific  ir.atitutioriS  j 

j 

It  is  toaioaea  that  xn  a  Murib^'  of  cases ^ laboratory  studies  | 
irivolving  iraication  viil  yerioit  one  to  obtar:.  an  ar.cvi.r  oi;  t:  thx  ! 
ioe.otity  of  this  agent  vltair.  i.  relatively  short  tlue^i.e.  ..rlor  vo  f 
,T.sriift'stt lion  of  £lc*j".e££  cases.  At  the  sauc  tijie,nowovei',it  shriula  » 
te  taKen  into  consiceration  that  icentification  of  a  series  of  a-  , 
genta  (_esi.ecit.lly  riCKsttsia  sj.a  viruses^  rcyuires  a  consiatratie  i 

Ei.iount  of  tioje.  In  these  instances  ^as-veil  as  ir.  those  cases  in  | 

vhich  a  diversity  of  bacteriological  ve&ponQ  is-  applied^;  ti:e  rirc  of  | 
agent  vill  be  ascertained  on  the  basis  of  clinictl  ana  laboiatozy  I 
ciagjiosls  of  the  first  Kanifesteo  cases  of  in.-fectioas  clseastt  ..Ij.  I 


Irioediftcly  after  establishr.ent  of  the  fact  regarcl?'g  ayili-  i 
cation  of  bacteriological  v.eai:or!3  by  chc  eiiany  aiio  sount  ii‘g  of  the  I 
r.;orocrlete  alert, ioeasures  oesigned  for  the  oirect  yrotection  of  tho  { 
po^ulttion  ^c-r  trooiSj  froa  the  bacteriological  attack  are  pot  into  | 
effect.  Persons  caught  ir.  the  street  shoulc  gou  an  ir.civicual  fr-uni- 
less  i,a£  iss.-c  ^evioentlyya  iloccj.  acoyteu  for  use  by  the  civi-liar. 

,.‘opui' rion  -  A.  i. j.  Ii‘  this  is  not  readily  available,! t  is  rao.:::G.er.-i 
cec  to  cover  the  nose  anc  south  uith  a  coubiy  folueu  hsntlctrchitf , 
scarf  01  any  other  clothing  object  so  as  tc  avoiu  inhale tior.  of  the 
baetcrioiogical  rierosol  (.Ij*  It  is  necessary  to  con  special  ^.rotsc- 
t:ve  ^anaents  (.best  of  all  anti-gas  ones  j, ana  in  case  of  their  acsenc^ 
festen  tij,htly  air  the  buttons  of  noirnal  clothing  oDj acts, tic  then 
around  the  wrists  ana  arbcles  axic.  put  on  gloves  ,.ii*  It  is  rc.co: nenaat^ 
whenever  possible,  to  take  cover  in  builoings,pbrcnes,  exose-u  aulorobi- 
If^SjO'x  any  ether  shcltereo  place 

In  the  UbA'  aniiea  forces,  custooxary  i«zxlxtary  gas  ixas.cs  ana 
antij;,a£  protective  «ar.aents  are  usea  as  inuiviaual  ...efense  ucans 
against  fcacterioiogical  veai.ons  i3j» 


The  gas  aasn  ana  the  protective  ganxients  can  be  tas:^!.  o: 


341 


only  faftir  c;r;er^cr.cc  frxT  the  infected  aietrict  cjit. 
inciviaui.i  oiei’^;:ec+;or)  .3.. 


;ri Olsens 


The  oi.'St  .ae.jic  for  col.' ective  *  roti-.ct.ioii  :  re  Hnciters 
fitr,  antij^eji  freilitiei:  J  they  .  i-ovice  ^.'rotectioii  t-j;c;.ir  .^t  bactcrioi-j- 
^jCcil  vieuijona  \.it}.out  bt-vir-i  in  the-t  /•t.isr;s  enu  ^-rotectivt-  cio i -i ■ 
f.eii.tivc-  ^:rotection  free:  r  cecv:-i'ioia^ic&l  ciciiu  s.,rLy  it  rif 
by  oibintiiy  t.cco.TiOGstioii£  hiivlnj-  ti^htli  cicsic-  v.lnc')' s  cnc  eoor;;. 
Obviously, hui ever, they  ciu.  not  er-sure  seiety  it  i  ni£,h  coi.cer.tiU'.ic;. 
of,.-i.e  j'lOAOr.gicc  ex^-oiure  to  lei'osoij  theieioie  '.hi;,  viricas  cuilcii^^e 
fortifiec  structures, im  tuyn^ts,  levciu  ef  tu-ti^ts  luciiitlte,i;  c 
u.eeu  us  shelters, it  is  necesst-ry  to  yut  ou  yus  aasu'-..  ay  ^.roteeUve 
clothings  they  uie  uvuiltblej. 

Iroopt  luiccr  fitlc  concitions  e-iyl-O'  ret/il-r  i.'.tri..'  of  co  lJ;  acti¬ 
ve  aei'erisc  .ij. 


.i,u  .;:’U.ui.i£ 


e  coGc.iu- 


ure  ol 
re  jUiri: 


JzS  soon  C.S  circuioEtuiices  vill  only  ^'eri-itj-.-orje  uir-sc.  it  .til- 
cttir.ii  the  bucterioiogictl  uttuCiC  results  shoulc  be  sthitcv.  iif^t 
of  those  tiht.sures  has  not  been  fo.niulsten  exactly  i;.  ssierienn  nui-is, 
however, i'tnerull sing  seyeri  tc  Ciet4-,citec  h.  tne  liteteturs,  the  concii- 
sion  cfc.n  be  uruwn  that  it  incli;ces  the  I'oxiovlnj:  liieits  utt^-rriiru.  tier 
of  the  infection  nucleus, orfeanitiition  of  iUsrsntine, perform;,  net  of 
special  pr-ophylsvis  uig  icitnvinitation  uaonj:  the  ir:x'€ctoci,t-x.;osure  of 
the  sick  uid  their  isolation, !«'.--.ir.tunuce  of  evaouate-G  persons  re ^uirint 
.tedicel  £tteiition,ts  veil  t.s  measures  Involving  cisinf'-ction  axid 
s an i tary-bygi eni c  su^' t- rvi exon. 

Oeteraining  the  area  of  the  infecteu  nistrict  is  carriec.  out 
as  soon  as  piossible  after  ascertairjcent  of  the  fact  that  e  bactorio-- 
.'logical  attack  vas  coiarcitted.  The  cistrict  bounuor’ies  i-re  ii.arloia  with 
icentifying  sigtis  anc  the  access  to  it  is  haltea.  Accoroing  to  /jx-ri- 
Cc-n  Girectives  ;.lj  the  perion  curing  which  tntry  to  the  con- 

taioinatfcd  territory  is  cleniru  viii  Ga,evlc‘ently,u  short  one,  since  the 
£-ea  in  'puestion  is  subjectea  very  rapitly  to  natural  ui sinfection, 
oeing  rostly  'inuer  the  influence  of  solar  ra'iia*tion. 


Vie  were  unsuccessful  in  finciiig  in  the  aveilable  literature 
concrete  inuications  regarning  the  character  of  the  hygienic,  rastrictivt.- 
nieui'ures  vnich  w.julc  be  aGo^itec  in  the  contai-LLitatea  alstrict.  Consiic' 
rin^jbewevor, that  in  £.  bacteriological  attaca, public  health  orgens 
wixl  be  chargee  with  ■'  the  ezecutiox*  of  rxeasures  iiivolvine,  the  esta- 
biistoent  of  guarantine  ^l,i»j,it  eax*  ue  assuneu  that  piar-antine, 
evicently,is  x.ot  envisagea  in  ail  of  the  cases.  It  is  probable  that  ii. 
non-contagious  inf  actions,  the  kYgie-nic  iiethous  will  be  liii.itca  .only  t: 
the  isolittion  of  the  sicn. 


342 


After  ascerttitir-e^  the  Kii:a  of  agent  ein^.ioyec,  Si^cciflc  f.rc-  , 
teotive  aiee.sures  e-^uinst  the  btctericlogicul  vet-^.'on  are  ^jut  into 
effect. 

>■.11  the  persons  fotax;  within  the  teiTito:-y  of  the  contciain:;tec 
district  are  subjected  to  active  i_'jii'ni2.ation  t.^ainst  infectiui, ti;e 
agent  ■  of  wiiich  is  c.pplied  as  an  anta,,oiu,fct.  In  aduition  to  than, 
specif:!  seroprophylaxis  of  the  expectec.  aisease  Siaonp,  the  riost 
tant  catet'^^y  "t^e  population  i.  troops,  in  the  aefense  set-up  is 
jsjerforoieci  [whenevei'  the  t.ppj-opri&te  serusa  is  availabrej  .ixecutioa  of 
special  prophylaxis  with  antibiotics  arid  che.:.Oi.rtpaistions  is  uivser- 
taxen  only  ampn^  ILnited  pop>ulation  ami  troops  contingents. 

Ail  of  these  ;.itasures,ai-s£a  at  ^.reventin^  the  c.evylopxn.t  ai.a 
props iittion  of  infectious  cisoasss  shoulc  be  .-.coors^ylisheu  by  local 
forces  of  ,.ubiic  health  organs  (.-‘•j*  'Ihey  are  entrustea  Kith  erposu:e 
and  isolation  vora  of  infc-ctaa  sica  people.  The  ill  uncovered  in 
this  fashion  are  sent  to  nosprtais  ana  cxiniss  '.uitie  cis.j,rxOais  of  th'-ijj 
..iscuse  is  saeue  anc.  treata.ent  is  cox:ductea  ^1^.  before  ^.laCc.'.er.t  in 
inecdcal  institutioiiSjthe  ill  anu  siex-sus^'ects  ore  suojtctea  tc  sani¬ 
tary  treat.:;ent  consistinA  of  q j  sinf ectxoix  of  clotj^ec  a:ic  u.neai’-.ear 

Aecorc.in5j  to  official  i  eco.az.enc&tions  ,^'lacva.«i.t  of  ■..our'a  -c. 
•.no  fiCK  unuar  conditions  of  ”  <-n  extraoixdr ary  state  ”  atonic, 
ciiemica.i.,becteriolcAi'Oal  itteckj  will  be  c-onducteu  not  only  in  hospi¬ 
tals  Operatin'^  during  peace  thee, but  also  in  those  functionir.jj  uurin& 
varti.te, 

.eecdcsl  institutions  of  nei.;,hDoariiiy  st.ntss  are  assuneu  to  b-o 
e.T.ployeu  for  hos^.i taliication  of  woundec  ana  sick  fro:a  the  cistrict 
havint<  .suffered  the  at'Ltcu. 

♦ 

oioi-eover, the  aeuical  service  of  industrial  enterprises  esn, 
evioently  also  be  included  in  the  exposure  anu  isolatiox:  vorx  of  the 
infecteu  sick,  its  function  at  the  present  tixe  is  restricted  to 
conti-ol  of  ."jaintsir-.ing  sanitary-hyp^ienic  standai-ds  ^  however, during 
wartime  this  service, according  to  ti^e  re-yulrments  of  civil  aefense 
or^^snsjcan  be  strengthened  consioerabiy.  Tiiis  will  ensure  the  creaticxi 
£t  cVciy  laige  enterpiise  of  a  .ricdic&l  center  which, when  e.paipped 
properly, can  serve  as  a.  t£.aporary  hospital  1.5 j. 


We  did  not  encounter  in  foreign  literatui'e  0.01-6  precise  indi¬ 
cations  regarding  the  jieaical-evacuaticn  rcaix;t&.na;nce  of  the  infecteu 
sick  unaer  conditions  of  bacteriological  warfare.  As  for  wiaely  illu¬ 
minated  cases  iii  Americar.  literature  regaruing  organisation  of  mecical- 
evacuftticn  pi’O vision  uTiUer  coxicitions  of  axi  atoixiic  attack,  they  xust, 
obviouslyybe  sxa.aii:ec  separately, since  they  to  not  envisage  uaixxtaxiar ce 
of  an  anti- epidemic  regiiLC  on  evacuation  stages  anu  routes. 


i 


The  entire  Gontan.insteci  district  to^etiicr  vitJi  cui-idiiigs^Gei'eti-: 
se  works, treiisports, end  other  equipmisnt  conU-intc  In  it  enc  rub,i>r.cted  1 
to  compuieoxy  disinfection, while  people  trapped  in  tl.e  are-n  ui.c.tifcj  ; 
sanitary  tre&tiaent.  | 

ihe  scope  of  3ariitt.ry  treatment  oepenas  on  the  jitite  up  oi  ti.u 
tactical  situ-ation  and  available  laeaiiS.  It  is  uonsjcei  tt  thut  fct  tne 
first  pobsicllity  ail  persons  luivin^  been  expocec  to  t..e  bt.c ..-eri ,  - 

cal  weapon  snould  uuidergo  coinplete  sanitary  treatment, charii.!:.,,;  tx'-.-ii  i 
contatainriXec  cioil'iee  arx  underwear  Sp-^ecial  wasnin«;  cur. tur?. 

ir  tne  orgarization  of  which  USA  aruy  personnel  ar.n  epaipuent  'Lj.-.c  i 
2jurt  are  ueveiopeo  for  rhis  purpose  L^j*  I 


Tanirig  into  account  the  enoiaous  scope  oi  tieasxa'es  C':  ccer.' f 
with  disinfectiou, the  latter  is  assuaec.  to  be  perfoi'T.eo  o'.:.  y  in  sna:.’ 
sections  of  the  affected  iocaiity  as  well  as  in.  structures  vni.cn  .ire 
of  coneicerabxe  significance  to  tne  var  effort,  it  os  assuned  that  tnc 
following  sittple  aethods  will  be  applied  lor  Vioespreau  cisuP. ec'.j on: 
isechanicsi  cleflr.ing,cryine,^veri.tilatxori,eoi£r  irradiation  vnicn  v.i:l’  he 
csrriec  tnixaugh  until  the  identity  of  the  bactei'ioaog.toi..u  vc-apov  -s 
escertainec.  Scricter  disinfection  Eethods  are  recouitenutu  shovU.u  it 
turn  out  that  spore  shapes  were  applied. 


The  use  of  bleaching  pbwuer  is  recoituaenaed  foi  t;»  u.>  si.  i'setiot 
of  cuildings, roads, j-nd  streets, as  well  as  for  tne  tree t*Ltn oi  .u.nu 
plots  and  fields,  Laige  continuous  surfaces  iricluuing  the  foilovirg,: 
stc-ne  ana  brick  fences, walls  of  buildings, solio  surfaces  of  rcj-uc  iJ-: 
streets, tile  and  concrete  floors, etc,  -  are  nisxnfecttd  by  si:cple  vatd 
wsshings  fr-oa  hoses  t5j>  thixiugh  the  utilization  cf  aisinfectirg  agents 
;a  nypocriiorite  solution  and  othersj  witr.  subsequent  hose  vasb.ir.gs, 
and  with  hot  steam  i.from  steam  kettlesi.  tisirJ'&ction  of  interior  tit'-.-o 
can  be  carr5.ed  out  by  simple  washing  cf  floors  and  vails, ver.t-iicitior, 
and  son  crying  of  nigs, stair  carpets, ana  even  furnitui'e 

nensene  ana  acetylene  biirners  are  sometixes  eftj  Icyea  f..>r  Tie 
oifinfection  of  so.me  forn.s  of  xetailic  euaipment  one,  r!on-fiisrx>K'b..c 
obj  rCto , 

All  of  these  measures  comprise  U-c  rx'sponsiciiitifs  of  Civil 
uefense  sanitary  services;  it  is  assuxea  that  hoA  axt-ec  forces 
participate  in  its  activity. 

ine  entire  personrieu  of  civil  cefensc  oetacixaerits  vorKir.j,  j.o 
bacteriological  weaponb  aetection  ana  execution  of  measures  concorneo 
i  witn  ciGinffcction  is  proviced.  with  gas  masss  ano  protective  cmituts. 
I.titex'  disinf ec tionisf  tne  contaminated  aastrict,the  j,jeopj.e  unc.-rgo 
I  a  couiyiete  treatment  anc  receive  clean  unaei''<''ear,vnilfc  their  Ci.ot.hei 
jcre  cisinfectea  or  aestroyed  t2j. 


344 


food  products  and  vs. ter  contained  in  tr.e  oistrict  faflectea  oy 
Dscterioiogicai  wea^xjns  are  suspecteu  to  de  inlecteu,snc  their  con¬ 
sumption  is  prohibited  penuing  spteciai  perxission. 

ihe  entire  vater  oesignated  for  coiu-unai  neeos  is  uislnfcctea 
through  chlorinatiorijvhich  is  consioeieo  as  Wi  ainiost  uriivtiStl  .i^e- 
thoa  for  its  pufification.  lOreover, i t  is  estumec, that  tne  Inr.tnsity 
of  chlorination  in  vater  pipes  siiouid  not  oe  uower  than  1  : 
of  resicuai  chlorine  after  a  15  minute  contact  perioa  i,5j.  In  onse 
it  is  impossible  to  organize  vater  cnloriiiation,it  shoulc  he  suo^ec- 
teo  to  couijr-uisory  boiling. 


Fraquent  bacteriological  water  analyses  several  tic.es  per 
dayj  shoulc  be  perfonaea  on  large  water  pipes  (.water  springs j  in 
oroer  to  ensure  continuous  water  control  l5j» 

Under  fielc  conditions, water  supply  is  provioed  by  military 
water  works  in  which, besides  chlorination, tne  water  is  also 
filtereo.  In  order  to  provide  water  for  small  military  groups, U.e 
so-called  Lister  bag  is  employed  which  is  aao^^ted  by  the  ivmerican 
army  for  water  supply,  iMoreover, water  for  diainfectlf-r,  can  be  suo- 
jecteo  to  boiling.  Inasmuch  as  spore  fonca  of  microbes  yield  poorly 
to  customaiy  disinfection  metbod6,in  cases  of  bacteriological  attack, 
pending  special  permission, only  boiled  water  should  be  consumed  J3j» 

All  food  products, contaminated  or  suspected  to  be  infected, 
are  aestroyed  or  subjected  to  disinfection  (.cooaing, boiling]  ijjfta 
determined  by  local  authorities.  In  order  to  supply  the  population  of 
the  contaminated  oistrict  with  food, a  special  service  of  communal  caije 
is  created  In  the  civil  defense  systea  t5j»  It  is  considereo  that 
control  involving  execution  of  normal  sanitary-hygienic  measures  in 
the  contaminated  district  shoulc  be  strengthenea  si^B^ply,  However, 
in  the  opinion  of  American  specialists  these  measures  should  not  ai- 
ifer,in  essence, from  similar  ones  put  into  effect  in  time  of  natu¬ 
rally  arising  epidemics.  All  responsibility  for  their  execution 
rests  with  the  sanitary  sections  of  the  State  public  health  oepart- 
masts. 

1 


345 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


t.  Civil  Dcienv  Ag«inM  Biuiogical  Watfarc.  U.  S.  Government  Prindng 
UUire.  1953. 

2  Plans  lor  Special  Weapons  Delense.  Part  I.  Defense  Against.  Biological 
Warfare  Agents.  J.  A.  M.  A.,  1953.  153.  9.  839. 

3.  Handbook  of  the  Hospital  Corps.  United  States  Navy,  1953 

4.  L  1  n  g  m  u  i  r  A.  D..  Andrews  J.  AL  Am.  J.  Pub  Health.  1%2.  42. 

3.  235. 

5  Health  Services  and  Special  Weapons  Defense  U.  S.  Government 

Printing  Office,  I960.  (Pepr.  1952). 

6  Forreatal  R.  B.  Mil.  Rev..  1950,  30.  4.  89 


