DOCUMENT RESUME 



SO 016 981 

Talbot, Elizabeth, Ed.; Vaillaat, Janet G. f Ed. 
Russia/Soviet Union: A Guide to Print Materials for 
Teachers. 
85 

114p. 

Russian & Eastern European Center, University of 
Illinois, 1208 W. California, Urbana, IL 61801 
($4.00,; $2.50 each for 10 or more copies). 
Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MP01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. 
Annotated Bibliographies; *Area Studies; Cultural 
Awareness; *Foreign Culture; Grade 6; Guides; Junior 
High Schools; *Literature Reviews; Reference 
Materials; Resource Materials; *Russian Literature; 
Secondary Education; Social Studies 
♦Russia; *USSR 



Intended to provide middle school and high school 
teachers and others interested in Russia and the Soviet Union with a 
guide to printed materials, this booklet is divided into several 
sections. The first section, comprising the bulk of the publication, 
is devoted to reviews of 69 books that were written for classroom use 
or appear as if they might be particularly interesting to students in 
grades 6-12. Each book has been reviewed by two people: a 
university-based expert evaluating balance and accuracy and a 
classroom teacher focusing on accessibility and possible uses in the 
classroom. For each entry, author, title, pages, identifying numbers, 
physical description, price, grade level, subject, summary, and 
comments by both a Russia/USSR specialist and a teacher/learner 
specialists are provided. Additional sections list over 200 
background readings, teacher and student projects, reference books, 
Russian and Soviet Literature, and maps and atlases. A section 
describing additional information sources lists university Russian 
and East European centers, special interest groups, distributors of 
Soviet materials, distributors of Soviet films, and travel agencies. 



ED 267 003 

AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 
ABSTRACT 



******************************i l i l i f i t i t i t i t i t iti t i t i t i t i t i t i tilililil1t1t1t1t1t1t1t1t .************ 
* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

from the original document. * 



Russia / Soviet Union 



O 
O 

r\i 
o 



UA DEPARTMENT OF EDOCATIOW 

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ Tho document has been reproduced at 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

• F omts of view or opinions suted in tho docu- 
ment do not necessanly represent official NIE 
position or policy 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL IN MICROFICHE ONLY 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



A Guide to Print Materials 

for Teachers 




r'/SSssy/ssssssssSysssAs 





Russia / Soviet Union 



A Guide to Print Materials 
for Teachers 



Compiled and Edited 
by 

Elizabeth Talbot 
University of Illinois Urbana/ Champaign 
and 

Janet G. Vaillant 
Harvard University 
1985 



ERLC 



3 



INTRODUCTION 



The purpose of this booklet is to be useful to those who want to teach 
and learn about Russia and the Soviet Union. Our goal is to help answer 
such questions as: "What is the best book for my class? What books should 
my library buy? What can my study group read about the Soviet Union? What 
is available about Soviet education? women? the different Soviet 
nationalities?" These are questions that the editors of this booklet have 
been answering for middle and high school teachers and, increasingly, for 
other adults over the last few years as part of their work at area centers 
of the Universities of Illinois and Harvard. It has become clear, however, 
that many teachers and others who have such questions cannot visit our 
centers in person. Furthermore, the answer as to what is best varies with 
audience and purpose. We tl srefore set out to collect information about 
what is available and to evaluate it in a form that would allow individuals 
to choose what seems to match their needs. 

The choice of what to review proved more difficult than we had 
anticipated. We decided to limit ourselves primarily to what is currently 
in print and easily available. It is not useful to be told that there is an 
extraordinary book that has not been available for fifteen years. There 
were a few things, however, that we could not resist mentioning because 
they are particularly good, and may be available in public libraries or 
through book search services. Furthermore, even during the time we have 
been working on the project, some ite^s have gone out of print while others 
have been reprinted. Our dilemma in this should serve as a reminder to all 
those working in this field or an::ious to build up a good collection: buy 
things when you see them, because the in-print life of Russian and Soviet 
materials is often very short. As a result, you may find some discrepancies 
in price or availability when you go to purchase a book, and inevitably we 
will have missed some new books or failed to include some excellent old 
ones, but we have done our best to be complete, and still get this into 
print as quickly as possible. 

The booklet is divided into several sections. The first and longest 
section is devoted to reviews of books that were written for classroom use 
or looked p.t first glance as if they might be particulary interesting to 
6-12 students, as we anticipate that our primary audience will be 6-12 
teachers and school librarians. Each book has been reviewed by two people, 
one a university-based expert in the field who was asked to evaluate the 
book's balance and accuracy, and the other a classroom teacher, who was 
asked to focus on the book's accessibility and possible uses in the 
classroom. Here we cast our net as widely as possible to locate reviewers 
of different viewpoints and expertise. There are in addition sections on 
background reading for teachers and student projects, reference books, 
books useful for their visuals, maps and atlases, literature, and 
additional miscellaneous information we thought might be helpful to those 
seeking information or teaching about the Soviet Union. 

Many people have helped us in our work. Individual reviews in 
Section One are signed by their authors. Sections Two and Four are the work 
of Janet Vaillant, with much help on Section Four from Katherine O'Connor, 
Associate Professor of Russian at Boston University. Ken Poppe of 
Farming ton (CT) High School provided some help with the section on emigre 
literature. Sections Three, Six and Seven are the work of Elizabeth Talbot, 
and Section Five of Catherine Jones, librarian of Harvard's Teaching 



ERJC 



4 



Resource Center. Assistance in locating additional reviewers for Section 
One was provided by Brian Carter of the Council on Russian and East 
European Studies at Yale University, and by Dr. Ruth Hastie of the Center 
for Russian and East European Studies at the University of Michigan. 

Special mention must be made of Bill Jaeger, staff assistant of the 
Harvard Center, who devised ingenious methods to know who was doing what 
and goaded us all into action. Without him, this project would still be 
just that, a projact. We also thank Susan Zayer who stepped in at the end 
to provide added help. Finally we would like to thank the US Department of 
Education for its financial support, and Dr. Ann Schneider in particular 
for her encouragement of our work. Responsibility for the views expressed 
lies, of course, with the individual authors and the editors. 

Janet G. Vaillant 
Elizabeth Talbot 
Cambridge, Maos. 
July, 1985 



5 



A REVIEW OF MATERIALS FOR TEACHING 
ABOUT RUSSIA/SOVIET UNION 



Table of Contents 



INTRODUCTION 



I. BOOK REVIEWS 

A. Books written for Classroom Use 1 

B. Supplementary readings and references 38 

II. BACKGROUND READINGS FOR TEACHERS AND FOR STUDENT PROJECTS 

A. History . . 70 

B. Contemporary Life 73 

1. Scholarly Investigations . . » 73 

2. Visitors 1 Accounts 75 

C. Emigre and Samizdat works 76 

D. Miscellaneous 79 

III. REFERENCE BOOKS 

A. Encyclopedias 80 

B. Single Volume References 80 

C. Historical and Contemporary Images in Photographs . . 82 

D. Architecture and the Arts 86 

IV. RUSSIAN AND SOVIET LITERATURE 

A. Folk Tales and Stories 87 

B. Literature written before the Revolution . . . * . 88 

C. Literature of the Soviet period 89 

D. Background Information and Anthologies 90 

V. MAPS AND ATLASES 92 

VI. ARTICLES 95 

VII. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 

A. University Russian and East European Centers .... 97 

B. Special Interest Groups 98 

C. Distributors of Soviet Materials 100 

D. Distributors of Soviet Films 102 

E. Travel Agencies 104 

VIII. INDEX OF BOOKS kEVIEWED 

A. By Author 105 

B. By Title 106 



ERJC 



6 



1A. BOOKS WRITTEN FOR CLASSROOM USE 



-1- 

Belasco, Milton Jay. THE SOVIET UNION: HISTORY, CULTURE, PEOPLE. Third revised 
edition. Joint author Harold E. Hammond. New York, Globe Book Company, Inc., 
1981. "Regional Studies" series. 234 pages. Illus. Maps. Index* Bibliography. 
Glossary. ISBN 0-87065-629-5. Paper. $5.72. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY* This textbook provides a cursory, direct, didactic look at the USSR's 
economy, culture and society, foreign relations, and its relationship with the 
United States since the inception of Communist rule. Chapters are titled with 
subtitles throughout each. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* Although the preface indicates the author's intention 
to focus on developments since lbo3 and to explain the reasons for communism's 
continuing existence, the text's emphasis on factual summaries rather than 
analysis does not allow the student to answer the questions posed in the 
preface. Often, the significant features of Russia's earlier history are not 
related to events after 1863. For example, the discussion of Peter the 
Great's reforms fails to explain the significance of the development of the 
westernized gentry. The author's presentation of the period after 1863 would 
benefit from an analysis of the development of the revolutionary movement, 
including the relationship of Lenin's ideas to those of earlier Russian 
revolutionaries and social thinkers. The book contains a clear explanation of 
dialectical materialism and the labor theory of value, but the analysis of 
Marxism ignores communism' s failure to take power in the industrially advanced 
countries. Despite its title, the book gives scant attention to the 
development of Russian culture, and a chapter on Soviet foreign relations does 
not go beyond the mid 1970s. The book is marred by minor slips such as Paul 
III for Paul I, misspellings, and more serious errors such as the statement 
that the "United States helped the Communists with large supplies of food and 
armaments" during the rule of the Provisional Government. 

Vincent Hammond, University of Illinois 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. The objectives of the author are stated in the 
preface of the book: How and why did the Soviet Union move from a backward 
nation to an industrial giant? What is it really like? What is communism? 
Is it as bad as many Americans believe? And why has it lasted 60 years? I 
believe the authors do an adequate job in answering these questions for a high 
school course on Russian studies. Its reading level is for the average 
student oi below, so it is not a good book for students who are college bound 
or in an advanced social studies curriculum. It covers too much in too short 
a space in an elementary manner. The chapters are factually written, 
encyclopedic and rather cut and dried. 

A teacher with a strong foundation in Russian Studies could bring life to 
a course using this book. S/he would have to supplement chapters with human 
interest stories — Peter the Great, Lenin, Marx, Stalin — and other tools. 

The book Is well organized and suppplemented with maps, charts, pictures, 
and projects. The "Case Inquiries" are inadequate to convey a sense of the 
humanity of the Soviet peoples. The tests are elementary and some items are 
ridiculous. The book is good bui needs a teacher "on fire" for Russian/ Soviet 
studies. 

Cathy Franciosi, Grosse He (MI) High School 



9 

ERIC 



7 



-2- 



Bingham, Marjorie Wall* WOMEN IN THE USSR* Joint author Susan Hill Gross. 
Hudson, WI, Gary E. McCuen Publications, Inc., 1980. "Women in World Cultures" 
series. 150 pages. Teaching Juide, 19 pages. Illus. Maps. Bibliography. 
Glossary. Pronunciation Guide. ISBN 0-86596-005-4. Paper. $6.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Social Studies, Women's Studies 

SUMMARY* The role of women in Russian and Soviet history is presented through 
the use of quotes from diaries, travelogues, and biographies as well as from 
commentary based on historical and sociological studies. Selections, framed 
by commentaries, are arranged in chronological order from the Scythian period 
to the present. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The coverage of women's positions in Russia and the 
USSR is uneven, and this seems to reflect the mixture of high-powered 
scholarly sources and more popular travel accounts and biographies. The two 
levels of analysis represented in the sources are not always integrated to 
good effect. The selection of items is peculiar and stresses the unique and 
often the grotesque rather than the typical. Auna Akhmatova's poetry is 
beautiful and haunting but its place here is unclear; Evgeniia Ginzburg might 
have been a better individual to focus on. The vulgar eighteenth century 
ruler Anna Ivanova is included at the expense of the more interesting and 
accomplished Elizabeth. Too much attention is pnid \n general to rulers and 
dynastic issues, as though there were only peasants and tsars in Russia, and 
no aristocrats (pp. 68-69). Furthermore, many items which are cited to 
suggest the bizarreness and backwardness of Russia — the work roles of 
peasant women (p. 74), the issue of higher education for women (p. 96) — 
would benefit from the observation that such conditions were similar in 
Western Europe. There are occasional factual errors: Trudovik (p. 92) was a 
political party, not a male peasant leader, the picture on p. 89 is of Smolny 
Convent, not Smolny Institute, and the Polish Mutiny identified as occurring 
in the 1840s (p. 123) took place in 1830. Finally, the book seems to rely 
upon the reader's prior knowledge of the history of Bolshevism, Marxism and 
the basic characteristics of the Soviet system (pp. 106 and 114). 

Diane Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. The book succeeds well in its objective of 
providing materials on women in Russia for use in global studies and world 
history courses. The selections are interesting and very readable and the 
format (large type, use of boldface type, maps, time lines, sketches, and 
photographs) is attractive. There are discussion questions at the end of each 
section and a glossary at the end of the book. A Teacher's Guide states 
objectives and provides responses to the questions at the end of each section. 
Also included in the guide is a cognitive test made up of forty multiple 
choice questions. 

Patricia Bean, Grand Ledge (MI) High School 



ERJC 



8 



-3- 



Catchpole, Brian. A MAP HISTORY OF RUSSIA. London, Heinemann Educational Books 
Ltd., 1976. 122 pages. Illus. Index. ISBN 0-435-31157-3. Paper. $7.00. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History, Geography 

SUMMARY* Brian Catchpole discusses Russian and Soviet history from the time of 
the Vikings to the development of dissent in the 1960s. More than half of the 
book is devoted to the Soviet period. Each topic is briefly and concisely 
summarized on one page, which is faced by an illustrative graphic. Maps are 
tailored to illustrate a significant point in the text, such as the expansion 
of Russia, invasion of the Mongols, or changes in borders after World War II. 
They are supplemented by other small illustrations. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This book is highly recommended for its accuracy, and 
for the skill with which the illustrations enhance the text. Imaginative 
illustrations, such as a "map" of a typical kolkhoz and a map of the City of 
Moscow in the 17th century, a chart of population growth between the early 
18th and 20th centuries, and a facsimile of a "beard license" from the time of 
Peter the Great, supplement more conventional maps that illustrate changing 
borders and the important locations ♦ In keeping with his format, the author 
emphasizes political history. The only quibble I might have is with the odd, 
gratuitous observation of the author that some American jails have a layout 
like those of Stalin's prison camps. This is a small quibble indeed for an 
excellent book that provides a fresh approach to presenting its material. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Brian Catchpole 1 s MAP HISTORY OF RUSSIA is a 
useful tool for teachers and students who need to acquire some Russian and 
Soviet history in order to begin to understand contemporary international 
affairs. In 120 pages, Catchpole presents precise accounts of events, 
programs, and national and international crises. He minces no words in 
describing the human costs of present and past achievements. 

Facing each page of text are black and white photos, maps, diagrams, or 
graphs with extensive legends that illustrate important situations and 
emphasize critical aspeccs of events. For example (p. 84), the division of 
Germany (1945-49) identifies the leaders of the countries, shows the various 
sectors, airports, air corridors used during the Berlin blockade, and 
delineates the political boundaries we have today. In equally clear terms, 
current conditions and problems in Poland, Korea, and China, as well as 
economic challenges in the USSR, are introduced and described. 

The vocabulary Catchpole uses is a bit formidable, but appropriate. This 
reviewer will use the book with a 10th grade Modern World Societies class, and 
with 11th and 12th grade U.S. history classes. Perhaps the best description 
of the text's usefulness is that we can all learn from it. I, for one, am 
delighted that it is available. 

Carol Horgan, Newton (MA) North High School 



3 



Clark, James I. THE SOVIET UNION, Revised Edition. Evanston, IL, McDougal, 
Littell & Company, 1983* "People and Cultures" series. 143 pages. Teaching 
guide, 65 pages. Ilius. Maps. Index. Chronology. ISBN 0-88343-632-9. Paper. 
$6.39. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. THE SOVIhT UNION consists of twelve chapters and is divided into two 
units. The first, "A Nation's Roots and Growth" (four chapters), shows the 
sociopolitical, cultural, and economic evolution of Russia from the beginnings 
of the nation to the emergence of Khrushchev as leader of the USSR. The 
second unit, "Soviet Life Today" (eight chapters), covers the effects of 
communist rule on such things as growing up in the USSR, education, rural and 
urban life, the arts, and the roles of the Church, family, and women in modern 
Russia. Also included in this unit is a brief look at foreign affairs. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The introductory historical section is excellent in 
discussing Imperial Russia as a pyramidal society, and in its presentation of 
Marxism, Leninism, the Bolshevik victory in 1917 and Stalin's forced 
industrialization. However it contains errors and instances of inadequate 
treatment and misplaced emphasis. Early Kiev was not "Russia" and should be 
treated as the cultural-religious seedbed of all Eastern Slavs. The Mongol 
impact on the emergence of Russian nationality is hardly noted. Also the 
author undervalues the impact of Stalin's purges on contemporary Soviet life 
and leaders. Most of the chapters in the main section on "Soviet Life Today" 
are good. But that on women and religion ignores recent scholarship on the 
unequal burden of family responsibilities on women and the persistence of 
religious belief. There is no chapter on nationalities and nationalism. The 
book's strong point throughout is the author's widely chosen and provocative 
selections from literature and accounts of people and events to highlight 
historical issues, cultural values and the textures of Soviet life. Finally, 
although the book was revised in 1983, the book essentially concludes with 
Khrushchev's ouster and fails to note that his successor reversed his break 
with Stalinism. Thus, it offers no context for understanding current economic 
stagnation, the crisis in morale, Jewish demands for emigration and other 
dissent. There is nothing about the new Cold War in East-West relations, 
tensions in Eastern Europe and the break with Communist China. The list of 
dates, index and study guide are accurate and useful. 

David B. Miller, Roosevelt University, Chicago, IL 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Teachers of world history or regional studies will 
find this textbook to be a rich source in the study of Russian history and 
culture. The Student Guide at the back of the text and the separate Teacher's 
Manual are thoughtful and useful adjuncts to the text. 

The book provides students with an examination of historical Russia and 
the contemporary Soviet Union. The reader is led to see the development of 
Russian and Soviet institutions through the eyes of the people themselves 
through the lavish use of fictional and non-fictional primary source 
materials. An excellent black and white picture portfolio on "The Soviet 
Union Today" opens that unit. 

Altogether, this is a beautifully written book that should attract and 
excite the interest of average or above- average readers. 

Joseph F. McGuire, Centennial High School, 
Champaign, IL 



10 



-5- 



THE COLD WAR: A CONFLICT OF IDEOLOGY AND POWER. Edited by Norman A, Graebner. 
Boston, D.C. Heath and Company, 1976. "Problems in European Civilization" 
series. 206 pages. ISBN 0-669-81984-0. Paper- $5.50- 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Political Science 

SUMMARY* This book is an update of an earlier 1963 edition of readings on the 
U.S.'s relationship with the Soviet Union since World War II. Historians and 
political experts from several parts of the political spectrum, including 
Khrushchev himself, assess the causes and course of this conflict of wills and 
cultures. Only a few readings have been added to the 1963 edition, and they 
fail to shed much more light on the subject. There is an extensive annotated 
bibliography of further readings which could be helpful to the serious 
student. Readings cover subjects from the origins of the Cold War to the 
Brezhnev era in the early seventies. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. A well selected collection of diverse perspectives, 
including the obviously "pro-Soviet" views of Khrushchev and the "revisionist" 
arguments of William Appleman Williams are presented. Reading such a variety 
of views on the origins and nature of the cold war is definitely worthwhile. 
It clearly illustrates that well informed people can disagree and that there 
is therefore no clearly "correct" interpretation of this important era. 
However, a good knowledge of the basic facts of the period helps put into 
perspective the more extreme views contained in some of these essays. I 
particularly recommend the relevant sections in the books by Alvin Rubens tein, 
or Joseph Nogee and Robert Donaldson, both of which are entitled SOVIET 
FOREIGN POLICY SIWCE WORLD WAR II. One or more of the available "full length" 
discussions of this period should also be read such as Louis J. Halle, THE 
COLD WAR IN HISTORY. In short, the cold war is a very important topic, one's 
understanding of which is bound to affect one's view of the current state of 
Soviet- American relations. No one book can possibly provide all the necessary 
background. 

Ronald Pope, Illinois State University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST* Since these essays were first published in 
scholarly journals, their language is quite sophisticated and a great deal of 
knowledge and/or facility with language is assumed by the authors. This 
limits their usefulness for the average classroom teacher, although I would 
recommend it for background reading for the teacher or for very able students. 

There are brief introductions to each article which help the reader to 
understand the viewpoint which will be expressed and to judge the 
qualifications of the author. 

I found this book informative and generally well-balanced between 
revisionists and more traditional historians. Neither group reflects extreme 
bias and both are articulate in arguing for their particular viewpoints. The 
only real problem with this collection is that it is aimed more at college 
rather than at secondary level students of world affairs. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) Senior High School 



-6- 



Cubitt, Heather. RUSSIA UNDER THE LAST TSAR. London, Longman Group Ltd., 1980. 
"Then and There" series. 96 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Glossary. ISBN 
0-582-22141-2. Paper. $3.40. 

tirade: 7-9 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This brief volume is part of a 100-title "Then and There" series 
produced by the British publisher, Longman Group Ltd. Its stated purpose is 
to show "why there was a revolution in Russia in 1917," primarily by looking 
at the mistakes of the last tsar, Nicholas, and his advisors. The book covers 
the period from the 1890 f s when Nicholas was crowned through the revolutions 
of 1917 and the death of the royal family in 1918. It deals with the personal 
lives of the Romanov family against the background of the major political, 
diplomatic, social, economic, military and revolutionary aspects of life in 
the last days of Imperial Russia. Ten well-organized chapters are 
supplemented by pictures and a glossary. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This is a simple and remarkable little book. Rather 
than a narrative, it is a series of vignettes, drawing upon both primary and 
secondary, Eastern and Western sources. Cubitt explains and questions her 
sources, drawing attention to bias and (in the case of Rasputin, for example) 
to the apocryphal. 

The book covers the conventional, high-profile topics (Revolution, The 
Potemkin, War with Japan) and also delves Into urban and rural daily life with 
accuracy and ease. For example, the vignette on village life is accessible, 
not overly simplistic, and astonishingly accurate. "An English Girl's View of 
Russia" uses contemporary sources to contrast the two countries. To take one 
final example, "Murder at Ekaterinburg?" gives several versions of the story, 
and reviews evidence and interpretations in an open-ended way. RUSSIA UNDER 
THE LAST TSAR is creative, sufficiently comprehensive, honest and accurate. 

Carla Ann Schmidt, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. This is a well-written, interesting book, which 
contains a great deal of information, as well as a useful list of activities 
in a "Things To Do" section. What is particularly interesting is a brief 
account of how the author researched the book. Other features of the book are 
the fascinating descriptions and analyses of highly interesting and 
significant events such as the tragic events surrounding Nicholas' coronation, 
the Russo-Japanese War, Bloody Sunday, the Potemkin mutiny, World War I and 
the murder of the royal family. Equally fascinating are the portraits of 
important personalities, including Nicholas, Alexandra, Alexis, and Rasputin* 
The life of the Russian nobility of the time is vividly portrayed by citing 
the diaries and accounts of English governesses who served Petersburg and 
Moscow families. The author also describes other segments of Russian society, 
including the peasant, the urban worker and the revolutionaries. There is no 
analysis of the provisional government or the events leading to the Bolshevik 
take-over in October, but the author suggests that that story is taken up in 
another "Then and There" book called "Lenin and the Russian Revolution." The 
strength of "Russia Under the Last Tsar" is the ability of the author to 
portray convincingly the last decades of Imperial Russia. It should interest 
students and be a useful resource for teachers. As with other volumes in this 
series, however, there are no questions for students at the end of the 
chapters. 

Kenneth Poppe , Farmington ( CT) High School 



ERJC 



12 



& - 

V 



-7- 

Gerhart, Genevra. THE RUSSIAN'S WORLD: LIFE AND LANGUAGE. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace Jovanovich, 1974. 257 pages. Illus. Index. ISBN 0-15-577983-4. $12.95 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Language, Sociology 

SUMfARY* Genvra Gerhart wrote this book to explain how the Russian world 
differs frora ours in its physical appearance — its stoves, its apartments, 
its games, and its way of spending leisure time. As she is herself a Russian 
language teacher, she provides Russian words for what she describes, which are 
then scattered throughout the text. The book is divided into 12 chapters', 
some with a linguistic emphasis such as how names are formed: patronymics, 
diminutives, special names for relatives, and which names were popular before 
and after the revolution, and why. Others describe in detail how Russians 
spend holidays, what their schools look like, and what games they like most. 
There are many small drawings. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This book is a storehouse of detail about daily life 
in Russia before the Revolution and in the USSR today. In includes details 
hard to come by elsewhere that are almost always accurate. Although a person 
who knows Russian will appreciate parts of it inaccessible to the non-Russian 
speaker — names for horses, cats, and dogs, for example — most of the 
information is presented in a way that is quite understandable without a 
knowledge of Russian. This book provides for teachers those bits and pieces 
of information needed to bring immediacy to the subject. After seeing a sketch 
of a Russian stove and reading about how it is used, it will oe clear why the 
stove plays such a large part in Russian stories and why (and how) old people 
sleep on them. The index is useful for locating information. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST* As stated in the preface, THE RUSSIAN'S WORLD is 
intended to present everyday aspects of the contemporary Russian's world. The 
text, in English, is interrupted with Russian vocabulary and, for this reason, 
students tend to find the text slow-going. In fact, vocabulary is one of the 
emphases of the book as the title implies. In some sections, like "The Man 
Himself" or "Russian Names," considerable space is devoted to lists of Russian 
vocabulary. 

While inclusion of Russian vocabulary diminishes the book's usefulness as 
a text for social studies classes, its value as a vocabulary supplement in a 
beginning or intermediate language course is also limited because of the 
esoteric nature of much of the vocabulary, and because the book lacks the 
necessary drill work that is critical to teaching vocabulary. It does, 
however, present a great deal of interesting information about daily life that 
can easily be used to supplement a unit on the Soviet Union. The book might 
prove useful as a resource for teachers, who can Incorporate the information 
into lectures and classroom activities. 

Elaine Eisenhauer, Newton (MA) South High School 



-8- 



GROUND ZERO EDUCATIONAL PACKAGE FOR ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS. Portland, OR, Ground 
Zero, Year. 58 pages. Illus. Maps. Cassette tapes. $9.95. 

Grade: 1-8 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY* The objective of this package is to acquaint children with 
similarities and differences between the peoples of the Soviet Union and the 
United States. Through the use of map skill activities, comparative language 
exercises and exposure to culture and literature, children in grades 1-8 are 
expected to gain a feel for what the Soviets are all about. In 1985 audio 
tapes, "Growing Up in Russia" and "Russian Fairy Tales" were added to this 
package. They were not examined by these reviewers. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This project to provide basic information about the 
peoples and the land of the Soviet Union for use in elementary schools is well 
intentioned, but poorly executed. In the sectiou on the alphabet and 
language, the authors keep insisting that the letters of the Russian alphabet 
are pronounced ah, beh, veh, etc. The unit designed to make it possible for 
American youngsters to write letters to their Soviet counterparts by copying 
set phrases in Russian and filling in blanks by phonetically writing their 
names, etc. is very clever and could work if the Russian alphabet was properly 
presented. The unit on geography contains some interesting and effective 
learning games, and also sone inexcusable errors, e.g., that zemlya (land) 
means "island," that one can get from Astrakhan to Leningrad by means of the 
longest "canal" in the world, that Greenland is a country, etc. 

The units on people and culture fare somewhat better. There is a fine 
list of Russian and corresponding American proverbs. There is a rather odd 
unit on "Beliefs" consisting of four pages on American Indian and old Russian 
and Slavic mythologies, but not a word on orthodoxy, Christian or Marxist. 

It is unfortunate that the committee that put these materials together 
did not show them to specialists in the several areas discussed who could have 
readily spotted the errors or poor formulations. 

Rasio Dunatov, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. These materials could be interwoven into character 
education, social studies, literature, and world culture studies. Although 
the texts have been written in an interesting manner, the teacher will need to 
prepare the class for their use. The map exercises, for example, would need 
to be broken down into smaller lessons and specialized vocabulary taught 
before the exercises are attempted. The purpose of each activity is clearly 
stated, but noticeably lacking is a resource list of other materials that 
could be used in a unit of study. The selection of topics could be improved. 
For example, a comparison of holidays rather than folk beliefs would offer a 
more realistic common ground for students in the upper elementary schools. In 
order to check what the students have learned, the teacher will have to create 
more worksheets or tests than are provided. Also, for the concepts to be 
internalized the teacher must supplement the materials with films, colorful 
pictures, and additional readings. 

Barbara Smith, Garden Hills School, Champaign, IL 



14 



-9- 



Hartley, L. THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. London, Bell & Hyman Limited, 1983. 
"Knowing World History" series. 48 pages. Illus. Maps. Bibliography. 
Chronology. ISBN 0-7135-2417-0. Paper. $3.50. 

Grade: 7-9 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. Beginning with an overview of "What is a Revolution?", THE RUSSIAN 
REVOLUTION uses the standard chronological stops — Nicholas II, 1905, World 
War I, 1917, Civil War, etc. — to move from Ivan III to Stalin. In 21 
two-page sections, the author has included four maps, four charts and 63 
black-and-white photographs. Each section also contains three to five 
questions related to the narrative or illustrations. There is no bibliography, 
but a very brief "Further Readings" with 16 suggestions is included. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This is a pastiche of distorted, sensational, and 
sometimes historical facts. The author appears to have no qualifications for 
his/her task, and seems to have drawn randomly and uncritically from general, 
pro-Soviet, and anti- Soviet sources. The emphasis is on telling a gripping 
story rather than making complex processes clear to a young readership. There 
is no systematic bias, but confusion everywhere: 19th-century Marxists are 
"communists." Lenin's coffin is irrelevantly and wrongly placed in a "long 
narrow room" in the Kremlin. The theoretical division of 1917 into bourgeois 
and proletarian revolutions, which ties 1917 to Marxism, is not developed, so 
the idea becomes meaningless. Inconsistency of interpretation abounds, 
without proper discussion of alternative interpretations., The Bolsheviks 
"steal power like a thief in the night" despite earlier exaggeratedly 
sympathetic discussions of popular misery. Lenin is both hero and villain. 
Pictures are liberally used but also uncritically: on the same page (34) 
there are a line drawing of Red Guards — to show they wore everyday dress — 
and a photo of Red Guards in uniform. In general, the book will confuse more 
than it will inform. 

Diane Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. The first reaction to this work is that it is very 
short. The author uses 39 pages to move from circa 1480 to the conclusion of 
World War II in 1945. The intent is to introduce the student to Russian 
history and more specifically the revolutionary period. This worthwhile goal 
is overshadowed, however, by a gross lack of detail. There is no clear 
definition of the revolutionary period. Therefore, the work comes closer to 
an overview of Russian history than of the revolution. It is also 
disconcerting to find the last chapter ending with 1945. If the author is to 
go that far into the Stalin era, it seems reasonable to at least conclude with 
the death of Stalin in 1953. The teacher will find the work far too 
simplistic for the target audience of "...slightly older pupils who generally 
study modern history." To the author's credit, new words are italicized and 
defined, and the photos are well chosen, and relate to their location in the 
text. They use up considerable space, however, that in a work this short 
should be used for information on the subject. In general, the student can 
learn as much or more about Russia and the revolution in a good encyclopedia 
article, without the expense of purchasing the book. 

Denny L. Schillings, Homewood-Flossmoor (IL) H.S. 



15 



-10- 



Hess, Jacqueline. U.S. -SOVIET RELATIONS. Arlington, VA, Close Up Foundation, 
1983. 43 pages. Maps. Glossary. Videotapes. $5.50. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History, Political Science 

SUMMARY. This 46-page booklet consists of four parts designed to help students 
understand both the process of formulating foreign policy and the complex 
US-Soviet relationship. Part I discusses the ideological and geopolitical 
factors which influence the superpowers' foreign policy decisions. Part II 
traces the evolution of US-Soviet relations. Part III focuses on the arms 
race, and Part IV looks at the future through the views of various prominent 
foreign policy experts. The book is accompanied by a Teachers Guide and four 
half-hour videocassettes which are not reviewed here. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Summarizing a complex foreign policy topic in 46 pages 
is a hazardous undertaking, but this "Special Focus" is generally successful. 
The importance of geopolitical factors is discussed. Using an historical 
perspective, communism and capitalism are described as ideologies and as 
economic systems. The brief, somewhat muddled discussion of the two economies 
is the only serious weak spot in the booklet. A description of the two 
political systems is used to demonstrate the apparatus through which foreign 
policy decisions are filtered. The account of the evolving US-Soviet 
relationship is accompanied by thoughtful comments on fundamental concepts 
(e.g. "What is a Cold War?"), and the discussion of the arms race is placed in 
the context of overall defense philosophies. The author recognizes the fact 
that scholars do not always agree on how to interpret past or current Soviet 
and American actions. 

Ruth Hastie, University of Michigan 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. This well-organized booklet provides a good 
structure for building a unit on an important subject in the high school 
social studies curriculum. 

Successful course use of U.S. -SOVIET RELATIONS will depend heavily on 
teacher enlargment of student factual knowledge and conceptual understanding. 
This is the ca3e particularly in the first chapter, "Differing World Views," 
where the author's assumptions about student background in European as well as 
American history and government are probably overly optimistic. Unfortunate 
omissions and blurring of time periods may also lead to student 
misconceptions. Laissez-faire capitalism appears in the text to accompany the 
Renaissance; both the role of the U.S. government in the development of 19th 
century American industry and socioeconomic conditions in pre- revolutionary 
Russia are seriously underplayed. Chapter Four , " In Pursuit of Peace , M might 
also benefit from teacher addition of readings from Soviet sources. (Here, the 
limited bibliographical references are a weakness.) A helpful format with 
introductory questions and a summary of main points in each of the four 
chapters, as well as the useful diagrams of Soviet and U.S. governmental 
systems and the clear maps and charts, facilitate students' reading of the 
highly compressed textual information. Overall, the merits of the text's 
organization and language/ style and the accompanying curriculum guide (with 
eight excellent sample classroom lessons) make up for what may be inevitable 
defects in a concise presentation of such a large subject. 

Joanne Wheeler, University High School, Urbana, IL 



16 



-11- 



Jackson, W.A. Douglas. SOVIET UNION. Grand Rapids, MI, The Fideler Company, 
1983. "World Cultures" series. 160 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Glossary. ISBN 
0-88296-197-7. $13.70. 

Grade: 5-8 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. SOVIET UNION begins with a geography section, with maps and pictures. 
It also includes sections on "History and Government," "People and Their Way 
of Life", and "Earning a Living." It is in the final chapter of Part 4 that 
the book considers some of the issues related to the Soviet Union's 
"superpower" status and foreign relations with the United States. At the end 
of each chapter there are learning activities to engage students further in 
their study of the U.S.S.R. The didactic presentation and literary style is 
in bold contrast to the profusion of colorful photographs that, by themselves, 
invite investigation into the Soviet Union. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The strength of this book lies in its descriptions of 
Soviet geography, Soviet culture and the Soviet peoples. The author, a 
geographer, is clearly at his best when depicting terrain as it affects 
agriculture and life-styles. 

The book is weakest in its historical and political aspects. The author, 
while not overtly anti-Soviet, obviously has a distinct point of view. First, 
the author makes it clear that life is better in the U.S. Second, he 
repeatedly mentions "dictatorship" and the people "not choosing" their 
leaders. Although both statements are true, the general simplification of the 
Soviet political process creates a starkly anti-Soviet impression. 

The author's confusing description of the Party and state organization 
have been clarified by a diagram. 

As a specialist in Soviet foreign policy, I found most to disagree with 
in this realm. Although his descriptions of the Cold War are relatively 
balanced, they are simplified to the point of being devoid of information. In 
terms of Soviet policy toward the Third World, the author confuses the issues 
in the Arab-Israeli dispute with the reasons for the Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan. 

Carol Saivetz, Northeastern University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Jackson's apparent objective in presenting his 
textbook to upper-elementary level students is two-fold: one, to provide 
information, and two, to provoke interest. The language is plain, the text 
perhaps too tersely written to be stimulating, but with the profusion of maps 
and colorful illustrations, numerous learning activities, and the emphasis on 
real people, SOVIET UNION should meet his objectives. Less capable readers and 
older students could utilize the book, especially in special interest areas 
such as government or the arts. It is basically a social studies text, but 
teachers of art, music, or physical education might also integrate appropriate 
sections into their courses. 

There are also numerous skill and activity sections for each part, and at 
the end, a glossary as well as a student Skills Manual. Although unit tests 
are one recommended means of determining students 1 learning, research papers 
and problem solving activities provide alternatives or supplements to that 
method. 

Gail Gardner, Martin Luther King School, 
Cambridge, MA 



ERIC 



17 



-12- 



Kublin, Hyman. RUSSIA, Revised Edition. Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 
1974. "World Regional Studies" series. 268 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. 
Bibliography. ISBN 0-395-17718-9. Paper. $8.48. Companion volume RUSSIA: 
SELECTED READINGS. 262 pages. ISBN 0-395-17715-4. Paper. $8.28. 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY* In 255 pages Hyman Kublin has provided a comprehensive survey of 
Russian history from the beginnings through the early Brezhnev years. 

The textbook is organized in a solid, traditional chronology with chapter 
headings and subsections. It includes lists of items for identification, 
questions for further discussion, and suggestions for future readings, most of 
which are available in a companion volume of selected readings. Certain 
chapters contain good capsule summaries of historical figures or events. There 
is a companion volume of readings. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Coverage stops at 1972. Except for the discussion of 
1917, the narrative is clear, if somewhat dull. A slight anti-Soviet bias is 
detectable, though the facts are generally accurate. Kublin gives his version 
of events without identifying any alternatives — e.g. did Bolshevism lead 
directly to Stalinism? Were conditions prior to 1914 or World War I the main 
reason for the February Revolution? What was the contribution of agriculture 
to the industrialization effort of the First Five Year Plan? Was the Stolypin 
reform viable? Was Stalin's government totalicarian in nature? What degree of 
social support did it have? The text is too thorough pn foreign affairs to 
the detriment of discussion of internal political and social questions. Thus 
Kublin mentions the Pakistani-India war and Sukharno f s Indonesia but fails to 
mention Kronstadt, the "Fathers and Sons" cultural debate of the 1860s, Witte, 
or the Silver Age of Literature. The author tends to define "progress" as 
making Russia into a world power instead of as improving the welfare of the 
people. He fails to show the continuing Russian dilemma of the desire to be a 
great power and the necessity of recognizing the reality of backwardness. 
There is little material on "average" people except with regard to economics. 
Kublin does not relate parties and movements (i.e. Old Believers) to their 
social bases, nor does he note the weakness of the middle class. The terms 
socialists and liberals are used without an explanation of their meaning in 
the Russian context. The author includes little from recently-done research on 
1917, i.e. that the Bolsheviks in 1917 were not a small, disciplined party. 
The pictures are good. Better, more interesting and up-to-date texts that 
include more domestic and social history should be available. 

Tim Mixter, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. This text is intended to be used with a companion 
volume of selected readings. Presumably these selections would enliven the 
historical data presented here. The numerous and attractive maps, charts, and 
illustrations are extremely useful. Sections with detailed information on 
topics of particular interest are interspersed throughout the text. 

On the whole, Kublin 1 s RUSSIA provides a clear and useful summary for 
high school students of history. Teachers whose knowledge of Russian history 
is extensive and who have access to more vivid primary and secondary source 
readings can use this book with the assurance that their students will bb 
provided with a serviceable guide to a complex subject. 

Bonny Musinsky, Cambridge School of Weston (MA) 



18 



-13- 

Lane, Peter. THE USSR IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. London, B.T. Batsford Ltd., 
1978. "Twentieth Century World History" series. 96 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. 
ISBN 0-7134-0977-0. $14.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This small book (part of a series on the 20th century) attempts to 
give a concise view of the Russian/ Soviet state from the late 19th century 
until 1976. Interesting illustrations and maps amplify the information. At 
the end of each section are several review questions and suggestions for 
further activities. (Some of the activities are rather challenging 
considering the almost skeletal structure of the information contained in this 
book.) Material is presented in chronological order with clearly marked 
headings. References are made to each numbered illustration and to some of 
the other books of the series which treat some of the subjects discussed here. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The tone of the book is straightforward and factual; 
if anything, there is a slight anti-aristocratic bias suggested by the 
treatment of World War I and the 1917 revolution. Especially in the pre-1945 
sections, good use is made of passages quoted from eyewitness accounts. 
Pictures are not always correctly identified: the photo of the St. Petersburg 
workers 1 soviet (#16) was taken in exile in Siberia, which makes them look 
more like peasants than they would have in St. Petersburg; the Duma (#23) met 
in the Tauride palace, not the Winter Palace. On the whole, information is 
presented in encyclopedic fashion, becoming quite breathless and 
helter-skelter in the post-Stalin chapter. As a result, little or no 
deference is paid to differences of interpretaion. Inevitable simplifications 
lead to error, although not in any systematic way. (P. 12: the SDs in the 
1880s wanted a revolution which would lead to a "Communist form of government" 
— no such form was then envisioned.) The author is not a specialist in the 
field, but does appear to have read the appropriate and standard secondary and 
primary sources. 

Diane Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. This book has a great deal of information crammed 
into less than 100 pages. Most of it is accurate and the illustrations are 
helpful and amplifying. One is almost breathless upon its completion (it can 
easily be read in one sitting) , feeling almost assaulted by the encyclopedic 
array of facts about Russia/ the USSR from the freeing of the serfs to near the 
end of the Brezhnev era. For the student with almost no knowledge to begin 
with, it would give a bare bones view of the things that have shaped life in 
this great land. I would not recommend sticking to the questions/activities at 
the end of each chapter as a basis for using the book. It could well be used 
as a starting point for basic information on a particular subject, and then 
supplemented with readings of more depth and detail such as those in the 
Vaillant/ Richard FROM RUSSIA TO USSR. The material in the book is clearly 
stated with a vocabulary that should be within the range of most able junior 
high students and above. Large print headings for the chapter sections would 
make it possible to find material on a particular subject for the student 
looking for a specific section of history. Selections from numerous original 
sources are quoted to give more authenticity to the reading ranging from 
Khrushchev's boyhood memories to Lenin's testament on Stalin and John Reed's 
TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK THE WORLD. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) Senior High School 

; 19 

■s, 



-14- 



ERIC 



Lawrence, John* A HISTORY OF RUSSIA, Sixth Revised Edition* New York, The New 
American Library, Inc. (Meridian Books), 1978* 352 pages* Index* Bibliography. 
Chronology. ISBN 0-452-00670-8. Paper. $6.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. John Lawrence first visited the USSR in 1934, and later lived there 
for three years during World War II as British Press Attache and editor of the 
weekly "British Ally." He speaks Russian fluently and has a broad and 
scholarly point of view. The history text is divided into four sections: 
Forest and Steppe, The Age of Moscow, The Age of St. Petersburg, and The 
Soviet Age. Each section has from five to eight chapters and some of these 
are divided. Following each section is a useful list of comparative dates. 
Lawrence writes carefully and smoothly. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This sixth edition of Lawrence's 1957 work remains 
true to the author's stated purpose — to offer the beginning student a 
coherent introductory survey. Disclaiming any pretensions of covering in 
detail every aspect of Russia's long and complex history, Lawrence has chosen 
to focus upon both Russia's internal development (as opposed to foreign 
relations) and the Russians (as opposed to numerous non-Russian minorities). 
On the whole, the book is what it purports to be, a readable, sympathetic but 
highly interpretative essay on the entire span of Russian history. Not at all 
a textbook, HISTORY is idiosyncratic and, at its best, incisive. At its 
weakest, however, it tends to be superficial and somewhat vague. The author 
is at his best when he analyzes Russian Orthodoxy, its distinctive spiritual 
life and rituals, differences from Catholicism and Protestantism, its role in 
the evolution of the autocracy, and its destiny under the Soviet regime. Also 
well done are his treatments of Russia's physical geography, the roots of the 
Polish and Jewish problems, the peasant's world, the emergence of Moscow, and 
the reign of Peter the Great. On the Soviet period, uhich represents roughly 
one-third of the book, Lawrence is very uneven. For example, Stalinism is 
glossed over and unduly simplified, and the 1977 Soviet Constitution is not at 
all discussed. The book is, nonetheless, a fine introduction to the 
prerevolutionary period of Russian history. 

P.E. Micciche, Fitchburg (MA) State College 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Although this book is interesting and has been in 
circulation since 1957, this reader thinks it unlikely that most high school 
students of either Russian or European history will find it readable. There 
is very little information about the events of the last 40 years. For a 
teacher, preparing to speak to classes about Russian history, however, there 
is a wealth of information an J much useful editorializing by the author. For 
example: "In Ivan the Terrible Muscovy found a gifted and strong ruler who saw 
some of his country's blinding Russian clarity which often inspires great 
undertakings only to bring them to tragic conclusions..." (p. 102) or "The 
Russian peasants are avaricious enough but the townspeople, who set the tone, 
have always lacked bourgeois forethought and calculation" (p. 326). This 
reviewer found the accounts of the various expansions of Russia and of World 
War II thought-provoking. 

If you are looking for a volume to add to reference material on Russian 
and early Soviet history, then I can recommend this book to you. There are no 
maps or illustrations. 

Carol Horgan, Newton North (MA) High School 



20 



-15- 



Leone, Bruno. COMMUNISM. St. Paul, MN, Greenhaven Press, Inc., 1978. "Opposing 
Viewpoints" series. Four pamphlets, 96 pages total. ISBN 0-91261b-52-0. 
Teaching guides. Illus. $5.95. 

Grade; 11-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. COMMUNISM by Bruno Leone is a compilation of seventeen excerpts from 
journals, newspapers, books and speeches in four pamphlets, presenting 
divergent views on various aspects of communism and life in the Soviet Union. 
Topics include: "Communism, Socialism, or Capitalism? 'The Great Debate'"; 
"The Communist State: Democracy or Totalitarianism?"; "Life in the Soviet 
Union: Freedom or Tyranny?"; and "Commcnism Today: For and Against." Each 
excerpt is preceded by a brief biographical sketch of the author and one or 
more questions to focus the reader's attention. Topic headings appear 
throughout the text and short exercises on various critical thinking skills 
conclude each pamphlet. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The stated purpose of these pamphlets is to introduce 
high school students to a "wide range of conflicting opinions" about the 
economic and political benefits of capitalism, socialism, and communism. The 
texts, though, consist only of short polemics, written by famous and not so 
famous people, that lack supporting evidence and fall woefully short of the 
author's purpose. Rather than a wide range of respectable opinions, the 
author presents a series of superficial diatribes concerning the merits and 
demerits of the Soviet Union vis-a-vis the United States. For example, he 
includes the contrasting views Ojc Joseph Stalin and Daniel Cohen-Bendit on 
political liberty in the Soviet Union. The exercise of intellectual freedom 
is treated from similarly divergent perspectives. These unsubstantiated, 
radical positions will not provide a valuable resource for instruction by high 
school teachers. 

George Putnam, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Bruno Leone's pamphlets are geared for developing 
critical thinking skills through analysis of objectivity, distinguishing fact 
from opinion, recognizing ethnocentric views, and identifying characteristics 
of communism. As such they could be utilized in high school as supplements in 
Modern Problems courses or in 20th-century U.S. or World History courses to 
stimulate debate on the nature and practice of communism. 

Several areas cf caution seem appropriate. The overall reading level of 
this series is college. Thus, its use is limited to upper division classes. 
The sources presented provide only a superficial introduction to polarized 
points of view. Consequently, proper critical analysis necessitates both 
student knowledge, of history and economics and teacher expertise on communism. 
Several of the sources seem out-of-date (1917, 1922, 1930, 1936) and the scope 
of references on the nature of communism is rather narrow. Tito, Khrushchev, 
Mao and Communist Party positions in nations other than the Soviet Union are 
not mentioned. Finally, the pro-Soviet ccmmunisc and U.S. conservative 
viewpoints of cited publications are inconsistently identified. Perhaps the 
process of education would better be served by using more current and 
representative sources on the nature and practice cf communism. 

Sister Barbara Link, 0,S.F., Academy-Spalding High 

School, Peoria, IL 



21 



Leppert, Ella C. SOVIET UNION. Columbus, OH, Charles E. Merrill, 1980. 
"Global Insights: People and Culture" series. 136 pages. Illus. Glossary. 
Index. ISBN 0-675-01912-5. Paper. $3.90. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History, Sociology 

SUMMARY. This book is one of a series dealing with six global areas. As the 
title of the series implies, the focus is on the people and their environment. 
There are nine chapters, including two on geography, one on the Soviet 
nationalities, and one on daily life. The history of Russia and the USSR is 
presented in five thematic chapters: the cities, the tsars, the revolution, 
the peasants, and industrialization. Pictures, maps, and charts supplement 
the text. A revised edition of this book is to be published in 1985. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Because this book focuses on the people and their 
environment rather than the nation state, the author does not provide the 
student with vital information on the Soviet Union's role in history and as a 
major force in the world today. The method used in this book is to 
intersperse the text with primary sources, which in most cases are valid 
comments on the theme being discussed. While not ignoring shortcomings in 
Soviet society, the author is generally very positive and sensitive to Soviet 
pride in the areas of education, housing, and industrialization, and she is 
willing to deal with such topics as environmental problems and nationalism 
within the Soviet Union. While the book emphasizes contemporary life and 
provides some social and economic history, students will need supplementary 
material in order to understand both the internal and external policies of the 
Soviet Union. The book is marred by a few obvious, even ludicrous errors made 
by someone who coadensed the text, but these should not hinder its use. 

Elizabeth Talbot, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. For teachers eager to find a brisk little 
introductory textbook for short courses on the Soviet Union, Insights is a 
very appealing book. The author has put the book together in a direct and 
interesting manner that will certainly appeal to high school students of 
average or above reading ability. The use of maps and interpretive charts and 
graphs strengthens the text and will be a useful point of departure for 
teachers who wish to explore topics in greater depth than does the text. The 
pictures that begin each chapter are dramatic and compelling, a refreshing 
departure from the drab photography that is common to so many texts about the 
Soviet Union. 

The author has included a case study in each chapter which focuses on a 
particular event or incident. She also has an "Exploration" section which 
puts each topic in perspective in order to allow students to think about it in 
the larger context of Soviet life and history. Throughout the book there is 
an abundant use of source material from newspapers, popular journals, and 
monographs on history and culture. 

James F. Marran, New Trier West High School, 

Northfield, IL 



22 



-17- 



Ludlow, Hope T. THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE. New York, Scholastic Book 
Services, 1973. Revised 1980. "Scholastic World Cultures 0 series. 239 pages. 
Teaching guide, 79 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Pronunciation Guide. ISBN 
0-590-30158-6. Paper. $4.45. 

Grade: 6-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. The roots of Soviet culture and life in the Soviet Union are 
presented in the first seven chapters, accompanied by black and white 
photographs and eight colored maps. Interspersed are six shorter sections 
dealing with major periods in Russian history. Twenty-four pages at the 
center provide a photo essay on land, people, economy and culture of the 
region. The final eight chapters and one historical section examine the 
Balkans and the Northern Tier of Eastern Europe, accompanied again by 
photographs and colored maps. The book has a story-like approach that 
stresses human relations and attempts to integrate anthropology, economics, 
sociology, geography and history. Each chapter ends with review questions, 
discussion topics, student activities, and a skill development project. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. A book that introduces nine countries in so few pages 
faces daunting problems and must choose carefully the facts and ideas it can 
present. The first half of Ludlow's little book is better at this, focusing 
on the USSR and touching briefly on every topic it should. Its sections on 
politics and history are balanced and accurate, though now dated. Sketches of 
the causes of the revolution, of Stalinism, and of de-Stalinization are 
especially good. It is similarly balanced on ethnicity, religion, and 
education; but on daily life in Moscow it is full of minor errors, on the arts 
it notices only dissent, and it overemphasizes poverty, minimizing real 
Japrovements since the 1960s. Still, it is a solid, useful work. None of the 
chapters on East Europe is more than 12 pages long. Most focus on ethnography, 
slighting history and economics, but what there is of these is accurate. The 
Polish chapter is best, packed with dramatic events, but also now quite d^ted. 
The Czechoslovak chapter works well comparing rural Slovaks with urban Czechs, 
but the reader learns only that the Bulgarians are poor and bored, not why 
they are the most loyal of the satellites, and only that the Hungarians have 
struck a deal, not of their relative freedom and prosperity. It ends with a 
summary titled "Will Communism Last?" that emphasizes economic development and 
nationalism, but does not try to answer its own question. Beware of the 
pronunciation guide, which is full of ludicrous mistakes. 

Brian Carter, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. The stcry-like approach of this book should 
capture student interest, for political and economic forces are integrated 
into tales of people's lives over the last half century. This attractively 
presented book is appropriate for the middle grade (6-9) student and for the 
high school student reading below grade level. According to Fry f s readability 
testing guide, six random samples averaged to an 8th grade reading level. 
Unfortunately, the range varies from grade 6 to grade 12, which could prove 
problematic for students with limited reading skillsc The text would benefit 
from a clearly defined vocabulary listing, integrated into each chapter. 
Overall a useful text for a young student's initial introduction to this 
region. 

Larry Michaud, For an High School ( Mi If or d, CT) 



ERLC 



23 



-18- 



Mack, Donald W. LENIN AND THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. London, Longman Group 
Limited, 1970. 104 pages. Illus. Maps. Bibliography. Glossary. ISBN 
0-582-20457-7. Paper. $3.40. 

Grade: 8-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. Mack relates, in a simple narrative style, a history of Russia from 
1914 to 1924. The text is generously interspersed with quotations from source 
materials and organized in 14 short, descriptively titled chapters in 
chronological order. Approximately half the p3ges are illustrated with period 
photographs or maps. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Focusing on the most dramatic events of the 
Revolution, the author also gives the reader a sense of what daily life was 
like for worker, peasant, and soldier. Although Mack may not be a specialist 
in Russian history, he has written here a colorful, exciting, and informative 
narrative that cannot fail to rivet the attention of middle and secondary 
school pupils. But is this achieved without doing violence to the reality of 
the Revolution and Civil War? The book is marred by several glaring errors in 
minor facts. More serious, however, are the omissions. Most books on the 
Russian Revolution either fail to do justice to the Bolsheviks or to their 
opponents. This book errs against the 3olsheviks f opponents, as can be easily 
seen in the grossly inadequate characterization given the Socialist 
Revolutionary Party and the Menshevik Party in the author's otherwise useful 
glossary. Illustrating the vivid narrative are well-chosen contemporary 
photographs. Some of these are misidentif ied; one, "Storming the Winter 
Palace," is not authentic but is a "still" from Eisenstein's great film, 
"October: Ten Days That Shook the World." Nevertheless, the book succeeds in 
the main thing: it makes the complex Revolution comprehensible to the novice. 

Albert Resis, Northern Illinois University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Donald Mack has, in approximately 100 profusely 
illustrated pages, produced a surprisingly complete account of events in 
Russia from the outbreak of World War I to the death of Lenin and the 
subsequent Stalin-Trotsky power struggle. 

Though the simple text can be read easily by junior high school students, 
the content makes it useful for older students as well. A glossary, keyed to 
italics in the text, defines not only political and Russian t*rms, but also 
general English vocabulary. The numerous archival photographs are well-chosen 
and often striking. The amount of information squeezed into this tiny book is 
remarkable. Complicated political and economic topics are presented with 
clarity. Frequent quotations from primary documents and a brief 
historiographical note provide both color and authenticity. 

The book' s British origins are betrayed in its spelling and currency 
references, and time has invalidated some statements made at the time of 
writing (1970), but Mack's work is a model of concise and simple treatment of 
a complex topic. It should be suitable for a wide range of courses and ages 
from 8th grade through high school. 

J. Milton McGinnis, Prospect High School, 
Mount Prospect, IL 



24 



-19- 



McCauley, Martin* STALIN AND STALINISM. Essex, England, Longman Group Limited, 
1983. "Seminar Studies in History" series. 128 pages. Map. Index. 
Bibliography. Glossary. ISBN 0-582-35266-5. Paper. $6.25. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This book deals with the means by which Stalin gained control of the 
Soviet Union, how he consolidated and exercised power and how "Stalinism," at 
least in modified form, has left its imprint upon Soviet life. The 80- page 
text describes the early post-revolutionary period, the 1930s and the Great 
Patriotic War before dealing directly with the intricacies of "high Stalinism" 
and an assessment of some scholars 9 views of Stalin. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This book is part of a series of publications designed 
for classroom use which are "more substantial than a textbook chapter but less 
formidable than the specialized full-length academic work." In 71 pages the 
author covers the political institutions, economic structure, cultural life, 
domestic politics and foreign policy of the Soviet Union from the Bolshevik 
revolution to the dsath of Stalin. The book examines most of the important 
issues within each topic. A "feel" for the period is provided by a collection 
of documents at the end of the book, which contains excerpts from Stalin's 
speeches and official Soviet panegyrics as well as dissident memoirs 
describing the realities of life in the system. Nevertheless, the book 
occasionally skimps on certain subjects, such as the ways in which Eastern 
Europe was integrated into the Stalinist system after World War II. There Is 
also no description of Stalin's youth and activities in the period before the 
Bolshevik seizure of power which would give the reader some understanding of 
Stalin the man as well as Stalinism the system. Overall, the book is a 
concise and comprehensive introduction to the Stalinist period. The author's 
standpoint is that of an objective — but not morally neutral — observer, 
recording the economic and political successes and failures of Stalinism 
without losing sight of the human cost and the missed opportunity to build a 
viable society by less brutal means. 

Juozas A. Kazlas, Yale University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. The author's objective is to define Stalinism and 
place it within the present Soviet context. He sees it as a pragmatically 
evolved, essentially Russian, totalitarian socialist system put into place by 
an arguably gifted politician who placed personal power and the preeminence of 
the Soviet Union beyond all other considerations. In the author's view, 
Stalin wedded socialism to ageless, pre-revolutionary modes of Russian social 
control. 

The text is packed with fascinating details and insightful analyses. 
Teachers will find the book extremely interesting and professionally useful, 
but few of their students will Le able to profit from it directly. While the 
information contained in STALIN AND STALINISM may be used for research 
purposes or independent study in upper grade level courses which deal in depth 
with the post-revolutionary period, the book is by no means appropriate for 
most secondary students • The conceptual level ( especially in initial and 
concluding sections) and much of the vocabulary are beyond the ability level 
of all but the most able and highly motivated upper class secondary school 
students. 

Robert C Cox, Milford (CT) Public Schools 



ERIC 



25 



-*0- 



Millar, James R. THE ABC'S OF SOVIET SOCIALISM. Urbana, IL, University of 
Illinois Press, 1981. Glossary. ISBN 0-252-00845-6. $6.50. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Economics 

SUMMARY. James Millar first deals with the evolution and the testing of the 
Stalinist economic system during World War II. Next, he assesses the actual 
workings of socialism, separating the government's view from above from the 
individual's view at the bottom, and then considers the intermediate sectors 
of industry, agriculture, and natural resources which fall between these 
extremes. Finally, the operation of the system itself is analyzed, and future 
directions are considered. Information is presented directly with headings 
and subheadings utilized throughout and suggested readings for each chapter. 
There is a glossary. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This is an interestingly written, comprehensive survey 
of the Soviet economic system. The author provides an especially 
knowledgeable discussion of the formative years of Soviet economic 
institutions. The book is distinguished by first-hand experience and 
perspective. A thorough understanding is conveyed without excessive detail or 
rhetorical complexity. (The one exception to this is the chapter on 
macroeconomic performance, for which a rudimentary background in theory would 
be useful.) The author's use of example and comparison permits him to touch 
all bases without ever becoming tedious or textbookish. Adding to the interest 
of the volume is the theme running through it — the distinct, systemic 
obstacles to the achievement of economic efficiency under Soviet central 
planning and administration. 

The only significant gap in Millar's treatment is his failure to provide 
a quantitative survey of Soviet economic performance. No tables on Soviet 
economic growth, factor use or productivity are included. Such time series 
data would have provided useful background, e.g., for the discussion on the 
urgency of economic reform. 

Barney Schwalberg, Brandeis University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Millar's objective is to put together fifteen 
years' study of the Soviet economy in one volume. Above-average students, ages 
16-18, can handle the material; certain selected portions could be studied by 
younger students with teacher discretion. The book is good for Economics, 
Comparative Economics, Modern European History, or Soviet History. The text 
is well-written and interesting, luring one into the human side of economics; 
however, Chapter 6 is far too technical for most high school students. Since 
it is not intended as a typical textbook, teaching/ learning aids such as 
questions, activities or further projects are not included. The work is 
developed extremely logically and is very current. 

This book could be used as a text on Soviet socialism for above- average 
high school students, a resource book for teachers from which many individual 
lessons on socialism could be compiled and/or a reference/ resource book for 
students working on special projects. Millar explains the socialist economic 
system in a readable, useful form. He even poses other questions on the 
periphery of economics which could be included, such as the problem of sources 
in studying the Soviet Union (pp. xii-xvi). That is a lesson in itself! 

Marilou Spash, Harvard (MA) High School 



ERIC 26 



-21- 



Molander, Earl A. MINICOURSE: WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS? Portland, OR, Ground 
Zero. 38 pages. Bibliography. Paper. $12.95. 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: History, Political Science 

SUMMARY* This curriculum package includes a minicourse on US-Soviet relations 
to be used in conjunction with the Ground Zero Primer WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS 
— AND NUCLEAR WAR? A thumbnail sketch of Russian history from tsarist times 
to the present Soviet era and a look at Russian/ Soviet lifestyles which points 
out differences from Western culture is given fairly well balanced treatment. 
Generally well written materials on the Russian language/ alphabet, Soviet 
political system, religion, etc. make this an attractive packet. It has a 
short bibliography. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This is a laudable effort to present balanced 
information on the Soviet Union in the briefest possible space. It suffers, 
however, from a lack of careful proofreading, at least a few outright factual 
mistakes, and, in general, excessive brevity, with the overall result that the 
reader is likely to be misled about important aspects of Soviet reality. For 
example, the text implies greater government toleration of religion than is in 
fact the case. The most glaring factual error I encountered was the claim 
that "there has not been a single charge of Soviet treaty violation by the 
U*S.... " (emphasis in the original). This is at least misleading since there 
have been a number of serious questions raised over the years. Somewhat less 
important, the claim that political indoctrination in Soviet schools is 
limited is also misleading. In general, my feeling is that Ground Zero's 
commendable desire to "prove" that we can do business with the Soviets has 
inclined them to argue, or at least imply, that there are fewer differences 
between our two societies than is in fact true. While there is frequently 
more balance in this material than is available in many other sources, and it 
does raise some important questions, I would not recommend that it be used by 
itself. 

Ron Pope, Illinois State University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. There is much of interest and value in this 
package of materials. The authors tend to bend over backwards to limit 
criticism of either the Soviet or US system and emphasize our common values 
rather than our differences. While this material was prepared in 1983, 
inevitably it is already dated. Much of the material implies that Andropov is 
still going strong. While there is probably little real difference in the 
gerontocracy, the names should be changed. There are a number of interesting 
activities such as question-answer exercises to use with the material. 

There is a limited bibliography prepared by the author of WHAT ABOUT THE 
RUSSIANS — AND NUCLEAR WAR? Some are old standards; others are of lesser 
value. Also included is a statistical comparison of the USA/USSR economies, 
trade, and arms capabilities. A careful study of this material should clear 
away some of the common misconceptions about US-Soviet relations, but Soviet 
studies certainly should not be confined to this material. 

We do share the responsibility for the present "balance of terror," and 
the Soviets haven 1 t flagrantly disregarded SALT agreements, even the ones not 
ratified. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) High School 



27 
ERJC 



-22- 



Parker, W.H. THE RUSSIANS: HOW THEY LIVE AND WORK. New York, Praeger 
Publishers, 1977 (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973). "How They Live and Work" 
series. 179 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. ISBN 0-03-029581-5. $8.95 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. THE RUSSIANS by W.H. Parker introduces the reader to the diverse 
Soviet peoples, their government and the geography of the country. The book 
concentrates on ^he modern period and pays scant attention to Russian history. 
Chapters discuss the Soviet republics, ethnic groups and geography, living 
standards and occupations of the people, and some abbreviated material on 
Russian leisure time and sports. One chapter deals briefly with education and 
the last chapter concerns itself with travel in Russia. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Parker's summary introduction to contemporary Soviet 
life is so dense with facts that it sometimes reads like a statistical 
handbook. All major topics are covered, but the book is particularly strong 
on geography and the economic organization of the country, accurately 
describing each branch of industry and agriculture, how the plan works, how 
wages are paid, and so on. Chapters on education and on sports and leisure 
are equally pithy, informative, and accurate. Parker is less detailed about 
history, ethnicity, family, and living standards, and on these topics he 
sometimes errs, usually in favdt: of Soviet claims, underestimating the number 
who died in Stalin's terror, for example, or ignoring the oppressive side of 
Soviet arts policy. His comparison of Soviet and US inequality is utter 
nonsense, and he is much too rosy about women's roles in Soviet society. 
Still, his look at politics and his assessment of Soviet military power are 
fairly balanced and straightforward, though now dated. In sum, the book is a 
good high school reference in just those areas in which other introductory 
works are weak, and vice versa : it has much information about the economy, 
less on the arts and politics; its evaluations erring on the side of 
generosity to the USSR (when they err) instead of being overly harsh. 

Brian Carter, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. W.H. Parker's book would not be an adequate text 
to use for a high school Russian history course. The book is written in such 
a boring, repetitious style that it would put a youthful mind to sleep. THE 
RUSSIANS lacks concepts and analytical materials needed to challenge above 
average and superior students. The chapters are divided into so many 
subheadings that few contain the in-depth factual material necessary for a 
viable high school course. Hedrick Smith's THE RUSSIANS is a far superior 
book for analyzing the Russian people and their outlook. The best use of 
Parker's book would be in the school library as a quick reference for general 
data on the Soviet Union and as a helpful guide to someone who was traveling 
to the USSR and wanted a quick overview of the people , geography, and 
government. 

Michael P. Kukel, Amity Regional High School 

(Woodbridge, CT) 



28 



-23- 



Pimlott, Tamara, STALIN 1 S RUSSIA, 1924-1939, London, Macmillan Education 
Limited, 1984* "History in Depth" series, 48 pages, Illus, Index, Maps, 
ISBN 0-333-35079-0, $2.95, 

Grade; 6-10 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. STALIN 1 S RUSSIA, 1924-1939 by Tamara Pimlott is one of eight 
"evidence based" history books from Macmillan Education Ltd. presented as 
supplementary "in depth" material for their "History in the Making" series. 
In 48 pages, the author has admirably combined two maps, three charts, 31 
illustrations and dozens of select primary and secondary sources into an 
exciting illumination of Stalin's impact on Russia and its people up to the 
time of the Second World War, Written with 11 to 16 year olds in mind, this 
little book can easily be used at any level of high school, 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. With the exception of chapter one, the book is 
reasonably accurate. Throughout there is a nice focus on problems in 
interpretation. The book tends to emphasize negative aspects of Stalin's 
regime, however, including its rewriting of history. This leads to trouble in 
chapter one: an exercise on page 11 is meant to suggest Stalin could not have 
stood at Lenin's side in 1917 as pictured because he was in prison "in 1917" 
(page 10), In fact, Stalin left jail in February 1917 and returned to 
Petrograd even before Lenin, Other errors: muzhuk (page 12) is not a middle 
peasant but any peasant, and is spelled muzhik , Trotsky was murdered not by 
an intruder but by an NKVD agent on his personal staff (page 31), There are 
others. The book stops in 1939, so that its heavy emphasis on the purges and 
the labor camps (a whole chapter) is not balanced by the experience of World 
War II, For many Soviets, victory in war compensated for the harshness of 
Stalin's rule. The omission of the war period certainly prejudices the task of 
the final chapter, where the student must make an assessment of the 
achievements of Stalin, 

Diane Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHES/ LEARNER SPECIALIST, Rare is the book that excites a teacher as much as 
STALIN'S RUSSIA 1924-39 did me, Tamara Pimlott has combined a masterful 
assortment of well-chosen illustrations and written sources with a brief but 
helpful coordinating text. With classroom time so short and the amount of 
required instruction so large, a book like this provides student and teacher 
alike with a stimulating in-depth look at one of history's most controversial 
and dynamic epochs. The photographs and illustrations are particularly 
wonderful. In them we see Stalin as a schoolboy and a prisoner, a demigod and 
lying in state; and we see him as the subject of socialist realism in 
paintings and posters. The primary sources Pimlott has chosen are as diverse 
a group of sources as can be found in texts much larger and more ambitious o 
We examine Stalin through the eyes of his great enemy Leon Trotsky, his 
daughter Svetlana, his henchman and accuser Khrushchev and of his victims 
Alexander Solzhenitsyn and Evgenia Ginsburg, The maps, charts and cartoons are 
uncomplicated and neatly reproduced. Ideological and technical terms are kept 
to a minimum, and then explained well, as are Russian language terms. The 
exercises that complete each of the six chapters have been tailored well to 
the visual and written materials, so that in completing them, students gain 
the maximum value of each topic presentation, 

Richard Jensen, Hingham (MA) High School 



9 

ERLC 



29 



-24- 



READINGS IN RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION, VOLUMES I-III, second edition. Edited by 
Thomas Riha. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1969. 844 pages. Index. 
Chronology. ISBN 0-226-71853-0, 0-226-71855-7, 0-226-71857-3 paper. $8.50 
each. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. Thomas Riha has edited three volumes of sources for the study of 
Russian and Soviet history. RUSSIA BEFORE PETER THE GREAT: 900-1700; IMPERIAL 
RUSSIA: 1700-1917; and SOVIET RUSSIA: 1917-1963. Each selection has 
introductory comments by the author. Topics range from the impact of the 
Mongols on Russia, the development of serfdom, and 14th-century missionaries 
to Stalin's purges and World War II. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. These rich colections of articles represent the state 
of the art in 1968, when Riha put together the revised edition. He combined 
primary with secondary sources to provide both important texts of the time, 
and up-to-date interpretations by top scholars in the field. Inevitably some 
of those scholarly interpretations now seem a bit dated, as new work has led 
to new views. Nonetheless, these books are well worth getting for their 
wisely chosen and broadly representative primary sources, eyewitness accounts 
and literary excerpts. Many are not readily available elsewhere and provide 
the much-needed immediacy and sense of real life that only such material can 
provide. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. The author explains what is important in the study 
of the Russian past and present in 72 readings. He begins with the earliest 
written source for Russian history, "The Tale of Bygone Years." Students will 
begin to understand the bylina ("what has happened") and the starina ("what is 
old") in a Russian context. 

There is a chronological presentation of selections and some topical 
grouping of readings. The articles will stimulate students 1 curiosity as well 
as conveying the Russians 1 pride in their language and history. The series 
concludes with the question of the future of the Soviet system as of the late 
1960s. These are books that provide a broad range of thought-provoking 
materials for teachers and able students. Students will gain much help in 
formulating their own views through use of this series. 

Robert Friel, Stoneham (MA) High School 



30 



-25- 

Resnick, Abraham. RUSSIA: A HISTORY TO 1917. "Enchantment of the World" 
series. Chicago, Children's Press, 1983. 127 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. 
Chronology. ISBN 0-516-02785-9. $19.95. 

Grade: 5-9 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. The pictures alone in RUSSIA: A HISTORY TO 1917 convey a sense of the 
country's history, its institutions, and its people. The book is organized by 
chapters and sub-chapters. In addition to maps, there are a chronological 
table, a section entitled "Mini-Facts At-A-Glance," an index, and a list of 
important people. The table of contents begins with "Mother Russia," and 
concludes with "Russia's 0 Contribution to the Arts." 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. A major difficulty encountered in this book is that 
the simplification needed to make the book accessible to young readers often 
leads to inaccurate generalization. Such inaccuracies usually reflect those 
found in more traditional interpretations of Russian history. Thus, Ivan IV is 
depicted only as a crazed murderer, while Peter I is applauded as Russia's 
great modernizer. Perhaps such oversimplified statements are inevitable in 
writing for a young audience. 

The book provides a fairly cohesive and interesting narrative of Russian 
history from the times of nomadic invasion and settlement to 1917, and 
attempts to convey a sense of the life of the people through time. The author 
also describes the growth of trade and the emergence of industries. Despite 
these efforts to provide the reader with a basic sense of Russian society and 
economy, the author still spends an excessive amount of time describing 
battles and the tsars' personalities. For example, Resnick devotes a 
paragraph to Rasputin's murder, yet does not even discuss the revolution of 
1905. The book's fundamental flaw is that the chain of events related can not 
always be adequately explained without consideration of political factors — 
which are almost never discussed. 

Susan G. Zayer, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Resnick makes a truly heroic attempt to cover his 
topic in approximately 110 pages. Although this beautiful book includes a 
wealth of color illustrations and maps to supplement the text, the average 
junior-high student will find the writing style tedious, unchallenging, and 
cryptic. The book might, however, whet the appetite of less advanced readers, 
or younger students, for history. 

The book is clearly divided into chapters with sub-headings. Appropriate 
words or phrases which may not yet be familiar to young readers are explained 
in the text. After the final chapter, there are appendices which provide 
information-at-a-glance on Russia's rulers, population, etc. One advantage of 
this historic overview is in the opportunity it provides the teacher to 
encourage students to utilize the library, because the treatment of most 
topics is so brief. 

Students at the junior high level could find the text itself 
unchallenging, as the sentence structure, paragraphing, and vocabulary seem 
more appropriate for elementary school students. 

Gail Gardner, Martin Luther King School, 

Cambridge, MA 



31 



-26- 



Resnick, Abraham. THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS. "Enchantment of the 
World" series. Chicago, Children 1 s Press, 1984. 128 pages. Illus. Maps. ISBN 
0-516-02789-1. $19.95. 

Grade: 5-9 Subject: Soviet Union Today 

SUMMARY. Eleven chapters present the geography of the USSR, historical 
background since 1917, and discussion of the Soviet economic and political 
systems today. The chief focus is on everyday life. Many color illustrations. 
Useful chronology of events since 1917. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This survey of life inside the USSR today (foreign 
affairs are excluded) is marred by structural flaws, simplifications, and an 
inability to separate the important from the trivial. Chapters devoted 
primarily to geography are separated, and chapters on Lenin and Stalin precede 
rather than following discussion of the era they shaped. The reader will 
simply be confused about collectivization (the term "changeover" is used 
instead) and the purges. There are also errors: the Volga does not flow from 
the Baltic, for example. The Tien-Shan Mountains are in Kazakhstan, not 
Uzbekistan, and tea is chai, not chi. The chapter on the economy summarizes 
very well the difference between communism and capitalism but then says 
nothing about the causes of the Soviet Union's economic problems. The author 
makes a rather odd choice of two distinguishing customs: the bear-hug greeting 
and the rhythmic applause after a performance. Similarly, the "three special 
places of which people are especially proud" are not necessarily those most 
Russians might choose, but rather three Soviet showcases: Lake Baikal, 
Akademgorodok, and the Baikal-Amur Mainline Railroad (BAM). The chapter on 
literature, music, and the performing arts gets off to a good start but runs 
aground in a confusing paragraph about Pasternak and DOCTOR ZHIVAGO, in which 
Resnick never makes clear that this book was never published in the Soviet 
Union. The lists of famous people and important dates are erratic and 
idiosyncratic in coverage. Ilyshin is appropriately included, but not Tupolev, 
as is David Oi.strakh, but not Stravinsky or Rostropovich. On balance, this 
book avoids unpleasant explanations. 

Joseph Bradley, University of Tulsa 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Abraham Resnick 1 s unbiased book, THE UNION OF 
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, would be useful as a reference book for a middle 
school geography or social studies class doing research projects on the Soviet 
Union, but I would not recommend using it as a textbook. Writing for an 
American readership, the author is careful neither to whitewash Soviet history 
nor to portray the Soviet Union as our evil enemy. 

Why then would I not recocmend this book as a text, given that it has so 
much of value? First of all, its homogenized, non- judgmental tone makes it 
pretty dull reading. Students 1 interest could have been enhanced by asking 
questions. There are no questions, and although there is a lot of information 
presented in this book, I doubt if much of it serves the purpose of getting 
students to think. My second reservation about using this as a text is that 
while the geography sections are quite good, the history and government 
chapters are not. The history sections suffers from being too bland, and the 
government section is very confusing. Furthermore, the book assumes political 
knowledge and geographic skills which few elementary or middle school students 
would have. Therefore, it would be difficult to teach from without getting 
side-tracked onto tangential topics. 

Alice Stewart, Brimmer & May School, Brookline, MA 

flfc 32 



-27- 

Ritchie, W.K. RUSSIA UNDER PETER THE GREAT. London, Longman Group Ltd., 1979. 
"Then and There" series. 96 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Glossary. ISBN 
0-582-22161-7. Paper. $3.10. 

Grade: 7-9 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This brief volume is part of a 100-title "Then and There" series 
produced by the British publisher, Longman. Its stated purpose is to show 
"how the people of Russia started to become like the people of Western Europe" 
through the efforts of Peter the Great. One-third of the book describes 
17th-century Russia through the impressions of English and German travelers. 
The rest of the book deals with Peter's attempts to modernize Russia, with 
special emphasis on the Grand Embassy, the Great Northern War, and the 
founding of St. Petersburg. Eight well-organized chapters with subheadings 
are supplemented with appropriate pictures and a helpful glossary. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This book is indeed beautifully illustrated from 
contemporary sources and covers the salient features of Peter's reign. 
However, the test's presentation does not offset its shortcomings. 

Ritchie's portrayal of 17th and 18th-century Russia is drawn almost 
entirely from 17th and 18th-century Western sources. The "you are there" 
approach reproduces unref lectively the attitudes and notions of contemporary 
Westerners. This compounds a further problem: the book gives little sense of 
relationships between Peter, the reforms, and Russia before or after him. It 
concludes with a conventional historiographical question: were the changes 
that took place due to Peter, or were they part of a larger trend that would 
have taken place anyway? We are, however, given little basis for any 
discussion of the question, for the historical context given is both biased 
and scanty. 

Carla Schmidt, Yale University 

TEACHES/LEARNER SPECIALIST. This is well-written and interesting, and despite 
its brevity, includes a great deal of information. Appropriate for middle 
school grades 7-9, it presents a vivid description of Russia in the time of 
Peter, making excellent use of quotes from travelers to Russia and of a series 
of helpful pictures. Skillful use is made of the technique of asking the 
reader to "imagine yourself to be in Moscow in 1680 — let's make our way into 
the city." This enables the reader to identify with the subsequent 
description. The author carefully raises questions, asking the reader to 
study the pictures or to refer to earlier passages. This elevates the text 
from mere exposition to analysis. Students will be attracted to the details 
of the customs of the Russian people and to the examples of the bizarre, 
exotic, unusual and even cruel episodes mentioned as part of Peter's time. A 
detailed description of Peter's wars with Charles XII of Sweden will fascinate 
those military buffs. A portrait of Peter makes his personality and 
adventures come alive. What is disappointing, however, is the brief index, 
the poor and unimaginative list of follow-up activities, and the absence of 
questions or activities after each chapter. Teachers will have to design 
their own activities. The strength of this book is the content that will 
interest young people and provide teachers with a helpful resource for units 
and courses in Russian history. 

Kenneth A. Poppe, Farmington (CT) High School 



ERLC 



33 



Robottom, John. MODERN RUSSIA, Second Edition. London, Longman Group Ltd., 
1972. "Modern Times" series. 171 pages. Illus. Map. Index. Bibliography. 
Glossary. ISBN 0-582-20440-2. Paper. $4.25. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. The author presents a compact view of modern day Russia from Tsar 
Nicholas II to Lenin, Stalin and Khrushchev. The book is chronologically 
organized in 13 chapters with a short glossary and good illustrations, which 
make it useful for secondary classrooms and the general public. The 
leadership of Russia under the monarchy and in the Soviet period is clearly 
portrayed, but the author deals mostly with society and the roles that the 
people played then and now. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. John Robottom has published several introductory works 
on the USSR as well as the book on China in the "Modern Times" series. Yet 
MODERN RUSSIA is a disappointing book. It presents a fairly comprehensive 
survey of political history from the mid-19 th century through the 1960s. 
Coverage is less complete on economic and social changes, and almost 
nonexistent on cultural and intellectual history. Despite its title, the book 
pays some attention to the non-Russian peoples, though Robottom has not 
attempted to cover the minorities thoroughly or systematically. There are ten 
useful maps, and more than 80 photographs, including scenes from the lives of 
ordinary people. However, some of the pictures on daily life were supplied by 
an organization identified as the Society for Cultural Relations with the 
USSR. Its photographs show only primitive, impoverished features of life in 
tsarist Russia, and only modern, urban aspects of "Russia in the 'sixties." 
While Robottom 1 s text gives a more balanced assessment of Soviet achievements 
in improving living standards, the visual evidence is selective. The chapters 
on the Soviet period are generally sounder than those on tsarist Russia, and 
display greater familiarity with the sources and scholarly studies available 
at the time the book was written. But both sections of the book need to be 
revised to reflect recent work by specialists and to eliminate numerous 
errors, misstatements ("the Mensheviks opposed the Revolution"), and other 
dubious interpretations, some of which could seriously mislead beginners. 
Consequently, although MODERN RUSSIA contains several sections of good 
elementary analysis, it is not a reliable introduction. 

Richard King, St. Cloud (MN) State University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Robottom effectively presents the change of 
leadership of Russia from 1905 to 1964. The text is presented in a crisp and 
refreshing style with proverbs, personal views of participants, and humorous 
anecdotes sprinkled throughout. The book is suitable for secondary school 
students in world history, government, or adult evening classes dealing with 
Soviet history. There are no chapter reviews or questions but each chapter 
ends with a comprehensive paragraph dealing with its major point. The book is 
chronologically ordered and clearly written. It serves to introduce Soviet 
society in a realistic, colorful, and comprehensive package. 

Cornelius J. Vanciu, H.H. Dow High School. 

Midland, MI 



34 



-29- 



RUSSIA: 1900-1953. Edited by Tony Howart. London, Longman Group Limited, 1980. 
123 pages. Illus. Maps. ISBN 0-582-35930-9. $10.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY* This is a series of five units for high school courses on Russian or 
European history. Each unit provides a readable narrative, documentary 
sources, photographs, charts, graphs, maps and many suggested activities. The 
center four pages in each unit are a special "File Sheet" of statistical data 
and map exercises. Unit titles are "The Empire of the Tsar," "From Tsar to 
Commissars," "Hammer and Sickle," "Dreams, Plans and Nightmares," and "The 
Soviet Union at War and in Victory." There is a table of contents for each 
unit, but no index or separate bibliography. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This is an excellent introduction to Russian political 
and economic history from 1900 to 1953, focusing on the relation of economic 
goals and constraints to political struggles and decisions. It is remarkably 
packed with information but at the same time manages to be dramatic, in spots 
even gripping. For the most part, Howarth and Robottom present even the most 
controversial issues with balance and accuracy. In some places, they 
emphasize the drama of events at the expense of the causes behind them — a 
student learns only one of the reasons the Reds won the Civil War, and only 
the economic, not the political, factors behind collectivization — but these 
are exceptions. In the first four booklets, Howarth superbly summarizes and 
explains the fall of the Romanovs, War Communism, the dilemmas of NEP, and the 
Five-Year Plans and their relation to Stalin's rise, with considerable 
attention to how these affected people's lives. John Robottom wrote the fifth 
booklet, about World War II 1 s Eastern front, the division of Europe, and the 
origins of the Cold War, again remarkable in its balance, b>? with less 
emphasis on the events' impact on individual lives. The story t s abruptly 
with Stalin's death. I was surprised at how much I learned from this high 
school text and hope the series continues beyond 1953. 

Brian Carter, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. These five brief units actually comprise a 
textbook of sorts that covers the changes that Russia has undergone from 
tsarist empire to modern superpower. The strength of the units lies in their 
narrative and suggested activities for students, many of which focus on 
role-playing simulations. In addition, the centerfold or "File Sheet" makes 
good use of maps and other data. 

Shortcomings include photographs of uneven quality, a somewhat confusing 
organization, and a lack of index and suggested readings. Furthermore, the 
units are printed entirely in black-and-white print (including photos) and the 
pages looic as if they were simply typed and copied. In other words, the 
cosmetics of the units are weak. However, the maps are sharp and clear, and 
lack of color and graphics does not detract from the basic soundness of the 
text and the quality of the student activities. 

Political, economic, diplomatic and military history is emphasized. 
There is little or no social history, nor references to the world of art, 
literature, and music. Teachers will find many valuable aids in these units, 
but it is not clear if they by themselves would be comprehensive enough for 
the major text of a course. 

Ken Poppe, Farmington (CT) High School 



ERIC 



35 



-30- 



RUSSIAN REVOLUTION AND BOLSHEVIK VICTORY. Edited by Arthur E. Adams. Boston, 
D.C. Heath and Company, 1972. "Problems in European Civilization" series. 196 
pages. Bibliography. ISBN 0-669-81745-7. Paper. $5.50. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This text is a slightly revised editon of the D.C. Heath series which 
was published 25 years ago. It contains a series of readings which Arthur E. 
Adams compiled for the voluminous "Problems in European Civilization" series 
published by D.C. Heath in the 1960s. The second edition follows the same 
outline as the much older one: "The March Revolution and Its Causes," "From 
March to October," and "The Bolshevik Victory." In each section, readings 
which are germane to the particular subject are presented to the reader with 
appropriate commentary by the various authors. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. RUSSIAN REVOLUTION AND BOLSHEVIK VICTORY is one of a 
series of beginning college level history texts entitled "The Problems in 
European Civilization." As the text indicates, the book covers the events of 
1917 and is divided into three sections. The book, drawing upon both Western 
and Soviet sources, offers varying interpretations of the revolution. A 
compilation of eyewitness accounts (Trotsky, Kerensky) and Western scholars' 
views (Kennan, Ulam) provides an accurate and balanced picture of the period. 
The editor's introduction and chronology are useful to the beginning student; 
the book is well-organized and well-written, lending itself to high school 
level reading. The editor's suggestions for additional reading offer the 
student a wide selection of books and periodicals concerning the causes and 
events of the Russian revolution and its leaders. 

Christiane M. Carney, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. I have used this book in its first edition for 
some 25 years, as an undergraduate, graduate student, and as a teacher of 
Soviet studies. RUSSIAN REVOLUTION AND BOLSHEVIK VICTORY is an extremely 
useful reference work for the high school social studies teacher. Students who 
are engaged in a project pertaining to the revolution can use this concise 
volume as a handy reference to examine the opinions and evaluations of the 
revolution by the acknowledged experts. 

I would highly and enthusiastically recommend this volume, as well as the 
two others in this series on Russia and the Soviet Union, for high school 
Russian studies teachers and their students. 

Paul Rowan, Branford (CT) High School 



ERJC 



36 



-31- 



THE SOVIET UNION, By the Editors of Time-Life Books* "Library of Nations" 
series, Amsterdam, Time-Life Books, 1984. 160 pages, Ilius. ISBN 
0-8094-5302-9, $15. 94. 

Grade: 7-12 Subject: Geography, History 

SUMMARY. THE SOVIET UNION, one volume in the new Time-Life "Library of 
Nations" series, offers a many-sided view of the vast Soviet Union. Six 
chapters provide photographs (155 in all) and text focused on the USSR's 
everyday life, natural setting, its many peoples, its history, its artists and 
its present political organization. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This book could not be used as the main textbook in a 
course, since its scope is somewhat limited and the narrative is often 
disconnected or incomplete. These shortcomings are most evident in the two 
chapters devoted to Russian/Soviet history and the functioning of the Soviet 
political apparatus. In the former chapter, a useful time table survey does 
not compensate for an inadequate narrative account which virtually omits 
discussion of the medieval period and the 19th century. The Soviet period is 
neglected as well, with only one page devoted to the post-Leninist era. The 
book's final chapter, which deals with the Soviet political apparatus as well 
as the functioning of a planned economy, suffers from the attempt to convey a 
great amount of information in too few pages. 

The bock f s strength is the vivid portrayal of Soviet society which is 
conveyed and greatly reinforced by a profuse number of photographs. Stories 
about specific individuals are often used to give more substance to general 
statements about society as a whole. The book's strongest chapter is the 
first, which describes various aspects of daily life in the Soviet Union. The 
chapter on Soviet nationalaties is also useful, although the attempt to 
describe the history of each ethnic group is often hurried and haphazard. 
Finally, the chapter on Soviet geography and agriculture is flawed by an 
overly detailed and somewhat superfluous discussion of the Siberian permafrost. 

In summary, this book is an interesting and useful photo essay. It could 
be used to supplement a more rigid social studies or history textbook which 
may not convey to the student a very lively sense of Soviet society. 

Susan G. Zayer, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. The Time-Life editors, with consultation from 
Vadim Medish, who grew up in the Soviet Union, present a wide spectrum of 
information and scenes from the USSR. The aim is to enlighten readers as to 
the vastness of the country and the variety of the Soviet peoples. The 
pictures are suitable for elementary students, though the text is more 
appropriate fcr high school level, or advanced middle school classes. The book 
is a definite plus for any media resource center. 

The chapters are organized kaleidoscopically, with a specific caption for 
every picture in the book. Each centers on a particular aspect of Soviet life. 
Students can learn about queues and their impact on everyday life, or attempt 
to envision the character necessary for surviving in a city like Neryungri, 
only 700 miles from the Arctic Circle. Questions concerning housing 
(prefabricated) are constantly raised — a comparison with American urban 
housing problems would be an excellent area for research. 

The Cyrillic alphabet is included, with a guide to help students 
pronounce unfamiliar words. This book is highly recommended for American 
students. The complexities of a Soviet society are realistically portrayed. 

Robert Friel, Stoneham (MA) High School 



ERIC 



37 



-32- 

THE SOVIET UNION: A SYSTEMATIC GEOGRAPHY. Edited by Leslie Symone. London, 
Hodder and Stoughton, 1983. 266 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Bibliography. ISBN 
0-340-26280-X. Paper. $21.50. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Geography 

SUMMARY. This is a textbook/handbook on the physical, economic and human 
geography of the Soviet Union. The aim of this new (1983) text is to provide 
the serious student with a more modern and useful study of Soviet geography by 
"filling in the gaps" that have been evident even in better textbooks on this 
subject. Five contributors — John Dewdney, David Hooson, R.E.H. Mellor, 
Walter W. Newey and Leslie Symons — have divided the study into 12 topics 
including a brief "evolution of the Russian state," the country's basic 
physical and economic geography, and thorough investigations of more specific 
topics such as water resources and biogeography. The textual coverage is 
supplemented by 50 maps and diagrams, 35 tables, and 54 photographs. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This book was compiled by five well-known geographers 
specializing in the USSR, under the editorship of a respected British scholar. 

The book gives an objective and current picture of the country but not a 
complete one. Some modern economic and social problems are not shown or are 
not demonstrated clearly enough, such as the Soviet Union-Comecon 
relationship. The book relies extensively on current statistics from numerous 
Soviet sources, and the authors exhibit a wide knowledge of basic data bases. 
It covers everything that the title and preface indicate. However, it seldom 
provides comparisons with the non-Communist world. 

In general, the book is a reasonable, informative and truthful survey of 
the USSR's geography. My best college students have found this book 
comprehensive and valuable. However, some students were confused, especially 
with the chapter on "Physiography," with its abundance of unfamiliar 
definitions and physical regions. The last 13 pages give thumbnail sketches 
of the 18 major economic regions plus Moldavia. This book is one of the most 
complete and up-to-date sources for high school students. A better but more 
difficult text is THE SOVIET UNION by G. Melvyn Howe (London, MacDonald & 
Evans, 1983). 

Ksenya Khinchuk, Boston University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. It is unfortunate that high school Russian/ Soviet 
history texts of necessity sacrifice useful and interesting material in the 
rush to cover the complete epoch in shortened time spans. In the remaining 
watered-down versions, many subjects are overlooked or given poor coverage. It 
is pleasing then, to review a book like THE SOVIET UNION: A SYSTEMATIC 
GEOGRAPHY, which though intended for highly specialized university courses, 
may yet be used selectively to enhance the reading or discussion of any of its 
12 topics. The maps are particularly well done — cat&fully drawn, and 
beautifully printed. Many of the 50 maps and diagrams, such as "Vegetation 
Zones (figure 4.1, page 53) and "Expansion of the Russian Empire" (figure 1.2, 
page 11) are of the staple variety that all teachers use, and several maps, 
though not always essential, are nonetheless intriguing and potentially 
valuable, such as "Dates of Foundations of Towns" (figure 1.2, page 189) and 
"Rural Settlement Types" (figure 10.4, page 198). Naturally, in a text of 
this type, most of the reading and many of the maps and charts are beyond the 
interest and ability of the high school student. Still, this excellent text 
would be a valuable addition to the classroom or library reference shelf. 

Richard Jensen, Hingham (MA) High School 

o 38 

ERJ.C 



-33- 



Vaillant, Janet G. FROM RUSSIA TO USSR: A NARRATIVE AND DOCUMENTARY HISTORY. 
Joint author John Richards II. Wellesley, Massachusetts, Independent School 
Press, Inc., 1985. 381 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Chronology. Glossary. ISBN 
0-88334-175-1. $11.95. 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This book is a collection of primary sources combined with summary 
essays by the authors that trace Russian history from Kievan Rus f to the 
present day. It starts with geography, and contains chapters on Old Russia, 
Imperial Russia, the Revolution, Soviet History, and the UCSR today. A 
glossary of terms, a chart on the Romanov dynasty and a time line that 
parallels major events in western history are included. Adding to its 
usefulness are a few maps and illustrations, a bibliography and suggestions 
for more in-depth reading at the end of each section. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This text is a well-organized overview of the history 
and development of the USSR. The first chapter on geography is quite good. 
Chapter Two, "Elements of Old Russian Culture," describes the origins of the 
Russian state and its evolution through the Time of Troubles. The readability 
of the chapter suffers from the nature of the documents and the struggle for 
accuracy. For example, the first page refers to the Russian Empire, Old 
Russia, Rus 1 , and Muscovite Russia, a succession of terms which complicates 
student reading. Chapter Three, which covers Imperial Russia from Peter the 
Great through World War I, is competently written and covers both foreign 
relations and domestic developments. The second half of the book, which 
describes the revolutions of 1917 and the Stalin and Khrushchev eras, is a 
solid effort which ends with a brief summary of the Brezhnev years. The final 
chapter provides a basis for discussion of the current situation. 

The documents, which comprise over half of the book, will not always be 
easy for students to read or interpret, but they offer a sense of the "texture 
of life" which no historical narrative can, and they provide an opportunity to 
introduce students to the raw materials on which history texts are based. 
This book fills an important purpose and should be considered for adoption. 

Ruth Hastie, University of Michigan 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST* This book is logically organized and should prove 
helpful to teachers and students of Russian/ Soviet history. The bes' and worst 
sections are near the beginning of the book. The first chapter on geography 
is really excellent, but the first reading written in Elizabethan English 
would leave most students at sea. Also in this section on early history, 
"Facts" are given with such terms as 'probably," "is reported to," "seems to 
be," etc. 

Despite these few weak points, the overall quality including the choice 
of readings is excellent. It should fill a long-standing need and I would 
recommend it for every school library and history classroom. Most of the 
readings should be within the range of most able junior high and high school 
students. World history, world cultures, and American history students could 
profit from this book. I am aware of no other single book that goes so far 
toward giving the reader an in-depth understanding of what makes the° 
Russian/ Soviet government and citizenry what they are today. I highly 
recommend it. Adults as well as youth with little background on the Soviet 
Union could well benefit from reading it. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) Senior High School 



ERJC 



39 



r 



-34- 

WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS—AND NUCLEAR WAR? Edited by Earl A, Molander and 
Roger C, Molander for Ground Zero, New York, Pocket Books, 1983, 237 pages, 
ISBN 0-671-47209-7, Paper, $3,95 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY- In six chapters, Ground Zero's WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS— AND NUCLEAR 
WAR? discusses Russian and Soviet history; Soviet economy, society and 
culture; the Soviet political system; Soviet foreign policy since 1945; the 
Soviet military challenge and the arms race; and the future of US-Sov.tet 
relations. Study aids include frequent subheadings and a four-page study 
guide. There are appendices featuring 21 statistical comparisons of the USA 
and USSR, US-Soviet trade relations, the arms race, and highlights of the SALT 
II Treaty, Additional aids are available for a small fee, 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This is a useful and generally balanced book. It notes 
the strengths and weaknesses of both the Soviet and American systems, along 
with our mutual contributions to the current renewal of tensions. There are, 
however, some factual errors. For example, the U,S, had no "spy satellites" 
in 1961, Moscow secretly shipped missiles to Cuba in 1962 in part in order to 
offset an existing — not "upcoming" — American advantage in ICBMs, More 
important, in an apparent, possibly unconscious, effort to "prove" that the 
Soviet Union isn't completely "evil," some important facts are not discussed. 
For example, the book briefly touts several features of Soviet "socialism," 
including "free medical care," without noting that access to the best 
available care generally requires bribes or connections, or that Soviet infant 
mortality is high and on the rise, facts that suggest that "free care" can be 
costly. Such a brief book can not possibly deliver on its promise to provide 
"everything you ever wanted to know" about the Soviet Union, but it offers a 
good beginning, 

Ronald R, Pope, Illinois State University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS— AND NUCLEAR WAR? is a 
non-partisan, non-advocacy attempt to foster greater understanding among 
Americans about the Soviet Union and the nuclear situation. It explains both 
myths and reality about the USSR by tracing the roots of Soviet government, 
society, military concerns and nuclear development. Chapters are short and 
well-organized with concise introductions and effective summaries. Technical 
terminology is defined in the text, and both study guide and appendices 
enhance its useability with upper-ability 11th or regular 12th grade students 
in Modern American History, Contemporary Problems or Peace Studies courses. 
It is also suitable for adult education study groups. 

Several limitations need to be mentioned. Neither a glossary nor an 
index is provided, and there are proofreading errors. Additional materials, 
both those correlating with the text (simulation game, Minicourse, "USSR IQ," 
bibliography) and others from Ground Zero, are needed as supplements. However, 
given its limits in space and scope, this volume is an objective, credible and 
valuable addition to current literature on the issue, 

Sr, Barbara Marie Link, 0,S,F, , Academy-Spalding 

High School, Peoria, IL 



ERLC 



40 



-35- 

Williams, Brian. COME TO RUSSIA. New York, Warwick Press, 1979. "Come To" 
series. 29 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Glossary. ISBN 0-531-09157-0. $9.40. 

Grade: 4-8 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMfAftY. The author has attempted to present a comprehensive view of a vast 
and complex nation in fewer than 30 pages, of which about half are pictures. 
The people are presented through discussion of their politics, education, home 
life, and work situations. Chapters are clearly defined as cues to the 
highlights of the material. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This well-packaged and profusely-illustrated book is 
so skimpy on content that at $9.40 the best that can be said for it is ttat it 
is a rip-off. Less than half of the 29 pages are devoted to text about people 
and everyday life in the Soviet Union. Included also is a half- page list 
entitled "Highlights of History," and brief lists of "Famous Russian 
Composers" and "Famous Russian Writers" and some of their works. A good idea 
of the level of this book is the fact that Pushkin is credited only with BORIS 
GODUNOV, while Solzhenitsyn is credited with three titles. Loaionosov made the 
list, but Turgen^v, Gorky, and Sholokov did not. 

Even in this little bit of text, the author manages to include numerous 
errors or silly statements, e.g., USSR is defined as "...a union of 15 
independent Socialist Republics' (p. 2); Russians address each other as 
" ... tovarisch or 'con^ade 1 . This is because they regard each other as equal 
partners in a classless state" (p. 8). On other pages we learn that Russian 
women never leave home without a shopping bag, that all 90 stations of the 
Moscow subway are decorated with mosaics and murals, that Alexander II was 
murdered in 1861, and that Western pop music is not allowed. Enough said! 

Rasio Dunatov, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST* This book could be used in upper elementary and 
middle school classes, or as a low vocabulary, high interest book for high 
school students. It would be an interesting supplement for social studies 
teachers when short, concise comparisons with our country are needed. 
Specialized vocabulary is dealt with as it occurs and in one page of Russian 
terms. Phonetic pronunciation would have been helpful. Clearly lacking are 
activities to extend, enrich, and check the comprehension of the students, and 
there is no bibliography. The front and back map contains two errors: 1) the 
Soviet population contains over 150 different racial ( sic ) groups; and 2) the 
height of Communist Peak is stated in feet whereas all other measurements are 
in meters. Students using this book will need to consult other sources for a 
more complete understanding of the Soviet Union. 

Barbara Smith, Garden Hills School (Champaign, IL) 



ERJC 



Wood, Anthony* THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION* London, Longman Group Ltd*, 1979* 
"Seminar Studies in History" series* 105 pages* Index* Bibliography, ISBN 
0-582-35227-4* Paper. $6*25* 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY* A historical survey with particular attention to the social and 
political ideas of various pre-revolutionary groups is followed by a 
description of the 1917 Revolution, the Civil War, and its aftermath through 
1921. Wood offers his assessment of the events, and the book closes with 
several pages of documents which are cited in his narrative. There is a 
bibliography. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This book adequately surveys the antecedents of the 
revolution and the events of 1917; it is quite a bit weaker on the aftermath 
of 1917: the civil war that lasted until 1921. What dominates the section 
labeled "Assessment" is a consistent undervaluing of the social revolution 
that 1917 represented, and the ways in which the political choices made in 
Russia reflected the aspirations of ordinary workers, soldiers, and peasants. 
The minimization of this enormously important social revolution allows the 
author to focus on and to blame Lenin for the outcome of the revolution. It 
is argued that Lenin was victorious because his party stuck to the 
conspiratorial principles first set down in 1902 in WHAT IS TO BE DONE? This 
view is outdated: the Bolsheviks in 1917 were exceptionally democratic, as 
has been shown by recent scholarship, some of which is included in Daniel 
Brower, ed., THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. The selection of documents is one-sided 
and arranged to reinforce this view: Bolsheviks were the creatures of Lenin, 
a fanatical anti-democrat and true father of Stalinism. This point of view 
has been widely argued, but it has been challenged by recent research. The 
resulting tone suggests that the 1917 revolution had no resonance with "real 
aspirations" of Russian people, and conveys the idea that the 
Bolshevik/ Communist revolution was and remains illegitimate. 

Diane Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHES/LEARNER SPECIALIST. When dealing with a complicated subject such as 
the Russian Revolution, the author should strive for a lucid style. The 
language of this book, however, is stiff aad the choice of words beyond the 
working vocabulary of the average high school student. Complex sentence 
structures only add to the reading difficulty, making this a book appropriate 
solely for an exceptional student. 

The chapters and divisions within the book are well labeled. There is an 
index at the end and a documents section but no activities to get the reader 
started. A lengthy bibliography is given, but there are no specific 
suggestions for further study, nor are there any checks for student 
cowpr ehens ion • 

The information is simply not presented in a manner conducive to 
encouraging the reader to further his/her knowledge. The book would not be 
particularly interesting to high school students. I would not suggest that my 
librarian purchase thie book, nor would I purchase it for use in my world 
history classes. 

Jeneen Conway, Niles (MI) Senior High School 



42 



-37- 



"World History Program/' Edited by Malcolm Yapp, Margaret Killingray, and 
Edmund O'Connor. St. Paul, MN, Greenhaven Press, Inc., 1980. 

Grade: 9-10 Subject: Soviet and Russian History 

SUMMARY. The Greenhaven "World History Program" is a collection of 64 
individual 32-page studies designed to be used at the 9th or 10th grade level 
in a globally-oriented history program. They feature a simplified text, 
meaningful visuals, and primary sources. The series is geared for adaptability 
within all levels of ability. The three texts particularly suited for Russian 
and Soviet studies are THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION and STALIN, both by David 
Killingray, and THE COLD WAR by Alasdair Nicolson. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. These three short unembellished booklets are 
necessarily oversimplified in spots, but on the whole do a very good job of 
presenting their facts accurately and in a balanced fashion (although it is 
annoying that "Khrushchev" is misspelled throughout). The two by David 
Killingray occasionally present terms without definition in such a way as to 
confuse, as in THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION where he states that both the tsarist 
and post-revolutionary regime were dictatorships, or in STALIN where he uses 
the term totalitarianism, without defining it or warning of its controversial 
history. The weakest parts of both booklets are in their summary conclusions. 
THE COLD WAR is a good factual treatment of a complex subject. Unfortunately, 
it slumps particularly on the war-time agreements and the early years 
(1945-48) in Eastern Europe, which are a key to understanding the origins of 
the Cold War. It also stops in the early 70s, leaving the unwary with the 
impression that the superpowers went on to a lasting period of friendship. 
Given its brevity, however, the booklet gives some sense of both the reasons 
for and the global implications of the Cold War. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. The three Greenhaven titles on the Soviet Union 
follow the usual format for the series: 4000 words of text and 4000 words of 
documentation, with 15 to 25 illustrations in each 32-page text. While this 
may be a plus for the series, gearing it toward all levels of 9th and 10th 
grade may not be. It is rather more idealistic than practicable. The readings, 
while pertinent and interesting, are of a variety that would appeal primarily 
to a highly motivated or upper class student; and the text, though complete 
and easy to read, is not as challenging as its supporting documents or as 
might be found in other materials less restricted by such considerations. In 
that each of the topics offered by Greenhaven is amply served by many 
publishing houses, it would be beneficial to compare. A giant plus for the 
Greenhaven program is the excellent review and testing materials which are 
carefully tailored to the texts and may be reproduced without permission or 
copyright infringement. 

Richard Jensen, Hingham (MA) High School 



ERIC 



-38- 



1. B: SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS AND REFERENCES 



Appignanesi, Richard. LENIN FOR BEGINNERS. Joint author Oscar Zarate. New 
York, Pantheon Books, 1979. 169 pages. illus. Bibliography. ISBN 
0-394-73715-6. Paper. $2.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Sumary: Political Science 

SUMMARY* This short volume of captioned cartoons and photographs presents an 
overview of Lenin's life and thought. While claiming historical authenticity, 
Appignanesi aims primarily to entertain and amuse the reader. Each page has 
many black and white figures and varying type faces. A "Russian Revolutionary 
Calendar" precedes the text. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Contrary to its title, this is not a useful book for 
beginners. Behind its surface of clever cartoons, it offers little 
explanation of key Marxist cr Leninist theories, but rather bombards the 
reader with a barrage of doctrinal labels and distinctions, which could not be 
understood without a prior acquaintance with Marxist terminology and history. 
Hundreds of names and dates are tossed into the text with only the most 
sporadic efforts to identify their historical significance and overall 
relevance to Lenin and his ideas and actions. 

The obscurity of the text is matched by the stridency of its bias. Lenin 
the man emerges as a heroic figure free from error or doubt, while those who 
disagreed with him are portrayed as malicious or at best misguided. Bolshevik 
failures and misdeeds, which occurred while Lenin was the leader of the Party 
— the forcible suppression of the democratically elected Constituent Assembly 
in January, 1918, the police terror of 1928-1920, the artificial mass famines 
of the early 1920s — are glossed over, explained as the result of the "great 
chaos" of the times or the "undemocratic" nature of the non-Bolshevik parties, 
or simply ignored altogether. 

The authors themselves state in their bibliography: "There are no 
impartial studies of Lenin!" The book they have produced bears this out most 
emphatically. 

Geoffrey Levitt, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. LENIN FOR BEGINNERS is a dismal disappointment for 
any secondary school teacher seeking source material on Leninism. While it 
provides basic information about the emergence of the Bolsheviks and the 
course of the Revolution, it is not intendedfor use in the classroom. The book 
is actually a series of political cartoons that totally fails either to 
simplify or to enliven a rather heavy topic for pre-college pupils. The 
cartoons are sandwiched between photographs in an attempt to present the 
career of Lenin as if he were an infallible prophet and an unerring leader of 
the proletariat. The authors 1 brief flirtations with levity are stale and 
misleading. 

The reading level of Lenin for Beginners varies between 7th and 9th 
grade. This is entirely misleading, however, since the content of the pages 
is so sophisticated as to render it incomprehensible to a middle school 
student. 

John Fletcher, John F. Kennedy Junior High School, 

44 

ERIC 



-39- 



Barlow, Pamela. THROUGH THE YEAR IN THE USSR. London, Batsford Academic and 
Educational Ltd, 1981. "Through the Year" series. 72 pages. Illus. Index. ISBN 
0-7134-3555-0. $14.95. 

Grade: 7-9 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. Before beginning a month by month explanation of special days on the 
Soviet calendar, Barlow provides a brief look at the Soviet Union, per se , 
through tables, a map, and text. There is a detailed contents page, chapter 
headings, and sub-headings. There are many black and white photographs, as 
well as highlighted inserts providing information ranging from a recipe for 
the Easter pudding, paskha , to the lyrics for "The Volga Boatmen." Sentence 
structure, paragraphing, and vocabulary combine to produce a very readable 
book. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This book is structured around descriptions of 
holidays, large and small, with vignettes interspersed on a wide variety of 
topics — political, social, cultural, ethnographic, and economic. The 
author, an Information Officer for a British group with close ties to the 
Soviet Union, lists in her "Acknowledgements" only her own and other 
organizations, like SOVIET WOMAN magazine, which are unlikely to give any but 
the official Soviet view of the topics discussed. She does not supplement he* 
research with scholarly or popular works offering different perspectives. 
This is unfortunate, since the book does contain much information on diverse 
subjects. Thus, the description of holidays seems largely reliable, although 
in some cases (e.g., Maslenitsa, or Shrovetide) there is insufficient 
distinction between traditional and modern celebrations. The real weakness of 
the book lies in its depiction of everyday life, where adherence to the 
official line leads to distortions on many natters, from the trivial (e.g., 
the low price of cotton dresses) to the extremely important (e.g., the 
observance of constitutional guarantees). The photographs tend to reinforce 
this one-sidedness. In summary, the book is a work of propaganda that 
therefore can not be unreservedly recommended. 

Edythc C. Haber, University of Massachusetts at Boston 



TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. THROUGH THE YEAR in the USSR is an invitation for 
a visit. The book portrays the people and places of the Soviet Union with 
apparent realism as well as charm. It evoked in me memories of books read as 
a student which inspired a thirst for travel and the interest I have in 
history and literature. I suspect this book by Pamela Barlow could do the 
same for many students today. Used in a social studies unit on the Soviet 
Union, its vividly written text will lure readers after class is over. 

There* are neither "instructions for the teacher," nor suggestions for 
testing. There are a few suggested books and films. 

This is an interesting, enjoyable book to read. I do have some words of 
caution, however: it presents a less than critical view of life in the Soviet 
Union. That positive view is reinforced because discussion of several 
controversial areas of Soviet life, the practice of religion and aspects of 
marriage and family life, for example, are either neglected or misrepresented. 
Government policy in the Soviet Union is one thing; practice might be, and 
often is, altogether different. 

Gail Gardner, Martin Luther King School, Cambridge, MA 



ERLC 



45 



-40- 



Bialer, Seweryn. THE USSR AFTER BREZHNEV. New York, Foreign Policy 
Association, 1983. "Headline Series." 63 pages. Illus. Maps. Bibliography. 
ISBN 0-87124-086-6. Paper. $3.00. 

Gxa<*e: 10-12 Subject: Political Science 

SUMMARY. Those familiar with the Foreign Policy Association's "Headline 
Series" will find THE USSR AFTER BREZHNEV similar in style to the others. The 
work deals with five major themes — "Brezhnev's Legacy," "Hard Choices in the 
1980s," "The Andropov Succession," "Soviet Foreign Policy Under Andropov," and 
"Western Policies Toward the Soviet Union." As always, the "Headline Series" 
concentrates more on content than visuals, but there are a few illustrations. 
In the last section, called "Talking it Over," analytical discussion questions 
are posed and a selective and briefly annotated "Reading List" is provided. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Bialer has written a succinct, informed summary of 
contemporary Russian problems at, what he calls, the USSR's "transition 
point." The author correctly notes Brezhnev's stabilization of the Soviet 
system by bringing technocrats into high level decision making positions, as 
well as Brezhnev's last six years of non-cyclical economic crisis. The USSR 
simultaneously pushed traditional and ideological drives for external 
expansion and total security. These contradictory tendencies have brought 
Soviet leadership after Brezhnev face-to-face with a central paradox: how to 
institute economic reforms of sufficient magnitude to halt further economic 
slump so that they can maintain and increase influence abroad. Bialer 
contends that only radical reforms would overcome bottlenecks, restore 
discipline, check "clientelism" and help the USSR sustain military parity with 
the West. According to Bialer, "mini-reforms" won't do the job. The 
challenge before any new leadership is to overhaul the entire system. This 
Bialer considers unlikely. Furthermore, any new leadership must meet American 
efforts to check the USSR through disincentives and incentives : containing, 
confronting and using detente wherever possible. Recent Soviet expansion has 
ignited American rearmament, annoyed China, and led to problems in Poland. Can 
any leader succeed without real reform? Would the technocracy tolerate it? 
Possible answers to these questions will provoke lively discussion among the 
readers of this thoughtful and well-illustrated little bo>k. 

Donald E. Davis, Illinois State University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. In general the "Headline Series" provides 
well-written, informative and up-to-date materials. This work is no 
exception. The student and teacher will find material that is not readily 
available elsewhere, presented in an interesting and provocative fashion. The 
most outstanding feature of the work is a double page chart concerning "Where 
the Power Lies in the Soviet Union." 

The author, a prominent Sovietologist, has succeeded in providing an 
understandable overview of a confusing period in the Soviet Union. Despite 
the fluidity of Soviet internal politics, this work will not become outdated 
with the next shift in leadership, but will continue to provide valid insights 
into the complexity of Soviet leadenrtiip. The teacher will find the work well 
suited as supplemental reading to any treatment of Soviet politics and foreign 
policy, and to some extent able to stand alone as an instructional tool. The 
secondary student will find it interesting and, at least on a surface level, 
capable of answering many questions. 

Denny L. Schillings, Homewood-Flossmoor (IL) H.S. 



9 

ERIC 



46 



-41- 



Bronfenbrenner, Urie. WO WORLDS OF CHILDHOOD: U.S. AND U.S.S.R. With the 
assistance of John C. Condry, Jr. New York, Simon & Schuster, Inc. (Touchstone 
Books), 1970. 190 pages. Illus. Index. ISBN 0-671-21238-9. Paper. $9.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Sociology, Psychology 

SUMMARY. Bronfenbrenner' s study examines Soviet Russian child-rearing and 
educational techniques and contrasts them with those in the United States. The 
material is presented from both the sociological and psychological 
perspectives, with considerable detail on the Soviet schools. The book is 
organized by descriptively titled chapters and subheadings. The Russian 
section of the book is well-illustrated with photographs and poster 
reproductions. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Commenting on L. Liegle f s THE FAMILY'S ROLE IN SOVIET 
EDUCATION (1973), Bronfenbrenner implicitly modified his own conclusions in 
WO WORLDS: "It came as a surprise to me that there was more emphasis on 
privacy, less involvement in external social and political concerns, and more 
separation from the outside world in the Soviet family than in its American 
counterpart." TWO WORLDS emphasizes the integration of family, work, school 
and community and tends to present an ideal model of the functioning Soviet 
school. Liegle and others have stressed the disruptive impact of the larger 
society on family and school, in the form of "inexorable pressures and 
demands: the necessity for women to work, housing shortages, scarcities, etc." 
Liegle discovered that in the USSR most children spend three to four hours 
daily in unstructured, unsupervised play, and that family values often 
conflict with those propagated in school. In dealing with the U.S. 
Bronfenbrenner calls for part-time jobs for one or both parents, for 
involvement of children in tasks bearing genuine responsibility, and for 
reacquainting them with the workplace in America. Precisely the same concerns 
preoccupy the Soviet press and educators today. However, despite his tendency 
to gloss over shortcomings in the Soviet system, Bronfenbrenner 1 s book is 
stimulating and informative. 

A. Benoit Eklof , Indiana University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Bronfenbrenner' s thesis is that Russian children 
are fully integrated into adult society and socialized largely by constructive 
peer pressures structured by the "up-bringers." American children, on the 
other hand, are largely isolated from adult society and, therefore, largely 
alienated from it, while peer groups tend to oppose adult norms. The 
character development of Soviet children is planned to accord with societal 
norms, while American character development is relegated to morally neutral 
schools, television, and those destructive peer groups. These problems are 
especially acute among the economically deprived. Bronfenbrenner makes 
several suggestions as to how Americans might profitably adapt Russian 
techniques. 

Although the book is in a scholarly format, its reading level should pose 
no problem to most high school students. The book is suitable for psychology, 
sociology, or child development classes, as well as courses on the Soviet 
Union. Its controversial thesis should be considered by all who are 
interested in education. 

J. Milton McGinnis, Prospect High School, 
Mt. Prospect, IL 



ERIC 



47 



-42- 



"Current Digest of the Soviet Press". Columbus, OH. ISSN 0011-3425. One year 
subscription $64.00. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject* Soviet Studies 

SUMMARY • "Current Digest of the Soviet Press" is a weekly digest (usually 24 
pages) of materials taken from over 100 Soviet sources and translated into 
English with "every effort to preserve the sense and spirit of the Russian 
text." Intending to provide a unique collection of material for research, 
analysis, and teaching, the staff of CDSP draws heavily on PRAVDA and 
IZVESTIA, but also reports from numerous and varied newspapers and magazines 
which are not usually available in the United States • Available by 
subscription, CDSP also regularly publishes compendia of selected articles. 
Their most recent is THE USSR TODAY, Sixth Edition, containing representative 
articles from 1981 to 1984. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Many researchers begin their study of current issues 
by going through the weekly "Current Digest." Its experienced editors provide 
a balanced selection of articles from the USSR's most important newspapers and 
journals. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. In the introduction to his LIFE IN RUSSIA (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1983), Michael Binyon notes in speaking of the Soviet 
press that they "regularly report the most bizarre goings on, and in doing so, 
reveal a great deal about life in the Soviet Union." One can not agree more 
with Mr. Binyon after savoring the weekly banquet of information offered us by 
the "Current Digest of the Soviet Press." Published in Columbus, Ohio by an 
independent, non-profit organization, the Digest is probably the quickest and 
surest way to keep current on events in the Soviet Union, and to broaden and 
deepen one's understanding of its enigmatic people. The staff at CDSP do all 
the work — gathering, reading, translating, and editing material from well 
over 100 literary sources. The product is indeed a many-coursed feast of 
information. The current issue (May 29, 1985) has articles on Russian teenage 
gangs and alcoholism in management, a criticism of the "Star Wars** initiative, 
a Che Guevara panegyric, a look at Staling role in World War II (he still 
erred), a monograph on the NEP, and yet another criticism of yet another 
modern art exhibition. And there's more — much more. Each clearly outlined 
issue is as interesting and diversified as the last. Though it is fairly 
expensive, a subscription to this unique resource is almost a must for a high 
school or college that is serious about its coverage of Soviet studies. The 
"Digest" also offers quarterly and annual indexes, and issues compilations 
regularly. 

Richard Jensen, Hingham (MA) High School 



48 



-43- 



D'Encausse, Helene Carrere. LENIN: REVOLUTION AND POWER (Volume I in A HISTORY 
OF THE SOVIET UNION 1917-1953). Translated by Valence lonescu. New York, 
Longman Inc., 1982. 279 pages. Index. Bibliography. ISBN 0-582-29559-9. Paper. 
$11.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: History, Political Science 

SUMMARY* Professor Carrere d'Encausse devotes her first chapter to discussing 
the theoretical differences and development of the Russian Left before 1914. 
The remainder of the book traces the evolution of Bolshevik ideology and 
practice from the Tsarist dissolution to the consolidation of Stalin's power 
in 1929. The text is organized as a factual chronological narrative with 
descriptive chapter headings and subheadings. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The author, a political scientist at the University 
of Paris, has won an international reputation as a specialist on the USSR's 
nationality problems, especially those concerning the Moslem peoples. Not 
surprisingly, then, this book is strongest in its treatment of the Soviet 
regime's application of Lenin's vaunted principle of the "right of peoples to 
self-determination." Also noteworthy is the author's pursuit of the shifting 
loci of power from February 1917 and the efforts Lenin and Stalin made to 
legitimate their political authority. Offsetting these virtues, however, are 
several grave defects. The book contains numerous factual errors, especially 
in chronology, that vitiate much of the analysis. Virtually ignoring the 
cardinal importance the Bolsheviks attached to a world revolution, and more 
particularly, a German revolution, she omits information indispensable for 
understanding Bolshevik policy. Moreover, imprecise and misleading 
terminology often make key passages incomprehensible. Finally, much of the 
text is mangled by faulty translation from the French- More readable and 
reliable alternatives are: T. von Laue, WHY LENIN? WHY STALIN? (2nd ed., New 
York, 1971); John Thompson, REVOLUTIONARY RUSSIA 1917 (New York, 1981); THE 
RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 1917-1932 (New York, 1984), as well as other works now out 
of print. 

Albert Resis, Northern Illinois University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. The focus of this volume is primarily on the 
theoretical evolution and the intra-party struggles of the Bolsheviks and 
secondarily on the actual course of events in the USSR. The book does an 
excellent job of depicting the transition from the ideologically diverse, 
opportunistic and somewhat disorganized minority party of 1917, to the 
monolithic, Stalin-dominated apparatus of 1929. The title of the book is 
misleading, for the narrative continues well beyond the death of Lenin. 

The book would, however, be very difficult for most students below 
college level. The author presupposes the reader's familiarity with Russian 
history and personalities. The style is scholarly and makes no concession to 
less able readers. Professor Carrere d'Encausse marvelously clarifies the 
Byzantine convolutions of party politics, but it is the close attention to 
this very topic that disqualifies the book for any reader without considerable 
background or specialized interest. 

J. Milton McGinnis, Prospect High School, 

Mt. Prospect, IL 



49 



-44- 



Feshbach, Murray, THE SOVIET UNION: POPULATION TRENDS AND DILEMMAS. In 
"Population Bulletin," Vol* 37, No, 3, August, 1982. Wellington, Population 
Reference Bureau, Inc. 45 pages, Illus. Map* Bibliography, ISSN 0032-468X. 
Paper, $3.00o 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: Demography 

SUMMARY. This brief pamphlet gives a concise, straightforward view of the 
Soviet population distribution and composition by age, sex, and ethnicity, 
giving overall averages and then breaking figures down according to che 
various Soviet republics. Succinct charts and graphs illustrate the 
information admirably. It is well organized and well documented with clearly 
stated headings and a good selected bibliography for further study. Population 
trends are projected to the year 2000. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* The author may well be the best informed individual on 
this subject anywhere — including scholars in the Soviet Union. He has 
produced an excellent reference source packed with the best available data 
presented in a well-written text and in clear tables and charts. He 
demonstrates beyond any reasonable doubt that Soviet leaders will increasingly 
be forced to confront a series of interrelated "population problems" with very 
important implications. For example, they are going to have to decide what to 
do about the fact that most of the new labor force is being born in Soviet 
Central Asia while most of the factories are in European Russia and most of 
the raw materials are in Siberia. (It would not surprise me to learn that 
this and Feshbachs's other writings are translated into Russian, but with 
limited distribution in numbered copies because of the unpleasant implications 
of the data and his well- reasoned analysis.) The one weakness I see in this 
material is the lack of specific examples to help give meaning to the numbers. 

I would therefore recommend chat it be used primarily as a reference source 
and in conjunction with other readings. 

Ronald R. Pope, Illinois State University 

TEACHES/LEARNER SPECIALIST. This brief pamphlet is loaded with information 
that anyone rith .n interest in the Soviet Union can find useful. It is well 
organized and deals with population trends since the Revolution and their 
implications for the military, agricultural, and industrial potential of the 
nation. The variations among the Slavic, Baltic, Transcaucasian, Turkic, and 
other peoples are discussed. It is clear that if present trends continue, the 
Russian majority will no longer exist. The higher birth rates of the 
Muslim/ Asian Soviet citizens and their aversion to abortion as a major means 
of birth control ate responsible for this* 

Soviet policies that continue to ignore the Soviet citizenry's demands 
for more adequate housing and more consumer goods in favor of the continued 
buildup of the military/heavy industry potential can only exacerbate the 
problem. 

The language is clear and the charts and graphs are excellent 
supplements. Any reasonably literate high school student should find this 
pamphlet useful, although it should by no means be limited to high school use. 
Every public and high school library should have this book. Furthermore, if 
this is typical Of the quality of Population Reference Bureau bulletins, 
libraries should subncribe to their annual series which "tells the world about 
population." 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) High School 



50 



-45- 



Golyakhovsky, Vladimir. RUSSIAN DOCTOR. Translated by Michael Sylwester and 
Eugene Ostrovsky. New York, St. Martin 9 s/ Mar ek, 1984. 312 pages. Illus. ISBN 
0-312-69609-4. $17.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Sociology, History 

SUMMARY. In his book, RUSSIAN DOCTOR, emigre orthopedic surgeon Dr. Vladimir 
Golyakhovsky chronicles the education and career, successes and 
disappointments of a young Jewish doctor, from his entrance into the Second 
Moscow Joseph Stalin Medical School in 1947 to his emigration in February, 
1978. In this episodic uarrative (55 chapters), Golyakhovsky describes his 
life as * struggling young surgeon and his growing dissatisfaction with the 
Soviet medical establishment* 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Golyakhovsky 9 s account rings true and provides 
fascinating insights into many facets of Soviet life. A great deal of 
attention is devoted to the fate of Jews in the Soviet social and medical 
system, the process o2 medical education and entrance into the medical schools 
(often done through bribery) , and the ever-present role of the Party in every 
aspect of life and work. For example, promotions beyond a certain level do 
not usually go to non-Party people. There are details on the quality of 
medicine, the supply of medical instruments and pharmaceuticals, and the 
author 9 s assessment that Soviet medicine is several decades behind 
accomplishments in the West. There are some intriguing vignettes about the 
ways in which the top Soviet elites live and <>muse themselves. Because the 
author treated Khrushchev, Plisetskaya, and the physicist Landau, he often was 
£*ven occess to elite facilities (including Kosygin 9 s luxurious dacha in the 
Caucasus where tvery whim was fulfilled by a staff of obedient servants). 
There is a discussion of the abysmally low salaries received by doctors, the 
universal existence of "under the table" payments for any aspect of medical 
care, and the fact that money was an overwhelming preoccupation of doctors. 
The book reads well. There are glimpses of self-deprecating humor, although 
perhaps a little bit too much emphasis on the author 9 s attractiveness to women 
and his romantic conquests. It could be read in conjunction with William 
Knaus 9 INSIDE RUSSIAN MEDICINE to get a better insight into the realities of 
Soviet socialized medicine. 

Mark Field, Boston University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Vladimir Golyakhovsky seeKs to enlighten a general 
readership as to the shortcomings and idiosyncracies of the Soviet medical 
system that caused him to emigrate to the United States. While Dr. 
Golyakhovsky has no particular audience in mind, students of Russian history 
and/or culture of high school or college age especially will find this book 
entirely readable due to good translation, short chapters, and some intimate 
encounters with a few of the Soviet Union 9 s most fascinating personalities. 
Despite the many interesting and intriguing insights into Soviet life, 
however, the numerous and varied indictments of the Soviet system and society 
require some balance* I found the book surprising, revealing, and in places 
unbelievable. Though it often seems self-serving and ego-centered, it is 
certainly not unique in its tone or in its tattling. Golyakhovsky provides 
added information about the Khrushchev and Brezhnev eras available only to 
someone acquainted with the higher workings of the Soviet bureaucratic machine. 

Richard Jensen, Hingham (MA) High School 



9 

ERIC 



51 



-46- 



Goode, Stephen. THE END OF DETENTE? U.S. -SOVIET RELATIONS. New York, Impact 
Books (Franklin Watts), 1981. 92 pages. Index. Bibliography. ISBN 
0-531-04334-7. $9.90. 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: Political Science 

SUMMARY. This is an 88-page book looking at the rivalry and the issue of 
brinksmanship between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. since World War II. The 
author has concisely described the three periods of detente, specifically 
stating why they failed or had opportunities for success. The material is 
presented in seven chapters, chronologically organized, each with several 
subheads. The evolution of the word detente and differences in its 
interpretation are explained. This book is a basic introduction to the facts 
of military escalation and argues for dialogue between the superpowers. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This very short book, written in 1980 (and now dated), 
deals primarily with US-Soviet relations in the 1970s. Unfortunately, it 
presents too many bland and naive historical statements, which high school 
students do not deserve, and which fail to provide basic reasons for the 
general hostility that has existed between the two countries since the 
Bolshevik Revolution of November, 1917. The book abounds in Cold War 
vocabulary; the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia is labelled "ruthless and 
dangerous" but US intervention in Vietnam is passed off as "American 
globalism" and "framework of order" (whatever that means). On the other hand, 
the author fails to mention one of the most important ingredients in US-Soviet 
relations — the KGB and the wide-ranging foreign policy difficulties inherent 
in current Soviet technology theft, espionage, etc. The book's message seems 
unsure — the author does not address directly or convincingly the question of 
whether the Soviet Union is really a dangerous enemy ready to pounce upon an 
unsuspecting United States. Not recommended. 

P.H. Clendenning, Harvard University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Stephen Goode is concerned with the periods of 
tension and relaxation between the U.S. cad the U.S.S.R. since 1945. His 
brief synopsis in the introductory chapter explains the challenge of the 
Soviets, the fear in the U.S. and the inception of diplomatic relations in 
1933. Ninth-grade students would find this book informative and reliable. 

The book is suitable for a multitude of social science courses at the 
secondary level: 20th-century American History, Comparative Government, 
European History, International Relations, Contemporary Issues, and 
Russian/Soviet History. 

The chapters are organized along thematic lines, each introduced with a 
historical quote from an American statesman. Goode clearly defines what will 
be discussed in each section, a positive student aid. The bibliography is 
limited, though adequate for secondary level. The student has many 
opportunities for follow-up research on the many topics covered: American and 
Soviet globalism, objectives and economic conditions pursued, the concepts of 
inferiority and superiority, the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, SALT I and II, the 
China factor, and the invasion of Afghanistan, to mention a few. 

THE SOVIET UNION in the Time-Life Series/Library of Nations would be an 
excellent additional resource to help students understand the people and 
cultures of the Soviet Union. 

Robert Friel, Stoneham (MA) High School 



52 



-47- 



Hansson, Carola. MOSCOW WOMEN. Joint author Karin Liden. New York, Random 
House, Inc. (Pantheon Books), 1983. 194 pages. Illus. Bibliography. ISBN 
0-394-71491-1. Paper. $7.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: History, Women's Studies 

SUMMARY* Two Swedish journalists recorded interviews with 13 Soviet women from 
different walks of life. Those interviewed include an editor at a publishing 
house, student at Moscow University, hairdresser, university graduate in 
languages (housewife at the time of the interview), draftswoman in truck 
factory, professor of education, chambermaid, data programmer, pensioner 
(former librarian), artist, and law student. Interspersed among the interviews 
are brief analyses of issues such as day care for children, political power, 
divorce, and salaries. There are 16 pictures. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* The condition of women in Soviet society is among the 
least known aspects of life in the Soviet Union. It also represents one of 
the numerous patterns of inequality (sexual, ethnic, class, political) that 
exist. Until recently little attention has been given in Western scholarship 
to this topic and even less in the Soviet Union. Nor have the problems of 
Soviet women found much of an outlet in the Soviet media, since, from the 
official point of view, they are equal, liberated and contented. 

The book comes with a scholarly introduction by one of the few American 
specialists on Soviet women, which provides a good historical-sociological 
background for the interviews. There are also short introductions for each 
interview providing the broader context for it and a postscript. 

The topics cover a wide range of issues: work, family, material living 
conditions, birth control, career aspirations, relations with parents or 
in-laws (who in most cases supplement the incomes of the young), shopping and 
daily life. If there is any major pattern or theme that emerges it is the 
concern with shortages and especially that of housing, and the resigned, if 
not cheerful acceptance of certain inequalities including the superior 
importance of the man's job and career. By Western and especially American 
standards expectations are low and aspirations modest. 

Paul Hollander, University of Massachusetts 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. These interviews are candid and frequently moving. 
They give a vivid picture of the tenor of life of Soviet women. 

With some knowledge of Russian/ Soviet history and society and/or the 
international women's movement, third and fourth year high school students 
would find much to stir debate. In a Russian/ Soviet history course, Moscow 
Women could be combined with pre-Revolutionary material in an effort to 
discern, examine, and compare patterns and changes in attitudes. What 
changed, if anything, as a result of the events of 1917? 

The book could serve as the basis for a cross-cultural comparative study 
of women's actual and perceived roles in a given society. What are the 
differences? How are roles defined, defended, protected, and justified? And 
why? 

Because the material is not specifically or necessarily targeted for a 
student audience, instructors would have to develop their own teaching 
guidelines. 

Gail Gardner, Martin Luther King School, 

Cambridge, MA 



ERIC 



53 



-48- 



Hecht, Leo. THE USSR TODAY: FACTS AND INTERPRETATIONS, Second Revised Edition. 
Springfield, VA, Scholasticus Publishing, 1982. 237 pages. Maps. Index. ISBN 
0-9606754-2-6. Paper. $12.95. 



SUMMARY. Beginning with a general overview of geography, THE USSR TODAY moves 
through political organization, armed forces, housing, health care, education, 
performing arts, women, marriage and dissidence — to mention only a few of 
the 28 brief chapters. There are 35 charts that provide new or supportive 
information (not merely compilations of the texts) , and several maps. The 
appendices cover terminology, the Constitution of the USSR and the Communist 
Party Statutes. The index, while brief, is adequate when coupled with the 
well organized and descriptive table of contents. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. "The veil-educated American in his personal 
relationship vis-a-vis the USSR (sic)" shows "profound ignorance" says Leo 
Hecht on page 1. The author has attempted to provide "the most important 
basic information" necessary to rectify such ignorance. 

The book has a strong political and sociological bias: of the 28 chapters 
only two deal witn the arts, and then briefly; classical music and ballet are 
allotted four sentences each (p. 139). There is a useful appendix on the bane 
of Russianists, transliteration from Russian Into English, but the two 
appendices containing the texts of the Soviet Constitution and of the Statutes 
of the Communist Part/ are superfluous. 

Not all the "facts and interpretations" inspire confidence: Bulgaria is 
dismissed as "the most backward, economically and culturally" of the Soviet 
Union's East European allies (p. 66); in his chapter on economic planning the 
author fails to mention Khrushchev's Seven-Year Plan (pp. 71-77); the 
astonishing claim is made that before 1917 "there was virtually no industry in 
the country" (p. 77); few would agree with Hecht 1 s view of Edvard Limonov as a 
major writer (p. 130). There are numerous misprints and the index is of 
little help to the reader. Nevertheless, THE USSR TODAY may be regarded as a 
useful supplement to more reliable and informative reference books like THE 
CAMBRIDGE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE SOVIET UNION. 



TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. In slightly more than 200 pages Leo Hecht has 
provided a remarkable collection of facts and figures. In general, his 
interpretations are not so much judgmental as they are informational. This 
work should not be approached as a narrative; it is rather to be used for 
research. As Hecht points out in his first edition, he has '...attempted to 
compile the most important basic information to be used towards an 
understanding of the Soviet system and ... people." The style is' wot, 
however, encyclopedic, and the student researcher will not become overwhelmed 
with data. A most useful feature at the end of each chapter is a list of 
readings. Many of these are easily accessible and understandable at the high 
school level. The work should provide a nice adjunct to a school library or 
teacher's personal resources — especially if Hecht continues to update the 
material as he has in this second edition. 



Grade: 9-12 



Subject: Social Studies 



Richard Tempest, University of Illinois at Urbana 



Denny L. Schillings, Homewood-Flossmoor ( TL) 
High School 



ERLC 




-49- 



Kahn, Kathy. FRUITS OF OUR LaBOR. New York, G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1982. 370 
pages. Illus. ISBN 0-399-12698-8. $17.95. 

Grade: 7-12 Subject: Social Studies, Sociology 

SUMMARY. The author, whose last book, HILLBILLY WOMEN, won MADEMOISELLE 
magazine 1 s "People of the Year" prize, here transcribes 27 interviews with 
alternating Soviet and American workers. The first section is called "Salt of 
the Earth" and it is followed by "Technology's Harvest" and "Arctic Boomtowns: 
The Last Frontiers." There are eight pages of pictures of the interviewees. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* The most attractive thing about this book is the 27 
interviews with Soviet and U.S. workers: when people relate their most 
precious childhood memories or describe their struggles to make ends meet they 
tend to speak movingly and to talk a good deal of sense. Yet when Ms. Kahn 
prompts her Soviet interlocutors to discuss the U.S. or their opposite numbers 
in America to talk about the USSR, the interviewees are altrjst invariably 
misinformed and speak in political cliches: they do not know what they are 
talking about. 

Neither does Ms. Kahn. She explains the high level of bank savings in 
the USSR by the desire of Soviet citizens to provide for a "rainy day," 
whereas the chief cause of this phenomenon, as has been acknowledged by Soviet 
economists, is a surplus of money chasing a paucity of goods. When comparing 
the respective living standards of Soviet and American workers she arbitrarily 
chooses an exchange rate of 1 ruble«$1.50; her conclusions are correspondingly 
askew. There are factual mistakes: subbotniks started not in the "early 
1900s" but in 1919; Ilia Muromets is not Ukrainian but Russian. Kathy Kahn's 
book has neither an index nor a bibliography; the absence of the latter is 
revealing. FRUITS OF OUR LABOR is of no scholarly value. 

Richard Tempest, University of Illinois at Urbana 

TEACHES/LEARNER SPECIALIST* Kathy Kahn's FRUITS OF OUR LABORS, while not too 
difficult for high school students is not a book that I would recommend for 
the classroom, unless it is used as an example of biased reporting or is 
balanced by a book such as Hedrick Smith's THE RUSSIANS. 

Ms. Kahn has the same starry-eyed approach to the Soviet system that Jane 
Fonda had in Hanoi, and similarly seems to find nothing commendable on the 
American scene. Kahn's guide spoke little English, so she depends on tapes 
which are translated for her back home. Her Soviet interviewees are carefully 
chosen and she is wined and dined bountifully wherever she goes. Her reaction 
to her interviewees takes up a considerable part of the book. Sometimes, as 
is the case with the reindeer herder, she doesn't even get the interview. 

A migrant worker is offered as a representative of American agriculture. 
A Midwesterner farming a family farm owned for four or five generations would 
certainly have a different viewpoint. Soviet women claim fulfillment in their 
jobs and supposedly lack the strains of American working women because of the 
marvelous day care facilities, consistently helpful husbands and excellent 
health care. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) Senior High School 



ERJC 



55 



-50- 



Kennan, George. THE NUCLEAR DELUSION: SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS IN THE ATOMIC 
AGE. New York, Pantheon Books, 1982. 264 pages. Index. ISBN 0-394-71318-4. 
Paper. $4.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Political Science 

SUMMARY. This "expanded, updated" edition is a collection of the speeches, 
interviews and published articles of this veteran diplomat and scholar of 
Russian/Soviet history. He has long been "the voice crying in the wilderness" 
insisting that the USSR is not peopled by demons, but rather that their people 
and leaders are products of their history and geography, both of which are 
vastly different from that of the West. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The dean of American Sovietologists, George F. Kennan, 
a US State Department expert from 1926-1952 and 1961-1963, was dismayed by 
President Roosevelt's supposed "soft-line" Soviet policies between 1933 and 
1945. Suddenly in 1946, however, Kennan 1 s hard-line recommendation — 
"containment" of the USSR — became official US doctrine. Washington, he 
writes, then became obsessed by the "delusion" that only America's growing 
nuclear arsenal could effectively deter Soviet agression. The Russians 
reacted by amassing their own nuclear arsenal. Today, first use of nuclear 
weapons by either side could lead to the destruction of civilization or even 
of life on this planet. The real enemy is the Bomb itself, "a sterile and 
hopeless weapon." 

In this collection of articles and speeches dating from 1950 to 1982, 
Kennan, a traditional conservative, sees Soviet leaders as motivated by 
concern for Soviet security. The belief held in the West that the USSR is 
bent on armed conquest when, in fact, its highest priority is "the 
consolidation and economic development of its existing sphere of power" is, he 
contends, "a primitive, seriously oversimplified and misleading idee fixe ." To 
reduce the mounting danger of mutual annihilation, he advocates 
"denuclearization, 31 beginning with a 50% across-the-board cut in both nuclear 
arsenals. For a diametrically opposed view, see the neo-conservative analysis 
in Richard Pipes, SURVIVAL IS NOT ENOUGH: SOVIET REALITIES AND AMERICA'S 
FUTURE (1985). For other views, see: Fred Warner Neal, ed., DETENTE OR 
DEBACLE: COMMON SENSE IN US-SOVIET RELATIONS (1979) and David Holloway, THE 
SOVIET UNION AND THE ARMS RACE (1984). 

Albert Resis, Northern Illinois University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Kennan' s speeches were presented to audiences of 
college students and to other scholars; therefore he usually assumes some 
prior knowledge and does not stick to a limited vocabulary. Nevertheless he 
writes with such clarity that almost anyone with reaonable literacy can profit 
by exposure to his ideas. He understands the Russian people and their history 
and sees them as products of their past, just as we are tied to ours. 

Within this book there is an astute analysis of almost every crisis in 
American/ Soviet relations since the Bolshevik Revolution, with a particular 
focus on the post-World War II (nuclear) period. Readings could be assigned 
to able students in either history or political science classes. Articles are 
dated in the table of contents to further direct both student and teacher. 
While classroom use of this book would be necessarily limited, it is still 
very worthwhile reading. Above all it should be required reading in the 
Pentagon. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) Senior High School 

ERLC 5 b 



-51- 



Knaus, William A., M.D. INSIDE RUSSIAN MEDICINE. Research assistance by 
Nicholas A. Petroff. Boston, Beacon Press, 1981. 407 pages. Index. 
Bibliography. Glossary. ISBN 0-8070-2159-8. Paper. $11.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Sociology 

SUMMARY. Dr. William Knaus provides the reader with a wide-ranging examination 
of medical care in the Soviet Union. The book is primarily based upon the 
author's personal observations, made while he worked for the U.S. I. A. in the 
Soviet Union early in the 1970s. It sheds light on a rarely explored area of 
Soviet life. The text, intended for an adult audience, also includes 
appendices and a useful bibliography for further study. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This is a book written by an American physician who 
was assigned to accompany groups of American guides in a cultural exchange 
program with the Soviet Union. A physician was assigned to such groups 
because earlier a guide had died in the Soviet Union as a result of a 
botched-up operation. The author is a well-qualified physician who had a 
unique opportunity to follow patients into Soviet hospitals and observe 
current clinical and surgical practices. In addition to eyewitness accounts, 
the author provides some background data on the history and nature of the 
Soviet system of socialized medicine. The book is not a systematic or 
scholarly treatment of the subject. Knaus also adduces hearsay evidence of 
the specialized network of medical facilities reserved for the Soviet elites. 
Generally speaking, his assessment of Soviet medicine is not favorable for 
many reasons, such as the availability of up-to-date equipment. Perhaps one 
of the most valuable (and practical) aspects of the book for those 
contemplating travel to the Soviet Union is a 13-page appendix on "Taking Care 
of Yourself in the USSR — An Informal Guide for Travelers." This alone would 
be worth the price of the book. The book rings true as a description of 
Soviet medicine (except Soviet medicine for the elites, which remains hidden 
from direct scrutiny). 

Mark Field, Boston University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. This book is written by an American physician 
possessed of a remarkable sensitivity to the shapes and textures of Soviet 
culture. In spite of the limits its title might suggest, it presents a 
variety of facets of Soviet life seldom encountered by Westerners. In this 
respect the book is useful to the secondary school teacher less because of its 
treatment of Soviet medical practices than for its glimpses of everyday life 
in the USSR. It offers insightful and sharply focused views of institutional 
life, and these are never more effective than when Dr. Knaus brings the reader 
along those soft edges of that culture where real people function. At times 
he is intensely critical of his hosts' approach to health care, but he notes 
that "differences" need not always be construed as deficiencies. His 
experiences in the USSR are often intensely intimate and personal, and not 
wishing to be nekul' turno , the reader is almost inclined to "look aside" as 
the Soviet people are subjected to the type of scrutiny that only a physician 
can render. The book is neither polemical nor shrill, and a sense of 
proportion colors the entire work. It contains a wealth of information on 
women's issues and individual chapters (e.g., "Evacuation from Siberia") can 
be read with genuine interest by many high school students. 

Robert A. Cole, Hamilton-Wenham (MA) Regional High School 



ERIC 



57 



-52- 



Kovalevskaya, Sofya. A RUSSIAN CHILDHOOD. Translated and edited by Beatrice 
Stillman. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1978. 250 pages. Illus. Bibliography. 
I C BN 0-387-90348-8. $19.00. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History, Social Studies 

SUMMARY. The author, one of the great creative mathematicians of the last 
century, tells the story of her childhood and adolescence in a prosperous 
upper-class Russian family. An introduction places the memoirs into the 
perspective of their time and provides further information about 
Kovalevskaya* s adult life. An autobiographical sketch written a year before 
Kovalevskaya* s sudden death at age 41, and an appendix on her scientific work 
by a Soviet scholar conclude the book. Detailed notes follow each section. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. For a high school student curious about Russia or just 
discovering his/her own mathematical talent (or both), this book could be a 
treasure. Stillman* s introduction, placing Kovalevskaya in the proper social 
and political context, is as competent as the translation is readable. She 
explains the position of women in Russia in the second half of the 19th 
century and describes the generational conflicts that divided educated Russian 
society. She recounts the personal consequences for someone in Kovalevskaya* s 
position that resulted. Stillman is equally adept in her treatment of social 
and political issues In France, Germany, and Sweden relevant to the course of 
Kovalevskaya' s subsequent career outside Russia. The afterward on 
Kovalevskaya 1 s mathematical contributions must be judged by others than I, but 
the value of the book lies not in what is specialized, i.e. its treatment of 
history or mathematics, but in Kovalevskaya 1 s memoir itself, the centerpiece 
of the book. Her insights into the emergence of personality in childhood and 
the development of its complexities in adolescence possess an astuteness and 
clarity that transcend the historical and cultural limitations of "a Russian 
childhood." Her international renown can inspire; but her acuity into the 
process of maturity will instruct. The mood, suspense, detail and 
conciseness, apt for each essay, provide the aspiring writer with a guide to 
the construction of a memoir piece. 

Alexis Pogorelskin, St. Peter's College, 

Hoboken, NJ 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. In these beautifully written memoirs, Kovalevskaya 
evokes the loneliness of a child of the upper class growing up in a household 
people by an extensive staff of servants and tutors, but isolated from her 
parents. She recreates childhood impressions, and provides vivid 

characterizations of those around her. Especially striking are her accounts 
of the cruel methods of teaching children, and the frustrations of a young 
girl who longed for intellectual stimulation but was trapped in the stifling 
emptiness of gentry life. Kovalevskaya provides not only a record of 
childhood in the last century, but insight into the intellectual and emotional 
development of a girl who became a mathematical prodigy. Certain details are 
particularly Russian: mushroom hunting in the forest, the howling of wolves, 
the elaborate stone mansion surrounded by a desolate snow-covered plain. 

Although the clear, direct language could be understood by younger 
readers, A RUSSIAN CHILDHOOD is especially recommended for high school 
students and teachers of literature, history, or even psychology. Once 
started, this book was hard for me to put down. 

Bonny Musinsky, Cambridge School of Weston (MA) 



58 



-53- 



Lee, Andrea. RUSSIAN JOURNAL. New York, Vintage Books, 1979 (Random House). 
235 pages. ISBN 0-394-71127-0. Paper. $4.95. 

Grade: 8-12 Subject: Sociology 

SUMMARY. In 36 entries, by date with headings of one or a few words, this 
reads as a journal should, complete with many opinions. There is no index and 
no table of contents. Andrea Lee and her husband spent eight months at Moscow 
University and February and March in Leningrad. The same people do move in and 
out of the lives of these 25-year old students, "living on rubles, standing in 
queues, riding the Metro — wila ordinary Russians," as the author several 
times reminds the reader. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* This evocative and subjective book is based on what 
Andrea Lee observed in Moscow and Leningrad. It is not, therefore, a Russian 
journal but a Moscow and Leningrad one. The author vividly describes many 
common, everyday scenes — the subway, the lines, the public baths and th*» 
countryside. Those who people her book, however, are a special sort of Sovie. 
young person, the ones drawn by things Western to seek her out. Most are both 
privileged and either cynical or disaffected. The journal form allows the 
free expression of opinions, both Lee's of Russians and theirs of her. Most 
of these ring true. There is a disturbing undercurrent, however, that may be 
the result of Lee's effort to shape each encounter into a literary vignette. 
Embedded in the vocabulary of description are subtle judgements: hospitality 
is "bullying," a peasant woman looks into a shop with "avidity. • .as if she 
longed to plunder an entirely new world." Lee has a rare talent for words 
which brings her Russia to life, but this personal account has the limits of 
the form: it is highly subjective and the people described represent a narrow 
slice of urban society. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Andrea Lee's book is in no way a textbook, but it 
can be a fine example of how to edit journal entries for publication while 
keeping hints of the real feeling present in the original entry. Because 
there is no index, the teacher must be very familiar with the book to find 
quotable lines again. Vivid pictures are created with few words: "a dreary 
marble room whose walls give off a penetrating cold" and "his protuberant 
mulberry-colored eyes and pugnacious jawline suggest a forceful, opinionated 
temperament..." The author's regard for the rules of writing is exemplified 
in her organization of a topic, lead-in sentences, etc. The book could well 
be used in the following ways. A 7th or 8th grade student could use a chapter 
for getting the flavor of an event such as a jazz concert in Moscow. As an 
introduction to World Cultures, a panel of six 10th graders, well versed in 
the book, could tell the class what to observe in a culture, how to treat it, 
what words are needed to be objective, etc. RUSSIAN JOURNAL presents examples 
— to use and to avoid. A pronunciation guide would help with names, and some 
other Russian words are used but not quite explained in context. Students 
doing writing for any course should read even a few chapters to see how well 
words can be used to convey experiences with feeling, whether defined or 
simply suggested. 

Catherine Jones , former library/ media specialist , 

Lincoln, MA 



59 



-54- 



LENIN. London, Jackdaw Publications Ltd., 1972. Compiled by Anthony Cash. 
Distributed by Social Studies School Service, Culver City, CA. Maps. Illus. 
Bibliography. ISBN 0-305-62028-2. $11.95. 

Grade: 9-12 Subject: Russian and Soviet Studies 

SUMMARY. Jackdaw kits are reprint collections of historical documents and 
"exhibits" which, combined with information broadsheets, provide a thorough 
investigation of selected historical and biographical topics. Among the over 
100 kits currently offered are four which can be useful in Russian and Soviet 
studies: THE CRIMEAN WAR (#11), THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION (#42), THE RETREAT FROM 
MOSCOW (#73), and LENIN (#113). The documents and "exhibits" represent a wide 
range of coverage for each topic, and the broadsheets provide a thorough 
textual treament. Jackdaw kits sell for $11.95 and are most effective when 
used by an individual student. They also provide good bulletin board material. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Given the length of the work, I was expecting a rather 
problematic glossing over of Lenin's character. There is no question, of 
course, that matters are dealt with very schematically. The nature of the 
Party, a question so important to Lenin, is relegated to a matter of lines. 
Indeed, in the sheet containing excerpts from his political tracts, there is a 
curious omission of all reference to WHAT IS TO BE DONE, clearly a work of 
key importance. The era of War Communism and the horrors of the period between 
February, 1917 and the introduction of NEP are largely covered over rather 
blandly, though again I thank this has more to do with length constraints. 

While one might quibble with interpretative schemes, I have yet to see a 
better summary of so complex a character. Though Lenin appears rather 
curiously lacking in passion, the student would be presented with a quite 
comprehensive and sound treatment of the period and of the man. As to the 
problem of gaps, an excellent bibliography suggests where to get supplementary 
information. 

Ron Mercier, Regis College, Toronto, Canada 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. I must confess at the outset that I have 
entertained a bias concerning Jackdaw kits from early in my teaching career. 
Based entirely on price (currently $11.95 per kit) and what I considered to be 
a lack of general classroom utility, this bias prevented my close examination 
of what turns out to be an intelligent and interesting resource. The kit I 
examine here is LENIN, compiled by Anthony Cash, author of THE RUSSIAN 
REVOLUTION (Doubleday, 1969). Cash develops five themes in Lenin's life: the 
making of the revolutionary, Lenin in exile, his return to Russia, Lenin in 
power and "his last campaign." To highlight these themes (and here is where 
Jackdaws shine), he utilizes a varied selection of twelve "hands on" (reprint) 
sources, among which are Lenin's "school-leaving" certificate, his application 
for use of the British Museum's reading room, and a rather kitsch postcard 
issued after his death in 1924. These sources are explained in a manner that 
enlarges and clarifies our view of Lenin. The guidebook for the kit provides 
a "plan of attack" for the kit that makes the package meaningful and 
satisfying. The exercises that cap the unit are creative, intriguing and fun , 
and the suggested bibliography is ample. It remains, of course, a problem as 
to how to use this resource in the classroom. A quick look at the materials 
however, provides enough of an impetus to work that problem our satisfactorily. 

Richard Jensen, Hingham (MA) High School 



ERIC 



60 



-55- 



Massie, Suzanne. LAND OF THE FIREBIRD: THE BEAUTY OF OLD RUSSIA. New York, 
Touchstone Books (Simon and Schuster), 1980. 493 pages. Illus. Index. 
Bibliography. ISBN 0-671-46059-5. Paper. $13.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Russian Art, Literature 

SUMMARY. Suzanne Massie has named her book after the old Russian fable of the 
Firebird and writes not primarily of governments or wars, but instead provides 
a wonderfully colorful and eminently readable survey of Russian culture, from 
the coming of Orthodox Christianity to Kiev in the 10th century to the 
flowering of the avant-garde in the early 20th. We read about tsars, to be 
sure, but primarily of artists, writers, and musicians, as well as their 
subjects and their patrons. There are chapters on cities and on the 
countryside, on merchants and on peasants, on ice-slides and Easter eggs, and 
on the ballet. By the end of the book's 493 pages, we have learned a great 
deal about pre-Revolutionary Russia's customs, manners, and ceremonies, about 
its beauty and those who contributed to that beauty. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. One should not expect to read this as an historical 
text. That would do an injustice to the author. Its history largely repeats 
well-worn, and now superceded accounts of events. The treatment of Peter I 
and the romantic picture of Ivan the Terrible are typical. This work should be 
used with supplementary materials to balance the historical presentation. 

As the title implies, Ms. Massie did not set out to write historical 
prose. The key lies in the subtitle: "The Beauty of Old Russia." Indeed, the 
author presents as sympathetic a vision of Imperial Russian culture as 
possible, with particular emphasis on high culture. Her intense sympathy for 
Pushkin is but one case in point. Yet, in the process she makes available 
material often left untouched in historical texts, material which gives one a 
taste of Russian life, once one allows for an overly romantic vision of life, 
especially in regard to the "masses." 

Most interesting is her stress on the fine arts, as the "Firebird" of the 
title suggests. Her treatment of Diaghilev in particular helps to show the 
dynamism of Russian culture at the turn of the century, an area often 
overlool'ed. No doubt a teacher at the high school level would find this most 
useful in any presentation of Russian culture. 

In summary, one should beware of expecting too much from this. The 
author has a broad, but rather uncritical, knowledge of Russian culture. 

Ron Mercier, Regis College, Toronto, Canada 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Fascinating as it is, this is a book primarily for 
adult readers. In my opinion, it is not really suitable for classroom use, 
except with the more advanced student. It takes a degree of maturity to 
respond to the sort of aesthetic subject matter with which Massie deals, and 
most high school students will not fully appreciate the amount of attention 
given to such things as folk art, menus, and palaces. On the other hand, I 
think it is a "must" for teachers of Russian history, who will find it a 
treasure- trove of facts and anecdotes. Beyond this, sections of it, such as 
the chapters on ice-slides and Easter eggs, could be read aloud in class to 
excellent advantage. 

John Richards II, Phillips Academy, Andover, MA 



ERLC 



61 



-56- 



Morton, Miriam. GROWING UP IN THE SOVIET UNION. Moscow, Progress Publishers, 
1982. "Impressions of the USSR" series. Distributed by Imported Publications, 
Inc., Chicago. 213 pages. Illus. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY* Miriam Morton, veteran visitor to the Soviet Union, is a strong 
advocate of the Soviet system of raising children. In GROWING UP IN THE 
SOVIET UNION (published in Moscow), she paints a glowing picture of children's 
lives as family members, students, and social beings. Morton discusses the 
goals established for Soviet children, goals which focus upon the optimal 
intellectual, moral, physical, social, and aesthetic development of each and 
every individual, so that s/he can contribute to the Soviet state. 

The text is organized into chapters with subheadings. Though there are 
some proof-reading errors (Rus ian , for example) , they do not detract from the 
impact of Morton's straightforward, passionate writing style. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This is a disappointing book which I would not 
recommend to the student just beginning to study the Soviet Union. The author 
has produced a propaganda tract in which the Soviet educational and health 
care systems are presented as models of effectiveness and fairness for the 
rest of the world. In the 1930s such naivete was the norm; it is no longer 
acceptable. The author, an American, possibly a Communist Party member, was 
perhaps commissioned to produce a counterweight to the recent studies of such 
competent observers as Hedrick Smith, Robert Kaiser and David Shi pier. She 
has not succeeded. Examples abound of distortion and tendentiousneas. She 
praises "the availability of free legalized abortion," but fails to note that 
is the only means of contraception the state provides. She insists that 
special technical programs for adolescents are devoid of "even the remotest 
connection with war technology." Yet scholars have begun to note increasing 
militarism in the upbringing of Soviet youth. The author states that 
"non-socialist. . .pluralistic societies. . .fail their minority children." Yet 
in Estonia school-aged children have conducted open demonstrations against 
instruction in the Russian language. Only the book's photographs are engaging. 

Alexis Pogorelskin, St. Peter's College 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. Miriam Morten presents a comprehensive examination 
of Soviet child-rearing goals and practices established since the 1917 
revolution. Students in social studies courses may be intrigued by the 
emphasis placed, not upon gratification of the superficial pleasures of 
childhood, but upon ensuring total development: physical, intellectual, 
aesthetic, moral, and social — for every individual. Teachers will find many 
opportunities for discussion. 

The text is clearly organized and simply written, providing explanations 
of foreign or technical words. The photographs show only smiling, healthy, 
enthusiastic children. Discussion with students regarding bias in such 
Writings is encouraged. There are no suggestions for future reading. Urie 
Bronfenbrenner's TWO WORLDS OF CHILDHOOD, published in 1970, is recommended as 
an interesting companion piece and, for comparison, MOSCOW WOMEN (Lida and 
Hansson) refutes of some of Morton's presumptions. 

Gail Gardner, Martin Luther King School, 
Cambridge, MA 



ERLC 



62 



-57- 



Mowat, Farley. THE SIBERIANS. New York, Penguin Books, 1979 (Little, Brown and 
Company, 1970). 360 pages. ISBN 0-1400-3456-0. Paper. $3.95. 

Grade: 9 to adult Subject: Sociology, Geography 

SUMMARY* In 23 chapters with two maps, Mowat describes two visits, 1966 and 
1969, to major cities and remote areas of Western, Central and Northeast 
Siberia. He depicts the life of various ethnic groups, the retention of their 
traditional ways, and the modernization of their communities through the 
development of natural resources and transportation systems. Mowat also 
offers an historical perspective on Siberia as well as a comparative view of 
the Arctic regions of North America and the USSR. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Siberia, to many Western minds, evokes simply a vast, 
frozen wasteland, a place for tsarist exiles and site of Stalin* s gulag camps. 
It is, in fact, much more: a land or great scenic beauty, an ecosystem 
encompassing unusual varieties of flora and fauna, the home of scores of 
culturally diverse peoples who have adapted with ingenuity to their harsh 
environment, and a treasure-trove of natural resources only recently tapped 
for economic development. This is the Siberia described, on the basis of two 
extended trips as an invited Soviet guest by Farley Mowat. The author, a 
Canadian naturalist specializing in the Arctic North, has a fine feel for the 
environment and people, a sharp eye for the telling detail, and a marvellously 
anecdotal style. Unfortunately, he has no knowledge of history and little 
understanding of Soviet politics. He reports uncritically the information 
provided by his hosts and interpreters — be it on Soviet-style democracy or 
the purported lack of pollution in Lake Baikal. In short, this is a highly 
readable, romanticized and frequently naive account that must be balanced by 
more sophisticated, scholarly analyses of this rapidly changing region. 

Lubomyr Hajda, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. THE SIBERIANS could be used as supplemental 
reading in a variety of high school courses. It would be appropriate as part 
of a study of the cultural diversity of the Soviet population. It is also an 
excellent work for studying the topography of Siberia and for understanding 
the impact of the land on a people's history and development. Another theme 
is the diversity of Siberia's economic structure. The chapters are clearly 
organized by city, region, and topic. Whether the reader's emphasis is 
historical, cultural, geographical, or environmental, negative stereotypes 
will be shattered. In this context, there is an opportunity to examine bias 
in a writer's approach to a topic, as Mowat paints a glowing picture of Soviet 
Arctic communities that is quite convincing. In order to make students aware 
of their own biases, they could be asked to identify their stereotypes of 
Siberians/Siberia before reading this book. Another, more general bias of the 
author is evident in his sexist descriptions of Siberian women: "the buxom 
stewardess," "the little Buryat beauty," "an attractive Evenki damsel." Such 
descriptions outnumber the introductions of women in non-sexist terms, 
although a few outstanding women in leadership positions do receive 
appropriate recognition. All the people presented through Mowat' s eyes are 
genuine, lively, and generous. He gives an uplifting portrayal of a strong, 
proud, and courageous group of small peoples who have made "an uninhabitable 
region hospitable." 

Judy Hudson, Newton (MA) Country Day School of the Sacred Heart 



63 



-58- 



Newby, Eric. THE BIG RED TRAIN RIDE. New York, Penguin Books, 1980. 267 pages. 
Illus. Maps. Index. Bibliography. ISBN 0-1400-5243-7. Paper. $5.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. Newby, an English writer, has written several books based on his 
extensive world travels. This one deals with his six-day journey in 1977 on 
the Trans-Siberian Railway. It is an account of his joys, frustrations and 
observations of the sites along the nearly 6,000-mile route, plus a history of 
the railway itself. ' It is organized into 19 chapters which take the reader 
mile by mile across the country, ia a pattern similar to that used by 
Elizabeth Pond in her FROM THE YAR0SLAVSKY STATION, *ncluded are an index, a 
useful bibliography (mostly English sources) , a helpful map and some 
photographs. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. THE BIG RED TRAIN RIDE is not primarily a bock of 
political commentary, but it is critical of the Soviet system. Looking at 
Siberia strictly through Western eyes, the author repeatedly makes comparisons 
with his own lifestyle in London. He therefore can only be critical, pointing 
out every shortcoming of the Soviet system, whether it is bad food or ugly 
people. His sarcastic comments are irrelevant to the text; his sense of humor 
is insulting to Russian people and to Russian and Soviet culture, and is often 
sexist. The author erroneously assumes that all people in Siberia live there 
unwillingly and unhappily. He is, however, a poor and unqualified judge, as 
he did not converse with native Siberians because he could not speak Russian. 

There are positive aspects to this book: the author provides through 
firsthand accounts and secondary sources an interesting and accurate history 
of how Siberia was first explored, the growth of its cities, and how the 
railway was constructed. It includes a discussion of the native peoples of 
Siberia and realistic photos of everyday life, although there could be more. 
The book has a good map of Siberia and of the route of the railway. 

Christiane Carney, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. "There are so many questions that have to remain 
forever unanswered when one travels by train. ••" Newby f s own comment reveals 
the major weakness of his book; that is, much of the book simply deals with 
what he sees through the train window. He is often forced, therefore, to deal 
with life on the train with its lack of sink plugs, its unhinged toilet seats, 
its sealed windows, its lack of beer, and its surly conductresses who restrict 
his picture-taking. His references to English history as points of comparison 
might be somewhat mysterious to an American reader, particularly a high school 
student. 

However, in spite of these shortcomings, Newby does write extremely well. 
His humor finally forces the reader to laugh, in spite of himself. He is at 
his best when he describes the side-trips he is able to make to Zagorsk, 
Novosibirsk, Irkutsk, Ulan-Ude, the Bratsk dam, a collective farm and a 
Buddhist monastery. He is well-read and provides a brief but fascinating 
history of the construction of the railroad and the cities along the way. 

It is suitable for above-average high school students and is, at least as 
a library resource, a very good supplement to Farley Mowat's The Siberians and 
to the National Geographic film "Siberia: The Endless Horizon." 

Ken Poppe, Farmington (CT) High School 



64 



-59- 



PETER THE GREAT CHANGES RUSSIA, Second Edition, Edited by Marc Raeff. Boston, 
D.C. Heath and Company, 1972. "Problems in European Civilization" series. 199 
pages. Bibliography. ISBN 0-669-82701-0. Paper. $5.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY, This collection of essays on Peter the Great by outstanding scholars 
is designed to illuminate his role in Russia 1 s transition to a "modern" state. 
The editor has included three good character sketches followed by more 
specialized essays on specific aspects of his reforms. The final essays give a 
good overview of the man and the effect of his reign. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Raeff 1 s reader provides a fine blend of narrative and 
analytical history • As an anthology, it has great value as an introductory 
overview of all the essential aspects of one of the most momentous periods of 
modern Russian history. Given its overall balance and editorial quality, it 
provokes countless questions for further historical inquiry. There are three 
new selections added to this second edition of an earlier collection: A. 
Gerschenkron f s economic analysis of Peter's reign, M. Cherniavsky 1 s study of 
the symbolic legacy of Peter, and A. Besancon f s application of psycho-history 
to the tragic personal life of Peter the Great. The remaining 15 selections 
span the entire spectrum of politics, religion, intellectual history, social 
history, and historiography. Raeff provides an excellent 20-page introductory 
essay in which he surveys the major interpretive problems surrounding Peter 
the Great and his place in modern Russian history, and short introductions to 
each of the 18 selections. In summary, this reader is a fine collection of 
historical literature — it has breadth, richness, and a clear scholarly 
focus. 

Pasquale Micciche, Fitchburg (MA) State College 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Russia experienced not one, but a series of 
revolutionary breaks from its past: first, its conversion to Christianity; 
second, the reign of Peter the Great; and finally the revolution of 1917. 
These essays provide a convincing argument that Peter's reign was perhaps the 
purest form of absolutism in seventeenth and eighteenth century Europe. 
Consequently, this is an excellent source book for an advanced Russian history 
course. Yet, it does not have enough structure to lead students to the major 
points under consideration. For example, the selections on economic 
development in the seventeenth and eighteenth century would be more useful if 
they analyzed why capitalism failed, rather than just recounting Russia 1 s 
economic development. The editor does not provide much guidance in making the 
transition from one reading to the next. The book is an excellent collection 
of sources, particularly those on Peter's character, but sho^s little 
editorial ingenuity which would be sorely needed for all but the most 
sophisticated reader. 

Tim Bickford, Belmont (MA) Hill School 



ERIC 



65 



-60- 



Reed, John. TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK THE WORLD. Harmondsworth, England, Penguin 
Books Ltd., 1982 (New York, Boni and Liveright Inc., 1919). 351 pages. 
Chronology. ISBN 0-1400-2433-6. Paper. $3.95 

Grade: 1C-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY* John Reed, an American journalist and ardent socialist, wrote an 
eyewitness account of the second Russian Revolution in 1917. It is in no sense 
unbiased since he was clearly thrilled with the Bolshevik victory. 
Nonetheless it is probably as good a description of a revolution in progress 
as has ever been written. At the beginning there is a chronology of the 
events of February-November, 1917, and an explanation of terms that helps the 
reader better understand the story. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. First published in 1919, Reed's book 111 conveys the 
millenary spirit that galvanized many Bolshevik leaders, th^xr followers, and 
Reed himself in the Bolshevik Revolution. In retrospect, this is a pioneering 
effort to write "history from below," depicting the revolution as viewed by 
the ordinary people who made it, as well as their leaders. Despite Reed's 
unconcealed pro-Bolshevism, romantic idealism, and factual mistakes 
(unavoidable in 1919), readers of virtually every ideological persuasion have 
found his book an honest, compulsively readable, indispensable eye-witness 
account of the Bolshevik Revolution. Indeed, the book is unrivaled, except 
possibly for the firsthand account by N. Sukhanov, THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION, 
1917 (1955, 1962, 1984). 

The "Introduction" by the renowned British historian A.J. P. Taylor is 
marred by factual errors avoidable today. This edition carries a chronology of 
the revolution making this the most useful of the four editions currently 
available in English. 

For the most reliable one-voluce narrative account of the revolution, see 
Alexander Rabinowitch, THE BOLSHEVIKS COME TO POWER: THE REVOLUTION OF 1917 in 
Petrograd (1976 and 1978). An authoritative biography of Reed is Robert A. 
Rosenstone, ROMANTIC REVOLUTIONARY: A BIOGRAPHY OF JOHN REED (1975 and 1981), 
on which Warren Beatty's film "Reds" was based. But there is no adequate 
substitute for reading TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK THE WORLD ~ not even Sergei 
Eisenstein's masterful film "October" (1928), based on Reed's book. 

Albert Resis, Northern Illinois University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. John Reed's classic description of the Bolshevik 
Revolution in 1917 is an interesting tale. It is heavily biased toward the 
Bolsheviks and one can not help wondering what his reaction to Stalin's purges 
of the Old Bolsheviks in the 1930s would have been, had he lived. To read 
through the heroes of the book is practically a roll call of the purge lists! 

It is a moving story and shows the Soviet leadership stumbling into a 
power vacuum rather than deviously plotting and carrying out a blueprinted 
revolution step by step. 

This book covers such a tiny segment of Soviet history that I think that 
it has limited use in the classroom. It ^is well written and the vocabulary 
should be within the reach of at least better high school students, but 
because of its limited scope I think other materials would better serve the 
teacher's purpose. The only classroom use I would recommend would be as an 
extra credit assignment for a talented student. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) Senior High School 



ERIC 



66 



-61- 



THE RUSSIAN VERSION OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR. Edited by Graham Lyons. 
Translated by Marjorie Vanston. New York, Facts on File, Inc., 1976. 142 
pages. Illus. Maps. Index. ISBN 0-87196-136-9. $14.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. Published originally in England and later in the U.S. by 
Facts-on-File, this book is a series of excerpts from textbooks (pre-1973) 
used by Soviet high school students. It provides a iook at how the Soviets 
interpret the origins and events of World War II. It includes 15 chapters 
plus three very useful appendices, appropriate maps and a few photos. The 
editor states: "If we want to know the feeling of a nation about great events 
in its history, the best possible sources are its school books ...they give 
the flavour of a nation's attitude for its own history..." 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The stated aim of this book is to give the general 
reader in the West an opportunity to "find ut exactly what is the official 
Soviet version of the Second World War ai what their schoolchildren learn 
about it." Memories of World War II play an enormous role in the Soviet 
socialization process, and Western readers may find it both interesting and 
useful to be exposed to writings which undoubtedly affect the attitudes of 
future Soviet leaders and ordinary citizens. They are unlikely to agree, 
however, with quotes on the book's jacket such as "the Soviet version is 
nearer the truth than most versions current in the West." They may also be 
irritated by the ostentatious evenhandedness displayed in introductory remarks 
by the editor, who questions whether Western attitudes on issues such as the 
forced incorporation of the Baltic Republics into the Soviet Union or the 
Russian attack on Finland may not have been caused by the "Cold War 
anti-Russian bias" of Western writings, while "there has been nothing for us 
to read from the Soviet side to set the record straight..." Each section is 
introduced with a perfunctory summary of the Western position by the editor. 

Juozas A. Kazlas, Yale University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. This book belongs on every teacher's desk and in 
every school library. Its cost and the limited time span it covers make it 
unlikely that teachers will be able to purchase it and use it in classroom 
sets, but it is an excellent resource for wiitten and oral reports by 
students. The book focuses on the Soviet interpretations of the origins of 
the war and of the Soviet victories at Stalingrad, Moscow, and Leningrad that 
led to the defeat of Nazi Germany. The Soviets believe that it was their 
armies that won the war with little help from England and the U.S. Of 
particular interest is the Soviet interpretation of such events as the 
campaigns in North Africa and Italy, the second front in France, the use of 
the atomic bombs against Japan and the war-time diplomacy among the allies. 
Three appendices, based on other Soviet history books, add excellent material 
on the Nazi-Soviet pact, the Soviet-Finnish War, and the Warsaw uprising. The 
entire book is enlightening and sure to spark controversy and discussion among 
students. Teachers should especially note the role chat Stalin plays in the 
war according to the textbooks. One hint is that Winston Churchill is 
mentioned more often than Stalin! Interesting commentary about Soviet texts 
is included in SOCIAL EDUCATION, April, 1981, which devotes its entire issue 
to "Teaching about Russia and the Soviet Union." 

Kenneth Poppe, Farmington (CT) High School 



ERLC 



67 



-62- 



THE RUSSIAN WORKER: LIFE AND LABOR UNDER THE TSARIST REGIME. Edited by 
Victoria E. Bonnell. Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1983. 216 
pages. Illus. Bibliography. ISBN 0-520-05059-2. Paper. $9.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History, Economics 

SUMMARY* Victoria Bonnell examines five specific kinds of work to explain the 
pulse of everyday life in the 1890s and early 1900s. Metal, textile, garment 
and sales-clerk workers are shown to us from dawn until late evening. We see 
the perceptions and aspirations of young workers. Job stratification at all 
levels of work is explored in depth. The author cites firsthand accounts of 
the housing, sanitary and living conditions of early ui an workers. Each 
chapter has a selected bibliography for future reference and study. There are 
16 illustrations. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. THE RUSSIAN WORKER is a collection of firsthand 
accounts of the working class under the Tsarist Regime. The editor, a leading 
specialist on the prerevolutionary working class, has gathered together an 
impressive collection of now classic primary sources in lively, readable 
translations. This is a unique collection as it is the only collection of 
firsthand accounts on Russian labor in English. Coverage for the most part is 
restricted to St. Petersburg and Moscow (and outlying areas), but nonetheless 
conveys the flavor of life and labor everywhere. The collection also provides 
excellent coverage of a range of topics which have receutly become subjects of 
serious study: workers 9 aspirations, leisure time, diet, vodka consumption, 
housing, status differentials within the factory, relations with foremen and 
management, etc. Perhaps most important, the accounts reveal the central 
significance of Russian labor 1 s ties to the countryside and the difficult 
process of cultural urbanization, subjects of major importance in recent 
Western historiography. The book is excellently (and thoroughly) annotated 
and contains a good, select bibliography. The editor 1 s introduction ties 
together the most important themes in the accounts in a solid and very useful 
survey of Russian labor. The collection presents an excellent and 
true-to-life portrayal of "life and labor under the Tsarist regime." 

Lynne Viola, University of California 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Students will be able to make valid comparisons 
with factory conditions in the U.S. (which were deplorable), length of work 
day, salaries, and the problem of drunkenness which both societies 
experienced. The readings demonstrate the vital connection of the Russian 
peasant to his village and the continuing importance of village ties even in 
the factory. Similar patterns can be observed in the guild, grange and early 
union movements in the U.S. 

Students can gain valuable insights into how yemng Russian workers found 
their identities through their trades. The editor 1 s use of footnotes 
encourages the student to pursue original sources. The information presented 
is useful as a supplement to a course on European or American history. There 
are 16 illustrations that will assist the learner in obtaining insight into 
contemporary working conditions. Of special interest to young people will be 
the age of those involved at spinning wheels, sewing, ironing and apprentice 
programs • 

Robert Friel, Stoneham (MA) High School 



ERJC 



68 



ST. PETERSBURG: A TRAVELLERS* COMPANION. Edited by Laurence Kelly. New York, 
Atheneum, 1983. 303 pages. Illus. Maps. Index. Bibliography. ISBN 
0-689-70645-6. Paper. $7.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. This book is a collection of 102 essays, literary excerpts, 
selections from travel diaries, etc., that give impressions of various 
landmarks in and near St. Petersburg. They date from the founding of the city 
to the Revolution in 1917. Authors range from great Russian writers such as 
Pushkin and Dostoevsky to Catherine II, John Quincy Adams and John Reed. The 
brief selections are grouped around the landmarks in roughly chronological 
order. A map of St. Petersburg is included along with a genealogical table of 
the Romanovs. There are two dozen black and white illustrations. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. The editor 1 s selections illuminate the grand 
aristocratic milieu of Imperial Russia. The uninitiated reader might wish 
Kelly had been a more active editor: standardizing transliterations, 
modernizing spellings, translating the passages in French, eliminating 
confusing asides, and footnoting obscure references. The Russian literature 
segments are the best, expertly selected by Kelly, each one a gem. The 
memoirs are all the work of foreign visitors, and vary greatly in reliability. 
The passages from secondary literature are uniformly mediocre. In sum, the 
book is amusing and memorable, but also incomplete and unbalanced. For 
example, amid the colorful accounts of the Decembrist revolt, the democratic 
ideals which spurred it are neglected. Peter the Great emerges only as the 
larger-than-life, energetic barbarian of popular biographies, his true 
accomplishments and significance shrouded by legend. Consequently, the novice 
would likely end up with a biased picture of St. Petersburg. In the hands of 
a knowledgeable instructor, however, the volume may become a valuable source 
of anecdotes to enliven a student tour or slide lecture. 

Eve Levin, Ohio State University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. It was the author's premise that a trip to St. 
Petersburg would be enriched by reading these selections before seeing the 
places and monuments and listening to the modern tour guides, who often 
concentrate on statistics such as size and tons of bronze or concrete, instead 
of the fascinating people who created them or the circumstances under which 
they were built or used. He suggests they be used also as entertainment for 
the armchair traveller. Several untranslated passages in French reflect how 
very non-Russian the court was, but handicap the student who does not read 
French. While many of the passages are entertaining, they really do not give 
an adequate picture of the great leaders and events of Russian history. Other 
material is needed to flesh out both Peter the Great and Catherine the Great. 
There seems to be an assumption that the reader knows the background of the 
Decembrists uprising, whiuh most high school students would not. The teacher 
would need to supply other materials to complete the story. Some of the 
articles could be useful if carefully chosen by a knowledgeable teacher, but 
the book ; s value is limited for general classroom use. 

Aleela McCleary, Urbana (IL) High School 



69 



-64- 



Scott, John. BEHIND THE URALS: AN AMERICAN WORKER IN RUSSIA 1 S CITY OF STEEL. 
Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 1973. 288 pages. ISBN 
0-253-10600-1. Paper. $5.95. 

Grade: 10-12 Subject: History 

SUMMARY. In February 1931, Stalin declared, "Russia must overtake and surpass 
the most advanced capitalist countries in industry and military achievement 
within ten years or these capitalist countries will annihilate us." Twenty 
months later, John Scott, a sympathetic twenty-year old American student, 
arrived in the Soviet Union to participate in the construction of this new 
industrialized society as a worker in Magnitogorsk — the "City of Steel" in 
the Urals — where, over the next five years, he observed in microcosm the 
process of rapid industrialization and its consequences. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. BEYOND THE URALS remains a classic work, similar in 
its way to John Reed f s TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK THE WORLD. It is a primary source 
that remains as evidence that a significant number of idealistic Americans 
shared Soviet enthusiasm for socialist development in the 1920s and 1930s. 
Students should be reminded that at the very time Scott struggled in 
Magnitogorsk, Stalin was beginning his great purges. The discrepancy between 
the view of the "eye witness" and that of the historian who benefits from the 
advantage of hindsight should be kept in mind when using this book. 

Janet Vaillant, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. John Scott 1 s BEHIND THE URALS provides an 
interesting, readable, and informative source for high school students to 
supplement their study of the Soviet Union. This personal narrative suffers 
slightly from poor organization but provides students with a view of life in 
Magnitogorsk. Scott 1 s enthusiasm for socialism, his ambivalence toward 
Stalinibt policy, and his polemical style should not be viewed as a deterrent 
to recommending this book. He reveals an admiration of Stalin characteristic 
of leftist writers in the Thirties, noting, for example, that the tempo of 
construction ordered by Stalin, causing millions to be starved, frozen, or 
brutalized, was a "cruel concept," but a necessary sacrifice on "the altar of 
Revolution and Progress." The author 1 s success is in the presentation of a 
very inclusive eye-witness account of the area in which he worked. His 
observations are accurate and his perceptions should be interesting to 
teachers and students who seek to understand both the period, and one 
particular perspective on that period. 

James Valin, Canton (MA) High School 




ERJ.C 



-65- 

Sivachev, Nikolai V. RUSSIA AND THE UNITED STATES. Joint author Nikolai N. 
Yakovlev. Translated by Olga Adler Titelbaum. Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1979. "The United States in the World: Foreign Perspectives" series. 
301 pages. ISBN 0-226-76150-9. Paper. $9.00. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Political Science 

SUMMARY. N.V. Sivachev and N.N. Yakovlev give the official Soviet view of the 
Russian-American relationship. The book is arranged chronologically, from 
Catherine's role during the American Revolution to the Cold War that followed 
World War II. The authors conclude with their interpretation of Carter's 
human rights policy, and their impressions of Voice of America and the 
dissident Solzhenitsyn. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. A more accurate title for this book might be THE 
OFFICIAL SOVIET VIEW OF THE HISTORY OF SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS. If it is 
understood as such, and not as the work of two independent Soviet scholars, 
this book can be recommended as a reasonably concise, readable survey of 
relations betweeen the two countries from 1776 to the mid 1970s. Its coverage 
of events relating to World War II and the immediate post-war period is 
particularly valuable for an understanding of the official Soviet position on 
the origins of the Cold War. However, the authors 1 coverage of the last few 
decades of the relationship between the superpowers is, unfortunately, quite 
brief and sketchy. This is a work that must be read with great care, 
especially by students of Soviet-American relations with little background. 
Students should be briefed on the extent and nature of the regime 1 s control 
over the mass media, and the system of education, as well as the politics of 
historiography in the Soviet Union. Some attention should also be paid to what 
the authors pass over in silence. Two examples of topics they ignore are the 
1939 Nazi-Soviet pact and the Soviets 1 unpreparedness for World War II. 
Finally, if readers still are willing to accept RUSSIA AND THE UNITED STATES 
as a serious work of scholarship, it is recommended that they read the book f s 
epilogue — no more need by said. 

Sanford Lieberman, University of Massachusetts at Boston 



TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. The book f s objectives are clearly stated, and 
information is presented chronologically. The chapter headings are ample. The 
material and information can be absorbed and comprehended by good ninth-grade 
students, but would be more appropriate for upper secondary students. The 
book could serve as a useful supplement in a world history or comparative 
government class. It could be used effectively with a course in *j.S. -Soviet 
affairs or an international relations course, but their prose may tend to be 
cumbersome to the non-academic reader. 

This material can certainly lead to interesting discussions in the 
classroom; it provokes thought and stimulates ideas. The sources for each 
chapter are included in notes in the index. This gives the student the 
opportunity for further research if good library facilities are available. 
Students should have some background in history before using this book. 

RUSSIA AND THE UNITED STATES encourages us to examine the Soviet-American 
relationship from the Soviet perspective and to try to distinguish fact from 
fiction in the historical accounts presented in both countries. 

Robert Friel, Stoneham (MA) High School 



ERIC 



71 



-66- 



Thubron, Colin. WHERE NIGHTS ARE LONGEST: TRAVELS BY CAR THROUGH WESTERN 
RUSSIA. New York, Random House, Inc., 1984. 212 pages. ISBN 0-394-53691-6. 
$16.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: Travelogue 

SUMMARY. Thubrcn, a writer of travel books and documentary films, divides his 
account into ten chapters with titles that describe where he went on his 
10,000 mile, 2 1/2 month odyssey across the Soviet Union by car. A map at the 
beginning shows his route. There is neither an index, subheadings nor 
questions. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST* The author, a British writer, spent the summer of 1980 
driving through European Russia, the Baltic region, the Caucasus, the Ukraine 
and White Russia. Sometimes he stayed at hotels, while at other times he 
camped out with ordinary Soviet citizens. Occasionally he was assigned an 
Intourist guide, but most of the time he was on his own. What he has put 
together here is an old-fashioned "traveler's report," rich with anecdotal 
material, perceptive observations on customs, food and drink, comments on 
Russian and Soviet literature and, most important, an astonishingly accurate 
picture of the rigors of everyday life in the USSR, and the odd combination of 
passion and torpor which seems to characterize most people in that country. 

Citing the Marquis de Custine, who declared in 1839 that "Russia is a 
country where everyone is part of a conspiracy to mystify the foreigner," the 
author makes a concerted effort to get behind the cliches of Soviet officials 
and publications, as well as his own preconceptions and biases. He is quick 
to make friends and reports some disarmingly intimate discussions about 
national stereotypes, patriotism, relations between the sexes, conflict 
between the Russians and the national minorities, political dissent, religion 
and a host of other topics. Some of the portraits he paints are quite 
poignant; the best is of an agricultural specialist he met in Yalta. Their 
talks about World War II, the generation gap, East-West tensions and personal 
values and needs make for enthralling reading. 

By the time Thubron's journey ends, he knows vastly more than he did at 
the outset and has lost some of his initial fear, but several encounters with 
the KGB leave him with a feeling of disquiet. He remarks at the very end that 
the USSR continues to be an enigma for him, "less a physical country than an 
area of mingled tenderness and unease in my mind..." Most of us will share his 
ambivalence, but we all will profit from reading about his journey. 

David Powell, Harvard University 

TEACHER/LEARNER SPECIALIST. All who are interested in the USSR and who enjoy 
good writing will like this book. It is a must for school libraries because 
students and teachers welcome a respite from textbook prose. Its length makes 
it feasible for busy people to read. A NEW YORK TIMES review says "Thubron 
writes in a classical style of grave beauty, with an intense feeling for 
places and people. A dozen scholarly theses would not provide so clear and 
perceptive an insight." I recommend this book to teachers who are about to 
begin work with their classes on the USSR and wish to refresh their memories 
and to students who would like to know more about the conditions in the 
country. It's a wonderful book to give for a prize for academic achievenent 
— or as a gift. 

Carol Horgan, Newton (MA) North High School 



ERJC 



72 



-67- 



Troyat, Henri. DAILY LIFE IN RUSSIA UNDER THE LAST TSAR. Translated by Malcolm 
Barnes. Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press, 1982. 242 pages. Illus. 
Index. Bibliography. ISBN 0-8047-1030-9. Paper. $7.95. 

Grade: 11-12 Subject: History, Sociology 

SUMMARY. Troyat attempts to provide the reader, through the extensive use of 
memoirs and other historical materials, a realistic picture of Russian society 
at the turn of the century. The author focuses on an examination of Moscow. 
Five of the book's fifteen chapters deal with specific social groups, while 
the others explore social institutions, ranging from a background of the 
Orthodox Church to a description of the Russian baths. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. This book is one of those vulgarizations of history of 
which Troyat has done so many. Here, Troyat manages to give a considerable 
amount of valid information about the period. He subordinates the narrative 
to facts to such an extent that there is something unnatural about his young 
hero, who goes about quoting to the reader from his 1902 Baedeker guide. 
Troyat, however, conveys an accurate picture of pre-revolutionary Russia. The 
generous sprinkling of the text with Russian words and expressions gives it a 
flavor of the time and makes it useful as a beginner's work of reference. 

Troyat, who did not have to put up with the rigors of travel in tsarist 
Russia, as the French traveller the Marquis de Custine did, is able to be much 
more impartial than Custine was. This makes DAILY LIFE seem neither pro-tsar 
nor pro- revolution. There is nothing left murky in Troyat' s account: when 
Russell wants to learn about the army, it turns out that the nephew of the 
merchant he is staying with imparts all the information Russell asks for. 
Troyat describes a wide range of social classes and explains the absence of a 
middle class, but the grim sides of peasant life are barely touched upon, 
although rosier aspects such as religious festivals, wedding customs, and 
bathhouses are described at some length. Almost entirely absent, also, is the 
political scene, with the increasing importance of the intelligentsia and the 
social ferment which has already overwhelmed Alexander III and was to make 
Nicholas II the Russian Louis XVI. 

Catherine LeGouis, Yale University 



ERJC 



73 



Ustinov, Peter. MY RUSSIA. Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1983. 224 pages. 
Illus. Map. Index. ISBN 0-316-89052-9. $19.95. 



Grade: 10-12 



Subject: History 



SUMMARY. Ostensibly motivated by a sense of national identity, Peter Ustinov 
dons the historian's cap and presents a survey of Russian/ Soviet history from 
the time of the nomadic invasions to the present. The book is full of terse, 
witty prose and numerous fine illustrations. Ustinov provides no bibliography; 
thus, the source of his historical material is unknown. 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. MY RUSSIA is not a scholarly work; rather, it is 
Ustinov's personal generalized and editorialized recounting of Russian 
history. His simplified interpretation of events distorts reality and reads as 
if it were fiction. Because the book tries to cover a great deal, facts are 
selected, creating a work which is not true to the world it portrays. Ustinov 
claims that he is examining the history of prejudice to which Russia/USSR has 
been a victim. His judgements, therefore, are made in this context. In 
defending the USSR, he too easily blames the US and its propaganda efforts. He 
condemns the lack of understanding between East and West without explaining 
its causes in his historical presentation or offering suggestions for its 
resolution. Ustinov rarely refers to current events, but when he does he 
demonstrates a lack of understanding of Soviet foreign policy. 

The author does not write from firsthand knowledge nor from specific 
research and does not cite any secondary sources. The book does have an 
excellent assortment of illustrations which make up half the book, although 
they do not portray the society as a whole, but rather tsars and .military 
leaders • 



TEACHES/LEARNER SPECIALIST. Peter Ustinov's MY RUSSIA is, as the title 
implies, an impressionistic, "coffee table" work. It is a personal history in 
which the author picks and chooses events that interest him, while other 
events are treated superficially or left out altogether. Ustinov's eccentric 
determination of what topics to treat and which to ignore can be irritating to 
the well informed reader, but as an introduction or supplement to classroom 
work the book is a worthwhile addition. The illustrations, reproductions, and 
photographs are well chosen and of high quality. They are for the most part 
coordinated with the text and lend a sense of time and place to the reading. 

The book's strongest point, however, lies in the author's ruminations and 
asides about the impact of history and environment on the development of 
Russian cultural traits. Ustinov humanizes Russian reactions to events of both 
major and everyday significance. Ustinov goes beyond the events of history to 
touch the souls of the Russian people. It is here that the book's true value 
lies. 



Christiane M. Carney, Yale University 



Russell H. Edes, Salibury (CT) School 




-69- 



Watson, Jane Werner, THE SOVIET UNION: LAND OF MANY PEOPLES, Champaign, IL, 
Garrard Publishing Company, 1973. 112 pages, Illus, Maps* Index* ISBN 
0-8116-6862-2, $7,99, 

Grade: 6-9 Subject: Social Studies 

SUMMARY. The book tries to give young readers a quick summary of Russian and 
Soviet history, as well as a glimpse of life "today" (note the 1973 
copyright) in that country. After a description of Moscow, there is a very 
brief (17 pages) , straightforward presentation of major historic facts from 
the first Viking settlements in the ninth century up to the reign of the last 
tsar in the first years of the 20th century. There is a bit more elaboration 
of the revolutionary events before and after 1917, The last three chapters 
discuss daily life. There are chapter subtitles and a few photographs to help 
focus the reader's attention, 

RUSSIA/USSR SPECIALIST. Watson 1 s book is a successful attempt at providing 
students with a balanced, non-judgmental presentation of daily life in the 
Soviet Union, A variety of geographical areas are covered in discussions of 
agriculture, transportation and industry. However, there is less coverage of 
the diversity of ethnic groups than one would expect from the title of the 
book. Nearly half of this survey of the Soviet Union is a history of Russia, 
beginning with Kievan Rus f and ending with the present. This approach is 
admirable and other texts on the contemporary Soviet Union would do well to 
emulate it. It is not enough, however, to have a good approach. One must be 
as careful with the historical information as with the contents of the study's 
main focus. The historical section is filled with out-of-date interpretations, 
misleading inferences, and mistakes. In general, the quality of the factual 
information is better in the sections on more recent periods, 

Helen Hundley, Wichita State University 

TEACHER/ LEARNER SPECIALIST. It is difficult to educate anyone about the Soviet 
Union in 112 pages. The author does emphasize topics which should catch the 
interest of young students; she mentions the visual and cultural highlights of 
the capitol city, for instance, and gives details of farm produce in markets, 
ethnic clothing and the comforts of luxury railroad cars. Chapter Five gives 
a clear picture of school life, and Chapter Six is equally rich in precise 
detail of home and family that will remain in the reader's mind. If a 
teacher's aim is the Social Studies approach, and how the USSR contrasts to 
the U,S», this book would be helpful in upper elementary and junior high 
classes. If, however, the hope is to provide an awareness of Russia in world 
history, much supplementing would have to be done. Suggestions for 
presentation, a glossary, map and comprehension questions would help a teacher 
involve the students in their own learning. It is too general a book for 
research, so a bibliography of other teaching materials — films, etc, — 
would be helpful. The book is easy to read, but the information is 
overpowering. It would be best offered to children in small doses, discussed 
and expanded upon, 

Constance Solberg, Leal School, Urbana, IL 



ERLC 



75 



-70- 

II. BACKGROUND READING FOR TEACHERS AND STUDENT PROJECTS 



A. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 

Billington, James. THE ICON AND THE AXE. 786 p. New York, Random 
House, 1970. ISBN 0-394-70846-6. Paper. $9.95. This is a general, 
interpretative history by a recognized scholar in the field. It emphasizes 
Russian culture as well as the facts of history, and is written in a 
readable style. 

Brumfield, William Craft. GOLD IN AZURE: ONE THOUSAND YEARS OF RUSSIAN 
ARCHITECTURE. 448 pages. Boston, David R. Godine K-ess, 1983. ISBN 
0-87923-436-9. $60.00. This book combines fine pictures, beautifully 
produced, with an informative history of Russian architecture from the 
early churches of Kiev to the modernism of the 1930s and the functional 
style of the 1970s. 

Crankshaw Edward. THE SHADOW OF THE WINTER PALACE: THE DRIFT 
TO REVOLUTION 1825-1917. 429 pages. New York, Penguin Books, 1978. ISBN 
0-14-004622-4. Paper. $4.95. Readable, interesting account of developments 
leading up to the Revolution. 

Daniels, Robert V. RUSSIA: THE ROOTS OF CONFRONTATION. 396 pages. 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1985. ISBN 0-674-77965-7. $25.00. 
Parallels and contrasts with the American experience make this oook 
especially useful for background reading, as does its analysis of 
contemporary Soviet society and recent history. 

Dmytryshyn, Basil. THE USSR: A CONCISE HISTORY. 672 pages. Fourth 
Edition. New York, Scribner, 1984. ISBN 0-684-18083-9. $30.00. A direct, 
brief, simple history. Covers the basic material without digression. Dry, 
but some teachers have used it with advanced high school students as a 
text. 

Dmytryshyn, Basil, ed. IMPERIAL RUSSIA: A SOURCE BOOK (1700-1917). 
497 pages. Second Edition. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1974. ISBN 
0-03-089237-6. $19.95. 

Dmytryshyn, Basil, ed. MEDIEVAL RUSSIA: A SOURCE BOOK (900-1700). 
312 pages. Second edition. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973. ISBN 
0-03-086441-0. $17.95. 

Both books offer an excellent selection of primary sources. 

HISTORY OF THE USSR. Parts I-III. Moscow, Progress Publishers, 1977. 
Available through distributors of Soviet books (see page 101). This and 
other official histories of the Soviet Union are available in English 
translation and might prove valuable as sources of the Soviet version of 
their own history. 

Holloway, David. THE SOVIET UNION AND THE ARMS RACE. 208 pages. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1984. ISBN 0-300-03241-2. Paper. $7.95. This 
is an objective account of a complex topic, with relevant historical 
background. Difficult for a high school student, the book still provides 
the basic information necessary for a sensible discussion of the subject. 



76 



-71- 



Kean, Beverly Whitney. ALL THE EMPTY PALACES: THE MERCHANT PATRONS OF 
MODERN ART IN PRE-REVOLUTIONARY RUSSIA. 342 pages. New York, Universe 
Books, 1983. ISBN 0-87663-412-9. $29.50. This book presents, with ample 
illustrations, the little known story of the Moscow art collectors of the 
turn of the century. 

Kennan, George. SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY: 1917-1941. 191 pages. 
Melbourne, FL, Krieger, 1979. ISBN 0-88275-749-0. Paper. $5.95. Text and 
documents are combined in this succinct study. This senior diplomat and 
scholar, former ambassador to the Soviet Union has written a number of 
important books marked by elegance of style and clarity of interpretation. 
All are recommended for those interested in American and Soviet foreign 
policy: RUSSIA AND THE WEST UNDER LENIN AND STALIN, a history of Soviet 
foreign policy under Lenin and Stalin, and most recently, THE NUCLEAR 
DELUSION (New York, Pantheon, 1982), a series of meditations about th^ 
Soviet Union and the United States today (see page 50). 

Lincoln, W. Bruce. IN WAR'S DARK SHADOW. 444 pages. New York, The Dial 
Press, 1983. ISBN 0-385-27409-2. $19.95. Attention to the social fabric and 
the arts of Russia at the turn of the century is skillfully interwoven with 
political history to provide an intriguing account of the last decades of 
the empire. Lincoln is the author of another interesting history, THE 
ROMANOVS (1981). 

Nove, Alexander. AN ECONOMIC HISTORY OF THE USSR. Revised edition. 416 
pages. New York, Penguin, 1972. ISBN 0-14-021403-3. Paper. $5.95. A 
distinguished British economist gives a direct, well-written account. 

Pipes, Richard. RUSSIA UNDER THE OLD REGIME. 361 pages. New York, 
Scribner, 1975. ISBN 0-684-14826-9. Paper. $14.95. This interpretive 
account provides Russia 1 s history as a background for the Revolution. 

Riasanovsky, Nicholas V. A HISTORY OF RUSSIA. Fourth edition. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1984. ISBN 0-19-513361-2. Paper. $24.95. The 
most widely respected, straightforward text available. It is readable, 
detailed, and has an excellent bibliography. 

Riordan, James. SPORT IN SOVIET SOCIETY. 435 pages. New York, 
Cambridge University Press, 1978. ISBN 0-8147-7383-4. Paper. $12.50. This 
is a serious historical study of the development and organization of sport 
in the Soviet Union, including a discussion of organized sport before the 
Revolution. Riordan discusses the ways in which sport is both recreation 
and a reflection of the Soviet way of life. 

Schwarz, Boris. MUSIC AND MUSICAL LIFE IN SOVIET RUSSIA: ENLARGED 
EDITION, 1917-1981. 736 pages. Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1983. 
ISBN 0-253-33956-1. $27.50. This history of Soviet music emphasizes the 
classical (See Federick Starr, RED AND HOT, on jazz, page 72). It is 
organized chronologically and is full of facts about music, musicians, the 
opera and ballet, and the impact of Soviet policy on musical life. Dry. A 
book to refer to rather than to read as a whole. 



ERIC 



77 



-72- 



Sivachev, Nikolai V* and Yakovlev, Nikolai N. RUSSIA AND THE UNITED 
STATES: US-SOVIET RELATIONS FROM THE SOVIET POINT OF VIEW. 269 pages. 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1979. ISBN 0-226-76150-9. Paper. 
$9.00. The authors, well-placed Soviet scholars, provide the official view 
(as of 1979) of the history of Soviet-American relations (see page 65). 

Smakov, Gennady. THE GREAT RUSSIAN DANCERS. 342 p. New York, Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1984. ISBN 0-294-51074-7. $45.00. This profusely illustrated book 
lies somewhere between a visual history and a reference book, providing 
short, knowledgable, discussions of the lives and accomplishments of 33 
outstanding artists of the Russian ballet. 

Starr, S. Frederick. RED AND HOT: THE FATE OF JAZZ IN THE 
SOVIET UNION: 1917-1980. 368 pages. New York, Harper and Row, 1985. 
Available September, 1985. ISBN 0-87910-0265. Paper. $9.95. The book 
provides more than its title suggests. It is a history of jazz, and a 
recounting of popular culture in the Soviet Union, together with the twists 
and turns of official policy. A good high school reader, particularly one 
interested in popular music, will not want to put this one down. 

Ulam, Adam. A HISTORY OF SOVIET RUSSIA. 312 pages. New York, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1976. ISBN 0-275-89260-3. Paper. $19.95. A relatively 
short, straightforward, readable account. 

Ulam, Adam, EXPANSION AND CO-EXISTENCE: SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY, 
1917-1973. Second edition. 797 pages. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
1974. ISBN 0-275-88630-1. Paper. $18.95. Detailed survey of Soviet foreign 
policy. 

Ulam, Adam. DANCER0US RELATIONS: THE SOVIET UNION IN WORLD POLITICS, 
1970-1982. New York, Oxford University Press , 1983. ISBN 0-19-503424-4. 
Paper. $7.95. Takes up the history of Soviet foreign policy where his 
earlier volume leaves off. 

Wertn, Alexander. RUSSIA AT WAR. 1136 pages. New York, Carroll and 
Graf, 1984. ISBN 0-88184-084-X. Paper. $13.95. One of the great 20th 
century obc rvers brings this terrible ordeal to life. Insofar as memories 
of the war play such an important part in the Soviet ^antality, it is 
important to understand its devastation. 

Zenkovsky, Sergei. MEDIEVAL RUSSIA'S EPICS, CHRONICLES AND TALES. 
526 pages. Revised edition. Now York, E.P. Dutton, 1974. ISBN 
0-525-47363-7. Paper. $10.95. A collection of primary sources with short 
introductions for those interested in the literature and world view of old 
Russia. 



ERIC 



78 



-73- 



B. CONTEMPORARY LIFE 



1* SCHOLARLY INVESTIGATIONS 

Beeson, Trevor. DISCRETION AND VALOUR: RELIGIOUS CONDITIONS 
IN RUSSIA AND EASTERN EUROPE. Revised Edition. 416 pages. Philadelphia, 
Fortress Press, 1982. ISBN 0-8006-1621-9. Paper. $15.95. This book, put 
together by a committee of the Church of England, is balanced and 
relatively complete. 

Bialer, Seweryn. STALIN'S SUCCESSORS: LEADERSHIP, STABILITY AND 
CHANGE IN THE SOVIET UNION. 416 pages. New York, Cambridge University 
Press, 1980. ISBN 0-521-28906-8. $9.95. Bialer' s fine analysis of the basic 
characteristics of the Soviet system is placed in the context of theories 
and developments in other societies. A difficult book that will reward the 
reader's effort. 

Cohen, Stephen F. RETHINKING THE SOVIET EXPERIENCE: POLITICS AND 
HISTORY SINCE 1917. 224 pages. London, Oxfovd University Press, 1985. ISBN 
0-19-503468-6. $17.95. This recent book by a "revisionist" scholar takes a 
new look at the Soviet period, it has been well-reviewed elsewhere but has 
not yet been seen by this editor. 

Cracraft, James, ed. THE SOVIET UNION TODAY: AN INTERPRETIVE GUIDE. 
357 pages. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Educational Foundation for 
Nuclear Science Inc., 5801 South Kenwood Ave., Chicago, Illinois, 1983. 
(Distributed by the University of Chicago Press) ISBN 0-941682-06-4. Paper. 
$9.95. This collection of essays first appeared in the BULLETIN OF THE 
ATOMIC SCIENTISTS. Each is short, written for the intelligent person with 
no special knowledge of the Soviet Union, and authored by a respected 
specialist. Subjects range from the political elite to agriculture, science 
policy and religion. 

D'Encausse, Helene Carrere. CONFISCATED POWER: HOW SOVIET RUSSIA 
REALLY WORKS. Translated from the French by George Holoch. 415 pages. New 
York, Harper and Row, 1982. ISBN 0-06-039009-3. $19.95. A French scholar 
provides an outstanding, well-balanced and complete presentation of how the 
Soviet Union works and the problems that face its leaders. Though 
analytically sophisticated, the book is written in a readable style that is 
free of jargon. It may be too difficult for the average high school 
student, but is highly recommended for teachers. 

D'Encausse, Helene Carrere. DECLINE OF AN EMPIRE: THE SOVIET 
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS IN REVOLT. 304 pages. New York, Harper and Row, 1981. 
ISDN 0-06-1313988-0. Paper. $5.95 An up-to-date, clearly written account of 
the challenge to the Soviet leadership that results from the diversity of 
Soviet peoples. This book provides excellent background for understanding 
the situation of the Soviet Union's various nationalities. 



ERLC 



79 



-74- 



Fesho^ch, Murray. "The Soviet Union: Population Trends and Dilemmas," 
POPULATION BULLETIN, Vol. 37, August 1982. 44 pages. Feshbach provides 
charts, statistics about population, and information about trends in 
workforce, health, military and national differences. Order from 
Population Reference Bureau, 1337 Connecticut Ave, N.W., Washington D.C. 
20036. $4 includes shipping (see page 44). 

Fitzpatrick, Sheila. THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. London, Oxford University 
Press, 1982. ISBN 0-19-219162-4. $19.95. A revisionist historian takes a 
new look at the Russian Revolution and comes up with a controversial but 
well-documented new interpretation emphasizing its social dynamics. 

Garrison, Mark, and Gleason, Abbot. SHARED DESTINY: FIFTY YEARS OF 
SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS. 167 pages. Boston, Beacon Press, 1985. ISBN 
0-8070-0200-3. $16.95. In six essays by academic experts, with an 
introduction and afterword by the editors, the historical experiences and 
mutual perceptions of Russian/Soviet and American are presented in a 
readable fashion. 

Heilbroner, Robert L. MARXISM: FOR AND AGAINST. 186 pages. New York, 
W.W. Norton and Company, 1980. ISBN 0-393-01307-3. $4.95. For those 
interested in the enduring interest and influence of Marxism, Heilbroner 
has written a brief, lucid account of its essential feature? and influeuce 
on today 9 s socialist regimes. 

Hollander, Paul. SOVIET AND AMERICAN SOCIETY: A COMPARISON. 476 pages. 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1978. ISBN 0-226-34947-0. Paper. 
$10.00. Much information and many ideas for comparison by a Soviet 
specialist, born in Hungary, who now lives in the US. 

Kort, Michael. THE SOVIET COLOSSUS: A HISTORY OF THE USSR. 318 pages. 
New York, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1985. ISBN 0-684-18178-9. Paper. $19.95. 
A clearly written, lively account of Soviet history which provides some 
historical background for the revolution and brings the story right up to 
the present. This book arrived too late for teacher review. It was written 
for classroom use, but avoids a textbook format. 

Lane, David c POLITICS AND SOCIETY IN THE USSR. 616 pages. Second 
Edition. New York, New York University Press, 1978. ISBN 0-8147-4989-5. 
Paper. $17.50. This is a detailed, sociologically oriented study of the 
current situation, arranged by topics. 

Lapidus, Gail W. WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY: EQUALITY, DEVELOPMENT, 
AND SOCIAL CHANGE. 381 pages. Berkeley, University of California Press, 
1978. ISBN 0-520-03938-6. Paper. $8.95. Thi* balanced, scholarly treatment 
of the role of women in Soviet society considers Soviet women both in the 
light of traditional attitudes and roles, and as conditioned by the present 
structure and ideology of Soviet society. 

Millar, James R. THE ABC'S OF SOVIET SOCIALISM: THE SOVIET ECONOMIC 
EXPERIMENT, 1917-80. 225 pages. Champaign, IL, University of Illinois 
Press, 1981. ISBN 0-252-00872-3. Paper. $6.50. An excellent comprehensive 
account of how the Soviet economy works (see page 20). 



ERIC 



-75- 



2. VISITORS' ACCOUNTS 

A tradition has grown up whereby newspaper correspondents who have 
been stationed in the Soviet Union transform their impressions into books* 
American exchange students have done the same. These books are often an 
excellent source of information about everyday life in the Soviet Union, 
though readers should always remember that in fact the correspondents' 
impressions of the Soviet Union are very circumscribed by limits imposed on 
them by the Soviet authorities, as well as those of personality and 
profession. 



Binyon, Michael. LIFE IN RUSSIA. 286 pages. New York, Pantheon Press, 
1984. ISBN 0-394-53339-9. $15.95. This book differs from most of the 
correspondents' books in that Binyon does not rely solely on his own 
experience, but has culled the Soviet press for vignettes that will reveal 
the life and concerns of the average Soviet citizen. The result is an 
interesting book that gives a sense of the everyday concerns of everyday 
people, not just the rich and powerful, or dissenting, in Moscow. 

Kaiser, Robert G. RUSSIA: THE PEOPLE AND THE POWER. 576 pages. New 
York, WSP, 1984. ISBN 0-671-50324-3. Paper. $5.95. An excellent book, 
topically organized, by a thoughtful and knowledgable person about life in 
Moscow. Kaiser weaves in many of his own thoughts about the past and future 
of the system. The book was originally published in 1976. 

Klose, Kevin. RUSSIA AND THE RUSSIANS: INSIDE THE CLOSED SOCIETY. 
384 pages. New York, Norton, 1984. ISBN 0-393-01786-9. $17.50. Well-written 
but not at all comprehensive, this book focuses mostly on the dissidents. 
It includes an unusual view of life among the workers in a provincial town. 

Lee, Andrea. RUSSIAN JOURNAL. 235 pages. New York, Random House, 1984. 
ISBN 0-394-71127-0. Paper. $4.95. Ms. Lee was not a correspondent but a 
student studying in Moscow. She presents well-writt< n accounts of the city 
and of the people she met, most of whom were attracted to Americans, and so 
represent a special slice of Muscovite society (see page 53). 

Pond, Elizabeth. FROM THE YAROSLAVSKY STATION: RUSSIA PERCEIVED. 
296 pages. New York, Universe Books, 1982. ISBN 0-87663-584-2. Paper. 
$8.95. This book consists mostly of reflections on Russian culture by a 
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR reporter on her farewell journey across the 
Soviet Union. 

Robinson, Logan. AN AMERICAN IN LENINGRAD. 320 pages. New York, 
Norton, 1984. ISBN 0-393-30167-2. Paper. $7.95. Robinson studied at the law 
faculty in Leningrad. His account stresses the negative but includes 
details of interest. 

Shipler, David K. RUSSIA: BROKEN IDOLS, SOLEMN DREAMS. 416 pages. New 
York, Times Books, 1984. ISBN 0-14-007408-2. Paper. $7.95. Shipler makes 
more effort than some of the earlier correspondents to explain the 
Russian/ Soviet outlook as well as what Soviet citizens do and say. 



ERLC 



81 



-76- 

Smith, Hedrick. THE RUSSIANS* Second edition* 580 pages. New York, 
Times Books, 1976. ISBN 0-8129-1086-9* $22.50. This was one of the 
earliest books of this genre. Lively and interesting, if now a bit dated, 
it focuses mostly on life in Moscow. 

Willis, David K. KLASS : HOW RUSSIANS REALLY LIVE. 328 pages. New York, 
St. Martin's Press. 1985. ISBN 0-312-15763-4. $15.95. Willis, recently a 
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR reporter in Moscow, focuses on the system of 
privileges and benefits within the classless society and the ways in which 
Soviet consumers strive to get what they want. 



C. EMIGRE AND SAMIZDAT WORKS 

A number of Soviet citizens have emigrated from the USSR and written 
about their experiences. Others who have remained in the USSR have \\ad 
similar works published in the West, often after appearing in the USSR as 
samizdat . (The word "samizdat" means, literally, self-publishing. These are 
those writings which cannot be published officially in the Soviet Union but 
circulate in typescript.) 

Alovert, Nina. BARYSHNIKOV IN RUSSIA. 204 pages. New York, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1984. ISBN 0-03-062589-0. $35.00. Balletomanes will 
love these reminiscences of Baryshnikov in Leningrad and the multitude of 
photographs taken by Alovert during that period. The general reader will 
gain some understanding of the history of the Kirov Ballet and the 
restrictions placed on its dancers. 

Bukovsky, Vladimir. TO BUILD A CASTLE: MY LIFE AS A DISSENTER. 438 
pages. New York, Viking, 1979. ISBN 0-670-71640-5. $17.50. A vividly 
written account of a pilgrimage through the Soviet psychiatric prisons by a 
person of unusual insight. 

Ginzburg, Eugenia. JOURNEY INTO THE WHIRLWIND. 418 pages. New York, 
Harcourt Brace, 1975. ISBN 0-15-646509-4. Paper. $7.95. An autobiographical 
account of the purges and camp life told with verve and stark detail. 

Golyakhovsky, Vladimir. RUSSIAN DOCTOR. 384 pages. New York, St. 
Martin, 1984. ISBN 0-312-69609-4. $17.95. An informative memoir by an 
emigre physician (see page 45). 

Grigorenko, Petro G. MEMOIRS. 462 pages. Translated by Thomas P. 
Whitney. 453 p. New York, Norton, 1983. ISBN 0-393-01570-X. $19.95. This is 
an extraordinary account by an extraordinary man. Born poor, an 
enthusiastic supporter of Soviet power, a successful and much-decorated 
General in World War II, he evolved to a point where he risked everything 
to criticize the system in the name of human rights. A direct, accessible 
account of a remarkable life. 



82 



Kaminskaya, Dina. FINAL JUDGMENT: MY LIFE AS A SOVIET DEFENSE LAWYER. 
348 pages* New York, Simon and Schuster, 1982. ISBN 0-671-24739-5. $18.95. 
Kaminskaya is known for her defense in court of dissidents and she 
describes their cases here, but equally fascinating is her account of the 
case of two boys unjustly accused of rape and murder in 1967. Not only do*s 
she explain how the Soviet legal system functions, but she conveys well the 
atmosphere in which she worked and lived. 

Mamonova, Tatyana, ed. WOMEN AND RUSSIA: FEMINIST WRITINGS 
FROM THE SOVIET UNION. 274 pages. Boston, Beacon Press, 1984. ISBN 
0-8070-6709-1. Paper. $9.57. This is a collection of essays, never 
published in the USSR outsida of tvonizdat 1 , by a a variety of women who 
discuss topics varying from their experience of motherhood, to life on the 
job, to drugs and peace. 

Medvedev, Zhores. SOVIET SCIENCE. 262 pages. New York, Norton, 1978. 
ISBN 0-393-06435-2. $15.95. In this well written survey of Soviet science, 
a prominent Soviet geneticist who left his country in 1976 illuminates some 
of the factors that may affect a career in the sciences. 

Orlova, Raisa. MEMOIRS. Translated by Samuel Cioran. 366 pages. New 
York, Random House, 1984. ISBN 0-394-52948-4. $20.00. This account by a 
writer of her life among writers may prove difficult for students Lo 
follow, as it is not chronologically arranged. It provides an account of 
gradual disillusionment with the Soviet system and portraits of some 
well-known writers. 

Shostakovich, Dmitri. TESTIMONY: THE MEMOIRS OF DMITRI SHOSTAKOVICH. 
As told to Solomon Volkov and translated by Antonina W. Bouis. 289 pages. 
New York, Harper and Row, 1979. ISBN 0-06-014476-9. $15.00. This account 
provides many interesting details about Shostakovich's life and milieu, as 
well as his provocative reflections about the oddities of his world. 

Simis, Konstantin M. USSR: THE CORRUPT SOCIETY. 300 pages. New York, 
Simon and Schuster, 1982. ISBN 0-671-25003-5. $14.95. One of the original 
manuscripts for this book was confiscated by the KGB in 1976 causing its 
author to be dismissed from his research post and stripped of his degrees. 
The book describes the Soviet underworld, with anecdotes about bribery, 
misuses of influence, the underground economy, and decadent lifestyles. 
These stories are fascinating, but describe only a small segment of Soviet 
society. 

Sakharov, Andrei. MY COUNTRY AND THE WORLD. 109 pages. New York, 
Random House, 1975. ISBN 0-394-72067-9. Paper. $1.95. The Soviet Union's 
leading theoretician of nuclear physics makes a plea to the West for an 
informed policy toward the Soviet Union. Sakharov is one of the most 
resilient, courageous, and intelectually sophisticated among Soviet critics 
of the Soviet system. 



83 



-78- 



Shevchenko, Arkady N. BREAKING WITH MOSCOW. 370 pages. New York, 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1985. ISBN 0-317-17512-2. $18.95. The highest- ranking 
Soviet official ever to defect to the U.S., Shevchenko was an expert in 
foreign affairs. His memoir is full of detailed information about the 
workings of Soviet power, as well as the author's reflections on those 
aspects of the Soviet system that eventually led him to give up a highly 
successful career for life in the United States. 

Vishnevskaya, Galina, GALINA: A RUSSIAN STORY. Translated by Guy 
Daniels. 504 pages. New York, Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1984. ISBN 
0-15-134250-4. $19.95. Galina Vishnevskaya was an oustanding singer with 
the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow. She tells her own story with verve, one of 
extraordinary determination, talent, and hobnobbing with the gifted and 
great. It is an old fashioned "good read", as well as of interest for 
information about the arts and top politicians. 




84 



-79- 




D. MISCELLANEOUS 

Amery, Heather, and Kirilenko, Katrina. THE FIRST THOUSAND WORDS IN 
RUSSIAN* 64 pages. Tulsa, OK, EDC Publishers, 1983. ISBN 0-86020-769-2. 
$10.95. This is a picture book of Russian language, reminiscent of Richard 
Scarry's BEST WORD BOOK EVER. Not typical of what we include here, it might 
prove amusing for beginning language students. There is a pronunciation 
guide but, unfortunately, the individual words lack stress marks. 

Goldstein, Darra. A LA RUSSE: A COOKBOOK OF RUSSIAN HOSPITALITY. 320 
pages. New York, Random House, 1983. ISBN 0-394-53018-7 $16.95. Goldstein 
has collected recipes from the Russian and ethuic cuisines and added 
discussions of the culture and traditions associated with those dishes. 

Makarenko, A.S. THE COLLECTIVE FAMILY: A HANDBOOK FOR RUSSIAN PARENTS. 
Translated by Robert Daglish. 368 pages. Gloucester, MA, Peter Smith, 1973. 
ISBN 0-8446-2515-9. $10.50. Makarenko f s guide for parents, originally 
published in 1937, was widely used for many years in the Soviet Union and 
became, in a way, the Soviet equivalent of Dr. Spock. Assuming that parents 
have a civic as well as personal obligation to their children, Makarenko 
provides advice as to how to develop a collective spirit and sense of 
communal responsibility in children. Told by means of vignettes, thfc 
handbook therefore provides insight into the values important in the new 
Soviet man. 

Papashvily, Helen. RUSSIAN COOKING. 206 pages. Alexandria, VA, Tinie 
Life, 1969. ISBN 0-8094-0043-X. $16.95. This book explores the native 
dishes of many of the lands and peoples of the Soviet Union, not just the 
Russians. It includes historical notes and fine photographs. 

Sternberg, Hilary, ed. FODOR 1 S SOVIET UNION, 1984. New York, 1984. 
ISBN 0-679-01154-4. $15.95. Intended for the traveler, the guide includes 
essays on history, literature, art and cinema that provide useful 
background. Presumably it will be regularly up-dated. 

Volokh, Anne, and Manus, Mavis. THE ART OF RUSSIAN CUISINE. 448 pages. 
New York, Macmillan, 1983. ISBN 0-02-622090-3. $24.95. This book is devoted 
to what the author calls "classic Russian cuisine.** It includes not only 
recipes, but occasional literary references and explanations as to how and 
when dishes were served. It provides social history as well as a guide to 
good eating and suggestions where to get ingredients. 



85 



-80- 



III. REFERENCE BOOKS 

A. ENCYCLOPEDIAS 

Encyclopedias are the most obvious sources of information on reference 
shelves in libraries and most entries on Russian and Soviet topics are 
written by experts in the field. Not surprisingly, unsigned entries tend 
to be less objective than signed articles. Although many encyclopedias are 
reissued in "new" editions every year, entries are not uniformly updated. 
Thus, the main entry on the Soviet Union in the ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 
(1979) mentions the 1977 Constitution, but the entry on Russian/ Soviet law, 
which is otherwise excellent, does not bring its coverage up to date on the 
latest constitution. The BRITANNICA MACROPEDIA entry on history is 
particularly good. Much more serious is the use of I960 data on the Soviet 
Union in a 1982 edition of COMPTON'S ENCYCLOPEDIA AND FACT INDEX, for this 
gives a totally inaccurate picture of life in that country. While the entry 
in LANDS AND PEOPLES (1981) has a clearly written and informative text, the 
photographs date back to the sixties and the text itself needs to be made 
more current. The encyclopedias written for more advanced students 
generally use more recent data and information. However, suggested reading 
lists often do not include publications from the last five years. Special 
topic encyclopedias should not be overlooked. For example, the coverage of 
the Soviet government is very good in the WORLD ENCYCLOPEDIA OF POLITICAL 
SYSTEMS AND PARTIES, Vol. II (1983). Likewise, good commentary on the 
Soviet space program can be found in the MCGRAW-HILL ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, Vol. XII (1982). There are special, multi-volume 
encyclopedias devoted to the Soviet Union, Russian/ Soviet history, etc., 
but most of these will not be available to high school students, nor will 
they have need for them at this stage of their studies. For this reason, 
the annotated reference section begins with single-volume reference books. 
Since good visuals enhance the study of any society, sections on historical 
and contemporary images in photography as well as a few good resources on 
the art and architecture of the country are also included here. 

B. SINGLE VOLUME REFERENCES 

Akir, Shirin. ISLAMIC PEOPLES OF TKE SOVIET UNION. 467 pages, Boston, 
Kegan Paul International, 1983. ISBN 0-7103-0025-2. $50.00. A good 
introduction helps the reader understand Islam and how it is practiced in 
the Soviet Union. The Islamic peoples are then discussed in individual 
chapters focusing on historical background, language and religion. Most of 
this material is hard to find elsewhere. 

Brown, Archie, et al. THE CAMBRIDGE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF RUSSIA AND THE 
USSR. 492 pages. New York, Cambridge University Press, 1982. Illus. Maps. 
ISBN 0-521-23168-9. $37.50. Without a doubt, this is the best single-volume 
reference book currently available. Thanks to good indexing, students 
should have no difficulty finding information on topics as diverse as BAM, 
Catherine the Great , censorship, mineral resources , national languages , 
Sholokhov, and sports. The quality of the entries, which are all signed, 
is uniformly high. 



ERIC 



86 



-81- 



Horack, Stephan M. THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE: A 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC GUIDE TO RECOMMENDED BOOKS FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED 
LIBRARIES AND SCHOOL MEDIA CENTERS. 373 pages. Littleton, CO, Libraries 
Unlimited, 198?. ISBN 0-87287-469-9. Short annotations and selectivity 
among the possible choices make this a valuable reference for the audience 
suggested in its title. 

Jensen, Robert G. > Shabad, Theodore, and Wright, Arthur W. SOVIET 
NATURAL RESOURCES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY. 686 pages. Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press, 1983. ISBN 0-226-39831-5. $100.00. This massive volume 
consisting of 31 chapters, each an original contribution, will be available 
only in research or large public libraries. While a few sections are very 
technical, there is much clearly conveyed information on Soviet natural 
resources and their impact on both the domestic economy and world trade. 
For advanced students and teachers only. 

McCrea, Barbara, Plan, Jack C. and Klein, George. THE SOVIET AND 
EAST EUROPEAN POLITICAL DICTIONARY. 367 pages. Santa Barbara, CA, ABC Clio 
Information Services, 1984. ISBN 0-87436-347-0. Paper. $30.00. Nearly 300 
terms are grouped alphabetically within eight subject matter chapters with 
ample cross references. Each definition is followed by a lucidly written 
explanatory paragraph giving historical development, making comparisons and 
providing other relevant information. This is an excellent reference tool 
for use with introductory courses on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. 

Morey, George. SOVIET UNION: THE LAND AND ITS PEOPLE. 63 pages. 
Macdonald Educational, 1976. ISBN 0-382-06103-9. $12.68. Although there is 
a minimum of commentary here, this bock's attractive layout and selection 
of topics ranging from historical figures and events to daily life will 
appeal to middle school students. All of the books in this series emphasize 
the positive and this one is no exception. 

Paxton, John. COMPANION TO RUSSIAN HISTORY. 503 pages. New York, Facts 
on File, 1983. ISBN 0-87195-771-5. $21.95. More than 2500 entries identify 
places, events, concepts and important figures from the tenth century 
through the end of the Khrushchev era. In addition there are 18 maps, a 
16-page chronology and a select bibliography. 

Scherer, John L. USSR: FACTS AND FIGURES ANNUAL. Volume Eight. 300 
pages. Gulf Breeze, FL, Academic International Press, 1984. ISBN 
0-87659-081-5. $64.50. Based on data drawn from official, private sector 
and international sources in addition to articles by specialists in many 
fields, this annual statistical handbook presents current data, news items, 
a few short articles on new programs, and reproductions of graphs. 



ERJC 



87 



-82- 



Schulze, Fred, and Gordon Livermore. THE USSR TODAY: PERSPECTIVES 
FROM THE SOVIET PRESS. 313 pages. Columbus, OH, Current Digest of the 
Soviet Press, 1985. ISBN 0-913601-76-4. $15.00. This compilation of 
translations from articles that have appeared in the Soviet press is an 
invaluable source because the articles have been carefully selected to 
provide not only official Soviet policy statements but Soviets 1 views of 
the problems and challenges faced by their own society. The 14 topics 
covered range from politics and demographics to social problems. Each 
article has a useful short introduction giving essential background 
information (see page 42). 

Shoemaker, M. Wesley. THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE, 1984. 
179 pages. Styker Publications, 1984. A yearly publication of the "World 
Today" series, about a quarter oc the handbook focuses on Russian/ Soviet 
history. Although its editors claim that it is updated each year, readers 
should be warned that the difference between the 1983 and 1984 editions is 
minimal. 

THE SOVIET UNION. 264 pages. Washington, D.C, Congressional 
Quarterly, 1982. ISBN 0-87187-232-2. Paper. $9.75. Summaries of 
Russian/ Soviet history such as are found in the first half of this book are 
available elsewhere; the rest of the material is not. Especially valuable 
are the biographical sketches of past and present leaders (including brief 
biographies of American policy makers who have been prominent in dealing 
with the Soviets) and a document section, which includes summit statements, 
trade agreements, SALT treaties, the Helsinki Final Act, and statements by 
American and Soviet leaders. A chronological listing of major events from 
1900 to 1982 adds to the usefulness of this publication. 

Terras, Victor, ed. HANDBOOK OF RUSSIAN LITERATURE. 558 pageo. New 
Haven, Yale University, 1985. ISBN 0-300-030155-6. Identifies authors and 
movements (see page 91). 



C. HISTORICAL AND CONTEMPORARY IMAGES IN PHOTOGRAPHS 
1. RUSSIAN EMPIRE AND REVOLUTION 

Allshouse, Robert H. , ed. PHOTOGRAPHS FOR THE TSAR: THE PIONEERING 
PHOTOGRAPHS OF SERGEI MIKHAIL0VICH PR0KUDIN-G0RSKII C0MISSI0NED BY TSAR 
NICHOLAS II. 216 pages. New York, The Dial Press, 1983. ISBN 0-385-27927-2. 
Paper. $29.95. 

Lyons, Marvin. RUSSIA IN ORIGINAL PHOTOGRAPHS, 1960-1920. 211 pages. 
Boston, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977. ISBN 0-7100-9243-1. Paper. $13.95. 

Obolensky, Chloe. THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE: A PORTRAIT IN PHOTOGRAPHS. 343 
pages. New York, Random House, 1979. ISBN 0-394-41029-7. $24.95. 

A multitude of ethnic groups, social classes, life styles and living 
conditions are chronicled in these superb collections of photographs of 
Russia in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Any one of them would be 
an excellent resource for a school library. 



ERJC 



88 



-83- 



Grabbe, Alexander THE PRIVATE WORLD OF THE LAST TSAR: IN THE 
PHOTOGRAPHS AND NOTES 7F GENERAL COUNT GRABBE. 192 pages. Boston, Little, 
Brown, 1985. ISBN 0-316-32271-7. $25.00. 

Vyrubova, Anna, ed. THE ROMANOV FAMILY ALBUM. Introduction by Robert 
K. Massie. Research by Marilyn Pfeifer Sezey. New York, Vendome Press, 
1982. ISBN 0-86565-019-5. $25.00. 

These collections reveal the privileged life of the upper nobility and 
provide glimpses into the life of the royal family. 

Kochan, Lionel. THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. 125 pages. New York, G.P. 
Putnam's Sons, 1971. Out of print. More than 200 illustrations in this 
small book (9 M X 7 M ) present a pictorial history through the use of 
reproductions of etchings, paintings and poster art in addition to 
photographs. The period covered is broader than indicated by the title for 
about a fifth of the book focuses on the period before 1917. 



2. EARLY YEARS OF THE SOVIET STATE 

Shudakov, GrigOry, et al. PIONEERS OF SOVIET PHOTOGRAPHY. 255 pages. 
New York, Thames and Hudson, 1983. ISBN 0-500-540-95-0. 20 pounds. Ranging 
from photographs of revolutionary leaders to peasants wearing bast shoes as 
they arrived in Moscow in 1936, this is an extraordinary collection of 
photojournalism. The excitement of the period is captured well in the 
photographs of construction projects. 

For unofficial photographs of destitute people, queues, the 
destruction of churches and other such topics, one would need to consult a 
book long out of print: Abbe, James E. I PHOTOGRAPH RUSSIA. George G. 
Harrap and Company, 1935. Additional photographs of this period and World 
War II are available in THE COLLECTED PHOTOGRAPHS OF MARGARET B0URKE-WHITE. 



3. WORLD WAR II 

Bethell, Nicholas, e t al. RUSSIA BESIEGED. 208 pages. Alexandria, VA, 
Time-Life, 1977. ISBN 0-8094-2470-3. $14.95. 

Shaw, John, _et__al. RED ARMY RESURGENT. 203 pages. Alexandria, VA, 
Time-Life, 1979. ISBN 0-8094-2518-1. $14.95. 

Simmons, Gerald, et al. VICTORY IN EUROPE. 210 pages. Alexandria, VA, 
Time-Life, 1982. ISBN 0-8094-3403-2. $14.95. 

Ziemke, Earl F., et al. THE SOVIET JUGGERNAUT. 203 pages. Alexandria, 
VA, Time-Life, 1980. ISBN 0-8094-3387-7. $14.95. 

Soviet historians have complained that American textbooks downplay the 
role of their country in the defeat of Germany and ignore heavy Soviet 
losses. These excellent books with vivid photographs and good commentary 
wil compensate for any such omissions. Senior high students should be 
encouraged to read the text. Younger students may find BATTLE OF 
STALINGRAD, by G.C. Conrad (Children's Press, 1981) and SIEGE OF LENINGRAD, 
by R. Conrad Stein (Childreu's Press, 1983) more manageable. 



89 

ERIC 



-84- 



Shub, Boris and Bernard Quint. SINCE STALIN: A PHOTO HISTORY OF OUR 
TIME. 175 pages. Swen Publications, Inc., 1951. Although out-of-print and 
reflecting the biases of the Cold War mentality, this book is included 
because its pages offer good photojournalism from the period of the 
Russo-Japanese War through the fall of East European countries under the 
domination of Communist governments in the period after World War II. 



4. RECENT DECADES 

Blum, Dieter (photographs) and Mikhailov, N.N. (text)* RUSSIA: THE 
LAND AND PEOPLES OF THE SOVIET UNION. 185 pages. New York, Harry A. Abrams, 
Inc., 1980. ISBN 0-8109-1552-9. Excellent photographs are accompanied by an 
exuberant text by a Soviet who is proud of his country. Informative 
commentaries to the photographs enhance this book. 

Cartier-Bresson, Henri. ABOUT RUSSIA. 141 pages. New York, Viking 
Press, 1975. ISBN 0-670-100-61-7. Wonderful pictures of Soviet humanity 
taken in the 70s by this renowned French photographer express well the many 
contrasting realities encountered in the Soviet Union. 

Gruliow, Leo. MOSCOW. 200 pages. Time-Life International, 1977. ISBN 
0-8094-2274-3. $14.95. Gruliow 1 s perspective is that of an American who 
lived and worked in Moscow in the 30s, 40s, 50s and 70s. While looking at 
these photographs of life in that city rather than its monuments, students 
may become intrigued by the commentary, which can greatly contribute to our 
understanding of Soviet Russians. 

Kaiser, Robert G., and Kaiser, Hannah Jopling. RUSSIA: FROM THE 
INSIDE. 186 pages. New York, E.P. Dutton, 1980. ISBN 0-525-47632-6. Paper. 
$10.95. The photographs, most of which were taken by professional Soviet 
photographers before they left their homeland, have an emotionalism often 
lacking in tourist snapshots and official photographs. The text, as 
sweeping as the photographs attempts to characterize daily life while 
providing a historical perspective and describing some policies of the 
Soviet government. 

McDowell, Bart. JOURNEY ACROSS RUSSIA: THE SOVIET UNION TODAY. 361 
pages. Washington, DC, National Geographic Society, 1977. ISBN 
0-87044-220-1. $14.75. Outstanding coverage of the ranges in the physical 
geography of the Soviet Union and the diversity of its peoples makes this 
book especially useful for its visual images. 

Morath, Inge, and Miller, Arthur. IN RUSSIA. 240 pages. New York, 
Viking Press, 1969. Although out-of-print, this book can be found in many 
public libraries and is included because of its specific focus on writers 
and artists. Among the more than 150 photographs are intimate pictures of 
writers prominent in the 60s (some of whom are now living in the West), a 
series of places described by Dostoevsky in CRIME AND PUNISHMENT, and the 
homes of Tolstoy, Pasternak, and Tchaikovsky. Miller 1 s descriptions of the 
country and especially of his conversations with writers and others are 
illuminating. 



90 



-85- 



St. George, George. SOVIET DESERTS AND MOUNTAINS. 181 pages. 
Netherlands, Time-Life International, 1974. ISBN 0-8094-2012-0. $12.95. 
The photographs of the physical geography of this part of the Soviet Union 
lying between the Middle East and the Far East are often dramatic as they 
reveal its topography and wildlife. The people who inhabit this sparsely 
populated area are found only in the text, where St. George describes his 
visit to the region. 

Sinclair, Marianne. RUSSIA. Introduction by Heinrich Boll and Valentin 
Katayev. 188 pages. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1970. ISBN 0-671-22433-6. 
$29.95. Good photographs and an adulatory text present the achievements of 
the Soviet peoples from diverse regions of the country. This book presents 
only the positive and this gives an added poignant note to the photograph 
of Rostropovich, who is identified as Honored Peoples' Artist of the Soviet 
Union, for in 1978 he was stripped of his citizenship. 

Sichov, Vladimir (photographs), and Silianoff, Eugene (text). THE 
RUSSIANS. 195 pages. Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1981. ISBN 
0-316-78951-8. $17.50. The photographs in this book were smuggled out of 
the Soviet Union in the 70s and do not offer a balauced portrait of that 
country. Although there are some wonderful human interest photos, the 
emphasis in the pictures and especially in the text is almost exclusively 
on negative facets of Soviet society. 

SOVIET ALMANAC. Compiled and edited by Novosti Press. 269 pages. New 
York, Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich, 1981. ISBN 0-15-683923-7. Paper. $10.95. 
Photographers and editors from the official Soviet Press Agency present the 
Soviet Union as they wish us to see it. It is a shame that a book covering 
the geography of the USSR does not contain a single map. The text must be 
approached with caution for it contains some very misleading statements. 

THE SOVIET UNION. By the editors of Time-Life Books. "Library of 
Nations" series. 160 pages. Alexandria, VA, Time-Life Books, 1984. ISBN 
0-8094-5302-9. $14.95 (see page 31). 




9 

ERIC 



91 



-86- 



D. ART AND ARCHITECTURE 

Andrews, Peter. THE RULERS OF RUSSIA. 167 pages. Denver, CO, 
Stonehenge Books, 1983. ISBN 0-86706-051-4. Artistic and architectural 
achievements as well as historical events are the subject of the five 
chapters of this book devoted to the reigns of Ivan IV, Mikhail Romanov, 
Peter the Great, Catherine II and Nicholas II. Even detailed filigree work 
is clear in the high-quality photographs. 

Bortoli, Georges. MOSCOW AND LENINGRAD OBSERVED. 154 pages. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1975. ISBN 0-19-51809-3. Full color photographs 
are coordinated with an informative text, which uses bold face type to help 
the reader quickly find commentary on the subject of each picture. 
Although the focus is on architectural monuments, there are enough 
photographs of people to convey a human image of each city as well as a 
; ense of its history. 

Brumfield, William. GOLD IN AZURE. 429 pages. Boston, Godine, 1983. 
ISBN 0-87923-435-9. $60.00. Splendid photographs by the author illustrate 
Russian architecture from the early churches through the recent Soviet 
period. The quality of the illustrations is matched by a clearly written 
text. 

Fronek, Thomas, ed. THE HORIZON BOOK OF THE ARTS OF RUSSIA. 383 pages. 
New York, American Heritage Publishing Co., 1970. ISBN 0-8281-0100-0. 
Although out of print, this valuable resource should be available in many 
libraries. It is an outstanding collection of photographs, reproductions 
of Russian and Soviet art, poetry, stage designs, and even film stills with 
informative essays, maps, and even a genealogy of the tsars. 

German, Mikhail, ed. ART OF THE OCTOBER REVOLUTION. 241 pages. New 
York, Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1979. ISBN 0-8109-0675-9. Material in this 
book, which was prepared by Aurora Art Publishers in Leningrad, includes 
photographs taken in 1918-21, posters, book illustrations, stamps and other 
art forms. Teachers will find the selection of posters especially useful in 
discussing this period with students. 

Hamilton, George. THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF RUSSIA. Third edition. 
415 pages. New York, Penguin Books, 1983. ISBN 0-14-056006-4. $18.95. 
Paper. This encyclopedic volume covers Russian art and architecture from 
its beginnings through the second decade of the 20th century. While it is a 
good resource for teachers, other books with large photographs in color 
will be needed in the classroom. 

Klimova, Nina T. FOLK EMBROIDERY OF THE USSR. 125 pages. New York, 
Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1981. ISBN 0-442-24464-9. $19.95. The art form 
most frequently practiced by women for many centuries was embroidery. The 
illustrations in this book are excellent and the text gives good background 
information on different traditions developed in the Slavic areas, the 
Caucasus, Central Asia and Siberia. A good book devoted exclusively to 
Russian embroidery is EMBROIDERY OF ALL RUSSIA by Mary Gostelow, published 
by Scribner f s Sons in 1977. 



ERIC 



92 



-87- 



Pronin, Alexander, and Pronin, Barbara. RUSSIAN FOLK ARTS. 192 pages. 
San Diego, A.S. Barnes and Co., 1975. ISBN 0-498-01276-X. Good introduction 
to Russian folk arts. For practical directions on how to make Ukrainian 
pysanky (Easter eggs) and Byelorussion straw designs, consult ART FROM MANY 
HANDS by Jo Miles Schuman. 

Voldarsky, Vsevolod, ed. THE TRETYAKOV GALLERY, MOSCOW. 328 pages. 
London, Collet's, 1979. ISBN 0-317-14327-1. $60.00 Also TRETYAKOV GALLERY: 
PAINTINGS. 192 pages. ISBN 0-317-14328-X. $39.00. Russian art from icons to 
paintings of the early 1960s is covered in these volumes. A one- page essay 
accompanies each illustration. 



IV. RUSSIAN AND SOVIET LITERATURE 

There is no need to make the case that Russian writers have made 
enormous contributions to world literature. We have tried here to avoid 
suggesting too many writers, and to focus on those works which are short, 
which are readily available, and which provide insight into the 
Russian/ Soviet way of life. There are numerous collections of Russian short 
stories and an abundance of critical works, for example, but we thought 
that to list them all would be less useful than to suggest the ones that we 
consider most appropriate. 

A. FOLK TALES AND STORIES 

Downing, Charles. RUSSIAN TALES AND LEGENDS. 215 pages. Reprint of 
1956 edition. New York, Oxford University Press, 1978. ISBN 0-19-274106-3. 
$14.95. This collection includes heroic poems, ( byliny) , as well as folk 
tales, including such favorites as "Fair Vasilissa and Baba Yaga" and "The 
Firebird." There is no introduction, nor are there explanatory notes. 

Morton, Miriam, ed. A HARVEST OF RUSSIAN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE. 474 
pages. Berkeley, University of California Press, 1967. ISBN 0-520-01745-5. 
Paper. $8.95. This collection includes poetry, short stories, and excerpts 
from longer works. The introduction gives an overview of children's 
literature in the Soviet Union, including works translated from English. 

Riordan, James. TALES FROM CENTRAL RUSSIA: RUSSIAN TALES, 
BOOK ONE. 286 pages. Kestrel Books, England. Penguin Books, 1976. ISBN 
0-670-69154-2. This collection includes a commentary on folk tales that 
provides a bit of historical background, as well as a large and varied 
selection. 

RUSSIAN FOLK TALES. Compiled by Alexander Afanasyev. Translated by 
Robert Chandler, Illustrated by Ivan I. Bilibin. 78 pages. New York, 
Shambhala/ Random House, 1980. ISBN 0-394-7 1234-S. Paper. $9.95. What makes 
this collection special are the reproductions of the extraordinary 
illustrations by one of the worlds greats, Bilibin, who worked at the turn 
of the century. 



ERIC 



93 



-88- 




B. LITERATURE WRITTEN BEFORE THE REVOLUTION 

Chekhov, Anton. THE PORTABLE CHEKHOV. New York, Penguin, 1977. ISBN 
0-14-015035-8. Paper. $7.95. Also, SEVEN SHORT NOVELS. New York, Norton, 
1971. ISBN 0-393-00552-6. Paper. $8.95. Of all the Russian writers of the 
19th century, Chekhov is the only one who portrays the total spectrum of 
Russian society. There are stories about peasants, clergy, intelligentsia, 
aristocracy, the professions (he himself was a physician), the relations 
between the sexes, as well as urban and country life. Furthermore, many of 
the stories are short, and lend themselves to the classroom. Particularly 
recommended are: "The Peasants" (about the ;.*ssant milieu); "The Bishop" 
(clergy); "The Duel" (intelligentsia, clergy), "A Woman f s Kingdom" (about 
the plight of a wealthy heiress.) 

Pushkin, Alexander. COMPLETE PROSE TALES OF ALEXANDER PUSHKIN. New 
York, Norton, 1968. ISBN 0-393-00465-1. Paper. $9.95. Particularly 
recommended are his short stories: "The Queen of Spades," about gambling 
and the interaction between German and Russian sensibilities, and "The 
Captain's Daughter," based on the Pugachev rebellion. Pushkin's poem, "The 
Bronze Horseman," about Peter the Great and his monumental statue is 
another favorite, but must be sought elsewhere. 

Tolstoy, Leo. THE GREAT SHORT WORKS OF TOLSTOY. New York, Harper and 
Row. ISBN 0-06-083071-9. Paper. $3.37. Tolstoy's works are set in Russia, 
but are universal in significance. "The Death of Ivan Ilich" is one of the 
greatest short stories ever written on the subject of death and dying. Of 
interest might, be "Hadzi Murat" which presents real historical figures 
(Nicholas 1 and Hadzi Murat), as it portrays the clash between Russian and 
Tatar culture, and between the bureaucrat and the free spirit. (Both are in 
THE GREAT SHORT WORKS.) Tolstoy has also provided an extraordinary picture 
of combat and warfare, and the psychological experience of being under fire 
in "The Sebastopol Stories." For these, see Bayley, John, ed. THE PORTABLE 
TOLSTOY. New York, Penguin, 1978. ISBN 0-14-015091-9. Paper. $7.95. 

Turgenev, Ivan. FATHERS AND SONS. Translated by Rosemary Edmonds. New 
York, Penguin Books, 1965. ISBN 0-14-044147-6. $2.95. This is a classic 
novel of the conflict of generations within a family, as well as a study of 
the mentality of the radical "nihilist" generation of the 1860 f s. The 
protagonist, Bazarov, is one of the most famous heroes in Russian 
literature. 



9<i 



-89- 



C. LITERATURE OF THE SOVIET PERIOD 

Babel, Isaac. COLLECTED STORIES, Walter Morrison trans. New York, New 
American Library, nd. ISBN 0-452-00778-8. Paper. $7.95. Babel's very short 
stories, especially those of "Red Cavalry and Other Stories," written in 
the late 1920s are set at the time of the Civil War and depict it as horror 
and spectacle. Babel writes about the experience of being a Jew at the 
mercy of anti-Semitic cossacks. Particularly recommended are: "My First 
Goose," "Gdali" and "My Dovecote." The latter is an extraordinary account 
of a pogrom from a child* s point of view. 

Baranskaya, Natalya. "The Alarm Clock in the Cupboard," in REDB00K, 
March, 1971. This story caused a stir when it appeared in the Soviet Union 
for its frank portrayal of a week in the life of a Soviet woman. It is 
recommended not so much for literary value but for its glimpse of real 
life. 

Gladkov, F. V. CEMENT. 311 pages. A.S. Arthur and C. Ashleigh, 
translators. New York, Ungar, 1966. ISBN 0-8044-6178-3. Paper. $7.95. This 
novel is a classic example of "socialist realism" and portrays both the 
excitement and difficulties of socialist construction in the early 1920s. 

Shalamov, Varlam. GRAPHITE. Translated by John Glad. New York, Norton, 
1981. ISBN 0-393-01476-2. $14.95. Also KOLYMA TALES. Translated by John 
Glad. New York, Norton, 1982. ISBN 0-393-0007 7-X. Paper. $5.95. Short 
stories, fictionalized accounts of life in Stalin's camp system. 

Solzhenitsyn, Alexander. ONE DAY IN THE LIFE OF IVAN DENIS0VICH. 210 
pages. New York, Bantam Books, 1984. ISBN 0-553-24777-8. Paper. $2.95. This 
book caused a great stir when it was published in the Soviet Union in 1962. 
It gives a short, easy-to-read account of one day in the life a man in one 
of Stalin's -amps. Short stories of Solzhenitsyn are also recommended, 
particularly "For the Good of the Cause, and "Matryona's House". His GULAG 
ARCHIPELAGO (Parts One and Two. Translated by Thomas P. Whitney. New York, 
Harper and Row, 1974. ISBN 0-06-013914-5. $20.14) is a painstakingly 
put-together factual account of the world of Soviet prison camps. THE FIRST 
CIRCLE (New York, Bantam, 1976. ISBN 0-553-24623-2. Paper. $4.50), set in 
one of the camps for intellectual workers, is probably too long a novel for 
most students, but chapters 18-21 can be used separately for their portrait 
of Stalin. Neither FIRST CIRCLE nor GULAG were published in the USSR. 

Trifonov, Iuri. ANOTHER LIFE: THE HOUSE ON THE EMBANKMENT. Translated 
by Michael Glenny. 368 pages. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1983. ISBN 
0-671-24266-0. $16.95. The stories in this collection were published in the 
Soviet Union in the 1970s by one of its finest and most respected writers. 



ERIC 



95 



-90- 



Vladimov, Georgi. FAITHFUL RUSLAN: THE STORY OF A GUARD DOG. 220 
pages* Translated by Michael " >y. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1979. 
This is the story of a dog, we* . '.rained as a guard for one of the Soviet 
camps. Bewildered by the camp's dissolution, Ruslan struggles to adapt to 
a new way of life in which many of his most valued characteristics do not 
seem to fit. Some say Vladimov has presented a perfect portrait of the 
popular mentality created by Stalinism. An out-of-print book worth looking 
for. An excerpt from it appears in Clarence Brown's anthology listed below. 

Voinovich, Vladimir. THE LIFE AND EXTRAORDINARY ADVENTURES 
OF PRIVATE IVAN CHONKIN. Translated by Richard Lourie. 316 pages. New York, 
Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 1976. ISBN 0-374-51752-5. Paper. $7.95. A 
humorous spoof on life in the Soviet army among the bureaucrats. His THE 
IVANKIAD (144 pages, New York, Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1977. ISBN 
0-374-51398-8. $5.95) is a mock epic account, based on a true incident, of 
the struggle for an apartment in Moscow. 

Zamiatin, Evgenii, WE. New York, Dutton. ISBN 0-525-47039-5. Paper. 
$4.95. This anti-utopian novel preceded George Orwell's 1984. Its Russian 
author sensed the implications of a utopia based on th2 collective. Shn^t 
and appropriate for high school readers. 

Zoshchenko, Mikhail. NERVOUS PEOPLE AND OTHER SATIRES. 480 pages. 
Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1975. ISBN 0-253-20192-6. Paper. 
$4.95. A famous satirist of the early Soviet period who writes about the 
confusion of the "little guy" in the face of Soviet reality. These stories 
are very short, larticularly recommended are "The Bathhouse" and "Poverty." 



D. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND ANTHOLOGIES 

Brown, Clarence ed. TWENTIETH CENTURY RUSSIAN READER. 599 pages. New 
York, Penguin Books, 1985. ISBN 0-14-015-100-1. Paper. $7.95. This 
anthology contains the editor's favorites: some poetry, some short stories, 
some excerpts from longer works. All were written in the 20th century, so 
that authors range from Tolstoy and Gorky to Voinovich and Sasha Sokolov. 

Brown, Edward, ed. RUSSIAN LITERATURE SINCE THE REVOLUTION. 400 pages. 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1982. ISBN 0-674-78204-6. Paper. 
$9.95. This general survey of 20th century Russian literature is 
well-written and provides reliable information about the major figures. 

Crouch , Martin , and Porter , Robert . UNDERSTANDING SOVIET POLITICS 
THROUGH LITERATURE. 300 pages. Winchester, MA, Allen Un»?n, 1984. ISBN 
0-04-3201-58-X. Paper. $9.95. Excerpts from literary works written during 
the Brezhnev era are used to illustrate topics such as ideology, Stalinism, 
tradition, the economy, and religion. Each section ends with suggestions 
for readings dealing directly with the topic and other related literary 
works • 



ERJC 



96 



-91- 



Mehnert, Klaus. THE RUSSIANS AND THEIR FAVORITE BOOKS. 296 pages. 
Stanford, Hoover Press Publications, 1983. ISBN 0-8179-7821-6. $19.95. This 
book is hard to classify. Mehnert undertook an informal survey of Russians 
he met during visits in 1981, 1982 and 1983 to find out what contemporary 
authors they read most. He then discusses those authors and their works to 
speculate about what it might be that makes them popular today in the 
Soviet Union. 



Mirsky, D.S. A HISTORY OF RUSSIAN LITERATURE: FROM ITS BEGINNINGS TO 
1900. Edited by Francis J. Whitfield. New York, Random House, 1958. ISBN 
0-394-72730-6. Paper. $3.95. This is the standard history of Russian 
literature up the beginning of the twentieth century. 

Proffer, Carl L. ANTHOLOGY OF CONTEMPORARY RUSSIAN PROSE. 430 pages. 
Ann Arbor, MI, Ardis, 1982. ISBN 0-99233-597-9. Paper. $9.95. Excellent 
collection, includes writers presently popular and published in the Soviet 
Union. 



Reavey, George, editor and translator. THE NEW RUSSIAN POETS 1953-1968. 
An Anthology. 292 pages. Boston, Marion Boyars, 1981. ISBN 0-7-145-2715-7 
$9.95 This bilingual edition provides representative samples of the work 
of poets ranging from Pasternak to Voznesensky, and Yevtushenko, as well 
as of the popular baladeer Bulat Okudzhava. 

Richards, David, ed. THE PENGUIN BOOK OF RUSSIAN SHORT STORIES. New 
York, Penguin, 1981. ISBN 0-14-004816-2. Paper. $4.50. The best single 
collection of classic Russian short stories of the 19th and 20th centuries. 

Slonim, Marc. SOVIET RUSSIAN LITERATURE: WRITERS AND PROBLEMS, 
1917-1967. Slonim has written chapters on the major authors. 

Terras, Victor, ed. HANDBOOK OF RUSSIAN LITERATURE. 558 pages. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1985. ISBN 0-300-03155-6. An encyclopedia of 
information on authors, literary movements and important social and 
historical events as they relate to, and are reflected in, Russian 
literature. A useful reference of high scholarly standard. 




0 



97 



V* MAPS AND ATLASES 



Because of the great size of the Soviet Union, the world's largest 
political unit, the scale of a printed map and the projection used by the 
cartographer are next in importance to accuracy and readability. According 
to cartographer J • C • Dewdney ( see below) , " the problem of size is 
exacerbated by shape. A rectangle precisely enclosing the USSR measures at 
a ratio of 1.8 to 1, because it covers so much greater distance from west 
to east than from north to south." However, those are not the usual 
proportional dimensions of atlas pages or maps. 

The following specialized atlases should be used along with a fine 
visual map of the present-day USSR. 

A. RUSSIA/USSR IN SPECIALIZED ENGLISH LANGUAGE ATLASES 

Catchpole, Brian. A MAP HISTORY OF RUSSIA. Maps and diagrams by 
Regmarad. Reprinted with additions in 1982. 122 pages. London, Heinemann, 
1982. ISBN 0-435-31157-3. $7.00. 51 maps or charts (black and white) with 
one page of text for each. Paper. Grade: 10 and up. Period: 800 A.D. - 
1975. The charts and maps with their many arrows and complicated graphics 
require closer attention than the well-organized text (see page 3). 

Chew, Allen F. AN ATLAS OF RUSSIAN HISTORY: ELEVEN CENTURIES OF 
CHANGING BORDERS. Revised edition. 127 pages. 37 maps (black and white) 
with 1-3 pages of text per map. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1970. 
ISBN 0-300-01445-7. Paper. $10.95. Grade: 11 and up. Period: 878 A.D. - 
1956 • Detailed maps show the territory added by war or annexation as well 
as the whole country when needed. Included are maps of zones of 
vegetation, climate and precipitation. The text assumes knowledge of names 
of historical persons and places, and gives no social history. 

Dewdney, J.C. USSR IN MAPS. 128 pages. 49 double page spreads of one 
page of text and facing page of maps and diagrams (black and white). New 
York, Holmes & Meir, 1982. ISBN 0-8419-0760-9. $32.50. Grade: 11 and up. 
Emphasis: Physical, Human, Economic, Regioncl. The sources are largely 
British, giving a tremendous amount of current information. 

Gilbert, Martin. RUSSIAN HISTORY ATLAS. Cartographic consultant 
Arthur Banks. 146 maps (black and white). New York, Macmillan, 1972. 
Grade: 9 and up. Period: 800 B.C. to 1970 A.D. There is a bibliography of 
sources used, and a detailed index by the author. The maps are 
straightforward and easy to understand. Much information is concentrated in 
small boxes on most pages. Worth using though not current. NOTE: Neither 
the above title nor the following are listed in the latest BOOKS IN PRINT. 
However, Social Studies School Services lists ATLAS OF RUSSIAN HISTORY by 
Gilbert, published by Dorset Press. $5.98. ISBN 0-9604594-88029. Dorset 
Press is part of Marlborough Books, San Diego, CA. 



98 



-93- 



SOVIET UNION IN MAPS. Cartographic editor Harold Fullard. 33 maps 
(color) with one column of text for each. Distributed by Denoyer-Geppert 
for George Philip & Son, Ltd., Chicago, 1972. ISBN 0-87453-81052. $4.25. 
Paper. Grade: 9 up. Emphasis: physical and economic information only. No 
maps on history. Climate, vegetation, agriculture, minerals, population, 
physical maps of USSR in six area maps. Pine color delineation. Succinct. 
There are no page numbers. 

USSR ENERGY ATLAS. 79 pages. Washington, D.C., CIA, 1985. Stock 
number 041-015-00-157-4. $13.00. Price subject to change. Excellent 
maps, photographs and graphs. To order, contact the U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. 



B. RUSSIA/ USSR IN GENERAL ATLASES 

Evaluations of general English- language world atlases can be found in 
KISTER'S ATLAS BUYING GUIDE, published by Oryx Press in 1984, price $38.50: 
a most valuable guide. The following entries mention only the treatment of 
the USSR in the most useful general atlases. 

THE NEW INTERNATIONAL ATLAS. 568 pages, 319 pages of maps. Chicago, 
Rand McNally, 1981. 11 1/2" x 15". ISBN 0-528-83150-X. $100. Truly 
international in scope (text in five languages), this atlas is one of the 
best, with maps from several cartographers including Phillips. Place names 
are tranr iterated with 29 pages of "World Thematic Maps" and a full index. 

One whc . . section of the atlas covers the USSR in 12 double-page maps : 
political by area, physical , cultural, key regions, and cities. Only three 
scales are used; most important for making comparisons. 



TIMES ATLAS OF THE WORLD: COMPREHENSIVE EDITION. 512 pages, 244 pages 
of maps. New York, Harper and Row, 1983. 12 1/2" x 18". ISBN 
0-8129-0906-2. $139.95. "Best in the land, bar none" says Kister, with 
more maps by Bartholomew, and 41 pages of world introductory material. 
USSR delineated in 10 double- page plates in variable scales. Easier to 
read than the NEW INTERNATIONAL, but not as detailed. 

GOODE'S WORLD ATLAS. 384 pages, 234 pages of maps. Chicago, Rand 
McNally, 1982. 9" x 11 1/2". ISBN 0-528-83061-9. Paper. $9.97 to school 
libraries. Numerous thematic world maps and pages on projections precede 
area maps of which there are five on parts of the Soviet Union. Included 
too are two maps each on Moscow and Leningrad, plus a page of industrial 
and economic maps of the USSR. 



NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC ATLAS OF THE WORLD. 386 pages, 200 pages of maps. 
Washington, D.C, National Geographic, 1981. 12 1/2" x 18 1/2". ISBN 
0-87044-347-X. $37.20. The four maps of the Soviet Union are in two-point 
equidistant projection. Very full of transliterated names but little of 
physical features. 



ERLC 



99 



-94- 



BRITANNICA ATLAS carries the same maps as are published in the NEW 
INTERNATIONAL ATLAS, but it is smaller (11 1/2" x 15") and costs $64.50. 

Most atlases beyond the ones mentioned above include only two maps of 
the Soviet Union, one each of the European and Asian USSR, regardless of 
size, price, or basic cartographer. 



C. RUSSIA/ USSR IN MAPS 

National Geographic Educational Services, Dept. 84, Washingon, D.C. 
20036. SOVIET UNION #02827. 1981. No index. 1 inch : 160 miles. 37" x 23". 
$3.00 paper, $4.00 plastic-coated. 

National Geographic. PEOPLES OF THE SOVIET UNION #02828. 1976. 
Descriptive notes and illustrations on two sides. 1 inch : 189 mi. 37" X 
23". $3.00 paper, $4.00 plastic-coated. 

USSR AND ADJACENT LANDS. A Wenschow map, formerly distributed by 
Denoyer-Geppert, now Rand McNally, New York. 1 : 6,000,000. 64" X 44". 
$142.50. 

USSR SUMMARY MAPS. Produced by U.S. Central Intplligence Agency. Order 
from U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C. Stock number 
041-015-00096-9. 12 maps on one fold-out sheet, covering population, 
industries, ethnic groups, power, etc. 23" X 31". $3.50. 

American Map Company. USSR WALL MAP. Reference #88x4. Shows separate 
states of the Soviet Union, cities, rivers, mountains, boundaries. 1" : 120 
miles. 42" X 29". $1.75. 

MAPS ON FILE. New York, Facts on File, 1984. Several hundred 
reproducible maps of all parts of the world, updated where necessary. 
Thirty or forty were updated for the current edition. Includes 24 on the 
USSR, covering Soviet Arms Expenditures, Coal Reserves, Non-Cultivated 
Lands, Literacy Tables, etc. 8 1/2" X 11". $145.00. 

Beyond the maps listed above, fine maps of the USSR are produced by 
Bartholomew, Freytag-Berndt , Hallwag, Hildebrand, Kummerly & Fry, Nagel, 
Ravenstein (sometimes listed as Geographia), etc. Most cover only the 
Western USSR, usually have fine cartography, use several languages 
including English, and are not sold individually by the publishers but 
through map stores. For a list of member map stores in your area, contact 
the International Map Dealers Association, P.O. Box 1789, Kankee, IL 60901, 
Attn: Norman Strasma, Executive Director. Iiformation courtssy of Tony 
Naden, Harvard Square Map Store, Cambridge, MA. 



ERIC 



100 



-95- 



VI. ARTICLES 



Good articles on the Soviet Union appear in journals and newspapers 
widely available in public libraries* Those listed here are bat a few of 
those that have appeared recently* More scholarly articles analyzing the 
political behavior of the Soviet Union and other aspects of that society 
appear in such journals as CURRENT HISTORY, FOREIGN POLICY, and the WILSON 
QUARTERLY* Many of these can be found in the annual edition of WORLD 
POLITICS published by the Dushkin Group (Sluice Dock, Guilford, CT). This 
company expects to publish a compilation of articles devoted exclusively to 
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in the fall of 1985. 

Aksyonov, Vassily. "Success and the Soviet Writer." THE NEW 
YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW. March 10, 1985. Pages i and 34-35. An exiled 
Russian novelist ponders success Soviet style (both popular and official 
success) and surveys its effect on a number of writers from Pasternak to 
Vysotsky. 

Brumfield, William. "Russia's Glorious Churches." HISTORIC 
PRESERVATION. February, 1985. Pages 42-46. 

Brumfield, William. "Russia's Churches: Will They Survive?" THE 
SATURDAY EVENING POST. October, 1982. Pages 67-69. 

Daniloff, Ruth. "Letters from Medieval Russia." SCIENCE 83. August, 
1983. Pages 52-59. 

All of these articles have wonderful visuals and furnish us with 
insights into the Russian cultural heritage and attempts to preserve its 
monuments and artifacts. 

Galbraith, John Kenneth. "Reflections (Russia)." THE NEW YORKER. 
September 3, 1984. Pages 54-65. Using reflections on four trips to the 
Soviet Union between 1959 and 1984, Galbraith offers his personal views and 
some sensible commentary on the Soviet economy. 

Gavrenta, John. "Down on the Farm Soviet Style: An American 4-H 
Adventure." Photographs by James Tobin and Carol Schmidt. NATIONAL 
GEOGRAPHIC. Number 155. June, 1979. Pages 768-797. 

Greenfield, Marc. "Life Among the Russians.", THE NEW YORK TIMES 
MAGAZINE. October 24, 1982. Pages 94-99 and 104-108. 

Although several years have passed since the American students spent a 
summer on Soviet collective farms, their reactions retain an authenticity 
that will appeal to today's students. Greenfield is a young man who worked 
in Moscow for a year as a translator and his comments will intrigue many 
students. 

Kaiser, Robert. "The USSR: The Generation that Failed." WASHINGTON 
POST. September 23-24, 1984. 

Shipler, David K. "Russia: A People Without Heroes." NEW YORK TIMES 
MAGAZINE. October 16, 1983. Pages 29-36. 

Both of these men served as correspondents to Moscow for their 
newspapers. Shipler wrote his article not long after returning from his 
tour there; Kaiser had been in Moscow in the '70s and wrote his article 
after a return visit. 



ERIC 




-96- 



Kennan, George. "Reflections (on Soviet- American Relations)." THE NEW 
YORKER. September 24, 1984. Pages 55-56, 60-63, 65-66, and 71-80. Written 
in the form of letters to two friends (one American, one Soviet), this is a 
very strong article by a former ambassador to the Soviet Union and a 
perceptive scholar of the relations of the superpowers. 

Gelb, Leslie H. "What We Know about Russia." NEW YORK TIMES 
MAGAZINE. October 28, 1984. Pages 22-25. 

Murphy, Cullen. "Watching the Russians." THE ATLANTIC. February, 1983. 
Pages 33-52. 

Students sometimes wonder where and how American experts get their 
information on the Soviet Union. Both articles provide some answers and 
che Murphy article in addition to profiling Murray Feshbach, a demographer 
who has spent many years studying the Soviet Union, gives much information 
on the development of Soviet studies in this country. 

"Detente on the High Seas." LIFE. August, 1983. Pages 42-44 and 48. A 
short text and large photos tell about a joint U.S. -Soviet fishing venture 
off the Oregon coast. U.S. trawlers catch the fish, which are then 
processed on Soviet factory ships. 

SCHOLASTIC UPDATE. April 15, 1983. 30 pages. The entire issue is 
devoted to the Soviet Union. The treatment of topics is adequate, but 
students of Russian will laugh at the ridiculous statement that the 
Cyrillic alphabet has no letter "s." 

Long, James. "Putting the Soviet Union in Perspective." THE 
SOCIAL STUDIES. Number 73. May/June, 1982. Pages 120-124. 

Mehlinger, Howard D., and Alexander Rabinowitch, editors of a special 
section. SOCIAL EDUCATION. April, 1981. Pages 232-265. 

These articles may be especially helpful to teachers preparing a 
course or unit on the Soviet Union. 




ERLC 



102 



-97- 



VII. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
A. UNIVERSITY RUSSIAN AND EAST EUROPEAN CENTERS 

Most of these centers have outreach services, which may include 
newsletters for teachers, consultation on materials, the loan of print 
and/ or audiovisual materials, workshops, etc. Contact the center nearest to 
you for details. 

Center for Slavic and East European Studies 
University of California at Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720 
(415) 642-2230 

Center for Russian and East European Studies 

University of California at Los Angeles 

334 Kinsey Hall 

Los Angeles, CA 90024 

(213) 825-4060 

W. Averill Harriman Institute for Advanced 

Study of the Soviet Union 
Columbia University 
International Affairs Building 
420 West 118th Street 
New York, NY 10027 
(212) 280-4623 

Soviet and East European Language and Area Center 
Harvard University 
1737 Cambridge Street 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
(617) 495-5852 

Russian and East European Center 
University of Illinois 
1208 W. California Avenue 
Urbana, IL 61801 
(217) 333-1244 

Russian and East European Institute 
Indiana University 
Ballantine Hall 565 
Blooming ton, in 47405 
(812) 335-7309 

Center for Russian and East European Studies 
University of Michigan 
Lane Hall 

204 South State Street 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 
(313) 764-0351 

o 103 
ERJC 



-98- 



Center for Slavic and East European Languages 

Ohio State University 

344 Dulles Hall 

230 West 17th Avenue 

Columbus, OH 43210 

(614) 422-8770 

Slavic Language and Area Center 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
(215) 898-7654 

Russian and East European Studies Program 
University of Pittsburgh 
4E-23 Forbes Quadrangle 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 
(412) 624-1215 

Center for Russian and East European Studies 

Stanford University 

Room 200, Lou Henry Hoover Building 

Stanford, CA 94305 

(415) 497-3562 

Russian and East European Studies 
University of Virginia 
Charlottesville, VA 22901 
(804) 924-3033 

Russian and East European Studies 

University of Washington 

Jackson School of International Studies 

Seattle, WA 98195 

(206) 543-4852 



B. SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS (NON-PROFIT) 

The listing of an organization is not an endorsement of its philosophy 
or its materials. This section is simp.ly for your information. For 
further information and prices of materials, please write directly to the 
organizations. 



AMERICAN COMMITTEE ON EAST-WEST ACCORD 
109 11th Street, S.E. 
Washington, DC 20003 
(202) 546-1700 

The American Committee on East-West Accord believes that the security 
of the U.S. is best served by reducing tensions between East and West and 
in particular by strengthening public understanding of equitable strategic 
arms agreements and mutually beneficial programs in science, culture, and 
trade. A 1983 publication, COMMON SENSE IN U.S. -SOVIET TRADE, includes 18 
articles that argue for non-military trade with the Soviet Union. 



ERLC 



104 



-99- 



COMMITTEE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY 
2000 P Street, N.W,, Suite 515 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 833-3140 

The Committee for National Security is preparing packets of materials 
on the Soviet Union and on U.S,-Soviet relations, A packet on Soviet women 
is now available. The Committee now has available a guide to films on the 
Soviet Union ($8.50), and will initiate a speaker's bureau referral service 
in the fall of 1985. 



EDUCATORS FOR SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 
23 Garden Street 
Cambridge, MA 01128 
(617) 492-1764 

A non-profit membership organization based on the principle that the 
nuclear age demands new approaches to education. It has focused on teaching 
about the dangers of nuclear war and has published "Learning About the 
Soviets: Selected Teaching Resources 19 pages* 



THE GROUND ZERO PAIRING PROJECT 
P,0. Box 19049 
Portland, OR 07210 
(503) 245-3519 

The Ground Zero Pairing Project produces educational materials on the 
Soviet Union (see page 8). The organization also distributes educational 
materials on arms control and a newsletter called ** Linkages , ** and promotes 
a project which pairs U.S. and Soviet cities and urges citizens of those 
cities to exchange packets of materials about themselves and their homes. 



INSTITUTE FOR SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS 
1608 New Hampshire, N,W. 
Washington, DC 20009 
(202) 387-3034 

The Institute for Soviet-American Relations, with the Friends 
Committee on National Legislation, issues a newsletter, "Surviving 
Together," which uses an eclectic approach to report items on trade, 
tourism, scientific and cultural exchanges, community projects, educational 
materials, television productions and anything else that may be related to 
the Soviet Union and the United States* The ISAR is currently updating its 
HANDBOOK OF ORGANIZATIONS INVOLVED IN SOVIET-AMERICAN PELATIONS • 



105 



-100- 



NATIONAL COUNCIL OF CHURCHES 
US-USSR Church Relations Committee 
Room 880, 475 Riverside Drive 
New York, NY 10115 

The Committee on US-USSR Church Relations works to bring Christians of 
both nations together to learn from each other by sending groups to the 
Soviet Union and hosting Soviet delegations to the United States. The 
Committee rents a videotape of the television documentary "The Church of 
the Russians," and has published TOGETHER ON THE WAY: THE STORY OF THE 
DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE CHURCHES OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION. 



THE US/USSR YOUTH EXCHANGE PROGRAM 
3103 Washington Street 
San Francisco, CA 94115 

The US/USSR Youth Exchange Program distributes learning resource 
packets which include advice for corresponding with Soviet friends. 

RUSSIAN PEN FRIEND PROJECT 
International Friendship League 
55 Mount Vernon St. 
Boston, MA 02108 
(617) 523-4273 

For a fee of $5.00 this organization will match you with a Pen Friend 
from the Soviet Union. (Only ages 19-35 are available). 

C. DISTRIBUTORS OF SOVIET MATERIALS 

1. SOVIET EMBASSY AND MISSION 

USSR Embassy 

1706 18th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20009 

Has a film library (see page 103). 



USSR Mission 

136 East 67th Street 

New York, NY 10021 

Distributes pamphlets on a variety of topics from agriculture to 
sports. 



National Council of American-Soviet Friendship 
Educational Services 
162 Madison Avenue 
New York, NY 10016 

Rents films, books, pamphlets, slides, photographs, and graphic art. 



106 



-101- 



2. BOOK DISTRIBUTORS 

The Soviets publish many books in English translation. Those that 
might be of special interest to teachers are books on art and architecture 
or on individual Soviet cities; some have fine visuals. Squally worthwhile 
are some of the translations of books by Russian and Soviet authors. 

Imported Publications 
320 West Ohio Street 
Chicago, IL 60610 

Victor Kamkin Bookstore 
149 Fifth Avenue 
New York, NY 10010 
or 

12224 Parklawn Drive 
Rockville, MD 20852 

Russica Book Shop 

799 Broadway 

New York, NY 10003 

Szwede Books 

Post Office Box J 214 

Palo Alto, CA 94302 



3. SOVIET LIFE 

1706 18th Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 

A subscription to the magazine SOVIET LIFE costs $9.35 per year. It is 
sold in the U.S. on the basis of an agreement by which the U.S. 
publication, AMERIKA, is distributed in the Soviet Union. The visuals in 
SOVIET LIFE are excellent. The text, of course, is self-promotional. 



107 



-102- 



D. FILM/VIDEO DISTRIBUTORS AND RENTAL LIBRARIES 
1. EDUCATIONAL FILMS 

There are more than three dozen university films centers across the 
country that rent educational films. Consult the reference book, 
EDUCATIONAL FILM LOCATOR OF THE CONSORTIUM OF UNIVERSITY FILM CENTERS AND 
THE R.R. BOWKER COMPANY, which has an index of films relating to the Soviet 
Union. Each film is described briefly and a list of the film libraries 
renting it is given* Or, educators may contact the Film and Video Search 
at the University of Illinois Film Center, 1325 South Oak Street, 
Champaign, IL 61820, (217) 333-1360 (Illinois clients may use the toll free 
number, 800-252-1357). Educators should realize that descriptions of films 
in catalogs are usually descriptive. Critical annotations of more than 40 
films can be found in the new FILM GUIDE, distributed by the Committee for 
National Security (see page 99)* Some Russian and East European Centers at 
major universities publish their own guides; contact the one nearest to you 
(see page 97-98). 

The following list of distributors of educational films on 
Russian/Soviet history and the Soviet Union is not complete. Only 
distributors of five or more films in this area are listed. Note: in some 
cases films may be rented at a lower cost from a university film center. 

Educational Services 

National Council of American-Soviet Friendship 
162 Madison Avenue 
New York, NY 10016 

Most of the educational films that are rented by this organization can 
be obtained without charge from the Soviet Embassy's Film Library. Quality 
is very uneven. 

Films for the Humanities 
P.O. Box 2053 
Princeton, NJ 08540 

Programs on literary figures, the cinema, the theater and music are 
available in film and video format. 



Learning Corporation of America 
1350 Avenue of the Americas 
New York, NY 10019 

LCA both sells and rents its films but it encourages renters to 
utilize university film libraries. 



PBS Video 

475 L'Enfant Plaza, S.W* 
Washington, DC 20024 

Sells and rents videotapes of many programs that have been shown on 

PBS. 



108 



-103- 



USSR Embassy 

Film Library 

1706 18th Street. N.W. 

Washington, DC 20009 

The Film Library loans films without charge but the quality of the 
films and the service is uneven. It is recommended that teachers preview 
films before showing them. 



2. FEATURE FILMS 

Ark's Intervideo 

545 Ortega Street 

San Francisco, CA 94122 

Sells videocassettes of Soviet films. Not all of the films are 
sub-titled in English, nor is the quality of the image always as clear as 
one would like. 



Corinth Films 

410 East 62nd Street 

New York, NY 10021 

Corinth has a large collection of films produced between 1924 and 
1977. Most are in Russian with English subtitles. Among these films are 
several of opera and ballet productions. 



IFEX Films 

201 West 52nd Street 
New York, NY 10019 

IFEX rents Soviet films produced in the '70s and '80s. All have 
English subtitles. Be sure to ask for classroom rates, which are much 
lower than those for public showings. 

A rather incomplete list of films and their distributors can be found 
in FEATURE FILMS ON 8MM, 16MM AND VIDEOTAPE, edited by James Limbacher. 

Also, see "A Guide to Films About the Soviet Union," a project of the 
committee for National Security and the W. Averill Harriman Institute for 
the Advanced Study of the Soviet Union. Forty-one films, all available to 
the general public, are evaluated. Available from the Committee for 
National Security, 2000 P Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20036 for $8.50. 



109 



-104- 



E. TRAVEL AGENCIES 

This is an alphabetical listing of some agencies that promote tours to 
the Soviet Union. It is not an endorsement • 

Academic Travel Abroad 

1346 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20036 

Arranges tours for students and adults; many routes are organized 
according to themes. Recently has been organizing study programs* 
Distributes a newsletter* 



Anniversary Tours 
250 West 57th Street 
New York, NY 10107 

Organizes special interest group and youth tours. 



Citizen Exchange Council 
18 East 41st Street 
New York, NY 10017 

Tours for educational iastitutions, professional groups and special 
interest groups. CEC has a newsletter and rents some audiovisual 
materials. 



Counterpart Tours 

250 West 57th Street, Suite 1428 

New York, NY 10107 

A division of Labor Research Association sponsors tours hosted by 
Soviet trade unions. Tour groups are organized by professions. 

International Travel Service 
1055 Texas Avenue, Suite 104 
College Station, TX 77840 

Arranges academic credit seminars and tours. 



Pioneer Travel Service 
203 Allston Street 
Cambridge, MA 02139 

Offers camping and driving tours. 



Voices of the Future 

250 West 57th Street, Suite 1428 

New York, NY 10017 

Offers youth tours (youth defined as 16 to 35) and a summer language 
and touring program. 



ERLC 



-105- 

INDEX OF BOOKS REVIEWED - BY AUTHOR 



Appignanesi, Richard. 38 


Liden, Karin. 47 




Barlow, Pamela. 39 


Ludlow, Hope T. 17 




Belasco, Milton Jay* 1 


Mack, Donald W. 18 




Bialer, Seweryn. 40 


Massie, Suzanne. 55 




Bingham, Margorie Wall. 2 


McCauley, Martin. 19 




Bronfenbrenner, Urie. 41 


Millar, James R. 20 




Catchpole, Brian. 3 


Molander, Earl A. 21, 


34 


Clark, James I. 4 


Morton, Miriam. 56 




Cubitt, Heather. 6 


Mowat, Farley. 57 




"Current Digest of the 


Newby, Eric. 58 
O'Connor, Edmund. 37 




Soviet Press". 42 




D'Encausse, Helene Carrere. 43 


Parker, W.H. 22 




Feshbach, Murray. 44 


Pimlott, Tamara. 23 




Gerharr, Genevra. 7 


Raeff, Marc. 59 




Golyakhovsky, Vladimir. 45 


Reed, John. 60 




Goode, Stephen. 46 


Resnick, Abraham. 25, 


26 


Gross, Susan Hill. 2 


Richards, John. 33 




Ground Zero. 8 


Riha, Thomas. 24 




Hammond, Harold E. 1 






Hansson, Carola. 47 


Ritchie, W.K. 27 




Hartley, L. 9 


Robot torn, John. 28 




Hecht, Leo. 48 


Scott, John. 64 




Hess, Jacqueline. 10 


Sivachev, Nikolai V. 


65 


Jackson, Douglas W. 11 


Symons, Leslie. 32 




Kahn, Kathy. 49 


Thubron, Colin. 66 




Kennan, George. 50 


Troyat, Henri. 67 




Killingray, Margaret. 37 


Ustinov, Peter. 68 




Knaus, William A. 51 


Vaillant, Janet G. 33 


Kovalevskaya, Sofya. 52 


Watson, Jane Werner. 


69 


Kublin, Hyman. 12 


Williams, Brian. 35 




Lane, Peter. 13 


Wood, Anthony. 36 




Lawrence, John. 14 


"World History Program 


i". 


Lee, Andrea. 53 


Yapp, Malcolm. 37 




Leone, Bruno. 15 


Yakovlev, Nikolai N. 


65 


Leppert, Ella C. 16 


Zarate, Oscar. 38 





111 



-106- 



INDEX OF BOOKS REVIEWED - TITLE 



THE ABC'S OF SOVIET SOCIALISM (Millar). 20 
BIG RED TRAIN RIDE (Newby). 58 

THE URALS: AN AMERICAN WORKER IN RUSSIA'S CITY OF STEEL (Scott). 64 
THE COLD WAR (Nicolson). 37 

COLD WAR: A CONFLICT OF IDEOLOGY AND POWER (Graebner, ed.). 5 
COME TO RUSSIA (Williams). 35 
COMMUNISM (Leone). 15 

DAILY LIFE IN RUSSIA UNDER THE LAST TSAR (Troyat). 67 
THE END OF DETENTE? US-SOVIET RELATIONS (Goode). 46 
FROM RUSSIA TO USSR: A NARRATIVE AND 

DOCUMENTARY HISTORY (Vaillant, Richards). 33 
FRUITS OF OUR LABOR (Kahn). 49 

GROUND ZERO EDUCATIONAL PACKAGE FOR ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS. 8 
GROWING UP IN THE SOVIET UNION (Morton). 56 
A HISTORY OF RUSSIA (Lawrence). 14 
INSIDE RUSSIAN MEDICINE (Knaus) . 51 

LAND OF THE FIREBIRD: THE BEAUTY OF OLD RUSSIA (Massie). 55 
LENIN AND THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION (Mack). 18 
LENIN FOR BEGINNERS (Appignanesi) . 38 
LENIN (Cash, comp.). 54 

LENIN: REVOLUTION AND POWER (D'Encausse) . 43 

A MAP HISTORY OF RUSSIA (Catchpole). 3 

MINICOURSE: WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS? (Molander). 21 

MODERN RUSSIA (Robottom). 28 

MOSCOW WOMEN (Hannson) . 47 

MY RUSSIA (Ustinov). 68 

THE NUCLEAR DELUSION: SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS 

IN THE ATOMIC AGE (Kennan). 50 
PETER THE GREAT CHANGES RUSSIA (Raeff, ed.). 59 
READINGS IN RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION (Riha, ed.). 24 
RUSSIA (Kublin). 12 

RUSSIA: A HISTORY TO 1917 (Resnick). 26 

RUSSIA: 1900-1953 (Howart, ed.). 29 

RUSSIA AND THE UNITED STATES (Sivachev). 65 

RUSSIA UNDER PETER THE GREAT (Ritchie). 27 

RUSSIA UNDER THE LAST TSAR (Cubitt). 6 

A RUSSIAN CHILDHOOD (Kovalevskaya). 52 

RUSSIAN DOCTOR (Golyakhovsky) . 45 

RUSSIAN JOURNAL (Lee). 53 

THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION (Hartley). 9 

THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION (Killingray) . 37 

THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION (Wood). 36 

RUSSIAN REVOLUTION AND BOLSHEVIK VICTORY (Adams, ed.). 30 
RUSSIAN VERSION OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR (Lyons, ed.). 61 
THE RUSSIAN WORKER: LIFE AND LABOR UNDER THE TSARIST 
REGIME (Bonnell, ed.). 62 

THE RUSSIAN'S WORLD: LIFE AND LANGAUGE (Gerhart). 7 

THE RUSSIANS: HOW THEY LIVE AND WORK (Parker). 22 

ST. PETERSBURG: A TRAVELLERS' COMPANION (Kelly, ed.). 63 




-107- 



THE SIBERIANS (Mowat). 57 

THE SOVIET UNION (Clark). 4 

SOVIET UNION (Jackson). 11 

SOVIET UNION (Leppert). 16 

THE SOVIET UNION (Time-Life Books). 31 

THE SOVIET UNION: A SYSTEMATIC GEOGRAPHY (Symons, ed.). 32 

THE SOVIET UNION: HISTORY, CULTURE, PEOPLE (Belasco). 1 

THE SOVIET UNION: LAND OF MANY PEOPLES (Watson). 69 

THE SOVIET UNION: POPULATION TRENDS AND DILEMMAS (Feshbach). 44 

THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE (Ludlow) . .1.7 

STALIN (Killingray) . 37 

STALIN AND STALINISM (McCauley). 19 

STALIN'S RUSSIA, 1924-1939 (Pimlott). 23 

TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK THE WORLD (Reed). 60 

THROUGH THE YEAR IN THE USSR (Barlow). 39 

TOO WORLDS OF CHILDHOOD: US AND USSR (Bronfenbrenner) . 41 

THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS (Resnick). 25 

US-SOVIET RELATIONS (Hess). 10 

THE USSR AFTER BREZHNEV (Bialer). 40 

THE USSR IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY (Lane). 13 

THE USSR TODAY: CURRENT DIGEST OF THE SOVIET PRESS. 42 

THE USSR TODAY: FACTS AND INTERPRETATIONS (Hecht) . 48 

WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIANS— AND NUCLEAR WAR? (Molander, ed.). 34 

WHERE NIGHTS ARE LONGEST: TRAVELS BY 

CAR THROUGH WESTERN RUSSIA (Thubron). 66 

WOMEN IN THE USSR (Bingham). 2 




113 



B 


6 


b 


K 


K 


k 


M 


M 


m 


T 


T 


t 


3 


3 


z 




a 




d 






f 


r 


r 


g 


ji 


ji 


i 


H 


H 


n 


n 


n 


P 


p 


P 


r 


c 


c 


s 


B 


B 


V 




H 


y 



^ 


H 


ch 


X 


X 


kh 


IU 


III 


sh 


m 


m 


shch 


n 


u 


ts 


)K 




zh 




h 


soft 
sign 




A 


a 


ah 




H 


yah 


3 


3 


eh 


E 


e 


yeh 


BI 


u 


ih 


H 


H 


(e'e) 


0 


0 


oh 


E 


e 


yo 


y 


y 


u 

(00) 


K) 


K) 


yu 




