DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 367 370 



IR 054 918 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Saveleva, Mel inda 

Russian Corporate and Personal Natne Headings on OCLC 
and RLIN: A Comparison Study* 
Nov 90 

28p.; M.L.S* Research Paper, Kent State 
University. 

Dissertations/Theses - Masters Theses (0A2) 
MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Authority Control (information) ; ^Bibliographic 
Utilities; ''^Cataloging; Comparative Analysis; Error 
Patterns; Library Catalogs; Online Systems; Quality 
Control ; ^Russian; Translation 

Anglo American Cataloging Rules; Library of Congress 
Classification; '"^OCLC; '^Research Libraries 
Information Network; Transliteration 



ABSTRACT 

It is commonly believed that the quality of original 
cataloging on OCLC (Online Computer Library Center) and RLTN 
(Research Libraries Information Network) significantly differs. Past 
stereotypes reflected the fact that OCLC traditionally emphasized 
increasing the size of the database, while RLIN ascribed top priority 
to cataloging quality. The literature is mixed regarding whether 
significant differences do exist. Focusing on Russian name headings, 
this project investigates whether the quality of member-contributed 
cataloging in this Slavic area does significantly differ on OCLC and 
RLIN. The study draws membsr-contributed records containing Russian 
name headings from both the OCLC and RLIN databases and compares the 
name headings with respect to correct transliteration, punctuation, 
and tagging, as well as conformrmce to AACR2 (Anglo American 
Cataloging Rules 2) and Library of Congress rule interpretations. 
(Contains 12 references.) (Author/ JLB) 



t^: Vc Vc ****** ?V * Vc Vc * * * Vc * * * Vc * * * * * * Vc Vc * * Vc * Vc * Vc Vc Vc * * Vc * * * * * ****** ii * * * ***** Vc ****** * 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
from the original document. 

* * * * Vc * * Vff Vc * * Vc Vc Vc Vc * Vc * * Vc Vc * Vc Vc * * Vc * * * Vc * * * * Vc * * Vc * ** * * * * * * * Vc * Vc * * * * * Vc * Vc * * * * * Vc * * * * * 



U.S. OCWBTIiiNT or EOt'CATION 
Ct Educatwnai R«M«rch »nd tmprovomeni 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ Th»« tJocumtnt has betn reproduced •& 
r*c«<v*d from ih« person or organijuion 
origir\Aiing it 

□ Minor Changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



• Points of yiaw Of opinions stateo in this docu- 
ment do not nece&sanly represent oHiciat 
OERl position Of policy 



RUSSIAN CORPORATE AND PERSONAL NAME HEADINGS 
ON OCLC AND RLIN: A COMPARISON STUDY 



A Master's Research Paper submitted to the 
Kent State University School of Library Science 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the degree Master of Library Science 



by 

Melinda Saveleva 



November, 1990 

"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

RosGinary Du Mont 



2 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERlCl * 



RUSSIAN CORPORATE AND PERSONAL NAME HEADINGS 
ON OCLC AND RLIN: A COMPARISON STUDY 



It is commonly believed that the quality of original 
cataloging on OCLC and RLIN significantly differs. Past 
stereotypes reflected the fact that OCLC traditionally 
emphasized increasing the size of the database, while RLIN 
ascribed top priority to cataloging quality. The literature 
is mixed regarding whether significant differences do exist. 
Focusing on Russian name headings, this project will 
investigate whether the quality of member-contributed 
cataloging in this Slavic area does significantly differ on 
OCLC and RLIN. Member-contributed records containing Russian 
name headings will be drawn from both the OCLC and RLIN 
databases, and a comparison of the name headings will be made 
with respect to correct transliteration, punctuation, and 
tagging, as well as conformance to AACR2 and Libraarjr of 
Congress rule interpretations. 



Master's Research Paper by 
Melinda Saveleva 
B.A», Ohio State University, 1980 
Ohio State University, 1983 
M.L.S., Kent State University, 1990 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Suiranary of Findings 1 

Introduction 2 

Literature Review 5 

Research Objectives 7 

Areas of Study 8 

Methodology 

Data Collection 9 

Error Schedule 13 

Identification of Errors 14 

Data Analysis 14 

Findings 15 

Conclusions 

Bibliography 20 



ERLC 



5 



LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 - Occurrence of errors 
Table 2 - OCLC Errors by MARC Field 
Table 3 - RLIN Errors by MARC Field 



ERIC 



6 



PREFACE 

I gratefully acknowledge the professional guidance given 
to me by my advisor^ Dr- Ann Allan- She freely volunteered 
both her expertise and time^ and it was a pleasure working 
with her* I also wish to thank Dr* Lubomyr Wynar for his 
guidance in the field of ethnic librarianship* Heartfelt 
thanks are also due Mrs, Marge Markewicz^ secretary of the 
Kent State University School of Library Science^ Columbus^ 
and Kui Qui^ KSU graduate laboratory assistant^ for their 
support and encouragement. 



I I 



Siimmary of Findings 

The present study examined 181 matched pairs of catalog 
records from OCLC and RLIN in an attempt to discover whether 
any differences exist in the quality of member-contributed 
cataloging on both networks. Differences in most name 
heading areas were negligible, with the exception of errors 
in conformance to AACR2 and Library of Congress rule 
interpretations: member-contributed cataloging on both 
databases contained nximerous errors in respect to the latter. 
RLIN records contained 19 name heading errors whereas OCLC 
records contained 14. 

A total of 63 name heading errors of all types were 
found, an average of .17 errors per record. The 181 OCLC 
records contained a total of 26 errors, or .14 errors per 
record, while the 181 RLIN records possessed a total of 37 
errors, or .20 errors per record. The majority of errors 
occurred in the application of AACR2 and LCRIs: 14 errors in 
OCLC and 19 errors in RLIN. MARC tagging followed in total 
number of errors (17). OCLC records contained 7 errors in 
MARC tagging and RLIN 10. 

The hypothesis that RLIN records are more accurate than 
OCLC records was not upheld, at least in terms of name 
headings: Of the 63 total errors, 37 were attributable to 
RLIN member-input records. The small sample size, however, 
renders additional testing necessary to confirm the above 
results . 



1 

8 



Introduction 

In the present era of online information retrieval , 
accurate -entry of name headings is a necessity for efficient 
searching of online bibliographic records. Typos, inaccurate 
transliteration inaccuracies in name structure with respect 
to Library of Congress rule interpretations can all impede 
the retrieval process. 

Accurate and consistent entry of name headings online is 
perhaps even more crucial than in a manual system, because 
name headings entered inaccurately will often not be 
retrievable at all online. In a manual system, slight 
inaccuracies in spacing, minor typos, etc. will often present 
no problems as far as retrieval. Errors in non-English 
language name headings may present special problems (such as 
transliteration error for languages in non-Roman alphabets). 
The decision to document name entry errors in Russian records 
specifically was occasioned by the researcher's experience in 
the OCLC Retrospective Conversion area and in the Eastern 
European Studies Department of the Ohio State University Main 
Library. In the course of daily online searching, both at 
OCLC and at OSU (using LCS), the author noticed incorrect or 
inconsistent Russian name headings, inaccuracies that would 
often have made proper retrieval of records by the 
inexperienced searcher impossible. 

Since both OCLC and RLIN serve as major resources for 
shared cataloging in the United States and abroad, it is 
proposed that a comparison of name headings on the above 



databases with respect to Russian, in order to systematically 
document the quantity and type of errors occurring, would 
contribute to improving the quality of Russian records 
derived from the two largest sources of shared cataloging in 
the U.S. Name heading entries were chosen because of their 
significance as a major access point to the online record, in 
addition to title and nxameric search keys. 

In the early years of both OCLC (Online Computer Library 
Center) and RLIN (Research Libraries Information Network) 
Library of Congress machine-readable cataloging (LC-MARC 
records) formed the major portion of both these databases. 
(Intner 1989, 3). By 1989, however, the situation had 
altered somewhat and member-contributed copy comprised the 
greater portion of each database. Quality control became 
increasingly important as the proportion of member- 
contributed copy vs. LC copy increased. The present study 
will primarily focus on and draw its sample from the last 1.5 
million records input on OCLC and the corresponding matching 
RLIN records, the majority of these items being published in 
1989. 

In its early years, OCLC was primarily concerned with 
building its database, and awarded each institution that 
entered a record for the first time a small financial reward, 
irrespective of the fullness and accuracy of the record. 
Neither entry of a K-level record (one with only the minimum 
number of fields) nor entry of an I-level record (a record 
containing all fields specified by AACR2 and the network) was 

3 

» 10 

ERLC 



charged if the above records were entered for the first time. 
OCLC did publish bibliographic standards, but quality control 
was largely on a voluntary basis. Errors could be corrected 
by ineinbers submitting a report to the network. OCLC 
cataloging, unlike RLIN, has only one master record for each 
item in its database. Only the entering library was 
permitted to alter an I-level record, and was able to do so 
only if no other institution had attached holdings symbols. 
LC copy would replace member- contributed copy, as would 
copy from "Enhance" libraries (libraries with consistently 
top-notch cataloging that are permitted to correct or improve 
other institutions' records) (Inter 1989, 4). 

RLIN was dependent on voluntary compliance to its 
cataloging standards as well, but its pricing scale varied 
with the completeness and accuracy of the record; quality 
control was a high priority from its inception. The majority 
of RLIN member libraries were academic and research 
institutions, dedicated to providing materials for graduate 
and post-graduate study. Complete and accurate catalog 
records were particularly important in serving these research 
needs. OCLC member libraries included many colleges, smaller 
universities, and public libraries. The users of these 
libraries were not primarily researchers and placed less 
importance on complete and accurate catalog records. 

Quality control is particularly important with respect 
to foreign language cataloging, especially in dealing with 
materials written in non-Roman alphabets. This study will 



4 

II 



focus on monographs in Russian, with a view toward improving 
quality control of name headings on member-contributed 
records • 

There are several factors that one must take into 
account in researching Russian name headings on the two major 
bibliographic databases: 

1. Does one consider LC copy, member-contributed copy, 
or both? 

2. What errors in name entry are significant, i.e., 
affect retrieval? 

3 • How are these errors measured? 

4 . What implications will such a study have for the 
library community? 

Literature Review 

Existing research pertinent to the proposed study falls 
into three categories: OCLC-RLIN comparison studies, 
treatment of problems in transliteration, and discussions of 
AACR2 in relation to Slavic name headings . A search of 
existing literature did not reveal any previous studies 
dealing specifically with Russian -languages name headings 
on OCLC and/or RLIN. 

OCLC-RLIN comparison studies generally focus on one 
aspect of the services these bibliographic networks provide. 
Studies comparing OCLC vs. RLIN's usefulness as a reference 
tool exist. Studies on the comparative cost effectiveness of 
the above networks, such as "RLIN/OCLC, A Cataloging Cost 
Study in the Health Sciences Library" (Dailey, Jaroff, and 
Gray 1982) and hit rate studies such as "Chasing MARC: 
Searching in BibliofilC; Dialog, OCLC, and RLIN" (Allan 1990) 



are also numerous • More germane to the present paper, 
however, are those comparison studies specifically treating 
the question of cataloging quality on OCLC and/or RLIN, 

Two outstanding studies should be cited in this 
connection: "Quality in Bibliographic Databases: An Analysis 
of Member-Contributed Cataloging in OCLC and RLIN" (Intner 
1989) and "Accuracy of LC Copy: A Comparison between Copy 
that Began as CIP and Other LC Cataloging" (Taylor and 
Simpson 1986). Intner analyzed a group of 215 matched pairs 
of catalog records contributed by member libraries to OCLC 
and RLIN in from 1983 to 1989, and concluded that 'he 
widespread notion of RLIN's preeminence in cataloging quality 
was without basis in fact. The Taylor study, although it 
dealt exclusively with OCLC, was useful from a methodological 
standpoint: it provided the researcher with guidelines in 
sampling technique for this type of comparison study. 

Little discussion of transliteration problems relevant 
to East Slavic or Russian was found in the literature, but 
one study did prove especially relevant. "Establishing Slavic 
Headings under AACR2" discusses several pertinent 
transliteration problems (Markiw 1984). For example, one 
must be careful to differentiate Ukrainian and Russian 
personal names, particularly in cases when the Ukrainian 
author's work is published in Russian. One might tend to 
establish a heading for Russian language material written by 
a Ukrainian as "Mihkailov, Igor" (using the LC 
transliteration table for Russian) if one was unaware of the 



1 



author's Ukrainian nationality* However, correct 
establishment of the name should be "Mykhailov, Ihor" (using 
the LC transliteration table for Ukrainian). 

One must also consider conformance to AACR2 in 
establishing correct Russian language headings. Markiw 
(1884) discusses this in some detail in the above article, 
delineating changes in the structure of corporate name 
headings and changes in the manner in which personal names 
are established under AACR2. 
Research Objectives 

This study addressed the commonly held belief that the 
quality of original cataloging on OCLC and RLIN differs. 
The present study's purpose was two-fold: First, error rate 
estimates for t3npes of Russian language name heading errors 
on OCLC and RLIN were developed. Secondly, an analysis was 
conducted in order to discover what types of name heading 
errors in Russian occur more frequently on both databases, 
and whether there is a difference in type and level of error 
by database. 

The first analysis, testing the hypothesis that quality 
control of Russian language name headings is superior on the 
RLIN database in terms of fewer errors, could lead to an 
investigation of quality control practices regarding member- 
contributed foreign language copy at both OCLC and RLIN. The 
second analysis, that of developing a typology of errors 
occurring most frequently on both databases, and a 
comparison of name heading error patterns on each database, 

ERLC 



M 

could perhaps point toward specific solutions (such as 
workshops or handbooks) to specific quality control problems. 
As outlined above, the study both quantified and categorized 
errors. On both databases, errors were to be quantified with 
respect to kind (transliteration error, punctuation error, 
etc.) and type of name heading in which they occurred 
(personal name or corporate name). Random OCLC samples were 
drawn by the OCLC Office of Research, while pairing of OCLC 
sample records with RLIN records was done by the researcher. 
Control procedures built into the study included random 
selection, exclusion of LC copy (which is likely to be the 
same for both bibliographic networks), and limitation of the 
study to one format, books. Microform records were also 
eliminated. In addition, only Russian language materials 
published in the Russian republic (fixed field country code 
"rur" ) were chosen, in order to eliminate from consideration 
non-Russian authors who may have been published in Russian 
at one time. 
Areas of Study 

Areas of study included name headings for main and added 
entries. Name headings used as subject entries were 
excluded, as were title added entries (field 740). 
Unfortunately, no conference headings appeared on any of the 
records sampled. "Name headings" referred to in subsequent 
areas of this study are to be defined as above. 

In all name heading fields treated in the present paper 
data will be quantified as to type of error: name heading 

■ 8 

15 



I - 4 



punctuation error, name heading transliteration/spelling 
error, name heading tagging error, and name heading AACR2 and 
LCRI error. 

Name heading punctuation errors can be defined for the 
purposes of this study as the misplacement, omission, or 
incorrect usage of marks of punctuation (such as a period 
where a comma would be appropriate). Name heading 
punctuation errors will also include errors in 
capitalization . 

Transliteration and spelling errors are grouped together 
because it is virtually impossible for a researcher to 
determine whether the inputter was confused regarding correct 
transliteration of the Cyrillic or was simply careless in 
typing. Transliteration/spelling errors usually occur as a 
"typo", and are to be distinguished from name headings that 
are completely inconsistent with NAF (Name-Authority File) 
forms . 

Name heading tagging errors include incorrect or absent 
tagging of MARC fields, subfields, and indicators. AACR2 and 
LCRI errors will primarily represent headings whose forms are 
inconsistent with the Library of Congress Name-Authority 
File. Records with incorrect tagging (such as a 6xx that 
should be entered as 7xx) will be listed as tagging errors 
rather than AACR2 and LCRI rule errors. 
Methodology 

The study consists of four parts: data collection, 
construction of an error schedule, identification of errors, 

9 16 - 



1 V A 



and data analysis ♦ 

Data Collection The final sample of paired 
bibliographic records drawn from OCLC and RLIN was chosen 
according to the four basic parameters described below: 

1. No cataloging for the item from LC or any other 
national library such as NLM or NAL existed. 

2 . The item was present on both databases . 

3. The item represented full cataloging: I-level 
on OCLC or 9114,9115,9116,9117, or 9118 on RLIN. 
RLIN cataloging category had to be "b" or "c" . 

4. Data was limited to the last 1.5 million records 
cataloged by OCLC and their matching RLIN pairs. 

The population under study was originally designed to 
include Russian-language books published 1983-1989, but later 
modified. The final sample was chosen from the last 1,5 
million records cataloged by OCLC, and the majority of the 
sample items have a publication date of 1989. The author 
hopes to publish the results of this study in the future, 
using a larger sample size (240 record pairs) and a wider 
time span (1983-1989). 

It is hypothesized that altering the time frame from 
which the final sample was drawn could have engendered 
problems in matching. The initial OCLC mini-sample was drawn 
from the years 1983-1989, and it is from the mini-sample that 
the estimate of RLIN hits relative to OCLC items was taken. 
In addition, altering the time frame may have altered the 
proportion of matching records available on RLIN in the final 
sample: Only 152 matching RLIN records were located from the 
700 records selected from OCLC (27 matched pairs were used 

: • . . 10 . .... 

ERLC 



from the mini-sample, for a sample total of 181 matched 
pairs )• Because the final OCLC sample was drawn from books 
that were quite recently cataloged, this may have contributed 
to the n\imerous unusable "in process" records on RLIN that 
were not usable as matches for the purpose of the present 
study. 

The initial 1983 date chosen by Intner, two years from 
the date LC began implementing AACR2 cataloging, allowed for 
several years to elappa during which errors attributable to 
the change in cataloging rule might occur. Intner noted that 
"training for experienced catalogers might take time, and 
newly graduated catalogers might have been taught earlier 
rules up to the end of the 1981 academic year" (Intner 1989, 
6). This paper, however, will consider OCLC and RLIN paired 
records for Russian language titles contributed by members 
primarily, but not exclusively, in 1989, and does in fact 
yield results that differ somewhat from the Intner study. 

A preliminary mini-sample was drawn, in order to 
anticipate potential problems in the sampling and pairing 
procedure. Preliminary sampling was conducted by the OCLC 
Development Division. The preliminary OCLC sample and RLIN 
matching procedure not only dided in avoiding methodological 
and statistical problems; it also assisted in predicting how 
large the actual OCLC sample needed to be in order to locate 
a sufficient number of paired records in the RLIN database. 

Matching RLIN records were located, using any search key 
necessary to locate the appropriate items. Personal and 

; , 11 • . ^ 

IS 



1 4 



corporate name headings were obviously the last choice for 
search key^ ISBN numbers being the first choice. The RLIN 
primary cluster member was used as the basis for comparison 
with the corresponding OCLC record. Pairing of OCLC/RLIN 
records was be determined according to the following 
criteria: 

1. Both items were member-contributed, full cataloging 

2. Title: Exact match to shortest string (field 245) 

3. Edition: Matches on number or name (field 250) 

4. Publishers Matches on two words (field 260 subfield 
b) 

5. Dates of publication (date 1 in fixed field or 260 
subfield c) may differ by one year 

6. Pagination: Matches largest Arabic ninnber within 10 
pages (field 300 subfield a) 

The final OCLC sample (to be paired with RLIN records ^ 
an RLIN hit determined by examining the main cluster record) 
was to have been drawn according to the following parameters: 

Fixed Field 

Type: a 
Source: d 
Bib Ivl: m 
Lang: rus 
Enc Ivl: I or L 
Ctry: rur 

dates: 1983 through 1989 for date 1 



Variable Fields 

040: DLC, NLM^ and NAL must be absent from this 
field 

041: record should not include 041 field 
Ixx^ 7xx: Either Ixx^ 7xx^ or both must be present 
in record 



ERIC 



12 



In actuality, the final OCLC sample was drawn using solely 
the fixed field parameters described above. All OCLC records 
were examined manually, and those records lacking name fields 
or that were obviously translations were excluded from 
consideration. After OCLC records were drawn and paired with 
RLIN records, the study examined name headings in the 
following fields: 100, 110, 700, and 710. 

Error Schedule An error schedule was constructed using 
the following categories: 

1. Name heading punctuation error 

2. Name heading transliteration/spelling error 

3. Name heading tagging error (such as tagging for 
personal name when corporate name would be 
appropriate ) 

4. AACR2 rule error or LCRI error (such as the pre- 
AACR2 practice of entering East European corporate 
names under place, then under name. Current AACR2 
practice is to enter East European name heading 
directly, i.e. "Gosudarstvennyi Ermitazh (Soviet 
Union)" rather than "Leningrad. Ermitazh"). 
Headings will be verified in the LC Name-Authority 
File when possible, and discrepancies with the NAF 
will be considered LCRI errors . 

The validity of the instrument was determined by having 
the instrument reviewed by a panel of experts chosen from the 
cataloging field. 

Identification of Errors Four types of name heading 
errors were defined and distinguished above. These name 
heading errors will also be quantified as to field in which 
they occur. 

In addition, one should note that since the items 
catalogued were not in hand, coding for AACR2/LCRI errors was 

... 13 : 

ERiC 20 . . 



limited to those errors that could be deteirmined by examining 
the catalog record and the LC Name-Authority File. In the 
case of discrepancies between RLIN and OCLC name headings 
that could not be resolved by examining the catalog record or 
the NAF, the pair was discarded. 

Data Analysis Errors in name heading entry for both 
OCLC and RLIN follow in table format. Errors are described 
by type (transliteration error, AACR2 error, etc.) and by 
place of occurrence (corporate name or personal name). 
Percentages for type and place of error were calculated for 
both OCLC and RLIN. Statistical packages available through 
Kent State University School of Library Science were used to 
tabulate data, and statistical experts reviewed all 
statistical procedures for appropriateness. 

Each record pair was first assigned a control number to 
identify it as a single unit, and each pair was further 
identified by listing the appropriate OCLC number and RLIN 
record number. A coding sheet for the pair was developed, 
and included all the error types listed above (i.e., name 
heading punctuation error, name heading, 

transliteration/spelling error, name heading tagging error, 
and name heading AACR2/LCRI error) . These errors were also 
categorized as to field in which they occurred. Data was 
tabulated using Lotus. 
Findings 

Analysis of the data indicates that numerous errors in 

14 



name heading entry occurred on both databases, a total of 63 
errors in the 181 matched pairs (i.e., 362 catalog records)- 
Of these 63 errors, 26 were name heading errors of OCLC 
member libraries, while the remaining 37 errors were made by 
RLIN member libraries- 

The greatest number of errors in both databases occurred 
in the application of AACR2 and LCRIs, the most common error 
type in this category being inconsistency with LC's Name- 
Authority File. Errors in MARC tagging occurred somewhat 
less frequently, with 7 errors on OCLC and 10 on RLIN. 
Errors in Library of Congress rule interpretations were 
considered to be potentially serious because they might 
affect retrieval of the catalog record. Spelling and 
transliteration error occurred infrequently on both 
databases, with one error on OCLC and four errors on RLIN. 
Punctuation errors were not considered to be significant, as 
they almost never affect retrieval. Four punctuation errors 
occurred on OCLC and an equal number on KLIN. For a sximmary 
of the study's findings in table form, see page 16. 



15 



TABLE 1. Occurrence of Errors 



Error Type 


OCLC 


RLIN 


Total 


#(%) 


#(%) 


#(%) 


Punctuation 


4(6.3) 


4(6.3) 


8(12.6) 


Trans . /Spell 


1(1.6) 


4(6.3) 


5(7.9) 


Tagging 


7(11.1) 


10(15.9) 


17(27.0) 


AACR2/LCRI 


14(22.2) 


19(30.2) 


33(52.4) 


Total errors 


26^41.3) 


37(58.7) 


63(100.0) 




Table 2. 


OCLC Errors by MARC Field 




Error Type 


Ixx 


7 XX 


Total 


Punctuation 


2 


2 


4 


Trans . /Spell 


0 


1 


1 


Tagging 


2 


5 


7 


AACR2/LCRI 


3 


11 


14 


Total errors 


7 


19 


26 



ERIC 



16 . 



Table 3. RLIN Errors by MARC Field 



Error Type Ixx 7xx Total 



Punctuation 0 4 4 

Trans. /Spell 2 2 4 

Tagging 5 5 10 

AACR2/LCRI 11 8 19 



Total errors 7 19 37 



Conclusions 

Keeping in mind that the study's results may be skewed 
due to sample size and a predominarice'of record publication 
dates in the late 1980' s, one can nevertheless draw several 
tentative conclusions from the above analysis. 

Contrary to the prevailing notion ,r RLIN records 
possessed more total name heading errors than the 
corresponding OCLC records. This appears to support Intner's 
conclusion that the quality of member-contributed cataloging 
on OCLC is not significantly poorer than that of RLIN. One 
can only draw tentative conclusions at best using data from 
only two fields, but the study's findings at least lend 
credence to the notion that the quality of member-contributed 
original cataloging on OCLC and RLIN is similar. 

Both databases contain numerous errors v/ith respect to 
Library of Congress rule interpretations; these are mostly 

• • 17 • . . 



discrepancies with the NAF, In some cases, the NAF record 
was added after the catalog record was input. In other 
cases, the correct form of entry might have been made had the 
cataloger understood the Russian language (For example, if 
one sees the title "doktor biologicheskikh nauk" in reference 
to a name heading in the Name-Authority File, one may 
conclude that the person in question has a Ph.D. in biology, 
and was likely to write books and articles on that subject. 
In addition, the number of errors in MARC tagging on both 
databases indicate the need for further staff training in 
both OCLC and RLIN member libraries. 

The present study serves to confirm the sense of all of 
Intner's recommendations regarding the training of 
cataloger s , namely: 

1. Correct punctuation should be emphasized. 

2. Greater emphasis should be placed on the encoding of 
data for the MARC formats 

3. Greater emphasis should be placed on the application 
of AACR2 according to the Library of Congress' 
policies and practices 

Further research in areas related to this study might 

include the following: a) An analysis similar to the present 

study using the 1983-1989 time span to obtain 240 matched 

pairs b) A study on the scale of Intner's, analyzing all 

aspects of the catalog record (i.e., fixed field data and all 

variable field data such as subject headings, title, imprint, 

and collation c) The application of a similar methodology 

to other languages or error types d) The classification of 

member-input records as to quantity and type of error. 

18 



Possibilities are ntimerous, 



19 



ERIC 



BIBLIOGRM>HY 



Allan, Ann. 1990. Chasing MARC: Searching in Bibliofile, 
DIALOG /'OCLC, and RLIN. Journal of Academic 
Librarianship 15 ( Januairy) : 338-343. 

Dailey, Kazuko M. , Grazia Jaroff, and Diana Gray. 1982. 

RLIN and OCLC-Side by side: Two comparison studies. In 
Advances in library admini s trat ion and organi zation , ed. 
Gerard B, McCabe and Bernard Kreissman, 69-125. 
Greenwich, Conn . : JAI Press . 

Hagler, Ronald, and Peter Simmons. 1982. The Bibliographic 
Record and Information Technology . Chicago: American 
Library Association. 

Hillman, Diane, and Christopher Sugnet. 1983. Comparison of 
OCLC and RLIN: A question of quality. Cataloging and 
Classification Quarterly 4 (Fall): 65-72. 

Intner, Sheila S. 1989. Much ado about nothing: OCLC and 
RLIN cataloging quality. Library Journal (Februairy 1): 
38-40. 

. 1989. Quality in bibliographic databases: An 

analysis of member-contributed cataloging in OCLC and 
RLIN. In Advances in Library administration and 
organization , ed. Gerard B. McCabe and Bernard 
Kreissman, 1-24. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press. 

Jacobs, Mary Ellen, Richard Woods, and Judith Yarborough. 
1979. Online resource sharing II: A comparison of 
OCLC, Incorporated, Research Libraries Information 
Network, and Washington Library Network . 

Maccaferri, James Tilio. 1990. Cataloging Ottoman Turkish 
personal names . Library Resources and Technical 
Services 34 (January /March ) : 62-78. 

Markiw, Michael. 1984. Establishing Slavic headings under 
AACR2. Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 5 
(Winter) : 13-20. 

. 1988. Searching East Slavic materials in library 

catalogs. The Reference Librarian no. 22 (March): 309- 
316. 

Taylor, Arlene G., and Charles W. Simpson. 1986. Accuracy 
LC copy: A comparison between copy that began as GIF 
and other LC cataloging. Library Resources and 
Technical Services 30 ( October /December ) : 375-387. 

Whitby, Thomas J. and Tanja Lorkovic. 1979. Introduction to 



Soviet national bibliography . Littleton, Colo, 
Libraries Unlimited. 



21 « 

28 



