DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 306 771 



FL 017 969 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 

GRANT 

NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



Scorza, Margaret H. 

Computer Focused Russian Bilingual Instructional 
Program, 1986-1987. OEA Evaluation Report. 
New York City Board of Education, Brooklyn. Office of 
Educational Assessment. 

Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
Affairs (ED), Washington, DC. 
89 

00B40141 

65p.; For the 1985-1986 evaluation, see ED 279 
211. 

Reports - Evaluative/Feasibility (142) 
MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Academic Achievement; Acculturation; ^Bilingual 
Education Programs; Career Awareness; *computer 
Assisted Instruction; Curriculum Design; *English 
(Second Language); Federal Programs; High Schools; 
Limited English Speaking; Private Schools; Program 
Descriptions; Program Effectiveness; Program 
Evaluation; Public Schools; *Russian; Student 
Characteristics; *Urt)an Schools 
Content Area Teaching; *New York (New York) 



The Computer Focused Russian Bilingual Instructional 
P'^ogram was a federally-funded program providing instructional and 
support activities for 323 Russian-speaking students of limited 
English proficiency at four public and two private high schools in 
Brooklyn, New York. The main goals of the program were to develop 
Englicn proficiency and provide content area instruction smd computer 
literacy. Instructional content varied across sites. Public school 
students took courses in English as a second language, Russian 
culture and literature, content areas, business, and vocational 
courses taught in English. Private school students had tutorials and 
small-group classes in English and academic subject areas. Career 
awareness was developed by the grade advisor at each site, and 
additional components included personal counseling, tutoring, 
parental advisement, curriculum development, and staff training. 
Analysis of student achievement indicated that program objectives 
were met in content-area courses and computer literacy/key boarding 
but not in English language development. The native language 
literature and culture courses were found to have unrealistically 
high objectives. Recommendations for program improvement include 
additional guest speakers in high technology fields, program-wide 
activities to promote student contact across sites, more appropriate 
assessment of English language skills, and more realistic native 
language goals. (MSE) 



********* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 





OEA 



0^ 

NO 

cr 





Prepared by the O.E.A. 
Bilingual Education 
Evaluation Unit 

Jose J. Villegas, 
Unit Manager 

Margaret H. Scorza, 
Principal Investigator 



O.E.A* Evaluation Section Report 



Robert Tobias, Adminis 
Judith S. Torres, 

Grant Number 



trator of Evaluation 
Senior Manager 

: 00B40141 



COMPUTER FOCUSED RUSSIAN 
BILINGUAL INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM 
1986-1987 



Prepared by the O.E.A. 
Bilingual Education 
Evaluation Unit 

Jose J. Villegas, 
Unit Manager 

Margaret H. Scoriia, 
Principal Investigator 



New York City Public Schools 
Office of Educational Assessment 
Richard Guttenberg, Director 



ERIC 



3 



It is the policy of the Board of Education not to discriminate on the basis of race cr»«l national oriain -no 

«*''"«'?^/!f<'°". 0^ in «» •duc«k>naI^i^S^^°LSeS e^CS S 
as required tvlaw. Any person who believes he or she has been discriminated anainst should aJitacrSSe Que ra' 
Sf^:l" ■ Coortinator. Office of Educational Asswsment, 110 sS^S. wji^' 

New York 11201. inquines regarding compliance with appropriate laws may also bed^mctKi to- ktomMteTA i^lw 
Director. Office of Equal Opportunity, 110 Lhrtngtton sKSTScTbSiw S^^- ^S^ri^^^^ 
of Civil Rights. U.S. Department of Educatio?TFWeral>1S ^iS; ^ 



ERIC 



A SUMMARY OF THE REPORT 



The Computer Focused Russian Bilingual Instructional Program 
was an E.S.E^A. Title Vll-funded program that provided 
instructional and support activities to 321 Russian-speaking 
students of limited English proficiency (LEP) at four public and 
two private high schools in Brooklyn* It completed the second 
year of a three-year funding cycle in June 1987. 

The program's main goals were to develop students' English 
competency and at the same time provide them with instruction in 
the content areas and computer literacy* Helping students 
acclimate to American life without becoming alienated from their 
native culture was an ancillary objective* All students in the 
program were from the Soviet Union, save six from Poland and two 
from Hungary. The students varied widely in their English- 
language proficiency, native-language ability, and content-area 
knowledge and skills. 

The Title VII staff consisted of a project director and 
secretary, located at the central site, and two resource 
teachers, a per-session grade advisor/curriculum specialist, and 
an educational assistant, all of whom worked at the five 
remaining sites. 

All program staff were supervised by the project director, 
and when on site, the educational assistant assigned to the two 
private schools was supervised by the school principals, and the 
staff assigned to the four public high schools were supervised by 
the assistant principals of the schools' foreign-language 
departments . 

The program's instructional content varied across sites. 
Students at the public schools took courses in: English as a 
second language (E.S.L.), Russian culture and literature, content 
areas, business, and vocational coi ses taught in English. At 
the private schools, students took ' .torials and imall-group 
classes in English and the content areas. 

At all six sites, career awareness was developed by the 
grade advisor via meetings with members of the school guidance 
staff and program staff members, as well as through regularly 
scheduled presentations by guest speakers. 

Additional program components included; personal counseling, 
tutoring, parental advisement, curriculum development, and staff 
training. 

The program's instructional obj^^.ctives were assessed in 
English-language development ( Criteriou Referenced English 
syntax Test [CREST]); mastery of the native language (teacher- 
made tests); mathematics, science, and social studies (teacher- 
made tests); computer literacy/keyboarding classes (teacher-made 



ERIC 



5 



tests); and attendance (school and program records). 

Quantitative analysis of student achievement data indicates 

that: 

• Forty--three percent of program students tested with the 
CREST in the fall, and 14 percent in the spring mastered 
an average of one CREST skill per month of instruction. 
Therefore, the program criterion of 80 percent mastery 
was not met. This was due in part to high pretest 
scores. 

• Over 70 percent of the students achieved a 65 percent 
passing grade in their content-area courses, thus 
achieving the proposed objective. 

Students in native language literature and culture 
classes did not meet the high criterion levels set by the 
program. This suggests that the criterion (a minimum of 
80 percent of the students achieving a 75 percent or 
higher grade) set in the proposal was unrealistic. 

The program objective was met by students in computer 
literacy/keyboarding classes, who achieved an overall 
passing rate of 97 percent. 



The following recommendations are offered as possible 
program improvements: 

Include more guest speakers from high-tech, especially 
computer-related, fields so that students are better 
informed about the many employment opportunities in these 
areas . 

Organize program-wide activities, such as trips and a 
newsletter, so that there is more contact among bilingual 
program students at all six sites. 

Change the objective and test instrument proposed for 
English language development so that students' skills are 
assessed more appropriately. 

Change the objective in native language studies so that 
a realistic goal is set for the students. 



ERLC 



8 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The production of this repo.rt, as of all Office of 
Educational Assessment Bilingual Education Evaluation Unit 
reports, is the result of a cooperative effort of regular staff 
and consultants. In addition to those whose names appear on the 
cover, Arthur Lopatir.i has edited the manuscripts. Shelley 
Fischer and Martin Kohli have spent many hours creating, 
correcting, and maintaining data files. Maria Grazia Asselle, 
Rosalyn Alvarez, Donna Plotkin, and Milton vickerman have 
interpreted student achievement and integrated their findings 
into reports. Finally, Betty Morales has worked intensively to 
produce, duplicate, and disseminate the com^^leted documents. 
Without their able and faithful participation, the unit could not 
have handled such a large volume of work and still have produced 
quality evaluation reports. 



ERLC 



111 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
II. STUDENT CHARACTERISTICS 
III. FINDINGS 



PAGE 
1 
5 
12 



English As a Second Language 3^2 

Enrichment of Native Language Skills 20 

Instruction in Academic Subject Areas 23 

Computer Skills Classes 28 

Affective Domain 3? 

Parental Involvement ,i 



36 



Curriculum Development 37 

Staff Development 37 

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 39 

V. APPENDICES ^2 



ERIC 



IV 



LIST OF TABLES 



PAGE 

TABLE 1: Number of Students Leaving the Program. 6 

TABLE 2: Number of Program Students by Age and Grade. 8 

TABLE 3: Students' Years of Education by Grade. H 

TABLE 4: Results of the Criterion Referenced English 

Syntax Test . 19 

TABLE 5: Passing Rates in Native Literature and Culture 

Courses. 22 

TABLE 6; Students' Passing Rates in Content-Area 

Subjects. 27 

TABLE 7: Passing Rates in Computer Literacy Courses. 30 

TABLE 8: Comparison of Program and School-wide 

Attendance. 3g 



ERIC 



V 

9 



COMPUTER FOCUSED RUSSIAN BILINGUAL INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM 



Year of Operation: 

Target Language: 
Number of Students Served: 
Project Director: 
Central Office Locations 

Public School Sites: 

South Shore High School 
6565 Flatlands Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 11236 

James Madison High School 
3787 Bedford Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 11229 



1986-87, Second Year of a 
Three-Year Funding Cycle 

Russian 

305 Fall, 320 Spring 

Florence Seiman 

South Shore High School 
6565 Flatlands Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 11236 



Franklin D. Roosevelt High School 
5800 Twentieth Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 11204 

Abraham Lincoln High School 
Ocean Parkway and West Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 11235 



Private School Sites: 

Yeshiva Harama 
2600 Ocean Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 



Yeshiva Be'er Hagola 
293 Neptune Avenue 
Brooklyn, New York 11235 



I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
In its second year of funding under Title VII of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (E.S.E.A.), the Computer 
Focused Russian Bilingual Instructional Program operated in 
virtually the identical manner as was described in the Office of 
Educational Assessment's evaluation report for 1985-86 • During 
the year under review 321 Russian-, six Polish-, and two 
Hungarian-speaking students of limited English proficiency (LEP) 



ERLC 



10 



were served. They attended four public and two private high 
schools in Brooklyn. Thirty students attended South Shore High 
School; 67 attended Franklin D. Roosevelt (F.D.R.) High School; 
50 attended Abraham Lincoln High School; 31 attended James 
Madison High School; 64 attended Yeshiva Hararna; and 87 attended 
Yeshiva Be'er Hagola. 

The project sought to foster English proficiency and 
intellectual growth via academic, computer, and career 
instruction. Students at all six sites received instruction in 
English as a second language (E.S.L.), and in mathematics, 
science, and social studies taught in English or with program 
staff members. In addition to this basic curriculum, students at 
all six sites took mainstream courses in computer skills, art, 
music, physical education, and/or business and vocational 
subjects. To give students in these courses the linguistic help 
they needed, the program provided small-group or individual 
tutorial assistance on an as-needed basis. 

The Title VII staff consisted of a project director, two 
resource teachers, an educational assistant, a secretary, and a 
per session (hourly) grade advisor/curriculum specialist. All 
staff members were fluent in both English and Russian. The 
project director and secretary were headquartered South Shore. 
One resource teacher, who also served as community liaison, spent 
two days a wee"k at James Madison, two days at Abraham Lincoln, 
and one day at South Shore. The other resource teacher was 
available for two mornings a week at South Shore, and spent the 

2 

ERiC 



rest of his time at F.D.R. The educational assistant spent three 
clays each week at Yeshiva Harama and two days at Be'er Hagola, 

The project director was supervised by the manager of the 
Bilingual/E.r.L. Unit of the New York City Public Schools' 
Division of High Schools. Her duties included designing and 
implementing program activities, hiring and supervising project 
personnel, directing curriculiun- and staff -development 
activities, and maintaining communication with the Board of 
Education and state and federal agencies. 

The resource teachers and educational assistant coordinated 
project activities at the sites, counseled and tutored program 
students, provided instruction in native language arts and 
culturt., and ser\ ed as liaisons between the schools and students' 
families. Their activities were supervised by the project 
director and, when on-site, by the assistant principal of each 
school's foreign language department or, in the case of the 
yeshivas, by the principal. All staff members communicated 
regularly with the project director. She reported that there 
were no conflicts between their Title VII responsibilities and 
the educational policies of each school. 

The program office, located on the third floor of South 
Shore, was brightly decorated with travel posters of the Soviet 
Union and Eastern Europe, maps, Russian objects d'art, newspaper 
clippings, and photographs of students and staff members. 
Russian-language newspapers and boc>>s, popular magazines 
containing articles on the Soviet Union, Russian/English 

3 



ERLC 



12 



dictionaries, and pamphlets on careers, college admission and 
financial aid were available for student use. The office had a 
large storeroom which was used for supplies and a small Russian- 
language lending library that was open to parents as well as 
students . 



ERIC 



13 



II- STUDENT CHARACTERISTICS 

The program served a total of 329 students during the year 
under review, 305 of whom were enrolled in the fall and 320 in 
the >pring. (in other words, 296 students were enrolled both 
semesters; nine were enrolled in the fall only; and 24 were 
enrolled in the spring only.) Data also were received for 29 
students who were in the program in June 1986 but left before the 
beginning of the fall semester: 11 graduated; 9 transferred; 5 
were mains treamed; 3 dropped out for unstated reasons; and 1 left 
for family reasons. One hundred and thirteen students who were 
served during the academic year left the program for reasons such 
as graduation, transfer, and leaving the country (see Table 1). 

Data on time in the program were available for 254 of the 
320 students present in the program during the spring. Of these 
students, 138 had been in the program for one year or less; 114 
had been in the program for two years; and two students had been 
in the program for two years and also participated in a prior 
bilingual program. 

Three hundred and twenty-one of the program's 329 students 
(98 percent) v;ere born in the Soviet Union and spoke Russian; six 
students (1.5 percent) were born in Poland and spoke Polish; and 
two students (0.6 percent) were born in Hungary, and spoke 
Hungarian. 

Program-wide, the students were 57 percent female, but sex 
distribution varied from school to school — ranging from 33 

5 



percent female at South Shore to 100 percent female at Yeshiva 
Harama . 



TABLE 1 

Number of students Leaving the Program 





Reason For 
Leaving 


Left 
January 


By 
1987 


Left By 
June 1987 


Percent 
Of Total 



Mainstreamed 


1 


4 


4.4 


Transferred 


5 


34 


34.5 


Left U.S. 




11 


9.7 


Graduated 


1 


40 


36.3 


Earned G.E.D. 


1 




* 


Employment 


1 


7 


7.1 


Family Problem 




1 


* 


Other Reasons 




7 


6.2 


TOTAL 


9 


104 


100.0 



*Under one percent 

• About 71 percent of the program students left the program 
because they graduated (36 percent) or transferred to 
another school (35 percent). 



ERIC 



6 

15 



Table 2 presents the distribution of program students by age 
and grade. Data were available for 309 students: 125 (41 
percent) were in grade nine; 89 (29 percent) were in grade ten; 
63 (20 percent) were in grade eleven; and 32 (10 percent) were in 
grade twelve. Twenty-three percent were overage for their grade 
placement. The largest number of overage students was in grade 
nine — 17 students (14 percent of the grade). Seven of 32 
twelfth-grade students (22 percent) were overage. The age of the 
ninth graders ranged from 13 to 18 years, whereas the age of 
twelfth graders ranged from 17 to 19. Many overage students had 
entered the program upon arrival from the Soviet Union. Although 
their academic background was good, after their parents had 
applied for exit visas practically all were deprived of schooling 
for periods of up to two years. 



ERIC 



7 

16 



TABLE 2 

Number of Program students by Age* and Grade 



Age Grade 9 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12 Total 



1 ^ 


11 


0 


0 


0 


11 


14 


49 




0 


0 


52 


15 


48 


32 


2 


0 


82 


16 


11 




27 


^^^^^ 


79 


17 


4 


13 1 


^^25 


11 


53 


18 


2 


0 


9 j 




25 


19 


0 


0 


0 


1 ^ 


7 


TOTAL 


125 


89 


63 


32 


309** 


Overage Program-Wide 
Students 


Number 


17 


13 


9 


7 


71 


Percent 


13.6 


14.6 


14.3 


21.9 


23.0 



NOTE. Numbers in bold area reflect expected age range for grade. 
*Age on June 30, 1987. 

**Data for 20 program students were invalid or missing. 

• Twenty-three percent of the program students were 
overage for their grade placement. 



ERIC 



8 

7 



Unlike previous programs for Russian students in New York 
City, the bulk of those enrolled in the Computer Focused Russian 
Bilingual Program had already spent several years in an American 
public high school or transferred from yeshivas where most of 
their time had been spent learning Hebrew. (Several overage 
students were from the latter group. ) Overall, their mean years 
of education in the United States ranged from 4.5 (s.d. + 2.4) 
for ninth graders to 5.4 (s.d + 2.1) for twelfth graders (see 
Table 3). However, when analyzed by site, the time spent by 
students in the American school system varied widely — from 3.3 
years at F.D.R. to 7.7 years at Abraham Lincoln (see Appendix A). 

About 50 percent of the program's students were classified 
as LEP because they had scored below the twenty-first percentile 
on the English version of the Language Assessment Battery * (LAB) 
examination. Although the remaining students in the program were 
somewhat more proficient in English, the project director said 



The Language Assessment Battery (LAB) was developed by 
the Board of Education of the City of New York to 
measure the English language proficiency of non-native 
speakers of English in order to determine if their level 
of English proficiency is sufficient to enable them to 
participate effectively in classes taught in English. 
The areas measured are listening, reading, writing, and 
speaking. The LAB was designed to maximize the 
discrimination of the test for the non-native at the 
20th percentile on the norms for the English-proficient 
sample. This is the cutoff point for eligibility for 
bilingual and E.S.L. instruction. The Kuder-Richardson 
Reliability Estimate for the total test was .97 for the 
high school level (Level 4). Studies have shown that 
the relative difficulty of items was highly similar for 
both native and non-native speakers, thus validating the 
homogeneity of the test's content. 



9 



their academic performance was below par for two reasons: 
problems of cultural adjustment^ and a disparity between academic 
level and competence in English. She also noted that the current 
program had more students than its predecessors who had spent 
several years in Israel where they had learned Hebrew and lost 
(or never acquired) the ability to read and write Russian. 



ERIC 



10 



19 



I 



TABLE 3 

Students' Years of Education by Grade 



Years Education- Years Education 
Total Years of Education Native Country United States 

Grade <8 9 10 11 12 >12 Total Mean S.D. Mean S.D 



9 


43 


53 


24 


1 


1 


1 


123 


4.5 


2.5 


4.5 


2.4 


10 


13 


34 


37 


4 


0 


1 


89 


4.6 


2.5 


4.8 


2.6 


11 


4 


14 


20 


27 


0 


1 


66 


5.0 


2.3 


5.1 


2.6 


12 


0 


2 


4 


12 


14 


2 


34 


5.9 


2.1 


5.4 


2.1 


TOTAL 


60 


103 


85 


44 


15 


5 


312* 


4.8 


2.4 


4.8 


2.5 


* Data 


for 17 


program 


students 


were 


invalid or 


missing 









• The mean years of education in the United States ranged from 4.5 for 
ninth graders to 5.4 for twelfth graders. 

• The mean years of education in the students' native country ranged from 
4.5 for ninth graders to 5.9 for twelfth graders. 

• Nineteen percent of the students had eight or fewer years of education. 

ERIC 



III. FINDINGS 



The evaluation findings for the 1986-87 academic year 
include both objectives measurable by standardized tests and 
those that were assessable by examining program materials and 
records, making site visits, and interviewing program staff 
members, in the following section, findings are presented by 
the instructional and non-instructional objectives proposed to 
and accepted by the Office of Bilingual Education and Minority 
Languages Affairs (OBEMLA) . 

ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 

A jfiinimum of 80 percent of the students participating In 
the program will master an average of one objective per 
twenty days of instruction as measured by the Criterion 
Referenced English Syntax Test ( CREST ) . 

At the public schools, E.S.L. courses were provided at 
beginning , intermediate, advanced, and transitional levels. At 
the private schools, program students received tutorial 
assistance in English reading and writing from the Title VII 
paraprof essional . 

Public school students qualified for E.S.L. instruction by 
scoring below the twenty-first percentile on the English version 
of the LAB- Some students had more advanced English-language 
skills and were enrolled in mainstream English classes. However, 
the project director emphasized that many such students were 

At James Madison and Abraham Lincoln this included three 
daily periods of beginning-level E.S.L. instruction. 

12 



ERLC 



21 



unable to realize their potential in mainstream classes because, 
despite their higher LAB scores, their practical knowledge of 
English was limited. 

The program provided small-group tutorials for both students 
taking regular E.S.L. courses and those who had scored above the 
20th percentile on the LAE. In addition, it encouraged program 
students to participate in ongoing schoolwide tutorial programs 
in English. 

Classroom Observations 

A member of the evaluation team observed E*S,L. clcisses at 
three public high schools. A3.1 of the classes contained a mixture 
of Asian, Hispanic, Haitian, Russian, and Middle Eastern students 
and were conducted entirely in English. 

At South Shore, a beginning-level class of 11 students was 
observed. (Tv;o more students were being tutored in the back of 
the room by a paraprofessional. ) The aim of the lesson was to 
learn how to use ''has" and "have" as auxiliary verbs. The 
teacher's method was to supply the pronoun and main verb herself, 
and to then call upon students to supply the missing auxiliary. 
For the second half of the lesson, the teacher distributed a 
handout featuring items of furniture commonly found in a living 
room and asked the students to name each item. Afterward, the 
teacher asked students to write five sentences about the furniture 
in their own living rooms. While this exercise was being 
completed, the teacher provided individualized help to students 
who needed it. When all the students were through, they read 

13 



ERIC 



22 



ERIC 



their compositions aloud, and the teacher corrected each one. 

An intermediate-level E.S.L* class was also observed at South 
Shore. Nineteen students attended. The quality and popularity of 
fast-food restaurants was the topic. The lesson combined practice 
in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. The teacher began 
the class by having the students write in their notebooks the 
answers to questions in their textbook. Insights and Ideas . The 
teacher then called upon students to read their answers out loud, 
while a student volunteer wrote them on the blackboard. The 
teacher urged the students to speak loudly and enunciate clearly. 
The students appeared^ to be enjoying the class and many eagerly 
raised their hands to answer the teacher's questions. 

The two classrooms at South Shore were colorfully decorated; 
— the first with posters showing rules of grammar, and examples 
of antonyms, synonyms, homonyms, and punctuation marks; the second 
with posters depicting various countries of Asia, Europe, and the 
Caribbean. 

An E.S.L. workshop for 20 beginning-level students was 
observed at James Madison. The "do-now" exercise asked students 
to fill in the missing words for five sentences that had been 
written on the blackboard. When this assignment finished, the 
teacher called upon students to answer orally. She spoke loudly 
and clearly, and asked the class to repeat new vocabulary items 
that sprung up in the ensuing discussion. 

Also observed at Madison was an advanced-level E.S.L. class. 
The teacher was giving a short spelling quiz containing words used 

14 



9^ ^3 



ERIC 



in the Test of English as a Foreign Lanau rjfe (T.O.E.F.L. ) . After- 
ward, she called on students to spell out each word, and wrote 
the correct spelling on the blackboard. The second half of the 
lesson was a review of the previous day's homework assignment: 
to answer questions about the first chapter of The Pigman by Paul 
Zindel. it appeared that nearly all the students had done the 
assignment, because many raised their hands in response to the 
teacher's questions. 

At F.D.R., a beginning- and an intermediate-level E.S.L. 
class were observed. The beginning-level class had an attendance 
of 27. The topic, "What do you like to eat?" was written on the 
blackboard. To begin the lesson, the students were called upon 
to correct sentences containing errors that the teacher had 
written on the blackboard before class started. Then the teacher 
held up a number of artificial fruits and vegetables, asked 
students to name each one and state v/hether they enjoyed eating 
its real counterpart. She made sure that students answered in 
full sentences. She then had them ask each other about their 
alimentary preferences. New words were defined and written on the 
board. Judging by the amount of joking and laughter, the students 
appeared to be enjoying the class. 

The aim of the intermediate-level E.S.L. class at F.D.R. was 
to learn "How can we interview our classmates?" Twenty- two 
students attended. The teacher asked the students to pose as 
reporters and think about the questions they would ask each other 
in an interview. Many students volunteered questions, end the 

15 



teacher listed them on the blackboard. She also tried hard to 
involve students who were reluctant to participate. As in the 
previous class, new words, such as "hobby" and "reporter," were 
defined and written on the board. 

To help learn how the program functioned at tne two private 
school sites, a member of the evaluation team observed the educa- 
tional assistant tutoring three students at Yeshiva Be'er Hagola. 
The students had arrived in the United States only the month 
before, after spending several months in a Viennese transit camp 
waiting for visas. During this time they were required to study 
Hebrew. Since their English skills were extremely limited, they 
had been "pulled out" of their regular English classes for 
tutoring. In an interview the educational assistant said that at 
both schools, Russian LEP students were referred to her for 
tutoring in English, and English-prof ici^int Russian students with 
academic problems were referred to her for tutoring in the content 
areas. 



ERIC 



16 



C — 



student Achievement in E.S.L. 

The assessment instrument used to evaluate the objective in 
this area was the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test * 
CREST) • 

The CREST was administered at the beginning and the end of 
each semester. A mastery score to indicate gains was computed for 
eav:h student by calculating the difference between pretest and 
posttest. The number of months of instruction between testings 
was computed for each student by multiplying the number of months 
between testings by the student's attendance rate. The number of 
skills mastered per month was calculated by dividing the mean' 
mastery by the mean number of months of instruction between 
testings. 

Table 4 presents the test results for students who were 
pretested and posttested with the same level. Of the students who 
were reported to have taken E.S.L. -ilasses (levels 1, 2, and 3), 
complete data (levels, pretest score, and posttest score) were 
available for 155 in the fall and 185 in the spring. 

Examination of Table 4 reveals that most of the students were 



*The Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test (CREST) was 
developed by the Board of Education of the City of New York to 
measure mastery of instructional objectives of the E.S.L. 
curricula, and thus was constructed to maximize content validity. 
The test contains four items per curricular objective, and 
mastery of an objective is achieved when three of these items are 
ansv/ered correctly. The test measures mastery of 25 objectives 
at Levels 1 and 2, and 15 objectives at Level 3. The Kuder- 
Richardson Reliability Estimates for pretest and posttest 
administrations of the three levels of the CREST are: 

Level 1 — pretest ( .91) /posttest (.96) 

Level 2 pretest ( .94) /posttest (.95) 

Level 3 — pretest ( .91) /posttest (.91). 

17 



Re 



tested at Level 3. Appendices Bl through B6 present students' 
test scores by school, overall, students gained 0.9 objectives 
per month in the fall and 0.6 objectives per month in the spring. 
Of the students for whom pretest and posttest CREST scores were 
available, 43 percent gained one or more objectives per month in 
the fall and 14 percent gained one or more objectives per month in 
the spring. Thus the program objective was not met. 

One reason for not meeting the objective was that students 
ha<? high pretest scores. Thus, although many students achieved 
the maximum posttest score possible, they could not show gains of 
one objective per month on the CREST. The objective is therefore 
not realistic because the instrument is inadequate for measuring 
gains for this population: it appears to be at too low a level 
for these students. 



18 



TABLE 4 

Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 





Test 
Level 


Number of 
Students 


PRETEST 
Mean S.D. 


POSTTEST 
Mean S.D, 


MASTERY 
Mean S.D. 


Mean 
Mastery 
Per Month 


Percentage 

Meeting 

Objective 



FALL 



1 


11 


12.7 


5.5 


20.3 


4.7 


7.6 


2.1 


2.9 


100 


2 


14 


13.6 


5.4 


18.1 


5.0 


4.5 


2.7 


1.5 


71 


3 


130 


11.2 


2.6 


13.2 


2.3 


2.0 


1.5 


0.7 


35 


TOTAL 


155 • 


11.5 


3.3 


14.1 


3.6 


2.6 


2.3 


0.9 


43 












SPRING 










1 


15 


14.5 


5.9 


17.0 


5.1 


2.5 


2.1 


1.4 


27 


2 


12 


18.3 


4.8 


20.9 


3.8 


2.6 


2.2 


1.0 


50 


3 


158 


12.0 


2.0 


13.3 


1.4 


1.3 


1.0 


0.5 


9 


TOTAL 


185 


12.6 


3.2 


14.1 


3.0 


1.5 


1.3 


0.6 


14 



• Overall, program students achieved 0.9 CREST skills per month in the 
fall and 0.6 CREST skills per month in the spring. 



ERIC 



19 

P8 



ENRICHMENT OF NATIVE LANGUAGE SKILLS 

— A minimum of 80 percent of the students participating 
in the project will achieve a 75 percent or higher 
rating in the native language arts component of the " 
program. 

The program's resource teachers conducted classes in Russian 
culture and literature at all four public school sites. Russian 
culture was taught on a tutorial basis at the two private schools. 

According to staff members, students' ability in the native 
language was mixed: recent immigrants had strong native language 
skills and could discuss difficult literary texts with a fair 
degree of sophistication; those who had immigrated as young 
children or after long stays in Europe or Israel could speak but 
not read or write fluently. To help the latter group, the 
resource teachers provided small-group tutoring. At some sites, 
peer counseling was also available via extracurricular 
Russian- language clubs. 

Classroom Observations 

Two Russian literature and culture classes, conducted by the 
resource teachers, were observed at F.D.R. and Abraham Lincoln. 
The aim of the F.D.R. class was for students to discuss what they 
had learned about World War II from their parents and grand- 
parents. Seven students were present. The teacher read aloud a 
short Russian passage describing one family's experiences during 
the war. The teacher posed several questions which required the 
students to compare what they had heard from their relatives with 
the story they had just read. 

20 

90 



The teacher seemed to enjoy good rapport with the students, 
and there was some joking and laughter during the story's lighter 
moments. All the students paid close attention to the teacher's 
reading, and participated enthusiastically in the ensuing 
discussion. 

Nine students were present in the class observed at Abraham 
Lincoln, including two whose tight programs required that they 
eat lunch at this time. The topic was Alexander Pushkin's 
influence on Russian literature\ The resource teacher distributed 
a handout in Russian on Pushkin's life. Several students 
volunteered to read the selection out loud. The teacher 
interrupted the reading several times to emphasize various points 
and wrote new or difficult words on the blackboard. As in the 
class above, the students actively participated in the lesson. 
Most were able to answer the teacher's questions about the text. 

Student Achievement in Native Language Arts 

Sixty--eight percent (rather than the proposed 80 percent) of 
the students achieved a final grade of 75 percent (see Table 5). 
This criterion, however, is higher than the citywide standard 
passing grade (65 percent) used in New York City high schools. 
Had the standard passing criterion been applied, 88 percent of the 
students would have passed in the fall and 93 percent would have 
passed in the spring, thereby more than meeting the 80 percent 
objective. Therefore, it is recommended that this objective be 
revised to reflect the city-wide standard as well as students' 
actual abilities. 

21 



30 



TABLE 5 

Passing Rates in Native Literature and Culture Courses 





SITE 


Number of 
Students 


Percent 
Passing 
at 75% 


Number of 
Students 


Percent 
Passing 
at 75% 


Overall 
Passing 
at 75% 



Be'er Hagola 


49 


57.1 


72 


48.6 


52.0 


Harama 












Abraham Lincoln 


18 


11.1 


19 


52.6 


32.4 


James Madison 


19 


100.0 


12 


100.0 


100.0 


Franklin D. Roosevelt 


41 


85.4 


44 


81.8 


83.5 


South Shore 


25 


88.0 


19 


94.7 


90.9 


TOTAL 


152 


69.7 


166 


66.9 


68.2 



• Overall, 68 percent of the program students achieved a passing 
grade of 75 percent. Thus, the program objective was not met. 
However, program students at Madison, Roosevelt, and South shore 
achieved the program objective during the fall and spring 
semesters. 



22 

31 



INSTRUCTION IN ACADEMIC SUBJECT AREAS 



ERIC 



— Seventy percent of the program students will pass with a 
passing grade of 65 percent or better on teacher-made 
tests. Sixty-five percent is a passing grade for the 
students in the City of New York. 

Many program students, including those at the private 
schools, were enrolled in mainstream offerings in content-area 
subjects; however, public school students whose English profi- 
ciency was limited could attend special content-area courses 
taught with an E.S.L. approach. South Shore offered such courses 
in math, biology, hygiene, American history, and global studies; 
James Madison offered general science, American history, and 
global studies; F.D.R. offered basic math, general science, 
biology^ chemistry, global studies, and U.S. history and 
government; and Abraham Lincoln offered biology, American history, 
and American government. Program staff members were available at 
all sites to tutor program students in both mainstream and special 
courses. 

Classroom Observations 

At the public high schools a member of the evaluation team 
observed classes in mathematics, science, and social studies. The 
classes contained LEP students from several nations and were 
conducted entirely in English. 

Twenty-three students were present in a mathematics class 
observed at F.D.R. The aim of the lesson was to teach students 
three different ways to write ratios and how to reduce fractions 
to the lowest common denominator. The teacher wrote several 

23 



32 



problems on the blackboard, and the students solved them in their 
notebooks* All the students participated in t.ie lesson and 
appeared eager to be called upon to present their answers on the 
blackboard* 

The general science class observed at F.D.R. contained 20 
LEP students. The topic of the day's lesson was "How do some 
animals replace lost parts?" During the lecture on regeneration, 
the teacher frequently referred to a dessicated starfish, an 
artificial lobster, and a giant lobster claw. The teacher took 
care to define, write on the blackboard, and have the students 
repeat all new terms. Students were sometimes asked to give the 
names of animals in their native languages. They appeared to 
enjoy this part very much, and there was much laughter as they 
compared English terms with their native-language equivalents. 

At James Madison, a member of the evaluation team observed a 
health education class that was being taught for the first time 
through an E.S.L. methodology. The class contained 26 students. 
The topic of the day's lesson was "your personality." Students 
were asked to choose two characters from a book, movie, or 
television program and to list the personality traits they shared 
and those they did not share. The students were then called upon 
to read their responses and discuss the actions and motivations of 
the characters they had selected. Most had selected characters 
from popular television shows, such as T he Colbys , The A Team , and 
Stingray . Some students appeared reticent about speaking English 
in front of the class, and those who spoke did so at an 

24 



33 



intermediate level of ability. 

An E.S.L. social studies class observed at South Shore 
contained 29 students. The teacher called upon students to answer 
the question "Why do new immigrants have problems in the United 
States?" — which had been written on the blackboard in English. 
Based on their responses, the teacher wrote a list of items — 
e.g., "the language barrier and culturrl differences," — on the 
blackboard. Then he spoke about his own family's experiences as 
immigrants to this country and his own experiences during a long 
visit to India. During his talk, he referred to several maps 
posted on the walls. The students clearly were very interested in 
the topic. Many raised their hand to give specific examples of 
how their native traditions differed from American culture. They 
also seemed to like and respect their teacher. 

Eighteen students were present in the social studies class 
for foreign students that was observed at F.D.R. To begin the 
class, the trilingual teacher (English, Spanish, and Mandarin) 
distributed a small map of the world to each student and asked 
them to identify lakes, rivers, mountains, and seas in Asia. Many 
st'idents raised their hands to contribute information. The 
teacher wrote new terms, such as "plain," "desert," and 
"peninsula" on the blackboard and defined each one. The teacher 
also translated several words for a recently arrived Chinese- 
speaking student. 

In an American history class observed at the same site, 
students were at work on an assignment from their text. Thirty- 

25 



34 



two students were presents As the students worked, the teacher 
called each one to his desk to review and grade a homework assign- 
ment* He appeared to take special care to explain new vocabulary 
and correct spelling errors • Only one student did not hand in an 
assignment ♦ 

Student Achievement in Academic Subject Areas 

Table 6 illustrates program students' performance in content 
areas. The program objective was met both semesters. Overall, 
program students' achievement was high (83 percent passing rate). 
Achievement was highest in social studies courses, with an 89 
percent passing rate in the fall and an 82 percent passing rate 
in the spring. 



26 



TABLE 6 

Students' Passing Rates in Content-Area Subjects 



FALL SPRING TOTAL 



COURSE 


Number of 
Students 


Percent 
Passing 
at 65% 


Number of 
Students 


Percent 
Passing 
at 65% 


Overall 
Passing 
-at 65% 


Math^ 


203 


85.2 


245 


77.1 


80.8 


Science^ 


212 


85.8 


229 


78.6 


82.1 


Social 
Studies*^ 


217 


88.9 


258 


82.2 


85.3 


TOTALS 




86.7 




79.4 


82.8 



^Math courses ranged from remedial to calculus and computer math. 

^Science courses ranged from general science to physics. 

^Social studies courses included: world geography, global history 

A, B, and C; American history A and B; economics; civics, American 
studies, and other courses. 



Overall, program students achieved an 83 percent passing rate, 
thus meeting the proposed objective. 



COMPUTER SKILLS CLASSES 

A minimum of 75 percent of the students participating in 
the program will be able to perform the following tasks 
relating to computer literacy/keyboarding: 

• Elementary programming skills in BASIC language. 

• Touch keyboarding using the alphabetic, numeric, and 
symbol keyboard. 

• Type at least 25 w.p.m. with a high degree of accuracy on 
a personal computer keyboard. 

Each school offered a range of business education and com- 
puter literacy courses conducted in English. Whenever possible, 
computers were made available for students to use during their 
free periods. The program used existing curricula and softv/are 
and instructional materials developed by previous Russian 
bilingual programs. In addition, this year the program developed 
a Russian/English dictionary containing over 150 definitions of 
computer-related terms. (See Appendix C.) Program staff members 
provided tutorial assistance and encouraged peer tutoring by more 
advanced students. 

Classroom Observations 

Sixteen LEP students from various ethnic backgrounds 
attended a typing class observed at F.D.R. The room contained 
Sharp and IBM electric typewriters, and a chart of the keyboard 
was posted on the wall. The teacher spoke entirely in English as 
she presented the new vocabulary for the day's lesson — to learn 
filing rules. The teacher then called out fictitious names and 
asked students in which order they should be filed. Many 
students v;ere eager to answer, and the teacher called on those who 

28 

ERIC 



did not volunteer. Most of the students appeared to understand 
the material presented in the class, and most could answer the 
teacher's questions. 

A computer skills class with 14 students was observed at 
Be'er Hagola; approximately half the students were program 
participants. The students worked at nine Apple personal 
computers, using an instructional softv;ra.re program that asked them 
to complete sentences by choosing the correct word from a pair of 
homonyms. The ten students who shared terminals took turns 
answering the questions. The program's educational assistant sat 
among the Russian students, translating unfamiliar English words 
and making sure that they understood the exercise. All of the 
students appeared to understand the material, and were able to 
advance through the program. 

Student Achievement in Computer Skills 

The instruments used to assess the objectives in this area 
were teacher-developed tests that included all tasks mentioned in 
the objective. The classes reported were in computer literacy, 
keyboard/ typing, and typing courses. 

Table 7 presents the number of students enrolled and the 
percentage passing these courses in the fall and spring. 
Overall, the objectives were met: more than 97 percent of the 
students were able to perform the required tasks. 



29 



TABLE 7 

Passing Rates in Computer Literacy Courses 



FALL 



SPRING 



TOTAL 



Content 
Area 



Number of 
Students 



Percent 
Passing 



Number of 
Students 



Percent 
Passing 



Overall 
Passing 
Rate 



Computer 
Literacy* 



133 



96.2 



210 



98 •! 



97.4 



*Includes computer literacy, keyboard/typing, and typing courses. 



• The program's objectives were met both semesters: more 
than 97 percent of the participating students were able to 
perform the required tasks related to computer 
literacy/keyboarding skills. 



ERIC 



30 



AFFECTIVE DOMAIN 

— A minimum of 80 percent of the students participating in 
the program will have developed a more positive attitude 
about school and its importance for their future lives. 

The director of the program pointed out that immigrants f.rom 
the Soviet Union generally had greater difficulty adjusting 
emotionally to life in the United States than they did in handling 
new academic tasks. She pointed out that in the Soviet Union, 
students had few decisions to make about their educational 
programs and post-graduation plans. By contrast, in the United 
States they were expected to choose an educational future and plan 
how to finance it. Since they had no experience with the American 
educational system, students' parents were confused by their 
offspring's range of options and could not provide realistic 
advice. The director added that most parents' socioeconomic 
status had declined as a result of the move to the United States, 
and that some had severe financial problems. The psychological 
strains this caused sometimes severely disrupted students' home 
life. 

To bridge the knowledge gap and provide emotional support, 
the program offered students psychological counseling, vocational 
and college advisement, tutorial assistance, and extracurricular 
activities. 

« 

Psychological Counseling 

All program students received the full array of counseling 
and guidance services that were available at each school. 

31 

ERIC ^ 



However, program staff members said that Russian students tended 
to approach them for help because they were able to discuss 
studt2nts' academic or personal problems in the native language as 
well as English, m addition, a per session grade advisor /curri- 
culum specialist was available to visit each school to provide 
individual counseling on an as-needed basis. Program students at 
Abraham Lincoln also were r-erved on a weekly basis by a counselor 
from the Russian Adolescent Project. He was Russian-born, 
bilingual, and thoroughly familiar with both cultures and 
educational systems. He provided individual or small-group 
guidance to those students identified by program staff members and 
classroom teachers as being especially in need of support. 

Finally, as part of the program's guest speaker series, a 
psychologist spoke to students at James Madison and Abraham 
Lincoln on coping with peer pressure. 

College/Vocational Advisement 

Staff members, especially the grade advisor, spent a good 
deal of time advising program participants on college and 
vocational options because, in many cases, students' parents could 
not. Helping students set realistic educational goals was a 
primary concern. Many wanted to apply only to Ivy League colleges 
because they were the only ones whose names they knew, other 
students set their sights too low — despite demonstrated academic 
ability, they were determined to enter the job market as quickly 
as possible. 

The career component of the program also included a guest 

32 

41 



speaker series coordinated by the grade advisor • Sponsored by the 
New York City Board of Education's "Open Doors" program, 
representatives from various professions and institutions ad^ 
dressed students, with program staff members translating whenever 
necessary* Speakers included: an attorney who addressed students 
at Abraham Lincoln on the criminal justice system (October 1986); 
a nutritionist from Brooklyn College's Home Economics and Consumer 
Studies Department who spoke to students at James Madison 
(November 1986); a Russian-born attorney who told James Madison 
students about his experiences as a lawyer (November 1986); a bank 
representative who lectured at Abraham Lincoln about careers in 
finance (December 1986); and a pianist/composer who talked about 
music and musical careers (March 1987) • 

A member of the evaluation team attended the latter 
presentation at Abraham Lincoln. The speaker, who had formerly 
taught music, addressed students from two E^S.L. classes about her 
current career as a rehearsal pianist and composer • She also 
spoke about related musical careers, such as sound technician, 
engineer, concert performer, etc* Although none of the students 
were interested in a career in music, all paid close attention to 
the talk, and several responded to the speaker's questions. 

For the second half of the lecture, the speaker discussed -the 
origins of music, the different types of music and musical 
instruments, and the definitions of terms like "harmony," 
"melody," and "rhythm." She also let the students examine several 
primitive wind and percussion instruments that she had brought 

33 



ERIC 



42 



with her. 

During the presentation, the resource teacher sat among the 
Russian students and translated for those who could not understand 
the speaker. 

Tutoring 

Tutorial assistance was the program's backbone • As stated 
previously, students' academic and linguistic skills varied 
widely, depending particularly on when their academic careers had 
been interrupted. To best meet the full spectrum of student 
academic needs as well as to provide emotional support, one-to-one 
and/or small-group tutoring and counseling sessions were conducted 
at all six sites. 

When they were not in the classroom, the resource teachers 
and educational assistant provided tutoring in English, native 
language arts, and the content areas during students' free 
periods. During visits to several sites by a member of the 
evaluation team, staff members were observed providing such 
assistance to single students and small groups. At South Shore 
these sessions were conducted in the project office, and in the 
foreign language office at the other public schools. Peer 
tutoring v/as also available for students in need. 

Extracurricular Activities 

The principal purposes of the extracurricular program were to 
introduce students to American culture and deepen their knowledge 
of their native culture. Activities held during the 1986-87 year 

34 



ERIC 



45 



included: an "international food fair" at Abraham Lincoln; a folk 
and popular music assembly at James Madison; and a "foreign 
language week" celebrations at each school. 

Program staff members also promoted the integration of 
project participants into the larger student body by encouraging 
them to take part in school-wide activities. 

Attendance Outcomes 

Staff members believed that the program's emphasis on 
support services was helping students to develop more positive 
attitudes toward school. 

In order to evaluate the objective regarding students' 
attitudes toward school, the attendance rate of program students 
was compared to the school-wide rates. Since the school's 
attendance rate includes the^ attendance of program students, 
statistical significance between program and school attendance was 
determined through the application of a _z-test for the 
significance of a proportion.* This procedure tests whether the 
difference betv;een one proportion (the program's attendance) and a 
standard proportion (the school's attendance) is greater than what 
can be expected by chance variation. 

An examination of Table 8 indicates that the attendance of 
program students at the four public schools was higher than the 
attendance of mainstream students at those sites. At Abraham 



Bruning, J.L. and Kintz, B.L. Computational Handbook of 
Statistics (Glenview, Illinois: Scott, Foresman and Company, 
1968) . 

35 



44 



Lincoln, the higher attendance rate of program students was 
statistically significant. Data were not available for private 
school attendance rates; however, the attendance of program 
students at these sites was generally higher than that of the 
program students at public schools. Thus, the objective was met. 

TABLE 8 

Comparison of Program and School-wide Attendance 



Program site 



Number of Program 
Program Students ' 
Students Attendance 



School- 
wide 

Attendance 



Yeshiva Be'er Hagola 74 

Yeshiva Harama 47 

Abraham Lincoln 43 

James Madison 29 

Franklin D. Roosevelt 65 

South Shore 30 



93.8 
94.6 
86.1 
94.7 
90.0 
87.7 



N/A 
N/A 
78.0 
86.4 
84.1 
85.3 



2.74 
1.32 
1.31 
0.37 



.01 
NS 
NS 
NS 



PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT 

A series of E.S.L. classes for parents of LEP students in 
the project will have been given at four of the taraet 
sites. 

— A minimum of seven workshops (one at each of the 

identified sites) will have been conducted by project 
staff to inform parents about the project and 
specifically the computer instruction component of the 
project. 



Encouraging parents to become more involved in their 
children's education was a continuing priority for program staff. 
To this end, the program organized a parents' advisory council 
containing parents from six schools. 

Jn lieu of holding E.S.L. classes, the program referred 

36 



4.15 



interested parents to E.S.L. and citizenship classes offered at 
Temple Emanu-El, located at 1880 Rockaway Parkway in Brooklyn. 
Parents also were encouraged to call or visit the project to 
discuss their children's academic or social problems, to use the 
program's lending library, and to attend the open-school days 
held at each site. 

Although the objectives were not achieved as proposed, there 
were indeed efforts to facilitate parental involvement. 

CURRICULUM DEVE LOPMENT 

The program used many materials that had been developed by 
prior Russian bilingual programs in New York City and also 
developed additional curricula. Bilingual curricula were 
developed or adapted in: general science, mathematics, economics, 
American history, the history of the U.S.S.R. , and hygiene. 
Russian-language curricula were developed or adapted in: career 
exploration, Russian culture (including language, history, and 
geography), Russian literature (beginning, intermediate, and 
advanced levels), and western civilization (based on World History 
by J. Abramovitz and Po Soyedinonym Shtatam Americi by c. Ginter). 
In addition, the per-session grade advisor/curriculum specialist 
developed a Russian/English dictionary of computer terminology 
that was distributed to program staff members and computer 
teachers. 

STAFF DEVELOPMENT 

The project director attended workshops sponsored by the New 

37 



ERLC 



York Multifunctional Resource Center at Teachers College. In 
addition, three staff members continued their education at local 
universities: a resource teacher took courses at New York 
University; the educational assistant, at Brooklyn College; and 
the program secretary, at Kingsborough Community College. 



38 



IV. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMT-IENDATIONS 

CONCLUSIONS 

In its second year of operation, the Computer Focused 
Russian Bilingual Instructional Program continued to make 
satisfactory progress toward achieving its proposed objectives. 
Students at all sites received instruction in E.S.L. and content- 
area subjects taught in English or with an E.S.L. approach. In 
addition, students were enrolled in mainstream courses in computer 
skills and business and vocational subjects, as well as in art, 
music, and physical education. Students at the public high 
schools also took classses in the native language, culture, and 
literature taught by project staff members. 

A review of student achievement revealed that instructional 
objectives were achieved in content-area and keyboarding courses 
both semesters. The' objectives for CREST achievement and native 
language arts were not met, because the proposed criteria were 
unrealistic. 

The project's non-instructional component included a network 
of support services for students, including academic and 
vocational advisement, psychological counseling, and tutoring; a 
career program of guest speakers; the development of new curricula 
materials; training activities for project staff; and contacts 
with students' parents. However, exposure of students to speakers 
from computer-related fields seems to have been limited. 

The program was well received at all six sites, and the 
project director and resource teachers had good relations with 



administrators and teachers • The program was well administered, 
and the program staff was highly experienced, having worked in 
previous Russian bilingual programs at the same sites • in an 
interview/ the principal of Be'er Hagola said she was pleased that 
her school had chosen to participate in the project because the 
educational assistant assigned to her site was dolrg a very good 
job* She said she had assigned all newly arrived Russian-speaking 
students to work with the educational assistant on an individual 
or small-group basis* The assistant principal of foreign 
languages at F.D.R. was also pleased with the work of the 
resource teacher and hoped that her school could continue to offer 
the Russian heritage ard culture class after Title VII funding 
ended* According to staff members at all six sites, as a result 
of participating in the project, students were enabled to function 
succes.^f ully in the. American school environment and the larger 
culture while at the same time retaining a sense of pride in their 
native culture. 

RECOiyiM'ZNDATIONS 

The following recommendations are offered to improve the 
project in its third year of operation: 

1. Since the current projec^t emphasizes the development of 
students' computer skills, the career component might stress 
exposing students to guest speakers from various computer-related 
industries to present employment opportunities in this field* 

2. Although virtually all project students have the same 



40 

49 



native language and culture, they have little contact with each 
other. The project is urged to sponsor field trips or other 
extracurricular activities for students from two or 
more sites. The project might also consider publishing a 
project-wide newsletter containing information on the projcjct and 
its activities, community-sponsored events for students and their 
parents, and student artwork, stories, or poems. 

3. The objectives in English and native language development 
should be changed to set realistic goals for the students. Since 
most students are in advanced E.S.L., a norm-referenced reading 
test could be used to determine if they are making significant 
gains. The native language arts objective should use 65 percent 
as the passing grade. 



ERIC 



41 



50 



V. APPENDICES 



» 51 

ERIC ^ 



APPENDIX A,l 

Students' Years of Education by Grade 
at South Shore 



Years Education Years Education 
Total Years of Education Native Country United States 



Grade 


8 


9 


iO 


11 


12 


Total 


Mean 


S.D. 


Mean 


S.D. 


9 


5 


2 


0 


0 


0 


7 


4.9 


1.9 


3.4 


1.7 


10 


1 


5 


2 


0 


0 


8 


5.0 


1.1 


4.0 


1.2 


11 


1 


3 


4 


1 


0 


9 


6.0 


1.9 


3.6 


1.8 


12 


0 


0 


2 


3 


1 


6 


6.7 


1.4 


4.2 


1.7 


TOTAL 


7 


10 


8 


4 


1 


30 


5.6 


1.7 


3.8 


1.6 



• students on the average had 3*8 years of education in the United States* 

♦ The mean years of education in the native country ranged from 4.9 in grade nine 
to 6*7 in grade twelve. 



APPENDIX A* 2 

Students' Years of Education by Grade 
at Franklin D. Roosevelt 



Grade 


8 


Total 


Years 


of 


Education 


Years 
Native 


Education 
Country 


Years Education 
United states 

Mean S.D. 


9 


10 


11 


Total 


Mean 


S.D. 


9 


6 


0 


0 


0 


6 


4.8 


1.6 


3.0 


1.3 


10 


11 


14 


3 


0 


28 


5.5 


1.3 


3.3 


0.9 


11 


2 


9 


10 


1 


22 


5.8 


1.3 


3.6 


1.3 


12 


0 


2 


1 


0 


3 


6.7 


2.1 


2.7 


1.5 


TOTAL 


19 


25 


14 


1 


59* 


5.6 


1.4 


3.3 


1.1 



*Data were missing for eight program students. 

• The mean years of education in the United States ranged from 3 in grade nine 
to 2.7 in grade twelve • 

• The mean years of education in the native country ranged from 4*8 in grade 
nine to 6.7 in grade twelve. 



APPENDIX A. 3 



Students' Years of Education by Grade 
at James Madison 



Grade 




Total 


Years 


of 


Education 


Years 
Native 


Education 
Country 


Years Education 
United States 


o 


10 


11 


12 


>12 


Total 


Mean 


S.D. 


Mean 


S.D. 


9 


8 


1 


0 


0 


0 


9 


3.1 


3.7 


6.0 


3.5 


10 


0 


5 


0 


0 


0 


5 


4.0 


2.0 


6.0 


2.0 


11 


1 


1 


5 


0 


1 


8 


4.6 


3.7 


6.3 


3.1 


12 


0 


1 


2 


5 


0 


8 


5.6 


1.3 


5.9 


0.6 


TOTAL 


9 


8 


7 


5 


1 


30* 


4.4 


3.0 


6.0 


2.5 



^Information for one program student was missing. 

• The mean years of education in the United States was six. 

• The mean years of education in the native country ranged from 3.1 in grade 
nine to 5.6 in grade twelve. 



i 


< 






1 






APPENDIX A. 4 






Students 


• Years of Education by Grade 
at Abraham Lincoln 






Total 


Years of Education 




Years Education 
Native Country 


Years Education 
United States 


Grade 8 9 


10 11 12 >12 


Total 


Mean S . D . 


Mean S . D . 


9 0 9 


110 0 


11 


2.*5 3.4 


6.8 3.0 


10 ^ 14 


13 1 0 0 


19 


1.6 3.0 


8.2 3.0 


11 0 0 


19 0 0 


10 


1.7 2.0 


9.2 2,0 


12 0 0 


0 5 3 2 


10 


5.3 3.3 


6.4 2.9 


TOTAL 1 13 


15 16 3 2 


50 


2.5 3.2 


7.7 2.9 


• The mean years 
grade eleven. 


of education in the 


U.S. ranged from 6.4 in grade 


twelve to 9.2 in 


• The mean years of education in the 
to 5.3 for twelfth graders. 


native country ranged from 1.6 


for tenth graders 








55 




ERJC 











• • • . . 



APPENDIX A. 5 

Students' Years of Education by Grade 
at Be 'or Hagola 



Grade 


8 


Total 


Years 


of 


Education 


Total 


Years 
Native 


Education 
Country 


Years Education 
United States 


9 


10 


11 


12 


>12 


Mean 


S.D. 


Mean 


S.D. 


9 


28 


12 


22 


0 


1 


1 


64 


5.7 


1.8 


3.3 


1.5 


10 


0 


5 


8 


0 


0 


0 


13 


5.6 


1.6 


4.0 


1.6 


11 


1 


1 


2 


3 


0 


0 


7 


5.6 


0.8 


4.4 


0.5 


TOTAL 


29 


18 


32 


3 


1 


1 


84* 


5.7 


1.7 


3.5 


1.5 



*Data were missing for three program students. 

• The mean years of education in the United Stated ranged from 3.3 in grade nine to 
4.4 in grade eleven. 

• The mean years of education in the native country was 5.7. 



56 



APPENDIX A. 6 



Students' Years of Education by Grade 
at Yeshiva Harama 



Grade 


8 


9 


10 


11 


9 


4 


22 


0 


0 


10 


0 


6 


6 


3 


11 


0 


0 


2 


8 


12 


0 


0 


0 


2 


TOTAL 


4 


28 


8 


13 



0 
0 
0 
5 
5 



0 
1 
0 
0 

1 



26 
16 
10 
7 
59* 



Years Education 
Native Country 



Years Education 
United States 



Mean 



S.D. 



2.6 
5.8 
5.7 
6.0 
4.4 



1.3 
1.7 
1.2 
0.8 
2.1 



Mean 



6.4 
4.3 
5.1 
5.7 
5.5 



S.D. 



1.3 
1.9 
1.5 
0.5 
1.7 



*Data were missing for five students. 

' 6^4 i-rgrlde"inl^'^"''^''^°'' ""^^ ''''^^^^ ^^^^"^ ^^"^^^ ^^'^ ten to 

* rL'"g?adrtwIl?e.^'^"''^'''°'' ""^^ '"^^^''^ ""^^^ 2.6 in grade nine to 



ERIC 



APPENDIX B.l 



Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 

South shore 



PRETEST 



POSTTEST 



MASTERY 



Mean 

Test Number of Mastery 
Level students Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Mean S.D.. Per^Month 











FALL 










2 


4 


16.3 


1.0 


18.3 


1.0 


2.0 


0 


0.6 


3 


12 


10.1 


2.2 


11.7 


1.9 


1.6 


0.8 


0.5 


TOTAL 


16 


11.6 


3.4 


13.3 


3.4 


1.7 


0.7 


0.5 










SPRING 










2 


2 


17.5 


3.5 


21.5 


0.7 


4.0 


2.8 


1.6 


3 


21 


11.9 


1.3 


13.3 


1.3 


1.4 


0.6 


0.5 


TOTAL 


23 


12.4 


2.2 


14.0 


2.7 


176 


1.1 


0.6 



• Overall, program students mastered 0.5 CREST skills per month in 
the fall and 0.6 CREST skills per month in the spr.ing. 



49 



ERIC 



APPENDIX B.2 



Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 

Franklin D. Roosevelt 





Test 
ijeve± 


Nuinber of 
otuoents 


PRETEST 
Mean S . D . 


POSTTEST 
Mean S.D. 


MASTERY 
Mean S.D. 


Mean 
Mastery 
Per Month 










FALL 










2 


4 


13.5 


5.3 


18.8 


6.4 


5.3 


3.3 


1.9 


3 


28 


8.8 


2.6 


10.7 


2.5 


1.9 


1.1 


0.6 


TOTAL 


32 


971 


3;3 


11.7 


4.1 


273 


1.8 


0.7 










SPRING 










1 


1 


13.0 


0 


15,0 


0 


2.0 


0 


0.7 


2 


5 


17.6 


7.1 


20.8 


6.0 


3.2 


2.3 


1.3 


3 


49 


11.0 


1.5 


12.7 


1.2 


1.6 


1.0 


0.6 


TOTAL 


55 


11.7 


ITT 


13.5 


ITT 


178 


T72 


0.7 



• Overall, program students achieved 0.7 CREST skills per month in 
the fall and spring. 



50 

59 



APPENDIX B.3 



Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 

James Madison 



PRETEST POSTTEST MASTERY Mean 

Test Number of Mastery 
Level Students Mean S^D^ Mean S^D^ Mean S.D* Per Month 











FALL 










3 


22 


13.2 


2.3 


13.9 


2.1 


0.7 


0.9 


0.3 










SPRING 










2 


4 


20.5 


0.6 


21.5 


1.3 


1.0 


1.4 


0.3 


3 


20 


13.5 


1.5 


14.4 


0.9 


0.9 


0.9 


0.3 


TOTAL 


24 


14.7 


3.0 


15.6 


27? 


079 


1.0 


0.3 



• Overall, program students achieved 0.3 CREST skills per month in 
the fall and in the spring. 



51 

60 



TABLE B.4 

Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 

Abraham Lincoln 



PRETEST POSTTEST MASTERY Mean 

Test Number of Mastery 
Level students Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Per Month 



FALL 

1 1 22.0 0 25.0 0 3.0 0 1.2 

2 2 10.5 .7 16.0 2.8 5.5 2.1 1.4 

3 29 13.2 1.0 14.1 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.2 
TOTAL 32 13.3 J76 UTs 272 TTz ITI oT? 

SPRING 

2 . 1 15.0 0 18.0 0 3.0 0 ■ 1.0 

3 25 13.5 2.2 14.4 1.1 0.9 1.2 0.3 
TOTAL 26 13.5 2.2 liTI ITI "TTo TTJ oTI 



• Overall, program students mastered 0.4 CREST skills per month 
in both the fall and spring semesters. 



52 

61 



TABLE B*5 



Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 

Yeshiva Be'er Hagola 



Test 
Level 


Number of 
Students 


PRETEST 
Mean S.D. 


PubTTEST 
Mean S.D. 


MASTEriY 
Mean S.D. 


Mean 
Mastery 
Per Month 










FALL 










1 


7 


12.6 


3.3 


21.0 


3.9 


8.4 


1.1 


3.4 


2 


1 


19.0 


0 


25.0 


0 


6.0 


0 


2.4 


3 


23 


10.8 


0.8 


14.5 


0.7 


3.7 


2.6 


1.5 


TOTAL 


31 


11.5 


2.2 


16.3 


ITT 


478 


272 


179 










SPRING 










1 


11 


14.9 


4.9 


17.6 


3.9 


2.7 


2.4 


1.6 


3 


13 


10.7 


0.9 


11.6 


0.9 


0.9 


0.9 


0.5 


TOTAL 


24 


12.6 


4.0 


14.4 


TTo 


178 


179 


1.0 



• Overall, program students mastered 1.9 CREST skills per month in 
the fall and 1.0 in the spring. 



er|c 



62 



TABLE B.6 



Results of the Criterion Referenced English Syntax Test 

Yeshiva Harama 

4 



PRETEST POSTTEST iyiASTERY Mean 

Test Number of m^^^^^^ 
Level Students Mean S.D. Mean s.D. Mean S.D. Per Month 











FALL 








1 


3 


10.0 


7.9 


17.0 6.1 


7.0 


2.0 


Z • 8 


2 


3 


10.3 


9.5 


16.0 7.9 


5.7 


3.1 


2.3 


3 


16 


10.2 


2.6 


14.1 1.4 


3.9 


1.3 


1.6 


TOTAL 


22 


10.2 


T74 


14.7 3.5 


175 


T79 


T78 










SPRING 








1 


3 


13.7 


11.0 


15.7 10.1 


2.0 


1.0 


0.1 


3 


16 


10.8 


0.9 


12.5 1.1 


1.8 


1.0 


1.1 


TOTAL 


19 


11.2 


379 


13.0 3.7 


1.8 


iTo 


TTT 



• Overall, program students achieved 1.8 CREST skills per month in 
the fall and 1.1 CREST skills per month in the spring. 



ERIC 



54 

63 



APPENDIX C 



Sample from Progra.ii-Developed 
Dictionar/ 



KPATKHM CJIOBAPt TEPMHHOB 
MCnOJItSyEMLK nPM nPOrPAMMHPOBAHM 
M PABOTE HA ROCJIOBHOM nPOUECCOPE 



DICTIONARY OF 
WORD PROCESS I NP 



55 



1 4 

. * i 

• » 
...1 ^ 



ACCESS TIME 



ACCOUNTING 
CAPABILITIES 

ACCOUNTS 

PAYABLE 

ACCOUNTS 
RECEIVABLE 

ACCUMULATOR 



ACK 



ACRONYM 
ACTIVE FILE 



ADDRESS 



ADJUST 



ADMINISTRATIVE 
SYSTEM 



ALIGNMENT 
ALPHANUMERIC 



AMERICAN STANDARD 



BPEMfl flOCTyriA HHxepEa;! EpeMenw MewAy MoweHTOM 

BHA^HM- KOMaHAM Ha nepeAaHy AaHHbix / e naMHTB viJivi M3 naMHXw/ 
M HaHa;ioM nepeAaMW. 



CHETHUE B03M0KH0CTH ycTpoMCTsa, no3Eo;ii3iomMe cMcxeMe 



noc^OBHoro npoueccopa npoMSBOAwiB 
aanncn 



pacHexu M 6yxra;iTepcKMe 



CHETA K ynJIATE fleHtrw, Koxopue KOMnaHMH Ao^iKHa nocTaEiuMKy 



CHETA K nO-?iyMEHMK) 



fleHBTM, KOTOpUe KOMnaHMH AOi/DKHa 



noJiyHUTh oT K.;MeHTOB aa npoAaHHue TOEapu m ycJiyrn 

AKKvMy.;ifl7op yae;! apM$MeTMHecKoro ycxpoiicTEa, coxpaHHiomMM 

peay^iBxaxbi npeAUAymwx onepauwii rjih Mcno;iB30EaHMH mx e 
noc;ieAyKHUMX onepauwHX, 

ACK OTBETHHM CHrHAJI OGpaTHUM cMrHa;i ox npweMHoro 

ycxpoiicxEa k nepeAaiomeMy ycxpoiicxEy, noAXEepwAaiomMii HopMa;ii 
Hoe saBepujeHwe ceanca cehsm. 

AKPOHMM C;ioEO,cocxaE;ieHHoe M3 nepEUX 6yKE necKOJiBKMX c;ioe 

AKTMBHUM ^AtlJI <I>aM;i, ajih Koxoporo EwnoJiHeHa npoueAypa 
oxKp$XMH,x.e noAroxoE^iena paSoMaH oCJiacxB a-^h EEOAa AaHHHX 

AflPEC HoMep,npeAocxaE;ieHHuii KawAOMy MMenii e naMHXM a-^h 
HaxoKAeHMH HyHCHoro xeKcxa 

nPKCnOCOBJIEHME KoHxpo^iBHoe ycxpoiicxBo, no3Eo;iHiomee 
Ao6aE;iHXi> viJivi cxwpaxB xeKCT m nepecxaE^iHXB no;iH. 

AflMHHHCTPATMBHg CHCTEMA Ta HacxB cMcxeMU noc;ioEHoro 
npoueccc^^a, Koxopan KOHxpo;iMpyex EunoJiHeHwe aaAaM, He 
CEHsaHHti.. c nenaxaHMeM. 

CBflSKA Ta HacxB noc;ioBHoro npoueccopa, Koxopaa CEHSUEaex 
pasJiMHHUe oxpesKM xeKcxa EMecxe. 

A.;ij)aBMXHO-UM(i)POEOM HaBOp SnaKOE, EK^IIOHaiomMM 6yKEU| 

mi$pi>i M cneuwaJiBHtie sHaKW. 

AMEPMKAHCKHM CTAHflAPTHHM KOfl OEMEHA ]/im>0?lAAUmi/L CxaHAapx- 



CODE FOR INFORMATION hum eocbmmSmxoeum koAi McnoJiBsyeMuii a-^h npeAcxaEJieHWH 



INTERCHANGE 



ARITHMETIC SECTION 



ASSEMBLER 



v O UDIO 

ERLC— 



MH$opMaUMM E CMCxeMax o6pa6oxKM AaHHUX, B orox HaCop 
EXOAHX cJiyweOHue 3HaKM, uwijpu, 6yKEU ;iaxMHCKoro a;i<J)aEMxa 
M cnemra^iBHue sHaKW. 

APH<I>METMMECKAfl CEKUHfl HacxM ueHxpa;iBHoro npoueccopa 
BunoJiHHiomaH cJioweHwe, BUHMxaHwe, yMHowenwe m Ae^enwe. 

n POrPAMtAA ACCEMBJIEP CwcxewHan oScJiywMEaiomaH nporpawi^a, 
Koxopan npeoCpaayex cMMEOJiWHecKwe WHCxpyKUMW e KOMaHAU 

MaUlHHHOro H3UKa. 

AyZlMO 3EyK, EocnpMHMMaeMbm ve;iOEeKOMt 

55 • 00 



