International Journal of Environmental & Science Education, 2016,11(4), 473-484 



PUBLICATIONS 


The Problem of Reading and 
Reading Culture 
Improvement of Students- 
Bachelors of Elementary 
Education in Modern High 
Institution 


Lera A. Kamalova & Natal’ya D. Koletvinova 

Kazan (Volga region) Federal University, RUSSIA 

•Received 15July 2015 •Revised 10 September 2015 •Accepted 27January 2016 


This article is aimed to study the problems of reading and improve reading culture 
of students-bachelors of elementary education in modern high institutions and 
development of the most effective methods and techniques for improving of 
reading culture of students in the study of Humanities disciplines. The leading 
method to the study of this problem is a pedagogical experiment (ascertainment, 
formation and control stages of experiment), and the method of expert estimations, 
statistical processing of quantitative research results. The article identifies the most 
effective methodological techniques of reading culture improvement of 
undergraduate students, future specialists of elementary education in their learning 
process at the University; We offered the methodology of reading culture 
improvement for the undergraduate students of "Elementary education" profile, 
providing thoughtful skill of reading of the works of various styles and genre, 
creative reading skill, formation of reading competence of students. 

Keywords : elementary education, reading skill, reading culture, personal and 
professional development, creative reading, means of communication 

INTRODUCTION 

The urgency of the problem 

Over the last twenty years the reading status, its role, the attitude of Russian 
society to it, as in many countries around the world, has changed dramatically. 
The decline of interest in reading is a worldwide trend of globalization of media 
and the rapid development of the entertainment industry, displacing reading 
and as a prestigious source of information and as a pleasant and prestigious 
form of leisure. The latest opinion of the Russian population respondents show 

Correspondence: Lera A. Kamalova, 

Kazan (Volga region) Federal University, 18 Kremlyovskaya Street, 420008, 

Kazan, RUSSIA 

E-mail: Ieraax57@mail.ru 

doi: 10.12973/ijese.2016.318a 


Copyright © 2016 by iSER, International Society of Educational Research 
ISSN:1306-3065 






L. A. Kamalova & N. D. Koletvinova 


that not only pupils, but also among those categories of citizens who have 
higher education decreased interest in reading books significantly. 

With the appearance of electronic media begins a new era of neotribalism, 
"global village" when the world of a human will again become common, but this 
time only on a global level. Means of communication and information change, 
the way of thinking changes, behavior and forms of Association change too", 
conclude foreign scientists (McLuhan, 2005], 

The problem of reading among students and young people is one of the 
urgent problems of our time (Sadykova, Yashina & Sharafieva, 2014], Nowadays 
reading of students is in a state of ambiguous transformation (positive and 
negative], managed by the Institute of higher education, sociocultural space, 
subjectivity of youth, the information revolution under the systemic 
transformation of the late 80-ies of XX - beginning of XXI c. (Volkova, 2012; 
Novik & Podgorecki, 2015; Ribakova, Parfilova, Karimova & Karimova, 2015; 
Khuziakhmetov, Shafikova & Kapranova, 2015], 

Recent studies of clinical psychologists indicate that young people gradually 
starts to clip the perception of information. It means that short messages, 
hyperlinks, clicks replace the thoughtful reading of the works. A rejection of 
such traditional reading is dangerous because people gradually cease to think 
over the read works, which leads to lower quality and reading level. Reading a 
paper book not only develops the human imagination, but also promotes brain 
function by the accumulation of acquired knowledge. However, the percentage 
of systematically reading young people has declined in our country from 48% in 
1991 to 28% in 2005. 

Literature Review 

Russian scientists emphasize the importance of reading in human 
development. Reading contributes to the development of full intellectual and 
emotional person, capable to self-development and self-realization (Valeev & 
Baranova, 2013; Sagitova, 2014], 

About the quality and level of reading culture is indicated in Russian 
teaching, library science, bibliology, bibliography, cultural, socio-psychological 
studies of the reading problems of students: A. G. Akimova (2014], E. A. 
Volkova (2012], And.In.Vorontsov (2012], G. G. Granik & S. M. Bondarenko & L. 
A. Kontsevaya (2007],D. S. Likhachev (2006], V. A. Kozyrev & V. D. Cherniak 
(2007], N. N. Svetly & the Peach-ool, T. S. (2007], 1.1. Tikhomirova (2008], V. P. 
Chudinova (2008], About ways to improve the quality of reading and the 
culture of reading writing foreign scientists M. Adler (2014], M. McLuhan 
(2005], D.Pennac (2015], 

According to A. V. Vorontsov, reading people differ from non-reading to the 
fact that:l] they are able to think in terms of problems, to grasp the whole and 
to identify conflicting relations of phenomena; more adequately assess the 
situation and quickly find the correct decision; 2] have a large amount of 
memory and active imagination; 3]speak better, their speech is more expressive 
and more strict on the thoughts and richer in vocabulary; 4] formulate more 
precisely and write better; 5] more sociable; 6] have a greater need for 
independence and inner freedom, more critical, independent in judgments and 
behavior (Vorontsov, 2012], Here we are not talking about extensive reading 
and education, not about intelligence, not about knowledge but about the 
patterns of thought that has particular relevance today (Valeeva & Valeeva, 
2013], It is established that the smaller the cultural experience of the person is, 
the poorer not only the language but also the conceptual sphere (Kozyrev & 
Chernyak, 2007], 


474 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 




The problem of reading and reading culture 


The ability to read is determined by experts as the skill of reading, in the 
process of mastering which a person goes through the development of four 
stages: the first stage, one learns to put letters into words and to read; the 
second level is learning to read aloud; the third is to read to yourself; on the 
fourth stage is critically reading. To become a full-fledged, competent reader, 
you must master all four phases of reading skills (Vorontsov, 2012], It is 
established that the full perception of an artistic work does not happen without 
a culture of reading. Reading culture is the achievement of the individual, the 
level of reading development, quantitative and qualitative indicators of 
consciousness, activity and communication are both a product and a factor of 
personality development. The culture of reading includes: 

1] the rational organization of the process of reading depending on the text, 
the broader context of reading and the properties of the reader; 

2] deep, accurate, clear and complete understanding and appropriation of 
the content of the text, accompanied by emotional empathy, critical analysis and 
creative interpretation of the read work; 

3] search, analysis and selection of text (books, electronic documents, 
databases, search engines on the Internet, etc.] for reading in accordance with 
the interests and capabilities of the reader, and also for the purpose of reading; 

4] a variety of ways (oral, written] and language means saving read work on 
native and foreign languages (statement, judgment, report, plan, abstract, 
abstract, abstract, abstract, etc.]; 

5] the culture of reading of the reader is implemented in the actions of the 
reader as a manifestation of his compassion, co-thinking, co-creation with other 
people in society, subject to the laws of nature and society. 

The culture of a qualified reader is a «slow reading, which requires diverse 
analytical and synthesizing work of the mind and work of the senses, serious 
emotional "connection". Such a reading in the 20-ies of XX century was called 
"feeling inside". Reading culture involves intense spiritual work, which is 
essentially the production of meanings. Thus the construction and expression of 
personal meanings inherent in the very nature of the semantic reading is an 
important symptom of a culture of reading. Reading culture is not formed by 
itself it develops in the process of formation of the person. An important 
condition for the development of a reading culture is the inclusion of a personal 
component (needs, motives, values, meanings] in the structure of educational 
activity. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Research methods 

With the purpose of studying of reading culture problem of undergraduate of 
the "Elementary education" profile students we carried out a diagnosis based 
on the following methods of research: theoretical (theoretical analysis of 
pedagogical, psychological, scientific-methodical literature on the research 
topic], empirical (analysis, comparison, synthesis, content selection, 
observation, questionnaires], pedagogical experiment (ascertainment, 
formation and control stages of the experiment], the method of expert 
evaluations, statistical processing of quantitative research results. 

Implementation of brainstorming method 

In practical classes of "Children's literature" course conducted by 
"brainstorming" technology, students worked in creative groups of 5-6 people. 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 


475 



L. A. Kamalova & N. D. Koletvinova 


Discipline tasks were focused on careful, thoughtful reading of the texts studied 
works by children's writers, joining the private world of the writer, search 
quotations, argumentation, evidence, synthesis of the read work. During 
practical classes on "Children's literature of 40-50-ies of XX century", the 
students answered questions of partial search character: 

-What is the perspective of the works of L. Panteleeva, N. Konchalovskaya, V. 
Kataev, V. Oseeva? What are the specifics of the authors ' works? What are the 
artistic features of creativity of each of those writers of 40-50-ies? Who is the 
protagonist of their works? Are the works of the writers of 40-50-ies relevant to 
today's schoolchildren? 

During the "brainstorming practical class "Children's literature of 60-80 
years of the XX century" students, working in small groups, performed the tasks 
of creative and reproductive character: 

- What do you think about the kinds of poems for elementary school 
children? 

- What are the themes of the poems of E. Blaginina, I. Tokmakova, R. Sefa, V. 
Berestov? 

- Which of the poets could disclose the age and psychological characteristics 
of children of elementary school age in his poems? 

- Determine three key words applicable to each of the poets, revealing the 
stylistic features of his poetry for children. Write down 5-6 of the thoughts that 
occurred to You during our lessons. Select the top three and make the 
presentation of Your creative ideas. 

The implementation of "Theatrical premiere" method 

Theatrical premiere" method is focused on creative interpretation of the 
artwork, the opportunity to ponder the meaning of what was read, to relate the 
actions of the heroes with their thoughts of the author - with his own position. 
Theatrical premiere creates conditions for development of creative imagination, 
the birth of associations, their own original ideas about reading. Practical class 
on "the works of N. N. Nosov and V. Dragunsky" was carried out by the method 
of "premieres". Students were instructed to read the texts of works "The 
adventures of Neznayka and his friends", "Neznayka in Floral city" by N. Nosov, 
story of V. Dragunsky "Deniskin stories" and to make scripts for plays on their 
basis. 

The implementation of “Group discussion method" 

Group discussion is a method of organizing a joint communication in the 
interests of intensive and productive solutions of group task. The main object of 
the discussion is the exchange of opinions between participants, clarification 
and harmonization of their positions, development of a common approach to 
the problem. Method discussion contributes to the consolidation of the 
knowledge; broaden their horizons, increasing the reading activity, the culture 
of reading and the culture of dialogue. We used group discussions in the process 
of studying those topics that do not have an unambiguous assessment in 
literary studies and criticism. For example, on the topic "What should a modern 
children's book be?" 

The implementation of "Creative uphold of the read books" 

On the final training courses of "Children's literature" and "Foreign 
children's literature" the students prepared a creative task, aimed at a deep, 


476 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4), 473-484 




The problem of reading and reading culture 


thoughtful reading of the book and took the form of creative uphold to the read 
books independently. The students were then given the opportunity to choose a 
book of Russian or foreign author to study the discipline, to read it, to present 
its content in an original way: to write a poem about this book, about the main 
character, make a script for the book, write a continuation of the chosen books, 
to stage the work, create a promotional video. 

RESULTS 

Experimental work on quality reading formation of undergraduate students 
was conducted during the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 academic years in two 
directions. The first area is the study of the users ' preferences of students. The 
second direction is the formation of skill of thoughtful reading of works of 
various genres. 

During September 1, 2013-April 25, 2014, we carried an experimental work 
with a group of students of the 2 and 3 courses of "Pedagogical education" 
direction of "Elementary education" profile (bachelor], 

53 students of the 2nd year and 49 of the 3rd year students a total number 
102 people t: 101 girl and 1 boy participated in the experiment. The 
experimental work took place in three stages. In the first phase of the 
experiment (establishing (September 2013] we carried a questionnaire to 
identify the reading interests and preferences of the students. 

Purposes of ascertaining stage of the experiment 

The purpose of the first phase of the experiment was a reading quality 
determining of students, to highlight the hierarchy of genres and literary works 
from undergraduate students of the 2 and 3 courses. The system of 
questionnaires served as a method of the study drawn up by us in the course of 
the study and included 7 blocks. The first set of questionnaires was aimed to 
identifying the relationship to reading, to determine the motives of reading. The 
second set of questionnaires revealed to the content and regularity of reading 
students. The third block of the questionnaire was aimed to determining of the 
opinions about the level of erudition of people in modern society. The fourth 
block of the questionnaires contained questions that determined the 
preferences of students in the genres of literature. The fifth block of the 
questionnaires was aimed to find out students ' opinions about the relationship 
of professional activity with reading literature. The sixth block of the 
questionnaires contributed to the communication of personal interests of 
students with reading literature. The seventh block of the questionnaires 
helped to highlight favorite authors and favorite books of undergraduate 
students. 

The results of ascertaining stage of the experiment 

The responses of students at the stage of ascertaining experiment showed 
the following: 

On the first set of questions: 67% of respondents did not like to go to the 
library; and 78% of the students used online libraries; 54% loved reading; 
motives for reading: leisure - 89%, science-cognitive - 45%; 86%, of 
respondents asked friends’ advice by selecting books; 22% parents; 31% -. 
Teachers; It was Interesting fact that 41% of respondents read paper books; 
59% read e-books. 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 


477 



L. A. Kamalova & N. D. Koletvinova 


On the second block of questions: preference is given to fiction by 27% of 
respondents; 23% chose popular science literature; 11% read textbooks; 19% 
read magazines and Newspapers; 62% read entertaining literature; 33% of 
respondents read every day regularly; 39% read once a week; 46% read 2-3 
times per week; 18% read once in a month. 

On the third set of questions the students answered: the level of erudition of 
people in modern society - l.High - 4%; 2.Average - 47%; 3. Low - 
42%;4.Difficult to rate - 7%. 

On the fourth block-preferences in genres of literature -the following 
answers: 1. Romans - 17%; 2.Stories - 5%; 3.Novels - 12%; 4.Fictions - 62%; 
5.Poems - 1%; 6.Epics - 1%; 7. Comedies - 7%; 8.Melodramas 56%; 9.Tragedies 
13%, 10.Lyric poems - 5%;-ll.Essays -1%; 12.Songs - 10%.;13.Detectives - 
59%; 14.Fantasy - 89%. 

The results of the fifth set of issues: 54% of the respondents evaluated as 
"close" the relationship of professional activity with literature reading ; 25% 
evaluated as "the need to read" ; 19% answered "I can do without reading 
literature; 2%- "for my professional field of reading literature has no value". 

The sixth block is the relationship between personal interests and the 
reading of literature. Students identified that reading and personal interests are 
bound: l.as "closely" - 32%; 2. "weakly" - 43%; 3. "reading has no value for my 
interests"- 25%. 

The seventh block was "favorite authors, favorite books". Students of the 2 
and 3 courses called 5 favorite writers and their books: l.JK Rowling's "Harry 
Potter"; 2.Tolkien's “Lord of the rings”; 3. Antoine de Saint-Exupery "The Little 
Prince"; 4. Margaret Mitchell “Gone with the wind";5. S. Esenin "Black man" 
(see. Table 1 " Diagnosis at the first stage of the experiment showed the 
following results"]. 

After the first stage (ascertainment] of the experiment the following results 
were obtained. 67% of students-bachelors of the 2 and 3 courses did not like to 
go to the library; 78% of students used online sources to supplement their 
knowledge; 54% of students loved to read books; 18% of students did not 
consider reading to be mandatory and necessary; For 62% of students the 
predominant motivation of reading was leisure, reading for entertainment 
which did not require deep intellectual work and imagination. For 27% of 
students Reading of artistic literature was not a primary motive in reading, as 
well as reading of textbooks (11%]. 47% of students determined the level of 
erudition of people in modern society as the "average" and 42% as "low". 
Among literary genres, preference was given to students fiction by 89% of 
students, to fantasy by 62%, to detectives by 59% and to romances by 56%. 
Nevertheless, 54% of students believed that reading was associated with their 
future professional activity as "close", and 19% of students were confident that 
the work of elementary school teachers will not be associated with reading 
literature. The relationship of reading to personal interests was weakly 
expressed among 42% of students; closely resonated with the sphere of 
personal interests among 32% of the students. In the ranking of favorite 
authors and works of the leading positions 57% of students had J.Rowling’s 
"Harry Potter"; Tolkien's "Lord of the rings"; Exupery's "The Little Prince". On 
the basis of obtained data we can conclude that undergraduate students of the 2 
and 3 courses did not establish reading culture, there was no creative reading 
skill. 


478 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 




The problem of reading and reading culture 


Table 1 . Diagnosis at the first stage of the experiment showed the following results 

Attitude to the 
reading 

Preferences in 
kinds of 
literature 

The erudition 
of people in 
modern 
society 

Preferences in 
genres of 
literature 

Connection of 
reading with 
professional 
activities 

The 

relationship of 
reading to 
personal 
interests 

Favorite 

books 

High level- 
54% 

High level 

62% (leisure 
literature) 

High level -4% 

Fiction - 89% 
Fantasy - 62% 
Detectives - 
59% 

Melodramas- 

56% 

High level - 
54% 

(closely 
connected 
with the 
future 
profession) 

High level 

43% (weakly 
connected) 

High level 

57% 

1. JK Rowling's 
"Harry 

Potter"; 

2. Tolkien’s 
“Lord of the 
rings”; 

3. Antoine de 
Saint-Exupery 
"The Little 
Prince" 

Average level- 
28% 

Average level- 
27 % (artistic 
literature) 

Average level- 
- 47% 

Average level- 
Romances- 
17% Novels- 
12% 

Tragedies- 

13% 

Average level- 
- 25% 

(weakly 
connected 
with the 
future 
profession) 

Average level- 
32% (closely 
connected) 

Average level- 
- 32% 

Margaret 
Mitchell “Gone 
with the wind" 

Low level- 
18% 

Low level-11 

% 

(educational 
literature ) 

Low level- 
-42% 

"difficult to 
evaluate”- 7% 

Epic -1% 

Essay -1% 

Story - 5% 

Low level - 
19% 

(has no 
connection 

with the 
profession) 

Low level- 
25% (reading 
literature is 
irrelevant) 

Low level- 
11% 

S. Esenin 

"Black man" 


The goal of the formative stage of the experiment 

The second experimental work was the formation of skill of thoughtful, 
creative reading of works of various genres. For realization of this direction of 
work we have carried out the second phase of the experiment- formative stage. 

In the second phase of the experimental work (October 2013 - April 2015] 
we carried out individual and group work with students. The goals of this stage 
were: 1] changing attitudes to reading, to the book and creativity as core values 
in the work of the specialists of elementary education; 2] development of 
priority reading of classical Russian and foreign literature, thoughtful, creative 
reading of paper books on. Therefore, we used interactive learning 
technologies: discussion, brainstorming, theatrical premiere, uphold of read 
books. 

The results of the control phase of the experiment 

The third stage of the experimental work - control stage was held on 25 
April 2015. Students of the 2 and 3 courses were asked to answer 10 questions 
of the questionnaire, containing their attitude to the book, reading, reading 
preferences, favorite authors (see. Table 2 " Diagnosis in the third stage of the 
experiment showed the following results"]. 

Students changed their attitude to the authors of the books. Favorite authors 
of students are presented in table (see. Table 3 " Diagnostic readers ' 
preferences of students"]. 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 


479 



L. A. Kamalova & N. D. Koletvinova 


Table 2. Diagnosis 

in the third stage of the experiment showed the following results 



-c 

Cd 

03 

U 

03 

P 'cS 

C/3 

cd - 
« "bo 

03 

p & 

C/3 

X 

o 

o 

O X 


. "c/3 

>» '«5 

£ 

01 

> 

Read rarely 
(2-3 times in 
a month] 

o 

'd 

03 

X 

j 

Liked t 
read 
classic; 
literati 

Liked “ 
readin; 

Liked t 
read p; 
books 

4-J ■ 

T3 “ 

03 *0 

X «d 

03 

-2 U 

Read b 
friends 
advice 

Read b 
teache 
advice 

Read b 
parent 
advice 

01 

T3 

re 

oj re 

OC T3 

81% 

78% 

22% 

75% 

25% 

44% 

41% 

15% 

82% 

18% 

Table 3. Diagnostic readers' preferences of students 


> 





cd 

> 

03 




s 

o 

c 

C 

j £ 

o 

C/3 

C/3 

'o 

o 

C/3 

o 

C/3 

X 

x 

JS 

o 

■ £ 

'S 

o 

C/3 03 

03 a 

e 

cd 

s- 

u 

cd 

>> 

03 

C/3 

'o 

H 

U 

03 

cd 

^ 3 

> £ 
a) 

J C/3 

03 

T3 d 
■ X 

>- 

u 

o 

2 

H 1 

& 03 

< CL, 

S J 

c/5 > 

< w 


J 

> 

J 

X < 

u PC 

27% 

34% 

35% 

67% 

32% 

44% 

23% 

39% 

68% 

14% 


Thus, the control stage of the experiment revealed significant changes in the 
structure and content of the reading contemporary among undergraduate 
students of the 2 and 3 courses, changes in the quality of reading, the reading 
culture of undergraduate students, future specialists of elementary education. 
Preference is given to paper books; Russian and foreign classics replaced the 
entertainment reading; almost half of the students read by advice of teachers; 
the majority of respondents read every day; attitudes toward reading had 
changed during the textual study of the works during practical classes; they 
consider the books which they staged by creative uphold of read books as 
favorite books. 

DISCUSSIONS 

Reading is a basic component of education, training and development of 
culture. It is an activity of forming and developing the identity, a tool for 
education and the dissemination of culture, evidence of formation of 
communicative and professional competence of a specialist tool for achieving 
success in life. According to A. G. Akimova, "reading all these years was 
primarily entertainment; the most popular genre now is the detective and 
fantasy. That is what disturbs most of all: because in the Russian tradition 
artistic literature shaped the values and educated the younger generation for a 
long time"(Akimova, 2014], 

The development of media culture, the rapid growth of Internet technologies 
"shift" the traditional structure of reading - both mass and "elitist". V. P. 
Chudinova describes the contemporary situation with reading in adolescence 
and youth so:"Reading of the younger generation is becoming more functional 
and utilitarian. Teenagers more often read as adults. On the one hand, reading is 
receiving the necessary information for their studies, on the other hand it is 
“easy" reading for entertainment (reading magazines, comics, books with 
lighter, simple and short texts, usually not of high artistic merit]" (Chudinova, 
2008], 

There are different definitions of the concept"reading” in modern science. 
Foreign scientists give the following definition of reading: "Reading is a skill 
(habit, practice, memorizatio], work with printed text". This is the Western 
definition. Followers of this direction, including Russia, solve the problems of 
careful functional reading as a set of knowledge and skills to select, understand, 
and organize information. The Russian definition of reading is based on the 


480 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 




The problem of reading and reading culture 


spiritual and moral traditions, it does not deny the basic skills of literacy, but 
formulates the term a bit differently: "Reading is a creative recreation of 
written, communication with the author through the system of artistic means, it 
is the art of words, the ability to see beyond the word - image" (Tikhomirova, 
2008], 

Thus, depending on purpose and motives of people to reading, we can focus 
on two parallel paradigms. 

1. Reading as a functional literacy - consumption of information. Skills of 
such reading are most essential to work with the scientific literature, to 
Supplement knowledge, the development of logic. Such reading must be 
rational. 

2. Reading as creativity, a spiritual process of development of personal 
characteristics, of consciousness, of mental images, values under the influence 
of artistic literature. Such reading should be creative. 

G. Granik, Bondarenko S. M. & Kontsevaya L. A. [2007] hold the view that to 
understand the meaning of the text means to highlight the main idea. Here is the 
reader's readiness to search the activities within the text and relevant 
technology of the search. In their book "How to learn to work with the book" 
they gave a system of operations in each stage, beginning with the work with 
the title of the book. Consequently, scientists understand reading as a process of 
obtaining information from a given text. 

Other Russian scientists believe that reading is a creative process, in which 
readers encounter their own thoughts and feelings, the Association are born, 
the imagination developes. "Reading is a creative process", says I. Tikhomirova 
[2008], 

According to the point of view by I. 1. Tikhomirova, "the creative sense of 
perception is a way which leads through a system of images of artwork, to the 
soul of the child, is an extension of his experience of life through the experience 
and fate of literary characters, is the development of his creative abilities, the 
immersion into the inner world of people and their relationships. In individual 
terms, this is a creative self-realization of the reader, stimulating the need for 
communication" (Tikhomirova, 2008], According to the scientist, there is a way 
of solving the problem of reading promotion in youth environment" 
(Tikhomirova, 2008], As a social value it is an intellectual and spiritual resource 
of the nation on the way to culture, to progress. 

A huge role in the formation of proper, thoughtful reading belongs to the 
school teacher. Elementary school is now working on the implementation of the 
Federal state standard of Elementary General education. There is the most 
important goal in front of the elementary school teachers- developing reading 
competence of younger students. This means that in four years of schooling at 
first stage children must learn to understand themselves as "competent readers 
are able to use the library activity as a means of self-education." Younger 
students should master the technique of reading, techniques of reading 
comprehension and listening works, knowledge of books and their ability to 
independent selection, the formation of spiritual need in the book and 
reading"(Indicative of the program on academic subjects, 2010], The result of 
teaching reading in the elementary school is determined by N. N. Svetly, as "the 
ability to think before reading, during reading and after reading" (Svetly & 
Peach-ool, 2007], 

Teacher of Russian language and literature at the secondary school is the 
spiritual mentor of the younger generation. It largely depends on him what and 
how will children read not only studying at school, but graduating it. Erudition, 
intelligent of school literature teacher, his broad outlook , reading preferences, 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4), 473-484 


481 



L. A. Kamalova & N. D. Koletvinova 


a common culture all affect the quality of the lesson of the literature on the 
quality of reading his pupils, the level of their reading culture 

The task of the university teacher is to form a creative reading skill, to instill 
the culture of reading, to educate the interested reader who loves reading and 
books. University lecturer, who teaches Humanities, has the opportunity to 
introduce students to reading and re-reading of favorite authors, favorite art 
works. Reading books should be a pleasure, getting aesthetic pleasure from 
reading, only then opens a rich inner world of the writer opens in front of the 
reader, becomes clear his thoughts and ideas. According to D. S. Likhachev, an 
educated person needs to repeatedly return to read the book: "If you first read 
the work not attentively read it again, the third time. The person should have 
favorite works to which he refers repeatedly which he knows in detail, which 
can be recalled in an appropriate setting that allow to lighten the mood, defuse 
the situation (when accumulated irritation against each other), it is possible to 
amuse, simply to Express their attitude to what had happened with you or with 
anyone else" (Likhachev, 2006). 

Famous American scientist M. Adler in his work "How to read books" defines 
reading as a mean of communication: the book helps to establish a dialogue 
between the author and the reader, guiding, as Socrates said, to search of truth. 
Mortimer Adler believes that reading is not fun, but heavy mental work, 
constant training, the training of the senses and thinking that we are not aware 
of internally. It is the process by which the mind of man "overcomes new 
heights solely through his own efforts" (Adler, 2014). The man, attained the 
reading requires patience, habit and understanding that the best result is 
achieved by constant training, as in sports. "You need to be able to determine 
the structure of the book, to find keywords, build a chain of logical reasoning 
followed by the author...True reading requires intensive work of the mind. 
Reading usually is a hard and slow work" (Adler, 2014). 

The famous French writer Dmitry Pennak believes that a careful reading of 
the book is like a discovery of the philosopher's stone: "Such a transformation 
does not go in vain. A lot of people "do not return from such a journey like as 
they were in the past. In any reading, no matter how it is depressed, we can 
find a joy to read, and it is akin to the delight of the alchemist. A joy to read is 
indestructible, no spectacle, even TV, even walking every day solid avalanche 
are not scaring for reading" (Pennak, 2015). Pedagogical competence is a 
product of self-education, self-improvement, self-development of the future 
specialist (Kamalova, 2015). In our opinion, the teacher will be successful only if 
he works hard on himself, follow the path of his personal growth, or, as Maslow 
wrote, if he is a self-actualized personality (Kamalova & UTyanitskaya, 2014). 

Thus, the Russian and foreign scientists are unanimous in the view that you 
need to learn to read books, to learn this art all your entire adult life. The main 
thing that unites all scientists who write about the problem of reading is the 
idea of self-development, self-study, self-improvement through reading books. 

"National program of support and development of reading" emphasizes: 
"Reading is the most important way of learning of basic socially significant 
information - professional and everyday knowledge, cultural values, past and 
present, information about the historically enduring and current events, 
regulatory submissions, component-based, system the core of a multinational 
and multi-layered Russian culture... Reading is the most powerful mechanism 
for maintaining and augmenting the wealth of the native language" (National 
program for support and development of reading, 2006). 

Reading is the only intelligent technology studying the human knowledge; it 
is obvious that the Foundation of the information society's culture should be a 
culture of reading, the foundations of which are laid in the family, in the library, 


482 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4), 473-484 




The problem of reading and reading culture 


educational institutions. The level of intelligence of the nation, the stability of its 
development and prosperity, the country's competitiveness are directly 
determined by the level and quality of reading of the young generation in the 
society. 

The main goal in improvement of the quality of reading among students is a 
culture of reading, to foster interest in reading (especially classics], the 
development of reading and information culture. This provides major life 
decision problems of youth: learning, development of professional activity, self- 
education, formation of world Outlook, moral foundations of the individual; 
promotion of reading to non-reading or low reading environment for students 
and youth. 

CONCLUSION 

During the experimental work we have identified the most effective methods 
of improving the reading culture of undergraduate students, future specialists 
of elementary education in their learning process at the University. Offered 
method of reading culture improvement of undergraduate students of 
"Elementary education" profile allows creating thoughtful skill of reading the 
works of various styles and genres, of creative reading skill, developing reading 
competence of students. Reading in this case acts as the major means of 
preserving the intellectual and cultural potential of society, continuity of 
knowledge and the essential factor of the social-communicative development of 
man, as a way to develop moral potential of undergraduate students. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

The materials of this article may be interesting for teachers, teachers of 
higher educational institutions, universities involved in the education and 
training of undergraduate students, developing reading competence of students 
who are interested in the problem of reading and reading culture improvement 
of students. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The work is performed according to the Russian Government Program of 
Competitive Growth of Kazan Federal University. 

REFERENCES 

Adler, M. [2014], How to read books. A guide to reading the great works. The publishing 
house Mann, Ivanov and Ferber, 344. 

Akimova, A. G. (2014). The culture of reading of youth: myths and reality. Electronic 
source: http://lib.lseptember.ru/2006/08/16.htm 
Approximate program of academic subjects. [2010], Moscow, Education, 400. 

Chudinova, V. P. (2008], Reading of children as a national value. Electronic source: 
http://www.polemics.ru. 

Granick, G. G., Bondarenko, S. M. & Kontsevaya, L. A. [2007], When the book teaches, 
256. 

Kamalova, L. A. & Ul’yanitskaya, T. V. (2014], The study of the pedagogical values of the 
future elementary school teachers, Life Science Journal, ll(10s), 522-526. 
Kamalova, L. A. (2015], Formation of Professional Competences of "Primary Education" 
Profile Students While the Studying Process at the University, Review of European 
Studies, 7(1], 94-100. 


© 2016 iSER, InternationalJ. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4], 473-484 


483 



L. A. Kamalova & N. D. Koletvinova 


Khuziakhmetov, A. N., Shafikova, G. R. & Kapranova, V. A. (2015). Conditions of 
Educational Environment for the Development of Teenagers’ Moral Relations. 
International Journal of Environmental and Science Education, 10 (4), 515-521. 

Kozyrev, V. A. & Chernyak, V. D. (2007). The reading range and Russian language ability 
of the student. Bulletin of the Herzen University, 47. 

Likhachev, D. S. (2006). Writing about the good and the beautiful. SPb., Logos, 234. 

Me Luhan, M. (2005). The Gutenberg Galaxy. The development of man print, 45-46. 

Novik, N. N. & Podgorecki, J. A. (2015). Model of Developing Communication Skills 
among Adolescents with Behavioral Problems. International Journal of 
Environmental and Science Education, 10 [4], 579-587. 

Pennac, D. (2015). Essay as a novel. Moscow, Scooter, 196. 

Ribakova, L. A., Parfilova, G. G., Karimova, L. Sh. & Karimova, R. B. (2015). Evolution of 
Communicative Competence in Adolescents Growing Up in Orphanages. 
International Journal of Environmental and Science Education, 10 (4), 589-594. 

Sadykova, A. G., Yashina, M. E. & Sharafieva, A. D. (2014). Citation as a stimulus to boost 
students’ communication skills at the English lessons. English Language 
Teaching, 7 (12), 12-25. 

Sagitova, R. R. (2014). Training students to be autonomous learners. International 
Journal of Humanities Education, 12 (1), 27-34. 

Svetlovskaya, N. N. & Peach-ool, T. S. (2007). How to help children who don't want to 
learn to read. Publishing House Archi: 54. 

The national programme for support and development of reading. (2007). Library, 10- 
28. 

Tikhomirova, I. 1.(2008). About the development of creative reading in Russia: a case 
history. School library, 68-76. 

Valeev, A. A. & Baranova, A. R. (2013). The development of the future engineers' 
capacity for creative self-realization. 16th International Conference on Interactive 
Collaborative Learning, ICL, 2013 (pp.436-437). Kazan, Russian Federation: Kazan 
National Research Technological University. 

Valeeva, L. A. & Valeeva, R. A. (2013). Development of future engineers' critical thinking 
in foreign language teaching. 16th International Conference on Interactive 
Collaborative Learning, ICL, 2013 (pp. 438-439). Kazan, Russian Federation: 
Kazan National Research Technological University. 

Volkova, E. A. (2012).Transformation reading student youth. Abstract of the 
dissertation on competition of degree of candidate of pedagogical Sciences: 
28.11.2012. Krasnodar, 35. 

Vorontsov, A. V. (2009). Reading as a socio-economic problem. Society. Environment. 
Development, 28. 


<$><$> <$> 


484 


© 2016 iSER, International J. Sci. Env. Ed., 11(4), 473-484 




