DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 038 884 



FL 001 387 



AUTHOR 

■J>T 

INSTITUTION 



PUB DA'T’B 
NOTE 



JOURNAL CIT 



EDPS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Vakar, Nicholas 

teaching Russian Civilization. 

American Association of University Professors, 
Washington, D. C. 

49 



lOp. ; Paper read at the 
American Association of 
Eruopean Languages, New 
1948 



Annual Meeting of the 
Teachers of Slavic and T ast 
York, M ew York, December 28, 



American Association of University Professors 
Bulletin; v35 p651-660 194Q 



EDRS Price MF-S0.25 HC-S0.60 

*Area Studies, ^Colleges, ^Cultural Awareness, 
Cultural Factors, Cultural Interrelationships, 
Fducational History, Educational Problems, European 
History, Foreign Culture, History, ^History 
Instruction, Language, Literature, ^Russian, 
Sociocultural Patterns, K * -tern Civilization, World 
History 



ABSTRACT 

Prior to World War Two, Slavic 
treated history, literature, and language as is 
often neglected the study of Russian literature 
The pragmatic necessities of the war questioned 
traditional approach and specialists appeared, 
efforts on the recent Soviet period exclusively 
studies became distinct from Slavic studies. Th 
how integration of former traditional and fragm 

the more recent Russian stud 
colleges. (RL) 



Slavic 

number 



studies and 
of American 



studies in America 
dated disciplines and 
written after 1 Q i7. 
the relevance of this 
concentrating their 
. Thus, Russian 
is article explores 
ented approaches in 
ies has begun at a 







EDO 38884 



* 



Fro fA ; ft A U P '£ 



0 35~ jp 45"/ - L O ^ 



/?vf 



*v I 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION & WELFARE 
OFFICE OF EDUCATION 



THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REPRODUCED EXACTLY AS RECEIVED FROM IHE 
PERSON OR ORGANIZATION ORIGINATING II. POINTS OF VIEW OR OPINIONS 
STATED DO NOT NECESSARILY REPRESENT OFFICIAL OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
POSITION OR POLICY. 



TEACHING RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION 1 



By NICHOLAS VAKAR 
Wheaton College (Massachusetts) 



bo 

<0 

rT 

O 

o 




Despite the brisk development of Slavic studies during and since 
the war, the prediction is made that they have no future in this 
country. The Slavic world has changed into the Soviet world 
whose Slavic aspects are rapidly dissolving in the um^-al prob- 
lems of Communism, Dictatorship, and Totalitarianism. It is 
therefore no longer a subject for Slavists, but for teachers of polit- 
ic al and social sciences who are better equipped to deal with such 
matters. 

According to this concept, Russia as a historical nation is in- 
cidental to Communism, as the Arabic world was incidental to 
Mohammedanism or German culture to Nazism. Is it really neces- 
sary to study Goethe to understand Hitler, or to translate Dante in 
order to foresee another Mussolini? It seems that the' more we 
studied the German and Italian past, the less we were able to under- 
stand their present. Russia interests the American only as the 
embodiment of an idea which threatens American liberties. Can 
Pushkin help him to recognize the aims of Stalin? The Russia of 
old is to the Soviet Union what ancient Rome is to Italy of De 
Gasperi and Togliatti. Let the dead bury their dead. 

The field of Slavics is thus located somewhere close to the field 
of Classics. We can teach language and, with certain reservations, 
history and literature. But more and more the language will be 
taught by a general linguist: assisted by native informants, for our 
technique is deemed obsolete. We are thought to be limited to the 
speech of Pushkin and Tolstoy, and the American wants to know 
how Molotov uses it. If history and literature are left to us this is 
primarily for the reason that their references lie in the past, and 
they are not directly related to the current issues at stake. 

1 Based on a paper read at the Annual Meeting of the American Association of 
Teachers of Slavic and East European Languages, December 28, 1948, in New York 
City. 



652 AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS 

One may object that the present situation in Russia is a mixture 
of old and new and one must know something of the former in order 
to evaluate the latter. But the opponents will point out that no 
one would care to know what features of the 1929 model are re- 
peated in the 1949 Chevrolet. The fact that some aspects of the 
Soviet system can be traced back to the time of Cyril and 
Methodius is of little conseq uence. No one will study Henry Ford’s 
life or General Motors’ history to see how the new automobile 
operates. All that the American wants to know is how the Soviet 
system operates. The approach is pragmatic. Only those features 
of Russian civilization are studied which are relevant to the new 
political and economic fact which is the Soviet Union today* 
America, we are reminded, is in need of quick specialists, not of 
ponderous philosophers. There is no time to waste. World War 
III may break out in a couple of years. 

Consequently new techniques are being developed for teaching 
Russian subjects, and new men prepared outside the organized 
Slavic field. Their strong points seem to be — at least this is the 
way they put it— integration of data within specific fields of ob- 
servation, absence of bias and prejudice, and “an alert feeling of 
practical American interest.” Slavic scholars are under pressure to 
change their methods or go out of business, leaving their field to 
others. 



II 

The new trend has been widely, and sometimes severely, criti- 
cized. Narrow and shallow specialization, before a general back- 
ground is acquired, is meaningless and dangerous to the rightly 
understood American interest. Indeed, how would we feel if the 
study of America were to start with the New Deal? We would 
shrug our shoulders at an expert on American affairs who knew how 
many votes were cast at the last elections or how the Stock Ex- 
change operates, but had heard nothing of Monroe, Emerson, and 
the American Frontier. How can he be competent to deal with 
America if he does not know what kind of people we are? He should 
know that the American character was not formed in Washington, 
D. C., during recent years, but has come out of “long inheritance, 
environment and experience.” His approach to America would be 



TEACHING RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION 



653 



judged irrelevant and, in so far as foreign policy is concerned, un- 
practical. 

But we start Russian studies with the Five-Year Plans and the 
Stalin Constitution of 1936. What do we know about the Russian 
character? About Russian inheritance, environment, and experi- 
ence? One can hear from the American expert, produced by the 
new educational machine, that Peter the Great died in the sixteenth 
century, having made a testament for world conquest; that the 
liking for uniform is one of the permanent elements of Russian 
culture; that political exiles crowded out the natives in Siberia, and 
annexed it to the Russian Empire; that Russian citizens were not 
protected by law before the Revolution; and other such nonsense. 
These and the following are not fancy examples, but are taken from 
life and from documents collected in different colleges. Our spines 
would shiver if certain techniques, developed for the study of' 
primitive societies, were applied to the study of American behavior. 
Yet, the American is told that among the European peoples the 
Russians are the only ones who swaddle their babies very tightly, 
thus depriving them of muscular cognition during the very im- 
portant first nine months of life; of course, as has been observed 
among certain tribes, they will make up for this period later, and 
develop a violence complex. This will explain the Moscow trials 
and concentration camps. Students are told that it is not necessary 
to know Russian to take a dictionary and find that Russian has no 
word ior privacy y which would mean that the Russians have never 
known what privacy is. 

One may point to a tightly swaddled Christ painted by Giotto 
on the walls of the Arena Chapel in Padua. However questionable 
the source of information about the Russian baby may be, the 
early muscular cognition did not eliminate violence in the rest of 
Europe. German and French have no direct term for English 
privacy , and even the Texans have no word for prostor (boundless 
expanse, vast horizons, and complete freedom of moving about). 
Strangely enough, Russian has no word for autocracy , and yet — . x 

1 Samoderzhavie, samovlastie by which the word autocracy is currently trans- 
lated, refer to power, not to government. On the other hand, the idea of “democ- 
racy” is expressed by narodopravstvo which is distinguished from narodoolastie. 
C'f. samodenhavny gospoditt Veliki Novgorod while Novgorod was a classical example 
of medieval democracy. 



4 






654 AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITV PROFESSORS 

All this, of course, is beyond the scope of study, and Russian life 
appears to the student of Soviets as an inextricable cluster of 
paradoxes. 

With such stories one can fill a book. But I shouldn’t advise 
publishing the book. It may boomerang, and sadder stories would 
be told about us, the teachers of Slavics. I am afraid that we have 
only ourselves to blame for the situation just described. 

Ill 

At this point a little history is appropriate. 

Until lately, we concentrated on teaching language on the one 
hand, and history and literature on the other. If we did not dis- 
play much imagination, competence, and enterprising spirit, this 
was not entirely our fault. Before 1914, only three American 
colleges were giving regular instruction in Russian. While teachers 
of French, German, and Spanish farmed with most modern equip- 
ment, we had to work our field with spades and pick-axes in the 
later years. There were many who had never known how to handle 
even these tools. Having been born in Russia was often their only 
qualification for a teacher’s position. They were pioneering in a 
field and climate unknown to them. True, they learned quickly 
from experience. They even wrote textbooks. It is easy to criti- 
cize their work, but good things also were achieved. There are 
able people among us and their efforts inspire respect and admira- 
tion. Hundreds of Americans have learned Russian; we could not 
possibly expect a better harvest. 

The war gave a tremendous momentum to the instruction in 
Russian, and we are better off now in both method and equipment. 
According to the survey made by Professor Arthur P. Coleman, 
Russian was taught in more than 200 American colleges last year. 1 
Only a few, however, have been able to maintain, develop, and im- 
prove the intensive wartime techniques. In most cases we still 
have to labor with spade and pick-ax. Instructors who have no 
adequate preparation still have no place to go for a “refresher 

1 A Report on the Status of Russian and Other Slavic and East European Laniuaies 
in the Educational Institutions of the United States, Its Territories , Possessions and 
Mandates , with Additional Data on Similar Studies in Canada and Latin America , by 
Arthur Prudden Coleman, Assistant Professor, Department of Slavic Languages, 
Columbia University (New York, 1948), 109 pp. 



TEACHING RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION 



655 



course.” American universities prepare excellent teachers of 
French, of German, and of Spanish, but they leave the Russian 
teacher to fend for himself. As a result, Russian students in certain 
colleges find themselves at a disadvantage when they apply for 
foreign service. 

Perhaps more precarious is the situation in the field of history 
and literature. True, Professor Coleman’s survey has recorded 
important quantitative gains since the war. Russian history was 
taught in 81, and Russian literature in 44, American and Canadian 
colleges last year. More often than not, however, a course in 
Russian history will concentrate on the Imperial period and cover 
the Soviet Revolution only slightly, if at all. Likewise, a course in 
Russian literature usually v/ill be a course in writings from the 
nineteenth century up to World War I. History is presented as a 
story of emperors, conquests, and invasions, and literature as a 
catalogue of poets, novelists, and playwrights— both programs end- 
ing with the Revolution. Some instructors even make it clear that 
there has been no Russian literature since I9 1 ?* 

What is the student to know about sociological and psychological 
conditions that made the Soviet Revolution possible and success- 
ful? At a final examination, he would have to answer such ques- 
tions as these: Describe the death of Dostoevski and that of Turgenev. 
Give the hour, day , month , and year. Describe and discuss their re- 
spective funerals and evaluate their positions in Russian literature ; 
and these: Which feature of the murder trial is a first in Russian 
literature? When and where was the novel published? Serially? In 
book form? Still another: When was Turgenev's “ A Month in the 
Country" first produced? Who was the famous actress who enacted 
first Verochka and later Natalia Petrovna? How many times? The 
questions follow a pattern well known before the introduction of 
Slavic studies to this country. (Don’t you remember: Give the 
names of all the kings in the plays of Shakespeare?) 

Seldom is an attempt made to pierce the Russian mind, let alone 
a sociological examination. History and literature are treated as 
disciplines sufficient to themselves, disconnected from life, and en- 
tirely separated from problems of our day. A literary critic, a 
former teacher himself, deplores the translation of Vyshinski’s 
book The Law of the Soviet State into English, because it gives a 



656 AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS 

distorted picture of Russian culture, and of the history of Russian 
juridical thought in particular. That is true, of course. But one 
must not confuse scientific objectivity with lifeless neutrality. The 
translator and the publisher realize that the American wants to 
know present Russia as well. 

Thus two concepts of Russia are presented. On the one hand, a 
historical nation in its relation to world culture and, on the other 
hand, a modern political power in its relation to world affairs. The 
student learns from us the important heritage of the Russian past. 
But when he wants to know how the heritage is being spent, we tell 
him that this is another story. Two Russias appear before the 
American, separated and independent from each other. Can we 
wonder that life begins for him precisely where it ends for some of 
us? 



IV 

To fill the gap, Russian area studies emerged during the war. 
The pendulum shifted to the other extreme: if the Slavic studies 
showed no interest in the present, so the regional studies ignored 
the relevant past. At the time, this was explained by conditions of 
emergency. But the pendulum stuck, and did not swing back im- 
mediately after the war. On the contrary, more colleges offer 
courses in Soviet Literature, Soviet Drama, Twentieth Century 
Russian History, Soviet Economics, Soviet Law, Soviet Social 
Institutions, and the like, for enrollment in which no knowledge of 
Russian history or literature is required. 

Who is to teach these courses? In many cases, instructors have 
had contact with the subject only via the English printed page and, 
as it often has been pointed out, it makes a certain difference 
whether the pages are of Maurice Hindus and Frederic Shuman or 
of William Henry Chamberlin, David Dallin, and Max Eastman. 
In both cases, however, Soviet facts are interpreted in terms of 
American civilization and social science, and thus the point is often 
missed and the student misled. Miscarriages have become ob- 
vious. 

It is significant and fortunate that the inadequacies of the two 
extremes were soon realized. This country requires that Russian 
studies serve a practical purpose, and neither Slavists nor social 



TEACHING RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION 



657 



scientists knew how to serve it. When the Slavist stops at the 
threshold of the Revolution because he is unable to explain it, his 
science is moonshine; and so is social science which is limited to a 
description of the Soviet mechanism. Of course, studies of Im- 
perial Russia, of the Revolutionary Movement, the Stalin Con- 
stitution, the Blueprints of the Five-Year Plans, and the Social 
Changes in the Soviet Union within the last decade increase our 
factual knowledge. Out of historical context, they contribute little 
to our understanding. 

Communism can be profitably studied only against its own back- 
ground, which is formed by the inheritance, environment, and ex- 
perience of the peoples. The Russian situation confronts us with a 
series of questions to which we shall find no correct answers unless, 
paraphrasing Henry Steele Commager, we realize that answers are 
dictated by the Russian past and the Russian character. One can- 
not make sense of Soviet aims and behavior unless one knows how 
the peoples of the Soviet Union regard their own 1 utory and mani- 
fest destiny, and how they look at themselves. We knew German 
history and literature, and we also knew the Nazi political mech- 
anism, but only a few were able to bridge their knowledge, and fore- 
see. We knew all the political and economic facts about prewar 
Japan, and how did it serve us? Mistakes of that sort are paid for 
dearly. 

America faces the same problem again: What to teach about 
Russia? How to teach it? Who can teach it? 

V 

The sociologist and the Slavist must come out of their ivory 
towers, and join hands. For the Slavist, the problem is to connect 
history; literature, and linguistics with life. For the social scientist, 
it is to realize that the statistical approach can be but a temporary 
expedient. 

There is evidence that they both are beginning to get rid of their 
respective biases. Harvard University was the first institution, as 
far as this writer knows, to grant a Ph.D. degree in Sociology and 
Slavics three years ago. Other plans are in operation, or in prepara- 
tion, and they tend to one goal: study of Russian life as a whole. 
The purpose is to cover all the aspects of Russian behavior in order 



658 AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS 

to discover its regularities and continuum. History is treated as a 
process, not a series of static periods. The student will not only be 
able to describe the Soviet machine in operation, but can also see 
the forces which produced it, and which maintain it alongside with 
the MVD. If something happens to the 1949 model, he will not 
have to run to the nearest fix-it shop. Trained appropriately, he 
will be able to deal with changing as well as with static situations in 
the Soviet Slavic world. 

The new trend, struggling against the two extremes, is slowly 
taking shape. The first full course in Russian Civilization was in- 
troduced at Wheaton College, (Massachusetts) in 1945-46. Last 
year, twenty-five American colleges were engaged in a similar ven- 
ture. The process is spontaneous. Let us briefly examine its 
heartening characteristics. 

Integration of Russian studies, undertaken by a few progressive 
colleges, falls into.two different patterns : (1) a Soviet area program 
when the budget, library, and personnel facilities permit it, and (2) 
a comprehensive course in Russian Civilization when facilities are 
limited to one or two competent men on the faculty. Not all the 
colleges answered my inquiry about the new organization of their 
programs, and my information is by no means complete. In some 
cases, it would seem, a course in Russian Civilization is still pri- 
marily a course in political history or in literature, and such topics 
as geography, government, peoples, foreign policy, religion, eco- 
nomics, education, law, arts and sciences, are left out. Instructors 
complain that they were not able to overcome the resistance of 
other departments where Russian subjects seem to be deaf-mute 
and very dear stepchildren. The integration is partial, but there is 
hope for the future. 

In some other cases, however, we can see a successful attempt to 
integrate Russian life, from the beginnings of the Russian State to 
our day. This does not mean that contradictions ana paradoxes 
are eliminated. On the contrary, they are presented in their inter- 
action, and explained. The well informed student is able to form 
his own opinion. At Stanford University a course in Russian 
Civilization includes a survey of geography and history, peoples and 
institutions, religion and philosophy, language and literature, art 
and music, about fifty lectures in all ; it is offered at the beginning 



TEACHING RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION 



659 



of the academic year to give the student an opportunity “to find 
out which of the above topics he would prefer for a more advanced 
study.” At Wheator College, a full-year course covers such sub- 
jects as the origins of the Slavs, the growth of the Russian State, 
geography, demography, government, foreign policy, economics, 
law, literature, family, arts and sciences, religion, education, com- 
munism and nationalism. A Russian area course is given at Col- 
gate University, where “once every other week,’ ’ writes Professor 
Albert Parry, “all the eight area courses get together for a panel 
discussion.” At Indiana University a course in Russian Civiliza- 
tion is offered every other year, and it includes communism, na- 
tionalism, religion, education, problems of national minorities, the 
judicial system, the press, theatre, sciences, art, music, and litera- 
ture. A few years ago, these topics were entirely ignored by Ameri- 
can schools. 

The obvious shortcoming of the above programs (but perhaps 
their advantage, too) is that they are entirely determined by the 
competence and vision of an individual instructor. More important 
though less integrated is the organization of studies in larger insti- 
tutions. Their Russian programs are usually supported with 
grants from endowments and foundations and, in general, operate 
as autonomous bodies such as the Russian Institute at Columbia 
University, the Committee of International and Regional Studies 
at Harvard University, the Slavic Institute at the University of 
California, the Board of Russian Studies at Syracuse University, 
and so on. They cut across the departmental lines, and the gaps 
are filled by specially appointed instructors or visiting lecturers. 
Greater facilities permit the covering of most aspects of Russian 
life with separate courses, the integration of which within the stu- 
dent’s time has already become a difficult problem. It is com- 
plicated by language requirements getting higher each year, for 
more courses are based almost entirely on 'reading the Russian 
original material. A comprehensive program usually extends over 
two years, leading to a certificate in some institutions and to a 
Master’s degree in some others. 

It is interesting to note that both the single cour?" and the area 
programs seem to compete in raising their scholastic requirements. 
At Harvard University, only the twenty best qualified applicant 



660 AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS 

are admitted to the Soviet Union program each year. Regardless 
of the credit obtained in class instruction, students are submitted 
to a general examination in Russian, written and oral, before taking 
their degrees. Various prerequisites have been set in other institu- 
tions to select students on both undergraduate and graduate levels: 
freshmen at Colgate University, and freshmen and sophomores at 
Wheaton College are excluded from Russian courses, and at the 
University of Miami admission is now “more and more by permis- 
sion of the instructor.” The tendency is toward elite rather than 
mass education in understanding the Soviet world. 

Yet, the integration of studies still is far from being horizontally 
and vertically complete. In at least three universities, the Area 
study is paralleled by a Research Center working with it in a more 
or less close cooperation. But Slavic Departments, except for 
language instruction, seldom participate fully in the program. 
They still look askance at each other, and this is unfortunate. 
Indeed, only in a few cases has a full cooperation been achieved. 

The Russian programs still struggle between the Charybdis of 
scholastic conservatism and the Scylla of facile pragmatism, but 
they are coming nearer to the goal. This country is in need of well 
prepared men to plan future relations with Russia. The quick 
specialist, though still in demand, is an obsolete model indeed. 
Two systems of teaching Russian Civilization, yesterday in opposi- 
tion, seem to be merging into a sound and promising plan. Errors 
and mistakes will be committed, but the evidence is growing that 
common sense may win. 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED 

BY_£Lft 0 p 

TO ERIC AND ORGANIZATIONS OPERATING 
UNDER AGREEMENTS WITH THE U.S. OFFICE OF 
EDUCATION. FURTHER REPRODUCTION OUTSIDE 
THE ERIC SYSTEM REQUIRES PERMISSION OF 
THE COPYRIGHT OWNER.” 



