lliii; 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 


:5jr>  ^  -!  R.  G  e/!>  -7=1  h  I.  €  rL>at( 


PIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 


STUDIES   IN    HISTORY,   LITERATURE 
AND   PHILOSOPHY 


BY 

THOMAS  GARRIGUE   MASARYK 

Sometime  Professor  of  Philosophy  at  the  Czech  University  of 

Prague;  Member  of  the  Austrian  Parliament;  Lecturer 

at  the  School  for  Slavonic  Studies  at  London 

University,  King's  College 


I   I   WCf-.  \    : 


fifitl     \ 


TRANSLATED   FROM  THE  GERMAN  ORIGINAL 

BY 

EDEN  AND   CEDAR   PAUL 


VOLUME  TWO 


LONDON:    GEORGE    ALLEN    &    UNWIN    LTD. 
RUSKIN    HOUSE  40    MUSEUM    STREET,   W.C.  i 

NEW   YORK:        THE  MACMILLAN   COMPANY 


First  published  in  igig 


(Al!  rights  reserved) 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 


PAGC 

Chapter  Fourteen  :    Realism  and  Nihilism.     Cerny- 
Sevskii  and  Dobroljubov.     Pisarev. 

I. 

f  95.  Cerny§evskii's  philosophical  Development. — Realism  (Nihil- 
ism) ;  Feuerbach,  Positivism,  Utihtarianism. — The  "  an- 
thropological Principle." — Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment 
in  the  Sense  of  Peter  the  Great  and  that  of  Leasing. — Cemy- 
5evskii  versus  Kant  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .        '  i 

§  96.  CernySevskii's  Utilitarianism. — The  Problem  of  the  Will. — His 
Ethic  social  and  socialistic ;  Love  and  Egoism  upon  a  material- 
istic Basis  necessitate  Communism  as  a  System  of  EquaUty 
.-^  and  Equal  Rights. — Whai  is  to  be  done  as  a  Description  of 
the  materiahstic  and  positivist  Utilitarians,  the  Reahsts  or 
Nihilists. — The  Woman's  Question. — Cernygevskii  versus  ^^ 
Self-Sacrifice     .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  ,       (S) 

§  97.  Utilitarian  Reahsm  in  Aesthetics. — Beauty  is  Life         .  .     ^17; 

§  98.  Dobroljubov  continues  CernySevskii's  hterary  Criticism  .    /ig) 

§  99.  CemySevskii's  Philosophy  of  History. — History  and  Science 
in  general  do  not  exclude  Convictions. — The  hypothetical 
Method    ..........       25 

§  100.  Cernygevskii  and  Marx  ;  Heroes  of  the  Spirit  as  primal  Sources 
of  Energy. — Lessing. — Cernygevskii  versus  Darwin  and  the 
Struggle  for  Existence       .......        28 

§   loi.  Cernygevskii's  Socialism  is  ethical. — He  favours  the  Liberation 
"■•<        of  the  Peasantry  and  the  Assignment  of  Land  to  the  Peasants. 
— Economics. — The  Mir  and  the  social  Order  of  the  Future  ; 
Russia  can  overleap  Stages  of  Development       ...        30 

§  102.  Cernysevskii's  Sociology  and  Politics. — Anarchist  Elements. — 
The  Opposition  between  Aristocracy  and  Democracy. — The 
Conflict  with  Herzen. — Cernysevskii  and  Dobroljubov  as 
Representatives  of  the  Rasnocinec,  as  "  Children  "  against 
"  Fathers." — The  Question  of  Nationahty  from  the  material- 
ist Outlook       .  .   ^: 35 

,     §   103.  CernySevskii's  Participation  in  the  practical  Work  of  Revolu- 
tion .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .        39  "^ 

§   104.  Cernygevskii's  philosophical  and  literary  Activities  in  Siberia       43 

§  105.  The  true  Significance  of  Cernysevskii's  MateriaUsm  ;  the  philo- 
sophical Revolution  against  the  Theocracy         ...       48 


vi  CONTENTS 


rxoE 


5   io6.  Cernygevskii's   Influence. — Cerny§evskii  prepares    the    Ground 

for  Marxism. — CernySevskii   and   the  Narodnicestvo   .  .        50 

II. 

§  107.  Pisarev's  Realism. — The  Realist  as  a  consistent  Individualist, 
Egoist,  and  Hedonist ;  Aesthetics  and  Principles  in  general 
are  annihilated. — The  Realist  might  murder  and  rob,  and  is 
withheld  from  doing  so  only  by  his  subjective  Taste. — 
Pisarev's  Exaggerations  (Pisarev,  Stirner,  and  Nietzsche). — 
Pisarev's  Utilitarianism,  naturalist  Materialism,  and  Positiv- 
ism ..........        53 

§  108.  The  Realist  becomes  a  "  thoughtful  ReaUst." — Pisarev's  In- 
terpretation of  Turgenev's  Bazarov. — The  absolute  Negation 
of  Russia  ;  Stupidity  and  Poverty. — Matters  must  be  thought 
to  a  Finish  ;  Salvation  by  natural  Science  ...        58 

§  109.  The  Problem  of  the  Hungry  and  the  Insufficiently  clad  ;  the 
"  thoughtful  Realist  "  becomes  the  "  thoughtful  Proletar- 
ian."— The  thoughtful  Reahst  not  a  Faust. — The  NihiUst 
even  recognises  the  old  morality. — Pisarev's  Influence  ;  the 
Nihihst  as  Intellectual      .......       63 

III. 

§;iio.  Nihilism       ..........      69 

i.  Reahsm    as    Nihilism    in    Art,    Aesthetics,    and    literary 
Criticism  ;    Naturahsm  :    ReaUsm  versus  Romanticism      .        69 

ii.  Positivism    and    Materialism  ;      Facts,    not    Philosophy ; 

Practice,  not  Theory      .......        70 

iii.  Nihihsm  as  destructive  Criticism  and  socio-political  Nega- 
tion of  the  Uvarovian  Trinity  ;    Atheism  and  Materiahsm  ;  , 
Nihilist  Disillusionment  versus  Mysticism. — Nihilism  is  not 
Pessimism  and  Indifferentism. — The  Nihilist  is  a  believing 
Unbeliever    .........        72 

iv.  Ethics  the  leading  nihilist  Discipline. — Empiricist  and 
practical  Ethics. — Nihilist  Industry  versus  aristocratic 
Tedium. — Irony  and  Cynicism  versus  romanticist  Senti- 
mentality.— Nihihst  Democracy  takes  the  Form  of  the 
•  Movement  "  towards  the  People." — Nihilists  in  social 
Intercourse  and  nihilist  Phraseology. — The  nihilist  Com- 
munity ;  Friendship  and  Love. — Nihilism  inevitably  be- 
comes political  and  revolutionary  ....       74 

V.  Nihilism  versus  Aristocracy  and  Liberahsm. — Nihilism  as 
'•^  Radicalism,   Democracy,   SociaUsm. — Nihihsm  as  Anarch- 

ism ;  all  Things  are  lawful. — The  Problem  of  Crime  .  .        78 

vi.  The  manifold  Types,  Kinds,  and  Degrees  of  Nihilism. — 
Fathers  and  Children  ;  Questions  put  by  the  "  Chil- 
dren"  to  the  "  Fathers." — Nihihsm  as  the  leading  Problem 
of  the  day  ;  Dostoevski! ;  Nietzsche        ....       79 

IV. 

§  III.  Nihihsm  and  Terrorism. — The  Program  of  the  revolutionary 

Movement        .........       Ji 


CONTENTS  vii 


FAGS 


of  the 


8i 
85 

86 
89 
89 
92 

94 
95 

97 


i.  The  secret  Society  Zemlja  i  Volja,  1862 ;  Vehkorus' ;  the 
"  Organisation  "  of  the  Karakozovcy  (1865). — The  first 
Attempt  on  the  hfe  of  Alexander  II,  made  by  Karakozov 
in  1866. — The  first  revolutionary  Proclamations  :  Young 
Russia,  1862  ;  To  the  Younger  Generation,  1861. — The 
Addresses      ....... 

ii.  The  Bakuninist  Program  of  1868  . 

iii.  Necaev's  Catechism  of  Revolution  and  the  Program 
Narodnaja  Rasprava,   1869     .    '*     . 

iv.  The  Program  of  the  Caikovcy,   1871 

V.  The  Program  of  the  Lavrovists,   1873     . 

vi.  Tkacev's  Jacobinism  ;   Nabat,   1 875-1 877 

vii.  Program  of  the  new  Zemlja  i  Volja,   1877 

viii.  The  terrorist  Narodnaja  Volja,   1879 

ix.  Party  of  the  Cernyi  Peredel,    1879,   as  the  Beginning  of 
Social  Democracy.  ..... 

&  112'.  Nature  and  Development  of  the  political  Radicalism  of  the 
Vw-^  Sixties  and  Seventies. — The  Socialism  of  the  Day  mainly 
agrarian  ;  the  Narodnicestvo. — Terror  without  Mass  Move- 
ment.— IndividuaUsm  and  Terrorism  ;  Terrorism  and  Social 
Revolution. — Marxism  and  Bakuninism  ;  nihilist  Utilitarian- 
ism versus  Bakuninist  Revolutionism. — Socialism  and  Polit- 
ism. — Increasing  Significance  of  the  urban  Workers  ;  the 
Movement  not  a  Students'  Movement         ....        98 

I  113.  Nihilism  and  Terrorism  are  not  identical  in  Nature. — Stepniak's 
\,^^    ^■-      ethical  Theory  of  Terror  as  a  Means  of  Self-defence,  a  Theory 
based  on  natural  Right ;    a  Life  for  a  Life  ! — The  Bourgeois 
is  the  Enemy,  but  we  strike  down  the  Gendarme. — The  philo- 
sophical Problem  of  Nihilism  as  Atheism  .  .  .102 

V. 
5  114.  Psychology  of  the  Russian  Terrorists  of  the  Seventies;    the 
V  Lamb  becomes  a  Tiger     .  .  .  .  .  .  .105 

Chapter  Fifteen  :    The  so-called  Sociological  Sub- 

JECTIVISTS  ;     LaVROV   AND    MlHAILOVSKII. 

I. 

§  115.  Lavrov  as  Philosopher  of  History  and  Theorist  of  Subjectivism  ; 
Comte  and  Kant. — Lavrov's  "  Historical  Reahsm  "  and  his 
Conception  of  History  ;  Consciousness  versus  Nature    .  .      115 

§  116.  Lavrov  accepts  the  Comtist  developmental  Scheme,  but  modifies 
it  in  a  socialist  and  Darwinist  Sense. — Universal  History  as 
a  World  Assize  ;  History  and  Ethics. — The  Illusion  of  Free- 
dom.— The  critically-thinking  Individuahty  as  the  motive 
Force  in  History  ;  Criticism  and  Faith. — Lavrov's  Formula 
of  Progress  and  his  progressive  Imperative. — The  three 
Duties  of  the  "  more  definite  "  Individual  :  Propaganda  ; 
Organisation  of  the  socialist  Party ;  a  progressive  Example. — 
The  Duty  of  working  for  Progress  as  a  Duty  to  promote  Revo- 
lution ;  Lavrov's  revolutionary  Scepticism. — Lavrov's  Con- 
cessions to  Terrorism         .  .  .  ,  .  .  .121 


viii  CONTENTS 

PACK 

§  117.  Lavrov's  Socialism  ethical  and  humanist. — Lavrov  opposed  to 
Marx's  historical  Materialism. — Humanity. — State  and 
Nation. — Minimum  of  the  State  ;  the  State  as^  a  Contract. — 
This  Contract  is  no  longer  binding. — Lavrov  and  his  Russian 
Contemporaries  and  Predecessors        .  •  .  .  .128 

§  118.  Lavrov's  Significance.— Was  he  the  first  Russian  Sociologist? 
— Kant  reduced  to  the  Level  of  Ruge  and  Bruno  Bauer. — 
The  Problem  of  Individualism  left  unsolved. — Lavrov's 
negative  Philosophy  of  Religion. — Lavrov  as  Pohtician  ;  the 
pohtical  Utopian       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .131 

IL 

§  119.  Mihailovskii  an  Empiricist  and  Positivist ;  denies  the  Exist- 
ence of  innate  Ideas  and  apriorist  Axioms. — Agnosticism  and 
Relativism. — No  Naturalism. — UtiUtarianism  versus  Kant         136 

§  120.  Mihailovskii's  Sociology,  the  Question  of  the  subjective  Method; 
the  Impassivity  of  positivist  Historism  rejected. — Society  not 
an  Organism. — Work  the  essential  Attribute  of  Individu- 
ality.— Cooperation  the  Essence  of  Sociahty       .  .  .140 

§  121.  Mihailovskii's  Philosophy  of  History. — The  three  Stages  of 
Development  :  the  objective  anthropocentric,  the  eccentric, 
and  the  subjective  anthropocentric. — Evolutionary  Type  and 
evolutionary  Stage. — The  Development  of  Cooperation        .      146 

§  122.  Criticism  of  Darwinism  from  the  Outlook  of  the  Philosophy  of 
History  ;  the  Darwinian  Struggle  for  Existence  invahd  for 
human  Society.^ — The  Struggle  between  the  Rich  and  the 
Poor. — Physiological  and  social  Division  of  Labour. — Dar- 
winism in  the  Service  of  Liberalism. — Socialism  versus  Liber- 
alism and  Darwinism  ;  Liberty  corrected  by  Equality. — Al- 
leged democratic  Spirit  of  the  natural  Sciences. — The  Struggle 
for  Individuality :  the  Harmony  of  IndividuaUsm  and 
Socialism. — The  evolutionary  Explanation  of  Consciousness. 
■ — Mihailovskii's  Formula  of  human  Progress      .  .  .148 

§   123.  The  Defects  of  Mihailovskii's  History  of  Philosophy       .  .      153 

§  124.  The  modern  Age  as  an  Epoch  of  Transition  ;  Replacement  of 
medieval  Cathohcism  and  Feudalism  by  false  IndividuaUsm, 
Scepticism,  and  Subjectivism. — The  eighteenth-century 
Enlightenment  and  the  Revolution. — Does  the  Comtist 
Classification  of  Epochs  apply,  to  Russia  ? — The  Revolution 
engenders  the  Liberalism  of  the  Bourgeoisie. — The  social 
Question  (the  Bread  Question)  of  the  Forties. — "  Aristocrats 
doing  Penance  "  and  the  Raznocincy.  The  new  Woman. — 
Love  and  Marriage  ........      154 

§  125.  Liberal  political  Economy,  professorial  Socialism,  and  Marx- 
ism.— Sociology  and  political  Economy. — Socialism  and 
consistent  Individuahsm  are  not  mutually  exclusive. — Mi- 
hailovskii and  the  Narodniki     .  ,  .  .  .  .      156 

§  126.  Mihailovskii  and  the  pohtical  Problem. — Unity  of  Theory  and 
Practice,  of  Truth  and  Justice. — Ethics  necessarily  social ; 
there  is  no  ethical  formula  "  upon,  in,  over,  and  under  itself." 
— The  Right  of  Judging  involves  the  Duty  to  act. — The  Ethics 


CONTENTS  ix 

PACK 

of  Conscience  and  of  the  Sentiment  of  Honour. — Law ; 
Revenge. — Ethics  and  PoUtics. — In  1873  Mihailovskii  unable 
to  join  Lavrov  ;  "  I  am  not  a  Revolutionary." — Mihailovskii 
as  a  Socialist.  His  Explanation  of  the  terrorist  Act  of  V6ra 
Zasulic  in  1878. — Mihailovskii  favours  the  political  Struggle 
but  is  opposed  to  Terrorism. — It  is  the  Idea  of  Autocracy 
that  is  to  be  slain. — The  Theory  of  Retribution  too  narrow. — 
The  Revolutionists  must  combine  with  the  Liberals. — The 
Assassination  of  Alexander  II. — Mihailovskii's  political 
Views  during  the  Eighties  and  the  Nineties        .  .  .160 

§  127.  Mihailovskii's  Philosophy  of  Religion  ;  Religion  as  a  coherent 
Outlook  on  the  Universe  ;  the  religious  Spirit  equivalent  to 
Definiteness  of  Character. — The  early  Christian  Martyrs  and 
Scedrin's  "  Devourers." — Modern  Disharmony  of  Reason  and 
Sentiment ;    Weakness  of  Will ;    Bourget's  Le  Disciple         .      167 

§  128.  Mihailovskii's  Analysis  of  the  present  Epoch  of  Transition  ; 
Suicide.- — Lack  of  Religion  the  Cause  of  Suicide. — Goethe's 
Faust. — Philosophical  Significance  of  the  Increase  in  Suicide     172 

§   129.  The  Faust  Problem  in  Goethe  and  Voltaire. — The  Faust  Problem 

and  the  Suicide  Problem  ;    Irreligion  of  the  Age  of  Transition     174 

§  130.  Mihailovskii's  Analysis  of  the  Chaos  of  the  present  Day  ;  the 
enhghtened  and  wealthy  Bourgeois. — Indeiiniteness  and  Dil- 
ettantism ;  Pornography  and  Decadence  ;  War  of  All  against 
All. — Nationalism  of  the  Slavophils  and  the  Narodniki ; 
Darwinism  ;  Nietzsche  and  Stirner  ;  Tolstoi  and  Dostoevskii ; 
Marxism  ;  Mysticism  and  IdeaUsm  of  converted  Materialists. 
■ — Rehgion  versus  Mysticism      .  .  .  .  .  .177 

§  131.  Mihailovskii  as  Author  and  Critic. — Nature  and  Function  of 
Art  and  Criticism. — Mihailovskii's  judgments  concerning  his 
Contemporaries  and  his  Predecessors. — Definitive  Judgment 
of  Mihailovskii's  Philosophy. — Mihailovskii  and   Marxism    .      181 


HAPTER  Sixteen  :  The  Theorists  of  the  Official  Theo- 
cracy :     Katkov  ;     Pobedonoscev  ;    Leont'ev. 


§  132.  Katkov,  philosophising  JournaUst  and  hack  Politician  for  the 

Theocracy         .........      191 

§  133.  Pobedonoscev,   Bureaucrat  and  official  State  Philosopher  for 

the  Theocracy  ........      I97 

§  I34y  The  ReUgion  of  the  Theocracy  ;  K.  N.  Leont'ev  ;  Rehgion  is 
""^  Fear  of  the  Lord. — The  Struggle  against  LiberaUsm. — The 
Law  of  Evolution  ;  the  Idea  of  Progress  disastrous  ;  Russia 
must  be  preserved  in  cold  Storage. — Leont'ev  and  the  Slavo- 
phils; NationaUsm  is  revolutionary. — Leont'ev  opposed  to 
Panslavism  for  Austria. — Russians  akin  to  Asiatics. — The 
,„      Conquest  of  Constantinople  and  of  Asia    ....      207 

§  135.  The  Church,  not  Christ  ! — Caesaropapism  and  Papism. — Dos- 

^■^ — ^'     toevskii's    grand     Inquisitor    approved. — Morality    without 

Rehgion  is  valueless  ;    Pohtics  is  devoid  of  Morality  but  not 


CONTENTS 


devoid  of  Religion. — Leont'ev  and  Nietzsche  ;  Amoralism. — 
A  Word  on  behalf  of  the  Revolution. — Tsarism  and  Aristo- 
cracy.— The  Disintegration  in  Leont'ev's  Mind  ;  Faith  and 
Unfaith. — Timor  Dei  essential. — Theistic  Nihilism  and 
Terrorism. — Leont'ev  confirms  Feuerbach  ;  God  and  the  Tsar. 
— The  "  Constraint  to  believe  " 

II. 


FA«K 


214 


§   136.  Comparison  between  the  Theocrats  and  their  Opponents  ;    the 
\^  Theocrats   are   quantitatively    and    qualitatively   inferior. — 

Struggle  against  the  nineteenth  Century  as  a  Whole. — The 
Clergy  is  the  main  Prop  of  the  Throne. — Theology  as  the 
Russian  State  Philosophy. — The  Struggle  between  Faith 
and  Unfaith  a  political  Struggle. — Feuerbach's  Significance 
for  the  Russian  Revolution  ;  Atheism  and  Materiahsm  are 
Crimes  against  the  State  and  treason  to  the  Country  ;  the 
Monk  versus  Feuerbach. — Not  Conservatism  but  Reaction  ; 
Tsarism  is  in  Conflict  with  Peter  and  with  itself. — Theocratic 
Negation. — The  Theocrats,  too,  are  Sceptics ;  Theocratic 
Jesuitry. — The  corpselike  Obedience  of  the  converted  Revo- 
lutionary (Tihomirov)  ;  a  skilled  and  vigorous  Pohce  as  an 
infallible  Authority. — The  Theocrats  are  Westernisers  ;  De 
Maistre's  Executioner         .......      220 


Chapter   Seventeen  :    Vladimir  Solov'ev  ;    Religion 
AS  Mysticism. 

§   137.  Vladimir  S.  Solov'ev  ;  free  Theocracy  .....     225 

a  §  138.  Ethics  and  the  Philosophy  of  Religion  ;  the  Good  is  equivalent 
to  the  Godhead. — The  ascetic  Principle  of  Shame  is  the  Root 
of  Morality  and  ReUgion  ;  Shame  as  Conscience,  Sympathy, 
and  Veneration  ........      228 

§  139.  The  Individual  and  Society  ;  Solov'ev  opposed  to  Egoism  and 
Individualism,  to  Eudemonism  and  Utilitarianism. — Morality 
is  organised  Morality. — Agriculture  and  the  State. — Op- 
posed to  Privilege  as  manifested  in  Despotism,  Aristocracy, 
and  Democracy. — The  Church  as  the  Organisation  of  Piety. 
— Significance  of  Dogma  and  the  Sacraments  ;  Theurgy. — 
"  Russian  Socialism  "  as  Church  universal. — The  three 
functions  of  moral  Organisation  :  High-Priesthood,  King- 
ship, and  Prophetship. — Need  for  the  Renascence  of  the 
prophetic  Function  ;   the  essential  Nature  of  the  true  Prophet     233 

§  140.  The  Schism  of  the  Churches  must  be  healed  by  a  Union  of  the 
Churches. — Nature  and  History  of  the  Schism. — Relationship 
of  the  State  to  the  three  leading  Churches,  Catholicism, 
Orthodoxy,  and  Protestantism.— The  Russian  Church  and  the 
State. — Free  Theocracy  will  be  inaugurated  by  a  Union  of 
Pope  and  Tsar. — Significance  of  the  Poles  and  the  Jews  in 
Relation  to  the  Union  of  the  Churches         ....      236 

§   141.  Solov'ev  and  the  Slavophils. — Catholicism  and  Orthodoxy. — 

NationaUsm  and  Nationahty  ;    Russian  Messianism     .  .241 


CONTENTS  xi 

PA«B 

§  142.  Eduard  von  Hartmann's  Philosophy  as  the  Culmination  of 
western  Philosophy. — Transition  to  the  Theosophy  of  the 
East. — The  historical  Manifestation  of  the  God-man  ;  the 
cosmological  and  historical  Process  as  the  Aspiration  of  the 
Finite  towards  Immortality        ......      245 

§  143.  Epistemological  Foundations  of  free  Theosophy. — Absolute 
Cognition  versus  Subjection  and  Scepticism. — Revelation. — 
Religious  or  mystical  Cognition. — Solov'ev  and   Kant  .     250 

§  144.  Philosophy  and  Revelation  as  free  Theosophy. — The  Idea  of 
Catholicity. — Solov'ev's  Scholasticism  as  his  Life  Tragedy  ; 
the  inward  Struggle  between  Kant  and  Plato. — Solov'ev 
takes  refuge  in  Anselm  and  Origen. — Solov'ev's  Doctrine  of 
Ideas  and  his  free  Theurgy       ......      254 

§  145.  Solov'ev's  Mysticism. — Epistemological  and  historical  Exam- 
ination of  Mysticism. — Mysticism  and  Religion. — Solov'ev 
opposed  to  the  One-sidedness  of  oriental  Mysticism  ;  ad- 
vocates an  active  "  Christian  Policy." — Mystical  States  in  - 
Solov'ev.  Mysticism  and  the  Mysterious. — Mysticism  is 
aristocratic  and  conservative  ;    the  CathoUcising  Tendency  .      259 

§  146.  Symptoms  of  Decadence  in  secularised  Europe  and  Russia. — 
This  Secularisation  is  Atheism,  atheistic  Subjectivism,  and 
Individualism. — Solov'ev  is  opposed  to  the  Reforms  suggested 
by  Atheism,  is  opposed  to  Revolution. — Theism  is  Life, 
Atheism  is  Death  ;    Atheism  leads  to  Murder  or  Suicide     .      266 

§  147.  Solov'ev's  Aesthetics. — Solov'ev  upon  Pu§kin,  Lermontov,  and 
Aleksei  Tolstoi. — Solov'ev,  Lev  Tolstoi,  and  Dostoevskii. — 
Solov'ev  and  the  decadent  Movement         ....     269 

§  148.  The  apocalyptic  Vision  :  Tolstoi  as  Antichrist. — Dostoevskii 
the  Russian  Prophet. — Solo'"^'ev  abandons  free  Theocracy  ; 
his  Campaign  for  Kant  and  Plato     .....     274 

§  149.  Significance  of  Solov'ev  to  Russia  ;   he  recognised  the  Value  of 

Criticism  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .281 

V 

V 

'hapter (eighteen':    Modern  Socialism  ;   Marxism  and 

the  SOCIAL  Democracy  ;  Marxism  and  the  Narod- 

ni6estvo.  The  Crisis  within  the  Marxist  Move- 
ment. The  religious  Problem.  The  Social 
Revolutionaries. 

I. 

§  150.  Socialism  in  Russia  and  "  Russian  Socialism." — Russian 
Socialism  preeminently  a  Philosophy. — Positivism,  Material- 
ism, and  Atheism. — The  ethical  Foundation  of  Sociahsm,  its 
new  Ethic,  the  new  Man,  the  new  Society. — The  social  Revo- 
lution and  Terrorism. — "  Russian  Socialism  "  manifests  itself 
as  the  Narodnicestvo. — Marxism  turns  its  Attention  to  the 
Operatives         .........      287 

§   151.  The  outward  History  of  Marxism  in  Russia  .  .  .289 

§  152.  A  Sketch  of  the  History  of  Russian  Social  Democracy  (1883- 

1912) 291 


xii  CONTENTS 


PAQB 


II. 


§  153.  Marxism  in  Russia  has  to  solve  peculiar  Problems  determined 
by  Russian  Evolution. — The  Problem  of  Tactics  ;  the  his- 
torico-philosophical  Explanation  cf  Russia ;  the  Struggle 
upon  the  philosophical  Plane  (Materialism  and  historical 
Materiahsm,  Subjectivism  versus  Objectivism)    .  .  .      300 

§   154.  Nature  and  Development  of  the  Narodnicestvo     .  .  .     303 

§  155.  The  Doctrine  of  the  Narodniki  ;  its  philosophical  Basis  and 
its  economic  Outlook. — The  Problem  of  the  Communism  of 
the  Russian  Mir  and  Artel  and  of  Russian  Capitalism  ;  the 
Question  whether  Russia  can  pass  directly  to  Communism  of 
a  higher  Order  without,  as  a  Preliminary,  passing  through  the 
Stage  of  Capitalism  .  .  .  ...  .  .      306 

§  156.  The  Peculiarities  of  Russian  agricultural  Development  do  not 
justify  tne  Doctrine  of  the  Narodnicestvo. — The  Muzik  cannot 
be  regarded  as  a  social  and  moral  Ideal. — The  Muiik,  too, 
is  a  Bourgeois.  ........      309 


III. 

§  157.  The  Crisis  within  the  European  Marxist  Movement. — The 
Nature  of  Marx's  historical  Materialism  as  the  philosophic 
Basis  of  communist  Socialism. — The  philosophical  Inadequacy 
of  Materialism  and  Positivism. — Objectivistic  amoralist 
Historism  does  not  suffice  for  the  Foundation  of  Socialism. — 
There  is  no  collective  Consciousness. — Justification  for  the 
individual  Consciousness  ;  SociaHsm  can  have  no  other  than 
*    an  ethical  Foundation. — Return  to  Kant  ?  .  .  .317 

§   158.  The  first  social  democratic   Program   (1884)  ;     Plehanov,   the 

"  Father  of  Russian  Marxism  "  .  .  .  .  .      325 

§  159,  The  Cleavage  in  Plehanov's  Views  ;  the  revolutionary  PoUtism 
of  the  Communist  Manifesto  and  the  comparative  Apolitism 
of  the  subsequent  Doctrine  of  historical  Materiahsm    .  .      328 

§  160.  Marx's  Theory  of  Revolution. — No  more  than  Outhnes  of  a 
philosophic  Theory  of  Revolution  as  Dialectic. — Revolution 
and  Evolution  ;  gradual  Evolution  or  Evolution  by  Leaps  ? 
— Marx  (and  Engels)  more  and  more  inchned  to  stress  the 
utiliarian  Aspect  of  the  Problem. — Distinction  between 
definitive  and  temporary  Revolution. — Mass  Revolution  ver- 
sus Stirner  and  Bakunin  ;  Socialism  versus  Anarchism. — 
The  amoral  Valuation  of  the  Revolpttion. — Marx  favours 
legal  Purchase  in  lieu  of  forcible  Expropriation. — Even 
Engels  renounces  Street  Fighting  for  Germany. — Com- 
munism abandoned. — The  most  recent  Discussion  among 
German  Marxists  concerning  the  Problem  of  Revolution ; 
Revolutionism  versus  Reformism. — The  Cleavage  in  Revo- 
lutionism :    definitive  Revolution,  continued  Mass  Action  ,     33a 


CONTENTS 


Xlll 


PAOX 


§  i6i.  The  Indefiniteness  of  German  Marxism  characterises  Russian 
Marxism  as  well. — The  Dispute  over  the  Question  of  Politism. 
— What  may  the  Duma  signify  for  Socialism  ? — The  Or- 
ganisation of  the  Masses  versus  the  Oligarchy  of  secret 
Societies. — ^Vera  Zasulic  opposed  to  Terrorism. — Is  a  Re- 
public possible  in  Russia  ? — Struve's  Reformism  versus 
Revolutionism. — Bogdanov's  Philosophy  of  Revolution 

§  i6t.  The  Marxist  Estimate  of  the  Revolution  of  1905-6 


338 
343 


IV. 

S  163.  Russian    Marxism    is    philosophical,    its    Province    being    the  ) 

Philosophy  of  Religion. — Plehanov  favours  the  naive  Real- 
ism of  Engels,  but  likewise  favours  Spinozism  ;  he  is  opposed 
to  Kant  and  to  Solipsism. — Subjectivism  as  Scepticism. — 
Scepticism  as  an  Expression  of  the  Degeneration  of  the 
Aristocracy  and  the  Bourgeoisie. — The  Proletarian  is  free  from 
Scepticism         .........     348 

§  164.  The  Contrast  between  the  orthodox  Marxists  and  the  Re- 
visionists as  a  Contrast  between  Objectivism  and  Subjectiv- 
ism.— Struve's  Transition  from  Marxism  to  idealistic  Meta- 
physics, Religion,  and  Mysticism. — The  orthodox  Marxists, 
too,  seek  new  philosophical  Foundations  (Empirio-Criticism, 
Mach,  etc.). — The  ethical  Problem  in  the  Foreground  of  the 
Discussion ;  materialist  Objectivism  guarantees  Revolu- 
tionism   ..........      351 

§  165.  The  Relationship  of  Socialism,  Marxism,  and  the  Social  Demo- 
cracy, to  ReUgion.- — The  Lack  of  Christian  Socialism  in 
Russia. — Plehanov's  and  Lunacarskii's  Philosophy  of  Reli- 
gion.— From  Feuerbach  to  Solov'ev  and  Dostoevski!  .  .      354 

§  166.  Significance  of  Marxism  for  Russia. — Marxism  and  Art ;  Marx- 
ism opposed  to  the  decadent  Movement    ....      359 


V. 

§  167.  Development  of  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party  since  1902. — 
The  terrorist  Revolution  its  leading  Aim. — Attempts  at  the 
Revival  of  Terrorism  after  the  Unmasking  of  Azev  (the 
Burcev  Wing). — The  Maximalists  ;  "  economic  Terrorism  " 
as  the  Beginning  of  socialist  Expropriation         .  .  .     362 

§  168.  The  ethical  Foundations  of  the  Revolution  and  in  particular  of 
the  social  Revolution,  as  conceived  by  the  MaximaUsts ; 
Nestroev's  Diary       ........     368 

§  169.  The  philosophical  Foundations  of  the  social  revolutionary 
Movement ;  Lavrov  and  Mihailovskii. — Cernov ;  from 
Marxism  to  the  Empirio-Criticism  of  Avenarius  and  Mach. — 
The  Unity  of  Theory  and  Practice  ;  "  active  ReaUsm  "  as  a 
Philosophy  of  Reahty  and  Activity. — This  Activity  is  Revolu- 
tion.— "  Active  Realism  "  as  an  "active-dynamic"  School  of 
Sociology. — The  new  "  dynamic  "  Ethic. — Revolution  as  an 
ethical  Problem. — Ethical  Maximalism  and  MinimaUsm  ;  the 
Need  for  Compromise. — The  Right  of  the  Majority  and  major- 
ity Rule. — The  Majority  as  a  party  Majority     .  .  .      372 


xiv  CONTENTS 


rA«B 


Chapter  Nineteen  :    Modern  Anarchism.     Kropotkin. 
''- — -    Anarchism  and  Socialism. 

I. 

§  170.  Kropotkin's  Anarchism  a  clarified  Bakuninism. — Kropotkin 
opposed  to  the  State  and  to  Authority  in  general. — Anarch- 
ism as  Method  and  Science  ;  the  new  Man  and  the  new 
Faith. — Anarchism  is  SociaUsm ;  anarchising  Sociahsm 
(Communism)  in  contradistinction  to  social  Democracy. — 
Federalism  versus  CentraUsm. — Kropotkin  opposed  to  Indi- 
viduahsm  (Nietzsche),  but  hkewise  opposed  to  social  Demo- 
cracy.— Ethics  without  Sanction  or  Obligation. — The  Ethic 
of  Liberty  ;  Equality  leads  to  mere  Justice  and  Mediocrity. — 
Equality  the  Death  of  Society. — Be  strong  ! — Kropotkin's 
Theory  of  Revolution  and  Terrorism  ;  the  Tyrant  slaughtered 
as  a  Viper  ! — Kropotkin's  Russian  and  European  Teachers  ; 
Kropotkin  as  Narodnik. — Criticism  of  Kropotkin's  System     .      378 

11. 

§  171.  The  modern  anarchist  Movement  in  Europe  and  in  Russia. — 
Increasing  Strength  of  Russian  Anarchism  since  1901  ;  the 
Revolution  of  1905  and  the  Counter-Revolution. — Anarch- 
ism gathers  Strength  in  Europe  as  well  ;  the  anarchistic 
labour  Movement  and  hterary  and  philosophic  Anarchism. — 
Influence  of  this  Movement  upon  Russia  ....      389 

§  172.  Anarchism  as  Astatism  and  Apolitism. — Anarchism  opposed  to 
Authority  in  general. — Liberty  more  important  than  Equahty 
and  Fraternity. — Anarchist  Individuahsm  and  Subjectivism  ; 
the  ethico-poUtical  and  psychologico-epistemological  Stand- 
point.— Extreme  Individuahsm  and  Subjectivism  (Solipsism)  ; 
anarchistic  Aristocracy. — The  Individual  and  social  Organisa- 
tion in  general. — CentraUsm  versus  Federahsm  (Autonom- 
ism). — Aims  and  Means  ;  Disorganisation  and  Reorganisa- 
tion.— Revolution  with  or  without  Bloodshed  ;  ethical  An- 
archism.— Anarchist  individual  Outrages. — The  general 
Strike. — Revolutionism. — Anarchism,  Nationality,  Church. 
— Scientific  Organisation  ;  Communism  and  Collectivism. — 
The  Division  of  Labour. — The  new  Man  and  the  new  Ethic. — 
Can  Peace  be  attained  through  Force  ? — The  Problem  of 
Revolution  and  Terrorism  ;  is  it  right  to  kill  ? — Are  all 
Things  lawful  ? — Ordinary  Crime. — Free  Love  and  Marriage. 
—Anarchism  metaphysical  and  reUgious  ;  ni  Dieu  ni  Maitre. 
— Atheism  and  Astatism. — Anarchist  Atheism  and  Auto- 
apotheosis. — The  Anarchy  of  Anarchism  ;  anarchistic  In- 
determinism  ;  Chaos  and  Miracle. — Anarchism  assumes 
artistic  Forms  ;  the  decadent  Movement    ....      393 

§  173.  Comparison  of  Anarchism   with  Sociahsm   and  in  particular 

with  Marxism  .  .  .  .  .  •        .  .  ,  .     400 

§  174.  Marx  and  Anarchism  ........     406 

§  175-  Anarchism,  or  at  least  communist  Anarchism,  is  a  sociahst 
System  ;  but  the  extreme  Type  of  individuahst  Anarchism 
is  unsociaHst    .........     408 

§  176.  Territorial  Varieties  of  Anarchism  and  Sociahsm  ;  Spain,  Italy, 
France,  and  Russia,  are  the  leading  anarchist  Countries. — 
How  far  is  Russia  anarchist  ?  .  ,  .  ,  ,         .     409 


CONTENTS  XT 


rA«B 


Chapter  Twenty  :    Liberalism. 


§  177.  Liberalism  as  a  universalised  Struggle  to  secure  Freedom  ;  a 
Struggle  waged  against  the  theocratic  social  Order ;  a. 
Struggle  waged  against  the  Church,  at  first  on  behalf  of  the 
State,  but  subsequently  against  the  State  as  well. — In  the 
theoretical  Field,  Liberalism  is  Aspiration  for  EnUghtenment 
(Locke,  Voltaire)  ;  in  the  ethical  Field,  it  is  an  Aspiration 
for  Humanitarianism  and  Individualism. — Natural  Law. — 
The  Rights  of  Man  and  popular  Sovereignty  ;  Democracy. — 
The  Achievements  of  the  older  LiberaUsm  .  ,  -413 

§  178.  The  Restoration  versus  the  Revolution. — Romanticism  ;  Re- 
catholicisation. — Positivism  the  main  Prop  of  the  Uberal 
Laodiceans. — Historical  Right  versus  natural  Right. — Leg- 
itimacy versus  Revolution  ;  Order  and  aristocratic  InequaUty, 
— Peace  with  Church  and  State  (Strauss  and  Constant)  ;  the 
State  infalhble. — Governmental  Efficiency  at  any  Price. — 
Imperialism. — The  Bourgeoisie  becomes  capitahstic ;  the 
industrial  State. — Organisation  of  the  fourth  Estate. — After 
1848  Liberahsm  opposed  to  Socialism  and  to  socialist  Demo- 
cracy.— Liberal  Chauvinism  in  favour  of  official  Patriotism 
and  opposed  to  the  democratic  Idea  of  Nationahty. — The 
Negation  of  Liberalism  ;  its  Half-Measures  and  its  Love 
of  Compromise  (Tolerance). — Liberalism  as  transitional 
Trend 416 

5  179.  Liberalism  as  Offspring  of  Protestantism  and  Parent  of  Social- 
ism and  Anarchism. — Renaissance  of  LiberaUsm  ? — Demo- 
cratisation  and  SociaUsation. — Is  Cooperation  of  Liberahsm 
with  Social  Democracy  possible  ? — Marxist  Repudiation  of 
LiberaUsm  as  Anarchism  .  .  .  .  .  .  .421 

II. 

§  180.  Herzen  upon  Liberalism. — Russian  LiberaUsm  and  its  Develop- 
ment       ..........     423 

§  181.  Why  the  Author  gives  no  detailed  Account  of  representative 
Liberals. — Lukewarmness  and  Indecisiveness  of  recent 
Russian  Liberalism. — Renascence  of  LiberaUsm  after  Nov- 
gorodcev ;  Democratisation  and  SociaUsation. — Russian 
LiberaUsm  akin  to  SociaUsm. — The  moral  and  reUgious 
Question  to  be  faced  by  the  Democracy   ,       ,    .  .  .     428 


Chapter  Twenty-One  :    The  Crisis  in  Revolutionism  ; 
The  Religious  Question. 

(  I. 

§  182.  Signposts,  1909  ;  the  Ex-Marxists  versus  th^  nihiUstic  Atheism 
of  the  IntelUgentsia  and  versus  the  Revolution  ;  back  to 
Christ  and  to  the  Church. — Liberal  Defence  of  the  Intelli- 
gentsia (Miljukov  and  his  Associates)         ....     435 


xvi  CONTENTS 


PAGC 


§  183.  Defects  of  Liberalism  in  religious  Questions. — One-sided 
Rationalism  and  Romanticism. — From  Romanticism  to 
ecclesiastical  Reaction. — Political  Appraisement  of  the 
Church  and  of  Religion  ;  Witte  versus  Pobedonoscev. — The 
Elections  to  the  fourth  Duma  and  the  Authors  of  Signposts. — 
Liberalism  as  Indifferentism      .  .  .  .  .  .     439 

IL 

§  184.  Social  revolutionary  Scepticism. — Rop§in's  The  Pale  Horse  ; 
the  Right  to  Revolution  and  the  Right  to  kill. — Rop§in 
accepts  Dostoevskii's  Analysis  of  terrorist  Nihilism  ;  Feuer- 
bach's  and  Stirner's  Autoapotheosis  leads  to  Murder  and 
Suicide. — The  old  and  the  new  Revolutionist  as  typical  of 
the  Contrast  between  Faith  and  Scepticism. — Subjectivism 
and  Ultra-individualism  ;  "I  am  with  No  one  !  " — The 
revolutionary  Subjectivist  as  a  decadent  Faust — Ivan  and 
Don  Juan — Sanin. — The  Terrorist  who  would  gladly  pray. — 
The  Revolver  as  last  Resort     ......     444 

§  185.  Rop§in's  second  Novel,  The  Tale  of  What  was  Not. — Cernov 
and  Plehanov  versus  RopSin. — Russian  Revolutionism  at  the 
Parting  of  the  Ways         .......     456 


PART    THREE    (A   Summary) 

DEMOCRACY   VERSUS   THEOCRACY;    THE 
PROBLEM  OF  REVOLUTION 

Chapter  Twenty-Two  :   The  Epistemological  Problem 
OF  Russian  Philosophy. 

§  186.  The  Summary  attempts  an  Explanation  of  the  facts  that 
have  been  adduced. — Russian  Philosophy  is  preeminently 
Philosophy  of  History  and  Philosophy  of  Religion  ;  its  Con- 
nection with  Politics  and  especially  with  the  Revolution    .     465 

§  187.  Russian  Philosophy  devoid  of  epistemological  Foundation ; 
Kant  has  had  less  Influence  in  Russia  than  Kant's  German 
Successors        .........     467 

§  188.  World-Historical  Importance  of  the  Kantian  Criticism ; 
critical  Reflection  in  the  Contest  of  Scepticism  against  eccle- 
siastical Rehgion. — Philosophy  versus  Mythology  and  Theol- 
ogy.— Russian  Thought  more  steeped  in  Myth  than  European 
Thought. — Russian  Negation  lacks  critical  Force. — Russian 
Longing  for  Faith. — BeUnskii  is  archetypal  of  believing  Nega- 
tion ..........     468 

189.  Kant's  Criticism  not  directed  against  Empiricism,  but  against 
mythical  and  mystical  Extravagance. — Herzen's  "  Disillu- 
sionment."— Kant  and  Plato,  Platonism  and  Nihilism  .  .471 


CONTENTS  xvii 

PA  ox 

§  rgo.  The  Russian  Thinkers  are  epistemological  Passivists,  adverse 
to  Criticism  regarded  as  subjectivist  Activism  ;  they  reject 
Subjectivism  as  SoUpsism  ......      472 

J  191.  Belinskii's  ethical  Analysis  of  extreme  Subjectivism  and  Ob- 
jectivism ;  Crime  and  Superstition  (Myth). — SoUpsism  as 
ethical  and  metaphysical  Isolation  ;  Murder  or  Suicide  as  a 
Consequence  of  Solipsism  ?  (Bakunin,  Belinskii,  Dostoevskii, 
Mihailovskii)     .........     473 

§  192.  The  ethical  Imperative  plays  a  Part  in  Russian  Philosophy 
despite  Empiricism  and  Utilitarianism  ;  Russian  Philosophy, 
too,  is  a  moral  Outlook  on  the  World. — Ethics  versus  His- 
toricism  ..........     474 


Chapter  Twenty-Three  :    The  Religious  Problem  of 
Russian   Philosophy. 


§   193.  The  Analysis  of  ReUgion  in  Russian  Philosophy       .  .  -477 

§  194.  The  religious  Disunion  of  Russia  ;  ecclesiastical  Religion  and 
the  rationalistic  Philosophy  of  the  Enhghtenment ;  Nihilism 
and  its  Negation  of  Religion  in  general. — Atheism  and 
MateriaUsm. — Russia's  sudden  and  unbridged  Acquaintance 
with  the  European  Philosophy  of  the  Enlightenment ; 
Feuerbach. — Moral  and  pathological  Consequences ;  the 
Problem  of  Murder  and  Suicide  in  Russian  Philosophy         .     481 

II. 

§  195.  Nature  and  Defects  of  Orthodoxy  ;    Passivism  and  Stationar- 

ism.     (Byzantinism) ........      487 

III. 

§  196.  Development  of  Theocracy  in  the  three  leading  Christian 
Churches. — Comparative  Considerations. — The  Reformation 
and  modern  Changes  in  our  Outlook  on  Life  and  the  Universe. 
— Attempts  at  the  Separation  of  Church  and  State  ;  the 
historic  Process  of  DisestabUshment. — The  Anti-ecclesiasti- 
cism  of  Catholic  Countries  is  especially  radical  .  .  .491 

IV. 

§  197.  Christianity  and  Christian  Passivism  favour  the  Development 

of  Theocracy    .  .  .  .  .  .      -    ,  .  ,     497 

V. 

§  198.  Historico-philosophical  Significance  of  the  three  leading 
Christian  Churches,  and  the  Development  of  the  anti- 
theocratic  and  antireUgious  Radicalism  of  Russian  Phil- 
osophy    ..........     5o« 

1*  VOL.    II. 


xviii  CONTENTS 

Chapter  Twenty-Four  :  Democracy  versus  Theocracy. 


PASB 


§  199.  Opposition  between  Democracy  and  theocratic  Aristocracy  : 
the  democratic  Spirit  of  Industry  as  contrasted  with  the 
aristocratic  Desire  to  rule. — The  democratic  Characteristics 
of  Science,  Pliilosophy,  and  Art. — Criticism  as  Determinant 
of  Democracy  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     506 

§  200.  Democracy  and  Religion. — Democracy  has  an  ethical,  not  a  reli- 
gious foundation  :  it  is  founded  upon  Justice. — The  Right  of 
Initiative. — Democratic  Catholicity  (popular  Sovereignty)      .     514 

II. 

§  201.  Catholicism  and  Protestantism  in  Relation  to  Democracy. 
— Protestantism  positively  demands  Democracy. — General 
Inferiority  of  CathoUc  Countries. — Catholicism  more  radical 
and  revolutionary     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .517 

§  202.  Inferiority  of  Orthodox  Catholicism. — Russians  are  compara- 
tively revolutionary,  but  comparatively  undemocratic  .     523 


Chapter  Twenty-Five  :    Democracy  and  Revolution. 

§  203.  The  concept  of  Revolution  ;  modern  Revolutionism. — Its 
Evolution. — Distinction  between  CathoUc  and  Protestant 
Peoples  as  regards  the  Degree  of  Revolutionism  .  .     528 

§  204.  The  ethical  Problem  of  Revolution  ;    is  Revolution  attended 

by  Bloodshed  permissible  ?......     533 

§  205.  The  jurist  Defenders  and  Opponents  of  Revolution. — Natural 

Law  versus  historical  Law         ......     538 

§  206.  Thomas  Paine  as  a  typical  democratic  Revolutionary. — The 
Russian  Revolution  anarchistic,  nihiUstic,  but  compara- 
tively undemocratic  .  .  .  .  .  .  .541 

§  207.  Bakuninism  and  Blanquism  ;  Russian  Revolutionism  akin  to 
French. — Western  Catholicism  and  Orthodox  CathoUcism 
the  Nurseries  of  Revolutionism  of  this  Type      .  .  •546 


Chapter   Twenty-Six  :     Holy    Russia  ;     the    Russian 
Monk  and  Feuerbach. 

§  208.  Russian  Catholicism  (Orthodoxy)  disintegrated  by  (German) 
Protestantism. — Feuerbach's  materialistic  Anthropologism 
and  the  Russian  Monk  with  his  third  Century  Orthodoxy. — 
Sudden  Exposure  to  the  Influences  of  a  higher  Civilisation. — 
Russian  Passivism  revolutionised  by  European  Activism. — 
Russian  philosophico-historical  and  philosophico-religious 
Analysis  of  this  historical  Process  ;  the  Problem  of  Solipsism 
and  of  Crime  ;  Murder  and  Suicide. — Impulse  to  Suicide  and 
the  Revolutionary  Spirit  from  the  eighteenth  Century  on- 
"wards       ...,.....•     553 


CONTENTS  xix 

PAGS 

209.  Significance  of  evolutionary  Stages  ;  epistemologically  con- 
sidered there  is  no  Superman. — World-historical  Importance 
of  the  eighteenth  Century  ;  Hume,  Kant,  the  great  Revolu- 
tion.— Medieval  Russia  drawn  without  Transition  into  the 
new  developmental  Process        ......     555 

§  210.  The  Explanation  of  Russia  in  Terms  of  Race  and  Nationality 
(national  Character)  is  inadmissible. — Economic  and  natural 
Conditions  are  equally  inadequate  as  Explanations        .  .     556 

§  211.  ReUgion  as  the  central  spiritual  Force. — Ecclesiastical  Religion 

and  its  educative  Influence. — The  Russian  Church       .  .      557 

§  212.  Goethe's    philosophico-historical    Formula;     the    Struggle    of 

Behef  with  Unbelief  .  .  .  .        .  .  .      558 

§  213.  The  Question  of  Russian  Independence  and  Originality. — 
Russian  Philosophy  of  History  and  its  creative  Mission  ;  the 
Overcoming  of  Nihilism  ;  Revolution  and  Imitativeness  ;  the 
Trend  towards  Hume  and  Kant         .....     559 

§  214.  Defects  and  Dangers  of  Europe;    in  Europe,  too,  there  is  an 

Aspiration  towards  Rebirth        .  .  .  .  .  .562 

§  215.  The  political  and  philosophical  Interest  which  Europe  takes 
in  Russia. — The  philosophico-historical  Problem  of  Russian 
Development ;    the  Russian  Revolution      ....     564 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   APPENDIX      . 567 

INDEX    OF  NAMES 575 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 


CHAPTER  FOURTEEN 

REALISM      AND      NIHILISM.     CERNYSEVSKII      AND 
DOBROLJUBOV.     PISAREV 

§95- 

I'N  Europe,  Herzen  was  carrying  on  Belinskii's  work,  and 
from  1850  onwards,  unaffected  by  the  censorship,  was 
exercising  a  hterary  influence  on  progressive  and  radical 
Russia  ;  in  Russia,  simultaneously,  Belinskii  found  a  successor 
in  Nikolai  GavriloviC  Cernysevskii.  This  writer  made  his 
literary  debut  in  1853.  In  1854,  he  became  a  collaborator  on 
the  "  Sovremennik  "  (Contemporary),  a  periodical  founded  by 
Puskin,  and  after  1847  edited  by  the  poet  Nekrasov.  Soon 
he  became  the  most  active  spirit  in  the  production  of  this 
periodical,  and  during  the  responsible  and  difficult  time  that 
followed  the  Crimean  defeat  he  was  literary  and  poUtical 
leader  of  the  younger  generation.  The  young  writer  was 
not  slow  to  avail  himself  of  the  comparative  freedom  of  author- 
ship during  the  first  years  of  Alexander's  reign.  His  hterary 
essays  from  1853  to  1863  fill  eleven  large  volumes,  although 
the  year  of  the  liberation  of  the  serfs  and  the  subsequent  epoch 
of  reforms  did  not  bring  enhanced  freedom  to  CernySevskii 
and  his  organ.  On  the  contrary,  to  the  government  and  even 
to  many  liberals  his  trend  seemed  dangerous,  for  a  pohtical 
ferment,  largely  due  to  Cernysevskii's  influence,  now  became 
apparent,  and  manifested  itself  in  1861  in  the  disturbances 
that  broke  out  among  the  students  and  were  directed  against 
the  reactionary  pohcy  in  education.  The  first  victim  of  re- 
pression {1861)  was  Cerny§evskii's  fellow  worker  on  the 
"  Sovremennik,"  M.  J.  Mihailov,  translator  and  poet.^     Next 

»  As  the  reputed  author  of  the  proclamation,  To  the  Younger  Generation, 
he  was  sent  to  Siberia,  where  he  died  in  1865. 

2  VOL.    II. 


2  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

year  the  "  Sovremennik  "  was  suppressed  for  eight  months 
and  its  editor  was  arrested,  for  during  the  days  of  the  Pohsh 
rising,  reaction  could  not  be  long  delayed.  After  two  years 
of  preliminary  imprisonment,  Cernysevskii,  now  in  his  thirty- 
fifth  year,  was  sentenced  to  fourteen  years  in  the  Siberian 
mines,  and  to  exile  for  life  to  Siberia — the  scaffold  comedy 
then  customary  in  such  cases,  the  ceremony  of  civil  death, 
being  first  played.  The  reasons  for  the  sentence  are  still  un- 
known. All  Cernysevskii's  extant  works  were  passed  by  the 
censor,  so  it  can  only  be  supposed  that  he  was  condemned 
for  some  illegal  publication,  or  for  secret  revolutionary  pro- 
paganda. The  police  did  in  fact  bring  forward  evidence 
bearing  on  such  a  charge,  producing  two  depraved  individuals 
(one  being  a  nephew  of  Kostomarov)  to  testify  that  Cerny§evskii 
had  written  secret  proclamations  and  had  had  these  printed. 
The  minister  for  justice  submitted  to  the  court  a  memorial 
Concerning  Cernysevskii's  Literary  Activities,  and  thereupon 
sentence  followed.^ 

^  There  is  no  good  biography  of  Cerny§evskii,  and  we  know  little  of  him  as 
a  man  and  in  his  intimate  personal  relationships  with  friends  and  family.  We 
even  lack  details  concerning  his  labours  as  author  and  politician.  ■  He  was  born 
at  Saratov  in  1828,  and  passed  the  earlier  years  of  his  life  in  this  town. 
Sprung  from  a  non-aristocratic  clerical  family,  he  was  at  first  trained  by  his 
father  for  the  priesthood,  but  since  he  showed  unmistakable  talent  for  litera- 
ture and  science  he  was  entered  in  1846  at  the  historico-philological  faculty 
of  the  St.  Petersburg  university.  In  boyhood,  CernySevskii  was  already  a 
great  reader  and  practical  philologist,  acquainted  with  many  languages  both 
ancient  and  moderii.  Apart  from  poetry  and  the  Bible,  the  young  man  was 
chiefly  interested  in  historical  writings,  the  works  of  Raumer,  Schlosser,  etc. 
In  St.  Petersburg,  Cerny§evskii  joined  a  hterary  circle,  whose  leader,  Irinarh 
Ivanovici  Vvedenskii,  introduced  him  to  the  study  of  BgUnskii.  He  also  read 
German  philosophy,  and  became  acquainted  with  the  works  of  the  French 
sociahsts.  In  1850,  Cerny§evskii  returned  to .  his  .  native  town  as  teacher  at 
the  gymnasija,  and  there  met  Kostomarov,  the  historian,  v/ho  had  been  sent 
to  Saratov.  In  1853,  CernySevskii  married  and  returned  to  St.  Petersburg, 
to  join  the  staff  of  the  Sovremennik  in  1854,  and  to  devote  all  his  energies  to 
that  periodical.  Little  is  known  regarding  his  life  in  Siberia.  He  was  visited 
by  friends  in  1871,  1873,  and  1875  ;  but  for  nearly  twenty  j'ears  all  attempts 
to  secure  his  hberation  were  fruitless.  At  length,  in  1883,  he  was  permitted 
to  return  to  Russia.  Through  the  intermediation  of  the  liberal  journahst 
Nikoladze  the  government  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  committee  of 
the  revolutionary  society  Narodnaja  Volja,  in  order  to  secure  that  there  should 
be  no  disturbances  at  the  coronation  of  Alexander  III,  and  one  of  the 
revolutionists'  conditions  was  that  Cernysevskii  should  be  set  at  hberty.  In 
18S3,  therefore,  he  was  sent  to  Astrakhan,  although  a  promise  had  been 
given  to  permit  his  immediate  return  to  Saratov.  Not  until  1889  was  he 
allowed  to  revisit  his  native  place,  and  he  died  there  a  few  months  later  at 
the  age  of  sixty-one. — Consult  G.  Plechanow,  N.  G.  Tschernischewsky  mne 
Literar-Historische  Studie,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1894. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  8 

Cernysevskii's  philosophical  development  closely  resembled  j> 
that  of  Herzen  and  Bakunin,  for  like  both  these  writers  he  \ 
was  a  student  of  Hegel  and  Feuerbach.       To  him,  however,  | 
Hegel  was  less  congenial  than  to   Herzen,   and  CernySevskii  5 
became  far  more  definitely  Feuerbachian.     All  that  he  took   ' 
from  Hegel  was  the  idea  of  development,  whereas  Feiierbach's 
influence  upon  his  mind  was  decisive.     Once  more,  like  Herzen 
and  Bakunin,  CernySevskii  learned  from  Comte  and  the  French 
sociaHsts,  his  views  being  formed  in  especial  by  those  of  Louis 
Blanc,  Fourier,  and  Proudhon.       But  far  more  than  Herzen     j 
or   Bakunin,    CernySevskii   had   recourse    to   English   writers, 
studying  philosophers  as  well  as  socialists  and  political  econo- 
mists.     His  readings  of  Bentham  and  Mill  confirmed  him  in 
his  positivist  outlook  and  made  him   a  utilitarian  ;    he  was 
famihar  with  the  writings  of  Owen  ;    in  economics,  he  recog- 
nised the  authority  of  Adam  Smith,   Ricardo,   and  Malthus, 
and  in  addition  that  of  John  Stuart  Mill.      It  must  further 
be   mentioned   that    Cerny§evskii   was   intimately    acquainted 
with  the  works  of  Buckle,  one  of   the  writers   on  historico- 
philosophical  topics  by  whom  Cernysevskii  was  ever  greatly 
influenced.      He  had  also  read  Vico,   and  many  earher  and 
later   historians    and   philosophers    of   history,    among   whom 
Guizot  deserves  special  mention. 

Cernysevskii  devoted  more  attention  than  did  either  Herzen 
or   Bakunin   to   the   literature   of  his   native   land,   especially 
when  still  quite  young.     At  the  university  he  immersed  him- 
self in  Bt^Hnskii's  writings,  and  Herzen's  work  hkewise  affected 
him    during    the   years   when   his    mind   was    still   eminently    \ 
receptive.     Thus  Cernygevskii's  mental  physiognomy  became    ' 
very  different  from  that  of  either  Herzen  or  Bakunin.    Russian 
Uterature    (Gogol   as  well  as   B^hnskii   and   Herzen),   Enghsh  \ 
impressions,   and  the  main   derivation  of  his  thought   direct   : 
from  Feuerbach  instead  of  from  Hegel,  give  Cernysevskii  his 
characteristic   philosophical   stamp.      Far   more   than   Herzen 
or  even  than   Bakunin,   he  was   a  positivist  in  the  Comtist    ^ 
sense,  a  "  reaUst  "  as  the  term  is  used  in  Russia.      He  con- 
sistently carried  out  the  disillusionment  postulated  by  Herzen, 
turning   away   from   German  ideas   to   Russian   facts.      With 
BSlinskii  he  conceived  realism  as  the  opposite  of  romanticism,    i 
and  he  fought  sentimentalism  in  all  its  forms,  demanding  an    I 
accurate  interpretation  of  human  motives.     We  have  further 
to   remember   that   Cernysevskii   remained   in   Russia,   where 


4  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

as  publicist  he  was  in  uninterrupted  contact  with  Russian 
friends  and  opponents.  For  this  reason  CernySevskii  was, 
if  the  expression  be  permissible,  more  Russian  than  Herzen 
I  or  Bakunin.  Russian  questions  of  the  day  and  Russian 
conditions,  were  his  chief  concern. 

In  further  contrast  with  Herzen,  CernySevskii  was  in  philo- 
sophical matters  more  consistent  and  more  stable.  At  the 
university  and  during  the  first  years  of  his  study  of  Feuerbach  | 
he  was  still  a  believer  ;  but  in  the  end  Feuerbach  got  the 
better  of  faith,  and  thenceforward,  from  about  1850,  Cerny- 
sevskii  remained  a  consistent  positivist  and  materialist.  He 
exhibited  no  trace  of  the  metaphysical,  struggles  which  affected 
Herzen  and  which  Herzen  repeatedly  described.     Cernysevskii, 

(like   Herzen,  had  to  pass  through  the   process  of  disillusion- 
ment, but  as  soon  as  it  had  been  completed,  this  chapter  of    j 
'  development,  was  closed  for  ever. 

This  is  a  mere  outline  sketch  of  CernySevskii,  which  must 
now  be  filled  in,  so  far  as  a  study  of  his  writings  renders  that 
possible.  Let  me  repeat,  however,  that  in  the  case  of  Cerny- 
sevskii, the  man  who  makes  so  few  direct  references  to  himself 
and  who  far  less  than  most  other  writers  furnishes  us  with 
indirect  disclosures  of  his  personality,  the  lack  of  an  adequate  . 
biography  is  peculiarly  unfortunate. 

Let  us  begin  with  an  account  of  Cernysevskii' s  philosophy. 
In  doing  so  we  can  justify  ourselves  by  quoting  the  author 
in  person,  for  he  contended  that  a  man's  practical  hfe  and 
all  his  other  activities  are  largely  determined  by  his  general 
philosophical  outlook. 

The  very  title  of  his  leading  philosophical  study.  The  Anthro- 
pological Principle  in  Philosophy  (i860),  suggests  Feuerbach 
to  our  minds.  In  view  of  the  censorship  Cernysevskii  did 
not  mention  Feuerbach  by  name,  but  the  contents  of  the  book, 
show  clearly  enough  that,  as  he  once  wrote  from.  Siberia,  he 
knew  Feuerbach  almost  by  heart. 

Alike  epistemologically  and  metaphysically  Cernysevskii 
adopts  Feuerbach's  anthropologism.  Man  as  a  sentient 
organism  is  for  CernySevskii  the  arch-reality.  Like  Feuerbach, 
Cernysevskii  combines  rationalism  with  sensualism,  and  like 
his  German  exemplar  (whom  in  this  point  he  outdoes)  he 
utterly  ignores  epistemological  criticism. 

A  special  study  of  the  subject  would  enable  us  to 
display    the    many    points    of    contact    between    pupil    and 


THE   SPmTT   OF   RUSSIA  5 

teacher ;  ^  at  the  same  time  there  arc  differences,  which  are 
largely  referable  to  Cerny§evskii's  lack  of  criticism.  But  the 
question  of  which  we  are  chiefly  concerned  is  how  we  are 
to  classify  Cerny§evskii  from  the  epistemological  and 
metaphysical  outlook. 

Cernysevskii  speaks  of  himself  as  a  materiahst,  and,  by 
friends  and  foes  alike,  his  doctrines  are  termed  materialistic. 
He  writes  :  "  Philosophy  sees  in  man  what  medicine,  physiology, 
and  chemistry  see  in  him.  These  sciences  prove  that  in  man 
no  dualism  is  discoverable  ;  but  philosophy  adds  that  if  man 
had  a  second  nature  in  addition  to  his  real  [material]  nature, 
the  second  nature  would  necessarily  manifest  itself  in  some 
way.  But  since  no  such  second  nature  displays  itself,  since 
all  human  conduct  and  all  human  manifestations  conform 
solely  to  his  real  [material]  nature,  it  follows  that  he  has  no 
second  nature."  I  select  this  passage  because  Cernysevskii' s 
materialism  and  his  philosophical  method  are  thereby  pre- 
sented in  a  nutshell.  CernySevskii  is  a  materiahst  sans  phrase,  . 
materiahst  after  the  manner  of  Herzen  and  Bakunin,  and 
therefore  preeminently  one  who  denies  the  existence  of  an 
imrriortal  soul.  Cernysevskii  recognises  the  distinction  between  ^ 
the  so-called  material  and  the  moral  *  phenomena  in  man, 
but  contends  that  the  difference  between  these  phenomena 
does  not  conflict  with  the  unity  of  nature.  Cernysevskii 
beheves  that  this  unity  of  the  physiological  and  the  psycho- 
logical can  be  illustrated  and  explained  by  the  analogy  with 
the  three  states  of  aggregation  of  water.  "  In  these  three 
states,  one  and  the  same  quahty  is  manifested  in  a  threefold 
series  of  quite  distinct  phenomena,  so  that  a  single  quahty 
assumes  the  form  of  three  distinct  qualities  ;  it  is  distinguished 
as  three  quahties  simply  in  accordance  with  differences  in 
quantitative  manifestation  ;  a  quantitative  difference  is  trans- 
formed into  a  qualitative  difference."  Here  we  see  once  more 
that  Cernysevskii' s  materiahsm  is  what  may  be  termed 
"  common  sense  "  materialism.  He  stresses  always  the  single 
nature  of  man.  Every  activity  of  the  one  and  undivided 
human  being  is  the  activity,   either  of  the  entire  organism 

»  Take,  for  example,  the  well-known  saying,  Man  is  what  he  eats.  In 
Cernysevskii  this  runs  :  "  Nutrition  and  sensation  are  so  intimately  associated, 
that  the  character  of  one  determines  the  character  of  the  other." 

2  Cernysevskii  here  follows  the  French  terminology,  "  moral "  meaning 
"  mental  "  or  "  spiritual."  This  terminology  has  important  bearings  upon 
his  ethical  ideas. 


6  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

"  from  top  to  toe,"  or  of  the  activity  of  a  special  organ,  and 
this  organ  must  be  studied  in  its  natural  associations  with 
the  entire  organism.  For  Cerny§evskii,  psychology  is  a  branch 
of  physiology. 

Consistently  with  his  m.aterialism,  Cernysevskii  teaches 
that  egoism  is  the  true  motive  of  every  action,  however  sublime. 

Let  us  pause,  first,  to  consider  the  metaphysical  and  epis- 
temological  problem, 

Feuerbach,  when  he  abandoned  his  primitive  Spinozism, 
conceived  monism  in  a  less  materialistic  sense  than  CernySevskii 
and  at  least  did  not,  as  a  positivist,  come  to  a  definitive 
decision  upon  the  problem.  Cerny§€vskii  had  a  great  esteem 
for  Spinoza  as  well  as  for  Feuerbach.  Accepting  Spinoza's 
monism,  he  conceived  it  in  a  purely  materialistic  sense,  and 
did  this  most  emphatically,  for  he  would  not  agree  that  posi- 
tivism is  metaphysically  vague.  For  Cernysevskii,  the  laws 
of  nature  apply  equally  in  the  domain  of  the  psyche.  Psychical 
processes  are  organic  processes,  and  organic  processes  are  no 
more  than  partial  manifestations  of  nature,  one  and  undivided. 

I  shall  not  undertake  a  refutation  of  materialism,  nor  shall 
I  attempt  to  test  Cernygevskii's  reasoning,  for  its  weakness 
is  obvious.  Cernysevskii  had  never  thought  out  philosophical 
problems ;  his  psychology  and  epistemology  lacked  pre- 
cision ;  his  work  displayed  numerous  contradictions,  the 
individual  thoughts  conflicting  one  with  another  and  with 
the  general  principle.  Materialism  was  for  him  an  article 
of  faith  and  a  political  program,  and  this  is  why  his  Anthro- 
pological Principle  became  the  program  of  radical  youth. 
Relentless  daring,  a  sovereign  tone,  the  energy  of  conviction  in 
the  name  of  science  and  not  in  that  of  any  official  metaphysic, 
ensured  for  Cernysevskii  a  literary  and  poHtical  victory  in 
the  debates  that  ensued. 

CernySevskii's  outlook  became  the  basis  of  the  reahsm  of 
the  sixties,  for  which  Turgenev  introduced  the  name  of 
"  nihihsm."  Liberals  as  well  as  conservatives  took  the  field 
against  this  realism.  JurkeviC,  professor  at  the  Kiev  seminary, 
writing  as  an  expert,  had  httle  difficulty  in  .indicating  the 
weaknesses  of  extreme  sensuaUsm  and  materiaHsm,  and  he 
was  able  to  point  out  a  number  of  by  no  means  inconsiderable 
errors  in  matters  of  detail.  Moreover,  Jurkevi(3  had  good 
reason  for  his  protest  against  the  general  tone  of  CernySevskii's 
essay.      Vladimir   Solov'ev   endeavoured,    though   with   scant 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  7 

success,  to  revive  JurkeviC's  memory  and  to  make  the  most 
of  his  attack  on  Cernj^Sevskii.  It  was  all  too  plain  that 
JurkeviC  was  merely  defending  theology  and  theocracy,  and 
that  ev^en  if  CernySevskii's  psychology  and  epistemology  were 
defective,  this  did  not  prove  that  JurkeviC's  ideas  in  the  same 
domains  were  correct.  It  was  doubtless  through  Katkov's 
influence  that  JurkeviC  was  now  appointed  professor  at  the 
university  of  Moscow,  but  the  latter's  sentimentalities  about 
the  heart,  and  similar  romanticist  survivals,  did  not  suffice 
to  stem  the  rising  tide  of  nihilism.  Katkov's  own  onslaught 
on  Cernysevskii,  and  the  attacks  made  by  the  liberals,  v/ere 
definitely  political  and  literary  in  nature ;  as  regards  the 
general  trend,  CernySevskii  carried  heavier  metal  than  his 
opponents,  and  his  rejoinders  afforded  proof  of  this  superiority. 
It  is  true  that  he  failed  to  secure  a  better  philosophical  founda- 
tion, but  the  controversy  made  plain  the  untenability  of  the 
opposing  arguments  and  aims,  while  in  the  struggle  against 
the  aims  Cerny§evskii  had  the  best  of  the  dispute — and  had 
right  on  his  side. 

Cernysevskii's  philosophy  and  his  literary  endeavours  bear 
the  stamp  of  the  enlightenment,  and  it  is  that  of  the  enlighten- 
ment in  its  aggressive  phase  prior  to  the  French  revolution. 
Cernygevskii  knew  that  his  thought  was  revolutionary,  for 
he  desired  to  continue  and  to  strengthen  the  revolution  of 
Peter  the  Great.  As  far  as  Russia  was  concerned,  Peter  was 
for  him  the  ideal.  Whilst  the  French  enlightenrnxcnt  and 
French  materialism  were  his  philosophical  and  political  models, 
he  found  his  literary  guide  in  Lessing. 

It  was  Cernysevskii's  ambition  to  be  a  modern  Aristotle, 
one  who  should  instruct,  not  Russia  alone,  but  all  mankind. 
Quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  enlightenment,  he  planned  several ' 
encyclopaedic  works  in  which  the  ideas  and  the  material  and 
mental  development  of  humanity  were  to  be  jointly  presented 
as  in  a  codex  or  in  the  Bible.  A  definitive  encyclopsedia  of 
"  knowledge  and  life,"  published  in  the  French  tongue,  was 
to  serve  the  needs  of  all  mankind.  | 

In  Cernygevskii's  view,   the   enlightenment   was  necessary    | 
above  all  for  Russia,  of  whose  culture  he,  like  Caadaev,  took 
a  low  estimate.     Russia,  he  said,  had  an  army  of  one  and  a 
half  million  soldiers,  and  could  conquer  Europe  as  the  Huns 
or  the  Mongols  had  done  of  old,  but  that  was  all.     For  him. 


as  for  Caadaev,  it  seemed  the  climax  of  patriotism  to  follow 


8  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Peter's  example  in  pushing  the  work"  of  enhghtenment ;  the 
west  needed  knowledge,  but  Russia  needed  enhghtenment ; 
Cernysevskii  felt  that  his  own  mission  was  that  of  pubhcist,  and 
a  pubhcist  is  "  not  a  professor,  but  a  tribune  or  advocate." 

Cernysevskii  does  not  conceive  the  enhghtenment  as  the 
propagation  of  a  civilisation  taken  bodily  from  the  west, 
and  he  accuses  Herzen  of  a  desire  for  such  "  civihsation 
snatching."  Enhghtenment  signifies  the  getting  rid  of  a 
false  outlook  on  the  universe,  signifies  a  new  civihsation 
on  a  materialistic  basis.  The  German  [Feuerbach]  had  indeed 
laid  the  foundations  of  this  materialism,  but  the  Russian 
would  be  its  universal  Aristotle.  Realism  notwithstanding, 
we  discern  here  a  species  of  popular  messianism,  even  though 
it  be  only  in  the  sense  of  Hegel  or  Feuerbach,  each  of  whom 
proclaimed  his  philosophy  the  terminus  of  human  thought. 

,  Cernysevskii  frequently  speaks  of  himself  as  a  rationalist. 
Following  the  French  usage,  he  employs  the  term  with  the 
connotation  of  reasonableness,  but  he  also  has  in  mind  rational- 
ism in  the  eighteenth-century  sense  of  an  unrestricted  belief 
in  reason,  so  that  he  deliberately  attacks  (in  theory  !)  the  life 
of  feeling  and  emotion  as  "  romahticism  "  and  "  sentiment- 
alism."  Cernysevskii' s  rationalism  is  dogmatic  in  the  sense 
in  which  that  word  was  used  by  Kant ;  Cernysevskii  accepts 
Feuerbach's  philosophy  quite  uncritically,  he  believes  in 
Feuerbach. 

Cernysevskii  takes  Kant's  subjectivism  less  to  heart  than 
his  Russian  predecessors  had  done.  Putting  this  "  meta- 
physical nonsense  "  aside,  he  passes  directly  to  the  order  of 
the  day.  But  in  thus  rejecting  subjectivism,  he  rejects 
criticism  as  well.  I  mean  that  his  belief  in  Feuerbach  is  not 
objectivist  merely,  but  uncritically  objectivist. 

§96. 

FOR  Cernysevskii  the  ethical  consequence  of  the  "  anthro- 
pological principle"  is  the  recognition  of  determinism 
as  valid  alike  for  the  life  of  the  individual  and  for  society  and 
history,  and  in  the  second  place  the  proclamation-  of  egoism 
as  the  basis  of  ethics. 

In  i860  these  doctrines  were  no  novelty  in  philosophy  and 
ethics,  but  nevertheless  CernySevskii's  use  of  them  exercised 
a   profoundly   stirring    influence   upon   his   Russian    contem- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  9 

porariea.  ■  Ho  made  no  investigation  of  the  problem  of  the 
freedom  of  the  will  nor  of  that  of  egoism,  and  it  is  indeed 
evident  that  these  problems  were  positively  ahen  to  his  mind. 
Since  Mill's  Utilitarianism  was  first  published  in  1861,  this 
treatise  was  not  available  to  CernySevskii  when  he  wrote  in, 
i860,  but  he  could  have  instructed  himself  regarding  the 
difficulties  from  the  works  of  Bentham,  to  say  nothing  of  Kint 
and  other  ethical  writers,  including  Feuerbach.  Moreover,  at 
a  much  earlier  date  Hume  had  effected  so  luminous  a  psycho- 
logical analysis  of  egoism,  and  in  particular  of  the  "  rational 
egoism"  which  was  the  peculiar  recommendation  of  Cerny- 
sevskii,  that  from  the  scientific  outlook  the  theory  of  extreme 
egoism  was  in  i860  an  anachronism-,  (Be  it  noted,  I  make 
my  appeal  here  to  such  ultra  empiricists  and  sceptics  as  Hume 
and  Mill,  and  not  to  a  man  like  Jurkevic  !) 

As  far  as  concerns  the  psychological  and  epistemological 
foundation  of  the  ethical  principle,  the  doctrine  that  man's 
actions  are  determined  solely  by  egoism,  we  find  passages 
even  in  Cernysevskii  wherein  this  contention  is  modified  by 
the  assertion  that  love  also  is  natural  to  man,  that  unegoistic, 
disinterested,  direct  love  for  his  fellows  is  one  of  man's  inborn 
characteristics.  The  essays  concerning  Behnskii  {Sketches 
dealing  it'ith  the  Period  of  Gogol,  1855)  contain  an  exphcit  and 
severe  condemnation  of  egoism.  It  is  true  that  even  in  this 
account  of  the  matter,  egoism  is  treated  as  an  inborn  charac- 
teristic, but  love  and  benevolence  are  likewise  regarded  as 
inborn,  and  the  human  being  vrho  acts  upon  exclusively  ego- 
istic calculations  is  positively  stigmatised  as  an  unnatural 
monster. 

We  read :  "  Positive  is  he  alone  who  desires  to  be  a 
complete  human  being.  Inasmuch  as  he  labours  for  his  own 
advantage,  he  also  loves  others,  for  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
isolated  happiness.  He  renounces  thoughts  and  plans  which 
are  disharmonious  with  the  laws  of  nature,  but  he  does  not 
renounce  useful  labour."  Following  Bentham,  Cernysevskii 
takes  as  his  standard  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest 
number,  which  it  is  the  business  of  the  individual  to  promote. 
The  general  human  interest  seems  to  him  to  rank  higher  than 
the  interest  of  an  individual  nation ;  the  general  interest 
of  the  entire  nation  ranks  higher  than  the  interest  of  any 
particular  class ;  and,  finally,  the  interest  of  the  state  is 
measured  in   accordance  with   the   number   of  its  members. 


10  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

But  all  this  fails  to  give  us  a  clear  insight  into  the  relationship 
between  altruism  and  egoism. 

As  regards  the  problem  of  freedom,  Cernysevskii's  material- 
istic determinism  leads  him  to  deny  the  freedom  of  the  will, 
and  this  denial  is  based  upon  a  general  denial  of  the  existence 
of  the  will  (or  rather  of  "  \vilHng,"  for  on  this  occasion  Cerny- 
sevskii  uses  more  concrete  language).  In  earlier  days,  we 
read  in  The  Anthropological  Principle,  man's  actions  were 
explained  as  the  outcome  of  his  "  will  "  ;  he  was  said  to  "  will  " 
to  do  good  or  to  do  evil.  But  the  anthropological  principle 
teaches  us  that  evil  behaviour  and  good  behaviour  are  not 
brought  about  by  any  moral  (i.e.  psychical)  or  material  fact 
or  combination  of  facts.  "  Wilhng  is  a  mere  subjective  im- 
pression which  in  our  consciousness  accompanies  the  origin- 
ation of  thoughts,  actions,  or  external  phenomena." 

I  am  well  aware  that,  before  CernySevskii  wrote,  the  attempt 
had  been  made  to  refer  will  to  the  sphere  of  the  intellect 
(Herbart),  but  CernySevskii  does  not  make  this  endeavour 
deliberately.  For  him,  the  intrusion  of  the  will  into  the  affairs 
of  the  world  of  which  the  organism  is  a  part  seems  incon- 
venient, for  it  disturbs  his  determinism,  and  will  therefore 
becomes  for  him  no  more  than  a  subjective  "  impression,"  a 
species  of  illusory  epiphenomenon  of  the  intellect,  but  an 
epiphenomenon  also  of  actions  and  of  external  phenomena. 
Yet  how,  we  must  ask,  do  the  thoughts  and  the  actions  arise, 
and  how  does  wiUing  accompany  the  "  external  phenomena  "  ? 
Such  questions  as  these,  such  questions  as  are  inseparably 
associated  with  the  problem  of  consciousness  in  general  and 
with  the  problem  of  the  separate  psychical  activities,  are 
simply  ignored  by  Cernygevskii.  Moreover,  his  materiahsm 
goes  but  half  way.  It  is  only  the  will  which  is  a  puzzle  to 
him,  and  there  is  no  difficulty  about  the  determined  intelli- 
gence !  His  teacher  Mill,  at  least,  was  more  consistent  and 
thoroughgoing  ;  so  was  Schopenhauer  ;  so  were  all  who  have 
discussed  the  problem  with  full  understanding. 

To  estabUsh  the  principles  of  ethics  upon  firm  foundations, 
to  do  this  in  the  theoretical  field  with  the  aid  of  accurate 
epistemological  criticism,  is  one  thing  ;  to  live  morally  and  to 
work  practically  on  behalf  of  one's  fellows  is  another.  It  has 
often  been  said  of  Cerny§evskii  and  of  all  the  egoists  of  the 
sixties,  that  these  men  who  were  egoists  in  theory  were  the 
greatest  idealists  in  practice.     This  is  perfectly  true.     When 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  11 

we  watch   Cernysevskii  at    work,   when  we   contemplate   his 
labours  by  day  and  by  night,   we  can  have  no  doubt  con- 
cerning  the   true   nature  of   his   "  very   useful   utility  "  (thus 
does  he  formulate  his  view  in  The  Anthropological  Principle), 
and  we  understand  why  his  egoism  is  to  be  "  rational."     Cerny- 
Sevskii's  opponents  marshalled  all  the  old  arguments  which 
have  from  the  first  been  adduced  against  hedonism,  and  yet 
Cernysevskii  was  anything  other  than  hedonist  and  epicurean 
in  the  sense  of  their  accusations.     Cernygevskii  detested  moral 
sermonising  and  the  inert  sentimentality  of  the  altruists.     He  ! 
simply  wanted  people  to  do  something  for  their  neighbours, 
to  work  on  their  behalf.     His  "  neighbour  "  was  for  him  no 
abstraction,    but   the   extant   social   organisations,    graded   in  i 
the  way  that    has   been  previously   described  ;  and  for  these  i 
and  with  these  the  individual  was  to  work.      Cernysevskii's  ' 
ethic  v/as  eo  ipso  social.      For  him  useful  labour  was  the  goal 
of  all  activity,  and  this  implied  for  him  the  demand  that  each  \ 
man  should  work  for  himself,  and  should  never  make  another  | 
work  for  him  and  in  his  place.    CernySevskii's  ethic  is  not  social'/ 
merely,  but  socialistic  ;    his  conception  of  practical  and  active 
love  is  communistic,  for  he  sets  out  from  the  naturally  given 
equality  of  all  men  (or,  as  he  would  put  it,  of  all  the  organisms 
of  humanity).     ISIaterialism  is  ethical  and  socio-political  com- 
munism ;  it  is  the  equaUty  of  rights  of  organised  human  beings, 
who  by  nature  lead  gregarious  lives.     The  love  for  his  fellows, I 
and  the  self-love  which  are  inborn  to  man,  lead,  upon  a  material- 
istic basis,  to  an  equality  of  rights  ;    but  this  equahty  of  rights 
is  by  Cern^'sevskii  carried  to  its  logical  term,  is  conceived  by 
him   socialistically   or  communistically  in  its   apphcations   to 
all  departments  of  social  life.     His  communism  does  not  halt 
before  family  Ufe  and  marriage.     "  My  linen  your  Hnen  ;   my 
pipe-stem  your  pipe-stem  ;    my  wife  your  wife  "  :    thus  speaks 
Rahmetov  in  What  is  to  be  Done. 

While  imprisoned  in  St,  Petersburg,  Cernysevskii  wrote 
his  first  novel,  What  is  to  be  Done  ?  ^  The  work  was  pubHshed 
in  1863,  and  became  the  program  of  the  younger  radical 
generation,  the  program  of  the  sons  against  their  fathers.  In 
Fathers  and  Children,  Turgenev  had  analysed  nihihsm,  fhen 
in  its  inception  ;  in  What  is  to  be  Done,  Cernysevskii  wrote 
the  gospel  of  nihilism,  which  was  already  at  work.    Kropotkin,! 

»  An  English  translation  by  Nathan  Haskell  Dole,  has  been  published  in 
New  York  under  the  title,  A  Vital  Question  or  What  is  to  be  Done? 


12  THE   SPII^IT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  all  who  have  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  sixties,  recognise 
this.  The  young  men  of  that  day  were  less  concerned  with 
the  philosophical  foundations  of  the  book  than  with  following 
the  positive  example  set  them  in  What  is  to  be  Done. 

It  is  easy  for  us  to  understand  the  powerful  influence  exer- 
cised by  this  novel.  The  mere  fact  that  it  was  written  and 
circulated  during  the  -author's  prosecution  could  not  fail  to 
make  its  effects  powerful  upon  young  men  of  advanced  views. 
But  even  CernySevskii's  opponents  could  not  close  their  eyes 
to  the  fact  that  in  writing  his  book  the  captive  had  done  a 
great  deed.  "  This,"  he  said  in  effect,  "  shows  you  w^hat  I 
want !  "  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  Cernysevskii  to 
give  his  official  and  unofficial  inquisitors  a  more  energetic  or 
prouder  answer  than  was  given  in  this  work. 

The  realists  or  nihilists  (the  latter  name  was  given  them 
by  Turgenev,  and  was  adopted  by  them)  are  in  Mliat  is  to  be 
Done  the  consistent  positivists,  materialists,  and  egoists  whose 
abstract  principles  Cernysevskii,  following  Feuerbacli,  had 
previously  expounded  in  his  literary  essays.  The  characters 
in  the  novel  are  guided  by  these  principles.  They  are  not 
learned,  but  they  think  scientifically  ;  they  are  persons  who 
feel  it  incumbent  upon  them  to  think  scientifically  and  philo- 
sophically ;  they  are  accurate  observers,  and  they  draw  logical 
conclusions  from  what  they  observe.  The  truth  of  actual 
fact  and  of  positive  knowledge  is  applied  by  them  in  the  moral 
sphere.  They  have  consistently  carried  out  the  "  process  of 
disillusionment "  demanded  by  Herzen,  not  excepting  the 
emotional  life  from  its  operations  ;  pose  of  any  kind  is  repug- 
nant to  them ;  naturalness,  simplicit}/,  directness,  straight- 
forwardness, are  their  watchvs'ords,  and  characterise  their  j 
lives.  They  therefore  speak  little,  and  would,  rather  act  or 
learn  ;  but  they  debate  much  with  one  another,  discussing 
chiefly  philosophical  and  socio-political  principles.  One  or 
another  of  them  maj^  carry  his  reaHsm  to  an  extreme,  but 
on  the  whole  they  are  persons  who  work  for  themselves  and 
for  their  fellows,  to  whom  the  best  which  has  hitherto  been 
demanded  as  a  great  exception  by  the  church  and  by  society 
seems  a  mere  matter  of  course,  by  which  they  are  to  guide 
their  lives.  They  are  at  ease  and  self-possessed  amid  the 
most  difficult  problems  and  in  the  most  difficult  situations. 
Everything  is  so  obvious. 

What  then  is  to  be  done  ?      Society  must  be  organised 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  13 

I  upon    a    socialistic    and    communistic    basis ;     its    institutions 

j  must  conform  to  the  ideals  of  Fourier ;    these  ideals  are  to 

:  be  realised  through  cooperative  organisations  a  la  Louis  Blanc, 

and  by  the  education  of  men,  not  only  as  suggested  by  Fourier, 

but  also  in  accordance  with  the  designs  of  Owen. 

V^ra,  Lopuhov's  wife,  takes  delight  in  organising  pro- 
ductive cooperatives  of  sempstresses.  Not  merely  does  her 
husband  assist  Vera  in  these  social  endeavours,  but  when  he 
learns  that  his  wife  loves  the  philosopher  Kirsanov,  and  is 
loved  in  return,  he  voluntarily  retires  from  the  field.  Having 
arranged  the  details  of  a  pretended  suicide,  he  betakes  himself 
to  America.  His  wife,  now  legally  free,  but  privately  in- 
formed as  to  Lopuhov's  place  of  residence  and  designs,  marries 
Kirsanov.  As  soon  as  Lopuhov  is  convinced  that  he  has 
overcome  his  love  for  VSra  he  returns  to  St.  Petersburg  to 
marry  a  friend  of  his  former  wife.  The  two  families  live 
thenceforward  on  the  most  cordial  terms. 

The  construction  of  the  novel  is  not  merely  simple,  but 
weak.  In  conflict  with  the  principle  of  realism,  there  is  little 
action,  but  a  great  deal  of  discussion.  The  most  important 
psychical  processes  are  not  subjected  to  analysis — and  this 
indeed  is  not  to  be  expected  from  a  realist.  The  socialistic 
institutions  of  society  are  presented  to  us  in  dreams.  Many 
other  criticisms-  might  be  made  from  the  aesthetic  outlook. 
The  main  interest  of  the  novel  is  concentrated  upon  elective 
affinities  (to  use  Goethe's  phrase),  and  upon  the  description 
of  the  realists  or  nihilists.  Persons  of  the  younger  generation 
were  enthralled  with  the  book  ;  those  of  the  older  generation, 
and  not  conservatives  alone,  were  angered  by  it.  Even  Saltykov 
used  very  ambiguous  language  about  it,  writing  on  the  subject 
in  Cernysevskii's  review,  and  comparing  nihilist  women  with 
demi-mondaines,  and  nihilist  men  with  the  minor  recipients 
of  official  distinctions.  The  literary  debate  concerning  nihil- 
ism gathered  strength  to  become  an  open  fight. 

The  woman's  question,  and  above  all  the  problem  of  the 
relationship  between  husband  and  wife,  has  long  exercised 
men's  minds.  Indeed,  we  might  almost  say  that  the  whole 
of  modern  literature  is  devoted  to  the  subject,  Rousseau, 
Lessing,  Goethe,  and  Byron,  did  not  merely  discuss  it  as  a 
topic,  but  Uved  it  in  their  personal  fives.  In  Russia,  during 
the  forties,  George  Sand  was  the  fashion,  but  PuSkin  treated 
the   subject   boldly    and   independently   in    the    character   of 


14  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

Tatjana.  Druzinin's  Polin'ka  will  not  accept  the  sacrifice 
which  her  husband  oilers  to  make,  and  remains  with  him  ; 
the  husband,  aware  of  her  love  for  the  young,  ardent,  and 
romantic  Galickii,  condones  it ;  but  in  the  end  dies  of  con- 
sumption. Similarly,  Herzen  makes  his  unhappy  husband 
die  of  drink.  Turgenev,  GonCarov,  and  Ostrovskii,  all  treated 
the  problem  prior  to  Cernysevskii.  Thus  the  last-named 
had  before  him  numerous  attempts  at  its  solution.  More- 
over, as  a  sociahst,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  devote  serious 
attention  to  the  subject,  being  impelled  thereto  by  socialist 
authorities  and  by  the  members  of  his  own  circle.  Mihailov 
early  began  to  write  seriously  upon  the  woman's  problem 
and  CernySevskii  followed  in  his  footsteps. 

Russian  history  contains  records,  not  only  of  learned  women 
like  Da§kova,  but  also  of  the  vaUant  wives  of  the  decabrists. 
Under  Nicholas,  wives  and  mothers  suffered  from  poHtical 
oppression  no  less  than  husbands  and  fathers ;  women  shared 
men's  poHtical  aspirations,  and  bravely  played  their  parts  in 
the  revolutionary  movement  that  followed  1861.  The  social 
position  of  the  middle  class,  and  above  all  that  of  the  rasno- 
cinec,  was  rendered  acutely  difficult  by  the  liberation  of  the 
peasantry,  and  the  woman's  question  consequently  became 
more  pressing.  As  a  result  of  this,  hberals  and  radicals 
busied  themselves  in  securing  the  admission  of  women  to  the 
sources  of  education  and  to  the  means  of  independent  liveli- 
hood. Even  the  government  took  some  steps  forward,  and 
women's  schools  were  founded  as  early  as  1858. 

The  reproach  of  immoraUty  which  has  been  made  against 
Cernysevskii's  novel,  the  reproach  that  the  author  is  an  advo- 
cate of  "  free  love,"  may  be  unhesitatingly  dismissed.  Even 
those  who  refuse  to  accept  Cernygevskii's  solution  must  admit 
that  after  separation  and  remarriage  the  two  couples  Hved 
far  more  morally  than  many  wedded  pairs  in  liberal  and  con- 
servative circles  of  the  day— not  to  speak  of  court  fife.  In 
youth,  Cernysevskii  had  made  up  his  mind  to  remain  continent 
before  marriage,  and  kept  his  resolution.  Writing  in  1858 
a  review  of  Turgenev 's  Asja,  he  said  :  "  Away  v/ith  erotic 
problems.  The  modern  reader  takes  no  pleasure  in  them,  for 
he  is  concerned  with  the  question  of  perfecting  the  adminis- 
tration and  the  judicial  system,  with  questions  of  finance, 
and  with  the  problem  of  hberating  the  peasantry."  This  was 
and  remained  the  dominant  mood  of  the  nihilists.'  Cernysevskii 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  16 

was  far  from  being  an  epicurean,  and  indeed  as  regards  this 
department  of  life  we  must  rather  look  upon  him  as  a  stoic. 

Cerny§evskii  desired  to  Hberate  woman  from  the  Old 
Russian  atmosphere,  from  the  yoke  of  so-called  patriarchaUsm,  ' 
and  to  make  her  into  a  "  thinking  being."  With  this  end 
in  view,  utiHtarianism  seemed  to  him  to  offer  the  best  guiding 
principle  where  the  love  of  man  and  wife  was  concerned,  just 
as  it  offered  the  best  guiding  principle  elsewhere.  In  the 
days  of  their  courtship,  V^ra  reproached  Lopuhov  for  his 
theory  of  rational  egoism.  It  was,  she  said,  cold,  prosaic, 
and  harsh.  The  utilitarian  egoist  answered  his  wife  as  fol- 
lows :  "  This  theory  is  cold,  but  it  teaches  men  how  to  create 
warmth.  A  match  is  cold,  the  side  of  the  matchbox  on  which 
you  strike  it  is  cold,  but  in  them  is  fire,  which  prepares  warm 
food  for  man  and  warms  his  body.  This  theory  is  harsh,  but 
if  men  will  follow  it  they  will  cease  to  be  the  tragic  sport  of 
futile  sympathies.  The  hand  that  holds  the  lancet  must  not 
flinch,  for  mere  sympathy  will  not  do  the  patient  any  good. 
This  theory  is  prosaic,  but  it  reveals  the  true  motive  of  hfe, 
and  only  in  the  truth  of  life  is  poesy  found." 

Through  the  personahty  of  his  hero,  CernySevskii  expressed 
his  detestation  for  the  theory  of  self-sacrifice,  which  was  always 
being  held  up  against  him.  "  The  word  and  the  concept  are 
false,"  says  Lopuhov.  "  Nobody  ever  sacrifices  himself,  for 
everyone  does  what  he  Ukes  best.     Sacrifice  is  mere  fustian." 

Cernysevskii  is  perfectly  right  in  his  animadversions  against 
sacrifice.  His  ethic  in  general  is  a  serious  and  noble-minded 
attempt ;  but  its  foundation  is  unsound,  and  it  is  impossible 
to  accept  the  solution  suggested  in  What  is  to  be  Done. 

Self-sacrifice  ?  It  is  true  that  genuine  self-sacrifice  is  a 
rarity.  Such  sacrifice  is  as  a  rule  purely  imaginary.  But  it 
exists.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  self-sacrifice  utterly  devoid 
of  egoism  and  utterly  free  from  the  spirit  of  mercenary  calcu- 
lation. This  is  where  CernySevskii  errs  ;  there  are  feeUngs 
and  impulses  of  a  quite  unegoistic  order  ;  and  Cernysevskii 
simply  does  not  understand — himself !  But  from  the  days 
of  Aristippus  and  Epicurus  dov>'n  to  those  of  Bentham  and 
Mill  the  same  mistake  has  been  made  by  more  than  one  phil- 
osopher, by  more  than  one  of  the  best  and  noblest  among 
mankind.  They  all  desired  an  empirical  and  practical  system 
of  ethics,  and  believed  they  could  base  such  a  system  upon 
the  doctrine  of  egoism.     Unquestionably  society  ought  to  be 


16  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

so  organised  as  to  render  self-sacrifice  superfluous,  for  as  long 
as  men  exist  who  are  ready  and  willing  to  make  sacrifices,  so 
long  will  egoists  take  advantage  of  these  sacrifices.  And 
seldom  indeed  have  men  any  right  to  demand  sacrifices  from 
their  fellows  ! 

In  America,  Lopuhov  overcomes  his  love  for  V^ra.  How 
does  he  effect  this  ?  Apart  from  the .  consideration  that  by 
the  year  1863  a  flight  to  America  was  already  a  somewhat 
trite  expedient,  we  feel  impelled  to  ask  how  Lopuhov  could 
succeed  in  extirpating  his  first  passion  so  radically  as  to  be 
able,  not  merely  to  love  a  second  time,  but  to  live  tranquilly 
in  close  association  with  his  former  wife.  The  author  tells 
us  how  V6ra  finds  Kirsanov  and  why  she  loves  him  ;  we  under- 
stand that  an  inexperienced  girl  may  delude  herself  concerning 
the  depth  and  genuineness  of  her  affection.  But  Lopuhov, 
a  thinker,  a  man  of  wide  experience  and  quite  exceptional 
intelligence,  was  he  also  self-deluded  when  he  married  V^ra  ? 
This  can  hardly  have  been  the  case,  or  he  would  not  have  had 
to  journey  to  America  in  search  of  a  cure.  But  the  main 
point  is  this,  that  a  man  or  a  woman  may  resolve  to  love  once 
and  once  only  during  a  lifetime.  What  is  to  be  done  then  ? 
"  I  will  love  but  once  in  all  my  life,"  is  the  entry  v.-e  find 
in  Cernysevskii's  ovv^i  diar}^  What  would  CernySevskii  have 
said  had  Lopuhov  elected  to  follow  this  rede  ?  Would  he 
tell  us  that  it  was  a  needless  sacrifice  ?  All  honour  to  utili- 
tarianism, but  there  are  times  when  it  seems  narrow  and 
petty.  ^  •     . 

CernySevskii  continued  to  ponder  the  problem  in  Siberia. 
In  a  comedy  (this  writer  loved  to  convey  his  serious  thoughts 
in  paradoxes,  jests,  and  shafts  of  irony)  he  shows  us  a  woman 
who  loves  two  men  with  an  equally  strong  affection,  and  the 
way  out  of  the  difficulty  is  discovered  in  a  marriage  a  trois. 
The  development  of  the  plot  is  as  follows.  First  of  all  the 
heroine  decides  between  the  two  men  by  lot.  When  the  die 
is  cast,  she  marries  one,  and  the  other  disappears.  The  wife 
falls  ill,  and,  acting  on  medical  advice,  goes  upon  a  sea  voyage, 
accompanied  by  her  husband.  A  storm  ends  in  a  shipwreck, 
and  the  two  are  saved  bj?'  being  cast  up  on  a  lonely  islet  and 
rescued  from  drowning  by  the  vanished  friend  and  third 
member  of  the  trio.  Recapitulation  of  the  earlier  troubles 
follows,  in  an  aggravated  form.  Jealousy,  despair,  thoughts  of 
murder.     It  seems  as  if  the  affair  must  end  in  the  destruction 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  17 

of  all  three.  But  why  need  this  be  so  ?  The  conflict  ter- 
minates in  a  union  k  trois,  and  hell  is  transmuted  into  paradise. 
The  "triple"  now  goes  to  Europe,  and  in  England  the  un- 
conventional relationship  leads  to  a  prosecution,  but  the  jury 
acquits  the  accused  after  a  brilhant  speech  from  the  wife.  In 
^America  thej'  are  received  with  open  arms. 

§  97- 

AFTER  the  death  of  Behnskii,  Russian  literature  and  •> 
criticism  in  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow  were  under  the  I 
dominion  of  the  police-aesthetics  inaugurated  by  Nicholas'  \ 
henchmen,  who  had  been  quite  thrown  off  their  balance  by  * 
the  revolution  of  1848,  Druzinin  and  Annenkov,  with  their 
philosophy  of  moderation,  their  liberalism  in  politics,  and 
their  system  of  aesthetics  which  was  tantamount  to  the 
advocacy  of  art  for  art's  sake  and  desired  to  immerse  itself 
in  memories  of  the  days  before  Puskin,  had  little  influence 
on  the  rising  generation,  on  the  young  people  who  had  read 
Herzen.  Annenkov  had  much  that  was  informative  and 
interesting  to  bring  back  from  Europe.  .  Druzinin  made  a 
name  for  himself  with  the  publication  of  his  novel  rolin'ka 
Saks  (1847).  His  critical  and  literary  essay's  were  instructive, 
while  his  studies  in  English  literature  and  his  translations 
from  the  English  tongue  were  of  value  as  a  supplement  to 
the  French  and  German  trends ;  but  Nicolaitan  Russia,  faced 
by  the  catastrophe  of  Sevastopol,  looked  for  other  pabulum 
than  was  provided  by  articles  on  Samuel  Johnson  and  by  the 
polemics  waged  by  the  English  tories  in  the  name  of  aesthetics 
against  "  the  didactics,"  that  is  to  say  against  writers  on 
social  topics  and  writers  with  a  purpose, 
.  Cernysevskii's  criticism  satisfied  the  philosophical  and 
political  needs  of  his  day.  As  we  have  learned,  he  made 
his  literary  debut  in  1853,  and  shortly  afterwards  he  took 
the  field  as  champion  of  Belinskii  and  continuer  of  that  author's 
work.  He  secured  general  recx)gnition  for  the  forbidden 
name  of  Belinskii  {Sketches  dealing  with  the  Period  of  Gogol, 
1855)  ;  and  in  his  thesis  for  the  degree  of  master  of  arts, 
The  Aesthetic  Relationship  of  Art  to  Reality  (1855),  he  applied 
Feuerbachian  principles  to  aesthetics. 

Cerny§evskii  feels  the  lack  of  beauty  in  life,  in  reality. 
He  demands  that  art  shall  not  merely  represent  life,  but  shall 

3  VOL.    II. 


18  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

interpret  it ;  it  is  the  artist's  function  to  embody  imaginatively 
the  development  of  mankind.  "  Beauty  is  life."  But  for 
this  very  reason,  beauty,  as  beauty  is  defined  by  idealist 
aesthetics,  is  not  the  sole  content  of  art.  "  All  that  has  a 
general  bearing  on  life>  is. the  subject  matter  of  art."  Aesthetics 
becomes  an  ancillary  science  to  ethics,  to  the  utilitarian 
principle  of  the  greatest  good  of  the  greatest  number,  and 
thus  to  the  policj/  of  social  regeneration.  From  this  point 
of  view,  we  see  that  the  doctrine  of  art  for  art's  sake  must 
be  utterly  rejected  as  epicureanism.  To  Cernygevskii  the  work 
of  art  becomes  the  work  of  labour  ;  labour  with  the  axe  is 
the  starting-point  of  all  art ;  Shakespeare  and  all  poets  and 
^tists  are  judged  by  him  in  virtue  of  the  utilities  they  have 
contributed  and  continue  to  contribute  to  society. 

It  is  true  that  the  artist  does  not  work  with  his  under- 
standing, as  does  the  thinker.  The  artist  works  with  his 
imagination  ;  but  precisely  for  this  reason  he  must  keep  all 
the  closer  to  reality,  seeing  that  imagination  cannot  attain 
to  reality.  But  inasmuch  as  the  artist  reproduces  life  in  his 
work,  inasmuch  as  he  endeavours  to  solve  the  problems  set 
to  him  by  life,  willy-nilly  (even  while  remaining  an  artist)  he 
is  compelled  also  to  think,  to  become  a  thinker,  and  his  work 
thus  "  acquires  scientific  significance."  Art  and  science  are 
handbooks  for  the  beginner  in  practical  life,  and  they  are 
works  of  reference  for  the  experienced. 

Cernysevskii  wages  war  against  false  art,  against  romanti- 
cism and  idealism,  employing  the  latter  term  to  denote  German 
philosophy  since  the  days  of  Kant ;  also  against  romanticist 
art,  likewise  contemned  as  characteristically  German. 

It  is  readily  comprehensible  that,  from  his  outlook,  Cerny- 
sevskii should  esteem  poesy  (imaginative  literature)  as  the 
loftiest  of  the  arts,  for  poesy  seemed  to  him  to  have  an  especiall}'' 
close  relationship  to  life,  to  be  the  most  generally  comprehen- 
sible of  all  the  arts,  and  to  be  capable  of  exercising  the  widest 
possible  influence  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  written 
and  printed  word.  He  does  not  admit  that  architecture  can 
properly  speaking  rank  as  an  art,  and  he  has  the  same  low 
estimate  of  music,  at  any  rate  in  the  form  of  song,  which  he 
regards,  like  speech,  as  a  means  of  social  expression.  Painting 
and  sculpture  he  esteems  devoid  of  action,  too  rigid.  It  is 
natural,  therefore,  that  he  should  give  his  full  approval  to, 
imaginative    literature    alone,    for    this    directly    reflects    and' 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  19 

interprets  life,  socio-political  life  above  all.  In  What  is  to  be 
.Done  he  furnishes  a  practical  example  of  his  theory.  Hence 
we  can  understand  his  definition  of  poesy  as  "  Life,  activity, 
and  passion."  It  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  despised 
romanticists  would  be  warranted  in  claiming  this  device  as 
their  own  ! 

In  his  socio-political  estimate  of  art  and  the  artist, 
Cernygevskii  is  thus  in  agreement  with  Plato,  the  ultra- 
materiahst  with  the  ultra-ideahst — with  the  romanticist  as 
Cernysevskii  would  have  to  term  him.  Plato  in  his  Republic 
subordinates  art  to  "  life,"  and  this  would  be  the  course 
taken  by  Cerny§evskii.  He,  the  socialist,  would  not  allot 
to  artists  any  material  compensation  for  their  artistic  labours, 
and  he  would  not  permit  the  enjoyment  of  works  of  art  until 
the  individual  could  no  longer  busy  himself  upon  the  useful 
(1861). 

It  is  from  this  standpoint  that  Cernysevskii  classifies 
particular  artists,  and  especially  poets.  Like  his  teacher 
Belinskii,  he  rates  Schiller  exceedingly  high.  Among  Russian 
poets  he  is  far  fonder  of  Gogol  than  of  PuSkin.  He  considers 
Pubkin  rather  a  pure  poet  than  a  thinker  ;  his  v/ork  lacks 
body  ;  and  he  has  no  definite  outlook  on  life.  Gogol,  on  the 
other  hand,  in  his  analysis  of  Russian  life,  gives  expression 
to  the  most  definite  ethical  aspiration,  and  this  must  be  in- 
cluded among  the  influences  proper  to  the  poet.  Cernysevskii 
condemns  Turgenev's  Asja  as  an  example  of  unpractical 
romanticism. 

The  aesthetic  conceptions  of  Cernysevskii  and  his  school 
were  unjustly  censured  as  hostile  to  art  by  the  opponents 
of  this  school,  who  were  animated  by  a  dread  of  materialism 
and  utilitarianism.  Cernysevskii  wrote  several  novels,  and 
it  was  to  elucidate  the  questions  which  seemed  to  him  of 
most  moment  that  he  had  recourse  to  art. 


§98 

CERNYSEVSKII  abandoned  his  work  as  literary  critic 
as  soon  as  his  disciple  and  friend  Dobroljubov  was  able 
to  take  over  this  department  in  his  periodical.  An  exposition 
must  be  given  of  the  little  that  Cernysevskii  'wrote  concerning 
Dobroljubov  as  aestheticist  and  critic,  and  this  not  merely 
apropos    of    the    friendly    relationship    between    teacher    and 


20  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

pupil  and  of  their  joint  work  on  behalf  of  their  literary  organ 
and  its  supporters.  The  account  will  further  be  of  interest 
because  it  will  serve  admirably  to  complete  our  knowledge 
of  the  teacher's  own  trend  of  thought.  Since  Dobroljubov 
was  exclusively  a  critic,  he  was  typical  of  the  new  realistic 
tendency  especially  from  this  aspect. 

Dobroljubov's  activities  were  not  of  long  duration,  but 
they  gave  a  rich  yield.  He  was  animated  with  an  enthu- 
siastic and  inspiring  love  for  intellectual  liberty,  and  he 
fought  to  introduce  the  light  into  the  Old  Russian  "  realm  of 
darkness  "  (his  analysis  of  Ostrovskii's  dramas  depicting  the 
mercantile  classes).  Writing  of  Goncarov's  Oblomov,  he  de- 
■  scribed  Oblomovism  as  the  issue  of  this  darkness  and  as 
characteristic .  of  the  Russians  in  general ;  but  the  errors, 
he  said,  were  those  of  one  already  struggling  towards  the 
light.  Oblomov  was  the  represelitative  of  the  liberal  nobles, 
inactive  but  longing  for  activity,  "  superfluous  persons."  The 
effect  of  Dobroljubov's  essays  vras  all  the  greater  because 
he  had  a  closer  and  more  realistic  knowledge  of  Russian  con- 
ditions than  was  possessed  by  his  friend  and  teacher  and 
because,  too,  he  had  in  the  highest  degree  the  gift  of  satire. 

Dobroljubov  turned  away  from  the  "  phantasmagorias  of 
the  orientalist  imagination  "  ;  he  turned  to  B^linskii  (of  the 
last  phase)  and  to  Herzen  ;  in  this  way,  like  Cernysevskii 
and  his  radical  contemporaries  in  general,  he  came  to  Feuerbach 
and  the  Hegehan  left.  He  now  adopted  the  political  views 
of  Cernysevskii,  and  in  the  latter's  review  secured  a  free  plat- 
form for  the  expression  of  his  ideas.  To  Cernysevskii  we 
owe  a  biography  of  his  young  friend  and  disciple,  who,  in 
turn,  exercised  considerable  influence  upon  the  teacher.^ 

As  materiahst  and  utihtarian,  Dobroljubov  could  not  fail 
to  ask  himself  the  question  whether  there  was  any  justification 

1  Dobroljubov  was  born  in  1S36  and  died  in  1861.  His  father  was  a  priest 
of  Nijni-Novgorod,  and  he  was  educated  in  the  ecclesiastical  seminary  of  that 
town.  Since  his  parents  were  unable  to  maintain  him  at  the  university,  on 
leaving  the  seminary  he  entered  the  Pedagogical  Institute  in  St.  Petersburg. 
His  parents  died  next  year,  so  that  while  still  a  student  he  had  to  maintain 
his  brothers  and  sisters,  which  he  did  by  translations  and  private  tuition.  He 
made  CemySevskii's  acquaintance  in  1855,  'CernySevskii  refusing  to  accept  a 
.short  story  by  Dobroljubov  end  advising  the  latter  to  leave  literature  alone. 
CernySevskii's  influence  upon  Dobroljubov  was  decisive.  In  1856,  Dobroljubov 
became  critic  on  the  staff  of  Sovremennik,  and  from  1858  onwards  he  was  editor 
in  chief  of  the  critical  and  bibliographical  department,  editing  likewise  the 
satirical  supplement,  Svistok  (Whistle). 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  21 

for  art  in  general  and  for  literary  criticism  in  particular,  to 
ask  himself  whether  literary  criticism  was  "  work  "  in  the 
sense  in  which  work  was  demanded  by  Cerny^evskii.  In 
Dobroljubov's  critical  writings  we  often  feel  that  this  question 
is  troubling  him,  and  his  answer  does  not  always  set  doubts 
at  rest.  WheFeas  at  first  his  judgment  of  Puskin  coincided  with 
that  of  Cerny§evskii,  who,  despite  his  admiration  for  PuSkin 
considered  the  latter's  work  lacking  in  realist  content,  Dobro- 
ljubov's later  opinions  concerning  the  utilit}^  of  poets,  and  of 
Puskin  in  especial,  have  a  harsher  ring.  But  a  closer  examina- 
tion of  Dobroljubov's  studies  leads  us  to  recognize  that  all  he 
insisted  upon  was  a  clear  distinction  between  art  and  pseudo- 
art.  Only  the  genuine  artist,  the  truly  great  artist,  has  a 
justified  existence,  for  he  alone  in  his  creative  work  is  so  per- 
meated with  the  truth  of  life  that  simply  by  his  faithful  repro- 
duction of  facts  and  relationships  he  furnishes  for  us  a  solution 
of  the  problems  we  are  endeavouring  to  solve.  According 
to  Dobroljubov,  persons  of  mediocre  talent  must  be  content 
with  subordinate  parts,  must  serve  in  the  interests  of  propa- 
ganda. It  is  true  that  the  question  arises  who  is  to  decide 
concerning  the  quality  of  the  talent  ;  who  is  to  decide  when 
an  .artist  is  to  be  classed  as  nfediocre  and  excluded  from  the 
circle  of  Dobroljubov's  recognised  great  ones,  from  the 
company  of  Dante,  Shakespeare,  Byron,  and  Goethe.  Of 
those  named,  Dobroljubov  esteems  Shakespeare  most  highly, 
considering  that  his  work  marks  a  new  phase  in  human 
development. 

This  realistic  valuation  of  art  does  not  differ  greatly  from 
the  views  of  the  romanticists,  who  could  not  stress  the  great- 
ness of  the  artist's  influence  more  strongly  than  did  these 
realists,  the  reputed  enemies  of  art.  In  matters  of  detail, 
too,  we  ran  discover  points  of  contact  between  the  two  schools. 
Dobroljubov,  for  instance,  considers  that  the  natural,  that 
nature,  is  psychologically  manifested  in  instinct,  instinct 
being  to  him  the  all-powerful  energy  of  nature.  Similarly,  he 
gives  a  psychological  explanation  of  the  suicide  of  Katerina 
in  Ostrovskii's  The  Storm.  I  do  not  myself  think  that  instinct 
as  a  blindly  working  force  takes  us  very  far  in  the  way  of 
explanation,  and  this  apart  from  the  consideration  that  the 
theory  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  high  valuation  of  reason 
and  culture  which  Dobroljubov  shares  with  Cerny§evskii. 
Manifestly  here  Feuerbach's  philosophy,  and  the  endeavour 


22  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

to  attain  to  a  purely  empirical  and  materialistic  psychology, 
are  at  work. 

According  to  Dobroljubov  (and  CernySevskii),  the  critic's 
task  as  propagandist  mainly  consists  in  a  kind  of  reperception 
of  artistic  truth,  and  this  led  Dobroljubov  to  prize  above  all 
those  works  of  art  wherein  the  artist  has  revealed  himself. 
It  is  continually  urged  against  Dobroljubov  that  he  was  un- 
just to  PuSkin,  but  on  the  other  side  we  must  point  out  that 
he  took  delight  in  Goncarov.  He  admires  Gonfarov,  not 
merely  on  account  of  the  latter's  creation  of  the  Oblomov 
type,  but  he  praises  this  writer's  repose  and  objectivity  and 
his  superiority  to  the  passions  and  influences  of  the  moment. 
The  desire  to  be  swept  along  by  the  current  "  is  Oblomovist, 
and  arises  from  the  wish  always  to  have  a  leader  even  in 
matters  of  sentiment."  As  propagandist,  Dobroljubov  exhorts 
us  to  judge  poets  by  their  theories  of  life, 

Dobroljubov  is  severe  in  his  criticism  of  Turgenev,  whose 
characters  Rudin  and  Lavreckii  have  too  much  of  the  Oblomov 
in  them  ;  but  the  critic  admires  Inzarov,  being  perhaps  here 
somewhat  inconsistent  with  the  theory  above  expounded. 
Personally  Dobroljubov  did  not  get  on  v/ith  Turgenev,  finding 
him  a  dull  companion,  as  Dobroljubov  said  openly  to  Turgenev. 
Turgenev,  on  his  side,  in  Fathers  and  Children,  inveighed 
against  realists  of  the  Dobroljubov  type  ;  but  we  cannot 
admit  that  Bazarov  is  a  direct  portrait  of  Dobroljubov,  as 
was  then  maintained  in  literary  circles.  Subsequently,  in 
Virgin  Soil,  Turgenev  recognised  the  imaginative  force  of 
Dobroljubov's  work,  but  spoke  of  the  young  critic's  relentless 
onslaughts  upon  recognised  authorities  as  "  the  attacks  of 
a  cobra."  Marx  compared  Dobroljubov  with  Lessing  and 
Diderot. 

Following  CernySevskii,  Dobroljubov  shows  how  the  indi- 
vidual's merits  and  defects  derive  from  the  social  environment. 
In  his  hands,  aesthetic  criticism  becomes  an  analysis  of  the 
family,  of  classes  (mercantile  and  aristocratic),  and  of  social 
institutions  in  general.  He  condemns  Russian  patriarchalism, 
which  enslaves  the  family  and  above  all  enslaves  woman  ;  and 
he  endeavours  in  Katerina's  suicide  to  discover  a  manifes- 
tation of  the  folk-soul  unbemused  by  official  morality.  To 
selfish  merchants  and  nobles  he  hold's  up  the  muzik,  the  folk, 
as  models.  In  the  political  field  he  condemns  as  Oblomovism, 
not  aristocracy  alone,  but  liberalism  as  well,   with  its  un- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  28 

practical  culture.  "  None  of  the  pblomovians  have  trans- 
muted into  their  own  blood  and  marrow  the  principles  that 
have  been  instilled  into  them  ;  they  have  never  carried  them 
out  to  their  ultimate  logical  consequences  ;  they  have  never 
attained  the  boundary  Hne  v/here  word  becomes  deed,  where 
principle  becomes  fused  with  the  innermost  need  of  the  soul, 
is  dissolved  into  that  need,  and  is  transformed  into  the  single 
energy  that  moves  the  man.  This  is  why  such"  persons  never 
cease  lying  ;  this  is  why  they  are  so  inconsistent  in  the  indi- 
vidual manifestations  of  their  activity.  This  is  why  abstract 
opinions  are  dearer  to  them  than  Uving  facts,  why  general 
principles  seem  more  important  to  them  than  the  simple 
truths  of  hfe.  They  read  useful  books  to  learn  what  is  written 
therein  ;  they  write  well-meaning  essays  in  order  to  luxuriate 
in  the  logical  constructions  of  their  ow^n  phraseology  ;  they 
utter  bold  speeches  in  order  to  enjoy  the  sound  of  their  own 
periods  and  in  order  to  secure  applause.  But  all  that  lies 
beyond,  all  that  is  the  goal  of  reading,  writing,  and  oratory, 
if  not  utterly  beyond  their  ken,  is  at  least  a  matter  about 
which  they  are  little  concerned." 

The  reader  \vill  not  fail  to  recall  Bakunin's  analysis  of 
the  liberals.  In  Dobroljubov's  characterisation,  the  liberals 
appear  as  "  superfluous  persons,"  who  begin  with  Puskin's 
Onegin  and  are  subsequently  represented  by  Turgenev's  types 
and  by  Gon(^arov's  Oblomov — dragging  out  a  miserable  exist- 
ence whether  in  literature  or  in  real  hfe.  These  cultured  and 
hypercultured  individuals  are  affected  with  the  malady  of 
Oblomovism,  they  suffer  from  the  paralysis  and  morbidity 
of  civilisation.  Dobroljubov  here  succumbs  to  a  paroxysm 
of  Rousseauism,  and  accuses  Pu§kin  of  remaining  too  much 
aloof  from  the  folk.  The  peasant,  says  Dobroljubov,  is  physi- 
cally and  mentally  vigorous  and  healthy,  in  contrast  with  the 
"  superfluous  "  weaklings.  Cernysevskii  by  no  means  shared 
this  favourable  opinion  of  the  muzik,  and  would  have  rejected 
it  as  romanticist.  Nor  do  we  find  the  theory  consistently 
carried  out  by  Dobroljubov;  but  we  have  to  remember  that 
the  mercantile  "  kingdom  of  darkness  "  was  peopled  for  him  by 
"  living  corpses  "  {Katerina's  husband  being  among  the  number), 
and  that  he  looked  upon  these  Russians  of  the  mercantile 
classes  as  persons  remote  from  civilisation. 

In  this  criticism  and  analysis  of  literary  and  socio-political 
types,    Dobroljubov   is   one-sided   and   lacking   in   precision. 


24  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Moreover,  we  can  detect  a  certain  vacillation,  for  despite  his 
campaign  against  the  Oblomovs  and  superfluous  persons,  he 
is  almost  mastered  by  an  enthusiasm  for  Stankevi(^.  If,  he 
tells  us,  most  of  the  members  of  human  society  were  to  resemble 
Stankevie,  no  struggles,  no  sufferings,  and  no  privations,  would 
be  necessary — "  those  privations  which  unduly  utilitarian 
persons  are  so  fond  of  expecting  from  others."  We  here  see 
the  utilitarian  discovering  that  the  utiHtarians  are  in  the 
opposite  camp. 

Dobroljubov's  pen,  Dobroljubov's  realistic  criticism,  became 
a  poUtical  weapon.  In  his  hterary  critiques  the  written  word 
was  actually  transmuted  into  deeds — opponents  declared,  into 
deeds  of  violence.  Doubtless  much  was  said  during  the  heat 
of  battle  which  would  better  have  been  left  unsaid,  but  we 
must  not  forget  what  weapons  of  word  and  deed  the  nihilists' 
opponents  used  !  Dobroljubov  was  a  fighter  ;  this  was  his 
mission  and  this  was  the  service  we  owe  to  him.  In  his  study 
of  Stankevic,  he  finely  tells  us  upon  what  he  is  waging  war, 
and  it  is,  "  the  constrained  and  artificial  virtue  of  inner  false- 
hood towards  oneself."  Dobroljubov  fought  this  fight  honour- 
ably. We  may  perhaps  note  here  and  there  in  his  polemic 
the  seminarist's  touch,  that  of  the  preacher  or  the  professor. 
From  his  days  as  a  theological  student  there  had  clung  to  him 
a  tinge  of  the  hermit  spirit ;  yet  his  judgment  and  condemnation 
of  the  world,  of  society,  was  not  religious  but  political.  Though 
we  learn  from  his  diary  that  as  a  student  he  aspired  in  ethical 
matters  to  be  guided  by  the  stoics  Cato  and  Zcno,  he  shows 
us  often  enough  that  he  failed  to  adhere  to  his  principles. 
Do  we*  note  in  him,  in  fine,  a  touch  of  the  Oblomov  ? 

Dobroljubov  never  attempted  a  philosophical  elaboration 
of  his  principles.  He  accepted  Cerny§evskii's  materiahsm 
without  making  any  strict  examination  of  its  foundations. 
To  him  personally,  since  from  childhood  onwards  and  at  school 
his  education  had  been  strictly  theological  and  religious, 
materialism  brought  enfranchisement.  Dobroljubov  was 
nourished  almost  exclusively  on  Russian  literature  ;  European 
philosophers  were  practically  unknown  to  him.  Moreover, 
his  interest  lay  rather  in  the  direction  of  practical  ethics  than 
in  those  of  abstract  philosophy,  as  we  may  learn  from  his 
essay  directed  against  the  pedagogic  principles  of  Pirogov. 

Nor  did  Dobroljubov  acquire  his  political  and  socialistic 
principles  in  the  philosophic  field.     It  is  evident  from  the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  25 

essays  against  Cavour  and  in  favour  of  Owen  that  he  was  here 
wholly  dependent  upon  Cerny^evskii.  Besides,  his  socialism 
was  the  fruit  of  personal  experience.  Dobroljubov  was  the 
embodiment  of  the  poor  raznoCinec,  was  the  man  who  in 
his  own  frame  had  had  experience  of  the  blessings  of 
poverty. 

Dobroljubov's  opponents  made  malicious  reference  to  a 
number  of  the  critic's  literary  oversights,  saying,  for  example, 
that  in  Beranger,  for  whom  he  had  an  enthusiasm,  he  had 
failed  to  detect  the  small-minded  adherent  of  Napoleon. 
Dobroljubov  did  not  contribute  any  strongly  original  ideas 
to  the  general  stock,  but  he  was  an  energetic  literary  propa- 
gandist, such  as  the  time  needed. 

§  99. 

CERNYSEVSKII  was  a  practical'  poHtician  rather  than  a 
theoretical  sociologist.  From  1859  onwards  he  pub- 
lished in  his  review  a  monthly  survey  of  political  events, 
devoting  himself  to  the  questions  of  the  hour,  but  always 
attempting  to  give  the  discussion  a  wide  general  bearing. 
This  endeavour  is  extremely  characteristic  of  CernySevskii. 
I  am  unable  to  determine  vv'hether  it  was  simply  a  mani- 
festation of  his  own  philosophic  trend,  or  whether  he  was 
influenced  here  by  regard  for  the  risks  of  the  censorship. 

He  never  wrote  any  connected  account  of  his  views  con- 
cerning the  philosophy  of  history.  His  fundamental  outlook 
upon  historical  development  was,  that  history  is  the  unfolding 
of  culture,  of  reason.  Progress,  the  developmental  process, 
is  conceived  bj^  him  as  a  growth  of  the  organism  of  man  and 
of  humanity,  a  growth  which  follows  a  rigidly  determined 
course  in  the  individual  and  in  the  species.  For  him  this 
idea  of  organic  growth  is  so  self-evident  that  he  does  not 
attempt  any  proof  of  its  truth.  After  he  had  made  acquaint- 
ance with  the  work  of  Buckle,  the  idea  of  progress  (in 
Buckle's  sense)  was  conceived  by  him  as  the  history  of 
enlightenment. 

Cerny§evskii  formulated  as  follovv's  his  thoughts  concerning 
the  general  scheme  of  historical  development.  The  aspira- 
tions of  the  best  men,  or  at  least  some  of  their  desires,  are 
after  prolonged  and  arduous  labour  understood  by  society  at 
large.     Society  then  works  for  a  time  at  the  reaUsation  of 


26  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

these  wishes,  but,  becoming  wearied,  desists  when  half  way 
towards  the  goal.  A  lengthy  period  of  arrest  ensues,  until 
at  length  the  "  optimates  "  get  to  work  once  more.  In  a  brief 
period  of  noble  stimulation  (this  is  Cerny§evskii's  euphemism 
for  the  revolution),  extensive  transformations  ensue.  Since 
these  changes  are  effected  somewhat  hurriedly,  we  cannot 
expect  that  the  new  constructions  will  be  beautiful.  During 
the  subsequent  epoch  of  stagnation,  the  optimates  are  at  work 
anew,  and  there  succeeds  a  fresh  period  of  active  labour,  fol- . 
lowed  again  bj'  slumber — and  so  on  unceasingly. 

The  significance  of  this  developmental  process  is  more 
definitely  represented  as  progress  towards  collectivism.  The 
mir,  we  are  told,  was  the  primitive  form  of  the  economic  and 
social  organisation  of  society  ;  next  came  private  ownership  ; 
this  will  be  replaced  by  collectivism.  The  change  will  take 
place  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  historical  evolution  that 
society  in  its  development  returns  to  the  primitive  form,  but 
the  later  manifestation  will  have  a  richer  content  than  had 
the  early  one. 

We  have  previously  learned  that  Cernysevskii's  attention 
was  drawn  by  Hegel  to  the  concept  of  evolution.  In  What 
is  to  be  Done  we  are  told  that  work  to  promote  the  develop- 
ment of  the  individual  and  of  society  is  the  only  true  happiness. 
The  evolutionary  law  formulated  above  was  also  taken  from 
Hegel,  but  was  modified  in  the  sense  of  Vico's  "  ricorsi." 
Development,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  slow  and  gradual  pro- 
cess. CernySevskii  does  not  accept  the  notion  of  a  definitive 
revolution  ;  he  considers  that  we  never  get  more  than 
approximations  to  the  ideal. 

This  outlook  is  admirably  expressed  in  What  is  to  he  Done. 
Cernysevskii's  characters  display  different  stages  of  progress 
towards  perfection,  and  we  see  how  in  capitalist  society  social- 
istic plans  are  being  realised  in  varying  degrees.  CernySevskii 
shows  us  an  entire  gradation  of  characters,  these  being  in  a 
position  to  realise  the  correct  principles,  some  to  a  greater  and 
some  to  a  lesser  extent.  All  meet  with  his  approval,  but  he 
esteems  most  highly  the  ideal  figure  of  Rahmetov. 

From  time  to  time  CernySevskii  discusses  individual 
factors  of  evolution.  For  example,  he  shows,  in  opposi- 
tion to  Buckle,  that  cHmatic  conditions  have  little  effect 
upon  development.  In  another  place  he  refutes  the  idea 
that  the  influence  of  racial  qualities  is  decisive. 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  27 

The  lack  of  a  philosophy  of  history  is  partly  the  outcome 
of  CernySevskii's  rationalism.  He  followed  Feuerbach  rather 
than  Hegei ;  he  followed  the  rationalists  generally,  in  whom 
the  historical  sense  had  not  yet  awakened.  CernySevskii's  whole 
dialectic  is  unhistorical ;  it  is  logical,  rationalistic.  Cerny- 
Sevskii  adopts  the  prehegeHan  and  precomtist  outlook,  the 
outlook  of  a  day  when  the  evolutionary  idea  had  not  become 
established.  We  can  see  that  in  part,  too,  he  was  influenced, 
in  this  connection,  by  the  materialistic  view  of  the  individual 
and  of  the  social  organism,  in  accordance  with  which  progress, 
history,  is  expla'ned  as  organic  or  physiological  growth.  In 
his  polemic  against  CiCerin  (1859),  we  already  find  him  defend- 
ing the  opinion  that  every  really  live  man  will  and  must,  as 
a  student  of  science,  bring  his  conviction  of  what  is  right  into 
play  in  his  scientific  v/ork  as  well  as  elsewhere.  "  The  only 
persons  who  will  not  display  their  convictions  in  this  manner 
are  those  who  have  no  convictions." 

Cernygevskii  expressly  condemns  Roscher's  historical 
method,  and  does  so  with  much  justice,  for  the  method  is 
utterly  fallacious.  He  makes  a  distinction  between  "  the  theory 
of  the  object  "  and  its  history  ;  he  admits  that  the  two  branches 
-of  knowledge  "  are  closely  connected  each  with  the  other," 
but  does  not  attempt  a  more  precise  study  of  the  nature  of 
the  connection.  He  was  perhaps  thinking  of  Comte's  dis- 
tinction between  sociological  statics  and  dynamics.  But  all 
that  his  disquisition  discloses  is. that  he  chiefly  had  in  mind 
the  "constantly  "  existing  objects,  and  above  all  had  in  mind 
the  present,  which  he  did  not  think  of  as  history,  for  he  thought 
of  history  (wrongly,  of  course)  rather  as  the  study  of  remote 
times. 

Nevertheless  we  find  that  Cerny§evskii  expresses  the  view 
that  history  is  the  basis  of  theory,  at  least  in  the  domain  of 
art.  "  The  history  of  art  is  the  foundation  of  the  theory 
of  art." 

For  the  elucidation  of  economic  ideas,  Cernysevskii  makes 
use  of  a  "  hypothetical  method  "  which  is  tantamount  to  the 
resurrection  of  our  old  friend  Robinson  Crusoe,  so  familiar 
in  economic  disquisitions.  He  "  hypothetically  "  assumes  the 
existence  of  a  social  order  wherein  the  phenomena  under  con- 
sideration are  displayed  in  their  essential  simplicity.  He  fails 
to  notice  that  his  abstraction  from  existing  facts  may  readily 
become  most  unrealistic. 


28  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

§  100. 

AS  an  appendix  to  what  has  just  been  said  we  must  discuss 
Cernysevskii's    relationship    to    Marx   and  to   historical 
materiahsm. 

From  the  Marxist  side  we  learn  that  Cernygevskii  was  a 
Utopian  sociaHst,  and  that  he  was  an  "  idealist  "  notwithstand- 
ing his  materialisAi  in  the  explanation  of  social  phenomena. 
Some  Marxists  tell  us,  however,  that  Cernysevskii  came  nearer 
than  any  other  man  of  his  day  to  scientific  socialism  and 
historical  materialism. 

It  has  been  shown  above  that  Cernysevskii's  conception 
of  history  differed  from  that  of  Marx.  But  the  main  point  is 
that  the  Russian  considered  the  understanding  to  be  the  motive 
force  of  history  and  of  human  Ufe  in  general — though  he  failed 
to  explain  how  and  in  accordance  with  what  laws  the  under- 
standing or  the  brain  undergoes  modifications.  The  under- 
standing, culture,  science,  opinion  (Cernysevskii's  terminology 
lacks  precision  and  uniformity),  are  the  primary  motive  force, 
that  which  sets  other  forces  at  work?  In  What  is  to  be  Done 
the  mission  of  Rahmetov,  the  ideal  man  of  the  new  time,  is 
described  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Such  persons  are  few  in 
number,  but  through  them  the  general  life  blossoms,  and 
without  them  it  would  be  choked  ;  they  are  few  in  number, 
but  they  enable  all  other  men  to  breathe,  for  without  them 
these  would  be  stifled.  Honest  and  good  men  exist  in  plenty, 
but  those  of  whom  I  am  thinking  are  rare  specimens.  They 
are  like  theine  in  tea,  Hke  the  bouquet  in  a  fine  wine,  they  are 
the  source  of  the  strength  and  the  fragrance.  They  are  the 
flower  of  the  optimates  ;  they  are  the  primal  sources  of  energy  ; 
they  are  the  salt  of  the  salt  of  the  earth." 

Thus  it  is  Rahmetov  and  his  kind  who  count,  and  not 
the  methods  of  production  !  In  his  novel,  CernySevskii  pre- 
sented us  with  no  more  than  eight  such  primal  sources  of  energy. 
In  history  he  had  found  one,  Lessing.  With  contagious  enthu- 
siasm, Cernysevskii  describes  this  hero  of  the  spirit  and  his 
significance  for  the  Germany  of  that  day.  "  Though  politics 
and  industry  may  move  noisily  along  in  the  foreground  of 
history,  history  none,  the  less  bears  witness  to  the  fact  that 
knowledge  is  the  essential  energy  to  which  poUtics,  industry, 
and  all  else  in  human  life,  are  subordinated."  In  the  same 
sense,  in  his  historical  disquisitions,  it  is  Cernysevskii's  way 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  29 

to  draw  special  attention  to  individual  forces  when  he  is  deahng 
with  differont  countries  and  various  times.  Religion,  science, 
literature  and  art,  politics  with  journalism  and  parliamen- 
tarism, militarism,  the  economic  or  material  conditions  of  social 
existence,  may  each  in  turn  occup}^  "  the  foreground."  But 
he  insists  that  in  all  these  forces  the  understanding  is  a  factor, 
though  he  fails  to  show  how  and  to  what  extent  it  operates, 
for  here,  as  usual,  precision  of  detail  is  lacking.  He  tells  us 
more  than  once  that  all  the  evil  in  the  world  comes  from  the 
disorder  in  men's  heads.  He  uses  such  expressions  as  the 
following  :  "  The  great  facts 'of  historic  Ufe  give  the  tone  to 
hfe,"  Criticise  his  v.^ant  of  precision  as  we  may,  at  least  we 
must  admit  that  this  is  not  the  doctrine  of  historical  materiahsm. 
Cernysevskii  does  indeed  tell  us  that  material  conditions  "  per- 
haps play  the  leading  role  in  hfe  and  may  be  the  fundamental 
causes  of  almost  all  the  happenings  in  other  and  higher  spheres 
of  Ufe"*,  but  the*  hypothetical  formulation  suffices  to  show 
tliat  Cernysevskii's  doctrine  was  not  historical  materiahsm. 

There  are  other  proofs  besides  the  admiration  for  Lessing, 
for  we  find  that  Cernysevskii  assigns  to  literature  a  role  very 
different  from  that  assigned  to  it  in  the  work  of  Marx.  For 
example,  Cernysevskii  thinks  that  Gogol's  influence  was  pro- 
foundly important  for  Russia  ;  great,  he  says,  was  the  work 
done  by  Byron  for  England  and  for  humanity  as  a  whole 
(Byron  was  a  greater  power  than  Napoleon). 

After  his  return  from  Siberia,  Cernj^sevskii  wrote  an  essay 
against  Darwinism,  and  this  aroused  much  hostiUty,  for  he 
represented  the  Darwinian  theory  as  a  bourgeois  discovery 
intended  to  justify  the  exploitation  of  the  workers.  Cernysevskii 
declared  himself  an  adherent  of  Lamarck,  and  his  essay  was 
signed  "  Transformist."  References  have  been  made  to  the 
relationship  betv/een  Cernysevskii's  ideas  and  the  newer 
Lamarckism.  I  only  refer  to  these  matters  because  Marx 
and  Engels  were  Darwinians.  In  my  opinion,  Cernysevskii 
more  correctly  diagnosed  the  aristocratic  character  of  Darwin's 
teaching  than  the  Darwinian  Marxists  who  interpreted  Darwin- 
ism democratically.  However  this  may  be,  I  may  point  out 
that  Cernysevskii  condemned  the  struggle  for  existence  on 
moral  grounds,  and  I  may  also  recall  Dobroljubov's  repudiation 
of  struggle.  The  class  struggle,  again,  is  regarded  by  Cerny- 
sevskii, in  so  far  as  he  describes  it,  as  a  deviation  from  .the 
norm,  whereas  to  Marx  this  struggle  is  natural 'and  normal. 


30  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

Finally  a  notable  distinction  between  the  two  men  is  found 
in  this,  that  CernySevskii  employed  the  novel  for  the  exposition 
of  his  most  important  theories,  whereas  Marx  favoured  a 
strictly  scientific  method  and'sought  always  for  logical  proof. ^ 


§  loi. 

V 

CERNYSEVSKII'S  socialism  is  not  Marxist.  As  we  have 
shown  in  our  discussion  of  What  is  to  be  Done,  Cerny-. 
sevskii,  like  his  predecessors,  finds  an  ethical  foundation  for 
socialism.  Moreover,  Cernysevskii  adopted  the  pragmatical 
trend  of  German  philosophy,  and  was  inclined  to  rate  practice 
above  theory.  I  have  already  drawn  attention  to  his  termin- 
ology, and  have  shown  how  he  speaks  of  the  sciences  of  the 
mind  as  "  moral  "  sciences,  and  have  pointed  out  that  the  moral 
aspects  of  his  outlook  are  stressed  in  his  mode  of  expression. 
Socialism  is  to  him  a  matter  of  conviction  ;  it  is  the  categorical 
imperative  of  virile  honesty  ;  he  is  fond  of  using  this  latter 
expression  to  denote  "the  good"  as  he  understands  it  in 
utilitarian  fashion. 

Cernysevskii  (and  with  him  Dobroljubov,  as  we  have  seen) 
is  far  too  strong  an  individuaHst  to  accept  Marxist  socialism. 
His  best-known  saying,  which  dates  from  1859  and  was  fre- 
quently repeated,  runs :  "  We  perceive  nothing  on  earth 
higher  than  human  personality."  He  could  not  accept  Marxist 
sociahsm  because  he  had  far  too  strong  a  belief  in  heroes  of 
the  spirit  a  la  Lessing,  too  strong  a  belief  in  literature  and  in 
the  powers  of  his  own  pen  ;  and  secondly,  because  he  had  far 
too  little  confidence  in  the  masses.  In  the  latter  respect, 
Cernygevskii  may  have  vacillated  ;  it  is  possible,  as  many  of 
his  exponents  declare,  that  in  later  days  he  came  to  believe 

»  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  whether  CernySevskii  knew  the  work  of 
Marx  or  that  of  Engels.  Engels  was  quoted  in  the  Sovremennik  ;  in  1872  a 
copy  of  Capital  was  sent  to  CernySevskii  in  Siberia  ;  but  he  never  mentioned 
the  book  or  its  author.  Rusanov  who  in  1910  gave  an  account  of  the  contents 
of  CernySevskii's  Siberian  letters,  expresses  surprise  at  CernySevskii's  silence 
upon  this  matter.  It  is  certainly  remarkable,  for  CernySevskii  was  accustomed 
to  write  about  the  books  sent  to  him  even  when  these  were  of  little  importance. 
Yet  more  striking  is  it  that  before  his  exile  to  Siberia,  Cernygevskii  should  have 
failed  to  come  across  the  writings  of  Marx  :  the  newspapers  ;  the  Communist 
Manifesto  ;  the  first  controversy  with  Bakunin  ;  the  Holy  Family,  i'S45  ;  the 
polemic  against  Proudhon,  1S47  ;  A  Criticism  of  Political  Economy,  1859, 
In  the  postscript  to  the  second  edition  of  Capital,  Marx  gave  a  word  of  praise 
to  CernySevskii's  work  on  MilU 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  31 

in  the  political,  nay  in  the  revolutionary,  force  of  the  broad 
masses  of  the  people  ;  but  on  the  whole  he  was  far  removed 
from  Dobroljubov's  Rousseauism.  In  his  essay  on  Thierry 
he  writes  in  an  almost  elegiac  strain  when  he  represents  the 
crowd  as  incompetent  to  understand  and  to  esteem  work  done 
on  its  behalf.  He  consequently  recommends  the  great  men 
v/hom  he  admires  to  seek  the  justification  for  their  activities 
in  these  activities  themselves,  untroubled  by  the  question 
whether  the  crov/d  (he  constantly  employs  the  word  iolpa, 
which  contemptuously  denotes  the  unintelligent  mob)  can 
follow  them  ;  and  he  WTites,  "  to  close  one's  career  in  bitter 
solitude  of  the  understanding  and  of  the  heart,  this  is  worthy 
of  undying  respect  and  admiration."  The  hero  of  a  novel 
written  by  Cernysevskii  in  1889,  after  his  return  from  Siberia 
and  shortly  before  his  death,  says,  "  I  love  the  people  of  my 
own  nation,  but  I  find  myself  out  of  touch  with  them." 

In  this  mood,  Cernysevskii  acclaimed  the  accounts  of  folk- 
life  we  owe  to  N.  V.  Uspenskii  (not  to  be  confounded  with  his 
nephew  Gleb  Uspenskii),  for  this  writer  scourged  the  misery 
and  ignorance  of  the  muzik.  Uspenskii  himself  died  poor 
and  unknown. 

Cernygevskii's' political  activities  began  in  the  days  when 
the  liberation  of  the  peasantry  was  being  vigorously  advocated. 
He  energetically  demanded  that  the  peasants  should  be  given 
land,  and  after  the  liberation  he  favoured  the  reforms  neces- 
sitated by  that  step.  His  insistence  that  the  peasant  must 
have  land  was  a  logical  deduction  from  his  thesis  that  every- 
one must  work  for  himself,  on  his  own  behalf.  »  If  the  peasant 
were  to  be  enabled  to  do  this,  he  must  own  a  plot  of  land.  In 
this  demand,  says  CernySevskii,  are  comprised  all  those  con- 
tained in  the  so-called  Utopias,  and  the  phrase  shows  how  far 
Cernygevskii  himself  was  a  Utopian  ;  he  was  content,  at  any 
rate,  v/ith  the  formulation  of  this  modest  aim. 

Such  was  Cernysevskii's  language  before  the  liberation. 
At  that  time  (1858)  he  dissented  from  the  view  of  Haxtbausen 
and  the  latter's  Russian  adherents,  that  in  Russia  a  system  of 
agriculture  based  upon  the  workers  alone  was  an  impossibility. 

In  conformity  with  Russian  conditions,  he  conceived  of 
classes  rather  as  estates,  or  at  times  as  (political)  parties.  He 
did  not  recognise  the  class  struggle  in  the  Marxist  sense. 

His  leading  demand  was  for  a  harmonious  distribution  of 
the  product  of  labour.     He  thought  here,  above  all,  of  Malthus 


32  THE    SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  his  law  of  population,  to  which  he  had  devoted  much  I 
consideration,  desiring  to  give  it  a  better  arithmetical  formu- 
lation. He  adopted  from  Malthus  the  latter's  id^as  on  the 
relationship  between  the  increase  in  population  and  the  increase 
in  the  means  of  subsistence,  but  wished  to  correct  the  English 
economist's  calculations,  and  it  was  typical  of  Cernysevskii 
that  he  should  fail  to  recognise  how  arbitrary  is  Malthus' 
mathematical  formula.  He  placed  Malthus  beside  Ricardo 
as  one  of  the  greatest  of  thinkers,  and  declared  that  a  know- 
ledge of  Malthus  was  an  essential  precondition  to  accurate 
sociological  thought. 

In  economics,  Cernysevskii  followed  the  so-called  classical 
economists,  especially  Adam  Smith  and  Ricardo  ;  but  he  had 
a  personal  preference  for  John  Stuart  Mill,  and  in  his  trans- 
lation of  this  writer's  work  he  gave  expression  in  notes  to 
occasional  dissent,  voicing  his  own  radical  views.  He  doubtless 
selected  Mill  owing  to  the  latter's  intimate  association  with 
utilitarian  ethics  and  sociology.  Moreover,  Mill's  political 
individualism  was  congenial  to  Cernysevskii.  His  own  con- 
ception of  economics  was  ethical.  Political  economy  was  for 
him  the  medicine,  the  hygiene,  of  economic  life,  and  not  merely 
its  pathology  ;  the  function  of  economic  science  was  to  teach 
what  men  must  do  in  order  to  escape  economic  destruction. 
Competition  and  struggle  were  to  be  done  away  with. 

His  ethical  outlook  on  economic  relationships  is  conspicu- 
ously displayed  in  his  valuation  of  labour.  Following  Fourier, 
CernySevskii  maintains  it  to  be  a  part  of  the  very  nature 
of  work,  that  ^'  almost  "  all  varieties  of  it  are  agreeable  or 
attractive;  if  work  be  disagreeable,  this  is  "almost"  always 
due  to  "  fortuitous  external  conditions."  Labour  is  not  a 
commodity. 

Cernysevskii  formulates  the  customary  arguments  against 
excessive  division  of  labour — although  the  classical  economists 
derive  them  from  the  conventional  economic  view  that  labour 
is  essentially  distasteful  and  that  labour  is  a  commodity. 

The  crimes  of  capitalist  production,  the  proletarianisation 
of  previously  independent  industrial  workers,  the  heaping  up 
of  wealth  in  the  hands  of  a  few,  and  so  on,  are  depicted  by 
Cernysevskii  in  vivid  colours,  but  he  admits  that  capitalism 
has  favoured  individuahsm  ;  the  fundamental  evil  of  capitalism, 
he  says,  is  free  competition.  He  extols  the  growth  of  manu- 
facturing industry  and  the  modern  spirit  of  enterprise  which 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  83 

has  promoted  that  growth.  He  anticipates  that  the  victory 
of  manufacturers,  engineers,  merchants,  and  technicists  will 
bring  greater  advantages  to  Russia  than  the  victory  of 
Napoleon  brought  to  Spain  and  Germany.  The  growth  of 
manufacturing  industry  necessitates  the  diffusion  of  science 
and  culture,  promotes  the  growth  of  improved  legal  conditions, 
etc. 

CernySevskii  follows  Ricardo  in  his  analysis  of  the  process 
of  production,  recommending  that  the  yield  of  the  soil  (rent), 
of  capital  (profit),  and  of  labour  (wages),  should  be  weighed 
one  against  the  others,  and  should  be  harmoniously  distributed 
in  accordance  with  the  greatest  good  of  the  greatest  number. 
It  is  obvious  that  he  is  thinking  here  of  Proudhon's  "  dis- 
harmonies." 

In  What  is  to  be  Done  Cernysevskii  introduces  us  to  the 
new  social  order  and  to  the  "  new  men."  This  new  order 
will  rest,  above  all,  upon  a  new  morality,  and  he  therefore 
describes  for  us  the  relationship  between  man  and  wife,  and 
their  views  concerning  love.  It  is  plain  that  he  has  far  less 
interest  in  the  economic  organisation  of  the  new  society.  The 
formation  of  productive  cooperative  societies  is  recommended. 
These  cooperatives  are  to  be  private*,  but  it  does  not  appear 
that  Cernysevskii  regards  their  regulation  by  the  state  as 
inadmissible.  His  plans  here  are  altogether  vague.  When 
circumstances  make  it  necessary  for  him  to  discuss  and  advocate 
social  reforms  in  connection  with  the  concrete  conditions  of 
his  day,  as  for  example  when  he  deals  with  the  decay  of  silk- 
weaving  in  Lyons,  his  suggestions  are  extremely  modest ;  the 
weavers,  he  tells  us,  must  have  their  workshops  outside  the 
town  ;  must  cultivate  a  plot  of  land  in  addition  to  working  at 
their  looms  ;  and  so  on.  Cernysevskii  never  made  any  practical 
attempt  at  the  inauguration  of  cooperative  production. 

Important  are  Cernysevskii's  views  concerning  the  Russian 
mir  and  its  significance  for  the  future  organisation  of  society. 

His  opinions  as  to  the  social  value  of  the  mir  were  not 
consistent.  In  1857  there  appeared  in  Cernysevskii's  review 
an  excerpt  from  Haxthausen  discussing  the  mir,  and  it  would 
appear  that  at  first  Cernysevskii  agreed  with  Haxthausen  and 
the  Slavophils.  Subsequently,  however,  he  recognised  the 
weaknesses  of  the  mir  and  its  tendency  to  oppress  the  individual. 
He  conceded,  moreover,  to  the  opponents  of  the  mir  that  this 
institution  is  not  specifically  Russian  or  Slav,  but  a  European 

4  VOL.   II. 


84  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

development ;  and  he  even  recognised  that  the  mh*  represents 
a  primitive  stage  of  development.  He  believed,  none  the 
less,  that  Russia  could  be  socialised  upon  the  foundation  of 
the  mir  and  the  artel. 

The  mir,  however  primitive,  is  for  Cerny§evskii  a  means 
by  which  Russia  is  to  be  safeguarded  from  proletarianisation  ; 
and  despite  his  scepticism  concerning  the  peasant  and  the 
latter's  capabilities,  he  esteems  the  mir  most  highly.  He 
believes  that  Siberia,  where  the  populace  in  general  is  in 
comfortable  circumstances,  must  by  the  "  democrat  "  be 
ranked  higher  than  England,  where  the  poverty  of  the  majority 
is  extreme.  Cernysevskii  pays  little  regard  to  the  position  of 
the  industrial  worker,  the  proletarian.  To  him  the  muzik  is 
still  the  genuine  man  of  the  people.  He  continually  employs 
the  term  prostoljudin,  which  signifies  "  man  of  the  common 
people." 

These  views  explain  why  at  a  later  date  Cernysevskii  con- 
tinued to  speak  so  warmly  of  the  mir,  saying  in  an  apostrophe 
to  youth  in  his  letter  to  Herzen,  "  Give  your  lives  to  maintain  i 
equal  rights  in  the  soil,  give  your  lives  for  the  principle  of  the 
village  community."  He  demanded  that  the  state  should ' 
protect  the  mir.  In  his  later  and  more  revolutionary  phase, 
he  was  opposed  to  private  ownership  of  any  kind,  not  excepting 
private  ownership  of  land,  though  he  had  previously  expressed 
his  gratification  at  the  acquisition  of  land  by  the  peasants. 

Cernysevskii  subsequently  came  to  regard  the  mir  and 
its  agrarian  communism  from  the  outlook  of  the  associative 
designs  of  European  socialists,  just  as  he  came  to  regard  the 
artel  as  the  basis  of  the  future  productive  cooperatives.  In 
these  matters  his  views  contrasted  with  those  of  the  Slavophils 
and  of  Herzen. 

Cernysevskii's  account  of  the  transition  from  the  primitive 
communism  of  the  mir  to  the  communism  of  the  future  society, 
resembles  that  given  by  Herzen.  Society,  hke  the  individual, 
can  overleap  one  or  several  stages  of  development,  evolution 
being  thus  accelerated.  Cernygevskii  appeals  to  a  general 
law  of  evolution,  in  accordance  with  which  the  terminal  stage 
is  a  return  to  the  initial  stage.  He  compares  the  primitive 
rope  bridge  with  the  modern  suspension  bridge.  The  latter 
is  constructed  upon  the  same  principle  as  the  former  and  is 
yet  entirely  different  ;  similar  will  it  be  with  the  communism 
of  the  future.     Russia  need  not  develop  "  organically,"  need 


THE  SriRIT   OF   RUSSIA  35 

not,  that  is  to  say,  traverse  all  the  stages  of  European  develop- 
ment ;  Russia  can  take  over  as  a  heritage  all  the  desirable 
acquirements  of  European  evolution,  just  as  Russia  has  intro- 
duced railways  though  she  did  not  herself  discover  them.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  the  analogy  is  a  lame  one,  and  that  it 
displays  the  mir  in  a  light  which  makes  that  institution  seem 
anything  but  suitable  to  the  socialism  of  the  future. 

§  102. 

IN  view  of  the  censorship,  CernySevskii  was  unable  to 
attempt  a  direct  exposition  of  his  opinions  on  political 
science.  He  judged  the  state  from  a  utiHtarian  standpoint. 
The  function  of  the  state,  he  considered,  was  to  promote  the 
interest  of  the  individual,  and  he  rejected  as  unreaHstic  the 
theory  that  the  state  exists  to  further  justice,  or  for  similar 
ends.  All  his  efforts  were  directed  against  absolutism  ;  he 
fought  against  centraUsation  and  tutelage,  and  favoured 
decentralisation  and  self-government. 

Whilst  still  at  the  university  he  began  to  follow  with  close 
attention  the  course  of  political  developm.ent  in  Europe  ;  he 
witnessed  the  fall  of  the  French  repubhc  and  the  commence- 
ment of  reaction  ;  and  at  this  early  stage  he  had  decided  in 
the  interests  of  liberty  to  adopt  a  pohtical  and  publicistic 
career.  In  accordance  with  the  ideas  of  Guizot  he  had  formu- 
lated a  scheme  of  pohtical  evolution :  primitive  natural  freedom 
had  been  restricted  by  the  establishment  of  the  state,  of  the 
aristocracy,  and  of  society  ;  leading  minds  were  striving  to 
bring  about  the  reinstatement  of  liberty,  and  with  this  end 
in  view  it  was  essential  that  the  masses  should  be  enlightened  ; 
the  more  highly  evolved  human  beings  became,  the  less  neces- 
sary was  government,  the  less  .  essential  was  governmental 
centralisation. 

In  1848,  as  a  republican  and  a  sociahst,  Cernysevskii  had 
asked  himself  whether  absolute  monarchy  were  not  after  all 
preferable  to  a  bourgeois  repubhc.  The  hereditary  monarch 
"could  maintain  a  neutral  and  just  attitude,  and  could  promote 
the  advantage  of  the  peasants  and  workers.  At  that  time, 
too,  Cernysevskii  was  doubtful  as  to  the  benefits  of  universal 
suffrage.  But  before  long  he  came  to  recognise  (1850)  that 
a  monarch  willing  to  look  upon  himself  as  means  merely  and 
not  as  end,  a  monarch  prepared  to  retire  of  his  own  free  will 


36  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

as  soon  as  the  masses  should  become  sufficiently  enlightened, 
was  not  to  be  found  ;  he  saw  that  absolute  monarchy  was 
no  more  than  the  completion  of  aristocratic  hierarchy,  and 
that  freedom  can  be  estabHshed  in  no  other  way  than  from 
below  upwards,  democratically,  by  the  democracy.  Hence- 
forward Cernysevskii  advocated  the  sound  view  that  the 
opposition  between  democracy  and  aristocracy  is  fundamental 
to  the  political  organisation  of  society,  that  monarchy  is  but 
a  form  of  aristocracy.  He  refuted  CiCerin  when  the  latter 
pointed  to  instances  in  which  monarchs  had  made  common 
cause  with  the  people  against  the  aristocracy.  With  equal 
justice  he  considered  that  serfdom  was  the  groundwork  of 
aristocratic  absolutism. 

His  individuahsm,  the  high  value  he  placed  upon  culture, 
and  his  recognition  that  manufacturing  industry  is  the  leading 
motive  force  of  the  present  time,  frequently  led  him  into  a 
disapproval  of  and  even  a  contempt  for  the  state,  and  this 
gave  his  teaching  a  somewhat  anarchistic  flavour.  Sometimes 
he  displayed  hostihty  to  the  word  "  government,"  and  would 
at  least  hear  nothing  of  "regulation."  It  is  evident  that  he 
was  greatly  influenced  by  Proudhon. 

His  antipathy  to  absolutism  led  him,  in  the  existing  state 
of  foreign  affairs,  to  put  his  trust  above  all  in  France,  "  the 
European  volcano."  It  was  in  France,  in  especial,  that  he 
studied  the  political  evolution  of  the  new  age. 

His  opposition  to  Russian  absolutism  led  him  to  approve 
the  radical  movement  in  Poland,  heralded  already  by  the 
events  of  the  year  1863  ;  and  he  desired  complete  indepen- 
dence, not  for  the  Poles  alone,  but  likewise  for  the  Little 
Russians.  He  sympathised  with  the  Magyars  against  Austria. 
Like  Marx,  he  found  it  hard  to  forgive  the  Austrian  Slavs  for 
their  reactionary  and  antirevolutionary  conduct  in  1848  ; 
and  whQn  the  beginnings  of  constitutionaHst  freedom  were 
manifest  in  the  early  sixties,  it  was  his  fear  that  the  Austrian 
Slavs  would  become  tools  of  the  reaction. 

Cernysevskii  openly  declared  himself  in  favour  of  "democ- 
racy," and  occasionally  spoke  of  his  trend  as  "  radical  "  ; 
the  poHtical  significance  of  these  designations  becomes  clear 
in  the  hght  of  the  theory  just  expounded  concerning  the  oppo- 
sition between  democracy  and  aristocracy  (as  a  democrat 
Cernysevskii  was  of  course  a  republican)  ;  and  it  is  further 
illuminated  by  his  attacks  upon  the  liberals  or  progressists. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  87 

His  terminology  reminds  us  of  Bakunin's  democratic  program. 
Cernygevskii  does  not  attempt  to  provide  any  definite  philo- 
sophical foundation  for  the  opposition  between  democracy  and 
liberahsm,  and  is  content  to  accept  the  empirical  opposition 
as  a  historic  datum. ^ 

Cernysevskii's  criticism  of  Russian  liberahsm  is  severe. 
He  is  specially  adverse  to  Speranskii's  plans  of  reform  ;  among 
his  contemporaries  he  attacks  Cicerin,  Ravelin,  and  last,  not 
least,  Herzen.  In  1859  Herzen  had  written  an  article  against 
CernySevskii  and  his  adherents,  speaking  of  the  decay  and  even 
the  "  corruption  of  spirit  "  characteristic  of  the  trend  opposed 
to  his  own.  Cernysevskii  went  to  see  Herzen  in  London, 
hoping  to  put  an  end  to  the  struggle,  but  was  unsuccessful. 

The  conflict  between  the  two  tendencies  went  on  developing. 
In  his  study  on  the  fall  of  Rome,  pubhshed  in  1861,  Cernysevskii 
made  a  fresh  attack  on  Herzen.     But  Cernysevskii  was  already 

I  Cernj'sevskii's  hostilit}^  to  liberalism  is  displayed  in  his  judgments  of 
Macaulay,  Thiers,  Ranke,  Guizot,  Cavour,  etc.  CefnySevskii  devoted  special 
attention  to  the  study  of  postrevolutionary  France,  discussing  in  carefully 
written  essays  the  Bourbon  restoration,  the  regime  of  Louis  Philippe,  and  the 
revolutions  of  1830  and  1848.  It  is  necessary  here  to  make  a  specific  allusion 
to  his  terminology.  He  is  erroneously  supposed,  when  he  speaks  of  democ- 
racy, to  think  of  sociahsm  in  contrast  with  liberalism,  but  this  view  is  incorrect, 
for  he  speaks  of  Cavaignac  as  a  democrat.  True  democracy  is  in  any  case 
social.  The  terminology  shows  that  to  Cern}sevskii  the  political  seemed  of 
greater  importance  than  the  social.  He  frequently  spoke  of  the  socialists  as 
"  reformers,"  but  he  also  spoke  of  "  reformative  parties  "  ;  this  implies  that 
nonsocialist  parties  aim  at  reform,  including  social  reform.  He  distinguished 
the  Uberals  from  the  democrats  and  from  the  radicals,  and  used  the  expression 
"  radical-democratic'."  "  Radicalism  was  to  him  the  name  of  a  method,  the 
revolutionary  method  ;  democracy  was  the  substance  of  what  that  method 
would  achieve,  the  regime  of  the  masses  of  the  population,  hitherto  subjugated  ; 
liberalism  aimed  at  the  dominion  of  the  upper,  cultured,  and  well-to-do  classes. 
A  comparison  of  Cernysevskii's  historical  essays  above  enumerated  with  Marx's 
writings  on  the  same  subject  confirms  what  has  been  said  about  the  difference 
between  the  two  men.  Marx,  although  at  this  early  date  he  had  not  yet  for- 
mulated his  doctrine  of  historical  materialism,  gave  a  far  more  thorough 
account  of  economic  conditions,  and  looked  upon  the  struggles  of  party  as 
class  struggles.  Cernysevskii,  on  the  other  hand,  considered  that  party  struggles 
sprang  from  erroneous  judgments  concerning  the  political  situation,  concerning 
the  intentions  of  opponents,  and  concerning  the  tasks  which  the  partisans  them- 
selves believed  their  respective  parties  had  to  perform.  Moreover,  Cernysev- 
skii paid  much  attention  to  individuals,  and  often  to  persons  of  subordinate 
importance,  whereas  Marx  dealt  only  with  the  general  situation  in  France  and 
in  Europe.  It  must  be  admitted  that  Cerny§evskii's  essays  do  not  furnish 
an  adequate  expression  of  the  historical  knowledge  of  the  fifties.  They  con- 
tain, indeed,  many  surprising  statements  :  for  instance,  that  Napoleon,  as  an 
absolutist;  was  the  first  to  introduce  centraUsation  into  France  ;  that  the 
monarchy  acquired  its  strength  in  the  struggle  with  ultramontanism  ;    etc. 


38  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

in  Siberia  when  his  disciple  Serno-Solov'evic  wrote  the  before- 
mentioned  pamphlet  against  Herzen.  By  this  time,  as  pre- 
viously explained,  the  younger  generation  had  turned  away 
from  Herzen. 

In  attacking  the  liberals,  Cernysevskii  wished  to  hit  the 
bourgeoisie,  those  whom  Dobroljubov  termed  the  Oblomovs. 
He  reproached  the  Russian  liberals  for  desiring  to  secure  the 
dominion  of  the  mercantile  classes,  for  he  himself  would  have 
preferred  the  dominion  of  the  peasantry.  On  principle,  in 
opposition  to  the  liberals,  he  approved  state  interference  in 
economic  concerns. 

Detailed  investigation  would  be  required  to  enable  us  to 
determine  whether  the  herce  campaign  against  the  liberals, 
whose  best  representatives  were  then  endeavouring  to  secure 
political  and  administrative  reforms,  was  invariably  discreet. 
It  is  true  that  at  this  particular  epoch.  Lassalle  and  others 
were  likewise  attacking  the  liberals,  but  we  must  bear  in  mind 
the  differences  between  the  countries.  It  may  be  true  that  in 
Europe  the  question  of  constitutional  government  is  already 
of  small  importance,  but  in  Russia  its  importance  is  now  only 
beginning.  In  Cernysevskii  and  in  Dobroljubov,  we  discern 
the  rasnocincy  ;  we  see  the  democratic  "  children  "  rising  in 
complaint  against  their  aristocratic  "  fathers." 

For  the  same  reason,  CernySevskii's  condemnation  of  the 
bourgeoisie  has  a  different  ring  from  that  of  Herzen  ;  the 
latter  writes  rather  as  an  aristocrat,  the  former  as  a  democrat 

The  liberals,  in  their  turn,  strongly  opposed  the  trend  of 
the  "  Sovremennik."  It  will  sufhce  to  mention  that  Kavelin, 
who  had  defended  Herzen  against  CiCerin,  did  not  hesitate  to 
suspect  Cernysevskii's  adherents  of  arson  when  great  confla- 
grations took  place  in  St.  Petersburg  in  1862. 

In  the  question  of  nationality,  which  was  an  incessant 
topic  of  controversy  between  the  westernisers  and  the  eastern- 
isers,  Cernysevskii's  view  was  that  national  character  is  con- 
ditioned, not  by  race,  but  rather  by  the  degree  of  economic 
development  or  of  division  of  labour  ;  but  he  had  not  made 
a  detailed  study  of  the  question  either  psychologically  or 
sociologically.  To  some  extent  he  threw  light  upon  the 
problem  by  his  view  of  the  influence  which  a  working  life  or 
an  idle  life  has  upon  men.  He  considered  the  fact  that  the 
aristocracy  and  the  well-to-do  invariably  live  without  working 
was   a  more  potent   cause   of   organic   differences  than  any 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  89 

distinction  of  race.  Classes  or  estates,  he  said,  differ  organic- 
ally more  than- do  nationalities.  National  differences  within 
the  limits  of  a  race  are  similarl}^  explicable. 


§  103. 

IN  the  before-mentioned  controversy  Herzen  prophesied 
that  Cernygevskii  and  his  adherents  would  receive  the 
order  of  St.  Stanislaus,  which  showed  that  even  such  a 
man  as  Herzen  could  misjudge  the  radical  mood  and  could 
misunderstand  the  critics  of  liberalism. 

The  condemnation  and  exile  of  Cerny§evskii  have  not  yet 
been  fully  explained.  It  was  known  already  in  1862  that 
the  government  had  long  been  afraid  of  Cernysevskii  on  account 
of.  his  influence,  and  it  was  not  surprising  that  the  third 
section  should  seize  any  chance  that  offered  for  getting  rid 
of  the  dreaded  tribune  by  sending  him  to  Siberia.  But  from 
the  legal  point  of  view  the  grounds  brought  forward  for  the 
condemnation  were  insufficient,  and  it  is  fairly  certain  that 
false  witnesses  were  employed  against  Cernysevskii. 

We  do  not  know  whether  the  government  had  at  its 
disposal  any  true  reports  from  its  secret  agents,  or  whether 
these  latter  possessed  genuine  information  concerning  Cerny- 
§evskii's  personal  participation  in  the  revolutionary  move- 
ment. Such  details  as  are  furnished  by  those  associated  with 
this  movement  and,  by  Cerny§evskii's  acquaintances  are  in- 
decisive and  conflicting.  Persons  best  acquainted  with  the 
available  material  can  get  no  further  than  suppositions. 
During  the  trial,  CernySevskii  denied  all  the  accusations  made 
against  him,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  either  before^  or  after 
his  arrest  he  ever  said  a  v/ord  regarding  his  share  in  the  revo- 
lutionary movement.  His  biographers  are  compelled  to  base 
their  hypotheses  upon  his  letters  and  other  writings,  those 
of  presiberian  days  and  those  composed  in  exile. 

During  July  to  September  in  the  year  1861  there  were 
published  in  St.  Petersburg  three  numbers  of  the  secretly 
printed  periodical  "  Vehkorus'  "  (Great  Russia).  We  now 
know  that  the  proclamation  To  the  Younger  Generation  which 
appeared  in  its  columns  was  composed  by  Selgunov,  a  collabor- 
ator on  Cernysevskii' s  review,  and  we  are  informed  by 
Dostoevski!  and  others  that  it  was  not  approved  by  Cerny- 
sevskii.    But  the  political  program  of   "  Velikorus'  "  was  in 


40  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

harmony  with  Cerny§evskii's  views,  and   there   are  traces  of 
his  hand  or  of  his  editorship  in  the  hterary  style. 

In  the  beginning  of  1862  the  secret  society  Zemlja  i  Volja 
(Land  and  Freedom)  was  organised,  probably  by  members  of 
the  staff  of  "  Velikorus',"  which  ceased  to  exist  after  the  issue 
of  its  third  number. 

It  ^eems  indubitable  that  Cernysevskii  participated  in  the 
secret  revolutionary  organisation  Velikorus',  and  also  that 
he  was  a  member  of  Zemlja  i  Volja.  This  much,  at  least,  is 
certain,  that  he  was  part  author  of  the  proclamation  to  the 
peasants. 

The  catastrophe  that  befell  Cernysevskii,  his  participation 
in  revolutionary  propaganda,  seem  to  conflict  with  the  views 
to  which  he  gave  expression  in  his  writings.  We  might  recall 
what  he  said  concerning  the  futihty  of  sacrifice,  but  this 
would  hardly  be  relevant.  Cernysevskii  did  not  make  any 
sacrifice  but  was  coerced  by  the  powers  of  reaction  under 
Alexander  II,  and  no  one  is  secure  against  the  tactics  of 
absolutism.  More  weighty  is  the  circumstance  that  prior  to 
1861,  when  he  discu^ed  the  question  of  secret  revolutionary 
activities,  he  declared  that  these  were  not  wholly  to  his 
liking.  In  Lessing  and  his  Time,  a  work  published  in  1856, 
he  declared  himself  opposed  to  secret  societies,  saying  that 
great  and  truly  useful  ends  can  be  secured  only  by  straight- 
forward and  open  procedures.  He  went  further,  and  expressed 
opposition  to  revolutions  in  general,  or  at  any  rate  was  very 
sceptical  as  to  the  practicability  of  their  doing  any  good.  He 
had  no  belief  in  the  possibility  of  a  revolution  to  be  effected 
by  the  Russian  peasants,  for  he  was  disinclined  to  idealise 
the  muzik,  and  was  under  no  illusions  regarding  the  extent 
of  the  latter's  enlightenment.  We  are  told,  however,  that 
by  1861  and  1862  he  had  abandoned  or  modified  his  scepticism, 
having  noted  the  unrest  and  activity  among  the  peasantry, 
and  having  decided  therefore,  though  sceptical,  to  take  part 
in  secret  revolutionary  work.  The  conclusion  of  What  is  to  be 
Done  may  certainly  be  quoted  in  favour  of  the  belief  that  its 
author  looked  forward  to  the  speedy  success  of  the  revolution. 

Reference  is  sometimes  made  to  Cernysevskii's  Siberian 
novel  The  Prologue,  which  is  considered  to  contain  autobio- 
graphical confessions,  and  the  following  passage  is  quoted, 
"  Wait,  wait,  as  long  as  possible  and  as  quietly  as  possible." 
Quoted,  again,  is  the  passage  wherein  Cernysevskii  criticises 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA.  41 

the  participation  of  the  French  democrats  in  the  February 
revolution,  and  refers  to  their  action  as  utterly  stupid  owing 
to  the  lack  of  preparation.  But  he  also  tells  us  in  this  con- 
nection that  circumstances  may  arise  compeUing  us  willy  nilly 
to  take  part  in  such  stupic^ty ;  that  the  rule  "  everything  at 
the  proper  time  "  is  an  excellent  one,  but  that  we  cannot  always 
tell  when  the  proper  moment  has  arrived.  When  Cernysevskii 
makes  tun  of  those  who  expect  a  "  thunderstorm  in  a  bog," 
he  may  well  be  ironically  condemning  his  own  participation 
in  the  revolution. 

If  I  am  not  mistaken,  Cernysevskii's  adherents  are  much 
concerned  because  he  made  a  mistaken  diagnosis  of  the  situ- 
ation in  1861.  It  is  considered  comprehensible  enough  that 
Bakunin  should  have  expected  a  rising  of  the  Russian  peasantry, 
but  it  is  felt  that  Cernygevskii's  realism  should  have  induced 
a  different  judgment  of  the  then  existing  state  of  affairs,  and 
should  therefore  have  led  to  the  formulation  of  a  different 
policy. 

I  believe  that  CernySevskii  did  in  fact  make  a  mistake. 
He  made  np.ny  similar  errors  of  judgment.  In  1858,  for 
example,  he  acclaimed  Alexander  II,  no  less  warmly  than  had 
Herzen,  as  liberator  and  saviour  of  Russia  ;  but  the  circum- 
stances of  the  liberation  of  the  peasantry  wrought  a  change  of 
mood,  as  is  proved  by  the  Unaddressed  Letters  (1862).  These 
were  published  abroad  and  were  directed  to  the  tsar.  It 
would  not  be  anything  extraordinary  had  Cernysevskii  changed 
his  views  regarding  revolution.  Moreover,  a  man  may  take 
part  in  an  undertaking  when  he  is  extremely  dubious  about 
its  results.  To  believe  that  all  sceptics  are  persons  with  no 
capacity  for  action,  is  pure  superstition. 

I  am  of  opinion,  then,  that  Cernysevskii  had  formed  a  false 
estimate  of  men  and  of  conditions.  I  believe,  further,  that 
in  Siberia  Cernysevskii  came  to  recognise  his  mistake,  and 
that  this  explains  the  peculiar  passivity  he  displayed  in 
Siberia  in  contrast  with  the  activity  that  was  typical  of  the 
days  prior  to  his  exile.' 

The  poet  Korolenko  has  written  some  reminiscences  of 
Cernysevskii,  and  these  confirm  my  supposition.  Cernysevskii 
points  out  that  practically  all  the  political  criminals  atoning 
for  their  offences  in  Siberia  are  raw  youths,  and  he  says  that 
he  is  ashamed  to  find  himself  in  their  company.  The  feeling, 
he  continues,  is  all  the  more  powerful  since  he  recognises  the 


42  ■  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

futility  of  revolution.  My  impression  is  that  Cernygevskii's 
biographers  are  extremely  concerned  because  CernySevskii, 
the  Siberian  exile,  and  the  CernySevskii  who  returned  to  Russia, 
was  no  more  (as  the  phrase  runs)  than  the  shadow  of  his  former 
self.  It  has  even  been  affirmed  t^iat  in  Siberia,  Cernysevskii 
became  mentally  disordered. 

The  impression  produced  on  mj^  own  m.ind  by  the  available 
data  is  that  Cernysevskii's  mental  health  was  perfectly  sound 
both  in  exile  and  afterwards,  but  that  he  was  none  the  less 
broken  by  Siberia.  Cernysevskii  was  a  publicist  and  politician, 
a  man  whose  intellectual  faculties  were  kept  alive  by  a  daily 
pabulum  of  new  material.  When  he  was  isolated  and  cut 
off  from  the  outer  world,  he  lacked  energy  to  enable  him  to 
busy  himself  with  theoretical  questions  or  solve  theoretical 
problems.  As  theorist  and  thinker,  he  was  not  so  great  a 
man  as  has  been  contended.  Not  merely  did  he  adopt  Feuer- 
bach's  views  quite  uncritically,  not  merely  did  he  fail  to  see 
through  the  weaknesses  of  materialism,  but  when  he  discussed 
important  questions  of  detail  he  failed  to  deal  with  them  in 
the  exhaustive  manner  demanded  by  his  own  doctrine  of  the 
supremacy  of  positive  science.  It  seems  to  me  characteristic 
that  he  attempted  no  scientific  discussion  of  the  problems  of 
socialism  ;  he  lacked  power  for  the  independent  treatment 
of  economic  questions,  and  was  content  with  writing  notes 
on  Mill. 

An  examination  of  his  literary  activities  in  Siberia  confirms 
this  judgment.  Let  us  recall  how  some  of  the  decabrists 
worked  in  Siberia,  how  they  continued  to  cultivate  their  minds. 
Cernysevskii  produced  a  few  belletristic  pieces,  but  displayed 
no  inclination  to  undertake  any  difficult  literar}'  task.  Cerny- 
sevskii was  no  more  than  thirty-six  when  his  exile  began,  and 
I  contend  that  had  he  possessed  a  really  vigorous  interest  in 
science,  that  interest  would  not  have  been  annulled  by  the 
unfavourable  conditions  of  Siberia. 

After  his  return,  Cernj^sevskii  translated  the  fat  tomes  of 
Weber's  Universal  History,  adding  a  comment  here  and  there. 
The  choice  of  this  book  is  in  itself  an  indication  of  weakness 
in  the  intellectual  sphere,  but  we  must  not  forget  that  it  was 
made  after  more  than  twenty  years  in  prison  and  in  Siberia. 

From  the  very  opening  of  his  career,  CernySevskii  was  a 
man  of  practice,  a  politician,  a  revolutionary.  Above  all  he 
was  a  revolutionary  man  of  letters  ;    his  incessant  polemic 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  48 

was  revolutionary  in  tone.  His  introduction  to  the  practical 
revolutionary  movement  was  by  way  of  literature. 

My  final  judgment  is  that  by  his  participation  in  the  revo- 
lution Cernysevskii  furnished  a  stimulating  example  to  the 
radical  generation  of  .his  day.  Upon  many,  doubtless,  his 
arrest  and  exile  exercised  an  inhibitive  and  sobering  influence  ; 
but  conversely,  energetic  men  were  by  his  fate  rendered  more 
hostile  to  absolutism,  and  the  revolutionary  movement  was 
thereby  strengthened  and  accelerated.  It  is  futile  to  enquire 
whether  Cernysevskii,  even  in  exile,  might  not  have  written 
more  and  better.  He  was  a  fighter,  and  fell  in  battle  with- 
out a  word  of  complaint,  and  perhaps  without  a  thought  of 
repentance. 

In  1874  the  government  attempted  to  induce  Cernysevskii 
to  sue  for  pardon,  but  he  rejected  the  suggestion  with  manly 
pride,  and  in  the  most  decisive  terms. 

§  104. 

I  MUST  now  say  a  few  words  concerning  Cernysevskii  in 
Siberia.  Since  his  literary  activities  before  the  days  of 
his  exile  endured  for  barely  half  the  number  of  years  that  he 
spent  in  Siberia,  it  will  be  interesting  to  consider  his  thoughts 
and  his  writings  during  banishment.  This  has  been  rendered 
possible  by  a  report  published  in  1910  by  Rusanov  (Kudrin),  a 
specialist  upon  Russian  socialism  in  general  and  Cernygevskii's 
work  in  particular,  dealing  with  the  latter's  Siberian  corres- 
pondence. We  still  await  the  publication  of  the  actual  letters, 
and  there  is  other  material  that  has  yet  to  see  the  light — 
Cernygevskii's  diary,  and  his  letters  written  before  he  was 
sent  to  Siberia. 

My  own  views  concerning  Cern^^gevskii  were  formed  from 
my  knowledge  of  the  writings  of  the  earlier  phase,  and  I  had 
hardly  expected  that  these  views  would  be  confirmed  as  fully 
as  they  have  been  confirmed  by  the  information  that  has  now 
become  available  concerning  Cernysevskii's  philosophical  and 
literary  occupations  in  Siberia.^ 

I  The  first  draft  for  this  study  of  CernySevsldi  was  based  upon  the  older 
editions  of  his  works,  those  pubhshed  in  Europe  ;  it  was  completed  after  my 
examination  of  the  edition  of  CernySevskii's  writings  undertaken  by  his  son 
in  1906.  The  belletristic  works  composed  in  Siberia  and  the  writings  of 
CernySevskii  after  his  return  from  exile,  must  now  be  taken  into  consideration. 
On  the  whole,  however,  I  have  been  guided  in  my  estimate  of  the  man  by  the 
work  he  did  before  he  was  sent  to  Siberia. 


44  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Rusanov  refuses  to  accept  the  idea  that  the  man  who 
returned  from  Siberia  was  but  the  shadow  of  the  former  Cerny- 
sevskii.  He  considers  that  the  Siberian  letters  furnish  proof 
that  the  exile  retained  energy  and  independence  of  thought, 
but  his  "titanic  logical  apparatus  "  often  worked  in  the  void 
because  he  had  no  opportunity  for  busying  himself  practically 
with  living  social  problems  ;  because  the  great  electric  cable 
(I  am  paraphrasing  Rusanov)  which  had  connected  him  with 
his  readers  and  disciples,  had  been  severed,  and  it  had  become 
impossible  for  him  to  react  directly  upon  real  phenomena  as 
writer  and  practitioner. 

I  am  in  agreement  with  Rusanov  in  holding  that  Cerny- 
sevskii  did  not  lose  his  intellectual  powers  in  Siberia,  but  I 
differ  in  my  estimate  of  these  powers.  Doubtless  there  was 
lacking  to  him  in  Siberia  living  contact  with  his  reading  public  ; 
but  just  as  he  had  done  in  the  St.  Petersburg  prison,  he  might 
have  concentrated  his  mind  upon  some  definite  theme  ;  and 
perhaps  he  might  have  found  Siberia  a  better  point  of  vantage 
than  St.  Petersburg  from  which  to  observe  the  evolution  of 
Russia  and  of  Europe.  No  one  would  expect  him  to  produce 
in  Siberia  encyclopaedic  works  of  reference  well  supplied  with 
citations  and  similar  details,  but  so  much  material  was  sent 
to  him  that  he  might  have  produced  a  few  monographs.  At 
least  he  might  have  translated  some  scientific  book  by  one  of 
the  thinkers  he  so  greatly  esteemed.  But  in  Siberia,  Cerny- 
sevskii  lived  only  upon  his  memories,  and  it  is  questionable 
whether  and  to  what  extent  his  belletristic  works  were  the 
artistic  elaboration  of  these  memories.  As  far  as  philosophy 
and  politics  were  concerned,  his  Siberian  letters  and  other 
writings  offer  nothing  new,  and  nowise  contribute  to  the 
amplification  of  the  ideas  and  arguments  he  had  earlier  put 
forward.  But  as  intimate  utterances  the  letters  furnish  a 
valuable  commentary  upon  his  philosophy  and  upon  his 
mental  development. 

To  come  to  a  brief  account  of  the  matters  treated  in  the 
letters,  I  will  begin  with  family  affairs.  I  am  astounded  to 
find  that  he  counsels  his  wife  to  remarry.  Cernysevskii's 
letters  to  his  sons  have  an  educational  purpose  ;  his  judgments 
concerning  many  leading  men  are  often  little  more  than  crude 
depreciations,  whilst  he  represents  himself  as  a  leading  thinker 
and  author. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  Siberia  he  breaks  and  casts   aside 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  45 

many  of  his  earlier  ideals  and  idols  :  Malthus  has  become  a 
"  charlatan  "  ;  Proudhon  is  a  "  blockhead  "  ;  Hume,  Kant, 
and  Berkeley  are  "  those  fellows  "  ;   Comte  is  a  pure  nobody. 

Opinions  are  also  given  concerning  the  authors  whose 
I  works  had  been  sent  to  him.  For  example,  he  censures 
Hellwald  (author  of  the  History  of  Civilisation)  and  Bagehot 
as  blind  followers  of  Darwin.  Darwin,  and  above  all  the 
Darwinian  doctrine  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  are  utterly 
condemned  by  him.  This  struggle  for  existence,  carried  out 
.by  mankind  and  applied  to  human  history,  will  simply  mean  a 
surrender  to  nationalism  ;  but  exclusively  nationalist  struggles 
are  invariably  injurious.  Thus  Cernysevskii's  judgment  of 
Darwinism  is  primarily  ethical. 

In  political  matters  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Cernygevskii 
favours  the  peaceful  spread  of  culture,  and  rejects  revolution 
in  all  its  forms.  It  is  evidently  in  connection  with  his  view 
of  the  gradual  nature  of  evolution  that  he  extols  Lyell  and 
Lamarck  (the  latter  as  contrasted  with  Darwin).  He  says 
also  that  he  is  and  always  has  been  weary  of  continual  invec- 
tive against  the  bourgeoisie,  and  that  he  is  becoming  tired  of 
works  upon  the  village  community. 

What  he  has  to  say  about  excessive  division  of  labour  and 
other  matters  is  a  mere  recapitulation  of  views  previously 
expressed. 

Cernysevskii's  most  vigorous  utterances  in  Siberia  deal 
with  his  fundamental  views  upon  philosophy.  Energetically 
does  he  assert  the  opinion  strange  in  a  materiahst  that  alike 
in  the  individual  and  in  the  species-  all  human  activity  has 
a  moral,  not  a  material  explanation.  Especially  does  he 
reprove  the  historians  for  their  lack  of  convictions,  and  he 
recommends  the  study  of  moraUsts  and  jurists  to  those  who 
wish  to  secure  accurate  conceptions  of  history.  He  writes  : 
"The  criteria  of  historical  phenomena  in  all  times  and 
among  all  nations  are  conscience  and  a  sense  of  honour." 

Reason  and  uprightness  are  "  the  true  laws  of  human 
nature,"  with  reference  to  which  history  must  be  explained  ; 
events  are  determined  by  the  general  moral  character  of  the 
time.  Cernysevskii  dissents  from  those  who  propose  to  explain 
events  as  the  outcome  of  so-called  general  national  conditions. 
History  is  the  record  of  great  events  and  great  men,  and 
therefore  the  older  historiography,  that  of  a  Herodotus  or 
Thucydides   down    to    that    of    Macaulay   and   Grote,   of    a 


46  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Niebuhr  or  Sismondi,  is  preferable  to  the  modern  history  of 
civilisation. 

His  historical  speculations  recall  those  of  Buckle,  whose 
works  he  eagerly  studied  while  in  Siberia.  For  example,  he 
considers  that  the  cradle  of  the  human  race  must  have  been 
in  the  equatorial  regions,  and  suggests  that  it  is  a  masked 
patriotism  which  induces  various  historians  to  contend  that 
the  climate  of  the  temperate  zones  was  once  milder  than  it 
is  to-day.  However,  the  later  stages  of  human  development 
are  determined,  not  by  nutritive  conditions,  but  by  the  political 
organisation  of  society. 

Cernj/gevskii  gives  a  detailed  exposition  of  his  egoistic 
ethics,  going  so  far  as  to  equate  good-rational-useful  with 
bad-irrational-injurious.  Cernygevskii  conceives  the  moral 
criterion  as  an  imperative  no  less  than  does  Kant ;  he  is  indeed 
positively  apriorist  when  he  declares  that  this  criterion  has 
an  identical  and  absolute  applicability,  not  to  the  inhabitants 
of  this  planet  alone,  but  to  the  reputed  dwellers  on  other  worlds 
than  ours.  (We  may  compare  the  reserve  which  led  Mill  to 
say  that  the  law  of  causality  must  be  assumed  as  applicable 
only  within  the  domain  of  the  known  solar  system  !) 

In  metaphysics,  CernySevskii  continues  to  profess  material- 
ism, and  is  faithful  to  his  old  love  for  Spinoza  and  Feuerbach. 
He  has  no  fault  to  find  with  Feuerbach,  but  points  out  that 
the  German  discussed  only  the  religious  aspect  of  philosophy. 

He  tells  us  that  his  views  are  Newtonist,  that  the  law  of 
gravitation  is  universally  valid,  forgetting  that  he  is  here 
following  in  Comte's  footsteps.  Concerning  Comte  we  read 
that  the  French  philosopher  had  nothing  to  offer  beyond  a 
misreading  of  Kant  ;  there  had  never  been  any  theological 
stage  of  knowledge  ;  nor  will  CernySevskii  admit  that  there 
was  a  metaphysical  stage  such  as  was  conceived  by 
Comte. 

Most  energetically  does  he  repudiate  the  pessimism  of 
Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann,  writing  :  "  Melancholia  is  not 
science."  His  rationalism  leads  him  to  protest  against  scepti- 
cism. Pascal,  he  says,  was  the  last  of  the  honest  sceptics  ; 
as  a  rule,  scepticism  is  no  more  than  a  mask  for  obscurantism. 
Quite  consistently,  he  expresses  his  disapproval  of  the  positivist 
"  ignorabimus." 

Noteworthy  is  the  admission  that  after  the  age  of  twenty- 
two  he  had  read  no  works  on  natural  science. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  47 

Finally  I  may  mention  that  he  takes  much  trouble  to  show 
that  the  popes  and  also  the  Jesuits  were  of  no  account  and 
were  practically  powerless.  The  middle  ages,  he  says,  were 
far  less  religious  than  is  generally  believed,  and  this  explains 
the  weakness  of  the  popes. 

I  can  say  no  more  here  regarding  CernySevskii's  Siberian 
phase.  Upon  certain  points  I  reserve  my  definitive  judgment 
until  I  have  had  an  opportunity  for  studying  all  the  corres- 
pondence and  other  material  at  first  hand.  But  this  much 
seems  certain  to  me,  that  in  any  special  study  of  CernySevskii, 
we  should  have  in  the  case  likewise  of  his  Siberian  exile  to 
examine  the  various  utterances  in  relation  to  the  time  and 
circumstances  in  which  they  were  made,  for  in  Siberia,  too, 
Cerny§evskii's  development  was  continuing. 

Rusanov  concludes  his  report  by  asking  whether  Cerny- 
Sevskii's  socialistic  opinions  underwent  any  notable  change 
in  Siberia.  "  Of  course  not  !  "  is  his  answer,  but  it  is  not 
unlikely,  he  says,  that  Cernysevskii's  views  may  have  changed 
regarding  the  possibility  of  speedily  effecting  any  thorough 
transformation  in  Russia.  In  the  belief  that  an  energetic 
attack  upon  the  government  and  the  great  landowners  was 
practicable,  Cernygevskii  had  sacrificed  himself  to  the  historical 
process ;  later  he  may  have  come  to  believe  that,  as  a  pre- 
liminary, reformist  endeavours  nmst  be  favoured,  to  secure 
the  general  diffusion  of  sound  ideas,  and  that  the  rest  would 
follow  in  due  course.^ 

Rusanov  is  himself  in  agreement  with  Volgen  in  Cerny- 
sevskii's Siberian  novel  The  Prologue,  when  Volgen  tells  his 
young  interlocutors  that  the  participation  of  the  French 
democrats  in  the  affair  of  1848  came  within  the  category  of 
stupidity. 

I  Rusanov,  too,  asks  why  CernySevskii  had  nothing  to  say  about  Capital, 
though  the  book  was  sent  him.  It  was  impossible,  says  Rusanov,  for 
CernySevskii  to  write  anything  about  socialism  owing  to  the  supervision  to  which 
he  was  subjected  ;  besides,  Marx's  work  was  unlikely  to  please  CernySevskii. 
Marx's  explanation  of  history  was  largely  based  upon  the  workings  of  the 
blind  force  of  instinct,  and  to  CernySevskii,  Marx  would  seem  a  mere  Ricardian, 
and  a  poor  Ricardian  at  that,  writing  in  an  unpopular  style.  Even  if  both 
these  suppositions  were  accurate,  none  the  less,  since  Cernygevskii  looked  upon 
Ricardo  as  a  primary  authority,  this  new  presentation  of  Ricardian  views 
could  hardly  fail  to  interest  him,  especially  seeing  that  he  found  time  to  write 
at  length  about  such  authors  as  Hellwald.  Besides,  the  authorities  would  not 
have  objected  to  a  criticism  of  Marx — if  unfavourable. 


48  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

*       §105. 

V 

CERNYSEVSKII'S  true  significance  for  the  mental  develop- 
ment of  Russia,  and  above  all  for  philosophy,  is  found 
in  his  materialism.  Materialism  has  frequently  proved  revolu- 
tionary. This  was  manifest  in  the  materialism  that  preceded 
and  followed  the  French  revolution  ;  the  statement  is  especi- 
ally applicable  to  German  materialism  before  and  after  1848  ; 
Russian  materialism  at  the  same  epoch,  and  still  more  in  the 
sixties,  had  like  significance.  In  Russia  as  elsewhere,  material- 
ism was  an  ultraradical  negation  of  the  theocratic  view  of  the 
universe  and  of  life  ;  in  Russia  it  was  a  philosophical  revo- 
lution against  the  oppression  of  Nicholas  and  Alexander.  This 
philosophical  revolution  was  all  the  more  energetic  inasmuch 
as  after  the  Crimean  catastrophe,  and  still  miore,  after  the 
liberation  of  the  peasantry,  hopes  of  thoroughgoing  reforms 
had  been  awakened. 

The  objection  may  perhaps  be  made  that  in  his  writings 
Cernysevskii  had  but  little  to  say  concerning  or  against  religion 
and  the  church.  It  may  even  be  asserted  that  he  assigned 
small  importance  to  religion. 

It  is  true  that  in  his  philosophy  of  history  Cernysevskii 
ignored  religion  and  church.  He  considered,  for  example, 
that  the  Thirty  Years'  war  was  not  a  war  of  religion,  that  its 
aims  were  secular.  Similarly  the  role  he  ascribed  in  history 
to  the  papacy  was  insignificant,  whilst  his  polemic  had  little 
direct  concern  with  theology  and  the  church.  Striking,  too, 
was  the  way  in  which  he  adopted  Feuerbach's  metaphysical 
materialism  without  making  any  exhaustive  use  of  the  anti- 
theological  side  of  the  German  philosopher's  doctrine,  the 
reduction  of  religion  to  anthropomorphism.  We  have  learned, 
moreover,  that  when  in  Siberia  he  accused  Feuerbach  of  being 
one-sided,  on  the  ground  that  the  German  had  treated  only 
of  the  philosophy  of  religion. 

None  the  less,  Cernysevskii's  materialism  and  materialist 
anthropologism  were  directed  against  theology  and  theocracy. 
Objectively  considered,  the  reaction  in  Russia  was  a  theocratic 
reaction,  and  for  this  reason  the  stress  laid  upon  metaphysical 
materiahsm  involved  a  direct  attack,  not  merely  upon  the 
state,  but  also  and  above  all  upon  the  church.  We  must  not 
fail  to  take  into  account  this  energetic  insistence  upon  mate- 
rialism, and  we  have  to  remember  that  Cernysevskii  was  not  a 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  49 

refugee,  that  he  wrote  under  the  eyes  of  the  censor.      It  was 
impossible  for  him  to  express  his    opinions  as  freely  as  did 
Herzen  and  Bakunin,  who  emphasised  Feuerbach's  anthropo- 
'morphic  explanation  of  religion. 

Again,  it  was  no  longer  necessary  for  Cern3^sevskii  to  stress 
this  explanation,  since  Herzen  and  Feuerbach  had  done  it 
before  him.  For  the  very  reason  that  Cernysevskii  had  so 
warmly  recommended  Feuerbach's  philosophy,  Feuerbach  was 
read  in  the  original,  and  translations  of  his  principal  writings 
were  freely  disseminated  {The  Essence  of  Christianity  in  1861, 
and  The  Essence  of  Religion  in  1862).  The  influence  of 
Feuerbach's  works  was  reinforced  by  that  of  Kenan's  Life 
of  Jesus,  published  in  1863. 

Cernysevskii's  antitheological  trend  was  manifest  sub- 
jectively as  well  as  objectively.  I  refer  to  the  fact  that, 
like  Feuerbach,  he  had  been  trained  for  a  theological  career, 
and  that  materialism  M^as  a  weapon  for  personal  use  against 
the  views  in  which  he  had  been  brought  up.  At  the  university, 
before  he  had  become  acquainted  with  Feuerbach's  works, 
he  was  still  a  believer,  or  at  any  rate  he  still  accepted  the 
conventional  ethics  of  the  church.  Dobroljubov,  too,  had  a 
theological  training  ;  like  Cernysevskii  he  belonged  to  a  family 
jof  priests  ;  to  him,  likewise,  materialism  and  atheism  were 
weapons  for  personal  use  against  theologj^  and  the  church. 
This  is  why  both  these  writers  make  so  much  of  materialism. 
This  is  why  they  are  so  insistent  in  their  preaching  of  egoism 
and  utilitarianism  ;  this  is  why  Cerny§evskii  rejects  the  idea 
of  sacrifice,  herein  directly  conflicting  with  church  doctrine. 
Cernysevskii  frequently  inveighed  against  passivity  and 
humility,  which  Herzen  had  so  vigorously  attacked  as  typical 
Christian  virtues.  Cernysevskii,  in, fact,  was  fully  aware  of 
the  import  of  his  materialism. 

It  was  impossible  for  him  to  say  much  that  was  openly 
directed  against  the  church,  but  we  can  feel  his  hatred  for 
religious  and  theocratic  oppression.  Cernysevskii's  nature 
differed  widely  from  that  of  Bakunin,  who  always  trumpeted 
his  hatred  from  the  housetops.  Cernysevskii  was  cooler, 
more  reserved,  more  cautious,  but  not  therefore  less  effective. 
j  Special  reference  must  here  be  made  to  one  development 
of  his  teaching.  Cernysevskii  came  to  stress  philosophic  ethics 
>n  proportion  as  he  rejected  ecclesiastical  religion  and  the 
ethics  of  the  church.     Hume  and  Kant  took  the  same  course  ; 

5  VOL.  11. 


50  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  1 

so  did  all  notable  philosophers  of  modern  days  ;  so,  above  all, 
did  the  socialists,  for  these  considered  ethics  and  religion  to 
be  the  essential  foundations  of  socialistic  reform.  This  is 
the  true  light  in  which  to  regard  CernySevskii's  utilitarianism ' 
and  the  ethical  groundwork  he  provided  for  socialism.  He 
desired  to  replace  Christianity  by  utilitarian  morality,  and 
this  morality,  was  to  be  carried  out  consistently  in  practical, 
political,  and  social  life. 

It  amounts  to  little  to  say  that  Cern3^sevskii's  socialism 
was  Utopian.  Cernysevskii  expounded  his  own  views  upon 
the  so-called  utopianism  of  socialism  and  of  all  the  newer  social 
aspirations.  In  his  analj'sis  of  the  reign  of  Louis  Philippe  he 
described  Saint-Simonism  and  spoke  of  it  as  "  Utopian."  The 
first  manifestations  of  new  social  aspirations  are  invariably 
tinged  with  enthusiasm,  so  that  they  seem  to  belong  rather 
to  the  field  of  poesy  than  to  that  of  science.  Cernysevskii's 
view  of  utopianism  resembled  that  taken  by  Marx.  Cernj'- 
Sevskii,  like  Marx,  claimed  that  his  own  doctrines  were  scien- 
tific ;  and  he  based  his  science,  once  more  like  Marx,  upon 
positivism.  But  whereas  Marx  subsequently  discarded  ethics 
and  inculcated  a  positivist  amorality,  Cernysevskii  did  not 
abandon  morality,  desiring  rather  to  give  ethics  a  "  serious 
scientific  foundation,"  and  beheving  himself  to  have  discovered 
this  foundation  in  utilitarianism.  I  will  not  dispute  about 
words,  but  I  consider  Cernysevskii's  standpoint  more  correct, 
and  I  do  not  think  it  Utopian  to  retain  ethics.  Questions  of 
a  different  order,  however,  are  the  respective  values  of 
Cernysevskii's  and  Marx's  contributions  to  science,  and  the 
influence  which  the  two  men  respectively  exercised  upon  the 
development  of  socialism. 


§  io6. 

CERNYSEVSKII'S  influence  in  the  late  fifties  and  early 
sixties  w^as  extensive,  and  this  is  why  the  government 
swept  him  out  of  its  path.  His  influence  was  political,  and 
consequently  his  banishment  had  strong  political  effects. 

Cernysevskii's  influence  was  exercised  through  his  peculiar 
intellectual  trend.     His  energies  were  especially  devoted  to 
the   elaboration  of  realism.     He  endeavoured  on  the   philo- 
sophical plane  and  with  the  aid  of  Feuerbach's  anthropologism  ; 
to  provide  a  stable  foundation  for  the  positivist  disillusionment 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  51 

and  sobriety  demanded  by  Herzen.  Such  was  the  main  trend, 
such  was  the  method  of  CernySevskii  ahke  in  individual  ques- 
tions and  in  the  configuration  of  his  general  outlook.  What 
is  to  be  Done  was  an  artistic  embodiment  of  this  trend  and 
this  method. 

Cernysevskii  continued  the  literary  work  of  B51inskii. 
Whereas  Herzen  and  feakunin  supphed  the  younger  generation 
with  revolutionary  ardour,  CernySevskii  made  that  generation 
aware  of  the  decisive  importance  of  rationalist  preeminence 
and  reasonable  conviction.  In  the  section  on  Saint-Simonism 
in  his  analysis  of  the  July  monarchy,  he  demonstrated  with 
true  realistic  calm  how  natural  is  the  occurrence  of  political 
persecution,  saying  that  as  long  as  society  retains  its  existing 
structure,  innovators  will  have  to  suffer,  innovators  in  science 
and  art  as  well  as  innovators  in  politics.  "  This  is  inevitable 
while  the  present  state  of  society  continues."  What  must 
be,  must  be — CernySevskii  accepted  his  own  destiny  with  a 
dash  of  fatalism,  accepted  it  as  a  logical  development.  This 
is  plainly  shown  in  many  of  his  letters  from  Siberia  and  from 
Astrakhan.  Cerny§evskii's  adherents  took  science  and  its 
conclusions  as  the  ultimate  and  highest  authority.  In  the 
i  name  of  science,  they  held  that  the  same  logical  sequence 
proved  the  necessity  for  revolution. 

Cernysevskii  highly  esteemed  and  never  failed  to  recommend 

logical  and  scientific  consistency  and  unity  of  outlook.     He 

disliked    eclecticism    (see  his  polemic   against    Lavrov),    and 

unquestionably   this   strengthened   his  hold  on  the  younger 

generation,     since     he     did    not     display    the    cataclysmic 

variations  typical  of   Herzen  and   Bakunin. 

I        CernySevskii   did  little  to   further  the  solution  of   philo- 

'  sophical  and  scientific  problems.     His  influence  was  educative, 

\  and  the  importance  of  his  work  lay  in  its  general  trend  and 

I  not  in  particular  doctrines.     It  is  true,  as  we  learn  in  the  letters 

I  from  Siberia   and  Astrakhan,   that   Cernysevskii's  own  view 

I  was  that  his  authority  in  the  scientific  field  was  extensive. 

'  He  believed  that  his  contributions  to  science  were  to  be  of  far- 

I  reaching  significance,  not   merely  in   Russia  and  for   Russia, 

I  for  he  imagined  that  in  their  French  rendering  they  would 

I  influence  European  thought.     In  this  matter  he  was  mistaken. 

•        I  have  previously  pointed  out  that  divergent  views  prevail 

I  in    Russian   literature    concerning    Cernysevskii's    importance 

and   concerning   the   effect   of   his   writings.     His   adherents 


52  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

transfer  his  political  influence  to  the  domain  of  science,  and 
his  opponents  do  the  same  thing,  the  former  over-estimating 
and  the  latter  under-estimating  the  value  of  his  contributions 
to  science  and  philosophy. 

In  actual  fact,  CernySevskii  was  a  brilliant  publicist  and 
literary  critic,  but  as  far  as  scientific  work  is  concerned,  his 
views  on  political  economy  had  the  effect  for  years  of  turn- 
ing the  younger  radical  generation  away  from  the  study 
of  economics.  His  novel  What  is  to  be  Done  was  and 
remained  the  most  influential  of  all  his  writings. 

In  What  is  to  be  Done  Cernysevskii  described  the 
actual  life  of  his  "  new  men."  He  gave,  it  is  true,  a  some- 
what vague  sketch  of  socialist  plans  for  the  future.  Far  more 
important  and  far  more  influential  was  his  elaboration  of  the 
characters  in  the  book,  and  especially  of  Rahmetov,  the'idealist, 
an  exceptional  man  among  the  "  new  men,"  a  "  primal  source 
of  energy,"  upon  whom  Cernysevskii  makes  extremely  exalted 
claims.  What  the  monk  had  been  for  the  church,  Rahmetov 
was  to  be  for  the  new-society,  a  man  of  iron  will,  one  who  on 
his  own  behalf  and  on  behalf  of  those  among  whom  his  lot 
was  cast  accepted  the  dictates  of  reason  as  self-evident  truths. 
The  revolutionaries  of  the  sixties  and  seventies  were  affected 
more  by  Cerny§evskii's  example  than  by  his  precepts,  Cerny- 
sevskii in  Siberia  was  for  them  a  living  memento,  and  he  was 
this  not  to  them  only,  but  also  to  the  government  and  to  the 
reactionaries — for  these,  as  Bakunin  aptly  diagnosed,  were 
privileged  persons  in  point  of  political  blindness.  At  any 
rate  they  failed  to  understand  that,  as  Poerio,  the  Italian 
statesman  persecuted  by  the  king  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  phrased 
it,  "  il  patire  e  anche  operare." 

CernySevskii's  reahsm  paved  the  way  for  Marxism  and 
social  democracy,  but  those  Marxists  err  who  contend  that 
Cernysevskii  was  a  Russian  Marx  or  something  approaching 
this. 

Nor  is  it  right  to  assert  that  Cernysevskii  was  founder  or 
father  of  the  narodniCestvo.  Cernysevskii  took  a  more  realistic 
■  view  of  the  mu^ik  and  the  mir  than  Bakunin  and  Herzen  had 
taken,  and  this  enabled  him  to  strengthen  the  more  political 
and  practical  trends  of  the  narodniCestvo ;  but  he  conceived 
the  mir  to  be  an  association  in  the  European  sociahst  sense 
and  did  not,  like  the  later  narodniki,  ascribe  exclusive  import- 
ance to  that  institution.      Nor  did  CernySevskii,  as  did  the 


t" 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  58 

Slavophils,  regard  Europe  as  decadent.  In  his  view  the 
European  masses  (the  middle  classes)  had  not  yet  entered 
into  full  activity.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  we  are 
writing  about  the  beginning  of  the  sixties,  and  that  at  that 
time  there  did  not  as  yet  exist  a  sharp  distinction  between 
socialism  and  narodnicestvo,  for  the  conceptual  differentiae 
of  the  two  doctrines  had  not  then  been  fully  elaborated. 


II 

§  107. 

SHORTLY  after  his  first  appearance  on  the  scene,  Pisarev 
was  branded  by  numerous  opponents  as  the  enfant  terrible 
of  the  CernySevskian  trend.  Even  to-day,  "  the  annihilation 
of  aesthetics,"  if  not  ascribed  to  him  as  a  crime,  is  at  least 
charged  to  his  literary  account. 

Pisarev,  like  Dobroljubov,  was  a  critic,  and  he  carried  on 
the  work  of  Dobroljubov,  but  died  in  the  flower  of  his  youth. » 
While  still  a  schoolboy  Pisarev  had  begun  to  write  upon 
the  burning  questions  of  the  day.  His  mind  had  been  stirred 
by  Cernysevskii  and  Dobroljubov  ;  Herzen,  to  a  lesser  extent 
Bakunin,  and  Feuerbach  who  was  the  spiritual  father  of  them 
all,  influenced  him.  He  knew  of  Stirner's  work,  but  I  believe  at 
second  hand.  (Pisarev  occasionally  admits  that  his  knowledge 
even  of  Russian  literature  was  second  hand.)  He  preached 
radical  individualism,  understanding  by  this  term  the  struggle 
for  the  emancipation  of  the  individuality,  a  struggle  which  for 
him  embodied  the  essential  meaning  of  civilisation.  ("  Every 
living  being  is  for  himself  the  centre  and  the  meaning  of  the 
universe.  For  the  most  insignificant  subject,  his  personal 
joys,  vexations,  aspirations,  and  cares,  are  more  important 
than  universal  revolutions  which  take  place  without  his  parti- 
cipation and  exercise  no  influence  upon  the  destiny  of  his 
individuality.")  Pisarev  believed  that  the  securest  founda- 
tion for  his  individualism,  for  individualist  doctrine,  was 
to  be  found  in  declared  egoism,  but  at  an  early  stage  he  was 
cautious  enougli"  to  recommend  a  "rational  egoism."  To 
Pisarev  it  seemed  self-evident  that  the  healthy  human  under- 

I  Pisarev  was  born  in  1840  ;  his  first  lengthy  essays  were  published  in  1861  ; 
from  1862  to  1864  he  was  a  political  prisoner ;  in  1868  he  was  drowned  while 
bathing. 


54  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

standing  would  make  the  same  recommendation  to  every 
man.  To  Pisarev  "  the  healthy  human  understanding"  was 
ever  a  leading  authority. 

Freely  following  Stirner  and  Feuerbach,  Pisarev  negates 
all  principles,  all  ethical  aims,  the  concept  of  duty,  ideals  in 
general.  He  laughs  the  idealists  to  scorn,  and  conversely 
he  extols  the  realists.  Plato,  for  example,  was  merely  a 
general  of  philosophy,  just  as  others  are  generals  of  infantry. 
What  pleases  oneself,  this  is  real,  this  is  the  real,  and  all 
the  rest  is  idle  chatter. 

The  realist  has  no  need  of  philosophy  to  guide  him  in  the 
observance  of  a  reasonable  measure.  Pisarev  likewise  con- 
demns specialisation,  and  has  a  word  to  say  in  favour  of 
dilettantism.  He  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  philosophic 
pedagogics  or  with  maxims  of  education.  Children  are  to  be 
fed  and  protected,  and  to  be  provided  with  thought-material 
on  which  they  can  exercise  their  own  thinking  processes. 

His  occupation  with  literature  led  him  to  write  criticisms, 
but  these  were  never  anything  more  than  the  recapitulation 
of  the  subjective  impression  which  the  piece  of  literature  or 
the  work  of  art  had  made  upon  the  realist. 

Pisarev,  like  Stirner,  denies  the  existence  of  crime.  Only 
by  their  subjective  taste  are  such  men  as  Turgenev's 
Bazarov  restrained  from  murder  and  robbery.  It  is  nothing 
but  subjective  taste  which  incites  men  of  similar  type  to  make 
scientific  discoveries. 

Pisarev  had  a  special  fondness  for  new  and  vigorous  expres- 
sions. It  delighted  him  to  term  Puskin  and  Lermontov  rhyme- 
sters of  consumptive  girls  and  lieutenants.  "  That's  the  sort 
of  thing  they  like,  whereas  pastrj^  is  more  to  my  taste." 

To  a  certain  extent  Pisarev  may  be  compared  with  Nietzsche, 
with  whom  he  has  ideas  in  common.  Waging  a  rude  and 
relentless  war  against  the  traditional  and  against  recognised 
authorities,  it  is  his  wish  to  "  reanswer  "  ^  the  questions  that 
have  already  been  answered  ;  in  this  struggle  he  demands 
from  his  contemporaries  steadfastness  and  hardness  ;  ^  like 
Nietzsche  he  is  an  adversary  of  historism  ;  3    and  so  on. 

I  Percr65it',  literally,  to  rehear  a  lawsuit. 

»  The  Russian  tverdost'  has  this  double  signification. 

"  Pisarev's  personal  biography  may  to  some  extent  be  compared  with 
Nietzsche's.  Pisarev,  too,  suffered  from  mental  disorder,  and  twice  attempted 
suicide  whilst  in  a  state  of  morbid  mental  excitement.  But  Pisarev  got 
through  the  struggle  early  in  his  career. 


THE   SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA  55 

The  strong  emphasis  upon  evohition  and  renovation  led 
Pisarev,  before  Nietzsche,  to  the  same  conclusions.  For  the 
creation  of  the  new,  for  the  creation  of  the  new  men,  the  old 
must  be  relentlessly  destroyed:  "  What  can  be  struck  down, 
must  be  struck  down  unceasingly  ;  whatever  resists  the  on- 
>-,laught,  is  fit  for  existence  ;  whatever  flies  to  pieces,  is  fit 
for  the  rubbish  heap.  Hew  your  way  vigorousl}',  for  you 
can  do  no  harm."  In  Pisarev's  view  there  are  no  great  men. 
As  a  materialist,  his  outlook  upon  the  historical  evolutionary 
process  is  decisively  determinist,  and  he  explains  great  men 
as  the  sport  of  circumstance.  He  does  not  recognise  that  he 
has  a  false  conception  of  determinism  and  of  the  historical 
process. 

Pisarev  approves  Turgenev's  Bazarov,  and  would  make 
Bazarov  his  model.  In  his  essay  on  Baza,rov,  he  compares 
with  that  character  Pec^orin  and  Rudin,  Bazarov's  predecessors 
in  the  imaginary  world  of  literature,  and  comes  to  the  follov/ing 
conclusion.  In  its  views  upon  good  and  evil  the  older  gener- 
ation was  merely  giving  itself  unnecesary  torment  to  find 
nothing  and  do  nothing  in  the  end.  Rudin  had  knowledge 
without  will ;  Pecorin  had  will  without  knowledge  ;  Bazarov 
has  both  will  and  knowledge,  he  knows  his  v/eaknesses  but 
knows  also  his  strength,  he  understands  the  situation  in  which 
he  is  placed  and  adapts  himself  to  it  practically.  His  con- 
dition is  "one  of  calm  despair,  which  culminates  in^ absolute 
indifferentism,  but  leads  to  a  personal  development  which 
is  the  extremity  of  steadfastness  and  independence.  Since 
men  cannot  act,  they  begin  to  think  and  to  investigate.  Since 
they  find  it  impossible  to  transform  life,  their  anger  at  their 
own  impotence  makes  itself  felt  in  the  sphere  of  thought, 
where  the  destructive  work  of  criticism  proceeds  unceasingly. 
Superstitious  ideas  and  authorities  are  shivered  to  a  thousand 
fragments,  and  the  outlook  becomes  absolutely  freed  from 
every  variety  of  spookish  concept." 

Such  is  Pisarev's  psychological  description  of  the  realistic 
process  of  disillusionment,  and  his  terminology,  with  the 
reference  to  spooks,  recalls  Feuerbach  and  Stirner. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  why  Pisarev  should  have 
thus  inclined  to  make  too  much  of  realism  in  his  struggle 
against  absolutism.  A  young  fellow  of  twenty-two,  who  had 
been  forced  for  mere  nothings  to  spend  nearly  five  years  of 
his  life  in  a  fortress  prison,  could  hardly  be  expected  to  write 


56  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

without  exaggeration.  We  must  not  in  Pisarev's  work  mis- 
take the  envelope  of  style  for  the  contents.  I  do  not  take 
the  manifest  exaggerations  too  seriously.  Mihailovskii  is 
doubtless  right  when  he  says  that  Pisarev's  onslaught  upon 
PuSkin  was  a  piece  of  vandalism  ;  but  the  talk  about  the 
"annihilation  of  aesthetics"  and  similar  extravagances  indicate 
no  more  than  that  Pisarev  was  a  literary  protagonist  at  war 
with  the  abnormal  poUtical  and  social  conditions  of  Russia 
in  the  epoch  of  the  enfranchisement  of  the  serfs.  (Pisarev 
wrote  from  1859  to  1868.)  Such  sayings  as  that  a  cigar  is  j 
the  reaHst's  only  happiness,  that  without  which  the  realist 
(the  "thoughtful  reaUst  "  !)  cannot  think  properly,  and 
similar  utterances,  are  in  truth  childish  ;  but  the  saying  is 
expressive  of  the  mentahty  of  a  considerable  proportion  of 
young  Russia,  for  Pisarev  and  his  subjective  outpourings  were 
taken  very  seriously  by  the  young. 

Pisarev  was  even  less  concerned  than  Cernysevskii  to 
consider  the  philosophical  foundations  of  his  outlook  and 
to  excogitate  the  problems  of  principle.  Just  as  Cernysevskii 
adhered  to  Feuerbach  or  to  Mill,  so  did  Pisarev  seek  his  teachers 
and  authorities,  expound  their  doctrines,  popularise  and  dis- 
seminate them.  Authoritatively  he  conducted  the  campaign 
against  authority.  There  was  no  critical,  epistemological 
reflection,  or  at  least  there  was  no  determination  of  a  course  ; 
his  criticism  did  not  deal  with  fundamentals  but  only  with 
isolated  doctrines  and  their  consequences. 

With  him,  as  with  his  predecessors,  the  authority  against 
which,  on  principle,  he  was- campaigning  was  that  of  the 
theocracy,  the  state,  and  the  church.  Hence  on  the  negative 
side  he  advocated  atheism,  and  on  the  positive  side  positivism 
and  materialism.  From  the  first,  no  attempt  was  made  to 
effect  an  epistemological  and  metaphysical  settlement  between 
positivism  and  materialism.  The  sources  of  his  positivism 
were  various,  for  he  drew  from  Comte,  Mill,  and  Buckle,  as 
well  as  from  Feuerbach.  To  Comte  he  was  especially  indebted, 
and  he  knew  also  the  work  of  Taine.  ^ 

Pisarev's  materialism  was  derived  from  Feuerbach,  but 
also  from  Vogt,  Biichner,  and  Moleschott,  whose  views  Pisarev  i 
popularised.  He  deliberately  took  his  stand  against  the 
-Hegelians,  resolving  the  dialectical  historical  process  into  the 
physiological  vital  process,  taking  materiahst  sensualism  as 
his    starting    point.     Hence  his    preference   for   the   natural 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  57 

sciences  and  for  naturalism  in  general ;  hence  his  positivist 
esteem  for  scientific  sobriety  as  contrasted  with  imaginings, 
illusions,  and  the  Hke.  "  Facts,"  is  one  of  his  favourite  words, 
as  it  is  a  favourite  word  with  the  reaUsts  in  general.  "  Dreams 
and  illusions  pass  ;  facts  remain."  Pisarev  fights  superstition. 
Were  it  not  for  the  censorship,  he  would  tell  us  plainly  that 
he  fights  orthodoxy.  Not  merely  orthodox  theology  but  also 
the  official  philosophy  and  science  of  his  day,  are  rejected  by 
him  as  "  scholastics,"  and  in  connection  with  these  state- 
ments it  is  only  just  to  recall  the  disastrous  condition  of  the 
Russian  universities.  Pisarev,  Cernysevskii,  and  most  of  the 
oppositional  writers,  though  they  had  a  university  training, 
were  in  literary  and  scientific  matters  self-made  men. 

But  Pisarev  is  quite  uncritical  in  the  formulation  of  hi*^'. 
leading  concepts.  Consider,  for  instance,  his  use  of  the  term 
"  utilitarianism."  The  significance  is  nowhere  precisely  ex- 
plained, not  even  when  Pisarev  expresslj''  wishes  to  make  us 
understand  what  use,  real  use,  is.  He  does  not  get  beyond  a 
rough  statement  based  on  the  work  of  Bentham,  Mill,  and  the 
accepted  authorities  of  hedonism.  The  furthest  he  goes  is 
to  tell  us  that  the  idea  of  utility  must  not  be  taken  "  in  a 
narrow  sense."  There  is  a  marked  difference  between  Mill's 
teaching  and  Bentham's  ;  Mill  does  not  recognise  every  desire 
as  useful,  but  distinguishes  between  qualities  of  desire  ;  these 
shades  do  not,  however,  disturb  Pisarev,  who  is  satisfied  with 
the  "  healthy  materiahst  human  understanding." 

Similarly  as  regards  "  materiahsm."  Nowhere  is  this 
concept  distinguished  from  that  of  positivism,  though  here 
Pisarev  errs  in  the  company  of  European  philosophers,  as  for 
instance  in  that  of  Taine,  who  was  an  authority  to  Pisarev  and 
many  others.  But  further,  Pisarev  does  not  test  his  founda- 
tions. He  does  not  distinguish  the  epistemological  from  the 
metaphysical  or  the  religious.  Thus,  at  one  timdwhen  he  talks 
of  materialism  he  will  mean  sensualism  ("  the  philosophy  of 
the  obvious  ") ;  at  another  time  consciousness  will  be  material- 
istically explained;  and  so  on.  It  was  natural  that  Jurkevic^'s 
protest  against  materialism  should  make  no  impression  o'n 
Pisarev. 

The  concept  of  "  positivism  "  is  likewise  left  undefined. 
Pisarev,  though  a  positivist,  recommends  dilettantism  and 
rejects  specialisation. 


58  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 


P 


§io8. 

ISAREV'S  philosophic  impressionism  is,  of  course,  quite 
inconsistent  ;  he  contradicts  himself  frequently  and  in 
almost  all  points  ;  his  rapid  development  is  effected  catastro- 
phically  and  by  leaps.  The  "  Prometheus  "  of  to-day  was 
yesterday  still  a  "  sheep  "  ;  yesterday's  darling  has  to-day  be- 
come a  hHe  noire.    Thus  did  he  treat  Pu§kin  and  many  others. 

Nevertheless  we  discern  that  Pisarev  became  calmer  as 
he  grew  older,  and  it  may  also  be  said  that  he  became  clearer. 
Many  critics  suggest  that  his  prison  experiences  and  the  diligent 
reading  of  many  books  had  a  favourable  effect  upon  his  mind. 
Pisarev  himself  ascribed  his  green  extemporisations  (I  speak 
a  la  Pisarev)  to  the  liberating  influence  of  Heine. 

I  cannot  in  this  brief  sketch  give  a  detailed  account  of 
Pisarev's  mental  development,  but  I  must  refer  to  his  later 
study  of  Turgenev's  Bazarov,  which  is  the  best  criticism  of 
the  Pisarev  of  the  first  epoch,  the  Pisarev  I  have  just  been 
characterising ;  it  has  moreover  literary  importance,  for 
Pisarev's  name  has  a  pecuharly  intimate  association  with  the 
literary  disputes  concerning  Turgenev's  Fathers  and  Children 
and  concerning  nihilism.  A  consideration  of  his  febrile  activity 
in  this  matter  will  furnish  an  excellent  opportunity  for  a  philo- 
sophic study  of  the  nature  and  significance  of  nihilism. 

Turgenev's  novel  Fathers  and  Children  appeared  during 
1862  in  Katkov's  review.  In  the  figure  of  Bazarov,  the  young 
doctor,  we  have  an  analysis  of  realistic  youth,  its  outlook  on 
the  world,  and  its  aspirations,  and  realism  is  given  the  desig- 
nation of  nihilism.  The  type,  though  not  the  term  was  new 
in  Russian  literature. 

An  analysis  of  the  Bazarov  type,  in  so  far  as  Turgenev 
himself  provides  it,  will  follow  later.  At  present  we  are  only 
concerned  with  grasping  the  essence  of  realism  as  nihilism  in 
the  sense  wherein  the  realists  of  that  day,  the  realistic  critics, 
became  clearly  aware  of  their  own  principles  through  the  study 
of  Bazarov.  For  decades  Bazarov  and  nihiUsm  remained  a 
general  theme  of  literary,  philosophic,  and  political  discussion.^ 

I  Turgenev  had  already  begun  to  deal  with  the  problem  in  Dmitri  Rudin. 
Rudin,  whose  character  was  conceived  at  the  beginning  of  the  liberal  era  of 
Alexander  II  (1855),  was  Onegin  advancing  to  become  a  nihiUst ;  Bakunin 
was  the  model  for  Rudin.  But  not  until  he  came  to  write  Fathers  and  Children 
did  Turgenev  provide  in  the  figure  of  Bazarov  a  completed  portrait  of  the 
nihilism  of  his  day,  whilst  in  Smoke  (1867),  and  Virgin  Soil  (1877),  he  described 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  59 

In  March,  Pisarev  wrote  his  article  Bazarov,  accepting  the 
type  in  the  name  of  young  Russia.     Shortly  afterwards,  in 
the    May    issue    of    "  Sovremennik,"    appeared    AntonoviC's 
criticism  of  the  novel,  wherein  Bazarov  was  described  as  a 
worthless  and  vulgar  fellow,  who  even  in  extremis  desires  to 
procure  sensual  pleasure  and  recuperation  from  the  sight  of" 
Odincova.     AntonoviC  regards  Bazarov  as  an  insult  to  realistic 
,  young  Russia,  as  a  caricature  which  has  no  correspondence 
I  with  reahty,  as  a  caricature  of  something  that  does  not  exist. 
!  Antonovi(:^  therefore  compared  Turgenev  with   the  notorious 
I  writer  Asko(fenskii,   author   of   The  Modern  Asmodeiis  ;    this 
i  distinctive  and  condemnatory  title  was  borrowed  by  Antonovic! 
for  his  essay.  ^ 
I 

I  the  further  development  of  nihilism  and  recorded  his  own  personal  experiences. 
I  have  previously  pointed  out  that  CernySevskii's  What  is  to  be  Done  (1863) 
had  an  even  more  powerful  influence  upon  youthful  radicals  than  had  Tur- 
genev's  Fathers  and  Children,  CernySevskii  in  particular  pointing  out  the 
path-  which  radical  youth  was  to  follow.     All  the  great  writers  of  that  epoch, 

!  Gonfarov,  Dostoevskii,  and  Tolstoi,  discussed  the  problem  of  nihiUsm.  Dos- 
toevskii,  above  all,  dealt  v.ith  it  in  his  books  and  in  numerous  articles,  returning 
to  it  again  and  again,  and  probing  it  to  the  depths. 

In  a  sense,  the  entire  Russian  literature  of  these  decades  might  be  referred 
to  in  this  connection.  Saltykov  (Scedrin),  Nekrasov,  and  Ostrovskii,  also 
contributed  to  the  analysis  of  the  new  trend.  In  addition  to  these  men  who 
are  generally  recognised  as  great  writers,  during  the  sixties  and  seventies  many 
talented  authors  were  busied  with  the  problem  of  nihilism,  of  whom  I  may 
mention  the  following  :  Pisemskii  (The  Unruly  Sea,  1863)  and  Leskov  (No- 
v.hither,  1864).  To  the  same  category  belong  a  number  of  books  which  were 
widely  read  at  that  time  by  progressively  minded  persons,  such  as  Pom.ja- 
lovskii's   Molotov   (1861)    and   PhiUstine   Happiness   {1861),    Slepcov's   Difficult 

'  Times  (1865),  Fedorov's  (Omulevskii's)  Step  by  Step  (1S70,  pubUshed  in  1871 
under  the  title  Svetlov),  and  the  novels  of  ScUers-Mihailov,  Fetid  Swamps 
(1S64)  and  many  subsequent  works.  A  novel  by  Sonja  Kovale\'skaja,  the 
woman  writer  and  mathematician,  published  posthumously  in  iSqt,  must  also 
be  mentioned  ;  it  was  entitled  The  Voroncov  Family  ;  a  German  translation 
appeared  in  1896  as  Die  Nihilistin.  I  may  also  refer  to  Andrei  Koluhov  (1889), 
a  novel  written  by  the  terrorist  Stepniak  (Kravcinskii),  the  man  who  killed 
Mezencev,  chief  of  the  secret  police.  Most  of  the  writers  mentioned  above 
were  opponents  of  nihilism.  The  attacks  of  these  philosophical  adversaries 
were  reinforced  from  the  conservative  and  reactionary  side  by  semi-official 
polemic  and  propaganda  directed  against  nihiUsm.  The  following  antinihiUst 
novels  were  of  this  character.  Kljusnikov's  Mirage  (1864 — this  work  was 
fiercely  attacked  by  Pisarev)  ;  Krestovskii,  The  Sheep  of  Panurge  (1869),  Two 
Forces  (1874)  ;  iMarkevic,  Twenty-Five  Years  Ago  (1878),  The  Revolution 
(1880),  The  Bottomless  Abyss  (1883 — unfinished)  ;  Avsdenko's  Gnashing  of 
Teeth,  The  Evil  Spirit,  etc.  This  type  of  literature  was  sedulously  cultivated  ; 
the  famous  Prince  MeScerskii  wrote,  I  Want  to  be  a  Russian  Woman,  etc.  ; 
Ustrjalov  introduced  nihilism  upon  the  stage  in  Word  and  Deed  {1863). 

'  AskoCenskii  (1813-1879),  as  professor  of  patrology,  a  liberal  who  had 
abandoned  theology  (1846),  was  the  official  defender  of  obscurantism.     From 


60  THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

Pisarev  and  his  literary  associates  (Zaicev,  and  others)  took 
the  field  against  AntonoviC.  Whilst  in  prison  in  1864  Pisarev 
wrote  a  more  detailed  essay  on  Bazarov.  This  was  entitled 
The  Realists,  and  even  its  dedication  was  intended  to  blunt 
the  weapons  of  opponents  ;  it  was  inscribed,  "  To  my  best 
Friend,  my  Mother." 

At  the  very  time  when  the  dispute  about  Bazarov  was 
flaming  high,  CernySevskii's  novel  was  published,  and  the 
more  radical  among  the  realists  were  not  slow  to  perceive  that 
the  characters  of  What  is  to  be  Done  represented  the  true 
type.  Above  all,  the  figure  of  Rahmetov  became  the  ideal 
of  the  nihilists.  From  Rahmetov,  Pisarev,  likewise,  borrowed 
a  few  lineaments,  but  to  him  Turgenev's  conception  was 
(character] sticall}^  enough)  more  congenial  than  Cernysevskii's, 
though  Pisarev  admits  that  Cernysevskii  had  a  profounder 
insight  than  Turgenev  into  Russian  life. 

Pisarev  began  his  analysis  of  realism  (he  did  not  use  the 
word  nihilism)  by  explaining  that  it  was  the  first  independent 
manifestation  of  Russian  thought.  All  previous  trends  had 
been  foreign  mental  products  which  our  good  forefathers 
borrowed  from  abroad,  simply  because  they  were  then  the 
fashion  abroad.  Martinism,  Byronism,  Hegelianism,  and  all 
the  other  "  isms  "  were  to  relieve  the  terrible  tedium  which 
then  prevailed.  After  the  Crimean  war,  there  had  been  a 
rapid  development  of  accusatory  literature,  but  it  was  feeble 
and  inefficacious  and  had  brought  about  no  notable  changes  ; 
the  various  panaceas  that  had  been  recommended  had  failed 
to  work  a  cure. 

The  Russians  were  faced  by  two  great  facts  ;  they  were 
poor  and  they  were  stupid — poor  because  they  were  stupid, 
and  stupid  because  they  were  poor.  This  was  not  to  say  that 
the  Russian  was  an  idiot,  but  the  strength  of  his  brain  was 
not  displayed  in  the  field  of  action.  A  way  out  of  this 
charmed  circle  must  be  discovered.  First  of  all  it  was  the 
duty  of  the  government  to  enact  laws  which  would  put  an  end 
to  poverty  by  arranging  that  the  products  which  now  passed 
from  the  hands  of  the  producers  (the  workers)  into  the  hands 
of  non-producers  should  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  former. 
,  A  practical  influence  must  also  be  exercised  upon  the  non- 
1858  onwards  he  published  DomaSnjaja  BecSda  (The  Family  Journal),  the 
instrument  for  his  campaign  against  the  progressive  movement.  The  novel 
mentioned  in  the  text  was  published  in  1858. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  61 

workers  not  by  beating  the  big  moral  drum,  but  by  the 
diffusion  of  live  ideas,  so  that  the  Russian  brain  might  at 
length  set  to  work. 

This  latter  task  must  be  initiated  with  extreme  caution. 

!  The  work  must  be  rightly  chosen  and  rightly  assigned  ;    it 

i  must  be  of  such  a  nature  that  it  will  be  of  real  use  to  society. 

I  Pisarev  considered  that  a  guarantee  for  the  correct  solution 

i  of  the  problem  was  found  in  this,  that  his  contemporaries 

i  were  at  length  beginning  to  realise  the  necessity  of  employing 

j  their  intellectual  powers.     "  The  economics  of  mental  forces 

(  consists  wholly  in  strict  and  consistent  realism." 

i        From  the  standpoint  of  ethical  utilitarianism,  in  the  sense 

of  a  reasonable  and  deliberate  hedonism,   Pisarev  approves 

Bazarov,  and  expounds  Turgenev's  novel  in  order  to  refute 

the  objections  levelled  against  Bazarov. 

Social  or  general  advantage  is  to  be  found  in  universal 
human  sohdarity ;  with  hand  and  head  the  realist  must 
work  to  estabUsh  this  sohdarity  on  a  firm  foundation. 
"  The  realist  is  the  thoughtful  worker,  the  man  who  loves 
his  work."  (Turgenev's  Bazarov  looks  upon  nature  as  a 
workshop  !)  The  reaHst  is  a  practical  thinker  and  a 
practical  worker,  he  will  therefore  take  due  care  con- 
cerning the  way  in  which  he  is  to  work  for  the  community 
in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  solidarity,  and  how 
under  the  conditions  that  are  quite  peculiar  to  Russia  he 
is  to  work  for  Russia  whilst  simultaneously  working  for 
the  wider  world  community.  All  work,  all  practice,  is  based 
upon  knowledge ;  Russia  needs  knowledge,  needs  science. 
Pisarev  distinguishes  the  natural  sciences,  those  in  which 
research  for  the  new  is  undertaken,  from  such  sciences  as 
history  and  economics  (he  is  thinking  here  not  of  Cerny§evskii 
but  of  Kireevskii !)  which  confine  themselves  to  a  calm  analysis 
of  human  social  relationships.  To  Pisarev,  science  is  merely 
the  energy  which  is  competent  "  independently  of  historical 
events,"  to  awaken  public  opinion  and  to  educate  the  thought- 
ful leaders  of  the  national  work.  This  liberating  science  takes 
for  Pisarev  the  form  of  natural  science,  and  he  rejects  history 
("  Macaulayism ").  He  therefore  demands  of  the  literary 
critics  that  they  shall  become  students  of  natural  science. 
He  is  dissatisfied  with  BSlinskii,  whose  thought  was  too  much 
confined  to  the  aesthetic  field,  and  who  ought  to  have  studied 
natural  science.     Lermontov's  PeCorin,  the  type  of  an  earlier 


62  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

generation,  was  intelligent  enough  to  escape  from  Macaulayism, 
but  his  chosen  expedient,  Don  Juanism,  is  impossible  in  a 
society  which  lives,  or  is  beginning  to  live,  a  full  life. 

Pisarev  proves  his  thesis  on  Germany,  on  the  very  land 
decried  for  its  phiHstinism,  and  adduces  a  whole  catalogue 
of  investigators  of  natural  science  whose  example  Russia 
would  do  well  to  follow-7-Liebig,  Virchow,  etc.,  etc. 

The  reader  recalls  how  Bazarov  in  Fathers  and  Childyen 
undertakes  physiological  observations  upon  frogs,  and  recom- 
mends such  observations  to  others.  Pisarev  pounces  upon  the 
motif,  and  for  all  his  stylistic  extravagance,  he  is  essentially 
in  earnest  when  he  writes  :  "  There  you  have  it,  in  the  frog  you 
will  find  the  rescue  and  the  renewal  of  the  Russian  people." 

In  brief,  says  Pisarev,  "  matters  must  be  thought  to  a 
finish  ...  we  must  be  honest  with  ourselves."  The  realist 
must  be  straightforward  and  truthful  to  himself,  to  all  his 
fellows,  and  above  all  to  women  ;  he  must  enter  into  no 
relationships  that  arc  other  than  straightforward  and 
truthful.  The  realist  must  put  before  himself  a  rational 
aim,  and  must  not  fail  to  attain  it.  But  this  rational  aim 
will  become  clear  to  him  alone  who  has  been  scientifically 
trained,  and  the  ultimate  essential  therefore  is  to  diffuse  and 
to  popularise  science  in  Russia.  The  essay  concludes  with 
suggestions  as  to  the  right  method  of  popularisation,  and 
sums  up  the  nature  of  realism  in  the  dictum  :  "  Love, 
Knowledge,  and  Work." 

Is  this  all  ?  Was  it  merely  for  this  that  Pisarev  was 
denounced  as  a  robber  and  an  assassin  ?  We  have  to  remember 
that  in  the  early  sixties  this  negation  of  Russia  seemed  an 
extremely  revolutionary  doctrine.  Besides,  who  was  the  new 
authority  who  permitted  himself  such  a  liberty  ?  He  was  a 
man  four-and-twenty  years  of  age,  an  aristocrat,  indeed, 
belonging  to  a  wealthy  famil3^'  but  apart  from  this  a  man 
of  no  account,  an  arrogant  upstart  without  even  a  university 
degree  to  his  credit.  His  adversaries,  on  the  other  hand, 
could  truthfully  say  that  he  had  spent  several  months  in  a 
lunatic  asylum,  whilst  the  conservatives  could  point  to  the 
fact  that  he  was  under  lock  and  key  in  the  fortress  of  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paul.  But  it  was  precisely  this  last  consideration  w^hich 
commended  Pisarev  to  his  young  contemporaries,  and  com- 
mends him  to  our  own.  This  is  why  his  words  have  been 
so  eagerly  read,  and  this  is  why  people  have  been  willing  to 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  63 

pay  as  much  as  fifty  roubles  for  a  collection  of  his  writings — 
though  cheaper  editions  are  now  available. 

Pisarev  jettisoned  all  the  literary  and  critical  works  of  his 
predecessors,  not  even  excepting  the  writings  of  Belinskii, 
Cernysevskii,  and  Dobroljubov.  Caadaev  had  at  least  retained 
approval  for  Peter,  but  Pisarev  included  in  his  iconoclasm 
Caadaev  and  all  men  of  letters,  together  with  the  amiable 
Granovskii,  whose  writings  and  lectures  were  nothing  but 
"  futile  Macaulayism."  It  is  not  surprising  that  even  some 
of  the  radicals  shared  Antonovic's  alarm  ;  and  as  for  the 
liberals,  they  were,  on  principle,  opponents  of  Pisarev  and 
his  whole  trend.  Caadaev  had  attacked  theology  and  ortho- 
doxy, and  was  therefore  congenial  to  the  liberals,  but  Pisarev 
renounced  the  liberal  adversaries  of  theology  and  orthodoxy. 
He  continually  returned  to  the  attack  upon  liberalism.  He 
regarded  a  liberal  as  a  pygmy,  as  a  dwarf,  or  as  a  cow  trying 
to  gallop  like  a  cavalry  horse. ^ 

.  At  that  time  Saltykov  agreed  with  Antonovic,  and  it  was 
all  the  more  natural  that  Katkov,  the  conservatives,  and  tho 
reactionaries,  should  share  Antonovic's  views. 

As  a  matter  of  course,  the  Slavophils  were  opposed  to 
Pisarev  and  the  reaUsts,  were  opposed  to  the  man  w^ho  had 
the  audacity  to  speak  of  Ivan  Kireevskii  as  a  Don  Quixote. 
The  pocvenniki,  too,  were  strongly  adverse  to  Pisarev  and 
to  nihilism  ;  it  w^as  in  the  pocvennik  circle  that  Dostoevski! 
began  his  life  work  against  nihihsm.  Nor  was  it  Hkely  that 
the  narodniki  and  the  sociahsts  would  be  pleased  by  Pisarev's 
view^s  upon  economics  and  history. 

Herzen,  though  he  had  himself  interpreted  Bazarov  and 
nihilism  in  a  Byronic  sense,  was  opposed  to  Pisarev  and  to 
the  nihihsm  of  the  sixties.  There  remained,  therefore,  to 
support  Pisarev  none  but  the  most  radical  among  the  radicals. 

Antonovic's  essay  spHt  the  radical  camp. 


J 


§  109. 

UST  as  Herzen  endeavoured  to  harmonise  his  proud  and 
contemptuous  individualism  with  sociaHsm  and  with  love 

I  The  following  are  mentioned  by  Pisarev  among  his  liberal  opponents  : 
Gromeka  (wrote  a  polemic  against  Herzen  in  1862.  and  in  the  same  year  con- 
demned CernySevskii  and  his  teaching)  ;  DudySkin,  the  real  editor  of  Oteces- 
tvennyja  Zapiski ;  Zarin  (the  translator  of  Byron's  plays),  who  m  the  same 
periodical  attacked  Cernysevskii,  Dobroljubov,  and  Pisarev. 


64  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

for  Russia,  so  also  did  Pisarev  advance  from  individualism 
and  egoism  to  socialism.  The  question  of  "  the  hungry  and 
the  insufficiently  clad  "  became  to  him  the  question  of  questions. 
Beside  this,  he  exclaimed  in  1865,  there  is  nothing  worth 
thinking  or  troubling  about.  Science  and  culture  were  the 
means  by  which  the  problem  was  to  be- solved  and  by  which 
the  goal  was  to  be  attained — not  science  as  an  amusement  for 
wealthy  and  idle  aristocrats  and  landowners,  but  the  science 
that  is  the  daily  bread  of  every  healthy  human  being  and 
must  therefore  permeate  the  intelHgence  of  manual  workers, 
factory  operatives,  and  peasants.  Until  this  happened,  the 
toiling  masses  would  continue  to  languish  in  poverty  and 
immorality. 

In  addition  to  these  prescriptions,  which  remind  us  of 
Lassalle,  of  his  utterances  concerning  science  and  its  relation- 
ship to  the  workers,  physical  toil  is  recommended  to  members 
of  the  cultured  class,  for  this  alone  "  renders  possible  a  genuine 
drawing  near  to  the  people."  From  this  outlook  a  complete 
scheme  was  drafted  for  the  reform  of  instruction  and  education, 
Comte's  positivism  being  here  combined  with  the  experiences 
of  Tolstoi  as  recorded  in  his  works  upon  his  childhood  and 
youth. 

Although  Pisarev  transformed  the  "  thoughtful  realist  " 
into  the  "  thoughtful  proletarian,"  he  did  not  advance  beyond 
these  plans  for  reform. 

He  felt  assured  that  his  socialism  was  only  for  the  cultured. 
None  but  the  most  intelligent  among  the  workers  could  respond 
to  his  demand  that  they  should  labour  with  love.  For  the 
time  being,  therefore,  the  manual  workers  were  outside  the 
domain  of  realism  ;  were  no  realists,  although  theirs  was  the 
most  real  of  all  work.  The  manual  workers  could  not  as  yet 
love  labour ;  they  were  mere  machines,  though  machines 
susceptible  to  fatigue.  Consequently  the  realist  must  for 
the  nonce  leave  the  workers  alone.  Pisarev  desired  merely 
to  train  realistic  leaders  for  the  workers  ;  the  cultivation  of 
the  masses  would  be  a  subsequent  task  ;  ,  meanwhile  the  real- 
ists were  to  turn  to  the  peasants.  Pisarev  gave  little  or  no 
thought  to  the  factory  hands,  to  the  urban  proletariat. 

Pisarev's  socialism  may  well  be  compared  with  that  of 
Plato.  Plato,  too,  demanded  communism  for  the  two  higher 
classes  alone,  not  for  the  peasants  and  operatives  ;  the  leaders 
of  communist  society  were  to  govern  the  workpeople.  Similarly 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  65 

Pisarev  insisted  upon  realism  for  the  intellectual  workers,  and 
these  were  to  lead  the  manual  workers,  who  could  not  as  yet 
become  realists. 

The  destiny  of  the  folk,  said  Pisarev,  will  be  fulfilled  in  the 
universities,  not  in  the  elementary  schools, 

Pisarev  appeals  exclusively  to  the  middle  class.  Only 
the  middle  class,  he  said  as  early  as  1861,  ideally  lives  and 
moves  ;  to  the  middle  class  belongs  almost  everybody  capable 
of  writing,  reading,  thinking,  and  developing.  Though  him- 
self of  aristocratic  birth,  Pisarev  renounced  the  higher  aris- 
tocracy as  stagnant,  but  the  people  was  likewise  stagnant.  It 
is  true  that  when  Pisarev  referred  to  the  middle  class,  he  was 
thinking  of  those  members  of  it  who  would  accept  his  radical- 
ism ;  to  the  ordinary  bourgeois  Pisarev  was  no  less  hostile 
than  Herzen,  whose  socialistic  program  of  brain  equality  was 
thus  reproduced  by  Pisarev, 

In  his  account  of  the  realists,  Pisarev  dealt  with  the 
problem  of  objectivism  and  subjectivism,  and  illustrated  it 
by  a  reference  to  Goethe.  Goethe  had  had  his  ego,  his  subjec- 
tive fiction,  namely,  the  establishment  of  a  unitary  organism, 
which  he  ranked  higher  than  the  actual  drama  of  social  life, 
Goethe  had  considered  the  world  of  individual  experience  not 
as  a  refuge  but  as  a  temple,  the  most  beautiful  and  the  holiest 
in  the  world.  "  To  enable  him  to  see  in  himself  a  temple  of 
light  and  in  the  environing  life  a  squalid  market  place,  to 
enable  him  thus  to  forget  the  natural  solidarity  between  his 
own  ego  and  the  surrounding  stupidities  and  sorrows  of  other 
men,  he  found  it  necessary  to  corrupt  his  critical  understanding 
systematically,  and  to  lull  it  to  sleep  with  the  beauty  of  ex- 
quisite phrases.  Petty  thoughts  and  petty  feelings  must  be 
transformed  into  the  pearls  of  creation.  Goethe  performed 
this  work  of  art,  and  down  to  the  present  day  similar  works 
have  been  regarded  as  the  greatest  achievements  of  art ;  such 
hocus  pocus  takes  place,  however,  not  in  the  sphere  of  art 
alone,  but  likewise  in  all  the  other  spheres  of  human 
activity." 

Pisarev  thus  opposes  extreme  subjectivism  and  indivi- 
dualism in  the  name  of  social  solidarity.  He  continues  to 
strive  for  the  independence  of  the  ego,  to  strive  like  a  titan, 
for  these  are  the  "  titanic  ideas  "  of  which  he  speaks  ;  but  he 
considers  ludicrous  the  Goethe  auto-apotheosis  in  Faust.  To 
express   the   matter  in   materialistic   terminology,   no  single 

6  VOL.    II. 


60  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

organism  possesses  the  value  of  the  massed  organisms  that 
constitute  society. 

In  his  first  essa;/  upon  Bazarov,  Pisarev  found  it  the  especial 
merit  of  Bazarov  that  he  had  refused  to  recognise  any  regulator, 
any  moral  law,  any  principle,  whether  above,  external  to,  or 
within  himself  ;  but  two  years  later,  Pisarev's  Bazarov  has 
come  to  recognise  a  regulator  and  a  moral  law.  We  read  that 
life  must  be  built  up  upon  an  idea,  and  this  idea  is  the  general 
solidarity  of  mankind.  Within  a  brief  space,  the  realist  a  la 
Stirner  has  been  transformed  into  the  thoughtful  realist. 

At  first  he  had  endeavoured  subjectivistically  and  ego- 
istically  to  justify  crime,  but  later,  when  he  became  a 
"  thoughtful  realist,"  he  condemned  bloodshed  of  any  kind 
(see  his  account  of  Dostoevskii's  Crime  and  Punishment, 
1867-1868). 

Pisarev's  dissatisfaction  with  radical  individualism  toward 
the  close  of  his  career  is  further  proved  by  the  information 
recently  made  public  that  he  desired  to  popularise  the  first 
volume  of  Capital  (1867),  for  he  had  been  charmed  by  the 
Marxist  theory.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  Pisarev's  con- 
ception of  socialism  differed  from  that  of  Marx.  In  1864 
he  had  assigned  to  the  individual  a  secondary  role  in  the 
social  and  historical  process,  but  in  1865  he  exclaimed,  "  I, 
too,  am  a  phenomenon." 

Strong  expressions  are  used  in  the  essay  entitled  The 
Annihilation  of  Aesthetics,  which  appeared  in  1865.  Every 
man  of  artistic  sensibilities  must  find  it  disagreeable  to  read 
that  Dussiaux,  a  celebrated  St.  Petersburg  chef,  was  worth 
just  as  much  as  Raphael ;  but  when  we  go  on  to  read  that 
Pisarev  would  himself  rather  be  a  Russian  cobbler  or  baker 
than  a  Russian  Raphael  or  Grimm,  it  is  not  difficult  to  under- 
stand that  this  is  the  author's  way  of  telling  us  that  practical 
economic  work  is  the  greatest  need  of  contemporary  Russia. 
Doubtless  Pisarev  erred  in  looking  upon  Puskin's  Onegin  as 
an  apotheosis  of  the  status  quo,  and  in  considering  Puskin 
himself  a  colossal  rudiment.  Moreover,  it  was  thoroughly 
unrealistic  to  dictate  to  Saltykov  and  Dobroljubov  whether 
they  should  write  verses  or  study  natural  science.  All  this 
was  distorted  and  overstrained,  but  it  did  not  signify  that 
Pisarev  rejected  art  in  good  earnest.  In  fact,  he  approved- 
none  but  the  genuine  poets,  the  thought  champions  sans  peur 
et  sans  reproche,  the  "  knights  of  the  spirit."     The  pygmiea 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  67 

and  the  parasites  had  no  claim  to  indulgence.     As  yet,  he 
contended,   Russia  had  no  such  poets,     Griboedov,   Krylov, 
Puskin,  and  Gogol,  did  not  suffice  him  ;    whilst  Russia  could 
boast  a  Fet  as  against  Shakespeare,  Dante,  BjTon,  Goethe, 
and    Heine  !     Pisarev   admired    Dickens,    Thackeray,  George 
Sand,  and  Victor  Hugo,  who  had  awakened  men  from  their 
,  slumbers  and  had  done  practical  work.     He  could  even  admire 
i  metaphysicians  like  Pierre  Leroux,  for  Leroux,  despite  his  im- 
possible doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  had  supported  mankind 
I  in  the  great  struggle,  just  as  had  Proudhon  and  others, 
j        Nor  must  we  forget  that  Tolstoi  displayed  similar  feelings 
I  towards  art,  towards  his  own  art.     Many  parallel  thoughts 
can  be  discovered  in   the  writings  of   Pisarev   and   Tolstoi. 
Students  of  aesthetics  have  become  accustomed  in  the  case 
of  Tolstoi  to  his  repudiation  of  art  and  to  his  realistic  definition 
;  of  art  as  absolute  truth  ;    but  just  as  Tolstoi  continually  re- 
'  turned  to  art,  so  likewise  did  Pisarev  no  less  than  Dobroljubov 
'  and  Cernysevskii  again  and  again  immerse  himself  in  works 
of  art.     This  is  what  counts,  not  the  "  annihilation  of  aesthe- 
'  tics,"  not  the  campaign  against  Puskin,  Schiller,  etc.     Besides, 
1  aesthetics  is  one  thing,  art  another  ! 

In  studying  Pisarev,  we  must  always  take  into  account 
this  writer's  tendency  to  polemic  overstatement.  In  the  very 
essay  of  1862  in  which  he  coquetted  with  the  idea  of  crime, 
the  essay  on  Bazarov,  we  read  the  following  involuntary  confes- 
sions of  the  Bazarovian  realist  :  "  In  the  depths  of  his  soul 
he  approves  much  which  in  words  he  denies,  and  perchance  it 
is  this,  this  element  that  he  hides,  which  preserves  him  from 
moral  decay  and  moral  nullity."  Moreover,  as  we  have  seen, 
the  essay  of  1862  concludes,  like  Herzen's  similar  writing, 
with  love.  We  are  told  by  Pisarev's  biographers  that  he  was 
very  strictly  brought  up  by  his  mother,  and  that  while  at  the 
university  he  continued  to  be  guided  by  the  teachings  of  his 
:  youth.  The  dedication  of  The  Realists  confirms  this  state- 
ment, and  shows  us  in  Pisarev  the  very  dualism  of  theory 
and  practice  which,  as  a  theorist,  he  attacks. 

The  "  titanic  ideas  "  announced  by  Pisarev  were  not 
notably  distinguished  for  incisiveness,  momentum,  or 
originality  ;  the  main  secrets  of  Pisarev's  influence  were 
the  fire  of  his  enthusiasm,  and  his  relentlessness.  The 
hum  of  battle  sounded  in  his  essays ;  their  aggressive 
negation,    their     revolutionary    mood,    won    the     heart    of 


OS  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

youth.  The  power  of  Pisarev's  writings  was  enhanced 
because  the  government  imprisoned  the  I'aw  student  for  a 
proclamation  in  which  he  had  defended  Herzen  against  the 
reactionary  minions  of  authority.  The  most  widely  influential 
of  Pisarev's  essays  were  written  in  prison. 

Pisarev  did  not  exercise  an  illuminating  influence  upon 
literature  and  philosophy,  and  still  less  can  it  be  said  that 
his  work  was  creative,  but  among  all  the  radicals  of  his  day 
his  was  certainly  the  most  philosophical  intelligence. ^ 

Pisarev,  like  Cernysevskii,  was  essentially  a  philosopher 
of  the  enlightenment.  The  "  thoughtful  realist  "  aims  at  a 
"  rational  comprehension  "  of  the  world.  He  strives  to  secure 
a  precise  and  scientific  conception  of  the  universe.  With 
Buckle,  he  sees  human  progress,  and  anticipates  its  continuance 
solely  through  the  diffusion  and  strengthening  of  the  reasoning 
powers,  through  culture.  Pisarev  knows  of  only  one  evil 
thing  in  humanity,  ignorance ;   and  he  has  but  one  remedy  to 

I  During  the  sixties  and  seventies  there  were  a  number  of  other  authors 
and  journahsts  besides  Pisarev  to  represent  the  reahstic  trend  ;  their  names 
are  but  httle  known  to-day,  and  their  works  Ue  buried  in  the  various  reviews 
that  have  been  named  above.  Autonovic  acquired  a  reputation  from  1859 
onwards  as  a  critic,  contributing  to  the  Sovremennik  ;  after  Cernygevskii's 
arrest  he  became  editor  of  that  periodical  ;  subsequently  he  achieved  notable 
successes  in  his  speciahty,  geology.  Selgunov  worked  unremittingly  from 
1859  to  his  death  in  1881.  Noteworthy  were  his  studies  upon  the  Englisli 
proletariat,  based  upon  the  work  of  Engels,  and  published  in  tlie  Sovremennik ; 
and  many  other  articles.  There  has  been  a  collected  edition  of  his  works. 
Zaicev  was,  with  Pisarev,  a  leading  collaborator  on  the  Russkoe  SIovo.  In 
materialistic  fashion,  Zaicev  declared  that  artistic  work  was  a  manifestation 
of  stimulated  sensuality,  of  spinal  irritation  ;  he  was  an  eager  adversary  of 
liberalism  and  aristocracy.  His  literary  criticisms  were  far  more  radical  than 
those  of  Pisarev.  For  example,  Lermontov's  hero  was  denominated  "  a  dis- 
illusioned idiot  "  ;  manual  workers  were  stated  to  be  far  more  useful  than 
poets.  Despite  his  radicalism,  Zaicev  favoured  negro  slavery,  and  therefore 
attacked  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe.  If  the  Irish  would  eat  peas  instead  of 
potatoes  they  would  become  more  cultured,  wealthier,  and  freer — and  so  -on. 
When  the  Russkoe  SIovo  was  suppressed,  Zaicev  took  refuge  abroad,  and  in 
1880  wrote.  Concerning  the  Utility  of  Tsaricide.  Blagosvetlov  was  of  note 
at  this  period.  From  1S60  onwards  he  was  editor  of  the  Russkoe  SIovo  and 
had  considerable  influence  upon  Pisarev's  development.  Tkacev,  an  associate 
of  BlagosvStlov,  will  be  considered  in  §  iii,  vi.  Among  men  of  a  still  younger 
generation,  Protopopov,  the  critic,  who  came  to  the  front  in  1877,  has  been 
regarded  as  a  successor  of  Cernygevskii,  Dobroljubov,  and  Pisarev,  although , 
he  wrote  some  sharp  things  jbout  Pisarev.  Subsequently  he  was  under  narod- 
nik  influence  ;  and  finally  he  became  a  mj'stic.  The  positivist  Skabicevskii, 
who  died  quite  recently,  deserves  mention  as  critic  and  historian  of  literature ; 
he  formulated  his  critical  credo  in  the  polemic  against  Pisarev's  exaggerations, 
but  continued  down  to  our  own  day  to  represent  the  realistic  trend. 
Skabicevskii,  however,  though  a  realist,  was  a  bourgeois  realist. 


;  THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  69 

'recommend,  knowledge.     Brehm's  Animal  Life  delights  him, 
I  for  he  finds  it  an  embodiment  of  genuine,  real,  realistic  science. 
In  his  struggle  for  enlightenment,  the  impassioned  phil- 
osopher, a  man  of  nervous  temperament,  becomes  an  ultra- 
rationahst.     "  Reason  is  worth  more  than  all  the  rest ;    or, 
to  put  the  matter  more  precisely,  reason  is  everything."     The 
Russian  "  annihilator  of  aesthetics  "  has  in  him  an  element 
of  enlightened  absolutism,  a  spice  of  Josephan  utilitarianism. 
Pisarev,  therefore,  rejects  theory  ;    or  rather,  and  this  is 
'  the  true  formula  of  realism,  he  demands  the  personal  veri- 
I  fication  of  theory  by  practice.     Word  and  deed,  as  Dobrgljubov 
says,  are  to  be  one.     Pisarev  repeats  this. 


Ill 

§  no. 

THE  designation  "  nihiHsm  "  was  not  new  in  Russia.     As 
^  far   back   as    the    thirties,    Nadezdin,    in   his    campaign 

[against  romanticism,  had  given  the  name  of  nihilist  to  those 
;who  in  literature  and  art  would  recognise  no  leading  prin- 
jciples.  In  1858  Dobroljubov  made  fun  of  the  reactionaries 
'who  stigmatised  young  men  and  their  justified  scepticism  as 
■nihihstic.  At  this  date  the  nihilist  onslaught  began  to  be- 
come active,  and  Turgenev,  in  his  novel,  did  not  merely  present 
a  new  type  but  gave  it  its  name. 

Let  us  now  attempt  to  analyse  the  concept   nihilism,  to 
display  its  leading  content. 

[       i.  The  concept  of  realism  was  first  formulated  in  the  domain 
iof  literature  and  art.     This  is  readily  comprehensible  when 
jwe  consider  the  importance  of  literature  under  the  oppressive 
regime  of  absolutism.     From  the   days  of   Belinskii  onwards 
{literary  criticism  became  an  endeavour  to  present  the  essence 
'of  realism  as  contrasted  with  romanticism.     In   this  sense, 
Belinskii   accepted   for  Gogol's   work   the   name   given  it  by 
opponents,   who   had   said    that   this   work  belonged   to    the 
"  natural  "  school.     Defending  such  naturalism,  Belinskii  pre- 
sented romanticism  and  realism  as  generalised  outlooks,  as 
philosophies.     Naturalness,  simplicity,  truth,  now  became  the 
watchwords  of  the  realist  aestheticists  ;    and  folk-songs  were 
held  up  to  the  poets  as  models.     The  advocates  of  this  trend 
•  did  not   demand  any  slavish  imitation   of   nature,  did   not 


70  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

demand  merely  photographic  reproduction,  but  they  insisted 
that  the  artist,  too,  should  cultivate  the  sense  of  exactitude 
and  precision  which  modern  science  was  developing  and 
maturing.  They  clung  firmly  to  objectivism  as  contrasted 
with  the  subjectivism  of  the  romanticists. 

Cernysevskii  and  his  successors  (Dobroljubov  and  Pisarev) 
conceived  realism  in  the  sense  of  philosophic  positivism,  con- 
ceived it  as  naturalism.  Seeing  that  Russian  social  and  political 
conditions  made  even  of  literature  an  instrument  of  "  accusa- 
tion," it  is  not  surprising  that  the  literary  critics,  the  aesthe- 
ticists,  should  approve  these  accusations.  The  question  was 
now  mooted  whether  the  ugly,  no  less  than  the  beautiful,  could 
properly  be  the  object  of  art.  To  the  realists,  who  answered 
this  question  in  the  affirmative,  Gogol  seemed  preferable  to 
Puskin,  although  Puskin,  and  our  classical  writers  in  general, 
had  paved  the  way  for  realism.  After  the  days  of  Cernysevskii 
and  Dobroljubov,  French  realism  began  to  make  headway 
in  the  form  of  naturalism.  Zola,  in  especial,  came  to  the 
front  in  the  middle  sixties;  a  decade  later  (1875-80),  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Turgenev,  he  expounded  his  theory 
(which  was  likewise  directed  against  romanticism  and  senti- 
mentalism)  in  the  periodical  "  Vestnik  Evropy."  But  many 
authors  and  critics  failed  to  keep  within  reasonable  bounds ; 
exaggeration  prevailed  in  art  as  well  as  in  criticism  ;  hence 
resulted  the  nihilistic  "  annihilation  of  aesthetics." 

ii.  Philosophically,  realism  is  positivism.  Comte  taught 
the  realists  to  regard  mathematics  and  its  exactitude  as  the 
scientific  ideal,  and  thus  whereas  the  romanticists  had  extolled  j 
the  nature  philosophy,  the  realists  proclaimed  that  mathe- 
matics and  those  natural  sciences  in  which  mathematics  were  ' 
employed  were  the  genuine  and  proper  knowledge.  The 
mental  sciences  were  condemned,  or  the  attempt  was  made 
to  transform  them  into  natural  sciences.  Psychology,  in 
especial,  became  physiology  and  biology.  Positivism  was 
conceived  by  the  realists  in  a  materialist  and  sensualist  sense. 
As  a  rule,  stress  was  laid  upon  positivist  method. 

Pisarev,  in  the  presentation  of  his  views,  sometiijies  fol- 
lowed Comte's  definition,  although  he  failed  to  conceive  it 
with  precision.  He  said,  for  example,  that  the  realist  desired 
to  establish  scientifically  nothing  more  than  the  relations  of 
phenomena,  not  general  results.  But  this  term  "  general 
results  "  is  extremely  vague,  and  does  not  belong  to  the  true 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  71 

positivism  of  Comte.  Pisarev,  like  so  many  others,  is  in 
truth  an  empiricist,  and  he  himself  frequently  speaks  of  the 
realists  as  empiricists.  This  interchange  of  empiricism  with 
sensualism  and  materiahsm  is  a  stereotyped  phenomenon  in 
the  history  of  thought.  In  like  manner,  the  idealisation  of 
the  natural  sciences,  of  naturalism,  frequently  occurs,  and  is 
typical  of  empiricism.  Enumeration,  weighing,  measuring, 
the  precise  record  of  facts,  these  constitute  for  Pisarev  the 
only  right  method,  laboratory  methods  being  applied  to  life 
by  the  nihilistic  Bazarovs. 

Facts,  this  is  the  realistic  and  nihilistic  slogan,  used  to 
wearisome  iteration,  palpable  facts  being  recognised  natural- 
istically  and  materialistically,  whilst  impalpable  facts  are 
simply  ignored.  The  nihilist  is  extremely  hostile  toward 
everything  which  he  terms  abstract  or  general ;  he  demands 
the  concrete,  concreteness  is  his  war-cry.  "  There  is  no  such 
thing  as  an  abstract  truth  ;  truth  is  concrete.  .  .  .  Every 
thing  depends  upon  the  conditions  of  time  and  sj>ace  "  (Cerny- 
sevskii).  "  Let  us  have  the  real  man  of  flesh  and  blood  with 
his  doings,  not  fantastic  relationships  to  the  entire  outer 
world"  (Dobroljubov).  We  m.ust  have  facts,  therefore, 
isolated  facts,  no  philosophy,  no  metaphysics,  no  general 
outlook  on  the  universe,  no  theory,  no  illusions,  no  verbiage. 
Pisarev  positively  condemns  a  general  outlook,  writing : 
"  There  can  be  nothing  more  disastrous  for  the  student  of 
nature  than  to  have  a  general  outlook  on  the  universe." 

The  nihilist  distorts'  positivism  further,  inasmuch  as,  in 
contrast  with  Comte  or  Mill,  he  subordinates  theory  to  practice, 
life  being  in  this  sense  opposed  to  science.  Looking  at  the 
matter  more  closely,  we  find  that  science  in  this  connection 
means  oihcial  academic  science.  Thus  Pisarev  tilts  against 
"  modern  scholasticism." 

The  genealogical  tree  of  nihilism  is  not  difficult  to  draw 
up.  Comte  and  Mill ;  Taine  and  Littre  ;  Biichner,  Moleschott, 
and  Vogt.  The  three  last-named,  in  especial,  exercised  great 
influence  over  the  majority  of  nihilists.  Moleschott  pro- 
claimed the  nature  student  as  the  Prometheus  of  the  modern 
age.  He  expounded  The  Circulation  of  Life,  explained  that 
chemistry  was  the  supreme  science,  and  actually  expected  from 
it  the  solution  of  the  social  qiiestion.  The  Russian  students, 
hungering  for  knowledge,  and  the  budding  reformers,  were 
fascinated  by  these  materialistic  pronunciamentos  and  watch- 


n  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

words  of  Vogt  and  Biichner,  these  ^utterances  of  the  Force 
and  Matter  type  which  were  then  arousing  widespread 
interest. 

Subsequently  Darwinism  and  naturaHstic  evolutionism  found 
eager  acceptance. 

The  positivism  of  the  nihilists  was  derived  from  Feuerbach 
and  Stirner,  and  in  part  from  Hegel.  We  have  seen  that 
the  Russian  Hegehans  had  much  to  say  about  the  rationality 
of  the  real.  The  development  from  Hegel  to  Feuerbach  and 
to  materiaUsm  was  the  same  in  Russia  as  in  the  "west. 

Schopenhauer  must  likewise  be  mentioned  as  a  teacher  of 
the  nihihsts.  His  pessimism,  his  criticism  of  official  phil- 
osophy, and  his  hterary  style,  had  during  the  sixties  a 
potent  influence  in  Russia. 

Most  of  the  nihihsts  acquired  their  philosophical  culture 
at  second  hand,  from  Russian  teachers.  First  of  all  came 
Herzen,  and  subsequently  Bakunin.  Herzen's  influence  was 
displayed  chiefly  in  the  theoretical  field,  whilst  Cernysevskii 
directly  affected  practice,  above  all  in  the  sphere  of  ethics. 

Russian  literature,  and  in  particular  accusatory  hterature, 
supplemented  philosophical  schoohng,  and  for  many,  indeed, 
replaced  philosophical  schooling. 

Foreign  belletristic  literature  came  to  play  a  part  beside 
that  of  Russia.  We  may  refer  to  the  positivism  of  George 
EUot ;  to  the  reahsm  of  Dickens  and  Zola  (and  Spielhagen 
with  his  novel  Problematic  Natures  may  also  be  mentioned 
in  this  connection)  ;  to  Victor  Hugo,  George  Sand,  etc.  The 
corrosive  criticism  of  Heine  was  especially  influential. 

iii.  Turgenev's  Bazarov  is  a  man  who  bows  before  no 
authority,  one  who  will  not  accept  any  principle  as  an 
article  of  faith,  be  that  principle  furnished  with  as  many 
testimonials  as  you  please.  The  definition  may  seem  some- 
what vague,  somewhat  tortuous,  but  we  can  and  must  make 
it  clear.  Nihilism  criticises  and  negates  the  authorities  and 
principles  of  the  elder  generation ;  in  the  concrete,  it 
criticises  and  renounces  the  Uvarovian  trinity  of  church,  state, 
and  nationality.  "  Destructive  "  criticism  is  aimed  chiefly 
at  orthodoxy  and  theocracy,  even  though  in  view  of  the 
censorship  the  onslaught  must  be  indirect.  Atheism  and 
materiahsm  are  at  once  preconditions  and  logical  consequences 
of  nihihst  criticism  and  negation. 

When  Pisarev,  like  all  the  reaUsts,  is  continually  engaged 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  73 

in  the  attempt  to  destroy  authority,  superstition,  illusion,  and 
falsehood,  he  is  'campaigning  against  orthodoxy.  But  the 
nihilists  have  by  no  means  thought  out  their  doctrine  meta- 
physically ;  their  nihilism  is  social  and  political ;  they  aim 
at  destroying  Old  Russia,  the  Russia  of  Nicholas.  They  read 
Mill  and  Schopenhauer,  but  the  metaphysical  nihilism  of 
these  authors  was  largely  ignored  ;  the  criticism  of  the  Russian 
nihilists  was  turned  against  the  oppressive  theocracy. 

Fundamentally,  Pisarev's  attack  on  aesthetics  is  an  on- 
slaught upon  the  illusions  of  theology. 

Atheism  and  materialism  repudiate  teleology,  offering  their 
own  causal  explanation  of  the  universe,  of  the  individual 
life,  and  of  the  life  of  society.  Materialism  is  mechanism, 
naturalistic  mechanism. 

In  Herzen's  writings,  nihilism  already  makes  its  appearance 
as  positivist  disillusionment.  The  opposite  of  positivist  dis- 
illusionment is  metaphysical  and  religious  intoxication.  It 
is  a  case  of  nihilism  versus  mysticism. 

Pisarev  frequently  condemns  the  "  intuitive  "  philosophy, 
to  which  he  counterposes  practice,  the  daily  bread. 

Dostoevskii  was  the  first  to  force  upon  nihilism  reflection 
upon  its  own  relationships  in  the  field  of  metaphysics  and 
in  that  of  the  philosophy  of  religion  ;  he  was  the  first  to  make 
a  serious  attempt  to  grasp  its  general  significance,  though 
preliminary  essays  in  this  direction  may  be  found  in  the 
writings  of  Bakunin  and  Herzen.  Subsequently,  building 
upon  the  foundation  laid  by  Dostoevskii,  Nietzsche  conceived 
nihilism  metaphysically  and  in  its  world-wide  and  historical 
relationships. 

However  much  the  nihilist  might  read  Schopenhauer, 
however  greatly  he  might  esteem  the  German  writer's  works, 
he  did  not  become  a  pessimist,  did  not  surrender  to  despair. 
The  nihilist  is  fierce  (Herzen  is  right  here),  and  he  turns  wrath- 
fully  against  oppressive  authority.  The  nihilist  accepts  the 
views  of  Stirner,  but  Stirnej-  does  not  make  him  indifferent. 
Stirner  himself,  refraining  in  1848  from  participating  in  the 
revolution,  incorporated  into  his  life  the  true  significance  of 
his  book  The  Ego  mid  his  Own,  whereas  the  Russian  "  ego  " 
is  a  theoretical  and  practical  revolutionist  guided  by  the 
teaching  of  Bakunin,  his  aim  is  socio-political  destruction, 
pandestruction.  The  nihilist  is  a  politician,  not  a  meta- 
physician ;   he  is  opposed  to  the  theocracy,  but  he  is  not 


74  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

aware  of  having  any  philosophy  of  religion  ;  he  holds  fast 
to  his  Moleschott  or  to  his  Pisarev,  and  that  suffices  him. 

The  nihilist  is  fundamentally  an  unbeliever,  but  he  believes 
in  the  frog  (Pisarev),  in  the  electric  cable  (Herzen),  or  in  the 
railway  (BSHnskii).  The  nihilistic  atheist  and  materialist 
believes  in  his  atheism  and  materialism ;  often  his  belief  is  no 
less  fanatical  and  blind  than  that  of  his  orthodox  opponents. 
The  nihilist  has  merely  changed  the  object  of  his  faith.  In 
infancy  and  boyhood  he  had  believed  in  the  doctrines  of  the 
catechism  ;  in  the  higher  classes  of  the  middle  school  and  at 
the  university  he  has  come  to  believe  in  the  doctrines  of 
Feuerbach  and  Moleschott.  The  nihilistic  philosophy  of 
enlightenment  is  negative,  negational ;  it  is  not  critical ; 
the  unbelieving  nihilist  is  a  believer,  just  -as  the  "  infidel  " 
Mohammedan  becomes  a  fervent  Christian. 

This  unbelieving  belief  is  typical  of  Russian  philosophical 
development,  as  we  have  had  occasion  to  see  in  the  case  of 
numerous  Russian  thinkers. 

iv.  The  emphasis  laid  upon  practice  led  the  nihilists  to 
morality.  Ethics  was  the  most  important  nihilistic  discipline. 
The  influence  of  German  philosophy  v/as  here  partially  operative, 
for  since  the  days  of  Kant  that  philosophy  had  preferred  the 
practical  reason  to  the  theoretical.  Personal  motives,  too, 
played  their  part.  Cernysevskii  and  Dobroljubov  had  had 
a  theological  training,  whilst  Pisarev's  home  education  had 
been  on  rigidly  moral  lines.  A  determinative  influence  was 
exercised  by  Russian  social  and  political  conditions,  by  the 
intolerable  character  of  theocratic  absolutism,  which  rendered, 
a  new  conduct  of  life  essential.  It  is  true  that  the  nihilists 
fulminated  against  morality,  but  they  were  referring  to 
the  old  ecclesiastical  morality.  Bakunin  desired  a  "  new 
morality,"  Cernysevskii  desired  "  new  men." 

Hoping  to  establish  ethics  upon  irrefutable  principles 
and  unshakable  foundations,  Cernysevskii  and  his  successors 
had  recourse  to  egoism  and  utilitarianism.  This  system  has 
often  been  extolled  as  empirical  and  practical,  and  was 
contrasted  by  the  nihilists  with  the  moral  phrasemongering 
(in  fact  unpractical)  of  many  so-called  idealists. 

Just  as  to  the  nihilists  empirical  natural  science  seemed  to 
be  the  true,  the  absolute,  the  mathematically  demonstrable 
basis  of  philosophy,  so  was  hedonism  to  safeguard  their  ethic, 
and  M^as  above  all  to  make  it  thoroughly  practical.     Bazarov, 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  75 

says  Pisarev,  has  knowledge  and  will ;  he  desires  to  act. 
What  is  to  be  Done  is  the  distinctive  title  of  the  nihilistic 
evangel,  which  is  competent  to  give  a  definite  answer  to  the 
most  burning  questions. 

Many  critics  of  nihilism  have  referred  to  the  religious 
character  of  the  movement.  Unquestionably  this  was  a  new 
trend,  one  which  involved  an  attempt,  moving  forward  with 
logical  consistency  from  its  base,  to  regulate  the  whole  of  life 
anew.  The  nihilists  were  quite  in  earnest  in  their  desire  for 
"  new  men."  Their  consistency  and  their  tenacity  may  be 
compared  with  religious  endeavour,  in  so  far  as  religion 
is  employed  mainly  as  a  sanction  for  moralit3^ 

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  egoism  and  hedon- 
ism of  the  nihilists  must  not  be  taken  quite  at  their  face  value. 
The  nihiUsts  railed  against  the  unpractical  and  fanatical  rigours 
of  monastic  morality  and  Christianity  in  general ;  they  rejected 
the  idea  of  sacrifice  ;  but  only  too  often  they  were  themselves 
zealots  and  fanatics,  giving  their  lives  with  a  delight  in  sacrifice, 
with  a  positive  desire  for  victimisation,  which  frequently  re- 
minds us  of  the  morbid  love  of  religious  mart3^rdom.  Vladimir 
Solov'ev  wittily  remarked  of  these  men  of  the  sixties  that 
their  logical  inference  appeared  to  be,  "  Man  sprang  from  the 
ape,  therefore  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." 

What  does  the  egoist  Cernysevskii  actually  preach  ?  "  We 
recognise  nothing  higher  on  earth  than  the  human  individu- 
ality " ;  and  again,  "A  positivist  man,  one  who  is  positivist 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  cannot  be  other  than  loving 
and  noble-minded."     Pisarev  and  Herzen  return  to  love. 

The  nihihsts  wish  to  be  consistent  ;  they  endeavour  to 
apply  in  practice,  at  once  and  universally,  the  theories  they 
have  so  recently  acquired  ;  deed  and  word  are  to  harmonise. 
In  brief,  the  nihihsts  are  campaigning  against  the  system  of 
conventional  lies. 

The  nihilists  wish  to  escape  the  consuming  tedium  from 
which  the  unoccupied  aristocracy,  and  above  all  the  landed 
gentry,  suffer  ;  they  desire  to  find  practical  and  genuinely 
useful  work. 

Herzen  adduces  in  example  Homjakov,  who  fled  to  Europe 
to  find  refuge  from  boredom,  who  there  wrote  his  tragedy 
Ermak,  who  held  converse  with  all  possible  and  impossible 
Czechs  and  Dalmatians,  and  then  flung  himself  into  the  Turkish 
war  ;   Puskin's  OnSgin  envied  gener-al  paralytics  ;  Lermontov's 


76  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

PeCorin  betook  himself  to  Persia  ;  Caadaev  consorted  with 
CathoUcs ;  other  writers  became  orthodox  and  Slavophil.  It 
was  all  the  outcome  of  tedium  vitae.  In  his  Realists  Pisarev 
gives  a  similar  account  of  the  effects  of  boredom. 

The  nihilists,  therefore,  attack  romanticism  on  ethical 
grounds  as  well.  "  Oh  why  was  I  not  a  block  of  wood  ?  " 
— thus  Pisarev  quizzically  of  the  romanticists  weary  of  life  ; 
their  German  romanticist  colleagues  a  la  Schlegel  envied  the 
quiet  existence  of  the  plants. 

x\gainst  romanticist  sentimentalism  and  extravagances  of 
feeling,  the  nihilists  entrench  themselves  with  irony  and  cyni- 
cism. Concerning  the  irony  and  cj-nicism  of  Bazarov,  Pisarev 
writes  that  irony,  internal  cynicism,  is  directed  against  senti- 
mentality, gushes  of  feeling,  and  similar  absurdities.  Bazarov, 
he  sa3^9,  is  animated  by  this  c^micism.  Pisarev  likewise 
approves  outward  cynicism,  a  rough  method  of  expresLing 
this  irony,  extreme  bluntness  in  general.  But  these  char- 
acteristic9  do  not  constitute  the  essence  of  realism  ;  they  aie 
mere  ephemeral  manifestations  ;  and  they  are  less  formidable 
than  they  appear.  ^ 

The  ultra-positivist  impassivity  of  the  nihiUst  was  in  fact 
a  mere  mask. 

The  nihilists  were  democrats  (they  used  the  familiar  "  thou" 
to  all).  In  practice  this  meant  that  the}^  were  to  work  for 
the  recently  liberated  muzik,  an4  were  themselves  to  work 
like  the  muzik.  The  liberation  made  the  nihilists  turn  to  the 
peasants  ;  the  movement  "  towards  the  people  "  began.  The 
nihilist  wished  to  enlighten  the  peasant.  As  a  democrat  and 
as  a  worker  he  would  not  distinguish  himself  from  the  peasant  ; 
assuming  a  peasant  mode  of  life,  he  endeavoured  to  become 
simpler  ;  outwardly,  and  in  part  inwardly,  he  grew  to  resemble 
the  peasant.  The  nihilistic  democrat  therefore  adopted  plebeian 
manners  and  customs. 

Pisarev  recommends  agricultural  work  'to  the  member  of 
the  intelligentsia  who,  when  he  becomes  for  practical  purposes 
a  peasant,  is  thus  best  in  a  position  for  carrying  on  his  work 
of  enlightenment. 

This  utilitarian  democratic  movement  therefore  aimed  at 

"  annihilating  "   aesthetics.     In  times   of  social  and  po]itical 

difficulty  and   oppression  like  the  years   which  immediately 

followed  the  liberation  of  the  peasants,  excellent  men  incUne 

»  This  analysis  of  nihilist  cynicism  is  found  in  the  first  essay  on  Bazarov. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  77 

to  take  a  very  depreciatory  view  of  art,  and  still  more  of  phil- 
osophising about  art.  "  L'art  gate  tout,"  Mably  had  said 
just  before  the  French  revolution ;  the  sansculottes  had  other 
things  to  think  about. 

The  nihihsts,  therefore,  would  have  nothing  to  do  with 
aesthetics  either  in  externals  or  in  the  forms  of  social  inter- 
course. This  was  the  outcome  of  their  fraternisation  with 
the  muzik  and  the  operative.  But  in  addition  many  of  them 
were  in  truth  extremely  poor,  and  those  that  had  any  money 
to  spare  devoted  it  to  the  purchase  of  books  and  other  things 
that  seemed  more  important  to  them  than  arts  and  graces. 
Not  without  justice  could  their  opponents  censure  them  for 
lack  of  cleanhness,  for  being  badly  dressed,  and  so  on. 

As  we  see  in  Bazarov,  in  Rahmetov,  and  even  in  Pisarev's 
style,  nihilism  was  hostile  to  all  needless  formalities.  Pisarev 
wrote  and  spoke  "without  ceremony,"  as  the  Russians  phrase 
it.  For  instance,  when  he  differed  from  Goethe,  this  was 
enough  to  make  him  accuse  Goethe  of  philistinism.  He  was 
ever  fond  of  strong  expressions.  Whenever  possible  he  minted 
new  words  to  help  him  in  the  campaign  against  obsolete  opinions 
and  ideas.  For  example,  the  old-fashioned  daughters  of  good 
families  were  by  him  designated  "  muslin  girls,"  and  so  on. 
Pisarev,  like  his  predecessors,  was  an  enemy  of  phrases,  but 
he  knew  (and  declared  occasionally)  that  phrases  are  indis- 
pensable, and  he  therefore  coined  nihilistic  .phraseology. 

The  nihilists,  being  a  hunted  minority,  held  firmly 
together,  and  without  deliberate  conspiracy  a  kind  of  secret 
.society  came  into  existence.  The  nihilists  recognised  one 
another  by  dress,  language,  methods  of  criticism,  general 
views.  To  this  extent,  therefore,  Mihailovskii  was  right  in 
comparing  the  nihilists  with  the  disciples  of  Tolstoi,  and  the 
former  resembled  the  latter  in  their  sectarian  spirit. 

In  personal  relationships,  and  above  all  in  friendship  and 
in  marriage,  the  nihihsts  consistently  carried  out  their  ethical 
principles.  In  nihilist  circles,  friendship  was  based  upon  inex- 
orable straightforwardness,  all  conventional  trappings  being 
discarded. 

Side  by  side   with   friendship,   the   sex   relationship,   love 

and  marriage  was  regarded  as  the  truest  of  all  the  relationships 

^  of  hfe.     The   love   and   the   marriage   of  the   "  thoughtful  " 

realist    became     "  thoughtful "     love     and    marriage.     Thus 

nihiHsm  was  the  most  radical  emancipator  of  the   Russian 


78  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

woman.  The  opponents  of  the  nihilists  fail  to  recognise  how 
great  was  the  service  which  Cernysevskii,  Dobroljubov,  and 
Pisarev  rendered  in  this  field.  Even  Saltj^kov,  as  has  been 
shown,  was  so  short-sighted  and  old-fashioned  that  he  could 
not  judge  the  big  words  of  the  nihilist  spokesmen  in  accordance 
with  their  real  significance,  in  accordance  with  their  actuality. 
The  utterance  of  Cernysevskii's  Rahmetov  concerning  the 
community  of  wives  is  still  quoted  shudderingly  against  the 
nihilists. 

v.  It  was  a  logical  development  that  nihilistic  ethics  with 
an  aspiration  towards  the  practical  should  bring  the  nihilists 
into  politics.  The  criticism  and  negation  of  authority,  scien- 
tific and  artistic  individualism,  the  spirit  of  independence, 
the  struggle  against  theological  and  theocratic  idealism,  neces- 
sarily led  to  social  and  before  long  to  political  rebellions, 
revolts,  and  revolutions.  The  horror  which  Gogol  had  voiced 
in  Dead  Souls,  affected  persons  of  conspicuous  intelligence ; 
and  in  a  society  based  upon  serfdom  it  was  natural  that  a 
vigorous  nihilism,  a  nihilism  eager  for  deeds,  should  originate. 
The  inadequate  reforms  of  the  sixties  did  not  convert  Cerny- 
sevskii into  a  professor,  but  made  it  essential  for  him  to  become 
the  tribune,  the  advocate  of  the  muzik.  What  happened  to 
Cernysevskii  happened  to  all  the  others ;  absolutism  pre- 
cipitated the  younger  generation  in  the  direction  of  revolution. 

The  nihilists  followed  RylSev,  and  gave  ear  to  his  appeal 
on  behalf  of  civic  duty.  When  Nekrasov,  in  his  Poets  and 
Citizens,  fulminated  the  phrase,  "  Thou  canst  not  be'  a  poet, 
but  it  is  thy  duty  to  be  a  citizen,"  the  nihilists  took  the  matter 
quite  in  earnest,  regulating  their  theories  in  accordance  there- 
with, and  devoting  their  leisure  to  politics  and  other  practical 
work  on  behalf  of  the  people.  It  was  for  this  reason  that 
Pisarev  "  annihilated  aesthetics "  ;  it  was  for  this  reason 
that  Bazarov  was  hostile  to  poesy  and  art  ;  it  was  for  this 
reason  that,  somewhat  earlier,  Bglinskii  had  given  utterance 
to  his  heretical  judgment  concerning  the  Sixtine  Madonna. 

In  actual  fact,  nihilism  embodied  an  endeavour  to  intro- 
duce poesy  into  life,  or,  to  put  it  in  another  way,  to  trans- 
figure life  poetically.  From  the  time  of  Puskin  and  Belinskii, 
Russian  literature  and  literary  criticism  had  been  so  intimately 
concerned  with  Russian  life,  and  had  so  vigorously  endeavoured 
to  fathom  its  meaning,  that  the  day  naturally  came  for  men 
to  attempt  the  practical,  ethical,  and  poHtical  realisation  of 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  79 

'the  teachings  of  Hterature.     The  nihiHsts  were  the  heirs  of 

I  Russian  hterature  and  Hterary  criticism. 

Turgenev  rightly  presented  Bazarov  as  an  enemy  of  the 
aristocracy,  as  a  revolutionary,  as  a  pendant  to  the  followers 
of  Pugacev.  The  democratic  hostility*  to  aristocracy  was 
enhanced  and  concreted  in  the  social  sphere  by  the  proletarian 
position  of  the  literary  rasnocinec.     The  nihilist  felt  proud  of 

I  his  contrast  with  the  aristocrat  ;    he  was  class  conscious  ;  he 
was  in  revolt  against   oppression,   theoretically  at   first,   but 
before  long  practically,  ethically,  and  politically  as  well. 
The   nihilist   was   opposed   to   the  political   doctrines  and 

'  ideals  of  the  aristocrarts.  He  renounced  state  and  church, 
and   he   renounced   the   aristocrat's   nationalism.     When   his 

'  adversaries  closed  their  ranks  against  him,  when  they  re- 
proached  him    with    atheism,   materialism,  and   russophobia, 

;  the  nihilist, -cynically  enough  in  many  cases,  admitted  all  these 

i  counts  in  the  impeachment.  Nevertheless  the  nihilist,  the 
nihilist  above  all,  loved  Russia,  in  his  own  peculiar  manner  ; 
he    loved  in   Russia   that   which   seemed  to  him  loveworthy 

1  and   sacred. 

]  ■      The  nihilist  was  radical  to  the  extreme  ;   he  was  the  sworn 

;  foe  of  political  liberalism  and  of  the  bourgeoisie.     He  spoke 

;  of  himself  as  a  democrat  and  a  socialist. 

Nihilist  sentiment  was  to  a  large  extent  anarchist.     Thus, 

;  as  we  have  seen,  Pisarev's  realist  did  not  shrink  even  from 
crime.     He  recognised  no  objective  authority  competent  to 

'  forbid  murder  and  robbery,  competent  to  restrain  him  from 
crime.  To  the  nihilist,  all  things  were  lawful.-/  Such  had 
been  the  doctrine  of  Pakunin,  such  had  been  the  doctrine  of 
Herzen  and  Belinskii.  The  problem  of  crime  occupied  his 
mind  from  the  first  appearance  of  nihilism.  Initially,  the 
interest  was  theoretical,  when  he  discussed  the  moral  impli- 
cations of  Byron's  Cain,  discussed  them  in  association  with 
the  metaphysical  doctrines  of  subjectivism  and  solipsism,  but 
soon  the  interest  became  practical  and  the  nihilist  developed 
into  the  revolutionary  and  the  terrorist. 

vi.  Intimate  analysis  discloses  several  distinct  varieties 
of  nihilism,  and  the  literary  presentation  of  nihilism  created 
several  distinct  types  of  nihilist.  The  nihilists  themselves 
disputed  which  type  was  the  model,  some  seeing  in  Bazarov, 
some  in  Rahmetov,  etc.,  the  correct  and  genuine  incorporation 
of  nihilism. 


80  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

A  definitive  judgment  of  nihilism  is  far  from  easy,  for  the 
nihihsts  were  active  in  very  various  fields,  in  theory  and  in 
practice,  in  philosophy  and  in  science,  in  ethics  and  in  politics, 
in  medicine  and  in  other  technical  spheres — universally. 

Moreover,  nihilism  evolved,  and  assumed  various  forms. 
•Frequently  a  distinction  is  made  between  degrees  of  nihilism. 
Herzen,  for  example,  who  dissented  from  CernySevskii,  spoke 
of  the  ultras,  of  the  Sobakevics  and  Nozdrevs,  the  Dantonists 
of  nihilism.  This  subdivision  of  nihilism  into  moderate  and 
radical  wings  is  still  current  to-day.  Herzen,  despite  his 
antipathy  to  Cernysevskii's  trend,  himself  accepted  nihilism 
as  a  radical  philosophical  tendency.  The  conservative  and 
reactionary  opponents  of  nihilism  denounced  as  nihilism  every 
movement  aiming  at  liberty,  and  an  elementary  knowledge 
of  Latin  was  sufficiently  widespread  for  the  mere  name  to 
inspire  terror. 

A  summary  criticism  of  nihilism  would  be  futile.  We 
may  recall  the  opinions  of  Herzen  and  of  Strahov,  that  nihilism 
made  no  new  contributions  to  thought,  that  the  nihilists  had 
no  real  understanding  even  of  their  own  principles,  and  so  on. 
-Many  took  an  adverse  \'iew  of  nihilism  as  the  philosophy  and 
politics  of  the  young. 

To  me  the  true  significance  of  the  matter,  the  signum 
temporis  for  Russia  and  for  Europe  as  well,  is  indeed  found 
in  the  j^outh  of  the  spokesmen  of  nihilism.  In  Fathers  and 
Children,  Turgenev,  though  half  unwittingly,  hit  the  mark. 
The  children  demanded  an  account  from  their  fathers  ;  the 
children  wished  to  learn  from  their  fathers  what  they  them- 
selves were  to  do  ;  the  children  drew  the  logical  conclusions 
from  the  parental  premisses.  So  accurate,  so  logical,  often 
enough  were  these  deductions,  that  the  parents  were  apt  to 
become  alarmed.  Herzen,  with  sacrilegious  hand,  overturns 
the  altars  of  the  old  gods,  and  Pisarev  thereupon  asks  him, 
"  Are  not  all  things  now  lawful  ?  " 

The  Russian  "  children  "  of  the  sixties  attempted  to  up- 
build a  new  and  complete  philosophy  of  life  upon  the  founda- 
tions that  had  been  laid  by  their  fathers  in  the  forties  ;  in 
all  seriousness  these  "  children  "  wished  to  become  new  men, 
desired  to  begin  the  new  life.  Such  was  the  sense  in  which 
Dostoevskii  conceived  nihilism,  looking  upon  it  as  the  leading 
problem  of  the  day,  returning  again  and  again  to  its  criticism, 
and  attempting  to  refute  it.     Following  Dostoevskii's  example. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  81 

Nietzsche  formulated  the  problem,  and  in  this  spirit  the  problem 
of  nihiUsm  is  to-day  being  reconsidered  with  renewed  zeal  by 
many  thinkers. 

Since  the  sixties,  nihilism  has  been  the  question  of  questions 
for  thoughtful  Russians— and  for  thoughtful  Europeans. 


IV 

» 

§111. 

THE  great  hopes  which,  after  the  Crimean  catastrophe, 
had  been  founded  upon  the  liberation  of  the  peasantry 
'  and  upon  administrative  reforms,  were  speedily  dashed,  and 
a  revolutionary  movement  ensued,  culminating  in  the  assassin- 
ation of  Alexander  II.  The  outward  history  of  this  move- 
j  ment  is  known ;  partial  freedom  stimulated  aspirations  for 
I  complete  freedom.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  views  which 
!  found  expression  in  and  through  this  movement,  to  discuss 
I  the  program  disseminated  by  secret  presses  and  unlawful 
I  secret  societies,  both  in  Russia  and  elsewhere. 
I  i.  In  1862  was  established  in  St.  Petersburg  the  first  secret 
^  society,  known  as  Zemlja  i  Volja  (Land  and  Freedom). 
■  It  maintained  relationships  with  the  Polish  revolutionaries, 
1  and  through  the  instrumentality^  of  Bakunin  was  likewise 
I  in  correspondence  with  Herzen,  though  the  last-named 
'  mistrusted  it. 

The  program   of   the   Central   Committee   of  the   Russian 

.[  People  maintained  the  duty  and  the  right  of  revolution  as 

j  a  means   of   defence   against   the   oppression   and   cruelty   of 

absolutism;     it     sharply   counterposed     the    interests    of   the 

'  people  to  the  interests  of  tsarist  absolutism  ;    and  appealed 

\  for  the  cooperation  of  those  whom  no  danger  could  affright. 

'  The   ultimate    aim    of  the   revolution   was   stated  to   be  the 

I  summoning  of  a  national  assembly  which  was  freely  to  decide 

'  the  social  organisation  of  Russia  ;  the  activitj-  of  the  society 

would    terminate  when    freedom  of    election   to   the    national 

assembly  had  been  secured. 

Another  secret  society,  to  which  reference  has  already  been 

made,  was  Velikorus'  (Great  Russia).     CernySevskii  was  said 

to  have  participated  in  the  work  of  both  these  societies  (§  103). 

The  secret  organisation  of  the  radical  revolutionary  elements 

began  at  various  places  and  assumed  many  different  forms. 

7  VOL.    II. 


82  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

A  secret  society  came  into  existence  in  Moscow,  and  towards 
the  close  of  1865  was  consolidated  under  the  name  of  Organi- 
sation. In  this  society,  two  trends  were  manifest^  one  com- 
paratively moderate,  which  aimed  merely  at  the  diffusion  of 
a  socialist  program,  and  the  other  more  radical,  desiring  to 
bring  about  the  revolution  by  direct  action  and  if  needs  must 
by  tsaricide.  Karakozov,  who  belonged  to  this  left  wing, 
made  the  first  attempt  upon  Alexander's  life  on  April  17,  1866. 
Karakozov  and  his  associates  v»^ere  adherents  of  Cernysevskii, 
but  the  attempt  was  made  by  Karakozov  upon  his  own  initiative 
and  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  society. 

Agitation  was  carried  into  wider  circles  by  the  proclama- 
tions issued  from  the  newly  established  secret  printing  presses, 
The  aim  of  these  proclamations  was  not  so  much  to  formulate 
a  program  as  to  function  as  instruments  of  political  propaganda 
and  to  promote  a  political  awakening.  Such^  proclamations 
were  sometimes  issued  by  authors  and  publicists  of  note,  or 
were  ascribed  to  these,  rightly  or  wrongly.  They  were  addressed 
either  to  the  community  at  large  or  to  particular  strata  of 
society,  to  cultured  persons  and  to  students,  to  soldiers,  to 
peasants,   to   operatives. 

As  early  as  1854,  proclamations  were  issued  (by  Engelssohn); 
but  not  until  the  radical  movement  of  the  sixties  was  in  full 
swing  did  they  become  an  effective  means  for  political  propa- 
ganda. 

Much  attention  was  attracted  by  the  before-mentioned 
proclamation  Young  Ri4ssia  (May,  1862),  which  contained 
threats  of  a  bloody  and  pitiless  revolution  ;  Russia  was  to 
be  transformed  into  a  republican  and  federative  state  ;  there 
were  to  be  national  and  local  parhaments,  a  judiciary  appointed 
by  popular  election,  just  taxes,  "  social  "  factories  and  shops, 
"  social  "  education  of  children,  emancipation  of  women, 
abolition  of  marriage  and  the  family,  abolition  of  monasteries, 
provision  for  invalids  and  the  elderly,  increased  pay  for  soldiers, 
etc.  Should  the  tsar  and  his  party,  as  v»as  to  be  anticipated, 
turn  upon  Young  Russia,  then  :  "  Inspired  with  full  confidence 
in  ourselves,  in  our  energies,  in  popular  sj-mpathy,  in  the 
splendid  future  of  Russia,  predestined  to  be  the  first  of  all 
countries  to  realise  socialism,  we  shall  sound  the  clarion  call, 
'  Seize  your  axes.'  Then  we  shall  strike  down  the  members 
of  the  tsarist  party,  shall  strike  them  unpityingly  as  they  have 
unpityingly  struck  us,  shall  hew   them  down  in  the  squares 


1- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  88 


should  the  rout  venture  forth  into  the  open,  hew  them  down 
in  their  dweUings,  in  the  narrow  alleys  of  the  towns,  in  the 
wide  streets  of  the  capitals,  in  the  villages  and  the  hamlets. 
When  that  day  dawns,  he  that  is  not  for  us  will  be  against  us, 
will  be  our  enemy,  and  our  enemies  must  be  destroyed  root 
and  branch.  But  with  each  new  victory  and  in  the  hour 
of  struggle,  never  forget  to  repeat,  '  Long  live  the  social 
and  democratic   Russian  republic  !  '  " 

The  proclamation  purported  to  be  issued  by  the  "  Revo- 
lutionary Central  Committee." 

The  excitement  aroused  by  this  bold  document  was  intense. 
;  The  liberals,  no  less  than  the  authorities,  were  outraged  beyond 
I  measure,   for   the   liberals   were   stigmatised   as   henchmen   of 
I  the  tsar.     Even   Bakunin  was  ill  pleased,   for 'he  considered 
'  that  those  who  had  issued  the  proclamation  failed  to  under- 
stand the  situation,  that  they  had  no  definite  goal,  and  that 
i  they     lacked     revolutionary     discipline.     Herzen,     who     was 
,  attacked  by  name  in  the  proclamation,  criticised  it,  but  did 
not  take  it  too  seriously,  saying  that  it  was  an  ebullition  of 
I  youthful  radicalism,  that  its  authors  had  wished  to  instruct 
politicians  and  officials  more  far-seeing  than  themselves.     The 
proclamation,  he  said,  w^as  unrussian  ;    it  was  a  mixtum  com- 
positum    of    undigested    Schiller    (Robber    Moor),    Gracchus 
Babeuf,  and  Feuerbach. 

The  proclamation  is  an  interesting  testimony  to  the  nature 
of  the  epoch.     We  see  that  the  younger  radical  generation  of 
the  sixties  is  socialistically  inclined,   that  liberahsm  and  its 
constitutionalist  formulas  have  been  found  inadequate  ;  that 
j  society  is  to  be  rebuilt  from  its  foundations  on  a  socialist  plan. 
According  tQ  the  philosophy  of  history  of  the  writers  of 
the  proclamation,  society  consisted  of  two  classes,  the  members 
of  the   tsarist   party   and   the   non-possessing   revolutionaries, 
;  for  the  existing  order  was  based  solely  upon  private  property  ; 
\  the  tsar  was  merely  the  man  standing  on  the  highest  rung 
I  of  the  ladder,  whose  lower  rungs  were  occupied  by  landowners 
\  merchants,  and  officials — all  ahke  capitahsts.     Private  property 
I  was  to  be  abohshed  ;    above  all,  the  land  was  to  belong  to  the 
'  whole  people,  and  therefore  the  mir  with  its  provisional  sub- 
division of  the  land  was  accepted  ;    but  such  property  as  had 
been  hitherto  held  privately  was  to  be  held  only  on  terms 
of  usufruct,  and  after  the  usufructuary's  death  was  to  accrue 
I  to  the  mir.     Since  every  individual  must  belong  to  a  village 


u  ■ 


84  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

community,  the  social  and  democratic  Russian  republic  would 
take  the  form  of  a  federative  union  of  the  village  communities. 

Federation  was  to  be  free,  and  therefore  the  "  brother  " 
Poles  and  Lithuanians  could  form  independent  states  should 
they  be  unwilling  to  enter  the  Russian  federation. 

Herzen  was  wrong  in  describing  the  proclamation  as  un- 
russian.  Not  merely  may  we  consider  Sten'ka  Razin  and 
PugaCev  to  have  been  its  forerunners,  but  it  likewise  embodies 
the  ideas  of  Pestel,  from  whom  the  authors  learned,  as  well 
as  from  Cernysevskii  and  Bakunin. 

The  influence  of  the  French  socialists  is  likewise  discernible, 
and  perhaps  also  that  of  Marx. 

The  proclamation  is  unquestionably  obscure  in  point  of 
political  outlook,  as  regards  ways  and  means  ;  this  becomes 
obvious  in  its  appeal  to  the  people,  to  the  "  millions  "  of  the 
old  believers,  to  the  army  and  its  officers,  to  the  Poles  and  the 
peasants,  and  above  all  to  young  men  ("  our  main  hope  "). 

Analogous  in  its  outlook  was  the  proclamation  To  the- 
Younger  Generation,  which  has  hitherto  been  ascribed  to 
Mihailov,  who  was  sentenced  on  this  account  and  sent  to 
Siberia.  In  actual  fact  the  proclamation  was  written  by 
Selgunov.^ 

The  proclamation  represents  the  younger  members  "  of 
all  classes  "  as  successors  of  the  decabrists,  animadverts  against 
the  pitiful  economists  "  of  the  German  text  books  "  and  against 
narrow-minded  individualism,  and  repudiates  the  attempt  to 
make  an  England  out  of  Russia.  In  support  of  Herzen's  and 
Cerny§evskii's  doctrine  that  Russia  could  skip  certain  stages 
of  European  development,  we  read  :  "  Who  can  maintain  that 
we  must  necessarily  walk  in  the  footsteps  of  Europe,  in  the 
footsteps  of  a  Saxony,  an  England,  or  a  France  ?  The  Gneists, 
Bastiats,  Mollis,  Raus,  and  Roschers,  serve  up  to  us  masses 
of  excrement,  desiring  to  make  the  refuse  of  dead  centuries 
into  laws  for  the  future.  Such  laws  may  do  for  them,  but 
we  shall  find  another  law  for  ourselves.  It  is  not  merely  that 
wer  can  find  something  new,  but  it  is  essential  that  we  do  so. 
Our  life  is  guided  by  principles  utterly  unknown  to  Europeans." 
Quite  after  the  manner  of  Caadaev  and  Herzen,  the  Russians 

I  In  the  year  1873,  Dostoevski!  referred  to  a  proclamation,  To  the  Younger 
Generation,  which  he  had  shown  to  CeraySevskii,  and  concerning  which 
CernySevskii  had  expressed  an  adverse  opinion.  If  Dostoevskii's  statement 
that  this  proclamation  was  quite  short  is  accurate,  it  cannot  have  been  the 
one  usually  attributed  to  Mihailov. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  85 

are  described  as  backward  in  their  development,  but  are  said 
to  be  competent  for  this  very  reason  to  undergo  a  different 
evolution,  non-economic  and  peculiar  to  themselves.  "  Therein 
lies  our  salvation,"  that  we  are  backward  in  our  development. 
The  Russian  bourgeoisie,  manufactured  by  Catherine  II,  is 
to  be  swept  away,  for  the  bourgeois  are  nothing  but  peasants, 
only  peasants  without  land. 

In  addition  to  these  proclamations,  addresses  to  the  tsar 
and  to  the  general  public  were  circulated.  Such  addresses 
were  sometimes  issued  by  radicals,  but  still  more  by  liberals 
and  especially  by  some  of  the  liberal  zemstvos.  For  example, 
the  Tver  zemstvo  issued  a  document  of  this  character  in  1862. 
Secretly  printed  addresses  were  likemse  circulated  for  propa- 
ganda purposes.  As  far  as  political  demands  are  concerned, 
these  writings  ask  for  nothing  more  than  constitutionahst 
reforms.  I 

ii.  Bakunin  is  of  leading  importance  in  connection  with 
the  further  development  of  the  revolutionary  movement.  It 
is  therefore  necessary  to  consider  a  Bakuninist  program,  and 
we  will  choose  for  this  purpose  the  program  of  the  year  1868, 
as  formulated  in  the  "  Narodnoe  DSlo  "  (The  People's  Cause) 
Bakunin's  Genevese  organ.  Herein  the  liberation  of  the  mind 
is  proclaimed  as  the  basis  of  social  and  political  freedom  ; 
the  belief  in  God  and  immortality  and  in  "  ideaUsm  of  any 
kind  "  is  proscribed,  the  spread  of  atheism  and  materiaUsm 
being  announced  as  definite  party  aims  ;  religion  is  said  to 
produce  slaves,  to  paralyse  the  energies,  and  to  prevent  the 
realisation  of  natural  rights  and  true  happiness. 

The  economic  condition  of  the  people  is  affirmed  to  be 
the  "  corner  stone,"  and  this  economic  condition  is  said  "  to 
explain  political  existence  " — thus  runs  a  somewhat  obscure 
formulation  of  economic  materiaUsm.  In  essence  the  state 
is  based  upon  conquest,  upon  the  right  of  inheritance,  upon 
the  patria  potestas  of  the  husband  and  father,  and  upon 
the  rehgious  consecration  of  all  these  principles.  The  necessary 
outcome  of  the  existence  of  such  "a  state  is  the  slavery  of  the 
working  majority  and  the  dominion  of  the  exploiting  minority, 
of  the   so-called   cultured   class.     For  the   abolition   of   these 

»  There  should  be  mentioned  in  this  connection  the  plan  for  an  address 
to  the  tsar,  written  wholly  or  partly  by  CernySevskii  and  outUned  in  a  procla- 
mation issued  by  the  secret  society  VeUkorus'  (1861).  In  1862,  Herzen  and 
Ogarev  drafted  such  a  docunaent,  which  was  condemned  by  Turgenev.  It 
was  never  circulated. 


86  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

privileges  it  is  necessary  to  do  away  with  the  inheritance  of 
property,  to  secure  equal  rights  for  women,  this  involving 
the  abolition  of  the  patria  potestas  and  of  marriage  ;  to  main- 
tain children  until  they  reach  full  age,  and  to  secure  for  them 
at  the  hands  of  a  free  society  an  education  which  shall  make 
them  equally  competent  for  "  muscular  "  and  "  nervous  "  work. 

In  ultimate  analysis  the  basis  of  economic  organisation  must 
rest  on  the  two  principles,  that  the  land  is  the  property  of  those 
who  till  it,  the  property  of  the  village  communities,  and  that 
capital  and  all  the  instruments  of  production  belong  to  the 
workers,  are  the  property  of  workers'  associations.  The  entire 
political  organism  is  to  be  a  free  federation  of  agricultural 
and  manufacturing  associations  (artels)  ;  the  state  is  to  be 
destroyed.  The  separate  peoples  in  Russia  may,  should  they 
so  desire,  unite  to  form  a  free  federation,  becoming  members 
"  of  the  Russian  folk,"  and  this  \rill  affiliate  vrith  the  equally 
free  societies  of  Europe  and  the  entire  world. 

iii.  Important  for  the  further  development  of  secret  revo- 
lutionary propaganda  was  the  Society  of  the  People's  Assize, 
a  secret  society  founded  by  Nec^aev  in  1869.  Ne^aev,  Bakunin's 
disciple,  secured  widespread  notoriety  through  his  Catechism 
of  Revolution.  This  work  was  an  introduction  to  conspiracy 
and  to  propaganda  by  deed,  and  presupposes  the  acceptance 
of  Bakunin's  program.^ 

In  the  Catechism  the  arts  of  the  secret  conspirator  are  urged 
with  consummate  Jesuitry,  this  word  Jesuitrj'  being  understood 
in  its  most  evil  connotation  as  political  Machiavellianismi,  The 
members  of  the  secret  society  have  to  obey  their  leader -abso- 
lutely, and  for  the  most  part  remain  unknown  one  to  another  ; 
the  revolutionary  conspirator  must  be  a  blind  instrument, 
must  abandon  all  personal  interests  and  sentiments,  must 
break  every  family  tie  and  must  give  up  even  his  nam^e,  to 
devote  his  whole  individuality  to  the  life  and  death  struggle  ; 
the  genuine  revolutionist  abandons  all  romanticism,  even  - 
hatred  and  personal  feelings  of  revenge  being  subordinated  to  ' 

'  The  Catechism  is  reprinted  in  Dragomanov's  edition  of  Bakunin's  Cor- 
respondence, p.  371.  Many  regarded  the  Catechism  as  the  work  of  Bakunin, 
who  never  denied  the  supposition.  Dragomanov  left  this  question  open,  and 
it  needs  reconsideration.  G.  Adler,  in  the  article  Anarchism  in  the  Handwor- 
terbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften,  2nd  edition,  p.  30S,  adduces  certain  passages 
as  doctrines  and  utterances  of  Keiaev  taken  from  the  Catechism,  but  they  are 
in  fact  utterances  by  Bakunin  and  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  Catechism,  Cf. 
Dragomanov,  op,  cit,,  pp.  353  and  363. 


TTTE   SPTETT   OF   RUSSIA  ST 

the  revolutionary  idea.  The  secret  conspirator  may  and  must 
do  anything  needful  for  the  cause  ;  he  may  lie  if  l5dng  will 
promote  the  working  of  the  revolutionary  forces  ;  he  must 
enter  into  suitable  relationships  with  prostitutes,  with  the 
pohce,  with  "  the  so-called  criminals,"  etc.  The  members  of 
society,  against  which  Nccaev  is  campaigning,  are  divided 
by  him  into  six  categories.  The  first  of  these  consists  of  indi- 
viduals whom  the  revolutionaries  have  sentenced  to  death, 
and  who  must  be  removed  forthwith,  whereas  the  most  evil 
of  creatures  may  be  left  alive  if  his  misdeeds  promote  the 
growth  of  revolutionary  energy.  The  second  class  consists  of 
persons  whose  lives  may  provisionally  be  spared.  In  the 
third  category  are  "  highly  placed  beasts,"  wealthy  individuals 
who  are  personally  of  no  importance,  but  who  can  be  exploited 
for  the  benefit  of  the  revolution.  In  ttie  fourth  class  are 
"aspiring  officials  and  liberals  of  various  grades.  With  these 
the  revolutionary  remains  ostensibly  on  friendly  terms  that 
he  may  learn  their  secrets,  maj^  compromise  them,  may  make 
it  impossible  for  them  to  draw  back,  and  may  compel  them 
to  serve  the  revolution.  Fifthly  come  the  doctrinaires,  those 
who  are  conspirators  and  revolutionaries  in  word  merely,  and 
similar  chatterers  ;  these  must  be  urged  to  deeds  and  con- 
verted into  genuine  revolutionaries.  Women  constitute  the 
sixth  category,  the  most  important  of  all,  and  these  are  divided 
into  three  sub-classes  :  (a)  those  of  no  account  must  be  ex- 
ploited like  the  men  in  categories  three  and  four  ;  (b)  the 
enthusiasts  among  them,  who  however  are  not  yet  fully  v/on 
over  to  the  cause,  must  be  treated  like  the  men  of  the  fifth 
category  ;  {c)  the  adepts,  the  genuinely  revolutionary  women 
"  must  be  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  our  treasures,  without 
which  we  could  do  nothing." 

The  real  aim  of  the  secret  society  is  to  secure  perfect  free- 
dom and  complete  happiness  for  the  workers.  But  since  this 
freedom  and  this  happiness  can  be  secured  in  no  other  way 
than  by  an  all-destroying  revolution  carried  out  by  the  people 
as  a  whole,  the  guiding  purpose  of  the  secret  society  must  be 
to  increase  the  existing  evils  in  order  that  the  people  may 
lose  patience  and  may  be  stimulated  to  a  mass  rising. 

In  1869  and  1870  Ne^aev  published  a  periodical  in  Geneva. 
It  was  entitled  "  Narodnaja  Rasprava  "  (The  People's  Assize), 
and  no  more  than  tv/o  numbers  appeared.  Flerein  was  preached 
absolute  negation    and   pandestruction.     The   formulation    of 


88  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

plans  for  the  future  was  condemned,  and  condemned  too 
therefore  was  all  exclusively  theoretical  rational  activity.  The 
only  knowledge  to  be  tolerated  was  that  which  directly  pro- 
moted practice,  the  practice  of  "  radical  and  universal  pan- 
destruction."  As  for  reconstruction,  "  to  upbuild  is  not  our 
work,  but  that  of  those  who  will  come  after  us."  The  imme- 
diate concrete  aim  was  "  to  sweep  away  the  tsar  with  all  his 
family."  If,  none  the  less,  Alexander  II  was  still  permitted  to 
live,  this  was  merely  because  his  proceedings  were  stimulating 
the  revolutionar}^  movement  among  the  'people.  Necaev  was 
willing  to  leave  his  condemnation  and  punishment  to  the 
people's  assize ;  the  Russian  folk  was  entitled  to  inflict  a 
death  sentence  on  the  man  who  had  deceived  them  with  his 
Ij'ing  reforms. 

During  1869,  Necaev  organised  among  the  Moscow  students 
a  secret  society  which,  under  his  leadership  was  speedily  to 
shed  blood.  An  alleged  traitor,  a  student  named  Ivanov, 
was  sentenced  and  murdered,  the  Bakuninist  revolution 
having  thus  an  ominous  beginning  with  the  assassination  of 
one  of  its  own  adherents.  Necaev  had  an  additional  reason 
for  this  blood-letting  in  that  he  desired  to  intimidate  his  own 
followers,  to  knit  them  more  closely  together,  and  to  promote 
the  spread  of  the  idea  of  pandestruction  by  the  excitement 
which  the  murder  would  cause. 

Bakunin  condemned  Necaev  in  strong  terms — though  not 
until  after  Necaev's  "  deed."  In  1870  Bakunin  spoke  of 
Nec^aev  as  a  traitor,  and  in  1872  censured  his  MachiavelHanism 
and  Jesuitism.  It  is  difficult  to  decide  to  what  extent  Nettlau 
is  right  in  maintaining  that  Necaev  had  fooled  Bakunin  and 
Ogarev.  It  was  certainly  characteristic  of  Bakunin  that  his 
plans  for  world-wide  destruction  laid  him  open  to  be  befooled 
by  such  as  Ne($aev.  From  the  very  first  Herzen  distrusted 
Necaev.  In  1872  Necaev  was  extradited  from  Switzerland 
as  a  common  criminal,  and  in  Russia  was  condemned  to  twenty 
years  in  a  penitentiary,  but  was  confined  in  the  fortress  of 
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  where  he  died  in  1882.  Even  had  this 
not  been  his  fate,  he  would  have  been  unable  to  maintain  his 
position  in  the  revolutionary  world.  As  Kropotkin  shows  in 
his  Memoirs,  Necaev's  program  was  promptly  repudiated  by 
Caikovskii's  adherents.  Moreover,  in  Lavrov's  program 
NeCaev's  position  is  denounced.  Above  all,  the  later  members 
of  the   Narodnaja   Volja   disapproved   of   Necaev's   methods. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  89 

Further,  the  anarchist  followers  of  Necaev  and  Bakunin, 
Cerkezov,  for  instance,  the  opponent  of  Marxism,  did  not 
accept  this  aspect  of  Neiaev's  anarchism. ^  Kropotkin  does 
not  reject  the  idea  of  armed  revolution,  but  he  is  opposed  to 
all  deception,  whether  practised  against  friend  or  enem^^ 

Not  until  much  later,  when  the  younger  generation  had 
forgotten  the  facts  established  by  Ilerzen  against  NeCaev  in 
1871,  were  certain  attempts  made  to  idealise  him. 

Once  only  was  the  method  of  NeCaev  practically  apphed, 
this  being  in  the  peasant  revolt  of  1877  in  the  Chigirin  district. 
Here  a  false  "  secret  charter  issued  by  supreme  authority  " 
was  dangled  before  the  eyes  of  the  peasants, 

iv.  Of  a  very  different  character  was  the  program  of  those 
organisations  which  made  it  their  business  to  promote  the 
revolutionary  culture  of  the  masses  as  a  precondition  of  the 
definitive  revolution.  I  may  refer  for  example  to  the  program 
of  the  Caikovcy  who  were  organised  in  the  year  1871.2 

For  the  Caikovcy,  the  social  revolution  was  the  terminal 
aim  of  all  revolutionary  organisation,  and  the  greatest  possible 
number  of  peasants  and  operatives  must  be  won  over  to  the 
cause.  Adherents  among  the  operatives,  returning  to  their 
native  villages,  would  promote  the  spread  of  revolutionary 
ideas  among  the  peasants.  Local  disturbances,  such  as  were 
advocated  b}^  Bakuninist  groups,  were  not  approved,  for  it 
was  held  that  these  casual  risings  diverted  people's  attention 
from  the  terminal  aim,  the  definitive  revolution.  But  no 
objection  was  raised  to  local  disturbances  and  local  acts  of 
resistance  to  government  when  these  originated  spontaneously. 

The  Caikovcy  sympathised  with  the  workers'  international 
of  Bakuninist  trend,  and  sympathised  with  the  Russian  refugees, 
to  whom  they  attributed  an  independent  and  peculiar  influence 
upon  the  Russian  folk. 

V.  The  program  of  the  Lavrovists,  the  adherents  of  Lavrov, 
has  important  bearings  upon  revolutionary  developments 
during  the  seventies.  It  will  be  found  in  the  periodical 
"  Vpered  "  (Forward)  which  was  published  in  Zurich  and  in 
London  in  several  different  forms  during  the  years  1873  to  1878, 

The   Lavrovist   program   recognises   the   existence   of   two 

'  Cf.  W.  Tcherkesoff,  Pages  d'histoire  socialiste,  I,  Doctrines  et  Actes  de 
la  Sociale  Democratic. 

s  N.  Caikovskii  was  a  refugee  from  Russia  in  the  year  1871,  but  returned 
to  Russia  in  1905.     His  program  was  revised  by  Kropotkin. 


90  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

universal  tasks,  two  struggles,  in  which  every  thoughtful 
man  must  participate  ;  the  struggle  of  the  "  realist  "  out- 
look against  the  theological  and  the  metaphysical,  the  struggle 
of  science  against  religion  ;  and  the  struggle  of  labour  against 
the  idle  enjoyment  of  the  good  things  of  life,  the  struggle  to 
secure  complete  equality  for  individualities,  the  struggle  against 
monopoly  in  all  ,its  forms.  The  former  struggle,  we  are  told, 
is  nearly  finished,  and  as  far  as  Russia  is  concerned  has  no 
notable  significance  (!).  But  for  the  latter,  the  principal 
struggle,  we  must  now  prepare  the  ground  and  provide  a 
realist  foundation.  By  a  realist  foundation,  Lavrov  means 
positive  or  scientific  socialism. 

Lavrov  opposes  the  conservatives  and  the  pseudo-liberals, 
but  Hkewise  opposes  Ne^aev  and  Bakunin,  energetically  reject- 
ing falsehood  as  a  weapon  for  use  in  the  campaign  to  secure 
juster  social  institutions.  Falsehood  must  be  overcome,  just 
as  must  all  the  ir^truments  and  methods  of  the  old  injustice  ; 
the  new  order  cannot  be  founded  upon  exploitation,  nor  upon 
the  dictatorial  dominion  of  the  few,  nor  upon  the  forcible 
appropriation  of  unearned  wealth.  Against  an  enemy  (Lavrov 
emphasises  the  word)  it  may  doubtless  be  permissible  to  make 
use  of  falsehood  in  moments  of  extreme  and  temporary  need, 
but  the  employment  of  such  methods  among  equals  and  among 
persons  of  like  views  is  a  crime.  In  answer  to  Bakunin 
and  Necaev,  he  points  out  that  even  those  who  say  that  the 
end  justifies  the  means  will  always  add,  with  the  exception 
of  those  means  whose  use  will  per  se  prevent  the  attainment 
of  the  end. 

Lavrov  declared  that  the  social  question  was  the  first  and 
the  most  important  of  all  questions.  He  expressly  subordin- 
ated the  political  problem  to  the  social  and  above  all  to  the 
economic  problem,  and  he  insisted  that  in  view  of  the  import- 
ance of  the  social  struggle  we  should  put  all  thought  of 
nationality  out  of  our  minds.  Accepting  Marx's  theory  of  the 
class  struggle,  Lavrov's  primary  demand  was,  therefore,  for 
the  organisation  of  the  "  entire  "  working  class  movement, 
and  he  was  here  thinking  of  the  Russian  peasants  as  well  as 
of  the  factory  operatives.  An  all-embracing  organisation  was 
essential  because  isolated  struggles  were  irrational  and 
purposeless  in  view  of  the  powerful  organisation  of  the  enemj\ 

Lavrov  was  convinced  that  the  terminal  aim  would  not 
be  achieved  at  one  step  ;    there  would  be  intermediate  stages. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  91 

He  therefore  held  very  strongly  that  during  the  progress  of 
the  struggle  we  should  never  cease  to  pursue  the  possible, 
and  to  choose  suitable  means  for  the  attainment  of  the  goal. 

Political  programs  and  parties  of  a  constitutionalist  and 
liberal  character  were  regarded  as  inadequate.  Just  as  little 
as  Herzen,  would  Lavrov  accept  the  bourgeois  repubHc  in 
place  of  the  bourgeois  monarchy,  for  the  whole  principle  of 
the  bourgeoisie  was  faulty.  It  was  no  doubt  essential  to 
make  the  best  possible  use  of  liberal  institutions  in  so  far  as 
these  could  be  made  to  subserve  socialist  aims  (Lavrov  was 
thinking  of  freedom  of  conscience,  the  right  of  free  combina- 
tion, and  the  Hke)  ;  but  the  sociaHst  ought  not  to  think  of 
making  common  cause  with  the  liberal,  though  perhaps  here 
and  there  the  two  might  occupy  common  ground. 

In  respect  of  nationaUty,  according  to  Lavrov's  program 
human  beings  only  were  to  be  recognised,  and  the  common 
aims  of  mankind  ;  all  the  nations,  therefore,  were  to  unite 
for  joint  work,  regardless  of  linguistic  traditions.  Rivalry 
between  the  Russians  and  the  members  of  other  nationalities 
was  unsocialist. 

In  Russia,  the  peasants  constitute  a  preponderant  majority 
of  the  population,  and  consequently  work  for  the  peasant 
masses  was  the  special  mission  of  the  Russian  socialist.  The 
Russian  folk  must  not  merely  be  the  aim  of  the  social  revo- 
lution, but  its  instrument  as  well.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Russian 
revolutionar}^  the  intellectual,  to  expound  the  sociaUst  aim 
to  the  people  ;  he  must  not  desire  to  exercise  authority  over 
the  folk,  for  his  only  role  is  to  carry  into  effect  the  universal 
social  aspirations.  It  is  the  task  of  the  intellectual  to  instil 
into  the  folk  confidence  in  itself,  conceived  as  an  individuality, 
to  enhghten  the  people  concerning  its  own  aims  and  activities  ; 
his  work  is  to  pave  the  way  for  the  coming  of  Russia's  better 
future.  "  Only  when  the  course  of  historical  events  indicates 
that  the  moment  of  revolution  is  at  hand  and  that  the  Russian 
folk  is  prepared  for  it,  are  we  justified  in  appealing  to  the  folk 
to  reaUse  the  great  transformation."  Revolutions  cannot  be 
artificially  evoked,  for  they  are  the  issue  of  a  long  series  of 
compUcated  historical  processes,  and  are  not  the  result  of 
individual  wills.  Nevertheless,  every  attempt  at  a  popular 
revolution,  even  should  it  prove  unsuccessful,  is  a  means  of 
social  education.  "  But  v/hether  a  particular  revolution  be 
•useful  or  injurious,  history  leads  up  to  revolutions  with  in- 


92  THE   SPIRIT  OF   RUSSIA 

evitable  fatalism."        Lavrov  declares  in  conclusion  that  for 
Russia,  too,  the  revolutionary  path  is  "  the  most  probable." 

For  Lavrov,  likewise,  the  mir  seems  the  social  and  economic 
foundation  upon  which  the  socialistic  transformation  of  society 
as  a  whole  can  be  based.  But  it  is  necessary  that,  as  a  pre- 
liminary, the  peasants  shall  receive  enUghtenment,  for  other- 
wise, even  should  the  revolution  prove  successful,  they  would 
be  exploited  by  the  minority. 

Marx  and  Comte  versus  Bakunin,  such  is  the  gist  of  this 
revolutionary  program.  In  view  of  the  lust  of  battle  which 
.animates  the  young  Bakuninist  revolutionaries,  Lavrov  voices 
the  exhortation,  "  Look  before  you  leap  !  "  As  against  the 
secret  society  men  {buntari),  L'avrov  emphasises  the  advantages 
of  propaganda,  and  the  opponents  of  the  Lavrovists  therefore 
spoke  of  them  contemptuously  as  "  progressives." 

vi.  "  Nabat  "  (The  Alarm  Bell),  a  periodical  published  in 
Geneva,  and  edited  by  Tkacev,  was  the  organ  of  Lavrov's 
adversaries.  TkaCev  was  a  Blanquist  who  took  part  in  the 
opening  political  demonstrations  of  the  early  sixties,  and  was 
sentenced  in  the  NaCaev  trial.  His  aim  was  to  continue  and 
outbid  the  radicaUsm  of  Bakunin  and  Necaev,  so  that  for 
him  not  Lavrov  merely  but  even  Bakunin  were  "  bourgeois 
pseudo-revolutionaries  "  in  the  sense  of  Ne^aev's  Catechism. 
TkaCev  denominated  his  system,  jacobinism.  The  immediate 
aim  of  the  revolution  is  to  seize  political  power,  but  this  seizure 
of  power  is  not  itself  the  revolution,  to  which  it  is  no  more  than 
a  preliminary.  The  revolution  will  first,  be  reahsed  by  the 
revolutionary  state,  which  will  attain  to  the  negative  .and 
positive   dims   of   the   revolution. 

The  revolutionary  state  will  strengthen  itself  by  summoning 
a  national  assembly  (narodnaja  duma),  and  will  conduct 
revolutionary  propaganda,  will,  that  is  to  say,  guide  education 
in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  new  order.  Whereas 
Lavrov  laid  the  principal  stress  upon  the  education  of  the 
people  for  the  revolution,  and  made  the  revolution  depen-  i 
dent  upon  such  education,  Tkacev  taught  that  the  forcible  ' 
overthrow  of  the  old  order  would  precede  the  revolutionary 
propaganda. 

In  matters  of  detail  Tkacev  recapitulates  Bakunin's  ideals. 
The  existing  mir  with  private  ownership  will  be  transformed 
into  a  completely  communistic  local  community  ;  all  private 
tools   and   machinery   for   production    will   be   expropriated ; 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  98 

and  the  exchange  of  products  will  be  effected  directly,  to  the 
exclusion  of  all  intermediaries.  Physical,  mental,  and  moral 
inequality  will  be  abolished  by  degrees  ;  all  will  be  educated 
alike,  in  the  spirit  of  love,  equality,  and  fraternity  ;  the  existing 
family,  with  its  subordination  of  woman  and  its  indulgence 
of  man's  egoism  and  arbitrariness,  will  be  abolished.  The 
centralised  state  will  gradually  be  replaced  by  the  self- 
government  of  the  communes. 

Since  the  immediate  aim  of  the  revolutionaries  is  the  seizure 
of  political  power,  they  must  organise  themselves  in  a  "  state 
I  conspiracy."  By  this  Tka^ev  means  something  essentially 
i  similar  to  the  Lavrovist  "  mass  organisation."  He  expressly 
j  condemns  isolated  revolutionary  outbreaks  on  the  part  of  small 
I  circles,  but  he  demands  hke  Bakunin  a  rigid  hierarchical 
I  subordination  to  the  "  general  leadership,"  for  this  alone 
[  "  can  bring  definiteness  of  aim  and  can  secure  unity  in  the 
i  activity  of  all  the  members."  For  to  TkaCev  the  immediate 
i  and  sole  program  of  revolutionary  activity  is  "  organisation 
I  as  a  means  for  the  disorganisation  and  annihilation  of  the 
J  power  of  the  existing  state." 

Tkacev  remained   editor  of   "  Nabat  "   till   1877,  and  the 

j  paper  was  continued  under  other  editors  until  188 1.     It  was 

i  disavowed  by  the  Narodnaja  Volja  as  NeCaev  had  been  dis- 

'  avowed,  for  the  blood-curdhng  glorifications  of  terrorist  deeds 

were  too  compromising. 

The  influence  of  "  Nabat  "  in  Russia  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  great,  but  TkaCev,  writing  under  pseudonyms, 
,  diffused  his  views  also  in  authorised  radical  periodicals.  Though 
i  he  had  to  choose  his  words  carefully,  in  view  of  the  censorship, 
I  he  was,  like  other  radical  writers,  perfectly  well  understood. 
I  Tkacev  had  an  effective  style  as  publicist  and  as  literary  and 
historical  critic,  and  his  writings  exercised  a  revolutionary 
i  influence  upon  the  young. ^ 

I 

i        I  Tkacev  was  a  consistent  expounder  of  economic  materialism.     He  rejected 

'•  in  its  entirety   Russian   aristocratic   literature   with  its   excursions    into   the 

!  domain  of  the  humiliated  and  the  suffering.     Owing  to  the  new  developments, 

he  said,  the  position  of  waiters  had  become  economically  insecure,  and  in  their' 

creative  work    this   insecurity   betrayed   itself    in   the   form   of    weltschmerz. 

Consequently    every  aristocratic  author  exhibited   two   sides.      For  example 

Turgenev,  GonCarov,  Pisemskii   were  great  writers,  but  "  apart  from  this  their 

horizon  did  not  extend  further  than  the  length  of  their  noses  "  ;    with  one 

side  of  his  nature,  Tolstoi  loved  the  people,  but  with  the  other  side  he  loved 

i  to  chatter ;  Dostoevskii  was  not  worth  mentioning  ;  and  so  on. 


94  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

vii.  In  the  year  1877,  a  new  Zemlja  i  Volja  came  into 
existence.  The  organs  of  this  association  advocated  peaceful 
revolutionary  propaganda.  The  agrarian  problem  was  repre- 
sented as  the  supreme  social  problem  for  Russia.  The  factory 
problem  could  be  "  left  in  the  shade,"  since  it  did  not  really 
exist  for  Russia,  but  was  the  social  problem  of  the  west.  In 
Russia,  the  supreme  demands  had  always  been  for  land  and 
freedom.  Land  must  be  the  property  of  those  who  tilled  it, 
and  must  therefore  be  taken  away  from  the  landlords.  For 
the  Cossacks,  liberty  signihed  free  self-governing  communes, 
in  which  those  elected  to  carry  out  the  popular  will  were  subject 
to  recall.  Quite  similar  were  the  views  of  the  secret  society 
Zemlja  i  Volja,  as  the  successor  of  the  revolutionary  socialists 
Pugacev  and  Razin,  men  of  the  people.  No  attempt  was 
made  to  formulate  a  more  specific  program  ;  the. future  could 
take  care  of  itself  ;  for  the  time  being  it  was  necessary  to 
realise  "  the  revolution  of  the  folk,"  that  is  to  say  to  revo- 
lutionise the  masses  of  the  people,  in  order  to  render  possible 
the  socialistic  organisation  of  the  Russian  nation. 

The  organisation  of  the  society  was  directed  towards  the 
attainment  of  this  aim.  Its  leadership  was  centrahsed,  but 
not  in  accordance  with  the  prescriptions  of  Bakunin  and 
Tkacev.  Where  important  questions  had  to  be  decided,  the 
officers  took  a  vote  of  the  council,  and  in  matters  of  supreme 
importance  a  ballot  was  taken  of  all  the  members.  The  council 
consisted  of  the  members  residing  in  St.  Petersburg,  which 
was  the  centre.  The  league  was  subdivided  into  four  groups  : 
intellectuals  (for  propaganda  and  for  the  organisation  of  uni- 
versity students)  ;  operatives ;  the  village  group  (which 
contained  the  largest  number  of  members)  ;  and  the  disor- 
ganisation group.  The  last-named  was  the  most  important, 
for  it  had  life  and  death  powers  over  the  members.  Its  duties 
were' to  help  imprisoned  comrades,  to  set  them  at  liberty 
whenever  possible,  and  to  protect  them  against  the  violence 
of  the  administration  ;  from  time  to  time  these  duties  brought 
the  society  into  open  conflict  \nth  the  government,  although 
such  conflict  was  not  a  regular  part  of  its  program.  As  a 
precaution  against  treachery,  traitors  might  be  killed  in  case 
of  need.  The  disorganisation  group  kept  the  details  of  its 
plans  and  doings  strictly  secret,  communicating  them  to  the 
council  in  general  outhne  merely. 

In  addition  to  the  four  groups  there  existed  certain  sections 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  95 

for  special  tasks,  the  most  important  of  these  being  the 
"  heavenly  chancellery "  of  the  central  executive,  whose 
business  it  was  to  provide  passports,  etc. 

viii.  The  aim  of  the  Zemlja  i  Volja  was  peaceful  revo- 
lution, but  nevertheless  the  heralds  of  this  peaceful  revolution 
advanced  to  terrorist  methods,  the  white  terror  evoking  the 
red.  In  July  1877,  corporal  punishment  was  administered 
in  prison  to  Bogoljubov,  a  revolutionary,  and  the  authorities 
committed  a  number  of  revengeful  actions.  In  consequence 
of  these,  Trepov  was  shot  by  V^ra  Zasuh(5  (1878),  Mezencev 
was  stabbed  by  Stepniak,  and  various  other  terrorist  acts 
were  committed  or  attempted. 

In  June  1879,  there  was  organised  a  declared  terrorist 
party,  Narodnaja  Volja  (People's  Will)  replacing  the  Zemlja  i 
Volja.  The  purpose  of  the  new  party  was  to  terrorise  the 
government  and  the  reactionary  elements  of  society. 

The  party  declared  itself  socialistic  in  the  sense  of  the 
narodniki.  Only  the  people's  will  had  the  right  to  sanction 
social  forms  ;  every  idea  which  was  to  be  reahsed  poUtically 
and  socially  must  "  first  of  all  traverse  the  consciousness  and 
the  will  of  the  people."  To  this  people's  will,  which  strongly 
reminds  us  of  Rousseau,  the  capitalist  state  was  counterposed 
as  oppressor.  In  accordance  with  the  principles  of  people's 
weal  and  people's  will,  the  Narodnaja  Volja  desired  to  restore 
power  to  the  people  by  political  revolution,  and  a  legislative 
assembly  would  then  undertake  the  reorganisation  of  society. 
The  leading  socialistic  principles,  notwithstanding  their  in- 
fringement by  the  arbitrary  proceedings  of  the  monarchy, 
had  remained  ahve  in  Russia.  These  principles  were,  the 
consciousness  of  the  people  that  it  was  justly  entitled  to  the 
land,  communal  and  local  self-government,  the  rudiments  of 
federal  organisation,  freedom  of  speech  and  conscience. 

The  political  program  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja  comprised 
the  following  items  :  continuous  national  representation  ; 
local  self-government ;  independence  of  the  mir  as  an  economic 
and  administrative  unit  ;  ownership  of  land  by  the  folk  ;  all 
factories  and  similar  industrial  enterprises  to  be  in  the  hands 
of  the  operatives  ;  absolute  freedom  of  conscience,  speech, 
press,  assembly,  combination,  and  electoral  agitation  ;  universal 
suffrage  ;    replacement   of  standing  armies  by  a   militia. 

More  important  than  the  program,  were  the  organisation 
and  the  work   of   the   Narodnaja   Volja.    The   leadership   of 


96  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

the  party  was  vested  in  the  executive  committee.  The  work 
was  subdivided  into  the  popular  diffusion  of  the  idea  of  a 
democratic  revolution,  and  into  agitation  which  was  to  give 
expression  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  folk  and  of  society 
with  the  existing  order.  Terrorist  activities  were  to  take  the 
form  of  the  removal  of  the  most  noxious  individualities  in  the 
government.     The  killing  of  spies  was  another  terrorist  duty. 

With  this  end  in  view,  small  secret  societies  vv'ere  to  be 
organised  everywhere,  these  being  affiliated  to  and  directed 
by  the  central  executive  committee.  Members  of  the  party 
were  to  endeavour  to  secure  influential  positions  and  ties  in 
the  administration,  in  the  army,  in  societ}^  and  among  the 
people. 

Aware  of  the  fact  that  a  secret  organisation  whose  members 
comprised  no  more  than  an  infmitesimal  minority  could  not 
properly  express  and  sustain  the  people's  will,  the  energy  of 
the  party  was  concentrated  upon  preliminar}^  labours,  upon 
the  preparations  for  a  rising.  '"  If,  contrary  to  our  expec- 
tations, this  rising  should  prove  needless,  our  collected  forces 
can  then  be  appHed  to  the  work  of  peace." 

These  general  principles  were  incorporated  in  a  number 
of  speciaUsed  programs,  which  prescribed  the  work  to  be  done 
among  the  urban  operatives,  in  the  army,  in  the  intelHgentsia, 
and  among  young  people.  Moreover,  the  partj^  had  to  attempt 
to  arouse  European  S3^mpathy  for  its  aims',  and  this,  it  was 
considered,  could  best  be  effected  by  suitable  literary  activities. 

The  Narodnaja  Volja  conducted  all  the  terroristic  attempts 
and  enterprises,  and  was  before  all  responsible  for  attempts 
made  upon  the  life  of  the  tsar.  Three  such  attempts  had 
been  undertaken  before  the  society  was  organised,  whilst  the 
Narodnaja  Volja  was  responsible  for  four.  Despite  its  declared 
terrorist  aim,  "  to  break  the  charm  of  the  administrative 
power  "  by  the  assassination  of  the  most  noxious  members 
of  the  administration  and  the  government,  the  Narodnaja 
Volja  condemned  the  blind  campaign  of  destruction  advocated 
by  Bakunin  and  Ne^aev,  Ne^aev's  methods  being  rejected 
as  charlatanry.  After  March  13,  1881  (the  assassination  of 
Alexander  II),  the  terrorist  activity  of  the  society  came  to  , 
an  end.  In  the  general  belief  this  change  of  tactics  was  brought 
about  by  the  alienation  of  pubHc  sympathy  from  the  Narodnaja  , 
Volja,  but  according  to  Stepniak  this  v/as  not  the  determining 
cause  of  the  change.     The  Narodnaja  A^'olja,  he  declares,  dis- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  97 

continued  individual  outrages  because  it  had  decided  to  devote 
itself  exclusively  to  the  preliminary  work  of  revolutionising 
the  masses. 

It  continued  to  exist,  but  seldom  played  any  public  part. 
(After  Turgenev's  death  in  1883,  the  Narodnaja  Volja  issued 
a  proclamation,  and  there  were  a  few  other  manifestations 
of  activity.  During  the  revolutionary  movement  of  1905, 
it  was  reorganised  as  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party.) 

ix.  Besides  the  terrorist  Narodnaja  Volja,  there  issued  in 
1879  from  the  Zemlja  i  Volja  the  party  of  the  Cernyi  Pered^l 
(Black  Redistribution,  that  is  to  say,  redistribution  or  re- 
allotment  of  the  black  earth — see  vol.  I,  p.  154).  The  aim  of 
this  party  was  to  promote  an  agitation  among  the  operatives 
and  peasants.  Plehanov,  who  was  its  leader  in  the  theoretical 
field,  strongly  condemned  the  methods  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja. 

The  Cern3d  Pered§l  likewise  declared  itself  representative 
of  the  narodniCestvo,  of  the  revolutionary  section  of  that  move- 
ment, seeing  that  its  members  considered  that  the  solution 
of  the  agrarian  problem  was  the  very  essence  of  the  social 
question,  and  being  guided  in  this  view  by  the  same  reasons 
as  those  which  influenced  the  narodovolcy.  Socialism  was 
declared  to  be  the  last  word  in  sociologj^  and  collectivism  was 
-considered  the  goal  of  the  "  radical  reformer."  This  radicahsm 
must  be  "  economic  "  radicalism,  meaning  that  the  radical 
reformer  must  strive  to  the  utmost  to  secure  the  betterment 
of  economic  conditions,  since  these  constitute  the  real  basis 
of  all  other  social  and  political  conditions  (historical  material- 
'jism).  In  1879,  Plehanov  believed  that  collectivism  could 
develop  in  Russia  out  of  the  mir  and  the  artel,  especially  since 
capitalism  was  preparing  agriculture,  too,  and  landownership 
for  socialisation — for  in  Russia  as  in  Europe  capitalism  paved 
the  way  for  socialism.  Plehanov  and  his  associates  in  the 
Cernyi  PeredSl  believed  that  capitalism  in  Russia  would  con- 
centrate landed  proprietorship,  and  would  therefore  prepare 
conditions  for  the  "  black  redistribution "  essential  to  the 
muzik. 

The  Cernjd  PeredSl  was  hkewise  revolutionar3^  but  its  view 
of    its    mission    differed    from    that     ol     the    narodovolcy. 
The  members  of  the  Cernjd  PeredSl  considered  that  political 
I  revolutions  had  never  secured  economic  freedom  for  the  people, 
j  nor  had  even  afforded  anywhere  guarantees  for  poUtical  free- 
dom.     Constitutions  were  exploited  by  the  bourgeoisie  against 

8  VOL.   II. 


98  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

the  monarch  and  against  the  working  masses,  and  the  same 
thing  would  happen  in  Russia.  It  was  a  matter  of  no  import- 
ance whatever  whether  Alexander  II  or  Alexander  III  did 
or  did  not  serve  out  these  "  social  cates  "  (the  constitution)  ; 
the  bourgeoisie  would  eat  them  whilst  the  revolutionaries 
looked  on.  Doubtless  the  intelhgentsia  and  also  the  folk 
desired  political  freedom  ;  but  for  the  mu^ik  freedom  was 
intimately  connected  with  economic  conditions,  and  it  was 
to  such  conditions  that  the  mu^ik  must  look  in  the  first  in- 
stance. The  business  of  a  genuinely  practical  revolutionary 
party  in  Russia  was  to  awaken  men  intellectually  and  to  prepare 
the  means  for  the  struggle.  Such,  at  any  rate,  was  the  work 
of  peaceful  days  ;  when  the  revolution  came,  the  party  would 
have  to  regulate  the  movement  and  to  determine  its  trend. 
The  special  function  of  the  intelhgentsia  was  initiatory  merely, 
the  folk  would  do  the  rest  for  itself  and  would  create  its  own 
leaders.  But  the  function  of  the  intelhgentsia  did  not  consist 
in  the  mere  handing  on  of  culture  in  accordance  with  legally 
authorised  methods  ;  an  energetic  revolutionary  secret  agitation 
must  be  promoted. 

In  1881,  the  Cernyi  Peredel  was  forced  for  a  time  to  suspend 
its  journalistic  activities,  but  in  1883  the  party  was  reorganised 
as  the  Group  for  the  Liberation  of  Labour,  and  developed 
henceforward  along  Marxist  lines,  in  continuous  and  close 
connection  with  the  Marxist  and  socialist  movements  in  other 
lands  and  above  all  in  Germany.  In  1883,  and  in  fuller  detail 
in  1884,  Plehanov  defined  the  attitude  of  his  party  towards 
other  parties  and  trends,  condemning  from  the  Marxist  outlook 
the  sociahsm  of  Herzen  and  Cernysevskii,  the  anarchism  of 
Bakunin,  and  the  Blanquism  of  Tkacev.  We  shall  have 
more  to  say  about  this  matter  when  we  come  to  discuss  the 
history  of  Marxism. 

§  112. 

YV/^EN  we  survey  these  programs  which  appeared  during 
W  the  space  of  two  decades,  we  recognise  that  political 
radicalism  has  taken  the  form  of  socialism.  All  the  programs 
preach  socialism,  those  of  earlier  date  chiefly  in  the  French 
sense,  whilst  the  later  ones  are  formulated  more  along  the 
lines  of  Marx  and  Lassalle.  To  speak  of  Russian  sociahsts, 
the  ideas  of  Pestel,  Herzen,  Bakunin,  CernySevskii,  and  Lavrov, 
are  prominent.    The  leader  of  the  Marxists  was  Plehanov. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  99 

The  socialism  is,  as  Herzen  put  it,  "  Russian  socialism." 
That  is  to  sa3^  it  is  agrarian  socialism,  for  the  peasantry  repre- 
sents and  is  the  mass  of  the  Russian  people.  Everyone  of  the 
programs  paj'S  its  homage  to  the  narodni(^estvo,  this  state- 
ment being  no  less  true  of  the  early  Marxists  than  of  the 
adherents  of  Cernysevskii,  Bakunin,  and  Lavrov. 

The  radical  narodniki  believed  in  the  peculiar  social  insti- 
tutions and  the  peculiar  mission  of  Russia,  according  general 
recognition  to  the  independent  evolution  of  Russia,  and  con- 
trasting that  evolution  favourably  with  the  development 
of  Europe. 

It  was  necessary  to  win  over  the  folk  to  the  cause  of  its 
own  liberation,  to  win  over  the  muzik,  and  thus  originated 
the  movement  "  towards  the  people,"  some  going  towards 
the  people  as  teachers,  others  as  agitators,  the  respective  aims 
being  to  educate  and  to  revolutionise  the  folk.  The  revo- 
lutionary enthusiasts  soon  learned  by  experience  that  thev 
were  officers  and  generals  without  an  army  ;  they  perceived 
that  the  masses  of  the  folk  were  incompetent  for  action  and 
that  no  more  than  small  peasant  circles,  hkc  the  small  circles 
of  operatives,  could  be  induced  to  make  up  their  minds  for 
the  revolution.  Very  rarely  could  a  local  rising  be  expected 
to  achieve  success,  and  it  was  not  possible  to  reckon  with 
certainty  upon  anything  more  than  the  wilhngness  of  isolated 
individuals  to  sacriiice  themselves.  More  and  more  did  it 
become  evident  that  a  widespread  popular  rising  such  as  that 
of  which  Bakunin  had  dreamed,  must  remain  in  the  land 
of  dreams. 

The  movement  "  towards  the  people  "  was  of  brief  duration. 
It  began  in  1872,  became  considerably  more  extensive  in  1873, 
but  was  already  checked  in  the  following  year,  the  govern- 
ment having  imprisoned  or  banished  hundreds  and  even 
thousands  of  those  engaged  in  it  (trying  them  in  great  batches, 
as  in  "  the  trial  of  the  one  hundred  and  ninety-three  ").  Those 
who  had  no  worse  fate  were  placed  under  pohce  supervision, 
and  all  suffered  socially. 

Simultaneously   the   radicals   began   to   grasp   the   nature 

of  the  contrast  between  country  and  town,  between  peasant 

and  operative,  and  to  apprehend  the  revolutionary  significance 

"I  of  this  contrast ;    in  the  programs  of  the  later  seventies  we 

I  find  that  the  urban  proletariat  is  already  declared  to  be  the 

true  incorporation  of  revolutionary  ideas  and  revolutionary 


100  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

energy.  The  most,  emphatic  and  effective  revolutionary  pro- 
paganda was  carried  on  in  the  towns  and  above  all  in  the 
capital ;  this,  too,  was  a  necessary  outcome  of  the  revolu- 
tionary aim,  which  was  to  abolish  the  monarchy,  to  get  rid 
of  the  dynasty,  and  to  do  away  with  the  highest  organs  of 
the  government. 

In  proportion  as  the  urban  proletariat  became  recognised 
as  a  distinct  class,  did  the  Marxist  ideas  of  the  class  struggle 
and  of  economic  determinism  secure  general  recognition. 

From  this  point  of  view,  we  recognise  that  terrorism  was 
a  guerilla  warfare  of  intelligentsia  versus  absolutism.  The 
struggle  has  been  frequently  represented  as  nothing  more  than 
a  students'  movement,  but  the  view  is  erroneous.  Apart 
from  the  consideration  that  the  total  number  of  students  was 
at  this  time  inconsiderable,  among  students  revolutionists 
were  certainly  in  the  minority.  Students  of  both  sexes  parti- 
cipated in  propaganda  by  deed  and  functioned  also  as  teachers 
and  agitators  ;  but  by  the  end  of  the  seventies  the  majority 
of  terrorists  were  members  -of  the  working  class,  and  even 
in  the  leadership  of  the  movement  these  latter  competed  with 
the  intellectuals. 

Precise  statistics  of  the  terrorist  movement  are  still  lack- 
ing, and  we  do  not  even  know  how  many  revolution ar}^  groups 
existed.  In  a  refcently  published  history  of  the  Narodnaja 
Vol]  a  it  is  asserted  that  the  members  w;ere  few  in  number 
and  that  the  executive  committee  was  quite  a  small  body. 
This  ma}'  be  true,  but  it  does  not  lessen  the  significance  of  the  , 
radical  and  terrorist  movement.  The  government  and  the 
pohce  considered  the  Narodnaja  Volja  the  chief  enemy,  and 
fought  the  organisation  with  aU  the  means  at  their  disposal. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  terrorist  revolution  was  rendered 
possible  solely  by  the  understanding,  S3'mpathy,  and  support 
it  secured  among  wide  liberal  strata  of  the  urban  population 
and  the  intelligentsia,  and  even  among  the  bureaucracy. 

In  Russia  at  that  epoch  there  were"  few  indications  of  a 
spontaneous  folk-movement  in  the  social  direction.  The 
most  distinctive  manifestation  of  a  social  movement  occurred 
in  the  yes-v  i8Si,  after  the  death  of  Alexander  II,  in  the  form 
of  the  vigorous  antisemitic  movement  which  took  place  in  the 
south  and  in  the  west.  At  any  rate,  by  adherents  both  of  the 
Narodnaja  Volja  and  of  the  Cernyi .  Pered^l,  the  pogroms 
were  regarded  as  the  beginnings  of  a  movement  which,  while 


THE   SPTFJT   OF   RUSSIA  101 

directed  at  first  against  the  Jews,  would  subsequently  develop 
into  an  attack  upon  the  master  class  as  a  whole.  Antisemitic 
articles  were  published  in  the  organs  of  both  these  revolutionary 
associations.  The  Narodnaja  Vol] a  went  so  far  as  to  prepare 
an  antisemitic  manifesto  in  the  Little  Russian  tongue  addressed 
"  To  the  Ukrainian  People,"  but  it  was  never  circulated. 
This  took  place  in  August  1881,  and  it  must  be  remembered 
that  after  the  assassination  of  the  tsar  on  IMarch  13th  the 
party  was  in  a  state  of  incipient  dissolution. 

Terrorism  and  its  revolutionary  practice  gave  expression 
to  the  vigorous  individuahsm  characteristic  of  literature  and 
of  all  hberal  aspirations.  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  social- 
ism and  individualism  are  mutually  exclusive,  but  I  wish  to 
emphasise  the  fact  that  these  radical  and  revolutionary  pro- 
grams were  not  the  issue  of  clear  concepts  concerning  the 
revolution. 

Their  aim  was  the  definitive  social  transformation,  the 
social  revolution,  the  inauguration  of  the  new  society  and 
of  the  new  man.  We  learn  from  the  programs  that  the  revo- 
lutionists were  themselves  doubtful  whether  terrorism,  above 
all  in  the  form  of  individual  outrage,  v:as  the  true  tactic  of 
the  social  revolution.  The  evolution  of  radicalism  and  terror- 
ism shows,  to  put  the  matter  in  concrete  terms,  the  waj'  in 
which  Marx  was  continually  gaining  wider  influence  as  com- 
pared with  Bakunin.  The  definitive  social  revolution  was 
distinguished  from  preparatorj^  revolutions,  and  still  more 
from  isolated  terrorist  outrages.  Outrages,  local  disturbances, 
revolts,  and  revolutions,  were  appraised  from  the  utilitarian 
outlook,  their  value  as  means  to  an  end  was  estimated  b}'  the 
utilitarian  calculus.  Nihilist  utilitarianism  took  a  critical 
attitude   towards   Bakunin's   revolutionism. 

In  this  connection,  the  fact  is  distinctive  and  one  to  be 
stressed  very  clearly  that  the  more  Marxist  members  of  the 
Zemlja  i  Volja,  those  who  conceived  the  social  revolution  as 
a  mass  revolution,  were  beginning  to  part  company  with  the 
terrorists  even  before  the  assassination  of  Alexander  II  and 
the  ensuing  reaction. 

It  is  true  that  the  ideas  and  programs  of  the  respective 
sections  had  not  yet  been  fully  clarified.  In  all  the  programs 
We  can  discern  uncertainty  and  vacillation  in  the  delimitation 
of  frontiers  between  the  social  and  political  spheres.  Between 
the  Lavrovists  and  the  Bakuninists,  for  example,  there  were 


102  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

many  disputes  concerning  the  differences  between  propa- 
ganda and  agitation,  but  since  in  practice  both  the  opposing 
groups  adopted  the  same  methods,  the  distinction  between 
Lavrovist  propaganda  and  Bakuninist  agitation  was  fluid. 

Its  sociaUst  program  notwithstanding,  terrorist  radicalism, 
in  virtue  of  its  whole  practice  and  in  view  of  the  character 
of  its  secret  organisation,  was  political  rather  than  socialist. 
The  goal  of  the  movement  was  the  abolition  of  absolutism, 
and  when  practical  questions  concerning  poHtical  and  social 
institutions  came  under  consideration,  the  views  of  the  radical 
terrorists  were,  after  all,  not  so  remarkably  radical.  In  the 
letter  to  Alexander  III  which  the  executive  committee  of  the 
Narodnaja  Vol] a  issued  after  the  death  of  Alexander  II,  it 
was  conceded  as  possible  that  the  national  assembly  would 
legalise  the  monarchy  ;  the  revolutionists  would  accept  this 
if  the  election  of  the  deputies  had  been  effected  freely  and  in 
due  form  of  law.. 

§  113. 

IN  Europe,  and  in  Russia  as  well,  revolutionary  terrorism 
was  from  the  first  identified  with  nihilism.  One  who 
was  in  the  movement  and  who  suffered  personally  under  the 
white  terror,  Sisko,  who  was  writer  as  well  as  revolutionist, 
tells  us  that  after  Karakozov's  attempt,  the  accused  were  asked  , 
whether  they  belonged  to  the  sect  of  nihilists,  and  that  many 
had  to  sign  a  declaration  renouncing  the  errors  of  nihilism, 
of  the  periodical  "  Sovremennik,"   and  of  socialism. 

Nihilism  was  and  was  not  identical  with  terrorism.  Nihilism 
was  the  aspiration  for  new  men  and  the  new  social  order,  was 
the  attempt  to  attain  to  the  philosophy  and  to  the  mode  of 
life  of  these  new  men  and  of  this  new  social  order  ;  terrorism 
is  merely  a  means  to  an  end,  and  may  be  a  means  to  this  end. 
But  not  all  the  terrorists  were  nihilists  in  theory  or  in  practice. 
Kropotkin  says  with  perfect  justice  that  nihilism  was  far  more 
profound  than  terrorism. 

Philosophical!}'  considered,  the  revolutionary  programs  are 
based  upon  materialistically  formulated  positivism  ;  we  en-\ 
counter  in  them  the  thoughts  of  Feuerbach,  Comte,  Mill,  Vogt, 
Biichner,  and  Moleschott.  Marx,  too,  begins  to  exercise  an 
influence ;  so  also,  through  Lavrov's  instrumentalit}',  dc 
Kant  and  Schopenhauer  ;  whilst  the  teaching  of  Spencer  an* 
the  doctrine  of  evolution  (Darwin)   play  their  part.     Amon| 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  103 

Russian  teachers  of  revolution,  in  the  sixties,  next  to  Bakunin. 
CernySevskii  was  most  influential.  Enough  has  been  said 
previously  regarding  the  influence  of  other  Russian  thinkers, 
above  all  of  Herzen. 

Atheism  and  materiaUsm  are  definite  demands  in  these 
programs,  being  counterposed  to  the  Russian  theocracy ;  atheist 
and  materiaUst  teaching  is  popularised  to  make  it  palatable 
to  the  common  people. ^ 

The  problem  as  to  the  permissibility  of  revolution,  and 
above  all  as  to  the  permissibility  of  assassination  and  crime, 
will  subsequently  be  considered  in  fuller  detail,  when  we  have 
made  acquaintance  with  the  views  of  the  other  theorists  of 
revolution.  The  theorists  of  terrorism  do  not  treat  the  question 
in  association  with  the  various  philosophical  problems  formu- 
lated by  nihihsm,  but  content  themselves  with  asserting  the 
revolutionary  jus  tahonis.  A  Life  for  a  Life  was  the  title  of 
the  pamphlet  pubhshed  by  Stepniak  shortly  after  the  assas- 
sination of  Mezencev.  This  title  gives  concise  expression  to 
the  ethical  theory  of  the  terrorist  revolution,  and  it  is  found 
also  in  Stepniak's  other  writings  on  terrorism,  above  all  in  his 
novel  The  Career  of  a  Nihilist,  which  describes  the  hfe  of  the 
nihilist  terrorists. 

Stepniak  compares  the  arbitrary  use  of  force  by  the  gen- 
darmerie, the  way  in  which  the  members  of  that  body  cynically 
oppress  on  the  large  scale  all  who  cherish  thoughts  of  freedom, 
depriving  them  of  hfe,  with  a  band  of  robbers,  against  whom 
everyone  is  by  natural  right  entitled  to  defend  himself  by 
force.  Faced  by  the  absolute  and  arbitrary  power  of  the 
■gendarme,  the  socialist's  only  resource  is  to  take  up  arms  in 
his  own  defence.  Mezencev  was  formally  condemned  to  death 
by  Stepniak's  associates,  and  the  sentence  was  carried  into 
effect.  But  Stepniak  was  aware  that  political  slavery  was 
conditioned  by  economic  slavery,  not  conversely.  The 
I  bourgeoisie  is  the  real  enemy  of  the  sociahsts  ;  the  gendarmes, 
\  and  the  government  generally,  protect  the  bourgeoisie  and 
the  economic  inequality  sanctioned  by  the  bourgeois  class  ; 
only  in  so  far  as  they  do  this,  are  gendarmes  and  government 
attacked  by  the  socialists.     Stepniak  therefore  demanded  of 

I  For  example,  in  the  popular  pamphlet  The  Story  of  the  Kopeck  (1870  ?), 
the  mufik  philosophises  as  follows  concerning  God  :  "  God  takes  care  of  us, 
for  without  the  mui^ik  he  would  not  have  so  much  as  to  buy  a  candle  for  him- 
self, and  he  would  have  to  do  without  incense.  In  fact,  but  for  the  mu2ik, 
God  would  have  perished  long  ago." 


104.  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

the  government  that  it  should  abstain  from  all  arbitrary  acts 
and  forcible  methods,  and  should  concede  complete  amnesty 
to  poUtical  offenders  ;  if  this  were  done,  the  sociahsts  would 
leave  the  gendarmerie  and  the  government  alone  ;  the  govern- 
ment could  do  nothing  more  for  the  sociahsts.  Th^  rest  was 
in  the  hands  of  the  bourgeoisie,  and  from  the  bourgeoisie  the 
socialists  would  seize  the  rest,  taking  the  very  life  of  the  bour- 
geoisie as  well.  But  this  fight  is  the  concern  solely  of  the 
two  opponents,  the  socialists  and  the  bourgeoisie ;  if  the 
government  does  not  interfere  in  the  struggle,  the  socialists 
will  not  trouble  the  government.  The  socialists  are  quite 
indifferent  how  the  rulers  arrange  with  the  bourgeoisie  for  the 
partition  of  power.  "  Grant  a  constitution  or  do  not  grant 
it,  as  you  please  ;  appeal  to  the  electors  or  do  not  appeal ; 
make  the  landlords,  the  popes,  and  the  gendarmes,  electors 
if  you  will — we  care  for  none  of  these  things.  Do  not  infringe 
our  elementary  human  rights.     This  is  all  we  ask  of  you." 

Altogether  on  these  lines  was  the  decision  of  the  executive 
committee  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja  that  the  tactics  and 
activities  of  that  body  could  only  be  admitted  and  justified 
as  exceptional  measures  of  defence  and  in  view  of  the  pecuhar 
circumstances  of  the  time.  After  the  attempt  on  the  Winter 
Palace,  the  committee  issued  a  proclamation  (February  20, 
1880)  deploring  the  death  of  the  soldiers  who  had  guarded 
the  palace.  When  Garfield  was  shot,  the  committee  condemned 
the  assassination  of  the  president  (September  23,  1881).  In 
a  country  where  individual  hberty  renders  it  possible  to  carry 
on  an  honourable  campaign  of  ideas,  where  the  free  popular 
will  determines  the  laws  and  chooses  the  rulers,  in  such  a 
country  political  assassination  as  a  method  of  warfare  is  no 
more  than  a  manifestation  of  the  very  despotism  against 
vvhich  the  Russians  are  fighting.  Individual  despotism  and 
part}^  despotism  are  equall}'  to  be  condemned,  and  force  can ' 
be  justified  solely  when  it  is  directed  against  force. 

It  is  obvious  that  Stepniak's  ideas  concerning  the  relation- 
ship between  the  state  and  the  economic  basis  are  somewhat  j 
crude.  Moreover,  we  may  doubt  whether  the  terror  had  any 
real  revolutionary  effect,  and  we  may  contest  its  utihty  for 
the  very  aims  advocated  by  Stepniak.  As  we  learn  from  the- 
programs,  many  of  the  revolutionists  harboured  doubts  of 
such  a  character,  but  men  hke  Stepniak  were  not  accessible 
to  these  and  similar  considerations. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  105 

Stepniak  had  no  profound  insight  into  the  ethical  and 
philosophical  problem,  for  he  was  nothing  more  than  a  revo- 
lutionary practitioner.  In  his  novel  he  described  the 
revolutionaries,  noting  among  other  things  that  they  were 
men  of  atheistic  views,  but  he  went  no  further,  he  did  not 
discuss  the  relationships  between  atheism  and  terrorism.. 
Yet  the  philosophical  problem  of  nihilism  and  terrorism,  and 
in  particular  the  problem  of  crime,  to  which  we  have  just 
had  occasion  to  recur,  was  far  more  deeply  considered  by 
BeHnskii,  Bakunin,  and  Herzen.  These  writers  had  asked 
themselves  what  v/as  the  connection  between  nihiUst  atheism 
and  materiahsm,  on  the  one  hand,'  and  revolution  with  the 
associated  method  of  assassination,  on  the  other.  Pisarev 
vindicated  for  the  nihiUsts  the  right  to  kill  and  to  rob  ;  the 
opponents  of  nihilism,  led  by  Dostoevski!,  endeavoured  to 
prove  (above  all  from  the  works  of  Pisarev)  that  nihilist  . 
atheism  was  the  parent  of  revolution  and  crime.  But  a  word 
of  caution  is  here  necessary.  We  have  to  remember  that  certain 
theologians  have  defended  tyrannicide,  and  we  shall  have 
in  due  course  to  ponder  the  problem  more  deeply. 


§  114- 

IN  the  various  literary  works  devoted  to  nihilism,  those 
of  Turgenev,  CernySevskii,  Dobroljubov,  etc.,  we  find 
many  contributions  to  the  psychology  of  the  Russian  terrorist. 
In  addition  to  these  imaginative  pictures,  we  have  authentic 
records,  and  in  especial  we  have  autobiographies  of  noted 
revolutionists  and  terrorists  of  the  epoch  under  consideration. 
Among  these  may  be  mentioned  certain  writings  by  V^ra 
ZasuhC,  the  memoirs  of  Debagorii-Mokrievi^,  etc .  Those 
who  read  Russian  can  study  the  data  furnished  by  clandestine 
periodicals,  and  all  the  literature  of  the  movement  towards 
freedom.  Of  especial  importance  are  the  works  of  Stepniak, 
wherein  he  described  the  revolutionary  activities  of  the  sixties 
and  seventies.  In  my  Russian  library  I  have  a  special  section 
for  the  revolutionists,  containing,  in  addition  to  clandestine 
journals,  the  memoirs,  diaries,  political  treatises  and  pamphlets, 
sociological  works,  short  stories,  and  novels,  which  were  written 
by  men.  young  for  the  most  part,  in  fortresses,  Siberian  prisons. 


106  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

or  in  the  foreign  lands  to  which  they  had  fled  for  refuge.    I 
must  confess  that  it  arouses  in  me  a  strange  emotion  to  read 
the  poems  or  the  poUtical  writings  of  the  decabrists  who  paid 
for  their  bold  views  on  the  scaffold   (Ryl^ev,   Pestel,   etc.)  ; 
and  still  more  remarkable  is  the  impression  aroused  by  the  | 
works  of  those  who  were  personally  engaged  in  the  work  of  ' 
political  assassination,  ©r  who  furnished  the  leading  inspira-  | 
tion  to  some  terrorist  outrage  involving  the   deaths   of   large 
numbers  of  persons. 

In  1889,  Stepniak's  novel  The  Career  of  a  Nihilist  was 
published.  In  1878,  the  author  had  in  the  open  street  stabbed 
General  Mezencev,  chief  of  the  secret  police,  and  Stepniak's 
experiences  in  the  service  of  the  revolutionary  secret  society 
formed  the  topic  of  the  novel,  which  Georg  Brandes  and  j 
Prince  Kropotkin  commended  to  the  European  public.  The 
work  affords  considerable  insight  into  the  psychology  and 
ethics  of  the  nihilist  revolutionary. 

From  the  first,  the  revolution,  whether  theoretical  or 
political,  had  no  base  of  support  among  the  masses,  for  these, 
or  at  any  rate  the  peasants,  were  opposed  to  it  down  to  a 
quite  recent  date.  For  a  long  time  the  Russian  revolutionary 
idea  was  restricted  to  a  small  circle  and  to  isolated  individuals, 
so  that  the  revolutionary  thinker  and  the  revolutionary  propa- 
gandist Hved  a  life  apart.  The  revolutionary  circle  had  a 
world  of  its  own,  and  formed  a  state  within  the  state. 

Moreover,    the   revolutionaries   were   isolated   through   the  I 
inadequate    development    of    means    of   communication    in    a 
country  of  vast  extent,  and  the  movement  therefore  lacked 
living  continuit}^  so  that  in  one  town  after  another  the  work 
was  ever  being  begun  anew  by  some  Uttle  circle.     Hence  the 
Russian  terrorist  revolution  was  episodic  and  desultory,  the ; 
work  of  unknown  leaders,  many  of  whom  resided  in  Europe. 
The  movement,   it  is  true,   was   diffused  throughout   Russia, 
but  there  was  no  direct  communication  between  the  different ; 
circles  and  individualities  ;    the  nihilists  acted  independently, 
though,  being  exposed  to  the  same  influences,  they  worked 
everywhere   much   in    the    same    manner.     There    thus    came  J 
into  existence  a  kind  of  muted  harmony. 

The  Russian  revolution,  like  Russian  revolutionary  litera- 
ture, was  at  the  outset  the  work  of  persons  of  aristocratic 
birth,  and  this  circumstance  influenced  its  character.  For  in 
the  first  place  the  aristocrat,  though  theoretically  a  socialist 


THE   SPIT^IT   OF   RUSSIA  107 

and  man  of  the  people,  had  a  mentahty  ahen  from  that  of 
the  peasant   (and  in  early  days  the   Russian  operative  was 
ino  more  than  a  peasant).     Despite  its  socialistic  and  demo- 
cratic  program,   the   revolution   was   essentially   pohtical  ;    it 
was  an  aristocratic  struggle  for  freedom  waged  against  tsarist 
I  absolutism.     The    aristocratic    revolutionary    had    an    indivi- 
dualist conception  of  his  task  ;  it  was  to  him  a  point  of  honour. 
;Not    being    habituated    to     daily   physical    toil,    he    aspired 
jto  distinguish  himself  b}^  deeds  of  personal  heroism.     In  a 
Iword,  he  was  strongly  individualist. 

j       The  Russian  terrorist  was  young.     In  Italy,  in  Germany, 

fete,  revolution  was  the  work  of  Young  Italy,  Young  Germany, 

1  and  so  on  ;   but  Young  Russia  was  much  younger  than  Young 

I  Europe.     The  papers  were  full  of  news  items  about  revolts 

among  schoolbo^-s  and  girls.     Pisarev  began  authorship  at  his 

school  desk ;    Herzen    was    barely    thirteen    when    he    joined 

with  Ogarev   in  a  vow  to  take   vengeance  for  the   executed 

decabrists. 

The  youthful  terrorist  had  a  fine  enthusiasm,  but  he  was 
green  in  judgment,  he  lacked  knowledge  of  men  and  things, 
he  knew  little  of  pohtical  and  administrative  institutions. 
For  these  reasons,  his  enmity  was  concentrated  upon  indi- 
viduals, and  was  frequently  directed  against  the  tsar  alone. 
Owing  to  this  political  anthropomorphism  (it  might  even 
be  termed  fetichism),  the  young  terrorists  were  in  sociaJ  and 
pohtical  matters  Utopian,  unpractical,  and  negative. 

The  boyish  nihihst,  in  his  inexperience  and  simplicity, 
was  naive  also  in  the  ethical  and  political  fields  ;  he  was  frank 
and  straightforward,  devoid  of  understanding  for  compromise, 
and  with  no  fears  concerning  the  consequences  of  his  logic. 
Thus  the  "  children  "  made  their  "  fathers  "  very  uncomfort- 
able. §{^edrin,  who  at  first  condemned  the  nihilists,  subse- 
quently expressed  his  respect  for  these  "  nestlings,"  discerning 
in  their  callowness  a  great  wehing  up  of  energy. 

Russian  v/omen  and  girls  played  a  prominent  part  in  the 
terrorist  revolution.  The  wives  of  the  decabrists  were  renowned 
for  the  devotion  and  tenacity  v/ith  which  they  clung  to  their 
husbands'  ideals.  Nihilism  and  the  revolutionary  movement 
secured  from  women  and  girls  a  notable  contingent  of  persons 
of  fearless  temperament  and  indomitable  will.  We  ma}' 
recall  the  high  estimate  placed  by  Bakunin  and  NeCaev  upon 
feminine    cooperation    in    the    revolution ;    and    the    Russian 


108  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

government,  from  the  adverse  outlook,  took  a  similar  view.* 
The  poet  Polonskii,  although  he  acted  as  censor,  wrote  in 
1877-1878  an  enthusiastic  description  of  a  girl  propagandist 
languishing  in  gaol.  Turgenev's  prose  poem  The  Threshold: 
is  an  apotheosis  of  the  woman  terrorist  Perovskaja. 

Girls  often  consecrated  their  lives  to  the  revolution  when 
they  were  still  little  more  than  children. = 

Man}-  writers  on  the  Russian  revolution  ascribe  a  religious 
character  to  the  movement,  but  it  is  necessary  here  to  be 
precise  in  our  use  of  terms.  The  revolutionist,  especially  if 
still  quite  young,  beheved  in  the  revolution  as  shortly  before 
he  Jiad  beheved  in  heaven.  He  delighted  in  self-sacrifice, 
and  had  a  certain  resemblance  to  .the  earl}/-  Christians  with 
their  love  of  mart3Tdom.  Nolens  volens  the  terrorist  shunned 
self-indulgence  ;  he  had  no  taste  for  bodily  pleasures  ;  despite 
his  theories  he  was  not,  could  not  possibly  be,  a  practical 
materialist  and  hedonist.  He  sacrificed  ever3'thing  to  his 
ideal,  even  personal  inclinations,  even  love  and  marriage. 
There  was  something  of  the  ascetic  about  him. 

The  Russian  terrorist  was  frequently  a  mystic  ;  he  had  a 
mystical  faith  in  the  revolution  ;  he  had  exchanged  his 
religious  creed  for  a  philosophical  and  political  creed,  for  a 
kind  of  revolutionary  gnosis.  Just  as  the  rehgious  mystic 
immerses  himself  wholly  in  the  anthropomorphic  idea  of  his 
god,  so  did  the  revolutionary  devote  himself  wholly  to  the 
contemplation  of  the  deed  to  be  performed  and  of  the  person 
to  be  destroyed.  The  horror  of  crime,  the  horror  of  assas- 
sination, had  a  dehriant  influence  upon  these  young  minds, 
made  them  drunken  with  death,  and  in  proportion  as  it  did 
this,  it  unfitted  them  for  detail  work.  The  Russian  revo- 
lutionist could  die  for  his  idea,  but  he  could  not  always 
live  for  it. 

Not  infrequently  the  Russian  revolutionist  became  utterly 
indifferent  to  life  ;    he  grew  accustomed  to  the  dangers,  the 

1  Cf.  the  article  entitled,  Woman,  in  the  collective  work,  Russia  by  Russians. 
In  this  article  we  iind  the  1874  report  of  Co.unt  Pahlen,  Minister  for  Justice, 
who  ascribed  the  success  of  the  revolutionary  organisations  to  the  collabora- 
tion of  women  and  girls.  Amfitcatrov,  the  writer  of  the  article,  estimated 
that  among  the  revolutionists  the  numerical  proportion  of  the  women  to  the 
men  was  as  1:4. 

2  We  find,  for  example,  in  the  reminiscences  of  BreSkovskaja,  "  By  sixteen 
I  had  read  much  of  Voltaire,  Rousseau,  and  Diderot,  and  I  knew  by  heart  the 
French  revolution." 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  100 

death  risks,  to  which  his  friends  were  exposed,  and  in  the 
end  his  own  death  seemed  to  him  nothing  more  than  a  means 
towards  a  revohitionary  end.  He  took  to  heart  the  saying 
of  Mihailov  :  "In  truth  it  is  no  whit  easier  to  die  in  a  room 
than  to  die  on  the  battlefield  !  " 

I 

I  But  because  of  this  very  indifference,  the  revolutionary 
i  shunned  detail  work,  and  when  he  was  forced  to  undertake 
!it  it  was  because  he  was  attracted  to  it  by  the  stimulus  of 
I  danger,  not  because  he  desired  it  as  an  occupation. 
I  The  peculiar  technique  of  revolution  made  of  the  revolu- 
itionary  a  speciaHst  who  was  unfitted  for  all  other  work. 

This    remarkable    terrorist    occultism    had    a    powerfully 
stimulating    effect    upon    the    revolutionaries    and    upon    the- 
'population   at   large,  for  the   mysterious,  the  unforeseen,  the 
incalculable,  has  ever  a  strange  power. 

In  his  occultism  and  mysticism,  the  Russian  revolutionary 

was  a  zealot,  a  fanatical  autocrat,  a  revolutionary  tsar.     Such 

j  was  Bakunin.     Despite  his  democratic  program  and  his  social- 

jistic   ideals,    the   revolutionary,    no   less   than   his   adversary, 

i  was  an  aristocrat. 

;       In  conjunction  with  revolutionary  occultism,  there  devel- 
oped a   species   of  revolutionary   augurship,   and  not  inaptly 
did  Herzen  describe  as  a  new  priestly  caste,  the  revolutionary 
minority  which  desired  to  lead  the  European  majority.     This 
augurship    readily    passed    over    into    MachiavelUanism    and 
Jesuitry ;    a   NeCaev  was  produced  as  soon   as  the  terrorist 
outrage  ceased  to  be  a  duel  and  became  a  murder.     The  revo- 
lutionists,  as   we  learn   from   Lavrov's   utterances   concerning 
falsehood,  felt  how  delicate,  how  terrible,  was  the  situation  ; 
and  was  it  not  terrible  that  the  revolutionary,  who  was  willing . 
to  stake  his  hfe  unhesitatingly,  should  in  his  tactical  caution 
be   constrained   to    falsehood   and   misrepresentation  ?-       The 
executive  committee  did  no  doubt  as  a  rule  inform  its  victims 
that  sentence  of  death  had  been  passed  upon  them,  but  the 
actual  outrage  had  to  be  planned  and  carried  out  with  the 
:  utmost  secrecy.     This  hero,  this  martyr,  was  one   who   must 
''  be  prepared  to  he  unceasingly.'    But  indeed  we  shall  do  well 
!  to  remember  that  the  hero's  death  on  the  field  of  battle  is 
.  supplemented  by  the  death  of  the  spy.     The  Trojan  war  knew, 
;  not  Hector  alone,  but  also  Ulysses.     The  revolution,  revolu- 
;  tionary   organisation,   has  its  tacticians  and  diplomatists  as 
i  well  as  its  technicists.     It  has,  moreover,  its  bureaucrats. 


110  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

Let  us  try  to  form  for  ourselves  a  vivid  picture  of  tlie  Russian  j 
terrorist's  life.     In   the  majority   of  cases  his   existence,   f uU  i 
of  vexations  and  hardships,  had  to  be  passed  in  bitter  poverty  j 
and  deprivation.     For  the  refugee,  Europe  was  but  a  civiHsed  i 
Siberia.      Whilst  the  Siberian  prisoner  or  exile  succumbed  to  i 
misfortune,    the   refugee   was   prematurely   worn   out   by   his  \ 
activities.     In   many   cases,    the   revolutionist   was   driven   to  i 
suicide  to  escape  the  informers,  who  even  in  Europe  would : 
not  leave  him  in  peace.     In  Russia  itself,  the  struggle  between 
the  police  and  the  nihilist  was  of  a  most  exciting  character. 
The  secret  police  waged  a  life  and  death  warfare  against  thei 
conspirators,  using  all  possible  means  to  gain  the  upper  hand,  j 
The  conspirator  had  to  be  ever  on  his  guard,  even  against ' 
his   most   intimate  friends,   as  is  evidenced  by  the  frequent 
assassination  of  spies  and  traitors.     Finally  we  have  to  remem- 
ber that  for  the  revolutionists  all  family  ties  were  dissolved ; 
that  they  had  been   torn  from   their  customary  environment, ' 
from  their  familiar  social  sphere  ;   that  they  had  been  isolated, 
had  been  plunged  into  a  sea  of  tears  and  blood,  had  become: 
indwellers  of  a  realm  of  death. ^ 

The  revolutionist  frequently  became  a  proletarian,  a 
declasse,  losing  all  interest  in  culture,  and  judging  society  and 
social  organisation  from  this  narrow  outlook. - 

The  Russian  terrorist,  like  Russian  liberal  and  progressive 
society  in  general,  had,  notwithstanding  his  realism  and  real- 
istic nihilism,  a  nervous  and  restless  element  in  his  composition. 
I  have  numbered  among  my  personal  acquaintances  several 
Russians  who,  burning  with  curiosity  and  eagerness,  came  to 
Europe  as  to  the  promised  land,  and  yet  hardly  had  they  | 
become  settled  there  when  they  began  to  feel  that  European  ■ 
life  was  too  uniform,  too  bourgeois,  too  orderly  and  philistine,  | 
too  monotonously  grey.    The  European  intelligentsia,  European  I 
political  and  socialist   parties,  appear  to  the  Russian  utterly  i 
unrevolutionary  ;    parliament  is  insipid  ;    Russia,  with  all  its  i 
horrors,  seems  to  him  more  attractive,  and  he  is  seized  with  j 
violent  home-sickness. 

"  We  need  something  diffei'ent ;    we  need  storm  and  life, 

*  The  average  duration  of  life  of  the  Russian  terrorist  was  estimated  at 
two  years.  The  number  of  victims  of  the  terrorist  revolution  during  the  years 
1866  to  1892  is  stated  to  have  been  30,000. 

»  Lieutenant-Colonel  N.  V.  Sokolov,  an  administrative  exile,  wrote  The 
Renegades  (1866)  in  which  he  ascribed  all  human  progress  to  the  activity  of 
the  diclasb^b. 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  111 

world  that  is  lawless  and  therefore  free,"  WTote  Bakunin. 
To  him  and  to  Herzen,  the  revolutionary  seemed  successor  to 
ithe  Cossack.  It  is  certainly  true  of  the  revolutionary  and 
of  the  Russian  intellectual,  that  he  has  in  him  something  of 
;the  nomad.  He  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  a  combination 
'of  the  monk  and  the  Cossack  or  of  the  monk  and  the  pilgrim. 

The  Russian  terrorist  cannot  withdraw  his  hand  from  the 
'plough,  however  much  he  may  wish  to  do  so  ;  he  has  no  place 
under  the  government  and  official  society,  unless  he  becomes 
an  inert  tool  in  the  hands  of  his  former  enemies.  In  certain 
instances,  a  revolutionary  author  and  leader  piay  openly  go 
over  to  the  opposite  side,  as  happened  in  the  case  of  Tihomirov, 
but  it  was  impossible  for  an  ex-revolutionist  to  resume  a  quiet 
i working  life  in  Russia.  Whenever  the  Russian  revolutionary 
movement  became  stagnant,  the  champions  of  that  movement 
sought  a  field  for  their  activities  in  foreign  lands.  Men  hke 
Stepniak  took  part  in  the  Herzegovina  rising  and  in  the  Bene- 
vento  revolt  ;  others  were  active  in  the  Paris  commune. 
Bakunin  was  the  prototype  of  Turgenev's  Rudin. 

If  we  are  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  the  Russian  terrorist, 
we  must  take  into  account  the  way  in  which  tsarism  fought  him. 

The  outlook  of  absolutism  towards  revolutionary  valour 
cannot  but  remind  us  to  some  extent  of  John  the  Terrible. 
The  tyranny  exercised  over  literature  and  over  academic 
'freedoms  was  all  the  more  intolerable  in  Russia,  because  in 
these  respects  liberty  had  already  for  the  most  part  been 
secured  elsewhere  in  Europe,  and  because  such  liberty  could 
not  be  kept  out  of  Russia,  unless  the  tsarist  censorship  should 
attempt  to  gag  the  whole  of  Europe.  None  the  less  the  im- 
possible \\^s  attempted.  Forcibly  and  brutally  Russian 
absolutism  stamped  on  every  movement  towards  freedom. 
Each  revolutionary  outrage  had  to  be  atoned  for  by  the  sacrifice 
of  countless  victims  on  the  scaffold,  in  fortresses,  and  in  Siberia. 
The  revolutionists  fell  sick  and  died  by  hundreds  in  the  fetid 
gaols.  Many  of  them,  unquestionably,  were  perfectly  inno- 
cent. Numbers  became  insane.  Many  terminated  their  pro- 
tracted martyrdom  by  suicide,  often  in  some  unprecedented 
manner,  as  by  the  hunger  strike.  Even  more  inhuman  than 
the  cruelty  was  the  depravity  of  the  bureaucracy,  the  arbitrary 
infliction  of  corporal  punishment  upon  pohtical  prisoners,  and 
all  the  brutality  to  which  the  official  tyrants  were  prone.  Cases 
of  the  violation  of  nihiUst  girls  and  women  are  on  record. 


112  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

Kvjatkovskii,  a  member  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  prose- 
cuted in  1880  for  participation  in  the  terrorist  movement, 
gave  in  his  speech  for  the  defence  the  following  account  of 
the  psychology  of  the  Russian  terrorists.  While  frankly 
admitting  that  his  party  was  preparing  for  a  popular  revolt, 
he  protested  against  the  designation  "  anarchist."  The  revo- 
lutionary party,  he  said,  recognised  the  necessity  for  a  govern- 
ment ;  its  opposition  was  merely  to  the  existing  absolutist 
form  of  government ;  it  was,  therefore  not  an  anarchist  party 
"  I  do  not  propose  to  maintain  that  terrorism  plays  no  part 
in  our  program.  I  admit  that. this  is  one  of  our  activities.  But 
it  occupies  only  the  second  or  third  place  in  order  of  import- 
ance. We  practise  it  for  the  protection  of  our  members,  but 
not  as  a  primary  means  to  secure  our  ends.  It  is  not  necessary 
to  have  been  a  tiger  from  the  first  and  bj^  nature  in  order  to 
display  tigerish  qualities.  Social  conditions  exist  by  which 
lambs  are  converted  into  tigers.  Pohtical  assassination  was 
evoked  by  the  horrible  cruelties  practised  by  the  government 
against  the  revolutionaries." 

The  student  Balmasev,  who  in  1902  shot  Minister  Sypjagin, 
made  a  similar  answer  to  the  court  when  he  was  asked  to 
disclose  the  names  of  his  helpers  and  confederates.  His  sole 
assistant  and  fellow  conspirator,  he  declared,  had  been  the 
government.  "  I  do  not  deny  that  in  earlier  days,  at  school 
and  at  the  university,  I  carried  on  propaganda  against  the 
government,  but  I  never  favoured  terrorism  or  the  use  of 
forcible  methods.  Far  from  it,  I  was  always  an  advocate  of 
legal  order  and  constitutional  procedure.  But  the  Russian 
ministers  convinced  me  that  right  and  legality  do  not  exist 
in  Russia,  that  they  have  been  replaced  by  unpunished  ille- 
gality, by  a  regime  of  arbitrary  force,  against  which  force  is 
the  only  weapon." 

Bakunin  was  not  merely  the  theorist  of  Russian  terrorism, 
but  was  in  addition  the  spokesman  of  the  hatred  which  tsarism 
had  stored  up  in  the  minds  of  the  cultured  classes,  hatred  for 
the  church,  for  religion,  for  the  state,  for  the  Russian  theocracy. 
Kropotkin  no  less  than  Bakunin,  Kropotkin  the  anarchistic 
apostle  of  humanitarianism,  was  overflowing. with  a  like  hatred. 
Again  and  again  the  Russian  lamb  has  become  a  tiger.  "  Gods 
-pass.  Kings  pass.  The  prestige  of  authority  passes.  Who 
shall  take  the  place  of  gods,  kings,  and  priests,  if  not  the  free 
individual,  confident  in  his  o^^•n  powers  ?     Simple  faith  vanishes. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   Rl^SSIA  113 

Make  way  for  science  !  Caprice  and  charity  disappear.  Make 
way  for- justice  !  "  Kropotkin  teaches,  with  Nietzsche,  that 
the  strong  individual  must  win  for  himself  the  right  to  force. 
In  his  strength,  he  may  kill  the  tyrant  as  he  may  kill  a  viper. 

"  A  life  for  a  life." 

These  incentives  of  the  Russian  revolution  must  be  sensed 
behind  the  revolutionary^  deeds  if  we  wish  to  understand  the 
true  nature  of  the  movement.  The  revolutionary  negation 
of  Russia  was  the  offspring  of  mingled  love  and  loathing. 

The  loathing  often  made  the  Russian  revolutionaries  blind, 
blinder  than  was  consistent  with  the  achievement  of  the 
revolutionary  aim. 

The  traits  that  have  been  previously  described  as  typical 
of  the  realists,  the  roughness  of  their  forms  of  social  inter- 
course, their  laconic  speech,  their  contempt  for  everything 
that  was  not  relevant  to  the  ends  immediatelj^  in  view,  the 
cynicism  analysed  by  Pisarev — all  these  qualities  were  still 
more  fully  developed  in  terrorist  circles.  It  was  natural,  for 
the  terrorists  were  men  consecrated  to  death. 

Whatever  the  fauits  of  the  Russian  revolutionists  and 
terrorists,  it  is  impossible,  in  a  final  survey,  to  judge  them 
unfavourably.  Their  ardent  devotion  to  intellectual  and 
political  freedom,  their  self-sacrificing  enthusiasm  for  the 
folk,  their  reckless  disregard  of  their  personal  interests  and 
of  their  own  lives,  their  fidelit}^  tovrards  their  comrades — 
■these  are  brilliant  characteristics,  are  qualities  of  the  utmost 
value,  which  cannot  fail  to 'arouse  respect  and  sympathy  for 
individual  revolutionists  and  for  the  Russian  people  from 
which  they  sprang.^ 

I  In  1894,  when  two  calvTmniatory  articles  had  been  pubUshed  by  the  New 

Review   (London)    attempting   to  discredit   in   the  eyes   of  Europe   the   whole 

Russian  revolutionary  movement,   Kennan,  ift  Free  Russia,   found  apt  words 

for  the  defence  :    "In  the  course  of  my  late  visit  to  Russia  and  Siberia  I  made 

the  personal  acquaintance  of  more  than  five  hundred   men  and  women  who 

were  regarded   by  the   Russian  secret  police  as   '  Nihihsts.'     Some  were  still 

at  liberty  in  European  Russia,  some  were  in  exile  in  Siberia,  and  some  were 

in  penal  servitude  at  the  mines  of  Kara.     Among  them  all,  I  did  not  find  a 

'  single  human  being  who  could  be  called,  by  any  stretch  or  licence  of  language, 

an  Anarchist, 'nor  did  I  find  a  single  human  being  who  would  have  approved 

— still  less  encouraged — such  crimes  as  those  recently  committed  in  Paris  and 

'  Barcelona.      ;Most   of   the    '  Nihihsts  '    whom    I    met   in   Siberia   were   simply 

1  moderate  Liberals,  and  even  the  members  of  the  extreme  and  radical  fraction 

;  of  the  revolutionary  party,  known  as  the  '  Terrorists,'  declared  to  me,  again 

i  and  again,  as  they  had  already  declared  to  Alexander  III  in  their  famous 

;  letter  of  March    lo,   1881,  that  they  were  fighting  merely    for    a    free  repre- 

9  VOL.    II. 


114  .     THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

sentative  form  of  government,  and  that  if  the  Tzar  would  summon  a  national 
assembly,  to  be  elected  by  the  people,  they — the  '  Terrorists  ' — '  would  submit 
unconditionally  to  the  decisions  of  such  an  assembly,  and  would  not  allow 
themselves  to  offer  violent  resistance  to  any  government  that  such  an  assembly 
might  sanction.'  Men  and  women  who  make  declarations  of  this  kind  can 
be  called  '  Anarchists  '  only  bj'  those  who  are  grossly  ignorant  of  their  char- 
acter and  aims.  In  conclusion,  I  can  only  say  again  what  1  have  already  said 
elsewhere,  that,  morally,  the  Russian  revolutionists  whom  I  met  .in  Siberia 
would  compare  favourably  with  any  body  of  men  and  women  of  equal  numerical 
strength  that  I  could  collect  from  the  circle  of  my  own  acquaintances.  I 
do  not  share  the  opinions  of  all  of  them,  but  it  is  my  deliberate  conviction, 
nevertheless,  that,  tested  by  any  moral  standard  of  which  I  have  knowledge, 
such  '  Nihilists  '  as  Volkhovsky,  Chudnofski,  Alexander  Krapotkin,  Kogan- 
Bernstein,  Charoushin,  Klements,  Natalie  Armfeldt  and  Anna  Pavlovna  Korba, 
represent  the  flower  of  Russian  young  manhood  and  young  womanhood. 
General  Strelnikof  may  say  that  they  are  '  fanatics  '  and  '  robbers  '  ;  secret 
agents* of  the  Russian  police  in  London  may  call  them  '  Anarchists  ' ;  and 
]Nfr.  Galkine-Wrasskoy  may  describe  them  as  '  wretched  men  and  women  whose 
social  depravity  is  so  great  that  it  would  shock  the  EngUsh  people  if  trans- 
lated into  proper  English  equivalents  '  ;  but  among  these  men  and  women, 
nevertheless,  are  some  of  the  best,  bravest  and  most  generous  types  of  manhood 
and  womanhood  that  I  have  ever  known.  I  am  linked  to  them  only  by  the 
ties  of  sympathy,  humanity,  or  friendship  ;  but  I  wish  that  I  were  bound  to 
them  by  the  tie  of  kindred  blood.  I  should  be  proud  of  them  if  they  were  my 
brothers  and  sisters,  and  so  long  as  any  of  them  live  they  may  count  upon 
me  for  any  service  that  a  brother  can  render." 


't. 


CHAPTER  FIFTEEN 

THE    SO-CALLED    SOCIOLOGICAL    SUBJECTIVISTS ; 
LAVROV   AND   MIHAILOVSKII 

I 

§115. 

PETR  LAVROV  became  well  known  in  Europe  as  a  theorist 
and     leader     among    the     revolutionary     refugees.       Of 
his  numerous  essays,  pamphlets,  and  longer  works,  a  few  only 
•have   been   translated,    notably   the    Historical    Letters.      He 
also  contributed  several  essays  to  European  sociaUst  periodicals, 
chiefly  French  and  German. 

Lavrov's  literary  phj'siognomy  is  peculiar  to  himself. 
Pisarev,  with,  youthful  impudence,  termed  him  a  scholastic, 
but  this  was  a  libel.  Lavrov  was  a  conscientious  scholar, 
what  Russians  might  call  "  a  German  professor."  He  was 
dihgent  as  an  analyst,  but  lacked  constructive  talent  and 
had  little  originality,  and  was  a  vigorous  but  not  an  incisive 
thinker.  As  an  author  he  was  cumbrous,  and  of  his  opus 
magnum,  which  was  to  be  a  history  of  thought,  nothing  more 
was  ever  completed  than  an  introduction  to  the  introduction. 
But  he  was  prolific  as  a  clandestine  poet,  and  his  Russian 
"  Marseillaise  "  is  still  sung.^ 

I  Historische  Briefe  aus  dem  russischen  iibersetzt  von  S.  Dawidow.  Mit 
einer  Einleitung  von  Dr.  Charles  Rappoport,  1901.  These  Historical  Letters 
were  first  published  during  the  years  1 868-1 869  in  the  periodical  Nedelja,  being 
signed  with  the  pseudonym,  Mirtov.  In  1870  they  were  pubHshed  in  book 
form.  In  1872,  Lavrov  prepared  a  new  edition  which,  however,  was  not  issued 
until  1 89 1,  when  it  had  been  revised  and  had  been  supplemented  by  a  letter 
written  in  1881  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Progress.  This  second  edition 
is  the  basis  of  the  following  sketch.  Lavrov  was  a  prolific  writer  of  essays 
and  books,  his  books  being  no  more  than  enlarged  essays.  Consult  also 
Arnoldi    (Lavrov),   The  Task  of  History,  the  Project  of  an  Introduction  to 

115 


116  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Like  his  contemporaries,  L^vrov  was  a  student  of  Hegel 
and  of  the  Hegelian  left,  his  first  hterary  works  being  devoted 
to  Hegel ;  but  whereas  so  many  Russian  writers  of  that  day 
remained  Feuerbachians,  Lavrov  returned  from  Feuerbach 
to  Kant.  He  was  acquainted  with  French  philosophy,  that 
of  Cousin  and  others,  but  the  influence  of  Cornte  and  of  posi- 
tivism generally  were  decisive  upon  his  development. 
Among  the  French  socialists,  Proudhon  influenced  him  more 
than  Louis  Blanc  or  any  other.  The  writings  of  Darwin 
and  Spencer  had  a  great  effect  upon  him,  and  through  a  study 
of  the  doctrine  of-- evolution  he  was  led  to  make  the  Comtist 
idea  of  progress  the  central  notion  of  his  system.  In 
epistemolog}',  too,  Lavrov  learned  much  from  Herbert 
Spencer. 

Lavrov  was  a  contemporary  of  Cernysevskii,  and  was 
influenced  by  that  writer.  The  two  men  passed  through  the 
same  philosophical  school,  and  were  busied  with  and  dis- 
quieted by  the  same  problems.  But  whereas  Cernysevskii 
decided  in  favour  of  positivist  materialism  and  utiUtarianism, 
Lavrov  turned  back  to  Kant,  though  without  abandoning, 
positivist  materialism  and  utihtarianism. ;    Lavrov  was  keenly 

the  Study  of  the  Development  of  Human  Thought,  1898  ;  Arnoldi,  Contem- 
porary Teaching  concerning  Morals  and  the  History  of  Ethics,  1904  ;  Attempt 
at  a  History  of  Modern  Thought,  vol.  I,  Introductory,  part  r  Preliminaries, 
The  Tasks  and  History  of  Thought,  book  I,  Prehistorical  (1888). — Petr  Alek- 
sSevic  Lavrov  was  born  in  1823.  His  father  was  a  retired  colonel,  and  a 
wealthy  landowner.  From  the  age  of  thirteen  the  son  was  educated  in  the 
artillery  school  for  an  officer's  career.  Under  the  father's  pedantic  and  unsys- 
tematic supervision  the  boy  devoted  himself  at  home  to  an  unregulated  course 
of  reading,  this  being  facilitated  by  his  knowledge  of  French  and  German. 
When  nineteen  j^ears  of  age  he  became  an  officer,  and  when  twenty-one  he 
was  appointed  teacher  of  mathematics  in  his  school,  subsequently  becoming 
teacher  at  the  artillery  academy.  He  married  in  1S47,  his  wife  being  of 
German  descent.  His  education  at  home  was  conservative.  At  the  military 
school  his  views  were  modified  as  a  result  of  his  training  in  exact  science.  The 
excitement  aroused  by  the  Crimean  war  affected  him  no  less  than  others  ; 
his  poems,  voicing  the  views  of  the  opposition  and  revolutionary  in  sentiment, 
were  widely  circulated  in  manuscript,  but  they  were  topical  verses  rather 
than  the  expression  of  any  carefully  considered  program.  Lavrov,  like  his 
contemporaries,  had  given  much  time  to  the  study  of  German  philosophy, 
and  in  addition  was  well  read  in  French  socialism,  being  familiar  with  the 
Avorks  of  Fourier,  Saint-Simon,  Louis  Blanc,  and  Proudhon,  and  with  those 
of  the  Catholic  socialist  Buchez  and  his  pupils.  These  influences  led  him 
in  1862  to  join  the  secret  society  Zemlja  i  Volja,-  in  which,  however,  he  did  not 
play  an  active  part.  At  this  epoch,  too,  he  was  acquainted  with  Cernysevskii. 
,  In  1865  his  wife  died.  A  year  later,  after  the  attempt  of  Karakozov  (to  whose 
circle  he  did  not  belong),  he  was  arrested  on  account  of  his  clandestine  literary 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  117 

aware  of  the  opposition  between  criticism  and  positivism, 
between  subjectivism  and  objectivism,  between  Kant  and 
Comte,  but  lacked  power  to  transcend  this  opposition.  His 
solution  of  the  difficulty  was  to  conceive  the  fundamental 
epistemological  problems  psychologically,  somewhat  after  the 
manner  which  had  been  adopted  by  the  most  recent  adherents 
of  Hume,  and  after  the  manner  which  Spencer  attempted  for 
the  apriori,  Lavrov  also  speaks  of  the  concept  of  duty  quite 
in  the  Kantian  style.  He  formulates  his  own  categorical 
imperative,  but  this  imperative  (and  it  is  here  that  he  differs 
from  Kant)  is  referred  by  him  to  psychical  endowments  which 
are  to  be  admitted  positivistically  as  extant  facts. 
I  Notable  is  the  extent  to  which  Lavrov  was  influenced  by 
^thinkers  of  the  second  and  third  rank.  In  the  Historical 
Letters  more  space  is  allotted  to  the  consideration  of  Proudhon, 
Buckle,  Ruge,  and  Bruno  Bauer,  than  to  the  consideration 
of  Kant  and  Comte,  although  the  book  is  essentially  con- 
cerned with  the  ideas  of  the  two  last-named  philosophers. 
Proudhon  reproduced  the  ideas  of  Kant,  Buckle,  and  Comte  ; 
but  just  as  in  Proudhon 's  writings  Kantianism  passes  without 
transition   into    Hegehanism  and    into  positivism,  so  in  the 


activities,  poems  directed  against  Nicholas  1  and  Alexander  II,  and  on  account 
.  of  his  personal  relationships  with  Cernygevskii  and  Alihailov.  In  1867  he  was 
interned  at  Vologda,  where  he  wrote  his  Historical  Letters.  Lopatin,  the 
translator  of  Marx,  helped  him  to  escape.  Herzen  had  invited  Lavrov  to 
Paris,  and  he  reached  that  city  in  March  1870,  but  before  that  date  Herzen 
i  had  died.  Lavrov  became  a  member  of  the  International,  and  took  part 
in  the  Commune,  being  sent  to  Belgium  and  to  London  to  seek  help  for  the 
Commune.  In  Loudon  he  became  acquainted  with  Marx  and  Avith  other  conti- 
nental refugees,  but  had  before  this  date  become  a  convinced  socialist.  From 
1S73  to  187G,  he  was  editor  of  the  revolutionary  periodical  Vpered,  w-ith 
whose  program  we  are  alreadj-  familiar.  Not  only  did  he  become  estranged 
from  Bakunin  and  the  Bakuninists,  but  in  1876  his  own  supporters  turned 
against  him.  From  1876  to  1877,  Vpered  continued  to  appear  under  a  different 
editorship.  For  six  years  thenceforward  Lavrov  remained  outside  the  revolu- 
tionary organisation  of  the  new  Zemlja  i  Volja  and  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja, 
and  in  1879  he  protested  against  the  fighting  methods  of  the  latter  body. 
After  the  assassination  of  Alexander  II,  Lavrov  resumed  a  place  in  the  ranks 
of  the  active  revolutionaries,  promoting  the  organisation  of  the  Red  Cross 
of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  and  being  for  this  reason  expelled  from  France  for 
some  time.  In  London  he  entered  into  relationships  with  the  Narodnaja  Volja, 
and  became  co-editor  of  its  organ,  V^stnik  Narodnoi  Voli  (1883-1886).  During 
this  period  Lavrov  was  chiefly  engaged  in  the  attack  upon  absolutism.  Dur- 
ing the  nineties,  Lavrov  edited  clandestine  refugee  literature,  and  wrote, 
Contributions  to  the  History  of  the  Russian  Revolution.  In  addition,  as  in 
:  earlier  years,  he  was  continually  occupied  with  his  personal  work  in  the 
theoretical  field.     He  died  in  Paris  in  the  year  1900. 


i 


118  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

writings  of  Lavrov  do  Kant  and  Comte,  Comte  and  Hegel, 
seem  to  merge  one  into  another.  Further,  just  as,  for 
Lavrov,  Buckle  was  the  chief  instigator  to  the  study  of  numerous 
questions,  so  Ruge  was  the  Russian's  leader  in  .the  problems 
of  individualism. I 

We  shall  learn  shortly  how  far  as  a  socialist  Lavrov  agreed 
with  Marx,  For  the  moment  it  will  suffice  to  say  that 
Lavrov's  socialism  was  ethically  grounded,  that  Lavrov  rejected 
historical  materiahsm,  appeahng  to  the  categorical  imperative 
and  not  to  the  general  law  of  evolution. 

Historical  Letters  embodies  an  endeavour  to  solve  the  old 
problem    of    object    versus    subject,    subject    versus    object, 
Lavrov  contrasting  history  with  the  process  of  nature,  civili- 
sation with  nature.      By  the  term  history,  Lavrov  understands 
objective  and  subjective  history,  to  use  the  current  distinction. 
He  conceives  objective  history  as  part  of  the  general  nature 
process,    considered    not    materialistically    but    in    Spencer's 
fashion.      The    contrast    he    conceives    between    nature    and 
history  is  therefore,  properly  speaking,  a  contrast  only  between 
nature  and  history  in  the  subjective  sense.      Such  is  the  sig- 
nificance  we   must   attach   to   Lavrov's   "  historical  realism," 
the  name  he  himself  gives  to  his  standpoint.      He  opens  his 
enquiry  by  asking  whether  natural  science  or  history  is  "  the 
closer   concern "    of   modern   man.      He   replies   that   history 
touches  man's  vital  interests  more  closely  ;    that  history  is 
the  story  of  human  problems.      Natural  science  may  enable 
us  to  conduct  life  more  rationally,  but  history  alone  can  repre- 
sent life  and  comprehend  it.      We  recognise  that  "  history  " 
signifies  here  the  history  of  consciousness,  that  the  contrast 
to  which  reference  is  made  is  between  nature  and  conscious- 
ness, and,  be  it  noted,  between  nature  and  individual  con- 
sciousness— nothing  but  individual   consciousness,   as   Lavrov 
again  and  again  insists. 

This  opposition  between  natural  science  and  history  is  not 
subjected  by  Lavrov  to  a  detailed  epistemological  examination. 
It  certainly  does  not  suffice  to  say  that  history  is  man's,  modern 
man's,  closer  concern  ;  but  we  can  excuse  Lavrov  when  we 
remember  that  Comte  failed  to  examine  the  contrast  with 
any  greater  precision.  Nor  shall  we  dispute  the  contention 
that  history,   as   contrasted   with   natural  science,   embraces, 

'  Ruge  drew  attention  to  Buckle  by  his  translation  of  that -writer's  work 

(i860). 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  119 

properly  speaking,  the  entire  domain  of  the  mental  sciences, 
and  that  it  merges  into  psychology. 

Lavrov  reckons  the  morphological  and  phenomenological 
disciplines  among  the  natural  sciences.  The  former  are 
those  termed  by  Comte  the  concrete  sciences,  whilst  the  latter 
are  the  sciences  whose  aim  it  is  to  establish  the  laws  of  pheno- 
mena. They  are  enumerated  by  Lavrov  in  the  following 
order  :  geometry,  mechanics,  physics  .and  chemistry,  biology, 
psychology,  ethics,  sociology — a  somewhat  motley  hierarch}^ 
which  is  obviously  reminiscent  of  Comte  as  restated  by  Spencer, 
Lavrov  is  at  one  with  Spencer  and  differs  from  Comte  in  affirm.- 
ing  the  independence  and  importance  of  psychology  and 
ethics,  because  he  takes  consciousness  as  his  starting  point, 
and  is  unable  to  accept  the  Comtist  view  of  psychology  a^ 
an  appendage  to  biology.  None  the  less  the  Comtist  and 
naturalist  demands  are  conceded  to  this  extent,  that  psycholog^^ 
ethics,  and  sociology  are  made  to  figure  as  natural  sciences. 
The  use  of  the  term  "  phenomenological  "  is  doubtless  in- 
tended to  imply  that  positivism  is  phenomenological,  but  the 
word  is  unhappily  chosen,  seeing  that  (from  Lavrov's  outlook) 
the  "  morphological "  sciences  have  likewise  to  do  with 
phenomena.  With  Comte,  Lavrov  sees  in  the  phenomeno- 
logical sciences  the  laws  of  phenomena.  They  are,  in  fact, 
the  "  abstract  sciences  "  of  Comte. 

History  does  not  appear  in  Lavrov's  hierarchy.  It  is 
plain,  however,  that  we  must  understand  him  to  speak  of 
history,  now  in  a  wider  sense  (that  which  is  contrasted  with 
nature),  and  now  in  a  narrower  and  more  ordinary  sense.  But 
the  domain  of  the  latter  is  not  clearly  defined.  We  are  told 
merely  that  history  must  furnish  the  interpretation,  must 
explain  the  significance,  of  historical  development.  It  must- 
therefore  provide  a  philosophy  of  history  such  as  was  under- 
taken by  Comte  as  a  department  of  sociology.  Lavrov  had 
not  attained  to  clarity  of  thought  upon  these  fundamental 
epistemological  and  methodological  questions.  For  example, 
he  gives  very  vague  explanations  of  sociology,  and  in  especial 
he  fails  to  determine  the  relationship  between  sociology  and 
history.  He  defines  sociology  (which  he  also  speaks  of  as 
"  social  science  ")  as  the  theory  of  the  processes  and  events 
of  social  development,  and  also  as  the  science  of  social  organi- 
sation (the  social  organism) .  But  concerning  the  relationships 
between  these  discipHnes  and  history,  all  he  tells  us  is  that 


120  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

they  are  "  closely  connected,"  and  he  explains  that  history 
is  the  science  of  non-recurrent  phenomena,  whereas  sociology 
is  the  history  of  recurrent  phenomena.  Are  we  to  interpre.t 
this  as  meaning  much  what  recent  philosophers  of  history 
(for^  example  Windelband  and  Rickert)  mean  when  they  talk 
of  the  individual  in  the  historical  process  ?  In  one  who  wrote 
after  Comte,  and  a'fter  the  Spencerian  criticism  of  Comte's 
hierarchy  of  the  sciences,  this  lack  of  precision  is  a  serious 
matter,  even  apart  from  the  consideration  that,  as  previously 
pointed  out,  Lavrov  failed  to  distinguish  clearly  between 
the  ideas  of  Comte  and  those  of  Kant. 

For  Comte,  in  his  classification  and  hierarchy  of  the  sciences, 
applied  his  positivism,  which  he  beheved  to  be  perfectly 
objectivist.  Psych  ologj',  based  upon  the  conceptions  of 
consciousness,  disappeared  from  the  field,  because  conscious- 
ness, individual  consciousness,  disappeared  before  the  his- 
torical process  of  humanity  at  large ;  psychology  was 
degraded  to  become  a  mere  department  of  biology,  sociology 
being  constituted  as  the  true  mental  science,  and  being 
conceived  also  as  the  psychology  of  humanity  and  of  human 
history.  Spencer,  on  the  other  hand,  rightly  rejected  the 
Comtist  hierarchy  of  the  sciences,  for  he  found  it  impossible 
to  dispose  of  the  facts  of  "  subjective  "  psychology  in  the 
unpositive  and  autocratic  manner  adopted  by  Comte. 
Spencer  insisted  upon  the  rights  of  logic  and  above  all  upon 
those  of  ethics,  and  on  these  lines  constructed  his  epistemo- 
logically  modified  classification  of  the  sciences.  Spencer  had 
recognised  how  naive  was  Comte  in  epistemological  matters  ; 
he  had  grasped  the  fundamental  significance  of  consciousness 
and  therefore  of  psychology ;  and  in  like  manner  he  had 
recognised  the  importance  of  ethics  beside  and  above  sociology. 
Spencer  paid  due  epistemological  regard  to  the  rights  of 
subjectivism,  whereas  Comte,  in  his  later  phase,  which  was 
contrasted  with  his  objectivist  positivism,  was  forced  un- 
critically into  subjectivism.  Spencer,  too,  believed  that  his 
evolutionism  sufficed  to  explain  Kant,  alike  epistemologically 
and  efhically. 

By  the  study  of  Kant,  Comte,  and  Spencer,  Lavrov  was 
led  to  the  same  problems  as  Spencer,  but  Lavrov  lacked  the 
philosophic  strength  which  would  have  enabled  him  to  estabhsh 
his  doctrines  upon  sound  epistemological  foundations,  to 
render  his  standpoint  philosophically  secure.      Lavrov's  classi- 


THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  121 

I  fication  of  the  sciences  was  an  unorganised  compromise  between 
Comte  and  Spencer. 

§ii6. 

EVOLUTION  is  the  evokition  of  thought,  of  thinking. 
Since  the  sixteenth  century,  mankind  has  abandoned 
the  rehgious  outlook  and  the  rehgious  regulation  of  life  which 
had  hitlierto  prevailed,  and.  a  secular  education  has  been 
the  result.  But  there  has  ensued  a  disastrous  dualism  between 
scientific  theory,  between  theor}'  based  upon  the  sciences 
(philosophy),  on  the  one  hand,,  and  the  police  state  (Lavrov 
means  the  absolutist  state)  which  has  replaced  the  church, 
upon  the  other — the  police  state  characterised  by  competition 
in  the  economic  field.  This  dualism  must  yield  place  to  a 
new  and  superior  unity  of  theory. and  practice.  Scientific 
socialism  and  internationalism!  are  competent  to  bring  about 
such  a  synthesis.  But  religious  views  and  practices  will  con- 
tinue to  exist  as  vestiges  long  after  socialism  and  scientifically 
grounded  social  institutions  have  come  into  existence. 

Thus  far  we  have  a  presentation  of  Comte's  developmental 
scheme,  socialistically  retouched,  but  it  is  not  made  clear  to 
us  why  the  absolutism  which  has  replaced  the  church  has 
manifested  the  same  or  a  similar  opposition  to  science  as  did 
tha  church. 

The    Comtist    scheme    is    expanded    by    Lavrov    in    the 

[Darwinian  evolutionist  sense,   following  the  hues  of  Spencer 

and  of  more  recent  students   of  civilisation,   notably   French 

and  English  writers.   .  Lavrov's  History  of  Thought  begins  with 

the  history  of  the  cosmos  and  of  the  formation  of  the  earth. 

.Man  separated  himself  from  other  animals  in  virtue  of  the 

;  organ  of  thought,  living  at  first  in  loose  isolated  groups,  which 

[attained    their   acme   in    the    patriarchal    tribal    organisation. 

:  Lavrov   leaves    open   the   question   whether   the   patriarchate 

'preceded  the  matriarchate,  and  in  any  case  to  him  the  problem 

is  of  less  importance  than  it  is  to  the  Marxists.     From  out  the 

patriarchal  order  the  economic  organisation  of  contemporary 

society   developed   through   the   division   of   labour,   and   the 

political  and  legal  state  organisation  came  into  being.     This 

development    was    completed    (Lavrov    here    follows    Comte) 

upon  the  basis  of  the  theological  and  religious  outlook  on  the 

universe.     Like  Comte's,  is  Lavrov's  corception  of  the  church, 

■and  of  the  medieval  state  subordinated  to  the  church;    the. 


122  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

reformation  broke  the  power  of  the  church  and  its  doctrines  ; 
the  absolute  state  came  into  existence,  but  will  jdeld  place 
to  the  new  socialistic  ordering  of  society. 

Whereas  Comte  regarded  social  evolution  and  its  stages 
as  proceeding  in  accordance  with  a  iiistorically  given  regime 
of  law,  Lavrov  refuses  to  accept  this  reign  of  law  as  a  mere 
empirical  datum,  but  desires  to  understand  it  and  establish 
it  rationalistically.  Comte  had  indeed  explained  his  law  of 
the  three  stages  psychologically,  with  reference  to  the  analogy 
of  individual  development.  But  in  his  Philosophic  Positive, 
Comte  failed  to  demonstrate  the  individual  obligation  to  accept 
his  positivism  ;  he  did  not  show  why  ever\'one  of  us  ought 
to  cooperate  actively  in  the  spread  and  practical  development 
of  the  positive,  antitheological,  and  antimetaphysical  outlook 
on  the  universe. 

Lavrov  was  aware  of  the  weakness  of  positivism  in  this 
respect,  and  he  therefore  endeavoured  to  introduce  the  idea 
of  moral  obligation  into  the  historical  process  without  the 
epistemological  dualism  which  severs  Comte 's  Politique  positive  \ 
from  his  Philosophic  'positive.  To  Lavrov,  universal  history- 
was  per  se  a  world  assize  ;  he  regarded  evolution  as  the 
development  of  moral  aspirations  ;  for  him,  the  historical 
description  of  individual  historic  epochs  was  an  illustration 
of  ethical  principles. 

To  Lavrov,  history  was  a  developmental  process  subjected 
to  definite  and  necessary  laws.  Man,  himself,  was  likewise 
subordin9,ted  to  these  laws,  but  was  at  the  same  time  empowered, 
with  full  awareness  of  the  situation,  to  adapt  himself  to  the 
historical  process,  freely  deciding  to  strive  for'  attainable 
goals.  Lavrov  terms  the  primary  social  state  "  culture," 
this  being  the  stage  which  Hegel  described  as  the  unfree  and 
the  unconscious.  But,  according  to  Lavrov  we  have  to 
understand  by  "  civilisation,"  histor}^  as  it  is  deliberately 
made  by  men  with  awakened  consciousness,  the  purposive 
elaboration  of  inherited  "culture." 

The  Kantian  postulate  of  freedom  is  transformed  by 
Lavrov  into  the  illusion  of  freedom.  The  conscious  indi- 
vidual (and  when  Lavrov  speaks  of  consciousness  he  is  thinking 
not  only  of  the  psychological  but  also  of  the  critical  and  ethical 
consciousness)  chooses  aims  for  himself  and  appraises  these 
aims  ethically.  But  whereas  Kant  had  endeavoured  to 
establish   ethical   purposiveness   upon   his   apriori,  Lavrov   is 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  123 

content  to  recognise  the  existence  of  a  higher  impulse  towards 
truthfuhiess  and  morality.  Lavrov  here  follows  the  French 
socialists,  and  we  may  consider  in  especial  that  he  must  have 
borrowed  from  Louis  Blanc  the  doctrine  of  physical,  intellectual, 
and  moral  needs  ;  but  whereas  Blanc  had  a  theistic  founda- 
tion for  his  psychology,  Lavrov  detests  metaphysics  and 
religion. 

Thus  Lavrov  attains  a  peculiar  subjectivism  of  aims  and 
values.  The  moral  ideal  is  considered  to  give  men  their  per- 
spective for  the  arrangement  and  valuation  of  history,  many 
recognising  that,  despite  temporary  arrests  and  relapses, 
historical  progress  is  a  reality. 

The  brief  formula  of  the  idea  of  progress  is  thus  worded 
by  Lavrov  :  "  The  development  of  individuality  alike  physicallj', 
mentally,  and  morally  ;  the  incorporation  of  truth  and  justice 
in  social  forms." 

Society  and  individuals  are  veridical  data  ;  but  only  the 
fully  conscious,  the  "  more  definite "  individuality,  the 
personality,  only  (as  Lavrov  expresses  it,  following  Ruge  and 
Bruno  Bauer)  the  critically  thinking  individuaHty,  makes 
history — by  elaborating,  as  we  have  already  been  told,  tradi- 
tional culture,  and  thus  forming  a  human  society  out  of  the 
human  ant-hill.  The  critically-thinking  individuaHty  keeps 
history  going,  keeps  it  moving,  and  in  doing  so  converts  simple 
evolution  into  progress. 

Bruno  Bauer  in  conjunction  with  many  adherents  of  the 
HegeHan  left,  transformed  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Reason 
into  a  "  pure  critique,"  that  is  to  say  into  a  negation  of 
theology  and  of  the  (absolutist)  state.  Lavrov  agreed  in  this 
estimate,  but  wished  the  criticism  to  be  conceived  more  in 
Kant's  own  sense.  Such  was  the  leading  problem  with  which 
he  dealt,  though  it  was  not  clearly  formulated.  We  note, 
hovvever,  iiis  endeavour  to  display  the  contrast  between  faith 
and  criticism,  meaning  by  faith,  not  religious  faith  merely, 
but  faith  of  every  kind.  He  w^as  aware  that  faith  alone  can 
move  mountains,  and  he  desired  such  a  faith  for  himself, 
condemning  unfaith  as  indifferentism.  Criticism  must  not 
destroy  faith.  Its  function  is  to  upbuild  firm  convictions,  so 
that  what  was  criticism  yesterday  becomes  belief  to-day. 
Faith  is  omnipotent,  but  is  not  all-sufficing,  since  falsehood 
ino  less  than  truth  may  be  animated  with  faith.  This  is  why 
eriticism  on  the  part  of  the  thinking  individuaUties  is  essential ; 


124  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

for  Lavrov,  "  critical  thought  "  becomes  the  creative  principle, 
as  spirit  was  for  Hegel. 

It  is  plain  that  Lavrov  saw  the  negative  tendency  of  the 
Hegelian  left,  and  that  for  this  reason  he  drew  nearer  to  Kant, 
but  failed,  as  we  have  seen,  to  formulate  the  problem  with 
adequate  precision.  For  like  reasons  and  in  like  manner  he 
extolled  the  Russian  critics  (Herzen,  Granovskii,  Bakunin, . 
Cernysevskii,  and  Dobroljubov)  without  giving  any  exact 
account  of  the  nature  of  their  criticism. 

The  same  philosophical  weakness  clings  to  Lavrov's  other 
ideas. 

For  example,  he  expounds  his  subjective  teleology  of  the 
historical  process,  but  looks  also  for  objective  props  of  this 
teleology  ;  such  is  the  origin  of  his  formula  of  progress.  More- 
over, he  beUeves  in  a  coincidence  of  individual  interest  with 
the  interest  of  the  community,  quite  after  the  manner  of  the 
older  metaphysical  teleologists  and  teleological  economists. 
But  while  expressing  profound  approval  of  this  community 
of  interests,  and  terming  it  "  solidarity,"  he  is  nevertheless 
disquieted  because,  after  all,  the  interests  of  the  individual 
and  those  of  the  community  are  frequently  divergent.  When 
this  happens,  however,  an  appeal  is  made  to  the  categorical 
imperative  :  "  Live  according  to  the  ideal  which  thou  hast 
formed  for  thj-self  of  what  a  fully  developed  human  being' 
should  be."  Lavrov  is  aware  that  progress  has  been  a  most 
costly  affair.  Blood  has  flowed  in  streams,  but  has  been 
poured  out  ever  for  the  sake  of  posterity.  It  is  therefore  the 
duty  of  each  one  of  us  to  pay  his  share  of  the  costs  of  progress, 
to  do  his  best  to  lessen  the  evils  which  threaten  society,  in 
the  present  and  in  the  future. 

Lavrov  sees  that  his  critically-thinking  individuahties  are 

in  truth  isolated  in  their  briUiant  and  heroic  struggle  against 

society,   but  he  consoles  himself  with  the  thought  that   the 

heroes  are  never  quite  alone,  and  that  the  number  of  their 

■  adherents  and  fellow  fighters  is  increasing. 

The  duty  of  the  strong,  of  the  "  more  definite  "  individuals, 
is,  therefore,  to  join  the  party  of  those  who  are  struggling  on 
behalf  of  progress.  There  are  in  truth  three  tasks  for  the 
critically-thinking  individuahty.  First  of  all  such  persons 
must  instruct  and  enhghten  their  fellow  men  concerning  pro- 
gress, must  devote  themselves  to  propaganda  ;  secondly,  they 
must  enter  into  an  organised  progressive  fellowship  ;-last  of  all, 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  125 

the  organiser  of  the  party  of  progress  must  alike  theoretically 
and  practically  be  a  model  of  the  right  way  of  living. 

Lavrov  recognises  as  his  fundamental  dogma  the  idea  of 
humanity  ;  life  is  the  cult  of  the  ethics  of  humanity,  but  life 
further  demands  self-sacrifice  ;  the  struggle  for  progress  is 
imposed  upon  individuals  as  a  moral  duty. 

Lavrov  criticises  the  various  theories  of  progress,  and 
rejects  most  of  them.  He  cannot  accept  uncritical  optimism  ; 
he  rejects  pessimism  ;  and  he  is  no  less  displeased  with 
naturalism,  which  describes  progress  as  an  illusion,  and  con- 
siders mechanical  and  technical  evolution  to  be  the  only  real 
factors  of  history.  In  this  connection,  historical  (economic) 
materialism  is  likewise  rejected.  Lavrov  terms  himself  a 
historical  realist,  and  for  the  historical  realist  the  very 
formulation  of  the  problem  is  different.  Eveit  if  the  universe 
and  history  were  naught  but  illusion,  man  cannot  help  setting 
himself  aims  and  seeking  suitable  means  for  their  realisation. 
Man  cannot  comprehend  the  ultimate  nature  of  things,  and 
need  not,  therefore,  waste  his  time  over  metaphysics  ;  but  we 
'can  and  must  act  ethically,  even  though  our  ethical  aspiration 
be  purely  subjective.  Let  the  nature  of  things  be  what  it 
may,  for  us  insists  Lavrov,  the  question  of  "  the  better,"  the 
question  of  progress,  remains  always  of  vital  significance. 

Lavrov's  compromises  are  obvious.  He  has  amalgamated 
Kant's  thing-by-itself,  the  apriori  of  cognition,  and  the  cate- 
gorical imperative,  with  positivist  relativism  ;  he  has  fused 
and  confused  Kant  with  Comte.  Of  course,  Lavrov  is  likewise 
extremely  •  sceptical,  admitting  as  he  does  the  possibility  of 
:illusionism,  even  though  he  terms  it  "  idealisation  "  ;  this 
idealisation,, he  considers,  is  found  above  all  in  the  v.'orking  of 
the  consciousness  of  freedom  (of  free  will),  by. which  the  power 
of  the  laws  of  unconscious  matter  is  transcended.  Lavrov 
accentuated  his  scepticism  by  the  study  of  the  ancient  sceptics, 
quoting  above  all  Protagoras  in  support  of  his  relativist 
subjectivism. 

Lavrov,  like  Kant,  values  practice  more  highl}'  than  theory. 
Or  rather  it  may  be  said  that  Lavrov  is  so  much  the  positivist 
that  he  here  modifies  Kant  to  some  extent,  placing  theory 
and  practice  on  the  same  level,  postulating  the  unity  of  theor}^ 
and  practice.  The  idea  of  progress  is  doubtless  theory,  but 
at  the  same  time  it  involves  practice,  and  the  practice  of 
progress  involves  for  our  age  that  the  conscious,   the  fully 


126  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

developed  and  progressive  man,  should  collaborate  in  a  party 
with  others  of  the  like  way  of  thinking  to  ensure  the  realisation 
of  progress.  "  History  needs  sacrifices,  and  he  makes  sacri- 
fices who  accepts  the  great  and  severe  task  of  becoming  a 
fighter  for  his  own  development  and  for  that  of  others.  The 
problems  of  evolution  must  be  solved.  The  conquest  of  a 
historic  future  must  be  achieved.  Everyone  who  has  become 
conscious  of  the  evolutionary'-  need  has  to  face  the  terrible 
question  :  Wilt  thou  be  one  of  those  who  are  ready  for  all 
sacrifices  and  sufferings,  that  they  may  be  numbered  among 
the  fully  awakened  and  far-seeing  fighters  for  progress,  or 
wilt  thou  stand  aside,  as  passive  spectator  of  the  terrible  ills 
of  the  world,  with  the  carking  awareness  that  thou "  art  a 
renegade  ?     Choose  !  " 

Fighter  for  progress,  but  perspicacious  fighter  !  We  have 
already  made  ourselves  familiar  with  Lavrov's  theory  of  revo- 
lution as  formulated  in  the  program  of  "  Vpered  "  ;  we  have 
seen  how  he  cautiously  weighs  the  pros  and  the  cons,  how  he 
endeavours  to  calculate  the  chances  of  the  revolution,  and 
how,  just  as  in  the  Historical  Letters,  he  feels  the  final  decision 
to  be  a  terrible  responsibility.  Lavrov  was  one  who  could 
not  venture  without  thus  estimating  the  chances,  and  this 
is  why  he  and  his  adherents  were  vilified  by  the  Bakuninists 
as  mere  propagandists.  In  actual  fact,  as  a  practical  revolu- 
tionary, Lavrov  never  failed  to  fulfil  the  three  demands  which 
he  considered  to  be  imposed  upon  the  practitioner  of  progress, 
upon  the  revolutionary  ;  but  he  did  not  show  himself  to  be 
a  leader  of  the  revolutionary  movement.  Yet  it  must  be 
remembered  that  Lavrov  never  claimed  such  leadership. 

At  the  outset  he  opposed  the  terrorism  of  the  Narodnaja 
Volja,  but  in  the  end  he  joined  that  camp,  approving,  or  at 
least  tolerating  terrorist  tactics.  He  protested  against  Tolstoi's 
doctrine  of  non-resistance,  and  expounded  the  ethical  justifi- 
cation for  the  exceptional  use  of  forcible  measures. 

We  can  now  form  a  definitive  judgment  upon  Lavrov's 
subjectivism,  and  ahke  from  the  epistemological  and  the 
metaphysical  outlook  this  is  the  impprtant  matter  in  the  study 
of  the  movement  of  Russian  thought. 

Lavrov's  views  are  ill-defined. 

Lavrov  formulated  his  subjectivism-  in  several  different 
ways,  and  he  admitted,  to  use  his  own  phrase,  that  it  was 
derived  from  various  sources.    He  drew  distinctions  between 


THE  SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  127 

[  subjective  aims,  the  outlook  on  the  universe,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  the  consequent  judgments,  the  vahiation  of  the  world 
outlook,  on  the  other ;  between  judgments  concerning  the 
course,  the  epochs,  and  the  phases  of  progress,  and  judgments 
concerning  the  causes  and  consequences  of  these  epochs  and 
phases.  It  i^^  obvious  that  this  subjectivism  implies  nothing 
more  than  variations  in  the  judgments  of  the  individuals  who 
are  thinking  historically — that  it  has  nothing  whatever  to 
do  with  the  great  question  of  subjectivism  and  objectivism 
as  studied  by  postkantian  German  idealists.  The  Marxists, 
for  example,  likewise  speak  of  class  morality,  and  thus,  for  all 
their  objectivism,  recognise  such  a  "  subjectivism,"  i.e. 
relativism. 

But  Lavrov  furnishes  us  with  supplements  to  critical  sub- 
jectivism in  so  far  as,  with  Schopenhauer,  he  cherishes  episte- 
mological  and  metaphysical  illusionism.  Nevertheless  in  this 
question  Lavrov  is  less  decided  than  Schopenhauer,  for  Lavrov 
is  a  sceptic,  and  his  acceptance  of  illusionism  is  no  more  than 
conditional. 

In  the  name  of  individual  freedom,  Belinskii  protested 
most  energetically  against  history,  its  chronological  sequence, 
and  its  individual  data,  and  yet  we  should  not  term  him  a 
subjectivist.  Lavrov,  like  Bchnskii,  championed  the  indi- 
vidual and  individual  liberty  against  the  historical  and  social 
totality.  Society  was  no  abstraction  to  Lavrov  ;  it  was  a 
real  complex  of  definite  and  "  more  definite "  individuals. 
Progress,  says  Lavrov,  is  not  non-individual,  it  is  definite 
persons  who  progress,  who  comprise  society  and  make  history. 
Some  are  the  genuine  factors  of  the  historical  process  ;  others 
merely  participate  in  it  ;  and  yet  others  are  merely  in  it,  are 
simply  there  while  it  goes  on.  We  see  that  Lavrov  rejects, 
not  only  the  Marxist  conception  of  society  and  history,  but 
the  Comtist  conception  as  well ;  he  holds  fast  to  individual 
consciousness,  and  endeavours  from  this  outlook,  somewhat 
after  the  manner  of  Spencer,  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between 
the  views  of  Kant  and  those  of  Comte. 

People  often  speak' of  Lavrov 's  "subjective  method"  but 
I  Lavrov  himself  rarely  makes  use  of  the  expression.  We  have 
;  not,  in  fact,  to  do  with  a  method,  but  with  something  more 
[  concrete,  with  a  decision  upon  the  question  of  objectivism 
'  versus  subjectivism.  The  term  "  subjective  method  "  is  em- 
ployed more  frequently  by  Mihailovskii  and  subsequent  writers. 


128  THK   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

§117. 

LAVROyS  socialism  is  essentially  based  upon  Kant's 
idea  of  humanity — humanity  and  human  dignitj^. 
Mankind,  life,  sacrifice,  are  Lavrov's  humanistic  battle  cries  ; 
justice  and  truth  are  his  two  great  demands.  Theoretically 
the  aspiration  towards  truth,  practically  the  struggle  for 
justice,  these  are  the  duties  of  the  developed  individuality. 
Justice  is  recognised  to  consist  in  equal  respect  for  the  rights 
of  one's  own  and  for  those  of  another's  individuality. 

Lavrov  was  on  terms  of  personal  friendship  with  Marx 
and  the  earlier  Marxists,  but  never  accepted  historical  material- 
ism. To  use  his  own  words,  he  was  not  a  historical  materialist, 
but  a  historical  realist.  Being  the  latter  he  rejected  materialism 
as  a  whole,  regarding  it  as  too  dogmatic,  as  unduly  meta- 
physical ;  nor  could  he  accept  the  extreme  objectivism  of 
the  materialists,  the  historical  materialism  of  Marx.  Lavrov 
was  a  subjectivist.  Nevertheless  he  endeavoured  to  be  just 
to  metaphysical  and  historical  materialism,  which  impressed 
him  by  its  consistency  and  its  radicalism.  In  the  works  he 
wrote  after  the  Historical  Letters,  economic  conditions  were 
recognised  as  extremely  important  factors,  political  manifes- 
tations, for  example,  being  deduced  therefrom.  From  time 
to  time  he  represented  the  present  as  predominantly  economic, 
but  he  never  really  abandoned  a  rationalist  foundation. 

Nor  must  we  fail  to  note  what  Lavrov  said  about  the 
class  struggle,  which  did  not  to  him  seem  of  essential  significance 
as  it  did  to  Marx. 

We  must  note,  too,  his  outlook  on  the  international,  which 
he  regarded  as  the  reaHsation  of  philosophic  cosmopolitanism, 
waxing  enthusiastic  on  behalf  of  the  latter  at  the  very  time 
when  Marx  was  endeavouring  to  exclude  cosmopolitanism 
from  the  international. 

Lavrov  was  further  distinguished  from  Marx  by  his 
conception  of  society  and  of  history,  for  Lavrov  made  the 
individual  his  starting  point,  held  fast  to  the  individual  con- 
sciousness, and  considered  that  qualitative  differences  between' 
individuals  must  be  invoked  to  explain  the  historical  process. 
Concessions  to  Marx  and  Comte  were  doubtless  made,  but  the 
individuahsm  of  the  "  critically-thinking  individuality  ".  was 
nevertheless  retained. 

In    agreement    with    Comte,    Lavrov    conceived    historical 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  129 

development  as  the  development  of  mankind.  But  whereas 
Comte  regarded  the  individual  nations  as  the  representatives 
and  leaders  of  mankind  during  different  epochs,  and  expected 
that  the  definitive  positivist  organisation  of  humanity  would 
ensue  from  a  synthesis  of  the  leading  nations  of  Europe,  Lavrov 
assigned  to  the  nations  a  more  modest  role,  holding  that 
human  development  was  effected  by  individuals.  The  idea 
'of  nationality  had,  he  thought,-  no  more  than  a  temporary 
,and  transient  significance  ;  nationality  was  characterised,  in 
part  by  certain  mental  qualities,  but  mainly  by  historical 
occurrences  ;  in  practice  the  question  of  nationality  was  a 
question  of  states.  Lavrov  was  hostile  to  nationalist  chauvin- 
ism. For  him  (and  here  he  reminds  us  of  Caadaev)  the  true 
patriot  was  one  who  endeavoured  to  make  his  nation,  his 
fatherland,  the  finest  representative  of  science  and  of  justice 
among  contemporary  nations. 

The  state,  too,  had  for  Lavrov.  no  more  than  a  temporary 
significance,  although  it  seemed  to  him  more  important  than 
did  nationahty.  The  leading  task  of  socialism  was,  he  con- 
sidered, to  fight  the  state,  against  which  the  social  revolution 
was  directed.  The  state  originated  in  a  contract.  Lavrov 
accepted  this  obsolete  theory,  but  his  interpretation  of  it  was 
that  the  social  contract,  whereof  law  was  the  formal  expression, 
could  not  be  regarded  as  absolutely  binding.  For  Lavrov, 
the  state  was  no  more  than  the  external  order  which  men 
without  convictions  had  accepted — it  was  the  unreflective 
acceptance  of  vital  conditions  which  were  not  dependent  upon 
individuals.  In  this  view  the  state  becomes  a  coercive  order, 
merely  physical  at  first,  but  subsequently  moral  or  religious. 
Lavrov  therefore  held  that  political  history  was  of  very  trifling 
interest,  that  the  aim  of  progress  was  to  reduce  the  state  to 
a  minimum.  To  attain  this  minimum  was  the  endeavour  of 
modern  scientific  socialism,  which  would  abolish  the  social 
order  of  the  state  as  a  modification  of  the  church.* 

Lavrov 's  conception  of  the  future  was  that  it  would  be 
a  federation  of  communes  and  artels.  Nevertheless  he  ad- 
mitted the  possibility  that  there  would  be  a  zemskii  sobor, 
as  an  organ  of  the  definitive  social  revolution,  and  presupposing 
that  it  would  duly  promote  the  economic  and  political  interests 
of  the  peasants.  Lavrov  made  a  sharp  distinction  between 
the  liberal  conception  of  the  state  and  his  own  conception. 
In  all  forms  of  state,'  the  republican  not  excepted,  he  was 

10  VOL.   II. 


130  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

opposed  to  centralism,  for  he  regarded  the  centralised  state 
as  essentially  bourgeois. 

I  cannot  expound  in  detail  how  in  these  questions,  too, 
Lavrov  was  eclectic,  how  here  likewise  he  displayed  tactical 
vacillations  between  "  politism  and  apolitism,"  between 
socialism  and  anarchism,  between  Marx  and  Bakunin.  This 
is  obvious  in  his  relationship  to  anarchism  and  in  the  cautious 
way  in  which  he  formulates'  his  liostiHty  to  the  state.  His 
opposition  to  Bakunin  and  Na&iev  was  based  chiefly  upon- 
ethical  grounds. 

Lavrov's  attitude  towards  Herzen  was  dictated  by  the- 
former's  consistent  socialism  and  by  his  ethical  rigorism. 
Lavrov  was  a  stoic,  and  Herzen  seemed  to  him  unduly  dilet- 
tantist  (using  the  word  in  Kenan's  sense).  He  stood  nearer 
to  Belinskii  and  Cernysevskii,  and  had,  indeed,  marked  resem- 
blances with  the  latter.  In  the  early  sixties,  Lavrov  preached 
anthropologism,  following  Cerny§evskii.  From  this  standpoint, 
the  "historical  realist,"  like  the  Feuerbachian  anthropologist, 
was  thoroughly  rationalistic  and  definitely  anti-religious. 
When  we  studied  the  program  of  "  Vpered  "  we  saw  that  his- 
torical realism  was  sharply  contrasted  with  theology  and 
philosophy.  Cernj^sevskii,  too,  was  an  ethical  rigorist,  and 
it  was  from  the  characters  in  What  is  to  be  Done  that  Lavrov 
derived  the  content  of  his  socialistic  imperative.  Finally, 
Cernysevskii  likewise  displayed  a  certain  harshness  of  style, 
and  we  may  ask  ourselves  whether  in  his  case,  as  in  that  of 
Lavrov,  this  may  have  been  connected  with. the  vigorously 
rationalist  outlook. 

Passing  finally  to  consider  Lavrov's  relationship  to  the 
narodniki,  it  is  an  illuminating  fact  that  Lavrov  cannot  be 
accounted  one  of  the  philosophers  of  the  narodnicestvo.  To 
Lavrov,  as  to  the  other  progressive  and  revolutionary  thinkers 
and  politicians  of  his  day,  it  seemed  that  the  Russian  peasantry 
constituted  the  Russian  folk,  and  his  '"  workers'  socialism  '.' 
was  conceived  rather  on  agrarian  than  on  industrial  lines. 
Moreover,  he  approved  the  mir  and  the  artel  as  socialistic 
institutions,  and  he  favoured  propaganda  among  the  peasants. 
But  just  as  for  himself  he  was  content  with  propaganda  among 
the  intelligentsia,  so  were  his  whole  method  and  mentality 
too  much  the  fruit  of  his  strong  and  peculiar  individualism 
for  it  to  be  possible  that  he  should  accept  as  decisive  and 
assume  for  his  own  guidance  the  principles  of  the  narodnicestvo. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  131 

Late  in  life  (1893)  Lavrov  wrote  an  introductory  article 
entitled  "History,  Socialism,  and  the  Russian  Movement" 
for  a  collection  Materials  for  the  History  of  tlie  Russian  Social 
Revolutionary  Movement,  published  by  some  of  the  older 
adherents  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  Herein,  and  likewise  in  a 
second  article  written  in  1895,  "  The  Narodniki  1873-1877," 
he  expressed  warm  approval  of  the  propaganda  of  the  revo- 
lutionary narodniki  as  a  fulfilment  of  the  Russian  socialist 
mission.  He  welcomed  this  propaganda  amongst  the  people  as 
the  logical  continuation  of  the  civilisation  and  Europeani- 
sation  of  Russia  that  had  been  begun  by  Peter.  The 
movement  "  towards  the  people  "  seemed  to  him  the  fruit 
of  the  humanist  idealism  of  the  forties,  and  above  all  of 
the  enthusiastic  materialism  and  realism  of  Cernysevskii  and 
Pisarev.  When,  shortly  before  his  death,  the  Russian 
refugees  founded  an  agrarian  socialist  league,  Lavrov  hailed 
its  program  with  delight. 

§118. 

PROFESSOR  KAREEV  declared  that  Lavrov  was  the  Hrst 
and  most  influential  of  Russian  sociologists.  In  my 
opinion,  Caadaev  and  KirCevskii  were  more  notable  than 
Lavrov  as  philosophers  of  history  and  as  thinkers.  The 
questions  which  by  Comte,  Marx,  and  the  later  sociologists 
.were  placed  in  the  foreground  of  sociological  interest,  questions 
of  fact  and  of  methodologj^  were  not,  it  is  true,  discussed 
by  Caadaev  and  Kireevskii,  or  at  any  rate  were  not  dis- 
cussed in  detail,  for  the  only  philosophy  of  history  with 
which  they  were  acquainted  ^^■as  that  of  German  idealism  ; 
but  they  did  not  fall  into  the  errors  which  characterised 
Lavrov's  thought  upon  such  matters. 

Lavrov,  though  familiar  with  the  sociological  and  philo- 
sophical situation  of  his  day,  was  incompetent  to  play  an 
effective  part  in  its  further  development.  Let  me  give  an 
example.  Lavrov's  conception  of  the  historical  subjective 
method  was  that  the  individual  historian  or  philosopher  of 
history,  taking  his  stand  in  the  present  at  the  close  of  a  his- 
torical period,  acquires  thereby  a  historical  perspective,  and 
from  this  standpoint  looks  on  into  the  future.  The  presentation 
is  quite  accurate,  but  explains  nothing,  for  it  merely  states 
the  fact  of  historical  contemplation  and  historical  construction 


132  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

(i.e.  speculation  regarding  the  future).  Neither  qua  fact  nor 
qua  methodolog}'  is  the  process  ekicidated  and  firmly  estab- 
lished. Lavrov  should  at  least  have  paid  due  attention  to 
the  problems  of  historical  method  formulated  by  Mill,  who 
built  here  upon  a  Comtist  foundation — to  say  nothing  of  the 
discussion  of  the   wider  problems  of  the  philosophy  of  history. 

I  ma}'  content  m^^self  therefore,  in  this  stud}^  with  indicating 
what  were  the  problems  with  which  Lavrov  busied  himself, 
for  the  results  of  his  investigations  were  of  comparatively 
little  moment.  It  was  important  in  relation  to  Russian  condi- 
tions that  Lavrov  should  have  occupied,  nay  tormented,  his 
mind  with  the  philosophical  problems  of  his  da3^  He  did 
good  service  here,  and  showed  his  strength  by  his  avoidance 
in  the  theoretical  field  of  the  materialism  to  which  his 
contemporaries  succumbed  ;  but  his  influence  in  this  direction 
was  negative  rather  than  positive.  Lavrov's  subjectivism 
would  have  been  of  considerable  importance  in  the  development 
of  Russian  thought  had  he  been  able  to  state  precisely  the 
boundaries  and  the  range  of  subjectivism,  and  had  he  ,beeH 
able  to  present  an  epistemological  criticism  of  his  objectivist 
Russian  contemporaries  and  predecessors.  He  failed,  too, 
to  assume  a  definite  position  in  relation  to  contemporary 
adversaries  of  materialism.  He  gave  special  approval  to 
Jurkevic,  the  opponent  of  Cernyievskii,  but  characterised 
him  b}^  the  vague  epithet  of  "  dialecticiaji."  ^  Moreover  his 
polemic  against  Pisarev  and  Antonovic,  against  the  nihilists 
and  their  radical  opponents,  dealt  only  with  their  depreciation 
of  morality  and  their  contempt  for  the  idea  of  duty,  for  as 
usual  the  metaphysical  and  epistemological  problem  was  far 
too  cursoril}^  considered. 

To  express  the  matter  concisely,  the  essence  of  Lavrov's 
philosophic  weakness  lies  in  his  failure  to  take  a  profounder 
view  of  the  relationships  between  Kant  and  Comte.  Kant's 
criticism  was  quite  unhistorical ;  Comte's  positivism  was 
thoroughly  historical,  but  quite  uncritical  ;  Comte,  Hegel, 
Darwin,  and  Spencer  were  the  spokesmen  of  contemporary 
historism,  of  evolutionism.  Now  how  is  Kant's  criticism  to 
be  associated  with  this  historism  and  evolutionism  ?  Can 
criticism  and  historism  be  harmonised,  and  if  so,  how  ?  German 
philosophy  is  still  occupied  with  these  questions  to-day,  and 

J  Lavrov  thought  well  also  of  Giljarov-Platonov,  the  theologian,  speaking 
of  him  and  of  Jurkevic  as  "  our  ablest  contemporaiy  dialecticians." 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  133 

it  was  the  merit  of  Lavrov  that  he  mooted  the  problems  as 
earl}^  as  the  close  of  the  sixties.  But  his  defect  was  that  he 
made  no  attempt  to  solve  the  problems  epistemologically. 
I  have  previously  explained  that  he  effected  no  more  than  a 
compromise  between  Kant  and  Comte,  his  essential  mistake 
being  that  he  degraded  the  Kantian  criticism  to  the  level 
of  the  criticism  of  Ruge  and  Bruno  Bauer. 

I  may  point  out  that  Lavrov,  in  contradistinction  to  the 
other  philosophers  that  have  been  treated  in  this  work,  though 
himself  an  imaginative  writer,  was  but  little  concerned  with 
literary  criticism.  It  is  true  that  he  wrote  essays  on  Tolstoi, 
Turgenev,  and  others,  but  merely  in  order  to  discuss  the 
socio-political  problems  of  the  day,  as  they  were  presented 
in  the  works  of  these  writers.  ^ 

Consider,  again,  what  Lavrov  thinks  concerning  the  problem 
of  individualism.  Writing  of  the  relationship  between  the 
individual  and  society,  he  declares  that  individuals  (by  which 
he  means  the  "more  definite"  individuals,  his  critically- 
thinking  ill  dividual  ities)  create  the  organism,  wherein  they 
subsist  "as  mere  organs"  of  the  common  organism.  It  is 
true  that  the  individualities  are  accustomed  to  "  moral 
isolation,"  but  they  voluntarily  undertake  social  duties,  they 
subordinate  themselves,  so  that  their  individualities  disappear^ 
to  become  merged  in  the  general  trend  of  thought. 

Now  what  precisely  is  this  "  general  trend  of  thought  "  ? 
Must  not  the  "  more  definite  "  individuals  recognise  it  as  a 
duty,  on  occasions,  to  resist  the  general  trend  ?  Is  it  per- 
missible for  these  "  more  definite  "  individuals  to  merge 
themselves,  to  disappear,  if  the  thought  trend  is  to  be  general 
or  universal  ?  It  can  be  universal  only  if  they  too  exert  their 
influence  upon  it  ;  if  they  disappear,  the  individualities  of 
less  value  remain  predominant. 

I  In  a  dialogue.  To  Whom  Belongs  the  Future  ?  Lavrov  formulates  his 
views  on  aesthetics.  Being  a  positivist,  he  is  on  the  side  of  realism  as  against 
romanticism,  and  rejects  the  romanticist  theory  that  artists  are  persons  of 
especially  lofty  and  positively  prophetic  capacity.  Realistic  psychology  will 
not  admit  that  things  can  be  comprehended  without  precise  analysis  and 
systematic  synthesis.  Lavrov  is  therefore  inclined  (and  this  is  typical  of  his 
method)  to  adopt  a  middle  position  between  the  two  extremes,  and  to  say 
that  the  artist  perceives  the  true  significance  of  things  by  his  direct  intuition 
of  them.  Lavrov  gives  as  an  example  Lermontov  and  his  poetic  "  intuition  " 
of  contemporary'  historj-.  It  is  obvious  that,  notwithstanding  his  positivism, 
Lavrov  has  here  abandoned  positivism  for  romanticism,  or  has  at  any  rate 
tinged  positivism  deeply  with  romanticism. 


134  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Besides,  Lavrov  directly  contradicts  himself.  In  one  place 
he  demands  the  subordination  of  the  individual  to  the  whole, 
and  speaks  of  the  disappearance  of  individuality,  but  he  subse- 
quently protests  against  the  subordination  and  engulf ment 
of  the  individual,  saj/ing  that  we  must  think  merely  of  a  merging 
of  "  social  and  individual  interests  "  (interests,  then,  arc 
something  altogether  distinct  from  individualities). 

In  ethics,  too,  Lavrov  did  not  get  beyond  a  compromise. 
On  the  one  hand  he  accepted'  Kant's  absolutism  and  rigorism, 
and  yet  he  simultaneously  clung  to  utilitarianism  and  the 
theory  of  egoism.  How  is  the  struggle  between  the  conflicting 
interests  to  be  adjusted  ?  How  are  v.'c  to  figure  the  harmony 
of  egoistic  and  social  interests  ?  "  Sociality  becomes  the 
realisation  of  individual  aims  (purposes)  in  social  life."  But 
is  this  definition  of  sociality  anything  more  than  an  assertion 
of  mutual  accommodation  ? 

Finally,  while  Lavrov  adopts  from  Comte  a  positivist, 
antitheological,  and  antireligious  standpoint,  he  provides  no 
foundation  for  his  positivism.  He  should  have  analysed 
religion  more  closely,  for  positivism  cannot  rest  content  with 
the  simple  assertion  that  religion  is  a  vestigial  remnant.  Is 
religion  really  dead  ?  Or  is  it  only  theology  and  the  church 
that  are  defunct  ?  Lavrov  accepts  the  Kantian  reduction  of 
religion  to  morality,  and  insists  therefore  upon  Proudhonian 
justice  in  addition  to  (theoretical)  truth.  He  is  in  his  rights, 
but,  Kant  notwithstanding,  and  we  may  even  say  because 
of  Kant,  the  problem  of  religion  is  not  thereby  reduced  to 
non-existence. 

In  the  politicS,l  field,  Lavrov's  work  remained  preparator}', 
cultural,  educative,  rather  than  the  v/ork  of  a  leader.  His 
industry,  probity,  self-sacrificingness,  sense  of  discipline,  and 
above  all  his  character  and  example,  had  their  due  influence  ; 
but  as  a  leader  he  was  v/eak.  He  lacked  the  faculty,  so  essential 
to  the  leader,  for  making  prompt  decisions,  and  his  political 
development  was  tardy.  In  the  sixties  he  was  of  moderate 
conservative  or  liberal  views,  certainly  not  a  radical.  During 
the  seventies  he  became  a  declared  socialist,  coming  to  consider 
social  questions  more  important  than  political,  and  taking 
the  social  revolution  as  his  terminal  aim.  In  this  phase,  he 
was  opposed  to  liberalism,  and  declared  that  the  socialist 
must  not  make  common  cause  with  liberals.  In  the  eighties, 
politics  has  resumed  its  place,  in  the  first  rank  ;    the  primary 


THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  135 

task  was  to  break  and  destroy  absolutism  ;  for  this  end,  he 
was  now  willing  to  unite  with  the  liberals.  Whereas  some 
years  earlier  he  had  condemned  terrorism,  he  now  favoured 
terrorist  methods.  For  a  moment  he  even  believed  in  the 
possibility  of  negotiating  with  absolutism  and  its  official 
representatives.  I  am  thinking  here  of  the  episode  with 
PobGdonoscev's  "  Holy  Retinue." 

Lavrov  closed  his  political  career  as  editor  of  clandestine 
Hterature.  Throughout  life  he  was  a  writer  and  a  man  of 
learning,  but  sacrificed  his  learned  leisure  and  his  opinions 
for  political  ends.  This  must  not  be  taken  as  irnplying  that 
he  was  weak  of  character.  Whilst  he  temporarily  accepted 
political  and  revolutionary  methods,  his  fundamental  aim 
ever  remained  to  bring  about  a  moral  modification  of  society, 
for  this  change  seemed  to  him  of  more  decisive  importance 
than  any  socio-political  transformation. ^ 

The  judgment  of  the  most  competent  of  his  contemporaries, 
of  those  \vhose  personal  knowledge  of  the  man  especially 
entitled  them  to  an  opinion,  was  that  Lavrov's  greatest  and 
most  far-reaching  influence  was  exercised  by  his  Historical 
Letters,  by  the  effects  which  this  book  pi-oduced  upon  the 
rising  generation  then  awakening  to  revolutionary  ideas. 

Lavrov's  influence  upon  his  contemporaries  and  successors 
was  greatly  restricted  because  he  became  what  I  may  term  an 
absolute  westerniser.  I  mean  that  in  his  books  he  concerned 
himself  little  about  his  Russian  predecessors  and  contempor- 
aries, writing  like  an  Englishman  or  a  Frenchman  who  knew 
nothing  of  Russian  literature  and  Russian  thought.  For 
example,  he  accepted  the  Comtist  developmental  scheme  ;  his 
thought  was  devoted  to  western  Catholicism  and  Protestantism, 
to  European  philosophers  and  their  s^^'stems.  The  Russian 
church  and  its  development,  Russian  sectarians,  and  Russian 
thinkers,  seemed  for  him  practically  non-existent.  Caadaev 
had  renounced  the  Russian  church,  but  we  feel  that  this 
renunciation  cost  him  much.  Lavrov  desired  to  be  a 
revolutionist,  a  revolutionary  leader,  but  he  wished  to  play 
this  part  with  a  positivist  ataraxia  which  made  him  his  own 

I  His  adversaries  continually  recur  to  the  fact  that  prior  to  the  publication 
of  his  program  in  1873  he  had  drawn  up  two  other  programs  of  a  more  radical 
character.  In  1895,  Lavrov  explained  this  apparent  vacillation  by  saying 
that  in  the  two  earlier  programs  he  had  attempted  to  establish  at  least  a  modus 
Vivendi  with  his  Bakuninist  adversaries,  and  had  therefore  partially  sup- 
pressed his  own  views. 


136  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

historian  while  he  was  yet  living.     Lavrov  wrote  as  if  he  were 
presenting  another's  thought  system  instead  of  his  own. 

An  additional  cause  of  Lavrov's  weakness  as  a  leader  was 
that,  for  all  his  theoretical  scepticism,  he  was  a  convinced 
Utopian,  for  he  believed  in  good  earnest  that  the  definitive 
social  revolution  was  impending,  that  its  coming  was  a  matter 
of  two  or  three  years  at  most. 


II 

§119- 

NICOLAI  KONSTANTINOVIC  MIHAILOVSKII  ^  is 
rightly  placed  beside  Lavrov.  The  two  men  represent  the 
same  philosophical  trend,  and  their  writings  have  considerable 
resemblance  in  point  of  st3de.  Mihailovskii,  a  self-taught 
man  thirsting  for  knowledge,  had  his  attention  drawn  by 
Lavrov  to  the  rich  sources  of  European  literature.  This  was 
his  introduction  to  Comte  and  to  socialism,  and  he  was  greatly 
influenced  by  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  "  historical 
realism."  Though' he  was  not  pleased  by  the  Historical  Letters 
the  book  had  a  considerable  effect  upon  his  mind. 

Mihailovskii  belongs  to  the  younger  generation,  being 
younger  than  Cernysevskii  and  Lavrov,  and  a  contemporary 
of  Pisarev  and  Kropotkin.  During  the  3^ears  after  the  liber- 
ation of  the  peasantry  he  was  exposed  to  the  philosophical 
and  political  influences  which  have  been  adequately  discussed 
in  earlier  pages.  A  good  German  and  French  scholar  from 
childhood  onwards,  IMihailovskii  was  not  solely  dependent 
upon  Russian  teachers,  but  early  began  to  absorb  French  and 
German  literature,  belletristic  no  less  than  scientific. 

He  was  chiefly  distinguished  from  his  somewhat  older 
contemporaries  in  that  the  influence  of  Hegel  upon  him  was 
small,  whereas  the  influence  of  Comte  was  practicall}^  decisive. 
I  might  speak  of  him  as  a  fully  conscious  Comtist,  but  I 
cannot  term  him  a  critical  Comtist,  for  he  did  not  sufficiently 

I  Mihailovskii  was  born  in  the  j-ear  1842,  in  the  administrative  district 
of  Kahiga.  His  parents  were  of  noble  birth,  but  not  very  well  off.  After 
leaving  the  lower  gimnasija  he  went  to  the  mining  academy,  from  which  he 
was  sent  down.  As  early  as  i860  he  produced  an  essay  on  Goncarov.  Thence- 
forward, from  his  eighteenth  year  until  his  death  in  1904,  Mihailovskii 
devoted  himself  to  scientific  and  philosophical  self-culture  and  to  the 
popularisation  of  science. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  137 

exercise  his  faculty  of  epislemological  criticism.  Had  he 
done  so  he  would  not  have  remained  a  positivist.  But  his 
outlook  on  positivism  was  less  naive  than  that  of  many  of 
his  contemporaries. 

In  epistemological  matters  Mihailovskii  was  a  positivist 
and  an  ultra-empiricist.  Comte's  formula,  that  while  obser- 
vation cannot  take  place  in  the  absence  of  a  guiding  theory, 
this  theory  cannot  possibly  have  been  constructed  without 
preliminary  observation,  is  accepted  by  Mihailovskii  as  it  was 
accepted  by  Mill,  the  former  believing  with  the  latter  that 
'  this  is  not  to  argue  in  a  vicious  circle.  The  observations  and 
'  generalisations  which  are  at  first  unnoticed  (Mihailovskii 
writes  that  they  are  "  unconscious  "),  are  subsequently  devel- 
oped into  clearly  formulated  general  and  abstract  propositions, 
which  guide  the  detailed  observations.  These  propositions 
are  generalisations  from  experience  ;  there  is  nothing  innate 
or  apriori  about  them. 

Mihailovskii  expressly  rejects  innate  ideas,  as  expounded 
by  the  doctrine  of  idealism.  Not  merely  is  he,  with  Mill, 
opposed  to  the  notion  that  there  are  inborn  moral  ideas  ;  but 
■further,  touching  upon  the  problem  of  mathematical  axioms, 
he  decides  with  Comte  and  Mill  that  these  axioms,  and  axioms 
tin  general,  are  no  more  than  extremely  simple  and  therefore 
generally  recognised  truths. 

In  opposition  to  Kant,  Mihailovskii  borrows  here  also  from 
j  Spencer.     By    empiricism     (experience)     he    understands,     in 
i  addition  to  our  own  experience,  the  experience  of  our  fore- 
fathers.    The  brain  of  the  newborn  is  not  a  tabula  rasa.     He 
even  believes  that  hereditary  transmission  of  ancestral  experi- 
ience   is    manifested    physiologically    through    changes    in    the 
descendants'   nerves.     It   is   true   that   Mihailovskii   does   not 
verify  the  hypothesis,  and  all  that  he  says  under  this  head 
amounts  in  the  end  to  no  more  than  to  show  that  the  so-called 
innate  ideas  are  referable  historically  to  tradition  and  psycho- 
logically to  apperception   ("  apperception   preponderates   over 
perception  ").     It  is  true  that  he  has  certain  hesitations,  seeing, 
for  example,  that  tradition  may  be  false  as  well  as' true  ;    and 
i seeing  that  the  apriori  of  idealism,  when  explained  by  inheritance, 
ibecomes    tantamount    to     "  preconceived     opinions,"     i.e.    to 
prejudices.     But  he  is  satisfied  in  the  end  with  the  emendations 
that  result  from  experience  and  from  increasing  insight. 

In   metaphysics,  too,  Mihailovskii   follows   Comte,  holding 


138  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSLV 

that  the  nature  of  things  is  uncognisable,  incomprehensible. 
But  the  thesis  is  not  precisely  formulated  in  detail  ;  the  pro- 
position is'  reiterated  in  the  terminology  of  Hume  and  Comte 
and  sometimes  also  in  that  of  Kant  ;  on  the  whole  it  is 
Spencer's  agnosticism  to  which  IMihailovskii  adheres.  Quite 
in  the  sense  of  Comte,  he  insists  upon  the  idea  of  the  relativity 
of  knowledge.  Man  cannot  get  beyond  his  five  senses  ;  there 
are  no  absolute  truths,  but  only  relative  truths,  things  that 
are  true  for  men. 

It  is  plain  that  Mihailovskii's  theory  of  cognition  remains 
purel}'  positivist.  Like  his  contemporaries,  above  all  like 
Lavrov,  he  rejected  the  Kantian  idealism,  in  so  far  as  this 
was  criticism,  in  a  most  uncritical  manner  ;  and  he  reduced 
the  apriori  to  physiological  differences  of  organisation. 

Nevertheless  Mihailovskii  was  not  a  naturalist,  not  a 
materialist  like  the  radical  realists  ;  to  him  psychical  phenomena 
were  no  less  real  than  physical.  Mihailovskii  was  here  in 
agreement  with  Lavrov  and  with  the  emphasis  the  latter  laid 
upon  consciousness. 

From  Comte  and  Spencer,  IMihailovskii  passed  to  Darv»dn. 
Having  been  trained  in  the  natural  sciences,  he  retained  his 
interest  in  these  branches  of  knowledge.  Darwinism  gave 
him  an  opportunity  to  clear  up  his  ideas  upon  the  important 
question  of  the  social  struggle,  and  evolutionism  confirmed 
for  him  the  positivist  doctrine  of  progress  ;  but,  as  we  shall 
shortly  see,  he  made  a  profound,  a  positively  dualistic  dis- 
tinction, between  progress  and  evolution,  and  he  rejected 
Darwinism. 

In  ethics,  Mihailovskii  was  a  utilitarian,  and  he  took 
occasion  from  time  to  time  to  defend  this  standpoint,  all  the 
more  since  utilitarianism  was  condemned  in  official  literature."^ 
For  example,  he  championed  utilitarianism  against  the 
theologian  Malcev,  a  Russian  writer  whose  name  is  not  unknown 
in  German  theological  literature.  For  Mihailovskii,  utili- 
tarianism was  the  ethic  based  on  experience.  Precisely 
because  based  on  experience  was  it  preferable  to  intuitive 
morality,  erroneously  preferred  as  more  ideal".  Mihailovskii 
differed  from  Lavrov  concerning  Kant,  and  Kant's  conception 
of  duty,  which  Mihailovskii  could  not  accept.  Were  he  a 
painter,  said  Mihailovskii,  he  would  represent  the  history  of 
mankind  in'  three  pictures.  The  second  of  these  would  be 
named  "  The  Last  Criminal."     It  would  shov/  society  perishing, 


THE   SPTUIT   OF   RUSSIA  139 

but  in  the  very  last  moment  the  last  criminal  'would  have 
been  executed  in  the  name  and  in  honour  of  absolute  justice. 
In  the  main  square  of  the  abandoned  and  ruined  city,  we  should 
see  the  crumbling  scaffold  on  which  is  the  skeleton  of  the  last 
criminal ;  perched  on  the  skull  is  a  raven  ;  fiat  justitia,  percat 
mundus. 

Despite  this  rejection  of  rigorism  and  its  metaphysical 
foundation  (the  term  metaphysical  is  used  in  the  Comtist 
sense),  Mihailovskii  laid  stress  upon  the  necessity  for  recognising 
the  extant  contrast  between  good  and  evil,  which  he  tended 
to  conceive  as  a  continuation  of  the  ancient  Iranian  and 
Indian  dualism.  Truth  has  withdrawn  to  heaven,  and  the 
task  of  the  ethical  volunteer  corps  is  to  bring  it  back  to  earth. 
For  the  positivist,  truth  is  m.erely  relative,  not  absolute  ;  but 
in  practice,  says  Mihailovskii,  it  is  after  all  absolute  for  man, 
since  man  cannot  transcend  it. 

Mihailovskii  was  a  Comtist,  but  he  apprehended  positivism 
as  it  was  originally  conceived  bj^  Hume  and  emended  by  Mill, 
for  both  the  English  philosophers  regarded  ethics  as  an  integral 
portion  of  philosophy.  Spencer,  too,  showed  ]\Iihai]ovskii  the 
right  path  in  these  matters. 

Mihailovskii  was  much  influenced  by  the  socialists  as  well 
as  by  Comte.  Proudhon,  Louis  Blanc,  and  Marx,  must  in 
especial  be  recognised  as  his  teachers.  Proudhon  was  com- 
mended to  him  bj/  the  authority  of  Hcrzen,  and  exercised  a 
great  effect  upon  his  mind  in  earlier  years.  In  1867  he 
translated  Proudhon's  Dc  la  capac He  politique  des  classes  ouvriercs, 
and  he  learned  from  its  aiitlior  to  prize  individuality.  He 
was  attracted  by  Louis  Blanc's  philosophy  of  historj^  was 
delighted  by  the  principle  of  the  organisation  of  labour,  and 
was  an  enthusiast  on  behalf  of  social  workshops  ;  he  is  said 
to  have  spent  his  inherited  property  upon  the  founding  of  a 
bookbinders'  workshop.  Marx's  writings,  and  in  especial 
the  first  volume  of  Capital,  drev/  Mihailovskii's  attention  to 
the  dangers  of  the  division  of  labour  and  to  the  anarchy 
of  the  capitalist  economic  order. 

From  1877  onwards,  Mihailovskii  was  interested  in  the 
work  of  D.iihring,  tlie  opponent  of  Marx  and  Engels,  and  was 
interested  also  in  that  of  F.  A.  Lange,  recomm.ending  both 
Diihring  and  Lange  to  the  Russian  youth.  It  need  hardly 
be  said  that  Mihailovskii's  thought,  like  that  of  his  Russian 
predecessors  and  contemporaries,  was  akin  to  Feuerbach's. 


140  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

In  addition  to  these  influences,  we  have  to  consider 
Mihailovskii's  acquaintanceship  with  the  works  of  Rousseau, 
for  this  led  the  Russian  towards  socialism,  towards  the  social 
collectivity,  as  contrasted  with  Proudhonian  anarchism. 

Russian  literature  exercised  a  notable  influence  upon 
Mihailovskii.  I  have  already  referred  to  Lavrov ;  but 
Mihailovskii  learned  also  from  Herzen,  and  still  more  from 
Cern37sevskii,  whose  anthropologism  recurs  as  "  humanitism." 
Mihailovskii  was  a  consistent  opponent  of  Pisarev  and  the , 
latter's  adherents,  and  sharply  distinguished  his  own  individ- 
ualism from  that  of  Pisarev.  Nor  did  Mihailovskii  forget 
BSHnskii.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Mihailovskii  was  at  an 
early  date  intimately  associated  with  Nekrasov  and  Saltj^kov, 
becoming  in  1868  a  contributor  to  Nekrasov's  periodical. 
At  this  time  he  was  on  friendly  terms  with  several  other 
Russian  authors,  amongst  whom  may  be  mentioned  Eliseev 
and  Selgunov.  Among  the  Russians  who  helped  to  form  his 
mind,  Mihailovskii  refers  to  Nozin,  who  died  prematurely 
in  the  year  1866,  being  then  onl}^  twenty-three  years  old. 
The  two  men  worked  together  for  several  years  on  the  staff 
of  the  same  journal.  Nozin  was  involved  in  the  trial  of  the 
Karakozovc}^  Nozin  was  a  zoologist.  In  a  European  journey 
he  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  Bakunin.  His  publicist 
ideas  derived  primarily  from  Proudhon,  but  he  differed  from 
his  teacher  in  his  view  that  the  division  of  labour  was  injurious  • 
to  individuality  and  was  the  cause  of  the  unequal  division 
of  the  product  of  labour.  Nozin  denied  the  reality  of  the 
Darwinian  struggle  for  existence  among  the  individuals  of 
the  same  species,  referring  expressly  to  the  phenomena  of 
mutual  aid.     All  these  ideas  recur  in  the  work  of  Mihailovskii. 


§  T20. 

MIHAILOVSKII  was  a  sociologist,  and  in  sociology  was  a 
follower  of  Comte,  but  he  was  distinguished  from  Comte, 
and  was  distinguished  no  less  from  Marx  and  the  Marxists,  by 
his  insistence  upon  the  "subjective  method"  in  sociology. 

In  Russian  literature,  much  has  been  said  concerning 
Mihailovskii's  and  Lavrov's  "subjective  method."  The 
Marxists,  in  particular,  have  fiercely  attacked  it,  and  one  of 
Plehanov's  principal  writings  is  devoted  to  Mihailovskii  and 
to  a  refutation  of  the  subjective  method. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  141 

Mihailovskii,  like  Lavro\',  recognised  the  existence  of 
psychology,  side  b}^  side  with  sociology,  as  an  independent 
science,  differing  here  from  his  leader  Comte,  and  accepting 
the  views  of  IMill  and  Spencer.  The  sociologist  must  employ 
tlie  subjective  method  as  well  as  the  objective  ;  social  and 
historical  facts  demand  a  psychological  as  well  as  a  material 
explanation.  Consequently  Mihailovskii  often  speaks  of 
"  social  psj^chology." 

Mihailovskii  explicitly  protested  against  the  idea  that 
the  subjective  method  was  not  inductive,  and  would  conflict 
with  experience.  But  in  sociology,  he  said,  in  the  expla- 
nation of  the  relationships  between  human  beings,  the  objective 
method  was  not  all-sufficing.  The  historical  process,  he 
declared,  is  teleological,  for  individual  men,  groups  of  men, 
and  humanity  as  a  whole,  pursue  aims.  Now  an  aim  implies 
a  desire,  the  sentiment  of  what  is  agreeable,  and  the  conscious- 

!  ness  of  duty.  The  sociologist,  therefore,  in  his  presentation 
of  the  historical  process  and  of  social  organisation,  must  duly 
take  into  account  this  subjective  element  in  man. 

IMihailovskii  demands  that  the  observing  sociologist  shall 
allow  his  mind  to  permeate  the  observed  object,  man  ;  the 
observer,  as  he  puts  it,  must  "  merge  "  with  the  object,  so 
that  the  observer  may  find  himself  in  the  place  of  the  observed  ; 
he  demands  that  the  sociologist  shall  have  the  faculty  of 
"impressionability"  (imaginative  insight). 

But  this  is  not  to  give  an  exhaustive  account  of  Mihailovskii's 
subjective  method.  Every  individual,  he  sa3^s,  is  member  of 
a  historically  given  group  of  human  beings,  of  a  class,  and 
shares  the  opinions  and  desires  of  that  class.  Utterly  different 
are  the  respective  judgments  formed  bj^  the  feudalist  and  by 
the  socialist  concerning  historical  and  social  things.  What 
standpoint  should  the  scientific  thinker  assume  ?  Mihailovskii 
admits  that  a  man's  views  are  invariably  suggested  by  his 
social  position.      How,   then,  is  scientific  sociology  possible  ? 

;  Mihailovskii  adheres  to  the  opinion  of  Comte.  He  who  desires 
to  devote  himself  to  sociology  must  attain  to  a  high  moral 
level,  that  he  may  be  able  to  do  justice  to  all  views  and  valua- 
tions, and  that  he  may  be  able  to  overcome  preconceived 
opinions  based  upon  tradition  (apperception). 

For  Mihailovskii,  the  objective  method  in  sociology  seems 

,  no  more  than  a  mask,  assumed  by  men  without  conscience 

i  in   order   to   befool   their   conscientious   fellows.     Mihailovskii 

li 


142  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

justifies  his  departure  from  Comte's  historism  by  relerring  to 
Comte's  own  mental  development,  to  the  way  in  which  Comte 
moved  on  from  his  objective  sociology  to  the  subjective  method 
in  politics  and  the  philosophy  of  religion.  He  quotes  Balzac's 
La  recherche  dc  I'absolu,  showing  how  the  brilliant  realist  had 
made  positivist  detachment  appear  ludicrous  and  contemp- 
tible, by  representing  a  disciple  of  Lavoisier  defining  tears  in 
purely  chemical  terminology  as  consisting  merely  of  this  and 
that  variety  of  matter.  In  contrast  with  such  an  outlook, 
Mihailovskii  champions  the  socio-psychological  standpoint, 
rightly  declaring  that  to  do  this  is  not  to  abandon  positivism. 

Comte  had  demanded  that  we, should  avoid  any  tincture 
of  enthusiasm  or  of  a  spirit  of  condemnation  in  our  judgment 
of  historical  and  above  all  of  political  facts  ;  we  should  regard 
them,  he  declared,  as  simple  facts  of  observation,  comprehending 
each  fact  solely  in  its  setting  in  relation  to  coexisting  phenomena 
and  in  association  with  the  antecedent  and  subsequent  condi- 
tion of  human  developmeait.  But  Mihailovskii,  while  recog- 
nising that  this  positivist  detachment  is  a  demand  of  "  pure 
rationality,"  regards  it  as  impossible  and  unsound,  "  Tout 
comprcndre,  c'est  tout  pardonner,"  is  a  pretty  saying,  but 
wrongheaded.  "Tout  comprendre  "  must  not  be  taken  to 
imply  that  we  are  not  to  insist  upon  the  fundamental  opposition 
between  good  and  evil.  "  Tout  comprendre  "  is  impossible  ; 
no  one  can  understand  everything,  and  therefore  we  must 
not  forgive  ever3'tliing. .  Besides,  "  tout  comprendre  "  is 
impossible  to  a  decent  man  ;  for  example,  certain  meannesses 
are  quite  beyond  his  understanding.  In  a  word,  there  is  no 
justification  for  the  demand  that  the  historian  should  display 
a  positivist  detachment.  ]\Iihailovskii  returns  frequently  to, 
the  exposition  of  these  views,  and  they  are  especially  to  be 
found  in  the  preface  to  his  John  the  Terrible. 

Plehanov's  rejection  of  Mihailovskii 's  subjective  method 
is  based  on  the  contention  that  this  method  suggests  no  other 
criterion  than  the  personal  wishes  of  the  individual,  that  it 
proposes  to  replace  scientific  research  by  subjective  caprice.     - 

Indisputably  there  are  historians  and  philosophers  of  history 
who  are  guided  by  caprice,  but  the  objection  is  none  the  less 
fallacious.  As  a  Marxist,  Plehanov  adopts  the  standpoint 
of  purely  objective  history,  the  individual  consciousness  being 
eliminated  by  Engels  and  the  other  Marxists.  Mihailovskii's 
views  are  clearer  and  more  accurate,  for  he  recognises  that 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  143 

the  objective  interpretation  of  history  is  inadequate.  Marx 
beheved  himself  to  have  proved  that  the  age  of  communism 
was  approachnig  by  historical  necessity  ;  he  believed  that 
this  proof  could  be  furnished  by  the  use  of  the  Hegelian  dialectic. 
I  But  what  would  be  the  result  of  such  a  proof  for  my  personal 
conduct,  for  yours,  for  Marx's  own,  for  everyone's  ?  The 
socialist  decides  in  favour  of  socialism  and  communism  upon 
ethical  and  not  upon  historical  grounds  ;  the  Russian 
socialists  are  right  ;  Marx's  attempt  to  give  sociahsm  a  purely 
objective  historical  foundation  was  futile.  It  is  only  because 
men  of  the  present  day  are  deciding  in  favour  of  communism, 
and  have  reasons  and  motives  for  this  decision,  that  his- 
torians .have  been  able  to  point  to  the  beginning  of  the 
communistic  epoch.  Other  philosophers  of  history,  differing 
from  Marx,  refuse  to  consider  the  socialist  movement  as  the 
opening  of  a  new  historical  epoch,  and  look  upon  it  as  no  more 
than  a  morbid  episode.  Which  party  is  right  ?  Upon  whose 
side,  that  is  to  say,  is  the  truth  —  a  truth  which,  as  I  see  it, 
can  be  no  more  than  relative  ?  It  is  clear  that  the  question 
with  which  Mihailovskii  is  really  concerned  when  he  discusses 
the  subjective  method,  is  whether  psychology,  and  sociology 
grounded  upon  psychology,  are  really  possible.  To-day  we 
may  sa}^  that  the  question  has  been  adequately  answered, 
has  been  answered  alike  theoretically,  epistemologicalW,  and 
practically,  by  the  advent  of  a  genuinely  scientific  psychology 
and  sociology,  whereby  the  objections  of  the  Marxists  have 
been  rendered  simply  anachronistic. 

But  for  Mihailovskii  the  question  has  a  yet  more  general 
significance.  If  every  human  being  be  involuntaril}'-  and 
necessarily  guided  by  the  preconceived  opinions  of  his  class 
and  of  his  day,  how  is  science  possible  ?  To  put  the  matter 
in  concrete  terms.  Which  class  can  contend  that  it  possesses 
J  science,  that  science  is  enlisted  in  its  service  ?  Mihailovskii 
t  replies  by  amending  Lassalle  and  Engels,  by  saying  that 
ii  science  serves  the  people,  that  is,  the  "entirety  of  the 
f!  labouring  classes  of  society." 
I  It  is  necessary  to  note  and  to  commend  the  way  in  which 
I )  Mihailovskii  invariably  pays  great  attention  to  the  problem 
'i  \  of  accurate  method.  When  discussing  individual  scientific 
and  philosophic  writers,  he  never  fails  to  examine  their 
methodology,  and  to  consider  how  it  corresponds  to  their 
actual    treatment    of    the    topic.      As    regards    sociology,    he 


1 


144  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

■ 

challenges  the  validity  of  analogy  as  a  method  capable  of 
giving  accurate  results,  his  views  in  this  respect  conflicting 
with  those  of  Spencer  and  certain  Russian  sociologists,  above 
all  with  those  of  Stronin. 

Mihailovskii  contests  Spencer's  opinion  that  society  is  an 
organism,  rejecting  at  the  same  time  false  conceptions  of  a 
collective  consciousness.  For  Mihailovskii,  societ}^  is  an 
organisation  of  individuals  of  like  kind  and  of  equal  value. 
In  his  explanation  of  historical  and  social  facts,  the  sociologist 
ought  not  to  set  out  from  the  whole,  but  from  the  consciousness 
of  the  individual.  The  nature  of  the  individual,  says 
Mihailovskii,  is  most  conspicuously  shown  in  work  ;  for  men, 
for  the  human  individual,  work  is  what  motion  is  for  matter. 
(It  must  be  observed  that  Mihailovskii  is  here  drawing  an 
analogy  !)  Work  is  the  chief  attribute  of  individuality,  the 
chief  characteristic  of  individuality  as  such.  Talent,  birth, 
wealth,  beauty — these  are  non-essentials,  to  a  greater  or  less 
extent  they  are  chance  qualities  ;  talent  comes  by  favour  of 
fortune  ;  a  man's  wealth  is  not  won  solely  by  himself ;  and 
so  on.  But  work  is  the  deliberate  use  of  energy,  the  expendi- 
ture of  energy  to  attain  a  goal,  and  work  is  therefore  the 
manifestation  of  man's  true  essence,  the  manifestation  of 
individuality. 

It  follows  that  the  essence  of  sociality  is  to  be  found  in 
the  collaboration  or  cooperation  of  individuals,  and  that  the 
nature  of  the  cooperation  determines  the  character  of 
successive  epochs. 

For  this  reason,  because  cooperation  socialises  men, 
Mihailovskii  is  just  as  little  inclined  as  Comte  and  other 
sociologists  to  admit  the  validity  of  economic  materialism. 
Cooperation  is  not  merely  economic  in  nature,  but  comprises 
all  social  work,  including  intellectual  work.  In  the  last  resort, 
culture  subserves  the  purposes  of  work,  and  therefore  culture 
cannot  be  utilised  as  an  explanation  of  social  and  historical 
processes.  Oi  course  the  cooperation  of  human  beings  is 
explicable  by  motives  and  reasons,  and  is  referable  above  all 
to  inborn  egoism  and  altruism.  Here  Mihailovskii  follows 
Adam  Smith,  for  to  natural  and  inborn  egoism  he  counter- 
poses  the  no  Igss  inborn  and  natural  altruism  ;  he  appeals  to 
Comte's  "altruism,"  to  Feuerbach's  "  tuism,"  and  to 
Diihring's  "sympathetic  natural  impulses." 

Mihailovskii   was   not   slow   to  study   Marx.     Immediately 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  145 

after  the  appearance  of  the  first  volume  of  Capital  he  read  the 
book  carefull37,  and  was  especially  interested  in  the  chapters 
upon  cooperation  and  upon  the  division  of  labour,  for  his 
attention  had  already  been  drawn  to  these  questions  by 
Comte,  Adam  Smith,  and  Louis  Blanc.  In  his  work  on  Dar- 
winism, published  in  1870,  Mihailovskii  stated  that  in 
Capital  he  had  found  the  confirmation  of  his  views  concerning 
the  disastrous  consequences  of  the  division  of  labour. 
Mihailovskii  was  likewise  interested  in  Marx's  philosophy  of 
history,  and  had  frequent  controversies  with  Marx  and  the 
Marxists,  especially  in  later  years,  when  the  latter  had  come  to 
regard  him  as  an  adversary.  Notwithstanding  his  esteem  for 
Marx,  he  never  accepted  the  doctrine  of  historical  materialism, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  always  energeticall3/  combated  it. 

The  way  in  which  Mihailovskii  appealed  to  psychical  energies 
in  explanation  of  social  facts,  is  shown  by  his  studies  con- 
cerning imitation  and  suggestive  influences,  a  theme  in  which 
he  was  always  greatly  interested.  From  1882  onwards  he 
penned  a  series  of  essays  analysing  the  way  in  which  human 
beings  influence  one  another,  and  why  certain  men  in  par- 
ticular (the  "  heroes  ")  influence  the  masses  for  good  or  for 
ill,  and  compel  lesser  men  to  follow  their  example.  Mihail- 
ovskii displayed  much  industry,  here  anticipating  Tarde,  in 
studying  the  French  writers  who  have  recorded  manifes- 
tations of  imitativeness  and  have  described  its  pathological 
forms. 

It  seems  self-evident  to  Mihailovskii  that  history  is  subject 
to  laws.  Man,  he  says,  cannot  escape  from  the  domain 
of  natural  law.  But  in  the  field  of  politico-moral  processes 
the  human  will  is  one  factor  among  many,  and  within  this 
field  therefore  freedom  of  the  will  has  its  scope.  The  formation 
of  ideals  and  the  endeavour  to  realise  these  ideals,  occur, 
therefore,  likewise  in  accordance  with  law.  Mihailovskii 
understands  freedom  of  the  will  in  the  determinist  sense, 
making  a  sharp  distinction  between  determinism  and  fatalism. 

General  laws  determine  the  order  of  the  phases  of  historic 
evolution,  but  individual  intervention  can  retard  or  accelerate 
the  course  of  development.  Great  and  vigorous  personalities 
make  their  appearance  upon  the  frontier  between  two  phases 
of  development. 

Mihailovskii,  consequently,  takes  a  critical  view  of  the 
so-called    "  great    men    theory  "    of    recent    days.     Following 

11  VOL.   II. 


U6  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Louis  Blanc,  he  shows  that  great  men  create,  not  out  of  them- 
selves, but  out  of  their  environment,  and  that  it  is  individual 
circumstances  and  the  circumstances  of  the  day  which  make 
these  great  men  representatives  and  leaders.  Precise 
psychological  analysis  enabled  Mihailovskii  to  reduce  to  reason- 
able proportions  exaggerations  a  la  Carlyle  (hero-worship), 
and  to  keep  close  to  fact. 

Mihailovskii's  social  psychology,  precise  and  indefatigable, 
utterly  excludes  historical  materialism.  For  Mihailovskii,  as 
he  himself  said  at  times,  the  stomach  question  was  also  a  soul 
question. 

§121. 

THE  philosophy  of  history,  as  Mihailovskii  maintains  in 
opposition  to  the  sceptics  in  his  study  of  Louis  Blanc, 
ought  to  expound  the  meaning  of  history.  Mihailovskii  takes 
this  idea  from  Comte,  the  socialists,  the  evolutionary  students 
of  natural  science,  and  above  all  from  Darwin.  In  practical 
and  political  matters  it  is  natural  that  Mihailovskii  should 
think  as  a  Russian  concerning  the  meaning  of  historical  develop- 
ment, his  outlook  being  determined  by  that  ot  his  Russian 
predecessors  and  contemporaries. 

He  formulates  a  scheme  of  development  in  three  stages, 
naming  them,  in  conformity  with  Lavrov,  the  objective 
anthropocentric,  the  eccentric,  and  the  subjective  anthropo- 
centric  stage. 

The  objective  anthropocentric  stage  is  characterised  by 
the  naive  belief  in  accordance  with  which  man  holds  himself 
to  be  the  objective,  absolute,  and  real  centre  of  nature,  deter- 
mined from  without.  It  is  the  stage  of  anthropomorphism 
and  mysticism,,  the  stage  of  theology  and  religion,  the  stage 
of  objective  teleology.  The  second  or  eccentric  stage,  pushing 
dualism  of  body  and  soul  to  an  extreme,  regards  man  as  under 
the  dominion  of  abstract  ideas.  The  third  or  subjective 
anthropocentric  stage  is  the  genuinely  human  epoch,  wherein 
man,  his  ethical  ideals,  a  purely  human  teleology,  are  realised. 
It  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  era  of  science  and  of  positivism. 
Manifestly  this  scheme  is  referable  to  the  three  stages  of 
Comte.  We  are  contemplating  the  theological,  the  'meta- 
physical, and  the  positive  stage  ;  but  whereas  Comte  maintains 
as  his  principle  of  classification  the  theoretical  relationship 
of  man  to  the  universe,  Mihailovskii  is  increasingly  concerned 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  147 

with  the  ethical  relationship  of  man  to  his  fellows  and  to  the 
universe,^ 

We  may  think  also  of  the  three  stages  of  Louis  Blanc, 
which  are  likewise  to  some  extent  a  reflex  of  Comte's  ideas  ; 
the  stage  of  authority  (Catholicism),  of  individualism  (Luther 
and  Protestantism),  and  of  harmony  or  association.  Mihail- 
ovskii  himself  expounds  Louis  Blanc's  philosophy  of  history, 
and  does  so  to  clarify  his  own  ideas.  He  also  reproduces 
Saint-Simon's  scheme,  in  which  Saint-Simon  distinguished 
between  the  organic  era  and  the  critical ;  and  he  adduces 
Vico's  three  stages,  the  divine,  the  heroic,  and  the  human. 
He  compares  all  these  schemata  with  Comte's  stages  and  with 
his  own. 

Mihailovskii  devotes  much  thought  to  the  three  stages  of 
development.  He  moots  the  question  why  historians  and  ■ 
philosophers  of  history  commonly  inclined  to  speak  about 
three  stages,  and  answers  his  own  question  by  an  analysis  of 
the  Hegelian  dialectic  evolutionary  process,  which  likewise 
has  three  stages.  He  contends  that  the  basis  of  this  conception 
of  three  stages  is  to  be  found  in  the  natural  and  obvious  con- 
templation of  the  future  as  compared  with  the  present  and 
the  past.  Since  the  future  is  the  natural  continuation  and 
development  of  the  past,  with  the  idea  of  the  three  historical 
stages  there  very  readily  becomes  associated  the  concept  of 
the  Hegelian  dialectic  or  that  of  Vico's  "ricorsi,"  namely  that 
the  third  stage  redevelops  itself  into  the  lirst.  But  this  redevel- 
opment is  not  a  reversion  ;  it  is  a  further  evolution  upon 
a  higher  level.  Mihailovskii  therefore  distinguishes  between 
the  degree  of  development  and  the  type.  When  Rousseau, 
for  example,  expresses  his  loathing  for  civilisation  and  his 
desire  to  return  to  primitive  conditions,  he  is  not  longing  for 
the  savagery  and  lack  of  cultivation  characteristic  of  primitive 
man,  but  aspires  merely  to  restore  primitive  simplicity  (the 
type,  that  is  to  say)  in  conjunction  with  the  higher  evolution. ^ 

1  In  a  study  of  Bismarck  (1871),  Mihailovskii,  quite  in  Comte's  manner, 
formulates  the  following  aphoristic  scheme  :  I  Absolutism,  Theology  War, 
Regime  of  Great  Landed  Proprietorship  II  Constitutional  Monarchy,  Meta- 
physics and  Professional  D  xterity,  Stock  Exchange,  Regime  of  Capital  ; 
III  Science,  Right  to  Work    and  Duty  to  Work. 

»  An  example  may  make  the  matter  clearer.  Mihailovskii  holds  that 
economically  England  is  on  a  higher  level  than  Russia,  but  that  as  type  Russia 
is  higher  than  England.  When  Tolstoi  said  that  the  melody,  Back  to  Mother 
Volga,  was  loftier  than  any  of  Beethoven's  symphonies,  the  assertion  was 
true  of  the  type,  not  of  the  stage  of  development. 


148  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

The  idea  of  Vico's  recurrences  i^ricorsi)  is  reduced  by  Mihaii- 
ovskii  to  the  simple  conviction  that  the  social  principles  given 
to  man  by  nature  necessarily  enter  into  strife  one  with 
another  (as  we  see,  in  the  modern  age,  in  the  struggle  between 
authority  and  criticism),  and  that  ultimately  one  of  these 
principles  secures  general  validit}^  as  the  principle  of  authority 
has  done  in  science,  and  so  on. 

Mihailovskii  likewise  applies  his  three  stages  in  the  domain 
of  economics.  Society  is  for  him  the  organisation  of  labour, 
society  is  a  working  and  co-operating  society. 

•  In  the  first  stage,  according  to  Mihailovskii,  simple 
co-operation  is  dominant,  a  number  of  individuals  working 
side  by  side  and  together  for  the  same  practical  end.  From 
the  very  first  these  individuals  are  differently  endowed  and 
differ  in  the  extent  of  their  training  ;  but  even  at  this  stage 
there  are  manifest  the  first  and  still  inconspicuous  consequences 
of  co-operation,  in  the  form  of  the  division  of  labour.  Division 
of  labour,  however,  does  not  become  well  marked  until  the 
second  stage.  This  "  eccentric  "  stage  is  not  characterised 
-  by  any  aim  tending  to  unite  men,  by  any  human  aim  ;  theory 
and  practice  are  severed  ;  the  division  of  labour  is  perfected  ; 
the  individual  becomes  one-sided  and  a  mere  organ  of  society  ; 
man  ceases  to  be  a  complete  man,  and  therefore  ceases  to  be 
man.  Not  until  the  coming  of  the  third  stage,  the  subjective 
anthropocentric  stage,  does  man  return  to  the  type  of  simple 
cooperation,  but  does  so  upon  a  higher  plane  of  evolution. 
"•Man  for  mankind,  everything  for  mankind,"  becomes  the 
saving  password. 

In  the  domain  of  knowledge,  the  fully  developed  human 
being  is  presented  to  us  as  "  the  profane  one."  He  is  the 
positivist  philosopher  who  has  renounced  metaphysics  and 
theology,  and  who  endeavours  to  cognise  those  things  only 
which  are  within  his  mental  grasp.  He  is  the  positively 
trained  man  of  culture  in  contradistinction  to  men  of  profes- 
sional dexterit}'  and  the  one-sided  specialists  of  earlier  days. 

§  122. 

MIHAILOVSKII  was  compelled  to  consider  Darwin's 
theory  of  evolution,  for  this  theory  was  interwoven 
with  the  leading  social  and  pohtical  problems,  not  only  by 
Marx   and   Engels,   but   also   by   the   Darwinists   and     their 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  149 

opponents.  History  and  the  philosophy  of  history  were 
extended  to  cover  biology,  zoology,  and  cosmology ;  and 
conversely  the  theory  of  evolution  in  the  world  of  natural 
science  influenced  history  and  the  history  of  philosophy. 
Mihailovskii  was  very  keenly  aware  of  this  mutual  relationship. 

Mihailovskii  examined  Darwinism  and  Darwinistic  litera- 
ture to  ascertain  whether  the  theory  of  the  struggle  for  existence 
must  be  applied  to  human  society  to  justify  struggle,  or  at 
least  to  show  that  struggle  was  inevitable.  He  admitted 
that  struggle  was  characteristic  of  nature,  of  the  animal  world, 
but  since  he  would  not  admit  the  applicability  of  the  analogical 
method  to  sociology,  he  considered  that  biology  could  not 
furnish  any  sociological  deductions.  He  accepted  the  Dar- 
winian theory  in  large  part,  was  willing  to  admit  that  man  is 
an  animal,  of  animal  origin,  but  did  not  think  that  this  made 
it  necessary,  as  he  once  put  it,  to  regard  man  as  a  beast. 
Experience  showed  him  that  the  struggle  for  existence  has 
indeed  a  place  in  human  society,  but  it  also  taught  him  that 
man,  recognising  the  harmfulness  of  the  struggle  for  existence, 
endeavours  to  mitigate  it  and  to  put  an  end  to  it. 

When  he  speaks  of  struggle  in  societ}/,  Mihailovskii  thinks 
not  merely  of  war,  but  also,  and  still  more,  of  the  continuous 
struggle  enduring  for  entire  epochs  between  the  rich  and 
powerful  on  the  one  hand  and  the  poor  and  weakly  on  the 
other.  In  this  matter  he  accepts  the  view  of  the  socialists, 
who  desire  to  put  an  end  to  the  social  struggle  of  the  capitaHst 
era  with  its  highly  elaborated  system  of  the  division  of 
labour. 

Like  Marx  and  the  other  sociahsts,  Mihailovskii  discerns 
in  history  a  degenerative  development  of  egoism  as  contrasted 
with  the  temporarily  weakened  altruism  of  mankind  ;  it  is 
insatiable  covetousness  which  sphts  society  into  the  two  camps 
of  rich  and  poor,  of  workers  and  rulers. 

According  to  Mahailovskii,  Darwinism  does  not  explain 
the  social  division  of  labour.  Spencer  attempted  to  identify 
the  physiological  differentiation  of  the  various  organs  of  the 
individual  with  the  differentiation  of  individuals  in  the  capi- 
talistic epoch.  Mihailovskii  considers  that  such  an  identifi- 
cation is  impossible  ;  the  facts  with  which  we  have  to  deal 
in  the  two  cases  are  of  distinct  categories,  and  analogy  is  no 
proof.  Moreover,  Darwinism  affords  an  explanation  of  the 
differentiation  of  species  only,  not  of  individual  differentiation. 


150  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

Mihailovskii  accepts  the  general  law  of  evolution,  in 
accordance  wherewith  organised  matter  becomes  ever  more 
complex  and  the  sum  of  individual  energies  and  capacities 
continually  increases.  The  increasing  complexity  consists  in 
this,  that  the  number  of  the  organs  increases,  that  the  differ- 
ences between  them  become  more  marked,  and  that  physio- 
logical division  of  labour  (i.e.  the  differentiation  of  organs 
for  special  functions)  becomes  more  effective.  Social  division 
of  labour,  however,  as  history  shows,  is  not  a  natural  law  ; 
it  is  an  empirical  law,  a  social  and  historical  law  applicable 
to  a  particular  epoch,  and  the  division  of  labour  can  therefore 
be  replaced  by  simple  cooperation. 

Liberalism,  with  its  false  doctrine  of  the  necessity  for  free 
competition,  might  endeavour  to  turn  Darwinism  to  account. 
But,  with  Louis  Blanc  and  the  other  socialists,  Mihailovskii 
shows  that  as  far  as  the  workers  are  concerned,  liberty  and 
free  competition  do  not  entail  freedom  but  slavery.  To 
liberalism,  therefore,  he  counterposes  socialism,  which  demands 
equality,  including  economic  equality  ;  and  he  proposes  to 
replace  the  division  of  labour,  with  its  differentiation  of  indi- 
viduals, by  the  simple  cooperation  of  fully  cultured  individuals, 
of  individuals  whose  cultivation  is  persistently  maintained. 
Free  competition,  being  in  truth  anarchy  and  slavery,  must 
be  abolished, 

Darwinism  is  conceived  aristocratically  and  plutocratic- 
ally,  not  democratically.  Mihailovskii  therefore  shows  that 
the  boasted  democracy  of  the  natural  sciences  (an  idea  which 
appealed  to  many  socialists)  has  no  absolute  validity.  Sociology, 
history,  and  scientific  philosophy  may  be  democratic.  "  All 
roads  lead  to  Rome,"  says  Mihailovskii.  He  admits,  too, 
that  the  natural  sciences,  by  weakening  theology,  by  estab- 
lishing the  doctrine  of  the  natural  equality  of  men,  and  by 
favouring  the  spread  of  modern  industry  and  technique,  may 
have  exercised  a  democratising  influence  in  the  era  before 
the  great  revolution.  But  he  considers  Buckle  to  be  wrong 
in  maintaining  that  natural  science  is  essentially  democratic. 

Looking  at  the  matter  subjectively,  Mihailovskii  contends 
that  it  is  a  universalised  aspiration  of  modern  man  to  abolish 
the  division  of  labour  ;  the  modern  human  being  energetically 
desires  to  become  a  complete  individuality,  to  make  an  end 
of  the  partiaUties  and  incompletenesses  that  are  entailed  by 
the  enforced  division  of  labour.     The  aspiration  is  justifiable. 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  151 

and  does  not  conflict  with  innate  altruism  ;  on  the  contrary, 
altruism  will  first  become  possible  in  a  society  of  fully  developed 
individuals,  of  individuahties.  Mihailovskii  considers  that 
the  struggle  for  individuality  comprises  the  main  content 
of  human  history  and  development  ;  this  struggle  corresponds 
to  the  social  ideal  of  the  abolition  of  the  division  of  labour, 
of  the  process  by  which  the  individual  is  damaged,  restricted, 
subdivided.  The  division  of  labour  must  yield  place  to  simple 
cooperation  on  the  part  of  fully  developed  human  beings. 

"  Our  human  ego  is  not  something  single  and  undivided;  it 
is  not  an  '  ego,'  it  is  a  '  we.'  But  the  members  of  this  plural 
have  long  since,  by  the  process  of  organic  evolution,  been 
reduced  to  the  level  of  completely  subordinated  individuals, 
whose  independent  significance  is  merged  in  the  consciousness 
of  the  whole."  Spencer,  the  opponent  of  socialism,  might 
be  content  with  this  declaration.  Here,  as  so  often,  Mihai- 
lovskii's  thought  is  far  too  biological,  so  that  he  himself  lapses 
into  the  detested  objective  method.  The  lack  of  clearness 
is  connected  with  the  fact  that,  as  regards  consciousness, 
Mihailovskii  adopts  the  alleged  explanation  furnished  by 
Haeckel,  Maudsley,  and  others,  which  assumes  man  to  comprise 
within  himself  numerous  subjects  and  consciousnesses  which 
are  hierarchically  subordinated  to  the  whole  ;  this  whole  is 
self-conscious,  and  carries  out  its  will  as  a  unified  undivided  ego. 

In  this  connection  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to  the  concept 
of  individuality.  Mihailovskii  does  not  apply  this  term 
merel}''  to  the  isolated  human  individual,  as  individuality, 
seeing  that  to  him  the  family,  the  class,  the  state,  the  folk, 
etc.,  are  likewise  individualities — "  egocentric  "  individualities 
fighting  for  their  individuality, 

Mihailovskii's  aim  is  to  fuse  Proudhon  with  Louis  Blanc, 
to  effect  a  harmonious  combination  of  individuaUsm  and 
socialism.  With  this  end  in  view,  he  gives  the  following 
formula  of  progress.  "  Progress  is  the  gradational  approxi- 
mation to  the  totality  of  individuals,  to  the  maximum  possible 
and  most  comprehensive  division  of  labour  among  the  organs 
and  to  the  minimum  possible  division  of  labour  among 
men.  Immoral,  unjust,  injurious,  and  irrational,  is  ever3'thing 
tending  to  arrest  this  movement.  Moral,  just,  rational,  and 
useful,  are  those  things  alone  which  lessen  the  diversity  of 
society  while  thereby  increasing  the  diversity  of  the  individual 
members  of  society." 


152  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Bej^ond  the  limits  of  this  formula,  saj^s  Mihailovskii,  no 
compromise  is  possible  between  the  interests  of  the  individual 
and  those  of  society  ;  beyond  the  limits  of  this  formula,  no 
end  can  be  secured  for  the  wearisome  struggle  between  these 
respective  interests. 

All  formulas  of  this  character,  preciselj^  because  they  are 
so  extremely  generalised,  are  liable  to  divergent  interpretations  ; 
and  this  criticism  is  especially  applicable  to  Mihailovskii's 
formula  owing  to  the  deliberate  vagueness  of  its  terminology 
(e.g.  the  use  of  the  expressions  "  maximum  possible  "  and 
"  minimum  possible ").  Lavrov  contested  the  validity  of 
the  formula,  saying  that  it  did  not  deal  with  the  actual  facts 
of  evolution  ;  it  was  negative  ;  it  merely  prescribed  what 
history  ought  not  to  have  been.  Later  critics,  adherents  as 
well  as  opponents  of  Mihailovskii,  have  refused  to  accept  the 
formula.  Mihailovskii  himself  seems  to  have  been  aware 
of  its  vagueness,  for  he  frequently  returns  to  the  subject  with 
elucidations  and  amplifications.  Interesting  is  Mihailovskii's 
relationship  to  Durkheim,  who,  following  Comte,  regards  the 
modern  division  of  labour  as  the  most  important  factor  in 
recent  history  and  as  the  foundation  of  social  solidarity.  The 
possibility  of  this  sociological  conception  and  valuation  of 
the  division  of  labour  compelled  Mihailovskii  to  revise  and 
supplement  his  formula.  Durkheim 's  De.  la  division  du 
travail  social  was  published  in  1893.  Criticising  the  work 
in  1897,  Mihailovskii  wrote,  in  definite  opposition  to  Durkheim, 
that  the  social  division  of  labour  must  be  conceived  as  in- 
volving class  differences  and  class  contrasts.  But  it  is  open 
to  question  whether  the  emendation  can  save  the  formula  or 
free  it  from  ambiguity. 

§  123. 

FOR  the  history  of  philosophy,  at  least  for  the  two  earlier 
epochs,  Mihailovskii  contents  himself  M'ith  the  most 
abstract  formulas.  He  reviews  the  work  of  Louis  Blanc, 
Vico,  Comte,  etc.,  drafts  his  schemata,  supplements  or  modifies 
in  various  respects  what  he  has  culled  from  these  authorities. 
It  is  needless  to  go  into  fuller  detail  here,  though  I  may 
mention  in  passing  that  Mihailovskii  assumes  that  after  the 
first  development  of  man  from  the  animal  world  there  was  a 
period  wherein  no  cooperation  was  practised  He  was  greatly 
interested  in  studies  dealing  with  the  primitive  forms  of  marriage 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  153 

(by  Bachofen  and  others),  and  in  works  on  the  law  of  popula- 
tion, but  did  not  upon  these  subjects  utter  definitive  views  of 
his  own.  As  in  so  many  other  questions,  it  sufficed  him  to 
gain  a  general  scientific  outlook. 

Were  we  to  enter  into  a  fuller  criticism  of  his  views,  we 
should  have  to  ask  whether  Mihailovskii  had  rightly  understood 
the  evolution  of  the  division  of  labour  and  the  significance  of 
that  process,  and  we  should  have  to  enquire  whether  the 
abolition  of  the  division  of  labour  has  the  fundamental  import- 
ance that  Mihailovskii  ascribes  to  it.  Marx  looked  forward 
to  such  an  aboHtion  in  the  societ}^  of  the  future,  but  to  him 
the  matter  was  of  no  more  than  secondary  importance.  Closer 
study  of  the  subject  is  requisite.  With  Bficher  and  others 
we  may  distinguish  between  several  kinds  of  division  of  labour  ; 
we  must  clearly  recognise  that  the  injurious  eftects  of  division 
of  labour  are  largely  dependent  ■  upon  the  undue  length  of 
the  working  day,  and  so  on. 

No  more  than  a  passing  reference  can  be  made  to  all  these 
questions,  for  I  desire  to  do  no  more  than  indicate  the  leading 
defects  of  Mihailovskii's  periodic  subdivision  of  the  stages  of 
evolution.  His  distinction  of  the  three  stages  as  objective 
anthropocentric,  eccentric,  and  subjective  anthropocentric, 
was  a  failure. 

In  early  days  man  was  objectivist,^  for  he  did  not,  like 
Descartes,  deliberately  make  his  own  consciousness  the  starting 
point  of  his  theory  and  practice  ;  man  had  a  naive  belief  in 
the  outer  world,  wherein  his  thoughts  and  feelings  were  wholly 
immersed.  Nevertheless,  and  indeed  for  this  very  reason, 
he  was  a  (naive)  anthropomorphist  and  mythologer,  as  we 
learned  in  §  41A.  The  rpiddle  ages  had  not  become  "  eccen- 
tric "  ;'  what  Mihailovskii  talks  of  as  eccentric  is  nothing  more 
than  the  objective  anthropomorphic  stage  ;  there  is  no  dis- 
tinction here  between  the  middle  ages  and  the  earlier  epoch. 
Besides,  the  duaHsm  of  body  and  soul  is  by  no  means 
characteristic  of  the  middle  ages. 

Equally  unsatisfactory  is  Mihailovskii's  characterisation  of 
the  subjective  anthropocentric  era.  He  supplements  his 
study  of  Louis  Blanc's  philosophy  of  history  by  an 
accurate  estimate  of  Descartes'  subjectivism  ;  but  he  fails 
to  distinguish  adequately  between  epistemological  and  critical 
subjectivism,  on  the  one  hand,  and  sentimental  or  "  roman- 
ticist "    subjectivism,    on   the   other.      In   both   respects   the 


154  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

anthropocentrism  of  such  a  philosopher  as  Fichte  was  some- 
thing very  different  from  the  anthropocentrism  of  the  medieval 
and  classical  philosophers.     I  can  but  refer  again  to  §  41A. 

Just  as  little  as  Lavrov,  does  Mihailovskii  attain  to  a 
ps3'chological  grasp  of  the  difficulties  which  his  predecessors, 
Bakunin,  B^linskii,  and  others,  had  had  in  their  dealings  with 
the  subjectivism  of  German  idealism.  For  all  his  perspicacity 
and  circumspection,  Mihailovskii  shows  here  his  lack  of 
adequate  insight  in  the  psychological  and  the  philosophico- 
historical  fields.  He  has  not  grasped  the  epistemological 
significance  of  German  idealism,  despite  his  own  excursions 
(immediately  to  be  discussed)  into  the  same  domain  of  thought. 
.Mihailovskii's  defects  arise  out  of  his  positivism. 


§  1^4- 

MIHAILOVSKII  contemplates  chiefly  the  modern  age, 
the  present  day,  having  far  less  interest  in  the  earlier 
periods  of  history.  With  Comte,  he  considers  that  the  modern 
age  is  the  historical  transition  to  the  desired  social  reconstruc- 
tion. 

Following  Comte,  he  characterises  the  epoch  of  transition 
as  anarchist,  exaggeratedly  individualistic,  and  sceptical. 
Like  Comte  (and  like  Louis  Blanc  and  the  Fi:ench  in  general), 
he  considers  that  the  decomposition  of  the  Catholic-feudal 
middle  age  begins  with  Protestantism,  with  Luther,  and  in 
philosophy  with  Descartes,  whose  "  cogito  ergo  sum  "  gives 
expression  to  a  one-sided  and  overstrained  indiyiduahsm. 
Descartes  is  already  sceptical,  but  ]\Iontaigne  is  the  true  spokes- 
man of  the  sceptical  spirit.  Then  came  the  eighteenth  century, 
with  Voltaire,  the  encyclopaedists,  and  the  materialists,  the 
age  of  rationalist  enhghtenment,  whereby  the  old  medieval 
philosoph}-  and  morality  were  definitively  uprooted.  The 
great  revolution  brought  this  negative  and  destructive  epoch 
to  a  close,  being  itself  the  transition  to  a  new  organic  epoch. 

In  Mihailovskii's  terminology  the  revolution  constitutes 
the  transition  from  the  eccentric  to  the  subjective  anthropo- 
centric  modern  age  ;  tue  revolution  is  the  beginning  of  the 
modern  age.  In  connection  with  this  philosophico-historical 
construction,  I  must  refer  to  what  has  previously  been  said  • 
concerning  his  philosophy  of  history ;  the  Comtist  formula 
has  replaced  his  own,  for  there  is  really  no  difference  between 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  155 

the  two  ;  the  characterisation  of  the  period  of  transition,  in 
especial,  is  purely  Comtist.  Hence  Mihailovskii  has  to  make 
use  of  Comte's  terminology.  The  designations  subjectivism, 
individualism,  anarchism,  scepticism,  and  metaphysics,  are 
all  taken  bodil}'  from  Comte. 

This  close  adhesion  to  the  views  of  Comte  leads  us  to  the 
question  how  we  are  to  apply  to  Russia  Comte's  subdivision 
of  historical  epochs.  Mihailovskii  is  far  too  fond  of  speaking 
of  the  Catholic  and  feudal  middle  age  of  the  west  ;  he  accepts 
the  world-historical  importance  of  Protestantism  and  the 
great  revolution.  But  has  the  revolution,  have  Protestantism, 
feudalism,  and  Catholicism,  the  same  world-wide  significance 
for  Russia  ?  Comte  considered  that  his  classification  into 
epochs  was  universally  applicable,  and  he  utilised  it  for  the 
explanation  of  human  evolution  in  its  entirety.  To  Mihailovskii, 
however,  fell  the  task  of  discovering  how  to  apply  the  formula 
to  Russia.  On  one  occasion,  referring  to  the  relationship 
between  Russia  and  western  Europe,  he  said  that  the  Russians 
disported  themselves  like  a  cook  who  had  been  given  an  old 
hat  by  her  mistress.  If  we  look  to  the  philosophico-historical 
significance  underlying  the  sarcasm,  the  meaning  would  seem 
to  be  that  Russia  is  following  the  same  developmental  course 
as  the  west.  We  shall  learn,  however,  that  Mihailovskii 
likewise  defended  the  view  that  Russia  might  evolve  differently 
from  Europe.  But,  for  this  very  reason,  an  exposition  of 
the  universal  vahdity  of  Comte's  historical  epochs  might  have 
been  useful. 

Mihailovskii  assumes  that  the  political  problem,  the 
question  of  political  freedom,  has  been  solved  by  the  revolution  ; 
but  that  the  question  of  social  equalit}-,  the  bread  question, 
has  not  been  solved.  However,  in  his  opinion,  by  1840  the 
problem  had  become  ripe  for  solution. 

According  to  Mihailovskii,  the  complete  freedom  demanded 
by  the  revolution  took  the  form  of  anarchy.      Men  rejected 
supernatural   and   theological   traditions,    and   devoted   them- 
selves to  observation  and  experiment,  but  economic  freedom  w^as 
not  established  in  conjunction  with  theoretical  freedom.     Liber- 
alism is  inadequate.      "  Mankind,"  solemnl\^  proclaiming  the 
;  rights  of  man  as  the  eighteenth  century  drew  to  its  close, 
:  assumed  the  lineaments  of  the  petty  bourgeois,  covetous  and 
small  minded.      This  bourgeois  was  an  enthusiast  for  freedom 
jOf  thought,  and  demanded  political  freedom,  but  was  a  con- 


156  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

vinced  defender  of  serfdom  ;  he  favoured  political  freedom, 
but  defended  the  monarch}^  because  liberalism  pushed  him 
onwards  toward  republican  forms.  The  liberal  bourgeois  was 
delighted  with  Darwin's  doctrine,  because  it  enabled  him  to 
adduce  scientific  proof  in  support  of  his  inward  conviction 
that  inequality  was  a  most  useful  institution. 

In  Russia  during  the  forties  the  social  question  was  brought 
to  the  front  with  the  appearance  of  "  the  aristocrat  doing 
penance  "  (the  phrase  is  Mihailovskii's  own).  Isolated  speci-' 
mens  had  appeared  at  an  earlier  date,  but  in  the  epoch  of  the 
forties  he  first  appeared  on  the  historic  stage  as  a  mass 
phenomenon.  During  the  sixties  aristocrats  of  this  type 
became  a  notable  historical  factor,  mingling  with  the  raznocincy, 
that  is  to  say,  with  men  from  the  lower  strata  of  society  belonging 
to  the  most  varied  professional  classes  and  differing  greatly 
in  the  extent  of  their  possessions,  who  had  been  called  to 
social  activity  by  the  reforms.  ^ 

The  modern  Russian  woman  is  for  Mihailovskii  a  notable 
sign  of  the  times.  IMihailovskii  warns  us  against  regarding 
the  woman's  question  as  the  principal  question  of  the  fifties 
and  the  sixties  ;  the  new  women,  he  saj's,  are  among  the 
"  aristocrats  doing  penance  "  ;  the  new  women  take  their 
places  among  the  new  men.  Mihailovskii  insists  that  there 
were  no  raznocinc}'  among  the  new  women,  and  that  the 
ideas  of  the  raznocincy  had  but  little  influence  upon  new 
women. 

Mihailovskii  is  very  serious  and  extremeh^  definite  in  the 
enunciation  of  his  views  concerning  love  and  marriage.  Off- 
spring, he  says,  are  not  the  aim  of  marriage,  but  merely  one 
of  its  consequences.  Love,  he  contends,  'has  phj/sical  roots, 
but  psychological  blossoms.  A  successful  marriage  will  not 
interfere  with  the  aspiration  for  individuality. 


§125. 

MIHAILOVSKII  rejects  economic  liberalism  because  this 
doctrine  leads  in  the  end  to  Stirner's  egoistic  individu- 
alism., to  social  atomism.  He  is  not  unsym.pathetic  towards 
certain  representatives  of  the  ethical  trend  of  political  economy 
and  tov/ards  some  of  the  so  called  professorial  socialists,  but 

»  Mihailovskii   instances   Pisarcv   as   an   aristocrat   doing   penance,    whilst 
he  regarded  RSSetnikov  as  a  literary  raznocinec. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  157 

his  formula  for  the  solution  of  the  social  question  (the  abolition 
of  the  division  of  labour  by  simple  cooperation)  has  a  purely 
socialist  foundation.      His  socialism,  however,  is  not  Marxist. 
We  have  already  seen  that  Mihailovskii  does  not  accept 
I  economic    materialism.      He    rejects,    further,    the    positivist 
!  objectivism  and  the  amoralism  of  the  Marxists  ;    nor  does  he, 
j  like  Marx  and  the  Marxists,  provide  for  socialism  a  necessary 
and  exclusively  historical  foundation.     Mihailo\'skii  is  a  sub- 
jectivist,  and  his  socialism  liaj  an  ethical  foundation  ;    in  his 
treatment  of  history  he  elucidai:es  the  social  mischief  which 
has   been   effected   under   the   regime   of   liberalism.     Despite 
his   socialism,   and   qua   socialist,    Mihailovskii   fights   for   the 
rights  of  individuality.      The  loss  of  individuality,  the  impossi- 
bility   for    the    average    man    to    develop    his    individuality 
completely,  de-individualisation — this  is  for  him  the  crowning 
evil  of  the  capitalist  division  of  labour,  and  of  the  capitalist 
economic  oppression  of  the  masses. 

Mihailovskii  prizes  Marx's  sociology  more  than  he  prizes 
that  writer's  economics.  He  considers  that  Marx  was  still 
'far  too  much  influenced  by  the  unsound  conception  of  the 
'■  abstract  man  by  which  the  thought  of  Adam  Smith,  Ricardo, 
and  the  other  classical  economists,  was  dominated.  Speaking 
generally,  Mihailovskii  censures  the  economists  for  undue 
tendency  to  abstraction,  objecting  above  all  to  the  concept 
oi  national  wealth  as  an  abstract  figment  in  whose  name 
individuality  is  stifled.  It  is  for  this  reason,  says  Mihailovskii, 
that  the  liberal  political  economists  never  carried  the  principle 
of  individualism  to  its  logical  conclusion.  Like  Comte,  he 
refuses  to  regard  political  economy  as  the- leading  and  deter- 
minative constituent  of  social  science,  for  he  looks  upon  it 
as  a  discipline  subordinate  to  sociology,  one  whose  function 
it  is  to  discuss  a  variety  of  social  reciprocity,  namely  economic 
reciprocity. 

Mihailovskii  wrote  freely  in  support  of  his  campaign  against 
"  the  disciples  "  (i.e.  the  'followers  of  Marx),  but  it  cannot  be 
said  that  he  settled  his  account  with  Marxism  adequately. 
I  His  polemic  against  the  Marxists  brought  Mihailovskii 
into  closer  personal  relationships  with  the  narodniki,  and 
eventually  he  became  one  of  the  collaborators  on  their  literary 
organ.  But  we  cannot  term  him  a  narodnik,  even  though 
,some  have  wished  to  describe  him  as  a  representative  of  the 
'"critical  narodnicestvo."     He  blames  the  narodniki  for  their 


158  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

failure  to  direct  their  interest  towards  all  sides  of  social  life, 
and  for  their  narrowness  in  regarding  the  folk  as  consisting  of 
miiziks  alone.  To  Miliailovskii,  the  folk  was  the  entirety 
of  the  working  classes  of  society,  and  he  therefore  was  decisively 
opposed  to  Voroncov's  unsympathetic  attitude  towards  the 
intelligentsia,  whilst  he  rejected  the  liberal  and  bourgeois 
identification  of  the  folk  with  tlie  nation — the  political  nation. 
But  he  never  forgot  that  the  enormous  majority  of  Russians 
are  muziks,  and  that  for  this  reason  political  and  social  activities 
must  be  mainly  concentrated  upon  the  muzik. 

When  he  spoke  of  the  intelligentsia  he  was  thinking  of 
the  scientifically  and  artistically  cultured  members  of  the 
community.  This  intelligentsia,  liberal  and  progressive  in 
its  political  and  social  ideals,  though  detached  from  the  folk, 
honestly  devotes  itself  to  the  service  of  the  folk,  and  with 
the  judgment  as  well  as  with  the  emotions.  The  intelligentsia, 
therefore,  consisting  of  workers,  of  persons  who  are  working 
on  behalf  of  the  folk,  must  be  sharply  distinguished  from  the 
bourgeoisie,  for  the  bourgeoisie  is  composed  of  non-workers, 
it  is  the  class  of  those  who  pay  the  workers. 

Mihailovskii's  views  concerning  the  mir  and  the  artel 
resembled  those  of  his  predecessors,  and  he  was  at  one  with 
the  narodniki  in  holding  that  these  institutions,  being  of  a 
social  nature,  must  be  preserved.  Mihailovskii,  however,  laid 
less  stress  than  did  some  of  the  narodniki  upon  the  social 
significance  of  the  mir,  precisely  because  his  sociaHsm  was 
less  exclusively  based  upon  the  economic  system.  This  is 
manifest,  likewise,  in  his  utterances  concerning  the  manual 
v/orkers.  Mihailovskii  censures  the  Marxist  intellectuals  for 
their  tendency  to  exalt  labour  over  the  labourer.  In  his  view, 
neither  the  operatives  nor  the  mu?iks  were  to  be  regarded 
as  constituting  the  entire  folk. 

Mihailovskii  was  opposed  to  capitalism.  As  we  are  aware, 
he  considered  that  the  division  of  labour,  with  its  antisocial 
consequences,  was  the  outcome  of  capitalism ;  whereas  the 
narodniki  held  less  decisive  views  upon  this  matter.  Some  of 
Mihailovskii's  strictures  upon  the  capitahsation  and  indus- 
trialisation of  agrarian  Russia  have  been  declared  reactionary. 
The  interpretation  is  unsound.  We  must  keep  in  mind 
Mihailovskii's  fundamental  philosophic  and  sociological  doc- 
trines, for  these  give  the  true  meaning  to  his  concrete  and 
practical    declarations.      Mihailovskii    never    failed    to    apply 

i 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  150 

[  his  ethical  measure   to  economic   development,   to   apply  it, 

1  that  is  to  say,  to  the  individual  men  who  were  conducting 

!  economic  development.^ 

Mihailovskii    found    the    correct    answer    to    the    question 

!  whether  Russia  had  or  had  not  yet  become  a  capitalist  country. 
In  Europe,  he  said,  capitalism  was  not  so  completely  dominant 
as  the  narodniki  maintained  (Mihailovskii  was  criticising  the 
views  of  Voroncov).  In  Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
development  of  capitahsm  had  proceeded  a  great  deal  further 
than  the  narodniki  were  wilhng  to  admit. = 

Mihailovskii  beheved  that  it  might  be  possible  for  Russia 
to  overleap  the  middle  stage  of  European  evolution,  that  of 
the  bourgeois  state,  and  to  attain  forthwith  the  higher  phase 
of    poHtical  and  social  order.     Writing  in   1880,  he  said  this 

'  development  was  theoretically  conceivable,  but  that  its 
hkelihood   was     daily  diminishing. 3 

^  Here  is  a  characteristic  sentence  from  an  economic  report  of  the  year 
1S72  :    "  True  freedom,  rightly  organised  and  useful  industry,  honest  financial 
combination,  the  construction  of  necessary  railway's,  genuine  self-government, 
cannot  be  opposed  to  the  interests  of  the  folk,  or,  and  this  is  the  same  thing, 
cannot  be  opposed  to  the  interests  of    labour."       True,  useful,  honest,  neces- 
sary, genuine — these  and  similar  epithets  show  what  were  Mihailovskii's  views 
^  upon  industrial  development.     Nor  must  we  forget  that  for  him  the  folk  did 
;  not  signify  the  agriculturists  alone.      We  see  in  the  passage  just  quoted  that 
:  he  accepts  the  definition  of  the  concept  folk  which  he  has  taken  from  western 
socialist  science. 

'  Mihailovskii  found  much  to  say  about  the  leading  narodniki,  and  especi- 
^  ally  about  Voroncov  and  Nikolai-on.  With  perfect  justice  he  wholly  con- 
!  demned  Juzov  ;  but  he  approves  the  sociological  works  of  Juiakov. 

3  In  1877  Mihailovskii  defended  Marx  against  a  Russian  critic  (Carl 
.Marx  before  the  Tribunal  of  I.  2ukovskii).  He  here  mooted  the  question 
'  whether  Russia,  now  enlightened  by  INIarx  concerning  the  capitaUst  evolution 
'  of  the  west,  must  necessarily  follow  the  same  course.  Accepting  Marx's 
i  description   of   European   evolution,    he   enquired    whether   Russia   might   not 

•  take  warning  by  this'  development.  As  shown  above,  he  made  a  distinction 
between  historic  determinism  and  fatalism.  He  held,  therefore,  that  a  Russian 
disciple  of  Marx  could  not  be  content  to  look  on  quietly  at  his  country's 
evolution.  It  was  necessary  for  the  onlooker  to  take  a  side,  he  must  make  up 
his  mind  whether  he  was  to  rejoice  at  the  capitalisation  of  the  still  medieval 
economy  of  Russia,  to  rejoice  despite  all  the  evils  attendant  on  the  process, 
to  rejoice  in  the  break  up  of  the  medieval  mir  and  artel  and  of  the  system  of 
common  property  in  the  soil  and  the  instruments  of  production  ;  or  whether 
he  would  deplore  these  developments  and  seek  to  resist  them  to  the  uttermost. 
Quoting  Marx's  polemic  against  Herzen  (in  the  first  edition  of  Capital)  Mihai- 
lovskii defended  Herzen's  view  that  Russia  could  traverse  an  e\-olution  sui 
generis,   but  did    not  surrender  to  slavophilism,   and    did  not  ascribe   to   the 

•  Russian  folk  any  mystic  or  sublime  qualities  peculiar  to  the  Russian  national 
spirit.  The  Russian,  he  said,  must  and  will  learn  from  Europe.  The  man 
who  has  studied  Marx  will  reflect  upon  the  evolutionary  process  to  which 


160  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 


§  126. 

IT  is  not  eas}^  to  ascertain  Mihailovskii's  attitude  in  politica.1 
matters,  and  especially  his  views  concerning  Russian 
refugees  and  the  Russian  revolution,  for  very  few  sources  of  . 
information  on  these  matters  have  as  yet  been  opened.  Of 
late  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  regard  him  as  having  been 
in  truth,  even  though  unofficially,  one  of  the  "  ideologues  " 
of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  whilst  some  declare  that  even  more 
that  Lavrov  he  was  a  leader  of  the  revolution. 

My  own  view  of  Mihailovskii's  relationship  to  practical 
politics  is  formed  by  a  study  of  his  works,  and  these  suggest 
that  his  outlook  was  predominantly  theoretical.  As  a 
sociologist,  of  course,  he  considered  the  political  questions  of 
the  day  ;  as  a  sociahst  and  an  adversary  of  liberalism  he 
favoured  the  radical  trends ;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  he  was 
personally  in  the  revolutionary  camp. 

Such  is  the  general  impression  produced  by  his  writings, 
even  though,  reading  between  the  lines  (as  we  must  do  in  the 
case  of  all  Russians  who  wrote  under  the  pressure  of  the 
censorship),  I  can  discern  passages  containing  extremely 
radical  allusions  to  the  misdeeds  of  powerful  persons,  .It 
does  not  follow  that  Mihailovskii's  influence  was  trifling  because 
he  was  never  banished  to  Siberia.  In  1883,  Pleve  sent 
him  to  Viborg  for  a  speech  he  had  made  to  students  at  a 
ball,  and  it  is  said  that  sharper  measures  were  contemplated. 

Russia  is  subject,  and  if  the  Russians  must  traverse  the  same  route  as  Europe, 
they  can  traverse  it  fully  aware  of  what  they  are  doing.  But  since  Russian 
conditions  differ  from'  those  that  obtain  in  Europe,  the  development  of 
capitahsation  in  Russia  may  prove  peculiar  to  that  country.  Mihailovskii 
drew  attention  to  this  possibility  in  1872,  shortly  after  the  publication  of  the 
Russian  translation  of  Capital.  Marx  wrote  an  answer  to  Mihailovskii,  but 
the  reply  did  not  appear  until  i888,  when  it  was  published  in  the  Russian 
periodical.  The  Legal  Courier,  as  A  Writing  by  Carl  Marx.  Marx  explained 
that  he  had  not  formulated  his  law  of  evolution  as  universally  vaUd,  but  that 
as  soon  as  a  country  had  entered  this  Specific  course  of  development  it  became 
subject  to  the  formulated  laws  of  evolution.  In  each  individual  case  the 
matter  must  be  considered  in  relation  to  the  pecuUarities  of  the  historically 
extant  conditions.  There  was  no  fatal  necessity  about  the  capitalist  develop- 
ment of  Russia,  nor  was  it  essential  that  in  Russia  the  countryfolk  should  be 
proletarianised  in  order  to  become  "  free  "  industrial  workers,  as  had  happened 
in  Europe.  Mihailovskii  referred  to  Marx's  reply  as  late  as  1892,  insisting 
once  more  that  in  view  of  the  special  character  of  Russian  historical  conditions, 
it  was  certainly  possible  that  Russian  evolution  would  take  a  course  peculiar 
to  that  country. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  IGl 

The  opinion  I  have  formed  regarding  Mihailovskii  as 
poHtician,  an  opinion  based  upon  my  first  study  of  his  writings, 
may  now  be  briefly  elucidated  by  an  examination  of  his  ethical 
teachings  and  of  such  clandestine  works  as  are  at  my  disposal. 

Like  Lavrov,  Mihailovskii  assumes  the  unity  of  theory 
and  practice.!  He  refers  to  the  development  of  the  fifties. 
The  younger  Russians  of  that  day  adopted  materialism, 
positivism,  and  reahsm  because,  after  the  experiences  of  the 
Nicolaitan  epoch,  they  wished  to  know  what  the  world  really 
is,  whilst  simultaneously,  and  for  the  same  reason,  they  desired 
to  know  what  the  world  must  become.  Not  merely  did  they 
contemplate  the  world  positivistically,  but  they  wanted  to 
transform  it  in  the  positivist  direction. 

From  the  mutuaUty  of  the  individual  and  of  society  there 
is  deducible,  according  to  Mihailovskii,  but  one  practical 
morahty,  which  is  far  from  being  a  morality  that  implies, 
under  ethical  pretexts,  a  withdrawal  from  social  life.  He 
opposes  recipes  for  self-development  ;  he  opposes  the  comfort- 
able and  cheap  individualism  which  works  "  upon,  in,  over, 
and  under  itself "  (compare  Pisarev's  similar  expression), 
whilst  ignoring  the  folk,  the  working  people.  For  the  same 
reason,  Mihailovskii  rejects  liberalism  because  it  is  concerned 
only  about  the  few.  He  is  not  satisfied  with  political  freedom 
in  default  of  economic  freedom,  for  he  will  not  consent  to  the 
sacrifice  of  millions  of  hungry  proletarians  for  the  sake  of  a 
few  thousand  fat  bourgeois.  For  Mihailovskii  the  only  ethics 
are  socialist  ethics,  and  the  socialist  tests  everything  by  its 
effect  upon  the  workers.  For  Mihailovskii,  therefore,  "  the 
right  of  ethical  judgment  is  per  se  the  right  to  intervene  in 
the  course  of  events,  and  to  this  right  there  corresponds  a  duty, 
the  duty  of  responsibility  for  one's  actions.  The  living  indi- 
vidualit}^  with  all  its  thoughts  and  feelings,  becomes,  at  its 
pwn  risks,  a  factor  in  history." 

The  ethical  struggle  must  therefore  at  the  same  time  be  a 
struggle  for  the  right.  To  Mihailovskii  it  seems  that  the 
motivation  to  this  struggle  is  necessarily  twofold.  The  cam- 
paign on  behalf  of  individuahty,  intervention  in  the  causal 
chain  of  historical  and  social  events,  is  on  the  one  hand 
determined   by   a   sore   conscience,   and   on   the   other   by   an 

^  Mihailovskii  is  fond  of  pointing  out  that  the  Russian  terms  for  the  respec- 
tive concepts  of  truth  and  justice,  pravda  and  spravedlivost',  have  the  same 
primitive  significance. 

12  VOL.    II. 


1C2  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

injured  sense  of  honour.  In  his  study  of  Saltykov,  Mihailovskii 
brings  into  prominence  these  two  fundamental  motives  of 
practical  socialist  ethics.  A  man's  conscience,  he  says,  leaves 
him  no  rest  as  soon  as  he  has  come  to  realise  that  in  one  way 
or  another  he  has  unjustly  exercised  power  over  his  fellow^s  ; 
his  conscience  demands  an  adequate  sacrifice.  If  he  cannot 
change  his  nature  or  his  habits,  it  is  his  duty  to  offer  up  his 
life.  The  sense  of  honour  is  the  awareness  of  needlessly  endured 
affronts  and  constraints,  and  this  therefore  demands,  not  self- 
sacrifice,  but  space  for  all  the  energies  and  ideals  that  have 
hitherto  been  repressed.  If,  from  the  pressure  of  circumstances, 
this  space,  this  satisfaction,  cannot  be  secured,  the  man  whose 
sense  of  honour  has  been  awakened  is  in  this  case  too  impelled 
to  sacrifice  his  life.  Mihailovskii  is  aware  that  this  rigorous 
demand  will  not  always  be  fulfilled  ;  he  knows  that  the  con- 
science and  the  sense  of  honour  are  not  in  every  case  sufficiently 
keen  ;  he  knows  that  compromises  will  be  effected.  There 
are  cases,  again,  when  the  sacrifice  of  life  is  not  required,  and 
when  men  find  satisfaction  in  struggle.  Finally,  in  the  great 
majority  of  men,  conscience  and  the  sense  of  honour  are  not 
awakened  at  all. 

Mihailovskii  enters  a  protest  against  the  criticism  that  his 
concept  of  honour  is  identical  with  the  feudal  and  aristocratic 
"  honneur  "  of  the  days  of  chivalr}^ ;  it  is,  he  contends,  a  new 
and  entirely  different  ethical  sentiment.  Personal  wellbeing 
as  an  ethical  principle,  he  says  in  one  place,  is  old,  and  it  is 
enough  for  the  bourgeois  ;  the  ethics  of  compunction  are  likewise 
old  ;  but  new,  perfectly  new,  is  the  "  sentiment  of  personal 
responsibility  for  one's  own  social  position." 

In  his  study  of  Renan  and  Diihring  (1878),  Mihailovskii 
contrasted  the  idea  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  individual,  the 
democratic  right  of  every  individual  to  political  initiative, 
with  the  oligarchical  and  monarchical  right  of  the  few  or  even 
of  a  single  person,  which  the  bourgeoisie  regards  as  valid.  We 
may  harbour  doubts  concerning  the  way  the  principle  is  formu- 
lated ;  we  may  ask  whether  the  relationship  between  conscience 
and  the  sense  of  honour  be  rightly  conceived ;  but  the 
fundamental  idea  is  sound. ^ 

*  In  the  study  of  Diihring,  Diihring's  theory  of  vengeance  as  the  source 
of  criminal  law  and  of  law  in  genera)  is  described  as  negative,  and  the 
autonomy  of  the  individual  is  asserted  as  a  positive,  as  a  reasonable  demand 
of  democratic  equality,  But  it  is  a  matter  for  examination  how  much  of 
Diihring's  theory  underlies  Mihailovskii's  theory  of  the  sense  of  honour. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  1G3 

When  therefore  the  question  is  mooted,  which  rules  are 
higher,  those  of  individual  morality  or  those  of  social  conduct, 
Mihailovskii  shows  {Letters  Concerning  Truth  and  Untruth, 
1878)  how  the  customary  political  programs  may  lead  indeed 
to  results,  but  not  to  sound  and  just  results.  It  seems  to 
him,  therefore,  that  the  conscience  is  the  only  ultimate  court 
of  appeal.  He  refers  to  the  fortunate  circumstances  in  which 
there  may  be  no  conflict  between  individual  and  social  ideals,. 
but  being  well  aware  that  these  are  no  more  than  fortunate 
.  (i.e.  exceptional)  circumstances,  we  must  continually  reiterate 
the  moral  demand  to  remain  faithful  under  all  circumstances 
to  truth  and  justice. 

Let  us  now  examine  Mihailovskii's  own  political  conduct. 

We  may  recall  that  he  began  to  come  to  the  front  in  the 
literary  world  during  the  early  seventies,  at  the  time  when 
the  far-reaching  and  widely  diffused  literary  movement  was  in 
progress,  paving  the  way  for  and  organising  the  practical 
movement  "  towards  the  people."  His  writings  during  jhis 
first  phase  afforded  sufficient  proof  of  his  socialist  views.  In 
1873,  Lavrov  invited  him  to  collaborate  upon  "  Vpered." 
Mihailovskii  hesitated  for  a  time  whether  he  should  not  leave 
Russia  for  good,  and  make  common  cause  with  Lavrov  ;  but 
in  the  end  he  became  convinced  that,  as  he  expressed  it,  he 
was  no  revolutionary,  and  was  indeed  more  afraid  of  the 
revolution  than  of  the  reaction.     His  political  credo  at  that 

•  time  was,  "  Sit  quiet  and  make  ready."  Mihailovskii  was  a 
Lavrovist  in  that  he  accepted  Lavrov's  propagandism,  whilst 
his  refusal  to  work  with  Lavrov  shows  that  he  had  formed 
a  just  estimate  of  Lavrov's  incapacity  for  leadership. 

Mihailovskii's  views  w^ere  still  apolitical.  This  is  most 
plainly  shown  in  his  criticism  of  Dostoevskii's  The  Devils, 
published  in  the  year  w^e  are  considering  (1873).  Mihailovskii 
therein  declares  that  he  desires  political  freedom,  "  but  if  all 
the  rights  associated  wdth  this  freedom  are  to  be  for  us 
nothing  more  than  a  pretty  and  sweet-smelling  flower,  these 
rights  and  this  freedom  are  things  we  can  dispense  with  ! 
Away  with  them  when  not  merely  do  they  fail  to  provide  for 
us  the  possibility  of  pa5dng  our  debts,  but  when  they  even 

•  contribute  to  swelHng  the  total  of  these  debts  !  "  At  a  later 
date  (1886),  Mihailovskii  declared  that  these  words  were  too 
emphatic,  but  it  would  seem  that  his  views  concerning  the 

-Utiuty  of  politics  had  undergone  a  change.  ^ 


164  '  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Mihailovskii's  socialism,  his  work  for  the  folk  and  above 
all  for  the  peasants,  harmonise  better  with  the  political 
aspirations  which  found  their  climax  in  the  call,  "  Land  and 
Freedom."  I  do  not  know  whether  and  to  what  extent  he 
was  then  connected  with  the  secret  societies,  but  in  1878  he 
wrote  on  behalf  of  "  Nacalo  "  (beginning,  principle),  a  revolu- 
tionary periodical  clandestinely  printed  in  Russia,  a  leaflet 
in  which  the  acquittal  of  Vera  Zasulic  by  the  jury  was  made 
the  occasion  for  the  demand  for  a  constitution  or  for  the 
summoning  of  the  zemski  sobor.  Should  this  demand  not  be 
granted,  a  secret  committee  of  public  safety  must  be  consti- 
tuted. "  Woe,  then,  to  the  fools  who  oppose  the  course  of 
history  !  "  Zasulic  was  represented  as  the  embodiment  of 
the  Russian  conscience  and  the  Russian  idea,  but  Mihailovskii 
emphasised  the  words  which  Zasulic  had  uttered  before  the 
judge  ;  "  It  is  hard  to  raise  one's  hand  against  a  fellow  human 
being." 

•In  1879,  Mihailovskii  published,  in  the  organ  of  the 
Narodnaja  Volja  two  Political  Letters  by  a  Socialist.  They 
were  political  because  he  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
revolutionists  were  mistaken  in  despising  political  work 
because  they  aspired  to  the  social  revolution.  He  reitferated 
his  views  concerning  the  consequences  of  the  French  revolu- 
tion, which  had  indeed  brought  the  constitutionalism  of 
bourgeois  liberalism,  but  had  left  social  inequality.  The 
revolutionaries  were  wrong  in  believing  that  Russia  could 
effect  the  social  revolution  without  the  aid  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
Russia,  he  showed,  was  still  under  the  yoke  of  its  bourgeoisie. 
Alexander  II  would  not  voluntarily  grant  a  constitution  ; 
it  must  be  forced  from  him.  Mihailovskii  therefore  summoned 
the  revolutionaries  to  the  political  struggle.  In  Europe, 
political  freedom  was  proclaimed  after  the  third  estate,  the 
bourgeoisie,  had  already  become  firmly  established  alike 
intellectually  and  materially.  Russia  -must  learn  by  Europe's 
example,  and  must  exact  political  freedom  by  force  before  the 
bourgeoisie  had  in  like  manner  become  firmly  established 
in  Russia.  Mihailovskii  did  not  believe  that  the  Russian 
folk  would  rise  in  revolt ;  and  the  revolutionaries,  the  intelli- 
gentsia, must  therefore  take  up  the  political  struggle.  The 
social  disease  of  Europe  was  caused,  not  by  political  freedom, 
but  by  the  system  of  private  robbery.  The  Russian  eagle 
had  two  heads,  and  with  one  beak  he  tore  political  freedom 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  165 

in  pieces,  whilst  with  the  other  he  gobbled  up  the  peasants. 
"  Aim,  therefore,  at  both  heads  of  the  bird  of  prey  !  Vogue 
la  galere  !  "  *  ' 

Mihailovskii's  writing  was  signed  "  Grognard."  It  cer- 
tainly   lacks    clarity.     What    were    the    revolutionaries    really 

,  to  do  ?  How  were  they  to  conduct  the  desiderated  political 
struggle  side  by  side  with  the  social  struggle  ?  Were  the 
tM^o  campaigns  distinct,  and  if  so  in  what  respect  ? 

The  second  writing  was  somewhat  clearer.  Mihailovskii 
declared  that  he  did  not  himself  feel  able  to  kill  a  human 
being  in  cold  blood,  and  that  he  had  never  thought  it  right 
to  teach  others  who  was  to  be  killed  and  how.  He  desired 
to  undertake  a  logical  investigation,  from  the  outlook  of  those 
who  claimed  a  right  to  kill,  to  ascertain  what  practical  meaning 
the  assassination  of  such  men  as  Mezencev  could  have.  The 
revt)lutionaries  said  that  the  Russian  revolution  was  of  an 
exclusively   social   character.     They   did   not   want   a   consti- 

^  tution,  for  this  would  merely  impose  a  new  yoke  upon  the 
people.  They  contended  that  the  assassinations  were  nothing 
more  than  a  defence  against  spies,  against  the  Mezencevs. 
Blood  must  be  paid  for  with  blood. 

The  reader  will  recall  Stepniak's  theory,  against  which 
Mihailovskii  now  directed  his  arguments.  Mihailovskii  in- 
sisted, in  the  first  place,  that  the  alleged  self-defence  was,  after 
all,  nothing  but  a  political  struggle  ;  the  terrorist  murders 
had  no  specifically  socialist  character  ;  the  same  means  were 
employed  by  aristocrats,  clericalists,  liberals,  intriguers  of  all 
kinds.  Hence,  continued  Mihailovskii,  it  is  not  the  Mezencevs 
who  ought  to  be  killed,  but  the  idea  of  autocracy.  He  there- 
fore demanded  a  poHtical  struggle  of  a  different  kind.  The 
terrorist  method  was  too  episodic  and  unsystematic  ;  there 
was  no  clear  consciousness  at  the  back  of  it  ;  the  revolution- 
ists, he  complained,  understood  how  to  die  but  did  not  wish 
to  live.  His  conclusion  was  that  the  revolutionists  ought  to 
combine  with  the  liberals  for  a  systematic  political  struggle, 
not  a  struggle  waged  on  their  own  behalf,  but  for  the  sake  of  the 
whole  country  and  to  win  the  whole  country.  For  Mihailovskii, 
the  constitutionalist  regime  in  Russia  was  merel}-  a  question 
of  the  morrow,  though  this  morrow,  it  was  true,  would  not 
bring  the  solution  of  the  social  problem.  Human  peace  and 
wellbeing  belonged  to  a  remoter  future. 

Among  other  clandestine  essays  I  must  mention  a  vigorous 


16G  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

criticism  of  Count  Loris-Melikov,  the  "  Asiatic  diplomatist," 
and  the  Open  Letter  of  the  Executive  Vonnnittee  to  Alexander  III. 
In  the  latter  document  an  explanation  is  given  of  the  death 
of  Alexander  II,  and  his  successor  is  exhorted  to  put  an  end 
to  the  revolution  by  granting  complete  amnesty  and  by 
summoning  a  legislative  representative  assembly  of  the  entire 
people. I 

Concerning  Mihailovskii's  relationship  to  the  Narodnaja 
Vol] a  and  its  executive  committee,  we  are  further  enlightened 
by  the  fact  that  he  was  deputed  to  take  part  in  the  negotiations 
with  the  "  Holy  Retinue  "  which  were  conducted  by  Lavrov 
in  1882. 

Mihailovskii  subsequently  wrote  several  more  essays  for 
publication  in  clandestine  journals,  among  which  was  one 
discussing  the  suppression  of  his  review  in  1884.  His  political 
views  do  not  seem  to  have  undergone  any  further  change. 
But  this  point  cannot  be  decided  until  a  completer  edition  of 
his  writings  and  a  collection  of  his  letters  are  available.  In 
the  works  belonging  to  the  close  of  the  eighties  and  subsequent 
years  he  is  partly  engaged  in  his  struggle  with  the  Marxists. 
In  a  letter  of  July  1898  to  Rusanov  (Kudrin),  who  had  been 
a  refugee,  he  deplored  the  effects  of  the  refugee  movement 
by  which  Russia  was  deprived  of  her  young  people.  Mihail- 
ovskii was  inclined  to  regard  this  loss  as  responsible  for  the 
prevailing  mental  chaos  and  for  the  spread  of  Marxism.  The 
end  would  doubtless  come  before  long.  Either  liberal  ten- 
dencies would  gain  the  victory  at  court,  or  else  "  we  shall 
return  to  the  terror  with  its  indefinite  consequences  (though 
I  regard  the  results  of  the  terror  in  the  seventies  as  definite 
enough)."  Rusanov's  explanation  of  Mihailovskii's  allusion 
to  the  indefinite  consequences  of  terrorism  was  that  the 
terrorist  movement  did  not  "  march  consistently  forward 
towards  a  definite  end."  In  1901,  again,  it  seemed  to  Mihail- 
ovskii that  the  return  to  terrorism  was  inevitable.  "  I  cannot 
myself  take  part  in  it,  and  T  cannot  recommend  it  to  others, 
but  it  must  come  sooner  or  later." 

We  sec  that  Mihailovskii  vacillated  from  the  first  between 
theory  and  practice,  between  sociology  and  politics,  between 
constitutionalism  and  revolutionism.  He  condemns  the 
terrorist  revolution  ;    in  his  moral  system  there  is  no  place 

I  This   document,    one    of   considerable   political   importance,    received    its 
definitive  form  in  Mihailovskii's  hands. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  167 

for  Stepniak's  motivation  by  vengeance  ;  but  when  terrorism 
has  become  an  accomphshed  fact  he  recognises  it  as  inevitable, 
and  linds  himself  "  logically  "  compelled  to  rally  to  its  support. 
Mihailovskii  was  ever  fearless  in  the  way  he  devoted  his  pen 
to  the  awakening  of  political  consciousness  and  of  the  vengeful 
feeling  of  honour. 

§  127. 

MIHAILOVSKirS  attitude  towards  the  religious  problem 
was  peculiar.  He  was  favourable  to  religion,  ascribing 
to  it  the  greatest  value  alike  for  the  individual  and  for  society  ; 
but  his  treatment  of  the  matter  was  never  more  than  casual, 
and  he  frequently  apologised  for  being  altogether  the  layman 
in  relation  to  theology. 

This  avoidance  of  the  religious  problem  w^as  not  wholly 
dependent  upon  his  fear  of  the  censorship. 

Mihailovskii's  distinctive  outlook  upon  this  field  is  dis- 
played in  his  studies  of  Tolstoi  and  Dostoievskii.  He  does 
not  analyse  the  attempts  they  made  to  solve  the  religious 
problem,  and  merely  reports  that  they  considered  it.  He 
shov\^s  a  similar  reserve  in  his  analysis  of  European  writers. 
In  1873,  penning  a  critique  of  Strauss's  The  Old  Faith  and  the 
New,  he  merely  takes  occasion,  apropos  of  the  theory  that 
the  gods  are  anthropomorphic  constructions,  to  throw  light 
upon  the  contrast  between  an  ideal  and  an  idol ;  and  he 
demands  that  ideahstic  and  reahstic  idols  (in  the  addition  of 
the  "  realistic  idols "  he  is  inspired  by  his  antagonism  for 
Pisarev's  realists),  that  is  to  sa}^  mythical  and  anthropomorphic 
ideaUsations  of  men  and  things,  shall  yield  place  everywhere 
to  ideals. 

None  the  less,  in  1901,  Mihailovskii  pubhshed  Fragments 
concerning  Religion.  Here,  in  reference  to  the  greater  literature 
on  the  topic,  the  existence  of  the  new  "  science  of  religion  " 
is  recognised,  and  its  justification  is  admitted  ;  but  at  most 
he  is  willing  to  allot  the  vague  name  of  "  teachings  concerning 
rehgion "  to  this  domain  of  enquiry.  He  inveighs  against 
economic  materialism,  with  its  endeavour  to  make  light  of 
the  significance  of  religion  (in  socialism  and  elsewhere)  ;  but 
thereafter  he  is  content  to  refer  to  recent  works  upon  the 
evolution  of  religion  and  to  make  special  mention  of  certain 
theories  concerning  the  origin  of  religion — those  of  Comte, 
Spencer,  Tylor,  Lubbock,  Feuerbach,  Guyau,  etc., 


168  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

As  regards  the  essential  definition  of  religion,  Mihailovskii 
refers  to  his  own  expositions  of  the  matter  in  1875.  These 
were  interesting,  all  the  more  so,  perhaps,  because  they  were 
parenthetical,  because  they  were  the  outcome  of  frequently 
recurring  personal  moods  and  doubts. 

Mihailovskii  had   been   disquieted,   not   for  the   first   time 
as  we  shall  learn,  by  the  increasing  frequency  of  suicide,  and 
it  occurred  to  him  to  compare  our  own  epoch  with  that  of  the 
decay  of  Rome.     In  this  comparison  he  was  concerned  more 
with  differences  than  with  resemblances,  and  was  particularly 
struck  with  one  phenomenon.     Recalling  the  early  Christians 
and  their  pagan  opponents,  he  was  filled  with  wonder  at  both 
parties,  both  the  martyrs  and  their  persecutors,  being  aston- 
ished at   the  splendid  definiteness  of  all  their  doings.     These 
people  were  perfectly  clear  as  to  their  purposes,  those  of  one 
side  kilhng  with  unalloyed  energy  ;    and- those  who  died  being 
equally  clear  as  to  what  they  were  dying  for.     This  definiteness 
of  view,   said   Mihailovskii,   existed  because  both   sides   were 
religious.     "  It   was  rehgion  which  gave  their  feelings,   their 
ideas,  and  their  actions,  the  definiteness  which  our  feelings, 
ideas,  and  actions  lack  ;   the  la^k  of  this  definiteness  in  our 
dead-alive  social  life  can  be  explained  solely  by  this  lack  of 
religion.  ...  By    religion    I    understand    a    doctrine    which 
connects  the   views   concerning  the  universe  prevailing  at  a 
given  time,  with  the  rules  of  individual  life  and  social  activity  ; 
this  connection  must  be  so  firm  that  no  one  who  professes 
the  religious  doctrine  can  possibly  disregard  his  moral  convic- 
tions,  any  more  than  he    can  admit    that   2x2  is   a   tallow 
candle."     Mihailovskii    complained    of    the    indefiniteness    of 
the  age.     Our  views  of  what  is  were  isolated  ;    our  views  of 
what  ought  to  be  were  isolated  ;    similarly,  our  actions  were 
isolated.     This,    exclaimed    Mihailovskii,    is    our    misfortune, 
the  supreme  misfortune  of  Russian  social  life.     Ravelin  had 
desired  to  overcome  the  moral  weakness  of  the  Russians  by 
the  elaboration  of  an  independent  Russian  philosophy.     But 
in    opposition   to    Ravelin,    Mihailovskii   contended   that    this 
would  not  suffice.     Philosophy  might  unify  ideas  of  what  is 
and  what  ought  to  be,  but  this  unification  would  merely  be 
effected  in  the  sphere  of  thought,  in  the  thoughts  of  a  few 
men  ;  it  would  not  be  effected  in  the  sphere  of  life.     Philosophy 
would  not  furnish  that  religious  devotion  to  an  idea  which 
alone   was  competent   to  overcome  moral   weakness.     It  did 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  169 

not  suffice  to  unify  theoretical  ideas.  "  The  crumbling  habi- 
tation "  of  ideas  must  be  set  in  order  in  such  a  way  as  to  be 
the  starting  point  of  action  in  a  definite  direction. 

Miha,ilovskii  did  not  forget  Spencer's  philosophj^  of 
religion,  but  Spencer's  religion  did  not  suffice  him,  for  in  his 
view  it  lacked  the  most  essential  characteristic  of  religion 
since  it  was  incompetent  to  guide  men's  actions.  Mihailovskii 
was  aware  that  the  demand  for  a  coherent  outlook  on  life  was 
widespread,  but  this  philosophical  coherence  the  field  of  theory 
did  not  suffice  for  the  demands  of  practical  life  ;  did  not  teach 
us  how  to  live.  Again  and  again,  Mihailovskii  alluded  to  the 
absolute  certainty,  definiteness,  devotion,  preparedness,  and 
active  zeal,  of  the  Christian  martyrs. 

Mihailovskii  consistently  held  to  this  theory,  returning  to 
it  in  his  John  the  Terrible  (i8S8)  and  again  in  the  Frag- 
ments. In  the  work  on  John  the  Terrible  he  gave  a  more 
succinct  deffiiition  of  religion,  saying  that  it  was  a  harmonious 
blend  of  reason  and  sentiment.'  It  is  important  to  note  that 
Mihailovskii,  therefore,  considered  that  the  essence  of  rehgion 
must  be  sought  in  the  sphere  of  reason  as  well  as  in  that  of 
feeling.  Knowledge  and  faith,  he  said,  are  in  a  sense  less 
widely  separated  one  from  another  than  is  commonly  assumed, 
faith  or  belief  represents  our  provisional  conclusions,  before 
we  have  attained  to  knowledge  ;  in  the  domain  of  science, 
hypotheses  constitute  the  element  of  faith  ;  by  a  quite  natural 
process,  beliefs  (hypothetical  assumptions)  are  replaced  by 
knowledge,  and  conversely  from  knowledge  we  pass  on  to 
beliefs  (hypothetical  assumptions). 

We  are  not  here  concerned  to  ask  whether  Mihailovskii 's 
philosophy  of  religion  is  sound,  but  it  certainly  seemed  remark- 
able that  in  his  critical  studies,  and  above  all  in  those  dealing 
with  Russian  poets  and  prose  writers,  Mihailovskii  did  not 
undertake  a  profounder  discussion  of  religious  problems.  I 
have  previously  referred  in  this  connection  to  Tolstoi  and 
Dostoevskii,  but  the  remark  applies  equally  to  Merezkovskii 
and   other   writers  about   whom  Mihailovskii   wrote   critiques. 

I  A  more  precise  analysis  of  Mihailovskii 's  views  would  demand  a  fuller 
account  of  his  psychological  conceptions.  Here,  in  reference  to  his  positivism 
and  to  the  question  of  positivist  detachment,  I  may  point  out  that  he  did  not 
regard  reason,  feeling,  and  will,  as  three  absolutely  distinct  faculties  or  activi- 
ties, but  considered  that  all  three  elements  are  present  in  every  psychical  act. 
Mihailovskii  referred  occasionally  to  Lehmann's  psychological  study,  The 
Principal  Laws  of  the  Affective  Life  of  IMan,   1892. 


170  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

It  applies  above  all  to  Mihailovskii's  endeavours  to  take  a 
comprehensive  view  of  latter  day  developments  in  Russia, 
for  such  a  view  cannot  be  attained  without  a  study  of  the 
religious  problems  and  endeavours  of  an  epoch.  Yet  Mihai- 
lovskii,  though,  as  we  have  seen,  he  thought  the  main  weakness 
of  the  day  was  its  lack  of  religion,  did  not  undertake  such 
an  enquiry. 

Positivism  or  positivist  detachment  cannot  have  been  his 
reason  for  ignoring  the  matter,  for  he  had  early  overcome  this 
defect  of  positivism.  Nor  can  I  regard  his  ethical  views, 
his  utilitarianism,  as  the  cause — all  the  less  seeing  that,  despite 
his  hostility  to  Kant,  his  utilitarianism  had  a  distinctly  rigorist 
flavour. 

The  objection  -  may  be  made  that  Mihailovskii  reduces 
religion  essentially  to  morality  (the  question  whether  this  is 
done  with  or  without  Kant  may  be  left  unconsidered),  and 
that  his  analysis  of  the  springs  of  moral  conduct  is  therefore 
adequate.  It  is  unquestionable  that  Mihailovskii's  primary 
demand  from  religion  v/as  not  for  dogmas,  but  for  strength 
of  character,  for  definiteness.  For  him,  nevertheless,  religion 
was  something  more  than,  something  different  from;  morality. 
In  his  Literary  Reminiscences  (1894)  he  alluded  to  various 
ethical  systems,  and  made  the  following  characteristic  utter- 
ance :  "  Morality  incontestably  begins  from  the  moment 
when  man  imposes  any  sort  of  bridle  upon  his  ego,  from  the 
moment  when  he  is  willing  to  give  up  any  of  his  wishes  in  the 
name  of  something  which  he  regards  as  higher,  as  sacred, 
as  inviolable.  Until  this  moment  comes,  we  have  nothing 
but  customs  !  " 

By  other  socialists,  Mihailovskii,  for  having  used  this 
image  of  the  bridle,  was  accused  of  borrowing  from  Kant's 
rigorism.  He  defended  himself,  though  not  very  vigorously. 
(He  might  have  referred  to  his  description  of  the  execution 
of  the  last  criminal !) 

"  I  believe  that  I  do  not  err  in  saying  that  the  extant 
Russian  realism  is  as  remote  from  the  ideal  of  religion  as  it 
is  from  a  star  in  the  heavens."  The  lack  of  religion  was 
evident,  not  in  Russia  alone,  b.ut  in  France  and  throughout 
the  world.  Mihailovskii  gave  an  account  of  Bourget's  novel 
Le  disciple,  and  accepted  its  analysis  of  the  modern  mental 
cleavage  which  takes  the  form  of  the  paralysis  of  will  by  the 
analytical  reason.     He  recurred  to  his  diagnosis  of  the  lack 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  171 

of  religious  harmony  in  modern  man.  Noteworthy  is  the 
manner  wherein,  along  a  devious  route,  Mihailovskii  passed 
by  wa}^  of  Bourget  to  Dostoevskii,  coming  to  essential  agree- 
ment with  the  last-named.  But  it  is  likewise  noteworthy 
that  he  did  not  directly  consider  Dostoevskii 's  analysis  of  the 
modern  man  in.  order  to  give  his  opinion  thereon. 

Let  me  repeat,  however,  that  Mihailovskii  was  sufficiently 
positivist  to  regard  religious  feeling,  in  the  sense  in  which  he 
used  the  word,  as  thoroughly  natural,  for  he  would  have 
nothing  to  do  with  mysticism.  Instructive,  in  this  connection, 
is  the  study  of  1875  mentioned  two  or  three  pages  back.  He 
considered  that  weakness  of  character  was  exhibited  even 
by  the  men  all  of  whose  thoughts  and  doings  had  been  sum- 
marised by  Scedrin  in  the  single  word  "  devourers  "  !  Even 
these  clear-sighted  and  deliberate  devourers  were  afraid  to 
display  their  moralit}'^  in  all  its  nakedness,  and  concealed 
their  motives  behind  moral  flourishes.  "  So  difficult  do  even 
such  as  tliese  find  it  to  be  religious.  Do  I  say  '  religious  '  .'* 
Yes,  for  it  is  to  be  religious  to  pursue  an  aim  with  the  whole 
soul,  with  the  whole  will,  without  any  reserves."  Mihailovskii 
concludes  the  passage  with  a  lament  that  it  is  impossible  to 
approximate  to  this  religious  ideal  if  a  man  has  a  wider  and 
more  complicated  program  than  the  "  devourers,"  if  he  desire 
to  recognise  a  wider  circle  of  phenomena,  and  if  he  wish  to 
take  his  stand  in  a  more  complex  grouping  of  facts.  Being 
an  evolutionist,  Mihailovskii  assumes  that  religion  is  destined 
to  undergo  further  evolution.  Whereas  Comte,  led  astray  by 
Hume,  had  regarded  religion  as  a  surpassed  historic  phase, 
Mihailovskii  holds  rather  with  Spencer  that  religion  is  destined, 
for  further  development.  He  understands  Hume's  view  that 
religion  is  mere  superstition,  but  does  not  agree  with  it.  In 
so  far  as  religion  involves  faith,  it  may  at  any  given  moment 
become  superstition ;  but  superstition  can  be  replaced  by 
knowledge ;  thereby  religion  is  modified,  not  destroyed. 
Mihailovskii  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  men  have  found 
.the  designation  faith  or  belief  inadequate,  and  have  therefore 
made  use  of  the  term  religion.  It  is  obvious  that  Mihailovskii 
felt  that  in  his  own  epoch  there  was  occurring  a  transition 
from  the  extant  ecclesiastical  religion  to  a  higher  religious 
form,  but  for  his  own  part  he  was  incompetent  to  determine 
the  psychological  characteristics  of  the  transition  and  to 
formulate  the  elements  of  the  new  religion. 


172  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 


§128. 


MIHAILOVSKirS  interest  was  to  a  high  degree  concen- 
trated upon  the  signs  of  the  period  of  transition,  and 
he  endeavoured  to  find  meanings  in  the  chaos  of  the  transition. 
He  was  especially  struck,  as  one  of  the  signs  of  the  times,  with 
the  increasing  frequency  of  suicide,  characteristic  of  Russia 
no  less  than  of  western  Europe,  and  he  was  able  to  show  that 
suicide  and  melancholia  were  assuming  positively  epidemic 
proportions. 

He  touched  on  the  question  in  1875,  in  connection  with 
his  first  formulation  of  the  religious  problem,  referring  to 
the  great  number  of  suicides  in  Russia,  and  asking  the  momen- 
tous question  as  to  the  cause.  He  recognised  that  the  corpses 
of  the  unfortunates  harmonised  in  tint  with  the  corpselike 
lividity  of  background  in  the  general  social  structure,  but 
this  was  to  see  a  picture,  not  to  give  an  explanation.  He  knew 
that  at  least  half  of  those  who  had  taken  their  own  lives  could 
not  have  explained  a  moment  before  the  act  why  they  were 
about  to  do  so,  whilst  in  the  case  of  the  other  half  the  suicide 
had  been  determined  by  the  pressure  of  the  question,  Wh}^ 
am  I  in  this  picture  at  all  ?  Finding  no  answer,  they  deliber- 
ately sought  death.  Thus  Mihailovskii's  .answer  to  the 
sinister  "  Whv,"  was  that  a  life  without  meaning  or  aim  was 
intolerable. 

On  this  first  occasion,  Mihailovskii  did  not  dwell  on  the 
topic.  It  merely  occurred  to  him  that  the  frequenc^^  of  suicide 
and  the  associated  cry  for  "  bread  and  circuses  "  gave  our 
time  a  similaritj'  to  the  decadent  epoch  of  Rome.  Though 
the  thought  was  not  followed  up,  it  led  Mihailovskii  to  recall 
the  early  Christian  martyrs  and  their  opponents,  and  it  was 
in  this  connection  that  he  formulated  his  definition  of  religion. 
From  the  definition  and  from  the  connection  in  which  it  is 
given,  the  conclusion  may  be  drawn  that  the  lack  of  religion 
is  the  answer  to  the  question  asked  by  the  sociologist  and  by  - 
the  suicide  who  falls  victim  to  his  era.  A  life  without 
meaning  and  aim  is  intolerable. 

Mihailovskii  returned  to  the  problem  of  suicide  in  a  study 
of  Eduard  von  Hartmann  and  of  modern  pessimism  with 
its  characteristic  torment  of  the  soul  and  its  ultimate  expedient, 
suicide.  He  took  Goethe's  Faust  as  spokesman  of  the  day, 
and   explained  why  Faust   could   find   neither    happiness   nor 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  173 

satisfaction,  Faust  was  unhappy  because  he  could  discover 
no  answer  to  his  questions  regarding  the  real  being  and 
essence  of  things.  Faust  failed  to  understand  that  there 
is  no  answer  to  such  questions,  that  it  is  a  false  metaphysics 
which  leads  us  to  ask  them,  and  that  we  must  do  awa}^  with 
them  altogether.  This  false  metaphysics  must  be  replaced 
by  positivism.  The  metaphysics  is  false  because  it  has  origin- 
ated in  a  false  relationship  to  the  sciences,  has  originated  in 
an  aristocratic  endeavour  4o  answer  ultimate  questions 
without  a  positive  study  of  the  special  sciences.  It  is  the 
philosophy  of  capitahsm,  is  constructed  by  the  capitalist  who 
is  cut  off  from  the  tools -that  produce  by  direct  labour.  The 
Fausts  seek  happiness,  but  discover  nothing  beyond  an  unap- 
peasable thirst  for  happiness,  because  their  metaphysics  is 
based  upon  the  labour  and  hunger  of  millions,  and  because 
this  leads  them  to  set  themselves  tasks  which  transcend  their 
own  powers  and  transcend  human  faculty  in  general. 
Practical  life,  positive  and  unmetaphysical  knowledge,  oppose 
Faust  and  refute  him. 

Faustian  metaphysics  is  not  only  theoretically  false,  but 
is  "likewise  morally  unsound,  being  an  expression  of  the  crass 
egoism  which  leads  a  man  to  isolate  himself  from  the  great 
majority  of  his  fellows,  although  he  wishes  to  exploit  the 
labours  of  his  fellow  men  for  his  own  private  purposes.  "  The 
metaphysician  is  a  man  who  has  been  driven  mad  bj^  fatness," 

The  Fausts,  therefore,  are  just  as  unhappj^  as  the  specu- 
lator who  is  driven  to  suicide  by  a  collapse  on  the  stock 
exchange.  Mihailovskii  alludes  more  than  once  to  the  suicide 
of  the  unsuccessful  commercial  speculator,  and  there  is  an 
obvious  connection  in  his  mind  between  the  word  "  speculation  " 
in  this  sense  and  the  speculation  of  the  Fausts. 

Mihailovskii  concludes  his  sketchy  analysis  by  saying  that 
neither  Hartmann  with  his  philosophy  of  the  unconscious, 
nor  Pogodin  with  his  orthodox  slavophilism,  could  exorcise 
the  spirit  of  suicide. 

In  a  study  of  Garsin  (1885)  Mihailovskii  analysed  The 
Night.  It  is  a  minor  point  that  Mihailovskii  should  have 
regarded  the  hero's  death  as  a  suicide,  whereas  GarSin  merely 
made  him  die  suddenly  from  the  intensity  of  his  newly  awakened 
sentiment  of  love  for  his  fellows.  What  interests  us  is  Mihai- 
lovskii and  his  analysis  of  suicide.  Like  Faust,  the  egoist  is 
recalled  to  childhood  by  the  sound  of  the  bell  summoning 


174  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

to  early  mass  ;  he  feels  what  pure  love  and  purQ  sentiment 
might  be  ;  he  would  like  to  tear  the  pot-bellied  idol  out  of 
his  heart  ;  but  he  does  not  know  where  to  turn  and  how  to 
take  up  the  burden  of  his  fellow  men's  misery.  The  new 
feeling  is  fugitive,  and  the  egoist  puts  an  end  to  his  life  with 
a  pistol  shot.    , 

Mihailovskii  considers  that  Bourget's  book  Lc  disciple 
contains  an  accurate  analysis  of  the  modern  incapacity  for 
living.  The  modern  man  is  riven  in  twain,  his  thought  is 
estranged  from  life,  his  thirst  for  analysis  undermines  the 
energy  of  will,  he  is  afraid  to  act,  and  he  succumbs  to  this 
disease  of  the  will. 

In  his  explanation  of  consciousness  as  an  aggregate  of 
multiple  consciousnesses,  Mihailovskii  extols  the  centralism 
and  despotism  of  the  central  consciousness,  which  finds  expres- 
sion in  the  will.  This,  he  says,  is  health,  but  the  loss  of  such 
a  healthy  despotism  leads  to  a  weakening  and  destruction 
of  consciousness  and  of  life  in  general.  It  is  obvious  that 
the  explanation  is  purely  verbal,  that  no  real  explanation  is 
given  wh}^  consciousness  and  will  become  enfeebled,  seeing 
that  we  are  not  told  for  what  reason  the  beneficent  activity 
and  energ}/  of  the  healthy  centralising  despotism  disappear, 
because  we  do  not  learn  under  what  conditions  they  disappear. 


§  129. 

MARX  had  represented  Goethe's  Faust  as  a  capitalist. 
Mihailovskii  followed  up  the  idea,  for  the  Faust  problem 
attracted  him  and  busied  him  from  early  days.  In  one  of 
his  first  studies,  that  of  Voltaire  as  Man  and  Tliinkcr  (1870), 
Mihailovskii  discussed  the  question  at  some  length. 

Faust  could  not  become  happy  because  he  had  set  himself 
an  impossible  aim  and  had  chosen  improper  means  for  its 
realisation.  Faust  made  a  sharp  distinction  between  the 
physical  and  the  mental,  and  this  was  why,  as  Goethe  aptly 
shows,  he  desired  to  solve  his  metaphysical  problems  with 
the  aid  of  magic.  But  merely  to  formulate  these  problems 
is  to  enter  the  wrong  path.  In  order  to  illustrate  the  morbidity 
characteristic  of  these  Fausts  with  divided  minds,  Mihailovskii 
quotes  from  Brierre  de  Boismont's  Dn  suicide  ct  de  la  folie 
suicide  similar  speculations  by  a  suicide. 

Voltaire's   good,   learned,  and    wealthy  Brahman   was  no 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   PaiSSIA  175 

less  unhappy  than  Goethe's  Faust.  He  had  studied  and  taught 
for  forty  years,  and  knew  m  the  end  just  as  httle  as  Faust ; 
an  old  woman,  his  neighbour,  who  had  learned  nothing,  and 
merely  had  faith  in  Vishnu  and  the  old  myths,  was  perfectly 
happy.  The  Brahman  was  well  aware  that  he  too  would  have 
been  happy  had  he  remained  stupid,  but  neither  he  nor  anyone 
else  would  have  been  willing  to  change  places  with  the  happy 
old  woman.  Voltaire  caustically  enquires  why  intelligence 
and  happiness  should  be  thus  contrasted,  but  cannot  furnish 
an  answer. 

Metaphysical  speculation  devours  itself  and  others, 
Mihailovskii,  borrowing  an  expression  from  Turgenev,  terms 
it  "  self-devouring."  There  is  a  remedy  for  the  trouble,  the 
remedy  recommended  by  Chrysostom  to  a  disciple  suffering 
from  the  malady  of  speculation,  and  it  is  to  have  a  wife  and 
children.  This,  says  INIihailovskii,  is  practical  counsel,  for  it 
prescribes  that  man  shall  not  live  for  himself  alone,  but  shall 
concern  himself  for  others.  The  Brahman  and  the  old  woman 
are  both  defective,  both  impossible,  both  victims  of  social 
institutions  ;  they  are  not  complete  human  beings,  but  merely 
parts  of  the  social  organism.  The  Brahman's  old  neighbour 
works  and  does  nothing  else,  just  as  Wagner,  Faust's  famulus, 
does  nothing  but  work,  seeing  that  his  only  function  is  to 
acquire  knowledge  of  facts  The  Brahman  and  Faust,  no 
less  than  the  old  woman  and  Wagner,  are  not  complete  human 
beings.  They  are  all  invahds  ;  they  all  suffer  from  hyper- 
trophy of  some  particular  organ,  which  undergoes  excessive 
development  pari  passu  with  neglect  of  the  other  organs. 
If  we  are  to  remain  human  in  our  study  of  science,  we  must 
not  like  the  Brahman  and  Faust  endeavour  to  transcend  the 
hmits  of  the  knowable,  but  we  must  be  equally  careful  to 
avoid  becoming  like  Wagner  enslaved  by  sensual  empiricism. 
Wagner,  too,  ceased  to  be  human,  for  it  was  he  who  endeav- 
oured to  construct  the  homunculus.  Faust  did  not  follow 
Wagner  in  this  unnatural  aberration,  but  Faust  himself 
succumbed  to  the  folly  of  metaphysics. 

In  the  second  part  of  Faust,  Goethe  attempted  to  solve 
the  problem.  The  allegorical  struggle  with  the  forces  of  nature, 
says  Mihailovskii,  is  magnificent ;  the  endeavour  to  be  useful 
is  morally  good — but  it  fails.  The  principle  of  utility  is  no 
less  inadequate  than  are  all  the  other  special  criteria,  such 
as  truth,  beauty,  justice,  etcr.     The  only  sound  criterion  of 


176  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

perfection  in  human  ajffairs  is  integrality,  a  harmony/  of  func- 
tions in  man,  and  harmony  of  means  in  man's  activities.  By 
an  integral  human  being,  happiness  for  himself  and  his  asso- 
ciates can  only  be  found  in  activity  on  behalf  of  himself  and 
his  associates.  Wagner  can  discover  truth  as  well  as 
another ;  to  stitch  shoes  and  to  drain  marshes  are  useful 
actions.  The  man  of  science  may  strive  with  nature,  and  he 
may  do  this  theoretically  (not  practically  like  Faust)  ;  but 
what  he  must  shun  is  the  method  adopted  by  Faust  or  b^^ 
Wagner.  Faust  desires  to  work  magic,  and  thereby  becomes 
non-human.  Wagner,  too,  is  non-human,  for  everything 
human  is  alien  to  him  ;  he  is  the  piston  of  a  pump,  a  pumping 
machine  ;  not '  a  whole  but  a  mere  part ;  not  an  individual 
(integral  or  undivided)  but  a  mere  instrument  for  the 
acquisition  of  facts. 

With  Comte,  Mihailovskii  appeals  against  Faust  and  the 
Brahman  to  the  consideration  that  in  true  humanity  theory 
and  practice  exist  in  mutual  equipose.  If  we  can  give  Faust 
and  the  Brahman  fuller  scope  for  their  activities,  if  we  can 
give  them  the  opportunity  and  the  power  of  sympathising 
practically  with  others'  lives,  if  we  can  awaken  in  them  the 
altruism  of  Comte,  the  tuism  of  Feuerbach,  the  sympathy 
of  Adam  Smith,  .they  will  become  healthy,  they  will  be 
concerned  about  very  different  problems,  and  this  concern 
will  lead  them  to  victory,  not  defeat. 

Faust  and  Wagner,  the  Brahman  and  the  old  woman,  live 
close  beside  one  another,  but  they  do  not  know  one  another, 
and  scarcely  notice  one  another.  They  are  complementary 
opposites,  the  obverse  and  the  reverse  of  the  same  "  eccentric  " 
medal.  ,    . 

The  use  of  the  word  eccentric  shows  us  what  was  Mihai- 
lovskii's  historico- philosophical  explanation  of  the  Faust 
problem. 

It  is  the  division  of  labour  into  the  economic  and  mental 
spheres  which  has  made  men  non-human.  Philosophically 
it  is  metaphysics  which  causes  the  disintegration  of  the  stage 
of  eccentricity.  It  is  thus  in  Saint-Simon's  sense  that 
Mihailovskii  appraises  the  eighteenth-century  enlightenment 
which  found  expression  above  all  in  Voltaire,  by  saying  that 
an  organic  epoch  is  succeeded  by  a  critical  epoch.  In  the 
story  of  the  Brahman  and  the  old  woman  his  neighbour,  Vol- 
taire displayed  the  opposition  between  knowledge  and  happi- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  177 

ness  without  being  able  to  show  how  the  opposition  could  be 
transcended.  Voltaire  could  not  be  positive  ;  he  was  merely 
negative  ;  his  philosophy  and  Goethe's  philosophy  issued  from 
a  moribund  soqial  order,' 

The  connection^  of  the  Faust  problem  and  the  suicide  problem 
,  in  Mihailovskii's  thought  has  now  been  made  clear.  Faust's 
questions  cannot  be  answered  by  metaphysics ;  his  ethics 
can  furnish  no  satisfaction  for  his  aspirations.  Faust,  like 
the  Brahman,  can  undermine  the  old  woman's  faith,  but  he 
i  has  no  power  to  make  either  himself  or  his  associates  happy 
In  the  moribund  epoch,  men  die  by  their  own  hands. 

The  age  is  inharmonious  ;  all  our  social  institutions  are 
(  inharmonious ;  individual  human  beings  are  inharmonious 
Epoch,  society,  and  men,  are  irreligious — thus  runs  Mihai- 
lovskii's briefest  formulation,  for  to  him  irreligion  is  the  dis- 
harmony of  reason  aiid  sentiment,  of  science  and  life,  of 
philosophy  and  ethics.  Upon  this  disharmony  depends  the 
modern  malady  of  the  will,  the  incapacity  for  living. 

Faust  is  the  representative  of  civilisation.  The  majority 
of  German  civilised  beings  are  to  some  extent  Fausts,  and 
this  is  why  Mihailovskii  considers  Fciusi  the  greatest  of  Goethe's 
works.  Not  until  the  end  of  his  life  does  Faust  succeed  in 
doing  that  which  every  village  lad  learns  to  do  from  the  very 
beginning — useful  work.  Mihailovskii  asks  which  is  the 
higher,  Faust  or  the  village  lad.  In  accordance  with  his  theory 
of  progress,  Mihailovskii  replies  that,  whilst  Faust  has  attained 
a  higher  stage  of  evolution,  the  village  lad  stands  higher  as 
type. 

§  130. 

FROM  190 1  onwards  Mihailovskii  wrote  his  literary  remin- 
iscences in  a  series  of  essays  entitled  Literature  and 
Life.  These  were  subsequently  collected  in  book  form  as 
Literary  Reminiscences  and  the  Present  Chaos.  Two  additional 
volumes  of  studies,  reprinted  from  Mihailovskii's  review  after 
his  death,  pursue  the  same  aim. 

When  Mihailovskii  speaks  of  "  the  present "  he  thinks 
primarily  of  the  nineties  and  of  the  opening  years  of  the  new 
century,  but  he  is  also  concerned  with  the  eighties,  with  tlie 
whole  period  since  the  daj's  of  Nicholas,  and  one  may  even 
say  with  the  epoch  since  the  forties,  when  the  Russians  first 
clearly  recognised  the  consequences   of  the  great  revolution, 

13  VOL,    II. 


178  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

By  "chaos  "  Mihailovsldi  means  the  philosophical  and  literary 
confusion  attendant  upon  the  unclarified  and  gloomy  situation, 
but  we  must  remember  that  the  Russian  word  smuta  likewise 
signifies  "  riot."  In  his  historico-philosophical  scheme  he 
describes  the  period  of  transition  from  the  eccentric  to  the 
subjective  anthropocentric  epoch  as  anarchy  and  false  indi- 
vidualism, and  likewise  speaks'  of  it  as  revolution  and  as 
scepticism.  The  ultimate  stage  of  the  eccentric  epoch  has 
deindividualised  and  therefore  dehumanised  man.  Faust, 
Wagner,  and  •  the  stock  exchange  speculators,  have  broken 
the  shackles  of  religious  and  political  absolutism  without  being 
able  to  throv*'  off  economic  shackles.  The  regime  of  arbitrary 
force  continues,  and  in  the  tiniest  village  no  less  than  in  the 
capital  the  usurer  satisfies  his  avarice  with  the  aid  of  the  state 
police.  In  the  west,  liberal  constitutionalism  and  parliamen- 
tarism, the  monarchy  and  the  republic,  serve  the  bourgeois 
vampire  ;  whilst  in  Russia,  absolutism,  with  its  bureaucracy 
academically  trained  on  the  European  model,  serves  .the 
bourgeois. 

Mihailovskii's  analysis  of  the  chaos  lays  bare  its  various 
elements.  In  the  theoretical  field  the  leading  factor  is  the 
indefiniteness  and  dilettantism  of  metaphysics,  the  negative 
philosophy  of  the  spiritual  and  political  slaves  who  have  been 
awakened  by  Voltaire  and  the  enlightenment. 

Morally,  the  enlightened  slave,  the  bourgeois,  now  freed 
from  his  dread  of  the  old  authorities,  reveals  himself  in  his 
pornographic  literature.  ]\Iihailo\skii  does  not  hesitate  to 
condemn,  as  far  as  Russian  developments  are  concerned, 
Zola's  theoretical  talk  concerning  the  alleged  naturalistic 
positivism  ;  and  with  all  the  energy  of  which  he  is  capable 
he  censures  such  writers  as  Nemirovic-Dancenko  who  have 
devoted  their  pens  to  a  literature  which  has  sunk  to  the  level 
of  the  Parisian  "  Journal  des  Cochons."  Mihailovskii  is 
especially  fierce  in  his  denunciation  of  the  lesser  bourgeoisie 
of  the  third  republic.  By  their  wealth  they  were  removed 
from  the  necessity  of  labour  ;  they  had  abandoned  clericalism 
and  even  Catholicism  without  finding  anything  to  replace 
it  which  could  minister  to  the  mental  and  moral  life  ;  thus 
had  it  come  to  pass  that  the  "  Journal  des  Cochons  "  was  the 
catechism  of  these  phiHstines.  Pornography  has  always 
existed,  but  not  until  to-day  has  it  been  raised  to  the  level 
of  a  public  system. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  179 

In  Russia  the  lesser  bourgeoisie  was  not  so  numerous  as 
in  Europe,  but  here  it  was  the  greater  bourgeoisie  which  followed 
in  the  footsteps  of  the  aristocratic  leaders.  Mihailovskii  was 
never  weary  of  attacking  the  European  leaders  of  decadence, 
symbolism,  magianism,  and  the  rest,  so  that  he  might  inflict 
shrewder  blows  upon  their  Russian  imitators.  He  adopts 
from  Nordau  a  few  references  to  these  types  of  degeneration, 
and  analj'ses  the  ideas  of  Sacher-Masoch. 

Pessimism  is  the  upshot  of  such  ethics.  The  readers  of 
the  "  Journeaux  des  Cochons "  become  gloomy  and  melan- 
cholic ;  tedium  and  melancholia  drive  them  to  a  voluntary 
death.  Works  deaUng  with  the  problem  of  weltschmerz  did 
not  escape  Mihailovskii's  literary  attention,  and  he  did  not 
fail  to  point  out  the  false  individualism  of  the  chief  exponents 
of  weltschmerz.  Mihailovskii  enters  the  lists  against  Stirner 
and  Nietzsche  as  apostles  of  arbitrariness.  Nietzsche,  it  is 
true,  opposed  the  decadent  movement,  and  therefore  occupied 
higher  ground  than  his  Russian  imitators,  against  whom 
Mihailovskii  protects  their  teacher  ;  but  Nietzsche's  superman 
is,  after  all,  no  more  than  the  expression  and  the  advocacy 
of  eccentric  dehumanisation. 

Thus  ^Mihailovskii  is  led  to  attack  Darwinism  with  peculiar 
energy,  and  unceasingly  to  oppose  its  aristocratic  master 
morality. 

The  ethics  of  free  competition  unchains  the  war  of  all 
against  all.  To  Mihailovskii,  Byronic  "  gloom "  seems  the 
ultimate  result  of  this  development.  It  is  only  a  dog  that 
remains  faithful  to  its  dead  master. 

The  bourgeois  is  subject  to  the  dominion,  not  of  the  state 
alone,  but  also  of  chauvinistic  nationalism.  For  this  reason 
Mihailovskii  is  even  more  averse  to  the  new  slavophilism  than 
to  the  old,  and  for  this  reason  he  attacks  the  chauvinist 
narodniki.  He  continues  his  campaign  against  all  the  deca- 
dent phenomena  of  the  day,  disregarding  accusations  that  he 
is  aiding  sanctimonious  humbug  and  pohce  rule.  He  knows 
well  enough  that  the  obscurantists  opposed  Darwinism,  declaring 
Darwinism  to  be  a  sign  of  the  times.  In  a  vigorous  satire, 
Darwinism  and  Ofenhach's  Operettas  (1871)  he  shows  that 
Darwin's  doctrine  may  very  well  be  compared  with  Offenbach's 
music,  in  that  here  and  there  Darwinists  and  Offenbachians 
misuse  science  and  art  for  the  benefit  of  the  bourgeoisie.  Beyond 
question  Offenbach  with  his  cynical  mockery  of  the  old  gods 


180  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

and  the  old  morality  could  exist  only  in  a  decaying,  degener- 
ating, and  corrupt  society.  But  this  immorality  is  one  of 
the  hammers  of  history ;  a  great  amputation  is  imminent. 
The  eighteenth  century  enlightenment  and  the  diffusion  of 
wealth  have  freed  the  lords  of  the  theatre  from  their  fears, 
and  they  now  plunge  into  enjoyment. 

Notwithstanding  his  onslaughts  on  the  dominant  morality, 
Mihailovskii  did  not  become  a  disciple  of  the  Russian  preachers 
Dostoevskii  and  Tolstoi.  They  too,  were  absolutists  who 
represented  their  own  opinions  and  feelings  as  universally 
valid  rules  of  ethics.  In  the  case  of  both  these  moralists 
Mihailovskii  censured  the  exaggerated  personal  striving  towards 
self-perfectionment,  which  led  Tolstoi  to  a  Buddhistic  quiet- 
ism, and  Dostoevskii  to  the  voluptuousness  of  martyrdom. 
Man  has  not  simply  to  consider  his  personal  responsibility. 
Not  conscience  alone  is  decisive,  but  also  the  sense  of  honour, 
and  it  is  the  two  in  conjunction  which  lead  the  rightly 
balanced  human  being  to  play  his  part  in  the  social  order. 

Mihailovskii  opposed  the  representatives  of  the  latest 
Russian  philosophical  idealism,  which  was  on  3tich  excellent 
terms  with  bourgeois  politico -social  materialism.  In  the  days 
of  the  great  revolution,  the  bourgeois  had  been  the  idealists, 
whilst-  the  philosophers  of  that  day  had  taught  anthropological 
and  cosmopolitan  realism.  The  philosophical  idealists  were 
like  Voltaire,  who  thought  that  a  belief  in  God  was  a  good  thing 
for  his  tailor. 

Mihailovskii  was  especially  opposed  to  those  later  disciples 
of  Marx  who  abjured  historical  materialism  to  champion 
mysticism  and  ecstasy.  Whilst  Mihailovskii  had  at  first 
attacked  the  Marxists  on  account  of  their  historical  materialism, 
he  turned  later  against  the  materialists  who  had  been  converted 
to  idealism. 

Mihailovskii  draws  a  sharp  distinction  between  religion 
and  mysticism,  considering  them  to  be  fundamental  opposites. 
Mysticism  translates  man  from  natural  reality  into  a  cloudy 
indefinite  remoteness,  into  regions  where  the  fantastic  gods 
of  the  rriythologies  play  their  senseless  parts  ;  religion,  on 
the  other  hand,  connects  man  with  the  realities  of  life,  and 
makes  him  responsible  for  his  actions.  Belief  and  knowledge 
may  be  dead,  may  be  incapable  of  leading  to  action.  Religion 
is  the  harmon}''  of  belief  and  knowledge  with  man's  ethical 
ideals,   and  is  the  impulse  to  action  in  a  definite  direction. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  181 

The  religious  man  has  a  clear  and  definite  idea  of  what  he 
wills  to  do  ;  he  believes,  not  only  in  what  he  wills  to  do,  but 
in  what  he  actually  does. 

§  131. 

WHILE  still  a  student  at  the  mining  academy,  Mihailovskii 
made  his  first  literary  venture  by  penning  an  analysis 
of  the  female  types  in  Gonciarov's  books  (i860),  but  he  did  not 
seriously  engage  in  authorship  until  1869.  A  general  survey 
of  his  works  subsequent  to  that  date  gives  the  following  results. 
During  the  first  years,  to  be  precise,  from  1869  to  1871,  Mihai- 
lovskii's  writings  were  of  a  predominantly  scientific  character. 
Some  were  essays  upon  themes  of  his  own  choice,  but  most 
of  his  scientific  writings  were  critical  notices  of  works  by  other 
authors,  selected  by  "Mihailovskii  from  the  literature  of  the 
world  as  a  vehicle  for  the  conveyance  of  his  own  ideas  and 
plans.  The  six-volume  edition  of  his  works  contains  about 
thirty-five  lengthier  essays,  twenty-three  of  v/hich  deal  with 
European  and  twelve  with  Russian  authors.  In  the  period 
from  1872  down  to  the  beginning  of  January  1904,  Mihailovskii 
wrote  more  or  less  connected  accounts  of  the  principal  events 
in  Russian  life,  of  individual  authors,  and  of  literary  trends, 
with  occasional  references  to  the  drama  and  to  graphic  art, 
Such  essays,  taking  the  form  of  "  Literary  and  Journalistic 
Observations,"  "  A  Layman's  Notes,"  "  A  Contemporary's 
Notes,"  "  A  Reader's  Diary,"  and  so  on,  bulk  more  largely 
than  studies  of  a  monographic  nature.  As  far  as  such  studies 
were  produced  during  this  period,  they  belong  chiefly  to  the 
seventies.  Mihailovskii  never  wrote  a  book,  a  work  containing 
the  systematic  elaboration  of  some  particular  theme.  By 
deliberate  choice  he  remained  a  critic,  but  as  he  himself  put 
it  on  one  occasion,  the  critic  is  neither  more  nor  less  than 
the  expounder  of  artistic  creations.  Mihailovskii  himself, 
however,  was  hkewise  an  expounder  of  •  scientific  creations. 

If  we  compare  Mihailovskii' s  style  and  his  whole  method 
of  criticism  vv'ith  those  of  his  predecessors,  the  contrast  with 
Herzen  and  Belinskii  becomes  obvious.  Mihailovskii  has 
more  kinship  with  Cernygevskii  and  Lavrov.  His  writing 
has  a  certain  hardness,  produces  an  impression  of  greyness, 
and  yet  we  soon  forget  this  as  we  go  on  reading,  for  we  become 
enthralled  by   the  contents,  by   the  sturdiness,   and  by   the 


182  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

conscientiousness  of  what  is  written.^  Mihailovskii  had  belle- 
tristic  aspirations,  and  proposed  to  write  a  topical  novel,  but 
soon  desisted  from  the  attempt.  His  best  friends  advised 
him  against  it,  and  he  was  sufficiently  self-critical  to  recognise 
that  his  imagination  was  unequal  to  the  task.  The  cumbrous- 
ness  and  monotony  of  Mihailovskii' s  style  is  especially  con- 
spicuous in  his  more  intimate  reminiscences  and  in  his  critiques 
of  the  masterworks  of  literature  ;  but  he  understood  how  to 
express  his  judgments  in  pregnant  words  and  phrases,  as  if 
in  the  hope  that  these,  giving  colour,  would  make  the  reader 
forget  the  stylistic  monotony.  Not  a  few  of  his  words  and 
phrases  have  become  widely  current. 

Throughout  life,  though  he  acquired  much  knov/ledge, 
and  acquired  it  thoroughly,  Mihailovskii  regarded  himself,' 
not  as  a  philosopher,  but  as  a  reader.  "  A  Reader's  Diary  " 
— here  we  have  a  picture  of  the  onlooker  who  is  an  inde- 
fatigable reader,  but  we  have  likewise  a  characterisation  of  his 
literary  modesty.  This  modesty  does  not  exclude  a  justified 
self-complacency.  When  he  contrasts  himself  as  a  "  layman  " 
with  professional  experts,  or  when  his  pen  finds  a  critical 
word  to  say  about  "  men  of  learning,"  we  sense  satire  and 
gentle  mockery.  Yet  Mihailovskii  could  gladly  do  justice 
to  the  claim  of  the  professional  expert.  He  wa^  less  abstract 
than  Lavrov.  The  latter  took  Europe  as  his  starting  point, 
and  contemplated  Russia  from  a  distance  ;  the  former  lived 
in  Russia,  and  set  out  from  the  extant  problems  and  difficulties 
of  that  country. 

Whereas  Lavrov,  like  so  many  of  his  predecessors  and 
contemporaries,  wrote  as  a  refugee,  and  whereas,  living  abroad, 
he  enjoyed  complete  freedom  of  speech,  Mihailovskii  worked 
at  home,  under  the  knout  of  the  Russian  censorship,  and  very 
few  of  his  essays  were  first  published  abroad.  The  consequence 
was  that  Mihailovskii's  method  of  expression  was  somewhat 
subdued,  and  bore  the  stamp  of  excessive  reflection,  while 
his  choice  of  subjects  was  determined  in  relation  to  the  censor- 
ship. But  the  very  significance  of  Mihailovskii  lies  in  this, 
that  he  did  not  take  refuge  abroad,  and  was  not  sent  to 
Siberia.  Thus  for  three  decades,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
seventies  onwards,  his  works  were  as  a  beacon  to  the  younger 
generation  and  as  a  guide  to  his  contemporaries.     But   this 

»  Herzen,  th<augh  pleased  with  the  contents  of  Mihailovskii's  first  published 
work,  What  is  Progress,  censured  its  style. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  183 

« 

guide  himself  belonged  to  the  generation  of  those  who  had 
attained  to  intellectual  maturity'  after  the  liberation  of  the 
serfs. 

Reference  should  be  made  to  Mihailovskii's  literary  and 
philosophical  steadfastness.  Whereas  in  their  literary  devel- 
opment most  of  the  Russian  thinkers  have  displayed  crude 
transitions  and  profound  internal  revolutions,  Mihailovskii 
remained  the  same  from  his  debut -in  youth  to  the  end  of  his 
literary  career  ;  he  -developed,  he  matured,  but  there  was  no 
change  in  his  fundamentally  positivist  outlook.  As  he  himself 
puts  it,  he  wore  an  overcoat  thi^oughout  life.  In  one  of  his 
essays  he  compares  Proudhon  and  Be'linskii,  referring  to  the 
steadfastness  of  the  Frenchman  and  to  the  vacillations  and 
mutability  of  the  Russian.  He  is  inclined  to  regard  this  lack 
in  Russian  writers  as  due  to  the  want  of  a  cultural  tradition, 
but  he  is  aware  that  to  Europeans  tradition  is  a  heavy  ballast. 
The  influence  of  Mihailovskii's  steadfastness  was  necessarily 
all  the  greater  seeing  that  his  fundamental  outlook  and  his 
leading  doctrines  were  already  formulated  at  the  very  outset 
of  his  career. 

Literary  criticism  thus  used  to  the  exclusion  of  other 
methods  was  the  implement  of  the  philosophic  and  poUtical 
opposition.  Discussing  the  doctrine  of  the  adaptation  of  indi- 
viduals to  the  environment,  Mihailovskii  distinguishes  between 
two  types  of  adaptation.  Some  endeavour  to  raise  the  en- 
vironment to  their  level ;  others  adapt  themselves  to  the 
environment.  The  fishes  and  the  birds,  he  says,  are  the  best 
adapted  in  the  latter  sense,  and  they  therefore  are  the  happiest 
of  all  animals.  In  human  society,  the  birds  and  the  fishes 
are  represented  by  the  men  who  delight  in  celebrating  the 
days  of  their  patron  saints  (the  Russians  have  a  special  name 
for  such  festivals) .  In  politics  and  history,  the  leading  principle 
of  these  proposers  of  toasts  is  patriotism  ;  in  economics,  it 
is  perpetual  harmony  and  wealth  for  wealth's  sake  ;  in  science, 
it  is  science  for  science'  sake  ;  in  philosoph}-,  it  is  the  teleology 
of  nature  ;  and  so  on.  . 

In  aesthetics,  these  adapters  have  the  principle  of  art 
for  art's  sake,  and  against  such  a  formula  Mihailovskii  pro- 
tested from  the  very  first.  Art,  in  his  view,  had  social 
significance.  As  early  as  1874  he  defined  the  poet  as  one 
endowed  with  the  capacity  of  speaking  for  himself  and  for 
others.     What  applies  to  the  poet  appUes  to  artists  in  general. 


184  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

They  can  speak  for  others,  they  can  hve  the  inner  hfe  of  others, 
can  feel  their  way  or  think  their  way  into  the  inner  hfe  of 
others.  Mihailovskii  considers  that  the  artist  possesses  in 
a  high  degree  that  capacity  for  sympathy  which  every  man 
ought  to  have,  but  of  course  the  artist  is  hkewise  distinguished 
by  his  method  of  expression  which  differs  from  that  of  the 
non- artist.  The  aim  of  the  critic  must  therefore  be  to  report 
how  the  artist  speaks  for  himself  and  for  others,  and  to  report 
for  whom  the  artist  is  speaking.  The  critic  must  grasp  the 
relationship  between  the  artist  and  his  object,  and  must  show 
how  this  relationship  is  artistically  displayed.  Mihailovskii 
complains  of  Cehov  that  he  applies  his  artistic  apparatus  in 
like  manner  to  the  swallow  and  to  the  suicide,  to  the  fly  and 
to  the  elephant,  to  tears  and  to  water.  Mihailovskii  demands 
from  the  artist  the  same  definiteness  that  he  demands  from 
others. 

Mihailovskii  will  only  recognise  as  a  true  artist  one  who 
does  not  speak  for  a  class  or  group  of  society,  but  for  the 
entire  folk,  for  the  workers.  The  idea  of  the  folk  is  implied 
in  every  serious  work  of  art.  Starting  from  his  view  that 
society  rests  upon  cooperation,  he  would  like  to  introduce 
work  as  the  measure  of  value  into  belles  lettres  and  aesthetics 
no  less  than  elsewhere.  The  thought  is  not  elaborated,  but 
enough  is  said  to  show  what  Mihailovskii  demands  from  art, 
namely  that  it  should  pay  at  least  as  much  attention  to  the 
idea  of  the  folk  as  to  the  idea  of  love. 

Mihailovskii  frequently  insists  that  the  true  artist  should 
exhibit  a  sense  of  proportion,  for  he  considers  that  the  essential 
quality  of  artistic  capacity  is  displayed  in  moderation.  To 
give  a  concrete  instance,  he  contends  that  GrigoroviC  and 
Leskov  lack  a  sense  of  proportion. 

Art  is  per  se  social  and  ethical ;  ethics  and  aesthetics  are 
intimately  associated — although  Mihailovskii  recalls  the  fact 
that  Cain  and  Abel  were  brothers,  and  yet  one  of  them  slew 
the  other  !  Mihailovskii  was  not  guilty  of  literary  fratricide  ; 
his  ethics  and  his  socialism  are  guided  by  the  old  but  beautiful 
and  genuinely  humane  saying,  nil  humanum  a  me  alienum 
puto  ;  but  the  fact  that  he  had  no  liking  for  the  decadents 
and  for  their  sexual  erethism  and  abnormality  may  be 
ascribed,  not  merely  to  his  socialist  ethics,  but  also  to  his 
healthy  virility. 

From  this  outlook,  Mihailovskii  can  best  adjust  his  relations 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  185 

to  his  contemporaries  ;  his  ablest  and  most  detailed  literary 
studies  deal  with  his  friends  and  acquaintances,  with  SCedrin, 
Uspenskii,  and  Nekrasov.  It  is  characteristic  that  he  should 
show  most  interest  in  and  understanding  for  the  imaginative 
writers,  those  whose  work  manifests  reflection  or  the  direct 
life  of  feeling — SCedrin,  for  instance,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
Uspenskii  and  Garsin,  on  th^  other.  Jakeibovi^.  (Mcl§in)  is 
congenial  to  him  ;  of  Cehov,  the  same  can  be  said  as  regards 
the  later  works,  wherein  that  writer  has  abandoned  his  earlier 
pose  of  impassivity.  Mihailovskii  found  Andreev  obscure, 
and  Gor'kii's  work  did  not  please  him,  for  he  considered 
Gor'kii's  characters  too  domineering. 

There  is  little  about  Puskin  in  Mihailovskii's  writings,  and 
little  about  Gogol.  He  cannot  forgive  the  latter  for  sermon- 
ising, and  he  finds  the  same  tendency  to  sermonise  uncongenial 
in  Dostoevskii  and  Tolstoi.  The  two  last-named  writers,, 
however,  receive  detailed  consideration,  with  the  remarkable 
omission,  previously  referred  to,  that  Mihailovskii  largely 
ignores  their  discussion  of  religious  problems.  Doubtless 
Mihailovskii  had  good  grounds  for  rejecting  passivity  and 
humility,  but  these  do  not  comprise  the  whole  of  the  rehgious 
problem.  The  relationship  to  Dostoevskii  is  remarkable, 
for  Dostoevskii's  literary  and  journalistic  genre  resembled 
that  of  Mihailovskii.  Yet  Mihailovskii's  treatment  of  Dos- 
toevskii was  inadequate,  whilst  Dostoevskii  never  said  a  word 
about  Mihailovskii. 

Mihailovskii  has  .frequently  been  extolled,  as  for  instance 
by  Kropotkin,  because  as  early  as  1875  he  predicted  the  religious 
crisis  which  was  coming  in  Tolstoi's  mind.  Kropotkin  refers 
to  the  articles  entitled  The  Right  Hand  and  the  Left  Hand  of 
Count  Tolstoi.  In  my  opinion,  however,  Tolstoi  had  clearly 
displayed  this  trend  long  before  1875,  for  the  later  Tolstoi 
is  foreshadowed  in  that  writer's  earliest  creations.  However 
this  may  be,  \yq  are  here  concerned  only  with  the  characteri- 
sation of  Mihailovskii  himself,  with  the  study  of  Mihailovskii's 
mental  development.  We  can  readily  understand  that  he 
could  not  approve  Tolstoi's  campaign  against  science,  or  the 
ethical  outlook  on  marriage  enunciated  by  Tolstoi  in  The 
Kretitzer  Sonata,  though  it  may  be  suggested  that  Mihailovskii 
took  the  onslaught  on  science  too  literally.  Moreover,  Tolstoi's 
apohtical  trend  requires  closer  examination,  for  we  must  ask 
whether  it  did  not  in  the  end  subserve  the  aim.s  of  the  pohtical 


186  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

movement.  May  we  not  suppose  that  the  left  hand  (passivity, 
shrinking  from  responsibihty)  knew  what  the  right  hand 
(energy,  criticism,  activity)  was  doing  ? 

In  historical  perspective,  Mihailovskii  pictured  the  evolution 
of  Russian  literature  as  a  transition  from  aristocracy  through 
the  stage  of  the  "  aristocrats  doing  penance  "  to  the  demo- 
cratic literary  movement  of  our  own  day.  Analysing  the 
spokesmen  of  the  aristocratic  epoch,  and  in  especial  the 
writers  of  the  forties  and  the  sixties,  Mihailovskii  found  in 
their  work  a  confirmation  of  his  own  Ijiistorico-philosophical 
analysis  of  the  age.  Lermontov's  Hero  of  our  own  Time  is  the 
spokesman  of  hezvrenien' e  (the  word  has  the  double  meaning 
of  bad  weather  and  bad  "luck),  the  representative  of  an  inert 
epoch.  From  Avdeev's  Our  Society  in  the  Heroes  and  Heroines 
of  the  Literature  of  the  Fifties  (1874),  Mihailovskii  cites  the 
analysis  of  the  types  Cackii,  Onegin,  Pecorin,  Rudin,  Bazarov, 
and  Rjazanov  ;  and  Mihailovskii  is  doubtless  right  when  he 
makes  common  cause  with  Avdeev  on  behalf  of  Rudin  as  a 
representative  of  the  sixties,  suggesting  that  Rudin  was  by 
no  means  so  passive  and  inert  as  is  usually  held.  Turgenev 
already  represented  the  coming  of  better  days,  and  still  more 
could  this  be  said  of  Mihailovskii's  favourite  authors,  but  the 
bezvremen'e  has  by  no  means  disappeared,  as  can  be  shown 
by  a  study,  not  only  of  Dostoevskii,  but  also  of  Tolstoi,  and 
still  more  of  Cehov  and  of  the  decadents. 

Apropos  of  the  term  favourite  authors,  Mihailovskii  is  by 
no  means  a  blind  admirer.  For  example,  in  connection  with 
the  dispute  concerning  Nekrasov's  true  character,  Mihailovskii 
recalls  an  early  saying  of  Nekrasov's,  that  fie  had  sworn  not 
to  die  in  a  garret.  Mihailovskii  saw  clearly  enough  that  this 
proletarian  wished  to  become  a  wealth}'  man. 

In  his  criticism  of  philosophical  and  of  social  and  political 
trends  and  currents  (Mihailovskii  speaks  rather  of  "  moral 
and  political  "  trends  and  currents),  Mihailovskii  is  concerned 
chiefly  with  the  present  day.  Only  in  passing  does  he  allude 
to  the  earlier  movements,  like  those  of  the  Slavophils  and  of 
the  westernisers,  for  he  considers  that  both  these  trends  belong 
entirely  to  the  past. 

He  says  very  little,  too,  concerning  his  Russian  predecessors 
in  the  critical  fields,  concerning  CernySevskii,  Herzen,  and 
B^linskii ;  but  in  the  early  days  of  his  literary  activity  he 
is  never  wearj^  of  pointing  out  the  exaggerations  in  the  nihilist 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  187 

aesthetics  of  Pisarev  and  that  writer's  associates,  whilst  he 
stigmatises  Pisarev's  attitude  towards  Pu§kin  as  pure  vandahsm. 
Mihailovskii  is  a  sharp  critic  of  reaHsm,  condemning  the  whole 
trend,  but  Pisarev  and  Blagosv^tlov  in  especial,  for  this 
hterature,  he  says,  had  no  thought  for  the  folk,  but  only  for 
a  sect.  Mihailovskii  speaks  with  much  sympathy  of  the 
works  written  by  his  friends  Eliseev  and  Selgunov. 

The  shafts  of  Mihailovskii's  criticism  were  directed  against 
European  authorities  as  well  as  against  those  of  Russia,  and 
in  this  respect  he  is  differentiated  from  Cernysevskii,  Herzen, 
and  Belinskii.  Consider,  for  example,  his  writings  on  Darwin 
and  Darwin's  successors,  on  Spencer,  Voltaire,  Renan,  Stirner, 
Nietzsche,  Hartmann,  Zola,  and  Ibsen.  iMihailovskii  uses 
this  means  of  attack  against  many  of  the  dominant  views  in 
his  own  camp,  for  the  foes  of  his  own  household  seem  to  him 
more  dangerous  than  declared  opponents. 

In  connection  with  his  analysis  of  the  contemporary  chaos, 
and  in  especial  in  his  analysis  of  the  decadent  movement, 
Mihailovskii  had  a  controversy  with  Merezkovskii  and  with 
the  critic  Volvnskii. 

I  must  conchide  these  brief  and  incomplete  observations. 
It  has  not  been  my  aim  to  expaund  Mihailovskii's  views  on 
aesthetics,  but  merely  to  show  his  spiritual  associations 
("  Tell  me  thy  company,  and  I  will  tell  thee  what  thou  art  "). 

Our  definitive  judgment  of  Mihailovskii  cannot  but  be 
favourable.  His  uniformitj',  consistency,  and  independence 
were  ai"  notable  significance  to  Russia.  He  was  not  a  genius, 
nor  even  a  brilliant  writer,  but  his  methodical  foresight,  his 
endeavour  to  attain  clearness  and  precision,  made  his  works 
what  they  still  are,  a  notable  school  of  sociological  and  political 
culture.  The  subjective  method  (a  bad  name  for  an  excellent 
thing)  corrected  the  one-sided  drift  of  the  positivists  towards 
natural  science  and  materialism,  and  supplemented  realism 
by  the  study  of  psycholog}^  and  of  mental  activities. 

Delight  in  psychological  analysis  led  IMihailovskii  to  bring 
his  philosophy  into  harmony  with  the  "  psychologism  "  of 
the  Russian  novelists,  but  the  outcome  of  this  psychologism 
was  to  lead  Mihailovskii  to  reduce  the  theory  of  cognition  to 
the  sphere  of  psychology.  The  consequence  was  that,  not 
in  metaphysical  questions  merety,  but  likewise  in  epistemo- 
logical  questions,  Mihailovskii's  thought  was  affected  by  a 
vagueness  which  was  dangerous  to  the  success  of  his  aspirations 


188  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

towards  precision.  Without  being  aware  of  it,  Mihailovskii 
replaced  epistemological  criticism  by  a  reliance  upon  authorities 
whom  he  did  not  venture  to  question.  Comte,  Feuerbach, 
Adam  Smith,  and  John  Stuart  Mill  were  for  him  such 
authorities. 

Of  late  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  class  Mihailovskii  a& 
among  the  empiricist  critics,  and  to  speak  of  him  as  a  precursor 
of  Mach  and  Avenarius.  Such  a  classification  is  admissible 
only  in  so  far  as  it  is  true  that  Mihailovskii  accepted  the  posi- 
tivism of  Comte  and  Mill,  and  was  content  with  a  purely 
psychological  analysis.  Believing  with  Comte  that  we  can 
have  no  scientific  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things,  Mihailovskii 
rested  content  v/ith  this  agnosticism.  Mach  and  similar 
thinkers  have  moved  along  the  same  road  with  their  revival 
of  Hume  ;  but  Mach,  Avenarius,  etc.,  studied  Kant,  and  took 
Kant's  thought  into  account  in  the  formulation  of  their  own 
empirical  standpoint,  whereas  ]\Iihailovskii  ignored  Kant. 
Herein  lies  a  notable  distinction  between  Mihailovskii  and 
the  German  Humists. 

Of  late  certain  disciples  (Struve,  Berdjaev,  etc.)  have  under- 
taken an  epistemological  examination  of  Mihailovskii's  sub- 
jective method,  and  have  brought  it  into  harmony  with  the 
more  recent  developments  of  German  philosophy,  but  I  cannot 
see  that  these  investigations  have  had  any  noteworthy  result. 
The  "  chaos  "  against  which  Mihailovskii  fought  still  dominates 
the  theory  of  cognition  and  the  field  of  criticism. 

Mihailovskii's  psychologism  can  further  be  detected  in  his 
philosophy  of  religion.  An  effect  of  the  religious  spirit/ is 
mistaken  for  the  very  essence  of  religion.  But  an  important 
contribution  is  made  to  the  practical  aspect  of  the  problem, 
inasmuch  as  Mihailovskii  demands  clearness  and  definiteness 
above  all  in  the  ethical  domain,  and  here  finds  his  strongest 
standing  ground.  In  this  respect  he  is  in  agreement  with 
Hume,  but  also  with  Kant  and  with  more  recent  writers,  such 
as  Mill  and  Spencer,  His  theoretical  agnosticism  becomes 
a  practical  gnosis,  if  I  may  employ  the  word  to  denote  his 
clearly  conceived  and  deliberately  chosen  ethical  outlook. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  that  Mihailovskii  did  not  study 
the  religious  problem  as  considered  in  the  works  of  Dostoevskii 
and  Tolstoi.  This  seems  to  me  very  remarkable,  but  I  cannot 
venture  to  suggest  an  explanation.  In  his  analysis  of  the 
environing  chaos  he  occasionally  refers  to  the  philosophy  of 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  189 

religion  of  some  of  the  Slavophil  stragglers  (Rozanov,  for 
instance).  But  this  cannot  be  termed  a  serious  analysis  of 
the  problem.  Is  it  possible  that  fears  of  the  censorship  with- 
held him  from  a  thorough  analysis,  not  only  of  Dostoevskii 
and  Tolstoi,  but  also  of  such  writers  as  Vladimir  Solov'ev 
and  Pob^donoscev  ?  But  surely  the  work  could  have  been 
published  abroad  ? 

For  Mihailovskii  the  association  of  religion  with  morality 
was  extremely  intimate,  and  here  the  influence  of  German 
philosophy,  indirectly  that  of  Kant,  is  perceptible.  To 
Mihailovskii  the  transition  to  socialism,  and  to  a  union  of  French 
and  of  German  socialism,  was  to  be  effected  on  these  lines. 
In  this  matter  Feuerbach  rendered  Mihailovskii  the  service 
which  Mihailovskii  rendered  to  Marx. 

Such  considerations  indicate  Mihailovskii' s  philosophical 
position  in  relation  to  socialism.  Some  have  regarded 
Mihailovskii's  work  as  the  climax  of  "  Russian  socialism." 
In  actual  fact,  Mihailovskii  derived  his  socialism  from  the 
same  philosophical,  historical,,  and  political  sources  as  those 
from  which  the  views  of  Lavrov,  Cernysevskii,  Belinskii,  and 
Herzen  were  derived ;  but  Mihailovskii's  outlook  upon  the 
justification  of  socialism  and  the  necessity  for  socialism  v/as 
far  more  comprehensive  than  that  of  the  other  writers  named. 
In  essence,  Mihailovskii's  socialism,  like  that  of  his  prede- 
cessors and  teachers,  was  a  logical  application  of  humanist 
morality.  Man,  the  human  essence,  are  the  alpha  and  omega 
of  Mihailovskii's  socialism.  '  For  Mihailovskii,  therefore, 
socialism  was  revolutionary  in  Europe,  but  conservative  in 
Russia. 

In  this  matter,  above  all,  he  agreed  with  Lavrov.  The 
fact  that  Mihailovskii  and  Lavrov,  one  remaining  in  Russia, 
the  other  a  refugee  in  Europe,  shouldl  have  simultaneously 
insisted  upon  the  ethical  trend  of  philosophy  and  of  socialism, 
is  one  of  primary  significance,  and  exercised  a  great  influence 
in  educating  and  leading  forward  the  young  generation  that 
arose  after  the  liberation!  of  the  peasantry. 

I  may  point  out  in  conclusion  that  Mihailovskii  would 
have  done  well  to  pay  closer  attention  to  Marx  and  Marxism. 
What  he  had  to  say  about  these  matters  in  his  controversies 
with  the  Marxists  and  the  narodniki  (in  the  middle  nineties 
and  subsequently),  and  in  his  controversies  with  Plehanov, 
Struve,  and  Voroncov,  did  not  serve  to  clear  up  the  questions 


190  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

in  dispute  either  philosophically  or  economically.  Mihailovskii 
was  an  adversary  of  historical  materialism,  but  nevertheless 
his  philosophy  of  history  paved  the  way  for  the  spread  of 
Marxist  ideas,  both  in  their  orthodox  and  in  their  revisionist 
forms. 


CHAPTER  SIXTEEN 

THE  THEORISTS  OF  THE  OFFICIAL  THEOCRACY 
KATKOV;    POBEDONOSCEV  ;    LEONT'EV. 


.    '  §  132. 

WE  have  now  to  turn  to  the  contemporary  opponents 
of  the  progressive  and  radical  pohticians  hitherto  con- 
sidered, and  shall  begin  with  Mihail  Nikiforovic  Katkov  (1818- 
1887),  the  publicist  defender  of  the  government  and  the 
theocracy. 

At  Moscow  during  the  forties  Katkov  was  a  member  of 
Stankevic's  circle,  being  on  intimate  terms  with  Belinskii  and 
Bakunin,  and  beginning  his  publicist  activities  under  Belinskii's 
auspices.  When  Belinskii  left  Moscow  for  St.  Petersburg, 
Katkov,  with  Ketc^er  and  Bakunin,  accompanied  him  part 
of  the  way.  Shortly  afterwards  a  breach  occurred  between 
Katkov  and  Bakunin,  and  in  Belinskii's  house  on  one  occasion 
(1840)  the  two  men  actually  came  to  blows.  At  the  end  of 
the  thirties,  Katkov  was  under  Hegel's  influence,  which,  how- 
ever, was  soon  replaced  by  that  of  Schelling— the  Schelling  of 
the  later  phase.  In  1840  and  1841,  Katkov  attended  Schelling's 
lectures  in  Berlin.  Already  in  1840,  when  the  leaven  of  ScheUing 
had  begun  to  work,  Katkov  adopted  as  his  program  the  three 
high-sounding  words  of  Uvarov,  Orthodoxy,  autocracy,  and 
nationality.  Nevertheless  the  aspiring  j^oung  thinker  found 
it  possible  to  conceive  Uvarov's  program  in  the  sense  of  Peter. 
He  wrote  in  1840  :  "  Russia  first  originated  through  Peter." 
In  1841  he  expressed  himself  as  strongly  averse  to  the  Old 
Russism  of  Pogodin  and  Pogodin's  associates,  defending  Europe, 
and  maintaining  that  Europe  was  not  falling  into  decay. 

In  1845  he  had  become  professor  of  philosophy,  but  in  1850 

191 


192  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

he  lost  this  position  during  the  reaction  that  followed  1848. 
Taking  up  the  work  of  publicist  in  1851,  he  was  appointed 
editor  of  the  official  periodical  "  Moskovskija  VSdomosti  " 
(Moscow  News),  subsequently  notorious,  and  held  the  post 
until  1S55.  In  1856  he  founded  the  "  Russkii  VSstnik " 
(Russian  Messenger),  and  under  his  editorship  this  review  soon 
became  the  most  noted  organ  of  moderate  liberalism.  In  the 
early  days  of  his  public  career,  Katkov  w^as  an  enthusiastic- 
admirer  of  England  and  English  institutions  ;  he  paid  a  visit 
to  England,  and  studied  the  English  constitution,  reading  the 
works  of  Blackstone  and  Gneist.  The  "  Moskovskija  Vedomosti  " 
became  the  standard-bearer  of  constitutionalism.  But  his 
political  anglomania  was  already  of  a  perfectly  innocent 
character,  as  is  shown,  for  example,  by  his  admiration  for  the 
English  landed  gentry.  By  now  in  essentials  Katkov  was  a 
conservative,  and  therefore  in  his  newspaper  he  had  taken 
sides  against  the  early  Slavophils.  The  Slavophil  theory  of 
nationality,  and  Slavophil  burrowings  into  the  foundations  of , 
Russian  nationalit}^  were  uncongenial  to  him.  The  French, 
he  said,  are  not  so  terribly  concerned  about  their  nationality, 
nor  is  such  concern  needful,  for  if  nationality  be  healthy  it  will 
assert  itself  spontaneously,  Homjakov,  of  course,  held  a 
different  view,  and  could  appeal  to  Klopstock,  Fichte,  and 
Schiller. 

As  late,  nevertheless,  as  1858,  Katkov  took  part  with  Kose- 
lev  in  organising  a  demonstration  and  a  collection  of  funds  on 
behalf  of  Kruse,  who  had  been  deprived  of  his  office  of  censor 
on  account  of  liberal  views,  but  after  186 1  Katkov  moved 
notably  towards  the  right. 

In  his  view,  the  liberation  of  the  peasantry  and  the  ensuing 
reforms  gave  undue  scope  to  the  forces  of  progress,  and  opened 
undesirable  channels  for  these  forces.  He  detested  in  the 
progressive  and  democratic  movement  its  negation  of  the 
principles  of  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  centralism,  which  he 
regarded  as  essential  to  true  progress.  The  problem  was,  he 
considered,  to  allot  to  these  principles  their  proper  position 
and  to  assign  to  them  their  due  boundaries  in  the  organism  ^ 
of  the  state  as  a  whole.  "  Interest  in  freedom,"  he  wrote  in 
1862,  "  constitutes  the  soul  of  conservatism " — vague  and 
indefinite  phraseology  was  characteristic  of  Katkov's  utterances. 
It  is  possible  to  quote  passages  from  his  essays  wherein  he 
accepts  the  new  reforms  and  speaks  of  their  splendid  mission. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  193 

Of  the  zemstvos,  for  example,  adopting  here  Slavophil  ideas, 
he  expects  that  they  .will  discover  the  true  relationship  to  the 
past,  will  re-establish  the  national  life  in  its  totaUty,  and  will 
awaken  the  creative  energies  of  that  life. 

He  was  thinking  not  only  of  the  Enghsh  gentry  (the  EngHsh 
gentry  of  that  day  !),  but  also  of  the  Russian  nobles,  whom  he 
regarded  as  the  born  leaders  of  the  common  people.  Mihailov- 
skii  tells  us  in  his  memoirs  that  in  1861  Katkov  denounced 
Eliseev  for  desiring  to  protect  the  aristocracy  of  culture  against 
the  aristocracy  of  birth. 

In  June  1862,  Katkov  opened  a  campaign  against  Herzen 
and  the  "  Kolokol  "  ;  after  the  Polish  rising  in  1863  he  exploited 
national  chauvinism  for  his  own  ends.  During  the  revolt, 
Schedo-Ferroti  (von  Fircks)  pubUshed  a  pamphlet  entitled 
Que  fcra-t-on  de  la  Pologne  ?  in  which  he  demanded  that  Poland, 
whilst  remaining  an  integral  part  of  Russia,  should  be  granted 
local  self-government.  Katkov  made  this  the  text  for  a  violent 
attack  on  the  Poles,  and  while  ostensibly  aimed  at  Schedo- 
Ferroti,  his  onslaught  was  really  directed  at  the  liberal  minister 
Golovnin. 

Katkov  was  not  slow  to  oppose  Cernysevskii  and  the  reahst 
movement.  At  first,  indeed,  he  had  collaborated  with 
Cernysevskii  on  the  staff  of  the  "  Otecestvennyja  Zapiski  "  ; 
but  in  186 1,  in  his  own  review,  Katkov  pubhshed  Jurkevici's 
anti-materiaUstic  writing,  and  the  "  Russkii  Vestnik  "  became 
the  chief  organ  of  the  counternihihst  movement.  Turgenev's 
Fathers  and  Children  was  published  by  Katkov  ;  Dostoevskii, 
despite  his  earher  polemic  against  Katkov,  issued  his  antinihihst 
novels  under  Katkov's  aegis  ;  and  Katkov  was  dehghted  to 
pubUsh  the  novels  of  Kljusnikov,  Krestovskii,  and  Markevia. 
To  Katkov,  Uterature  was  subservient  to  his  poUtical  plans 
Not  for  the  sake  of  Uterature  had  he  founded  his  review,  but 
because  he  had  formed  a  sound  estimate  of  the  pohtical  power 
of  literature  ;  and  in  view  of  the  hterary  conditions  prevailing 
at  the  close  of  the  Nicolaitan  period  it  was  not  difficult  for  him, 
aided  by  his  collaborators  (the  name  of  Ostrovskii  may  be 
added  to  those  already  mentioned),  to  acquire  hterary  influence. 
In  1862,  writing  in  Dostoevskii's  review  "  Vremja "  (Time), 
Grigor'ev  rightly  pointed  out  that  Uterature  was  to  Katkov  of 
no  consequence,  a  mere  means  to  an  end.'     Katkov's  disposition 

I  Katkov  could  naturally  pay  better  than  could  the  progressive  organs 
and  even  Turgcnev  was  often  short  of  money  ! 

It  VOL.    IT. 


194  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

is  most  unambiguously  displayed  in  his  censorial  work  as  editor. 
Publishing  Turgenev's  Fathers  and  Children,  he  treated  Bazarov 
most  maliciously  by  simply  suppressing  all  the  mitigating 
traits  of  that  hero's  character. 

The  year  1863  and  the  Polish  rising  gave  Katkov  an  authori- 
tative position  among  the  conservatives  and  nationalists. 
Resuming  the  editorship  of  the  "  Moskovskija  Vedomosti," 
he  thus  acquired  a  widely  circulated  journal  through  which 
to  push  his  designs.  More  and  more  the  program  of  Orthodoxy, 
autocracy,  and  nationality  came  to  be  conceived  by  him  in 
the  sense  of  the  government ;  and  after  1866,  when  the  first 
attempt  was  made  on  the  tsar's  life,  he  definitely  took  up  a 
position  opposed  to  the  intelligentsia.  In  1867  he  formulated 
his  credo  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Russia  needs  a  unified  state 
and  a  strong  Russian  nationality.  Let  us  create  such  a  nation- 
ality upon  the  foundation  of  a  language  common  to  all  the 
inhabitants,  upon  that  of  a  common  faith,  and  upon  that  of 
the  Slavic  mir.  Let  us  overthrow  everything  which  imposes 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  these  designs.  In  this  program  of  rigid 
Russification,  the  only  exception  he  was  willing  to  make  related 
to  the  Poles  (see  §  68). 

Katkov  was  shrewd  enough  to  turn  his  attention  to  the 
schools.  Effecting  a  rapprochement  to  Pobedonoscev  and 
Count  D.  A.  Tolstoi,  he  favoured  classicism  in  the  gimnazija  and 
he  attacked  the  reorganisation  of  the  universities  effected  in 
1863.  In  1878  the  Moscow  students  accompanied  the  start 
of  a  convoy  of  exiles,  and  for  this  peaceable  demonstration  were 
savagely  handled  by  the  butchers.  The  next  day  Katkov's 
organ  strongly  commended  this  butcher  patriotism. 

With  increasing  energy,  Katkov  opposed  the  bureaucracy, 
which  seemed  Laodicean  and  too  liberal.  His  prestige  grew 
when  in  1866  his  paper  was  suspended  for  two  months.  Once 
again,  in  1870,  he  received  an  official  admonition.  He  was 
greatly  dissatisfied  with  Russian  diplomacy,  while  the  Turkish 
war  and  its  results  were  as  little  to  his  liking  as  to  that  of  other 
politicians  and  partisans.  His  conduct  of  a  campaign  upon 
two  fronts  made  Katkov  highly  respected  in  court  circles,  and 
it  is  reported  that  Alexander  II,  who  beyond  question  was  not 
wholly  in  accord  with  Katkov's  ideas,  protected  Katkov  by 
saying  that  that  writer  would  be  his  own  censor. 

It  was  after  Alexander's  death  that  Katkov  acquired  his 
most  extensive  influence  over  the  government  and  the  court. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  195 

Loris-Melikov's  dictatorship  was  his  idea,  although  the  plan 
was  not  carried  out  precisely  as  he  had  wished.  Denouncing 
the  assassination  as  the  work  of  the  Poles  and  of  the  intelli- 
gentsia ("  the  intrigue  "),  he  gave  free  rein  to  his  reactionary 
ideas.  He  had  by  now  conceived  a  hatred  for  the  zemstvos, 
and  in  economic  questions  had  become  a  rigid  protectionist. 
His  accusations  were  directed  against  the  ministries  and  the 
other  high  institutions  of  state,  and  he  was  right  to  this  extent, 
that  the  state  servants  had  often  no  clear  views  of  what  they 
wanted  to  do,  were  inert,  vacillating,  and  lukewarm.  Katkov 
was  in  alliance  with  Pobedonoscev.  Katkov's  influence  made 
itself  felt  in  the  administration  of  the  schools  and  the  universities. 
Orest  Miller,  a  Slavophil,  but  a  liberal  historian  of  literature, 
was  suspended  because  he  had  given  expression  to  his  opinions 
upon  Katkov.  The  reactionary  university  statutes  of  1884 
were  mainly  the  work  of  Katkov. 

The  telegram  of  condolence  which  Alexander  III  sent  to 
the  widow  of  Katkov  when  that  writer  died,  and  the  way  in 
which  his  patriotism  was  extolled,  showed  how  great  was  his 
prestige  at  court.  The  fact  that  Katkov  was  able  to  gain 
such  a  position  for  himself  has  been  regarded  as  in  a  sense  a 
victory  of  journalism  over  the  closed  circle  of  the  Russian 
court. 

Katkov  frequently  changed  his  opinions,  for  as  politician 
he  was  far  from  being  a  man  of  firm  and  definite  character, 
or  one  clearly  conscious  of  his  aims.  Turgenev  was  doubtless 
right  in  speaking  of  him  as  a  poseur  ;  and  other  publicists, 
such  as  Annenkov  and  Panaev,  took  the  same  view.  Katkov 
was  shrewd  enough  ;  he  recognised  the  instability  of  the  regime 
of  Alexander  II  (though  this,  indeed,  did  not  require  much 
sagacity).  But  Katkov  himself  was  hardly  less  unstable.  He 
lacked  a  thoroughly  elaborated  conservative  philosophy,  but 
he  served  the  headless  and  heartless  reaction,  and  (as  Solov'ev 
put  it)  he  defended  the  Russian  state  with  truly  Mohammedan 
fanaticism.  This  explains  the  paradoxical  advice  which  he 
gave  the  Bulgarians  during  the  reign  of  Alexander  of  Battenberg, 
when  he  counselled  them  to  establish  a  republic.  Monarchy, 
he  said,  was  the  best  form  of  government  for  great  states,  but 
was  unsuited  for  petty  states,  since  the  sovereigns  of  these 
were  too  weak  not  to  pass  under  the  influence  of  one  or  other 
of  the  great  states,  and  this  led  to  disastrous  conflicts  between 
people    and   ruler.     Katkov's   opinion   secured    the   approval 


196  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

of  the  renowned  Colonel  Komarov,  but  none  the  less  it  gives 
sufficient  proof  that  Katkov's  tsarism  was  affected  by  internal 
corrosion.  The  arguments  Katkov  used  in  favour  of  tsarism 
and  autocracy  were  taken  from  de  Maistre,  but  he  lacked  the 
political  consistency  of  the  man  who  glorified  the  executioner.  ^ 
Moreover,  in  youth  Katkov  had  had  dealings  with  Tocqueville 
and  Macaulay  ;  in  France  and  in  England  these  v/ere  accounted 
men  of  moderate  views,  but  in  Russia  their  opinions  had  a 
revolutionary  influence.  Not  without  significance  was  the  fact 
that  in  youth  Katkov  had  made  translations  from  Shakespeare, 
Hoffmann,  and  even  Heine. 

His  own  indecisiveness  enabled  him  to  understand  the 
indecisiveness  of  the  government  and  the  bureaucracy,,  and 
likewise  enabled  him  to  understand  the  shortsightedness  of 
the  censorship,  which  (in  a  petition  to  the  government)  he 
accused  of  undermining  religion.  Nor  was  he  under  any 
illusions  concerning  the  weakness  of  the  autocrat.  In  Katkov's 
devotion  to  the  reaction  there  was  a  dash  of  anarchism.  If  I 
mistake  not,  Herzen  realised  this  when  he  pointed  out  with 
delight  that  Katkov  had  forced  journalism  upon  tsarism. 

We  cannot  discover  in  Katkov's  writings  any  definite  system 
of  political  views,  nor  did  he  exercise  a  guiding  influence  in 
matters  of  principle.  Mihailovskii  once  aptly  termed  him  the 
vii  of  the  "  Moscow  News."  The  vii  is  a  Little  Russian 
m3^thical  being  who  is  unable  to  see  in  ordinary  circumstances 
because  his  eyelids  reach  to  the  ground  ;  but  the  vii  can  see 
-perfectly  well  if  his  lids  are  held  forcibly  open  with  a  pitchfork. 

Katkov  was  continually  vacillating.  In  the  sixties,  for 
example,  he  was  opposed  to  the  Slavophils  ;  in  1880,  at  the 
Puskin  festival,  he  became  reconciled  with  them  (with  Ivan 
Aksakov,  at  least,  for  Turgenev  refused  to  clink  glasses  with 
him)  ;  but  almost  immediately  after  this  reconciliation  Katkov 
resumed  his  old  attitude  of  hostility.  During  the  Turkish 
war  he  was  antigerman  ;  in  1882  he  was  well  pleased  with 
Bismarck,  because  the  chancellor  was  more  Russian  than  was 
Russian  diplomacy,  which  rested  upon  no  national  foundation  ; 
but  from  1886  onwards  he  opposed  Bismarck  and  the  Bis- 
marckians  in  the  most  violent  terms.  In  like  manner,  he  was, 
at  first  antifrench,  and  subsequently  profrench.     Having  been 

1  Shortly  after  Katkov's  death  de  Maistre's  theocratic  poUcy  was  dis- 
cussed in  the  Russkii  V§stnik  (1889),  and  was  applied  in  its  entirety  to  Russian 
affairs. 


THE   SPIRIT  OF   RUSSIA  197 

a  moderate  free  trader  before  the  Turkish  war,  he  became  a 
protectionist  when  the  war  was  over. 

Katkov  was  the  typical  bourgeois  stigmatised  by  Herzen 
and  Mihailovskii,  one  of  those  parvenus  who  push  themselves 
into  the  company  of  the  great  ones  of  earth,  impose  themselves 
by  force  of  individuality,  but  at  the  same  time  render  service. 
At  the  outset  of  his  career  he  had  written  to  Kraevskii :  "  The 
sum  of  my  ambition  is  to  be  employed  upon  special  service  by 
a  big  gun,  or  at  least  by  a  gun  of  medium  calibre." 

I  do  not  think  I  underrate  Katkov  or  do  him  an  injustice 
when  I  refrain  from  the  attempt  to  construct  a  philosophy  of 
history  or  a  philosophy  of  religion  out  of  his  innumerable  articles 
and  reviews.  (I  may  mention  in  passing  that  in  1852  he  wrote 
a  history  of  early  Greek  philosophy  for  a  collective  work  pro- 
duced by  his  friend  P.  M.  Leont'ev.)  In  the  early  seventies, 
A.  S.  Suvorin,  editor  of  the  "  Novoe  Vremja,"  described  Katkov, 
Leont'ev,  etc.,  as  busy  exploiters  of  credulity  and  stupidity. 
Subsequently,  Suvorin  changed  his  mind  in  this  as  in  other 
matters  ;  nevertheless,  in  an  obituary  notice  published  in  the 
"  Novoe  Vremja  "  of  August  9,  1887,  a  week  after  Katkov's 
death,  Suvorin  wrote :  "  He  occasionally  endeavoured  to 
formulate  his  views,  and  when  he  succeeded  in  such  a  formula- 
tion he  could  never  avoid  oratorical  sophistry."  It  may  be 
added  that  the  "  Novoe  Vremja  "  w^as  itself  expert  in  journaUsm 
of  this  nature. 

§  133- 

IN  addition  to  the  journaUsts  of  the  theocracy,  we  have  to 
consider   Konstantin   Petrovi^  PobSdonoscev    (1827-1907), 
who  defended  theocracy  as  a  sociologist. 

"  The  bringer  of  victory,"  such  is  the  significance  of  the  name 
PobSdonoscev,  the  name  of  the  man  whose  opinions  w^ere  long 
dominant  among  the  ruling  class  of  Russia,  of  the  man  whose 
desperate  attempt  to  suppress  the  progressive  movement  of  the 
Russian  youth  and  the  Russian  intelligentsia  was  largely 
responsible  for  the  deplorable  situation  of  the  countr3^  Such 
a  name  as  "the  bringer  of  victory  "  is  a  lucky  and  desirable 
one  in  a  land  of  superstition  and  at  a  court  where  superstition 
is  rife.  It  is  true,  however,  there  were  man}^  in  Russia  to  point 
out  that  bedonoscev  means  "bringer  of  evil  "  and  that  donoscev 
signifies  "informer."  Whoever  wishes  to  know  what  has  been 
going  on  in  Russia  under  Alexander  III  and  Nicholas  II  must 


198  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

study  the  mental,  scientific,  and  journalistic  characteristics 
of  Pobedonoscev.  His  activities  were  extensive,  and  were 
concerned  with  the  questions  of  the  day.  In  addition  to  learned 
collections  of  juristic  data,  he  published  legal  textbooks  (the 
most  important  of  which  was  a  manual  of  civil  law),  and  a 
number  of  journalistic  essays.  In  1896  appeared  a  series  of 
articles  under  the  title  of  Moskovskii  Sbornik  (Moscow  Collection), 
in  which  Pobedonoscev  expounded  his  political  and  religious 
creed.     The  book  ran  through  a  number  of  editions. 

The  mere  title  "  Moscow  Collection  "  is  enough  to  show 
anyone  who  possesses  the  necessary  insight  that  the  author, 
though  he  held  office  in  St.  Petersburg,  felt  himself  to  be  a 
man  of  Moscow — for  to  Pobedonoscev,  Moscow  was  the  third 
Rome  of  true  Christianity,  the  ideal  capital  of  the  genuine 
Russian.  Born  in  Moscow,  in  Moscow  he  became  professor 
of  civil  law  and  procedure,  and  as  such  was  appointed  juristic 
tutor  to  the  imperial  princes.  In  1880,  during  the  Loris- 
Melikov  regime,  the  tutor  of  Alexander  II  was  appointed  chief 
procurator  of  the  holy  synod,  and  held  this  office  until  1905. 

His  official  position  gave  his  opinions  the  great  weight 
which  they  have  possessed  in  Russia  since  the  time  when 
Alexander  III  ascended  the  throne.  The  liberal  or  semi-liberal 
system  of  Loris-Melikov  was  replaced  by  the  clericalist  system 
of  Pobedonoscev,  and  notwithstanding  1905  and  1906  this 
system  is  still  (1913)  dominant  in  St.  Petersburg. 

Pobedonoscev  was  and  desired  to  remain  the  man  of  Moscow. 
He  sought  his  intellectual  forbears  among  the  Moscow  Slavo- 
phils, and  above  all  among  the  Slavophil  Old  Russians.  It  is 
undeniable  that  his  fundamental  philosophical  principles  remind 
us  of  those  held  by  the  leaders  of  the  Slavophil  school,  so  that 
we  think  now  of  Kireevskii,  now  of  Konstantin  Aksakov,  and 
now  again  of  Samarin  and  Homjakov ;  but  the  images  of  these 
notable  thinkers  pale  before  those  of  Pogodin  and  Katkov, 
which  loom  far  more  plainly  behind  the  pages  of  the  Moskovskii 
Sbornik.  As  far  as  Katkov  is  concerned,  we  do  not  see  that 
writer  in  his  youthful  and  liberal  days,  but  we  discern  the 
counsellor  of  Alexander  III.  The  assassination  of  Alexander 
II  brought  Katkov  and  Pobedonoscev  into  power.  In  nihilism 
and  revolutionary  terrorism,  Pobedonoscev  found  the  precise 
antithesis,  as  a  philosophy  of  history,  to  his  own  fundamental 
outlook,  which  was  that  Old  Russian  civilisation,  as  the  precise 
opposite   of   western   civilisation,   could   alone   constitute   the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  199 

true  basis  for  a  genuinely  Russian  political  system.  The 
relationship  between  Russia  and  Europe  resembled  that  between 
day  and  night,  between  light  and  darkness,  between  Ormuzd 
and  Ahriman  ;  Russia  was  social  order,  Europe  was  anarchy  ; 
Russia  was  life,  Europe  death,  the  death  of  the  individual  and 
of  the  nation  as  a  whole,  death  at  once  moral  and  physical. 

Finally,  though  with  a  gross  distortion  of  the  Slavophil 
philosophy  of  history,  Pobedonoscev  considered  that  the 
essential  malady  of  Europe  and  of  liberalism  (including  Russian 
liberalism  under  Alexander  II)  was  rationalism.  The  meaning 
he  attached  to  this  term  varied.  Sometimes  he  attacked  logic 
and  the  syllogistic  method ;  sometimes  he  censured  logical 
formalism  or  animadverted  upon  the  critical  movement  in 
literature.  In  contrast  with  these  things  he  extolled  life  and 
its  immediate  needs,  placing  all  his  confidence  in  immediate 
sensation,  in  warm  feeling,  and  in  experience.  Quite  after 
the  manner  of  so  many  ultra-moderns,  did  he  thus  display 
Rousseauist  views.  For  Pobedonoscev,  too,  had  studied  in 
the  school  of  Rousseau,  and  like  so  many  of  the  romanticists 
he  rejected  science,  philosophy,  and  civilisation.  He  did  not, 
however,  aim  at  the  return  to  a  state  of  nature,  but  at  returning 
to  the  prepetrine  third  Rome  with  its  Byzantine  orthodoxy 
and  its  philosophy  of  the  fathers  of  the  church.  This  philosophy 
is  mystical,  and  utterly  without  rationalism.  Pobedonoscev 
accepted  in  its  entirety  the  mystical  psychology  of  the  Slavophils, 
but  as  a  practical  statesman  and  ecclesiastic  he  carried  it  out 
to  its  logical  political  consequences.  Thus  the  mystical 
imitator  of  Christ  (Pobedonoscev  translated  a  Kempis)  developed 
into  the  "  grand  inquisitor  "  of  Dostoevskii. 

According  to  the  literal  phrasing  of  this  Orthodox  Russian 
theory  of  cognition,  only  the  blockhead  can  desire  to  think 
clearly  about  everything.  The  most  valuable  ideas,  those 
most  needful  in  life,  remain  in  a  mystical  chiaroscuro  in  the 
remote  recesses  of  the  soul.  The  greatest  thoughts  are  neces- 
sarily obscure.  The  mass  of  the  population  is  under  the  sway 
of  a  natural  vis  inertiae,  but  this  inertia  must  not  be  confused 
with  unculture  and  roughness,  for  it  is  a  natural  and  healthy 
shrinking  from  logical  thought,  a  natural  tendency  to  shun 
the  hustle  of  modern  progress.  The  folk  trusts  tradition, 
which  has  not  been  thought  out,  but  has  been  made  by  life 
itself  ;  history,  history  alone,  not  the  law  of  nature,  is  the 
desirable  and  needful  authority  for  mankind.     The  believing 


200  .       THE   SPIRIT  OF   RUSSIA 

!  spirit  of  the  genuine  Russian,  being  uncorrupted  by  logic,  accepts 
this  authority  as  a  matter  of  course ;  the  folk  feels  directly, 
feels  in  its  soul,  and  perceives  absolute  truth,  artist  fashion, 
by  way  of  faith.  In  folk-sagas  this  absolute  truth  has  found 
artistic  expression,  for  the  saga  is  the  history  of  the  whole 
folk.  History  is  the  most  trustworthy  of  all  authorities. 
Absolute  truth  is  religious  truth  ;  but  it  is  the  Russian  church, 
not  religion  in  the  abstract,  which  embodies  absolute  truth. 
This  truth  is  imparted  to  the  uncultured  masses  by  the  church 
ceremonies,  without  any  admixture  of  logic  and  philosophy. 
The  Russian  church  possesses  absolute  truth,  is  absolute  truth, 
and  therefore  the  Russian  folk  possesses  and  is  this  truth. 
The  various  churches  correspond  to  the  needs  of  the  various 
nations,  and  the  Russians  have  a  church  of  their  own.  The 
believer  will  never  recognise  a  foreign  doctrine,  but  on  the 
contrary,  "  should  need  arise  he  will  forcibly  impose  his  own 
belief  on  others." 

As  we  see,  the  mysticism  of  Joannes  Damascenus  (who 
was  the  Slavophils*  favourite  'father  of  the  church)  has  degener- 
ated into  orthodox  Jesuitism.  If  every  nation  has  its  own 
religion  and  nationality,  why  should  Russia,  with  its  milUons 
of  Poles,  Germans,  Finns,  Swedes,  etc.,  have  but  one  church 
and  but  one  recognised  nationality?  "Europeans!"  the 
answer  runs — that  is  quite  another  aftair  :  the  Russian  church, 
the  Russian  folk,  has  and  is  absolute  truth,  and  that  suffices  ! 

From  rationalism,  the  original  sin  of  Europe,  there  arises 
by  logical  sequence  a  second  original  sin,  belief  in  the  excellence 
of  the  natural  man.  Pob^donoscev,  however,  teaches  that  man 
is  by  nature  bad  and  full  of  malice,  and  he  infers  from  this 
that  democracy  in  all  its  forms  is  evil.  PobSdonoscev  attacks 
parliamentarism  and  the  representative  system  of  government 
with  inexorable  scorn  and  mockery,  stigmatising  parliamentarism 
as  "  the  great  lie  of  our  age."  Liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity 
are  mere  phrases  and  idols.  No  man  of  honour,  no  man  with 
a  sense  of  duty,  can  accept  the  modern  electoral  system  with 
its  universal  suffrage.  PobSdonoscev  inveighs  against  the 
agitators,  the  modern  sophists  and  logomachists,  who  keep 
the  masses  in  leading  strings,  and  he  is  no  less  opposed  to  the 
demagogy  of  trial  by  jury.  He  detests  the  newspaper  press, 
and  denies  its  claim  to  represent  public  opinion,  for  the  press 
too  is  one  of  the  most  lying  institutions  of  our  time.  Of  course 
this  remark  was  not  to  be  taken  as  applying  to  Katkov's  news- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  201 

paper,  but  only  to  the  organs  of  the  nihihsts,  the  sociaHsts,  and 
the  Hberals. 

Pob^donoscev  considered  that  the  frequency  of  suicide  in 
modern  times  afforded  proof  that  modern  Hfe  had  become 
utterly  unnatural,  senseless,  and  false;  The  old  and  tried 
standards  of  social  and  family  life  had  disappeared,  and  their 
place  had  been  taken  by  egoism,  the  outcome  of  unbridled 
individualism  and  subjectivism.  The  man  who  can  find  no 
supports  outside  his  own  ego,  the  man  who  possesses  no  moral 
standards  independent  of  that  ego  to  guide  him  through  life, 
runs  away  from  life  and  destroys  himself.  Even  better  men, 
men  with  high  ideals,  succumb  to  the  falsity  of  their  environ- 
ment, becoming  aware  of  the  vanity  of  their  ideals  when  these 
are  not  sustained  by  faith. 

A  strange  hotchpotch  this  of  truth  and  falsehood,  a  charac- 
teristic jumble  of  far-sightedness  and  short-sightedness.     The 
newspaper  press  is  evil,  and  yet  Pob^donoscev  is  himself  author 
and  journalist ;  the  masses  of  the  people  run  after  the  agitators, 
and  yet  these  same  masses  are  absolute  truth  when,  in  their  ; 
unculture  and  superstition,  the}''  prostrate  themselves  before 
the    Orthodox    altars  !     Vox    populi   vox    dei,    when    populus 
acknowledges  the  Orthodox  faith  ;    but  vox  populi  vox  diaboli,  i 
when  populus  demands  a  parliament  and  the  suffrage  !     Thus  ^ 
does  the  mysticism  of  the  fathers  of  the  church  take  vengeance  -, 
on  Pob^donoscev,  upon  his  philosophy,  and  upon  his  politics. 
He    is    cultured   enough    to    perceive    how   superstitious   and 
uncultivated  are  the  masses  and  the  Russian  clergy  ;   he  admits 
the  facts  ;    but  his  mysticism  makes  it  impossible  for  him  to 
see  clearly,   to  distinguish  between  true  religion  and  super- 
stition, to  banish  superstition  in  the  interest  of  true  religion. 
Pob^donoscev,  therefore,   did  not  merely  regard  superstition 
as  "  a  matter  of  no  importance,"  but  he  even  regarded  the 
religious  fervour  of  the  folk  as  endowed  with  something  sub- 
limely mysterious.     The  sublimity  of  this  mystery  produced 
so  strong  an  impression  on  his  mind  that  he  declared  popular 
elementary  education   to   be   needless  and   injurious,   for   this 
would  be  rationaHsm,  this  would  be  logic,  and  logic  is  the  work 
of  the  devil.     "  The  diffusion  of  popular  education  is  absolutely 
harmful." 

This  sophistry  and  partial  application  of  logic  was  to  be 
momentous  for  Russia  !  Man  is  by  nature  evil  and  malicious  ; 
therefore  the  masses  must  be  guided  under  the  tutelage  of  the 


202  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

holy  synod  in  the  service  of  the  aatocracy.     Men  are  by  nature 
evil  and  mahcious  ;   except  for  the  chief  procurator  of  the  holy 
synod   and   all   the   greater   and   lesser   aristocrats.     Western 
civihsation  is  a  disaster  ;   but  the  modern  breech-loading  rifles, 
the  new  ordnance,  the  railways,  telegraphs,  and  other  practical 
acquirements  of  the  "  logic  "and  the  logical  sciences  of  Europe, 
must    nevertheless    serve    the    Russian    Orthodox    autocracy. 
Pobedonoscev,  hke  all  reactionaries,  has  himself  been  sicklied 
o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of  thought,  or  at  any  rate  is  sufficiently 
inconsistent  to  accept  the  fruits  of  European  civihsation  without 
foreseeing  that  the  inevitable  result  will  be  to  make  holes  in 
his  Old  Russian  philosophy  and  by  degrees  to  destroy  it.     Such 
is  the  great  lie  of  the  Russian  reaction,    He  who  makes  use  of 
locomotives,   cannon,   telegraphs,   and  telephones,   may  forbid 
logic  and  philosophy  as  much  as  he  pleases,  but  the  prohibition 
will  be  of  no  avail,  for  he  must  perforce  teach  mathematics 
and  natural  science,  and  these  will  once  more  bring  philosophy 
and  logic  into  honour,  if  by  a  devious  route.    In  all  seriousness, 
Nicholas  I  forbade  the  study  of  philosophy  at  the  universities, 
but  the  prohibition  was  futile,  for  Russian  thought  became  all 
the  more  distinctively  naturaUstic  and  even  materialistic  in 
trend.     The    Russian   autocracy   needs   an    army   of   officials, 
and  these  must  be  educated  men.     Even  if  they  were  to  take 
Pobedonoscev's  manual  as  their  only  textbook  of  jurisprudence, 
they  could  not  understand  it  unless  they  had  had  an  extensive 
preHminary     training.     Pobedonoscev     himself,     though     un- 
wittingly, definitely  espouses  the  doctrine  of  economic  material- 
ism when  he  teaches  that  law  is  nothing  more  than  the  formal 
fixation  of  the  relationships  created  by  life  and  by  economic 
conditions.     Moreover,  the  modern  state  cannot  dispense  with 
political  economy.     The  bureaucracy  of  the  modern  absolutist 
monarchy  cannot  base  its  actions  solely  on  the  teachings  of 
Joannes  Damascenus  and  on  the  authority  of  the  sagas.     Katkov 
reahsed  this  when  he  directed  his  campaign,  not  only  against 
the  students,  but  also  against  the  Russian  bureaucracy. 
I        It  need  hardly  be  said  that  we  may  find  much  to  agree  with 
I  in  Pobedonoscev's  condemnation  of  the  errors  of  our  civihsation 
'  and  of  our  political  institutions.     Who,   for   example,   would 
dissent  from  what  the  chief  procurator  wrote  about  demagogy  ? 
Who   could   be   wholly   content   with   parhamentarism,    as   it 
exists,     say,     in    Austria  ?     Was    Carlyle,-    of    whose    works 
Pobedonoscev  was  a  diligent  student,  satisfied  with  parhamen- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  203 

tary  government  ?  Do  not  the  anarchists,  moreover,  reject 
parhamentarism  ?  A  number  of  notable  Europeans,  ahke 
men  of  the  study  and.  men  of  practical  life,  have  held  views 
which  do  not  differ  greatly  from  those  held  by  Pobedonoscev. 
But  the  great  distinction  lies  in  this,  that  in  Europe  we  already 
have  some  experience  of  parliamentary  government  and  of 
democracy,  and  hence  it  is  not  merely  our  right  but  our  duty 
to  criticise  these  institutions,  for  to  do  this  is  to  fulfil  democracy. 
But  a  Russsian  who  from  western  literature  sharks  up  arguments 
against  parliament,  democracy,  and  the  newspaper  press,  in 
order  to  incorporate  these  arguments  into  his  absolutist  system, 
is  a  man  ever  open  to  suspicion.  Indisputably,  demagogy 
(not  parliamentarism  per  se)  is  one  of  the  great  lies  of  our  epoch. 
But  in  this  epoch  of  ours  to  defend  autocratic  absolutism,  even 
for  Russia  ;  to  endeavour  to  find  historical,  philosophical,  and 
religious  arguments  on  behalf  of  this  regime,  though  its  incapacity 
is  manifest  to  all  the  world — what  is  it,  when  done  by  a  man  of 
culture  but  a  literary  crime  ?  Pobedonoscev  was  the  declared 
enemy  of  the  west,  and  yet  it  was  from  the  west  that  he  derived 
his  own  culture  and  his  own  antiliberal  and  antidemocratic 
arguments. 

For  the  representation  of  Pobedonoscev's  views  the  question 
of  the  relationship  between  state  and  church  has  an  important 
bearing,  seeing  that  Pobedonoscev  was  in  a  position  to  speak, 
not  only  as  teacher  of  public  law,  but  also  as  chief  procurator. 
He  criticised  the  various  attempts  at  a  solution  that  had  been 
made  in  Europe.  In  the  Catholic  system,  he  said,  the  church 
controlled  the  state.  The  more  or  less  liberal  systems  which 
had  developed  from  the  eighteenth  century  onwards,  granting 
equal  rights  to  all  religions,  independence  of  the  state  from  the 
church,  and  a  free  church  in  a  free  state,  were  vague  half- 
measures,  and  could  not  be  effectively  carried  out  in  practice. 
The  church,  in  view  of  its  educational  function,  could  not 
possibly  renounce  the  moral  guidance  of  the  citizens;  a  separation 
between  church  and  state  was  de  facto  impossible  ;  "a  state 
without  a  creed  is  a  purely  Utopian  ideal,  and  one  incapable 
of  realisation,  for  unbelief  is  the  direct  negation  of  the  state.  ^ 

»  It  is  necessary  to  draw  attention  to  the  sophistical  character  of  Pobedo- 
noscev's argument  All  that  he  has  a  right  to  say  about  European  states  is 
that  they  are  "  churchless  "  ;  but  he  makes  use  of  the  word  "  bezvgrnoe," 
which  may  mean  "  faithless "  and  "  unbeUeving "  and  goes  on  to  use  it 
unhesitatingly  in  the  sense  of  "  unbehef  "  (bezvfirie). 


204  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Holding  firmly  as  he  does  to  the  theory  that  there  is  a  natural 
harmony  between  state  and  church,  it  goes  without  saying  that 
for  Russia,  where  there  are  many  creeds,  the  Orthodox  church 
is  to  be  the  state  church.  "  The  state  recognises  one  creed 
among  all  as  the  true  one  ;  it  supports  and  favours  one  church 
exclusively  ;  all  other  churches  and  creeds  being  regarded  as 
of  lesser  value." 

Such  was  the  spirit  in  which  Pobedonoscev,  as  chief  pro- 
curator of  the  holy  synod,  treated  the  old  believers  and  the 
sectaries,  being  especially  harsh  to  the  stundists. 

When  the  decree  of  toleration  was  issued  in  April  1905  and 
was  followed  by  a  manifesto  in  October  of  the  same  year, 
the  clergy  demanded  the  summoning  of  a  council  for  the  revision 
of  the  existing  relationships  between  church  and  state.  In 
response  to  this  demand,  Pobedonoscev  sent  the  chiefs  .of 
the  eparchies  a  questionnaire,  wherein,  however,  no  reference 
was  made  to  the  thorny  problem  of  the  relationship  between 
church  and  state.  Despite  his  slavophilism,  Pobedonoscev 
suddenly  became  a  defender  of  Petrine  ecclesiastical  reform 
and  of  the  uncanonically  founded  synod. 

In  PobSdonoscev's  view,  perfect  harmony  between  church 
and  state  was  to  be  realised  by  unmitigated  absolutism.  He 
was  ever  the  most  determined  opponent  of  political  no  less 
than  of  religious  reform.  During  the  regime  of  Svjatopolk- 
Mirskii,  when  the  question  of  political  reforms  was  under  dis- 
cussion, Pobedonoscev,  speaking  in  the  name  of  religion, 
denied  the  tsar's  right  to  limit  in  any  way  whatever  the 
powers  bestowed  on  him  by  the  deity.  Similar  had  been 
the  ideas  of  the  ecclesiastical  politicians  in  the  days  of  old 
Moscow. 

It  is  said  that  as  early  as  1906  Pobedonoscev  had  elaborated 
a  design  to  recruit  from  the  clergy  against  the  duma  a  clerical 
governmental  party,  and  certainly  the  elections  to  the  fourth 
duma  realised  this  plan. 

Pobedonoscev  was  by  no  means  original.  His  Moscow 
Collection  was  a  mere  compilation  of  well-known  ideas  from 
numerous  European  and  Russian  conservatives  and  reactionaries. 
Most  of  the  notions  in  the  book  may  be  traced  back  to  Le  Play. 
Pobedonoscev  wrote  a  cordial  appreciation  of  this  Catholic 
adviser  of  Napoleon  III.  But  Le  Play  was  no  more  than  one 
among  the  many  French  adversaries  of  democracy  and  revolu- 
tion to  exercise  an  influence  upon  Russian  politicians  and 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  205 

theorists,  the  most  influential  of  all,  as  we  have  seen,  being 
de  JIaistre. 

I  have  mentioned  the  Russian  predecessors  and  teachers 
of  Pobedonoscev,  but  another  name  must  be  added  to  the  list, 
that  of  Leont'ev,  about  whom  we  are  to  learn  in  the  next  section. 
Nearly  all  Pobedonoscev's  ideas  may  be  found  in  the  writings 
of  Leont'ev  no  less  than  in  those  of  Le  Play,  and  it  is  possible 
that  these  two  thinkers  made  the  strongest  impression  upon 
Pobedonoscev's  mind.  But  the  chief  procurator  gave  ex- 
pression to  Leont'ev's  ideas  in  the  Russian  forensic  style. 
Leont'ev's  ideas  led  him  to  a  monastery  remote  from  the  world  ; 
but  Pobedonoscev,  adopting  these  same  ideas,  could  bask 
at  the  courts  of  Alexander  III  and  Nicholas  II.  Leont'ev 
insisted  upon  the  need  for  great  deeds  of  deathdealing  signifi- 
cance ;  whereas  Pobedonoscev  (as  we  learn  from  a  London 
report  concerning  the  tsar's  decree  of  January  26,  1905)  asked 
to  be  promoted  to  the  second  class  of  the  ofhcial  hierarchy, 
and  was  granted  the  privilege  of  wearing  an  extra  stripe  upon 
the  trousers  of  his  full-dress  uniform,  to  show  that  he  ranked 
as  a  minister. 

In  view  of  these  facts  it  is  not  agreeable  to  have  to  institute 
a  comparison  between  Pobedonoscev  and  Tolstoi,  and  yet  the 
official  and  personal  relationships  between  the  chief  procurator 
and  Tolstoi  impose  such  a  comparison.     Somewhat  prematurely, 
in  1900,  Pobedonoscev  refused  Tolstoi  the  right  to  a  religious 
burial,  whilst  in  1901  he  had  Tolstoi  excommunicated.     These 
measures  suggest  hostile  sentiments    and  yet  it  is  impossible 
to   avoid  comparing   Pobedonoscev  with   Tolstoi.     Both  men 
manifested  the  same  aversion  to  civilisation,  science,  and  phil- 
osophy ;    to  both,  religion  seemed  the  alpha  and  omega  of  en- 
deavour.   Tolstoi's  estimate  of  parliament,  democracy,  and  many 
other  institutions,  was  closely  akin  to  that  of  Pobedonoscev. 
The  great  difference  between  the  two  men  lay,  however,  in  this, 
that  Tolstoi  wished  for  a  rational  religion,  Pobedonoscev  for 
a  mystical  and  positively  irrational  religion.     In  this  matter 
Tolstoi's  opponent  was  in   the  centre  of  the  great   mystical 
movement  which  affected  so  large  a  part  of  the  Russian  intelli- 
gentsia in  the  closing  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the 
movement   whose   greatest   prophet   was   Dostoevskii.     Pobe- 
donoscev,   too,    had    learned    from    Dostoevskii,    having    hac^ 
personal  relations  with   that   author.     A   strange  comparison 
this   between    Pobedonoscev    and    Tolstoi — Tolstoi    to    whom 


206  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

religion  was  a  world  problem  and  an  intimately  vital  question  ; 
Pobedonoscev  to  whom  religion  was  a  means  to  political  ends. 

Aftei  the  death  of  Alexander  II,  Tolstoi  sent  Pobedonoscev, 
for  transmission  to  Alexander  III,  a  heartfelt  letter  petitioning 
that  the  assassins  should  be  pardoned.  Pobedonoscev  kept 
the  letter  to  himself,  and  did  not  reply  to  Tolstoi  until  after 
the  execution  of  the  condemned.  The  defender  of  capital 
punishment  then  wrote  as  follows  :  "  Our  Christ  is  not  your 
Christ.  To  me  Christ  is  the  man  of  energy  and  truth,  who 
heals  the  weak  ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  your  Christ  shows 
lineaments  of  weakness,  is  himself  in  need  of  heahng." 

Other  writers  and  artists  besides  Tolstoi  were  subjected  to 
censorship  by  Pobedonoscev.  I  may  recall  the  chief  procura- 
tor's intention  to  forbid  the  exhibition  of  Polenov's  picture 
of  Christ  and  the  woman  taken  in  adultery.  The  tsar,  however, 
liked  the  picture  and  purchased  it. 

Some  interest  might  attach  to  a  discussion  of  Pobedonoscev's 
ideas  concerning  foreign  policy.  His  feelings  towards  France, 
for  example,  were  far  less  cordial  than  those  of  most  chauvinists, 
advocates  of  the  Franco-Russian  alhance  ;  he  had  little  fondness 
for  Austria  ;  he  was  by  no  means  an  enthusiast  for  the  Slavs, 
and  the  liberal  Czechs  were  especially  uncongenial  to  him. 
But  he  took  pleasure  in  the  description  of  travel  written  by 
Vratislav  von  MitroviC,  the  Bohemian  nobleman  who  visited 
Constantinople  in  1591  as  member  of  an  embassy  from  Rudolf  II. 
Pobedonoscev  translated  the  book,  and  it  is  obvious  that  he 
took  a  sympathetic  delight  in  the  believing  author's  descriptions 
of  the  life  and  doings  of  the  Turks. 

*  Pobedonoscev,  despite  his  hostiHty  to  negation,  was  himself 
after  all  merely  negative ;  he  negated  the  west.  But  his 
negation  was  weak  and  half-hearted  ;  he  cast  out  Satan  with 
Satan's  aid ;  the  pillars'  of  his  theocratic  orthodoxy  were 
European  authorities,  whose  works  he  turned  to  his  own 
account ;  a  Kempis,  de  Maistre,  Emerson,  Spencer,  Carlyle, 
Goethe,  etc.,  were  utihsed  to  lay  the  foundations  of  the  crown 
jurist's  scholastic  edifice.  Amid  his  incessant  appeals  for 
uniformity,  he  displayed  a  deplorable  lack  of  uniformity.  But 
this  is  characteristic  of  all  theological  and  theocratic  apologetic 
literature,  and  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Russia.  Two  German 
translations  of  the  Moscow  Studies  have  been  published,  both 
under  Protestant  auspices,  the  translators  being  delighted  with 
the  Russian  obscurantist. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  207 

PobSdonoscev  has  been  extolled  for  his  genial  and  winning 
manners.  We  remember  that  certain  inquisitors  used  to  weep 
when  sentencing  their  victims  to  death,  and  we  recall  that  the 
"  winning  "  Pobedonoscev  was  the  firm  ally  of  such  men  as 
Pleve,  the  grand  dukes  Vladimir  and  Alexis,  and  the  leading 
spirits  in  the  black  hundred.  In  Aylmer  Maude's  biography 
of  Tolstoi  we  are  told  that  in  1901,  when  Tolstoi  fell  ill  after 
his  excommunication,  Pobedonoscev  commissioned  a  priest 
to  visit  Tolstoi  and  subsequently  to  announce  that  Tolstoi 
had  confessed  to  him.  I  have  not  looked  for  confirmation  of 
this  stor}^  but  it  is  perfectly  credible,  for  Pobedonoscev  was  a 
thoroughgoing  Jesuit. 

Characteristic  were  the  announcements  he  made  for  Europe 
and  in  Europe  (see  various  interviews,  newspaper  articles,  etc.). 
In  these  it  was  his  habit  to  pay  compliments  to  Europe,  to 
declare  that  complete  freedom  of  conscience  prevailed  in  Russia, 
that  current  accusations  against  the  Russian  government  were 
absolutely  false.  Complete  freedom  of  conscience !  Why, 
then,  did  not  Archbishop  Antonii  agree  with  Pobedonoscev's 
ecclesiastical  policy  ?  And  Witte,  no  less  than  Antonii,  turned 
against  Pobedonoscev  (see  §  188). 

§  134- 

KONSTANTIN  NIKOLAEViC  LEONT'EV  (1831-1891) 
represents  a  very  different  type  of  defender  of  the 
theocracy. 

Leont'ev  acted  as  army  surgeon  in  the  Crimean  war,  and 
subsequently  became  a  general  practitioner  in  the  country. 
After  a  time,  entering  the  service  of  the  foreign  office,  he  passed 
the  years  1863  to  1870  as  consul  in  various  towns  of  European 
Turkey.  It  was  during  this  period  that  he  became  reconciled 
with  Orthodoxy.  Resigning  his  post  he  lived  for  a  while  on 
Mount  Athos  (1870-1871).  He  then  returned  to  Russia,  sub- 
sequently served  on  the  staff  of  the  official  newspaper  in  Warsaw 
(1880),  and  then  became  censor  in  Moscow.  In  1887,  however, 
he  finally  retired  from  the  world  to  reside  in  the  monastery 
of  Optina  Pustyn',  which  Kireevskii  and  hkewise  Dostoevskii 
had  frequented  in  their  day.  He  was  secretly  received  as  a 
monk,  and  in  1891  died  in  the  Troicko-Sergievskaja  monastery 
near  Moscow. 

Leont'ev  made  his  literary  debut  as  contributor  of  belle- 


208  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA    ' 

tristic  articles  to  liberal  periodicals.  After  his  conversion  he 
renounced  these  activities,  and  condemned  them  even  more 
severely  than  Tolstoi  had  done  in  his  own  case,  for  Leont'ev 
lamented  that  his  early  writings  had  been  modelled  upon  the 
pagan,  devilish,  and  utterly  immoral  works  of  George  Sand, 
and  that  in  point  of  style  he  had  imitated  Turgenev. 

Nevertheless,  after  his  conversion  he  wrote  sketches  of 
Christian  life  in  Turkey  (which  were  commended  by  Tolstoi 
among  others),  a  number  of  short  stories,  a  novel,  and  literary 
critiques.! 

Leont'ev  unreservedly  accepted  ecclesiastical  Orthodoxy 
and  its  doctrines.  WTiat  he  understood  by  Orthodoxy  was 
Byzantinism,  the  primitive  Greek  ecclesiasticism  which  had 
given  the  law  to  the  Russian  church.  Byzantinism  was  for 
him  the  peculiar  Byzantine  culture.  Its  system  and  its  principle 
were  characterised  politically  by  autocracy  conjoined  with 
aristocracy  ;  in  the  religious  field,  by  true  Christianity  in  con- 
trast with  the  western  church  and  the  sects  ;  and  in  the  moral 
sphere,  by  refraining  from  putting  the  high  value  upon  human 
individuality  which  was  the  dominant  feature  of  Teutonic 
feudalism,  so  that  in  the  B3^zantine  system  earthly  happiness 
and  mundane  life  were  renounced  from  the  outlook  of  a  rigorous 
Christian  ideal,  one  contemning  the  world.  Further,  Byzan- 
tinism rejected  the  hope  of  general  welfare  for  the  people,  its 
essential  idea  being  sharply  contrasted  with  the  idea  of  universal 
humanitarianism,  universal  equality,  universal  freedom,  uni- 
versal perfectionment,  and  universal  satisfaction.  Artistically 
and  aesthetically,  Byzantinism  had  secured  plain  expression  in 
its  architecture  and  other  works. 

Such  was  the  conception  of  Chrtstianity  formulated  by 
Leont'ev  in  the  year  1876.  In  his  writings  he  continued  to 
expound  and  defend  the  principles  of  the  monkish  religion 
to  which  he  had  come  to  adhere  during  his  residence  on  Mount 
Athos,  and  to  apply  these  principles  to  contemporary  condi-. 
tions,  above  all  in  opposition  to  the  reforming  and  revolutionary 
trends  of  literature  and  politics. 
■      Leont'ev's    "  true    Christianity "    is    the    Christianitj^    of 

«  His  essays  composed  during  the  years  1 873-1 883  were  published  in  two 
volumes  (1885  and  1886)  as  The  East,  Russia,  and  Slavdom.  Noteworthy, 
in  addition,  is  Father  Clement  Sederholm  (1879),  the  biography  of  one  of  his 
friends,  a  monk  from  the  Baltic  provinces.  Literary  criticisms  of  Tolstoi 
and  other  writers  may  likewise  be  mentioned. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  209 

peasants,  monks,  and  nuns,  not  rose-water  Christianity  with  its 
chatter  of  love,  and  the  rest  of  it.  To  Leont'ev,  love  for 
humanity  was  unchristian,  was  the  idolisation  of  mankind. 
He  considered  fear  the  foundation  of  true  religion,  the  fear  of 
God,  the  fear  of  punishment  here  and  hereafter.  Man,  the 
world,  mundane  life,  are  all  essentially  evil.  The  true  life  of 
the  Christian  is  not  found  here  but  in  heaven.  The  true  (read 
Orthodox)  Christian  despises  the  flesh,  and  declares' all  nature, 
all  natural  inclinations  and  reason,  to  be  evil ;  the  true  Christian 
renounces  the  world  as  the  ascetics  of  the  Orthodox  church 
had  renounced  it.  "  Such  were  the  views,"  wrote  Leont'ev 
"  which  I  learned  from  the  Orthodox  church  and  its  monasteries 
— in  these  alone  is  truth  to  be  found." 

God  had  cursed  the  world  ;  everything  existing  in  the  world 
must  perish.  Leont'ev's  deductions  were  here  identical  with 
those  of  Mephistopheles.  It  was  undeniable  that  the  earth 
was  beautiful,  and  the  truth  of  mundane  life  was  on  the  side  of 
aesthetics  ;  but  Christianity  ran  counter  to  aesthetics,  and  the 
true  Christian  must  sustain  Christianity  against  the  truth. 

God  and  the  world  are  opposites.  "  We  must  constrain  our- 
selves to  belief  in  God.  .  .  .  The  recognition  of  God  as  a  God  of 
love  is  a  falsehood."  For  Leont'ev,  religion  was  far  from  being 
always  consolatory.  Often,  he  said,  religion  is  a  heavy  yoke, 
but  the  true  believer  would  not  willingly  be  without  this  yoke. 

The  religion  of  fear,  which  represents  God  as  the  ahnighty 
Jehovah,  the  wielder  of  force,  is  logically  and  practically  carried 
out  on  earth  by  the  ruler,  the  anointed  of  Jehovah.  This  ruler 
must  be  a  true  image  of  the  unloving  God  ;  he  must  be  God 
on  earth  ;  the  absolutist  autocracy  is  the  only  true  Christian 
state.  Christian  society  is  a  theocracy  ;  the  autocrat  is  God's 
right  hand  ;  despotism  was  and  remains  necessary  to  the 
organisation  of  society ;  the  human  masses  must  be  held 
together  with  the  mailed  fist. 

The  tsar  is  the  highest  and  most  sacred  authority  ;  what 
he  does  is  good  and  legal ;  his  actions  must  not  be  judged  by 
results.  One  who  fails  to  grasp  this  may  be  an  excellent  man, 
but  is  no  Christian,  no  true  Russian.  __^ 

Leont'ev  acclaimed  the  manifesto  of  Alexander  III  main- 
taining the  principle  of  autocracy,  for  Leont'ev  did  not  fear 
the  name  of  reactionary.  Russia  needed  reaction,  needed 
forcible  measures.  Constraint,  rightly  used,  was  a  good  thing  ; 
the  Russian  peasant  loved  to  be  vigorously  ruled.     The  true 

15  VOL.   II.    ~ 


210  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Christian  was  lowly  in  spirit,  and  bowed  humbly  before  the 
supreme  will  of  the  tsar. 

Mysticism  is  the  true  knowledge  of  God  ;  mysticism  is  true 
science.  Mundane  science  is  condemned  by  Leont'ev,  since  it 
seeks  the  useful,  not  God  and  eternal  life.  Leont'ev  rails  against 
utilitarianism  and  eudemonism.  To  be  a  true  Christian,  a 
man  has  no  need  of  modern  science,  modern  technique,  modern 
institutions.  The  peasant  who  believes  that  the  world  is 
supported  by  three  whales  is  not  a  dangerous  character  ;  illi- 
teracy is  Russia's  good  fortune  ;  "we  must  strive  with  all 
our  might  against  popular  education."  It  is  for  the  intelli- 
gentsia to  learn  from  the  peasant,  not  conversely.  For  this 
it  is  not  necessary  to  love  the  folk  ;  nor  does  it  suffice  to  have 
a  national  or  aesthetic  sentiment  for  the  folk,  to  love  the  folk- 
characteristics  ;  but  in  matters  of  principle  we  must  be  at 
one  with  the  folk. 

It  is  from  this  outlook  of  the  monk  of  Athos  that  Leont'ev 
judges  the  world  and  its  history,  and  judges  in  especial  the 
relationship  of  Russia  to  Europe.  Russia  is  of  value  only 
in  so  far  as  she  has  kept  alive  the  principles  of  Byzantinism  ; 
Europe  is  going  dov/n  to  mental  and  physical  destruction 
because  she  has  betrayed  these  principles  ;  in  Russia,  all  traces 
of  the  European  must  be  eradicated. 

Leont'ev' s  philosophy  of  history  is  simple.  Mankind  and 
its  individual  parts  (the  nations)  traverse  three  historical 
stages,  childhood,  manhood,  and  old  age.  In  the  first  stage, 
primitive  simplicity  prevails  ;  this  is  succeeded  by  the  com- 
plicated organisation  and  differentiation  of  the  prime  ;  there 
succeeds  in  turn,  the  simplicity  of  levelling.  In  Europe,  the 
Teutons  in  the  days  of  the  national  migrations  represent  child- 
hood and  simplicity.  During  the  middle  ages,  Europe  attained 
her  prime  and  exhibited  the  blossoming  of  all  her  energies. 
Since  the  eighteenth  century  enlightenment  and  the  French 
revolution,  Europe  has  been  declining  towards  the  tomb  ;  in 
the  name  of  democratic  equality,  liberalism  (the  new  religion 
of  the  bourgeoisie)  has  been  extinguishing  all  the  natural 
differences  by  which  the  nations  live.  This  law  of  evolution 
is  conceived  by  Leont'ev  biologically.  He  regards  Kireevskii's 
Slavophil  philosophy  of  history  and  the  way  in  which  Kireevskii 
contrasted  Russia  and  Europe  as  positively  ridiculous.  The 
decay  of  Europe,  he  says,  is  the  natural  decay  of  an  organism, 
^-^  But  if  this  be  so,  surely  we  must  regard  the  censured  views 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  211 

of  liberalism  as  the  consequence  and  not  as  the  cause  of  the 
decay  ?  In  any  case,  Leont'ev's  theory  implies  that  the  natural 
law  of  evolution  is  something  altogether  different  from  the 
progress  preached  by  European  philosophers  and  their  Russian 
imitators.  However  this  may  be,  Leont'ev  becomes  somewhat 
alarmed  when  he  contemplates  the  future  of  Russia,  for  he  is 
seized  with  a  doubt  whether,  in  accordance  with  his  evolutionary 
law,  Russia,  too,  must  not  perish,  despite  her  Byzantinism. 
He  cannot  console  himself  with  the  thought  that  Russia  is  still 
young,  for  his  country  is  already  in  fact  more  than  a  thousand 
years  old.  Besides,  Peter  and  his  successors  introduced  a 
suspiciously  large  amount  of  the  European  enlightenment  and 
of  European  institutions  into  Russia.  How,  then,  can  Russia 
be  preserved  ?  With  pitiless  consistency  Leont'ev  comes  to 
the  conclusion  that  Russia  must,  in  contrast  with  Europe, 
undergo  an  arrest  of  development ;  Russia  must  be  "  frozen  " 
that  she  may  escape  "  living  " — for  everything  that  lives  must 
die.  Russia  must  therefore  be  protected  from  her  arch  enemy, 
European  progress ;  Russia  must  not  succumb  to  equalitarian* 
Hberalism.  Leont'ev  would  rather  accept  socialism  than 
liberalism,  for  socialism  contains  elements  of  discipline  and 
organisation.  Liberalism  seems  to  him  to  embody  negatiorij 
as  its  principle  ;  liberahsm  is  decomposition,  for  it  wishes  to 
level  and  to  suppress  natural  inequalities.  Leont'ev  believes 
that  in  civilized  lands  socialism  will  inevitably  be  realised,  but 
that  in  Russia  hereditary  inequalities  will  persist.  He  deplores 
that  in  1861  the  "  stone  wall  "  of  privileges  was  overthrown. 
The  old  aristocracy  in  conjunction  with  the  tsar  constituted 
aristocracy  as  by  God  estabhshed  ;  their  piety  was  exemplary  ; 
during  the  days  of  serfdom  the  peasant,  too,  kept  the  fasts  of 
the  church  according  to  rule.  ^^ 

It  is  obvious  that  Leont'ev  is  disturbed  by  the  undesired  ' 
consequences  of  his  evolutionary  law.  He  would  like  to  keep 
Russia  in  the  second  stage  of  development,  and  that  is  why 
the  "  mailed  fist  "  of  absolutism  must  be  used  against  liberaHsni.  ^ 
The  liberalism  which  in  his  belief  was  effecting  the  decomposition 
of  Europe,  was  regarded  with  the  utmost  hostility  by  Leont'ev 
in  all  its  forms  and  gradations  ;  he  considered  every  liberal 
to  be  half  a  nihilist  ;  and  he  thought  the  most  dangerous  of 
all  liberals  were  those  who  diffused  .their  doctrines  under  the 
protection  of  the  miHtary  uniform,  the  professorial  chair,  the 
judicial  bench,  or  the  editorial  pen. 


212  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

Leont'ev  wished  that  the  police  were  enabled  to  read  men's 
inmost  thoughts,  so  that  they  might  prevent  the  liberals  from 
doing  any  harm.  He  did  not  shrink  from  being  termed  a 
reactionary,  and  he  approved  the  work  of  the  informer.  "It  is 
time,"  he  said,  "  that  the  word  informer  should  cease  to  have 
a,  degrading  significance.  .  .  .  Politics  are  not  ethics." 

It  is  obvious  that  Leont'ev  is  vacillating  between  a  purely 
biological  law  of  evolution  and  a  social  and  historical  law, 
according  as  he  contemplates  the  problem  from  the  outlook  of 
historic  determinism  or  from  that  of  freedom.  Whilst  he 
laughs  at  the  Slavophils  as  children,  he  cannot  entirely  escape 
the  influence  of  their  ideas.  Before  his  conversion,  Leont'ev's 
thought  had  been  based  upon  that  of  Danilevskii,  and  upon 
the  latter's  principles  of  Russian  policy  ;  the  ideas  of  Russia 
and  Europe  continued  to  some  extent  to  influence  his  mind, 
although  he  gave  a  new  significance  to  the  leading  demand 
of  Danilevskii  and  the  older  Slavophils.  He  regarded  it  as 
the  error  of  the  Slavophils  that  they  had  failed  to  effect  an 
organic  union  of  nationality  with  religion  and  ecclesiasticism. 
He  was  manifestly  in  agreement  with  Koselev's  formula,  "  With- 
out Orthodoxy  our  nationaUty  becomes  fudge."  He  therefore 
abandoned  nationahty,  for  he  regarded  it  as  essentially  based 
upon  liberal  and  cosmopolitan  democracy  and  as  an  instrument 
.for  the  promotion  of  universal  revolution.  The  title  of  one 
of  his  essays  runs  National  Policy  as  a  Means  to  the  World 
Revolution.  He  considers  that  the  main  weakness  of  Russian 
policy  is  to  be  found  in  its  nationalism.  It  is  true  that  he 
conceives  the  idea  of  nationality  as  political  nationality  or 
nationahst  policy.  For  this  reason  Leont'ev  puts  his  whole 
faith  in  religion.  From  his  outlook,  Slavism  as  a  principle  is 
a  nonentity  when  contrasted  with  Byzantinism,  or  at  most 
is  a  sphinx,  an  enigma.  Slavism  as  an  idea  is  obscure  and 
inchoate.  There  doubtless  exists  Slavdom,  the  unorganised 
substratum  of  Slav  nations.  There  are  panslavist  aspirations  ; 
but  panslavism,  precisely  because  it  is  nationalist,  conflicts 
with  Byzantinism,  and  therefore  with  true  Russism.  Pan- 
slavism  is  a  "  utilitarian  and  liberal  "  ideal,  and  must  therefore 
be  abandoned  ;  Russian  policy  must  aim  at  the  protection  of 
Austria,  for  Austria  is  "  a  sanitary  cordon  against  the  Czechs 
and  the  other  excessively  Europeanised  Slavs."  Byzantinism 
is  the  foundation,.  Byzantinism  is  the  nervous  system  of  Russia, 
and  there  is  no  need  for  either  Catholic  or  Protestant  Slavs. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  218 

Leont'ev  is  disturbed  because  Byzantine  Russia  has  annexed 
Catholic  Poland,  and  the  unrussian  and  unbyzantine  frontier 
lands  are  a  continual  worry  to  him,  Russia's  mission,  as 
suggested  by  the  Slavophils,  the  unification  of  the  Slavs,  seems 
to  Leont'ev  a  momentous  and  diihcult  task. 

We  may  recall  what  Tsar  Nicholas  thought  of  panslavism, 
and  we  may  recall  that  Nicholas  practised  the  Austrian  policy 
of  Leont'ev  in  the  days  before  Leont'ev. 

For  the  nonce,  Russia,  said  Leont'ev,  was  to  be  guided  by 
the  old  maxim  "  divide  et  impera,"  above  all  in  her  Balkan 
policy.  The  political  fragmentation  of  the  Balkans  was  an 
advantage,  and  Russia's  only  aim  should  be  to  secure  religious 
unification  ;  the  parliaments  of  the  Balkan  states  were  disastrous. 
The  southern  Slav  bourgeoisie  had  already  been  infected  by 
European  liberalism,  and  nothing  but  the  Turkish  suzerainty 
had  saved  the  Balkan  states  from  annihilation  by  European 
liberaHsm.  The  Russian,  said  Leont'ev,  has  little  in  common 
with  the  other  Slavs  ;  by  nature  he  is  more  akin  to  Asiatics, 
to  the  Turks  and  to  the  Tatars,  than  to  the  southern  and  western 
Slavs  ;  he  is  lazier,  more  fatahstic,  more  obedient  to  authority, 
more  good-natured,  more  regardless  of  consequences,  braver, 
more  inconsistent,  and  much  more  inclined  to  religious  mysti- 
cism, than  are  the  Serbs,  the  Bulgars,  the  Czechs,  and  the 
Croats.  In  his  stories  of  Balkan  Hfe,  Leont'ev  showed  much 
S3^mpathy  with  the  Turkish  character,  and  a  profound  under- 
standing of  its  qualities  both  good  and  evil. 

Leont'ev  agrees  with  the  narodniki  and  the  Slavophils  in 
the  view  that  Russia  possesses  in  the  mir  an  institution  which 
is  worthy  to  be  incorporated  into  Byzantinism. 

Leont'ev  approves  for  Russia  the  annexation  of  Asiatic  lands, 
as  yet  uncontaminated  by  Europeanism.  He  is  unaff righted 
by  differences  in  race,  language,  and  even  religion,  because, 
as  we  have  learned,  he  considers  that  these  maintain  the  life 
of  society,  are  that  life,  and  because  at  the  same  time  they 
facilitate  autocracy. 

As  regards  the  Balkan  peninsula,  Leont'ev  desired  above 
all,  like  the  Slavophils  and  Dostoevskii,  to  occupy  Constantinople, 
not  on  nationalist  grounds,  but  in  order  to  revive  the  eastern 
empire  of  Rome.  He  was  so  consistent  in  his  Byzantinism 
that  in  the  rehgious  dispute  between  the  Bulgars  and  the 
Greeks  he  espoused  the  Greek  cause.  As  an  absolutist,  he 
consistently    advocated    aristocracy    and    condemned    Hberal 


\ 


214  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

democracy,  favouring  not  merely  Magyar  aristocracy  but 
even  Turkish  aristocracy  and  the  German  aristocracy  of  the 
Baltic  provinces.  He  held  that  a  baron  in  the  Baltic  provinces 
was  of  more  use  to  Russia  than  were  the  Letts  and  the  Lithu- 
jffnians.  So  logical  was  Leont'ev  in  the  application  of  his  prin- 
ciples, that  in  the  American  civil  war  his  sympathies  were  with 
the  southern  slave-owning  planters.  Writing  a  good  many 
years  after  the  event,  it  was  a  regret  to  him  that  Russia  should 
have  supported  the  north  against  the  south. 


§  135. 

LEONT'EV'S  thought  and  literary  style  recall  Hamann  and 
Carlyle  in  many  respects,  but  also  de  Maistre  and  similar 
i  authors,  whilst  in  the  matter  of  doctrine  we  must  refer  back  to 
•  Tertullian   and   his   "credo   quia   absurdum."      For   Leont'ev 
will  believe  and  can  believe  in  nothing  but  the  absurd. 

For  him  religion  exists  only  as  mysticism,  and  he  clings  to 
theology  and  scholasticism.  Though  the  declared  enemy  of 
the  revolutionary  realists  and  nihilists,  he  is  himself  obstinately 
realist  and  nihilist.  Desiring  a  positively  clear  and  definite 
religion,  he  holds  fast  to  the  letter  as  realised  in  practice  at 
Athos  and  in  the  Russian  monasteries.  He  puts  his  trust 
in  ritual  (terming  it  "  ritual-mystic"  religion),  in  monasteries, 
in  monks,  in  the  church  visible  with  its  doctrines  and  religious 
practices.  "  Before  all,  love  the  church  ;  "  do  not  love  mankind, 
do  not  love  your  neighbour.  Love  for  the  church  is  the  true 
Christian  love.  The  church  teaches  us  to  know  God,  to  know 
Christ ;  therefore  we  must  obediently  follow  the  church  ;  "  love 
is  a  secondary  matter." 

Thus  the  church  is  the  most  im'portant  thing,  not  God, 
In  the  church,  moreover,  the  hierarchy  is  the  essential.  In 
addition,  Leont'ev  venerates  the  monk  (not  the  white  clergy, 
for  the  members  of  that  body  are  married)  ;  and  among  the 
monks  he  venerates  the  starec  (the  elder),  whom  he  recognises 
as  the  absolute  leader  in  religion  and  morals.  Leont'ev 
desires  to  have  an  entirely  material  religion.  To  him 
personally  God  and  Jesus  are  nothing  ;  he  thinks  only  of  the 
definitely  prescribed  teachings,  dogmas,  and  practices  of  the 
church. 

The  world  is  naught,  heaven  is  all,  and  he  therefore  seeks  the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  215 

monastery,  the  hermitage,  so  that  in  part,  at  least,  he  may 
share  the  hfe  of  heaven  while  still  on  earth. ^ 

Leont'ev  tells  us  that  we  must  constrain  ourselves  to  believe. 
This  means  that  he  subjected  himself  to  this  constraint,  sacrific- 
ing science,  above  all  natural  science,  to  revelation.  The  medica> 
man,  the  zoologist,  the  materialist,  doing  violence  to  his  intelli- 
gence, came  to  believe  in  miracle,  so  that  he  could  even  imagine 
that  when  attacked  by  cholera  the  sight  of  an  icon  from  Athos 
cured  him  within  two  hours. 

But  for  Leont'ev  the  church  proves  in  the  end  too  compHcated, 
with  its  multiplicity  of  hierarchs  and  monks  ;  he  requires  a 
single  view,  he  wishes  to  be  guided  by  a  single  and  perfectly 
definite  opinion,  he  asks  for  a  single  authority — the  autocrat, 
the  tsar.  This  aspiration  for  real  uniformity  and  unity  should 
logically  lead  the  defender  of  Byzantinism  to  the  Roman  papal 
church,  for  he  demands  a  strong  church,  a  true  theocracy. 
In  his  polemic  against  Dostoevskii  he  rejects  the  humane  all- 
man  and  the  theology  of  Zosimus,  but  accepts  the  grand  inquisi- 
tor, saying  :  "  The  grand  inquisitor  incorporates  the  positive 
side  of  Christianity,"  Leont'ev,  as  we  have  said,  is  wilHng  to 
make  concessions  even  to  socialism  because  socialism  has 
discipline.  He  conceives  that  the  Russian  autocracy  may 
enter  into  an  alliance  with  sociaHsm  and  with  ardent  mysticism. 
When  this  happens,  things  will  be  made  hot  for  many  persons  ; 
then  the  grand  inquisitor  will  be  able  to  arise  from  the  tomb 
and  hold  out  his  tongs  to  seize  Dostoevskii. 

In  the  polemic  against  Dostoevskii  we  read  further  that  it 
is  quite  comprehensible  to  love  the  church.  But  to  love  con- 
temporary Europe  which  is  so  cruelly  persecuting  the  Roman 
church,  a  church  that  is  grand  and  apostolic  despite  its 
profound  dogmatic  errors,  to  love  this  Europe  is  simply  sinful. 

His  approval  of  the  papacy  and  its  grand  inquisitors  leads 
Leont'ev  to  Russian  caesaropapism.  It  was  no  chance  matter 
that  Leont'ev,  in  the  before-mentioned  definition  of  Byzantinism, 
should  have  assigned  the  first  place  to  political  absolutism. 
In  his  aspiration  for  religious  realism,  he  finds  that  for  the  church, 
too,  the  tsar  becomes  a  practical  and  tangible  head  ;  to  obey 
the  tsar  unconditionally  and  blindly,  this  is  true  Christianity. 

It  logically  follows  that  Leont'ev's  religion  and  Leont'ev's 

*  Leont'ev  was  married.  I  do  not  know  if  anything  has  hitherto  been 
written  concerning  his  relations  with  his  wife.  The  only  information  I  have 
on  this  subject  is  that  his  wife  was  long  an  invaUd. 


216  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

church  cannot  lay  any  stress  upon  either  morality  or  love. 
Religion  is  timor  Dei,  Christian  practice  is  therefore  ritual,  and 
in  the  ethical  sphere  Christianity  is  the  consistent  fuliilment 
of  God's  will,  of  his  revelations.  Leont'ev  tells  us  that  he 
loathes  "  an  independent  morahty,  a  morality  independent  of 
the  fear  of  the  Lord." 

Leont'ev's  religion  conflicts  with  natural  human  morality. 
Just  as  Tolstoi  takes  his  Karataev  from  among  the  sectaries, 
so  does  Leont'ev  seek  among  the  raskolniki  for  instances  of 
the  true  faitli.  He  tells  us  of  Kurtin  the  raskolnik,  who  slew 
his  own  son  to  preserve  the  boy  from  the  danger  of  eternal 
damnation  in  the  event  of  his  losing  the  true  faith.  To  Leont'ev 
the  force  of  Kurtin's  faith  seems  terrible,  but  it  is  faith,  "and 
without  this  faith  whither  can  a  man  turn,  one  who  detests 
with  all  his  might  the  soulless  aspects  of  contemporary  European 
progress.  Whither  can  he  turn  if  not  to  Russia  where,  within 
the  Orthodox  fold,  the  existence  of  such  great  and  holy  priests 
as  Filaret  is  still  possible  ?  "    We  have  learned  what  Filaret  was. 

From  his  own  outlook  Leont'ev  arrives  at  valuations  which 
recall  Nietzsche,  though  not  Jesus.  "  Everything  that  is  beau- 
tiful and  strong,  is  good;  all  one  whether  it  be  holiness 
or  dissipation,  conservation  or  revolution.  Men  have  not  yet 
grasped  this." 

This  amoraUsm  and  the  aesthetic  and  artistic  outlook  on 
the  world  were  strongly  developed  in  Leont'ev.  His  absolutist 
aristocratic  leanings  and  his  hatred  of  the  democratic  bourgeois 
were  dependent  upon  this  outlook,  and  he  had  learned  the  hatred 
from  his  teacher — Herzen.  "  Would  it  not  be  terrible,"  he 
exclaims  on  one  occasion,  "  would  it  not  be  humiliating  to 
think  that  ]\Ioses  should  have  ascended  Mount  Sinai,  that  the 
Greeks  should  have  built  their  lovely  citadels,  that  the  Romans 
should  have  fought  the  Punic  wars,  that  the  handsome  and 
brilliant  Alexander  in  his  plumed  helmet  should  have  crossed 
the  Granicus  and  fought  at  Arbela,  that  the  apostles  should 
have  preached,  the  martyrs  suffered,  the  poets  sung,  the  painters 
painted,  and  the  knights  pranked  it  in  the  Hsts — only  that 
the  French,  German,  or  Russian  bourgeois  in  his  ugly  and 
ridiculous  attire  should  '  individually  '  and  '  collectively  ' 
enjoy  himself  amid  the  ruins  of  all  these  lost  splendours  ?  " 
And  Leont'ev  asks  :  "  Which  is  better,  the  bloody  but  spiritu- 
ally brilliant  epoch  of  the  renaissance,  or  latter-day  Denmark, 
Holland,    or   Switzerland,    tranquil,  well-to-do,    and   smug?  " 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  217 

Leont'ev  defends  "  the  unlimited  rights  of  the  individual  spirit, 
into  whose  depths  the  general  regulations  of  the  laws  and 
the  universal  and  customary  opinions  of  mankind  cannot 
penetrate."  It  is  true  that  this  amoralism  was  Leont'ev's 
standpoint  before  his  conversion,  but  it  was  one  which  he 
was  not  able  to  transcend  even  after  he  had  become  a  monk. 
Whereas  before  conversion  he  had  contemplated  history  and 
human  life  aesthetically,  as  if  he  had  been  among  the  audience 
at  a  tragedy,  after  conversion  he  withdrew  to  his  "  moon  " 
from  which,  with  no  less  objectivity  and  equally  as  a  spectator, 
he  could  express  the  opinion  that  for  the  development  of  great 
and  strong  characters  it  was  essential  that  there  should  be 
social  injustices,  that  there  should  be  class  oppression, 
despotism,  dangers,  mighty  passions,  prejudices,  superstition, 
fanaticism — essential,  in  a  word,  that  there  should  be  every- 
thing against  which  the  nineteenth  century  has  fought. 
"  Without  forcible  constraint  no  good  thing  happens." 

In  his  literary  studies  as,  for  example,  in  the  work  on  Tolstoi 
written  shortly  before  his  death,  the  artist  of  early  days,  the 
artistic  observer  of  mankind  and  history,  once  more  comes 
into  his  own. 

It  is  Leont'ev's  amoraHsm  which  misleads  him  into  effecting 
a  radical  severance  of  religion  from  morality,  and  which  induces 
in  him  the  conviction  that  "  politics  has  nothing  to  do  with 
ethics."  For  the  same  reason  he  detests  democracy',  because 
democratic  politics  has  in  the  last  resort  an  ethical  sanction 
(cf.  Mihailovskii).  Leont'ev's  political  thought  has  a  religious 
trend,  and  for  him  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  at  the  same  time 
fear  of  the  temporal  ruler.  Ivan  Aksakov  says  of  Leont'ev's 
philosophy  of  religion  that  it  is  "  the  voluptuous  cult  of  the 
cane."  Similarly  de  Maistre,  long  before  the  days  of  Darwin, 
left  the  weak  to  be  the  prey  of  the  strong,  and  extolled  the 
soldier  and  the  executioner  side  by  side  with  the  pope. 

Leont'ev's  central  thought  is  the  necessity  for  theocracy. 
Augustine's  city  of  God  appears  in  Russian  guise  ;  God  becomes 
tsar  and  tsar  becomes  God.  Feuerbach  and  all  those  who 
conceive  the  essence  of  religion  to  consist  in  anthropomorphism 
and  sociomorphism  may  well  be  content  with  Leont'ev.  The 
historian  of  civilisation  and  the  philosopher  of  history  will 
see  in  his  crude  doctrines  a  reflex  of  the  political  conditions 
that  prevailed  during  the  reaction  under  Nicholas  and  his 
successors.     Leont'ev  did  not  evolve  his  theocratic  ideal  from 


218  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

his  inner  consciousness,  but  learned  it  from  the  study  of  reahty, 
Leont'ev's  theology  is  an  involuntary  criticism  of  the  regime 
of  Alexander  II  and  Alexander  III.  To  Leont'ev  it  seems 
that  atheism  is  tantamount  to  treason  to  the  tsar  and  to  the 
state. 

Leont'ev's  nature  was  an  extremely  complex  one  ;  he  himself 
describes  it  as  "  intolerably  complex."  He  suffered  from  a 
spiritual  disintegration  ;  his  body  was  inhabited  by  two  souls  ; 
he  had  a  Faust  nature,  or  was  as  he  put  it  "  a  spiritual  Icarus." 
Artist  and  aristocrat  by  temperament ;  realist  and  materialist 
by  scientific  and  medical  training  ;  pupil  of  Herzen,  Cernysev- 
skii,  Danilevskii  and  the  Russian  nihilists  ;  admirer  of  Turgenev 
and  the  great  Russian  and  European  writers — he  turned  his 
back  on  his  training  and  his  natural  gifts.  Desiring  to  stifle 
doubt,  he  sought  the  gloomy  monastic  cell,  he  became  a  monk. 
Yet  it  took  him  long  to  make  up  his  mind,  and  he  became  a 
monk  in  secret  only,  for  he  who  has  eaten  of  the  tree  of  know- 
ledge can  never  wholly  forget.  This  explains  the  internal 
struggle,  the  cleavage,  the  disintegration,  the  unceasing  self- 
torment,  and  the  ever-renewed  thirst  for  absolute  satisfaction. 
But  the  torment  grew  to  become  a  need,  and  thus  Leont'ev 
conceived  God  as  a  punishing  Jehovah,  as  a  Russian  tsar, 
whose  unrestricted  arbitrariness  develops  into  metaphysical 
freedom.  Homjakov  saw  in  Christ  the  head  of  the 
church,  but  to  Leont'ev  the  head  was  the  tsar.  Religion 
became  politics  ;  yet  again  and  again  the  strong  individuality 
of  the  man  who  wished  to  believe  but  could  not  believe  rose  in 
rebellion  against  the  God-tsar.  He  would  like  to  take  courage, 
and  to  cast  down  the  terrible  god  from  his  throne,  but  energy 
fails,  and  his  tortured  soul  longs  for  eternal  peace.  The  world, 
mundane  life,  vanishes  before  the  image  of  eternity.  Life 
seems  so  null,  man  seems  so  powerless,  that  Leont'ev  has  no 
need  of  morality  ;  he  needs  merely  religious  practice,  and  for 
him  religious  practice  is  nothing  but  fear  and  ascetic  inactivity. 
It  is  pessimistic  renunciation  of  will,  complete  moral  and  political 
nihilism,  directed,  however,  not  against  God  but  against  God's 
victims — a  believing  and  theistic  terrorism  ! 

Leont'ev  hates  democracy  and  hates  socialism.  Essentially 
he  is  the  egoistic  aristocrat,  who  requires  the  whole  church, 
the  whole  of  heaven,  for  himself  alone.  Leont'ev  spoke  of  his 
own  religion  as  "  transcendental  egoism,"  and  it  was,  in  fact,  a 
crude  religious  individualism  carried  to  the  pitch  of  anarchism. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  219 

Compared  with  Leont'ev,  Katkov  and  Pobedonoscev  were 
mere  bunglers,  the  hired  condottieri  of  reaction.  Leont'ev 
was  the  born  reactionary,  the  predestined  self-made  reactionary. 
The  Katkovs  and  Pobedonoscevs  enjoyed  his  approval,  but 
he  regarded  them  as  compromisers,  and  considered  that  they 
availed  themselves  of  petty  expedients.  Nevertheless  Leont'ev 
defended  Katkov  against  Turgenev  and  other  adversaries  who 
at  the  Puskin  festival  had  refused  to  be  reconciled  with  the 
great  Russian  publicist.  Katkov  had  defended  the  might  of 
Orthodox  Russia  and  of  the  tsar,  and  on  this  ground  Leont'ev 
esteemed  him  highly.  Leont'ev  would  have  liked  to  see  Katkov 
"  politically  canonised  during  his  lifetime."  If  the  Russians 
possessed  only  a  spark  of  moral  courage,  they  would  erect  a 
statue  to  Katkov  in  Moscoiv  near  the  Puskin  monument. 
"  It  is  time  we  should  learn  how  to  make  a  reaction."  The 
reactionaries  should  be  as  pitilessly  logical  as  the  nihilists. 

In  theological  matters  Leont'ev  had  an  untrained  mind, 
but  was  well  read  in  philosophy  and  literature.  Whilst  he 
accepted  official  Russia,  his  penetrating  understanding  made 
clear  to  him  the  futility  and  distintegration  of  the  reactionaries 
no  less  than  of  the  liberals,  and  made  him,  in  his  longing  for 
unity  and  integrality,  wish  for  the  restoration  of  prepetrine 
Old  Moscow. 

In  his  philosophy  of  religion,  Leont'ev  took  the  Slavophils 
as  his  starting  point.  Kireevskii,  Homjakov,  Konstantin 
Aksakov,  Samarin,  and  Ivan  Aksakov,  facilitated  for  him  the 
transition  to  orthodoxy,  whilst  the  philologian  T,  I.  Filippov 
fortified  him  in  his  Byzantinism.  Danilevskii,  he  tells  us, 
disclosed  to  him  the  true  meaning  of  slavophilism.  Katkov, 
finally,  was  for  him  the  Puskin  of  civic  activities.  For  Leont'ev, 
the  developm.ent  of  slavophilism  into  Asiaticism  was  com- 
paratively easy.  In  this  matter,  as  in  others,  Leont'ev  anti- 
cipated the  actualities  of  tsarism.  Prince  Uhtomskii  officially 
announced  the  panasiatist  policy  shortly  after  the  death  of 
Leont'ev  (see  §  33). 

Critical  theologians  can  hardly  fail  to  recognize  that  Leont'ev 
was  in  essentials  no  Christian  (cf.  Aggeev's  monograph  on 
Leont'ev,  1909).  Leont'ev's  faith,  even,  is  suspect  to  theolo- 
gians, and  with  good  reason,  for  the  will  to  believe  is  not  j^et 
belief.  In  the  later  years  of  his  life,  Leont'ev  was  profoundly 
impressed  by  Solov'ev's  philosophy  of  history  and  of  religion, 
and  Solov'ev's  ideas  shook  Leont'ev's  Byzantinism.     Solov'ev 


220  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

considered  that  the  future  belonged  to  a  union  of  the  churches, 
that  Byzantium  and  the  third  Rome  must  yield  place  to  the 
first  Rome.  Leont'ev  wished  to  constrain  himself  to  believe 
but  wished  the  impossible. 

Leont'ev's  philosophy  of  religion  and  philosophy  of  ecclesi- 
asticispi  win  more  influence  among  theologians  than  among 
the  more  recent  philosophers  of  religion.  Weak-minded  men, 
or  those  who  have  become  weak-minded,  cannot  withstand 
absurdities  and  paradoxes.  ^ 


II 

§  136. 

I  HAVE  alluded  to  the  most  notable  defenders  of  official 
theocracy.  Let  us  now  take  a  comparative  survey  of 
the  two  camps,  that  of  the  right  and  that  of  the 'left. 

Alike  quantitatively  and  qualitatively,  the  theocrats  are 
inferior  to  the  radicals  and  the  revolutionaries.  If  we  contrast 
B^linskii,  Herzen,  Bakunin,  Cernysevski ,  Dobroljubov,  Pisarev, 
Lavrov,  and  Mihailovskii,  with  Katkov  and  Pobedonoscev, 
the  two  latter  are  incomparably  weaTcer  both  as  men  of 
letters  and  as  philosophers ;  Leont'ev  alone  has  claims  on 
our  respect,  but  his  theocratic  allies  were  themselves  alarmed 
by  his  syllogistic  straightforwardness. 

The  reaction,  long  drawn  out,  after  the  days  of  Alexander  I, 
had  little  to  show  in  the  way  of  intellectual  pre-eminence. 
Karamzin,  Siskov,  Pogodin,  and  Sevyrev ;  such  official  publicists, 
now  quite  forgotten,  as  Glinka,  Grec^,  Bulgarin,  and  Senkovskii 
(Brambeus)  ;  such  periodicals  as  "  Majak  "  and  "  V^st  "—a 
lean  inventory  ! 

The  theocracy  was  incapable  of  attracting  and  training 
vigorous  thinkers.  The  state  fundamental  law,  Count  Uvarov's 
formula,  and  the  administrative  machine,  occupied  and  con- 

»  A  brief  reference  only  can  be  made  to  Leont'ev's  epigrams,  a  few  of  which 
have  been  quoted  in  the  text.  They  are  often  arresting  and  suggestive.  For 
example,  he  speaks  of  his  own  system  as  "  optimistic  pessimism,"  for  it  is 
optimistic  in  respect  of  its  transcendental  egoism,  but  pessimistic  in  relation 
to  this  world.  In  many  cases  he  does  no  more  than  remint  well  known  phrases 
of  his  predecessors.  KirSevskii,  for  example,  had  referred  to  the  artificial 
,  society  which  in  Europe  (as  contrasted  with  Russia)  was  based  upon  the 
calculus  of  personal  interests ;  for  Leont'ev  this  'becomes  the  "  reciprocal 
honesty  "  of  the  European  bourgeois. 


THE   SrilUT   OF   RUSSIA  221 

tinue  to  occupy  the  energies  of  the  reaction,  under  the  aegis 
of  the  church.  These  labours  were  quite  mechanical,  and 
intelligence  was  practically  superfluous  for  their  performance. 

As  Leont'ev  declared,  the  theocrats  were  opposed  to  every- 
thing towards  which  the  nineteenth  century  aspired.  Their 
primary  aim  was  to  forbid  thought  and  culture,  and  to  render 
these  impossible.  Philosophy,  the  sciences,  the  universities 
and  the  elementary  schools,  journalism,  in  a  word,  all  the 
instruments  of  culture,  were  restricted.  The  new  democratic 
trends  and  aspirations  were  crushed  ;  socialism  and  liberalism, 
endeavours  to  secure  liberty,  equality,  and  progress,  were 
strenuously  opposed. 

The  theocracy  had  one  of  its  main  pillars  in  the  aristocracy, 
in  the  great  landowners.  In  this  connection,  the  reactionary 
agrarian  program  of  Russia  may  be  said,  in  a  sense,  to  have 
more  justification  than  it  has,  for  example,  in  Prussia,  where 
the  population  is  not  predominantly  agricultural.  But  even 
within  the  ranks  of  the  Russian  nobility  there  has  always 
existed  a  liberal  minority.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the 
army,  the  second  buttress  of  governments  and  dynasties.  To 
a  certain  extent,  too,  bureaucracy  is  perforce  liberal. 

There  remains,  then,  the  clergy,  the  altar,  which  is  the  most 
essential  pillar  of  the  throne.  Theology  is  the  true  state 
philosophy  of  Russia,  the  official  conception  of  the  universe. 
Bakunin,  in  his  earlier  conservative  days,  formulated  this  in 
lapidar}'  style  for  subsequent  state  philosophers  and  court 
philosophers,  writing,  "  Where  there  is  no  religion  there  can 
be  no  state,"  and  "  Religion  is  the  substance,  the  essence,  of 
the  life  of  every  state."  Pobedonoscev  did  no  more  than 
repeat  Bakunin's  formula  when  he  declared,  "  Unbelief  is  the 
direct  negation  of  the  state."  Surely  it  almost  transcends 
irony  that  the  founder  of  anarchism  should  have  anticipated 
Pobedonoscev. 

In  Europe  too,  doubtless,  conservatives  and  reactionaries 
appealed  in  political  matters  to  divine  revelation  as  the  ultimate 
source  of  authority,  appealed  to  divine  right  ;  but  the  divine 
right  of  the  tsar  was  on  principle  elevated  to  the  rank  of  a 
categorical  imperative  of  revelation. 

The  struggle  between  religious  faith  and  philosophical 
unfaith  is  not  waged  solely  in  the  fields  of  philosophy  and 
theology  ;  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  political  struggle,  the  struggle 
between   absolute    monarchy    and   democracy.    The    Russian 


222  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

radical  philosophy  of  history  and  philosophy  of  religion  bring 
the  facts  so  clearly  to  light  that  democracy,  no  less  than 
theocracy,  has  and  must  have  a  philosophical  foundation. 

Thus  philosophy  opposes  theology  in  the  political  field,  the 
philosophy  which  is  above  all  associated  with  the  ideas  of 
Feuerbach,  in  whose  name,  from  the  middle  forties  onwards, 
the  theoretical  and  practical  resistance  to  tsarism  was  con- 
ducted Without  circumlocution,  the  nihilistic  terrorists  pro- 
claimed atheism  and  materialism  as  the  main  pillars  of  their 
poUtical  program.  Belinskii,  Herzen,  Bakunin,  Cernysevskii, 
Dobroljubov,  Pisarev,  Lavrov,  Mihailovskii,  one  and  all  (and 
it  is  no  less  true  of  Marx  and  the  Marxists)  start  from  Feuerbach. 
Now  Feuerbach  tells  us  bluntly  that  God  is  the  anthropomorphic 
likeness  and  phantasmagoria  of  king,  emperor,  and  tsar  ;  he 
tells  us,  to  quote  Bakunin's  harsh  formula,  that  heaven  is  the 
dram  shop  sub  specie  aeternitatis. 

"  Feuerbach  "  on  one  side,  "  monk  "  on  the  other,  are  the 
slogans  of  the  political  opponents  ;  in  the  eyes  of  the  theocrats, 
atheism  is  treason  to  state  and  country. 

Homjakov  desired  a  true  conservatism.  The  system  of 
Uvarov  and  Leont'ev  is  not  conservatism,  but  the  blind  accept- 
ance of  tsarism  and  tsarist  administration.  Bismarck  dis- 
tinguished between  conservatism  and  governmentalism,  but 
the  Russian  conservatives  were  far  from  having  advanced  to 
this  point.  The  Russians  aimed  at  absolute  arrest,  at  the 
repristination  of  prepetrine  Moscow.  In  Europe,  conservatism 
admits  of  progress,  but  Russian  conservatism  absolutely  negates 
progress ;  it  was  natural,  therefore,  that  the  reactionaries  should 
find  themselves  opposed  to  Peter  and  his  reforms.  The  practical 
meaning  of  this  was  that  tsarism  was  in  conflict  with  itself. 

The  theorists  of  theocracy  vigorously  opposed  nihilism  and 
nihilist  negation,  but  they  themselves  were  merely  negative 
and  repressive,  were  uncreative. 

V.  Rozanov,  who  studied  for  a  time  under  Leont'ev,  charac- 
terised Pobedonoscev  as  a  sceptic.  All  that  Rozanov  meant 
was  that  the  deceased  procurator  did  not  believe  in  mankind 
or  in  the  present,  but  for  my  part  I  feel  justified  in  adding  that 
Pobedonoscevj  Leont'ev,  and  Katkov  all  suffered  from  the 
canker  of  unbelief,  and  that  this  explains  their  scholastic  warfare 
against  unbelief.  Medieval  faith  was  half  interred  with  the 
bones  of  scholasticism,  and  the  same  statement  applies  to 
modern  scholasticism  alike  in  Europe  and  in  Russia.     He  who 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  228 

finds  it  necessary  to  furnish  reasons  to  himself  and  others  in 
defence  of  his  traditional  beliefs,  is  already  a  lost  man. 

Hence  the  theocratic  apologia  is  mere  Jesuitry.  Even 
Leont'ev  is  under  no  illusions  ;  he  recognises  that  the  reaction 
can  find  nothing  but  specious  reasons  for  the  defence  of  its 
unavowed  aims,  and  that  in  the  last  resort  it  must  necessarily 
have  recourse  to  force. 

Leont'ev  felt  that  he  was  defending  a  lost  post. 

This  is  why  the  ex-revolutionary  Tihomirov  was  dissatisfied, 
not  only  with  Dostoevskii,  Solov'ev,  and  Homjakov,  but  also 
with  Leont'ev. 

In  the  seventies  Tihomirov  had  been  a  revolutionist  and 
terrorist,  and  had  been  one  of  those  to  collaborate  with  Mihailov- 
skii  in  composing  the  letter  to  Alexander  III,  Tihomirov  drafting 
for  that  document  the  minimum  demands  for  reform.  As 
member  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja 
he  took  part  in  the  before-mentioned  negotiations  with  the 
"  Holy  Retinue."  In  the  year  1888,  in  a  writing  entitled 
Why  I  am  no  longer  a  Revolutionary,  he  attempted  to  defend 
his  change  of  view.  Mihailovskii  has  written  concerning  the 
early  activities  of  the  convert  in  St,  Petersburg.  Tihomirov, 
collaborating  on  Katkov's  paper  and  other  reactionary  journals, 
demanded  absolute  faith  in  reHgion  and  pohtics.  He  knew 
what  scepticism  was,  since  for  a  long  time  he  had  doubted  the 
justification  for  revolution,  but  had  none  the  less  remained 
active  for  years  in  the  refugee  movement.  In  1893  Tihomirov 
pubnshed  a  work  upon  Clergy  and  Society  in  the  Contemporary 
Religious  World,  declaring  here  quite  unambiguously  that  the 
believer  must  be  absolutely  devoted  and  perfectly  submissive 
to  the  church.  ReUgious  faith;  in  his  view,  was  exclusive  of 
any  kind  of  spontaneous  religious  activity  on  the  part  of  the 
critical'  understanding ;  ecclesiastical  authority  rendered  all 
search  for  rehgious  truths  superfluous  ;  this  search  was  per- 
nicious. Just  as  the  church  was  the  highest  spiritual  authority, 
so  were  the  autocracy  and  the  government  alone  competent 
and  alone  entitled  to  regulate  social  order  ;  Europe,  no  less 
than  Russia,  could  be  saved  only  by  absolute  monarchy.  In 
Russia,  "  a  skilled  and  vigorous  pohce  "  would  suffice  to  put 
an  end  to  the  various  socialist  fantasies. 

In  the  first  work  written  after  his  conversion,  Tihomirov 
renounced  revolution  in  favour  of  peaceful  evolution,  but  when 
he  had  himself  evolved  in  the  reactionary  direction  he  aban- 


224  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

doned  evolution  as  well.  Nevertheless,  in  the  name  of  the 
church  and  of  the  autocracy  a  few  shamefaced  protests  were 
made  against  Tihomirov's  demand  for  blind  obedience. 

It  was  characteristic  of  the  theocracy  that  it  should  seek 
its  condottieri  among  renegades  from  the  other  camp  (Katkov, 
Tihomirov,  etc). 

De  Maistre  paved  the  way  for  the  Russian  theocrats  with  his 
executioner,  his  glorification  of  the  soldier,  and  his  defence 
of  the  inquisition.  De  Maistre,  too,  anticipated  Feuerbach  by 
representing  the  monarchy  as  a  true  image  of  divine  governance 
on  earth. 

Thus  the  Russian  theocrats  appear  to  us  as  westernisers, 
one  might  almost  say  absolute  westerniser-s.  It  is  the  European 
theocrats  and  reactionaries  who  furnish  their  Russian  congeners 
with  a  meagre  store  of  intellectual  provender  ;  in  return  the 
Tihomirovs  promise  the  European  reactionaries  that  tsarism 
will  bring  help  and  rescue. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN 

VLADIMIR  SOLOVEV  ;  RELIGION   AS   MYSTICISM 

§  137- 

HAVING  dealt  with  the  defenders  of  official  theocracy 
we  have  now  to  consider  the  theorist  of  "  free  theocracy  " 
Vladimir  Sergeevic  Solov'ev,  the  most  influential  teacher  of 
the  recent  searchers  after  God  and  the  leading  representative 
of  the  Russian  philosophy  of  religion. 

Solov'ev  was  born  at  Moscow  in  the  year  1853.  A  gifted 
lad,  he  found  much  to  stimulate  his  literary  and  philosophical 
faculties  in  his  home  and  among  the  family  acquaintances. 
Sergei  Solov'ev,  the  father,  is  already  known  to  us  as  liberal 
historian  and  professor  at  Moscow  university  ;  the  mother 
was  also  a  person  of  active  intelligence  ;  whilst  the  Solov'ev 
family  had  lively  traditions  of  the  remarkable  philosopher 
Skovoroda,  to  whom  the  mother  was  kin.  The  family  talent 
is  further  signahsed  by  the  fact  that  Vladimir  Solov'ev's  elder 
brother  was  a  writer  of  novels,  whilst  one  of  his  sisters  attained 
reputation  as  painter  and  poet. 

Before  leaving  school,  Solov'ev  had  already  shown  keen 
interest  in  philosophical  and  religious  questions.  In  the  middle 
and  late  sixties,  when  the  representatives  of  the  radical  trend 
of  Cernygevskii  and  Pisarev  were  being  persecuted,  Solov'ev, 
at  the  age  of  fourteen,  became  an  enthusiastic  nihihst.  Until 
his  seventeenth  year  he  was  faithful  to  positivism,  materialism, 
and  atheism,  regarding  Pisarev  as  the  greatest  Russian 
philosopher,  and  Spinoza  as  the  greatest  philosopher  the  world 
had  ever  produced.  Further,  Solov'ev  was  an  enthusiast  for 
Buddhism,  and  his  pantheistic  inclinations  were  fostered  by  the 
study  of  Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann.  Entering  the  uni- 
versity in  1869,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  natural 
science,  but  transferred  two  years  later^  to  the  philosophical 

16  VOL.   U. 


226  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

faculty,  where  his  chief  teacher  was  JurkeviC.  In  addition, 
he  attended  the  philosophical  lectures  of  Kudrjavcev-Platonov 
at  the  "eeminary.  Throughout  life  Solov'ev  cherished  these 
two  teachers  in  grateful  memory.  We  are  already  acquainted 
with  JurkeviC,  the  opponent  of  CernySevskii.  The  characteristics 
of  Kudrjavcev's  philosophy  will  be  suggested  by  the  considera- 
tion that  he  adopted  the  additional  name  of  Platonov.  A 
highminded  opponent  of  contemporary  philosophy,  especially 
of  materialism,  positivism,  and  Darwinism,  he  exercised  an 
enduring  influence  upon  Solov'ev. 

Study  of  the  Slavophils  led  Solov'ev  to  Plato,  and  also  to 
neoplatonism,  to  Plotinus  ;  he  was  especially  interested  in  the 
work  of  Homjakov.  From  the  Slavophils  he  passed  to  Schelling, 
and  Schelling  smoothed  his  path  to  Baader,  Jacob  Boehme, 
and  all  the  mystics,  Swedenborg  of  course  not  excepted. 
Solov'ev  found  in  the  mystics  the  mainspring  of  true  knowledge. 
The  gnostics  (Philo  and  Valentinus),  the  first  Greek  fathers  of 
the  church  (especially  Origen),  and  Augustine,  became  his 
favourite  authorities.  The  study  of  ecclesiastical  history  and 
the  ideal  of  the  union  of  the  churches  led  Solov'ev  to  the 
Catholic  traditionalists  (de  Bonald,  de  Maistre,  etc.). 

Even  before  he  left  the  university,  but  still  more  in  later 
years  (his  translation  of  Kant's  Prolegomena  was  published  in 
1889),  Solov'ev  was  much  disquieted  by  Kant  as  well  as  by  the 
mystics.  Hegel  reinforced  the  rationalistic  trend,  whilst 
Schopenhauer  and  Eduard  von  Hartmann  confirmed  Solov'ev 
in  his  mysticism.  In  addition,  Schopenhauer  directed  his 
attention  to  Hindostan,  whilst  his  own  inclinations  towards 
magian  superstition  made  spiritualism,  hypnotism,  and  occultism 
congenial  to  him.  He  was  greatly  influenced  by  Auguste  Comte  : 
at  first  by  positivism,  which,  however,  he  soon  came  to  regard 
as  inadequate,  his  own  earliest  philosophical  writings  being 
refutations  of  positivism  ;  and  subsequently  by  Comte's  works 
upon  the  religion  of  humanity. ^ 

In  1874  he  took  up  his  residence  as  professor  of  philosophy 
in  Moscow,  and  published  his  work  on  The  Crisis  in  Western 
Philosophy .     Next  year,  however,  he  set  out  on  a  journey  to 

^  In  the  Russian  edition  of  Brockhaus'  encyclopaedia,  the  following  articles 
on  philosophers,  theologians,  and  mj'^stics  are  penned  by  Solov'ev :  Plato, 
Plotinus,  Proclus,  Origen,  Pglagius,  Basil  the  Great,  Duns  Scotus,  Hugues 
of  Saint-Victor,  Raymond  Lully,  Hermes  Trismegistus,  Campanella,  Male- 
branche,  Swedenborg,  de  Maistre,  Kant,  Hegel,  Comte,  Hartmann,  Maine 
de  Biran. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  227 

study  in  the  west,  and  visited  London  to  examine  in  the  British 
Museum  the  sources  of  our  knowledge  of  Hindostan.  Thence 
he  passed  to  the  east,  to  search  among  the  Bedouins  of  Egypt 
for  remnants  of  ancient  apostolical  tradition.  Returning  to 
Moscow  in  1876,  he  resigned  his  professorship  in  1877.  A  dispute 
had  broken  out  over  the  university  statutes  between  the  liberal 
and  the  conservative  professors.  Solov'ev  (in  opposition  to 
his  own  father)  espoused  the  cause  of  the  conservatives,  and 
was  supported  by  Katkov,  with  whom  the  younger  Solov'ev 
had  now  become  closely  acquainted,  Solov'ev  being  a  collabor- 
ator on  Katkov's  review.  At  this  epoch,  too,  he  had  friendly 
relations  with  Ivan  Aksakov  and  Leont'ev,  whilst  among  the 
younger  Slavophils  KojaloviC  was  a  favourite  associate. 

Removing  from  Moscow  to  St.  Petersburg,  Solov'ev  joined 
the  ministry  for  education  as  a  member  of  the  scientific  com- 
mittee. The  outbreak  of  the  war  with  Turkey  led  him  for  a 
while  to  think  of  visiting  the  theatre  of  war  as  correspondent 
of  Katkov's  review,  but  the  idea  was  never  carried  out.  In 
St.  Petersburg  he  became  intimate  with  Dostoevskii,  with  the 
poet  Fet,  and  also  with  Tolstoi,  although  his  mental  outlook 
became  continually  more  divergent  from  that  of  the  last-named. 

In  the  year  1880,  at  the  St.  Petersburg  philosophical  faculty, 
he  defended  his  dissertation.  Critique  of  Abstract  Principles, 
which  had  not  brought  him  the  desired  professorship.  Vladi- 
slavlev,  professor  of  philosophy,  was  opposed  to  Solov'ev ; 
Cicferin,  too,  was  adverse  at  this  time  (see  Mysticism  in  Science, 
1880)  ;  and  at  a  somewhat  earlier  date  Kavelin  had  likewise 
shown  himself  an  opponent  [Apriori  Philosophy  or  Positive 
Science  ?) .  Despite  the  veto  thus  exercised  by  two  of  the  most 
notable  representatives  of  westernism  and  liberaUsm,  Solov'ev 
after  a  while  (1888)  moved  away  from  Katkov  towards  the 
liberals — or  at  any  rate  his  writings  secured  acceptance  in 
liberal  organs. 

In  188 1,  after  the  assassination  of  Alexander  II,  in  a  public 
lecture  Solov'ev  demanded  pardon  for  the  tsaricides.  There- 
with his  academic  career  necessarily  came  to  a  close.  Count 
Deljanov,  minister  for  education,  a  willing  instrument  of  Pobe- 
donoscev,  had  no  place  for  Solov'ev  as  professor,  for  Solov'ev 
was  "  a  man  with  ideas." 

Solov'ev  now  devoted  himself  to  questions  concerning  the 
philosophy  of  religion  and  the  history  of  the  church.  His 
studies  in  these  fields  led  him  to  defend  the  union  of  the  churches 


228  THE   SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA 

and  brought  him  near  to  Cathohcism.  He  entered  into  close 
relationships  with  Bishop  Strossmayer  and  the  Jesuit  Pierling. 
Among  Cathohc  thinkers,  Bossuet,  with  his  philosophy  of 
ecclesiastical  history,  became  dear  to  Solov'ev.  The  rehgious 
censorship  now  forbade  him  to  publish  in  Russia  any  writings 
upon  religious  topics,  and  his  chief  works  were  therefore  pro- 
duced abroad.  The  first  volume  of  the  History  and  Future  of 
Theocracy,  containing  Foreword,  Introduction,  and  Philosophy 
of  Biblical  History,  was  published  in  Russian  at  Agram  in  1887  ; 
La  Russia  et  I'eglise  universelle  appeared  at  Paris  in  1889. 

During  the  nineties,  Solov'ev  devoted  his  attention  to 
ethical  and  political  questions.  His  leading  ethical  treatise 
was  entitled  Justification  of  the  Good,  Moral  Philosophy  (1897, 
2nd  edition  1898). 

At  this  time  he  planned  with  Tiis  brother  a  translation  of 
Plato ;  he  translated  Kant's  Prolegomena  ;  and  he  wrote  a  de- 
tailed biography  of  Mohammed  (1896) — the  Mohammedan 
religious  world  had  ever  allured  him. 

Solov'ev  paid  frequent  visits  to  Europe.  In  1899  he  re- 
visited Egypt,  and  wished  to  go  to  Palestine,  but  lacked  funds 
for  the  purpose.  Returning  home  in  debilitated  health,  he 
died  next  year  (August  12th)  on  the  estate  of  one  of  his  pro- 
fessorial friends.  Prince  Trubeckoi. 

All  his  biographers  are  agreed  in  deploring  Solov'ev's  care- 
lessness about  his  health.  His  meals  were  ill  selected  and 
irregular  ;  in  later  years  he  became  a  vegetarian,  though  he 
ate  fish  occasionally  ;  when  ill  he  often  refused  to  follow  his 
doctor's  advice.  He  would  work  far  on  into  the  night  ;  lived 
quite  alone  for  months  without  a  servant  ;  whilst  he  would 
visit  his  friends  unexpectedly,  this  too,  perhaps,  at  a  very 
late  hour,  in  order  to  discuss  vital  questions  with  them.  It 
cannot  be  said  that  he  shunned  society.  He  was  restless, 
highly  strung,  of  irregular  habits,  and  might  be  described  as  a 
secular  monk  and  ascetic. 

§  138. 

A  DETAILED  study  of  Solov'ev  would  have  to  follow 
closely  the  philosopher's  course  of  internal  development, 
but  in  a  sketch,  which  is  all  that  can  be  given  here,  I  must 
content  rnyself  with  presenting  the  leading  important  ideas  of 
Solov'ev's  philosophy  and  with  making  no  more  than  brief 
allusion  to  the  chief  phases  of  his  development. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  229 

I  will  begin  with  a  description  of  his  most  important  work, 
the  History  of  Ethics,  the  second  edition  of  which  was  published 
shortly  before  his  death.  At  the  outset  I  must  insist  that  this 
treatise  is,  in  fact,  Solov'ev's  only  finished  work.  It  is  far 
more  carefully  elaborated  than  any  of  the  others,  and  it  exhibits 
the  author's  views  on  the  philosophy  of  religion  in  a  clarified 
and  largely  mitigated  form.  It  provides  free  theocracy  and 
theosophy  with  an  ethical  foundation,  whilst  mysticism  is 
kept  within  bounds  by  Kantian  criticism. 

Having  to  face  the  decisive  question,  what  proof  he  can , 
find  for  theism  and  consequently  for  theocracy,  he  adduces 
the  so-called  moral  proof  of  the  existence  of  God,  but  from  this 
outlook  he  goes  beyond  Kant,  whose  hypothetical  statement 
naturally  seems  to  him  inadequate.  To  Solov'ev  the  con- 
sciousness of  good  and  evil  appears  absolute  ;  he  considers 
that  this  consciousness,  and  the  distinction  between  good  and 
evil,  cannot  be  shaken  by  any  scepticism.  All  that  scepticism 
can  effect  is  that  it  may  make  us  doubt  the  existence  of  the 
objective  world  ;  it  cannot  affect  moral  conviction  ;  man  has 
to  recognise  within  himself  the  dualism  of  good  and  evil,  and 
he  cannot  fail  to  feel  the  sense  of  moral  obligation  ;  conscience 
cannot  be  purely  subjective.  To  this  point  Solov'ev  follows 
Kant.  Morality''  is  autonomous.  But  thence  Solov'ev  does 
not  merely  derive  postulates  ;  he  deduces  rather  that  God 
and  the  soul  are  not  superadded  to  morality  from  without,  but 
are  the  direct  energies  of  moralit3\  The  historic  fact  that 
for  the  generality  of  mankind  the  moral  standard  continues 
to  grow,  and  that  for  mankind  this  standard  grows  indepen- 
dently of  individual  men,  leads  Solov'ev  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  moral  growth  of  mankind  is  the  direct  outcome  of 
the  superhuman  power  of  the  Good  ;   but  the  good  is  God.^ 

Thus  for  Solov'ev  the  direct  moral  consciousness  affords 
direct  certainty  of  the  living  God  and,  the  living  soul.  Religion 
is  for  him  the  living  sense  of  the  real  presence  of  the  unitary 
and  all-embracing  godhead.  I 

Before  ethics,  Hume  called  a  halt  to  his  scepticism.     Solov'ev  I 
accepts  this  limitation,  strengthens  the  argument  by  an  appeal 
to  Kant,  and  proceeds  thence  to  the  highest  good  of  Plato. 
Solov'ev  believes  himself  to  have  thus  constructed  an  ethic  \ 
entirely  independent  of  theory,  independent  alike  of  the  theory 

'  Solov'ev  is  not  consistent  in  the  use  of  the  capital,  writing  sometimes 
"  th»  Good  "  and  sometimes  "  the  good." 


230  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

of  cognition  and  of  metaphysics — for  ethics  cannot  be  wholly 
independent  of  religion. 

The  views  are  reminiscent  of  Kant  and  Plato,  but  also  of 
Spinoza  ;  and  we  must  ask  ourselves  whether  the  real  presence 
of  the  all-embracing  God  is  to  be  interpreted  pantheistically 
or  monotheistically..  When  Solov'ev  speaks  of  the  soul  he 
tells  us  that  he  does  not  conceive  the  soul  as  being  necessarily 
an  individual  and  independent  substance.  It  is  possible  to 
conceive  the  soul  as  a  relationship,  as  one  of  many  mutually 
inseparable  relationships,  of  the  godhead  to  one  or  another 
substratum  of  mundane  life,  relationships  that  are  perdurable, 
immortal.  Immortal  relationships?  We  cannot  further 
consider  this  argument,  which  does  not  seem  particularly 
cogent,  for  it  has  been  adduced  merely  to  show  how 
Solov'ev  passes  back  from  Kant  by  way  of  Spinoza  to 
Plato. 

Solov'ev  shows  more  originality  and  independence  when 
he  deduces  the  theocratic  organisation  of  mankind  from  an 
ethical  principle,  that  of  asceticism.  He  assumes  the  feeling 
of  shame  to  be  inborn.  It  appears,  he  says,  in  three  distinct 
modifications,  and  constitutes  the  moral  vital  energy.  The 
sentiment  of  shame  in  the  strictest  sense  is  shown  in  the  relation- 
ship between  man  and  the  lower  creation,  and  in  man's  relation- 
ship to  matter,  in  especial  towards  his  own  material  body, 
towards  matters  of  sex.  The  sentiment  of  shame  also  takes 
the  form  of  fellow-feeling,  of  sympathy  or  altruism.  Sympathy 
is  not  irrational  as  Schopenhauer  contends  ;  it  is  rational ;  it. 
is  the  positive  recognition  of  another ;  it  is  truth  and  justice, 
compassion,  conscience. 

In  veneration  (pietas,  reverentia),  finally,  Solov'ev  discerns 
the  root  of  religion  for  each  individual.  The  first  manifesta- 
tions of  veneration  are  seen  in  family  life,  in  veneration  for 
parents.  "  The  idea  of  the  godhead  is  incorporated  in  the 
living  personality  of  the  parents  ;  providence,  the  main  attri- 
bute of  the  godhead,  is  incorporated  in  the  care  and  foresight 
of  the  mother."  To  emphasise  the  religious  significance  of 
motherhood,  Solov'ev  appeals  to  the  first  stage  of  historical 
development,  to  the  theoiies  of  matriarchy  and  gynecocracy. 
Yet  the  father  has  the  higher  religious  significance.  The  mother 
is  greatly  esteemed  by  children,  but  to  the  adult,  death  brings 
awareness  of  veneration  towards  ancestors  ;  to  the  adult,  his 
father  seems  an  understudy  for  the  gods,  whilst  his  grandfather 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  231 

has  simply  become  a  god.^  Christianity  discovered  the  father 
of  the  universe  and  the  sentiment  of  veneration  in  the  spirit 
and  in  truth  ;  the  relationship  of  sonhood  became  sacred  ;  this 
relationship  attests  what  the  Son  of  God  has  taught  us,  that  we 
must  do  the  Father's  will,  not  our  own  ;  for  Solov'ev,  Christianity, 
and  God  incarnate,  are  identical  ideas. 

Thus  for  Solov'ev  shame  is  the  starting  point  and  the  rational 
foundation  of  the  moral  organisation  of  mankind.  Individual 
chastity  is  the  guarantee  of  sound  asceticism  ;  social  chastity, 
the  conscience,  regulates  the  relationships  between  man  and 
man  ;  finally,  religious  chastity,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  brings 
man  into  his  true  relationship  with  God. 

Without  entering  upon  a  detailed  criticism,  we  may  recog- 
nise, above  all,  the  vigour  of  this  attempt  at  a  unitary  con- 
struction, while  perceiving  that  Solov'ev  is  more  indebted 
than  he  is  himself  aware  to  Schopenhauer  and  modern  phil- 
osophy. In  a  word,  although  his  first  and  chief  desire  is  to  be 
a  Christian,  he  seems  to  have  mislaid  Christian  love.  It  is  true 
that  he  frequently  insists  upon  love  as  the  basis  of  religion, 
but  he  is  thinking  of  Spinoza's  "  amor  intellectualis  "  and  not 
of  Christian  love  ;  the  "  pietas  "  and  "  reverentia  "  of  the 
patriarchs  are  far  more  akin  to  fear,  to  Leont'ev's  timor  Domini, 
than  they  are  to  Christian  love.  Moreover,  Schopenhauer's 
"  sympathy  in  mutual  human  relationships  "  is  not  love,  and 
it  is  a  mere  accessory  that  the  feeling  should  be  rationalised. 
Such  rationalisation  of  basic  sentiments  is  extremely  charac- 
teristic of  Solov'ev  ;  he  starts  voluntaristically  from  feeling, 
but  proceeds  to  rationalise  feeling.  Schopenhauer  is  supple- 
mented and  corrected  by  Kant  and  Spinoza.  Spinoza  shared 
with  Schopenhauer  the  position  of  Solov'ev's  first  philosophic 
love. 

The  important  question  is  whether  Solov'ev  failed  to  note 
that  his  explanation  of  morality  and  the  religious  sentiment 
accorded  ill  with  Christian  doctrine.  In  essentials  Solov'ev 
accepted  the  attempts  of  the  deists  to  explain  religion  as  natural. 
He  appealed  on  his  own  account  to  natural  religion,  never 
noting  that  natural  religion  and  revealed  religion  are  somewhat 
inharmonious.  He  showed,  indeed,  that  we  should  not  con- 
ceive religion  either  as  fetichism  or  as  mythology,  but  he  merely 

*  Solov'ev  lays  especial  stress  upon  the  Russian  practice  of  using  patrony- 
mics (e.g.  Vladimir  ScrggeviC,  the  son  of  Sergfii)  as  an  index  of  the  importance 
of  "  fatherhood." 


282  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

did  this  in  order  that  he  might  stress  more  effectively  the  pietas 
erga  parentes.  But  since  he  admitted  (following  Darwin  and 
others)  that  even  the  dog  and  the  monkey,  in  their  feelings 
towards  the  master,  display  the  rudiments  of  religious  senti- 
ment, we  must  ask  why  man,  who  in  religious  matters  stands 
so  far  above  the  beasts,  should  need  revelation.  We  must  ask 
what  proofs  there  are  of  the  existence  of  revelation.  What 
need  has  Solov'ev  of  dogma,  to  which,  as  we  shall  shortly  see, 
he  attaches  so  much  importance  ? 

By  Schopenhauer,  too,  Solov'ev  was  won  over  to  the  cause 
of  asceticism,  or  rather  Schopenhauer  led  him  to  esteem  religious 
asceticism  even  more  highly  than  before.  The  entire  super- 
structure of  his  free  theocracy  is  founded  upon  asceticism.  For 
him,  church,  state,  individual  morality,  the  entire  moral  organisa- 
tion of  mankind,  are  ascetic.  In  asceticism,  in  the  sentiment 
of  shame,  man  reaUses  himself  to  be  man,  therein  he  finds 
himself  to  be  higher  than  the  beasts  and  higher  than  matter  ; 
and  in  asceticism  Solov'ev  seeks  the  essence  of  genius.  (Here, 
too,  he  borrows  to  some  extent  from  Schopenhauer.) 

It  is  impossible  to  expound  Solov'ev's  individual  doctrines 
or  to  recapitulate  his  prescriptions  for  asceticism.  Suffice  it 
to  say  that  he  conceives  of  marriage  as  a  form  of  asceticism, 
characterising  it  as  a  great  deed  and  as  an  act  of  martyrdom. 
Russian  theologians  refuse  to  accept  Solov'ev's  ascetic  principle. 
Solov'ev,  they  say,  exaggerates  the  significance  of  this  principle 
in  the  spiritual  life  of  mankind,  and  they  insist  that  he  is  wrong 
in  regarding  it  as  a  primary,  not  as  a  secondary  principle. 
Finally  they  reproach  him  because  his  teaching  is  not  in  accord 
with  Holy  Writ,  though  it  may  be  endorsed  by  that  of  some  of 
the  fathers  of  the  church.  Solov'ev  does  in  fact  come  to  the 
same  conclusions  as  Eduard  von  Hartmann.  Solov'ev  demands 
absolute  sexual  continence,  and  the  dying  out  of  the  human 
race  would  not  conflict  with  his  outlook. 

Solov'ev's  psychological  interpretation  of  the  sentiment  of 
shame  was  fallacious,  and  his  moral  estimate  of  the  sentiment 
was  no  less  erroneous.  We  may  admit  that  he  showed  a  fine 
understanding  of  the  feeling  for  another's  individuahty,  the 
feehng  that  induces  the  reflective  man  to  discover  within  him- 
self something  akin  with  all  other  individuals  and  even  with 
non-living  things,  but  Solov'ev  errs  when  he  interprets  this 
sentiment  as  a  manifestation  of  shame. 

I  must  also  draw  special  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  fails 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  233 

to  recognise  the  distinction  between  chastity  and  physical 
intactness  (virginity),  failing  here  to  transcend  ecclesiastical 
materialism. 

In  his  poems  the  poet-philosopher  gives  an  intimate  record 
of  a  succession  of  meetings  The  nine-year-old  boy  conceived 
an  ardent  love  for  a  girl  of  the  same  age,  and  at  this  early 
age  already  sought  help  against  passion  in  the  church.  The 
second  meeting  took  place  in  London  ;  the  third  in  Egypt. 
On  several  subsequent  occasions  Solov'ev  had  tender  relation- 
ships with  women.  Once  he  was  on  the  point  of  marrying  a 
peasant  girl ;  another-  time,  a  family  council  dissuaded  him 
from  marrying  a  relative  ;  a  yet  later  intimacy  was  broken  off 
by  himself.     •   • 

Solov'ev  displayed  similar  inconsistencies  as  regards  the 
other  physical  passions.  He  kept  fasts,  and  ate  no  meat, 
but  was  fond  of  wine  (not  to  excess)  and  sweets. 

Solov'ev's  doctrine  of  asceticism  was  connected  with  his 
view  that  man's  nature  is  radically  evil.  In  this  matter,  too, 
he  followed  Kant  and  not  Rousseau,  who  considered  that 
man  was  naturally  good  but  had  been  corrupted  in  the  course 
of  history.  In  contradistinction  to  Kant,  however,  Solov'ev 
exhibited  a  habitual  concern  about  life,  tantamount  to  pessim- 
ism. This  accounts  for  his  antipathy  to  Nietzsche  and  to  the 
Nietzschean  cult  of  a  pagan  joie  de  vivre. 

§  139- 

SOLOV'EV  is  definitely  opposed  to  egoism  and  therefore  to 
eudemonism  and  to  utilitarianism,  since  these  are  based  on 
egoism.     He  rejects  egoism  as  individualism  and  subjectivism  ; 
his  metaphysical  amalgam  of  monotheism  and  pantheism  makes 
it  impossible  for  him  to  find  satisfaction  in  individualism.     His 
conception  of  the  relationship  between  the  individual  and  society 
resembles  that  of  Comte.     There  is  for  him  no  opposition  ; 
society  forms  the  content  of  personality,  and  the  individual 
is  concentrated  society  ;  in  the  historical  process,  the  individual 
is  the  dynamic  factor,  whilst  society  is  the  static  factor.    Thus, 
and  in   similar  ways,   does   Solov'ev  formulate   the   problem. 
He  does  not  trouble  himself  with  psychological  and  sociological  [ 
analysis,    but    is    interested    in    practical    aspects.     For   him,  |^ 
humanity  is,  or   to  be   more  precise,  will  become,  a  unified  • 
organism,  the  organism  of  the  church  universal.     At  present, 


234  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

I  evolution   has   not   gone   so    far,  but  the   trend   and    aim   of 
I  evolution   are    already  so   far  discernible  that  we   can    in   all 
\   seriousness  now  speak  of  "  humanity  as  a  whole.'' 
^  Inasmuch   as   Solov'ev   so   decisively   rejects   subjectivism, 

he  can  only  regard  morality  as  organised  morality.  The  indi- 
vidual, the  individual  consciousness  does  not  exist  in  isolation, 
but  as  a  member  of  church  and  state  ;  the  philosophical  princi- 
ples of  ethics  and  religion  are  abstractions  derived  from  a  study 
of  the  concrete  state  and  the  concrete  church,  abstractions 
from  the  study  of  the  members  of  these  extant  organisations. 

Solov'ev  distinguishes  three  leading  social  organisations, 
the  economic,  the  political,  and  the  ecclesiastical.  The  eco- 
nomic order  reposes  upon  the  division  of  labour  (Solov'ev  inclines 
here  towards  the  views  of  Mihailovskii),  and  aims  at  the  organi- 
sation of  labour  ;  the  positive  sciences  and  the  methods  of 
technique  belong  to  this  domain.  The  state  is  the  political 
organisation  of  the  workers,  and  in  this  field  art  and  philosophy 
are  active.  The  church,  finally,  is  the  spiritual  society,  the 
manifestation  of  mysticism  and  theology  the  organisation 
of  spiritual  love  ;  the  state  does  not  need  love,  but  only  law, 
or  justice,  the  latter  being  recognised  by  Solov'ev  as  merely 
a  formal  principle.  Law  is  for  him  the  attainable  minimum 
of  morality  ;  law  is  distinguished  from  morality  by  the  former's 
appeal  to  the  coercive  powers  of  the  state.  Solov'ev  does  nol 
recognise  that  there  is  any  right  to  inflict  capital  punishmeni 
or  to  impose  sentences  of  lifelong  imprisonment  ;  but,  differing 
from  Tolstoi,  he  regards  war  as  permissible. 

Solov'ev  defends  human  rights  (though  not  equal  rights) 
and  rejects  political  privileges.  The  privilege  of  one,  is  realised 
in  oriental  despotisms  ;  the  privilege  of  a  few,  in  classical 
aristocracies  ;  and  finally  the  privilege  of  many,  in  democracy 
Solov'ev  rej  ects  socialism  on  account  of  its  economic  material- 
ism, saying  that  the  socialist  order  would  be  a  social  ant-hil 
(Dostoevskii  was  fond  of  this  phrase).  The  social  question 
he  contends,  will  be  readily  and  spontaneously  solved  from  th( 
religious  outlook.  Coming  to  practical  details,  Solov'ev  i' 
at  one  with  the  narodniki  in  contending  that  land  should  b( 
assigned  to  every  family. ^ 

According  to  Solov'ev  the  church  with  its  doctrines  anc 
mystagogy  must  permeate  political  and  economic  society,  th( 

I  In  opposition  to  Voroncov,  Solov'ev  defends  agrarian  reform  ;    he  favour 
latifundia,  upon  which  intensive  agriculture  could  be  carried  on. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  235 

state.  This  involves  the  essence  of  free  theocracy,  for  men, 
he  holds,  cannot  fail  to  approve  and  accept  true  Christianity 
as  soon  as  they  are  sufficiently  acquainted  with  it. 

The  church  is  the  organisation  of  piety.  Man  lives  in  "  this 
world,"  which  is  imperfect,  finite,  and  relative  ;  but  man  lives 
also  a  life  in  God,  in  "  the  realm  of  God,"  and  for  this  latter 
life  the  church  is  the  mediating  religious  instrument. 

Religious  life,  religious  truth,  is  neither  scientific  nor  phil- 
osophical ;  it  is  not  even  theological ;  but  it  is  life,  pious  life, 
such  as  the  teachings  of  religion  demand  and  render  possible. 
Theoretic  theosophy  finds  expression  in  theurgy.  The  mysteries 
of  the  seven  sacraments  and  the  dogmatic  utterances  of  the 
seven  councils  (the  holy  seven  !)  are  represented  and  manifested 
in  the  church  by  and  through  life.  ^ 

In  the  church  a  fraternity,  a  liberty,  and  an  equality,  real 
because  spiritual,  are  realised,  not  however  through  the  indi- 
vidual, but  through  Christ.  Solov'ev  accepts  Dostoevski's 
dictum  concerning  "  Russian  socialism,"  whereby  is  denoted 
the  essential  being  of  the  church  universal.  The  principle  of 
the  spiritual  life,  says  Solov'ev,  basing  himself  on  St.  John, 
is  "  not  of  itself  "  ;  hence  the  need  for  the  apostolate  and  the 
hierarchy — the  church.  The  church  is  for  Solov'ev  the  incarna- 
tion of  God  ;  in  and  through  the  church,  men  are  united  with 
Christ,  God  incarnate 

The  personal  representatives  of  the  moral  organisation  of 
mankind,  those  upon  whom  the  higher  services  devolve,  are : 
the  high  priests,  absolute  authority  (but  an  authority  devoted 
to  true  tradition),  the  representative  of  the  highest  piety  ; 
the  climax  of  grace  and  sympathy,  absolute  power,  the  being 
truly  aware  of  existing  needs,  to  wit  the  king  (tsar)  ;  the 
prophet,  finally,  who  represents  the  acme  of  the  sense  of  shame 
and  of  conscience,  represents  absolute  freedom,  believes  in 
the  true  picture  of  the  future. 

Solov'ev  has  most  of  all  to  tell  us  about  the  prophetic  function. 
Christianity  was  in  truth  right  to  do  away  with  the  prophets. 
In  rare  cases  only  have  they  appeared  since,  and  usually  as 
false  prophets,  this  explaining  all  the  anomalies  of  medieval 
and  modern  history.  Solov'ev  desires  the  reestablishment  of 
the  prophetic  function,  but  this  does  not  depend  upon 
the  human  will.  The  prophet  has  profound  social  significance 
in  that  he  is  perfectly  independent,  has  no  fear  of  anything 
external,  and  is  not  subordinated  to  anything  external — possesses 


286  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

an  absolute  freedom  which  neither  the  masses  nor  democracy 
can  ever  guarantee.  The  prophet  is  not  a  vain  dreamer  oi 
dreams  ;  his  picture  of  the  future  is  not  a  utopia  spun  out 
of  personal  fancies,  but  arises  in  response  to  the  actual  needs 
of  society  and  is  rooted  in  mysterious  religious  tradition  ;  herein 
lies  the  connection  between  the  prophet's  mission  on  the  one 
hand,  and  high  priesthood  and  kingship  on  the  other. 

It  is  diffic\ilt  to  determine  how  far  Solov'ev  was  thinking 
of  Nietzsche  in  this  description  of  a  modern  prophet.  Nietzsche's 
prophet  was  creator  rather  than  seer,  whereas  Solov'ev  vacillates 
between  seer  and  creator.  For  Solov'ev  the  creator  became 
transformed  into  the  artist  (vide  infra  §  144). 


§  140 

WHEN,  in  his  Ethics,  Solov'ev  expounds  his  free  theocracy 
we  feel  throughout  that  his  aim  is  to  provide  an  ethica: 
foundation  for  the  idea  of  theocracy.  Speaking  generally,  foi 
Solov'ev  Ufe,  history,  and  the  world  have  a  moral  meaning.  In 
his  ethical  systeni  the  Kantian  outlook  finds  expression,  and 
he  endeavours  to  formulate  the  concept  of  theocracy  as  reason- 
ably as  possible,  to  bring  the  idea  into  harmony  with  the 
views  of  modern  philosophers  and  sociologists. 

The  earlier  works  devoted  to  the  establishment  of  the  doctrine 
of  free  theocracy,  those  of  the  eighties,  produce  a  very  differeni 
impression,  for  in  these  Solov'ev  is  guided  by  the  theology 
and  the  teachings  of  the  Slavophils.  In  its  first  draft,  his  free 
theocracy  has  a  much  closer  resemblance  with  the  actual 
theocracy  of  Russian  caesaropapism. 

In  practice,  Solov'ev  wishes  to  secure  a  free  theocracy  by 
a  union  of  the  three  main  churches.  In  this  matter  the  state, 
as  the  second  great  social  organisation,  must  cooperate  witli 
the  church;  the  ecclesiastical  and  the  pohtical  organisatior 
must  work  in  harmony.  The  absolute  truth  of  the  church  being 
recognised,  Christianity  cannot  fail  to  permeate  the  entire 
hfe  of  society  ;  but  for  this  the  state,  too  must  become 
Christian,  and  the  state  must  help  the  church  to  diffuse 
Christianity.  .  . 

In  the  west,  the  church  conquered  the  powerful  Roman 
state.  After  the  schism,  however,  the  church  became  unduly 
pohtical,  taking  over  the  function  of  the  state,  and  since  the 
Teutonic  state  was  too  feeble  to  resist  it,  CathoHcism  grew 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  23T 

one-sidedly  coercive.  But  the  most  momentous  schism  in 
the  church  was  the  secession  of  Byzantium,  which  thereby 
became  Asiatic  ;  the  state  subdued  the  church,  the  church 
retired  into  itself,  lapsed  into  spiritual  death,  and  was  there- 
fore conquered  by  Islam  ;  the  east  was  and  is  the  true  home  of 
Christianity,  which,  however,  has  remained  an  inward  Chris- 
tianity, and  has  failed  to  animate  life  and  civihsation.  The 
extant  autocephalic  Orthodox  churches  have,  even  more  than 
the  Byzantine  mother  church,  become  the  prey  of  httle  states. 
Solov'ev  points  to  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  patriarchate  of 
Constantinople  towards  the  Bulgarian  church,  and  shows  how 
the  churches  of  the  Balkans  are  dominated  by  a  petty  nationalist 
spirit. 

Protestantism,  in  its  justified  protest  against  Rome,  was  too 
one-sided  in  its  advocacy  of  the  critical  activity  of  the 
understanding. 

Whereas  the  functions  of  high  priest,  king  (Solov'ev  is  speak- 
ing in   Russian   terminology  of  the  tsar),   and  prophet  were 
harmoniously  united  in  the  person  of  Christ,  these  three  reHgious 
functions  were  one-sidedly  developed  in  the  three  churches.  / 
The   papacy  represented   the   one-sided  development   of  high  ! 
priesthood ;  Orthodoxy,  the  one-sided  development  of  kingship  ;  | 
Protestantism,    the    one-sided    development    of    prophethood.  \ 
To  express  the  matter  in  a  different  way,  in  the  person  of  Christ 
there  existed  a  harmonious  unification  and  unity  of  Father  ; 
(high  priest) ,  Son  (king) ,  and  Holy  Spirit  (prophet) .     The  aim  ' 
of  the  church  must  be  to  effect  the  social  reaUsation  of  this 
trinity  in  unity,  but  the  three  Christian  churches  have  carried 
out  the  task  in  a  non-organic  and  one-sided  manner. 

Russia  received  church  and  civilisation  from  Byzantium, 
and  for  this  reason  in  Russia,  too,  church  and  civihsation  are- 
one-sided.  Situated  geographically  between  the  Asiatics' 
(Mohammedans)  and  the  Latins,  Russia  maintained  her  freedom, 
developed  her  political  organism,  and  separated  herself  wholly 
from  the  west.  But  in  Russia  the  church  was  weakened  even 
more  than  in  Byzantium.  Solev'ev  gives  an  account  of  eccle- 
siastical evolution  in  Russia  wherein  the  patriarch.  Nikon,  in  con- 
tradistinction to  customary  views,  is  represented  as  antichrist. 
The  persecution  of  the  raskolniki  and  of  the  sectaries  is  described 
as  an  unchristian  use  of  violence  ;  Peter's  reforms  are  con- 
sidered to  be  nothing  more  than  an  outward  and  mechanical 
Hnking-up  with  the  west,  nothing  more  than  a  first  step  ;  Peter 


238  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  his  successors  definitively  subjugated  the  church.  The 
task  of  Russia,  therefore,  is  to  secure  an  intimate  and  inwarc 
union  with  the  west.  She  must  not  merely  adopt  foreign  forms 
but  must  understand  them.  At  the  same  time,  Russia  wil 
place  a  vigorous  state  at  the  disposal  of  the  church  universal 
so  that  the  latter  may  complete  the  rebirth  of  the  nations 
The  Russian  tsar  and  the  pope  must  become  the  instruments 
of  the  genuine  and  the  free  theocracy — for  the  theocracy  thai 
reposes  upon  force  is  false. 

The  content  of  history  is  constrained  by  Solov'ev  to  submi' 
itself  to  the  hmitations  of  the  formula  of  a  struggle  betweei 
Asia  and  Europe.  Solov'ev  frequently  speaks  of  the  centralising 
force  of  the  east  (the  Mohammedan  east),  of  the  individuahsn 
of  western  civilisation,  and  of  the  reconciling  energy  or  missioi 
of  the  Slavs. 

Thus  Solov'ev  looks  for  hght  from  the  east,  ex  oriente  lux 
But  he  asks  on  one  occasion  whether  it  is  to  come  from  th( 
east  of  Xerxes  or  from  the  east  of  Christ. 

In  historically  extant  Russia,  Solov'ev  discerns  the  capacit] 
for  the  practical  inauguration  of  the  church  of  the  future,  anc 
considers  that  this  will  be  effected  by  the  solution  of  the  Polisl 
problem  and  of  the  Jewish  problem. 

The  mission  of  the  Poles,  says  Solov'ev,  is  something  ven 

different  from  the  attainment  of  political  independence.     Th( 

Poles  forfeited  their  political  independence  because  their  noble: 

absorbed,  overvalued,  and  therefore  ruined,  the  entire  state 

The  pohtical  independence  of  Poland  can  never  be  regained 

and  this  political  aim  is  fantastical  and  fruitless.     Nor  cai 

Poland  become  comparatively  independent  upon  the  basis  o 

I   a  one-sided  idea  of  nationaUty.     But  Poland  can  constitute 

I   a  "  living  bridge  "  between  the  west  and  the  east,  and  ma^ 

1   serve   the   free   theocracy  by  inaugurating  the  union  of   th( 

i   churches. 

The  pohtical  aims  of  the  Pohsh  nobles  are  "  irrational  an( 
immoral,"  and  yet  these  nobles  are  to  take  part  in  the  "  servio 
of  God  "  which  Solov'ev  assigns  to  the  Polish  nation,  they  an 
'to  help  in  bringing  about  the  union  of  the  churches  !  Besides 
how  are  we  to  represent  to  our  minds  the  "  living  bridge  ' 
between  east  and  west  ?     Do  such  bridges  exist  ? 

The  question  of  the  Jews  was  one  by  which  Solov'ev  is  mor 
disquieted  than  by  that  of  the  Poles.  In  the  Jews  he  dis 
covers  a  living  link  between  Old  Testament  days  and  the  stagi 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  239 

of  religion  and  revelation,  of  which  Christianity  was  an  organic 
succession.  The  relationship  between  Jews  and  Christians  is, 
therefore,  of  a  quite  exceptional  character.  In  Solov'ev's 
apocalyptic  vision  (vide  infra  §  148),  the  significance  of  the 
question  is  symbohcally  displayed  when  the  author  makes  the 
number  of  the  Christians  exceed  that  of  the  Jews  by  no  more 
than  one  half. 

Upon  his  deathbed  Solov'ev  begged  his  friends  to  keep  him 
awake,  for  he  had  many  prayers  to  say  on  behalf  of  the  Jews. 
In  the  complex  of  Russian  problems,  the  Jewish  question  is 
one  of  the  most  momentous,  and  Solov'ev  frequently  dis- 
cussed it. I  The  importance  of  the  question  for  Russia  depends 
upon  the  fact  that  there  are  nearly  six  million  Jews  in  the 
country,  a  population  equal  to  that  of  the  whole  state  of 
Belgium. 

To  Solov'ev  the  Jewish  problem  is  a  Christian  problem,  a 
religious  problem.     Solov'ev's  treatment  of  the  Jews  as  pioneers 
of  commerce   and  industry  frequently  recalls  the  manner  in 
which  Marx  handles  the  question.     It  was  not  the  Jews,  but  the 
Christians,  who  created  the  cult  of  the  golden  calf.     Cultured 
Europe,  which  had  become  dechristianised,  and  had  devoted 
itself  to  the  service  of  mammon,  was  here  the  offender.     The 
Jews  were  merely  consistent  in   the  way   they  followed   the 
example  thus  set  before  them.     If  economic  life  is  to  be  human- 
ised,  it   must  be   resubordinated   to   the   rehgious   and  moral 
life.     For  Europe  and  for  Russia  this  can  be  effected  in  no 
other  way  than  by  the  great  union  of  the  churches,  in  which 
the  Jews  will  find  their  place.  .  As  a  theocratic  nation  they 
will  be  at  home  in  the  renovated  theocracy  ;    now  they  are 
estranged  from  themselves  just  as  the  Christians  are  estranged 
from  themselves.     But  true  Jewish  principles  lead  to  Chris- 
tianity, just  as  true  Christian  principles  lead  to  Judaism.     The   ' 
union  of  the  churches,  therefore,  will  at  the  same  time  be  a 
union   between   the   renovated   Christians   and   the   renovated   : 
Jews,  these  latter  being  the  better  part  of  Jewry,  namely  the  | 
Russian  Jews,  who  have  maintained  their  religious  principles   . 
in    greater    purity    than    have    their    western    brethren.     The   ' 
Jews  as  town  dwellers  will  retain  their  social  and  economic 
function,  but  this  function  will  assume  a  different  meaning, 

*  As  early  as  1882,  at  St.  Petersburg  university,  in  his  lectures  to  women, 
he  discussed  the  universal  and  historical  significance  of  Judaism,  whilst  at  a 
later  date  he  wrote  upon  the  theme. 


240  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

will  be  guided  by  a  loftier  aim.  Its  aim  will  be  to  humanis 
nature  and  material  life.» 

The  Utopian  character  of  Solov'ev's  ecclesiastical  polic 
is  manifest.     He  works  with  unhistorical  schemata. 

Solov'ev's  essential  error  is,  of  course,  that  he  assume 
church  doctrine  to  be  absolutely  true,  and  that  from  this  outloo 
•he  touches  up  the  whole  of  history  ;  for  him,  not  Jesus  an 
Jesus'  teaching,  but  church  doctrine  and  church  dogma,  ai 
decisive.  He  fashions  for  himself  the  ideal  of  a  Christian  churc 
and  the  ideal  of  a  Christian  state.  If,  as  Solov'ev  tells  us  i 
his  Ethics,  the  church  is  to  represent  sympathy  with  the  sou 
and  the  state  is  to  represent  sympathy  with  the  body,  thei 
will  doubtless  be  an  orgariic  harmony  between  church  an 
state  ;  but  these  as  we  know  them  are  something  altogeth( 
different.  As  a  matter  of  historic  fact,  we  recognise  differer 
types  of  theocracy,  and  Solov'ev  is  right  when  he  rejects  extar 
theocracy  as  false,  as  coercive  ;  but  he  errs  all  the  mere  coi 
spicuously  when  he  regards  a  union  between  pope  and  tsc 
as  furnishing  the  promise  and  potency  of  a  free  theocrac; 
Solov'ev  himself  shows  us  how  one-sided  was  the  developmer 
of  the  papacy  and  of  tsarism,  how  both  these  institutions  ha^ 
ever  been  based  upon  the  use  of  force.  Are  we  to  expect  thj 
pope  and  tsar,  having  made  common  cause,  will  sudden] 
become  compassionate  ?  We  ask  whether  the  genuine] 
Christian  state  will  and  can  cooperate  with  the  church  for  tl 
diffusion  of  true  Christianity,  and  we  ask  what  means  the  stai 
will  employ  to  secure  this  end. 

I  In  support  of  his  ideas  of  union,  Solov'ev  might  have  referred  to  tl 
Judaising  sects  among  the  Christians  and  to  the  Christianising  sects  among  t 
Jews.  In  actual  fact  the  Jews  have  exercised  a  religious  influence  in  Russi 
and  they  have  done  this  also  in  Europe.  Concerning  this  question  of  an  ini 
mate  synthesis  of  Judaism  and  Christianity,  I  may  refer  to  a  work  of  considc 
able  psychological  interest,  Lhotzky's  biography  of  Josef  Rabinovic,  entitl 
Blatter  zur  Pflege  des  personlichen  Lebens,  1904,  Heft  II.  Solov'ev  did  n 
consider  the  possibihty  that  the  Jews,  starting  from  their  own  religious  found 
tions,  might  effect  a  religious  reformation  in  the  modern  sense,  might  do  tt 
spontaneously,  though  availing  themselves  of  the  general  acquirements 
civihsation.  This  possibihty,  however,  is  the  leading  idea  of  the  Russi; 
Jew  Achad-ha-am  (Uscher  Ginzberg),  whose  writings  on  the  philosophy  * 
history  and  the  philosophy  of  religion  recall  in  many  respects  those  of  Solov'e 
Dostoevskii,  and  the  Slavophils.  For  the  consideration  of  the  Jewish  questic 
in  Russia,  and  for  the  understanding  of  the  different  parties  among  tl 
Russian  Jews,  Achad-ha-am,  in  so  far  as  he  has  been  translated,  is  indispe 
sable.  I  should  add  that'Achad-ha-am's  views  are  rooted  in  religious  mysticis 
(that  of  the  Chasidim),  but  that  he  has  attained  rank  as  a  modern  think( 
Consult,  Am  Scheideweg  (At  the  Parting  of  the  Ways),  Achad-ha-am's  select" 
essays  translated  from  the  Hebrew  by  Professor  Friedlander,  1904. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  241 


§  141- 


SOLOV'EV'S  views  upon  the  philosophy  of  ecclesiasticism 
necessitate  a  comparison  with  the  teachings  of  the  Slavo- 
phils. Solov'ev  was  greatly  influenced  b}''  the  founders  of  slavo- 
philism, and  above  all  b^-  Homjakov,  After  his  materialistic 
crisis,  it  was  by  the  Slavophils  that  Solov'ev  was  led  to  rehgion 
and  the  church,  it  was  their  trend  which  he  followed  through- 
out. He  was  at  one  with  them  in  recognising  the  cultural 
primacy  of  religion,  of  mystigism,  in  the  approval  he  gave  to 
eastern  theology,  and  in  the  importance  he  attached  to  the 
Russian  church.  Being  guided  by  the  same  tendency,  he  was  led 
on  occasions  to  the  same  or  to  similar  judgments  in  points  of 
detail.  The  Slavophils  and  Solov'ev,  moreover,  sat  at  the  feet  of 
the  same  teachers  (Plato,  Schelling,  etc.)  ;  whilst  Solov'ev  had 
personal  and  literary  relations  with  Ivan  Aksakov,  and  wrote 
for  the  latter's  periodical  "  Rus'  !  " 

In  the  course  of  his  mental  development,  Solov'ev  came  to 
recognise  the  value  of  Catholicism,  came  to  consider  that  it 
possessed  ecclesiastical  advantages  as  compared  with  the 
eastern  church.  This  made  him  diverge  in  certain  details 
from  the  Slavophils,  though  his  general  trend  remained  the 
same.  Where  Solov'ev  differed  as  a  philosopher  from  the 
Slavophils  was  that  he  attempted  to  found  an  independent 
theosophical  system,  whereas  the  Slavophils  were  content  with 
the  philosophical  idealisation  of  official  orthodoxy. 

Solov'ev  subsequent^  diverged  from  the  Slavophils,  and 
above  all  from  Homjakov,  in  his  exposition  of  the  history  of 
Christendom  and  of  the  severance  of  the  churches.  Solov'ev 
who  upon  historic  and  dogmatic  grounds  acknowledged  the 
supremacy  of  the  pope  of  Rome,  referred  the  schism  to  ante- 
cedent heretical  endeavours  in  Byzantium,  and  considered 
that  the  fault  lay  with  Byzantium,  not  with  Rome.  We  may  1 
say  that  in  general,  in  his  studies  of  ecclesiastical  history, 
Solov'ev  was  far  more  influenced  than  were  the  Slavophils  by 
the  idea  of  evolution  ;  and  we  may  say,  too,  that  Solov'ev  was 
more  critical,  though  onh-  towards  the  east. 

For  Solov'ev  was  of  opinion  that  the  Catholic  church,  in 
contrast  with  the  eastern,  and  above  all  with  the  Russian 
church,  had  evolved  and  progressed.  The  Roman  church  had 
in  especial  promoted  the  evolution  of  dogma,  and  had  made 
reiterated  attempts  to  lead  the  cultural  development  of  the 

17  VOL.    II. 


242  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

western  nations,  to  permeate  that  development  with  its  spirit. 
Solov'ev  was  greatly  impressed  by  the  rock  of  Peter  and  its 
steadfastness.  Doubtless  Rome  had  been  masterful  and 
pitiless  in  her  condemnation  of  the  godless  world  ;  but  in  this 
unyieldingness,  too,  we  must  recognise  the  mysterious  energy 
of  God.  Solov'ev  admitted  that  Rome  had  fallen  very  low, 
but  it  had  continued  to  progress,  and  had  never  failed  to  rise 
after  its  falls.  Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  had  never  fallen 
because  it  had  continued  to  sit  unceasingly  on  the  same  spot. 

In  his  ecclesiastical  history  and  in  his  views  of  church  policy 
Solov'ev's  trend  was  unmistakably  Catholicising.  The  re- 
proach he  levelled  against  Homjakov  may  be  turned  against 
himself.  Homjakov,  said  Solov'ev,  while  criticising  Catholicism 
and  Protestantism  in  their  historically  extant  forms,  gave  an 
idealised  view  of  Orthodoxy.  But  no  less  idealised  was  Solov'ev's 
presentation  of  Catholicism  and  the  papacy,  whereas  he  took  a 
somewhat  more  realistic  view  of  the  two  other  leading  churches. 
But  essentially,  as  has  already  been  explained,  he  completely 
failed  to  see  the  historically  extant  churches  in  their  true  colours. 
In  Russia,  both  clericalists  and  liberals  have  written  much 
concerning  Solov'ev's  attitude  to  Catholicism.  On  many 
occasions  he  was  publicly  represented  as  a  Catholic,  and  publicly 
defended  himself  against  the  accusation,  to  which  weight  was, 
however,  given  by  his  acquaintanceship  with  Bishop  Strossmayer 
and  with  Pierling,  and  by  the  fact  that  he  had  his  book  The 
History  and  Future  of  Theocracy  printed  at  Agram. 

Solov'ev  did  not  in  actual  fact  become  a  Catholic  while' in 
Europe,  but  his  intimate  friends  expected  him  to  go  over  to 
Rome,  considering  that  this  step  would  have  been  the  logical 
outcome  of  his  opinions.  When  directly  asked  why  he  had  not 
been  received  into  the  Catholic  church,  seeing  that  his  inclina- 
tions towards  that  faith  were  so  strong,  he  replied  that  to 
become  a  Catholic  would  deprive  him  of  his  influence  upon  the 
Russian  people.  When  further  asked  whether  consideration 
for  the  welfare  of  his  own  soul  did  not  imperiously  demand 
that  he  should  become  a  Catholic,  Solov'ev  rejoined  that  he 
was  not  concerned  about  his  personal  salvation,  but  was  thinking 
about  Russia. 

I  consider  that  the  logic  of  his  friends  and  opponents  was 
sounder  than  his  own.  In  the  end,  Solov'ev  went  so  far  to 
admit  the  cogency  of  these  arguments  that,  in  1896,  long  after 
his  friendship  with  Strossmayer,  he  joined  the  Russian  Uniats. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  243 

Before  death  he  received  communion  from  an  Orthodox  priest 
(no  CathoHc  priest  was  available).  , 

None  the  less  it  remains  significant  that  the  most  notable  / 
modern  philosopher  of  religion  should  have  been  an  admirer! 
of  Catholicism.  It  is  not  enough  to  suggest  that  Solov'ev  was  j 
won  over  by  the  efforts  towards  union  made  by  Leo  XIII,  \ 
for  the  existence  of  a  whole  series  of  Catholicising  Russians  \ 
before  and  since  the  days  of  Alexander  I  gives  a  more  general  j 
significance  to  attempts  towards  union. 

It  need  hardty  be  said  that  the  Slavophils  censured  Solov'ev 
in  strong  terms  for  his  attitude  towards  Catholicism  and  towards 
Orthodoxy.  Ivan  Aksakov  frequently  wrote  against  Solov'ev, 
and  polemic  writings  emphasising  the  Slavophil  views  con- 
cerning Orthodoxy  and  concerning  the  impossibility  of  a  union, 
exercised  a  notable  influence  upon  Solov'ev,  He  was  less 
affected  by  the  controversial  opinions  of  Strahov  and  the 
other    demi-slavophils    and    demi-westernisers. 

Solov'ev' s  sociological  and  philosophical  estimate  of  nation- 
ality likewise  distinguished  him  from  the  later  Slavophils. 
The  early  Slavophils  had  not  attained  to  perfectly  clear  views 
concerning  the  relationships  of  nationality  to  religion,  church, 
and  culture  ;  although  Kireevskii  had  subordinated  nationality 
to  spiritual  culture  and  religion;  whilst  Homjakov  did  the 
same  thing,  though  he  endeavoured  to  arrive  at  a  more  indepen- 
dent conception  of  the  historic  function  of  nationality.  It 
was  only  the  later  Slavophils  who  made  common  cause  with 
the  Old  Russians  in  proclain^ing  nationality  as  coequal  with 
state  and  church. 

For  Solov'ev,  race  and  nationality  were  entirely  subordinate 
to  religion  and  church.  The  idea  of  a  nation,  said  Solov'ev,  • 
is  not ^  constituted  by  what  the  nation  thinks  about  it.self  in 
time,  but  by  what  God  thinks  about  the  nation  in  eternity.  ; 
It  was  his  fundamental  idea  of  the  God-man  and  God-humanity 
which  led  him  to  view  as  essentially  different  the  roles  of  the 
individual  nations  in  the  theocratic  organisation  of  mankind. 

When  Solov'ev  accepted  the  idea  of  Russian  messianism, 
he  was  not  thinking  of  the  national  qualities  of  the  Russian 
folk,  but  of  the  Russian  church  and  religion.  He  went  so 
far  as  to  declare  that  the  qualities  of  the  chosen  people  were 
a  minor  matter,  seeing  that  this  people,  in  fulfilling  its  function 
of  saviour,  would  not  be  realising  its  own  ideas,  but  the  divine 
ideas.  •  He  spoke  of  the  God-nation  as  an  organic  member  of 


244  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

God-humanity  (by  which  he  meant,  the  united  church  universal). 
But  none  the  less  for  Solov'ev  the  Russian  people  and  the  Russian 
state  were  the  chosen  theocratic  people  and  the  chosen  theo- 
cratic state. 

Contrasting  nationality  with  nationalism,  Solov'ev  fiercely 
attacked  the  nationalism  of  the  younger  Slavophils.  He 
considered  that  Russian  nationalism  had  exhibited  three  stages. 
The  early  Slavophils  prostrated  themselves  before  the  nation 
as  the  chosen  bringer  of  universal  (religious)  truth.  Next 
came  Katkov,  who  saw  in  the  nation  the  elemental  vital  energy 
which  was  independent  of  universal  truth.  Last  of  all  came  the 
chauvinistic  obscurantism  of  late  date  (he  was  referring  to  the 
era  of  Alexander  III),  when  people  paid  homage  to  the  national 
one-sidedness  and  the  historical  anomalies  by  which  the 
Russians  were  kept  separate  from  civilised  mankind.  ■  Katkov 
was  the  nemesis  of  the  Slavophils  ;  recent  obscurantism  was 
the  nemesis  of  Katkov.  Solov'ev  went  so  far  as  to  say  that 
slavophilism  had  declined  to  the  level  of  "  national  and  political 
blackmailing."  He  condemned  Jaros,  professor  at  Moscow 
university,  who  proposed  to  supplement  Katkov's  program 
by  the  apotheos'is  of  John  the  Tenible  as  the  first  and  most 
exemplary  Russian,  Orthodox,  and  Tsar.  Whilst  Katkov  had 
taken  his  crude  politics  from  de  Maistre,  Katkov's  successors 
contented  themselves  with  a  caricature  of  de  Maistre  (Bergeret, 
Principes  de  politique)  ;  in  like  manner,  Danilevskii  borrowed 
his  leading  idea  from  Professor  Riickert,  a  German,  This 
alleged  primal  Russian  slavophilism  was  in  fact  unrussian  and 
foreign.  Solov'ev's  definitive  formula  was  that  we  should  love 
all  other  nationalities  as  we  love  our  own. 

From  this  outlook  we  must  consider  and  appraise  Solov'ev's 
own  views  concerning  the  Poles  and  the  Jews.  He  gave  due 
recognition  to  the  valuable  religious  inheritance  of  these  two 
peoples,  who  were  when  he  wrote  more  hostile  to  the  Russians 
than  any  others.  The  Poles  and  the  Jews,  he  declared  mujt 
lend  aid  to  the  Russians.  The  messianism  of  the  "  theocratic 
nation  "  was  not  a  source  of  privilege,  but  involved  duty  and 
service  ;  it  did  not  give  any  right  to  dominance  or  hegemony. 
True  patriotism,  said  Solov'ev,  was  to  be  found  in  national 
self-knowledge,  not  in  national  self-complacency,  whereas  the 
nationalists  had  reduced  the  Slavophil  idea  of  messianism  to 
the  level  of  zoomorphic,  zoological  patriotism.  True  patriotism 
involved  conviction  of  sin  and  confession. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  245 

§  142. 

TO  know  Solov'ev  thoroughly  we  must  examine  his 
theosophy,  though  we  shall  content  ourselves  with  a 
few  samples.  What  is  meant  by  theosophy  ?  The  desire  to 
know,  the  belief  that  we  really  do  know  preciseh',  what  God 
is,  what  he  has  made  and  is  making. 

Solov'ev  finds  in  German  philosophy  the  last  word  of  phi- 
losophic knowledge  as  hitherto  attainable.  Above  all  it  is 
the  latest  German  philosophical  system,  that  of  Eduard  von 
Hartmann,  which  has  attracted  wide  attention  in  Russia  no 
less  than  elsewhere,  that  discloses  to  Solov'ev  the  mission  of 
a  new  and  higher  philosophy.  From  Hartmann,  Solov'ev 
learns,  first  of  all,  that  epistemoiogicall}^  neither  rationalism 
nor  empiricism  has  proved  competent  to  furnish  satisfactory 
and  trustworthy  knowledge ;  metaphysicall3^  Hartmann 
points  the  way  to  a  concrete  spiritual  monism  ;  in  the  ethical 
field,  finally,  we  gain  the  knowledge  that  our  ultimate  aim  can 
be  attained  and  our  true  satisfaction  secured  solely  in  the  uni- 
fication of  all  being  and  through  the  development  of  the  world- 
all,  to  which  the  individual  must  surrender  himself. 

Solov'ev  is  unable  to  follow  Hartmann  all  the  way,  but  he 
considers  that  Hartmann  is  on  the  right  track,  if  only  because 
the  German  sets  out  from  Schelling's  positive  philosophy,  a 
synthesis  of  Hegel  and  Schopenhauer,  of  rationalism  and  volu- 
tarism.  Schclling  had  been  commended  to  Solov'ev  by  his 
first  Russian  teachers,  the  Slavophils. 

Thus  in  German  philosophy  from  Schelling  to  Hartmann 
does  Solev'ev  discover  intimations  of  Christian  philosophy 
as  a  rationalistic  and  scientific  interpretation  of  Christian 
•revelation.  Solov'ev  actually  believes  that  he  is  able  to  secure 
a  sound  understanding  of  Christian  revelation  by  a  synthesis 
of  German  rationalism  and  French  positivism.  Comte's 
philosophy  of  histor3^  positivist  fetichism,  and  Hartmann's 
philosophy  of  the  world  process,  lead  him  to  the  gnostics  and 
neoplatonists,  and  to  their  theosophy  and  their  theogony. 

Solov'ev  believes  that  from  this  material  and  imperfect 
world  we  can  press  forward  to  true,  absolute  being.  We  have 
thus  discovered  the  inclined  plane  connecting  the  absolute 
with  the  finite,  and  the  inmost  nature  of  the  world  is  compre- 
hended and  explained. 

The  absolute,  for  Solov'ev,  is  the  all-in-one  being,  is  God, 


246  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

is  the  good.  The  absolute  is  one,  of  one  kind,  the  unif^/ing, 
the  one  thing  uniting  all  others  ;  God  is  all-embracing  and  all- 
unifying  in  the  sense  that  all  parts  of  the  world-all  aspire  to- 
wards him,  through  him,  finding  unity  in  him.     God  is  love. 

Absolute  being,  as  absolute  substance,  as  absolute  reality, 
as  actus  purus,  God  taking  pleasure  in  himself,  God  with  his 
absolute  autonomy,  with  his  freedom  (the  only  freedom  in 
the  true  sense  of  the  word) — is  spaceless  and  timeless,  is  ever- 
lasting. Beside  him,  likewise  eternal,  exists  chaos,  the  eternal 
potentiality,  or  as  Hegel  put  it,  evil  infinity,  multipHcity,  the 
subdivided,  the  not-one,  anarchy.  God's  wisdom  (sophia) 
conquers  chaos,  displaying  all  might  and  intelligence  ;  at  the 
same  time  (displaying  goodness  and  grace)  he  bestows  upon 
chaos  more  than  chaos  deserves,  namely  the  possibility  of 
choosing  freely  the  side  of  God. 

Like  God,  chaos  is  eternal.  In  this  fundamental  point 
Solov'ev  already  diverges  from  Christian  mythology.  But, 
following  Christian  mythology,  he  assumes  that  there  are 
three  hypostases  in  the  Godhead,  the  father,  the  son  logos, 
and  the  spirit. 

According  to  Solov'ev,  the  doctrine  of  the  trinity  is  a 
revelation  of  God,  and  is  the  doctrine  of  the  infallible  church  ; 
but  none  the  less  Solov'ev  believes  himself  able  to  expound 
and  prove  the  doctrine  upon  grounds  of  reason.  The  existence 
of  God  being  given,  the  trinity  in  unity  of  God  immediately 
follows  from  this  existence.  Solov'ev  considers  that  every 
living  being  necessarily  possesses  a  unity,  a  duality,  and  a 
trinity.  The  unity  is  given  by  being  itself.  The  duality 
arises  from  the  conviction  that  this  being  does  not  merely  exist, 
but  that  it  is  something,  that  it  has  a  definite  objectivity  (the 
idea  of  itself,  the  raison  d'etre  of  itself).  The  trinity  of  the 
living  being  is  comprised  in  the  threefold  relationship  of  the 
being  towards  this  its  objectivity  :  it  possesses  this  objectivity 
simply  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  exists  ;  it  possesses  this 
same  objectivity  in  its  activity,  which  is  the  necessary  mani- 
festation of  the  existing  being  ;  and  thirdly  it  possesses  this 
objectivity  in  the  sphere  of  feeling,  in  the  enjoyment  of  its 
being  and  its  activity. 

With  the  aid  of  this  scholasticism  it  is  not  difficult  for 
Solov'ev,  in  accordance  with  the  Hebrew  text  of  certain 
passages  from  the  Old  Testament  which  he  quotes  word  for 
word   (betraying  to  U3  the  while,  that  the  Hebrew  phrases 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  247 

exercise  a  fetichistic  influence  upon  his  mind),  and  with  the 
assistance  of  certain  passages  from  the  New  Testament  (which 
he  gives  us  not  in  Greek,  but  in  Latin),  to  interpret  the  Christian 
doctrine  of  the  trinity  and  the  three  designations  of  father, 
son,  and  holy  ghost,  in  the  sense  of  strict  monarchism  (Solov'ev 
writes  "  monarchism,"  not  "  monarchianism,"  though  the 
latter  form  is  the  one  usually  preferred  by  theologians),  as 
energy,  truth,  and  grace,  or  as  power,  justice,  and  goodness, 
or,  finally,  as  reality,  idea,  and  life. 

God,  as  the  absolute,  could  be  self-sufficing,  but  this  would 
conflict  with  his  grace  and  goodness.  From  God  and  chaos, 
Solov'ev  evolves  the  world  and  its  history,  evolves  them  as 
do  all  mythagogues,  notionally  and  in  their  reality. 

The  Sophia  strives  against  chaos  ;  this  struggle  presupposes 
a  soul,  the  world-soul,  the  materia  prima,  the  potential  mother 
of  the  created  world.  The  creation  of  the  world  proceeds  from 
the  father  ;  the  logos  brings  forth  the  higher  world  of  ideas, 
but  these  ideas  are  mere  contemplative  and  impassive  beings  ; 
from  the  holy  ghost  originate  the  pure  spirits  or  angels,  which 
have  feeling  and  will,  and  possess  a  higher  order  of  freedom 
than  man. 

The  cosmic  process  in  its  first  period  is  astral,  and  at  this 
time  the  stellar  bodies  are  formed  ;  during  the  second  period 
our  own  solar  system  comes  into  existence  ;  during  the  third 
period,  within  this  system,  the  earth  becomes  the  peculiar 
stage  for  mankind,  mankind  being  conceived  by  Solov'ev  as 
the  second  absolute.  Solov'ev's  God  takes  his  delight,  not 
in  the  angels,  but  in  men.  Every  living  being  finds  the  meaning 
of  his  own  being  in  the  absolute  being  of  God  ;  the  significance 
of  man  lies  in  the  union  between  the  divine  and  the  mundane. 
In  man,  the  world-soul  becomes  completely  conscious  of  itself.^ 

The  fall  of  the  angels  and  of  man  is  described  on  Old  Testa- 
ment lines.  The  fallen  angels,  possessing  a  higher  freedom 
than  man,  side  eternally  against  God  ;  man,  with  his  more 
limited  freedom,  is  able  after  the  fall,  to  rejoin  himself  to  God. 
According  to  Solov'ev,  man  possesses  freedom  of  choice,  and 
this  is  manifested  in  the  choice  of  evil,  not  in  the  following 

'  Some  expounders  identify  the  world-soul  with  mankind  or  with  "  ideal 
humanity."  Radlov  has  recently  given  expression  to  the  latter  view,  with  a 
reference  to  Comte's  Le  Grand  Etre,  which  in  Solov'ev's  teaching,  says  Radlov, 
appears  as  the  world-soul.  In  my  opinion,  the  idea  of  the  world-soul,  as  formu- 
lated by  Solov'ev,  derives  from  Schelling  and  Plato.  It  is  certain,  moreover,. 
that  Solov'ev  was  familiar  with  the  speculations  of  Giordano  Bruno,  etc. 


248  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

after  good  ;  but  after  the  fall,  man  can  choose  the  good.  Evil 
is  for  Solov'ev  not  the  simple  absence  of  good,  but  is  a  positive 
energy,  one  dominating  the  world,  which  man  must  destroy 
in  himself — evil  and  the  evil  one  being  here  fused  into  a  single 
concept. 

With  the  coming  of  man,  the  cosmological  process  is  trans- 
formed into  a  historical  process,  and  history  forms  the  most 
important  constituent  of  the  world  process  ;  the  unification 
of  the  divine  and  the  mundane  must  take  place  in  man  and  for 
man.  As  a  rational  being,  man  can  comprehend  the  divine, 
the  absolute  ;  thus  man  is  the  mediator  between  heaven  and 
earth,  the  deliverer  of  the  world  from  chaos,  the  unifier  of  the 
world  with  God. 

Man  is  a  union  of  logos  (reason)  and  matter  (body)  ;  man 
is  the  active,  woman  the  passive  ;  sex  represents  the  contrast 
between  the  logos  and  the  mundane. 

Man  as  individual  has  complete  being,  but  mankind  alone 
can  realise  all  that  exists  potentially  in  the  individual.  In 
actual  fact  there  is  but  one  form  of  human  existence,  man  ; 
woman  is  no  more  than  the  supplement,  society  no  more  than 
the  expansion  of  man. 

The  direct  union  of  God  with  mankind  has  taken  place  in 
but  one  being,  the  God-man,  the  incarnation  of  the  logos  ; 
Christ,  therefore,  is  the  only  complete  personality,  the  supple- 
ment of  the  God-man  is  the  holy  virgin,  his  expansion  is  the 
church. 

God,  man,  church,  are  the  three  fundamental  ideas  of  Solov'ev. 
They  may-,  however,  be  reduced  to  two,  God  and  church,  for 
the  church  is  organised  mankind  ;  and  mankind,  not  man,,  is 
for  Solov'ev  the  essential. 

Cosmology  is  to  him  no  more  than  the  introduction  to  and 
the  background  of  the  historical  process,  which  unfolds  itself 
as  a  religious  and  moral  drama.  Man,  as  an  imperfect  being, 
cognises  perfect  good,  and  there  thus  originates  in  human 
beings  the  aspiration  towards  perfection.  Solov'ev  fully 
accepts  the  modern  notion  of  progress,  but  conceives  it  as  a 
spiritual  process,  wherein  the  external  or  material  remains 
without  significance.  This  progress  is  naturally  collective, 
for  only  collective  mankind  can  realise  the  destiny  of  man. 

Regarded  anthropologically,  human  history  begins  with 
the  organisation  of  the  sexual  relationship  (it  is  worth  noting 
that    Solov'ev's   father    maintained    this   theory    against    the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  249 

Slavophils)  ;  the  second  stage  is  characterised  by  the  organisa- 
tion of  nations  and  of  the  state,  wherein  sex  manifestations 
take  the  form  of  family  life  ;  this  organisation  continues  to 
exist  in  the  present,  but  will  be  replaced  by  the  universal 
organisation  of  mankind  which  the  future  will  bring. 

This  future  organisation  will  be  effected  by  the  church  and 
in  the  church  ;  in  the  church  the  fullness  of  the  genuinely  human 
life  will  be  attained  ;  man  will  lead  a  complete  existence,  at 
once  individually,  sociall}',  and  politically. 

Examining  the  spiritual  content  of  'evolution,  Solov'ev 
considers  that  the  first  stage  of  universalism  was  Buddhism, 
the  second  Platonism,  the  third  Christianit3^  Since  the 
appearance  of  the  God-man,  history  has  been  the  history  of 
the  church,  and  the  task  of  the  philosophy  of  ecclesiastical 
history  is  to  explain  why,  after  Christ's  coming,  history  should 
continue,  and  why  and  how  the  great  schism  of  the  churches 
should  have  preceded  the  predestined  union  of  the  churches. 
By  his  life,  the  God-man  overcame  moral  evil ;  by  his  resur- 
rection he  vanquished  physical  evil,  the  evil  of  evils,  death. 
Man  must  freely  choose  Christ,  but  freedom  can  be  attained 
solely  through  experience,  and  therefore  the  historical  process 
must  endure  after  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  baptised  Christian 
must  first  spiritually  assume  Christ  into  himself  ;  history  mak^s 
this  possible  to  him. 

The  meaning  and  the  aim  of  the  cosmological  process  and 
the  historical  process  lie  in  this,  that  the  world  and  mankind 
strive  towards  union  with  God  ;  this  union  with  God  will  secure 
for  the  finite,  for  nature,  and  for  mankind,  a  share  in  divine 
immortality. 

Thus  does  theosophy  cosmologically  and  historically  justify 
a  belief  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  kingdom  is  not  to  be 
identified  with  any  of  the  existing  churches,  nor  is  it  the  sum 
and  union  of  the  separated  churches  ;  the  union  of  the  churches 
is  merely  the  condition- of  its  realisation  in  .so  far  as  it  can  be 
realised  on  earth. 

Belief  in  the  realm  of  God  unites  within  itself  three  beliefs 
(thus  is  the  doctrine  expressed  in  the  third  of  his  Addresses 
commemorative  of  Dostoevskii)  :  belief  in  God  ;  .belief  in  man  ; 
and  belief  in  matter  (nature).  The  severance  of  these  three 
beliefs  manifests  itself  in  three  one-sided  intellectual  trends. 
The  quietists  and  pietists  desire  to  content  themselves  with 
the  mere  contemplation  of  God ;    they  despise  the  freedom  of 


250  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

man,  and  turn  away  from  nature.  The  rationalists  and  idealisi 
believe  in  man,  but  for  them  God  shrinks  to  become  an  embry 
man,  whilst  nature  becomes  the  shadow  of  man.  Since,  hov 
ever,  this  shadow  makes  itself  strongly  felt,  the  naturalisi 
(realists  and  materialists)  have  come  into  existence  ;  thes 
worship  the  dead  mechanism  of  natur^  whilst  denying  a 
that  is  divine  and  spiritual. 

Just  as  the  three  severed  churches  must  be  united,  so  mu! 
these  three  trends  or  "  faiths "  be  theoretically  synthetise 
and  practically  conciliated.  The  belief  in  God  gives  rise  1 
belief  in  the  God-man  and  in  God-matter  (the  mother  of  God 
True  theism,  true  humanism,  and  true  naturalism,  in  the 
organic  unity,  are  the  precondition  for  the  realisation  an 
diffusion  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth. 

§  143. 

THE  brief  account  that  has  been  given  of  Solov'ev 
theosophical  and  mythological  speculations  may  sufft( 
to  furnish  a  general  idea  of  his  thought  ;  I  have  done  no  moi 
than  select  what  is  most  important,  and  will  not  attempt  a 
examination  of  the  individual  contentions,  as  regards  the 
derivation  from  the  works  of  this  or  that  neoplatonist,  froi 
Plato,  Paracelsus,  Schelling,  etc. 

Essentially,  Solov'ev's  theosophical  speculations  are  mere] 
the  projection  of  his  ethics  and  politics  into  the  universe,  an 
Feuerbach  would  have  claimed  that  Solov'ev's  mythology  w< 
but  additional  confirmation  of  his  theory. 

In  his  Critique  of  Abstract  Principles  (1877-1880),  Solov'e 
already  opens  an  attack  upon  the  subjectivism  of  the  ne 
philosophy,  and  he  combats  it  as  scepticism.  He  finds  eve 
Kant  unduly  sceptical,  for  he  considers  that  not  rationalisi 
alone  (the  dogmatic  and  critical  rationalism  of  P^ant  and  th 
absolute  rationalism  of  Hegel),  but  likewise  empiricism  (sei 
sualism,  empiricism,  positivism),  leads  to  subjectivism,  an 
therefore  to  scepticism.  For  experience  and  ratiocinatio 
lead  only  to  relative  knowledge  ;  experience  merely  teachf 
what  is,  while  reason  tells  us  no  more  than  what  must  be  i 
given  circumstances,  so  that  in  both  cases  we  attain  only  t 
relativism.  In  contradistinction  to  this,  Solov'ev  demand 
absolute  principles  alike  for  practice  and  theory,  demand 
absolute,  absolutely  certain,  knowledge.     "  Nothing  can  furnis 


THE    SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  251 

true  satisfaction  but  the  one  truth  which  can  be  neither  of  to-day 
nor  of  to-morrow  because  it  is  eternal."  With  Descartes, 
Solov'ev  considers  that  scepticism  can  serve  only  as  a  method- 
ological instrument,  through  the  use  of  which  the  absoluteness 
of  true  knowledge  is  all  the  more  brilliantly  displayed.  Solov'ev 
does  not  condemn  the  temporary  and  honest  unbelief  of  a 
Thomas. 

It  was  Solov'ev's  aim  to  complete  his  ethic, and  his  philosophy 
of  religion  by  a  systematic  exposition  of  "  theoretical  phil- 
osophy," but  he  published  no  more  than  a  few  essays  contribu- 
tory to  this  work  (1897-1899).  It  is  interesting  to  read  in  one 
of  these  that  Solov'ev  does  not  admit  the  force  of  Descartes' 
cogito  ergo  sum.  The  "  sum  "  is  unwarranted.  Of  him 
who  contends,  I  think  (i.e.,  I  have  consciousness),  therefore  I 
am,  we  may  ask,  Whose  consciousness  have  you  ?  The  answer 
might  run,  No  one  knows,  for  it  might  be  the  consciousness 
of  Peter  or  of  Paul ;  it  might  be  a  pathological  consciousness  ; 
and  so  on. 

Solov'ev  believes,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  his  History 
of  Ethics  he  has  provided  an  absolutely  secure  foundation  for 
knowledge  and  activity,  that  he  has  furnished  the  basis  for 
normal  society,  free  unity  in  spiritual  love.  Free  theosophy 
ensures  truth,  absolute  truth  ;  this  truth  is  characterised  by 
absolute  reality  and  absolute  rationality. 

In  contradistinction  to  the  sceptical  relativism  of  the  ante- 
decent  empirical  and  rationalistic  philosophy,  Solov'ev  anchors 
his  free  philosophy  to  the  all-in-one  being.  This  absolute  (this 
absolute  absolute,  we  might  say  after  the  manner  of  Solov'ev) 
is  given  us  directly  by  the  mystical  or  religious  apprehension. 
Through  this  immediate  apprehension,  experience  and  thought 
are  verified,  thought  acquires  its  absolute  rationality,  experi- 
ence acquires  its  absolute  reality,  the  mystically  conceived 
"truth"  becomes  natural  truth.  Absolute  truth  is  "intro- 
duced "  into  the  forms  of  logical  thought  and  is  reahsed  in 
experience. 

In  this  unification  of  mystical  cognition  with  experience  by 
means  of  logical,  rational  thought,  Solov'ev  beheves  he  has 
furnished  a  harmonious  synthesis  of  theology,  rationalistic 
philosophy,  and  positive  science. 

A  synthesis  of  theology,  Kant,  and  Comte  ? 

In  his  endeavour  to  evade  scepticism,  in  the  last  resort 
Solov'ev  can  discover  no  other  expedient  than  to  make  an 


252  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

unconditional  surrender  to  theology.  Nevertheless,  the  critic 
consciousness  cannot  find  even  in  theology  true  repose  an 
certainty ;  scepticism  is  not  transcended.  In  Solov'ev 
thought,   Kant   again   and  again   comes  into  his  own. 

Kant  and  Kant's  influence  are  already  discernible  in  tl 
fact  that  Solov'ev's  real  starting-point  is  from  ethics,  th; 
Solov'ev  seeks  in  ethics  the  foundation  of  the  absolute  as  goo' 
Practical  philosophy  is  made  the  basis  of  theoretical,  qui 
after  the  manner  of  Kant  and  his  successors  and  in  especi 
of  Schopenhauer.  At  the  close  of  The  Critique  of  Abstra 
Principles  we  read  :  "In  God,  truth  is  eternal,  but  in  so  f; 
as  God  is  not  in  us  we  do  not  live  in  the  truth  ;  not  only  is  oi 
knowledge  fallacious,  but  our  very  being,  our  very  reality 
fallacious.  Consequently  for  the  true  organisation  of  knowled 
the  organisation  of  reality  is  essential." 

We  recognise  Kant  in  Solov'ev's  mythology.  Solov'ev 
theosophical  novel  gives  an  ethical  description  of  the  cosmolog 
cal  process  ;  the  world-drama  is  the  mythical  objectivati( 
of  ethical  human  relationships  ;  ethical  problems  are  myth 
logically  projected  into  the  aeons. 

And  what  is  Solov'ev's  theoretical  philosophy  but  t] 
Kantian  apriorism,  expressed  in  a  different  terminology  ai 
provided  with  a  different,  a  theological,  content  ?  Solov'ev 
"  mystical  perception  "  is,  in  fact,  modelled  upon  the  "  regulati^ 
ideas  "  of  Kant.  Just  as  for  Kant  these  ideas  were  associat( 
with  rational  or  conceptual  thought  and  with  sensuous  expei 
ence,  so  for  Solov'ev  is  mystical  apprehension  associated  wi' 
thought  and  experience  or  sensation.  Solov'ev  even  us 
unhesitatingly  the  Kantian  terminologj^  speaking  of  "  tl 
forms  of  thought,"  of  "  concepts,"  and  so  on. 

Conceptual  thought  and  sensations,  says  Solov'ev,  give 
us  objects  merely  as  these  are  conceived  and  perceived  by  r 
But  we  ascribe  existence  to  such  objects  ;  we  assume  the 
effect  upon  us  as  manifested  in  our  sensations  to  be  immediate 
true  ;  we  create,  in  thought,  relationships  between  one  obje 
and  other  objects  ;  and  we  are  convinced  that  the  object  exis 
independently  of  our  thought  and  sensation.  Here,  to 
Solov'ev  employs  Kantian  terminology  when  he  says  that  tl 
object  persists  by  itself  ;  we  have  to  do  with  the  Kanti^ 
thing-by-itself.  Even  though  Solov'ev  differs  from  Kant 
the  psychological  explanation  of  the  way  wherein  the  thin 
by-itself  enters  into  relation  with  our  understanding,  neve 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  253 

theless  the  explanation  he  gives  is  Kantian  in  character.  For 
Solov'ev  considers  that  the  apprehension  of  objectively  existing 
things  is  a  combination  of  belief,  imagination,  and  creation. 
The  belief  is  the  inward  and  immediate  apprehension  of  the 
object.  In  the  belief  that  the  object  exists  objectively,  inde- 
pendently of  our  sensuous  perception  and  conceptual  thought, 
we  manifest  ourselves  as  free  cognising  subjects,  as  existing 
beings,  who  inwardly  apprehend  another  existing  being.  This 
inward  apprehension  is  a  species  of  union  of  the  knower  with  the 
known  ;  it  is  something  distinct  from  sensation  and  from  com- 
prehension in  thought.  The  immediate  apprehension  is  belief, 
faith  ;   it  is  absolute,  mystical  cognition. 

Further,  in  this  act  of  belief,  imagination  plays  its  part. 
In  our  understanding  we  construct  the  idea  of  the  object,  we 
imagine  what  the  object  is.  Ultimately,  the  ideal  image  of 
the  object  becomes  incorporated  in  sensations.  Solov'ev 
thus  inverts  the  formula  of  rationalism,  and  contends,  nihil 
est  in  sensu,  quod  non  fuerit  prius  in  intellectu. 

As  I  have  pointed  out,  this  psychological  analysis  of  the 
process  of  cognition  reminds  us  of  Kant.  We  have  here  what 
Kant  terms  the  spontaneity  of  the  active  understanding,  the 
self-birth  of  our  reason  ;  we  have  the  synthesis  of  the  various 
elements  of  cognition  in  connection  with  which  for  Kant, 
too,  the  force  of  imagination  had  so  great  a  part  to  play  ;  and, 
further,  the  Kantian  transcendental  apperception,  the  "  I 
think,"  comes  into  its  own  in  Solov'ev's  system.  The  great 
distinction  between  Solov'ev's  doctrine  and  Kant's,  is  that 
for  Kant  the  thing-by-itself  is  no  more  than  imaginatively 
cognised,  whereas  Solov'ev  effects  an  inward  union  with  the 
thing-by-itself. 

The  dependence  of  Solov'ev's  thought  upon  that  of  Kant 
is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  title  of  the  work^  we  are  con- 
sidering. It  is  a  critique  of  abstract  principles.  In  other 
words,  it  is  a  critique  of  pure  reason  ;  but  pure  reason  does  not 
suffice  Solov'ev,  and  he  transforms  it  into  the  direct  mystical 
apprehension  of  realit3/. 

With  Plato,  Solov'ev  is  an  ultra-realist.  Plato  looked  upon 
being  as  pure  soul  before  incorporation  ;  Solov'ev  transformed 
Plato's  pre-existent  contemplation  into  an  existent  contempla- 
tion, and  considered  that  man  contemplates  the  truly  existing 
in  this  life. 

What   is   this   that   really  exists  ?     Solov'ev   answers,   like 


254  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Plato,  that  that  which  really  exists  is  in  truth  God.  Abov( 
all  else,  mystical  contemplation  apprehends  God ;  but  ii 
addition  we  directly  contemplate  individual  things ;  appre 
hending  them  belie vingly,  imaginatively,  and  creatively. 


§  144- 

SOLOV'EV  believes  himself  able  to  reconcile  experience  an( 
thought  with  theology.  In  all  seriousness,  he  believe 
himself  able  to  apprehend,  not  God  only,  but  the  triune  God 
the  God  of  revelation. 

Solov'ev  turns  away  from  Kant  and  Comte  to  revelation 
the  critical  and  sceptical  philosopher  becomes  a  scholastic  an( 
a  mythagogue  who  with  the  aid  of  analogies  and  images  desire 
to  rationalise  the  content  of  revelation.  For  Solov'ev,  toe 
philosophy  becomes  ancilla  theologiae,  free  theosophy  become 
scholasticism.  "  To  justify  the  faith  of  our  fathers  by  raisin 
that  faith  to  a  new  level  of  the  rational  consciousness  ;  to  sho> 
how  this  old  faith,  freed  from  the  shackles  of  local  separatisr 
and  national  self-complacency,  can  be  harmonised  with  etern£ 
and  universal  truth — such,  in  general  terms,  is  the  aim  of  m 
work."  Such  is  the  program  of  Solov'ev's  History  and  Futm 
of  Theocracy. 

The  faith  of  our  fathers,  where  has  this  faith  been  precisel 
formulated,  and  who  are  these  fathers  ?  Where  has  the  etern? 
and  universal  truth  been  formulated  ?  Like  many  orthodo 
theologians,  Solov'ev  frequently  insists  that  Christ  is  the  hea 
of  the  church  and  of  Christianit\'  ;  but  this  means  that  th 
New  Testament,  supplemented  by  the  Old  Testament,  const: 
tutes  the  decisive  authority  in  matters  of  faith.  Solov'e 
stresses  this  consideration  against  Tihomirov  above  all,  fc 
Tihomirov  had  referred  the  cultured  to  the  authority  of  th 
clergy.  Solov'ev  quotes  against  him  Platon,  the  metropolita 
of  Moscow,  for  whom  the  authority  of  Holy  Writ  was  the  so] 
and  ultimate  appeal.  It  is  not  the  clergy,  continues  Solov'e'' 
but  the  folk,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  bearer  and  custodia 
of  Christian  verity.  Thus  we  are  told  that  Jesus  Christ,  Hoi 
Writ,  the  folk,  our  fathers,  and  the  church,  all  furnish  us  wit 
eternal  and  universal  truth.  This  wealth  of  sources  and  criteri 
of  truth  is  really  somewhat  embarrassing  ! 

Solov'ev  clings  to  the  idea  of  catholicity,  but  in  the  en 
the  formal  principle  of  catholicity  leaves  him  in  the  lurch,  i 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  255 

it  has  left  others  betore  him.  The  principle  of  catholicity  of 
St.  Vincent  of  Lerins  did  not  prevent  Pius  IX  from  proclaiming 
papal  infallibility  as  the  formal  principle  of  the  Catholic 
church. 

Solov'ev  was  not  clear  in  his  own  mind  concerning  the 
formal  principle  of  the  Catholic  church  in  the  sense  of  the 
catholicity  he  demanded,  as  we  can  discern  from  the  conflicting 
nature  of  the  criteria  he  adduces.  In  the  end,  however,  he 
discerned  divine  truth  in  the  syllabus  of  Pius  IX  and  in  the  new 
dogma  of  that  pope. 

Characteristic  was  Solov'ev's  attitude  towards  DoUinger 
and  the  Old  Catholics. 

Instead  of  examining  the  reasons  put  forward  by  these 
prominent  theologians,  and  instead  of  enlightening  himself 
as  he  should  from  their  historical  studies  concerning  the  develop- 
ment oi  papal  centralism  and  absolutism,  he  dismisses  the 
whole  movement  with  the  remark  that  Old  Catholicism  is 
nothing  more  than  professorial  learning,  the  learning  of  the 
study,  that  the  masses  have  remained  unaffected  by  it,  that 
at  most  Bismarck  has  favoured  it  as  against  the  Catholic  church. 
Solov'ev  was  greatly  impressed  by  the  fact  that  the  entire 
Catholic  world  accepted  the  new  dogma  of  infallibility,  whereas 
Dollinger  and  his  associates  protested  in  the  name  of  individual 
freedom  against  the  authority  of  the  church,  thus  rejecting 
the  principle  of  the  Catholic  church  in  favour  of  the  Protestant 
principle, 

This  criticism  of  Old  Catholicism,  written  in  the  year  1883, 
is  extremely  uncritical.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  hot  true  that 
Bismarck  favoured  the  Old  Catholics,  for  Bismarck,  like  Solov'ev, 
considered  that  the  masses  were  quite  unaffected  by  the  move- 
ment, and  that  for  this  reason  it  was  devoid  of  significance  for 
the  Protestant  statesman.  "  Quieta  non  movere  "  was  Bismarck's 
leading  principle  in  practical  politics,  and  he  did  not  lift  a  finger 
to  set  the  masses  in  motion.  It  is  not  to  Bismarck  but  to 
Solov'ev  that  we  should  look  for  an  examination  of  the  problem, 
for  a  consideration  of  the  numerous  and  important  points  made 
against  papal  absolutism  by  such  men  as  Dollinger,  von  Schulte, 
Maassen,  Friedrich,  Langen,  and  others.  But  in  his  studies 
of  dogmatics  and  ecclesiastical  history,  Solov'ev  did  not  get 
beyond  an  extremely  uncritical  dilettantism,  and  thus  it  was 
that  in  a  question  of  such  importance  he  could  associate  himself 
with  Strossmayer,  a  man  of  scant  competence  in  theological 


256  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

matters.     Yet    even    Strossmayer    found    the    new    dogn 
repugnant ! 

None  the  less,  the  scholastics,  some  in  especial,  did  much  f 
the  development  of  modern  philosoph}/,  and  the  slavophi 
were  perfectly  right  in  holding  that  scholasticism  had  inaugurat( 
the  reformation  and  the  revolutionary^  movement.  Scholasi 
cism  slew  theology — and  Solov'ev,  like  the  scholastics,  h^ 
a  fondness  for  discovering  reasons  for  what  he  already  believe 
Solov'ev's  scholasticism  was  an  attack  upon  Russian  theolog 
upon  clericalism,  and  helped  the  Russian  movement  towar( 
libert5^  Solov'ev  praised  the  true  monk  for  his  willingness  ■ 
undertake  all  kinds  of  distasteful  and  dirty  work  in  additic 
to  the  service  of  God  ;  such  work  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  vo 
of  obedience.  In  the  field  of  literature,  Solov'ev  accepts 
service  of  this  kind,  and  made  a  clearance  of  all  the  garbaj 
of  such  pseudo-orthodox  pseudo-patriots  as  Tihomirov  &  Co. 

Solov'ev,  however,  was  not  solely  concerned  with  th 
campaign  against  the  Tihomirovs  ;  he  had  an  internal  strugg 
of  his  own,  the  struggle  with  himself,  the  struggle  betwec 
faith  and  untaith.  "  Kant  "  and  "  Plato  "  are  the  two  wa 
cries  wherein  the  tragic  problem  of  Solov'ev  is  comprise! 
The  man's  whole  life  was  a  vain  attempt  to  bring  these  tw 
poles  together,  to  reconcile  their  opposition.  Kant  represen 
deliberate  action  in  accordance  with  the  light  of  reason,  r 
presents  individual  activity  and  spontaneity^ ;  Plato  repr 
sents  deliberate  receptivity^  passive  contemplation  of  tl 
objective  higher  world.  Kant  represents  the  self-sufiicienc 
and  independence  of  the  individual  critical  understanding 
Plato  represents  dependence  upon  the  absolute,  upon  the  revi 
lation  of  the  absolute,  upon  dogma,  upon  the  church.  Solov'ev 
life  problem,  life  drama,  life  tragedy,  was  found  in  the  epist* 
mological  impossibility  of  effecting  an  organic  combinatio 
between  fire  and  water,  between  two  mutually  destructi\ 
elements.  It  was  impossible  for  Solov'ev  to  extinguish  th 
Kantian  flame  with  Slavophil  and  orthodox  holy  wate: 
The  flame  allured  him  ;  in  the  fireman,  the  artist  aM'akened 
the  fireman  forgot  his  duties,  and  in  rapt  contemplation,  h: 
eyes  glistening  in  the  radiance,  he  looked  on  admiringly  at  th 
splendour  of  the  conflagration. 

I  am  aware  that  this  view  of  Solov'ev,  this  criticism,  wi 
please  neither  his  friends  nor  his  foes.  I  need  not  troubl 
myself  about  the  foes,  and  in  especial  may  ignore  the  theologian? 


'  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  257 

but  I  must  insist  that  his  friends  and  adherents  discern  in  the 
works  of  their  teacher  and  master  a  unity  which  is  in  truth 
non-existent.  It  cannot  reasonably  be  contended  that  Solov'ev's 
greatness  and  originaHty  lay  in  an  alleged  organic  synthesis 
of  opposites.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  a  synthesis  of  such 
opposites  cannot  possibly  be  organic,  it  is  in  the  very  failure 
of  the  attempt  that,  in  my  view,  is  to  be  discovered  Solov'ev's 
originality  and  significance,  above  all  for  Russia.  Unwillingly 
did  he  become  a  heretic  to  his  own  teaching. 

A  man  cannot  for  four  years  be  a  materialist,  a  positivist, 
and  an  atheist,  without  his  thought  being  thereby  affected 
throughout  life.  Shortly  before  his  death  he  was  engaged  in 
the  simultaneous  translation  of  Kant's  Ptolegomena  and  of 
Plato  ;  and  he  arranged  for  the  translation,  not  only  of  Plato, 
but  likewise  of  Lange's  History  of  M ata-ialism  and  of  Jodl's 
History  of  Ethics — Jodl,  the  Feu"&rbachian  ! 

Solov'ev's  tendency  towards  individualism  and  subjectivism 
was  reinforced  by  the  study  of  Kant  and  of  German  idealism. 
His  primitive  materialism  and  positivism  gave  expression  to 
a  naive  objectivism  or  realism,  and  this  phase  was  overcome 
by  Solov'ev  with  the  aid  of  Kant  and  idealism.  At  the  same 
time,  however,  the  study  of  Schopenhauer,  Schelling,  and  even 
Hegel,  made  his  mind  receptive  to  Slavophil  mysticism — the 
ecclesiastical  and  religious  conditions  prevailing  in  his  native 
land  having,  of  course,  a  contributory  influence.  Despite  Kant, 
and  with  Kant,  Solov'ev  moved  on  towards  Spinoza,  Jacob 
Boehme,  and  Baader.  He  learned  from  Baader  how  Kant 
and  Descartes  could  be  epistemologically  transcended,  or  at 
least  made  susceptibly  of  an  orthodox  interpretation.  Kant's 
apriori  was  transformed  into  revelation  ;  Kant's  thing-by- 
itself  and  ens  realissimum  became  the  triune  God  as  the  highest 
and  only  rational  being  ;  transcendental  idealism  took  on  a 
new  aspect  as  religious  and  mystical  faith. 

Impelled  by  necessity,  Solov'ev  moved  on.  to  Anselm  and 
his  credo  ut  intelligam  ;  while,  from  the  practical  side,  at  least, 
Solov'ev  had  to  halt  when  he  came  to  Augustine.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  freedom  of  man  should  be  reconciled  with 
the  influence  of  the  absolute  on  man.  but  it  cannot  be  said 
that  Solov'ev  was  able  to  give  a  precise  solution  of  this  problem. 
Basing  himself  upon  Augustine,  he  was  a  determinist ;  but  he 
endeavoured  to  content  himself  with  psychologically  conceivable 
freedom  of  choice  as  an  extant  datum.     Metaphysically,  he 

18  VOL.   II. 


258  THE    SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA 

followed  Augustine  in  deducing  the  doctrine  of  grace.  God, 
the  absolute,  exercises  an  influence  upon  the  world  and  upon 
men ;  the  logical  consequences  of  absolute  predestination 
cannot  be  evaded.  Empirically,  however,  it  suffices  that  we 
are  aware  of  our  freedom  of  choice,  and  that  we  are  conscious 
of  the  fundamental  distinction  between  the  concepts  of  good 
and  of  evil.  The  Kantian  ethic  must  be  based  upon  the  meta- 
physic  of  Anselm,  Augustine,  Origen,  and  Plato. 

Baader  led  him  astray  into  the  attempt  to  transcend  Kant 
entirely,  and  to  establish  even  the  theory  of  cognition  upon  a 
religious  foundation  ;  but  Kant  contmuany  .  reasserted  his 
rights,  and  Solov'ev  found  it  necessary  to -concede  that  ethics 
could  not  be  wholly  grounded  on  religion.  Again  and  agam 
did  he  return  to  Kant. 

More  than  once  Solov'ev,  in  truth,  forgot  his  past  when  he 
animadverted  upon  Tihomirov  and  the  latter' s  rejection  of 
"  independent  philosophising  "  in  matters  of  religion. 

Solov'ev  was,  as  it  were,  a  modern  Origen,  nor  was  it  a 
chance  matter  that  Origen  should  have  exercised  so  strong  an 
attraction  upon  him.  We  have  in  Solov'ev  the  same  attempt 
as  in  Origen  to  reconcile  gnosis  with  orthodoxy  ;  upon  a  Platonist 
basis  there  is  effected  an  association  between  mysticism  and 
revelation,  between  the  human  and  the  divine.  It  gratified 
Solov'ev  to  find  that  Origen  laid  so  much  stress  upon  the  idea 
of  the  God-man,  whilst  as  a  sj^stematist  Solov'ev  was  delighted 
with  the.  first  attempt  at  a  system.atisation  of  Christian 
doctrine. 

I  do  not  purpose  to  undertake  a  detailed  description  of 
Solov'ev's  theory  of  cognition.  Doubtless  the  attentive  reader 
will  already  have  perceived  that  Solov'ev  gives  an  unjustifiable 
extension  to  the  concept  of  belief,  unhesitatingly  subsuming 
religious  faith  in  revelation  under  belief,  which  latter  is  in  reality 
a  judgment  of  truth.     In  fact,  the  question  is  begged. 

For  the  further  characterisation  of  Solov'ev's  theory  of 
cognition,  I  shall  allude  to  two  only  of  his  doctrines. 

As  we  have  seen,  from  Plato  and  the  neoplatonists  Solov'ev 
likewise  took  the  doctrine  of  ideas,  not  in  the  Kantian  form, 
but  in  that  which  we  owe  to  Plato.  He  adopted  the  view  that 
ideas  were  not  simply  ideal  concepts,  but  objectively  existing 
ideal  beings.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  there  resulted  for 
Solov'ev  all  the  epistemological  difficulties  which  resulted  long 
ago  for  Plato. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  259 

Of  great  importance  finally  for  Solov'ev  was  his  doctrine 
that  theory  depends  upon  practice.  Here,  too,  Solov'ev  did 
not  think  after  the  manner  of  Kant  and  his  successors  (Schopen- 
hauer, for  instance),  but  understood  by  the  realisation  of  the 
divine  in  human  nature  that  which  he  termed  "  free  theurgy." 
Our  whole  empirical  reality  must  be  "  organised,"  must  be 
made  inwardly  "  subject  "  to  our  mind,  just  as  our  mind  must 
itself  be  made  "  subject  "  to  the  divine.  "  Free  theurgy  is 
the  realisation  of  the  divine  principle  through  mankind,  its 
realisation  in  the  whole  of  empirical  and  natural  reality  ;  it 
is  the  realisation  through  mankind  of  the  divine  energies  in 
the  real  being  of  nature  "  We  perceive  that  the  ethical  and 
religious  imitatio  Christi  has  become  the  imitatio  Dei  in  the 
sense  of  a  metaphysical  creation,  for  Solov'ev  does  not  speak 
merely  of  the  permeation  of  the  humail  by  the  divine,  but  of 
the  like  permeation  of  nature  in  general.  It  is  manifest,  how- 
ever, that  Solov'ev  cannot  apply  the  idea  of  free  theurgy  con- 
sistently and  in  all  seriousness,  and  he  is  therefore  content  to 
reduce  theurgy  to  the  spheres  of  artistic  creation  and  aesthetics. 
Manifestly  we  have  here  an  attempt  to  outbid  the  thought  of 
Schelling,  and  consequently  we  find  ourselves  once  more  in 
the  realm  of  mythology  and  mysticism. ^ 

§  145. 

TO  enable  us  to  appraise  Solov'ev's  mysticism,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  undertake  an  epistemological  examination  of 
the  general  nature  of  mysticism.  This  is  essential  to  the 
understanding  of  Russian  philosophy,  and  I  should  perhaps 
have  discussed  the  question  at  an  earlier  stage,  before  giving 
an  account  of  the  Slavophils. 

The  attention  of  the  mystic  is  exclusively  concentrated 
upon  a  single  object  of  cognition,  and  especially  upon  God, 
philosophy  becoming  theosophy.  Amid  the  multiplicity  of 
things,  the  mystic  endeavours  to  grasp  unity,  and,  more  directly, 
to  grasp  the  one  ;  even  the  dualism  of  the  ego  and  the  non- 
ego  is  to  be  transcended.  The  mystic  is  a  radical  monist,  at 
once  monotheist  and  pantheist. 

In  the  religious  domain  the  mystic  aspires  towards  union 

»  Solov'ev's  free  theurgy  may  be  compared  with  the  doctrine  of  Smetana, 
the  Schellingian,  who  beUeved  that  in  days  to  come  religion  would  be  replaced 
by  a  loving  art  which  would  purify  and  transform  nature. 


260  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

with  God,  and  wishes  to  free  the  soul  from  the  body  and  its 
earthly  shackles.  He  longs  for  repose,  repose  of  the  soul,  and 
finds  it  in  mysticism. 

Mystical  exclusiveness  readily  becomes  pathological,  the 
attention  being  hypnotised  by  a  single  object ;  contemplation 
rises  into  ecstasy,  with  its  peculiar  feelings  of  blissfulness. 

The  mystic  despises  the  empirical,  the  conceptual  cognition, 
which  advances  step  by  step,  for  he  is  impatient,  and  desires 
at  one  stride  to  attain  to  the  highest  cognition  ;  the  mystic 
contemplates  God  and  objects.  In  this  aspiration  towards 
complete  knowledge,  the  mystic  gladly  adopts  the  results  of 
cognition  ;  he  cherishes  traditionalism  ;  revelation  is  welcome 
to  him  as  a  complete  doctrine.  The  mystic  rejects  logic  and 
,  methodology  ;  he  seeks  the  desert,  the  hermitage,  and  the 
cloister,  with  their  artificial  solitude,  for  there  he  can  embrace 
mysticism  as  a  permanent  condition.  The  mystics  have 
cultivated  their  own  peculiar  and  quasi-pathological  methods 
for  the  attainment  of  the  mystical  state  in  its  completeness. 

'l\Iysticism  makes  its  appearance  in  the  earlier  stages  of 
civilisation.  Speaking  generall}^,  we  may  say  that  as  the 
centuries  pass  mysticism  becomes  weaker  and  rarer.  Solov'ev 
finds  it  necessary  to  fall  back  upon  the  neoplatonists  and  upon 
Plato,  whilst  he  gives  his  approval  to  the  religious  imbeciles 
[jurodivyi)  of  his  own  land.  Obviously,  certain  times  and 
certain  places  will  display  a  greater  inclination  to  mysticism 
than  will  others. 

Mysticism  is  an  outcome  of  a  mythical  outlook  on  the  uni- 
verse, and  therefore  thrives  best  in  the  theological  and  religious 
domain.  The  new  critical  and  empirical  philosophy  and  science 
exercise  a  debilitating  influence  upon  myth  and  mysticism. 

Criticism  ;  scientific  specialised  training  with  its  complete 
subjection  of  miracle  to  law  and  consequent  rejection  of  miracle  ; 
scientific  analysis  of  all  so-called  mysterious  phenomena  (hypno- 
tism, spiritualism,  etc.)  ;  technological  efficiency,  which  replaces 
and  outbids  miracle  ;  the  universal  need  to  labour  ;  the  doing 
away  with  idle  aristocracy  ;  the  general  restlessness  and  haste 
of  economically  developed  and  civilised  life  ;  the  characteristics 
of  urban  existence  ;  finally,  the  great  diffusion  and  educative 
influence  of  literature  and  art,  supplementing  and  mitigating 
intellectualism,  and  thus  rendering  mysticism  superfluous — 
such  are  the  chief  factors  by  which  we  can  explain  the  decline 
of  mysticism  and  the  decay  of  myth. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  261 

To-day,  therefore,  the  religious  problem  is  dominated  by  the 
question  whether  religion,  the  religious  mentality,  be  in  fact 
necessarily  mystical,  and  whether  they  may  not  exist  in  default 
of  mysticism,  though  the  theologians  and  many  philosophers 
have  ever  insisted  upon  the  need  for  the  mystical  factor.  For 
our  purposes  it  suffices  to  moot  the  question,  and  in  our  study 
of  the  various  philosophies  of  religion  to  determine  in  each  case 
the  content  of  mysticism,  its  degree  and  its  quality. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  many  of  the  opponents  of  mysticism 
condemn  as  mystical  the  mere  dwelling  in  contemplation  upon 
internal  psychical  processes  and  experiences  (mental  self- 
analysi^ .  Many  materialists,  naturalists,  realists,  and  positivists, 
detest  such  feelings  and  moods,  detest  all  psychical  processes 
of  the  kind.  Yet  many  of  these  opponents  of  mysticism  (the 
naturalists,  for  instance)  are  themselves  mystics. 

Attention  must  be  drawn  to  another  point.  Mysticism  is 
not,  as  mystics  contend,  a  source  of  profounder  and  loftier 
insight.  Mystics  are  wholly  subordinated  to  the  knowledge 
of  their  time  and  environment ;  the  Christian  mystic  differs 
from  the  Buddhist  mj^stic,  and  so  on.  As  psychologists,  the 
mystics  are  noteworthy  only  in  so  far  as  they  comprehend 
the  intimate  relationships  of  men  one  to  another  and  to  the 
outer  world.  To  this  extent  mystics  may  render  service  to 
ethics  and  religion. 

There  exist  various  kinds  of  m3'sticism,  for  the  mystical 
mood  varies  in  accordance  with  the  object  of  mystical  contem- 
plation and  with  the  nature  of  the  mystical  subject.  It  varies 
according  as  the  object  is  God  ;  God  as  Christ  (man,  the  love 
of  Jesus,  the  love  of  Mary,  and  so  on)  ;  pantheistic  God  (con- 
ceived now  materialistically,  now  again  spiritualistically)  ; 
theistic  God  ;  or,  again,  man,  animals,  and  other  objects  (these, 
in  association  with  the  Godhead,  constituting  the  so-called 
devotionalia).  It  varies  also  as  the  subject  vaiies  in  con- 
formity with  variations  in  the  degree  and  quality  of  culture 
and  philosophy;  in  accordance  with  differences  of  time  and 
place  ;  and  in  accordance  with  peculiarities  of  individual  or 
of  national  character.  It  varies  according  as  the  mystical 
thinker  inclines  to  be  intellectual  or  sentimental ;  to  be  clear 
or  obscure  in  his  scientific  outlook  ;  to  be  abstiact  or  concrete 
in  his  mode  of  thought ;  to  be  dilettantist,  poetic  (thinking  in 
pictures)  ;  according  as  he  is  inclined,  to  theorise  (gnostic  or 
theosophic)  ;   or,  finally,  according  as  he  is  characterised  b}^  an 


262  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

ethical  trend  (dwelling  upon  the  sentiment  of  love  or  upon  the 
need  for  a  change  of  will). 

As  regards  Solov'ev,  it  may  be  asked  whether  his  mysticism 
was  predominantly  Russian,  Orthodox  (Byzantine),  Catholic, 
or  Protestant.  This  much  is  certain,  that  Solov'ev  had  im- 
mersed himself  in  the  thought  of  various  eastern  and  western 
mystics,  ancient  and  modern,  thus  training  him.self  mystically. 
His  experience  had  included  a  knowledge  of  the  monastic  and 
folk  mysticism  widely  diffused  in  Russia.  Competent  persons 
allude  to  meditation,  contemplation,  ecstatic  union  with  God, 
absorption  in  the  mysteries  of  ceremonial  (mystagogv),  as 
especially  characteristic  of  the  Orthodox  church,  and  tell  us 
that  this  applies  above  all  to  Russian  mystics.  Noteworthy 
in  this  connection  are  the  hesychasts  (quietists)  of  Athos. 
The  west  inclines  to  stress  the  ethical  aspect,  so  that 
western  mysticism  operates  above  all  upon  the  will,  which  is 
sometimes  weakened,  but  sometimes  strengthened  (Loyola). 
Among  Roman  Catholics,  mysticism  was  less  common  than 
in  the  oriental  churches  ;  and  it  was  still  less  common  in  the 
Lutheran  and  Protestant  churches  (though  there  were  Lutheran 
quietibts).  The  eighteenth-century  enlightenment  was  hostile 
to  mysticism.  With  romanticism  was  associated  a  partial 
approval  of  mysticism,  but  on  the  whole  we  may  say  that  the 
modern  age  is  unfavourable  to  mysticism. 

Solov'ev's  mysticism,  therefore,  appears  in  the  following 
light. 

In  the  first  pla^^e,  we  must  point  out  that  Solov'ev  desired 
to  escape  from  subjectivism  and  scepticism  by  way  of  mystical 
or  religious  cognition.  It  is  questionable  whether  mystical 
contemplation,  as  he  describes  it,  does  really  do  away  with 
subjectivism  to  the  extent  that  Solov'ev  contends.  Does  a 
presumably  direct  contemplation,  uniting  subject  with  object, 
suffice  ?  Are  not  belief,  imagination,  and  the  creative  act-  of 
imagination,  likewise  subjective  ?  Beyond  question,  against 
Solov'ev's  mystical  cognition  we  may  adduce  the  same  argu- 
ments that  he  himself  adduced  against  Descartes'  cogito  ergo 
sum  ;  we  may  talk  of  errors,  illusions,  pathological  states,  as 
invalidating  his  theory  no  less  than  that  of  Descartes. 

Moreover,  in  what  respect  is  Solov'ev's  mystical  cognition 
religious  ?  All  that  Solov'ev  describes  is  the  cognition  of 
objects ;  every  external  object  is  similarly  apprehended  by  the 
subject  in  a  "  mystical  or  religious  "  manner.     This  universal 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  268 

application  of  the  term  seems  forced,  though  I  by  no  means 
wish  to  deny  that  Solov'ev's  psychological  study  of  the  cognition 
of  objects  was  perspicacious. 

In  view  of  these  considerations,  it  might  be  contended  that 
Solov'ev's  mysticism  is  not  really  m3^sticism  at  all ;  on  the 
other  hand,  it  might  be  contended  that  Solov'ev's  mysticism 
is  not  restricted  to  the  domain  of  theosophy,  but  extends  to  all 
domains  of  thought,  religious  belief  being  no  more  than  a  special 
case  of  belief. 

On  the  other  hand,  Solov'ev  restricts  mystical  contemplation 
to  God  and  to  the  higher  suprasensible  world,  herein  conforming 
to  the  traditional  views  concerning  mysticism,  and  under- 
standing by  that  term  the  direct  intercourse  between  the 
cognising  subject  and  the  Godhead.  He  does  not  make  it 
clear  how  far  mysticism  is  philosophic  and  how  far  it  is  religious, 
for  by  the  term  "  direct  intercourse "  we  may  understand 
objective  cognition,  but  we  may  also  understand  the  emotional 
aspect  and  outcome  of  such  cognition,  and  above  all  the  love 
of  God. 

In  the  present  sketch,  no  attempt  can  be  made  to  come  to 
a  definite  decision  regarding  these  and  similar  obscurities.  There 
would  first  be  necessary  a  detailed  comparison  of  Solov'ev  with 
Plato,  Plotinus,  Philo.  and  Crigen  ;  with  Spinoza,  Jacob 
Boehme,  and  Swedenborg  ;  with  Schelling,  Baader,  Schopen- 
hauer, and  the  Indian  mystics.  Moreover,  we  should  have  to 
describe  Solov'ev's  own  mystical  mood  in  actual  life  ;  we  should 
have  to  quote  textually  a  number  of  passages  from  his  writings  ; 
we  should  have  to  appeal  to  the  biographies  of  Solov'ev  and  to 
the  records  of  his  personal  intimates.  Here  I  can  do  no  more 
.  than  give  a  brief  account  of  Solov'ev's  mysticism,  as  I  have 
given  a  brief  account  of  his  philosophy,  this  account  being 
based  upon  a  study  of  his  writings  ;  but  I  cannot  feel  sure  that 
what  I  sa}^  about  his  mysticism  will  evoke  a  mystical  mood  or 
mystical  sympathy  in  the  reader. 

As  previously  stated,  Solov'ev  studied  the  works  of  eastern 
and  western  mystics,  immersing  himself  in  their  mentality. 
This  per  se  suffices  to  show  that  in  mysticism,  too,  he  was 
endeavouring  to  effect  a  synthesis.  Inasmuch  as  setting  out  from 
Kant,  he  considered  that  morality  was  the  most  important 
element  in  religion,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  prefer  western 
mj^'sticism,  and  above  all  Catholic  mysticism,  to  oriental  mysti- 
cism.    Since  he  never  permanently  adopted  the  contemplative 


264  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

life,  but  rather,  as  a  born  fighter,  entered  the  arena  on  behalf 
of  his  ideals,  we  must  be  careful  to  avoid  exaggerating  his 
mysticism.  We  have  learned  that  he  regarded  mere  religious 
contemplation  as  inadequate.-  For  him,  religion  was  leadership, 
the  active  leadership  of  men  and  mankind  by  the  church.  For 
him,  the  Russian  cloister  and  the  Russian  monk  were  historic 
representatives  of  traditional  energy,  in  conjunction  with  the 
great  landowners  and  the  village  community  ;  but  he  did  not 
consider  monasticism  powerful  enough  to  conquer  the  modern 
world.  He  demanded  the  realisation  of  free  democracy  by  an 
active  "  Christian  policy." 

From  time  to  time,  Solov'ev  suffered  from  hallucinations, 
fancying  he  had  seen  Satan  in  bodily  form,  and  having  other 
spectral  visitants.  Wliilst  it  is  not  improbable  that  his  un- 
hygienic .and  ascetic  life  was  a  partial  factor  in  inducing  his 
mysticism,  we  must  also  recognise  that  his  mode  of  life  was 
the  outcome  gf  his  mysticism.  Solov'ev  held  spiritualistic 
stances  amid  romantic  forest  solitudes  ;  when  in  Eg37pt  he 
visited  a  Bedouin  tribe  which  was  supposed  to  have  preserved 
secret  traditions  of  Solomon.  He  sought  solitude  in  the  city, 
but  also  sought  society  there.  There  was  something  too  restless, 
too  nomadic,  about  his  temperament  for  him  to  be  wholly  and 
enduringly  the  mystic. 

He  accepted  theology,  Christian  mythology,  as  revelation 
His  philosophy,  therefore,  necessarily  became  scholastic,  despite 
his  mysticism,  and  despite  his  repudiation  of  scholasticism. 
Philosophy,  said  Solov'ev,  must  illumine  the  religious  life, 
and  should  not  attempt  to  demonstrate  it.  But  he  was  not 
always  guided  by  his  own  rule,  and  the  scholastic  frequently 
replaced  the  mystic  ! 

Mysticism  obscured  Solov'ev's  scientific  insight,  debilitated 
his  critical  faculties  (he  wrote,  for  example,  an  introduction 
to  a  work  by  Hellenbach),  and  misled  him  in  practical  matters. 

Solov'ev  was  interested,  not  merely  in  hypnotism,  but 
likewise  in  spiritualism,  in  the  unexplained  phenomena  of  so- 
called  telepathy,  and  in  the  various  other  matters  comprised 
under  the  general  name  of  occultism,  endeavouring  in  these 
fields  to  discover  proofs  for  the  existence  of  a  higher  world  of 
mystery  and  of  its  influence  upon  human  life.  The  impracticable 
theosophy  of  his  co-national  Madame  Blavatsky  was  more  than 
condoned  b}^  Solov'ev. 

The  mystics  seek,  and  ever^'where  discern,  the  mysterious. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  265 

They  associate  things  and  ideas  which  have  no  reasonable 
connection,  for  they  discover  secret  similarities  and  identities. 
In  this  matter,  the  mystic  resembles  the  scholastic,  with  his 
analogies,  interpretations,  indexes  of  truth,  and  so  on.  In 
the  name  "  Roma,"  Solov'ev  discovers  the  word  amor,  for  it 
would  appear  that  the  Romans  must  have  read  from  right  to 
left  after  the  Semitic  fashion  ! 

The  attempt  to  find  evidences  for  the  influence  upon  this 
world  of  a  higher  invisible  world,  led  him  to  regard  as  miracle 
the  failure  of  the  attempt  on  the  tsar's  life  at  Borki. 

We  have  an  index  here,  not  merely  of  superstition,  but  of 
the  conservative  trend  characteristic  of'mysticism.  Mysticism 
is  per  se  religious  aristocracy,  and  aristocracy  in  general.  The 
mystic  evades  the  petty  details  of  work,  in  scientific  matters 
no  less  than  in  economic.  He  delights  in  the  giddy  theosophical 
constructions  of  a  fantastic  cosmogony  ;  he  has  no  taste  either 
for  stable  and  empirical  conceptual  thought  or  for  technical 
economic  labour.  Contempt  for  this  world  is  aristocratic, 
a  manifestation  ot  a  conservative  and  reactionary  aristocratic 
trend. 

Solov'ev  organised  his  free  theocracy  in  a  thoroughly  aristo- 
cratic manner.  Above  all,  the  gift  of  prophecy  was  denied  to 
the  masses  and  to  the  democracy. 

In  political  matters,  too,  Solov'ev  was  conservative.  This  is 
why  his  attention  was  riveted  by  the^miracle  of  Borki,  whereas 
he  had  no  eye  for  thousands  of  similar  miracles.  This  is  why 
Emperor  WilUam  II  (dissent  as  he  might  from  the  latter's 
philosophy  of  history)  was  for  him  the  new  Siegfried.  This  is 
why  he  admired  Tsar  Nicholas  I,  for  to  the  tsar  there  had  been 
granted  a  mysterious  knowledge  'of  higher  Christian  truth 
when  in  the  name  of  Christianity  he  forbade  Samarin  to  effect 
the  forcible  Russification  of  the  Baltic  provinces.  In  1896, 
again,  Solov'ev  participated  in  the  official  jubilee,  and  shared 
in  the  joys,  of  his  opponent  PobSdonoscev. 

The  aristocratic  trend  of  mysticism  was  likewise  displayed 
in  his  preference  for  Catholicism,  though  the  reasons  for  this 
preference  were  not  clear  to  his  own  mind.  Although  he  looked 
upon  the  church  as  the  cathoHcity  of  the  human  race,  it  was  the 
monarchical  element  in  the  papacy  which  allured  him.  Mono- 
theism found  its  Uving  symbol  and  Hkeness  in  monopapism,  if 
I  may  coin  the  term. 

It  is  true,  however,  that  Solov'ev's  aristocratic  leanings 


286  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

depend  upon  his  ecclesiastical  ideas  as  well  as  upon  his  mysticism. 
He  ascribes  a  decisive  role  to  the  hierarchy,  thus  completely 
abandoning  Homjakov's  conception  of  the  church.  Leont'ev, 
thoroughly  approved  his  estimate  of  the  hierarchy. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  I  must  not  be  interpreted  as  suggesting 
that  every  mystic  is  a  mere  conservative  and  reactionary. 
Mysticism  was  frequently  adverse  to  scholasticism  and  to  the 
church's  faith  in  the  letter.  Even  Solov'ev,  despite  his  mysticism 
and  by  his  mysticism,  was  driven  into  the  liberal  camp,  just  as 
the  masonic  mystics  as  well  as  the  Voltairians  were  serviceable 
to  the  enlightenment.  As  circumstances  may  demand,  we 
must  examine  mysticism  either  in  respect  of  its  content  or  of 
its  social  influence 

§  146. 

ACCORDING  to  Solov'ev,  Europe,  having  been  secu- 
larised by  the  reformation,  had  since  then  been  passing 
into  a  state  of  religious  and  moral  decay.  The  ideal  of  Christi- 
anity had  disappeared.  Revolutionary  philosophy  had  made 
praiseworthy  efforts  to  replace  the  unity  of  the  church  by  the 
unity  of  the  human  race,  but  v/ith  scant  success.  The  uni- 
versality of  militarism  converted  entire  nations  into  hostile 
armies,  and  stimulated  a  national  hatred  which  had  been 
unknown  in  the  middle  ages.  The  class  struggle  threatened  to 
transform  everything  int^  blood  and  fire.  As  the  increasing 
frequency  of  mental  disorder,  suicide,  and  crime,  showed, 
individual  moral  strength  had  been  weakened.  In  contrast 
with  these  symptoms  of  degradation,  the  most  we  could  point 
to  as  indications  of  a  certain  degree  of  moral  progress  was  that 
the  criminal  law  had  become  less  harsh  and  that  torture  had 
been  abolished.  Nothing  but  the  union  of  the  churches  offered 
the  possibility  of  realising  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth. 

In  Solov'ev's  opinion,  secularised  Russia,  no  less  than  secu- 
larised Europe,  though  in  a  different  form,  presented  an  image 
of  decay. 

Partial,  one-sided,  and  purely  political  reform  was  incapable 
of  producing  the  desired  and  indispensable  regeneration.  The 
program  of  the  moral  and  religious  rebirth  of  the  individual 
and  of  the  Russian  people,  the  program  of  the  positive  all-in-one, 
as  Solov'ev  termed  his  theocratic  idea,  discountenanced  the 
political  aspirations  of  his  contemporaries  as  one-sided  and 
inadequate,  and  discountenanced  above  all  the  revolution. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  267 

In  his  conception  of  revolution  and  in  his  condemnation  of 
the  revolutionary  movement,  Solov'ev  agreed  with  Dostoevskii, 
taking  from  that  author  his  analysis  and  his  estimate  of  the 
revolution,  of  nihilism,  and  of  atheism.  Just  like  Dostoevskii, 
Solov'ev  had  at  first  enthusiastically  accepted  nihilism.  In 
his  school  days  he  had  been  an  "  iconoclast,"  and  on  one  occasion 
had  thrown  out  of  the  window  the  icons  before  which  he  had 
been  accustomed  to  pray. 

The  essence  of  the  moral  decay  of  Europe  and  Russia,  the 
essence  of  "  secularisation,"  is  discerned  by  Solov'ev  as  by 
Dostoevskii  in  atheism,  in  the  turning  away  from  God,  in  god- 
lessness,  which  manifests  itself  as  modern  subjectivism  and 
individualism,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  superman. 

It  was  from  Dostoevskii  that  Solov'ev  took  his  philosophy 
of  atheism,  which,  to  put  the  matter  shortly,  was  that  atheism, 
as  subjectivism  and  individualism,  leads  to  murder  or  to  suicide. 

Solov'ev  adduced,  in  addition  the  spread  of  criminality, 
the  increasing  frequency  of  suicide  and  mental  disorder,  as 
symptoms  and  consequences  of  moral  decadence.  He  was 
especially  interested  in  the  study  of  suicide,  his  attention  having 
been  directed  to  the  matter  by  Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann. 
He  began  his  Ethics  by  enquiring  what  was  the  essential  nature 
of  suicide.  He  considered  that  suicide  afforded  proof  that  there 
are  men,  serious-minded  men,  who  take  their  lives  deliberately, 
fully  responsible  for  what  they  are  doing,  actuated  by  dis- 
illusionment or  despair,  and  thus  give  expression  to  their 
conviction  that  life  is  void  of  meaning.  These  practical  pessim- 
ists impress  Solov'ev's  imagination  more  than  do  the  theoretical 
pessimists,  more  than  those  who  continue  to  cling  to  life  despite 
all  their  reasoning  concerning  its  futility  ;  it  is  the  existence  of 
the  former  which  induces  him  to  give  the  leading  place  in  his 
philosophy  to  ethics  as  the  doctrine  of  the  meaning  of  life.  God 
is,  and  God  furnishes,  the  meaning  of  life.  Theism  gives  meaning 
and  value  to  life,  whereas  atheism  deprives  life  of  meaning  and 
value  ;  atheism  is  death,  and  the  atheist  becomes  a  murderer 
or  a  suicide. 

In  his  analysis  of  Dostoevskii,  Solov'ev  accepts  this  formula 
and  develops  it  as  follows, 

A  man  who  bases  his  right  to  change  the  world  upon  his 
wickedness  and  unreason  is  essentially  a  murderer  ;  he  will 
employ  force  against  others,  and  will  himself  ultimately  perish 
through   force.     He   considers  himself   strong,   but   is   in   the 


268  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

power  of  others.     He  is  proud  of  his  freedom,  but  is  the  slave 
of  chance  and  of  outward  happenings. 

The  man  must  undergo  conversion  if  he  is  to  be  saved  from 
this  logical  sequence  of  his  atheism,  and  the  first  step  upon  the 
way  to  salvation  is  that  he  should  recognise  his  weakness  and 
lack  of  freedom.  But  Solov'ev  warns  us  that  while  one  who 
takes  no  more  than  this  first  step  will  cease  to  be  a  potential 
murderer,  he  will  nevertheless,  if  he  goes  no  further,  remain 
a  potential  suicide. 

Suicide,  the  application  of  destructive  force  to  oneself,  is 
a  loftier  and  freer  deed  than  murder.  The  judge  and  the  con- 
demned are  one  and  the  same  ;  but  the  judgment  is  false,  for 
the  decision  to  commit  suicide  involves  a  contradiction  (this 
is  an  echo  of  Schopenhauer).  The  man  recognises  his  weakness 
and  lack  of  freedom,  and  yet  the  act  of  suicide  manifests  the 
possession  of  a  certain  degree  of  strength  and  freedom.  Why, 
then,  did  he  not  turn  this  strength  and  freedom  to  account 
on  behalf  of  life  ? 

The  suicide  rightly  recognises  in  himself  the  existence  of 
human  incapacity,  but  he  draws  a  false  conclusion  when  he 
makes  this  incapacity  a  universal  law,  for  now  he  does  not 
merely  teel  the  evil  but  believes  in  evil.  "  Everyone  who 
recognises  the  universality  of  human  evil,  but  fails  to  believe 
in  superhuman  goodness,  is  driven  to  suicide."  Now,  super- 
human goodness  is  God. 

Thus  suicide  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  atheism. 
Belief  in  ,God  restores  to  men  belief  in  man.  But  the  man 
who  is  left  entirely  to  himself,  and  who  attempts  to  dispense 
with  God,  becomes  a  murderer  or  a  suicide.  The  last  deed  of 
the  godless  man  is  murder  or  suicide.  Unmeaning  concen- 
tration upon  oneself,  disastrous  isolation,  results  in  murder 
or  suicide.  He  only  who  unites  himself  in  Christ  with  God 
and  in  the  church  with  the  world  will  avoid  transferring  his  own 
wickedness  into  nature  ;  all  that  he  will  take  from  nature  will 
be  death. 

Dostoevskii  bases  the  thesis  in  a  somewhat  different  manner, 
and  we  shall  have  to  discuss  the  problem  in  fuller  detail  when 
we  come  to  consider  the  ideas  of  that  writer  Here  it  suffices 
to  say  that  Solov'ev,  like  Dostoevskii,  identifies  the  revolution 
with  murder,  but  that  Solov'ev  fails  to  discuss  the  matte-r 
adequately.  He  indicates  that  there  is  a  connection  between 
the  problem  of  suicide  and  murder,  and  the  general  question 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  269 

of  objectivism  and  subjectivism;  but  he  fails  to  perceive  the 
real  significance  ot  the  matter  as  it  was  formulated  before  his 
day  by  Belinskii  and  Bakunin. 

§  147. 

SOLOV'EV  was  a  poet,  and  art  plays  a  leading  part  in  his 
system.  When  he  wishes  to  give  expression-  to  his  most 
intimate  thoughts  and  feelings,  he  takes  refuge  in  rhapsody. 
His  last  work  on  the  philosophy  of  history  was  an  apocalyptic 
vision.  Speaking  generally,  his  philosophy  of  religion  is  a 
product  of  the  mythological  imagination. 

In  the  field  of  aesthetics,  too,  as  a  mystic  Solov'ev  followed 
Plato  and  Plotinus.  Among  recent  writers,  he  was  influenced 
by  Schopenhauer  and  Hegel. 

In  harmony  with  his  metaphysics  and  his  free  theosophy, 
beauty  is  defined  as  the  perfect  freedom  of  the  individual  parts 
in  the  completed  unity  of  the  whole  ;  the  uniting  element, 
unity,  uniformity,  is  the  yearning  of  the  philosopher,  who 
desires  to  escape  from  his  own  internal  disunion. 

The  beautiful  is  essentially  identical  \\^ith  the  good  and  the 
true.  The  artist's  aim  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  philosopher 
and  statesman.  All  three  desire  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  exist- 
ence. The  artist  embodies  his  ideas  in  pictures  ;  the  philosopher 
in  ideas  ;  the  statesman  in  actions.  BSlinskii  expressed  the 
same  thought,  but  Solov'ev  interprets  the  notion  in  the  sense 
of  his  mystical  theosophy,  for  to  him  an  idea  is  what  it  was 
to  Plato  and  Plotinus. 

He  frequently  indicates  his  view  that  artistic  genius  and 
enthusiasm  constitute  a  condition  sui  generis,  rendering  the 
enthusiast  (Solov'ev,  like  Plato,  conceives  artistic  inspiration 
as  a  kind  of  divine  possession)  capable  of  grasping  ideas  ; 
artistic  inspiration  verges  on  the  gift  of  prophecy  and  is 
essentially  akin  thereto. 

He  considers  that  the  force  of  imagination  is  an  element  ot 
primary  importance  in  artistic  creation.  For  him,  imagination 
is  an  intimation  of  the  higher  world  which,  in  virtue  of  this 
function  of  imagination,  is  able  to  come  into  touch  with  our 
phenomenal  world.  That  which  Schopenhauer  discerns  in 
music,  Solov'ev  discerns  in  poesy,  and  especially  in  lyric  verse, 
for  here  we  have  a  direct  grasp  of  ideas,  of  the  higher  world, 
Goethe,  Shakespeare,  and    Hoffmann,  are    the    chiefs   among 


270  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

poets  ;  in  this  realm  of  art  they  are  the  arch-controllers  of 
the  force  of  "fantastic  imagination,"  (Solov'ev  translated 
Hoffmann's  The  Golden  Pot  into  Russian.) 

Solov'ev  considers  art  higher  than  philosophy.  Artistic 
creation,  as  a  form  of  activity,  is  more  akin  than  philosophy 
to  moral  action  ;  it  is  an  image  of  the  divine  work  of  creation. 
Solov'ev's  views  concerning  the  mission  of  free  theurgy  have 
already  been  discussed. 

In  his  Three  Addresses  in  commemoration  of  Dostoevski! 
(1881-1883),  Solov'ev  expresses  the  hope  that  poesy,  the  poesy 
of  the  future,  will  reunite  itself  with  religion,  reconstituting 
the  union  that  existed  in  the  primitive  days  of  our  race,  when 
poets  were  prophets  and  priests.  He  discerns  in  Dostoevski! 
as  contrasted  v.'ith  the  artists  of  materialist  realism,  the  pre- 
cursor of  the  art  of  the  future,  which  will  work  in  free  association 
with  rehgion. 

By  his  antipathy  for  materialism,  Solov'ev  had  his  attention 
directed  to  the  definition  of  ugliness.  The  ugly  contrasts  with 
unity  and  harmony  ;  it  is  found  in  chaos,  and  in  the  opposition 
of  chaos  to  the  higher  world  and  to  ideas. 

Although  he  thus  clings  to  metaphysical  aesthetics,  from 
time  to  time  Solov'ev  gives  expression  to  more  realist  notions 
on  the  subject,  endeavouring,  for  exfanple,  to  furnish  a  syste- 
matic exposition  of  the  gradations  of  beauty  in  nature.  His 
classification  of  natural  beauties  is  based  upon  the  physical 
classifications  of  the  external  world.  First  comes  the  quiescent 
world  of  light — sun,  moon,  stars,  atmosphere  (the  rainbow), 
the  sea  in  a  calm,  matter  (the  noble  metals,  and  above  all 
the  diamond).  Next  comes  nature  in  motion.  Solov'ev  then 
gives  an  analysis  of  beauty  in  organic  life,  and  tells  us  that  the 
worm  is  here  the  archetype  of  ugliness  ;  living  beings  are 
beautiful  in  proportion  as  their  organisation  contrasts  with 
that  of  the  worm.  In  this  disquisition  Solov'ev  avails  himself 
of  modern  zoological  theories,  borrowing  in  especial  from  the 
ideas  of  Darwin. 

Solov'ev  wrote  a  few  studies  dealing  with  poets  he  admired. 
He  distinguished  three  categories  among  Russian  poets,  ac- 
cording to  the  degree  to  which  their  art  was  self-conscious 
Puskin's  relationship  to  his  creative  work  was  directly  organic, 
not  reflective.  By  reference  to  the  poems  wherein  Puskin 
wrote  concerning  poetry  and  the  poet,  Solov'ev  endeavoured, 
to  show  that  Puskin's  views  concerning  .art  and  the  artist's 


11 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  271 

mission  were  still  purely  naive  and  uncritical,  Solov'ev  took 
a  low  estimate  of  Pu§kin  as  a  thinker,  and  said  that  PuSkin's 
Byronism  was  superficial.  In  these  judgments  we  may  perhaps 
trace  the  influence  of  Pisarev  or  Tolstoi.  Unquestionably 
Solov'ev  failed  to  understand  the  significance  of  PuSkin's  Onfgin, 
and  failed  to  understand  the  general  significance  of  PuSkin's 
creative  work,  for  he  looked  upon  PuSkin  too  one-sidedly  as 
a  representative  of  pure  art.  In  Solov'ev's  article  The  Fate 
of  Puskin,  the  poet's  death  was  rightly  represented  as  self- 
ordained  destitiy  ;  but  the  analysis  of  Puskin's  relationship 
with  Madame  Kern  is  incomplete  and  biased,  whilst  the  poet's 
fondness  for  epigram  is  taken  amiss,  and  Uvarov  is  commended 
in  comparison.  This  study  by  Solov'ev  has  been  deservedly 
censured.^ 

Lermontov  and  Barjatynskii  are  poets  of  reflection.  That 
which  in  Pu§kin  was  the  expression  of  a  passing  mood,  was  in 
the  two  other  poets  the  outcome  of  definitive  conviction.  For 
them,  sceptical  and  pessimistic  reflection  became  a  constitutive 
element  of  creation  ;  there  was  a  rift  within  their  philosophy, 
and  this  disintegration  impaired  their  artistic  activities.  Sub- 
jective dissatisfaction,  says  Solov'ev  (speaking  here,  too,  in 
the  sense  of  his  doctrine  of  methodological  scepticism),  has 
notable  significance  as  providing  the  first  impulse  towards  self- 
consciousness  ;  thus  negation  is  essential,  but  what  is  abnormal 
and  futile  is  to  rest  in  negation,  to  find  satisfaction  in  per- 
sonal dissatisfaction.  Solov'ev  considers  that  Lermontov  shows 
strong  leanings  towards  Nietzscheanism  ;  towards  the  psycho- 
pathic idea  of  the  superman,  which  ascribes  superhuman 
importance  "  to  the  ego,  or  to  the  ego  and  company."  This  is 
the  complete  victory  of  egoism  and  of  contempt  for  mankind. 
No  doubt  the  principle  of  individuaUty  is  the  precondition  of 
the  most  intensive  awareness  of  the  content  of  hfe,  but  the 
principle  is  not  itself  that  content,  for  the  strong  ego  can  be 
void  of  content.  Lermontov  was  too  much  the  man  of  genius 
to  remain  void.  He  devoted  himself  to  love  ;  but  really,  says 
Solov'ev,  in  the  end  he  sang  only  the  praise  of  loving,  not  the 
beloved,  not  love  itself.  He  considers  that  Lermontov  dis- 
played  a   positively   demoniacal  ,wickedness   and    demoniacal 

I  Solov'ev  had  good  reason  for  his  critical  view  of  PuSkin's  relationship  with 
his  fellows  ;  but  it  was  inconsistent  of  Solov'ev  to  speak  of  Uvarov  as  the  most 
highly  cultivated  and  talented  of  Russian  ministers  for  education,  as  a  man 
whose  activities  were  peculiarly  fruitful. 


272  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

sensuality  ("  impurity  ")  ;  he  recognises  the  rehgious  spirit 
of  the  poet,  and  ascribes  to  him  the  mystical  faculty  of  so-called 
second  sight,  for  Lermontov  is  supposed  to  have  foreseen  the 
circumstances  of  his  death.  For  Solov'ev,  this  alleged  talent 
of  Lermontov  seems  a  confirmation  of  his  own  mysticism. 

The  third  category  comprises  the  poets  of  harmonious 
thought,  and  to  this  class  belong  Tjutcev  and  AleksSi  Tolstoi. 
Lermontov's  disintegration  has  been  overcome  ;  negation 
has  given  place  to  positivism.  In  Tolstoi,  moreover,  there  has 
been  superadded  the  factor  of  the  will,  of  the  love  of  struggle, 
impelling  towards  activity.  Solov'ev  recalls  the  satire  directed 
against  the  St.  Petersburg  officialdom,  published  in  Cerny§ev- 
skii's  periodical  during  the  fifties  and  sixties,  and  reissued  in 
book  form  in  1883.  The  work  was  professedly  written  by  a 
certain  Kozma  PetroviC  Prutkov,  but  was  really  composed 
by  A.  Tolstoi  and  A.  2emcu^nikov.  Solov'ev  had  an  affection 
for  Prutkov,  whom  he  imitated  ;  whilst  he  wrote  a  brief  but 
sympathetic  article  concerning  A.  2emCu^nikov. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Solov'ev's  literary  and  aesthetic 
studies  were  exclusively  concerned  with  the  lyric  poets.  The 
only  novelists  to  whom  he  referred  were  Dostoevskii  and 
L.  Tolstoi,  but  with  them  he  dealt,  not  from  the  aesthetic  out- 
look but  from  that  of  the  philosophy  of  religion.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  he  treated  of  the  development  of  nihilism  no 
more  than  casually  and  in  brief  annotations.  He  was  as  little 
interested  in  Turgenev's  Bazarov  as  in  OnSgin,  and  the  only 
novel  to  which  he  gave  detailed  attention  was  Lermontov's 
A  Hero  of  our  own  Time.  To  Cernysevskii's  What  is  to  be  Done 
he  made  no  more  than  a  passing  allusion,  as  an  attempt  to 
outbid  Fathers  and  Children,  whilst  artistic  appreciation  was 
expressed  for  GonCarov's  Oblomov  as  a  universal  Russian  type. 
He  frequently  mentioned  Tolstoi  ;  that  author's  literary 
judgments  were  quoted  on  occasions  ;  and  Tolstoi's  psychologi- 
cal analysis  met  with  Solov'ev's  approval.  But  on  the  whole, 
Solov'ev's  interest  in  Tolstoi  concerned  only  the  latter's  phi- 
losophy^ of  religion,  and  it  was  Solov'ev's  dissent  from  that 
philosophy  which  ultimately  led  him  into  conflict  with  Tolstoi. 

Dostoevskii  was  not  merely  congenial  to  Solov'ev,  but  was 
elevated  to  the  rank  of  a  prophet.  Proof  of  the  prophetic 
function  was  found  in  the  fact  (for  Solov'ev)  that  in  Crime 
and  Punish7nent  the  murder  committed  by  a  Moscow  student 
was  foreseen,  whilst  in  'The  Devils  the  NeSaev  trial  was  fore- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  "^      273 

shadowed.  Dostoevskii  did  not  merely  look  around  but  looked 
ahead  ;  he  possessed  a  philosophic  understanding  of  the  move- 
ment of  Russian  society  ;  he  deduced  from  this  movement  its 
inevitable  consequences,  and  passed  the  right  judgment  upon 
them.  As  a  revolutionary,  Dostoevskii  grasped  while  in  Siberia, 
and  recounted  in  The  House  of  the^  Dead,  that  he  had  erred,  and 
how  he  had  erred  ;  he  came  to  understand  that  Russia  could 
be  saved  in  no  other  way  than  hy  a  moral  rebirth.  Solov'ev 
discovered  in  Dostoevskii  his  own  theocratic  ideal.  Dos- 
toevskii's  speech  at  the  Puskin  festival,  with  its  reconciliation 
of  Slavophils  and  westerhisers,  had  really  formulated  the  pro- 
gram of  the  reconciliation  of  east  and  west  in  the  church 
universal. 

Solov'ev  was  on  terms  of  personal  friendship  with  Dostoevskii. 
In  1878  the  two  were  together  on  a  visit  at  the  monastery  of 
Optina  Pustyn.  It  is  remarkable  that  Solov'ev  gave  no  account 
of  Dostoevskii's  attitude  towards  Catholicism,^  but  Solov'ev 
had  no  understanding  of  Dostoevskii's  real  nature. 

Like  Homjakov,  Solov'ev  occasionally  expounded  his  ideas 
upon  the  philosophy  of  rehgion  in  m.etrical  form.  His  poems 
convey  an  impression  of  truth,  and  some  of  them  are  excellent. 
Apart  from  these  verses  on  the  philosophy  of  rehgion  and  others 
of  a  more  directly  religious  nature,  distinguished  by  their 
sincerity  are  the  biographical  sketches  wherein  the  poet  endea- 
voured to  give  a  psychological  description  (affective  in  its  colour 
for  the  most  part)  of  his  feelings  at  the  time  of  writing.  In 
Solov'ev's  philosophy,  above  all  in  his  theosophy  but  also  in 
his  ecclesiastical  history,  we  trace  the  poet.  His  translation 
of  Plato  was  to  some  extent  the  outcome  of  an  artistic  imipulse. 
It  was  the  same  impulse,  doubtless,  which  led  him  to  translate 
part  of  Dante's  Vita  Nuova  and  the  before-mentioned  work  by 
Hoffmann. 

Solov'ev  carried  on  a  vigorous  campaign  against  the  deca- 
dents and  the  s^'-mbolists.  This  is  psychologically  noteworthy, 
seeing  that  he  himself  was  a  great  symbolist,  and  seeing  that 
the  general  impression  he  produces  on  our  minds  is  that  he  was 
a  decadent  strugghng  towards  regeneration.  The  pathological 
aspects  of  his  mysticism  and  asceticism,  the  fondness  he  dis- 
played for  the  mysterious,  the  attempt  to  transcend  Kantian 

I  Th6\^  third  address  in  commemoration  of  Dostoevskii  was  delivered  in  1883, 
at  a  time  when  Solov'ev  had  already  been  strongly  influenced  in  the  direction 
of  CathoHcism, 

19  VOL.    II. 


274  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

criticism  and  Comptist  positivism  by  gnosticism,  his  romanticist 
return  towards  the  old  theology  and  the  old  religion,  may  all, 
I  believe,  be  considered  indications  of  decadence. 


§  148. 

N    the    year   1899,    Solov'ev   published    in    the    periodical 

"  Nedelja  "  an  apocalyptic  picture  of  the  end  of  the  world. 
He  himself  termed  this  writing  a  work  of  genius,  and  the  judg- 
ment was  endorsed  by  his  friends  and  adherents. 

Solov'ev's  apocalypse  is  certainly  of  great  philosophical 
interest,  and  in  our  general  appreciation  of  this  writer  it  is 
important  to  note  the  manner  in  which  his  vicM^s  on  the 
philosophy  of  history  underwent  modification  towards  the 
close  of  his  career. 

First,  however,  we  must  briefly  recount  the  contents  of  the 
three  discourses.^ 

At  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century,  Japan  awakens 
the  slumbering  energies  of  China  and  unites  the  Mongol  races. 
During  the  ensuing  half-century,  Europe  falls  a  prey  to  the 
Asiatics.  At  first  the  unprepared  Russian  army  is  defeated  ; 
the  Germans  gain  a  great  victory  ;  but  -the  French  now  enter 
into  an  alliance  with  the  Asiatics,  and  the  Germans  are  given 
honourable  conditions  of  demobilisation.  The  French  army 
gets  out  of  hand,  and  Paris,  where  there  has  been  a  rising  of 
the  sanspatrie  workmen,  opens  its  gates  to  the  bogdyhan 
[Russian  title  for  Chinese  emperor].  The  English  buy  his  favour, 
paying  for  a  pledge  that  he  will  not  attack  England.  This 
subjugation  brings  the  various  European  nations  to  their  senses  ; 
they  effect  their  political  unification  ;  the  Mongol  yoke  is  shaken 
off  after  a  decisive  victory  of  European  arms  has  been  secured 
in  the  plains  of  Russia.  The  old  European  monarchies  dis- 
appear ;  the  United  States  of  Europe  are  organised  "  more  or 
less  democratically  "  ;  at  their  head  is  the  superman  as  life- 
long president.  No  long  time  elapses  before  this  president, 
who  has  acquired  world-wide  reputation  by  a  work  entitled 
The  Open  Way  to  Universal  Peace  and  Well  Being,  is,  as  a  mark 
of  general  recognition,  elected  Roman  emperor. 

I  Three  Discussions  concerning  War,  Progress,  and  the  End  of  the  History, 
including  a  short  story  of  the  antichrist,  with  appendixes,  pubhshed  in  1899 
and  1900  in  "  NedSlja,"  and  reprinted  in  book  form  in  1900.  Two  Enghsh 
translations  have  been  published. 


I 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  275 

The  new  emperor  is  antichrist,  though  an  antichrist  of  an 
extremely  progressive  type.  He  beUeves  in  the  good,  he  beheves 
in  God  and  Christ  ;  but  his  love  is  given  to  himself  alone.  He 
is  abstemious,  disinterested,  and  gentle  ;  he  is  a  spiritualist, 
an  ascetic,  a  philanthropist,  and  even  a  philozoist  ;  but  he 
considers  himself  greater  than  Christ,  whom  he  regards  with 
boundless  envy  and  hatred. 

.  In  outward  aspect,  the  civilisation  of  the  new  United  States 
is  dazzling  and  resplendent,  but  the  inner  spiritual  life  remains 
unsatisfied.  Through  the  advances  in  psychology  and  physi- 
ology, the  problems  of  "  life  and  death,"  of  the  end  of  the 
world  and  of  mankind,  are  rendered  more  complicated,  but 
are  not  solved,  all  that  is  attained  being  a  purely  negative 
result.     A  notable  decay  of  theoretical  materialism  sets  in. 

Antichrist  establishes  his  world  monarch}^  and  introduces 
social  reforms,  by  which  everyone  is  remunerated  in  accordance 
with  his  capacities,  every  capacity  in  accordance  with  work 
and  service  ;  there  ensues  the  equality  of  universal  satiety. 
The  satiated,  hov/ever,  as  in  ancient  Rome,  desire  circuses  as 
well  as  bread.  These  are  provided  for  them  by  a  magian 
(a  half  oriental,  half  European,  bishop  in  partibus)  with  the 
aid  of  the  acquirements  of  natural  science.  Antichrist  having 
at  length  removed  his  capital  from  Rome  to  Jerusalem,  now 
summons  a  general  council  of  the  Christian  population,  reduced 
by  this  time  to  forty-five  millions.  In  Jerusalem  he  is  unmasked, 
and  the  leaders  of  the  three  principal  churches,  Peter  II,  John, 
and  Professor  Paul  (the  respective  representatives  of  Petrine, 
Johannine,  and  PauUne  Christianity  ;  of  Catholicism,  Orthodoxy, 
and  Protestantism),  unite  in  brotherly  love  at  a  remote  and 
solitary  spot.  John  and  Paul  recognize  Peter  as  shepherd  of 
the  united  flocks.  The  Jews,  who  to  the  number  of  thirty 
millions  have  settled  in  Palestine,  rise  against  the  antichrist, 
who  has  announced  himself  to  them  as  a  Jew  and  the  messiah, 
Christ  now  appears  for  the  last  judgment,  and  the  millennium 
dawns. 

It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  picture  of  the  future,  Solov'ev 
accepts  the  widely  diffused  philosophico-historical  view  of  the 
pessimists  and  socialists  that  a  cataclysm  is  imminent,  and 
that  he  shows  us  the  development  of  civilisation  brought  to  a 
close.  Mankind  has  become  senile  ;  European  civilisation 
has  by  the  growth  of  positivism,  materiahsm,  and  socialism, 
been   transformed  into   a   Chinese  system  ;    consequently   the 


27G  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

actual  China  is  destined  to  devour  Europe  with  all  her  civilisa- 
tion and  all  her  progress.  Europe  will  succumb  to  the  "  yellow 
peril,"  from  within  and  from  without. 

Solov'ev  received  the  impulse  to  this  vision  from  Finland 
in  1894,  when  he  was  contemplating  the  Finnish  nationahst 
movement.  We  learn  this  from  his  poem  Panmongolism, 
wherein  he  sees  the  yellow  peril  knocking  at  the  gates  of  St. 
Petersburg  and  of  the  winter  palace.  Some  years  later,  he 
was  profoundly  impressed  by  the  expedition  of  the  western 
powers  against  China.  The  speech  of  Emperor  William  to 
the  soldiers  leaving  for  China  aroused  his  enthusiasm.  William 
seemed  to  him  the  successor  of  the  Christian  crusaders.  Shortly 
before  his  death  he  dedicated  to  the  German  emperor  his  poem 
The  Dragon.     The  new  Siegfried  was  to  save  Christendom. 

Solov'ev's  disciples  admire  the  Three  Discussions  as  a 
veritable  prophecy,  but  in  my  opinion  this  view  is  exaggerated. 
In  Russia,  relationships  with  Asia  arouse  keener  feelings  than 
among  us  in  the  west,  and  the  so-called  yellow  peril  is  more 
strongly  felt.  As  long  ago  as  1887,  I  was  frequently  told  of 
the  danger  threatening  from  the  east,  and  was  assured  that 
even  among  the  common  people  a  fear  of  China  was  widespread. 
Mihailovskii,  giving  a  description  of  Solov'ev's  vision,  refers 
to  numerous  other  Russian  and  European  prophesies  of  the 
yellow  peril. 

The  vision  of  antichrist  seems  weak  to  me,  and  especially 
weak  do  I  consider  the  onslaught  on  Tolstoi.  Antichrist  is 
Tolstoi  himself.  Tolstoi's  Buddhistic  doctrine  of  non-resistance 
exasperated  Solov'ev,  for  Solov'ev  had  long  been  of  opinion 
that  "  cross  and  sword  are  one."  Solov'ev  had  hoped  at  first 
that  he  and  Tolstoi  would  be  able  to  work  jointly  on  behalf  of 
Solov'ev's  religious  ideal,  but  personal  intercourse  between 
the  two  men  was  frequently  broken  off.  As  far  back  as  1884 
Solov'ev  had  confided  to  common  friends  his  doubts  concerning 
Tolstoi's  trustworthiness.  At  length,  in  the  Three  Discussions, 
Solov'ev  definitely  formulated  his  opposition  to  Tolstoi. 

The-  description  of  antichrist  recalls  Dostoevskii's  grand 
inquisitor,  and  in  the  figure  of  antichrist  we  may  likewise  dis-. 
cern  traces  of  the  Nietzschean  superman.  In  Solov'ev's  delinea- 
tion, Tolstoi  appears  not  merely  futile,  null,  and  prone  to  fallacy, 
but  a  deliberate  cheat.  Solov'ev  pursues  his  opponent  with 
ardent  hatred,  which  finds  expression  both  in  the  general 
picture   and  in   certain   prominent   details.     Without   further 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  27f 

ado,  Tolstoi's  thoughts  of  suicide  are  transformed  into  an  attempt 
at  suicide  on  the  part  of  the  dissatisfied  superman.  His  Hfe  is 
saved  in  miraculous  fashion  by  the  devil,  who  then  instils  into 
the  superman  a  man-controlling  energy. 

This  hatred  blinded  Solov'ev  and  weakened  his  artistic 
faculty.  His  apocalypse  does  not  for  a  moment  bear  com- 
parison with  its  Johannine  exemplar.  Solov'ev's  writing  is 
didactic,  rhetorical,  and  overladen.  In  points  of  detail  the 
quality  of  his  analysis  is  here  and  thera  extremely  questionable, 
as  when  he  tells  us  that  the  election  of  the  emperor  is  under- 
taken at  the  desire  of  the  freemasons,  who  are  made  to  appear 
the  real  leaders  of  European  politics.  Moreover,  the  positive 
element,  the  description  of  the  Christian  leaders,  is  lacking  in 
strength.  The  Fichtean  and  Schellingian  formula  of  the 
Johannine  church  of  the  future  is  realised  in  an  unduly  pro- 
fessorial manner. 

Many  other  objections  could  doubtless  be  raised  to  the 
historico-philosophical  criticism  embodied  in  the  work.  Abov^ 
all  does  it  seem  questionable  to  me  whether  in  the  figure  of  anti- 
christ, Solov'ev  has  rightly  characterised  the  dangers  of  the 
present  day.  I  am  confirmed  in  this  doubt  when  I  read  the 
preface  to  the  reissue  in  book  form.  Solov'ev  here  refers  to 
the  importance  of'Islam  and  panislamism,  a  matter  discussed 
by  him  in  a  further  but  unpublished  prophetical  work.  He 
speaks  of  the  possibility  that  the  end  of  the  world  may  be 
deferred  for  another  two  or  three  centuries,  whereas  elsewhere 
he  gives  us  to  understand  that  the  end  may  be  expected  in  the 
immediate  future  Surely  a  prophet  should  be  a  little  less 
•  vague  about  dates  ! 

If  we  are  to  regard  this  polemic  against  Tolstoi  as  a  literary 
monument  of  the  revival  of  prophecy,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  venture  is  somewhat  ineffective.  The  rules  which 
Solov'ev  himself  formulated  for  the  recognition  of  the  true 
prophet  are  not  fulfilled — though  we  may  doubt  whether  in 
these  rules  Solov'ev  was  entirely  successful  in  defining  the 
concept  of  the  modern  prophet.  In  Solov'ev's  writings,  the 
figures  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets  blend  with  the  figure  of 
Socrates  (this  does  not  accord  very  well  with  his  Platonism), 
and  above  all  he  recognises  Dostoevskii  as  a  divinely  sent  seer. 
But  in  addition  to  Dostoevskii,  the  leading  Russian  imaginative 
thinkers  are  "hailed  as  prophets. 

Characteristic    of   Solov'ev   is   the    opposition    to  Tolstoi. 


278  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Solov'ev,  like  Tolstoi,  is  at  odds  with  the  Orthodox  church  ; 
Solov'ev,  like  Tolstoi,  assigns  a  modest  role  to  the  under- 
standing ;  both  thinkers  have  a  special  fondness  for  Schopen- 
hauer and  Kant;  Solov'ev,  too,  stresses,  above  all,  the  moral 
aspects  of  religion  and  philosophj^ — and  yet  Solov'ev  discerns 
in  Tolstoi  the  figure  of  antichrist  ! 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  antichrist  embodies  large  elements 
of  self-criticism.  Solov'ev' s  polemic  writing  is  often  strongly 
worded  precisely  because  the  author  is  endeavouring  to  convince 
himself.     Tolstoi  is  his  own  uneasy  conscience. 

During  the  closing  years  of  his  life,  Solov'ev  succumbed 
to  a  pessimistic  mood,  and  this  can  be  discerned  in  the  anti- 
christ figure.  In  fact,  Solov'ev  completely  abandoned  his 
earlier  policy  of  ecclesiasticism.  In  the  Three  Discussions 
the  messianic  mission  of  the  Russian  people  and  of  the  tsar 
has  completely  disappeared.  We  do  not  find  that  a  union  of 
the  churches  is  effected  as  a  precondition  for  theocracy.  The 
three  churches  are  reconciled  during  the  last  days,  those  im- 
mediately preceding  Christ's  second  advent-;  and  the  reunion 
takes  place  without  any  assistance  from  the  state.  The  tsar, 
meanwhile,  and  the  tsarist  realm,  have  disappeared  with  the 
formation  of  the  democratic  United  States  of  Europe.  No 
more  than  forty-five  millions  of  Christians  remain,  a  com- 
paratively small  body  of  believers,  who  stand  firm,  however, 
in  the  faith,  and  can  therefore  effect  the  union  of  the  churches — 
just  before  the  closing  of  the  gates. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  earlier  ecclesiastical  policy  has  been 
wholly  abandoned,  and  that  the  union  of  the  churches  takes 
place  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  Protestant  ecclesi- 
astical policy  a  la  Schelling.  Russians  and  the  Russian  church 
are  somewhat  scurvily  treated  in  Three  Discissions.  In  further 
proof  of  this  assertion,  I  may  mention  that  at  the  council 
Solov'ev  makes  the  emperor  win  over  the  Russians  by  providing 
them  with  funds  for  the  construction  of  a  universal  museum 
for  Christian  archeology.  In  return  for  this,  most  of  the  hier- 
archs  of  the  east  and  the  north,  half  of  the  old  believers,  and 
more  than  half  of  the  Orthodox  priests,  monks,  and  laymen, 
espouse  the  emperor's  cause. 

Manifestly  a  precise  census  would  notably  reduce  the  forty- 
five  milHons  of  "  genuine  Christians." 

In  actual  fact,  Solov'ev  had  lost  his  vigorous  faith,  not  only 
in  the  tsar  but  also  in  the  Russian  people.     We  learn  from  his 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  279 

biography  that  as  early  as  1891  this  faith  had  been  seriously 
shaken  when  he  witnessed  the  devastations  of  the  famine  and 
the  apathetic  inertia  of  society.  At  this  epoch  he  conceived 
constitutionalist  hopes,  but  did  not  cherish  them  for  long.  For 
a  time,  even,  he  had  thoughts  of  revolution,  a  revolution  of  a 
somewhat  quaint  character.  He  seriously  believed  that  he 
would  be  able  to  persuade  General  Dragomirov  and  one  of  the 
dissatisfied  princes  of  the  church  to  place  themselves  at  the 
head  of  the  movement,  and  that  the  army  and  the  people 
would  thus  be  won  over.  Solov'ev's  friends  killed  this  great 
design  by  their  ridicule. 

In  1894,  he  produced  PanmongoUsm,  a  work  in  which  he 
had  conceived  the  fall  of  the  third  Romie,  without  however 
following  the  example  of  the  old  Moscow  chronicler,  and  mooting 
the  possibility  of  a  fourth  Rome. 

Writing  in  1896  upon  the  relationship  of  Byzantinism  to 
Russia,  Solov'ev  again  displayed  his  scepticism  concerning 
the  mission  of  the  third  Rome. 

Coming  now  to  the  period  in  which  the  antichrist  was  con- 
ceived, we  find  numerous  documentary  proofs  that  Solov'ev 
had  abandoned  his  messianic  designs.  In  1898  he  penned  an 
essay  to  controvert  the  opinions  of  those  who  looked  for  the 
solution  of  the  Russian  and  European  question  to  be  effected 
after  some  centuries  by  the  simple  law  of  superior  force,  and 
with  the  aid  of  the  four  hundred  millions  to  which  by  then 
the  population  of  Russia  was  to  have  increased.  Solov'ev 
declared  that  many  uncertain  elements  entered  into  such 
calculations  ;  he  pointed  out  that  in  the  interior  administrative 
districts  of  Russia  the  population  had  ceased  to  increase  ;  and 
he  appealed  to  "  reflective  and  disquieting"  patriotism  to  attend 
without  delay  to  its  duties  of  conscience. 

He  had  also  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Europe  is  less 
corrupt  than  he  had  imagined  in  earlier  years,  when  he  had 
regarded  positivism  and  socialism  as  affording  the  most  striking 
manifestations  of  estrangement  from  God. 

In  like  manner,  he  had  altered  his  attitude  towards  the 
revolutionaries  and  the  radicals. 

In  the  autumn  of  1898,  dehvering  a  lecture  on  Belinskii. 
he  represented  that  writer  as  an  apostle  of  humanitarianism 
and  of  practical  Christianity.  BeUnskii's  only  defect  was  that 
he  had  not  found  the  true  faith.  Solov'ev  blames  himself, 
however,  for  having  allowed  his  attention  to  be  monopoHsed 


280  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

by  the  still  insoluble  question  of  the  union  of  the  churches, 
whilst  disregarding  those  more  injmediate  interests  of  the 
present  to  which  B^linskii  was  devoted.  "  Mea  culpa," 
exclaims  Solov'ev,  "  mea  maxima  culpa  !  " 

During  this  same  year,-  Solov'ev  penned  an  extremely 
cordial  commemorative  essay  on  Cernysevskii  which  could 
not  be  pubhshed  until  after  the  writer's  death.  ExtolUng 
Cernysevskii' s  character,  he  showed  that  the  government 
had  committed  a  crime  against  "  this  wise  and  just  man." 
Solov'ev  had  hoped  to  write  more   fully  about   Cernysevskii. 

Coming  last  of  all  to  the  Antichrist,  we  find  that  in  this 
work  the  change  in  Solov'ev's  views  on  the  philosophy  of 
history  is  most  conspicuous.  Not  merely  has  he  abandoned 
the  idea  of  Russia's  mission,  but  he  would  seem  to  have  held 
less  favourable  views  of  Cathohcism  now  than  of  yore.  His 
description  of  the  pope,  his  reference  to  the  Cathohc  magian, 
and  finally  the  flight  of  the  pope  (who  flees  to  St.  Petersburg 
to  escape  the  emperor,  secures  there  a  friendly  reception,  but 
is  cautioned  against  carrying  on  propaganda  in  Russia) — all 
these  details  would  seem  to  confirm  the  impression  that  Solov'ev 
had  grown  out  of  tune  with  Cathohcism  and  the  .papacy. 

Let  me  reiterate,  in  conclusion,  that  his  fierce  onslaught 
o*n  Tolstoi  was  in  truth  directed  against  the  rebel  within  himself. 
Antichrist  displays  the  inner  cleavage  of  Solov'ev's  personal 
experience.  On  the  one  hand  he  is  forced  to  concede  that  Kant 
was  right,  and  under  the  influence  of  Kantian  thought  he  wrote 
his  Ethics,  a  second  edition  of  this  work,  very  carefully  revised, 
having  been  pubhshed  in  the  same  year  as  Antichrist.  Here, 
following  Kant,  the  whole  outlook  on  the  universe  is  based  upon 
morality.  On  the  other  han'd,  Solov'ev  could  not  completely 
free  himself  from  the  opinions  of  his  church  and  of  the  Slavophils, 
Being  unable  to  dispense  with  the  mystical  element  in  rehgion, 
he  could  not  break  with  the  church  and  church  tradition  as 
Tolstoi  had  done.  "  Not  only  do  I  beheve  in  everything  super- 
natural, but,  to  speak  accurately,  I  beheve  in  nothing  else." 
These  word^,  written  in  1887  in  the  Letter  to  Strahov,  give  terse 
expression  to  Solov'ev's  religious  sentiments  as  contrasted 
with  those  of  Tolstoi.  They  explain  why  Solov'ev  inchned  to 
the  ideas  of  Dostoevski!,  and  why  he  could  never  wholly  agree 
with  Tolstoi.  Solov'ev's  faith  demanded  miracle.  Behef  in 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  was  for  Solov'ev  the  most  important 
doctrine  of  all,  for  Solov'ev  dreaded  death,  which  he  interpreted 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  281 

as  the  manifest  victory  of  non-sense  over  sense,  of  chaos  over 
cosmos.  In  a  letter  to  Tolstoi,  Solov'ev  expressed  his  dissent 
from  the  latter's  views  in  respect  of  one  concrete  particular,  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection. 

Kant  versus  Plato,  criticism  versus  myth  and  mysticism, 
such  is  the  momentous  contrast. 


§  149- 

SOLOV'EV'S  general  trend  and  the  purport  of  his  philo- 
sophical and  religious  aspirations  make  him  appear  as  a 
successor  of  the  Slavophils  and  a  continuer  of  their  work,  that 
of  Kireevskii  and  Homjakov  at  least.  But  in  Solov'ev  the 
mystical  element  is  much  stronger,  is  denser,  I  might  say, 
and  more  opaque.  His  criticism  and  negation,  of  Byzantium 
and  Old  Russia  has  much  in  corhmon  with  Caadaev,  for  Solov'ev 
and  Caadaev  displayed  similar  leanings  towards  Catholicism. 

Solov'ev's  critical  side  brought  him  into  association  with  the 
westernisers  and  the  liberals,  although  these  by  no  means 
approved  of  his  mysticism.  Cicerin  and  Ravelin  both  protested 
against  Solov'ev's  mysticism,  being  concerned,  of  course,  not 
solely  with  the  distinction  in  individual  points  of  teaching, 
but  with  the  entire  trend  and  mood.  Compare,  for  example, 
Solov'ev  with  Mihailovskii  ;  how  great  is  the  contrast  between 
the  positivist  critic,  the  "  profane  "  man,  and  the  mystical 
prophet. 

Mysticism  and  the  philosophy  of  religion  brought  Solov'ev 
for  a  time  into  association  vdth  Katkov  and  Leont'ev,  the 
latter,  during  his  closing  years,  being  much  disquieted  by 
Solov'ev's  philosophy  of  history  and  by  his  criticism  of  the 
Russian  church  and  of  the  Orthodox  church  in  general.  Solov'ev 
defended  Dostoevskii  against  Lecnt'ev's  accusation  of  "  new  " 
Christianity,  but  it  was  characteristic  that  Solov'ev  should 
have  completely  failed  to  Recognise  the  devastating  internal 
struggle  with  nihilism  that  was  taking  place  in  Dostoevskii's 
mind. 

Solov'ev  shunned  intercourse  with  the  socialists  and  the 
narodniki,  for  he  detested  economic  materialism  and  "  econo- 
mism  "  in  general.  Religious  prejudice  (I  can  use  no  other 
term)  made  it  impossible  for  Solov'ev  to  understand  socialism. 
If  he  regarded  socialism  as  nothing  more  than  the  extremest 
manifestation   of   bourgeois   civihsation,   it   was   because   his 


282  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

attention  was  exclusively  concentrated  on  metaphysical  material- 
ism and  positivism.  He  failed  to  discern  the  great  political 
and  social  movement  of  the  masses,  and  failed  to  grasp  its 
ethical  significance.  From  the  liberals,  too,  he  might  well 
be  repelled  by  their  religious  indifferentism  ;  but  there  were 
some  liberals  of  religious  inclinations,  and  notably  Solov'ev's 
own  opponents,  Cicerin  and  Kavelin.  By  his  conception  of 
progress,  Solov'ev  was  compelled  to  regard  the  modern  civilisa- 
tion of  Europe  secularised  by  the  reformation,  as  an  advance 
upon  the  religious  society  of  former  days.  It  is  true  that 
Voltaire,  as  adversary  of  the  old  (and  ununified)  church,  was 
necessarily  uncongenial  to  him,  but  he  could  not  fail  to  recognise 
the  Christian  in  the  Frenchman's  humanitarian  efforts. 

It  seems  to  me  that  his  attitude  towards  Voltaire  was 
characteristic  of  Solov'ev's  vacillations  between  rationalism 
and  mysticism. 

In  Russia,  Solov'ev's  espousal  of  the  cause  of  religion  was 
an  important  and  noteworthy  act,  seeing  that  the  new  and 
non-academic  philosophy  had  been  antireligious.  Herzen, 
Belinskii,  Bakunin,  Cernysevskii,  Dobroljubov,  Pisa.rev,  Mihailov- 
skii,  Lavrov,  the  Marxists,  and  most  of  the  narodniki,  had  been 
disciples  of  Feuerbach  and  Comte.  Solov'ev,  on  the  other  hand, 
though  at  the  outset  he  had  shared  their  antireligious  philosophy, 
soon  took  the  field  as  an  opponent  of  their  basic  theories,  alike 
in  the  theoretical  and  in  the  practical  field.  Faith  which 
Granovskii  had  tacitly  cherished,  which  half  ashamedly  he  had 
defended  against  Herzen,  was  championed  by  Solov'ev  with  the 
armoury  of  a  thoroughly  cultivated  philosophical  mind. 

Starting  from  the  extant  ecclesiastical  theology,  Solov'ev 
attempted  to  reconstitute  that  theology  on  philosophical  lines, 
but  he  endeavoured  more  than  he  was  himself  willing  to  admit 
to  preserve  the  foundations  of  the  Russian  church,  to  preserve 
its  dogma,  its  ritual,  and  its  mysticism.  If  the  majority  of 
Solov'ev's  theological  adversaries  failed  to  note  this  clearly, 
it  was  because  they  themselves  adhered  to  Solov'ev's  views 
upon  church  history  and  church  politics.  In  this  connection  it 
was  not  difficult  to  demonstrate  Solov'ev's  errors.  Guettee, 
for  instance,  was  right  in  declaring  that  Solov'ev's  historical 
outlook  on  the  filioque  controversy  was  unsound.  As  I  have 
mentioned  Guettee,  it  may  be  interesting  to  recall  that  this 
French  priest  and  ecclesiastical  historian,  was  (just  like  Baader, 
the   Catholic   philosopher,    who  was   influenced  by   Solov'ev) 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  •  288 

inclined  towards  Orthodoxy  by  the  study  of  theology.  Guettde 
was  ultimately  received  into  the  Orthodox  church. 

To  the  official  representatives  of  the  church  and  of  "  coercive 
theology,"  Solov'ev's  free  theology  and  free  theocracy  were 
a  stumbling-block,  Solov'ev's  campaign  on  behalf  of  freedom 
of  conscience  deserves  full  recognition, 

Solov'ev  saw  clearly  enough  that  the  outward  "  temple 
Christianity  "  was  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  inward  "  family 
Christianity,"  and  yet  he  could  not  himself  abandon  the  temple 
of  the  Pharisees — for  there  are,  in  truth,  honest  Pharisees. 

"  Men  of  action  live  a  life  apart,  but  it  is  not  they  who  create 
life,  not  they,  but  the  men  of  faith  !  Those  who  are  called 
fantasts,  utopists,  imbeciles,  these  are  the  prophets,  these  are 
the  best  of  men  and  the  leaders  of  mankind  !  "  Solov'ev  did 
not  realise  that  Belinskii,  Herzen,  Cernysevskii,  and  the  other 
"  just  men  "  of  modern  da^'s,  likewise  had  faith,  and  sacrificed 
their  lives  to  their  faith,  Solov'ev's  own  faith  was  hardly 
stronger.  His  own  theory  of  faith  should  have  enabled  him  to 
comprehend  the  faith  of  others.  What  was  the  real  content 
of  belief  in  the  respective  camps  ?  In  which  camp  were*  the 
better  men  to  be  found  ?  Does  a  Katkov  or  a  Pobedonoscev 
bear  comparison  for  a  moment  with  a  Belinskii  or  a  Cernysevskii  ? 

The  critics  have  drawn  attention  to  one  pecuharity  in 
Solov'ev's  letters.  Side  by  side  with  the  humorous  cheerfulness 
which  breathes  from  his  confidential  utterances  to  his  friends, 
we  discover  a  scathing  cynicism,  a  cynical  irony  concerning 
himself  and  his  most  sacred  feeUngs,  reUgious  feehngs  not 
excepted.  The  fact  is  undeniable,  but  the  explanation  of  this 
cynicism  is  very  different  from  that  suggested  by  the  aforesaid 
critics.  We  shall  have  to  discuss  this  matter  in  fuller  detail 
when  we  come  to  deal  with  Dostoevskii,  and  for  the  present 
it  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  circumstance,  and  to  say  that 
such  cynicism  could  not  exist  in  the  absence  of  a  profound 
inner  scepticism, 

Solov'ev  suffered  from  spiritual  disintegration.  He  himself 
declared  that  the  disintegration  of  modern  man  was  due  to 
incapacity  for  uniting  heaven  with  earth.  Now  Solov'ev 
himself  was  unable  to  harmonise  the  past  with  the  present. 
He  was  unequal  to  the  task  ;  he  desired  to  be  a  Christian, 
but  his  metaphysic  was  Platonist,  not  evangehcal.  He  wished 
to  save  monotheism,  but  pantheism  was  too  strong  for  him, 
and  his  god,  who  was  "  more  than  personality,"  had  less  re- 


284  -  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

semblance  to  Jesus  than  to  the  god  of  Spinoza.  Of  Jesus,  the 
great  adversary  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  there  remains 
little  for  Solov'ev,  In  the  end,  therefore,  theology  gains  the 
victory  over  Solov'ev's  philosophy  ;  Kant  is  not  transcended, 
but  sacrificed  ;  a  Utopian  philosophy  and  theocracy  are  built 
up,  incompetent  to  lead  either  theoretically  or  practically  to 
any  desired  goal.  The  absolute  all  and  all-in-one,  and  its 
unfolding  in  the  world  process,  shrinks  to  the  ideal  of  a  papistical 
church  universal ;  the  religion  of  universalised  humanity  can 
offer  us  in  the  end  nothing  more  than  the  vague  content  of  an 
ecclesiastico-political  imperialism  ;  _  religion,  in  place  of  a  belief 
in  Jesus,  gives  us  a  belief  in  signs  and  wonders  ;  a  morbid  and 
multiform  mysticism  is  elevated  to  the  position  of  intimate 
essence  of  religion. 

Yet  the  very  weaknesses  of  his  philosophy  of  religion  and 
of  his  religious  outlook,  secured  for  Solov'ev  numerous  and 
enthusiastic  disciples.  These  disciples  and  Solov'ev  himself 
were  signs  of  the  times,  indications  of  an  incomplete  transition 
from  the  past.  As  so  often  happens,  the  master's  weaknesses 
were  more  conspicuous  in  the  pupils.  Solov'ev  found  it  diffi- 
cult to  tolerate  quite  a  number  of  his  followers,  and  engaged 
in  controversy  with  some  of  them. 

Solov'ev's  significance  for  the  development  of  Russian 
philosophy  was  very  great.    . 

I  have  already  pointed  out  that  Solov'ev  had  had  a  thorough 
philosophical  training.  I  mean  that  Solov'ev  had  studied 
ancient  and  modern  philosophy  thoroughly,  and  as  a  specialist. 
His  real  significance,  however,  lay  in  this,  that  he  was  the  first 
Russian  to  study  the  Kantian  criticism  in  all  its  bearings  ;  he 
was  the  first  Russian  who  thought  the  whole  question  over 
anew  for  himself  ;  and  he  was  the  first  who  attempted  to 
transcend  the  Kantian  criticism  by  a  .criticism  of  his  own. 
Solov'ev  learned  from  many  sources,  and  adopted  philosophical 
details  from  many  different  writers,  but  from  Kant  he  derived 
his  epistemological  criticism.  A  number  of  philosophers  of 
academic  status  had  discussed  Kant  before  Solov'ev  ;  Solov'ev 
himself  heard  much  of  Kant  from  Jurkevic  ;  but  Jurkevic's 
study  of  Kant  was  not  fandamental.  Solov'ev,  as  a  grateful 
pupil,  was  embarrassed  by  this  without  realising  it — or  at  any 
rate,  when  speaking  of  JurkeviC,  he  failed  to  allude  to  the 
matter. 

Solov'ev  fully  reahsed  that  the  Kantian  criticism  marked 


THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  285 

a  turning  point  in  the  evolution  of  human  thought,  and  he 
reaUsed  why  this  was  so.  In  the  ethical  sphere,  Solov'ev  even 
believed  that  Kant  had  estabhshed  the  basis  of  ethics  for  all 
time.  It  seemed  to  Solov'ev  that  the  categorical  imperative 
was  as  certain  as  are  the  axioms  of  pure  mathematics. 

Solov'ev  understood  the  problem,  formulated  by  Kant,  of 
subjectivism  versus  objectivism  ;  and  he  realised  that  Kant 
failed  to  discover  the  epistemological  solution  of  this  problem, 
remaining  entangled  in  a  powerless  subjectivism  and  apriorism. 
Solov'ev  set  to  work,  building-  upon  a  Kantian  foundation 
and  using  Kantian  methods,  to  attempt  .his  own  solution.  He 
had  learned  frorri  Kant  that  the  cognition  of  the  thing-by-itself 
must  really  be  the  cognition  of  God,  must  be  a  creative  and 
purely  intellectual  intuition,  which  after  all  originates  in 
man.  Solov'ev's  creative  and  imaginative  behef  was  to  replace 
Kant's  creative  intellectual  intuition.  Solov'ev  had  learned 
from  Kant  that  criticism  led  back  to  faith.  He  heard  with 
gladness  the  tidings  of  this  mission  ;  and  since  Kant  did  not 
furnish  any  cogent  doctrines,  Solov'ev  returned  to  the  faith 
of  the  fathers  of  the  eastern  church,  borrowing  the  while  in 
addition  from  Plato,  Spinoza,  Jacob  Boehme,  and  many  others. 

The  attempt  to  effect  an  organic  union  between  criticism 
and  mysticism  failed,  and  could  not  but  fail.  Solov'ev  was, 
however,  cautious  enough  to  follow  Kant  in  estabUshing  reHgion, 
too,  upon  an  ethical  foundation.  He  was,  I  repeat,  cautious. 
He  could  not  but  feel  the  inadequacy  of  his  attempt,  and  for 
this  very  reason  the  internal  warfare  waged  by  Solov'ev  with 
his  critical  rationahsm  against  his  own  traditionahst  mysticism, 
is  so  instructive  and  so  fascinating.  A  more  detailed  study 
of  Solov'ev's  philosophical  development  would  describe  the 
vicissitudes  of  this  struggle  in  its  individual  stages,  would 
show  how  Solov'ev's  views  matured,  and  to  what  influences 
he  was  chiefly  subjected  at  various  epochs  ;  and  it  would  further 
be  necessary  to  sympathise  with  his  remarkable  spiritual  cleavage 
and  the  moods  to  which  that  cleavage  gave  rise  from  the  time 
of  its  first  appearance. 

From  this  outlook,  Solov'ev's  Antichrist  and  his  attack 
on  Tolstoi,  the  rehgious  rationaUst,  becomes  comprehensible. 
Within  the  recesses  of  Solov'ev's  own  mind,  Tolstoi  threatened 
to  gain  the  victory  ! 

Solov'ev's  influence  upon  Russian  philosophy  was  powerful 
and  beneficial,  above  all  because  philosophy  was  not  for  him 


286  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

a  profession,  or  an  opportunity  for  the  display  of  academic 
learning,  but  was  an  attempt  to  understand  life  and  to  solve 
the  problems  of  life.  Congenial  minds  have  endeavoured  to 
clarify  even  his  mysticism  epistemologically  (S.  Trubeckoi). 
Critical  historians  of  Russian  philosophy  have  raised  a  memorial 
of  their  friendship  and  appreciation  in  the  form  of  detailed 
criticism  (E.  Radlov) .  I  will  merely  add  the  opinion  of  a  personal 
friend  and  associate  of  Solov'ev,  to  whose  judgment  I  attach 
importance  because  he  is  himself  an  academic  philosopher,  a 
professor.  Professor  Lopatin  of  Moscow  wrote  :  "  He  was  the 
first  among  us  Russians  to  undertake  a  direct  investigation 
of  the  problems  or  objects  of  philosophy,  the  first  who  was  not 
content  to  discuss  the  opinions  of  western  philosophers  con- 
cerning these  problems.  Thus  it  was  that  he  became  the  first 
Russian  philosopher." 

Solov'ev  lamented  that  he  had  no  school,  no  successors. 


CHAPTER   EIGHTEEN 

I  MODERN  SOCIALISM  ;  MARXISM  AND  SOCIAL  DEMO- 
CRACY ;    MARXISM  AND  THE  NARODNICESTVO. 

I  THE  CRISIS  WITHIN  THE  MARXIST  MOVEMENT  ; 

I  THE  RELIGIOUS  PROBLEM.     THE  SOCIAL  REVO- 

LUTIONARIES. 


§150- 

WE  now  come  to  the  concluding  section  of  the  second 
portion  of  this  study,  of  our  sketch  of  Russian  philo- 
sophy of  history  and  of  Russian  philosophy  of  religion,  and  have 
to  expound  the  leading  social  and  political  trends  and  mass 
movements — Marxist  social  democrac3^  the  narodnicestvo,  the 
social  revolutionary  movement,  modern  anarchism,  and  liberal- 
ism. From  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  individualities  of  men 
of  letters  and  of  leaders  will  be  less  conspicuous  than  in  the 
preceding  studies,  for  we  are  now  concerned  mainly  with 
general  trends  and  currents. 

We  begin  with  Marxism  and  social  democracy. 
Socialism  is  as  old  in  Russia  as  in  Europe.     The  socialist 
ideas   of   Europe   always   secured   their   earliest   adherents   in 
Russia. 

The  humanitarians  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  and  at 
the  opening  of  the  nineteenth  century,  those  who  advocated 
the  liberation  of  the  peasantry,  had  a  political  and  indeed 
a  democratic  conception  of  their  humanitarian  doctrine,  and 
this  was  especially  noteworthy  in  Pestel.  During  the  forties, 
socialist  doctrine,  if  it  was  not  the  actual  cause  of  the  sever- 
ance between  radicals  and  liberals,  at  least  made  that  severance 
'more  conspicuous  and  more  definite.  Belinskii,  Herzen,  and 
Bakunin  on  the  left,  and  Granovskii  on  the  right,  were  charac- 
teristic  representatives   of   the   distinction   between   sociahsm 

267 


288  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and   liberalism.     (In    Belinskii's    case   this   is    shown,   by    his 
youthful  drama.) 

The  PetraSevcy  (1848)  are  the  Russian  analogues  of  the 
French  revolutionary  socialists  of  the  same  epoch. 

The  Russians  were  influenced  above  all  by  the  teachings 
of  French  socialists  ;  but  German  philosophy,  and  notably 
that  of  Feuerbach,  likewise  had  its  effect  in  promoting  the 
development  of  political  radicalism  and  socialism.  Towards 
the  close  of  the  forties,  the  ideas  of  Marx  and  Lassalle  began 
to  be  known  in  Russia. 

After  the  liberation  of  the  peasantr3^  socialism  upon  a 
theoretical  basis  of  materialism  became  the  credo  of  the  in- 
telligentsia. Cernysevskii  and  his  positivist  realism  matured 
into  nihilism.  In  the  secret  society  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja, 
revolutionary  aspirations  secured  their  most  logical  elabora- 
tion in  the  form  of  a  deliberate  policy  of  terrorism.  It  was 
significant  that  the  little  secret  societies  should  have  been 
^tyled  "  communes." 

Herzen,  Bakunin,  and  Cernysevskii  regarded  the  Russian 
mir  as  the  social  unit  of  the  society  which  was  to  be  renovated 
by  the  social  revolution,  and  this  view  was  elaborated  into 
a  complete  social  and  economic  theory,  the  narodniCestvo. 
Simultaneously  Lavrov  and  Mihailovskii  were  endeavouring  to 
found  socialism  anew  as  a  philosophical  system. 

This  brings  us  to  the  eighties,  to  the  decade  of  reaction 
following  upon  the  assassination  of  Alexander  II.  Even  before 
the  momentous  March  13,  1881,  a  split  had  occurred  in  the 
revolutionary  camp,  and  the  Marxist  social  democracy  had 
been  organized  under  the  influence  of  Marx  and  Engels,  the 
terrorist  tendency  being  greatly  weakened,  though  not  entirely 
destroyed. 

A  survey  of  the  development  of  "  Russian  socialism  "  (or 
"  Russian  communism  ")  since  Herzen,  cannot  fail  to  convince 
us  that  the  Russian  socialists,  like  the  French  and  the  German 
socialists,  were  looking  for  a  new  philosoph}^  and  a  new  ethic. 
Life  was  to  be  entirely  renovated  ;  society  was  to  be  rebuilt 
upon  completely  new  foundations. 

In  the  domain  of  theorj^  this  new  foundation  was  to  be 
positivism  and  materialism,  the  converse  and  the  negation  of 
official  theocracy.  Dostoevskii,  therefore,  had  good  reason  for 
equating  socialism  with  atheism  and  for  pointing  to  atheism 
as  the  leading  tenet  of  socialism. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  289 

Positivist  materialism  and  atheism  had  as  its  ethical  aim 
the  creation  of  the  new  man,  and  as  its  political  aim  the  bring- 
ing about  of  the  social  revolution.  Socialist  practice  had  an 
ethical  basis.  Its  ideal  was  a  fundamental  transformation,  a 
social  revolution,  which  should  sweep  away  once  and  for  all 
every  form  of  injustice  and  inequality. 

In  practice,  with  one  section  of  the  revolutionary  sociahsts, 
this  ideal  led  to  terrorism.  The  mass  rising  of  the  decabrists 
had  given  ocular  demonstration  of  the  impracticabihty  of  mass 
revolution. 

The  intellectuals,  collectively  forming  the  intelHgentsia, 
were  the  leaders  of  the  socialistic  and  philosophic  revolution. 
This  revolution  was  to  liberate  the  mu^ik,  the  peasantry  being 
then  practically  synonymous  with  Russia.'  NarodniCestvo, 
mu^ikophilism,  was  characteristic  of  Russian  socialism.  It 
was  not  until  a  later  date  that  the  operatives,  that  urban 
influences,  became  important  for  socialism  ;  and  we  have  to 
remember  that,  after  all,  the  urban  operative  who  came  to 
serve  the  needs  of  expanding  industry  was  nothing  more  than 
a  peasant.     Marxism  turned  its  attention  to  these  operatives. 

§151. 

BY  the  term  Marxism  we  understand  in  the  first  place  the 
actual  doctrines  or  works  of  Marx  ;  but  the  word  also 
signifies  the  movement  inaugurated  by  Marx  in  philosophy, 
sociology'  (above  all  the  philosophy  of  history),  and  economics  ; 
'  finally  we  have  to  think  of  the  Marxist  social  democracy  as 
a  working-class  party,  and  of  the  political  aims  and  methods 
of  that  party. 

Marx's  doctrines  and  ideas  speedily  became  known  in 
Russia,  and  were  widely  diffused,  the  first  translation  of  Capital 
being  into  Russian.  Marx  more  than  once  drew  attention  to 
the  fact  that  the  Russians  had  always  been  enthusiastically 
receptive  of  his  teaching,  notwithstanding  his  criticism  of 
Russia  and  his  hostihty  to  that  country. 

B^Hnskii  gave  a  friendly  greeting  to  the  "  Deutsch- 
Franzosische  Jahrbiicher  "  of  Marx  and  Ruge.  Prior  to  the 
year  1848,  information  concerning  Marx  had  been  sent  to  St. 
Petersburg  by  P.  V.  Annenkov,  author  at  a  later  date  of  a 
history  of  Hterature.  We  have  already  made  this  writer's 
acquaintance  as  a  member  of  BfUnskii's  circle.     From  1846 

20  -        VOL.  II. 


290  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

to  1848  he  was  living  abroad,  and  was  an  associate  of  the 
Russian  refugees,  notably  of  Herzen  and  Bakunin.  He  was 
acquainted  with  Marx,  and  corresponded  with  him.  A  detailed 
report  from  Marx  to  Annenkov  dealing  with  Proudhon's 
Philosophie  de  la  Misere  (1846)  has  recently  been  published. 
Among  the  Russian  refugees,  notably  in  Paris,  there  were 
towards  the  close  of  the  forties  numerous  adherents  of  the 
socialism  of  that  day,  and  Marx  may  have  been  personally 
acquainted  with  some  of  them.^ 

Herzen  and  Bakunin  were  already  acquainted  with  Marx 
at  this  date. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  fifties,  the  activity  of  all  the  refugees, 
those  from  Russia  no  less  than  those  from  Germany  and  else- 
where, was  paralysed  by  the  reaction  after  1848,  although 
Herzen  and  Ogarev  continued  their  labours.  During  the  early 
sixties,  after  the  liberation  of  the  peasantry,  the  number  of 
Russian  refugees  underwent  considerable  increase,  and  their 
activities  became  more  lively,  being  stimulated  by  Herzen's 
"  Kolokol,"  by  Bakunin's  work  as  agitator,  and  by  the  struggle 
between  Marx  and  Bakunin  in  the  International.  The  repres- 
sive movement  in  Russia  swelled  the  number  of  the  refugees, 
and  favoured  the  growth  of  their  revolutionary  sentiments. 

In  1862,  Bakunin  translated  the  Communist  Manifesto.  In 
1865,  TkaCev,  in  his  literary  critiques,  diffused  the  doctrine 
of  historical  materialism  as  formulated  by  Marx  in  1859.  In 
1872  was  published  Nikolai-on's  translation  of  the  first  volume 
of  Capital  (2nd  edition,  1898).  Bakunin,  too,  wished  to  trans- 
late this  work.  Nikolai-on  translated  the  second  volume  of 
Capital  in  1885,  and  the  third  volume  in  1896. 

As  early  as  1870,  Mihailovskii  applied  Marx's  theory  to 
the  historical  development  of  Russia ;  subsequently  (1877)  he 
discussed  2ukovskii's  criticism  of  Marx  ;  in  the  nineties, 
Mihailovskii  defended  the  views  of  the  narodniki  against  the 
Marxists. 

Lavrov,  too,  was  in  friendly  relations  with  Marx  and  his 
circle,  and  Lavrov  learned  much  from  Marx. 

In  1861,  Selgunov  availed  himself  of  Engel's  work  upon 
the  condition  of  the  English  working  classes  in  the  compilation 

^  To  Herzen's  Moscow  circle  belonged  N.  I.  Sazonov,  who  subsequently 
engaged  in  journalistic  work  in  France,  and  died  there  in  1862.  Another 
Russian  refugee  in  France  was  I.  N.  Tolstoi,  who  had  been  a  decabrist  and 
friend  of  Pu§kin,  but  ultimately  proved  to  be  an  agent  of  Nicholas'  government. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  291 

of  his  own  account  of  working-class  conditions  in  England 
and  France. 

Engel's  book  on  Diihring  became  known  in  Russia  soon 
after  its  appearance  (1878),  and  Diihring  was  eagerly  read  by 
the  Russian  socialists. 

From  the  outset,  Marx's  theory  of  value,  as  a  theory  of 
labour,  secured  acceptance  in  Russia.  The  first  detailed  dis- 
cussion of  Marx  in  the  Russian  tongue  was  published  in  1871. 
This  was  Ziber's  book,  Ricardo's  Theory  of  Value  and  of  Capital 
in  relation  to  subsequent  Elucidations  and  Enlargements,  a  work 
in  which  Marx's  doctrine  was  represented  as  a  development 
of  the  teachings  of  Ricardo  and  Adam  Smith.  Among  Russian 
economists,  Marx's  theory  of  value  has  numerous  and  notable 
adherents  down  to  the  present  day  (Cuprov,  Isaev,  etc.). 

Marx  (like  Engels)  learned  Russian,  so  that  he  might  be 
able  to  study  Russian  works,  above  all  statistical  statements 
concerning  economic  conditions  and  their  development.  .Some 
of  his  letters  bear  witness  to  the  result  of  these  labours,  letters 
to  Nikolai-on,  Sorge,  Kugelmann,  and  others,  wherein  Marx  is 
mainly  concerned  with  the  fundamental  theme  of  the  narodniki. 

Marx's  doctrine  of  historical  materiahsm  had  a  fertilising 
influence  upon  Russian  historiography  and  upon  Russian  his- 
tories of  literature.  Allusion  has  already  been  made  to  Tkacev's 
literary  criticisms.  There  is  a  notable  quantity  of  Marxist 
literary  criticism  in  Russian,  though  this  consists  merely  of 
studies  of  individual  authors,  for  no  complete  history  of  Russian 
literature  on  Marxist  lines  has  as  yet  been  produced.  Certain 
collective  studies  of  literary  history  have  recently  appeared, 
but  none  embodying  a  consistent  exposition  of  historical 
materialism. 

The  same  observation  applies  to  certain  Marxist  disquisi- 
tions on  Russian  history. 

Last  of  all  we  have  to  consider  the  matter  which  is  of  chief 
importance  to  ourselves,  the  achievements  of  Russian  Marxism 
in  the  domains  of  philosophy  and  of  the  philosophy  of  history, 
which  will  shortly  be  discussed  in  some  detail. 

§  152. 

THE  spUt  in  the  Zemlja  i  Volja  in  1879  resulted  in  the 
formation  of  the  Social  Democratic  Party  in  1883,  the 
year  in  which  Marx  died. 


292  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

The  terrorist  Narodnaja  Voija  crumbled  away  after  the 
assassination  of.  Alexander  II,  and  the  party  of  the  Cernyi 
Peredel  developed  into  the  Social  Democratic  Party  upon  a 
Marxist  basis,  the  social  democrats  tending  more  and  more 
to  constitute  a  working-class  party. 

It  is  a  very  difficult  matter  to  furnish  in  Europe  a  history 
of  the  Russian  social  democracy  which  shall  even  approach 
to  accuracy  ;  the  sources  of  information  are  inaccessible  and 
have  hitherto  been  subjected  to  little  critical  examination, 
while  even  in  Russian  literature  but  little  has  been  written 
upon  the  history  of  the  Russian  social  democracy.  I  can, 
therefore,  attempt  here  no  more  than  an  incomplete  sketch. 
Should  I  make  any  mistakes  regarding  facts,  I  must  excuse 
them  by  the  explanation  that  the  Russian  theorists  and 
historians  of  the  Russian  social  democracy  differ  among 
themselves  as  to  points  of  the  first  importance  in  respect 
of  chronological  and  other  data. 

The  evolution  of  Russian  manufacturing  industry  and  the 
growth  of  the  operative  population  during  the  reigns  of  Alex- 
ander II  and  Alexander  III,  rendered  possible  the  development 
I  of  a  spontaneous  labour  movement  with  which  the  socialist 
intelhgentsia  made  common  cause.  From  1878  onwards, 
notable  strikes  began  to  occur.  The  strikes  were  non-political, 
for  the  workers  did  not  formulate  any  political  demands.  The 
opening  years  of  the  accentuated  reaction  during  the  reign  of 
Alexander  III  were  characterised  by  an  arrest  of  movement 
among  factory  operatives  no  less  than  elsewhere,  but  at  this 
time  the  government  took  the  first  steps  in  the  way  of  factory 
legislation. 

The  organisation  of  the  Social  Democratic  Party  in  1883 
'  was  fraught  with  weighty  consequences.  This  organisation 
I  was  first  effected  abroad,  members  of  the  Cernyi  Peredel  coming 
together  under  Plehanov's  leadership  and  styling  themselves 
Group  for  the  Liberation  of  Labour  {gnippa  osvohoMenija 
truda).  In  St.  Petersburg  the  first  social  democratic  group 
was  formed  in  1885.^ 

The  political  quiescence  of  the  eighties  was  broken  in  1891 
owing  to  the  famine  and  the  cholera,  and  a  great  ferment 
occurred  among  the  working  classes.  The  intelhgentsia  of  all 
trends  and  of  all  shades  of  opinion  shook  off  the  apathy  of  the 
preceding    decade.     In    1891    was    established    the    Party    of 

I  N.  V.  Vodovozov,  ^Yho  died  prematurely,  was  the  leader  of  this  body. 


THE  SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  298 

National  Right,  which  aimed  at  effecting  an  alUance  between 
the  hberal  and  the  revolutionary  elements  for  the  struggle 
against  despotism.  This  party  issued  a  periodical  and  a 
number  of  pamphlets.  It  was  suppressed  in  1894,  but  the 
suppression   did  not  entirely  put   an  end  to  its  activities. 

The  Social  Democratic  Party  gained  increasing  influence, 
and  in  consequence  of  the  liveher  political  movement  which 
ensued  upon  1891  this  body  became  the  leading  force  among 
the  workers.  Until  then,  the  remnants  and  .the  successors  of 
the  Narodnaja  Volja,  organised  in  various  towns  as  petty 
groups,  had  maintained  the  upper  hand,  but  in  the  strikes 
that  became  increasingly  frequent  after  1893  social  democratic 
leadership  was  already  dominant.  The  great  strike  of  the  St. 
Petersburg  textile  workers  during  1896  may  be  regarded  as 
the  opening  of  the  veritable  labour  movement. 

The  conduct  of  strikes,  and  the  campaign  against  the 
entrepreneurs  and  the  government,  were  undertaken  by  the 
League  for  the  Struggle  to  Liberate  the  Workers,  organised 
in  the  spring  of  1895.  The  agitation  among  the  operatives 
was  partly  oral  and  partly  written  (proclamations). 

Of  great  importance  was  the  comprehensive  organisation  of 
the  Jewish  workers  of  the  west  and  the  south  to  form  the 
Bund.  This  +ook  place  in  1897.  In  view  of  the  outlawed 
position  of  the  Jews,  the  estabUshment  of  a  Jewish  sociaHst 
party  was  a  matter  of  moment  to  the  working  classes,  and 
further,  the  Bund  served  to  give  expression  to  the  revolutionary 
sentiments  of  the  Jews. 

Just  as  in  the  working-class  organisations  the  growing 
social  democracy  constituted  an  opposition  to  the  adherents 
Of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  so  during  the  middle  nin'eties  did  those 
who  were  expounding  the  theories  of  the  social  democracy 
enter  into  a  controversy  with  the  narodnic^estvo  concerning 
the  apphcation  of  the  principles  of  the  philosophy  of  history 
to  explain  the  evolution  of  Russia.  In  1884  Struve  took  the 
field  ;  in  1895  Plehanov  (Beltov)  played  a  prominent  part  ; 
and  there  were  many  other  notable  Marxist  writers,  som.e  of 
them  confining  their  activities  to  the  domain  of  theory  (Tugan- 
Baranovskii,  Bulgakov,  etc.),  and  others  being  in  addition 
practical  workers  on  behalf  of  social  democracy  (Vera  ZasuHC, 
Lenin,  Martov,  etc.).  I  have  previously  referred  to  this  im- 
portant literary  duel,  and  shall  have  something  more  to  say 
about  the  matter  presentlJ^ 


294  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

In  their  campaign  against  the  narodniCestvo,  most  members 
of  the  inteUigentsia  took  the  side  of  the  Marxists,  but  as  soon 
as  a  victory  had  been  gained  over  the  narodniki,  a  great  crisis 
took  place  within  Marxism  itself,  leading  ultimately  to  the 
secession  of  a  number  of  distinguished  theorists  from  social 
democracy  and  from  Marxism.  The  writings  and  teachings 
of  Sombart,  Herckner,  Schulze-Gavernitz,  and  Brentano,  had 
for  some  time  been  exercising  considerable  influence,  and  these 
secessions  were  the  practical  upshot,  the  beginnings  of  German 
revisionism  and  above  all  the  coming  of  Bernstein  to  the  front 
notably  contributing.  The  influence  of  those  English  "and 
French  socialists  who  are  opposed  to  orthodox  Marxism  was 
less  conspicuous  in  Russia  than  that  of  the  German  revisionists. 

The  Russian  social  democrats  and  their  Marxist  leaders, 
notably  Plehanov,  maintained  a  continuous  and  lively  inter- 
course, both  literary  and  personal,  with  the  German  social 
democracy.  German  influence  and  the  German  example  were 
decisive,  above  all  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  German  social 
democracy,  the  ideas  and  the  organisation  of  the  German 
movement,  were  exercising  a  similar  influence  upon  the  French 
and  English  labour  movements  and  upon  socialism  generally. 

In  Germany,  after  the  repeal  of  the  exceptional  laws  in 
1890,  the  labour  movement  and  the  socialist  current  greatly 
increased  in  vigour;  but  the  movement  of  the  "  Jungen " 
now  began,  and  Vollmar  and  the  Badenese  compelled  the  party 
leaders  of  the  social  democracy  to  reconsider  the  question  of 
tactics.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Engels  had  modified 
his  views,  especially  upon  the  matter  of  revolution.  Shortly 
before  his  death  (1895)  he  .had  written  the  important  preface 
to  Marx's  Class  Struggles  in  France,  and  had  here  effected  a 
far-reaching  revision  of  social  democratic  tactics. 

An  analogous  evolution  took  place  in  French,  Belgian,  and 
Italian  socialism.  Russian  social  democracy,  while  in  the  act 
of  undergoing  consolidation,  was  thus  subjected  to  a  cross  fire 
from  the  orthodox  Marxist  and  revisionist  camps.  It  was 
only  to  be  expected  that  in  Russia,  too,  similar  oppositions 
would  speedily  come  to  light. 

As  early  as  1899,  Struve  gave  expression  to  a  direct  oppo- 
sition to  orthodox  Marxism.  That  which  was  at  first  mani- 
fested as  critical  revisionism,  came  before  long  to  display  itself 
as  an  independent  philosophical  trend,  whose  positive  watch- 
word found  expression  in  1904  in  the  title  of  Bulgakov's  essays 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  295 

* 

From  Marxism  to  Idealism.  But  whereas  in  Germany,  Bernstein, 
all  differences  of  opinion  notwithstanding,  desired  and  was 
able  to  remain  in  the  party,  the  Russian  revisionists  cut  them- 
selves adrift  from  the  social  democracy. 

In  addition  to  revisionism,  another  independent  trend 
known  as  "  economism  "  found  expression  both  tactically  and 
in  writing  ;  this  economism  gives  expression  in  Russia  to  the 
same  opposition  as  exists  in  Europe  between  the  political 
parties  and  the  trade  unions.  The  relationships  between 
economism  and  revisionism  remain  obscure  in  respect  of 
chronology  no  less  than  in  respect  of  other  matters.  ^ 

In  1898  the  first  Russian  social  democratic  congress  took 
place,  being  held  abroad.  An  organising  central  committee 
was  appointed,  and  a  program  was  elaborated,  wherein  the 
social  democrats  declared  themselves  to  be  a  proletarian  party 
(Russian  Social  Democratic  Labour  Party).  The  Jewish  Bund 
joined  the  organisation. 

The  growth  of  the  labour  movement  continued.  In  1899 
the  reorganised  Group  for  the  Liberation  of  Labour  set  to 
work  afresh,  and  there  was  great  activity  in  all  radical  and 
liberal  organisations.  For  both  these  trends,  the  year  1901 
was  rich  in  notable  events.  During  this  year  there  took  place 
no  less  than  120  strikes.  Among  these  the  strike  at  Obuhov 
was  of  peculiar  significance,  since  here  for  the  first  time  bar- 
ricades were  erected  by  the  workers.  By  this  time  the  labour 
movement  had  become  definitely  political  as  well  as  economic. 

Since  1899  the  movement  among  the  students  had  been 
markedly  on  the  increase.  At  Kiev  in  1901  there  occurred 
an  unprecedented  academic  revolution  and  a  students'  strike. 
The  progressive  professors,  the  men  of  letters,  and  all  the 
advanced  section  of  the  intelligentsia,  espoused  the  cause  of 
the  young  people  against  the  educational  policy  of  the  nagaika 
(the  Cossack  whip).  Bogolepov,  minister  for  education,  was 
shot  by  a  student  named  KarpoviC  ;  in  the  .following  year 
another  student,  Balma§ev,  shot  Sypjagin,  the  new  minister 
for  education. 

From  1901  onwards  terrorism  and  outrage  again  became 
dominant  political  forces.     The   traditions   of  the   Narodnaja 

'  I  may  take  this  opportunity  of  giving  a  concrete  example  to  show  how 
the  theorists  and  historians  of  social  democracy  differ  in  their  accounts  of 
important  events.  Plehanov  declares  that  economism  originated  in  1897;  the 
date  given  by  Dr.  Ida  Akselrod  is  1899;  Akimov  tells  us  that  economism  came 
to  an  end  in  1897,  the  movement  having  begun  in  1895. 


296  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Volja  were  revived ;  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party  was 
organised  (its  beginnings  date  from  about  1892)  ;  the  fighting 
organisation  [boevaja  organisacia)  of  the  social  revolutionaries 
took  the  place  of  the  extinct  terrorist  executive  committee. 
The  assassination  of  Sypjagin  was  followed  in  1904  by  that 
of  Pleve  and  in  1905  by  that  of  Grand  Duke  Sergius. 

As  the  social  revolutionary  party  increased  in  strength,  and 
as  Marxism  became  weakened  by  revisionism  and  economism, 
there  ensued  an  increase  in  the  vigour  of  the  narodni(!estvo, 
which  now  entered  the  theoretic  field  as  the  "  new  "  or  "  reno- 
vated "  narodnidestvo.  The  contentions  by  which  the  narod- 
niki  and  the  Marxists  were  kept  asunder  came  to  the  front 
once  more,  for  in  the  newly  founded  Marxist  periodicals  "  Iskra  " 
(Spark),  1901,  and  "  Zarja  "  (Dawn),  1902,  the  former  being  a 
political  and  the  latter  a  scientific  journal,  the  Marxists  were 
voicing  their  answers  to  the  revisionist  criticism,  whilst  the 
revisionists  had  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the  narodniki. 
The  chief  spokesmen  of  Marxism  at  this  epoch  were  Plehanov, 
Vera  ZasuliS,  L.  Akselrod  ("  Orthodox  "),  Martov,  Starovgr 
(Potresov),  Moreover,  the  vigorous  movement  among  the 
peasantry  which  manifested  itself  in  1902,  and  the  increasing 
urgency  of  the  agrarian  problem,  served  at  first  to  strengthen 
the  narodnicestvo. 

Journalistic  discussion  of  the  relationship  of  liberalism  to 
Marxism  and  to  socialism  in  general,  and  the  cooperation 
which  was  desired  by  members  of  both  these  sections  of  thought, 
assumed  palpable  forms  in  1902.  In  June  of  that  year  there 
was  published  at  Stuttgart  the  first  number  of  "  Osvobof- 
denie  "  (Deliverance)  ;  edited  by  Struve,  this  periodical  served 
the  aims  of  the  constitutionalist  movement,  and  in  especial 
those  of  the  liberal  members  of  the  zemstvos.  In  1903  was 
organised  the  League  of  Deliverance  (Sojuz  Osvobo2denija), 
which  revived  and  extended  the  aims  of  the  Party  of  National 
Right. 

The  same  year,  at  the  second  congress  (held  in  London) 
occurred  the  formal  split  in  the  Social  Democratic  Party.  In 
especial,  the  group  which  controlled  "  Iskra  "  became  severed 
into  two  distinct  trends,  the  majority  being  led  by  Lenin  and 
the  minority  by  Martov.^  Simultaneously  the  Jewish  Bund 
severed  its  connection  with  the  party. 

1  The    names    of     "  majoritarians '     (bol§eviki,    bol3evisti)    and     "  minori- 
tarians  "  (men'Seviki,  men'Sevisti)  have  become  current.     At  first  people  spoke 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  297 

At  the  outset  the  struggle  between  the  two  sections  was 
declared  to  depend  solely  upon  differences  concerning  the 
problem  of  organisation.  The  majority  wished  for  rigid  central- 
isation, whilst  the  minority  considered  that  this  centraUsation 
would  weaken  the  party.  But  in  the  course  of  an  unduly  rapid 
poUtical  evolution,  additional  differences  of  tactics  and  aim 
became  apparent.  On  the  whole,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  to 
formulate  these  differences  precisely,  the  bol§eviki  inchned 
towards  the  tactics  of  the  social  revolutionaries,  and  their 
tactical  theories  determined  their  general  outlook  on  the  situa- 
tion and  their  choice  of  tactical  methods.  Whereas  the 
men'seviki  desired  that  revolutionary  energy  should  first  be 
concentrated  and  that  the  masses  of  the  workers  should  first 
be  educated  to  understand  sociaHst  principles,  the  bol§eviki 
beUeved  in  the  imminent  possibility  of  a  definitive  revolution, 
urged  individuals  and  the  masses  towards  an  immediate 
struggle,  and  endeavoureel  to  strengthen  the  centralist 
dictatorship  as  the  framework  of  the  future  central  govern- 
ment. They  wished  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Narodnaja 
Volja  and  to  entrust  the  party  leadership  to  a  revolutionary 
dite. 

In  actual  fact,  Russia's  internal  and  external  situation  was 
an  incitement  to  a  mass  revolution.  Universal  dissatisfaction 
and  a  revolutionary  mood  had  been  stimulated  by  the  dis- 
astrous war  with  Japan,  whilst  on  the  other  hand  this  war 
had  promoted  the  growth  of  nationahsm,  not  the  liberals 
alone,  but  converts  •  from  Marxism -(Struve),  having  adopted 
nationaUst  views.  Through  the  revolutionary  and  counter- 
revolutionary movements,  all  the  progressive  and  all  the  con- 
servative and  reactionary  forces  in  the  country  at  length 
secured  expression.  The  constitution,  won  by  the  revolution, 
rendered  it  possible  to  organise  political  parties,  and  work  in 
the  duma  made  it  necessary  for  these  parties  to  undertake 
practical  administrative  activities. 

The  bol§eviki  boycotted  the  duma  and  opposed  cooperation    , 
with  the  liberals  (cadets).     Only  with  the  social  revolutionaries    / 
and  with  the  trudoviki  (members  of  the  Labour  Party)  would 
they  make  common  cause.     The  m.en'Seviki,  on  the  other  hand, 
were  in  favour  of  the  duma  and  of  cooperation  with  the  cadets. 

of  the  "  hard  "  iskrovcy  and  the  "  soft  "  isla-ovcy,  the  former  designation 
attaching  to  the  majoritarians.  "  Iskra  "  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  minority, 
and  has  since  been  known  as  the  "  Novaja  Iskra." 


298  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

The  bol^eviki  went  so  far  as  to  rejoice  at  the  (first)  dissolution 
of  the  duma. 

Despite  these  complications,  quite  a  number  of  social 
democrats  were  elected  to  the  first  duma,  and  a  still  larger 
number  to  the  second.  In  the  later  elections,  however,  the 
party  was  positively  decimated.  This  did  not  induce  the 
bol§eviki  to  change  their  tactics.  In  the  year  1906  a  serious 
effort  was  made  to  reconcile  the  two  factions,  but  without 
success,  and  the  conflict  between  them  subsequently  became 
accentuated. 

In  the  agrarian  question,  a  matter  of  extreme  urgency, 
and  indeed  in  all  questions,  the  bolseviki,  pending  the  definitive 
collapse  of  absolutism,  made  a  working  program  of  their  ulti- 
mate aim,  whereas  the  men'seviki  were  endeavouring,  by 
critical  methods  and  by  their  estimate  of  the  existing  situa- 
tion and  of  the  social  and  political  forces  of  the  day,  to  destroy 
the  illusion  of  the  bolSeviki. 

The  members  of  the  radical  left  wing  of  the  bol§eviki 
developed  into  anarchising  socialists.  In  the  name  of  ortho- 
dox Marxism  they  approved  acts  of  expropriation,  and  they 
opposed  the  constitution  and  parliament,  styling  themselves  or 
being  known  as  oizovisty  and  ultimatisty .  (The  "  otzovisty  " 
are  the  "  recallers,"  those  who  wish  to  recall  from  office  their 
representatives  in  the  duma.  "  Ultimatism,"  as  a  tactical 
method,  meant  that  an  ultimatum  was  to  be  presented  to  the 
members  of  the  duma  and  to  the  party  organisations  in  general, 
those  that  proved  recalcitrant  being  terrorised  by  a  boycott 
declared  by  the  party  executive.) 

During  this  same  period  the  men'seviki,  too,  went  through 
their  political  distemper.  In  their  endeavour  to  be  a  purely 
proletarian  party  they  penalised  the  intelligentsia,  and  the  more 
extreme  and  radical  section  among  them  even  demanded  that 
the  party  should  become  wholly  a  mass  movement,  for  leader- 
ship, they  said,  was  improper  and  must  be  abolished  (must  be 
"  liquidated,"  whence  this  trend  was  called  "liquidationism"). 

The  antipathy  to  the  liberals  was  simultaneously  displayed 
by  the  appearance  of  an  anarchist  trend  which  was  theoretical 
rather  than  practical.  This  became  conspicuous  in  1904  in  a 
polemic  against  the  intelligentsia,  and  since  Mahaev  was  its 
principal  exponent  it  was  denominated  "  Mahaevism." 

The  social  revolutionaries,  likewise,  were  torn  by  internal 
dissensions.    Among  them,  too,  there  appeared  a  right  and  a 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  299 

left  wing,  minimalists  and  maximalists,  the  cleavage  being 
analogous  to  that  in  the  social  democracy.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  unmasking  of  Azev  wrought  much  harm  to  the  part5\ 
The  proofs  brought  forward  by  Burcev  (1908),  the  admission 
made  b3^  Stolypin  in  the  duma  (1909),  and  Lopuhin's  confirma- 
tion, inspired  mutual  mistrust  among  the  terrorists,  and  made 
them  doubt  the  soundness  of  their  tactics  seeing  that  since 
1892  iVzev  had  been  able  to  pursue  his  work  as  provocative 
agent,  his  double  game  with  the  party  and  the  secret  police. 
The  assassinations  of  Pleve  and  Grand  Duke  Sergius  had  been 
his  work,  and  presumably  he  aimed  at  still  higher  game. 

It  was  natural,  in  view  of  this  disintegration  and  of  the 
mistakes  of  the  revolutionary  and  radical  parties,  that  after 
the  revolution  the  reaction  should  quickly  reconstitute  its  forces. 
Enough  has  already  been  said  concerning  the  matter.  The 
social  democrats  were  not  slow  to  grasp  how  deplorable  was 
the  situation,  and  they  endeavoured  to  reorganise  themselves, 
whilst  tlie  other  parties  made  similar  efforts. 

The  Russian  social  democracy  has  changed  much  since  the 
revolution  of  1905,  and  because  of  it,  learning  much  during 
and  after  the  revolution.  To  the  masses  as  well  as  to  the 
leaders  the  revolution  furnished  occasion  for  practical  political 
and  revolutionary  activities.  It  became  necessary  for  the 
revolutionaries,  not  merely  to  examine  the  efficacy  of  their 
everyday  methods,  but  likewise  to  reconsider  their  aims,  to 
ask  themselves  to  what  extent  the  socialistic  goal  was  attainable. 

Counter-revolution  and  reaction  deprived  all  the  revolu- 
tionary parties  of  leaders.  Those  leaders  vvho  survived  the 
storm  languished  in  gaol  or  in  administrative  exile,  except 
for  the  many  who  had  taken  refuge  in  foreign  lands.  The 
increasing  hostility  to  the  intelligentsia  was  largely  the  out- 
come of  the  perplexities  of  the  working-class  organisations  thus 
bereft  of  leadership.  In  my  account  of  the  reaction  I  showed 
that  illegal  activities  were  fgrced  upon  the  social  democrats 
because  public  and  legitimate  political  organising  work  was 
forbidden  them.  The  restrictions  imposed  by  the  state  created 
additional  obstacles  to  the  centralisation  desired  by  the  bolse- 
viki,  and  the  part}/  broke  up  into  amorphous  and  disconnected 
local  organisations. 

Nevertheless  a  continuous  process  of  organisation  and  re- 
organisation went  on.  The  leaderless  mass  threw  up  new 
leaders,  for  the  most  part  men  of  working-class  origin,  who 


800  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

gained  experience  in  political  organisations,  yet  more  in  trade 
union  and  cooperative  organisations,  and  in  the  numerous 
strikes.  The  workers  were  consequently  in  a  position  to  com- 
pare detail  work  in  the  legislative  field  with  the  illegal  and 
so-called  "  underground  "  revolutionary  activities,  and  could 
form  their  own  opinions  concerning  the  comparative  efficiency 
of  the  respective  methods. 

None  the  less,  the  confusion  is  still  extensive,  and  its  degree 
may  be  measured  by  the  fact  that  Plehanov,  the  real  leader 
of  the  men'geviki,  has  left  his  party  on  the  ground  that  it  is 
too  opportunist.  But  Plehanov  is  now  writing  busily,  and  it 
may  be  that  the  real  motive  for  his  withdrawal  was  the  desire 
for  a  detachment  which  would  enable  him  to  continue  his  work 
in  the  theoretical  field.  In  the  fourth  duma,  six  boBeviki 
were  at  feud  with  seven  men'§eviki.  The  men'seviki  were 
subdivided  into  the  so-called  "  Hquidators  "  and  the  "  faith- 
ful "  (partiicy)  who  desired  to  maintain  the  party  organisation. 
The  small  force  of  boHeviki  broke  up  into  otzovisty,  Leninists, 
and  other  sections  ;  the  organs  of  the  respective  groups  con- 
tinuing to  fight  one  another  with  notable  vigour.  ^ 

The  fury  of  the  reaction,  the  light  thrown  upon  the  govern- 
ment by  the  Azev  affair,  the  disclosures  concerning  the  provo- 
cative suppression  of  the  second  duma,  the  relationship  of  the 
tsar  to  the  crafty  rogue  Rasputin,  and  various  other  matters, 
are  an  incessant  demonstration  to  the  social  democracy  that  it 
is  necessary  for  it  to  close  its  ranks  and  to  organise  a  central 
executive  committee. 


n 

§  1-53  • 

THE  understanding  of  Russian  Marxism  will  be  faciUtated 
if  we  make  it  clear  to  ourselves  that  Marxism  in  Russia  is 
faced  by  special  philosophical  and  socio-poHtical  tasks.  Russian 
socialism  has  a  tradition  of  its  own,  and  Russian  history  has 

1  In  1 9 12  there  came  into  existence  the  organisation  committee  of  the 
bolSeviki  and  the  central  committee  of  the  men'Seviki.  These  two  committees' 
lead  the  secret  organisations,  which  are  increasing  in  number.  It  counts  among 
the  absurdities  of  the  reaction  that  the  two  clandestine  organisations  should 
be  permitted  to  issue  daily  newspapers.  "  Lu£  "  (Light)  is  the  bolSevik  organ 
"Pravda"  (Truth)  the  men'Sevik  organ.  In  addition  there  are  a  number  of 
scientific  reviews  and  specialist  periodicals. 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  301 

brought  into  being  conditions  of  a  quite  peculiar  kind,  with 
which  I\Iarxism  has  to  concern  itself. 

German  Marxism  has  made  its  way  into  all  the  countries 
of  Europe,  and  its  tactical  and  theoretical  principles  have  been 
widely  adopted.     As  a  socio-political  system  Marxism  had  to 
prove  its  validity  in  the  struggle  v;ith  extant  social  and  political 
conditions,  and  in  competition  with  other  social  and  socialistic 
theories.     England    had    its    parhamentarism    and    its    trade 
unionism,  and  in  that  country  there  has  been  little  trace  of 
a   revolutionary   movement   since   the   days   of   the   chartists. 
France,  on  the  other  hand,  possesses  the  tradition  of  the  great 
revolution  and  of  several  other  notable  revolutions  ;    it   has 
numerous  socialistic  systems  and  parties  ;    it  is  a  republic  sui 
generis.      In    England   and   France,    therefore,    Marxism    has 
made  headway  slowly,  and  only  by  small  degrees  has  it  been 
accepted  by  the  working  classes  and  their  leaders.     In  Russia, 
Marxism  found   the  field  occupied   by  Russian  sociahsm  and 
its    traditions    of    nihilism    and    terrorism,  the    traditions    of 
the  revolutionary  narodnicestvo.    The  assassination  of  Emperor 
Alexander    II    constitutes,    as    it    were,    a    boundary    stone 
between  Russian  sociahsm  and  Marxist  sociahsm.     In  Russia, 
absolutism  is  dominant,  absolutism  in  a  markedly  theocratic 
form  ;   the   country  is  predominantly   agricultural,  for  manu- 
facturing industry  is  found  as  yet  in  scattered  oases  only,  and 
we  cannot  speak  here  of  industrialisation  as  it  is   known  in 
western  lands.    Owing  to  all  these  circumstances,  Marxism  in 
Russia  has  had  to  undertake  peculiar  tasks. 

It  was  mainly  a  practical  question  of  tactics  which,  after 
the  spht  in  the  Zemlja  i  Vol]  a  in  the  year  1879,  led  a  section 
of  the  revolutionaries  and  socialists  into  the  Marxist  camp.  ^ 
The  supporters  of  the  Cernyi  PeredSl  made  it  their  direct  con- 
cern to  study  more  closely  the  socialist  movement  in  foreign 
countries.  Plehanov,  the  leader  of  this  group.,  says  of  himself 
that  by  1880  he  had  already  in  large  part  become  a  social 
democrat  (he  does  not  say  that  he  had  become  a  Marxist). 

It  was  not  by  chance  that  Plehanov  and  his  followers 
turned  above  all  to  Germany  to  study  social  democracy  and  to 
learn  from  the  German  movement.  The  Marxist  recruits 
followed  in  the  footsteps  of  their  leaders,  and  it  must  be 
remembered  that  it  had  long  been  customary  to  supplement 
Russian  culture  by  studies  in  Germany.  Moreover,  at  this 
epoch  the  labour  movement  in  Germany  was  extremely  vigorous 


302  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  was  arousing  general  interest.  The  reconstituted  empire, 
led  by  Bismarck,  deliberately  took  up  the  campaign  against 
socialism  in  the  name  of  legitimate  monarchy,  so  that  from 
this  aspect  Prussia  is  a  more  advanced  Russia.  A  year  before 
the  organisation  of  the  Cernyi  Peredel,  Bismarck  had  intro- 
duced the  exceptional  laws,  and  thus  it  came  to  pass  that  the 
first  Russian  social  democrats  had  before  them  the  example 
of  German  Marxism  in  a  revolutionary  mood,  as  they  had 
expected  and  perhaps  desired  from  the  first. 

None  the  less,  the  development  of  Marxism  in  Germany 
took  the  direction  of  reformist  revisionism  and  parliamen- 
tarism, and  by  German  influence  the  Russian  Marxists  were 
likewise  urged  in  the  direction  of  revisionism.  As  early  as 
1894,  Struve  declared  that  he  was  not  wholly  orthodox. 

Apart  from  differences  of  tactics,  the  Marxists  were  dis- 
tinguished from  the  sociahstic  narodniki  in  respect  of  the 
historical  and  philosophical  explanation  of  the  evolution  of 
Russia,  the  chief  problem  being  whether  Russia  was  already 
in  a  position  in  which  she  would  be  able  to  realise  the  social- 
istic order,  although  the  country  had  not  passed  through  all 
the  stages  of  economic  evolution  that  were  known  to  Europe. 
Above  all  it  was  a  disputed  point  whether  Russia  would  have 
to  traverse  a  capitalist  stage  in  order,  in  accordance  with  the 
Marxist  law  of  evolution,  to  pass  from  capitalism  to  socialism. 

Finally  there  was  a  struggle  upon  the  philosophical  plane. 
It  is  true  that  the  Russian  socialists  and  radicals  were  material- 
ists ;  like  Marx  and  Engels,  they  were  disciples  of  Feuerbach  ; 
adhesion  to  Comte  and  positivism  was  common  ground.  But 
Marxism,  with  its  historic  or  economic  materialism,  involved  a 
distinct  trend. 

In  addition,  it  was  the  so-called  subjective  method  which 
separated  the  Russian  socialists  and  radicals  from  the  Marxists. 
The  Marxists  adopted  a  thoroughly  objectivist  standpoint. 
Eliminating,  or  at  least  ignoring,  the  individual  consciousness, 
they  took  the  masses  and  the  laws  of  their  historical  evolu- 
tion as  vaUd  arguments  for  the  reaUsation  of  sociaUsm.  The 
significance  and  the  foundation  of  sociaUsm  were  differently 
conceived  in  the  two  camps.  The  controversy  was  one  of 
ethics  versus  history. 

To-day  when  we  speak  of  the  narodniki  we  mean  above 
all  the  philosophical  defenders  of  the  narodni^estvo  in  this 
conflict   with  Marxism.     But   the  term  has  a  wide  meaning 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  303 

in  addition,  for  narodnic^estvo  likewise  signifies  the  parties 
and  sections  of  the  new  narodnicestvo  •  and  the  social 
revolutionaries  which  have  come  into  existence  since  the 
revolution  and  the  promulgation  of  the  constitution.  Some 
of  the  Marxists,  with  a  certain  maUce,  will  not  give  the 
social  revolutionaries  any  other  name  than  "  narodniki." 

§  154. 

IN  the  old  byhny  (epic  folk-poems)  of  Russia,  one  of  the 
favourite  heroes  is  Ilja  of  Murom,  the  peasant.  When 
the  country  is  in  straits,  Ilja  awakens  from  his  apathy,  displays 
his  superhuman  energy,  and  saves  the  situation. 

Of  all  the  European  states,  Russia  is  alike  economically 
and  socially  the  most  predominantly  agricultural,  and  we  have 
to  note  in  this  connection  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  Russian 
agriculture,  which  on  the  whole,  and  above  all  in  the  remoter 
areas,  is  still  in  an  extremely  primitive  condition.  It  is  natural 
that  the  great  concern  of  Russia,  the  chief  concern  alike  of 
the  government  and  of  the  political  parties,  should  be  the 
peasant  and  his  destiny. 

Interest    in    the    muzik    and    in    agriculture    had    already 
awakened  in  the  days  of  Muscovy.     From  the  time  of  Peter  : 
onwards   the    government    perforce    became    more    and    more   ^f 
occupied  with  the  matter,  for  the  national  finances  demanded 
an   increasing   revenue.     The   great   landowners,    as   we   have 
learned,  took  a  selfish  advantage  of  the  situation,  using  their 
powers,  not  in  the  interest  of  the  state,  not  in  the  interest  of   / 
the  peasantry,  and  not  indeed  in  their  own  true  interest. 

The  mood  prevailing  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century 
secured  literary  expression  in  the  idyllic  and  pastoral  poetry 
written  during  the  reign  of  Catherine,  by  the  Anacreontically 
inclined  L'vov  and  others.  Doubtless  European  example 
exercised  a  contributory  influence.  Just  as  the  French  dis- 
ciples of  Rousseau  were,  a  la  Chateaubriand,  making  a  cult  of 
the  Red  Indians,  so  did  the  Russians  discover  the  muzik. 

Great  honour  was  then  paid  to  the  muzik.  Even  before 
the  days  of  Herder,  his  songs  were  being  collected  and  were 
receiving  due  literary  appreciation,  and  this  aesthetic  recog- 
nition was  followed  by  an  appreciation  of  folk-performances 
in  other  fields.  In  the  days  of  the  enhghtenment  and  of  the 
popular  philosophy,  proverbs  were  regarded  as  incorporating  an 


304  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

excellent,  if  not  the  most  excellent,  philosophy  of  the  sound 
human  understanding,  as  incorporating  the  true  wisdom  of 
Hie.  Subsequently  the  customs  and  the  economic  institutions 
of  the  peasantry  were  looked  upon  as  the  embodiment  of  the 
best  possible  social  institutions.  Finally,  for  the  intellectuals, 
the  mu^ik  came  in  addition  to  represent  the  religious  ideal. 
Yet  11]  a  of  Murom,  the  Russian  hero,  was  nothing  but  a 
serf.  The  aspirations  of  the  humanitarians  RadiSCev  and 
Pnin,  the  hopes  of  the  decabrists  and  of  the  liberal  thinkers, 
writers,  and  statesmen  during  the  reign  of  Nicholas  I,  were 
not  realised  until  1861.  Ilja's  fetters  were  not  struck  off  until 
long  after  his  western  congeners  had  been  free  men. 

The  new  Russian  literature  reflects  the  growing  interest  in 
the  muzik's  fate.  Beginning  with  PuSkin,  modern  Russian 
authors  have  depicted  an  idealised  rural  life,  and  from  the  sixties 
onwards  an  increasing  number  of  writers  have  dealt  with  all 
the  activities  of  the  peasants.  Allusion  was  made  to  this 
literary  development  in  connection  with  our  analysis  of  the 
liberation  of  the  peasantry  and  of  the  agrarian  crisis. 

"  C'est  la  campagne  qui  fait  le  pays,  et  c'est  le  peuple  de 
la  campagne  qui  fait  la  nation."  These  words  of  Rousseau 
in  Emile  are  the  creed  of  the  narodniCestvo,  in  so  far  as  that 
movement  is  simply  an  expression  of  the  fact  that  Russia  is 
preeminently  agrarian,  and  that  therefore  all  thoughts  concern- 
ing Russia  and  Russia's  destiny  turn  upon  the  muzik.  Govern- 
ment and  administration  are  busied  with  thoughts  of  the  . 
mu^ik  ;  art  and  hterature,  history  and  the  social  sciences, 
centre  in  the  muzik  ;  the  muzik  constitutes  an  important 
section  of  every  political  program. 

The  narodniCestvo,  therefore,  was  likewise  the  basis  of 
Russian  socialism,  the  mir  and  the  artel  becoming  the  hope 
of  Russian  communism.  Beginning  with  the  Slavophils,  the 
narodnicestvo  recurs  in  Herzen,  in  Bakunin,  in  Cernygevskii 
and  his  successors  ;  the  secret  societies  of  the  revolutionaries 
and  the  terrorists  raise  the  war-cry.  Land  and  Freedom. 

The  narodnicestvo  is  not  a  unified  doctrine,  and  was  never 
advocated  by  a  single  leading  authority,  as  socialism  was 
advocated  by  Marx.  Groups  of  various  shades  of  opinion, 
and  at  a  later  date  various  political  parties,  have  endea- 
voured after  their  respective  fashions  and  in  divers  domains 
to  expound  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the  narodnic^estvo. 
Of  poHtical  importance  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventies 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  305 

was  the  movement  of  the  intellectuals,  and  in  especial  of  the 
younger  intellectuals,  who  endeavoured  to  educate  the  people 
and  to  win  them  on  behalf  of  a  program  of  social  and  political 
reconstruction.  It  is  frequently  contended  that  Lavrov  w?ls 
the  originator  of  the  movement  "  towards  the  people."  True 
enough  that  Lavrov,  in  his  Historical  Letters  (1868-1869), 
insisted  upon  the  duty  of  self-sacrifice  on  behalf  of  the  folk, 
and  thus  did  much  to  promote  the  movement  "  towards  the 
people."  But  that  movement  had  been  directly  advocated  by 
other  writers  before  Lavrov.  It  originated  out  of  the  peculiar 
situation  which  ensued  upon  the  liberation  of  the  peasantry. 
The  intellectuals,  if  they  wished  to  realise  their  social  and 
political  ideals,  had  to  turn  for  help  to  the  enfranchised  peasants. 
The  movement  was  favoured  by  the  literary  idealisation  of 
the  peasant.^ 

Simultaneously  with  the  political  movement  there  origi- 
nated the  ethico-economical  movement  introduced  by  A.  N. 
Engelhardt.  The  intelligentsia  was  to  withdraw  to  the  country 
and  was  to  engage  in  rational  agriculture  ("  to  establish  itself 
upon  the  soil  "). 

Towards  the  close  of  the  seventies  occurred  the  develop- 
ment of  the  radical  and  revolutionary  narodnifestvo  led  by 
the  Narodnaja  Volja.  After  the  assassination  of  Alexander  II, 
the  revolutionary  mood  became  weaker,  and  at  the  same  time, 
owing  to  the  increasing  strength  of  Marxism,  the  narodnicestvo 
was  compelled,  not  merely  to  revise  its  doctrines,  but  above 
all  to  formulate  them  with  greater  precision.  The  develop- 
ment of  manufacturing  industry  and  the  growth  of  the  towns 
were  contributory  causes  of  the  change,  for  an  increasing 
number  of  peasants  became  operatives.  It  is  usual  to  speak 
of  a  crisis  in  the  narodniCestvo,  setting  in  during  the  eighties 
and  attaining  its  climax  in  the  middle  nineties,  when  the 
Marxists  were  endeavouring  to  furnish  statistical  proofs  that 
the  teaching  of  the  narodniki  was  fallacious, 

I  In  1 86 1  Herzen  issued  to  the  students  sent  down  from  the  university  the 
watchword,  to  the  folk.  In  1862  Bakunin  urged  upon  the  young  "  the  heroic 
action  of  dx^awing  near  to  the  folk  and  reconciliation  with  the  folk  "  ;  and  from 
Bakunin  originated  the  phrase  "  towards  the  people."  Pisarev  commended 
physical  toil  as  a  means  for  genuine  approximation  to  the  folk. 


4-       . 

.  2r  VOL.  II. 


306  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 


§  I 


DO' 

JUZOV  (Kablitz)  attempted  to  provide  a  philosophic 
basis  for  the  narodniCestvo,  not  however  with  much 
success.  He  was  a  diUgent  translator  of  Spencer  and  the 
English  empiricists  (Bain  and  Mill),  and  he  published  detailed 
studies  of  the  raskolniki,  whom  he  considered  to  embody  the 
genuine  Russian  essence.  Juzov  accepted  Spencer's  and  Comte's 
emotionalism,  and  in  his  consideration  of  the  national  essence 
and  of  national  character,  he  found  these  to  subsist  psycho- 
logically in  the  realm  of  feeling,  in  the  dominance  of  emotion 
over  understanding. 

By  his  campaign  against  intellectualism  he  was  led  to 
take  up  a  position  adverse  to  the  intelligentsia  and  to  their 
endeavours  on  behalf  of  popular  education.  Drawing  a  sharp 
distinction  between  the  nation  and  the  state,  he  lapsed  into 
a  hazy  apolitism,  conceiving  the  mir  and  the  artel  to  furnish 
sufficient  support  for  the  folk  and  for  its  economic  activities 
in  the  domains  of  agriculture  and  home  industry.  Juzov's 
Principles  of  the  Narodnicestvo  (1882,  etc.)  thus  inclined  to 
the  side  of  the  reaction  under  Alexander  III,  and  was  opposed 
to  the  radical  and  revolutionary  trend  of  the  narodnicestvo, ^ 

The  more  critical  adherents  of  the  narodnicestvo  did  not 
follow  Juzov's  lead,  being  inclined  rather  to  accept  the  views 
of  Lavrov,  Cernysevskii,  and  Mihailovskii.  On  the  other  hand, 
some  of  the  narodniki  were  especially  interested  in  the  economic 
aspect  of  the  problem.  In  deliberate  opposition  to  Marx  and 
the  Marxists,  they  attempted  to  show  that  the  economic  and 
social  evolution  of  Russia  was  quite  peculiar,  was  distinct 
from  and  independent  of  that  of  Europe.  Notable  was  the 
manner  in  which  the  teaching  of  the  narodnicestvo  was  like- 
wise defended  by  the  historians  of  literature. 2 

^  Abramov,  a  talented  writer  of  belles  lettres,  represented  in  his  work  the 
same  trend  as  Juzov.  During  the  middle  eighties  Selgunov  stigmatised  "  Abra- 
movism  "  (Abramovscina)  as  a  reactionary  development  of  the  narodnicestvo. 

*  In  this  connection,  mention  should  be  made  of  Ivanov-Razumnik,  author 
of  a  number  of  works  bearing  on  the  history  of  literature,  wherein  he  defended 
the  attitude  of  the  narodnicestvo  as  against  Marxism.  The  most  notable  of 
these  books  were,  A  History  of  the  Russian  Social  Spirit  (1908),  and  The  Meaning 
of  Life  (1910).  But  he  insisted  on  the  need  for  a  "critical"  narodnicestvo, 
and  accepted  the  experience  philosophy,  while  basing  his  views  upon  Kant, 
especially  in  ethical  matters  "  Russian  socialism  "  and  Marxism,  he  said, 
were  not  opposites,  but  Russian  Marxism  must  certainly  be  contrasted  with 
the  narodniiestvo.  K.  Kacorovskii  was  another  writer  who  discussed  the 
theory  and  history  of  the  mir  (The  Russian  Village  Community,  1900  et  seq.i. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  807 

The  later  narodniki  modified  the  doctrine  which  had  been 
first  advocated  by  the  Slavophils  and  Herzen.  To  a  large 
extent  they  accepted  Marx's  theory  of  value  and  agreed  with 
his  history  and  criticism  of  capitalism,  but  they  modified  his 
statement  of  historic  evolution.  Marx  had  declared  that  the 
historical  evolution  of  mankind  was  a  necessary  development 
from  primitive  communism  through  the  intermediate  stage  of 
capitalism  into  the  higher  and  definitive  form  of  communism. 
The  narodniki  considered  that  the  Russian  mir  and  artel 
represented  primitive  communism,  but  they  believed  that 
Russia  could  attain  the  higher  and  definitive  form  of  socialism 
and  communism  without  passing  through  the  stage  of  capital- 
ism. Capitalism  had  indeed  developed  in  Europe,  but  would 
not  be  able  to  estabhsh  itself  in  Russia.  The  narodniki  ad- 
mitted that  the  muzik  had  not  sufficiently  developed  the  mir 
and  the  artel,  had  not  turned  them  adequately  to  account; 
it  was  necessary  therefore  to  educate  the  peasant,  and  this 
was  the  mission  of  the  intelligentsia. 

The  narodniki  did  not  overlook  the  fact  that  in  Russia, 
too,  certain  capitahstic  developments  had  taken  place  ;  they 
perceived  that  foreign  capital  had  found  its  way  from  Europe 
into  Russia.  But  they  considered  this  capitahsm  an  artificial 
product  ;  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  continuation  of  the  ex- 
ploitation which  European  capitahsm  had  undertaken  in  the 
case  of  all  the  less  civiUzed  peoples  to  the  detriment  of  these. 
To  the  narodniki,  Russian  capitahsm  seemed  purely  destruc- 
tive ;  it  was  not  favouring  poHtical  development,  as  European 
capitahsm  had  done  ;  it  could  not  possibly  undergo  a  vigorous 
evolution,  for  the  foreign  markets  were  already  occupied,  and 
the  demand  in  the  home  market  was  weak.  Russia,  therefore, 
now  that  the  liberation  of  1861  had  stimulated  more  intensive 
economic,  social,  and  pohtical  activities  among  the  peasants, 
would  make  its  way  forward  with  the  aid  of  agriculture  and 
home  industry  ;  it  would  never  be  capitahsed,  and  therefore 
would  never  be  proletarianised.  In  like  manner,  the  narodniki 
beheved  that  there  would  never  develop  in  Russia  a  system 
of  large-scale  landed  proprietorship  v/orking  on  capitahst  hnes. 
Russian  agriculture  in  conjunction  with  Russian  industry, 
both  passing  to  a  higher  stage  of  development,  would  constitute 
a  natural,  organic,  socialistic  whole. 

The   later   narodniki,    adopting   methods   contrasting   with 
those  of  the  earher  members  of  their  school,  endeavqured  to 


808  THE   SPIRIT  OF   RUSSIA 

provide  a  firm  inductive  foundation  for  these  basic  doctrines, 
engaging  in  a  statistical  and  historical  study,  and  attempting 
to  show  that  the  economic  and  social  conditions  of  the  eighties 
and  nineties  furnished  support  for  their  outlook.  It  was  the 
especial  merit  of  Voroncov  that,  in  contrast  with  Juzov,  he 
aimed  at  the  inductive  verification  of  his  teaching  bj''  the  use 
of  statistics,  especially  those  furnished  by  the  zemstvos. 

The  Marxists,  for  their  part,  were  engaged  in  the  onerous 
task  of  effecting  a  scientific  survey  of  the  history  of  Russia's 
economic  evolution.  Having  secured  as  accurate  statistics  as 
possible  concerning  the  economic  conditions  of  Russia  (number 
of  factories,  operatives,  etc.)  and  concerning  the  position  of 
the  various  classes,  and  having  studied  the '  development  of 
industry  and  commerce,  they  endeavoured  to  prove,  and 
indeed  succeeded  in  proving,  that  Russia,  notwithstanding  the 
mir,  notwithstanding  the  artels  and  the  home  industries,  was 
already  carrying  on  its  economic  life  on  a  capitalist  basis, 
and  that  the  proletarianisation  of  the  operatives  and  peasants 
was  by  now  far  advanced. 

This  criticism  and  counter-criticism  of  the  narodniki  (Voron- 
cov, Nikolai-on,  Kary§ev,  etc.)  and  the  Marxists  (Plehanov, 
Struve,  Tugan-Baranovskii,  etc.)  was  the  chief  concern  of 
Russian  theorists  and  politicians  and  of  the  wider  circle  of  the 
intelligentsia  during  the  early  and  middle  nineties.  The 
liberals  took  sides  against  the  narodniki,  although  they  were 
not  in  all  points  in  agreement  with  the  Marxists. ^ 

'  »  The  utterances  of  Marx  and  Engels  upon  the  question  discussed  in  the 
text  are  not  without  importance.  These  two  writers  were  no  less  hostile 
towards  absolutist  Russia  than  had  been  the  European  liberals  of  1848.  As 
previously  recounted,  Marx  became  personally  acquainted  with  a  number  of 
Russians,  and  the  influence  of  these  could  not  fail  to  confirm  him  in  his  un- 
favourable views.  In  the  first  volume  of  Capital  (1867),  Marx  engaged  in  a 
vigorous  polemic  against  Herzen.  In  the  second  edition  (1872).  this  adverse 
passage  was  suppressed  ;  Marx  commended  the  Russian  translation  of  Capital, 
spoke  favoiirably  of  the  before-mentioned  works  by  Ziber,  and  extolled  Cerny- 
Sevskii  for  his  critique  of  Mill.  As  early  as  1870,  in  Marx's  letter  to  the  Russian 
section  of  the  International  in  Geneva,  a  word  of  praise  had  been  given  to 
Cerny§evskii  and  to  Flerovskii  (Condition  of  the  Working  Classes  in  Russia). 
In  his  letters  to  the  Russian  editor  and  translator  of  the  first  volume  of  Capital, 
Nikolai-on  (Danielssohn),  Marx,  in  1873,  declared  himself  opposed  to  Ciderin's 
theory  concerning  the  origin  of  *he  mir.  In  1877,  Mihailovskii,  writing  in  the 
*'  Otecestvennyja  Zapiski,"  basing  his  views  .on  Marx's  history  of  European 
capitalism,  had  anticipated  a  sinister  future  for  Russian  economic  evolution. 
Writing,  however,  to  the  editor  of  this  periodical,  Marx  declared  that  if  Russia 
should  continue  to  pursue  the  path  entered  in  1861,  that  country  would  rob 
itself  of  the  finest  opportunity  that  any  nation  had  ever  had  of  eluding  all  the 
vicissitudes  of  capitalistic  organisation.     Marx  further  declared  in  this  com- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  809 


§  156. 

IN  matters  of  detail  the  narodniki  frequently  differ  con- 
siderably one  from  another.  Some  incline  to  be  conser- 
vative and  Slavophil,  whilst  others  are  socialistic  and  westernist 
in  trend.  These  differences  depend  upon  the  extent  to  which 
they  make  concessions  to  Marxism,  or  upon  the  other  hand 
attempt  to  interpret  Marxist  doctrines  in  their  own  sense. 

The  great  difference  between  the  economic  and  social 
structure  of  Russia  as  contrasted  with  the  rest  of  Europe, 
and  the  peculiarities  of  Russian  economic  evolution,  rendered 
the  doctrines  of  the  narodniki  possible.     Seeing  that  Russian 

municatiou  that  his  history  of  European  capitalism  (in  the  first  volume  of 
Capital)  was  notaliistorico-philosophical  theory  of  the  general  course  of  evolution, 
an  evolution  which  all  nations  must  inevitably  follow.  In  1882,  writing  an  intro- 
duction for  the  Russian  translation  of  the  Communist  Manifesto  (the  translation 
by  VSra  Zasulic)  Marx  and  Engels  insisted  that  the  mir  ought  not  to  be  broken 
up,  as  the  village  community  had  been  in  the  west,  for  it  might  serve  as  the 
starting  point  of  a  communistic  development,  but  could  do  so  only  on  condition 
that  the  Russian  revolution  should  give  the  signal  for  a  working-class  revolution 
in  the  west.  Writing  to  Nikolai-on  in  1892,  Engels  recalled  Marx's  words  of 
1877,  and  declared  that  the  Russian  .peasant  was  already  feeling  the  traditional 
Russian  agrarian  conditions  (those  of  the  mir)  to  be  a  fetter,  as  in  former  days 
the  peasant  had  felt  similar  conditions  to  be  in  Europe.  "  I  am  afraid,"  con- 
tinued Engels,  "  that  we  shall  soon  have  to  look  upon  your  mir  as  no  more  than 
a  memory  of  the  irrecoverable  past,  and  that  in  the  future  we  shall  have  to 
do  with  a  capitalistic  Russia.  If  this  be  so,  a  splendid  chance  will  unquestion- 
ably have  been  lost."  Engels  anticipated  the  proletarianisation  of  the  mufik, 
but  anticipated  likewise  the  ruin  of  the  great  landed  proprietors,  who  would 
be  compelled  by  the  burden  of  their  debts  to  alienate  their  lands.  Between 
the  proletarians  and  the  impoverished  landed  proprietors  there  was  pressing 
in  a  new  class  of  landowners,  the  village  usurers  and  the  burghers  from  the 
towns,  who  would  perhaps  be  the  ancestry  of  the  coming  agrarian  aristocracy. 
In  this  letter  and  in  other  letters  of  1892,  Engels  admitted  that  large-scale 
industry  in  Russia  was  being  artificially  cultivated,  but  he  rightly  pointed  out 
that  similar  artificial  methods  were  being  used  to  promote  industrialisation 
in  other  lands.  As  soon  as  Russia  ceased  to  be  a  purely  agricultural  state, 
she  must  necessarily  adopt  artificial  methods  of  industrialisation  (protective  ~ 
measures,  etc.).  Engels  pointed  out  to  Nikolai-on  the  inevitable  consequences 
of  the  capitalisation  of  Russia,  underlining  the  analogies  with  the  other  countries 
whose  economic  development  was  described  in  Capital.  In  1893  Engels  entered 
into  a  controversy  with  Struve,  who  took  a  lighthearted  view  of  the  evils  of 
capitalisation.  Engels  believed,  with  Nikolai-on,  that  the  capitalisation  of 
Russia  would,  in  view  of  the  peculiar  institutions  of  that  country,  mvolve  an 
extensive  and  disastrous  social  revolution.  Nevertheless  he  did  not  share 
Nikolai-on 's  pessimism.  The  mir,  certainly,  was  doomed  ;  its  continued 
existence  was  impossible  as  soon  as  some  of  its  members  had  become  debtors 
(and  in  fact  slaves)  of  the  others.  Capitalism,  however,  would  open  up  new 
perspectives  :  new  hopes  would  dawn ;  a  great  nation  such  as  the  Russian 
would  survive  any  crisis. 


810  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

economic  statistics  are  still  very  imperfect,  it  is  difficult, 
concerning  disputed  points,  to  adopt  an  apodictic  interpreta- 
tion of  the  facts,  one  that  should  exclude  every  possibility 
of  doubt.  Nevertheless  the  position  of  the  narodniki  has 
become  untenable. 

Let  us  consider  the  question  of  the  capitalisation  of  Russia. 

The  eighties,  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  III  (the  epoch  of 
the  new  economic  policy  which  supported  itself  on  French 
capital),  was  the  era  during  which  the  historico-philosophical 
and  economic  views  of  the  narodniki  secured  literary  for- 
mulation. To  others  as  well  as  to  the  narodniki,  the  febrile 
industrialisation  of  the  country  by  the  state  was  looked  upon 
as  a  hothouse  grov/th. 

Russia  was  largely  provided  with  capital  from  abroad,  so 
that  in  this  sense  the  development  was  "  artificial,"  and  was, 
as  the  narodniki  phrased  it,  "  nursed  "  by  the  state.  But  in 
a  number  of  European  countries,  in  Austria  for  example,  and 
of  late  date  in  Hungary,  foreign  capital  was  introduced,  and 
industrialisation  was  promoted  by  the  state,  no  less  "  arti- 
ficially "  than  in  Russia.  Similar  conditions  prevailed  at  one 
time  in  Germany,  and  almost  universally. 

It  is  true  that  the  (foreign)  capital  of  Russia  was  not  gradually 
accumulated  as  it  was  in  Europe,  where  the  accumulation 
of  capital  was  effected  out  of  industry,  and  pari  passu  with 
the  growth  of  industry.  In  Russia,  however,  side  by  side 
with  the  capital  invested  in  large-scale  manufacture,  the  work- 
ing capital  of  home  industry  {kusiar')  has  continued  to  exist. 
Small-scale  manufacture  carried  on  in  houses,  has  developed 
alongside  large-scale  capitalist  manufacture,  giving  rise  to 
specific  investments  of  capital,  technical  schooling,  and  so  on. 
The  inadequate  facilities  for  communication  in  most  parts  of 
Russia,  the  large  expanse  of  thinly  populated  areas,  an'd  above 
all  the  primitive  state  of  agriculture,  have  helped  to  main- 
tain kustar'  industry  ;  the  simultaneous  industrialisation  and 
capitalisation  of  the  two  chief  cities  and  of  certain  districts 
(eight  in  number)  constituting  industrial  oases — districts  which 
either  enjoy  an  exceptionally  favourable  geographical  situation 
or  have  been  endowed  by  nature  with  coal,  ores,  naphtha, 
etc. — have  favoured  the  growth  of  kustar'  industry. 

The  Marxists  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  Russia 
industrial  concentration  and  the  concentration  of  capital  were 
taking  place  to  a  greater  extent  than  in  Germany  and  other 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  311 

European  lands,  and  references  were  made  to  the  similarities 
between  Russian  and  American  economic  development. 

'  No  doubt  this  so-called  concentration  must  be  accurately 
explained  in  the  Hght  of  Russian  conditions,  its  distinct  forms 
and  causes  must  be  grasped.  A  difference  must  be  made 
between  the  concentration  of  operatives  and  the  concentration 
of  labour  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  concentration  of  capital 
on  the  other.  For  example,  the  plethora  of'  operatives  is 
referable  to  their  inadequate  quahfications  and  to  their  poor 
capacity  for  work,  for  the  majority  of  them  are  still  peasants 
and  semi-peasants,  whose  "  concentration  "  is  of  a  quite  pecu- 
liar kind.  Again,  the  concentration  of  capital  has  quite  a 
different  significance  when  great  capitalists  are  still  few  in 
number,  and  when  these  appear  to  act  as  concentrators  because 
from  the  very  outset  it  has  only  been  possible  for  men  with 
large  capital  to  undertake  industrial  enterprise.  Since  there 
does  not  exist  in  Russia  a  middle  class  corresponding  to  that 
known  to  Europe,  the  owners  of  a  moderate  amount  of  capital 
are  likewise  unknown.  Nevertheless,  in  Russia,  too,  there  has 
occurred  an  increasing  development  of  trusts  and  cartels, 
whilst  in  addition  there  exist  in  that  country  the  monopolies 
which  are  already  of  old  standing. 

Russia  is  "becoming  industrialised  and  capitalised  ;  manu- 
facturing industry,  home  industry,  and  agriculture,  being 
transformed  and  developed  by  industrialisation  and  capital- 
isation. The  home  market  is  not  so  weak  as  the  narodniki 
declared.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  increasing  imports  in  spite 
of  high  duties,  and  by  the  increasing  deposits  in  the  saving 
banks,  Russian  exports  of  manufactured  goods  are  as  yet 
scanty,  but  even  here  the  increase  is  noteworthy. 

It  is  hardly  needful  to  adduce  serious  arguments  against 
the  views  of  those  among  the  narodniki  who  desire  by  all 
possible  means  to  keep  Russia  a  purel}^  agricultural  country, 
and  who,  with  that  end  in  view,  go  so  far  as  to  discountenance 
political  activity  and  to  boycott  the  constitution,  for  it  is 
so  obvious  that  in  the  domain  of  agriculture  the  control, 
cooperation,  and  initiative  of  the  duma  has  led  to  an  improve- 
ment in  agricultural  methods.  If  the  narodniki  said  that 
parliament  would  destroy  the  mir,  we  have  to  remember  that 
it  is  open  to  question  whether  it  is  really  to  the  interest  of 
the  mu2ik  that  the  mir  should  be  retained.  Moreover,  it  v.'as 
not  the  duma,  but  the  government  hostile  to  the  duma,  which 


312  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

nearly  brought  about  the  destruction  of  the  mir  by  the  inno- 
vation of  November  9,  1906,  Again,  though  the  defects  of 
this  measure  are  numerous,  it  cannot  justly  be  said  to  have 
been  injurious  on  the  whole.  Finally,  it  is  certain  to-day 
that  agricultui^e  and  stock-raising  are  making  notable  and  rapid 
progress,  partly  owing  to  the  introduction  of  cooperative 
farming,  and  partly  owing  to  the  technical  training  in  agri- 
culture furthered  by  the  government. 

The  historically  conditioned  pecuHarities  of  Russian  agri- 
cultural life  will  persist,  just  as  Russian  literature  and  art, 
Russian  science  and  philosophy,  Russian  religious  and  social 
conditions,  remain  peculiar,  notwithstanding  the  influence  of 
the  west,  and  notwithstanding  the  identical  tendencies  of 
evolution. 

The  narodniki  could  not  shake  their  minds  free  from  the 
mythical  conception  of  the  soil  as  "  mother  earth,"  or  "  little 
mother  earth."  ^  Doubtless  the  narodniki  had  studied  eco- 
nomics, most  of  them,  indeed,  were  Marxists,  or  rather,  to 
be  precise,  most  of  them  expressed  their  ideas  in  Marxist 
terminology.  They  analysed  the  special  problem  of  land  rent, 
but  continually  diverged  into  the  mythical  conception  and/ 
estimate  of  the  soil.  The  narodniki  were  the  successors  off/ 
the  old  physiocrats,  who  regarded  agriculture  as  the  primitive/ 
and  natural  economy,  opposing  thereto  manufacture,  commerce, 
and  the  other  occupations  of  the  "  classe  sterile  "  as  unnatural. 
According  to  this  view,  agriculture  and  manufacturing  industry, 
country  and  town,  peasant  and  manufacturer,  soil  and  capital, 
are  irreconcilable  opposites  ;  the  history  of  human  develop- 
ment is  a  capitalist  aberration  which  at  the  last  moment  Russia 
may  be  able  to  avoid. 

In  the  light  of  these  doctrines,  strictly  applied,  fruit — • 
fresh  fruit — would  be  the  only  "  natural  "  product  of  the  soil, 
the  only  "  natural  "  nutriment.  Indeed  we  may  go  further, 
and  say  that  only  certain  varieties  of  fruit  could  serve  our 
turn,  for  fruit  trees,  just  like  cereals,  have  for  the  most  part 
been  improved  by  selection,  while  as  for  bread,  this  is  an 
extremely  comphcated  artifact.  Indeed,  it  was  the  soil  which 
first  provided  the  stone  from  which  the  most  primitive  tools 
were  made,  and  all  that  chemistry  and  chemical  manufac- 
turing industry  can  do  is  to  elaborate  the  gifts  of  the  soil. 

t  The  Kussian  term  "  zemlja  "  denotes  the  world,  land,  and  soil ;   in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Slavophils  and  the  narodniki,  these  three  signiiications  merge. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  818 

The  first  peasant  needed  tools,  which  were  not  provided  him 
by  nature  in  the  form  in  which  he  used  them.  Cereals  are 
to-day  to  a  notable  extent  a  manufactured  product,  even  if 
we  consider  them  simply  as  produce,  and  not  as  commodities 
in  the  marketable  sense.  It  is  true  that  the  narodnik  may 
object  that  the  working  of  capitalism  has  been  to  turn  the 
soil  into  a  mere  instrument  for  the  production  of  land-rent, 
thus  annulling  the  old  conception  of  the  soil  as  the  nourisher  ; 
but  even  from  this  outlook  it  is  necessary  to  strive  for  ihe 
technical  perfectionment  of  agriculture,  seeing  that  increase 
of  population  enforces  this  endeavour. 

Besides,  the  narodniki  have  forgotten  the  question  of 
stock-raising.  Is  stock-raising  likewise  perfectly  natural  ? 
What  is  its  relationship  to  the  bringing  of  the  soil  under 
cultivation  ?  Which  was  the  earlier  development,  which  is 
"  more  primitive  "  ? 

Again,  and  similarly,  we  must  enquire  why  home  work, 
and  above  all  the  so-called  home  industry,  should  be  considered 
more  primitive  and- more  natural  than  technically  perfected 
factory  industry. 

The  history  of  agriculture  is  part  of  the  general  history  of 
industry,  and  it  is  utterly  fallacious  to  separate  the  two  spheres 
of  labour  one  from  another,  to  oppose  them  one  to  another 
as  Ormuzd  to  Ahriman. 

But  in  addition  to  the  economic  problem,  the  socio-political 
problem,  the  problem  of  the  apportionment  of  the  soil  presses 
for  solution.  It  is  really  hard  to  see  how  the  mir,  the  artel, 
and  home  work  (whether  as  home  industr}/  for  the  capitalist 
market  or  as  home  industry  for  the  supply  of  family  needs), 
could  solve  the  social  question  in  the  socialist  sense.  We 
have  merely  to  turn  the  pages  of  Russian  history  to  note  on 
almost  every  page  how  unjustly  the  soil  has  been  apportioned. 
We  have  to  ask.  Why  did  "  holy  ".Russia,  despite  its  mir  and 
artel  and  kustar',  fall  into  capitalist  temptation  at  all,  why 
did  the  Russian  Ivan  abandon  his  steppe  to  seek  the  modern 
Jerusalem  ? 

Confirmation  of  the  objections  I  have  adduced  is  furnished 
by  the  agrarian  program  formulated  by.  the  narodniki  after 
the  revolution  of  1905.  The  analysis  of  this  program  is  beyond 
our  present  scope,  but  I  may  be  permitted  a  brief  reference 
to  it  in  so  far  as  it  furnishes  an  additional  argument  against 
the  fundamental  positions  of  the  narodniki. 


314  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

As  early  as  1905,  the  "  young  "  narodniki  came  forward 
with  a  new  program.  This  program  for  the  "  nationaUsation  " 
of  the  land  was  nothing  more  than  a  scheme  for  an  authori- 
tarian state  socialism,  which  aimed,  by  the  system.atic  restric- 
tion of  capitalism,  at  creating  for  the  first  time  an  ideal  m.ir, 
the  mir  that  was  to  save  Russia.  It  is  not  difficult  to  under- 
stand how  the  young  narodniki  yielded  to  the  lure  of  state 
socialism  when  we  remember  that  many  of  the  old  narodniki 
(Nikolai-on,  for  instance)  had  placed  their  hopes  on  state 
socialism  and  its  agrarian  bureaucracy.  When  we  speak  of 
the  state,  however,  we  must  think  of  the  extant  Russian 
state  of  Peter  the  Great,  an  institution  which  the  narodniki 
were  often  no  less  ready  to  ban  than  the  Slavophils  had  been. 

This  state  now  received  the  approval  of  the  "  folk-socialists," 
an  offshoot  of  the  narodniCestvo  formed  after  1905.  Pesehonov, 
who  was  their  spokesman,  reasoned  soundly  when  he  dis- 
played to  the  3^oung  narodniki  the  defects  of  the  arbitrary 
repressive  measures  which  would  degrade  the  commune  to  an 
agrarian  ghetto  ;  yet  he,  for  his  part,  distinguishing  between 
"  possibilities  "  and  simple  "  desires,"  compounded  wdth  the 
historicall}/  extant  monarchy,  hallow^ed  as  it  was  by  centuries, 
and  assigned  to  it  a  decisive  and  leading  role  in  agrarian 
reform.  In  regard  to  details,  the  "  nationalisation  "  of  the  land 
was  to  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  teachings  of 
Henry  George,  for  Pesehonov  forgot  that  Henry  George  had 
based  his  ideas  of  reform  upon  the  institutions  of  a  state  utterly 
different  from  the  Russian.  Or  are  we  perchance  to  believe  . 
that  Pe§ehonov  was  prepared  to  approve  the  revolution  and 
the  constitutionalism  it  had  inaugurated  ? 

However  this  ma}''  be,  Pesehonov  lays  great  stress  on  the 
consideration  that  the  revolution  must  be  social  and  not 
pohtical,  and  he  continually  relapses  into  the  apolitical  social- 
ism of  the  narodni^estvo.  He  maintains,  for  example,  that 
the  demand  for  the  eight-hour  day  will  not  be  effectively 
realised  until  every  worker  has  his  own  portion  of  land,  for  then 
the  workers  will  not  be  dependent  upon  the  factory.  It  is 
plain  that  Pesehonov  is  here  endeavouring  to  put  a  narodnikist 
gloss  upon  the  social  democratic  demand  which  the  folk- 
socialists  have  adopted.  He  refers  to  the  unsuccessful  strike 
of  the  St.  Petersburg  operatives,  which  the  employers  con-  . 
verted  into  a  lock-out,  simply  letting  the  strikers  starve.  The 
operatives  failed  because   they  had  no   "land."     PSSehonov 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  315 

forgets  that  well-organised  workers  win  their  strikes,  not 
through  "  land,"  but  through  the  possession  of  ample  reserve 
funds  and  through  disciphne.  But  far  more  important, 
and  far  more  characteristic  of  narodnikist  "  sociahsm,"  is 
Pegehonov's  recognition  that  factories  are  to  continue  to  exist 
after  the  nationahsation  of  the  land.  How  is  it  possible,  we 
must  ask,  when  once  the  land  has  been  nationalised,  when 
every  worker  (not  merely  every  peasant)  shall  have  received 
his  share  of  land — how  is  it  possible  that  these  tillers  of  the 
soil  can  be  expected  to  leave  their  land  and  to  go  to  work  in 
the  factories  ? 

It  is  plain  that  the  folk-sociahsts  constitute  an  intermediate 
link  between  the  liberals  (cadets)  and  the  social  democrats. 
Their  program  is  a  compromise,  whose  interest  for  us  lies  above 
all  in  this,  that  it  is  derived  rather  from  the  west  than  from 
the  Russian  east.  Economically,  it  is  mainly  a  scheme  for 
amehorations  ;  socially  it  is  a  program  for  land  reform,  wherein 
the  ideals  of  Henry  George  are  reduced  within  the  limits  of 
the  practically  attainable. 

The  narodniki  entertain  uncritical,  mythical  views  concern- 
ing the  moral  worth  of  the  peasant  and  of  rural  or  village  life. 
It  is  a  fallacy  to  regard  the  Russian  peasant  as  at  once  the 
economic  and  the  moral  saviour  of  Russia.  The  country  and 
the  rural  population,  no  less  than  the  town  and  the  urban 
population,  possess  shortcomings,  errors,  and  vices.  Recent 
critical  investigations  into  the  moral  condition  of  rural  areas, 
such  as  have  been  made  in  Germany  (and,  be  it  noted,  by 
men  of  rehgious  and  conservative  views),  should  surely  put  to 
flight  for  ever  this  traditional  romanticism  and  Rousseauism. 

A  critical  survey  of  Russian  rural  life  would  furnish  pre- 
cisely similar  results.  This  is  proved  by  the  descriptions  we 
owe  to  belletristic  writers  among  the  narodniki.  Some,  it 
is  true,  like  Zlatovratskii,  represent  the  peasant  as  a  moral 
hero  ;  but  others,  Gleb  Uspenskii  and  Korolenko  for  instance, 
exhibit  the  muzik  as  human,  all-too-human.  Further,  the 
descriJ)tions  we  owe  to  such  writers  as  ReSetnikov  sKow  us 
rural  life  in  positively  repulsive  colours.  For  the  rest,  even  the 
romanticists  involuntarily  disclose  the  seamy  side  of  Russian 
village  life.^ 

'  I  may  allude  once  more  to  Mel'nikov,  for  his  descriptions  of  the  raskol 
have  frequently  been  eulogised  in  the  spirit  of  the  narodnidestvo.  But  his 
writings  indicate  the  existence  among  the  raskolniki  of  marked  elements  of 


316  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Thus  even  Tolstoi,  who  believed  himself  to  have  been  led 
by  the  mu^iks  and  the  sectaries  to  the  discovery  of  true 
religion,  disclosed  in  his  The  Power  of  Darkness  the  moral 
corruption  of  the  mu^ik.  It  is  enough  in  this  connection  to 
mention  Cehov  and  Gor'kii  ! 

Finally,  if  we  were  to  believe  the  descriptions  of  the  mu^ik 
which  have  been  printed  of  late  in  clericalist  organs,  the  Russian 
saviour  and  messiah  has  become  an  anarchistic  hooligan. 

In  Smoke,  Turgenev  characterises  the  uncritical  narod- 
nicestvo  in  the  following  terms  :  "  The  cultured  Russian 
stands  before  the  Russian  peasant,  makes  a  profound  reverence, 
and  says,  '  Heal  me,'  for  I  am  perishing  from  moral  corrup- 
tion,' and  the  mu^ik  makes  a  reverence  no  less  profound,  and 
rejoins,   '  Help  me,  I  am  perishing  from  ignorance  '." 

As  early  as  1862,  Turgenev  justly  indicated  to  Herzen  the 
political  conservatism  of  the  muzik,  insisting  that  beneath  the 
sheepskin  were  concealed  the  germs  of  the  same  bourgeois 
spirit  which  Herzen  had  discerned  in  the  western  bourgeoisie. 
In  his  prose  poem  The  Worker  and  the  White  Hand  (1878) 
Turgenev  depicts  a  workman  who  would  like  to  have  the  luck- 
bringing  halter  wherewith  a  member  of  the  inteUigentsia  who 
has  gone  down  among  the  people  has  been  hanged — hanged 
on  account  of  his  activities  in  the  cause  of  the  workers.  Mihail- 
ovskii  animadverted  upon  the  "  optimism  "  of  Zlatovratskii. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Russian  peasant  has  changed 
of  late,  and  has  changed  for  the  better,  but  the  improvement 
is  not  due  to  the  labours  of  the  narodniki.  The  mir  notwith- 
standing, the  Russian  village  has  since  1861  undergone  rapid 
economic  and  social  transformation  ;  during  this  period  the 
kulak  (literally  "  fist,"  the  name  given  to  the  village  dealer 
or  middleman)  has  acquired  and  enlarged  his  sinister  reputa- 
tion ;  the  Russian  village,  as  is  conspicuously  indicated  b}'' 
the  great  rise  in  prices,  has  been  drawn  within  the  vortex  of 
capitalism. 

The  young  narodniki  recognise  that  Russia  has  already 
been  capitalised  and  industrialised,  and  they  recognise  further 
that  capitalism  exhibits  for  Russia  and  releases  for  Russia 
energies  that  are  not  merely  negative  and  destructive,  but 
are  in  addition  positive,  organic  and  formative. 

Thus  the  economic  differences  between  the  narodniki  and 

sexual  decadence,  such  as  a  MereJkovskii  could  well  have  utilised  in  his  accounts 
of  the  sectaries. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  317 

the  Marxists  are  overshadowed  by  the  wide  divergence  between 
the  two  camps  in  the  historico-philosophical  domain.  The  two 
trends  are  distinguished  in  respect  of  the  philosophic  founda- 
tions they  attach  to  sociaHsm,  and  as  a  pohtical  party  the 
narodniki  have  since  1905  exhibited  numerous  transitional 
stages  between  the  left  and  the  right.  Some  of  them  incline 
towards  liberalism,  others  towards  Marxism  and  social  demo- 
cracy. Of  the  latter,  again,  some  are  revisionists,  others 
orthodox  revolutionary  Marxists.  As  .previously  explained, 
the  social  revolutionaries,  like  their  predecessors  the  adherents 
of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  are  likewise  counted  among  the 
narodniki.  j: 

III 

§  157- 

FOR  the  understanding  of  Russian  Marxism  it  will  be  ad- 
vantageous, in  view  of  the  intimate  mutual  connection 
between  Russian  and  European  Marxism  and  especially  be- 
tween Russian  and  German  Marxism,  that  we  should  give  a 
brief  account  of  the  state  of  Marxism  in  Europe,  concentrating 
our  attention  upon  German  Marxism.  We  shall  discuss  the 
crisis  within  the  Marxist  movement — for  such  is  the  aptest 
designation  of  the  state  of  Marxism.- 

I  In  illustration  of  these  transitional  phases  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  after 
1905  Voroncov  joined  the  trudoviki.  This  group  was  distinguished  from  the 
folk-socialists  by  its  tactical  methods.  As  a  writer,  however,  from  1900  onwards. 
Voroncov  became  connected  with  the  liberal  periodical  "  VSstnik  Evropy,"  which 
previously  he  had  fiercely  attacked.  Thus  the  views  of  the  narodniki  under- 
went development,  and  their  position  was  modified.  Of  late  P^Sehouov  has 
been  advocating  a  working  alliance  between  the  two  socialist  parties,  between 
the  social  revolutionaries  and  the  social  democrats. 

-  In  1898  I  gave  a  summary  of  the  scientific,  philosophical,  and  political 
situation  within  the  Marxist  movement.  A  more  detailed  consideration  of 
the  same  theme  will  be  found  in  the  work  which  I  pubUshed  in  German 
in  1S99,  The  Philosophical  and  Sociological  Foundations  of  ^Marxism.  My 
analysis  has  been  confirmed  by  the  subsequent  history  of  Marxism,  a  history 
with  which  I  have  dealt  in  a  number  of  essays.  In  the  "  Zeit  "  of  Vienna 
during  the  years  1S99  to  1901  appeared  :  Bernstein's  Suppositions,  Kautsky's 
Critique  of  Bernstein,  The  Millerand  Affair,  The  Party  Congresses  of  Stuttgart 
and  Liibeck,  The  Revision  of  the  Hainfeld  Program.  In  the  "  Wolfschen  Zeit- 
schrift  fiir  Sozialwissenschaft  "  during  the  years  1904  to  1907  were  published  : 
the  Viennese  Marx-Studies,  Lassalle  by  H.  Oncken,  the  Ethics  of  A.  Menger 
and  of  Kautsky,  Vandervelde's  Socialistic  Essaj-s.  In  the  "  Zeitschrift  fiir 
Politik  "  for  1912  was  published.  Syndicalism  and  Democracy  (Lagardelle  and 
Sorel).  I  append  this  hst  of  my  own  writings  to  justify  myself  for  introducing 
a  summary  of  my  views  into  the  present  study. 


318  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

According  to  Marx,  the  organisation  of  society  in  the  epoch 
of  civiUsation,  beginning  in  Greece  with  the  dominance  of 
Athens,  and  in  Italy  with  the  rise  of  Rome,  fundamentally 
consists  in  the  continual  opposition  and  struggle  between  two 
classes  ;  this  struggle,  he  contends,  makes  up  the  essence  and 
comprises  the  content  of  history  ;  the  mass  of  the  working 
population  is  kept  in  subjection  by  the  idle  but  dominant 
class,  is  kept  in  one  form  or  another  of  social  or  political  ser- 
vitude. The  state  is  the  political  expression  of  the  dominant 
and  oppressing  class.  In  the  modern  era,  class  contrasts  have 
become  accentuated  in  the  struggle  between  the  proletarian 
masses  and  the  capitalists.  The  proletarian  masses  undergo 
increasing  impoverishment  owing  to  the  way  in  which  the 
product  of  their  labour,  value  and  surplus  value,  is  continuously 
absorbed  by  the  capitalist  entrepreneur  ;  this  process  will 
continue  until  possessions  become  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of  a  very  small  number  of  capitalists,  and  then  will  come  the 
cataclysm,  the  definitive  revolution,  whereby  the  proletarians 
will  reestablish  communism.  For  in  Marx's  view,  society  in 
its  most  primitive  stage  was  communistically  organised,  and 
primitive  communism  was  swept  away  when  the  era  of  private 
property  began.  Extant  capitalism  is  the  terminal  phase  of 
private  property,  and  in  the  comparatively  near  future  will 
yield  place  to  communism.  This  already  imminent  com- 
munism v/ill  doubtless  differ  in  certain  respects  from  primitive 
communism  ;  it  will  be  a  complicated  but  deliberately  thought- 
out  system  of  social  organisation.  The  coming  of  the  com- 
munistic era  can  be  foreseen  by  the  scientific  historian  ;  and 
communism  itself,  therefore,  is  in  part  rooted  in  the  historical 
process.  Practically,  socio-politically,  the  transformation  •  in- 
alterably  determined  by  the  objective  dialectical  process  of 
historical  evolution  will  be  brought  about  in  the  following 
manner.  In  the  very  last  phase  of  the  capitalistic  epoch  the 
workers  will  gain  control  of  the  state  (the  dictatorship  of  the 
proletariat),  v/ill  abolish  the  state,  and  will  conduct  society 
to  the  higher  communistic  stage  of  evolution.  This  stage  will 
close  the  era  of  historical  evolution. 

Marx  did  not  furnish  a  detailed  account  of  the  history  of 
this  evolution,  but  in  his  analysis  of  capitalist  production  and 
of  the  circulation  of  goods  and  commodities  he  endeavoured 
to  elucidate  the  application  of  the  dialectical  process  of  evolu- 
tion to  the  present  day,  to  the  most  recent  phase  of  history. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  319 

It  was  left  for  Engels  to  undertake  a  detailed  application  of 
the  Marxist  scheme  to  history  at  large. 

Marx  and  Engels  were  so  exclusively  historians,  so  exclusively 
dialecticians  in  Hegel's  sense,  that  they  were  not  concerned 
to  undertake  an^  exposition  of  social  organisation  (to  deal 
with  what  Comte  termed  social  statics  in  contrast  with  social 
dynamics).  The  concept  of  this  organisation  can,  however, 
be  abstracted  from  history,  and  we  have  moreover  for  this 
purpose  the  Marxist  formula  known  as  the  doctrine  of 
historical  materialism. 

Marx  contends  that  the  totality  of  the  relationships  of 
production,  the  economic  structure  of  society,  constitutes  the 
real  basis  upon  which  the  legal  and  political  superstructure 
is  built  and  to  which  definite  forms  of  social  consciousness 
correspond.  These  relationships  of  production  are,  in  fact, 
independent  of  the  human  v/ill ;  they  have  originated  histori- 
cally, in  correspondence  with  a  definite  stage  of  the  evolution 
of  the  material  forces  of  production.  In  a  certain  phase  of 
development  the  material  productive  forces  of  society  come 
into  conflict  with  the  preexistent  relationships  of  production 
(i.e.  conditions  of  ownership)  within  which  they  have  hitherto 
had  their  being.  These  earlier  relationships,  which  were  at 
first  evolutionary  forms  of  the  productive  energies,  now 
manifest  themselves  as  shackles  to  those  energies,  and  an 
epoch  of  social  revolution  ensues.  With  the  transformation 
of  the  economic  basis,  the  whole  colossal  superstructure  is 
more  or  less  rapidly  overthrov/n.  When  we  are  contemplating 
such  transformations  we  must  ever  be  careful  to  distinguish 
.between  the  material  transformation  in  the  economic  con- 
ditions of  production,  which  is  effected  in  strict  conformity 
with  the  reign  of  natural  law,  and  the  legal,  political,  religious, 
artistic,  or  philosophical  (in  a  word,  ideological)  forms  wherein 
human  beings  become  aware  of  this  conflict  and  carry  on  the 
struggle.  In  broad  outline  Marx  depicts  the  Asiatic,  classical, 
feudal,  and  modern  capitalist  modes  of  production,  respectively, 
as  progressive  epochs  in  the  economic  formation  of  society. 
The  capitalist  method  of  production  has  created  the  antagon- 
ism between  the  productive  forces  of  society  and  the  relation- 
ships of  ownerships,  an  antagonism  which  will  be  solved  by 
the  material  conditions  which  this  same  capitalist  structure 
of  society  has  already  prepared  ;  for  humanity  never  sets 
itself  problems   which  it  is  incompetent   to  solve,  and  indeed 


320  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

these  problems  can  only  become  intelligible  when  the  material 
conditions  rendering  their  solution  possible  alread}^  exist,  at 
least  in  the  germ. 

Such  is  the  celebrated  formula  of  historical  or  economic 
materialism  whereby  history  is  represented  as  a  dialectical 
and  objective  mass  process  independent  of  ttie  individual  will. 
The  formula  v^all  be  found  in  the  preface  to  Marx's  Critique 
of  Political  Economy,  published  in  the  year  1859.  The  first 
sketches  of  this  formulation  exist  in  earlier  works,  but  Marx 
himself,  and  to  a  still  greater  extent  Engels  and  his  younger 
disciples,  were  subsequently  responsible  for  such  extensive 
variations  in  the  formula  that  the  "  real  basis  "  of  productive 
relationships  has  been  supplemented  or  replaced  by  technical 
advances  (including  the  fundamental  sciences  of  mathematics, 
physics,  chemistry,  etc.),  racial  qualities,  the  geographical 
environment,  the  energies  that  determine  the  relationships  of 
population,  etc.  At  the  same  time,  historical  materialism,  in 
view  of  the  criticism  it  encountered,  was  reduced  to  a  method, 
a  heuristic  method. 

It  would  be  quite  incredible  that  so  obscure  and  inaccurate 
a  formula  should  have  had  so  powerful  an  influence,  had  it 
not  become  the  scientific  basic  formula  of  revolutionary  social- 
ism, which  in  Germany  and  other  countries  has  effected  the 
national  and  international  organisation  of  the  working  masses 
to  constitute  the  social  democracy. 

Marxist  historical  materialism  has  been  philosophically 
and  sociolologically  superseded.  The  history  of  mankind  has 
a  significance  different  from  that  which  Marx  impressed  upon 
it  with  his  doctrine  of  historical  materialism  based  upon  the 
materialism  of  Feuerbach. 

Practically  and  socio-politically,  just  as  much  as  theo- 
retically, Marxism  abandons  its  positions,  or  at  least  modifies 
them  to  a  great  extent.  In  especial  it  is  necessary  to  insist 
on  the  fact  that  Marxist  social  democracy,  above  all  in  Germany 
and  Austria,  has  had  the  revision  of  its  doctrines  forced  upon 
it  by  participation  in  political  and  parliamentary  work.  Re- 
visionism has  never  possessed  any  theorist  whose  abihty  and 
force  rivalled  those  of  Marx.  It  was  the  work  of  practical 
politics  which  necessitated  revisionism. 

In  Germany,  Austria,  Italy,  Belgium,  France,  and  England, 
the  Marxists,  during  their  political  activities  within  their  own 
party,  during  their  work  in  parliaments,  local  governments. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  821 

trade  unions,  etc.,  had  forced  upon  them  the  conclusion  that 
state  and  church  are  no  mere  superstructure,  as  Marx  contended 
(Marx's  own  thought  was  obscure,  since  he  conceived  the  super- 
structure, now  as  the  state,  now  as  pohtical  ideals,  and  now 
again  as  law).  Moreover,  in  the  work  of  practical  poUtics 
the  Marxist  learned  to  prize  nationality  as  an  independent 
social  organisation  side  by  side  with  the  organisation  of  state 
and  church — in  a  word,  he  came  to  recognise  that  the  compHcated 
organisation  of  society  cannot  be  accurately  conceived  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  simplifying  formula  of  historical  material- 
ism. At  the  same  time  the  practical  Marxist  learned  that  the 
social  democracy  and  its  program  were  less  radically  distinct 
from  the  other  democratic  parties  and  their  programs  than 
the  founder  of  the  social  democracy  had  assumed  and  than 
many  of  its  leaders  still  assume.  Bernstein's  phrase  "  from 
sect  to  party  "  affords  a  summary  watchword  of  the  new  view 
which  through  the  discussion  of  tactics  has  come  to  prevail 
widely  among  the  Marxists  of  all  lands. 

This  discussion  of  tactics  relates  in  especial  to  the  possible 
participation  of  the  social  democrats  in  the  government.  If 
the  discussion  laid  especial  stress  upon  the  question  of-  the 
acceptance  of  office  by  socialists  and  upon  the  question  of  voting 
for  the  state  budget,  the  restriction  of  outlook,  though  com- 
prehensible enough,  is  uncritical,  for  participation  in  local 
government  is  essentially  of  the  same  nature  as  participa- 
tion in  the  government  of  the  state — quite  apart  from  the 
consideration  that  a  Berlin  town  councillor  may  have  more 
important  functions  than  a  minister  in  Baden. 

In  the  last  resort,  the  discussion  of  tactics  must  lead  to  a 
revision  of  the  concept  of  social  revolution  ;  the  terms  revo- 
lution, reform,  and  evolution,  must  be  accurately  defined. 
The  social  democrat  who  enters  parliament  as  a  deputy,  who 
enters  a  bourgeois  institution,  participates  in  the  working  of 
the  state  which  in  theory  he  boycotts  and  negates.  In  practice, 
therefore,  he  has  decided  in  favour  of  the  tactics  of  reform, 
for  history  has  taught  him  that  the  time  for  the  definitive' 
social  revolution  anticipated  by  Engels  and  Marx  has  not 
yet  arrived.  In  truth  the  people  who  expect  too  much  are  of 
as  little  practical  use  as  were  their  forerunners  the  millenarians. 
In  practice,  the  Marxist  who  is  dominated  by  the  revolutionary 
mood  and  aspires  to  the  (definitive)  social  revolution  is  faced 
with  a  dilemma.     According  to  his  program,  extant  society 

22  VOL.  II. 


322  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

is  wholly  bad  ;  but  he  must  eicher  recognise  it  inasmuch  as 
he  makes  no  attempt  to  improve  it,  or  else  he  must  attempt 
to  improve  it  and  must  thereby  recognise  it — and  either  course 
will  conflict  with  the  letter  of  the  Marxist  doctrine. 

But  theory,  too,  confutes  Marxism.  It  is  an  old  story  that 
the  materialism  of  Marx  and  Engels  is  untenable  ;  the  entire 
doctrine  of  historical  or  economic  materialism  is  simply  unscien- 
tific as  a  form  of  psychological  and  metaphysical  materialism  ; 
and  the  Vv^hole  conception  of  the  "  superstructure  "  is  obscure 
and  devoid  of  meaning.  -    . 

The  positivism  of  Marx  and  Engels,  no  less  than  their 
materialism,  is  epistemologically  untenable  and  incapable  of 
being  carried  out  in  practice. 

With  positivism,  there  falls  likewise  historism  in  its  extreme 
form,  the  attempt  to  base  socialism  as  communism  in  a  purel)^ 
objective  manner  and  by  a  law  of  evolution.  If  Marx  and 
Engels  conceive  the  notion  of  science  and  conceive  their  scien- 
tific socialism  in  this  sense  of  positivist  historism,  it  is  because 
they  start  from  the  entirely  false  assumption  that  for  the 
masses,  for  society,  for  humanity  (this  concept  is  not  accurately 
defined  by  Marx  and  Engels)  and  its  history,  the  individual 
consciousness  is  a  negligible  quantity.  The  theory  is  in  con- 
formity with  the  teaching  of  Comte  and  v/ith  his  contem.pt 
for  psychology,  but  it  is  fundamentally  erroneous.  When 
Marx  says.  It  is  not  the  consciousness  of  human  beings  which 
determines  their  existence,  but  conversely  it  is  their  social 
existence  which  determines  their  consciousness,  this  is  to  say 
nothing  at  all,  and  is  moreover  to  beg  the  question  (by  the 
use  of  "existence"  and  "social  existence"  as  convertible 
terms).  There  is  simply  no  such  thing  as  a  mass  conscious- 
ness or  a  class  consciousness ;  when  Engels  sacrifices  the 
"  beggarly  individual  "  to  the  mass,  and  eliminates  the  indi- 
vidual consciousness  as  a  negligible  quantity,  he  is  altogether 
wrong-headed.  Everything  which  Engels  and  the  Marxists 
adduce  for  the  elucidation  of  their  conception  of  ideology  as 
a  reflex,  an  indication,  a  sign,  and  so  on,  lacks  clearness, 
and  is  erroneous,  precisely  for  the  reason  that  the  individual 
consciousness  is  not  falsified  in  the  sense  in  which  Engels 
declared  it  to  be  falsified  when  he  explained  individual  motive 
as  appaarance,  imagination,  and  illusion.  - 

Postkantian  philosophy  has  made  so  thorough  a  study  of 
psychology  and  sociology,  and  above  all  of  the  philosophy  of 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  823 

history,  that,  despite  certain  new  attempts  a  la  Diirkheim, 
we  can  quietly  ignore  the  mass  consciousness  talked  of  by 
Marx  and  Engels.  The  discussion  concerning  the  nature  of 
history  has  been  so  diUgently  and  so  persistently  conducted 
that  we  are  further  in  a  position  to  discard  Marx's  conception 
of  history  and  his  purely  would-be-objective  historism.  The 
historical  dialectic  which  was  transferred  from  the  Hegelian 
system  into  the  Marxist  system  as  an  objective  "  material 
dialectic,"  has  no  real  existence. 

Marx  and  Engels  developed  historism  into  an  ultra-positivist 
amoralism  which  is  untenable  precisely  because  the  individual 
consciousness  cannot  be  absorbed  by  the  mythical  mass  con- 
sciousness. (The  concept  of  mass  is  vaguely  employed  by  Marx 
and  Engels,  nov\'  as  party,  and  now  as  humanity.)  From  the 
notion  of  the  determinism  of  nature  and  of  history,  Marx- 
deduced  the  unfreedom  of  the  individual  will,  instead  of  em- 
pirically approaching  the  problem  of  the  so-called  freedom 
of  the  will  through  a  psychological  analysis  of  facts.  Thus 
determinism  was  transformed  into  fatalism. 

In  practice,  none  the  less,  Marx  and  Engels  made  a  pre- 
dominant appeal  to  the  ethical  decision  of  the  individual ; 
the}^  continually  appealed  against  capitalism  to  the  revolu- 
tionary sentiment ;  every  speech  in  a  social  democratic  meeting, 
the  entire  social  democratic  party  education,  is  a  flagrant 
disavowal  of  objectivist  amoralism  ;  theoretical  amoralism  is 
overthrown  by  practical  moralism.  To  Marx  and  Engels, 
moral  preachments  are  tedious  and  appear  ineffective — but 
they  are  themselves  preachers,  and  expect  their  sermons  to 
change  the  bourgeois  outlook.  Marxism  as  a  philosophical 
and  sociological  system  is,  after  all,  itself  nothing  but  ideology, 
and  this  ideology  has  been  conceived  prior  to  the  practical 
realisation  of  communism,  Marxist  ideology  is  not  a  super- 
structure but  a  substructure  and  an  anteroom  ! 

Socialism  can  have  no  other  than  an  ethical  foundation. 
The  European  and  Russian  predecessors  of  Marx  are  perfectl}/' 
right  here.  Criticism,  science,  does  not  do  away  with  the 
motivation  of  actions  or  with  the  formulation  of  aims  ;  uto- 
pianism  is  not  rooted  in  morality,  but  in  inadequate  criticism 
and  in  the  lack  of  scientific  grasp.  Consequently  Marx's 
amoralism  is  itself  Utopian.  Unquestionably  it  is  far  from  easy 
to  grasp  and  to  decide  how  the  course  of  history  exercises  a 
codeterminative   influence   upon   the   individual,    or   to   what 


324  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

extent  individual  consciousness  and  will  find  expression  in  the 
mass  and  in  the  course. of  evolution,  but  this  is  not  to  admit 
that  the  individual  is  "  beggarly  "  and  of  no  account.  There 
are  differences  between  individuals ;  historiographers  speak 
of  great  m.en,  and  associate  historical  happenings  with  the 
personalities  of  these  ;  to  what  extent  they  are  right  in  doing 
so  is  a  question  to  be  decided  on  its  merits  in  each  case,  but 
anyhow  the  'so-called  great  men  are  themselves  individuals. 
Bernstein  does  no  more  than  give  expression  to  an  admitted 
truth  when  he  desires  to  establish  socialism  subjectively  not 
objectively,  ethically  not  historically.  Socialism  is  an  ethical 
problem. 

Are  we  then  to  return  to  Kant  ?  That  is  a  different  question. 
It  is  true  that  Engels  discovered  his  philosophical  mentors 
in  Kant  and  Fichte  as  well  as  in  Hegel,  and  reasons  can  be 
adduced  for  a  synthesis  of  Marxism  with  Kantianism.  Vor- 
lander  and  others  made  such  an  attempt  ;  Tugan-Baranovskii 
and  men  of  similar  views  have  written  on  the  other  side.  The 
cry.  Return  to  Kant,  may  signify  that  the  Marxists  wish 
to  devote  themselves  to  epistemological  criticism,  and  to  this 
extent  there  is  good  reason  for  the  adoption  of  such  a  watch- 
word. But  Kant's  philosophy  is  essentially  ethical,  and  we 
are  compelled  to  ask  how  the  amoralist  and  positivist  histor- 
ism  of  Marx  and  Engels  can  be  practically  united  (I  mean  of 
course  organically  united)  with  the  teaching  of  Kant. 

The  orthodox  Marxists,  as  contrasted  with  the  younger 
socialists  and  the  revisionists,  raise  the  cry.  Return  to  Marx. 
In  many  cases,  especially  in  the  field  of  political  economy, 
there  may  be  good  reason  for  the  demand.  As  a  philosopher, 
Marx  has  been  superseded,  and  revisionism  has  made  no  new 
contribution  in  this  domain. 

The  Marxists,  the  orthodox  Marxists  that  is  to  say,  are 
accustomed  to  conduct  their  apologetics  in  a  purely  scholastic 
manner.  Scholasticism  arises  ever^^where  and  always  when 
reputedly  absolute  concepts  and  absolute  truths  have  to  be 
maintained  and  restated  in  opposition  to  the  progress  of  thought. 
For  the  orthodox  Marxists,  however,  it  remains  a  scandal  that 
the  so-called  unorthodox  revisionism  should  continue  to  find 
a  place  within  the  party,  should  be  tolerated  there,  and  should 
be  enabled  to  maintain  its  place  with  the  assistance  of  scholastic 
and  ambiguous  resolutions  passed  at  party  congresses. ^ 

^  The  exclusion  of  the  author  Hildebrand  for  his  colonial  policy,  decreed 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  325 

Socialism  is  not  identical  with  Marxism,  but  Marxism  is 
an  extremely  important  and  significant  socialistic  system. 

§  158. 

THE  Russian  social  democratic  refugees  formulated  their 
first  program  in  the  year  1884, 
Russia,  they  said  (and  we  read  here  the  Marxist  diagnosis), 
is  suffering  from  the  development  of  capitalism,  but  likewise 
from  the  incompleteness  of  that  development.  The  outcome 
of  these  conditions  is  the  lack  of  a  middle  class,  one  competent 
to  take  the  initiative  in  the  struggle  against  absolutism.  Con- 
sequently the  socialist  intelligentsia  must  take  over  this  task, 
must  assume  leadership  in  the  fight  for  liberation  ;  their  work 
is  to  secure  free  political  institutions  for  Russia  and  to  found 
a  democratic  constitution.  In  matters  of  detail  the  constitu- 
tionalist demands  of  the  social  democrats  were  essentiall}/ 
identical  with  those  of  the  Narodnaja  Vol] a. 

The  socialist  intelligentsia  is  to  lead  ;  but  to  lead  whom  ? 
There  is  no  middle  class,  the  peasant  is  conservative,  so  there 
remain  only  the  operatives,  the  proletariat.  This  last  must 
be  organised  by  the  socialist  intelligentsia,  prepared  for  the 
struggle  against  absolutism,  but  also  for  the  struggle  against 
th'B  bourgeois  parties  of  a  coming  day. 

In  addition  to  the  preparatory  work,  the  program  recognises 
that  there  is  need  for  a  terrorist  campaign  against  the  absolutist 
government.  The  relationship  to  the  terrorist  party  of  the 
Narodnaja  Volja  is  expressly  based  upon  the  divergent  concep- 
tion of  the  social  democrats  regarding  "  the  so-called  seizure 
of  power  by  the  revolutionary  party  and  regarding  the  aims 
of  the  immediate  activity  of  the  socialists  within  the  working 
class." 

The  mere  name  of  the  new  group,  which  was  known  as 
the  Group  for  the  Liberation  of  Labour,  recalls  the  phraseology 
of  the  Gotha  program^  which  served  in  1875  as  the  basis  of  a 
fusion  between  the  Marxist  "  Eisenachers  "  and  the  LassalHsts. 
In  certain  other  respects,  too,  the  Russian  program  is  reminis- 
cent of  the  German,  but  the  most  important  resemblance  of 

in  April  1912  by  the  executive  committee  of  the  German  Social  Democratic 
Party,  having  been  referred  to  a  special  arbitral  committee,  was  confirmed  by 
four  votes  against  three. 

*  Cf.  English  translation,  The  Gotha  Program,  Socialist  Labour  Press,  1919. 


326  THE' SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

all  lies  in  this,  that  both  were  compromise  programs.  The 
Russian  program  was  that  of  the  terrorist  executive  committee^ 
restated  in  Marxist  terminology  ;  it  was  really  Marxist  in  so 
far  only  as  concerned  the  nature  of  its  hopes  for  the  future, 
seeing  that  for  the  present  it  recommended  the  tactics  of  the 
terrorist  Narodnaja  Vol] a. 

Plehanov,  who  with  VSra  ZasuliC  and  P.  Akselrod,  was 
the  leader  of  the  group,  subsequently  admitted  the_Jnconsis- 
tencies  of  the  program,  and  agreed  that  unduly  extensive 
concessions  were  made  to  the  narodniki.  Personally  he 
endeavoured  to  make  good  the  defect  and  to  expound 
clearly  the  principles  of  social  democracy. 

In  articles  and  other  writings  published  during  the  eighties, 
Plehanov  follov\'ed  the  lines  of  the  Communist  Manifesto,  doing 
this  notably  in  Socialism  and  the  Political  Struggle  (1883)  and 
Our  Differences  (1884) .  Subsequently,  during  the  nineties,  he  was 
guided  rather  by  the  tactics  of  the  German  social  democracy. 

Plehanov  was  critical  of  his  socialist  predecessors,  the 
Bakuninists,  the  Blanquists,  the  Lavrovists,  and  the  Narodnaja 
Volja.  He  described  Herzen,  Bakunin,  Tkacev,  and  Cerny- 
sevskii  as  narodniki,  and  he  rejected  the  doctrines  of  the  narod- 
ni($estvo.  He  anticipated  the  further  development  of  Russian 
capitalism,  already  fairly  strong  by  1884,  and  at  the  same 
time  he  hoped  that  the  socialist  ideal  would  be  realised  through 
the  work  of  the  Social  Democratic  Labour  Party.  An  ex- 
narodnik  and  ex-m_ember  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  he  regarded 
as  mere  utopianism  the  hopes  that  had  hitherto  been  centred 
in  the  Russian  muzik.  It  was,  he  said,  positively  childish 
utopianism  to  imagine  that  ninety  per  cent,  of  the  members 
of  a  national  assembly  elected  by  universal  suffrage  would 
decide  in  favour  of  the  sociahst  (communist)  program.  The 
only  goal  for  Russian  socialists  who  desired  to  keep  their 
fancies  within  bounds  must  be,  he  said,  to  secure  a  demoj 
cratic  constitution  upon  the  basis  of  universal  suffrage,  and 
Jto' prepare  the  elements  for  the  future  socialist  party  of  the 
workers.  To  this  end,  the  sympathy  of  society  at  large  was 
essential,  and  he  therefore  warned  his  fellow  socialists  against 
needlessly  alarming  men  of  moderate  views  by  the  display 
of  the  "  red  phantom."  The  peasant  mentahty  was  not 
socialist,  and  therefore  the  preliminary  work  must  be  done 
by  the  socialists  among  the  intelligentsia  and  by  the  urban 
operatives.     It   will  be   seen   that   Plehanov   assigned   to   the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  827 

"  socialists  "   the   role   which  in   1848   had  been   assigned  by 
Marx  and  Engels  to  the  "  communists," 

In  all  the  older  revolutionary  trends,  from  Herzen  onwards, 
there  had  been,  thought  Plehanov,  a  strong  admixture  of 
anarchism.  In  his  view,  however,  the  main  purpose  of  the 
political  struggle  must  be  to  awaken  the  political  consciousness 
of  the  workers  and  to  educate  them  against  absolutism.  Bar- 
ricades and  bombs  were  not  the  only  weapons  in  the  political 
campaign. 

These  views  had  already  been  enunciated  in  the  essay  of 
1883  on  Socialism  and  the  Political  Struggle.  They  were  reiter- 
ated in  1902  in  the  opening  number  of  the  review  "  Zarja." 
He  here  elaborated  the  distinction  between  his  own  "  political  " 
program  and  the  program  of  Herzen  and  Herzen's  successors, 
pointing  out  once  more  the  anarchism  that  characterised  these 
earlier  revolutionaries.  At  this  date,  Plehanov  had  already 
come  to  accept  the  parliamentary  tactics  of  the  German  social 
democracy,  and  subsequently  therefore  was  consistent  in  his 
opposition  to  the  boycotting  of  the  duma.  In  conformity 
with  these  views,  Plehanov  declared  himself  opposed  to  the 
jacobin  and  anarchist  theory  of  the  "  seizure  of  the  reins  of 
power,"  contending  that  in  view  of  the  unpreparedness  of  the 
masses  this  seizure  could  end  only  in  a  fiasco  and  would  display 
itself  in  essentials  to  be  nothing  beyond  an  ephemeral  con- 
spirac}^  When  Plehanov  thought  of  the  seizure  of  power  he 
had  in  mind  that  the  seizure  v/as  to  be  effected  by  the  masses 
sufficiently  prepared  for  the  social  revolution,  that  is  to  say 
by  the  masses  of  the  operatives.  But  Plehanov  held  that  as 
far  as  Russia  was  concerned  the  hour  for  such  a  seizure  was 
still  far  distant. 

This  opposition  to  anarchist  Blanquism  likewise  inspired 
Plehanov's  philosophical  treatise  against  the  narodniki,  a  work 
entitled  Concerning  the  Evolution  of  the  Monistic  View  of  His- 
tory. In  this  book,  Plehanov  laid  the  principal  stress  upon 
determinism,  endeavouring  to  clarify  the  concepts  of  freedom 
and  necessity.  Speaking  generally,  as  against  the  chance-it 
and  trust-to-luck  of  Blanquism,  he  advocated  a  positivist  in- 
sight into  the  law-abiding  course  of  historical  development 
as  the  essence  and  superior  merit  of  the  m.aterialist  concep- 
tion of  history. I 

»  Plehanov  was  born  in  1857,  and  joined  the  revolutionary  narodniki  whilst 
still  a  student  at  the  mining  academy  in  St.  Petersburg.     From  the  outset  he 


828  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 


§  159. 

THE  history  of  the  Russian  social  democracy , is  an  effective 
refutation  of  Marxist  historical  materialism. 
The  forerunner  of  the  Social  Democratic  party,  the  Group_ 
for  the  Liberation   of   Labour,  was   a   literary  association   to. 
popularise  and  diffuse  the  ideas  of  Marx.     Plehanov's  isolation 
after  the  disintegration  of  the  party  was  itself  an  argumentum 
ad  hominem,  for  it  showed  that  philosophical  ideas  are  not 
dependent  upon  economic  relationships  to  the  extent  implied 
by  the   doctrine   of  historical  materialism.     Willingly  or  un- 
willingly, Plehanov  and  the  orthodox  Russian  Marxists  were 
a  section  of  the  socialist  intelligentsia.     In  like  manner,  Marx 
and  Engels  were  the  teachers  and  organisers  of  the  German 
social  democracy,  and  according  to  them,  too,  the  role  of  the 
social  democratic  intelligentsia  was  one  of  intellectual  leader- 
ship.    Hunger,    said   Marx,   makes   no   history  ;     but   further, 
hunger  makes  no  politics  and  no  parties.     Marxist  ideas  are 
not    a    mere    superstructure,    for    they    anticipate    economic 
development.     The    Marxist    program    relates    to   social    and 
political  work  which  has  yet  to  be  performed  ;    it  is  an  anti- 
preferred  to  work  among  the  operatives.     He  was  a  member  of  the  Zemlja  i 
Vol]  a,  and  after  the  spUt  in  that  party  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Cernyi 
PeredSl.     In    1880   Plehanov   sought  refuge  in   Europe.     Here   for   a   time   he 
collaborated  in  the  periodical  issued  by  the  Narodnaja  Volja,  but  his  antagonism 
to  Blanquism  severed  him  from  his  sometime  friends,  and  he  thus  became  the 
real  founder  of  the  Russian  social  democracy  and  the  "  father  of  Russian  Marx- 
ism."    It  was  remarkable  that  in  1895  he  should  have  been  expelled  from  Paris 
as  an  anarchist.     In  1889  he  had  been  expelled  from  Geneva,  but  before  long 
was   readmitted.     The   granting   of  constitutional   freedom   in   Russia  enabled 
Plehanov    to    retm-n   home.     When   the   social   democrats  broke    up    in    1903, 
Plehanov,  though  taking  the  side  of  the  minority,  adopted  a  peculiar  position 
which  led,  as  previously  described,  to  his  leaving  that  faction  and  taking  up 
a  somewhat  isolated  position.     After   1905   Plehanov  published  his  Diary  of 
a  Social  Democrat,  composed  after  the  manner  of  Mihailovskii  and  Dostoevskii. 
He  also  issjied  collected  essays,  comprising  literary  criticisms  (The  Narodniki 
in     Belletristic    Literature,    viz.  :     Naumov,    GlSb    ITspenskii,    and    Karonin  ; 
Nekrasov  ;     Gor'kii  ;     Ibsen)  ;    essays  on  Belinskii,  CernySevskii,   Herzen,   and 
Pogodin  ;    and  philosophical  articles,  polemic  for  the  most  part,  directed  against 
the  various  opponents  of  historical  materialism.     In  addition  to  the  two  works 
against  the  narodnilu,  I  may  mention  his  translation  of  Engels'  book  on  Feuer- 
bach,  and  his  contributions  to  the  Russian  translation  (1903)  of  Thun's  History 
of  the  Revolutionary  Movement  in  Russia  (first  published  in  German  in  1883). 
In  the  German  language  he  has  contributed  numerous  articles  to  the  "  NeueZeit." 
Independent  works  in  German  are  Contributions  to  the  History  of  Materialism 
(Holbach,  Helvetius,  and  Marx),   1896  ;    N.  G.  Tschernischewsky,   1894  ;    The 
Fundamental  Problems  of  Marxism,  19 10. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  829 

cipation  of  the  future  ;    it  is  not  an  ideological  superstructure,  ' 
but  an  anteroom.  f 

Just  as  little  as  the  intelligentsia,  as  a. class  and  as  a  living 
representative  of  mental  work,  fits  into  the  Marxist  two-class 
system,  so  little,  too,  can  the  state,  its  political  and  adminis- 
trative functions,   and  political  life  in  general,  be  conceived 
as  ideology  in  the  Marxist  sense.     The  weakening  of  tsarist 
absolutism,  the  establishment  of  the  duma,  and  the  legalisa- 
tion of  political  electoral  work  and  political  party  work  in? 
general,   have   an  independent   and  high  value  of  their  own 
for  Russia  and  for  Europe.     The  alliance  of  the  socialists  with 
the  liberals  was  necessary  and  right.     Is  it  proper  for  a  socialist 
to  carry  on  propaganda  among  the  peasantry  and  not  among 
the  bourgeoisie  ?     Struve   did  good  service  hy  going  to   the 
bourgeois  as  before  him  the  narodniki  had  gone  to  the  people  ; 
the  reasons  he  may  subsequently  have  found  for  abandoning 
Marxism  are  another  story. 

In  1883  and  1884  Plehanov  was  perfectly  right  in  holding 
fast  to  the  Communist  Manifesto,  and  in  deducing  therefrom 
rules  for  the  political  struggle  and  for  cooperation  with  the 
liberals  and  the  bourgeoisie.  But  in  the  nineties,  and  subse- 
quently during  the  revolution,  abandoning  the  teachings  of 
the  Communist  Manifesto,  he  preached  the  later  theories  of 
Marx  and  Engels,  and  preached  them  in  a  manner  altogether 
too  one-sided. 

The  Communist  Manifesto  does  not  yet  exhibit  the  doctrine 
of   historical   materialism   in   its    full   bloom^  for   the  writing 
derives  from  the  earlier  phase  of  Marx  and  Engels,  when  they 
.were  political  radicals,  political  revolutionaries,  and  not  as  yet 
Marxists.     Later  only  did  Marx  and  Engels  formulate  historical 
materialism  with  precision,  and  ascribe  a  decisive  significance 
to  the  economic  basis.     The  weakness  of  the  political  revolu- 
tion of  1848,   the  triumph  of  reaction,   the  apolitism  which, 
as  far  as  practice  was  concerned,  was  forced  upon  the  refugees, 
led  Marx  to  conceive  his  historical  materialism  ;    his  English 
experiences  were  responsible  for  his  mistaken  overestimate  of 
the   importance   of   economic   conditions.     From   the   Enghsh 
outlook,    regular    political    activity    appeared    comparatively 
worthless.     It  was  the  parliamentarism  of  universal  suffrage 
which  ultimately  taught  Engels  to  esteem  pohtical  activity 
more  highly,  and  to  oppose  parliamentarism  to  revolutionism. 
This  pohtical  development  of  Marxism  and  of  the  German 


330  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

social  democracy  exercised  a  confusing  influence  upon  Ple- 
hanov  and  the  Russian  Marxists. 

In  the  Communist  Manifesto  Plehanov  had  discovered 
arguments  for  the  political  struggle  and  for  the  alliance  v/ith 
the  liberals  ;  he  found  here  also  an  argument  against  mere 
economism  (Russian  economism  was  no  novelty)  ;  the  Com- 
munist Manifesto  harmonised  with  the  transition  from  the 
terrorism  of  the  Narodnaja  Vol] a  to  Marxism,  The  later 
phase  of  Marxism,  hov>'ever,  was  out  of  harmony  with  this 
transition,  and  this  later  phase  therefore  provided  Plehanov's 
disciples  with  their  arguments  on  behalf  of  economism,  their 
arguments  against  political  activity,  against  the  duma,  against 
the  state  in  general.^  None  the  less,  Plehanov's  disciples 
could  discover  arguments  for  politism  also  in  Engel's  writings 
during  the  latest  of  his  evolutionary  phases. 

The  establishment  of  the  duma  involved  a  number  of  theo- 
retical and  practical  inconveniences  for  the  Marxists.  The 
first  question  they  had  to  consider  was  whether  they  should 
recognise  the  duma  or  boycott  that  institution,  and  the  answers 
they  gave  were  divergent. 

The  agrarian  question  promptly  came  before  the  duma  in 
a  concrete  practical  form.  The  electoral  system  guaranteed 
the  peasants  a  definite  number  of  deputies,  and  in  the  duma 
the  narodniki  were  able  to  discover  whether  they  had  been 
right  in  believing  that  ninety  per  cent,  of  the  peasants  were 
socialistically  inclined.  The  result  of  the  elections  v/as  in  the 
first  place  an  argument  against  the  narodniki,  but  the  Marxists 

I  The  distinction  between  the  conceptions  of  the  Communist  Manifesto 
and  those  of  the  later  phase  of  Marxism,  are  very  well  characterised  in  Engel's 
preface  to  the  fifth  edition  (1891).  Explaining  the  designation  "  communists," 
he  says  :  "  Those  among  the  workers,  on  the  other  hand,  who,  convinced  of 
the  inadequacy  of  purely  political  revolutions,  demanded  a  thoroughgoing 
transformation  of  society,  spoke  of  themselves  at  that  time  as  communists." 
Thus  we  see  that  "  purely  political  revolutions  "  are  contrasted  with  the  thorough- 
going [i.e.  communistic]  "  transformation  of  society  "  [not  merely  of  the  statej. 
In  the  manifesto,  ISIarx  and  Engels  declaim  against  economism.  In  the  section 
on  bourgeois  socialism  we  read  :  "A  second,  less  systematic  but  more  practical 
form  of  socialism  endeavoured  to  disincline  the  v.-orkers  for  any  sort  of  revo- 
lutionary movement  by  the  demonstration  that  no  political  change  could  be 
of  any  use  to  them,  but  only  a  change  in  the  material  conditions  of  life,  in 
economic  relationships."  It  is  true  that  Russian  economism  was  of  a  somewhat 
different  character  from  the  economism  to  which  Marx  and  Engels  were  referring 
in  the  manifesto,  for  the  former  doctrine  was  the  outcome  of  trade  union  organi- 
sation, and  \vas  in  part  the  doctrine  of  those  who  contended  that  trade  union, 
organisation  was  the  only  thing  which  mattered  ;  but  "  apolitical  "  syndicalism] 
teaches  us  that  trade  unions  can  also  cherish  political  and  revolutionary  aims 


1 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  831 

were  likewise  compelled  to  consider  the  agrarian  program  with 
more  attention  than  it  had  hitherto  received  from  Marxists 
in  Germany  and  elsewhere  in  the  west. 

The  problem  of  nationahsm,  too,  had  nov/  to  be  faced  by 
the  Marxists.  It  became  evident  that  the  indentification  of 
every  kind  of  nationalist  sentiment  with  chauvinism  and  official 
patriotism  was  fallacious.  As  long  as  the  Marxists,  living 
abroad,  had  little  intercourse  with  the  other  refugees  from 
Russia,  a  concrete  internationaUsm  among  the  members  of 
the  various  Russian  stocks  was  possible  enough.  But  as  soon 
as  this  international  -could  engage  in  legalised  activities  in 
Russia,  and  as  soon  as  the  constitution  guaranteed  national 
as  well  as  pohtical  freedom,  the  problem  of  language  and  the 
problem  of  nationahty  became  actual  for  the  Russian  Marxists 
as  it  had  become  actual  for  the  Marxists  of  other  multihngual 
lands  (notably  for  those  of  Austria-Hungary).  Discussion  con- 
cerning the  language  in  which  the  proceedings  of  the  duma 
were  to  take  place,  concerning  the  official  language,  concerning 
the  language  of  pubhc  instruction,  and  so  on,  was  now  essential. 
As  in  the  west,  so  in  Russia,  constitutional- government  first 
made  people  fully  aware  of  the  problems  of  nationality  and 
speech,  giving  as  it  did  an  ocular  demonstration  that  nationality  is 
something  more  that  a  "  reflex  "  of  the  capitahst  economic  order.   |, 

Hardly  had  Marxism,  during  the  middle  nineties,  undergone 
general  diffusion  among  the  Russian  intelhgentsia,  hardly  had 
the  one-sided  philosophy  of  history  of  the  narodniki  been 
transcended,  when  the  rise  of  revisionism  ensued,  and  this 
not  solely  through  the  v/ork  of  Bernstein.  It  v/as  impossible 
that  the  inaccuracy  of  historical  materiahsm  and  that  the 
changes  in  the  evolution  of  the  Marx-Engels  doctrine  and  of 
the  social  democracy  should  remain  unnoted  in  Russia.  The 
crisis  in  the  Russian  social  democracy  is  the  necessary  outcome 
of  the  cleavage  Vvhich  the  actual  course  of  development  forces 
upon  Marxist  theory.  Historical  empiricism  does  not  conform 
to  historico-phiiosophical  deduction.  Hence  the  vacillations, 
the  inadequacies,  and  the  perplexities  of  the  Marxist  leaders, 
above  all  during  the  revolution  ;  hence,  too,  the  insufficiency 
of  the  social  democracy  during  the  revolution  and  thereafter 
down  to  the  present  day.  The  Marxists  gained  the  victory 
over  the  history  of  philosophy  of  the  narodniki,  but  they  were 
incompetent  to  understand  the  history  of  Russia  in  one  of 
its  most  critical  phases. 


882  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIx\ 

§  i6o. 

MARX  and  Engels  had  no  clear  and  unambiguous  formula 
of  revolution.  Although  in  the  Marxist  system  the 
idea  of  revolution  is  of  decisive  importance,  neither  he  nor 
Engels  attempted  to  define  the  precise  significance  of  the  con- 
cept. Adopting  the  radical  revolutionary  trend  in  the  mood 
that  prevailed  before  and  during  the  year  1848,  Marx  and 
Engels  declared  themselves  and  declared  sociahsm  to  be  pre- 
eminently revolutionary,  and  yet  they  offered  no  exact  analysis 
of  this  most  important  element  in  their  system.  We  cannot 
attribute  the  neglect  solely  to  regard  for  the  censorship  of 
absolutism,  for  they  were  manifestly  disinclined  to  say  much 
about  this  serious  theme.  "  A  revolution  is  something  to  effect 
and  not  to  talk  about  ; '  for  resolute  practical  men,  the  details 
are  a  matter  of  course  ;  the  prospects  of  success  must  be  clear, 
or  the  attempt  at  revolution  will  not  be  made — this  is  the 
main  point."  Summaril37  expressed,  this  seems  to  be  the 
attitude  of  these  writers  towards  the  revolution,  as  far  as  I 
can  ascertain  it  from  the  scanty,  casual,  and  unsystematic 
utterances  of  Marx  and  Engels  upon  the  subject. 

An  attempt  at  a  philosophy  of  revolution  is  found  in  the 
writings  on  Feuerbach  compiled  in  the  year  1845,  but  the 
results  are  meagre. 

Starting  from  the  theoretic  revolution  of  Feuerbach,  Marx 
accepted  Feuerbach's  views  by  recognising  that  rehgion  was 
anthropomorphism  and  by  considering  the  religious  world  to 
be  a  mere  reflex  of  the  mundane  world.  But  Marx  considered 
that  after  Feuerbach  had  demonstrated  these  facts,  the  chief 
task  was  still  left  undone,  for  it  was  necessary  to  put  an  end 
to  the  contradiction  inherent  in  the  mundane  world  itself. 
Men,  he  said,  had  constructed  for  themselves  a  religious  world 
in  the  clouds  because  their  earthly  basis  did  not  suffice  them^^ 
The  contradiction  between  the  reHgious  world  and  the  mun- 
dane world  was,  in  fact,  the  contradiction  within  the  mundane 
world.  The  disintegration  of  the  mundane  world  must  be 
understood  and  transcended,  and  this  could  only  be  effected 
by  the  poHtical  revolution.  Marx  censured  the  philosophical 
materiaUsts  because  they  had  hitherto  conceived  reaHty  solely 
as  object  or  as  perception,  but  had  not  conceived  it  subjectively 
as  practical,  human,  sensuous  activity.  The  ideahsts  had 
developed  the  active  side,   but  only  on  the  abstract  plane, 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  388 

because  they  would  not  recognise  real  sensuous  activity. 
"  Philosophers  have  done  no  more  than  give  different  inter- 
pretations of  the  world  ;  but  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  change 
it."  This  change  could  not  be  effected  in  accordance  with 
Owen's  recipe  that  men  are  the  products  of  circumstances  and 
education,  for  this  would  imply  the  division  of  society  into  two 
parts,  one  of  these  superior  to  society.  Owen  had  forgotten 
that  circumstances  are  modified  by  men  and  that  the  educator 
must  himself  be  educated.  The  modification  of  circumstances, 
and  the  alterative  activities,  can  be  conceived  and  rationally 
explained  in  no  other  way  than  as  revolutionary  practice. 

Marx's  terminology  is  obscure  ;  there  is  no  sociological 
precision  about  the  way  in  which  he  speaks  of  "  circumstances  " 
and  of  the  "  world  "  which  is  to  be  "  changed  "  ;  without 
further  ado  the  change  is  identified  with  a  "  revolutionary 
transformation  "  and  with  the  "  practical  and  critical  "  activity 
of  revolution.  At  this  early  stage  he  is  already  conceiving 
historical  evolution  in  too  objective  a  manner.  He  represents 
the  individual  and  the  subject  as  "an  abstract  individual," 
who,  however,  in  reality  belongs  to  a  specific  social  form. 
For  Feuerbach  and  the  older  materialists,  this  social  form  had 
been  "  bourgeois  "  society  ;  the  newer  materialism  of  Marx 
recognised  only  human  society  or  socialised  humanity. 

The  defects  of  extreme  objectivism  are  conspicuous  in  this 
theory  of  revolution.  Engels  extols  Marx  on  the  ground  that 
he  did  not  simply  brush  aside  Hegel,  but  adopted  the  revolu- 
tionary side  of  the  dialectical  method,  transforming  the  Hegelian 
conceptual  dialetic  into  a  materialist  dialectic.  Here,  however, 
our  sole  concern  is  with  the  concept  of  revolution,  which  Engels 
and  Marx  attempted  to  deduce  in  a  purely  objectivist  manner 
from  the  alleged  dialectic  of  the  world  process.  As  an  answer 
to  this  attempt  it  suffices  to  insist  that  there  is  no  objective 
dialectic,  that  nature  does  not  exhibit  dualism  or  dialectical 
trialism,  that  the  e"^olution  of  the  world  cannot  be  conceived 
either  dualistically  or  trialistically.  Marx  and  Engels  merely 
foisted  the  subjective  on  the  objective,  projecting  into  the  outer 
world  the  conceptual  and  psychological  oppositions  and  con- 
trasts and  the  solution  of  these,  and  then  quite  uncritically 
formulating  the  result  as  a  sort  of  metaphysical  law  of  the 
universe. 

In  the  development  of  the  individual  there  occur  conflicts 
and  crises  which  manifest  themselves  in  the  form  of  oppositions, 


384  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

but  these  are  purely  individual  oppositions.  In  like  manner 
there  are  logical,  conceptual  contrasts  of  different  degrees  and 
kinds.  But  it  is  necessary  to  determine  precisely  how  far 
and  in  what  sense  it  is  permissible  to  speak  of  oppositions 
in  social  life  and  in  history  ;  we  must  not  uncritically  introduce 
psychological  and  logical  contrasts  into  the  sphere  of  sociology. 
Still  less  is  it  legitimate,  in  anthropomorphic  fashion,  to  intro- 
duce psychological  and  logical  oppositions  into  nature  and  the 
universe. 

Marx  makes  an  improper  use  of  logical  and  psychologi- 
cal analogy  when  he  bases  his  catastrophic  theory  upon  the 
reputed  opposition  between  two  classes.  Marx  himself 
occasionally  advocated  a  sounder  view.^ 

As  time  passed,  the  views  of  Marx  and  Engels  upon  revolu- 
tion underwent  modification,  for  they  came  to  conceive  the 
social  struggle  in  the  spirit  of  the  modern  doctrine  of  evolution. 
They  no  longer  represented  this  struggle  solely  in  political  and 
strategical  terms  as  a  violent  physical  struggle,  for  they  looked 
upon  it  also  as  a  bloodless  economic  struggle,  thinking  here 
of  strikes  and  above  all  of  the  general  strike — the  struggle 
in  this  form  being  likewise  conceived  as  revolutionary.  To 
j  put  the  matter  in  general  terms,  they  now  conceived  revolu- 
■■  tion  rather  as  the  gradual  evolution  of  the  definitive  social 
state.  In  this  double  sense  Engels  frequently  spoke  of  his 
party  as  "  the  most  revolutionary  party  known  to  history  "  ; 
in  this  sense  it  was  asserted  that  capitalism  was  "  revolu- 
tionising society  "  ;  and  so  on. 

Eventually  Marx  and  Engels  accepted  Darvvdnism,  and  were 
thereby  led  to  modify  their  Hegelianism  and  their  use  of  the 
Hegelian  dialectic,  although  they  failed  to  take  clear  note  of 
their  change  of  outlook.  The  modern  cosmologist  no  longer 
regards  the  developmental  process  as  revolutionary  or  catas- 
trophic, but  looks  upon  it  as  an  evolution  effected  by 
infinitesimal  and  innumerable  quantitative  and  qualitative 
modifications.  Geological  and  cosmical  catastrophe  is  looked 
upon  as  the  terminal  outcome  of  numerous  gradational 
changes. 

*  For  example,  in  the  criticism  of  the  Gotha  program  the  bourgeoisie  is 
not  described  as  a  unified  class,  nor  was  the  existence  of  such  a  unification 
suggested  even  in  the  Communist  Manifesto.  Kautsky,  too,  in  his  writing 
published  in  1889,  the  Class  Oppositions  of  1789,  attacked  the  views  of  those 
who  hold  that  in  accordance  with  the  theory  of  historical  evolution  by  class 
struggles  there  can  be  no  more  than  two  camps  within  society. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  885 

Many  historians  conceive  historical  evolution  in  Uke  manner, 
and  in  the  name  of  evolution  such  writers  oppose  the  idea  of 
pohtical  revolution.  Such  is  the  outlook  of  the  revisionist 
reformists,  of  those  who  tell  us  that  our  aim  must  be  to  promote 
reform,  not  revolution. 

The  evolutionist  argument  against  pohtical  revolution  is 
not  self-evident  and  is  not  entirely  vaUd.  Revolutions  may 
well  be  a  part  of  evolution  ;  in  actual  fact,  revolutions  have 
occurred  and  do  occur  ;  but,  despite  this,  evolutionists  and 
historians  espouse  the  theory  of  gradual  evolution.  Moreover, 
modern  evolutionists  inchne  to  recognise  the  existence  of  an 
evolutionary  process  wherein  progress  is  effected  by  leaps, 
and  from  this  outlook  the  idea  of  revolution  may  Ukewise 
be  defended  in  the  domains  of  history  and  pohtics,  although 
it  is  true  that  evolution  by  leaps  may  also  be  interpreted  in 
the  reformist  sense. 

As  a  matter  of  methodology  it  is  necessary  to  point  out 
that  cosmological  and  botanical  analogies  cannot  be  taken  as 
proof  by  the  sociologist.  Political  revolution  must  be  socio- 
logically explained  as  a  social  and  historical  fact. 

After  1848,  during  the  first  years  of  reaction,  Marx  had 
frequent  occasion,  in  his  pohtical  articles,  to  speak  of  the  revo- 
lution of  1848  and  of  revolution  in  general,  but  he  failed  to 
define  the  term  more  precisely.  For  example,  in  articles  upon 
the  eastern  question  (1853  to  1856)  he  spoke  of  the  explosive 
energy  of  democratic  ideas,  of  man's  natural  thirst  for  free- 
dom, and  the  like.  Revolution  and  democracy  in  Europe 
were  contrasted  with  absolutist  Russia.  In  the  Communist 
Manifesto,  in  the  attack  on  Proudhon,  in  the  series  of 
articles  entitled  Revolution  and  Counter-Revolution,  the 
definitive  social  revolution  was  assumed  to  be  close  at  hand. 

Marx's  outlook  was  ever  purely  practical.  He  deprecated 
the  "  capricious  attempts  to  foment  revolution  "  made  by  many 
socialists  and  even  by  some  of  his  own  followers.  In  his  essay 
upon  the  trial  of  the  Cologne  communists  he  showed  that  the 
overthrow  of  a  government  could  be  no  more  than  an  episode 
in  the  great  struggle  that  was  imminent,  and  that  the  matter 
of  real  importance  was  to  make  ready  for  this  last  and  decisive 
contest.  Capitahsm,  he  said,  was  a  mightier  and  more  terrible 
power  than  pohtical  despotism.  In  like  manner  Engels  dis- 
tinguished in  1890  between  the  "  fundamental  transformation 
of  society  "  and  a  "  mere  pohtical  revolution  "  ;   whilst  shortly 


386  THE    SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA 

before  his  death  (1895)  he  questioned  the  very  possibihty  and 
need  for  revolution. 

In  Marx,  therefore,  and  also  in  Engels,  we  have  to  note 
that  a  clear  distinction  is  made.  For  Marx  the  definitive, 
terminal,  "  ultimate  and  decisive  "  revolation,  the  total  trans- 
formation of  the  conditions  of  production  and  ownership,  the 
negation  of  negation  (in  the  Hegelian  formula),  was  entirely 
different  from  lesser  and  indecisive  revolutions.  He  did  not 
clearly  explain  how  far  these  lesser  revolutions  would  be 
advantageous  to  the  great  revolution,  but  in  accordance  with 
the  Communist  Manifesto  we  may  assume  that  such  revolu- 
tions, too,  were  to  be  regarded  as  valuable.  Granting  this 
distinction,  it  is  obvious  that  the  critical  question,  the  one 
that  is  decisive  for  the  revolutionist,  remains  to  be  answered. 
When  will  the  terminal  revolution  begin  ?  How  are  we  to 
recognise  the  decisive  hour  ?  Who  shall  determine  that  the 
decisive  hour  has  struck  ? 

To  Marx  it  seemed  self-evident  that  the  terminal  revolu- 
tion must  be  unified,  must  be  a  mass  revolution.  In  his  literary 
and  political  contest  vvith  Stirner  and  Bakunin,  Marx,  from 
this  outlook,  sharply  contrasted  socialism  with  anarchism  alike 
tactically  and  as  a  system.  The  Marxist  conception  of  the 
mass  movement  eliminated  the  individual  and  individual 
consciousness,  and  art  the  same  time  an  amoral  estimate  was 
formed  of  the  purely  objective  historical  process, 
i  At  Amsterdam  in  1872  Marx  declared  that  in  the  United 
'  States  of  America  and  in  England  a  social  revolution  could  be 
effected  by  legal  means.  For  England,  in  particular,  Marx 
subsequently  mooted  the  buying  out  of  the  landlords  as  a 
possibility  in  lieu  of  forcible  expropriation.  The  catastrophic 
theory  was  thus  modified  in  the  evolutionary  sense,  and  simul- 
taneously a  high  value  was  placed  upon  a  political  constitution 
— in  the  case  of  America,  upon  a  republic.^ 

In  the  frequently  quoted  preface  to  Marx's  Class  Struggles, 
Engels  showed  in  1895  that  the  revolutionist  was  not  concerned 

I  In  his  elucidations  to  the  Erfurt  program,  Kautsky  states  that  the  definitive 
revolution  may  assume  the  most  varied  forms  in  accordance  with  changing 
circumstances,  and  will  not  necessarily  be  associated  with  violence  and  blood- 
shed. He  admits,  for  example,  that  the  transition  to  the  collectivist  organi- 
sation of  society  can  in  no  case  involve  the  expropriation  of  the  lesser  manual 
workers  and  the  peasants  ;  it  is  only  large-scale  industries  that  will  need  to  be 
socially  owned  and  controlled  ;  all  that  Marxism  demands  is  that  the  means 
of  production  shall  become  social  property. 


i 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  33T 

solely  with  the  question  of  revolution,  but  must  also  be  a 
politician  and  tactician.  Parliamentary  activity,  everyday 
political  work  upon  the  basis  of  universal  suffrage,  were  pro- 
claimed to  be  the  "  sharpest  weapon,"  whilst  street  fighting 
was  declared  practically  impossible.  "  The  revolutionist  would 
be  insane  who  should  select  for  the  erection  of  barricades  the 
new  working-class  districts  of  the  north  and  east  of  Berlin." 
The  immediate  task  of  the  party,  said  Engels,  was  to  be  found 
in  "  the  slow  work  of  propaganda  and  in  parliamentary  activity." 
The  right  to  revolution  might  be  left  to  foreign  comrades. 
"  We,  '  the  revolutionaries,'  c^n  advance  far  more  rapidly  by 
legal  means  than  by  extra-legal  and  revolutionary  tactics." 

These  explanations  of  Engels  were  interpreted  at  the  time, 
and  are  still  interpreted,  in  various  senses  by  orthodox 
scholastics  of  Marxist  trend  ;  but  even  the  ultra-orthodox 
*  Kautsky  and  Mehring  wrote  contemptuously  in  the  "  Neue 
Zeit "  of  "  revolutionary  romanticism  "  and  of  "revolutionary 
Philistinism,"  whilst  the  revisionists  unhesitatingly  advocated 
reformism  and  rejected  revolutionism. 

Concomitantlj/  with  their  recognition  of  parliamentarism, 
the  Marxists  came  more  and  more  to  advocate  the  economic 
organisation  of  the  workers,  to  promote  trade  union  and 
cooperative  organisation,  and  to  encourage  self-help  among  the 
working  classes.  The  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  the 
seizure  of  political  power,  politism  in  general,  receded  into 
the  background  as  the  new  economism  came  to  occupy  the 
stage.  I 

Connected  with  the  discarding  of  revolutionism  is  the  re- 
markable silence  of  orthodox  Marxists  concerning  communism. 
Communism  is  the  most  essential,  or  at  least  the  most  important, 
social  demand  of  Marxism,  but  to-day  this  demand  is  hardly 
voiced-;  or  at  any  rate  finds  no  place  in  the  foreground  of  the 
program. 

Within  the  social  democracy  there  is  an  opposition 
movement   against  revisionist  reformism,  and  the  question  of 

I  In  his  work,  Le  vie  nuove  del  socialismo,  the  reformist  Bonomi  points 
out  that  ]\Iarx  advocated  the  ultimate  seizure  of  political  power  in  the  form  of 
the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  as  the  precondition  of  the  economic  trans- 
formation of  society  in  the  socialist  sense,  simply  because  it  was  impossible 
for  him  to  foresee  the  material  uplifting  of  the  proletariat  that  would  be  effected 
by  the  trade  union  movement  and  by  the  gradual  conquest  of  political  power 
through  the  working  of  universal  suffrage.  It  was  not  true,  as  Marx  had  con- 
tended, that  the  state  was  merely  the  executive  organ  of  the  bourgeoisie,  for 
the  state  could  likewise  serve  the  labour  party. 

23  VOL.    II. 


338  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

revolution  is  elaborately  discussed  in  the  party  organs.     The 
discussion  is  still  far  from  its  close. 

To-day,  in  point  of  tactics,  three  trends  may  be  distinguished 
in  Marxist  social  democracy,  for  the  radical  opponents  of 
reformism  have  split  into  two  camps. 

Kautsky,  the  literary  opponent  of  revisionism,  rejects 
reformism,  and  is  able  to  appeal  to  Marx  and  Engels  (first 
phase)  on  behalf  of  radical  revolutionary  tactics.  Kautsky 
maintains  the  thesis  that  the  party  can  for  the  nonce  do  no  more 
than  make  ready  for  the  definitive  mass  revolution,  in  order 
that,  when  the  fitting  moment  arrives,  it  may  be  prepared 
to  establish  dictatorship  and  to  inaugurate  the  social  revolution. 

But  other  representatives  of  a  more  radical  tendency,  other 
opponents  of  revisionist  reformism,  object  to  this  outlook  on 
the  revolution  (an  outlook  which  is  in  the  main  that  of  orthodox 
Marxism),  that  this  quiet  preparation  for  the  terminal  revolu- 
tion necessarily  involves  passivism,  and  that  however  radical 
it  may  be  in  theory  it  must  inevitably  in  practice  culminate 
in  reformism.  The  representatives  of  the  adverse  conception 
of  revolutionism  demand  that  the  need  for  direct  action  shall 
be  continually  inculcated  upon  the  masses  ;  they  insist  that 
the  party  executive  must  itself  assume  the  revolutionary  initia- 
tive, and  must  not  content  itself  with  the  mere  administration 
of  the  party  organisation.  In  conformity  with  the  revolu- 
tionary program  of  French  syndicalism,  mass  action  is  advo- 
cated as  the  supplement  and  corrective  to  parliamentarism  ; 
in  the  trade  unions  and  the  cooperative  societies  and  in  all 
the  democratic  organisations,  the  revolutionary  sentiment 
must  not  merely  be  sustained  and  fortified,  but  must  be  given 
practical  expression  whenever  opportunity  arises  ;  in  default 
of  this  radicalism,  the  spirit  of  those  who  advocate  the  terminal 
aim  and  the  definitive  revolution,  tends  to  degenerate  into 
a  mere  parliamentary  opposition,  and  in  the  economic  field 
into  the  advocacy  of  economic  reform  within  the  existing 
order. 

§  i6i. 

IN  the  writings  of  the  Russian  Marxists  we  discern  the  same 
difficulties  and  uncertainties  which,  in  respect  of  tactics, 
and  above  all  as  regards  the  question  of  revolution,  perplexed 
Marx  and  Engels  and  their  German  successors — for  the  Russian 
Marxists  were  mainly  influenced  by  German  Marxist  theory. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  339 

When  the  diffusion  of  Marxism  took  place  in  Russia  during 
the  middle  nineties,  revisionism  and  antirevolutionary  reform- 
ism found  their  place  in  the  new  movement. 

Down  to  the  present  day  Plehanov  has  continued  the  dis- 
cussion concerning  tactics  which  he  began  in  the  eighties. 
The  principles  and  the  leading  arguments  have  remained 
unchanged ;  but  the  social  and  political  situation  has  undergone 
modification,  and  new,  specifically  Russian,  problems  have 
come  to  the  fore.  During  the  reaction  of  the  eighties  a  species 
of  enforced  apoHtism  was  widely  diffused,  and  the  discussion 
with  the  narodniki  was  historico-philosophical  rather  than 
political  in  character.  During  the  nineties,  however,  pohtical 
trends  increased  in  strength,  until  at  length  at  the  opening 
of  the  new  century  the  era  of  isolated  acts  of  terrorism  began, 
culminating  in  the  mass  revolution.  The  introduction  of  the 
constitution,  the  new  constitutional  problems  pressing  for 
solution,  and  the  lively  experiences  of  the  last  decade,  have 
given  increased  interest  to  the  discussion  of  the  tactical  problem. 

We  know  that  Marx  carried  on  a  campaign  against  Bakunin 
and  Bakuninist  revolutionism.  Plehanov,  after  the  spht  in 
Zemlja  i  Volja,  continued  this  campaign  against  the  followers 
of  Bakunin  and  the  supporters  of  Bakuninist  methods.  At 
first  his  opposition  was  conducted  against  the  Narodnaja  Volja, 
subsequently  against  the  social  revolutionaries,  and  finally 
against  the  revolutionaries  in  his  own  party.  The  creation 
of  the  duma  gave  a  practical  turn  to  the  dispute  concerning 
the  importance  and  efficacy  of  politism  and  economism  respec- 
tively, for  the  question  now  took  the  form,  "  Are  you  for  or 
against  the  duma  ?  "  The  first  answers  were  purely  abstract, 
but  in  practice  it  soon  became  apparent  that  the  question 
comprised  a  considerable  number  of  concrete  subsidiary  prob- 
lems. Those  who  wished  to  decide  whether  on  the  one  hand 
the  duma  should  be  theoretically  and  practically  boycotted 
(in  the  latter  case  by  "  active,"  i.e.  forcible,  hindrance  of  the 
elections),  or  whether,  on  the  other,  the  duma  should  be 
recognised,  were  compelled  to  consider  the  relationship  of 
the  sociahsts  to  other  parties  and  to  the  programs  of  these, 
to  consider  the  question  of  pohtical  alliances,  and  so  on. 

Plehanov  and  his  supporters  could  not  fail  to  point  to  the 
purely  practical  and  utilitarian  aspects  of  the  new  constitu- 
tionahsm.  The  dum.a  actually  existed,  and  the  question  was 
how  it  could  be    turned  to  account  for  sociaUst  ends.     The 


340  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

argument  could  be  reinforced  by  appeal  to  the  German  example 
and  to  German  theories,  notably  those  of  Engels. 

The  duma  elections  necessitated  a  revision  of  opinions  con- 
cerning the  essential  nature  of  mass  organisation,  and  disclosed 
the  inadequacy  of  the  method  of  secret  organisation.  During 
the  close  of  the  nineties,  vigorous  discussions  were  in  progress 
concerning  kruzkovsdina^  Subterranean  secret  societies  and 
conspiracies,  and  the  Machiavellianism  and  Jesuitism  apt 
to  be  associated  with  such  activities,  are  in  fact  essentially 
undemocratic.  Publicity  is  the  precise  converse  of  aristocracy 
and  aristocratic  absolutism. 

In  the  disputes  between  the  majority  and  the  minority  this 
question  played  a  considerable  part.  Lenin  protested  against 
conspiracies,  but  Lenin's  adversaries  accused  him  of  being 
himself  a  conspirator,  and  declared  that  there  was  an  aris- 
tocratic taint  about  the  central  committee  of  professional 
revolutionaries  advocated  by  this  leader  of  the  majority.  The 
social  democratic  party  was  in  actual  fact  led  by  a  central  com- 
mittee which  acted  in  association  with  local  committees.  To 
a  predominant  extent  the  leaders  of  the  party  were  intellectuals, 
and  this  gave  the  social  democratic  organisation  the  character 
of  an  undemocratic  and  aristocratic  secret  society.  In  this 
connection,  we  have,  of  course,  to  bear  in  mind  the  nature 
of  Russian  conditions,  which  rendered  it  impossible  to  con- 
stitute a  comprehensive  united  organisation  such  as  exists  in 
European  lands,  for  in  Russia  there  are  obstacles  to  the  union 
and  association  of  the  workers  such  as  do  not  exist  to  the 
same  degree  in  Europe.  Owing  to  the  defective  development 
of  means  of  communication,  a  comprehensive  and  elastic  union 
of  the  masses  is  hard  to  secure.  The  industrial  centres  are 
widely  separated  ;  the  towns  are  smaller  and  less  populous 
than  in  Europe  ;  there  are  fewer  operatives,  and  the  proportion 
of  those  who  have  had  some  political  culture  is  much  smaller. 
Further  difficulties  are  imposed  by  the  repressive  policy  of 
the  government,  .which  refuses  to  permit  the  radical  parties 
to  organise  on  lawful  lines.  Last  of  all  (and  the  importance 
of  this  factor  must  not  be  underestimated),  owing  to  the  wide- 
spread illiteracy  of  Russian  operatives  they  are  far  more  de- 

^  Kru2kov§5ina  is  derived  from  kruzok,  a  small  circle  of  persons,  and  denotes 
the  pettifogging  activities  of  such  a  circle.  It  is  frequently  applied  by  Marxists 
to  the  revolutionaries.  Many  terrorists  have  spoken  adversely  of  kru2kov5dina, 
Tkadev  being  especially  adverse. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  341 

pendent  upon  cultured  leaders. ^  The  fact  that  among  Russian 
operatives  the  great  majority  are  uneducated,  suffices  per  se 
to  make  the  instructed  workers  into  an  aristocracy. 

The  struggle  between  the  centrahsts  and  the  autonomists 
within  the  Russian  social  democracy  is  thus  based  upon  the 
nature  of  working-class  conditions.  The  autonomists  borrowed 
Liebknecht's  argument  against  centralisation,  saying  that  in 
an  over-centralised  party  the  destruction  of  the  central  execu- 
tive involved  the  destruction  of  the  entire  party,  and  they 
referred  in  confirmation  of  this  contention  to  the  history  of 
the  Narodnaja  Volja.  However  this  may  be,  Ostrogorskii's 
demonstration,  and  still  more  recently  that  furnished  by  Michels, 
of  the  essentially  oligarchical  character  of  mass  organisation 
even  in  the  case  of  working-class  parties  is  confirmed  by  Russian 
experience. - 

There  are  moral  as  well  as  utilitarian  motives  for  the  re- 
jection of  secret  societies  and  the  methods  of  the  conspirator. 
Persons  of  frank  and  manly  nature  are  repelled  by  the  dis- 
honesty, the  ]\Iachiavellianism,  and  the  Jesuitism  so  often 
associated  with  underground  activities. 3 

The  amnesty  associated  with  the  promulgation  of  the  con- 
stitution, and  the  return  to  Russia  of  many  of  the  revolutionary 
refugees,  served  for  a  time  to  strengthen  the  party  of  those 
who  favoured  political  activity  by  lawful  methods.  The 
subsequent  reaction,  however,  and  the  efforts  of  absolutism 
to  discredit  the  duma  by  rendering  the  activities  of  that  body 
sterile,  served  once  again  to  strengthen  the  opposition  to 
politism.  The  remarkable  agreement,  in  this  instance,  between 
radicalism  and  absolutism,  is  worthy  of  attention  ! 

An  attack  on  the  methods  of  secret  societies  led  to  an  attack 
on  terrorism.  Upon  the  basis  defended  by  Plehanov,  the 
orthodox  Marxists  came  to  condemn  terrorism  as  anarchist 
tactics.     This  was  the  line  taken,  in  a  series  of  articles  against 

1  At  the  unifying  congress  held  in  1906,  thirty-five  of  the  delegates  were 
of  the  working  class,  while  one  hundred  delegates  had  had  a  university  and 
secondary  school  education. 

2  Consult  Ostrogorskii,  La  democratie  et  I'organisation  des  partis  politiques. 
Caiman  L6vy,  Paris,  1903  ;  Robert  Michels,  Political  Parties,  a  Sociological 
Study  of  the  Oligarchical  Tendencies  of  Modern  Democracy,  Jarrold,  London, 

1915. 

3  Plehanov  tells  us  that  as  a  member  of  the  Zemlja  i  Volja,  in  opposition 
to  the  majority  of  his  comrades,  he  disapproved  of  the  tactics  employed  in  the 
before-mentioned  peasant  rising  at  Chigirin. 


342  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

the  social  revolutionaries,  by  no  less  a  person  that  Vera  ZasuliC, 
one  of  the  co-founders  of  the  Social  Democratic  Party. 

She  endeavoured  to  prove  that  individual  outrages  could 
not  destroy  absolutism,  nor  even  weaken  it,  but  that,  on  the 
contrary,  they  actually  favoured  absolutism  by  natural  selec- 
tion among  its  tools.  Individual  terrorist  acts  were  mere 
demonstrations,  not  a  means  of  combat.  They  might  perhaps 
gratify  the  sentiment  of  personal  vengefulness,  but  it  was  not 
the  mission  of  the  Russian  revolutionist  either  to  take  ven- 
geance for  the  masses  or  to  defend  the  masses  ;  it  was  his 
task  to  act  among,  not  for,  the  masses.  He  must  inspire  them 
with  enthusiasm,  must  carry  them  along  with  him.  Vera 
Zasulic^  considered  that  the  terrorist  social  revolutionary 
organisation  was  merely  a  bureaucratic  regulation  of  spon- 
taneous personal  outbreaks  of  sentiment,  and  she  condemned 
systematic  terrorism  no  less  emphatically  than  she  condemned 
spontaneous  acts  of  vengeance  on  the  part  of  individuals. 

The  situation  was  certainly  a  strange  one.  The  terrorist 
of  1878  penned  in  1902  an  ardent  philippic  against  terrorism, 
whilst  her  party,  in  the  dispute  with  the  bolseviki,  recognised 
terrorism  as  a  temporary  method  of  revolution  !  i 

Men  with  a  political  intelligence  can  hardly  doubt  which 
method  is  likely  to  be  more  effective  politically,  the  terrorist 
slaughter  of  a  despot,  or  the  parliamentary  decision  of  a  majorit}^ 
a  competent  majorit}^  to  reduce  the  civil  list  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  president  of  a  republic.  But  it  is  true  that 
such  a  parliament  presupposes  the  political  education,  not  of 
the  deputies  merely,  but  likev»dse  of  the  electorate,  to  a  degree 
still  unknown  in  Europe.     It  is  therefore  all  the  easier  for  us 

»  The  social  revolutionaries  quoted  Marx  as  an  authority  in  support  of 
terrorism.  In  April  1881,  writing  to  his  daughter,  Marx  referred  to  the  speci- 
fically Russian  tactics  of  the  terrorists,  saying  that  these  were  "  true  heroes, 
without  any  melodramatic  pose,"  and  referring  to  their  methods  as  "  historically 
unavoidable."  But  Marx  said  nothing  in  this  letter  as  to  the  political  efficacy 
of  ten-orism,  and  still  less  is  it  possible  to  extract  from  it  an  argument  for 
terrorism  now  that  the  duma  exists.  In  1900,  Kautsky  declared  that 
terrorism,  which  had  opened  with  the  shooting  of  Trepov  by  Vera  Zasulic,  was 
a  glorious  struggle  on  the  part  of  a  handful  of  heroes.  But  he  v/ent  on  to  say : 
"  Although  the  individual  terrorists  were  heroes,  and  although  their  unselfish 
hazarding  of  their  lives  in  an  unequal  struggle  for  the  great  cause  makes  a  pro- 
found and  elevating  impression  upon  our  minds,  nevertheless  the  system  of 
terrorism  was  a  product  of  the  weakness  of  the  social  forces  opposed  to  tsarism. 
As  long  as  the  adversaries  of  tsa.rism  had  no  other  means  of  attack  than  terror- 
ism, though  they  might  be  able  to  kill  individual  ministers  and  even  tsars,  they 
were  unable  to  overthrow  tsarist  absolutism." 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  343 

to  understand  that  Plehanov's  main  demand  for  Russia  was 
that  there  should  be  a  revolution  in  men's  minds. 

Without  an  effective  revolution  in  men's  minds,  in  millions 
and  millions  of  minds,  the  radical  program  of  socialism  cannot 
be  realised.  Whereas,  in  his  comments  on  the  Gotha  program 
of  1875,  Marx  had  justified  the  failure  of  that  program  to 
demand  a  democratic  republic  for  Germany,  as  regards  the 
Russia  of  the  years  1905  to  1913  the  question  was  debated 
whether  the  demand  for  a  socialist  or  at  least  for  a  democratic 
republic  ought  not  to  form  a  permanent  rubric  of  political 
agitation. 

Plehanov's  great  merit  was  that  he  laid  bare  the  Vv-eak- 
nesses  of  the  revolutionary  parties,  and  in  especial  the  weak- 
nesses of  the  social  democracy  ;  and  that  he  counterposed 
blind  radicalism  with  his  realistic  criticism  of  the  existing 
situation  and  of  the  factors  of  political  power.  He  laid  due 
stress  upon  the  consideration  that  evolution  has  a  law-abiding 
character  and  a  constancy,  in  virtue  of  which  (in  accordance 
with  a  well-known  saying)  the  labour  pains  attending  the  birth 
of  the  new  social  order,  though  they  can  be  mitigated  and 
though  their  duration  can  be  reduced,  can  never  be  wholly 
avoided. 

Involuntarily,  therefore,  Plehanov  was  led  to  give  his  support 
to  the  reformism  of  the  revisionists.  Emphasising  the  reign 
of  law  in  socio-political  no  less  than  in  capitalistic  evolution, 
condemning  terrorists  tactics,  exposing  the  blindness  of  the 
incautious  radicalism  which  would  not  look  ahead,  and  recom- 
mending cooperation  with  the  liberals,  he  reinforced  constitu- 
tionalism and  its  advocates,  and  assisted  the  revisionists  in 
maintaining  their  program  of  reformism. 

It  is  this  that  makes  Plehanov's  relationship  to  Russian 
reformism  so  interesting.  Struve,  who  simultaneously  v/ith 
Plehanov  during  the  middle  nineties  took  the  field  as  a  Marxist 
against  the  narodniki,  found  his  main  argument  against  revo- 
lutionism and  terrorism  in  his  insistence  upon  the  constancy 
of  historical  evolution.  Nature,  he  said,  makes  no  leaps  ;  the 
variations  in  social  life  are  not  discontinuous  variations.  In 
addition,  Struve  contested  the  validity  of  Marx's  theory  of 
increasing  misery,  and  he  was  of  course  right  in  maintaining 
that  it  was  impossible  for  a  degenerate  class  to  effect  the  great 
social  revolution.  In  essentials  this  argument  is  identical  with 
the  evolutionary  conception. 


344  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

The  earlier  Russian  Marxists  passed  through  the  school 
of  Mihailovskii  and  Lavrov,  already  contemplating  evolution 
as  the  opposite  of  revolution,  and  thus  paving  the  way  for 
revisionism   and  reformism. 

.  I  have  already  pointed  out  that  these  evolutionist  arguments 
by  no  means  exhaust  the  problem  of  reformism  versus  revolu- 
tionism, and  that  still  less  can  they  be  said  to  solve  it.  Struve 
appeared  to  feel  this,  and  he  therefore  attempted  to  rescue 
reformism  by  rejecting  revolution  in  toto  as  epistemologically 
incomprehensible.  But  Struve's  formula  is  one  difficult  to 
establish,  and  at  any  rate  Struve  did  not  succeed  in  establishing 
it.  Epistemologically  the  revolution  becomes  comprehensible 
enough  as  soon  as  it  exists.  In  the  collective  work  entitled 
Vehy  (signposts),  the  sometime  ex-Marxists,  Struve  among 
them,  took  up  another  position.  The  revolution  of  1905-1906 
was  made  the  occasion  for  the  publication  of  their  philosophical 
confessions,  wherein  not  this  revolution  alone,  but  also  the 
entire  revolutionary  spirit  of  the  intelligentsia,  the  spirit  which 
had  animated  the  intelligentsia  for  years,  were  discarded  as 
theoretical  and  moral  confusionism.  The  revolution  was  con- 
demned, not  epistemologically,  but  ethically — as  nihilism. 

Theoretically,  the  revolution  is  comprehensible  enough,  but 
the  question  is  whether  revolution  is  ethically-  permissible. 
Primarily,  of  course,  we  think  here  of  a  forcible  revolution 
attended  by 'bloodshed  ;  but  the  question  applies  more  generally 
to  every  revolution,  in  the  field  of  theory  as  well.  Marx  and 
Engels  have  an  easy  task  of  it  here  with  their  amoralism,  and 
Engels  declares  that  the  right  of  revolution  is  the  only  historic 
right,  seeing  that  all  modern  states  have  in  fact  come  into 
existence  through  revolutions. 

In  reality  the  question  is  less  simple,  but  for  the  time  being 
our  sole  concern  is  with  the  way  in  which  the  Marxists  envisage 
the  problem.  The  orthodox  Marxists  claim  the  "  right  "  to 
revolution  (since  they  are  amoralists  the  word  right  must  be 
placed  in  quotation  marks).  Some  of  them,  in  this  connec- 
tion are  thinking  of  the  future  definitive  revolution,  whilst 
others  ha,ve  in  mind  an  iminterrupted  revolutionism.  But  the 
orthodox  Marxists  have  not  yet  discussed  the  problem  of 
revolution  in  a  way  that  can  be  considered  even  partially 
satisfactory.  I 

'  An  attempt  has  been  made  by  A.  Bogdanov.  This  writer,  too,  is  a 
revisionist  in  so  far  as  he  desires  to  harmonise  IMarxism  with  JMach  (and  also 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  345 


§  162. 

THE  contradictions  noticeable  in  the  Russian  Marxists' 
views  concerning  the  general  question  of  revolution  are 
especially  conspicuous  in  their  appraisement  and  analysis  of 
the  Russian  revolution  of  1905-1906. 

rt-ith  Dietzgen).  Upon  the  foundation  of  "  cmpiriomonism  "  (monism,  be  it 
abserved,  not  criticism  !)  revolution  arises  out  of  the  contradictions  of  social 
ife,  out  of  the  struggle  of  the  productive  energies  of  society  against  the 
deological  forms  ;  revolution  is  social  criticism  and  social  creation,  it  is  the 
tiarmonisation  of  human  existence.  Philosophy  results  from  the  recognition  of 
1  conflict  between  human  experience  and  the  historically  transmitted  ideas 
md  conceptual  forms.  Marx  was  the  first,  says  Bogdanov,  to  understand 
:he  true  nature  of  this  conflict,  for  IMarx  recognised  that  men  regarded  their 
social  and  historical  life  as  determined  by  the  understanding,  divine  or  human 
is  the  case  may  be,  and  it  was  this  conception  of  social  and  historical  life  which 
ed  to  the  formulation  of  socialist  Utopias.  Marx  perceived  that  existence 
ietermined  consciousness,  not  conversely,  and  was  thus  the  first  to  found  a 
:rue  philosophy.  With  Auguste  Comte,  Bogdanov  conceives  the  Utopian  stage 
)f  philosophy  as  religious  and  metaphysical  fetichism,  and  he  discovers  the 
essence  of  this  fetichism  in  the  dualism  which  results  from  the  individualistic 
itomisation  of  the  social  whole.  The  dualism  of  Descartes  is  outspoken,  whilst 
:he  dualism  of  Spinoza  is  masked.  Accurately  regarded,  Spinoza's  "  god  " 
s  merely  the  "  crystallised  reflex  "  of  the  interconnection  of  all  the  elements 
)f  a  society  organised  upon  a  basis  of  exchange — an  interconnection  of  which 
,ve  are  elementally  aware.  Fetichistic  dualism  must  give  place  to  scientific 
nonism.  Monism  is  equivalent  to  philosophy,  that  is  to  say  to  genuine  philo- 
iophy.  The  revolution,  harmonising  life,  will  create  new  motives  and  a  new 
naterial'  for  the  harmonising  of  cognition.  The  old  philosophy  was  often  no 
Tiore  than  instinctively  revolutionary,  and  was  frequently  conservative;  but 
:he  new  philosoph}^  having  become  self-conscious,  is  purely  revolutionary. 
When  class  contrasts  disappear,  when  the  class  struggle  has  come  to  an  end, 
:he  revolution  will  be  resolved  into  the  continuous  and  harmonious  progress 
)f  society,  and  philosophy  will  be  resolved  into  the  continuous  and  harmonious 
progress  of  the  monism  of  science.  According  to  Bogdanov,  modern  philosophy 
nust  be  based  upon  natural  science,  for  natural  science  is  merely  the  systemati- 
sation  of  technical  experience,  the  systematisation,  that  is  to  saj',  of  what  Marx 
termed  the  productive  energy  of  society.  Bogdanov  therefore,  in  contradis- 
tinction to  Plehanov,  accepts  the  ideas  of  Mach,  finding  in  the  logical  consistency 
Df  this  writer  and  in  his  unsparing  positivist  annihilation  of  all  intellectual 
fetiches,  the  indispensable  philosophical  revolution.  Bogdanov  gave  expression 
to  these  ideas  in  the  preface  to  the  translation  of  Mach's  Analysis  of  Sensation, 
and  in  a  number  of  other  writings  (notably  in  the  essay.  Revolution  and  Philo- 
sophy). I  need  not  undertake  a  detailed  criticism  of  Bogdanov's  views,  which 
are  in  essence  no  more  than  an  exposition  of  the  Marxist  glosses  on  Feuerbach, 
and  are  tainted  wth  all  the  errors  of  positivist  materialism  and  amoralism. 
The  connection  between  the  revolution  and  philosophy  is  not  clearly  elucidated, 
for  surely  there  is  a  great  difference  between  revolutionising  people's  minds 
in  the  way  suggested  by  Plehanov,  and  simply  clubbing  them  on  the  head. 
Monism  misleads  Bogdanov  into  instituting  a  deductive  parallelism  between 
revolution  and  philosophy  which  conflicts  with  the  empiricism  customary  in 
natural  science.     (Be  it  noted  that  Marx  was  not  a  student  of  natural  science, 


346  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

The  subject  was  eagerly  considered.  It  was  natural  that 
contemporaries,  a  number  of  whom  participated  personally  in 
the  events,-  should  be  interested  in  searching  out  the  causes 
of  the  revolution.  The  question  they  usually  asked  was, 
whether  and  to  what  extent  the  revolution  was  socialistic, 
whether  it  was  a  working-class  revolution,  a  peasant  revolu- 
tion, or  a  bourgeois  revolution  ;  and  they  wished  to  estimate 
the  value  of  the  revolution  from  the  socialist  outlook,  to  ascer- 
tain whether  and  to  what  extent  it  had  advantaged  or  injured 
particular  classes  and  above  all  the  working  class,  whether 
and  to  what  extent  the  revolution  had  favoured  or  hindered 
the  attainment  of  the  socialist  goal.  The  discussion  was 
instructive,  but  was  somewhat  confused.  Participation  on  the 
part  of  the  workers  in  its  events  does  not  make  the  revolution 
socialistic.  The  concepts,  bourgeoisie,  liberalism,  intelligentsia, 
etc.,  have  many  meanings.  No  attempt  was  made  to  ascertain 
precisely  how  great  a  part  the  capitalists  played  in  bringing 
about  the  revolution,  side  by  side  with,  and  after  a  certain 
point  independently  of,  the  great  landowners  ;  no  attempt  v»-as 
made  to  determine  when  either  of  these  two  classes  intervened, 
or  when  and  why  either  of  them  cfeased  to  participate.  But  it 
is  equally  difficult  to  ascertain  the  precise  share  of  the  Marxists 
and  the  social  revolutionaries  in  the  revolution. 

I  am  not  thinking  solely  of  direct  and  active  participation 
in  the  struggle.  We  are  also  concerned  with  the  question 
how  far  the  revolutionists  received  sympathetic  help  from 
various  strata  of  the  population.  It  is  further  necessary  to 
examine  what  were  the  consequences  of  the  revolution,  what 
trend  the  movement  took,  and  why. 

Finally,  the  individual  facts  and  the  revolution  as  a  whole 

and  yet  Bogdanov  tells  us  that  i\Iarx  inaugurated  the  true  philosophy  !)  When 
Bogdanov  tells  us  concerning  Marx,  that  in  Marx  philosophy  discovered  itself, 
became  aware  of  its  own  position  in  nature  and  society,  a  position  "  above 
nature  and  society,  but  not  outside  them  "  we  cannot  but  feel  that,  despite 
Bogdanov's  general  veneration  for  positivism,  he  departs  here  from  a  strictly 
positivist  and  monistic  outlook.  Bogdanov  has  also  written  "  novels  of  fancj'  " 
wherein  he  describes  the  future  of  society  by  depicting  life  on  Mars.  Here 
we  are  told  of  a  "  universal  science  of  organisation  "  which  will  afford  a  ready 
solution  of  the  most  complicated  tasks  of  organisation  after  the  fashion  of 
mathematical  calculations  in  practical  mechanics.  Manifestly  the  inhabitants 
of  Mars,  in  their  amoralist  objectivism,  take  very  kindly  to  these  calculations. 
It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  "  universal  science  of  organisation  "  is  founded 
by  a  disciple  of  Marx,  the  Martian  Marx,  however,  passing  by  the  name  of 
Xarma.  I  can  understand  why  Plehanov  reproached  Bogdanov  for  being  no 
longer  a  Marxist. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  347 

ught  to  be  considered  historically  and  philosophically  in  their 
eneral  bearing  on  the  historical  evolution  of  Russia. 

Russian  works  available  in  translation  afford  us  some 
isight  into  the  discussion.  Cerevjanin's  book,  The  Proletariat 
nd  the  Russian  Revolution,  1908,  written  from  the  standpoint 
[  the  men'geviki,  concludes  that  the  economic  development 
f  all  classes  of  the  population,  with  the  exception  of  the  feudal 
obiHty,  must  lead  to  the  formation  of  an  opposition  to  the 
Dvernment,  and  must  ultimately  culminate  in  revolution.  In 
lis  anti-absolutist  coahtion  the  working  class  unquestionably 
lays  the  leading  role,  but  it  experiences  reverses  and  hinders 
le  further  development  of  the  revolution  because  it  does  not 
nderstand  how  to  work  hand  in  hand  with  the  liberal  bour- 
joisie.  Cerevjanin  considers  the  enforced  concession  of  the 
ght-hour  day,  and  all  extreme  demands  and  actions  on  the 
art  of  the  operatives,  to  have  been  tactical  errors,  whose 
ily  result  was  to  sow  dissension  between  the  workers  and  the 
berals  and  thus  to  promote  the  victory  of  reaction.  For 
srevjanin,  the  boycott  of  the  duma  was  another  characteristic 
cample  of  this  erroneous  tactic,  and  the  boycott  was  a  con- 
ibutory  cause  of -the  further  tactical  errors  committed  by  the 
hour  leaders. 

It  is,  of  course,  quite  easy  after  the  event  to  point  to  the 
Tors  of  the  revolution.  There  need  be  no  hesitation  about 
imitting  that  not  the  workers  alone,  but  the  liberals  also, 
ade  numerous  and  extensive  mistakes.  On  the  whole,  how- 
'■er,  a  study  of  the  revolution  induces  the  impression  that  the 
ovement  was  better  conducted  than  might  have  been  anti-  ' 
pated  in  view  of  the  lack  of  firmly  estabhshed  and  well-tried 
■ganisations.     In  my  opinion,  the  council  of  workers'  deputies 

St.  Petersburg,  despite  some  weakness  and  vacillation, 
^serves  commendation  for  its  general  conduct  of  the  cause  ; 
it  it  is  plain  enough  that  the  first  successes  had  a  somewhat 
toxicating  effect  upon  the  working-class  leaders  and  that  they 
rerestimated  the  strength  of  the  revolutionary^  forces  while 
Ley  underestimated  the  pOwer  of  the  government. 

Judged  as  a  whole,  the  revolution  of  1905-1906  was  ad- 
mtageous  to  the  development  of  Russia,  Vv'as  a  notable 
irning  to  the  government  and  an  impressive  lesson  to  the 
volutionaries.i 

*  Cf.  A.  Tscherewanin,  Das  Proletariat  und  die  russische  Revolution,  1908. 
revjanin's  overstrained  criticism,  which  is  based  upon  a  too  Utcral  application 


348  .  THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

IV 

§  163. 

WE  must  now  devote  a  brief  section  to  considering  the 
position  of  Marxism  as  a  part  of  the  most  recent  trend; 
in  philosophy  and  above  all  in  the  philosophy  of  religion.  The 
influence  of  Marxist  philosophy  was  peculiarly  powerful  ir 
Russia.  By  the  Russian  Marxists,  therefore,  an  exceptionally 
keen  attention  has  been  paid  to  philosophical  problems,  anc 
it  is  easy  to  understand  the  reason,  seeing  that  since  the  day! 
of  Herzen  the  fundamentals  of  socialism  have  been  eagerl} 
debated.  Before  Marxism  came  to  Russia,  its  philosophica 
groundwork  had  already  been  prepared  in  that  country 
Hegel,  Feuerbach,  French  and  English  positivism,  materialism 
all  the  philosophical  elements  out  of  which  Marxism  is 
constituted,  had  made  themselves  at  home  in  Russia.  Fo] 
this  very  reason,  Marxism  did  not  long  retain  its  grip  upoi 
the  Russians. 

The  matter  is  partly  explained  by  the  fact  that  Marx  hac 
failed  to  give  a  systematic  exposition  of  his  philosophica 
fourrdations,  and  had  exhibited  them  merely  in  the  concret( 
in  his  political  and  economic  studies.  Marx  had  doubtlesi 
aimed  at  becoming  a  teacher  of  philosophy,  and  his  first  essay; 
in  literature  dealt  with  this  field  of  knowledge,  but  his  sub 
sequent  development  and  the  course  of  events  modified  hi; 
plans,  so  that  towards  1848  he  devoted  himself  to  revolu 
tionary  political  activities  and  revolutionary  journalism,  thes( 
activities  culminating  in  his  critical  and  revolutionary  economi( 
studies. 

In  Germany,  Marx's  adversaries  have  for  a  long  tim( 
concerned  themselves  almost  exclusively  with  his  economics 
the  philosophical  content  of  his  writings  receiving  inadequat( 
attention. 

Moreover,  Marx  never  formulated  his  philosophy  clearb 
and  unambiguously.  His  commentators  are  not  agreed  to  wha 
extent  he  remained  a  Hegelian,  and  to  what  extent  he  mus 
be  considered  a  Feuerbachian,  a  positivist,  and  a  materialist 
Misled  by  Hegel's  failure  to  recognize  the  principle  of  con 

of  Plehanov's  political  doctrines,  may  be  usefully  corrected  by  a  perusal  0 
N.  Trotzky,  Russland  in  der  Revolution,  1909.  Trockii  was  a  member  an( 
one  of  the  leaders  of  the  council  of  workers. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  349 

radiction,    Marx    contented    himself    with     epistemologically 
mcritical  positivism  and  positivist  historism,  and  this  is  why 
lis  formula  of  historical  materialism  remains  so  nebulous. 
Engels,  in  his  criticism  of  Diihring's  philosophy,  attempted 

0  systematise  the  philosophy  of  Marxism,  but  the  work  Engels 
;as  attacking,  Diihring's  The  Rcvohition  of  Science,  is,  epis- 
emologically  considered,  nothing  more  than  a  naive  exposition 
f  naive  realism.  Seeing,  therefore,  that  the  Russian  orthodox 
larxists,  Plehanov  in  especial,  but  also  Lenin,  took  their 
tieory  of  cognition  from  Engels  (as  Plehanov  is  careful  to 
xplain),  we  cannot  expect  much  valuable  fruit  from  the 
hilosophical  discussions  of  the  Marxists. 

"The  father  of  Russian  Marxism"  is,  in  fact,  satisfied  with 
Angel's  naive  realism. ^  Nevertheless  he  believes  himself  to  be 
n  orthodox  Marxist  in  proclaiming  materialism  as  monism, 

1  approximating  it  as  closely  as  possible  to  Spinozism,  and 
ven  in  positively  identifying  it  with  Spinozism,  for  he  main- 
lins  that  the  materialism  of  Marx  and  Engels,  and  also  the 
laterialism  of  Feuerbach  and  Diderot,  are  no  more  than  a 
ariety  of  Spinozism.  At  the  same  time  he  defends  the 
laterialistic  foundation  of  dialectic,  wherein  he  discovers  the 
:ue  essence  of  historical  materialism,  of  the  Marx-Engels 
hilosophy. 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  there  is  no  justification  for  the 
lentification  of  Marxism  with  Spinozism,  as  the  Marxists 
ave  admitted  (Stein,  for  example,  in  his  book  on  Spinoza), 
pinoza  assumes  a  parallelism  between  being  and  thought, 
hereas  in  the  Marx-Engels  philosophy  the  relationship  is 
jgarded  as  causal,  for  existence  is  assumed  to  determine 
lought.  As  a  parallelist,  Spinoza  is  a  rationahst,  and  indeed 
n  ultra-rationalist.  Marx,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an  ultra- 
mpiricist.     Moreover,  Plehanov  may  learn  from  Engels  how 

»  In  Plehanov's  latest  polemic  writing.  From  Defence  to  Attack,  Kant's 
ling-by-itself  and  subjectivism  are  disposed  of  with  the  assertion  that  modern 
;ience  does  not  merely  study  tilings  by  its  analysis,  but  actually  produces 
lings,  and  that  what  we  can  ourselves  produce  cannot  be  said  to  be  uncog- 
isable.  Here  is  Plehanov's  epistemological  basic  formula:  "We  give  the 
ame  of  material  objects  (bodies)  to  such  objects  as  exist  independently  of  our 
insciousness,  act  upon  our  senses,  and  thus  awaken  in  us  definite  sensations, 
lese  sensations,  in  their  turn,  being  a  fundamental  element  of  our  ideas  of 
le  outer  world,  that  is  to  say,  our  ideas  of  the  aforesaid  material  objects 
nd  of  their  mutual  relationships."  Mihailovskii  was  Ukewise  a  materialist, 
ut  Mihailovskii  at  least  did  not  fail  to  recognise  the  subjective  element  of 
pperception. 


850  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

as  early  as  1844  the  latter,  in  his  critique  of  Carlyle,  following 
Feuerbach,  rejected  Spinozism  as  pantheism.  Plehanov's  belief 
in  an  objective  dialectic  based  on  materialism  is  equally  void 
of  foundation,  for  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  objective  dialectic. 
Plehanov  weakens  his  own  position  by  his  fondness  for  advo- 
cating dialectic  as  a  method.  He  learned  this  from  Engels, 
but  both  he  and  Engels  were  in  error.  Historical  materialism 
is  merely  materialism  ;  as  such,  in  interpreting  history,  it  may 
formulate  its  own  method,  but  it  is  not  itself  a  method.  Struve, 
therefore,  successfully  maintained  as  against  Plehanov  that 
dialectic  has  no  proper  place  in  Marxism  (materialism).  It 
is  true  that  Plehanov  offers  two  proofs  on  behalf  of  objective 
dialectic.  He  says  that  motion  and  becoming  involve  an 
inward  contradiction,  Zeno,  the  founder  of  the  Stoic  philosophy, 
being  again  raised  to  honour  ;  and  he  introduces  into  the 
concept  of  becoming  an  antirevolutionary  contrast,  which  is 
itself  however  subjective,  conceptual,  not  objective. 

Against  the  revisionists,  who  advocate  a  return  to  Kant, 
Plehanov  adduces  Jacobi's  argument  against  Kant.  If  we  base 
ourselves  on  Kant  we  are  faced  with  a  dilemma.  We  have  to 
choose  between  Feuerbach's  materialism  ("  I  am  a  real,  a  sensual 
being,  and  the  body  in  its  totahty  is  my  ego,  my  essence  "), 
and  Fichte's  sohpsism.  But  solipsism  is  absurd  (no  one  can 
contend  that  my  mother  exists  only  within  me),  and  we 
are  therefore  compelled  to  accept  materialism. 

It  is  needless  to  refute  a  disjunctive  statement  of  this  sort 
or  to  waste  time  discussing  arguments  of  such  a  calibre.  We 
may  reject  Kant  and  Fichte,  we  may  reject  Kantian  apriorism 
and  Kantian  subjectivism  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  sub- 
jectivism is  wholly  false,  and  that  materialism  as  naive  realism 
or  objectivism,  is  sound.  The  whole  aim  of  recent  philosophy 
has  been  to  revise  Hume  and  Kant,  and  to  provide  a  critical 
foundation  for  empiricism — "  critical  "  in  the  Kantian  sense. 
The  Marxists  have  hitherto  taken  no  part  in  this  wort  of 
revision,  but  no  one  who  seriously  attempts  it  can  possibly 
remain  a  materialist. 

Plehanov  is  doubtless  right  in  his  energetic  rejection  of 
extreme  subjectivism  as  scepticism.  Belinskii,  Bakunin,  the 
Slavophils,  Mihailovskii,  etc.,  took  the  same  sound  view.  Ple- 
hanov sees  in  the  scepticism  which  has  been  diffused  since  the 
eighteenth  century  a  manifestation  of  decadence,  and  we  have 
in  fact  to  do  here  with  decadence,  with  the  degeneration  of 

j 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  351 

he  lay  and  ecclesiastical  aristocracy  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
md  with  the  degeneration  and  decay  of  the  bourgeoisie  in 
he  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries.  Plehanov  further 
ontends  that  scepticism  has  nothing  to  do  with  theological 
"  extra-human  ")  doctrines.  The  bourgeois  ideologues  are 
'  instinctively  "  aware  of  the  approaching  destruction  of  their 
lass,  and  this  explains  their  feeling  of  profound  discontent, 
v'hich  finds  expression  in  scepticism,  pessimism,  etc.  Proletarian 
deologues,  on  the  other  hand,  are  animated  with  a  vigorous 
eeling  of  the  joy  of  life,  and  every  one  of  them  exclaims  with 
lutten  :  "  It  is  bhss  to  be  alive  !  "  The  proletarian  knows 
lothing  of  scepticism. 

Thus  Plehanov  rejects  Hume  as  well  as  Kant,  for  Hume's 
>hilosophy  is  incompatible  with  Marxism.  With  Hume,  the 
nodern  Humists,  and  especially  Mach,  must  be  discarded, 
^lehanov  vigorously  animadverts  upon  Bogdanov  and  other 
r'larxists  who  accept  the  philosophy  of  Mach. 

Lenin,  too,  though  an  opponent  of  Plehanov,  defends 
-larxist  materiaHsm  in  a  writing  against  empirio-criticism. 
.enin  considers  that  the  ideas  of  Avenarius,  Mach,  and  their 
Russian  successors,  are  merely  a  reiteration  of  the  masked 
ohpsism  of  Fichte  and  Berkeley.  The  adoption  of  subjec- 
ivism  involves  the  burial  of  the  healthy  hum^an  understanding 
t'ith  its  beUef  in  an  objective  world  subordinated  to  the  reign 
•f  law.  But  thereby  religion,  one  of  the  main  props  of  the 
tourgeoisie  and  of  bourgeois  dominion,  is  favoured.  Conse- 
[uently  empirio-criticism  is  a  reactionary  philosophy. 

Lenin's  book  is  written  in  a  racy  style  :  Avenarius,  Schuppe, 
.nd  the  others  are  smartly  handled  ;  but  no  further  hght  is 
hrown  upon  the  essential  questions  in  dispute.  Lenin  makes 
10  advance  bej^ond  Engels. 

§  164. 

"pHE  old  dispute  in  Russian  philosophy  between  objec- 
1  tivism  and  subjectivism  is  the  nuclear  point  at  issue 
letween  the  Russian  orthodox  Marxists  and  the  revisionists. 
Bernstein,  who  insists  that  socialism  must  be  founded,  not 
objectively  but  subjectively,  upon  the  basis  of  a  proper  direc- 
ion  of  the  will  and  upon  individual  motivation,  thereby  gives 
.n  accurate  epistemological  formulation  to  his  opposition  to 
/larxism.     The   Marxism   of   Marx   and   Engels   is   decisively 


352  THE  -SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

\  objectivist.  The  individual  and  the  individual  consciousness 
are  wholly  absorbed  in  the  mass  ;  the  individual  consciousness 
must  yield  place  before  the  mass  consciousness.  Russian 
orthodox  Marxists  take  the  same  standpoint,  and  therefore 
attack  the  subjectivism  of  Mihailovskii  and  Lavrov  and  these 
authors'  endorsement  of  ethics  and  ethical  aims,  Objectivist 
Marxism  is  objectively  historical  and  amoralist. 

Russian  revisionism  was  inaugurated  by  Struve,  who 
declared  himself  in  favour,  not  only  of  ethical  but  also  of 
metaphysical  individualism.  Struve  defended  the  individual 
consciousness  and  the  idea  of  substance,  giving  a  more  than 
Kantian  prominence  to  soul-substance  and  the  freedom  of 
the  will. 

From  positivism  and  materialism  Struve  made  an  abrupt 
return  "to  metaphysics.  The  acceptance  of  metaphysics  implied 
the  acceptance  of  religion  and  mysticism.  Before  long  it  was 
hardly  possible  to  speak  of  the  movement  as  one  of  Marxist 
revisionism  ;  the  revisionists  had  simply  become  "  idealists," 
the  name  used  by  friend  and  foe  alike  to  denote  those  who  tend 
towards  the  opposite  pole  from  materialism  and  positivism 
("  from  materialism   to  socialism,"   Bulgakov). 

For  Russians  the  watchword.  Return  to  Kant,  embodies 
a  comparatively  vague  philosophical  program,  for  there  has 
hitherto  been  little  accurate  study  in  Russia  of  the  Kantian 
philosophy.  In  the  present  volumes  it  has  been  possible  to 
refer  to  Solov'ev  alone  as  possessing  a  knowledge  of  Kant.  For 
the  Russian  revisionists  (and  indeed  for  the  German  revision- 
ists) the  name  of  Kant  is  little  more  than  a  catchword.  The 
reference  is  really  to  neokantianism  or,  to  speak  yet  more 
strictly,  to  the  various  German  philosophers  of  the  present 
day  whose  thought  is  related  to  that  of  Kant.  F.  A.  Lange, 
Schuppe,  Riehl,  Cohen,  Windelband,  Rickert,  Stammler,  and 
others,  have  been  the  teachers  of  the  Russian  revisionists. 

Properly  speaking,  therefore,  Russian  revisionism  falls  back 
upon  Mihailovskii.  The  revisionists  accept  Mihailovskii' s 
subjective  method.  The  orthodox  Marxists  regard  this  as  a 
reversion  to  the  narodniCestvo,  or  at  any  rate  -Plehanov 
identifies  subjectivism  with  the  narodnicestvo.  But  as  far  as 
metaphysics  and  the  philosophy  of  religion  are  concerned,  the 
revisionists  find  Mihailovskii  inadequate,  and  therefore  these 
sometime  Marxists  have  returned  to  Solov'ev  and  Dostoevskii. 

So  general  has  been  this  turning  away  from  Marxism  as 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  353 

m  embodiment  of  materialism  that  even  the  orthodox  Marxists 
lave  begun  to  abandon  their  Marx.  Avenarius,  Mach,  and 
mpirio-criticism,  have  become  the  authorities  of  many  of  the 
Tthodox,  whilst  Dietzgen  begins  to  replace  Engels.  Plehanov 
iisputes  the  v-alidity  of  these  new  authorities  championed  by 
is  comrades,  and  so  does  Lenin,  but  it  cannot  be  said  that 
ither  Plehanov  or  Lenin  is  wholly  right,  for  Marxist  positivism 
an  readily  be  associated  with  the  ideas  of  Mach  or  Hume, 
till,  we  are  concerned  with  ethics  as  well  as  with  epistemology 
nd  metaphysics,  and  from  the  ethical  outlook  Marxist  amoral- 
;ni  is  incompatible  with  Humism.  It  would  seem,  however, 
lat  even  Plehanov  must  have  been  attacked  by  the  revisionist 
itellectual  anaemia — for  why  else  should  he  make  out  Marx 
D  be  a  Spinozist  ? 

For  the  Marxists  the  struggle  between  subjectivism  and 
bjectivism  has  no  mere  theoretical  significance,  but  is,  rather, 
ractical  and  ethical.  With  good  reason  since  the  days  of 
[ume  and  Kant  subjectivism  has  been  in  essentials  a  moral 
hilosophy.  In  the  dispute  between  the  orthodox  Marxists 
nd  the  revisionists,  the  ethical  problem  comes  to  the  front, 
le  question  whether  our  estimate  of  socialism  and  the  socialist 
rogram  is  to  be  ethical  or  amorahst  and  historical.  The 
rthodox  Marxists  are  especially  concerned  with  founding  and 
sfending  revolution  and  the  revolutionary  mood,  and  for 
lem  the  revolutionary  mood  is  the  touchstone  of  philo- 
)phy.  From  this  outlook  Plehanov  defends  materialism  as 
)jectivism  against  subjectivism,  contending  that  subjectivism 
ads  to  scepticism,  and  therefore  weakens  and  destroys  the 
volutionary  spirit. ^ 

»  Tn  the  epilogue  to  the  Russian  translation  of  Thun's  work  on  the  Russian  • 
i^olutionary  movement,  Plehanov  expressed  his  objections  to  the  so-called 
bjectivist  method  of  Lavrov.  The  task  of  science,  he  said,  and  therefore 
e  task  of  scientific  socialism,  was  to  explain  the  subject  (in  so  far  as  explana- 
in  was  requisite)  by  the  object.  Russian  progressive  thought  had  become 
are  and  more  objectivistic  in  proportion  as  it  was  richer  in  the  revolutionary 
irit,  whereas  it  had  become  increasingly  subjecti\astic  in  proportion  as  it 
IS  poor  in  revolutionary  content.  Cerny§evskii  and  Dobroljubov,  he  con- 
ided,  had  certainly  not  been  subjectivists.  This  is  perfectly  true,  but  they 
re  far  from  being  extreme  objectivists  ;  they  recognised  the  significance 
ethics  and  gave  their  socialism  an  ethical  foundation,  whilst  the  narodovolcy 
d  the  terrorists  agreed  with  them  in  representing  the  duty  of  revolution  as 

ethical  imperative.  Rosa  Luxemburg,  writing  in  "  Iskra  "  an  article 
ticising  Lenin  (1904)  discerned  subjectivism  in  the  fondness  of  Lenin's  ad- 
rents  for  centralism.  The  ego,  crushed  by  absolutism,  took  its  revenge  by 
throning  itself  as  a  conspirators'  committee,  as  an  almighty  "  popular  will." 

24  VOL.  II. 


354  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

In  his  philpsophical  opus  magnum,  The  Monistic  View  of 
History,  Plehanov  discusses  the  ethical  problem,  although  the 
work  is  properly  concerned  solely  with  the  question  of  freedom 
and  necessity.  How,  asks  Plehanov,  can  the  consciousness, 
how  can  voluntary  decisions,  how  can  motivation,  be  explained 
in  a  purely  objectivist  manner  ?  How  can  voluntary  decisions, 
above  all,  be  even  partially  conceived  as  a  mere  "  reflex  "  of 
the  object  ?  With  this  question,  the  objectivism  of  Marx  and 
Engels  is  shivered  to  fragments,  and  despite  all  his  Marxist 
orthodoxy,  Plehanov  takes  refuge  in  Spinoza.^ 


§  165. 

WHEN  we  talk  of  "  from  Marxism  to  idealism,"  we  have 
to  understand  by  idealism,  religion  as  the  definite 
opposite  of  materialism.  In  Russia,  materialism  signifies, 
irreligion  or  antireligion,  and  in  the  narrower  sense,  atheism. 
The  return  to  religion  effected  by  the  revisionists  was  partly 
determined  by  the  example  of  the  German  revisionists.  For 
the  most  part,  however,  the  Russian  revisionists  followed  the 
current  represented  by  Solov'ev  and  Dostoevskii.  To-day,  as 
I  have  said,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  speak  of  Struve,  Bul- 
gakov, and  similar  writers,  as  revisionists.     But  there  do  exist 

But  the  subjective  ego  was  soon  forced  to  recognise  that  the  "  object,"  i.e. 
the  absolutist  knout,  was  the  stronger  party.  Rosa  Luxemburg,  therefore, 
following  the  teaching  of  Marx  and  Engels,  declared  that  the  mass-ego  of  the 
working  class  was  the  true  determinant  of  history.  I  leave  undiscussed  the 
problem  whether  and  how  the  mass-ego  can  exist  without  the  individual  ego, 
for  I  have  merely  referred  to  the  passage  in  order  to  show  how  the  orthodox 
Russian  Marxists  condemn  subjectivism  in  all  its  forms  and  for  every  con- 
ceivable reason. 

I  Be  it  noted  that  Plehanov  does  not  in  truth,  as  does  Engels,  completely 
eliminate  the  subject.     In  his  translation  of  Engels'  Feuerbach  (1892)    Plehanov, 
declares,  just  like  Descartes,   that  his  own  existence  at  least  stands  for  hi: 
above  the  possibility  of  doubt,  for  this  existence  is  guaranteed  by  "  an  abso' 
lutely  insuperable  "  inner  conviction.     In  his  polemic  against  Kant  he  contend: 
that,  objectively  regarded,  Engels'  position  is  that  in  the  historical  process  o: 
transition  from    one    form    to  another,   reality    comprises    Engels    as    one    o: 
the   necessary   instruments   of   the   imminent    revolution  ;    whilst   subjectivel 
regarded,  we  perceive  that  Engels  found    this    participation    in    the  historical 
movement  as  agreeable,  and  that  he  looked  upon  it  as  his  duty.     The  objectiv( 
historical  process  is   agreeable  to  the  individual,   who   considers  participatio 
in  it  to  be  his  duty — thus  Plehanov,  in  this  matter  likewise,  is  not  an  amoralis' 
of  orthodox  rigidity,  for  Spinozist  parallelism  has  him  in  its  toils.     This  is  why' 
I  say  that  Plehanov,  too,  was  a  revisionist.     Is  it  not  to  him  that  we  owe  the 
term  "the  red  phantom"?     Did  not  Lenin  ridicule  Plehanov's  revolutionism 
by  saying  that  its  motto  was,  "  Kill  with  kindness  "  ? 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  355 

Marxists  friendly  to  religion,  of  whom  LunaCarskii  is  the  best 
known — not  to  speak  of  Gor'kii,  who  has  coined  the  term 
'  creator  of  God  "  (not  "  seeker  after  God  !  "),  a  term  used 
by  opponents  to  designate  the  trend.  At  the  head  of  the 
Marxists  hostile  to  religion  stands  Plehanov,  and  Plehanov 
tilts  with  especial  vigour  against  Lunacarskii,  who  has  de- 
Fended  his  position  in  a  two-volume  treatise. 

The  discussion  has  been  somewhat  unedifying  and  dis- 
:ursive,  but  may  be  briefly  summarised  as  follows. 

The  question  is  frequently  asked,  what  is  the  relationship 
Detween  socialism  and  religion,  and  it  is  necessary  to  point 
Dut  how  the  history  of  socialism  shows  that  socialism  and 
•eligion  are  not  mutually  incompatible.  With  regard  to  the 
jpecial  question  whether  socialism  can  or  cannot  be  reconciled 
A^ith  Christianity,  we  have  to  ask  what  is  meant  by  Christianity, 
:he  teaching  of  Jesus  or  the  extant  ecclesiastical  forms,  and 
urther  we  have  to  ask  which  system  of  socialism  is  meant, 
some  desire  to  prove  that  materialism  is  essentially  incom- 
patible with  Christianity  and  religion,  whilst  others  beheve  that 
Vlarxism  can  be  reconciled  v/ith  rehgion  in  general  and  with 
Christianity  in  particular. 

Another  formulation  of  the  problem  occurs  when  socialism 
tself,  or  the  social  democratic  movement,  is  spoken  of  as  a 
•eligion,  as  the  new  religion.  This  line  has  been  taken  by 
3ietzgen,  to  whom  others  besides  Marxists  and  declared  social- 
sts  appeal  as  an  authority  upon  the  matter.  In  the  works 
)f  Filosofov,  for  example,  I  find  such  an  appeal  to  Dietzgen, 
md  a  reminder  that  Dietzgen  had  lived  in'  Russia  for  several 
^ears.  Filosofov  is  one  of  those  who  recognise  the  great  im- 
)ortance  of  socialism,  and  for  that  reason  are  loath  to  admit 
hat  rehgion  and  socialism  are  antagonistic. 

Again,  it  often  happens  that  socialism  (or  social  democracy) 
s  represented  as  a  new  stage  in  the  development  of  the  religious 
;onsciousness,  a  stage  to  which  ecclesiastical  rehgion  will  have 
:o  adapt  itself. 

In  connection  with  all  these  formulations,  it  is  necessary 
;o  insist  upon  a  more  precise  definition  of  the  concept  religion, 
md  above  all  it  is  essential  to  distinguish  the  principal  elements    • 
)f  religion  in  general  from  extant  ecclesiastical  rehgion. 

Frequently  when  people  speak  of  the  rehgious  factor  in  ij 
lociahsm,  they  mean  the  faith,  the  beheving  energy,  the  con-  'I 
action,  and  the  hope,  of  the  sociahsts.     Plehanov  extols  this  ,i 


356  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

believing  energy  of  socialism  as  contrasted  with  the  scepticism 
of  the  bourgeoisie,  and  declares  that  the  proletarian  is  pecu- 
liarly unsceptical.  Before  Plehanov,  nearly  all  the  socialists, 
and  in  particular  the  revolutionary  socialists,  valued  and  de- 
manded this  energy  of  belief.  In  such  a  sense,  for  example, 
the  nihilists  were  "  religious,"  were  persons  animated  with 
faith.  We  recall,  too,  how  the  earlier  writers,  beginning 
with  Belinskii  and  Herzen,  demanded  faith  and  condemned 
scepticism.  But  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  faith 
and  religious  faith,  between  belief  and  religion. 
'  Intimately  related  with  this  mood  of  faith  is  the  enthusiasm 
of  the  socialists,  admired  even  by  their  adversaries — an  enthu- 
siasm which  may  on  occasion  pass  into  fanaticism. 

Another  notable  trait  is  the  self-sacrificingness  and  the 
active  fraternity  of  the  socialists.  Those  to  whom  the  essence 
of  religion  lies  in  morality  will  gladly  term  socialists  "  religious 
persons." 

We  have  further  to  consider  the  mystical  tendency  and  the 
belief  in  miracle,  factors  which  play  a  notable  part  in  Russia 
in  constituting  the  idea  of  religion.  Whilst  the  orthodox 
Marxists  cling  to  Marxist  rationahsm  and  its  associations  with 
the  enlightenment,  the  Marxists  with  religious  inclinations 
(to  whom-  Plehanov,  of  course,  refuses  the  name  of  Marxists) 
turn  towards  mysticism  which  is,  they  insist;  a  necessary 
supplement  to  purely  scientific,  one-sidedly  scientific,  Marxism. 
From  this  outlook,  ceremonial  and  symbolism  are  recognised 
as  important.  (For  Lunacarskii,  for  example,  productive 
energies  are  the  Father,  the  proletariat  is  the  Son,  and  scientific 
socialism  is  the  Holy  Ghost.) 

Finally  an  appeal  is  made  (as  by  V.  Bazarov,  whose  philo- 
sophic starting-point  is  Engel's  empiricism)  to  rehgion  as  an 
authority  which  will  be  competent,  in  virtue  of  its  higher 
religious  power,  to  maintain  order  in  a  disintegrated  society 
that  is  breaking  up  into  separate  classes  and  castes. 

In  this  study  of  the  relationships  between  Russian  socialism 
and  religion,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Christian  socialism 
is  practically  unknown  in  Russia.  A  certain  number  of  priests 
have  joined  the  liberal  movement,  and  a  few  even  have  entered 
the  Social  Democratic  Party  ;  this  party  carries  on  an  agita- 
tion among  the  sectaries  and  old  believers,  but  there  are  few 
traces  of  Christian  socialism.  Whereas  in  France,  England, 
Germany,    and    everywhere    throughout    the    west,    socialism 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  357 

first  manifested  itself  as  Christian  or  religious  socialism, 
Russian  socialism  was  from  the  outset  a  philosophic  movement, 
influenced  by  western  philosophic  doctrines. ^ 

In  his  philosophy  of  religion,  Plehanov  follows  Feuerbach, 
kvhose  anthropomorphic  theory  he  supplements  for  the  first 
stages  of  evolution  by  Tylor's  animism.  But  for  Plehanov 
the  essential  ideas  of  rehgion  are  the  reflex  of  the  productive 
"orces  of  society  and  of  material  conditions  in  general.  (For 
lim  philosophy,  too,  is  a  reflex,  law  is  a  reflex — in  fact  we  have 
;oo  much  reflex  altogether  !)  Plehanov  does  not  merely  deny 
■evelation  but  he  contests  the  existence  of  an  inborn  subjective 
leed  for  rehgion.  He  follows  Comte  in  holding  that  religion 
s  essentially  a  lower  stage  in  the  theoretical  elucidation  of 
;he  world  ;  that  the  main  theological  doctrines  (for  example, 
;hat  of  the  creation  of  the  world  by  God,  a  conception  itself 
jased  upon  the  analogy  of  primitive  or  more  advanced  technical 
icquirements)  are  hypotheses  to  be  abandoned  as  reason  gains 
;trength.  For  Plehanov,  therefore,  there  is  no  inner  connec- 
ion  between  morality  and  rehgion.  Morality,  as  a  systematic 
ormulation  of  the  mutual  relationships  of  human  beings, 
irises  antecedently  to  religion,  and  is  not  subordinated  to 
eligion  until  a  subsequent  stage  of  development,  when  duties 
ire  represented  as  the  commands  of  the  godhead.  When 
lespotism  prevailed,  God  was  conceived  as- a  despot,  but  the 
;"od  of  the  deists  has  his  heavenly  constitutionalist  parliament — 
hus  literally  does  Plehanov  reecho  the  teaching  of  Feuerbach. 
Religion,  says  Plehanov,  is  destined  to  disappear,  and  is  already 
lisappearing  in  proportion  as  man  comes  to  understand  social 
ife  and  its  relationships,  and  in  proportion  as  he  acquires 
)0wer  over  nature  and  himself. 

It  is  plain  that  Plehanov  supplements  Feuerbach's  philo- 

I  Social  democracy,  with  its  parliamentary  minimum  program,  can  more 
eadily  be  accepted  than  can  theoretical  Marxism  by  a  practising  clerk  in  .holy 
rders.  We  must  of  course  take  into  account  the  differences  of  creed.  A 
'rotestant  pastor  in  Germany  or  America  differs  from  a  Russian  pope.  Work 
mong  the  sectaries  is  political  in  character,  is  an  advocacy  of  social  reform. 
5ee,  for  example,  "  Razsvet  "  [Dawn],  a  periodical  edited  for  the  social  demo- 
racy  in  Geneva,  during  the  year  1904,  by  Bonc-Bruevic.)  Lunacarskii  claims 
Julgakov  as  a  Christian  socialist ;  also  Solov'ev  and  Tolstoi,  although  he  admits 
tiat  Tolstoi  should  i-ather  be  termed  a  Christian  anarchist,  and  that  Solov'ev 
'as  not  really  a  socialist.  Nor  is  it  accurate  to  speak  of  the  sometime  Marxists 
s  Christian  socialists.  They  have  abandoned  Marxism,  and  Plehanov,  in  his 
olemic  against  these  adversaries,  has  good  reason  for  spealdng  of  them  as 
Mr.  So  and  So,"  no  longer  as  "  Comrade  So  and  So." 


358  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

sophy  of  religion  by  Comte's  positive  philosophy.  Whereas 
Feuerbach  conceived  religion  as  the  religion  of  humanity, 
agreeing  here  with  the  later  developments  of  Comte's  philo- 
sophy, Plehanov  divorced  humanity  from  religion.  Religion 
for  him  was  purely  ephemeral,  and  he  could  not  agree  with ' 
Feuerbach  and  Schleiermacher  in  the  view  that  there  exists 
a  natural  need  for  religion. 

Plehanov  shares  the  prejudice  of  Comte  and  the  positiv- 
ists  when  he  represents  religion  as  a  lower  stage  of  evolution. 
How  can  religion  be  replaced  by  the  positive  philosophy  if 
it  be  completely  different  from  the  positive  philosophy  ? 
Comte  confused  theology  or  myth  with  religion,  and  it 
was  upon  the  basis  of  this  confusion  that  he  formulated  his 
three  stages,  which  conflict  with  history  and  with  the  idea 
of  evolution  and  progress.  A  priori  it  is  extremely  improbable 
that  religion  will  now  cease  to  exist  and  will  leave  science 
victor  on  the  field,  seeing  that  religion  has  continued  to  develop 
since  the  very  beginning  of  history.  Mankind  has  already 
existed  for  thousands  of  years,  perhaps  for  hundreds  of  thou- 
sands of  years,  and  throughout  this  long  period  religion  has 
unceasingly  developed.  Will  it  now  pass  away  entirely  ?  Is 
it  not  more  probable,  above  all  from  the  evolutionist  stand- 
point, that  religion  will  continue  in  the  future  to  develop  side 
by  side  with  science,  just  as  science  has  hitherto  developed 
side  by  side  with  religion  ? 

Plehanov  follows  the  views  of  Engels,  who  (in  the  before- 
mentioned  critique  of  Carlyle)  declared  that  all  the  possibilities 
of  religion  have  been  exhausted,  and  maintained  that  no  other 
form  of  religion  could  come  into  existence  in  the  future.  This 
contention  was  a  presumptuous  one,  and  was  the  outcome  of 
a  false  philosophy  of  religion  and  of  history,  of  an  epistemo- 
logical  confusion  of  religion  with  myth. 

Lunacarskii,  who  would  like  to  combine  his  Marx  with 
Avenarius  and  others,  likewise  follows  Comte  and  Feuerbach, 
but  comes  to  conclusions  differing  from  those  of  Plehanov, 
for  in  his  view  the  positivistic  phase  of  evolution  is  likewise 
religious.  Atheism,  says  Lunacarskii,  is  religious;  man  is  put 
in  God's  place,  and  we  have  the  Comtist  religion  of  humanity  ; 
God  disappears,  or,  a  la  Feuerbach,  he  is  transformed  intOj 
man  ;  "  homo  homini  deus  "  repeats  Lunacarskii  after  Feuer- 
bach. To  put  the  matter  otherwise,  democracy  is  not  merely! 
a  political  system  but  also  a  religious  system  ;   the  aspirations] 


THE   SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA  359 

of  the  scientific  and  fully  conscious  socialist  are  guided  by  the 
idealism  of  the  class  and  the  species.  Collectivism  is  religious  ; 
sociaHsm  is  a  religious  system  ;  Marxist  socialism,  above  all, 
is  "  the  fifth  great  reUgion  formulated  by  Jewry." 

Since  the  days  of  Herzen  the  Russian  socialists  have  fol- 
lowed in   the   footsteps   of   Feuerbach.     Bulgakov,   who   gave 
the  watchword  "  from  Marxism  to  idealism,"  needed  therefore 
strong    personal    reasons    before    forsaking    Feuerbach.     In    a 
work  entitled  The  Religion  of  the  Man-Godhead  in  the  Works 
of  L.  Feuerbach  (1906),  a  belated  contribution  to  the  Feuer- 
bach centenary  (1904),  the  sometime  Marxist  declares  that  the 
Feuerbachian   religion   of  humanity  is  inadequate.      Not   the 
man-god,  he  says,   not  the  god-humanity,  but  the  God-Man, 
the  Christ,  is  the   true  object  of  religious  devotion.     As  the 
terminology     indicates,     Bulgakov,    too,    is     returning    from 
Feuerbach    to    Solov'ev    and    Dostoevskii.      Bulgakov    states 
the   alternatives  :    "  Humanism    with    Christ   and    in   Christ's 
name,  or  humanism  versus  Christ  and  in  man's  own  name." 
Nevertheless,   Feuerbach    is   given    a   place    among   the    holy 
ones    of   the    Christian   calendar    (an   honour   which   Solov'ev 
had   paid   to   Comte    as    well),    for    the    social    freedom     of 
mankind    is    and    must    remain    the    precondition    of     the 
kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  and  Feuerbach,  despite  his  atheism, 
sincerely  cooperated  in  the  upbuilding  of  this  kingdom. 

§  166. 

FOR  Russia,  as  for  Europe,  Marxism  is  something  more 
than  a  living  memento  to  the  defenders  of  the  old  social 
order,  it  is  in  addition  a  positive  crea.tive  energy. 

Apart  from  its  scientific  performances  in  the  domain 
of  economics  and  economic  history,  Marxism  during  the 
nineties  awakened  and  reinvigorated  the  Russian  intelhgentsia. 
The  revision  of  the  narodnicestvo  and  its  documentary  refuta- 
tion with  the  aid  of  economic  and  financial  statistics  was  a 
valuable  service,  through  the  performance  of  which  reaUsm 
first  became  wholly  reaUstic.  The  bhnd  hopes  based  upon 
the  peasant  had  to  be  abandoned — though  we  must  admit 
that  the  Marxists,  in  their  campaign  against  the  narodniki, 
endeavoured  to  prove  a  good  deal  more  than  was  susceptible 
of  proof. 

The    pohtical   achievements   of   Marxism  have  been    con- 


360  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

siderable.  By  their  defence  of  politism,  Plehanov  and  his 
associates  estabhshed  a  clearer  distinction  between  sociahsm 
and  anarchism.  For  a  time,  none  the  less,  the  influence 
of  Marx  was  overshadowed  by  that  of  Bakunin ;  only  a 
minority  of  the  Marxists  remained  equal  to  their  task  ; 
but*  the  views  of  this  minority  have  continually  gained 
ground.  During  the  strenuous  days  of  the  revolution, 
though  all  the  progressive  parties  were  joint  leaders  in  that 
movement,  and  though  it  was  approved  and  supported  even 
by  the  right  wing  of  liberahsm,  it  was  the  Marxists  in 
especial  who  proved  their  organising  capacity. 
u  Marxist  social  democracy  teaches  the  workers  to  advance 
by  legal  methods  ;  the  duma  and  the  constitution- are  utiUsed 
to  better  and  better  effect  on  behalf  of  the  minimum  program. 
Everyday  political  and  administrative  work  in  the  individual 
organisations  (the  trade  unions,  cooperatives,  etc.),  is  training 
up  a  new  generation  of  operatives,  and  the  organisation  of  the 
workers  necessitates  to  an  increasing  extent  the  development 
of  political  capacity. 

The  tactical  struggles  between  the  "  economists  "  and  the 
advocates  of  pohtical  action  become  less  acrimonious  ;  edu- 
cational activity  is  diffusing  among  the  workers  a  large  share 
of  culture,  and  above  all  of  pohtical  culture.  To  a  notable 
extent,  this  development  is  promoted  by  the  consciousness  of 
belonging  to  a  party  and  to  an  international  organisation. 
The  Russian  social  democratic  workman's  outlook  upon  the 
social  and  pohtical  activities  of  the  entire  world,  lifts  him  to 
a  higher  plane,  poHtically  speaking,  than  has  been  attained 
by  the  average  liberal.  Working-class  leaders  play  the  part 
which,  during  the  reign  of  Alexander  I,  was  played  in  the  army 
and  in  society  by  those  officers  who  had  been  in  Europe  ;  these 
leaders,  too,  have  made  personal  acquaintance  with  Europe. 
To  this  extent,  therefore,  Marxism  is  in  essentials  a  renovated 
radical  westernism.  In  Russia,  the  land  of  so  many 
nationahties,  the  mission  of  Marxist  internationahsm  cannot 
but  be  fraught  vv^ith  blessings. 

It  is  impossible  for  the  nonce  to  say  whether  and  when 
the  Russian  Marxists  will  succeed  in  winning  over  the  peasants, 
but  this  much  is  certain,  that  the  agrarian  question  is  of  far 
more  pressing  importance  to  the  Russian  than  to  the  European 
Marxist. 

We  cannot  esteem  the  social  democracy  too  highly  for  the 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  861 

way  in  which  it  has  made  it  a  point  of  principle  to  insist  that 
science  must  be  apphed  to  pohtical  practice,  to  demand  that 
poHtics  shall  be  based  upon  strictly  scientific  historical  and 
sociological  knowledge.  In  this  matter,  Marxism  follows  the 
example  set  by  Herzen  and  his  successors. 

On  the  philosophical  plane,  the  religious  problem  presents 
great  difficulties  to  the  Marxists,  though  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  other  parties,  and  above  all  the  representatives  of 
the  church,  have  the  same  problem  to  solve.  Mere  Feuer- 
bachian  negation  will  not  suffice.  Doubtless  such  negation 
may  have  been  the  most  effective  weapon  to  employ  against 
theocratic  caesaropapism,  but  the  old  religion  can  be  defeated 
only  by  a  new  religion. 

To  a  certain  extent,  Marxism  replaces  religion  by  the 
cultivation  of  art. 

In  the  literary  field,  at  any  rate,  the  Marxists  make  their 
appearance  as  critics,  for  in  Russian  Marxism  literary  criticism 
plays  the  same  role  as  in  the  other  trends.  The  Marxists 
have  endeavoured  to  create  a  comprehensive  historj'-  of  litera- 
ture, but  since  the  task  is  still  beyond  their  unaided  strength 
they  have  had  to  join  forces  here  with  the  narodniki,  the 
liberals,  and  the  social  revolutionaries. 

Among  creative  artists,  the  Marxists  have  a  certain  right 
to  claim  Gor'kii  as  their  own,  although  the  orthodox  Marxists 
incHne  rather  to  regard  him  as  a  revisionist  or  a  social 
revolutionary. 

In  the  sphere  of  the  fine  arts,  Marxism  is  still  weak. 
Further,  it  is  necessary  to  note  that  Marxism  as  yet  has  done 
hardly  anything  for  the  popularisation  of  art.  Its  endeavours 
to  popularise  science  have  a  one-sidedly  intellectualist  stamp. 

It  must  be  accredited  to  Marxism  as  a  service  that  it  has 
vigorously  opposed  the  decadent  movement  in  literature,  as 
manifested  not  only  in  Saninism,  but  also  in  m.etaphysical, 
rehgious,  and  political  aberrations. ^  The  works  of  Andreev, 
Mere^kovskii,  and  Sologub,  were  rightly  criticised,  and  an 
apt  estiniate  was  formed  of  Nietzsche  and  the  Nietzschean 
cult.  The  cause  of  decadence  was  seen  to  lie  in  the  social 
system  of  capitalism.  It  was  recognised  that  pessimism, 
ideaHsm,  and  mysticism,  are  merely  so  many  outward  mani- 
festations of  the  widespread  taedium  vitae  which  is  charac- 

»  A  collection  of  antidecadent  essays  filling  two  volumes  was  published 
during  1908  and   1909,  under  the  title.  The  Literary  Decadence. 


362  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

teristic  of  the  decay  of  the  old  era,  with  its  satiety  and  debiUty. 
Plehanov,  we  remember,  regards  scepticism  (itself,  too,  an  ; 
outcome  of  subjectivism)  as  a  symptom  of  bourgeois  decadence. 
Bakunin  wrote  against  scepticism  in  a  quite  similar  manner. 
So  did  Mihailovskii,  who,  in  addition,  referred  to  the  sympto- 
matic significance  of  suicide.  Quite  recently  (January,  1912), 
the  epidemic  of  suicide  among  the  Russian  youth  was  analysed 
by  Gor'kii  in  an  animated  attack  upon  "  the  fathers  "  who 
drive  their  "  children  "  to  suicide.  We  can  readily  under- 
stand that  some  of  the  decadents  will  turn  for  sensational 
stimulation  to  social  democracy  and  the  revolution.  The 
decadent  vacillates  between  the  church  and  the  lupanar,  and 
in  his  physical  and  mental  debilit}^  he  may  also  find  his  way 
to  the  barricade. 

But  however  much   I   admire   the   democratic   aspirations ' 
of  Marxism  and  the  social  democracy,  however  gladly  I  accept 
socialism   (not   communism  !),   I   deplore   the   scholasticism   of 
Marxist  orthodoxy,  and  lament  the  philosophic  and  scientific 
sterility  of  the  doctrine. 

V  i 

§  167. 

IN  our  historical  sketch  we  gave  an  account  of  the  develop- ; 
ment  of  the  revolutionary  parties  in  Russia,  and  we  have  '■ 
made    acquaintance  with   the  radical  program   and  with   the 
essential  features   of   the  terrorist  revolution  which  came   to 
its  climax  with  the  assassination  of  Alexander  II. 

After  the  tsar's  death  the  members  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja 
remained  organised  in  small  local  circles.  These  circles  were 
continuall}^  breaking  up  and  being  reorganised,  and  in  some 
cases  small  new  centres  of  the  party  came  into  existence.  The 
relationships  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja  with  the  growing  social 
democratic  organisation  were  friendly  in  some  places,  hostile 
in  others. 

During  the  autumn  of  1901,  the  various  revolutionary 
elements  amalgamated  to  form  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party 
with  a  central  committee.  Side  by  side  with  this  central  com- 
mittee there  was  soon  formed  a  more  or  less  independent 
"  fighting  organisation  "  {boevaja  organizacia).  Bogolepov, 
Sypjagin,  Pleve,  Sergius,  Suvalov,  and  others,  were  its  victims. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 


363 


The  term  "  social  revolutionaries "  goes  back  to  Bakunin, 
and  was  intended  to  denote  those  who  aimed  at  the  definitive 
social  revolution  ;  but  the  name  likewise  stressed  the  idea  of 
revolutionary  tactics. 

In  respect  of  organisation  and  of  program  the  Social  Revo- 
lutionary Party  was  the  rival  of  the  Social  Democratic  Party. 
The  contrast  between  the  two  organisations  is  succinctly  shown 
in  the  following  table  : — 


Social  Revolutionary  Party. 

Represents  the  workers  gcnerrJIy, 
opposes  every  kind  of  exploitation  of 
the  workers;  is  not  a  class  party, 
but  a  union  of  the  intelUgentsia,  the 
peasantry,  and  the  operatives. 

The  peasants  constitute  the  most 
numerous  contingent  of  the  working 
class  and  must  be  revolutionised  ;  the 
factory  operatives  will  then  follow 
their  lead.  The  peasant  is  not  a  petty 
bourgeois  but  a  coUectivist. 

The  mir  is  a  socialistic  factor  ;  it 
has  defects,  but  they  can  be  remedied. 

The  small  holdings  of  the  peasantry 
will  not  be  absorbed  by  the  large 
estates  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  number 
of  small  holdings  is  on  the  increase. 

Private  property  in  land  is  inad- 
missible; the  land  belongs  to  all 
(nationaUsation  of  the  land).  Private 
property  in  land,  free  o\riaership  of 
land,  advantages  none  but  the  rich. 

Terrorism  is  ethically  and  politically 
pemiissible  as  a  supplement  to  the 
mass  revolution;  it  must  however  be 
conducted  by  the  party,  and  must  not 
be  undertaken  by  individuals  upon 
their  own  initiative. 

All  the  revolutionary  parties  should 
amalgamate. 

The  organisation  of  the  party  is 
centralist. 

The  party  considers  a  republic  to 
be  a  practicable  aim. 

The  duma  is  to  be  boycotted. 


Social  Democratic  Party. 

Represents  the  factor^'  workers,  the 
proletariat  as  a  class,  which  will  put 
an  end  to  the  class  struggle. 


The  peasant  is  inferior  to  the  factory 
operative  in  respect  of  revolutionary 
energy ;  he  is  a  petty  bourgeois. 


The  mir  has  played  its  part,  and 
is  now  a  moribund  and  reactionary 
institution. 

The  small-holding  peasant  will  be 
gobbled  up  by  the  great  landlord. 


Freedom  of  landownership  may  serve 
to  accelerate  the  concentration  of  land- 
ownership. 

Terrorism  is  injurious  to  the  mass 
revolution,  and  does  no  good. 


The  social  democrats  can  make  com- 
mon cause  with  other  revolutionary 
parties  only  temporarily  and  ad  hoc. 

The  organisation  of  the  party  is 
either  centralist  or  autonomist. 

The  party  aims  at  a  republic. 

The  duma  is  to  be  boycotted 
(majority);  deputies  should  be  sent 
to  the  duma  (minority).' 


'  The  translations  of  Thun's  book  and  the  supplements  to  that  work  which 
we  owe  to  Plehanov  and  Sisko  respectively,  facilitate  an  interesting  comparison 


364  .  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

This  exposition  shows  plainly  that  the  program  of  the  social 
revolutionaries  is  the  program  of  the  narodniki  in  a  socialist 
dress  ;  the  folk-socialists  (sacial-narodniki)  and  the  neonarod- 
niki  developed  pari  passu  and  in  association  with  the  social 
revolutionaries.  Since  the  question  of  tactics  was  the  main 
interest  of  the  social  revolutionaries,  since  they  advocated  the 
fomenting  of  revolution  by  terrorist  methods,  it  was  natural 
that  they  should  pay  comparatively  little  heed  to  economic 
questions  ;  these  matters  were  left  to  the  narodniki  ^nd  their 
leading  periodical  ("  Russkoe  Bogatstvo").  The  menace  to 
the  existence  of  the  mir  involved  by  the  law  of  November  g, 
1906,  aroused  little  discussion  among  social  revolutionaries, 
although  from  time  to  time  it  was  frankly  recognised  that 
the  working  of  this  law  would  completel}/  destroy  the  mir 
within  two  or  three  decades,  and  that  the  hopes  based  upon 
Russian  socialism  by  the  narodni^estvo  were  therefore  tending 
to  prove  illusory. 

The  experiences  that  followed  the  revolution  of  1905  wrought 
much  confusion  in  the  ranks  of  the  social  revolutionaries,  a 
confusion  manifested  by  the  cleavage  of  the  party  into  numerous 
factions,  whose  existence  was  often  ephemeral.  We  have 
already  learned  that  the  social  revolutionaries,  like  the  social 
democrats,  split  into  maximalists  and  minimalists  ;  for  a  short 
time  there  was  a  section  known  as  "  initiativists,"  who  advo- 
cated radical  terrorism  as  it  had  been  practised  by  the  narodo- 
volcy.  There  were  several  social  revolutionary  periodicals 
which  preached  a  boycott  of  the  duma,  but  there  was  another 
organ  which  opposed  this  boycott.  In  three  of  the  elections 
to  the  duma,  the  boycott  was  actually  practised,  but  the  second 
duma  was  not  boycotted. 

Upon  the  question  of  revolutionary  terrorism  the  party 
was  disunited,  and  failed  to  formulate  clear  views.  It  was 
not  by  its  constitution  outspokenly  terrorist.  After  certain 
terrorist  activities  and  after  the  revolution,  at  a  congress  held 
in  June  1906  it  was  decided  to  abandon  the  terrorist  struggle 
until  further  notice.  The  party  was  here  yielding  to  the  general 
sentiment.  The  first  terrorist  acts  had  been  at  least  tacitly 
approved  by  persons  of  all  parties  and  trends,  but  after  the 
revolution,  terrorism  was  decisively  condemned. 

between  the  Social  Democratic  Party  and  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party. 
(SiSko,  who  died  recently,  was  at  one  time  a  member  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja 
and  was  one  of  the  few  seniors  among  the  social  revolutionaries.) 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  365 

The  counter-revolution  which  followed  the  revolution  led 
the  revolutionists  to  harbour  doubts  about  the  policy  of  indi- 
vidual outrage,  for  it  seemed  that  these  at  best  must  be  useless, 
seeing  that  even  the  mass  revolution  had  been  unsuccessful. 
At  the  same  time,  terrorism  was  compromised  by  the  practice 
of  brigandage,  a  decomposition  in  the  revolutionary  organisa- 
tions setting  in  owing  to  the  activities  of  those  who  practised 
expropriation  in  the  name  of  the  revolution. 

It  has  previously  been  explained  that  an  especially  severe 
blow  was  administered  to  the  party  by  the  unmasking  of  Azev. 
When  the  terrorists  could  no  longer  feel  sure  whether  they 
were  not  promoting  the  aims  of  provocative  agents,  they 
could  not  fail  to  reconsider  the  whole  question  of  the  efficacy 
of  terrorism. 

Since  the  government  was  actually  willing  to  sacrifice  persons 
of  considerable  importance  in  order  to  sow  panic  throughout 
society,  and  in  order  that  the  reaction  might  be  enabled  to 
pursue  its  course  undisturbed,  the  revolutionists  were  com- 
pelled to  ask  themselves  whether  terrorism,  whether  the  policy 
of  individual  outrage,  could  possibly  be  a  sound  and  efficient 
method.  After  the  unmasking  of  Azev,  the  Social  Revolu- 
tionary Party  was  decimated.  Azev  had  wielded  great  author- 
ity in  the  party  and,  as  one  of  the  party  organs  said,  had  been 
esteemed  even  more  highly  than  the  revolutionists  2eljabov 
and  Gersuni.  Now,  of  a  sudden,  came  a  crushing  disillusion- 
ment !  There  was  little  consolation  to  be  found  in  the  fact 
that  the  party  itself  had  discovered  the  traitor  (Burcev,  who 
unmasked  Azev,  was  a  member  of  the  party)  ;  nor  was  it  an 
effective  argument  that  provocative  agents  had  likewise  been 
discovered  among  the  social  democrats  and  in  the  Bund,  for 
in  these  non-terrorist  organisations  provocative  agents  had 
never  played  a  leading  part  such  as  Azev  had  played  among 
the  social  revolutionaries  and  Degaev  in  the  Narodnaja  Volja. 
When  therefore  in  1909,  at  a  meeting  of  the  party  executive, 
the  resolution  of  1906  was  revoked,  and  it  was  agreed  that  the 
terrorist  campaign  should  be  continued  notwithstanding  the 
experiences  with  x\zev,  the  impression  produced  by  this  decision 
was  that  an  attempt  was  being  made  to  gloss  over  the  dis- 
integration   of    the    party. ^     A    minority    faction,    organising 

'  "  Azev's  participation  in  a  number  of  terrorist  enterprises  has  not  dis- 
credited and  cannot  discredit  this  fighting  method  in  the  eyes  of  the  party. 
The  better  the  existing  situation  has  become  understood,  the  more  plainly  has 


366  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

itself  in  Paris  as  a  "  League  of  the  Revolutionary  Socialists  of 
the  Left,"  and  carrying  on  its  journalistic  and  literary  activities 
from  the  French  capital,  attempted  under  the  leadership  of 
Burcev,  the  indefatigable  historian  and  publicist,  to  carry  out 
an  inexorable  self-criticism,  and  thereby  to  liberate  the  party 
and  its  organisation  from  "  revolutionary  phihstinism."  The 
creative  activity  of  the  individual,  and  the  active  struggle  of 
an  organised  minority  of  persons  of  initiative,  must,  said  the 
members  of  this  group,  come  into  their  own.  The  party  must 
reahse  that  it  was  no  more  than  a  minority,  and  could  be  nothing 
else.  There  is  no  revolutionary  mass  ;  the  mass  has  always 
been  led  by  minorities.  The  party  must  therefore  abandon 
its  centrahst  organisation  ;  Azev  was  the  product  of  central- 
isation. The  greatest  enemy,  in  truth  the  only  enemy,  of 
socialism  (not  only  in  Russia  but  elsewhere  as  well)  is  autocracj'. 
In  concrete  terms,  the  Romanov  dynasty  is  everywhere  the 
prop  of  reaction  ;  it  must  therefore  be  the  first  object  of  attack, 
and  must  first  of  all  be  annihilated.  The  autocracy,  too,  is 
only  a  minority. 

From   the  maximalist  ^  side,  objections  were  raised  to  this 
program  of  the  left. 

The  maximalists  contended  that  the  minimum  socialist 
program  (the  minimum  social  revolutionary  program  not 
excepted)  comprised,  as  a  whole,  those  demands  which  were 
realisable  under  the  continuance  of  the  old  regime.  Of  course 
the  minimum  was  extensible,  varjdng  according  to  the  way 
in  which  the  term  "  reahsable  "  was  defined.  The  minimum 
might  be  conceived  either  in  a  reformist  or  in  a  revolutionary 
sense. 

the  party,  recognised  that  whilst  the  participation  of  provocative  agents  cannot 
prevent  a  great  victory  in  this  field,  such  participation  does  serve  to  impair 
the  energies  of  the  terror  at  the  most  critical  moment  for  the  government  and 
the  revolution,  for  it  prevents  the  unfolding  of  the  entire  strength  of  this  fighting 
method,  prevents  the  displaj'^  of  all  the  energy  which  the  party  might  devote 
to  it  ;  it  increases  the  confidence^  of  the  government,  and  increases  therewith 
the  resoluteness  of  the  government  at  a  time  when  the  government  has  especial 
need  for  resolution.  While,  therefore,  the  unmasking  of  Azev  has  led  certain 
individuals  to  doubt  the  efficacy  of  the  terrorist  campaign,  the  party  as  such 
merely  discovers  therein  the  reason  for  the  failure  of  the  terror  to  do  all 
that  it  might  have  done  for  the  party  and  the  revolution ;  and  it  has  taught 
the  party  what  a  renascent  terror  may  be  competent  to  do.  In  this  matter, 
consequently,  the  party  retPvins  its  old  fighting  position." 

'  The  reader  must  not  forget  that  the  "  maximalists  "  referred  to  in  this 
and  the  ensuing  sections  are  social  revolutionaries,  not  the  maximalist  social 
democrats  or  bolseviki.     See  pp.  296  and  364. 


.      THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  367 

The  maximalists,  who  began  to  organise  themselves  towards 
the  close  of  1905,  demanded  a  social  revolution.  They  were 
therefore  sceptical  regarding  the  political  revolution  of  the 
left.  If,  they  said,  the  minority  can  seize  political  power,  why 
should  it  not  make  social  revolution  its  direct  aim  ?  Simple 
political  dictatorship  by  the  minority  was  repudiated  by  the 
maximalists  as  Marxism  and  socio-political  realism. J 

The  maximalists  expanded  the  program  of  socialisation  of 
the  land  to  include  the  socialisation  of  factories  and  industrial 
enterprises.  In  accordance  therewith,  political  terrorism  was 
enlarged  to  include  "  economic "  (agrarian)  terrorism.  Expro- 
priation was  to  be  inaugurated  by  a  campaign  against  the 
capitalists,   carried  on-  by  individual  action. 

The  organisation  of  the  party  must  be  democratic.  The 
maximalists  rejected  centralisation,  but  demanded  nevertheless 
a  "  strong  centre."  Maximalist  democracy  was  to  be  secured 
by  the  federation  of  autonomous  revolutionary  communes. 
There  was  talk  of  "  the  method,  of  communal  revolution  "  ; 
this  'demand  goes  back  to  Bakunin  and  Proudhon,  but  I  cannot 
see  that  those  who  formulated  it  had  paid  due  attention  to 
the  social  characteristics  of  the  modern  great  town  and  its 
administrative  tasks.  How  is  such  a  city  as  St.  Petersburg 
or  Moscow  (to  say  nothing  of  London)  to  be  revolutionised  ? 
On  the  other  hand,  how  are  the  Russian  villages  to  be  revo- 
lutionised ?  The  maximalist  program,  too,  is  unduly  abstract, 
unduly  schematic  ;  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  at  the  first 
maximalist  congress  (in  so  far  as  a  judgment  can  be  formed 
from  the  very  inadequate  reports),  sympathy  for  the  program 
was  mainly  displayed  by  the  peasants  and  the  representatives 
of  the  lesser  towns. 

The  maximalists  are  declared  adversaries  of  Marxism  and 
social  democracy.  They  speak  of  the  Marxists  as  "  scientific 
reactionaries,"  and  extol  personal  initiative,  especially  that 
of  academic  youth.  They  aim  at  a  union  of  classes  and  at 
cooperation  with  the  declassed  intelligentsia. 

I  "  The  Commune,"  the  organ  of  the  maximalists,  was  first  published  in 
December  1905,  and  the  first  congress  of  the  group  was  held  in  the  following 
year. 


368  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

§  i68. 

THE  stress  laid  upon  revolutionist  tactics  led  the  maxi- 
■  malist  social  revolutionaries  to  reexamine  the  traditional 
views  of  their  party,  and  this  reexamination  resulted  in  an  unre- 
stricted approval  of  traditional  ethics  and  in  a  rejection  of  the 
amoralist  outlook  of  the  Marxists.  Mihailovskii  and  Lavrov 
gained  the  victory  over  Marx, 

The  rules  followed  by  the  expropriators  show  that  a  dis- 
tinction was  made  between  social  revolutionary  expropriations 
and  ordinary  theft,  and  between  social  revolutionary  assassina- 
tion and  ordinary  murder.  The  rule  was  that  in  the  first  place 
the  funds  of  the  state  were  to  be  requisitioned,  and  in  the 
second  place  the  treasure  houses  of  the  capitalists  were  to  be 
attacked.  The  money  thus  secured  was  to  be  used  solely  for 
revolutionary  party  purposes  (to  defray  the  costs  of  party 
administration,  to  provide  chemicals,  and  so  on). 

It  is  instructive  to  note  the  attitude  of  Russian  public 
opinion  towards  expropriation.  Even  in  extremely  conser- 
vative circles  the  condemnation  of  political  outrage  was  far 
less  severe  than  the  condemnation  of  ordinary  theft  or  murder, 
and  experience  of  the  expropriations  would  seem  to  sanction 
the  customary  distinction  between  political  and  ordinary 
crime  In  the  rural  districts,  indeed,  "  idealised  robbery  "  was 
supported  by  the  peasantry,  and  those-  who  practised  it  were 
esteemed  heroes.^ 

The  ethical  problems  of  the  revolution  and  of  terrorism 
have  been  very  vividly  discussed  by  a  young  maximalist  named 
Grigorii  Nestroev.^ 

Nestroev  began  his  revolutionary  career  when  he  was  still 
a  student,  participating  in  the  students'  movement  of  the 
year  1899.  He  soon  came  into  personal  contact  with  Ger§uni, 
Azev,  and  other  well-known  revolutionists.  In  1902  he  v/as 
arrested  for  the  first  time.  After  his  release  he  played  a  practical 
part  in  the  revolution,  and  had  a  notable  share  in  some  of  the 
more  important  revolutionary  enterprises.     Having  again  been 

1  A  well-known  instance  is  that  of  SaSka  Savickii.  In  1905  he  joined  the 
revolutionary  movement.  In  the  end  of  1906  he  withdrew  into  the  forests 
of  the  administrative  district  of  Chernigov,  and  maintained  himself  there  with 
the  connivance  of  the  country  folk  until  1909,  when  he  was  betrayed  by  one 
of  his  associates,  and  was  shot  by  the  soldiers  who  were  pursuing  him. 

^  Pages  from  the  Diary  of  a  Maximalist,  with  a  Preface  by  V.  L.  Burcev, 
Paris,   igio. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  369 

arrested,  he  was  sent  to  Siberia,  and  thence  escaped 
abroad. 

His  personal  experiences  confirmed  Nestroev's  ethical  out- 
look, and  led  him  to  take  an  ethical  view  of  the  revolution. 

In  conformity  with  Stepniak,  Nestroev  justifies  revolution 
and  terrorist  methods  by  considering  them  to  embody  reprisal 
and  punishment.  In  this  connection  he  would  like  to  make 
a  clear  distinction  between  anarchism  and  maximalism,  but 
does  not  succeed  very  well.  All  that  he  is  able  to  suggest  by 
way  of  distinction  is  that  anarchism  practises  terror  in  its 
lesser  forms,  for  the  anarchists  kill  policemen,  spies,  and  so 
on  ;  maximalism  wishes  to  avoid  this  needless  and  purposeless 
bloodshed,  desires  above  all  to  avoid  the  wastage  of  its  own 
energies,  and  is  therefore  concerned  to  practise  "  central 
terrorism,"  that  which  is  directed  against  the  highest  peaks 
of  absolutism,  against  the  centre  of  all  the  centres.  Hence 
organisers  of  genius,  "  creative  terrorists "  like  Gersuni, 
abundant  means,   and  large  groups,  are  essential. 

The  quality  of  the  revolutionists  is  of  decisive  importance, 
for  nothing  but  quality  can  protect  the  party  against  the  Azevs. 

Nestroev  is  sufficiently  critical  to  find  fault  even  with  the 
Napoleons  of  the  revolution.  In  the  case  of  one  of  them 
(M.  J.  Sokolov)  whom  he  admires,  he  points  out  that  Sokolov 
put  too  light  a  value  upon  life — his  own  and  others.  To  this 
revolutionist  the  saying  is  especially  applicable,  that  the 
Russian  terrorists  can  strive  for  death  but  not  for  victory. 
Nestroev  complains  that  his  hero,  though  leader  of  a  demo- 
cratic organisation,  was  a  born  dictator.  Finally,  Sokolov 
is  charged  v/ith  carelessness  in  the  choice  of  instruments. 

In  addition,  Nestroev  draws  attention  to  the  romanticism 
of  many  of  the  terrorists,  their  love  of  danger  and  even  death. 
"  To  such  a  man  the  beauty  of  life  seems  to  consist  in  death 
for  death's  sake,  in  action  for  action's  sake." 

Nestroev  depicts  for  us  certain  types  of  revolutionists  whom 
he  characterises  as  "  individualistic."  To  one  of  these,  shortly 
before  his  expected  execution,  the  question  occurs.  Are  all 
means  permissible  for  the  construction  of  the  temple  of  the 
future  ?  He  is  tempted  to  save  his  own  life  by  betraying 
the  party  and  the  revolution,  but  he  withstands  the  temptation 
by  invoking  the  concept  of  honour,  and  goes  to  meet  death. 
Another  considers  the  example  of  Azev  and  similar  persons. 
The  methods  of  the  provocative  agent,  he  says,  are  dar^erous 

25  VOL.    II. 


870  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

only  to  the  weakly,  not  to  the  strong,  and  I  am  one  of  the 
strong.  One  who  rejects  the  concept  of  duty  as  part  of  the 
religion  of  the  master  class  cannot  admit  the  need  to  recognise 
the  idea  of  revolutionary  duty.  I  am  not,  he  says,  a  slave 
to  conventionalities,  but  neither  will  I  be  a  slave  to  party 
morality.  I  will  seek  new  paths,,  on  which  I  will  march  boldly 
forward. 

Nestroev  had  frequent  opportunities  for  the  study  of  the 
new  brigandage  and  its  advocates  ;  he  was  acquainted  with 
the  "  revolutionary  robbers  "  and  the  "  gamins  of  the  ideal." 
Such  a  lying  and  thievish  mob-revolutionist  once  declared  that 
he  could  not  live  a  quiet  life,  and  that  he  loved  danger,  for 
he  enjoyed  the  sensations  it  brought.  This  individualist,  of 
course,  had  long  ago  abandoned  all  ethical  valuations.  Why 
is  lying  dishonourable,  he  would  ask.  What  is  moral  un- 
cleanliness  ?  And  so  on.  His  metaphysics  culminated  in  the 
proposition  :  "  What  is  man  ? — a  piece  of  flesh  and  that's 
all."  In  view  of  such  an  interpretation  and  such  a  practical 
realisation  of  principles  which  he  himself  approves,  Nestroev 
enquires  whether  the  revolution,  even  should  it  prove  victorious, 
can  do  any  good  when  it  contains  such  elements. 

In  Siberia,  among  persons  of  this  type  there  were  formed 
"  proletarian  communes  "  and  groups  of  expropriators,  dis- 
senters being  convinced  with  the  knife. ^ 

The  "  dead  house  "  and  its  abnormalities,  concluded  Nes- 
troev, have  a  bad  influence  upon  men.  But  in  addition,  his 
experiences  as  a  refugee  made  Nestroev  take  serious  if  not 
positively  pessimistic  views.  He  found  the  commonness  of 
human  nature  especially  conspicuous  among  the  refugees ; 
the  differences  and  oppositions  of  personal  life  were  in  glaring 
contrast  with  party  principles  ;  there  was  a  great  gulf  fixed 
between  the  peaks  and  the  plain. 

In  his  preface  to  Nestroev's  diary,  Burcev  expresses  the  hope 
that  the  work  will  restore  to  the  Russian  revolutionaries  the 
prestige  they  enjoyed  before  the  revolution  of  1905-1906.  In 
actual  fact,  Nestroev's  criticism  aims  at  distinguishing  the  true 
revolution  from  the  false  ;  but  we  are  left  enquiring,  What 
is  the  criterion  of  true  revolution  ? 

This  is  the  problem   which   disturbs   Nestroev.     Speaking 

»  In  Russia,  as  well  as  in  Siberia,  many  of  the  camp  followers  of  revolution 
took  to  thieving,  organising  quasi-syndicates  for  this  purpose,  communistic 
societif*  of  thieves. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  871 

of  his  personal  development,  he  tells  us  that  at  first  he  joined 
the  social  democrats,  but  was  repelled  by  their  anti-terrorist 
campaign  against  the  social  revolutionaries  and  the  anarchists 
— for  Nestroev  felt  himself  to  be  an  anarchist.  He  therefore 
went  over  to  the  social  revolutionaries,  considering  that  in 
this  party  his  own  watchword,  "  A  life  for  a  life,"  adopted 
from  Stepniak,  was  effectively  realised.  Lavrov's  Historical 
Letters,  Mihailovskii's  writings,  Thun's  History  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Movement  in  Russia,  and  Stepniak's  Underground 
Russia,  confirmed  him  in  his  decision. 

But  Nestroev  grew  tired  of  the  ordinary  social  revolution- 
aries, and  developed  into  a  maximalist.  We  have  learned  what 
were  the  practical  demands  of  the  maximalist  section  of  the 
social  revolutionaries,  and  can  now  come  to  a  definitive 
judgment. 

The  program  of  this  section  lacks  definiteness  in  its  details 
and  as  a  whole  ;  we  see  in  it  a  non-organic  synthesis  of 
anarchism  and  Marxist  socialism. 

Nestroev  formulates  the  task  of  maximalism  in  five  de- 
mands :  promotion  of  the  class  consciousness  of  the  workers  ; 
their  organisation  into  a  class  ;  the  revolutionising  of  the 
will  ;  the  destruction  of  the  fetichism  of  private  property  ; 
the  destruction  among  the  people  of  the  sentiment  of  legality, 
and  the  strengthening  of  the  sentiment  of  revolt. 

Not  one  of  these  demands  conflicts  with  Marxism.  There 
is  not  even  any  contradiction  between  Marxist  rationalism 
and  the  voluntarist  idea  of  revolutionising  the  will,  although 
Nestroev  is  somewhat  prejudiced  against  the  leadership  of  the 
intelligentsia.  What  distinguishes  Nestroev's  maximalism  from 
Marxism  is  his  distinctively  ethical  outlook.  Socialism  defi- 
nitely represents  to  him  the  ethical  "  thou  shalt,"  the  sense  of 
moral  duty,  that  which  is  ethically  desirable. 

But  the  question  arises,  how  far  that  which  is  ethically 
desirable  can  also  be  considered  possible.  Now  we  learn  from 
Nestroev  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  possibility,  maxi- 
malism is  justified  provided  that  the  social  revolution  can  be 
realised  forthwith.  Apart  however  from  the  considerations 
which  led  Nestroev  while  in  Siberia  to  doubt  whether  revolu- 
tion was  salutary,  we  are  compelled  to  enquire  whether  maxi- 
malism has  not,  first  of  all,  to  weld  its  adherents  into  a  class 
and  to  educate  them  for  the  revolution.  And  will  not  this 
education  take  a  very  long  time  before  we  can  hope  that  the 


372  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

definitive  revolution  will  be  actually  realised  and  accepted  by 
at  least  a  notable  minority  of  the  European  nations  ?  How, 
then,  is  the  definitive  social  revolution  to  be  effected  forthwith  ? 
The  problem,  therefore,  is  not  theoretical  merely,  but 
ethical  and  thoroughly  practical.  Nothing  but  the  widest 
knowledge  of  men  and  things,  the  widest  understanding  of 
all  social  and  political  forces,  can  enable  us  to  decide  whether 
a  definitive  social  revolution  is  as  yet  possible.  I  do  not  lay 
claim  to  such  a  knowledge,  for  I  confine  myself  to  the  numerous 
experiences  since  1905  and  say  that  these  lead  me  to  the 
conclusion  that  neither  in  Russia  nor  in  Europe  is  such  a 
revolution  possible  forthwith.  By  this  reasoning  Nestroev  would 
be  compelled  to  deny  the  justification  of  maximahsm,  but  his 
own  philosophical  view  is  an  opposed  one,  for  he  contends 
that  what  ought  to  be,  is  and  must  be  possible.  "  Thou  canst, 
for  thou  oughtest." 

§  169. 

THE  philosophical  and  scientific  achievements  of  the  social 
revolutionaries  cannot  be  so  precisely  defined  as  those  of 
the  Marxists,  for  the  social  revolutionary  program  is  less  definite 
and  exclusive.  In  philosophy  and  sociology,  the  social  revo- 
lutionaries take  their  stand  upon  the  views  of  Lavrov,  and 
above  all  upon  those  of  Mihailovskii ;  but  they  likewise  regard 
Cernysevskii  and  Herzen  as  authorities  ;  whilst  as  concerns 
economics  and  the  philosophy  of  history  they  are  narodniki. 
In  individual  cases,  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  whether  a  writer 
is  a  social  revolutionary  or  a  narodnik.  The  main  difference 
is  that  the  narodniki  or  neonarodniki  treat  more  of  theoretical, 
the  social  revolutionaries  more  of  political  matters.  Upon  the 
social  revolutionaries,  no  less  than  upon  the  narodniki,  Marxism 
exercises  much  influence,  even  when  they  are  attacking  the 
Marxist  doctrine  ;  and  in  their  onslaughts  on  Marxism  they 
are  glad  to  enter  into  an  alliance  with  revisionism. 

As  typically  representative  of  their  views  I  select  Cernov 
and  his  Philosophic  and  Sociological  Studies  (1907). 

It  is  plain  that  Cernov  derives  his  philosophical  views 
from  Marx,  or,  if  he  does  not  take  them  directly  from  Marx, 
that  he  is  influenced  by  Marxist  ideas  as  restated  by  Lavrov 
and  Mihailovskii.  Indeed,  he  describes  himself  as  an  "  ardent 
and  honest  "  admirer  of  Marx  ;    but  he  attempts  to  build  a 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  378 

bridge  between  Marx  and  the  "  ethico-sociological  school " 
(Lavrov  and  Mihailovskii) ,  the  piers  of  his  bridge  being  Riehl 
and  Ward.  Now  as  regards  the  evolution  and  ripening  of 
ideas,  such  bridges  may  exist ;  but  there  is  no  justification 
for  this  particular  bridge.  Cernov  abandons  the  economic 
and  metaphysical  materialism  of  Marx  and  Engels,  and  accepts 
the  empiric-criticism  of  Avenarius  (adding  the  ideas  of  Mach) — 
but  what  have  Riehl  and  Ward  to  do  with  the  m^atter  ?  It 
is  obvious  that  Cernov  has  learned  epistemological  criticism 
in  the  school  of  Riehl,  and  thus  his  native  realism  develops 
into  empirio-criticism  ;  Ward's  "  dynamic  sociology  "  attracts 
him  to  the  "  active-dynamic  "  school  of  sociology  and  to  active 
reaUsm  in  general. 

When  Cernov  desires  to  construct  a  "  synthetic  "  social 
revolutionary  philosophy,  we  are  compelled  to  ask  whether 
he  does  not  succumb  more  than  he  would  hke  to  admit  to  the 
eclecticism  which  is  so  much  censured  by  himself  and  the 
other  members  of  his  party. 

Cernov  commends  empirio-criticism  for  its  antagonism  to 
all  metaphysic,  to  all  that  is  supranatural  and  transcendental, 
commends  it  for  its  view  that  man  cannot  get  beyond  "  pure 
experience."  He  adopts  this  doctrine  in  order  to  prove  that 
Mihailovskii's  positivism  was  essentially  a  foreshadowing  of 
the  empirio-criticism  of  Avenarius  and  Mach.  Cernov  is  a 
declared  monist,  and  even  in  his  outlook  on  history  he  regards 
his  own  views  as  more  monistic  than  economic  materiaHsm, 
wherein  he  detects  a  certain  remnant  of  duaHsm.  Ideas  are 
simply  extant  as  an  important  part  of  reahty,  and  must  there- 
fore be  recognised  as  social  forces.  Cernov  concedes,  however, 
that  ideas  are  not  properly  speaking  primary  forces  (he  borrows 
from  Ward  here)  ;  man  is  dominated  by  feeling,  the  emotions 
are  the  motive  power,  and  the  intelligence  is  merely  the  direc- 
tive energy.  But  why,  in  this  matter,  should  Cernov  base 
himself  upon  Ward,  seeing  that  not  Spencer  alone,  but  also 
Mihailovskii's  teacher,  Comte,  taught  that  the  intelligence  was 
a  secondary  factor?  Ward's  Dynamic  Sociology  had  bewitched 
him.  It  seemed  to  him  but  a  short  step  from  the  "  dynamic  " 
to  revolution,  although  the  idea  of  the  dynamic  as  expounded 
by  Ward,  and  Ward's  whole  sociology,  contain  but  httle 
admixture  of  revolutionary  elements 

Subjectively,  the  dynamic  appears  in  Cernov  as  voluntar- 
ism.   Like  so  many  voluntarists,  Cernov's  definition  of  truth 


374  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

is  utilitarian  ;  the  preservation  of  the  individual  is  the  "  root  " 
of  theoretical  truth.  Cernov  has  failed  to  reflect  that  from 
this  standpoint  he  might  readily  lapse  into  the  detested 
metaphysics  and  even  into  religion,  for  from  this  outlook  it 
might  easily  be  made  to  appear  that  reHgion  is  useful  for  the 
preservation  of  the  individual  and  of  the  species  (compare, 
for  example,  Benjamin  Kidd's  Social  Evolution). 

Cernov  pleads  for  unity  of  theory  and  practice".  In  support 
of  this  he  can  appeal  to  Herzen,  and  he  is  influenced,  too, 
by  his  fondness  for  monism.  Further,  he  bases  himself  on 
Marx,  who  represented  "  practically  critical "  activity  as 
revolutionary  practice.  For  Cernov,  socialism  is  at  once  an 
instrument  of  research  and  a  measure  of  value  ;  it  is  a  revolu- 
tionary philosophy,  simultaneously  the  philosophy  of  reality 
and  of  activity  ;  ^  the  "  active-dynamic  "  school  of  sociology 
is  for  him  the  scientific  equivalent  of  practical  revolutionary 
socialism. 

In  contrast  with  Marx  and  Engels,  Cernov  recognises  the 
existence  of  a  universally  valid  morality.  The  conscious, 
critically  thinking  individuality  (of  Lavrov)  does  not  accept 
class  morality,  for  this  is  of  purely  accidental  origin,  the  out- 
come of  birth,  environment,  etc.,  whereas  socialism  must 
recognise  a  universally  valid  morality.  Positivist,  historical 
foresight  does  not  suffice  as  a  guide  to  action,  does  not  suffice 
the  revolutionary.  Foresight  relates  solely  to  the  temporar3'' 
result  of  the  decision  ;  but  the  socialist  has  ideals,  and  the 
ideal  is  something  more  than  foresight.  Foresight  is  the 
outcome  of  observation,  whilst  the  ideal  goal  is  prescribed  by 
feeling.  The  revolution,  in  Cernov's  sense,  therefore  contains 
subjective  ideal  factors,  whereas  Marx  entertained  a  fatalistic 
optimism  based  upon  a  claim  to  the  foreknowledge  of  historical 
events. 

In  this  matter,  as  in  general,  Cernov  does  not  get  beyond 
the  sphere  of  peychology.  We  can  see  that  he  is  influenced 
by  the  antihistorism,  the  voluntarism,  and  the  emotionahsm 
of  Nietzsche  (and  of  Schopenhauer,  etc.).  But  he  does  not 
attempt  an  epistemological  foundation  and  appraisement  of 
morality  ;  he  does  not  try  to  explain  why  emotion  is  better, 
more  right,  than  intelligence,  or  to  which  feelings  the  asser- 
tion applies.     Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  Cernov's 

»  The  Russian  term  for  "  reality  "  is  "  dSistvitel'nost,"  that  for  "  action  " 
or  "  activity  "  is  dSjanie  ;    this  facilitates  Cernov's  comparison. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  375 

empirio-criticism  does  not  pay  due  attention  to  the  theory  of 
cognition.  It  is  true  that  he  attempts  to  discard  apriorism, 
but  he  does  not  succeed  in  getting  any  further  than  Mihailov- 
skii  with  the  empirical  explanation  of  the  axiom.  To-day, 
to  do  no  more  than  this  is  to  do  too  little. 

Seeing  that  Cernov  emphasises  the  importance  of  ethics  as 
contrasted  with  the  amoralism  of  Marx,  he  ought  to  have 
considered  the  ethical  problem  more  closely.  Above  all  the 
problem  of  revolution  ought  to  have  been  more  precisely 
formulated  from  the  outlook  of  the  Social  Revolutionary 
Party,  seeing  that  this  is  preeminently  the  problem  which  has 
to  be  faced  in  practice.  Other  writers  have  of  late  considered 
the  theory  of  revolution,  and  very  notably  has  this  been  done 
in  the  novels  of  Ropsin.  The  maximalist  discussions  of  the 
topic,  discussions  to  which  I  have  previously  referred,  are 
likewise  worthy  of   attention. 

In  actual  fact,  in  a  series  of  articles  published  in  the  recently 
founded  party  magazine  "  Zavety  "  (testaments),  Cernov  has 
dealt  with  the  question.  He  sees  quite  rightly  that  the  revolu- 
tion of  1905  has  above  all  a  moral  significance  for  the  new 
ethic.  Cernov,  just  like  Bakunin,  demands  a  new  ethic,  the 
ethic  of  the  new  man,  of  the  new  humanity,  the  ethic  which 
is  one  of  the  primary  aspirations  of  the  social  revolution. 

Cernov  is  much  interested  in  the  thought  of  Nietzsche,  but 
does  not  identify  his  new  man  with  the  superman.  On  the 
contrary,  it  appears  that  the  new  ethic  makes  essentially  the 
same  demands  as  the  old,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  new 
ethic  lays  especial  stress  upon  the  social  aspects  of  life.  The 
new  ethic,  like  the  old,  demands  personal  improvement,  but 
efforts  at  personal  improvement  must  always  be  directed  with 
an  eye  to  their  bearing  upon  the  social  whole,  and  must  not 
be  undertaken  merely  in  the  interest  of  the  individual. 

Cernov  likewise  terms  his  ethic  "  dynamic,"  but  the  new 
name  denotes 'in  truth  a  very  old  thing,  the  new  morality 
aims  at  giving  room  for  the  strong  and  vigorous  expression 
of  individuality.  At  the  same  time,  the  concept  of  the  dynamic 
is  defined  on  the  ethical  plane  after  the  Comtist  example  by 
saying  that  social  statics  constitutes  the  moral  maximum, 
social  dynamics  the  moral  minimum  ;  ethical  maximalism  is 
the  demand  for  the  universalised  ideal  harmony  of  mankind, 
of  all  the  members  of  the  human  race  ;  the  moral  minimum 
is  the  bridge  to  the  maximalist  ideal. 


376  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Cernov's  attempt  to  combine  socialistic  ethics  with  sociology 
and  history  deserves  commendation.  It  is  clear,  and  the 
demand  has  long  been  current,  that  the  socialist,  one  who 
desires  to  play  an  active  part  in  political  Hfe,  should,  hke  every 
politician,  be  thoroughly  conversant  with  the  elements  of 
poHtical  science.  In  view  of  existing  conditions  in  Russia, 
Cernov  did  well  in  that  he  attempted  to  provide  an  ethical 
foundation  for  politics  and  to  give  politics  an  ethical  trend. 
We  are  faced,  it  is  true,  by  the  time-worn  puzzle  which  was 
considered  by  Cernov's  predecessors  when  they  discussed  the 
problem  of  freedom  and  necessity,  and  above,  all  the  problem 
of  historical  necessity.  As  repeatedly  occurs,  we  are  confronted 
with  the  essential  question,  what  is  the  importance  of  the 
individual  within  the  social  whole,  a  historically  evolving 
whole  ;  and  we  have  to  enquire  whether  the  individual's 
voluntary  decisions  are  free  decisions. 

On  the  one  hand  Cernov  lays  stress  upon  the  strong  per- 
sonality, but  on  the  other  he  insists  that  we  must  give  due 
weight  to  the  social  whole.  Since  the  whole  develops,  since 
the  ideal  maximum  is  not  yet  attainable,  Cernov  is  prepared 
to  compromise  "  with  life,"  The  right  compromise  will  be 
recognised  by  its  being  a  step  towards  the  ideal,  and  not  away 
from  the  ideal. 

I  do  not  think  it  can  be  said  that  the  difficulties  formulated 
by  Nestroev  the  maximahst  are  overcome  by  Cernov's  new 
socialistic  ethic.  Cernov  declares  that  ethical  maximalism 
completely  excludes  the  use  of  force  ;  but  ethical  minimaUsm 
permits  the  use  of  force.  The  revolutionary  has  to  answer 
the  definite  question.  May  I,  shall  I,  must  I,  kill  or  expro- 
priate ?  Cernov  replies  :  Ethical  maximalism  forbids  the  use 
of  force  in  any  form,  for  ethical  maximalism  leads  with  inex- 
orable logic  to  Tolstoian  non-resistance  ;  but  ethical  minimal- 
ism permits  revolution  and  terrorism  when  these  are  steps  to 
the  ideal.  The  revolutionist  will  naturally  enquire,  Is'  this 
particular  deed,  is,  let  us  say  the  revolution  of  1905,  such  a 
step  ?  Cernov's  reply  is  that  in  this  matter  sociology  and 
history  must  provide  the  answer  for  socialistic  ethics.  It  need 
hardly  be  said  that  the  reflective  revolutionary  will  find  the 
reply  inadequate,  and  he  will  press  the  question  whether  he, 
a  definite  individual,  not  a  revolution  in  general,  nor  a  historic 
epoch,  nor  any  similar  abstraction,  may,  shall,  and  must  decide 
in  favour  of  action  in  a  particular  case. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  37T 

We  cannot  discover  in  Cernov's  writings  any  clear  and 
definite  answer  to  this  question.  Here  the  "  new  ethic  "  fails 
us.  We  are  merely  told  that  the  maximaHst  ideal  "  must 
be  carried  into  effect  by  the  consciousness  and  the  will  of  all, 
or  at  least  by  the  majority  "  ;  but  on  further  examination 
it  transpires  that  this  "  majority  "  does  not  signify  the  majority 
of,  say,  the  Russian  people,  but  signifies  the  majority  of  the  party 
which  is  united  into  a  collective  whole  by  its  pursuit  of  a  par- 
ticular ideal — an  ideal  which  can  be  realised  by  joint  action.  We 
are  further  told  that  the  principle  of  majority  involves  the 
submission  of  the  minority  and  of  the  individual,  for  these 
must  yield  to  the  desires  of  the  majority,  and  must  recognise 
the  morally  coercive  energy  of  the  common  action. 

Poor  arguments,  these  !  The  periodical  in  which  Cernov 
published  them  had,  apropos  of  the  seventieth  anniversary  of 
Mihailovskii's  birth,  made  a  formal  declaration  that  the  social 
revolutionaries,  including  Cernov,  regarded  themselves  as 
Mihailovskii's  disciples.  But  Mihailovskii  would  never  have 
consented  to  such  an  abdication  of  individuality,  and  to-day 
he  would  have  envisaged  the  problem  of  revolution  far  more 
energetically.  Cernov  had  under  his  eyes,  not  merely  Nes- 
troev's  diary,  but  the  works  of  his  comrade  Rop§in  as  well, 
and  these  deserved  better  treatment  !  For  the  rest,  Cernov 
has  written  about  Rop§in,  and  this  is  a  matter  to  which  we  shall 
return  after  the  discussion  of  certain  other  important  ideas 
or  trends. 


CHAPTER   NINETEEN 

MODERN   ANARCHISM:    KROPOTKIN.    ANARCHISM 

AND   SOCIALISM 


§  170- 

IN  our  account  of  modern  Russian  anarchism  we  shall  first 
describe  the  system  of  Petr  Kropotkin.^  For  the  most 
part  Kropotkin  is  a  disciple  of  Bakunin,  but  is  a  less  highly 
strilng  revolutionist  than  his  predecessor,  his  anarchism  being 
more  temperate,  or  shall  I  say  less  rugged,  than  Bakunin's, 
not  only  in  form  but  in  content.  Bakuninist  pandestruction 
is  in   Kropotkin's  hands   a   sociological   and  ethical   criticism 

I  Prince  Petr  Kropotkin  sprang  from  the  family  of  Rjurik,  and  was  born 
in  the  year  1842.  From  1857  to  1862  he  was  in  the  pages'  corps  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  from  1863  to  1867  was  in  the  army  as  aide-de-camp  to  the  viceroy 
of  Transbaikaha.  Retiring  from  miUtary  service,  from  1868  to  1872  he  studied 
geography,  geology,  and  the  natural  sciences  in  general,  making  a  name  for 
himself  as  geographer  by  his  observations  upon  Asiatic  orography.  In  1872 
he  visited  Europe  and  came  into  contact  with  the  International  Working-Men's 
Association.  In  1874  he  was  arrested  as  a  member  of  the  Caikovcy  ;  and  in 
1876,  having  escaped  from  the  infirmary  of  the  fortress  of  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Paul,  he  took  refuge  in  Europe.  Here  he  entered  into  close  association  with 
the  Bakuninist  wing  of  the  International,  and  laboured  to  promote  the  organ- 
isation of  anarchism.  In  1883,  having  been  arrested  by  the  French  government 
for  his  participation  in  the  second  anarchist  congress  at  Geneva,  he  was  sen- 
tenced to  five  years'  imprisonment  after  a  trial  wherein  much  irrelevant  matter 
was  introduced  as  evidence.  Pardoned  in  1886,  he  removed  to  London.  A 
well-known  book  is  his  Memoirs  of  a  Revolutionist,  1900.  He  has  given 
numerous  expositions  of  anarchist  doctrines,  briefly  in  the  Scientific  Basis  of 
Anarchy  ("  Nineteenth  Century,"  1887),  and  in  fuller  detail  in  La  morale 
anarchiste,  1891.  See  also  his  Paroles  d'un  revolte,  ouvrage  pubhe,  annote 
et  accompagn6  d'une  preface  par  Elys6e  Reclus.  In  Russian  Literature,  Ideals 
and  Realities,  1905,  Kropotkin  deals  with  the  leading  figures  of  the  Russian 
literary  world.  In  The  Great  French  Revolution,  1 789-1 793,  Kropotkin  describes 
the  revolution  from  his  own  outlook.  Consult  also :  Mutual  Aid,  a  Factor  of 
Evolution  ;  Fields,  Factories,  and  Workshops  ;  The  Conquest  of  Bread. 

378 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  ,379 

and  negation  of  the  old  social  order,  which  the  revolution 
is  destined  to  abolish. 

According  to  Kropotkin,  this  old  order  is  the  dominance 
of  the  few  over  the  many,  and  above  all  the  dominance  of  a 
small  number  of  capitahsts.  The  love  of  our  neighbour  is 
officially  preached,  but  remains  mere  dead  preachment,  just 
as  we  are  habitually  told  that  we  are  never  to  lie  whilst  mis- 
representation and  sophistry  constitute  the  whole  basis  of  our 
social  life.  .  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  this  hfe  can  be 
retained,  and  it  must  be  altered  from  the  foundations  upwards. 
But  the  question  of  its  transformation  does  nor  depend  merely 
upon  the  material  conditions  of  existence,  and  the  change 
must  involve  the  entire  domain  of  human  activity.  The  new 
world  can  only  be  upbuilded  by  a  new  faith.  This  new  world 
signifies  the  political  and  social  freedom  of  all. 

Anarchism,  for  Kropotkin,  is  a  method,  is  a  natural  philo- 
sophy of  socialism,  a  philosophy  in  fact.  Just  as  Marx 
proclaimed  his  socialism  as  science,  so  does  Kropotkin  speak 
of  anarchism  as  science. 

Kropotkin's  anarchism  is  directed  against  the  power  and 
dominion  of  the  state,  being  essentially  astatism  and  apoHtism, 
but  at  the  same  time  it  is  directed  against  authority  in  every 
form.  Kropotkin  stigmatises  the  wielders  of  power,  the  guar- 
dians of  the  law,  and  the  pious,  as  the  heredtary  enemies  of 
thought.  Opposing  reason  to  authority,  he  rejects  the  Bible 
and  the  gospels,  Kant  (the  categorical  imperative),  Bentham 
and  the  utilitarians  (self-interest  rightly  understood),  and  all 
hitherto  extant  religious  and  moral  education.  Like  Bakunin, 
he  demands  a  new  morahty  and  a  new  faith,  meaning  thereby, 
not  a  new  religion,  but  a  new  philosophy. 

As  happens  to  so  many  of  the  anarchists,  Kropotkin's 
astatism  involves  him  in  grave  perplexities.  Let  us  suppose, 
he  says,  that  a  group  of  individuals  have  combined  to  carry 
out  an  undertaking.  One  of  them  proves  disorderly  and 
work-shy  ;  what  is  to  be  done  ?  Is  the  group  to  be  dissolved  ; 
is  it  to  be  given  an  overseer  who  will  dictate  punishments  or 
keep  a  time-book  of  work  done  ?  Kropotkin  "solves  the  diffi- 
culty in  the  following  way.  "  The  comrades  will  say  to  the 
comrade  whose  conduct  is  injuring  the  undertaking  :  '  Good 
friend,  we  should  hke  to  go  on  working  with  you,  but  since 
you  often  fail  to  turn  up,  and  often  neglect  your  work,  we 
shall  have  to  part  company.     Go  and  seek  other  comrades 


380  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

who  will  get  on  better  with  you.'  "  Extremely  amiable,  but 
somewhat  childish.  Lenin's  comment  would  be,  "  Kill  with 
kindness  !  " 

Bakunin  spoke  of  his  anarchism  as  revolutionary  socialism, 
and  sometimes  as  social  or  socialistic  democracy.  Kropotkin 
terms  his  own  doctrine  "  anarchistic  socialism,"  for  he  dis- 
tinguishes anarchism  from  sociaHsm  solely  in  respect  of  method. 

Kropotkin  represents  the  relationship  between  anarchism 
and  socialism  in  the  following  way.  Socialism  has  sprung 
from  three  sources  and  in  a  threefold  manner  Social 
democracy  (state  sociaHsm)  originated  from  Saint-Simonism, 
anarchism  from  Proudhonism,  autonomist  trade  unionism 
and  municipal  sociaHsm  from  Owenism.  These  systems 
represent  three  trends,  three  methods,  three  routes  towards 
a  common  goal ;  anarchism  is  far  more  closely  akin  to  Owenism 
than  to  Saint-Simonism.  Anarchising  sociaHsm  and  social 
democracy  are  distinguished  one  from  another  by  their  diver- 
gent estimates  of  organisation  or  of  state  socialism.  Kropotkin 
is  opposed  to  centralisation.  Like  Bakunin  and  Proudhon, 
he  demands  the  autonomous  federation  of  the  individual 
associations,  which  he  does  not  conceive  as  territorial,  but 
rather  as  consisting  of  a  moderately  large  number  of  persons 
belonging  to  different  locaHties.  Kropotkin  adduces  the 
postal  service  as  an  example  of  the  anarchistic  organisation 
of  the  future.  Just  as  the  posts  between  the  different  states 
can  be  carried  on  exceedingly  well  without  a  central  office, 
so  can  the  autonomous  lesser  social  organisations  be  federa- 
tively  linked  and  internationally  combined.  But  Kropotkin 
forgets  that  the  international  postal  treaties  are  regulated 
and  guaranteed  by  the  state.    ^ 

Kropotkin  rejects,  not  merely  centraHsm,  but  individuaHsm 
as  well.  He  refuses  to  recognise  the  rights  of  the  individual, 
since  these  do  not  signify  equal  rights  for  all,  but  the  rights 
of  the  few  over  the  many.  Above  all,  Kropotkin  dissents 
from  Nietzsche,  whom  he  regards  as  a  hopelessly  vague  thinker, 
and  where  not  vague,  narrow.  Rejecting  Nietzsche,  he  rejects 
also  the  Russian  individualist  aristocrats  like  Merezkovskii. 

To  some  extent,  Kropotkin  agrees  with  poHtical  radicaHsm 
in  his  estimate  of  the  state  ;  he  opposes  the  state  on  principle. 
The  radicals,  he  says,  hope  that  the  repubUc  and  universal 
suffrage  will  bring  salvation,  but  their  hope  is  vain.  ParHa- 
ment  cannot  help  the  weak,  nor  can  it  reconcile  opposing 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  381 

forces  ;  majority  rule  means  always  the  rule  of  mediocrity  ; 
the  electoral  method  is  not  the  way  to  find  those  who  can 
represent  the  people.  The  whole  of  poUticalHfe  is  permeated 
With  falsehood  ;  the  root  of  the  evil  lies  in  the  very  principle 
of  the  state  ;  consequently  all  the  functions  of  the  state  are 
to  be  reduced,  not  to  a  minimum,  but  to  nil.  Anarchism  is 
annihilation  of  the  state,  is  anarchy,  Kropotkin  declares, 
following  Bakunin. 

Kropotkin  has  much  to  say  against  social  democracy, 
but  he  never  really  tries  conclusions  with  social  democracy. 
Like  Bakunin,  he  is  adverse  to  Marxism  and  to  Marx,  but 
gives  no  sufficient  grounds  for  his  antipathy.  He  fails  to 
pay  sufficient  attention  to  the  evolution  of  the  Marx-Engels 
doctrine  and  to  Marxism ;  he  fails  to  see  that  Marx,  too, 
was  opposed  to  the  state,  and  was  an  enthusiastic  advocate  of 
revolution.  Kropotkin's  utterances  upon  the  leading  question 
of  historical  materialism  are  extremely  vague. ^ 

Kropotkin's  views  are  distinguished  from  Marx's  above 
all  in  the  recognition  of  morality.    He  negates  the  old  morality, 

»  The  bread  question  is  occasionally  described  as  the  matter  of  most 
essential  importance,  but  this  does  not  involve  for  Kropotkin  an  acceptance 
of  historical  materialism.  In  his  work  on  the  French  revolution  we  read  : 
"  Two  great  currents  prepared  and  mado  the  Great  French  Revolution.  One 
of  them,  the  current  of  ideas,  concerning  the  political  reorganisation  of  states, 
came  from  the  middle  classes  ;  the  other,  the  current  of  action,  came  from 
the  people,  both  peasants  ^nd  workers  in  towns,  who  wanted  to  obtain  imme- 
diate and  definite  improvements  :a  their  economic  condition.  And  when 
these  two  currents  met  and  joined  in  the  endeavour  to  realise  an  aim  which 
for  some  time  was  common  to  both,  when  they  had  helped  each  other  for  a 
certain  time,  the  result  was  the  Revolution.  ...  To  arrive  at  a  result  of  this 
importance,  and  for  a  movement  to  assume  the  proportions  of  a  revolution, 
as  happened  in  England  between  1648  and  16S8,  and  in  France  between  1789 
and  1793,  it  is  not  enough  that  a  movement  ol  idea;-,  no  matter  how  profound 
it  may  be,  should  manifest  itself  among  the  educated  classes ;  it  is  not 
enough  that  disturbances,  however  many  or  great,  should  take  place  in  the 
very  heart  of  the  people.  The  revolutionary  action  coming  from  the  people 
must  coincide  with  a  movement  of  revolutionary  thought  coming  from  the 
educated  classes.  There  m.ust  be  a  union  of  the  two."  Note  the  vagueness 
of  the  concepts.  Ideal  cuiTent= revolutionary  thought= bourgeoises  cultured 
classes ;  and  again,  activity  =  the  masses = peasants  and  proletarians  =  the  people = 
the  economic  situation.  The  concurrence  of  activity  and  thought  seems  to 
be  ascribed  by  Kropotkin  to  a  mere  happy  chance.  The  whole  conception 
is  inaccurate  and  obscure.  The  cultured  classes  participate  in  revolutionary 
action  as  well  as  the  people.  Obviously  more  precise  elucidation  is  requisite ; 
we  want  to  know  when  and  how  revolutionary  ideas  originate,  how  revolutionary 
activities  come  to  be  supersadded  to  these  ideas,  what  phases  are  displayed 
by  revolutionary  activities,  and  so  on.  Nor  is  Kropotkin  right  in  representing 
Marxism  as  a  rechaufid  of  the  state  collectivism  of  Pecqueur  and  Vidal.  Similar 
erroneous  contentions  are  frequent  in  Kropotkin's  writings. 


382  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

but  his  outlook  is  not  amoralist  either  in  the  sense  of  Marx- 
Engels  or  in  that  of  Nietzsche.  Like  Bakunin,  Kropotkin 
wishes  to  found  a  new  ethic.  For  Kropotkin,  that  is  good 
which  is  useful  to  society,  and  that  is  bad  which  is  harmful 
to  society.  He  troubles  himself  Httle  to  enquire  whether 
this  definition  is  adequate,  just  as  he  fails  to  formulate  with 
precision  the  concept  "  society,"  Without  further  ado,  he 
identifies  that  concept  with  the  concept  "  race,"  and  he  uses 
the  term  "  humanity "  with  the  same  signification.  An 
opponent  of  Bentham  and  the  other  utilitarians,  Kropotkin 
himself  is  unable  to  get  beyond  the  utilitarian  foundation  of 
his  ethic.  He  is  a  rationalist  utilitarian,  a  disciple  of  the 
English  utilitarians  of  the  eighteenth  century.  He  goes  back, 
above  all,  to  Adam  Smith,  teaching  that  men  are  endowed 
with  natural  sympathy,  which  suffices  as  a  principle  of  morality. 
This  natural  sympathy  is  simultaneously  a  sense  that  we  are 
all  members  of  one  another,  and  that  consequently  the  sound 
organisation  of  society  is  a  spontaneous  product.  Kropotkin 
discerns  this  social  sense  of  mutual  dependence  among  the 
lower  animals  also,  and  he  therefore  considers  the  formation 
of  societies  to  be  a  natural  law.  Mutual  aid  is  a  natural  law 
for  beast  as  well  as  for  man.  The  struggle  for  existence, 
the  class  struggle,  are  not  the  only  laws  of  nature  and 
society. 

Kropotkin  terms  this  natural  social  order,  mutualism. 
In  this  matter  Kropotkin  dissents,  not  only  from  Darwin, 
but  also  from  Spencer,  for  whereas  Spencer  had  taught  that 
the  great  progress  of  future  society  would  be  realised  by 
effecting  a  coincidence  between  the  happiness  of  the  individual 
and  the  happiness  of  the  community,  Kropotkin  contends  that 
there  has  not  from  the  first  been  any  conflict  between  the 
interest  of  the  individual  and  that  of  the  community  ;  there 
has  always  been  a  harmony  of  interests,  for  had  it  not  been 
so  the  human  race  would  never  have  been  able  to  maintain 
itself,  and  no  animal  species  would  have  been  able  to  attain 
to  its  present  level  of  development.  Kropotkin  forestalls 
possible  objections  to  this  idea  of  preestablished  harmony 
by  admitting  that  alike  among  men  and  among  animals  there 
have  always  existed  numerous  individuals  unable  to  compre- 
hend such  harmony  and  mutuality.  But  the  failure,  he  says, 
is  due  merely  to  a  lack  of  understanding,  to  narrowness  and 
stupidity  ;     and  there  have   always  been  individuals  able  to 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  383 

recognise  the  triie  nature  of  the  case  and  therefore  able  to 
lead  a  perfectly  social  life. 

Like  so  many  positivists  and  evolutionists,  Kropotkin 
fails  to  reconcile  ethics  with  historical  development.  For 
him  ethics  is  a  positive  science,  its  function  being  merely  to 
note  facts.  There  is  no  ethical  imperative.  The  anarchist 
studies  society,  and  endeavours  to  understand  its  past  and 
present  trends.  His  ideal  does  no  more  than  specify  in 
which  direction  evolution  is  actually  advancing.  It  seems 
hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  such  a  sociological  guide 
to  action  is  extremely  vague  and  unpractical.  Kropotkin 
recognises  four  great  historical  stages  :  the  social  order  of 
primitive  tribal  communism  ;  feudahsm  ;  urban  communities  ; 
and  finally  the  centraHsed  organisation  of  the  state,  which 
will  be  replaced  by  the  stateless  communistic  federation. 
Now  if  we  assume  this  account  of  historical  development  to 
be  accurate,  what  follows  as  regards  the  practical  activities 
of  Kropotkin  himself  ?  Are  his  concrete  doings  based  upon 
such  an  outlook  ? 

In  this  evolutionist  solution  of  the  problem  of  liberty, 
Kropotkin  follows  Guyau,  whom  he  extols  as  the  founder  of 
anarchist  ethics.  Kropotkin  eludes  the  imperative  by  a 
positively  foolish  turn  of  phrase.  Since  he  is  compelled  to 
insist  upon  the  right  and  even  the  duty  of  revolution  and 
tyrannicide,  he  adopts  the  hypothetical  form,  saying  that 
every  stalwart  man  begs  us  to  kill  him  if  he  should  become  a 
tyrant.  Of  course  the  use  of  "  if  "  does  not  really  evade  the 
imperative,  but  Kropotkin  imagines  he  has  eluded  the  diffi- 
culty when  he  declares  the  moral  sense  to  be  a  natural  endow- 
ment, no  less  natural  than  the  sense  of  taste  or  smell.  Morals, 
therefore,  need  neither  sanction  nor  obligation  (une  morale 
sans  obligation  ni  sanction,  as  Guyau  puts  it).  When,  there- 
fore, Kropotkin  makes  use  of  the  term  "  right,"  he  promptly 
explains  that  it  means  nothing  more  than  the  consciousness 
of  a  good  action.  Kropotkin  recognises  no  right,  no  law, 
no  coercion.  The  natural  inclinations  of  human  beings  serve 
to  explain  human  actions  ;  every  one  treats  others  as  he 
wishes  to  be  treated  by  them. 

Kropotkin  likewise  adopts  Guyau's  ethical  measure  of 
intensity.  The  more  intense  a  man's  moral  sense,  the  more 
does  he  do  for  society  ;  and  the  more  a  man  lives  for  society, 
the   more   intensively   does  he   Hvc.    This   follows   from   the 


384  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

previously  explained  mutuality  of  the  individua'  and  of  society. 
Kropotkin  therefore  condemns  the  morality  of  simple  equality, 
condemns  a  life  in  which  everything  should  be  meted  out  to 
all  by  the  same  measure.  Such  a  life  would  be' grey,  monoto- 
nous, devoid  of  strong  impressions,  lacking  great  joys  and 
great  sorrows,  a  vegetative  life  of  mediocrity,  Ufe  in  a  rotting  , 
swamp.  "  Be  strong  !  "  cries  Kropotkin  to  his  neighbour, 
and  he  demands  that  life  shall  be  lived  to  the  full ;  we  must 
strive  to  give  more  than  we  receive,  to  produce  more  that  is 
great,  beautiful,  and  powerful.  "  To  live  means  to  spread 
one's  energies  abroad  ;  to  live  means  to  strive  for  the  attainment 
of  perfect  freedom  ;  mere  justice,  mere  equality  would  be 
the  death  of  society.  The  anarchist  must  be  strong  and 
active  ;   he  must  do  great  things  ;   must  do  the  greatest !  " 

Kropotkin,  perhaps,  hardly  realises  that  he,  the  communist, 
is  borrowing  from  Guyau's  aristocratic  doctrines,  and  even 
from  Nietzsche's  aristocratic  radicalism. 

Aristocratic,  too,  is  Kropotkin's  theory  of  revolution,  at 
any  rate  in  so  far  as  revolution  is  the  great  deed  he  demands 
from  the  anarchist. 

For  Kropotkin,  revolution  is  merely  a  form  of  natural 
evolution.  Revolution  represents  the  period  of  accelerated 
evolution,  the  period  of  torrential  progress  of  the  new  order 
of  society.  Revolution  is  just  as  natural  and  necessary  as 
is  the  slower  manifestation  of  evolution. 

It  cannot  therefore  be  the  task  of  the  sociologist  and 
politician  to  discover  how  revolution  is  to  be  avoided.  His 
aim  must  be  to  learn  how  revolution  can  be  made  to  yield  the 
greatest  results. 

Here  Kropotkin  takes  a  different  line  from  Bakunin. 
Whereas  Bakunin  is  quite  unconcerned  about  plans  for  the 
future,  and  merely  demands  negative  passion,  the  instinct  of 
pandestruction,  Kropotkin  insists  that  we  must  have  a  definite 
plan,  a  distinct  aim,  and  that  we  must  choose  the  right  method 
of  revolution.  Kropotkin  v/ishes  to  restrict  civil  war  to  the 
utmost  ;  the  number  of  victims  must  be  as  small  as  possible  ; 
we  must  endeavour  to  minimise  the  reciprocal  embitterment 
of  the  contending  parties. 

There  is  only  one  means  to  secure  these  practical  human 
restrictions.  The  revolting  and  oppressed  portion  of  society 
must  be  perfectly  clear  in  its  own  mind  regarding  the  aims 
and  methods  of  the  civil  war,  and  must  possess  the  enthusiasm 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  385 

requisite  to  carry  it  on  to  the  goal.  Kropotkin,  therefore, 
in  contradistinction  to  Bakunin,  does  not  desire  to  have  any 
secret  revolutionary  organisations.  The  mass  revolution  must 
be  the  outcome  of  the  deliberate  agreement  of  all. 

The  revolution  will  be  assured  of  success  when  the  social 
class  against  which  the  struggle  is  being  carried  on  shall  have 
been  brought  to  recognise  the  validity  of  the  new  ideals  of 
the  revokes.  Already  the  members  of  the  dominant  classes 
have  ceased  to  appeal  to  the  rectitude  of  the  old  regime,  and 
they  appeal  merely  to  its  utility.  Consequently  the  imminent 
great  revolution  is  already  half  won. 

Turning  to  recent  history  for  an  example,  Kropotkin 
refers  to  the  Paris  commune  of  1871  as  a  mistaken  and 
spurious  revolution.  Whereas  Bakunin  regarded  this  mani- 
festation of  civil  war  as  the  first  "  striking  and  practical  " 
expression  of  revolutionary  socialism,  and  whereas  Marx 
likewise  gave  his  cordial'approval  to  the  commune,  Kropotkin 
condemns  it  as  an  awful  example  of  a  revolution  devoid  of 
definite  aim.  On  the  other  hand  he  describes  the  great  French 
revolution  with  loving  admiration.  As  an  anarchist,  he  cares 
nothing  for  the  parliamentary  institutions  brought  into  being  by 
the  revolution,  but  he  delights  to  note  how  the  lower  strata  of 
the  population,  the  peasantry  no  less  than  the  urban  prole- 
tariat, were  won  over  to  the  revolution.  Obviously,  he  is 
thinking  of  the  possibility  of  an  extensive  peasant  uprising 
in  Russia,  such  a  movement  as  that  of  which  Bakunin  had 
dreamed.  Severe,  on  the  other  hand,  is  his  condemnation 
of  the  bourgeoisie  of  that  day,  and  above  all  his  condemnation 
of  the  Girondists,  so  that  the  account  he  gives  of  the  Gironde 
and  its  political  aims  differs  greatly  from  that  which  we 
owe  to  liberal  historians.  But  Kropotkin  idealises  the  com- 
munists of  the  council  of  the  Paris  commune  (Roux,  Varlet, 
etc.)  and  Chaumette  as  genuine  representatives  of  the  working 
class.  It  is  plain  that  Kropotkin  is  not  a  scientific  historian, 
and  that  his  historical  works  are  written  to  further  his  socio- 
political ideals. 

Kropotkin  recognises  the  right  and  the  duty  of  individual 
acts  of  violence  as  well  as  of  mass  revolution,  but  in  accord- 
ance with  his  revolutionary  principles  he  demands  that  an 
individual  act  of  violence  shall  only  be  undertaken  in  the  last 
resort,  as  an  act  of  self-defence.  For  example,  he  exculpated 
Perovskaja  and  was  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with  Stepniak, 

26  VOL.  II. 


386  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

having  cordially  commended  the  novel  wherein  Stepniak 
described  the  life  of  the  terrorists.  Tyrannicide,  said  Kro- 
potkin,  is  morally  permissible,  we  have  a  "  right  "  to  undertake 
it,  because  the  terrorist  asks  us  in  advance  to  slay  him  also 
should  he  ever  become  a  tyrant,  a  viper  to  his  fellow  men. 
"  Treat  others  as  you  would  wish  them  to  treat  you  in  similar 
circumstances."  To  slay  a  tyrant  is  just  as  justifiable  as 
to  slay  a  viper. 

Kropotkin  is  himself  a  fresh  illustration  of  the  psychology 
of  the  Russian  revolutionary.  Humane  as  a  man  can  be, 
a  gentleman  in  the  best  and  finest  sense  of  the  word,  when 
he  speaks  of  "  vipers "  Kropotkin  is  concentrating  in  that 
expression  the  revolutionary  mood  of  a  lifetime.  The  phrase 
embodies  his  personal  experiences,  his  unjust  persecution  by 
^he  government  and  the  court,  the  way  in  which  his  beloved 
brother  was  compelled  to  seek  by  suicide  an  escape  from  the 
intolerable  conditions  of  Siberian  exile  ;  it  embodies  his  view 
of  Russian  conditions  as  these  had  been  determined  by  the 
existence  of  serfdom  (conditions  which  had  poisoned  home 
life  for  Kropotkin  during  childhood).  Thus  does  it  come  to 
pass  that  a  man  who  by  temperament  and  philosophic  training 
is  one  of  the  kindliest  of  his  day  can  justify  and  recommend 
the  slaughter  of  a  tyrant  as  though  he  were  a  viper.  Such 
is  the  mood  in  which  Kropotkin  has  described  and  stigmatised 
the  white  terror.  (See  §  36,  and  Kropotkin's  The  Terror  in 
Russia.) 

To  complete  this  sketch  we  must  briefl}^  consider  Kropotkin's 
relationship  to  his  Russian  predecessors  and  contemporaries, 
and  his  attitude  towards  Russian  literature  and  its  "leading 
trends.  For  Kropotkin,  his  system  of  anarchism  is  a  general 
philosophy  of  life. 

Kropotkin's  chief  teacher  among  the  Russians  was 
Bakunin,  regarded  by  Kropotkin  as  the  founder  of  modern 
anarchism  or  antistate  socialism.  A  few  of  the  distinctions 
between  these  two  thinkers  have  already  been  mentioned. 
The  most  notable  difference  is  that  Kropotkin  is  less  strongly 
and  less  directly  influenced  by  Feuerbach,  so  that  Bakuninist 
"  antitheologism  "  makes  its  appearance  in  Kropotkin  in  a 
somewhat  mitigated  form. 

Bakunin  died  just  at  the  time  of  Kropotkin's  escape  from 
prison,  so  that  the  two  men  never  met.  But  Lavrov  was 
a  personal  friend  of  Kropotkin,  and  Kropotkin  considers  that 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  387 

Lavrov's  Historical  Letters  supply  the  correct  solution  of  the 
problem  of  the  relationships  between  the  folk  and  the 
individual.  Lavrov,  writes  Kropotkin,  "  was  too  widely 
learned  and  too  much  of  a  philosopher  to  join  the  Germ&.n 
social  democrats  in  their  ideals  of  a  centralised  communistic 
state,  or  in  their  narrow  interpretation  of  history." 

Kropotkin  agrees  with  Cerny§evskii's  socialism.  Kropotkin, 
too,  wishes  the  liberated  peasants  to  get  possession  of  the 
land,  and  he  looks  upon  the  mir  as  the  groundwork  of  the 
coming  federative  autonomy.  He  agrees  with  Cernysevskii 
in  the  latter's  estimate  of  the  nihilists,  and  above  all  he  is 
enthusiastic  in  his  admiration  for  Cernysevskii's  feminine 
types.  He  accepts  the  solution  offered  in  What  is  to  he  Done 
of  the  problem  of  marriage  and  divorce.  In  PuSkin,  too, 
he  extols  that  writer's  respect  for  women. 

Kropotkin  was  a  young  man  of  twenty  when  the  struggle 
was  raging  round  Turgenev's  Bazarov  and  the  problem  of 
nihilism.  Accepting  nihilism,  Kropotkin  interpreted  it  as 
anarchist'  philosophy. 

From  this  outlook  Kropotkin  followed  Herzen,  and  made 
a  great  distinction  between  terrorism  and  nihilism,  insisting 
that  the  nihilist  is  a  far  profounder  and  more  significant  figure 
than  the  terrorist.  Thus  Kropotkin  was  not  satisfied  with 
the  Bazarov  type,  for,  as  has  been  explained,  his  own  ideals 
were  those  of  Cernysevskii  as  expounded  in  What  is  to  be  Done. 

In  respect  alike  of  matter  and  of  form,  Herzen  exercised 
great  influence  upon  Kropotkin.  As  writer  and  philosopher, 
Kropotkin  likewise  owes  something  to  Turgenev,  and  yet 
more  to  Nekrasov  and  Tolstoi.  Ethical  anarchism  is  his  link 
with  Tolstoi.  Nekrasov  charms  him  by  the  apotheosis  of  the 
mother-woman  and  of  the  Russian  peasant  woman.  For  the 
same  reason,  Kropotkin  is  especially  attached  to  other  Russian 
authors  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  a  good  analysis  of 
the  Russian  woman  (Hvos6nskaja,  Panaev).  Dostoevski's 
outlook,  on  the  other  hand,  is  essentially  alien  to  Kropotkin, 
who,  as  rationalist  and  positivist,  detests  mysticism.  He 
considers  Raskolnikov  a  poor  typification  of  the  nihilist,  and 
he  disapproves  of  GonCarov's  analysis  of  nihilism. 

Kropotkin  forms  a  low  estimate  of  Saltykov,  finding  him 
too  undecided  in  politics.  The  poet  Ogarev,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  one  of  Kropotkin's  favourites,  and  he  is  likewise  fond 
or  Gor'kii  and  Cehov.     Concerning  Gogol,   Kropotkin  agrees 


388  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

with  Belinskii's  later  judgment.  "  Gogol  was  not  a  deep 
thinker,  but  was  a  great  artist.  .  .  .  Art  in  Gogol's  conception 
is  a  torch-bearer.  .  .  .  Gogol  was  the  first  to  introduce  the 
social  element  into  Russian  literature." 

Among  the  writers  on  philosophy  and  politics,  those  who, 
besides  Cernysevskii,  exercised  most  influence  upon  Kropotkin 
were  Belinskii,  Dobroljubov,  and  above  all  Pisarev.  Kro- 
potkin speaks  of  Belinskii  as  "  a  teacher  and  an  educator  of 
Russian  society,  not  only  in  art,  .  .  .  but  also  in  politics, 
in  social  questions,  and  in  humanitarian  aspirations."  Mihail- 
ovskii  was  congenial  to  Kropotkin  as  adversary  of  Darwin 
and  as  critic. 

Kropotkin  is  a  narodnik  in  his  high  esteem  for  the  Russian 
folk.  Herein  he  agrees  with  the  more  progressive  among 
the  Slavophils.  In  the  mir,  he  discerns  the  social  principle 
of  federation.  Prior  to  the  Tatar  dominion,  Russia  was  not 
an  absolutist  state  but  a  federation  of  distinct  folk-communes. 
After  the  introduction  of  Mongolian  tsarism,  and  after  the 
establishment  of  the  official  church,  these  folk-communes 
remained  the  asylum  of  popular  rights  (in  contradistinction 
to  the  right  of  the  state  and  to  the  laws  imposed  by  the  state) 
and  of  the  federative  idea. 

Therewith  is  connected,  too,  Kropotkin's  aversion  to  the 
intellectuals.  He  extols  Cehov  and  Hvoscinskaja  because 
these  two  writers  have  depicted  and  analysed  the  complete 
mental  and  moral  bankruptcy  of  the  intellectuals.  He  sympa- 
thises with  Gor'kii's  rebel  tramp,  looking  upon  this  figure, 
not  as  a  Nietzschean  superman,  but  as  a  strong  and  unselfish 
hero  of  the  people,  who  is  in  revolt  against  society. 

When  we  turn  to  the  European  influences  that  have  affected 
Kropotkin,  we  have  in  the  first  place  to  speak  of  positivism. 
If  Kropotkin  be  especially  inclined  to  adopt  Guyau's  formu- 
lations, this  is  merely  because  Kropotkin  has  already  directly 
and  indirectly  assimilated  Comte's  positivism  from  his  Russian 
teachers.  Kropotkin  learned  much  from  English  thinkers, 
and  notably  from  Bentham,  Mill,  and  Spencer ;  Darwin's 
views  underwent  modification  at  his  hands  ;  in  conformity 
with  Marx,  he  definitely  rejected  the  doctrines  of  Malthus. 
Kropotkin  has  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  life  in  England, 
and  the  English  influence  upon  his  mind  is  especially  marked. 

German  philosophy  had  little  direct  effect  upon  Kropotkin. 
Nietzsche  was  akin  to  him  as  an  evolutionist ;  he  shared  with 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  389 

Nietzsche  the  device  "  be  strong,"  but  gave  it  a  humanitarian 
significance.     The  idea  of  the  superman  did  not  attract   him. 

The  French  sociaUsts,  finally,  were  familiar  to  Kropotkin, 
but. he  has  had  less  acquaintance  with  Marx  and  Engels.  He 
has  diligently  collaborated  with  other  modern  anarchists 
(Reclus,  etc.)  in  the  work  of  anarchist  organisation,  and  upon 
the  various  party  organs. 

It  is  needless  to  attempt  a  more  detailed  appreciation  of 
Kropotkin.  His  is  a  most  congenial  personality,  but  he  does 
not  shine  as  a  thinker.  For  example,  he  advocates  the  abolition 
of  the  division  of  labour  ;  but  it  will  suffice  him  that  the  author 
shall  do  his  own  typesetting — though  assuredly  a  consistent 
abolition  of  the  division  of  labour  would  not  call  a  halt  at 
the  compositor's  case.  The  manner  in  •  which  he  gives  his 
approval  to  luxury  in  modern  society,  his  explanation  of  the 
categorical  imperative  (the  habitual  drinker,  too,  has  an 
irresistible  impulse),  and  so  on — in  all  these  things  his  thought 
is  weak. 

Nor  is  Kropotkin  always  accurate  in  his  statements  of 
facts  ;  his  literary  work  and  his  book  on  the  French  revolution 
offer  more  than  one  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  assertion. 

II 

§  171. 

IN  view  of  the  great  importance  of  anarchism  for  the 
understanding  of  Russia,  the  nature  of  the  movement 
demands  fuller  consideration. 

In  the  first  place  we  must  note  that  anarchism  has  recently 
gained  ground  both  in  the  theoretical  field  and  as  a  practical 
movement,  above  all  as  a  mass  movement,  and  that  this 
development  is  noticeable  both  in  Russia  and  in  Europe.  In 
Russia,  since  about  igoi,  the  growth  of  anarchism  has  been 
so  considerable  as  to  lead  to  the  organisation  of  declared 
anarchist  groups,  not  only  among  Russian  refugees,  but 
actually  within  Russia,  though  these  latter  are  of  course  secret 
societies. 

In  the  programs  of  these  groups  we  find  indications  of 
the  revolutionary  excitement  of  the  epoch,  and  we  note  their 
affinity  to  the  program  of  the  radical  parties.  We  must  not 
forget    that    simultaneously   with    this   growth    of    anarchism 


390  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

occurred  the  strengthening  of  the  social  revolutionaries,  and 
that  at  the  same  time  the  social  democrats  exhibited  a  more 
radical  trend,  which  culminated  in  the  formation  of  a  distinct 
radical  faction,  that  of  the  bol§eviki — the  members  of  the 
left  wing  of  the  bol§eviki  are  actually  called  anarchising 
socialists.  The  maximalists  severed  themselves  from  the 
social  revolutionaries,  and  although  the  maximalists  cannot 
be  classified  as  anarchists,  the  influence  of  European  anarchism 
is  unquestionably  traceable  in  their  views ;  but  both  the 
social  revolutionaries  and  the  bolseviki  have  publicly  and 
repeatedly  protested  in  the  strongest  terms  against  anarchistic 
campaigning  methods  (individual  acts  of  assassination,  expro- 
priation applied  to  private  persons,  and  the  like).  Under 
anarchist  influence  the  so-called  Mahaevcy  have  broken  away 
from  the  social  democracy.  Volskii  (the  pseudonym  of  a 
Pole  named  Machajski),  the  founder  of  this  trend,  offers  an 
agglomeration  of  syndicalism,  anarchism,  and  Marxism,  in 
conjunction  with  a  fierce  polemic  against  the  intellectuals. ^ 

In  the  growth  of  anarchism  since  1901  I  discern  a  mani- 
festation of  the  radical  mood  which  led  in  1905  to  the 
revolution,  and  which  after  the  counter-revolution  impelled 
to  the  revival  of  the  revolution.  Beyond  question  the  latest 
Russian  revolutionary  movement  is  characterised  by  an 
anarchistic  mood.  After  Bakunin,  the  only  notable  advocates 
of  anarchism  for  a  time  were  Kropotkin  and  Prince  Cerkezov. 
.Since  1901  anarchism  has  assumed  a  more  moderate  form.* 

'  Volskii  was  at  first  a  Marxist.  His  book,  The  Mental  Worker,  was  pub- 
lished in  Geneva  in  1904.  In  this  he  attacks  social  democracy  and  the 
anarchism  of  Kropotkin  as  unduly  bourgeois. 

*  Prince  Cerkezov  is  one  of  the  ablest  theorists  of  Bakuninist  "  federalistic- 
communism,"  and  was  a  supporter  of  the  older  Narodnaja  Volja  and  its  terror- 
ism. As  participator  in  Karakozov's  attempt  he  was  sent  to  Siberia  in  1866, 
and  escaped  in  1876.  Consult  his  criticism  of  Marxism,  W.  Tscherkesofi,  Pages 
of  Socialist  History,  Doctrines  and  Acts  of  the  Social  Democracy,  1902.  In 
1903  began  the  publication  of  the  anarchist  periodical  "  Hleb  i  Vo'ja  "  (bread 
and  freedom,  a  modification  of  the  old  formula  Zemlja  i  Volja,  land  and  free- 
dom) ;  on  the  whole  this  paper  represented  the  ideas  of  Kropotkin.  The 
journal  "  Beznacalie  "  (anarchy)  which  appeared  in  1906,  was  more  radical 
and  more  individuaUstic.  The  periodicals  "  Novyi  Mir  "  (the  new  world)  and 
"  Burevestnik  "  (the  stormy  petrel^  the  title  is  that  of  a  well-known  poem  by 
Gor'kii),  originating  in  1907,  were  syndicalist.  In  the  same  year  there  came 
into  existence  an  organisation  entitled  Russian  Federation  of  Revolutionary 
Anarchists.  The  principal  items  in  the  program  of  "  Hlgb  i  Volja  "  run  as 
follows  :  anarchism  is  opposed  to  government  of  every  kind,  and  is  therefore 
opposed  to  attempts  to  establish  a  Russian  constitution ;  it  consequently 
rejects,  in  addition,  the  organisation  of  the  party  in  central  committees  ;    it 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  391 

The  strengthening  of  anarchism  as  a  manifestation  of  the 
revolutionary  mood  is  partly  traceable  to  foreign  influences. 
In  Europe,  too,  during  the  last  years  of  the  nineteenth 
century  the  growth  of  anarchism  was  manifest.  We  see  this 
in  Spain,  in  France  (syndicaHsm),  in  Italy,  in  Germany  (the 
."  Jungen  "  and  the  "  Localists  ")  ;  even  in  England  and  the 
United  States  the  anarchist  movement  gains  ground.  The 
growth  of  anarchism  is  witnessed  by  the  organisation  of 
the  anarchist  Libertarian  Communist  International,  with  its 
international  correspondence  bureau  (Amsterdam,  1907). 

It  is  noteworthy  that  this  movement  is  not  confined  to 
the  intellectuals,  but  has  likewise  affected  the  working  classes. 
It  is  therefore  predominantly  communistic,  and  adopts  the 
well-tried  methods  of  agitation  and  organisation  that  have 
long  been  practised  by  the  social  democrats. 

Discontent  with  parliamentarism  and  revisionism  is  an 
obvious  spur  to  apolitism  and  revolution,  and  it  is  easy  to 
understand  how  the  idea  of  syndicalist  "  direct  action  "  must 

recognises  nothing  but  free  groups,  whose  unity  is  secured  by  a  community 
of  principles  and  aims  and  by  joint  revolutionary  endeavours.  The  grouping 
of  the  anarchists  and  of  their  party  is  effected  solely  by  voluntary  agreement  of 
the  individuals  within  the  groups  and  of  the  groups  one  with  anothe)'.  Conse- 
quently coopeiation  with  other  parties  is  excluded.  The  aim  of  all  the  free 
associations  is  merely  this,  to  promote  among  the  people  a  vigorous  development 
of  the  revolutionary  spirit,  the  spirit  of  revolt ;  the  other  requisites,  conspiracy 
and  revolution,  will  come  in  due  time.  The  ultimate  aim  of  anarchism  is  to 
bring  about  the  social  revolution,  through  which  the  state  and  capitalism  will 
be  replaced  by  anarchist  communism.  The  social  revolution  must  be  a  folk- 
revolution.  Anarchism  rejects  social  democracy  and  the  social  revolutionary 
movement.  It  is  true  that  the  social  revolutionaries  demand  the  socialisation 
of  the  land  ;  but  the  anarchists  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  land  national- 
isation, tor  they  consider  that  the  land  must  be  owned  by  the  peasants,  not  by 
the  nation.  With  regard  to  terrorism,  "  Hleb  i  Volja  "  insists  that  this  must 
subserve  economic  as  well  as  political  ends.  The  terror,  therefore,  must  be 
directed,  not  solely  against  the  government,  but  also  against  the  capitalists, 
the  great  landlords,  etc.  But  the  terror  m.ust  likewise  be  anarchistic,  viz.  free  ; 
it  must  not  be  controlled  by  the  party  ;  the  decision  whether  a  terrorist  deed 
i=  to  be  performed  is  a  matter  for  the  individuals  who  undertake  it.  The  terror 
as  conducted  by  a  central  committee  is  a  duel  between  two  governments, 
whereas  the  terror  ought  to  be  a  struggle  carried  on  by  the  people  against  the 
government.  Novomirskii  (a  pseudonym,  meaning  "  man  of  the  new  world  ") 
has  played  a  prominent  part  as  representative  of  individuahst  anarchism. 
Starting  from  French  syndicalism,  he  conceives  communism  as  a  stage  of  transi- 
tion, and  for  him  anarchist  communism  in  particular  is  merely  a  phase  in  the 
evolution  towards  anarchism.  In  philosophy  Novomirskii  is  a  voluntarist,  an 
opponent  of  Marxist  rationalism.  He  follows  Kropotkin  in  regarding  the 
duty  of  revolution  as  a  natural  sacrifice.  He  considers  a  fine  death  to  be  of 
greater  value  than  a  fine  life  ;  death  is  for  him  no  more  than  a  higher  stage 
of  a  strong  and  intensive  life. 


892  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

flourish  in   an   epoch  when  industrial  strikes  are  of  almost 
incessant  occurrence. 

Simultaneously  there  has  taken  place  a  growth  in  anarchist 
literature.  There  are  now  more  theorists  of  anarchism  than 
hitherto,  and  above  all  the  problem  of  astatism  and  of  the 
definitive  revolution  is  discussed  more  directly  and  more 
exhaustively  than  of  old.  In  this  connection  I  may  refer  to 
Reclus,  Grave,  Cornehssen,  Nieuwenhuis,  Cafiero,  Fabbri, 
Landauer,  Friedeberg,  Tucker,  and  also  to  the  theorists  of 
syndicalism,  Sorel,  Lagardelle,  etc. 

It  may  further  be  noted  that,  in  recent  days,  many  learned 
works  have  been  devoted  to  anarchism  and  to  the  history  of 
■anarchism.  Numerous  theorists  and  historians  have  dealt 
with  Nietzsche,  Stirner,  Bakunin,  and  the  International. 

An  associated  development  is  the  way  in  which,  during  the 
same  epoch,  those  philosophers  and  poets  who  may  be  desig- 
nated anarchists  have  gained  a  wider  influence.  The  already 
great  vogue  of  Nietzsche,  Stirner,  and  Ibsen  continually 
increases  ;  and  before  all  of  these  in  importance  comes  Tolstoi. 
In  addition  must  be  mentioned  the  names  of  certain  younger 
writers  such-  as  Mackay  and  Tailhade.  Of  course  the  ideas 
and  ideals  of  such  men  are  not  always  accepted  in  their  true 
-significance  in  the  wider  circles  of  the  proletariat.  To  adapt 
Heine's  mot  concerning  atheism,  anarchism  begins  to  smell 
of  cheese  and  beer.  . 

This  theoretical  and  pohtical  movement,  too,  has  exercised 
an  influence  upon  Russia. 

The  first  anarchist  journals  in  the  Russian  tongue  were 
pubhshed  abroad,  and  were  directly  inspired  by  foreign 
anarchism.  Simultaneously  the  literature  of  anarchism  was 
made  known  to  wider  circles,  and  especially  to  the  working 
classes,  by  translations  (Eltzbacher,  etc.).  French  syndicaHsm, 
too,  was  eagerly  studied. 

Especially  influential  in  Russia  have  been,  in  addition  to 
the  works  of  Tolstoi,  those  of  Nietzsche,  Stirner,  and  Ibsen. 
A  number  of  recent  writers  have  adopted  anarchist  views 
under  the  influence  of  these  and  other  European  exemplars. 
I  may  refer  to  F\  Sologub  with  his  soHpsist  paroxysms  ;  and 
to  L.  Sestov,  an  imitator  of  Stirner  and  Nietzsche,  following 
the  latter  in  style  as  well  as  in  ideas. 

Dostoevskii  must  be  mentioned  in  this  connection,  in  so 
far  as  the  conceptions  of  individuaHstic  anarchism  incorpor- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  898 

ated  by  him  in  the  figure  of  Ivan  Karamazov  are  given  a 
positive  turn  by  the  anarchists  and  are  accepted  by  them. 


§172. 

IF  we  wish  to  grasp  the  significance  of  anarchism  in  general 
and  of  Russian  anarchism  in  particular,  we  must  endea- 
vour to  define  the  concept  with  more  precision,  and  this  will 
be  easier  now  that  we  have  made  acquaintance  with  certain 
anarchist  systems. 

From  the  methodological  point  of  view,  we  must  be  careful 
to  avoid  being  influenced  by  the  suggestions  attaching  to  the 
name  and  by  the  prejudice  that  is  so  widely  felt  against 
anarchism.  Anarchism  has  to-day  become  a  catchword  for  all 
the  more  radical  types  of  opposition  to  the  existing  order, 
so  that  to  many  persons  the  word  has  such  a  ring  as  was 
formerly  associated  with  the  words  communism  and  socialism. 
Even  "  revolution,"  bogey  as  it  is,  seems  less  alarming,  although 
for  a  very  large  section  of  society  all  these  designations  (revo- 
lutionary, communist,  socialist,  and  anarchist)  are  employed 
quite  indifferently  to  denote  the  Evil  One  in  his  socio- 
political manifestations.  Of  late  the  ill  r.epute  of  anarchism 
has  been  accentuated  by  the  vehement  hostility  of  the  Marxists 
and  of  the  Marxist  wing  of  the  social  democracy.  It  is  natural 
for  people  to  say  that  anarchism  must  be  a  terrible  thing  when 
even  the  social  democrats  condemn  it. 

We  must  further  take  into  account  the  differences  between 
the  various  anarchist  systems,  for  we  must  distinguish  between 
these  as  regards  their  principles,  just  as  we  had  to  distinguish 
between  the  different  systems  of  socialism.  The  meaning 
and  importance  of  the  specific  programs  can  only  be  grasped 
in  relation  to  the  whole  system  to  which  they  belong.  If  we 
consider,  for  example,  Eltzbacher's  classification,  we  find  that 
he  presents  to  us  empirically  the  teaching  of  seven  represen- 
tatives of  anarchism  (Godwin,  Proudhon,  Stirner,  Bakunin, 
Kropotkin,  Tucker,  and  Tolstoi),  but  fails  to  throw  an  adequate 
light  upon  the  connection  between  their  ideas,  in  respect 
either  of  the  historical  development  or  of  the  actual  nature 
of  these.  Though  he'  gives  us  a  juristic  exposition  of  their 
views  upon  law,  state,  property,  and  tactics,  he  does  not 
succeed  by  this  method  of  examination  in  elucidating  the 
differences  between  the  anarchist  systems.     He  tells  us,   for 


394  THE   SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA 

example,  that  both  Stirner  and  Tolstoi  are  opposed  to  law, 
the  state,  and  property — but  these  tv/o  thinkers  base  their  • 
respective  views  of  such  questions  upon  foundations  so  utterly 
divergent  that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  regard  them  as  repre- 
sentatives of  a  single  undifferentiated  anarchism.  Again, 
when  Most  and  Tolstoi  "  anarchistically  "  defending  the  same 
thesis,  both  protest  against  patriotism,  it  is  b}^  a  purely  verbal 
identification  that  we  apply  the  term  "  anarchism  "  to  their 
respective  doctrines. 

Anarchism  signifies  the  negation  of  archism  (if  the  neologism 
may  be  permitted).  x\n-archism  (Bakunin)  discloses  itself 
as  opposition  to  archism,  and  there  will  therefore  be  as  many 
anarchisms  as  there  are  archisms.  The  most  usual  interpre- 
tation of  anarchism  in  the  political  sphere  is  to  conceive  it 
as  astatism,  when  we  are  told  that  society  should  exist  without 
the  state.  But  we  need  a  definition  of  the  term  state  before 
we  can  have  any  cle_ar  idea  as  to  what  is  meant  by  astatism. 
In  many  cases  the  concept  "  state  "  is  used  in  an  extremely 
abstract  way,  and  when  this  is  done  the  term  anarchism,  con- 
ceived as  astatism,  likewise  remains  abstract.  We  have  to 
ask  whether  the  anarchism  we  are  considering  is  solely  directed 
against  the  absolutist  state,  or  whether  it  is  equally  hostile 
to  a  constitutionalist  state,  or  to  a  republic.  Further,  we 
have  to  analyse  the  idea  of  the  state,  distinguishing  between 
dynasty,  government,  parliament,  militarism,  law,  the  admin- 
istration (central  and  local).  In  our  examination  of  the 
doctrines  of  individual  anarchists,  we  must  attempt  to  ascer- 
tain precisely  what  each  one  of  them  means  by  the  state, 
and  which  elements  of  the  state  they  wish  to  abolish.  It  is 
further  necessar\7  to  ascertain  to  what  extent  and  in  what 
way  the  state  does  actually  exercise  over  the  various  social 
organisations  (the  church,  the  nation,  etc.)  the  primac}^  of 
which  the  anarchists  complain  ;  we  have  to  ask  whether  the 
state  is  really  as  important  as  the  anarchists  contend. 

Not  merely  do  anarchists  reject  the  state,  but  they  repudiate 
political  methods  in  their  entirety.  The  term  apolitism  is 
often  used  to  denote  this  repudiation  of  political  activities, 
the  predominant  objection  of  the  anarchists  being  to 
participation  in  parliamentarism. 

Going  yet  further,  anarchists  oppose  authority  in  all  its 
forms,  refusing  to  recognise  anything  as  valid  beyond  logic 
and  the  individual  reason.     Of  late,  however,  there  has  been 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  395 

a  tendency  to  subordinate  reason  to  feeling,  will,  and  instinct. 
The  anarchists  have  advanced  as  philosophy  has  progressed, 
and  have  turned  away  from  rationalism  towards' voluntarism. 

To  authority,  the  anarchists  counterpose  a  demand  for 
liberty,  upon  which  they  lay  more  stress  than  upon  equality 
or  even  fraternity. 

As  against  the  state  and  authority,  anarchists  proclaim 
individualism,  and  anarchism  is  often  defined  as  individualism. 
The  term  is  extremely  ambiguous,  and  it  is  above  all  necessary 
to  distinguish  between  individualism  and  subjectivism,  for 
these  two  words  are  often  encountered  in  association.  Indi- 
vidualism is  mainly  an  ethical  and  socio-political  concept, 
whereas  subjectivism  belongs  chiefly  to  the  spheres  of 
psychology  and  epistemology.  Individualism  concerns  the 
relationship  of  the  individual  to  the  social  whole  or  to  the 
entire  universe,  and  deals  therefore  with  an  ethical,  socio- 
political, and  metaphysical  relationship  ;  but  v/hen  we  think 
of  subjectivism  we  are  thinking  of  the  subject  as  contrasted 
with  the  object,  and  our  attention  centres  upon  what  we  mean 
by  the  subject  psychologically  and  epistemologically  (and, 
of  course,  metaphysically  as  well). 

We  must  distinguish,  further,  different  degrees  and  kinds 
of  individualism  and  of  subjectivism.  These  terms  are 
ordinarily  used  in  their  extremer  sense. 

Extreme  individualism  (unless  the  term  be  employed  to 
denote  nothing  more  than  a  well-developed  and  vigorous 
personality)  often  signifies  a  neglect  of  the  social  whole.  Other- 
wise expressed,  the  individual  is  set  in  opposition  to  the  social 
whole  and  is  considered  superior  to  that  whole.  Individualism 
then  manifests  itself  as  aristocracy. 

Extreme  subjectivism  or  solipsism  is  at  the  same  time 
extreme  individualism  ;  but  the  converse  of  this  is  not  true, 
for  extreme  individualism  need  not  necessarily  be  subjectivism. 
Solipsism  is  necessarily  aristocratic. 

If  individualism  be  opposed  on  principle  to  the  state  and 
to  its  organisation  of  society,  the  question  arises  how  anarchism 
conceives  of  the  organisation  of  society,  whether  it  recognises 
organisation  of  any  kind,  and  if  so  how  that  organisation  is 
to  be  carried  on.  Since  as  an  actual  fact  a  number  of  indi- 
viduals exist  side  by  side  (for  the  absurdity  of  solipsism  is 
self-evident)  the  anarchist  cannot  ignore  the  fact.  Logically, 
the  relationship  of  the  individual  to  the  organised  social  whole 


896  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

cannot  be  assumed  apriori  to  be  one  of  opposition,  of  anarchistic 
opposition,  and  we  find  as  a  historical  fact  that  anarchism 
originated  in  the  later  stages  of  political  and  social  organisation. 
A  non-organised  whole  may  more  readily  be  conceived  as 
an  opposition  to  the  organised  whole.  But  we  must  not 
without  further  ado  identify  the  concept  "  organised  "  with 
the  concept  authoritative.  On  the  other  hand,  a  non-organised 
whole  must  doubtless  be  conceived  as  anarchistic  in  the  sense 
in  which  the  term  is  used  by  most  anarchists. 

As  a  rule  the  advocates  of  anarchism  admit  that  social 
organisation  is  essential  ;  but  they  detest  every  kind  of 
organisation,  and  above  all  every  kind  of  political  organisation, 
that  implies  the  use  of  compulsion  or  of  coercive  methods. 
What  anarchists  regard  as  permissible,  what  they  desire  to 
achieve,  is  a  kind  of  social  spontaneity,  a  spontaneous  organ- 
isation ;  and  in  connection  with  this  idea  we  have  to  enquire 
whether  the  anarchistic  organisation  will  be  derivable  from 
natural  affection  (sympathy,  humanitarianism),  from  egoism, 
or  finally  from  some  other  motive. 

Nor  must  we  be  misled  by  anarchist  terminology.  We 
have  to  ask  whether  the  organisation  regarded  as  admissible 
by  anarchists  be  not  itself  in  ultimate  analysis  something  of 
the  nature  of  a  state.  When,  for  example,  Proudhon  advocates 
a  federative  organisation  of  society,  has  what  he  suggests 
nothing  in  common  with  the  state  ?  If  there  be  but  a  mini- 
mum of  state,  if  there  be  but  a  minimum  of  political  centralisa- 
tion, we  have,  after  all,  a  state.  Autonomy  and  federation 
are  simply  inconceivable  without  some  appropriate  type  of 
centralisation.  Organisation  is  essential ;  and  organisation, 
however  free,  remains  the  organisation  of  individuals,  and 
therefore  produces  a  social  whole. 

Anarchists  do  not  as  a  rule  accept  the  doctrine  of  economic- 
materialism,  and  they  differ  from  the  Marxists  in  that  they 
refuse  to  regard  classes  and  the  class  struggle  as  the  driving 
force  of  social  evolution.  Many  anarchists  think  of  organisation 
as  subject  to  repeated  or  continuous  change.  The  concept 
is  by  no  means  clear,  but  what  they  seem  to  have  in  mind 
is  the  existence  of  mutable  and  transient  associations  of 
individuals  or  groups  ;  they  think  of  free  agreements  entered 
into  ad  hoc  for  the  fulfilment  of  certain  social  functions  and 
for  the  satisfaction  of  certain  social  needs. 

It  is  often  admitted  that  during  the  period  of  transition 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  397 

there  will  have  to  be  some  sort  of  coercive  organisation  con- 
trolled by  anarchistic  parties  and  leagues  such  as  will  be 
determined  by  the  extant  type  of  social  organisation. 

We  must  distinguish  between  the  ultimate  condition  of 
anarchism,  the  ideal  which  the  anarchists  aspire  to  attain, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  means  proposed  by  anarchists  to 
enable  them  to  advance  ■  towards  that  ideal. 

The  ultimate  aim  of  anarchism  is  not  difficult  to  specify. 
It  is  that  there  should  be  secured  an  absolutely  free  union 
of  individuals,  enabling  them  to  satisfy  their  economic, 
biological,  and  mental  needs  in  the  absence  of  any  kind  of 
state  and  of  any  form  of  coercion.  It  is,  however,  less  easy 
to  classify  the  means  recommended  by  anarchists,  for  this  is 
a  matter  upon  which  far  less  unity  prevails.  There  is  much 
less  agreement  among  anarchists  than  there  is  among  socialists 
concerning  the  means  by  which  they  hope  to  attain  the  goal. 

Anarchism  demands  the  disorganisation  of  the  extant 
social  order,  founded  upon  coercion.  Anarchism  is  revolu- 
tionary on  principle,  is  the  negation  on  principle  of  the  old 
order.  The  anarchist  conceives  of  revolution  as  mass  revolution, 
and  he  regards  the  definitive  revolution  as  an  immediate 
practical  possibility. 

By  a  minority  of  anarchists  this  revolution  is  conceived 
as  involving  neither  bloodshed  nor  the  use  of  force.  Certain 
anarchists,  in  fact,  reject  force,  on  principle.  They  desire 
a  ^revolution,  but  it  must  come  without  constraint  ;  dis- 
organisation is  to  be  reorganisation  ;  they  advocate  education, 
reform.  Anarchists  of  this  type,  of  whom  Tolstoi  is  a  typical 
example,  are  termed  "  ethical  anarchists." 

Some,  of  course,  advocate  reform  in  addition  to  revolution. 
Bakunin  aimed  solely  at  disorganisation,  and  never  troubled  his 
head  about  reorganisation  ;  and  even  to-day  most  anarchists 
think  and  feel  as  he  thought  and  felt.  Anarchism  is  therefore 
negative.  Anarchists  of  this  complexion  approve  of  terrorist 
guerrilla  warfare,  of  individual  outrages.  Anarchism  is  still 
looked  upon  as  propaganda  on  behalf  of  outrage,  although 
its  advocates  now  incline  above  all  to  favour  strikes,  and 
notably  the  general  strike,  as  the  instrument  of  anarchist 
revolution.  The  more  consistent  among  the  anarchists  favour 
individual  outrage  in  the  most  rigid  sense  of  the  term,  con- 
tending that  the  deed  must  not  be  planned  by  the  anarchist 
group,  but  must  be  the  purely  spontaneous  act  of  an  individual. 


398  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

We  are  not  informed   to  what  extent  it  is  possible  to  apply 
this  principle  in  all  its  strictness. 

Anarchism  approves  all  means  of  disorganisation  whereby 
revolutionary  enthusiasm  and  the  revolutionary  spirit  can 
be  maintained  and  strengthened.  Anarchism  is  revolutionism 
elevated  into  a  principle. 

Anarchists  reject  national  organisation  as  well  as  the 
state.  They  are  likewise  opposed  to  patriotism,  be  this  con- 
ceived in  the  narrower  political  or  in  the  wider  nationalistic 
sense.     Nationality  is  the  enemy  no  less  than  the  state. 

Similarly,  ecclesiastical  organisation,  the  church,  and  above 
all  the  state  church,  are  repudiated.  So-called  ethical 
anarchism,  however,  frequently  admits  the  permissibility 
of  a  sort  of  church,  but  this  must  be  no  more  than  an  ethical 
union,  not  properly  speaking  religious.  Certain  anarchists, 
again,  are  astatists  merely,  and  have  no  objection  to  other 
associations  than  those  which  partake  of  the  nature  of  the 
state,  or  at  least  do  not  object  to  them  on  principle. 

The  question  of  economic  organisation  remiains  to  be 
considered.  The  newer  anarchists  are  communists  or  collec- 
tivists.  In  this  domain  the  anarchists  have  to  face  the  same 
problems  as  the  socialists — the  division  of  labour,  the  organ- 
isation of  labour,  the  distribution  of  the  product  of  labour, 
and  so  on. 

The  anarchist  demands  the  renovation  of  society ;  he 
demands  a  new  man  and  a  new  humanity  ;  this  involves  the 
problem  of  the  "  new  ethic."  It  was  thus  that  Bakunin 
envisaged  the  task.  Pisarev  and  Nietzsche  might  demand 
a  revaluation  of  the  old  values,  might  look  for  the  coming 
of  the  superman,  or  might  formulate  their  wishes  as  they 
pleased  ;  but  they  could  not  escape  the  inevitable  ethical 
implication. 

For  the  anarchists  the  problem  of  problems  is  this.  Can 
the  existing  unjust  social  order,  established  and  maintained 
by  force,  be  forcibly  swept  away,  so  that  the  new  order,  in 
which  force  will  be  unknown,  may  take  its  place  ?  Will  the 
physical-force  anarchist,  the  forcible  expropriator,  of  to-day, 
be  the  peaceful  brother  of  to-morrow  ?  Anarchism  is  opposed 
on  principle  to  the  use  of  force  ;  is  it  then  permissible  for 
the  anarchist  to  slay  and  to  expropriate  ;  can  Beelzebub  cast 
out  devils  ?  The  philosophic  theorists  of  anarchism  do  their 
utmost  to  estabUsh  the  right  to  kill.     But  they  cannot  get 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  399 

beyond  the  ancient  utterance,  an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth 
for  a  tooth.  Universally  the  anarchist  formula  is.  All  things 
are  lawful. 

But  the  very  anarchists  make  a  distinction  between 
anarchist  outrage  and  ordinary  crime.  The  bomb  outrage 
of  Emile  Henr}/  (1S94)  was  condemned  by  Elys^e  Reclus  as 
an  ordinary  crime,  and  even  Most  considered  the  assassina- 
tion of  the  empress  Elizabeth  useless.  On  the  other  hand 
we  must  not  forget  that  anarchism  is  a  menace  to  the 
very  anarchists  themselves,  that  Kropotkin  and  Reclus  were 
threatened  with  death  by  anarchists. 

Many  anarchists  attack  monogamic  marriage,  demanding 
free  marriage  and  free  love  (a  species  of  communism),  but 
this  doctrine  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  exclusively 
characteristic  of  socio-political  anarchism. 

Impelled  by  Stirner  and  Feuerbach,  the  new  ethic, 
that  which  would  annihilate  the  state  and  political  action, 
deposes  God.  Atheism  is  taken  as  a  matter  of  course.  Ni 
Dieu  ni  maitre  !  To  the  anarchist  this  seems  to  follow 
necessarily  upon  a  recognition  of  the  nature  of  theocracy. 
Anarchistic  atheism  is  not  satisfied  simply  with  amonarchism, 
but  goes  on  to  demand  that  astatism  shall  be  universalised. 
At  most,  if  he  be  a  solipsist,  he  may  proclaim  himself  God 
and  tsar. 

Anarchism  readily  degenerates  into  the  anarchism  of 
anarchism.  The  anarchist  conception  of  liberty  leads  Bakuniri 
to  proclaim  chaos.  The  metaphysic  of  anarchism  becomes 
indeterminist  ;  miracle  plays  its  ancient  role  in  the  anarchist 
chaos  ;  anarchist  philosophers  become  poets  ;  anarchist  poli- 
ticians develop  into  Utopians. 

There  are  striking  relationships  between  anarchism  and 
the  so-called  decadent  movement.  We  see  this  in  Nietzsche 
and  in  such  poets  as  Tailhade.  It  is  natural  that  anarchist 
ideals  and  methods,  crime  above  all,  should  serve  as  a 
stimulant  to  weary  souls. ^ 

Even  a  very  incomplete  knowledge  of  anarchist  literature 
will  teach  us  that  we  must  not  take  decadent  grandiloquence 
at  its  face  value.  There  is  for  example  a  booklet  entitled 
The  Right  to  Sin  ;    its  frontispiece  is  a  titan  bearing  a  rock  ; 

I  In  Brussels  there  was  at  one  time  an  anarchist  Caf6  au  Tombeau,  where 
the  tables  were  shaped  like  coffins  and  the  utensils  Uke  skulls  and  sepulchral 
urns. 


400  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

but  the  contents  of  the  volume  are  utterly  tame,  and  all  that 
is  demanded  is  the  right  to  subvert  the  old  order. 


§173- 

OUR  ideas  will  be  clarified  by  a  closer  examination  of 
the  relationship  between  socialism  and  anarchism. 

We  have  learned  from  the  comparison  between  Bakunin 
and  Marx  (§  94)  that  there  are  numerous  points  of  contact 
between  anarchism  and  socialism,  so  that  we  are  forced  to 
doubt  whether  the  contrast  between^' the  two  doctrines  is  as 
far  reaching  as  Marx  and  the  Marxists  believe.  We  must 
not  be  led  astray  by  the  enmity  between  the  anarchists  and 
the  Marxists,  for  hostiUty  is  often  most  intense  between  the 
parties  and  trends  that  are  most  closely  akin.  We  cannot 
without  further  examination  accept  Marx's  campaign  against 
Bakunin,  Proudhon,  and  Stirner,  or  Liebknecht's  polemic 
against  Most,  as  proof  that  socialism  and  anarchism  are  essential 
opposites.  In  practice,  it  is  only  during  recent  years  that 
the  opposition  has  been  so  strongly  emphasised  by  the  Marxists 
(exclusion  of  anarchists  from  socialist  congresses,  antisocialist 
congresses  held  by  anarchists). 

The  history  of  anarchism  and  socialism  shows  that  these 
two  systerns  were  not  at  first  sharply  distinguished.  The 
two  trends  did  not  diverge  until  after  the  exclusion  of  Bakunin 
from  the  International  in  1872,  when  there  was  a  severance 
of  socialist  Marxism  from  anarchist  Bakuninism.  At  first, 
moreover,  the  quarrel  was  more  personal  than  one  of  principle. 

The  development  of  Marx  and  Stirner  was  contemporary, 
and  we  can  point  to  similar  parallels  at  an  earlier  day,  as 
between  Godwin  and  Babeuf.  Notwithstanding  the  official 
exclusion  of  anarchists  from  the  international  congress  in 
London  (1896),  in  the  various  political  and  other  organisations 
of  France,  Italy,  and  Russia,  the  anarchists  and  the  socialists 
did  not  invariably  become  segregated ;  they  continued  to 
work  together  without  being  fully  aware  of  their  differences. 
Many  anarchist  publicists  have  endeavoured  of  late  to  annul 
the  distinction  between  anarchism  and  socialism.  They  admit 
that  at  the  outset,  and  so  long  as  anarchism  was  advocated 
mainly  bj^  philosophers  and  poets,  anarchism  differed  from 
socialism,  especially  as  concerns  questions  of  organisation  and 
economic  policy ;    but   to-day,   they  contend,   the   difference 


THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  401 

is  disappearing,  for  the  anarchists,  hke  the  sociaHsts,  are 
organising  the  working  masses,  and  are  themselves  members 
of  the  working  class.  Such  are  the  arguments  of  the  Dutchman 
CorneHssen,  the  ItaUan  Fabbri,  and  many  others.  While 
admitting  that  earUer,  and  even  to-day,  anarchism  has  often 
got  upon  the  wrong  track,  the  aim  of  these  writers  is  to  conceive 
of  anarchism  as  a  trend  or  section  of  socialism. 

On  the  socialist  side,  on  the  other  hand,  can  be  heard  the 
voices  of  those  who  endeavour  to  mitigate  the  official  con- 
demnation of 'anarchism.  Current  terminology  indicates  that 
the  relationship  between  anarchism  and  sociahsm  is  intimate. 
For  a  considerable  period  the  terms  "  anarchist,"  "  socialist," 
and  "revolutionary"  were  employed  quite  promiscuously, 
and  even  to-day  there  are  sociologists  and  political  writers 
who  use  the  names  and  concepts  as  interchangeable.  The 
anarchists  speak  of  themselves  as  revolutionary  sociaUsts, 
revolutionary  anarchists,  anarchising  sociahsts,  hbertarian 
sociaHsts,  and  "  Jungen."  Anarchist  periodicals  pass  by 
such  names  as,  "  The  Revolutionist,"  "  Poor  Conrad,"  "  The 
Poor  Devil,"  "  Knowledge,"  and  so  on — all  names  which 
might  just  as  well  be  used  for  socialist  papers. 

In  a  closer  examination  it  would  be  necessary  to  compare 
specific  socialist  systems  with  specific  anarchist  systems,  and 
to  make  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  developmental  history  of 
these.  For  our  present  concern  it  will  suffice  to  compare  the 
extant  definitions  of  anarchism  and  socialism,  meaning  by 
socialism  in  this  connection  the  doctrine  of  the  social 
democracy,  Marxism  in  its  latest  phase. 

Both  sides  are  agreed  in  considering  that  the  main  dis- 
tinction between  sociahsm  and  anarchism  is  that  the  latter 
is  more  individuahst  than  sociahsm,  and  in  fact  the  opposition 
between  extreme  individuahsm  and  socialism  is  especially 
important. 

Originally  the  word  sociahsm  was  minted  quite  distinctively 
in  the  sociological  sense  of  sociahsation,  and  it  still  retains 
that  signification  to-day.  Marxism  is  the  declared  enemy 
of  extreme  individuahsm,  especially  of  individuahsm  in  its 
subjectivist  and  solipsist  form. 

Metaphysically  considered,  sohpsism  bluntly  declares,  "  I 
am  God,  I  am  the  Lord  and  creator  of  the  universe."  Naturally 
this  autoapothesis  is  limited  by  practical  possibihties,  by 
power,    which   is   small.     This   is   why   Nietzsche   craves   for 

27  VOL.   II. 


402  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

power  !  The  solipsist,  if  he  be  in  earnest,  cannot  fail  to  be 
aware  of  his  weakness,  cannot  fail  to  recognise  the  absurdity 
of  his  epistemological  and  metaphysical  isolation. 

For  the  ethical  and  social  appraisement  of  subjectivism, 
of  extremist  subjectivism  or  solipsism,  Stirner  and  his  absolute 
egoism  are  still  adduced  b}^  some  as  a  model  and  by  others 
as  an  awful  example.  Even  if  Stirner's  identification  of  solip- 
sism and  egoism  be  regarded  as  sound,  this  does  not  provide 
an  ethical  criterion  for  the  characterisation  of  subjectivism 
in  all  its  form.  The  solipsist  is  not^  perforce  ^n  egoist  and 
nothing  more.  Schopenhauer,  for  instance,  despite  his 
solipsism  and  nihilism,  declares  that  sympathy  is  the  founda- 
tion of  all  true  morality.  Nietzsche,  in  like  manner,  by  no 
means  rejected  morality  when  he  preached  "  the  revaluation 
of  values  "  and  "  beyond  good  and  evil."  But,  in  his  view, 
sympathy  degraded  the  superman  to  man. 

Moreover,  there  is  egoism  and  egoism ;  there  are  varying 
degrees  and  qualities  of  egoism.  The  egoist  and  egoistic 
subjectivist,  unless  he  be  an  absolute  solipsist  (and  in  truth 
there  can  be  no  such  being),  may,  for  all  his  absolutism,  egoism, 
and  sense  of  the  sovereignty  of  his  own  personality,  nevertheless 
recognise  that  others  have  rights  ;  he  ma}^  become,  let  us 
say,  a  constitutionalist  and  even  a  parliamentarist. 

Subjectivist   German   philosophy   has   in   truth   laid  much 
stress  on  ethics.     All  subjectivists  are  incurable  moralists  and 
preachers  of  morality — witness  Fichte,  Schopenhauer,  Stirner, 
and    Nietzsche.     Here    we    have    a    fingerpost    whose    legend . 
cannot  be  mistaken  ! 

But  if  solipsism  and  solipsistic  individualism  be  absurd, 
the  extreme  objectivism  of  Marx  and  Engels  is  no  less  absurd. 
There  is  simply  no  such  thing  as  a  mass  consciousness  or  a 
class  consciousness,  no  folk-spirit,  no  sensus  communis,  no 
general  will,  if  the  term  consciousness  is  to  be  understood  in 
a  psychological  sense  ;  what  exist  are  class  views,  mass  views, 
or  what  we  may  term  collective  judgments  and  views  generated 
by  the  mutual  interactions  of  individuals. 

I  have  previously  pointed  out  (§  44)  that  Fichte's  "  ego  " 
is  less  alarming  than  it  may  seem.  Nevertheless,  it  was 
against  Fichte's  solipsism  that  Schelling  formulated  his  nature 
pantheism  ;  in  Hegel's  hands  this  pantheism  became  historical, 
and  in  those  of  Marx  it  became  social  as  well.  But  social 
pantheism  is  a  psychological  and  logical  absurdity.     Society 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  408 

is    not    a    unified   organism   and    there    is    no    unified    social 
consciousness. 

Marx  formulated  his  extreme  social  objectivism  in  opposition 
to  the  extreme  subjectivism  and  individualism  of  Stirner  ; 
but  Marx,  no  less  than  Stirner,  preached  egoism  and  annulled 
ethics,  though  rather  from  an  amoral  than  from  an  antimoral 
outlook. 

Psychologically  no  less  than  epistemologically  and  meta- 
physically, ethically  no  less  than  socially,  we  reject  individualist 
solipsism  and  socialist  solomnism  (I  really  must  ask  pardon 
of  the  philologists  !). 

For  anarchism  just  as  for  socialism,  the  fundamental  problem 
is  the  relationship  of  the  individual  to  society.  What  is  the 
individual  ?  What  is  society  ?  I  and  the  world,  I  and  societ}/, 
subject  and  object — this  is  the  problem  which,  since  the  days 
of  Hume  and  Kant,  philosophy  has  been  endeavouring  to 
solve. 

I  and  thou,  we  and  you  ?  We  and  you — some,  many, 
the  majority,  all  ? 

Society  is  a  peculiar  organisation  of  organisations, 
comprising  the  separate  organisations  of  state,  church,  and 
school,  the  organisation  of  the  nation  and  of  the  economic 
unit,  the  lesser  organisations  of  parties  and  classes,  and  so 
on.  The  social  whole  is  made  up  out  of  the  socialisation  of 
organised  individuals,  and  therefore  the  problem  cannot  be 
formulated  "  aut  individual  aut  society,"  but  must  necessarily 
be  formulated,  "  individual  and  society."  There  is  no  indi- 
vidual without  society  and  no  society  without  the  individual. 
Extreme  individualism,  individualism  in  the  solipsist  sense, 
is  absurd  ;  but  no  less  absurd  is  extreme  socialism,  the  socialism 
which  in  its  pronounced  objectivism  solomnistically  negates 
the  individual.  The  individual  must  not  and  cannot  be 
sacrificed  to  society,  and  society  must  not  and  cannot  be 
sacrificed  to  the  individual.  It  is  not  individualism  and 
socialism  that  are  mutually  exclusive,  but  solipsism  and 
solomnism,  or,  in  the  concrete,  Stirner  and  Marx,  for  both 
are  wrong.  ^ 

I  need  not  now  fear  that  I  am  using  empty  words  when 
I  declare  that  individualism,  as  an  endeavour  to  secure  the 
utmost  possible  development  and  perfectionment  of  one's 
own  personality  within  society,  is  justifiable,  and  must  be 
made    possible  .and  regarded   as  desirable    in    every  poHtical 


404  THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

1   system,  the  socialist  system  not  excepted.     In  this  sense  we 
I   accept  individuahsm  and  its  aspiration  for  Hberty. 

With  sovereign  pride  and  contempt  many  individuahsts 
enunciate  the  "  odi  profanum."  The  pubhcity,  the  community, 
which  socialism  demands,  do  not  touch  the  innermost  recesses, 
the  holy  of  holies,  of  the  individual  soul ;  all  that  democracy 
requires  is.  that  everyone  should  work  in,  with,  and  for  the 
community  ;  it  puts  no  hindrance  in  the  way  of  this  work 
being  purely  individual.  Democracy  does  not  hamper  men 
of  genius,  does  not  restrict  the  activities  of  poets,  writers, 
and  artists. 

Society  and  socialisation  endure  in  space  and  time,  so  that 
it  is"  impossible  for  the  individual  to  enter  into  a  brief  and 
experimental  union  with  society.  Nolens  volens  the  individual 
is  permanently  associated  with  the  social  whole,  and  an  ephem- 
eral treaty  such  as  some  individualists  desire  is  impossible 
in  practice.  The  solitude,  the  isolation  of  the  intellectual 
forces,  essential  to  every  individual,  is  something  utterly 
different  from  the  forcible  isolation  of  the  solipsist,  which 
necessarily  culminates  in  metaphysical  disaster. 

Whatever   definition   socialism   may   offer   of   the   concept 

of  "  the  mass,"  the  point  of  practical  importance  to  socialism 

is  its  definition  of  the  concept  "  organisation." 

,         Socialistic   organisation  is   usually   conceived   as   compara- 

■  tively    centralised.     Doubtless    equality    and    fraternity    are 

demanded  as  well  as  liberty ;  but  socialists  insist  upon  the  need 

for   discipline,    and   centralisation  is   hardly   possible   without 

I  a  certain  amount  of  coercion,  or  in  the  absence  of  a  unified 

I  authority.     The    anarchists,    on   the    other   hand,    lay   special 

stress  upon  liberty,  and  upon  various  forms  of  federation. 

Sociahsm,    and    above    all    Marxism,    wishes    to    train    its 
/I adherents    to    order,    order    and    liberty    being    conceived    as 
'  existing  simultaneously  ;    the  anarchists,  on  the  other  hand, 
ask  for  liberty  first,  contending  that  order  will  be  the  spon- 
taneous outcome  of  liberty, 

Marxist  socialism  is  by  hypothesis  working-class  socialism, 
is  proletarian.  Anarchism  has  been  proletarian  only  as  voiced 
by  certain  representatives  of  the  doctrine,  and  not  until  quite 
recently  has  anarchism  proclaimed  itself  proletarian.  Now, 
indeed,  as  against  Marxism  and  social  democracy,  it  claims  to  be 
the  genuinely  democratic  representative  of  the  proletariat,  whereas 
the  Marxists  stigmatise  anarchism  as  the  doctrine  of  the  mob. 


It 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  405 

Marxism  is  more  distinctively  an  economic  theory  than 
is  anarchism.  Not  merely  do  we  find  that  the  socialists  as 
students  pay  far  more  attention  to  economics  than  do  the 
anarchists,  but  we  note  further  that  in  practical  work  in  the 
social  and  economic  fields  the  Marxists  lead  the  way.  Bakunin 
and  Kropotkin  are  both  weak  as  political  economists.  Kro- 
potkin,  for  example,  fails  to  note  that  the  free  groups  of 
workers  which  he  counterposes  to  the  socialistic  centralisation 
of  larger  social  bodies  must  inevitably  lead  to  a  sort  of  middle- 
class  economy. 

Marxism  is  declared  communism.  Bakunin,  like  Proudhon, 
was  opposed  to  communism,  and  aspired  to  a  federative  collec-  j 
tivism.  To-day  many  anarchists  are  communists  and  detest 
collectivism,  which  many  socialists,  on  the  other  hand  (the 
revisionists) ,  demand  as  a  mitigation  of  the  original  communism. 
In  any  case,  there  are  now  two  notable  trends  in  anarchism, 
respectively  individualist  and  communist. 

Socialism,    too,    is    astatism.     According    to    Engels-Marx,  I 
the"  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  is  a  primary  aim,  but  only 
in  order  to  secure  the  abolition  of  the  state.     Marxism,  however, 
has  grown  more  and  more  political,  and  to-day  parliamentarism 
is  the  most  powerful  weapon  in  its  armoury. 

Socialism,  like  anarchism,  is  opposed  to  nationalism,  though 
quite  recently  it  has  here  and  there  assumed  nationalist  forms. 

Socialism  is  likewise  revolutionary,  preaching  the  class 
struggle  and  a  definitive  social  revolution,  using  the  strike  as 
a  revolutionary  instrument,  and  cultivating  the  revolutionary 
mood.  Anarchism,  however,  is  more  revolutionary  than 
socialism,  for  anarchism  endorses  the  revolution  in  all  its  forms, 
individual  terrorism  not  excepted,  whereas  socialism  rejects 
individual  terrorism  on  principle. 

The  Marxists  contend  that  anarchism  is  Utopian,  in  so  far 
as  the  anarchists  believe  the  definitive  social  revolution  to 
be  already  a  practical  possibility  ;  and  they  consider  that 
many  of  the  means  recommended  by  anarchists  are  less  effec- 
tive than  these  contend.  Originally,  and  for  a  considerable 
time,  Marx  and  Engels  were  likewise  Utopians,  but  their  pupils 
tend  more  and  more  to  the  adoption  of  evolutionist  tactics, 
seeing  that  historical  development  has  failed  to  verify  Marx's 
teaching  of  the  intolerable  contrast  between  the  capitalists 
(the  bourgeoisie)  and  the  proletariat — has  failed  to  verify  the 
theories  of  the  collapse  of  capitaHsm,   of  increasing  misery, 


100  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  of  crises.  The  anarchists,  on  the  other  hand,  defend 
themselves  by  appeaUng  to  the  (unanarchistic  !)  authority 
of  Marx. 

As  a  philosophic  system,  Marxism,  with  its  materialism, 
positivism,  and  evolutionism,  can  hardly  be  distinguished  in 
point  of  principle  from  anarchism  ;  but  Marxism  contains  a 
more  notable  element  of  historism.  Anarchism  is  philosophical 
rather  than  historical,  and  the  anarchist  programs  pay  less 
attention  to  positive  science. 

Marxism  is  peculiarly  characterised  by  its  amoralism, 
which  is  dependent  upon  solomnism.     Anarchism  is  moralistic. 

Very  few  anarchists  accept  historical  materialism  in  its 
strict  Marxist  form.  Moreover,  the  anarchist  philosoph}^  of 
history  differs  from  the  Marxist,  and  the  ultimate  aim  is  differ- 
ently conceived.  The  class  struggle  and  its  final  abolition 
are  for  the  anarchists  mere  means  to  an  end,  an  end  which 
lies  quite  beyond  any  class  aims,  an  end  which  com.prises  the 
complete  economic  and  mental  enfranchisement  of  the ' 
individuality.  The  goal  is,  a  condition  where  authority  shall 
be  unknown. 

In  respect  of  religion  and  metaphysics,  both  trends  alike 
are  atheistic  and  materialistic.  Socialism  is  definitely  deter- 
minist,  anarchism  undeterminist  rather.  For  both  systems  the 
problem  of  necessity  and  free  will  is  one  of  great  importance. 

§  174- 

IF  we  are  to  define  the  relationship  of  Marx  himself  to 
anarchism,  it  is  necessary  to  insist  once  again  that  Marx 
developed.  The  thought  of  Marx  and  Engels  in  the  first  phase 
differed  from  that  in  the  second  phase,  and  this  applies 
especially  to  their  outlook  on  revolutionism. 

To  put  the  matter  briefl3^  the  Marx  of  the  Communist 
Manifesto  and  of  the  period  that  elapsed  until  the  publication 
of  the  first  volume  of  Capital,  was  more  anarchistic  than  the 
later  Marx.  In  the  earlier  phase,  Marx  was  strongly  revolu- 
tionary, and  preached  a  more  decisive  astatism  ;  his  earlier 
writings  contain  stronger  expressions  against  militarism, 
parliamentarism,  and  patriotism.  It  is  doubtless  open  to 
dispute  whether  revolutionism  is  in  fact  stronger  because  it 
finds  stronger  and  more  emotional  expression.  But  this  much 
is  certain,  that  in  1848  and  for  a  great  many  years  afterwards. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  407 

Marx  felt  as  a  forty-eighter,  and  that  he  gave  free  expression 
to  these  feehngs.  Marx  and  Engels  continued  for  a  very  long 
time  to  regard  the  definitive  social  revolution  as  an  immediate 
possibilit}' ;  and  in  truth  at  the  bottom  of  their  hearts  they 
remained  in  this  respect  Utopians  to  the  last.  In  this  sense, 
let  me  repeat,  Marx  was  more  anarchist  early  than  late.  It 
is  noteworthy  that  as  late  as  1872,  when  he  succeeded  in 
bringing  about  Bakunin's  exclusion  from  the  International, 
Marx  did  not  shrink  from  the  designation  anarchist.^ 

To  this  extent,  therefore,  the  French  syndicalists  who  are 
so  fond  of  appealing  to  Marx  have  right  on  their  side.  Indeed 
not  only  the  syndicalists,  but  many  declared  anarchists  as 
well,  are  convinced  Marxists. 

In  any  case,  the  Marxists  cannot  fight  against  anarchist 
revolutionism  on  principle  ;  the  only  questions  at  issue  between 
the  socialists  and  the  anarchists  are  those  concerning  tactics, 
concerning  the  value  of  particular  methods  in  a  particular 
place  and  at  a  particular  tim.e.  Such,  as  we  have  seen,  were 
the  differences  dividing  socialists  and  anarchists  during  the 
Russian  revolution. 

The  revisionists,  too,  approximate  in  certain  respects  to 
anarchism,  for  the}'  abandon  Marxist  solomnism,  emphasise 
the  importance  of  individuahsm  and  subjectivism  (proclaiming 
the  return  to  Kant),  and  insist  upon  the  vahdity  of  ethics  as 
against  historism  in  its  extreme  form.  Certain  revisionists, 
therefore,  have  at  times  advocated  an  understanding  with 
the  anarchists. 

But  by  their  insistence  upon  politism  and  by  their  watering 
down  of  revolutionism  into  reformism,  the  revisionists  come 
into  conflict  with  anarchism — though  even  here  the  conflict 
is  only  with  those  anarchists  who  preach  a  forcible  revolution. 
Tolstoi,  Tucker,  Friedeberg,  and  not  a  few  other  anarchists, 
are  opposed  to  the  attempt  to  bring  about  revolution  by  force, 

'  "  Tous  les  socialistes  entendent  par  anarchic  ccci:  le  but  du  mouvement 
proletaire,  I'abolition  des  classes,  une  fois  atteint,  le  pouvoir  de  I'etat,  qui 
sert  k  maintenir  la  grande  majority  productrice  sous  le  joug  d'une  minorite 
exploitante  peu  nombreuse,  disparait  et  les  fonctions  gouvernementales  se 
transforment  en  de  simples  fonctions  administratives." — Marx,  Les  pr6tendues 
scissions  de  I'lnternarionale,  1872. 


408  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 


§17: 


1MAY  sum  up  my  view  of  the  relationship  between 
anarchism  and  sociahsm  by  saying  that  communist 
anarchism  is  a  system  of  sociahsm,  whereas  individuahsf 
anarchism,  especially  in  its  extreme  form,  is  unsocialistic. 
The  individualist  anarchists  are  at  one  with  the  Marxists  in 
holding  that  anarchism  (individualist  anarchism)  and  com- 
munism are  essential  contradictories.  Such  is  the  view  taken, 
for  example,  by  Tucker  and  by  Plehanov,  Both  these  writers 
contend  that  Kropotkin  is  not  an  anarchist,  for,  they  say, 
he  desires  the  socialisation  of  the  means  of  production.  This 
demand,  contends  Plehanov,  cannot  be  reahsed  without  some 
sort  of  legislative  authority.^ 

The  newer  and  more  practical  anarchism  has  obviously 
originated  from  socialism,  and  in  particular  from  Marxism. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  many  anarchists  have  been  Marxists 
and  members  of  the  social  democracy  (Sorel  and  other  syndi- 
calists). Consequently  socialism  appears  to  them  to  be  a 
transitional  stage  towards  anarchism,  or  they  consider  anarchism 
to  be  one  of  the  socialist  systems,  a  variety  of  socialism,  and 
so  on. 

We  can  in  fact  note  the  existence  of  numerous  transitions 
between  practical  anarchism  and  socialism,  and  conversely  ; 
and  there  are  also  combinations  and  syntheses  of  both  systems. 

Frequentl}/  anarchism  is  distinguished  from  socialism  as 
more  radical  and  revolutionary.  But  we  must  not  allow 
ourselves  to  be  deceived  by  a  name.  For  example,  anarchists 
protest  against  the  way  in  which  socialists  overestimate  the 
importance  of  parliamentarism,  but  we  find  that  many  within 
the  socialist  camp  likewise  detest  this  overvaluation.  Where 
socialism  undergoes  decay  or  disorganisation,  a  more  radical 
and  revolutionary  type  of  socialism  becomes  apparent  ;  but 
a  similar  development  may  be  manifest  in  the  early  days  of 
a  socialist  movement,  before  it  has  gained  strength.  Con- 
versely, where  socialism  assumes  a  comparatively  revolutionary 
form,  the  anarchist  movement  is  apt  to  be  weak. 

The  differences  that  have  been  enumerated  are  not  in  truth 

I  The  relationship  between  anarchism  and  sociahsm,  as  he  sees  it,  is  indicated 
by  the  Russian  Marxist  Tugan-Baranovskii  in  his  classification  of  socialist 
systems,  which  is  as  follows  :  (i)  centralist  socialism  ;  (2)  federalist  socialism  ; 
(3)  corporative  socialism  ;   (4)  anarchism, 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  409 

differences  of  principle.  Moreover,  there  are  different  types 
and  degrees  of  radicalism  and  of  revolutionism.  Often  enough 
radicalism  is  blind,  and  we  cannot  consider  every  revolution 
a  step  towards  the  goal.  Marxist  socialism  has  an  advantage 
over  anarchist  radicalism  in  that  the  former  has  devoted  more 
scientific  attention  to  the  philosophy  of  history  and  to  economics, 
and  takes  the  revolution  more  in  earnest.  But  this  must  not 
be  held  to  imply  that  venturesome  and  blind  radicalism  may 
not  often  prove  more  successful  in  choosing  the  right  moment 
for  action.  When  the  need  for  action  comes,  daring  and  caution 
will  always  choose  separate  paths. 

Finally,  it  is  necessary  to  insist  once  more  upon  the  fact 
that  anarchism  has  developed  as  well  as  socialism,  and  that 
anarchism  has  to-day  become  more  socialistic  and  commu- 
nistic than  of  old.  But  the  anarchist  systems,  when  we 
examine  their  scientific  content  and  their  foundation,  are  seen 
to  be  more  inchoate  and  more  Utopian  than  socialism. 

In  the  camp  of  anarchism,  considered  theoretically, 
ethically,  and  politically,  we  find  far  too  manj^  advocates  of 
negation  and  chaos.  I  am  thinking  here  especially  of 
Bakuninism,  of  the  anarchism  of  anarchism. 

In  the  literary  and  artistic  fields,  sociaHsm,  Marxist  socialism 
at  any  rate,  is  on  principle  opposed  to  decadence. 

§176. 

IT  is  generally  recognised  that  anarchisrri  prevails  more 
widely  in  Latin  than  in  Teuton  lands.  Spain,  Italy, 
and  France  are  anarchist  countries,  whereas  in  Germany, 
England,  and  the  United  States  anarchism  of  native  origin 
is  rarer  and  less  revolutionary.  England,  the  United  States, 
and  to  some  extent  Switzerland,  are  bold  enough  to  give  har- 
bourage to  foreign  anarchists.  We  shall  enquire  later  whether 
there  are  material  causes  for  these  territorial  differences. 

Russia,  too,  is  widely  regarded  as  pecuUarly  anarchist. 

Many  authors,  Russians  among  them,  beUeve  that  they 
can  explain  Russian  anarchism  by  saying  that  the  Slavs  in 
general  and  the  Russians  in  particular  are  quahfied  by  nature 
to  play  an  anarchist  part.  By  anarchism  these  authors  mean 
an  inborn  incapacity  for  the  activities  of  state  life.  Some 
Russians,  too,  contend  that  Russians  have  no  faculty  for 
understanding   legal  ideas!    Certain   authors,    however,  when 


410  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

they  talk  of  anarchism  in  this  connection,  are  thinking  rather 
of  an  inborn  tendency  towards  democracy  and  hberty. 

In  support  of  such  a  view,  people  point  to  Bakunin  as  the 
founder  of  the  new  anarchism,  and  they  point  also  to 
Tolstoi, 

Let  us  first  enquire  into  the  facts.  I  touched  upon  the 
matter  in  my  account  of  Old  Russia  (§  i,  v).  If  we  examine 
the  more  recent  socio-political  trends,  we  observe  that  the 
Slavophils  incline  to  minimise  the  importance  of  the  state, 
but  the  same  thing  is  done  in  the  west  by  all  those  who 
desire  to  fortify  the  church  as  against  the  state.  Belinskii 
and  Herzen  both  had  revolutionary  inclinations.  Herzen  was 
for  a  time  a  declared  anarchist,  though  his  views  moderated 
later.  Bakunin  was  a  most  outspoken  anarchist,  and  even 
more  anarchist  was  his  adept  Necaev  ;  moreover  Bakunin's 
anarchism  was  strongly  revolutionary.  Cernysevskii  and  the 
nihilists  were  revolutionists,  and  the  same  may  be  said  yet 
more  definitely  of  the  declared  terrorists,  but  these  last  must 
not  be  described  as  anarchists  merely  because  they  espoused 
terrorism  as  a  practical  method. 

Mihailovskii  in  earlier  years  was  in  theoretical  matters 
an  adherent  of  Proudhon,  and  was  therefore  an  anarchist. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  was  little  of  the  anarchist  in  Lavrov. 

The  Marxists  and  the  social  revolutionaries  are  revolutionists 
and  terrorists.  Within  these  two  camps,  anarchism  undergoes 
subdivision  into  distinct  trends.  But  only  since  1901  has 
anarchism  exhibited  any  notable  development  in  Russia. 
Other  recent  Russian  writers  besides  Kropotkin  have  been 
theorists  of  anarchism. 

Finally  we  have  to  remember  the  existence  of  Tolstoi  and 
his  ethical  anarchism. 

To  sum  up,  we  nia^'  say  that  Russia  does  not  appear  to 
be  more  anarchistic  than  France  or  Ital}'.  It  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  Bakunin  and  Kropotkin  learned  their  doctrines 
from  Proudhon  and  the  other  western  anarchists  ;  that  Stirner, 
Nietzsche,  and  Ibsen  are  Teutons  ;  that  the  English  and  the 
Americans  have  respectivelj^  Godwin  and  Tucker.  New  England 
and  new  America  are  just  as  much  products  of  revolution  as 
is  new  France. 

As  regards  Russia,  we  must  not  forget  the  liberals  and  the 
westernisers,  who  endorsed  the  existence  of  the  state  (of.  the 
opinion^  recorded  in  §  72,  of  the  jurist  and  historian  Gradovskii). 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  411 

Russian  anarchism,  taking  the  form  of  astatism  and  apoh- 
tism,  is  the  revolutionary  struggle  against  absolutism. 

Tsarist  absolutism  works  injury  to  the  state.  The  political 
refugee  is  in  practice  forced  to  adopt  an  astatist  outlook,  for 
the  foreign  state  in  which  he  dwells,  even  though  it  grants 
him  asylum,  remains  foreign,  and  is  not  felt  by  him  to  be  his 
state  and  recognised  as  such.  Absolutism  enforces  apolitism 
upon  the  subject  who  is  granted  no  rights,  upon  the  man  for 
whom  public  activity  and  initiative  are  rendered  impossible. 
Moreover,  in  rural  districts  and  in  small  provincial  towns  the 
Russian  state  is  almost  out  of  sight.  Political  life  is  con- 
centrated in  large  towns  and  in  western  Russia.  In  eastern 
Russia,  and  still  more  in  Asiatic  Russia,  the  state  seems  to 
be  non-existent,  and  in  practice  an  official  anarchism  prevails, 
which  is  explicable  by  the  deficiency  in  state  servants  and 
soldiers.  The  main  forces  of  the  state  are  concentrated  in 
western  Russia.  Again,  the  Russian  state  differs  from  the 
western  state  because  the  former  in  many  places  does  not 
possess  the  requisite  number  of  officials. 

Finally,  the  revolutionary  lives  in  his  own  narrow  circle, 
which  becomes  for  him  a  model  of  the  social  institutions  of 
the  future.  Owing  to  the  inadequacy  of  communications 
in  Russia,  there  is  forced  upon  the  individual  autonomous 
organisations  a  kind  of  free  federation  by  tacit  consent. 

These  concrete  conditions  largely  explain  why,  as  has  been 
shown,  the  Russian  lamb  has  grown  to  become  a  tiger. 

The  inadequacy  of  the  Russian  state  church  has  given 
rise  to  the  so-called  ethical  anarchism,  which  is  in  fact 
anti-ecclesiastical  anarchism.  Here,  of  course,  we  think  of 
Tolstoi. 

But  the  opponents  of  religion  in  general,  the  atheists,  those 
who  contrast  most  strongly  with  the  ethical  anarchists,  must 
likewise  be  classed  as  anarchists  in  so  far  as  for  them  atheism 
is  the  metaphysical  basis  of  anarchism. 

Anarchism  has  recently  come  into  contact  v\dth  certain 
religious  and  above  all  mystical  currents,  so  that  there  now 
exists  a  "  mystical  anarchism."  ^ 

I  Some  reference  must  be  made  to  attempts  at  the  practical  realisation 
of  religious  and  ethical  anarchism.  There  have  been  many  colonies  established 
by  the  adherents  of  Tolstoi,  but  they  have  been  shortlived.  An  interesting 
attempt  of  the  kind  was  one  initiated  in  1886  by  certain  intellectuals,  who 
founded  the  colony  of  Krinica  on  the  Black  Sea.  The  founders  wished  to  allow 
individuality   to  develope  without  any  coercion   either  reUgious  or  political, 


412  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  also  in  freedom  from  the  pressure  of  any  philosophic  system.  An  account 
of  this  experiment  has  recently  been  pubhshed  by  one  of  the  participators, 
and  the  book  has  already  run  into  a  second  edition  (G.  Vasilevskii,  The  Colony 
of  Intellectuals  at  Krinica,  191 2).  The  book  reveals  that  the  attempt  has 
been  a  fiasco.  The  principle  of  unrestricted  individuality  had  to  yield  before 
the  corporative  and  communal  spirit,  and  the  colony  is  at  the  point  of  disso- 
lution. Still,  it  persisted  for  two  decades.  (Krinica  was  the  continuation 
of  an  earlier  expenment  in  the  administrative  district  of  Ufa.)  No  very  clear 
account  ot  the  philooophical  views  of  the  colonists  seems  possible.  We  trace 
the  influence  of  Rousseau,  of  Tolstoi,  and  of  primitive  Christianity. 


CHAPTER   TWENTY 

LIBERALISM 


1 


1^77- 

IBERALISM  as  a  historical  and  philosophical  trend  and 
v  political  system  arose  in  opposition  to  theocracy.  Charac- 
teristically, the  name  "  liberal  "  originated  in  the  land  of  the 
inquisition. 

As  an  opposition  to  theocracy,  liberalism  strives  to  secure 
the  secularisation  of  churches  and  of  all  institutions.  To  this 
extent  it  has  in  practice  always  supported  an  extension  of 
the  powers  of  the  state,  despite  its  opposition  to  state  abso- 
lutism. LiberaHsm  was  a  struggle  against  two  evils.  Regard- 
ing the  state  and  its  omnipotence  as  the  lesser  evil  of  the  two, 
liberahsm  upheld  the  state.  This  peculiar  duplex  attitude 
has  often  been  momentous  for  the  liberals. 

Liberalism  manifested  itself  as  rationahsm  ;  deism,  the 
philosophy  of  enlightenment,  freethinking,  are  of  the  essence 
of  liberalism.  Liberalism  was  an  attempt,  v/ith  the  aid  of 
authorship  and  journalism,  to  organise  the  so-called  sound 
human  reason  as  a  public  authority.  Locke  may  be  regarded 
as  the  first  interpreter  and  systematiser  of  liberalism  ;  during 
the  eighteenth  century,  Voltaire  and  the  encyclopaedists  were 
the  representatives  of  liberalism  in  the  philosophic  field. 

To  a  considerable  extent,  even  the  churches  adopted 
liberalism.  With  Protestantism,  came  the  epoch  of  rationalist 
theology  ;  upon  the  CathoUc  side,  Febronianism  originated, 
galUcanism  was  strengthened,  and  above  all  the  dissolution 
of  the  Jesuit  order  by  the  pope  in  the  year  1773  was  of  the 
greatest  symptomatic  significance.  '  " 

Ethically,  eighteenth  century  liberalism  was  guided  by 
the  humanitarian  ideal.  In  this  connection  we  think  of 
Rousseau  and  Voltaire,  of  Lessing  and  Herder,  of  most  of 
the  noted  belletristic  writers   of   the  day,  and  of  the  moral 

413 


414  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

philosophers  (Hume,  Adam  Smith,  etc.).  LiberaHsm,  following 
Schiller,  conceived  such  men  as  in  Rousseau's  view  Christ 
had  been,  to  be  the  embodiments  of  the  humanitarian  ideal. 
That  ideal  was  conceived,  extensively,  as  an  endeavour  to 
secure  the  ethico-political  unification  of  all  mankind. 

Thus  interpreted,  liberalism  aimed  at  freedom  in  all 
domains.  Hence  its  various  watchwords  ;  freedom  of  belief, 
conscience,  and  thought  ;  free  speech  ;  freedom  of  teaching, 
science,  and  education  ;  free  schgols  and  a  free  press  ;  free 
trade  and  free  industr}'  ;  free  contract  between  employer 
and  employed  ;  and  so  on.  Freedom  was  regarded  as  the 
greatest  possible  expansion  of  individuality  in  the  sense  of 
ethical  personality.  The  philosophic  expression  of  liberal 
individualism  was  found  in  Kant's  insistence  upon  equal 
respect  for  one's  own  individuality  and  for  that  of  others, 
and  in  his  maxim  that  we  must  never  treat  another  human 
being  as  a  mere  means  to  our  own  ends. 

Opposing  the  church  and  theolog}/,  liberalism,  as  voiced 
by  most  of  its  representatives,  tended  to  be  utilitarian  and 
hedonist,  adverse  to  the  ascetic  ideal. 

In  the  domain  of  law,  liberalism  adopted  and  developed 
the  old  doctrine  of  natural  law  in  the  spirit  of  enlightenment 
and  of  humanitarianism. 
;  The  political  outcome  of  this  liberalism  was  the  recognition 
of  the  rights  of  man  and  of  popular  sovereignty  as  fundamentals 
of  the  power  of  the  state  ;  constitutionalism  and  parliamen- 
tarism (majority  rule)  were  the  further  necessarj^  consequence 
of  the  establishment  of  the  power  of  the  people  through  the 
system  of  universal  suffrage.  The  power  of  the  aristocracy 
and  of  the  clergy  was  restricted  simultaneously  with  that  of 
absolutism.  Characteristic  is  the  fact  that  the  modern  written 
democratic  constitution  originated  in  imitation  of  the  agree- 
ment concerning  religious  liberty  (in  the  American  colonies). 

Absolutism  was  further  weakened  by  the  doctrine  of  the 
partition  of  forces.  Some  even  of  the  monarchs  cherished 
liberal  ideas  (the  so-called  enlightened  despotism  of  Joseph  11, 
Frederick  the  Great,  and  Catherine  II).  In  France,  above 
all,  the  monarchy  had  to  recognise  constitutionalism  ;  and 
after  the  revolution,  in  absolutist  Prussia,  too.  Stein  and 
Hardenberg  instituted  liberal  reforms. 

Liberahsm  logicall}''  presses  on  towards  democracy.  Abbe 
Sieyes  assigned  a  great  future  to  the  third  estate,  to  the  bour- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  415 

geoisie.     The  bourgeoisie  had  effected  the  revolution  in  order 
to    rebuild    public    institutions    from    the    foundation.      They 
Catholic    religion    was    abolished   by    the    municipalities    (not ) 
by    parliament)  ;     the    clergy    were    secularised  ;     the    nobles'^ 
were    deprived    of    their    privileges  ; '  state    and    church    were"^ 
democratised  ;  the  republic  was  introduced. 

The  great  revolution  was  continued  in  the  risings  of  1830 
and  1848. 

Liberty,  equality,  fraternity,  were  the  watchwords  of  the 
democratic  revolution. 

The  historic  sense  awakened  during  the  eighteenth  centurj'. 
The  philosophy  of  history  vv^as  the  manifestation  of  the  newer 
evolutionar}'  outlook  upon  history  and  societ}'.  The  idea 
of  progress  was  enthusiastically  adopted,  and  in  the  name 
of  progress  a  demand  was  pressed  for  a  revolutionary  change 
in  the  old  order.  During  the  last  months  of  his  life,  Condorcet 
composed  his  enthusiastic  Esquissc  d'un  tableau  historique 
des  pr ogres  de  V esprit  humain.  The  socialists  continued  these 
revolutionary  speculations. 

The  state  was  now  regarded  as  the  protector  of  property, 
and  free  competition  was  looked  upon  as  the  best  motive 
force  of  economic  life.  Adam  Smith  supplemented  the  hum.ani- 
tarian  ideal  by  economics,  which  in  his  hands  become  a  doctrine 
of  consistent  egoism  and  hedonism. 

Laissez-faire  became  the  leading  socio-political  principle, 
being  interpreted  by  the  radical  Bentham  in  the  English  phrase, 
Be  quiet.  Bentham  and  his  friend  John  Stuart  Mill  had 
indeed  to  admit  that  due  regard  must  be  paid  to  the  needs 
of  the  fourth  estate  ;  but  these  writers  could  not  conceive 
that  the  workers  were  able  and  entitled  to  lead  themselves  ; 
bourgeois  employers  were  the  natural  leaders  of  the  working 
class  ! 

The  liberal  bourgeoisie  effected  important  social  reforms. 
Serfdom  was  abolished,  the  peasant  was  made  independent, 
industry  was  freed  from  the  oppression  of  the  guilds,  women 
and  children  were  partially  liberated  from,  the  harsh  domi-  • 
nance  of  the  patriarchal  system.  In  this  respect,  too, 
liberalism  was  a  precursor  of  socialism. 

It  was,  however,  in  the  social  domain  that  the  political 
limitations  of  practical  liberalism  were  made  manifest.  In 
the  days  of  the  great  revolution,  the  first  advocates  of  economic 
equality  and  democracy,  the  first  experimenters  in  Communism, 


416  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

were  put  to  death  b}-  the  democratising  bourgeoisie.  Although 
Rousseau,  Mesher,  Morelly,  Mably,  and  other  writers,  had 
condemned  private  property  and  inequahty  of  propert3^  the 
repubhc  declared  property  sacrosanct,  just  as  absolutism  had 
declared  the  monarchy  sacrosanct.  Attacks  on  the  principle 
of  private  property  became  a  capital  offence ! 

§  178. 

THE  revolution  was  superseded  by  the  restoration,  and  the 
so-called  romanticism  which  followed  the  revolutioij  was 
largely  characterised  by  a  strengthening  of  religious  sentiment 
and  above  all  by  recatholicisation.  Napoleon  entered  into 
the  concordat  with  Pius  VII  ;  the  inquisition  was  set  up  anew 
in  Spain  ;  the  Jesuit  order  was  reinstated ;  Alexander  I, 
Francis  I,  and  Frederick  William  III  entered  into  the  holy 
alliance  to  assist  divine  providence  (§  15)  ;  in  England,  Catholic 
emancipation  vras  carried  through. 

Liberalism  underwent  transformation.  In  the  philosophic 
field  liberalism  became  a  supporter  of  positivism,  that  peculiar 
mixtum  compositum  of  progress  and  reaction.  The  liberals 
associated  the  doctrine  of  evolution  with  positivism. 

Positivism,  with  its  historism  and  relativism,  provided 
liberalism  with  weapons  against  radical  assaults,  whether 
from  the  right  or  from  the  left.  The  idea  of  progress  was 
toned  down,  and  the  tolerance  advocated  by  Locke  was  now 
extended  towards  the  ideas  and  trends  against  which  liberalism 
had  previously  fought. 

Thus  to  an  increasing  extent  liberalism  became  a  system 
of  half-measures. 

The  antirevolutionary  school  of  jurists  opposed  historical 
law  to  natural  law,  and  countered  revolution  with  the  doctrine 
of  legitimism.  After  the  revolution,  the  appeal  for  liberty- 
was  replaced  by  the  demand  for  order  ;  liberty,  it  was  said, 
must  arise  out  of  order.  The  demand  for  equality  was  quietly 
dropped,  or  in  some  cases  scientific  reasons  for  the  change 
of  sentiments  were  adduced,  reasons  based  upon  Darwinian 
considerations. 

Before  1848,  to  reactionaries  of  the  type  of  Metternich 
and  Tsar  Nicholas  the  term  liberalism  was  synonymous  with 
the  term  revolution. 

The  church,  which  had  been  fought  and  in  places  even 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  417 

abolished,  was  now  upheld,  and  under  the  pretext  of  toleration 
its  doctrines  were  prized  as  the  chief  means  of  defence  against 
radical  democracy,  the  obscure  and  ambiguous  proposition 
that  religion  is  a  private  matter  being  gladly  represented  as 
liberal.  The  liberalism  of  earlier,  days  aspired  after  a  natural 
religion,  but  modern  liberalism  no  longer  concerns  itself  with 
rehgion  as  a  matter  of  principle,  being  satisfied  with  the 
political  aim  of  separating  state  and  church,  or  with  Cavour's 
formula  of  a  free  church  in  a  free  state.  The  philosophic 
systems,  and  materialism  above  all  (which  after  1848  developed 
strongly  in  opposition  to  the  reaction  of  the  counter-revolu- 
tion), were  adopted  only  by  the  more  radical  wing  of  the 
liberals.  Materialism  was  the  official  philosophy  of  the  socialist 
movement,  which  was  now  making  headwaj^ 

Characteristic  of  the  trend  of  liberalism  towards  the  right 
is  the  attitude  of  the  Jews  vis-a-vis  the  official  church.  Since 
the  Jews  are  an  oppressed  race  it  is  natural  that  they  should 
incline  towards  liberalism,  and  many  Jews  have  therefore 
become  socialists  ;  but  the  Jews  of  the  capitahstic  stratum 
pay  homage  not  only  to  the  state  but  to  the  official  church 
as  well. 

■  Nevertheless  the  process  of  secularisation  proved  irre- 
sistible. The  republic  was  reestablished  in  France,  and  turned 
against  Rome  (le  cl6ricalisme  c'est  I'ennemi)  ;  the  kultur- 
kampf  raged  in  Germany  ;  nolens  volens,  Austria  had  to 
fortif}/  her  position  by  liberal  legislation  and  b}^  the  intro- 
duction of  a  constitution.  Protestant  theology  has  of  late 
exhibited  a  number  of  liberal  trends,  of  which  the  historic 
trend  is  the  most  characteristic.  In  the  Catholic  church, 
too,  liberalising  tendencies  have  been  manifest,  culminating 
in  the  contemporary  modernist  movement.  But  during  the 
same  epoch  the  papacy  has  grown  stronger  and  has  ventured 
the  proclamation  of  new  dogmas,  such  as  the  dogma  of 
infallibility. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  founder  of  positivism  should 
have  returned  to  fetichism,  and  that  the  author  of  the  Life 
of  fesus,  which  was  the  most  radical  manifestation  of  the 
Hegelian  left  in  the  days  before  1848,  should  in  the  beginning 
of  the  seventies  have  concocted  The  Old  Faith  and  the  New, 
the  catechism  of  liberal  theology  and  religion.  Strauss  was 
a  typical  representative  of  the  new  bourgeoisie.  Benjamin 
Constant,  the  indefatigable  theorist  of  liberahsm,  had  indeed 

28  VOL.  II. 


418  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

anticipated  Strauss.  Having  worked  for  thirty  years  at  his 
book  De  la  Religion,  he  declared  in  the  end  that  HberaHsm 
was  inadequate,  and  that  rehgion  alone  could  provide  a  sure 
foundation  for  social  life.  He  had,  of  course,  no  other  religion 
to  offer  than  that  of  his  Adolphe,  a  sentimental  amalgam  of 
Rousseau  and  Jacobi,  of  Kant  and  Scottish  philosophy 
Constant  insisted  further  that  philosophy  could  not  replace 
religion,  for  philosophy  did  not  leave  room  for  faith  and  would 
therefore  never  be  accepted  by  the  people — religion  was  essen- 
tial to  the  populace,  and  Voltaire  recognised  that  there  must 
be  a  religion  for  his  tailor.  Even  Locke,  who  had  so  long  ago 
and  so  ardently  advocated  toleration,  desired  that  for  the  sake 
of  social  order  atheism  should  be  made  a  capital  offence. 
Constant  followed  Locke  in  this  matter,  but  liberalised  Locke's 
teaching. 

After  1848,  liberalism  aimed  more  and  more  at  the  pro- 
motion of  governmental  efficiency.  Whilst  the  old  liberalism 
had  adopted  Sieyes'  saying,  "  le  roi  reigne  mais  ne  gouverne 
pas,"  the  new  liberalism  inclined  to  favour  Napoleon's  dictum 
that  the  monarch  is  no  mere  "  cochon  a  I'engrais."  Bismarck's 
antiparliamentarian  creed,  and  Prussian  and  Austrian  constitu- 
tionahst  practice,  were  more  honoured  than  Enghsh  parlia- 
mentarism. The  night-watchman  theory  of  the  state  was 
abandoned  by  the  liberals,  now  that  they  had  been  admitted 
to  a  share  in  the  powers  of  government.  They  supported 
an  extension  of  state  authority,  abandoning  their  earlier  and 
more  radical  tenets  of  antimilitarism  and  democracy,  and 
advocating  political  centralisation  as  contrasted  with  the 
earlier  liberal  aspiration  for  autonomy  and  self-government. 

Liberalism  has  thus  arrived  at  the  apotheosis  of  the  state. 
Belief  in  the  state  is  upon  the  same  footing  as  belief  in  God, 
now  that  constitutionalism  has  transformed  the  liberals  them- 
selves into  parts  of  this  mundane  god.  A  certain  liberal, 
and  what  is  more  an  American  and  a  republican.  Burgess, 
I  the  teacher  of  constitutional  law,  has  in  conformity  with  the 
fold  English  maxim  that  the  king  can  do  no  wrong,  seriously 
declared  the  state  to  be  infallible.  The  state,  be  it  noted, 
is  infallible,  not  the  president,  but  the  state  as  principle,  the 
state  as  an  institution,  the  state  as  the  liberal  god. 

To  the  liberalism  of  the  manufacturing  classes,  imperialism 
has  been  thoroughly  welcome,  and  the  liberals  have  understood 
very  well  how  to  adapt  their  formulas  to  imperiahst  ideas. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  419 

even  while  continuing  to  give  lip-service  to   Kant's  plea  for 
perpetual  peace. 

This  evolution  of  the  hberal  bourgeoisie  will  be  more  readily 
understood  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  fourth  estate, 
the  working  class,  has  become  emancipated  from  liberalism, 
and  has  adopted  socialism,  above  all  Marxist  socialism. 
The  masses  are  now  lost  to  liberalism.  Modern  capitalism 
and  the  plutocracy  have  come  into  existence.  The  parvenus 
of  the  plutocracy  have  been  taken  into  favour  by  the  old 
aristocracy  ;  the  dynasties  are  finding  in  the  modern  stock 
exchanges  and  in  the  Rothschilds  something  to  replace  their 
Jewish  financiers  of  old  days.  The  state  is  becoming  an  indus- 
trial state.  The  capitalist  is  not  merely  an  entrepreneur,  a 
director  and  organiser  of  labour  ;  he  is  a  wealthy  man,  often 
exceedingly  wealthy,  so  that  the  abyss  between  riches  and 
poverty  widens  ;  the  worship  of  the  golden  calf  tends  increas- 
ingly to  be  the  true  religion  of  the  bourgeoisie  and  of  those 
who  wield  political  power ;  militarism  is  now  a  lucrative 
economic  system  of  enrichment  ;  protective  tariffs  and 
agrarian  duties  bring  about  conciliation  between  the  rival 
and  hostile  half-brothers,  between  the  manufacturers  of  the 
great  towns  and  the  junkers  of  the  rural  areas.  It  need  hardly 
be  said  that  the  question  of  protection  is  not  really  one  of 
principle  ;  prior  to  1870,  when  the  great  landed  estates  still 
produced  for  export,  the  German  conservatives  were  free- 
traders, but  now  they  are  protectionists.  The  liberal  view  of 
protection  is  similar,  and  it  is  only  within  national  limits 
that  modern  liberals  insist  upon  free  competition  as  a  matter 
of  principle — free  competition  against  the  working  classes. 

The  Chinese  writer  Ku-Hung-Ming,  in  China's  Defence 
against  European  Ideas,  says  with  considerable  truth  :  "The 
European  liberalism  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  civilised, 
but  modern  liberalism  is  no  longer  civiHsed.  The  liberalism 
of  the  past  read  books  and  understood  ideas  ;  modern  liberaHsm 
reads  nothing  but  newspapers,  and  uses  the  great  liberal 
phrases  of  the  past  as  catchwords,  as  a  mere  cloak  for  selfish 
interests.  Eighteenth  century  liberalism  fought  on  behalf 
of  right  and  justice  ;  the  pseudo-liberalism  of  to-day  fights 
on  behalf  of  rights  and  trading  piivileges.  The  liberalism  of 
the  past  fought  on  behalf  of  the  cause  of  humanity  ;  the. 
pseudo-liberalism  of  to-day  endeavours  to  promote  the  vested 
interests  of  capitalists  and  financiers." 


420  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

This  liberalism  constitutes  the  reserve  force  of  aristocracy 
and  plutocracy  ;  liberals  of,  this  calibre  unhesitatingly  vote 
repressive  laws  against  socialist  workers.  The  old  watch- 
words, liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity,  are  left  to  the  social 
democracy. 

The  old  liberalism  was  national  in  character,  but  genuinely 
liberal,  and  with  cosmopolitan  inclinations.  But  when  the 
national  minorities  in  the  historically  extant  multilingual 
states  had  gained  strength  through  liberal  constitutionalism 
and  parliamentarism,  and  when  the  doctrine  of  popular 
sovereignty  was  given  a  definite  folk-signification,  when  the 
nationahst  idea  became  definitely  democratic  vis-ci-vis  the 
state,  liberahsm  swung  over  to  the  side  of  the  state,  proclaiming 
everywhere  the  official  doctrine  of  patriotism.  Metternich's 
reaction  had  led  to  an  oppression  of  the  nationalities  in  Austria 
and  Germany.  In  Austria,  after  1848,  the  liberals  followed 
in  Metternich's  footsteps,  even  endeavouring  to  effect  a  forcible 
denationalisation. f  ^  The  liberal  capitalists  found  no  difficulty 
in  turning  political  chauvinism  to  account  economically.  In 
this  connection  I  ipay  quote  once  more  from  Ku-Hung-Ming, 
who  refers  to  a  liberal  aspirant  who  betrayed  his  party  and 
his  government  to  espouse  the  cause  of  reaction  :  "  When 
Kang-Yu-Wei  was  compelled  to  take  to  flight,,  and  when  the 
lives  of  some  of  his  adherents  were  forfeit,  Tuan-Fang  had 
not  a  moment's  perplexity,  for  with  all  the  shamelessness  of 
light-hearted  youth  he  exhibited  a  complete  change  of  front 
and  had  recourse  to  the  scoundrel's  last  refuge — patriotism. 
Immediately  after  Kang-Yu-Wei  had  fallen  and  the  empress 
dowager  had  grasped  the  reins  of  power,  Tuan-Fang  com- 
posed a  popular  patriotic  song,  extolHng  the  glories  of  the 
empress  dowager  and  her  government.  In  this  wise  he  saved 
himself  from  the  consequences  of  his  association  with  Kang- 
Yu-Wei." 

Open-minded  liberals  are  no  longer  under  any  illusion 
concerning  the  decay  of  liberalism. 

Intellectually,  liberahsm  has  become"  a  dangerous  system 
of    dilettantism ;     ethically    it    is    often    lax    and    positively 

I  The  idea  of  nationality  was  discussed  in  §  59.  It  was  there  shown  that 
the  nationahst  program  is  differently  formulated  in  different  countries  and  by 
divers  national  stocks.  In  1848,  for  example,  the  Austrian  Germans  were  less 
nationalist  than  the  Germans  in  Germany  proper.  Individuals,  too,  changed 
their  views,  from  time  to  time.  Prior  to  1848,  Ruge  was  no  less  opposed  to 
nationahsm  than  Marx. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  421 

anarchistic,  and  therefore  opposed  to  the  authority  of  church 
and  state. 

Pohtically,  hberahsm  tends  more  and  more  to  break  up 
into  a  number  of  factions,  and  in  the  parHamentary  struggle 
it  is  therefore  weak  in  its  front  against  the  uniform  mass  of 
the  social  democrac}^  and  .also  against  the  governmental 
reaction.  Being  void  of  real  content,  liberalism  tends  increas- 
ingly to  chng  to  formal  principles  ;  the  liberal  parties  lack 
independence  and  initiative.  As  an  educational  and  economic 
force,  hberahsm  becomes  more  and  more  negative  ;  the  earlier 
aspiration  for  liberty  is  replaced  by  a  political  moderation 
which  is  delighted  to  accept  as  freedom  the  fairly  endurable 
measure  of  unfreedom  that  now  exists.  The  cry  for  toleration 
as  voiced  by  early  Hberahsm  was  a  call  to  arms  against 
theocratic  coercion,  but  the  modern  liberal  conception  of 
toleration  grows  ever  more  negative. 

Thus  hberahsm  is  the  codification  of  half-measures,  per- 
sistent compromise*  in  theory  as  well  as  in  practice.  We  may 
quote  Goethe  ;  "  When  I  hear  people  speak  of  liberal  ideas 
I  am  amazed  to  see  how  readily  human  beings  are  satisfied 
with  empty  sounds  ;  an  idea  cannot  be  liberal.  It  may  be 
vigorous,  efficient,  self-contained,  in  order  that  it  may  fulfil 
its  divine  mission  of  being  productive  ;  but  it  is  quite  beyond 
the  mission  of  an  idea  to  be  liberal.  Where  we  must  seek 
liberalness  is  in  the  feelings,  in  the  living  sphere  of  the  affective 
life." 

Historically  considered,  the  lukewarmness  and  vagueness 
of  liberalism  are  thoroughly  characteristic  of  a  transitional 
trend  ;  these  features  explain  its  persistence,  its  mutability 
and  its  adaptabihty. 

§  179- 

CATHOLIC  pohticians  reproach  liberalism  with  being  the 
offspring  of  Protestantism  and  the  parent  of  sociahsm 
and  anarchism.  They  bring  the  identical  charge  against 
modern  philosophy. 

There  is  considerable  truth  in  the  accusation.  In  actual 
fact,  hberahsm  grew  to  greatness  in  England,  and,  under 
English  and  American  influence,  in  France  ;  the  liberal  regime 
in  politics  was  transplanted  from  England  and  America  to 
the  continent  of  Europe. 


422  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Liberalism  is  differently  tinted  in  various  countries  and 
as  advocated  by  various  nationalities.  English,  American, 
German,  French,  Italian,  and  Spanish  liberalism  are  divergent 
types. 

The  relationships  of  liberaHsm,  of  the  primary  principles 
of  the  liberal  doctrine,  to  anarchism  and  socialism  are  obvious. 

According  to  Bougie,  French  liberalism  was  "  dead  and 
buried  "  in  1902  ;  the  same  diagnosis  concerning  liberalism 
comes  from  England,  Germany,  everywhere.  Of  late  years, 
therefore,  there  has  been  in  progress  among  liberals  a  serious 
self-examination,  which  has  culminated  in  the  conviction 
that  liberalism  must  rediscover  its  democratic  past,  and  must 
renew  its  earlier  aspirations  towards  liberty.  The  liberals 
must  cease  to  dread  freedom.  "  The  only  cure  for  liberty 
is  more  liberty  "  (Macaulay). 

As  regards  German  liberalism,  various  counsels  are  offered 
for  promoting  a  democratic  renaissance.  Naumann  cherished 
hopes  of  a  union  between  democracy  and  emperordom.  More 
important  is  the  demand  that  the  liberals  should  join  forces 
with  the  social  democracy. 

It  can  hardly  be  said  that  any  precise  formula  has  been 
offered  for  this  alliance,  but  from  time  to  time  a  transient 
cooperation  has  been  effected,  such  a  cooperation  as  has  been 
recommended  by  L.  Brentanq,  and  earher  by  Barth,  Mommisen, 
and  others. 

From  the  social  democratic  camp  advances  in  the  same 
direction  have  been  made  by  the  revisionists  (in  the  "  Sozial- 
istische  Monatshefte  "  and  elsewhere).  The  revisionists  point 
to  the  numerous  members  of  the  so-called  new  middle  class, 
and  contend  that  these  could  make  cooperation  between  the 
social  democrats  and  the  liberals  a  practical  possibility.       * 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  dem.onstrate  the  political  impor- 
tance of  such  cooperation  for  Germany  and  for  the  world  at 
large  ;  the  importance  is  self-evident  in  view  of  the  numerical 
strength  of  the  German  social  democracy. 

In  France,  Italy,  and  even  England,  the  course  of  political 
evolution  has  brought  the  liberals  nearer  to  socialism. 

In  considering  these  plans  for  cooperation  on  the  part  of 
liberals  and  social  democrats,  we  must  not  forget  that 
Marxism  and  socialism,  too,  have  undergone  theoretical  and 
political  changes,  and  hav^  in  a  sense  become  liberalised  (if 
the  word  be  rightly  understood).     For  the  time  being,  hov/ever. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  41 

the  orthodox  Marxists  regard  liberaUsm  as  twin  brother  ol 
the  anarchism  they  so  strongty  condemn.  This  adverse  judg- 
ment is  all  the  more  powerful  in  its  effect  seeing  that  the 
liberal  opponents  of  Marxism  (Diehl,  for  instance)  take  the 
same  view. 

All  that  I  need  say  in  conclusion  is  that  when  the  possibility 
of  a  renascence  of  liberalism  is  mooted,  I  am  not  thinking 
so  much  of  the  relationship  of  liberalism  to  Marxism  as  of 
the  socialisation  and  democratisation  of  liberalism. 


II 

•§i8o. 

"  T  IBERALISM  is  the  latest  of  the  religions,  but  its  church 
L/  is  of  this  world,  not  of  the  world  to  come  ;  its 
theodicy  is  a  political  doctrine  ;  its  roots  are  in  the  earth  ; 
it  knows  nothing  of  mystical  peace  formulas,  for  its  need  is 
to  make  peace  a  practical  reality.  Liberalism,  at  first  vic- 
torious and  subsequently  defeated,  disclosed  the  sundering 
breach  in  all  its  nudity.  The  distressing  consciousness  of 
this  breach  is  manifested  in  the  irony  of  the  contemporary 
world,  in  the  scepticism  with  which  modern  man  scatters  the 
fragments  of  his  broken  idols."  Such  was  the  characterisation 
of  liberalism  penned  by  Herzen  in  the  year  1852,  when  his 
mood  was  one  of  despair  owing  to  the  collapse  of  the  revolu- 
tion. The  same  mood  had  in  the  previous  year  led  him  to 
express  the  conviction  that  liberalism  would  not  make  itself 
at  home  in  Russia,  that  liberalism  was  quite  alien  to  the 
Russian  nature. 

-  Herzen  erred,  for  liberalism  had  hid  a  home  in  Russia 
since  the  days  of  Peter.  After  Peter,  Catherine  II  was 
likewise  representative  of  liberal  ideas,  for  she  had  direct 
philosophic  associations  with  Voltaire  and  Diderot,  though  her 
regime  was  less  liberal  than  that  of  Peter.  Voltaire,  Rousseau, 
and  Diderot  secured  in  St.  Petersburg  numerous  and  enthusi- 
astic readers  and  adherents,  so  that  the  French  enlightenment 
reinforced  the  enlightenment  already  inaugurated  by  Peter 
and  his  successors.  We  find  in  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow 
the  freethinking  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the 
rationalism  and  the  humanitarian  philosophy  of  the  enlighten- 
ment ;    this   philosophy   directed  its    shafts  against*  serfdom, 


424  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

and  encouraged  thoughts  of  poHtical  Uberty  and  poUtical 
reforms.  In  addition  to  the  Voltairians  there  were  hberals 
of  a  religious  turn  (Radisc^ev  and  the  freemasons),  and  there 
were  liberals  who  declaimed  against  the  moral  corruption  of 
Europe.  French  liberalism,  with  its  individualism  and  its 
aspirations  towards  freedom,  took  Russian  society  by  storm  ; 
democratic  and  even  republican  programs  were  conceived. 
Alexander  I,  no  less  than  Catherine  II,  had  a  certain  sympathy 
with  the  republican  ideal. 

The  revolution  and  the  terror  aroused  a  reaction  in  St. 
Petersburg  no  less  than  in  Europe  (of  this  matter  and  con- 
cerning this  date  it  would  be  incorrect  to  say  "  aroused  a 
reaction  in  Russia  ")  ;  nevertheless,  cultured  men  occupying 
influential  positions  were  still  found  to  cherish  an  honest 
belief  in  the  possibility  of  liberal  reforms  even  in  Russia,  and 
such  men  endeavoured  to  realise  their  ideals  (Speranskii). 
Alexander  I  was  co-founder  of  the  holy  alliance  ;  the  wars 
against  Napoleon  confirmed  the  satisfaction  with  the  old 
regime  ;  the  reaction  became  p>atriotic  and  nationalist.  The 
romanticist  movement,  with  its  search  for  an  asylum  in  the 
past,  made  its  appearance  also  in  Russia.  Karamzin,  who 
had  at  one  time  been  an  admirer  of  enlightened  Europe,  may 
be  regarded  as  spokesman  of  romanticism  and  reaction. 

But  it  proved  impossible  to  repress  liberal  aspirations ; 
repression  served  but  to  generate  a  more  energetic  resistance. 
Ideas,  well-grounded  ideas,  cannot  be  repressed.  Benjamin 
Constant  and  similar  writers  of  the  day  secured  Russian 
readers.  The  cult  of  liberalism  was  carried  on  in  secret  societies  ; 
the  decabrist  revolution  was  an  attempt  after  the  French 
model ;  some  even  believed  in  the  possibility  of  a  Russian 
republic  (Pestel). 

In  the  reign  of  Nicholas  I  the  nationalist  and  patriotic 
reaction  grew  stronger  and  was  more  fully  conscious  of  its 
aims.  New  legal  and  administrative  foundations  were  pro- 
vided for  the  theocracy,  with  its  programs  of  orthodoxy, 
autocracy,  and  Russian  nationalism. 

Yet  the  reaction  under  Nicholas  worked  no  real  harm  to 
liberalism.  Caadaev  stepped  forward  with  his  bold  negation 
of  theocracy.  It  is  true  that  there  now  originated  the  influ- 
ential Slavophil  movement,  whose  trend  was  conservative ; 
but  the  westernisers  were  thereby  stimulated  to  redouble 
their  efforts  to  diffuse  western  liberalism.    To  Belinskii  the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  •         425 

term  "  liberal  "  seemed  practically  synonymous  with  the  term 
"  man."  The  liberal  current  of  the  day  was  not  solely 
manifested  in  the  writings  of  the  literary  critics,  but  found 
able  journalistic  exponents  as  well  (Polevoi).  Abroad,  the 
ideas  of  the  decabrists  were  propagated  by  N.  Turgenev  and 
by  Herzen.  The  Russian  refugees,  organising  their  efforts, 
endeavoured  to  break  the  fetters  of  the  censorship. 

During  the  reign  of  Nicholas  came  the  blossoming  time 
of  modern  Russian  literature.  The  great  writers  of  this 
epoch,  PuSkin,  Gogol,  Turgenev,  Goncarov,  etc.,  were  liberals  ; 
all,  that  is  to  say,  led  and  sustained  individualistic  aspirations 
towards  freedom,  even  though  some  of  them  could  not  alto- 
gether lay  aside  conservative  habits  of  thought.  Modern  art 
in  general  (for  the  remark  does  not  apply  solely  to  imaginative 
literature)  can  no  longer  be  deliberately  conservative  and 
theocratic  in  its  leanings.  Such  has  been  the  valuable  and 
momentous  outcome  of  the  evolution  following  upon  the 
French  revolution. 

Agrarian  and  economic  development,  too,  had  perforce 
to  take  a  hberal  turn.  Whether  at  the  hands  of  the  crown, 
the  landowners,  the  mercantile  classes,  or  the  peasants,  more- 
efhcient  production  could  only  be  brought  about  by  scientific 
method,  and  especially  by  the  intelHgent  application  of  the 
achievements  of  natural  science.  Further,  the  principles  of 
Adam  Smith  secured  recognition,  and  were  put  into  practice 
in  internal  affairs.  Owing  to  the  defective  yield  of  servile 
labour  the  liberation  of  the  peasantry  was  found  to  be  essen- 
tial. Liberahsm  was  invigorated  by  the  influence  of  German 
philosophy,  and  especially  by  that  of  Hegel ;  towards  the 
close  of  the  forties,  the  Hegelian  left  (Feuerbach),  positivism, 
materialism,  and  the  French  socialists,  began  to  influence 
the  Russian  liberals,  so  that  a  number  of  them  now  became 
socialists.  The  Petra^evcy  were  the  first  victims  of  the  more 
radical  current.  Socialism  and  anarchism  were  evoked  by 
the  revolutionary  sentiments  voiced  by  Herzen  and  Bakunin, 
at  first  while  they  were  still  in  Russia,  and  subsequently  as 
refugees.  Socialism  and  Bakuninist  anarchism  now  domJnated 
the  mind  of  youth. 

Liberalism  became  distinguished  from  socialism  and  from 
anarchism  in  respect  of  program  and  in  respect  of  its  advocates  ; 
Herzen  and  Bakunin  drew  apart,  not  only  from  the  Slavophils, 
but  also  from  Granovskii. 


426  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

The  liberation  of  the  peasantry,  and  the  effecting  of  the 
other  reforms  that  necessarily  accompanied  and  followed  that 
measure,  were  a  notable  victory  for  liberalism.  But  this  was 
not  the  first  time  on  which  absolutism  had  entered  liberal 
paths.  Since  the  days  of  Peter,  the  bureaucracy  had  been 
compelled  to  recognise  liberalism  in  practice,  the  constraint, 
in  Russia  as  elsewhere,  being  supplied  by  the  administra- 
tion's own  interests,  which  could  be  adequately  served  in  no 
other  way.  Reactionaries  like  Katkov  realised  this  clearly 
enough. 

It  was  natural  that  these  reforms  should  strengthen 
radicalism.  After  1861,  the  socio-political  opposition  became 
organised  in  secret  societies  ;  and  the  example  of  the  Polish 
revolution  of  1863  had  its  effect  upon  radical  circles  in  Russia 

The  reaction  armed  in  its  own  defence,  and  many  liberals 
wavered  in  their  allegiance  to  liberal  principles.  Katkov, 
the  admirer  of  English  constitutionalism,  opened  his  campaign 
against  Herzen.  Cicerin,  a  typical  exponent  of  moderate 
liberalism,  likewise  attacked  Herzen.  But  Herzen  found  a 
defender  even  among  the  moderate  liberals  (Kavelin). 

The  attempt  on  the  life  of  Alexander  II  in  the  year  1866 
strengthened  the  reaction.  Such  liberals  as  Nekrasov  now- 
made  for  the  sake  of  the  reaction  the  "  sacrificio  del  intelletto  " 
(Nekrasov,  for  the  rest,  was  always  a  wiseacre)  ;  but  the 
opposition  was  by  no  means  intimidated.  Society  underwent 
a  cleavage  into  liberal  "  fathers  "  and  revolutionary  "  children  "; 
liberals,  no  less  than  conservatives  and  reactionaries,  devoted 
themselves  to  the  analysis  of  "  nihilism."  The  leader  of  such 
liberals  was  Turgenev,  the  spokesman  of  liberal  Hamletism, 
but  his  admiration  for  the  bold  woman  terrorist  swept  him 
off  his  balance. 

Both  before  and  after  1S61,  the  aristocracy  and  the  gentry 
continued  to  make  up  the  bulk  of  the  liberals,  but  the  strength 
of  the  raznocincy  contingent  increased.  The  towns  were 
expanding  and  were  undergoing  economic  changes,  and  the 
capitalistic  bourgeoisie  and  plutocracy  were  gaining  in  strength 
and  numbers.  The  rich  bourgeois  wanted  to  lead  a  quiet 
life,  but  at  the  same  time  he  wanted  to  play  the  gentleman. ^ 
It  was  natural  that  the  radical  should  despise  the  bourgeois 

'  MendelSev,  the  distinguished  chemist,  was  a  prominent  spokesman  of 
the  industrial  plutocracy.  Not  merely  was  he  an  opponent  of  communism. 
but  he  likewise  "looked  upon  constitutionalism  as  superfluous. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA  427 

just  as  much  as  he  despised  the  aristocrat — for  the  leaders 
of  radicahsm,  and  above  all  the  best  writers  on  behalf  of  the 
movement,  were  of  noble  birth. 

The  public  activities  of  the  liberals  were  mainly  devoted 
to  the  zemstvos,  and  these  bodies  were  schools  of  political 
self-government.  In  the  zemstvos,  the  petty  bourgeois,  the 
metchant,  and  the  intellectual,  could  make  themselves  felt, 
just  as  well  as  the  great  landlord. 

The  activities  of  the  revolutionary  opposition  v/ere  now 
accentuated,  with  the  passive  and  at  times  more  than  passive 
assistance  of  the  liberals.  The  government  was  disposed  to 
make  certain  concessions  (Loris-Melikov),  but  the  assassination 
of  Alexander  II  brought  Katkov  and  Pobedonoscev  into 
power.  The  new  reaction  was  not  immediately  effective  in 
arresting  liberal  activities,  and  these  persisted  especially  in 
the  zemstvos.  It  is  true  that  Dragomanov,  as  spokesman 
of  the  constitutionalist  liberals,  solemnly  proclaimed  himself 
opposed  to  tyrannicide  ;  but  Dragomanov  and  his  associates, 
no  less  than  the  revolutionaries,  were  compelled  to  seek  asylum 
abroad. 

The  radical  and  democratic  trend  of  Cernygevskii  was 
replaced  by  that  of  Mihailovskii,  a  mediator  between  hberahsm 
and  radicalism.  Lavrov,  though  «i  refugee,  and  more  radical 
than  Mihailovskii,  did  nothing  to  hinder  the  growth  of 
liberalism. 

After  the  death  of  Alexander  II,  came  a  period  of  vengeful 
reaction.  Katkov  and -Pobedonoscev  v/ere  its  leading  literary 
advocates,  while  Leont'ev  was  its  chief  liberal  opponent. 

The  Social  Democratic  Party  was  constituted  in  1883. 
The  political  activity  of  liberalism  slackened  in  proportion 
as  the  organisation  of  the  revolutionaries  was  hindered  by 
the  reaction. 

The  controversy  between  the  Marxists  and  the  narodniki 
during  the  middle  nineties  was  advantageous  to  the  liberals, 
more  especially  because  the  liberals  for  the  most  part  were 
on  the  Marxist  side.  Moreover,  discussion  had  an  invigorating 
influence  on  all  parties  alike.  A  controversy  of  especial 
interest  was  that  concerning  the  relationship  of  the  social 
democracy  and  of  the  revolutionaries  in  general  to  the  liberals. 
The  relationship  achieved  practical  recognition  in  the  League 
of  Deliverance  (Sojuz  Osvobozdenija),  and  this  body  furnished 
a  platform  for  joint  political  activities.     Then  came  the  long- 


428  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

desired  mass  revolution.  With  the  help  of  the  liberals,  the 
working  classes  and  their  radical  leaders  fought  for  and 
obtained  the  constitution. 


§  i8i. 

THIS  brief  historical  sketch  should  suffice,  for  a  history 
of  Russian  liberalism  was  given  as  part  of  the  historical 
sketch,  and  a  description  was  furnished  of  the  principal  facts 
bearing  on  the  movement. 

*The  question  may  be  asked,  why  no  noted  liberals  have 
received  individual  treatment  such  as  was  given  in  the  case 
of  Kropotkin  apropos  of  anarchism.  The  reply  is  that  liberalism 
is  so  multiform  that  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  deal 
with  a  very  large  number  of  individuals.  Most  liberals  of 
note  are  persons  whose  main  distinction  has  been  acquired 
in  other  fields  ;  they  are  historians,  political  economists, 
jurists,  and  the  like,  who  turn  aside  for  a  time  from  these 
special  studies.  But  the  socio-political  characteristics  of 
Russian  liberalism  have  been  described,"  though  briefl3^ 

Russian  liberalism,  like  that  of  Europe,  has  had  two  distinct 
epochs  ;  and  the  liberalism  of  the  later  phase,  that  of  the  days 
since  the  death  of  Alexander  II,  exhibits  all  the  defects  as 
well  as  the  merits  of  European  liberalism.  Lukewarmness, 
indecision,  dread  of  political  initiative,  are  conspicuous  failings. 
Upon  many  questions  of  the  first  importance,  the  views  of 
liberals  are  divided.  For  example,  Cicerin  is  in  favour  of 
natural  law,  Maromcev  (president  of  the  first  duma)  is  in 
favour  of  historic  law.  Similar  differences  prevail  among 
liberals  upon  religious  matters. 

The  Russian  liberal  looks  for  help,  not  to  his  own  exertions, 
not  to  the  people,  but  to  those  in  high  places.  CiCerin,  like 
Naumann  in  Germany,  hoped  for  the  establishment  of  a 
democratic  monarchy  ;  but  whereas  Naumann,  when  he  spoke 
of  the  people,  meant  the  social  democracy,  and  wanted  a 
socialist  nlonarchy,  Cicerin  proposed  to  break  the  power  of 
the  aristocracy  with  the  aid  of  the  jDopulace  led  by  the  crown. 
The  tsar  was  to  destroy  his  own  aristocracy  !  Cerny§evskii 
in  this  matter  saw  much  more  clearly  than  Cicerin  (§  102). 

The  liberal,  being  a  man  of  half-measures,  is  inconsistent, 
and  stops  half  way  to  the  goal. 

The  "  children,"  therefore,  could  not    feel    much  respect 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  429 

for  the  "  fathers."  It  seemed  to  the  "  children  "  that  the 
Oblomov  disease  was  the  outcome  of  this  Uberahsm,  and  they 
regarded  their  Uberal  "  fathers  "  as  belonging  to  the  category 
of  "  superfluous  men."  Pisarev  compared  the  liberal  to  the 
cow  which  wished  to  play  the  part  of  cavalry  charger. 
Conservative  opponents,  on  the  other  hand,  looked  upon 
liberalism  with  contempt.  Dostoevskii  represented  the  devil 
as  a  liberal  bourgeois. 

Liberalism  could  point  in  exculpation  to  the  prolonged 
operation  of  tsarist  absolutism,  forcibly  restraining  men  from 
public  activities  and  delivering  them  over  to  irresponsible 
inertia. 

But  some  regarded  liberalism  as  a  manifestation  of  the 
irresponsibility  and  inertia  which,  said  these  persons  are 
inborn  in  the  Russians. 

The  revolution  of  1905  and  the  inauguration  of  the  duma 
compelled  all  the  political  parties,  and  especially  the  liberals,  - 
to  reexamine  the  principles  upon  which  their  respective  pro- 
grams were  based.  The  first  point  to  be  considered  was  the 
relationship  of  liberalism  to  socialism  and  to  revolutionism. 
In  the  liberal  camp,  even  before  the  revolution,  particular 
attention  had  been  devoted  to  the  attitude  towards  the  state 
and  towards  the  problem  of  revolution.  The  discussion  con- 
cerning the  differences  between  the  Marxists  and  the  social 
revolutionaries,  the  practical  efforts  to  secure  progressive 
unity  in  the  League  of  Dehverance  (Struve),  and  a  personal 
desire,  to  clarify  his  views  upon  the  crisis  in  Russian  affairs, 
induced  Miljukov  to  debate  these  problems.  Miljukov,  who 
is  now  the  intellectual  leader  of  the  cadets,  has  had  ample 
political  experience,  and  as  historian  and  philosopher  of  history 
he  is  exceptionally  well  quaUfied  to  gi^ve  an  opinion  upon 
such  matters.  n 

Miljukov's  idea  is  that  the  role  of  liberahsm  is  to  mediate  t 
between  the  revolution  and  governmental  circles.  He  holds 
that  the  liberal  opposition  has  pecuhar  competence  as  mediator, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  in  opposition  without  being  revolutiona^ry.^ 
As  recently  as  1909,  at  a  banquet  given  by  the  lord  mayor  of 
London  in  honour  of  the  Russian  deputation,  Miljukov  reiter- 
ated the  old  saying  that  as  long  as  Russia  possessed  a  legislative 
chamber  which  controlled  the  budget,  the  Russian  opposition 

I  Miljukov,  Russia  and  its  Crisis,  1905,  p,  517.  (The  text  was  composed 
in  the  year  1903.) 


430  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

would  be  "  his  majesty's  opposition  "  and  not  opposition  to 
his  majesty.  After  the  attem.pt  on  the  hfe  of  Stolypin 
(September  15,  1911),  Miljukov's  organ  piibhshed  a  solemn 
declaration  to  the  effect  that  the  Constitutional  Democratic 
Party  condemned  political  outrage,  and  would  countenance 
nothing  beyond  normal  political  evolution. 

Liberalism  thus  recognised  the  state,  and  proclaimed  its 
willingness  to  work  directly  in  favour  of  the  strengthening 
of  the  state,  expressed  its  readiness  ultimately  to  cooperate, 
as  a  governmental  party,  in  the  activities  of  the  state.  The 
emphasis  laid  in  cadet  policy  upon  the  importance  of  .main- 
taining state  authority  may  have  been  due  to  the  fact  that 
at  this  time  the  social  democracy  was  exhibiting  anarchist 
leanings.  Possibly,  too,  the  liberal  faith  in  the  mechanism 
of  state  (cf.  Gradovskii's  opinion  of  the  westernisers,  recorded 
in  §  72)  played  a  part  in  this  development. 

Whilst  in  Germany,  too,  the  cooperation  of  liberals  with 
social  democrats  has  been  recommended  (by  the  liberals), 
we  have  to  remember  that  Russian  party  relationships  and 
Russian  conditions  in  general  differ  widely  from  those  which 
obtain  in  Germany,  in  England,  and  in  France.  Whereas  the 
German  social  democrats  regard  parliament  as  the  chief  weapon 
in  their  armoury,  the  Russian  social  democrats  are  not  yet 
agreed  upon  this  matter.  The  social  revolutionaries  (not  to 
speak  of  the  anarchists)  are  still  more  dubious  as  to  the  value 
of  parliament.  The  divergence  between  legal  and  illegal 
political  opposition  is  extremely  wide,  and  it  is  hard  for  illegal 
parties  to  abandon  their  customary  tactics. 

We  have  further  to  remember  that  tsarism  is  altogether 
different  from  French  republican  government,  and  differs 
greatly  also  from  Prussian  monarchy. 

As  members  of  a  state  party,  the  liberals  have  expressed 
their  views  very  plainly  in  the  controversy  concerning  the 
question  of  nationality. 

They  have  always  been  non-nationalist,  having  rightly 
opposed  nationalism  as  advocated  by  Uvarov  and  his  successors, 
and  above  all  as  advocated  by  Katkov. 

When  the  constitution  was  secured  after  the  revolution, 
and  when  the  political  parties  were  being  organised,  the  liberals 
split  into  two  large  factions,  that  of  the  octobrists  and  that 
of  the  constitutional  democrats.  The  octobrists  may  be 
described   as   the   national   liberals   of   Russia.     In   a  general 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  481 

way,  the  cleavage  may  be  compared  with  that  which  took 
place  in  Germany  during  the  year  1866,  v/hen  the  German 
progressives  became  subdivided,  with  the  formation  of  the 
"  loyal  opposition  "  constituted  by  the  national  liberals,  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  democratic  wing,  on  the  other.  The 
war  with  Japan  had  an  effect  similar  to  that  produced  by  the 
war  of  1866  ;  there  was  an  increase  in  the  sentiment  of  nation- 
ality, and  fidelity  to  the  state  was  strengthened.  Not  only 
did  the  Union  of  Genuine  Russians  spring  to  life,  but  the 
liberal  octobrists  and  even  the  cadets  displayed  a  more  lively 
nationalist  sentiment. 

Miljukov  himself,  at  the  outset,  manifested  a  benevolent 
neutrality  towards  neoslavism. 

Struve's  advocacy  of  nationalist  views  (1908)  is  of  interest. 
As  member  of  the  Cadet  Party,  he  insisted  that  the  liberals 
must  maintain  the  unity  of  the  Russian  state,  and  declared 
that  the  intelligentsia  must  not  confuse  the  state  with  the 
bureaucracy,  the  fatherland  with  the  absolutist  autocracy. 
He  admitted  the  equality  of  the  various  nationalities  under 
Russian  rule,  but  would  not  endorse  the  idea  of  federation. 
The  Russian  language  and  Russian  civiHsation  were  to  serve 
as  a  link  between  all  the  peoples  of  the  empire  ;  the  state  must 
defend  the  Russian  majority  against  the  nationalist  errors 
of  the  minorities.  The  intelHgentsia  must  hold  fast  to  the 
conception  of  "  Great  Russia."  The  strength  of  the  state 
vis-a-vis  the  foreign  world  offers  no  hindrances  to  internal 
political  development,  that  which  aims  at  domestic  welfare  ; 
the  intelligentsia,  therefore,  must  become  permeated  with 
the  idea  of  statehood,  and  must  abandon  its  futile  radicalism. 
"  The  revolution  has  served  to  impress  upon  me  a  conviction 
as  to  what  is  the  real  significance  of  the  state."  The  revolution 
he  said,  had  been  shipwrecked  by  its  antistatism. 

Besides  Struve,  other  convinced  liberals  have  endeavoured 
to  formulate  the  national  ideal  and  above  all  the  slavic  ideal 
(as  contrasted  with  neoslavism,  which  was  advocated  by  the 
reactionaries).  I 

Struve's  nationalism  is  certainly  much  nearer  to  the 
program  of  the  octobrists  than  to  that  of  the  cadets.     I  cannot 

'  I  may  refer  here  to  the  slavist  A.  Pogodin,  whose  formula  may  be  briefly 
summarised  as  follows  :  "  Union  of  the  Slavs  upon  the  basis  of  civiUsing  work  ; 
union  of  the  peoples  of  Russia  upon  the  basis  of  equal  rights,  upon  the  basis 
of  the  free  development  of  all." 


482  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

feel  that  references  to  Bismarck  and  to  that  statesman's 
policy  make  Struve's  arguments  in  favour  of  "  Great  Russia  " 
more  congenial  and  more  democratic.  His  identification  of 
state  and  nationality  is  extremely  characteristic.  Struve's 
ideas  are  too  closely  akin  to  Uvarov's  official  nationalism, 
and  he  is  thus  led  to  construct  a  barrier  between  the  liberals 
and  the  socialists.  The  liberals  themselves  recognised  this,  and 
disowned  Struve,  though  the  latter  could  appeal  to  the 
authority  of  Pestel. 

It  was  very  natural  that  after  the  granting  of  the  consti- 
tution the  question  of  nationality  should  bulk  so  largely. 
Political  freedom  necessarily  signifies  the  freedom  of  the 
nationalities,  and  constitutionalist  Russia  has  therefore  to 
face  the  problems  which  have  remained  unsolved  in  Austria- 
Hungary  since  1848.  Nationally,  linguistically,  and  racially, 
Russia  is  the  least  unified  state  in  the  world.  The  Polish 
question  and  the  Jewish  question  have  always  been  acute  ; 
to  these  are  superadded  the  Finnish,  the  Ruthenian,  and 
other  national  problems.  The  fact  that  the  dominant  nation 
does  not  even  command  a  majority  throws  a  new  light  upon 
the  old  question  of  centralisation  versus  autonomy  and 
federation. 

The  radicals,  following  Carlyle,  may  despise  the  duma  as 
"  National  Palaver,"  but,  after  all,  parliament  is  a  school  of 
languages  ;  the  tongue  that  has  been  mute  under  absolutism 
can  now  make  itself  heard  ;  public  utterances  in  parliament, 
in  electoral  meetings,  in  political  associations,  and  the  ]ike, 
is  a  new  and  integral  part  of  constitutionalism.  Thus  in 
Russia,  as  elsewhere,  the  constitution  has  made  the  language 
question  a  matter  of  practical  politics  and  has  aroused  general 
interest  in  the  problem. 

In  Russia,  as  elsewhere,  we  find  that  the  problem  of 
.nationality  is  interconnected  with  other  questions  of  primary 
importance.  In  the  multilingual  areas,  above  all,  nationality 
is  not  merely  a  political  question,  but  is  an  economic  and 
social  question  to  boot.  For  example,  the  Polish  question 
and  the  Little  Russian  question  have  agrarian  aspects  ;  the 
exceptional  treatment  cf  the  Poles  and  the  Jews  necessarily 
affects  the  economics  of  agriculture,  for  neither  Pole  nor  Jew 
can  acquire  land  (cf .  §  68) .  Again,  the  problem  of  nationaUty 
has  ecclesiastical  and  religious  aspects  ;  the  Poles,  the  Finns, 
the    Germans,    the    Caucasians,    etc.,    do    not    belong    to    the 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  433 

Orthodox  church.  The  "  genuine  Russians  "  are  especially 
fond  of  drawing  attention  to  this  feature  of  the  problem  of 
nationality. 

Socialism,  no  less  than  hberalism,  has  to  solve  all  these 
problems  ;  and  in  the  attempts  made  to  find  solutions  the 
political,  social,  and  philosophic  differences  between  the  two 
outlooks  and  philosophies  are  conspicuously  displayed. 

Such  elucidations  and  delimitations  are  made  practically 
rather  than  theoretically,  and^often  under  pressure  of  immediate 
need  ;  but  in  Russia,  as  in  Europe,  there  are  to  be  found  liberal 
theorists  who  supply  philosophical  criticism  of  the  liberal 
program,  considering  that  program  in  relation  to  contemporary 
developments  in  Europe,  and  endeavouring  to  replace  the 
old  liberalism  by  a  new,  to  reform  liberahsm.  I  may  refer, 
for  example,  to  Novgorodcev,  professor  of  the  philosophy  of 
law  at  Moscow.  In  his  earlier  writings,  and  notably  as  editor 
of  a  collection  of  essays  entitled  'T/^c  Problems  of  Idealism 
(1902),  he  has  announced  his  adhesion  to  the  modern  idealist 
movement,  but  has  adopted  a  sound  democratic  foundation, 
declaring  in  favour  of  natural  law.  He  has  also  done  well 
in  taking  his  start  from  Kant. 

In  agreement  with  the  French  and  the  English  theorists 
of  renovated  liberahsm,  Novgorodcev  hopes  for  a  rebirth  of 
liberalism  in  Russia. ^  He  demands  the  democratisation  of 
liberalism,  and  he  advocates  reform  whereby  the  extraparha- 
mentary  initiative  of  the  people  may  be  organised  and 
strengthened  (the  introduction  of  the  referendum,  etc.).  He 
also  favours  the  socialisation  of  liberalism,  but  it  must  be 
admitted  that  he  fails  to  explain  clearly  what  he  means  by 
this  demand. 

The  question  of  the  socialisation  and  democratisation  of 
liberalism  is  one  of  peculiar  and  seasonable  importance  for 
Russia,  seeing  that  Russian  liberahsm  from  the  first  accepted 
the  ideals  of  socialism,  even  if  some  vacillation  was  subsequently 
noticeable.  This  is  precisely  what  differentiates  modern 
Russian  liberalism  from  European  liberalism,  and  especially 
from  German  and  English  liberalism.  I  have  done  my  best 
to  insist  upon  the  inner  kinship  between  liberalism,  sociahsm, 
and  anarchism  ;  and  in  the  accounts  given  of  the  individual 
thinkers  I  have  endeavoured  to  convey  precise  information 
in  each  case  regarding  their  socio-pohtical  trend  and  their 
'  Novgorodcev,  The  Crisis  in  the  Contemporary  Consciousness  of  Law,  1909. 

29  VOL.    II. 


484  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

political  evolution.  The  reader  may  recall  what  was  said 
concerning  the  movement  of  Herzen's  ideas  from  liberalism 
to  socialism  and  anarchism,  and  back  again  to  liberalism. 
Bakunin's  mental  development  and  that  of  the  other  noted 
thinkers  was  considered  from  a  similar  outlook. 

But  the  problem  of  modern  democracy  is  not  exhausted 
by.  formulating  a  demand  for  the  socialisation  and  democra- 
tisation  of  liberalism.  Novgorodcev  shows  how  this  problem 
of  democrac}^  necessarily  involves  the  problem  of  education, 
and  above  all  of  moral  education  ;  and  he  makes  an  effective 
point  Vv^hen  he  refers  to  the  peculiar  difficulties  with  which, 
in  this  respect,  republican  France  has  to  contend.  Obviously, 
too,  the  ecclesiastical  and  religious  problem  is  interwoven  with 
the  problem  of  morality.  From  this  outlook,  Novgorodcev 
has  not  thrown  much  light  on  Russian  conditions  ;  but  many 
other  liberal  theorists  and  politicians  have  devoted  attention 
to  such  matters. 


CHAPTER   TWENTY-ONE 

THE   CRISIS   IN   REVOLUTIONISM;    THE 
RELIGIOUS   QUESTION 

I 

§182. 

IN  1909  was  published  A  Collection  of  Essays  conce-rning 
the  Russian  Intelligentsia,  this  being  the  subtitle.  The 
main  title  was  Vehy  (Signposts).  The  little  volume  was  issued 
from  Moscow,  as  if  by  geographical  affiliation  to  claim  connec- 
tion with  the  Slavophils  (and  following  therein  the  example 
set  by  Pobedonoscev's  Moscow  Collection !).  Several  of  the 
authors  have  been  referred  to  elsewhere  in  the  present  work. 
The  most  noted  among  them,  in  addition  to  Struve,  Bulgakov, 
and  Berdjaev,  were  :  Kistjakovskii,  a  sociological  writer  of 
European  reputation  ;  Gersenzon,  the  literary  historian  who 
has  paid  especial  attention  to  the  Slavophil  movement  ;  Frank, 
a  writer  on  philosophy  ;  and  Izgoev,  a  writer  on  philosophico- 
political  topics.  Some  of  those  named  have  published  compre- 
hensive v/orks  to  convey  their  views  on  the  subjects  now 
under  discussion. 

A  book  on  the  intelligentsia  is  sure  of  a  hearing.  To  use 
an  expressive  colloquialism,  Signposts  "  caught  on."  Edition  • 
followed  edition  ;  a  brisk  controversy  was  evoked  ;  lectures 
were  delivered  pro  and  con  ;  newspapers  and  other  periodicals 
defined  their  attitude.  Further,  two  detailed  replies  were 
published,  one  from  the  liberal,  the  other  from  the  social 
revolutionary  camp. 

Signposts  may  be  characterised,  to  begin  with,  by  saying 
that  it  secured  a  friendly  reception  from  theological  critics, 
and  that  Archbishop  Antonii  of  Volhynia  v.Tote  an  article 
commending  the  book  shortly  after  its  appearance.  He 
extolled  the  heroism  of  the  authors,  who  had,  he  said,  called 

433 


486  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Russian  society  to  repentance,  had  issued  to  the  Russians  a 
summons  on  behalf  of  faith,  work,  and  knowledge,  had  exhorted 
them  to  unite  with  the  people  and  to  enter  into  the  heritage 
of  Dostoevskii  and  the  Slavophils.  Antonii  reminded  his 
readers  of  Saltykov's  street  arab,  who  had  called  after  the 
German  bourgeois,  "  You  have  sold  your  soul  to  the  devil 
for  a  groschen  !  "  But  we  Russians,  said  the  archbishop, 
have  let  him  have  our  soul  for  nothing,  so  we  can  demand  its 
return.  Reading  the  book  in  sleepless  nights,  the  hierarch 
had  regained  faith  in  Russian  society,  and  had  acquired  the 
conviction  that  Russia  was  not  lost  to  Christ. 

The  archbishop's  rejoicing  over  the  repentant  prodigal 
is  not  difhcult  to  understand,  for  nearly  all  the  authors  of 
Signposts  had  been  Marxists,  and  some  even  had  been  members 
of  the  Social  Democratic  Party. 

Struve  answered  the  archbishop.  His  rejoinder  was  an 
adroit  parry  to  Antonii's  cheerful  adulation,  the  adulation 
that  came  from  a  man  who,  if  I  mistake  not,  had  by  one  of 
the  essayists  been  described  as  the  most  interesting  figure  in 
the  black  hundred  group.  Struve  reminded  the  prince  of 
the  church  of  what  Dostoevskii  had  said,  that,  since  the  time 
of  Peter  the  Great,  the  church  had  been  suffering  from  palsy  ; 
and  Struve  declared  that  he  and  his  friends  were  filled  with 
concern  because  the  Orthodox  church  was  so  utterly  sub- 
ordinated to  the  state  and  to  the  aims  of  state  policy. 

Shortly  afterwards,  Berdjaev  issued  an  open  letter  to  the 
archbishop,  declaring  himself  a  penitent  son  of  the  church, 
but  at  the  same  time  putting  such  awkward  questions  as  to 
the  spiritual  poverty  of  the  church,  as  to  its  violence,  its 
condonation  of  capital  punishment,  and  the  like,  that  the  reader 
was  forced  to  wonder  how  the  questioner  could  possibly  have 
"  come  once  more  to  recognise  the  church  "  as  his  "  spiritual 
mother." 

Signposts  contained  little  more  than  a  recantation  of 
Marxism  and  social  democracy.  The  docket  "  from  Marxism 
to  idealism  "  was  tantamount  to  a  condemnation  of  the 
revolution  and  even  of  political  activity.  The  revolution  of 
1905-1906  and  the  subsequent  events  had  been  the  test  of 
the  intellectual  foundations  of  the  intelHgentsia,  and  these 
foundations,  the  values  that  had  been  esteemed  by  the  intelli- 
gentsia for  more  than  half  a  century,  had  been  proved  essentially 
unstable  and  fallacious. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  487 

The  authors  of  Signposts  abandoned  the  eadier  philosophy 
of  the  intelUgentsia.  The  Russian  intelHgentsia  must  with- 
draw from  the  outer  to  the  inner  hfe  ;  the  spiritual  life  must 
secure  a  theoretical  and*  practical  primacy  over  the  outward 
forms  of  the  life  of  the  community  ;  the  inner  hfe  of  the  per- 
sonality was  the  sole  creative  energy  of  human  existence  ; 
it  was  impossible  for  the  political  order  to  be  the  basis  of 
genuine  social  creation. 

As  their  spiritual  fathers  and  teachers,  the  authors  of 
Signposts  acknowledged  Caadaev,  Solov'ev,  Dostoevskii, 
Homjakov,  CiCerin^  Kozlov,  S.  Trubeckoi,  Lopatin,  Losskii, 
and  NesmSlov  ;  on  the  other  hand  sentence  was  in  effect  passed 
upon  BgUnskii,  Herzen,  Cernygevskii,  Mihailovskii,  and  Lavrov.' 
Thus  the  writers  make  a  distinction  between  Russian  and 
unrussian  philosophy.  Russian  philosophy  is  animated  by 
the  spirit  of  Plato,  by  classic  German  ideahsm,  and  by  mysti- 
cism ;  essentially,  its  interests  are  religious  ;  its  mission  is  to 
mediate  between  religion  and  science.  This  Russian  philosophy 
aims  at  the  objectivation  of  mysticism. 

Mysticism  and  positive  science,  we  are  told,  are  by  no 
means  mutually  exclusive.  The  European  west  has  succeeded 
in  bringing  to  maturity  a  science  that  is  neutral  in  religious 
and  metaphysical  matters. 

Concerning  the  nature  of  Russian  mysticism  in  particular, 
the  writers  inform  us  that  it  harmoniously  combines  the 
Dionysiac  and  ApoUine  elements,  but  needs  to  be  objecti vised 
and  normahsed  in  the  philosophical  aspect.  Positive  rehgion 
(i.e.  the  Orthodox  faith)  is  full  of  the  higher  mysticism. 

Conversely,  the  philosophy  of  the  intelhgentsia  is  the 
expression  of  nihihsm,  which  on  utihtarian  grounds  denies 
the  existence  of  any  absolute  values.  Nihihsm  is  therefore 
atheism,  and  this  means  anthropo-idolatry.  The  members 
of  the  intelligentsia  are  the  militant  monks  of  a  nihiUstic 
religion  of  purely  mundane  wellbeing. 

In  political  matters  the  intelhgentsia  is  anarchistic,  for 
it  lacks  the  sense  of  the  state  and  is  devoid  of  a  feeling  for  law. 

Finally,  we  are  told  that  the  intelhgentsia  has  grave  moral, 
defects.     Reference  is  made  to  the  sexual  laxity  and  corrup- 

«  Kozlov  (ob.  1901)  was  professor  of  philosophy  in  Kiev  ;  Lopatin  is  pro- 
fessor at  Moscow  university  ;  Losskii  is  professor  of  philosophy  at  St.  Petersburg 
University  and  has  written  works  in  German  ;  Nesmglov  is  professor  at  the 
seminary  in  Kazan. 


438  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

tion  of  youth  and  to  the  prevalence  of  masturbation,  and  in 
the  same  connection  the  writers  speak  of  the  increasing 
frequency  of  suicide,  also  on  the  part  of  the  young. 

It  is  needless  to  undertake  a  detailed  criticism  of  Signposts, 
for  most  of  the  problems  with  which  it  deals  have  been  dis- 
cussed elsewhere  in  these  volumes.  Moreover,  the  writers 
make  no  serious  attempt  to  establish  their  chief  propositions, 
which  appear  merely  as  unsupported  assertions. 

It  was  not  difficult  for  adversaries  to  discover  numerous 
weaknesses  in  Signposts.  There  are  frequent  contradictions, 
as  between  the  various  authors  ;  the  style  is  often  hyper- 
bolical, and  there  are  many  overstatements  upon  matters  of 
fact  ;  the  theses  are  not  precisely  formulated  ;  the  whole  work 
gives  the  impression  of  an  improvisation.  The  validity  of 
these  criticisms  was  recognised  by  some  of  the  contributors, 
and  in  the  course  of  the  discussion  the  book  evoked  they 
modified  and  toned  down  their  views.  None  the  less  the  work 
had  considerable  significance,  for  it  showed  that  quite  a 
number  of  writers,  much  as  they  might  differ  upon  points 
of  detail,  were  agreed  at  least  in  this,  that  it  was  necessary 
to  abandon  the  road  trodden  by  the  radical  intelligentsia 
since  the  days  of  Belinskii  and  Herzen,  and  to  enter  a  new 
domain  of  united  thought  and  activity.  In^a  word.  Signposts 
urged  the  intelligentsia  to  face  the  religious  problem.  A  purely 
political  revolution  is  futile,  said  the  writers,  for  it  can  have" 
no  more  than  political  consequences;  such  consequences  are 
not  worthy  objects  of  desire,  for  the  aspirations  towards  them 
IS  based  upon  false  philosophy  and  false  sentiment. 

Indisputably  since  the  revolution  the  radical  intelligentsia 
has  been  passing  through  a  crisis.  This  crisis  has  involved 
all  Russia,  and  the  great  problem  that  has  to  be  faced  may 
be  formulated  thus  :  Was  the  old  path  a  wrong  one  ;  must 
a  new  path  be  entered  ;  if  so,  v/here  is  that  new  path  to  be 
found  ? 

Most  of  the  writers  in  Signposts  were  by  no  means  clear 
upon  the  last  matter,  and  for  this  reason  the  real  philosophical 
backbone  of  the  book  is  furnished  by  Bulgakov's  essay,  for 
Bulgakov  simply  returns  to  Dostoevski!,  and  with  Dostoevskii 
to  the  church.  Like  Dostoevskii,  Bulgakov  counterposes 
faith  in  God  to  atheistic  nihiHsm,  and  the  worship  of  Christ 
to  the  Feuerbachian  worship  of  man.  The  intelligentsia  must 
discard  socialism  in  all  its  forms,  for  sociaHsm  is  materialistic 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  489 

and  atheistic.  If  the  intelhgentsia  will  abandon  atheism, 
the  chasm  between  the  intelligentsia  and  the  folk  will  be 
bridged  over,  and  the  disastrous  apostasy  in  political,  national, 
and  religious  affairs  will  come  to  an  end.  Bulgakov  unre- 
servedly accepts  Dostoevskii's  ideals,  adopting  that  writer's 
explanation  of  the  contemporary/  Russian  crisis,  and  in  especial 
Dostoevskii's  explanation  of  the  epidemic  of  suicide  among 
young  people,  which  is  ascribed  to  the  prevalence  of  atheism. 

Bulgakov  does  not  develop  these  ideas  in  detail,  and 
plainl}/  assumes  that  his  readers  will  be  familiar  with  Dos- 
toevskii's writings.  But  he  makes  it  sufficiently  clear  that 
the  revolutionaries  are  to  replace  atheistic  heroism  by  Christian 
heroism.  "  Seek  humility,  proud  man,"  he  exclaims  with 
Dostoevskii  ;    "  return  to  Christ,  return  to  Orthodoxy  !  " 

The  new  path  suggested  by  Signposts  is  thus  a  very  old 
one,  but  this  antiquity  does  not  render  the  possibility  of  an 
agreement  to  follow  it  a  matter  of  any  less  urgency. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  detailed  replies  furnished  by 
the  liberals  and  the  social  revolutionaries  did  much  to  favour 
understanding  and  agreement,  for  they  hardly  touched  the 
main  issue,  the  ecclesiastico-religious  problem  ;  and  moreover 
their  treatment  of  all  matters  of  detail  v/as  unduly  abstract. 
Miljukov,  for  example,  showed  very  well  that  rehgious  evolu- 
tion in  Russia  had  been  favoured  by  the  influence  of  western 
ideas,  but  his  conclusion  was  unduly  liberal,  if  I  m.ay  use  the 
expression.  To-day,  said  Miljukov,  there  are  new  possibili- 
ties of  religious  development.  But  we  want  to  know.  What 
possibilities  ?  We  wish  to  know,  further,  what  part  the 
liberal  party  has  to  play  in  this  development,  and  what 
decisions  the  liberals  must  take  upon  religious  and  ecclesiastical 
affairs.^ 

§183. 

IN  the  early  days  of  the  movement,  liberalism  was  inspired 
by  the  spirit  of  the  enlightenment,  was  rationalist,  deist, 
freethinking.     Liberals    sometimes    denied    religion    on    prin- 

'  The  libera!  replies  to  Signposts  were  incorporated  in  a  collection  of  essays 
published  in  1910,  entitled,  The  Intelligentsia  and  the  People.  Most  of  the 
writers  were  men  of  EuropeaiTTepulatioh  :  Petrunkevid,  Arsenev  (literary 
critic),  Gredeskul  (historian),  Maxim  Kovaievskii,  M'ljukov,  Ovsjaniko- 
Kuhkov^kii  (historian  of  literature),  Slavinskii  (beJletristic  writer),  Tugan- 
Baranovskii. 


440  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

ciple  ;  ill  other  cases  they  were  content  to  reject  theology 
and  ecclesiastical  religion. 

Then  came  the  reaction  against  eighteenth-century  ration- 
ahsm  ;  romanticism  arose,  with  its  insistence  upon  imagination 
and  the  hfe  of  feehng.  Liberals,  too,  were  involuntarily 
swept  away  by  the  current,  and  many  a  hberal  became  a 
person  of  motley  views,  half  rationalist  and  half  romanticist. 

Romanticism  effected  the  restoration  and  estabhshed  the 
sway  of  reaction,  and  liberahsm^  underwent  an  analogous 
evolution.  Despite  his  rationahsm,  the  liberal  began  to 
support  the  churoh  in  the  social  and  political  spheres,  for  the 
altar  upholds  the  throne  and  the  bourgeoisie,  and  the  church 
dominates  the  masses.  It  became  a  liberal  doctrine  that 
religion  must  be  preserved  for  the  people.  The  liberal,  the 
aristocrat  of  culture,  might  retain  his  private  opinions,  but 
religion  was  absolutely  essential  for  the  folk  ! 

In  Russia  the  attitude  of  liberaHsm  towards  rehgion  was 
similar  to  that  adopted  in  Europe.  The  more  radical  among 
the  hberals  were  opposed  to  rehgion  on  principle,  whilst  the  less 
radical  declared  against  ecclesiastical  rehgion  and  adopted, 
more  or  less,  the  creed  of  Rousseau  and  his  Savoyard  vicar 
(Radisc^ev,  Granovskh)  ;  the  earher  Slavophils  went  so  far,  at 
any  rate,  as  to  ideahse  ecclesiastical  religion.  When  sociahsm 
began  to  develop  side  by  side  with  liberaHsm,  the  left  wing 
of  the  liberals  adopted  the  sociahsts'  negative  outlook  upon 
religion  and  the  church,  whilst  the  liberal  centre  and  right 
wing  evaded  any  discussion  of  the  principles  of  rehgion.  We 
may  recall  that  Solov'ev  pubhshed  his  later  views  in  the  chief 
liberal  organ.  But  at  this  stage  it  remained  a  matter  of  course 
for  the  liberals  that  they  should  fight  theocratic  ideas  and 
theocratic  policy.  . 

The  significant  beginning  of  the  constitutionahst  era  was 
the  issue  of  the  patent  of  toleration.  The  war  with  Japan, 
entered  into  with  such  high  hopes  in  February  1904,  soon 
proved  disastrous.  Pleve  was  assassinated ;  the  zemstvos 
began  to  stir,  and  the  liberals  made  common  cause  with  the 
revolutionaries  ;  in  November  1904  Svjatopolk-Mirskii  was 
appointed  to  succeed  Ple^^'e,  and  thoughts  were  entertained 
of  summoning  a  zemskii  sobor.  On  December  25th  the  ukase 
to  the  senate  was  issued  demanding  "  provisional  suggestions 
for  the  perfectionment  of  political  institutions  "  ;  a  committee 
of  high  officials  was  thereupon  appointed,  and  this  body  dis- 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  441 

cussed  among  other  questions  that  of  freedom  of  conscience. 
The  first  tangible  concession  on  the  part  of  the  theocracy  was 
the  ukase  concerning  toleration  promulgated  on  April  30, 
1905.  The  theocracy  recognised  clearly  enough  that  certain 
renovations  in  the  Uvarovian  foundations  were  essential,  but 
this  matter,  however  characteristic,  cannot  be  discussed  here. 
My  concern  is  to  describe  the  disputes  that  ensued  among 
the  dignitaries  who  were  discussing  the  necessary  reforms. 
Information  upon  this  subject  is  afforded  by  a  recent  pubU- 
cation  containing  the  correspondence  between  the  liberals 
and  the  reactionaries  [Historical  Correspondence  concerning 
the  Destiny  of  the  Orthodox  Church,  1912). 

The  leaders  on  the  two  sides  were  Witte  for  the  Uberals 
and  Pobedonoscev  for  the  theocrats.  Witte  admits  that 
the  church  has  been  bureaucratised  and  subjected  to  hier- 
archical control,  that  the  dioceses  have  lost  their  ancient  right 
of  electing  bishops,  that  the  congregations  are  decaying.  He 
deplores  that  the  clergy  should  lend  themselves  to  misuse 
as  poKce  agents  and  detectives  ;  he  recognises  the  inadequacy 
of  the  lifeless  church  schools  ;  he  shares  the  views  of  those 
who  have  regarded  Peter's  reforms  as  uncanonical,  and  who 
have  demanded  that  the  church  be  rendered  independent  of 
the  state,  this  independence  being  secured  (above  all)  by  the 
reestablishment  of  the  patriarchate.  He  is  aware  that  the 
congregations  have  lost  their  Hberties  owing  to  pohtical  central- 
isation and  owing  to  serfdom  (Uvarov,  likewise,  had  recognised 
this  connection).  Witte  eloquently  defends  the  freedom  of 
the  church  and  of  rehgion,  advocates  local  self-government 
in  ecclesiastical  matters  as  against  centrahsation,  and  suggests 
•the  revival  of  the  conciliary  principle. 

Antonii  the  metropoUtan,  who  dreads  the  autonomy  of 
the  sects,  prudently  defends  the  freedom  of  his  church  ; 
whereas  Pobgdonoscev  is  all  fire  and  fury  when  he  defends 
the  existing  order  against  the  onslaughts  of  Witte.  To  the 
procurator,  the  synod  is  a  permanent  council ;  the  centralisation 
of  the  church  and  the  estabhshment  of  hierarchical  authority 
have  been  essential  ;  independent  congregations  are  now 
impossible  ;  and  so  on.  In  a  word,  all  is  for  the  best  in  the 
best  of  all  possible  churches. 

It  seems  strange  to  find  Witte  defending  the  Hberty  of 
the  church.  It  was  Witte  who  had  fought  against  freedom 
for  the  zemstvos,  on  the  ground  that  such  freedom  would  be 


442  THE    SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

a  menace  to  autocracy.  It  was  Witte  who  proved  vacillating 
and  indecisive  as  first  premier,  his  only  ideal  being  to  main- 
tain and  fortify  the  state  authority.  The  same  ideal  underlay 
his  plea  on  behalf  of  the  Russian  church.  He  was  not  con- 
cerned about  religion  for  its  own  sake,  but  hoped  to  strengthen 
the  state  by  strengthening  the  church  ! 

The  modern  liberal  believes  only  in  the  state  and  its 
providence  ;  but  in  an  hour  weighty  with  responsibilities  Witte 
recalled  rehgion  to  mind,  for  the  infallibility  and  providence 
of  his  secular  god  seem.ed  to  him  a  broken  reed  in  view  of 
the  personalities  through  whom  that  deity's  activities  secured 
expression. 

Bulgakov  contends  that  the  mission  of  the  intelHgentsia 
is  to  secure  a  return  to  Christ — to  Christ,  not  to  Kant  or  to 
Hume.  For  Bulgakov,  Christ  means  the  Orthodox  church, 
though  he  is  forced  to  admit  that  all  is  not  in  order  in  the 
official  church.  His  desire  is  that  malcontents  shall  not  leave 
the  church,  shall  not  exult  over  its  defects,  but  shall  endeavour 
to  reform  it  from  within.  Moreover,  to  one  who  has  faith 
in  the  mystical  life  of  the  church,  the  historically  extant 
outward  form  of  the  institution  cannot  possibly  be  a  stumbling- 
block. 

It  had  been  my  impression  that  Bulgakov's  conversion 
was  the  outcome  of  genuine  religious  need,  and  I  was  therefore 
eager  to  ascertain  what  had  been  his  attitude  towards  the 
electoral  alliance  between  the  synod  and  the  reaction.  In 
his  account  of  the  elections  to  the  fourth  dum.a  he  speaks  of 
the  conduct  of  the  synod  with  much  indignation.  He 
even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  Russia  is  actually  perishing 
under  our  eyes,  that  "  Holy  "  Russia  has  alhed  herself  with 
the  basest  elements  of  the  mob.  Russia,  he  continues,  is 
poisoned  by  a  twofold  nihihsm,  the  nihilism  of  the  intelHgentsia 
and  the  nihilism  of  the  bureaucracy,  and  the  latter  is  the  worse. 
He  deplores  that  hitherto  his  attacks  have  been  too  exclu- 
sively directed  against  the  former,  but  consoles  himself  in 
the  end  with  the  reflection  that  "  belief  in  the  church  is  not 
inseparably  connected  with  the  status  quo  of  her  extant 
local  organisations," 

These  are  remarkable  concessions  from  a  defender  of  the 
church.  Bulgakov  makes  us  feel  that  he  finds  the  church 
too  narrow  for  him,  but  that  he  is  able  for  the  time  being  to 
salve   his   conscience   by   talking   of   the   churches   as    "  local 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  448 

organisations."  The  association  between  the  synod  and  the 
"  black  hundred  "  was  not  fortuitous,  however,  for  the  church 
is  unprogressive  and  reactionary  by  tradition  and  on  principle. 
"  Sint  ut  sunt  aut  non  sint,"  applies  to  the  third  Rome  no 
less  than  to  the  second. 

Struve  seeks  a  similar  expedient,  saying,  "  the  Christian 
faith  has  no  intimate  connection  with  any  specific  political 
forms  and  institutions."  But  apart  from  the  consideration 
that  the  authors  of  Signposts  were  concerned,  not  with  ideal 
Christianity,  but  with  the  actual  Christianity  of  the  Russian 
church,  Struve  is  merely  evading  a  straightforward  answer 
to  the  religious  problem. 

Miljukov,  too,  notwithstanding  his  hostihty  to  Struve 
and  the  others,  shuns  the  issue  of  principle.  He  tells  us  that 
Tolstoi  and  Tolstoi's  rehgious  crusade  are  a  proof  of  the  exis- 
tence of  "  new  possibilities "  of  religious  development  in 
Russia.  Yet  we  cannot  but  remember  that  Tolstoi  was 
excommunicated  from  the  church  of  Pobedonoscev,  and  that 
he  would  have  been  sent  to  Siberia  had  it  not  been  for  the 
personal  intervention  of  the  tsar  ;  we  have,  moreover,  to 
enquire,  what  are  the  "  new  possibihties  "  of  religious  develop- 
ment of  which  Miljukov  is  thinking. 

Let  me  quote  once  mere  from  Feuerbach.  "  I  would  not 
give  a  rush  for  political  liberty  if  I  v/ere  to  remain  a  slave  of 
religious  fancies  and  prejudices.  True  freedom  can  be  found 
there  only  where  man  is  free  also  from  the  tyranny  of  rehgion." 

Most  of  the  Russian  liberals  adopted  the  same  attitude 
towards  religion  as  had  been  adopted  by  their  European 
prototypes.  Fundamentally  they  followed  the  teaching  of 
old  TatisCev,  v/ho  had  advised  his  son  never  to  renounce 
religious  belief  publicly  and  never  to  change  his  creed.  Pirogov, 
the  philosopher  and  pedagogue,  gives  expression  in  his  diary 
to  these  rules  of  Descartes  in  the  follov/ing  words  :  "As  long 
as  I  make  no  attempt  to  leave  the  bosom  of  the  state  church, 
as  long  as  I  raise  no  hand  against  that  church,  as  long  as  I 
pay  it  all  due  respect,  in  a  v/ord,  as  long  as  I  do  nothing  which 
can  be  construed  as  hostile  to  the  national  and  state  rehgion 
which  I  and  my  family  profess,  my  personal  faith,  a  matter 
which  I  keep  to  myself,  is  no  one's  business  but  my  own." 

Thus  in  the  religious  sphere  Russian  liberalism  has  become 
a  system  of  indifierentism,  and  therein  lies  the  secret  of  its 
weakness.     Liberalism  is  not  sceptical  merely,  but  indifferent ; 


444  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

and  indifferentism,  not  scepticism,  is  the  true  unbelief.  This 
Uberal  unbelief  clings  to  the  church  in  whi^h  it  has  ceased  to 
believe  just  as  the  tsar  clings  to  the  church. 


II  . 

§  184. 

THE    social    revolutionaries'    reply   to    Signposts    appeared 
contemporaneously  with   that   of   the   Hberals,   and  was 
entitled  Signposts  as  Signs  of  tjie  Time  (1910),!  an  apt  name. 
Signposts   was   stigmatised   as   the   most   reactionary   volume 
that  had  been  issued  from  the  press  for  many  years,  and  Struve 
and  his  associates  were  taxed  with  falseness  and  equivocation. 
In  points  of  detail  the  comprehensive  work   contained  much 
^    that  was   good,   but   the   main  issue    (the  rehgious  problem) 
*^vas  left  unconsidered.     Speaking  generally  we  may  say  that 
.f<he   social   revolutionary    "  anti-signposts "    were    directed   to 
the    wrong    quarter.     From    the    social    revolutionary    camp 
there  was  issued  almost  simultaneously  a  critique  of  revisionism 
which  was  enormously  superior  to  Signposts  in  respect  of  its 
analytic  depth. 

In  January  1909  "  Russkaja  Mysl "  (Russian  Thought), 
a  Moscow  review  edited  by  Struve,  began  the  publication  of" 
a  novel  entitled  The  Pale  Horse.  The  work  takes  the  form  of 
a  diary  extending  from  March  6th  to  October  5  th  of  a  single 
year.  The  author,  V.  Ropsin,  was  a  man  previousl}'^  unknown. 
The  implication  of  the  title  is  conveyed  by  the  first  of  the 
two  mottoes  :  •"  .  .  .  and  behold  a  pale  horse  ;  and  his  name 
that  sat  on  him  was  Death  .  .  ."  (Revelation  vi.  8).  Neither 
this  motto  nor  the  other,  "  But  he  that  hateth  his  brother  is 
in  darkness,  and  walketh  in  darkness,  and  knoweth  not 
whither  he  goeth,  because  that  darkness  hath  blinded  his  eyes  " 
(i  John  ii.  11),  can  be  regarded  as  attractive  to  the  ordinary 
reader,  for  they  suggest  that  the  novel  is  to  be  a  contribution 
to  the  prevalent  mysticism,  to  the  apocalyptic  mysticism 
of  Merezkovskii  and  similar  rehgious  decadents.  But  the 
opening  pages  arrest  our  attention.  We  learn  that  the  diary 
is  kept  by  the  leader  of  a  terrorist  group  of  five  persons  who 
are  to  assassinate  the  governor  of  a  provincial  town.     A  terrorist 

»  Most  of  the  authors  wroce  anonymously.     Two  of  the  articles  were  almost 
certainly  from  the  pen  of  Cernov,  whilst  SiSkov  contributed  one. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  445 

who  quotes  the  apocalypse  and  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 
is  a  new  type.  A  new  feature,  too,  in  terrorist  fiction  is  the 
liaison  between  the  hero  and  Erna,  the  chemist  of  the  group. 
The  relationship  between  George  and  Erna  comes  into  the 
category  of  what  is  known  as  free  love,  and  we  are  told  at 
the  very  outset  that  when  George  holds  Erna  in  his  arms  he 
thinks  of  another  woman,  Elena.  The  diary  opens  with  the 
account  of  these  love  relationships,  but  passes  immediately 
to  the  consideration  of  its  main  ethical  problem,  that  of  the 
right  to  kill  :  "  Why  shouldn't  one  kill  ?  And  why  is  murder 
justified  in  one  case  and  not  in  another  ?  People  do  find 
reasons,  but  I  don't  know  why  one  should  not  kill ;  and  I 
cannot  understand  why  to  kill  in  the  name  of  this  or  that  is 
considered  right,  while  to  kill  in  the  name  of  something  else 
is  v^Tong.  ...  I  am  not  conscious  of  hate  or  anger  when  I 
think  of  him.  At  the  same  time  I  do  not  feel  any  pity  for 
him.  As  a  personality  he  leaves  me  indifferent.  But  I  want 
him  to  die.  Strength  will  break  a  straw.  I  don't-  beUeve 
in  words.  I  do  not  want  to  be  a  slave  myself,  and  do  not 
want  any  one  else  to  be  one."  ^ 

As  I  read,  I  feel  that  I  am  making  the  acquaintance  of  a 
new  type  of  terrorist,  and  of  a  real  terrorist,  not  an  imaginary 
one.  My  Russian  correspondents  inform  me  that  Rop§in,  a 
young  man  of  about  thirty,  married  to  a  daughter  of  the  poet 
Uspenskii,  was^  the  leading  spirit  in  the  assassination  of  Pteve 
and  in  that  of  the  grand  duke  Sergius.  In  the  periodical 
"  Byloe,"  devoted  to  the  history  of  the  revolution,  RopSin's 
mother  has  given  an  account  of  the  author  of  The  Pale  Horse. 
His  real  name,  it  appears,  is  Savinkov.  Arrested  and  con- 
demned for  his  participation  in  the  before-mentioned  assas- 
sinations, he  escaped  from  prison  a  few  days  before  the  date 
fixed  for  his  execution,  and  now  lives  abroad  as  a  member 
of  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party. 

Ropsin's  George  (and  this,  again,  is  something  new  in  a 
terrorist)  thinks  and  feels  precisely  after  the  manner  of  Ivan 
Karamazov.  Whilst  Ivan  was  a  typical  representative  of 
the  opposition  intelHgentsia,  was  a  philosophic  revolutionist, 
George  combined  the  roles  of  philosophic  revolutionist  and 
practical  revolutionist.     Dostoevskii,  it  must  be  remembered, 

I  The  quotations  are  made  from  the  English  version  of  the  novel,  V.  Ropshin, 
The  Pale  Morse,  translated  from  the  Russian  by  Z.  Vengerova,  Maunsel,  Dublin, 
1917,  and  Allen  and  Unwin,  London,   1918. 


446  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

employed  the  figure  of  Ivan  to  manifest  his  hostilitj'  to  the 
revolution,  but  Ropsin  accepts  on  behalf  of  his  own  generation 
Dostoevski's  analysis  of  the  revolution, 

Dostoevskii  represented  the  ethico-political  alternatives 
of  force  and  love  as  religious  in  character,  as  the  alternatives 
of  unfaith  and  faith,  as  the  alternatives  of  murder  or  suicide 
on  the  one  hand  and  life  on  the  other.  Ivan  and  his  half- 
brother  Smerdjakov  are  contrasted  with  Aliosha.  Ivan  and 
Smerdjakov  commit  parricide  ;  Smerdjakov  kills  himself  ; 
Aliosha  is  the  apostle  of  life  to  the  young  men  of  his  generation. 

RopSin  puts  Dostoevskii's  philosophy  into  the  mouth  of 
Vanja,  one  of  the  members  of  the  group  : 

"  Now,  tell  me,  have  you  ever  thought  of  Christ  ?  " 

"  Of  whom  ?  " 

"  Of  Christ,  of  the  God-Man  Christ  ?  Did  you  ever  ask 
yourself  what  you  ought  to  believe  in  and  how  you  ought 
to  live  ?  In  my  lodgings,  in  the  driver's  yard,  I  often  read 
the  Gospels,  and  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  only  two 
ways  are  open  to  men,  no  more  than  two.  One  is  to  believe 
that  everything  is  permissible.  Please,  understand  me — 
everything,  without  exception.  Now  that  leads  to  the  making 
of  such  a  character  as  Dostoevskii's  Smerdjakov,  provided 
that  a  man  has  a  mind  to  dare  and  not  to  shrink  at  any 
consideration.  After  all,  there  is  logic  in  such  an  attitude  : 
since  God  does  not  exist,  since  Christ  is  but  a  man,  there  is 
no  love  as  well  ;  there  is  nothing  whatever  to  stop  you.  The 
other  is  the  way  of  Christ  which  leads  to  Christ.  Tell  me, 
if  there  is  love  in  a  man's  heart — I  mean  real,  deep  love — 
could  he  kill  or  not  ?  " 

Vanja  is  a  mystic.  He  feels  that  his  death  is  drawing 
near  ;  before  death  the  soul  concentrates  its  energies  and 
looks  beyond  the  limits  of  sense  and  of  the  every-day  under- 
standing. There  is  something  more  than  reason,  says  Vanja, 
but  we  have  blinkers  on. 

George  is  a  rationalist  extremist.  Just  as  Ivan  extolled 
Euclidean  reasoning,  so  does  George  extol  arithmetic  ;  like 
Ivan,  he  now  beheves  in  nothing,  neither  in  God  nor  in  Christ, 
nor  even  in  the  watchword  of  his  party,  in  the  war  cry,  "  Land 
and  Hberty  !  "  These  for  him  are  mere  words.  Can  fifteen 
desjatinas  of  land  (he  asks  in  the  phrase  of  Kropotkin)  make 
a  man  happy  ?  Sociahsm,  he  says,  is  only  Martha,  and  Martha 
is  only  half  the  truth.      The  other  half  of  truth  is  Mary — 


THE   SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA  447 

— and  where  is  Mary  ?  George  admits  that  the  man  is  happy 
who  believes  in  Christ,  who  believes  in  socialism,  who  believes 
in  anything  at  all,  and  his  chief  longing  is  for  religious  faith  : 
"  I  would  pray  if  I  could  !  "  But  George  is  a  sceptic 
through  and  through,  and  his  path  therefore  does  not  lead 
towards  any  goal ;  he  is  a  rudderless  ship  ;  life  is  to  him 
nothing  more  than  a  puppet  show  at  a  fair.  "  What  is  my 
law  ?  "  he  asks,  and  replies,  "  I  am  on  the  boundary  line 
between  life  and  death,  and  there,  where  death  rules,  there 
is  no  law,  for  law  relates  to  life  alone." 

If  he  could  think  hke  his  comrade  Van] a,  he  would  not 
kill.  But  since  his  mission  is  to  kill,  he  cannot  think  like 
Vanja.  Besides,  Van] a,  the  Tolstoian,  is  none  the  less 
prepared  to  kill. 

George  accepts  Nietzsche's  superman,  more  especially 
since  an  anticipatory  sketch  of  the  superman  was  given  by 
Dostoevskii.  The  superman  of  Nietzsche  and  Dostoevski! 
loves  no  one,  not  even  himself.  "  I  am  alone.  If  there  is 
none  to  protect  me,  I  am  my  own  protector.  If  I  have  no 
God,  I  am  my  own  God."  George's  reasoning  recalls  Feuer- 
bach's  "  Homo  homini  deus  "  ;  and  since  the  days  of  Herzen, 
Feuerbach's  teaching  has  inspired  revolutionary  philosophy 
with  atheism.  Dostoevskii  ccunterposed  the  God-Man  to 
Feuerbach's  man-god.  George  knows  this,  but  follows 
Feuerbach  and  Ivan,  not  AHosha.  In  Ivan's  company  he 
follows  the  first  steps  of  Faust.  Just  as  Faust  is  preserved 
from  the  sinister  phial  by  the  sound  of  the  Easter  bells,  so  is 
George's  mood  softened  at  Eastertide,  and  he  philosophises 
upon  Christ's  resurrection.  It  then  seems  to  him  that  he 
can  and  must  believe  in  miracle,  seeing  that  for  one  who 
believes  in  miracle  there  are  no  difficulties,  and  violence  is 
therefore  needless. 

Like  Ivan,  George  craves  for  life,  for  a  full  life.  He  would 
like  to  live  "  as  the  grass  grows,"  without  questionings,  without 
pangs  of  conscience,  without  thought.  That  is  why  he  loves 
to  read  ancient  authors,  to  read  the  works  of  those  who  did 
not  seek  for  the  truth,  but  simply  lived.  Similarly  in  Siberia, 
after  his  escape  from  prison,  he  recovered  his  delight  in  life. 
During  the  first  days  after  his  escape  there  was  dead  indiffer- 
ence in  his  heart.  Pie  did  iTiechanically  all  that  was  necessary 
to  avoid  being  recaptured,  but  why  he  did  it  he  could  not 
tell.     A  day  came,  however,  when  he  was  walking  alone  in 


448  THE   SPIRIT    OF   RUSSIA 

the  evening,  and  realised  that  the  spring  was  all  around 
him,  that  life  was  before  him,  that  he  was  young  and  strong 
and  in  perfect  health.  George  loves  nature,  which  has  on 
him  a  tranquilHsing  effect  and  fills  him  with  the  joy  of  Hfe  ; 
then  he  becomes  all  contemplation,  and  must  not  think. 

Thought,  that  is  the  trouble  !  Like  his  predecessors,  the 
old  German  romanticists,  George  would  like  "  simply  to  live, 
as  the  grass  grows."  In  Nietzschean  fashion,  he  would  follow 
instinct  only,  and  follows  instinct,  continually  seeking  after 
woman.  He  lives  with  Erna,  but  seeks  and  ultimately  finds 
Elena  as  well.  Elena's  word  to  him  is,  "  Give  up  thinking, 
and  kiss." 

George  is  not  Faust  alone,  he  is  also  Don  Juan.  He  has 
read  Arcybasev's  Sanine,  the  Don  Juan  of  the  disillusioned 
revolutionists.  But  Ropsin's  Don  Juan  (be  it  accounted  to 
RopSin's  credit)  is  more  human.  Nevertheless,  the  mood  of 
Solomon  overcomes  him  ;  he  finds  life  wearisome,  saying, 
"  All  is  vanity  and  lies  !  " 

George  follows  Dostoevskii,  Nietzsche,  Goethe — he  follows 
Goethe's  Faust,  relives  Faust.  We  are  told  in  the  histories 
of  literature  that  Faust  is  the  representative  of  the  modern 
type  of  man.  But  did  not  Faust,  too,  kill  ?  Did  not  he  stab 
Gretchen's  brother  ?  Must  not  Faust  be  held  accountable  for 
the  death  of  Gretchen's  mother  and  for  the  death  of  his  own 
child  ?  -Was  he  not  cowardly  in  the  way  in  which  he  allowed 
Gretchen  to  go  to  her  death  ?  And  did  not  Faust  wish  to 
put  an  end  to. his  own  life  ?  The  modern  type  of  man  ?  Do 
not  we  see  in  Faust  an  exemplification  of  Dostoevskii's  formula, 
that  he  who  abandons  the  ancient  faith,  he  who  throws  the 
old  aside,  is  confronted  with  the  brutal  alternative  of  murder 
or  suicide  ?  By  Dostoevskii,  this  spiritual  state  is  termed 
atheism,  and  in  his  Faust- Ivan  he  demonstrates  its  conse- 
quences.    Is  Faust,  the  whole  Faust,  really  the  modern  man  ? 

The  first  attempt  on  the  governor's  life  is  a  complete 
failure.  At  the  second  attempt,  though  the  bomb  explodes, 
the  governor  is  unhurt,  whilst  in  the  explosion  and  subsequent 
pursuit  ten  persons  are  killed  or  seriously  injured,  and  Fedor, 
who  had  been  designated  by  the  group  as  the  practical  leader 
on  this  occasion,  kills  himself  to  avoid  capture.  The  third 
attempt  is  successful,  but  Vanja,  the  thrower  of  the  bomb, 
is  arrested  and  eventually  hanged. 

From  the  purely  utilitarian  outlook,  no  less  than  ethically 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  449 

and  philosophically,  George  is  compelled  to  ask  himself  whether 
to  achieve  the  death  of  a  governor  is  worth  so  much  sacrifice, 
and  whether  the  sacrifice  fm-thers  the  end,  brings  nearer  the 
attainment  of  poUtical  and  social  liberty.  Moreover,  he 
doubts  whether  it  is  still  right  to  practise  terrorism  now  that 
Russia  has  a  constitution. 

Not  merely,  however,  is  George  oppressed  by  the  problem 
of  the  right  to  life  and  death,  and  by  his  doubts  concerning 
the  utiHty  and  purposefulness  of  terrorism  ;  but  further,  the 
terrorist's  outlawed  existence  is  utterly  repulsiye  to  him. 
Without  a  country,  without  a  name  (for  he  is  always  appearing 
under  some  new  alias),  without  a  family,  George  has  to  lead 
a  life  of  fraud  and  falsehood.  There  chase  one  another 
through  his  brain  thoughts  concerning  God  and  human  destiny, 
concerning  the  future  of  Russia  and  of  humanity  ;  he  would 
like  to  sit  down  and  quietly  think  out  his  own  attitude  towards 
the  ideas  of  Dostoevskii,  Nietzsche,  Goethe,  Tolstoi,  etc.  But 
his  connection  with  the  revolutionary  party  compels  him  to 
lead  the  Hfe  of  a  spy  ;  all  his  thoughts  and  all  his  activities 
must  be  concentrated  upon  a  single  point ;  like  Tihomirov, 
the  revolutionary  leader  who  abjured  revolution  at  the  close 
of  the  eighties,  George  feels  the  pettiness,  deplores  the 
restrictedness,  of  his  mental  horizon. 

W^at  to  him  is  governor  X  or  governor  Y  ?  Hecuba — 
and  yet  something  more.  WTien  the  first  attempt  miscarries, 
George's  mood  becomes  tinged  with  gall,  and  from  the  moment 
when  the  governor  has  given  him  a  friendly  greeting  in  the 
street  he  conceives  a  personal  hatred  for  the  man.  A  strange 
sentiment  of  revenge  overpowers  him,  and  it  becomes  clear 
to  him  that  he  does  not  wish  to  lead  a  peaceful  Hfe,  that 
blood-letting  charms  him  for  its  own  sake. 

George,  therefore,  does  not  merely  kill  his  political 
opponent.  He  challenges  Elena's  husband,  feeling  certain 
that  his  bullet  will  lay  the  man  low.  He  cannot  endure  that 
he  should  not  have  exclusive  possession  of  Elena.  Elena  does 
not  believe  in  eternal  love,  and  he  has  himself  expressed  to 
Erna  his  disbelief  in  such  love,  but  in  Elena's  mouth  the 
sentiment  seems  utterly  wrong  to  him  ! 

We  are  given  an  insight  into  a  moral  chaos.  George  feels, 
none  the  less,  that  to  kill  in  the  war  with  Japan  and  to  slay 
Elena's  husband  are  two  different  things,  for  the  latter 
killing  is  something  which  he  does  solely  for  himself,  is   the 

30  VOL.    II. 


450         '  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

act  of  an  egoist.  In  the  end  it  becomes  perfectly  clear  to  him 
that  he  has  no  ties  with  any  one  in  the  world,  that  he  cares 
nothing  either  for  any  individual  or  for  the  world  at  large. 
The  emissary  from  the  central  committee  seeks  him  out. 
The  party  has  a  difficult  task  to  entrust  to  George.  But 
George  suddenly  decides  that  he  will  have  nothing  to  do  with 
the  matter,  that  he  does  not  wish  to  kill.  "  M^.y  kill  ?  " 
he  asks.  The  emissary,  probably  a  man  who  has  spent  his 
days  in  prison  or  in  Siberia,  seems  to  him  only  an  old  fellow 
in  his  dotage.  "  He  looked  anxiously  at  me  and  stroked  my 
hand  affectionately  like  a  father.  But  I  knew  for  certain  : 
I  was  not  with  him,  nor  with  Vanja,  nor  with  Erna.  I  was 
with  no  one."  He  decides  that  he  will  cease  to  live.  Memo- 
ries of  childhood  and  of  his  mother's  love  cannot  teach  him 
to  love  his  fellow  men.  The  world  has  become  accursed  to 
him.  He  had  a  desire  of  old,  and  accomplished  his  task. 
Now  the  desire  is  gone.  The  ultra-rationalist  sickens  from 
infirmity  of  will.  "  I  am  alone.  I  will  leave  the  dull  puppet 
show."  The  beautiful  autumn  day  beguiles  him  for  a  moment, 
but  when  night  falls  George  will  say  his  last  word.  "  My 
revolver  is  with  me." 

Ropsin  gives  a  gruesome  confirmation  of  Dostoevskii's 
formula,  the  alternatives  of  murder  and  suicide.  Erna  takes 
her  own  life,  not  merely  because  the  police-spies  are  upon  her 
trail.  Fedor  kills  his  pursuers  and  finally  himself  because, 
like  George,  he  sees  no  meaning  in  the  life  he  has  been  leading. 
"  I  will  reserve  the  last  shot  for  myself  .  .  .  that  will  settle 
it  " — such  is  the  mood  in  which  he  undertakes  the  affair.  If 
he  is  not  killed  in  the  struggle,  he  will  kill  himself.  Vanja  is 
of  a  very  different  type.  He  kills,  but  knows  even  as  he  does 
so  that  he  is  committing  a  great  sin.  He  hopes  that  he  too 
will  be  killed  by  the  bomb  that  he  throws,  conceiving  that 
his  own  death  will  be  an  appropriate  punishment  for  his  crime. 
He  submits  quietly  to  arrest  that  he  may  atone  with  his  own 
death,  for  he  has  no  wish  to  continue  living  after  he  has 
committed  murder.  He  was  a  peculiar  Christian  or  half- 
Christian.  In  a  letter  to  his  friends  which  he  managed  to 
smuggle  out  of  prison  he  wrote  :  "I  did  not  feel  in  me  the 
strength  to  live  for  the  sake  of  love,  and  I  understood  that 
I  could  die  and  ought  to  die  for  the  sake  of  it." 

According  to  Vanja,  and  he  is  here  reproducing  Dostoevskii's 
thought,  it  is  easy  to  die  for  another,  easy  to  sacrifice  one's 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  451 

life  for  mankind  ;  but  it  is  far  more  difficult  to  live  for  mankind, 
to  live  in  love  from  day  to  day,  from  minute  to  minute.  In 
his  mysticism,  Vanja  supplements  this  theory  by  modifying 
the  words  of  the  Gospel.  "  Just  remember,"  he  says,  "  the 
words  '  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay 
down  his  life  for  his  friends.'  And  he  must  lay  down  more 
than  his  life — his  soul." 

The  logic  is  chaotic.  Vanja  pi esumes  upon  the  boundless 
mercy  of  Christ,  and  hopes  for  pardon  in  the  other  world. 
He  is  superstitious,  and  George  the  rationalist  is  likewise 
superstitious. 

Beyond  question,  Ropsin  had  in  mind  the  frequency  of 
suicide  among  the  revolutionary  intelligentsia.  He  must 
have  been  acquainted  with  the  discussions  concerning  this 
matter  which  have  formed  a  leading  theme  of  recent  literature. 
He  may  have  been  conversant  with  Mihailovskii's  analysis. 
His  own  decision  is  entirely  accordant  with  Dostoevskii's 
formula.  He  makes  suicide  appear  as  the  logical  end  of  the 
rationaHst,  the  basis  of  whose  mentaUty  is  his  ego — an  ego 
conceived  as  naught. 

Stepniak's  novel  was  written  only  twenty  3/ears  before 
that  of  Ropsin,  but  how  great  is  the  difference  between  the 
characters  portrayed  in  the  two  books,  how  widely  sundered 
are  the  respective  conceptions  of  the  terrorist  revolution.  It 
is  true  that  Andrei  and  George  in  Stepniak's  book  (presumably 
Ropsin  was  thinking  of  his  predecessor's  work  when  he  chose 
the  name  of  George  for  his  hero)  occasionally  ask  themselves 
whether  they  have  the  right  to  kill.  The  question  was  con- 
tinually being  asked  by  the  opponents  of  the  revolution,  and 
Stepniak  was  certainly  acquainted  with  Dostoevskii,  but  the 
enquiry  is  unhesitatingly  answered  by  "  a  life  for  a  life."  Such 
is  the  creed  of  Stepniak's  hero,  and  such  was  the  explanation 
(if  not  the  justification)  of  his  own  terrorist  act.  Shortty  before 
his  death  (he  was  run  over  by  a  train  in  London  in  1895) 
he  wrote  the  following  words  in  a  girl's  album  :  "  Remain  true 
to  yourself  and  you  will  never  know  the  pangs  of  conscience, 
which  are  the  only  real  unhappiness  [in  life."  Stepniak, 
Brandes  assures  us,  knew  nothing  of  the  pangs  of  conscience. 

Stepniak's  revolutionists  have  faith  ;  they  believe  enthusi- 
astically in  Russia,  in  socialism,  and  in  the  social  revolution  ; 
they  are  atheists,  for  atheism  is  one  item  of  the  nihihst  program, 
but   they  have  replaced  belief   in  the  old  God  by   belief  in 


452  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Russia  and  the  muzik.  These  atheists  have  not  yet  become 
man-gods,  they  have  not  yet  become  aristocratic  supermen 
to  whom  everything  is  permissible.  They  carry  on  their 
war  Hke  formal  belligerents,  and  are  permeated  with  the  con- 
viction that  their  sacrifice  is  an  act  of  duty.  Environed  by 
an  atmosphere  of  death,  these  revolutionists  regard  them- 
selves as  victims  of  the  sacrifice,  feeling  themselves  in  truth 
to  be  already  dead.  Such  a  man  leaves  his  young  wife  without 
hesitation,  but  it  is  to  go  to  his  death,  for  his  relationship  to 
women  in  general  and  to  his  wife  in  particular  is  very  different 
from  that  of  Ropsin's  George.  George  is  a  polygamist,  a 
decadent  polygamist,  but  Stepniak's  revolutionist  is  a  strict 
monogamist.  We  feel  that  in  many  cases  the  relationship 
between  man  and  wife  may  have  been  in  confcrmity  with  the 
ideal  propounded  by  Tolstoi  in  the  Kreutzer  Sonata.  Ropsin's 
George  debihtates  his  nerves  in  accordance  with  all  the  rules 
of  sexual  pathology  Characteristic  is  the  manner  in  which, 
simply  from  boredom,  he  visits  the  public  places  where 
women  offer  themselves  for  sale.  (Does  it  not  seem  likely 
that  Ropsin  was  familiar  with  Alphonse  Daudet's  Une 
petite  paroisse,  which  contains  an  analysis  of  a  decadent 
anarchist  soul  ?) 

In  a  word,  the  revolutionist  of  earlier*  days  was  quite 
objectively  devoted  to  his  party  and  to  the  cause  of  the  people  ; 
free  from  subjectivism,  devoid  of  scepticism,  his  faith  rose 
to  the  pitch  of  fanaticism.  The  latter-day  revolutionist  is 
subjectivist,  infidel,  individualist  to  the  uttermost  limit  of 
social  isolation,  a  sceptic  through  and  through.  The  man 
of  the  earlier  type  was  a  follower  of  John  Stuart  Mill,  of  the 
writer  who,  despite  his  utilitarianism,  demanded  the  sacrifice 
of  1  fe  ;  in  offering  up  his  life  to  an  ideal,  such  a  revolutionary 
felt  himself  to  be  a  consecrated  victim.  The  modem  revolu- 
tionist does  not  believe  in  any  ideal ;  he  has  carried  out  the 
thoughts  of  Feuerbach  and  Stirner  to  their  logical  conclusion  ; 
the  desecration  of  all  that  is  holy  has  culminated  in  cynicism. 
He  will  kill,  but  his  act  is  a  personal  one  ;  he  feels  personally 
injured  by  his  opponent,  the  deed  must  shake  him  out  of  his 
own  apathy,  and  the  adversary's  death  acts  on  him  as  a 
stimulant.  The  earlier  revolutionist  had  no  thought  of  suicide, 
but  would  kill  himself  unhesitatingly  to  avoid  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  police,  or  to  spite  the  prison  administration.  For 
RopSin's  George,  on   the  other  hand,  suicide  is  desirable  in 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  453 

itself,  is  the  means  by  which  an  escape  can  be  secured  from 
this  dull  variety  entertainment  which  is  hfe. 

Much  more  might  be  said  on  this  topic,  but  my  present 
aim  is  merely  to  display  the  significance  of  The  Pale  Horse 
in  relation  to  the  contemporary  crisis  in  revolutionism. 

I  have  Uttle  space  to  devote  to  Rop§in  as  artist  and  man 
of  letters,  for  the  philosophic  content  of  his  book  has  so 
largely  absorbed  my  attention.  His  style  contrasts  with  that 
of  the  more  modern  decadents.  It  is  extremely  simple  ;  he 
loves  short,  staccato  sentences,  this  being  in  keeping  with  the 
diary  form.  As  a  whole  and  in  its  details  the  work  is  skilfully 
composed.  For  example,  George's  relationships  with  women 
are  indicated  at  the  outset,  and  the  ethical  and  religious  problem 
as  propounded  by  Dostoevskii  is  placed  in  the  foreground  of 
the  discussion.  Ropsin's  analysis  of  nihihsm  is  at  the  same 
time  an  analysis  of  the  Karamazov  disease  ;  Ivan  Karamazov 
is  Faust  and  Don  Juan  rolled  into  one.  Revolutionary  tech- 
nique, which  plays  a  great  part  in  Stepniak's  writings,  is 
but  cursorily  sketched  by  Ropsin,  whose  leading  interest  is 
in  the  metaphysics  of  revolution.  We  feel  that  for  the  author 
these  metaphysical  problems  have  been  matters  of  personal 
experience,  that  he  has  himself  hved  the  Faust-Ivan  life. 

I  must  not  be  taken  as  implying  that  in  George,  Ropsin 
is  merely  describing  himself  and  his  own  experiences.  He 
deliberately  distributes  his  personal  experiences  among  the 
various  characters,  among  George  and  his  comrades.  Dos- 
toevskii employed  a  similar  method.  Much  in  the  book  is 
personal  experience,  but  RopSin  is  not  analysing  himself 
merely,  for  he  considers  also  the  psychology  of  his  associates 
and  of  the  whole  revolutionary  movement  since  the  close 
of  the  nineties. 

In  A  Mother's  Reminiscences,  S.  A.  Savinkova  tells  us  that 
her  two  sons  went  to  St.  Petersburg  in  1897  to  study  at  the 
university.  The  two  young  men  took  part  in  the  demonstra- 
tion in  Khazan  Square.  They  were  arrested,  and  one  night 
the  prescribed,  domiciliary  visit  was  made  at  their  parents' 
house.  The  mother  hastened  to  the  capital  and  was  able  to 
secure  certain  mitigations  ;  but  again  and  again  the  effects 
of  her  intervention  and  of  that  of  influential  persons  (Lopuhin 
is  mentioned  among  others)  was  overborne  by  the  arbitrary 
powers  of  the  poUce.  The  upshot  was  the  ruin  of  the  whole 
family.    The   father,   a  judge  in   Poland,   died   insane  ;    the 


454  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

elder  brother  was  sent  to  Siberia  and  killed  himself  there  ;  ^ 
the  younger  escaped  shortly  before  the  date  fixed  for  his 
execution.  Thus  like  an  avalanche  does  a  terrible  destiny 
develop  out  of  a  students'  demonstration,  thus  does  the  ruth- 
lessness  of  absolutism  force  the  most  peaceable  of  men  into 
revolutionary  opposition,  thus  does  absolutism  as  it  were 
compel  the  very  sceptic  to  the  hesitating  use  of  the  automatic 
pistol. 

I  am  unable  to  say  how  far  A  Mother's  Reminiscences 
contains  an  accurate  record  of  events,  but  the  book  suffices 
to  show  how  Ropsin's  conception  of  the  fourth  apocalyptic 
rider  Death,  whom  Hell  followed,  was  a  necessary  outcome 
of  the  pathological  state  of  revolutionary  and  absolutist 
Russia. 

The  Pale  Horse  is  a  notable  work  both  from  the  literary 
and  philosophical  point  of  view,  but  progressive  criticism  was 
extremely  reserved  in  its  attitude,  partly  perhaps  because  the 
writing  was  published  in  Struve's  revievv^  In  1912,  however, 
a  second  novel  by  Ropsin,  The  Tale  of  What  was  Not,  was 
published  in  "  Zavety,"  the  new  social  revolutionary  review. 
Discussion  and  polemic  concerning  Ropsin's  writings  now 
became    general. 

No  fresh  philosophical  contribution  is  furnished  by  this 
second  novel,  but  the  philosophy  of  revolution  is  exhibited, 
or  it  might  be  better  to  say  experienced  by  revolutionists, 
in  a  different  situation.  Ropsin  describes  the  mass  revolution 
and  the  subsequent  constitutionalist  epoch.  The  revolutionists 
bring  forward  their  ideas  on  the  barricades  and  during  the 
proceedings  of  the  new  duma.  Ropsin  is  wholly  occupied 
with  his  own  problem.  He  makes  no  attempt  to  show  to  what 
extent  the  terrorist  tactics  of  the  social  revolutionaries  con- 
tributed to  bring  about  the  mass  rising  ;  he  merely  describes 
how  his  party  was  drawn  into  the  general  revolt,  and  how 
this  revolt  was  crushed  by  the  triumphant  reaction.  The 
disaster  is  accompanied  by  an  internal  process  of  dissolution, 
for  general  disillusionment  ensues  upon  the  recognition  that 
the  party  has  been  led  by  a  provocative  agent  (Ropsin's  Azev 
passes  by  the  name  of  Berg),  who  destroys  the  central 
committee  and  therewith  the  whole  party. 

Philosophicall}^  Rop§in  restates  his  dilemma  thus.  Either 
it  is  lawful  to  kill  always,  or  not  at  all.     Nothing  but  behef 

*  Kropotkin's  brother,  in  like  manner,  died  by  his  own  hand  in  Siberia. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  455 

in  God,  in  the  Christian  God,  in  Christ,  is  competent  to  break 
the  sword.  Either  we  must  follow  Dostoevskii's  Smerdjakov- 
Ivan  and  say  "  all  things  are  permissible,"  or  else  we  must 
follow  Tolstoi  and  accept  his  gospel  of  non-resistance. 

Bulgakov's  return  to  Dostoevskii  and  his  criticism  of  the 
revolution  are  far  less  effective  then  Ropsin's  analysis  of 
terrorist  anarchism.  On  the  barricade,  Andrei  Boiotov  (once 
more  the  name  of  one  of  Stepniak's  heroes  is  chosen)  philoso- 
phises a  la  George  after  the  death  of  the  superintendent  of 
police  :  "  Look  here,  Sergii,  I  can't  make  it  out.  .  .  .  They 
shoot  us  down,  hang  us,  exterminate  us.  We  in  return  hang, 
burn,  and  strangle.  But  why,  because  I  have  killed  Slezkin, 
should  I  be  regarded  as  a  hero,  and  why  should  he  be  regarded 
as  a  contemptible  wretch  and  a  good  for  nothing  because  he 
hangs  me  ?  That's  all  humbug.  Either  one  should  not  kill, 
and  in  that  case  both  Slezkin  and  I  are  breaking  the  higher 
lav/  ;  or  else  killing  is  permissible,  and  then  we  cannot  say 
that  one  of  us  is  a  hero  and  the  other  a  contemptible  wretch, 
for  we  are  both  simple  human  beings  who  happen  to  be  at 
enmity.  Now  answer  me  this.  Do  you  admit  that  this 
Slezkin  whom  we  have  killed,  hunted  us  from  conviction, 
and  not  simply  to  make  money  out  if  it  ?  Do  you  admit  that 
he  was  not  self-seeking,  but  did  what  he-  did  for  the  sake  of 
the  people,  holding  (erroneously,  of  course)  that  it  was  his 
duty  to  fight  us  ?  Do  you  admit  these  things  ?  It  may  well 
be  that  among  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  Slezkins,  one  at  least 
is  such  a  man  as  I  suggest.  In  such  a  case,  what  is  the  differ- 
ence between  Slezkin  and  me  ?  In  my  viev/,  either  we  may 
always  kill,  or  we  may  never  kill.  Does  this  mean  that  we 
may  not,  and  yet  we  must  ?  Where  shall  we  find  the  law  ? 
In  the  party  program,  in  Marx,  in  Engels,  or  in  Kant  ?  To 
say  this  is  nonsense — for  neither  Marx,  nor  Engels,  nor  Kant 
ever  killed  anyone.  They  never  killed,  do  j^ou  hear  me,  never. 
Thus  they  do  not  know,  cannot  know,  what  you  and  I  and 
Volodja  know.  Whatever  they  may  have  written,  it  remains 
hidden  from  them  whether  we  may  kill  or  may  not  kill.  But 
I  know,  with  an  absolute  conviction,  that  a  Slezkin  ought 
not  to  be  killed,  whatever  the  circumstances,  v.-hatever  I  may 
be  myself,  and  whatever  I  may  think  of  him." 

Noteworthy  is  Ropsin's  analysis  of  expropriation.  The 
revolutionary  idealist,  who  confiscates  state  funds  on  behalf 
of  the  revolution,  passes,  resist  as  he  may,  beneath  the  sway 


456  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

of  the  bandit  Muha,  and  has  in  the  end  to  admit  that  between 
himself  and  Muha  there  is  no  essential  difference.  "  The 
next  thing  after  God  is  money,"  is  held  vahd  also  by  provo- 
cative agents,  of  whom  two  types  are  described  by  Ropsin. 
Dr.  Berg,  the  leader,  sells  himself  to  the  pohce  because  he 
has  a  taste  for  luxury.  The  young  Nietzschean,  on  the  other 
hand,  seeks  "  protection,"  ostensibly  in  order  to  serve  the 
party,  a  similar  attempt  having  previously  been  made  by  the 
Narodnaja  Volja  ;  moreover  there  is  at  work  in  his  mind  a 
complex  of  "  emotions  "  and  stimuh.  Of  course  the  rascal, 
although  he  continually  has  Nietzsche  upon  his  tongue,  and 
is  always  quoting  Zarathustra,  is  likewise  in  pursuit  of  money 
as  the  source  of  agreeable  "  emotions."  The  sailor  who  has 
recently  joined  the  party,  a  man  who  has  survived  the  dis- 
grace of  Tsushima,  brother  of  the  leader  Andrei  who  is 
eventually  executed,  learns  the  spy's  secret,  and  insists  that  he 
shall  either  kill  the  superintendent  of  police  or  be  killed  himself. 

The  details  are  powerful.  The  naval  officer  joins  the  party 
to  continue  the  fight  for  Russia  and  honour  ;  he  is  no  philo- 
sopher, or  analyst,  and  his  simple  formula  is  that  of  Stepniak, 
An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.  Alexander  has 
no  decisions  to  make,  for  he  lacks  experience,  and  has  not  the 
whole  revolutionary  movement  under  his  eyes.  The  youngest 
brother  {Three  Brothers  is  the  sub-title  of  the  book)  with 
boyish  enthusiasm,  hastens  from  school  to  the  barricade,  and 
is  shot  on  the  way  thither.  But  Andrei  is  famiUar,  not  only 
with  Nietzsche,  but  with  the  whole  literature  of  the  revolution, 
and  aims  at  having  a  philosophy  of  revolution. 

RopSin  shows  us  how  the  revolutionists  do  their  deeds 
hesitatingly  and  in  defiance  of  inward  resistance.  He  shows 
us  once  more  how  suicide  is  esteemed  the  last  resort.  All 
these  things  we  have  learned  from  The  Pale  Horse.  But  The 
Tale  of  What  was  Not  is  a  work  of  wider  scope. 

* 

§  185. 

THE  publication  of  Ropsin's  second  novel  and  the  simul- 
taneous appearance  of  the  second  edition  of  The  Pale 
Horse  put  an  end  to  the  irresolution  of  the  critics,  whether  of 
his  own  party  or  of  the  opposing  camps.  So  unexpected,  so 
incredible,  seemed  such  a  philosophy  of  revolution  as  the 
work  of  a  social  revolutionary,  fhat  people  had  been  slow  to 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  •  457 

realise  the  full  significance  of  the  ideas  expressed  in  The  Pale 
Horse.  In  a  letter  to  the  party  review,  RopSin  now  defended 
himself  against  the  reproach  imphed  by  his  hterary  and  philo- 
sophical comrades'  silence  concerning  his  first  book.  That 
work, 'he  said,  was  merely  an  attempt  to  solve  a  moral  problem 
and  was  not  intended  to  deal  with  tactical  questions  ;  the 
figures  that  moved  through  its  pages  were  purely  imaginative 
creations  and  were  not  descriptions  of  any  definite  persons. 

Shortly  afterwards,  in  November  1912,  the  same  review 
published  a  letter  signed  by  twenty-two  of  its  contributors, 
a  protest  against  The  Tale  of  What  was  Not.  The  novel  was 
stigmatised  as  a  false  and  biased  description  of  the  revolutionary 
movement,  the  author's  outlook  was  declared  utterly  alien 
to  the  movement,  and  it  was  contended  that  his  work  ought 
never  to  have  been  issued  by  "  ZavSty." 

The  editors  of  that  periodical  rejoined  that  doubtless 
there  was  good  ground  to  complain  of  the  accuracy  of  Ropsin's 
delineations,  but  that  the  columns  of  the  review  were  open 
for  the  presentation  of  the  other  side  of  the  case.  They  pro- 
tested against  any  attempt  to  expel  RopSin  from  the  party. 
Simultaneously  with  the  before-mentioned  protest  appeared 
a  review  of  The  Pale  Horse  from  the  pen  of  Cernov  ;  and  a 
little  later,  in  February  1913,  Plehanov  joined  in  the  discussion. 
To  us,  of  course,  social  revolutionary  and  social  democratic 
criticism  of  RopSin's  philosophy  of  revolution  is  of  especial 
interest  and  importance. 

Cernov,  with  whose  "  dynamic  "  philosophy  and  ethics 
we  have  already  become  acquainted,  is  found,  on  close  exami- 
nation, to  have  nothing  new  to  say  about  Ropsin's  book. 
Ethical  maximalism,  he  tells  us,  insists  that  violence  shall 
be  done  to  no  man  ;  a  deduction  from  this,  continues  Cernov, 
is  Tolstoi's  doctrine  of  non-resistance.  But  ethical  minimalism 
refutes  Tolstoi's  theory,  for  the  maximum  must  be  realised 
step  by  step  (see  above,  p.  376). 

This  amounts  to  very  little,  and  contributes  absolutely 
nothing  to  the  solution  of  the  problem  or  of  the  doubts 
expressed  by  RopSin.  That  author's  question  is  perfectly 
definite.  Have  I  the  right  to  kill  anyone,  be  his  position 
high  or  low,  who  represents  the  authoritative  order  of  the 
existing  state  ?  May  I  do  this  on  my  own  initiative,  or  in 
pursuance  of  a  party  decree  ?  In  the  second  novel  we  are 
shown  very  clearly  that  RopSin's  terrorist  longs  to  sacrifice 


458  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

himself.  But  he  realises  that  in  addition  to  sacrificing  himself 
he  has  to  kill  others,  and  he  enquires  whether  his  voluntary 
sacrifice  of  himself  gives  him  the  right  to  rule  Russia.  Such 
a  right  cannot  be  founded  on  machine  guns,  any  more  than 
it  can  be  founded  on  the  Holy  Mass,  or  on  loyalty  to  the 
autocracy. 

Belinskii's  and  Herzen's  answer  to  Cernov  would  have 
run  as  follows  :  "  Before  the  moral  maximum  can  be  realised, 
the  times  of  the  moral  minimum  must  be  fulfilled."  Belinskii, 
and  subsequently  Herzen,  protested  vigorously  against  the 
notion  that  the  ideal,  that  fre'e  resolve,  can  be  made  depen- 
dent upon  the  time  and  upon  historical  facts.  Besides, 
how  is  the  moral  maximum  to  be  realised  ?  For  each  indi- 
vidual the  question  takes  the  definite  form.  May  I  kill  ?  If 
the  moral  maximum  signifies  a  condition  characterised  by  the 
non-existence  of  coercion,  will  not  its  realisation  be  more 
speedily  effected  if  individuals  should  decide  from  the  first  to 
abstain  from  the  use  of  force  ? 

In  any  case,  RopMn  challenges  Stepniak's  justification  of 
terrorism  by  an  appeal  to  the  law  of  retaliation.  The  device, 
an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,  seems  to  him  to 
smack  too  much  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  to  be  manifestly 
unjust. 

Other  members  of  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party  besides 
Ropsin  were  inclined,  especially  after  the  Azev  disclosures, 
to  doubt  the  utility,  not  merely  of  terrorism,  but  of  the 
whole  method  of  party  organisation,  and  in  particular  of  the 
rigid  system  of  aristocratic  centralisation.  The  committee 
appointed  to  investigate  the  Azev  affair  reported  that  provo- 
cative methods  had  not  made  their  appearance  by  chance, 
for  the  party  constitution  fitted  it  to  be  the  blind  tool  of  an 
individual.  In  the  party  periodicals,  increasing  expression 
was  given  to  the  view  that  terrorist  methods  were  unsound. 

Cernov' s  "  moral  minimalism  "  is  not  merely  vague  and 
obscure,  but  even  from  the  purely  utilitarian  outlook  it  fails 
to  throw  light  upon  the  proble^n  of  terrorism  and  revolution. 

Plehanov's  critique  is  no  less  inadequate.  First  of  all, 
adroitly  enough,  Plehanov  heaps  coals  of  fire  upon  Ropsin's 
head  and  upon  the  heads  of  that  writer's  adversaries  (social 
democrats  among  the  number)  by  defending  Rop§in  against 
the  charge  of  having  no  independent  style.  Rop§in  had  been 
accused  of  being  a  mere  imitator,   of  aping  Merezkovskii  in 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  459 

his  first  novel,  and  Tolstoi  (especially  War  and  Peace)  in  his 
second.  Some  critics  had  gone  so  far  as  to  speak  of  flat 
plagiarism.''  It  seems  to  me  that  Ropsin's  critics  were  attempt- 
ing in  this  way  to  evade  the  discussion  of  the  main  problem, 
and  Plehanov  would  appear  to  hold  the  same  view  ;  yet  he, 
too,  evades  the  issue,  sheltering  like  Cernov  behind  the  screen 
of  objective  history.  But  Plehanov  has  the  advantage  over 
Cernov  in  that  his  program  entitles  him  to  appeal  to  objective 
historism. 

Plehanov,  however,  makes  one  concession  to  ethics.  He 
admits  that  "  the  need  to  provide  an  ethical  justification  for 
the  struggle  is  no  light  matter."  Ropsin's  problem,  as  stated 
in  the  alternative  that  either  we  are  always  justified  in  killing 
or  else  are  never  justified — this,  says  Plehanov,  "  is  indubit- 
ably a  most  serious  question."  But  he  goes  on  to  show  us 
how  Ropsin's  doubts,  or  those  of  his  hero,  originated.  Ropsin 
strayed  into  the  paths  of  .subjectivism,  instead  of  keeping 
along  the  straight  road  of  historical  objectivism.  But  sub- 
jectivism, as  Plehanov  and  his  congeners  are  never  weary  of 
telling  us,  leads  to  scepticism  ;  and  subjectivism  has  made 
of  Ropsin  a  revolutionary  Hamlet. 

Plehanov  therefore  refers  Rop§in  to  Hegel  and  to  his 
"  algebra  of  revolution."  Hegel  had  shown  how  the  historical 
process  had  evoked  struggle  in  society  and  had  prescribed 
the  functions  of  that  struggle.  On  one.  side  is  the  divine 
right  of  the  existing  order  ;  on  the  other  is  the  equally  divine 
right  of  the  individual  consciousness  and  of  subjective  freedom, 
which  rises  in  revolt  against  the  antiquated  objective  norms. 
Hence  the  conflict,  a  tragedy  wherein  the  best  men  of  the 
day  often  perish.  "  But  though  men  perish  in  this  tragedy, 
no  one  is  to  blame.  As  Hegel  says,  those  on  each  side  are 
right  in  their  own  eyes." 

With  this  "  algebra  of  revolution,"  with  such  phraseology, 
Plehanov  expects  to  uproot  and  to' abolish  Ropsin's  Hamletism  ! 
It  is  not  enough  that   Ropsin's  heroes  should  be  willing  to 

I  In  the  text  an  account  has  been  given  of  RopSin's  chief  philosophic  prede- 
cessors. Certain  supplementary  details  may  be  appended  here.  The  saying 
that  a  man  must  lay  down  more  than  his  life,  that  he  must  lay  down  his  soul, 
is  to  be  found  in  almost  the  identical  words  in  ArcybaSev's  Sevyrev  the  Worker. 
I  am  not  sure  which  of  the  two  books  was  published  first,  and  whether  we  have 
to  do  with  borroAving  or  parallelism.  (The  Pale  Horse  was  pubhshed  in 
January  1909  ;  Sevyrev  the  Worker  was  likewise  issued  in  1909  as  the  third 
volume  of  a  collection  entitled  Zemlja.) 


4G0  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

sacrifice  themselves,  should  be  ready  to  die  ;  what  they  need 
is  a  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  historical  process  ! 
It  would  be  impossible  to  give  a  plainer  demonstration  of 
the  futility  of  historism,  to  show  more  clearly  how  fond  the 
exponents  of  that  doctrine  are  of  playing  hide  and  seek. 

As  exemplar  of  the  subjective  struggle  against  the  objec- 
tive norms,  Plehanov  adduces  Socrates,  and  he  tells  us  that 
the  struggle  between  subjectivism  and  objectivism  is  waged 
in  the  field  of  science.     But  assuredly  a  ver3^  moderate  "  under- 
standing  of   the   historical   process "    suffices   to   convince   us 
from  a  study  of  this  very  example  that  Socrates  and  Ropsin's 
George  have  nothing  whatever  in  common. ^      Both,  certainly, 
are  in  revolt  against  the  traditional  environment,  but  whereas 
Socrates    deliberately    accepts   the   poisoned   draught   handed 
him    by    the    representatives    of    coercive    authority,    George 
kills  certain  men  even  while  he   doubts  whether  they  are  in 
fact  his  oppressors.     In  the  Apology,  Plato  demonstrated  the 
innocence  of  Socrates  and  the  guilt  of  his  adversaries.     Ropsin, 
in  his  novels,  displays  to  us  the  doubts  he  has  come  to  enter- 
tain   regarding  terrorist    methods.     History  cannot    help    us, 
nor  yet  Hegel,  who  tells  us  both  sides  are  in  the  right.     "  Is 
it  right  for  me  to  kill  a  man  ?  " — there  is  the  simple  question, 
and  what  any  historian  or  philosopher  of  history  may  have 
written   concerning   the   historical   process   as   an   objectively 
given  whole,   is  utterly  irrelevant.     What  is  the   "  historical 
process  ?  "     Is  there   any  such  process,   over  and  above  the 
individual   consciousness   of   particular  individuals,   who   con- 
tinually, and  amid  varying  conditions,  have  severally  to    face 
the  ethical  problems  of  life  !     Rop§in,  we  are  told,  has  not  a 
sufficient    understanding    of    the    historical    process.     Perhaps 
not !     Perhaps    not !     But    does    the    historical    process,    as 
Plehanov    contends,    determine    the    functions    of    the    social 
struggle  ;    and  if  so,  how  ?     Characteristic  of  the  superficiaHty 
of  historism   and  its   objectivist   amoralism  is  the   continued 
evasion  of  the  question  of  personal  decision,  of  personal  respon- 
sibility for  action,  for  action  in  general,  and  not  merely  for 

I  If  Plehanov  Avished  to  turn  to  Hegel  for  a  contribution  to  the  "  algebra 
of  revolution  "  (the  reader  will  recall  that  the  phrase  was  used  by  Herzen), 
he  should  have  given  a  philosophico-historical  account  of  the  relationships 
between  the  revolution  and  the  enlightenment.  But  it  is  true  that  the 
Hegelian  enlightenment  (philosophy  as  mainspring  Oi  the  French  revolution, 
the  differences  between  the  Catholic  and  the  Protestant  peoples  in  the  revolu- 
tion) does  not  harmonise  well  with  historical  materialism. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  461 

terrorist  and  other  revolutionary"  deeds.  Let  Plehanov  tell 
us,  what  history,  what  the  study  of  history,  can  do  to  meet 
the  difficulty  of  Ropsin's  George,  to  answer  the  question 
whether,  here  and  now,  the  specific  George  is  right  to  kill 
the  specific  governor.  How  can  the  "  historical  process  " 
give  any  help  ;    and  what  is  this  "  historical  process  "  ?  ^ 

The  importance  of  Ropsin's  revolutionary  scepticism  is 
unaffected  by  the  criticism  to  which  his  writings  have  been 
subjected.  Ropsin,  as  compared  with  his  predecessors,  effected 
a  deeper  sounding  of  the  problem  of  revolution,  and  touched 
the  ethical  bottom  of  the  matter.  Moreover,  he  threw  a 
clear  light  on  the  purely  utilitarian  valuation  of  revolution, 
which  occupies  much  space  in  these  discussions.  In  addition, 
Ropsin's  personal  authority  as  a  social  revolutionary  leader 
gives  his  philosophy  of  revolution  the  requisite  practical  and 
political  outlook. 

For  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party,  above  all,  the 
publication  of  Ropsin's  works  denotes  the  existence  of  a  great 
crisis.  If  we  take  further  into  account  the  changes  made  in 
the  social  program  of  the  narodnicestvo,  we  are  justified  in 
saying*  that  in  the  Social  Revolutionary  Party,  Russian 
revolutionism  has  come  to  a  parting  of  the  ways.  Ropsin 
himself  hesitates  at  this  parting  of  the  waj^s,  and  -herein 
,lies  the  tragedy  of  his  situation,  that  while  he  recognises  the 
fallacies  of  terrorism  he  cannot  make  up  his  mind  to  abandon 
the  method.  He  knows  that  the  maxim  "  everything  is 
permissible  "  is  false  and  wrong  ;  he  is  forced  to  admit  that  he 
has  no  right  to  kill.  Yet  he  kills,  knowing  that  he  does 
wrong,  for,  "  One  must  have  courage  enough  to  say.  This  is 
wrong,  cruel,  and  terrible  ;  but  it  is  inevitable." 

1  Whilst  this  work  was  in  the  press,  there  was  brought  to  my  notice  a 
critique  of  Rop§in's  second  novel  from  the  pen  of  the  before-mentioned  Ivanov- 
Razumnik,  the  historian  of  literature.  He  sees  plainly  enough  that  Plehanov's 
historisra  is  superficial,  but  he  succumbs  to  the  same  historism,  although  (in 
opposition  to  Marxism)  he  professes  subjectivism.  Ivanov-Razumnik  does 
not  recognise  any  ethical  imperative  ;  there  are,  for  him,  no  universally  valid 
etliical  norms.  But  in  liis  view  there  does  exist  what  he  terms  a  "  psychological 
norm."  To  quote  his  own  words  :  "  This  psychological  norm  grows  with  the 
growth  of  mankind.  We  cannot  lull  our  personal  enemies  right  and  left,  for 
the  same  reason  that  we  cannot  practise  cannibalism.  We  are  restrained, 
not  by  logical  reasons  (which  are  non-existent),  nor  yet  by  any  ethical  norm, 
but  by  direct  sentiment.  Neither  logic  nor  ethic  is  determinative,  but  simply 
the  psychology  of  men  and  of  mankind."  We  remember  that  Pisarev  used  a 
similar  argunient.  But  whereas  Pisarev  regarded  the  disinclination  to  kill 
as  a  matter  of  individual  taste,  Ivanov-Razumnik  refers  it  to  "  growth,"  that 
is,  to  the  historical  evolution  of  men  and  of  mankind. 


PART    THREE 
(A   Summary) 

DEMOCRACY    VERSUS    THEOCRACY; 
THE   PROBLEM   OF   REVOLUTION 


CHAPTER   TWENTY-TWO 

THE  EPISTEMOLOGICAL  PROBLEM   OF   RUSSIAN" 

PHILOSOPHY 

§  i86. 

IN  this  summary  I  propose  to  discuss  the  chief  problems, 
to  formulate  the  leading  ideas,  suggested  by  a  survey 
of  the  material  that  has  been  placed  before  the  reader.  I 
have  endeavoured  to  furnish  as  many  facts  as  possible,  and 
in  the  first  instance  to  allow  the  facts  to  speak  for  themselves. 
We  may  now  attempt  to  grasp  the  significance  of  these  facts 
for  a  philosophical  explanation  of  Russia. 

Caadaev,  as  the  first  philosopher  of  history,  was  placed 
in  the  forefront  of  the  thinkers  of  his  school.  The  historico- 
philosophical  interest  dominates  his  writings  in  a  manner 
which  differentiates  him  clearly  as  a  theorist  from  the  practical 
politicians  who  preceded  him,  from  such  men  as  Pestel,  Sper- 
anskii,  etc.  I^ussian  philosophy  of  history  developed  by  a 
natural  evolution  out  of  political  aspirations,  and  its  scientific 
constitution  is  connected  with  the  development  of  the  philo- 
s'opHy  of  history  in  Europe.  Due  attention  has  been  paid 
to  the  fact  that  scientific  historiography  and  the  philosophy 
of  history  were  eighteenth-century  developments  associated 
with  the  great  revolution  (§§39  and  40).  In  like  manner, 
Russian  philosophy  of  history  originated  after  the  decabrist 
rising,  and  was  organically  connected  with  the  whole  revo- 
lutionary movement  (§  46).  The  general  sub-title  of  this  sum- 
mary, "  The  Problem  of  Revolution,"  has  not  been  chosen 
haphazard,   for  this  is  preeminently  the   Russian  problem. 

Russian  thought,  Russian  philosophy,  does  not  manifest 
itself  solely  as  philosophy  of  history,  for  it  is  likewise  very 
intimately  concerned  with  the  religious  problem.  It  is  not 
thereby  distinguished  from  European  philosophy.     Opposition 

**^  31  VOL.   II. 


466  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

to  ecclesiastical  theology  has  transformed  modern  philosophy 
into  the  philosophy  of  religion  (§§41   and  41  a). 

Thus  the  general  course  of  evolution  (alike  in  Russia  and 
in  Europe)  justifies  our  choice  of  these  associated  develop- 
ments of  the  philosophy  of  history  and  the  philosophy  of 
religion  to  throw  light  upon  the  study  of  Russia.  But  it  is 
necessary  for  me  to  anticipate  the  objections,  that  I  have 
failed  to  give  a  complete  account  of  the  philosophy  of  history 
and  the  philosophy  of  religion,  and  that  for  the  proper  under- 
standing of  Russia  we  must  draw  upon  a  knowledge  of  philo- 
sophy in  its  widest  ramifications. 

It  is  true  that  I  have  ignored  many  of  the  representatives 
of  professorial  philosophy,  many  exponents  of  philosophy  at 
the  seminaries,  and  other  philosophical  writers.  But  those 
who  take  the  trouble  to  examine  sketches  of  the  history  of 
Russian  philosophy  will  find  that,  while  many  noted  Russian 
names  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  present  work,  on  the  whole 
my  choice  of  representative  thinkers  will  appear  justified.  And 
that  is  the  real  question — whether  the  thinkers  I  have  selected 
do  truly  characterise  Russia.^  My  own  opinion  is  that  the 
substance  of  their  doctrines  and  the  historical  succession  of 
the  writers  I  have  selected  as  representative,  combine  to  justify 
my  choice. 

It  is  not  fortuitous  that  not  one  of  these  men  ever  secured 
a  professorial  position  at  a  state  university,  and  the  fact  is 
extremely  characteristic  of  Russia.  (Solov'ev  fruitlessly  en- 
deavoured to  obtain  a  professorship,  as  Kireevskii  had  done 
before  him.)  Moreover,  in  all  lands  where  freedom  is  un- 
known, the  official  representatives  of  science,  and  above  all 
of  philosophy,  are  on  the  whole  conservatives  and  supporters 
of  the  government,  especially  in  those  domains  which  are 
closely  connected  with  politics  by  direct  or  indirect  ties. 
Science  and  philosophy  are  not  identical  with  official  science 
and  philosophy,  with  the  teachers  appointed  by  govern- 
ment, or  with  the  teaching  caste  to  which  these  belong.  It 
suffices,  in  this  connection,  to  become  a'cquainted  with 
the  ideas  of    Pobedonoscev   (who  was  a  professor)   and  with 

*  For  those  who  do  not  read  Russian,  practically  the  only  survey  of  Russian 
philosophy  hitherto  available  has  been  the  section  on  Russia  contributed  by 
Kolubovskii  to  Ueberweg-Heinze,  Grundriss  der  Geschichte  der  Philosophic 
des  XIX  Jahrhunderts,  and  this  is  merely  bibliographical.  Of  Russian  works 
I  have  alluded  in  §  38  to  Radlov's  sketch.  I  may  also  mention  Grusenberg, 
Skizzen  der  gegenwartigen  russischen  Philosophic,  191 1. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  467 

those  of  the  other  conservative  thinkers  whose  views  I  have 
summarised. I 

An  account  of  the  views  of  some  of  the  leading  economists, 
sociologists,  and  historians,  would  be  both  interesting  and 
instructive.  But  the  writers  chosen  suffice  for  our  purpose, 
all  the  more  seeing  that  in  the  studies  of  which  the  present 
work  is  the  first  instalment  the  author  proposes  to  give  a 
sociological  analysis  of  the  work  of  Dostoevskii  and  of  modern 
Russian  literature  from  Puskin  onwards. 

No  stress  has  been  laid  upon  the  so-called  formal  (i.e. 
methodological)  problems  considered  by  professional  philo- 
sophers, though  these  have  not  been  entirely  ignored. 

§187. 

THE  account  of  the  character  of  Russian  philosophy  given 
in  §  38  has  been  confirmed  by  the  detailed  treatment  of 
the  ideas  of  representative  Russian  thinkers.  One  conclusion 
emerges  with  especial  force,  and  it  is  that  Russian  philoso- 
phicq.1  thought  lacks  epistemological  foundation.  As  Radlov 
puts  it,  the  leading  Russian  thinkers  manifest  no  interest  in 
epistemological  problems  ;  they  are  concerned  with  social  and  i 
political  questions,  with  the  questions  of  the  day  ;  Russian  I 
philosophy  has  a  markedly  practical  character,  and  it  is  chiefly 
devoted  to  the  study  of  ethical  problems. 

Pontics  is  based  upon  morality,  it  is  the  function  of  poHtics 
to  elucidate  and  to  realise  ethical  principles  on  behalf  of  and 
in  the  social  whole  ;  but  morality  is  associated  with  rehgion 
and  the  church.  There  is,  consequently,  no  contradiction  ' 
involved  in  the  two  assertions  I  have  made,  that  Russian 
philosophy  is  predominantly  the  philosophy  of  history  and 
the  philosophy  of  religion,  and  that  Russian  philosophy  is 
preeminently  practical  and  ethical. 

Ethics,  ethical  principles,  must  naturally  be  based  upon 
a  sound  theory  of  cognition.  If,  therefore,  we  say  that  Russian 
philosophy  has  not  adequately  examined  its  epistemological 
groundworks,  this  implies  that  Russian  ethical  thought  exhibits 
similar  defects.  . 

The  lack  of  a  sound  theory  of  cognition  in  Russia  is  pecu-    1 

»  In  Russia,  prior  to  1905,  at  the  seminaries — Pobddonoscev  notwithstanding 
— philosophy  was  in  a  sense  freer  than  at  the  universities.  At  the  former  it 
was  not  so  markedly  subject  to  the  direct  pressure  of  the  government. 


468  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

liarly  associated  with  the  meagre  influence  that  has  been 
exercised  in  that  country  by  the  writings  of  Kant.  It  is  true 
that  the  Russians,  after  becoming  acquainted  with  the  French 
philosophy  of  the  enhghtenment,  turned  therefrom  speedily 
and  characteristically  to  German  philosophy.  When  this 
happened,  however,  Schelling,  Hegel,  and  Feuerbach  were 
their  teachers,  rather  than  Kant ;  to  Fichte,  again,  they  paid 
little  attention,  whereas  the  influence  of  Schopenhauer  was 
considerable.  Auguste  Comte  and  his  positivism  cooperated 
with  Hegel  and  Feuerbach  ;  positivism  in  its  various  forms 
(Marxism  was  one  of  them)  held  the  field. 

I  am  not  contending  that  Kant  remained  utterly  unknown. 
We  have  learned  that  in  the  ethical  sphere  Solov'ev  and  Lavrov 
were  Kantians.  Tolstoi,  too,  in  great  measure  adopted  the 
Kantian  ethic.  But  there  was  little  understanding  of  Kant's 
theory  of  cognition,  of  his  critique  of  pure  reason.  Recently, 
however,  the  so-called  neokantianism  has  wielded  considerable 
influence  in  Russia,  so  that  of  late  the  epistemological  problem 
has  received  more  adequate  consideration  on  Kantian  lines. ^ 


§  J88. 

THE  world-wide  importance  of  Kant  depends 'upon  the 
Kantian  criticism.  Epistemologically  considered,  criti- 
cism as  a  philosophical  doctrine  signifies  critical  and  cognitive 
reflection  of  a  sceptical  character,  as  opposed  to  the  blind 
faith  that  has  hitherto  prevailed.  Criticism  is  the  opposition 
of  philosophy  to  theology,  opposition  based  on  grounds  of 
principle.  Regarded,  finally,  from  the  outlook  of  universal 
history,  Kant,  as  opponent  alike  of  theology  and  of  the  scepti- 
cism of  Hume,  signifies  that  with  the  coming  of  Kant  man- 
kind is  ripening  to  an  age  of  reflection,  and  that  men  are 
beginning  to  abandon  the  myths  that  have  hitherto  dominated 

^  The  history  of  Kantian  thought  in  Russia  is  exceedingly  interesting. 
Karamzin  was  one  of  the  earliest  admirers  of  Kant.  Opponents  of  the  KOnigs- 
berg  philosopher  soon  took  the  field;  in  1807  Osipovsldi  of  Kharkov  criticised 
Kant's  doctrine  of  space  and  time.  Kant's  fundamental  ethical  principles, 
on  the  other  hand,  secured  acceptance,  and  Kunicyn,  in  St.  Petersburg,  based 
natural  law  upon  Kant.  Jurkevic  opposed  Kant,  whilst  Kavelin  took  Kant 
as  guide  in  ethical  matters.  The  most  notable  works  on  Kant  containing 
critical  discussions  of  the  theorj^  of  cognition  are  those  of  Karinskii,  professor 
at  the  seminary  in  St.  Petersburg.  More  recently,  A.  I.  Vvedenskii  and  Losskii 
have  written  on  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  ;  these  writers'  books  have  been 
translated  into  German. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  469 

their  minds,  to  abandon  mythology  and  therewith  theology 
(which  is  a  further  development  of  mythology).  Consequently 
modern  philosophy  since  Kant  has  been  predominantly  philo- 
sophy of  history  and  philosophy  of  rehgion  ;  the  modern  man 
has  begun  to  consider  the  course  of  his  own  development 
cognitively  and  critically.  Kant  provides  the  epistemological 
basis  of  the  antitheological  enlightenment,  and  his  successors 
devote  themselves  to  the  analj^sis  of  mythology  and  theology. 
This,  from  the  standpoint  of  universal  history,  is  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  closer  study  of  myths  initiated  by  Vico,  and  con- 
tinued by  Hume,  Comte,  Feuerbach,  Spencer,  and  our  immedi- 
ate contemporaries.  The  theologians  endeavour  to  maintain 
theology  against  the  onslaughts  of  philosophy  ;  philosophers 
incline  to  forget  the  profound  mental  labours  undertaken  by 
modern  theologians  to  defend  their  doctrines  and  methods 
against  philosophy,  they  tend  to  ignore  the  literature  of 
apologetics. 

I  must  again  refer  the  reader  to  §§  41  and  41  A.  Our  aim 
here  is  to  deduce  the  consequences  to  Russian  thought  of  the 
facts  and  ideas  detailed  in  those  sections. 

The  Russians  failed  to  accept  Kant  because  they  were 
and  still  are  more  inclined  towards  mythology  than  the  Euro- 
peans. Under  European  influence,  Russians  could  be  induced 
to  negate  myth,  to  negate  theology,  but  they  could  not  be 
induced  to  criticise  myth  and  theology.  Russian  thought  is 
negative,  but  not  critical  ;  Russian  philosophy  is  negation 
without  criticism. 

This  explains  why  Russian  negation  remains  believing 
negation.  The  educated  Russian  abandons  the  faith  of  his 
childhood,  but  promptly  accepts  another  faith — he  believes 
in  Feuerbach,  in  Vogt,  in  Darwin,  in  materiaHsm  and  atheism. 
We  have  seen  how  BSlinskii,  Herzen,  and  their  successors 
struggled  to  escape  from  scepticism  to  faith.  In  the  case  of 
all  these  writers  I  have  had  occasion  to  insist  upon  their  lack 
of  criticism.  I  showed,  for  example,  how  Lavrov  declined 
from  Kant  to  Bruno  Bauer. 

Extremely  characteristic  is  the  unbridged  transition  from 
the  old  faith  to.  the  new.  The  mental  development  of 
Belinskii  offers  a  classical  example.  We  see  in  him  what 
negation  is  without  criticism,  without  epistemological  criticism. 

This  longing  for  faith  as  an  escape  from  scepticism  is  no 
mere  search  for  a  reHgious  belief.     Other  things  will  do  in 


470  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

default  of  religion,  but  the  Russian  must  always  have  some- 
thing to  beheve  in.  It  may  be  the  railway  (BeHnskii)  ;  it 
may  be  the  frog  (Bazarov,  the  nihihst)  ;  it  may  be  Byzantinism 
(Leont'ev)  ;  and  so  on.  Leont'ev  actually  forces  himself 
away  from  scepticism,   positively  talks  himself  into  belief. 

Russian  thought  further  displays  its  tendency  towards 
myth  in  this  respect,  that  down  to  to-day  in  Russia  far  more 
than  in  Europe,  poets  are  the  true  educators  of  the  people. 
Puskin,  Gogol,  Turgenev,  Dostoevskii,  Tolstoi,  Cehov,  Gor'kii 
;— these  are  the  thinkers  of  Russia.  It  is  the  thinker  as  poet, 
not  the  thinker  as  man  of  science,  to  whom  Russia  listens. 
Now  the  poet  stands  nearer  to  myth  than  does  the  philosopher. 

Whilst  Russia,  therefore,  has  numerous  literary  critics, 
the  country  knows  little  of  epistemological  criticism.  And 
when,  in  Russia,  the  problem  of  criticism  is  philosophically 
considered,  the  consideration  is  confined,  characteristically 
enough,  to  the  ethical  aspects  of  the  matter.'' 

I  In  exemplification  I  may  refer  to  Lavrov,  a  writer  much  influenced  by 
Kant,   and  will  quote  a  passage  from  the  fifteenth  of  the  Historical  Letters, 
which  is  entitled   Criticism  and   Belief  :     "  Will  not  the  personality,   if  it  be 
devoted   to    criticism   and    nothing   else,  tend  ultimately  to  forfeit  the  energy 
indispensable     for    action  ?     Criticism     presupposes     uncertainty,     vacillation, 
the  spending  of  time  in  weighing  arguments  pro  and  con.  ...  If  a  political 
storm  break  over  society  and  the  leaderless  masses  become  engaged  in  a  wrong 
path,   taking  friends    for    foes   and   foes   for  friends,   and  through  irresolution 
throwing  away  the  advantages  of   power  and  enthusiasm,  is  it  right  for  the 
first  citizen  who  grasps  the  situation  to  renounce  the  opportunity  because  he 
critically  refrains   from  drawing  conclusions  ?   .  .  .  All  this  is '  perfectly  true. 
And  yet  criticism  is  something  which  man  must  perforce  undertake  if  he  is  to 
have  a  reasonable  claim  to  be  considered  a  fully  developed  personality.  .   .  . 
A  citizen  who  has  held  so  completely  aloof  from  the  course  of  public  affairs 
that  he  is  taken  by  surprise  when  a  mass  movement  occurs,  is  no  effective  factor 
in   the  commonwealth.  .  .  .  One  who   studies  the   motley  play  of  history  is 
thereby  trained  for  the  struggle,  when  the  time  comes  to  struggle.     He  needs 
criticism,  not  when  the  hour  for  action  approaches,  but  in  readiness  for  action. 
.  .  .  The  severer,   the  more  perspicacious,   the  colder,   and  the  more  compre- 
hensive, his  criticism  has  been,  the  more  powerful  and  the  more  ardent  will  now 
be  his  faith.     Faith  can  move  mountains,   faith  and  nothing  else.   ...  It  is 
not  enemies  that  are  most  dangerous  to  militant  parties  ;    their  chief  danger 
arises  from  those  of  little  faith  who  stand  in  their  ranks,  from  those  indiffer- 
entists  who  assemble  under  their  banner  and  often  proclaim  their  watchwords 
more  loudly  than  the  most  zealous  among  the  leaders  ;    the  people  who  omit 
the  work  of  criticism  when  it  is  still  time  to  criticise,  but  who  devote  themselves 
to  criticism  when  the  time  has  come  for  action  ;    those  who  are  irresolute,  who 
stand  about  doing  nothing,  or  abandon  the  battle-field,  when  the  actual  fighting 
has  begun.  .  .  .  Only  in  a  limited  sense,  therefore,  can  it  be  said  that  there 
is  any  opposition  between  faith  and  criticism.     What  a  man  believes  is  a  thing 
he  no  longer  subjects  to  criticism.     But  this  does  not  mean  that  what  is  the 
object  of  faith  to-day  may  not  have  been  subjected  to  criticism  yesterday. 
Indeed,  onlj   those  beliefs  are  rational,  only  those  behefs  are  enduring,  which 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  471 

Now  we  can  understand  why  the  Russians  preferred 
Schelling  and  Hegel  to  Kant  and  Hume.  Schelhng,  as  against 
Kant,  introduced  mythology  into  philosophy  ;  and  Hegel, 
despite  his  opposition  to  theology,  furthered  both  theology 
and  m^/thology  by  his  dialectic  with  its  suspension  of  the 
principle  of  contradiction. 

In  this  connection,  too,  certain  separate  doctrinal  items 
brought  forward  by  Russian  thinkers  acquire  meaning  and. 
importance.  I  may  refer,  for  example,  to  Solov'ev  and  his 
commendation  of  the  "fantastic  imagination"  in  poesy,  which 
Kireevskii.  had  rejected  (the  fantastic  imagination,  be  it  noted, 
not  simple  imaginativeness,  not  the  "  exact  fantasy "  of 
Goethe  !).    See  Vol.  I,  pp.  245  et  seq.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  269  and  270, 

§189. 

AS  a  rule  the  fundamental  problem  of  the  theory  of  cog- 
nition is  represented  in  contrast  with  rationalism  and 
empiricism.  In  Russian  philosophy,  too,  we  find  this  con- 
trast sustained,  German  philosophy  in  general  and  Kant  in 
especial  being  rejected  by  the  Russian  defenders  of  empiricism. 

Since  Belinskii,  and  above  all  since  Herzen,  empiricism 
has  been  proclaim^ed  as  the  starting-point  of  philosophy, 
Herzen  and  his  successors  declare  themselves  positivists  and 
materialists,  but  none  the  less  they  cling  to  the  rationalistic 
Hegel.  Herzen  enters  no  protest  against  rationalism ;  he 
merely  demands  positivist  disillusionment,  which  he  counter- 
poses  to  mysticism,  romanticism,  and  illusion  (§  80).  It  is 
not  on  account  of  rationalism  that  Herzen  joins  issue  with 
Granovskii,  nor  is  it  rationalism  that  causes  Herzen's  oppo- 
sition to  the  Slavophils  ;  the  divergencies  here  are  the  outcome 
of  Herzen's  antagonism  to  religion,  theology,  and  metaphysics. 

But  it  is  precisely  here  that  the  Russian  empiricists  lack 
epistemological  criticism.  Kant  did  not  counterpose  empiri- 
cism to  rationalism  !  Kant  advanced  from  the  lines  estab- 
lished by  Plato,  but  his  criticism  was  ultimately  directed, 
not   against   empiricism,    but    against   the    extravagances    of 

have  been  subjected  to  criticism.  Criticism  alone  can  bring  firm  conviction. 
None  but  the  man  who  has  attained  to  firm  conviction  can  have  that  vigorous 
faith  which  is  essential  to  energetic  action.  In  this  connection  there  is  no 
essential  contrast  between  faith  and  criticism,  but  merely  a  temporal  succession. 
Criticism  and  faith  are  two  different  phases  in  the  development  of  an  idea. 
Criticism  is  the  preparation  for  action  ;   faith  is  the  immediate  cause  of  action." 


472  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Platonism.  Plato  was  the  first  philosopher  to  declare  that 
myth  has  a  place  in  philosophy ;  Hume's  scepticism  and 
Kant's  criticism  were  launched  against  myth  and  mysticism. 
Their  church  made  Platonists  of  the  Russians ;  Greco- 
Russian  Orthodoxy  cherished  the  Platonic  mythos ;  the 
Slavophils  turned  naturally  to  Joannes  Damascenus  and  to 
Plato.  In  this  matter  Solov'ev  followed  the  Slavophils  and 
his  church,  but  Solov'ev  had  understood  Kant,  hence  his 
inward  conflict  representing  the  opposition  between  Kant 
and  Plato  (§  144).  Kant  inclined  rather  to  the  school  of 
Aristotle,  whose  logic  was  abhorred  by  the  Slavophils.  Kant 
opposed  the  blind  acceptance  whether  of  empiricism  or  of 
rationalism,  but  the  Russians  failed  to  grasp  this,  and  hence 
their  unorganised  vacillation  between  Platonism  and  nihilism. 
Solov'ev  turned  from  Kant  to  Plato  ;  the  empiricists,  turning 
their  backs  on  Plato,  lapsed  into  uncritical  positivism  and 
materialism. 

§  190. 

KANT'S  criticism  as  epistemological  reflection  concerning 
the  range  and  limits  of  cognition,  was  rejected  by  Russian 
thinkers,  who  regarded  it  as  a  form  of  subjectivism?  Kant's 
epistemological  activism,  his  explanation  of  the  process  of 
cognition  as  an  active  procedure  on  the  part  of  the  understand- 
ing and  as  an  auto-procreation  of  concepts  (§  44),  was  not 
comprehensible  to  the  positivist  Russians.  The  teaching  of 
his  church  has  accustomed  the  Russian  to  accept  a  ready- 
made  and  objectively  given  revelation  ;  and  in  epistemology, 
therefore,  he  remains  an  extreme  objectivist  long  after  he 
has  ceased  to  accept  the  data  of  revelation.  The  Russian 
nihilists  and  empiricists,  the  Russian  materialists  and  posi- 
tivists,  remain  epistemological  objectivists.  In  like  manner 
they  remain  objectivists  vis-a-vis  the  chosen  European  author- 
ities— for  they  are  habituated  to  objective  authority. 

The  Russians  classed  Kant  with  Fichte  and  Stirner. 
Subjectivism,  conceived  by  them  in  its  extremest  manifes- 
tation, was  resisted  by  them  as  solipsism  ;  Belinskii  fought 
Stirner  just  as  he  fought  Homjakov ;  Solov'ev  discerned 
subjectivism,  not  only  in  rationaUsm,  but  also  in  sensuaHsm, 
and  in  his  dread  of  subjectivism  sought  refuge  in  myth  and 
mysticism.     Everywhere  we  find  the  same  lack  of  criticism, 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  478 

the  same  failure  to  effect  a  careful  estimate  of  the  degree  of 
subjectivism. 

Subjectivism  is  regarded  rather  from  the  ethical  than  from 
the  epistemological  outlook.  In  this  sense  and  with  this 
scope,  the  "  subjective  method  "  was  recommended  by  Lavrov 
and  Mihailovskii  ;  but  subjectivism  was  looked  upon  chiefly 
as  the  doctrine  of  Stirner,  and  was  rejected  as  egoism.  It  is 
because  they  use  this  ethical  standard  of  measurement  that 
the  Russian  Marxists  (Plehanov,  for  instance)  conceive  sub- 
jectivism as  a  manifestation  of  scepticism  and  decadence, 
and  combat  it  as  unrevolutionary. 


§  191- 

BELINSKII  vigorously  opposed  extreme  subjectivism.  We 
have  learned  that  Bglinskii  inured  himself  against  Fichte's 
solipsism  by  having  recourse  to  Hegel's  reality,  but  have  seen 
that  Russian  reality  brought  him  back  to  moderate  subject- 
ivism. He  looked  upon  extreme  subjectivism  as  egoism  and 
narrowness,  leading  to  miscoAduct  and  crime  ;  on  the  other 
hand  he  regarded  extreme  objectivism  as  a  form  of  super- 
stition. 

This  analysis  of  extreme  objectivism  and  extreme  sub- 
jectivism possesses  philosophical  importance.  B^linskii 
accurately  appraised  the  psychology  of  the  extreme  objectivist 
who,  succumbing  to  a  new  mythology,  naively  and  uncritically 
accepts  the  outer  world  as  a  fact  and  thus  becomes  its  sport. 
No  less  accurately  did  he  appraise  the  danger  of  extreme 
subjectivism,  of  solipsism,  maintaining  the  ethical  importance 
of  our  recognition  of  the  reality  of  our  fellow-men,  of  society 
and  history,  and  of  the  godhead. 

Jesus  showed  long  ago  that  all  thought  and  all  action 
centres  round  the  problem,  how  man  conceives  his  relation- 
ship to  his  fellow-men  and  to  God  ;  and  while  Jesus  tells  us 
to  love  God  and  to  love  our  neighbour,  John  ampUfies  the 
command  in  the  words,  "  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth 
his  brother,  he  is  a  har  :  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother 
whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not 
seen  ?  "  Epistemologically,  metaphysically,  and  ethically,  the 
problem  of  objectivism  and  subjectivism  is  the  fundamental 
problem  of  all  philosophy,  Russian  philosophy  not  excepted. 
The  Russians,  being  acquainted  with  German  ideahsm,   felt 


474  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

very  strongly  that  solipsism  involved  ethical  and  social  isolation, 
and  therefore  rejected  the  doctrine.  Bakunin  was  the  first 
writer  to  proclaim  that  suicide  was  the  logical  outcome  of  this 
solipsistic  isolation  ;  Belinskii  and  Herzen,  taking  a  wider 
view,  considered  that  solipsism  culminated  in  crime  and  in 
murder,  but  these  writers  understood  crime  and  murder  to 
be  manifestations  of  revolution.  Herzen,  too,  coquetted  with 
the  Byronic  view  of  these  m'atters.  Solov'ev  accepted  Dostoev- 
skii's  formula,  in  accordance  v/ith  v/hich  murder  and  suicide 
issue  from  solipsism.  Ropsin,  too,  agreed  here  with  Dostoev- 
ski!. Mihailovskii  associated  the  Faust  problem  with  sub- 
jectivism, but  considered  that  the  decadent  social  grder  of  capit- 
alism was  the  nursery  of  Faust  natures.  From  Plehanov-  and 
the  Marxists  we  have  a  similar  formulation  of  the  problem, 
these  writers  passing  to  the  other,  the  objectivist,  extreme, 
and  adopting  solomnism. 

A  detailed  consideration  of  the  whole  problem  will  find  a 
more  suitable  place  in  the  study  of  Dostoevskii,  who  devoted 
much  attention  to  the  matter.  All  that  it  is  necessary  to 
add  here  is  that  the  Russians,  while  rejecting  subjectivism, 
insist  the  more  vigorously  on  the  need  for  individualism. 
Individuality  and  its  rights  are  defended  against  state  and 
church,  and  in  the  sociological  sphere  the  attempt  is  made 
to  grasp  the  relationship  of  the  individual  to  the  nation.  But 
the  epistemological  difficulties  of  the  problem  are  not  ade- 
quately faced  (cf.  §  172). 

§  192. 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL  weakness  is,  as  already  indicated, 
especially  noticeable  in  the  ethical  domain,  in  the  treat- 
ment of  the  fundam.ental  problems  of  ethics.  Of  peculiar 
importance  is  the  problem,  upon  what  foundation  the  moral 
imperative  is  to  be  based. 

In  this  respect  two  tendencies  are  manifested  in  Russian 
thought.  Solov'ev  holds  firmly  to  the 'Kantian  ethic,  believ- 
ing that  the  moral  problem  has  been  solved  once  and  for  all 
by  Kant  and  his  categorical  imperative.  Lavrov  is  likewise 
influenced  in  ethical  matters  by  Kant,  but  Lavrov  does  not 
ponder  the  epistemological  side  so  deeply  as  does  Solov'ev. 

In  ethics  as  well  as  in  other  departments  of  philosophy, 
most  Russian  thinkers  have  been  consistent  empiricists,  and 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  475 

have  therefore  abhorred  Kant  and  his  a  priorist  imperative. 
Yet  these  very  empiricists,  Cernysevskii,  Lavrov,  Mihailovskii, 
and  Kropotkin,  whose  main  demand  in  ethics  is  that  there 
should  be  no  imperative  obUgation,  do  in  practice  arrive  at 
an  imperative.  For  Cernysevskii,  the  ethical  "  scientific  " 
imperative,  the  imperative  firmly  grounded  upon  scientific 
considerations,  is  equally  vahd  in  the  other  worlds  of  stellar 
space.  Mihailovskii  appeals  to  conscience  and  the  sense  of 
honour  ;  he  does  not  consider  that  consequences  can  be  the 
measure  of  ethical  value,  and  the  proclamation  "  To  the 
Younger  Generation  "  is  as  scornful  of  utihtarian  economics 
as  if  it  had  been  Vvritten  by  the  Slavophils  or  by  Carlyle.  It 
is  precisely  these  materialistic  utilitarians  and  hedonists  a  la 
Cernysevskii  who  chng  to  absolute  ethical  rules.  Preaching 
egoism,  laughing  at  the  idea  of  self-sacrifice,  they  demand 
unconditional  self-surrender  on  behalf  of  Russia.  "  Die  for 
the  mir,"  exclaims  Cernysevskii,  that  is,  die  for  the  peasant, 
die  for  the  people.  Even  to  the  nihihsts,  ethics  is  the  chief 
of  the  sciences,  and  in  this  respect  the  nihilists  are  followed 
by  the  Russian  sociahsts,  the  narodniki,  the  social  revolu- 
tionaries, the  very  anarchists. 

De  facto,  therefore,  these  Russian  thinkers  are  followers 
of  Kant  ;  or  (if  you  will)  are  followers  of  Hume,  who  endeav- 
oured to  protect  his  ethics  against  his  own  scepticism.  Whilst 
Kant  with  his  imperative  constructed  a  so-called  formal  ethic, 
Hume  estabUshed  an  ethic  which,  though  materiahst,  was 
none  the  less  absolute. 

In  this  matter  Russian  philosophy  is  wholly  at  one  with 
German  ideaUst  philosophy,  for  both  are  predominantly  moral 
outlooks  on  the  world.  Russia  adopts  the  humanitarian  ideal 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  preaches  it,  and  endeavours  to 
realise  it  in   practice. 

Hence  arises  the  vigorous  demand  for  a  unified  philoso- 
phical outlook,  hence  the  demand  that  theory  and  practice 
shall  be  harmonised.  "  Word  and  deed  "  becomes  the  device, 
at  least  the  device  of  the  3^ounger  generation,-  of  the  "  children  " 
as  contrasted  with  the  "  fathers." 

It  need  not  surprise  us  that  voices  were  heard  proclaiming 
deeds  rather  than  words  (Bakunin),  and  representing  theory 
as  inferior  to  practice  (Pisarev).  For  the  newest  lovers  or 
friends  of  practice,  voluntarism  serves  as  an  epistemological 
pretext. 


476  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Those  of  the  younger  generation  understand  by  "  practice," 
poUtical  practice,  or,  more  definitely,  revolutionary  practice. 
Hence  arises  the  problem,  how  an  ethical  foundation  is  to  be 
supplied  for  revolutionary  action. 

This  practical  ethical  philosophy  imposes  upon  the  Russian 
philosophers  of  history  the  important  problem  of  historicism, 
by  which  I  understand  the  contention  that  socio-political 
demands  have  an  exclusively  historical  basis.  Historicism  is 
a  widely  prevalent  theory,  as  is  natural  in  view  of  the  extensive 
development  of  the  historic  sense  since  the  eighteenth  centur}^ 
We  have  discussed  evolutionism  from  this  aspect  (§  39) . 

The  Russians,  following  Comte,  eagerly  accepted  positivist 
historicism,  being  impelled  in  the  same  direction  by  Hegel 
and  Feuerbach.  Marxism  is  historicism  in  an  extreme  form, 
and  is  therefore  amoral  ex  hypothesi. 

Philosophico-historical  contemplation  involves,  therefore, 
the  consideration  of  the  fundamental  problem  of  history. 
Has  history  a  meaning,  and  what  is  the  relationship  of  indi- 
vidual aspiration  and  effort  to  the  evolution  of  the  social 
whole  ?  Apart  from  tlie  temporary  renunciation  by  Herzen 
of  the  teleological  conception  of  history,  Russian  philosophers 
of  history  have  been  inclined  to  recognise  that  evolution,  if 
it  has  not  followed  a  plan,  has  at  least  proceeded  in  accordance 
with  law  ;  most  of  them,  too,  recognise  logic  (Bakunin)  and 
ethics.  B^hnskii  protests  against  the  blind  fataUty  of  time 
and  fact,  and  defends  the  notion  of  personal  freedom ;  Grigor'ev 
demurs  to  the  subordination  of  the  individual  mind  to  the 
historical  process  of  evolution ;  Bakunin  demands  a  new 
morahty  ;  Lavrov  and  Mihailovskii  attempt  to  give  a  "sub- 
jective "  formula  of  progress  ;  Solov'ev  contrasts  the  prophetic 
founders  of  the  future  with  the  men  of  hard  fact ;  the  social 
revolutionaries  and  the  anarchists  reject  Marxist  historicism 
in  their  endeavours  to  bring  about  socialism  and  to  effect  a 
revolution.  In  all  cases  alike,  the  problem  is  this :  How 
far  can  pursuit  of  a  remote  external  end  (an  ultimate  end) 
replace  the  need  for  a  personal  ethical  decision — or  at  least 
in  conjunction  with  such  an  ethical  judgment  be  a  co-deter- 
minant of  action  ?  I  have  again  and  again  enunciated  my 
own  view  of  the  answer  to  this  question,  and  that  view  is 
further  indicated  by  the  fact  that,  in  this  summary,  I  am 
not  devoting  an  independent  section  to  the  philosophy  of 
history. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY-THREE 

THE   RELIGIOUS   PROBLEM   OF   RUSSIAN 
PHILOSOPHY 


§  193- 

RUSSIAN  philosophy,  Uke  western  philosophy,  aims  at 
a  solution  of  the  religious  problem  in  general.  But,  in 
addition,  the  ecclesiastico-religious  problem  demands  solution, 
and  to-day  this  matter  is  the  more  important.  The  Russians, 
however,  follow  the  western  example  here  also,  for  they  are 
fonder  of  discussing  the  general  problem  of  rehgion,  and  under 
the  prevaihng  conditions  of  censorship  this  is  the  safer  course. 
The  earher  thinkers,  beginning  with  Caadaev  and  the  Slavo- 
phils, associated  the  philosophy  of  rehgion  with  the  comparative 
study  of  creeds,  for  the  comparison  of  Russia  with  Europe 
renders  the  association  essential.  In  this  matter  Solov'ev 
followed  the  Slavophils. 

In  a  survey  of  Russian  philosophy  of  rehgion,  the  follomng 
points  are  of  especial  interest, 

I.  Unanimously,  Russian  writers  conceive  religion  as  beUef, 
as  faith.  Faith  is  contrasted  with  knowledge,  with  cognition. 
Solov'ev  considers  religious  faith  to  be  a  special  instance  of 
belief.     (See  his  theory  of  the  cognition  of  objects.) 

In  this  sense,  religious  belief  is  characterised  by  its  objects. 
Theism,  in  particular,  is  regarded  as  the  preeminent  type  of 
rehgious  behef  ;  atheism,  of  unbelief.  The  general  problem 
of  transcendence  (spiritualism  versus  materiaHsm)  emerges  in 
this  connection. 

Neither  psychologically  nor  epistemologically  has  the  prob- 
lem of  rehgion  been  adequately  analysed  by  the  Russians. 
Above  all,  they  have  failed  to  grasp  the  consequences  of  criti- 
cism for  the  rehgious  problem,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that 

477 


478  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

.  in  this  matter  a  bad  example  was  set  them  by  western  philo- 
I  sophers,    not    excepting    Kant    himself.     For    Kant    declared 
'    that  he  had  formulated  his  criticism  in  the  desire  to  find  his 
way  back  to  faith.     This  was  one  of  the  numerous  examples 
of  Kant's  inconsistency.     As  we  have  seen,  Lavrov  followed 
the  bad  example  when  he  attempted  to  elucidate  the  relation- 
ships between  faith  and  criticism  solely  on  the  ethical  plane, 
;     instead  of  considering  the  matter  above  all  in  the  light  of  the 
theory  of  cognition. 

Epistemologically,  Goethe  is  right  when  he  insists,  as  he 
does  more  than  once,  that  no  one  can  return  to  faith,  but  only 
to  conviction.  His  meaning  is  that  faith  (credulity)  constitutes 
the  essence  of  myth.  That  which  theologians  ever  extol  and 
demand  as  child-like  faith  is  nothing  but  the  blind  belief,  the 
confident  credulity,  of  the  uncritical  human  being.  One  who 
has  understood  Hume's  scepticism  and  Kant's  criticism  can 
no  longer  "  believe  "  ;  he  must  kfiow,  must  seek  and  find 
conviction. 

Once  for  all,  Hume  and  Kant  destroyed  the  myths  upon 
which  childlike  faith  can  alone  be  established,  and  all  attempts 
to  reconcile  scientific  philosophy  with  theology  have  since 
their  day  been  of  necessity  fallacious  and  fugitive.  This 
applies  equally  to  the  so-called  liberal  and  mediatorial  theology, 
and  to  the  attempts  made  by  those  modern  seekers  after  God 
who  in  the  end  eft'ect  nothing  but  a  compromise  with  the 
church.  In  this  connection  the  most  recent  Russian  philo- 
sophy is  perhaps  less  dangerous  than  the  corresponding  philo- 
sophy of  the  west,  for  in  Russia  such  Jesuitism  is  less  extensively 
buttressed  by  theological   and  philosophical  learning. 

Criticism  has  rendered  impossible  the  cry,  "  Retrace  your 
steps  !  "  The  only  way  to  formulate  the  problem  is  to  ask, 
how  religion  is  possible  for  the  critical  and  scientific  thinker, 
and  if  possible,  what  religion  (cf.  §41  a). 

2.  Mythical  thought  conceives  religion  in  purely  objectivist 
fashion,  having  faith  in  an  alleged  revelation.     Russian  philo- 
sophy is  still  so  mythical  and  objectivist  that  even  the  opponents 
of  ecclesiastical  religion  are  nothing  but  objectivists.     Tolstoi 
I   is  typical  in  this  respect.     Despite  his  rationalism,  he  passively 
I   accepts   the   New   Testament   as   an   absolute   revelation,   his 
I    criticism  of  the  record  being  confined  to  the  crudest  and  most 
I    naive  of  the  myths  it  contains.     Such  epistemological  passivism 
\   is  eminently  characteristic  of  Russian  thought. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  479 

3.  This  objectivism  is  likewise  characteristic  of  Russian 
mysticism  as  direct  contemplation  of  the  godhead  (Platonism). 

By  Caadaev  and  Solov'ev  mysticism  is  actually  identified 
with  religion,  and  even  the  adversaries  of  rehgion  effect  the 
same  identification.  Mihailovskii  and  Tolstoi  are  exceptions 
here;  the  former,  while  rejecting  mysticism,  refuses  to  identify 
it  with  religion. 

4.  Russian  philosophers  of  religion  do  not  stress  morality 
as  a  constituent  of  rehgion  to  the  extent  that  is  customary 
in  the  west.  Tolstoi,  influenced  by  Kant,  has  gone  furthest 
in  this  direction.  Solov'ev  strongly  emphasises  the  moral 
element  of  rehgion  (for  he,  too,  is  influenced  by  Kant)  ;  but 
in  addition  he  demands  behef  in  miracle,  regarding  the  dogma 
of  the  resurrection  as  the  most  important  among  rehgious 
dogmas.  Mihailovskii's  thought  in  this  matter  is  also  akin 
to  that  of  Tolstoi,  in  so  far  as  Mihailovskii  regards  morahty 
as  the  essence  of  religion. 

Even  the  opponents  of  ecclesiastical  religion  look  upon 
ritual  and  ritual  mystagogy  as  the  leading  elements  in  rehgion. 

5.  Consequently,  side  by  side  wath  ordinary  morahty  a 
higher  rehgious  morality  is  recognised,  asceticism  being  con- 
sidered the  logical  outcome  of  objectivist  transcendentahsm 
and  of  mysticism.  In  the  ascetic  cult,  the  aristocratic  char- 
acter of  ecclesiastical  religion  finds  expression  ;  the  cloister 
and  the  monk  occupy  a  central  position  in  ecclesiastical  rehgion. 

Solov'ev  and  Tolstoi  approve  religious  asceticism  ;  Leont'ev 
and  Dostoevskii  glorify  the  monk  as  Christian  hero  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  heroes  of  this  world. 

The  adversaries  of  ecclesiastical  rehgion,  on  the  other 
hand,  attack  asceticism.  Hence  the  great  importance  of 
utihtarianism  (hedonism  and  eudemonism)  in  Russian  philo- 
sophy. The  westernisers  and  the  liberals,  the  nihihsts,  the 
sociahsts,  and  the  anarchists,  all  espouse  utihtarian  morality. 

6.  Religious  objectivism  and  passivism  proclaim  the  church 
as  leading  authority.  Beginning  with  Caadaev  and  Homjakov, 
this  insistence  on  the  importance  of  the  church  continually 
recurs.     Tolstoi  is  an  exception. 

The  church  is  a  thoroughly  aristocratic  organisation,  being 
primarily  the  organisation  of  the  members  of  the  priesthood 
as  mediators  on  behalf  of  the  laity,  the  latter  being  dependent 
in  rehgious  matters.  In  the  Russian  church,  the  aristocratic 
factor  is  further  strengthened  by  the  circumstance  that   the 


480  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

members  of  the  hierarchy  are  appointed  from  among  the 
ceHbate  monks,  not  from  among  the  married  secular  clergy. 
In  the  writings  of  Solov'ev,  no  less  than  in  those  of  Leont'ev, 
the  aristocratic  character  of  priestcraft  is  conspicuous. 

The  church  is  the  city  of  God  {the  ttoXic  Oeov  of  Origen,  the 
civitas  dei  of  Augustine),  and  as  such  every  social  organisation, 
and  in  especial  the  state,  must  be  subordinated  to  it.  In 
and  b^^  itself,  and  also  in  association  with  the  state,  the  church 
is  theocracy  (Solov'ev's  free  theocracy). 

For  as  soon  as  the  church  conceives  its  doctrine  and  its 
guidance  of  life  to  be  absolutely  true,  and  therefore  claims 
infallible  authority  alike  in  theoretical  and  in  practical  matters, 
and  as  soon  as  men  come  to  believe  in  this  authority  and  to  4 
bow  before  it,  the  primacy  of  the  church  over  the  state  is  the 
inevitable  consequence.  In  so  far  as  the  state  adduces  ethical 
arguments  for  its  own  existence,  in  so  far  as  it  justifies  on 
moral  grounds  the  necessary  existence  of  the  state,  an  intimate 
association  between  state  and  church  must  result,  for  the 
church  regards  the  moral  guidance  of  society  as  its  peculiar 
mission. 

This  intimate  relationship  is  conspicuous  in  the  origin 
of  canon  law  side  by  side  with  the  civil  law  to  which  the  state 
owes  its  origin. I 

The  church  and  ecclesiastical  religion  present  themselves 
as  objective,  integral,  absolute  authority;  ecclesiastical  religion 
is  made  to  appear  the  central  spiritual  force  of  the  individual 
and  of  society. 

From  this  outlook  we  can  readily  understand  why  Russian  | 
philosophy  lays  so  much  stress  upon  individualism  (Mihail- 
ovskii's  "  struggle  for  individuality  ").  Equally  clear  becomes 
the  significance  of  socialism  in  general  and  of  social  democracy 
in  particular.  With  the  absoluteness  of  the  Marxist  doctrine, 
the  social  democratic  organisation  is  authoritatively  counter- 
posed,  not  to  the  state  alone,  but  to  the  church  as  well. 

For  the  same  reason,  Russian  anarchism  is  anti-ecclesi- 
astical and  antireligious.  This  is  equally  true  of  liberalism, 
which  upholds  nationality  as  social  organisation  and  authority, 
against  the  church  and  the  church's  theocratic  ideal  of 
nationality, 

I  Rothenbiicher's,  Die  Trennung  von  Staat  und  Kirche,  1908,  contains  a 
discussion  on  the  question  whether  canon  law  is  really  law,  and  if  so,  in  what 
sense. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  481 

7.  The  absolute  religious  authority  of  the  church  logically 
manifests  itself  as  Catholicism.  It  is  impHcit  in  the  idea  of 
divine  revelation  that  this  revelation  should  be  Catholic,  that 
is  to  say,  should  be  accepted  always,  everywhere,  and  by  all. 
TraditionaHsm  is  the  essential  principle  of  belief  in  revelation. 
Messianism  (Caadaev,  the  Slavophils,  Solov'ev)  is  part  of  the 
very  nature  of  objectivist  ecclesiastical  rehgion. 

§  194- 

WITH  the  reforms  of  Peter  there  began  in  Russia  the 
struggle  of  the  rationalist  enlightenment  against  the 
philosophy  and  the  practice  of  the  church.  This  struggle 
and  its  results  form  the  substance  of  Russian  literature,  both 
philosophical  and  belletristic. 

When  we  examine  the  long  series  of  philosophers  and 
writers,  we  are  struck  by  the  fact  that  independent  Russian 
thought,  even  when  friendly  to  religion,  is  hostile  to  ecclesi- 
astical rehgion.  With  Caadaev  begins  the  phase  of  absolute 
negation  of  the  church  and  its  religion.  The  Slavophils,  too, 
criticise  ecclesiastical  religion,  though  somewhat  less  harshly. 
This  is  why  Gogol's  acceptance  of  Orthodoxy  was  so  repugnant 
to  his  contemporaries,  and  why  Belinskii  gave  so  lively  an 
expression  to  his  disapproval  of  Gogol's  outlook.  Belinskii 
himself  was  averse,  not  only  to  ecclesiastical  religion,  but  to 
religion  in  general.  By  way  of  Bakunin  and  Herzen  we  pass 
to  Cernysevskii  and  to  nihilism,  a  doctrine  in  which  anti- 
rehgious  negation  secured  its  most  characteristic  form.  This 
negation  persists  in  the  doctrines  of  contemporary  Marxists 
and  modern  anarchists. 

Among  the  westernisers  we  find  a  few  thinkers  friendly 
to  rehgion,  but  on  the  whole  in  philosophical  matters  the 
westernisers  agree  with  the  nihihsts.  Mihailovskii,  the  pro- 
gressive opponent  of  nihihsm,  is  a  noteworthy  exception. 
Solov'ev  defends  rehgion,  but  opposes  the  church,  though 
his  hostihty  to  the  church  is  less  marked  than  that  of  his 
great  opponent  Tolstoi. 

Dostoevski!  and  Solov'ev  have  converted  the  successors 
of  the  nihihsts.  Dostoevskii's  religious  philosophy  is  definitely 
antinihilist. 

Katkov,  Pobedonoscev,  and  Tihomirov,  outspokenly  con- 
servative and  reactionary  pohticians,  are  unconditional  defenders 

32  VOL.  II. 


482  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

of  religion.  Leont'ev,  for  all  that  he  became  a  monk,  occupies 
a  peculiar  position  among  the  reactionary  religious  philosophers, 
and  the  church  has  certainly  no  occasion  to  congratulate 
herself  upon  the  accession  of  this  apologist. 

Thus  Russia  presents  a  picture  of  philosophic  and  religious 
disunion.  Ecclesiastical  religion  is  opposed  by  the  absolute 
negation  characteristic  of  nihilism.  From  its  very  program, 
nihilism  is  not  merely  empiricism  and  agnostic  positivism, 
but  it  is  materialism  and  atheism  as  well — especial  stress 
being  laid  upon  materialism.  Herzen's  "  great  disillusion- 
ment "  is  a  consistent  renunciation  of  ecclesiastical  religion 
with  its  doctrines  and  its  conduct  of  life  ;  it  is  an  assertion  of 
the  epistemological  and  metaphysical  sufficiency  of  positivist 
materialism,  which  sees  through  the  thought-creations  of  the 
ego  as  illusion  and  fantasy,  and  therefore  looks  upon  the 
transient  and  mortal  ego  as  a  thing  of  no  moment.  Herzen's 
disillusionment  and  Herzen's  interpretation  of  nihilism  har- 
monise perfectly  with  Stirner's  nihilistic  iconoclasm,  Herzen, 
like  Stirner,  deduces  the  ultimate  logical  conclusions  from  the 
teachings  of  Feuerbach. 

Herzen  rightly  appraised  nihilism  as  a  transitional  doctrine, 
Caadaev  had  spoken  of  prepetrine  Russia  as  a  blank  sheet 
of  paper  ;  the  nihilist  fought  Russia  in  order  to  fill  the  intel- 
lectual void  with  a  new  content.  As  Kropotkin  expresses  it, 
nihilism  is  a  struggle  for  individuality. 

Saltykov,  when  his  newspaper  was  suppressed,  was  utterly 
overwhelmed  by  this  arbitrary  act  of  authority.  He  tells 
us  that  he  suddenly  lost  the  use  of  his  tongue.  Awakening 
one  day,  he  felt  that  he  had  gone  utterly  astray,  that  he  had 
ceased  to  exist.  Theocratic  absolutism  in  Russia  is,  in  fact, 
aphasia,  is  the  cessation  of  thought  and  the  abandonment 
of  individuality. 

We  can  understand  why  the  progressive  opponents  of 
ecclesiastical  doctrine  lay  so  much  stress  on  individualism, 
and  why  Russian  sociahsm  is  so  strongly  individuahstic.  To 
the  progressive  Russian,  individuaUsm  is  so  important  and 
so  dear  because  it  is  the  converse  of  Orthodox  passivism,  of 
the  individuahsm  of  the  traditional  faith  of  the  church.  In 
its  radical  and  embittered  negation  of  theocracy,  Russian 
individuahsm  is  apt  to  pass  into  anarchism.  This  is  why 
the  opponents  of  ecclesiastical  religion  (Lavrov,  Mihailovskii, 
etc.)  are  such  enthusiastic  advocates  of  the  idea  of  progress. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  483 

The  philosophical  and  socio-pohtical  nature,  of  nihiUsm 
has  been  sufficiently  analysed  in  the  preceding  pages  (§§  iio- 
114),  and  we  have  studied  the  nihilist  declarations  of  a  number 
of  representative  thinkers.  I  may  refer,  above  all,  to  Herzen ; 
but  in  succession  to  Herzen  the  other  writers  I  have  analysed 
devoted  attention  to  the  problem. 

As  atheism  and  materiahsm,  nihihsm  is  a  complex  spiritual 
and  social  state. 

For  all  the  Christian  churches  morahty  forms  an  integral 
constituent  of  reHgion  and  of  the  reUgious  conduct  of  Hfe. 
Nihihsm,  therefore,  with  its  atheism  and  materiahsm,  with 
its  negation  of  ecclesiastical  morality,  has  moral  and  socio- 
pohtical  importance.  It  is,  above  all,  the  practical  outcomes 
of  nihihsm  which  have  been  the  subject  of  lively  discussion 
in    Russian   philosophy    and   literature. 

Prepetrine  Russia  had  no  secular  culture,  and  properly 
speaking  no  spiritual  culture.  For  this  reason,  when  European 
culture  made  its  way  into  Russia,  it  at  once  and  necessarily 
took  the  form  of  opposition  to  what  passed  for  culture  in  that 
land.  As  we  have  shown,  Europeanisation  was  not  effected 
suddenly,  once  and  for  all  ;  but  none  the  less  the  transition 
was  too  abrupt,  for  the  intellectual  leadership  of  the  people 
had  hitherto  been  in  the  hands  of  the  Russian  church,  and 
the  church  was  not  only  without  a  philosophy,  but  without 
a  theology.  In  Constantinople,  in  Rome,  and  even  in  Ger- 
many and  England,  there  had  been  independent  developments 
of  philosophy  and  theology  ;  for  centuries,  scholasticism  had 
prepared  the  grdund  for  scientific  and  critical  thought.  There 
occurred  the  great  spiritual  movements  of  the  renaissance 
and  of  humanism.  In  addition,  by  the  reformation  and  by 
gradual  developments  within  Protestantism,  the  way  was 
paved  for  the  coming  of  the  new  philosophy  and  the  new 
science.  In  Europe,  the  ideas  of  Voltaire,  Hume,  Kant,  Comte, 
Fichte,  Hegel,  and  Feuerbach,  were  organic  hnks  in  the  evolu- 
tionary chain  ;  but  the  introduction  of  these  ideas  into  Russia 
signified  a  profound  spiritual  revolution. 

Orthodox  Russia,  in  a  state  of  spiritual  arrest,  was  over- 
whelmed by  the  flood  of  French  anti-ecclesiastical  and  anti- 
rehgious  rationalism.  Voltaire,  Diderot,  Rousseau,  Montes- 
quieu, gained  a  footing  in  Russia,  mainly  of  course  at  court 
and  in  "  society,"  though  some  of  the  works  of  Voltaire  were 
issued  from  a  village  printing  press  !     German  influence  was 


484  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

superadded  to  French,  especially  that  of  Hegel  and  of  the 
radical  Hegelian  left,  that  of  Feuerbach  and  Strauss  ;  with 
Feuerbach  came  materialism  (Vogt,  etc.),  the  positivism  of 
Comte  and  Mill,  and  the  naturaUstic  evolutionism  of  Darwin 
and  Spencer.  The  Russians,  enslaved  at  home,  sought  political 
culture  from  the  liberal  and  socialist  leaders  and  writers  of 
Europe.  Constant,  Saint-Simon,  Fourier,  Proudhon,  Owen, 
and  subsequently  Lassalle  and  Marx,  furnished  the  social 
and  political  ideals,  whilst  the  ideas  of  Hegel  and  Feuerbach 
were  a  solvent  to  Byzantine  Orthodoxy.  To  put  the  matter 
in  a  nutshell,  Marxist  astatist  communism  was  to  abolish  and 
replace  the  medieval  agrarian  natural  economy  of  theocratic 
Russia !  •  ' 

Let   the   reader   call   to    mind  Tolstoi's  Confession,   where 
that  writer   describes  the  revolution  that   took  place   within 
his  mind  when  he  learned,  as  a  great  novelty,  that  there  was 
no  God.     In  Europe,  generations  and  centuries  had  prepared 
the  way  for  this  novelty  ;   medieval  philosophy  and  theocratic 
organisation  had  been  transformed  step  by  step  ;    and  none 
the  less  Europe  was  not  everywhere  prepared  for  the  inno- 
vations.    But  think  of  theocratic  Russia,  enter  into  the  mind 
of  the  religiously  trained  Russian,  and  realise  how  there  came 
to  him,  like  a  bolt  from  the  blue,  the  message  of  Voltaire, 
Diderot,  Comte,  Kant,  Hegel,  Feuerbach,  Stirner,  Vogt,  Strauss, 
and   Marx.     In   Europe    as   early   as   the   thirteenth    century 
the  phrase  "  de  tribus  impostoribus  "  could  be  fathered  upon 
the  emperor  ;     and  we  know   that   there  were  infidel  popes. 
But  what  must  have  been  the  effect  of  the  sudden  invasion 
of    unbelief    in    Russia,    a    land    where    the    church    and    its 
monasteries  had  hitherto   been  the  highest,   and   indeed   the 
sole   generally  recognised,   spiritual    authority,   a  land   where 
the  state  formed  the  right  and  left  arms  of  this  authority  ? 
In   England,    Mill   and   Darwin   were  buried   in   Westminster 
Abbey  ;  in  Russia,  such  men  as  Cernygevskii,  the    adherents 
of   Mill  and  of  Darwin,  found  their  way  to   the  penitentiary 
or  to  Siberia  ! 

In  Europe,  too,  liberty  was  dearly  bought  by  revolutions 
and  reformations,  and  even  to-day  has  not  everywhere  been 
secured.  Such  liberty,  the  outcome  of  great  intellectual 
struggles  and  long-enduring  mental  labour,  can  already  be 
partially  endured  in  Europe  ;  but  in  Russia,  the  influence  of 
European   thought,    of   European   mental   life,    was   perforce 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  485 

revolutionary.  Theocracy  prohibited  and  suppressed  this 
thought,  this  mental  hfe  ;  but  the  forbidden  fruits  of  European 
civilisation  were  plucked  all  the  more  eagerly. 

In  Russia,  therefore,  philosophy  and  science,  art  and 
technical  progress,  were  revolutionary  instruments  ;  litera- 
ture became  a  social  and  pohtical  leader,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  "  Newgate  calendar "  ("  register  of  convicts "  was 
Herzen's  phrase),  a  record  of  the  thoughts  of  exiles  and 
refugees. 

The  issue  of  this  sudden  illumination  was  the  revolution 
— a  mental  and  pohtical  revolution  against  the  dominant 
theocracy.  Negation,  pessimism,  and  nihihsm,  are  the  natural 
consequences  of  an  unbridged  transition  from  Orthodoxy  to 
atheism,   materialism,   and  positivism. 

The  German  has  been  accustomed  for  centuries  to  be  left 
to  his  own  guidance  ;  the  German  has  passed  through  the 
reformation,  the  renaissance,  the  humanist  movement,  and 
the  enhghtenment ;  the  German  came  to  Feuerbach  by  degrees, 
through  many  intermediate  stages.  This  is  why  the  influence 
of  such  writers  as  Schopenhauer,  Stirner,  and  Nietzsche  is 
less  devastating  in  Germany  than  in  Russia.  The  German 
has  made  the  acquaintance  of  other  thinkers,  he  is  accustomed 
to  hearing  arguments  pro  and  con.  But  the  Russian  accepts 
Feuerbach,  Stirner,  Schopenhauer,  Nietzsche,  Darwin,  etc., 
as  isolated  and  supreme  authorities.  Hence  the  negation 
of  theocracy,  which  implies  here  the  negation  of  the 
entire  past,  and  imphes  therewith  the  social  and  pohtical 
revolution. 

In  the  eighteenth  century,  doubtless,  as  previously  ex- 
plained, Voltaire  influenced  the  Russians ;  but  Voltairism, 
when  compared  with  Humism  and  Kantianism,  is  after  all 
nothing  but  sceptical  lemonade  as  against  the  poison  which 
Hume  and  Kant  instil  into  the  veins  of  medieval  faith.  If 
Hume  awakened  Kant  from  his  dogmatic  slumber,  we  may 
say  with  equal  truth  that  Kant  and  German  philosophy 
awakened  the  Russians  from  their  dogmatic  slumber  ! 

Long  ere  this,  Europe  had  exercised  an  influence  upon 
Russia  ;  in  the  Russian  monastery,  Peter  had  opened  a  window 
towards  Europe  ;  Voltaire  had  brought  into  the  country  a 
breath  of  European  fresh  air.  But  Kant  and  German  philo- 
sophy shook  the  Russian  monastery  and  tsarist  absolutism  to 
their    foundations.     Europe    had    influenced    Russia    before, 


486  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

but  from  the  days  of  Kant  onwards  the  influence  was  that 
of  the  new  Europe  !  ^ 

Every  struggle  demands  its  victims,  even  the  struggle  of 
philosophy  against  theology  and  theocracy.  And  the  struggle 
we  are  now  considering  is  characterised  by  the  indecision 
which  invariably  ensues  upon  the  direct  contact  between 
an  old  and  a  new  civilisation.  A  general  process  of  decom- 
position sets  in,  accompanied  bj/^  abnormal  and  positively 
pathological  manifestations. 

In  many  instances,  radical  negation  remains  mere  scepti- 
cism. The  sceptic  lapses  into  a  mood  of  habitual  criticism, 
but  this  criticism  is  itself  uncritical,  the  inner  void  is  again 
and  again  filled  by  the  newest  ideas  and  "  idealets,"  but  these 
are  again  and  again  discarded.  The  scepticism  ends  in  a 
numbing  instability,  uncertainty,  and  vagueness.  The  will 
becomes  enfeebled  as  well  as  the  reason.  The  resulting  con- 
dition is  that  which  Mihailovskii  has  so  thoroughly  analysed 
(and  condemned)  as  the  modern  Faust-malady.  Ropsin  shows 
us  that  the  disease  has  invaded  the  camp  of  the  revolu- 
tionaries, who  prior  to  this  have  always  preserved  faith  in 
the   revolution. 

Philosophy  and  theology  fight  the  great  fight  concerning 
God.  The  struggle  rages  round  the  question  of  the  revealed 
God,  the  main  problem  being  that  of  revelation  and  tradition 
versus  experience  and  science.  Russian  thinkers  have  from  the 
religious  and  moral  aspect  attempted  to  sum  up  this  problem 
as  culminating  in  the  weighty  and  oppressive  alternatives 
of  murder  or  suicide.     Acceptance  of  modern  German  philo- 

I  In  exemplification  of.  the  psychology  of  the  sudden  and  unbridged  revo- 
lution in  thoughts  and  feelings,  I  may  quote  a  writer  who  is  quite  unconcerned 
with  philosophical  problems,  and  merely  records  facts.  I  refer  to  PantelSev, 
Siberian  exile  and  progressive  publisher,  who  has  recently  gained  considerable 
reputation  as  a  literator.  In  his  Reminiscences,  referring  to  the  close  of  the 
fifties,  he  writes  :  "  But  now,  one  fine  day,  a  veritable  bomb  was  hurled  at 
us,  in  the  shape  of  a  lithographed  translation  of  Buchner's  Force  and  Matter. 
We  all  read  it  with  the  utmost  enthusiasm,  and  from  every  one  of  us,  in  a 
moment,  it  tore  away  the  last  shreds  of  traditional  belief.  .  .  .  Notwithstanding 
the  brilliant  success  of  '  Sovremennik,'  progressive  socio-political  ideas  had 
secured  comparatively  few  adherents  even  among  young  people  ;  many  had 
adopted  them  only  to  abandon  them  lightly,  and  even  in  our  day  such  ideas 
had  to  struggle  for  existence  ;  but  the  thoughts  of  Biichner  and  Feuerbach 
took  the  Russian  mind  by  storm,  and  none  of  the  severities  of  the  subsequent 
reaction  were  able  to  restore  to  society  the  naive  beliefs  of  the  past." — I 
quote  this  passage  because  Panteliev,  who  makes  no  pretensions  to  philosophic 
illumination,  gives  a  frank  and  unadorned  but  perfectly  accurate  picture  of 
the  situation. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  487 

sophy  with  its  epistemological  subjectivism  and  individualism, 
the  negation  of  Old  Russia,  nihilism  as  atheism,  forced  these 
alternatives  upon  Herzen,  Belinskii,  and  Bakunin.  Dostoevskii, 
above  all,  devoted  his  life  to  the  exhaustive  consideration  of 
the  problem,  and  for  this  reason  the  study  of  Dostoevskii 
will  lay  bare  to  us  the  soul  of  the  modern  Russian. 

II 

§  195- 

IN  Europe,  the  term  Byzantinism  has  been  used  to  denote 
the  defects  of  the  Russian  church  and  of  Russian  eccle- 
siastical religion  ;  as  we  have  seen,  the  Russians  have  them- 
selves adopted  the  word  and  have  accepted  the  criticism 
implied  in  its  use.  It  suggests  excessive  formalism,  undue 
clinging  to  inherited  forms  and  doctrines  (cf.  Solov'ev's  satire 
upon  the  Orthodox  archeological  museum),  satisfaction  with 
externals  and  with  materialistic  piety  (ritual,  liturgy,  venera- 
tion for  icons  and  relics)  ;  it  suggests  a  passive  demeanour 
in  religious  matters  in  general,  coupled  with  extravagant 
mysticism  (Solov'ev,  though  himself  a  mystic,  disapproved 
of  Russian  mysticism)  ;  and  suggests,  finally,  the  amalgamation 
of  the  church  with  the  state  and  with  nationalism.  The 
Slavophils,  despite  their  friendliness  to  the  church  and  to 
religion,   here  join  with   Solov'ev  in  frank  criticism. 

Protestant  theologians  of  the  west,  Kattenbusch,  Miiller, 
Loofs,  and  more  recently  Harnack,  take  the  same  view  in 
their  comparative  judgments  of  the  Orthodox  church  and 
of  Orthodox  ecclesiastical  religion — above  all  in  the  case 
of  Russia. 

The  essential  characteristic  of  Russian  religion  is,  in  fact, 
the  belief  in  the  other  world  ;  for  believing  Russians,  trans- 
cendence is  no  mere  philosophical  principle,  but  is  actual 
reality  ;  belief  in  God  and  in  immortality  are  truly  living 
faiths.  Hence  arises  the  endeavour  whilst  still  in  this  life  to 
participate  in  the  life  to  come ;  hence  mysticism,  hence  addic- 
tion to  the  contemplative  life.  Russian  faith  is  faith  in 
miracle,  faith  in  thaumaturgy.  To  Russians,  Jesus  the 
God-man,  the  deity  in  human  form  who  awakens  men 
from  the  dead,  seems  a  being  close  at  hand.  Transcendence 
is  not    conceived   spiritually    and    ethically,  but   materially ; 


488  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

the  soul  itself  is  regarded  as  but  a  refined  form  of  matter  ; 
belief  in  immortality  retains  the  quality  of  primitive  animism, 
and  is  a  belief  in  ghosts.  Hence  the  anthropomorphic 
insistence  upon  the  characteristics  of  the  God-man  (this 
is  seen  already  in  Origen,  as  shown  in  §  144)  ;  hence  the 
delight  in  materialistic  ritual  and  materialistic  symbolism. 
Typical  are  the  purely  formalist  and  materialistic  doctrines 
and  customs  which  find  expression  in  the  raskol";  and  typical, 
too,  is  the  fact  that  the  state  church,  despite  hesitations 
and  vacillations,  has  not  definitely  repudiated  and  expelled 
the   raskol    (§  4).     Mysticism  is  itself  materialistic   (§  145). 

In  practice,  living  faith  in  transcendence  leads  to  asceticism. 
The  Russian  monk  is  nothing  but  an  ascetic,  a  hermit,  one 
who  despises  the  life  of  this  world,  whereas  Roman  Catholic 
monks  have  often  been  attendants  on  the  sick,  doctors,  teachers, 
and  the  like.  When  Herzen  speaks  of  Christianity  as  the 
religion  of  death,  he  is  thinking  chiefly  of  religion  in  Russia. 
Nevertheless,  the  saying  is  true  also  of  the  Russian  monk  : 
contemptor  suaemet  ipsius  vitae,   dominus  alienae. 

The  passivist  demeanour  of  the  Russian  is  thoroughly 
consistent  ;  he  blindly  accepts  the  revelation  and  the  practice 
of  the  church  ;  for  these  derive  from  the  God-man.  There 
can  be  no  progress,  no  development,  for  God  has  revealed 
in  the  God-man  the  highest  truths  and  those  that  are  most 
important  to  men.  Man  can  add  nothing  to  these  truths,  he 
must  simply  accept  them  unquestioningly  as  a  means  for 
moral  improvement.  Even  Augustine  considered  that,  pro- 
perly speaking,  history  had  come  to  an  end  with  the  appear- 
ance of  Jesus  ;  and  Solov'ev  therefore  felt  it  incumbent  on 
him  to  seek  justificatory  reasons  for  historical  development 
after   the   days   of   Christ. 

Russian  religion  and  the  Russian  church  are  unprogressive 
on  principle.  Religious  doctrine  and  religious  practice  must 
remain  exactly  as  they  were  established  as  early  as  the  third 
century  by  the  great  Greek   (Alexandrian)   dogmatists.^ 

Homjakov  was  opposed  to  this  "  Byzantinism  "  no  less 
than  Solov'ev  ;  but  Leont'ev  unreservedly  accepted  it,  and 
was  not  unwilling  that  Russia  should  remain  petrified. 

It  was   natural  that   the   Greeks,   philosophically   trained, 

»  Some  historians  consider  that  the  definitive  form  of  Orthodoxy  was 
attained  at  a  date  later  than  that  mentioned  in  the  text,  but  these  chronological 
difierences  have  no  bearing  on  the  argument. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  489 

should  be  the  founders  of  Christian  doctrine.  Clemens  Alex- 
andrinus,  Origen,  Methodios  of  Olympus,  and  the  other  Greek 
theologians,  drew  their  ideas,  not  only  from  the  Old  and  the 
New  Testament,  but  also  from  Greek  philosophy,  in  especial 
from  Platonism  and  neoplatonism,  but  to  some  extent  also 
from  stoicism.  Nor  must  we  forget  that  the  Greeks  were  early 
exposed  to  Asiatic  influences,  and  that  at  the  time  when 
Christianity  was  developing,  the  influence  of  the  religions 
of  Asia  was  not  restricted  to  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament.^ 
Pari  passu  with  the  political  and  cultural  detachment  of 
Byzantium  from  the  west  and  with  the  development  of 
Byzantium  into  an  oasis  of  civilisation  owing  to  the  inroads 
of  the  uncultured  nations  of  Asia  and  Europe  (and  above 
all  of  the  Turks),  religious  and  cultural  stationarism  evolved 
as  a  manifestation  of  self-sufhciency. 

Russia  received  her  church  and  her  religion  ready-made 
from  Byzantium.  The  significance  of  this  was  explained  at 
the  very  outset  of  these  studies.  All  that  need  be  added  here 
is  that  while  the  Russians  adopted  Byzantine  religion  they 
did  not  adopt  Byzantine  civilisation.  They  acquired  a  rich 
heritage,  but  their  timidity  led  them  to  bury  the  talent  in 
the  ground.  Moreover,  their  powers  were  not  equal  to  the 
digestion  of  Greek  theology,  and  after  prolonged  attempts 
they  secured  in  this  respect  no  more  than  a  partial  success 
(of.  §§  2  and  3). 

The  Russians  were  no  less  isolated  than  the  Byzantines, 
and  it  was  because  of  this  isolation  that,  like  the  Byzantines, 
they  cherished  ecclesiastico-religious  tradition.  At  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Kievic  epoch  there  doubtless  existed  a  certain 
cultural  community  with  the  west,  but  this  was  of  brief 
duration.  Russia,  cut  off  from  the  west,  and  before  long  from 
the  east  as  well,  had  her  cultural  and  religious  development 
arrested,  all  the  more  seeing  that  the  unceasing  need  for  defence 
against  hostile  neighbours  tended  to  promote  a  one-sided 
development  of  the  political  and  military  activities  of  the 
Russian  state.  Books  on  canon  law  and  various  other  subjects 
entered   Russia  from   Constantinople   and  from  the   southern 

I  An  excellent  though  concise  account  of  the  facts  is  given  by  Seeberg  in 
his  Grundriss  der  Dogmengeschichte,  3rd  edition,  1910.  Consult  also  Har- 
nack,  Sitzungsberichte  der  preussischen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften,  1913, 
and  Der  Geist  der  morgenlandischen  Kirche  im  Unterschied  von  der  abend- 
landischen.  Additional  authorities  are  mentioned  under  theological  literature 
in  §  47. 


490  THE    SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Slav  countries,  but  without  promoting  any  effective  com- 
munity of  civilisation.  The  isolation  of  Russia  was  intensified 
by  the  enmity  to  the  Catholic  Poles,  and  subsequently  to 
the  Protestant  Germans  and  Swedes. 

The  Russians  took  over  Byzantine  theology,  but  did  not 
acquire  Hellenism,  or  acquired  so  much  only  as  was  implicit 
in  the  theology.  When  we  compare  Russia  with  the  west 
we  may  say  that  the  former  knew  nothing  of  Aristotle  or  of 
the  corpus  juris  ;  Greek  never  played  in  Russia  the  part  that 
Latin  played  in  the  west  ;  there  was  no  humanist  movement, 
no  renaissance,  no  independent  growth  of  the  sciences  and 
of  modern  philosophy,  and  above  all  no  reformation  (or 
counter-reformation).  On  the  other  hand,  in  religious  matters 
Asia  from  earl}''  days  exercised  considerable  influence  upon 
Russia,  and  Leont'ev's  fondness  for  the  stationary  character- 
istics of  Asiaticism  was  not  wholly  unrussian. 

The  Slavophils  extol  Russia  because  she  did  not  produce 
any  counterpart  to  scholasticism.  But  Russia  was  not  called 
upon  to  defend  the  doctrines  of  the  church  against  classical 
paganism,  and  had  no  need  to  defend  those  doctrines  against 
her  own  thinkers.  The  Slavophils,  therefore,  are  fully  repre- 
sentative of  the  spirit  of  the  Russian  church  when  they  attack 
logic  and  spurn  Aristotle,  and  when  they  cling  to  Plato  and 
his  contemplation  of  eternal  ideas  and  unchangeable  verities. 
Altogether  Russian,  too,  is  their  thought  when  they  term 
scholasticism  the  mother  of  Protestantism  and  of  rationalist 
notions  in  general,  and  when  they  wholly  condemn  rationalism. 

Kireevskii,  Homjakov,  and  Solov'ev  are  representative 
exponents  of  Russian  religious  thought  and  feeling,  and  the 
same  may  be  said  of  Leont'ev. 

We  saw  that  Russian  philosophers  of  history  lay  great 
stress  on  the  importance  of  the  church.  But  for  the  Russians 
the  church  is  not  what  it  is  for  Catholics  or  Protestants.  To 
the  Russian,  indeed  to  any  member  of  the  Orthodox  church, 
the  priest  is  not  the  teacher  and  guide  in  matters  of  religion, 
but  is  above  all  the  miracle-worker,  the  magician.  The 
Russian  looks  upon  his  priest  as  a  live  "  good  conductor  " 
of  divine  grace,  as  a  passive  mediator.  The  Russian  is  a  con- 
sistent passivist.  Salvation  comes  to  man  without  his  personal 
collaboration,  and  even  the  priest  plays  no  individual  part 
here.  This  is  why  in  Russia  (as  in  the  east)  the  monk  is  held 
in    much    higher    esteem    than    the    ordinary    priest.     Priests 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  491 

marry,  and  are  therefore  more  closely  akin  to  laymen  ;  only 
during  the  actual  performance  of  his  priestly  functions  does 
the  priest  become  in  a  peculiar  way  a  passive  mediator  in  the 
transmission  of  higher  forces. 

To  the  Orthodox  Russian,  therefore,  the  church  is  not 
what  it  is  to  the  Roman  Catholic  westerner,  for  the  Russian 
does  not  regard  his  priest  as  an  exceptionally  religious  person- 
ality. Roman  Cathohcs  think  of  their  church  as  a  mighty 
and  all-embracing  organisation  ;  but  to  Russians  the  church 
is  no  more  than  the  hierarchical  corporation  of  supreme  leaders, 
who  are  appointed  from  the  monkish  ascetics  (more  highly 
esteemed  than  the  secular  priests).  For  the  hke  reason  the 
centralised  papacy  is  impossible  in  the  east,  and  the  existence 
of  the  papacy  is  the  most  fundamental  and  most  keenly  felt 
reason  for  the  severance  from  Roman  Catholicism.  The  eastern 
church  has  always  been  federally  organised,  as  a  patriarchate. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  why  the  so-called 
caesaropapism  originated  in  the  east.  The  state  was  gladly 
recognised  and  utihsed  by  the  church  as  helper  and  protector. 
In  Byzantium,  owing  to  the  assaults  made  on  the  empire  by 
Asiatic  and  European  enemies,  a  strongly  organised  state  was 
a  national  necessit}^ ;  and,  in  view  of  the  political  and  national 
isolation  of  the  realm,  the  eastern  church  could  not  develop 
along  the  internationahst  lines  characteristic  of  the  western 
papacy.  The  Roman  empire  of  the  west  fell  a  thousand  years 
earher  than  the  Roman  empire  of  the  east  ;  not  until  after 
the  lapse  of  several  centuries  was  the  western  empire  reorgan- 
ised after  the  eastern  model,  reorganised  by  the  papac}^  now 
fortified,   and  grown  into  an  independent  state. 

In  Russia,  too,  the  church  associated  itself  with  the  state 
to  estabhsh  caesaropapism  ;  but  the  Russian  Orthodox  church, 
continually  strugghng  against  Mohammedans  and  Cathohcs, 
and  later  against  Protestants  as  well,  became  national,  as 
contrasted  with  the  international  church  of  the  west. 


Ill 

§  196. 

IN  these  studies  I  set  out  from  the  historical  conception  that 
society   has   hitherto    been    and    still    is    organised    theo- 
cratically,    and   that   democracy   puts   an   end   to   theocracy. 


492  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

It  is  not  in  Russia  alone  that  church  and  state  constitute  a 
social  integer.  Everywhere  definite  laws  exist  to  regulate 
the  relationships  between  the  two  parts.  To  assure  oneself 
of  this  fact,  it  suffices  to  consider  the  endeavours  that  began 
during  the  eighteenth  century  to  bring  about  a  separation 
between  church  and  state.  The  first  such  separation  was 
the  one  effected  by  the  American  union  in  1787  ;  France 
followed  the  example  during  and  after  the  revolution  (1789, 
1794-1802)  ;  during  the  nineteenth  century  came  the  separ- 
ation in  Belgium  (1831)  ;  and  after  the  annihilation  of  the 
Papal  States  in  1870-1871,  separation  occurred  in  a  number 
of  European,  American,  and  Australian  states,  among  which 
France  was  the  most  important  (1905). 

The  liberal  program  of  disestablishment  is  a  socio-political 
attempt  to  solve  the  religious  problem  ;  this  program  was 
formulated  by  liberalism  in  the  struggle  against  the  theocratic 
social  order  on  behalf  of  spiritual  liberty  and  toleration  (§  177). 
Locke,  the  first  philosopher  of  liberalism,  was  the  first  advocate 
of  the  separation  of  church  and  state.  Liberalism  was  to 
be  understood  as  an  endeavour  to  secure  freedom — freedom 
from  the  spiritual  oppression  exercised  by  theocracy,  by  the 
union  of  church  and  state.  Separation  of  church  and  state 
would  afford  a  guarantee  of  freedom  of  conscience.  Religion 
was  to  be  a  private  matter  (the  phrase  is  not  happily  chosen)  ;. 
vis-a-vis  the  state,  the  church  was  to  become  an  institution 
established  upon  civil  la^v ;  education,  including  popular 
elementary  education,  was  to  be  entirely  removed  from  the 
hands  of  the  church. ^ 

In  the  historical  introduction,  we  considered  the  character 
and  development  of  the  Russian  theocracy.  Subsequently, 
when'  dealing  with  individual  thinkers,  we  examined  their 
respective  views,  not  only  concerning  religion,  but  likewise 
concerning  the  church  and  its  relationship  to  the  state.  This 
involved  a  comparison  between  eastern  and  western  conditions, 
and  above  all  in  our  account  of  the  Slavophils  we  found  it 

I  A  history  of  the  movement  considered  in  the  text  will  be  found  in  Rothen- 
bticher's  work,  Die  Trennung  von  Staat  und  Kirche,  1908  ;  the  book  also  contains 
an  excellent  survey  of  the  poUtical  program  of  disestablishment.  The  Utera- 
ture  of  the  subject  is  rapidly  extending.  I  may  refer  to  :  Debidour,  L'Eglise 
cathohque  et  I'etat  sous  la  troisi^me  r^pubhque,  2  vols.,  1906-1909  ;  Troeltsch,  J 
Die  Trennung  von  Staat  und  Kirche,  der  staathche  Rehgionsunterricht  und 
die  theologischen  Fakultaten,  Rektoratsrede,  1907 ;  Kahl,  Aphorismen  zur 
Trennung  von  Staat  und  Kirche,  Rektoratsrede,  1908. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  498 

necessary  to  discuss  in  passing  the  nature  of  theocracy 
(§  55).  The  consideration  of  this  matter  was  ampHfied  by  a 
critique  of  the  doctrines  of  Pobedonoscev,  Leont'ev,  and 
Solov'ev. 

A  summary  of  principles  is  now  requisite. 

Sociologists  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  in  the  earlier 
phases  of  civiUsation  the  functions  of  priest  and  ruler  are 
not  differentiated  ;  the  power  of  reUgion  oyer  all  the  members 
of  society  secures  the  intellectual  primacy  of  the  priest  as 
magician,  censor  of  morals,  prophet,  teacher,  philosopher, 
and  man  of  learning.  The  chief  owes  his  dominion  to  his 
functions  as  war-lord  and  administrator  of  economic  and 
social  conditions,  but,  just  like  the  priest,  he  bases  his  right 
and  his  power  upon  the  will  of  God  or  of  the  gods  ;  from  the 
earhest  times  down  to  the  present  day  he  has  been  ruler  by 
divine  right.  The  chief's  command  is  more  direct  than  that 
of  the  priest  ;  the  priest  has  moral  and  spiritual  influence, 
the  chief  has  force  at  his  disposal ;  the  priest  leads  and  educates, 
the  chief  must  have  recourse  to  material  acts  ;  the  influence 
of  the  priest  is  chronic,  that  of  the  chief  is  acute  ;  the  priest's 
power  is  mental,  the  chief's  is  physical,  i.e.  miUtary. 

The  relationship  between  priest  and  ruler  has  in  different 
places  and -ages  exhibited  numerous  variations,  many  vicissi- 
tudes of  mutual  dependence ;  priesthood  and  chieftainship  have 
been  perfected,  their  functions  have  been  differentiated,  state 
and  church  have  developed,  and  down  to  our  own  day  society 
has  been  duaUstically  organised  and  led  by  state  and  church. 
During  the  middle  ages,  theocracy  matured  as  an  intimate 
fusion  of  the  two  institutions  in  their  most  highly  developed 
form.  In  the  secular  empire  of  Rome,  the  church  presented 
itself  as  the  city  of  God  (Origen  and  Augustine),  claiming 
spiritual  supremacy ;  and  it  ultimately  came  to  exercise  this 
supremacy  in  the  two  forms  of  Roman  papacy  and  Byzantine 
caesaropapism. 

In  the  western  half  of  the  empire,  through  the  estabhshment 
of  the  Papal  States,  the  church  was  able  to  effect  a  material- 
isation of  its  spiritual  supremacy.  But  this  was  of  less 
importance  than  the  exercise  of  supremacy  over  the  kings 
and  the  emperor,  the  spiritual  power  of  the  church  and  its 
head  being  recognised  as  higher  and  more  estimable. 

Augustine,  already,  declared  the  state  to  be  the  work  of 
the  devil ;    and  this  conception  was  emphasised  in  set  terms 


494  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

-by  Gregory  VII. ^  Widespread  credulity,  and  the  increasing 
power  of  the  church,  secured  supremacy  for  the  pope  as  spiritual 
ruler  ;  the  church  became  the  city  of  God,  and  was  generally 
recognised  in  practice  as  a  real  state.  This  revolutionary 
doctrine  was  systematised  by  Aegidius  Romanus  and  James 
of  Viterbo,  followers  of  Thomas  Aquinas,  the  greatest  of  the  ; 
schoolmen. 

The  reformation  and  the  associated  revolution  in  religious 
and  ecclesiastical  affairs  brought  about  notable  transformations 
in  the  medieval  theocracy.  Great  changes  occurred  in  the 
religious  and  philosophical  outlook,  the  influence  of  the  renais- 
sance and  that  of  the  beginnings  of  modern  philosophy  and 
modern  science  being  superadded  to  that  of  the  reformation. 
The  reformation  marked  the  attainment  of  a  higher  stage  in 
religious  thought,  shown  in  the  overthrow  of  priestly  power. 
Morality,  the  relationship  of  man  to  man,  was  now  regarded 
as  the  chief  concern  of  religion  ;  the  priest  lost  his  privileged 
position  as  mediator  between  man  and  God  ;  men  began  to 
adopt  the  conception  of  a  reign  of  law  in  the  cosmos  and  in 
human  historical  development,  became  impressed  with  a 
feeling  of  personal  responsibility,  and  inclined  more  and  more 
towards  independence  in  religion  and  in  other  spheres  of  thought. 
The  ascetic  ideal  was  replaced  by  endeavours  to  conduct  life 
unascetically  ;  the  celibate  priesthood  disappeared ;  family 
life  was  exalted. 

Socio-politically  considered,  the  reformation  and  the  new 
trend  of  thought  mark  the  beginning  of  that  process  of  secu- 
larisation which  is  not  yet  completed.  The  first  stage  was 
to  free  philosophy  and  science  from  the  dominion  of  the  church  ; 
next  came  the  enfranchisement  of  the  state  and  of  law  ;  the 
secularisation  of  morality  and  even  of  religion  is  still  in  progress. 

Side  by  side  with  the  Roman  church  there  now  came  into 
existence  the  various  Protestant  churches,  as  props  to  those 
states  in  which  the  reformation  had  proved  victorious.  But 
the  states,  likewise,  in  which  the  ^counter-reformation  had 
gained  the  day,  now  became  stronger.  In  Catholic  France 
and  in  Catholic  Austria  absolutism  triumphed. 

The  state,  as  it  gained  power,  took  over  various  cultural 

'  Quis  nesciat,  reges  et  duces  ab  iis  habuisse  principium,  qui,  deum 
ignorantes,  superbia,  rapinis,  perfidia,  homicidiis,  postremo  universis  pene 
sceleribus  mundi  principe  diabolo  videlicet  agitante  super  pares,  scilicet, 
homines  dominare  caeca  cupidine  ut  intolerabili  praesumptione  affectaverunt. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  495 

functions  that  had  hitherto  been  in  the  hands  of  the 
church. 

Before  all,  came  the  work  of  education  ;  next  followed 
the  assumption  of  various  benevolent  activities  ;  and  to  an 
increasing  extent  the  new  state  became  supreme  administrator 
for  the  society  that  had  been  trained  by  the  church. 

In  the  Protestant  lands  of  the  west  there  thus  came  into 
existence  territorial  churches  (national  churches,  the  system 
of  territorial  supremacy,  and  so  on),  and  caesaropapism  of  a 
kind,  the  main  distinction  between  this  caesaropapism  and 
the  eastern  variety  being  that  in  the  west  the  church  was 
no  longer  sacerdotal.  The  theologian  Rothe  carries  this 
development  to  its  logical  conclusion  by  insisting  that 
the  churches  are  disappearing,  are  surrendering  their  socio- 
political functions  to  the  state  ;  but  before  Rothe,  Schleier- 
macher,  the  founder  of  modern  Protestant  theology,  had 
accepted  the  separation  of  church  and  state.  Such  is  the 
development  actually  going  on  in  the  Protestant  world. 

But  in  Catholic  countries  we  see  a  similar  evolution.  Since 
the  French  revolution,  a  separation  of  state  and  church  has 
been  effected  almost  everywhere,  notably  in  Catholic  lands, 
and  above  all  in  France.  The  rationalist  trend  of  modern 
thought  and  feeling  and  the  aspiration  to  make  the  whole 
of  life  as  natural  as  possible  (§  42)  have  favoured  the  spread 
of  radicalism  in  Catholic  countries.  As  early  as  the  eighteenth 
century,  French  liberalism  was  tinged  with  radicalism  ;  social- 
ism and  anarchism,  with  their  anti-ecclesiastical  doctrines 
and  policy,  were  first  organised  in  France  and  the  Catholic 
lands.  It  is  where  Catholicism  is  still  enthroned  that  the 
movement  for  disestablishment  has  become  antireligious  as 
well  as  anti-ecclesiastical  ;  in  the  regions  where  Protestantism 
prevails,  this  movement,  though  anti-ecclesiastical,  is  on  the 
whole  friendly  to  religion. 

In  the  eastern  empire  there  was  not  for  many  centuries 
anything  corresponding  to  the  decay  and  ultimate  disappear- 
ance of  secular  emperordom  in  the  west.  The  great  reforms 
tending  to  promote  the  consolidation  of  the  empire  issued 
from  the  eastern  capital.  Owing  to  the  power  of  the  secular 
state  and  owing  to  the  stationarism  of  the  eastern  church, 
that  church  remained  far  more  dependent  upon  the  state. 
The  church  accepted  the  traditional  Roman  emperor-worship, 
as  it  accepted  and  incorporated  so  many  other  ancient  and 


496  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

pagan  institutions,  customs,  doctrines,  and  ideas.  The  Byzan- 
tine empire  maintained  itself  for  more  than  a  thousand  years, 
whereas  the  western  empire  was  only  reestabhshed  after  the 
lapse  of  several  centuries,  and  then  with  the  help  of  the  papacy 
and  in  Germanic  form. 

After  the  fall  of  Constantinople,  Moscow,  the  third  Rome, 
perpetuated  Byzantium.  In  comparison  with  the  west,  Moscow, 
like  Byzantium,  was  distinguished  by  knowing  nothing  of  any 
Augustine,  of  any  Gregory  VII,  of  any  Aquinas  with  radical 
disciples,  or  of  any  Boniface  VIII,  to  maintain  the  prestige 
of  the  church  vis-a-vis  the  state.  Neither  Byzantium  nor 
Moscow  produced  monarchomachists  to  defend  the  right  of 
tyrannicide — ^but  in  the  west  the  theological  defenders  of  the 
supremacy  of  the  church,  representing  the  secular  chieftain 
as  inferior  and  even  as  morally  worthless,  gave  an  initial 
impulse  to  the  democratic  principle  of  popular  sovereignty  (in 
accordance  with  which  the  people  has  the  right  to  elect,  depose, 
or  punish  the  ruler)  by  defending  the  right  of  tyrannicide. 

Neither  in  Byzantium  nor  in  Moscow  do  we  find  indications 
of  any  struggle  between  patriarch  and  emperor  analogous 
to  the  struggle  between  pope  and  emperor  in  the  west.  In 
Byzantium,  doubtless,  and  in  Moscow,  there  were  defenders 
■  of  the  supremacy  of  church  and  priesthood  as  against  state 
and  secular  chieftainship  (§  3),  but  this  antagonism  never 
developed  into  any  such  condemnation  of  secular  chieftain- 
ship as  was  voiced  by  Gregory  VII.  Despots 'and  criminal 
rulers  like  John  the  Terrible  were  not  deposed.  When  the 
boyars  struggled  against  him,  it  was  merely  on  behalf  of  the 
privileges  of  their  caste  ;  they  never  challenged  his  right  to 
supreme  rule.  Thus  in  Moscow  as  in  Byzantium  the  emperor 
was  recognised  as  head  of  the  church  in  the  sense  previously 
explained.^ 

I  Kattenbusch  contends  that  the  term  caesaropapisra  is  more  applicable 
to  ancient  days  than  to  recent  times.  The  Russian  tsars,  he  says,  are  mere 
guardians  of  the  existing  order ;  they  have  identified  themselves,  with  the 
church,  not  the  church  with  themselves,  whilst  the  latter  identification  was 
the  true  index  of  caesaropapism. — I  have  in  an  earlier  chapter  referred  to 'the 
passages  in  the  state  fundamental  law  wherein  the  relationship  of  the  tsar  to 
the  church  is  defined.  Distinctive  is  the  fact  that  the  church  consecrates  and 
voluntarily  recognises  tsarist  absolutism,  and  in  return  is  protected  by  the 
state  with  the  absolutist  powers  thus  consecrated  by  religion.  We  have  seen 
the  efficiency  of  this  protection  against  hostile  churches  and  against  the 
enlightenment.  As  we  have  learned,  the  emperor  does  not  venture  to 
formulate  new  dogmas,  for  in  the  view  of  the  eastern  church  this  is  a  closed 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  497 

IV 

§  197- 

CHRISTIANITY  was  responsible  for  the  fuller  develop- 
ment of  theocracy  and  for  the  completion  of  the  union 
between  church  and  state.  Indeed,  the  very  concept  of 
theocracy  originated  in  the  Christian  notion  of  religion. ^ 

The  correct  understanding  of  the  problem  demands  atten- 
tion to  the  following  points. 

I.  Love  of  God  and  one's  neighbour  was  doubtless  repre- 
sented as  constituting  the  essence  of  Christianity  ;  but  from 
the  first,  continually  and  no  less  energetically,  religion  was 
identified  with  faith.  But  faith  killed  lo-ffe.  For  practical 
purposes,  to  believe  in  God  signified  to  believe  in  the  priests 
represented  as  mediators  between  God  and  the  laity.  Revealed 
religion  is  of  necessity  a  religious  and  priestly  aristocracy  ; 
and  as  such,  it  is  the  foundation  and  the  prototype  of 
socio-political  aristocracy. 

Jesus  himself  demands  blind  faith  ;  and  indeed,  on  the 
solemn  occasion  of  the  ascension  he  is  represented  as  saying 
that  the  unbeliever  shall  be  damned  (see  the  textually  dubious 
passage,  Mark  xvi,  i6).  This  was  the  basis  of  Thomas  Aquinas' 
teaching  that  heretics  should  be  punished  with  death.  On 
the  ground  of  this  text  the  inquisition  becomes  comprehensible, 
and  comprehensible  too  Calvin's  death  sentence  on  Servetus. 
Even  Locke  proposed  that  atheists  should  be  put  to  death.* 

chapter  ;  but  Kattenbusch  admits  that  Justinian's  attitude  towards  dogma 
was  papistical.  Peter  abolished  the  patriarchate  (his  action  in  this  matter 
being  uncanonical),  and  such  an  interference  in  church  organisation  was 
characteristically  papistical. 

I  When  I  speak  of  Christianity,  I  am  well  aware  of  the  vagueness  of  the 
term.  It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  ecclesiastical  doctrine  and  the 
teaching  of  Jesus,  the  teaching  which  we  can  discover  in  the  New  Testament 
by  a  process  of  analysis  that  is  far  from  easy.  Further,  from  the  church 
doctrine  (which  was  itself  differently  formulated  and  differently  interpreted 
at  different  times)  we  must  distinguish  the  concrete  ministry  of  the  church 
and  the  life  lived  within  the  church.  Jesus'  teaching  and  example  were  no 
more  than  the  leaven  ;  with  these  were  amalgamated  the  doctrines  of  Paul 
and  the  other  New  Testament  authors,  and  above  all  there  were  likewise 
incorporated  materials  from  the  Old  Testament  with  its  heterogeneous 
elements,  contemporary  philosophical  and  scientific  culture  being  further 
called  to  assistance.  Church  doctrine  and  discipUne  were  the  product  of 
this  amalgamation. 

»  The  nature  of  this  relationship  between  love  and  faith  was  perceived 
already  by  Augustine,  for  he  wrote  :    "  Qui  non  amat,  inaniter  credit,  etiamsi 

33  VOL.  II. 


498  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

"  Disobedience  is  the  root  of  all  evil,"  said  Methodios,  who 
in  the  third  century  was  the  most  influential  teacher  in  the 
eastern  church. 

2.  Christianity,  with  its  ascetic  doctrines,  esteemed  the 
passive  virtues  more  highly  than  the  active  ;  humility  was 
regarded  as  the  highest  merit  of  a  Christian.  This  is  why, 
in  the  eyes  of  modern  philosophers  from  Machiavelli  to  Marx 
and  Nietzsche,  Christianity  has  appeared  to  be  the  religion 
of  slaves  ;  and  unquestionably  the  dominion  of  priests  and 
kings  was  intimately  associated  v/ith  Christianity. 

Love  is  democratic,  faith  is  aristocratic,  and  Christian 
aristocracy  was  stronger  than  Christian  democracy.  The 
greatest  Christian  scholastic',  like  his  pagan  teacher  Aristotle, 
endeavoured  to  justify  slavery  ;  the  church  did  not  abolish 
slavery,  but  at  most  mitigated  it,  favouring  its  transformation 
into  feudal  retainership   and  serfdom. 

3.  Jesus  declared  that  the  love  of  God  was  of  greater  moment 
than  the  love  of  one's  neighbour,  but  the  result  was  to  weaken 
the  love  of  neighbours,  for  the  goal  of  religion  was  sought 
mystically,  in  an  illusory  and  ascetic  union  with  God.  The 
result  was  that  the  Christian  love  of  one's  neighbour  was  at 
rriost  manifested  socio-politically  in  works  of  benevolence 
and  charity,  whilst  social  inequality  and  the  dependence  of 
the  masses  was  recognised  on  principle.' 

4.  From  the  very  first,  church  doctrine  was  directly  and 
expressly  employed  to  favour  the  religious  foundations  of  the 
theocracy.  Paul,  the  founder  of  the  church,  contributed 
powerfully  to  this  development,  for  in  the  thirteenth  chapter 
of  his  epistle  to  the  Romans  he  decisively  and  unambigu- 
ously expounded  the  notion  of  divine  right.  He  declared 
that  the  powers  that  be  were  ordained  of  God.  He  wrote, 
"  Wherefore  ye  must  needs  be  subject,  not  only  for  wrath, 

sint  vera,   quae  credit  "  ;    nevertheless  he  considered  the  church  to  be  the 
civitas  dei. 

1  An  extremely  instructive  document  bearing  on  this  matter  is  the  letter 
from  Cardinal  Merry  del  Val  to  the  French  politician  de  Mun.  "II  y  a  dans 
ia  doctrine  sociale  catholique  des  points  deUcats  sur  lesquels  il  importe  d'etre 
fixd,  si  Ton  veut  que  Taction  k  exercer  sur  les  masses  populaires,  au  triple  point 
de  vue  religieux,  moral  et  materiel,  non  seulement  soit  rdgie,  comma  il  est 
n6cessaire,  par  la  verite,  mais  n'en  vienne  pas  k  se  retourner  contre  elle  pour 
la  fausser.  Faute  de  I'esprit  que  vous  avez  su  imprimer  k  votre  oeuvre,  ne 
voit-on  pas,  par  exemple,  le  domaine  de  la  justice  dlargi  plus  que  de  mesure  au 
d6triment  de  la  charity.  ..." 

"  Le  Temps,"  January  23,   1913. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  499 

but  also  for  conscience  sake."  He  declared,  again,  "  Who- 
soever therefore  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance 
of  God :  and  they  that  resist  shall  receive  to  themselves 
damnation." 

5.  Paul  writes  as  a  Jew,  as  a  man  used  to  the  Jewish 
form  of  theocracy,  but  at  the  same  time  he  compromises 
with   the  Roman  imperial  rule. 

Since  the  Christian  church  developed  within  the  Roman 
state,  absolutist  theocracy  was  the  inevitable  outcome  of 
such  ethical  and  political  views.  The  pagan  emperors  recog- 
nised the  church  as  a  state  church  ;  their  Christian  successors 
recognised  the  pagan  apotheosis  of  the  emperors.  Theocracy 
originated  in  two  forms,  the  Roman  and  the  eastern,  and  of  • 
these  the  eastern  was  the  primary. 

To  reflective  minds,  these  considerations  will  suggest  the 
solution  of  the  much  discussed  problem  whether  and  to  what 
extent  a  Christian  state  can  exist  at  all. 

In  our  estimate  of  Russian  Christianity  and  its  caesaro- 
papism,  we  are  guided  by  the  reflection  that  Russian 
Christianity  is,  as  the  Russians  themselves  contend,  orthodox 
in  fact  as  well  as  in  name,  is  genuine  Christianity.  It  is  in 
conformity  with  historical  development  that  the  principal 
stress  should  De  laid  upon  soundness  of  belief,  for  this  is  the 
derivative  meaning  of  the  term  "  orthodoxy."  f 

"  The   Orthodox   faith    is    an    ascetic  faith,"    says  Arch-   ■' 
bishop    Antonii  of    Volhynia,    and    caesaropapism    furthered 
asceticism  just  as  much  as  it  furthered  faith.  (' 

Russian  Christianity  is,  in  truth,  older  than  western 
Christianity  alike  theoretically  and  practically ;  it  is  the 
more  primitive  and  purer  form. 

But  for  this  very  reason  we  can  understand  why  the  leading 
Russian  thinkers  were  averse  to  Christianity  as  they  knew 
it.  We  can  understand  why  Belinskii  associated  the  idea  of 
God  with  the  knout  ;  we  can  understand  Russian  atheistic  and 
materialistic  nihilism,  and  the  political  struggle  of  nihilism 
against  caesaropapism  ;  we  can  understand  why  the  radical 
thinkers  and  the  revolutionaries  for  the  most  part  cherish 
socialism,  which  aims  at  establishing  the  realm  of  justice  in 
place  of  the  realm  of  Christian  love,  and  at  establishing  the 
republic  in  place  of  tsarism  ;  and  we  can  understand  why  the 
various  forms  and  grades  of  anarchism  haye  found  adherents 
in  Russia 


500  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

Herzen  abandons  Christianity  because  in  its  contempt 
for  the  world  and  in  its  cult  of  asceticism  he  discovers  the 
apotheosis  of  death  ;  he  seeks  the  religion  of  life,  and  he  finds 
this  religion  in  positivist  scientific  disillusionment  and  in 
socialism. 

The  oppression  exercised  by  the  Russian  theocracy  is  so 
strong  and  so  coercive  that  none  but  the  social  democrats 
and  social  revolutionaries  have  made  the  separation  of  the 
church  from  the  state  a  definite  part  of  their  program,  for  the 
liberals  merely  demand  that  the  Russian  church  and  the  other 
creeds  shall  be  freed  from  state  tutelage.  We  find  that  it  is 
the  reforming  theologians  to-day  who  are  more  inclined  to 
demand  the  abolition  of  caesaropapism  in  religion's  own 
interest. 


§  198. 

ONE  of  the  most  important  tasks  of  the  philosophy  of 
history  is  to  demonstrate  the  development  and  explain 
the  significance  of  the  three  great  ecclesiastical  systems,  Roman 
Catholicism,  Protestantism,  and  Orthodoxy,  and  to  elucidate 
their  reciprocal  relationships.  Important,  likewise,  in  relation 
to  social  evolution  as  a  whole  is  the  peculiar  relationship  which, 
since  the  days  when  Greek  influence  became  predominant, 
has  existed  between  theology  as  the  organon  of  myth  and 
philosophy  as  the  organon  of  science^y 

Theology  is  Greek  metaphysics  with  a  mythological  gloss 
(§41  a),  or  it  is  the  mythology  of  the  Greco-Roman  cultural 
syncretism  elevated  into  a  metaphysic.  From  the  very  first, 
the  relationship  between  philosophy  and  theology  (mythology) 
has  been  one  of  mutual  hostility  ;  the  general  evolution  of 
thought  in  these  matters  has  been  characterised  by  the 
increasing  vigour  of  criticism  and  science,  and  by  the  cor- 
responding decHne  in  the  strength  of  mythology ;  the 
process  has  sometimes  been  spoken  of  as  "  disanthropo- 
morphisation." 

But  not  merely  is  Christian  theology  the  issue  of  classical 
and  Asiatic  mythology  and  philosophy,  the  church  too  is  the 
work  of  the  pagan,  emperors  and  philosophers  of  Rome,  as 
well  as  being  the  outcome  of  Jewish  theocratic  tradition.    Even 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  501 

before  the  existence  of  the  New  Testament,  the  first  foundations 
of  CathoHcism  were  laid  under  Augustus  in  the  religious  revival 
he  promoted.  Constantine,  though  he  remained  a  pagan, 
made  Christianity  the  religion  of  the  state,  and  only  submitted 
to  baptism  on  his  death-bed  by  way  of  precaution.  Pagan 
as  he  was,  he  was  none  the  less  the  first  emperor-pope. 

Christian  ritual  developed  in  like  manner  out  of  the  pagan 
rituals  of  those  days.  To  put  the  matter  in  general  terms, 
Catholicism  is  the  most  highly  developed  form  of  classical 
and  Asiatic  polytheism  in  course  of  transition  to  monotheism. 
Protestantism  represents  a  higher  phase  of  religious  evolution, 
and  is  therefore  more  distinctively  monotheistic. 

Orthodox  CathoHcism  is  distinguished  from  western  or 
Roman  Catholicism  just  as  Byzantium  is  distinguished  from 
Rome,  just  as  the  west  is  distinguished  from  the  Greco- Asiatic 
east.  In  respect  of  theology  and  philosophy,  Orthodoxy 
owes  much  to  Plato  as  well  as  to  Jesus  and  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  ;  but  in  the  growth  of  Roman  CathoHcism  the 
influence  of  Paul,  of  Augustine,  and  subsequently  of  Aristotle, 
has  been  predominant. 

Whereas,  in  the  Orthodox  east,  self-sufficient  Byzantinism 
soon  became  firmly  estabHshed,  in  the  west  the  passivism  of 
Catholicism  weakened  the  power  of  that  creed.  The  most 
notable  outgrowth  of  western  Catholicism  was  scholasticism 
with  its  associated  development  of  medieval  theology.  Evolving 
from  Catholicism  simultaneously  with  the  great  cultural 
movement  of  the  renaissance  came  humanism  and  the  new 
science  and  new  philosophy  of  Protestantism. 

The  Protestant  reformation  secured  a  loftier  position  for 
the  moral  elements  of  reHgion,  and  effected  the  aboHtion  of 
the  priesthood  ;  through  the  growth  of  reHgious  and  ethical  • 
individuaHsm  and  subjectivism,  the  new  Protestant  churches 
became  something  quite  different  from  the  church  of  Rome. 
The  new  Protestant  theology  was  based  on  the  teaching  of 
Paul,  and  before  long  became  so  permeated  with  the  spirit 
of  modern  philosophy  that  the  distinction  between  theology 
and  philosophy  tended  to  disappear.  From  this  outlook  the 
Russian  philosophers  of  religion  (Herzen  as  well  as  the 
Slavophils)  were  perfectly  right  when  they  spoke  of  German 
philosophy  as  Protestant ;  and  it  was  from  this  outlook  that 
Kant  was  designated  the  philosopher  of  Protestantism.  Modern 
philosophy  is,  in  fact,  Protestant  in  this  sense,  that  it  has 


502  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

developed  in  Protestant  countries  and  upon  a  Protestant 
foundation.  Catholic  lands,  and  France  in  especial,  have 
sent  forth  reechoes  of  Protestant  philosophy  :  but  their  own 
independent  philosophy  is  anti-ecclesiastical ;  and  precisely 
owing  to  its  animosity  to  church  doctrine,  this  philosophy  is 
more  revolutionary,  and  in  many  respects  more  negational, 
than  the  philosophy   of   Germany   or   England. 

As  we  have  learned,  Russian  Orthodoxy  and  the  Russian 
church,  the  inheritors  of  Byzantinism,  have  remained  far 
more  stagnant  than  Roman  Catholicism — to  say  nothing  of 
Protestantism.  The  third  Rome,  therefore,  had  to  borrow 
from  the  west,  not  only  for  its  general  culture,  but  also  to 
promote  its  ecclesiastical  and  religious  growth  (§§  4  and  5). 

Since  the  days  of  Peter,  Russia  has  been  unceasingly 
influenced  by  Catholicism  and  Protestantism.  Theology,  too, 
was  fertilised  by  Peter's  reforms  ;  but,  as  we  recognised  when 
we  were  considering  Javorskii  and  Theofan  ProkopoviC  (§  9), 
the  influence  of  Protestant  and  Catholic  theology  was  com.para- 
tively  superficial.  The  first  aim  at  this  date  was  the  acquire- 
ment of  knowledge.  Theology  was  studied  in  Europe  as  well 
as  other  subjects,  a  notable  figure  in  this  respect  being  that 
of  Damaskin,  who  subsequently  became  a  bishop,  and  died 
in  the  year  1795.  But  it  was  not  until  the  reigns  of  Alexander  I 
and  Nicholas  I  that  the  theological  and  religious  aspirations 
of  the  Russians  were  rendered  more  intense  by  the  spread  of 
French  and  German  philosophy,  and  as  an  outcome  of  the 
religious  revival  of  European  romanticism.  It  was  typical 
of  the  new  movement  that  Russian  scholasticism  was  not 
initiated  by  theologians  but  by  secular  thinkers,  by  such  men 
as  Caadaev,  the  Slavophils,  Dostoevski!,  Solov'ev,  and  Leont'ev. 
Homjakov,  the  ex-soldier,  became  a  "  father  of  the  church  " 
(§  55)-  Quite  recently  (just  before  and  after  the  revolution 
of  1905),  the  ideas  of  these  writers  and  the  influence  of  pro- 
gressive Protestant  theology  and  of  the  Catholic  modernists 
have  led  to  the  development  of  a  comparatively  independent 
Russian  theology.  Its  leading  representatives,  Tareev  for 
instance,  may  be  regarded  as  the  founders  of  Russian 
modernism. I 

»  Buharev  was  mentioned  in  §  29,  and  reference  was  there  made  to  his  hos- 
tility to  monasticism.  We  must  speak  once  more  of  Bishop  Antonii  of  Volhynia, 
a  man  who  has  been  influenced  by  the  Slavophils  and  by  Dostoevski!.  His 
pupil  Sergii,  archbishop  of    Finland,  is  a  thinker  of  greater  note.     (Among 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  508 

The  nature  of  Orthodox  passivism,  its  backwardness  in 
reUgious  and  ecclesiastical  matters,  explains  why,  in  quarters 
friendly  to  the  church,  and  even  within  the  church  itself,  a 
Catholic  trend  is  so  often  and  so  conspicuously  manifest 
(Caadaev,  Pec^orin,  Solov'ev,  Leont'ev).  This  is  no  mere 
outcome  of  an  adaptation  in  externals  to  those  elements  in 
the  west  that  are  ecclesiastically  and  rehgiously  akin,  for  from 
within  outwards  Orthodoxy,  now  that  the  leaven  of  western  phi- 
losophy has  begun  to  work,  tends  logically  towards  Catholicism 
as  the  next  stage  upwards  in  ecclesiastico-religious  evolution. 
Among  the  common  people  there  is  no  Catholic  trend,  and 
the  folk  has  no  sympathy  with  the  movemicnt  tov/ards  tha 
union  of  the  churches  ;  but  the  inclination  of  the  cultured 
classes  and  of  instructed  theologians  towards  Catholicism  ia 
thoroughly  comprehensible. 

In  respect  of  ecclesiastical  policy,  no  less  than  in  respect 
of  doctrine,  Peter's  adversary  Javorskii  continues  to  find 
followers  ;  these  endeavour  to  fortify  clericalism  and  to  further 
centralisation  through  the  patriarchate.  In  connection  with 
such  efforts  at  ecclesiastical  reform,  it  is  essential  to  distinguish 
clearly  between  the  progressive  and  the  reactionary  elements 

(§  36). 

Protestantism    is   less    dangerous    to    Orthodoxy    precisely 

Sergii's  writings  may  be  mentioned,  The  Orthodox  Doctrine  of  Salvation,  An 
Analysis  of  the  Moral  and  Subjective  Aspects  of  Salvation.)  A  notable  work 
is  Tareev's  Christus,  the  Foundations  of  Christianity,  4  vols.,  1908.  This 
\vriter  has  been  influenced  by  Dostoevskii  and  Antonii.  Svetlov  likewise  deserves 
attention.  He  has  written  :  The  Cross  of  Christ  ;  The  Significance  of  the 
Cross  in  the  Work  of  Christ  ;  An  Attempt  to  Elucidate  the  Dogma  of  Redemp- 
tion, 1907.  The  writings  of  Sergii,  TarSev,  and  Svetlov  signify  a  revolution 
in  Russian  theology.  Not  merely  have  they  endeavoured  to  harmonise  church 
doctrine  with  life  and  literature,  but  they  have  attempted  to  dissipate  religious 
formalism,  and  above  all  to  get  rid  of  the  formalist  and  legalist  conception  of 
redemption  as  effected  by  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ.  Nesmelov  may  also 
be  mentioned  here  as  providing  a  philosophical  basis  for  ethics  (The  Doctrine 
of  Man  :  I,  Attempt  at  a  psjxhological  History  and  Criticism  of  the  funda- 
mental Problem  of  Life,  3rd  edition,  1906  ;  H,  The  Metaphj^sic  of  Life  and 
the  Christian  Revelation,  1907).  Nesmelov  goes  so  far  as  to  endeavour  to 
reconcile  the  ideas  of  Feucrbach  with  a  partial  adoption  of  Orthodoxy. 
JanySev,  a  thoroughly  modern  writer  influenced  by  progressive  Protestant 
theology,  opened  a  discussion  of  ethical  problems  (The  Orthodox-Christian 
Doctrine  of  Morality,  1887).  Zarin  deals  with  the  topic  of  asceticism,  one  of 
peculiar  importance  to  Orthodoxy  (Asceticism  in  Relation  to  Orthodox- 
Christian  Doctrine,  1907).  Sergii's  work  was  rejected  by  the  St.  Petersburg 
academy.  TarSev's  essay,  The  Temptation  of  Our  Lord,  1900,  had  to  be 
rewritten  before  it  could  secure  acceptance  as  a  dissertation  for  the  degree  of 
Master  of  Arts. 


504  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

because  the  gulf  between  the  two  is  so  much  wider.  The 
Slavophils  look  upon  Protestantism  as-  a  mere  philosophy, 
and  not  as  a  rehgion  at  all.  Hence  Russian  divinity  students 
(and  the  remark  apphes  also  to  the  divinity  students  from 
the  Greek  and  other  branches  of  the  Orthodox  church)  are 
officially  sent  to  Protestant,  not  CathoHc,  theological  faculties, 
above  all  in  Germany.  Protestant  influence  leads  individuals 
(Tolstoi)  and  masses  (the  stundists)  to  break  with  the  church, 
whilst  Catholicism  works  an  inward  change.  Dostoevskii  was 
keenly  aware  of  the  Cathohc  peril,  continually  animadverting 
upon  it  in  his  later  writings. 

From  this  outlook  we  are  enabled  to  understand  the 
general  differences  between  French  and  German  influence, 
between    CathoHc    and    Protestant    influence,    upon    Russia 

(§22). 

In  the  west,  modern  philosophy  and  modern  science 
developed  as  an  opposition  to  the  church  and  church 
doctrine,  as  an  opposition  to  theocracy.  In  Russia  the 
like  opposition  was  imphcit,  and  its  development  was 
accelerated  and  strengthened  by  the  influence  of  western 
thought. 

In  contradistinction  to  the  newest  Russian  scholasticism, 
Russian  progressive  philosophy  early  became  antitheocratic 
and  antirehgious.  Russian  religious  negation  was  more 
radical  than  that  of  Europe  ;  the  contrast  between  church 
doctrine  and  European  philosophy  was  greater  and  more 
definite  in  Russia,  owing  to  the  absence  in  that  country  of  a 
scholasticism  and  a  theology  competent  to  sustain  their  teach- 
ings in  argument  against  the  attacks  of  persons  of  education, 
and  competent  to  render  these  teachings  acceptable.  Blind 
faith  in  authority  succumbed  to  the  unanticipated  onslaught, 
and  atheism  and  materialism  were  accepted  with  as  much 
creduhty  as  had  of  old  been  exhibited  towards  ecclesiastical 
theism. 

This  explains  why  Russian  radical  philosophers  of  history 
have  displayed  scant  interest  in  the  rehgious  problems  of 
Europe.  Herzen  makes  a  few  casual  references  to  Catho- 
licism and  Protestantism,  both  of  which  he  consistently  rejects 
just  as  he  rejects  Orthodoxy.  Caadaev  can  constrain  himself 
to  no  more  than  passing  observations  on  Catholicism, 

To  Protestantism,  too,  radical  writers  have  devoted  very 
little  attention,  although  since  the  time  of  Peter,  Protestantism 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  505 

has  had  much  influence  in  Russia  (e.g.  the  Protestant  move- 
ment of  Tveritinov  during  Peter's  reign,  the  stundist  movement, 
and  so  on).  Very  few  Russian  thinkers  have  done  justice 
to  Protestantism  as  a  reUgious  no  less  than  as  a  civiUsing 
force. ^ 

J  Selgunov,  the  radical  author,  is  extremely  interesting  in  thia  connection 
(§  202), 


CHAPTER   TWENTY-FOUR 

DEMOCRACY   VERSUS   THEOCRACY 


§  199- 

^URING  the  great  revolution  the  essence  of  democracy  was 
accurately  defined  in  the  watchwords,  liberty,  equality, 
and  fraternity,  the  contrast  between  democracy  and  aris- 
tocracy being  thus  expressed.  The  aristocratic  organisation 
of  society  rests  upon  relationships  of  supraordination  and 
subordination  as  between  individuals  a'nd  groups  v/ithin  the 
community,  whereas  the  aim  of  democracy  is  that  all  should 
rank  alike.  Aristocracy  involves  the  acceptance  of  utterly 
divergent  estimates  of  .  human  values  ;  social  inequality  is 
regarded  as  natural  and  as  historically  necessary  ;  men  are 
divided  into  a  minority  of  rulers  and  a  majority  of  subjects. 
Aristocracy  is  social  organisation  based  upon  power  ;  demo- 
cratic equality  implies  fraternal  and  voluntary  cooperation. 

Aristocracy  is  not  confined  to  the  political,  mihtary, 
economic,  and  social  spheres  ;  in  the  realms  of  morals  and 
reHgion  there  is  likewise  inequality  ;  the  priest,  v/ith  his 
reputedly  higher  ascetic  ethic,  is  contrasted  with  the  layman  ; 
there  is  also  a  class  contrast  between  the  educated  and  the 
uneducated.  In  addition,  aristocracy  sometimes  mianifests 
itself  in  the  use  of  a  different  language  by  the  superior  caste 
(Latin  or  French,  for  instance),  and  is  occasionally  based  upon 
national  distinctions. 

.  Every  aristocracy  is  rendered  possible  by  the  existence 
of  a  corresponding  slavery  ;  on  the  one  hand  are  the  dominant 
priests  and  rulers,  on  the  other  hand  the  ruled  ;  the  very  nature 
of  theocracy  is  found  in  an  intimate  association  between  rulers 
and  priests.     Emperor  and  pope,  tsar  and  patriarch,  do  not 

506 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  507 

stand  alone  ;    the  organisation  of  a  spiritual  and  secular  aris- 
tocracy is  necessarily   and  invariably  hierarchical. 

Medieval  Christianity,   the   Catholic  church,   is  essentially  • 
aristocratic.     Not  merely'  does  there  exist  a  temporal  juxta- 
position of  political  and  ecclesiastical  aristocracy  ;  the  union 
between  the  two  forms  is  intimate  and  organic.     Divine  right,  ^ 
whether   political    or   priestly,    is    vested   in   but    few   hands  ;  ^ 
physical   and   spiritual   authority   has  in   the   past   inevitably 
taken    an   aristocratic    and   hierarchical   form,  culminating   in 
absolute  monarchy  alike  in  state  and  church.     ("  Legitimists 
need  a  master  to  enable  themselves  to  have  servants,"  wrote 
Anzengruber.)     Thomas   Aquinas  found   arguments,   not   only 
in  favour  of  inflicting  the  death  penalty  upon  heretics,  but 
also   in    proof    that    slavery   was    a   natural   institution,    the 
Catholic  Christian  being  in  this  matter  perfectly  at  one  with 
the  pagan  Aristotle.' 

The  political  and  social  aim  of  democracy  is  to  abolish  a 
relationship  of  subjection  and  rule.  The  derivative  meaning 
of  the  term  democracy  is  "  people's  rule."  Modern  demo- 
cracy does  not  aim  at  rule  at  all,  but  at  administration,  at 
the  administration  of  the  people,  by  the  people,  for  the  people. 
How  this  new  conception,  this  new  estimate,  of  state  organisa- 
tion and  social  organisation  can  be  carried  out  in  practice, 
is  no  mere  question  of  power  ;  it  is  a  difficult  problem 
of  administrative  technique.  Since  the  da^'s  of  Rousseau, 
philosophers  and  statesmen  have  been  concerned  with  the  prob- 
lem of   direct   and   indirect   government   and   administration. 

I  De  Maistre,  the  exponent  of  postrevolutionary  theocracy,  writing  to  Count 
J.  Fotocki  in  1810,  formulated  as  follows  the  intimate  relationship  between 
political  aristocracy  and  ecclesiastico-religious  aristocracy  :  "  Le  patricien 
est  un  pretre  laique  ;  la  religion  nationale  est  sa  premiere  propriet6  et  la  plus 
sacree,  puisqu'elle  conserve  son  privilege  qui  tombe  toujours  avec  elle.  II 
n'y  a  pas  de  plus  grand  crime  pour  un  noble  que  d'attaquer  les  dogmes." 
Compare  what  James  I  said  at  the  Hampton  Court  conference  (I  quote  from 
S.  R.  Gardiner's  History  of  England)  :  "At  the  word  Presbyters  James  fired 
up.  He  told  the  Puritans  that  they  were  aiming  at  '  a  Scottish  Presbytery, 
which,'  he  said,  '  agreeth  as  well  with  a  monarchy  as  God  and  the  devil.  .  .  . 
Then  Jack  and  Tom,  and  V'ill  and  Dick,  shall  m.eet,  and  at  their  pleasure 
censure  me  and  mj''  council  and  all  our  proceedings.  Then  Will  shall  stand  up, 
and  say,  "  it  must  be  thus  "  ;  then  Dick  shall  reply,  and  say,  "  Nay,  marry, 
but  we  will  have  it  thus."  '  .  .  .  More  and  more  the  maxim,  '  No  Bishop,  no 
King,'  became  the  rule  of  his  conduct."  Compare,  again,  with  this  utter- 
ance Napoleon's  concordat  with  the  pope,  which  contains  (§§  6  and  7)  the 
following  oath  for  the  bishops:  "  Si  dans  mon  diocese  ou  ailleurs,  j'apprends 
qu'il  se  trouve  quelque  chose  au  prejudice  de  I'Etat,  je  le  ferai  savoir  au 
gouvernement." 


508  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

Rousseau  recognised  that  owing  to  the  great  increase  in  popu- 
lation, owing  to  the  greater  intricacy  of  social  relationships, 
and  owing  to  the  inequahty  of  social  conditions,  direct  popular 
government  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term  was  impossible, 
and  he  declared  that  true  democracy  was  a  constitution  for 
the  gods.  In  practice,  such  equahty  as  has  hitherto  been 
attained  is  but  that  measure  of  inequahty  which  is  found  to 
be  just  endurable.  As,  in  actual  working,  aristocratic  monarchy 
was  always  an  oligarchy,  so  also  is  democracy  in  actual  working 
an  oligarchy.  The  problem  that  has  to  be  solved  is,  how  to 
prevent  democratic  oHgarchy  from  degenerating  into  aristo- 
cratic hierarchical  rule.i  The  democratic  organisation  of 
'society  must  in  essence  be  a  mutualist  federation  of  social 
organisations  (§  172),  and  of  the  individuals  who  combine 
to  form  these  organisations. 

Anarchism  as -a  system  gives  expression,  in  an  extreme 
and  largely  distorted  form,  to  the  democratic  aspiration  towards 
liberty  ;  sociahsm  (social  democracy)  pives  expression  to  the 
democratic  aspiration  towards  equality.  Anarchism  and 
sociahsm  originated  simultaneously  as  soon  as  the  philosophic 
and  pohtical  revolution  had  uprooted  theocratic  absolutism. 

Aristocracy  is  the  rule  of  the  non-workers  over  the  workers. 
Democracy  therefore  demands  that  all  should  work,  and  refuses 
to  admit  that  it  is  right  for  the  product  of  labour  to  be  assigned 
to  the  non-workers.     The  aristocrat  rules,  the  democrat  works. 

Manual  labour  is  for  the  most  part  work  of  a  petty  kind. 
The  aristocrat,  as  born  ruler  and  leader,  will  do  nothing  but 
work  of  a  grand  order,  great  deeds  ;  he  is  the  hero,  the  man 
who  does  only  as  he  thinks  fit.  The  theocratic  aristocrat 
takes  an  indeterminist  view  of  the  universe  and  of  mankind. 
Just  as  God  is  free  so  also  is  his  representative  an  absolutely 
free  agent.  What  is  done  or  left  undone  is  not  controlled  and 
regulated  by  any  determinist  foreknowledge  ;  at  most  it  is 
possible  that  the  prophet  and  magician  can  at  times  foresee 
the  future. 

The  theocratic  aristocrat  believes  in  magic  ;  his  rehgion 
is  faith  in  miracle  ;  and  therefore  he  despises  work,  hves  upon 
the  enforced  labour  of  slaves,  lives  upon  the  sweat  of  their 
brows.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  slave,  too,  is  averse 
to  hard  work  ;    that  is  why  he  is  coerced  as  a  slave.      Ahke 

^  This  problem  has  been  considered  in  fuller  detail  in  §  157,  in  connection 
with  our  study  of  the  relationship  of  syndicalism  to  democracy. 


THE  SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  509 

morally    and    politically,    aristocracy    and    slavery    condition  \\ 
one  another  mutually  (§  26). 

Democracy  demands  that  all  shall_work  ;  it  allots  and 
organises  labour.  Democracy  aims,  not  merely  at  work, 
but  at  the  spirit  of  industry.  The  disinclination  that  every- 
one has  to  labour,  and  especially  to  labour  not  of  his  own 
choosing,  must  be  overcome  by  the  sentiment  of  duty.  The 
spirit  of  industry  develops  concomitantly  with  the  abandon- 
ment of  belief  in  a  fantastic  universe  of  m^ythical  spirits  and 
sorcerers,  and  concomitantly  with  the  growth  of  a  determin- 
istic insight  into  nature  and  social  life  as  subject  to  the  reign 
of  law.  Men  become  habituated  to  regularity  and  constancy  ; 
they  learn  to  observe  more  closely,  to  grasp  the  relationships 
of  cause  and  effect,  and  to  attain  their  ends  by  the  dehberate 
choice  of  means.  Modern  science  arises  and  is  applied  to  the 
purposes  of  practical  life  ;  modern  manufacturing  industry 
originates,  and  therewith  come  into  existence  new  means  of 
communication,  modern  commerce,  the  modern  economic 
system,  and  its  associated  mentality. 

Theocratic  aristocracy  makes  its  influence  felt  in  the  domain 
of  the  new  manufacturing  industry,  for  the  old  feudal  in- 
equality persists  ;  but  the  men  of  the  common  people,  the 
manual  workers,  the  proletarian  masses,  in  conjunction  with 
the  philosophic  and  scientific  leaders  of 'socialism,  are  paving 
the  way  for  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  democratic  ethic  of 
equality. 

Friedrich  Schlegel,  who  wished  to  safeguard  Catholic 
romanticism  epistemologically  by  means  of  a  "  theocratic 
consciousness,"  considered  that  likeness  to  God  was  to  be 
discerned  in  idleness  ;  and  Nietzsche,  the  aristocratic  camp- 
follower  of  our  own  day,  charged  the  spirit  of  industry  with 
being  the  cause  of  unbehef.  Nietzsche  had  the  aristocratic 
feehng  that  work  was  a  disgrace.  Aristocratic  "  far  niente  " 
is  equally  applicable  in  the  spiritual  sphere  ;  the  theocratic 
priest  is  the  guardian  of  divine  revelation  ;  the  understanding 
can  produce  nothing  new,  is  uncreative,  and  its  function  is 
purely  defensive — defensive  "  against  the  understanding." 
Scholasticism,  with  all  its  faults,  incorporates  the  knowledge 
of  the  theocracy.  The  priest  has  adopted  the  highest  and 
most  fundamental  truths  of  revelation,  and  has  become  a 
spiritual  ruler  as  guardian  of  these  truths  and  as  mediator  on 
their   behalf.     Utterly   different   is   the   intellectual   work    of 


510  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

modern  scientific  specialists  and  philosophers.  Not  merely 
must  they  elaborate  the  individual  details  of  knowledge  by 
observation  and  reflection,  but  by  independent  mental  toil 
they  must  win  their  way  to  the  highest  and  most  fundamental 
of  their  principles. 

By  its  very  nature,  democracy  cbunterposes  science  and 
philosophy  to  theology  and  scholasticism. 

The  democratic  character  of  modern  science  consists  mainly 
in  its  use  of  the  scientific  method  as  contrasted  with  the 
theocratic  method.  We  have  good  reason  for  speaking  of 
"scientific"  work  and  the  "scientific"  division  of  labour. 
Consistent  and  energtic  observation,  the  search  for  and  dis- 
covery of  new  and  ever  new'  scientific  details  and  systems, 
is  utterly  different  from  the  cherishing  of  ready-made  and 
reputedly  superhuman  items  of  knov/ledge  based  upon  direct 
revelation.  Theocracy  has  no  science,  but  only  esotericism, 
mysteries,  and  prophesies  ;  it  has  no  researchers,  but  only 
augurs.  Consequently  the  social  position  of  these  augurs  is 
something  utterly  distinct  from  that  of  the  modern  man  of 
science  ;  the  theocratic  priestly  augur  consummates  the  great 
theurgic  mysteries  and  magics  on  behalf  of  the  lay  slave, 

Antitheological  philosophy  is  based  upon  the  sciences, 
and  its  relationship  to  these  scientific  foundations  is  not  aris- 
tocratic but  democratic,  is  a  relationship  of  equality  and 
equivalence.  Hegel  continued  to  speak  of  philosophy  as 
queen  of  the  sciences,  but  this  was  merely  the  old  aristocratic 
view  of  the  relationship  of  theology  to  her  handmaiden  philo- 
sophy. The  relationship  of  the  sciences  one  to  another  and 
to  philosophy  is  purely  logical  and  methodological,  being 
the  outcome  of  the  nature  of  the  individual  sciences,  whereas 
theology  determines  its  relationship  to  the  understanding 
and  to  science  in  accordance  with  its  measuring  rod  of  absolute 
revealed  truth. 

Science,  too,  aims  at  universal  agreement  (of  classes, 
peoples,  humanity),  but  this  agreement  is  to  be  secured  solely 
by  logical  and  educational  methods  ;  at  an  early  date,  modern 
philosophy  became  the  philosophy  of  the  enlightenment. 
The  popularisation  of  science  is  one  of  the  great  tasks  of  the 
contemporary  enlightenment,  and  the  claims  of  popular  educa- 
tion are  continually  enlarged.  We  must  doubtless  take  with 
a  pinch  of  salt  Engels'  proclamation  of  the  workers  as  the 
successors    of    German    classical    philosophy ;     but    in    actual 


i 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  511 

fact  the  new  age  is  characterised,  not  by  the  universities, 
but  by  the  estabhshment  of  universal  compulsory  education. 
Modern  philosophy  and  science  must  not  be  identified  with 
polymathy.  The  democratic  demand  is  that  all  should  think 
and  observe  ;  and  democratic  catholicity  is  based  upon 
reflection  and  observation. 

Comenius  already  considered  it  possible  to  formulate  a 
metaphysic  which  should  be  within  the  comprehension  of 
children.  Here  we  touch  the  difficult  tasks  which  modern 
philosophy,  as  a  scientific  outlook  upon  the  universe  and  upon 
hfe,  has  to  effect  amidst  the  enlarging  spheres  of  scientific 
speciahsation.  The  problem  of  the  correct  division  of  labour 
in  scientific  matters  is  but  a  part  of  the  general  social  problem 
of  the  division  of  labour. 

In  contradistinction  to  theology,  science  is  knowledge  of 
menTand  for  men — not  the  knowledge  of  God  and  for  God. 
For  science,  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things,  man  is  the  true 
and  ultimate  object  of  all  research.  This  deliberate  anthropism 
is  quite  different  from  the  naive  anthropocentrism  of  the 
theological  outlook. 

Scientific  anthropism  naturally  asserts  its  vahdity  in  the 
ethical  and  social  domains.  Modern  philosophy,  as  Kant 
showed,  is  essentially  ethical  and  humanitarian  ;  it  aims  at 
the  foundation  of  a  new  morality,  at  the  elaboration  of  the 
new  democratic  poHtical  and  administrative  system,  at  demo- 
cratic anthropocracy.  Democracy  demands  a  new  system 
of  poHtics,  to  be  estabhshed  upon  scientific  sociology  and 
upon  all  the  abstract  sciences  concerned  with  the  problems 
of  social  hfe  (the  sciences  of  pohtics,  jurisprudence,  economics, 
etc.).  Enhghtenment  and  education  are  the  chief  concerns 
of  democracy.  Democracy  wrestles  with  theocracy  for  the 
control  of  the  school,  the  "  officina  humanitatis,"  as  Comenius 
termed  it.  Comenius  was  one  of  the  first  educationists  to 
propound  the  most  conspicuous  ideal  of  the  new  schooling — 
equality  in  education. 

In  this  connection  the  question  arises  whether  there  is 
a  specially  democratic  philosophy  as  a  unified  outlook  on 
the^universe  and  on  hfe,  and  if  so,  which  system  is  the  chosen 
one.^  Marx  and  his  adherents  have  contended  that  material- 
ism   and   positivism    constitute    the    essential   foundations    of 

«  If  the  name  be  not  liable  to  misinterpretation,  we  might  speak  of 
"  demology,"  as  related  to  democracy,  just  as  theology  is  related  to  theocracy. 


612  THE   SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA 

•  ■ 

democracy.  Other  systems  have  been  selected  (empirio- 
criticism,  for  instance),  and  specific  philosophers  have  been 
designated. 

In  like  manner,  particular  sciences  have  been  regarded 
as  peculiarly  democratic.  Frequently,  natural  science  is 
indicated  as  democratic  and  revolutionary.  This  latter  state- 
ment is  certainly  erroneous,  for  there  can  be  no  question  that 
history  may  exert  an  influence  quite  as  inimical  to  theology 
as  any  that  can  be  exerted  by  natural  science  ;  and  this  is 
equally  true  of  some  of  the  other  abstract  sciences — a  point 
on  which  Mihailovskii  rightly  insisted.  'Theology  possesses 
its  own,  distinctively  "  Christian  "  psychology,  ethics,  peda- 
gogics, history,  and  so  on  ;  in  every  domain,  every  science 
may  come  into  conflict  with  theological  scholasticism. 

Knowledge,  critical  knowledge,  is  democracy  ;  aristocracy 
is  the  offspring  of  the  mythological  outlook.  The  practical 
import  of  the  Kantian  criticism  is  found  above  all  in  this, 
that  criticism  cuts  at  the  root  of  mythological  aristocracy. 
If  the  essence  of  myth  lie  in  the  premature  drawing  of 
conclusions  from  analogy  (§  41A),  the  anthropomorphisation 
characteristic  of  belief  in  myth  is,  ethically  considered, 
egoism,  and,  politically  considered,  centraHsm  and  therefore 
absolutism.  The  naively  egocentric  human  being  does  not 
conceive  of  God  alone  as  ruler,  but  thinks  of  himself  as  like- 
wise occupying  such  a  position  ;  he  creates  God  in  his  own 
image,  discerning  himself  in  the  deity  he  has  fashioned.  In 
his  search  after  miracle  he  has  created  political  theurgy  as 
well  as  religious  theurgy  ;  typically  in  Byzantium  and  in 
Spain  was  political  ceremonial  elaborated  into  a  finished 
system. 

Just  as  the  mythopoeist  creates  God  in  his  own  image, 
so  does  he  personify  and  anthropomorphise  the  state  and 
society  at ,  large  ;  mythical  monotheism  and  monarchy  arise 
by  parallel  development  and  interpenetrate  one  another. 
.  The  attempt  made  by  Leo  XIII  to  reconcile  the  republic 
with  Catholicism  on  principle,  was  dictated  by  Jesuitism  and 
not  by  Cathohcism. 

Criticism,  therefore,  is  a  determinant,  not  of  knowledge 
alone,  but  also  of  democratic  equality  and  liberty.  Without 
criticism  and  without  publicity,  there  can  be  neither  know- 
ledge nor  democracy.  Democracy  has  been  well  described 
as  the  age  of  discussion. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  513 

Art,  too,  artistic  creation,  becomes  democratised.  Doubt- 
less the  view  still  widely  prevails  that  the  artist  as  man  of 
genius  occupies  an  aristocratic  position  in  society  ;  free  creation 
is  not  labour,  and  the  creative  activity  of  the  artist  makes 
him  godlike  ;  the  artist's  exceptional  gifts  are,  as  it  were, 
revelation,  special  manifestations  of  God's  grace. 

We  cannot  here  discuss  the  fundamental  problems  of 
aesthetics,  or  attempt  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  genuinely 
democratic  art.  For  our  purposes  it  will  suffice  to  point  out 
that  art,  like  politics,  has  been  modified  by  modern  science 
and  by  modern  philosophical  criticism.  We  speak  of  "  poet- 
thinkers  "  ;  we  expect  the  artist  to  grasp  truth  and  to  expound 
reality.  Poets,  in  fact,  are  the  true  teachers  of  the  people, 
more  definitely  so  than  are  philosophers.  Let  me  again  recall 
Goethe's  phrase  concerning  "  exact  fantasy,"  and  point  out 
that  in  artistic  creation  modern  psychology  is  competent  to 
discover  elements  of  the  spirit  of  industry.  What  Goethe 
said  about  political  poesy  has  long  ere  this  been  refuted  by  the 
fact  that  literature  and  art  are  intimately  related  to  the  social 
and  political  evolution  of  modern  society,  guiding  this  evolu- 
tion  as  well   as   preparing   the   ground. 

Obviously,  art  does  not  become  democratic  merely  by 
devoting  itself  to  the  exposition  of  the  democratic  program  ; 
by  composing  anti-aristocratic  lays  ;  by  producing  represen- 
tations of  the  revolutionary  struggle,  of  working-class  hfe,  or 
of  artistic  and  literary  Bohemia.  Zola,  for  example, , cannot 
be  considered  a  democratic  author.  The  artist's  attitude 
towards  the  world  and  society  must  spring  from  the  spirit 
of  democracy — for  democracy  is  a  special  way  of  regarding 
the  universe  and  life. 

In  this  connection  the  analogous  question  arises,  which 
varieties  of  art  are  peculiarly  democratic.  We  think  especially 
of  the  possibility  of  influencing  the  masses,  and  of  influencing 
large  numbers  of  persons  simultaneously  (music,  the  drama, 
oratory,  etc.),  and  of  artistic  education  (the  theatre,  museums, 
inexpensive  reproductions  of  works  of  art,  and  so  on)  ;  but 
what  we  are  really  concerned  with  is  to  secure  an  intimate 
understanding  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  particular  type 
of  artistic  creation,  and  to  decide  whether  it  be  democratic, 
or  aristocratic. 

These  questions  have  hardly  as  yet  been  seriously  con- 
sidered.    Exponents   of   aesthetics  have   merely   touched   the 

34  VOL.  II. 


514  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

fringe  of  the  matter  in  their  accounts  of  the  historical  develop- 
ment of  realism  and  naturalism  vis-a-vis  romanticism  and 
classicism,  and  in  their  descriptions  of  the  relationship  of 
such  artists  as  Heine  to  the  political  parties.  Still,  we  have 
advanced  so  far  at  least,  that  democracy  is  understood  to 
have  an  aesthetic  side. 

The  emergence  in  Russian  literature  of  the  raznocinec 
(plebeian)  beside  and  in  opposition  to  the  aristocrat  has  been 
acclaimed  as  a  democratic  achievement,  but  it  is  necessary 
to  reiterate  that  the  aristocratic  and  the  democratic  spirit 
respectively*  are  not  mere  matters  of  birth. 

It  should  be  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  democracy 
does  not  become  established  all  at  once.  The  decline  of  aris- 
tocracy is  gradual,  and  the  replacement  of  aristocracy  bj^ 
the  democratic  program  and  democratic  institutions  is  no 
simple  matter.  The  English  cry  for  "  men  not  measures  " 
is  the  fruit  of  a  study  from  the  life.  Universal  suffrage  affords 
no  guarantee  that  democratic  sentiments  will  prevail ;  the 
true  democrat  will  feel  democratically  and  work  democrati- 
cally, not  in  parliament  alone,  but  in  municipal  life,  in  his 
political  party,  in  the  circle  of  his  friends,  in  family  life,  every- 
where.   Democracy  is  a  new  outlook  and  a  new  conduct  of  life. 

It  is  a  significant  fact  that  the  idea  of  progressive  evolution 
was  advocated,  and  secured  general  acceptance,  simultaneously 
with  the  formulation  of  the  demands  of  democracy.  The 
connection  is  intimate  and  important.  Aristocracy  is  abso- 
lutist, conservative,  and  traditionalistic  ;  democracy  is  pro- 
gressive and  renovative  because  its  trust  is  placed,  not  in 
revelation,  but  in  experience  of  historic  evolution.  Democracy 
is  the  aspiration  towards  a  new  life. 

§  200. 

TO  many  persons,  democracy  seems  essentially  antirehgious, 
but  it  is  in  fact  no  more  than  antitheological  and  anti- 
ecclesiastical  ;  radical  materialism  and  atheism  were  political 
weapons  against  theocratic  absolutism.  The  antecedent  studies 
should  have  made  this  perfectly  clear  ;  the  democratic  struggle 
to  promote  progressive  development,  in  religion  as  well  as 
in  other  things,  is  hostile  to  ecclesiastical  religion  with  its 
demand  for  faith  in  myth  and  for  ethical  passivism. 

Democracy  is  not  inimical  to  religion  per  se,  if  by  religion 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  515 

we  understand  the  new  religion,  and  not  ecclesiastical  religion,   I 
not  ecclesiastical  Christianity.  | 

The  relationship  of  democracy  to  religion  is  implicit  in  the  1 
ethical  foundation  of  democracy.  Democratic  equality  is  I 
based  not  on  revelation  but  on  ethics  ;  and  modern  philo-  ' 
sophy,  which  is  predominantly  ethical,  discusses  this  foundation. 

The  social  and  political  aspirations  of  democracy  issue 
from  the  democratic  ethic,  for  in  ultimate  analysis  the  found- 
ation of  justice  is  necessarily  ethical.  But  theocracy  bases 
justice  and  ethics  upon  religion. 

Democracy  proclaims  the  right  of  individual  initiative, 
for  this  is  the  essence  of  modern  individualism.  How  extensive 
is  the  social  and  political  power  attaching  to  the  faculty  which 
each  one  of  us  now  possesses  of  publicly  criticising  persons 
and  things  !  This  power  of  public  criticism  having  been 
acquired -once  for  all  [written  in  1913],  aristocracy  and  its 
occultism  tend  increasingly  to  grow  feeble,  to  decay,  and  to 
be  replaced.  The  referendum  and  the  initiative  demanded 
by  the  democracy  alread}^  exist  in  substance,  even  though 
they  have  not  yet  been  formally  incorporated  into  parlia- 
mentary institutions. 

Democracy  consists  in  the  unloosing  of  every  energ}', 
whilst   the  essence   of   aristocracy  is  absolutist   restraint. 

Democracy  perforce  desires  to  create  the  new  ;    theocratic- 
aristocracy  wishes  to  preserve  the  old. 

Democracy  works  by  scientific  method,  and  its  tactics 
are  therefore  inductive,  realistic,  and  empirical  ;  theocratic 
aristocracy  is  deductive,  unrealist,  fanciful,  and  scholastic. 

Democracy  contrasts  with  theocratic  aristocracy  in  respect 
of  substance  as  well  as  in  respect  of  form.  The  political  and 
social  aspirations  of  democracy  spring  from  a  new  conception 
of  the  value  of  human  personality.  For  democracy,  too,  the 
supreme  moral  imperative  is  love  of  one's  neighbour  ;  the 
socialists  are  continually  referring  to  Jesus  and  to  Christianity. 
It  is  true  that  theocracy  likewise  preached  love,  but  it  was 
and  remained  aristocratic,  for  it  simultaneously  demanded 
absolute  faith,  and  its  conception  of  love  was  passivist  (in 
fact,  aristocratic).  Priests  and  rulers  wished  to  give  their 
believing  and  industrious  slaves  doctrine  and  daily  bread, 
thereby   assuring  the   continuance   of   their   own   dominion. 

Democratic  love  of  one's  neighbour  requires  the  legal 
estabhshment  of  equality,  demands  justice  ;  this  is  the  essential 


516  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

meaning  of  socialism  as  contrasted  with  theocratic  almsgiving 
and  philanthropy.  We  have  already  shown  how  natural  it 
is  that  the  theocrats  should  regard  their  conception  of  love 
as  the  matter  of  maximum  importance,  while  looking  upon 
justice  as  a  trifle  in  comparison. 

To  sum  up,  it  may  be  said  that  the  contrast  between 
aristocracy  and  democracy  involves  a  fundamental  difference 
in  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  authority.  Aristocratic 
inequality  is  the  recognition  and  enforcement  of  the  authori- 
tative principle. 

Aristocracy  derives  its  supreme  authority  from  ecclesiastical 
religion,  from  God,  from  revelation  ;  revelation  is  sanctioned 
by  tradition,  is  found  in  Holy  Writ,  and  is  safeguarded  by 
the  church  ;  the  pope  is  the  vicegerent  of  God.  These  and 
similar  formulas  of  theocratic  theology  culminate  in  the  con- 
ception of  the  infallibility,  not  merely  of  revelation  (for  this 
is  self-evident),  but  of  the  priestly  intermediator  and  guardian 
of  revelation.  From  this  follow  Catholicism  and  messianism, 
and  the  notion  that  the  religious  unification  of  mankind  is 
indispensable. 

Emperor,  kings,  the  state,  share  this  absolute  authority 
of  church  and  pope.  The  emperor,  too,  holds  sway  by  right 
divine  ;  he,  too,  is  infallible  as  guardian  and  servant  of  the 
church  ("  the  king  can  do  no  wrong  "). 

Democracy  likewise  appeals  to  authority,  appeals  to  the 
people,  to  humanity,  to  the  masses,  to  civilisation,  progress, 
historical  development,  and  so  on.  But  these  objective 
authorities  must  themselves  be  furnished  with  foundations. 
Rousseau  was  one  of  the  first  to  refer  to  the  cleavage  between 
Catholicism  and  the  real  will  of  the  people.  Universalitj^  and 
unity,  he  said,  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  error  ;  and  he 
endeavoured  to  determine  the  characteristics  of  the  genuine 
will  of  the  people.  This  popular  will,  also,  is  considered 
infallible   and  absolute. 

The  contrast  between  Rousseau's  teaching  and  theocratic 
doctrine  is  obvious.  Rousseau  cannot  appeal  to  any  objective 
revelation  ;  he  is  a  subjectivist  ;  his  religion  is  not  revealed. 
Similar  is  the  situation  of  every  reflective  person  who  abandons 
myth,  and  who,  with  Kant,  explains  all  knowledge  as  derivable 
from  the  natural  faculties  of  man.  Now  what  is  the  critical, 
the  scientific  thinker  forced  to  recognise  as  supreme  ?  What 
authority  is  for  him  vested  in  the  people,  in  humanity,  in 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  517 

the  parliamentary  majority,  and  so  on  ?  What  to  him  are 
state  and  emperor  ? 

The  critical  thinker  can  recognise  nothing  but  the  so-called 
inner  authority.  Such  is  the  significance  of  the  fact  that 
since  the  days  of  Kant  and  Hume  modern  philosophy  has 
been  predominantly  ethical.  In  such  departments  as  mathe- 
matics, mechanics,  etc.,  no  difficulties  arise  ;  we  can  readily 
agree  with  one  another  as  to  the  authority  of  a  mathematician 
or  a  natural  philosopher.  But  in  the  ethical  sphere,  and 
consequently  in  the  socio-political  sphere  as  well,  views  are 
temporarily  "conflicting.  Fichte  said  it  was  unconscientious  to 
act  upon  authority,  but  the  question  is  as  to  the  meaning  and 
content  of  conscience.  This  is  the  point  upon  which  all  reflec- 
tion has  been  concentrated  since  the  days  of  Kant. 

Kant  posited  in  his  categorical  imperative  an  absolute, 
infallible,  ethical  authority  ;  but  this  authority  is  subjective 
and  individual,  even  though  it  proclaim  itself  universal  as 
well  as  necessary. 

We  cannot  now  discuss  the  reiterated  attempts  to  under- 
stand rightly  Kant's  categorical  imperative.  All  we  need 
say  here  is  that  the  democratic  conception  of  the  principle 
of  authority  is  a  purely  ethical  one.  The  sovereignty  of  the 
people  must  not  be  conceived  in  the  sense  of  the  monarchical 
sovereignty  of  absolutism  ;  democratic  catholicity  does  not 
repose  solely  upon  the  arithmetic  of  universal  or  preponderant 
opinion, 

II 

§  201. 

FOR  the  right  understanding  of  the  nature  of  democracy 
and  of  its  contrast  with  theocracy  it  is  necessary  to 
examine  the  political  aspects  of  religion  in  the  existing 
ecclesiastical  systems,  and  we  shall  first  of  all  consider  the 
political  bearings  of   Protestantism   and  Catholicism. 

Observation  discloses  that  Protestant  countries  and  nations 
are  more  favourable  than  Catholic  to  the  development  of 
democracy.  Modern  constitutionalism  and  parliamentarism 
first  consolidated  their  forces  in  England  and  the  United  States. 
English  public  law  was  copied  by  the  west,  and  the  conse- 
quences of  this  were  no  less  momentous  than  the  consequences 
of  the 'wide  acceptance  of  Roman  law.   In  addition  to  America, 


518  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

England,  and  the  British  colonies,  the  Scandinavian  countries 
are  the  most  advanced  in  democratic  development.  In  lands 
where  Protestantism  and  Catholicism  are  on  a  more  or  less 
equal  footing,  such  as  Germany,  Holland,  and  Hungary,  the 
Protestants  are  the  sustainers  of  parliamentarism.  Protestant 
Finland  may  be  classed  with  the  Scandinavian  countries. 

To-day,  however,  many  Catholic  lands  have  a  constitution, 
and  not  a  few  are  familiar  with  parliamentary  institutions  ; 
France  is  actually  a  republic.  But  the  political  development 
of  France  was  peculiar.  During  the  eighteenth  century, 
France  was  influenced  in  political  matters  by  England  and 
America ;  and  after  a  number  of  sanguinary  revolutions 
the  establishment  of  the  democratic  French  republic  may 
be  regarded  as  now  fairly  secure.  In  like  manner  it  was 
only  after  a  revolution  or  a  series  of  revolutions  that  a 
constitution  was  introduced  into  other  Catholic  lands.  The 
political  development  of  the  Protestant  peoples  has  been 
comparatively  regular,  has  been  less  turbulent  than  that  of 
Catholic  countries. 

Yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  in  America,  too,  the  republic 
came  into  being  as  the  outcome  of  revolution  ;  and  in  England 
and  all  the  Protestant  lands  revolution  occurred  concomitantly 
with  the  reformation.  But  herein  lies  the  great  difference, 
that  the  Protestants  effected  their  political  revolution  simul- 
taneously with  the  ecclesiastical  and  religious  revolution, 
whereas  in  Catholic  countries  revolutions  have  remained 
purely  political,  have  at  most  in  the  religious  sphere 
brought  about  some  loosening  of  the  bonds  between  church 
and  state,  so  that  their  influence  upon  religion  has  been 
indirect  merely. 

Protestantism  has  furthered  democratisation  from  within 
outwards. 

The  subjectivism  and  individualism  manifested  in  the 
reformation  brought  about  a  weakening  of  Catholic  objectivism 
and  of  the  authority  of  a  wholly  objective  revelation.  Priest- 
hood was  abolished  by  the  reformation  ;  the  subjective  indi- 
vidual consciousness  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  an  authority  ; 
in  place  of  the  pope  cf  Rome,  every  layman  became  his 
own  pope.  Catholic  passivism  and  conservative  stagnation 
were  replaced  by  Protestant  progressive  activism  ;  self- 
governing  Protestant  churches  occupied  the  ground  that  had 
been  held  by  priests,  by  their  aristocratic  hierarchy,  and  by 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  519 

the  ecclesiastical  centralisation  of  the  papacy.  The  Catholic 
belief  in  miracle,  the  myth-haunted  realm  of  magic  and  mysti- 
cism, yielded  before  the  Protestant  disillusionment  ;  the  world 
was  disenchanted,  freed  from  the  dominion  of  spooks  ;  the 
rise  of  determinism  (at  first  in  the  crude  form  of  the  doctrine 
of  predestination)  led  to  the  acceptance  of  a  causal  view  of 
events  and  brought  about  the  spread  of  rationalism.  The 
abandonment  of  the  dogma  of  transubstantiation  was  a  frank 
relinquishment  of  the  magical  powers  of  the  priesthood. 
Finally,  the  disappearance  of  asceticism  strengthened  the 
new  moral  outlook  by  the  sanctification  of  family  life,  and 
the  same  development  simultaneously  promoted  the  diffusion 
of  a  spirit  of  industry  and  favoured  economic  development. 

Thus  Protestantism  is  more  favourable  than  Catholicism 
to  the  development  of  democracy,  for  Catholicism  is  essentially 
aristocratic.  The  intimate  connection  between  Protestantism 
and  democracy  can  be  followed  out  in  detail.  The  Protestant 
layman  receives  his  socio-political  training  in  the  work  of 
church  government  ;  the  recognition  of  the  importance  of 
preaching  "  the  word  "  educates  him  as  a  speaker  (it  must 
be  remembered  that  parliament  means  merely  the  speaking- 
place),  especially  since,  in  the  lesser  sects,  laymen  are  also 
preachers  ;  the  sanctification  of  the  vernacular  tongue  by 
the  translation  of  the  Bible  and  by  the  use  of  the  vernacular 
for  religious  services,  strengthened  the  national  consciousness 
and  overthrew  the  linguistic  aristocracy  of  Latin  and  French. 

The  connection  of  the  reformation,  especially  in  its  Calvinist 
form,  with  the  political  evolution  of  the  modern  age,  is  in- 
dubitable ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  democracy  had  developed 
with  and  out  of  the  reformation.  It  need  hardly  be  said 
that  the  evolution  has  been  gradual,  and  in  this  matter  as 
in  all  others,  special  circum.stances  must  be  taken  into 
account  in  the  application  of  the  formula  to  particular 
countries  and  areas. ^ 

I  Concerning  the  development  of  democracy  with  and  from  the  reformation, 
consult  Borgeaud's  studies  (Annales  de  I'Ecole  libre  des  Sciences  PoUtiques, 
1890  and  1 891)  ;  the  copy  at  my  disposal  is  the  English  translation  bj^  Mrs. 
Hill  with  a  preface  by  Firth,  The  Rise  of  Modern  Democracy  in  Old  and  New 
England.  Stimulated  by  Borgeaud,  Ellinek  has  dealt  with  this  topic,  but 
his  treatment  lacks  clarity.  In  his  study.  Exposition  of  the  Rights  of  Man 
and  Civil  Rights,  1895,  political  and  individual  fundamental  rights  are  con- 
sidered to  have  a  rehgious  origin  and  to  be  based  upon  the  reformation.  In 
his  PoUtical  Science,  second  edition  1905,  the  general  drift  is  closely  akin  to 
that  of  the  sketch  given  in  our  text,  but  Ellinek  has  failed  to  understand  the 


520  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

In  modern  times  economic  evolution  has  proceeded  pari 
passu  with  poHtical.  Just  as  democracy  sprang  from  the 
reformation,  so  in  Protestant  lands  and  among  Protestant 
peoples  was  economic  development  more  rapid  and  more 
intense  than  in  Catholic  countries.  Capitalist  wealth  and 
capitalist  enterprise,  the  modern  economic  order,  are  far  more 
characteristic  of  Protestant  than  of  Catholic  countries. ^ 

Socialism,  too,  is  in  this  sense  and  to  this  extent  Protestant, 
inasmuch  as  German  Marxism  (building  upon  Feuerbach) 
and  social  democracy  have  been  the  philosophical,  scientific, 
and  political  foundations  of  socialism  as  a  system.  To  a  con- 
siderable extent,  Marxism  has  replaced  other  socialistic  systems 
and  endeavours,  and  it  has  notably  influenced  these  even  where 
it  has  not  replaced  them. 

Anarchism,  likewise,  received  its  philosophic  foundations 
from  the  thinkers  of  Protestant  countries.  The  Russian 
anarchists  and  those  of  the  Romance  lands  built  upon  the 
work  of  Feuerbach,  Stirner,  and  Nietzsche.  Finally,  modern 
philosophy  as  a  whole  is  distinctively  of  Protestant  origin, 
and  Kant  has  quite  rightly  been  designated  the  philosopher 
of  Protestantism.  The  Protestant  peoples  in  general  are 
more  highly  cultured  than  the  Catholic. ^ 

The  inferiority  of  Catholicism  may  also  be  proved  in  the 
domains  of  literature  and  art.     For  modern  times,  the  fact  is  ■ 
admitted   by  Catholic   investigators,   notably  in   the   case   of 
Germany,  a  country  where  the  two  creeds  confront  one  another 
in  comparatively  equal  numerical  strength.     We  may  say  in 

nature  of  medieval  theocracy  and  of  the  political  process  of  disestablishment 
characteristic  of  modern  times.  In  these  respects  Laveleye  has  shown  keener 
insight. 

I  In  addition  to  Laveleye,  we  may  refer  here  to  M.  Weber,  and  to  his 
explanation  of  the  capitalist  spirit  as  an  outcome  of  the  reformation,  and  in 
particular  of  the  Calvinist  reformation.  (It  seems  expedient  that  I  should 
declare  that  I  differ  from  Weber  in  that  I  regard  the  problem  as  more  compre- 
hensive, and  in  the  stress  that  I  lay  upon  other  moral  and  social  forces.) 

^  Of  late,  much  attention  has  been  paid  to  this  question  of  the  cultural 
inferiority  of  Catholics.  It  is  well  known  that  the  modernists,  F.  X.  Kraus, 
Schell,  and  others,  have  admitted  the  inferiority  of  Catholicism  in  this  respect. 
Von  Hertling  has  conceded  the  point  as  far  as  science  is  concerned.  In  the 
polemic  discussions  upon  the  subject  the  issues  have  been  cleared.  Certain 
regions  of  Germany  have  been  methodically  compared,  and  statistical  proof 
of  Catholic  inferiority  has  been  furnished.  I  may  refer  to  the  work  by  Rost, 
The  Catholics  in  the  Cultural  and  the  Economic  Life  of  To-day,  1908.  Rost 
is  a  Catholic,  and  there  is  therefore  no  reason  to  be  suspicious  of  his  apologetic 
disquisitions  and  admissions,  though  suspicion  may  be  felt  regarding  Yves 
Guyot's  Le  Bilan  sociale  et  politique  de  I'Eglise,  1901,  and  similar  books. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  521 

general  that  since  Shakespeare  the  greatest  imaginative  writers 
and  artists  have  been  Protestants,  have  been  that  is  to  say 
far  more  distinctively  Protestant  than  the  great  imaginative 
writers  and  artists  among  the  Catholics  have  been  Catholic. 
What  I  wish  to  convey  is  that  such  an  artist  as  Michelangelo 
created  rather  in  a  secular  and  humanist  than  in  a  Catholic 
sense. I 

Passing  now  to  the  domain  of  morality,  it  would  seem 
expedient  that  first  of  all  this  much  disputed  problem  should 
be  succinctly  stated.  I,  at  least,  do  not  contend  that  Protes- 
tant peoples  are  in  all  respects  more  moral  than  Catholic  ; 
but  I  should  formulate  the  outcome  of  my  observations  and 
studies  by  .saying  that  the  morality  of  Protestantism  is  higher 
than  the  morality  of  Catholicism,  and  this  not  merely  in  so 
far  as  a  higher  culture  is  requisite  for  a  higher  morality,  but 
because  Protestant  morality  and  religion  are  per  se  of  a  loftier 
character.  To  put  the  matter  more  precisel3^  Protestantism 
is  the  endeavour  to  secure  loftier  religion  and  morality.  The 
use  of  the  term  "  endeavour  "  gives  expression  to  my  reserves, 
for  the  great  and  long-lasting  epoch  of  transition  from  the 
middle  ages  is  not  peculiar  to  Catholicism.  Protestantism, 
too,  exhibits  much  that  is  inchoate  and  much  that  is  defective.* 

In  the  sense  and  scope  thus  denned,  the  intimate  relation- 
ship between  Protestantism  and  democracy  can  be  historically 
and  philosophically  established  and  elucidated.  But  it  is 
as  well  to  point  out  in  set  terms  that  when  I  speak  of 
Protestantism  I  am  not  thinking  solely  of  the  orthodox 
system  of  the  confessions  and  the  reformers.  Protestantism 
developed  from  within  in  contrast  to  stationary  Catholicism, 
and  we  can  watch  this  development  in  its  ecclesiastical 
schisms  and  in  the  evolution  of  theology  to  become 
philosophy.  The  philosophic 'ideals  of  humanitarianism  and 
Qaturalness  (natural  religion,  natural  morals,  natural  law, 
natural  reason,  and  state  of  nature  in  general  (cf.  §§  42 
and  43),  developed  in  the  sense  of  the  reformation  and 
were  a  continuance  of  its  trend.  Upon  this  basis  were 
sstablished   the   democratic   ideals   of  liberty,    equality,    and 

I  Cf.  C.  Muth  (Veremundus),  Is  Catholic  Belletristics  abreast  of  the  Time? 
(1898),  and  The  Literary  Tasks  of  German  Catholics  (1899). 

»  I  do  not  touch  upon  problems  of  detail,  such  as  the  population  question, 
the  sexual  question,  and  so  on.  But  I  advance  the  general  opinion  after  due 
consideration,  and  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  relevant  literature. 


522  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

fraternity  ;    upon  this,   the  rights   of  man    and  civil  rights  ; 
and   upon   this,   was   estabhshed   social  legislation. 

One  objection  has  to  be  met  despite  all  our  methodological 
reserves.  Was  not  and  is  not  France,  we  shall  be  asked,  pre- 
eminently the  land  of  civilisation  and  culture  ;  has  not  France 
become  wealthy  and  economically  progressive  ;  was  it  not 
France  that  proclaimed  the  ideal  of  liberty,  equality,  and 
fraternity  ;    is  not  France  republican  ? 

France,  like  all  Catholic  countries,  adopted  the  new  pro- 
gressive ideas  in  opposition  to  its  Catholicism  and  despite  its 
Catholicism  ;  it  was  on  the  basis  of  such  ideas  that  the  modern 
development  of  France  was  upbuilded.  Even  during  the 
first  revolution,  under  the  influence  of  these  modern  ideas, 
France  cut  herself  completely  adrift  from  the  church,  this 
severance  being  the  most  decisive  and  revolutionary  ex- 
pression of  opposition  to  ecclesiastical  religion.  France 
attempted  an  ecclesiastical  and  political  restoration,  but 
revolution  recurred  again  and  again,  so  that  France,  in 
contradistinction  to  England,  has  become  the  typical  land 
of   revolution. 

France  is  radical  and  revolutionary,  but  not  democratic  ; 
not  even  the  French  republic  is  democratic  per  se.  In  like 
manner,  whilst  French  philosophy  developed  into  radical 
positivism,  in  the  very  founder  of  French  positivism,  in  Auguste 
Comte,  we  may  note  the  manner  in  which  anti-ecclesiastical 
and  antitheological  positivism  relapsed  into  mythopoeic  fetich- 
ism.  Positivism  was  radical,  but  it  lacked  the  spirit  of 
criticism, 

German  philosophy  and  English  philosophy,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  more  critical,  and  consequently  more  stable  ;  they 
are  no  less  anti-ecclesiastical  and  antitheological  ;  but  they 
do  not  encounter  in  their  respective  churches  the  absolute 
hostility  which  thought  has  to  encounter  in  France  and  in 
other  Catholic  lands.  We  need  only  compare  Comte  with 
John  Stuart  Mill.  Comte  relapses  into  fetichism  ;  Mill,  start- 
ing from  a  Comtist  base,  advances  to  nihilism.  There  has 
been  an  analogous  political  development  in  England  and  in 
Germany.  England  is  nominally  a  monarchy,  but  is  actually 
subject  to  an  aristocratic  oligarchy,  whereas  semicatholic 
Germany  with  its  Prussian  junkerdom  is  being  steadily  demo- 
cratised. Germany  has  the  most  progressive  and  the  strongest 
social  democracy  in  Europe  ;   in  Germany,  Bismarck,  the  most 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  523 

efficient  and  most  stalwart  champion  of  monarchy,  was  opposed 
to  the  absolutist  and  theocratic  pretensions  of  the  emperor/ 
and  was  in  effect  a  rebel. 

This  peculiar  contrast  between  Catholicism  with  its  anti- 
ecclesiastical  negation,  and  Protestantism  with  its  critical 
superecclesiasticism,  can  be  discerned  in  the  two  greatest 
French  philosophers  of  the  revolution.  Voltaire,  the  Catholic, 
is  the  revolutionary  negation  of  the  church  ;  Rousseau,  the 
Calvinist,  endeavours  to  sustain  democracy  by  means  of  a 
civil  religion. 

The  Catholic  apologists  have  a  clear  grasp  of  this  distinction, 
and  they  rightly  regard  Protestantism,  as  the  foundation  of 
modern  development.  Where  they  are  mistaken  is  in  their 
appraisement  alike  of  the  development  and  of  the  foundation.- 

Concurrently  with  the  reformation  was  initiated  the  new 
antitheocratic  development  of  humanity,  the  renaissance. 
Science  and  philosophy,  all  the  intellectual  forces  of  man 
grown  self-conscious,  combined  to  overthrow  aristocratic 
theocracy,  to  cast  off  .the  spiritual  oppression  it  exercised, 
and  to  secure  a  consistent  application  of  liberty  and  equality 
on  behalf  of  the  democratic  organisation  of  society. 


§  202. 

DEMOCRACY  in  Russia  is  in  its  inception.  We  know 
from  our  study  of  Russian  history,  how  theocratic 
aristocracy  developed  as  caesaropapism  ;  the  history  of  the 
liberation  of  the  peasantry  in  1861  is  the  history  of  an 
unwilling  renunciation  of  aristocratic  privileges.  Not  until  the 
nineteenth  century  was  well  under  way  did  men  who  were 
not  of  noble  birth,  the  raznocincy,  acquire  notable  positions  in 
the  administration,  in  the  army,  and  in  the  field  of  literature, 
whilst  simultaneously  the  industrialisation  of  agricultural 
land   was  creating   a   plutocracy.     Saltykov  summed  up   the 

1  Emperor  William  in  all  seriousness  proclaimed  his  grandfather  to  be  a 
divine  revelation,  and  declared  himself  to  be  God's  chosen  instrument. 

2  In  the  much  discussed  encyclical,  Diuturnum  illud  (1881),  Leo  XIII 
derived  from  Protestantism,  not  merely  modern  philosophy,  but  modern  law, 
the  liberal  aspirations  of  democracy,  communism,  socialism,  and  even  nihilism. 
In  a  subsequent  encyclical,  Militantis  ecclesiae  (1897),  the  same  pope  condemned 
the  reformation  as  a  Lutheran  rebellion.  All  that  Leo  XIII  did  in  these 
encyclicals  was  to  formulate  an  effective  summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the 
Syllabus,  and  to  express  the  common  opinion  of  Cathohc  ecclesiastical  polemists. 


524  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

transformation  in  the  following  words  :  "  The  epoch  of  agrarian 
serfdom  is  closed  ;  the  epoch  of  the  serfdom  of  the  toil-stained 
operative  has  opened,"  In  the  radical  camp,  the  bourgeoisie 
soon  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  real  enemy.  Stepniak's  theory 
that  the  revolution  is  of  advantage,  not  to  the  community 
at  large,  but  to  the  bourgeoisie,  is  in  conformity  with  the 
German-made  theory  of  historical  materialism.  "  The 
philistine  "  [the  bourgeois],  said  Marx,  "  is  the  substratum 
of  the  monarchy,  and  the  monarch  is  nothing  but  the  king 
of  the  Philistines." 

We  have  rejected  as  unsound  the  contention  that  the 
Russians  and  the  Slavs  in  general  are  by  nature  peculiarly 
democratic.  This  alleged  democratic  tendency  is  negative 
merely,  not  positive  (§  i.  ii).  Modern  democracy  is  a  con- 
scious and  purposive  opposition  to  theocratic  aristocracy. 
In  this  sense,  democracy  is  the  new  outlook,  is  the  philosophy  - 
to  which  Bakunin  first  gave  expression  in  his  program  of  1842. 

The  Russian  theocracy  is  founded  upon  the  Catholic  Ortho- 
doxy that  was  adopted  from  Byzantium.  What  was  written 
above  concerning  the  cultural  inferiority  of  western  Catholicism, 
applies  still  more  forcibly  to  the  Orthodox  Catholicism  of 
the  "  third  Rome."  The  very  fact  that  eastern  Catholicism 
lays  so  much  stress  upon  religious  orthodoxy,  is  an  indication 
of  the  spiritual  absolutism  which  presses  so  heavily  upon  the 
Russians.  Orthodoxy  signifies  stagnation,  as  the  inevitable 
outcome  of  the  mythopoeic  fiction  of  revelation,  and  this  is 
why  the  enlightened  Russian  protests  so  vigorously  against 
Orthodoxy. 

Count  Uvarov  proclaimed  autocracy  no  less  than  Orthodoxy 
to  be  a  typically  national  Russian  development,  and  the  Slavo- 
phils endeavoured  to  provide  a  philosophico-historical  founda- 
tion for  Uvarov's  theocratic  practice.  In  actual  fact,  however, 
a  critical  analysis  of  ideas  and  historical  data  necessarily 
leads  us  to  the  recognition  that  the  Russian  autocracy  was  a 
caesaropapism.  It  cannot  be  justly  regarded  as  peculiarly 
national,  for  autocracy  was  established  upon  a  similar  basis 
in  Byzantium  and  in  the  west.  The  church  provided  a  religious 
sanction  for  monarchical  absolutism.  All  attempts  to  dis- 
cover national  qualities  as  the  foundation  of  autocracy,  and 
all  the  conceptual  idealisations  of  the  brute  facts  (idealisations 
which  official  philosophy  and  jurisprudence  is  ever  ready  to 
furnish),  are  pure  illusion.     Just  as  the  Slavophils  endeavoured 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  525 

to  explain  autocracy  as  the  outcome  of  Russian  or  Slavic 
traits,  so,  in  the  west,  noted  jurists  attempted  to  deduce  mon- 
archy, as  contrasted  with  democracy,  from  certain  reputedly 
Teutonic  juridical  characteristics.  The  theocratic  sanction 
of  autocracy  is  a  deduction  from  the  ecclesiastico-religious 
sanction.  As  far  as  Russia  is  concerned.  Count  Uvarov 
impressed  this  upon  the  tsar  (§  24) ;  and  before  Uvarov, 
Karazin  had  energetically  defended  the  divine  right  of  the 
great  landed  proprietors  (§  15). 

Emperor  William  is  more  realist  than  his  crown  jurists 
when  he  insists  that  his  absolutism  ^  is  a  revealed  divine  right, 
and  when  in  his  well-known  letter  on  religion  he  defends  reve- 
lation against  liberal  theology.  In  these  matters  the  views 
of  Emperor  William  coincide  with  those  of  Tsar  Nicholas  II  ; 
Metternich,  voicing  the  sentiments  of  Emperor  Francis  of 
Austria,  spoke  in  almost  identical  terms  (§36)  ;  and  the  founders 
of  the  holy  alliance  all  felt  themselves  and  declared  themselves 
to  be  instruments  in  the  hands  of  providence  (§  15).  Such 
differences  as  exist  between  Prussian  monarchy  and  Russian 
monarchy  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  differences  between 
Prussia  and  Russia  in  respect  of  ecclesiastical  and  religious 
institutions. 

Wherever  it  has  existed,  theocratic  absolutism  has  endea- 
voured by  coercive  means  to  maintain  the  conditions  whereby 
subjects  were  shut  out  from  political  activities.  Isolation  from 
human  contact  led  to  the  moral  and  biological  degeneration 
of  aristocracies  and  dynasties,  the  universal  result  being  revo- 
lution. But  aristocracy  and  absolutism  are  not  based  solely 
upon  coercion,  for  they  are  maintained  in  addition,  as  Herzen 
rightly  insisted,  by  general  recognition,  b}''  the  opinions  in 
the  minds  of  men. 

Since  the  days  of  Peter,  philosophy,  and  above  all  European 
philosophy,  has  revolutionised  thought.  Peter  was  himself  a 
revolutionary.  The  regime  of  Nicholas  I  made  the  philoso- 
phical revolution  radical  ;  it  was  from  political  even  more 
than  from  philosophical  need  that  atheism  and  materialism 
were  counterposed  to  Uvarov's  theocratic  principles.  Material- 
ism in  its  radical  negation  was  always  a  political  weapon. 

In    opposition    to    theocracy  and    to  its  mythopoeic    and 

I  "  The  soldier  must  not  have  a  will  of  his  own.  You  must  all  have  but 
one  vnW,  and  that  is  my  will ;  there  is  but  one  law,  and  that  is  my  law  I  " — 
Speech  to  recruits  about  to  take  the  mihtary  oath,  November  i6,  1893. 


526  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

mystical  theology,  realism  and  nihilism  were  preached  as 
positivist  disillusionment ;  this'  is  the  significance  of  Herzen's 
positivism,  of  Bakunin's  antitheologism,  and  of  Cernysevskii's 
materiahsm.  Feuerbach's  philosophy  was  utilised  above  all 
as  a  solvent  of  ecclesiastical  religion  and  of  religion  in  general. ^ 

Russian  positivism  with  its  atheism  and  materiahsm  has 
proved  inadequate.  Russian  philosophical  and  therefore 
Russian  pohtical  thought  fails  through  the  lack  of  criticism. 
Russian  philosophy  has  not  succeeded  in  uprooting  myth. 

In  practice  this  defect  manifests  itself  in  the  failure  of 
the  Russians  to  adopt  the  ethic  of  perseverance  wholeheartedly 
and  consistently.  Kireevskii  pointed  this  out  long  ago,  but 
consoled  himself  in  aristocratic  fashion  by  saying  that  the 
Russian  could  atone  for  his  lack  of  perseverance  by  splendid 
bursts  of  labour.  Here  speaks  the  typical  aristocrat,  the 
man  who  despises  application  and  the  petty  details  of  every- 
day work. 

Since  Pestel  and  Herzen,  the  Russian  revolutionaries  have 
expressed  themselves  as  opposed  to  constitutionahsm  and 
parliamentarism.  Herein  we  have  a  sample  of  the  widely 
discussed  Russian  anarchism.  Owing  to  the  prolonged  domi- 
nance of  theocratic  absolutism,  Russians  have  been  laymen  in 
pohtical  no  less  than  in  rehgious  matters,  and  they  therefore 
incline  to  regard  the  constitutionahst  beginnings  of  democracy 
as  of  trifling  importance.  Herzen,  feeling  as  an  aristocrat, 
declared  constitutionahsm,  the  repubhc,  and  even  universal 
suffrage,  to  be  nulhties.  Herzen,  however,  was  thorough- 
going enough  to  regard  the  acquirements  of  the  bourgeois 
revolution  as  manifestations  of  Protestantism  ;  and  against 
Protestantism  he  directed  his  most  emphatic  protests.  The 
Russian  atheist  could  not  share  in  the  rehgious  disillusion- 
ment of  Protestantism  ;  also,  as  a  matter  of  theory,  he 
demanded  this  disillusionment  in  conjunction  with  Feuerbach 
the  positivist  and  materialist. 

In   like   manner   the    revolutionaries    since    Herzen   have 

I  I  reiterate  Feuerbach's  dictum  :  "I  would  not  give  a  rush  for  political 
liberty  if  I  were  to  remain  a  slave  of  rehgious  fancies  and  prejudices.  True 
freedom  can  be  found  there  only  where  man  is  free  also  from  the  tyranny  of 
rehgion."  Such  is  the  view  of  the  contemplative  philosopher.  But  let  me 
quote  Fouill6  in  addition  :  "  There  is  only  one  way  of  putting  an  end  to  prac- 
tical despotism,  and  this  is  to  put  an  end  to  metaphysical  despotism  and  to 
dogmatism  in  all  its  forms,  to  materiaUst  despotism  no  less  than  to  the 
spiritualist  despotism  which  claims  a  knowledge  of  absolute  salvation." 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  527 

aimed  rather  at  liberty  than  at  democratic  equality.  Even  to 
Kropotkin,  equality  seems  nothing  more  than  a  means  to 
secure  uniformity  and  justice.  Kropotkin,  despite  his  anar- 
chism, is  an  aristocrat,  and  his  attitude  towards  justice  closely 
resembles  that  of  the  pope's  secretary.  Mihailovskii  is  here 
more  progressive  and  democratic,  though  less  revolutionary. 

This  lack  of  the  democratic  spirit  characterises  the  apos- 
tates of  Signposts  (§§  182  and  183).  Berdjaev,  one  of  their 
spokesmen,  aspires  towards  a  mystical  form  of  aristocracy. 
Aristocracy  is  ever  mythopoeic  and  mystical. 

Nor  has  Russian  liberaHsm  as  yet  had  courage  to  free  itself 
completely  from  the  theocracy.  Only  the  social  democrats 
and  the  social  revolutionaries  demand  the  severance  of  state 
from  church.  The  liberals  content  themselves  with  the  pro- 
gram of  freedom  of  conscience.  In  this  matter,  as  previously 
explained,  the  progressive  theologians,  few  in  number,  are 
further  advanced,  for  they  demand  disestablishment  in  the 
interest  of  religion  itself. 

The  presupposition  of  democracy  is  the  new  ethic  of  equality, 
not  solely  the  Herzenian  brain  equality.  The  defenders  of 
theocracy  are  perfectly  aware  of  this.  Leont'ev  tells  us  that 
the  state  can  exist  without  morals  but  not  without  religion. 
Pobedonoscev  denounces  unbelief  as  the  direct  negation  of 
the  state.  Tihomirov  tells  us  that  if  independent  thought 
in  the  sphere  of  religion  be  but  rendered  impossible,  an  able 
police  service  will  be  competent  to  take  care  of  all  other 
essentials. 

The  Russians  are  extremely  revolutionary,  but  not  very 
democratic. 


■^.^ 


CHAPTER   TWENTY-FIVE 

DEMOCRACY  AND   REVOLUTION 

§203. 

THESE,  studies  might  well  be  entitled  "The  Russian  Revo- 
lution," for  since  the  days  of  Peter,  Russia  has  been  in 
a   chronic   condition   of  revolution,   and   the   problem   of   the 
revolution  is  one  of  the  leading  interests* of  all 'philosophers 
||  -  of  history  and  statesmen  in  Russia.     We  may  indeed  say  that 
jj    the   problem    of   revolution   is   preeminently   the   problem    of 
Russia, 

In  Russia,  as  well  as  in  Europe,  the  French  revolution  gave 
rise  to  the  development  of  modern  philosophy  of  history  and 
modern  sociology  (§  46).  Since  the  time  of  the  great  revolution, 
the  problem  of  revolution  has  in  Russia  been  a  standing  item 
upon  the  agenda,  practically  no  less  than  theoretically.  The 
reaction  under  Alexander  I  and  Nicholas  I,  definitely  directed 
against  the  revolution,  forced  Russian  thinkers  into  two 
opposing  camps,  that  of  the  revolutionaries  and  that  of 
the  antirevolutionaries.  The  revolutionary  trend  began  with 
-  Pestel  and  Radiscev  ;  the  succession  was  continued  by 
Bghnskii,  Herzen,  Bakunin,  Cernysevskii,  Dobroljubov,  and 
the  nihihsts,  the  terrorists,  and  especially  the  Narodnaja 
Vol] a,  Lavrov  and  Mihailovskii,  and  finally  the  revolutionary 
exponents  of  socialism  and  anarchism  (the  Marxists  on  the 
one  hand,  and  Kropotkin  on  the  other). 

The  right  wing  is  represented  by  the  official  pohcy,  which 
was  reduced  by  Count  Uvarov  to  the  simple  formula  of  Ortho- 
doxy, autocTracy,  and  nationahty,  and  which  made  an  impres- 
sion upon  Puskin,  and  yet  more  markedly  upon  Gogol.  The 
Slavophils  did  their  utmost  to  give  this  formula  a  philosophic 
content,  but  the  philosophy  speedily  became  dissipated  into 

628 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  529 

the  prescriptions  of  the  theocracy,  for  Katkov,  Pobedonoscev, 
and  Leont'ev  were  but  spokesmen  of  the  caesaropapist  reaction. 
Solov'ev  renewed  the  attempt  of  the  Slavophils,  and  a  number 
of  sometime  revolutionaries  have  of  late  followed  in  his  foot- 
steps, for  the  interest  in  religion  has  been  fortified  by  the 
writings  of  Dostoevskii  and  Tolstoi.  In  Ropsin,  above  all, 
we  have  been  able  to  demonstrate  the  manifestations  of  the 
crisis  in  revolutionism.  The  first  Russian  mass  revolution, 
and  its  conquest  by  the  reaction,  once  more  made  the  problem 
of  revolution  a  matter  of  urgent  actuality. 

The  concept  of  revolution  secures  graphic  expression  in 
current  terminology.  Everywhere  when  people  speak  of  a 
rising,  a  revolt,  a  tumult,  an  insurrection,  or  a  rebellion,  they 
mean  something  quite  distinct  from  revolution,  for  this  last 
is  regarded  as  a  thorough  transformation  from  the  foundation 
upwards.  In  the  last  sense,  people  speak  also  of  "  the  definitive 
revolution." 

Civil  war,  again,  is  distinguished  from  revolution,  and 
we  distinguish  between  revolution  from  above  and  revolution 
from  below.  Reaction  is  a  form  of  revolution,  for  reaction 
is   the   counter-revolution. 

In  most  cases  the  idea  of  bloodshed  is  attached  to  the 
idea  of  revolution,  but  of  course  a  revolution  may  be  effected 
without  bloodshed,  though  carried  out  by  the  use  of  force 
and  even  military  force. 

These  terms  afford  a  fairly  accurate  classification,  or  at 
any  rate  provide  a  survey,  of  the  different  varieties  of 
revolution,  and  we  may  content  ourselves  with  the  simple 
enumeration  of  designations  without  attempting  precise 
definitions. 

As  far  as  Russia  is  concerned  we  have  to  think  especially 
of  the  difference  between  mass  revolution  and  individual 
revolutionary  acts  (terrorism).  Enough  has  been  said  in 
previous  chapters  to  emphasise  this  distinction,  tor  it  is  clearly 
explained  in  the  history  of  the  Russian  revolution  and  in  th6 
doctrines  of  individual  writers  on  the  subject. 

Ordinarily  the  term  revolution,  when  used  without  quali- 
fication, signifies  political  revolution.  But  there  are  also 
non-political  revolutions  :  religious,  moral,  and  ecclesiastical  : 
philosophic  and  scientific  ;  literary  and  artistic.  Much  has 
been  written  concerning  the  economic  and  social  revolution, 
brought  about  by  capitalism. 

35  VOL.  II. 


530  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

The  distinction  between  the  varieties  of  revolution  pre- 
viously enumerated  is  based  upon  differences  in  causation. 
In  some  cases  a  revolution  may  arise  from  a  momentary  and 
transient  dissatisfaction,  or  even  from  a  more  enduring  dis- 
satisfaction, and  may  aim  merely  at  such  a  change  as  the 
removal  of  one  or  two  oppressive  personahties,  or  at  the 
transformation  of  individual  jneasures  or  institutions.  Very 
different  is  the  deliberate  aim  at  the  reconstruction  of  an 
entire  poHtical  regime  and  of  all  the  institutions  of  society. 

Thus  the  French  revolution  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth 
century  is  rightly  distinguished  as  the  "  great  "  revolution. 
The  pecuhar  significance  of  the  French  revolution  and  its 
sequels  was  that  they  aimed  at  revolution  in  the  true  sense 
of  the  word,  at  a  fundamental  transformation.  There  were 
philosophical,  ethical,  and  religious  preparations  for  the  change  ; 
man  was  to  be  renovated,  and  the  whole  of  hfe  was  to  be 
built  up  anew  from  its  very  foundations.  The  reaction  and 
the  restoration  served  only  to  strengthen  this  aspiration ; 
philosophically  and  historically,  the  revolution  was  repre- 
sented as  a  necessary  process  of  renewal,  the  reconstitution 
of  society  and  mankind.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  modern 
faith  in  progress  (§  40),  of  the  idea  of  the  new  age  and  of  novelty 
in  general,  an  idea  which  has  now  secured  general  recognition 
in  theory,  in  practice,  and  in  statecraft. 

In  our  account  of  Marxism  (§  160)  we  pointed  out  that 
the  idea  of  progress  and  evolution  furnishes  many  persons 
with  arguments  against  revolution.  It  is  contended  that 
the  development  of  human  history  must  be  gradational,  just 
as  the  world  and  the  cosmos  have  evolved  by  infinitesimal 

stages. 

The  question  arises  here,  whether  those  who  argue  thus 
have  rightly  understood  the  data  of  history.  We  learn  from 
the  history  of  revolutions,  and  above  all  from  the  history  of 
the  French  revolution,  that  these  happenings  cannot  be  ex- 
plained into  non-existence  by  analogies  drawn  from  the  modern 
theories  of  those  geologists  and  cosmologists  who  will  hear 
nothing  of  catastrophe.  Psychology  and  sociology  teach  us  that 
in  the  spiritual  or  psychical  sphere  individual  development, 
and  therefore  also  the  development  of  society,  is  charac- 
terised by  crises,  by  crude  contrasts,  by  revolutions.  Struve 
is  utterly  wrong  in  deducing  from  the  theory  of  evolution, 
the   view   that   revolution  is   epistemologically  inconceivable. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  531 

Psychologically   and  logically,   glaring   oppositions   exist    (the 
so-called  contrast  effects),   and  to  this  extent  the   HegeHan 
dialectic  is  justified.     We  may  admit   that,   objectively  con- 
sidered, the  contrasts  are  less  glaring  than  they  seem  to  those 
.who  know  them  subjectively.     Revolution  may  be  accounted 
an  exceptional  happening  ;,  we  may  wish  that  there  were  no 
revolutions,  that  development  could  take  place  without  such 
shocks.     But  revolutions  have  occurred,  and  it  is  undeniable 
that  since  the  great  revolution,  revolutionism,  the  revolutionary 
mood,  has  become  widespread  and  enduring.     SociaHsm  and 
anarchism    as   mass   moods   are    definitely   revolutionary.     In 
philosophy,  literature,  and  art,  and  also  in  the  moral  domain, 
revolutionary  sentiment  is  general.     Socio-political  revolutions 
are  intimately  connected  with  revolutions  in  the  mind.     We 
may  recall  Caadaev's  saying  that  in  the  west  revolutions  have 
at  first  always  been  mental ;    "  interests  "  have  followed  ideas. 
Modern  revolutionism  has  developed  since  the  reformation 
and    the    renaissance.      The  religious   and  ecclesiastical  refor- 
mation was  revolutionary,  and  led  by  a  natural  development 
to   the   social   and   political   transformation   of   Europe.     The 
peoples  which  accepted  and  carried  through  the  reformation 
subsequently  exhibited  a  socio-political  trend  in  the  direction 
of  democracy,    so    that    among    them    the    manifestations    of 
revolutionism  were  less  radical  than  these  proved   among  the 
Catholic  peoples,   those  that  suppressed  the  reformation  and 
for  that  very  reason  again  and  again  broke  into  revolution 
against    theocratic    absolutism.     The    French    revolution    was 
the  natural  outcome  of  theocratic  absolutism,  against  which 
the  enlightenment  and  modern  philosophy,  fertilised  by  English 
and    American    ideas,    directed    their    shafts.     Diderot    gave 
distinctive  utterance  to  the  mood  of  revolutionary  Frenchmen 
when  he  expressed  the  wish  that  the  last  king  might  be  strangled 
with    the    entrails    of    the    last    priest.      Protestantism    was 
comparatively  favourable  to  modern  ideas,  to  philosophy  and 
science.     Among  the  Protestant  peoples,  therefore,'  the  revo- 
lution  was   less   radical,    and  was   predominantly   theoretical, 
literary,  and  philosophical. 

We  must  refer  once  more  to  Hume  and  Kant,  and  above 
all  to  the  Kantian  criticism.  As  we  have  more  than  once 
had  occasion  to  insist,  the  world-wide  historical  significance 
of  critical  philosophy,  as  contrasted  with  uncritical  mythology, 
is  that  the  former  effectively  destroys  the  theoretical  founda- 


532  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

tions  of  theology,  and  the  practical  foundations  of  theocracy. 
Hume  and  Kant  have  revolutionised  the  minds  of  beUevers 
once  for  all. 

Marx  and  his  successors  are  right  in  proclaiming  philosophy 
and  science  to  be  essentially  revolutionary  ;  but  they  are 
wrong  when  they  endeavour  to  limit  the  revolutionary  spirit 
to  atheism  and  materialism  or  to  certain  specified  sciences 
(they  speak  of  the  natural  sciences,  but  we  may  remember 
that  F.  A.  Lange  regarded  moral  statistics  as  the  most 
revolutionary  of  all  the  sciences).  The  philosophic  revolution 
consists  in  the  recognition  of  the  futihty  of  mythology,  in 
the  growth  of  a  critical  self-consciousness.  Atheistic  and 
materialistic  negation  is  the  ephemeral  and  purely  negative 
form  of  this  revolution. 

During  and  after  the  French  revolution,  many  philosophers, 
jurists,  and  students  of  political  science,  endeavoured  to  define 
the  essence  of  that  movement.  Peculiarly  instructive  are 
the  writings  of  the  adversaries  of  the  revolution  :  in  France, 
de  Mafstre,  and  the  philosophers  of  the  restoration,  de  Bonald, 
Ballanche,  etc.  ;  in  England,  Burke  ;  in  Germany,  Baader, 
Gorres,  Stahl,  such  converts  to  Catholicism  as  Schlegel,  and 
the  Metternichian  publicists,  led  by  Gentz. 

I  am  in  accord  with  the  analysis  furnished  by  these  reaction- 
aries. From  their  stately  series  I  may  select  the  Prussian 
court  publicist  Stahl,  an  eye  witness  and  analyst  of  the  revolu- 
tion of  1848.  Stahl  rightly  recognised  that  the  revolution 
was  not  an  isolated  act,  but  a  permanent  state  from  which 
the  new  order  was  to  spring.  "  Revolt,  expulsion  of  dynasties, 
overthrow  of  constitutions,  have  occurred  in  all  ages.  The 
revolution  is  the  characteristic,  world-wide,  and  historical 
signature  of  our  own  epoch."  Stahl  is  right,  again,  when  he 
refers  the  revolution  to  an  attempt  "  to  base  the  whole  of 
pubHc  hfe  upon  the  will  of  man  instead  of  upon  God's  ordinance 
and  disposition."  Stahl  is  right,  finally,  when  he  proclaims 
rationahsm  in  rehgion  to  be  the  original  cause  of  revolution. i 

Though  I  agree  with  Stahl  upon  these  points,  I  differ 
from  him  in  that  what  he  censures  as  "  the  extremity  of  sin 
in  the  pohtical  domain,  ...  the  essential  defiance  of  God's 
ordinance,  ...  the  counter-beHef  in  man  rather  than  God," 
seems  to  me  thoroughly  justifiable. 

Like  Stahl  and  the  before-mentioned  philosophers  and 
I  Stahl,  What  is  the  Revolution  ?  (1852). 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  RUSSIA  583 

political  writers,  the  Russian  reactionaries  rightly  understood 
the  nature  of  revolution.  Whereas  Stahl  thought  that  one 
power  only,  that  of  Christianity,  could  overcome  the  revolu- 
tion, and  whereas  de  Maistre  turned  for  aid  to  the  authority  of 
the  pope.  Count  Uvarov  and  the  Russian  theocrats  from  Katkov 
to  Leont'ev,  pursuing  the  same  end,  consistently  counterposed 
the  theocracy  to  the  revolution. 


§  204.    ■  - 

IT  is  comprehensible  that  the  official  exponents  of  philo- 
sophy should  deny  or  gloss  over  its  revolutionary  effects. 
In  this  spirit,  during  the  reign  of  Nicholas  I,  the  liberal  writer 
Polevoi  took  up  the  cudgels  on  behalf  of  French  philosophy, 
saying  that  it  had  not  been  the  cause  of  the  revolution  any 
more  than  Christianity  had  been  responsible  for  the  massacre 
of  St.  Bartholomew. 

True,  not  every  philosophy  is  revolutionary.  Even  Kant 
never  attained  to  clear  views  upon  the  problem  of  revo- 
lution. He  contended  that  revolution  was  inadmissible,  and 
that  the  utmost  the  people  might  do  was  to  refuse  to  pay 
taxes.  He  did  not  discuss  the  consequences  of  such  a  refusal, 
nor  did  he  explain  why  he  was  sympathetic  towards  the  French 
revolution,  nor  why  he  accepted  the  ideas  of  Rousseau.  When 
"the  king  commanded  him  to  refrain  from  the  pubHc  discussion 
of  religious  questions,  Kant  compHed  with  the  order.  ^ 

But,  in  similar  circumstances,  Kant's  successors,  Fichte  for 
instance,  refused  to  comply.  Hegel's  disciples,  the  Hegehans 
of  the  left,  had  an  influence  in  promoting  the  events  of  the 
year  1848,  and  some  of  them  were  direct  participators  in 
the  revolutionary  movements;  but  Feuerbach,  the  founder  of 
the  trend,  held  aloof,  explaining  that,  though  a  republican, 
he  desired  to  see  a  repubUc  estabhshed  only  where  men  were 
ripe  for  repubhcan  institutions.  For  the  same  reason,  the 
revolutionary  Herzen  went  so  far  as  to  invoke  maledictions 
on    the    year    1848  ;    but   his    successors    persisted    in    their 

t  "  A  revolution  may  perhaps  lead  to  a  decline  in  personal  despotism  and 
in  oppression  based  upon  desire  for  gain  or  love  of  power,  but  can  never  bring 
about  a  true  reform  in  the  realm  of  thought.  The  unthinking  masses  will 
speedily  succumb  to  the  sway  of  new  prejudices."  Kant  is  here  referring 
merely  to  the  effects  of  a  transient  revolt,  and  his  remark*  do  not  apply  to 
the  great  revolution  and  its  sequels. 


534  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

endeavours  to  promote  an  intellectual  and  political  revolution 
in  Russia,  and  down  to  our  own  day  they  have  continued  to 
ponder  the  ethics  of  revolution. 

In  many  cases  a  revolution  is  judged  by  its  fruits,  by  the 
apphcation  of  a  utiHtarian  standard.  Should  it  prove  success- 
ful, its  leaders  and  initiators  are  commended  ;  should  it  fail, 
an  unfavourable  judgment  is  passed.  That  is  the  way  in 
which  the  world  judges  wars,  and  most  other  enterprises. 

Of  course  such  judgments  are  apt  to  be  unsound  and 
unjust,  and  their  only  value  is  that  they  stress  the  consideration 
that  the  initiators  of  revolutionary  undertakings  must  have 
foresight   and   a   due   sense   of  responsibihty. 

The  ethical  judgment  of  revolution  is  concerned  with 
motives,  for. this  is  merely  to  apply  to  revolution  the  ethical 
standard  by  which  all  activities  are  to  be  appraised.  By 
following  such  a  rule  we  can  overcome  the  difficulties  which 
have  troubled  Ropsin  and  other  writers. 

All  revolutions,  including  revolutions  in  the  mental  sphere, 
must  be  judged  by  these  ethical  canons.  The  philosophical 
and  literary  critic,  and  every  conscientious  and  earnest  worker, 
will  not  fail  to  ask  himself  how  his  words  and  deeds  will  be 
received.  Doubtless  the  thinker  is  not  responsible  for  the 
various  interpretations  that  may  .be  placed  upon  his  ideas; 
but  a  conscientious  man  pays  heed  to  the  environment  in 
which  he  has  to  work,  and  takes  into  account  the  intellectual 
capacity  of  those  before  whom  his  thoughts  will  be  laid. 
Thought  is  social. 

But  the  writer  is  responsible  for  the  consequences  of  his 
words  when  he  demands,  incites  to,  or  suggests  action.  There 
are  numerous  grades  of  responsibihty,  according  to  the  degree 
to  which  the  aim  was  clearly  conceived.  "When,  for  example, 
Tailhade  was  sentenced  for  incitements  to  murder,  his  defender 
was  right  in  pointing  to  the  manner  in  which  the  antisemites 
and  the  nationahsts  were  continually  inciting  to  murder. 

In  Europe,  in  days  that  are  not  yet  remote,  difference  of 
opinion  was  punishable  with  banishment  and  even  death. 
In  Russia,  Nicholas  I  had  Dostoevskii  condemned  to  death 
for  the  public  reading  of  Belinskii's  writing  against  Gogol, 
the  capital  sentence  being  commuted  to  one  of  many  years' 
Siberian  exile.  Nicholas  might  have  appealed  to  the  example 
of  Locke,  who  proposed  that  atheism  as  a  political  crime  should 
be  punishable  with  death.     For  words  are  also  deeds. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  535 

Since  the  da37s  of  Belinskii  and  Herzen,  for  Russian  thinkers 
the  ethical  problem  of  revolution  has  been  the  question  whether 
crime  and  murder  are  permissible.  Ropsin  became  aware 
that  as- a  revolutionary  he  had  not  merely  to  sacrifice  his  own 
life,  but  to  slay  others,  and  he  asked  himself.  May  one  kill  ? 
Such  is  the  real  problem  of  conscience,  and  the  question  can 
only  be  answered  in  the  negative.  Man  cannot  play  the  part 
of  God  towards  his  fellows.  In  accordance  with  humanitarian 
ethics,  all  human  life  without  distinction  is  sacred.  There 
are  no  exceptions  to  the  humanitarian  law  that  no  man  has 
the  right  to  kill  his  fellow  man.  The  law  is,  of  course,  equally 
binding  on  rulers. 

A  further  canon  of  humanitarian  ethics  is  that  everyone 
may,  nay  must,  defend  himself  against  anything  that  imperils 
his  mental  or  physical  life,  and  that  he  ought  to  do  so  in  all 
circumstances,  and  whatever  the  source  of  the  menace.  Every- 
one should  resist  coercion  and  constraint.  Tolstoi's  doctrine 
of  non-resistance  is  false.  The  only  element  of  truth  it  con- 
tains is  that  the  defender  must  confine  himself  to  defence  ; 
the  aggressor's  violence  does  not  justify  the  use  of  active 
violence  in  return.  Humanitarian  ethics  does  not  appraise 
slaying  in  accordance  with  the  Old  Testament  law  of  retalia- 
tion. The  essence  of  moral  progress  is  that  the  psychological 
motivation  of  every  action  demands  individual  considera- 
tion, so  that  every  act  of  killing  must  be  judged  according 
to  the  attendant  circumstances.  To-day,  not  every  killing 
is  punishable  with  death  ;  jurists  distinguish  between  death 
and  manslaughter,  and  legally  there  are  varying  degrees 
of  murder. 

The  humanitarian  standard  must  be  applied  in  our  judg-  [ 
ment    of    revolution,    and    of    revolutionary    killing.     Socio-  ■ 
political  self-defence,  defence  of  one's  own  and  others'  lives, 
the  defence  of  the  general  weal  and  above  all  of  moral  and    , 
spiritual  interests  against  the  violence  of  rulers,  are  permissible   / 
and  are  indeed  positive  duties.     Experience  ,  has  shown  that 
theocratic    aristocracy    in.  its    absolutist    form    is    essentially 
coercive,  and  is  prone  to  the  use  of  force  ;   hence  the  resistance 
offered  by  the  democracy  is  fully  justified.     Revolution  may 
be   a  right   and  necessary  means   of  resistance,   and  is  then 
ethically  justified.     It  may  even  become  a  moral  duty. 

My  contention  is,  that  revolution  may  be  the  right  instru- 
ment for  the  democracy  to  adopt.     It  may  be.     But  some 


!) 


536  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

revolutions  are  reactionary,  undemocratic,  unprogressive.  A 
revolution  may  be  unnecessary. 

Thus  the  real  question  is,  what  is  the  guiding  motive  and 
what  the  ultimate  aim  of  revolution.  We  have  to  distinguish 
ephemeral  tumults  from  deliberately  planned  reformative 
revolutions.  But  a  revolt  brought  about  by  the  stress  of 
poverty,  hunger,'  or  despair,  must  not  be  harshly  judged. 
Goethe,  though  of  aristocratic  temperament,  blamed  govern- 
ments for  revolutions ;  these  were  never  the  fault  of  the 
people. 

No  one  should  ever  promote  a  revolution  or  participate 
in  one  in  consequence  of  vengeful  or  angr}'  feelings.  Vera 
Zassulic  did  well  to  insist  upon  this  point.  A  justifiable 
revolution  will  not  be  the  outcome  of  romanticism  and  its 
fantasies,  will  not  arise  from  tedium  or  from  a  cynical  con- 
tempt for  mankind  ;  nor  must  we  confuse  the  hodmen  and 
the  condottieri  of  revolution  with  the  progressive-minded 
revolutionaries.  These  distinctions  of  motive  and  of  type 
are  manifest  among  the  participators  in  every  revolution. 
What  we  are "  concerned  with  is  the  dominant  motive  of 
those  who  initiate  the  movement  and  of  those  who  assume 
its  leadership  with  a  deliberate  sense   of  responsibihty. 

In  appraising  a  revolution,  therefore,  we  must  distinguish 
carefully  between  the  movement  as  a  whole,  and  its  individual 
phases,  periods,  and  activities.  Our  ethical  approval  may 
be  given  to  the  revolution  as  a  whole  even  while  we  condemn 
I  the  acts  of  individual  participators.  Kropotkin  prescribes  a 
sound  rule  for  revolutionaries  when  he  says  that  bloodshed 
must  be  reduced  to  a  minimum. 

The  psychologist,  analysing  the  mass  movement,  will 
furnish  the  morahst  with  a  knowledge  of  numerous  extenuating 
circumstances,  and  will  be  able  in  particular  to  point  to  the 
general  atmosphere  of  revolutionary  excitement,  and  to  show 
how  this  may  at  times  .assume  morbid  forms.  But  the 
moralist,  like  the  sound  tactician,  will  never  fail  to  insist 
that  excitement  is  a  bad  leader  for  reformers.  A  desirable 
revolution  springs  from  the  calm  conviction  that  no.  other 
means  can  bring  abou^  the  requisite  progress,  and  that 
revolution   is   consequently  indispensable. 

True  revolution  is  reformative  revolution,  and  therefore 
those  who  defend  and  advocate  revolution,  continually  insist 
that  preparatory  work  in  the  mental  sphere  is  essential,  that 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  537 

only  those  revolutions  that  have  been  deUberately  thought 
out  in  advance  can  possibly  prove  successful. 

We  may  unhesitatingly  concede  that  revolutionaries  do 
not  invariably  possess  the  requisite  quotum  of  patience.  But 
here  they  do  not  stand  alone,  for  men  are  unduly  prone  to 
appeal  to  force.  This  is  manifest  in  the  case  of  war,  which, 
like  revolution,  may  be  justified  as  a  defensive  measure,  but 
is  far  too  often  used  as  a  means  for  imposing  constraint  on 
others.  Speaking  generally,  men  are  still  apt  to  squander 
their  vital  energies,  and  they  continually  sustain  the  realm 
of  death.  Thou  shalt  not  kill  !  The  commandment  is  univer- 
sally valid,  and  its  significance  is  that  the  reflective  man  must 
do  his  utmost  to  husband  his  own  and  his  neighbours'  vital 
forces. 

From  this  outlook,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  state 
institutions  and  the  administrative  methods  that  have  hitherto 
prevailed  are  characterised  by  grave  moral  defects,  and  that 
for  this  reason  even  a  blood-stained  revolution  may  be  ex- 
cusable. As  long  as  the  state  and  its  "  god-given  "  monarchy 
bases  its  power  on  the  army,  whose  force  is  turned  not  only 
against  enemies  abroad  but  against  subjects  at  home,  and 
as  long  as  the  death  penalty  is  enforced,  it  is  natural  that  many 
malcontents  should  have  recourse  to  the  violent  means  whose 
use  seems  sanctioned  by  the  state.  Tumults  and  risings  are 
often  manifestations  of  an  unrefiective  dissatisfaction.  If  the 
conduct  of  state  affairs  be  equally  unrefiective,  such  mani- 
festations of  dissatisfaction  tend  to  become  endemic,  until 
ultimately  reforms  are  conceived  and  effected.  Oxenstierna 
was  right  when  he  contended  that  every  government  has  the 
revolutions  it  deserves.  Theocratic  absolutism,  using  force, 
is  responsible  for  the  use  of  violence  by  the  revolutionary 
opposition. 

A  correct  judgment  of  any  particular  revolution  will  be 
facilitated  by  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  social  organism, 
and  above  all  by  an  understanding  of  the  social  harmony 
of  the  various  forces  at  work.  The  cultured  sociologist  and 
philosopher  of  history  will  take  a  very  different  view  from  the 
ordinary  taxpayer  as  to  the  question  of  blame  for  revolution 
in  any  given  state  of  society.  To  give  a  concrete  instance, 
such  a  philosopher  may  wonder  whether  de  Maistre  did  not 
do  more  to  promote  reaction  than  was  done  by  Louis  XVIII, 
Charles   X,   or  Louis  PhiHppe.    The  philosopher  of  history, 


538  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

the  man  who  has  read  and  understood  Kant's  Critique  and 
Goethe's  Faust,  will  know  how  to  discriminate  between  a 
needless  popular  rising  arid  an  indispensable  revolution. 

Moreover,  our  judgment  of  the  revolution  will  vary  accord- 
ing to  our  estimate  of  the  significance  of  state  organisation, 
of  government,  and  of  dynasties.  One  who  does  not  regard 
the  state  as  the  most  important  and  most  valuable  element 
of  social  organisation,  will  hardly  regard  a  pohtical  revolution 
as  a  revelation  from  on  high. 

An  insight  into  the  nature  of  social  harmony  leads  us  to  | 
insist  that  the  revolutionary,  if  he  claims  the  right  to  be  judge 
over  others  in  life-and-death  matters,  must  himself  before 
all  things  think,  feel,  and  live  progressively  and  democratically. 
Democracy  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  rights.  Democracy 
is  no  mere  pohtical  system  of  universal  suffrage,  but  a  new 
philosophy  and  a  new  conduct  of  hfe.  It  is  essential  that 
democrats  should  educate  and  train  men  for  democracy.  For 
the  time  being,  the  schools  are  in  the  hands  of  state  and  church, 
and  an  essential  point  to-day  in  the  political  struggle  is  there- 
fore to  liberate  the  school  from  the  theocracy  ;  political  culture 
'and  education  must  for  the  nonce  be  secured  outside  the 
school,  and  in  opposition  to  the  official  ideals  of  education. 
The  supreme  difficulty  lies  in  the  vicious  circle,  that  the  children 
are  educated  by  the  fathers,  the  young  by  the  old,  democrats 
by  aristocrats.  Hence  the  revolution  is  an  uprising  of  the 
children  against  the  fathers. 

§  205. 

IN  support  of  their  opinion  that  revolution  is  justifiable, 
progressively  minded  and  democratic  jurists  appeal  to  the 
so-called  natural  right  which  was  formulated  in  the  sense  of 
the  humanitarian  ideal.  Substantially,  by  natural  right  is 
meant  that  ethical  rules  are  to  be  embodied  in  legislation, 
and  numerous  attempts  have  been  made  towards  the 
formulation  of  this  idea.  According  to  Hume  and  Kant, 
however,  no  precise  epistemological  foundation  has  hitherto 
been  provided  for  natural  right. 

A  primary  democratic  claim  is  the  right  of  individual 
initiative,  and  this  apphes  in  especial  to  revolution.  The 
justification  for  a  revolution  is  not  furnished  by  the  partici- 
pation of  the  masses,  but  depends  upon  the  motives  of  those 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  539 

* 

who  recognise  and  declare  that  the  revolution  is  necessary, 
and  who  initiate  and  guide  the  movement.  Always,  how- 
ever, it  is  essential  to  adduce  proof  that  the  revolution  is 
actually  in  conformity  with  the  true  interests  of  the  people, 
that  it  represents  a  real  progress  in  democratic  evolution, 
and  that  it  is  indispensable.^ 

The  modern  right  of  initiative  ascribes  the  leading  role 
to  the  individual  intelHgence,  emotions,  and  will.  Side  by 
side  with  the  legally  appointed  and  officially  recognised  leaders 
of  humanity,  (men  need  leaders  in  addition  to  thinkers),  there 
arise  in  all  domains  persons  who  are  assigned  leadership  or 
directly  and  deliberately  seize  it. 

The  right  of  initiative  concurrently  impHes  individual 
responsibiUty.  He  who  talks  of  liberty,  who  talks  of  the 
right  of  initiative,  talks  also  of  personal  responsibiUty.  The 
ego,  always  the  ego,  is  responsible,  not  the  majority,  not  the 
plenum,  this  is  the  doctrine  of  modern  progressive  individual- 
ism, whereas  the  man  of  an  earher  day  took  shelter  behind 
the  church,  the  state,  the  nation,  the  party,  the  majority, 
or  even  mankind  as  a  whole. 

The  official  conservative  and  reactionary  jurists  counter- 
posed  revolution  by  proclaiming  legitimist  right  and  by 
appeahng  to  the  so-called  historic  right.  In  actual  fact,  the 
formulas  of  historic  right  are  fictions,  invented  to  support  the 
actual  and  historically  extant  relationships  of  power.  The  same 
remark  appHes  to  the  attempt  to  formulate  the  special  rights 
of  reigning  dynasts.  Rulers  appeal  to  ecclesiastico-religious 
sanction,  to  divine  right,  and  Stahl  was  perfectly  logical  in 
referring  historic  right  to  the  sanction  of  ecclesiastical 
Christianity,* 

»  Bluntschli  already  formulated  a  natural  right  of  the  state  to  develop. 
Cf.  Allgemeines  Staatsrecht,  5th  edition,  1876,  p.  29. 

2  The  discussion  will  be  clarified  by  an  example  of  the  way  in  which  jurists 
have  endeavoured  to  master  the  problem  of  revolution.  The  instance  I  select 
is  that  of  Merkel,  who  writes  on  the  elements  of  general  jurisprudence  in  the 
fifth  edition  of  Holtzendorff's  Encyclopadie  der  Rechtswissenschaft,  1890 
(p.  12).  From  the  binding  force  of  legal  prescriptions  Merkel  deduces  the  view 
"  that  a  forcibly  estabUshed  order  does  not  becom.e  a  legally  and  rightfully 
estabhshed  order  (or  a  part  of  such  an  order)  until  the  moment  arrives  when 
the  preponderance  of  the  moral  forces  of  the  people  inclines  towards  its  side, 
and  condones  its  existence,  so  that  a  voluntary  respect  for  the  estabUshed  order 
becomes  a  decisive  principle  of  action.  ...  It  follows  that  right  or  justice  can 
issue  from  force  and  injustice.  This  happens  because  through  the  influence 
of  habituation  and  other  intermediating  factors  the  forces  of  the  popular  con- 
sciousness become  favourable  to  that  which  has  been  brought  about  by  force 


540  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

Whilst  I  thus  emphatically  reject  the  doctrine  of  historic 
right,  and  even  regard  the  phrase  as  a  contradiction  in  terms, 
we  must  be  careful  to  avoid  appealing  to  historic  right  to 
justify  revolution.  This  is  the  error  of  those  who  in  the  name 
of  progress  would  acclaim  the  demand  for  innovation  as  the 
only  sound  principle. 

Neither  the  old  nor  the  new  is  per  se  right  and  true. 
A  thing  is  not  necessarily  true  and  right  because  it  has 
actually  existed  and  continues  to  exist.  This  settles  the 
whole  problem  !  The  democrat  who  contests  the  validity 
of  the  principle  of  catholicity  (quod  semper,  quod  ubique, 
quod  ab  omnibus),  realises  clearly  that  histor3^  chronology, 
cannot  replace  logic  and  ethics. 

This  conception  must  be  emphatically  counterposed  both 
to  the  doctrine  of  the  reactionaries  and  to  that  of  the  radicals. 
The  defenders  of  revolutionism,  no  less  than  the  defenders 
of  a  particular  revolution,  must  attain  to  clear  ideas  on 
the  subject. 

The  radicalism  that  is  always  apt  and  eager  for  revolution, 
stricken  with  blindness  to  philosophico-historical  and  political 
realities,  is  often  a  danger  owing  to  the  wa}^  in  which  it  plays 
into  the  hands  of  reaction.  All  well-informed  political  thinkers 
of  modern  times  have  recognised  how  revolution  may  promote 
reaction,  and  it  must  therefore  be  the  aim  of  true  democrats 
and  scientific  statesmen  to  get  the  better  of  radicalism.  I  do 
not  mean  by  this  that  we  should  attempt  to  discover  a  so-called 
golden  mean  between  extremes,  for  the  paltry  doctrine  of 
the  golden  mean  has  ever  been  a  favourite  with  reactionaries, 
and  it  imphes  the  continued  existence  of  the  oppositions 
it  pretends  to  conciHate.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to  remain 
consistently  progressive  in  our  thoughts  and  in  our  actions, 
so  that  by  creative  progress  we  may  render  reaction  and 
radicalism  alike  impossible. ^ 

and  injustice."  Merkel  is  thinking  of  a  revolution  trom  above,  of  a  coup 
d'etat ;  but  his  remarks  obviously  apply  with  equal  force  to  a  revolution  from 
below.  The  drift  of  his  argument  is  that  might  precedes  right  and  makes  right, 
and  the  official  jurisconsults  are  sufficiently  ingenious  to  cloak  these  hard 
facts  in  legal  terminology.  What  sort  of  "  moral  forces  "  are  these,  what  sort 
of  "  condonation  "  ;  how  can  "  habituation,"  how  can  "  other  intermediating 
factors,"  make  "  the  forces  of  the  popular  consciousness  .  .  .  favourable  " 
so  that  "  right  or  justice  can  issue  from  force  and  injustice  ?  "  In  face  of  such 
logic  and  such  ethics,  Engels  was  perfectly  justified  in  contending  that  the 
right  to  revolution  was  the  only  true  historic  right. 

>  We  recall  Metternich's  saying  :    "  The  sacred  middle  line  upon  which 
truth  stands  is  accessible  to  but  a  few.' 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA  541 

Radicalism  is  frequently  unprogressive.  The  radicals  fail 
to  understand  that  earlier  revolutions  have  provided  us  with 
other  and  often  more  effective  means  of  democratisation,  and 
they  do  not  know  how  to  turn  these  means  to  account.  Once 
constitutionaHsm,  and  still  more  once  parliamentarism,  has 
been  attained,  constitutional  channels  offer  scope  for  such 
effective  political  activities  that  revolution  becomes  needless 
and  often  futile.  Ethically  considered,  revolution  is  permis- 
sible only  in  the  last  resort.  Not  until  all  other  means  have 
been  tried  must  we  have  recourse  to  the  extreme  measure  of 
revolution,  and  then  only  after  the  most  profound  searchings 
of  conscience. 

Progress  does  not  signify  a  continuous  and  positively 
morbid  lust  for  innovation.  Radicals  and  revolutionaries,  no 
less  than  conservatives  and  reactionaries,  are  affected  with 
the  malady  of  historism,  are  guided  by  chronology  instead  of 
by  a  study  of  the  facts.  The  conservative  regards  that  as 
good  which  existed  yesterday ;  the  revolutionary  regards  that 
as  good  which  exists  to-day  or  will  exist  to-morrow.  The 
conservative  succumbs  to  traditionahsm ;  the  revolutionary 
succumbs  to  radicalism,  to  philoneism,  to  modernism,  to 
a-la-modism.     In  this  sense  I  contrast  historism  with  realism. 

Progressive  democracy  desires  to  overcome  both  conser- 
vatism and  radicahsm,  for  both  are  Utopian.  Without  a 
clearly  conceived  aim,  and  devoting  all  his  energies  to  an  attack 
upon  the  historically  extant,  the  revolutionary  is  apt  to  exercise 
a  purely  negative  influence.  Such  a  revolutionary  is  the 
awful  example  of  a  politician  for  whom  the  existence  of  the 
old  is  a  necessary  presupposition,  of  one  who  could  not  live 
were  it  not  for  the  existence  of  the  old.  The  revolutionary 
becomes  a  reactionary,  the  opponent  of  philistinism  is  him- 
self a  phihstine.  AntiphiHstinism  is  frequently  nothing  more 
than  a  form  of  philistinism. 

§  206. 

IF  I  mistake  not,  among  the  participators  in  the  French 
revolution  Thomas  Paine  may  be  regarded  as  the  most 
conspicuous  example  of  a  modern,  democratically  minded, 
deliberately  progressive  revolutionary.  His  writings  supply 
the  philosophical  foundations  of  the  democratic  revolution. 
Precisely  because  his  participation  in  the  revolution  was  so 


542  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

deliberate,  he  was  able  to  estimate  very  accurately  the  errors  of 
the  revolution,  and  yet  would  not  allow  these  errors  to  confuse 
his  mind  as  to  the  general  necessity  of  the  movement.  Paine, 
and  here  he  stood  alone,  had  the  courage  to  defend  Louis  XVI, 
saying,  "  Kill  the  king,  not  the  man,"  thus  modifying  Augustine's 
maxim,  "  DiUgite  homines,  interficite  errores."  Paine,  too, 
was  valiant  enough  to  defend  the  republic  and  democracy 
against  his  brother  revolutionaries. 

The  Russian  revolutionaries  lack  Paine's  qualities.  The 
errors  of  the  revolutionarjr  movement  alarmed  Herzen,  and 
warped  his  judgment  both  of  Europe  and  of  Russia.  Bakunin 
clung  to  revolution,  but  his  revolutionism  was  blind  ;  it  is 
always  Bakunin  to  whom  Russians  appeal,  to  Bakunin's 
doctrine  of  revolutionary  instinct,  when-  what  is  requisite 
is  intelligent  revolutionary  conviction.  Cernysevskii  might 
perchance  have  developed  into  a  Russian  Paine,  had  he  not 
been  monstrously  condemned  to  a  living  death  in  Siberia. 
But  the  Russian,  who  continues  to  believe  uncritically  in 
myth,  still  expects  the  revolution  to  work  miracles.  What 
Russians  need,  in  a  word,  is  a  Kant  to  apply  criticism  to  their 
revolutionary  doctrines.  For  lack  of  such  a  Kant,  they  have 
never  got  beyond  Stepniak's  Old  Testament  theory  of  a  life 
for  a  life. 

The  Russians  are  apt  to  forget  that  their  goal  is  not  revo- 
lution, but  democracy  ;  and  Russian  revolutionism  readily 
lapses  into  anarchism  and  nihilism.  Bakunin  was  perfectly 
right  in  demanding  a  new  ethic  for  Russia  and  for  Europe, 
but  he  was  unable  to  guide  his  own  actions  consistently  in 
accordance  with  the  doctrines  of  this  new  ethic.  A  democrat 
in  theory,  he  was  an  aristocrat  in  practice. 

The  new  ethic  is  the  ethic  of  democratic  equality,  and 
democratic  equality  demands  critical  thought.  The  Russian 
revolutionaries  (and  notably  Mihailovskii)  recognised  that  as 
a  preliminary  step  the  old  ideas  and  customs  must  be  destroyed,  , 
but  the  Russian  revolutionary  is  himself  none  the  less  apt  ^ 
to  cherish  the  old  ideas  and  to  follow  the  old  customs.  He 
desires  to  be  free,  but  cannot  abandon  the  tradition  and  the 
persistent  habits  of  serfdom.  The  first  revolutionaries  were 
the  first  of  the  emancipated  serfs.  It  is  not  to  the  point  to 
object  that  most  of  the  revolutionaries  were  in  actual  fact 
members  of  the  free,  the  aristocratic  caste,  for  slavery  was 
the  social  and  spiritual  condition  alike  of  masters  and  of  slaves. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  543 

The  uncritical  character  of  the  Russian  revolutionary 
movement  is  exhibited  in  the  strong  sense  of  personal  injury 
(if  I  may  use  the  term)  by  which  the  Russian  revolutionaries 
are  animated.  We  may  admit  that  in  Russia  it  is  far  from 
easy  to  avoid  feeling  a  positive  hatred  towards  the  reaction- 
aries. For  example,  Burcev's  personal  campaign  against  the 
tsar  is  not  difhcult  to  understand.  But  there  must  be  a  sus- 
tained endeavour  to  conduct  the  struggle  without  personal 
animus,  to  avoid  regarding  individuals  as  responsible  for 
collective  sins.  Tsarism  is  no  more  than  a  part  of  theocratic 
aristocracy  ;    the  tsar  is  but  one  among  many. 

The  inchoateness  of  Russian  conditions  explains  the  emer- 
gence of  terrorism  as  a  typical  feature  of  the  Russian  revolu- 
tionary movement.  Terrorism  is  per  se  individualist,  a  method 
by  which  individuals  attack  individuals. 

The  Marxists  are  to  be  commended  for  their  rejection  of 
terrorism  and  for  their  attempts  to  pave  the  way  for  the  mass 
revolution.  They  do  well  to  strive  to  promote  the  poHtical 
culture  and  education  of  the  masses,  for  a  definitive  revolu- 
tion can  unquestionably  be  effected  only  when  the  bulk  of 
the  population  shall  have  attained  a  high  level  of  pohtical 
development.  But  if  culture  and  education  are  competent  to 
secure  the  necessary  reforms,  a  sanguinary  revolution  will  be 
superfluous. 

Marxism  openly  proclaims  its  revolutionary  goal,  and  yet 
in  most  countries  it  has  a  recognised,  or  at  least  a  tolerated, 
status  side  by  side  with  the  other  pohtical  parties ;  this  signifies 
a  great  political  victory  for  democracy.  To  all  intents  and 
purposes,  absolutism  and  monarchy  have  already  been  routed  ; 
the  conceptual  basis  of  the  theocracy  has  been  overthrown. 
To-day  monarchy  must  seek  utihtarian  grounds  for  its  support, 
for  no  reflective  persons  now  believe  in  divine  right.  Con- 
stitutionalism and  parhamentarism  are  the  outcome  of  mutual 
concessions  ;  they  are  half-way  houses  which  will  ultimately 
be  replaced  by  the  indispensable  newer  forms  of  popular 
administration. 

What  applies  to  Europe  applies  also  to  Russia.  In  Russia, 
however,  the  caesaropapist  theocracy  is  more  powerful  than 
theocracy  in  Europe,  and  Russian  conditions  gave  rise  to 
the  terrorist  guerilla  revolution.  But  long  before  the  pubhca- 
tion  of  Ropsin's  books,  the  Russian  terrorists  had  recognised 
and  admitted  the  danger  of  terrorist  tactics. 


5U  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

First  of  all,  the  Russian  terrorist  cannot  delude  himself  into 
believing  that  he  is  acting  in  the  name  of  the  Russian  people. 
The  Narodnaja  Volja  openly  declared  itself  to  be  a  mere  pre- 
parative for  the  popular  will,  not  that  will  in  actual  operation. 
Stepniak  took  refuge  in  Rousseau  against  the  parhamentary 
doctrine  of  majority  rule.  In  like  manner  Kropotkin,  in  his 
theory  of  the  revolution,  said  that  its  success  would  depend 
upon  the  acceptance  of  its  ideals  by  the  classes  against  which 
it  had  been  directed.  The  terrorists,  it  is  true,  never  attained 
to  clear  views  regarding  their  relationship  to  the  people.  The 
people,  they  contended,  had  independent  rights  as  a  subjective 
entity  vis-a-vis  the  state,  but  their  explanations  of  what  they 
meant  by  this  contention  were  exceedingly  confused.  Moreover, 
the  mass  revolution  can  only  be  brought  about  by  the  dictatorial 
leadership  and  the  initiative  of  a  few  persons,  it  may  be  of  a 
single  individual.  In  the  last  resort,  the  individual  must 
hazard  the  initiative  in  all  revolutions.  Kropotkin  suffers  from 
self-deception  when  he  asserts  that  the  sole  function  of  leaders 
is  to  instigate,  not  to  lead,  and  when  he  contends  that  the 
leader  merely  provides  the  theoretical  forms  for  which  the 
masses  furnish  practical  expression.  To  these  views  there 
still  cHngs  the  haziness  of  the  narodnicestvo  concerning  the 
relationship  of  the  individual  to  the  social  whole.  ■ 

The  terrorists  attempted  to  carry  out  terrorism  systemati- 
cally but  practice  convinced  them  that  the  method  was  an 
impossible  one. 

Recognising  the  ethical  dangers  of  their  tactics,  the  terrorists . 
manifested  their  dubiety  in  various  ways.  First  of  all  they 
explained  that  revolution  was  always  waged  in  self-defence, 
and  that  they  adopted  revolutionary  methods  solely  as  a  last 
resort  and  with  "reluctance.  In  1862,  even  Bakunin  said  that 
it  would  be  much  better  if  revolution  could  be  effected  with- 
out bloodshed,  and  he  continued  to  hope  that  the  tsar  would 
initiate  the  necessary  revolution  by  granting  the  essential 
and  fundamental  reforms.  Mihailov,  one  of  the  first  victims 
of  the  revolutionary  movement,  says  in  his  proclamation, 
"  To  the  Younger  Generation,"  that  he  and  his  associates 
desired  a  peaceful  revolution,  but  would  not  shrink  from  using 
force,  should  force  ultimately  prove  necessary.  Similar  was 
the  language  of  the  terrorists  of  the  Narodnaja  Volja  and  even 
of  the  adherents  of  the  Cernyi  Peredel  ;  to  the  last  moment 
they  all  continued  to  hope  for  a  peaceful  solution  of  the 
intolerable  situation 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  545 

After  the  attempted  blowing  up  of  the  Winter  Palace, 
when  many  soldiers  were  killed,  the  executive  committee 
issued  a  proclamation  (February,  1880)  deploring  the  deaths 
of  the  victims,  but  declaring  that  such  tragic  incidents  would 
remain  inevitable  as  long  as  the  army  continued  to  protect 
the  tsar.  At  the  same  time,  the  proclamation  insisted  that 
terrorism  was  armed  defence  against  the  tyranny  and  the 
cruelty  of  the  government,  and  it  held  the  government  and 
the  tsar  accountable  for  all  that  was  done. 

As  late  as  March  10,  1881,  the  terrorists  issued  a  proclama- 
tion to  Tsar  Alexander  II  declaring  that  they  would  instantly 
and  unconditionally  submit  to  a  government  appointed  by  a 
national  assembly.  The  same  year,  after  the  assassination 
of  President  Garfield,  the  "  Narodnaja  Volja,"  the  organ  of 
the  terrorists,  published  the  following  declaration  (No.  6, 
October  23,  1881)  :  "  The. executive  comimittee,  expressing  its 
profoundest  symp'athy  with  the  American  people  on  account 
of  the  death  of  James  Abram  Garfield,  feels  it  to  be  its  duty  to 
protest  in  the  name  of  the  Russian  revolutionaries  against  all 
such  deeds  of  violence  as  that  which  has  just  taken  place  in 
America.  In  a  land  where  the  citizens  are  free  to  express 
their  ideas,  and  where  the  will  of  the  people  does  not  merely 
make  the  law  but  appoints  the  person  who  is  to  carry  the  law 
into  effect,  in  such  a  country  political  assassination  is  the 
manifestation  of  a  despotic  tendency  identical  with  that  to 
whose  destruction  in  Russia  we  have  devoted  ourselves. 
Despotism,  whatever  mky  be  the  parties  or  whoever  may  be 
the  individuals  that  exercise  it,  is  always  blameworthy,  and 
force  can  be  justified  only  when  employed  to  resist  force." 

The  ethical  perils  of  systematic  terrorism  were  plainly 
displayed  in  the  combination  of  Jesuitism  and  Machiavellianism 
characteristic  of  NeCaev's  underground  activities.  We  have 
seen  that  NeCaev's  tactics  were  condemned  by  Lavrov,  Kropot- 
kin,  and  others.  It  is  true  that  certain  European  authorities 
(Mazzini,  for  instance)  have  condoned  and  even  recommended 
assassination  as  a  political  weapon,  but  an  honest  and  straight- 
forward revolutionary  finds  it  difficult  to  adapt  himself  to 
terrorist  occultism.  This. is  why  the  Russian  terrorists  were 
accustomed  to  pass  death  sentences  on  their  victims  by  formal 
resolution  and  to  announce  the  sentence  to  the  condemned. 

The  secret  tactics  of  the  revolutionaries  and  their  adver- 
saries  in    the    state    police    produce,   in    addition    to    vulgar 

36  VOL.   II. 


546  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

traitors,  those  diplomatists  of  the  revolution  who,  like  Lassalle's 
Franz  von  Sickingen,  wish  to  avail  themselves  of  the  "cunning 
of  ideas,"  those  who  hope  to  bring  about  the  great  reform 
without  shock  and  without  arousing  resistance.  The  attempt 
is  vain,  for  the  awakeners  must  have  sufficient  courage  to 
knock  loudly  at  the  door  of  the  theocratic  bed-chamber. 

Not  everything  is  permissible  in  and  for  the  revolution. 
Our  refusal  to  admit  that  the  end  can  always  justify  the  meanS, 
applies  to  the  revolution  as  well  as  to  other  things.  Ropsin 
need  not  have  allowed  Dostoevskii's  Ivan  to  influence  him 
so  powerfully.  The  formula  "  all  things  are  permissible  " 
originates  because  official  absolutism  sticks  at  nothing.  Dos- 
toevskii's Ivan  wishes  to  give  this  formula  a  religious  significance. 
Ivan,  however,  is  not  a  revolutionist  defending  the  people,  but 
a  self-willed  man,  an  absolute  egotist. 

Many  revolutionaries  appraise  the  revolution  by  a  purely 
utilitarian  standard.  Pestel  deduced  the  utiHty  of  the  revolution 
from  the  consideration  that  the  Bourbon  restoration  had 
accepted  the  majority  of  the  essential  institutions  of  the  revolu- 
tion, and  this  writer  declared  that  the  recognition  of  the  fact 
had  marked  an  epoch  in  his  political  convictions  and  in  his 
trend  of  thought.  Pestel  was  speaking  of  a  mass  revolution, 
but  it  is  another  affair  when  we  have  to  appraise  the  utility 
of  terrorism.  If  we  think  of  the  great  number  of  victims 
sacrificed  in  the  cause  of  terrorism,  and  of  the  masses  of  men 
who  have  languished  in  Siberia  or  as  refugees,  if  we  throw  into 
the  scales  the  losses  and  gains,  we  find  that  even  from  the 
utilitarian  standpoint  which  the  nihilists  have  adopted  in  ethics, 
it  is  far  from  easy  to  come  to  a  conclusion. 

My  own  belief  is  that  terrorism  may  have  a  revolutionary 
effect,  but  that  the  effect  is  not  usually  proportionate  to  the 
deed.  Systematised  terrorism  I  consider  an  erroneous  method. 
The  dangers  of  S37stematised  terrorism  have  been  recognised 
by  those  anarchists  who  have  declared  individual  outrage 
useless,  and  on  a  level  \vith  ordinary  crime  (§  172). 

§  207. 

FOR  the  complete  understanding  of  Russia  revolutionism 
we  must  return  to  what  has  already  been  said  regarding 
democracy  in  Catholic  and  in  Protestant  nations  ;  we  must 
return  to  the  consideration  that  in  political  matters  Catholic 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  547 

nations  are  more  radical  and  revolutionary  than  Protestant.* 
This  was  shown  to  be  a  historical  fact,  and  we  saw  that  it  was  ex- 
plicable from  the  educative  influence  exercised  by  the  respective 
churches.  Not  by  chance,  then,  was  it  possible  for  me  to  point 
to  Paine,  Englishman  and  Quaker,  as  exemplar  of  a  democratic 
revolutionary.  The  French,  on  the  other  hand,  produced  the 
revolutionary  type  of  which  Blanqui  was  the  cardinal  instance, 
and  in  this  matter  the  Russians  are  more  akin  to  the  French 
than  to  the  Protestant  English,  Americans,  Scandinavians, 
and  Germans.  Bakunin  the  Russian,  is  the  counterpart  of 
Blanqui  the  Frenchman. ^ 

Bakunin  grew  to  manhood  in  Orthodox,  absolutist  Russia, 
whereas  Marx  and  Engels  were  reared  in  Prussia,  which  though 
absolutist  is  Protestant ;  the  distinction  is  conspicuous  in  the 
two  great  adversaries.  A  Protestant,  qua  Protestant,  is 
positivistically  "  disillusioned,"  as  Herzen  and  all  the  Russians 
desired  to  be  but  were  not.  To  a  German  Protestant,  Feuerbach 
and  Vogt  with  their  materialism  and  atheism  are  not  so 
stimulating  and  exciting  as  they  are  to  a  Russian.  The 
Protestant  has  the  great  ecclesiastical  revolution  behind  him  ; 
he  grows  up  in  a  comparatively  rationalistic  church  and  gains 
experience  in  its  administration  ;  he  has  become  habituated 
to  philosophising  ;  the  transition  from  theology  to  science  is 
not  so  sudden  and  unbridged  as  in  the  Russian  Orthodox 
church,  which  has  still  faith  in  revelation,  is  still  mystically 
inclined,  and  is  still  so  theurgical  as  to  regard  theological  demon- 
stration (and  even  scholastic  demonstration)  of  its  doctrines 
and  institutions  as  superfluous,  and  is  satisfied  to  guide  the 
faithful  by  its  absolute  and  reputedly  divine  authority.  This  is 
why  Feuerbach,  this  is  why  philosophy  and  science  in  general, 
affect  so  differently  from  the  Protestant  the  Russian  who  has 
hitherto  been  firm  in  his  faith.^  The  effect  upon  Roman 
Catholics  was  somewhat  similar,  but  Roman  Catholicism  has 
to  a  considerably  greater   extent   than    Orthodoxy    taken    to 

I  The  radical  lust  for  revolution  is  conspicuous  in  the  life  of  Blanqui,  and 
has  given  its  peculiar  connotation  to  the  term  Blanquism.  Born  in  1805,  he 
died  in  1881,  wheii  seventy-six  years  of  age.  Between  1827  and  1870,  a  period 
of  forty-three  years,  he  took  part  in  thirteen  risings,  was  condemned  to  death 
several  times,  and  spent  thirty-seven  years  in  prison,  although  he  was  pardoned 
more  than  once. 

*  Marx  was  of  Jewish  birth.  When  he  was  six  years  of  age  the  whole 
family  was  converted  to  Protestantism.  Mosaism  is  even  more  "  positivistic  " 
than  Protestantism. 


548  ,      THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

■itself  elements  from  the  world  of  science  and  from  modern 
philosophy. 

Feuerbach,  in  fact,  drags  the  Russian  down  out  of  his 
Orthodox  heaven,  drags  him  down  to  an  earth  on  which  the 
Protestant  and  the  Jew  have  already  long  ere  this  planted 
their  feet.  Herzen  and  Bakunin,  Uke  Behnskii,  were  at  the 
outset  defenders  of  Christianity  ;  Bakunin,  hke  Granovskii, 
clung  to  the  idea  of  immortahty,  but  here  too,  in  the  end, 
agreed  that  Feuerbach  was  right ;  Behnskii,  Herzen,  and 
Bakunin  were  all  adverse  to  scepticism.  In  1847,  Bakunin 
reproached  his  friend  Annenkov,  the  liberal  critic,  for  being  a 
sceptic  ;  after  his  removal  to  Europe,  Bakunin  asked  Herzen 
whether  the  latter  was  still  a  believer.  Throughout  Hfe  Bakunin 
himself  remained  a  behever,  nay,  remained  superstitious, 
remained  a  mystic,  notwithstanding  that  the  influence  of  Feuer- 
bach and  Comte  had  gone  far  to  convince  him  that  the  old 
mythopoeic  and  mystical  outlooks  must  be  abandoned.  The 
object  of  his  faith  was  changed,  but  the  old  mental  trend  was 
still  dominant  ;  his  behef  in  democracy  was  now  a  reUgion  of 
whose  truth  he  was  profoundly  convinced  ;  it  seemed  to  him 
that  there  was  something  inadequate  in  a  system  of  poHtical 
ideas  untinctured  by  religion.  He  gave  unambiguous  expression 
to  this  opinion  in  his  program  of  1842,  the  philippic  against 
the  conservatives  and  the  liberals  which  furnishes  us  with  the 
clearest  Hght  on  Bakunin's  own  philosophical  development. 
Russian  anarchists,  sociaUsts,  liberals,  even  Slavophils,  all  draw 
upon  the  same  source  of  Russian  anarchism  ;  to  all  of  them  it 
seems  that  hfe  in  the  poHtical  field  is  concerned  solely  with 
"  externals  "  ;  and  they  all  insist  upon  the  need  for  an  "  inward  " 
spiritual  Hfe.  Precisely  because  they  are  religiously  inchned 
do  they  value  the  extant  state  so  httle,  and  it  is  only  those 
among  them  who  are  indifferent  to  religious  matters  (including 
a  considerable  proportion  of  the  hberals)  that  are  satisfied 
with  the  poHtical  and  administrative  state  in  its  present  form. 

As  an  Orthodox  Russian,  Bakunin,  Hke  Herzen,  felt  through- 
out Hfe  the  burden  of  the  theocratic  authority  ;  this  is  why 
the  two  men  were  in  revolt  against  religion,  against  the  church, 
against  theocratic  authority  in  general ;  hence  their  detestation 
of  this  authority,  their  hatred  of  tsar,  church,  state,  of  power 
in  aH  its  forms.  The  revolution  against  the  theocracy,  against 
the  extent  absolute,  filled  Bakunin's  whole  mind,  and  he  desired 
to  replace  the  false  absolute  by  tjie  true  and  definite  absolute  ; 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  549 

it  seemed  impossible  for  him  to  conceive  of  himself  as  ever 
resting  quietly  content  with  a  seat  in  a  parliament.  Herzen, 
Bakunin,  and  K.  Aksakov,  all  had  a  poor  opinion  of  European 
constitutionalism  and  parHamentarism.  Residing  in  Europe, 
residing  in  England,  their  estimate  of  the  European  state 
was  identical  with  Pestel's.  Herzen,  too,  had  shrewdly  recog- 
nised that  parliamentarism  and  constitutionahsm  were  Protes- 
tant products,  which  had  never  been  organically  incorporated 
into  their  structure  by  the  Catholic  nations.  Concerning  the 
Latin  world,  Herzen  wrote  aptly  that  it  had  sufficient  energy 
for  a  movement  towards  liberation,  but  lacked  the  strength 
requisite  for  the  enjoyment  of  freedom.  England,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  possessed  of  the  latter  capacity.  Herzen' s  views  on 
the  matter  were  not  clearly  thought  out,  but  he  touched  the 
fringe  of  the  problem.  It  is  striking  to  note  how  energetically 
he  insisted  that  the  Russians  would  never  become  merely 
constitutionalist,  would  never  become  merel}^  liberal,  would 
never  become  merely  Protestant.  For  Bakunin,  in  Hke  manner, 
Protestantism  is  preeminently  disillusionment,  is  essentially 
characterised  by  its  lack  of  enthusiasm— for  Bakunin  never 
realised  the  extent  to  which  he  was  prone  to  mistake  excitement 
for  enthusiasm.  In  our  detailed  psychological  analysis  of  the 
Russian  revolutionary,  we  have  already  shown  how  the  lamb 
grew  to  become  a  tiger. 

Bakunin's  whole  method,  his  fondness  for  sudden  leaps, 
his  desultoriness,  his  rashness,  were  characteristic  of  the  habitual 
indeterminist,  of  the  man  who  expects  a  miracle.  .Whilst 
Fourier  was  ever  on  the  look  out  for  the  millionaire  who  should 
provide  him  with  funds  for  the  realisation  of  his  plans,  Bakunin 
lived  in  daily  expectation  of  the  miracle  of  revolution.  Herzen 
said  of  him  very  truly,  that  despite  his  demand  for  a  positivist 
philosophy  of  history,  despite  Hegel,  Comte,  Feuerbach,  and 
Vogt,  he  ever  retained  his  mystical  faith  in  miracle,  ever  remained 
the' indeterminist,  the  man  who  has  utterly  failed  to  grasp  the 
reign  of  law  in  nature  and  history.  Moreover,  Bakunin's 
outlook  was  that  of  the  aristocrat  who  has  not  yet  learned  to 
work,  for  work  is  continuous  attention  to  detail,  and  for  this 
the  Russian  great  landov/ner  has  as  yet  no  inclination.  He 
only  can  be  industrious  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term  who 
has  thoroughly  acquired  the  determinist  constancy  of  purpose 
associated  with  deUberate  foresight,  who  has  recognised  the 
importance  of  thinking  out  ways  and  means.     In  Russia,  as  a 


550  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

member  of  the  landowning  class,  he  had  no  experience  of  the 
life  of  industrial  towns  ;  in  Europe  he  paid  no  attention  to  the 
effects  of  machine  methods  of  production  or  to  the  effects  of 
modern  trade  and  commerce  upon  education  and  upon  the 
formation  of  character.  Bakunin  was  a  political  occultist  ; 
as  leader  of  a  secret  society,  he  was,  in  the  political  sphere,  to 
play  the  part  of  the  wonder-working  Russian  pope,  hidden 
behind  the  altar-piece. 

Bakunin  had  studied  German  philosophy,  and  he  studied 
French  philosophy  as  well,  but  never  came  to  realise  that  the 
two  philosophies  do  not  mix  well.  He  had  a  special  fondness 
for  Proudhon  and  the  French  socialists.  Blanqui,  rather  than 
Marx,  was  congenial  to  him.  Catholic  education,  in  Russia 
and  in  France,  has  similar  effects  on  men's  minds,  forming 
them  both  positively  and  negatively.  Bakunin  took  his  ideas 
from  the  Germans,  but  the  French  were  his  teachers  in  practical 
matters.  His  anarchism  was  Russian,  but  it  was  Orthodox 
anarchism,  and  it  is  comprehensible  only  as  a  revolt  against 
Russian  Orthodoxy.  This  Russian  anarchism  is  closely  akin 
to  the  French  socialism  of  those  days  ;  French  socialism  Vv'as 
strongly  anarchist,  and  down  to  our  own  time  anarchism  has 
remained  especially  characteristic  of  Catholic  nations.  German 
and  Marxist  socialism,  on  the  other  hand,  has  developed  chiefly 
in  Protestant  lands.  Among  Protestants,  anarchism  as  a 
philosophical  system,  and  anarchism  as  a  mood,  do  not  exist 
to  the  same  extent  as  among  the  Catholic  Latin  races,  the 
Catholic  Germans  (in  Austria  and  South  Germany),  and  the 
Slavs.  It  is  therefore  incorrect  to  speak  of  anarchism  as  simply 
a  Russian  manifestation,  as  a  peculiar  outcome  of  the  Russian 
national  character  ;  and  we  must  distinguish  clearly  between 
anarchism  and  revolutionism  (§  176).  The  mental  stagnation 
of  the  Russian  theocracy,  the  absence  of  intellectual  life 
and  activity,  the  inertia  of  absolutism,  impelled  the  cultured 
aristocracy  towards  anarchism  ;  Bakuninist  anarchism  is  'the 
anger  and  the  irritability  of  the  aristocrat  upon  whom  inactivity  ^ 
has  been  imposed  by  circumstances  and  by  education.  Towards  1 
the  close  of  his  life  Bakunin  was  extremely  fond  of  reading 
Schopenhauer,  the  philosopher  of  bitterness,  and  the  fact  is 
psychologically  characteristic  of  this  aspect  of  Bakuninist 
anarchism. 

Herzen  might  have  been  enlightened  in  this  respect  by  his 
teacher  Hegel.     He  accurately  diagnosed  the  nature  of  Bakunin's 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  551 

revolutionary  anarchism,  and  rejected  that  doctrine  ;  he  reahsed 
the  defects  of  the  French  democracy  of  his  day  ;  but  he  failed 
to  grasp  the  essence  of  the  matter  ^ 

Herzen  declared  that  the  revolution  effected  by  Peter  had 
made  of  the  Russians  the  very  worst  that  could  be  made  of 
men,  for  it  had  converted  them  into  "  enlightened  slaves  " — 
the  enlightened  slaves  of  the  theocracy.  I  may  add  by  way 
of  explanation  that  Herzen  furnished  a  subjective  analysis  of 
this  state  of  enlightened  slavery  ;  so  did  Belinskii,  Bakunin, 
and  others  ;  Mihailovskii's  analysis  of  suicide  is  on  the  same 
lines.  "  Lapse  into  tormenting  reflection  ;  distractedness  of 
feeling  and  of  consciousness;"  thus  did  Belinskii  characterise 
the  mental  state  of  himself  and  his  fellow  progressives.  The 
problem  of  murder  and  suicide  is  discussed  in  the  play  written 
by  Belinskii  during  his  student  days. 

This  is  the  painful  process  of  disillusionment  whose  nature 

»  I  have  censured  Plehanov  for  failing,  in  his  polemic  against  the  social 
revolutionaries,  to  make  an  adequate  use  of  Hegel  (§  185).  Here  is  Hegel's 
explanation  why  there  h^d  been  a  revolution  in  France,  but  not  in  Germany. 
The  French,  he  said,  had  from  the  theory  of  enlightenment  passed  unhesitat- 
ingly to  practice,  but  the  Germans  had  confined  themselves  to  theory.  Hegel 
admitted  that  the  first  impetus  to  revolution  had  come  from  philosophy  ;  but 
in  Germany  theology  had  itself  adopted  the  enlightenment,  whereas  in  France 
the  philosophic  enlightenment  had  bean  directed  against  theology.  The 
Protestants  alone,  continued  Hegel,  could  be  content  with  legal  and  moral 
reality,  for  the  Protestant  church  had  effected  a  reconciliation  between  law 
and  religion.  The  reformation  had  brought  about  enormous  improvements 
in  secular  matters.  Poverty,  sloth,  unspeakable  injustice,  intellectual  slavery, 
the  disastrous  institution  of  celibacy — all  had  been  abolished.  Monarchy 
was  no  longer  regarded  as  absolutely  divine,  but  was  simply  proclaimed  to 
be  based  upon  law. — Selgunov  has  a  much  better  grasp  of  the  situation  than 
Herzen.  In  his  Sketches  of  Russian  Life,  he  compares  the  Russians  with  the 
Germans  and  the  Latins,  and  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  what  the  Russians 
condemn  in  the  Germans  as  mechanical  routinism,  is  in  truth  precision  and 
definiteness  of  ideas  and  rules.  Now  these  qualities,  he  says,  are  to  be  found 
only  among  Protestant  peoples  ;  the  Cathohcs,  the  French  and  the  Italians, 
are  disorderly,  undisciplined,  and  do  not  begin  to  plan  their  actions  until  the 
time  has  already  come  to  act.  According  to  Selgunov,  Protestantism  has 
disciplined  all  thoughts  and  feelings  ;  Martin  Luther  was  a  thoroughly  prac- 
tical reformer  ;  Cathohcism  and  the  papacy  promise  wonderful  things  in  heaven, 
but  Protestantism  gives  promise  of  the  best  order  on  earth.  Lutheranism 
is  a  school  for  the  organisation  of  mundane  relationships,  and  provides  ethical 
instruction  to  fit  its  scholars  to  deal  with  aU  possible  situations.  Selgunov 
does  not  state  in  set  terms  that  the  Russian  owes  his  peculiarities  to  the 
Orthodox  faith,  but  this  is  impUed.  He  shows  a  keen  insight  into  certain 
traits  of  the  Russian  character  and  contrasts  them  with  the  traits  exhibited  by 
the  Germans  ;  the  German  character,  he  tells  us  expressly,  is  moulded  by 
Protestantism.  Among  the  spiritual  influences  that  formed  prepetrine  Russia, 
religion,  according  to  Selgunov,  occupied  the  first  place. 


552  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Herzen  grasped  so  accurately  when  he  counterposed  positivistic 
atheism  and  materiahsm,  reahstic  nihihsm,  to  ecclesiastical 
mythology  and  theocracy.  Herzen  was  himself  proof  against 
this  disillusionment,  but  he  could  not  wholly  escape  the 
crushing  influence  of  science.  He  was  keenly  aware  of  the 
extreme  sobriety  of  Protestantism,  in  which  faith  his  mother 
had  brought  him  up  ;  and  he  emphatically  rejected  Protestant- 
ism for  the  Russians,  saying  that  it  was  a  bourgeois  creed. 

Herzen  never  realised  the  true  implications  of  the  mental 
revolution  he  had  personally  experienced,  and  the  same  remark 
applies  to  his  philosophical  successors.  He  rightly  rejected 
Bakunin's  revolutionism,  but  he  failed  to  recognise  that  an 
appeal  to  Feuerbach  was  requisite  to  revolutionise  Bakunin 
the  believer.  Herzen  understood  that  Bakuninist,  that  Russian 
revolutionism  was  not  the  democracy  to  which  he  aspired.  He 
was  on  the  right  track,  but  to  Herzen,  as  to  Bakunin,  and  to 
all  the  two  men's  successors,  the  Kantian  criticism  was  lacking. 
He  was  right  when  he  declared  that  the  Latin  world,  though  it 
had  sufficient  energy  for  a  movement  towards  liberation,  lacked 
the  strength  requisite  for  the  enjoyment  of  freedom  :  but  the 
true  significance  of  the  remark  becomes  apparent  to  those 
only  who  have  grasped  the  nature  of  theocracy,  and  above 
all  of  Catholic  theocracy ;  to  those  who  have  understood 
how  and  why  Cathohcism,  while  favourable  to  the  growth  of 
revolutionism,  is  comparatively  unfavourable  to  the  growth 
of  democracy. 


CHAPTER   TWENTY-SIX 

HOLY   RUSSIA;    THE   RUSSIAN   MONK 
AND   FEUERBACH 


§  208. 

IF  at  the  close  of  these  studies  'and  sketches  I  were  to  venture 
an  attempt  to  summarise  the  present  drift  of  Russian 
thought,  my  formula  would  run  as  follows  :  Russian  Orthodoxy 
is  being  replaced  by  (German)  Protestantism. 

By  the  terms  Orthodoxy  and  Protestantism  are  to  be  under- 
stood, not  merely  the  theology,  but  the  whole  ecclesiastical 
culture,  leadership,  and  organisation  of  the  respective  societies. 
Ecclesiasticism  in  its  entirety  is  regarded  in  the  sense  in  which 
Kant  spoke  of  the  philosophy  of  Protestantism,  and  in  which 
the  Slavophils  looked  upon  German  philosophy  in  general 
as  Protestant  philosophy.  The  postkantian  philosophers, 
Fichte,  Schelling,  Hegel,  Feuerbach,  and  Schopenhauer  ;  the 
materiahsts,  Vcgt,  Biichner,  and  Moleschott ;  finally,  Marx, 
Darwin,  and  Spencer  :  these  were  the  thinkers  who  awakened 
the  Russians  from  the  slumber  of  Orthodoxy.  The  part  played 
by  individuals  in  promoting  this  awakening  has  been  suffi- 
ciently considered,  and  we  have  learned  that  the  influence 
of  Feuerbach  was  pecuharly  strong  and  decisive. 

I  would  ask  the  reader  to  be  good  enough  to  recall  the  descrip- 
tion of  my  visit  to  the  Troicko-Sergievskaja  monastery  ;  to 
recall  how  to  the  eager  young  monk  who  acted  as  my  guide 
I  represented  an  embodiment  of  Feuerbach's  philosophy  of 
religion  ;  how  my  coming  an  1  my  conduct  revealed  to  him  the 
great  secret  that  his  faith,  that  the  content  of  his  rehgious 
thoughts  and  aspirations,  were  nothing  more  than  the  naive 
egoistic  formulation   of  the   desires  which  the  ex'igencies  of 

Russian   life   had   impressed   upon   his   mentality ;     how   the 

553 


554  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

message  I  brought  to  him  was  that  God  was  nothing  more  than 
himself,  the  monk  who  stood  greatly  in  need  of  help.  .  .  . 

What  I  moot  here  as  a  possibility,  has  in  truth  been  a  reality 
for  Russia.  Since  the  days  of  Peter,  German  culture,  German 
science,  and  German  philosophy  have  steadily  been  invading 
Russia ;  and,  abstractions  apart,  we  have  to  consider  the 
personal  influence  of  the  German,  Swedish,  and  Finnish  Pro- 
testants who  secured  official  appointments  at  court,  in  the 
bureaucracy,  in  the  army,  and  in  the  navy.  The  French,  at 
■first,  were  the  foreign  teachers  of  Russia  ;  but  during  the  reigns 
of  Alexander  I  and  Nicholas  I,  and  still  more  during  subsequent 
decades,  German  influence  greatly  predominated. 

This  German  influence  acted  without  transitional  stages  ; 
the  Russian  was  quite  suddenly  awakened  from  Orthodox 
mysticism  and  myth.  Russia  and  the  Russian  church  repre- 
sent the  intellectual  trends  of  the  third  century,  and  it  will 
suffice  to  realise  how  the  Russian,  habituated  to  the  passive 
acceptance  of  Christian  revelation,  was  all  in  a  moment  con- 
fronted with  the  results  of  European  progressive  thought ! 
Hitherto  the  Russian  had  lived  quite  objectivistically,  believing 
the  authority  of  church  and  state,  the  authority  of  the  theo- 
cracy, to  be  supreme.  All  at  once  he  found  it  necessary  to 
depend  upon  himself  and  upon  his  natural  intellectual  forces. 
By  Kant  and  Kant's  successors  he  was  referred  to  his  own 
mental  energies ;  he  was  assured  that  his  own  intellectual 
activities,  and  not  divine  revelation,  had  given  birth  to 
science,  philosophy,  and  religion  ;  it  was  made  clear  to  him 
that  man,  not  God,  was  the  creator  of  social  life  in  its  entirety. 

This  crisis  which  Russia  has  experienced  may  be  compared 
with  the  process  of  decomposition  and  solution  affecting  the 
so-called  savage  peoples  that  suddenly  come  into  contact 
with  European  civilisation,  though  doubtless  in  the  latter 
case,  owing  to  the  gulf  between  the  two  civilizations,  the  process  1 
of  decomposition  is  more  acute  and  more  intense.  Medieval 
Russia  thus  exposed  to  the  decomposing  influence  of  modern 
civilisation  is  far  more  spiritually  akin  to  Europe  than  are  the 
Australian  blacks  and  other  quite  uncivilised  peoples.  Never- 
theless the  crude  desecration  of  official  sanctities  effected  in 
Russia  by  Feuerbach's  influence,  does  bring  about  a  process 
of  decomposition ;  Russian  Orthodox  passivism  and  objec- 
tivism is  revolutionised  by  European  Protestant  activism  and 
subjectivism. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  „    555 

The  Russian  philosophers  of  history  and  of  rehgion  accu- 
rately gauged  the  result,  though  not  the  essential  nature,  of  this 
peculiar  historical  process.  Metaphysically,  epistemologically, 
and  ethically,  they  rejected  German  philosophy  as  solipsism, 
and  they  were  afraid  that  crime  would  be  the  outcome  of  the 
philosophic  revolution. 

But  two  distinct  moods  prevail  among  those  who  voice 
such  judgments.  Some,  like  Belinskii  and  Herzen,  when  they 
speak  of  crime,  think  of  murder  and  revolution  ;  others,  Hke 
Bakunin,  think  of  suicide. 

The  analysis  of  Dostoevskii's  struggle  against  nihilism  will 
convince  us  that  Behnskii  and  Bakunin  did  in  fact  both  succeed 
in  accurately  diagnosing  the  great  problem  of  the  age.  Since 
the  eighteenth  century,  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  Russia,  there 
has  been  manifest  a  peculiar  increase  in  the  impulse  to  suicide, 
whilst  simultaneously  there  has  occurred  a  growth  of  the 
revolutionary  spirit. 

§  209. 

SOCIOLOGISTS  have  not  yet  sufficiently  analysed  and 
elucidated  the  concept  of  historical  stages.  We  have 
to  ask  why  our  own  time  is  generally  felt  and  proclaimed  to 
be  new.  In  what  does  its  newness  consist  ?  What  is  the 
essential  characteristic  of  the  contrasted  older  epoch  ? 

In  these  studies  I  have  frequently  expressed  my  dissent 
from  historicism.  More  especially  I  have  objected  to  the 
theory  of  Comte  and  of  Marx  that  during  successive  stages  of 
development  man  is  transformed  by  the  influence  of  peculiar 
objective  historical  forces,  not  physically  alone,  but  psychically 
as  well.  In  my  view,  man  evolves  himself,  forms  himself  ; 
and  I  consider  that  this  self-evolution  begins  at  the  very  outset 
of  historical  development.  In  a  word,  there  is  no  epistemological 
warrant  for  the  presumed  coming  of  the  superman  ;  the  modern 
age  is  distinguished  solely  by  the  fuller  unfolding  of  forces  that 
have  previously  existed  in  a  less  developed  state. 

As  I  see  the  matter,  during  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth 
centuries  mankind  grew  fully  conscious  of  this  fact.  This  is 
the  world-wide  historical  significance  of  Humist  scepticism- 
of  the  philosophy  of  the  enlightenment,  and  above  all  of  the 
Kantian  criticism  and  of  the  great  revolution.  Man  became 
fully  conscious  of  the  opposition  between  myth  and  science. 


556  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Herein  lies  the  essence  of  the  Kantian  criticism,  and  this 
explains  why  history  and  the  philosophy  of  history  were 
simultaneously  constituted  as  a  science. 

When  I  refer  in  this  manner  to  the  supreme  significance  of 
the  eighteenth  century  in  universal  history,  it  is  necessary  for 
me  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  antecedent  stage  of  evolution 
lasted  many  thousands  of' years.  According  to  the  conception 
which  permeates  this  work,  the  entire  antecedent  period  con- 
stituted antiquity  in  its  various  phases.  The  aspirations  of 
the  modern  age  began  to  become  apparent  as  early  as  the 
twelfth  century ;  but  not  until  the  eighteenth  century  did 
the  new  spirit  begin  to  display  itself  to  the  full  both  quanti- 
tatively and  quahtatively,  and  not  until  then  did  it  become 
completely  self-conscious  in  the  philosophic  sense. 

Medieval  Russia,  the  Russia  of  antiquity,  was  dragged 
without  transition  into  the  European  evolutionary  proqess  of 
the  eighteenth  and  subsequent  centuries. 

§   210. 

MY  exposition  furnishes  Httle  support  to  the  fashionable 
explanation  of  historical  evolution  as  determined  by 
nationahty  and  race,  as  the  outcome  of  national  character.  No 
one  can  deny  that  racial  and  national  distinctions  exist,  but  the 
origin  of  these  distinctions  is  itself  in  need  of  explanation,  and 
they  are  not  of  such  a  kind  as  to  render  them  adequate  explana- 
tions of  historical  evolution.  I  have  discussed  the  problem 
more  than  once,  and  especially  in  §  59. 

Further,  for  the  reasons  previously  given,  I  find  myself 
unable  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  historical  materialism. 

Nor  can  the  undeniable  influence  of  natural  environment 
suffice  to  explain  history,  and  least  of  all  Russian  history. 
Obviously,  the  influences  of  natural  environment  are  peculiarly 
strong  in  Russia.  The  Russian,  who  for  almost  half  the  year 
is  winter-bound  in  his  miserable  wooden  hut,  must  become 
different  from  the  dweller  in  Central  Europe  and  from  the 
southerner,  must  work  in  a  different  way.  But  such  influences 
cannot  fully  explain  the  intellectual  and  physical  life  of  the 
nations. 

Were  it  only  on  account  of  the  enormous  geographical 
extent  of  Russia,  great  caution  is  needed  in  assigning  Russian 
national  pecuHarities  to  the  influences  of  nature.     Very  different 


THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSL\  557 

is  Russian  life  in  Serbia,  in  Archangel  or  in  Vologda,  in  Tula 
or  in  Caucasia.  We  must  further  take  into  consideration  the 
differences  between  the  Great  Russians  and  the  Little  Russians  ; 
we  have  to  think  of  the  mingUng  of  races  ;  and  we  must  not 
forget  that,  as  time  passes,  changes  invariably  occur  in  modes 
of  life  and  in  national  characteristics.  We  must  carefully  dis- 
tinguish the  important  from  the  unimportant,  the  essential 
from  the  casual. 

Let  me  reiterate  that  in  the  extant  natural  and  social  con- 
ditions man  forms  himself.  In  fact  I  share  BeHnskii's  behef 
that  man  is  free  in  his  historical  environment.  It  is  not 
chronology,  it  is  not  space  and  time,  that  constitute  the  essence 
of  mankind  ;  man  himself  is  that  essence.  Thus  again  and 
again  are  we  -brought  back  to  the  problem  of  subjectivism 
versus  objectivism.  My  decision  is  in  favour  of  a  mitigated 
subjectivism,  and  these  studies  have  been  a  consistent  attempt 
to  apply  such  a  view  epistemologically  and  methodologically. 

§  211. 

IN  my  attempts  at  philosophico-historical  explanations  I 
start  from  the  conviction  that  reUgion  constitutes  the  central 
and  centraHsing  mental  force  in  the  life  of  the  individual  and 
of  society.  The  ethical  ideals  of  mankind  are  formed  by 
reHgion  ;  religion  gives  rise  to  the  mental  trend,  to  the  life 
mood  of  human  beings. 

We  are  speaking  here  of  ecclesiastical  reHgion.  The  church 
as  the  organisation  of  society,  the  church  as  the  chief  pillar  of 
the  state  and  of  state  organisation,  the  church  as  the  very 
foundation  of  the  theocracy,  has  been  and  still  remains  the 
teacher  and  educator  of  the  nations. 

The  effective  energy  is  supphed,  not  by  ecclesiastical  doctrine 
alone,  but  by  the  Uving  example  which  the  church  furnishes 
through  its  priest  or  its  preachers  ;  in  every  village  will  be 
found  one  or  several  clerics  Xo  guide  the  inhabitants  in  the 
spirit  of  the  church ;  the  church  is  a  grandly  conceived, 
unitary,  and  centraHsed  educational  institute.  If  it  be  true, 
as  Comenius  declared,  that  the  school  is  the  offtcina  humanitatis, 
then  the  church  is  this  officina,  for  hitherto  the  church  has 
conducted  the  school,  and  has,  speaking  generally,  provided 
for  the  entire  spiritual  leadership  of  society. 

The  unbeliever,  the  philosopher,  is  subject  to  the  influence 


558  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

of  the  church  in  that  he  fights  against  its  doctrines  and  insti- 
tutions ;  the  pecuHar  relationship  of  theology  to  philosophy, 
and  the  content  of  philosophy  down  to  our  own  day,  afford 
the  best  proof  of  the  strength  of  ecclesiastical  influence.  For 
practical  purposes,  the  mass  of  indifferents  simply  comply  with 
the  demands  of  the  church.  On  the  supremely  important 
occasions  of  birth,  marriage,  and  death,  even  the  indifferent 
is  compelled  to  reflect  upon  the  meaning  of  life,  and  there  the 
church  stands  ready  to  help  him. 

Whilst  those  hostile  to  the  church  are  fond  of  assuring 
us  that  the  church  to-day  influences  none  but  women  and 
children,  herein  we  see  confirmation  of"  the  fact  that  the  church 
influences  adults  as  well.  Not  one  of  us  can  escape  the  im- 
pressions and  influences  emanating  from  the  church,  influences 
that  have  affected  him  during  childhood,  that  have  affected 
him  as  a  member  of  society.  We  know  that  the  influences 
operative  during  childhood  are  largely  decisive  for  the  rest 
of  life. 

As  early  as  the  third  century,  the  church  was  a  finished 
structure,  and  thenceforward  exercised  its  .educative  and 
formative  influence  on  society  in  virtue  of  the  recognition 
accorded  to  it  as  supreme  authority.  For  Russia  in  particular 
we  have  to  remember  that  the  Byzantine  church  was  taken 
over  as  a  ready-made  theocratic  organisation,  and  that  as  such 
it  exercised  its  influence  upon  the  Russian  state  and  upon 
Russian  society. 


r-p 


§   212. 

HE  profoundest  theme,  nay,  the  one  theme  of  the 
1  history  of  the  universe  and  of  mankind,  the  theme  to 
which  all  others  are  subordinated,  is  the  conflict  between 
faith  and  unfaith."  Goethe's  saying  has  been  confirmed  anew 
by  our  own  philosophico-historical  analysis.  The  content 
of  history  is  the  peculiar  struggle  of  the  critical  understanding 
with  myth,  the  struggle  between  critical  and  scientific  thought 
on  the  one  hand  and  mythology  on  the  other. 

During  the  eighteenth  century  this  struggle  reached  a 
turning-point  in  the  thought  of  Hume  and  Kant,  but  it  still 
continues,  and  the  crowning  task  of  the  present  is  to  create  the 
religion  and  the  religious  organisation  of  society  that  will  be  in 
conformity  with  the  demands  of  the  critical  understanding.     To 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  559 

create,  I  say.  We  are  not  looking  for  a  reconciliation  between 
science  and  ecclesiastical  religion  ;  our  aim  is  the  creation 
of  a  new  religious  and  spiritual  content  for  life.  Comte's  idea, 
the  view  of  those  liberals,  sociahsts,  and  anarchists  who  are 
hostile  to  religion,  that  the  modern  epoch  constitutes  a  higher 
non-religious  stage  of  development,  is  erroneous.  I  have 
already  insisted  that  evolutionism  itself  demands  the  further 
development,  not  only  of  science,  but  also  of  religion  and  of 
all  the  forces  of  the  mind.  The  Russian  philosophers  of  history 
and  philosophers  of  religion  confused  myth,  confuseii  un- 
critical credulity  and  mysticism,  with  the  rehgious  spirit ; 
they  confused  theocratic  ecclesiastical  reUgion  with  reHgion 
itself. 

§  213. 

FROM  this  outlook,  too,  I  consider  the  problem  of  the 
independence  and  the  originality  of  the  Russians.  It  is  the 
general  view  that  Russians  differ  from  Europeans  ;  but  we 
have  to  remember  that  the  French  and  the  ItaHans  differ  from 
the  Enghsh  ;  and  we  have  to  ask  what  precisely  are  the  genuine 
and  true  characteristics  of  the  Russians  and  of  the  Europeans 
respectively,  and  how  much  independence  and  originality  is 
possessed  by  the  other  peoples. 

We  have  examined  with  critical  care  the  available  explana- 
tions and  estimates  of  Russian  distinctiveness,  and  we  have 
considered  the  ways  in  which  Russians  and  Europeans  have 
been  contrasted.  In  many  cases  the  judgments  are  extremely 
sketchy.  Sociology  and  history  have  still  much  to  do  in  this 
domain.  It  can  hardly  be  said,  for  example,  that  Roman  and 
Greek  cultural  influences  affecting  the  Gauls,  the  Teutons, 
the  southern  Slavs,  and  so  on,  have  as  yet  been  precisely  and 
critically  determined.  What,  again,  was  original  in  the  Greeks 
and  the  Romans  ?  Has  the  originaHty  of  the  French,  the 
Enghsh,  the  Germans,  etc.,  been  objectively  estabhshed  ? 

To  solve  this  problem  it  would  be  necessary  to  effect  a 
philosophico-historical  revision  of  history. 

The  influence  of  Europe  upon  Russia  has  incontestably 
been  great,  yet  while  this  influence  has  been  at  work  Russia 
has  undergone  a  development  no  less  independent  than  that 
of  the  various  western  nations,  and  we  must  not  forget  this 
spontaneity.     Regarding  the  Russia  of  the  earhest  times,  we 


560  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

cannot  to-day  determine  with  accuracy  to  what  degree,  in 
cultural  and  political  matters,  the  Russians  shared  the  ideas, 
customs,  and  institutions  common  to  the  other  Indo-European 
stocks  ;  nor  do  we  know  how  these  ideas,  institutions,  and 
customs  originated.  The  spread  of  Christianity  subsequently 
laid  the  same  or  similar  foundations  throughout  the  western 
world,  and  upon  these  foundations  a  superstructure  of  ideas 
and  institutions  could  be  erected  in  Russia,  analogous  to  those 
which  were  erected  in  Byzantium  and  in  the  west.  Similar 
considerations  apply  to  the  recent  Europeanisation  of  Russia 
and  to  the  working  of  western  influences  in  that  country. 

In  the  historical  sketch,  and  during  the  description  of  the 
specific  western  influences,  I  have  distinguished  as  precisely 
as  possible  between  the  effects  of  adoption  from  abroad  on  the 
one  hand,  and  of  spontaneous  parallel  development  on  the 
other.  To  give  a  concrete  example,  I  referred  to  the  parallel- 
ism between  Pisarev  and  Stirner,  for  in  this  instance  similar 
superstructures  were  erected  upon  an  identical  foundation 
(Feuerbach)  in  Russia  and  in  Europe  respectively.  In  great 
measure  the  development  of  Marxism  in  Russia,  based  upon 
the  acceptance  of  Feuerbach,  Comte,  and  materialism,  may  be 
regarded  as  parallel  to  the  development  of  Marxism  in  Europe. 
In  the  case  of  the  Slavophils  we  were  able  to  demonstrate  that 
western  influences  were  at  work,  and  we  were  able  to  point  to 
the  independent  elaboration  of  German  ideas.  The  hke  parallel 
evolutionary  series  can  be  discovered  in  the  case  of  Russia  and 
of  Europe  in  respect  of  feudalism,  capitaHsm,  constitutionalism, 
the  revolution,  and  so  on.  Side  by  side  with  adoption  from 
abroad  and  the  direct  influence  of  such  adoption,  we  can  always 
note  a  comparatively  independent  further  development  of  what 
has  been  adopted. 

Adoption  from  foreign  sources  may  vary  greatly  both 
quantitatively  and  qualitatively.  There  may  occur  a  purely 
mechanical  seizure  (such  as  in  literature  is  termed  gross  plagiary), 
and  imitation  ;  or  there  may  occur  a  more  or  less  deliberate 
selection  (such  as  was  effected  by  Caadaev),  and  elaboration 
by  a  congenial  spirit. 

This  deliberate  elaboration  may  develop  into  a  creative 
synthesis  wherein  the  entire  personality  experiences  the  labour 
pains  attendant  on  the  birth  of  the  ideal  of  the  future.  Such 
a  synthesis  is  attempted  by  Kireevskii,  and  indeed  by  many 
of  the  best  Russian  thinkers. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  561 

It  is  this  which  gives  Russian  philosophy  its  pecuHar  stamp  ; 
this  is  why  that  philosophy  is  preeminently  philosophy  of 
history  and  philosophy  of  religion.  The  questions  continually 
agitating  the  Russian  mind  are  two  :  Whither  ?  and  What 
is  to  be  done  ? 

I  do  not  believe  that  the  critical  Russian  thinker  will  be 
content  to-day  with  the  answers  that  have  been  suggested  by 
Russian  philosophers  of  history.  For  example,  when  Homjakov, 
speaking  of  railways  and  of  many  other  things,  says  that  all 
the  Russians  need  do  is  to  harvest  the  ripe  fruits  of  the  labour 
of  other  lands,  whilst  the  rule  may  be  good  enough  from  a  purely 
technological  outlook,  it  is  none  the  less  a  dangerous  one  to 
follow.  The  thought  and  the  energy  of  those  who  depend 
much  on  others  are  apt  to  become  enfeebled.  The  danger  is 
exemplified  when  Homjakov  takes  satisfaction  to  himself 
because  the  Russian  has  not  had  to  squander  his  forces  in 
experimental  work,  and  has  not  exhausted  his  imaginative 
faculties  through  arduous  toil.  We  must  challenge  the  sug- 
gestions made  by  Caadaev  and  others  that  the  backwardness 
of  Russia  has  been  her  salvation. 

Behnskii  sometimes  declared  that  Russia  often  found  it 
necessary  to  do  in  five  years  what  the  west  had  taken  fifty 
years  to  accomplish.  The  truth  of  the  assertion  is  questionable  ; 
and  in  so  far  as  it  is  true,  it  merely  indicates  a  lack  of  stead- 
fastness and  diligence.  Too  often  and  too  urgently  did  the 
Slavophils  call  attention  to  the  lukewarmness  of  westernism  and 
liberalism,  to  the  lukewarmness  of  what  Ivan  Aksakov  spoke 
of  as  "  pothouse  civilisation."  It  is  precisely  in  Russia  that  we 
note  a  disastrous  lukewarmness,  a  tendency  to  excessive  reliance 
upon  the  mental  work  done  in  Europe.  Detailed  analysis 
would  display  the  existence  of  several  varieties  of  this  trouble. 
In  his  biography  of  Granovskii,  the  orientalist  V.  V.  Grigor'ev 
characterised  one  of  these  varieties  by  saying  that  it  was  a 
tendenc}'  "  to  grasp  at  the  summits."  (About  this  work  by 
Grigor'ev  there  was  much  ado  in  its  da3^  Ravelin  took  up 
the  cudgels  on  behalf  of  Granovskii.) 

Nor  will  it  do  to  follow  Herzen  and  others  in  the  belief 
that  it  is  possible  for  Russia  to  skip  certain  stages  of  historical 
development,  to  pass  without  transition  from  a  low  stage  to 
a  much  higher  one.  Against  the  original  sin  of  passivity  it 
is  continually  necessary  to  guard  by  the  encouragement  of 
activity,  steadfastness  and  diligence. 

37  VOL.  II. 


562  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

The  task  for  the  critical  Russian  thinker  is,  starting  from 
what  actually  exists,  to  promote  the  attainment  of  the  desirable 
aims  by  a  process  of  organic  development.  These  aims  may  in 
part  be  determined  by  the  example  of  other  nations,  for  in  many 
respects  the  future  of  Russia  is  foreshadowed  in  the  present 
and  the  past  of  the  west.  But  at  the  same  time  the  Russian, 
applying  his  knowledge  of  his  own  people  and  its  history, 
must  never  fail  to  aspire  towards  an  active  and  independent 
development,  and  must  never  cease  from  the  endeavour  to 
create  the  ideals  for  such  a  development. 

I  believe  we  may  deduce  from  an  analysis  of  Russian  philo- 
sophy of  history  the  lesson  that  criticism  alike  of  Russia  and 
of  Europe  ma^^  be  renovated  on  the  basis  of  a  profounder 
knowledge  of  these  two  objects  of  comparison.  Such  criticism 
must  deal  with  the  inner  life  as  well  as  with  externals,  must 
deal  with  moral,  religious,  and  mental  life  in  its  entirety.  Then 
only  can  the  great  synthesis  be  effected  ;  then  only  can  the 
reformative  revolution  prove  successful. 

This  philosophical  criticism  we  expect  from  the  Russians 
will  have  to  return  to  Hume  and  to  Kant  ;  it  will  have  to 
discard  nihilism  and  the  negation  of  all  that  is  old  ;  it  will  have 
to  discard  uncritical  revolutionism  ;  and  it  will  have  to  discard 
an  easy-going  imitativeness. 

§  214. 

THIS  critical  revisionism  will  have  to  be  based  upon  a 
sociological  and  philosophico-historical  appraisement  of 
European  as  well  as  of  Russian  civilisation.  The  question  is 
not  merely,  "  what  elements  of  Old  Russia  are  valuable,  worthy 
of  preservation  and  of  further  development  ?  "  We  have 
likewise  to  ask,  "  what  elements  of  Old  Europe  are  valuable  ?  " 
In  §  14  I  showed  that  as  long  ago  as  the  reign  of  Catherine  II 
Boltin  attempted  to  prove  that  the  defects  which  the  Europeans 
discovered  among  the  Russians,  existed  also  in  Europe.  In 
my  own  study  of  Russia  I  have  had  my  attention  directed  to 
more  than  one  instance  of  European  happenings  which,  though 
they  may  not  excuse  what  has  been  done  in  Russia,  must  none 
the  less  make  us  chary  about  comparisons  derogatory  to  Russia. 
One  who  reads  the  reports  concerning  the  Austrian  censorship 
prior  to  the  year  1848,  will  be  Httle  inchned  to  express  surprise 
at  the  cruelties  of  the  censorship  under  Nicholas  I.     Again, 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  563 

when  we  read  that  the  empress  Josephine  spent  during  six 
years  no  less  than  five  and  twenty  milHon  francs  upon  dress, 
the  extravagance  of  the  "  Semiramis  of  the  North  "  becomes 
more  comprehensible. 

These,  of  course,  are  mere  details.  European  philosophers 
of  history  have  ere  this  effected  a  thorough  criticism  of  the 
development  and  of  the  present  condition  of  the  various  western 
peoples,  and  have  endeavoured  to  fashion  new  ideals.  Nietzsche 
was  not  first  in  the  field  with  his  demand  for  the  revaluation 
of  values. 

Herzen  and  many  of  his  successors  had  little  love  for  Europe, 
esteeming  Europe  far  less  highly  than  their  predecessors  and  the 
westernisers  had  done  ;  but  such  judgments  must  be  accepted- 
with  caution,  since  they  are  those  of  refugees  who  never  struck 
firm  root  in  European  soil.  In  some  cases,  and  this  is  especially 
true  of  Herzen,  these  writers'  vision  was  obscured  by  Russian 
prejudice.  One  becomes  used  in  time  even  to  hanging — the 
proverb  applies  to  Russians  as  well  as  to  Europeans.  Our 
judgments  concerning  Europe  and  Russia  must  have  a  socio- 
logical, a  philosophico-historical  foundation. 

In  Europe  there  still  exist  medieval  Catholicism  and  the 
papacy,  whose  philosophic  foundations  have  long  since  been 
undermined  ;  in  Europe  we  find  that  ecclesiastical  Protestantism 
still  persists,  though  it  too  is  philosophically  outworn  ;  Europe 
remains  familiar  with  absolute  monarchy,  which  proved  com- 
petent after  the  revolution  to  convert  constitutionalism  and 
parhamentarism  into  its  own  instruments  (tsarism,  too,  will 
in  due  course  achieve  the  like  success  !)  ;  Europe  knows  mon- 
archical militarism,  and  Europe  knows  capitalism — in  Europe, 
in  a  word,  democracy  is  not  yet  secure,  and  the  political  strength 
of  theocracy  is  still  considerable.  It  is  true  that  in  point  of 
principle  the  European  theocracy  no  longer  possesses  any 
philosophic  basis,  whilst  poHtically  the  theocracy  has  been  so 
greatly  weakened  that  it  is  compelled  to  compromise  with 
democracy.  Speaking  generally,  Europe  is  the  land  of  com- 
promise, of  half-measures ;  but  they  are  the  half-measures 
of  transition.  The  philosopher  of  history  can  already  regard 
democracy  as  an  attainable  ideal,  and  as  the  predestined  heir 
of  theocracy. 

The  danger  in  Russia  is  that  many  Russians  do  not  feel 
this  conviction  as  far  as  their  own  country  is  concerned, 

Europe  has  to  face  the  problem  of  the  suicidal  impulse,  the 


564  THE   SPIRIT   OF  RUSSIA 

great  problem  for  men  and  for  hmnanity  ;  in  Europe  much 
attention  is  being  paid  to  the  problem  of  decadence  and  degenera- 
tion ;  the  pecuHar  theme  of  French  decadence  and  degeneration 
is  a  standing  item  on  the  agenda,  and  not  in  France  alone. 
Universal  in  Europe  is  a  lively  aspiration  towards  rebirth.  I 
consider  that  the  Russian  philosopher  of  history  has  every 
reason  to  urge  upon  his  nation  that  the  situation  is  serious, 
the  task  difficult ;  but  he  has  no  occasion  to  doubt  or  to  despair 
of  the  future. 


§  215. 

EUROPE  feels  a  lively  interest  in  Russia  and  in  the  destiny 
of  that  country,  as  we  can  learn,  not  only  from  the  daily 
press,  but  also  from  the  numerous  books  written  about  Russia 
and  from  the  attention  paid  to  Russian  literature. 

For  the  nonce  political  interest  predominates.  European 
theocracy  looks  upon  Russia  as  a  natural  ally.  The  holy 
alliance  was  the  issue  of  this  conception.  The  conception  was 
shared  even  by  such  a  man  as  Bismarck,  for  as  champion  of  the 
Prussian  monarchy  he  found  tsarism  congenial.  Metternich 
had  the  same  feehng  where  Austria  was  concerned.  Precisely  | 
for  this  reason,  European  liberals  and  democrats  have  fought 
tsarism  as  their  hereditary  foe,  and  the  social  democrats  adopt 
the  same  attitude  towards  official  Russia.  We  owe  to  Feuer- 
bach,  the  philosophic  teacher  of  the  Russians,  the  saying : 
"  We  have  but  two  hereditary  enemies^  spiritually  the  papacy, 
and  temporally  Russdom." 

A  philosophic  interest  in  Russia  and  Russian  development 
is  however  displayed  in  the  extensive  European  literature 
concerning  Russia.  This  interest  has  become  so  marked  that 
it  is  now  possible  to  speak  of  the  Russification  of  Europe  as 
well  as  of  the  Europeanisation  of  Russia.  Not  merely  has 
the  political  influence  of  Russia  upon  Europe  continually 
increased  since  the  eighteenth  century,  but  Europe  has  eagerly 
accepted  Russian  literature  and  has  thus  learned  to  participate 
in  Russia's  internal  problems.  We  have  seen  how  Voltaire  and 
Herder  admired  Russia  ;  to-day  we  can  enumerate  Nietzsche 
MaeterUnck,  and  many  others  among  those  who  have  accepted 
Russian  ideas  and  ideals. 

The  sociologist  and  the  philosopher  of  history  can  learn 
much  from  Russia. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  565 

From  the  methodological  point  of  view,  much  advantage 
can  be  derived  from  a  comparison  of  Europe  with  Russia. 
Europeans  will  find  that  a  study  of  Russian  analogies  makes 
their  own  problems  more  fully  alive. 

But  in  respect  of  matters  of  detail  Russia  and  Russian 
development  are  likewise  most  instructive.  The  enormous 
extent  of  the  country  suffices  to  make  it  a  world  in  miniature. 
The  study  of  the  Europeanisation  of  Russia,  expanding  as  it 
does  into  a  study  of  reciprocal  cultural  influences,  suggests 
numerous  and  extremely  interesting  problems.  The  study 
of  Russia  will  give  the  sociologist  a  clearer  insight  into  the 
problem  of  cultural  mutuahty  and  cultural  unification,  a  problem 
that  is  of  such  profound  importance  to  human  evolution. 

The  philosopher  of  history  who  undertakes  the  study  of 
Russia  must  perforce  acquire  a  clearer  understanding  of  the 
outlook  of  the  middle  ages  and  of  earher  days,  and  he  is  thereby 
constrained  to  undertake  a  more  accurate  analysis  of  the 
essential  nature  of  the  modern  epoch.* 

As  far  as  I  myself  am  concerned,  I  have  no  hesitation  in 
saying,  not  merely  that  the  study  of  Russia  and  Russian  hterature 
helped  me  to  form  more  accurate  estimates  of  the  philosophies 
of  Feuerbach  and  of  Hegel,  but  further  that  it  was  through 
Russian  philosophy  and  literature  that  I  came  to  realise  the 
world-historical  importance  of  Hume  and  of  Kant. 

How  instructive  is  the  study  of  the  Russian  revolution. 
The  interest  of  Europe  in  the  Russian  revolution  was  very 
great,  and  the  Russian  revolution  had  a  favourable  repercussion 
upon  Europe.  In  Austria,  for  example,  manhood  suffrage  was 
introduced  as  an  outcome  of  the  pressure  exercised  by  the 
Russian  revolution.  It  is  true  that  the  victory  of  the  reaction 
in  Russia  was  acclaimed  by  the  European  reaction,  but  it  cannot 
be  said  that  the  dehght  in  Europe  was  by  any  means  intense. 

The  interest  in  'the  Russian  revolution  does  not  attach 
solely  to  the  political  aspect  of  the  question.  The  philosopher 
of  history  sees  in  the  revolution  the  great  religious  and  ethical 
problem  of  the  age.  This  is  a  matter  upon  which  we  may 
learn  something  from  the  Russians. 

The  present  studies  will,  I  may  hope,  have  made  this  point 
clear,  and  that  is  why  I  conclude  by  appealing  to  the  reader's 
interest  on  behalf  of  the  sequel,  which  will  deal  with  Dostoevskii. 
the  great  analyst  of  the  Russian  revolution. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    APPENDIX 

AUTHORITIES   FOR   THE   STUDY   OF   RUSSIA 

THE  present  chapter  contains  a  list  of  works  available  in  non- 
russian  languages  from  which  readers  can  acquire  a  knowledge 
of  Russia,  of  Russian  conditions  and  evolution.  The  brief  com- 
ments are  penned  from  the  general  outlook  of  the  foregoing  study. 
Reference  is  made  in  the  text  to  a  fevv'  additional  books  of 
importance. 

One  who  wishes  to  learn  Russia  from  within,  to  acquire  such 
a  view  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  present,  will  find  little  to  help 
him  in  European  literature.  Almost  the  only  books  are  those  of 
Hcrzen,  the  works  of  that  author  which  appeared  in  French  or 
German.  Russians  have  of  late  years  written  a  number  of 
historical  accounts  of  "  social  thought,"  the  intelligentsia,  etc., 
etc.  To  gain  an  understanding  of  the  Russian  spirit  and  its 
DEVELOPMENT  it  is  neccssary  to  read  the  more  notable  Russian 
authors  from  Puskin  to  Gbr'kii.  The  whole  series  can  be  pro- 
cured in  translation,  and  groups  of  especially  valuable  works  can 
be  selected  for  special  subjects  (for  example,  life  in  Siberia,  prison 
life,  the  so-called  ethnographical  novels,  etc.). 

(a)  The  following  are  the  chief  works  on  the  history  of  Russian 
LITERATURE  available  in  foreign  tongues  :  A.  von  Reinholdt, 
Geschichte  der  russischen  Liter  at ur,  1886  (this  is  still  the  best  and 
most  complete  survey  of  the  whole  field).  A.  Briickner,  Geschichte 
der  russischen  Liter atur,  1905  (a  stimulating  surve}^  of  recent 
literature).  S.  Volkonskii,  Pictures  of  Russian  Life  and  History, 
1898  (brief  sketches).  Kropotkin,  Ideals  and  Realities  in  Russian 
Literature,  1905  (stresses  the  sociopolitical  and  revolutionary  aspects 
of  recent  literature).  A.  Wesselovsky,  Die  russische  Liter  atur, 
1908  (brief  but  valuable  study,  published  in  the  collective  work, 
entitled  "  Die  Kultur  der  Gegenwart  ").  De  Vogiie,  Le  roman 
ntsse,  1868.  Ossip-Lourie,  La  psychologic  des  romanciers  russes. 
dii  dix-neuvieme  Steele,  1905  (confused).  Maurice  Baring,  Russian 
Literature,  1914.  K.  Wahszewski,  History  of  Russian  Literature, 
1900.     Also  the  articles   on  Russian  Language  and  Slavonic  Lan- 

567 


568  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

guages,  by  E.  H.  Minns,  in  the  nth  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia 
Britannica. 

The  censorship  and  journalism.  W.  J.  Nagradov,  Moderne 
russische  Zensur  und  Presse  vor  mid  hinter  den  Ktdissen,  1894  (facts 
only,  \vithoiit  comment).  Upon  this  subject  consult  in  addition 
the  data  in  the  histories  of  literature  and  in  the  other  historical 
works  that  have  been  cited,  and  also  Kennan's  Siberia. 

There  is  no  separate  work  upon  the  history  of  Russian 
PHILOSOPHY.  Upon  this  subject  Kolubovskii  contributes  a  section 
to  Ueberweg-Heinze,  Grundriss  der  Geschichfe  der  Philosophie  des 
X7X'^"  JahrJmnderts,  loth  edition,  1906,  but  it  is  bibliographical 
merely.  Ossip-Lourie,  La  philosophie  nisse  contemporaine,  1902 
(very  slight).  Pilet,  La  Russie  en  proverbes,  1905  (by  no  m^ans 
profound).  Grusenberg,  Skizzen  der  Gegenwdrtigen  russischen  Phil- 
osophie, 1911. 

From  my  own  standpoint  I  have  much  reason  to  complain  of 
the  lack  of  a  modern  history  of  the  Russian  church  and  of 
RELIGION  in  Russia.  Among  older  books  may  be  mentioned, 
Basarov,  Die  russisch-orthodoxe  Kirche,  1873.  The  follo\ving  are 
recent  publications.  F.  Kattenbusch,  "  Lehrbuch  der  vergleichen- 
den  Konfessionskunde,"  vol.  I,  Die  orthodoxe  anatolische  Kirche, 
1892.  E.  F.  K.  Miiller,  Symbolik  :  Vergleichende  DarstelUmg  der 
christlichen  Hauptkirchen  nach  ihrem  Gnindzuge  iind  ihren  wesentlichen 
Lebensdusserungen,  1896.  In  the  before-mentioned  collective  work 
"  Die  Kultur  der  Gegenwart  "  there  is  a  volume  entitled  Geschichte 
der  christlichen  Religion,  of  which  the  second  edition  wai  published 
in  1909  ;  to  this  Bonwetsch  contributes  a  section,  "  Griechisch- 
orthodoxes  Christentum  und  Kirche."  Reference  may  also  be 
made  to  the  appropriate  articles  in  'the  Realenzyklopddie  fur 
protestantische  Theologie  und  Kirche,  3rd  edition  (of  special  value 
is  th?  article  "  Orientahsche  Kirche  ").  L.  K.  Gotz,  Kirchenrechtliche 
und  kirchengeschichtliche  Denhndler  AUrusslands,  nebst  Geschichte 
des  russischen  Kirchenrechts,  1905  ;  Staat  und  Kirche  in  Altnissland  ; 
Kiever  Periode  988-1240,  1908  ;  Das  Kiever  Hohlenkloster  als  Kul- 
turzentrtim  des  vormongolischen  Russlands,  1904.  As  to  the  relation- 
ship between  church  and  state  in  Byzantium,  consult  IVIaassen, 
Neun  Kapitel  iiber  freie  Kirche  und  Gewissensfreiheit,  1876.  See  also 
Prugavin,  Die  Inquisition  der  russisch-orthodoxen  Kirche,  1905,  and 
J.  Gehring,  Die  Sekten  der  russische  Kirche  nach  ihrem  Ursprung 
und  inner  em  Zusammenhange,  1898  (covers  period  1003  to  1897). 

{b)  Russia  in  general,  country,  people,  and  institutions. 
A  very  valuable  work  is  Anatole  Leroj^-Beaulieu,  L'empire  des 
tsares,  4th  edition,  1897-8  ;  consult  also  D.  Mackenzie  Wallace, 
Russia,  1887  (numerous  editions,  and  a  revised  edition 'in  1905). 
Wallace  is  conservative  and  has  no  insight  into  the  spiritual  life 
of  the  country.     In  this  respect  Leroy-Beaulieu,  a  man  of  liberal 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  569 

views,  greatly  excels  him.  Concerning  nature  and  its  relation- 
ships to  man  consult  Alfred  Hettner,  Das  europaische  Russland : 
Siudie  zur  Geographic  des  Menschen,  1906. 

Problems  of  the  present  day.  Valuable  matter  bearing 
upon  these  problems  from  the  progressive  outlook  is  to  be  found 
in  the  eighteen  essays  contained  in  the  collection  by  J.  Mel'nik, 
Rifssen  iiber  Russland,  1906.  Other  works  are  the  following :  M. 
Sering,  Russlands  KuUur  und  Volkswirtschaft,  1913  (an  excellent 
book) .  M.  L. .  Schlesinger,  Russland  in  XX  Jahrjiundert :  mit 
einer  Uehersichtskarte,  1908  (the  author  is  well-informed,  but  his 
treatment  of  the  subject  is  somewhat  cursory).  A  better  book 
by  the  same  author  is  Land  und  Leute  in  Russland,  1909.  Gregory 
Alexinsky,  Modern  Russia,  1912,  and  Russia  and  Europe,  1917. 
Harold  W.  Williams,  Russia  of  the  Russians,  1913.  Maurice  Baring, 
The  Mainsprings  of  Russia,  1914. 

Political  organisation.  M.  von  Oettingen,  Abriss  des 
russischen  Siaatsrechts,  1899  (a  serviceable  work,  but  somewhat 
antiquated).  The  topic  is  treated  more  fully  in  the  following 
articles  in  Marquardsen's  Handbuch  des  offentlichen  Rechtes  :  J. 
Engelmann,  "  Das  Staatsrecht  des  russischen  Reiches." 

Concerning  the  organisation  of  the  zemstvos  consult  A.  von 
Gernet,  Die  Grundzilge  der  russischen  Landschafts  verfassung,  1897 
(the  account  is  given  after  the  reorganisation  of  1890).  Palme, 
Die  russische  Verfassung,  1890  (analysis  of  the  state  fundamental 
law  and  of  the  electoral  law — a  good  book). 

In  Sombart's  Archiv  filr  Sozialwissenschaft  und  Sozialpolitik, 
vol.  xxiii.  Heft  i.  Appendix,  Max  Weber,  in  "  Russlands  Uebergang 
zur  Scheinkonstitutionalismus,"  1906,  gives  a  critical  sketch  of 
the  development  of  parties  after  the  December  rising  in  Moscow. 

The  following  articles  should  be  consulted  in  the  Handworter- 
huch  der  Staats  wissenschaften  :  "  Mir,"  "  Bauernbefreiung  "  (in 
Russia),  "  Artelle,"  etc.  Turning  to  periodicals,  the  "  Neue  Zeit," 
and  the  "  Sozialistische  Monatshefte  "  regularly  publish  accounts 
of  Russian  conditions  and  economic  literature  bearing  upon  Russia. 

(c)  Social  and  economic  history.  G.  von  Schulze-Gavernitz, 
Volkswirtschaftliche  Studien  aus  Russland,  1899.  Engelmann,  Ges- 
chichte  der  Leibeigenschaft  in  Russland,  1884.  Keussler,  Zur 
Geschichte  und  Kritik  des  bduerlichen  Gemeindebesitzes  in  Russland, 
4  vols.,  1876-87.  Nicolai-on,  Die  Volkswirtschaft  in  Russland  nach 
der  Bauernemanzipation,  1899.  Simkhowitsch,  Die  Feldgemeinschaft 
in  Russland,  1898.  (For  criticism  of  Nicolai-on  and  the  narodniki 
generally,  consult  the  author's  essay  Die  sozialokonomischen  Lehren 
der  russischen  Narodniki,  "  Jahrblicher  fiir  Nationalokonomie  und 
Statistik,"  1897.  Jas.  Mavor,  An  Economic  History  of  Russia, 
2  vols,,  1914  :  V.  de.  Kovalevski,  La  Russie  a  la  fin  du  XIX'  sikle. 
Paris,  1900. 


570  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Zur  Agrarbewegung  in  Russland,  edited  by  B.  Brande,  1907, 
this  contains  :  Petrunkevic,  "  Agrarkrjsis  imd  die  politische  Lage  in 
Russland  "  ;  Manuilov,  "  Agiarfrage  und  ihre  okonomische  Losung  "  ; 
also,  in  an  appendix  by  the  editor,  "  Uebersicht  der  agrarischen 
Reformprogramme."  See  also  the  works  by  P.  Masslow,  written 
from  the  social  democratic  standpoint  and  translated  into  German 
by  M.  Nachimson,  Die  Agrnrfrage  in  Russland,  1908,  etc. 

Ssemenow  and  Kasperow,  Riisslands  Landwirtschaft  imd  Getreide- 
handel,  translated  by  M.  Blumenau,  1901.  L.  Jurowsky,  Der 
russische  Getreideexport,  seine  Entwickhmg  und  Organisation,  1910. 

Tugan-Baranovsky,  Geschichfe  der  russischen  Fabrik,  1900. 

Witschewsky,  Russlands  Handels-,  Zoll-  und  Industriepolitik  von 
Peter  dem  Grossen  bis  aiif  die  Gegenwart,  1905  (the  recent  period 
from  1894  to  1904  is  treated  most  thoroughly). 

Pazitnov,  Die  Lage  der  arbeitenden  Klasse  in  Russland :  einc 
historische  Darstclhmg  an  der  Hand  amilicher  und  privater  Unier- 
suchungen  und  der  Berichte  der  Fabrikinspectoren  von  1861  bis  in 
die  Jieutige  Zeit,  1907  (German  translation  by  Nachimson  with  an 
epilogue  by  that  writer). 

Russian  finance  is  lucidly  and  in  my  opinion  accurately  treated 
by  Helferich,  Das  Geld  ini  russisch-japanischen  Kriege,  1906.  In 
Die  Zukunft  Russlands  und  Japans,  1905,  and  Die  Zukunft  Russ- 
lands, 1906,  Martin  describes  Russian  financial  policy  as  fraudulent, 
and  foretells  absolute  bankruptcy,  but  the  writer's  deductions 
are  exaggerated,  and  despite  his  extensive  acquaintance  with 
ephemeral  literature  Martin  has  no  true  insight  into  Russian  con- 
ditions. If  I  mistake  not,  the  first  book  was  withdrawn  from 
circulation.  No  less  one-sided  is  Russlands  Banhrott,  1906,  by 
Plutus  (Plutus  is  the  pseudonym  of  Bernhard,  a  social  democrat). 
A  more  judicious  compilation  of  various  judgments  upon  Russian 
finance  is  given  by  Biermer,  Der  Streit  um  die  russischen  Finanzen 
der  Gegenwart,  und  die  neue  MiUiardenanleihe,  2nd  edition,  1906. 

A.  von  Bonstedt  and  D.  Trietsch,  Das  russische  Reich  in  Enropa 
und  Asien  :  ein  Handbuch  i'tber  seine  wirtschaftlichen  Verhaltnisse, 
1910  (an  official  compilation,  giving  the  chief  data  of  importance). 

{d)  Existing  conditions  and  the  revolution.  M.  von 
Reusner,  Die  russischen  Kdmpfe  um  Rechi  und  Freiheit,  1905  (the 
author  was  professor  of  constitutional  law  in  Russia  and  his  data 
are  trustworthy).  H.  Ganz,  Vor  der  Katastrophe,  ein  Blick  ins 
Zarenreich,  1904  (a  good  recapitulation  of  Russian  views).  K. 
Zilliacus,  The  Russian  Revolutionary  Movement,  1905  (the  work 
is  incomplete  and  the  data,  are  not  alwa3^s  accurate).  Alexander 
Ular,  Die  russische  Revolution,  1905  (a  description  of  the  principal 
personalities  concerned  in  the  revolution,  especially  those  of  the 
court ;  insufficiently  discriminative).  Bernard  Pares,  Russia  and 
Reform,  1907. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  571 

Tscherevanin,  Das  Proletariat  und  die  russische  Revolution,  1908 
(the  writer  is  a  "  minority  "  social  democrat).  N.  Trotzky,  Russland 
in  der  Revolution,  1909.  References  to  Tscherevanin  and  Trotzky 
were  made  in  §  162. 

Sufferings  of  the  revolutionists  in  prison  and  in  Siberia. 
Leo  Deutsch,  Seize  Ansen  Siberie,  1904.     Noworusski,  Achtzehnein- 
halb  Jahre  hinter  russischen  Kerkermauern,  Schliisselhnrger  Aufzeich 
mmgen,  1908.     Kennan,  Siberia  and  the  Exile  System,  2  vols.,  1891. 

Little  has  been  written  in  the  languages  of  Europe  concerning 
the  philosophical  foundations  of  the  Russian  movement 
towards  liberty.  Herzen's  writings  are  still  the  best.  More 
recent  works  are  :  P.  Miliukov,  Russia  and  its  Crisis,  1905,  and  his. 
earlier  Essai  sur  I'Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  Russe,  Paris  1901 
(Miljukov  is  the  leader  of  the  cadets)  ;  M.  Zdziechowski,  Die  Grund- 
probleme  Ritsslands,  literarisch-politische  Skizzen,  1907  (from  the 
Polish,  a  stimulating  work,  the  writer  is  Catholic  and  conservative). 

Strongly  to  be  recommended  are  the  writings  of  the  nihilist 
Stepniak  (S.  M.  Kravcinskii).  The  Career  of  a  Nihilist,  1889  (a 
novel).  Nihilism  as  it  is  (undated).  The  Russian  Peasantry,  their 
Agrarian  Condition,  Social  Life,  and  Religion  (2  vols.,  1888).  Under- 
ground Russia,  1883.  Russia  under  the  Tsars,  1885.  The  Russian 
Storm-Cloud,  or  Russia  in  her  Relations  to  Neighbouring  Countries, 
1886. 

The  memoirs  and  autobiographies  of  revolutionists  furnish 
important  contributions  to  our  knowledge  in  this  field,  the  works, 
for  instance,  by  Vera  Zasulic,  Debagorii-Mokrievic,  and  many 
others.  Kropotkin's  Memoirs  of  a  Revolutionist  was  published  in 
English,  1899.  This  work  contains  the  main  lines  of  a  trustworthy 
history  of  the  revolutionary  movement. 

For  the  earlier  periods  of  this  movement  a  good  book  is  Thun, 
Geschichte  der  revolutiondren  Bewegungen  in  Russland,  1883.  It  deals 
with  principles  as  well  as  facts. 

The  Woman's  Movement.  H.  Lange  and  G.  Baumer,  Handbuch 
der  Frauenbewegiing,  vol.  I,  1901.  This  deals  solely  with  the  legal 
activities  of  women.  Studies  in  the  history  of  the  revolutionary 
movement  must  be  utilised  to  supplement  our  knowledge  of  the 
part  played  by  women  in  the  revolution. 

{e)  Political  history  of  Russia.  A  survey  of  this  subject 
will  be  found  in  the  work  of  Alfred  Rambaud,  Histoire  de  la  Russie 
(6th  edition,  completed  up  to  1913  by  E.  Haumant),  English  trans- 
lation by  L.  B.  Lang,  pubHshed  in  1879.  Kluchevsky,  History  of 
Russia,  3  vols.,  1911  :  F.  H.  Skrine,  The  Expansion  of  Russia, 
1815-1900,  Cambridge,  1903. 

Of  works  dealing  with  specific  epochs  and  with  other  special 
topics,  the  following  may  be  recommended  :  T.  Schiemann, 
Geschichte  Russlands  unter  Kaiser  Nicholaus  I,  3  vols.     A.  Bruckner, 


572  THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA 

Peter  der  Grosse,  1879  ^Oncken.  "  Allgemeine  Geschichte  ")  ; 
Katharina  II,  1883  (Oncken).  J.  Possoschkow,  Ideen  und  Zustdnde 
im  Zeitalter  Peters  des  Grossen,  1878  ;  Kulturhistorische  Studien,  die 
Rttssen  im  Ausland,  die  Ausldnder  in  Russland  im  XVII  Jahrhundert, 
1878 ;  Die  Europdisienmg  Russlands,  Land  und  Volk,  1888.  Bil- 
basov's  work  upon  Catherine  the  Great  was  suppressed  in  Russia, 
but  portions  have  appeared  in  German  under  the  title  Katharina  II 
im  Urteile  der  Welfliteratur,  2  vols.,  1897. 

History  of  civilisation  in  Russia.  P.  Miliukov,  Skizzen 
russischer  Kultnrgeschichte,  1898-1901,  2  vols.  E.  Haumant,  La 
culture  frangaise  en  Russie,  1910.  The  "  Bibliothek  russischer 
Denkwiirdigkeiten  "  edited  by  Schiemann  contains  a  fine  collection 
of  documents  relating  to  Russian  civilisation.  They  are  as  follows  : 
I,  Memoiren  von  J.  J.  de  Sanglen,  1776-1831  ;  II,  Erinnertmgen 
von  L.  de  Seeland  aus  der  polnischen  Revolution,  1830-31  ;  III,  N.  J, 
Pirogov,  Lebensfragen  ;  IV,  K.  Ravelins  und  J.  Turgenjevs  sozial- 
politischer  Briefwechsel  mit  A.  J.  Herzen :  V,  Erinnerimgen  eines 
Dorfgeistlichen,  ein  Beitrag  ztir  Geschichte  der  Leibeigenschaft  und 
ihrer  Aufhebung ;  VI,  M.  Bakunins  sozialpolitischer  Briefwechsel 
mil  A.  J.  Herzen  und  Ogarjov,  mit  einer  biographischen  Einteilung, 
Beilagen  und  Erlduterungen  von  M.  Dragomanov ;  VII,  Jtigend-. 
erinnerimgen  des  Prof.  A.  J.  Nikitenko,  (1826-1877).  ., 

A  glance  at  certain  memoirs  may  be  recommended.  I  may 
mention  Memoires  de  I'imperatrice  Catherine  ecrits  par  elle-meme, 
edited  by  Herzen.  Extremely  characteristic  as  regards  eighteenth 
century  Russia  is  the  work  of  Fedor  Golovkine,  La  cour  et  le  regne 
de  Paul  I,  avec  introduction  et  notes  par  S.  Bonnet,  1905.  Cf,  also 
Der  Briefwechsel  zwischen  der  Kaiserin  Katharina  II  von  Russland 
und  Johannes  Georg  Zimmermann,  published  by  Eduard  Bode- 
mann,  1906. 

Russo-Japanese  War.  On  this  topic  Kuropatkin's  work  is 
now  available.  Gadke,  Japans  Krieg  und  Sieg,  1907,  may  iikewse 
be  consulted. 

Early  works  on  Russia.  Many  of  these  will  still  be  found 
instructive.  La  Russie  et  les  russes,  by  N.  Turgenev,  published  in 
1847,  has  already  been  referred  to.  Kustine,  La  Russie  en  1839 
(published  in  1843),  may  also  be  mentioned.  Of  especial  value 
is  Haxthausen,  Studien  iiber  die  inneren  Zustdnde,  das  Volksleben 
und  insbesondere  die  Idndlichen  Einrichtungen  Russlands,  3  vols., 
1847-52.  Haxthausen  made  his  studies  in  Russia  during  the 
years  1843  and  1844,  at  the  request  of  Tsar  Nicholas  I.  His  book 
was  printed  at  the  public  expense. 

Those  interested  in  Muscovite  Old  Russia  may  be  recommended 
to  read  one  of  the  early  descriptions,  the  most  notable  among  which 
is  that  by  Herberstein,  the  Austrian,  Rerum  Moscovitarum  Commen- 
iarii,  1549.    This  was  the  first  exhaustive  study  of  prepetrine  Russia. 


i 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   RUSSIA  573 

Herbeistein  paid  two  visits  to  Moscow,  and  had  numerous  excellent 
documents  at  his  disposal.  A  second  Latin  edition,  ampHfied  and 
improved  by  the  author,  was  pubhshed  in  1556.  The  German 
edition  of  1557  was  also  Herberstein's  own  work.  An  Englishman 
named  Fletcher,  an  employee  of  the  Anglo-Muscovite  Trading 
Company,  in  his  work  Of  the  Russe  Commonwealth,  described  Moscow 
in  the  year  1591.  Fletcher  made  much  use  of  the  works  of  Horsey, 
Travels,  etc.  Horsey  was  another  servant  of  the  same  company, 
There  are  also  several  other  descriptions  of  old  date,  by  Olearius,  etc. 


.1 


INDEX   OF  NAMES 


Abramov,  306 

Achad-ha-am  (Uscher  Ginzberg),  240 

Adam  Smith,  see  Smith 

Adler,  86 

Aggeev,  219 

Aegidius  Romanus,  494 

A  Kempis,  see  Kempis 

Akimov,  295 

Aksakov,    Ivan,    196,    217,    219,    227, 

241,  246,  561 
Aksakov,  Konstantin,  198,  219,  549 
Akselrod,  Ida,  295 
Akselrod,  L.,  296 
Akselrod,  P.,  326 
Alexander  I,  of  Battenberg,  Prince  of 

Bulgaria,  195 
Alexander  I,  Tsar  of  Russia,  220,  243, 

360,  416,  424,  502,  528,  554 
Alexander  II,  Tsar  of  Russia,  i,  40,  41, 

48,  58,  81,  82,  88,  96,  98,  100,  loi. 

102,   117,   164,   166,   194,   195,   198, 

199,  206,  218,  227,  288,   292,  301, 

305,  362,  426,  427,  428,  545 
Alexander  III,  Tsar  of  Russia,  2,  98, 

102,   113,  195,   197,   198,  205,  206, 

209,  218,  223,  244,  292,  306,  310 
Alexander  the  Great,  216 
Alexinsky,  569 

Alexis  Aleksandrovic,  Grand  Duke,  207 
Amfiteatrov,  108 
Andreev,  185,  361 
Anneakov,   17,   195,   289,  290,  548 
Anselm,  Saint,  257,  258 
Antonii,  archbishop  of  Volhynia,  207, 

435.  436,  499.  502,  503 
Antonii,  metropoUtan,  441 
Antonovic,  59,  60,  63,  68,  132 
Anzengruber,  507 
Aquinas,  494,  496,  497,  507 
ArcybaSev,  448,  459 
Aristippus,  15 
Aristotle,  7,  8,  472,  490,  501,  507 


Armfeldt,  114 

Arnoldi    (pseudonym),    115,    116,    see 

also  Lavrov 
Arsenev,  439 
Askocenskii,  59 
Augustine,   Saint,   217,   226,   257,   258, 

480,  488,  493,  496,  497,  501,  542 
Augustus  (Caius   Julius  Caesar  Octa- 

vianus),  501 
Avdeev,  i86 

Avenarius,    188,   351,   353,   358,   373 
Avseenko,  59 
Ayliner  JMaude,  see  Maude 
Azev,  299,  300,  365,  366,  368,  369,  458 

Baader,  226,  257,  258,  263,  282,  532 

Babeuf,  83,  400 

Bachofen,  153 

Bagehot,  45 

Bain,  306 

Bakunin,  3,  4,  5,  23,  30,  37,  41,  49,  51, 

52,  53.  58.  72,  73.  74.  79,  81.  83,  84. 
85,  86,  88,  89,  90,  92,  93,  94,  96, 

98,  99,    lOI,   103,   105,   107,   109.   Ill, 

112,   117,  124,  130,   140,   154,  191, 

220,   221,  222,  269,  282,  287,  288, 

290,  304,  305,  326,  336,  339,  350, 

360,  362,  363,  367,  375,  378,  379, 

380,  381,  382,  384,  385,  386,  390, 

392,  393.  394.  397.  398,  399,  4°°, 

405.  407,  410.  425.  434.  474.  475. 
476,  481.  487,-524,  526,  528,  542, 

544,  547.  548,  549,  55°.  55i.  552 
Ballanche,  532 
Balmasev,  112,  295   , 
Balzac,  142 

Baranovskii,  see  Tugan-Baranovskii 
Baring,  567,  569 
Barjatynskii,  271 
Barth,  422 
Basarov,  568 
Basil  the  Great,  226 


575 


576 


INDEX   OF  NAMES 


Battenberg,  Prince  of,  see  Alexander 
I,  Prince  of  Bulgaria 

Bauer,  117,  123,  133,  469 

Baumer,  571 

Bazarov,  356 

Beaulieu,  see  Lei-oy-Beaulieu 

Beecher  Stowe,  see  Stowe 

Beethoven,  147 

Belinskii,  2,  3,  9,  17,  19,  20,  51,  61, 
63.  69,  74,  78,  79,  105.  127,  130, 
140,  154,  181,  183,  186,  1S7,  189, 
191,  220,  222,  269,  279,  280,  282, 
283,  287,  288,  289,  328,  350,  356, 
388,  411,  424,  437,  438,  458,  469, 
470,  471,  472,  473,  474,  476,  481, 
487.  499,  528,  534,  535,  548,  549, 
551,  555,  557.  561 

Beltov,  see  Plehanov 

Bentham,  3,  9,  15,  57,  379,  382,  388, 

Beranger,  25 

Berdjaev,  188,  435,  436,  527 

Bergeret,  244 

Berkelej',  45.  35i 

Bernhard  (Plutus),  570 

Bernstein,     Eduard,     294,     317.     321, 

324,  331,  351 
Bernstein  (Siberian  exile),  see  Kogan- 

Bernstein 
Bierraer,  570 
Bilbasov,  572 
Biran,  226 
Bismarck,    147,    196,    222,    255,    302, 

418,  432,  522,  564 
Blackstone,  192 
Blagosvgtlov,  68,  187 
Blanc,  3,  13.  116,  123,  139,  145,  146, 

147,  150,  151.  152,  153,  154 
Blanqui,  547,  55° 
Blavatsky,  264 
Blumenau,  570 
Bluntschli,  539 
Boehme,  226,  257,  263,  285 
Bogdanov,  344,  345,  346 
Bogolepov,  295,  362 
Bogoljubov,  95 

Boismont,  see  Brierre  de  Boismont 
Boltin,  562 
Bonald,  226,  532 
Bonc-Bruevic,  357 
Boniface  VIII  (Pope  of  Rome),  496 
Bonomi,  337 
Bonstedt,  570 
Bonwetsch,  568 
Borgeaud,  519 


Bossuet,  228 

Bougie,  422 

Bourget,  170,  171,  174 

Brambeus,  see  Senkovskii 

Brande,  570 

Brandes,  106,  451 

Brehm,  69 

Brentano,  294,  422 

Bre§kovska  j  a,  108 

Brierre  de  Boismont,  174 

Brockhaus,  226 

Briickner,  567,  571 

Bruevic,  see  Bonc-Bruevic 

Bruno  Bauer,  see  Bauer 

Bruno,  Giordano,  247 

Biicher,  153,  553 

Buchez,  116 

Biichner,  56,  71,  72,  102,  486 

Buckie,  3,  25,  26,  46,  56,  68,  117,  n8, 

150 
Buharev,  502 
Bulgakov,  293,  294.  352,  354,  357,  359, 

435,  438.  439,  442,  455 
Bulgaria,   see   Alexander   I,   Prince  of 

Bulgaria 
Bulgarin,  220 

Burcev,  299,  365,  366,  368,  370,  543 
Burgess,  418 
Burke,  532 
Byron,  13,  21,  29,  63,  67,  79 

Caadaev,  7,  63,  76,  84,  129,  131,  135, 
281,  424,  437,  465,  477,  479,  481, 
482,  502,  503,  504,  531,  560,  561 

Cafiero,  392 

Caikovskii  and  the  Caikovcy,  88,  89, 

378 
Calvin,  497 
Campanella,  226 
Carlyle,   146,  202,  206,  214,  350,  358, 

432,  475 
CaruSin,  114 
Catherine    II,    the   Great,    Tsarina   of 

Russia,  85,  303,  414,  423,  424,  562 
Cato,  24 
Cavaignac,  37 
Cavour,  25,  37.  417 
Cehov,  184,    185,    186,    316,    387,   388, 

470 
Cerevjanin,  347,  571 
Cerkezov,  89,  390 
Cernov,  372,  373,  374,  375,  376,  377, 

444.  457.  458,  459 
Cerny§evskii,  1-19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  25-53, 
56,  57,  59,  6°'  61,  63,   67,  68,    70, 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


577 


71,  72,  74,  75,  78,  80,  81,  84,  85, 
90,  99,  103, 105, 116, 117, 124,  130, 
131,  132,  136,  140,  181,  186,  187, 
189,  193,  218,  220,  222,  225,  226, 
272,  280,  282,  283,  288,  304,  306, 
308,  326,  328,  353,  372,  387,  388, 
410,  427,  428,  437,  475,  481,  484, 
526,  528,  542,  555 

Charles  X,  King  of  France,  537 

Charoushin,  see  Caru§in 

Chaumette,  385 

Chrysorrhoas,  see  Joannes  Damascenus 

Chrysostom,  175 

Chudnofski,  see  Cudnovskii 

Cicerin,  27,  36,  37,  38,  227,  281,  282, 

308,  426,  428,  437 
Clemens  Alexandrinus,  489 
Cohen,  352 
Comte,  3,  27,  45,  46,  56,  64,  70,  71,  92, 

102,  116,   117,  118,  119,   120,  121. 

122,   125,  127,  128,  129,   131,  132, 

133.  134.  136,  137.  138,  139,  140. 
141,  142,  144,  145,  146,  147,  152, 
154.  T^55,  157,  167,  171,  176,  188, 
226,  233,  245,  247,  251,  254,  282, 
302,  306,  319,  322,  345.  357.  358, 
359.  373.  388,  468,  469,  476,  483, 
484,  522,  548,  559,  560 

Comenius,  511,  557 

Condorcet,  415 

Constant,  417,  418,  424,  484 

Constantine,  the  Great,  Roman  Em- 
peror, 501 

Cornehssen,  392,  401 

Cousin,  116 

Cudnovskii,  114 

Cuprov,  291 


Damascenus,  see  Joannes  Damascenus 

Damaskin,  502 

Dancenko,  see  NemiroviS 

Danielssohn,  see  Nikolai-on 

Danilevskii,  212,  218,  219,  244 

Dante,  21,  67,  273 

Darwin,  29,  45,  102,  116,  132,  138, 
146,  148,  179,  187,  217,  232,  270, 
382.  388,  469,  484,  485,  553 

Da§kova,  14 

Daudet,  452 

Dawidow,  115 

Debagorii-MokrievicJ,  105,  571 

Debidour,  492 

Degaev,  365 

Deljanov,  327 


Descartes,    153,    154,    251,    257,    262. 

345.  354.  443 
Deutsch,  571 

Dickens,  67,  72 

Diderot,  22,  108,  349,  423,  483,  484,  531 

Diehl,  423 

Dietzgen,  345,  353,  355 

Dobroljubov,  i,  19-26,  29,  30,  31,  38, 
49,  53.  63,  66,  67,  69,  90,  71,  74, 
78,  105,  124,  220,  222,  282,  353, 
388,  528 

Dole,  II 

Dollinger,  255 

Dostoevskii,  39,  59,  63,  66,  73,  80,  84. 
93,  105,  163,  167,  169,  171,  180, 
185,  186,  188,  189,  193,  199,  205, 
207,  213,  215,  223,  227,  234,  235, 
240,  249,  267,  268,  270,  272,  273, 
276,  277,  280,   281,  283,  288,  328, 

352,  354.  359.  387,  392,  429,  436. 
437.  438,  439.  445.  446.  447.  448, 
449.  450,  451.  453.  455.  467,  47°. 
474.  479.  481,  487.  502,  503,  529, 
534.  546,  5^5 

Dragomanov,  86,  427 

Dragomirov,  279 

Druiinin,   14,   17 

DudySkin,  63 

Diihring,   139,   144,   162.  391,  349 

Duns  Scotus,  226 

Durkheim,   152 

Dussiaux,  66 

Eliot,  72 

Eliseev,   140,   187,   193 

Elizabeth,  Empress  of  Austria,  399 

Ellinek,  519 

Eltzbacher,  392,  393 

Emerson,  206 

Engelhardt,  305 

Engelmann,  569 

Engels,  29,  30,  68,  139, 

288,   290,  291,  294, 

319,  320,  322,  323, 

329,   330.  332.  333, 

337.   338.  340.  344. 

353.  354.  356,  358. 
382,  389,  402,  405, 
510,  540,  547 

Engelssohn,  82 
Epicurus,  16 
Evans,  see  Eliot 


142,  143.  148, 

302,  308,  309. 

324.  327,  328. 

334.  335,  336, 

349.  350,  351. 

373,  374,  381, 

406,  407,  455, 


Fabbri,  392,  401 
Fang,  s$t  Tuan-Fanj 


88 


TOL.  II. 


578 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


Fedorov,  59 

Ferroti,  see  Fircks 

Fet,  67,  227 

Feuerbach,  3,  4,  6,  8,  9,  12,  20,  21, 
27,  42,  46,  48,  49.  50,  53,  54,  55, 
56,  72,  74,  83,  102,  116,  139,  144. 
167,  176,  188,  189,  217,  222,  224, 
250,  282,  288,  302,  320,  328,  332, 
333,  345.  348,  349,  350.  357,  358, 
359,  386.  399.  425,  443,  447,  452. 
468,  469,  476,  482,  483,  484,  485, 
486.  503,  520,  526,  533,  547,  548, 
553.  554-  560,  564,  565 

Fichte,  154,  192,  323,  350,  351,  402, 
468,   472,   473,   483,   517,   533.   553 

Filaret,  216 

Filippov,  219 

Filosofov,  355 

Fircks  (Sch6do-Ferroti),   193 

Firth.  519 

Flerovskii,  308 

Fletcher,  573 

Fourier,   3,    13,   32,    116,   484,   549 

Francis   I,    Emperor   of  Austria,    416, 

525 
Frank,  435 
Frederick     II,     the     Great,     King    of 

Prussia,  414 
Frederick  William  III,  King  of  Prussia, 

416 
Friedeberg,   392,  407 
Friedlander,   240 
Friedrich,  255 

Gadke,  572 

Galkin-Vraskoi,   114 

Galkine-Wrasskoy,  see   Galkin-Vraskoi 

Ganz,  570 

Gardiner,  507 

Garfield,   104,  545 

Gar§in,   173,   185 

Gavernitz,  see  Schulze-Gavemitz 

Gehring,  568 

Gentz,  532 

George,  314,  315 

George  Eliot,  see  Eliot 

Gernet,  569 

GerSenzon,  435 

GerSuni,  365.  368,  369 

Giacomo  see  James  of  Viterbo 

Giles  of  Rome,  see  Aegidius 

Giljarov-Platonov,   132 

Ginzberg,  see  Achad-ha-am 

Giordano  Bruno,  see  Bruno 

Glinka,  220 


Gneist,   192 

Godwin,  393,  400,  410 
Goethe,   13,   21,  65,  67,   77,   172,    174, 
177,  206,   269,  421,  448,  449,  471, 

478,   513,   536,   538,   558 
Gogol,   3,   9,    19,   29,   67.   69,   70,   78. 

185,  387.  388,  425,  470,  481,  528 
Golovkine,  572 
Golovnin,    193 
Goncarov,  14,  20,  22,  23,  59,  93,  136, 

181,  272,  387 
Gor'kii,   185,   316,  328,  355,  361,   362, 

387.  388,  390,  470,  567 
Gorres,  532 
Gotz,  568 

Gradovskii,  410,  430 
Granovskii,    63,    124,    282,    287,    425, 

440,  471,  548,  561 
Grave,  392 
Grec,  220 
Gredeskul,  439 
Gregory   VII    (Pope    of    Rome),    494, 

496 
Griboedov,  67 
Grigor'ev,   193,  476,  561 
G  rigor  o  vie,   184 
Grimm,  66 

Grognard,  see  Mihailovskii 
Gromeka,  63 
Grote,  45 

Grusenberg,  466,  568 
Guettee,  282,  283 
Guizot,  3,  37 

Guyau,   167.  383,  384.  388 
Guyot,  Yves,  520 

Haeckel,   151 

Hamann,  214 

Hardenberg,  414 

Harnack,  487,  489 

Hartmann,  46,  172,  173,  187,  225, 
226,  232,  245,  267 

Haumant,  571,  572 

Haxthausen,  31,  33,  572 

Hector,   109 

Hegel,  3,  8,  26,  27,  72,  116,  118,  122, 
124,  132,  136,  191,  226,  245,  246, 
250.  257,  269,  319,  324,  333,  348, 
402,  425,  459,  460,  468,  471,  473. 
476,  483.  484,  533,  548,  550,  551, 

553.  5^5 
Heine,  58,   67,   72,   196,   392,  514 
Heinze,  466,  568 
Helferich,  570 
Hellenbach,  264 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


579 


Hellwald,  45,  47 

Helvetius,   328 

Henry,  399 

Henry  George,  see  George 

Herbart,   10 

Herberstein,  572,  573 

Herckner,  294 

Herder,  303,  413,  564 

Herodotus,  45 

Hertling,  520 

Herzen,   i,  3,  4,  5,  8,   12,   14,   17,  20, 

33.  37.  38,  39.  41.  49,  51,  52.  53. 
63,  65,  67,  68,  72,  73,  74,  75,  79, 
80,  81,  83,  84,  85,  88,  91,  98,  99, 
103,  105,  107,  III,  117,  124,  130, 
139,  140,  159,  181,  182,  186,  187, 
189,  193,  196,  197,  216,  218,  220, 
222,  282,  283,  287,  288,  290,  304, 
305,  306,   308,  316,  326,   327,   328, 

348,  356,   359,   361,  372,  374,  387, 

411,  423,  425,  426,  434,  437,   438, 

447,  458,   460,   469,  471,  474,   476, 

481,  482,  483,   485,  487,  488,   500, 

501,  504,  526,   528,  533,  535,  542, 

547,   548,  549,   550,  551,   552,   555, 

561,  563,  567,  571,  572 
Hettner,  569 
Hildebrand,  324 

Hill,  519 

Hoffmann,   196,  269,   270,  273 

Holbach,  328 

Holtzendorff,  539 

Holy  Roman  Empire,  Emperor  of, 
see  Joseph  II,  Rudolf  II 

Homjakov,  75,  192,  198,  218,  219, 
222,  223,  226,  241,  242,  266,  273, 
281,  437,  472,  479,  488,  490,  502, 
561 

Horsey,  573 

Hugo,  Victor,  67,  72 

Hugues  of  Saint-Victor,  226 

Hume,  9,  45,  49,  117,  138,  139,  171, 
188,  229,  350,  351,  353,  403,  414, 
442,  468,  469,  471,  472,  475,  478, 
483,  485,  5'^1,  531,  532,  51^,  558, 

562,  565 

Hung,  see  Ku-Hung-Ming 
Hutten,  351 
Hvo§cinskaja,  387,  388 

Ibsen,   187,  326,  392,  410 
Isaev,  291 
Ivanov,  88 

Ivanov-Razumnik,  306,  461 
Izgoev,  435 


Jacobi,  350,  418 

Jakeibovic  (Mel§in),   185 

James  I,  King  of  England,  507 

James  of  Viterbo,  494 

Janygev,  503 

Jaro§,  244 

Javorskii,  502,  503 

Joannes  Damascenus,    200,    202,   472 

Jodl,  257 

John  IV,  the  Terrible,  Tsar  of  Russia, 

III,    142,    169,    244,   496 
John,  Saint  (apostle),  235,  473 
Johnson,   17 
Joseph  II,   Emperor  of  Holy  Roman 

Empire,  414 
Josephine,  Empress  of  the  French,  563 
Jurkevic,   6,    7,   9,   57,    132,    226,    284, 

468 
Jurowsky,  570 
Justinian,  497 
Juzakov,   159 
Juzov,   159,   306,   308 


Kacorovskii,  306 

Kahl,  492 

Kang-Yu-Wei,  420 

Kant,  8,  9,  18,  45,  46,  49,  74, 
116,  117,  118,  120,  122,  123, 
125,  127,  128,  132,  133,  134, 
138,  170,  188,  189,  226,  228, 
230,  231,  233,  250,  251,  252, 
254,  256,  257,  258,  259,  263, 
280,   281,   284,   285,  306,  324, 

350,  351,  352,  353.  354-  379, 
407,  414,  418,  419,  433,  442, 
468,  469,  470,  471,   472,   474, 

478,  479,  483,  484,  485,  486, 
511,  516,  517,   520,   531,   532, 

538.  553,  554,  558,  562,  565 

Karakozov,  82,   102,   116,  390 

Karamzin,  220,  424,  468 

Karazin,  525 

Kareev,   131 

Karinslcii,  468 

Karonin,  328 

Karpovic,   295 

Karysev,  308 

Kasperow,  570 

Katkov,  7,  58,  63,  191-197,  198, 
202,  219,  220,  222,  223,  224, 
244,   281,  426,   427,   430,  481, 

533 
Kattenbusch,  487,  496,  497,  568 

Kautsky,    317,    334,    336,     337, 
342 


102, 
124, 

137. 
229, 

253. 

278, 

349, 
403, 
455, 
475. 
501, 
533. 


200, 
227, 
5^9, 


338, 


>80 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


Kavelin,  37,  38-  168,  227,  281,  282, 
426,  468,  561 

Kempis,  k,   199,  206 

Kennan,   113,  568,  571 

Kern,  271 

Ketcer,   191 

Keussler,  569  ' 

Kidd,  374 

Kireevskii,  61,  63,  131,  198,  207,  210, 
219,  243,  281,  466,  471,  490,  526, 
560 

Kistjakovskii,  435 

Klements,   114 

Klju§nikov,  59,   193 

Klopstock,   192 

Kluchevsky,  571 

Kogan-Bernstein,   114 

Kojalovic,  227 

Kolubovskii,  466,  568 

Komarov,   196 

Korba,   114 

Korolenko,  41,  315 

Ko§elev,   192,   212 

Kostomarov,  2 

Kovalevskaj  a,  59 

Kovalevskii,  439,  569 

Kozlov,  437 

Kozuhov,  59 

Kraevskii,   197 

Krapotkin,  see  Kropotkin 

Kraus,  520 

Kravcinskii,  see  Stepniak 

Krestovskii,  59,    193 

Kropotkin,    Alexander,    114,    386,  454 

Kropotkin,  Petr,  11,  88,  89,  102,  106, 
112,  113,  136,  185,  378-389,  390, 
391,  393.  399,  405.  408,  410.  428, 
446,  454,   475,  482,   526,  528,  536, 

544.  545,  567,  571 
Kruse,   192 
Krylov,  67 
Kudrin,  see  Rusanov 
Kudrjavcev-Platonov,  226 
Kugelmann,   291 
Ku-Hung-Ming,  419,   420 
Kulikovskii,  see  Ovsjaniko-Kulikovskii 
Kunicyn,  468 
Kuropatkin,  572 
Kustino,  572 
Kvj atkovskii,    ii 2 

Lagardelle,  317,   392 
Lamarck,  29,  45 
Landauer,  392 
Lang,  571 


Lange,  F.  A.,   139,  257,   352,  532 

Lange,  H.,  571 

Langen,  255 

Lassalle,  38,  64,  98,  143,  288,  484,  546 

Lavoisier,   142 

Laveleye,  520 

Lavrov,  51,  88,  89,  90,  91,  92,  98,  99, 
102,  109,  115-136,  138,  140,  141, 
146,  152,  154,  160,  161,  163,  166, 
181,  182,  189,  220,  222,  292,  288, 
290,  305.  306,  344,  352,  353,  368. 
371,  372,  373.  374,  386,  387,  410, 
427.  437,  468,  469,  470,  473,  474, 
475,  476,  478,  482,  528,  545 

Lehmann,   169 

Lenin,  293,  296,  340,  349,  351,  353, 
354.  380 

Leo  XIII   (Pope  of  Rome),  512,  523 

Leont'ev,  K.  N.,  197,  205,  207-220, 
221,  222,  223,  227,  231,  266,  281, 
427,  470,  479,  480,  481,  488,  490, 

493.   502,   503.   527.   529.   533 
Leont'ev,  P.  M.,   197 
Le  Play,  204,  205 
Lermontov,  54,   61,   68,  75,   133,   186, 

271,  272 
Leroux,  67 
Leroy-Beaulieu,  568 
Leskov,  59,   184 

Lessing,  7,   13,  22,  28,  29,  30,  413 
Lhotzky,  240 
Liebig,  62 

Liebknecht,  341,  400 
Littre,   71 

Locke,  413,  416,  418,  492,  534 
Loofs,  487 

Lopatin,   117,  286,  437 
Lopuhin,  299,  453 
Loris-Melikov,   166,    195,   198,  427 
Losskii,  437,  468 
Louis  XVI,  King  of  France,  542 
Louis  XVIII,  King  of  France,  537 
Louis  Philippe,   King  of  the   French, 

37,  50,  537 
Lourie,  see  Ossip-Lourie 

Loyola,  262 

Lubbock,   167 

Lully,  226 

Lunacarskii,  355,  356,  357,  358 

Luther,   147,   154,  551 

Luxemburg,  353,  354 

L'vov,  303 

Lyell,  45 

Maassen,  255,  568 


INDEX   OF  NAMES 


581 


Mably,  77,  416 

Macaulay.  37,  45,   196,  422 

Mach,    188,    344,    345,    351,    352,  353, 

373 

Machajski  and  the  Mahaevcy,  390 

Machiavelli,  498 

Mackay,  392 

Maeterlinck,  564 

Mahaev,  298 

Mahaevcy,  see  Machajski  and  the 
Mahaevcy 

Maine  de  Biran,  see  Biran 

Maistre,  196,  205,  206,  214,  217,  224, 
226,   2^  507,   532,   533,   537 

Malcev,   138 

Malebranche,  226 

Malthus,  3,  31,  32,  35,  388 

Manuilov,  570 

Markevic,  59,   193 

Maromcev,  428 

Marquardsen,  569 

Martin,  570 

Martov,  293,  296 

Marx,  22,  28,  29,  30,  36,  37,  47,  50,  52, 
66,  85,  90,  92,  98,  loi,  102,  117, 
118,  128,  130,  131,  139,  140,  143, 
144,  145,  148,  153,  157,  159,  160, 
174,  180,  189,  222,  239,  288,  289, 
290,  291,  302,  304,  306,  308,  309, 
318,  319,  320,  321,  322,  323,  324, 
327,  328,  329,  330,  332,  333,  334. 
335,  336,  337,  338,  339,  342,  343, 
344-  345,  346,  348,  349,  35i,  354, 
358.  372,  373,  374,  375,  379,  381, 
382,  385,  389,  400,  402,  403,  405, 
406,  407,  429,  454,  484,  498,  511, 

524,   532,  547,   550.  553,  555 
Masoch,  see  Sacher-Masoch 
Masslov,  570 
Maude,  207 
Maudsley,   151 
Mavor,  569 
Mazzini,  545 
Mel'nik,  569 
Mehring,  337 

Melikov,  see  Louis-MeUkov 
Mel'nikov,  315 
Melsin,  see  Jakeibovic 
Mendeleev,  426 
Menger,  317 
Mereikovsku,   169,   187,  316,  360,  380, 

444,  458 
Merkel,  539,  540 
MeScerskii,  59 
Meslier,  416 


Methodios  of  Olympus,  489,  498 
Metternich,  416,  420,   540,   564 
Mezencev,  59,  95,  103,  106,.  165 
Michelangelo,  521 
Michels,   341 

Mihailov,  r,  14,  84,  109,  117,  544 
Mihailovskii,  56,  77,  127,  136-190, 
193,  196,  197,  217,  220,  316,  328. 
344,  349,  350,  352.  362,  368,  371, 
372,  373,  375,  377,  388,  410,  427, 
437,  451,  473,  474,  475,  47^,  479, 
489,  481,  482,  486,  512,  527,  528, 

542,  551 
Miliukov,  see  Miljukov 
Miljukov,  429,  430,  439,  443,  571,  572, 
Mill,  3,  9,   10,   15,  30,  32,  42,  46,  56, 

57,  71,  73,  102,  132,  137,  139,  141, 

188,  306,  308,  388,  416,  452,  484, 

522 
Miller,    195 

Ming,  see  Ku-Hung-Ming 
Minns,  568 
Mirtov,  see  Lavrov 
Mirskii,  see  Svjatopolk 
Mitrovic,  206 
Mohammed,  228 
Mokrievic,  see  Debagorii 
Moleschott,  56,  71,  74,   102,  553 
Mommsen,  422 
Montaigne,    154 
Montesquieu,  483 
Morelly,  416 
Most,  394,  399,  400 
Miiller,  487,  568 
Muth,  521 


Nachimson,  570 

Nadezdin,  69 

Nagradov,  568 

Napoleon  I,  25,  28,  33,  39,  416,  418,  424 

507 
Napoleon  III,  202 
Naumann,  422,  428 
Naumov,  328 
Necaev,  86,  87-89,  90,  92,  96,  107,  109, 

130,   272,  410,  545 
Nekrasov,    i,   59,  78,    140,   186,  328, 

387,   426 
Nemirovic-Dancenko,   178 
Nesmelov,  437,  503 
Nestroev,  368,  369,  370,  371,  372,  376, 

377 
Nettlau,  88 
Nicholas  I,  Tsar  of  Russia,  14,  17,  48, 


582 


INDEX   OF  NAMES 


117,  177,  197,  202,  213,  217,  265, 
290,  304,  416,  424,  425,  502,  525, 
528,  533.  534.  554.  562,  572 

Nicholas  II,  Tsar  of  Russia,  205,  525 

Niebuhr,  46 

Nietzsche,  54,  55,  73.  81,  112,  179,  187, 
216,  233,  236,  361,  374,  375,  380, 
384.  388,  392,  398,  399,  410.  402, 
410,  447,  448,  449,  456,  485,  498, 
509,  520,  563,  564 

Nieuwenhuis,   392 

Nikoladze,  2 

Nikolai-on,  159,  290,  291,  308,309,  314, 

569 
Nikon  (patriarch),  237 
Nordau,   179 

North,  Semiramis  of  the,  see  Catherine 
Novgorodcev,  433,  434 
Novomirskii,   391 
Noworusski,  571 
Nozin,   140 

Octavius,  see  Augustus 

Oettingen,  569 

Offenbach,   179 

Ogarev,  85,  88,   107,  290,  387 

Omulevskii,  see  Fedorov 

Olearius,  573 

Oncken,   317,  572 

Origen,  226,  258,   263,  480,   488,  489, 

493 
Orthodox,  see  Akselrod  L, 
Osipovskii,  468 
Ossip-Lourie,  567,  568 
Ostrogorskii,  341 
Ostrovskii,   14,   20,  59,    193 
Ovsjaniko-KuUkovskii,  439 
Owen,  3,   13,  25,  333.  484 
Oxenstierna,  537 

Pahleu,   108 

Paine,  541,  542,  547, 

Palme,  569 

Panaev,   185,  3S7 

Panteleev,  486 

Paracelsus,  250 

Pares,  570 

Pascal,  46 

Paul,  Saint,  497,  498,  499,  501 

Pazitnov,  570 

Pecorin,  503 

Pecqueur,  381 

Pelagius,  226 

Perovskaja,   108,  385 


Pe§ehonov,  314,  315,  317 

Pestel,  84,  98,  106,  287,  424,  432,  465, 
526,  528,  546 

Peter  I,  the  Great,  Tsar  of  Russia,  7, 
8,  131,  191,  211,  222,  237,  303, 
314,  423,  426,  436,  441,  381,  485, 
497.   502.   503,  504,  525,  528,  551, 

554 

Petra§evskii  and  the  Petra§evcy  group, 
288,  425 

Petrunkevic,  439,  570 

Philo,  226,  263 

Pierling,  228,  242 

Pilet,  568 

Pirogov,   24,  443,  572 

Pisarev,  i,  53-69,  jc,  71,  72,  73,  74, 
75.  76,  77.  78,  79,  80,  105,  107, 
113,  115,  131,  132,  136,  140,  156, 
161,  167,  187,  220,  222,  225,  271, 
282,  305,  388,  389,  398,  429,  461, 
475,560 

Pisemskii,   59,  93 

Pius  VII   (Pope  of  Rome),  416 

Pius  IX   (Pope  of  Rome),  255 

Plato,  19,  54,  64,  226,  228,  229,  230, 
241,  247,  250,  253,  254,  256,  257, 
258,  260,  263,  269,  273,  281,  285, 

437.  460,  471,  472.  501 

Platon  (metropolitan  of  Moscow),  254 

Platonov,  see  Giljarov-PIatonov,  Kudr- 
j  avcev-Platonov 

Play,  see  Le  Play 

Plechanow,  see  Plehanov 

Plehanov,  2,  97,  98,  140,  142,  189, 
292,  293,  294,  295.  296,  300,  301 
308,  326,  327-331,  339,  34i,  343 
345,  346,  348,  349,  350,  351,  352, 
353,  354,  355.  356,  357,  358,  360, 
362,  363,  408,  457,  458,  459,  460, 

461,  473,  474.  551 
Pleve,    160,    207,   296,    299,    362,    440, 

445 

Plotinus,   226,  263,   269 

Plutus  (Bernhard)   570 

Pnin,  304 

Pobedonoscev,  135,  189,  194,  195, 
197-207,  219,  220,  221,  222,  227, 
265,   427,  435,   441,  443,  466,  467. 

481,   493,   527.  529 
Poerio,  52 

Pogodin,   173,   191,    198,   220,   328,  431 
Polenov,  206 
Polevoi,   425,  533 
Polonskii,    108 
Pomjalovskii,  59 


INDEX   OF  NAMES 


583 


Possoschkow,  573 

Potocki,  507 

Proclus,  296 

Prokopovic,  502 

Protagoras,   125 

Protopopov,  68 

Proudhon,  3,  30,  33,  36,  45,  67,  ri6, 
117,  139,  140.  151-  183,  290, 
335.  367,  380,  393,  396,  400, 
405,    410,    484,    550 

Prugavin,  568 

Prutkov,  272 

Pugacev,   79,  84,  94 

PuSkin,  I,  13,  17,  19,  21,  22,  23,  54,  56, 
66,  67,  70,  75,  78,  185,  187,  196, 
219,  270,  171,  273,  290,  304,  387, 
435.    467.    470.    528,    567 

Rabinovic,  240 

RadiScev,  304,  424,  440,  528 

Radlov,  247,   286,  465,  467 

Rambaud,  571 

Ranke,  37 

Raphael,  66 

Rappoport,   115 

Rasputin,  300 

Raumer,   2 

Raymond  Lully,  see  Lully 

Razin,  84,  94 

Razumnik,  see  Ivanov-Razumnik 

Reclus,  378,   389,  392,  399 

Reinholdt,  567 

Renan,  49,   130,   162,   187 

Re§etnikov,   156,  315 

Reusner,  570 

Ricardo,  3,  32,  33,  47,   157,  291 

Rickert,   120,  352 

Riehl,  352,  373 

Ropshin,  see  RopSin 

RopSin,    375,    377,    444-.461,    474,    486, 

529.  535.  546 
Roscher,  27 
Rost,  420 
Rothe,  495 

Rothenbiicher,  480,  492 
Rousseau,   13,  95,   108,   140,   147,   199, 

233.  303.   304.  412,  413,  414,  416, 
418,  423,  440,  483,  507,  508,  516, 

523,  533 
Roux,   385 
Rozanov,    189,   222 
Riickert,   244 
Rudolf  II,   Emperor  of   Holy   Roman 

Empire,  206 
Ruge,  118,   123.  133,  289,  420 


Rusanov  (Kudrin),  30,  43,  44,  47,  166 
Ryleev,   78,   106 

Sacher-Masoch,    179 

Saint-Simon,    116,    147,    176,   484 

Saint-Victor,  see  Hugues 

Saltykov  (Scedrin),  13,  59,  63,  66, 
78,  107.  140,  162,  171,  185,  387, 
482.    523 

Samarin,   198,  219 

Sand,   13,  67,  72,  208 

Savickii,   368 

Savinkov,  see  Rop§in 

Savinkova,  453 

Sazonov,  290 

Scedrin,  see  Saltykov 

Schedo-Ferroti,  see  Fircks 

Schell,  520 

Schelling,  191,  226,  241,  245,  247, 
250,   257,   363,   402,   468,   471,   553 

Schiemann,  571,  572 

Schiller,   19,  67,  83,   192,  414 

Schlegel,  509,  532 

Schleiermacher,  358,  495 

Schlesinger,  569 

Schlosser,  2 

Schopenhauer,  10,  46,  72,  73,  102, 
127,  225,  226,  230,  231,  232. 
245,  252,  257,  259,  263,  267,  268, 
269,  278,  374,  402,  468,  485,  550,  553 

Schulte,  255 

Schulze-Gavernitz,   294,  .569 

Schuppe,   351,  352 

Scotus,  see  Duns  Scotus 

Sederholm,   208 

Seeberg,  489 

Selgunov,  39,    68,    84,    140,    187,    290. 

.306,  505,  551 
Sellers-Mihailov,  59 
Semiramis  of  the  North,  see  Catherine 
Senkovskii  (Brambeus),  220 
Sergii,  Archbishop  of  Finland,  502,  503 
Sergius,  Grand  Duke,  296,  299,  362,  445 
Sering,  569 
Servetus,  497 
Sestov,  392 
Sevyrev,  220 

Shakespeare,  r8,  21,  67,  196,  269,  52 
Siey^s,  414,  418 
Simkhowitsch,  569 
§i§kov,  102,  220,  363,  364,  444 
Sismondi,  46 
Skrine,  571 
Skabicevskii,  68 
Skovoroda,  225 


584 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


Slavinskii,  439 

Slepcov,  59 

Smetana,  259 

Smith,  3,  32,  144,  145,  157,  176,  188, 
291,382,414,415,425 

Socrates,  277,  460 

Sokolov,   no,  369 

Sologub,  36  T.  392 

Solomon,  264,  448 

Solov'ev,  Vladimir,  6,  75,  189,  219, 
223,  225-286,  352,  354.  357.  359, 
437,  440,  466,  468,  471,  472,  474, 
476,  477.  479.  480,  481,  487,  488, 
490,    493.    502,    503,    529 

Solov'ev,  Sergei,  225,  227 

Sombart,   294,  569 

Sorel,  317,  392,  408 

Sorge,  291 

Spencer,  102,  116,  117,  118,  119,  120, 
121,  127,  132,  137,  138,  139,  141, 
144,  149,  151,  167.  169,  171,  187, 
188,  206,   306,  373,  382,  388,  469, 

484.  553 
Speranskii,  37,  424,  465 
Spielhagen,   72 
Spinoza,  6,  46,  225,  230,  231,  257,  263, 

284,  285,  345,  349,  354 
Ssemenow,  570 
Stahl,  532,  533,  539 
Stammler,  352 
Stankevic,  24,   191 
Starover,   296 
Stein,  Marxist  writer,  349 
Stein,  Heinrich  Friedrich  Carl,  Baron 

vom,  414 
Sten'ka  Razin,  see  Razin 
Stepniak,  59,  95,  96,  103,  104,  105,  106, 

III,   165,   167,  369,   371,  385,  386, 

451.  453.  455,  456.  458,  524.  542,  571 
Stirner,  53,  54,  55,  66,  72,  73,  156,  179, 

187,   336,  392,  393.  394.  399,  400, 

402,  403,  410,  452,  472,  473,  482, 

484,485,520,460 
Stolypin,   299,  430,  436 
Stowe,  68 
Strahov,  80,  243 
Strauss,   167,  417,  418,  484 
Strelnikof,  see  Strelnikov 
Strelnikov,   114 

Strossmayer,  228,  242,  255,  256 
Stronin,  144 
Struve,   188,    189,   293,   294,  297,  302, 

308,  309.  329,  343,  344,  350,   352. 

354.  429.  431,  432,  435,  436,  443. 

444.  454 


Suvalov,  362 
Suvorin,  197 
Svetlov,  503 

Svjatopolk-Mirskii,  204,  440 
Swedenborg,  226,  263 
Sypjagin,   112,  295,  296,  362 

Tailhade,  392,  399,  534 

Taine,  56,  57,  71 

Tarde,   145 

Tareev,  502,  503 

TatiScev,  443 

Tcherkesoflf,  see  Cerkezov 

TertuUian,  214 

Thackeray,  67 

Thierry,  31 

Thomas  of  Aquino,  see  Aquinas 

Thucydides,  45 

Thun,  328,   353,  363,  371,  571 

Tihomirov,    223-224,     254,     256,     258, 

449.  481,   527 

Tjutcev,  272 

Tkacev,  68,  92,  93,  94,  98,  290,  291, 
326.  340 

Tocqueville,   196 

Tolstoi,  Aleksei,  272 

Tolstoi,  D.  A.   194 

Tolstoi,  I.  N.,   290 

Tolstoi,  Lev,  59,  64,  67,  77,  93,  126, 
133,  147,  167,  169,  180,  185, 
186,  188,  189,  205,  206,  207,  208, 
216,  217,  227,  233,  271,  272,  276, 
277,  278,   280,   281,   285,  316,  357, 

387.  392,  393.  394.  397.  407,  41°, 
411,  412,  443,  449,  452,  455,  457, 
459,  468,  470,  479,  481.  484,  504, 

529.  535 
Trepov,  95 
Trietsch,  570 
Trismegistus,  226 
Trockii,  348,  571 
Troeltsch,   492 
Trotzky,  see  Trockii 
Trubeckoi,  228,  286,  437 
Tscherevanin,  see  Cerevjanin 
Tscherewanin,  see  Cervejanin 
Tscherkesoff,  see  Cerkezov 
Tschernischewsky,  see  CernySevskii 
Tuang-Fang,  420 
Tucker,  392,  393,  407,  408,  410 
Tugan-Baranovskii,     293,     308,     324, 

408.  439,  570 
Turgenev,  Ivan,  6,   11,   12,   14,  19,  22, 

23.  54-  55,  58,  59.  60,  61,  69,  70, 

72,   79,   80,   93,  97,   105,   108,   III, 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


585 


133.  175.  186,  193,  194,  195,  196, 
208,  218,  219,  272,  316,  387,  425, 
426,  470 

Turgenev,  Nikolai,  425,  572 
Tveritinov,  505 
Tylor,   167,  357 

Uhtomskii,   219 
Ular,  570 

Ul'janov,  see  Lenin 
Ulysses,  109 

Uscher  Ginzberg,  see  Achad-ha-am 
Uspenskii,  Gleb,  31,  185,  315,  328,  445 
Uspenskii,  N.  V.,   31 
Ustrjalov,  59 

Uvarov,     191,     220,     222,     271,     430, 
432,   441,    524,    525,    528,    533 

Valentinus,  226 

Varlet,  385 

Vasilevskii,  412 

Vengerova,  445 

Vico,    3,    25,    147,    148,    152,    469 

Victor,  Saint-,  see  Hugues 

Vidal,  381 

Vincent,  Saint  (of  Lerins),  255 

Virchow,  62 

Vitte,  see  Witte 

Vladimir  Aleksandrovic,  Grand  Duke, 

207 
Vladislavlev,  227 
Vogt,   56,   71,   72,    I02,   469,  484,  547, 

548,  553 
Vogiie,  567 
Volkonskii,  567 
Volkhovsky,  see  Volhovskii 
Vollmar,  294 
Volhovskii,   114 
Volskii,  see  Machajski 
Voltaire,  108,  154,  174,  175,  176,  177, 

178,   180,   187,  282,  413,  418,  423, 

483,485,523,564 


Volynskii,   187 

Voroncov,     158,    159,    189,    234,    308, 

317 
Vraskoi,  see  Galkin-Vraskoi 
Vvedenskii,   A.   I.,  468 
Vvedenskii,  I.  I.,  2 

Waliszewski,  567 
Wallace,  568 
Ward,  373 
Weber,  G.,  42 
Weber,  M.,  520,  569 
Wesselovsky,  567 

William  II,     King       of    Prussia    and 
German    Emperor,    265,  276,  523, 

525 
Williams,  569 
Windelband,   120,  352 
Witschewsky,  570 
Witte,  207,  441,  442 
Wrasskoy,  see  Galkin-Vraskoi 
Wei,  see  Kang-Yu-Wei 

Xerxes,  238 

Yves  Guyot,  see  Guyot 
Yu-Wei,  see  Kang-Yu-Wei 

Zaicev,  60,  68 
Zarin,  63,  503 
Zasulic,  95,    105,    164,   293,   296,   309. 

326,   342,   536,   571 
Zdziechowski,   571 
2eljabov,  365 
2emcufnikov,  272 
Zeno,   24,  350 
Ziber,  291,  308 
Zilliacus,  570 
Zlatovratskii,  315,  316 
Zola,  70,  72,   178,   187,  513 
Zosimus,  215 
2ukovskii,   159,  290 


Piinted  in  Great  Britain  by 
I'NWIN  BROTHERS,  LIMITED,  THE  GRESHAM  PRESS,  WOKINQ  AND  tONDON 


Russia  and  the  Struggle  for 

Peace  By  michael  farbman 

Crown  Svo.  5/.  »<?/. 

"  I  would  make  Michael  S.  Farbman's  '  Russia  and  the  Struggle  for 
Peace  '  compulsory  in  all  schools.  This  is  a  book  to  sweep  the  cobwebs 
away  for  ever.  We  here  learn  the  actual  truth  for  the  first  time  about 
the  Revolution." — Evening  News. 

"A  singularly  valuable  addition  to  our  knowledge.  Nowhere  could 
one  find  a  clearer  or  more  obviously  truthful  account  of  the  great 
upheaval." — The  Herald. 

Three  Aspects  of  the  Russian 

Revolution    ^^  emile  vandervelde 

Translated  by  JEAN  E.   H.   FINDLAY 
Crszvn  %vo.  5/.  net.     Postage  i^d. 

"  A  valuable  and  original  series  of  notes  on  revolutionary  Russia." — 
Daily  News. 

The     Romance     of    the 
Romanoffs     ^y  joseph  mccabe 

Author  of  "The  Tyranny  of  Shams,"  "The  Soul  of  Europe,"  etc. 

Demy  Sfo.  Illustrated.  10/.  6 J.  net. 

"  The  dynasty  flaunts  its  brutal,  sordid,  attractive  and  romantic  career 
through  his  pages." — The  Times. 

"  He  has  produced  a  picture  which  is  complete  and  admirably  clear." — 
Glasgow  Herald. 

History  of  the  Russian  Revolution 
to  Brest-Litovsk    by  l.  trotsky 

Crown  ^V9.  4/.  6d.  net. 

This  book  is  in  no  sense  propaganda  work,  but  a  serious  attempt  to 
show  every  stage  of  the  crisis  in  its  historical  perspective.  Trotsky's 
argument  is  that  "  war  is  the  method  by  which  capitalism  seeks  to  solve 
its  insoluble  contradictions,  and  to  this  method  the  proletariat  must 
oppose  its  own  method,  the  method  of  the  Social  Revolution."  His 
chapters  will  come  as  a  surprise  to  those  readers  who  do  not  know 
how  experienced  and  skilful  a  journalist  he  is,  and  there  is  an  added 
surprise  for  those  who  imagine  that  Trotsky  is,  or  was,  a  "  pro-German," 
for  they  will  find  him  to  be  one  of  the  bitterest  and  most  uncompromising 
opponents  of  the  imperialism  of  the  Central  Powers. 


The  German  Empire:  1867-1914 

and  the  German  Unity  Movement 

By  WILLIAM  HARBUTT  DAWSON 

Author  of  "  The  Evolution  of  Modern  Germany,"  "  Germany  and  the  Germans," 
"  Municipal  Life  and   Government  in  Germany,"  etc.,  etc. 

Detny  Svo.      In  z  vols,  each  of  about  500  pages.      About  16s.  net  each. 

Volume  I  covering  the  period  1806  to  the  middle  period  of 
Bismarck's  Chancellorship,  and  Volume  II  dealing  in  consider- 
able detail  with  the  twenty-five  years  preceding  the  present  war. 

"  The  German  Empire,"  a  work  which  has  long  been  in  preparation, 
represents  the  most  important  and  comprehensive  of  this  author's  many 
contributions  to  German  history  and  to  the  understanding  of  German 
politics  and  affairs.  It  is  characteristic  of  Mr.  Dawson's  presentation  of 
facts  that  he  devotes  special  attention  to  Anglo-German  relations  and 
that,  while  rigidly  eschewing  controversy,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  give 
expression  to  his  own  views  and  opinions.  As  he  states  in  the  Preface, 
"I  have  not  written  impersonally,  nor  have  I  tried  so  to  write."  The 
work  will  be  found  to  have  a  direct  and  important  bearing  upon  the 
present  international  situation. 


Mineral  Resources  of  Georgia 
and  Caucasia   by  d.  ghambashidze 

'Demy  %vo.  %s.  6d.  net. 

This  book  is  the  first  summary  in  English  language  of  (he  mineral 
resources  of  Georgia  and  Caucasia,  which  countries  are  bound  to  play  a 
very  important  part  in  developing  ttie  unlimited  resources  of  the  Middle 
East. 

It  can  be  used  very  conveniently  as  a  reference  book  for  engineers, 
financiers,  and  the  general  investing  public,  and  also  by  Government 
Departments. 


War  and  Revolution  in  Asiatic 

Russia     By  m.  philips  price 

Demy  Svo.  Ss.  6J.  nit. 

"  One  of  the  best  books  of  travel  that  have  appeared  for  many  years." 
— Everyman. 

From  Autocracy  to  Bolshevism 

T>emy  Zvo.  By  Baron  GRAVENITZ  5/.  net. 

"A  deeply  interesting  book." — Edinburgh  Evening  fiews. 


RECENT  HISTORICAL  LITERATURE 

The  Political  History  of  Japan  in  the  Meiji  Era 

By  Prof.  W.  W.  McLAREN.      Demy  8vo,  12s.  bd.  net.     Postage  td. 
A  valuable  and  suggestive  book." — Saturday  Review. 

History  of  Germany  in  the  Nineteenth  Century 

By  HEINRICH  VON  TREITSCHKE.  Translated  by  E.  and  C. 
PAUL.  With  Introductions  by  WILLIAM  HARBUTT  DAWSON. 
Six  Vols.     Price  15s.  net  per  vol.  (in  sets  only).     Postage  6d.  per  vol. 

Poland  and  the  Polish   Question     Impressions  and 

Afterthoughts     By  NINIAN  HILL. 

Demy  8vo,  with  Illustrations  and  a  Map,  105.  6d.  net.     Postage  6d. 

Poland's  Case  for  Independence   Demy  Svo,  7s.  6d.  net. 

"  An  admirable  summary  of  the  country's  distinguished  and  turbulent 
past."— Pa//  Mall  Gazette. 

History     of    Africa     South     of     the     Zambesi 

From  September  1505  to  September  1795.  In  Three  Volumes. 
With  Maps  and  Plates.  By  Dr.  GEORGE  McCALL  THEAL. 
Vol.  I.,  Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  (Vols.  II.  and 
III.,  Revised  and  Enlarged  Edition,  in  preparation.)  Demy  Svo, 
8s.  6d.  net. 

History   of   South    Africa  from    1795  to    1872 

Five  Volumes.  With  15  Maps  and  Plans.  By  Dr.  GEORGE 
McCALL  THEAL.  Vols.  I.  and  II.,  Fourth  Edition  ;  Vol.  III., 
Third  Edition,  all  Enlarged  and  Rewritten  ;  Vols.  IV.  and  V.  are  in 
their  Second  Edition.     Demy  Svo,  8s.  6d.  net. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  VOLUMES    (1873-1881)  in  preparation. 

History  of  the  Renaissance,  the  Protestant 
Revolution,  and  the  Catholic  Reformation  in 
Continental  Europe     By  edward  m.  hulme. 

Demy  Svo,  589  pages,  with  8  Maps,  los.  net.     Postage  6d, 

The  French  Renascence      By  dr.  charles  sarolea. 

Large  Crown  Svo,  Cloth,  with  Illustrations,  5s.  net.     Postage  6d. 
"  This  is  the  work  of  a  philosopher,  a  jurist,  and  a  keen  observer." — Globe. 

A   Brief  History  of  the   French   Revolution 

By  F.  W.  AVELING,  M.A.,  B.Sc.     Illustrated.      Crown  Svo,  2s.  net. 
"A  concise  and  clear  sketch  of  that  terrible  drama." 

A   Short  History  of  English   Rural  Life 

From    the    Anglo-Saxon     Invasion     to     the     Present    Time.      By 
MONTAGUE    FORDHAM,   M.A.    (Cantab.).     With  a  Preface  by 
Sir  CHARLES  BATHURST,  M.A.,  M.P. 
Large  Crown  Svo,  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  net ;  Paper  2S.  6d.  net.     Postage  4^. 

"  LONDON  :    GEORGE   ALLEN   &   UNWIN  LIMITED 


o 


a  .     I  *"* 


■r^-.  »„-v--avictft'f-;vaM»eaw;,j 


^ 


DK  Masaryk,   TomAs  Garrigue 

32  The  spirit  of  Russia., 

M4  V.2 

V.2 
cop  ,2 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


