NUNC  COGNOSCO  EX  PARTE 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


PRESENTED  BY 


ELIZABETH  BROWN 


J 


Z  b' 


) 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/modernrussianlitOOOOmirs 


PUSHKIN 


MODERN  RUSSIAN 
LITERATURE 


BY 


PRINCE  D.  S.  MIRSKY 

Lecturer  in  Russian  Literature  at  King’s  College 
University  of  London 


LONDON 

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
HUMPHREY  MILFORD 
I925 


Oxford  University  Press 
London  Edinburgh  Glasgow  Copenhagen 
NezoTork  Toronto  Melbourne  Cape  Town 
Bombay  Calcutta  Madras  Shanghai 
Humphrey  Milford  Publisher  to  the  University 


Printed  in  England 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

PRELIMINARY . 5 

THE  AGE  OF  THE  GREAT  NOVELISTS  : 


I.  ‘  The  Natural  School  ’  :  Aksakov 

.  14 

2.  From  Turgenev  to  Leskov  . 

22 

3-  Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy  . 

.  42 

4.  The  Drama  .... 

.  66 

5.  Poets  ..... 

•  7i 

6.  Critics  and  Publicists 

•  75 

7.  Chekhov  and  after  . 

82 

THE  NEW  AGE  .... 

.  IOI 

Bibliography  of  English  Translations 

.  115 

Index  .  ..... 

120 

2535-57 


LIST  OF  PORTRAITS 


Pushkin 

Gogol 

Aksakov 

Turgenev 

Leskov 

Dostoevsky 

Tolstoy 

Ostrovsky 

Nekrasov 

Chekhov 

Gorky 

Blok  . 


frontispiece 
facing  p.  12 

18 

22 

40 

44 

54 

68 

74 

86 

92 

108 


For  help  in  obtaining  the  portraits  thanks  are  clue  to 
the  Rodnoye  Slovo  of  222  Shaftesbury  Avenue,  W.C.  2, 
to  Sir  Isaac  Pitman  &  Sons,  Ltd.  (for  Gorky),  to  Mr  J.  D.  Duff 
(for  Aksakov),  and  Mr.  Aylmer  Maude  (for  Tolstoy). 


PRELIMINARY 


Russian  literature  is  synonymous,  for  the  purposes  of  the  general 
reader,  with  Modern  Russian  literature.  There  is,  it  is  true,  an 
Old  Russian  literature,  which  goes  back  as  far  as  the  middle  of 
the  eleventh  century.  It  is  of  prime  importance  to  the  student  of 
Old  Russian  civilization,  but  offers  little  in  the  way  of  literary 
masterpieces.  The  exceptions,  like  the  medieval  prose-poem  of 
The  Campaign  of  Igor  ( c .  1 1 86)  and  the  autobiography  of  the 
Archpriest  Avvakum  (1620-1681),  only  prove  the  rule.  They  are 
almost  mysteriously  isolated,  and  rise  like  solitary  volcanoes  over 
a  gently  undulating  plain.  The  old  Russians  were  not  lacking  in 
artistic  impulses,  but  they  directed  them  into  different  channels. 
They  gave  expression  to  their  sense  of  beauty  in  their  religious 
painting  and  in  their  church  architecture,  rather  than  in  works 
of  imaginative  literature.  Old  Russia  was  not  favourably  placed 
for  the  development  of  a  literary  tradition.  On  the  one  hand  she 
was  separated  from  the  West  by  a  religious  difference  which 
excluded  her  from  the  community  of  Latin  nations.  On  the 
other  hand  she  could  not  in  any  appreciable  degree  learn  from 
Byzantine  Greece  :  there  was  no  necessity  for  the  Russians  to 
study  Greek,  as  the  custom  of  the  Eastern  Church  gave  the  national 
vernaculars  an  entirely  independent  ecclesiastical  status.  Only 
those  Greek  writings  were  translated  or  imitated  which  were 
indispensable  for  the  working  of  the  Church.  Poetry,  if  it  did 
chance  to  crop  up,  had  no  tradition  to  lean  upon.  The  Campaign 
of  Igor  is  the  solitary  remnant  of  a  native  school  of  secular  poetry, 
which,  but  for  a  lucky  chance,  might  have  disappeared  without 
leaving  a  trace. 

Modern  Russian  literature  owes  next  to  nothing  to  Old  Russian 
literature.  From  the  point  of  view  of  literary  culture  it  is  entirely 
an  offshoot  of  Western  civilization.  It  has  many  roots  in 


6 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


Russian  life,  but  no  roots  in  an y  native  literary  tradition.  The 
Russian  literary  language  had  a  continuous  development  from  the 
oldest  time  to  ours.  But  the  pedigree  of  the  literary  forms  and 
ideas,  naturalized  in  Russia  since  the  eighteenth  century,  has  to  be 
traced  to  the  French  and  Provencal  poets  of  the  twelfth  century 
or  to  the  Italian  Renaissance,  not  to  any  native  source.  All  this 
does  not  of  course  impair  the  originality  of  Russian  literature. 
What  happened  in  Russia  in  the  1 7-1 8th  century  was  very  much 
like  what  happened  in  England  in  the  1 3— 14th  century.  English 
medieval  and  modern  literature  is  a  development  of  Continental 
traditions,  rather  than  of  the  poetry  of  Beowulf  and  the  Caedmon 
poems.  The  originality  of  English  as  of  Russian  literature  is  due 
to  the  creative  power  of  individual  genius  and  to  creative  forces 
developed  by  the  nation  outside  the  domain  of  literature,  not  to 
a  continuous  development  from  the  earliest  times.  The  same 
may  apply  in  varying  degrees  to  every  modern  nation.  Greek  is 
the  only  European  literature  that  has  developed  along  entirely 
native  lines. 

Modern  Russian  literature  began  in  the  seventeenth  century  as 
an  imitation  of  Polish  models,  and  up  to  the  middle  of  the 
eighteenth  century  it  was  but  the  province  of  a  province. 

Lomonosov  (1711-1765),  who  has  been  called  the  Peter  the 
Great  of  Russian  civilization,  was  the  first  to  go  directly  to  the 
source  of  the  literary  culture  of  the  times — to  the  literature  of 
French  Classicism.  For  eighty  years  Russian  literary  history 
becomes  the  history  of  a  gradual  assimilation  of  the  best  fruit  of 
Western  literature.  The  writers  of  the  time  are  schoolmasters 
and  translators  whose  task  it  was  to  teach  and  to  adapt  rather 
than  to  create.  The  period  did  produce  in  Derzhavin  (1743-1816) 
a  poet  of  eccentric  genius  and  abundant  originality,  but  the  main 
line  of  progress  is  marked  by  the  names  of  men  of  less  creative 
power,  but  greater  cultural  receptivity.  The  chief  of  these  names 
after  Lomonosov’s  are  those  of  Karamzin  (1766-1826)  and 


Preliminary  7 

Zhukovsky  (1783-1852),  two  great  pedagogues,  who  familiarized 
Russia  with  Rousseau  and  Ossian  and  Herder  and  all  the  pre¬ 
romantic  literature  of  England  and  Germany.  Zhukovsky  did 
more  than  that,  for  he  brought  Russian  verse  to  perfection  and 
set  the  standard  of  style  which  was  to  become  the  style  of  the 
Golden  Age  of  Russian  Poetry.  This  Golden  Age  began  with  the 
publication  of  Pushkin’s  first  book  in  1820. 

Pushkin  is  the  greatest  name  in  Russian  literature.  He  is  more 
than  that  to  the  Russian  mind  :  he  is  the  impersonation  and  the 
puresLessence  of  poetry  ;  he  is  also  what  Goethe  is  to  the  Germans 
and  Dante  to  the  Italians — the  ideal  incarnation  and  symbol  of 
national  civilization.  Few  foreigners  have  been  able  to  under¬ 
stand  this  Russian  attitude  towards  Pushkin.  Still  fewer  have 
found  it  possible  to  place  him,  as  the  Russians  do,  among  the 
greatest  poets  of  all  nations.  Though  he  is  the  most  universal 
and  the  most  European  of  Russian  writers,  he  is  still  the  divinity 
of  a  strictly  national  cult.  This  sounds  paradoxical,  but  is  only 
natural.  The  foreign  reader  values  Russian  writers  for  what  he 
thinks  are  their  most  Russian  qualities — qualities  which  he  can¬ 
not  find  anywhere  else.  Russian  literature  is  still  exotic  to  the 
rest  of  Europe,  and  prized  there  in  the  measure  of  its  obvious 
originality.  To  the  Russian  reader  this  preoccupation  does  not 
exist,  and  it  is  precisely  Pushkin’s  universality,  his  fan-humanity, 
as  Dostoevsky  put  it,  that  makes  him  what  he  is  to  the  Russian 
mind.  Another  reason  why  only  Russians  can  fully  appreciate 
him  is  that  he  was  a  poet,  and  a  poet  can  be  really  understood 
only  by  those  who  have  mastered  the  language  he  wrote  in  well 
enough  to  feel  those  imponderable  and  elusive  elements  which 
give  each  word  its  poetical  value.  Then  again  the  beauty  of  his 
poetry  is  of  a  kind  which  is  not  usually  expected  from  a  poet 
calling  himself  a  Romanticist,  the  contemporary  of  Shelley  and 
Victor  Hugo.  His  virtues  are  harmony,  taste,  and  sense  of 
measure.  His  effects  are  never  startling.  They  are  produced  by 


8 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


outline  rather  than  by  colour  ;  by  continuous  excellency,  not  by 
‘  purple  patches  In  a  word,  his  poetry  is  classical.  And  if  the 
classical  virtues  are  admired  in  Greek  and  French  poetry,  it  is 
not  in  quest  of  them  that  the  English  or  French  reader  turns  to 
Russia,  the  country  of  Bolshevism,  of  Dostoevsky,  and  of  the 
Russian  ballet.  It  is  indeed  difficult  for  the  foreigner,  perhaps 
impossible  if  he  is  ignorant  of  the  language,  to  believe  in  the 
supreme  greatness  of  Pushkin  among  Russian  writers.  Yet  it  is 
necessary  for  him  to  accept  the  belief,  even  if  he  disagrees  with  it. 
Otherwise  every  idea  he  may  form  of  Russian  literature  and 
Russian  civilization  will  be  inadequate  and  out  of  proportion 
with  reality. 

Pushkin’s  place  in  Modern  Russian  literature  is  very  similar  to 
Chaucer’s  place  in  Medieval  English  literature.  Like  Chaucer, 
he  does  not  in  any  sense  break  away  from  the  preceding  inter¬ 
national  tradition,  but  without  trying  to  be  national  is  national 
by  the  mere  fact  of  his  superior  genius  and  of  his  comprehensive 
humanity.  Like  Chaucer’s,  hisjgqetrv  is  aristocratic  in  origin  but 
universal  in  scope,  and  like  Chaucer’s  it  becomes  the  starting- 
point  of  a  great  tradition,  and  throws  into  the  shade  all  that 
preceded  it.  The  difference  is  that  in  England  immediately  after 
Chaucer  there  began  a  period  of  decline  and  comparative  sterility 
which  lasted  for  more  than  a  century,  in  which  Chaucer’s  tradition 
was  squandered  by  a  succession  of  inferior  imitators.  Pushkin’s 
period  finished  much  more  abruptly — in  fact  it  finished  before 
his  death  ;  but  it  was  succeeded  by  a  period  of  powerful  and 
antagonistic  creative  forces,  during  which  Pushkin  survived 
rather  as  a  great  name  than  as  a  living  influence  ;  he  becomes 
a  treasure-house  carefully  guarded,  but  scarcely  drawn  upon. 
Like  Chaucer,  Pushkin  was  not  alone  ;  by  the  side  of  Chaucer 
there  was  Gower,  by  the  side  of  Pushkin  a  whole  host  of  poets, 
some  of  whom,  like  Baratynsky  and  Yazykov,  were  men  of  powerful 
and  strikingly  original  genius  (more  strikingly  original  than 


Preliminary 


9 


Pushkin,  and  for  that  very  reason  inferior  to  him).  But  even  the 
most  indubitably  minor  poets  of  the  group  have  such  an  air  of 
distinction  and  elegance  about  them,  they  use  their  limited 
powers  with  such  adequacy,  there  is  in  them  so  much  of  taste  and 
beautiful  craftsmanship,  that  even  apart  from  Pushkin  this  period 
was  a  Golden  Age  of  poetry — so  high  was  the  artistic  level  of  its 
poetical  production. 

This  Golden  Age  came  to  an  end  about  1831,  and  was  followed 
by  a  period  of  about  fifteen  years  of  rapid  transition.  Romanti¬ 
cism,  which  had  been  a  watchword  but  not  an  essential  element 
of  the  preceding  decade,  now  asserted  itself  more  strongly.  Ger¬ 
man  influences  poured  in  in  full  stream.  It  was  an  age  of  con¬ 
flicting  ideas  and  rapid  evolution.  In  contrast  to  the  harmony 
of  the  preceding  age  it  was  dominated  by  the  struggle  of  opposing 
forces.  The  great  names  of  the  period  are  those  of  poets  of  discord 
and  violent  contrasts — Gogol,  Lermontov,  and  Tyutchev  (who 
wrote  and  published  most  of  his  best  work  before  1840  though  it 
met  with  recognition  only  much  later).  What  is  even  more  im¬ 
portant,  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  art  were  changed.  It 
'  ceased  to  be  the  free  and  self-justified  craftsmanship  it  had  been  to 
Pushkin  and  his  contemporaries,  and  came  to  be  dominated  by  or 
\  subservient  to  ideas.  The  aesthetic  doctrines  of  the  great 
German  Philosophers  played  a  principal  part  in  this  change.  As  a 


consequence  the  standards  of  workmanship  were  lowered  and  the 
poetic  culture  of  the  preceding  age  disappeared.  Lermontov  and 
Tyutchev  were  great  poets,  but  they  remained  isolated,  without 
any  healthy  undergrowth  round  them.  Poetry  began  to  give 
way  to  prose.  Still  the  centre  of  gravity  remained  on  the  side  of 
poetry,  and  the  prose  of  Gogol,  who  wrote  no  verse,  is  a  poet’s 
prose,  or  at  worst  a  rhetorician’s ;  it  abounds  in  rhythm,  in 
verbal  effects,  and  in  lyrical  emotion. 

At  the  same  time  the  idealism  and  the  cult  of  the  Absolute 
produced  by  the  contact  with  German  metaphysics  gave  birth  to 


10 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


a  new  mentality  which  contrasts  sharply  with  the  finite  and 
relative  humanism  of  Pushkin. 

Russian  Idealism  came  into  being  in  the  two  opposite  and  yet 
twin  forms — of  Slavophilism  and  Radicalism.  Herzen  called 
them  the  two  heads  of  a  single  Janus.  Both  were  intrinsically 
dogmatic  and  aimed  at  the  subjection  of  all  human  activity  to  one 
supreme  ideal.  The  more  complete  and  refined  philosophy  of 
Slavophilism  attracted  the  more  philosophical  minds,  and  became 
the  leaven  of  all  independent  original  Russian  thought.  Radicalism 
became  a  secular  religion  which  imposed  itself  on  the  great 
majority  of  educated  Russians  for  more  than  sixty  years.  The 
Radical  journalist  Belinsky  moulded  the  mentality  of  the  budding 
intelligentsia  and  imposed  on  the  public  his  idea  of  what  in  a 
general  scheme  of  progress  literature  should  be.  Gogol,  interpreted 
as  he  was  by  Belinsky  in  a  violent  and  arbitrary  fashion,  became 
the  idol  of  the  young  generation.  There  came  into  existence 
a  £  Natural  School  ’  which,  after  a  few  years’  groping,  sprang  into 
sudden  maturity  in  the  bewilderingly  abundant  literary  harvest 
of  the  year  1846.  All  this  rapid  development  made  the  writings 
of  the  preceding  age  obsolete,  and  the  new  generation  retained 
from  the  times  that  preceded  it  only  that  which  it  could  interpret 
as  an  anticipation  of  its  own  literary  and  social  ideals.  It  retained 
Pushkin  as  a  myth  rather  than  as  a  body  of  work,  and  it  retained 
all  that  was  felt  to  be  akin  to  its  own  Realism.  The  preceding 
age  began  to  be  seen  exclusively  from  the  angle  of  the  new  age, 
and  it  was  left  to  our  own  times  to  restore  to  it  its  true  propor¬ 
tions — a  process  which  is  by  no  means  at  an  end. 

Though  some  writers  who  like  broad  and  general  views  have 
spoken  of  the  inherent  Realism  of  the  Russian  people  and  traced 
its  history  to  the  popular  tales  and  the  popular  epics  of  the  North, 
I  do  not  believe  in  the  use  of  such  racial  generalizations.  The 
real  fathers  of  Russian  Realism  are  Boileau,  Moliere,  and  La 
Fontaine.  There  is  in  the  poetry  of  Derzhavin,  among  many 


Preliminary 


ii 


other  remarkable  things,  a  vigorous  and  eccentric  strain  of 
naturalism  ;  but  the  traditions  of  realism  first  asserted  them¬ 
selves  in  Russia  mainly  in  connexion  with  the  classical  genres  of 
satire,  comedy,  and  fable.  The  satires  of  Cantemir,  the  comedies 
of  Fonvizin,  the  long  line  of  Russian  fabulists  culminating  in  the 
wonderful  (and  yet  French-bred)  raciness  of  Krylov,  are  the  true 
predecessors  of  the  Natural  School.  The  traditions  of  Moliere, 
Fonvizin,  and  Krylov  met  in  the  work  of  Griboyedov  (1795-1829), 
whose  great  comedy  ( Gore  ot  Uma  =  Ehe  Misfortune  of  being  Clever, 
or  better,  Woe  from  Wit),  published  in  1825,  is  the  first  revelation 
of  that  wonderful  power  of  character-drawing  which  struck  the 
Western  reader  when  he  first  discovered  the  Russian  novel. 
The  comedy,  written  in  the  full  summer  of  the  Golden  Age, 
is  in  rhyme.  So  is  the  greatest  of  Pushkin’s  contributions  to  the 
Realistic  tradition,  perhaps  his  greatest  work  altogether — the 
novel  in  verse,  Evgeni  Onegin.  Being  a  novel  in  verse  and  not 
a  novel  (‘  the  devil  of  a  difference  ’,  according  to  Pushkin), 
Evgeni  Onegin  contains  many  beautiful  things  that  are  absent  from 
the  most  poetical  novels  of  Turgenev,  but,  like  Turgenev’s  novels, 
it  is  a  novel  of  character,  not  of  plot.  Its  interest  is  lyrical  and 
psychological  rather  than  narrative.  The  characters  of  Onegin 
and  Tatiana  contain  in  a  nutshell  almost  all  the  portrait  gallery 
of  Turgenev’s  novels.  Onegin  was  completed  in  1831.  After 
that  date  Pushkin,  following  the  general  trend  of  the  times, 
passed  to  prose.  Unlike  Onegin,  his  novel  The  Captain’s  Daughter, 
a  ‘  Waverley  ’  novel,  but  condensed  to  a  third  of  the  length  of 
one  of  Scott’s,  and  his  stories,  of  which  the  most  famous  is  The 
Queen  of  Spades,  are  not  stories  of  character,  but  pure  stories  of 
action.  The  example  of  Pushkin  was  but  little  followed  by  the 
Russian  realists,  but  at  least  he  taught  them  to  write  prose  that 
relied  for  its  effect  exclusively  on  the  logical  quality  of  the  thoughts 
expressed,  not  on  the  ornaments  of  style.  Of  all  prose-writers 
Pushkin  is  most  akin  to  Caesar. 


12 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


Pushkin’s  tradition  was  carried  on  by  Lermontov.  In  his  great 
novel  The  Hero  of  our  Limes  (1840)  he  continued  the  tradition 
of  Onegin  in  his  character-drawing,  and  of  the  Lhe  Queen  of 
Spades  in  his  style.  But  unlike  Pushkin’s,  it  is  a  novel  of  direct 
analysis,  and  in  the  history  of  analytic  novels  Lermontov  is  (together 
with  Stendhal)  a  link  between  the  older  French  tradition  and 
Tolstoy. 

Pushkin,  Griboyedov,  and  Lermontov  would  have  been  suffi¬ 
cient  to  call  Russian  Realism  into  life,  but  as  a  matter  of  historical 
fact  the  ‘  Natural  School  ’  was  much  more  affected  by  the  example 
of  Gogol  than  by  that  of  any  one  else.  In  the  traditional  history 
of  Russian  literature  Gogol  is  the  founder  of  the  Realistic  novel. 
But  applied  to  Gogol  the  word  Realistic  must  be  used  with  many 
reservations.  There  was  a  strong  unrealistic  strain  in  his  genius — 
a  strain  that  was  at  once  romantic,  rhetorical,  and  burlesque. 
His  prose  is  elaborate  and  ornate  :  it  is  never  simple  like  Pushkin’s 
or  Lermontov’s,  it  is  always  in  one  of  the  extremes  of  farce  or 
rhetoric.  He  chooses  his  subjects  from  the  trivialities  of  pro¬ 
vincial  life,  but  he  treats  them  in  a  manner  very  different  from 
that  of  the  realist.  Reality  is  for  him  a  material  for  creating 
grotesque  forms,  which,  though  their  moral  value  may  be  different, 
are  akin  to  the  delightful  characters  of  Dickens.  His  people  are 
rampantly  alive,  but  they  are  not  real  people.  He  has  an  abnor¬ 
mally  sensitive  eye  for  the  details  of  real  life,  but  he  uses  these 
realistic  details  to  construct  monsters  as  impossible  as  unicorns 
and  griffins,  which  yet  seem  more  alive  than  if  they  were  real. 
It  was  his  choice  of  subject,  and  the  material  he  used,  that  made 
Gogol  the  paragon  of  realism  to  his  admirers  of  1845.  They  made 
him  also  the  paragon  of  social  satire  and  socially  conscious  art. 
And  yet  his  satire  was  merely  the  outcome  of  an  exuberant 
creative  temperament,  creating  only  grotesque  and  ugly  figures. 
It  made  him  a  satirist,  but  this  did  not  mean  that  he  was  in  any 
sense  opposed  to  the  existing  order  of  things  in  Russia.  He  never 


GOGOL 


Preliminary  13 

realized  the  social  and  political  implications  of  his  satire,  which 
had  originated  in  sheer  joy  of  creation.  But  he  gave  the  public 
such  grotesque  and  Aristophanesque  pictures  of  provincial 
bureaucracy  that  his  comedy  Revizor  (The  Inspector  General) 
and  his  satirical  ‘  epic  ’  Dead.  Souls  could  not  but  be  received  as 
social  satires.  So  they  were,  and  they  became  the  starting-point 
of  the  social  literature  of  the  Natural  School. 

The  distinctive  note  of  subsequent  Russian  Realism,  with  its 
studied  simplicity  and  sense  of  proportion  and  restraint,  is  struck 
much  more  by  the  work  of  Griboyedov,  Pushkin,  and  Lermontov 
than  by  the  exuberant,  elaborate,  and  grotesque  inventions  of 
Gogol.  Dostoevsky  alone  of  all  the  £  Natural  School  ’  did  actually 
inherit  some  of  his  characteristics. 


THE  AGE  OF  THE  GREAT  NOVELISTS 


i 

‘  The  Natural  School’ :  Aksakov 

From  the  first  successes  of  the  ‘Natural  School’  in  1846  to 
the  death  of  Chekhov  in  1904  Russian  literature  was  entirely 
dominated  by  the  realistic  novel.  The  drama  was  a  mere  by¬ 
form  of  the  novel,  and  poetry — a  backwater  of  secondary  impor¬ 
tance. 

In  the  course  of  these  sixty  years  the  Russian  novel  underwent 
many  changes  and  assumed  many  different  forms,  but  all  the 
work  of  the  period  has  enough  of  common  characteristics  to  allow 
us  to  treat  the  Russian  novelists  from  Aksakov  and  Turgenev  to 
Chekhov  and  Gorky  as  a  single  school. 

One  of  these  characteristics  is  a  marked  preponderance  of 
character  over  plot.  In  the  art  of  character-drawing  the  Russian 
novelists  have  few  equals,  but  their  narrative  was  often  deficient, 
and  with  few  exceptions  they  were  not  exactly  thrilling  story¬ 
tellers.  They  held  in  contempt  everything  smacking  of  ‘  arti¬ 
ficial  ’  intrigue,  and  tended  to  make  their  stories  (and  their  plays) 

‘  slices  of  life  ’.  Hence  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  between 
fiction  and  autobiography. 

Another  important  characteristic  is  a  certain,  at  least  apparent, 
disregard  for  style.  Even  a  great  and  careful  stylist  like  Turgenev 
endeavours  to  make  his  style  beautiful  by  the  absence  rather  than 
by  the  presence  of  anything  striking.  This  tendency  is  traceable  to 
the  example  of  Pushkin  and  Lermontov,  but  not  to  Gogol.  It  may 
degenerate  into  atrocious  journalese,  but  at  its  best  it  is  full  of 
subtle  art  and  almost  classical  restraint.  There  was  no  ‘  fine 
writing  ’  in  Russia  between  Gogol  and  the  Symbolists. 


The  Natural  School 


i5 


The  Realism  of  the  Russian  novelist  implied  choosing  his  subject 
from  contemporary  (or  almost  contemporary)  Russian  life.  Great 
stress  was  laid  on  the  exact  description  of  the  milieu  and  minute 
truthfulness  of  detail.  The  story  was  meant  (and  expected  by  the 
critics)  to  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  political  or  social  problems 
of  the  day.  The  writer  sometimes  tried  to  shirk  this  onerous 
task,  but  he  was  invariably  reminded  of  it  by  the  critic  ;  and  the 
novel,  as  a  more  ambitious  form  than  the  short  story,  always 
recognized  the  obligation. 

Underlying  the  whole  work  of  the  school,  there  is  a  definite 
ethical  outlook.  It  is  idealistic  and  humanistic  in  substance. 
It  lays  stress  on  the  value  of  the  human  personality,  and  attaches 
great  importance  to  the  standards,  not  so  much  of  conduct,  as  of 
conscience ;  for  the  essential  ethical  problems  of  the  Russian 
novelists  are  always  problems  of  conscience,  rather  than  of  action. 
It  was  this  ethical  element  and  the  broad  human  sympathy  of  the 
Russian  novelists  that  most  struck  the  Western  mind  when  Russian 
literature  was  revealed  to  it.  Melchior  de  Vogue’s  book  on  the 
Russian  novel  is  a  lasting  monument  of  this  first  impression. 

The  pedigree  of  the  Russian  novel  is  traditionally  traced  to 
Gogol,  and  we  have  seen  that  it  may  be  even  more  plausibly 
traced  to  Pushkin  and  to  Lermontov.  But  foreign  example 
played  a  still  more  important  part  in  the  rise  of  Russian  Realism. 
This  example  was  mainly  French;  Dickens,  for  all  his  popularity 
about  1845,  does  not  appear  to  have  exercised  any  appreciable 
influence.  George  Sand  was  the  idol  of  the  generation,  and  her 
importance  in  this  connexion  can  scarcely  be  exaggerated.  Balzac 
had  an  equally  devoted,  but  less  extensive,  circle  of  followers,  and 
Stendhal  was  an  important  influence  in  the  formation  of  Tolstoy’s 
art.  France  has  more  than  once  been  the  great  reservoir  of 
literary  culture  from  which  Russian  literature  drew  fresh  force, 
like  Antaeus  from  Mother-Earth. 


i6 


The  Great  Novelists 


1846  was  the  annus  mirabilis  of  the  Natural  School :  it  saw 
the  publication  of  the  first  novels  of  Goncharov  and  of  Dostoevsky, 
of  the  first  of  Turgenev’s  Sketches  of  a  Sportsman,  and  of  the  first 
fragments  of  Aksakov’s  Family  Chronicle.  Other  works,  now 
more  or  less  forgotten,  contributed  to  the  effect  of  a  sudden 
Renaissance — problem  novels  by  Herzen  ( Whose  fault  F)  and 
Druzhinin  ( Polinka  Sacks),  both  testifying  to  the  influence  of 
George  Sand,  and  Grigorovich’s  stories  of  peasant  life,  where  the 
peasant  appears  for  the  first  time  in  literature.  In  1850  appeared 
the  first  novel  of  Pisemsky  and  the  first  play  of  Ostrovsky.  In 
1852  Tolstoy’s  Childhood  was  printed.  After  that  new  stars 
appeared  in  the  firmament  with  less  startling  frequency,  while 
the  welcome  accorded  to  them  ceased  to  be  unanimous.  Saltykov 
began  his  satirical  career  in  1857.  Leskov  (for  years  to  come 
neglected  by  the  critics)  published  his  first  story  in  1863. 

The  period  from  the  end  of  the  Crimean  War  (1856)  to  the 
outbreak  of  the  Polish  Rebellion  (1862)  was  an  era  of  liberal 
reform,  of  great  expectations  and  great  political  excitement. 
It  was  also  the  time  when  the  masterpieces  of  Aksakov,  Turgenev, 
Goncharov,  Pisemsky,  and  Ostrovsky  followed  each  other  in 
dazzling  abundance.  After  1862  the  older  writers  began  to  grow 
weary  and  to  lose  sympathy  with  the  intelligentsia.  Younger 
writers  began  to  displace  the  Classics  (for  they  had  become 
Classics)  in  popular  favour.  But  the  young  generation  turned 
out  to  be  ephemeral  and  ineffective,  and  the  old  had  yet  its  best 
to  produce.  The  following  period  is  chiefly  memorable  for  the 
great  novels  of  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky,  which  appeared  between 
1864  and  1880.  This  last  date  marks  the  approximate  end  of  the 
Golden  Age  of  the  novel.  Tolstoy’s  Confession  was  written  in 
1879  and  published  in  1882.  Dostoevsky  died  in  1881,  Turgenev 
in  1883.  The  field  was  left  to  inferior  men,  the  best  of  whom, 
like  Garshin  or  Korolenko,  did  not  reach  to  the  waist  of  the 
smallest  of  the  older  novelists.  Russian  Realism  appeared  to  be 


The  Natural  School 


17 


languishing  away.  But  there  was  yet  to  come  the  wonderful 
Indian  summer  of  Chekhov.  Chekhov  was  the  crest  of  a  second 
and  last  wave  in  the  history  of  Russian  Realism.  His  death  in 
1904  marks  the  end.  Before  his  death  there  had  arisen  a  younger 
group  of  writers  who  about  1900  aroused  great  expectations,  but 
though  Gorky  and  Bunin  have  produced  work  of  a  high  order, 
the  work  of  this  generation  turned  out  to  be  but  the  dying  echo 
of  a  great  past.  A  new  age  was  preluded  by  different  voices. 

The  period  which  witnessed  the  rise  and  decline  of  the  Russian 
novel  was  a  period  of  radical  changes  in  Russian  life.  I  am  not 
going  to  give  any  detailed  account  of  these  changes,  nor  do 
I  advise  the  reader  to  reconstruct  the  social  history  of  Russia  in 
the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  from  the  data  of  Russian 
fiction.  Realism  or  no  realism  Russian  fiction  is  after  all  Art,  and 
Art  is  always  a  creation,  an  invention,  if  you  like,  or  a  selection. 
It  can  never  become  the  equivalent  of  an  ordnance  survey  map, 
or,  to  use  a  more  hackneyed  phrase,  of  a  photograph.  But 
a  photograph  was  just  what  Russian  critics  wanted.  Continental 
and  English  critics  have  occasionally  been  led  astray  into  this  heresy. 
But  it  must  be  emphasized  again  and  again  that  to  reconstruct 
history  from  literature  shows  a  lack  of  respect  for  literature  and 
a  lack  of  understanding  of  history.  To  judge  the  relations  between 
a  literary  work  and  the  society  depicted  in  it,  the  critic  must  have 
a  sound  knowledge  of  the  society  from  extra-imaginative  sources. 

However,  a  few  words  must  be  said  about  the  very  profound 
changes  in  Russian  society.  The  great  political  and  social  event 
of  the  period  was  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs.  And  this  was 
one  of  the  many  causes  of  another  great  social  change,  which  had 
a  direct  bearing  on  literary  life — the  decline  and  gradual  disap¬ 
pearance  of  that  class  which  had  produced  the  literature  of  the 
classical  period — the  landed  gentry.  The  older  generation  of 
writers  from  Goncharov  (born  1812)  to  Tolstoy  (born  1828)  for 
the  most  part  belonged  to  the  gentry.  But  the  gentry  had  begun 

2535-57  B 


i8 


The  Great  Novelists 


to  disintegrate  before  the  middle  of  the  century.  It  ceased  to  be 
the  united  class  it  had  been  in  the  days  of  Pushkin,  and  part  of  it 
was  already  developing  into  an  intelligentsia.  Only  a  few  men 
of  the  generation  (notably  Tolstoy  and  Fet)  were  men  with 
a  distinct  caste-consciousness.  The  others,  including  Turgenev, 
were  more  or  less  declasses.  The  emancipation  dealt  the  coup  de 
grace  to  the  old  class-forms  of  the  gentry.  It  made  a  clean  sweep 
of  the  middle  layers,  which  formed  the  great  majority  and  most 
active  part,  leaving  the  aristocracy  isolated  and  unrooted.  A  new 
class,  the  intelligentsia ,  took  the  place  of  the  gentry  as  the  vessel 
of  national  culture.  It  was  constituted  by  the  more  or  less 
incomplete  fusion  of  the  educated  elements  of  the  middle  gentry 
with  the  so-called  raxnochintsi  (  =  men-of-all-ranks),  self-made 
intellectuals,  who  had  studied  at  the  universities  and  higher 
schools.  This  intelligentsia  is  the  dominant  feature  of  Russian 
life  between  the  Emancipation  and  the  Great  Revolution. 
Practically  all  the  writers  born  after  1830  belong  to  it.  It  is 
a  varied  and  fluctuating  class,  and  its  chief  characteristics  are  an 
absence  of  deep-rooted  tradition  and  a  permanent  dissatisfaction 
with  existing  conditions.  It  attained  to  its  highest  literary 
expression  in  the  works  of  Chekhov. 

Before  we  come  to  the  generation  of  the  forties  (the  men  born 
between  1812-1828)  we  must  turn  our  attention  to  Sergey 
Timofeevich  Aksakov,  a  man  of  a  much  older  generation,  whose 
genius  was  revealed  to  him  only  in  his  old  age  under  the  influence 
of  Gogol.  This  is  a  striking  case  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  Gogol’s 
influence.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  two  natures  more  unlike  than 
Gogol’s  and  Aksakov’s.  Yet  it  is  an  evident  fact  that  his  genius 
became  conscious  of  itself  only  by  the  example  of  Gogol.  Aksakov 
had  not  been  able  to  find  a  suitable  means  of  expression  in  the 
classical  forms  he  had  been  brought  up  in.  Gogol  opened  his 
eyes  to  the  possibility  of  making  the  whole  of  life  the  subject  of 
literary  treatment. 


AKSAKOV 


Aksakov 


19 


Aksakov  was  born  in  Ufa  (East  Russia)  in  1791.  The  story  of 
his  grandparents  and  parents  is  told  in  his  Family  Chronicle. 
His  grandfather  was  a  pioneering  landowner  who  had  planted  his 
new  estates  in  the  hitherto  un-Russian  Bashkiria.  He  was  an 
uneducated  and  rough  provincial  squire,  who  had  no  culture  but 
a  sound  and  simple  moral  code,  and  a  tradition  of  family  honour 
and  dignity.  But  his  son,  the  writer’s  father,  married  a  girl  of 
a  totally  different  class.  She  was  the  educated  and  cultivated 
daughter  of  a  high  official,  and  a  pupil  of  the  moral  philosophy 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  Aksakov  took  after  his  mother,  and  the 
careful  and  refined  training  she  gave  him  developed  that  sensi¬ 
tiveness  and  introspection  which  produced  Years  of  Childhood 
and  Recollections .  Aksakov,  as  his  readers  will  remember,  was  in 
intellect  and  feeling  an  extraordinarily  precocious  child.  He 
lived  at  home  till  he  was  eight,  then  he  was  sent  to  the  ‘  gymna¬ 
sium  ’  of  Kazan,  the  metropolis  of  the  east  of  Russia.  While  he 
was  there  the  gymnasium  was  expanded  into  a  university.  After 
taking  his  degree  in  1807  he  went  to  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg, 
where  he  was  introduced  into  certain  literary  and  theatrical 
circles,  and  became  a  staunch  follower  of  Admiral  Shishkov  and 
of  the  extreme  conservative  and  nationalist  party  in  Literature. 
He  married  in  1815  and  for  ten  years  carried  on  farming  in  his 
paternal  Aksakovo  (the  ‘  Bagrovo  ’  of  his  books).  But  soon  he 
discovered  that  he  had  no  vocation  for  farming.  In  1826  he 
came  to  Moscow,  and  his  old  friend  Admiral  Shishkov  (then 
Minister  of  Education)  found  employment  for  him  in  the  censor¬ 
ship.  He  remained  in  the  Civil  Service  till  1839,  when  he  retired. 
His  family  life  was  more  than  commonly  happy  and  prosperous. 
His  wife  was  a  paragon  of  all  the  domestic  virtues.  She  bore  him 
many  children,  and  two  of  his  sons,  Constantine  and  Ivan,  grew 
up  to  be  prominent  men  of  letters  and  leaders  of  the  Slavophil 
party.  Soon  after  the  first  appearance  of  Gogol’s  stories  Aksakov 
made  his  acquaintance,  and  the  Aksakov’s  house  became  the 


20 


The  Great  Novelists 


centre  of  that  cult  which  played  such  an  important  part  in  the 
undoing  of  the  great  writer.  Aksakov  took  rather  a  long  time 
to  ‘  see  through  ’  the  dark  and  disingenuous  nature  of  his  idol, 
and  to  discover  how  entirely  incapable  he  was  of  sincerity  and 
friendship.  But  he  came  to  realize  it  at  last.  Some  of  his  letters 
to  Gogol  are  remarkable  for  the  straightforward  and  intense 
sincerity  of  his  deeply  wounded  feelings.  Still  Gogol  had  revealed 
to  Aksakov  his  latent  genius,  and  as  early  as  1840  Aksakov  began 
writing  The  Family  Chronicle,  under  direct  encouragement  from 
Gogol.  In  1846  fragments  of  it  were  published  anonymously, 
but  at  first  attracted  little  attention  outside  the  Slavophil  set. 
They  were  followed  by  books  on  Angling  (1847),  Bird  Shooting 
(1852),  and  Sport  in  the  Orenburg  Country  (1854).  These 
produced  a  profound  impression  by  their  simple  truth  and  un¬ 
assuming  but  masterly  exposition.  Turgenev  wrote  an  enthusi¬ 
astic  review  of  the  second  of  these  books,  and  Gogol  wrote  to  the 
author  :  ‘  Your  birds  and  your  fish  are  more  alive  than  my  men 
and  women.’  The  atmosphere  was  favourable  for  Aksakov  to 
make  a  more  ambitious  venture  and  in  1856  appeared  The  Family 
Chronicle  and  Recollections.  The  reception  they  got  was  enthusi¬ 
astic.  Dobrolyubov,  the  most  influential  critic  of  the  day,  pro¬ 
claimed  Aksakov  the  greatest  living  Russian  author,  and  he  was 
recognized  as  a  national  classic.  Encouraged  by  his  success,  he 
continued  writing  voluminously.  During  the  last  three  years  of 
his  life  he  wrote  Tears  0$  Childhood  of  Bagrov's  Grandson  (pub¬ 
lished  1858),  a  volume  of  Literary  and  Theatrical  Recollections, 
and  numerous  detached  reminiscences ;  and  he  began  a  novel 
Natasha  in  which  he  intended  to  tell  the  life  story  of  his  younger 
sister.  In  1858  his  robust  health  began  to  fail,  and  his  last  year 
he  lived  as  an  invalid.  Still  he  continued  writing,  and  died  (1859) 
pen  in  hand. 

Aksakov’s  principal  books,  The  Family  Chronicle,  Tears  of 
Childhood,  and  Recollections,  have  within  recent  years  been  trans- 


Aksakov 


21 


lated  into  English,  and  have  met,  especially  The  Family  Chronicle , 
with  considerable  success  and  recognition.  The  Family  Chronicle 
is  no  doubt  the  most  interesting  and  attractive,  but  in  Tears  of 
Childhood  are  more  faithfully  mirrored  the  author’s  individual 
idiosyncrasies.  The  Family  Chronicle  is  the  history  of  Aksakov’s 
grandfather  and  the  love  story  of  his  parents.1  The  figure  of  the 
grandfather,  -Stepan  Mikhailovich,  the  pioneering  squire,  towers 
above  the  others  in  biblical  proportions.  With  his  unlimited 
power  over  his  wife  and  children,  with  his  numerous  serfs  and 
vast  estates,  he  is  like  an  Old  Testament  patriarch.  His  mentality 
is  simple  and  sound  ;  his  social  ascendancy  allows  him  to  develop 
his  large  personality,  but  his  family  are  reduced  to  a  socially 
dependent  and  mentally  inferior  position.  The  figure  of  Stepan 
Mikhailovich  is  Aksakov’s  most  memorable  creation. 

The  book  contains  more  incident  and  more  narrative  interest 
than  its  sequels,  and  less  psychology  and  minute  analysis,  for  the 
mentality  of  the  persons  represented  is  simple  and  primitive. 
Aksakov’s  principal  quality  revealed  here  is  a  wonderful  objectivity, 
an  impersonal  and  unbiased  truthfulness.  The  picture  he  drew 
of  serfdom  could  be  used  by  the  Radicals  to  prove  how  hideous 
and  brutal  it  was,  and  by  the  Slavophils  to  prove  that  it  was 
a  gentle  form  of  parental  authority.  Tears  of  Childhood  is  less 
attractive  to  the  general  reader,  and  may  even  seem  just  a  little 
tedious.  It  contains  no  incident  and  no  narrative.  It  is  merely 
the  history  of  a  little  boy  in  the  first  eight  years  of  his  life,  told 
with  a  wealth  of  observation  and  psychological  detail.  Taken 
as  such,  it  is  a  supreme  masterpiece,  but  a  masterpiece  of  this  kind 
does  not  appeal  to  every  one.  Aksakov  in  Tears  of  Childhood 
became  even  more  objective  than  in  the  Family  Chronicle.  The 
question  naturally  arises  whether  everything  Aksakov  wrote  was 

1  Here  and  in  T ears  of  Childhood  (but  not  in  Recollections)  the  real  names  and 
place-names  are  changed  to  fictitious  ones.  Aksakov  becomes  Bagrov,  and 
Aksakovo — Bagrovo. 


22 


The  Great  Novelists 


really  dictated  by  memory,  and  it  must  be  answered  in  the 
negative ;  or  rather  it  must  be  said  that  his  memory  was  an 
imaginative  and  a  creative  memory.  It  possessed  the  rare  and 
beautiful  power  of  recreating  the  past,  by  developing  and  expand¬ 
ing  what  it  had  retained.  However  it  may  be,  the  impression 
produced  by  every  line  of  Aksakov  is  one  of  absolute  truth.  His 
style  is  clear,  calm,  and  abundant ;  an  English  translator  has  well 
applied  to  it  the  words  £  lactea  ubertas  ’.  It  is  miles  away  from 
the  exuberant,  varied,  and  contorted  style  of  Gogol. 

Aksakov’s  other  works  are  of  subordinate  importance.  Recol¬ 
lections  in  its  earlier  parts  is  a  direct  continuation  of  Tears  of 
Childhood.  In  its  later  part  it  ceases  to  be  psychological  and  self- 
centred  and  becomes  an  account  of  intellectual  and  cultural  life 
in  Kazan.  It  forms  a  transition  to  the  reminiscences  of  literary 
life.  These  are  interesting  on  account  of  the  light  they  throw  on 
the  history  of  Russian  civilization  between  1810-1830.  They  are 
full  of  shrewd  psychology,  observation,  and  vivid  expression. 
The  memoir  on  Gogol,  who  played  such  an  important  part  in 
Aksakov’s  life,  is  by  far  the  most  interesting  and  penetrating 
document  in  our  possession  on  that  extraordinary,  complex,  and 
bewildering  personality. 


2 

From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 

The  first  of  the  great  novelists  to  win  general  recognition  at 
home  and,  afterwards,  abroad  was  Ivan  Sergeevich  Turgenev. 
He  was  born  in  1818  in  the  province  of  Orel  (Central  Russia). 
His  father  was  a  retired  cavalry  colonel.  He  married  for  money 
an  heiress  who  was  neither  young  nor  good-looking.  First  Love 
is  supposed  to  contain  the  portraits  of  Turgenev’s  parents.  His 
mother’s  youth  was  made  miserable  by  dishonest  guardians.  Her 
husband  never  loved  her.  She  became  a  domestic  tyrant,  making 


TURGENEV 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


23 


life  intolerable  to  all  those  dependent  on  her — to  her  serfs  and  to 
her  son.  She  had  no  connexions  in  society  and  Turgenev  grew 
up  alone.  In  1834  was  sent  to  t^e  University  of  St.  Petersburg. 
There  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  Professor  Pletnev,  one  of 
Pushkin’s  most  intimate  friends.  This  connexion  is  of  importance, 
it  is  a  link  with  the  Great  Age.  It  marks  Turgenev  off  from  all 
his  contemporaries,  and  makes  him  as  it  were  the  depository  of 
the  best  tradition  in  an  age  when  tradition  had  few  votaries. 
But  his  connexion  with  his  elder  contemporaries — the  young 
Idealists  and  Radicals  who  became  the  fathers  of  the  intelligentsia — 
was  more  decisive.  He  met  with  them  when  he  went,  in  1838,  to 
Berlin  to  follow  Hegel’s  philosophical  course.  There  were  many 
young  Muscovites  there  attracted  by  German  Idealism.  Yet,  as 
Turgenev  said  later  on,  what  they  wanted  from  Philosophy  was 
everything  except  pure  thought.  Turgenev  himself  had  little 
use  for  philosophy.  But  he  was  attracted  by  the  idealism  and 
aesthetic  culture  of  these  compatriots,  and  henceforward  he 
became  one  of  them — a  Man  of  the  Forties.  The  most  prominent 
members  of  the  group  were  the  brilliant  and  short-lived  Stankevich 
(1813-1840)  and  the  famous  critic  Belinsky.  It  included  all  that 
was  best  and  most  promising  among  the  progressive  young  men 
of  the  generation. 

In  1840  Turgenev  came  back  to  Moscow.  He  took  his  degree, 
and  had  at  one  time  the  idea  of  becoming  a  scholar.  But  instead 
he  became  a  poet.  His  verse  began  to  appear  regularly  in  the 
magazines  of  his  friends,  and  in  1843  he  published  his  first  book 
Parasha,  an  ironical  tale  in  verse  reminiscent  of  Lermontov  and 
of  Byron,  which  was  enthusiastically  reviewed  by  Belinsky. 
Turgenev  began  to  be  considered  as  the  rising  hope  of  Russian 
poetry.  In  the  next  two  years  he  published  several  new  poems, 
but  he  soon  realized  that  it  was  not  in  verse  that  he  was  to  achieve 
great  things.  After  1846  he  published  no  more  poetry.  He 
never  allowed  his  early  verse  to  be  reprinted  and  did  not  like  to 


24 


The  Great  Novelists 


be  reminded  of  it.  It  is  not  of  the  very  highest  order  and  of 
course  not  to  be  compared  with  his  prose.  Yet  this  poetical 
apprenticeship  is  important.  Turgenev  owed  to  it  the  verbal 
discipline  and  elegance  which  distinguishes  his  prose  from  that  of 
his  contemporaries  who  had  never  handled  metre.  He  began 
writing  prose  in  1844,  but  his  first  few  stories  are  immature,  full 
of  a  rather  obsolete  romanticism,  and  of  a  certain  violence  of 
colour  which  is  very  unlike  what  we  have  come  to  associate  with 
his  name.  These  years  were  the  hardest  for  him.  In  1845  he 
met  the  famous  singer  Pauline  Garcia  (Mme.  Viardot)  and  there 
began  his  hopeless  and  fruitless  attachment  to  her  which  lasted 
all  his  life.  Pauline  Garcia  responded  with  nothing  better  than 
a  cool  friendship.  This  love-affair  is  partly  responsible  for  the 
unhappy  ending  of  all  Turgenev’s  love  stories.  Turgenev’s 
mother  strongly  disapproved  of  his  attachment  to  the  actress, 
as  well  as  of  his  literary  activities.  She  stopped  giving  him  money, 
and  the  years  1845-1848  were  the  only  period  of  his  life  that  he 
spent  in  something  like  poverty.  In  1848  she  died,  leaving  him 
a  considerable  fortune. 

In  1846  Turgenev  published  the  first  of  his  Sportman's  Sketches 
(Khor  and  Kalinych ).  It  appeared  in  a  periodical,  Nekrasov’s 
Sovremennik,  in  an  inconspicuous  place,  and  at  first  attracted  little 
attention.  Sketches  continued  to  appear  in  the  Sovremennik ,  and 
in  1852  they  were  collected  into  a  book,  which  produced  a  sensa¬ 
tion  and  placed  Turgenev  in  the  very  first  rank  of  Russian  writers. 
In  these  sketches  (hardly  any  one  of  them  can  be  called  a  story) 
Turgenev’s  genius  reached  its  full  stature.  He  never  again  wrote 
anything  quite  as  perfect  as,  for  instance,  Bezhin  Meadow — ‘  the 
chapter  (to  quote  Henry  James)  in  which  he  spends  a  warm 
summer  night  lying  on  the  grass  listening  to  the  small  boys  who 
are  sent  out  to  watch  the  horses  at  pasture,  as  they  sit  chattering 
to  each  other  of  hobgoblins  and  fairies  ;  and  the  truly  beautiful 
description  of  a  singing  match  between  two  ragged  peasants 


25 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 

(The  Singers).  The  latter  is  simply  a  perfect  poem.’  From  the 
point  of  view  of  absolute,  all-round  perfection  this  last  story  is 
perhaps  the  crowning  glory  of  Russian  prose.  Turgenev  never 
wrote  anything  more  concentratedly  beautiful. 

Besides  their  matchless  artistic  perfection  the  Sportman’s 
Sketches  are  supposed  to  have  had  a  great  historical  importance 
as  anti-Serfdom  propaganda.  They  are  said  to  have  made  a  deci¬ 
sive  impression  on  the  future  Emperor  Alexander  II,  and  thus 
to  be  an  indirect  cause  of  the  Emancipation.  But  this  aspect  of 
the  book  has  been  grossly  exaggerated.  The  political  impression 
it  produced  only  ‘  testifies  (to  quote  Henry  James  again)  to  no 
small  culture  on  the  part  of  Russian  readers.  For  never,  surely, 
was  a  work  of  polemic  bearing  more  consistently  low  in  tone  ’. 
The  truth  is  that  the  unprejudiced  reader  cannot  possibly  discern 
any  ‘  polemic  bearing  ’  at  all.  It  needed  all  the  high-strung 
nervousness  of  Russian  society,  developed  by  the  unlimited 
despotism  of  Nicholas  I’s  last  years,  to  notice  the  very  unobtrusive 
‘  social  ’  note.  The  period  of  extreme  reaction  lasted  from  the 
Revolutionary  year  of  1848  to  the  death  of  the  Emperor  Nicholas 
in  1855.  Turgenev,  though  in  a  much  lesser  degree  than  Dostoev¬ 
sky,  was  to  become  one  of  its  victims.  When  in  1852  Gogol  died 
Turgenev  wrote  an  obituary  notice  in  which  he  spoke  in  terms  of 
boundless  enthusiasm  of  his  satirical  genius.  For  this  article  he 
was  banished  to  his  estate,  where  he  had  to  remain  for  about 
eighteen  months.  In  this  involuntary  isolation  he  wrote  a  series 
of  stories,  all  of  which  are  among  his  best,  including  that  wonderful 
masterpiece  The  Backwater. 

In  1853  he  was  allowed  to  return  to  St.  Petersburg.  He  became 
a  central  figure  in  the  literary  world.  Together  with  Nekrasov  and 
Annenkov  he  wellnigh  ruled  Russian  literature.  In  poetry  especially 
his  influence  amounted  to  a  dictatorship  :  the  poems  of  both  the 
greatest  poets  of  the  day,  Tyutchev  and  Fet,  used  to  be  amended  and 
‘  corrected  ’  by  Turgenev  before  they  were  allowed  to  see  the  press. 


26 


The  Great  Novelists 


In  1855  the  reign  of  Nicholas  I  came  to  an  end.  With  the  new 
reign  began  a  new  age — the  Age  of  Reforms,  which  was  also  to  be 
the  golden  age  of  Turgenev’s  popularity.  In  1856  he  published 
the  first  of  his  longer  novels,  Rudin.  This  was  followed  by  a  House 
of  Gentlefolk  (1858),  On  the  Eve  (i860),  and  Fathers  and  Sons 
(1862).  In  between  he  wrote  a  few  shorter  stories,  two  of  which, 
Asya  and  First  Fove,  are  among  his  most  lasting  masterpieces. 
The  longer  novels  were  all  of  them  more  or  less  1  novels  with 
a  purpose  ’  and  had  a  direct  bearing  on  the  problems  of  the  day. 
Turgenev  was  certainly  influenced  by  the  critics,  who  demanded 
that  novelists  should  present  in  their  works  a  creative  synthesis 
of  what  was  going  on  around  them.  The  novelist,  according  to 
Chernyshevsky  and  Dobrolyubov,  was  to  be  an  epitomizer  of 
current  history,  and  Turgenev  conscientiously  applied  himself  to 
the  task.  When  he  was  not  on  his  best  civic  behaviour  he  was 
promptly  reminded  of  his  duty.  When  Asya  was  published — 
a  purely  human  and  unpolitical  love-story — Chernyshevsky  wrote 
a  critique  which  transformed  it  into  an  allegory  of  burning 
actuality.  But  in  the  longer  novels  the  critics  had  no  difficulty 
in  finding  the  ‘  social  meaning’.  In  Rudin ,  for  instance,  Turgenev 
represented  the  type  of  the  eloquent  but  ineffective  revolte  of 
the  forties.  In  A  House  of  Gentlefolk  he  distilled  all  that  was 
best  in  the  old  conservative  civilization  of  the  gentry  into  the 
beautiful  figure  of  Liza.  In  On  the  Eve  he  tried  to  draw  the 
character  of  an  efficient  revolutionary,  the  counterpart  to  Rudin. 
He  made  his  hero,  Insarov,  a  Bulgarian.  This  led  the  critics  to 
declare  that  in  Turgenev’s  opinion  Russia  was  incapable  of  pro¬ 
ducing  men  of  action.  His  answer  to  the  critics  was  Fathers  and 
Sons,  the  last  of  the  series.  On  the  Eve  is  the  most  ‘  civic  ’  and 
the  least  attractive  of  Turgenev’s  novels.  Its  beauty  has  faded, 
and  even  the  heroic  Elena  lacks  the  charm  of  Turgenev’s  other 
heroines.  Fathers  and  Sons  is  also  civic  in  conception,  but  unlike 
On  the  Eve,  Turgenev  somehow  succeeded  in  making  it  a  master- 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


27 


piece,  which  has  not  faded  and  probably  never  will.  The  hero 
is  the  ‘  nihilist  ’  (the  word  is  of  Turgenev’s  coinage),  materialist, 
and  atheist  Bazarov,  a  ‘strong  silent  man’.  Turgenev  most 
obviously  drew  him  wdth  love  and  sympathy.  The  Radicals,  how¬ 
ever,  took  exception  to  Bazarov  and  proclaimed  him  an  impertinent 
caricature.  But  soon  there  came  up  a  new  set  of  younger  and 
extremer  Radicals  who  gloried  in  their  atheism  and  materialism 
and  in  their  contempt  for  art  and  beauty.  They  accepted  Bazarov 
as  a  portrait  of  themselves,  recognized  him  as  their  ideal,  and  took 
up  the  name  of  Nihilists.  Turgenev  had  out-radicalled  the  older 
radicals  and  prophetically  painted  a  type  which  at  the  time  he 
wrote  had  not  yet  come  into  existence.  This  flair  for  the  imme¬ 
diate  future  has  been  much  emphasized  by  the  commentators  of 
Turgenev  and  in  the  eyes  of  intelligentsia  criticism  it  has  become 
his  chief  litre  He  noblesse.  But  it  did  not  make  up  for  the  first  bad 
reception  of  the  novel.  This  first  reception  had  a  strong  effect 
on  Turgenev.  He  was  over- sensitive  to  popularity  and  hated 
being  ‘  out  of  the  movement  ’.  He  never  quite  recovered  from 
the  wound.  He  stayed  abroad,  and  only  came  back  to  Russia 
for  short  visits.  He  expressed  his  profound  disappointment  in 
a  prose-poem,  Enough,  so  ruthlessly  and  unkindly  parodied  by 
Dostoevsky  in  The  Possessed. 

Turgenev  settled  abroad,  first  at  Baden-Baden  and  afterwards 
at  Bougival,  near  Paris.  He  became  practically  an  emigre,  and 
lost  touch  with  the  Russian  soil.  His  next  novel,  Smoke  (1867), 
is  a  novel  of  Russian  life  abroad— the  scene  is  at  Baden-Baden. 
It  is  the  least  perfect  of  his  novels.  In  it  he  quite  irrelevantly 
combined  one  of  his  best  love-stories  with  a  Satirical  representation 
of  Russian  society  at  Baden-Baden.  He  satirizes  both  the  re¬ 
actionary  noblesse  and  the  radical  emigres,  and  the  book  is  full  of 
bitterness.  Turgenev  continued  writing  short  stories,  which 
though  they  include  such  masterpieces  as  Torrents  of  Spring  and 
A  Lear  of  the  Steppes,  passed  comparatively  unnoticed.  They  are 


28 


The  Great  Novelists 


all  retrospective  and  deal  with  Russian  life  before  the  Reforms. 
In  1877  published  his  last  novel,  Virgin  Soil,  once  again  taking  up 
a  civic  theme — the  revolutionary  propaganda  of  the  Populists 1 
among  the  peasants.  It  appeared  a  few  weeks  before  the  outbreak 
of  the  Turkish  war  and  failed  to  create  a  sensation.  But  though 
almost  everything  he  wrote  after  1862  met  with  a  lukewarm 
reception,  his  reputation  was  very  far  from  waning.  His  earlier 
work  from  A  Sportsman's  Sketches  to  Fathers  and  Sons  had  passed 
beyond  the  reach  of  praise  or  blame.  Turgenev  had  become 
a  classic  and  he  was  generally  recognized  as  the  greatest  living 
Russian  writer  (Tolstoy  was  as  yet  fully  appreciated  only  by 
a  very  few).  Turgenev’s  last  visit  to  Russia,  in  1880,  turned  into 
a  triumphant  progress  and  largely  made  up  for  the  bitterness 
caused  by  the  Radicals  twenty  years  earlier. 

During  these  last  years  Turgenev  was  more  and  more  pessi¬ 
mistic  and  haunted  by  the  idea  of  death.  He  was  attracted  for 
a  time  by  spiritualism  in  its  rather  crude  ‘  Victorian  ’  forms 
( Clara  Milich ),  but  his  last  work,  the  short  fragments  known  as 
Poems  in  Prose,  gives  full  expression  to  his  joyless  fatalism  and 
unbelief.  He  died  in  1883,  in  Bougival. 

For  the  English  reader  there  can  be  no  more  attractive  account 
of  Turgenev’s  personality  than  Henry  James’s  delightful  essay 
included  in  Partial  Portraits.  The  great  American  was  fascinated 
by  the  charm  of  the  Russian,  and  speaks  of  him  in  terms  of  un¬ 
stinted  admiration.  In  Russian  accounts  Turgenev  is  given  a  far 
less  attractive  character.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was 
more  cordial,  more  sincere,  more  generous,  and  more  simple  with 
foreigners  than  with  Russians.  Foreigners,  for  instance,  have 
often  dwelt  on  his  intense  patriotism,  while  to  all  Russians  he 
appeared  as  a  fastidious  cosmopolitan,  who  sneered  at  his  native 
country.  He  made  friends  with  French  novelists,  but  not  with 
his  Russian  compeers.  Only  those  could  be  his  friends  who 

1  See  p.  76. 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov  29 

submitted  to  his  superiority  without  murmuring  like  the  gentle 
and  modest  poet  Polonsky.  Tolstoy,  Dostoevsky,  Nekrasov, 
were  all  sooner  or  later  compelled  to  quarrel  with  him.  Fet  was 
the  only  man  who  remained  friends  with  him  on  terms  of  equality. 
But  Fet  was  a  man  of  infinite  reserve  and  singularly  self-contained. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  was  something  unmanly  both  in  his 
dealings  with  women  and  in  his  excessive  sensitiveness  to  what 
the  Radicals  and  the  younger  generation  thought  of  him.  In 
politics  he  was  a  consummate  trimmer ;  and  even  those  who 
happened  to  share  his  views  disliked  their  Laodicean  tepidness. 
He  has  not  inspired  his  biographers  with  that  hero-worship  which 
is  so  easily  kindled  in  a  biographer.  But  no  one  has  doubted  his 
great  intellect,  and  all  who  knew  him  testify  to  the  inimitable 
charm  of  his  conversation. 

Long  before  his  death  Turgenev  acquired  a  European  fame. 
He  was  translated  into  and  written  about  in  French,  German,  and 
English.1  He  was  an  important  figure  in  the  French  literary 
world  of  the  day  ;  on  friendly  terms  with  Flaubert,  and  recognized 
as  a  master  by  younger  men  like  Daudet  and  Maupassant.  And 
when  he  died  his  funeral  oration  was  delivered  by  Renan.  It 
was  about  or  soon  after  his  death  that  his  fame  reached  its  high- 
water  mark  both  at  home  and  abroad  (Melchior  de  Vogue,  Le 
Roman  Russe,  1885).  Since  then  it  has  been  eclipsed  by  that  of 
Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky  (in  this  country  perhaps  even  by  that  of 
Chekhov)  ;  but  it  is  because  their  fame  has  grown,  not  because 
Turgenev’s  has  diminished.  He  is  safe  in  his  splendour,  which, 
in  Russia  at  least,  shows  no  signs  of  waning. 

Turgenev  lacked  the  enormous  creative  power  of  Tolstoy  or 
Dostoevsky,  their  vitality  and  their  deadly  earnest  intensity,  but 
he  had  other  qualities  which  neither  of  his  greater  contemporaries 
possessed.  First  of  all,  his  beautiful  caressing  Russian.  His  prose, 
at  its  best,  produces  an  almost  physical  effect  of  intoxicating 
1  Henry  James’s  first  essay  was  published  in  1876. 


30 


The  Great  Novelists 


beauty.  His  language  is  very  much  his  own  creation.  He  broke 
away  from  all  literary  traditions,  from  the  neat  analytical  style  of 
Pushkin  and  Lermontov,  as  well  as  from  the  exuberant  eloquence 
of  Gogol.  Compared  with  what  came  before  him,  his  style  is 
cunningly  and  consistently  colloquial,  elaborately  natural,  and 
laboriously  unliterary.  It  is  inimitable  and  perfect  as  long  as  he 
keeps  it  fresh  and  renewed.  It  becomes  insipid  and  stale  as  soon 
as  the  suspicion  of  a  cliche  arises.  When  he  speaks  of  Nature 
and  Landscape  he  almost  invariably  keeps  it  fresh.  But  in  the 
direct  description  of  sentiment  he  very  often  sinks  into  the  rut  of 
self-imitation.  His  pitfalls  are  the  false-beautiful  and  the  languid. 
Nothing  can  be  more  insipid  than  the  sentiments  of  the  ideal 
heroine  Elena  in  On  the  Eve. 

This  danger  of  the  false-beautiful  lies  in  the  very  nature  of 
Turgenev’s  method.  It  is  not  analytical — it  is  what  one  might 
call  poetical  or  suggestive  :  he  does  not  describe  the  feelings  of 
his  characters,  but  tries  to  produce  an  atmosphere  of  sympathy, 
and  to  evoke  in  the  reader  responsive  emotions  by  purely  emotional 
means.  In  this  he  differs  from  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky,  but 
comes  very  near  to  Chekhov.  It  may  be  contended  that  his 
poetical  effects  are  less  perfect  and  successful  than  Chekhov’s, 
and  it  is  certain  that  he  could  never  attain  to  that  unity  of  com¬ 
position  which  is  the  great  strength  of  the  younger  master. 

What  most  modern  readers  will  dislike  in  Turgenev  is  his 
‘  humour  ’.  It  is  neither  the  loud  honest  laugh  of  Dickens,  nor 
the  kind,  contemptuously  sympathetic  smile  of  Chekhov — it  is 
a  sneer,  often  unmanly  and  always  self-conscious.  Another 
feature  of  Turgenev’s  which  is  quite  out  of  tune  with  our  tastes 
is  his  conversations  on  social  and  intellectual  topics.  Usually 
they  are  hors  d'ceuvres  quite  unassimilated  to  the  body  of  the 
story.  They  are  pieces  of  indifferent  journalism  painfully  en¬ 
crusted  on  a  beautiful  fabric.  Here  again  he  is  poles  apart  from 
both  Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy,  whose  conversations  are  never 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


3i 


irrelevant,  and  carry  on  the  main  impulse  of  the  story.  Like  most 
Russian  novelists,  Turgenev  is  first  ot  all  a  great  creator  of  char¬ 
acters.  They  have  not  the  absolute  reality  of  Tolstoy’s  people 
nor  the  intense  fantastic  vividness  of  Dostoevsky’s.  They  are 
on  a  more  conventional  and  more  artistic  plane.  His  art  of 
character-painting  goes  back  to  Pushkin — it  is  in  the  tradition  of 
Evgeni  Onegin. 

Conversation  has  little  and  analysis  no  part  in  the  shaping  of 
his  personages.  Their  individuality  is  produced  by  the  subtle  and 
elusive  methods  of  atmosphere.  Turgenev’s  best  and  most 
memorable  characters,  with  the  notable  exception  of  Bazarov, 
are  his  women,  especially  his  young  girls— Liza  in  a  House  of 
Gentlefolk,  Asya,  the  heroine  of  the  Backwater.  There  is  certainly 
an  element  of  poetical  or  romantic  idealism  in  these  creations  and 
perhaps  just  a  little  lack  of  backbone.  But  if  Turgenev  had  not 
created  Bazarov,  they  would  have  remained  his  principal  claim 
to  equality  with  the  great  Russian  novelists.  Bazarov  is  some¬ 
thing  of  a  miracle — so  isolated  and  unexpected  is  he  in  the  midst 
of  Turgenev’s  portrait  gallery.  But  he  is  also  after  all  a  creation  of 
atmosphere,  and  his  individuality  lies  in  the  subtle  halo  of  tragedy 
woven  round  him  by  the  cunning  poet  rather  than  in  the  £  strong¬ 
silentness  ’  of  his  character. 

One  of  the  eminent  French  admirers  of  Turgenev  compared 
his  work  with  Greek  Tragedy.  This  is  of  course  too  complimen¬ 
tary.  Turgenev’s  conception  of  the  human  universe  is  the  typical 
decadent  nineteenth-century  conception,  it  is  a  world  of  human 
weakness  and  blind  chance.  Irreligious  (but  not  courageous 
enough  to  be  an  atheist)  and  passive,  Turgenev  could  but  be 
a  pessimist,  and  his  pessimism  is  relieved  only  by  the  romantic 
visions  of  love  and  beauty,  beautiful,  fleeting,  frail  things,  veiling 
from  the  unwilling  eye  the  dreadful  abysses  of  Nonentity.  But 
there  is  not  in  Turgenev  an  ounce  of  the  active,  manly,  fearless 
pessimism  of  Thomas  Hardy.  The  unhappy  ending  of  all 


32 


The  Great  Novelists 


Turgenev’s  stories  has  been  often  noted.  It  is  of  course  first  of 
all  a  literary  convention,  a  mannerism  if  you  like,  but  a  convention 
and  a  mannerism  highly  characteristic  of  the  man  and  of  his  age. 
A  happy  ending  was  to  Turgenev  something  incredibly  vulgar. 
Like  Renan  and  Chekhov,  he  despised  success.  The  great  majority 
of  his  heroes  do  not  deserve  success,  but  twice  in  his  career  he 
created  or  tried  to  create,  under  the  stimulus  of  external  forces, 
men  who  deserved  it — Insarov  in  On  the  Eve  and  Bazarov. 
Bazarov,  of  course  as  he  was  created  by  Turgenev,  not  as  he  was 
imagined  by  the  younger  Radicals,  was  not  at  all  a  deserver  of 
success ;  he  was  called  into  existence  just  to  be  broken  down  by 
Ananke — a  brave  little  mouse  to  be  played  with  by  the  great 
merciless  Cat  of  Destiny — like  the  brave  little  sparrow  in  one 
of  the  Poems  in  Prose.  Consequently  he  is  a  great  creation  in  the 
true  spirit  of  his  creator.  Bazarov’s  unhappy  end  is  in  complete 
harmony  with  the  whole  conception.  Insarov,  the  strong  Bulgar¬ 
ian  of  On  the  Eve,  transcended  the  power  of  Turgenev.  He  is 
ludicrously  inadequate.  He  is  of  course  meant  to  1  deserve 
success  ’  and  there  is  no  reason  in  the  world  (except  in  Turgenev’s 
world)  why  he  should  not  command  it.  But  to  succeed  would 
have  been  to  become  a  philistine.  To  let  him  be  victorious  would 
have  been  (aesthetically)  to  kill  him.  It  would  have  been  a  grave 
breach  of  courtesy  on  the  part  of  the  author.  So  he  has  the 
privilege  of  suddenly  falling  ill  and  dying  in  the  very  appropriate 
scenery  of  Venice,  and  is  thus  unexpectedly  redeemed  from  the 
abomination  of  success.  On  the  Eve  is  the  worst  of  Turgenev’s 
works.  No  one  will  call  it  a  good  novel.  But  nowhere  is  it 
easier  to  lay  the  finger  on  the  mainsprings  of  Turgenev’s  effeminate, 
romantic,  and  aesthetic  pessimism.  This  effeminate  and  passive 
pessimism  has  been  supposed  to  be  typically  Russian  ;  Renan, 
a  fellow  pessimist,  spoke  to  this  effect  in  his  eloquent  funeral 
oration.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  typical  of  the  Cosmopolitan 
Europe  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  Renan  himself  is  at  least 


From,  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


33 


as  eminent  a  spokesman  of  it.  It  is  also  typical  of  the  dying 
civilization  of  the  gentry  and  the  Hamlet-like  generation  of 
the  forties.  It  was  this  heritage  that  was  taken  up  by  the  still 
more  decadent  intelligentsia — in  the  work  of  its  greatest  writer, 
Chekhov. 

For  the  general  reader  at  home,  and  especially  abroad,  Turgenev 
has  eclipsed  all  the  other  novelists  of  his  generation,  except  the 
major  lights  of  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky.  But  before  the  writers 
of  that  age  were  finally  pigeon-holed  according  to  their  respective 
importance,  the  table  of  precedence  had  been  otherwise.  A  critic 
writing  about  1862  might  mention  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky 
among  the  second  rank  of  writers,  reserving  the  first  places  for 
Turgenev  and  Goncharov,  without  any  sense  of  incongruity. 
It  was  a  long  time  before  Goncharov  was  displaced  from  a  position 
of  equality  with  Turgenev.  To  this  day  the  analysis  of  his  novels 
is  inflicted  on  Russian  schoolboys  and  schoolgirls  at  even  greater 
length  than  that  of  Turgenev’s.  But  if  the  schoolmaster  sticks  to 
him,  the  reader  has  abandoned  him,  for  the  good  reason  that, 
whatever  other  qualities  they  may  have,  his  novels  are  distinctly 
tedious.  Yet  the  historian  cannot  abandon  him  so  lightly  and 
must  reserve  for  him  a  very  prominent  place,  a  place  of  honour 
even,  for  of  all  Russian  writers  Goncharov  is  most  representative 
of  the  peculiar  idiosyncrasies  of  the  Russian  school  of  fiction. 

The  life  of  Ivan  Aleksandrovich  Goncharov  was  uninteresting 
and  uneventful.  He  was  born  in  1812  in  Simbirsk  (on  the  middle 
Volga),  of  a  wealthy  merchant  family  who  had  adopted  the  mode 
of  life  and  culture  of  the  gentry.  He  studied  at  Moscow,  and 
passed  most  of  his  life  in  St.  Petersburg,  in  the  Civil  Service.  The 
only  incident  in  his  life  worth  mentioning  is  his  voyage  to  Japan 
in  1854-1855,  which  he  described  in  The  Frigate  Pallada.  The 
only  other  events  are  the  publications  of  his  three  novels : 
A  Common  Story  in  1847,  Oblomov  in  1858,  and  The  Precipice  in 
1869.  He  died  in  1891. 


2535-5  7 


C 


34 


The  Great  Novelists 


Of  his  novels  the  most  famous  is  Oblomov,  which  appeared  in 
the  same  year  as  A  House  of  Gentlefolk.  It  produced  a  greater 
sensation  than  any  single  one  of  Turgenev’s  novels.  It  became 
the  special  favourite  of  the  critics,  for  it  realized  all  they  demanded 
from  a  novel.  It  may  be  taken  as  the  type  of  the  Russian  novel, 
in  which  all  its  peculiarities,  as  enumerated  in  the  beginning  of 
this  chapter,  are  most  fully  developed.  It  is  very  long,  has  four 
parts,  and  contains  some  250,000  words.  Goncharov  took  about 
ten  years  writing  it.  It  is  the  life-story  of  a  Russian  gentleman, 
Ilya  Oblomov,  who  is  made  to  be  the  incarnation  of  sloth  and 
conscious  inefficiency,  coupled  with  no  mean  amount  of  intellect 
and  talent.  The  subject  made  it  a  splendid  springboard  for  the 
exercise  of  critical  eloquence,  and  it  was  no  doubt  written  with 
a  very  distinct  view  of  creating  a  synthetic  and  comprehensive 
symbol  of  a  certain  aspect  of  Russian  life.  It  is  not  exhilarating 
reading,  but  it  is  very  powerful,  a  work  of  genius,  and  in  its 
way  a  perfect  work  of  art.  It  is  indeed  convincingly  symbolic 
and  synthetic,  and  the  gradual  growth  of  the  inevitable  doom 
of  the  unfit  man  is  developed  with  a  cunning  and  unerring  hand. 
The  general  impression  is  overpowering,  almost  elemental.  The 
passive  sloth  and  slovenly  weakness  of  Oblomov  looms  on  the 
reader  as  a  sort  of  superhuman  entity,  a  terrible  grey,  unclean 
and  sticky  monster.  This  effect  is  achieved  without  the  smallest 
falling  off  from  a  strictly  realistic  standard,  and  is  for  that  reason 
doubly  effective.  The  novel  is  the  crowning  glory  of  what  Miss 
Harrison  has  very  aptly  called  the  ‘  imperfective  ’  style  in  litera¬ 
ture.  The  name  of  Oblomov  has  given  rise  to  the  word  Oblomov- 
shchina — ‘  Oblomovdom  ’ — which,  to  quote  Miss  Harrison, 
‘  means  the  imperfective  state  incarnate  ’.  ‘  Oblomov  ’,  she  goes 

on  to  say,  ‘  is  the  incarnation  of  what  the  Russian  calls  kbalatnost, 
the  quality  of  dressing-gownness.  Oblomov’s  dressing-gown  is 
described  with  loving  appreciative  detail.  It  is  a  big,  soft,  roomy, 
Asiatic  dressing-gown,  easy  to  get  into,  almost  impossible  to  get 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


35 


out  of.  It  haunts  the  book  like  an  Ibsen  symbol.  It  stands 
for  the  impossibility  of  being  “  well-groomed  ”,  physically  and 
mentally 

Goncharov’s  remaining  two  novels  are  less  significant.  The 
Common  Story  is  a  series  of  more  or  less  disconnected  episodes 
contrasting,  with  mathematical  elegance,  the  mentality  of  a 
romantic  youth  and  of  his  practical  uncle,  and  ending  in  the 
romantic  youth  becoming  a  practical  business-man.  The  Precipice 
contains  much  first-class  character-drawing  and  a  charming  de¬ 
scription  of  old-world  country-town  life.  It  has  more  narrative 
interest  than  Oblomov,  but  it  lacks  the  superior  touch  of  genius. 
In  all  the  most  pathetic  and  thrilling  parts  it  is  ‘just  wrong’, 
and  altogether  it  belongs  to  the  second  best. 

A  writer  very  unlike  both  Goncharov  and  Turgenev  was 
Aleksey  Theofilaktovich  Pisemsky  (1820-1881).  In  the  great  days 
of  the  social  novel  he  was  invariably  quoted  as  third  in  a  trio 
which  included  the  other  two.  If  Goncharov  is  supremely 
typical  of,  Pisemsky  stands  outside  the  main  current  of  Russian 
fiction.  He  lacks  two  of  the  main  features  of  the  ‘  Russian  School  ’ 
— the  ethical  foundation  and  the  neglect  of  plot.  He  is  more 
akin  to  Balzac  than  to  any  one  of  his  Russian  contemporaries. 
As  a  mere  story-teller  he  excels  all  Russian  novelists  except 
Leskov.  His  principal  drawback  is  his  style,  which  lacks  art  and 
distinction  and  in  his  later  work  degenerates  into  the  ugliest 
journalese.  Even  in  his  best  period  (1850-1860)  it  is  just  inoffen¬ 
sive.  His  first  story,  The  Muff  (1850),  is  perhaps  his  best.  It  is 
very  gloomy  and  lacks  the  idealism  of  Turgenev,  but  it  is  gloomy 
in  the  way  Balzac  is  gloomy,  not  in  the  way  Goncharov  is.  His 
longest  work  is  the  powerful  novel  A  Thousand  Souls  which 
appeared  1858.  It  is  the  story  of  a  brilliant,  unscrupulous,  but 
honest  arriviste.  It  is  somewhat  less  consistently  pessimistic  in 
its  view  of  humanity,  for  it  is  relieved  by  the  charming,  delicately 
painted  and  entirely  unidealized  figure  of  the  heroine  Nastya. 


36 


The  Great  Novelists 


Unlike  most  Russian  novels,  but  like  Balzac’s,  its  plot  is  based  on 
a  business  affair,  and  it  abounds  in  thrilling  interest  of  the 
Balzacian  type.  Besides  stories  of  ‘  educated  ’  life,  Pisemsky 
wrote  stories  of  the  people,  like  the  Petersburgher  and  The  Car¬ 
penters.  They  contain  wonderfully  powerful  studies  of  the  strong 
and  passionate  type  of  Russians  of  the  uneducated  classes ;  there 
is  in  these  stories  a  forecast  of  Leskov.  Elsewhere  I  shall  have  to 
mention  Pisemsky  as  the  author  of  the  best  realistic  tragedy  in 
the  Russian  language. 

Pisemsky’s  stories  of  ‘  popular  ’  life  may  introduce  us  to  the 
provincial  ethnographical  novel  which  flourished  side  by  side 
with  the  £  genteel  ’  or  intelligentsia  novel  of  Turgenev  and  Gon¬ 
charov.  Few  of  the  provincial  novelists  rise  above  mediocrity, 
but  one  should  mention  Andrey  Pechersky  (pseud,  of  P.  I. 
Melnikov,  1819-1883),  author  of  two  four-volume  novels  about 
Old  Believers,1  In  the  Woods  and  On  the  Hills.  They  contain  some 
good  character-drawing  and  an  immense  wealth  of  observation  of 
this  singularly  conservative  community.  Nadezhda  Kokhanovsky 
(pseud,  of  Mme.  Sokhansky,  1825-1884),  in  her  stories  of  the  life 
of  the  Little-Russian  steppe  gentry,  reveals  a  very  personal  strain 
of  sentimental  humour.  Her  best  stories  deal  with  the  rough 
and  picturesque  provincial  life  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and 
deserve  a  place  by  themselves,  independent  of,  but  complementary 
to  Aksakov. 

In  the  novels  of  Turgenev,  as  distinct  from  his  shorter  stories, 
and  of  Goncharov,  there  is  an  appreciable  amount  of  journalism. 
In  Fathers  and  Sons,  in  Rudin,  and  in  Oblomov  it  is  welded  into  an 
organic  unity  with  the  imaginative  core  ;  but  in  a  less  perfect  work, 
like  Smoke,  the  journalistic  element  stands  apart  and  is  as  distinct 
from  the  main  creative  stream  of  the  novel  as  oil  is  from  water. 

1  Dissenters  who  refused  to  accept  certain  new  rites  and  customs  introduced 
in  the  Russian  Church  about  1660. 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


37 


In  this  compulsory  introduction  of  themes  of  actuality  into 
imaginative  work  there  lay  the  germ  of  a  development  that  was  not 
slow  to  follow.  Fiction  took  a  decided  turn  towards  journalism. 
It  began  to  dispense  with  the  discipline  and  conventions  of  the 
narrative  form  and  tended  to  become  mere  typical  description 
with  a  purpose.  This  tendency  is  best  illustrated  in  the  work  of 
Michael  Evgrafovich  Saltykov  (1826-1889),  who  wrote  under  the 
pseudonym  of  N.  Shchedrin.  Himself  a  member  of  the  gentry 
and  for  many  years  an  important  provincial  official,  he  devoted 
his  talents  to  satirizing  the  Russian  bureaucracy  in  all  its  aspects, 
and  combating  the  conservative  policy  of  the  landowning  class, 
undermined  but  not  abolished  by  the  Emancipation.  Later  on 
he  added  to  his  enemies  the  new  parvenu  and  unprincipled 
bourgeoisie  created  by  the  capitalistic  excitement  that  followed 
the  Reforms.  His  first  satirical  sketches  appeared  in  1857.  He 
continued  producing  them  till  his  death.  Towards  the  end  of 
his  life,  especially  after  the  death  of  Nekrasov,  he  became  the 
principal  spokesman  of  Russian  Radicalism.  His  sketches,  it  must 
be  confessed,  offer  little  to  attract  any  one  to-day.  His  earlier 
work  is  amusing,  but  it  lacks  not  only  the  higher  qualities  of 
genius,  but  also  sufficient  moral  earnestness  to  make  up  for  its  lack 
of  distinction.  By  a  curious  irony  of  fate  his  Provincial  Sketches 
and  his  History  of  a  Town  (a  witty  burlesque  of  the  history  of 
Russia)  became  the  favourite  reading  of  the  official  class  satirized 
in  them.  His  later  sketches  are  more  serious,  but  less  readable. 
They  are  full  of  obscure  allusions  to  wholly  forgotten  topics. 
On  a  higher  level  are  his  Fables  ( Skazki )  where  he  achieves  a  greater 
degree  of  artistic  concision ;  some  of  them  are  delightfully 
epigrammatic  and  pointed.  His  last  work  is  Old  Limes  in  Poshe- 
khonye,  a  very  tendentious  but  vastly  planned  synthetic  picture 
of  the  Russian  gentry  in  the  times  of  serfdom.  Saltykov  would 
remain  a  secondary  figure  in  Russian  literary  history  were  it  not 
for  one  book,  his  only  regular  novel,  The  Golovlev  Family,  which 


38 


The  Great  Novelists 


places  him  on  a  level  with  the  very  greatest.  Like  so  many 
Russian  novels,  it  is  the  story  of  the  undoing  of  a  life,  or  rather  of 
a  whole  family,  and  it  is  saturated  with  a  more  than  ordinary 
gloominess.  It  is  like  Poshekhonye ,  the  ‘  natural  history  ’  of  a 
family  of  landowners.  The  picture  it  offers  of  the  bestiality, 
meanness,  moral  and  intellectual  poverty  of  the  Golovlev  family 
is  unilluminated  by  a  single  redeeming  ray.  For  consistent  gloom 
the  book  has  no  equal — Wuthering  Heights  is  cheerful  compared 
with  it ;  but  in  its  kind,  of  cruel  literature  it  is  a  masterpiece, 
and  allows  us  to  place  its  author  in  the  first  rank  of  Russian 
novelists. 

After  i860  a  new  generation  of  raxnochintsi  (‘  men-of-all- 
ranks  ’)  came  forward  and  occupied  the  literary  stage.  The  first 
of  these  was  Nikolay  Gerasimovich  Pomyalovsky  (1835-1863) 
who  sprang  into  popularity  through  a  series  of  depressingly 
gloomy  pictures  of  life  in  the  ecclesiastical  schools.  He  was  a  man 
of  considerable  talent,  and  his  unfinished  novel  Brother  and 
Sister  contains  much  that  makes  one  regret  his  early  death.  But 
his  School  Sketches  are  after  all  mere  descriptive  journalism. 
His  contemporaries  followed  him  and  Saltykov  in  turning  fiction 
into  journalism.  The  most  famous  writer  of  the  group  in  his 
own  day  was  Gleb  Uspenski  (1840-1902),  a  man  of  great  gifts 
and  unusually  delicate  moral  sensitiveness.  But  the  formlessness, 
prolixity,  and  excessive  ‘  actuality  ’  of  his  descriptive  sketches  have 
made  them  unreadable.  There  were  other  men  of  promise  in  the 
generation  ;  they  experimented  in  form  and  tried  to  cast  aside 
the  conventions  of  fiction,  but  they  had  too  little  culture  for 
anything  to  come  of  their  experiments.  On  the  whole  the 
generation  born  between  1828  (birth  of  Tolstoy)  and  i860  (birth 
of  Chekhov)  was  remarkably  poor  in  literary  achievement,  if 
compared  with  either  the  preceding  or  the  following  generations. 
This  is  partly  made  up  for  by  the  fact  that  it  produced  the  greatest 
generation  of  Russian  composers — including  Chaikovsky,  Musorg- 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


39 


sky,  and  Rimsky- Korsakov.  There  is  one  writer  of  the  generation 
who  deserves  mention,  this  is  Nikolay  Afanasievich  Kushchevski 
(i847-i876),  a  young  Siberian  who  failed  in  life  and  died  of 
drink.  But  his  only  novel,  Nicholas  Negorev  or  the  happy  Russian 
(1871),  is  a  perfectly  delightful  book,  which  holds  its  own  even 
when  compared  with  the  greatest.  It  is  a  story  of  schoolboys’ 
and  students’  life  in  the  fifties.  His  characters  are  wonderfully 
alive.  His  humour  is  deliciously  fresh  and  he  has  a  beautiful 
lightness  of  touch  which  is  unique  among  the  somewhat  bear-like 
geniuses  of  Russian  literature. 

Midway  between  the  great  old  men  and  the  inferior  younger 
generation,  his  work  resembling  neither,  stands  Nikolay  Semeno¬ 
vich  Leskov.  He  was  born  in  1831,  in  Orel,  and  his  descent  was 
also  mixed  :  his  mother  was  a  gentlewoman,  his  father  a  priest’s 
son.  His  early  years  passed  under  mixed  influences,  among  which 
that  of  an  English  Quaker  friend  of  the  family  was  conspicuous. 
Leskov,  unlike  almost  every  other  Russian  writer,  did  not  study  at 
a  university,  and  did  not  enter  the  government  service.  He  was 
for  many  years  agent  for  a  Mr.  Scott,  an  Englishman  who  was 
chief  steward  of  a  nobleman’s  large  estate.  In  this  employment 
Leskov  came  into  contact  with  all  classes  of  people  and  learned  to 
know  them  from  an  angle  other  than  that  of  the  official  and 
landed  classes.  This  to  a  certain  extent  explains  the  great 
originality  of  his  writings  and  of  his  vision  of  Russian  life.  He 
began  writing  late.  His  first  story  appeared  in  1863.  He  was  at 
one  time  very  unpopular  with  the  Radicals,  even  boycotted  by 
them.  But  he  was  not  a  reactionary.  He  had  his  own  ideas  on 
things  and  they  did  not  fit  in  with  any  party  programme.  The 
critics  took  scant  notice  of  him,  but  the  reading  public  soon 
began  to  value  him  at  his  just  worth.  Some  of  his  stories  were 
much  appreciated  in  Court  circles,  especially  by  the  Empress 
Marie  Alexandrovna,  Alexander  IPs  consort,  and  he  was  given 
a  sinecure  in  the  Civil  Service  ;  but  he  left  it  when  he  found 


4o 


The  Great  Novelists 


himself  in  disagreement  with  the  Government.  In  his  later  years 
he  came  under  the  influence  of  the  ideas  of  Tolstoy,  but  as  a  writer 
he  always  remained  amazingly  original.  He  died  in  1895. 

Leskov’s  best-known  work  is  Soboryane  (in  English  the  title  is 
Cathedral  Folk),  which  has  been  translated  into  English  and  has 
caused  its  author  to  be  rather  inappropriately  dubbed  £  a  Russian 
Trollope  ’.  It  is  a  very  good  book,  full  of  humour  and  excellent 
character-drawing.  It  is  ‘  imperfective  ’  in  scheme,  but  the  author’s 
personality  asserts  itself  in  the  introduction  of  purely  anecdotic 
matter.  The  chief  character,  Deacon  Akhilla,  and  the  Archpriest 
Tuberozov,  a  strong  and  righteous  but  meticulous  man,  are  among 
the  most  memorable  in  the  portrait  gallery  of  Russian  fiction. 

But  Soboryane  is  not  typical  of  Leskov,  precisely  on  account  of 
its  ‘  imperfectiveness  ’.  For  Leskov  is  the  most  purely  narrative 
of  all  Russian  novelists.  He  is  a  great  story-teller,  in  fact  the 
greatest  of  Russian  story-tellers.  Many  a  story  of  his  contains 
more  wealth  of  incident  than  the  whole  of  Turgenev  and  Gon¬ 
charov.  Such  stories  as  the  Enchanted  Wanderer  or  the  Sealed 
Angel  have  a  wonderfully  rapid  narrative  development  sustained 
with  consummate  skill,  and  are  very  unlike  the  ordinary  con¬ 
ception  of  Russian  fiction.  Some  are  mere  anecdotes,  but  told 
with  the  skill  that  makes  them  great  literature.  Some  are  up¬ 
roariously  funny,  full  of  preposterous  puns  and  extraordinary 
slang,  invented  on  the  spur  of  the  moment.  There  is  nothing 
more  farcical  than  the  story  of  The  Left-handed  Smith  of  Tula 
and  his  adventures  in  England.  Others  are  concentrated  tragedies, 
something  after  the  manner  of  Stendhal’s  Italian  Nouvelles. 
The  tragedies  are  violent,  based  on  the  passions  of  simple  but 
strongly  feeling  men  and  women,  who  are  easily  roused  to  violent 
action.  His  Russian  characters,  a  foretaste  of  whom  is  to  be 
found  in  some  of  Pisemsky’s  stories,  are  poles  apart  from  the 
Russians  of  Turgenev,  Tolstoy,  or  Chekhov.  There  is  no  morbidity 
in  Leskov’s  heroes,  and  no  undue  analysis  or  psychology  in  his 


LESKOV 


From  Turgenev  to  Leskov 


4i 


method.  All  the  psychology  is  conveyed  by  direct  action.  But 
Leskov  has  the  deep-rooted  ethical  background  of  the  Russian 
novelists,  and  he  loves  to  bring  forward  the  generosity  and  charity 
of  the  simple  and  humble  in  contrast  to  the  great  and  clever. 
Leskov  is  one  of  the  most  Russian  of  Russian  writers,  though  he 
may  not  answer  to  the  English  idea  of  wdiat  is  Russian.  He  has 
a  greater  and  fuller  knowledge  of  the  Russian  character  and  an 
infinitely  wider  range  of  observation  than  any  other  single  Russian 
writer.  He  knows  all  classes,  from  the  highest  to  the  very  outcasts 
— vagabonds,  convicts,  tramps.  The  class  later  on  ‘  discovered  ’ 
by  Gorky  had  been  treated  by  Leskov  with  greater  truth  and 
intense  sympathy.  He  knows  all  the  extremes  of  sanctity  and 
crime,  nor  does  he  neglect  the  middle  layers  of  humdrum  virtue 
and  vulgar  vice.  He  is  in  fact  the  most  comprehensive  epitome 
of  the  complex  and  many-sided  Russian  life  in  the  mid-nineteenth 
century.  His  stories  are  also  a  treasure-house  of  the  raciest  and 
richest  Russian  :  the  narratives  are  usually  put  into  the  mouth  of 
one  of  the  characters  and  Leskov  richly  avails  himself  of  the 
occasion  to  unfold  an  astounding  fertility  of  verbal  invention  and 
a  peerless  mastery  of  his  mother  tongue.  In  his  later  years  under 
the  influence  of  Tolstoy  he  turned  to  a  different  style  and  wrote 
stories  of  early  Christian  life.  Meant  for  a  moral  end,  they  rather 
miss  it,  in  spite  of  the  author’s  sound  moral  sense — they  are  too 
attractively  told — the  narrative  is  too  captivating,  and  the 
picture  he  unfolds  of  late  Roman  Antioch  and  Alexandria  too 
glowingly  picturesque  and  pagan  to  leave  much  place  for  edifica¬ 
tion.  But  his  methods  are  infinitely  remote  from  those  of  the 
ordinary  historical  novelists,  for  he  succeeds  in  assimilating  the 
naive  spirit  of  the  Byzantine  hagiologists. 

Very  popular  from  the  outset  with  the  public,  Leskov  was  long 
neglected  by  the  critics.  Recently  there  has  been  a  great  revival 
of  interest  in  his  work.  Many  modern  novelists  try  to  imitate  the 
raciness  of  his  Russian.  But  his  best  qualities,  and  most  of  all 


42 


The  Great  Novelists 


the  manly  and  vigorous  directness  of  his  narrative,  remain  as  yet 
unassimilated.  In  a  better  understanding  of  Leskov  there  lies 
much  promise  of  a  revival  of  Russian  fiction. 


3 

Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 

It  is  customary  to  couple  these  two  names  together,  and  the 
custom  is  on  the  whole  justified.  The  two  are  comparable  not 
only  in  size  (they  were  head  and  shoulders  above  the  rest  of  their 
contemporaries)  but  also  in  kind.  They  were  both  masters  of 
the  psychological  novel.  They  were  both  passionately  interested 
in  the  essential  problems  of  life,  death  and  God,  and  both  en¬ 
deavoured  to  create  a  system  of  moral  and  social  philosophy  on 
a  religious  foundation.  For  the  literary  historian  they  are  of 
greater  interest  as  novelists  than  as  moralists  ;  but  even  apart 
from  their  imaginative  work  they  were  both  (though  in  an  unequal 
degree)  great  writers,  and  Tolstoy  the  greatest  master  of  non¬ 
narrative  Russian  prose. 

Though  all  novelists  have  to  do  with  the  feelings  and  emotions 
of  their  characters,  the  peculiarity  of  the  psychological  novelist 
is  that  his  method  of  dealing  with  them  is  intellectual — the 
method  of  direct  description  and  analysis — and  introspective  : 
he  is  assumed  to  know  everything  that  is  going  on  inside  them. 
The  ordinary  type  of  novelist,  like  Scott  or  Dickens,  is  concerned 
with  the  feelings  of  his  heroes  only  in  so  far  as  they  express  them¬ 
selves  in  speech  or  action ;  while  the  poetical  novelist,  like 
Turgenev  or  Chekhov,  conveys  them  by  the  indirect  way  of 
sympathetic  suggestion.  Tolstoy’s  method  is  purely  analytical ; 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


43 


Dostoevsky’s  is  purely  analytical  only  in  monologues,  like 
Memoirs  from  Underground.  In  his  big  novels  it  is  largely 
dramatic — the  speeches  being  the  main  means  of  revealing  their 
inner  life. 

The  psychological  novel  is  not  an  indigenous  Russian  growth. 
Its  pedigree  goes  back  to  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century, 
to  the  novels  of  Mme.  de  Lafayette,  to  Samuel  Richardson,  and 
the  Confessions  of  Rousseau.  In  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth 
century  the  French  tradition  was  carried  on  by  Benjamin  Constant, 
and  reached  its  fullest  expression  in  the  towering  genius  of 
Stendhal.  In  Russia  Lermontov  is  closely  connected  with  this 
French  tradition.  Aksakov,  on  the  other  hand,  with  his  manner 
at  once  broad  and  detailed,  stands  apart  from  the  main  current, 
but  is  related  by  way  of  the  sentimental  training  he  received  from 
his  mother  with  the  older  tradition  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
Tolstoy  is  a  direct  successor  of  the  French  analysts.  He  acknow¬ 
ledged  his  debt  to  Rousseau  and  Stendhal.  But  he  carried  their 
method  further  and  to  greater  perfection.  Dostoevsky’s  kinship 
is  much  less  clear.  His  direct  master  in  the  art  of  fiction  was 
Balzac,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  Gogol  and  Dickens,  neither  of 
whom  was  a  psychologist.  His  psychology  was  largely  his  own 
creation,  one  of  the  genuinely  original  novelties  in  the  history  of 
Literature. 

In  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky — and  in  Stendhal — the  psycho¬ 
logical  novel  of  the  nineteenth  century  reaches  its  high-water 
mark.  Their  pupils  did  not  rise  to  their  level.  Only  within  the 
last  years  have  we  seen  another  novelist  of  comparable  psycho¬ 
logical  power  and  equal  originality — the  great  and  perverse 
Frenchman,  Marcel  Proust. 

Though  Tolstoy  was  the  first  to  gain  general  recognition,  and 
his  influence  began  to  spread  earlier  than  Dostoevsky’s,  we  have 
only  to  compare  their  dates  to  see  that  priority  in  time  belongs 
to  Dostoevsky,  and  that  consequently  it  is  right  to  begin  with 


44 


The  Great  Novelists 


him,  though  in  the  history  of  literary  taste  he  may  come  second. 
Dostoevsky  was  seven  years  older  than  Tolstoy.  His  novels  were 
published  from  1846  to  1880,  Tolstoy’s  from  1852  to  1911  ( Hadji 
Murat).  Tolstoy’s  moral  and  social  propaganda  begins  where 
Dostoevsky’s  finishes — the  dates  are  respectively  1861-1881  and 
1882-1910. 

Theodore  Mikhailovich  Dostoevsky  was  born  on  30  October 
1821  in  Moscow,  where  his  father  was  a  doctor  in  one  of  the  big 
municipal  hospitals.  They  were  fairly  well  off,  and  when  Dostoev¬ 
sky  was  nine  his  father  bought  a  small  property  and  thus  became 
a  land  and  serf  owner.  But  for  all  that,  the  family  was  plebeian, 
and  Dostoevsky  felt  the  social  difference  separating  him  from 
Turgenev  or  Tolstoy.  In  1838  he  was  sent,  together  with  his 
elder  brother  Michael,  to  the  Military  Engineers’  School  in 
St.  Petersburg.  He  obtained  his  commission  in  1841,  but  in  1844 
he  left  the  service. 

He  came  under  the  influence  of  the  Westernizing  Radicals  and, 
like  them,  passionately  admired  George  Sand,  and  Fourier,  and 
Gogol  as  interpreted  by  Belinsky.  His  faith  was  in  Socialism  and 
Humanitarianism,  or,  as  it  was  then  called,  Philanthropy.  He 
was  an  indefatigable  reader,  and  he  early  began  to  write.  By  the 
end  of  1845  he  had  completed  Poor  Folk,  a  novel  in  the  style  of 
Gogol,  and  intensely  philanthropic  in  feeling.  When  Belinsky 
and  Nekrasov  read  the  manuscript,  they  declared  that  1  a  new 
Gogol  was  born  to  us '.  The  success  was  immediate  and  Dostoev¬ 
sky  sprang  into  sudden  fame.  But  there  were  more  things  in 
Dostoevsky  than  were  dreamt  of  in  the  philosophy  of  Belinsky, 
and  after  his  first  dazzling  success  there  began  a  period  of  mis¬ 
understanding  between  the  novelist  and  his  critics.  Dostoevsky 
was  groping  for  themes  and  new  ways  of  expression,  and  he  was 
by  no  means  inclined  to  write  to  the  dictation  of  Belinsky.  His 
second  novel,  Fhe  Double,  disappointed  the  critics  and  met  with 
derision.  It  is  a  most  powerful  production,  combining  the 


DOSTOEVSKY 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


45 


elaborate  verbal  art  of  Gogol  with  a  hitherto  unheard  of  depth 
and  detail  of  analysis.  It  described  a  mental  state  verging  on  and 
developing  into  insanity.  It  is  a  poem  in  prose  (the  sub-heading 
is  A  Poem  of  Petersburg)  and  at  the  same  time  a  clinical  study. 
Dostoevsky’s  great  sensitiveness  and  self-consciousness,  so  curiously 
akin  to  that  of  his  hero,  was  cruelly  wounded  and  exasperated  by 
the  reception  of  his  new  masterpiece  by  critics  who  had  just 
exalted  to  the  clouds  a  less  perfect  work,  and  he  quarrelled  with 
his  literary  friends  of  the  moment.  He  continued  writing  tale 
after  tale.  They  all  met  with  coldness  or  irony.  It  is  true  that 
he  had  not  yet  quite  found  himself,  and  it  was  not  easy  to  seize 
the  general  trend  of  these  unusual  and  startling  stories.  Besides, 
except  The  Double,  which,  judged  by  its  own  standards,  is  a  master¬ 
piece,  all  the  work  of  this  period  is  distinctly  immature,  untidy, 
and  formless.  But  it  included  such  powerful  productions  as 
The  Landlady,  with  its  passionate  romance,  and  Netochka  Nezva- 
nova,  an  unfinished  and  rough  torso  of  immense  significance, 
almost  foreshadowing  the  great  depths  of  Dostoevsky’s  subsequent 
psychological  adventures. 

Meanwhile  he  had  become  a  member  of  the  Socialist  circle  of 
Petrashevsky.  These  Socialists  were  very  peacefully  disposed, 
and  distinctly  hostile  to  all  ‘  bourgeois  ’  radicalism.  At  first  they 
were  viewed  with  toleration  by  the  Government.  But  then  came 
1848  ;  Nicolas  I  was  alarmed  by  the  Revolution,  and  a  period  of 
extreme  reaction  began  which  lasted  to  the  end  of  his  reign. 
All  the  members  and  friends  of  the  Petrashevsky  circle,  including 
Dostoevsky,  were  arrested.  Most  of  them,  after  a  prolonged 
court  martial,  were  sentenced  to  death.  On  21  December  1849 
they  were  brought  to  the  scaffold,  went  through  all  the  prepara¬ 
tions  made  for  the  execution,  and  only  at  the  last  moment  their 
reprieve  was  announced  to  them.  Dostoevsky’s  sentence  was 
commuted  to  four  years  of  hard  labour  in  Siberia.  He  served  it 
in  the  convict  prison  of  Omsk,  so  memorably  described  by  him 


46 


The  Great  Novelists 


in  the  House  of  Death.  This  terrible  ordeal  did  not  embitter 
Dostoevsky,  nor  did  it  break  him.  It  was  to  him  a  purgatory 
from  which  he  emerged  morally  fortified  and  purified.  But  his 
nervous  system  was  severely  shattered,  and  the  fits  of  epilepsy 
he  was  subject  to  became  more  frequent.  In  1854  his  term  of 
hard  labour  ended  and  he  was  transferred  to  Semipalatinsk, 
where  he  was  to  serve  at  first  as  a  private  soldier.  In  1855  his 
commission  was  restored  to  him,  and  before  long  he  was  allowed 
to  leave  the  service,  but  he  lived  in  Siberia  for  over  nine  years, 
and  it  was  only  in  1859  that  he  was  finally  pardoned. 

In  the  years  following  his  return  to  civilized  life  Dostoevsky 
wrote  Memoirs  from  the  House  of  Death ,  a  work  embodying  his 
experience  of  convict  life.  It  won  him  general  admiration  and 
was  during  his  life  always  regarded  as  his  principal  claim  to 
immortality.  About  the  same  time  he  wrote  two  more  novels. 
One  is  Stepanchikovo  and  its  Inhabitants  (in  the  English  translation 
A  Friend  of  the  Family ),  a  subtle  and  elaborate  study  of  a  bully 
who  rules  those  around  him  by  the  method  of  taking  offence  at 
everything.  It  is  also  interesting  as  the  first  example  of  the 
dramatic  construction  so  typical  of  Dostoevsky’s  great  novels. 
The  other  novel  is  Fhe  Oppressed  and  Insulted ,  probably  the  least 
good  of  all  his  books.  It  is  written  under  the  obvious  influence 
of  Dickens,  and  there  is  plenty  of  Dickens’s  sentimentality  in  it, 
but  none  of  his  humour. 

In  1861  Dostoevsky,  together  with  his  brother  Michael,  started 
a  monthly  magazine  Fhe  Times  (V remya).  Its  programme  was 
a  sort  of  democratic  Slavophilism,  akin  to  that  of  Grigoriev,  who 
became  one  of  its  principal  contributors.  The  magazine  met 
with  considerable  success,  but  in  1863  it  was  suppressed  by  the 
Censorship,  owing,  it  soon  turned  out,  to  a  misunderstanding. 
The  magazine  was  resumed  in  1864  under  a  new  name  (The 
Epoch)  ,  but  the  suppression  had  involved  the  Dostoevskys  in 
difficulties,  and  the  Epoch  could  not  attain  the  sale  of  its  pre- 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


47 


decessor.  Michael  Dostoevsky  died  and  by  the  beginning  of  1865 
it  was  realized  that  the  journal  was  a  complete  failure.  Dostoevsky 
entered  on  a  period  of  pecuniary  difficulties,  oppressed  by  debts 
and  the  necessity  of  helping  his  brother’s  family.  These  difficulties 
were  increased  by  his  gambling  away  all  he  had  in  Wiesbaden. 
For  several  years  Dostoevsky  was  under  the  constant  stress  of 
these  difficulties.  For  a  time  he  even  lived  abroad  for  fear  of  his 
Russian  creditors.  In  1866  he  married  his  secretary  and  this 
proved  his  salvation.  His  wife  turned  out  to  be  a  very  efficient 
housekeeper,  and  by  1871  with  the  aid  of  his  literary  earnings 
he  was  extricated  from  his  debts.  The  period  of  these  difficulties 
was  also  the  period  of  his  greatest  literary  activity.  Memoirs 
from  Underground  was  published  in  1864,  Crime  and  Punishment 
in  1866,  The  Idiot  in  1869,  and  Phe  Possessed  in  1871.  Some  of 
these  novels,  especially  Phe  Idiot,  were  written  under  the  imme¬ 
diate  stress  of  need  ;  they  came  out  as  serials  in  the  big  magazines — 
the  first  chapters  often  appearing  before  the  following  chapters 
were  written. 

A  great  inner  change  had  come  over  Dostoevsky.  Phe  Memoirs 
from  Underground  is  the  starting-point  of  that  Dostoevsky  whom 
we  know,  the  intrepid  investigator  of  the  innermost  recesses  and 
most  hidden  lurking-places  of  the  human  soul.  He  must  have 
gone  through  a  tragic  crisis  before  he  wrote  this,  and  the  great 
novels  that  followed  it.  But  we  have  no  biographical  knowledge 
on  this  point.  It  has  evidently  no  connexion  with  his  death 
sentence  and  imprisonment,  or  with  his  later  money  difficulties. 
Its  origin  must  have  been  internal.  But  it  may  have  been  con¬ 
nected  in  some  way  with  his  epilepsy. 

These  novels  of  Dostoevsky  attracted  considerable  attention, 
but  aroused  but  little  admiration.  The  time  was  one  of  fierce 
party  strife.  Dostoevsky  belonged  to  no  party,  but  the  Radicals 
considered  him  a  Reactionary  and  judged  him  accordingly.  The 
judgements  of  the  critics  and  reviewers  of  the  time  are  often 


48 


The  Great  Novelists 


ludicrously  inadequate.  Crime  and  Punishment  was  condemned 
by  a  Radical  critic  on  the  ground  that  it  might  favour  the  opinion 
that  all  students  were  murderers  and  thieves  like  Raskolnikov. 
The  Possessed,  with  its  violent  satire  of  the  Nihilists,  aroused 
a  veritable  storm  of  indignation.  In  1873  Dostoevsky  became 
editor  of  the  Citizen,  a  Conservative  paper,  thus  identifying 
himself  more  closely  with  the  Right.  He  began  publishing 
weekly  his  Diary  of  a  Writer,  and  his  influence  as  a  journalist 
began  to  grow. 

In  this  Diary  he  weekly  expounded  his  teaching  in  a  rather 
turgid  and  inelegant  prose  which  lacks  the  all-pervading  creative 
breath  of  his  novels.  His  doctrine  was,  as  before,  a  demo¬ 
cratic  Slavophilism,  a  profound  belief  that  the  Russian  People 
(with  a  big  P,  and  mainly  meaning  the  peasants)  was  a  narod - 
bogonosets — ‘  a  God-bearing  People  ’.  His  democracy  was 
ecstatically  Christian  and  anti-revolutionary,  and  one  of  his 
tenets  was  the  necessity  of  annexing  Constantinople.  But 
Dostoevsky  was  no  vulgar  Panslavist  or  Imperialist.  Constanti¬ 
nople  was  to  him  the  symbol  of  Russia’s  universal  Christian 
mission,  which  was  to  reconcile  in  one  supreme  harmony  all  the 
nations  of  the  world.  Dostoevsky’s  greatest  triumph  during  his 
lifetime,  and  at  the  same  time  the  fullest  and  most  brilliant 
assertion  of  his  national  doctrine,  was  the  Address  he  delivered 
in  1880  on  the  unveiling  of  the  Pushkin  memorial  in  Moscow. 
Pushkin,  said  Dostoevsky,  was  Russia’s  all-in-all  ( nashe  vse),  for 
the  very  reason  that  he  was  a  cosmopolitan,  or,  as  Dostoevsky  put 
it,  an  All-man  ( yse-chelovek ).  This  Pan-Humanity  is  the  national 
characteristic  of  Russia,  and  Russia’s  mission  is  to  effect  the  final 
synthesis  of  all  mankind. 

In  the  same  year  was  published  what  is  probably  his  greatest 
work,  The  Brothers  Karamazov,  though  it  produced  at  first  a  less 
powerful  effect  than  the  Pushkin  address.  In  the  next  year, 
30  January  1881,  he  died.  His  funeral  was  a  striking  manifestation 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


49 


of  his  wide  popularity.  The  number  of  mourners  was  unpre¬ 
cedented.  But  it  was  the  author  of  The  House  of  Death ,  the  great 
humanitarian,  and  the  political  martyr  of  1849  who  was  being 
buried.  The  general  attitude  of  the  critics  towards  Dostoevsky 
at  the  moment  of  his  death  may  be  well  typified  in  the  poet 
Sluchevsky’s  appreciation  of  him  :  ‘  He  may  or  may  not  have 
been  a  great  imaginative  writer,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
he  was  a  great  Christian  and  a  great  Humanitarian.’  To-day 
most  of  us  would  rather  reverse  the  judgement. 

It  took  some  time  for  Dostoevsky  to  come  to  his  own.  The  best 
critical  appreciation  of  his  work  before  his  death  was  Mikhaylov¬ 
sky’s  essay,  A  Cruel  Talent.  But  though  brilliantly  penetrating, 
it  is  invective  rather  than  criticism.  The  turn  of  the  tide  is 
marked  by  the  date  1888,  when  appeared  Andreevsky’s  article  on 
The  Brothers  Karamazov ,  and  Rozanov’s  book  on  The  Legend  of 
the  Great  Inquisitor.  In  both  of  them  Dostoevsky  was  implicitly 
recognized  as  a  towering  genius.  Since  then  his  position  has 
become  very  high  and  his  influence  ubiquitous.  All  the  great 
essayists  of  about  1900  were  mainly  commentators  of  Dostoevsky. 
His  fame  has  equalled  and  surpassed  Tolstoy’s  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  And  though  there  have  been  unhealthy  exaggerations 
in  the  Dostoevsky  mania,  his  place  as  one  of  the  two  greatest 
(most  of  us  would  now  say  the  second  greatest)  Russian  writers 
of  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  sufficiently  safe. 

Although  his  novels  are  much  more  read  than  his  non-imagina- 
tive  writings,  he  is  usually  regarded  as  a  writer  who  is  interesting 
mainly  for  his  ideas,  not  for  his  artistic  achievement.  Mr. 
Middleton  Murry  in  his  book,  which  is  the  most  notable  English 
contribution  to  the  study  of  Dostoevsky,  simply  refuses  to  discuss 
him  as  a  novelist  and  discusses  him  only  as  a  generator  and  handler 
of  ideas.  The  sentiment  of  every  true  Dostoevskian  is  that  there 
are  many  good  novelists,  but  only  one  Dostoevsky.  There  is 
a  good  deal  of  exaggeration  in  this  attitude.  A  novel  is  a  novel 

2535-57  D 


50 


The  Great  Novelists 


for  all  that,  and  must  be  treated  as  such.  But  there  is  also  a 
justification  for  the  non-novelist  view — for  Dostoevsky’s  novels 
are  indeed  romances,  or  rather  tragedies,  of  ideas.  It  has  been 
well  said  of  him,  that  ‘  he  felt  ideas  ’,  as  we  feel  frost  or  heat, 
hunger  or  thirst ;  they  were  to  him  potent  realities  which  pull 
the  strings  of  all  human  actions.  Ideas  are  the  real  heroes  of 
his  novels ;  but  his  ideas  are  so  strongly  individualized,  so  vividly 
tangible,  and  so  organically  complex,  that  they  cease  to  be  mere 
abstractions  and  become  living  beings.  They  are  widely  remote 
from  the  ideas  of  Plato  :  they  are  dynamic  ideas,  what  the  French 
call — idees  forces.  Very  few  men  before  or  after  Dostoevsky  had 
the  same  dynamic  sensitiveness  to  ideas :  St.  Paul,  St.  Augustine, 
Pascal,  Nietzsche— these  are  the  spiritual  kin  of  Dostoevsky. 
The  ideas  among  which  he  moved,  or  rather  by  which  he  was 
obsessed,  are  the  essential  ideas  of  God  and  of  Good  and  Evil,  and 
the  crucial  question  to  him  was,  How  is  it  possible  to  reconcile 
individual  suffering  and  individual  evil  with  the  supreme  goodness 
and  perfection  of  God  ?  How  can  this  suffering  and  that  evil 
be  dissolved  into  eternal  harmony  ?  How  can  universal  harmony 
make  up  for  the  undeserved  suffering  of  a  tortured  child,  which 
has  been,  and  whatever  may  happen,  cannot  cease  to  have  been  ? 
In  short,  the  crucial  questions  of  Theodicea  of  how  to  ‘  justify 
the  ways  of  God  to  man  ’,  the  stumbling-block,  which  can  never 
be  removed,  of  all  religious  philosophy.  Ostensibly  Dostoevsky 
was  on  the  side  of  God,  but  his  religion  was  entirely  irrational 
and  based  entirely  on  a  passionate  ecstatic  devotion  to  the  person 
of  Christ.  ‘  If  Christ  is  not  all  truth  ’,  he  writes  when  yet  in 
Siberia,  ‘  I  prefer  to  be  with  Christ  against  truth,  than  with  truth 
against  Christ.’  On  the  logical  plane  he  could  never  overcome 
the  antinomies  of  moral  reasoning.  All  his  preaching  is  Christian  ; 
but  he  was  only  too  well  aware  of  what  the  other  side  has  to  say, 
and  in  the  arguments  of  the  Man  from  Underground,  of  Kirilov,  and 
especially  of  Ivan  Karamazov,  there  is  more  than  can  be  answered 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


5i 


from  the  point  of  view  of  Dostoevsky’s  Christianity.  What 
makes  the  position  of  all  these  Dostoevskian  Devil’s  advocates 
so  strong  is  that  they  impeach  the  Divine  order  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  highest  morality.  On  the  surface  of  things,  to  the 
superficial  reader  and  thinker,  as  to  the  well-intentioned  man  in 
self-made  blinkers,  Dostoevsky  is  the  greatest  of  Christian  teachers, 
the  prophet  of  a  great  Christian  revival.  But  whether  this  is 
so,  and  whether  Dostoevsky’s  innermost  essence  was  Christian, 
is  a  very  doubtful  point.  There  were  terrible  abysses  of  evil  in 
the  soul  of  the  man  who  wrote  The  Underground  and  created 
Stavrogin.  These  abysses  open  at  his  feet  in  the  moments  of  his 
highest  creative  tension.  And  there  are  indications  that  he  had 
a  greater  personal  experience  of  evil  than  is  usually  believed. 
Even  in  his  saints,  in  Prince  Myshkin  and  in  Alesha  Karamazov, 
there  are  abysses  and  flashes  of  a  terrible  understanding  and 
sympathy  with  evil.  The  ‘  prophetic  ’  interpretation  of  Dostoevsky 
is  the  most  current.  But  there  are  people  who  see  deeper.  The 
first  of  these  was  Mikhaylovsky,  who  used  his  insight  mainly  as  a 
weapon  against  a  reactionary  author.  But  the  greatest  of  modern 
Dostoevskians,  Leo  Shestov,  is  also  one  of  the  Devil’s  advocates. 

Whatever  may  be  the  importance  and  vitality  of  Dostoevsky’s 
ideas,  he  was  first  of  all  a  novelist.  His  heroes  are  not  impersona¬ 
tions  or  abstractions  of  ideas ;  they  are  living  human  beings 
agitated  by  conflicting  forces.  They  are  living  beings — so  much 
is  certain.  But  are  they  human  beings?  At  any  rate  they  do  not 
belong  to  the  humanity  we  belong  to.  They  belong  to  a  world 
created  by  Dostoevsky  himself,  as  Gogol  and  Dickens  created 
theirs.  To  believe  that  Dostoevsky’s  novels  are  a  faithful  mirror 
held  up  to  any  section  (be  it  ever  so  particular)  of  the  Russian 
intelligentsia  reveals  either  a  lack  of  information  or  a  hopeless 
absence  of  any  sense  of  reality.  His  novels  are  essentially  tragedy, 
and  tragedy  works  in  conventions  and  exaggerations.  It  would 
be  as  reasonable  to  believe  that  Elizabethan  society  consisted  of 


52 


The  Great  Novelists 


Tamburlanes  and  Vittoria  Corombonas,  or  Athenian  society  of 
Medeas  and  Clytemnestras,  as  to  imagine  the  Russian  intel¬ 
ligentsia  of  the  age  of  Alexander  II  as  so  many  Stavrogins  and 
Verkhovenskys.  Dostoevsky  used  certain  conventions  of  Realism 
for  his  tragedies,  and  used  them  with  consummate  skill  (his 
colloquial  Russian  for  instance  is  a  masterpiece  of  vivid  character¬ 
ization),  but  he  used  them  to  give  flesh  and  blood  to  utterly 
unrealistic  conceptions.  This  does  not  mean  that  these  con¬ 
ceptions  are  utterly  unreal,  unreal  in  the  sense  of  everyday 
reality ;  they  possess  a  reality  of  their  own,  for  they  are  symbolic. 
Dostoevsky’s  people  have  consequently  an  enormous  convincing¬ 
ness — you  are  driven  to  believe  in  them  in  defiance  of  all  common 
sense,  and  they  are  as  real  in  the  artistic  sense  as  the  scrupulously 
true  characters  of  Tolstoy :  even  more  so,  for  their  vitality  is 
more  than  human,  they  are  giants  too  big  to  walk  this  earth. 
The  portrait  gallery  of  Dostoevsky  must  be  familiar  to  every  one. 
Its  heroes  and  Titans  are  easily  classified  according  to  the  meaning 
of  the  myths  they  embody.  There  are  the  rebels  against  the 
moral  order  of  the  universe  :  the  passive  questioner  Ivan  Kara¬ 
mazov,  the  ‘  pure  ’  super-man  Kirilov,  the  moral  adventurer 
Raskolnikov ;  then  the  pure  agents  of  Evil,  the  disciples  of  the 
great  Logician  the  Devil — Smerdyakov  and  Verkhovensky ;  tools 
of  lust  like  the  old  Karamazov  and  Svidrigaylov  ;  holy  youths 
inspired  with  pan-human  sympathy,  Alesha  Karamazov  and  Prince 
Myshkin,  whose  very  breath  is  charity  and  holiness — and  yet 
they  have  such  strange  inner  revelations  of  evil ;  tormented 
victims  of  passion  like  Rogozhin  and  Dmitri  Karamazov  ;  and, 
most  terrible  of  all  his  men,  the  bored  Stavrogin  with  his  purely 
intellectual  curiosity  in  lust  and  evil  and  his  complete  inner 
vacuum.  And  those  wonderful  women,  the  most  wonderful 
women  of  all  tragical  poetry  in  whom  the  pure  tragic  essence  of 
Dostoevsky  is  most  concentrated,  the  demoniac,  proud  and 
wretched  Nastasia  Filipovna,  and  Grushenka.  Truly  a  wonderful 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


53 


universe  with  more  pure  creation  in  it  than  any  other  world, 
except  the  one  we  live  in. 

t  Unlike  most  of  his  contemporaries  Dostoevsky  did  not  neglect 
plot,  and  though  in  most  of  his  novels  it  is  confused  and  intricate, 
in  Crime  and  Punishment  he  achieved  a  masterpiece  of  construc¬ 
tion.  The  narrative  or  rather  dramatic  interest  of  his  novels  never 
flags.  His  most  potent  method  in  achieving  this  constant  tension 
of  interest  is  his  mastery  in  dialogue.  Dostoevsky’s  novels  contain 
more  dialogue  than  anything  else  ;  in  fact  all  the  rest  is  no  more 
important  than  stage  directions  are  in  a  play.  It  has  been  found 
very  easy  to  turn  his  novels  into  plays  without  adding  a  single 
word.  The  dialogue  is  marvellously  individualized.  In  the 
Russian  original  you  recognize  every  character  by  the  peculiar 
intonations  and  rhythm  of  his  speech  as  easily  as  you  recognize 
the  voice  of  a  friend.  It  is  difficult  to  lay  one’s  hand  on  the 
processes  by  which  the  novelist  arrives  at  the  effect.  The  dia¬ 
logue  is  kept  up  at  a  high  pitch  of  emotional  tension  which 
communicates  itself  to  the  reader,  making  it  impossible  for 
him  to  lay  down  the  book  before  he  has  finished  it.  To  read 
a  novel  of  Dostoevsky’s  is  something  of  an  adventure  ;  to  embark 
on  it  is  to  become  his  slave  for  the  time  it  takes  one  to  master  his 
300,000  words.  Dostoevsky’s  novels  are  very  long,  but  hardly 
too  long,  so  charged  is  all  the  dialogue  with  emotional  and 
psychological  significance.  The  contrast  is  strong  between  the 
dialogue  and  the  narrative  part :  his  narrative  prose,  like  his 
journalism,  is  slovenly,  unkempt  journalese.  His  dialogue  is 
a  marvel  of  effectiveness.  This  makes  those  of  his  works  which 
are  written  in  monologue,  the  hero  all  the  time  speaking  in  the 
first  person,  his  most  uniformly  perfect  work.  Such  are  some 
minor  sketches  inserted  in  the  Diary  of  a  Writer ;  such  most  of 
all  are  the  Memoirs  from  Underground,  which  are  perhaps  the 
quintessence  of  his  genius.  Here  the  tension  of  interest  is  reached 
exclusively  by  psychological  means,  without  the  help  of  narrative 


54 


The  Great  Novelists 


interest.  It  is  the  triumph  of  his  analytical  power  and  his  greatest 
claim  to  the  title  of  a  cruel  genius. 

To  contrast  Tolstoy  with  Dostoevsky  has  been  a  favourite 
subject  on  which  many  writers  have  enlarged,  and  no  one  better 
than  Merezkhovsky  in  his  well-known  and  very  good  book  on 
these  two  great  authors. 

Their  lives  form  a  striking  contrast.  Unlike  the  plebeian 
Dostoevsky,  Count  Tolstoy  was  born  of  one  of  the  best  families 
in  the  country,  and  lived  a  long  life  of  affluence  and  success, 
which,  but  for  his  inner  struggles,  would  have  also  been  a  life 
of  almost  cloudless  happiness.  He  was  blessed  with  a  wife  of  rare 
virtue  and  devotion,  who  bore  him  numerous  children.  He 
augmented  his  fortune  both  by  efficient  farming  and  by  success 
in  literature,  and  attained  a  world-wide  celebrity  which  has  been 
equalled  in  modern  times  only  by  great  conquerors  or  successful 
leaders  of  revolutions.  Napoleon,  Garibaldi,  and  Lenin  are  the 
only  men  within  the  last  hundred  and  odd  years  whose  fame 
during  their  lifetime  was  equal  to  or  greater  than  that  of  Tolstoy. 

Count  Leo  Nikolaevich  Tolstoy  was  born  at  Yasnaya  Polyana 
(gov.  of  Tula),  on  28  August  1828.  Nicholas  Rostov  (  =  Tol- 
stoy)  and  Marie  Bolkonsky  (=  Volkonsky)  of  War  and  Peace 
are  roughly  his  father  and  mother.  His  education  was  strictly 
aristocratic,  and  he  did  not  come  in  touch  with  the  intellectuals 
before  he  went  to  the  University.  There  and  in  subsequent 
life  he  never  mixed  with  them.  In  all  his  books  the  £  peasant 
and  peer  ’  standpoint  is  consistently  maintained.  The  middle 
classes  are  absent  from  them.  Of  all  the  great  writers  of  his 
generation  he  was,  with  the  exception  of  Fet,  the  least  a  man- 
of- letters :  he  was  just  a  gentleman.  His  idiosyncracies  prevented 
him  from  being  a  man  of  the  world ;  but  he  was  most  himself 
when,  after  his  marriage,  he  spent  eighteen  years  on  his  estates, 
farming,  rearing  cattle,  and  providing  for  the  future  welfare  of 


TOLSTOY 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


55 


his  numerous  children,  seeing  but  a  few  relations  and  friends  of 
his  own  class,  much  interested  in  his  peasants,  and  writing  long 
epics  about  noble  families.  He  was  a  whimsical  and  somewhat 
uncouth  country  gentleman,  but  for  all  that  a  country  gentleman 
to  his  finger-tips.  The  interests  of  the  literary  profession  did  not 
exist  for  him,  and  he  had  no  friends  in  the  literary  world  (his 
quarrel  with  Turgenev  is  notorious)  except  Fet,  who  was  primarily 
a  country  neighbour,  and  Strakhov,  who  had  a  turn  of  thought 
in  tune  with  Tolstoy’s,  and  was  for  a  long  time  the  only  critic 
to  do  anything  like  justice  to  his  novels.  When  after  his  con¬ 
version  ’  Tolstoy  cast  aside  all  his  earthly  interests,  he  still  did  not 
become  a  litterateur  or  a  journalist — he  became  a  prophet, 
something  much  more  like  Buddha  than  like  Voltaire  or  Rousseau. 
The  patriarchal  and  intensely  aristocratic  figure  of  Tolstoy  is  in 
violent  contrast  to  the  general  plebeian  groundwork  of  Russian 
literary  life  from  Belinsky  and  Turgenev  to  our  own  times.  It  is 
one  of  the  principal  elements  of  his  unique  position,  and  must 
not  be  lost  sight  of.  It  developed  in  him  that  proud  individualism 
which  is  so  curiously  inconsistent  with  his  anti-individual  yearnings. 
It  was  Nature,  of  course,  that  made  him  great;  but  the  full 
development  of  his  gigantic  nature  was  favoured  by  his  wealth 
and  high  social  standing.  The  greatness  of  Tolstoy,  like  the 
greatness  of  Job,  is  primarily  a  moral  greatness;  but  this  moral 
greatness  found  favourable  conditions  for  its  development  in  the 
social  and  economic  independence  of  those  two  rich  men.  In  the 
greatness  of  Tolstoy,  as  in  that  of  Job,  there  is  an  element  which 
is  identical  with  the  greatness  of  a  patriarch  like  Laban  or  like 

Aksakov’s  Stepan  Mikhaylovich  Bagrov. 

But  to  return  to  the  facts  of  Tolstoy’s  life.  In  1848  he  went 
down  from  Kazan  University  without  taking  a  degree,  and 
intended  to  settle  at  his  now  famous  estate  of  Yasnaya  Polyana, 
and  to  engage  in  farming.  But  this  at  the  time  proved  a  failure, 
and  after  a  period  of  rather  wild  life  at  Moscow  he  joined  the 


56 


The  Great  Novelists 


army  as  an  ensign  and  went  to  the  Caucasus,  where  a  long-drawn- 
out  war  was  being  waged  against  the  mountaineers.  Before  he 
had  been  long  in  the  army  he  completed  his  first  story  Childhood, 
and  sent  it  to  Nekrasov,  the  editor  of  the  most  influential  magazine 
of  the  day.  Nekrasov  received  it  with  enthusiasm,  and  it  was 
immediately  printed  over  the  signature  L.  T.  (1852).  Tolstoy 
had  early  begun  writing  diaries  and  the  like,  in  which  he  had 
exercised  and  refined  his  innate  genius  for  psychological  analysis 
and  the  observation  of  minute  facts  of  the  inner  life.  He  was, 
and  always  remained,  an  ardent  admirer  of  Rousseau.  In  Child¬ 
hood  this  kinship  with  Rousseau  is  very  apparent.  Equally 
apparent  is  a  highly  developed  power  of  analysis.  The  story  is 
a  masterpiece  which  remained  unsurpassed  by  the  author  for 
many  years.  In  Childhood  (and  in  its  sequel  Boyhood,  but  to 
a  much  lesser  extent  in  T outh )  he  displayed  already  that  wonderful 
power  of  creating  the  illusion  of  absolute  truth,  of  absolute 
fidelity  to  life,  which  marks  him  off  from  all,  even  the  greatest. 
It  gives  an  impression  of  transcending  art,  of  not  only  representing, 
but  being  life.  It  is  easy  to  understand  that  it  created  a  sensation 
and  gave  the  impression  that  a  new  power  was  entering  literature, 
but  this  sensation  was  at  first  limited  to  the  inner  circles  of 
literature.  Even  after  PP ar  and  Peace  Tolstoy’s  fame  was  largely 
confined  to  those  inner  circles  and  to  the  upper  classes  of  whose 
life  he  had  drawn  such  an  attractive  picture.  It  did  not  become 
universal  till  later.  But  Childhood  was  not  followed  up  by  master¬ 
pieces  of  superior  or  even  equal  quality.  The  next  years  were 
a  period  of  transition.  In  the  stories  written  between  1852  to 
1862  he  is  not  the  same  supreme  master  of  psychological  realism. 
For  he  was  learning,  and,  partly  under  the  influence  of  Stendhal, 
deepening  and  perfecting  his  methods  of  analysis.  Personal 
experience  had  also  given  an  edge  to  his  analytical  powers,  for 
there  are  no  more  powerful  revealers  of  natural  man  than  war 
and  its  following — discomfort  and  danger.  Fear  is  a  great  ‘  de- 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


57 


veloper  It  is  precisely  in  the  treatment  of  fear  that  Tolstoy 
achieves  his  first  triumphs  in  analysis.  As  a  consequence  the 
works  of  this  period,  of  which  the  Sebastopol  sketches  may  be  taken 
as  typical,  are  somewhat  misshapen  :  they  are  exercises  in  analysis 
rather  than  works  of  art.  These  exercises  enhanced  his  power  of 
expression,  but  they  had  to  be  mellowed  before  it  attained  to  its 
full  maturity. 

In  these  early  stories  Tolstoy  is  already  a  preacher.  He  preaches 
a  gospel  of  return  to  nature  and  of  trust  in  the  ‘  natural  man 
a  developed  form  of  the  teachings  of  Rousseau.  In  Tolstoy’s 
case  it  had  been  largely  favoured  by  intercourse  with  £  primitive  ’ 
types  of  Cossacks  and  mountaineers  in  the  Caucasus. 

In  a  series  of  stories  written  after  1855  Tolstoy  is  still  a 
preacher.  Owing  to  his  immaturity  these  stories  with  a  purpose 
are  often  even  more  openly  didactic  than  those  he  wrote  after 
his  conversion.  Such,  for  instance,  are  Lucerne  and  Three  Deaths. 
This  was  only  a  transient  stage.  He  was  working  hard  and  striving 
after  more  perfect  forms  of  expression.  The  stories  that  mark 
the  end  of  this  period  are  again  works  of  conscious  and  mature 
art.  In  The  Cossacks  (1853-1861)  he  finds  an  adequate  expression 
for  his  ideal  of  the  natural  man  in  the  primitive  Cossacks  of  the 
Terek,  especially  in  the  heathen  and  pantheist  huntsman  Uncle 
Yeroshka.  In  Kholstomer,  the  History  of  a  Horse  (1861),  he  goes 
one  better  and  applies  his  perfected  methods  of  analysis  to  the 
feelings  of  a  dumb  animal.  Kholstomer  thus  marks  the  farthest 
limit,  both  in  his  endeavour  to  reach  unadulterated  ‘  nature  ’  and 
in  the  audacious  expansion  of  his  analytical  methods  over  new 
and  untrodden  fields. 

After  serving  for  two  years  on  the  Caucasian  front  Tolstoy 
volunteered,  in  1854,  to  j°in  t^ie  garris°n  of  Sebastopol,  and  from 
there  sent  his  three  famous  sketches  which  were  published  before 
the  siege  had  ended,  and  so  had  all  the  interest  of  actuality. 
They  produced  a  profound  impression  by  their  daring  analysis 


58 


The  Great  Novelists 


and  consciously  unromantic  representation  of  the  great  romantic 
stock-subject — war.  After  the  war  Tolstoy  came  to  St.  Petersburg. 
He  was  received  as  an  equal  by  the  greatest  writers  of  the  day, 
but  though  by  no  means  insensitive  to  popularity,  he  disliked  the 
atmosphere  of  literary  St.  Petersburg.  He  left  the  army,  travelled 
abroad,  and  settled  in  Yasnaya  Polyana.  There  he  took  to  the 
education  of  village  children,  and  startled  and  scandalized  his 
liberal  and  progressive  contemporaries  by  declaring  that  the 
peasants  had  nothing  to  learn  from  ‘  us  ’,  but  on  the  contrary 
it  was  ‘  we  ’  who  had  to  learn  from  the  village  children.  In  1861 
he  fell  in  love  with  Sophie  Bers.  At  first  he  was  sure  that  being 
old  (34)  and  ugly  he  had  no  chance  of  being  loved  by  her,  and 
under  this  impression  wrote  Family  Happiness ,  the  least  remark¬ 
able  of  all  his  imaginative  works.  But  in  1862  he  married  her 
and  settled  down  to  the  quiet  and  prosperous  family  life  of  a  rich 
country  gentleman.  This  life  continued  till  the  beginning  of  his 
religious  crisis.  It  saw  the  making  of  his  greatest  works  War  and 
Peace  and  Anna  Karenina — -his  Iliad  and  Odyssey. 

Although  for  Russians  the  work  of  Pushkin  is  a  more  essential 
and  indispensable  fact  of  national  civilization,  it  is  probable  that 
to  the  world  at  large  these  two  novels  are  Russia’s  most  important 
contribution  to  literature.  They  have  been  pronounced  to  be 
the  greatest  novels  in  the  world,  and  whether  this  be  true  or  not, 
they  certainly  occupy  an  unique  place  among  the  world’s  novels. 
That  which  distinguishes  them  from  the  rest  is  not  a  question  of 
degree  or  quantity,  but  a  question  of  presence  and  absence. 
If  this  peculiar  Tolstoyan  quality  be  taken  as  a  standard  of 
excellence,  the  other  novelists  are  simply  equal  in  their  inferiority ; 
they  have  not  a  grain  of  it.  It  is  the  peculiar  power  of  creating 
men  and  women  who  have  a  convincing  roundness  and  a  vividness 
which  makes  us  classify  them  with  real  men  and  women.  In 
Tolstoy’s  characters  the  absolutely  universal  is  combined  with 
absolutely  unique  features  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  at  once 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


59 


recognized  not  as  types,  nor  as  creations  of  an  imagination,  but 
as  individuals,  with  no  more  symbolism  in  them  than  is  inherent 
in  every  one  of  us.  This  effect  is,  of  course,  based  on  analysis, 
which  Tolstoy  learned  from  his  French  masters,  and  perhaps 
from  Lermontov ;  but  in  Stendhal  and  Lermontov  the  elements 
of  personality  remain  distinct  and  separate,  and  analysis  does  not 
result  in  synthesis.  It  is  significant  that  the  only  two  great 
writers  who  have  in  any  degree  the  same  quality  were  also  French¬ 
men — the  Duke  of  Saint  Simon  and  Marcel  Proust.  But  the 
genius  of  Saint  Simon  was  unconscious  and  is  not  accompanied 
by  the  light  of  analysis,  for  analysis  was  still  to  be  discovered. 
As  for  Marcel  Proust,  though  he  gives  his  people  absolute  reality 
and  personality,  he  does  not  give  to  his  figures  that  solidity  which 
Tolstoy  gives  to  his.  Proust’s  figures  are  animated  nebulae ; 
Tolstoy’s  have  the  toughness  of  human  beings. 

It  is  superfluous  to  give  any  detailed  account  of  these  two 
novels,  for  every  one  who  has  heard  of  the  existence  of  such 
a  thing  as  Russian  literature  is  presumed  to  have  read  them. 
As  works  of  art,  apart  from  that  power  which  is  peculiar  to  Tolstoy, 
they  may  be  easily  found  wanting.  But  it  is  doubtful  whether 
a  more  condensed  and  crisp  narrative  would  not  have  been  out 
of  place.  The  spacious,  loose,  easy  form  of  a  family  chronicle 
dealing  at  once  with  several  families  and  several  plots,  that  have 
little  or  nothing  in  common,  is  decidedly  the  best  form  for  the 
manifestation  of  his  peculiar  genius,  the  best  way  of  giving  to  the 
absolutely  real  characters  an  absolutely  real  frame  to  move  in. 
This  form  of  the  two  novels,  which  are  ‘  slices  of  life  ’  rather  than 
connected  narratives,  must  be  justified  as  necessary  for  that 
supreme  effect  of  life  itself  which  they  produce  upon  us.  The 
effect  of  absolute  realism  is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  Tolstoy 
chose  and  limited  himself  to  the  class  he  knew  so  well  and  to  which 
he  belonged — the  uppermost  stratum  of  the  Russian  nobility. 
The  life  of  the  Russian  upper  classes  between  1805-1820  and 


6o 


The  Great  Novelists 


about  1875  is  not  represented — it  is  re-created  :  it  seems  to  live 
for  ever  not  by  the  medium  of  art,  but  by  some  mysterious  process 
of  vital  continuity.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  War  and  Peace 
is  historically  insufficient.  The  Napoleonic  generation  were  not 
capable  of  reducing  to  articulate  speech  the  exceedingly  elusive 
feelings  Tolstoy  deals  in.  Natasha  is  an  anachronism.  It  may 
be  so,  and  we  may  agree  that  it  is  not  a  picture  of  the  time  as  it 
was,  but  of  the  time  as  it  would  have  been  if  peopled  by  men 
and  women  of  a  later  mentality.  This  is  a  venial  offence,  if  an 
offence  at  all.  A  more  serious  offence  is  the  constant  intrusion 
of  the  rationalizing  and  moralizing  Count  Tolstoy  into  this 
universe  of  his  creation.  In  Anna  Karenina  this  didactic  element 
is  so  finely  concealed  that  it  does  not  strike  the  reader  until  he 
has  grasped  the  whole  moral  hinted  at  in  the  motto.  But  it 
permeates  the  texture  of  the  novel  more  thoroughly  than  in 
War  and  Peace.  Anna  Karenina  is  from  this  point  of  view  a 
cunningly  written  novel  with  a  purpose.  In  War  and  Peace  the 
main  texture  is  quite  free  from  this  disingenuous  preoccupation. 
This  makes  the  first  two  parts  of  the  novel  the  most  agreeable 
reading  in  the  whole  of  Tolstoy.  But  it  contains  a  certain  pro¬ 
portion,  which  grows  as  the  novel  advances,  of  purely  rationalizing 
chapters  written  to  demonstrate  the  ineffectiveness  of  personality 
and  the  smallness  of  great  men.  Some  of  these  chapters  may  be 
simply  left  out.  But  others — all  those  dealing  with  Napoleon, 
Kutuzov,  and  the  symbolic  peasant  Platon  Karataev  who  is  the 
incarnation  of  the  unconscious  wisdom  of  the  masses — are  closely 
woven  into  the  texture  of  the  story,  and  cannot  be  taken  away 
from  it  without  destroying  the  architecture  of  the  whole. 

Tolstoy’s  philosophy  at  this  time,  best  expressed  in  War  and 
Peace ,  and  somewhat  less  distinctly  in  Anna  Karenina,  is  a  philo¬ 
sophy  of  complete  submission  to  life  and  to  the  subconscious 
wisdom  of  the  race.  It  subordinates  reason  to  the  irrational. 
But  Tolstoy,  greatest  of  rationalists,  who  had  carried  the  light  of 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


61 


analysis  into  the  deepest  recesses  of  the  animal  spirit,  could  not 
remain  satisfied  with  such  an  irrational  solution.  He  felt  the 
necessity  of  finding  a  rational  explanation  of  life.  The  horror  of 
inevitable  death  must  be  rationally  justified.  At  the  time  of  the 
completion  of  Anna  Karenina  the  initial  energy  of  his  family 
happiness  was  spent,  and  the  approaching  age  of  fifty  made  the 
shadow  of  death  an  ever  more  menacing  reality.  In  the  years  that 
followed  the  completion  of  Anna  Karenina,  Tolstoy  underwent 
a  crisis  which,  after  a  period  of  almost  hopeless  despair,  led  him  to 
adopt  a  philosophy  which  has  come  to  be  known  as  Tolstoyism, 
and  the  propaganda  of  which  filled  the  last  thirty  years  of  his  life. 

It  is  not  my  task  here  to  describe  the  genesis  or  the  essence  of 
Tolstoyism.  Its  essential  characteristics  are  familiar  to  every 
educated  and  semi-educated  European,  American,  and  Asiatic.1 
It  identified  itself  with  Christianity,  but  of  all  the  teaching  of 
Christ  it  took  ‘  Thou  shalt  not  oppose  evil  with  violence  ’  as  the 
central  point.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  purely  negative  doctrine,  more 
akin  to  Buddhism  than  to  Christianity.  It  involved,  among  other 
things,  the  negation  of  all  modern  civilization  as  tending  to  increase 
the  inequality  of  men.  It  is  profoundly  rationalistic.  It  rejects 
for  purely  rationalistic  motives  the  doctrine  of  future  life  and  all 
the  sacramental  teaching  of  the  Church.  But,  like  all  rationalism, 
it  was  doomed  to  leave  an  unexplained  residue.  Tolstoy  was 
aware  of  this  residue,  but  he  did  his  utmost  to  keep  his  eyes  away 
from  it.  His  rationalism  went  ‘  thus  far  and  no  farther  ’.  Under 
its  surface  there  remained  the  irrational  man.  He  had  been  well 
bridled,  and  there  is  scarcely  a  trace  of  him  in  most  of  Tolstoy’s 
writings  after  1880.  But  he  is  unmistakably  present  in  the  frag¬ 
ment  called  Memoirs  of  a  Madman ,  and  we  catch  more  than  one 
glimpse  of  him  in  the  wonderful  reminiscences  of  Gorky.  Tol¬ 
stoy’s  teaching,  for  reasons  which  it  would  be  out  of  place  to 

1  The  best  English  book  on  the  ideas  of  Tolstoy  is  Tolstoy ,  by  Janko  Lavrin 
(Collins). 


62 


The  Great  Novelists 


discuss  here,  attained  enormous  popularity,  and  in  a  few  years 
he  became  the  best  known  writer  in  the  world,  and  Yasnaya 
Polyana  the  Mecca  of  a  new  cult.  Tolstoy’s  obvious  greatness 
was  so  great  that  the  Russian  Government,  who  had  little  to  like 
in  his  activities,  left  him  unmolested,  and  never  so  much  as  touched 
a  hair  of  his  head.1  It  contented  itself  with  pursuing  his  less 
illustrious  followers. 

After  his  conversion  his  literary  activity  did  not  cease, 
nor  did  it  on  the  whole  lose  in  quality ;  but  it  assumed  a  very 
different  character,  becoming  a  consistent  and  rigidly  thought 
out  propaganda  of  his  new  doctrines.  The  new  period  of 
Tolstoy’s  literary  work  opens  with  the  Confession,  written 
in  1879  and  published  in  1882.  It  is  certainly  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  books  ever  written.  But  it  displays  qualities 
of  a  radically  different  kind  from  those  we  find  in  War  and 
Peace  and  Anna  Karenina.  It  is  a  perfectly  tempered  weapon 
meant  to  fight  with,  not  a  disinterested  reproduction  of  life. 
It  is  written  with  passion  and  a  power  that  has  no  equal,  and 
with  a  lucidity  and  distinctness  of  outline  which  we  hardly 
expect  from  the  author  of  W ar  and  Peace.  Its  sincerity  is  deeply 
convincing,  though  it  is  quite  obvious  that  Tolstoy’s  sincerity  is 
not  what  we  call  by  that  name  in  our  daily  life.  It  is  a  fully 
self-conscious  and  disciplined  sincerity,  a  sincerity  of  ‘  thus  far 
and  no  farther  ’.  Tolstoy’s  conscious  art  and  artistic  mastery  is 
nowhere  more  intense  and  perfect  than  in  his  Confession.  The 
work  which  announces  his  apostacy  from  art  is  his  most  perfect 
artistic  creation.  For  force  of  expression  there  is  nothing  equal 
to  the  first,  negative  part  of  the  Confession,  containing  the  story 
of  the  crisis  that  led  to  his  ‘  conversion  ’.  Its  nearest  relation  in 

The  excommunication  of  Tolstoy  by  the  Holy  Synod  in  1902  was  a  perfectly 
justifiable  and  abundantly  provoked  act.  It  did  not,  as  is  often  imagined,  lay 
a  curse  on  him;  but  merely  registered  the  fact  that  he  had  separated  himself 
from  the  Church,  a  fact  he  had  explicitly  recognized  more  than  once. 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


63 


literature  is  Ecclesiastes,  but  I  venture  to  think  that  the  Russian 
book  is  even  superior  to  the  Jewish.  If  the  end — the  positive  part, 
the  conversion  itself — map  come  to  some  readers  as  a  sort  of  anti¬ 
climax,  this  is  due  to  the  lesser  value  of  the  ideas  expressed,  not  to 
the  quality  of  the  literary  art,  which  is  sustained  to  the  end. 

In  his  other  didactic  writings,  written  after  1882,  Tolstoy  shows 
the  same  qualities  of  lucidity,  clarity,  consistency,  powerful  logic, 
excellently-tempered  irony.  But  none  of  them  contain  so  much 
passion  and  energy.  The  most  remarkable  of  these  writings  is 
What  is  Art?  It  is  well  known  to  the  English  reader,  and,  in 
spite  of  its  narrow  perversity,  contains  more  wise  and  witty 
things  on  Art  than  any  other  book  on  the  subject.  What  is  most 
admirable  in  all  Tolstoy’s  didactic  and  moral  tracts  is  his  language, 
which  is  very  largely  a  creation  of  his  own.  It  is  entirely  free 
from  all  bookish  and  ‘  intellectual  ’  influence.  It  is  exclusively 
based  on  the  spoken  language  of  the  society  he  belonged  to — and 
at  the  same  time  it  is  admirably  adapted  for  the  treatment  of 
abstract  and  philosophical  questions.  No  writer  has  written  on 
such  subjects  in  a  more  lucid,  simple,  and  universal  way.  His 
phrase  is  long  and  complex,  but  mathematically  exact  in  its 
structure.  In  fact  Tolstoy  is  the  writer  who  has  best  succeeded 
in  making  the  Russian  language  a  vehicle  of  abstract  thought. 
But  his  abstractness  always  tends  towards  the  concrete  and  the 
visual,  and  one  of  his  favourite  and  happiest  methods  is  the 
parable,  which  he  uses  with  supreme  skill,  and  nowhere  with  more 
effect  than  in  the  well-known  passages  of  the  Confession ,  where  he 
concentrates  round  parables  all  the  principal  emotional  effects  of 
his  sermon. 

After  his  conversion  Tolstoy  condemned  all  his  previous 
imaginative  writings.  But  he  did  not  condemn  himself  to  pro¬ 
ducing  no  more.  He  wrote  a  quantity  of  plays  (which  are  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  following  chapter)  and  stories.  These  stories  do  not 
possess  the  charm  of  War  and  Peace  ;  only  a  few  passages  from 


64 


The  Great  Novelists 


Resurrection  (1899,  the  youth  of  Katyusha  Maslova)  and  Hajji 
Murat  (written  in  1903,  published  191 1)  have  the  particular 
flavour  his  readers  had  grown  accustomed  to.  But  as  his  work 
lost  the  free  unfettered  charm  of  War  and  Peace  and  Anna 
Karenina,  it  acquired  other  qualities  which  are  also  of  a  high 
artistic  order,  qualities  of  economy,  construction,  and  concentra¬ 
tion.  The  didactic  and  philosophical  stories  of  this  period  are 
on  the  whole  superior  to  the  ‘  tendentious  ’  stories  of  his  youth, 
like  Lucerne  or  Three  Deaths.  These  stories  are  of  two  kinds — 
stories  written  for  the  educated  reader  and  stories  intended  for 
the  ‘  people  ’.  In  the  former  Tolstoy  continues  his  method  of 
detailed  description  and  minute  analysis.  But  he  gives  it  a  new 
edge,  and  concentrates  his  forces  more  decidedly  towards  a  distinct 
end.  The  first  of  these  is  The  Death  of  Ivan  Ilyich  (1882), 
a  counterpart  to  Confession,  a  piece  of  extraordinarily  penetrating 
analysis  and,  unlike  his  earlier  works,  of  powerful  synthesis, 
constructed,  like  Confession,  with  the  supreme  art  which  may  be 
qualified  as  ‘musical’  or  ‘lyrical’.  It  was  followed  by  The 
Kreutzer  Sonata  (1888),  Master  and  Man  (1895),  Resurrection 
(1899),  Hajji  Murat,  The  Devil,  and  Father  Sergius.  Of  these, 
Hajji  Murat  alone  is  a  disinterested  story  of  Caucasian  romance. 
The  others  are  all  written  with  a  purpose.  Resurrection,  which 
was  meant  to  be  the  great  imaginative  synthesis  of  Tolstoyism, 
is  very  imperfect.  Nowhere  is  the  essential  aridity  of  the 
doctrine  more  obvious.  It  contains  numerous  passages  compar¬ 
able  to  his  great  novels,  but  as  a  whole  it  is  a  failure.  The 
other  stories  are  problem  stories,  concentrated  round  distinct 
philosophical  problems — the  meaning  of  mortal  life  ( Ivan  Ilyich), 
moral  duty  (Master  and  Man),  the  desires  of  the  flesh  (Kreutzer 
Sonata,  The  Devil,  Father  Sergius).  They  are  unequal  in  merit. 
The  first  two  are  masterpieces,  and  Ivan  Ilyich  especially  is  a  work 
of  infinite  and  universal  significance — The  Confession  translated 
from  the  language  of  Ecclesiastes  into  that  of  Anna  Karenina. 


Dostoevsky  and  Tolstoy 


65 


The  stories  written  for  the  people  reject  all  the  paraphernalia 
of  the  realistic  novel — descriptive  detail  and  emotional  analysis. 
They  acquire  a  classical  neatness  of  outline,  a  reticence  and 
a  conciseness  which  Tolstoy  towards  the  end  of  his  life  valued 
above  all  artistic  qualities.  This  change  of  artistic  standards 
explains  his  later  dislike  for  TV ar  and  Peace  and  Anna  Karenina. 
He  chose  for  his  model  the  stories  of  the  book  of  Genesis ;  he  held 
the  story  of  Joseph  to  be  the  best  thing  in  all  narrative  literature. 
His  stories  for  the  ‘  people  ’  are  admirable  for  these  qualities, 
which,  again,  could  hardly  be  suspected  in  the  Tolstoy  one  knew 
before  1880.  Many  of  these  stories  are  universally  familiar. 
They  are  essentially  parables.  Most  of  them  are  very  short  and 
all  of  them  are  packed  with  narrative  interest.  Among  the  longer 
and  more  elaborate  ones  The  False  Coupon  is  as  delightful  a  piece 
of  narrative  as  there  is  in  Russian  literature.  So  after  all,  in  his 
last  period  Tolstoy  did  not  bury  his  talent— he  only  directed  it 
towards  new  ways.  From  a  literary  point  of  view  his  last  period 
is  a  period  of  classical  style,  of  selection,  self-limitation,  and 
outline,  as  opposed  to  the  preceding  period  of  naturalism,  of 
comprehensive  inclusion,  of  expansion,  and  atmosphere. 

Meanwhile  Tolstoy  continued  living  in  Yasnaya,  at  his  house 
in  Moscow,  or  in  the  Crimea,  surrounded  by  the  devoted  attention 
of  his  wife  and  family  and  the  admiring  importunity  of  pilgrims 
from  all  parts  of  the  world.  A  group  of  fervent  Tolstoyans, 
chief  among  whom  was  the  ex-Horse-Guardsman  V.  G.  Chertkov, 
began  to  play  an  ever-increasing  part  in  his  life.  The  contradiction 
between  his  ascetic  doctrine  and  the  comfortable  life  at  \asnaya 
gradually  came  to  weigh  heavily  on  Tolstoy.  He  had  renounced 
all  his  possessions,  but  they  had  passed  to  his  wife  who  had  no 

1  A  brilliant  analysis  of  Tolstoy’s  narrative  style  with  a  comparison  between 
his  earlier  and  late  style  is  to  be  found  in  Analysis ,  Style  and  Atmosphere  in  the 
Novels  of  Tolstoy  by  Constantine  Leontiev  (no  English  translation),  which  is 
the  masterpiece  of  Russian  critical  literature  (see  p.  81). 

2535-57 


E 


66 


The  Great  Novelists 


wish  to  leave  her  numerous  children  unprovided  for.  Tolstoy’s 
house  gradually  became  the  field  of  a  permanent  war  between 
Countess  Tolstoy  and  Chertkov.  Life  at  Yasnaya  became  a  hell. 
Tolstoy  more  and  more  began  to  feel  the  incongruity  of  his 
position  at  home  ;  and  finally  decided  to  leave  it.  At  the  end  of 
October  1910  he  left  his  house  in  the  company  of  his  doctor  and 
his  daughter  Alexandra,  the  only  one  of  his  children  who  had 
adopted  his  doctrines.  He  first  went  to  see  his  sister  who  was  a  nun 
at  a  convent  near  Optina,  then  he  travelled  farther  without  any 
destination.  The  state  of  his  health  forced  him  to  stop  at  Astapovo 
Junction  (gov.  of  Ryazan)  ;  there  in  the  station-master’s  house  he 
died  on  9  November  1910.  He  was  buried  at  Yasnaya.  There 
was  an  enormous  attendance  at  the  burial,  but  over  his  grave  no 
Christian  prayers  were  said. 


4 

The  Drama  ( 1850-1890 ) 

The  Russian  drama  cuts  a  comparatively  poor  figure  by  the 
side  of  its  neighbour  arts.  The  realistic  drama  is  overshadowed 
by  the  novel,  the  historical  drama  by  the  opera.  Then  again 
the  Russian  playwright  has  been  largely  eclipsed  by  the  actor, 
and  since  1900  by  the  producer.  The  Russian  theatre  is  brilliant 
and  interesting,  but  dramatic  literature  plays  a  secondary  part 
both  in  theatrical  and  in  literary  history. 

The  main  characteristic  of  Russian  drama,  as  of  the  Russian 
novel,  is  its  attention  to  character  and  its  neglect  of  plot.  It  is 
even  more  undramatic  than  the  Russian  novel  is  un-narrative. 
This  undramatic  quality  reaches  its  climax  in  the  ripest  and 
most  original  fruit  of  the  Russian  drama — the  plays  of  Chekhov. 


The  Drama  ( 1850-18Q0 ) 


67 


But  the  same  neglect  of  plot  becomes  discernible  much  earlier — 
in  the  comedies  of  Fonvizin  and  Griboyedov,  and  is  unmistakable 
in  the  work  of  Ostrovsky,  the  greatest  Russian  writer  to  devote 
himself  exclusively  to  the  drama.  He  was  the  exact  contem¬ 
porary  of  the  great  novelists  and  all  that  has  been  said  of  the 
general  character  of  their  work  may  be  applied  to  his  plays. 
The  greater  part  of  these  is  neither  tragedy  nor  comedy,  but 
belongs  to  the  hybrid  variety  called  drama  tout  court. 

Alexander  Nikolaevich  Ostrovsky  was  born  in  Moscow  in  1823, 
the  son  of  an  attorney  (if  English  terms  are  applicable  to  the  very 
un-English  forms  of  Russian  pre-Reform  law  courts),  whose 
practice  was  among  the  rich  but  uneducated  merchants  of  the 
city.  This  was  the  class  Ostrovsky  chose  for  the  subject  of  his 
plays.  His  first  play  appeared  in  1850  and  produced  a  sensation. 
Ostrovsky  was  hailed  as  the  dramatist  of  the  Natural  School. 
From  that  date  until  his  death  in  1886  he  almost  monopolized 
the  stage.  A  whole  school  of  Russian  actors  grew  up  on  his  plays, 
a  school  which  till  quite  recently  dominated  the  State  theatres 
of  both  capitals.  Ostrovsky’s  plays  may  be  described  as  dramatized 
short  stories.  He  was  fully  aware  of  the  exigences  of  the  stage, 
but  what  the  Russian  stage  demands  is  good  parts  for  individual 
actors,  ‘  grateful  ’  parts  as  the  Russian  theatrical  phrase  has  it.  To 
arouse  the  dramatic  suspense  of  the  audience  is  a  secondary  thing. 
Ostrovsky’s  chief  theme  is  not  character,  it  is  ‘  byt  ’ — the  peculiar 
manners  and  idiosyncracies  of  some  particular  milieu.  This 
milieu  in  most  of  his  plays  is  the  merchant  class.  Ostrovsky’s 
characters  are  not  so  much  individuals  as  types.  One  of  the  most 
memorable  which  he  repeats  in  an  infinite  but  never  tiring  and 
by  no  means  monotonous  variety,  is  the  ‘  samodur  ’ — the  domestic 
tyrant.  Ostrovsky  is  infinitely  resourceful  in  drawing  various 
shades  of  this  parental  despotism.  Especially  striking  is  his  gallery 
of  female  tyrants.  No  one  has  excelled  him  in  representing  the 
callousness  and  selfishness  of  old  women.  Ostrovsky’s  merchants 


68 


The  Great  Novelists 


are  very  unlike  the  educated  gentry  of  his  fellow-realists.  They 
are  more  primitive,  more  barbarous,  less  refined  ;  but  also  saner, 
stronger  of  will  and  more  of  a  piece.  Ostrovsky  was  not  sure 
whether  to  like  or  to  hate  them.  He  oscillated  between  an 
admiration  for  their  strong  characters,  their  strong  patriarchal 
principles,  and  a  repulsion  for  their  savage  crudeness.  He  could 
idealize  the  ‘  head  of  the  house  ’  into  a  patriarch,  or  vilify  him 
into  a  vulgar  bully.  This  of  course  only  adds  to  the  variety  and 
‘  objectivity  ’  of  his  types.  There  is  nothing  more  sordid  than 
the  merchants  of  his  first  ‘  comedy’,  The  Bankrupt,  and  nothing 
more  biblically  noble  than  the  merchant  of  Know  your  place. 
This  last  play  is  one  of  Ostrovsky’s  very  few  plays  that  have 
a  definite,  ‘  classically  ’  constructed  plot.  But  his  masterpiece, 
and  one  of  the  masterpieces  of  Russian  literature,  is  the  Thunder¬ 
storm  (i860),  which  is  distinctly  of  the  undramatic  type.  It  is 
so  pregnant  with  the  poetical  ‘  atmosphere  ’  of  a  Russian  country 
town  on  the  Volga  ;  there  is  so  much  passionate  poetry  in  the 
heroine  Katerina  that  it  can  be  placed  on  a  level  with  the  very 
best  of  Turgenev’s  stories,  and  its  parts  are  so  ‘  grateful  ’  that  it 
is  the  favourite  play  of  the  Russian  repertoire,  both  with  the 
public  and  with  the  actors. 

Though  Ostrovsky  was  the  one  great  writer  who  was  a  dramatist 
only,  many  of  his  contemporaries  wrote  plays  between  times. 
Turgenev  wrote  many  in  his  early  years,  before  the  success  of 
A  Sportsman’s  Sketches  finally  directed  him  to  fiction.  His  plays 
are  very  enjoyable  and  competent,  but  they  are  for  the  most  part 
dramatized  short  stories.  The  most  interesting  is  the  psycho¬ 
logical  comedy  A  Month  in  the  Country,  which  has  a  foretaste 
of  Chekhov. 

A  much  truer  dramatist  was  Pisemsky,  as  in  his  novels  he  was 
a  truer  story-teller.  His  drama  A  Bitter  Fate  is,  from  the  dramatic 
point  of  view,  one  of  the  best  Russian  plays.  It  is  the  only  realistic 
drama  in  Russian  that  deserves  the  name  of  tragedy.  It  is  con- 


OSTROVSKY 


-  W 


The  Drama  ( 1850-1890 ) 


69 


structed  with  classical  perfection.  The  plot  turns  on  the  relations 
between  a  serf  who  has  made  money  and  his  master  who  has 
become  the  lover  of  the  peasant’s  wife.  The  peasant  is  the  type 
of  the  strong  and  tyrannical  ‘  head  of  the  house  ’  ;  the  gentleman 
is  the  kindly  type  of  man  with  no  will,  familiar  to  us  from  so 
many  of  Turgenev’s  stories.  The  serf  is  a  tyrant  to  his  wife,  who 
really  loves  the  master,  and  a  rebel  to  the  squire.  The  situation 
is  eminently  dramatic  and  is  developed  with  much  dramatic 
ability. 

Another  writer  who  stands  out  as  a  dramatist,  not  a  mere 
novelist  in  dialogue,  is  Sukhovo-Kobylin  (1817-1902).  He  wrote 
plays  which  are  violent  satires  against  officialdom,  and  excellent 
comedies  of  intrigue.  The  best  known  is  Krechinsky,s  Marriage. 
It  was  never  appreciated  by  the  critics,  but  had  an  immense 
success  with  the  public.  The  others  were  too  violent  in  their 
satire  to  be  passed  by  the  stage  censorship.  Such  is  The  Death 
of  T arelkin ,  a  broad  and  crude  satire,  truly  Aristophanic,  and 
second  to  nothing  of  its  kind,  short  of  Gogol’s  Revizor.  But  there 
is  in  it  a  fierceness  of  which  Gogol  was  quite  incapable. 

Dostoevsky,  whose  genius  was  so  eminently  dramatic,  wrote  no 
dramas,  but  many  of  his  novels  have  been  dramatized  and  formed 
an  important  item  in  the  repertory  of  the  twentieth-century 
Russian  stage.  Tolstoy,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  no  dramatic 
proclivity,  wrote  several  plays  in  his  later  years.  The  Power  of 
Darkness,  though  a  powerful  and  impressively  hopeless  picture  of 
Russian  peasant  life,  and,  as  such,  popular  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  is  hardly  a  good  play.  The  plot  is  overloaded  with 
irrelevant  details  of  ‘  byt  ’.  The  Fruits  of  Culture  is  a  decidedly 
amusing  comedy,  of  the  quieter  kind  ;  it  contains  the  essence 
of  all  that  lighter  satire  of  ‘  society’  which  is  diffused  in  Anna 
Karenina  and  elsewhere.  The  Living  Corpse  is  as  undramatic  as 
any  Russian  play.  It  is  a  dramatized  novel.  But  there  is  in  it 
a  mellowness  and  a  sympathetic  wisdom  which  makes  it,  at  least 


70 


The  Great  Novelists 


to  the  present  writer,  one  of  the  most  attractive  of  all  Tolstoy’s 
works.  Lastly,  I  may  mention  the  didactic  anti-liquor  comedy, 
The  First  Distiller,  which  stands  out  for  that  lucidity  and  neatness 
of  outline  that  is  characteristic  of  all  Tolstoy’s  didactic  work. 
It  is  as  good  a  morality  as  has  been  written  since  the  Middle  Ages. 

The  historical  drama  in  verse  (which  shared  with  drama  of  real 
life  the  favour  of  the  public)  originated  about  i860,  when  the 
hitherto  unfruitful  lead  of  Pushkin  in  Boris  Godunov  was  taken 
up  almost  simultaneously  by  several  writers.  This  type  of  drama 
is  mainly  interesting  as  having  given  so  many  librettos  to  the 
Russian  opera.  The  opera  composers  did  not  limit  themselves 
to  using  ready-made  librettos,  and  the  greatest  of  them,Musorgsky, 
was  also  a  great  dramatist.  He  wrote  his  own  text  for  Khovan- 
schina  and  reconstructed  and  remodelled  Pushkin’s  Boris  into  a 
‘  popular  drama  ’  (as  he  called  it)  of  greater  sweep  than  its  original. 

Ostrovsky  was  among  the  first  to  try  his  hand  at  this  genre. 
His  chronicle  plays  are  decidedly  poor,  but  his  Snegurochka 
(Snow-maiden) — which  Rimsky- Korsakov  set  to  music — is  a 
singularly  charming  and  original  production.  Ostrovsky  utilizes 
in  a  very  fruitful  way  the  material  of  the  Russian  folk-stories 
and  creates  a  wonderful  world  of  phantasy  in  which  mythological 
romance  is  closely  intertwined  with  a  quietly-sparkling,  very 
Russian  humour. 

Of  the  strictly  historical  plays  Alexey  Tolstoy’s  dramatic 
Trilogy  are  the  best  known.  Not  that  they  are  really  very  great 
plays  :  they  are  turgid  and  lack  concision ;  their  local  colour  is 
conventional  and  operatic ;  their  versification  is  poor,  distinctly 
inferior  to  the  narrative,  humorous,  and  lyrical  work  of  the  same 
poet.  But  they  contain  good  dramatic  situations,  and  the  character 
of  Tsar  Fyodor  in  the  play  of  the  same  name  is  one  of  the  most 
interesting  in  Russian  literature.  He  is  the  saintly  fool — the 
same  character  as  Dostoevsky’s  Idiot,  but  stripped  of  all  its 
peculiarly  Dostoevskian  features  and  exalted  to  royal  rank. 


5 

Poets 


The  Victorian  age  in  England  was  an  eclectic  age,  an  age  of 
compromise.  The  contemporary  period  in  Russia  was,  on  the 
whole,  of  a  different  character.  It  was  rather  an  age  of  extremes, 
both  in  politics  and  in  art.  The  Nihilists,  Dostoevsky,  Musorgsky, 
or  a  reactionary  statesman  like  Pobedonostsev,  were  not  at  all 
‘  Victorian  ’  figures.  But  there  was  just  one  province  where  the 
Victorian  tendency  was  distinctly  apparent,  and  this  was  poetry. 
The  Russian  poets  of  the  mid-nineteenth  century  sought  for 
a  compromise  between  the  conflicting  forces  in  and  about  them  ; 
between  the  rights  of  poetical  imagination  and  the  hard  facts  of 
science  ;  between  ‘  pure  art  ’  and  social  utilitarianism  ;  between 
romanticism  and  realism.  With  two  exceptions — Fet  and 
Nekrasov,  who  stand  out  as  extremes — the  poets  of  the  period  are 
eclectic  and  £  Victorian  ’.  And  of  all  the  prose-writers  Turgenev, 
the  most  poetical,  is  also  the  most  ‘  Victorian  ’. 

There  are  however  important  points  of  differences  between 
Victorian  poetry  in  England  and  in  Russia.  The  chief  of  these 
is  that  in  England  the  Victorian  age  was  a  golden  age,  if  not  of 
genius,  at  least  of  poetical  culture.  The  level  of  poetical  crafts¬ 
manship  was  very  high  during  the  period  that  begins  with 
Tennyson  and  ends  with  Swinburne.  In  Russia  on  the  contrary 
there  was  a  distinct  falling  off  from  the  high  level  of  the  preceding 
age.  A  low  and  constantly  sinking  level  of  poetical  culture  is 
characteristic  of  the  Russian  £  Victorians  ’.  As  a  rule  the  later 
the  date  of  a  poet’s  birth  the  less  chance  is  there  of  his  having 
written  good  verse,  and  the  older  he  grew  the  worse  he  wrote. 
The  most  popular  and  least  questioned  poet  of  the  time  was 
Apollon  Maykov  (1821-1897).  He  satisfied  the  taste  of  the 
average  Russian  poetry-reader  for  cheap  ideas,  tame  picturesque¬ 
ness,  and  mild  realism.  Another  typical  eclectic  was  Yakov 


72 


The  Great  Novelists 


Petrovich  Polonsky  (1819-1898),  an  infinitely  more  attractive 
poet,  who  succumbed  to  the  low  poetic  culture  of  the  times  and 
to  the  desire  of  expressing  modern  ideas.  His  best  work  is  charm¬ 
ing,  at  once  romantic  and  homely,  a  world  of  sweet  music  and 
dimly  coloured  horizons.  He  has  a  simplicity  and  truth  in  the 
expression  of  sentiment  which  makes  him  a  worthy  heir  to 
Lermontov  and  Pushkin.  But  his  good  work  would  occupy  but 
a  few  dozen  pages — out  of  the  five  volumes  of  his  collected 
poems. 

A  more  interesting  and  independent  figure  was  Count  Alexey 
Tolstoy  (1817-1875).  He  was  a  distant  cousin  of  the  great 
novelist,  and  a  personal  friend  (he  had  been  a  playfellow)  of  the 
Emperor,  Alexander  II.  He  wrote  lyrics,  ballads,  narrative  poems, 
dramas  (which  I  have  mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter),  an 
historical  romance,  parodies,  humorous  satires,  and  even  genuine 
nonsense  verse.  In  these  last  categories  he  is  absolutely  supreme 
among  Russian  writers,  and  his  Dream  of  Popov  and  the  works  he 
attributed  to  the  imaginary  civil  servant  Kosma  Prutkov,  are  an 
inexhaustible  mine  of  pure  fun.  He  had  a  good  ear  for  the  sound 
of  words  and  some  of  his  historical  ballads  would  well  answer  to 
Mr.  Chesterton’s  description  of  Macaulay’s  Armada  as  a  ‘  good 
geographical  map  gone  mad  ’.  But  he  also  wrote  in  the  purest 
‘  Tennysonian  ’  and  idealist  style.  Some  of  his  shorter  lyrics  are 
as  fresh  and  pure  as  drops  of  rain  hanging  from  a  flower  ; — no  one 
ever  spoke  better  than  he  did  of  rain  and  dew  and  sunlight  and 
the  freshness  that  comes  after  a  thunderstorm.  His  paraphrase 
of  the  lament  used  in  the  Orthodox  service  for  the  dead  is  one 
of  the  noblest  pieces  of  religious  poetry  produced  in  the  nineteenth 
century.1  He  was  not  an  eclectic  in  the  sense  of  submitting  to 
any  external  compromise,  but  he  was  a  man  of  the  golden  mean, 
of  harmony  and  taste,  as  he  was  a  moderate  liberal  in  politics. 

1  This  and  another  lyric  of  his  are  excellently  translated  in  Mr.  Baring’s 
preface  to  The  Oxford  Book  of  Russian  Verse. 


Poets 


73 


The  ‘  extreme  right  ’  in  poetry  is  occupied  by  Afanasi  Afanasie¬ 
vich  Fet  (1820-1892,  after  1877  he  took  the  name  of  Shenshin), 
the  champion  of  ‘  pure  art  ’  and  of  the  eternal  rights  of  the  Poet. 
He  was  in  private  life  a  selfish  and  successful  business  man.  He 
devoted  most  of  his  life  to  raising  the  revenue  of  his  estates.  He 
was  the  intimate  friend  of  Leo  Tolstoy,  who  valued  his  talent  very 
highly,  and  who,  it  will  be  remembered,  also  devoted  a  period  of  his 
life  to  the  aggrandizement  of  his  rural  fortune.  There  was  in  Fet 
a  singular  contrast  between  the  man  and  the  poet.  He  consciously 
cultivated  it  and  advisedly  lived  a  double  life.  Poetry,  he  said, 
was  a  mountain  country,  and  in  its  rarefied  atmosphere  it  was 
impossible  to  live  permanently.  It  was  a  sanctuary,  not  a  home. 
His  poetry  is  purely  lyrical,  the  essence  of  the  lyrical  element. 
In  the  ’6o’s  the  Radical  critics  who  attacked  all  poetry  hooted 
him  down,  and  he  disappeared  from  literature  for  twenty  years, 
to  reappear  only  for  a  short  time  before  his  death.  His  early 
poetry  (1840-1860)  is  what  has  since  come  to  be  called  impres¬ 
sionistic.  It  is  nature  and  love  poetry.  The  most  characteristic 
lyrics  are  curiously  anticipative  of  Verlaine  and  the  French 
Symbolists.  But  Fet  was  fundamentally  sane  and  his  poetry  is 
in  the  major  key.  In  his  nature  worship  he  was  not  so  much 
a  pantheist  as  a  pagan.  This  early  poetry  is  strikingly  original 
and  entitles  him  to  a  place  among  the  four  or  five  greatest  Russian 
poets.  His  later  poetry  is  more  severe.  It  breathes  the  ‘  rarefied 
atmosphere  ’  he  loved  to  speak  of.  It  is  pure  poetry,  without 
a  single  drop  of  non-poetry  in  it,  and  like  pure  gold  is  somewhat 
difficult  to  handle.  It  may  almost  be  compared  with  the  ‘pure 
poetry  ’  of  Mallarme,  but  a  rural,  country-gentlemanly,  and  very 
Russian  Mallarme. 

At  the  other  extreme  stands  the  powerful  figure  of  Nikolay 
Alekseevich  Nekrasov  (1821-1877).  He  was  an^  is  the  impersona¬ 
tion  of  civic  poetry.  He  came  from  a  family  of  provincial  gentry, 
but  early  left  his  father’s  house  and  started  out  in  life  on  his  own 


74 


The  Great  Novelists 


account  in  St.  Petersburg.  He  was  successful.  By  1846  he  was 
the  editor  and  part-proprietor  of  the  Sovremennik  ( Contemporary ), 
which  he  made  the  most  influential  Russian  periodical,  and  the 
rallying-ground  of  all  that  was  best  in  literature.  After  1856  it 
became  more  exclusively  Radical,  and  Nekrasov  the  head  of 
the  Left  wing  of  Russian  literature.  He  was  idolized  by  the 
radical  youth  of  the  sixties  and  seventies,  and  detested  by  the 
‘  aesthetic  ’  school ;  even  Turgenev  maintained  that  £  poetry  had 
never  as  much  as  passed  a  night  in  Nekrasov’s  verse  ’.  Only 
recently  has  he  finally  been  recognized  as  a  great  and  unques¬ 
tioned  poet,  not  because  of  the  civic  character  and  revolutionary 
spirit  of  his  work,  but  because  of  its  originality  and  vigour. 
Nekrasov’s  poetry  is  not  of  the  conventional  Victorian  type.  He 
studiously  avoided  prettiness  even  at  the  risk  of  forfeiting  beauty. 
His  verse  is  often  an  amalgam  of  rhetoric  and  vulgarity  which 
makes  it  dangerously  like  journalism,  for  he  boldly  introduced  the 
crudest  prose  diction  into  the  sacrosanct  precinct  of  the  muse.  But 
he  had  great  power  over  all  the  sterner  forms  of  satire — from  bitter 
sarcasm  to  lyrical  invective.  A  splendid  specimen  of  the  latter  is  the 
‘  elegy’  Home ,  so  admirably  translated  into  English  by  Professor 
Elton.1  His  love-poetry  is  entirely  original,  which  is  free  from  all 
idealization  and  has  for  its  principal  subject  his  quarrels  with  his 
mistress.  On  the  other  hand  his  poetry  for  children  is  for  its 
homely,  familiar  humour  as  unique  in  its  way  as  Alexey  Tolstoy’s 
nonsense  verse.  The  central  nerve  of  Nekrasov’s  poetry  is  his 
adoration  of  the  people.  It  attains  to  mythological  proportions 
in  the  wonderful  poem  Frost  the  Red-nosed ,  where  the  Russian 
peasant  and  peasant  woman  are  painted  on  a  truly  Homeric 
scale.  He  was  the  only  Russian  poet  to  understand  and  to  adopt 
with  success  the  forms  of  the  Russian  popular  song.  His  two 
masterpieces  are  developments,  on  original  lines,  of  popular 
forms.  One  of  these  is  The  Pedlars,  a  story  of  peasant  life  told 
1  The  London  Mercury ,  March  1922. 


NEKRASOV 


Poets 


75 


in  a  rapid  and  exhilarating  folk-ballad  style.  The  other  is  Who 
lives  happily  in  Russia,  a  vast  epic,  satirical,  humorous  and  realistic. 
It  gives  a  broad  picture  of  post-Reform  Russia  over  which  the 
seven  peasants  wander  in  quest  of  the  happy  Russian.  It  is  a  master¬ 
piece  of  verbal  felicity,  and  a  great  achievement  of  realistic  poetry. 

Nekrasov  was  immensely  popular,  but  had  next  to  no  influence 
on  the  development  of  Russian  poetry.  His  so-called  disciples, 
the  ‘  civic  ’  poets  of  radicalism,  had  not  nerve  enough  to  adopt 
his  drastic  and  ungenteel  methods.  They  preferred  to  wallow  in 
mawkish  sentiment  expressed  in  helpless  verse.  Such  is  the 
poetry  of  Nadson  (1862-1887),  tb-e  idol  of  the  intelligentsia  of 
thirty  and  forty  years  ago.  In  the  generation  that  followed  that 
of  Nekrasov  and  Fet  the  art  of  poetry  reached  its  low  watermark, 
chiefly  owing  to  the  utter  decline  of  craftsmanship.  The  partisans 
of  Art  for  Art’s  sake  were  as  poor  as  the  civic  poets.  The  secret  of 
writing  verse  was  lost,  and  even  if  a  poet  of  genius  happened  to 
be  born  in  that  age  he  was  incapable  of  expressing  himself  other¬ 
wise  than  in  a  stammer.  Such  was  the  case  of  Constantine 
Sluchevsky  (1837-1904),  a  poet  of  great  possibilities,  who  seemed 
capable  of  creating  a  truly  modern  poetry.  It  would  have  given 
expression  to  a  vast  and  original  pluralistic  conception  of  the 
universe,  but  he  failed  because  he  had  no  tongue  to  speak  with. 


6 

Critics  and  Publicists 

It  is  not  my  task  to  outline  a  history  of  Russian  political  and 
ethical  thought.  I  am  merely  concerned  with  literature,  and 
with  those  writers,  whatever  may  have  been  their  subjects,  who 
produced  literary  masterpieces.  But  a  few  brief  indications  of 
the  development  of  ideas  must  be  given  as  landmarks. 

Russian  political,  social,  and  ethical  thought  from  about  1840 


7  6 


The  Great  Novelists 


onwards  was  dominated  by  an  antagonism  between  Radicals  and 
Traditionalists.  The  Russian  Radicals  rejected  all  native  tradition, 
and  of  European  tradition  accepted  only  its  rationalism  and 
progressiveness.  Their  religion  was  Enlightenment  and  Demo¬ 
cracy.  This  religion  passed  through  many  phases.  At  first  it  was 
strongly  coloured  by  German  Idealist  Philosophy  and  French 
Idealist  Socialism.  Towards  i860  it  became  agnostic,  it  w'ent  in 
for  natural  science  and  swore  by  Darwin  and  the  German  material¬ 
ists.  About  1870  it  assumed  its  most  typical  Russian  form  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Populists  (Narodniki).1  Their  occidentalism 
was  partly  mitigated  by  their  ‘  discovery  ’  that  the  Russian 
peasant  was  a  born  Communist  and  had  consequently  nothing 
to  learn  from  Western  Socialism.  They  retained  their  faith  in 
Science  and  Civilization,  which  they  continued  to  regard  as  pro¬ 
gressive  and  Revolutionary  forces,  but  Science  and  Civilization 
were  to  be  directed  into  channels  consistent  with  the  Commun¬ 
istic  Ideals  of  the  Russian  people.  But  whatever  their  attitude 
towards  the  Russian  peasant  the  Populists  maintained  an  un¬ 
swervingly  hostile  attitude  to  all  the  traditions  of  State  and 
Church,  to  Autocracy  and  Orthodoxy. 

The  Radicals  had  infinitely  more  influence  over  the  intelligentsia, 
especially  over  its  more  plebeian  layers,  but  they  did  not  produce 
much  great  writing.  Their  spokesmen  in  the  press  at  home  (as 
distinguished  from  that  of  the  Emigrants)  devoted  themselves 
mainly  to  literary  criticism.  This  was  partly  due  to  conditions 
imposed  by  the  censorship,  partly  to  the  great  achievements  of 
imaginative  literature.  Russian  intellectual  opinion  was  thus 
ruled  by  a  succession  of  Radical  critics — Belinsky  (1811-1848), 
whom  some  still  believe  to  be  a  ‘  great  critic  ’  ;  Chernyshevsky 
(1828-1889),  who  was  an  economist;  Dobrolyubov  (1836-1861) ; 
Pisarev  (1840-1868),  who  carried  farthest  the  anti-aesthetic 

1  The  Narodnik  or  Populist  propaganda  ‘  among  the  People  ’  is  the  subject 
of  Turgenev’s  novel  Virgin  Soil. 


Critics  and  Publicists 


77 


intolerance  of  the  time  ;  and  Nikolay  Konstantinovich  Mikhailov¬ 
sky  (1842-1904),  who  was  an  original  sociologist,  and  the  leader 
of  the  Populists.  Their  influence  was  great,  but  they  were 
neither  critics  (except  perhaps  Mikhailovsky,  whose  essays  on 
Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky  are  noteworthy)  nor  good  writers.  They 
(again  with  the  possible  exception  of  Mikhailovsky)  wrote  intolerable 
or  insipid  journalese,  and  have  become  entirely  unreadable. 

An  infinitely  more  important  and  attractive  writer  was  Alex¬ 
ander  Ivanovich  Herzen  (in  Russian  Gertsen).  He  was  born  in 
1812,  in  Moscow,  the  natural  son  of  a  wealthy  nobleman.  He 
came  very  early  under  the  influence  of  French  Socialism  (Saint- 
Simon)  and  became  the  centre  of  an  intimate  circle  of  friends 
interested  in  Socialism  and  Revolution.  He  was  twice  exiled  to 
provincial  towns.  About  1840  he  became,  next  to  Belinsky,  the 
leader  of  the  Westernizers.  He  wrote  brilliant  popular  articles 
on  Natural  Science,  and  in  1846  published  a  problem  novel  on 
free-love  ( Whose  fault  ?)  which  attracted  attention  as  one  of  the 
first  manifestations  of  the  ‘Natural  School’.  In  1847  he  went 
abroad,  never  to  return.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  Revolution 
of  1848  at  Paris  and  at  Rome.  After  the  defeat  of  the  Revolution 
he  settled  in  London,  founded  a  free  Russian  press,  and  became 
the  first  spokesman  of  Revolutionary  Russia  before  Europe. 
When  the  era  of  Reform  began  in  Russia  he  started  a  newspaper, 
The  Bell  (Kolokol),  which  became  immensely  influential.  Even 
the  Russian  Government  took  heed  of  its  advice  and  was  impressed 
by  its  revelations.  In  practical  politics  Herzen  took  a  moderate 
course,  and  in  spite  of  his  Socialism  he  gave  his  support  to  the 
Government  of  Alexander  II  as  long  as  he  believed  it  to  be 
sincere  in  its  policy  of  Reform.  But  in  1863  during  the  Polish 
Rebellion  he  took  the  side  of  the  Poles,  and  this  put  an  end  to  his 
influence  with  the  moderate  groups  and  greatly  impaired  his 
popularity.  The  Bell  came  to  an  end  in  1867  and  he  died  in  1870 
at  Nice. 


78 


The  Great  Novelists 


If  Herzen  had  only  written  the  leaders  of  The  Bell  his  name 
would  be  great  in  Russian  political  history,  but  comparatively 
small  in  Russian  literature.  Nor  are  his  novel  Whose  Fault  ? 
and  his  other  short  stories  very  important.  His  place  in  Russian 
literature  is  based  on  his  remarkable  memoirs  {My  Past  and 
Reflections )  and  on  a  series  of  articles  he  wrote  after  the  breakdown 
of  the  Revolution  of  1848.  Of  these  the  Russian  People  and 
Socialism,  which  is  a  letter  addressed  to  the  great  French  historian 
Michelet  on  the  occasion  of  his  giving  vent  to  some  unguarded 
sentiments  on  the  Russian  people  in  general,  in  his  famous  essay 
on  Kosciuszko,  is  in  a  way  the  creed  of  Russian  Socialism.  It  is 
a  brilliant  specimen  of  Herzen’s  eloquence,  which  is  French  in 
style,  but  somehow  engagingly  easy  and  informal.  But  the 
essays  and  dialogues  collected  in  From  the  Other  Shore  and  written 
under  the  strong  impression  produced  on  him  by  the  defeat  of 
the  Socialist  Revolution  are  still  more  remarkable.  Herzen  was 
deeply  pessimistic,  almost  as  if  1848  had  been  1914-1918,  and  to 
read  the  book  by  the  light  of  recent  events  is  singularly  interesting. 
Herzen  possessed  great  honesty  of  thought ;  he  did  not  shrink 
from  what  it  led  him  to,  and  there  is  nothing  more  impressive  and 
sadly  noble  than  what  he  says  on  the  Indifference  and  Meaning¬ 
lessness  of  Nature  in  one  of  the  dialogues  of  this  series.  But  he 
also  had  the  intuition  of  a  deeper  and  more  immanent  meaning 
in  Evolution,  which  stands  above  and  apart  from  human  history. 
This  intuition  has  in  it  a  strange  foretaste  of  Bergsonism.  In 
My  Past  and  Reflections,  written  between  1850  and  1855,  Herzen 
gives  a  connected  narrative  of  his  life  up  to  1847,  when  he  left 
Russia.  This  is  followed  by  a  series  of  disconnected  stories  of 
subsequent  years,  mainly  dealing  with  Revolutionaries  of  all 
Nations.  The  first  part  is  by  far  the  best.  It  is  at  the  opposite 
pole  of  Aksakov,  being  frankly  lyrical,  rhetorical,  and  subjective. 
It  is  not  in  any  way  supreme  or  amazing,  but  is  charming  for 
the  natural  ease  of  the  narrative,  for  its  somewhat  theatrical 


Critics  and  Publicists 


79 


jincerity,  for  the  wealth  of  observation  and  wit,  and  for  its  excellent, 
unpedantic,  man-of-the- world  Russian.  For  Herzen,  whatever 
else  he  might  have  been,  was  first  of  all  a  Russian  gentleman  of 
easy  and  well-bred  manners  and  a  brilliantly  witty  conversa¬ 
tionalist. 

Traditionalism  may  be  roughly  identified  with  the  Slavophils. 
They  had  much  less  influence  over  the  educated  and  semi- 
educated  masses,  but  intrinsically  they  were  more  significant. 
Slavophilism  arose  about  the  same  time  as  Westernizing  Radicalism 
and  was  also  initially  influenced  by  German  Idealism.  The 
Slavophils  were  hostile  to  the  Autocracy  of  the  St.  Petersburg 
Emperors,  but  were  unconditionally  attached  to  the  Orthodox 
Church,  and  to  the  religious  tradition  of  the  people.  They 
professed  a  somewhat  sentimental  admiration  for  old  Muskovy 
and  a  faith  in  the  essential  unity  of  Slavdom,  as  opposed  to  the 
Roman  and  Germanic  West.  Hence  their  political  Panslavism 
with  its  symbolic  expression  in  the  desire  for  Constantinople. 

Of  the  earliest  Slavophils  the  most  notable  was  Alexey  Stepano¬ 
vich  Khomyakov  (1804-1860),  a  poet  whose  devotional  and 
patriotic  poetry  is  the  best  in  the  language,  and  a  great  religious 
thinker  whose  doctrine  is  the  basis  of  all  modern  Orthodox 
Theology.  In  the  reign  of  Alexander  II  the  Slavophils  were 
brilliantly  represented  by  Ivan  Aksakov  (1823-1886),  the  son  of 
the  great  memoirist,  who  was  an  influential  and  eloquent  political 
journalist.  His  name  became  familiar  to  English  politicians  in 
the  days  of  the  Berlin  Congress.  All  the  Slavophils  in  the  strict 
sense  were  noblemen  by  origin  and  for  all  their  loving  admiration 
of  the  Russian  people,  of  its  religion  and  its  communism,  and  for 
all  their  ardour  for  the  Democratic  Balkan  Slavs — they  were  also 
essentially  aristocrats  in^their  tastes  and  manners. 

A  more  democratic"  form  of  Slavophilism  s  represented  by 
Dostoevsky  (of  whom  we  have  already  spoken)  and  his  journal¬ 
istic  ally  Apollon  Grigoriev  (1822-1864).  Grigoriev  was  a  plebeian, 


8o 


The  Great  Novelists 


almost  a  proletarian,  but  an  intensely  Russian  plebeian.  His 
career  was  unsuccessful,  his  private  life  was  unhappy,  and  he  was 
always  without  a  penny.  Wine,  women,  and  song  were  all-power¬ 
ful  over  him,  and  were  inextricably  linked  with  the  two  objects 
of  his  passion — Russia  and  Poetry.  Russia  he  almost  identified 
with  the  ‘  Surrey  Side  ’  of  Moscow,  the  home  of  Ostrovsky’s 
merchants.  He  idolized  Pushkin,  but  the  poetry  of  Byron  was 
to  him  even  more  intoxicating.  4  The  Last  of  the  Romanticists  ’ 
was  a  phrase  Grigoriev  liked  to  apply  to  himself.  A  Romanticist  he 
was  to  the  core,  and  consequently  quite  out  of  tune  with  his  times. 
He  was  undisciplined  and  most  of  his  writing  is  slovenly,  but  he 
had  flashes  of  genius.  In  his  intuition  of  life,  the  great  inscrutable, 
inexhaustible,  ironic  power,  there  is  again  something  Bergsonian. 
In  his  memoirs,  his  letters,  and  some  of  his  articles  his  genius  will 
flash  out  suddenly  and  dazzlingly.  But  all  his  writings  are  con¬ 
fused,  long,  and  formless.  His  best  are  two  or  three  songs,  unutter¬ 
ably  poignant  and  melodious,  which  have  survived  to  this  day  in 
the  mouth  of  the  Russian  gipsy-choruses  of  which  he  was  so 
passionately  fond. 

The  more  reactionary  Traditionalists  were  pretty  influential  in 
politics  but  their  place  in  literature  would  have  been  small  but 
for  Constantine  Leontiev. 

Leontiev  (1831-1891)  began  life  as  a  doctor,  an  agnostic  and 
a  passionate  admirer  of  George  Sand  and  her  humanitarian 
socialism.  He  wrote  stories  in  the  style  of  Turgenev.  Afterwards 
he  entered  the  consular  service  in  Turkey  and  wrote  a  series  of 
good  stories  of  modern  Greek  life.  Under  the  influence  of  Greek 
monasticism  he  became  converted  to  strict  Byzantine  Orthodoxy. 
He  quitted  the  service  and  passed  some  months  at  Mount  Athos, 
submitting  to  the  severe  discipline  of  that  extremely  ascetic 
community.  He  returned  to  Russia  and  began  publishing  a  series 
of  papers  on  political  questions.  Their  extreme  Byzantine  spirit 
staggered  even  the  reactionaries.  He  passed  his  last  years  in  the 


Critics  and  Publicists 


81 


shade  of  Optina  Monastery  and  died  a  monk  of  the  severest  rule. 
His  profound  originality  and  passionate  intensity  gradually 
attracted  the  attention  of  men  who  had  no  sympathy  with  his 
ideas  and  among  others  of  VI.  Soloviev,  and  gradually  he  became, 
at  least  for  the  few,  an  undisputed  classic.  He  has  been  compared 
with  Nietzsche  and  there  was  really  something  infinitely  daring 
and  Promethean  in  his  revolt  against  the  modern  spirit.  At  the 
basis  of  his  creed  was  the  belief  that  beauty  was  better  than 
good  and  that  societies  must  be  judged  by  aesthetic  standards. 
This  led  him  to  the  cult  of  aristocracy  and  inequality  and  to  the 
conscious  contempt  for  social  justice.  At  the  same  time  he  was 
consumed  by  an  ascetic  ardour  which  led  him  to  one  monastery 
after  another.  His  polemical  writings  are  brilliantly  eloquent 
and  intensely  sincere.  His  book  on  Tolstoy’s  novels  is,  I  think, 
the  best  critical  work  in  the  Russian  language.  The  fragments 
he  has  left  us  of  his  recollections  are  unique  for  the  lightning-like 
vividness  of  his  narrative  and  the  passionate  sincerity  that  dictated 
them.  In  the  way  of  confessions  (as  distinct  from  the  objective 
Aksakov  style)  they  are  the  best  in  Russian  literature. 

The  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  dominated  by  a  more 
general  interest  in  problems  of  religion,  apart  from  the  Slavophil 
setting,  and  religious  morality,  which  is  summed  up  in  the  opposing 
names  of  Tolstoy  and  Soloviev. 

Vladimir  Sergeyevich  Soloviev  (b.  1853  in  Moscow,  the  son 
of  an  eminent  historian,  d.  1900)  is  the  greatest  name  in  Russian 
Philosophy,  and  together  with  Dostoevsky  the  strongest  influence 
in  the  recent  revival  of  religion.  We  cannot  discuss  this  aspect  of 
his  work  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  his  religious  philosophy  was  mys¬ 
tical  and  Catholic  in  the  original  sense  of  the  word,  and  that 
he  was  the  first  Russian  to  combine  strict  religious  orthodoxy 
with  a  political  liberalism  of  a  European  type.  His  writings, 
theological,  philosophical,  mystical,  and  political,  are  all  admirable 
for  their  force  and  lucidity  of  exposition  and  style.  Of  these 


2535-57 


F 


82 


The  Great  Novelists 


The  Justification  of  the  Good  has  been  translated  into  English. 
But  from  the  literary  point  of  view  his  principal  work,  however,  is 
Three  Conversations  on  War,  Peace,  and  the  End  of  History,  to 
which  is  attached  a  short  history  of  Antichrist.  The  Conversations 
are  a  beautiful  exposition  of  the  main  points  of  Soloviev’s  moral 
philosophy  and  philosophy  of  history,  but  they  are  also  the  best 
and  most  readable  dialogues  in  any  modern  literature,  full  of  wit, 
humour,  and  solid  sense  ;  the  persons  of  the  dialogue,  The  General, 
The  Politician,  The  Tolstoyite,  The  Lady,  and  The  Mystic,  are 
all  drawn  with  admirable  consistency.  They  speak  up  to  their 
characters,  and  do  not  go  out  of  their  way  to  give  the  author  an 
easy  triumph.  Soloviev’s  poetry,  though  it  participates  in  the 
general  low  level  of  poetical  culture,  is  also  very  remarkable. 
Most  of  it  is  mystical  and  devoted  to  the  direct  description  of  his 
visions.  But  sometimes  he  introduces  a  curious  breath  of  humour 
even  into  his  most  serious  mystical  poetry,  and  he  is  second  to 
A.  Tolstoy  alone  in  the  art  of  nonsense  verse. 

7 

Chekhov  and  After 

The  great  age  of  the  Russian  novel  ended  about  1880  :  the 
death  of  Dostoevsky  (1881)  and  Turgenev  (1883)  and  the  conver¬ 
sion  of  Tolstoy  mark  the  end  of  it.  The  younger  plebeian 
generation  of  i860  had  also  by  that  time  spent  its  vitality.  There 
began  a  new  period  of  followers  and  imitators,  not  of  pioneers. 
The  1  modernist  ’  tendencies  of  the  young  Radicals  of  the  sixties 
were  forgotten,  fiction  was  once  more  divorced  from  journalism, 
and  the  now  classical  work  of  Turgenev,  Tolstoy,  and  their  con¬ 
temporaries  became  the  models  the  young  generation  strove  to 
approach.  There  was  a  revival  of  1  art  ’  and  ‘  beauty  ’  about  that 
time  which  found  expression  in  a  hectic  flowering  of  poetry  and 
in  the  renewed  cult  of  Turgenev.  The  writers  of  this  revival 


Chekhov  and  After 


83 


were  welcomed  as  great  ‘  artists  ’  in  contradistinction  to  the 
*  publicists  ’  who  had  preceded  them.  They  found  favour  with 
all  parties,  and  were  by  way  of  becoming  minor  classics.  The 
most  prominent  of  these  were  Garshin  and  Korolenko.  Vsevolod 
Garshin  (1855-1888)  wrote  very  little,  just  one  volume  of  short 
stories,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  exiguous  extent  of  his  work 
contributed  not  a  little  to  give  him  a  semi-classical  position. 
But  apart  from  a  greater  concern  for  expression  and  form  than 
had  writers  like  Uspensky,  there  is  very  little  to  be  said  for  him. 
His  first  and  best  story,  Four  Days,  the  impressions  of  a  wounded 
soldier  (Garshin  had  fought  as  a  volunteer  in  1877)  left  to  die 
on  the  field  of  battle,  produces  a  certain  impression  by  its  grim 
realism,  but  all  its  main  characteristics  are  borrowed  from  Tolstoy. 
Tolstoy’s  later  manner  is  reflected  in  Garshin’s  moral  stories 
written  in  a  ‘  biblical  ’  or  *  popular  ’  style.  His  more  personal 
work  is  intensely  pessimistic.  His  last  years  were  clouded  by 
mental  disease.  He  committed  suicide  while  insane. 

Vladimir  Galaktionovich  Korolenko  (1853-1921)  is  a  more 
cheerful  writer.  His  stories  of  convict  life  in  Siberia  (he  was  for 
several  years  a  political  exile  in  the  Yakut  country),  of  peasant 
life  in  Central  Russia,  and  of  his  early  years  in  semi-Polish 
Volynia,  are  all  full  of  a  kindly  humour  and  bathed  in  an  atmo¬ 
sphere  of  sympathetic  humanity.  His  realism,  humorous  and 
idealistic,  is  less  gloomy  than  that  of  most  Russian  writers.  He  was 
a  fundamental  optimist.  Even  in  his  representations  of  the  veriest 
villains  he  finds  abundant  proof  of  man’s  divine  nature.  His  world 
is  a  good-humoured  and  pleasant  world,  sullied  only  by  the  evil 
presence  of  despotism.  He  was  an  earnest  Radical  and  Socialist, 
and  in  his  later  years  won  the  high  esteem  of  Liberal  Russia  by 
his  campaign  against  capital  punishment  and  martial  law. 

Less  generally  known,  though  deserving  perhaps  a  greater 
reputation,  is  Alexander  Vanovich  Ertel  (1855-1908),  whose  best 
novel,  The  Gardenins ,  was  highly  valued  by  Tolstoy.  It  was 


84 


The  Great  Novelists 


written  largely  under  his  influence.  It  offers  a  comprehensive 
and  varied  picture  of  rural  life  in  Central  Russia  in  the  critical 
years  after  the  emancipation,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  good 
Russian  of  its  dialogue  and  its  Turgenev-like  impressions  of 
nature.  There  were  numerous  writers  much  appreciated  in  their 
time  who  have  quite  lost  what  interest  they  once  offered.  I  will 
mention  only  N.  Garin  (pseud,  of  N.  G.  Mikhaylovsky  (1852-1906) 
who  besides  many  mediocre  books  wrote  a  sort  of  autobiography 
consisting  of  three  parts — 7 etna’s  Childhood,  Schoolboys,  and 
Students.  In  addition  to  their  considerable  literary  merits  they 
are  a  first-rate  social  document.  It  is  the  story  of  a  typical 
intelligentsia  education  and  a  very  sad  story  it  is.  The  unhealthy 
atmosphere  seems  to  thicken  with  every  step  forward,  and  while 
the  first  book  is  on  the  whole  tolerably  cheerful,  Students  is 
a  depressing  picture  of  the  conditions  which  attended  the  growth 
of  Russian  intellectuals. 

Socially  speaking,  the  period  with  which  we  are  concerned  was 
one  when,  after  the  critical  Sturm  und  Drang  period  of  the  reign 
of  Alexander  II,  the  newly  constituted  social  class  of  the  intelli¬ 
gentsia  was  settling  down  to  fixed  and  apparently  lasting  forms  of 
life,  to  a  new  £  byt  ’.  The  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  was 
politically,  socially,  and  artistically  a  period  of  rest  and  of  stagna¬ 
tion.  In  the  historical  tradition  of  the  intelligentsia  the  period 
is  identified  with  the  decade  1880-1890  and  with  the  reign  of 
Alexander  III  (1881-1894),  and  goes  by  the  name  of  the  Eighties. 
The  first  years  of  Nicholas  IPs  reign  are  a  direct  continuation 
of  the  Eighties,  which  may  be  said  to  end  as  late  as  1904  with  the 
Japanese  War  and  the  first  violent  symptoms  of  the  Revolution. 
The  general  sense  of  stagnation  is  well  expressed  by  Rozanov 
when  he  tells  how  on  New  Year’s  Day  of  1901  he  and  his  friends 
expressed  the  hope  that  the  new  century  would  bring  events, 
any  events  as  long  as  there  was  a  change.  The  political  atmosphere 
of  the  average  man  of  the  intelligentsia  (as  distinct  from  the 


Chekhov  and  After 


85 


active  members  of  the  parties)  may  be  summed  up  in  Chekhov’s 
dream  that  ‘  perhaps  in  two  or  three  hundred  years  we  shall  have 
a  Constitution  This  period  is  the  age  of  Chekhov,  and  the 
dominant  mood  of  his  work  is  that  which  dominates  the  period. 
It  is  one  of  impotent  yearning  after  something  better,  like  the 
Three  Sisters’  yearning  after  Moscow.  It  is  known  in  Russia 
by  the  name  of  ‘  the  Chekhov  state  of  mind  ’ — c  Chekhovskoe 
nastroenie  ’.  When  one  realizes  that  for  the  Russian  reader 
Chekhov  is  so  indissolubly  associated  with  this  age  and  this  mood, 
it  will  be  easy  to  understand  why  some  Russians  find  it  difficult 
to  share  the  unbounded  admiration  for  him  of  certain  English 
critics,  like  Mr.  Middleton  Murry  or  Mr.  Gherardi.  Chekhov 
is  not  for  us  merely  a  great  artist  who  may  be  appraised  dis¬ 
passionately  and  not  found  wanting,  but  the  very  vivid  and  very 
adequate  expression  of  a  stage  of  the  past  we  have  no  grounds 
to  be  proud  of,  of  a  past  which  is  largely  responsible  for  the 
greatest  shame  of  Russian  history,  the  inglorious  bankruptcy  of 
the  middle  classes  (  =  intelligentsia )  in  1917.  For  all  that, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  greatness  of  Chekhov.  Without 
going  to  the  length  of  comparing  him  with  Shakespeare,  as  some 
English  critics  have  done,  without  putting  him  on  a  level  with 
Russia’s  greatest  writers — Pushkin,  Gogol,  Tolstoy,  and  Dostoev¬ 
sky — we  must  recognize  that  he  was  the  greatest  writer  of  his  age 
and  of  his  class.  Whatever  the  order  of  his  greatness,  he  was 
a  perfect  artist,  and  achieved  in  full  what  he  was  called  to  achieve. 
There  were  no  lost  possibilities  in  him  and  what  he  could  do  he 
did.  This  is  high  praise  and  one  which  cannot  always  be  assigned 
to  greater  men,  not  for  instance  to  Gogol  or  Dostoevsky.  Nor 
was  Chekhov  precisely  typical  of  his  age.  Being  a  great  artist, 
he  could  not  be  typical,  and  being  a  perfect  artist,  he  lacked  the 
chief  feature  of  his  contemporaries — ineffectiveness.  But,  being 
a  realist,  he  chose  his  age  for  his  subject  and  gave  it  permanent 
life  in  his  art. 


86 


The  Great  Novelists 


Anton  Pavlovich  Chekhov  was  born  in  Taganrog  (on  the  sea  of 
Azov)  in  i860.  His  father  had  been  a  serf,  but  had  risen  to  an 
independent  position  and  given  his  children  the  normal  middle- 
class  education  at  a  ‘  gymnasium  ’  (secondary  school).  From  the 
gymnasium  Chekhov  went  to  Moscow  University  to  study 
medicine,  and  in  1884  became  a  doctor.  But  he  practised  little 
and  very  early  made  literature  his  principal  occupation.  He 
began  writing  humorous  stories  for  the  press  as  early  as  1879. 
He  signed  them  Antosha  Chekhonte,  a  name  by  no  means  sugges¬ 
tive  of  any  literary  ambition.  The  readers  of  the  papers  soon 
began  to  single  him  out,  and  he  became  a  favourite  with  the 
general  public  before  he  had  published  his  first  book.  For  many 
years  Chekhov  was  a  readers’  writer  and  remained  unrecognized 
by  the  critics,  who  continued  sneering  at  him  till  late  in  the 
nineties.  Only  Suvorin,  the  proprietor  of  the  large  pro-Govern- 
ment  Novoe  V remya,  with  his  usual  sagacity,  singled  Chekhov  out 
and  helped  him  on  till  he  had  acquired  a  firm  footing  in  general 
opinion.  Chekhov’s  first  book  appeared  in  1886.  It  was  purely 
humorous,  and  so  was  the  one  that  followed  it.  But  when  read 
one  after  another,  his  humorous  stories  produce  an  impression 
of  gloom  rather  than  mirth,  so  uniformly  low  and  common  was 
the  provincial  middle-class  humanity  he  portrayed.  This  impres¬ 
sion  has  been  since  discerned  by  wise  writers,  but  Chekhov’s  first 
readers  do  not  seem  to  have  noticed  it,  and  they  read  him  merely 
for  the  fun  he  offered  them,  as  they  had  read  Saltykov  for  his  fun 
and  not  for  his  social  satire.  But  gradually  towards  1890  Chekhov’s 
manner  changed  and  became  that  which  we  know.  It  is  between 
1890  and  his  death  that  he  wrote  all  his  best  stories.  About  the 
same  date  he  began  writing  serious  drama.  In  1896  his  Seagull 
was  produced  and  hissed  off  the  stage.  He  was  for  a  time  dis¬ 
couraged.  But  in  1898  the  Moscow  Art  Theatre,  headed  by  the 
great  actor  and  producer  Stanislavsky,  took  up  the  play  and 
made  it  a  tremendous  success.  The  new  and  original  style  of 


CHEKHOV 


Chekhov  and  After 


87 


Chekhov’s  drama  combined  with  the  equally  new  and  original 
style  of  acting  to  produce  an  entirely  novel  effect.  The  theatre 
of  Chekhov-Stanislavsky  replaced  in  the  public  favour  the  theatre 
of  Ostrovsky,  The  Seagull  was  followed  by  Uncle  V anya  and 
The  Three  Sisters,  and  at  last  The  Cherry  Orchard.  The  first 
night  of  this  play  (January  1904)  was  the  crowning  success  of 
Chekhov’s  career. 

But  besides  a  disinterested  recognition  of  his  literary  greatness, 
Chekhov  received  another  and  more  debatable  homage  from  his 
class.  In  the  eyes  of  the  intelligentsia  he  was  included  with 
Tolstoy  and  Gorky  in  a  sort  of  trinity,  which  was  felt  to  be  the 
ideal  incarnation  of  progressive  and  independent  Russia  as  opposed 
to  the  forces  of  despotism. 

Chekhov’s  health  had  for  some  time  begun  to  fail  him.  His 
last  years  had  to  be  spent  between  the  south  coast  of  the  Crimea 
and  the  health  resorts  of  Germany.  He  died  in  1904  (June  17th) 
at  Badenweiler  in  South  Germany.  Those  who  knew  him  are 
unanimous  in  speaking  of  his  personal  charm.  He  was  good- 
looking,  well-bred,  gentle  and  modest.  His  attitude  towards 
people,  even  towards  people  of  the  stature  of  Tolstoy,  was  one 
of  sympathy  mixed  with  pity  and  humour,  of  contempt  tempered 

with  kindness. 

Chekhov  in  a  very  broad  sense  continues  the  tradition  of 
Turgenev,  but  he  is  no  imitator,  nor  even  in  any  strict  sense  of 
the  word  a  disciple.  He  has  in  common  with  Turgenev  the 
method  which  may  be  called  the  poetical  or  suggestive  method, 
as  opposed  to  the  analytical  method  of  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky. 
He  does  not  indulge  in  direct  descriptions  of  his  characters 
feelings,  but  by  appropriate  detail  tries  to  create  sympathetic 
emotions  in  the  reader.  Chekhov  is  a  singularly  even  writer. 
If  one  excepts  his  early  and  lighter  writings,  it  is  very  hard  to 
choose  between  his  stories:  they  are  all  on  the  same  level  of 
perfection.  Every  one  of  them  is  a  perfect  bit  of  work,  which 


88 


The  Great  Novelists 


holds  together  from  beginning  to  end,  and  which  can  neither  be 
added  to,  nor  taken  away  from.  He  is  the  supreme  artist  of 
Russian  fiction,  the  creator  of  the  most  perfectly  made  objects. 
In  this  respect  he  is  superior  to  Turgenev,  who  possessed  this 
sense  of  proportion  and  wholeness  in  an  inferior  degree,  and 
whose  stories  do  not  produce  that  impression  of  everything 
necessary  and  nothing  superfluous  which  is  the  essence  of  Chekhov’s 
art.  On  the  other  hand,  Turgenev’s  Russian  is  superior  to  Chek¬ 
hov’s.  Chekhov  lived  in  a  time  when  the  spoken  language  was 
losing  its  organic  raciness,  and  his  is  consequently  more  level  and 
less  rich.  This  makes  Chekhov  the  least  difficult  of  Russian 
writers  to  translate.  But  Chekhov  had  not  the  easy  mellifluousness 
of  Turgenev,  which  at  its  best  produced  Bezhin  Meadow  and 
The  Singers,  but  at  its  worst  degenerated  into  the  insipid  poetical¬ 
ness  of  On  the  Eve. 

Unlike  most  of  the  great  Russian  writers,  Chekhov  is  not  a  creator 
of  characters.  None  of  his  people  is  alive  with  the  independent 
and  three-dimensional  life  of  Bazarov,  of  Anna  Karenina,  of 
Stavrogin,  or  even  of  the  men  and  women  of  Goncharov  and 
Ostrovsky.  Chekhov’s  is  a  more  general  and  less  individualized 
humanity.  He  deals  in  that  which  is  common  to  people,  not  in 
that  which  is  peculiar  to  them.  All  his  characters  may  really  be 
reduced  to  two  types  :  the  gentle  and  ineffective  dreamer,  and 
the  vulgar  and  efficient  man  of  action.  There  are  infinite  grada¬ 
tions  in  these ;  but  the  ineffective  people,  if  sometimes  funny,  are 
invariably  lovable,  and  the  efficient  people  are  vulgar.  Nowhere 
is  this  contrast  more  marked  than  in  The  Cherry  Orchard,  between 
the  old  proprietors  and  the  nouveau  riche  Lopakhin,  who  has  all 
the  virtues,  but  is  successful,  and  for  that  reason  alone  detestable. 
For  every  foolishness  and  every  absurdity  Chekhov  has  an  immense 
treasure  of  sympathetic  pity  and  understanding,  but  not  for 
success.  This  dread  of  success  again  links  him  to  Turgenev. 
But  he  outdoes  Turgenev  in  the  cult  of  inefficiency.  He  hated 


Chekhov  and  After 


89 


the  man  who  deserves  success  quite  as  much  as  the  man  who 
commands  it  undeservingly.  Inefficiency  is  for  him  the  cardinal 
virtue,  and  defeat  the  only  halo.  This  attitude  has  been  believed 
by  some  to  be  essentially  Russian,  but  in  its  extreme  expression 
it  is  certainly  quite  personal  to  Chekhov.  The  tendency  of 
English  literature  has  been  the  other  way,  but  latterly,  and 
parallel  with  the  great  vogue  of  Chekhov,  the  cult  of  Inefficiency 
and  the  hate  of  Vulgar  Success  has  spread  in  this  country.  There 
is  nothing  more  Chekhovian,  outside  Chekhov,  than  Mr.  Lytton 
Strachey’s  life  of  Cardinal  Manning,  with  the  pointed  contrast 
between  the  active  and  obviously  detestable  Archbishop  of 
Westminster  and  the  gentle  dreamer  Newman. 

The  cult  of  inefficiency  goes  far  to  explain  the  general  atmo¬ 
sphere  of  pity  for  impotent,  ridiculous,  but  lovable  mankind 
which  pervades  the  whole  of  Chekhov’s  work.  For  he  is  a  poet 
of  atmosphere,  of  the  vague  thing  they  called  in  Russian  nastroenie 
and  in  German  Stimmung,  but  for  which  there  is  no  adequate 
word  in  English,  except  this  meteorological  metaphor.  But 
Chekhov’s  art  is  by  no  means  confined  to  atmosphere.  On  the 
contrary  he  is  one  of  the  most  constructive  writers  of  Russian 
prose.  His  stories  are  stories  of  situation,  to  which  the  characters 
play  an  entirely  subordinate  part.  In  this  he  has  hardly  any 
predecessor  in  Russian  literature,  except  perhaps  Lermontov, 
whose  Taman  Chekhov  thought  the  best  short  story  in  the 
language.  The  situations  of  his  stories  are  not  dramatic,  but 
subtly  psychological.  They  are  stated  not  in  terms  of  character, 
but  in  terms  of  humanity.  And  the  means  of  expression  is  not 
analysis,  but  suggestion.  Chekhov  found  numerous  disciples, 
but  none  of  any  worth  in  Russia  ;  England  will  again  probably 
have  the  distinction  of  following  his  example  with  greatest  profit. 
The  late  Katherine  Mansfield  was  probably  the  most  faithful  and 
at  the  same  time  the  most  original  of  his  disciples. 

All  Chekhov’s  mature  work  is  so  uniformly  excellent  that  it 


go 


The  Great  Novelists 


is  difficult  to  single  out  any  one  of  his  stories  for  special  praise. 
Most  of  them  deal  with  the  life  of  the  middle  class,  of  the  intelli¬ 
gentsia,  and  of  the  decaying  provincial  gentry.  But  others  have 
for  their  subject  the  life  of  the  lower  classes.  'The  Peasants,  with 
its  realistic  gloom  and  melancholy  poetry,  is  second  to  none.  The 
quintessence  of  Chekhov’s  pessimism  is  concentrated  in  WardN  6, 
a  dreary  vision  of  an  unbeautiful  and  unsympathetic  humanity 
and  of  a  gentle  ineffective  dreamer,  who  finds  at  last  a  sympathizing 
soul  in  a  lunatic  asylum.  Just  as  Tolstoy’s  Ivan  Ilyich  produced 
a  whole  sequence  of  stories  of  Death,  Ward  N  6  gave  rise  to 
a  series  of  stories  of  lunacy  in  the  age  when  Andreev  dominated 
the  book-market.  But  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  venture  an  opinion 
as  to  the  greatest  of  Chekhov’s  stories,  it  would  be  My  Life,  which 
is  something  more  than  his  other  stories ;  its  sweep  and  range 
are  wider  ;  it  is  like  the  ultimate  poetical  synthesis  of  his  intuition. 
This  life  of  Chekhov’s  favourite  and  only  hero,  the  delicate  and 
gentle  man  haloed  by  continuous  and  socially  justified  defeat, 
is  his  Odyssey  or  his  Purgatorio,  a  true  poem  of  immense  sym¬ 
bolical  pregnancy. 

The  history  of  Chekhov’s  plays  repeats  the  broad  outline  of  his 
tales.  There  are  the  early  light  comedies  comparable  to  the 
early  humorous  stories,  and  there  are  the  wonderful  dramas 
written  after  1895.  But  here  there  is  a  more  distinct  line  of 
progress.  The  first  of  his  long  plays,  Ivanov  (1887),  is  a  failure ;  the 
Seagull  and  Uncle  Vania  each  mark  stages  forward;  in  The  Three 
Sisters  and  in  The  Cherry  Orchard  he  attains  the  perfection  of  the 
genre.  This  last  play,  written  the  year  of  his  death,  has  been 
proclaimed  by  an  English  critic  the  greatest  play  since  Shakespeare. 
However  this  may  be,  Chekhov  created  a  new  kind  of  drama,  and 
in  this  new  kind  of  drama  produced  masterpieces  which  are  not 
likely  to  be  surpassed.  Chekhov  inherited  the  tradition  of  the 
Russian  stage  of  Ostrovsky  and  still  more  of  Turgenev  ( A  Month 


9i 


Chekhov  and  After 

in  the  Country)  in  deliberately  eliminating  that  element  which 
was  thought  to  be  essential  to  the  drama,  the  element  of  plot,  and 
in  removing  from  his  plays  all  theatrical  effect.  Only  he  went 
much  further  in  this  direction.  He  made  his  theatre  as  un¬ 
theatrical  as  possible.  On  the  face  of  it,  his  plays  were  to  prove 
a  failure  on  the  stage.  And  so  they  did  until  they  found  an 
adequate  cast  to  produce  them.  Stanislavsky’s  production  of 
'The  Seagull  was  a  great  date  in  the  history  of  the  theatre — 
undramatic  drama  was  given  the  freedom  of  the  stage.  Chekhov’s 
plays  are  not  progressively  developed  plots,  but  ‘  slices  of  life  ’ 
arranged  and  set  together  with  a  poetical,  rather  than  with 
a  dramatic,  purpose.  What  has  been  said  of  his  tales  applies  fully 
to  his  plays.  The  effect  is  attained  by  absolute  and  suggestive 
reality.  The  construction  is  not  narrative  but  subtly  psycho¬ 
logical,  or,  if  the  metaphor  be  allowed,  musical.  They  are  calcu¬ 
lated  to  arouse  certain  sympathetic  £  nastroenies  ’,  a  certain 
lyrical  atmosphere,  and  in  bringing  about  this  effect  Chekhov 
shows  a  sovereign  mastery  over  his  material.  In  the  contrast 
between  the  trivial  and  sordid  material  he  works  in  and  the 
intensely  poetical  or  musical  effect  derived  from  it  lies  the  great 
charm  and  originality  of  Chekhov.  Like  his  tales,  his  last  plays 
are  perfect,  with  all  that  is  necessary  and  nothing  superfluous  in 
them,  instruments  of  marvellously  calculated  precision.  But  to 
imitate  his  dramatic  system  or  even  to  learn  from  him  is  obviously 
impossible.  Those  who,  like  Gorky  and  Andreev,  have  tried  to 
do  so,  have  failed  piteously,  and  Russian  dramatic  literature  after 
Chekhov’s  death  is  one  unrelieved  desert. 

The  work  of  Chekhov  marks  the  crest  of  a  second  wave  in  the 
history  of  Russian  Realism.  But  it  is  a  lesser  wave  than  the  one 
that  carried  Turgenev,  Tolstoy,  and  Dostoevsky.  The  age  of 
Chekhov  is  an  Age  of  Silver.  Of  its  writers  Chekhov  alone  may 
be  compared  to  the  elder  ones.  Still  he  was  not  quite  alone. 


92 


The  Great  Novelists 


There  was  some  undergrowth  around  him,  and  it  seemed  for 
a  moment  that  it  would  grow  to  overshadow  him.  A  group  of 
writers  born  about  1870  came  into  prominence  in  the  last  years 
of  the  century  and  the  first  years  of  the  new  one.  They  were 
realists  and  looked  up  to  Chekhov  as  to  a  patriarch,  but  hardly 
as  to  a  master.  About  1900  there  was  an  impression  abroad  that 
we  were  in  for  a  new  Golden  Age  of  Realisitic  Prose.  But  it 
turned  out  to  be  a  false  dawn.  Chekhov  died,  and  the  movement 
almost  suddenly  lost  its  vitality — and  its  hold  on  the  public. 
It  gave  way  before  the  vigorous  onslaught  of  a  new  movement. 
The  writers  who  had  seemed  the  swallows  of  a  doubtful  spring 
were  found  to  be  the  £  moping  owls  ’  of  an  irrevocable  past. 

The  most  remarkable  writer  of  this  group  is  Gorky.  The  others 
are  Bunin,  Kuprin,  and  Andreev,  whose  work  is  the  decline  and 
fall  of  Realism  laid  bare. 

Maxin  Gorky 1  (whose  real  name  is  Alexey  Maksimovich 
Peshkov)  was  born  in  1869  in  Astrakhan.  He  lost  his  father  very 
early  and  was  brought  by  his  mother  to  Nizhni-Novgorod,  where 
he  was  placed  with  his  maternal  grandfather,  who  was  a  dyer. 
In  Childhood  he  has  left  us  unforgettable  portraits  of  the  hard, 
close  old  man,  and  of  his  charming  and  poetical  grandmother. 
The  boy  received  no  regular  education,  but  learnt  to  read  early. 
He  was  apprenticed  to  various  artisans,  was  for  some  time  pantry 
boy  on  a  Volga  steamer,  and  later  on  for  several  years  led  the  life 
of  a  wandering  journeyman.  Between  times  he  came  into  touch 
with  a  higher  civilization.  His  first  master  was  the  drunken, 
but  intelligent  cook  of  the  steamer  where  he  was  pantry-boy. 
The  one  who  did  most  to  complete  his  education  was  a  Mr.  Lanin, 
an  attorney  of  Nizhni,  in  whose  office  Gorky  was  clerk. 

In  1892  Gorky  published  his  first  story  in  a  provincial  news¬ 
paper,  and  a  few  years  later  was  introduced  by  Korolenko  to  the 
1  In  strict  transliteration— Gor’kiy. 


GORKY 


Chekhov  and  After 


93 


‘  big  literary  press  In  1898  his  stories  appeared  in  book  form,  and 
had  an  instant  and  enormous  success.  More  than  100,000  copies 
of  the  book  were  sold  in  the  first  year,  and  his  fame  immediately 
spread  abroad.  He  was  hailed  as  the  harbinger  of  a  new  era  in 
literature.  What  most  attracted  his  Russian  readers  was  the 
bright  and  bracing  atmosphere  of  his  early  stories,  which  seemed 
to  be  written  in  the  major  key,  and  offered  a  strong  contrast  to 
the  consistent  minor  key  of  Chekhov’s.  The  foreign  reader  was 
most  struck  by  the  subject-matter,  the  wonderful  free  and  lawless 
life  of  the  Romantic  Russian  tramps  he  depicted. 

The  charm  of  these  early  stories  of  Gorky’s  has  greatly  faded, 
and  Gorky  himself  has  spoken  of  them  with  contempt.  No 
one  now  will  maintain  that  he  initiated  a  new  era  in  Russian 
literature.  On  the  contrary,  the  place  assigned  to  him  in  history 
on  the  strength  of  his  later  work  will  be  that  of  the  last  of  a  great 
declining  tradition.  These  early  stories  are  immature  and  tawdry. 
Their  poetry  is  cheap,  and  their  landscape,  though  fresh  and 
breezy,  is  not  really  strongly  original.  The  message  of  these 
early  stories  was  summed  up  by  Gorky  himself  in  formulas  such 
as  £  We  sing  praise  to  the  folly  of  the  brave  ’,  and  in  contrasts 
such  as  that  between  the  snake  and  the  falcon.  Their  spirit  is 
romantic.  They  prefer  a  noble  lie  to  the  uninspiring  truth. 

Gorky  in  these  years  had  a  decided  leaning  towards  poetry.  He 
wrote  verse,  but  his  highest  poetic  achievement  as  well  as  the 
best  written  of  his  early  stories  is  Twenty-six  Men  and  a  Girl, 
a  little  masterpiece  of  powerful  poetry  made  out  of  vile  reality. 
There  is,  however,  more  promise  of  the  real  Gorky  in  Foma  Gor- 
deyev,  the  life  story  of  a  young  merchant  of  Saratov.  It  is  chaotic 
and  formless,  but  displays  a  great  power  of  detailed  and  sagacious 
observation. 

The  example  of  Chekhov  led  Gorky  to  try  the  drama,  and 
between  1901-1906  he  devoted  himself  to  it  almost  exclusively. 


94 


The  Great  Novelists 


His  plays  are  all  very  bad  and  most  of  them  attracted  little  atten¬ 
tion.  But  The  Lower  Depths  had  an  enormous  success.  This 
success  was  due  in  Russia  to  the  masterly  acting  of  Stanislavsky’s 
company,  in  the  -West  to  the  sensational  character  of  the  milieu 
portrayed,  a  world  of  philosophical  thieves  and  prostitutes,  whose 
philosophy  appealed  powerfully  to  the  jaded  taste  of  Europe. 
For  all  that  it  is  a  very  bad  play  with  hardly  any  redeeming 
features.  The  others  are,  if  possible,  worse,  following  Chekhov 
in  the  absence  of  conventional  action  without  any  of  his  dramatic 
or  rather  undramatic  skill.  Gorky  had  meanwhile  joined  the 
Social  Democratic  party,  and  owing  to  his  great  name  abroad 
became  a  prominent  figure  in  politics.  During  the  Revolutionary 
days  of  1905  he  was  editor  of  a  Social-Democratic  paper  and  took 
an  active  part  in  organizing  the  December  rising  in  Moscow. 
After  the  collapse  of  the  Revolution  he  left  Russia.  He  settled 
at  Capri,  where  he  became  immensely  popular  with  the  natives. 
He  continued  writing,  but  his  popularity  began  to  wane.  His 
new  novels  long  novels  with  a  social  purpose,  often  clever,  but 
always  immensely  tedious— met  with  little  success.  Critics  began 
to  speak  of  him  as  of  a  dead  writer.  Still  his  popularity  was  great, 
especially  outside  Russia,  and  among  the  semi-educated  classes  at 
home.  Before  the  war  Gorky  returned  to  Russia  and  started 
a  monthly  magazine.  In  1913-1915  he  published  his  first  auto¬ 
biographical  books.  These  books  at  length  give  the  full  measure 
of  his  talent.  They  are  infinitely  better  than  all  he  had  written 
before.  But  he  had  already  become  a  writer  of  the  past,  and 
though  his  new  books  revived  his  reputation  in  literary  circles, 
his  work  had  lost  all  actuality.  This  is  emphasized  by  their 
letrospective  character.  They  may  become  (they  have  to  a  certain 
extent  become)  classics,  but  they  have  missed  the  youth  of 
immediate  success. 

When  the  great  Revolution  came  in  1917  Gorky  sided  with 
the  Bolsheviks.  He  did  not  do  it  wholeheartedly.  He  assumed 


95 


Chekhov  and  After 

a  position  of  superior  irresponsibility,  condemned  the  Bolsheviks 
for  their  violence,  but  gave  them  substantial  support  in  his 
writings.  This  position  of  irresponsible  independence  did  not 
win  him  any  admirers,  but  it  had  an  aspect  for  which  Gorky  must 
be  gratefully  remembered  by  all  friends  of  Russian  civilization. 
He  took  on  himself  the  part  of  Champion  of  Civilization,  and 
played  it  in  the  worst  years  of  1918-1920  fairly  well.  It  is  due 
to  him  that  the  fate  of  Russian  writers,  artists,  and  scholars 
during  these  years  was  not  worse.  Gorky  is  a  fanatical  believer  in 
Western  civilization,  in  enlightenment,  and  science.  He  has  of 
late  expressed  his  great  contempt  and  detestation  of  the  Russian 
peasantry,  for  their  cruelty,  superstition,  and  denseness.  But 
he  believes  in  the  urban  classes,  the  workmen,  and  the  intellectuals. 
In  1922  he  left  Russia  and  lives  at  present  in  Germany,  near 
Berlin.  His  claim  to  a  high  place  in  Russian  literature  rests 
entirely  on  the  work  of  his  last  twelve  years.  This  includes 
a  biographical  trilogy,  Childhood ,  In  the  World  (these  two  published 
before  the  Revolution),  and  My  Universities  (1923).  Apart  from 
these  stand  Reminiscences  of  Tolstoy  and  Fragments  from  a  Diary. 
In  all  these  works  Gorky  proves  himself  an  excellent  realist, 
a  powerful  and  penetrating  observer,  and  a  ruthless  portrayer  of 
truth  as  he  sees  it.  What  is  most  remarkable  in  Childhood  and 
In  the  World  is  the  intense  vividness  of  his  vision.  His  people 
live  in  the  imagination  as  figures,  rather  than  as  characters.  They 
are  bathed  in  a  cold  hard  light  which  is  not  sympathetic,  but 
intensely  clear.  Altogether  the  two  books  rank  among  the  best 
Russian  autobiographies.  His  recollections  of  Tolstoy  are  perhaps 
still  more  wonderful,  for  here  his  keen  and  penetrating  intellect 
has  an  object  worthy  of  it.  The  portrait  he  draws  of  the  great 
man  is  more  convincing  and  satisfactory  than  any  other  portrait 
ever  attempted.  The  same  qualities  appear  in  his  recollections 
of  Leonid  Andreev.  His  last  book,  Fragments  from  a  Diary ,  is  on 
the  same  high  level.  It  is  a  book  of  Russian  eccentrics,  his  tribute 


96 


The  Great  Novelists 


to  the  country  where,  he  says,  ‘  even  fools  are  original  The  only 
thing  one  catches  no  glimpse  of  in  all  these  autobiographical 
books  is  the  personality  of  Gorky  himself — the  man  seems  to 
have  nothing  but  a  pair  of  wonderfully  observant,  keen,  and 
penetrating  eyes.  They  cast  a  cold  and  clear  light  on  all  external 
things,  but  tell  you  nothing  of  what  is  behind  them. 

Of  the  contemporaries  of  Gorky  the  least  pretentious  and  the 
most  ‘  nineteenth  century  ’  is  Alexander  Ivanovich  Kuprin 
(b.  1870).  He  served  in  the  army  and  first  made  himself  known 
by  stories  of  army  life.  In  1905  during  the  Japanese  War  he 
published  The  Duel,  a  novel  of  garrison  life.  The  picture  it  gave 
of  the  Russian  officer  was  exceedingly  dark.  It  is  the  last  of  a  long 
line  of  social  problem  novels  and  it  is  decidedly  ‘  tendentious  ’. 
Its  merits,  apart  from  its  ‘  social  importance  ’,  are  by  no  means 
striking.  But  some  of  Kuprin’s  later  work  displayed  a  quality 
rare  in  Russian  novelists — he  can  tell  a  story.  Good  examples 
of  his  best  manner  are  Lieutenant-Captain  Rybnikov,  the  story  of 
a  Japanese  spy  in  Russia,  and  The  Bracelet  of  Garnets,  a  romantic 
story  of  the  hopeless  love  of  a  poor  clerk  for  an  aristocratic  lady. 
But  his  good  stories  are  few.  He  lacks  style  and  taste.  The  work 
which  brought  him  most  success  both  in  Russia  and  recently  in 
France,  Tama,  is  scarcely  literature.  It  is  a  sensational,  senti¬ 
mental,  and  vulgarly  photographical  novel  of  the  life  of  prostitutes. 

A  far  greater  artist  is  Ivan  Alexeevich  Bunin  (b.  1870). 
Lacking  Kuprin’s  narrative  gift,  he  has  carried  to  the  extreme 
the  Russian  tendency  towards  what  Miss  Harrison  calls  ‘  the  im- 
perfective  ’  style.  Most  of  his  stories  have  no  movement  at  all. 

Bunin  belongs  to  the  tradition  of  Turgenev  and  Chekhov — 
his  art  is  fundamentally  poetical.  But  he  has  not  Chekhov’s  deep 
humanity.  He  is  an  artist  of  words,  and  is  the  only  living  writer 
who  writes  a  Russian  that  would  have  satisfied  the  standards  of 
Turgenev  or  Goncharov.  He  is  cold  and  reserved — a  true  Par¬ 
nassian  possessing  in  a  supreme  degree  both  the  Parnassian  virtues 


Chekhov  and  After 


97 


of  impeccability  and  impassiveness.  It  is  easy  to  guess  from  his 
prose  that  he  is  also  a  writer  of  verse,  but  his  verse  is  rather  of 
the  nature  of  an  exercise,  intended  to  keep  his  style  in  good  shape. 
The  Central  Russian  country-side  is  the  background  of  most  of 
his  stories.  The  most  considerable  of  these  is  The  Village  (1910), 
which  Gorky  has  declared  to  be  the  best  thing  ever  written  about 
the  Russian  peasant.  It  is  very  gloomy  and  seems  to  be  intended 
as  an  illustration  to  Gorky’s  recent  invective  against  the  peasant. 
But  there  is  also  in  Bunin  an  exotic  strain.  He  loves  the  south, 
and  his  greatest — his  only  really  great  story — has  Naples  and  Capri 
for  its  background.  This  is  The  Gentleman  from  San  Francisco , 
the  grim  story  of  a  rich  American  coming  to  Capri  only  to  die 
there  on  the  day  of  his  arrival.  It  is  one  of  the  most  powerful 
variations  on  the  eternal  theme  of  the  power  of  Death  and  the 
vanity  of  human  life. 

The  only  writer  of  the  generation  to  rival  the  popularity  of 
Gorky  was  Leonid  Nikolaevich  Andreyev.  Born  in  Orel  in 
1871,  he  came  of  a  family  of  provincial  ‘  intelligents  ’.  He 
studied  at  the  University  of  Moscow  and  became  a  lawyer, 
but  did  not  practise.  Though  sociable  and  even  gay  in  company, 
Andreyev  from  his  early  years  had  no  genuine  interest  in  life.  The 
presence  of  the  dark  realities  of  death  and  chaos,  and  the  inanity 
of  all  the  works  and  conventions  of  man  were  the  groundwork  of 
his  attitude  to  the  world.  As  a  student  he  attempted  suicide. 
Later  on,  his  happy  marriage  with  his  first  wife  (who  died  in  1906) 
and  his  popularity  were  like  a  veil  cast  over  the  dark  abysses  of  his 
soul,  but  on  the  whole  the  joyless  philosophy  of  his  writings  was 
based  on  his  genuine  intuition  of  life. 

He  began  writing  as  a  student.  In  1898  his  stories,  sentimental 
and  conventional,  but  fresh,  began  to  attract  the  attention  of 
critics  and  fellow-writers,  one  of  whom  was  Gorky.  In  1902  he 
acquired  a  scandalous  celebrity  by  two  stories,  The  Abyss  and 
In  the  Fog,  which  produced  a  sensation  by  their  crude  and  auda- 

G 


2535-5 7 


g8 


The  Great  Novelists 


cious  treatment  of  sexual  facts.  In  spite  of  the  scandal  it  produced, 
In  the  Fog  remains  one  of  his  masterpieces.  In  this  and  in  several 
other  stories  written  between  1900-1906  he  is  at  his  best  :  he  is 
an  intelligent  and  creative  disciple  of  Tolstoy’s  problem-stories, 
of  Ivan  Ilyich  and  The  Kreuzer  Sonata.  The  spirit  of  Ivan  Ilyich 
is  especially  present  in  The  Governor  (1906),  the  story  of  a  pro¬ 
vincial  administrator  condemned  to  death  by  the  Terrorists  and 
awaiting  his  assassination.  Unfortunately  Andreyev  did  not  follow 
the  excellent  example  he  gave  in  these  stories,  and  long  before  he 
wrote  The  Governor  developed  a  very  different,  ‘modernist’,  and 
rhetorical  style,  for  which  Edgar  A.  Poe,  Maeterlinck,  and  the  Pole 
Przybyszewskiarelargelyresponsible.  It  is  a  collection  of  rhetorical 
cliches.  Intense  black  and  glaring  red  are  his  only  colours,  and  there 
is  a  complete  absence  of  finer  shades.  His  lack  of  taste,  of  culture, 
and  of  craftsmanship  prevented  him  from  achieving  with  it  any¬ 
thing  but  crude  ‘  poster  ’  effects.  Most  of  the  numerous  problem 
stories  he  wrote  between  1901  and  his  death  are  in  this  unhappy 
style.  Some  of  them,  however,  are  interesting  and  attractive  for 
the  somewhat  sensational  and  theatrical  courage  with  which  he 
solves  the  great  problems  of  life  and  death  in  the  spirit  of  pure 
Nihilism.  Thought  (1902),  and  Darkness  (1908),  with  its  problem 
of  the  ‘  right  to  be  good  ’  when  others  are  bad,  are  among  the 
best.  Somewhat  apart  from  the  rest  of  his  work  is  The  Seven  that 
were  hanged  (1908),  where  he  once  more  returns  to  a  sober, 

‘  Tolstoyan  ’  manner,  and  which  is  rather  a  tribute  to  the  heroical 
virtues  of  the  Russian  Terrorists,  than  an  indictment  of  capital 
punishment. 

His  plays,  which  are  worse  than  his  stories,  are  of  two  kinds. 
They  are  either  in  a  very  debased  ‘  Chekhov  ’  style,  or  in  the 
crudely  sensational  ‘  symbolical  ’  manner  of  his  later  stories. 
The  most  typical  of  these  and  perhaps  the  most  typical  of  all  his 
writings  is  The  Life  of  Man  (1907),  a  mystery  written  in  a  studiedly 
abstract  and  generalized  tone.  Its  constant,  and  evidently  sincere, 


Chekhov  and  After 


99 


though  very  stagey  pessimism,  enhanced  by  the  colourless  mono¬ 
tony  of  its  dialogue  (or  rather  monologue),  does  produce  a  certain 
cumulative  effect,  which  however  is  hardly  of  an  artistic  nature. 

In  his  later  plays  he  displayed  a  greater  love  of  melodrama,  which 
in  combination  with  the  conventional,  marionette  nature  of  his 
character,  makes  some  of  these  plays  excellent  material  for  the 
cinema.  A  typical  example  of  this  last  development  is  He  who  gets 
slapped,  which  has  actually  been  made  into  a  ‘  movie  ’  play  in 
America. 

In  1914  Andreyev  was  deeply  affected  by  the  outbreak  of  the 
Great  W ar.  He  gave  himself  away  to  Patriotism  and  anti-Prussian 
feeling,  and  all  he  wrote  after  that  date  is  anti-German,  after  1917 
anti-Bolshevik,  propaganda.  As  literature  all  these  writings  are 
very  poor,  and  display  all  his  defects  without  any  of  his  merits. 
He  died  in  1919.  His  fame  has  faded.  As  literature  most  of  his 
work  is  dead,  but  it  will  remain  for  ever  as  an  historical  and 
psychological  document  of  great  value. 

Andreyev’s  popularity  was  greatest  in  and  about  the  year  1907. 
About  the  same  time  other  writers  appeared,  whose  message  was 
the  same  as  his — Death  and  Void — and  who  may  be  bracketed  as 
the  pessimistic  school.  The  most  well  known  of  these  was  Michael 
Artsybashev  (b.  1878),  who  about  1907  was  Andreyev’s  principal 
rival  in  the  popular  favour.  Artsybashev  is  well  known  to  the 
English  intelligentsia  by  his  notorious  Sanin,  a  novel  on  the 
‘  sexual  problem  ’.  In  so  far  as  it  is  not  mere  sensationalism  it  is 
a  bad  imitation  of  those  pages  of  Tolstoy’s  where  he  tries  to 
discredit  the  civilized  and  reveal  the  ‘  natural  ’  man.  Artsy¬ 
bashev’s  other  stories,  like  for  instance  Breaking-Point — a  new 
treatment  of  the  great  theme  of  death — are  comparable  to 
Andreyev’s ;  perhaps  just  a  little  less  pretentious  and  crude,  but 
also  less  sincere. 

Less  famous  at  first  than  Artsybashev,  but  intrinsically  much 
more  interesting,  is  Sergey  Nikolaevich  Sergeyev-Tsensky  (b.  1876). 

G  2 


100 


The  Great  Novelists 


Unlike  the  other  writers  of  the  ‘  pessimistic  ’  school  he  is  a  remark¬ 
able  craftsman,  and  the  style  of  his  early  work,  though  often 
excessively  ornate,  is  always  vigorous  and  fresh.  Above  all  he 
excels  in  the  art  of  making  his  characters  speak.  Of  his  early 
stories  the  best  is  Movements  (1910),  like  so  many  Russian  novels 
the  history  of  the  undoing  of  a  life.  The  exuberant  vitality  of  the 
self-made  man,  who  is  the  hero,  in  the  first  chapters,  gradually 
sinks  to  the  resignation  that  comes  before  death,  and  the  story 
ends  in  the  spirit  of  Ivan  Ilyich.  In  his  later  work  Sergeyev- 
Tsensky  has  abandoned  his  exuberant  early  manner  and  developed 
an  admirably  sober  and  restrained  manner.  He  has  recently 
(1923)  published  the  first  part  of  a  long  novel  which  is  to  picture 
the  Transfiguration  of  the  Russian  intelligentsia  during  the  War 
and  the  Revolution,  and  which  promises  to  be  one  of  the  most 
significant  works  of  modern  Russian  literature. 


THE  NEW  AGE 


In  the  work  of  Andreyev  and  liis  associates  the  great  Realistic 
tradition  had  come  to  an  end.  But  a  new  movement,  which 
had  gradually  and  imperceptibly  grown  up  within  the  last  decade, 
was  there  to  replace  it.  The  new  movement  rejected  the  tradition 
ot  yesterday  and  sought  at  first  for  guidance  abroad  ;  but  it  soon 
realized  its  connexion  with  older  native  traditions,  hitherto 
neglected.  In  its  first  stages  it  canonized  Dostoevsky,  Tyutchev, 
Fet,  Baratynsky,  later  on  Leskov,  Leontiev,  and  Grigoriev  ;  it  gave 
fresh  life  to  the  withered  cult  of  Pushkin  and  of  Gogol,  and  con¬ 
tributed  to  the  general  revival  of  pre-Realistic  Russian  literature, 
a  revival  which  is  still  in  full  swing. 

Though  it  is  evident  that  it  was  a  single,  if  very  complex, 
movement  that  changed  the  face  of  Russian  literature  between 
1894  and  1907,  it  is  difficult  to  define  it  in  a  few  words.  It  may  be 
best  of  all  defined  negatively  as  a  revolt  against  orthodox  ‘  intelli- 
gentsiaism  This  orthodox  intelligentsiaism  expressed  itself  in 
the  rationalistic,  social  idealism  of  the  Populists,1  and  in  the 
absolute  sway  of  realism  in  fiction.  The  new  movement  was  at 
first  strongly  anti-political  and  individualistic.  It  was  also 
aesthetic.  Its  aestheticism  was  romantic  rather  than  classic,  and 
valued  originality  above  perfection.  The  first  symptom  of  the 
new  age  was  a  violent  assertion  of  individualism  supported  by 
a  cult  of  Nietzsche.  Another  symptom  was  the  gradual  reversal 
of  the  respective  positions  of  prose  and  verse,  of  matter  and 
manner.  The  new  age  became  an  age  of  poetry,  and  found  its 
highest  expression  in  the  great  poets  of  the  twentieth  century, 
but  it  first  found  expression  in  a  series  of  notable  writers,  who 
for  want  of  a  better  word  may  be  called  religious  philosophers. 
The  first  of  these  to  win  public  attention  was  Dmitri  Sergeevich 

1  See  p.  76. 


102 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


Merezhkovsky  (b.  1865),  a  remarkably  versatile  writer,  who  had 
begun  as  a  ‘  civic  ’  poet  in  the  days  of  Nadson.  In  the  nineties 
he  headed  the  new  movement,  then  above  all  things  anti-civic, 
and  preached  a  new  Nietzschean  Paganism.  Then  he  reverted 
to  a  kind  of  Slavophil  Orthodoxy  which  became  about  1905 
Revolutionary  Mysticism,  in  the  mask  of  a  ‘  Christianity  of  the 
Third  Testament  Such  it  has  remained  since,  though  the 
Revolutionary  element  has  been  greatly  abated  by  a  strong 
disapproval  of  Bolshevism.  Equally  versatile  is  Merezhkovsky 
in  the  form  of  his  writings :  he  has  written  creditable  verse,  good 
novels,  excellent  (and  less  excellent)  criticism,  bad  plays,  political, 
mystical,  and  metaphysical  essays.  In  the  nineties  and  in  the 
early  years  of  the  new  century  he  was  first  of  all  the  champion  of 
Culture,  the  effective  reviver  of  universal  artistic  and  religious 
values,  of  antiquity  and  the  Renaissance.  Between  1894  and  1902 
he  was  the  mouthpiece  of  European  culture  in  Russia,  something 
like  a  Russian  Matthew  Arnold.  His  novels  The  Death  of  the 
Gods  (Julian  the  Apostate)  and  The  Forerunner  (Leonardo  da 
Vinci),  though  entirely  lacking  in  creative  force,  were  good 
civilizing  work.  Still  better  is  his  book  on  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky 
(1901-1902),  which  marks  the  summit  of  his  achievement.  It  is 
not  a  creative  or  original  book,  but  it  is  very  clever.  It  typifies 
in  the  best  manner  the  attitude  of  the  cultured  reader  of  his 
generation  towards  these  two  great  men.  It  is  his  best  book  by 
far,  and  one  of  the  best  works  of  criticism  in  the  language.  All 
he  wrote  afterwards,  including  his  novels  Alexander  I  and  the 
14  December,  is  more  or  less  worthless.  He  became  a  victim  to 
a  self-made  system  of  rhetorical  antithesis  which  he  developed 
in  book  after  book  with  depressing  monotony  and  hysterical 
volubility.  A  more  pleasing  writer  than  Merezhkovsky  himself 
is  his  wife,  who  writes  under  her  maiden  name  of  Zinaida  Hippius 
(b.  1867).  Her  novels  and  stories  are  not  worth  much,  but  she 
was  the  most  brilliant  journalist  and  polemist  of  the  new  school. 


The  New  Age 


103 


Her  criticism  is  intensely  subjective  and  more  often  than  not  very 
unkind.  But  her  principal  achievement  is  her  poetry — the  most 
personal  and  intellectual  poetry  of  the  age.  Her  best  poems  are 
quaint  little  myths — variations  on  the  Dostoevskian  theme  of 
Eternity  as  ‘  a  bathhouse  with  cobwebs  in  the  corners  ,.1 

Infinitely  more  significant  than  Merezhkovsky  was  Vasili 
Vasilievich  Rozanov  (1856-1919),  whose  first  important  work, 
The  Legend  of  the  Great  Inquisitor,  appeared  in  1890  and  ushered 
in  that  remarkable  series  of  Dostoevskian  Commentaries  which 
became  such  an  outstanding  feature  of  Russian  literature  towards 
1900.  Rozanov  was  a  Slavophil  by  tradition,  but  he  developed 
his  wonderful  personality  along  entirely  original  lines.  He  was 
mainly  a  journalist  and,  like  Chekhov,  owed  much  of  his  material 
success  to  Suvorin.  He  wrote  on  every  variety  of  subject,  but  his 
favourite  themes  were  the  inadequacy  of  the  historical  Church 
and  the  problems  of  Family,  Marriage,  and  Sex.  He  evolved  a 
perfectly  original  style,  unfettered  by  conventional  rules  of  com¬ 
position,  and  extraordinarily  racy.  It  reached  its  perfection  in  the 
wonderful  books  of  his  last  years,  Alone  with  Myself  (Uedinennoe), 
Fallen  Leaves,  and  The  Apocalypse  of  the  Russian  Revolution. 
They  consist  of  disconnected  fragments  of  a  singularly  intimate, 
candid,  and  unconventional  nature.  These  books  are  probably 
the  most  genuine  instance  of  a  ‘  heart  laid  bare  ’.  Their  strangely 
intimate  subjects  will  probably  make  them  for  ever  a  sealed  book 
to  foreigners.  The  style,  studded  with  parentheses  and  quota¬ 
tions,  full  of  allusions  and  associations,  and  suggestive  rather  of 
an  intimate  bedroom  whisper  than  of  the  printed  page,  con¬ 
tribute  to  make  them  a  sort  of  esoteric  taboo  book  open  only  to 
his  countrymen. 

Equally  original  in  thought  if  not  in  style  is  Leo  Shestov 
(b.  18 66).  His  books,  like  some  of  Rozanov’s  and  Merezhkovsky’s, 
take  the  form  of  commentaries  on  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky,  or 
1  See  Svidrigaylov  in  Crime  and  Punishment. 


104  Modern  Russian  Literature 

some  other  great  writer.  But  they  are  not  criticism.  They  are 
moral  philosophy.  His  style  is  largely  modelled  on  the  excellent 
example  of  Tolstoy’s  didactic  writings ;  but  contrary  to  the 
constant  ‘  Thus  far  and  no  farther  ’  of  Tolstoy,  Shestov  has  the 
courage  to  take  the  extreme  consequences  of  his  thought,  wrhich 
is  entirely  dominated  by  a  campaign  against  Philosophical  Idealism. 
He  reverses  the  saying  of  Euripides  that  ‘  if  the  gods  do  anything 
shameful  they  are  not  gods  ’,  and  in  one  of  his  last  essays  ( A  Thousand 
and  One  Nights)  reveals  his  belief  in  a  God  who  though  intensely 
human  is  beyond  the  sway  of  human  morality,  the  God  of  the 
Old  Testament.  Shestov  is  a  past  master  in  the  art  of  sarcasm, 
and  he  exercises  it  with  elegance,  but  without  pity,  against  all 
those  who,  like  Socrates,  Spinoza,  or  the  moralist  Tolstoy,  essayed 
to  build  a  system  of  ethics  based  on  rational  idealism.  He  is  in 
tune  with  those  thinkers  who  saw  the  irrational  roots  of  the  moral 
universe  and  fearlessly  looked  down  into  the  abyss — with  St.  Paul, 
Luther,  Pascal,  Dostoevsky,  Nietzsche,  and  the  irrational  Tolstoy 
who  wrote  that  frightening  fragment,  the  Memoirs  of  a  Madman. 

Rozanov  and  Shestov  are  the  most  original  and  from  the 
literary  point  of  view  the  most  significant  of  the  ‘  Religious 
philosophers  ’,  or  ‘  seekers  after  God  ’.  Here  is  not  the  place 
to  trace  a  history  of  the  ideas,  which  tended  towards  1910  to 
converge  towards  a  more  strict  Christian  Orthodoxy.  The 
principal  names  in  this  connexion  are  those  of  Nicholas  Berdyaev 
and  Father  Sergius  Bulgakov,  notable  thinkers,  but  comparatively 
insignificant  writers.  A  still  more  notable  thinker  is  Father  Paul 
Florensky.  His  Pillar  and  Foundation  of  Truth  is  one  of  the 
profoundest  and  subtlest  books  ever  written  on  questions  of 
Religion,  but  is  very  difficult  reading  and  will  greatly  perplex  an 
unprepared  reader.  1  here  was  more  literary  promise  in  the  late 
Dmitri  Boldyrev,  who  died  a  prisoner  of  the  Bolsheviks  in  1920. 
He  was  a  psychologist  by  training,  but  his  political  articles  written 
in  1917  prove  him  to  have  been  a  stylist  of  extraordinary  origin- 


The  New  Age  105 

ality  who  wrote  a  Russian  that  has  not  its  equal  for  vigour  and 
raciness. 

The  revival  of  Russian  poetry  dates  from  about  1894.  It  was 
the  work  of  a  school  of  poets  who  were  called  Symbolists  by 
themselves,  and  Decadents  by  their  enemies.  The  initial  impulse 
came,  as  literary  impulses  so  often  have  in  Russia,  from  France. 
It  proceeded  from  Baudelaire,  Verlaine,  and  the  poets  of  1885. 
But  after  its  initial  stages  Russian  Symbolism  early  became  a 
thoroughly  national  school,  which  found  its  masters  in  Tyutchev 
and  Fet  and  other  classics  and  developed  along  thoroughly 
Russian  lines.  It  was  a  romantic  and  lyrical  school  which  put 
£  music  ’  before  all  things.  It  was  also  metaphysical,  and  delighted 
in  subjects  of  eternal  and  universal  significance.  The  predomi¬ 
nance  of  the  musical  over  the  logical  element,  and  the  predilection 
for  big  themes,  as  well  as  a  deliberate  search  after  originality  and 
new  modes  of  expression,  makes  the  work  of  the  Symbolists  often 
c  caviare  to  the  general  ’  who  charged  them  with  obscurity  and 
preciosity.  The  initiators  of  the  movement  and  the  chief  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  this  initial  foreign  or  cosmopolitan  phase  were 
Constantine  Balmont  (b.  1867)  and  Valeri  Bryusov  (b.  1873). 
They  were  at  first  believed  to  be  great  poets,  but  it  is  rather 
difficult  at  present  to  revive  the  enthusiasm  that  was  felt  for  them 
twenty  years  ago. 

Balmont  in  his  early  work  (1894-1904)  displayed  a  beautiful 
gift  of  song,  but  even  at  its  best  his  poetry  lacks  all  finer  shades 
of  expression.  And  as  to  his  later  writings  they  are  an  ocean  of 
empty  and  turgid  garrulity.  Bryusov’s  masters  were  Edgar 
Allan  Poe,  the  French  Parnassians  and  Symbolists,  and  the  Latin 
poets  of  the  fourth  century.  His  poetry  is  entirely  formal,  but 
like  Balmont’s  it  lacks  taste  and  distinction.  It  is  tawdry.  One 
of  his  admirers  unsuspectingly  hit  the  point  when  he  called 
it  ‘  gilt  bronze  ’.  The  verse  of  both  Balmont  and  Bryusov, 
besides  being  crude  and  tasteless,  sounds  un-Russian  and  vaguely 


io6 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


‘  translated  Their  audience  was  at  first  delighted  by  the  exotic 
novelty  of  their  numbers,  but  they  were  forsaken  when  more 
genuine  goods  appeared  on  the  market. 

The  greatest  of  the  older  generation  of  Symbolists  were  Innocent 
Annensky  (1856-1909),  Theodor  Sologub  (pseud,  of  Th.  K.  Teter- 
nikov)  (b.  1863),  and  Vyacheslav  Ivanov  (b.  1866).  All  these  were 
great  craftsmen  and  perfect  artists.  They  restored  to  Russia  the 
high  standard  that  had  been  lost  since  the  Golden  Age  of  Pushkin. 
Annensky,  in  short  lyrics  of  immense  concision  and  elaborately 
complex  structure,  gave  expression  to  a  modern  soul,  disillusioned 
and  fastidious,  akin  in  a  sense  to  Chekhov’s,  but  more  sensitive 
and  nervous.  His  poems  are  difficult  and  obscure,  not  because 
he  could  not  express  himself  more  clearly,  but  because  in  its  great 
concentration  his  art  dispenses  with  the  links  and  bridges  of 
continuous  speech.  His  lyrics  are  quintessential  extracts  of 
emotion,  like  those  perfumes  to  the  making  of  each  ounce  of  which 
go  pounds  of  rose-leaves. 

Vyacheslav  Ivanov,  ‘  Vyacheslav  the  Magnificent  ’  as  he  has 
been  called  by  Shestov,  is  a  great  master  of  ornate  and  meta¬ 
physical  poetry.  He  is  a  man  of  immense  culture,  steeped  in  all 
the  lore  of  Christendom  and  of  antiquity.  His  poetry  is  Alexan¬ 
drian  in  its  abundant  scholarship,  overloaded  with  the  legacy  of 
centuries,  but  rather  Pindaric  in  the  wealth  of  his  beautiful  and 
pregnant  diction.  Though  saturated  with  Hellenism,  it  does  not 
sound  foreign,  for  the  treasures  of  Greek  diction  were  naturalized 
in  Russia  by  the  Slavonic  Liturgy  and  the  Slavonic  Bible. 

Sologub  (b.  1863)  is  better  known  in  England  than  either 
Annensky  or  Ivanov,  and  owes  this  relative  popularity  to  his 
prose  writings.  But  he  is  primarily  a  poet,  and  his  poetry  is  of 
a  very  high  order.  He  is  an  austere  and  forbidding  poet.  His 
verse  is  apparently  simple,  his  vocabulary  is  limited,  his  tone  is 
subdued,  and  there  is  nothing  striking  in  him,  but  the  perfection 
and  polish  to  which  he  brings  his  verse  is  amazing  and  incom- 


The  New  Age 


107 


parable.  Unlike  though  it  is  to  the  poetry  of  the  Golden  Age, 
it  has  the  same  classical  perfection.  Sologub  is  a  single-minded 
poet,  his  one  theme  is  the  opposition  of  the  calm  beauty  of 
Eternity  to  the  evil  diversity  of  Life.  His  philosophy  is  Manichaean 
and  his  cult  of  Eternity  merges  in  a  cult  of  Death.  He  hates  the 
creative  Divinity.  Its  emanation  is  the  Sun,  the  symbol  of  all  the 
curse  of  life.  This  hatred  of  the  Creator  easily  merges  into 
a  Satanism.  Sologub  is  the  only  one  of  the  older  Symbolists  to 
have  written  great  prose,  which  I  will  discuss  a  little  farther  on 
in  connexion  with  other  novelists. 

These  older  masters  were  followed  by  a  younger  generation 
whose  greatest  names  are  Alexander  Blok  (1880-1921)  and  Andrey 
Bely  (b.  1880).  Blok  is  altogether  the  greatest  poet  of  the  whole 
age,  the  greatest  literary  genius  of  the  last  quarter  of  a  century. 
Though  less  of  a  craftsman  than  Ivanov  or  Sologub,  he  was  made 
of  the  same  stuff  as  the  great  romantic  poets  of  the  early  nineteenth 
century.  He  is  akin  to  Shelley  and  Lermontov  in  the  powerful 
divine  breath  which  animated  him.  He  was  essentially  a  genius 
not  only  in  size,  but  in  mind.  His  poetry  is  mystical.  In  his 
early  lyrics  he  lives  a  life  of  mystic  unity  with  a  ‘  Beautiful  Lady  ’ 
who  is  the  Sophia  of  Soloviev’s  vision  or  the  Weltseele  of  German 
Romanticism.  This  early  poetry  is  nebulous  and  diaphanous 
to  the  point  of  seeming  non-existent.  It  is  of  the  stuff  that  dreams 
are  made  of.  But  before  long  he  lost  his  faith  in  his  mystic  visions. 
All  his  later  poetry  (from  1905  onwards)  is  like  Heine’s,  the 
expression  of  one  continuous  dissonance  between  the  Real  and 
the  Ideal.  It  is  as  musical  and  even  more  so  than  his  early  lyrics, 
but  it  becomes  more  solid,  more  material,  more  realistic.  The 
whole  of  life  enters  into  his  ken.  Passionate  longing,  blind  passion, 
and  bitter  irony  become  the  dominant  notes  of  his  poetry.  His 
wmrld  is  akin  to  Dostoevsky’s  world  of  antithesis,  and  also  to  the 
dreadful  waste  of  despair  and  emptiness  in  which  lived  Andreyev. 
But  unlike  Andreyev,  Blok  is  a  great  artist,  his  words  are  always 


io8 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


fresh  and  new,  alive  with  the  breath  of  genius.  In  his  best  lyrics 
Blok  strikes  the  note  of  cosmic  grandeur  and  tragical  majesty  in 
the  first  line  and  sustains  it  to  the  last.  For  sweep  and  for  what 
the  French  call  £  souffle  ’  he  has  no  equal  among  recent  poets, 
not  only  in  Russia.  After  losing  his  faith  in  his  Mystic  Lady  he 
thought  at  one  time  to  have  found  a  new  Faith  in  Russia.  Much 
of  his  best  poetry  between  1908-1916  is  inspired  by  his  passionate 
love  for  his  country.  When  the  Revolution  came  it  dazzled  and 
stunned  Blok  by  its  enormous  elemental  force,  and  he  thought 
he  saw  in  it  the  final  and  essential  expression  of  the  ardent  and 
impulsive  soul  of  Russia.  Under  this  impression  he  wrote  his 
greatest  poem  The  Twelve.  Here  his  power  of  expression  reaches 
to  a  pitch  which  makes  it  a  poem  of  almost  superhuman  power. 
It  is  at  once  musical  in  structure  and  realistic  in  subject.  His 
supreme  mastery  of  rhythm  far  surpasses  the  ordinary  limits 
assigned  to  poetic  expression,  and  transcends  the  rational  element 
of  speech.  But  the  words  he  uses  are  the  slang  of  the  streets 
and  the  pictures  he  evokes  (it  is  the  story  of  twelve  Red  guardsmen 
bullying  the  bourgeois  in  the  first  days  of  the  Bolshevist  triumph) 
are  boldly,  even  crudely  real.  The  perfect  fusion  of  the  musical 
and  realistic  element  gives  the  poem  its  unique  and  supreme 
position.  But  Blok’s  genius  was  essentially  feminine  and  passive, 
and  after  this  last  fitful  achievement  inspired  by  the  breath  of  the 
Revolution  there  followed  in  him  a  reaction  of  complete  impotence 
and  black  despair.  He  lost  his  momentary  faith  in  the  Revolution, 
and  his  last  years  were  spent  in  a  state  of  terrible  gloom  and 
emptiness.  He  saw  the  gradual  ruin  of  Petersburg  and  Russia 
round  him  and  died  of  heart  disease  in  xMigust  1921. 

Andrey  Bely  (b.  1880;  pseud,  of  B.  N.  Bugaev),  the  contem¬ 
porary  and  parallel  of  Blok,  is  also  a  mystic — philosopher,  poet, 
novelist,  anthroposophist,1  dreamer  and  charlatan ;  he  has  not 

1  Bely  was  from  1911  to  1916  one  of  the  most  faithful  adepts  of  Rudolf 
Steiner,  and  an  inmate  of  his  theosophical  establishment  near  Bale. 


B  LOK 


The  New  Age 


109 

created  anything  supreme  in  poetry,  but  his  novels,  of  which  I  will 
speak  farther  on,  are  among  the  most  wonderful  productions  of 
the  Russian  twentieth  century.  He  is  a  man  of  extraordinary 
biographical  interest  and  his  personality  will  be  an  inexhaustible 
mine  of  interest  to  the  future  biographers.  He  has  written  a  bio¬ 
graphical  work  of  first-class  rank  in  his  amazing  Reminiscences 
of  Blok. 

The  poetry  of  the  Symbolists  as  a  whole  had,  for  all  its  great 
qualities,  substantial  drawbacks.  It  was  feminine,  passive,  more 
receptive  than  active.  It  was  also  on  the  whole  too  exclusively 
musical,  and  the  appeal  of  its  metaphysical  subject-matter,  apart 
from  its  occasional  obscurity,  was  not  sufficiently  broad.  With 
the  exception  of  Blok,  the  Symbolists,  even  the  very  emotional 
and  human  Annensky,  remain  rather  poetry  for  a  minority.  Be¬ 
sides  their  philosophy,  their  mentality  was  essentially  unhealthy 
and  unproductive,  and  in  this  sense  they  well  deserved  the 
appellation  of  Decadents,  though  as  masters  of  their  art  they 
were  the  very  reverse.  The  Symbolist  triumph  was  followed 
by  a  reaction.  It  found  expression  in  two  divergent  movements : 
the  Petersburg  School  rejected  music  and  metaphysics  and 
turned  towards  clear  and  more  concrete  verbal  expression ;  the 
Futurists  started  a  poetry  of  prose  and  revolutionary  formalism. 
But  for  all  their  reaction  both  these  movements  continue  and  even 
exaggerate  an  important  feature  of  the  Symbolist  poetry  the 
cult  of  form  and  the  preference  of  Manner  to  Matter. 

The  Petersburg  School  made  itself  the  champion  of  restraint 
and  clarity.  It  rejected  the  metaphysical  style  of  Ivanov  and 
endeavoured  to  be  more  Latin  and  classical.  Its  patriarch  is 
Michael  Kuzmin  (b.  1875),  whose  charming  Songs  of  Alexandria 
(1906)  were  the  first  swallow  of  the  classical  spring.  The  leadei 
of  the  movement  was  Nicholas  Gumilev  (1886-1921)?  wh°  founded 
the  Petersburg  Guild  of  Poets  and  gave  the  younger  poets  lessons 
in  their  craft.  He  was  at  heart  a  man  of  action.  He  travelled  in 


no 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


Africa,  fought  with  distinction  in  the  Great  War,  and  was  executed 
by  the  Cheka  in  1921  on  an  alleged  charge  of  conspiring  against 
the  Soviet  Government.  His  poetry  is  manly  and  bracing,  full 
of  the  romance  of  adventure  and  fighting  and  of  the  exotic  charm 
of  tropical  lands.  It  strikes  a  note  rare  in  Russian  literature  when 
in  a  poem  like  The  Captains  he  sings  the  praise  of  the  great  adven¬ 
turers  of  the  high  seas. 

A  more  delicate  and  refined  poet  is  Anna  Akhmatova,  for  the 
last  ten  years  the  most  widely  popular  of  all  writers  of  Russian 
verse.  She  writes  little  and  her  poetry  displays  in  the  highest 
degree  the  classical  quality  of  restraint.  Her  poems  are  ‘  dramatic 
lyrics  ’,  where  the  substance  of  a  novel  is  condensed  into  eight  or 
twelve  terse  and  compact  lines.  Her  subject-matter  is  ordinary 
human  feeling,  free  from  all  metaphysical  complexity.  In  her 
last  work  she  has  attained  to  a  still  severer  and  sterner  form  of 
expression.  In  a  series  of  lyrics  on  the  woes  of  her  country,  her 
style  becomes  truly  grand  in  its  tragic  simplicity. 

Less  famous  than  Akhmatova,  but  not  less  highly  valued 
among  his  fellow-poets,  is  Joseph  Mandelstam,  whose  poems, 
written  for  the  most  part  on  historical  or  literary  subjects,  attain 
a  beautiful  oratorical  sweep  which  has  led  a  critic  to  say  that  the 
language  he  uses  is  not  really  Russian,  but  Latin. 

The  Futurist  movement  largely  belongs  to  post-Revolutionary 
days  and  consequently  falls  outside  the  scope  of  this  book.  But 
its  most  significant  representative,  Vladimir  Mayakovski  (b.  1893), 
began  writing  in  1912.  In  spite  of  many  extravagancies,  his 
poetry,  which  is  largely  political  (he  is  a  Communist),  possesses 
great  qualities  of  vitality  and  physical  health.  Mayakovski  is  first 
of  all  a  man  with  strong  lungs,  and  his  loud  utterings,  if  not  always 
refined,  often  crude  and  even  coarse,  are  essentially  the  healthy 
outcome  of  a  man  with  buoyant  animal  spirits. 

The  Symbolists,  who  achieved  so  much  in  poetry,  made  occa¬ 
sional  ventures  into  the  province  of  imaginative  prose,  but  most 


The  New  Age 


in 


of  their  stories  (for  instance  Bryusov’s,  which  are  largely  traceable 
to  the  influence  of  Edgar  Poe)  are  derivative  and  altogether 
inferior  to  their  verse.  The  only  exceptions  are  Sologub,  who 
stands  apart  in  splendid  isolation,  and  Bely,  whose  novels,  together 
with  Remizov’s,  may  be  considered  as  having  started  the  modern 
school  of  Russian  fiction.  Sologub’s  prose  is  as  beautiful  as  his 
verse  and  permeated  with  the  same  Manichaean  Philosophy.  His 
writings  are  all  based  on  the  essential  contrast  of  the  Ideal  and 
the  Real,  which  he  is  fond  of  symbolizing  in  the  figures  of 
Dulcinea  and  Aldonsa,  only  in  his  prose  the  world  of  coarse 
reality  and  brutal  action  is  painted  with  greater  vividness  than 
in  his  verse.  Most  of  his  short  stories  are  tangibly  symbolical. 
The  scene  is  laid  more  or  less  outside  time  and  space,  for  Life’s 
evil  Diversity  is  the  same  everywhere,  and  equally  coarse  and 
ugly  whether  it  happens  to  effect  the  forms  of  a  Russian  suburb 
or  of  a  medieval  castle.  His  greatest  work,  the  wonderful  novel 
which  bears  in  the  English  translation  the  somewhat  inadequate 
name  of  The  Little  Demon  (the  French  rendering  Le  demon 
mesquin  is  better  ;  the  Russian  is  Melky  Bes ),  assumes  all  the 
appearance  of  a  realistic  novel  of  provincial  manners.  But  the 
mask  must  not  deceive.  It  is  a  poetical  and  symbolical  novel  like 
his  stories  and  lyrics.  Written  with  great  power  and  perfectly 
constructed,  it  is  probably  the  best  Russian  novel  since  the 
death  of  Dostoevsky.  Like  all  Sologub’s  work,  it  turns  on  the 
antithesis  between  beauty  in  thrall  of  reality  (the  boy  Sasha 
Pylnikov)  and  the  brutal,  coarse,  and  joyless  spirit  of  brute  reality 
itself  in  the  person  of  the  assistant  head  master  Peredonov.  This 
is  a  symbolical  figure  of  enormous  realistic  convincingness. 
Peredonov  is  a  bully  who  finally  succumbs  to  a  mania  of  persecu¬ 
tion.  His  name  has  become  a  word  of  the  language  to  designate 
the  joyless  evil  of  the  narrow  and  dark  mind.  A  more  bewildering 
production  is  the  romantic  trilogy  The  Created  Legend  (or  more 
exactly,  as  the  Russian  participle  is  imperfective,  The  Legend  in 


112 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


-process  of  Creation)  with  the  figure  of  Trirodov,  Satanist  and 
Socialist,  who  is  for  Sologub  the  ideal  priest  of  Dulcinea.  The 
second  and  third  parts  of  the  trilogy  ( Queen  Ortruda  and  Smoke 
and  Ashes),  in  which  the  scene  is  shifted  to  the  imaginary  Kingdom 
of  the  United  Islands,  belong  to  Sologub’s  most  charming  work 
and  may  be  read  for  the  interest  of  the  romantic  story,  even  apart 
from  the  hidden  meaning,  which  may  not  be  to  the  taste  of  all 
readers.  It  is  the  most  attractively  romantic  of  Russian  novels 
and  very  unlike  their  common  run. 

The  novel  cannot  exist  divorced  from  life.  And  the  ‘  meta¬ 
physical  ’  novel  outside  space  and  time,  whether  it  stands  on  the 
low  level  of  Andreyev  and  Artsibashev,  or  on  the  very  high  level 
of  Sologub,  was  doomed  to  be  superceded  by  a  new  realism. 
This  new  realism  is  very  unlike  the  old  one,  for  first  of  all  it  has 
drunk  deep  of  the  art  of  the  Symbolists,  or  rather  breathed  the 
air  infected  by  its  vapours.  It  is  miles  away  from  the  elaborately 
artless  (in  reality  supremely  artistic)  simplicity  of  Turgenev, 
Tolstoy,  or  even  Chekhov.  Like  contemporary  poetry,  it  is  more 
concerned  with  manner  than  matter,  and  though  it  deals  with 
actual  life  it  approaches  it  in  another  spirit.  It  does  not  aim  at 
the  exact  reproduction  of  reality,  still  less  of  the  true  proportions 
of  reality.  It  uses  the  material  of  reality  for  its  own  constructions, 
which  may  be  mellow  or  grotesque,  but  which  are  primarily 
meant  to  be  expressive  and  pregnant.  The  German  term  of 
Expressionism  may  be  justly  applied  to  this  Russian  School, 
though  it  has  little  in  common  with  the  practice  of  the  German 
Expressionists. 

The  history  of  this  new  style  begins  in  the  year  1909  when  it 
produced  its  first  two  masterpieces,  The  Silver  Dove  of  Bely  and 
Remizov’s  The  Story  of  Ivan  Semenovich  Stratilatov.  Bely’s  novel 
is  a  story  of  a  Russian  Intelligent  who  comes  under  the  influence 
of  a  sect  of  mystics.  The  story  is  told  with  great  skill  and  written 
in  a  style  rich  and  suggestive  and  singularly  varied.  In  the 


The  New  Age  113 

humorous  parts  it  is  strikingly  reminiscent  of  Gogol.  Its  great 
achievement  lies  in  the  powerful  inner  rhythm  which  carries  on 
the  whole  story  towards  the  tragic  end  of  the  hero  in  the  trap  laid 
for  him  by  the  sectarians.  Bely’s  other  two  novels  ( Petersburg 
and  Kotik  Letaev ),  the  one  a  rhythmical  symphony  on  a  political 
theme,  the  other  an  exaggeratedly  subtle  story  of  a  childhood, 
mark  a  falling  off.  The  rhythmical  element  becomes  crude  and 
formal,  and  the  author  gets  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  his  all-too- 
elaborate  proceedings.  They  are  failures,  but  failures  of  genius. 
The  Idea  o  i  Petersburg — the  incarnation  of  mathematical  nihilism — 
has  exercised  a  powerful  influence  on  the  Russian  imagination. 
Bely’s  most  accessible  and  least  difficult  prose-work  is  his  remini¬ 
scences  of  Blok,  which  are  full  of  an  extraordinary  original  humour 
and  vividly  grotesque  pictures  of  Russian  literary  men. 

Alexey  Remizov  (b.  1877)  is  a  very  complex  writer  whose 
versatility  is  great,  but  under  all  its  forms  his  unmistakable  and 
charming  personality  is  strikingly  apparent.  He  has  created  an 
entirely  fresh  style  of  Russian  prose,  based  not  on  the  logic  of 
written  language,  but  on  the  system  of  intonations  of  living 
speech.  He  has  succeeded  in  giving  the  Russian  language  all  its 
natural  and  illogical  freedom,  which  even  in  the  raciest  of  nine¬ 
teenth-century  writers  is  covered  by  a  veneer  of  classical  grammar. 
His  masters  are  Dostoevsky,  Gogol,  and  Leskov.  It  is  impossible 
here  to  give  any  detailed  account  of  his  many-sided  activity — 
of  his  Fairy  Tales,  of  his  stories  from  the  Apocrypha,  of  his 
charming  prose-poems  on  folk-lore  subjects,  of  his  wonderful 
dreams,  and  his  no  less  wonderful  memoir  writings.  But  The 
Story  of  Stratilatov  and  the  other  stories  of  this  kind  were  great 
literary  events  which  created  a  new  school.  The  essential  feature 
of  these  stories  is  a  new  method  of  constructing  the  story.  Its 
movement  is  not  along  a  line  of  time,  but  towards  a  single  point. 
It  is  like  the  unravelling  of  a  ball  of  silk.  These  concentric  stories 
have  for  their  centre  a  human  soul  and  for  their  periphery  the 


2535-57 


H 


Modern  Russian  Literature 


114 

grotesque  milieu  of  an  old-world  Russian  country  town.  The 
provincial  environment,  the  psychocentric  construction,  the 
selection  of  grotesque  detail,  the  purity  and  raciness  of  language, 
and  a  profound  human  sympathy,  not  wistfully  mellow  as  in 
Chekhov,  but  scorchingly  intense  as  in  Dostoevsky,  are  the 
essential  features  of  these  stories. 

They  soon  began  to  be  imitated  and  are  still  imitated  in 
increasingly  high  proportions.  But  most  of  Remizov’s  followers 
have  only  been  able  to  imitate  the  grotesqueness  of  the  master, 
but  not  his  art  of  construction,  nor  his  Russian,  nor  his  human 
inspiration.  The  best  known  of  these  neo-realists  is  Alexey 
Nikolaevich  Tolstoy  (b.  1882),  who  possesses  a  wonderful  gift 
of  making  his  characters  alive,  but  no  gift  of  telling  a  story.  The 
extreme  expression  of  the  grotesque  tendency  is  Eugene  Zamyatin, 
who  has  been  the  medium  of  transmitting  Remizov’s  influence 
to  a  whole  school  of  young  writers.  In  Zamyatin  the  expressionist 
method  becomes  a  mosaic  of  more  or  less  expressive  and  striking 
detail,  without  any  artistic  unity.  The  best  of  Remizov’s  followers 
is  Michael  Prishvin,  who  is  the  only  one  to  rival  the  master  in  his 
command  of  Russian.  Unhappily  this  excellent  writer  has  written 
very  little  and  most  of  that  is  rather  descriptive  journalism  than 
fiction.  But  at  least  one  of  his  stories  is  a*  veritable  masterpiece  of 
great  originality  and  singular  beauty.  This  is  The  Beast  of 
Krytoyarsk  (1914),  the  story  of  a  dog — one  of  the  very  few  really 
good  animal  stories  in  the  language. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

ENGLISH  TRANSLATIONS 

I.  FICTION  AND  MEMOIRS 

Pushkin  :  The  Captain's  Daughter  and  other  Tales,  ti.  T.  Keane  (Hodder  & 
Stoughton). 

Lermontov  :  A  Hero  of  Nowadays ,  tr.  J.  S.  Phillimore  (Nelson).  Another 
version  :  The  Heart  of  a  Russian ,  tr.  J.  H.  Wilson  and  Mary  Murray 
(Herbert  &  Daniel). 

Gogol  :  Dead  Souls,  tr.  Constance  Garnett  (Chatto  &  Windus) ;  tr.  John 
Cournos  (Dent,  Everyman’s  Library)  ;  The  Overcoat  and  other  Stories, 
tr.  Constance  Garnett  (Chatto  &  Windus)  ;  The  Mantle  and  other  Stories, 
tr.  C.  Field  (Werner  Laurie)  ;  Taras  Bulba  and  other  Stories,  tr.  John 
Cournos  (Dent,  Everyman’s  Library). 

Aksakov  :  A  Russian  Gentleman,  Tears  of  Childhood,  and  A  Russian  Schoolboy, 
tr.  J.  D.  Duff  (World’s  Classics)  ;  Chronicles  of  a  Russian  Family,  tr. 
M.  Beverly  (Routledge). 

Turgenev  :  The  Novels  of  Ivan  Turgenev,  seventeen  volumes,  tr.  Constance 
Garnett  (Heineman)  ;  The  Novels  and  Stories  of  Ivan  Turgenev,  tr.  Isabel 
Hapgood,  introduction  by  Henry  James  ;  thirteen  volumes  (Scribner). 

Goncharov  :  A  Common  Story,  tr.  Constance  Garnett  (Heineman) ;  Oblomov , 
tr.  C.  J.  Hogarth  [abridged]  (Allen  &  Unwin) ;  The  Precipice,  [tr.  anon., 
abridged]  (Hodder  &  Stoughton). 

Mme.  Kokhanovskaya  :  The  Rusty  Linchpin  and  Lubov  Archipovna,  tr. 
M.  M.  S.  and  J.  H.  E.  (D.  Lothrope,  Boston,  Mass.). 

Saltykov  :  three  sketches  included  in  The  Village  Priest,  and  other  Stories, 
from  the  Russian  of  Militsina  and  Saltikov,  tr.  Beatrice  I.  Tollemache 
(Fisher  Unwin)  ;  The  Golovlev  Family ,  tr.  A.  Ridgway. 

Leskov  :  The  Sentry  and  other  Stories,  tr.  A.  E.  Chamot  (John  Lane) ;  Cathedral 
Folk,  tr.  Isabel  F.  Hapgood  (John  Lane). 

Dostoevsky  :  The  Novels  of  Fyodor  Dostoevsky,  twelve  volumes,  tr.  Constance 
Garnett  (Heinemann)  ;  Stavrogin’ s  Confession,  and  the  plan  of  the  Life 
of  a  Great  Sinner  [posthumous],  tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky  and  Virginia  Woolf 
(Hogarth  Press). 

Tolstoy:  Tr.  by  Constance  Garnett:  War  and  Peace-,  Anna  Karenina • 
The  Death  of  Ivan  Ilyich  and  other  Stories  (Heinemann).  Tr.  by  Aylmer 
Maude  :  Sevastopol  and  other  Stories  (Grant  Richards) ;  The  Cossacks  and 
other  T ales  of  the  Caucasus  ;  Twenty-Three  Tales  ;  War  and  Peace  -,  Anna 
Karenina ;  Resurrection  (The  World’s  Classics).  Edited  by  Hagberg 
Wright  :  Father  Sergius  and  other  Stories ;  The  Forged  Coupon,  and  other 

H  2 


n6 


Bibliography 


Stories-,  Hajji  Murad  and  other  Stories  (Nelson).  Complete  Works .  in 
twenty-four  volumes,  ed.  by  Leo  Wiener  (Dent). 

Herzen  :  My  Past  and  Thoughts  ;  The  Memoirs  of  A.  Herzen,  tr.  by  Constance 
Garnett,  four  volumes  (Chatto  &  Windus).  The  Memoirs  of  A.  H.,  tr.  by 
J.  D.  Duff  (Yale  University  Press). 

Garshin  :  The  Signal  and  other  Stories,  tr.  Rowland  Smith  (Duckworth). 

Korolenko  :  The  Murmuring  Forest  and  other  Stories,  tr.  Marion  Fell 
(Duckworth). 

Chekhov:  The  Tales  of  Tchehov ,  tr.  Constance  Garnett,  thirteen  volumes 
(Chatto  &  Windus). 

Gorky:  (a)  Early  work:  A  Naughty  Girl ;  Heartache-,  The  Individualists, 
tr.  A.  S.  Rappoport  (Maclaren)  ;  Twenty-six  Men  and  a  Girl,  tr.  E.  Jakovlev 
and  Dora  Montefiore  (Duckworth).  The  Orloff  Couple  and  Malva ,  tr. 
E.  Jakovlev  and  Dora  Montefiore  (Heinemann) ;  Chelkash  and  other 
Stories  (Hodder  &  Stoughton)  ;  Tales  from  M.  Gorky  (Brentano’s) ;  Foma 
Gordyeeff ;  and  Three  of  Them,  tr.  Isabel  F.  Hapgood  (Fisher  Unwin). 

(b)  Middle  period  :  Comrades  (Hodder  &  Stoughton) ;  Mother  (Appleton, 
N.Y.)  [these  two  are  one  and  the  same  book]  ;  A  Confession,  tr.  from  the 
German  (Everett  &  Co.)  j  The  Spy  (Duckworth) ;  Tales  of  Two  Countries 
(Werner  Laurie). 

(c)  Autobiographical  series  :  My  Childhood ;  and  In  the  World,  tr. 
Gertrude  M.  Foakes  (Werner  Laurie) ;  Fragments  from  my  Diary  (Philip 
Allen);  Reminiscences  of  L.  N.  Tolstoy  (Hogarth  Press). 

Kuprin  :  The  Duel  (Allen  &  Unwin) ;  The  Bracelet  of  Garnets,  and  other  Stories , 
tr.  Leo  Pasvolsky  (Duckworth)  ;  The  River  of  Life,  and  other  Stories,  tr. 
S.  S.  Koteliansky  and  J.  Middleton  Murry  (Modern  Russian  Library)  ; 
Sasha,  tr.  Douglas  Ashby  (Stanley  Paul  &  Co.) ;  A  Slav  Soul,  and  other 
Stories  (Constable). 

Bunin  :  The  Gentleman  from  San  Francisco,  tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky  and  Virginia 
Woolf  (Hogarth  Press);  The  Village,  tr.  Isabel  F.  Hapgood  (Martin 
Seeker) ;  The  Dreams  of  Chang  and  other  Stories,  tr.  B.  G.  Gurney  (Knopf). 

Andreev  :  The  Red  Laugh,  tr.  A.  Linden  (Fisher  Unwin) ;  And  it  came  to  pass 
that  the  King  was  dead  ;  and  His  Excellency  the  Governor,  tr.  Maurice 
Magnus  (C.  W.  Daniel) ;  The  Seven  that  were  hanged  (Ogilvie  Publ.  Co.)  ; 
The  Dark,  tr.  L.  A.  Magnus  and  K.  Walter  (Hogarth  Press)  ;  The  Little 
Angel  and  other  Stories  (Hodder  &  Stoughton) ;  The  Crushed  Flower ,  and 
other  Stories  (Duckworth);  Judas  Iscariot ,  forming  with  Eleazar  and 
Ben-Tobit  a  Biblical  trilogy,  tr.  W.  H.  Lowe  (Francis  Griffith) ;  Confessions 
of  a  Little  Man  during  Great  Days  (Duckworth). 

Artsybashev  :  Sanine,  tr.  Percy  Pinkerton  ;  The  Millionaire,  with  an  intro- 
duction  by  the  author  ;  Tales  of  the  Revolution  5  Breaking  Point  (Martin 
Seeker). 

Merezhkovsky  :  The  Death  of  the  Gods  ;  The  Forerunner  ;  Peter  and  Alexis , 
tr.  H.  French  (Constable) ;  December  the  Fourteenth,  tr.  Nathalie  Dudding- 
ton  (Jonathan  Cape). 


English  Translations 


ii  7 

Bryusov  :  The  Republic  of  the  Southern  Cross  and  other  Stories  (Constable). 

Sologub  :  The  Little  Demon  ;  The  Old  House ,  and  other  Stories ;  The  Created 
Legend ,  tr.  J.  Cournos  (Martin  Seeker):  The  Sweet-Scented  Name 
(Constable). 

Remizov  :  The  Clock ,  tr.  John  Cournos  (Chatto  &  Windus). 

Zamyatin  :  See  Slavonic  Review ,  No.  4  (1923). 

II.  MISCELLANEOUS  PROSE 

Dostoevsky  :  Pages  from  the  Journal  of  an  Author ,  tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky,  and 
J.  Middleton  Murry  (Maunsel  &  Co.). 

Iolstoy:  A  Confession ,  and  What  I  Believe ,  tr.  Aylmer  Maude  (World’s 
Classics)  ;  What  is  Art ,  tr.  Aylmer  Maude  (Grant  Richards)  ;  Essays  and 
Letters  (World’s  Classics)  ;  Complete  Works  (Dent). 

Solovyev  :  W ar ,  Progress  and  the  End  of  History ,  including  a  short  story  of  the 
Anti-Christ,  tr.  Alexander  Bakshy  (University  Press  of  London)  ;  The 
Justification  of  the  Good ,  an  essay  on  Moral  Philosophy ,  tr.  Nathalie 
Duddington  (Constable). 

Merezhkovsky  :  Tolstoi  as  Man  and  Artist ,  with  an  essay  on  Dostoevsky 
(Constable);  The  Life  Work  of  Calderon ;  Ibsen ;  Montaigne  ;  Pliny  the 
T ounger  ;  Flaubert ;  M.  Aurelius ;  Acropolis ;  Dostoevsky ;  tr.  G.  A. 
Mounsey  (Alexander  Moring). 

Shestov  :  Anton  T chehov  and  other  Essays,  tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky  and  J.  Middle- 
ton  Murry  (The  Modern  Russian  Library)  ;  All  Things  are  possible,  tr. 
S.  S.  Koteliansky  (Martin  Seeker). 

III.  LETTERS,  NOTE-BOOKS,  ETC. 

Turgenev  :  T ourgueneff  and  his  French  Circle,  edited  by  E.  Halperine- 
Kaminsky,  tr.  Ethel  M.  Arnold  (Fisher  Unwin). 

Dostoevsky  :  Letters  of  Dostoevsky  to  his  family  and  friends,  tr.  Ethel  Colburn 
Mayne  (Chatto  &  Windus)  ;  Letters  and  Reminiscences,  tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky 
and  J.  Middleton  Murry  (Chatto  &  Windus). 

Tolstoy  :  The  Diaries  of  Tolstoy,  tr.  C.  J.  Hogarth  and  A.  Sirnis  (Dent)  ; 
The  Journals  of  Tolstoy,  tr.  Rose  Strunsky  (Knopf) ;  Tolstoy's  Love-letters , 
tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky  and  Virginia  Woolf  (Hogarth  Press). 

Chekhov  :  Letters  of  A.  T chehov  to  his  family  and  friends,  tr.  Constance  Garnett 
(Chatto  &  Windus) ;  The  Note-books  of  A.  T chekhov,  together  with  Reminis¬ 
cences  of  T chekhov  by  M.  Gorky,  tr.  S.  S.  Koteliansky  and  Leonard  Woolf 
(Hogarth  Press). 

IV.  PLAYS 

(a)  In  Prose  : 

Gogol  :  The  Inspector-General,  or  Revizor,  tr.  Arthur  A.  Sykes  (Walter  Scott) ; 
Revizor,  tr.  for  the  Yale  University  Dramatic  Association  by  Max.  S. 
Mandell. 


ii8 


Bibliography 


Ostrovsky  :  The  Storm ,  tr.  Constance  Garnett  (Duckworth) ;  Plays ,  tr. 
edited  by  G.  R.  Noyes  (Scribner’s) ;  see  also  Moscow  Art  Theatre  Plays, 
second  series  (Brentano’s). 

Turgenev  :  The  Plays  of  Ivan  S.  Turgenev,  tr.  M.  S.  Mandell  (Heinemann). 

Tolstoy  :  Plays,  tr.  L.  and  Aylmer  Maude  (World’s  Classics) ;  Dramatic  Works, 
tr.  N.  H.  Dole  (Harrap). 

Chekhov  :  The  Plays  of  A.  T chehov,  two  volumes,  tr.  Constance  Garnett 
(Chatto  &  Windus). 

Gorky  :  The  Lower  Depths ,  tr.  L.  Irving  (Fisher  Unwin) ;  see  also  Moscow  Art 
Theatre  Plays  (Brentano’s). 

Andreev  :  Plays,  tr.  Clarence  Meade  and  Fred  Newton  Scot  (Duckworth) ; 
The  Dear  Departing ,  tr.  Julius  West  (Henderson)  ;  Anathema ,  tr.  G.  H. 
Bernstein  (Macmillan  &  Co.)  ;  To  the  Stars,  tr.  Maurice  Magnus  (C.  W. 
Daniel) ;  Katherine,  tr.  Bernstein  (Brentano’s)  ;  He  who  gets  slapped, 
tr.  Zilboorg  (Brentano’s). 

( b )  In  Blank  Verse  : 

Pushkin  :  Boris  Godunov,  tr.  Alfred  Hayes  (Kegan  Paul). 

A.  Tolstoy  :  Czar  Feodor  loannovitch,  tr.  Alfred  Hayes  (Kegan  Paul). 

(c)  In  Rhyme : 

Griboyedov  :  The  Mischief  of  being  Clever  (Acts  I  and  II),  tr.  Sir  Bernard  Pares 
( Slavonic  Review,  No.  7). 

V.  POETRY 

Fet  :  See  A  Sheaf  of  Papers,  by  Oliver  Elton  (University  Press  of  Liverpool) 
(Hodder  &  Stoughton). 

Nekrasov:  Who  can  be  happy  and  free  in  Russia? ,  tr.  Juliet  M.  Soskice 
(World’s  Classics). 

Blok  :  The  Twelve,  tr.  E.  E.  Bechhofer  (Chatto  &  Windus) ;  The  Twelve,  tr. 
Babette  Deutsch  and  Avrahm  Yarmolinsky  (New  York,  Huebsch). 

VI.  ANTHOLOGIES,  ETC. 

Anthology  of  Russian  Literature,  from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present  times,  by 
Leo  Wiener  (G.  P.  Putnam’s  Sons).  Two  volumes  [prose  and  poetry]. 

Russian  Poets  and  Poems,  by  Mme.  N.  Jarintzoff  (Oxford) ;  Modern  Russian 
Poetry ,  texts  and  translations  by  Paul  Selver  (Kegan  Paul)  ;  Modern 
Russian  Poetry,  chosen  and  translated  by  Babette  Deutsch  and  Avrahm 
Yarmolinsky  (John  Lane). 


INDEX 


Akhmatova,  Anna,  i  io. 

Aksakov,  Ivan,  79. 

Aksakov,  S.  T.,  19-22. 

Andreyev,  97-9. 

Annensky,  106. 

Artsybashev,  99. 

Avvakum,  5. 

Balmont,  105. 

Baratynsky  (Boratynsky),  8. 
Belinsky  (Byelinsky),  10,  76. 

Bely,  Andrey  (Byely,  ps.  of  Bugaev), 
108-9,  1  !3- 
Berdyaev,  104. 

Blok,  107-8. 

Boldyrev,  104. 

Boratynsky  :  see  Baratynsky. 
Bryusov,  105. 

Bugaev  :  see  Bely. 

Bulgakov,  104. 

Bunin,  97. 

Byelinsky  :  see  Belinsky. 

Byely  :  see  Bely. 

Cantemir  (Kantemir),  11. 

Chekhov  (Tchehov),  85-92. 
Chernyshevsky  (Tcherni-),  76. 
Chestov  :  see  Shestov. 

Chtchedrine  :  see  Shchedrin. 

Derzhavin,  6,  10. 

Dobrolyoubov,  76. 

Dostoevsky,  42-54. 

Druzhinin,  16. 

Ertel,  83-4. 

Fet  (Foeth  ;  Shenshin),  73. 
Florensky,  104. 

Foeth  :  see  Fet. 

Fonvizin  (Von  Wiesen),  11. 

Garin  (Mikhailovsky),  84. 

Garshin,  83. 


Gertsen  :  see  Herzen. 

Gippius  :  see  Hippius. 

Gogol,  9-10,  12-13. 

Goncharov,  33-5. 

Gorky  (ps.  of  A.  M.  Peshkov),  92-6, 

103-7. 

Griboyedov,  n. 

Grigoriev,  79-80. 

Grigorovich,  16. 

Gumilev,  109-10. 

Herzen,  77-9. 

Hippius  Gippius  (Mme  Merezhkov- 
sky),  102-3. 

Homyakov  :  see  Khomyakov. 

Igor,  Campaign  of,  5. 

Ivanov,  Vyacheslav,  106. 

Joukoffsky  :  see  Zhukovsky. 

Kantemir  ;  see  Cantemir. 

Karamzin,  6. 

Khomyakov,  79. 

Kokhanovsky  Nadezhda  (ps.  of  Mme 
Sokhansky),  36. 

Korolenko,  83. 

Krylov,  11. 

Kuprin,  97. 

Kushchevsky,  39. 

Kuzmin,  109. 

Leontiev,  Constantine,  80-1. 
Lermontov,  9,  12. 

Leskov  (Lyeskov),  39-42. 
Lomonosov,  6. 

Lyeskov  ;  see  Leskov. 

Mandelstam,  no. 

Mayakovsky,  no. 

Maykov,  71. 

Melnikov  :  see  Pechersky. 
Merejkovsky  (Merezhkovsky),  102. 
Merezhkovsky,  Mme  :  see  Hippius. 


120 


Index 


Mikhailovsky,  N.  G.  :  see  Garin. 
Mikhailovsky,  N.  K.,  77. 

Moussorgsky  (Musorgsky),  70. 

Nadson,  75. 

Nekrasov,  73-5. 

Ostrovsky,  67-9,  70. 

Pechersky,  ps.  of  Melnikov,  36. 
Peshkov  :  see  Gorky. 

Pisarev,  76. 

Pisemsky,  35-6,  68-9. 

Polonsky,  72. 

Pomyalovsky,  38. 

Pouchkine  :  see  Pushkin. 

Prishvin,  114. 

Pushkin,  7-9,  1 1. 

Pyeshkov  :  see  Peshkov. 

Remizov,  1 13-14. 

Rozanov,  103. 

Saltykov  (Shchedrin),  36-8. 
Sergeyev-Tsensky,  99. 

Shchedrin  (Chtchedrine)  :  see  Sal¬ 
tykov. 


Shenshin  :  see  Fet. 

Shestov  (Chestov),  103-4. 

Sluchevsky,  75. 

Sokhansky,  Mme  :  see  Kokhanovsky. 
Sologub,  Theodore  (ps.  of  Teternikov), 
106-7,  in-12. 

Soloviev,  Vladimir,  81-2. 
Sukhovo-Kobylin,  69. 

Tchehov  :  see  Chekhov. 
Tchernichevsky  :  see  Chernyshevsky. 
Teternikov  :  see  Sologub. 

Tioutchev  ;  see  Tyutchev. 

Tolstoy,  A.  K.,  70,  72-3. 

Tolstoy,  A.  N.,  1 14. 

Tolstoy,  L.,  42-4,  54-66,  69-70. 
Tourguenefi  :  see  Turgenev. 

Turgenev,  22-33,  68. 

Tyutchev  (Tioutchev),  9. 

Uspensky,  Gleb,  38. 

Von  Wiesen  :  see  Fonvizin. 

Yazykov,  8. 

Zamyatin,  114. 

Zhukovsky  (Joukoffsky),  7. 


Printed  in  England  at  the  Oxford  University  Press 


Date  Due 


3  lyfifi 

.<41 

•, 

1999 

yj  0 

*) 

H 

cta 

PG  2951  M53 

Mirsky,  D.  S.,  Prince,  18 
Modern  Russian  literature 


010101  000 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


PG2951  .M53 

Mirskii,  Dmitrii  Petrovich,  1890- 
Modern  Russian  literature  / 


DATF 


ISSUED  TO  Z.A  CLdL. l2> 


