
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



^Ш^^У 




^^r SUVIC ATJO BALTIC DIVISIQN 

NYPL RESEARCH UBRARlES 

3 3433 07335568 1 






^^£ 




Ч- 



!\i. 



Jt 



m 



r 



1%^ 









i V 






> . 



; -••-) 





Ojy^(:^A/y^AsJE> 



TCHITCHIKOFFS JOURNEYS; 



DEAD SOULS. 



BY 



NIKOLAI VASILIEVITCH GOGOL. 



TRANSLATED FROM THE RUSSIAN 



ISABEL F. HAPGOOD. 



VOLUME XL 



NEW YORK: 
THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO., 
13 AsTOR Place. 



Copyright, 1886, 
By THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO. 



ELECTROTYPED AND PRINTED 

BY RANU AVERY COMPANY, 

BOSTON. 






CONTENTS. 



CHAPTBB PAOB 

I. Tentyotnikoff ; or, The Sorrows of Love, 1 
II. An Ancient Relic of 1812 .... 49 

III. Two Persons who are Original, Each in 

HIS OWN Fashion 64 

IV. Khlobuyoff. — Luxury and Indigence. — 

Tchitchikoff on the Way to become a 
Landed Proprietor . . . . .114 

V. Two Wills. —A Fair. — A Lawyer. — A 

Holy Man. — Arrest and Delivery . 143 

VI. Miseries and Grandeurs of Tchitchikoff. 

— His Opinions in the Lap of Fortune. 204 



TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; 

OB, 

DEAD SOULS. 



CHAPTER I. 

TENTTOTNIKOFF ; OR, THE SORROWS OP LOVE. 

TcHiTCHiKOFF enters an admirable coantry : he advances to a point from 
which a very large village is visible, dominated by the gilded dome of a 
church, and the roofs, decorated with belvederes and attics, of a manor- 
house. — Portrait of the proprietor, according to the testimony of several 
of his neighbors. — He is a human being who smokes, in order that he may 
sulk without any compunctions of conscience. — His immediate surround- 
ings. — His name : Andrei Tentyotnikoff. — Exposition, apropos of him, 
of all the author's ideas as to the best system of education : his opinion on 
the public service, the salons of the Russian grandees, and of what a gen- 
tleman should have in view, when, disgusted with the world, he retiree 
to his own domain. — Scenes accompanying the installation of a pro- 
prietor on his estates. — Tentyotnikoff in love. — Life is suspended, as it 
were, throughout the entire domain, in consequence of a condition of 
things arising from a misunderstanding with the father of liis lady-love. — 
Tchitchikoff wishes to show his gratitude to the excellent Tentyotnikoff 
for the hospitality which he has experienced, by going, almost against 
the will of his host, to make diplomatic calls on Gen. Betrishtcheff, 
and on his daughter, the lovely Ulinka. — Tentyotnikoff places a car- 
riage at our hero's service, in order that the latter may indulge his fancy, 
on condition that he will not do or say any thing that shall have the 
appearance of submission to a man, who, on the score of his epaulets 
alone, takes the liberty, whenever he sees fit, of unceremoniously ad- 
dressing the neighbors and people of his acquaintance as thou. 

Why depict misery upon misery, and the imperfec- 
tion of our lives, by unearthing people from the wil- 
derness, from the remote nooks and corners of our 

1 



2 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

empire? But what is to be done if the character of 
the author is such, that, conscious of his own imper- 
fection, he is unable to depict any thing except misery 
on misery, and the imperfection of our life, unearthing 
people from the wilderness, from remote nooks and 
corners of the empire? And here we have again 
arrived in the wilds, again we have hit upon a distant 
nook. But, on the whole, what a nook, what wilds ! 

Like the gigantic escarpment of some interminable 
fortress, with angles and batteries, the mountainous ele- 
vation extends for more than a thousand versts. G randly 
did it pursue its course across the boundless expanse 
of the plain, now breaking off in the shape of a perpen- 
dicular wall, of a clayey or limestone formation, hollowed 
out into gullies and water-courses, and rounding over 
in a swelling which pleased the eye, covered, as with a 
lambskin coat, with young bushes, which had sprouted 
forth from the trees which had been felled ; and, last 
of all, with dark clumps of forest, which had escaped 
the axe by some miracle. The river, now faithful to 
its banks, makes sharp angles and curves, and now 
retreats to a distance in the meadow, in order, after 
making several windings, to glitter there, like fire be- 
neath the sun, to hide itself in a grove of beeches, 
ash-trees, and alder, and to emerge thence in triumph 
in company with bridges, mills, and dams, which seem 
to pursue it at every step. 

In one spot the steep and lofty side penetrated more 
deeply into the depths of the green curls of the trees, 
thanks to the inequalities of the rocky declyrity. The 
north and the south of the vegetable kingdom met here 
in one spot. The oak, the fir, the wild-pear, the maple, 
the cherry, and the thorn, or the nettle-tree and the 
wild-cherry, wreathed in hops, climbed all over the 



TENT70TNIK0FF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 3 

mountains, from summit to base, now aiding, again 
stifling, each other in their growth. And aloft, at their 
very temples, there were mingled with their verdant 
crests, the red roofs of manorial buildings, the peaks 
and frets of the peasants' cabins concealed in the 
rear, the upper addition to the manor-house, with its 
carved balcony and large, half-rounded window. And 
over all this collection of roofs and trees, the ancient 
church reared its five glittering golden crests. On all 
its domes stood open-work gilt crosses, with pendent 
chains, so that, at a distance, it seemed as though the 
gold, sparkling like burning ducats, hung suspended 
in the air, without support. And all this — roofs, tree- 
tops, and crosses — was charmingly reflected, but in a re- 
versed position, in the river, where hollow and deformed 
willows, standing, some in the water, others on the 
shore, and drooping thence their branches and their 
leaves, all enveloped in river-sponge which floated on 
the water in company with yellow water-lilies, appeared 
to be gazing upon their wondrous reflection. 

The prospect was very beautiful ; but the view from 
above, from the upper portion of the house off in the 
distance, was still finer. No guest or visitor could 
stand unmoved upon the balcony. He could only catch 
his breath with admiration, and exclaim, " Heavens ! 
what an extensive outlook ! ' ' The country lay exposed, 
without end or bounds. Beyond the meadows, dotted 
with groves and water-mills, in divers verdant bands, 
stretched the green forest. Beyond the forest, through 
the air, wl^jh already begins to be veiled in mist, gleam 
^ipllow sands ; and then more forest, which is blue now, 
like the sea, or a cloud spreading far into the distance ; 
then sands again, but pale, though still yellowish in 
hue. ... On the far-off horizon lies a jagged range 



4 TCniTCUIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

of chalky mountains, dazzling in their whiteness, and 
even in cloudy weather seeming to be illuminated by 
the eternal sun. But their brilliant whiteness was 
clouded by something resembling blue spots of smoke 
here and there at their bases. These were distant 
villages, but the human eye could not descry them. 
Only the flashing spark, emitted by the gilded dome 
of a church, beneath the rays of the sun, announced 
that a large settlement of people was situated there. 
All this was wrapped in an unbroken silence, which 
was not even disturbed by the echoes of airy songsters 
who had chanced to come to the neighborhood, and 
which hardly reached the ear. In short, after spend- 
ing two hours upon the balcony, in absorbed contem- 
plation, the guest could find nothing to say, except, 
'* Heavens ! what an extensive outlook ! " 

Who was the inhabitant and owner of this village, 
which, like an impregnable fortress, it was impossible 
to enter directly, but which had to be approached from 
the opposite side, where scattered oaks received the 
visitor courteously, stretching out their drooping boughs 
as though for a friendly embrace, and accompanying 
him to the very front of the house whose upper stories 
we have already seen from behind, and which now 
stood face to face with him, having on one side a row 
of peasants' cabins, displaying peaks and carved sum- 
mits, and on the other a church, glittering with golden 
crosses, and with a golden open-work pattern of chains 
suspended in the air? To what fortunate individual 
did this labyrinth belong ? 

To a proprietor of the Tremalakhansky district, 
Andrei Ivanovitch Tentyotnikoff, a lucky young fellow 
of thirty, who was still unmarried. 

Who is he ? what is he ? what qualities, what capaci- 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, ТПЕ SORROWS OF LOVE, 5 

ties, -has the man? We must inquire of his neigh- 
bors, — of his neighlwrs, dear readers. One neigh- 
bor, belonging to the family of clever, but now quite 
extinct, retired staff-officers of the fire-brigade, ex- 
pressed his opinion of him with the laconic phrase, 
"A most perfect beast!" A general, who lived at 
a distance of ten versts, said, *'He is by no means 
a stupid young man, but he has got a great many 
queer notions into his head. I might be of service to 
him, for I am not without influence in Petersburg, and 
even with "... The general did not finish his speech. 
The captain-ispravnik communicated this turn to his 
answer: "There's something low about him — he's a 
worthless fellow ; and I must go after him to-morrow 
for his arrears! " The muzhiks of his village, when 
questioned as to what sort of a man their master was, 
made no reply at all. So, of course, their opinion of 
him was unfavorable. 

But, to speak dispassionately, he was not a bad fel- 
low : he was simply a cumberer of the earth. Since 
there are a great many people in the wide world who 
are utterly useless, why should not Tentyotnikoff be so 
too? 

Now, here, for instance, is a day from his life, ex- 
actly like all the rest ; and admitting that it is from his 
life, and exactly like his life, let the reader judge for 
himself as to what his character was, and in what 
measure his life corresponded with the beauty which 
surrounded him. 

He woke very late in the morning ; and on rising, he 
eat for a long time on his bed, rubbing his eyes. And, 
since his eyes were unfortunately small, this operation 
lasted a remarkably long time ; and during the whole 
interval, his man, Mikhailo, stood at the door, with a 



6 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

hand-basin and a towel. This poor Mikhailo stood an 
hour, then another hour ; then he went to the kitchen, 
and came back again : the master was still rubbing his 
eyes, and sitting on his bed. Finally he rose from his 
bed, washed himself, put on his dressing-gown, and 
came out into the drawing-room to drink tea, coffee, 
cocoa, and even boiled milk, sipping a little of all of 
them, crumbling his bread mercilessly, and scattering 
ashes from his pipe everywhere, with perfect heedless- 
ness. He sat two hours over his tea, and that was 
not all : he took a cold cup of it, and walked to the 
window which looked on the court-yard ; and at the 
window, the following scene took place every day : — 

First of all, Grigoriy, a house-serf, who acted as 
butler, roared at Perfilievna, the housekeeper, in nearly 
these terms : '' You clumsy, big, rebellious darling ! 
you worthless hussy ! You might, at least, hold your 
noise, you disgusting woman ! ** 

'' And don't you want that? " shrieked the worthless 
woman, making an insulting sign wijth her hand. 
Perfilievna was a coarse woman in her actions, in spite 
of the fact that she was fond of raisins, fruit-tarts, 
and all sorts of sweets, which she kept under her lock 
and key. 

" You have entered into a compact with the steward, 
you storehouse good-for-nothing ! " shouted Grigoriy. 

'' Yes, and the steward is just such another thief as 
you. Do you think that the master doesn't know you? 
why, he's here, he is listening." 

" Where's the master? " 

" There he is, sitting by the window : he sees every 
thing." 

And the master really was sitting at the window, and 
saw every thing. 



TENTTOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 7 

To complete the uproar, a child belonging to a house- 
serf, which had received a hearty slap from its mother, 
screamed at the top of its voice; and a greyhound 
howled, as he sat flat on the earth, because of the hot 
water with which the cook had ducked him as the latter 
chased him from the kitchen. In short, every thing 
was screaming and wailing intolerably. The master 
saw and heard it all. And it was only when it became 
so unendurable that it prevented his doing any thing 
whatever, that he sent out to say that they must make 
less noise. 

Two hours before dinner, he retired to his study, to 
engage in a serious composition, which was designed 
to embrace all Russia, from all points of view, — from 
the political, the social, the religious, the philosophical, 
— to solve difficult questions put to her by time, and 
to clearly define her great future ; every thing, in short, 
in that form and fashion in which the man of the day 
likes to put things to himself. This colossal under- 
taking was limited, however, by thought alone: he 
nibbled his pen, drawings made their appearance on 
the paper, and then every thing was thrown aside, and 
a book was taken in hand, and not dropped again until 
dinner-time. This book was perused with the soup, the 
salad, the roast, and even with the pastry, so that some 
dishes grew cold, and some were even removed un- 
tasted. After this came a pipe and coffee, and a game 
of chess with himself. What he did afterwards until 
Bupper-time, it would be hard to say. He appears to 
have simply done nothing. 

And thus did one utterly solitary young man of thirty 
pass the time in sitting about constantly in his dressing- 
gown, without any neckcloth. He did not walk ; he did 
not even want to go up-stairs, to look off in the dis- 



8 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

tance and at the view; he did not wish to open the 
windows to admit fresh air to the room ; and the sight 
of the beautiful village, which no visitor could help 
admiring, was as though it did not exist for its owner. 
From this, the reader will see that Andrei Ivanovitch 
Tentyotnikoff belonged to that class of people which 
is not extinct in Russia, and who were formerly called 
sluggards and lazy-bones, and who are now called, I 
know not what. Are such characteristics born with a 
man ? or are they developed later in life, begotten by the 
gloomy circumstances with which the man is hemmed 
in ? In lieu of a reply to this, it will be better to relate 
the history of this man's childhood and bringing-up. 

It seemed as though every thing conspired to make 
something odd out of him. As a sharp-witted lad of 
twelve, of a half -thoughtful character, and a half-sickly 
constitution, he entered an institution of learning, 
whose head at that time was a very remarkable man. 
The idol of youth, the wonderful teacher, the incompar- 
able Alexander Petrovitch, was endowed with the gift 
of divining the nature of a man. How he did understand 
the character of the Russian man ! How he undei*stood 
children ! How well he knew how to move them I 
There was not a mischief-maker who did not come to 
him, after playing a prank, and confess of his own 
accord. But this was not all : the player of pranks did 
not leave the master's presence with drooping head, but 
he held it well in the air, with a hearty desire to atone 
for his fault. There was something encouraging in 
Alexander Petrovitch' s very reproof, something which 
said, " Forward ! Rise as quickly as possible to your 
feet, without heeding your fall ! " He called ambition 
the force which stimulates the qualities of a man 
onward, and he endeavored to arouse it. With him 



TENTYOTNIKOFF ; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 9 

there was no question of good behavior. He generally 
said, 'Ч require brains, and nothing else. He who 
bends his mind on becoming wise, will have no time for 
pranks: mischief will disappear of itself." And bad 
behavior actually did disappear of itself, however 
naughty the player of pranks might seem. The boy 
who would not have otherwise exerted himself to im- 
prove, was moved by the scorn of his comrades. The 
grown-up asses and fools had to endure the most offen- 
sive nicknames from the youngest, and dared not touch 
the latter with so much as a finger. Every one who did 
not try to be wise in this teacher's school, and to make 
progress in learning, was called a fool, and was the 
object of endless jest and insults. The clever boys not 
only made sport of the stupid ones, but they could even 
beat the latter ; and the latter dared not raise a finger 
against them, and had to bear it, even when they were 
wholly in the right. 

" This is too much," said many. '' The clever boys 
will turn out conceited." 

" No, it is not too much," said he : '' I do not keep 
incapables long ; one course is enough for them : but I 
have another course for the clever ones." And all the 
clever ones really received a different course from him. 
He was reproached with letting the clever boys have 
their own way too much, and for permitting them to 
laugh at, and even to insult, those who were less gifted. 
To this he replied, '' What am I to do? I am passion- 
ately fond of clever boys, and I want every one to see 
it." Their slightest thought was known to him. He 
did not seem to look at them, but like a magician con- 
cealed in an unapproachable, secret hut, he observed all 
their tendencies and capacities ; and therefore he did 
not heed wild deeds, perceiving in them the beginning 



10 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

of the development of spiritual qualities, and saying 
that they were useful to him, as eruptions are useful to 
a physician, that he may know with certainty what 
there is inside a man. How all the boys loved him ! 
No, there never was such attachment of children to 
their parents. No, not even in the senseless years of 
senseless outbursts, is unquenchable passion so strong 
as was their love for him. The grateful pupil, to the 
end of his life, to his grave, when he raised his glass 
on the birthday of his wonderful teacher, who had long 
been in the tomb, covered his eyes, and shed tears. . . . 

There was a multitude of branches of learning, and 
subjects, which he regarded as superfluous, and as apt 
to retard the independent development of the mind. 
With him, a great deal of time was devoted to manual 
labor in the garden, and to strengthening the body. 

The slightest encouragement from him threw a boy 
into a tremble, and a joyful quiver, and stimulated his 
ambitious desire to excel all others. . . . How the lad 
envied those who were in the higher course, and en- 
joyed the possibility of being always with their master ! 
This higher course, Alexander Petrovitch gave only to 
those who were the best endowed, — the most superior 
of all. ... He thought that boys of limited capacity 
should not be wearied with a prolonged session, any 
more than children. ... He did not detain the ungif ted 
long ; for them he had a brief course : but the gifted 
were obliged to undergo double instruction ; and the 
last class, which he kept for the choice spirits alone, 
did not in the least resemble the corresponding one in 
other institutions. There only did he demand of his 
pupil all that others foolishly require of children, — 
that higher understanding, which knows how to» re- 
frain from laughing, but which can endure every sort 



TENTTOTNIKOFF t OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 11 

of ridicule, — which can condescend to the fool, and 
neither become vexed, nor lose its self-command, nor 
take vengeance under any circumstances, but which 
abides in the proud tranquillity of an undisturbed soul ; 
and every thing which is adapted to develop a lad into 
a man of firm character was there brought into play, 
and the master himself was constantly putting them to 
the proof. Oh, how well did he understand the science 
of life ! 

He did not have many pupils. The greater part of the 
branches he taught himself. He understood how to give 
the very marrow of the subject, without pedantic ter- 
minology, or pompous views or speculations, and so 
that it was plain to the youngest that it was necessary 
to them. Only those branches of learning were chosen 
which were adapted to make of a man a good citizen 
of his own country. The greater part of the lessons 
consisted in stories about what awaited the young man 
in the future ; and he understood how to so sketch out 
the horizon of his career, that the youth lived mind 
and soul in the service while still on his school-bench. 
The master, hiding nothing, set before the boy, in all 
their nakedness, the bitterness and the hinderances which 
arise in the path of a man, and all the trials and temp- 
tations which awaited him. He knew every thing, just 
as though he had himself passed through every rank 
and calling. Whether it was from this cause, that 
ambition was so strongly aroused in them, or because 
there was something in the very eyes of the extraordi- 
nary teacher, which said to the youth, " Forward ! " — 
that word which is known to the Russian man, and 
which works wonders on his sensitive organization, — 
at all events, the youths, from the very start, sought 
only difiSculties, thirsting only to be in action there, 



12 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

where the greatest hardships existed, — where it was 
necessary to display the utmost firmness of soul. Few 
graduated from this course ; but those few were men of 
might, — men who had smelt of powder in the service. 
They remained firm, on the most insecure of places; 
while many, who were much more clever than they, did 
not endure, but abandoned every thing because of 
petty personal vexations, or, having become dull and 
lazy, found themselves in the hands of bribe-taKers 
and rogues. But these men wavered not, and knowing 
both life and men, and being wise with true wisdom, 
exercised a lюwerful influence on the evil-disposed. 

How this wonderful teacher startled Andrei Ivano- 
vitch in his boyhood ! The fiery heart of the ambitious 
lad, for a long time, leaped at the very thought of en- 
tering the higher courae ; and the sixteen-year-old Ten- 
tyotnikoff, having distanced all the lads of his own age, 
was counted worthy of being transferred to the highest 
class as one of the best, but did not believe it himself. 
What, to all appearances, could be better for our Ten- 
tyotnikoff than this instructor? But fate would have 
it so, that, at the very time when he was transferred to 
this class of the elect, — a thing which he had very 
ardently desired, — the remarkable teacher, whose 
word of encouragement alone thiew him into a sweet 
confusion, should fall ill, and die shortly after ! Oh ! 
what a blow this wa3 for him ! How terrible was this, 
his first loss ! It seemed to him as though every thing 
in the academy were altered. In the place of Alexan- 
der Petrovitch came a certain Feodor Ivanovitch, a 
good and painstaking man, but one who held utterly 
different views of things. In the easy unconstraint of 
the boys of the first class, he thought that he saw in- 
tractability. He began by instituting among them cer- 



TENTTOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 13 

tain outward forms of order ; he required the young 
fellows to preserve unbroken silence, and that under 
no circumstances should they walk except in pairs ; he 
even began by measuring the distance from couple ,to 
couple with the a?'s7uV-stick. At table, he arranged 
them according tx) size, for the sake of appearances, 
and not according to capacity ; so that the stupid boys 
got the best bits, and the clever boys the remnants. 
All this provoked grumbling, especially when the new 
master, in direct contravention of the practice of his 
predecessor, announced that brains and fine progress 
in their studies signified nothing to him ; that he looked 
only at conduct ; that if a boy studied badly, but be- 
haved well, he should show him a preference over the 
clever boy. But it was precisely that which he aimed 
at, that Feodor Ivanovitch did not attain. Secret 
pranks began. Every thing went like clock-work in 
the daytime, but at night there was rioting. 

In the higher class, also, he turned every thing 
upside down. He introduced all sorts of new ways, 
with the best intentions in the world, but all in 
vain. . . . 

Something odd happened to the branches of study 
also. New instructors were engaged, who had new- 
fangled notions, and fresh angles and points of view. 
The teachers overwhelmed their hearers with a multi- 
tude of new words and terms ; in their exiK)sitions 
they displayed both logical sequence and conformity to 
new discoveries, and the fervor of personal enthusiasm : 
but, alas ! life alone was lacking in this instruction. 
Dead science appeared as a corpse in their mouths. 
In short, every thing went in the opposite way from 
what it had gone before. But the worst feature of all 

1 Twenty-eight inches. 



14 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

was, that respect for their rulers, and the powers in 
general, disappeared : the boys began to laugh at their 
instructors, and at those in authority over them ; they 
began to speak of the director as Feodka the roll, 
and by divers other names. Vice, which was not at all 
childish, was introduced ; and such doings took place, 
that it became necessary to expel, and send away, 
many of the pupils. In two years it was impossible 
to recognize the school. 

Andrei Ivanovitch was of a quiet disposition. He 
could not be led astray by the nightly orgies of his 
schoolmates, who committed their evil deeds in full 
view of the windows of the principal's quarters, nor 
by their mockery of holy things, which arose because 
the pope chanced not to be a very clever man. No, 
even in his dreams his mind recognized its heavenly 
origin. But he hung his head: his ambition was 
aroused, but there was no career of active occupation 
open to him. It would have been better not to arouse 
it. He listened to tUfe enthusiastic professors at their 
lectures, and recalled his former instructor, who knew 
how to talk in intelligible terms without becoming ex- 
cited. What courses and subjects did he not hear! 
Medicine and chemistry, philosophy, law, and the uni- 
versal history of mankind, on such a vast scale that 
in three years the professor succeeded in reading the 
introduction only, and the development of the munici- 
pal idea in some German cities or other ; and God only 
knows what he listened to ! But all this lingered in his 
brain in formless masses. Tlianks to his native sense, 
he was conscious that he ought not to be taught in that 
manner ; but the proper way lie did not know. And he 
often recalled Alexander Petrovitch, and grew so sad 
that he did not know what to do with himself for grief. 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 15 

But youth is happy in this, that it has a future. In 
proportion as the time of his departure drew nigh, his 
heart began to beat more violently. He said to him- 
self, "Surely, this is not life; this is only the prepa- 
ration for life : real life lies in the service ; that is tlie 
place for action." And without even glancing at the 
marvellously beautiful little nook, which made such 
an impression on .every visitor, without paying obei- 
sance to the dust of his parents, he betook himself, 
after the custom of all ambitious men, to Petersburg, 
whither, as is well known, all our spirited young fel- 
lows hasten, from every quarter of Russia, to enter 
the seiTice, to shine, to complete their terra of service, 
or simply to skim the surface of the colorless, decep- 
tive culture of society, which is as cold as ice. An- 
drei Ivanovitch's ambitious aspirations were promptly 
quelled, however, at the very beginning by his uncle, 
Onufriy Ivanovitch, an actual councillor of state. The 
latter declared that the chief point was a good hand- 
writing, and nothing else whatever ; that, without this, 
one could not obtain admission to a minister, or to any 
imperial functionaries. At last, with great difficulty, 
and with the assistance of his uncle's influence, he se- 
cured an appointment in some department or ,other. 
When he was conducted into the light and magnificent 
hall, with its inlaid floor and varnished writing-desks, 
which looked as though the greatest grandees of the 
empire sat at them, and dealt with the fate of the 
whole country ; when he beheld the legions of hand- 
some gentlemen who were writing there, moving their 
pens noisily, and inclining their heads on one side ; 
and when they placed him at a table, and at once gave 
him a document — intentionally of little importance — 
to copy (it was a correspondence about three rubles, 



16 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

which had been going on for half a year) , — an ex- 
traordinarily odd sensation took possession of him. It 
seemed to him as though he were in some primary 
school, in order to get his education all over again. 
It was as though he had been degraded from the upi)er 
to the lower class for some prank : the gentlemen 
who were seated around him were so very much like 
scholars. To complete the likeness, some of them 
were reading a stupid romance, which they had placed 
between the large sheets of a document in process of 
settlement, in order that they might seem to be occu- 
pied with their business ; and they trembled every time 
that the head of the department made his appearance. 
Thus, it all seemed very strange to him : his former 
occupations seemed better than those of the present 
moment, and his preparation for the service superior 
to the service itself. He began to regret his school. 
And all at once, Alexander Petrovitch stood so vividly 
before liim that he came near bursting -into tears. The 
room spun round, the officials and the tables became 
all mixed up, and he with difficulty conquered the mo- 
mentary obscuration of his faculties. " No," he said 
on recovering himself, "I will set to work, no matter 
how petty that work may seem in the beginning!" 
Summoning strength to his heart and spirit, he resolved 
to acquit himself of his service in imitation of the rest. 
Where is enjoyment not to be had? People live in 
Petersburg in spite of its gloomy, repellent exterior. 
The fierce frost, which comes with thirty degrees of 
temperature, crackles in the streets ; that child of the 
North, the witch-whirlwind, howls, sweeping the side- 
walks, blinding the eyes, powdering fur collars, men's 
mustaches, and the hairy muzzles of animals : but 
somewhere, on the fourth floor, a tiny window shines 



TENTTOTNIKOFF; OR, ТПЕ SORROWS OF LOVE. 17 

cheerfully through the snow-flakes, which are whirling 
in every direction ; in a comfortable little chamber, a 
conversation which warms both heart and soul is beins: 
carried on by the light of modest tallow candles, and, 
to the accompaniment of the noisy samovar, a brilliant 
page is being read from some inspired Russian poet, 
such as God has vouchsafed to Russia ; and the heart 
of youth quivers with an ennobling flame, such as is 
unknown under the voluptuous Southern skies of other 
lands. 

Teutyotnikoff speedily became used to the service, 
only it did not come to be his chief aim and object, 
as he had supix)sed at first that it would be, but some- 
thing of secondary importance. It served as a means 
of dividing his time, causing him to set a higher value 
on the moments which remained to him. His uncle, 
the actual councillor of state, had begun to think that 
his nephew was going to do him credit, when all of a 
sudden this nephew disappointed him. Among the 
friends of Andrei Ivanovitch, — and these were nu- 
merous, — there chanced to be two who were what is 
called "embittered men." They possessed those un- 
easy and peculiar characters which not only cannot 
endure with equanimity real injustice, but even that 
which seems in their eyes to be unjust. Good men at 
the outset, disorderly in their own conduct, demanding 
consideration for themselves, and, at the same time, 
filled with intolerance towards others, they acted pow- 
erfully on him by means of their fiery language, and 
the manner in which they evinced a noble indignation 
against society. After having awakened in him the 
nerves and spirit of irritability, they called to his atten- 
tion all those trifles to which he would not have thought 
of paying any heed before. Feodor Feodorovitch Lye- 



18 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

nitzuin, the chief of one of the departments which were 
located in those magnificent halls, suddenly incurred 
his displeasure. He began to seek out a multitude of 
shortcomings in the latter. It seemed to him that Lye- 
nitzuin, in conversations with his superiors, turned en- 
tirely into a kind of artificial sugar, — and into vinegar 
when he addressed himself to a subordinate ; that, after 
the manner of all petty individuals, he took note of 
those who presented themselves with congratulations 
for him on festive occasions, and revenged himself on 
those whose names did not appear on the porter's list ; 
and in consequence of this, Andrei Ivanovitch felt a 
nervous disgust for him. Some evil spirit incited him 
to do something unpleasant to Feodor Feodorovitch. 
For a long time he sought an opportunity with spe- 
cial delight, and at length he succeeded. He once 
addressed Feodor Feodorovitch with so much imperti- 
nence that he received an intimation from the authori- 
ties that he must either ask pardon, or send in his 
resignation. He sent in his resignation. His uncle, 
the actual councillor of state, came to him in alarm, 
with entreaties: "For Christ's sake, Andrei Ivano- 
vitch, consider! what are you doing? Abandoning a 
career so auspiciously begun simply because you hap- 
pened not to like the chief? Reflect! Who are you? 
What is this to you? Why, if such things were to be 
noticed, no one would remain in the service. Recon- 
sider the matter, mortify your pride, go and explain 
•things to him ! ** 

"That is not the point, uncle," said his nephew. 
"It is not hard for me to ask his pardon. I am in the 
wrong : he is the chief, and it was not proper to speak 
to him in that manner. But the question is this :. I 
have another service, — three hundred souls of peasants, 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, TUE SORROWS OF LOVE. 19 

an estate in disorder, and a fool for a steward. The 
empire will suffer but little loss if some other man is 
set to copying documents in the office in my stead, but 
there will be a vast loss if three hundred men do not 
pay their taxes. What do you think about it? I am 
a land-owner ... if I busy myself with the preserva- 
tion, care, and amelioration of the lot of those who are 
intrusted to my oversight, and if I present to the empire 
three hundred upright, sober, and industrious subjects, 
in what way is my service inferior to the service of some 
head of a department — Lyenitzuin, for instance? " 

The actual councillor of state stood with his mouth 
wide open in amazement. Such a torrent of words he 
had not expected. After reflecting for a space, he 
began again in this fashion : " But still, . . . never- 
theless . . . how can you bury yourself in the country ? 
What sort of society can there be among the muzhiks? 
Here, at all events, you may encounter a general or a 
prince in the street. You will pass some one . . . 
there . . . well ; and lighting with gas, and busy Eu- 
rope ; and there every one you meet is either a peasant 
or a woman. And why . . . why condemn yourself 
to barbarity for your whole life? " 

But the convincing arguments of the uncle had no 
effect on the nephew. The latter had wearied of the 
department and of the capital. The country had begun 
to present itself to him in the light of a comfortable 
retreat, the refresher of mind and thought ; as the only 
career of useful activity. He had already unearthed 
the newest books on the subject of village economy. 

Within two weeks after this conversation, Teutyot- 
nikoff was in the neighborhood of those scenes where his 
childhood had been passed, not far from the very beau- 
tiful nook which no visitor or guest was ever able to 



20 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

admire sufficiently. Forracr impressions, wliich had 
not made their way to tlie surface for a very long 
time, began to awaken within him. He had already 
entirely forgotten some spots ; and he gazed with 
curiosity upon the magnificent views, like a new- 
comer. And, io! for some unknown reason, his 
heart began to beat on a sudden. When the path 
skirted a narrow ravine amid the brushwood of the 
dense forest ; when he gazed up and down, and beheld 
above him, below him, oaks of three hundred years, 
which three men could barely span, mingled with white 
pine, elms, and black poplar, and the smaller poplars, 
with which the summit was overgrown ; and when, 
in answer to the query, '* Whose forest is this?" he 
was told, " Tentyotuikoff's ; " when, emerging from the 
forest, the road ran through meadows, past groves of 
quivering aspefa, of young and old willows, and grape- 
vines, in sight of the heights which stretched afar, and 
flew over bridges, which crossed one and the same river 
in two separate places, leaving it now on the right, and 
now on the left ; and when, in answer to the query, 
*' Whose are these fields and water-meadows?" the 
answer was, " Tentyotnikoff's ; " when the road again 
ascended the heights, and ran along the level plateau, 
past unreaped harvests of wheat, rye, and barley 
on the one hand, and on the other past all the places 
which he had previously traversed, and which pre- 
sented themselves, all of a sudden, foreshortened by 
the distance ; and when, as darkness gradually de- 
scended, the way entered again beneath the shadows 
of luxuriant trees, scattered over the carpet of green- 
sward up to the very entrance of the village, and the 
peasants' cabins made their appearance here and there, 
together with the red roofs of the manor-house and 



TENTYOTNIKOFFi OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 21 

its dependent buildings, and the golden spires of the 
church gleamed brightly; when he became conscious, 
without putting any questions, by his hotly beating 
heart, what the place was at which he had arrived, — 
the sensations and thoughts which had been incessantly 
accumulating burst into expression in the following 
words: '^ Well, and have not I been a fool hitherto? 
Fate destined me to be the owner of an earthly para- 
dise, and I bound myself into servitude as a scribbler 
of dead documents ! The idea — after having studied, 
received an education, become enlightened, and accu- 
mulated a store of the knowledge which is requisite for 
the dissemination of good among the people around 
me, for the amelioration of a whole district, for the 
fulfilment of the multifarious duties incumbent on a 
landed proprietor, who appears also in the character of 
judge — of intrusting this place to a steward, — of pre- 
ferring the conduct of affairs at a distance among peo- 
ple on whom I have never set eyes, whose character 
and qualities I am not acquainted with, — to prefer to 
this actual management the fantastic paper manage- 
ment of provinces situated a thousand versts away, 
where I have never set foot, and where I can commit 
only a heap of contradictions and absurdities ! *' 

But another spectacle was awaiting him. Having 
learned of the impending arrival of their master, the 
muzhiks and women had assembled on the porch. 
JSoroki,^ киЫщ^ kerchiefs, peasant-kirtles, beards, with 
all the picturesque accessories of a handsome population, 
surrounded him, when the words, "O thou our nour- 
isher ! " rang out, and the old men and women burst into 

^ Linen bead-dreeeee, stitched with colored wool or yarn, worn by peasant- 
women in the Ural. 
* Also head-dresses. \ 



22 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

involuntary teare as they recalled his grandfather and 
his great-grandfather : he could not refrain from tears 
himself, and said to himself, ^^ How much love! And 
for what? Because I have never seen them, never 
troubled myself about them!'* And he made avow 
to share their labors with them, to attend to them, in 
order that their love might not be in vain, and in order 
that he might really be their " nourisher." 

Accordingly, he began to take charge of the man- 
agement, and to make various arrangements. He 
diminished the compulsory service to the lord of the 
manor, deducting the days of labor from those due to 
the proprietor, and adding them to the time allowed 
to the peasant. He dismissed the fool of an overseer. 
He began to examine into every thing himself ; to show 
himself in the fields, at the threshing-floor, at the 
grain-ricks, at the mills, the landing-places, at the lad- 
ing and launching of barks and flat-boats. 

"There he is: see the brisk-legged fellow!*' the 
peasants began to say ; and they even began to grow 
indolent, and to scratch the backs of their heads. 

But this did not last long. The muzhik is quick to 
learn the lay of the land. He speedily comprehended, 
that although the master was alert, and also fond of 
taking hold of a number of things, as to the proper 
way of treating them, he had no idea as yet; and 
though he 8[юке in a scholarly manner, it was not to 
the purpose. The result was, that the master and the 
peasant, for no substantial reason, not only did not 
understand each other in the least, and did not sing in 
harmony, but were incapable of uttering the same note. 

Tentyotnikoff began to observe that every thing on 
the land belonging to him thrived worse than it did on 
the peasants' land. The seed was sown earlier, but 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 23 

came up later ; and yet the men worked well, to all ap- 
pearances. He even presided over the work in person, 
and ordered a measure of brandy to be given to each 
man who worked assiduously. The peasants' rye had 
eared, their oats had yielded bountifully, their millet 
had developed stalks long before his grain had made 
more than a beginning of acquiring a stem, and while 
the base of the ear was as yet unset. In a word, the 
master began to perceive that the peasants were simply 
cheating him, in spite of all the privileges which he 
had conferred upon them. 

He tried reproof, but received some such answer as 
the following: "How is it possible, master, that we 
should not rejoice in our lord's profit? You have 
graciously observed for yourself how hard we tried when 
we were ploughing and sowing. You ordered a measure 
of vodka apiece for us because we did so." What 
reply could be made to that? 

" But why has it turned out badly now? '* the master 
pursued his interrogations. 

"Who knows? Evidently a worm has devoured it 
from below. And just see what a summer it has 
been : there's been no rain at all." 

But the master saw that no worm had devoured the 
peasants' crops from below, and that the rain had 
fallen in a peculiar streak : it had favored the peasants, 
but had not shed one drop on the. proprietor's fields. 

It was still more difficult for him to manage the 
women. They were continually begging off from their 
work, and complaining of the master's impositions. It 
was strange ! He had utterly abolished all tributes of 
linen, berries, mushrooms, and nuts : he had released 
them from fully half of their other labors, thinking 
that the women would devote this time to domestic 



24 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

affairs ; that they would mend and make their hus- 
bands' clothes, and increase their vegetable gardens. 
Nothing of tlie sort took place. 

Idleness, quarrelling, gossiping, and all sorts of 
dissension arose among the fair sex, so that their hus- 
bands were continually coming to him with such words 
as these : " Master, take away that devil of a woman ! 
she's a perfect fiend : there's no living for her ! *' 

He hardened his heart, and tried to resort to stern- 
ness. But how could he be stern ? The woman would 
come to him in regular feminine fashion, weak and ill 
and whining, with the most horrible and disgusting 
rags heaped и^юп her, — where she had got them, God 
only knows ! "Go away, go home ! only take your- 
self out of my sight ! God be with you ! " said poor 
Tentyotnikoff ; and then he saw the sick woman, just as 
soon as she had emerged from his doors, get into a 
fight with a neighbor over a beet, and belabor the lat- 
ter' s sides in a way of which a healthy man would 
have been incapable. 

It occurred to him to try the experiment of establish- 
ing a school among them, but this resulted in such 
folly that he hung his head in shame : it would have 
been better if he had not thought of it. In law mat- 
ters and investigations, all the fine legal points into 
which the philosophical professors had inducted him 
were absolutely of no avail.- One side lied, and the 
other side lied ; and the deuce only could make head or 
tail of the matter. He perceived that what was more 
needed than legal quiddities and philosophical books, 
was simply a knowledge of manhind ; and he saw that 
he was deficient in some way, but how, God alone 
knows. And then a state of things came about, such 
as frequently does occur : the peasant did not learn to 



TENTYOTNIKGFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 25 

know his master, neither did the master learn to know 
his peasant; and the peasant turned his worst side 
to his master, while the master turned his worst side to 
the peasant, — and the zeal of the proprietor lessened. 
He superintended the work in an inattentive way. 
When the scythes were rustling softly through the 
grass, or the men were piling the hay in stacks, or load- 
ing it on wagons, if the village labor was performed 
close at hand, his eyes gazed ever into the dis- 
tance: if the work was proceeding at a distance, 
they sought objects near at hand, or glanced aside 
at some bend of the river, along whose banks walked 
the red-billed, red-legged marten — the bird, of course, 
not the man. He gazed at it with curiosity, as it held a 
fish, which it had caught from the bank, crosswise in 
its bill, as though meditating whether to swallow it, or 
not, and gazing intently at the same time across the 
river at another marten, who gleamed white in the dis- 
tance, and who had not caught a fish, but was staring 
fixedly at the marten who had. Or, deserting both 
martens and the bend of the river, screwing his eyes 
tight together, and throwing up his head to the airy ex- 
panse, he resigned himself to drinking in the perfume 
of the fields by the sense of smell, while his ear was 
surprised by the voices of the melodious tenants of the 
air, when from everywhere, from heaven and earth, 
they unite in one harmonious chorus, never inhar- 
monious with each other. The woodcock pipes in 
the rye, the landrail croaks in the grass, the linnets 
grumble and twitter as they flit past, the marsh-snipe 
shrieks as he rises in the air, the trills of the lark roll 
down an invisible ladder of air, and the notes of the 
stork ring out like the blasts of a trumpet as it out- 
lines a triangle in the sky, and the whole neighborhood, 



26 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

converted into sound, gives back an echo. ... О 
my Maker! how far more beautiful is thy world in 
the solitudes, in a tiny hamlet, remote from the rascally 
highways and towns ! But this, too, began to bore 
him. He soon ceased to visit the fields altogether, sat 
in his own room, and refused even to receive the re- 
ports of the steward. 

At first people from the neighborhood came to visit 
him, — a retired lieutenant of hussars, soaked through 
and through with tobacco-smoke ; and a student, who 
had not completed his course, who held decided opin- 
ions, and had gathered his wisdom from current pam- 
phlets and newspapei-s. But this also began to bore 
him. Their conversation began to seem to him some- 
what superficial: their European frankness of inter- 
course, accompanied as it was with taps on the knee, 
and other familiarities, seemed quite too frank and 
straightforward. He decided to cut short his acquaint- 
ance with every one, and he effected this in a rather 
abrupt manner. This was the way of it: when tlie 
most agreeable of all the superficial conversers on all^ 
topics, the representative of the now extinct colonel, 
brand-major^^ and, at the same time, the herald of the 
new order of thought, Varvar Nikolaitch Vishnepokro- 
moff, came to him, in order to indulge in a long talk 
on politics and philosophy, and literature and morals, - 
and even on the condition of the finances in England, 
— he sent out to say that he was not at home, and, at 
the same time, was so indiscreet as to show himself at - 
the window. The glances of host and guest met. One, 
of course, muttered between his teeth, "The beast! " 
The other, in his vexation, sent some word like 
"pig" after the first. The acquaintanceship ended 

1 Brand-majoTt head of the fire<de|>artment in the capital. 



\ 



TENTTOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 27 

there. From that time forth, no one went to his 
house. 

He was glad of it, and devoted himself to planning 
a great work on Russia. The manner in which he pur- 
sued this operation, the reader has already seen. Still, 
it is impossible to assert that there was not a single 
minute in which he was thoroughly aroused from sleep. 
When the post brought him the newspapers and ga- 
zettes, and he came upon the familiar name of some 
former comrade in print, who had already succeeded in 
winning a conspicuous position in the imperial service, 
or had contributed an important addition to science or 
to universal progress, a secret and quiet sorrow pene- 
trated his heart, and a pained, speechlessly sad, gentle 
complaint at his own inaction involuntarily burst forth. 
Then his life appeared to him to be hateful and repul- 
sive. Then the vanished years of his life at school 
rose before him with extraordinary vividness, and 
Alexander Petrovitch suddenly stood before him, as 
though he were alive . . . and the tears lюured from 
his eyes in streams. 

What signifled these tears ? Did the pining soul re- 
veal in them the depressing secret of its disease, — 
that the exalted inner man which had begun to take 
form within him had not succeeded in filltng out its 
outlines, and fixing itself firmly? that, inexperienced 
from his very youth, in contending with failure he had 
not attained to that lofty state of mind where he could 
rise and grow strong on obstacles and limitations? that, 
after having been heated, like molten metal, the pre- 
cious hoard of grand sensations had not assumed the 
final moulds ? that his remarkable teacher had died too 
soon ; and that there was no one now in all the earth 
who could arouse the powej^ rendered insecure by 



28 TCHlTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

perpetual indecision, and deprived of all elasticity by 
an in firmness of will ; who could utter to his soul, in a 
rousing shout, this word of encouragement, '* For- 
ward ! '' which the Russian man thirsts for eveiy where, 
as he stands on the steps of all classes of society, and 
trades and callings? 

Who is he who has understood how to say to us, in 
our native tongue, that all-powerful word, forward? 
Who, knowing all the powers and qualities and all the 
depths of our nature, with one enchanting signal of the 
hand, could have directed us to this higher life? With 
what tears, with what love, would the grateful Russian 
man have requited him ! But century after century 
passes by in shameful indolence, and Russia is encom- 
passed with the senseless activity of immature youth, 
and God grants no man who knows how to pronounce 
that all-powerful word ! 

One circumstance came near rousing Tentyotnikoff, 
and nearly brought about some change in his character. 
Something in the nature of a love-affair took place. 
But that matter came to nothing. In the neighbor- 
hood, about ten versts from Tentyotnikoff's village, 
dwelt a general, who expressed himself, as we have 
seen, in not too flattering terms with regard to him. 
The general lived as a general should, — exercised hos- 
pitality, was fond of having the neighbors come to pay 
him their respects, talked in a hoarse voice, read books ; 
and had a daughter, — a being such as had never been 
seen before. It sometimes is vouchsafed to a man to 
behold something of the sort in his dreams ; and from 
that time forth, all his life long, he reflects upon that 
vision : reality has disappeared forever for him, and 
he is absolutely good for nothing. 

Her name was Ulinka. She had been rather strange- 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, ТПЕ SORROWS OF LOVE, 29 

ly brought up. An English woman, who did not know a 
word of Russian, had educated her. She had lost her 
mother in infancy. Her father had no time to attend 
to her. Moreover, as he loved his daughter to mad- 
ness, he might have merely spoiled her. This senti- 
ment was as vivid as life itself. She was self-willed 
in every thing, like a child which has grown up in free- 
dom. If any one had seen how a sudden outburst of 
wrath brought a collection of deep wrinkles to her lovely 
brow, and how warmly she disputed with her father, 
he would have thought that she was a very capricious 
creature. But her wrath only flashed up when she 
heard of some injustice, or of some ill-treatment. But 
she never disputed on her own account, and she never 
defended herself; and her anger disappeared on the 
instant if she saw the person against whom it was 
directed in trouble. At the fii'st request for alms, no 
matter from whom it proceeded, she gave all that she 
had, before she even had time to reflect on the impro- 
priety of flinging away her purse with every thing 
which it contained. There was something impetuous 
about her. When she spoke, it seemed as though 
every thing followed her thought ; the expression of 
her countenance, the tone of her conversation, the 
movement of her hands, the very folds of her gar- 
ments, seemed to incline in the same direction, and it 
seemed as though she were on the point of flying after 
her own words. There was no reserve about her. She 
never feared to reveal her thoughts to any one, and 
no power on earth could reduce her to silence when 
she wished to speak. Her peculiar and bewitching 
walk, which belonged to her alone, was so free and 
unconstrained, that any one would involuntarily make 
way for her. In her presence, a wicked man grew 



30 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

confused and silent; the most audacious and unre- 
strained in his language found not a word to utter to 
her, and 'lost his wits: but the shy man was able to 
convera^ with her as he had never done with any one 
else in all his life, and from the first moment of con- 
verse he felt that he had known her somewhere before, 
and as though he had already beheld her features ; that 
this had happened in the depths of his boyhood, in 
some familiar house, on a merry evening, amid the 
joyous games of a throng of children ; and for a long 
time afterwards, the man*s age of discretion seemed 
wearisome to him. 

The very same thing happened in the case of Tenty- 
otnikoff. It seemed to him, from the first day of their 
acquaintance, that he had known her always. A new, 
inexplicable sensation penetrated his soul. A gleam of 
light illumined his wearisome life for an instant. At 
first the general received Tentyotnikoff well and gladly, 
but they could not get on togetlier. Their conversations 
ended in disputes, and with a certain unpleasant sensa- 
tion on both sides : for the general was not fond of 
contradiction or retorts ; and TentyotnikofiP, on his 
side, was quick to take offence. Of course, he forgave 
the father a great deal for the daughter's sake ; and 
peace was preserved between them, until some relatives 
came to visit the general, — Countess Boduireva and 
Princess Yuzyakina, who had been maids of honor at 
court in the preceding reign, and who now kept up 
some connections with Petersburg, in consequence of 
which the general paid them great deference. From 
the very day of their arrival, it seemed to Tentyotni- 
koff that he was treated more coldly, — that he was 
overlooked, or regarded as a person of no importance : 
he was addressed in a somewhat negligent fashion, as, 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 31 

*'3/y dearest fellow!*^ ^^ Listen, my friend!'* and once 
they even said " thou '* to him. 

This finally enraged him. Nevertheless, hardening 
his heart, and setting his teeth, he had the presence of 
mind to say, in an unusually soft and courteous tone, 
while a spot of crimson made its appearance on his 
face, and every thing within him was boiling, " I am 
obliged to you for your kindly sentiments, general. 
By employing the word thou, you display an intimate 
friendship which compels me to address you as thou 
also. But the difference in our ages precludes such 
familiarity between us.'* 

The general was thrown into confusion. Collecting 
his words and ideas, he began to say, though in rather 
an incoherent way, that the word thou had not been 
uttered by him in that sense ; that it was permissible 
for an old man to say thou to a young one. (He did 
not say a syllable about his rank.) 

Of course, their acquaintance ceased from that mo- 
ment, and love came to an end at its very beginning. 
The light which had shone for an instant before him 
was extinguished, and the shadows which followed it 
became all the blacker. His life became what the 
reader has seen at the beginning of this chapter, — it 
was all converted into lying in bed and inactivity. Dirt 
and disorder took possession of his house. The broom 
stood for half a day in the middle of the floor, in com- 
pany with the dirt. His trousers strayed even into the 
drawing-room. On the elegant little table which stood 
in front of the divan lay some soiled suspenders, just 
as though they had been refreshments for a guest ; and 
his existence had become trivial and slumberous to 
such a degree that not only did the servants cease to 
respect him, but the very domestic fowls came near 



32 TCUITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

clawing him. On taking his pen in hand, he would 
pass hours in sketching, in a vacant-minded way, 
crooked trees, little houses, peasants* huts, telyegas, 
and troikas. But sometimes, when he had forgotten 
every thing, the pen drew, of its own will and without 
its master's knowledge, a little head with delicate 
features, with an alert, penetrating glance, and a lock 
of hair turned back ; and the master beheld, to his 
amazement, that it had turned out the portrait of one 
whose portrait no artist even could have sketched, — 
so it appeared. And then he became still more melan- 
choly ; and, believing that there is no such thing as 
happiness on earth, he remained thereafter more bored 
and silent than before. 

Such was the condition of Andrei Ivanovitch Tenty- 
otnikoff's soul. All at once, as he was one day walk- 
ing to the window, pipe and cup in hand, after the usual 
order of things, to his stupefaction he heard neither 
Grigoriy nor Perfilievna, but he did perceive a bustle and 
some hurrying to and fro in the yard. The scullion and 
the floor-washer were hastening to open the gates. At 
the gate, horses were visible, exactly like the horses 
which are carved or drawn on triumphal arches, — a 
muzzle to the right, a muzzle to the left, and a muzzle 
in the middle. Above them, on the box, sat a coach- 
man, and a footman in a voluminous surtout, girded 
with a pocket-handkerchief. Behind them sat a gentle- 
man in a leather- visored cap and cloak, muffled in a 
scarf of rainbow hues. When the equipage drew up 
before the porch with a sweep, it became apparent that 
it was nothing less than a light britchka on springs. 
The gentleman, who possessed an extremely pleasing 
exterior, sprang out upon the porch, with almost the 
alertness and agility of a military man. 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 33 

A ndrei Tvanovitch was struck with terror. He took the 
visitor for an official from the courts of justice. It must 
be stated, that, in his youth, he had become entangled 
in a piece of folly. Two philosophers belonging to 
the hussars, who had not completed their course in 
«esthetics, but had ruined themselves as gamblers, 
had got up some philanthropical society or other, 
under the chief superintendence of an old mason and 
rascal, who was also a gambler, but at the same time 
a very eloquent man. This society was organized with 
extensive views, — to procure lasting happiness for 
evei-y man, from the shores of the Thames to Kam- 
tchatka. A vast fund was required: contributions 
were collected from the incredibly generous meml>ers. 
Where all this money went to, no one knew, except 
the manager-in-chief. He had inveigled into the com- 
pany two friends, who belonged to the class of em- 
bittered men who had originally been good men, but 
who had been converted into regular drunkards by 
means of toasts in the name of science, culture, and 
the coming responsibilities of mankind. Tentyotni- 
koff soon recovered his senses, and freed himself from 
this circle. But the society had already succeeded in 
entangling him in some other operations of a character 
not exactly suited to a nobleman, so that an affair with 
the police ensued. . . . It is not surprising, therefore, 
that although he had taken his departure, and broken 
off all connection with them, he could not feel quite at 
ease. His conscience was not quite clear. It was not 
without alarm that he now gazed at the door as it 
opened. 

But his terror vanished at once when the visitor 
bowed with incredible skill, somewhat to one side, 
though preserving a respectful position of the head. 



34 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

He explained, in gentle but decisive words, that he 
had recently been traversing Russia, impelled by both 
business and by curiosity ; that our empire abounds in 
noteworthy objects, not to mention the abundance of 
trades and the variety of soils; that he had been 
attracted by the picturesque situation of the village ; 
that, nevertheless, in spite of its situation, he should 
not have ventured to incommode Tentyotnikoff with 
his inopportune arrival, if, in consequence of the spring 
floods and the bad roads, his equipage had not sus- 
tained an unexpected fracture, which required the in- 
tervention of a blacksmith and artisans ; but that, 
nevertheless, even if no accident had happened to his 
britchka, he could not have denied himself the pleasure 
of testifying to his respect in person. 

On finishing this speech, the guest, with bewitching 
suavity, gave a scrape of his foot, which was shod in 
an elegant, varnished half-boot, fastened with mother- 
of-pearl buttons, and, notwithstanding his corpulence, 
sprang backwards with the lightness of a rubl>er ball. 

Andrei Ivanovitch was re-assured, and concluded that 
this must be some inquisitive professor, who was trav- 
elling through Russia for the purpose of collecting 
some plants or other, or, possibly, fossils. He imme- 
diately expressed his readiness to render every as- 
sistance ; he offered the services of his artisans, his 
wheelwrights and blacksmiths ; he requested the stran- 
ger to dispose of things as though he were in his own 
house ; he seated him in his own large reclining-chair, 
and prepared to listen to his remarks on the natural 
sciences. 

But the guest touched rather upon the events of the 
inner life. He likened his life to a vessel in the midst 
of the sea, driven hither and thither by treacherous 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 85 

winds : he mentioned the fact that he had been obliged 
to make numerous changes in his residence and occu- 
pation ; that he had suffered much for the truth's sake ; 
that his life had even been more than once in danger 
from his enemies; and be related many things of a 
sort which showed him to be a practical man. At the 
conclusion of his speech, he blew his nose into a white 
cambric handkerchief, with such violence as Andrei 
Ivanovitch had never heard before. There is some- 
times found in an orchestra, a deceptive horn, of the 
sort which seems to have blared in your ear, instead of 
in the orchestra, when once it joins in. Exactly such 
a sound echoed through the startled apartments of the 
slumbering house ; and immediately after it followed 
the smell of eau-de-cologne^ which was invisibly dis- 
seminated by the skilful flourish of the cambric pocket- 
handkerchief. 

The reader has probably already divined that the 
visitor was no other than our respected and long-neg- 
lected Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff. He has grown a 
little older: evidently, time has not passed without 
tempests and anxieties on his part. It seemed as though 
the very swallow-tailed coat on his back had grown an- 
tique, and his britchka, and the coachman and the 
valet, and the horses and the harness, had become worn 
and threadbare. It seemed as though his finances 
could not be ill the most enviable condition. But the 
expression of his face, his courtesy, and his manners 
remained the same. He had become even more agree- 
able in his movements and conduct, and he twisted 
one leg under the other in a more skilful fashion than 
ever when he seated himself in an arm-chair. There 
was more suavity in his turns of speech, more caution 
and moderation in his words and expressions, more 



86 TCMITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

dexterity in his bearing, more tact in every way. His 
collar and sbirt-bosom were cleaner and whiter than 
enow ; and in spite of the fact that he was on a jour- 
ney, and jast from the road, there was not even a 
speck of down on his coat, — it was exactly as though 
he had just come from a birthday dinner. His cheeks 
and chin were so beautifully shaved, that even a 
blind man might have admired their agreeably rounded 
contours. 

A transformation took place in the house on the in- 
stant. The half of it which had hitherto remained in 
blindness, with the shutters nailed up, suddenly blos- 
somed out, and received light. Every thmg l)egan to 
move about in tlie newly illuminated rooms, and eveiy 
thing soon assumed a different aspect. The articles 
indispensable to a toilet for the night were placed in 
the chamber which was assigned for the bedroom. 
The apartment which was intended for the study . . . 
but the reader must first be informed, that in this room 
there were three tables : one, a writing-table, stood be- 
fore the sofa; the second, a table for Vhombre^ was 
placed between the windows, and in front of the mir- 
ror; the third, a comer-table, stood in the angle 
between the door leading to the bedroom and the door 
opening into an unoccupied hall (filled with decrepit 
furniture, and now used as an ante-room), in which no 
one had set foot for a year previously. On this comer- 
table some clothes, which had been taken out of the 
trunk, were placed ; namely, a coat, beneath it a pair 
of trousers, new trousers, gray trousers, two velvet 
and two satin waistcoats, and a surtont. All these 
things were ari^anged one on top of the other in the 
shape of a pyramid, and were covered over with a silk 
handkerchief. In the other comer, between the door 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 37 

and the window, was ranged a row of boots : some 
were not quite new ; othei*s were entirely new ; patent- 
leather boots, low shoes, and chamber slippers. They, 
too, were modestly veiled with a silk handkerchief ; so 
that it was just the same as though they were not 
there. On the writing-table, there were speedily ar- 
ranged with great regularity, a dressing-case, a bottle 
of eau'de-cologney some tooth-picks, a calendar, and 
two romances, — the second volume of each only. The 
clean linen was placed in the commode which stood in 
the room ; and the linen which required the services of 
a laundress was tied up in a bundle, and thrust under 
the bed ; the trunk, after it had been emptied, was 
also shoved under the bed. The sword which he car- 
ried with him on the road, in order to inspire robbei-s 
with fear, was also placed in the bedroom, and sus- 
pended from a nail not far from the bed. Every thing 
assumed an aspect of neatness and order. Nowhere 
was there a scrap of paper, a pen, or a speck of dust. 
The very air seemed to have become ennobled. The 
odor of a fresh and healthy man, who does not wear 
his linen too long, who goes to the bath, and rubs him- 
self down with a damp sponge on Sundays, became 
fixed in the apartment. The odor of the valet Pe- 
trushka attempted for a time to establish itself in the 
ante-room ; but Petrushka was speedily transferred to 
the kitchen, as was fitting. 

At first, Andrei Ivanovitch feared for his independ- 
ence, lest any guest should bind him, should embar- 
rass him with changes in his mode of life, and disturb 
the order of his day, which was so cleverly arranged. 
But his fears were unfounded. Our Pavel Ivanovitch 
displayed remarkable capacity for adapting himself to 
all circumstances. He expressed his approval of his 



BS TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

host's philosophical deliberation of method, saying that 
it promised to protract his life to a century. With re- 
gard to the solitude, he expressed himself vei-y happily, 
to the effect, namely, that it nourished grand thoughts 
in a man. After glancing into the library, and prais- 
ing books in general, he remarked that they rescued 
man from idleness. He let fall few words, but those 
few were weighty. In his behavior he displayed even 
more tact. He made his appearance just at the proper 
time ; and at the exact moment, which was fitting, he 
vanished ; he did not worry his host with questions 
during the latter's taciturn periods; he took pleasure 
in playing at chess with him ; and he enjoyed keeping 
silent. While one of them was emitting curling wreaths 
of smoke from his pipe, the other, who did not smoke, 
devised an occupation which corresponded with it : for 
example, pulling a snuff-box of oxidized silver from 
his pocket, and grasping it firmly l)etween two fingers 
of his left hand, he twirled it briskly with the right 
fore-finger, — as the sphere of the earth whirls on its 
axis, — or he drummed on the cover with his finger, 
and whistled the while. In short, he did not incom- 
mode his host in the least. " I now behold, for the 
first time, a man with whom it is possible to live,** 
said Tentyotnikoff to himself. "On the whole, this 
art is rare among us. There are plenty of people 
among us, who are learned and cultivated and good ; 
but as for people of a perfectly equable temperament, 
people with whom one could pass one's life without 
quarrelling, — I really do not know whether many such 
persons are to be found among us. This is the first man 
tnf that sort whom I have seen." Thus did Tentyot- 
shapff express himself with regard to his guest, 
handk'eitchikoff, on his side, was very glad that he had 



TENTYOTNIKOFF ; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 39 

quartered himself for a time on this quiet and peaceable 
host. He had grown tired of his gypsy life. Even 
from a sanitary point of view, it would prove advan- 
tageous to rest for a month in this lovely village, in 
sight of the meadows and the budding spring. 

It would have been difficult to find a letter nook in 
which to repose. The spring, long retarded by the 
cold, was suddenly bui*sting forth in all its beauty, and 
life was beginning to disport itself in every direction. 
The fresh emerald of the first verdure was dotted with 
the blue dog's mercury and the yellow dandelion, while 
the rose-pui-ple anemone nodded its graceful head above 
it. Swarms of gnats and other insects made their ap- 
pearance in the swamps : the water-spider was already 
hastening in pursuit of them, and birds of every species 
assembled on the dry reeds in search of them. Ducks 
and all kinds of water-fowl fluttered down upon the 
flooded lakes and rivers. The migration of the birds 
in flocks had begun still earlier. The earth became 
populous all at once ; the forests awoke from their 
sleep ; the meadows became vocal. How brilliant was 
the verdure ! how fresh the air ! what bird-calls rang 
through the gardens ! what echoes, rejoicing, and cries 
of joy from every thing ! The village was full of har- 
mony and song, as though at a wedding. AValks and 
promenades were going on merrily in every direction. 
Tchitchikoff walked a great deal. At one time he di- 
rected his course to the flat summit of the hill, which 
aflTorded a view of the valleys which spread out below, 
where still lingered wide lakes formed by the inunda- 
tion, with islands of still leafless forest lying darkly 
in their midst ; or he ascended to the wooded ravines, 
where the thickly clustered trees, weighted down with 
the nests of cawing rooks, who obscured the heavens 



40 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

with their flittings to and fro, were beginning to clothe 
themselves in their leaves ; or he betook himself over 
the dry soil to the wharf, whence the fii*st vessels were 
setting out, laden with pease and barley and wheat, 
while, at the same time, the water dashed noisily against 
the wheel of the mill, which was just beginning to 
work. He went to inspect the first labors of the 
spring, — he watched the freshly ploughed black strip 
of earth pass through the green ; or saw how the dex- 
terous sower, tapping the sieve which hung upon his 
breast with his hand, scattered the seed evenly by 
handfuls, so that not a grain fell to either one side or 
the other. 

Tchitchikoff went everywhere. He talked and dis- 
cussed things with the overseer, with the peasants, and 
with the miller. He knew everybody and all about 
every thing, and the how and the why, and after what 
fashion the affairs of the estate were progressing, and 
how much the grain sold for, and how much was sent 
to be ground in the autumn, and how much in the 
spring, and the name of every muzhik, and who was 
related to whom, and where he had purchased his cow, 
and what he fed his pigs on, — in short, every thing. 
He also learned how many peasants had died. It ap- 
peared that they were not numerous. Being a man of 
discernment, he perceived that matters were not going 
well with Andrei Ivanovitch. Ignorance, neglect, 
thieving, and not a little intoxication, reigned every- 
wliere. And he said to himself, in his own mind, 
''What a beast that Tentyotnikoff is ! Such an estate, 
and to neglect it so ! He might have an income of fifty 
thousand rubles a year ! ** 

More than once it occurred to him, in the course of 
these walks, that he would some time — that is to say, 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 41 

not now, but later on, when his principal business had 
been settled, and he should have the means on hand, 
— become the peaceful owner of some such estate as 
this himself. • Then, naturally, there presented itself to 
his imagination the figure of a rosy, fair-haired young 
girl, from the merchant or some other wealthy social 
class, who should even understand music. A younger 
generation, destined to perpetuate the name of Tchitchi- 
kofif, also presented itself to him, — a frolicsome little 
boy and a beautiful daughter, or two small urchins and 
two, or even three, little maidens, so that it might be 
known to all men that he had actually lived and ex- 
isted, and had not merely passed over the earth like a 
shadow or a ghost, — that he might not feel ashamed 
in the presence of his fatherland. Then he began to 
fancy that it would not be a bad idea to make some 
additions to his rank : a councillor of state, for in- 
stance, is an honorable rank, and one deserving of 
respect. . • . How many things enter a man's mind 
in the course of his walks ! They frequently divert it 
from the wearisome present, mock him, torment him, 
excite his imagination, and are dear to him even when 
he is himself convinced that they will never be realized ! 
The village pleased Pavel Ivanovitch's servants also. 
They, like himself, had become accustomed to it. Pe- 
trushka speedily struck up a friendship with the butler, 
Grigoriy, although at first both of them assumed a 
great deal of dignity, and put on an intolerable amount 
of airs towards each other. Petrushka threw dust in 
Grigoriy's eyes on the strength of having seen numer- 
ous places ; but Grigoriy promptly quenched him with 
Petersburg, where Petrushka had never been. The 
latter attempted to' recover his position, and launch 
into details as to the distance of the places in which 



42 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

he had been ; but G rigor iy mentioned a place which 13 
not to be found on any map, and reckoned up over 
thirty thousand versts, so that Pavel Ivanovitch's ser- 
vitor was struck dumb, dropped his jaw, and was then 
and there held up to the ridicule of all the domestics. 
The matter ended, however, in a close friendship be- 
tween them. Bald Pimen, the uncle of all the peasants, 
kept a drinking-shop at the extremity of the village, 
by the name of Akulka. In this establishment they 
were to be seen at all hours of the day. They became 
perfectly at home there, or, as the peasants expressed 
it, *' fixtures.*' 

Selifan found a different sort of attraction. As soon 
as evening came, the village maids sang songs, and 
wove and broke the chain of the spring khorovods.^ 
The girls, finely formed creatures of good race, such as 
are not now to be found in large, villages, kept him play- 
ing "raven** for hours together. It was hard to tell 
which of them was the prettiest : all had white necks, 
white bosoms, bright eyes, eyes which could roll, the 
walk of a peacock, and plaits of hair hanging to their 
waists. IVhen, taking their white hands in both of his, 
he moved slowly with them in the choral dance, or left 
them, and placed himself with the other lads in a line 
opposite them, stepping forward in rank to meet them, 
while the maidens, laughing loudly, sang, " Lords, 
show the bridegroom ! ** and the fading light of even- 
ing vanished, and the shades descended all around, 
and the mournful echo of their song came ringing 
back from far beyond the river, he did not know him- 
self, at such times, what was going on within him. 
Morning and evening, sleeping or waking, thereafter, 

^ For a description of tbeee choral dances, and of the songs and gamee 
which accompany them, see Songs of the Russian People^ by W. K. S. 
Ralston. 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 43 

all things danced before his eyes, and he seemed to 
hold white hands in his, and to be ever moving through 
the choral dance. 

Tchitchikoff's horses were also content with their new 
abode. The pole- horse and the Assessor, and even the 
piebald, found a residence with Teutyotnikoff any thing 
but tiresome : the oats were excellent, and the arrange- 
ment of the stable was remarkably comfortable. From 
each stall, although it was divided off, it was possible 
to see the other horses over the partitions ; so that, if 
any one of them, even tlie most distant among them, 
took a foolish fancy to neigh, it was possible to answer 
him at once. 

In short, they all felt quite at home. As far as the 
business upon which Pavel Ivanovitch is traversing 
far-reaching Russia — dead souls — is concerned, he 
has become extremely cautious and delicate in that 
matter, even when he has to deal with downright 
fools. But Teutyotnikoff reads books, and philoso- 
phizes, and tries to explain to himself the cause of 
every thing, the how and the why, as though nothing 
of the sort existed. "No: it will be better to try 
whether he cannot be approached more successfully 
from the other end." Thus thought Tchitchikoff. In 
the course of his chats with the house-serfs, he had 
found out that their master had formerly been in 
the habit of going quite frequently to see his neigh- 
bor, the general; that the general had a daughter; 
that their master was made for the young lady, and 
the young lady for their master. . . . But that they 
had fallen out all of a sudden, and had parted. He 
had himself observed that Andrei Ivanovitch was 
always sketching heads with his pen and pencil, and 
that they all resembled each other. 



44 TCniTCniKORF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

Once, after dinner, while be was twirling his silver 
snuff-box around its axis, as usual, he began thus: 
''You Ьал'^е every thing, Andrei Ivanovitch; and you 
lack only one thing." 

"What is that?" inquired the latter, emitting a 
wreath of smoke. 

" A companion of your life," said Tchitchikoff. 

Andrei Ivanovitch said nothing, and there the con- 
versation rested. 

Tchitchikoff was not disconcerted, but chose another 
opportunity, just l)efore supper ; and, while they were 
discussing one thing and another, he suddenly re- 
marked, "But, really, Andrei Ivanovitch, it wouldn't 
be a bad thing for you if you were married." 

Not a word did Tentyotnikoff respond to this, exactly 
as though the subject were displeasing to him. 

Tchitchikoff was not discouraged. He selected a 
third occasion, after supper, and spoke thus : " But 
still, turn your circumstances over in my mind as I will, 
I see that it is necessary for you to marry : you are 
falling into hypochondria." 

On this occasion, Tchitchikoff 's words were very de- 
cisive, or Tentyotnikoff^ s frame of mind was favorable 
to frankness — at all events, the latter sighed, and said, 
" One must be born lucky for every thing, Pavel Ivano- 
vitch." And then he related to him the whole history 
of his acquaintance with the general, and of the breach, 
just as it had taken place. 

AVhen Tchitchikoff had heard the whole story, word 
by word, and saw that the entire matter had arisen 
from the word thou^ he was taken aback. For a mo- 
ment he looked Tentyotnikoff fixedly in the eye, and 
could not decide whether he was a downright fool or 
crazy. 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE, 45 

''Pray, Andrei Ivanovitch," he said at length, tak- 
ing him by both hands, " what insult is there in that? 
What is there offensive about the word thou?" 

"There*s nothing offensive about the word itself," 
answered Tentyotnikoff ; " but in the application of the 
word, in the voice in which it is uttered, lies the in- 
sult. ТЛом, — that signifies, ' Recollect that you are a 
good-for-nothing fellow. I only receive you because 
there is no one better; but now a certain Princess 
Yuzyakina has come : learn to know your place ; stand 
on the threshold.' That's what it means ! " So say- 
ing, the eyes of gentle and peaceable Andrei Ivanovitch 
flashed : the irritation of wounded feeling was audible 
in his voice. 

"But even in that sense, what harm does it do?" 
asked Tchitchikoff. 

*'What! do you think that I should continue to 
visit him after such a misdeed? " 

"But what misdeed? That is not a misdeed," said 
Tchitchikoff. * 

" Why is it not a misdeed? " inquired Tentyotnikoff 
in amazement. 

" That is merely a habit with generals, and not ' a 
misdeed : ' they say thou to eveiylwdy. And, more- 
over, why should it not be permissible to a worthy man 
who has served his time? " 

" That's a different thing," said Tentyotnikoff. " If 
he had been an old man, a poor man, not proud nor 
boastful, nor a general, I would permit him to address 
me as thou^ and would even receive it respectfully." 

" He's an utter fool ! " said Tchitchikoff to himself. 
" The idea of permitting a thing to a ragamuffin, and 
not to a general! — Very well," he said aloud, "let 
us assume that he did insult 3'ou, you have had your 



46 TCniTCUIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

revenge on him : he said it to you, and you said it 
to liira. But to quarrel, to part forever because of 
a trifle, that is — you must excuse me. ... If you 
have chosen your goal, you must bid defiance to all 
obstacles. Why consider the fact that a man spits 
on you? Man is always spitting: that's the way he 
is made. And you may search the whole world through 
now for a man who has not spit at another man, and 
you won't find him." 

" A strange man, this Tchitchikoff ! '* said Tentyot- 
nikoff to himself ш surprise, quite disconceited by 
these words. 

''But what an eccentric fellow this Tentyotnikoff 
is ! " Tchitchikoff was thinking at the same moment. 
"Andrei Ivauovitch, I will talk with j'ou as brother to 
brother. You are an inexperienced man. Allow me 
to manage this affair. I will go to his excellency, and 
explain to him that it happened through a misunder 
standing on your side, — through your youth and 
your lack of acquaintance with men and with the 
world." 

" I have no intention of acting basely myself before 
him," said Tentyotnikoff, taking offence ; *' and I can- 
not authorize you to do so." 

"I am incapable of acting basely," retorted Tchi- 
tchikoff, offended. " Of other errors I may have been 
guilty, in common with the rest of mankind, but of 
baseness, never ! . . . Excuse me, Andrei Ivanovitch, 
for my good will. I did not expect that you would 
take my words in such an insulting sense." All this 
was uttered with an air of dignity. 

*' I am in the wrong ; forgive me," said Tentyotnikoff 
hastily, with emotion, seizing him by both hands. " I 
did not think of wounding you. I swear to you that 



TENTYOTNIKOFF; OR, THE SORROWS OF LOVE. 47 

your kindly sympathy is dear to me. But let us drop 
this discussion. We will never mention it again." 

" In that case, I shall go to the general." 

" Why?" asked Tentyotnikoff, looking him straight 
in the eye in his amazement. 

" To present my respects." 

" A strange fellow this Tchitchikoff ! " thought Ten- 
tyotnikoff. 

"A strange fellow this Tentyotnikoff!" thought 
Tchitchikoff. 

" I shall go to him about ten o'clock to-morrow 
morning, Andrei Ivanovitch. In my opinion, the 
sooner one pays his respects to a man, the better. As 
my britchka is not yet in a suitable condition, allow 
me to use your calash. In that way, I shall be able 
to reach his house at about ten o'clock to-morrow 
morning." 

"Certainly; what a request! You are completely 
master here, and the equipage and every thing is en- 
tirely at your disposal." 

After this conversation, they separated, and went 
off to bed, not without meditating on each other's 
peculiarities. 

But the affair was singular, nevertheless ! The next 
morning, when the horses were brought round for Tchi- 
tchikoff, and he sprang into the calash, with almost as 
much agility as a military man, in a new coat, a white 
neckcloth and waistcoat, and drove off to pay his re- 
spects to the general, Tentyotnikoff was assailed by 
a perturbation of mind such as he had not experienced 
for a long time. His whole rusty and dreamy mode of 
thought was converted into an active disquiet. A ner- 
vous emotion suddenly overpowered all the feelings of 
the idler, who had hitherto been wholly engrossed in 



48 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

heedless indolence. Now he seated himself on the 
sofa ; then he strayed to the window ; then picked up a 
book ; then tried to think, — fruitless endeavor ! Not 
a thought entered his brain. Then he tried not to 
think of any thing, — vain effort ! fragments of some- 
thing resembling thought, odds and ends of thoughts, 
crept in from everywhere, and clung to his brain. 
"What a strange state of mind!" he said, and ai> 
preached the window, to gaze at the road which pierced 
the gloomy forest, at the extremity of which the dust, 
which had been raised by the departing calash, and had 
not yet subsided, was wreathing like smoke. But let 
us abandon Tentyotnikoff, and follow Tchitchikoff. 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF ISlfS. 49 



CHAPTER II. 

AN ANCIENT RELIC OP 1812. 

Aybnue and external appearance of Betriehtcheff*e dwelling. — Portrait of 
the general. — Tchltchikoff is introduced. — At first he feels quite ill at 
ease, and stammers for a while, intentionally perhaps: then he so ar- 
ranges hie person and his discourse as to command attention as well as 
tolerance. — He soon finds an opportunity of meutioning Tentyotnikoff, 
who is, he says, very busy. . . . How? With the glory of his country. 
How so? He is writing the history of the generals of 1812. — Ullnka 
makes her appearance in the study, where they are sitting. — She pleads 
the cause of Andrei Ivanovitch against the prejudices of her father, 
which have been nourished, as she is aware, by a third person, whom 
ehe considers base and treacherous. — Tchitchikoff becomes witty; he 
eoliveus conversation : the general gradually yields to the merriment. — 
Our hero falls into anecdote, and knows good ones. — Hearty laughter 
overpowers the general, and he no longer resists, except for an instant, 
when Ulinka pronounces the deed narrated deplorable^ and not laugh- 
able. — Tchitchikoff is detained to dinner. — He assists at the general's 
toilet. — He takes advantage of the Betrishtcheff's favorable frame of 
mind, and of his prolonged ablutions, to beg him to sell his dead souls, 
improvising a tale about a wealthy and eccentric uncle, who is to make 
bim his heir in case he succeeds in becoming rich, by his own exertions, 
within a short space of time. — Betrishtcheff is so delighted at the oppor. 
tunity of amusing himself at the expense of this imaginary uncle's folly, 
that he gives away all his souls, both male and female, for nothing. — 
They go to the dining-room. 

In a little more than half an hour, the good horses ■ 
carried Tchitchikoff over the distance of ten versts : ^ 
first, through the dense forest ; then between the fields 
of grain, which were already beginning to show green 
through the freshly ploughed land ; then along a rocky 
ridge, whence views of the distant landscape were each 
moment disclosed ; then up a broad linden avenue, 

1 A verst is about three-quarters of a mile. 



50 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

which had hardly begun to put forth as yet, they bore 
him, to the very eeutre of the village. Here the ave- 
nue of lindens made a turn to the right, and changed 
to a street of poplars, hemmed in below by a wattled 
fence, which terminated in open-work cast-iron gates, 
through which peeped the facade of the general's house, 
resting on eight Corinthian columns, and richly orna- 
mented with florid carving. Paint had been applied 
) everywhere : every thing was kept in repair, and noth- 
ing was permitted to fall into decay. The court- 
yard resembled a polished wooden floor in cleanliness. 
Driving up to the entrance, Tchitchikoff sprang out, 
respectfully, upon the porch, gave orders that he was 
to be announced to the general, and was conducted 
directly to the latter in his study. The general sur- 
prised him by his magnificent personal appearance. 
He was clad in a wadded satin dressing-gown, of a 
superb purple hue. His glance was frank, his face 
manly; his mustache and bushy side-whiskers were 
streaked with gray ; his hair was clipped close behind 
on his thick neck, which was of the sort known as 
'4hree-story," or with three folds, with a transverse 
crease. In a word, he was one of those picturesque 
generals, in which the famous year '12 abounded. 
Gen. Betrishtcheff was possessed of a multitude of 
good qualities, and of a multitude of defects. Both, 
as is usual with Russians, were mingled in him in a 
sort of picturesque disorder. In decisive moments he 
displayed magnanimity, л'а1ог, wisdom, an unbounded 
•generosity in every thing, and, mingled with this, ca- 
prices of ambition, and that petty, personal touchiness 
which no single Russian can ever dispense with when 
he is sitting in idleness, and when no demands are 
made upon his decision. He did not love all those 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 1812. 51 

who had outstripped him in the service, and expressed 
himself in biting terms and pointed epigrams with re- 
gard to them. The one who suffered most of all was 
a former comrade, whom he regarded as inferior to 
himself in brains and capacity, but who had, never- 
theless, risen above him, and was already governor- 
general of two provinces, and, as though on purpose 
to spite him, of the yery two in which his own estates 
were situated ; so that he found himself dependent 
upon him, as it were. In revenge. Gen. Betrishtcheff 
calumniated him on every occasion, blamed every reg- 
ulation which he adopted, and regarded every measure 
and deed of his as the height of folly. There was 
something strange about him, beginning with civiliza- 
tion, of which he was a defender and an ardent advo- 
cate. He loved incense ; he loved brilliancy ; be was 
fond of boasting of his brains ; he was also fond of 
knowing things which other people did not know, and 
he did not like people who knew any thing which he 
did not know. Having received a half-foreign educa- 
tion, he was yet desirous of playing the part of a Rus- 
sian gentleman at the same time. And it is not to be 
wondered at, that with such unevenness, with such 
strong and salient contradictions, of character, he was 
infallibly destined to encounter in the service a multi- 
tude of vexations, in consequence of which he had 
handed in his resignation, laying the blame of his ac- 
tion on some inimical party, since he did not possess 
the magnanimity to assume any portion of blame him- 
self. He preserved, in his retirement, the same pictur- 
esquely grand demeanor as before. He was always 
the same, whether clad in a dress-coat, a surtout, or a 
dressing-gown. From the tone of his voice to the 
slightest movement of his body, every thing about him 



52 TCHITCn/KOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

was masterful, commanding; and inspired, if not re- 
spect, at least fear, in the lower ranks. 

Tchitchikoff felt both fear and respect. Bending 
his head reverentially to one side, and making a fleet- 
ing outward movement with his hands, as though pre- 
paring to lift a tray full of cups, he inclined his whole 
body with wonderful agility, and said, "I have re- 
garded it as my duty to present myself to your excel- 
lency. Cherishing as I do a reverence for the valor 
of the men who have saved their country in the field of 
battle, I have regarded it as my duty to present myself 
in person to your excellency." 

This proceeding was evidently not displeasing to the 
general. With an exceedingly condescending move- 
ment of the head, he said, ^^ I am very glad to make 
your acquaintance. I beg you to do me the favor to 
take a seat. Where have you served?" 

"My career in the service," replied Tchitchikoff, 
seating himself in an arm-chair, not in the middle, but 
sideways, and grasping the arms with his hands, " be- 
gan in the department of justice, your excellency. 
Its later course was completed in various localities, — 
in the superior court, the building commission, and the 
custom-house. My life may be likened to a vessel 
amid the billows, your excellency. In patience, as I 
may say, I was born and swaddled ; and being, so to 
speak, patience itself personified . . . But as for the 
enemies who have sought my life, no words, no colora, 
nor even the brush itself, so to speak, can possibly do 
justice to them. . . . Hence, in the decline' of life, I 
am merely seeking a nook where I may pass the rem- 
nant of my days. I have been stopping for a while 
with a near neighbor of your excellency." . . . 

*' Who is that?" 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 1812. 53 

** Tentyotnikoff, your excellency." 

The general frowned. 

*'He greatly regrets, your excellency, that he did 
not show proper respect." . . . 

''To what?" 

"To your excellency's merits. He finds no words 
... He says, ' If I could in any way ... for truly,* 
he says, ' 1 do know how to value the men who have 
saved our fatherland,' he says." 

"Pray, what is he thinking of? I am not angry," 
said the mollified general. " From my soul I sincerely 
love him, and I am convinced that he will become a 
very useful man in the course of time." 

"You have been pleased to express yourself with 
perfect justice, your excellency. Really, a most useful 
man: perhaps he will conquer with the gift of lan- 
guage; and he is a master with his pen." 

"But I suppose he writes some sort of nonsense 
and verses?" 

" No, your excellency, not nonsense. ... He is writ- 
ing something practical . . . history, your excellency." 

"History? The history of what?" 

"The history" . . . here Tchitchikoff paused ; and 
whether it was because the general was sitting opposite 
him, or with the view of imparting more weight to the 
subject, he added, " The history of generals, your ex- 
cellency." 

" Of generals ? Of what generals ? ' ' 

" Of generals in general, your excellency ; of gen- 
erals as a body. That is, to speak accurately, the 
generals of our country." Tchitchikoff had become 
completely entangled, and had lost his head ; and he 
almost spit on himself, and said to himself, " Heavens, 
what nonsense I am uttering ! " 



64 TCniTCnJKOFF'8 JOURNEYS ; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

*' Excuse me, T do not understand very clearly . . . 
what is it about? Is it to be the history of some de- 
tached period, or separate biographies ? and of all, or 
only of those who were engaged in the war of 1812?" 

*' Exactly so, your excellency; of those who took 
part in the war of 1812.*' Having thus spoken, 
he said to himself, ^^May I be hanged if I under- 
stand it!" 

"Then, why does he not come to see me? I could 
furnish him with a very great quantity of curious ma- 
terial." 

"He is afraid, your excellency." 

" What nonsense ! For the sake of a few idle words 
. . . But I'm not that kind of a man at all. I am 
willing to go to him, if you like." 

"He will not permit that: he will come to you," 
said Tchitchikoff, quite recovering himself; and he 
regained his courage, and thought, " What a chance ! 
I came to the general just at the right time ! But my 
tongue has been rattling away like a fool." 

A rustling became audible in the study. The walnut- 
wood door of a caiTed cabinet oi)ened of itself, and, be- 
hind the half which folded back, a living form appeared, 
which held the bronze knob in its hand. If a trans- 
parent picture, brilliantly illuminated by lights from 
behind, had suddenly made its appearance in the dark 
room, it would not have produced so startling an ef- 
fect by the unexpectedness of its coming. The girl 
had evidently entered for the purpose of sajing some- 
thing, but had caught sight of the strange man. It 
seemed as though a ray of sunshine had flitted in with 
her, and as though the general's frowning study broke 
into a laugh. Straight and light as an arrow, she 
seemed elevated above all her sex in heicrht. But this 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 1819. 65 

was an illusion. She was not of lofty stature. This 
was the result of the remarkably harmonious combi- 
nation of all the members of her body. Her gown 
fitted her as though the very best dressmakers had 
taken counsel together how they might best adorn her. 
But this was also an illusion. She dressed heraelf: 
she put her needle through two or three places in an 
uncut piece of cloth of one color, as it seemed, and it 
drai)ed and arranged itself around her in such loops 
and folds, that, if she had been transferred to canvas 
with all those bewitching draperies, she would have 
been pronounced the copy of a work of genius. All 
fashionably dressed young ladies would have appeared 
like the motley products of the rag -market, in her 
presence. . . . One thing about her was not pretty: 
she was too thin and slender. 

*'Let me introduce to you my spoiled pet,*' said 
the general, turning to Tchitchikoff. "'But I do not 
yet know your Christian name, patronymic, and sur- 
name." 

" Ought the name and patronymic of a man who has 
not distinguished himself by his merits to be known? " 
said Tchitchikoff, modestly dropping his head. 

*' Still, it is necessary to know." . . . 

*' Pavel Ivanovitch, your excellency," said Tchitchi- 
koff, bowing with almost the skill of a military man, 
and skipping backwards with the lightness of a rubber 
ball. 

" Ulinka," said the general, turning to his daughter, 
*' Pavel Ivanovitch has just imparted to me a very in- 
teresting piece of news. Our neighbor, Tentyotnikoff, 
is not at all so stupid a man as we supposed. He is 
occupied with a rather important work, — the history 
of the generals of 1812." 



56 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

" But who thought that he was a stupid man? " she 
broke in hastily. " No one, probably, except Vislme- 
pokromoff, whom you put faith in, and who is a base 
and empty-headed fellow." 

" Why is he base? He is rather empty-headed, it is 
true,*' said the general. 

*' He is not only empty-headed, but crafty and mean. 
A man who has so insulted his brothers, and driven his 
sister out of the paternal house, is a mean man." 

" But that is only what is said." 

" Such things are not said without cause. I do not 
underatand, father, how any one with your kind soul, 
and with such a rare heart as you have, can receive a 
man who is as far removed from you as heaven is from 
the earth, and whom з^ои yourself know to be bad." 

" There, you see," said the general, smiling at Tchi- 
tchikoff, "that's the way she and I always quarrel 
with each other ; " and turning to his daughter, he con- 
tinued, " But, my love, I cannot drive him away." 

" Why should you drive him away? But why show 
him so much attention ? Why love him? " 

Here Tchitchikoff thought it incumbent on him to 
interpose a word. " Every one asks for love, sudar- 
uinya^"^ said Tchitchikoff. "What is to be done? 
Even animals like to be stroked. They will thrust 
their muzzles through the bars, as much as to say, 
*Come, pat me! ' " 

The general broke into a laugh. "They really do 
thrust their muzzles through : ' Come, pat me ! ' Ha, 
ha, ha ! And there are some who are not content with 
their muzzle, but want you to come into their pen, 
and demand encouragement, as it were. . . . Ha, ha, 
ha!" and the general's sides began to quiver with 

1 Sudaruitij/a, mise or madam. 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 1812, 57 

laughter. His shoulders, which had formerly suppoi'ted 
heavy epaulets, shook, exactly as though they still up- 
held heavy epaulets. 

Tchitchikoff also interposed a laugh ; but, out of re- 
spect for the general, he emitted it on the letter e, — 
'' he, he! he, he, he!'* And his ^dy also began to 
quiver with laughter, although his shoulders did not 
shake, because they had never worn thick epaulets. 

"He will steal, he will rob the treasury, and he will 
demand a reward for it, the beast! ' lt*s impossible,* 
says he, 'to labor without encouragement.* . . . Ha, 
ha, ha, ha!** 

" Has your excellency ever heard, do you love us 
Ыаск^/ог every one will love us ivhitef" said Tchitchi- 
koff, turning to the general with a rather roguish smile. 

" No, I have never heard it.** 

"It is a most sympathetic anecdote, your excellency. 
On the estate, your excellency, of Prince Gukzovsky, 
whom your excellency probably deigns to know '* . . . 

" I do not know him.*' 

" There was a German ovei-seer, your excellency, a 
young man. He had occasion to go to the city in con- 
nection with the recruiting and other mattei-s, and had 
dealings with the judicial authorities ; well, and . . . 
you know, he . . . greased them.*' (Tchitchikoff 
screwed up one eye, and indicated by his counte- 
nance how one "greases** the officials of the court.) 
. . . "And they entertained him too, so that on one 
occasion, when he was dining with them, he says, 
' Well, gentlemen, you must come and visit me one 
of these days on the prince's estate.* They reply, 
'We will.* It chanced, your excellency, that a short 
time afterwards, the judges had to make an inves- 
tigation concerning a matter which, had happened on 



68 TCHITCniKOFF^a JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

the estate of Count Trekhmetieff , whom your excellency 
is, no doubt, pleased to *' . . . 

" I do not know him." 

''They did not make the investigation; but they 
turned their telyega into the farm-yard, went to the 
house-steward's apartment, and played cards for three 
days and nights without stopping to draw breath. The 
samovar and the punch, your excellency, never left 
the table. They fairly stuck in the throat of the count's 
steward, so to speak." (Here Tchitchikoff lюinted at 
his own throat. ) "In oi*der to get rid of them, he says, 
' You should go to the prince's overseer, gentlemen, the 
German : he is not far off, and he is expecting you.' — 
' Ah, surely ! * say they : ' he invited us.* So the whole 
of them, all sleepy and unshaven as they were, got 
into their telyega, and drove off to the German. . . . 
But the German, your excellency, had just been mar- 
ried. He had married a school-girl, a pretty and 
subtle young woman." (Tchitchikoff expressed her 
subtlety in his countenance.) '^ Being, so to speak, in 
the midst of their honeymoon, they were sitting over 
their tea, like two dear little angels. All of a sudden, 
the door opens, — and the assemblage bursts in upon 
them." 

" I can imagine it; very good ! " said the general, 
laughing. 

"This so surprised the German, your excellency, 
that he completely lost his head. He steps up to them, 
and says, 'What do you want?' — 'Well, you're a- 
pretty fellow ! ' Change of scene : a different turn 
of matters demands a different turn of speech. ' On 
business. How much brandy is distilled on this estate? 
Show your books ! * He stammered this and that. 
' Ei, off with him ! ' They seized him, bound him, 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 181S. 59 

carried him to town, and there the German sat in prison 
for a year and a half.*' 

'' Well, I declare ! '* said the general. 

Ulinka clasped her hands. 

*' His wife, your excellency, began to make a fuss. 
But what can a woman do when she is young, and hf\s 
not been tried in the furnace of experience, so to speak ? 
Fortunately, there were some kind people on hand, who 
advised her to go to the judge of the peace. The 
German recovered his freedom, your excellency, in 
consideration of spending two thousand rubles on a 
complimentary banquet. And after the dinner, when 
they all . . . and he with them . . . were pretty thor- 
oughly drunk, they simply say to him, ' Here, you see ! 
You scorned us ! You wanted to see us all properly 
shaved? No, do you love us black, for eveiy one will 
love us white." 

The general burst into a roar of laughter. 

A pained expression appeared on the noble face of 
the girl. 

" Ah, papa ! I do not understand how you can laugh. 
These dishonorable deeds cause me sorrow, and noth- 
ing more. When I see deception being practised openly 
in the sight of all, and that the perpetrators are not 
punished with universal sconi, I do not know what 
takes place within me, for on the instant I become 
angry, and I think and think." . . . And here she 
suddenly burst into tears. 

" Only please don't be angry with us," said the gen- 
eral. " We are not to blame in this matter. Is that 
not true? " he went on, turning to Tchitchikoff. "Kiss 
me, and go to your room. I am going to dress for 
dinner immediately. I hope," he said, looking Tchi- 
tchikoff in the eye, " that you will dine with me." 



60 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

" If your excellency will only " — 

"Without ceremony, will you not? I have enough 
to eat, thank God ! There is cabbage-soup." 

With a deprecatory motion of the hands, Tchitchikoff 
bent his head with respect and gratitude, so that all 
the objects in the room were hidden from his view for 
a space, and only the tips of his own half-boots re- 
mained visible to him. When he raised his head once 
more, after remaining in this reverent attitude for a 
few moments, Ulinka was no longer visible. She had 
vanished. In her stead there stood* before him a gigan- 
tic valet, with thick mustache and side-whiskers, with 
a silver washbasin and a towel in his hands. 

" You will permit me to dress in your presence? " 

" Not only to dress in my presence, but to do any 
thing which your excellency sees good." 

Pulling off his dressing-gown with one hand, and strip- 
ping up the sleeves of his shirt on his arms of heroic 
size, the general began his ablutions, splashing and 
snorting like a duck. The soapy water flew about in 
all directions. 

" How does it go?" said he, as he wiped his neck 
on all sides. " Love us white "... 

" Black, your excellency." . . . 

" Love us black, for every one will love us white. 
Very, very good ! They love, they love, they actually 
love encouragement. Stroke, stroke him ! For with- 
out encouragement, he will not steal. . . . Ha, ha, 
ha!" 

Tchitchikoff was in indescribable spirits. An in- 
spiration suddenly descended upon him. ''The gen- 
eral is a jolly fellow, and a good-natured one. 1*11 
try ! " tiiought he ; and, perceiving that the valet had 
retired with the waslibasin, he exclaimed, "Your ex- 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 1812, 61 

cellency, since you are so kind and attentiv^e to every 
one, I have a great favor to ask of you.** 

"What is it?" 

"I have, your excellency, an aged, invalid uncle,*' 
said Tchitchikoff, glancing about him. " He has three 
hundred souls, and no heir except myself. He is not 
able to manage his estate himself, on account of his 
infirmities ; and he will not allow me to manage it 
either. And he alleges a queer reason for this. Ч,* 
says he, ' do not know my nephew. Perhaps he is a 
spendthrift. Let him prove to me that he is a trust- 
worthy man : let him acquire three hundred souls for 
himself, then I will give him my three hundred also.' ** 

"Why, what does he mean? He's certainly a per- 
fect fool?** inquired the general. 

"If he were only a fool, one might get along. But 
think of my position, your excellency. The old man 
has taken a housekeeper, and she has children. Be- 
fore you know it, they will get every thing.** 

"The old fellow has lost his senses, and that's all 
there is to it," said the general. " Only I do not see 
how I can help you," he added, looking at Tchitchikoff 
in surprise. 

"This is what I have thought of. If your excel- 
lency will make over to me all the dead souls in your 
village, just as though they were alive, with a regular 
bill of sale, then I might show the bill of sale to the 
old man, and he would leave me the inheritance." 

Here the general burst into such a laugh as man can 
never have given vent to before. He flung himself, just 
as he was, into an arm-chair. He threw his head back, 
and almost choked. The whole house was alarmed. 
The valet made his appearance. His daughter ran to 
him in affright. 



62 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

"Father, what has happened to you?" she said, in 
terror and amazement, as she gazed into his eyes. 

But it was a long while before the general uttered a 
sound. ''It's nothing, my dear. Go to your own 
room. We will come to dinner directly. Be at ease. 
Ha, ha, ha!'' 

And, after uttering several sighs, the general's 
laughter burst forth with fresh violence, and re-echoed 
from the vestibule to the most remote room in the 
house. 

Tchitchikoff was troubled. 

'' Uncle, uncle ! how finely fooled you will be ! Ha, 
ba, ha ! To receive dead souls instead of live ones ! 
Ha, ha, ha!" 

"Eh, how ticklish his nerves are!" thought Tchi- 
tchikoff to himself. 

"Ha, ha, ha!" went on the general. "What an 
ass ! The idea of demanding such a thing ! Let him 
make three hundred souls out of nothing in my pres- 
ence, and I'll give him three hundred souls ! He's an* 
ass, of course! " 

"Yes, your excellency, he's an ass." 

" Well, that's a good trick of yours, to treat the old 
fellow to dead souls. Ha, ha, ha! I'd give, God 
knows what, to see him when you present that bill of 
sale to him. Well, what is he? What's he like? Is 
he very old?" 

" Eighty years." 

"But he moves about? he's alert? He must be 
pretty strong if that housekeeper lives with him." . . . 

" Strong, indeed ! He's wasting away, grain by 
grain, your excellency." 

" What a fool ! Surely, he is a fool ! " 

" He is, your excellency," 



AN ANCIENT RELIC OF 1812. 63 

"But he goes out in society? Does he look alert? 
Can he support himself on his legs? " 

" He can stand, but with difficulty.*' 

" What a fool ! But he is strong? Has he still his 
teeth?" 

" Only two, your excellency." 

" What an ass ! Don't get angry, my friend. . . . 
He's an ass, if he is your uncle." 

"He is an ass, your excellency, though he is my 
relative, and it is hard to acknowledge it. Still, what 
is to be done?" 

Tchitchikoff lied : it was not hard to acknowledge, 
for the probabilities are that he had never had an uncle. 

"If, therefore, your excellency will be so good as 
to grant me" . . . 

"To give you my dead souls? For such a device, 
I'll give them to you with land and houses. Take the 
whole cemetery ! Ha, ha, ha, ha ! That old man ! 
that old man ! Ha, ha, ha, ha ! How your uncle will 
befooled! Ha, ha, ha, ha!" 

And again the general's roars of laughter rang 
through the general's apartments. ^ 

> The reconciliation of Gen. Betriehtcheff with Tentyotnlkoff, a dinner 
at the generare, and a conversaiion about the year 1812, the betrothal of 
Ullnka to Tentyolnikoff, her prayers and tears at the grave of her mother, 
and the conversation of the betrothed pair in the garden, are here omitted. 
Tchitchikoff is commissioned by Gen. Betriehtcheff to visit his relatives, 
and announce the betrothal of his daughter; and he goes to one of these 
relatives, Col. Koshkareff. Kote by S. P. Shemiiref, — Gogol would prob- 
ably have re-written the whole of the second volume, and have inserted 
wtiat is lacking, had he lived. 



64 TCHlTCniK0FF'3 JOURNEYS; OR, DESD SOULS. 



CHAPTER III. 

TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, EACH IN HIS OWN 
FASHION. 

Ohr Ьэго, In a superb equipage, goee aetray, through the fault of hfe eervanie. 
— Fiehing-ecenee. — A gentleman who is floating in a net without danger 
of being drowned. — A rich haul. —The rustic tieherman turns out to be 
an arrant good liver. — The home and sons of this gentleman : their pros* 
pecte for the future. — A guest arrives. — .Joy of the host. — A Pantagruel 
dinner. — Contrast : Pyetukhoff who lives too much, and Platonoff who 
does not live enough. — Tchitchikoff is struck with the splenetic dispo- 
sition of the latter, and makes him a gracious proposal. — They agree to 
travel together. — Their host detains them by force for another twenty- 
four hours. — Manner in which he employe the remainder of the evening, 
after his guests have retired. — Employment of the following day; trip 
on the water; songs. — The fleherman at the end of the day. — Departure 
of Platonoff in company with Tchitchikofif, who coaeente to call upon 
the sister and the brother-in-law of his companion. —Madame Kostan- 
zhoglo is alone in the house at first. — Her husband returns shortly after- 
wards, accompanied by a group of countrymen, whom he dismisses.— 
Tchitchikoff is touched by the harmony which reigns in this house and in 
this fine domain. — He desires to learn the manner in which they contrive 
to make their estate produce double and treble wirat the neighboring es- 
tates yield, but an imperative duty obliges him to make an excursion 
to Col. Koshkareff. — Tohitchikoff goes to visit Col. Koshkareff, and to 
verify justice of the popular opinion regarding that gentleman : there 
every thing is given over to form and vain show. The colonel Is on the 
brink of the most utter ruin. — More fanatical than ever, he plays with 
administrative and governmental forms, employing therein a knowledge 
and patience worthy of a better cause. — Our hero escapes thence by , 
flight; and on his return to Kostanzhoglo, he views with enthusiasm, 
and ends by comprehending, after exhaustive explanations by his host, 
what real rural economy consists in. — Platonoff has understood nothing 
about these things. — It is the reverse with our hero; for, on retiring to 
the room which has been assigned to him, he dreams of nothing until 
nearly midnight, except various agricultural and domestic details, a good 
and pretty young wife, and pretty c4dldren ... a complete paradise . . . 
and superb revenues. 

"If Col. Koshkareff really is crazy, it would not be 
a bad thing," said Tchitchikoff, on finding himself 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 65 

once more amid the open fields and the vast expanse, 
when every thing had disappeared, and all that re- 
mained was the vault of heaven above, and two clouds 
on one side. 

'^ Selifan, did you make thorough inquiries as to the 
road to Col. Koshkareff's? *' 

" If you will please to consider, Pavel Ivanovitch, I 
had no time, because I was working over the calash ; 
but Petrushka inquired of the coachman." 

*' What a fool ! You have been told that no reliance 
is to be placed on Petrushka. Petrushka is a block- 
head, Petrushka is stupid, and Petrushka is certainly 
drunk now, to boot.'* 

'' There's surely no such difficulty about it," said 
Petrushka, turning half round, and looking out of the 
corner of his eye. '' There's nothing to it, except 
that you take to the fields after descending the 
hill." 

" And you have taken nothing into your mouth ex- 
cept common brandy? Good, very good! One may 
say, he marvelled at the beauty of Europe." After 
saying this, Tchitchikoff stroked his chin, and thought, 
" What a difference there is, after all, between the 
physiognomy of a cultivated nobleman .and that of a 
coarse lackey." 

Meanwhile, the calash had begun to go down-hill. 
The fields, and the wide expanse dotted with maple- 
groves, opened out again. The comfortable equipage, 
rocking gently on its elastic springs, continued to cau- 
tiously descend the declivity in an imperceptibly slant- 
ing direction, and at length, traversing the fields, 
passed the mill; then, over the bridges, with a light 
rumble; then, with a little bound, over the soft, yield- 
ing surface of the lowlands. And not even a mound 



66 TCn/TCfflKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

or a hillock allowed itself to be seen on either hand. 
Silence, and not even a calash. 

The clumps of vines, slender alders, and silvery pop- 
lars flew by, brushing Selifan and Petrushka, on the 
box, with their branches. They swept the latter's cap 
off every moment. The surly servitor leaped from the 
box, cursed the stupid trees, and his master who had 
placed him there, but would neither fasten his cap nor 
even hold on to it with his hand, hoping that each time 
would be the last, and that it would not happen again. 
Maples, birches, and pines were soon added to the list 
of trees. The forest grew darker, and seemed to be 
preparing to tura to the blackness of night. But all 
at once, from every quarter, gleams of light shone be- 
tween the branches and tree-boles, like flashes from a 
mirror. The trees became more sparsely scattered, 
the gleams of light grew larger . . . and, all at once, 
a lake lay before them, — a watery expanse four versts 
in diameter. High above the lake, on the opposite 
shore, lay scattered the gray board-cabins of a village. 
Shouts rang from the water. Twenty men, standing 
up to then* waists, their shoulders, and their necks in 
the water, were dragging a net to the opposite shore. 
An accident had happened. Along with the fish, a 
man had become entangled, bound, who measured ex- 
actly the same in height as in girth, like a watennelon, 
or a small cask. He was in a desperate condition, and 
was yelling at the top of his lungs, " Blockhead Denis, 
give it over to Kuzma! Kuzma, take the end from 
Denis ! Don4 bear on so. Big Foma ! Go yonder, 
where Little Foma is. You devils ! you'll break the 
net, I tell you ! " The watermelon evidently had no 
fears for himself: he could not drown, owing to his 
fatness ; and tumble about as he would, with the ob- 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 67 

ject of diving, the water kept bringing him to the sur- 
face ; and if two men had seated themselves on his 
back, he would have remained on the surface of the 
water with them like an obstinate bladder, merely grunt- 
ing a little beneath their weight, and emitting bubbles 
through his nose. But he was very much afraid that 
the net would break, and the fish escape ; and, there- 
fore, several men, stationed on the bank with ropes, 
were dragging him in as well as the fish. 

"He must be a gentleman, Col. Koshkareff," said 
Selifan. 

''Why?" 

" Because his body, if you will be pleased to ob- 
serve, is whiter than the others, and he is respectably 
corpulent, like a gentleman." 

Meanwhile, the gentleman, who was entangled in the 
net, had been dragged considerably nearer to the shore. 
On feeling that he could reach the bottom with his feet, 
he did so, and at the same time became aware of the 
calash descending to the dam, and of Tchitchikoflf 
seated in it. 

*'Have you dined?" shouted the gentleman, step- 
ping on the bank with the captured fish, all enveloped 
in the net, like a lady's hand in summer-time, incased 
in a transparent glove, holding one hand before his 
eyes like a visor, to shield them from the sun, and let- 
ting the other hang down, — like the Venus de Medici 
emerging from the bath. 

" No," answered Tchitchikoff, raising his cap, and 
continuing to bow from the calash. 

'' Well, thank God for that ! " 

" Why? " inquired Tchitchikoff, with curiosity, hold- 
ing his cap above his head. 

"Because! — fling the sturgeon into the washtub, 



68 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

Little Foma ! Go help him, Blockhead Kuzma." Two 
of the fishermen lifted the head of some monster out of 
the tub. '' See what a prince ! he came in from the 
river! " exclaimed the round gentleman. " Go to the 
manor-house. Coachman, take the road below, through 
the vegetable garden. Run, you stupid Big Foma, take 
down the bars. He will guide you, and I'll be there 
directly.'* 

Long-legged, barefooted Big Foma ran, just as he 
was, in his shirt alone, through the whole village, where 
drag-nets, fish-baskets, and various nets were draped 
over every cabin, — all the peasants were fishermen, — 
then he took down the bars of some vegetable garden, 
and through the garden the calash entered the square 
close by a wooden church. Farther on, behind the 
church, the roofs of the manorial buildings were 
visible. 

** This Koshkareff is rather eccentric," said Tchi- 
tchikoff to himself. 

"Here I am!" cried a voice on one side. Tchi- 
tchikoff glanced round. The gentleman had already 
arrived beside him, clad in a grass-green nankeen sur- 
tout and yellow breeches ; but his neck was devoid of 
a neckcloth, after the manner of Cupid's. He was 
seated sideways in a drozhky, the whole of which he 
took up by himself. Tchitchikoff tried to say something 
to him, but the fat man had already disappeared. The 
drozhky again made its appearance on the spot where 
the fish had been drawn out. Again his voice rang out, 
"Big Foma and Little Foma! Kuzma and Denis! " 
When Tchitchikoff arrived at the porch of the house, 
he was amazed to find the fat gentleman already there 
to receive him in his embrace. How he had managed 
to fly thither was incomprehensible. They kissed each 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 69 

other in a triple cross, after the ancient Russian cus- 
tom. The gentleman belonged to the old school. 

'' I have brought you a greeting from his excellency," 
began Tchitchikoff. 

'' From what excellency? " 

" From your relative. Gen. Alexander Dmitrievitch." 

" Who is this Alexander Draitrievitch? " 

*'Gen. Betrishtcheff," replied Tchitchikoff, in some 
surprise. 

"Don't know him." 

Tchitchikoff was still more amazed. 

*' How is this? ... I hope, at least, that I have 
the pleasure of addressing Col. Koshkareff ?" 

"T^o, don't hope it. Thank God that you have 
come, not to him, but to me. Piotr Petrovitch Pyetukh, 
Pyetukh Piotr Petrovitch," repeated the host. 

Tchitchikoff was petrified. " How's this? " said he, 
turning to Selifan and Petrushka, both of whom dropped 
their jaws, and stared with all their eyes, as one sat 
on the box, and tlie other stood at the door of the 
calash. "How's this, you fools? You were told to 
go to Col. KoshkarefTs, and this is Piotr Petrovitch 
Pyetukh's!" . . . 

" You have behaved capitally, my children ! Go to 
the kitclien : they will give each of you a measure of 
vodka there," said Piotr Petrovitch Pyetukh. " Un- 
haraess the horses, and go to the servants' quarters 
this instant ! ' * 

" I am meditating what I ought to do : such an un- 
foreseen mistake," . . . said Tchitchikoff. 

*' It's no mistake. First try what sort of a dinner 
we have, and then say whether it is a mistake. I beg 
you most humbly to enter," said Pyetukh, taking Tchi- 
tchikoff by the arm, and leading him into the house. 



70 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

From the rooms, there emerged to meet them two young 
fellows in summer surtouts, — as slender as willow 
wands : they exceeded their father in height by a full 
arshin. 

'* My sons, students at the gymnasium, have come 
home for the holidays. Do you remaiu with our guest, 
Nikolasha; and you, Alexasha, come with me." So 
saying, the host disappeared. 

Tehitchikoff devoted his attention to Nikolasha. 
Nikolasha, it appeared, bade fair to be a good-for-noth- 
ing in the future. He told Tehitchikoff, the veiy fii-st 
thing, that there was no advantage to be derived from 
studying in the provincial gymnasium ; that he and his 
brother wanted to go to Petersburg, because the prov- 
inces were not fit to live in. 

'' I understand," thought Tehitchikoff : "the matter 
will end with the confectioners' shops and the boule- 
vards. But how are matters?" he asked aloud: "in 
what condition is your papa's property?" 

" Mortgaged," replied the papa himself, who was 
in the drawing-room again. " Mortgaged." 

" That's bad," thought Tehitchikoff. " At this rate, 
there will soon be no estate at all. I must make haste. 
. . . But that was surely unnecessary," he said, with 
an air of regret. " You have been over-hasty in mort- 
gaging it." 

"No, not at all," said Pyetukh. "They say that 
it is profitable. Everybody mortgages: how can one 
help following the example of others? Besides, I have 
always lived here : I am going to try to live in Moscow. 
Here are my sons persuading me : they desire the cul- 
tivation of the capital." 

" Fool, fool ! " thought Tehitchikoff: " he is squan- 
dering every thing, and making spendthrifts of his sons. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 71 

It's a snug little property. When you come to look at 
it, the peasants are well off, and he's not badly situ- 
ated either. But when they become cultivated yonder, 
in the restaurants and theatres, — every thing will go to 
the Devil. This fish-pasty ought to live on his own 
property in the country." 

" I am sure that I know what you are thinking of," 
said Pyetukh. 

"What?" inquired Tchitchikoff, in some confusion. 

" You are thinking, ' Fool, fool that this Pyetukh is ! 
he has invited me to dinner, and as yet there is ho din- 
ner.' It will soon be ready, most respected sir. It 
will be ready before a girl with a shaved head has time 
to braid her hair." 

" Daddy, Platon Mikhailitch is coming," said Alex- 
asha, looking out of the window. 

" Mounted on his brown horse," added Nikolasha, 
leaning out of the window. • 

"Where, where?" cried Pyetukh, approaching the 
window. 

"Who is this Platon Mikhailitch?" inquired Tchi- 
tchikoff of Alexasha. 

" Our neighbor, Platon Mikhailovitch Platonoff, a 
very handsome man," answered Alexasha. 

In the mean time, Platonoff himself had entered the 
room : he was a handsome man, with a fine figure and 
glossy, pale blond hair, which curled naturally. A 
heavy-jawed terror of a dog, by the name of Yarb, fol- 
lowed him, rattling his brass collar. 

" Have you dined? " inquired the host. 

"Yes." 

" What have you come for, — to laugh at me ? What 
can I do with you after you have dined? " 

The visitor laughed, and said, "I will console you 



72 TCEITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS j OR, DEAD SOULS. 

by admitting that I ate nothing at dinner : I had no 
appetite at all.*' 

"And we have had such a catch ! if you could only 
have seen it! Such sturgeons! Such carp and kar- 
asishtcJn!"^ 

'4t*s vexatious enough to hear you tell about it. 
Why are you always so cheerful? " 

'' And why should one be bored, if you please?" 
said the master of the house. 

" Why be bored? Because things are tiresome." 

*' You eat too little ; that's all. Try to make a good 
dinner. It's only lately that boredom was invented. 
Nobody used to get bored in former times." 

*'Well, enough of your boasting! Just as if you 
were never bored ! " 

'' I never am. And I don't know, — there's no time 
to be bored. You wake up in the morning, and there's 
the cook on^^he spot, and dinner must be ordered : then 
comes tea, and then the overseer, and then the fishing, 
and then dinner. After dinner, and before you have a 
chance to snore, there's the cook again, and supper 
must be ordered. Where is there any time to get 
bored?" 

During the whole of this conversation, Tchitchikoff 
had been observing the visitor, who had amazed him 
with his remarkable beauty, his slender, picturesque 
form, the freshness of his unspoiled youth, and the 
feminine clearness of his complexion, which was not 
defaced by a single blemish. Neither passion nor 
grief, nor even any thing in the nature of emotion, had 
dared to lay a finger on this face, which was as pure 
as that of a young girl, nor to imprint on it a wrinkle, 
even though this would have added life to it. It looked 

^ A fieh resembling carp. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 73 

rather sleepy, in spite of the ironical smile which lighted 
it up at times. 

"And I, permit me to remark," said Tchitchikoff, 
" am unable to comprehend how a man can mope with 
such a personal appearance as yours. Of course, if 
he lacks money, or has enemies, — and there are people 
who are ready to make attempts even on the life of a 
man." . . . 

"Believe me," interrupted the beauty, "I should 
sometimes like a little uneasiness, for the sake of 
variety. If some one would only put me in a passion ! 
But there's no one to do it. It's a bore, and that's all 
there is about it." 

" Then, you have not a Sufficient amount of land in 
your estate, or the number of your serfs is small? " 

" Not in the least. My brother and I have ten 
thousand desyatins^ of land between us, and over a 
thousand men peasants on them." 

"Strange! I cannot understand it! But perhaps 
you have had no bad harvests, or epidemics, or some 
of your male serfs have died? " 

" On the contrary, every thing is in the best of order, 
and my brother is a capital manager." 

" And to mope with all that ! I don't understand it," 
said Tchitchikoff, shrugging his shoulders. 

"We'll drive away his moping mood immediately," 
said the host. " Run, Alexasha, quick, to the kitchen, ■ 
and tell the cook to send us some fish-patties as speedily 
as possible. And where's that jackanapes Yemelyan, 
and that thief Antoshka? ЛУЬу don't they serve the 
zakuskaf 

But here the door opened. The jackanapes Ye- 
melyan and the thief Antoshka made their appearance 

^ Tweuty-eeven thousand i 



74 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

with napkins, spread the table, and set on it a tray with 
six decanters, containing liquors of various colors. A 
necklace of plates, with all sorts of viands fit to arouse 
the appetite, soon surrounded the trays and decanters. 
The servants flitted hastily hither and thither, inces- 
santly fetching something in covered dishes, inside of 
which butter could be heaixi bubbling. The jacka- 
napes Yemelyan and the thief Antoshka arranged 
things in excellent style. These nicknames had been 
bestowed on them by way of encouragement. Their 
master was not at all fond of scolding, being a good- 
natured fellow ; but the Russian man cannot get along 
without a spicy word now and then. It is as necessary 
to him as a glass of vodka is to his stomach, to aid 
digestion. What is to be done? Such is his nature: 
he likes nothing that is sweet. 

The zakuska was followed by dinner. Here the 
kind-hearted host became a thorough brigand. No 
sooner did he spy a bit of food on any one's fork, than 
he immediately added another, saying, "Without a 
mate, neither man nor bird can live in this world." 
If any one had two morsels, he heaped a third on top 
of them, declaring, "What sort of a number is two? 
God loves a trinity." If his guest had three, he said, 
*' Where was there ever a telyega seen with three 
wheels ? Who builds a cabin with three corners ? * ' For 
the fourth bit he was prepared with a proverb also, and 
likewise for the fifth. Tchitchikoff devoured nearly a 
dozen slices, and thought, " Well, the host will not pile 
up anything more." But in vain: without saying a 
word, his host laid on his plate some ribs of veal, 
roasted on the spit, with kidneys, and from what a 
calf! 

"I fed him for two years on milk," said the host: 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 75 

"I cared for bim as though he had been my own 
son!" 

'' I cannot eat it," said Tchitchikoff. 

*' Try, and say I cannot afterwards." r 

'' It won4 go in : there's no room." 

" Well, there was no room in the church. The chief 
of police arrived, — and a place was found. There 
was such a throng that there was not room for an apple 
to fall. Only try: this moi*sel is the chief of police." 

Tchitchikoff did try, and the morsel actually was 
something in the nature of a chief of police. A place 
was found for it, but it seemed as though nothing more 
could be put in." 

'' Now, how is such a man to go to Petersburg or 
Moscow ! In three years, with such hospitality, he will 
ruin himself utterly," thought Tchitchikoff. Of course 
he was not aware that this had already been thoroughly 
accomplished, — that, even without being hospitable, 
one may get rid of every thing, not in three years, but 
in three months. 

It was the same with the wines. On receiving his 
money from the loan-bank, Piotr Petrovitch had pro- 
vided himself with a store of wines for ten years to 
come. Consequently, he poured and poured. What 
the guests did not drink, he gave to Alexasha and 
Nikolasha, who clinked their glasses together like the 
rest. It was plain in advance to what branch of human 
learning they would direct their attention on their arri- 
val in the capital. The guests could hardly move. 
With great difficulty they dragged themselves to the 
balcony, and with great difficulty disposed themselves 
in arm-chairs. The host had no sooner seated himself 
in his, of a special square shape, than he fell asleep. 
His corpulent person, convei-ted into a blacksmith's 



7G TCHlTCHtKOFF'B JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

bellows, began to emit, through the open mouth and 
the nostrils, such sounds as rarely enter the head of 
even a new writer. It was like a drum and a fife ; and 
there was another sound still, resembling the bark of 
a dog. 

'' Eh, how lie whistles ! *' said Platonoff. 

Tehitehikoff began to laugh. 

" Of course, if you dine like that, there's no chance 
to get bored. Sleep follows, does it not? " 

'^ Yes. But, nevertheless, I — you must excuse me 
— I cannot understand how it is possible for you to be 
bored. There are so many means to prevent being 
bored." 

*^ЛVhat are they?" 

" Are there not plenty for a young man? Dancing, 
playing on some instrument, . . . not to mention get- 
ting married." 

''To whom?" 

"Are there no rich and pretty brides in the neigh- 
borhood?" 

" Well, no." 

" Well, then you can look elsewhere : you can 
travel." And a brilliant idea flashed through the 
brain of Tehitehikoff. "Yes, that's a capital way! " 
he said, looking Platonoff full in the eye. 

"What?" 

" Travelling." 

" Where is one to go? " 

"Why, if you are at liberty, come with me," said 
Tehitehikoff; and thought, as he gazed at Platonoff, 
"That would be a fine thing. Then we might share 
expenses, and the whole cost of repairs to the calash 
might be carried to his account. ' * 

" But where are you going? " 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 77 

"Just at present I am not travelling on my own affairs 
80 much as on those of some one -else. Gen. Betrish- 
tcheff, an intimate friend, and, I may say, a benefac- 
tor, has requested me to notify his relatives ... In 
short, it's a family matter; but it is my own affair 
too, so to speak ; for, say what you will, to see the 
world, to observe the manners of its people, is like a 
living book, a second education." And, as he spoke 
thus, Tchitchikoff was thinking to himself, '* It really 
would be capital ! I might charge all the expenses to 
him, and even travel with his horses, while mine might 
be fed in his village." 

"Why should I not travel?" Platonoff was think- 
ing meanwhile. " I have nothing to do at home ; and 
the management of affairs is in my brother's hands, in 
any case ; so there would be no dissipation about it. 
IVhy not travel, in fact? Do you consent," he asked 
aloud, " to pass a couple of days with my brother? 
Otherwise, he will not let me go." 

" With the greatest pleasure ; — three even." 

"Come, shake hands on it. We'll go," said Plato- 
noff, brightening up. 

He clapi)ed his hands. " Let's go ! " 

" Where? where? " cried the host, waking and star- 
ing at them. " No,*my dear fellows. I have ordered 
a wheel to be removed from the calash ; and your horse, 
Platon Mikhailovitch, has been driven off fifteen versts. 
No : you are going to pass the night here ; and to-mor- 
row, after an early dinner, you may go your way." 

What was to be done with Pyetukh? They were 
forced to remain. They were rewarded with a l)eauti- 
ful spring evening. The host arranged a trip on the 
river. Twelve rowei-s and twenty-four oars, accom- 
panied by songs, bore them over the surface of the 



78 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

mirror-like lake. From the lake they entered the river, 
which was immeasurably broad, with sloping banks 
on each side ; and they passed, ever and anon, beneath 
ropes stretched from shore to shore, to assist in the 
fisheries. The waters were barely disturbed by the 
current; the changing views, as they succeeded one 
another, merely presented themselves in silence before 
them ; and grove after grove refreshed the sight with 
an ever-varying commingling of trees. The rowers, 
grasping their twenty-four oars simultaneously, sud- 
denly elevated them in the air, and the boat floated 
along over the motionless, glassy surface as lightly as 
a bird. The leader of the singers, a broad-shouldered 
youth, who sat third from the rudder, struck up in a 
clear, ringing voice, which seemed to issue from the 
throat of a nightingale, the opening cadences of a 
song. Five more caught up the refrain : the other six 
carried it on, and it poured forth in a melody as bound- 
less as Russia herself. Even Pyetukh roused up, and 
began to hum, supporting the part where the chorus 
was lacking in strength ; and even Tchitchikoff felt 
sensible that he was a Russian. Platonoff alone 
thought, '' What is there fine about this melancholy 
tune? It makes the soul still more depressed." 

The shades of night had already descended when 
they returned. In the darkness the oars beat upon 
water which no longer reflected the heavens. In dark- 
ness they landed on the shore, where fires were lighted, 
over which, on tripods, fish-soup of freshly caught 
and quivering chubs was cooking. The village cattle 
and poultry had long since been driven home : the dust 
raised by them had settled again, and the herdsmen 
who had driven them stood at the gates waiting for the 
earthen pot of milk and an invitation to the fish-soup. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 79 

Through the darkness the subdued hum of men's voices 
and the yelping of dogs resounding from some distant 
village were audible. The moon rose, and began to 
light up the darkened landscape, and evei7 thing was 
illuminated. Wondrous pictures ! But there was no 
one to admire them. Nikolasha and Alexasha, instead 
of dashing past on spirited steeds, in pursuit of each 
other, were dreaming of Moscow, of the restaurants 
and the theatres, of which a cadet who came from the 
capital had told them ; their father was meditating how 
he might feed his guests ; Platonoff was yawning. 
Tchitchikoff seemed to be the most animated of them 
all. *' Truly," thought he, *4 will set up a little ham- 
let of my own some day. How can a man live any- 
where except in the country?" And visions of a 
pretty wife and some small Tchitchikoffs began to pre- 
sent themselves to his fancy. 

And at supper they over-ate themselves again. When 
Pavel Ivanovitch entered the apartment which had 
been prepared for him, and, throwing himself on the 
bed, felt of his stomach, he said, '4t's a drum I No 
chief of police living could get into it!" By a con- 
currence of circumstances, the study of the master of 
the house must needs be situated at the other side of 
the wall. The partition was thin, and every word 
which was SIюken there was audible. The host was 
giving orders to the cook for a regular dinner on the 
morrow, under the pretext that it was an early break- 
fast ; and what orders they were ! A corpse would 
have acquired an appetite. First came a roar, " Now, 
roast it brown, and see that it is well basted ! " And 
the cook responded in a shrill falsetto, " I obey, sir ! 
It shall be done, sir! " 

"And you are to make a four-cornered fish-pasty," 



80 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

said he, drawing in his breath with a sucking noise. 
" In one corner you are to put the cheeks and the car- 
tilages of the sturgeon, in another buckwheat porridge, 
and mushrooms with garlic, and sweet milk, and brains, 
and something more, — you know, some of that stuff 
there . . . something like " . . • 

''Yes, sir. So it shall be." 

" And let it be browned on one side, and lighter on 
the other. And undeiiieath . . . bake it so that it 
may be all soaked and penetrated, so that it may be 
— you know how, not so that it will crumble to 
pieces, but so that it will melt in your mouth, like 
snow, in such a way that it may hardly be noticed." 
Thereupon Pyetukh smacked his lips, and slapped 
them. 

"Deuce take it! He won't let me go to sleep," 
thought Tchitchikoff, and wrapped the coverlet round 
his head, in order not to hear. But through the cov- 
erlet came the words, — 

" And round the sturgeon place little stars of beets, 
and of bleak, and pepper mushrooms, — and you know, 
turnips and carrots and beans, and some of that — 
what do you call it? — so that there may be as much 
garnishing as possible. And make me a pig's-stomach 
pudding . . . crack the ice thoroughly, so that it may 
rise well." 

And many dishes besides did Pyetukh order. And 
there was a stream of, "And brown it, and roast it 
crisp, and see that it is well basted!" Tchitchikoff 
fell asleep at last over a turkey. 

The next day the guests over-ate themselves to such 
an extent that Platonoff could not ride on hoi*seback. 
His stallion was despatched in charge of one of Pye- 
tukh's grooms. They seated themselves in the cals^h. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 81 

The thick-nosed dog followed the carriage languidly. 
He, too, had over-eaten himself. 

"This is too much," said Tchitchikoff, when they 
. had left the house behind them. 

" And he is never bored : that's the vexatious part 
of it!" said Platonoff. 

''If I had seventy thousand rubles a year income, 
like you," thought Tchitchikoff, '' I'd not let ennui 
come within sight of me ! There's that brandy- farmer, 
Murazoff — it's easy enough to talk ! — ten millions " — 

" Would you object to going to a village about ten 
versts from here? " inquired Platonoff. " I should like 
to take leave of my sister and my brother-in-law." 

''With the greatest pleasure," said Tchitchikoff. 

" If you are fond of the details connected with the 
management of an estate," said Platonoff, "you will 
take an interest in making their acquaintance. You 
cannot find a better manager than he is. In the space 
of ten years, he has brought his property into such a 
state that he now receives an income of two hundred 
thousand rubles, instead of thirty thousand as at 
first." 

"Ah, he is indeed a most estimable man! It will 
be extremely interesting to make the acquaintance of 
such a man. But how is this? That is to say . . . 
what is his family name?" 

" Kostanzhoglo." 

"And his baptismal name and patronymic?" 

" Konstantin Feodorovitch." 

" Konstantin Feodorovitch Kostanzhoglo ! It will 
be very interesting to make his acquaintance. It is 
instructive to know such a man." 

Platonoff took it upon himself to guide Selifan ; and 
it was requisite, for the latter could hardly hold him- 



82 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

self on his box. Petrushka tumbled from the calash 
twice like a log, so that it became necessaiy to bind 
him to the box with a rope. ''^What a brute!" was 
all that Tchitchikoff said. 

" Look ! his land begins here," said Platonoff. " It 
has quite another aspect." And in fact, all over the 
field, which was planted with forest-trees, the young 
saplings were as even and as straight as arrows ; be- 
hind them was another plantation of young trees, but 
a little taller ; behind it rose a wood of older growth, 
and so on, each taller than the preceding. Then came 
another strip of land, covered with a heavy growth of 
grain ; and again, in the same manner, a tender growth 
of forest, succeeded by an older one. And thrice did 
they pass through such vaulted arches of forest. '' All 
these have grown up with him in eight or ten years, 
which would not have grown for anybody else in 
twelve." 

"How does he manage it?" 

" Oh ! you must ask him. He's wise in matters con- 
nected with the earth. He does nothing in vain. He 
not only understands the soil, but he knows what lo- 
cality is required for each thing, and which ti-ee must 
go with each grain. He makes every thing answer 
three or four purposes at once. If he has a piece of 
forest, it is because, in addition to the forest as a 
forest, just so much extra moisture must be provided 
for the fields, and so much fertilizing mould from the 
falling leaves, and so much shade . . . when there is 
a drought everywhere about, there is no drought with 
him : when crops all about him fail, they do not fail 
with him. It's a pity that I know so little about these 
things that I cannot tell you about them ; but he has 
such devices ... He is called a sorcerer. You will 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 83 

see many, many things on his estate. But it's a bore, 
all the same." . . . 

"He really is a most remarkable man," thought 
Tehitehikoff. " It is most lamentable that this young 
man cannot tell even the general outlines. I am wait- 
ing with impatience to see him." 

At length the village made its appearance. It re- 
sembled a town : a multitude of. cabins were scattered 
on three elevations, crowned with churches, and every- 
where hemmed in with gigantic ricks of hay, and stacks 
of grain. "Yes," thought Tehitehikoff, "it is evi- 
dent that a man of importance lives here." The 
cabins were all well built ; the streets were levelled ; 
wherever a telyega was visible, it was stout and quite 
new ; the muzhiks whom they encountered had an in- 
telligent expression ; the horned cattle were of choice 
kinds ; even the peasants' pigs looked like noblemen. 
It was evident that here dwelt peasants, who, as the 
song says, dig with a silver spade. Here were no Eng- 
lish parks and lawns, arbors and bridges, with all sorts 
of devices ; but, after the ancient fashion, an avenue 
lined with granaries and laborers' cottages ran almost 
up to the very manor-house, so that all that was going 
on about him might be under the eye of the master ; 
and to complete the arrangement, a lofty tower of ob- 
servation, which commanded a view for fifteen versts 
in every direction, reared its form on the roof, not for 
the sake of ornament or the prospect, but for the pur- 
pose of overlooking the laborers in the distant fields. 
At the porch they were met by well-trained servants, 
very different indeed from drunken Petrushka, although 
they did not wear swallow -tailed coats, but cossack 
tunics of blue homespun. 

The mistress of the house herself ran out to the 



84 TCHITCfflKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

porch. She was as fresh as blood and milk ; she was 
as beautiful as God's day ; she was as like Platonofif as 
one drop of water is like another, with this difference, 
that she was not languid, like him, but merry and talka- 
tive. 

'' Welcome, brother ! How glad I am that you have 
come ! But Konstautin is not at home, though he soon 
will be.*' 

''Where is he?" 

"He has business in the village with some traders," 
she replied, conducting the visitors into the house. 

Tchitchikofif gazed with curiosity at the abode of this 
remarkable man, who received an income of two hun- 
dred thousand rubles, thinking to discern some traces 
of the owner's own qualities, as the oyster or snail 
leaves its seal on its late habitation, its abandoned 
shell. But it was impossible to draw any inferences. 
The rooms were simple, even bare : there were no fres- 
cos nor etageres nor porcelain, nor even books. In 
short, every thing indicated that the principal life of 
the individual who inhabited the apartment was not 
passed within the four walls of his room, by any means, 
but in the fields ; and that his ideas were not fii*st 
thought over in sybaritic fashion, before the fire, and 
in a comfortable arm-chair facing the chimney, but that 
they entered his brain on the field. of action ; and that 
there, where they occurred to him, they were put into 
practice. The only signs of any thing which Tchitchi- 
koff could perceive in the rooms were those connected 
with housewifery. Upon the tables and chairs were 
placed clean linden-wood planks, and strewed on them 
were the petals of flowers, which were being dried. 

'' What rubbish have you spread out here, sister?" 
asked Platonoff. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 85 

" Rubbish indeed ! " exclaimed the hostess. " This 
forms the very best remedy for fevers. We cured all 
the peasants with it last year. And this is for cordials. 
And this for preserves. You always laugh at my pre- 
serves and pickles, and then, when you taste of them, 
you praise them highly." 

Platonoff approached the piano, and began to turn 
over the music. " Heavens ! how old-fashioned ! " said 
he. " Come, now, are not you ashamed of yourself, 
sister?" 

'' Really, you must forgive me, brother: I have had 
no time to devote to music for a long while. I Ьал'е a 
little daughter, eight years old, whom I must educate. 
Shall I consign her to the hands of a foreign governess 
simply for the sake of making time to devote myself 
to music? No: you must excuse me, brother; that is 
something which I will not do." 

"How tiresome you have grown, really, sister," 
said the brother, and walked to the window. "Ah! 
there he is ! He's coming ! he's coming ! " exclaimed 
Platonoff. 

Tchitchikoff also hastened to the window. A man 
of forty, sunburnt and alert, was approaching the 
porch. He wore a tricot cap and a camel's-hair sur- 
tout. He paid no heed to his attire. A man of the 
lower classes was walking on each side of him, cap in 
hand, engaged in discussing something with him. One 
was a simple peasant : the other was some sort of an 
itinerant wholesale trader and adventurer, in a blue 
sibirka,^ As they all came to a halt near the porch, 
their conversation became audible in the house. 

" This is what you had better do," said Kostanzho- 
glo, — "purchase your liberty from your master. I 

^ A long coat without any opening behind. 



86 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

will lend you the money, if you like. You can work it 
out with me afterwards." 

'' No : why purchase our freedom ? Do you take us, 
rather. Every one learns sense of you. But the diffi- 
culty now is, that we can in no way take care of our- 
selves. The distillers have made such liquors that one 
glass makes your stomach ache as though you had 
drunk a pailful. Before you succeed in recovering 
your senses, you have squandered every thing. There 
are many snares. The Evil One, who rules the world, 
by Heavens ! has so arranged things that every thing 
throws a man off the track. . . . They have begun to 
make tobacco, and all sorts of things. . . . ЛVhat is 
to be done, Konstautin Feodorovitch ? A man is a 
man in the sight of God : you can't deny that." 

" Listen : the point lies here. You will not have 
full freedom, even with me. It is true that you will re- 
ceive every thing at the start, — a cow and a horse ; 
but the point of the matter is, that my demands on the 
peasant are greater than they are anywhere else. With 
me, work is the first consideration : I permit idleness 
neither to myself nor to any one else. I work like an 
ox myself, and therefore, my friend, I have tried my 
peasants. All sorts of rubbish gets into the head 
through lack of work. Therefore, do you all consider 
this in the mir,,^ and discuss it among yourselves." 

" We have already discussed it, Konstautin Feodoro- 
vitch. The elders have already expressed their mind. 
* What ! ' they say, * every one of your peasants is rich. 
This is not for nothing. And the priests are so com- 
passionate. And even they have been taken away from 
us, and no one can be buried.* " 

" Go and talk it over, nevertheless." 

^ The commana] council of village elders. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 87 

"I obey, Konstantin Feodorovitch. " 

" Do me the favor, Konstantin Feodoroviteh, and 
reduce the price," said the itinerant dealer in the blue 
sibirka^ who was walking on his other side. 

"I Ьал'е already given you my answer. I am not 
fond of diaffering. I am not like some other proprie- 
tors, whom you can beggar because of the pressure of 
payment on their mortgages. I know you all, you see. 
You keep lists of all those who must make payments. 
What is there to be surprised at in that? A man is 
reduced to extremities, he will sell to 5'ou at half-price. 
But what is your money to me? My things can lie 
three years if necessary. I have no payments to make 
to the bank of loans." 

" That's true, Konstantin Feodoroviteh. And it is 
simply because I wish to have dealings with you, and 
not from any motives of greed, that I do it. Please 
to accept three thousand rubles earnest-money." The 
sharper pulled a bundle of dirty bank-notes from his 
bosom. Kostanzhoglo took them with the greatest 
coolness, and thrust them into the rear pocket of his 
surtout. 

*'Hm!" thought Tchitchikoff : ''just as though it 
were a pocket-handkerchief ! " 

Kostanzhoglo made his appearance at the door of the 
drawing-room. Tchitchikoff was still more struck by the 
bronzed hue of his face, the stiffness of his dark hair, 
which was turning gray prematurely here and there, by 
the alert expression of his eyes, and by a certain bilious 
stamp of fiery Southern origin. Kostanzhoglo did not 
know himself whence his forefathers had come. He did 
not trouble himself alюut his genealogy, deeming it a 
matter of no importance, and a superfluous thing in his 
domestic management. He was not of purely Russian 



88 TCUITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

extraction, as his features proved, but was thoroughly 
couvineed that he was Russian, and was acquainted 
with no other tongue than Russian. 

Platonoff introduced Tchitchikoff. They kissed each 
other. 

*' In order to cure. myself of hypochondria, Kon- 
stantin, I have hit upon the plan of travelling through 
the different provinces," said Platonoff; ''and Pavel 
Ivanovitch here, has proposed that I should accompany 
him, in order to get rid of my low spirits." 

''Very good," said Kostanzhoglo. "To what lo- 
calities do you propose to direct. your course?" he 
went on, turning to Tchitchikoff. 

"I must confess," answered Tchitchikoff, inclining 
his head courteously to one side, and at the same time 
caressing the arm of the chair with his hand, " that 
just at present J am travelling, not so much on my own 
account, as on the business of some one else. Gen. 
Betrishtcheff, my intimate friend, and, I may say, my 
benefactor, has asked me to communicate with his 
relatives. There are relatives and relatives; but on 
the other hand, I am travelling on my own account, so 
to speak : for, not to mention the profit which is to 1ю 
derived from considerations of health, viewing the 
world, and the habits of the people, forms a living 
book, a science in itself, so to speak." 

" Yes, it does no harm to take a peep in various 
quarters." 

" Your remark is capitally put : really, in truth, as a 
matter of fact, it does no harm. You see things which 
you would not have otherwise seen : you meet people 
whom you would not have met. Conversation with 
some of them is as good as gold. Here, now, for ex- 
ample, a case presents itself. ... I appeal to you, 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 89 

most respected Konstantin Feodorovitch ! teach me, 
instruct rae, slake my thirst for knowledge of the truth ! 
I wait for your sweet words, as for manna ! " 

" But to what end ? In what should I instruct you ? " 
asked Kostanzhoglo in confusion. "I got my own 
poor education on copi>er money." 

" ЛVisdom, wisdom, most respected sir, — the wisdom 
to play the difficult part of the l^enefactor of a country 
estate ; the wisdom to extract an assured income ; to 
acquire a property which is not imaginary, but real, 
thereby fultiUing the duty of a citizen, and winning the 
reverence of one's fellow-countrymen." 

"Do you know what?** said Kostanzhoglo, gazing 

thoughtfully at him. " Remain a day with me. I will 

show you all the arrangements, and tell you all alюut 

every thing. You will see that there is no wisdom 

.about it.'* 

"Do stay," said the hostess; and turning to her 
brother, she added, " Stay, brother : what need is there 
for haste ? * ' 

" It's all one to rae. How shall it be, Pavel Ivano- 
vitch?" 

"I also, with the greatest pleasure. . . . But here 
is the difficulty : I must call upon a relative of Gen. 
BetrishtcheflP. A certain Col. Koshkareff." . . . 

"ЛУЬу, he's a lunatic ! " . 

" Yes, he is demented. I would not have gone to 
him, but Gen. Betrishtcheff, my intimate friend, and 
my benefactor, so to speak "... 

" In that case, do you know what you had better 
do? " said Kostanzhoglo. "It's not ten versts to his 
place. My carriage is standing harnessed. Go to 
him immediately. You will be able to get back here in 
time for tea." 



90 TCUITCUIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

" An excellent idea ! " exclaimed Tchitchikoff, seizing 
his bat. 

The prolyotka ^ was brought to the door, and in half 
an hour it had borne him swiftly to the colonel's abode. 
The whole village was in disorder : buildings in process 
of construction and of reconstruction, heaps of refuse, 
bricks and lumber, incumbered all the streets. The 
buildings were of the nature of courts of justice. On 
one was the inscription, in gilt letters. Depot of Agri' 
cultural Implements; on another, Cliief Office for Ac- 
counts; farther on, Committee of Rural Affairs; and, 
again. School for the Higher Education of the Peasantry, 
In short, the deuce only knows wliat was not there. 

He found the colonel at a desk in the counting-room, 
with a pen between his teeth. He received Tchitchi- 
koff with special affability. Judging from appearances, 
he was an extremely amiable, and vei-y approachable, 
man : he began to tell Tchitchikoff of the great labor 
which it had cost him to bring the estate to its present 
flourishing condition. He complained bitterly of the 
difficulty of bringing the muzhik to understand that 
there are higher motives, which procure for man en- 
lightened luxury, art, and skill ; that up to that time 
he had not been able to make the women wear corsets, 
while in Germany, where he had passed some time 
with his regiment in the year '14, the miller's daughter 
had even been able to play upon the piano ; that, nev- 
ertheless, in spite of all the opposition from the party 
of ignorance, he should, without fail, attain his object, 
so that the peasant of his village would read a book on 
lightning-conductors, or the " Georgics " of Virgil, or 
a chemical analysis of the soil, as he followed the 
plough. 

1 A variety of drozhky, of circular ehape. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 91 

"Well, did any one ever hear of such a thing!" 
thought Tchitehikoff. "And to this day, I have not 
even read 'The Duchess of La Valliere' through! 
there is never any time." 

The colonel had a great deal more to say about the 
means of contributing to the welfare of the people. 
Costume possessed great significance for him. He 
offered to wager his own head that if one-half only of 
the Russian peasantry could be induced to don German 
trousers, the sciences would progress, trade would 
flourish, and gold would remain permanently in Russia. 

Tchitehikoff listened and listened, looking him steadily 
in the eye the while, and finally said to himself, "Evi- 
dently, there's no need to stand on ceremony with this 
man 1 " and he immediately stated that souls were re- 
quired, with the accompanying deeds of sale, and all 
the formalities. 

" So far as I can judge from your words," said the 
colonel, in a good deal of confusion, " this is a request, 
is it not?" 

" Exactly so." 

" In that case, put it in writing. It will go to the 
commission for the reception of reports, which, after 
having passed upon it, will hand it to me. From me 
it will go to the committee of rural affairs. Thence, 
after amendments, it will pass to the superintendent. 
The superintendent will then communicate with my 
secretary." 

" Good gracious ! " exclaimed Tchitehikoff. " God 
knows how long it will take to transact the business in 
writing. You see, the souls are — after a fashion — 
dead." 

" Very good. Then write that the souls are, after a 
fashion, dead." 



92 TCIIITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

"But how can dead souls be written down? It is 
impossible to inscribe them thus. Although they are 
dead, it must appear as though they were alive." 

" Good. Then write, ' but it is necessary., or it is 
requisite., it is desirable., it is deniand4idj that they shall 
appear as though alive.' This cannot be transacted in 
any other way than by writing. England, and even 
Napoleon, has set the example. I will detail a com- 
missioner who will conduct you to all the departments." 

He touched a bell. A man, the secretary, made his 
appearance. 

"Send me a commissioner!" The commissioner, 
something between a peasant and an official, appeared. 
" This man here will conduct you to all these most in- 
dispensable places." 

TchitchikoflP decided to accompany the commissioner, 
and inspect these most indispensable departments, out 
of curiosity. The department for the reception of re- 
ports existed, as yet, only on the sign-board, and the 
doors were fastened. The head of affairs here had 
been transferred to the newly instituted committee of 
rural construction. His place had been supplied by the 
valet, Berezovsky ; but he also had been ordered off to 
the committee on construction. They knocked at the 
department of rural affairs, — and there things were 
undergoing re-arrangement : they routed out a drunken 
man, but got no satisfaction out of him. " We have 
a pack of nonsense here," remarked the commissioner 
to Tchitchikoff at last. "The master is being led by 
the nose. The commission of construction rules every 
thing here : it tears everybody from his business, and 
sends him where it sees fit. And the only profit from it 
is derived by the commission of construction." He was 
evidently displeased with the commission of construe- 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 93 

tion. ' ' And in fact, when Tchitchikoff glanced aronnd, 
building was going on everywhere. He did not care to 
push his inspection farther. On his return, he told the 
colonel that things were thus and so, that there was 
nothing but confusion on the place, and that it was im- 
possible to make head or tail of it, and that there was 
no commission for the reception of reports at all, but a 
desperate set of thieves. 

The colonel boiled with righteous indignation, press- 
ing Tchitchikoff 's hand warmly in token of his gratitude. 
Then, immediately snatching up a pen and paper, he 
wrote down eight questions of the most searching na- 
ture : On what ground had the commission of construc- 
tion disposed, in this high-handed manner, of officials 
who were not subject to its authority ? How could the 
director-in-chief permit the superintendent of works to 
set out on an investigation without having first resigned 
his post? And how could the committee of rural affairs 
view with indifference the fact that the commission for 
the reception of reports and petitions was not in exist- 
ence at all ? 

" Now there's going to be a storm ! " thought Tchi- 
tchikoff, and tried to take his leave. 

"No, I will not let you go. My personal pride is 
touched now. I will show you what a regular, organ- 
ized course of management is like. I will intrust your 
business to a man who is worth all the rest put together. 
He has completed the university course. That's the 
sort of serfs that I have ! In order not to waste valu- 
able time, I beg that you will take a seat in my library," 
said the colonel, opening a side-door. " You will find 
books, paper, pens, pencils, and every thing there. 
Make use of them, make use of them all, — you are 
the master here. Cultivation should be free to all." 



94 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

Thus spoke Koshkaretf, as he conducted Tchitchi- 
koflp into the book-room. This was a vast hall, lined 
from top to bottom with books. There were even some 
stufifed animals. The books pertained to all branches 
of learning : to the department of forestry ; the rearing 
of cattle, of swine ; of horticulture ; and there were spe- 
cial journals on every subject, which are disseminated 
on the sole condition of subscription, but which no one 
ever reads. Perceiving that none of these books were 
adapted for passing the time, Tchitchikoff turned to 
another case. It was jumping from the frying-pan 
into the fire. All these were philosophical books. Six 
huge tomes presented themselves to his eyes, under the 
title, "Preliminary Introduction into the Domain of 
Thought ; or, The Theory of Universality, Correlation, 
Essentiality, in its Application to the Conception of the 
Organic Beginnings of the Reciprocal Partition of 
Universal Productiveness." Turn the book over as 
Tchitchikoff would, on every page there occurred, 
phenomenon, development,, abstract, isolation, and con- 
junction, and the deuce knows what besides. '' This 
is beyond me I** said Tchitchikoff, and turned to a 
third book-case, where all the volumes were in the de- 
partment of art. Thence he drew out a bulky tome, 
with immodest mythological pictures, and began to look 
them over. That style of picture pleases bachelors of 
middle age, and sometimes even hoary old men, who 
run after ballet-dancers and other like spices. Having 
finished the inspection of this book, Tchitchikoff was 
on the point of pulling down another of the same de- 
scription, when Col. Koshkareff made his appearance, 
with a beaming countenance and a document. 

*' All is done, and capitally done ! The man of whom 
I spoke to you is a real positive genius. For this deed 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 95 

I shall place him over them all, and I shall establish an 
entire department for him alone. See what a clear 
head he has, and how he has settled every thing in a 
few minutes." 

'' Now, glory to thee, О Lord ! '' thought Tchitchi- 
koff, and prepared to listen. The colonel began to 
read : — 

'' 'On entering upon the consideration of the com- 
mission intrusted to me by your honor ' . . . well, here 
. . . ' I have the honor to report on it, — 

" 4st, The petition itself of the collegiate councillor 
and cavalier, Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff, contains 
a misconception ; for the revision souls have been 
styled dead through an oversight. By this designation 
he has probably been graciously pleased to indicate 
those who are near to death, but not dead. And this 
very designation bears witness to an empirical educa- 
tion, confined, in all probability, to the parish school ; 
for the soul is deathless.' 

'' He's a sharp fellow," said Col. Koshkareff, with 
satisfaction. '' He has pricked you a little there. But 
confess, he wields a clever pen ! *' 

*•' ' In the second place, there are no unmortgaged 
revision souls, either of those merely on the verge of 
death, or of any other sort, on the estate ; for all are 
not only hypothecated in conjunction, without any ex- 
ception, but re-hypothecated, to the amount of one hun- 
dred and fifty rubles a soul, in addition to the small 
hamlet of Gurmailovka, which is in a debatable con- 
dition, on account of a lawsuit with the landed pro- 
prietor, Predishtcheff, and inhibited in consequence, 
notice of which was published in "The Moscow Ga- 
zette," No. 42.' " 

" Then, why did not you tell me so in the first place? 



96 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

Why have you detained me with your nonsense?" in- 
quired Tehitehikofif angrily. 

"Really, now! Why, it was necessary that you 
should be made aware of all this through the formality 
of a transaction on paper. This is no jest. Even a 
fool can perceive a thing unintelligently, but it must be 
seen intelligently." 

Tchitchikoff snatched up his cap in a rage, and ran 
out of the house, in contravention of all decorum. The 
coachman was standing with the carriage in readiness, 
for he knew that he must not unharness the horses, 
because a written petition would have to be presented 
for fodder, and the order to serve out the oats would 
only be issued on the following day. Nevertheless, 
the colonel ran out to accompany him to his carriage. 
He shook Tchitchikoff*s hand warmly, pressed it to 
his heart, and thanked him for having afforded him 
an opportunity of seeing the course of transactions 
in operation. He said that things must be spurred up 
and kept in motion, for every thing was apt to become 
drowsy, and the springs of administration might grow 
rusty and weak ; that, in consequence of this incident, 
a happy thought had occuiTcd to him, — to institute a 
commission which should be entitled the commission of 
scrutiny over the commission of construction, so that 
then no one would dare to steal. 

Tchitchikoff returned angry and dissatisfied, and at a 
late hour, when the candles had already been lighted. 

'^What has detained you so* late?" asked Kostan- 
zhoglo, when he made his appearance in the doorway. 

" What were you discussing at such length with 
him?" inquired Platonoff. 

'* Such a fool I have never beheld since I was born ! " 
said Tchitchikoff. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 97 

"That's nothing," remarked Kostanzhoglo. " Kosh- 
kareff is a consoling phenomenon. He is useful, be- 
cause in him are reflected, in a grotesque and very 
striking manner, the follies of those of our wiseacres, 
who, without knowing any thing themselves, appro- 
priate the absurdities of others. He has set up offices 
and factories and schools ; and the deuce knows what 
these wise folks have not established ! ... No sooner 
have they recovered from the effects of the French of 
the year '12, than they must needs ruin themselves 
completely again. They have ruined themselves worse 
than the French ever did, so that a certain Piotr Petro- 
vitch Pyetukh is still regarded as a fine example of a 
landed proprietor." 

'' Well, his property is now pledged to the bank of 
loans," said Tchitchikoff. 

'* Just so ! Every thing is mortgaged, every thing 
will go to the bank of loans." Having spoken thus, 
Kostanzhoglo began to rage a little. *' There's Shlyap- 
kin has set up a candle-factory, has imported workmen 
from London, and has become a dealer in candles ! A 
respectable business, truly, for a landed proprietor! 
He visits manufacturers and factory-owners. He sets 
up spinning-machines, and makes calicoes for the 
hussies and the women of the town." 

" But you have factories yourself," remarked Tchi- 
tchikoff. 

"And who established them? They established 
themselves. The wool accumulated : there was no way 
of getting it off my hands, and I began to weave cloth, 
coarse cloth, merely suited to muzhiks, to my muzhiks. 
But it is purchased from me at the fairs because of its 
cheapness. For six years in succession the fishermen 
piled up fish-scales on my shores. And what was to 



98 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS i OR, DEAD SOULS, 

be done with them ? So I began to boil them down into 
glue, and I have made forty thousand rubles out of 
them. And that's the way every thing goes with me." 

" What a devil of a fellow ! " thought Tehitchikoff, 
staring at him with all his eyes. " What claws for 
raking in money ! " 

"And then, I have undertaken these things from 
another motive. I have drawn together many laborers, 
who would otherwise have died of hunger. It is a 
famine year, and all through the fault of the manufac- 
turers, who have neglected to plant crops. Many such 
factories have accumulated on my hands, my friend. 
A new one springs up every year, simply because 
scraps and refuse of something or other have accumu- 
lated. Only consider one's domestic economy atten- 
tively. Every sort of rubbish will yield a revenue, so 
that you thrust it from you, and say, ' I don't want it ! 
I don't build palaces with columnes and fa9ades for all 
that!'" 

"This is astounding! And the most astounding 
thing about it is, that rubbish should yield a revenue," 
said Tehitchikoff. 

" Now, I beg that you will take the matter simply as 
it really stands. But every one is a mechanic : every 
one wants to open the casket with instruments, instead 
of doing it in a simple manner. For that purpose he 
makes a special trip to England, that's the kernel of 
the matter. Fool ! . . . And he is a hundred times 
more stupid on his return from abroad." 

So saying, Kostanzhoglo spit. 

" Ah, Konstantiu ! you are in a passion again," said 
his wife anxiously. "Surely, you know that that is 
injurious to you." 

" How is a man to keep from going into a passion? 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 99 

It would be well enough if it were an extraneous mat- 
ter, but this lies close to one's own heart. The vexa- 
tious point about it is, to see the Russian character 
being spoiled. A Don Quixoteism is now exhibiting 
itself in the Russian character, such as never appeared 
in it before. Cultivation strikes a man's fancy, and 
be becomes a Don Quixote. He establishes such 
schools as would never enter the mind of even a fool ! 
The schools turn out a man who is good for nothing, 
either in town or country, except for a drunkard, and 
he is conscious of his woilh ! Of course, there's no 
harm in the reading and writing: they are good 
rather than the reverse. ... He goes into philan- 
thropy, and becomes a Don Quixote. Philanthropy 
erects ridiculous hospitals by the million, and institu- 
tions with columns, and ruins itself, and disperses every 
thing to the winds. There's philanthropy for you! 
Idiots ! asses ! " 

Kostanzhoglo spit in a rage. 

Tchitchikoff cared nothing for culture. He wanted 
to catechize his host in detail as to the manner in which 
every sort of rubbish could be made to produce a reve- 
nue. But Kostanzhoglo gave him no chance to inter- 
polate a word. So many bitter speeches had already 
flowed from his lips, that he could no longer restrain 
himself. 

"They imagine that they are enlightening the peas- 
ant. . . . Just make him rich first, and a good mana- 
ger, and the rest is his business. But nowadays 
everybody is more stupid than it is possible for you to 
conceive of. Just see what these scribblers write now ! 
They put forth some little book, and all men precipi- 
tate themselves upon it. . . . And this is what they 
have begun to say : ' The peasant leads a very simple 



100 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

life. He must be made acquainted with the articles of 
luxury : he must be made to feel the need of a higher 
civilization.* . . . They themselves, thanks to this 
luxury, have become rags, and not men, and have con- 
tracted, the deuce knows what, diseases : and there is 
no longer a little boy of eighteen who has not already 
tried every thing ; he has no teeth, and he's as bald as a 
bladder. So now they want to infect the peasants also. 
But, thank God, there is one healthy class still left 
among us which has not been initiated into those vices ! 
For this we simply owe thanks to God. The agricul- 
turist is the most honorable man among us. Why do 
you meddle with him? IVould to God that all men 
were like the husbandman ! " . 

" So you assume that agriculture is the most profit- 
able branch to which a man can devote himself? '* in- 
quired Tchitchikofif. 

"It is the most legitimate, but not the most profit- 
able. Thou shalt till the earth in the sweat of thy 
brow, it has been said. There's nothing surprising 
about that. It has already been proved, by the expe- 
rience of ages, that man is more moral, purer, nobler, 
more lofty, when engaged in the profession of agricul- 
ture. I do not say, refrain from engaging in any thing 
else, but let agriculture lie at the foundation, — that's 
all ! Factories will arise of themselves, and factories 
of a legitimate sort, that is what is needed here, 
under the hand of a man who is himself on the spot, 
and not these requirements of every description, which 
render the men of to-day effeminate. Not the sort of 
factories where, for their maintenance, for the purpose 
of disposing of their products, all manner of vile means 
are resorted to, and the wretched populace is demoral- 
ised and depraved. Therefore, say what you will 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 101 

about its being for their benefit, I shall not establish 
on my estate any of those thirigs which create a demand 
for the higher productions ; neither for tobacco nor 
sugar, even if I were to lose millions thereby. If vice 
must enter the world, then let it not be through my 
instrumentality ! Let me be righteous in the sight of 
God. ... I have been living among the people for 
twelve years, and I know the consequences." 

"The most wonderful thing to me is, that by judi- 
cious management, profit may be derived from scraps 
and remnants, and that every sort of refuse will return 
an income," said Tchitchikoff. 

" Hm ! political economists ! '* replied Kostanzhoglo, 
not heeding him, and with an expression of bitter 
sarcasm on his face. " Fine political economists they 
are ! Fool sits beside fool, and a fool is the driver ! 
The ass sees no farther than the end of his own stupid 
nose ; but he has mounted the pulpit, and will put on 
spectacles . . . Fools !" and in his wrath he sjjit again. 

*' Every thing is exactly as you state it, and per- 
fectly just, but please do not get angry," said his 
wife. "Just as though it were not possible to talk of 
this, without losing one's temper ! " 

" While listening to you, most respected Konstantin 
Feodorovitch, one penetrates, so to speak, into the 
very core of life, — one lays hold upon the very kernel 
of the matter. But, leaving on one side that which 
pertains to humanity in general, permit me to direct 
your attention to rudimentary questions. If, for in- 
stance, after having become a landed proprietor, I 
should desire to enrich myself in a brief space of time, 
that I might, so to speak, thus fulfil the most patent 
duty of a citizen, in what manner should I se^^about 
it?" 



102 TCniTCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

"How ought you to proceed, in order to become 
wealthy?" replied Kostauzhoglo. ''Ah, that's the 
point!" 

" Come, let us go to supper ! " said the hostess, ris- 
ing from the sofa ; and stepping to the middle of the 
room, she wrapped her shivering young limbs in a 
shawl. 

Tchitchikoflf sprang from his chair with almost the 
agility of a military man, flew to the hostess with the 
suave expression of a delicate statesman on his counte- 
nance, offered her his arm with a flourish, and escorU^d 
her in stately wise through two apartments to the dining- 
room, where the soup-tureen was already standing on 
the table, with its cover off, and exhaling an agreeable 
odor of a ix)ttage impregnated with fresh herbs and the 
fii-st vegetables of the spring season. All seated them- 
selves at table. The servants quickly placed all the 
courses on the table at once, in covered dishes, together 
with every thing that was necessary, and immediately 
quitted the room. Kostauzhoglo did not like to have 
the servants listen to all the conversation of their supe- 
riors, and still less to have them stare at his mouth 
while he was engaged in eating. 

Having eaten his soup, and drunk a glass of some 
sort of excellent liquor, which resembled Hungarian 
wine, Tchitchikoff addressed his host in the following 
manner: "Permit me, most respected sir, to once 
more direct your attention to the subject of our inter- 
rupted conversation. I was asking you what one was 
to do, how one should proceed, how best to set to 
work"! ^ , ^ 

Ok 1 Note of S. P. Shenulref. There is a break here In the conversation 
Qj.g*weea Tchitchikoflf and Koetanzhoglo. ЛVe must suppose that Kostan- 
* 'o proposed to Tchitchikoffj that he should purchase the estate of his 
IZed b>r Khlobuyoft. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 103 

. . . "It is an estate for which I would pay him 
forty thousand rubles on the spot, if he demanded that 
sum." 

"Hm!" Tchitchikoff fell into thought. «'But 
why/* he inquired, with some hesitation,, "do you not 
purchase it yourself? " 

" One must know how to prescribe limits to one's self 
somewhere. I have a great many cares connected with 
my present estate, without assuming more. Moreover, 
the noblemen of the district are crying out against me, 
even without that, and asserting that I have taken ad- 
vantage of their extremities and their bankrupt condi- 
tion, — that I am buying up land for a song. 1 have 
grown tired of this at last. ' ' 

*' How inclined people are in general to evil speak- 
ing ! " said Tchitchikoff. 

"And in our province in particular: it is something 
which you cannot even conceive of. They never men- 
tion me otherwise than as a niggard and a miser of the 
first water. They make excuses for themselves on every 
point. ' I certainly have been a spendthrift,' one of 
them will say ; ' but that was because I lived in accord- 
ance with the higher requirements of life, and encour- 
aged tradesmen (that is to say, rascals). But I might, 
if 3^u please, have lived like a hog, as that Kostauzho- 
glo docs.' " 

" I should like to be«uch a hog ! *' said Tchitchikoff. 

"And all that is falsehood and nonsense. The 
higher requirements, forsooth ! What are they so 
puffed up alx)ut? They buy books, indeed, but then 
do not read them. The matter ends in cards and 
champagne. . . . And all this comes of my not giving 
them dinners, and lending them money. I do not give 
dinners, because it would bore me : I am not accus- 



104 TCHITCHJKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

tomed to it. But if any one will come and eat what I 
eat myself, — I am very glad to have him. 1 do not 
lend money, — that's nonsense. Come to me in a case 
of absolute need, and tell me the circumstances, and 
how you propose to use my money ; if I see from your 
words, that you will employ it sensibly, and that the 
money will clearly be of advantage to you, — I will 
not refuse ; and I will not even ask you interest.*' 

"This must be taken into consideration," thought 
Tchitchikoff. 

"And I never refuse," went on Kostanzhoglo. 
" But fling my money to the winds, I will not ! You 
must excuse me from doing that. Deuce take such a 
man 1 He will use it for a dinner to his mistress, or 
he will furnish his house in a mad style, or will get up 
some sort of a jubilee in memory of the fact that he 
has lived his life in vain. There's no use in lending 
such a man money ! " 

Here Kostanzhoglo spit, and came near uttering 
some violent and indelicate words in the presence of 
his wife. The gloomy tint of hypochondria darkened 
his countenance. Vertical and perpendicular wrinkles, 
the witnesses of the wrathful movement of his spleen 
which had been so excited, collected on his brow. 

" Permit me, honored sir, to again recall you to the 
subject of our interrupted conversation," said Tchi- 
tchikoff, drinking off another glass of raspberry wine, 
which was truly excellent. "Suppose, for instance, 
that I were to acquire that property which you were so 
good as to mention ; then how much time would be re- 
quired for me to become sufficiently wealthy to " — 

" If you wish," interrupted Kostanzhoglo gruffly and 
abruptly, being still in an irritated frame of mind, " to 
grow rich in a short space of time, you will bever 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 105 

become wealthy at all; but if you desire to enrich 
yourself, without concerning yourself as to the time re- 
quired, you will speedily become rich. Yes," went on 
Kostanzhoglo, still abruptly, as though he were in- 
censed at Tchitchikoff personally, "it is necessary to 
feel a love for work : without that, nothing can be ac- 
complished. You must love to manage your estate. 
And, believe me, it is not at all wearisome. People 
have invented a fiction to the effect that it is dull in the 
country. . . . And I should die of dulness if I were 
to pass a single day in the city, as people do pass 
their days there, in those stupid clubs and inns and 
theatres ! Fools ! idiots ! race of asses ! The mana- 
ger of an estate has no time to be dull. No emptiness 
can come within half a verst of his life. It is always 
full. This life alone possesses variety of occupation, 
— of occupations which really elevate the soul. How 
could this fail to be the case, when man goes hand in 
hand with nature, with the seasons, and is a sharer 
and companion of every thing which goes on in crea- 
tion? Look at the yearly round of work. See how, 
even before the advent of spring, every thing is already 
on the watch and waiting for her : the preparation of 
the seeds, the sorting, the measuring of the grain in 
the barns, and the drying ; the arrangement for new 
land. Every thing is scanned beforehand, and every 
thing is reckoned up at the beginning. And when ^he 
ice breaks up, and the streams pour down, and every 
thing dries off, and the earth is warmed up, . . . the 
spade does its work in vegetable garden and orchard, 
and the plough and harrow perform theirs in the field ; 
and then come planting and sowing. Do you under- 
stand what that is ? A trifle : the future harvest is 
sown, the blessing of the world is sown, the food 



106 TCUITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS;* OR, DEAD SOULS. 

of millions is sown ! And then follows the haying, 
the haying. . . . And then summer has arrived. All 
at once the reaping is in full swing: the wheat has 
come up after the rye, and next the barley and the 
oats. Every thing is seething : it is impossible to 
lose a minute. If you had twenty eyes, there would 
be work for all of them. And when every thing is 
done, — the grain carried to the threshing-floor, and 
stored in the granaries, — then begins the autumn 
ploughing-under of the stubble, the preparation of 
the storehouses for the winter, of the ricks and the 
cattle-pens, and, at the same time, all the women's 
work ; and you cast up the sum-total, and you see what 
has been accomplished, and that is . . . And the win- 
ter ! Threshing on all the threshing-floors, the trans- 
portation of the threshed grain from the bins to the 
granaries ; the felling and sawing of trees in the forest ; 
the conveyance of bricks and timber for building opera- 
tions in the spring. You go to the mill, you go to the 
factory, you go to inspect the workmen's quartei-s, and 
to the peasant's cabin, to see how he is getting along 
there. Yes, for my part, if a carpenter handles his 
axe well, I am ready to stand and watch him for two " 
hours, such a cheering effect does work produce upon 
me. But if you can also see with what object all this 
is being done, how every thing about you is multiply- - 
ing and increasing, bearing increase and income, — 
well, I cannot express what takes place in your spirit 
then. And it is not because your money is increasing, - 
— money is nothing in itself, — but because all this is 
the work of your own hands, because you see that you 
are the source of it all ; that you are the creator, and 
that from you, as from some magician, good and abun- 
dance is showered upon all. Now, where else will you 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 107 

find me such another enjoyment? " said Kostanzhoglo ; 
and, as he raised his face, the wrinkles disappeared 
from it. He was all beaming, like an emperor on the 
day of his solemn coronation, and rays of light seemed 
to radiate from his countenance. "Yes, in the whole 
world, you will not find any such pleasure. Here, just 
here, is where man imitates God. God prescribed to 
himself the task of creation, as the loftiest of all en- 
joyment. And he demands the same thing from man, 
in order that he, like his Creator, may distribute happi- 
ness around him. And this is called a tiresome task ! *' 

Tchitchikoff listened to his host's melodious speech 
as to the song of heavenly birds. His mouth watered. 
His very eyes grew melting, and expressed sweetness ; 
and he could have listened to any thing. 

'' Konstantin, it is time to go,*' said the mistress of 
the house, rising from the table. Ail stood up. Tchi- 
tchikoff offered his arm with a fiourish, and conducted 
his hostess back again. But his movements now lacked 
agility, because his thoughts were all bent on practical 
matters. 

" You may say what you will, but it's a bore all the 
same," said Platonoff, as he walked behind them. 

"My guest is not a stupid man," thought the host. 
"He is attentive, cautious of speech, and no mere 
scribbler." And, meditating thus, he grew more cheer- 
ful, as though warmed up by his own speech, and re- 
joicing that he had found a man who knew how to 
listen to sensible counsels. 

When they had all settled themselves in a comfort- 
able little room opposite a balcony, with a glass door 
leading into the garden, and gazed through it at the 
stars shining above the crests of the trees in the sleep- 
ing garden, Tchitchikoff experienced an agreeable sen- 



108 TCHITCHIKOFF'B JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

sation, each as he had not felt for a long time, exactly 
as though his native roof had at length, after his pro- 
longed wanderings, received him once more, and as if, 
to crown all, he had accomplished every thing which 
he had desired, and had cast away his pilgrim's staff, 
saying, Enough ! Such an enchanted state of mind 
had the sensible discourse of his host produced in his 
soul. There are speeches which approach every man 
more nearly, and are more closely related to him, than 
all others; and often in some remote, forsaken, un- 
populated wilderness, you will unexpectedly meet with 
a man whose Inspiring discourse makes you forget 
yourself and the trackless roads, and the discomforts 
of your quarters for the night, and the dissoluteness 
of contemporary tumults, and the hollowness of the 
deceptions with which men are led astray. And the 
evening thus spent engraves itself once and forever on 
the memory, which retains it faithfully forevermore, — 
both who was present, and where each person sat, and 
what he held in his hand, and walls, corners, and every 
merest trifle. 

Just so did every thing come home to Tchitchikoff 
on that evening, — this simply furnished little room, 
and the kindly expression which illuminated the counte- 
nance of his clever host, and even the pattern of the 
wall-paper, and the ceiling, and the pipe which was 
handed to Platonoff, with its amber mouthpiece, and 
the smoke which he began to puff at Yarb's thick 
nose, and Yarb*s snuffing, and the laughter of the 
pretty hostess, broken by the words, "That will do; 
don't torment him," and the cheerful lights, and the 
cricket in the corner, and the spring night, which 
peeped in at them as it rested on the summits of the 
trees, all strewn with stars, and made melodious with 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL. 109 

Dightingales trilling loudly from the depths of the ver- 
dant copses. 

" Your words are sweet to me, honored Konstantin 
Feodorovitch ! *' exclaimed Tchitchikoff. " I may say 
that I have not seen a man in all Russia who is your 
peer in wisdom." 

The host smiled. He was conscious that these words 
were not undeserved. '^ No, Pavel Ivanovitch," said 
he, " if you want to know a wise man, we have one of 
whom it may be said that he is really wise ; and 1 am 
not worth his boot-heels." 

" Who can he be? " inquired Tchitchikoff, in amaze- 
ment. 

'' Our brandy- farmer, Murazoff." 

*'This is the second time that I have heard him 
mentioned ! " exclaimed Tchitchikoff. 

" He is a man who could manage not only an estate, 
but a whole empire. If I had an empire, I would im- 
mediately appoint him minister of finance." 

'' And they say that he is a man who transcends the 
measure of all belief. They say that he has accumu- 
lated ten million rubles." 

" Ten, indeed ! it amounts to over forty. The half 
of Russia will soon be in his hands." 

"You don't say so! " exclaimed Tchitchikoff, with 
staring eyes and open mouth. 

" No doubt about it. It's perfectly clear. The man 
who has a few thousands grows rich slowly : but the 
sphere of operations of the man who has millions is 
vast ; whatever he touches, doubles and trebles of itself. 
His field, his career, is very extensive. Such a man 
has no rivals. There is no one to compete with him. 
Whatever price he may fix stands : there is no one to 
break it." 



110 TCHlTCatKOFFS J0URXEY8; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

" Lord, ray God ! " cried Tchitchikoff, crossing him- 
self, and looking Kostanzhoglo straight in the eye: 
his breath failed him. *'Such wisdom is incredible! 
My mind is petrified with terror! People wonder at 
the wisdom of Providence when they gaze at a beetle : 
to me it is more wonderful that such л'ast sums should 
accumulate in the hands of a mortal man ! Allow me 
to put one question to you, with regard to one point : 
Of course this was not won in the first place without 
sin?*' 

"In the most irreproachable manner, and by the 
most upright means." 

"1 cannot believe it! It is incredible! If it had 
been thousands . . . but millions " . ; . 

"On the contrary, it is hard to win thousands hon- 
estly, but to acquire millions is easy. If you are a 
millionnaire, you have no need to resort to crooked 
paths. You can walk along the straight road, and 
pick up every thing which lies before you. No one 
else will take it : not every one has the power, — you 
will have no rivals. Your sphere is vast, as I said. 
Whatever you touch, yields double or treble the capital. 
But with thousands, only ten or twenty per cent." 

" And the most incomprehensible thing of all is, that 
the whole thing began with a kopek I " 

" It could not be otherwise. That is the legitimate 
course of things," said Kostanzhoglo. "The man 
who is born with thousands, who is reared on thousands, 
will accumulate nothing: he has already acquired 
caprices and all sorts of things. One must begin at 
the beginning, and not in the middle, — with a kopek, 
and not with a ruble, — from below, and not from 
above : the man who has done that understands the 
men and circumstances with whom he must deal later 



TWO PERSONS WHO ABE ORIGINAL. Ill 

on. It is another matter, when you have suffered 
things in your own person, when you know that every 
kopek is nailed down with a three-kopek piece, and 
when you have endured all the cheating yourself : then 
you grow wise, and become schooled to such a degree 
that you make no mistakes in any undertaking, and 
cannot be deterred from any thing. Believe me, this is 
true. One must begin at the beginning, and not in the 
middle. If any one says to me, ' Give me a hundred 
thousand rubles, and I will make my fortune instantly,' 
I do not believe him : he is trying his luck, and not 
working on a certainty. One must begin with a 
kopek.'' 

"In that case, I shall grow rich," said Tchitchikoff, 
his thoughts recurring involuntarily to the dead souls ; 
'> for I really am beginning with nothing." 

" Konstantin, it is time to allow Pavel Ivanovitch to 
rest," said the hostess, " but you keep on chattering." 

"Oh! you will infallibly become rich," responded 
Kostanzhoglo, paying no heed to his wife. "Rivers 
will flow to you, rivers of gold. You will not know 
what to do with your income." 

. Pavel Ivanovitch sat as though enchanted in the 
golden realm of his upspringing dreams and visions. 
His brain reeled. His playful fancy embroidered golden 
patterns upon the golden foundation of his future profits, 
and in his ears resounded the words, rivers^ rivers will 
flow.'* ... 

" Really, Konstantin, it is time for Pavel Ivanovitch 
to go to sleep." 

"What's the matter with you? Well, go, if you 
want to," said the host, and paused, because Plato- 
noff 's snores echoed loudly through the apartments, while 
Yarb struck in with even more vigor. Perceiving that 



112 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

it really was time to go to bed, he shook PlatonoflF, 
saying, '*Stop your snoring ! '* and wished Tehitchikoff 
good-night. They separated, and all were soon in bed 
and asleep. 

Tehitchikoff alone did not sleep. His thoughts kept 
him awake. He was meditating how he might become 
a landed proprietor, not of a fanciful, but of a real, 
estate. Every thing seemed so clear after that con- 
versation with his host ! The possibility of enriching 
himself seemed so self-evident ! The difficult problem 
of domestic economy had now become so easy and in- 
telligible, and seemed so thoroughly adapted to his own 
nature ! If he could only get rid of those souls to the 
bank, and set up an estate which was not in cloudland ! 
He already beheld himself actively engaged in directing 
things, just as Kostanzhoglo had instructed him, — 
swiftly, cautiously, establishing nothing new until he 
knew what was old through and through, overseeing 
every thing with his own eyes, making himself personally 
acquainted with all the peasants, casting from him all 
superfluities, devoting himself solely to labor and to the 
management of affairs. He tasted, in anticipation, the 
pleasure which he would experience when he should have 
instituted strict order, and when all the springs of the 
domestic machine should act vigorously, propelling each 
other effectively. Work pressed ; and, as flour is rap- 
idly ground from the grain in a mill, so cash, hard cash, 
was being continually extracted from every sort of 
scraps and refuse. A wonderful manager stood before 
his eyes every moment. This was the first man in all 
Russia, for whom he had experienced a personal re- 
spect. Up to this time, he had respected a man either 
for his fine official rank or for his other possessions. 
Never yet had he respected any man for his mind alone. 



TWO PERSONS WHO ARE ORIGINAL, 113 

Kostanzhoglo was the first. He comprehended that he 
could play no tricks on this man. Another project 
engrossed his thoughts, — that of purchasing the estate 
of Khlobuyoff . He had ten thousand rubles ; he pro- 
posed to make the effort to borrow fifteen thousand 
from Kostanzhoglo, since the latter had already de- 
clared that he was ready to assist any man who was 
desirous of becoming wealthy ; the rest must be ob- 
tained in some way, either by mortgaging to the bank 
of loans, or simply by making the seller wait. That 
was possible, too, surely : go, drag the case into court, 
if you have a fancy ! And he pondered this subject 
for a long time. At length, slumber, which had held 
all the household in its embrace for fully four hours 
already, received Tchitchikoff also to its bosom. He 
fell into a sound sleep. 



114 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 



CHAFPER IV. 

KHLOBUYOFP. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE. — TCHITCHI- 
KOFP ON THE WAY TO BECOME A LANDED PROPRIETOR. 

K08TANZHOOLO lends a large sura to ТсЫ1сЫко£Р, witboat interest. — He 
does the honors of his improvements to the latter. ~ He accompanies him 
and Platonoff to Khlobuyoff. — Drive of these four individuals through 
an estate In a condition of utter disorder. — Khlobuyoff, though sound of 
mind and heart, is extravagant in his conduct. — Kostanzhoglo urges Tchi- 
tchlkoff to become the owner of this property as speedily as possible. — 
Khlobuyoff invites to his house both Platonoff and Tchitchikoff. — Tchi- 
tchikoff makes an offer for the estate of his host, and becomes the owner. — 
Khlobuyoff mentions an aged millionnai re aunt of his who resides in the 
city, and whom he neglects. — Tchitchikoff is shocked at this disregard for 
millions. — Insoluble enigma of the diesit)ated existence of some people who 
have not even bread. — Platonoff takes Ids departure with Tchitchikoff, 
whom he introduces to his brother Vasiiiy. — The difficulty experienced 
by Tchitchikoff in winning the confidence of the latter. — A neighbor, 
named Lyenitzuin, hsa deprived the Platonoff brothers of a tract of land 
by which they set great store. — Tchitchikoff undertakes to go and cajole 
this liaughty neighbor, and bring him to reason. — Tchitchikoff at Lye- 
nitzuin*e. — His success in this liouse due to the effect which he contrives 
to produce, and, above all, to a grotesqne circumstance. —Tchitchikoff 
wins the devoted affection of the two Platonoffs. — He sets out tor town. 

On the following day, every thing arranged itself in 
the best possible manner. Kostanzhoglo gladly lent 
him ten thousand rubles, without interest or security — 
on his simple note : so ready was he to assist any one 
on the road to wealth. 

He showed Tchitchikoff every detail of his establish- 
ment. With him, not a single moment was lost ; noth- 
ing ran to waste ; not the slightest irregularity took 
place among his villagers. The proprietor set .the of- 
fender on his feet instantly, as though he had been 



KHLOBUYOFF, — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 115 

omniscient. There was not a sluggard anywhere. In- 
telligence and contentment were reflected from the 
faces of his peasants. Every thing was so simply and 
sensibly arranged that it ran itself. The alternations 
of forest and tilled land could not fail to astonish Tchi- 
tchikofif. How much this man had accomplished, with- 
out noise, without composing projects or treatises about 
the manner of insuring the well-being of all mankind ! 
And how useless is the life of the dweller in towns, of 
the frequenter of taverns, of the man who dances over 
polished floors ! And Tchitchikoff*s desire to become 
a landed proprietor grew ever stronger. 

Kostauzhoglo himself offered to accompany Tchi- 
tchikoflf to Khlobuyoff, in order to inspect the estate 
with him. Tchitchikoff was in fine spirits. After a 
hearty breakfast, tliey set out, all three riding in Pavel 
Ivanovitch's calash : the host's empty prolyotka^ fol- 
lowed them. Yarb ran on in front, chasing the birds 
from the road. Kostauzhoglo* s forests and tilled fields 
stretched for fifteen versts on both sides of the high- 
way. As soon as their limit was reached, every thing 
assumed a very different aspect : the grain was sickly, 
and stumps took the place of trees. The little village 
seemed deserted, in spite of its fine location. The new 
stone mansion, which had remained in an unfinished 
state and uninhabited for several years, stood out most 
prominently of all ; and behind it was the little old 
one, which was still used as a residence. They found 
the master of the house unkempt and yawning, having 
but just waked up. He was forty years of age ; his 
neckerchief was knotted on one side ; there was a 
patch on his surtout, and there were holes in his shoes. 

God knows what his joy at seeing his visitors was 

^ A circular drozhky. 



116 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

like : it was as though he beheld brothers, from whom 
he had been separated for a veiy long time. 

"Konstantin Feodorovitch ! Platon Mikhailovitch ! 
You have honored me with a visit. Let me rub my 
eyes ! I really thought that no one was ever coming to 
see me again. Everybody flies from me, as from the 
plague : they think that I will try to borrow money of 
them. Oh, it's hard, hard, Konstantin Feodorovitch ! I 
see that I alone am to blame. What am I to do ? The 
pig has earned his pig's fate. Excuse me, gentlemen, 
for receiving you in such a costume : my boots, as you 
see, are full of holes. What refreshment will you take ? ' ' 

"Do not stand on ceremony. We have come on 
business. Here is a purchaser for you, Pavel Ivano- 
vitch Tchitchikoff," said Kostanzhoglo. 

"I am heartily glad to make your acquaintance. 
Allow me to shake hands with you." 

Tchitchikoff gave him both his hands. 

"I should very much like to show you an estate 
which was worthy of your attention, Pavel Ivanovitch. 
. . . But permit me to inquire, gentlemen, whether 
you have dined?" 

" Yes, yes," said Kostanzhoglo, desirous of dismiss- 
ing the subject. "We will not trespass on your hos- 
pitalit3', and we are going back directly." 

"In that case, let us start." Khlobuyoff took his 
cap in his hand. " Let us go and inspect my disorder 
and thriftlessness." 

The guests put on their caps, and all set out on foot 
to survey the village. Almost every street was lined 
on both sides with wretched huts, whose tiny windows 
were stuffed with foot-cloths. ^ 

> The long strips of cloth which peasaiite wind about their feet in place 
of Btockings. 



KHLOBUYOFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 117 

" Let us go and inspect my disorder and thriftless- 
ness," repeated Kiilobiiyoff. *' Of course, it is well for 
you that you have diued. Will you believe it, Kon- 
stantin Feodorovitch ? there is not a single chicken in 
the house : to such straits have I come ! " 

He sighed ; and, as though sensible that he would 
meet with but little sympathy from Koustantin Feo- 
dorovitch, he took PlatonoflTs arm, and, pressing it 
close to his breast, he walked on in advance with the 
latter. Kostanzhoglo and Tchitchikoff remained be- 
hind, and, linking arms, followed the pair at a distance. 

''It's hard, Platon Mikhailovitch, it's hard!'* said 
Khlobuyofif to Platonofif. '' You cannot conceive how 
hard it is. No money, no food, no shoes ! These are 
surely words in an unknown tongue to you. All this 
would be but a trifle were I young and alone. But 
when all these misfortunes come to attack you in your 
old age, when you have a wife and five children by 
your side, then you grow sad involuntarily, you grow 
sad." 

'* Well, and if you were to sell your estate, would 
that set you right?" 

** Set me right indeed ! " exclaimed Khlobuyoff, with 
a wave of the hand. "Every thing must go to pay 
my debts, and there will not be a thousand rubles left 
for roe." 

" Then what are you going to do? " 

"God knows!" 

" Why do you not undertake something to extricate 
youi*self from such a position? " 

" What should I undertake? ." 

" Get some employment." 

"I am a governmental secretary. What sort of a 
place would tliey give me ? How am I to accept some 



118 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

paltry remuneration of five hundred rubles or so? I 
have a wife and five children." 

"Get a situation as overseer." 

''And who would intrust his property to me? I 
have ruined my own." 

" Well, but if hunger and death threaten, something 
must be done. I will ask my brother whether he can- 
not get you employment through some one in the city." 

"No, Platon Mikhailovitch," replied Khlobuyoflf, 
sighing, and pressing his hand warmly. " I am good 
for nothing now. I have become decrepit before my 
time, and my loins ache from my old sins, and I have 
the rheumatism in my shoulders. Of what use am I? 
Why should I ruin the treasury ? And besides, a great 
many lucrative places have been established for the 
benefit of public employees. God forbid that the taxes 
of the poorer classes should be increased on my ac- 
count!" 

"Behold the fruits of dissipation!" thought Plato- 
noff. "This is worse than my heedlessness." 

In the mean time, while they had been thus convers- 
ing, Kostanzhoglo, as he walked behind them with 
Tchitchikoff, was quite beside himself with rage. 

"Just see," said Kostanzhoglo, pointing with his 
finger, " to what a state of misery he has reduced his 
peasants ! Why, there are neither carts nor horses. 
If there is an epidemic, a man cannot consider his 
own property. A proprietor must sell all his own l)e- 
longings at once, and provide the peasant with cat- 
tle, in order that he may not be left for a single day 
without the means of pursuing his work. And now 
things cannot be remedied for years. The peasants 
have become lazy, dissipated, and drunkards. If you 
allow them to remain without work for even one year, 



KHLOBUYOFF.— LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 119 

you have ruined them fgrever ; and they have grown 
used to rags and vagabondage. . . . And what land ! 
Look at the land!*' he said, pointing to the fields, 
which soon made their appearance in the rear of the 
cabins. *'They are all water-meadows. I could raise 
flax, and make five thousand out of that alone. I 
could plant beets, and get four thousand. And look 
yonder ! on the slope a forest formerly rose : it is 
nothing but wind-falls now. He has planted no grain 
— I know that. And look at those valleys ! . . . I 
would raise such a forest here that the crows could not 
fly to the top of it. The idea of flinging away such 
treasures of land ! And if there was nothing to plough 
with, he might have cultivated the vegetable garden 
with a spade : he might have undertaken the garden. 
Take the spade in your own hand ; make your wife, 
your children, your servants, do it too : if you must 
die beasts, then die over your work ! You will, at all 
events, die in the fulfilment of your duty ; and if not, 
you can eat yourself for dinner like a pig ! " So say- 
ing, Kostanzhoglo spit, and his splenetic temper dark- 
ened his brow with a gloomy cloud. 

When they advanced farther, and stood upon the 
crest of a declivity overgrown with cytisus, and looked 
down upon the gleaming bends of the river, and at 
the distant prospect, where a portion of Gen. Betrish- 
tcheff's house peeped forth from the encircling forest, 
and at the wooded hill beyond, veiled in the blue mist 
of distance, Tchitchikofif suddenly divined that the 
latter must be Tentyotnikoff's estate ; and he said, '' If 
the forest were cut away here, the village would tran- 
scend every thing in the world in beauty/' 

" So you are a lover of fine prospects ! " said Kos- 
tanzhoglo, with a quick, stern glance at him. " See 



120 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

here ! if you take to running after views, you will be 
left without either bread or views. Look out for your 
fields, and not for beauty. The beauty will come of 
itself. Let it serve you for an example, that the best 
and handsomest cities are those which have constructed 
themselves, where each man has built according to his 
own convenience and taste ; but those which have been 
built by rule are nothing but a collection of barracks. 
. . . Away with beauty ! Look to practical results ! " 

*' It's a pity that it is necessary to wait so long: I 
should so like to see every thing in the proper con- 
dition." 

'* Patience ! Work for a few years : plant, sow, till 
the soil, without a moment's rest. It is hard, very 
hard ; but later on, when the earth has been well 
turned over, it will begin to assist you of itself, just as 
though it were a machine ; yes, my dear fellow, over 
and above your seventy hands or so, seven hundred 
invisible ones will begin to toil. Every thing will be 
increased tenfold. I never move a finger now, — 
every thing runs itself. Yes, Nature loves patience: 
that is the law, which God himself has prescribed to 
her." 

"When I listen to you, I am conscious of a great 
access of force. My courage rises," said TchitchikofiP. 

'' That's a nice way to plough land ! " exclaimed 
Kostanzhoglo, with a keen feeling of indignation, 
pointing to the slope. " I can't stay here any longer : 
it's death to me to gaze upon such disorder and desola- 
tion! You can come to an understanding with him 
now, without my assistance. Get this treasure out of 
that fool's hands as speedily as possible. He is only 
dishonoring the gifts of God." So saying, Kostanziio- 
glo, who was already clouded by the bilious disposition 



KBLOBUYOFF,— LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 121 

of his perturbed spirit, took leave of Tchitchikoff, and, 
having overtaken their host, began to say farewell to 
him also. 

*' I beseech you, Konstantin Feodoroviteh," said the 
astonished host, *' you have only just arrived, and you 
are going already ! " 

'' I can't stay. I have an imperative engagement at 
home,*' replied Kostanzhoglo. He took leave, seated 
himself in his carriage, and drove off. 

It seemed as though Khlobuyoff understood the cause 
of his departure. 

" Konstantin Feodorovitch cannot stand it," said he : 
" it is not pleasant for such a manager as he is to look 
at this disorderly administration. Believe me, Pavel 
Ivanovitch, I did not even plant grain this year. As 
I am an honest man, I had no seed, not to mention the 
fact that there were no means of ploughing. They say 
that your brother is a capital manager, Platon Mikhai- 
lovitch; but Konstantin Feodorovitch — well, what's 
the use of talking ! He's a Napoleon in his own line. 
In truth, I often think. Why is so much brains put 
into one head? Why could not I have at least one 
little drop in my stupid noddle ? — Look to yourselves, 
gentlemen : walk cautiously over the bridge, lest you 
tumble into the pool. I ordered the planks to be re- 
paired last spring. — What I feel the most compunction 
about is my poor peasants : I perceive the need of an 
example for them, but what sort of an example am 
I for any one ? But what am I to do ? I cannot be 
exacting and strict ; and how am I to inculcate order 
in them, when I am so disorderly myself? Take 
them under your charge, Pavel Ivanovitch. I should 
have given them their liberty long ago, but that it 
would have been of no advantage to any one. I see 



122 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

that it is necessary firat, to bring them into such a state 
that they shall know how to order their own lives. It 
is requisite that a man should be stem and just, and 
live long among them, in order to produce an effect 
on them by his own example and his unwearying ac- 
tivity. I perceive, from my own case, that the Russian 
man cannot get along without some one to urge him 
forwards : without it, he falls to dozing, and decays." 

'4t is sti-ange," said Platonoff, '4hat a Russian 
man should be capable of thus falling into drowsiness 
and decay, and that, unless you watch the man of the 
lower classes with all your eyes, he turns to a drunkard 
and good-for-nothing ! *' 

** That arises from the lack of civilization," re- 
marked Tchitchikoff. 

"God knows what is the cause of it!" went on 
Khlobuyoff. '' Surely, we are civilized. I have at- 
tended lectures at the university, and what have I to 
show for having been at the university ? Come, now, 
what have I learned ? They not only did not teach me 
to live an orderly life, but they even tried their best to 
teach me the art of spending as much money as possi- 
ble on every new refinement or comfort, and made me 
acquainted with as many subjects as possible which re- 
quire the expenditure of money. Why was I educated 
in so senseless a manner? Yes, and look at my com- 
rades. Two or three of them derived some real advan- 
tage from it, and possibly because they would have 
been sensible in any case ; but the rest only endeav- 
ored to learn that which ruins the health, and entices 
money from the pocket. Thus, we always select in 
our civilization that thing which is the worst of all: 
we grasp the surface, but not the substance. No, 
Pavel Ivanovitch, we do not understand how to live, 



KELOBUY OFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 123 

from some other cause , but what cause, by Heaven, I 
do not know." 

"There must be some cause," remarked Tchitchikoff. 

Poor Khlobuyoff sighed deeply several times, and 
proceeded as follows: "It sometimes seems to me 
that the Russian man is a lost being. You want to do 
every thing, and you can do nothing. You keep think- 
ing that you will begin a new life on the morrow, that 
you will put yourself on a diet to-morrow. Nothing 
comes of it. On that very same evening you over-eat 
yourself, so that you can do nothing but wink, and can- 
not manage your tongue. You sit and stare at every 
one like an owl. Truly, we are all just like that." 

"Yes," said Tchitchikoff, laughing: "such things 
do happen." 

"Let us take still another turn in this direction," 
said Khlobuyoff. " Let us inspect the peasants* fields. 
We are not born for wisdom in the least. I do not 
believe that there ever was one of us who was sensible. 
If 1 see that such and such a man is living a regular 
life, economizing, and amassing money, I do not be- 
lieve even in him. The Devil will entangle him in his 
old age. He will lose every thing later on. And it is 
true, equally, for the cultivated and the uncultivated. 
Yes : there is something else which we lack, and what 
that something is I do not know." 

The views on their way back were the same. Slat- 
ternly disorder everywhere exhibited its deformed ex- 
terior. Every thing was neglected and abandoned. 
An angry woman, in a dirty gown of pack-cloth, was 
beating a poor little girl half to death, and swearing 
by all the devils in every direction. Farther on, two 
peasant-men were observing the wrath of the drunken 
woman with stoical indifference. One was scratching 



124 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

his back, the other was yawning. Yawns were visible 
on the buildings, whose roofs were gaping also. Pla- 
tonoff yawned as he gazed at them. *' My future prop- 
erty, these peasants,'* thought Tchitchikoff. "Hole 
on hole, and patch on patch." And, in fact, on one 
cabin lay a whole gate, instead of a roof : the decaying 
windows were propped with poles, which had been re- 
moved from the master's barns. It was evident that 
Trishkin's method of dealing with his coat prevailed 
in the domestic management. They cut off the cuffs 
and the tails to patch the elbows.^ 

" Your estate is not in an enviable condition," re- 
marked Tchitchikoff, as they entered the house. 

There they were struck with the mixture of poverty 
and the glittering trifles pertaining to the latest luxury. 
A figure of Shakspeare sat on tiie inkstand : on the 
table lay a dainty ivory scratchback. They were re- 
ceived by the mistress of the house, dressed tastefully 
and in the latest fashion, who talked about the city, 
and the theatre which had been started there. The 
four children were also dressed prettily and in good 
taste, and they even had a governess. But this made 
them all the more sad to contemplate. It would have 
been better had they been clothed in striped petticoats 
and simple blouses, and had they been allowed to run 
about the yard by themselves, and had in no wise dif- 
fered from village children. The hostess was soon 
joined by a guest, — some empty-headed chatterer. 
The ladies retired to their own apartments. The chil- 
dren ran after them. The men were left alone. 

" What will your price be?" inquired Tchitchikoff. 

1 An allueion to a popular fable by Kruiloff, which makes this exact ap- 
plication of the man's method of repairing his coat, to the ways of Russiaa 
proprietors with their estates. 



KBLOBUTOFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE. 125 

'* I ask, I tell you frankly, In order to learn your ulti- 
mate, your lowest price ; for the property is in a worse 
condition than I had anticipated.** 

"In the very worst, Pavel Ivanovitch," answered 
Khlobuyoff. '' And that is not all. I will not conceal 
from you the additional fact, that, out of the hundred 
souls which are set down on the census list, only fifty 
are among the living. That is the result of the cholera 
among us. Some others have taken their leave without 
passports ; so that they, too, may be reckoned among 
the dead. If they were to be demanded in court, the 
whole estate would pass into the courts. Therefore, I 
shall ask you only thirty thousand rubles.*' 

Tchitchikoflf began to meditate and to bargain. 

"Mercy on us! Thirty thousand! For such an 
estate, — thirty thousand rubles ! Come, take twenty- 
five thousand.*' 

Platonoff felt ashamed. "Conclude the sale, Pavel 
Ivanovitch," he said. "You can get that much for 
the property at any time. If you will not give him 
thirty thousand, my brother and I will join together 
and purchase it.*' 

" Very good, I agree, '^ said Tchitchikoff in alarm, 
"Very good; but only on condition that half of the 
money is not to be paid for a year." 

" No, Pavel Ivanovitch, I cannot consider that for a 
moment. Give me half on the spot, and the remainder 
in a fortnight. The bank would lend me that amount, 
if there were only enough to satisfy the leeches." 

"Really? I don't know about that," said Tchi- 
tchikoff. " I have only ten thousand at present." He 
was lying ; he had twenty thousand in all, not count- 
ing the money which Kostanzhoglo had lent him. But 
it pained him to part with so much at one time. 



126 TCniTCHIKOFF'3 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

*' No, thank yoa, Pavel Ivanovitch ! I tell you that 
it is absolutely necessary that I should have fifteen 
thousand.*' 

'' Well, only five thousand will be lacking. I do not 
know where to get it." 

'* I will lend you five thousand," interpolated Plato- 
nofiP. 

*'Will you really?" exclaimed Tchitchikoff, and 
said to himself, '' Well, this is very opportune that he 
should lend me this money." They struck hands on 
the bargain. TchitchikofiP's dressing-case was brought 
from the calash, and ten thousand rubles were taken 
from it, which Tchitchikoff handed to Khlobuyofif as 
earnest-money. He promised to bring him the remain- 
ing five thousand on the morrow; that is to say, he 
promised. But he meant to fetch three thousand after 
a lapse of two or three days, and to put It off still 
longer if possible. Pavel Ivanovitch particularly dis- 
liked to let any money pass out of his hands. Even 
in a case of extreme necessity, it always seemed to 
him better to surrender the money to-morrow than to- 
day. That is to say, he proceeded as we all do. We, 
all find it agreeable to put off a creditor. Let him 
polish his spine in the ante-room for a while. Just as 
though he could not wait! What business is it of 
ours that every hour may be precious to him, and 
that his affairs may suffer from it? Come to-mor- 
row, my good fellow : I have no time to attend to you 
to-day. 

" Where will you live hereafter? " Platonoff inquired 
of Khlobuyoff. " Have you any other village? " 

"None at all; and I shall go to town. I have a 
little house there. It makes no difference. It would 
have been necessary to do so in any case, for the sake 



KHLOBUYOFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 127 

of the children. They must have masters in the law of 
God, in music and dancing. It is impossible to procure 
them in the village, of course.'* 

" Not a morsel of bread, but the children must learn 
to dance ! " thought Tchitchikoff. 

" This is queer ! " thought Platonoff. 

" But we must wet down the contract in some way," 
said Khlobuyoff. " Hey, there, Kiriushka ! fetch a 
bottle of champagne, my good fellow.*' 

"There is not a bit of bread, but there is champagne," 
thought Tchitchikoff. 

Platonoff did not know what to think. 

Khlobuyoff had provided himself with champagne, in 
ease of an emergency. He had sent to town, — what 
was to be done? Kvas is not given in the shops on 
credit, without payment, and a man must drink. But 
a Frenchman, who had recently come from Petersburg 
with wines, allowed every one to take them on credit. 
There was nothing to be done : a bottle of champagne 
must be taken. 

The champagne was brought. They drank three 
glasses, and grew meri^y. Khlobuyoff unbent ; he be- 
came charming and wise ; he overflowed with anecdotes 
and wit. He displayed, in his convereation, so much 
knowledge of men and of the world, he had observed 
many things so well and faithfully, he depicted his 
fellow-landowners so aptly and so skilfully in a few 
words, he so clearly perceived the errors and failings 
of all, he knew so thoroughly the history of ruined 
estate-owners. — the why and the how of their decay, — 
he knew how to reproduce their slightest habits with so 
much originality and ability, that both of his hearers 
were enchanted with his discourse, and were prepared 
to pronounce him an extremely clever man. 



128 TCHITCniKOFF^a JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

"I am astonished," said TchitchikofT, "that you, 
with such ability, can hit upon no plans or resources." 

" I have plans," replied Khlobuypff, and immecliately 
overwhelmed them with a whole mountain of projects. 
Every one of these was so senseless, so extraordinary, 
so little derived from any acquaintance with men and 
with the world, that all his hearers could do was to 
shrug their shoulders, and say, '* Good Heavens ! what 
an immeasurable gulf exists between the knowledge of 
men and of the world and the art of making use of that 
knowledge ! " Every thing was founded on the neces- 
sity of procuring, on the instant, from some quarter, 
one or two hundred thousand rubles. Then, as it 
seemed to him, every thing would come right, and his 
estate would be managed as it should, his income might 
be quadrupled, all holes might be repaired, and he 
would be placed in a position to pay his debts ; and 
he concluded his speech thus: " But what do you ad- 
vise me to do ? There is not, no, there is not in exist- 
ence, a philanthropist who could make up his mind to 
advance two hundred, or even one hundred, thousand 
rubles, as a loan. Plainly, God wills it not." 

" The idea," thought Tchitchikoff, " that God should 
send that fool two hundred thousand rubles ! " 

" I have an aunt, though, who is worth three mil- 
lions," pursued KhlobuyofiP, *' a pious old woman : she 
gives to churches and monasteries, but is slow to assist 
her nearest relatives. She's an aunt of the ancient 
pattern, who is worth inspection. She has four hun- 
dred canaries alone : her poodle-dogs, parasites, and 
servants are such as are not to be seen elsewhere 
nowadays. The youngest of her servants mnst be 
sixty years old, though she always addresses him as 
"Hey, there, boy!" If a guest does not behave to 



KHLOBUYOFF, — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE. 129 

suit her, she orders the viands to be carried past him at 
dinner. And it is done : that's what she is like ! '* 

Platonoff burst ipto a laugh. 

"What is her name, and where does she live?*' in- 
quired Tchitchikoff. 

" She lives in our town. Her name is Alexandra 
Ivanovna Khanasarova." 

"Why do not you appeal to her?" said Platonoff, 
with sympathy. "It seems to me, that, if she could 
enter into the condition of your family, she could not 
refuse. ' ' 

" Well, no : she could. My aunt is rather strong- 
minded. She's a flinty old lady, Platon Mikhailovitch ! 
And she has plenty of other courtiers to hang about 
her without me. There's one man who aspires to the 
governorship. He has claimed relationship with her. 
. . . God be with him ! perhaps he may succeed." 

"The fool ! " thought Tchitchikoff. " I would wait 
upon such an aunt as that, as a nurse waits upon a 
child!" 

"What dry work talking is!" said Khlobuyoff. 
" Hey, there, Kiriushka ! fetch another bottle of cham- 
pagne." 

" No, no : I shall not drink any more," said Platonoff. 

"Nor I," added Tchitchikoff; and both declined in 
a decided manner. 

"Well, then, promise me at least to visit me in town. 
I give a dinner to our city officials on the 8th of July." 

" Good gracious ! " exclaimed Platonoff. "A dinner 
in this state of affairs, when you are utterly ruined ! " 

" What am I to do? I can't help it. It is my duty," 
answered Khlobuyoff. "They have entertained me." 

Platonoff opened his eyes to their fullest extent. 
Up to that moment he had not been aware that there 



130 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

exist in the cities and towns of Russia certain wise in- 
dividuals, whose lives are an absolutely unsolvable 
problem. It seems as though an individual of this 
class were ruined ; he is head over ears in debt ; he has 
no property whatever, and yet he gives a dinner ; and 
all his guests say that it is the last, that their host will 
be canied off to prison on the morrow. Ten years 
elapse, and the wise man is still in existence, he is still 
more deeply in debt than before, and is still giving a 
dinner ; and the guests, as usual, think it will be the 
last, and again they are convinced that the morrow will 
see their host in prison. 

KhlobuyofTs house in town presented a remarkable 
spectacle. To-day the pope, clad in his vestments, 
would be celebrating a service of prayer ; and to-morrow 
French actors would be holding a reheai*sal there. On 
one day not a crumb of bread was to be found there : 
on the following, there was a hospitable reception to all 
artists and painters, and magnificent presents for every- 
body. Sometimes such very embarrassing iutervals 
occurred, that any one else in his place would have hung 
or shot himself ; but he was saved by a religious turn 
of mind, which in him was united, in some queer fashion, 
with a dissipated life. At these bitter and difficult 
moments he perused the lives of the saints and peni- 
tents, who had schooled their minds to soar above 
misfortune. His soul became very tender at such 
times : he grew gentle of spirit, and his eyes filled 
with tears. He prayed ; and, strange to say, some un- 
expected succor nearly always arrived from some quarter 
or other : either some one of his old friends remem- 
bered him, and sent him money, or some passing stranger 
lady, having heard his history by accident, with the im- 
pulsive generosity chaiacteristic of the feminine heart, 



KHLOBUYOFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 131 

sent him a handsome present, or rendered him a service 
in some quarter, of which he never heard. Then he 
piously acknowledged the boundless mercy of Provi- 
dence, had a service of prayer celebrated out of grati- 
tude, and began his life of dissipation afresh. 

" I'm sorry for him, I really am," said Platonoff to 
Tchitchikoff, as they were driving away, after having 
taken leave of him. 

'* The Prodigal Son ! " replied Tchitchikoff. '' Such 
people deserve no pity." 

And both soon ceased to think of him, — Platonoff, 
because he was accustomed to gaze languidly and sleepily 
on the situations of people, as he did on every thing 
else in the world. His heart suffered and contracted at 
the sight of the suffering of others, but the impression 
which was made on his soul was not very profound. 
After the lapse of a few minutes he thought no more 
about Khlobuyoff , because he no longer thought of him- 
self. Tchitchikoff did not think of Khlobuyoff, be- 
cause all his thoughts were seriously pre-occupied with 
his purchase. Consider it as he might, turn it on what- 
ever side he would, he perceived that the purchase was 
an advantageous one in any case. He might be able 
to manage so that he could mortgage it to the bank of 
loans. He might contrive so as to mortgage only the 
dead and fugitive serfs. He might even be able to 
arrange it so that all the best land could be sold piece- 
meal, and the estate mortgaged all the same afterwards. 
He might also make his arrangements to cultivate the 
property himself, and become a proprietor after the 
pattern of Kostanzhoglo, availing himself of the latter*s 
advice, as his neighbor and benefactor. He might 
also proceed in such a manner as to sell off the estate 
to private persons, in case, of course, he did not wish to 



132 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

undertake tbe care of it himself, retaining for himself 
the deceased and fugitive serfs. Then another means 
of profit presented itself to his mind : he might abandon 
this region entirely, and not pay Kostanzhoglo the 
money which he had borrowed from the latter. Strange 
thought ! Not that TchitchikofiP entertained it, but it 
suddenly presented itself before him, mocking and 
laughing and winking at him. A shameless hussy of 
a thought ! An unruly creature ! And who is the 
creator of these thoughts, which so suddenly spring up ? 
... He felt content, — content because he was now 
a landed proprietor, not in fancy, but in reality, a pro- 
prietor who had land and appurtenances and peasants, 
peasants who were not fictions, not creatures of the 
imagination, but actual persons. And by degrees he 
began to sway about, and to rub his hands, and to wink 
at himself, and to blow some march through his fist, 
placed to his lips, as though it had tj,een a trumj^etj 
and he even uttered a few encoui'aging words aloud, as 
well as some nicknames addressed to himself, such as 
"My little bull-dog," and '* My plump little chicken." 
But recalling the fact that he was not alone, he sud- 
denly ceased, and endeavored by some means to check 
the ill-timed outburst of rapture ; and when Platonoff, 
taking some of these sounds for fragments of a re- 
mark addressed to him, inquired, "What is it?" he 
replied, "Nothing." 

"Sjipp ! " shouted Platonoff to the coachman. 

f chitchikpff glapced about him, and perceived that 
fhey had, fpr a lpi)g time, been driving through a mag- 
nificent grove. The |:runks of the beech-trees and the 
^репэ, gleaiping like a mqwy palisade, rose in light 
and gy^cefjil putlipe^ agg,inst the background formed 
by the tender green of the newly unfolded foliage. 



KELOBUYOFF, — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 133 

Nightingales were trilling loudly in rivalry. . . . Wood- 
tulips gleamed yellow amid the grass. He could not 
account to himself for being in this beautiful place, 
when he had so recently been in the midst of naked 
fields. From among the trees peeped a church of white 
stone. At the end of the street a gentleman made his 
appearance, and advanced to meet them : he wore a 
leather cap with a visor, and carried a rather dry stick 
in his hand. A hound of English breed, with long, 
slender legs, ran on before him. 

"Ah! there's my brother,'' said PlatonofP. "Stop, 
coachman ! '* and he descended from the calash : Tchi- 
tchikoff did the same. The dogs had already succeeded 
in licking each other over. Lively, slender-legged Azor 
licked Yarb on the nose, then licked Platonoff's hand, 
then leaped on Tchitchikoff, and licked him on the ear. 

The brothers embraced. 

"Pray, Platon, what sort of treatment have you 
been giving me?" said the second brother, whose name 
was Vasiliy. 

"What do you mean?" answered Platon indiffer- 
ently. 

"What, indeed! Not a sound or a syllable from 
you for three days ! Pyetukh's groom brought your 
horse home. 'He has gone off with some gentleman,' 
he reported. Now, if you had but said one word as 
to where and why, and for how long a time you were 
going! Pray, brother, how can you behave so? And 
God knows what things I have been fancying all these 
days!" 

"Well, what is to be done about it? I forgot," 
answered Platon. "We went to Konstantin Feodoro- 
vitch's. ... He salutes you, and our sister also greets 
you. — Pavel Ivanovitch, let me introduce you : my 



134 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

brother, Vasiliy ; brother Vasiliy, this is Pavel Ivano- 
vitcb Tcbitcbikoff.'* The men thus invited to mutual 
acqaaintance shook hands, and took off their caps. 

''Who can this Tchitchikoff be?" thought brother 
Vasiliy. "Brother Platon is not very choice in his 
acquaintances." He scrutinized Tchitchikoff as closely 
as lюliteness would permit, and perceived that the 
latter was a very respectable-looking person. 

Tchitchikoff also stared, as much as propriety allowed, 
at brother Vasiliy, and perceived that the latter was 
shorter of stature than Platon, that his hair was darker, 
and that his face was far from being as handsome, but 
that there was much more life and animation, more 
heartfelt kindness, in his features. It was evident that 
he was less given to dreaming. But to this Pavel 
Ivanovitch paid little heed. 

'*! have made up my mind, Vasya, to travel through 
Holy Russia with Pavel Ivanovitch. Perhaps that will 
efface my hypochondria." 

"How could you make up your mind so quickly?" 
said brother Vasiliy, taken aback ; and he came near 
adding, " and go off with a man whom you see for the 
first time, and who may be a worthless fellow, and the 
Devil knows who?" Quite incredulous, he glanced 
askance at Tchitchikoff : and observed his remarkable 
respectability. 

They turned into a gate on the right. The court- 
yard was old-fashioned : the house was also old- 
fashioned, of a sort which is not built now, with 
sheds beneath the lofty roof. Two gigantic linden- 
trees grew in the middle of the yard, and covered 
nearly half of it with shade. Beneath them stood a 
multitude of wooden benches. Syringas and wild 
cherry-trees in blossom surrounded the yard, covering 



KHLOBUYOFF, — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 135 

it completely with their flowers and leaves. The manor- 
house was almost wholly concealed : only the doors 
and windows peered prettily out below, beneath the 
boughs. Through the forest-trees, straight as arrows, 
the kitchen, the storerooms, and the cellars were visible. 
Every thing was in the grove. The nightingales were 
warbling, and the whole grove gave back a loud echo. 
A feeling of peace and pleasantness stole into the soul. 
Every thing smacked of those untroubled times when 
men lived in amity, and when all was simple and plain. 
Brother Vasiliy invited Tchitchikoff to take a seat. 
They all sat down on the benches under the lindens. 

A lad of seventeen, in a handsome blouse of pink 
cotton, brought decanters filled with all sorts of fruit 
kvas, of various colors, some thick like butter, others 
foaming like carbonated lemonade, and placed them 
before the gentlemen. After setting the decanters on 
the table, he picked up a spade which was leaning 
against a tree, and went off to the garden. All the 
sei-vants of the Platonoff brothers, like those of their 
brother-in-law, Kostanzhoglo, were gardeners ; or, to 
speak more accurately, all the house-servants took 
turns at that employment. Brother Vasiliy insisted 
that servants were not a separate class, and that one 
could entirely dispense with them ; that everybody was 
capable of handing things, and it was not necessaiy to 
appoint certain people to do this ; that the Russian 
man is a fine, alert fellow, and no sluggard, so long as 
he goes about in blouse and peasant coat ; but, as soon 
as he dons a foreign surtout, he instantly becomes awk- 
ward, dull, lazy; he no longer changes his shirt; he 
ceases entirely to go to the bath ; he sleeps in his coat, 
and beneath it raises a crop of foreign fleas, and an 
innumerable multitude of insects. And on this point, 



136 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

he may have been right. In their village the people 
were dressed in a particularly dainty manner: the 
head-dresses of the women were covered with gold, and 
the sleeves of their blouses were made of the borders 
of genuine Turkish shawls, 

" Will you not take some refreshment?" said brother 
Vasiliy to TchitchikofiP, pointing to the decanters. 
'* These are various kinds of kvas, for which our house 
has long been celebrated." 

Tchitchikoff poured out a glass from the first decan- 
ter ; it was mead, such as he had drunk in Poland in 
days gone by ; it sparkled like champagne, and there 
was so much gas that it leaped from his mouth into his 
nose. " Nectar ! " said he. He drank a glass from a 
second decanter. It was even better than the fii*st. 

" That's a liquor, that's a liquor worth drinking ! " 
said Tchitchikoff. " I may say that I drank the very 
best of berry wine at your brother-in-law, Konstantin 
Feodorovitch's, and the very best of kvas at your 
house." 

" But we have berry wine also : my sister made this. 
In what direction, and to what places, do you propose 
to travel ? ' ' asked brother Vasiliy. 

"I am travelling," answered Tchitchikoff, swaying 
lightly on the bench, and stroking his knee, " not so 
much on my own account as on the business of othei*s. 
Gen. Betrishtcheff, my intimate friend, and I may even 
say my benefactor, has requested me to notify his 
relatives. Relatives are relatives, of coui-se : but I am 
also travelling on my own account, so to speak ; for, 
not to mention health, it is, so to speak, a book in it- 
self, and a second education, to see the world, and the 
different sorts of people." 

Brother Vasiliy fell into thought. " This man 



KHLOBUYOFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 137 

speaks rather rhetorically, yet there is some truth in 
what he says," thought he. After a brief silence he 
turned to Platon : "I begin to think, Platon, that 
travelling may really enliven you. There is nothing 
the matter with you but spiritual lethargy. You have 
simply fallen asleep, and that not out of satiety or 
weariness, but from the lack of vivid impressions and 
sensations. I am in precisely the contrary condition. 
I should be very glad not to feel things so acutely, and 
not to take every thing which happens so much to 
heart." 

"You like to take things to heart," replied Platon. 
" You search out disquiet, and manufacture troubles 
for yourself." 

" Why should I manufacture them, when something 
disagreeable is lying in wait at every step?" said 
Vasiliy. "Have you heard of the trick that Lyeui- 
tzuin has played us during your absence? He has 
seized the bit of wild land where we celebrate the red 
hill. In the first place, I will not surrender that land 
for any money whatever. My peasants celebrate the 
Krasnaya Gorka ^ there every spring, and all the memo- 

1 " Wilh the first week after Easter, commences the festival of the Krasnaya 
Oorka^ '• the red or little bright hill," the epithet referring to the red color of 
the Easter eggs, to the brightness of the spring, and the name " little hill ** 
being given to it because it was originally held or inaugurated on some high 
place. It lasts from Low Sunday till the end of June, and its chief feature is 
the khorovod — the circling dance attended by choral song. The chief singer 
on these occasions is a woman, who holds In her hands a round loaf and a red 
egg, each an emblem of the sun. Turning her face and hands towards the east, 
she begins one of these choral songs, which is then taken up by the chorus; 
and in many places this is attended or followed by the destruction of the 
figure of death or winter. Many of- the songs are addressed to the goddess 
of love, the presiding genius of the season, or at least bear reference to her 
influence ; and in some places it is customary to sing them under Ihe windows 
of newly married couples" (W. R. S. Ralston : Songn of the Russian People^ 
p. 221). Mr. Raleton*s valuable and interesting book contains a description 
of many of these khorovods and spring-games among the peasant girls and 
youths, which fascinated Selifan in Teatyutnikoff 's village. 



138 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

ries of the village are bound up with it : in my eyes, a 
custom is a sacred thing, and 1 am ready to make any 
sacrifice for its sake." 

" He does not know that, and that is the reason why 
he has seized it," said Platon. "He is a new-comer ; 
he has only just arrived from Petersburg : things must 
be explained and made clear to him." 

" He knows, he knows perfectly well. I sent him 
word, but he replied impertinently." 

'' You will have to go to him yourself, and explain 
matters. Talk it over with him yourself." 

" No, indeed ! He puts on too many airs altogether. 
I will not go near him. Go yourself, if you like." 

'^ I would go were it not for the fact that I have 
nothing to do with the management. He might mis- 
lead and cheat tne." 

*' I wiU go, if you think proper," said TchitchikoflP. 

Vasiliy glanced at him, and thought, "He must be 
fond of travelling ! " 

" Only tell me what sort of a man he is," pursued 
Tchitchikoff, " and the scope of the matter." 

" I am ashamed to impose so unpleasant a commis- 
sion on you. In my opinion, the man is a worthless 
fellow ; fie belongs to the petty landed nobility of our 
government; he has serA^ed his time in Petersburg, 
having there married some one's illegitimate daughter, - 
and acquired a great opinion of himself. He sets the 
fashion. But people do not live in an utterly stupid 
way with us. The fashion is no ukaz to our minds, - 
and Petersburg is not the church." 

"Exactly," said Tchitchikoff; "and what is the 
point of the business? " 

"He needs land, you see. And if he had not be- 
haved in this manner, I would have let him take some 



KHL OB и TOFF. — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE. 139 

other plot for nothing, but not this wild strip. But 
he's a quarrelsome fellow, and he thinks that I am 
frightened." 

''In my opinion, it would be better to talk the 
matter over. Perhaps you will not repent of it if 
you intrust the matter to me. Gen. Betrishtcheff 
also" . . . 

"But I am ashamed that you should be obliged to 
talk with such a man *' ^ . . . 

. . . "And taking into special consideration, that 
this occurred in private," said Tchitchikoff; "for it 
is not so much the crime itself, as the deceit, which is 
injurious." 

"That's so, that's so," returned Lyenitzuin, droop- 
ing his head completely on one side. 

" How delightful to encounter a similarity of opin- 
ion! " exclaimed Tchitchikoff. "I am engaged in an 
affair which is both legal and illegal : in appearance 
it is illegal, in reality it is legal. As I need chat- 
tels to mortgage, I do not wish to induce any one to 
incur a risk by the payment of two rubles for a living 
soul. Now, if a catastrophe should occur, which God 
forbid, it would not be pleasant for the owner ; so I 
have decided to make use of the fugitive and dead 
souls, which have not been stricken from the register, 
in order, at one and the same time, to perform a deed 
of Christian charity, and to free the unfortunate pro- 
prietors from the necessity of paying the taxes for 
them. We will merely execute a formal deed of sale 
between us, as though for living serfs." 

"But this is a very strange proceeding, neverthe- 
less," thought Lyenitzuin ; and he drew his chair back 

» Note by S. P. Shemiireff. There is a hiatus here, which probably 
cove» the accoant of Tchitcbikofl^e vbit to Lyenitzuin. 



140 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

a little. "But the transaction is, nevertheless, . . . 
of a character" ... he began aloud, but could not 
make up his mind to say any thing. 

'' There will be no deception, because it will be kept 
private,'* replied Tchitchikoff, ''and, moreover, be- 
tween honorable men." 

'* But still, on the whole "... 

*'It is a perfectly clean transaction, and there is 
no trickery about it," said Tchitchikoff, with great 
frankness and directness. '' AVhat the nature of the 
business is, we have just decided ; it lies between hon- 
orable men, who have reached years of discretion, who 
are of good standing apparently ; and it takes place in 
private, to boot." So saying, he looked the other in 
the eye with a frank and ingenuous expression. 

Clever as Lyenitzuin was, accomplished as he was 
in all methods of transacting business, he was on this 
occasion thrown quite out of his calculations ; the more 
so, as he had contrived, in some remarkable manner, 
to entangle himself in his own net. He was not at all 
fitted for dishonesty, and he had no wish to do any 
thing dishonest, even in secret. 

"This is an extraordinary affair! " he said to him- 
self. "Just try to enter into an intimate friendship 
with even the best of men, without repenting of it! 
There's a puzzle for you." 

But fate and circumstances seemed to favor Tchitchi- 
koff in a special manner. Exactly as though with the 
object of rendering assistance in this difficult question, 
the young mistress of the house, Lyenitzuin's wife, 
entered the room at that moment : she was thin, pale, 
and small, but dressed in Petersburg fashion, and was 
extremely fond of people who were comme il faut. 
Behind her came a nurse, bearing in her arms the fii*st 



KHLOBUYOFF, — LUXURY AND INDIGENCE, 141 

infant, a pledge of the tender love of the recently 
wedded couple. Tchitchikoff completely fascinated 
the Petersburg lady with his little skip, his agile walk, 
and his trick of inclining his head on one side ; and he 
captivated the baby also. At first, the latter set up a 
yell ; but Tchitchikoff succeeded — by dint of the words 
" Agu, agu, darling!** by tickling it with his finger, 
and by the beauty of the carnelian seal on his watch — 
in enticing him into his own arms. Then he began to 
toss the baby up to the very ceiling, thereby eliciting 
a pleased laugh, which greatly delighted its parents. 
But whether from mutual satisfaction, or from some 
other cause, the infant suddenly misbehaved himself. 

" О Heavens!** exclaimed Lyenitzuiu's wife: "he 
has completely ruined your coat.'* 

Tchitchikoff looked. The sleeve of his coat, which 
was quite new, was utterly spoiled. '^ I*d like to 
shoot you, you little devil I " he said to himself in his 
wrath. 

The host, the hostess, and the nurse, all ran for 
eau'de-ctjlogne : they began to scrub the sleeve in all 
directions. 

'^It*s nothing, it's nothing, it is of no consequence 
whatever,*' said Tchitchikoff, endeavoring to commu- 
nicate as cheerful an expression as possible to his 
countenance. "Is it possible for a child to spoil any 
thing at this golden period of his existence?** he re- 
peated ; and, at the same time, he said to himself, 
" You little brute I I wish the wolves had eaten you : 
that would suit me to a hair, you cursed little rascal I " 

This apparently trifling circumstance converted the 
host entirely to a favorable view of Tchitchikoff*8 
business. How could he refuse any thing to a guest 
who had bestowed so many innocent caresses on the 



142 TCfflTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

baby, and who had so magnanimously paid for them 
with his own coat? He resolved, in order not to set 
a bad example, to settle the affair secretly, since a 
thing is not so injurious as the deception connected 
with it. 

'' Permit me to repay your service with another ser- 
vice. I wish to act as mediator in your affair with the 
Platonoff brothers. You want some land, do you 
not?" 



TWO WILLS,— A FAIR.— A LAWYER, ETC. 143 



CHAPTER V. 

TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER. — A HOLY MAN. 
— ARREST AND DELIVERY. 

TcHiTCHiKorF Hhould take hie departure, but is detained by the attraction 
of a large local fair. — He makee purchases of a Jew who has the air of 
a smuggler. — Lyenitzuin enters, and takes our hero aside. — He is greatly 
alarmed by the discovery of a former will. — Tchilchikoff re assures him, 
but in hie own unceitainty he has recourse to a lawyer. — Divining the 
very critical position of his client, the latter promises to render matters 
complicated, and recommends bira to preserve absolute calm, no matter 
wliat may liappen to him. — Reassured by this advice, he displays him- 
self in bis calash. -^ He goes to select the cloth for a complete suit. — 
Khiobuyoff enters the shop. — Tchltchikoflf turns aside. — Khiobuyoff 
remarks on this. — At this moment, the wealthy proprietor Murazoff, 
a man known for his probity and piety, enters, Iiaving come there to 
make an appointment with Khiobuyoff. — Remarks of the shopman on 
Murazoff's vast fortune. — Khiobuyoff meets MurazoGf at the latter's own 
door. — Murazo£f sounds this poor gentleman, and finds that he has excel, 
lent stuff in him. — He proposes to Khlobuyofif a mission which will 
elevate him as a Christian, though it will humiliate him as a gentleman. 
— This matter settled, they speak confidentially of Tchitchikoff, and of 
the recent will of the deceased millionnairess. — Both regard Tchilchikofif 
as guilty of intri.'ue, at the least, but neither cherishes any hatred towards 
him. — Murazofif feels more sorrow for his errors than antipathy for hie 
person. — Madame Khanasarova's last will is pronounced to be forged. — 
Denunciations of Tchitchikoff pour in from all quarters. — Tchltchikoflf 
is preparing to go and e::hibit himself to various persons in a new and 
becoming suit, when the governor.geueral suddenly has him thrown into a 
terrible cell, without any legal forms. — Murazoff's visit to the prisoner. — 
Murazofif promises to speak in his behalf. — His sage meditations, when 
left alone, are interrupted by the visit of an employee, named Samosvis- 
toff, who brings excellent news. In consideration of a sum of thirty 
thousand rubles, Tchitchikoff will receive his casket, and all his effects, 
in loss than an hour, and his acquittal (and consequently his lil>erty) a 
few hours later. — He accepts this bargain with eagerness. — He receives 
his property half an hour later, and celebrates the event by ordering a 
copious and dainty dinner in his cell. — Murazofif arrives, finds him at 
table, calm and happy ; understands the state of the case, and announces 



144 TCHlTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

to oar hero that he Is free on the eole condition that be leavee town 
wllhin twenty-four hours, the sooner the better, and never retarns. — 
On emerging from prison, TcbitcliikoflF fiode his servants, and gives them 
divers orders relative to his departure. — The winter roads being good, he 
has runners put under his calash. — He sets out with no other view for 
the moment than that of getting away from so dangerous a locality. 
— Address of the govemor-generai to ali the functionaries and employ- 
ees.— This results in the voluntary resignation of the persons chiefly 
responsible for the disorder, and of the honorable Lyenitzuin, who 
retains many millions as consolation. — The fortune of the good Khlo- 
buyoff is re-established on a firmer foundation than ever before, at the 
expense of Lyenitzuin. 

Every tbing in the world has a use of its own. TF7/o- 
ever desires a thing makes an effort to obtain ity says 
the proverb. The expedition through the trunks had 
been successfully achieved ; and as a result of it, some 
things had found their way into Tchitchikoff's dressing- 
case. In short, it had been wisely planned. Tchitchi- 
koff had not exactly been guilty of theft, but he had 
taken advantage of circumstances. All of us have 
taken advantage at times, in one manner or another, — 
one, of the forests belonging to the crown ; another, of 
some one's savings ; one man will steal from his chil- 
dren for the sake of some itinerant actress ; another, 
from his peasants, for the sake of furniture from 
Hambs, or equipages. What can one do, when so 
many enticements exist in the world, — expensive res- 
taurants with mad prices, and masquerades, and drives 
and dances with the gypsies? Surely, one cannot al- 
ways restrain one's self : man is not God. Thus Tchi- 
tchikoff, like a veiy great many people who are fond of 
every comfort, turned matters to his own advantage. 

Tchitchikoflf ought to have taken his departure, but. 
the roads had liecome bad. In the mean time, another 
fair had begun in the town, a genuine ai'istocratic fair. 
The first had been more for horses, cattle, and raw 
products, and divers peasant manufactures, purchased 



TWO WILLS. — Л FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 145 

by drovers and by wholesale dealers. But now, every 
thing which had been purchased at the Nizhegorod 
fair, high-class wares of every description, had been 
brought hither. Those raiders on the Russian purse, 
the French, had brought pomades, and French women 
had brought bonnets, those enemies of money which 
has been accumulated with blood and toil, — Egyptian 
locusts, as Kostanzhoglo expressed it, who, not content 
with devouring every thing, leave their eggs behind 
them, buried in the earth. 

The bad crops had detained some landed proprietors 
in the country. On the other hand, the officials who 
had not suffered from the bad crops turned out in 
force ; so did their wives, to their misfortune. Having 
read many of those books which have been dissemi- 
nated of late with the object of inoculating mankind 
with all sorts of novel requirements, they had conceived 
an extraordinary thirst to experience all manner of new 
enjoyments. A Frenchman had opened a novel estab- 
lishment, of a sort hitherto unheard of in that gov- 
ernment, — a pleasure-garden,^ with a supper at what 
purported to be a remarkably low price, the half of it 
being allowed to remain on credit, to boot. This was 
sufficient to induce not only all the heads of depart- 
ments, but all the employees, to visit it, in the expecta- 
tion of future bribes from petitioners. A desire to 
show off in each other's presence in the matter of 
horses and equipages sprang up. There was a great 
elbowing of different classes for the sake of diversion. 
... In spite of the wretched weather, with mingled 
snow and rain, elegant calashes flew back and forth. 
Where they all came froro, God only knows, but they 
would not have done discredit to Petersburg. . . . 

1 A VauzhaU, literally. 



146 TCaiTCniKOFF'B JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

Merchants and clerks raised their hats adroitly, and 
invited the ladies to enter. Bearded merchants in 
fur caps were rarely to be seen. Every thing wore a 
Биго^эеап look. . . . 

Tchitchikoff, in a new Persian dressing-gown, of 
gold brocade, was lolling on his divan, and chaffering 
with an itinerant smuggler-pedler of Jewish extraction 
and German accent : and before him lay a piece of the 
finest cambric, which he had purchased for shirts ; and 
two cardboard-boxes of the choicest soap, possessed of 
the most desirable qualities. This was the very same 
sort of soap which he had formerly been in the habit 
of obtaining when employed in the custom-house at 
Radziwill. It really did ix)ssess the property of impart- 
ing a wonderful softness and whiteness to the cheeks. 
At the very moment when he, in the character of a 
connoisseur^ was making his purchases of these articles, 
which are indispensable to a well-bred man, the rumble 
of an approaching carriage became audible, together 
with the slight answering rattle of the walls and win- 
dows of the apartment, and his honor Alexei Ivano- 
vitch Lyenitzuin entered. 

" I submit to your honor's judgment as to the quality 
of this cambric, this soap, and this trifle, which I pur- 
chased yesterday." Thereupon Tchitchikoff placed on 
his head a cap embroidered with gold and pearl beads, 
and felt full of dignity and grandeur in his character 
of a Persian shah. 

But his honor, without vouchsafing any reply to the 
question, said, with a troubled look, "I must have a 
talk with you on business matters." Anxiety and un- 
easiness were depicted on his countenance. The worthy 
merchant with a German accent was instantly dis- 
missed, and they were left alone. 



TWO WILLS. — л FAIR.— A LAWYER, ETC. 147 

"Do you know what disagreeable thing has hap- 
pened? Another will by that old woman, executed five 
years ago, has been found. She bequeaths half of her 
property to a monastery, and the other half, in equal 
shares, to her two protegees ; and that is all." 

Tehitchikoflf was taken aback. . . . 

" But that will is —nonsense ! It signifies nothing. 
It is abrogated by the second,'' said he. 

" But it is not stated in the second will that the 
former one is thereby annulled." 

"That is taken for granted. The first is annulled 
by the last. This is folly. The first will is utterly 
invalid. I am well acquainted with the wishes of the 
deceased. I was with her. Who signed it? Who 
were the witnesses?" 

"It was duly witnessed in court. The witnesses 
were the ex-judge of the court of conscience, Burmiloff, 
and Khavanoff." 

"That's bad," thought Tchitchikoff. "Khavanoff 
is said to be an honest man. Burmiloff is a venerable 
hypocrite, who reads the Apostles in church on festival 
days. But nonsense ! nonsense ! " he said aloud, and 
immediately felt suflScient firmness to face any thing. 
" I know better than that. I was present at the last 
moments of the dead woman's life. I know all about 
it better than anybody else. I am ready to take my 
personal oath." 

These words and his air of decision re-assured Lyeni- 
tzuin for the moment. The latter was very much ex- 
cited, and had begun to suspect that there might have 
been some sort of fraud on Tchitchikoff's part in con- 
nection with the will. He now reproached himself for 
his suspicions. Tchitchikoff's readiness to take his 
oath was a plain indication of the reverse. We do not 



148 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

know whether Pavel Ivanoviteh would actually have 
had the audacity to take his oath on the Gospels ; but, 
at all events, he was audacious enough to say that he 
would. 

** Make yourself easy on that score. I will consult 
some lawyer on this matter. Nothing must be attrib- 
uted to you. You must keep ^tirely clear of this 
affair. But I can live in the town as long as it suits 
me." 

Tchitchikoff immediately ordered his carriage to be 
brought to the door, and betook himself to a lawyer. 
This lawyer was a man of extraordinary expeiience. 
He had fallen under the jurisdiction of the court 6f- 
teen years before this date, but he had so managed 
that it had been utterly impossible to interdict him in 
his profession. Everybody was perfectly well aware 
of the fact that he had deserved transportation half a 
dozen times. He was suspected to the last degree in 
every quarter, but it was impossible to produce plain 
and convincing proofs. There really was something 
uncanny about him, and he might have been boldly 
proclaimed as a wizard if the history which we are 
transcribing referred to an uncivilized epoch. 

The lawyer amazed Tchitchikoff by the coolness of 
his aspect and the filthiness of his dressing-gown, 
which presented a complete contrast to the handsome 
mahogany furniture, the gilt clock under a glass bell, 
the chandelier which peeped forth from a chintz cover 
which protected it, and with all the objects which sur- 
rounded him, and which bore the stamp of European 
civilization. 

Nothing daunted, however, by the dubious appear- 
ance of the lawyer, Tchitchikoff explained the per- 
plexing points of the matter in hand, and sketched a 



TWO WILLS. — Л FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 149 

seductive perspective of the gratitude which would in- 
fallibly follow sound counsel and assistance. 

The jurisconsult replied to this with a picture of the 
transitoriness of all earthly things, and with much art 
allowed it to be understood that a stork in the heavens 
signified nothing with him, but that he must have a 
tomtit in the hand. 

There was nothing to be done : the tomtit for the 
hand must be provided. The dubious coolness of the 
philosopher suddenly vanished. He turned out to be 
the most good-natured of men, extremely communica- 
tive and agreeable in conversation, and not a whit in- 
ferior in cleverness to Tchitchikoff himself. 

" Permit me to say to you, instead of entering into 
a long-winded 6uit,»that you certainly cannot have ex- 
amined the will thoroughly. It assuredly contains some 
codicil. Get it into your possession as speedily as pos- 
sible. Although, of course, it is forbidden to take 
such things home with one, still, if certain officials are 
appealed to in the proper way ... I will render as- 
sistance on my part." 

"I understand," thought Tchitchikoff; and he said, 
" I really cannot distinctly recall whether there was a 
codicil, or not," — just as though he had not written 
the will himself. 

" The very best thing that you can do will be to look 
it over. Besides, in any case," he continued, in a very 
amiable way, "you must feel quite at your ease ; and 
you must not take alarm at any thing, even if matters 
seem to be going very badly. Never despair of any 
thing under any circumstances whatever. There is 
nothing which cannot be remedied. Look at me. I 
am always tranquil. No matter what critical accusa- 
tions are brought up against me, my composure remains 



150 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

immovable." The face of the lawyer-philosopher did, 
in point of fact, retain a remarkably tranquil look, 
which was very re-assuring to Tchitchikoff. 

''That is, of course, a matter of the greatest mo- 
ment; but you must acknowledge, nevertheless, that 
occasions may arise of such a nature, that attack on 
tlie part of one's enemies may be of such a descrip- 
tion, and that there may occur difficult situations of 
such a sort, that all composure is put to flight." 

*> That is cowardice, believe me," returned the phi- 
losophical lawyer with great composure and amiability. 
" Only try to have all transactions set down on paper, 
and have nothing left in words alone. And as soon as 
you perceive that the affair is approaching a solution, and 
that it is ripe for settlement, do not» endeavor to justify 
and defend yourself, but simply tiy to introduce fresh 
issues, which have no connection with the case "... 

" That is with the object of " . . . 

" Producing confusion, producing confusion, nothing 
more : you must introduce side issues, extraneous cir- 
cumstances, into this case, so that other people may be- 
come involved in it ; the object is to render the matter 
complicated, neither more nor less. And then let some 
freshly arrived Official from Petersburg unravel it, let 
him unravel it, let him unravel it if he can!" he re- 
peated, looking Tchitchikoff straight in the eye with 
extraordinary satisfaction, just as a teacher contem- 
plates a pupil when he is explaining to him some 
treacherous passage in the Russian grammar. 

" And it will be well for you to collect such items as 
are calculated to throw dust in their eyes," said Tchi- 
tchikoff, also gazing with satisfaction into the eyes of 
the philosopher, like a pupil who has understood his 
teacher's exposition of a deceptive passage. 



TWO WILLS,— A FAIR.— A LAWYER, ETC, 151 

" Such items will be provided, they will be provided. 
Believe me, the brain grows inventive by dint of fre- 
quent practice. First of all, you must recollect that 
you are to receive assistance. You will gain a great 
deal by complicating matters ; and we must have as 
many officials as possible, and their fees must be hand- 
some. 1 . . In short, as many persons as possible 
must be drawn into the business. There is no neces- 
sity for sacrificing other people for nothing; but we 
must justify ourselves by means of them, and they 
must be responsible on paper. *Tbey must buy them- 
selves off. . . . There's a harvest for you ! ... In 
this manner you can complicate and entangle matters, 
so that no one can understand any thing about it. 
Why am I so calm ? Because I know this : when my 
affairs are going very badly, I get evei^ one implicated 
in them, — the governor and the vice-governor, and the 
chief of police and the treasurer, I get every one of 
them involved. I know all their circumstances, — just 
who has a quarrel with whom, and who is offended 
with whom, and who wants to revenge himself on 
whom. Then let them extricate themselves if they 
will : othei-s can be found to replace them. It is only 
in troubled waters that fish are caught." 

Here the philosopher-lawyer stared at Tchitchikoff 
with all his eyes, and again it was with the same satis- 
faction with which a teacher expounds to his pupil a 
treacherous passage in the Russian grammar. 

'* Yes, this man is truly wise," said Tchitchikoff to 
himself ; and he took leave of the jurisconsult in the 
most amiable and agreeable frame of mind. 

Perfectly re-assured, he flung himself with careless 
grace on the elastic cushions of his calash, and ordered 
Selifan to throw the hood back (he had gone to the 



152 TCBITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

lawyer with the hood raised, and even with the apron 
buttoned up), and assumed the exact attitude of a re- 
tired colonel of hussars, or of Vishnepokromoff himself, 
throwing one leg gracefully over the other, and present- 
ing pleasantly, to all who met him, a face which fairly 
beamed from beneath a new silk hat canted somewhat 
on one side. Selifan was oi-dered to drive in the direc- 
tion of the bazaar. The merchants, both those be- 
longing in the town, and strangers, took off their hats 
respectfully as they stood at the doors of their shops ; 
and Tchitchikoff, not without dignity, raised his in re- 
turn. Many of them were already acquainted with 
him : others, though strangers, were captivated with 
the attractive appearance of a gentleman who under- 
stood how to bear himself, and they greeted him as 
though they knew him. The fair in the city of Tfuslavl 
had not yet come to an end : the horse and agricultural 
fair had closed, and that which embraced fine wares for 
gentlemen of the highest breeding had opened. The 
merchants who had arrived on wheels had made up 
their minds not to return except on runners. 

'* Pray enter, sir, pray enter, sir ! " said the. man at 
the cloth-shop, striking a politely affected attitude, as 
he stood with bare head in a German surtout of Mos- 
cow make, and holding his hat in one hand while with 
two fingers of the other he stroked his round, cleanly 
shaven chin, and displayed an expression of dainty 
refinement on his face. 

Tchitchikoff entered the shop. "Show me some 
cloth, my good fellow." 

The amiable merchant immediately lifted a loose 
board in the counter ; and having thus made an entrance 
for himself, he found himself in his shop, with his 
back to his wares, and his face to his customer ; and 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 153 

with uncovered head, and flourishing his hat, he saluted 
Tehitchikoff once more. Then he put on his hat, and, 
bending gracefully forwards with both hands resting on 
the counter, he spoke thus: " What sort of cloth, sir? 
Do you prefer it of English make, or of domestic 
manufacture ? ' ' 

"Of domestic manufacture," replied Tchitchikofif ; 
" but it must be of the best quality, of the sort called 
English." 

" What colors would you like to look at? " inquired 
the shopman, still swaying to and fro, with his hands 
still resting on the counter. 

" Of an olive or bottle-brown tint, approaching cran- 
berry color, so to speak," said Tchitchikofif. 

"I may assert that you shall have the very best sort, 
than which no better is to be found except in enlight- 
ened capitals. Boy, fetch the cloth which is in number 
34, up-stairs. That's not it, my friend. Why do you 
always feel yourself above your station, you penniless 
scamp? Throw it here. Here is the cloth." And 
unfolding it from the other end, the shopman lifted it 
almost to Tchitchikoff*s л'егу nose, so that the latter 
could not only feel its silky gloss with his hand, but 
even smell it. 

"Very good, but that is not what I want," said 
Tehitchikoff. "I hav^e served in the custom-house, 
you see, so I must have the very finest quality ; and it 
must be also of a reddish tint, and it must not approach 
bottle-brown, but rather a cranberry tinge." 

"I understand, sir: what you really want is the 
shade which is now coming into fashion. I have cloths 
of the very best quality. I warn you that the price is 
high, but they are of the very finest quality." 

The European climbed up. The piece of cloth fell 



154 TCnJTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

down. He unrolled it with the art of a by-gone age, 
and even forgot for the moment that he belonged to a 
later generation as he held it to the light, even emer- 
ging from his shop to do so, screwing up his eyes as he 
faced the light, and saying, " 'Tis the most exquisite 
shade of cloth, Navarino smoke-tint and flame-color." 

The cloth was satisfactory : the price was agreed to, 
although it was with " a prefix," as the dealer declared. 
Then a clever tearing movement was executed with 
both hands. It was then enveloped in paper in the 
Russian fashion, with incredible swiftness. The bun- 
dle was then encircled with a slender cord, which 
clasped it with a knot which palpitated with life. The 
cord was then snipped off with the sheai*s, and the 
whole placed in the calash. 

*'Show me some black cloth," rang out a voice in 
the shop. 

'' Here's Khlobuyoff, deuce take him ! " said Tchi- 
tchikoff to himself, and turned his back, that he might 
not see the other ; as he considered it ill-bred on the 
latter's part to enter into any explanation with him in 
regard to the inheritance. But Khlobuyoff had already 
espied him. 

*' IJow is this, Pavel Ivanovitch? Are you avoiding 
me intentionally? I am never able to find you, though 
there are some matters which we must discuss seriously." 

" My most resi)ected sir, my most respected sir," 
said Tchitehikoff, squeezing his hand, "believe me, I 
am extremely desirous of having a talk with you; but 
I really have no time." And he said to himself, *'May 
the Devil fly away with you ! " when, all at once, he 
saw Murazoff entering the shop. "Ah, my Heavens, 
Afanasiy Vasilievitch ! " said Tchitehikoff: " this is a 
foitunate encounter I " 



TWO WILLS. — Л FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 155 

And Vishnepokromofif, who entered after him, re- 
peated, " Afanasiy Vasilievitch ! *' And the well-bred 
shopman, holding his hat as far from his head as his 
arm would allow, and bending his whole body forward, 
exclaimed, " Your most humble servant, Afanasiy Va- 
silievitch!" All their faces exhibited that dog-like 
servility which sinful man shows to a millionnaire. 

The old man bowed to all of them, and turned di- 
rectly to KhlobuyofiP. " Excuse me : having seen you 
from a distance entering this shop, I decided to trouble 
you. If you are at lil)erty, and if your way lies past 
my house, do me the favor to enter for a short time. 
I'must speak with you." 

Khlobuyoff replied, '' Very well, Afanasiy Vasilie- 
vitch." 

'' What very beautiful weather we are having, Afana- 
siy Vasilievitch ! " said Tchitchikoff. 

"Yes, are we not, Afanasiy Vasilievitch?" inter- 
posed Vishnepokromoff. " It is quite unusual, surely." 

"Yes, sir, thank God, it is not bad. But a little 
rain is required to allow of sowing." 

"It is very, very much needed," responded Vishne- 
pokromoff. "And it would be well for the hunting- 
season also." 

" Yes, a shower would do no harm," chimed in Tchi- 
tchikoff, who did not need rain at all ; but, for some 
reason, it is always pleasant to agree with a man who 
owns millions. 

" My head simply grows dizzy," said Tchitchikoff, 
when Murazoff went out, " at the thought that that 
man owns ten millions. It is simply incredible." 

"The thing is illegal, however," said Vishnepokro- 
moff. " Capital ought not to be in the hands of a few. 
This is now the subject of treatises in every country of 



156 TCffITCffIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

Europe. If you have money, share it with your neigh- 
bor ; entertain, give balls, indulge iii beneflcent luxury, 
which furnishes food to artisans and handicraftsmen." 

" I cannot understand it," said Tchitchikoff. "Ten 
millions, and he lives like a simple muzhik ! The deuce 
only knows what might be done with those ten millions ! 
It might be so employed that you would have no so- 
ciety lower than that of generals and princes." 

*' Yes, sir," added the shopman. '* With all Afana- 
Biy Vasilievitch's fine qualities, thei'e is much that is 
uncultivated about him. If a merchant arrives at 
honor, he is no longer a merchant : he is already, after 
a fashion, a wholesale dealer. In those circumstances 
I should feel bound to take a box at the theatre, and 
I would not marry my daughter to a simple colonel : 
no, sir ; I would wed her to a general. What's a col- 
onel to me? And my dinner should be prepared by 
the confectioner, and not by the cook any longer "... 

*' Well, what's the use of talking? Pray cease," 
said Vishnepokromoff . ' ' What could one not do with 
ten millions ? Only give me ten millions, and you will 
see what I will do! " 

*' No," thought Tchitchikoff: "much good you 
would do with ten millions! But if I only had ten 
millions, I would really accomplish something with 
them." 

"No: if I had ten millions, after all these terrible 
experiences!" said Khlobuyoff to himself. "Expe- 
rience teaches one the value of every kopek. Eh ! I 
am not now as I was" . . . And then, after a mo- 
ment's thought, he asked himself in private, " Would 
you really know how to manage your affairs now?" 
And, with a wave of his hand, he added, " What, the 
deuce! I believe that I should squander it now ex- 



TWO WILLS, — A FAIR,— A LAWYER, ETC. 157 

actly as I did before!" And he quitted the shop, 
burning with curiosity to know what Murazoff had to 
say to him. 

" I am waiting for you, Semyon Semyonovitch/' said 
Murazoff to Khlobuyoff, as he entered. " Please come 
to my room.*' And he led Khlobuyoff to the room 
already familiar to the reader, and which was no more 
comfortable than that of an official who received a salary 
of seven hundred rubles a year. 

''Pray tell me: I suppose that you are in a little 
better circumstances now ? You have surely received 
something, now that your aunt is dead? *' 

" What am I to say to you, Afanasiy Vasilievitch ? 
1 do not know whether my circumstances are improved, 
or not. I have received five hundred souls and thirty 
thousand rubles, with which I must pay off a portion 
of my debts ; and beyond that I have nothing what- 
ever. But the principal ix)int is, that things are not 
just as they should be in connection with that will. 
There has been some rascality about it, Afi^siy Vasi- 
lievitch ... I will tell you about it direcuy, and you 
will be amazed that such a transaction could take place. 
That Tchitchikoff " — 

" Excuse me, Semyon Semyonovitch : before talking 
of Tchitchikoff, permit me to speak about yourself. 
Tell me how much, according to your calculations, 
would be sufficient to set your affairs entirely to rights ? " 

"My affairs are in a very perplexing state,*' an- 
swered Khlobu^^ff. " In order to straighten them out, 
pay off my debts, and be in a condition to live in the 
most modest manner, I should need one hundred thou- 
sand rubles, if not more." 

" And if you had it, how would you order your life?" 

" Well, I should hire some inexpensive lodgings, and 



158 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

occupy myself with the education of my children. 
There is no use in thinking of myself; my career is 
ended ; I am no longer good for any thing." 

*' But your life will, in that case, ivmain an idle one ; 
and in an idle life, temptations arise which a man would 
never dream of when busy with work." 

"I cannot; I am good for nothing; I have grown 
stupid, and my loins pain me." 

*' But how can one live without work ? How can one 
exist in the world without duties, without a place of 
one's own, pray? 1.юок at every one of God's crea- 
tions. Every one of them has some service to perform, 
is of some use. Even a stone is created. for use ; and 
man, the most intelligent being of them all, — is it pos- 
sible that he should remain useless? " 

'" But I shall not be without occupation. I can 
attend to the education of my children." 

" No, Semyon Semyonovitch, that is the hardest 
thing of all. IIow can you educate your children when 
you are n^ educated yourself ? You can educate the 
children by the example of your own life. But is your 
life a fitting example for them? Is it well to teach 
them, for instance, to pass their time in idleness and 
in card-playing? No, Semyon Semyonovitch, give 
your children to me : you will spoil them. Think seri- 
ously of this matter : idleness has been your ruin once, 
— you must flee from it. How can you live in the 
world without attaching yourself to any thing? Some 
duty must be fulfilled. Even a day-laborer serves a 
use. He eats coarse bread, but he earns it; and he 
takes an interest in his occupation." 

"By Heavens, Afanasiy Vasilievitch, I have tried, 
I have really made an effort to conquer myself ! What 
am I to do? I have grown old, I have become un- 



TWO WILLS,— л FAIR.— Л LAWYER, ETC. 159 

fitted for any thing. Now, what can I do? Shall I 
enter the service? But how am I, in my forties, to 
sit at one desk with the office-clerks who have just 
begun their career? Besides, I am incapable of accept- 
ing bribes ; and hence I hinder my own advancement, 
and injure others. And they have their castes already 
formed. No, Afanasiy Vasilievitch, I have reflected, 
and I have tried, and I have meditated on all sorts of 
situations, — and I am unfitted for any one of them. 
In the almshouse, perhaps "... 

*' The almshouse is for those who have toiled ; but 
to those who have passed their youth m merriment, 
they give the answer which the ant gave to the grass- 
hopper, ' Go, dance ! ' And those who live in the 
almshouse work also, and toil, and do not play at 
whist. Semyon Semyonovitch, you are deceiving both 
yourself and your family." 

So saying, Murazoff gazed intently in the other man*s 
face ; but poor Khlobuyoff could make no reply. Mura- 
zoff felt sorry for him. 

" Listen, Semyon Semyonovitch. . . . But surely 
you pray when you enter a church : you miss neither 
mass nor vespers, that I know. Although you do not 
like to rise early, still you do it, and you go, — you go 
at four o'clock in the morning, when no one else is up." 

" That's another thing, Afanasiy Vasilievitch. I 
know that I am not doing that for man, but for Him 
who has commanded us all to exist on earth. But 
what of that? I believe that He is merciful to me; 
that, no matter how wretched and vile I may be, He 
will pardon and receive me when men repulse me with 
their feet, and when my best friend shall betray me, — 
and shall say thereafter that he betrayed me with a 
beneficent aim." 



160 TCHITCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

A feeling of bitterness was expressed on Kblobu- 
yoff's countenance ; and Murazoff held his peace for a 
moment, as tliough to allow him to recover himself, 
and then said, '' Why do not you accept some duties, 
neither for the sake of man nor for the gratification of 
society? Serve Him who is so nlerciful. Work is 
well-pleasing in His sight, as well as prayer. Engage 
in some occupation, but undertake it as though you 
were doing it for His sake, and not for that of man. 
Come, now, if you do but draw water in a sieve, think 
only that you are doing it for His sake. You will 
derive at least this profit from it, — that you will have 
no time left to lose money at cards, to feast with para- 
sites, lounge your life away. Eh, Semyon Semyono- 
vitch ! Do you know Ivan Potapuich? " 

" I know him, and respect him very deeply." 
" Well, he was formerly a prosperous merchant. 
He had half a million. Every thing which he looked 
at turned to profit, and he launched into large expendi- 
ture. He began to have his son taught French, and 
he married his daughteV to a general. And wherever 
he encountered a friend, whether in a shop or in the 
street of the exchange, he would drag him into a 
tavern : he feasted thus for days at a time, and finally 
became bankrupt. And then God sent a calamity 
upon him: his son died. And now, do you see? he 
is a clerk in my employ. He has made a fresh start. 
His affairs have righted themselves. He might again 
enter trade on a basis of five hundred thousand rubles. 
' I have been a clerk, and as a clerk I wish to die. 
Now,' he says, 'I have become healthy and fresh; 
but formerly I had the belly-ache, and dropsy was 
beginnmg to attack me. No ! ' says he. And he 
never tastes tea now: all he eats is cabbage soup 



TWO WILLS,— л FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 161 

and oatmeal porridge, nothing more, — yes, sir. And 
he prays as not one of the rest of us does, and he 
helps the poor as none of the rest of us do. And I 
should be glad to assist another man who has squan- 
dered his money." 

Poor Khlobuyoif became thoughtful. 

The old man took him by both hands. *' Semyon 
Semyonovitch, if you only knew how sorry I am for 
you ! I think of you constantly. Now listen to me. 
You are aware, that, in the monastery, there is a hermit 
whom no one sees. This man is possessed of great 
wisdom, — of more wisdom, sir, than any one whom 
I know. Now, if he gives a piece of advice ... I 
once began to tell him that I had a certain friend, — 
but I did not mention his name, — and that he was 
suffering from such and such a cause. He began by 
listening ; but all at once he interrupted me with the 
words, ' God*s business takes the precedence of your 
own. There are churches to be built, and there is no 
money to do it: money must be collected for the 
churches ! ' And then he clapped to the door. ' What 
does that mean ? * I thought to myself. Evidently he 
did not mean to impart any advice, so I w^nt to our 
archimandrite. No sooner had I entered the door, 
than the first words that he addressed to me were in 
the form of an inquiry : did not I know of some man 
to whom could be intrusted the task of making a col- 
lection for the churches? He must belong to the 
gentry or the merchant class, must be better educated 
than the average, and must regard the work as his 
salvation. I instantly paused. ' Ah, good Heavens I 
why, the hermit meant to designate Semyon Semyono- 
vitch for this task ! The remedy is adapted to his 
disease. By dint of going about with a book under 



1G2 TCUITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

his arm, from landed proprietor to peasant, from 
peasant to petty tradesman, he will learn how each 
class lives, and who stands in need of what, — so 
that when he returns, after having made the tour of 
several governments, he will understand the ground 
and the country far better than all the people who 
dwell in towns/ . . . And such men are needed now. 
Here a certain prince informs me that he would give 
a great deal to get hold of a man who would know 
•affairs, not from papers, but as they really are ; for, as 
he says, nothing can be gathered from papers, every 
thing is so involved.*' 

" You have utterly confused and overcome me, 
Afanasiy VasOievitch,*' said Khlobuyoff, as he gazed 
in amazement at the latter. '' I actually cannot believe 
that you are saying this to me. For your purpose you 
require an active man, of unwearied energy ; and more- 
over, how can I desert my wife and children? *' 

*' You must feel no anxiety with regard to your wife 
and children. I take them under my own protection, 
and teachers shall be provided for the children. If 
you are willing to go about with the double pouches, 
begging alms for yourself, it is much more noble to do 
it for God. I will give you a simple kibitka : do not 
• be afraid of being jolted ; it will be of benefit to your 
health. I will furnish you with money for the journey, 
so that, as you go along, you may give to those who 
stand most in need of it. In this way you can do a 
. great deal of good. You must make no mistake : those 
' to whom you give must bo worthy persons. By travel- 
ling about in this manner, you will make the acquaint- 
ance of every sort of individual, and you will learn how 
each one lives. This is not the same thing as being 
an official whom every one fears, but in your case, 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 163 

knowing that you are collecting for the church, they 
will talk freely.*' 

'Ч perceive that it is a very beautiful idea, and I 
should be very glad to have a share in it ; but it really 
seems to me as though it were beyond my powers/' 

"Well, what is within your powers?" said Mura- 
zoff. '' There is nothing within our powers : every 
thing is beyond our powers. Nothing is possible with- 
out aid from on high. Prayer concentrates the facul- 
ties. A man crosses hiniself, and says, ' Lord, have 
mercy ! ' then he rows on, and reaches the shore. One 
must not pause long to think of this : it is necessary 
merely, to cling blindly to God. The kibitka will be 
ready for you immediately ; and you must run to the 
father archimandrite for the book and his blessing, and 
then set out on yoxxv journey." 

" I will obey you, and I will accept this no otherwise 
than as the command of God ; and may the Lord give 
me his blessing ! " he said inwardly, and he felt 
strength and alertness begin to permeate his soul. His 
very brain seemed to be stimulated with the hope of 
escape from his sad and inextricable predicament. 
Light began to glimmer in the distance. 

" And now, permit me to ask you," said Murazoff, 
*' what sort of a man is Tchitchikoff ? " 

'' I can tell you incredible things about Tchitchikoff. 
He is engaged in such transactions ... Do you 
know, Afanasiy Vasilievitch, that will was certainly 
forged? The real one has been found, — one which 
bequeaths all the property to her protegees^ whom she 
brought up." 

"You don't say so! Then, who fabricated the 
forged will?" 

" That is the very point, and a most revolting busi- 



164 TCaiTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

ness it is ! They say that Tchitchikoff did it, and that 
the will was signed after the testator's death. They 
dressed up some woman to represent the dead woman, 
and that person signed it. In short, the affair is of 
the most rascally description. A thousand appeals 
have poured in from all quarters: wooers are now 
flocking to Marya Yeremyevna;^ two official person- 
ages are now quarrelling over her. That's the sort of 
a business it is, Afanasiy Vasilievitch I " 

" I have heard nothing about this, but there really is 
something wrong about the matter. I will admit, that 
Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff is to me an extremely 
repulsive man," said Murazoff. 

" I have also filed an appeal, in order to call to mind 
the fact that an immediate heir is in existence." . . . 

. . . "They may all fight it out among themselves, 
so far as I am concerned," thought KhlobuyoflT, as he 
left the house. '' Afanasiy Vasilievitch is no fool. He 
probably thought the matter over before he intrusted 
this commission to me. All I have to do, is to fulfil 
it." 

He had already begun to meditate on his journey, 
while Murazoff was still repeating, " Pavel Ivanovitch 
Tchitchikoff is to me an extremely repulsive man. If 
he would only display the same perseverance and force 
of will in a good cause ! " 

In the mean time, appeal after appeal had been pre- 
sented to the court. Relatives who had never been 
heard of before, made their appearance. As birds of 
prey swoop down upon a corpse, so every one swooped 
down upon the immense heritage left by the old wo- 
тщ* DeuTOciationg against Tchitchikoff, against the 

1 Probably the wom^n who personated the dead woman, and was well 
paid for doing во. 



TWO WILLS, — A FAIR, — A LAWYER^ ETC. 165 

fraudulent will ; complaints as to the fraudulent char- 
acter of the first will as well ; proofs of theft, and of 
the concealment of various suras ; proofs against 
Tchitchikoff in connection with his purchase of dead 
souls, and of his introduction of smuggled goods during 
his service in the custom-house, — had already been 
brought forward. Every thing had been ferreted out, 
and his former history was generally known. God 
alone knows how people had got scent of his history, 
and had unearthed the whole of it! But there were 
proofs, even with regard to such matters as Tchitchi- 
koff supposed to be known to himself and to the four 
walls only. All this was a judicial secret for the pres- 
ent, and had not as yet reached his ears ; although a 
confidential note from his lawyer, which he received 
before long, gave him to understand that there was 
trouble brewing. This note was couched in brief terms : 
" I hasten to inform you that your business is going 
to create a stir, but remember that you are not to feel 
anxious. The chief thing is — composure. We will 
settle it all.'* This note entirely re-assured him. 
" That man is a real genius ! " said Tchitchikoff. 

To complete his pleasant frame of mind, the tailor 
brought home his new suit just at this time : he con- 
ceived a strong desire to have a look at himself in his 
new coat of Navarino smoke and flame ; he buckled 
tight his trousers, which fitted him wonderfully well in 
every respect, so that he was a perfect picture. The 
cloth moulded itself to his hips and calves : it set 
snugly to his whole form, thereby communicating to it 
still greater elasticity. When he drew the strap close 
behind, his stomach was just like a drum. He imme- 
diately smote it with a brush, and said, " What a fool ! 
but, on the whole, it forms a picture." It appeared 



166 TCHITCUIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

that the coat was even better made than the trousers : 
there was not a single wrinkle ; all the parts stretched 
smoothly, curving outward over the rounding portions 
of his body, deflning the hollows. The tailor merely 
smiled at TchitchikofTs remark, that it pinched him a 
little under his left arm : it set all the better round the 
waist for that. "Be at your ease, be at your ease, as 
regards the work," he kept repeating with unconcealed 
triumph. *' Things are made so nowhere else outside 
of Petersburg.*' The tailor was from Petersburg him- 
self ; and on his sign he had inscribed. Foreigner from 
London and Paris. He was not fond of jesting, and 
his object in employing the names of these two cities 
was to close the throats of all other tailors on the spot, 
so that, in the future, no one should present himself 
with those cities, but might set himself down as from 
some Carlsruhe or Copenhagen.^ 

Tchitchikoff- settled his debt to the tailor in hand- 
some style ; and when he was alone once more, he began 
to survey himself at his leisure in the mirror, like an 
artist possessed of an aesthetic sense, and con amore. 
Every thing seemed more satisfactory than before : his 
cheeks were more interesting, his chin was more capti- 
vating, bis white collar imparted tone to his cheeks, his 
blue satin neckcloth imparted tone to his collar, the 
new-fangled plaits of his shirt-bosom gave tone to his 
neckcloth, his rich velvet waistcoat gave value to his 
shirt-bosom, and his swallow-tailed coat of Navarino 
smoke and flame, which was as glossy as silk, height- 
ened the effect of all the rest. He turned to the right, 
— good ! He turned to the left, — better still ! He 
bent forward as though in the house of a court-cham- 
berlain, or of a gentleman who even scratches himself 

1 Thia ie probably what is intended by Karlaoru and Kapenhar, 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR, — A LAWYER, ETC. 167 

in the French style, and who, even when angry, never 
disgraces himself by an unclean word in the Russian 
language, but curses in the French dialect. Such 
delicacy ! 

Inclining his head a little to one side, he tried to 
strike an attitude as though in the act of addressing a 
lady of middle age, and of the highest cultivation. 
The attitude turned out a perfect picture. Artist, take 
your brush, and limn it ! In his satisfaction he executed 
a little skip in the nature of a caper. The commode 
trembled ; and a glass bottle containing eau-de-cologae^ 
fell to the floor, but this occasioned him no dismay. 
He simply called the stupid bottle a "fool," and was 
thinking, "To whom shall I show myself fii-st? The 
best thing of all will be '* . . . when suddenly there 
became audible in the ante-room a clanking resembling 
that produced by boots and spui-s, and a gendarme 
entered in full uniform, and with a look on his face as 
though he were a whole army in himself. "You are 
ordered to present yourself instantly to the governor- 
general." Tchitchikoff was stunned. Before him 
towered a scarecrow with mustache, with a horse-tail 
on his head, a cross-belt over one shoulder, another 
cross-belt over the other, and a huge sword suspended 
at his side. It seemed to Tchitchikoff that a gun and 
the deuce knows what besides was suspended from his 
other side. There was a whole army contained in this 
one individual, and what an army ! He attempted to 
make some reply ; but the scarecrow interrupted 
roughly, "You are ordered to go immediately." 

On glancing through the door into the ante-room, 
Tchitchikoff caught a glimpse of another scarecrow ; 
he cast a glance through the window ; there was a car- 
riage in the court-yard. What was to be done ? He 



1G8 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

was forced to seat himself just as he was, coat of 
Navarino smoke and flame and all, in the equipage ; 
and, trembling in every limb, he was driven to the gov- 
ernor-general' s, and the gendarme with him. They 
did not even allow him time to recover himself in the 
ante-room. " Step up ! The Prince is waiting for 
you,'* said the official who was on duty. The ante- 
room, filled with couriers who had received their pack- 
ets, flashed past him as in a mist : then came a hall, 
through which he passed with but one thought, — "This 
Js the way one is seized, without a hearing or any for- 
mality, and sent to Siberia ! " His heart beat with 
such violence as even that of the most sincere lover 
is incapable of. At length a door opened : a study 
filled with portfolios, book-cases, and books, presented 
itself before him, and the Prince as angry as wrath 
personified. 

"My destro3'er, my destroyer ! '* said Tchitchikoff 
to himself. " He will cut my throat as the wolf tears 
that of the lamb." 

" I have spared you, I have permitted you to remain 
in the city when you should have been in prison ; but 
you have again sullied yourself with the most dishon- 
orable villany with which a man ever disgraced him- 
self!" 

The Prince's lips quivered with anger. 

" With what dishonorable deed and villany does 
your highness charge me?" inquired Tchitchikoff, 
trembling in every limb. 

"The woman," said the Prince, stepping a little 
closer, and looking Tchitchikoff straight in the eye, 
" the woman who signed that will, at your dictation, 
has been apprehended; and you will be confronted 
with her." 



TWO WILLS.— A FAIR, — A LAWYER, ETC, 1G9 

The world grew dark before the eyes of Tchitchi- 
koif , who turned as pale as a sheet. 

" Your highness, I will tell you the real truth of that 
matter. I am guilty, yes, guilty, but not so guilty 
. . . My enemies have betrayed me.** 

" No one can betray you, for the rascality within 
you is many times greater than the most abandoned liar 
could even conceive of. I don't believe that you ever 
have done a thing in your life which was not dishonor- 
able. Every kopek that you have acquired has been 
acquired by the most dishonorable means, and by rob- 
bery, and the most disgraceful sort of transactions, 
which deserve the knout and Siberia. No, there has 
been enough of this. You will be conveyed this instant 
to prison ; and there, on a level with the vilest of men 
and with thieves, you will await the judgment on your 
case. And this is but a slight punishment, for you 
are far worse than those who are clad in armyaks ^ and 
sheepskin coats; for you" ... He glanced at the 
coat of Navarino smoke and flame, and, seizing the bell- 
cord, he rang vigorously. 

"Your highness," cried Tchitchikoff, *' have 
mercy ! You are the father of a family : spare me, 
for the sake of my aged mother ! ' * 

"You lie!" exclaimed the Prince angrily. **Yon 
besought me once in the name of your children and of 
the wife which you never had, and now it is for the 
sake of your mother." 

*' Your highness, I am a wretch, and the vilest of 
good-for-nothings," said Tchitchikoff. " I really have 
lied ; I really had no wife and children ; but God is 
my witness that I have always wanted to have a wife, 
to fulfil the duties of a man and a citizen, in order 

X Long peaeant4K)ate. 



170 TCHITCHIKOFF^a JOURNEYS i OR, DEAD SOULS. 

thereafter to actually merit the respect of my fellow- 
citizens and of the authorities. But how inauspicious 
has been the course of circumstances ! Your highness, 
I have been forced to win an existence at the cost of 
my blood. At every step I have encountered deceit 
and temptation . . . enemies, corrupters, дnd robbers. 
My whole life has been like a stormy tempest, or like a 
vessel amid the billows, at the mercy of the gale. I 
am a man, your highness." 

Tears suddenly streamed in torrents from his eyes. 
He flung himself at the Prince's feet, just as he was, 
in his coat of Navarino smoke and flame, his velvet 
waistcoat, his blue satin neckcloth, his wonderfully 
well-made trousers, and touched his brow to the floor, 
while his finely arranged hair exhaled a sweet burst of 
eau-de-cologne of the first quality. 

"Get away from me! Call a soldier to take him 
away ! *' said the Prince to the man who entered. 

"Your highness!" shrieked Tchitchikoff, clasping 
the Prince's boot with both arms. 

A shudder traversed the Prince's body. 

" Go away, I tell you ! " said he, striving to extri- 
cate his leg from Tchitchikoff's embrace. 

"Your highness, I will not stir from this spot until 
you grant me mercy," said Tchitchikoff, not releasing 
the Prince's boot, but pressing it close to his breast, - 
and making his way across the floor, coat of Navarino 
smoke and flame included in company with the boot. 

" Leave, I tell you ! " repeated the Prince, with the - 
same inexplicable sensation of disgust which a man 
experiences at the sight of some repulsive insect which 
he cannot bring himself to crush under foot. He 
shook himself so violently, that Tchitchikoff felt the 
shock of the Prince's foot upon his nose, his lips, and 



TWO WILLS, — A FAIR, — A LAWYER, ETC, 171 

his rounded chin. But he did not relax his hold upon 
the boot, and clasped the leg in his embrace with re- 
newed energy. Two stalwart gendarmes dragged him 
away by main force, bound his arms, and then led him 
through all the apartments. He was pale and worn, 
and in that condition of nervous terror in which a man 
finds himself when he sees before him black, inevita- 
ble death, that bugbear which is so repellant to our 
natures. . . . 

At the very door opening upon the staircase, Mura- 
zoff met him. A ray of hope suddenly flashed through 
his mind. In an instant, by the exercise of supernat- 
ural strength, he had torn himself fram the hands of 
the two gendarmes^ and had flung himself at the feet 
of the astounded old man. 

'^My friend, Pavel Ivanovitch, what is the matter 
with you?" 

"Save me! They are leading me to prison, — to 
my death " . . . Here the gendarmes seized him, and 
carried him ofT, without allowing him to complete his 
sentence. 

A damp and musty attic filled with the odor of the 
boots and foot-bandages of the soldiers of the garrison, 
an unpainted table, two miserable chairs, a window with 
an iron grating, a worthless stove, through whose cracks 
the smoke emerged, but which gave out no heat, — such 
were the quartei-s where Tchitchikoff, in his fine new 
coat of Navarino smoke and flame, was lodged, before 
he had begun to t:\ste the sweets of life, and to attract 
the attention of his contemporaries. He had not been 
allowed to make any preparations, or even to take the 
most indispensable articles with him, — his dressing- 
case, where his money was kept. . . . His papers, his 
deeds of sale of the dead souls, — every thing now was 



172 TCHITCBIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

in the hands of the authorities. He flung himself on 
the earth ; hopeless sorrow, like a carnivorous worm, 
coiled itself about his heart. With ever-increasing 
swiftness did it begin to devour this heart, which was 
wholly unprotected. One day more, only one day more 
of such anguish, and Tchitchikoff would have utterly 
ceased to exist on this earth ! But some one's all-sav- 
ing hand had not been idle in Tchitchikoff* s affairs. 
An hour later the door of his prison was flung open. 
Old Murazoff entered. 

If some person had poured fresh water from a spring 
into the parched throat of a weary and fainting traveller 
tortured with thirst, and covered with the dust and dirt 
of the road, he would not have strengthened and re- 
freshed the latter to such an extent as this visit vivified 
poor Tchitchikoff. 

"My saviour!*' he exclaimed, suddenly springing 
from the floor, upon which he had thrown himself in 
his outburst of grief ; and, grasping Murazoff*s hand, 
he kissed it quickly, and pressed it to his bosom. 
"May God reward you for having thus visited an un- 
happy wretch ! " 

He burst into tears. 

The old man gazed at him with a look of pain and 
compassion, and merely said, " Ah, Pavel, Pavel Ivano- 
vitch ! Pavel Ivanovitch, what have you done? *' 

" What was there for me to do? That accursed lack 
of judgment as to measure overtook me, and I had not 
sense enough to pause in time. Satan, the accursed, 
beguiled me, led me beyond the bounds of reason and 
of human calculations. I have sinned, I have sinned ! 
But how could they behave in that manner? To throw 
a nobleman, a nobleman, into prison without a hearing, 
without an investigation ... A nobleman, Afauasiy 



T-WO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 173 

Vasilievitch ! And why did not they allow me time to 
go to my quarters, to arrange ray affairs ? Now every 
thing that belongs to me is left without any one to take 
care of it. My dressing-case, Afanasiy Vasilievitch ! 
my dressing-case ! It contains my entire property. I 
won it by the sweat of my brow, by my blood, by years 
of toil, by privation . . . My dressing-case, Afanasiy 
Vasilievitch ! Every thing will be stolen, — carried off ! 
О God!'' 

And, powerless to control the fresh attacks of 
anguish which attacked his very heart, he sobbed 
aloud in a voice which pierced the thick walls of his 
prison, and resounded dully in the distance : he 
snatched off his satin neckcloth, and, seizing his coat 
of Navarino flame and smoke by the collar, he tore it 
off. 

" Ah, Pavel Ivanovitch, how these riches have 
blinded you ! They prevent your realizing your terri- 
ble situation.'* 

" My benefactor, my saviour, save me ! " cried poor 
Pavel Ivanovitch, throwing himself at Murazoff's feet. 
*' The Prince loves you : he will do any thing for зюи." 

" No, Pavel Ivanovitch, I cannot, much as I should 
wish and like to do it. You have fallen under an 
inexorable law, and not under the power of any man." 

" That rascal of a Satan, that outcast of the human 
race, has ruined me ! " So saying, Tchitchikoff dashed 
his head against the wall, and struck the table with his 
fist, so that he wounded it till it bled ; but he felt 
neither the pain in his head nor the violence of the 
blow. 

"Calm yourself, Pavel Ivanovitch ; reflect how you 
may make your peace with God, and not with men ; 
think of your miserable soul." 



174 TCUlTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

"But what a fate, Afanasiy Vasilievitch ! Did 
such a fate ever overtake any other man ? I amassed 
my kopeks with patience, — with bloody patience, I 
may say, with toil, with toil ; and I have never cheated 
men, nor robbed the treasury, as many do. Why did 
I amass kopeks? In order to be able to pass the 
remnant of my days in comfort, to leave them to the 
wife and children whom I intended to acquire for my 
salvation, for the service of my country. That is why 
I wanted to amass them. I have gone astray; I do 
not deny it, I have gone astray : . . . but what could 
I do? But I only went astray when I saw that noth- 
ing was to be won by the straight road, and that the 
crooked ways were more profitable. But I have toiled 
and cultivated myself. If I have taken any thing, it 
has been from the wealthy. .But see those scoundrels 
in the departments of justice who steal thousands from 
the treasui-y, who rob the poor, who squeeze the last 
kopek from those who have nothing. What a misfor- 
tune this is ! Tell me why it is, that every time that 
you begin to reap the fruits of your labor, and to 
touch them with your hand, so to speak, there sud- 
denly arises a tempest, or you run aground on a reef 
beneath the water, and the whole ship is dashed into 
splinters? Here I had a capital of thirty thousand 
rubles ; I had, also, a three-story house ; on two occa- 
sions I purchased a village. . . . Ah, Afanasiy 
Vasilievitch, why are these blows dealt to me? Was 
not my life already like a bark amid the billows? 
Where is the justice of Heaven ? Where is the reward 
for patience, for unexampled perseverance? Three 
times have I begun afresh, after having lost every 
thing. I began again with a kopek, when any other 
man would long before have taken to drink in despair, 



TWO WILLS.— л FAIR.— A LAWYIJB, ETC. 175 

and ruined himself in the dram-shop. Consider how 
much I have had to contend with, how much to endure ! 
Why, every kopek has been wrung out, so to speak, 
with all the powers of my soul. Let us grant that 
some other man might have acquired it with ease : but 
for me every kopek has Ъеещ as the proverb runs, made 
fast with tJie nail of a three-kopek piece ,\ and God knows 
with what indefatigable toil I have earned that pekok 
made fast with the nail of a three-kopek piece ! '* 

He sobbed loudly with insufferable torture of heart, 
fell upon a chair, tore off completely the skirt of his 
coat, which was hanging by a part, flung it away from 
him, and thrusting both hands into his hair, over the 
improvement of which he had formerly taken so much 
pains, he tore it out remorselessly, enjoying the pain 
by which he strove to deaden the unquenchable torture 
of his heart. 

For a long time Murazoff sat silent before him, gaz- 
ing at this remarkable exhibition of madness on the 
part of a desperate man, which was something that he 
had never hitherto witnessed. This man, who had not 
long ago been fluttering about with the easy agility of 
a man of the world or a military man, was now fling- 
ing himself wildly about in a soiled, torn, and rumpled 
coat and unbuttoned trousers, with a hand bleeding 
from the blow which he had dealt it, and pourirtg out 
invectives on the hostile powers which attend upon man. 

'* Ah, Pavel Ivanovitch, Pavel Ivanovitch ! What a 
man you might have been if you had but exerted your- 
self with this same force and perseverance in the 
proper direction, with a better aim in view ! Great 
Heavens, how much good you might have accomplished ! 
If one of the people who love good had only expended 
as much power in its behalf as you have in the acqui- 



176 TCniTCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS} OR, DEAD SOULS. 

sition of your kopeks', and had understood how to sac- 
riflce his own self-love and ambition for good without 
sparing himself, as you have not spared youi-self for the 
sake of amassing money ! My God, how this earth of 
ours would have blossomed out! Pavel Ivanovitch, 
Pavel Ivanovitch ! the pity of it is not that you have 
been guilty towards others, but that you have been 
false to yourself, to the rich powers and talents with 
which you were endowed; You were intended to be a 
great man, but you have been the cause of your own 
loss and ruin." 

There are secrets of the soul, no matter how far 
the incorrigible criminal may have strayed from the 
path in his wanderings, no matter how hardened his 
feelings may have become, no matter how he may have 
peraisted in and clung to his life of corruption, yet if 
you reproach him with the very qualities which he has 
discredited, his soul involuntarily awakens, and quivers 
in every fibre. 

" Afanasiy Vasilievitch,'* said Tchitchikofif, and he 
seized the latter's hand in both of his. " Oh, if you 
could only contrive to set me free, to restore my prop- 
erty to me, I swear to you that I would thenceforth 
lead a wholly different life ! Save me, my benefactor, 
save me ! *' 

" What can I do? I must in that case war against 
the laws. Suppose that I were to bring myself to 
that: still, the Prince is a just man ; he would not re- 
lease you.** 

"My benefactor, you can do anything! The law 
does not terrify me. I could find means of coping with 
the law : what troubles me is, that I have been cast into 
prison, that I shall perish here like a dog, and that m}' 
property, my papers, my dressing-case . . . Save me ! *' 



TWO WILLS,— A FAIR.— A LAWYER, ETC, 177 

He embraced the old man's feet, and burst into tears. 

"Ah, Pavel Ivanoviteh, Pavel Ivanoviteh,'* said 
old Murazoff, shaking his head, " how this property 
has blinded you ! For its sake you refuse to listen to 
your poor soul." 

'' I will think of my soul : only save me ! " 

''Pavel Ivanoviteh,** . . . said old Murazoff, and 
paused. "It is not within my power to save you. 
You see that yourself. But I will exert myself so far 
as I can to lighten your fate, and to have you set at 
liberty. I do not know whether I shall succeed in 
effecting this, but I will try. But in case I should suc- 
ceed beyond my expectations, I shall claim a reward 
for my labor, Pavel Ivanoviteh. Cast aside all these 
efforts to acquire wealth. I say to you in serious ear- 
nest, that if I were to lose all my money, — and I have 
more than you, — I should not weep over it. Ei, ei! 
the point lies not in the property of which they may 
deprive me, but in that which no one can confiscate or 
steal away from me. You have already lived a tolera- 
bly long time in the world. You yourself style your 
life a bark amid the billows. You already have enough 
to live on for the remainder of your days. Settle 
down in some retired spot, as near the church and 
good, simple people as may be ; or, if you are anxious 
to leave descendants behind you, marry some good 
young girl who is not rich, but who is accustomed to 
moderation and to a modest way of living ; forget this 
noisy world and all its seductive caprices, and let it 
forget you. There is no rest to be had in it. You see 
how it is : every one in it is an enemy, a tempter, or a 
traitor." 

*' Certainly, certainly ! I have already intended and 
planned to order my life in accordance with the require- 



178 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

mehts of the soul, to occupy myself with the manage- 
ment of my estate, to live a quiet life. The tempter 
demon Satan, the Devil and his crew, turned me from 
the path, and beguiled me." 

Some hidden and hitherto unknown feelings now 
revealed themselves witliin him, as though something 
remote, something which had been dropped into his. 
mind long before, which had l)een stifled since his 
childhood by stern and deadly precepts, by the unpro- 
pitious conditions of his wearisome boyhood, by the 
dreariness of his paternal dwelling, by the changeless 
isolation, poverty, and misery of his earliest impres- 
sions, by the gloomy views on fate which peered sadly 
at him through a dim window-pane, obscured by the 
snow-storms of winter, was desirous of awaking. 

A groan burst from his lips ; and, covering his face 
with both hands, he exclaimed in a sorrowful voice, " It 
is true, it is true ! " 

'^ Neither your knowledge of mankind nor your expe- 
rience availed since the foundation was unlawful. But 
if there had been a lawful foundation . . . Eh, Pavel 
Ivanovitch ! why have you ruined yourself ? Awake ! 
it is not too late, there is still time.*' . . . 

" No, it is too late, too late ! " groaned Tchitchikofif 
in a voice which nearly broke MurazoflTs heart. '' I 
begin to feel, I am conscious, that it is not thus, not 
thus, that I shall go, that I have wandered very far 
from the straight road ; but I can do nothing now. 
No, not thus was I brought up. My father inculcated 
righteousness, he beat it into me : he made me copy 
moral precepts, and himself stole a forest from a neigh- 
bor in my presence, and forced me to assist him in the 
deed. He entered into an unjust lawsuit, and I knew 
it : he corrupted a young girl who was an orphan and 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 179 

his ward. Example is strooger than precept. I see, 
I feel, Afanasiy Vasilievitch, that I am not leading 
the right sort of life, but no one could have a greater 
repugnance for vice : my nature has grown coarse ; I 
have not that love for good, those fine impulses for 
deeds of benevolence, which are formed by habit; I 
have not as great a desne to do battle for the good, as 
for the acquisition of wealth. I am telling you the 
truth. . . . What am I to do? '* . 

The old man sighed heavily. 

'^ Pavel Ivanovitch, you possess as much strength of 
will as patience. Medicine is bitter ; but the sick man 
takes it, knowing that otherwise he will not recover. 
You have no love for the good : do good by main force, 
without any love for it. This will be accounted a 
greater merit in your case than in the case of a man 
who does good for the love of it. Only force yourself 
to do it a few times, and you will acquire a love for it. 
Believe me, every thing proceeds in this manner. We 
have been told that the ' kingdom of heaven is taken 
by force.* Only by force can we come near to it, . . . 
and by force is it necessary to lay hold upon it. Eh, 
Pavel Ivanovitch! surely you possess that strength, 
that iron patience which is not possessed by others, and 
can you not conquer? Yes, it seems to me that you 
would prove a bogatuir.^ For all men are now lacking 
in will, all are weak." 

It was evident that these words penetrated into Tchi- 
tchikoff's inmost soul, and touched something egoisti- 
cal at the bottom of it. Decision, or some powerful 
emotion which resembled it, gleamed in his eyes. . . . 

"Afanasiy Vasilievitch!" said he firmly, *' if you 

1 A hero of the ancient Epic songs. (See Epic Song9 of Bustia: 
L F. Hapgood). 



180 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

will only procure my release, and the means of depart- 
ing hence with some property, I give you my word that 
I will be^in a different life. I will purchase a village, 
I will become a good manager ; I will amass money, 
not for myself, but for the purpose of assisting others ; 
I will do good, so far as lies within my power ; I will 
forget myself, and all the dainties and feasts of the 
city ; I will lead a simple and 8ol)er life.'* 

'*May God strengthen you in that determination ! '* 
said the delighted old man. " I shall exert my utmost 
powers to beg your freedom from the Prince. Whether 
I shall succeed, or not, God alone knows. In any case, 
your fate will certainly be ameliorated. Ah, good 
Heavens, embrace me ! Permit me to embrace you ! 
How truly you have rejoiced my heart! Now God 
be with you ! I shall go straight to the Prince." 

Tchitchikoff was left alone. 

His whole nature had been shaken to the depths, and 
thoroughly softened. Even platinum, the hardest of 
metals, and the one which resists the fire longer than 
all the rest, melts at last ; when the fire is increased in 
the furnace, and the bellows blow upon it, and the heat 
of the flames attains to an intolerable pitch, then the 
most stubborn of metals blanches, and is converted into 
a liquid : and the strongest miseries of mental torture 
yield, when, augmenting their force with their intol- 
erable fires, they consume nature which has grown 
hardened. ... 

" I have no feelings myself, I feel nothing, but I will 
exert all my powers to cause others to feel ; I am evil 
and worthless myself, but I will use all my strength to 
convert others to goodness ; I am but a poor Christian 
myself, but I will strain every nerve in order that I 
may give no cause for offence. I will work, I will toil 



TWO WILLS, — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 181 

in the sweat of my brow. In the village I will con-» 
duet myself honestly, in order that I may have a good 
influence on others. \Vhy, after all, should I regard 
myself as an utter castaway ? I have capacity for the 
management of an estate : I possess the qualities of 
economy and skill, and good sense, and even of perse- 
verance. All that is necessary is to make up my miud 
to it.*' . . . 

After this fashion did Tchitchikoff meditate, and he 
seemed to be testing the half-awakened powers of his 
soul. It seemed as though his natui-e were becoming 
aware, in a dim, groping way, that there is some duty 
which must be fulfilled in every situation, in every 
nook however remote, notwithstanding all the con- 
ditions, perplexities, and disturbances which hover 
round a man, in every situation in which he may be 
placed. And a laborious life, far removed from the 
uproar of cities, and from those seductions which man 
has devised in his idleness, unmindful of toil, began to 
outline itself so distinctly before him, that he almost 
forgot the unpleasantness of his predicament, and was 
even prepared to return thanks to Providence for that 
heavy blow, if he might but regain his liberty and a 
portion of his . • . But here the single door of his 
noisome prison opened : an official personage entered, 
— Samosvistofif, an epicurean, a clever fellow, with 
shoulders an arshin * broad, and huge feet, a capital 
companion, a roisterer, and a thorough brute, as even 
his comrades expressed themselves in regard to him. 
In times of war, this man would have wrought wonders 
had he been despatched to make his way through some 
impenetrable, perilous place, to crawl in under the very 
nose of the enemy's cannon : it would have been the 

^ Twenty-eight inchee. 



182 TCBITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

very work for him. But having missed a military 
career, which might have made an honest man of him, 
he had set all his powers to the task of rendeiing him- 
self as vile as possible; and, incredible to state, he 
possessed extraordinary convictions and principles ; he 
behaved well with his comrades, never betrayed any 
of them, and having given his word, he kept it ; but 
official personages of a higher rank than his own he 
regarded in the light of a hostile battery, through 
which it behooved him to make his way, taking ad- 
vantage of every weak spot, of every breach, of all 
lack of watchfulness. 

''I know all about your situation : I have heard every 
thing,*' he said, when he saw that the door was closed 
behind him. '' Have no fears, none: all will be set 
right. P>erybody has set to work on your behalf, and 
we are all at your service. Thirty thousand will suffice 
for all, not a ruble more." 

'' Done ! " exclaimed Tchitchikoff. " And shall I be 
set completely at liberty? " 

"Completely. You will even receive compensation 
for your losses.*' 

'* And for the trouble?" . . . 

" Thirty thousand rubles. That is for all of us, our 
people, the governor-general, and his secretary." 

*'But excuse me, how can I? . . . All my effects, 
my dressing-case and the rest, are now under seal, 
under supervision " . . . 

" You will receive every thing an hour hence. Shall 
we strike hands on the bargain ? " 

Tchitchikoff yielded his hand. His heart beat 
violently, and he could not believe that this was 
possible. 

"Farewell for the present. I was commissioned by 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 183 

our mutual friend to tell you that the principal thing is 
— composure, and presence of mind.'* 

'' Hm ! " thought Tchitchikoff : 'Ч understand ; the 
lawyer." 

Samosvistofif disappeared. Tchitchikoff, left alone 
once more, had not yet succeeded in lending faith to 
these words, when, an hour after this conversation, his 
dressing-case and papers were brought to him, and, 
what is more, in the very best of order. Samosvistoff 
played the part of director; he scolded the sentinels 
who had been posted there for their heedlessness ; he 
inspected them, and ordered application to be made for 
extra soldiers, that the guard might be strengthened ; 
he seized not only the dressing-case, but all the docu- 
ments which could in any way compromise Tchitchikoff. 
Having made them all up into a package together, he 
sealed this, and ordered a soldier to take it to Tchi- 
tchikoff, under the pretext that it consisted of indis- 
pensable articles for his toilet and night-wear, so that 
Tchitchikoff received, together with his papers, all the 
warm clothing whicii was necessary for covering his 
delicate body. This speedy arrangement of mattei-s 
rejoiced him unspeakably. He conceived strong hopes, 
and he again began to dream of luxuries ; of e\'enings 
spent at the theatre, and of the ballet-girl whom he 
was courting. The country and quiet began to appear 
paler to him ; the city and tumult more clear and 
brilliant. Oh, life ! 

But in the mean time, the matter had assumed un- 
heard-of proportions in the court and council chamber. 
The pens of scribes labored awaj, wily heads took 
snuff and toiled, admiring their flourishing chirography 
like artists. The lawyer, like a hidden magician, 
guided the entire mechanism : he confused them all 



184 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

thoroughly before any one had succeeded in looking 
into the matter. The confusion augmented. Samos- 
vistoff excelled himself in audacity, and in incredible 
daring. On learning where the woman, who had been 
captured, was kept under guard, he straightway pre- 
sented himself with such a dashing and authoritative 
air, that the sentry saluted him, and dropped his hand 
to the seam of his trousers. 

" Have you been standing here long? " 

*'Ever since morning, your honor: it is three hours 
before I shall be relieved, your honor." 

'^I require your services. I shall tell the officer to 
despatch another man in your place." 

" I obey, your honor ! " 

And proceeding directly home, in order not to ini- 
tiate any one else, and to destroy all traces behind him, 
Samosvistoff dressed himself up like a geiidai^ie^ and 
made his appearance with mustache and side-whiskers. 
The Devil himself would not have recognized him. 
He presented himself in the house where Tchitchikoflf 
was confined, and, 'seizing the first woman whom he 
encountered, he gave her in charge to two official 
youngsters, who were also sharp practitioners. Then 
he presented himself with mustache and gun, as the 
case required, to the sentinel. " Go ! " said he, " the 
commander has sent me to take your duty in ex- 
change." 

The exchange was effected, and Samosvistoff took 
up his stand with his gun. This was all that was re- 
quired. Meanwhile the first woman had been replaced 
by another who neither knew nor remembered any 
thing. The former was then concealed in such a 
manner, that it was never known what had become 
of her. 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 185 

At the very time when Samosvistoff was transforming 
himself into the semblance of a warrior, the lawyer 
was working wonders in civil circles : the governor was 
given to understand indirectly, that the procurator was 
preparing a complaint about him ; the commandant of 
the gendarmes was informed that an official who had 
been living privately in town, was writing a denuncia- 
tion of him ; the official who had been living privately 
was told that there was another and still more mysteri- 
ous official personage, who was lodging information 
against him : and all of them were led into such a posi- 
tion, that they were forced to resort to him for advice. 
This was the utter nonsense which resulted : denuncia- 
tion was mounted upon denunciation, and things were 
on the point of being divulged, such as no one had 
ever heard of, and which had never had any existence 
in reality. Every sort of device was employed in the 
work, and brought to bear on the matter: one man 
was stated to be an illegitimate son, and his birth and 
name were announced ; another was declared to have 
a mistress, and the name of the man whom the wife of 
another was pursuing was also made known. Scandal, 
offence, and every sort of element, were so intermingled 
and intertwined with Tchitchikoff*s affair, and with 
dead souls, that it was utterly impossible to decide in 
any manner whatever which of these matters was the 
most nonsensical. When the papers at length began 
to attack the governor-general, the poor Prince could 
make nothing of them. The exceedingly clever and 
sensible official to whom the preparation of the abstract 
was intrusted came near losing his mind. It was ab- 
solutely impossible, by any means whatever, to grasp 
the thread of the transaction. The Prince was at that 
time troubled about a multitude of other matters, each 



186 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

more annoying than the other. Famine had made its 
appearance in one quarter of the government. The 
officials who had been sent thither to distribute bread 
had not taken the proper measures. In another quar- 
ter of the government, the Raskolniki ^ had been mak- 
ing a stir. Some one had circulated among them a 
report that Antichrist had been born, and that he 
gave tho dead no peace, for he had been collecting 
some dead souls or other. They howled, and made 
accusations ; and under the pretext of catching Anti- 
christ, they slew those who were not Antichrist. In 
another locality, the peasants had revolted against the 
proprietors and the meml)ers of the rural police. Some 
vagabonds had circulated a rumor among them, to the 
effect that the time was approaching when the peasants 
were to become land-owners therateelves, and array 
themselves in swallow-tailed coats, while the gentry 
would be clothed in blouses, and become peasants ; and 
without reflecting on the fact, that, in that case, there 
would be far too many land-owners, the entire district 
refused to pay any taxes whatever to the captain- 
ispravnik.^ It became necessary to resort to forcible 
measures. The poor Prince was in the most distracted 
state of mind conceivable. It was at such a time as 
this, that he was informed of the arrival of the brandy- 
farmer. " Let him enter," said the Prince: The old 
man made his appearance. 

"See what your Tchitchikoff has come to! You 
stood up for him, and defended him. Now he has in- 

1 When the Patriarch Nikon, about the middle of the eeventeenih century, 
had the sacred writings revised, and the numerous errors which had crept in 
through the carelessness of scribes (and otherwise) corrected, some people 
clung to the old and faulty versions ; and thus the sect of the Basholnikit or 
** Old Believers," came into existence. 

* The chief of the rural police. 



TWO WILLS, — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 187 

volved himself in a transaction such as the vilest of 
thieves would not have touched." 

" Permit me to observe to your highness, that I do 
not understand this matter very well." 

" He has forged a will, and has done such things 
besides ! ... He deserves public chastisement with 
the whip for such deeds." 

" Your highness, I do not say this with the object of 
defending Tchitchikoff. But surely, this has not been 
proved as yet. No investigation has yet been made." 

" There are proofs. The woman who was dressed 
up to represent the dead woman has been arrested. I 
intend to interrogate her expressly, in your presence." 

The Prince rang, and gave orders that the woman in 
question should be summoned. Murazoff held his 
peace. 

"It is the most disgraceful affair; and, to their 
shame be it said, the most prominent officials in the 
city are mixed up in it, even the governor himself. 
He ought not to be where thieves and rascals congre- 
gate ! " said the Prince wrathfully. 

" Why, the governor is the heir ; * he has a right to 
be connected with the matter : but it is only natural, 
your highness, that others should have interfered on all 
sides. A rich woman has died ; she has not made a 
just and reasonable disposition of her property : per- 
sons desirous of enriching themselves have flown 
hither from all quarters — that is human nature." 

"But why commit villanies? The scamps!" said 
the Prince with a feeling of indignation. " I have not 
a single honorable official about me: they are all 
rogues ! " 

"Your highness, which of us is a» good as he 

1 Lyenitzuin had become the governor. 



188 TCBITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

ought to be ? All the officials of our city are — men ; 
they have their merits, and many of them are ex- 
tremely well informed as to their business : and every 
one is liable to sin." 

" Listen, Afanasiy Vasilievitch : tell me, — you are 
the only honest man whom I know, — why have you 
such a passion for defending every sort of rascal? " 

*' Your highness," answered Murazoff, *' whoever 
the man may be whom you designate as a rascal, he is 
still a man. How can I help defending a man when I 
know that half the evil which he does proceeds from 
coarseness and ignorance? Surely we commit injus- 
tice at every step, and are every instant the cause of 
the misery* of another, even when we have no evil in- 
tentions. You have also certainly been guilty of great 
injustice, your highness." 

" What ! " exclaimed the Prince in amazement, thor- 
oughly astounded by the unexpected turn which the 
convei'sation had taken. 

Murazoff remained silent for a moment, as though 
pondering some question, and finally said, " Well, in 
the case of Derpeunikoff, for instance." 

"Afanasiy Vasilievitch, that was a crime against 
the fundamental laws of the empire : it was tantamount 
to a betrayal of one's native land." 

" I do not seek to justify him. But is it just to con- 
demn a young fellow who has been betrayed and led 
astray by others, by reason of his 3^outh, exactly as 
though he had been one of the ringleaders ? The same 
fate overtook Deq^eunikoff and a certain Voronnoi- 
Dryannoi, but their crimes were certainly not identi- 
cal." 

" For Heaven's sake "... returned the Prince, 
with perceptible emotion, "do you know any thing 



TWO WILLS.— A FAIR, — A LAWYER, ETC. 189 

about that matter? Tell me. It was only recently 
that I wrote direct to Petersburg in reference to a miti- 
gation of his punishment.** 

" No, your highness, I did not refer to that because 
I knew any thing about the matter with which you are 
not acquainted ; although there certainly does exist one 
circumstance which might be used to his advantage, 
only he will not consent to it himself, because another 
would be made to suffer thereby. I was merely think- 
ing whether you had not been over-hasty on that occa- 
sion. Pardon me, your highness : I only judge 
according to my weak understanding. You have sev- 
eral times enjoined upon me the duty of expressing 
myself frankly. When I was a master over men, I 
had a great many laborer of all sorts, both good and 
bad : now, if you do not take the special circumstances 
and the man's former life into consideration, if you do 
not inquire coolly into every particular, but cry out on 
the instant, you only frighten him, and you never attain 
to any real comprehension of the matter; but if you 
question him as a brother might question a brother, he 
will tell you all about it of his own accord, and he will 
not even ask for mercy, and he will cherish no hard 
feelings towards any one, because he will perceive 
clearly that it is not I, but the law, which is punishing 
him.** 

The Prince fell into thought. At that moment a 
young official entered, and remained standing in a re- 
spectful attitude with his portfolio. Distress and anx- 
iety were depicted on his countenance, which was 
both youthful and rosy. It was evident that he had 
not been appointed to special commissions without 
cause. He was one of the few who engage con amove 
in the administration of affairs, instigated neither by 



190 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

ambition, nor by a desire for gain, nor in imitation of 
others. He occupied himself with it because he was 
convinced that it was necessary that he should be 
there, and not in any other place, and that his life had 
been given him for that purpose. His business con- 
sisted in sitting and picking a matter to pieces, and in 
'explaining it when he had grasi^ed all its tangled 
threads. He felt that his toil, his efforts, and his 
sleepless nights were abundantly rewarded if the mat- 
ter at length began to unroll itself before him, to dis- 
close its secret causes, and when he felt that he could 
put it into a few clear and definite words, so that it 
would be patent and comprehensible to every one. It 
is safe to affirm that no student ever rejoiced as heartily 
when some exceedingly difficult phrase unfolded itself, 
and displayed the real thought of a great writer, as he 
did when a complicated piece of business was finally 
disentangled. 

. . . * " On the other hand . . . bread in those 
localities where the famine exists. I know this district 
better than your employees do : I will make a personal 
observation as to what is needful. And, if your high- 
ness will permit, I will talk with the raskolniki (old 
believers). They will converse more freely with a 
civilian like myself. Thus, God knows, I may be able 
to arrange matters peaceably with them. But the offi- 
cials will arrange nothing. A correspondence on the 
subject will ensue ; and, moreover, they have so compli- 
cated matters on paper, that the affair itself is not to 
be discerned by reason of them. And I shall accept 
no money from you, because, by Heaven, it would be a 
shame, at such a time, to think of one's own profit, 
when people are perishing with hunger. I have an 

1 Here a gap occurs in the Rueeian. 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC. 191 

abundant store of grain : I have already exported 
some to Siberia, and I shall send some more next sum- 
mer." 

" God alone can requite you for such a ser\4ce, 
Afanasiy Vasilievitch. But I shall not say a single 
word to you, because you can recognize the fact for 
yourself : all words are inadequate. But permit me to 
make one remark with regard to this petition. Tell 
me yourself, have I a right to let this matter pass with- 
out notice? and is it just or honorable on my part to 
pardon knaves? " 

'' By Heavens, your highness, it is impossible to call 
them that, the more so as many of them are very wor- 
thy people. The situations in which a man sometimes 
finds himself are difficult, very, very difficult. There 
are cases when a man appears to be undoubtedly guilty 
. . . but when you enter into the matter, it is not he 
at all." 

" But what will they say themselves if I let them 
go? There are certainly some among them who will 
raise their noses higher than ever after this, and will 
even say that they had frightened me. They will be 
the first to show me disrespect." . . . 

" Permit me, your highness, to communicate to you 
my advice on this subject : call them all together, give 
them to understand that you know every thing, and 
represent to them your own position in exactly the 
terms in which you have just been pleased to present 
it to me, and ask their advice as to what each one of 
them would have done in your place." 

"Yes, you think that they will be accessible to 
nobler sentiments than those connected with intriguing 
and enriching themselves ! Believe me, they will only 
laugh at me." 



192 TCniTCHlKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULB. 

" I do not tbink 80, your highness. There is a sense 
of justice left, even in a man who is worse than the 
common run of men. Some Jew might behave in that 
way, but not a Russian. No, your highness, there is 
no necessity for your concealing your meaning. Speak 
to them exactly as you have been graciously pleased to 
speak to me. They accuse you of being a proud and 
ambitious man, who will listen to nothing, who trusts 
to himself alone ; so let them see every thing as it 
really is. What is it to you ? You are in the right. 
Speak to them as though it were not in their presence, 
but in the presence of God himself, that you were 
making your confession."- 

"Afanasiy Vasilievitch," said the Prince thought- 
fully, " I will think this over; and in the mean while, 
I thank you sincerely for your advice." 

"And will your highness order Tchitchikoff's re- 
lease?" 

"Tell that Tchitchikoff, that he is to take himself 
away from here as speedily as possible ; and the farther 
he goes, the better. I should never forgive him." 

Murazoff went straight from the Prince to Tchitchi- 
koff. He found Tchitchikoff already in fine spirits, 
calmly occupied with the very excellent dinner which 
had been J^rought to him in faience dishes from a very 
good restaurant. But, from the very first phrases of 
the conversation, the old man perceived that Tchitchi- 
koff had somehow contrived to win over some of the 
cunning officials. He even recognized the fact, that 
the invisible influence of the crafty lawyer had been 
called into play in the case. 

" Listen to me, Pavel Ivanovitch," said he : "T have 
brought yon your freedom, on condition that you quit 
the city instantly. Collect your effects, and God be 



TWO WILLS, — A FAIR, — A LAWYER, ETC, 193 

with you ! delay not for a moment, for matters may 
grow worse. I am aware that a certain person is in- 
stigating you to your present course ; but I can inform 
you in confidence, tliat a matter is now on the point of 
disclosure, which is of such a nature that no earthly 
powers will be able to save him. Of course, he is only 
too glad to ruin others, in order that things may not 
be uncomfortable for him ; but the day of reckoning 
is at hand. When I left you, you were in a favorable 
state of mind, much more favorable than you are now. 
My advice to you is not lightly given. E'l, ei! the 
point lies not in that wealth for which men quarrel, 
and cut each other's throats, as though it were pos- 
sible to introduce rational order into the present life 
without a thought of a life beyond. Believe me, 
Pavel Ivanovitch, until men cast aside all those things 
for whose sake they gnaw and devour each other on 
this earth, and think on the rational acquisition of 
spiritual wealth, wealth and order will never be estab- 
lished on earth. The days of famine are approaching 
for the whole nation, and for each one separately. . . . 
This is clear. Say what you will, the lK)dy does depend 
upon the soul. If you wish that to progress as it 
should, think not of dead souls, but of your own living 
soul, and betake yourself, with God's aid, to a differ- 
ent course. I also shall take my departure to-morrow. 
Make haste I If you do not, a misfortune will happen 
to you in my absence." 

So saying, the old man quitted the room. Tchitchi- 
koff grew thoughtful. The significance of life once 
more seemed to him far from unimportant. "Mura- 
zoff is right," said he. *' It is time to enter on a dif- 
ferent path ! " So saying, he left his prison. One of 
the guards carried his dressing-case behind him. God 



194 TCUITCB!K0FF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

knows what the joy of Sell fan and Petrushka was like, 
over their master's release. 

'*Well, ray good fellows/* said Tchitchikoflf, turning 
to them in an amiable way, ^^ you must harness up and 
start." 

'* We'll go, Pavel Ivanovitch," said Selifan. '' The 
road must have formed by this time, for a good deal of 
snow has fallen. It really is time to get out of the 
city. We are so tired of it, that we don't even want 
to look at it." 

" Go to the carriage-maker, and tell him to put run- 
ners on the calash," said Tchitchikoflf, and then went 
into the town himself, but did not care to pay farewell 
calls on any one. He felt awkward after all that had 
passed, — the more so, as many scandals of the most 
unsavory description were in circulation about him in 
the city. He avoided all encountei*s, and went very 
quietly to the merchant from whom he had purchased 
the Navarino smoke and flame colored cloth : of this, 
he bought four arshins more, for a coat and trousers, 
and then directad his course to the same tailor as be- 
fore. In consideration of double pay, the tailor de- 
cided that he could expedite matters ; and the tailor 
colony settled down to work all night, with needle, 
goose, and teeth ; and the coat was ready on the mor- 
row, though a little late. It was excellent, exactly like 
the first. But, alas ! Tchitchikoflf observed that there 
was a smooth white spot on his head ; and he wailed 
mournfully, " And why need I have given myself up to 
'such violent grief? I ought not to have torn my hair 
for a long time to come." 

After settling with the tailor, he at length left the 
town in a rather extraordinary state. He was no lon- 
ger the Tchitchikoflf of former days : he was merely 



TWO WILLS. — Л FAIR, — Л LAWYER, ETC. 195 

the ruin of the previous Tehitchikoff. The internal 
condition of his soul might have been compared to a 
building which has been pulled to pieces, in order that 
a new one may be constructed from it, but the new one 
has not yet been begun, because the final plan has not 
yet arrived from the architect, and the workmen are 
left in a state of indecision. Old Murazoff took his 
departure an hour before Tehitchikoff, in a kibitka 
witli a cover of plaited rushes, in company with Pota- 
puitch ; and one hour after Tehitchikoff 's departure, an 
.order was circulated in the town, to the effect that 
the Prince wished to see every one of the officials, on the 
occasion of his approaching trip to Petersburg. 

The entire official force of the city, beginning with 
the governor, and ending with a titular councillor, as- 
sembled in the grand hall of the governor-general's 
residence : there were heads of offices and affairs, coun- 
cillors, assessors, Sourbiters, Rednoses, Blowhards,* 
those who had taken bribes, those who had not, those 
with crooked souls, those with half-crooked souls, and 
those whose souls were not crooked at all. All awaited 
the entrance of the governor-general in not a little 
excitement and trepidation. The Prince made his ap- 
pearance with a face which was neither gloomy nor 
pleasant : his glance was firm, so was his step. The 
entire official assemblage bowed, some of them to their 
very girdles. The Prince responded with a slight 
inclination of the head, and began as follows : — 

"As I am on the point of taking my departure to 
Petersburg, I have thought it proper to have an inter- 
view with you, and to explain to you, in some degree, 
the cause. A very disgraceful affair has been con- 
ducted in our midst. I presume that many of those 

^ Tranelatione of epithete employed ae proper names. 



196 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

now present know to what matter I refer. This affair 
has led to the detection of other matters, no less dis- 
graceful, in which men whom I had hitherto regarded 
as honest, have eventually become involved. I am 
even acquainted with their secret purpose to confuse 
every thing in such a manner that it shall be absolutely 
impossible to reach a formal decision in it. I know, 
both who is the leader, and whose the secret action is, 
although he has very cleverly concealed his share in 
the business. But the point lies here, — that I intend 
to investigate this matter, not by a formal investigation 
of the papers, but by swift military trial, as in time of 
war ; and I hope that the emperor will grant me the 
right to do this, when I shall have laid this whole busi- 
ness before him. In this case, since there exists no 
possibility of carrying it out in civil form, since cabi- 
nets full of documents have been burned, and since, 
finally, efforts are being made, by means of forged de- 
nunciations and a multitude of false extraneous testi- 
mony, to render obscure a matter which is dark enough 
already, I consider the martial-court to be the sole resoi-t ; 
and I should like to gather your opinion on the subject." 

The Prince paused as though awaiting a reply. All 
stood with their ej^es fixed upon tlie floor. Many were 
pallid. 

"I am also acquainted with another transaction, 
although those engaged in it are perfectly assured that 
it cannot possibly be known to any one. Its prosecu- 
tion will not be conducted on paper ; for I shall myself 
be the informant and the plaintiff, and I shall present 
convincing proofs." 

One of thi^ oflScial assemblage shuddered : some of 
the more timid al^o took the alarm. 

" As a patter of course, jthe chief ringleader will be 



TWO WILLS, — л FAIR, — Л LAWYER, ETC. 197 

punished by the loss of his ranks and property, and the 
rest by removal from their posts. .Naturally, many in- 
nocent men will suffer. But what is to be done ? The 
affair is very dishonorable, and cries aloud for justice. 
Although I am aware that this will not even serve as a 
lesson to others, — because, in the [)lace of those who 
are discharged, others will make their appearance, and 
the very men who have hitherto been honest will become 
dishonest, and the very men who are honored with con- 
fidence will deceive and betray, — still, in spite of all 
this, I am forced to act with rigor, for the case demands 
retribution. I know that I shall be accused of hai-sh- 
ness and cruelty ; but I know that I shall be less blamed 
by those for whom I must become simply an insensible 
instrument of justice, which must fall upon their 
heads." 

An involuntary shudder passed over the faces of 
all who were present. The Prince was calm. Neither 
wrath nor mental emotion was expressed on his coun- 
tenance. 

"And that man in whose hands the fate of many 
lies, and whom no appeals could move, now appeals 
to you all. All shall be forgotten, wiped out, for- 
given : I will myself intercede for all, if you will comply 
with my request. This is what I ask. I know that 
dishonesty cannot be extirpated by any means what- 
ever, neither by terror nor by chastisement. It has 
become too deeply rooted. The dishonorable prac- 
tice of taking bribes has come to be a necessity, and 
indispensable even for those who were not 1югп with 
dishonest instincts. I know that it is impossible for 
many men to resist the general current. But I am 
now obliged, at a sacred and decisive moment when 
the salvation of the country is in question, when every 



198 TClllTCHlKOFF'B JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

citizen contributes all he has, and sacrifices eveiy 
thing, I am obliged to make a proclamation to those, 
at least, who still have a Russian heart in their bosoms, 
and who have any comprehension of the significance 
of the word nobility. Why discuss which of us is the 
most to blame? I am, perhaps, more to blame than 
all the rest ; I may have been too stern with you in the 
beginning ; I may, through my superfluous suspicion, 
have repulsed those of you who honestly desired to be 
of service to me. If they really loved justice and the 
welfare of their country, they should not have taken 
offence at the haughtiness of my demeanor : they should 
have stifled their own self-love, and sacrificed their own 
personality. It is not possible that I should not have 
noted their self-sacrifice and their lofty love for good- 
ness, and have finally accepted wise and useful advice 
from them. Nevertheless, the subordinate ought rather 
to mould himself to the temper of his chief, than the 
chief to the temper of his subordinate. This is, at all 
events, more lawful and easier, since many subordinates 
have but one chief, while each chief has hundreds of 
subordinates. But we will now lay aside the question 
as to who is the most to blame. The point lies here, — 
that we are called upon to save our country ; that our 
fatherland is being ruined, not by the incursions of 
twenty foreign nations, but by ourselves ; that, along- 
side of the lawful government, another government 
has been established which is much more lюwerful 
than any lawful one. We have fixed our own condi- 
tions : every thing has had a price set on it, and these 
prices have even become universally known. And no 
ruler, were he even wiser than all the rulers and law- 
givers in the world, is able to remedy this evil, no 
matter how greatly he may limit the action of wicked 



TWO WILLS, — Л FAIR. — A LAWYER, ETC, 199 

officials by the appointment of other officials to oversee 
them. Every means will prove unavailing until each 
one of us feels that he must rise to repel dishonesty, 
in the same manner in which he armed himself at the 
epoch of the national rising. I now appeal to you as a 
Russian, as a man of one blood with yourselves. I turn 
to those among you who have the least comprehension 
of what nobility of thought consists in. I invite them 
to recall their duty, which presents itself to man 
wherever he may be. I invite him to examine this 
duty of his more closely, and the obligations of the ser- 
vice which he has undertaken ; for this presents itself 
to all of us in an obscure manner, and we ought'* * . . . 

"Well, gentlemen, will you now be so good as to 
follow me into the adjoining apartment ? * * 

As the Prince uttered these words, he made a sign to 
the lackeys who were standing on each side of one of 
the doors of the salon, and both leaves of this door 
were instantly flung open. He passed into the largest 
apartment of his official quartei-s ; the entire assembly 
followed him thither ; the door was closed again. 
This apartment, which was completely surrounded by 

1 Here Gogore text comee to an end. In 1857 a book was published In 
Kieff under the title of Continuation and Conclusion of Lead Souls^ by 
Vaetehenko Zakhartchenko. What follows is taken from that daring exper- 
iment. As 1 have not been &ble to obtain a copy of the Russian, I have taken 
it from M. Ernest Charrlerc's French version, a deed which I should con- 
sider quite unjustifiable in the case of a writer of talent. I have no doubt 
that the translation is very bad; it always is when filtered through the 
French: and it must be very much worse than usual in the present case, be- 
cause, judging from the comically unfaithful version which M. Charriere fur- 
niehes of what precedes, it must be very different indeed from the original, 
and contain far more of Charriere than of Zakhartchenko. Nevertheless, it 
may afford pleasure to those people who like to have their stories complete, 
and serve as a curiosity to others; for that purpose it answers very well: 
and the misrepresentations, which are the infallible result of a double trans- 
lation, may be regarde<l in the light of retribution long deferred for Mr. 
Zakhartchenko's audacity. M. Eugene Melchior de VogUe also condemns M. 
Charrierre'e tranalation of Dead Souls. ~I. F. H. 



200 TCHITCH/KOFF'S JOURNEYS,- OR, DEAD SOULS. 

writing-tables, was lighted from above, and had five 
doors, all of which wei*e closed : in front of each, on 
the inside, stood two gendarmes^ armed and motionless. 
This unforeseen circumstance seemed to add to the 
gravity of the language which they had just listened to 
in the salon. Still another peculiarity atti-acted gen- 
eral attention ; a few chairs usually stood near each of 
the writing-tables ; on this occasion, these chairs were 
considerably more numerous than usual ; and on the 
tables, in front of each chair, lay a sheet of white 
paper, and on the paper a freshly cut pen. 

The Prince addressed the company in these words : — 
" Gentlemen, the request which I have told you that 
I am about to make to you, is this : please to seat your- 
selves, take your pens, and express freely on these 
sheets of paper your opinion of the communication 
which I have just made to you, and of which I feel 
sure you have not missed a word. You will not re- 
quire more than twenty minutes to enunciate your sen- 
timents as to the state of things which I have described 
to you, and as to the measures which I ought to take. 
At all events, I wish to have the one hundred and 
sixty-two sheets of paper written, signed, and dated 
by your own hand, within half an hour.'' 

After speaking these last words, he withdrew into 
his study. Half an hour later he re-entered the room, 
had all the sheets of paper collected by the veterans 
who wore chevrons, and were decorated with the medal 
of the order of St. George, and attached to the service 
of the hotel and the offices : these sheets were all 
placed in the hands of Feodor Ivanovitch, and the 
Prince courteously dismissed the assemblage. All re- 
tired, either thoughtful or depressed, and returned home, 
without even dreaming of questioning or interrogating 
each other. 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR, — A LAWYER, ETC. 201 • 

After the scrutiny, which was conducted by the 
young employee under the Prince's own eye, twenty- 
seven humble requests for dismissal were laid on one 
side. The twenty-eighth, however, was written with a 
noble and profound sentiment of wounded pride. It 
was from an exalted personage, who had liimself an- 
nounced, and who was immediately admitted. The ex- 
planation and the conduct of this official who had 
resigned, bore, on this occasion, the stamp of loyalty, 
and a return to better sentiments. The Prince prom- 
ised to add a marginal note to the petition which the 
latter had at first addressed to the sovereign, in order 
to obtain his discharge: he then undertook to preside 
in person over the tribunal of arbitration, which this 
personage besought him to establish immediately, and 
in the presence of which he was desirous of terminating, 
in an honorable manner, this scandalous suit, which had 
arisen between him and the parties interested, with 
regard to the testamentary dispositions of his late 
relative, the aunt of Khlobuyoff. 

This matter having been arranged, the Prince wrote 
a circular, copies of which were despatched that same 
evening to the twenty-seven wretches of divers ranks 
who had been led to acknowledge themselves guilty on 
the spot. Each one was invited to consider whether it 
would not be appropriate, while soliciting a dismissal, 
which really amounted to an appeal to the sovereign for 
mercy, to support their request by an apology to their 
fellow-men, in the form of some work, — for example, 
the gift of money to the poor of the district, who were 
suffering from famine. Then they were to designate 
to which of the Eastern governments they intended to 
retire with the simple rank of citizen. This circular 
procured for the poor inhabitants of the district which 



202 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

was afflicted with famine, a sum of nearly one hundred 
thousand rubles, which was distributed among them. 

At the expiration of three months, not a single one 
of these twenty-seven rascals remained in the town : we 
do not know whether others afterwards arrived in their 
stead, but these were all forced to quit the government, 
never to appear there more. As for the lawyer, we do 
not know whether he came to that decision of his own 
free will, or in consequence of signs which had coun- 
selled him to a prolonged sojourn in the environs of 
Lake Baikal ; but, fifty days after the departure of our 
hero, the ex-advocate was installed in a small house in 
the Oriental suburb of Irkutsk. There, in the midst of 
gardens, like Diocletian in those of Salon after he had 
abdicated the imperial throne, our fallen lawyer inno- 
cently occupied himself, in the lack of employment for 
his legal talents, in the cultivation of vegetables, and 
the preparation of twenty sorts of preserves. 

His excellency, Gov. Lyenitzuin, in company with 
his wife and their charming infant, are to set out to- 
morrow, so it is said, for Nice, where they will spend 
the winter. 

Khlobuyoff, in the course of his tour of penitence, " 
has raised his humble mission almost to the level of a 
sprt of apostleship. Treasures of eloquence really 
an<relic have been discovered in the mind of this man, - 
who was for so long a time both dissipated and frivo- 
lous ; and their effects on the people have far surpassed 
those which Murazoff had hoped for aa by instinct. - 
Lyenitzuin has bought back the hereditary domain of 
Khlobuyoff, who, his mission accomplished, will learn 
that this land has been returned to him free from all 
encumbrances, abundantly provided with agricultural 
implements, with grain, horses, oxen, and flocks, and 



TWO WILLS. — A FAIR. — A LAW FEE, ETC. 203 

supervised for a year, free of cost, by an upright agri- 
culturist known to Murazoff and to Kostanzhoglo. 
Moreover, Lyenitzuin pays Klilobuyoff an annuity of 
twenty thousand rubles, which reverts, after the latter's 
death, to his wife, and, in default of him and his wife, 
to their eldest child. 

But let us return to our hei4>, and let us see what 
thoughts occupy his mind after he has been rescued 
from a most perilous situation, by precisely that which 
seemed destined to precipitate his ruin ; that is to say, 
by the deluge of accusations of a nature and compli- 
cation quite unexampled, and arbitrary imprisonment. 



204 TCniTCBlKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. — HIS OPIN- 
IONS IN THE LAP OF FORTUNE. 

TcHiTCHiKOFr, on waking, seta out to deposit three coffers with a certain 
Dobryakoff. — Arrl\ing at a princely hunting-box, he emerges thence the 
richer by a considerable sum. — He is on the point of marrying a wealthy 
and beautiful gentlewoman worth a million. — An enemy of Geo. Betrish- 
tcheff. — Unplearant experience with kisses. — A sporting squire. — 
Painful experience with fiery horses. — Giddiness to which the country 
gentry, of both sexes, on the steppes are subject. — Flight upon flight. — 
An angloroauiac prince. — Dividing an inheritance. — Tchitchikoflf is 
arrested in an inn. — The gorodnitchiy, or mayor, who has ways of his 
own. — He saves liis prisoner: he protects TchitchikofiPs fortune, and 
gives him his daughter. — The latter becomes a typical provincial Roeeian 
lady. — Tchitchikoff as the father of a family. — He has a child born to 
him each year. —Longing for a journey, after ten years of monotonous 
happiness and prosperity. — An interrupted trip. — Fresh dreams of 
travels. — The elections of maglAtrates. — Intrigues of the candidates. — 
Tchitchikoff for a moment fancies that he has been appointed marshal of 
the nobility for his district. — He is retsJned as the second nominee on the 
list, for the following triennial election. — Honored old age of Tchitchi- 
koff.— His habits, his principles, his sentiments, his opinions on the 
burning question of the abolilion of serfdom. — " Ft «i omnea рго» ego 
contra^** is his motto. —It is possible tliat Tchitchikoff is not dead. — In 
any case, Tchitchikoff is immortal. 

It was more than a month since Tchitchikoff had 
enjoyed the seven hours of sleep per day which are in- 
dispensable to the health of man ; and of late, repose 
seemed to have totally abandoned him at night. The 
gentle, easy movements of the sleigh were very favor- 
able to him ; for, stretched out comfortably in his 
calash, he slept fourteen hours at a stretch. He woke 
himself at last, by a powerful snore resembling the de- 
tonation of a blunderbuss, followed by a blowing of the 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 205 

nose of the most sonorous description ; and the commo- 
tion which accompanied this double explosion was a 
double test, to boot, for the admirable springs of the 
ancient calash. A dog broke his chain ; a cock, spurred 
like an eagle, released his prey, and set his numerous 
family the example of a headlong flight ; ivm peasants 
ran out into their yards to see who could be firing thus 
close to their dwellings ; a woman, trembling like a 
leaf, and standing with open mouth, let fall a large jar 
of clotted milk on the threshold of the barn ; but Seli- 
fan and Petrushka, who were not deceived as to the in- 
nocent nature of the phenomenon, rushed straight to 
their master's couch. Tchitchikoff, as soon as he 
could understand things about him, learned that the 
horses had been obliged to halt in order to regain their 
breath and recover, and that his people, after having 
kept their seats on the box for nearly fifteen hours by 
the clock, had taken advantage of this forced halt to 
refresh themselves a little in an atmosphere of men, 
cabbage, milk, and hot bread. 

Our hero entered the public room of the rustic hos- 
telry, and there devoured all by himself an entire third 
of a fine kulebyaka^^ weighing between six and eight 
pounds, which these good people had prepared for a 
wedding in the village: then, the horses, having been 
once more attached to the carriage, he paid his reckon- 
ing, resumed his seat, and set out again on his journey 
after having fully informed himself as to the situation 
of the domain of a certain Dobryakoff, who, five days 
previous to the imprisonment of Tchitchikoff, had re- 
ceived from the latter a deposit of three very heavy 
coffers, and to whom he had promised to consecrate, 

* A fieh-paety, whose ordinary contents were described, in a previous 
chapter, by Pyetakh, thus preventing Tchitchikoff from going to sleep. 



206 TCniTCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

oat of pure friendship, a whole week of his abundant 
leisure. 

He found Dobryakoff's manor-house, and the coffers 
which were awaiting him, but not Dobryakoff , who was 
absent. The uncle of that gentleman, an old man over 
eighty уеЯгз of age, gave Tchitchikoff and his ser- 
vants a perfect dinner, delivered the coffers at the re- 
quest of his guest of & few hours, and only allowed 
him to depart after a formal promise to return shortly 
and visit his nephew. 

Our hero repented cruelly of the precipitation with 
which he had abandoned that hospitable roof, although 
he had not considered it prudent to make any longer 
use of its hospitality on account of the burden which 
he was carrying away. He had hardly resumed his 
journey when the sky clouded over, the wind rose, and 
terrible squalls of snow whirled around him ; every 
trace of the road disappeared ; the tempest was all the 
more alarming since it was united with a tolerably 
sharp degree of cold. 

The travellers, who had lost their way completely, 
wandered at random, advancing with infinite difficulty, 
and not without great danger, until after midnight, 
when at length the profound despair which had begun to 
master them was succeeded by a feeble ray of hope ; 
the hurricane diminished in violence, the darkness be- 
came less impenetrable ; they fancied that they saw a 
clearmg, surrounded by thick underwood, stretching 
before them ; and fortunately the wind was behind 
them. They tacked in the valleys formed by the thou- 
sands of mountains of snow which were alternately 
raised and devoured by the tempest. During an inter- 
val of forced halt made by the horses, who were over- 
come with fatigue, they heard the barking of dogs; 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCIIITCHIKOFF, 207 

this auspicious sound restored a little courage, even to 
the hoi-ses : and five minutes later they could make out 
lights in the distance. 

It was the hunting-box of a wealthy lord, who was 
staying there with a considerable number of friends 
and neighbors of the best class. There his whole pack 
of hounds was assembled, and all his huntsmen, — a 
truly royal establishment : the company was gathered 
in the principal apartment, at the conclusion of a 
copious and splendid supper which had been wound up 
by lavish libations. It was at that moment that Pavel 
Ivanovitch was announced to Prince Kutinin as a trav- 
eller who had lost his way, and who requested the hos- 
pitality of his serene highness for the night. The 
prince, who was busy with having several card- tables 
prepared in haste, ordered that the stranger should, 
first of all, be supplied with a good 'supper and a fire, 
and that he should afterwards be presented to him, 
unless he should prefer to go to bed. 

At the expiration of an hour Tchitchikoff was in the 
salon, seated beside the prince, who had just won from 
a young gentleman, as the result of a game of cards, 
his money, the two estates which he owned, his stud, 
and even his equipage, his arms, and his dogs. 

The prince was desirous of learning who was the 
guest whom the storm had sent to him. TchitcBikoff 
posed as a man who, wearied of the benumbing influ- 
ence of towns, was in search of an estate and a wife, 
as he wished henceforth to live a family life, and to in- 
dulge his taste for agriculture during the remainder pf 
his days. The prince informed him of a magnificent 
property at a distance of thirty or forty kilometres, 
belonging to a young lady who was extremely well 
posted in the details of her domain, and who would 



208 TCniTCBIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS, OR, DEAD SOULS. 

probably be charmed to make his acquaintance, and, 
better still, to bestow herself and all her possessions 
on him. Then he invited Tchitchikoff to join a table 
of faro, if he was inclined to tempt fortune. But our 
hero had at the moment to give some ordei's to his ser- 
vants. He had himself shown him to the small cham- 
ber which had been assigned to him ; and an apology 
was made to him, because, in order to reach it, he was 
forced to pass thmugh the kitchen. On entering this 
apartment, followed by Petrushka, he beheld the three 
coffers ranged against the wall ; and he gazed at them 
intently with a contraction of the brows, for it was a 
very heavy burden to bear about with him in all his 
peregrinations. The idea occurred to him to ask 
Petrushka if he knew who the man was with a pier- 
cing glance, who was sitting on a stool by the kitchen- 
fire. 

"He is a Jew," answered Petrushka, "who is said 
to be worth millions, and whom chance always leads 
to that locality where fortunes are flying." 

" Beg him to come here, and leave me alone with 
him ; but try to borrow a scale and some weights, and 
remain in the kitchen near this door." 

The Jew was brought in, the scale was called for. 
At the expiration of half an hour the three embarrassing 
coffers had disappeared from the room, and perhaps 
from the house. ^ Tchitchikoff returned to the salon 
without having opened his cash-box, but with seventy- 
five thousand good rubles in his pocket-book, a portion 
of which he had taken the fancy to risk. He had the 
best of luck ; and the finest piece of all was, undoubt- 
edly, that, having won thirty thousand rubles without 

» According to an interpolation in the French version, these coffers con- 
tained about sixty pieces of gold, sUver, and silver-gilt plate aud jewcle. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCUIKOFF, 209 

any one having paid any heed to it, he had the pleas- 
ure of seeing the whole company, overwiielmed with 
fatigue, break up into groups, and, preceded by lackeys 
armed with torches, retire through all the doors. It 
was five o'clock in the morning. 

Tchitchikoff did not sleep. The weather was per- 
fectly calm now, the moonlight was superb. He 
pushed his bed towards the window, in a manner to 
barricade the door, and opened his cash-box on a large 
ottoman, quite close to him. Then, half reclining on 
his couch, with the white coverlet thrown picturesquely 
round his shoulders, he set to work to count up his 
capital, which amounted to over a million. As he was 
completing this intoxicating operation, he beheld a 
man, who seemed to be observing him, rise up beneath 
his window. lie rushed instantly to his casement, 
armed with a slipper, held as though it were a pistol ; 
and his gesture gave a comical fright to the prowler, in 
whom Tchitchikoff recognized, to his great joy, his 
coachman, Selifan. He called him, and gave him the 
formal order to harness up and be entirely prepared to 
set out at daybreak. 

Tchitchikoff*s double troika could not have been in a 
state to travel ten kilometres dragging the calash, and 
towing the britchka behind ; but, as his run of luck 
was not yet exhausted, there chanced to be fifteen 
stout post-horses put up under a coach-house there, 
which were obliged to start at daybreak to regain a 
posting-station situated nineteen kilometres distant, 
and in thg precise direction of the estate of the wealthy 
spinster. Tchitchikoff* 8 horses were attached, each by 
his reins, behind the carriage : in this way, the trip was 
only a promenade for the poor beasts. After three 
hours of repose at the inn, which was situated on the 



210 TCHITCHTKOFFS JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

boundary-liDe between the two goverDments, they were 
harnessed in earnest, and found themselves in a state 
to reach, at a gentle trot, the manor where, possibly, 
happiness was awaiting Tchitchikoff. 

Our hero thought it necessary, before traversing this 
email space of fifteen versts, to take minute pains with 
his toilet. In vain did they inform him that Appolina 
Mercurievna had had twenty suitors, all of whom she 
had successively ill-used and dismissed ; that she was 
proud, fantastic, choleric, and often cruel; that she 
made her twenty-five hundred souls suffer a worse 
fate than the torments of hell, and that she was 
abetted in this task by a woman, who, like hei*self, had 
remained unmarried, and whom her redoubtable activ- 
ity caused to appear a hundred times more ferocious 
than her noble mistress. He wished to see and to judge 
for himself: he presented himself, was received, paid 
his court, pleased the lady, became enamoured of her 
somewhat vigorous charms, made his offer, was ac- 
cepted, and a day was fixed for the wedding. 

There was great joy among the gentlewoman's 
serfs, who imagined that a man was soon to become 
their master, and that this master was an angel from 
heaven, a saviour, who had been sent to them by 
Providence. О hope ! what gulfs of misery and sor- 
row dost thou now and again eml)ellish with a fleet- 
ing ray ! The relatives who had been invited, arrived 
from all directions. One of them, alas ! was from the 
very town whence Tchitchikoff had come. This man 
privately related to his cousin all that hejinew, or 
thought he knew : it was the very eve of the day ap- 
pointed for the rich nuptials. Appolina having thor- 
oughly comprehended that Tchitchikoff had begged 
mercy from the governor-general for all his crimes, 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 211 

real or imaginary, in the name of his wife and children, 
knew all she cared to of the monster. She awaited 
him, surrounded by all her guests, who, not having 
been forewarned, had prepared only countenances ex- 
pressive of joy ; and at the moment when Tchitchi- 
koff entered the room, whither he was hastening to kiss 
her hand, that same hand suddenly showered down 
upon his rosy cheeks a hail-storm of blows, which made 
them turn promptly from pink to flame color. During 
this execution, she poured forth a torrent of frightful 
language, and ordered her lackeys to conduct this fine 
gentleman, with sound blows from thongs, to his 
calash, which was all harnessed and ready packed for 
the road. 

Our hero, who had seemed to have finally reached 
the goal of his labors, the innocent and laudable object 
of his expeditions, who had seemed on the point of 
marrying, of acquiring fine domains, of enriching his 
vassals, of giving himself up to a country life, in the 
bosom of an amiable family of his own, and of con- 
quering, by dint of sagacity, order, and prudence, the 
resi^ect and esteem of all the woxld, was forced once 
more to pass through the hands of perverse men. The 
first of these was a petty squire, the personal enemy of 
Gen. Betrishtcheff, to whom he was so unfortunate as 
to mention that general. This mad and fantastic gen- 
tleman, who had arrived, through a succession of ex- 
cesses, at the highest pitch of lunacy, dragged our hero 
oflT to his dwelling, and constrained him to take part in 
those excessive orgies which seem to be inevitably fol- 
lowed by the utter ruin and death of the madman. 
This man compelled Tchitchikoff, under penalty of 
death, to drink more spirituous liquors in the space of 
two hours than he had drunk in the whole preceding 



212 TCHITCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

thirty years ; and then he bad him kissed by fifty men, 
and immediately after by fifty women, who obeyed his 
commands. 

After this trial, the most terrible which he had en- 
dured so far, he escaped from the dangerous freaks of 
this tyrant of the steppes: and a few days later, in 
consequence of the loss of one of his horses, he fell 
in with a horse- jockey, who made him take a drive in a 
peasant's cart behind some fiery steeds; and it is 
almost incredible that he should not have lost his life 
in this new trial. Later on, a very great seigneur, an 
Anglo-maniac prince, who was perfectly infatuated 
with his stud and with sport, made him play a ridicu- 
lous part one day, by forcing him to adopt a lioi-sey 
mania, which was quite out of consonance with his 
personal appearance. Nevertheless, on the advice of 
this gentleman, he betook himself to a neighboring 
locality to inspect an estate which was for sale. 

In this house, a brother, who was in the diplomatic 
service, had just arrived from Petersbui^, for the pur- 
pose of making an amicable division with his sister, of 
the inheritance of a deceased uncle. This rustic, a 
young girl of nineteen, like a genuine, pure-blooded 
inhabitant of the steppes, was still more terrible and 
ferocious than the Appolina of whom we have spoken. 
Our hero fled from this dwelling, where violent scenes 
were of constant occurrence between this Amazon, wlio 
always had her whip in her hand, and her brother, 
who was driven to extremities, and was on the point of 
losing patience, which might result in some unfortunate 
occurrence, of which Tchitchikoff did not care to be a 
witness. With regard to the dispute, he had recognized 
the fact, that both the diplomat and his sister had set 
their minds on the same thing : the former was re- 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 213 

solved, by ruse or knavery, to get possession of the 
largest part ; she, on her side, was no less determined 
to obtain full two-thirds of the inheritance, but by 
means of strife, ill-usage, scandal, and transports of 
rage. 

At length, after having sold one hundred dead souls, 
at a wretched price, to a man named Bosnyakoff, and 
to some of the petty officials of a town of the tenth 
rank, he was led twenty days later, by urgent business, 
to the city of Krasnoi, situated in the district of the 
same name, and in the government of Bubni. There 
be installs himself in the inn, orders his dinner, and, 
while waiting to have it served in his own room, he be- 
gins the perusal of '' The Moscow Gazette " which the 
waiter has just brought him. There he read his full 
name and description, and the order which had been 
sent to all towns to arrest him, and to deliver him up to 
justice, for having bought, mortgaged, and sold a con- 
siderable number of dead souls, and for having com- 
mitted in various governments divers deeds prohibited 
by the laws. Ten minutes later, and before Selifan 
had had time to harness and to come for the luggage, 
the police api)eared, headed by the gorodnitchiy^ or 
mayor of the town, a man about fifty yeai-s of age, who 
was very expert in all sorts of matters of dispute with- 
out having been instructed by any university. This 
magistrate surveyed Tchitchikoff, his fine linen, and 
his fine appearance of prosperity ; he reflected on the 
latter's title of councillor of state, and took an interest 
in him ; then he cast a significant glance at his subor- 
dinates, who loved him. The latter retired into the 
corridor, and discreetly closed the door. 

'' Listen, Pavel Ivanovitch," said the municipal offi- 
cer. " You have been arrested through the diligence 



214 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

of an employee named Bosnyakoff, who is a very mali- 
cious fellow and wants money ; I can send some one 
to him, who for five hundred rubles will make a virtual 
contract with him to withdraw his complaint ; but he 
has accused you of having trafficked in dead souls of 
both sexes, and of having mortgaged a large number in 
institutions of credit." 

"In any case, I have done violence to no one in 
eitlier buying, selling, or mortgaging." 

'* Very good: now, if you have money, say so, 
and I am on your side. For how much have you mort- 
gaged the dead souls to the crown? " 

** For eighty thousand rubles." 

" You must pay that promptly, and deposit that sum 
by to-morrow : you understand me? " 

'' I will do so. But I have still a thousand souls, 
from whom I shall derive no profit, since I am under 
arrest." . . . 

" Never mind : I will find a way for you to mort- 
gage them very profitably. ' ' 

'* Pray do me that favor." 

[Лвгс/е.] "Tell me that you have five thousand 
rubles in silver in all, and not another thing in the 
world. [-4Zoud.] State, sir, of what sum you are 
possessed." 

[J.Zowd.] " I possess five thousand rubles in silver, 
which constitutes my entire property." 

[_Aloud.'] " Hand me those five thousand rubles, 
sir." 

\^Aloud.2 " Here they are." 

[_The mayor, after having opened the door. 2 " That 
is well, sir: be not alarmed at a wretched intrigue. 
[Hie counts the Jive thousand rubles, and divides it into 
two unequal parts,'] Five thousand. Good! I will 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 215 

take these four hundred and fifty- five rubles, which 
will suffice to pay your personal expenses and the cur- 
rent cost of the affair ; the police will render you an 
account of the money at any time when you may re- 
quest it : the forty-five which you see in this pocket- 
book, I shall place in your valise ; they will constitute 
the sum which was found when an inventory was taken. 
You understand me, I hope ? His excellency, the mili- 
tary governor, orders that you shall be kept under 
guard until he has been more fully informed by the 
police ; and as the police-quarters are in my house, 3'ou 
will live at my house, if you please, with me, and just 
as I do." 

This mayor had hardly any fortune, but he had kept 
on good terms with all classes of society. When a 
man impressed him as being rather good than evil, and 
when he could render him a service," he entered into the 
business with a great deal of zeal and good will : he 
had, above all things, a passion for a comme ilfaut air. 
On the present occasion he had the happiness, for less 
than one hundred and fifty rubles, of arranging all the 
affairs of his prisoner quite to his mind, of causing 
him, in addition, to derive a very good profit from the 
thousand souls which were left on his hands, and of 
saving a fine, ingenious man from the loss of his posi- 
tion, all with the same stroke. Then he took pleasure 
in having Tchitchikoff marry his daughter Marya, who 
was young, docile, fresh, and ignorant, it is true, and 
utterly insignificant, but very good and very affection- 
ate, nevertheless, the best sort of a wife that could be 
desired for our hero, and whom we could wish for the 
majority of our friends and acquaintances. 

A good third of the gentiy of the government took 
part in the wedding, which lasted three days without a 



216 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

break ; and the newly married couple retired to a very 
fine and rich estate which Tchitchikoff had purchased, 
at a distance of forty-eight kilometres from the city, 
and where, in the space of ten years of satisfactions of 
ail sorts, of repose and true happiness, he saw his first 
nine children born and brought up in succession. Our 
hero occupied his leisure with agriculture, with garden- 
ing, and even with arboriculture ; he regulated the ex- 
penses in perfect accordance with his revenues ; and, in 
order not to lose a certain talent of the pen which he 
possessed, he thought proper to gather together his 
memoii-s, and to commit them to paper in the form of 
notes, whence, from all appearances, and thanks to 
our author, have issued nearly the whole, or if it is 
preferred, nine-tenths, of our epic lay. 

In the eleventh year of this period of happiness 
without a cloud, such as it is given to but very few 
honest men to taste, Pavel Ivanovitch felt troubled: 
he felt weary of so much repose, of so much health, 
of so much luck, of the monotony, of the uniformity, 
of the calm of this felicity. His notes were aban- 
doned, he received the caresses of his young family in 
an absent-minded way, he no longer went outside the 
grounds of the manor. As he wandered about his 
yard, he reminded Selifan and Petrushka of the epoch 
of tlieir former peregrinations ; he endeavored to 
awaken in these burly men the desire for some excur- 
sion in the fashion of olden days ; but they had be- 
come embedded in a sedentary life as they grew old ; 
the wretched men did not understand his meaning. 
He gazed upon them with scorn, and was enraged with 
himself for having addressed the brutes except in the 
way of giving his orders. 

When spring arrived, he signified to these ancient 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCniKOFF, 217 

servitors, without admitting a single word of objection, 
that on the morrow, the 5th of May, at daybreak, the 
calash was to stand ready harnessed at the door, and 
that they were to hold tliemselves prepared for an 
absence of several months. He proposed to himself 
to go and view the household of Tentyotnikoff and the 
fair Ulinka, whose happiness he regarded as his own 
work. He should thus learn whether Gen. Betrishtcheff 
was still of this world. He flattered himself that in 
any case he should be welcome, at least among a por- 
tion of his extensive circle of relations ; and circum- 
stances alone had prevented his visiting that honorable 
family, as it was his duty to do, having promised it. 

They set out ; but at the fourteenth verst, and five 
versts distant from any wheelwright or blacksmith, two 
spokes and the rim of one of the wheels of the ancient 
calash broke. Tchitchikoff passed the night in a mis- 
erable village inn. On the following day, his constant 
presence in the artisan's shop having produced no re- 
sult except that of retarding the work, through afford- 
ing that rustic an opportunity to chatter, he was forced 
to make up his mind to pass a second night in the so- 
called inn, which was a hut. And when at length, on 
the second day, the wheels were all in good condition, 
the master felt ill. Selifan and Petrushka exchanged 
a glance ; and, without having received any ordera or 
instructions, the animals took the road for home of 
their own free will. Marya learned all, because she 
carefully refrained from interrogating her husband on 
his prompt return, and from laughing at his lamentable 
tale, — a piece of discretion which caused Tchitchikoff, 
after he had related what had taken place, to himself 
cast ridicule on his project and on his discomfiture. 

He then subscribed to seven Russian papers and 



218 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

journals, and to three periodical foreign publications, 

— two French and one German, — although he did 
not know a hundred words of French, and not six of 
German. 

Reading did not suit his taste for long. He took 
pleasure in caressing his children, but never thought of 
teaching or reproving them. He thought that the edu- 
cation of children was woman's work ; and, with this 
view, he had provided his wife with an old Swiss gov- 
erness, to whom he rarely spoke, not knowing very well 
what to say to her. 

Tchitchikoff reverted, in spite of himself, to the idea 
of a journey, of some excursion or other, but without 
any definite plan. It was in this state of mind that 
he passed the end of the autumn and the whole of the 
winter. But the triennial election of magistrates was 
soon to take place in the chief town of the government, 

— a town which was ordinarily quite deserted, quite 
sleepy, and which he had only visited at the epoch of 
his marriage, and on the occasion of the purchase of 
his property. He had spent only six da^^s there, and 
those incessantly in the courts. Many gentlemen came 
to sound his intentions, and to seek his vote : many of 
the out-going magistrates, who wished to retain their 
positions, or even to obtain more important ones, has- 
tened to pay court to him. Time sped on. It was a 
magnificent opportunity for escaping, for three weeks 
at all events, from the uniformity and the monotony of 
a prolonged sojourn in the country. 

He took the greatest delight in the preparations for 
bis trip. He carefully inspected for himself the condi- 
tion of his handsomest vehicle, recommended Selifan 
and Petrushka not to get drunk during his absence, for 
he took with him his favorite valet and his" wife's 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCniKOFF. 219 

coachman, a man of very fine appearance, who spoke 
little, and drank a great deal, but who had never been 
seen drunk. 

Now, here is the account of these elections, as pre- 
pared in 1857 by a genuine historian, Mr. Vastchenko 
Zakhartchenko, probably from the notes which, accord- 
ing to his own avowal, Tchitchikoff was so obliging as 
to communicate to his last biographer. 

Tchitchikoff, like all the nobility, went to the capital 
of the province. He descended at a hotel, sent in haste 
for a tailor, and ordered a noble's uniform : then he 
dined, and went to take a walk in the public garden. 
On returning to his hostelry in the evening, he passed 
PodgruzdyoflTs lodgings, which were brilliantly lighted. 
The latter had nearly half of his district in his rooms. 
The servants were handing round tea. The whole apart- 
ment was pervaded with an odor of lemon, rum, cigar- 
ettes, and Turkish tobacco smoked in long-stemmed 
pipes.^ But that which predominated over every tiling 
else was the discussion of the elections which were 
about to take place. Nearly all of Podgruzdyoff's 
guests were in a joyous frame of mind. In a large, 
magisterial chair, placed in front of the work-table in 
his study, sat Podgruzdyoff,^ a man of a certain age, 
endowed with an agreeable physiognomy. Judge Zazh- 
murin* sat as near him as possible on a very light, 
fanciful chair. 

" I should be glad to hear from your own mouth an 
answer to this question : Do you comply with the desire 
of the entire nobility, who beg that you will remain our 

1 There was another delicacy, du Maryland, What that may eignify, the 
reader can decide for Iiimeelf. 

* Btepan StcpanoTitch Podgruzdyoff, marshal of the nobility of the dis- 
trict in which Tchitchikoff' s eetate was situated. 

> Prokop Petrovitch Zazbmurin, elective police judge. 



220 TCniTCniK0FF*8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

marshal for aDother three years ? It is very flattering 
to serve under you ; and infirm as I am, I might, in 
that case, consider the subject of continuing my func- 
tions as judge for another term of three years, and 
even for two terms. But if they want me, it must be 
with you." 

** No, Prokop Petrovitch. I have told you, and I 
hold to it, that I have done my duty, and discharged 
my tribute. If the nobility re-elect me, all that I can 
do will be to thank them very cordially ; but I shall 
refuse." 

"In that case, I shall adhere to my determination. 
Who will be a worthy representative of our district 
after you ? Farewell, Stepan Stepanovitch ! I regret 
that I have not been able to alter your decision. It is 
vei-y hard of you to thus reject our supplications." 

Judge Zazhmurin pressed the marshal's hand, and 
gained the street by descending the inner staircase. 

No sooner had he taken his departure, than Burdya- 
kin^ entered the study. 

" Prokop Petrovitch has just gone. He surely must 
have told you that he has had more than enough of the 
service," said this other member of the Russian elec- 
tive magistracy to Podgruzdyoff. 

" That is really what he did say. What do you 
think of it, hey?" 

*' I think that he is lying." 
; '4Io!" 

'* That is putting it mildly, for he has his eye on the 
marshal's office. He marshal ! Imagine yourself with 
that pig's snout for marshal ! " 

" He is ambitious, is he not? " 

1 Burdyakin, iepramikf or captain-ispramikt the cMef police Judge of 
л dletrict. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 221 

" A man may have a weakness ; but Zazhmurin, with 
that phiz, to think of representing the nobility ! And 
even as judge, what is he ? To speak the plain truth, 
the nobility has cheated itself; for, after all, what is 
there more noble and sacred than to decide the fate of 
others ? . . . This office has been proposed to me, but 
I really dare not accept it. ... I have so much affec- 
tion for our aristocracy, that I feel sure that every gen- 
tleman would always be in the right in my eyes, and 
the common people would always be in the wrong. 
With such a method, it would not be long before I 
should be involved in a criminal suit. But what is to 
be done, if I am of opinion that one should always 
be affected by the petition of a gentleman? Yes: I 
shall do every thing for the nobility.*' . . . 

" You shcdl do. ... So you have reached a 
decision?" 

'* Eh ! yes. I offer myself as a candidate, for the 
sake of overthrowing that Zazhmurin : I know, that, if 
he sees but few chances of being elected marshal, he 
will cling to his place of judge. He is a very crafty 
fellow.'' 

" You are very intimate, yet just see how you speak 
of him ! " 

"Intimate, — intimate as one can be with him. He 
would like to have me a grain of salt, and hold out a 
spoonful of cool water to me : I shall not wait for my 
bath." 

''Ah. 

The marshal and the edile passed into the salon, 
where the numerous colloquies had slipped from the 
elections to quite different and rather risky subjects. 
As for the elections, each one kept his thoughts to 
himself. • Equipages could be seen driving up outside, 



222 TCniTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

the majority of which entered the court-yard. The 
sound of the laughter, and the words of the new 
arrivals, were audible, first at the foot of the stairs, 
and then in the ante-chamber. Hamyazoff, the Morka- 
tinoffs, Shtchavarin, Sosikoflf, and Kornikin entered, 
saluted the ' assembly, and went to shake hands with 
Podgruzdyoff, who was sitting quietly on a sofa, with 
a cigar in his mouth. Hamyazoff and the Morkati- 
noffs had just come from a dinner at the house of the 
civil governor. 

"If I had known," said Hamyazoff, puffing up his 
cheeks, "I should not have brought with me either 
wines, cook, or cooking utensils. This is an extremely 
hospitable town! I have only been here three days, 
and I have taken part in seven dinners : I am horribly 
afraid of acquiring a big belly. Pardon and mercy, 
Stepan Stepanovitch ! to-morrow I dine in two houses, 
and I am invited to breakfast in five others. I really 
do not know when I can come to you. . . . They will 
make me burst." 

" Here is a gentleman who has come to the elections 
in order to over-eat himself, and to drink from morning 
till night, and who can talk of nothing except his grand 
digestive capacity,*' said a small, thin, saffron- colored 
gentleman : "all that one hears about him is, what he 
has eaten here, and what he is going to eat there ; what 
he has drunk here, that he has been intoxicated there ; 
that he is invited to five houses farther on ; he is 
now on his way to sup with this importunate count; 
to-morrow morning at ten o'clock he is going to favor 
that monster of a prince with his company to break- 
fast. Where does this gentleman find time to lodge 
all that brag in his body? "... 

The plenipotentiary of an absent electofs a man 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCniTCITIKOFF. 223 

whose countenance recalled that of a hare, noisily re- 
pressed an inclination to laugh, and, in his fear of 
offending Hamyazoff or any one else, he instantly as- 
sumed the most serious possible mien ; he passed a very 
much damaged silk handkerchief over his face ; exe- 
cuted two or three dexterous skips, in order to gain a 
corner of the room ; there he made two or three pirou- 
ettes on. his heels, still continuing to wipe his face, and 
around his ears ; and from there he betook himself to a 
large table covered with a green cloth, lx)rdered with 
gold fringe ; he picked up the Regulations governing 
Elections^ and set about perusing it for the hundredth 
time, in a low voice, while lending an ear to a noisy 
conversation which was going on in the next room. 
Podgruzdyoff went out : he was going to the governor's 
for a few minutes. A portion of his company remained, 
thinking it seemly to await the return of their marshal. 
Hamyazoff accompanied Podgruzdyoff to the door of 
his carriage, then he returned to the salon : at first he 
surveyed all the faces present, and whispered a few 
words in the ear of his neighbors, while one of the 
electors said, — 

" If Stepan Stepanovitch would consent, we should 
be very glad to have him remain in charge.*' 

*' Well, gentlemen, you are not hard to suit, if you 
will put up with such a marshal ! " exclaimed Hamya- 
zoff. 

'* What do you mean by that? Podgruzdyoff is an 
active man : see how he fills the oflSce of guardian, see 
how he protects the orphan, how he defends the 
widow ! " 

''Eh! That's his first duty; any one of us would 
do the same : but you pay no heed to another and no 
less imlюrtant duty, — what sort of a cook has he? It's 



224 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOUnsrYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

shameful ! He pretends that that man of his has 
served his apprenticeship at the English club in Mos- 
cow : I don't believe a word of it, for my part. He's 
but a sorry cook. One eats and eats of his cooking, 
and is never satisfied : it only fatigues one's jaws. 
You all know what to think of his stuffed dishes, 
which take hold of the teeth and the palate, and which 
glue the walls of my oesophagus together in a way 
which renders me completely mute during the whole of 
the repast." 

*'And, God be thanked! that suits your neighbors 
marvellously well," said the little gentleman with the 
saffron complexion, who won great success and laughter 
by this witticism. 

"Witticisms are somewhat misplaced to-day: we 
have come hither to elect our magistrates. Listen ! I 
declare to you, that Melekitchentzoff, who has just 
returned from abroad, desires to be elected marshal ; 
that's the man whom we ought to elect ; he has a cook, 
a genuine French cook, gentlemen. He will never 
regale you with hotel-cooking. As far as the rest is 
concerned, why, I am ready to vote in favor of Pod- 
gruzdyoff, but on condition that he shall change his 
cook, and that he shall engage a real cordon bleu.** 

*' Send away his cook, indeed, for the sake of being 
elected marshal ! Come, now ! " 

'* What? He won't change his cook when the nobil- 
ity desire it ! If I were marshal, I would do every 
thing in the world for the sake of pleasing the nobility. 
And stay ! as a proof of my devotion to the nobility, I 
declare to you, that I will make the sacrifice to him of 
my own cook, and that I will give him to the marshal 
for the whole period of his office without indemnity. 
You will agree, I hope, that that is a sacrifice. My 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCIIIKOFF: 225 

cook is the soul of my house : in order not to perish 
of hunger, 1 shall have to desert wife, children, and 
home, and come to live with Podgruzdyoff. Never 
mind. I am prepared to do this, simply for the happi- 
ness of proving to all of you, how devoted I am to 
you." 

At the conclusion of this tirade, he remained with 
arms outstretched, and his body bent forwards, await- 
ing a response, which did not come. 

"We will beg Stepan Stepanovitch to remain with 
us yet another three years.'* 

" Even without either kitchen or cook? " 

"To the Devil with the cook! I have my dinner 
ready in my own house." 

"Well, gentlemen," said Hamyazoff, "there is 
nothing to be done but to elect Melekitchentzoff." 

"No!" 

"Why? Think of what Podgruzdyoff makes us 
eat" . . . 

" We will make things right for Podgruzdзюff when 
the balloting begins!" cried three or four persons- at 
once. "He is worthy of his position, and does honor 
to our district. " 

" Who? Podgruzdyoff? " said Murzyakin, entenng. 
" £Lh ! a marshal is always good and worthy. Listen : 
I will make no secret of the fact that they desire to 
elect me judge. Yes, me. You understand, — judge. 
That is what can be denominated an important and 
sacred office. I fear lest I might have to condemn a 
noble. I should acKjuit him : on my word of honor, I 
should acquit him. That would be equivalent to pla- 
cing a cord about my own neck. But every nobleman 
will be acquitted. In the name of Heaven, do not 
vote for either me or Zazhmurin. And if Zazhmurin 



226 • TCHITCUIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

cannot reconcile himself to the idea of not being voted 
for, very good : drop your ballots on the left, on the 
left, I beseech you.'* 

" You defend the cause of your friend and compan- 
ion in the service very well.*' 

'4t is for his good ; and then, his wife has spoken to 
me. It is said that his present office has totally de- 
ranged his nerves ; and for his wife, as you can imagine 
... As for myself, in the first place, I will say to you 
sincerely, that, if it pleases the nobility to elect me 
judge, well and good : I dare not refuse. I shall sub- 
mit. Di8lюse of me, in short." * 

Thereupon this colleague of Zazhmurin in his edile- 
ship and in his candidacy saluted, and withdrew with a 
brisk step. 

There had also been a re-union at Zazhmurin's, but 
of persons of a lower quality. Some drank bi-andy, 
and nibbled bread and butter and sandwiches. Baran- 
tzoff, the auditor, was playing a game of preference, 
with a stake of a quarter of a kopek, with three men 
who held powers of attorney, using a very ancient pack 
of cards. Zazhmurin, Burdyakin, and he had hired 
this lodging in company. In an extremely ruinous car- 
riage-house which stood in the yard of this house, 
Prince Smuirsky, an ex-cornet of hussars, was lodged ; 
Barantzoff having procured him a commission as 
deputy, and brought him thither for nothing. The 
prince was continually entering the rooms, in order to 
get an opportunity to refresh himself. He was con- 
tinually quarrelling with Barantzoff, his temporary 
patron ; and after every quarrel, he retreated to his 
carriage-shed ; there he remained, grumbling and fum- 
ing, until dinner or supper time, an hour when his heart 
experienced the necessity of effecting a reconciliation 
with the auditor. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHJTCHIKOFF, 227 

*'Tikhon Semyonovitch,*' said the prince enthusias- 
tically to the assessor, " it is for your sake that I came 
to town.'* . . . And as he said this, he pulled his enor- 
mous gray mustache. 

"And it is I who had the glory of bringing the 
prince with me," retorted Barantzoff, dealing the cards 
with a serious air. 

"As a friend, you will have my vote. I have come 
for your sake : for your sake I will drop my ballot on 
the right, only say, say what you wish to be." 

" Pass," said the assessor to his partners, and quitted 
the room. 

" The dear friend may count on black balls ; to the 
left, to the left," said the prince. "I will collect a 
handful, and stuff them in for my neighbors and my- 
self. He can reckon on that." 

Barantzoff returned. 

"I wish it to be thoroughly understood," said the 
prince, trying at the same time not to lose a drop of 
the glass of punch which he was holding in both hands, 
'* that Barantzoff and I are a genuine pair of friends." 

He drank, smacked with his tongue, stamped his 
foot, and went off to set his glass on the window-sill ; 
then he seated himself on a wretched chair, which he 
tormented in a most unworthy manner, as well as the 
inner walls of his nose ; . . . and he whistled an air 
which he seemed to be intentionally rendering unintelli- 
gible. 

"He must be spared a little until the voting is 
over," said Zazhmurin ; "for he can talk rather disa- 
greeably." 

" Yes : he can be prevented from doing any thing pf 
the sort, сапЧ he? A man of that kind "... 

" Where the deuce did he get that coat? It does not 



228 TCU/TCti/KOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

belong to him. Look at the two big wrinkles which 
eeparate the armpits." 

^^ Barantzoff has lent him the coat for the elections." 

*' Speak low. Some one said a word to him yester- 
day about his coat. * It's my coat ! ' he cried. ' No 
one will wear it after me. I never take it off. When 
I went to bed last night, I would not permit my servants 
to take it off. I had a fancy for sleeping in a coat. 
Has any one any remarks to make on that? ' That is 
what he said to them, with great violence." 

"What are you muttering there among youraelves? 
It strikes me that you are reviling me. Order me 
some punch and tobacco at my pleasure, or beware of 
the blacks . . . and by files to the right, forward, 
march! . . . left!" 

"Stop that, prince: these pleasantries are bitter 
folly." 

"Bitter and stupid are they? In the company of 
clever people, my pleasantry is light and sweet. It 
varies according to my surroundings, you see. You 
will all be served with black balls on the left ; because, 
being a prince, I detest demagogues. To-morrow 
comes the oath. There's no drawing back. I must 
do as my conscience dictates. You want office, you 
set youi-self up as candidate for a magistracy, and you 
belong to a party : you put yourself at the head of a 
coterie, . . . And why do you desire a position? . . . 
In order to coin money out of it. Ah ! we know ! I'll 
settle your business, that I will ! " 

" What an odd idea in you to irritate him, gentle- 
men," remaiked some one from one corner of the 
room. 

" Ah ! very true. So you are there, my little hare. 
Let us see what you want. You have just been mar- 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 229 

ried, hey? And to whom, imbecile? . . . You want 
to be auditor.'* (The prince went and whispered in the 
ear of his little hare.) ''You will have it so: then 
speak, speak ! You know that I am pretty well off for 
relations, tliat I am an aristocrat, an arch-aristocrat, all 
naked though I am ; 1 have absolutely free entrance to 
the governor and the marshal of the government ; 1 
have means of procuring protectors. Let us suppose 
that Barantzoff, or some one else, should make me a 
present of a uniform of the nobility, with the em- 
broidery of pure gold, such as befits my rank. Where 
is the general who would have a grander air than I? 
Barantzoff has a high opinion of me, and we lodge 
here together. But that is not always the ease. I have 
an apartment of my own all to myself. Faith, I pay 
seven rubles for the sake of occupying it during the 
elections. Barantzoff feeds me. Parbleu ! it must be 
so. Of what use would the cattle be ? Neither on the 
journey nor here have I fasted for a single hour. ' ' [/л 
a very low voice.'] " He wants to be auditor or coun- 
cillor. Only think of it!" 

" Another candidate ! But it is eighteen years since 
be has been out of office." 

*' Let him hold his pocket well open : I will provide 
him with plenty of black balls. Only do not you say 
any thing about it • . . you understand . . . ts. ts. 
. . • Stay, I must embrace you. Do you know, your 
wife is very pretty? The last time I saw her, I did not 
say to her what I had intended. Ugh, ugh ! . . . I 
don't know what that animal Barantzoff gives us to 
eat, but my stomach is fairly turned." 

Thereupon the prince quitted the room, and crossed 
the yard to reach his coach-house. It really was time, 
out of regaixi to the i}eace of mind of the other gentle- 



230 TCniTCHlKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

men, who, however, withdrew less than a quarter of an 
hour later. 

Zazhmurin retired, but left a candle burning near 
the bed which was prepared for Burdyakin, his friend 
and colleague, with whom yoa are already acquainted, 
and who, to the great astonishment of Prokop Petro- 
vitch, had not yet returned. 

Two hours after midnight, there came a violent 
knocking on the gate of the court-jard. Zazhmurin 
awoke at the veiy first knock, and sat up in bed. The 
three servants whom he had lirought with him were 
sleeping, fully dressed, on the floor of the ante-room. 
Zazhmurin roused them, and despatched them to the 
gate, where they opened the wicket; and a moment 
later the good Burdyakin entered like a bomb, pale, 
disordered, his hair unkempt, and his cloak for his 
only garment. 

"Where have you l>een?** asked Zazhmurin, with 
both interest and anxiety. 

" Oh, don't speak of it! I have just come from a 
place where they will never catch me again. It is the 
first time in my life that I have been there, and it will 
be the last. Hey, there, some cold water ! I cannot 
recover from my fright." 

" Tell me what is the matter with you.*' 

" Don't ask me." 

" But your boots, your clothes, your cap? " 

" Heaven be praised ! I am safe and sound myself : 
deuce take my effects ! Hey, there, boy ! Some ice, 
some ice, quick, and rub my back, the whole of my 
back!" 

" Well, then, I shall get up, and go make my decla- 
ration to the police." 

" No, do nothing ! In the name of Heaven, do not 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 231 

stir! Auother investigation, — that would be pretty! 
1 have been to a dancing-school: if my wife knew 
that I had set foot in such an establishment, she would 
never let me come to the elections. Then farewell to 
all my fine hopes ! " 

'* What the deuce were you doing in a dancing- 
school?" 

'' Eh ! there was occasion." 

"What occasion? Come, tell me all," said the 
future judge anxiously, putting on his dressing-gown 
and his velvet cap. And he seated himself by the bed- 
side of his poor colleague, whom he surveyed with 
interest as he pressed his hand ; for, after all, this ex- 
cellent friend was no longer to be feared as an oppo- 
nent. 

'Ч was at the marshal's house, where they were 
urging me to present myself as a candidate for one of 
the judgeships : I did not wish to do so. I repulsed 
their offers ; they continued to promise me their votes ; 
I felt that 1 was on the point of yielding. ' Bah ! ' I 
said to myself, ' I shall go to Khramikin's, and talk 
about something else.' I arrive. I find him : he says 
to me, ' Bravo ! let's go to the dancing-school.' " 

" So you went?" 

" So we went. As he dis^wses of two votes, there 
is not much that one can refuse him in election- time. 
The deuce knows to what school he took me ! There 
was a great illumination and music. It reminded me 
of my wedding ; but my heart began beating in a very 
different manner, even in the ante-room. I observed 
two black eyes. . . . Oh, oh, oh ! ahi, ahi, ahi ! 
softly! lah, lah!" 

The servants rubbed away with ice at the very ill- 
treated back of the candidate for a judgeship. . . • 



232 TCHITCIIIKOFF'S JOVRNETS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

After the ice, he had hot napkins applied : they drew 
on him a clean white shirt, and he fell asleep. Zazh- 
murin> having accurately divined from what school his 
colleague had come, allowed him to fall into a profound 
slumber, which, beneOcial as it was, caused him to lose 
his candidacy ; for he was obliged to keep his room for 
several days. 

Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff, unlike the others, did 
not become agitated or discomposed : he neither impor- 
tuned nor called upon any one, and went to bed, like a 
genuine rustic, long before eleven o'clock. On the 
following morning, the 15th of Stjptember, he pulled 
on his trousers, washed himself in plenty of water, 
and rubbed down his face, his neck, his chest, and his 
arms. He donned his Tartar dressing-gown ; and to 
his great stupefaction, he lieheld through the door, 
which his valet had left half open, the solid visage of 
the tailor, who was carefully carrying under his arm a 
light package enveloped in a large silk handkerchief. 

'* It is done? '* inquired Tchitchikoff. 

"Completely done," responded the tailor, raising 
his bundle, and extracting the pins. 

" According to that, it will become me? " 

*' It ought to," replied the artist. 

Tchitchikoff dressed himself from head to foot, and 
finally had his uniform put on ; and placing himself in 
front of a mirror, he executed divers movements of the 
body and arms, after which he remarked that perhaps 
the coat was a trifle tight under the arms. 

The tailor asserted that the fit under the arms left 
nothing to be 'desired. 

^^• Very well," said Tchitchikoff ; *' but look here ! if 
I do like this and this, it confines me under the arms." 

^^• The assembly of the electors is not a dangerous 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHJKOFF. 233 

pond, and you will not probably have to swim there as 
if for your life, in order to gain the shore*: there you 
will sit still, like all the other nobles of your age.*' 

" No doubt, no doubt,'* replied Tehitchikoflf, some- 
what mortified to think that he had put on the aii-s of a 
shipwrecked man in the presence of this person. But 
he could not refrain from trying on his three-cornered 
hat, and from saying, as he inspected it, " Faith, I 
have the air of a general in this uniform : don't you 
think so, my friend? " 

" When dressed thus, you are a real general." 

" Do you think so? And my face? Hey? " 

" Exactly the face which suits a general, and not a 
simple general either." 

''What? A simple general? Are there, then, 
many sorts of generals? " 

" As for generals, there is the American sort, sir." 

" What nonsense I Where did you get the idea that 
we have American generals? " 

" They are called so." 

"Who is called so?" 

" Why, the grandees, the high nobility, the noble 
lords who are the proprietors of great estates." 

"You lie! come, now. I perceive that you are a 
great braggart." 

" I say what I know, that is all." 

" Here is the price of your work. Did you cut and 
make it yourself? " he added, as he gazed at his figure 
in the glass. 

"I did, sir." 

" This money is for yourself? " 

" No ; it is for the master : if you will give me some- 
thing for myself, you will afford me great pleasure." 

"Here, then, take that, and go take a drink of 



234 TCHITCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

tea to my health." And he gave the man a silver 
ruble. 

After the departure of the tailor, he took different 
poses in front of the mirror, saluted forwards, back- 
wards, and obliquely, girded on his sword of state, 
drew on his gloves, and, as the weather was very fine, 
he betook himself on foot to the assembly-house of the 
nobility. 

The bell had been ringing for half an hour already, 
to sound the call to the elections ; the nobles arrived in 
increasing numbers as the moments elapsed ; before the 
door stood gendarmes^ who had been placed at the ser- 
vice of the city police, which was represented by five 
or six very busy agents. 

The house of the nobility's assemblage was full of 
noise, of entrances and exits, of unaccustomed com- 
motion. Acquaintances met and gave themselves up 
to the national intemperance of bugging and kissing, 
which did not exclude shaking hands in the English 
fashion. In the great hall, Tchitchikoff perceived, not 
without surprise, a throng of men who were saluting 
not only their acquaintances, but even strangers whom 
they .now saw for the first time. Their air was quiet 
and res^jectful, not to say obsequious : their hair was 
smooth, and their chins were freshly shaven. These 
gentlemen were the candidates for the magisterial 
oflfices in that government, which ai*e not inferior to 
tliose of presidents of chambers or courts of justice. 

The marshal of the nobility of the government, 
dressed in the uniform of a gentleman of the bed- 
chamber to His Imperial Majesty, made his entrance, 
bowing courteously on all sides : he halted in the midst 
of the crowd, and conversed in a friendly way with the 
nobles of his acquaintance. The marshals of districts 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOPF. 235 

took it npon themselves to present to him the nobles of 
their districts. The representative of all the nobility 
never ceased to bow, and he even gave his hand to 
some as they passed him. 

Tchitchikoff had not counted on so signal an honor, 
so that the discomposure caused by his surprise made 
him press the hand which the marshal extended to him 
without thinking with a good deal of warmth. His 
flattered self-love immediately showed itself in his walk, 
in the manner in which he carried his head, and in the 
air of his entire person; he fully comprehended how 
much he had just gained in the eyes of all his country 
neighbors ; his district stared at him for several min- 
utes, and some discovered that he possessed the physi- 
ognomy of a diplomat. 

"Tell me," said one noble to another, "why the 
marshal shook hands with Tchitchikoff? " 

"It happened through absence of mind: it was 
chance, that is all." 

" Not so, not so : after having given him his hand, 
he raised his thick eyebrows ; and I observed, that in 
looking at Tchitchikoff, as at a person whom one is 
glad to find at his post, he uttered a significant ah . • • 
a . . . a" . . . 

" Bah ! it was accident ! " 

" Accident explains nothing." 

" How am I to know what you are asking about?" I 
am looking above, in the galleries." i 

" You have acquaintances, relatives, who are looking 
at you?" 

"New arrivals surely, new arrivals, those ladies! 
We never have any thing like them here, even at fair- 
time. . . Look, look ! " 

" You ought to blush. A fine object for enthusiasm, 



236 TCHlTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

truly! Are we here for euch follies? And to think 
that you have such a beauty of a wife "... 

*' What has that to do with the matter? A beauty, 
if you like, yes. But the canons do not forbid one 
to admire the unicorn and the adder also : I wish to 
admire at a little closer range "... 

" Well, there he goes ! What an idea ! But I shall 
not endure this, and I shall go up-stairs to bring him 
back here." 

" Aprepyan Maximuitch ! Where are you going? " 

"The governor . . . sh . . . sh . . . sh . . . 
gentlemen, sh ! " 

The nobility suiTOunded the large table like a quad- 
ruple wall, fifty feet in thickness. The governor was 
a fine, handsome man : he saluted the assembly, and, 
without seating himself, he delivered, in his capacity of 
presiding officer, a speech, brief and full of sense, in 
which he announced the opening of the session. He 
begged those present, fii*st of all, to accompany him to 
church, in order to take the oath to preserve impartial- 
ity in the voting, and not to elect to the magistracy any 
men but such as were really worthy to exercise the 
functions. 

The church was situated in the principal street ; this 
central portion of the town presented a very animated 
aspect that day ; uniforms of all branches of the ser- 
vice, the liveries of all the civil employees, were visible, 
and carriages of all epochs, filled with electors, and 
with those eligible to office, on their way to church l)e- 
tween two thick and motley ranks formed by the popu- 
lace, a portion of which decorated all the windows, even 
to the very dormer-windows in the attics. 

The church was rather large for its uses, even on 
unusual occasions ; but the throng of curious gazers 
now made it seem extremely small. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 237 

After the ceremony of the oath, those who had taken 
it dispersed throughout the entire city, some to return 
home, others to hasten about to twenty houses and pay 
visits, and the majority to assure themselves of a place 
at a good table, ready to take it by assault if it did 
not present itself voluntarily. This was a day of fine 
hopes to many. Many who had not breakfasted at all, 
and who had dined very badly, suddenly discovered a 
copious supper, and the assurance of an excellent 
dinner for the succeeding days. 

On the following day, the session was opened by the 
reading of a list, arranged in alphabetical order, of the 
nobles of the entire government, who were, or who had 
been, in the hands of the law : after the proclamation 
of each name, it would be decided on the spot by the 
ballot, if the bearer was, or was not, to be accorded a 
right to take part in the election. 

Tchitchikoff was present at this affecting reading. 
He could no longer keep his seat. His impatience was 
so great, that many times he crept close to the sec- 
retary of the nobility, and looked over the latter's 
shoulder at the list which was being read ; and, taking 
advantage of a momentary interruption, he asked the 
secretary, in a low voice, if he would reach the letter 
T before very long. The secretary replied courteously 
that he was just about to begin the reading of the 
names having T for their initial letter. At this infor- 
mation, Pavel Ivanovitch returned with anxiety to his 
seat, and said to his neighbor that a decayed tooth 
was causing him horrible suffering ; that he had in vain 
hoped that the pain would cease ; that he perceived the 
necessity of having it extracted ; and that, in any case, 
he could not remain amid all these currents of air. He 
went out. On arriving at the inn, he threw himself on 



238 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

bis bed, while waiting for some pickled sturgeon, which 
be had ordered that morning to be ready at four o'clock. 

Half an hour at least had elapsed after Tchitchikoff's 
departure before the letter T was reached. The first 
name called was that of a sub-lieutenant, A. P. Tchu- 
viriu, who had been tried for having taken possession, 
by violence, of citizen Krovopatkin's cow. The court 
bad acquitted Tchuvirin. 

" Let him vote ! " cried a number of voices. 

G. P. Tchernoff, collegiate secretary, had been ac- 
cused of defrauding the brandy monopoly, and of hav- 
ing cruelly beaten the collector. Acquitted on the first 
charge, he had been condemned on the second, to 
damages and interest, as a reparation of honor for the 
benefit of the fnan who had been beaten, and to three 
days' arrest. 

'* Let him vote ! " was the cry, as in the preceding 
case. 

Ivan Borisovitch Tchimazoff, titular councillor, ac- 
cused of having on crown land . . . 

'* Crown-land ! Exclude him ! exclude him ! " cried 
a hundred voices at once, with an accent of wrath. 

Ivan Stepanitch Tzelikoff, collegiate assessor, who 
had been tried in court for having discharged a loaded 
fire-arm in the middle of the public square. 

"Tzelikoff discharged a loaded gun?" said a gen- 
tleman with tightly curled hair, in a vivacious manner. 
"Positively loaded?" 

" There is no doubt but that the gun was loaded." 

" If the gun was not loaded, it was not possibly to 
fire it." 

" Li-i-i-tle lx)-o-o-y-s so-o-o-meti-i-i-mes b-b-bum 
pri-i-i-ming for fun. At all eve-e-ents, thanks for the 
ex-ex-ex-pla-na-n-na- tion. I — I — I di-id not kno-o- w. ' ' 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 239 

[A general laugh.] 

"Why did not the secretary finish his sentence?" 
said a gentleman with leaden eyes and a very closely 
clipped head, with a thoroughly alarmed air. "Did 
Tzelikoff kill any one with his loaded gun?" 

" You are requested to be silent." 

"Pray, who regulates the discussion here? I ask 
whether Tzelikoff killed or wounded any one?" 

The uproar increased every moment. 

"Gentlemen, gentlemen ! Silence, I beseech you," 
said the marshal of the government gently. 

"I know all about it myself. I was present. He 
wounded "... replied with great gravity a large gen- 
tleman, who had a tuft of hair really remarkable in 
point of length and thickness on his right cheek. 

"By this discharge" . . . the secretary made an 
effort to continue. 

"Listen, Piotr Feodorovitch, listen! That shot of 
Tzelikoff's has been explained." 

" What? How? One can hear absolutely nothing. " 

" Well, it is going to begin now, since the whole or- 
chestra is tuning its instruments." 

" Speak louder, secretary, and proceed. Ahi ! ahi ! 
there's somebody treading on my cursed corn again ! 
Who goes there? . . . Ahi! ahi! he's a rude lout! 
He does not even ask pardon." 

"By this shot," resumed the secretary, pitching his 
voice an octave higher, " he inflicted mortal terror on 
a lady who was passing by. This lady is the wife of 
Mr. Shukin, the commissary of police of that quarter. 
In consequence of her fright, this lady, on reaching her 
home "... 

" Ah ! If she died, what matters it whether the shot 
struck her, or not?" 



240 TCHITCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

*"*• Id the name of Heaven, gentlemen, listen, and do 
not interrupt! " 

*' On arriving at her home, she took to her bed, and 
gave birth to two children, which proved to be of the 
male sex." 

[Great laughter.] 

" Very good. But the mother? " 

*' The mother and her children are in the best possi- 
ble health. As a result of the investigation which was 
ordered, Tzelikoff was exonerated from all respon- 
sibility." 

** Let him vote I " was the cry on all sides. 

"It would be too severe to deprive this man of his 
rights as an elector. He has aided science with a sug- 
gestion of a new means of assisting nature." 

" What you say is very just. And, by the way, 
how is your mare? " 

" I have sold her to a horse-dealer. But you have 
not heard of the adventure?" 

" No, I have not. But permit me to " . . . 

"Listen, gentlemen, for Heaven's sake! It is im- 
possible to hear a single word." 

" Larion Kuzmitch, look, look ! who is that man 
yonder, sitting on the lowest bench . . . there, there 
in the corner ? He has a lamp over his head . . . Ah ! 
now you see him . . . What a face! He would be 
worthy the pencil of Gavarni." 

" Be quiet ! The reading is going on ! " . . . 

"Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff, councillor of state, 
accused of forgery in connection with a will." 

" Ah ! for a gentleman that is rather bad. Exclude 
him ! exclude him ! " 

' ' Hey ? W- w- W'hat ? H-h-h-ow ? F-f-f-f-f or-gery 
in precious stones and di-di-di-a-monds ? " . . . 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 241 

" Well hit. . . . You were told for forgery in con- 
nection with a will." 

"Ha, ha! I un-unclerstand it. Various messes . . . 
In the e-e-e-lec-tions ? But what concern is it of the 
tribunals ? * ' 

" Come, now, will you let me have a pinch of snuff? 
They are squeezing me so that I cannot get at my 
snuff-box. One only comes here once in six years, 
and each time it is merely to be put in a vise at every 
step. As for me, I'm going to run away.*' 

" Why doesn't he proceed more rapidly, instead of 
chattering there, that big fellow? He monopolizes 
three seats all to himself, and there's no sitting near 
him. And he has to have his elbows free in order to 
take snuff. Excuse me ! " 

" Will you hold your tongues down there? Let us 
listen.'-' 

" Well, what did you people come here for? Ugh, 
ugh ! Oh, this is too much ! " 

*' Hush-sh-sh-sh ! Silence, I beg of you ! " 

. . . ''Accused of having perpetrated a forgery, in 
connection with a will, and of having purchased from 
different noble proprietor of inhabited estates, peas- 
ant-serfs, dead souls, with the land which they occu- 
pied. After an investigation and trial he was acquitted 
fully as not guilty." 

' ' What ? What ? Dead souls ? ' ' 

*'He had been accused of having purchased dead 
souls, — of absurdities, in short." 

" Wh-wh-a-a-t? He purchased the will of a dead 
woman f 

"Ah, my dear sir, you are tiresome! What the 
deuce ! Open your ears ! I answer you for the last 
time: he purchased thousands of dead souls." 



242 TCniTCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

*'Dk1 not you say dead? Ah, good Heavens! it is 
imIЮ8siЫe to hear : it is a perfect Babel here." 

^^ What scandals! I shall take my departure: the 
secretary reads one thing, and then they talk of an- 
other." 

"Not at all . . . this is the exact fact: he has 
awarded himself a lai*ge inheritance, and purchased 
ancient cemeteries." 

" Impossible ! That is the way you undei-stood it, I 
am willing to admit." 

"Repeat the article! Repeat, repeat!" cried a 
large portion of the noble assemblage. " And do you 
come nearer us, here, here ; this is a good place ; it is 
the exact centre of the hall." 

"That's not so; more to the right, to the right; 
that's the real 9entre ; here,- nearer us." 

The secretary placed himself in the very centre: 
then he coughed, and began to read. 

"Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff, councillor of state, 
accused of forgery in connection with a will, and ac- 
cused of having purchased from divei-s noble proprie- 
tors, their dead «owZiJ." . . . 

At these words a frightful uproar and confusion eur 
sued in the hall. Most of the electors rose to their 
feet. 

" This is news ! " 

" Crime upon crime ! " 

" What an appearance ! The idea ! " 

" He is an adventurer, a man of projects, a specur 
lator . . . that's what he is ! " 

" Oh, what an idea is that of disinterring the dead ! " 

" Did he mean to make bone-black out of them? " 

" Did not the inquest state what he intended to do 
with those bones and corpses ? " 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 243 

" I tbink that saltpetre can be made from tombs ; 
according to that, the bones would yield ashes which 
could certainly be utilized in commerce: for my 
part" ... 

"What horrors that man is uttering! It is a case, 
a case, such a case, you see, as I had never imagined ; 
no, such a case I never had even imagined. When I 
tell my wife of this, she will say that I am lying.'* 

" Why tell her, then ? Why incur a scolding ? What 
is the use of seeking quarrels? Don't they arise of 
themselves without that? 1 shall not say a word to 
my wife of this abominable affair. " 

'' I shall tell all to mine : otherwise she will hear of 
it from some one else, and it will furnish a good subject 
for quarrels." 

" Why did he do it? why did he do it? why did he 
purchase dead souls? " 

The chief marshal had preserved his patience up to 
this point : but feeling that this case must be disposed 
of, he armed himself with his bell, and rang it until the 
most complete silence was established; and then he 
said to the assembly, — 

" Gentlemen, there appears to be a difiFerence of 
opinion as to whether this gentleman shall be recog- 
nized by the assembly. Will you not on this occasion 
resort to the ballot? " 

"Very good." 

" Now is the time, or never." 

"The ballot, the ballot! " 

The balls were brought, and they proceeded to the 
ballot. 

"Ah, how I should like to see this Tchitchikoff, his 
face, his personal appearance, his manners ! " 

"He certainly must have the air of a sharper 



244 TCHITCBIKOrF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

•nd fioished rascal, — of an undertaker's man at 
least." 

** Not at all: every one was saying yesterday that 
be is still a young man, rather plump, with a rosy com- 
plexion, fine bearing, and of good style." 

^^ It is said that he has served in the Imperial 
Guards." 

"Tchitchikoff? Really? Come, tell us, Trofim 
Petrovitch : since be belongs in your district, you must 
know him." 

" No, I don't ; not in our district ; there is no per- 
son of that name there." 

'^ He has been an agent for the settlement of dis- 
puted claims in Siberia." 

*' We must find out from what district he comes : of 
whom shall we inquire?" 

** He came hither to us, straight from Eamtchatka, 
riding on a reindeer." 

"Stop, ha!" 

" I tell you that it is a very grave ease." 

" Tchetchelkoflf, Tehetchelkoff ! Just see what 
names of gentlemen one encounters in the world now- 
adays ! We only represent a single government here, 
not even an entire province, and you see what names 
we have to learn to spell. So the commerce in dead 
souls leads to nobility ! Bravissimo ! She is so gi'eat, 
our good mother Russia ! Naturally, she contains all 
sorts of i)eople, and all kinds of industries and trades 
are plied within her." . . . 

*-*- Uncle, hey, there, uncle, listen ! ... It is said 
that there are Kalmnks . . . Kalmuks! Is it true 
that there actually ai-e Kalmuks? " 

"Yes; let me alone. Ho, ho! Tehetchelkoff, a 
fine fellow!" . . . 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 245 

" What do you mean by your Tchetchelkofif ? What 
Tchetchelkoff ? It has been read to you a score of 
times plainly; it is Tehetehanin, and not Tchetchel- 
koff at all : it enrages me to hear proper names muti- 
lated." 

" Caught ! . . . Oh, that's uncle's way. If he takes 
a step, he stumbles : if he says a word, he hiccoughs." 

"And, like many others, he thinks that he is talking 
correctly." 

"The real name is Tchitchikoff. Mr. Tchitchikoff 
is here, here in this very hall. He has a fine appear- 
ance ; and the general expression of his face is one of 
those expressions which inspire, or which at least 
have the just reputation of inspiring" . . . 

" Very good, very good, Vasiliy Lukitch ! . . . О 
Heavens ! when that fellow sets about inventing, when 
he undertakes to talk, and, above all, to analyze, there 
is really nothing left for a man to do but hold his 
tongue, and to bite his lower lip with his upper teeth, 
or the reverse." 

"Admit him! admit him! Mr. Tchitchikoff must 
be admitted ! He purchased,, and since he purchased, 
that signifies that he paid for, his souls. If, instead of 
buying, he had robbed, carried off, stolen, — oh! then 
it would be necessary to exclude him everywhere, and 
to prosecute him." 

" No doubt. And then we should demand that he 
be stripped of his title of noble." 

"Uncle, tell us, uncle, when you are made deputy, 
local civic quartermaster, for lodging passing troops 
of soldiers, will you take me to see Leuboff, hey?" 

" He chooses a fine time and place to talk of his 
Leuboff!" 

" But, uncle, in the whole of your district, there is 



246 TCHTTCniKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

not a person who is as good as Leuboff, is there? 
Come now, uncle, confess'* . . . 

"It is true, very good ; but hold your tongue 
now." 

" Ah ! you acknowledge that it is true. She is very 
pretty, is she not?" 

*' Yes, yes, good. Go off to a distance." 

" Do you know, uncle, I am but a poor fool beside 
her?" 

"A fool, certainly. Leave me, in Heaven's name, 
leave me ! Your farces begin to weary me, on my 
word of honor." 

"What? Honor? Ah! upon my word, here is an 
uncle in his dotage, talking nonsense ! " 

" What ! you dare, you rogue ! You say "... 

"I say, uncle, that you are my dear little soul, my 
dear heart, my darling. Stay, I can resist no longer : 
I must embrace you." . . . 

The charming nephew threw himself on his uncle's 
neck ; the latter resisted, and grew quite crimson : and 
a circle formed around this outburst of family affection. 
Into this circle a third pei-son made his way, and im- 
mediately became the most prominent of the three. 
He was a small, very much wrinkled, old man in an 
ancient naval uniform, with an embroidered collar, 
very much out of repair. His whole face was cov- 
ered with pei*spiration, and his gray hair was plastered 
down on his temples. This old sea-dog was very much 
agitated. He had already searched eveiy corner of tlie 
room : he had now reached the centre, and his eyes 
roved in every direction. On penetrating into the circle 
of which we have spoken, he said, with a deeply pre- 
occupied but serious air, — 

"Gentlemen, will you have the very great kindness 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 247 

to tell me what price Tchitchikoff paid for a dead soul, 

— I mean his average price ? * * 

" Seven rubles and seventy-five kopeks, paper 
money," replied a large gentleman gravely, as he held 
a huge silver snuff-box three finger-lengths above his 
nose, and regaled himself methodically and delightedly 
with pinches. 

*' Of the male sex, or the other? " 

" Both, — male and female." 

The mariner's face lighted up : then he assumed an 
air of mystery, and added, — 

*' Did he purchase only grown-up persons, or did he 
take children also? " 

"I have told you what he did: he bought souls. 
You ought to know what souls are." ^ 

*'Ah, well, . . . only a word. Will you have the 
kindness to point out this Tchitchikoff to me, or to 
tell me where he is to be found at the present moment, 

— in what part of the hall? " 

" Stay, look yonder, far, far off, against the pillar 
at the corner of the gallery. See that tall, very thin, 
very ugly man, with long, whitish, untidy hair, and 
tortoise-shell spectacles? It is a face easily noticed." 

The naval oflScer gave a leap like a kid: then he 
rushed off at so violent and ungovernable a pace, that 
he flung two heavy gentlemen flat on the floor, over- 



' The ex -officer's qaeetion was a very natural one. In Rueeia, only male 
eerfe were counted ae souls, which did not prevent the landed proprietors 
from deriving a very good revenue from their female serfs on their estacee 
also, since they gave the latter a permit to go to the towns and support them- 
selves, in consideration of the payment of a stipulated sum [pbrok]. 'i'hey 
have been known to pay more than their fathers, brothers, or husbands 
rather than return to the village. The children are not required to pay any 
obrok until they grow up, but they are employed in a great many little ser- 
vices of which grown men would be incapable. Only the children, without 
regard to their sex, arc of no account iu the eyes of the tax-collector. 



248 TCniTCHTKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

turned three arm-chairs, walked over numerous benches, 
and at length reached his unkempt man in the tortoise- 
shell spectacles. He seized the latter convulsively by 
the arm, and dragged him to a deserted corner. The 
naval officer addressed him with a great many bows, 
accompanying each one of his words with abrupt move- 
ments of liis arms, eyelids, and head. The light-haired 
man smiled witli a scornful air, sun-eyed the eloquent 
mariner from head to foot, thrust out his under lip, and 
shrugged his thin shoulders. 

" Seriously, then, you are not Tchitchikoflf ? " 

'* Pray, do me the honor to tell me what you want of 
me. I have not the honor of knowing you. . . . Par- 
don me." . . . [The stranger made a movement to 
depart.] 

'' No : you shall not thus escape me, noble and gen- 
erous Tchitchikoff. You shall purchase my one hun- 
dred and forty souls, of both sexes, who died of chol- 
era : you shall indemnify me, in part at least, for that 
cruel loss. Give an old mariner, his sons, and grand- 
children cause to bless your name forever." 

"Will you please to leave me alone? What the 
deuce do you mean by the ridiculous things that you 
are saying to me?" 

" Every one seeks his own advantage : that is quite 
natural. I have so much respect for the traffic which 
you have adopted, and I regard it as so perfectly legiti- 
mate, that I am willing to deduct twenty-five kopeks 
from the price which you give for each dead soul, 
simply for the sake of enjoying the pleasure of thus 
assisting, according to my ability, in the success of 
your operations." 

"Once more I beg you to cease, and not to force 
me to say harsh things to you." 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 249 

" I certainly have no occasion to expect the least 
coarse word from so wise a man as yourself. Let us 
make our bargain here between ourselves ; and for the 
contract and the money, I will go to your house." 

"Will you?'' 

" Do not feel uneasy at that ; I shall have no diffi- 
culty in finding your house ; I should find it were it 
situated at the bottom of the sea. Well, then, my 
honorable Pavel "... 

This little private colloquy was interrupted by the 
silence which suddenly prevailed throughout the hall. 
The secretary proclaimed the result of the ballot. 

" The ballot which has just taken place, with refer- 
ence to Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff, councillor of 
state, has resulted in the maintenance of his right, by 
a vote of 499 against 87. Mr. Tchitchikoff is admitted 
as a member of the assembly, on a majority of 412 
votes." 

*' I congratulate you I " said the naval officer. 

"May the Devil confound you ! " said the spectacled 
gentleman. 

The reading of the remainder of the list was re- 
sumed, and concluded in half an hour. Several propo- 
sitions were then submitted to the deliberations of the 
assembly. Some of these offered an occasion for a 
great deal of uproar from all the districts, to such a 
degree that the most powerful voices which were raised 
inside the hall were audible outside. 

" No doubt," shouted one dark-complexioned gen- 
tleman, in a peculiar sing-song voice, " narrow-minded 
people, those who entertain on the subject of national- 
ity only the most paltry and commonplace ideas, and 
idealize vulgar popularity as much as possible, will not 
comprehend what true philanthropy is. But those who 



250 TCHITCBIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

understand us will acknowledge that individual ideas 
of a similar nature presuppose a ripe and grave sub- 
jective contemplation of all the sesthetical points of the 
creation, — [X)ints, the knowledge of which alone can 
furnish what we call actual points of view, which are 
contemporary and not absurd and behind the times." 

^^The gentleman is right: there is logic in what he 
has just said." 

'* He has spoken as wisely as Tatisheff's dictionary." 

" What did he say, after all? " 

"AVhat did he say? He expressed his opinion, 
that*s what he said ! " 

" What is his opinion ? " 

'^ He expressed his opinion : all that you had to do 
was to listen." 

'' He said nothing at all.". 

" You would speak like him, would you not? Come, 
then, I am sure that you are not in a condition to 
explain yourself! " 

" When I speak, every one understands me, at least." 

"Well, Sava Petrovitch speaks for those persons, 
who, having studied deeply, have their intelligence full 
of moral needs, and of the thought of our times." 

" Much good may it do them ! . . . But what did you 
do yesterday at that game of preference? " 

These gentlemen began to talk over their exploits at 
cards on the preceding evening, until one of their 
common acquaintances came to inquhre what it was all 
about and who the member was who had expressed 
his opinion. 

" Down yonder at the desk? pardon me, I was not 
paying attention ; but no, that was not an opinion 
which was expressed ; some proposition was made, I 
know not what. Hey, Pavel Dmitritch ! will you ex- 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 251 

plain to this gentleman what the secretary has just 
read ? I have no time myself : excuse me, I am going 
home." 

*' Your nobility makes a horrible noise, does it 
not?'' 

'* All have empty stomachs ; they shout in order to 
deceive their appetites for the moment : but it must be 
time for the session to close.** 

" We shall sign the protocol without noise or oppo- 
sition." 

" So much the better, since those who have prepared 
it are more crafty than we are." 

"Whom shall I invite to dine with me? It is so 
tedious to dine alone," said a gentleman with a flat 
nose. 

"Do you live very far away?" inquired a young 
man with a long nose. 

"No, close by." 

" I congratulate you : you will satisfy your appetite 
all the sooner." 

"As far as the satisfaction of my appetite is con- 
cerned, I do not take the distance into consideration. 
Do you live at a distance? " 

" No, not very far off," replied the young elector. 

"Well," said the flat-nosed gentleman, "let us go 
together, either to your house or to mine : it makes no 
difference to me." 

" Come. I am accommodating in such matters." 

" What I like in young people, is the charming lack 
of ceremony which most of them possess. One can 
tell immediately when one is dealing with a well-bred 
man, with a young man who has been a soldier for a 
while. I do not know him, he does not know me: 
suppose I say to him, ' I am going to dinner ! ' he 



252 TCHITCBIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

replies, ' Let us go to dinner ! ' and so off we go to 
dine in company. Is tliat not the way, my friend? '* 

" Certainly. Thou couutest on me, and I count on 
thee : confidence is the simplest and best thing in the 
world." 

It is evident that our two friends, one of whom was 
double the age of the other, have very speedily arrived 
at thee and thou. It was now the long-nosed, now the 
short-nosed, man, who seemed to lead his companion : 
in this way they made the tour of nearly the entire 
town. Their lodgings, it seemed, were far from the 
centre, or else they mistook the street : at all events, 
they did not reach them. The short-nosed man said 
to the man with the aquiline nose when he perceived 
that the latter was weary and bored, — 

"Confess that you had no intention of dining at 
your house, and that you gave your cook leave of 
absence this morning ! " 

" Well hit I What you say is the exact truth." 

"Well, I did not give any ordei*s to my servants 
either, and my kitchen-fire is not lighted. Let us 
part." 

" Ли revolr. . . . Deuce take the old scamp ! " 

"Farewell. . . . The idea of that young black- 
guard! "... 

The young gentleman remained undecided what to do 
for a whole quarter of an hour. He said to himself, — 

" There are a tolerable number of young spongers in 
a regiment, and there must be some of the same sort 
here. That flat-nosed old fool has made me tramp 
about unconscionably ; but I must eat, nevertheless. 
Bah ! I'll run to our judge's : he will surely have 
dined. At any rate, he'll not let me leave the house 
without offering me tea, if not something more solid." 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 253 

Meanwhile, the session of the assembly had not yet 
terminated. All those who had contrived to appease 
their stomachs with a breakfast, without their absence 
having been noticed, held out. At each proposition, 
many still shouted and declaimed pro and contra at 
random. Some, apropos of nothing, demanded a bal- 
lot ;.. . but all ended by feeling the prick of hunger, 
and were charmed to hear the governor adjourn the 
deliberations which would follow the seven or eight 
propositions which still remained to be made, until the 
close of the elections. 

In fact, the actual, final resolution was, that the sec- 
retary was to be allowed full liberty in all those points, 
since he probably knew in advance the opinion of the 
marshal of the government, and since he, more than 
any one else, must stand in great need of rest after 
such drudgery. 

There is one good thing about these days of electoral 
assemblies, — a man has the power, if not always of 
obtaining satisfaction for his self-love, of at least feast- 
ing, and of finding distractions from his ordinary cares. 
Very few gentlemen are to be met with who do not end 
by signing, without any reserve, every thing that the 
secretary of the nobility presents to them, every thing 
which he prepares, or proposes to prepare, upon nu- 
merous sheets of paper, without caring to impose any 
restrictions on his agile pen, nor even to spoil his appe- 
tite by annoyiug subtilties. 

That evening our hero felt infinitely better-than he 
had felt at the assembly. It is to be supposed that a 
triple portion of the pickled sturgeon, and a bottle of 
very old Chateau-la- Rose ^ which he absorbed in order 
to get rid of the ennui of several hours of solitude, had 
a salutary effect on his maxillary nerve, which relieved 



254 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; ОД, DEAD SOULS. 

him of the necessity of placing himself in the chair of 
any dentist. He took his round hat and a long, wadded 
Palmerston surtout, and set out to lounge along a few 
streets, with a handsome cane of an Indian wood in 
his hand. Every house in the town, every lodging, 
good or ba^l, the smallest chambers, the most contracted 
garden- pavilions, were filled to overflowing; the hos- 
telries and restaurants were glittering with lights ; their 
dooi-s were fairly assaulted with carriages, toth public 
and private, of all capacities, of every form and every 
name. The pretended harmonies of itinerant orches- 
tras, composed of foreign artists, the pitiless and much 
sought after Bohemians, rang intrepidly and with im- 
punity from several halls. The nobility were spending 
their gold in excessively costly breakfasts and dinners, 
where no one would hear to any wines except from 
some vintages which were privileged for their diver- 
sion, like champagne ; nor of any water except the 
famous natural seltzer water. As they ate and drank 
to excess, proposing toasts of great originality, a vast 
quantity of promises to cast a black ball for this or for 
that man, and for ten others to boot, burst forth as 
though bubbling from the heart ; but for such and such 
a man, and above all, for the host of the day, white 
balls. Vain words, forgotten as soon as uttered ! On 
the following day, the balls were dropped according to 
the impulse or the caprice of the moment, according 
to the influence of relations, or the degree of strength 
of the parties, which were perceived to be most sharply 
outlined at the decisive moment. 

" The late So-and-so," said one gentleman to another 
at the street-corner, "gave to a third person the sup- 
port which he promised me that verj' morning. He did 
not like to have me receive that modest oflSce. God 



MISERIES AND, GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 255 

punished him for his rascality : he died five months 
after his treaehei-y." 

"One thing is certain," replied the other, — "that 
not a hair of our heads falls without the will of God. 
But you — what do you mean ? To-day you want to 
be a judge . . . what would you do with that office? " 

" I ? The first thing I should do would be the things 
which my predecessor wrongfully neglected. As a pre- 
liminary to my installation, I should purify the audience 
chamber ; and it is only after having caused all parts 
of the place to be blessed, that I would show myself. 
And I should listen to no one, but act entirely on my 
own judgment." 

"According to your own judgment . . . hm ! yes, 
if Ivan Feodorovitch will allow it." 

" Ivan Feodorovitch has no chance whatever of be- 
ing chosen marshal." 

" May Heaven hear you ! But let us enter the cafe: 
the evening dew is falling ; I am shivering." 

"You are very good to call that a cafi. It is a 
tavern, not to say a cavern. P. P., V. V., M. S., 
P. M., K. L., and twenty other brawlers are in there 
gorging themselves with champagne, while three merry 
girls, in very low dresses, are playing on the harp, and 
singing to them, God knows what sprightly things. 
And those wretched fellows are all married men, who 
sit there devouring those women with their eyes. . . . 
And fancy, they were not ashamed to invite me ! " 

"And you?" 

" I looked in to see what was going on there, 
and I speedily stole away. Would you believe it, 
that many, in consequence of this permanent orgy, 
will be forced to set out for their villages after this 
evening? They had brought enough to live on for a 



256 TCBITCBIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

month or more : in three days they are drained dry, 
and to4lay they say that unforeseen circumstances recall 
them to their manor-houses as speedily as possible." 

*" Ah, good-evening, Pavel Ivanovitch," said Burdya- 
kin to Tchitchikoff. " You were at the assembly to- 
day?" he continued, looking intently at Tchitchikoff. 

^^Yes; I spent two hours there. I had taken a 
tooth-ache there with me, which the currents of air 
augmented to such a degree that I was obliged to return 
to my inn." 

"I, too, went to the assembly, in spite of a vei-y 
bad cold, but later, so that I did not meet you. Just 
imagine, they mentioned your affairs, your trial . . . 
nonsense, in fact." 

*' AVhat was it?" said Tchitchikoff, feigning to ig- 
nore the fact that any thing could have been said to 
his disadvantage. 

"The trial which you underwent was mentioned; 
and, although it was said that you had been acquitted, 
they laughed and talked and railed at you. After all, 
the "nobility does not wish you ill. In order to uphold 
you, I went from one district to another in the hall, talk- 
ing, insisting, flattering, beseeching, promising; . . . 
and, by my faith, I succeeded to the best of ray desire. 
Your electoral rights have been recognized by the ma- 
jority of votes." 

" Well, I never suspected any thing of the sort." 

" Listen : let me advise you, between oui*selves, to set 
yourself up boldly as a candidate for the marshalship. 
Believe me, your district is perfectly well disposed 
towards you at the present moment, and you will be 
elected." 

" I do not aspire to that office, which is not exempt 
from bustle and from . . . from removals" ... he 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHJTCHIKOFF. 257 

said aloud; but he thought to himself, "That would 
be very flattering, nevertheless." 

''No? Well, Pavel Ivanovitch, that is very wise; 
do not put yourself forward ; you are, and will remain, 
a remarkably sensible man, not only in your own dis- 
trict, but in all three governments of the province. 
Look at Zazhmurin : what does he lack? The fever, 
perhaps, for he is rich, intelligent, and an expert in 
rural economy. . . . But no, here he is burning with 
impatience to be marshal ; he has been warned that he 
will receive only black balls ; he will listen to nothing, 
he has good hopes; do you know why? This is the 
way he calculates. Oh, he's a cunning fellow ! To-mor- 
row and the day after are to be devoted to the solution 
of a multitude of questions : the third day is Sunday ; 
on that day the arrival of gentlemen from all three dis- 
tricts is expected. In these three days many here will 
have already expended all the money which they have 
brought with them, on cards, drinks, feasts, and orgies, 
and then they will recollect that Zazhmurin has a 
pocket which is very well padded with bills of credit ; ^ 
he will lend them money at six per cent, on good notes 
guaranteed by the most solvent of them : and, more 
than that, he will make the borrowers swear on their 
honor to put in white balls for him. Now I ask you, 
how can a pig's snout like that man aspire to be mar- 
shal of the nobility?" 

*' He impresses me as an honest man, and I do not 
see why he should be driven to purchase votes." 

" Well, if Zazhmurin is balloted for as judge, do 
me the pleasure of dropping a black ball for him ; and 
if he is balloted for the marshalship, I shall refrain 

» Bills of credit circulated throughout the country in company with 
banJE-bUle. 



258 TCHITCBIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

from voting altogether. Only, I beseech you to drop 
your ball at the left for eveiy one except Melekitchent- 
zoff, all at the left. As for myself, the general desire 
has obliged me to ofifer myself as a candidate for a 
judgeship : these are grave functions. It is a terrible 
thing to judge my fellow-men when I know that at the 
last judgment I shall have to render an account of my 
decisions, and yet I have made up my mind to it ; and 
I shall be an exemplary magistrate, you may depend 
upon that." 

*' Do so : it will be very meritorious. But what sort 
of a man is this Melekitchentzoff of yours?" 

'' A millionnaire ! That, that is the man who ought 
to be elected. That is the man who will make an ac- 
complished marshal. Do you know, he has promised 
to give a great dinner, where he will regale eveiy one 
with Holland milk? 1 am acquainted with the cheese 
of Holland, and I am very fond of it. So, for that 
reason alone, it has been decided to make him marshal 
of the district. My wife is very fond of it, and my 
eldest daughter also ; but milk, the real Holland milk, 
neither I nor my wife nor my children have ever tasted. 
Well, Melekitchentzoff has brought some from the low 
countries, — a hogshead, a large hogshead, — and, just 
imagine it, in his carriage ! " 

'^It is of Viktor Apollonovitch that you are speak- 
ing, surely? " said a gentleman with a shrill voice, who 
had just halted behind Burdyakin. 

'* Yes, of Melekitchentzoff, certainly." 

'* But what is this milk of which you were speak- 
ing?" 

'^ Milk, what? Why, milk, Holland milk." 

'^That is not milk at all; you have been misled; 
it is not milk, but whey; and not Holland whey, 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 259 

but what is called Amsterdam whey. I have tasted 
it.'' 

"Don't believe him, Pavel Ivanoviteh: he is lying. 
Well, let us see if you have tasted it, " resumed the 
captain of police: ''tell us what it tastes like, and 
what effect it has on the stomach." 

''A fine question that! The whey which Viktor 
Apollonovitch has brought is acid and bitter, salt and 
sweetish, at one and the same time.'* 

'' I suspected as much : ahi, ahi, ahi ! the jokers ! 
they have made htm swallow sea-water ! Water, water, 
I tell you : it was brackish water . . . that's what it 
was. You must know that Melekitchentzoff has 
brought with him from the west a whole world of men, 
birds, fish, and divers objects : among other things, he 
has been pleased to bring very small oysters, which are 
called muscles, I believe, to treat the poor pupils in a 
gymnasium in which he takes an interest. . . . Oh, 
what a fine thing it is to be rich ! In order to keep 
these shell- fish fresh, they must be bathed in salt water ; 
and it is probably that water which the prince's ser- 
vants, at his request, have made this gentleman drink. 
Monsieur has just swallowed a big jar of salt water, 
spoonful by spoonful. That's what he knows about 
Holland milk. Come, now, my dear fellow." 

"Come, now, yourself! Would th6 custom-house 
allow saltwater to pass?" 

" And why not? it is for use: the doctor has pre- 
scribed sea-water for me to drink ; I can drink ppthing 
else. . . . The custom-house allows it to pass, it muqt 
allow it." 

'• It may be as you say : so be it. But let us dis» 
cuss serious matters. Did you know that in the assem- 
bly they wanted to ballot for me as assessor of the 



260 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

tribunal of this district? That is very disagreeable to 
me, oh, very disagreeable indeed ! I begged them, I 
prayed them. No, they would not listen to me. They 
will force my nomination, the wretches! If you, at 
least, would only "... pursued the drinker of sea- 
water, who suddenly drew the captain of police to one 
side in order to say to him, *'i\nd wlio is this gen- 
tleman whom you have with you? " 

" He is Pavel Ivanovitch Tchitchikoff: he can dis- 
pose of two votes, and holds two more in reseiTC." 

" Permit me, sir,'* said the candidate for the office 
of assessor, in a honeyed voice, " to introduce myself to 
you : I am the governmental secretary, Tchyerin ; ray 
lands lie in your district ; I am a neighbor of Mr. Bur- 
dyakin ; " and here he walked to Tchitchikoflf's side. 

" I am much flattered, sir," . . . responded Tchi- 
tchikoff, while he walked on in front of him. 

" Until to-day I have not had the hardihood to pre- 
sent myself to you: excuse my thus accosting you 
with a request. When they vote for me, my name is 
Tchyerin : when they vote for me, drop your ball to the 
left, I beg of you, to the left. No doubt I shall be, 
on every occasion and wholly, at the command of the 
nobility. I shall cherish no other ambition than to 
please every gentleman belonging to our set; but 
nevertheless, you will oblige me, and that greatly, if 
you щ{\\ drpp your ball to the left." 

^J If jbhe pthej* persons who know you, esteem you 
^prthy of the post of assessor, I shall not cast my 
yote for you Щ ару othef way than does the nobility of 
the di^tpcf; : J ^hall c^t pQ phe right if other people do 
so." 

"As you pjea^e; \}ц^> receive the homage of my 
respectful devotion." 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 261 

After having uttered these words, this solicitor ran 
off to solicit elsewhere : Tchitchikoff glanced to right 
and to left, and could catch no sight of him any- 
where. 

"What sort of a fellow is this Tchyerin, your 
neighbor in the country? " 

"A passed-raaster ... in preference. . . . Oh, 
well ! he fears no Greek, whoever he may be." 

"Then he is a little " . . . 

" I warrant you that he is very strong : . . . put in 
a black ball for him, and another black one for Kos- 
tlyakin also." 

" Who is this Kostlyakin? " 

" A landed proprietor, nothing more. I wanted to 
marry his daughter to a brother of my wife, a fine fel- 
low, who had just been promoted to be lieutenant, and 
who has always been promised a troop. Kostlyakin 
had the effrontery to reply to the young man's request, 
' Begin by getting the troop, and then come and make 
your proposal to me.' Can any one conceive of such 
an animal refusing to ally himself with me? Drop a 
ball on the left for Vuirkin also. As for Yerebnikoff, 
take care ! he is a ferret ; distrust him ; drop, drop on 
the left. Kryaplin, too, must have a good black ball : 
however, do as you think fit about him. Stay, I have 
two other friends, — Ivan Telkin and Piotr Telkin, two 
cousins, — in favor of one of whom, I strongly recom- 
mend you to cast your ball on the left." 

" How am I to know which one I am to oppose?" 

"I will give you a signal; I will raise my right 
shoulder, like this ; then you will, hm . . . hm . . . 
and drop it on the left." 

"Why not on the right? You raise the right 
shoulder, so that it is on the right that I must cast it." 



262 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

" Why, no. I raise my right shoulder on purpose so 
that no one may divine that we have an understanding 
between us." 

'* I shall have a hard time : you have mentioned 
Beven or eight people. No • . . really, I fear that I 
shall not please you." 

" Do you wish to render me a service? ** 

" I desire it greatly." 

" Well, listen ! each time that you receive your balls 
from the hand of the marahal, hand them to me, and I 
will deposit them according to your desire, as the oath, 
honor, and conscience require. If you wish to cast 
them on the left, close one eye, or contract your brows, 
— but with the right eye : let us understand that thor- 
oughly, and the thing is done." 

" Well, we will see about it." 

" Good-eveoiog, Pavel Ivanovitch." 

"Adieu." 

" AVhat is the matter with all of them? " said Tchi- 
tchikoff to himself, as he re-entered his chamber at the 
inn: " why are they thus excited? One sees nothing 
but lying, fraud, and hypocrisy at every step. The 
elections are useful in many respects, as a privilege 
conferred on the nobility ; but in the practice, in the 
exercise of this right among us, one perceives circum- 
stances which lay bare a little too much perfidy and 
malignityr I am not ambitious of any office, certainly, 
of none : I only came to distract my mind from my 
occupations as a landed proprietor, and I find here only 
objects which make one melancholy. Instead of re- 
maining here any longer, I should do much better to 
go and occupy myself a little with the welfare of my 
peasants, with the education of my young family, and 
with many things which will all be positively useful to 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHlTCaiKOFF, 263 

me, and which will serve my family after I am gone. 
I must be honest: in fact, it is always this accursed 
ambition, or rather that petty vanity, which oppresses 
my heart, after having crept in there like a serpent. It 
is only too true, that I should like to be elected marshal 
of the nobility of our district. It seems that that is 
the goal of the desires of all the nobility, and that it 
is there that all these parties and intrigues have their 
birth. Whatever I do or say, it seems as though some 
one were every moment urging me on, and shouting in 
my ears, ' Announce yourself as a candidate ! try, try ! 
l^erhaps you will succeed ! ' One unhappy man has 
undermined his whole fortune himself, for the sake of 
collecting the nobility at his house ; he is ruining him- 
self, and all his family, by extravagant expenditure ; he 
never gets discouraged, and always hopes to be elected 
marshal in spite of affronts and discomfitures. There 
are a great many aspirants this year, for so few offices 
as there are to be filled. Ought not I to postpone my 
candidacy until the next election? But no : three years 
are three centuries ! Shall I be alive and in health 
three years hence? I should like to serve as marshal 
for eight or nine months, or a year at the most ; then I 
would hand in a peremptory resignation ; that would 
do very well : oh ! if Г could only have the pleasure of 
signing my name, in my clear, firm handwriting, on 
the letters of nobility, or on a circular addressed to all 
my noble electors ! " 

Tchitchikoff was so engrossed Vith this last idea, 
that, without thinking, he placed a sheet of paper be- 
fore him, seized a pen, and wrote with one sweep of 
the hand, in magisterial, flowing chirograpliy, "Tchi- 
tchikoff, Marshal of the Nobility." Thereupon he 
glanced about him, then twisted the paper into a spiral, 



264 TCniTCniKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

burned it in the flame of his candle, and thought, as he 
took ofiP his clothes, ''What a miserable creature is 
man ! After many tempests, I have entered a haven 
of safety, but my heart and my imagination have fol- 
lowed me thither ; and, in the absence of real troubles 
coming from without, I create for myself, by my own 
fancy, subjects of irritation and false hopes which do 
not allow me to taste the sweets of repose." 

Three days elapsed, and the noisy elections for the 
district opened. On that day the streets were furrowed 
from the rising of the sun by the coming and going of 
all sorts of equipages, filled, most of them to excess, 
with members of the country nobility, in their grand 
regimentals. Some even went modestly on foot to 
each other's houses : and, when men who were tolera- 
bly sure of each other met, they descended from their 
carriages, or halted and exchanged embraces; they 
could be seen saluting each other at fabulous distances. 
The most flattering hopes were depicted on these faces 
framed in tall, white, stiffly starched collars. 

This movement aroused Tchitchikoff long before his 
ordinary hour of rising : he hastened to his window, and 
amused himself with watching an enormous britchka, 
which was drawn by two horses with long, badly 
groomed coats, and contained with difficulty five lai-ge 
gentlemen in full dress. 

"Generals, upon my word ! all generals to-day ! . . . 
It*s a regular invasion of generals," said he; then, 
having donned his own gala attire, he studied two or 
three noble attitudes before his mirror ; and with arms 
crossed on his breast, and head borne loftily, but 
slightly inclined on one side, he said with much assur- 
ance, and in quite a loud tone of voice, "I know 
nothing about the others : let them look at us, and de- 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 265 

cide for themselves. There are, no doubt, wealthy men 
in this motley throng, men who are cultivated in mind, 
and handsome in person ; but I ... I alone, probably, 
realize the ideal of a general . . . an American gen- 
eral," And teai-s of egotistical tenderness and of 
vague uneasiness bathed the rosy cheeks of our hero : 
then he said to himself, "Lord God, what, then, is tak- 
ing place within me? And why these tears? It is my 
accursed ambition which weeps, knowing that it cannot 
be gratified. This ambition is a worm, which was 
bom with my heart, which surfeits itself on my blood, 
lives on me and in me, and will only die when I die : 
to curse it is to curse myself." 

Tchitchikoff entered his carriage, and drove to the 
assembly. On the way he was stared at, for he was 
not one of those men who never have a thought de- 
picted on their brows. He was. noticed by the popu- 
lace chiefly because he distanced not only pedestrians, 
but all the other carriages. Half of the street and 
three-quarters of the grand square were encumbered 
with vehicles. 

The gendarmes had the greatest difficulty in calming 
the excitement of the charioteers, Tartars or Mongo- 
lians, who, from the elevation of their boxes, still lead, 
as coachmen at least, the Russian aristocracy, in which 
so many of their ancient princes figured, and rise above 
the populace in general — the common herd, the pro- 
miscuous throng of nobles, artisans, clerks, citizens, 
and rustics — to the extent of their own stature. 

'^ Hey, there, you big-beard ! To the left, to the 
left ! and don't leave the line. Well? Don't you hear 
me?" said one of those quellers of disorder, those 
St. Georges in sky-blue uniform, vulgarly known as 
gendarmes, or blue dragons. 



266 TCHITCHIKOFF^S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

" We know what we know," retorted the son of 
Mamai,* who was thus addressed. '' We have driven 
in Moscow and Petersburg, and you can't frighten us 
much, comrade." 

" Come, CQme ! no arguing, unless you have a taste 
for blows with the flat of a sword." 

''Just try it! My master, there within, is already 
three-quarters elected marshal. And you, yoxx spurred 
lout, you present yourself before us, and lay down the 
law like the commander-in-chief of all the police ! You 
. . . what sort of a bii^d are you? We have our plate 
laid at the governor's table. My master will say to 
him . . . Stop ! listen ! Leave me ! AViil you let 
me alone, you madman? I'll leave the box and the 
horses and the carriage ! How dare you strike?" . . . 
[Turning towards his master.] "Sir! Hey, sir! . . . 
There, that's good. I will do what you wish. Where 
would you like to have me re-enter the line ? Will you 
cease pestering me? Just see how you have treated 
my tchekmeny^ which belongs to my master. . . . Hum I 
You beat and ill-treat people." 

Many gendarmes had little asides of this nature, at 
various points : othei-s established, maintained, and di- 
rected the line to the very sheds, and thence to the 
place where the general station was appointed. This 
choice corps is truly admirable in operations of this • 
sort, and in those collisions where the pride of the 
masters takes possession of the servants, who are 
prompt to multiply it a hundred-fold, in order to do- 

1 Son of Mamai, a Tartar. Maraai was the leader of one of the Tartar 
incureione in the Middle Ages (1380), and hie name |e preserved in history. 
Hid exploits are also celebrated in the Epic Songn, under various names, — 
МаганТ, Tzar Balyg, and Kallu the Tzar. (See Epic Songa of Rusaia: I. F. 
Hapgood.) 

* CudSttck coat. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 267 

themselves honor in the eyes of each other. Domina- 
tion is the universal passion in all ranks. 

Hardly had Podgruzdyoff entered the hall, when the 
balloting began. The first words which he uttered hav- 
ing been to announce his definite resignation of the 
office, and of any candidacy, votes were cast for three 
candidates in turn, who had offered themselves, in a 
fashion, and who were rejected by black balls. A com- 
pact crowd advanced to vote for Melekitchentzoff ; but 
the immense majority, who were discontented, observed, 
that, for the district which Podgruzdyoff had repre- 
sented, there was but one gentleman to oppose him who 
had any chance whatever. 

Tchitchikoff remained modestly leaning against a 
pillar, and the devouring worm of ambition inflicted 
painful bites. Every thing was left in suspense for 
several minutes, in default of a competitor to oppose 
this wealthy candidate. Melekitchentzoff was already 
casting patronizing and triumphant glances upon his 
supporters on all sides, and leering tenderly at the 
curule chair of the marshal. Our hero said to himself, 
'' Oh ! a thousand times better had it been, if I had 
undertaken the round of my visits to Betrishtcheff's 
relatives, interrupted these ten years, than to have 
come here and subjected myself to this torture. I have 
suffered a great deal in my life ; but, nevertheless, I 
have enjoyed some happy days. This is my harshest 
trial. AVould it not be well for me to go and announce 
myself openly as a candidate? . . . Good God ! What, 
not a single mouth will open before me, and say to me, 
'Will you not be pleased to accept?' . . . Let them 
talk to me about my grand air of an American general 
after this ! I have allowed myself to be caught with 
the raillery of a tailor ! Just let us see if a single per- 



268 TCHITCBIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

eon will come. О dead souls! dead souls! ye have 
eDriebed me without elevating me, and it is you who are 
now about to complete my abasement and my ruin ! " 

Tchitchikoff was raving. He really was in despair, 
when, all at once, three gentlemen belonging to his 
district approached him, and proposed to him that he 
should present himself as a candidate. Our hero could 
not reply at first, so overwhelmed was he; then he 
hesitated ; and it was only at the expiration of several 
minutes that he was able to pronounce, with some de- 
cision, the following honest and pathetic words : — 

''Divine Providence, in sending me, through your 
instrumentality, so unexpected an honor, seems inclined 
to render easy the forgetfulness of all the injustices 
which I have endured in the pilgrimage of life. Gen- 
tlemen, you cannot be ignorant of the fact that my 
existence has too long resembled, for that reason, the 
condition of a vessel buffeted by storms. You desire 
to intrust to me the helm of the vessel of your interests. 
You place too much value, possibly, on the little wis- 
dom with which experience may have endowed me. I 
perceive in this an oplюrtunity for self-sacrifice, and 
I no longer hesitate. Dispose of me." 

ТЬегеи1Юп he shed a few tears, and crumpled his 
three-cornered hat with both hands: then, obviously 
much agitated, he passed into an apartment adjoining 
the grand hall. 

Voting for the candidates was immediately proceeded 
with, and this operation did not last long. 

As soon as the voting was finished, there arose from 
all quarters of the great hall a loud and general shout, 
which allowed the words to be plainly understood, — 

'* We congratulate з^ои ! *' 

"It's all over," thought Tchitchikoff, wiping his 



MISER [ЕВ AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 269 

brow, which was quite moist from emotion. "The 
honors have fallen to me, and my heart is relieved of 
an immense weight." And his l)earing, as he re-en- 
tered the hall, showed the lively sentiment of personal 
dignity which he felt at that moment. 

"Gentlemen," he said to the entire throng which 
watched him as he passed along, "I thank you cor- 
dially for an election which cannot be otherwise than 
flattering to me from every point of view. But I have 
many reasons for begging you, for adjuring you, to ex- 
empt me from this noble office, for three yeara at least, 
in order that I may strike down deeper roots in a coun- 
try whose approbation will always be so precious to 
me." 

Pavel Ivanovitch, having delivered himself to this 
effect, bent his head slightly to the left shoulder, 
brougl)t both hands together on his breast, and awaited 
the effect. 

Prince Tchigirin, a man of very lofty stature, re- 
nowned for his overwhelming blows, who chanced to 
stand about ten paces from Tchitchikoff, then said in 
a very fine baritone voice, — 

" Mr. Tchitchikoff is wrong to thus disquiet him- 
self. Gentlemen, have the charity to explain to Mr. 
Tchitchikoff that he came out the third or fourth can- 
didate, and that he is excused from the office in ques- 
tion, not for three yeara only, but for fifteen or perhaps 
eighteen." 

Prince Tchigirin was not a competitor : he could not 
be, he did not wish to be, marshal ; but neither could 
he endure the thought that any one else should desire 
the office, unless that person were a prince, or at least 
a triple millionnaire. 

Melekitchentzoff sought Tchitchikoff in vain, and in 



270 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

vain caused biro to be sought, as he wished to invite 
him to dinner, and to regale him with the roe of Dutch 
herriitgsj which could be found only at his table.^ Tchi- 
tchikofif had disappeared from the hall: three hours 
later he was taking tea in a posting-house situated 
twenty-one vei*8ts from town, and listening to the over- 
ture of '' Lodoiska," executed by a musical snuff-box, 
which had constituted the delight of the superintend- 
ent of this station for the last twenty-five years. Our 
hero greatly envied the moderation of this good and 
simple man, who, in order to render himself happy, 
had only to rummage in his pocket, and press a small 
leather button. 

" And I," thought he, " what do I lack to be hdppy ? 
Nothing that a man can reasonably desire. Accused 
vanity, what wilt thou of me ? But the lesson which I 
have just i4jceived ought at last to teach me to restrain 
the impetuosity of my ambitious aspirations." 

Such was the style of his thoughts when he resumed 
his journey, and on returning to the bosom of his 
numerous family. He had been married for twelve 
years, and he had eleven children, who, fortunately for 
them, had always been the freest and the happiest chil- 
dren in the world ; and we will not say the same for the 
fourteen hundred families of serfs of which he was 
the lord and master, and for whom it cannot l>e asserted 
that he always had the feelings of a father. The only 
persons with regard to whom he was always inclined to 
passive indulgence were Selifan and Petrushka. They 
died shortly after the grand discomfiture of the elections 
of the nobility, possibly in consequence of the profound 
chagrin caused by the preference, more apparent than 

^ This wae the laiie (de Aareng) de Holland^ so recently a matter of die- * 
pute. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 271 

real, accorded by Tchitchikoff to the valet and coach- 
man who had then accompanied their master to town. 
He had, in his character of master, some principles 
from which he never departed : since he despised tale- 
bearing and tale-bearers, he never punished any faults 
of which he had not himself been a witness, or from 
which he personally suffered; but then he punished 
severely without pausing long to consider the degree of 
gravity of the offence. An impostor, a thief, a drunk- 
ard, a libertine, had only to avoid ever coming in Tchi- 
tchikoff's way, in order to appear perfectly innocent in 
his eyes, however detestable their reputation might be : 
but if one of his peasants told him a lie, or if one of 
them passed him on his way from the forest with a load 
of brushwood on his back ; if a third, in replying to 
him, gave vent to an alcoholic hiccough in his preseuce, 
or if he caught sight of a fourth courting a village maid 
in unseemly wise, even were she his betrothed, it 
made no difference, — all four were mercilessly con- 
demned to be flogged. 

Very few of his peasants were allowed the means of 
attaining to a state of comfort. Nevertheless, some 
of them, in spite of the thousand obstacles inherent 
to their condition of serfage, became positively rich, 
and besought him to give them their freedom on con- 
dition of payment. He invariably refused, without 
alleging any reason for this course ; and he never even 
consented to allow their daughters to marry freedmen. 
To have subjects, to keep them firmly under his con- 
trol, to augment as much as possible the sum of 
receipts in his own private government, such was 
henceforth his sole ambition. 

The considerations of equity, social amelioration, 
universal morality, the dissemination of knowledge, in- 



272 TCHITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD 80UL8. 

tellectual emancipation, touched bim infinitely little. 
They merely served to sadden him as being, if these 
nonsensical notions should win favor with the public, 
an extremely bad presage for the posterity which he 
believed that he had created in his own image and like- 
ness. 

He subscribed to several newspapers, gazettes, and 
illustrated publications, because these sheets were all 
to be met with in the reception-rooms of his neighbors ; 
but he never endeavored to discover by means of them 
the needs, the general feeling, the current of ideas, 
and of the aspirations of the new era. 

Out of the ordinary contents of the Jo 111*1101 des 
DebatSj for example, he never allowed any mention 
in his presence of any thing but what came under the 
heading. Court of Assizes; and all at once he would 
say, " Whafris the use of tribunals which are open to 
the public? Why confer this name of public on the 
populace? And what is the use of publishing all 
those horrors, which one hears in the court-room, all 
over again in the newspapers? " And more frequently 
still he was accustomed to say, — 

"You see, you see what abominations daily take 
place in the West ! And yet there are fools who want 
to Europeanize Russia, when, on the contrary, it is for 
Europe to Russianize herself, as she may do, for her 
own safety : otherwise I predict for her that she will 
shortly perish in final impenitence." 

The most important duty which he fulfilled with regard 
to his five eldest sons, was to accompany them in succes- 
sion to Petersburg and Moscow in order to install them 
respectively in the public service, — the army, the de- 
partment of finances, that of justice, the navy, and 
the department of the interior. The others, who were 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCniTCHIKOFF. 273 

younger, he placed in various educational institutions. 
That done, he received and opened their letters, and 
ran them over, beginning at the end, then threw them 
on the table, and left the task of answering them to his 
wife. He took some pleasure in seeing his sons again 
in turn when they came home on leave, and sent them 
back at the expiration of their furloughs much better 
provided with money than with sentimental l)enedic- 
tions. They, on their part, returned without regret, 
the one to his regiment, the other to the general whose 
aide-de-camp he was, the third to his office, the fourth 
to his ship, tlie others to their schools. As to his 
daughters, he could not comprehend how they could 
want any thing but ribbons and dancing-lessons in the 
first place, or than a dowry and a trousseau in the next. 

The district was unfortunate in its marshals : in less 
than two years, it lost three of them. Melekitchen- 
tzoff died of indigestion ; Count Nulin of a fall from 
his hoi-se ; and Kostlyakin of the measles, which struck 
in, — though others say, that it was of cholera, — so 
that Tchitchikoff was destined to arrive at the goal of 
his desires. He was summoned to exercise the honors 
of the marshalship during the interim, and was re- 
garded as a worthy representative of the local nobility, 
except by the country squires, who were impatient of 
all superiority, and who, like Prince Tchigirin, their 
leader, were never known to be satisfied with any one. 

An interim was what he wanted : less than a year 
later, he was confirmed for three years, and he resigned% 
himself to it. We will not designate those who were 
the most assiduous at his table and his festivals, — 
they can be divined. The malcontents? — Of course, 
with Tchigirin always at their head. 

At his death, the wealthy Melekitchentzoff had ap-» 



274 TCHITCHIKOFF'8 JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

pointed Tchitchikoflf his testamentary executor, and 
co-guardian of his two minor sons. 

All this weighed heavily in his favor, and was of 
great advantage to him, thanks to his broad way of 
interpreting and fulfilling his obligations : there was 
extremely little of the citizen about him, and, on the 
other hand, much of the grand seigneur of the self- 
made man, of the grand seigneur of the provinces of 
the antique pattern. 

His wife acquired a habit, which he did not notice, 
and which generally passed for a trick : she sighed in- 
cessantly ; each sigh was preceded by a slight yawn, 
and followed by a broad smile, and each smile by great 
fugitive shadows, which flitted across her brow like the 
clouds of autumn. In the privacy of her own heart, 
she groaned over all these successive novelties which 
condemned her to play the part of a great lady, and 
forced her to delegate to her subordinates the house- 
keeping, the oversight of the servants, of the cupboards, 
and of the cellars, and the care of manufacturing, with 
her own bands, all sorts of liquors and preserves, of 
which an unprecedented quantity was now consumed in 
the house. 

Our hero, on the other hand, having a heart far 
above his fortunes, was not in the least satisfied. 
With his horses of alabaster whiteness, his calm and 
upright bearing, his florid cheeks, his aristocratically 
fine and transparent nose, his magnetic glance, the 
noble and generous manner in which he did the honors 
of his house, his gala-days and his great festivals, he 
thought that the nobility of the country did not render 
him justice in exact proportion to his merits, and that, 
at the elections which took place eleven months after 
his exaltation, he ought to have been elected marshal 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 275 

of the government, Instead of being confirmed as mar- 
shal of his district for the succeeding three years. 
This well-deserved promotion would have had the 
effect, not only of taking him in triumph to the capital 
of that government, but would have opened to him the 
doors of the palace of the Tzai-s at Petersburg, and 
have attached possibly to his marshal's uniform a cer- 
tain golden key, which renders the offices of master 
and grand master of ceremonies accessible. . . . 

Tchitchikoff kept his thoughts to himself, however ; 
and, too proud to sulk like a fool, he retreated into him- 
self like a sage. But his eyes turned constantly to the 
"walls, the floors, and the ceilings of the principal rooms 
of his manor, and he thought them all very bare, very 
mean, very poor, compared to the marvels which he 
had seen in the Kremlin at Moscow, and in the great 
Winter Palace of the new capital. 

With so many great qualities, our hero will surely 
pardon us for not concealing any thing : he had a lofty 
soul, and a quick, just, and penetrating mind ; but his 
heart, which was often so strong, was not exempt from 
some weaknesses. He feared all contact with for- 
eigners, on account, in the first place, of their habit of 
judging a country which will not allow them to know 
it; in the second place, because of their detestable love 
of novelties, under the name of progress ; in the third 
place, because of their stupid principle of the equality 
of all citizens before the law. 

The very word citizen, as applied to plebeians, to 
peasants, and even to the merchant and artisan classes^ 
seemed to him a revolting absurdity. The law, in his 
opinion, is a machine set up and worked by noblemen, 
and which performs its functions for the benefit of 
noblemen, who have at their head the Tzar, who, to 



276 TCHITCHIKOFF'a JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

bis eteinal honor be it said, is the first gentleman in 
the empire : equality is only an antique phantom evoked 
by the evil-intentioned from the depths of the ruins of 
the fabulous republics of Pskoff and Novgorod, at the 
instigation of the philosophers of Grermany, who have 
already suffocated Poland in the fumes of their political 
wisdom. 

Thus Tchitchikoff entertained sentiments and con- 
duct with regard to the inhabitants of Europe, wliich 
were thoroughly Chinese : he conscientiously failed to 
fulfil his engagements towards all Englishmen, French- 
men, Germans, Swiss, and Italians, simply with the 
object of making those persons feel that a formal 
ti^eaty or engagement entered into with them was not a 
contract which could bind the Russian. If he yielded 
in the end, it was only at the entreaty of his peers in the 
nobility; and he still acquitted himself after his own 
fashion, obliging them to feel that he acted out of 
respect to himself, and not in virtue of the allied 
contract, which was and could be only a fiction. 

If he sought their Parisian soap, their eavy^e-cologne^ 
their Holland cambric, their knives and razors from 
81iefl3eld, their trufiles from Perigord, their Strasbni^ 
pdtes^ their wines of champagne, their cloths of Sedan, 
and their carpets of Aubusson, he much preferred to 
get these things from the Jews of Poland than from 
Frenchmen, Englishmen, Italians, and Germans. He 
would willingly have employed the Jews of White 
Russia to teach his daughters the languages and litera- 
tures of these four nations. He would have liked an 
Italian opera, entirely made up of singers from the 
Ukraina ; a French theatre, with actors who were natives 
of Simbirsk and Tobolsk ; a German theatre composed 
of Kalmuks and Kirghiz Kazaks. 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 277 

One of the most characteristic traits of our hero'8 
lofty personality was patriotism, the most exclusive 
Great Russian patriotism. He was perfectly willing to 
admit imitation as the simple mark of the universal 
adaptability of the Muscovite nature ; he did not admit 
the infusion of the foreign genius ; he repulsed every 
■ shadow of any association or affiliation whatever. The 
introduction of a Frenchman, an Englishman, a Swiss, 
a Belgian, into the councils of the government, would 
have been, in his eyes, as great an enormity as an invi- 
tation to a fox, a wolf, a hyena, a shark, to the super- 
vision of an aviary, a sheepfold, a menagerie, or a 
great national lake, like Ladoga or Onega or llmen. 
A Jew might be allowed, because, if he did not walk 
straight, one would have no hesitation in despatching 
him, without noise, to those vast Eastern countries of 
the empire, where the need of arms to develop the 
mines concealed in the great chain of the Chinese 
frontier is making itself more and more felt, and where 
the West has absolutely nothing to do with the question. 

Politics, diplomacy, internal administration, justice, 
men, things, defects, prejudices, abuses, numerous, 
varied, and universal, he accepted and protected. He 
adored every thing, — every thing that existed in Rus- 
sia; every thing that was Russian, because it was 
Russian, because it existed for the benefit of the no- 
bility of his country ; because, in spite of all this, the 
dever Russian, by proper guidance of the bark of his 
cupidity, could, even without special talents, without 
genius, without distinguished services, attain nobility, 
fortune, honors, and even dream of the highest digni- 
ties. And because vices, wrongs, crimes, anomalies, 
and the frequent contradictions of a state of things 
where every one believes in evil, and no one in the law, 



278 TCHITCBJKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS, 

bad, in his eyes, their good sides for the ambitious; 
and, in any ease, the right of limitation. Let thirty 
millions of serfs and low-class families remain immo- 
lated to the questionable pleasures, to the existence 
of a barbarous luxury, and of fancies (often savage) of 
three hundi*ed thousand satraps, upheld by a million 
of corrupt country squires, and flanked by three or four 
thousand Jewish, Greek, or Mongolian nabobs, — he 
saw no inconvenience to the country in this arrange- 
ment. 

Such were the most common texts for his conversa- 
tion on days of expansion, at the desserts of his most 
splendid banquets. And it is to be remarked, that all 
the days which separated these hours of Potemkin-like 
life, were days of death ; that is to say, of prostration, 
devoted to the silence of a Trappist monk, and to the 
strictest economy. 

Tchitchikoff, during the happy days of his joumey- 
ings, had dreamed of fortune, of a pretty wife, an 
elegant retreat, a sumptuous equipage, a numerous 
progeny, of clearing new land, of clever management 
of forests, of agricultural prosperity, the happiness of 
his vassals. Every thing, except the happiness of his 
vassals, except this last point, which had not, in fact, 
been included in the account otherwise than as the set 
dishes for dessert, which always remain intact in the 
refreshment- rooms on great railway lines, — every thing 
had prospered with him according to his wish, and had 
even much surpassed his expectations. But if he had 
been asked up to what point his wife and his five eldest 
sons shared the habitual order of his thoughts in his 
old age, he would have been very much embarrassed to 
say, we must confess ; for, if he had moments of efl'u- 
sion with the nobility who were invited to his feasts and 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF, 279 

festivals, he never indulged in any in the lюsom of his 
happy family. '' My family/' he might have answered, 
''^must love and honor m?, because I am its head ; as I 
love my country, as I love and honor the Tzar, because 
he is my chief and my master. Neither the emperor 
nor I demand an account of our mutual opinions any 
more than we do of our mutual affection. We do not 
even know each other. It is the same with my sons and 
me : they have the honor of being my sons. I do not 
allow them to want for any thing, as is my duty in the 
character of a father and a gentleman. What necessity 
is there, after that, of our knowing each other? " 

A heavy wager might be laid to-day that Tchitchikoff 
no longer belongs to this lower world. ЛУе will sup- 
pose that he has, materially speaking, followed to the 
tomb his illustrious poet, his Homer, the good and 
pious Nikolai Gogol. Upon this historic point we may 
consult his ingenious secretary, Mr. Vastchenko Zak- 
haitchenko. But to what purpose ? Who knows what 
became of Ninus, Romulus, Belisarius, the mother of 
the Pious ^neas, and Prince Andrei Kurbsky, Prince 
of Yaroslav, of the blood of Rurik ? 

Nevertheless, our duty as an impartial histonan de- 
mands that we shall report what has come down to us 
in relation to this sad subject ; without, however, guar- 
anteeing any thing, and witliout attaching more im- 
portance than they deseiTC to the conjectures of an 
idolatrous public, which, at the present time, is making 
it an object of diversion. Many maintain that he is 
still living, and that, octogenarian and decrepit tliough 
this noble personification of ancient Russia may be, he 
still seems to be in marvellously good health. They 
relate, in covert words, to the ear which cares to listen, 
that Tchitchikoff is, in his province, the secret chief, 



280 TCHITCHJKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

the real soul of the venerable faction, which is called 
the party of the immovables; who plead gravely, but 
in extravagant terms, in their secret conventicles, that 
all parts of the edifice of a government, which may 
have its faults, but which has in its favor the sanction 
of time, may not be demolished at once, under the 
siKfcious pretext of making reparation to a class which 
has been held for centuries under an inteixlict, and under 
the pretext of eclectic progress in humanitarian, social, 
and Christian civilization. According to this party, 
people must neither institute, nor allow to be instituted, 
any of those accursed revolutions which do violence 
to the past, overthrow the future, and deliver it over to 
adventurei-s. Tchitchikoff has never proffered one word 
of recrimination against any man, or any party estab- 
lished by legal or extra-legal order in the country. 
This must be said for him in justice, as a son, a nephew, 
a scholar, a parishioner, a scribe, an employee, a clerk, 
a custom-house official, as the associate of a son of 
Israel, superintendent for a gentleman, gentleman trav- 
eller, speculator, prisoner on two occasions, as a lover, 
— if he ever was one, even in imagination, — as admin- 
istrator, as a man who has been prosecuted and under 
condemnation, as a landed proprietor and an owner of 
serfs, as an elector of magistrates, as a candidate who 
has been scoffed at, or as one elected from necessity. 

Custom-houses, finances, church, the organization 
of the army, of the navy, of courts of justice, of 
prisons, the salaries of functionaries and clerks, public 
instruction, police, the serfdom of the masses, general 
simony, — these he has never protested against : he 
has accepted every thing, approved of every thing by 
his silence and his submission. And yet, as the reader 
has seen, our hero suffered horribly up to the date of 



MISERIES AND GRANDEURS OF TCHITCHIKOFF. 281 

his marriage. This did not, however, prevent his be- 
coming the master of a considerable fortune, an orderly 
man, and mai*shal of the nobility of his district, and 
enjoying, in his green old age, general esteem and 
respect. 

To our mind, the whole secret of his special policy 
(which will possess the merit, in the eyes of many per- 
sons, of being eminently practical) consisted in avert- 
ing obstacles, and of making use at all times, and in 
every situation, of evil to further his own highest good. 

Alas ! generations follow each other like days ; and, 
like days, they do not resemble each other. The whole 
of Tchitchikoff's youthful family, especiall}' since tlie 
epoch, unjustly allowed to fall into oblivion, of the 
ukaz relating to the laborers empowered to enter into 
free contracts, has been notoriously on the side of all 
the great reforms, so liberally prepared by a tutelary 
and truly paternal government. And their mother, in 
the privacy of the family, willingly recognizes, in com- 
pany with her children, this simple moral truth, that 
monstrous abuses are not any more respectable because 
they are old and tenacious of life. 

If we may be pardoned for our partiality towards the 
idea of reformation, which beams in the eyes of the 
modern generation, we will proclaim Tchitchikoff, in 
return, one of the most perfect of heroes, the proto- 
type of a generation which has seen its day, and* which 
seems destined to disappear shortly. We will even go 
so far as to maintain that our hero is not dead ; that 
it is not possible that he should die without having 
made an honorable apology ; that he is not, moreover, 
one of those men who die outright, and descend at 
once into the abyss of oblivion. We will proclaim that 
he is, that he must be, immortal. £h ! unless that be 



282 TCBITCHIKOFF'S JOURNEYS; OR, DEAD SOULS. 

done, of what avail is poetry? What end does his- 
tory subserve? We will say that he has become the 
object of a mysterious worship, and that he has an 
altar in the hearts of all partisan Russia, — the Russia 
more or less avowed in the character of the destroyer 
of liberty, of the type of Ivan the Terrible, of the de- 
stroyer of Pskoff, and of Novgorod the Great. We 
will say all this ; but we will not permit our admiration 
for the exploits of the father to blind us to the very 
dififerent merits of the sons, who vie with each other in 
understanding and proclaiming that the general good 
should cause all private interests to hold their peace, 
and that the happiness, the honor, of a whole people 
can only be the fruit of sacrifice. 

The Russian is not only Catholic and Christian at 
bottom, but he has, besides, all the instincts of the 
genius of initiation. What likelihood, then, is there 
that he will much longer put up with a badly disgubed 
slavery in the heart of his country, and with a semi- 
pagan system, which is the sole cause of his physical 
and moral discomfort, with a system which is an obsta- 
cle to the fruitful march of humanity in its career 
of progress? 



TABLE OF RUSSIAN RANKS. 



L . 





TABLE OF RUSSIAN 


RANKS. (Tchins:^ 




Civil Ranks. 


Сопвзрошшю Ranks. 




Army. 


Navy. 


Court 


1 


Chancellor of the 
Empire. 

Actual Priyy 
Councillor. 


General Field-mar- 
shal. 

General of Infiintry. 


Admiial-in-Chiet 


Chief Chamberiam. 




General of Cavalry. 
General of Artillery. 


AdmiraL 


Chief Steward oC 

the Household. 

Chief Marshal of 








the Court. 
Chief Cupbearer. 


3 

4 


Privy Councillor. 

Actual Councillor 
of Sute. 


lieutenant-GeneraL 
Major General. 


Vice-Admiial. 
Rear-AdmiraL 


Steward, Marshal, 
Master of the 
Hounds. 


5 


Councillor of 
Sute. 














6 

7 
8 


Collcfdate Coun- 
cillor. 
Court Councillor. 

Collegiate Assess- 
or. 


Staff 
CotoneU 

Lieutenant-Colonel. 

Major. 


Officers. 
Captain of the ist 

ftank. 
Captain of the ad 

Rank. 
Captain- Lieutenant 


Chamber-Fourrier. 


9 


Titular Councillor. 
Collegiate Coun- 


upper 
Captain of Infantry. 
Captain of Cavalry. 

StaflT-Captain. 
Staff-Cavalry Cap- 
tain. 


Officers. 
Ueutenant 


Court-Fourrier.» 


T1 


cillor. 
Naval Secretary. 






14 


Governmental 
Secreury. 

Senate, Synod, 
and Cabinet 
Registrar. 

Collegiate Regis- 
trar. 


Lieutenant 

Sub- Lieutenant 

Ensign of Infantry. 
Comet of Cavalry. 




Table-Decker, 
Coffee - Bearer, 
Butter-Bearer. 







The officers of the Young Guard, of the Engineer Corps, and Cadet Corps, have one 
Crade over those of the line, and the officers of the Old Guard have two, up to the rank 
of Colonel. 

The 5th class of the Military Hierarchy, which comprised the grades of Brigadier 
and CaMain-Commander^ has been abolished. It is the same in the nth class. It 
must also be observed, that, in the Imperial Guards, classes i and 8 (Lieutenant- 
Colonel and Major) do not exist ; and the same is true of Major m the Corps of Elngi- 
seers and Public Ways. . 

In the Military as well as the Naval Hierarchy, the grades from 14 to 7 confer per- 
sonal nobility, and the superior grades, beginning with the 6th class, hereditary nobility: 
while in the Civil and other Hierarchies, personal nobility is acquired only from the 9th 
class ( Titular ConnciUor), and hereditary nobility only from the 4th {Actual Coun- 
cillor of State). 

> In ancient times, the officer who assigned the lodgings to followers of the Court. 

284 



COMPARATIVE TABLE OP RUSSIAN 


RANKS. {Tchins.) 


Ranks. 




Titles. 


Hierarchy of thb 
Chupxh. 


Mines. 


Learned 
Degrees. 






X 

3 


Vuisokoprevoskho- 
diteistvo. Noble 
Excellency. 


Monastic Priesthood. 






I. Metropolitan. 






3. Archbishop. 

Title. Vuisokopreosvy" 
ashtchinstvo. Most 
Eminent. 






3 
4 


Prevoskhodltelstvo. 
Excellency. 


3. Bishop. 

Title. Preosvyash- 










4. Archimandrite. 

5. Abbot. 


Head Director of 
Mines. 


.... 


5 


Vuisokorddie. High 
bom. 


Director of 

Mines. 
Chief Surveyor 

of Mines. 
Chief Overseerof 

Forges, Sur- 

-veyorof Mines. 


Doctor. 


6 

7 
8 


Vuisokoblagorddie. 
Most Honorable. 


Title. Vuisokoprepo- 
ddbie. Right Rever- 
end. 

White Priesthood. 


Markscheider 
(Surveyor). 

Chief Assayer. 

Overseer of 
Forges. 


Magister 
(Master). 

Candidate 
(Bache- 
lor). 


9 

lO 

II 

13 

«3 


Blagorddie, Well 
bom. 


6. Archpriest. 

Title. Vuisokoprepo- 
ddbie. Right Rever- 
end. 

7. Priest. 

Title. Prepoddhi*. 
Reverend. 


Assayer. 
Foreman. 

It orcm дп ■ 


Actual Stu- 
dent. 


8. Archdeacon. 

9. Deacon. 



The 4th class of the Civil Hierarchy includes the titles Attorney-General and 
Uerald-in-Chie/ ; the 6th, the title Councillor of War; and the 13th, the title 
Prox'incial Secretary, 

Among the posts at court of the first rank also belong Chief Master ^ the Horse, 
Chief Master of the Hounds^ Chief Master of Ceremonies, Director of the Imperial 
Theatre : and, to the second rank. Master of the Horse ^ Chief Carver, Master of_ 
Ceremonies, as well as the posts of Chamberlain and Gentleman of the Bed<hamber» 

The grades above indicated in the Hierarchy of Mines are preserved only for those 
who obtained them previous to 1834, that is to say, before the formation of the СофЗ 
of Mining Engineers; at present, the employees of the Department of Mines are called 
functionaries of such or such a class. 

The titles VHisokoPre^'Oskhoditelstvo, Prevoskhodltelstvo, Vuisokorddie, etc., are 
only given to functionaries who possess no other. Russian Princes and Counts have the 
titles of Siydielstvo (Excellency); and Princes of the Empire, that of Svyitlost (Serene 
Highness). 

28s 



•• The demand for these Russian stories has but just /airly begun ; but it is a 
literary movemettt more widespread^ more intense^ than anything this country has 
probwly seen within the past quarter of a century У — Boston Traveller. 

Щ 

DOSTOYBVSKY'S WORKS. 

Crime and Punishment. i2ino. $1.50. 
Injury and Insult, in press. 
Becollections of a Dead-House. in press. 

**The readers of Turginief and of Tolstoi must now add Dostoyevsky to their list 
if they wish to understand the reasons for the supremacy of the Russians in modern 
fiction." — W. J). HowellSf in Harper's Monthly for September, 



Anna Kardnina. By Count Lyof N. Tolstoi. Translated from the Russian 
by Nathan Haskell Dole. Royal i2mo. $1.75. ' 
" Will rank among the great works of fiction of the age.**— Portland Transcript, 
"Characterized by all the breadth and complexity, tlie insight and tlie profound 

analysis, of •Middleinarch.' " — Critic^ New IWh. 

My Religrion. By Count Lyof N. Tolstoi. Translated by Huntington 
Smith, lamo. Gilt top. $1.25. 
*' Every man whose eyes are lifted above the manger and the trough should take 
* My Religion ' to his home. Let him read it with no matter what hostile preposses- 
sions, let him read it to confute it, but still read, and *bc tliat is able to receive it, let 
him receive it.* " — JVew York Sun. 

Childhood. Boyhood, Youth. By Count Lyof N. ToLSToY. Translated by 

Isabel F. Hapgood. VVitli portrait of the author. i2mo. $1.50. 

"Will make profound impression on all thoughtful people.** — Nation, NewYork, 

"A rare and veracious picture of character development." — Star^ New York. 

^ "These exquisite sketches belong to the literature which never grows old, which 

lives forever in the heart of humanity as a cherished revelation.'* — Literary World, 

Taras Bulba. By Nikolai V. Gogol. With portrait of the author. i2mo. $1, 
" For grandeur, simnlicitv of conception, and supcrbness of description, can 

liardly be equalled.*' — Pfew York Times. 
" A wonderful prose epic, having all the charm and style of a stately poem, — one 

of the masterpieces of literature." — AVw York Star. 

St. John's Eve, and Other Stories. By Nikolai v. Gogol. i2mo. $1.3^ 
In these tales of Gogol, the marvellous abounds. His field of observation is the 
village. His heroes are unimportant people, with superstitious imaginations, — very 
simple souls, whose artless passions are shown without any veil, but whose very 
ingenuousness is a deliciously restful contrast to our romantic or theatrical char, 
acters, so insipid and perfunctory in the refinements of their conventionality. 

This volume is the second of a series of Gogol's Works which we have in prepara- 
tion, and will be followed by " Dead Souls," now in press. 

A Vital Question; or. What is to be Done? By Nikolai G. Tchbr. 
NUisiiEVSKV. With portrait of the author. i2mo. $1.25. 
" A famous but crude novel.** — New York Tribune, 

" Yet it so touches the deep realities of life that in its force one forgets its crudity 
of fonn.** — Evening Traveller, Boston. 
" People accustomed to think out of leading strings will be glad to read it.*' 

— Hartford Post, 

Great Masters of Russian Literature. By Ernest Duiuy. Sketches 

ot the Life and Works of Gogol, Turg^nief, Tolstoi. With portraits. Trans- 
lated by Nathan Haskell Dole. i^mo. $1.25. 

**This volume, with its clear outline of the lives of these three great novelists, 
and its delineation cf tlieir literary characteristics, will be found a most available 
and useful hand-b(юk.'* — Traveller. 



THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO., 

13 ASTOB PLACE. NEW YORK. 



" The ikmandfor these RnssioH stories has Ш just fairfy begun ; hut it is a liienay 
mevememt more wides/readf more tutense^ than anytkiug this country has probably seem 
witkin ike past ftusrter of a century.'** — Boston Travbllbk. 



CRIME AND PUNISHMENT. 

By FEODOR M. DOSTOYEVSKY. 

lamo. $1.50. 



"The readers of Turgenief and of Tobtoi must now add Dostoyersky to their list, if 
they wish to understand the reasons for the supremacy of the Russians in nrodem 
ficUon."— If^. D. HoweUs, in Hamper's Monthly /or September. 

** There are three Russian novelists who, though with one exception little known out of 
their own country, stand head and shoulders above most of their contemporaries. In the 
opinion of some not indifferent critics they are superior to all other novelists of this 
generation. Two of them — Dostoyevsky and Turgenief — died not long ago ; the third— 
Leon Tobtoi — still lives. The one with the most marked individuality of character, 
probably the most highly gifted, was unquestionably Fe6dorDostoyevsky." — Spectator, 

" Outside Rusaa the name of Fe6dor Dostoyevsky was till lately almost unknown. Yet 
Dostoyevsky b one of the most remarkable of modem writers, and his book — * Cnme and 
Punishment ' — is one of the most moving of modem novels. It is a story of a murder 
and of the punbhment which dogs the murderer; and its effect b unique in fiction. It b 
realism, but such realism as M. Zola and hb followers do not dream of. The reader 
knows the personages — strange, grotesque, terrible personages they are — more intimately 
than if he had been years with them in the flesh. He is constrained to live their lives, to 
suffer their torture, to scheme and resist with them, exult with them, weep and laugh and 
despair with them ; he breathes the very breath of their nostrils, and with the madness 
that comes upon them he is afflicted even as they. Thb sounds extravagant praise, no 
doubt ; but only to those who have not read the volume. To those who have, we are sure 
that it will appear rather under the mark than otherwise. 

*' Every one has read the pages in which Dickens has dealt with the murder of Montague 
Tigg and the agony of Jonas Chuzzlewi;. The effect of ' Crime and Punishment ' is even 
more poignant and devouring. To analyze the work in detail is manifestly impossible. 
Every incident — and there are many — is worthy of comment; every character — and 
there is at least a dozen — would fumish the matter of a long discourse. All we can do in 
this place is to remark upon the strange completeness of the book as a work of art ; to 
describe, however imperfectly and inadequately, the extraordinary nature of its peculiar 
quality and the incomparable potency of its peculiar effect ; and to note that, in spite of its 
sordid subject and the sense of grinding misery which informs it throughout, its teaching b 
in the main ennobling and good. It is absolutely non-political ; and, if we accept it as a 
tme picture, — and apparently we have no choice, — it is the best and fullest explanation 
of Nihilbm in existence." — 7%^ Athetueum. 



THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO., 

13 ASTOR PLACE, NEW YORK. 






The Poor Boy and the 3Ierchant Prince; or.TheLifbop 
Amos Lawrence. Ibmo. By WibHAM M. Thayer . . 1.00 

The Good Girl and the True Woman; or, The Life op 
Mary Lyon. IGrno. 13y William M. Thayer . . . 1.00 

Nelson ; or, How a Country Boy Made his Way in the Citt. 
Being Incidents in the J.ile of a Successful Merchant of Boston. 
IGmo. By William M. Thayer 1.25 

Poor Boys who Became Famous. By Sarah K. Bolton. 
Short biograpliical sketches of George Peabody, Horace Greeley, 
Bayard layfor, Michael Faraday, and other Noted People, with 
numerous portraits. l2mo 1.50 

General Gordon, The Christian Hero. A careful and well- 
written life of this Knightly Soldier, especially adapted to 
young people. 12mo 1.25 

lattle Arthur's England. By Lady Calcott. With 36 Illiw- 
trations. Elegantly printed and bound in red cloth, giving ia 
concise and easy language all the essential facts of English His- 
tory for young People. 12mo. Cloth 1.25 

bittle Arthur's France. On the plan of Little Arthur's 
England, and bound in uniform style. 12mo .... 1.25 

"Exceptionally fitted to interest and instruct young people." — 
Boston Advertiser, 

Off to the Wilds. By Geo. Manvtlle Fenn. A Story of Hunt- 
ing Adventures in South Africa. A favorite book with the boys. 
Sq. 8vo. Fully Illustrated 1.75 

The Mutiny on Board the Ijeander. By Bernard Held- 
MANN. A Story of Strange Adventures in the Southern Pacific. 
Sq. 8vo. 24 Illustrations 1.75 

Martin the Skipper. By James F. Cobb, author of "The 
Watchers on the Longships," etc. A Tale for Boys and Seafar- 
ing Folk. 12mo 1.50 

The Watchers on the liong^ships. By James F. Cobb. A 
Story of Thrilling Interest, founded on fact, illustrating Moral 
Heroism and Faithfulness to Duty. 12mo .... 1.50 

A Home in the Holy Land. By Mrs. Finn. An excellent 
and faithful Description of Home Life in the Holy Land at the 
Present Day. 12mo 1.50 

The Farmer Boy ; or, How He Became Commander-in-Chief. 
The Life of George Washington. By Uncle Juvenal. IGmo . 1.00 

A Year at. Poplar Row. By March Ellinwood. A noble 
ideal of Christian Girlhood and Young Womanhood. 12mo . 1.25 

Hints to Our Boys. By A. J. Symington, with an Introduc- 
tion by Lyman Abbott, D.D. Square 16mo .... .75 

Abbott's American Histories for Youth. 8 vols. Illustra- 
ted. 12mo, ^10.00. 4 vols 6.00 

August Stories. 4 vols. Illustrated. 16mo .... 4.50 

Juno Stories. 4 vols. Illustrated. Ifimo .... 4.50 

The Jonas Books, в vols. Illustrated. IGmo . . . 5.00 

The Ijucy Books, в vols. Illustrated. 16mo . . . 5.00 

The Rollo Books. 14 vols. Illustrated. 16mo . . . 12.00 
MiUio> -8 of copies of Jacob Abbott's books have been sold, and 
they have become classics among the Literature for children. 




Ъ^'-м 



ijt*?:-* 



^^Ш 





'^.^^Ъ 



:, ,^¥ 



к 




Щ'^. 



ш 



I- 



т/- 



^^f^-^-jrS 





