Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



A 



M, '7/ 



7 




C^u//^ /(^^ < 




AN ESSAY 



ON THE 



IMPORTANCE OF THE STUDY 



OF 



THE SLAVONIC LANGUAGES 




BEING 

^be 3naudural lecture 

DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

JANUARY 25, 1890 

BY 

W. R. MORFILL, M.A. 

BCSSIAN AND THE OTHER SLAVONIC LANGUAGES 



iSonion 

HENRY FROWDE 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE 
AMEN CORNER, E.C. 

1890 



A 



7 3 2 3 _* 



/^/ 





s 



a 



f/7 



INAUGURAL LECTURE. 



-•-♦- 



For the purposes of my Inaugairal Lecture, it seems to me 
that the two following points would be most worthy the 
attention of my hearers. 

(i) What attempts in the way of studying the Slavonic 
languages have previously been made in England ? 

(a) What advantages can we gain from a study of these 
languages and their literature ? 

I shall proceed to discuss the first of these, and say a few 
words about the relations between England and Slavonic 
countries. 

The connexion between England and Russia, as is pretty 
generally known, dates from the middle of the sixteenth 
century. In the year 1553 three ships were sent under the 
command of Sir Hugh Willoughby and Richard Chancellor 
5 to attempt to find the north-eastern passage. The ships were 
< unfortunately separated by a storm ; Sir Hugh Willoughby 
crj and his crew were afterwards found frozen to death on the 
coast of Russian Lapland, but Chancellor arrived at Arch- 
angel, where he landed. He succeeded in reaching Moscow, 
the capital of Ivan the Terrible, then reigning, who concluded 
a treaty of commerce with the English and sent an embassy 
under Osep Napea in return. 

The whole reign of Ivan is described to us in the graphic 
diary of Sir Jerome Horsey, the English ambassador at his 
court, but I can only allow myself a few allusions to it, as 
the scope of my lecture is not historical. Some letters of 

B 



Ivan's are preserved in the British Museum, but only the 
signatures are his, the body of the letter being written by 
a diak or secretary. The rule of Ivan, tyrant as he was, was 
on the whole beneficial to Russia. Thus in the year 1553 a 
printing-press was set up in Moscow, and there was printed 
in 1564 the first book, an Apoatol as it is called by the Slavs, 
i.e. a book containing the Acts of the Apostles and the 
Epistles. The chief printers were Ivan Fedorov and Peter 
Mstislavets. Their labours, however, were destined to be of 
short duration. The eflTorts of those who earned a living by 
copying books, and the prejudices of the superstitious prevailed. 
The printers were driven out of Russia and found a refuge 
in Lithuania, having lost their protector, Macarius, the metro- 
politan of Moscow, who died in 1564. Ivan Fedorov was 
warmly received by Sigismund III of Poland, and printed 
several books in that country, among others the Bible of 
Ostrog in 158 1, of which there is a fine copy in the Bodleian 
Library. Another copy is preserved in the British Museum, 
and actually came from the library of Ivan. It was brought 
from Russia by Horsey. On the fly-leaf is the following 
memorandum in Horsey's own hand. 'This Bibell in the 

« 

Slavonian tonge, had out of the Emperor's librari.' 

Before parting with Horsey, I must give his character of 
Ivan, which is graphic and valuable as coming from one who 
had frequently seen him and conversed with him. He writes 
as follows : ' Thus much to conclude with this Emperor Ivan 
Vasiliwich. He was a goodlie man of person and presencie, 
well fevored, high forehead, shrill voice, a right Sithian, full 
of readie wisdom, cruell, bloudye, merciless ; his own experience 
mannaged by direction both his state and commonwealth 
afiares; was sumptuously intomed in Michell Archangell 
Church, where he though garded daye and night, remaines 
a fearfuU spectacle to the memory of such as pass by or heer 
his name spoken of, [who] are contented to cross and bless 
themselves from his resurrection again.' 



I have endeavoured in a small work about to be published 
to set before ray readers some of the cmious stories which 
bring" England into connexion with this tyrant. Amon^ 
other things, he wished his friend Elizabeth to procure him 
an English wife. One was accordingly selected for him, 
Lady Mary Hastings; but when she heard of the seven 
wives he had previously had, who had been divorced or had 
died, her heart failed her at the last moment and she declined 
the hand of the northern Nero. 

Horsey tells us that when on one occasion he showed a 
letter of Ivan's to Elizabeth, she asked him many questions 
about the Russian language and said in a bright, quick way, 
^I could soon learn it.' Mikulin, a Russian ambassador to 
her court, had his portrait painted while in England, which is 
still preserved. 

Boris Godunov, who usurped the throne after the death of 
Feodore the feeble son of Ivan, sent some youths to be 
educated in England, and one of them at least seems to have 
stayed in our country and become an English clergyman, for 
his name is mentioned in Walker's * Sufferings of the Clergy* 
as one who was expelled by the Puritans. 

A curious relique of the same period is still preserved in 
the Bodleian. It is the note-book of a certain Richard James, 
a clergyman, who seems to have been chaplain or something 
of the kind to the Embassy at Moscow. The vocabulary of 
Russian words which he has collected is curious : under the 
word kinzhal (dagger) he writes : such as the one which was 
shown me as that by which the false Demetrius was killed. 
It will be remembered, that this false Demetrius was an 
impostor, who gave himself out to be a son of Ivan the 
Terrible, who had been killed in early youth. This pretender 
however, after having for a time deceived the Russians, met 
with a violent death. 

But not only have we the curious note-book of James, but 
he has copied out, or caused to be copied out, some of the 

B % 



interesting Russian ballads of the time, biliuiy as they are 
called, of which I shall shortly speak more at large. One of 
these is yery interesting : it is the lamentation of Xenia the 
daughter of Boris Godunov, who on her father's death was 
forced to enter a monastery. Throughout Hakluyt's * Voyages' 
and the diary of Horsey we have stories about how our 
countrymen fared in Russia in these early times. Let us take 
one as a specimen, to show how hard it went with them 
in the Tatar invasions. This is the account in a letter of 
Richard Uscombe to Mr. Henry Lane, written the 5th day 
of August, 1571- 

* The Mosco is burnt every sticke by the Crimme, the a4th 
day of May last and an innumerable number of people ; and 
in the English house was smothered Thomas Sontham^ Tosild 
Waverley, Green's wife and children, two children of Rafe, 
and more to the number of twenty-five persons were stifeled 
in our beere seller ; and yet in the same seller was Rafe, his 
wife, John Browne and John Clarke preserved, which was 
wonderfull. And there went into that seller Master Glover 
and Master Rowley also ; but because the heate was so great 
they came forth againe with much perill, so that a boy at 
their heeles was taken with, the fire, yet they escaped blindfold 
into another seller, and there, as God's will was, they were 
preserved. The emperor fled out of the field, and many of 
his people were carried away by the Crimme Tartar. And 
so with exceeding much spoile and infinite prisoners they 
returned home againe. What with the Crimme on the one 
side and his crueltie on the other, he hath but few people 
left.' 

Cromwell was not recognised by the tsar Alexis, who was 
astonished to hear that the English had cut off the head of 
their King Carolus. We find Charles II during his exile 
and when in dire necessity borrowing money of the Russian 
tsar. The arrival of Peter the Great in England is well 
known: this was no doubt the cause of the first Russian 



i 



grammar being printed in England and at Oxford. It 
appeared in Latin in 1696. 

We must remember tbat Peter the Great was the lion of 
the day, and general object of curiosity, like the Shah in 
our own time; but it need hardly be said, that he was in 
every respect a much nobler and more interesting man. 
Henry Ludolf, the author of this work, was nephew of 
Job Ludolf, who wrote a history of Ethiopia, a celebrated 
work in its day. The grammar is a somewhat slender one : 
of course it knows nothing about the aspects of the verbs, that 
terror of modem Russian students. The dialogues at the end 
have a very modem ring about them: they would be good 
Russian at the present day. The Old Slavonic letters are 
used, for Peter had not as yet turned the tserkovnaya azbuka 
or church alphabet into the grazhdamkaya or civil. The 
type with which the book was printed is preserved at the 
Clarendon Press. 

Still no one as yet thought of studying Russian in 
England: there were many Scotxjhmen in Russia besides 
the English merchants, Dalziels, Gordons, Braces, Carmicha«ls, 
and Hamiltons. We come upon their names in various 
documents, frequently strangely perverted: thus Hamilton 
has got into Khomutov. A short time ago in the Starma, 
or Antiquary, a Russian magazine full of interesting matter, 
a document was published in which the tsar Alexis gives 
permission to Dalziel to quit his service. He was accused, as 
my hearers will remember, of having contracted some cruel 
habits while serving in barbarous Muscovy, which he exhi- 
bited in his treatment of the Covenanters. The diary of 
Patrick Gordon, one of the most active coadjutors of Peter 
the Great, is still preserved in manuscript and has partly been 
published. Peter has justly been charged with cruelty in his 
treatment of the revolted Streltsi, but Gordon does not seem 
to have» been of a more tender disposition, and coolly avows 
the severities he practised. One more fact about these 




8 

« 

Scotchmen in Russia, and I have done. Lermontov, who 
occupies the second place among the poets of that country, 
was of Scotch extraction, having been descended from a 
certain Learmont, who came from Scotland to Poland about 
the beginning of the seventeenth century, and thence mi- 
grated into Russia, probably at the smutnoye vremya or time 
of troubles, when so much fighting was going on. In one of 
his latest lyrics Lermontov alludes pathetically to his Scotch 
ancestors. Those who are curious in the matter will find 
many stories about Russian ambassadors in England, scattered' 
here and there in the diaries and other papers of the seven- 
teenth century. Pepys has something to tell us about them 
which is amusing. 

A very quaint little book of about the same period is the 
account of Russia by Samuel Collins, which contains curious 
personal details of Alexis, the father of Peter, a reKgious man 
and mild sovereign. Collins tells us that on one occasion he 
refused to allow a soldier to be shot for cowardice, piously 
remarking that the poor fellow could not help it, because 
courage being to a great extent a physical quality, God had 
not givien it to all persons alike. In his reign occurred the 
great struggle between the ecclesiastical and civil power 
headed by the metropolitan Nicon. And perhaps this reso- 
lute prelate would have carried his point with the easy-going 
tsar, had not the boyars been too much for him. The 
struggle is wonderfully interesting, and the account published 
by the Englishman Palmer is of primary importance, because 
he has translated from documents that have never been 
allowed to be published in Russia. 

Antiokh Kantemir, the Russian ambassador in England 
at the beginning of the reign of George II, wrote some of his 
satires in this country : the work of Stephen Krasheninnikov 
on Kamschatka, was translated by one James Grieve and 
published at Gloucester in 1764. About the same time 
we find some Russian students at Queen's College, Michael 



Bikov and Prokhor Suvorov, as I find in the entrance book. 
I have since discovered that the latter was president of the 
Russian Historical Society at the beginning of this century. 

English connexions with Poland are scanty. A palatine 
of Sieradz was enteirtained in England in the time of Eliza* 
beth and visited Oxford, where he saw a play acted. The 
arrival of the Polish ambassador Paul Dzialinski, whose name 
is Latinised into Jalinus, sent by Sigismund III to her court, 
is well, known. He was a man of stately presence and 
appeared in a fine suit of black velvet : on being presented to 
the Queen he made a long oration in Latin, complaining 
of the wars between the English and Spaniards, whereby 
he asserted that the commerce of Poland was seriously injured. 
In reply Elizabeth reprimanded him in excellent Latin, in 
which as Speed says, ' lion-like rising, she daunted the mala- 
pert orator no less with her stately port and majestical 
deporture than with the tartness of her princely checks.' 

Kochanowski, a Polish poet of the sixteenth century, 
still held in great esteem among his countrymen, says that 
the time will come when the Englishman will read his 
poems. Perhaps it has not come yet. but let us hope. I 
ought not to pass over the eminent Polish reformer John 
Laski or a Lasko, as he is sometimes called, who was much in 
our country in the sixteenth century. 

As regards Bohemia, the connexion with England has 
several times been close since the fourteenth century when 
Peter Payne, a former principal of St. Edmund Hall, carried 
over to that country the doctrines of Wicliffe, which led to the 
great religious movement among that people. The burning 
of Huss at Constance and the wars of the terrible Zi2ka are 
well known. The name of Wicliffe is of frequent occurrence in 
Bohemian religious songs still preserved. Mr. Wratislaw 
fortunately discovered at Cambridge one of the most valuable 
manuscripts of the chronicle of Dalimil of the fourteenth 
century. 



lO 

Wealthy Bohemians occasionally visited England, among 
others, Slavata, the hero of the defenestration, as it is called, in 
1618. The winter-king Frederick and his marriage with 
Elizabeth, the daughter of James I, are well known. After 
the battle of the White Mountain in 1620 the Bohemian 
nation is for a time obscured, but it has revived in our own 
days in a wonderful manner. About this subject I hope to 
speak more at length in a future lecture. With the Serbs 
and Bulgarians England has had but little to do. 

Upwards of sixty years ago, Dr., afterwards Sir John, 
Eowring published a series of translations from Russian, 
Polish, Serbian, and Bohemian. They did not effect much in 
the way of popularising among us the literatures of those 
countries. Unfortunately there is a want of colour in all these 
versions and a great sameness. In many instances one finds 
that the translator has mistaken the meaning of the original 
or translated through a German medium. This was decidedly 
the case with the versions of the Serbian folk-songs. Of these 
a German translation had previously appeared at Halle by a 
learned lady, Fraulein Theresia von Jacob, who wrote under 
the nom de guerre of Talvj, and afterwards married Professor 
Edward Robinson, the American theologian. In the charming 
little sketch of Slavonic literature which this lady published 
at New York in 1850, she alludes to the use which Dr, 
Bowring had made of her German version. 

In 1849 and 1852 Mr. Wratislaw published some excellent 
translations of Bohemian poems, and also in 1878 the lectures 
which he delivered on the Ilchester foundation on the litera- 
ture of the Chekhs in the fourteenth century. One of the 
first mentioned volumes contains versions of the notorious 
Kralodvorsky Rukopis^ or Queen's Court Manuscripts, but 
owing to the suspicion of spuriousness under which these 
poems labour, we cannot greet them with a welcome. The 
shades gathering round them seem to grow darker, and Hanka, 
who affected to have discovered them, has been almost con- 



II 

victed of forgery. Mr. W. R. Ralston, whose death last 
year must be ever lamented by Slavonic students, published 
two valuable works among others on Russian folk-tales 
and folk-songs. These well-written books have done a 
great deal to make English readers acquainted with the trea- 
sures of this kind possessed by Russia. Of all my late 
friend's work it may be said that it is done in honest and 
scholarly fashion: he was a man of sound knowledge and 
generous heart. 

Polish literature, with the exception of Bowring's poor 
versions, has been almost entirely neglected among us. We 
must add the translation of the Konrad Wallenrod of 
Mickiewicz by a Mr. Cattley some years ago, and versions of 
the same poem and the Pan Tadeusz of that author by Miss 
Biggs. The work by this lady is scrupulously accurate, but 
unfortunately she has deserted the metre of the original, a 
fatal error as I cannot help thinking. For the rhyming lines 
of Mickiewicz she has adopted a rather halting style of blank 
verse, and blank verse is a metre which is intolerable, unless it 
be effectively handled. It is not every day that we shall find 
a Milton or a Tennyson. Here and there in stray volumes I 
have come upon translations of some of the spirited lyrics 
of Mickiewicz. As, for instance, in a work entitled the * Polish 
Exile' published in Edinburgh in 1833, there is a vigorous 
version of the ode called Fans written on the enthusiast 
Wenceslaus Rzewuski, who passed his life among the Arabs in 
the desert and obtained the name Emir Tadj-oul^Fekher^ or 
the Emir of the Crown of Glory. What was the fate of this 
eccentric man is not known : he figured in the revolutionary 
war of 1 830, when he fitted out a squadron of cavalry at his 
own expense, but afterwards disappeared. According to some, 
he was found slain after the battle of Daszow ; another and a 
pleasing tradition is that he escaped to the desert, where 
he spent the remainder of his days. 

In 1881 was published at Chicago in America, a work 

B3 



12 

entitled * Poets and Poetry * of Poland, edited by Paul Sobo- 
leski. The book is however of a rather disappointing 
character. It consists for the most part of a reprint of the 
translations of Bowring, with a few others; some of the 
versions having evidently been composed by the editor, who 
appears to be imperfectly acquainted with the English lan- 
guage. On many grounds a new translation of the master- 
pieces of Mickiewicz is required, and it is probably owing 
to this cause and the difficulty of the language in which they 
are written, that this poet, who has considerable merits, is so 
little known among us. Pushkin, however, the Russian poet 
has fared even worse. 

The South -Slavonic languages have been seldom brought 
to the notice of Englishmen, almost the only exception being 
the interesting works published by Mr. Arthur J. Evans, who 
has visited both Serbia and Bulgaria and is well acquainted 
with South-Slavonic languages. He is the author of a 
valuable book of travels in Bosnia and the Herzegovina at 
the time of the war; he has issued a volume of Illyrian 
letters and also published 'Antiquarian Researches in Hly- 
ricum.' The Slavonic races have no more staunch friend 
among us. 

Some years back our libraries were very poor in Slavonic 
books, but now that of the Taylor Institution boasts of a 
fairly good collection, which includes the chief classics in the 
literature of each and some dictionaries of a high character, 
such as Dahl's Tolkovii Slovar, or Explanatory Dictionary, a 
valuable work^ full of information ; weak only in one point, 
the etymologies, and indeed this deficiency cannot be won- 
dered at, when we see how recently our own language has 
been scientifically treated. At the present day we are wit- 
nesses of the gigantic labours and learning which ai*e being 
expended on the great English Dietionaiy undertaken by the 
Clarendon Press. 

We have at the Taylor the Polish Lexicon of Linde and 



13 

the Cech or Bohemian of Jungmann. All appliances are at 
hand for a scientific study of the Slavonic languages. The 
Bodleian Library, through the care of Dr. Neubauer, who 
among other departments has superintended the Slavonic, has 
greatly increased its Slavonic books and is more on a level 
with other learned libraries. 

Leaving then this first division of my subject in which I 
have attempted to discuss what has been done in England in 
the fields of Slavonic study — very scanty at best — I come to 
my second division, viz., the use of the Slavonic languages. 
In plain English, what profit can be derived taking the 
word in its widest sense from the study of them ? 

I shall divide this part of my lecture into three heads : — 

(a) The importance of the Slavonic languages for the 
study of Comparative Philology. 

(5)- What literature they possess worthy of our attention, 
and the treatment of this wide subject must necessarily be 
brief on the present occasion, seeing how scanty are the limits 
I can allow myself. 

(c) Their practical use for diplomacy and other purposes, 
based upon the consideration of the great number of people 
who speak them, and other reasons. This third part of my 
subject may be considered the practical one in the strictest 
sense of the term. 

(a) Ever since the appearance of the great work of Bopp 
^ ^^35i which, as is well known, laid the foundation of 
Comparative Philology, the importance of the Slavonic branch 
in the study of the Aryan languages has been fully recog- 
nised. Only a short time before, Joseph Dobrowsky, the 
Nestor of Slavonic philology, had published in 1822 his 
Institutiones Linguae Slavicae IHalecti Veteris^ the first work 
to put Slavonic philology upon a scientific basis. Up to 
that time and indeed for some time afterwards — so long is 
error dying — the wildest theories had prevailed about the 
Slavs and their languages. For example. Professor Dan- 



14 

kowsky of Pressburg pnblislied a work to show that the old 
Slavonic was a direct daughter of Greek, and translated some 
portions of Homer into their exact Slavonic equivalents, 
which by twisting words he made almost identical, just as 
Sir W. Betham made the Punic in the Paenulus of Plautus to 
be Old Irish. Of course Dankowsky had much more to go 
upon, as the Greek and Slavonic languages belong to the 
same family. 

We shall see that there have been Slavomaniacs as 
there have been Keltomaniacs. Wolanski found Slavonic 
inscriptions in Italy, and KoUar the Bohemian, a good poet, 
but poor philologist, explained the geographical nomenclature 
throughout Italy by Slavonic roots. The di'oU thing is that 
all this nonsense found its way into Donaldson's Varronianus, 
which was a text-book in the University when I was an 
undergraduate thirty -three years ago. The map appended 
to that work is indeed a curiosity, with its Slavonic popula- 
tions of Italy and its identification of Lithuani and Latini. 
One rubs one's eyes on looking at it, and wonders how such 
nonsense was actually held to be gospel in the University. 

The impetus given by Bopp to scientific philology soon 
found an echo in the Slavonic countries : in Russia, Vostokov 
published his grammar of Old Slavonic ; he was followed by 
Sreznevski and others: in Bohemia, Schafarik treated of 
Slavonic ethnology in a monumental work, which has become 
familiar in its German translation under the title * Slawische 
Alterthiimer.' He has been followed by a series of scholai-s, 
one of the most eminent in our own day being Jan Gebauer 
of Prag ; Poland can boast of Malecki, author of an excellent 
Historico- Comparative Grammar, and Lucian Malinowski, 
now professor at Cracow and one of the most eminent of 
modern Slavists. 

J)am6i6, recently deceased, published an excellent Serbian 
grammar and Suman one of Slovenish, that strange Eastern 
Slavonic idiom, which is spoken in the provinces of which 



15 

Laibach is the centre, and although the vernacular of a small 
population, is of great interest on account of the old forms 
which it shows. Even the Lusatian Wends or Sorbs have 
their philologist in Dr. Pfuhl. Bulgarian late in the field, 
after being crushed for so many centuries, is now being 
scientifically treated in the pages of the Periodichesko Spisanie, 

The extinct Polabish, a language once spoken on the Elbe 
(Slav. Laba), was restored from some fragments by Schleicher, 
just as Professor Owen classified the extinct mowa by a few 
bones which had been found. The language ceased to be 
spoken, like Cornish among ourselves, in the early part of last 
century. Schleicher also wrote a good grammar of Old 
Slavonic, the language of the Bible and the Church among 
the Eastern Slavs, and we have the valuable Altbulgarisches 
Lesehuch of Leskien, which has been greatly improved in the 
second edition. A monumental labour is the Comparative 
Grammar of the Slavonic languages by Franz Miklosich, 
formerly professor at Vienna, and decidedly the greatest name 
in Slavonic philology. This is an indispensable work to all 
students of the subject. 

The Archiv fur Slavische Philologiey edited by Jagic and 
others, has now existed for some years and numbers among its 
contributors such men as Malinowski, Bezzenberger, Bruckner 
of Berlin, and Nehring, the author of the AUpolnische Sprach- 
denhndler^ an excellent work. 

The relative position of the Slavonic languages in the 
Aryan family has been accurately stated by Johannes Schmidt, 
who has also given the best classification of them in his Zur 
Geschichte des Indogermanischen Vocalumus, His classification 
has superseded the old ones of Schafarik and Dobrowsky, 
which once found universal acceptance. Slavonic shares certain 
peculiarities with Teutonic and others only with Iranian, 
There are fifty-nine words and roots peculiar to Slavo-Lithu- 
anian and Teutonic and sixty-one to Slavo-Lithuanian and 
Indo-Iranian, but only thirteen are peculiax* to Indo-Iranian 



i6 

and Teutonic. One hundred and thirty-two words and roots 
are peculiar to Latin and Greek, and ninety-nine to Greek 
and Indo-Iranian, and only twenty are peculiar to Indo- 
Iranian and Latin. Hence Slavonic forms the transition 
between Teutonic and Iranian, and Greek the transition 
between Latin and Sanskrit. 

We thus see that the Slavonic languages occupy a middle 
position between the Western and Eastern branches of the 
great Aryan family ; and after the Litu-Lettish group, with 
which they stand in close affinity, they exhibit some of the 
oldest forms of any of the Western Ary^an languages. The 
fulness of the inflexions, the elaborate forms of the verbs 
called * aspects,' by which all nuances of time and action can 
be expressed ; the preservation in some members of the family 
of the imperfect and aorist, as in Bulgarian and Serbian, 
whereas in the Teutonic languages they are lost ; the identity 
of the present and futm'e forms in the perfective verbs, as in 
Old English and Old High German ; the copiousness of the 
prepositions and their use both in and out of composition, 
are all noteworthy. In the latter particular the Slavonic 
languages resemble Greek — they are at the same time highly 
analytical and synthetical. In preserving the aspects of the 
verbs, Slavonic is truer to the primitive form of the Aryan 
languages than any other of the cognate tongues. But 
traces of them can be found in Greek, as Curtius, Miklosich, 
and Professor Smith of Copenhagen have shown, and Professor 
Rhys has discovered indications of them in Old Irish. ' Russian 
and Serb have preserved the fluctuating Old Aryan accent, 
the explanation of which is being slowly worked out ; the 
study of it will perhaps some day help us to understand the 
seemingly capricious Greek accent, about which books have 
indeed been written, which are in reality only annotated 
indexes, without any attempt being made to explain the 
origin of the accent itself. Only a glance at such works as 
Pick's Etymologise Acs WorterbucA, Schmidt's Zur Geschichte des 



Indogerm, Vocalismus^ previously cited, and Brugmann's Gruud- 
riss der vergleichenden Gramrnatik, which is now revolutionising 
the science of Aryan philology, will show us the great impor- 
tance for all purposes of etymology of the Slavonic languages 
and the cognate Litu-Lettish. Moreover, how additionally 
important the study of these languages becomes when we 
realise that if the new views propounded by Penka, Posche, 
Schrader, and others are true, the cradle of the Aiyan race is 
in Europe and perhaps in White Russia and Volhynia. 

As the German has in so many parts of Europe dispossessed 
the Slav, especially in the North, it is only by means of the 
Slavonic languages that we can interpret the geographical 
nomenclature of those parts of Europe. It is in Slavonic 
alone that we get a clue to the meaning of such names as 
B;Ostock, Dresden, Leipzig, Meissen, Berlin, Potsdam, Gratz, 
Zerbst, and hundreds of others. 

Leaving now the subject of the importance of these 
languages for the Comparative Philologist, let us turn to the 
second division of this last part of my subject. 

(^} What literature do they offer to us worthy of our attention? 

As these are the days in which real value is justly assigned 
to folk-lore aud popular traditions, since it is believed that 
they will help us to read the riddle of the evolution of 
civilisation, which is now being traced out on such firm 
lines by Dr. Tylor and others, it is perhaps incumbent upon 
me first to call attention to the vast treasures of popular 
literature, which the Slavonic races possess. Owing to their 
remoteness from the great European centres, and the com- 
paratively late development of education among them, we 
must be prepared to find an extensive folk-literature. Man is a 
thinking animal, his feelings must be aroused and his imagin- 
ation kindled ; if he cannot have a book to read, he must have 
a story-teller to recite to him or a bard to arouse him by 
chanting deeds of prowess and adventure and the great 
struggles of his luce. 



i8 

The vast collections of Russian hilinl, as they are called, 
which may be translated tales of the olden time, are but little 
known in this country. They range from the days of 
Vladimir, who introduced Christianity in the tenth century, 
almost to our own time; certainly the great struggle be- 
tween Russia and Napoleon did not lack a vates sacer of 
this description. These bilini have been collected by 
Ribnikov, Kirievski, Sakharov, and others. They are divided 
into cycles, those of Kiev, Novgorod, and Moscow, among 
others. 

In addition to them we have the great collections of folk- 
tales, as that of Afanasiev, some of which were introduced to 
our notice by Mr. Ralston. We have also — to turn from oral 
literature — the collections of chronicles,' extending from that 
of Nestor in the eleventh century, or the Chronicle which goes 
by his name, for Bestuzhev-Riumin and others consider it to 
be rather a collection of fragments pieced together than the 
production of a single writer. These chronicles, which were 
written by monks in the seclusion of their cloisters, extend in 
an almost unbroken series from that time to the days of 
Alexis, the father of Peter the Great. They were written at 
Novgorod, Pskov, Moscow, and other pieces, and are of great 
value to the student of Slavonic history, although they cannot 
be said to boast of much literary merit, if we except perhaps 
the Chronicle attributed to Nestor, which is full of picturesque 
Sagas, many of which are identical with the Norse, as I hope 
on a future occasion to show. 

Thus we can see that it is a mistake to suppose, as many 
do, that there is no early Russian literature. There is a 
considerable amount of early literature, but it is perhaps more 
interesting to the philologist and antiquarian than to the 
general reader. And indeed much the same may be said of 
our own authors before the sixteenth century, with the 
exception of Chaucer's noble works, and the poem which 
goes by the title of Piers Plowman. Besides the series of 




19 

chronicles there are numerous lives of saints in prose, books 
of Oriental travel, as that by Daniel, the pilgrim in the 
eleventh century, Anastasius Nikitin, who visited India in 
the fifteenth, and Korobeinikov and Grekov in the sixteenth. 
There are also the curious prose-poem, the Slovo o polku 
Igoreve or account of the Expedition of Igor in the twelfth 
century, a somewhat inflated composition, the author of 
which is unknown. It describes the journey of the Prince 
against the Polovtsi and his capture by the enemy. A 
similar production is the Zadonstchina of the fourteenth 
century, which describes the victory of Dmitri Donskoi over 
Mamai, the Tatar on the Kulikovo pole, or field of woodcocks. 
This curious prose-poem exists in three versions. 

If we come later — to the sixteenth centmy — we shall find 
some important books, such as the Stoglav or Book of 
Ordinances of the Church, compiled in the year 1551. To 
the period of Ivan the Terrible also belongs the Domosfroi or 
Book of Household Management, which exists in several 
versions. This is a most interesting production, as throwing 
light upon the ideas and manners of the Russians at that 
period, and it must be confessed the picture is not an agree- 
able one. Ignorance and superstition are triumphant, and 
the position of the wife to her husband is truly Oriental. 
She is little better than his slave and may receive personal 
chastisement at his hands. 

To the sixteenth century also belongs the strange life of 
Ivan the Terrible wi'itten by Kurbski, one of his most able 
generals, who for some failure in a military expedition, 
fearing the wrath of his master, fled to the court of Sigis- 
mund of Poland, and from thence addressed a fiercely abusive 
letter to Ivan, taxing him with his many cruelties, Ivan's 
answer has been preserved. He considers that the persons 
whose blood he had shed, were only his slaves, and could 
be treated by him in whatever way he pleased. These 
documents were edited by the historian Ustrialov in 1868 



20 

and are of cotisiderable value for the study of the earlier 
forms of the lang'uage. 

There is one more work which invites our attention, and 
that is the strange account of Russia by Gregory Koto- 
shikhin, who was a clerk in one of the Government offices, 
and having given some oflence to his superiors, fled first 
to Poland and thence to Sweden. In the latter country 
he compiled an account of Russia, which was found in manu- 
script at Upsala in 1840 by Professor Soloviev — not the 
historian. Kotoshikhin was executed about 1669 at Stock- 
holm for the murder, it is supposed in some dispute, of the 
man in whose house he lodged. His book, like the Domostroi^ 
gives but a gloomy picture of Russia. Perhaps he exag- 
gerated the defects of the country which he had abandoned 
for ever, but it is the same story of ignorance, superstition, 
and cruelty. It brings vividly before us the Russia of the 
time of Alexis Mikhailovich. 

In this very brief review of some of the features of Slavonic 
literature I am not able to discuss at any length their later 
authors, though here much will be found deserving attention. 
Among the Russians, Pushkin, Lermontov, and Nekrasov, as 
poets ; Turgueniev, Tolstoi, and Dostoievski as novelists, and 
their history may be studied in the picturesque pages of Karam- 
zin and the more critical works of Soloviev and Bestuzhev- 
Riumin. Unfortunately neither Poland nor Bohemia can boast 
chronicles in the vernacular such as Russia possesses : those of the 
former country, which indeed make a goodly list, are written 
in Latin by Martin Gallus, Vincent Kadlubek, Dlugosz or 
Longinus, as he is called, Cromer and others. There are 
the exceptions of Bielski and Stryikowski, but they wrote 
as late as the sixteenth century. However excellent their 
style may be and valuable the matter which they contain, 
the Latin chronicles can only be looked upon as exotics. 
The Poles have ud fortunately but little to show in the way 
of old ballad poetry : the heart was eaten out of the country 



21 

by the number of foreign ecclesiastics with which it swarmed. 
Here and there, however, fragments of old lays can be traced 
in the chronicles ; and elsewhere we seem to come upon 
passages which enshrine a saga as distinctly as the pictur- 
esque pages of Nestor, The Poles have boasted a literature 
in their own tongue of considerable pretensions since the 
sixteenth century. Like the nations of Western Europe, 
they felt the shock of the Renaissance, and Jan Kochanowski, 
previously mentioned, is nothing if not a learned poet ; whereas 
the influence upon Russia in her earlier times was distinctly 
Byzantine. The Academy of Cracow is now issuing a series 
of editions of some of the scarcer productions of their litera- 
ture. In the present century, the Poles have produced 
among other writers the poetical triad, Mickiewicz, Slowacki, 
and Krasinski ; in the first of these writers the genius of the 
country may be seen faithfully mirrored, its aspirations and 

 

struggles, its popular beliefs and traditions. There is a world 
of folk-lore enshrined in the poetry of Mickiewicz, and as a 
describer of nature, especially in the splendid cloud and 
forest pictures of his Pan Tadeusz, he is in no way inferior to 
Wordsworth. I hope in a subsequent lecture to gain the 
sympathies of my countrymen in my admiration of this 
delightful poet, almost unknown among us. 

Poland fully shares in that charm which all the Slavonic 
literatures seem to me to possess ; as if we found an Eastern 
soul in a W^estem body, or, shall we say, a wondrous piece of 
Oriental embroidery in an European frame-work. 

Of the Bohemian chroniclers, the earliest, Cosmas, who lived 
in the eleventh century, writes in Latin ; but we get a life of 
the Emperor Charles IV and the Chronicle of Pulkava of the 
fourteenth century in Chekh. To the same century also 
belongs the curious rhymed chronicle assigned to a certain 
Dalimil for no sufiicient reason, which abounds in abuse of the 
Germans. Wenceslaus Hajek, who flourished in the sixteenth 
century, wrote a wonderful history full of absurd stories about 



22 

early Eohemian days such as were in vogue at the time when 
he lived. The Chekhs can also boast a considerable early 
literature besides chronicles. I omit some of the pieces pre- 
viously alluded to, the Zelenohordky and Kralodvorsky Rukopis, 
which are considered by many to be spurious. Writers of merit 
appeared among them as early as the fourteenth centuiy, such 
as Smil FlaSka of Pardubice, author of the * New Council,' one of 
the innumerable beast-epics so much in vogue in the Middle 
Ages. Some other pieces are ascribed to him, of which the most 
original and amusing is the * Dialogue between the Groom 
and Scholar' (Podkoni a Zak), a quaint piece of mediaeval 
humour, which gives us a view of Bohemian life at the time. 
Large portions of the Bible were translated into Chekh during 
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. There was a complete 
version in the beginning of the fifteenth century. To the 
fourteenth century belongs the curious prose-poem called * The 
Weaver ' (Tkadle6ek), after the name of its author. In this 
production he celebrated the fair Adlidka, one of the beauties 
of the Bohemian court. 

But the great glory of Bohemian literature in the fourteenth 
century is Thomas of Stitny, a voluminous writer, chiefly on 
religious subjects. His principal works are a treatise on 
* General Christian Matters,' in six books, and the * Books of 
Christian Instruction.' The style of o ti tny is easy and flowing, 
and we can see from his writings that Bohemian prose was 
developed at a time when our own was in but a rudimentary 
condition. Some good remarks upon Stitny will be found in 
the work of Professor Loserth, entitled ' Wiclif and Hus.' He 
says of him that he tried to popularise the scholastic knowledge 
of his age. He is certainly a complete master of the Chekh 
language, and his countrymen have good reason to be proud of 
him. Much was also done for his native tongue by the 
great reformer John Hus, whose name is still a signal for 
party strife among his countrymen, as we have lately 
seen. The great Bohemian reformer did almost as much 



^3 

for his native tongue as Luther did for German. He 
corrected the translation of the Bible and made some improve- 
ments in the orthography of the language. His Bohemian 
writings were collected and edited by Karl Erben in 1865-8. 
We must remember all these services which he rendered to his 
people, to understand how completely Hus has become among 
them a symbol 0$ their nationality. 

There was abundance of literature in Bohemia in the fifteenth 
century, but a great deal of it was of a polemical character. 
Those were the days of fierce religious conflicts, of Zizka 
and his followers,, concerning whom such strange stories have 
come down to us. Peter ChelCicky deserves a passing notice 
as a popular writer. He was one of the leaders of the United 
Brethren, and was a cobbler by trade ; hence his nickname, 
Kopyta or the shoe-last. His works were aU written between 
1430 and 1456. The opinions of this man are indeed striking, 
if we consider the age in which they were uttered. He is 
as outspoken against war as a Quaker, and looks upon the 
artificial distinctions of society with the most democratic 
contempt. 

I have no time to dwell upon the Bohemian authors of 
the Renaissance after the Battle of the White Mountain in 
i6ijo ; during the rest of the seventeenth century and nearly 
the whole of the eighteenth the language was depressed, but 
it has had a wonderful resurrection in the nineteenth and can 
boast of historians such as Palacky, Tomek, GoU, and Gin- 
dely ; ethnologists, such as Schafarik ; scientists, such as 
Purkyne, and many excellent novelists and poets. 

Serbia cannot claim very valuable chronicles. We have, 
however, some interesting old documents, as the life of St. 
Simeon by his son St. Sabbas of the thirteenth century, and 
the history of St. Simeon and St. Sabbas compiled by Dome- 
tian in 1246 : there is also the Rodoslov or Lives of Serbian 
king^ and archbishops compiled by Archbishop Daniel, who 
died in 1338. The chronicles as a rule are meagre and 



24 

written in an inflated style ; the Croats, who are of the same 
race and use the same language as the Serbs, have the 
chronicle of the Anonymus Presbyter Diocleus, as he is 
called, who lived about the middle of the twelfth century. 

I mention the laws of the Serbian tsar Stephen Dushan 
of the fourteenth century, only to call momentary attention 
to the interesting Slavonic legal codes, which have been 
preserved. A similar document is the Hussikaya Pravda of 
Yaroslav of the eleventh century. 

But although little of the early Serbo-Croatian written 
literature has come down to us, we must npt forget the fine 
collection of. ballads first published by Vuk Stephanovic and 
subsequently by Bogoljub Petranovic Ristic and others. On 
their appearance in print, the civilised world was fairly 
astonished at this revelation of Slavonic song, of which people 
had had but slight knowledge previously, although glimp- 
ses of it had been given by the Abb^ Fortis and others. It 
would be impossible on the present occasion to give anything 
like an adequate account of the treasures contained in these 
ballads ; . but the cycle dealing with the Battle of Kosovo, and 
the fate of the unfortunate tsar Lazar, will probably prove 
most attractive to the majority of readers. 

I shall hope on subsequent occasions to return to this 
delightful subject, for eongs are the great inheritance of 
the Slavonic people. No nations abound more in literature 
of this kind. Wherever there is a Slavonic woman, there 
is a song, said Schafarik, and the remark is a true one. 

Nothing is, indeed, more striking than the grace, beauty, and 
naivete of the Russian popular songs. The more one reads 
them the more surprised one feels at their delicacy and at the 
absence of all coarseness and vulgarity, and that too among a 
people where peasant life has to be lived upon such a hard and 
sad level. Yet if we take the commonest Russian song-book, 
as for example one published at Moscow in 1854, we come 
upon charming collections, wedding songs, songs sung to 



25 

accompany a dance, and many others. The Malo-Russians, 
the inhabitants of the southern country, have a very rich 
collection. Professor Sodenstedt, the translator of Pushkin and 
other Russian poets, who has admirably rendered many of the 
Malo- Russian songs into German, pronounces the following 
opinion upon them : — 

* In no country has the tree of popular poetry borne such 
lordly fruit, nowhere has the spirit of the people exhibited 
itself in so vigorous and truthful a way as among the 
Malo-Russians. What a charming air of sadness, what deep 
true human feeling do those songs express, which the Cossack 
«ings while absent in a foreign country ! What tenderness and 
manly strength breathe throughout his love-songs I ' It seems 
to me that one of the Russian minor poets has beautifully 
expressed the feeling of hope and self-confidence which the 
patriot ought to feel as he listens to the peasant singing at his 
work : — 

More boldly thoiie songs of half-sadness are flowing, 
And fall of a strength that is young : 
They tell of a soul that triumphant is growing, 
Though through years it was toi-tured and wrung. 

Maybe thou hast bowed, native land, 'neath thy sorrow, 
And harsh was thy fortune to bide ; 
But nay — I'll believe not that freedom's glad morrow 
And her songs to these fields are denied.' 

Of the Ragusan school of poetry, an offshoot of the Italian, 
but using the native language, something also must be said at 
a fitting season. 

If we turn to the Bulgarians, whose splendid outburst into 
national life after the cruel bondage of centuries is one of the ^ 
wonders of the age, we find that their early chronicles — at 
least those which have come down to us, for a great deal 
of their literature has been destroyed by the Turks and 
Greeks — are merely translations from Byzantine originals. 
These are works which have their philological value, but 



26 

no special importance as Bulgarian. The Bulgarians, however, 
/ have fine collections of popular songs and ballads, many of 
which are of great beauty and pathos. The first great collec- 
tion of them was published in 1861 by the brothers Miladinov 
at Agram, at the expense of the patriotic Bishop Strossmayer. 
These two unfortunate men, on the most trivial of charges, 
were secretly strangled in a Turkish prison. Dozon, a French 
consul, published another collection, and there has also appeared 
a volume of Macedonian ballads, edited by Verkovic. The 
last of these writers has. since injured his reputation by the 
publication of what he called the Veda Slovena^ a volume of 
songs professedly gathered together in the Balkan mountains 
and furnishing specimens which went back as far as the time 
of Orpheus. But it was the appearance of another Macpher- 
son with another Ossian I 

As a specimen of the Bulgarian ballad, let us take a few 
lines from one in M. Dozen's collection, which I give in a 
strictly literal translation ; the original reminds one of some 
of the best Klephtic ballads : — 

Liben, the young hero cried out 

On the summit of the mountain. 

Liben bade adieu to the forest. 

To the forest and fountain he spake: 

Oh wood, oh green wood, 

And oh ! cool spring. 

Dost thou know forest, dost thou remember 

How often I have wandered over thee? 

Have led my young heroes, 

Have earned my red standard? 

*  * * 

The forest never spal^e to anyone. 

And yet it spake to Liben. 

Liben, thou hero Liben, 

£nough hast thou wandered over me. 

Hast led thy chosen youths. 

Hast cariied tliy red standard, 

On the summit, on the mountain 

By the cool thick shade of the trees 

By the dewy green grass. 

*  4^  



27 



Till this time, Voivode Liben, 
The old monntain was thy mother. 
The green forest was thy bride. 
With tufted foliage adorned; 
Refreshed with the sweet breese. 
The grass gave thee a bed, 
ThoQ wert cov^ed by the forest-leaves; 
The clear waters gave thee drink; 
The forest-birds sang to thee. 



To judge by the matter accamulated in such works bs the 
Collection of Ballads of the brothers Miladinov and the Butgar- 
ski Shvnik of Cholakov, there is a great field of folk-lore and 
folk-song to be investigated among this interesting people. 
Their language had almost disappeared for centuries &om the 
knowledge of the civilised world. The Turk was devouring 
them body and soul. "When Schafarik, about sixty-five years ago, 
wrote his epoch-making ' History of the Slavonic Languages 
and Literature/ so little was known about the Bulgarian 
language that he actually treated it as a dialect of Serbian. 
The Bulgarians were really discovered by a Malo-Bussian^ 
named Venelin or Hutsa, who sixty years ago travelled among 
them and interpreted them to the rest of Europe. He may 
be said to have awakened the self-consciousness of this cruelly * 
oppressed people. He lit the torch which has never ceased ^ 
to bum. But there was no grammar of the language till 
1 85a, when the brothers Tsankov published one at Vienna : 
in Latin letters, however, and as it seems to me \iath a very 
confused system of orthography. Still one had to be thank- 
ful for small mercies. We can see by their preface that they 
feel they are addressing a public which has confused notions on 
the subject of Bulgarian grammar. * Hofientlich wird man 
nicht langer mehr Meinungen und Behauptungen horen 
miissen, welche die bulgarische Sprache fiir ein skythisches, 
tatariscbes, und Gott weiss was noch fur ein anderes Idiom 
ausgaben.' 

It would be impossible to discuss on the present occasion the 



interesting question how far the modem Bulgarian language 
resembles the Old Church language — Palaeo-slavonic as it 
seems to me it should best be called, because that name commits 
the philologist to no theory — but certainly Bulgarian exhibits 
a very curious form of Slavonic in the postposition of the 
article, the loss of the cases, except in the dialects and popular 
songs, where we find them still a^d also in the preservation 
of the nasals in some of the dialects. The existence .of the 
latter in Palaeo-slavonic was discovered by the Russian scholar 
Vostokov, and a further light is thrown upon them by 
Slavonic words, which have entered Magyar and Roumanian. 
Thus, to take a single example, the Russian verb gliadiet^ to 
see, represents a nasal in the first vowel now lost, and the root 
is therefore glend^ as Miklosich correctly shows us in his * Etymo- 
logical Dictionary.' We have a proof of this in the Rou- 
manian word for looking-glass, oglinda. Besides the Bulgarian 
dialects nasals are found in Polish and also in Kashubish, the 
strange dialect of Polish, spoken near Danzig, which has been 
partly investigated by philologists. 

The younger and less important literatures of the Bulgarians, 
Serbs, and Slovenes have not such names to show us, but here 
and there a writer of charming lyrics has appeared, as Prera- 
dovic and Radicevid among the Serbs, and Vasov among the 
Bulgarians. 

The valuable literary and scientific reviews and journals 
appearing in Russia and Poland must be here mentioned. 
Students of natural history, anthropology, ethnology, chemistry 
and mathematics are now anxious to learn Russian and Polish 
to be able to read the Transactions of their learned Societies. 
Eminent scientific men in England have frequently expressed 
to me their sense of the importance of these publications. 
The Polish Academy and the University of Cracow are issuing 
a series of valuable papers ; we have also the Biblioteka 
Warszawska (Warsaw Library) published in that city, and the 
Prace Filologiczfie or Philological Studies, a review of first 



29 

rank, which appears at the same place and numbers among its 
contributors some of the ablest writers on Slavistik and is a 
mine of curious information. The same may be said of the 
Bohemian Casopis or Literary Journal, which appears four 
times a year at Prague. At the head of all we must place the 
Archiv fiir Slavische Philologie, edited by Professor Jagic, of 
Vienna, previously mentioned. The writers are Slavs, but the 
language employed is German; for a journal which aims 
at pleading the cause of Slavonic scholarship before the 
European Areopagus, it is best that one of the world languages 
should be chosen. Unfortunately the time has not come for 
the use of a Slavonic language in that capacity, but it is 
rapidly coming. 

The Croats at Agram boast of two excellent Reviews, Rady 
Labour, and Starine^ the Antiquary : the Serb of Belgrad 
has the Glasnik or Messenger, which contains papers on 
History, Philology, and Ethnology among other subjects, one 
of the chief contributors being M. Chedomil Mijatovi($, 
formerly Serbian ambassador at the Court of St. James, a 
man of varied learning. 

I have already alluded to the Bulgarian Periodichesko 
Spimnie, published at Sofia. But even the humble Lusatian 
Wends or Sorbs, that smallest of Slavonic peoples, and island 
amidst the waves of a German sea which is always threaten- 
ing to overwhelm it, boasts its literary journal, which appears 
twice a year and contains good collections of popular ballads, 
folk-lore, proverbs, and other matters. 

And here perhaps a few words may be said about that 
bugbear of modern politicians, Panslavism. It seems to me 
impossible that a political union of the Slavonic races should 
ever be formed. That there should be a certain amount of 
sympathy among them is not to be wondered at, but language 
and religion alone will prevent their complete fusion. The 
Eastern Slavs are members of the Orthodox Church, the 
Western of the Latin, and each clings to his special alphabet^ 



30 

in one case leading to the almost ladierons result that the 
Serbs and Croats, practically the same people, are divided into 
two families, one of which uses the Latin and the other the 
Cyrillic letters. Nay, we may actually see literary journals, 
one column of which is in the Cyrillic and the other the 
Latin alphabet. Moreover, although the various Slavonic 
languages have roots and forms in common, yet the people 
who use different languages of this family are not mutually 
intelligible. 

The Slavonic tongues naturally fall into two great divisions, 
the Western and South-Eastern. The latter includes the 
Palaeo-slavonic or language used in the religious services of 
the Greek rite, which, it must be remembered, is not a 
mother language, but merely an elder sister ; Russian with 
Malo-Bussian, more of a language than a dialect, and 
White Russian, a dialect ; Bulgarian, Serbian, and Slovenish. 
The Western division includes Polish and the cognate 
Kashubish, Bohemian and the cognate Slovak and Upper 
and Lower Sorbish ; of Polabish I have idready spoken, as 
now extinct. 

The first person to bring forward the idea of Panslavism 
P\ was a certain Yuri Kri2anic, a Serb by birth, who visited 
(-. , J ^' • Russia during the latter part of the seventeenth century, and 
"" for some unknown cause incurred the displeasure of the 

tsar Alexis and was banished to Siberia. He wrote several 
books, showing rather a wide culture, on government and 
philology. Among other things he attempted a comparative 
grammar of the Slavonic languages, a work in^ which he 
showed great ingenuity and a knowledge in advance of his 
age. Some of his works have been edited in our own time 
by Bezsonov. The second person, after a long interval, to take 
up the idea of Panslavism was Jan KoUar, already alluded 
to as having held fantastic opinions upon the Slavonic popu- 
lations of Italy. Kollar was a poet of some eminence, and 
in his collection of sonnets entitled Slavy Bcera^ the daughter 



31 

of gloiy, published in 1821, he dwelt on the nnity of the 
Slavonic races. 

I hope I have now sufficiently proved to my hearers 
that in giving up any time to these studies, they will not 
find themselves dealing with peoples without literatures and 
speaking ignoble languages. It was not an idle saying 
of Turgueniev, the great novelist, that so noble a language 
as Russian could not be spoken by a poor mean-spirited 
race. We must pay no attention to what people who know 
nothing about the subject, are fond of saying about the 
Slavs. They have a great future, and are every year push- 
ing more to the front. We need no longer say in the 
pathetic words of Mickiewicz : — 

biedny chlopie! Za c6z mi Iza pynie 

1 seroe bije mysl^ o twyxn czynie? 
Ahl zal mi ciebie, biedny Slawianinie 
Biedny narodzie! zal mi twojej doli 
Jeden znasz tylko heroizm — newoli ! 

Poor peasant ! ask^st thoa why my tears must flow, 
And beats my heart? I feel thy lot so low. 
Poor Slav, that through such bitter days must go! 
Poor people 1 in thy journey to the grave 
One virtue thine — the patience of the slave. 

[DziADY, p. 261.] 

(c) A few other considerations of what is called a more 
practical nature, although practical is always a word difficult 
to define, I have left till the conclusion of my lecture. 

For political and military purposes it is necessary for us 
to know more about the languages of the Slavs. Their 
aggregate number is nearly one hundred millions, and of 
these it is calculated that about sixty millions speak Russian. 
The population of that vast Empire, which, we must re- 
member, is inhabited by several peoples not speaking the 
Russian language, is according to a statement in the Ency^ 
clopaedia Britannica something more than one hundred and 
six millions. 

The Russians seem destined to divide with us a large part 



^^ 



32 

of Am., and the most direct route to our Indian ppssefisiona 
will ultimately be by way of Tiflis and the Samarkand rail- 
way. We have to do with a vigorous and expansive people, 
who cannot be ignored, still less stamped out, and must 
emphatically be reckoned with. If we wish to keep abreast 
with their movements, we must know their language. They 
are thorough linguists themselves, and many important Eastern 
languages — Georgian for example — can only be approached 
through the medium of Russian. The publications of Russian 
Oriental scholars are of great value, and their Universities are 
furnished with a good staff of profess(3rs, dealing with those 
subjects as all acquainted with these matters will admit. It 
is this neglect of the study of Russian books and of fiimili- 
arity with Russian ideas, that has sometimes led us into 
serious blunders. This was noticeable at the time of the 
Crimean War. If we had thoroughly understood the rela- 
tions of Russia to the Christians of the Orthodox Church, 
we should*not have believed that the Georgians, and some 
other kindred Orthodox populations, would have risen in 
support of Omar Pasha when he invaded Mingrelia in 1855 : 
as if forsooth, the Christians of the East were likely to rise 
against their co-religionists and deliverers from the Moslem 
yoke. How strange it seems at the present time to read the 
wonderment expressed in the English newspapers of the 
same period, that the Bulgarians and Serbs should have 
sympathised with the Russians in that war. 

In order to interpret properly the Eastern question, which 
never settled is still hovering over us, we must know the 
Slavonic mind, the Slavonic languages and literatures. 
Otherwise these races will be an enigma to us. For the 
statesman and soldier this knowledge is a necessity. 

In conclusion, I will allude to the existence of similar 
lectures to these, not only in Slavonic countries where they are 
naturally found, but where other languages are spoken, such 
as Paris, Vienna, Leipzig, Berlin, and even Copenhagen. 



33 

It must be the object of the present lecturer to follow, 
as best he may, for passibus acquis he cannot, the footsteps 
of the eminent men occupying at the present time, or who 
have occupied these chairs, and to make the teaching of 
the Slavonic languages and literature a real thing, so as to 
justify the confidence which has been placed in him. 



THE END. 




J 



I 





r 



