The




Harmonious

 




Circle




 

The Lives and Work of

 




 

G. I. Gurdjieff, P. D. Ouspensky, 

 




 

and Their Followers




James Webb




SHAMBHALA




BOSTON




1987




SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS, INC. 




HORTICULTURAL HALL 




300 MASSACHUSETTS AVENUE 




BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 02115




© 1980 by James Webb




All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in 




any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 




photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 




system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 




9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2  I




FIRST PAPERBACK EDITION




Original hardcover edition pubhshed by G. P. Putnam’s Sons 




Printed in the United States of America 




Distributed in the United States by Random House 




and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd. 




Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publicatlon Data 




Webb, James, 1946- 




The harmonious circle. 




Reprint. Originally published; New York: Putnam, 




cl980. 




Bibliography: p. 




Includes index. 




1. GurdjiefF, Georges Ivanovitch, 1872-1949. 




2.  Uspenskii, P. D. (Petr Dem’ianovich), 1878-1947. 




3.  Philosophers—Soviet Union—Biography. 4. Mystics—




Soviet Union—Biography. I. Title. 




[B4249.G84W4 1987] 




197'.2 [B] 




87-9716




ISBN 0-87773-427-5 (pbk.)




 

Acknowledgments




I  am grateful to the following for permission to quote from copyright and 




unpublished sources; 




For permission to quote from the works of G. I. Gurdjieff: Routledge and 




Kegan Paul Ltd.; Triangle Editions Inc. For permission to quote from the 




work of P. D. Ouspensky: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd.; Hoddet and 




Stoughton Ltd.; Faber and Faber Ltd.; Turnstone Press Ltd.; Mrs. Tanya 




Nagro; Alfred A. Knopf Inc.; Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. For permission to quote from the work and unpublished letters of A. R. Orage: Mrs. 




Jessie Orage; Artemis Press Ltd. For permission to quote from the work 




and unpublished papers of Jean Toomer: Mrs. Marjorie Content Toomer. 




For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  Maurice  Nicoll;  Watkins 




Publishing. For permission to quote from the work of Rodney Collin; Mrs. 




Chloe Dickins; Watkins Publishing. For permission to quote from the work 




of  J. G.  Bennett: Hodder  and Stoughton  Ltd.; Turnstone Press Ltd.  For 




permission to quote from the work of Katherine Mansfield: The Society of 




Authors; Alfred A. Knopf Inc. For permission to quote from the work of 




John Middleton Murry: The Society of Authors. For permission to quote 




from the work of Jane Heap and Margaret Anderson; Mr. Michael Currer- 




Briggs.  For permission to quote from the work of Margaret Anderson: 




Routledge  and Kegan  Paul  Ltd.; Samuel Weiser  Inc. For permission to 




quote from the work of Fritz Peters; Victor Gollancz Ltd.; Samuel Weiser




6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Inc. For permission to quote from the work of T. S. Eliot: Faber and Faber 




Ltd.; Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc.; New Directions Publishing Corporation, Inc. For permission to quote from the work of Waldo Frank: Mrs. Jean Frank. For permission to quote from a broadcast talk: Mr. J. M. Cohen. 




For permission to quote from private letters: the late A. S. Neill; Mr. J. B. 




Priestley.  For  permission  to  quote  from  her  work:  Mrs.  Irmis  Barrett 




Popofif. For permission to quote from the work of Thomas and Olga de 




Hartmann: Cooper Square Pubhshers Inc. For permission to quote from 




the  work  of  Rom  Landau  and  Paul  Selver:  Allen  and  Unwin  Ltd.  For 




permission to quote from the work of Rowland Kenney: J. M. Dent and 




Sons Ltd. For permission to quote from the work of Philip Mairet: J.M. 




Dent and Sons Ltd.; University Books Inc. For permission to quote from 




the work of William Seabrook: George G. Harrap and Co. Ltd.; A. Watkins 




Inc.  For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  Paul  Selver:  Allen  and 




Unwin Ltd. For permission to quote from the work of Boris Mouravieff: 




Mme. Larissa Mouravieff; Le Centre d’Etudes Chretiennes Esoteriques. 




For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  Michel  Random:  Editions 




Denoel. For permission to quote from work by C. Daly King: University 




Books  Inc.  For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  William  Welch: 




George  Braziller  Inc.  For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  C.  E. 




Bechhofer Roberts: David Higham Associates Ltd. For permission to quote 




from  the  work  of  James  Young:  Mrs.  Marcelle  Hasenfratz-Young.  For 




permission to quote from the work of Sir Paul Dukes: A. P. Watt and Son. 




For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  Edwin and  Willa Muir: The 




Hogarth Press Ltd. For permission to quote from the work of F. E. Lea: 




Methuen and Co. Ltd. For permission to quote from the work of Kathryn 




Hulme:  A.  M.  Heath  and  Co.  Ltd.;  Little,  Brown  and  Co.;  the  Atlantic 




Monthly Press. For permission to quote from the work of Beryl Pogson: 




Watkins  Publishing.  For  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  Mabel 




Dodge Luhan: Martin Seeker and Warburg Ltd. For permission to quote 




from from the work of T. S. Matthews: Mr. T. S. Matthews; Anthony Blond 




Ltd. For permission to quote from Roger Shattuck’s translation of the work 




of Ren6 Daumal: Watkins PubUshing; Pantheon Books/Random House. For 




permission to quote from the work of Monk Gibbon: Rupert Hart-Davis/ 




Granada  Pubhshing;  Macmillan  Publishing  Co.  Ric.  For  permission  to 




quote  from  the  work  of  John  Unterecker:  Anthony  Blond  Ltd.;  Farrar, 




Straus and Giroux Inc. For permission to quote from the work of Alan 




Watts: Jonathan Cape Ltd.; Pantheon Books/Random House. For permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  Joseph  Wood  Krutch:  Harcourt  Brace Jovanovich Inc. For permission to quote from the work of Edmund Wilson: 




Farrar, Straus and Giroux  

fnc. 

 For permission to quote from the work of J. 




B. Priestley: William Heinemann Ltd.; A. D. Peters and Co. Ltd.; 




A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S   

7




Doubleday  and  Co.,  Inc.  For  permission  to  quote iSrom Brom Weber’s 




edition of the letters of Hart Crane: The University of California Press. For 




permission  to  quote  from  H.  P.  D.  Lee’s  translation  of  Plato’s   

Timaeus:

 




Penguin Books Ltd. For permission to quote from from David Magarshack’s 




translation of Dostoievsky’s  

The Brothers Karamazov: Vengain

 Books Ltd. 




For permission to quote from the work of Claude Bragdon: Alfred A. Knopf 




Inc.  I  am  required  to  state  that   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  is  copyright 




1949 by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. 




Every effort had been made to communicate w^ith holders of copyright 




material, but in some cases it has proved impossible to establish contact. 




The author and publishers apologize to anyone who has been overlooked 




because of circumstances beyond their control. 







Contents

Preface




11

Introduction




17




PART 1 

 

“And I beheld the Man . . 




1 

The Seeker for Truth




25




2 

The Great Game




48




3 

The Professional Hypnotist




75




4




Life Against Life




94




5 

The Search for the Miraculous




118




6 

The Inner and the Outer Revolutions




132




7 

The Traveling Circus




163




PART 2 

 

Beelzebub and his Grandchildren




1 

The Maestro of the Musical Glasses




195




2




Suspensk




213




3 

The Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man




232




4 

A Crack in the Times




265




5 

A Chapter of Accidents




288




6




Per Americam ad Beelzebub




300




7 

The Prior of Avon




325




8 

Art, Science, Religion and Gymnastics




337




9 

The Dominion of Heropass




358




10 

What Struggle? What Magicians? 




379




11 

Real Psychology




393




12 

The Bone Beneath the Mountain




412




13 

The Strange Death of Pyotr Ouspensky




439




14  The Last Suppers 




461




15  The Quest for Harmony 




476




PART 3 

 

First and Last Things




1  The Sources of the System 




499




2  A Short Space Voyage with the Grand Inquisitor 




543




3  Of Masters and Men 




560




Sources 




574




Index 




591




Preface




“You have taken on a large task, ” warned one well-known author who had 




known Gurdjieff. “Looking for G. historically must be like looking for the 




historical Moses.” The analogy appeared increasingly apt as my work on this 




book progressed. For who was Moses? And  

what

 was Moses? A historical 




figure or a myth? And if the latter, with what motives did the mythmakers 




start to weave their glittering fabric? In the case of Moses we even begin 




vwth an enigma: the mysterious child abandoned in the bulrushes. In the 




case of Gurdjieff, the situation is not much different. 




A biographer in search of the authentic Gurdjieff begins by suspecting a 




campaign of mystification—^and to some extent he may continue to hold this 




opinion. Part of the difficulty is that there has never been a book written 




about GurdjiefiF and his followers by, someone not personally involved in 




their activities; and the grinding of axes among the Master’s successors has 




resulted in much of what has been written being—either deliberately or 




unconsciously—distorted. Ten years ago J. B. Priestley appealed in his  

Man

 




 

and  Time

  for  an  assessment  by  an  independent  writer.  This  is  the  first 




attempt to provide such a book, and a:t the same time to tell a fascinating 




story before the possibilities of telling it are obliterated forever. The book is 




largely  based  on  unpublished  documents  and  interviews—some  vwth 




people now dead; it seeks also to place in historical context the extensive 




and confusing body of Hterature concerning Gurdjieff, Ouspensky, Orage 




and their leading followers. 




1 1




1 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




There are peculiar difficulties in the way of the w6uld-be independent 




critic of GurdjiefF. The geographical obstacles to far-flung research are 




considerable; but as it was, I ranged from Austria to Tennessee. In Vienna 




the Keyserlings demonstrated their extraordinary musical instrument, the 




Chakraphone, until the hairs on the back of my neck rose like the hackles of 




a  dog;  in  Geneva  I  was  kindly  received  by  Mme.  de  Stoerneval  in  her 




house, which had been the last home of the novelist Robert Musil; in Paris 




Pierre Schaeffer interrupted a busy life to spend two hours discussing the 




decadence of modern music and the structure of the universe; whether in 




London, New York, or Paris, I was helped on my way by a stimulating 




variety of people. 




However, in only a very few cases have I introduced the names of living 




persons whose role in events has hitherto been unknown. This is largely 




because the particular problems of gathering information about “the Work” 




involved threading my way through a labyrinth of “political” complications, 




some of which were probably real, others, almost certainly manufactured. 




Some of my informants asked me not to use their names, others did not 




mind being mentioned, and some actually forbade me to use any information without stating from what source it came. Sometimes it seemed that such requests were part of a particular game which was in progress—and 




the reader will have to go some way into the book before he understands 




what  is  meant.  In  order  to  eliminate  such  uncertainties  and  to  avoid 




deploying a large cast of peripheral characters, I have reduced most of my 




informants to anonymity. The reader will have to accept my word that (to 




take some examples), “a pupil of Ouspensky,” “a follower of Orage,” or “an 




inmate of the Frieure” actually exists, and my judgment of each as a reliable 




source of information. 




Both the subject matter and my sources have placed certain limitations 




on the book, which it is the duty of a preface to indicate. Some limitations 




are voluntarily imposed. The music written jointly by Gurdjieff and Thomas 




de Hartmann and the body of dances and physical exercises known as 




Gurdjieff’s “movements,” are not. discussed in detail. This is partly for 




reasons of space, but chiefly because the book is primarily a historical and 




biographical study concerned with certain aspects of psychology. But—to 




take  the  movements as  an instance—those limitations  make a virtue of 




necessity. I have read about the movements, talked about them, Hstened to 




the music which accompanies them, and inspected notebooks in which the 




sequence of positions is recorded. I think I have a shrewd idea of what the 




movements are designed to achieve. But I have not practiced them myself, 




nor have I seen a live performance or a showing of the films on which they 




are recorded. This is not for want of trying. 




Other limitations imposed on this book come neither from the economics




P R E F A C E   1 3




of publishing nor the elusive quality of the subject. They result firom a 




deliberate policy of obstruction on the part of some of GurdjiefiF’s followers. 




There can be no real quarrel with this, because these followers are acting in 




complete good faith, protecting what they see as the integrity of the ideas 




with  which  they  have  been  entrusted.  There  is no  reason whatever for 




someone to cooperate in an undertaking of which he or she may thoroughly 




disapprove.  I  have  been  refused  permission  to  quote  from  certain  un- 




pubhshed writings, and it is also probable that a large quantity of potentially 




useful information has been withheld or suppressed. 




GurdjiefiF’s successors have provided a sort of limited cooperation— 




which in some cases went far beyond the bounds of anything I had a right to 




expect—^but in others seemed like a hand preferred only to turn into a 




clenched fist. In addition, it was always open to my informants to transform 




what  seemed  a  straightforward  process  of  research  into  the  kind  of 




ambiguous  situation  which  Gurdjiefif  excelled  in  creating.  In  fact,  it 




eventually became clear that an attempt was being made to ensnare me 




forcibly in the sort of activities about which I had hoped to write from a 




detached point of view. 




I must  admit that  this attempt was temporarily successful, and I am 




certain that it greatly helped me to understand the nature of GurdjiefTs 




curious discipline. Yet the ethics of the situation continue to puzzle me. At 




one point I suspected that I had been manipulated into writing the sort of 




book which the hierarchy wanted written; at another that the attempt to 




engorge me in the Work was designed to ensure that no book would be 




written at all. While very much in debt to certain people for the pains taken 




on my behalf, I must remain skeptical of the good faith of others. 




Why  all  this  secrecy?  Partly  it  can  be  explained  by  the  nature  of  the 




Work, which has little interest in coherent explanations, and partly as the 




consequence of decades of unthinking ridicule. Some followers of GurdjiefT 




and Ouspensky have uncomfortably thin skins and what must be a uniquely 




developed ability to see criticism where none is intended. This characteristic can militate against any view of the Work as a serious discipline and makes it impossible to believe in the strict accuracy of assertions made from 




within  the  movement.  The  resulting  impression  is  of  a  morbid  fear  of 




criticism and a tendency to play fast and loose with historical fact. But to 




leave matters there would not be entirely fair either to Gurdjieff or to the 




better natures of his followers. 




On one level GurdjiefiF was a fraud, a har, a cheat, and a scoundrel. He 




also possessed compensating qualities of sympathy, compassion, charity, 




and an eccentric code of honor. He attempted to use the friction generated 




by his negative qualities to strike fire from the hearts of his disciples; and 




GurdjieflF’s successors have studied their Master’s technique. Are they




1 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




really so insecure as to fear any criticism? Do they in fact wish to canonize 




GurdjieflF, Ouspensky, Orage, and Nicoil? Or, are such attitudes designed 




to reproduce the impression that Gurdjieff himself made on those who 




encountered him? 




The historian must separate hard historical fact from evidence of another 




sort. Individuals “in the Work” are often unreliable sources of historical 




information. On the other hand, their very equivocation makes it possible 




to recapture something of the uncertainty which they themselves experienced when they approached the Old Magician. In the last analysis, this may be more useful than any conventional assistance. I have therefore to 




acknowledge  help  of  an  unusual  nature,  while  at  the  same  time,  the 




interests of future writers compel me to register doubts. The reader should 




be warned that—despite constant vigilance—incidents may have crept into 




these pages which were intended as fables illustrating particular points, or 




even as moral allegories directed at the author. 




Because of the circumstances that compelled me to choose anonymity for 




many of my informants, I cannot acknowledge some of my greatest debts; 




and it would be invidious to name some who helped me while other names 




were absent. All I can do is offer a general expression of gratitude to at least 




fifty people, named or unnamed, who corresponded with me, allowed me 




to interview them, lent me rare or unpublished material, or undertook the 




thankless task of criticizing my typescript. 




Of those debts which can be acknowledged in conventional fashion, I 




should like to thank the librarians and staffs of the University Library, 




Cambridge,  the  British  Museum,  the  London  Library,  the  Warburg 




Institute, University of London, the Public Record Office, the India Office 




Library,  the  Biblioth^que  Nationale,  Paris,  the  tovra  library  at  Fontainebleau, the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Munich, the New York Public Library,  and  the  Special  Collections  Department  of  the  Library,  Fisk 




University, Nashville, Tennessee. For academic (as distinct from Gurdjieff- 




ian)  assistance,  I  am  grateful  to  Drs.  Phillippe  Berchtold  and  Edmond 




Stadler (Geneva), Trevor Hall (Leeds), and Michael Weaver (Exeter). I am 




particularly indebted to Stanley Baron and Frances McFadyen for their 




patient advice on the reduction of a typescript of over one thousand pages 




to more manageable proportions. 




In  the pages which follow, a scholarly reader might object to certain 




inconsistencies. Transliterations from the Russian do not always follow the 




same system; it seems unnecessary to complicate matters by transforming 




P. D. Ouspensky into “P. D. Uspenskii” because this spelling conforms to a 




system of transliteration in general use. If a person in the story is commonly 




known by one particular spelling of his name, that should be sufBcient 




reason for using it: one could spell “Gurdjiefif” “GourdjiefiF,” or “Gurdjiev,” 




P R E F A C E   1 5




and  a  more  fashionable  transliteration  might  be  “Gurdzhiev.”  Nor  are 




Russian women’s names always accurately rendered: it is clearly unnecessary to call Sophia Grigorievna Ouspensky “Ouspenskaya,” which was her real name. The same sort of liberties have been taken with place-names in 




Russia and  the East; in  all cases I  have preferred spellings used by the 




followers of Gurdjieff themselves. 




London, November 1978







 

Introduction




The Invisible Man, the Impossible Task




One day in the late 1920s a ferociously driven automobile might have been 




seen traveling along the Paris-Orleans road. If the driver were keeping to 




his  usual  custom,  the  journey  would  have  been  nerve  racking  in  the 




extreme; and the psasengers would be jolted, bruised, and scared as they 




read from a manuscript which appeared to recount the unflattering opinions 




of Beelzebub on the human race. It is reported that one of the captives in 




the car risked a glance out of the window. He saw that the road which his 




determined chauffeur was so wantonly traversing was dominated by a 




gigantic figure of Christ perched on a hilltop. He decided to risk distracting 




the driver from the task in hand. 




“Georgeivanitch, they have put your colleague up there on the hill!” 




The driver—no doubt with a number of choice imprecations—loudly 




demanded when he had ever said that Christ and he were colleagues. The 




passenger, who was the artist Alexander de Salzmann, provided chapter 




and verse: it had been in such and such a place—^Tiflis, Constantinople, 




Berlin—on  such  and  such  a  day.  From  the  driver’s  seat  came  only  the 




sound, “Humph!” 




Thirty years later the man who had been driving the car was dead, and 




mingled with the praises of his followers was a countercurrent of violent 




criticism.  Certain  rumors  became  common  property:  these  concerned 




GurdjiefiF’s ways with women, his supposed hypnotic power, his alleged




1 7




1 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




responsibility for several deaths in suspicious circumstances. A Catholic 




writer published what he called a “Ceremony of Execration” instead of an 




obituary. A writer in a philosophical journal declared that if GurdjiefF were 




not an avatar he was a  

skandalon

—the term the early Church had used for 




emissaries  of  the  devil.  A  more  rationalist  critic  in   

Nouvelles  Litteraires

 




fought to combat this alarmism. 




“He was not the devil,” he wrote, “but a false prophet, a pretentious 




ignoramus.” 




If Gurdjieff seemed any of these things, it was only to certain people. For 




GurdjiefF was an invisible man. 




In 1922 this strange individual appeared in Western Europe with a band 




of  followers  whom  he  had  rescued  from  the  chaos  of  the  Russian 




Revolution.  He  established  himself  in  a  chateau  in  the  Forest  of  Fontainebleau,  where  he  founded  something  he  called  “The  Institute  for Harmonious  Development  of  Man.”  Writers  and  intellectuals  were  attracted by Gurdjieff’s ideas and the lectures which his leading follower, P. D. Ouspensky, was giving in London; and Katherine Mansfield died of 




tuberculosis at Fontainebleau. In 1924 Gurdjieff and his pupils traveled to 




New York, where they created a sensation, leaving the celebrated editor 




A. R. Orage behind to preach the gospel. Then, in the middle of the 1930s, 




Gurdjieff appeared to quarrel with all his oldest followers. He disappeared 




from  sight  until  after  the  Second  World  War,  when,  in  the  few  years 




remaining to him, he again became the enigmatic prophet who fascinated 




the intellectuals of Europe and America. He died in 1949, leaving behind 




an  enormous  work  published  under  the  title   

All  and  Everything:  First

 




 

Series, 

 but more usually known as  

Beelzebub’s Tales to his Grandson. 




P. D. Ouspensky, who died two years earlier in England, left a record of 




his  time  with  Gurdjieff  in  his  book   

In  Search  of the  Miraculous. 

  Since its 




appearance in 1949, there has been a spate of literature reminiscing about 




Gurdjieff, whose character and teaching are perhaps more controversial 




today than during his lifetime. The body of activity deriving from Gurdjieff, 




Ouspensky, and Orage has become known as “the Work,” and it has spread 




to every continent and been extraordinarily influential. Neither a church 




nor a sect nor a school of philosophy, it is extremely difficult to define. 




It is also hard to be precise about its originator. However unwillingly, the 




biographer must recognize that understanding Gurdjieff’s "invisibility” is 




an essential part of understanding the man; worse yet, this invisibility can 




only  become  apparent  as  the  story  unfolds.  Gurdjieff  does  not  present 




himself as a man with a continuous life like other men. He seems more to 




be a collection of incidents. 




An old man, sitting in the sun on the terrace of a Paris cafe, or playing 




host to a horde of strangers in his tiny flat, a flat packed with people and hot




I N T R O D U C T I O N   1 9




as  an  oven  ...  a  man  of  early  middle-age  with  a  bristling  mustache, 




wearing  an  astrakhan  hat  and  an  overcoat,  entertaining  in  a  Moscow 




restaurant frequented by prostitutes, or sitting Oriental fashion in a St. 




Petersburg salon ... the same man, this time simply clothed in Caucasian 




dress, leading a party of terrified intellectuals through mountainous country 




in a state of civil war, his trousers hitched up by a fireman’s belt . . . the 




hollow-cheeked  and  hollow-eyed  guru  who  enticed  the  famous  to  his 




Institute  at Fontainebleau  ... or the  fox of the  Levant, up  to  his eyes  in 




shady  financial  operations,  his  dress  untidy,  spattered  with  food,  his 




environs a gray snowstorm of cigarette ash, a glint of stratagem in his eye 




... a Man of Power, seducer of women and exploiter of men; monstrous, 




monstrous Mr. GurdjiefF. 




These are all snapshots. The fact that they are not arranged in the order 




in which they were taken makes no difference. 




They represent roles through which, occasionally, the man beneath the 




role was glimpsed. 




All  the  photographs  were  taken  in  a  certain  context,  for  a  particular 




purpose, directed at definite people. So the theory goes; and how far it is 




valid will be for the reader to say. But it would be unfair to tell the story of a 




man who believed that covering his tracks was an integral part of his work, 




without trying to show how the very act of making him historical denies 




what he set out to achieve. Unless the inquirer is aware of the concept of 




“playing a role,” he risks misinterpreting the story of Gurdjieff and his 




followers altogether. For—except in an unusual and specialized context—it 




is virtually impossible to assess the motives of any particular person at any 




particular time. The sense of events will be completely distorted if judged 




by ordinary standards. What was really happening, for example, when 




Gurdjieff invited a sweet young thing to his Paris flat at midnight? Perhaps 




it was to gratify his natural appetites—and why not? Perhaps it was to shock 




a starry-eyed girl out of her illusions. Perhaps it was simply to see what 




answer he would receive; there were certainly cases when a girl actually 




slept  in  Gurdjieff’s  flat,  after  being  invited  to  stay  the  night,  and  was 




completely unmolested. And what was her reaction to being left to sleep 




alone? 




Gurdjieff himself described his apprenticeship in the discipline of role 




playing in a passage quoted by his follower C. S. Nott from an unpublished 




work called “A Letter to a Dervish”:




The sign of a perfected man and his particularity in ordinary life must 




be that in regard to everything happening outside him, he is able to, 




and  can  in  every  action,  perform  to  perfection  externally  the  part 




corresponding to the given situation; but at the same time never blend




2 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




or  agree  with  it.  In  my  youth,  I  too  .  .  .  worked  on  myself  for  the 




purpose  of  attaining  such  a  blessing  .  .  .  and  ...  I  finally  reached  a 




state when nothing from outside could really touch me internally; and 




so far as acting was concerned, I brought myself to such perfection as 




was never dreamed of by the learned people of ancient Babylon for the 




actors on the stage. 




The theory of role playing holds that the technique is an aid to detachment. 




Outwardly one plays the role in which one is cast, inwardly one becomes 




free from  this role: the object is to detach the sensation of “I” from the 




experiences  and  reactions  of  the  organism,  while  at  the  same  time 




extending one’s range by adopting unfamiliar parts. “1’ am not ‘it’” is the 




motto which the role player must always remember—he must, as Gurdjieff 




said, “seZ/-remember”—even when unjustly accused by a ferocious Gurdjieff who snapped at, cursed, and generally hauled one over the coals. 




In  his  book   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  Gurdjieff  illustrates  this 




principle with the fable of “Yelov” and “Pogossian. ” The two men are 




extremely close, but conceal their affection under assumed roles. If Yelov is 




offered a delicacy in a house where politeness demands that he accept it, he 




resists the pressure to conform; and although he is very fond of the sweet 




offered to him, he takes it home for his friend Pogossian. But he actually 




gives the tidbit to his friend with a volley of insults—and Pogossian takes 




the gift, no doubt aware of the difficulties Yelov had suffered in resisting 




both convention and his own sweet tooth, and devours the offering while 




insulting his benefactor in turn. 




When writers talk about Gurdjieff, the man, they show only a series of 




disconnected  snapshots;  when  they  talk  about  his  ideas,  their  books 




degenerate into a series of logoi, or sayings of Gurdjieff. To avoid distortion 




the snapshots are mounted in albums and their captions are the briefest 




possible. For to string the pictures together would be to commit the sin of 




making history—and history, in Ouspensky’s favorite phrase, is “the history 




of crime.” History attends only to unimportant things, and the process of 




historical selection is arbitrary and misleading. However, some men can 




avoid the history of crime; and because they are superior to the ordinary 




run of humanity, they vanish from its ken. They have escaped from the 




trap, and so far as history is concerned become invisible. 




Margaret Anderson, the founder of  

The Little Review, 

 has published an 




entire  book  called   

The  Unknowable  Gurdjieff, 

  partly  vwth  the  object  of 




proving how a book can never be written about the Master. The American 




novelist Jean Toomer recorded his uncertainties in some manuscript notes 




made after more than fifteen years of contact with Gurdjieff. “I do not know 




G.,” he wrote. "I have never knovra G. I never will.” GurdjiefF’s invisibihty




I N T R O D U C T I O N   2 1




was most complete for those who knew him personally, and the historical 




observer has a direct advantage over his immediate associates. But for the 




historian too, Gurdjieff’s doctrine of role playing produces a peculiar result. 




If there is a hidden meaning in every ordinary-seeming event, the story 




itself soon appears to have a significance independent of its component 




incidents.  The  Work  assumes  the  aspect  of  a  living  organism,  and  the 




various external events which form its history appear to be deliberately 




created for the benefit of the chronicler. The pattern of discipleship and 




schism,  loyalties  and  hatreds,  takes  on  the  appearance  of  having  been 




arranged: the actors seem to weave a web of collusion even when they are 




apparently at daggers drawn. 




It is a vast symbol: a glyph etched in history. The glyph is composed not 




of pen strokes on paper or chisel marks in stone, but of the lives of men and 




women and their interaction. The long upstroke here indicates Gurdjieff’s 




quest in Central Asia; that convergence of two lines—the last conversation 




of  Orage  and  Katherine  Mansfield;  the  cross-hatching  there  stands  for 




countless hirsute Peters and Magdalenes pursuing the reality of  

that fons et

 




 

origo

 of the magic influences: Gurdjielf. 




It  is  as  if  the  biographer  becomes  a  scribe  occupying  a  small  cell 




somewhere in the library of Alexandria. It is several hundred years after the 




birth of Christ, and before him the scribe has set out the interpretation of 




Christ’s  teaching  made  by  Origen.  This,  too,  finds a covert meaning in 




events,  records  echoes  from  the  harmonies  of  the  universe.  The  scribe 




knows the dangers seen in this interpretation by members of Origen’s own 




religion,  and  he  is  a  skeptical  scribe,  trained  in  the  schools  of  Greek 




rationalism, aware that around him in this city of Alexandria—in this library 




in particular—^there are learned men discussing Buddhism, the Cabala, and 




texts  attributed  to  Thrice-Great  Hermes.  This  accumulated  pressure 




surrounds the scribe in the corridors of the library, the streets of the great 




city, and the lecture rooms of the philosophers. He resists it. It is there to 




be resisted. 




Yet, the legend which the wretched Origen has suggested to him is an 




obsessively interesting one, and he returns to his room to study the codices. 




He must concede that the aspiration shown by the prophet and his followers 




is  extraordinary.  Their  goals  are,  to  say  the  least,  uncommon  in  any 




century. They want to awaken poor dozing Everyman from his stupor, blow 




a trumpet in his ear and persuade him to share their struggles, with a view 




to acquiring a permanent identity which he does not in fact possess, to 




maintaining perfect control over his largely automatic actions, and by a 




series of difficult exercises—physical, emotional, and intellectual—to inherit eternal life. 







I saw the Man. 




His figure reached from earth to heaven and was clad in a purple 




mantle. He stood deep in foliage and flowers and his head, on 




which  was  the  head-band  of  an  initiate,  seemed  to  disappear 




mysteriously in infinity. 




Before him on a cube-shaped altar were four symbols of magic— 




the sceptre, the cup, the sword and the pentacle. 




His right hand pointed to heaven, his left to earth. Under his 




mantle he wore a white tunic girded with a serpent swallowing its 




tail. 




His face was luminous and serene, and when his eyes met mine, 




I  felt  that  he  saw  the  most  intimate  recesses  of  my  soul.  I  saw 




myself reflected in him as in a mirror and in his eyes I seemed to 




look upon myself. 




And I heard a voice saying; 




—^“Look, this is the Great Magician!” 




—P.  D.  OUSPENSKY,  

The  Symbolism  of  the  Tarot

 




(St. Petersburg, 1913)







The Seeker for Truth




Georgei  Ivanovitch  Gurdjieff  was  born  .  .  .  and  here  all  pretensions  to 




accuracy stop. He was born; we can insist on that, and it is even fairly 




certain that he was born in the town of Alexandropol (now Leninakan) on 




the frontier between Russia and Turkey. But the precise birth date and 




even Gurdjieff s real name remain debatable, and they are only the first of 




die difficulties which confront the biographer. Evidence about the career of 




Gurdjieff is at all stages subject to special qualifications which the story 




alone can make clear. The man himself delighted in giving countenance to 




the most absurd tales about his past. This complicates in a peculiar fashion 




any attempt to reconstruct the story of his life until he appeared in Moscow 




about the year 1913. 




Georgei Ivanovitch Gurdjieff is said to have been born either in 1872 or 




1877. Both dates have their supporters, although some writers suggest that 




he was bom in 1886, and the American journalist William Seabrook favored 




the year 1873. Gurdjieff himself was fond of claiming a life of Methuselahan 




proportions. Once on a trip to the United States it was discovered that there 




had been confusion over the details on his passport. Consternation reigned 




among immigration officials and Gurdjieff’s aides. The passport gave his 




date of birth as sometime in the far distant future. “No mistake,” said the 




veteran of every concdivable traveling difficulty. “No mistake—^you go 




arrange.” And somehow things were disentangled. The biographer himself




2 5




2 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




must “go arrange,” and opt for the year 1874, for reasons which will become 




clear in the next chapter. 




The day which Gurdjieff himself celebrated as his birthday and which his 




followers still honor in his memory is January 13. By the Old Style calendar 




used in Russia until the Revolution, this represents New Year’s Day; and as 




Gurdjieff declared that he had been born precisely at midnight, this may be 




taken  as  a  purely  symbolic  birthday.  Yet  to  state  bluntly  that  this 




extraordinary man was  

not

 born at midnight, on January 1 Old Style, may 




well be an unjustified reaction from those who accept the date and derive 




from it some supernatural significance. People  

are

 born at midnight: it is 




even a likely hour for a child to arrive in the world. The double coincidence 




of hour and date would not be the strangest thing about Georgei Ivanovitch 




Gurdjieff. 




There is also a problem with his name. Gurdjieff was the son of a Greek 




father  and  an  Armenian  mother.  Although  he  spoke  both  Greek  and 




Armenian, the latter was the language of the Gurdjieff household. GurdjieJ^F 




is  the  Russian  form  of  the  name  which  in  Armenian  society  would  be 




rendered Gurdjtan. Such an alteration was the rule for Asiatic Russians who 




had dealings with European Russia. William Seabrook states bluntly that 




Gurdjieff  was  born  “George  S.  Georgiades,”  and  it  is  probable  that 




“Georgiades” was the original Greek name of Gurdjieff s father, who altered 




it  to  “Gurdjian”  when  he  found  himself  moving  in  circles  in  which 




Armenian was the lingua franca. 




The  country  where  Gurdjieff  grew  up  was  an  almost  unbelievable 




patchwork of races and religions. In classical times over seventy languages 




were spoken in Caucasia, and fifty are still in use. In Gurdjiefif’s childhood, 




Georgians, Armenians, and Azerbaijans rubbed shoulders with Greeks, 




Turks, and Persians; further north the high mountains of the Caucasus 




concealed pockets of puzzling tribes like the Khevsurs and Ossets who had 




no known genetic afBliations. There were the Russian masters of the area, 




Kurds wandering up from the south, Tartars, Cossacks from the north, and 




in the extreme northeast, Kalmuck Mongols in the provinces of Astrakhan 




and  Stavropol  on  the  coast  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  The  circumstances  of 




GurdjiefTs  birth,  writes  the  French  critic  Manuel  Rainord,  “make  one 




believe in a sort of geographical vocation.” 




The southern Caucasus was a frontier area in perpetual dispute between 




Turkey,  Russia,  and  Persia.  War  and  rapine  had  resulted  in  frequent 




migrations of peoples between the aggressor nations. The smaller races— 




Armenians and Kurds particularly—^were always in danger of persecution 




from  one  or  another  of  their  enemies.  The  Caucasus  range  itself  had 




traditionally formed a refuge for the disinherited; and the security of its 




inaccessible valleys was a further reason why the lands between the Black




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   2 7




Sea and the Caspian Sea gave the appearance almost of an experiment in 




the confusion of humankind. GurdjiefF clearly derived immense pleasure 




and  stimulation  from  the  diversity  of  people  he  encountered  in  his 




childhood. The gusto of some of the tales in  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 




and the stage directions for his “ballet”  

The Struggle of the Magicians

 bear 




witness  to  his  delight  in  the  variety— 

yet  sameness  in  that  variety

—of 




human beings. 




GurdjiefF’s  family  were  themselves  a  product  of  this  cosmopolitan 




situation. His father came from a family of Greeks from Asia Minor which 




had  been  slowly  migrating  eastward  ever  since  the  Turkish  capture  of 




Byzantium. According to GurdjiefF, they had first settled in central Turkey, 




then moved north to the east coast of the Black Sea, and next to Georgia. 




Shortly before the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78, GurdjiefF’s father left his 




brothers in Georgia and moved to the’ Armenian town of Alexandropol, 




where GurdjiefF was born. After this move, he suffered a financial disaster; 




and from being a rich grazier, he was forced to turn to manual labor to 




support his family. His efforts as a carpenter met with Uttle success and his 




prospects appeared better in Kars, a frontier town which the Russians had 




taken from the Turks in 1877. The Gurdjieff family moved yet again. 




It was in Kars that Georgei Ivanovitch GurdjiefF grew up. The family 




remained very poor, and there were three sisters and GurdjiefF’s brother 




Dmitri to be fed. The severity of their living conditions is shown by a story 




Dmitri Gurdjieff used to tell of a time when the two boys were rivals in 




love. It was not that they were rivals for the same girl, but if they both 




wanted to go out on the same evening, there was only a single pair of shoes 




between them. GurdjiefF’s experience of extreme poverty undoubtedly 




affected him throughout his life and made him impatient with dreamers, 




dropouts, and those who wanted to discard their worldly obligations. “Very 




important have piece of paper in life,” he would say, advising a young man 




to go away and pass his exams; or, “I also am business-man.” 




Apart from a few stray rumors, our only sources for GurdjiefF’s early life 




are his own writings, which present great problems when they are treated 




as biographical material. Certain episodes are illuminated by the privately 




published manuscripts knovra as the  

Third Series. 

 GurdjiefF’s pamphlet, 




 

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  (1933),  gives  a  rather  confusing  outline  of  his 




development up to the time when he appeared in Russia. The gargantuan 




 

Beelzebub’s  Tales  to  his  Grandson

  (1949)  can  be  combed  for  biographical 




details; but because of the deliberately obscure method of narration and the 




quite unbelievable, fantasies put in the mouth of GurdjiefiF’s benevolent and 




wise old Beelzebub, it is dangerous to take any statement as illustrating a 




real event. It is obvious, however, that there are autobiographical passages 




in  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 and its huge, irritating, and delightful bulk provides




2 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




many more general indications of where GurdjiefF traveled and what he 




saw. The chief source for the events of Gurdjieff ’s early life is the so-called 




autobiography,  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 (1963). 




 

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 is Gurdjieff ’s account of his education 




and his wanderings, first in his native Caucasus, and later in Central Asia 




vdth a band of explorers he calls “the Seekers for Truth.” The book was 




partly designed, he warned, to satisfy the merely inquisitive by providing 




answers to the recurring questions which most frequently made inroads on 




his time. In addition, it was meant to serve as material to prepare for an 




understanding of his system. He claimed that it was also designed to give a 




picture of his own life; but in what style this was painted he did not say. 




And  although  the  prose  is  clear,  racy,  and  uncluttered  by  the  Oriental 




complexities  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales  to  his  Grandson, 

  the  book  is  similarly 




laden with symbols and allegorical stories. 




The narrative is in the time-honored form used by Marcus Aurelius. 




“From  so-and-so  I  learned  such-and-such,  from  such-a-one  I  learned 




something  else.”  Gurdjieff  arranges  his  material  in  chapters  which are 




known by the names of the “remarkable men” they portray; but beside the 




important personages are other characters, the subjects of tales-within-tales 




or the mouthpieces of sermons designed to illustrate particular points. The 




reader  hears  of  Gurdjieff’s  boyhood  friend,  “Sarkis  Pogossian,”  whose 




mechanical abilities eventually won him a trading ship in the South Seas, or 




“Abraham Yelov,” the Assyrian bookdealer of Tiflis, who accompanied 




Gurdjieff in philosophical inquiries and eventually emigrated from Soviet 




Russia  to  the  United  States.  Lesser  characters  are  “Mme.  Vitvitskaya,” 




whose interests in  music and vibration  enable  Gurdjieff to  suggest the 




unusual way of considering sound which was so important to his system, 




and “Father Giovanni,” an Italian missionary whom the narrator meets in 




Kafiristan and who serves as his sponsor to the “World Brotherhood” and its 




remarkable monastery. 




Most of these characters probably had no historical existence. There may 




never  have  been  a  Yelov  or  a  Mme.  Vitvitskaya.  But  throughout  the 




brightly colored adventure story and through the fumes of armagnac which 




Gurdjieff proclaimed he had drunk in heroic quantities while writing the 




book, comes an undeniable sense of authenticity. The characters may be 




imaginary or composites, but a rich supply of autobiographical experience 




from Gurdjieff’s undoubtedly adventurous past went into their making. 




The  reader  soon  becomes  able  to  distinguish  the  different  styles 




employed  by  Gurdjieff  for  the  most  obvious  levels  of   

Meetings  with

 




 

Remarkable Men. 

 The account of his life and of his “remarkable” acquaintances  is  written  in  a  straightforward  fashion.  Into  the  mouths  of  the characters are inserted more oratorical declamations, rather in the manner




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   2 9




of  Beelzebub,  which  should  be  taken  like  the  pronouncements  of  that 




oracular personage. There are passages of deliberately “literary” compositions such as the melodramatic introduction to Mme. Vitvitskaya as a victim of the white slave trade; and sharp doses of the deliberately absurd to keep 




the critical faculties alert. Also there are short fables or parables, which 




lend themselves to interpretation—^and like all parables, to endless dispute 




about the meaning intended. 




It is dangerous to label any particular passage in the book as allegorical, 




for what seems obvious allegory often has a basis in fact. An example of this 




can be found in the chapter called “Prince Yuri Lubovedsky,” in which the 




members of the Seekers for Truth call a conference in the Gobi Desert to 




discuss the best method of crossing the sand with the resources at their 




disposal. A plan of what seems transparent symbolism is unfolded. It is 




discovered that because the sand is of “purely vegetable origin,” the sheep 




belonging to the expedition can be kept going for longer by mixing a certain 




proportion of sand with their food. The difficulty of extending their food 




supply is thus overcome. But what about the sandstorms so common in the 




desert? One of the Seekers for Truth discovers that with a ladder he can see 




over the sandstorms and suggests that the party equip themselves with 




stilts. A final expert ties the whole plan together. By fastening their stilts 




between  the sheep, they can form panniers to carry baggage and even 




themselves, thus conserving their energy. “We were all so astounded,” 




writes GurdjiefF, “that all of a sudden it seemed to us that the difficulties of 




crossing  the  Gobi  had  been  intentionally  exaggerated,  and  even  the 




impossibility of it suggested expressly for the traveller.” 




Of course, the obvious allegory is probably the point of the episode. It 




d^iBOjSstt^es certain principles of the GurdjiefiF Method. There must be 




 

sheep

 in his work, because the  

travelers need food. 

 They also need to see 




above appearances. The poor sheep—^who are only sheep anyway and can 




never transcend the obvious like the stilt walkers—can carry the stilts, and 




the men as well, who can use the time to “learn all the languages we shall 




need in future expeditions.” If you like, it is an allegory about the uses to 




which  sheep  can  be  put  by  an  intending  goat.  Why  set  it  in  the  Gobi 




Desert, except to play mystery man? But what is really astonishing is the 




essential realism of the allegory, which is apparent only if the inquirer has 




experienced sandstorms which  

do

 in fact often stop at a short height above 




the ground. Stilts would be a theoretical although impractical way of seeing 




over  the  top.  But  sheep  as  baggage  animals?  That  is  surely  carrying 




implausibiUty too far. Not according to Captain H.H.P. Deasy whose  

In

 




 

Tibet  and  Chinese  Turkestan

  was  published  in  1901.  “The  best  beasts  of 




burden for Tibet,” he vmtes, “are undoubtedly the sheep of the country or 




of Ladak. If in good condition at starting, and in charge of a man who knows




3 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




his business, they will carry loads of about 22 lbs. for a long time. . . . ” 




Carrying a man is an obvious impossibility, but by this time the inquirer is 




wondering about that sand . . .  

could

 it in fact be composed of vegetable 




matter? 




He  would  be  wise  to  wonder  no  further.  Gurdjiefif’s  statements  are 




neither one thing nor the other—^indeed, that is precisely what they are: 




neither-one-thing-nor-the-other—and confusion alone can result from following a too literal or a too skeptical approach. On one occasion Gurdjieff was embarked on some traveler’s tale of Egypt when his follower P. D. 




Ouspensky confronted him with a man who was able to denounce his 




“recollections” as bogus. On the other hand, his knowledge of Central Asia 




frequently proves extensive. Underneath the conceptual juggling one thing 




is clear; It is generally more likely than not that Gurdjieff had been where 




he said he had been, although no one can ever be certain exactly where his 




inventiveness runs away with the facts. 




Within this all but overwhelming jungle of allegory and symbolism lies 




the central metaphor of  

Meetings with Remarkable Men:

 the metaphor of 




the persons of the book. 




For from whatever materials Gurdjieff constructed his characters—^people 




like his fether or “Lubovedsky” whom he had actually met, personifications of 




one aspect of his work like “Vitvitskaya,” composites of several influences 




which had in truth operated in hiis life, or spokesmen for various schools of 




thought he . had met in the East—^their place in the structure of the tale is 




determined by their effect on the Gurdjieff who is telling the story, the 




“Gurdjieff” whom the author wished to present to his readers. The characters 




are introduced in some sense as his teachers, and perhaps certain of them 




actually  were.  But  the  most  instructive  way  of  reading   

Meetings  with

 




 

Remarkable Men

 from a historical point of view is to treat each character as if 




he were an aspect of Gurdjieff himself. Gurdjieff taught that every man is 




composed of countless little “I s,” hundreds of small and demanding egos 




whose competing claims deny man any individuality. On the one hand the 




characters represent the various “I’s” of Gurdjieff which directed his pilgrim’s 




progress. On the other hand they are expository, and symbolic. In Rainord’s 




interpretation, “‘My Father’ is, if you like, the goal of existence, ‘Father Borah’ 




the destiny of the male and female together, ‘Bogachovsky’ objective morality, 




‘Pogossian’ the necessity of work, ‘Abraham Yelov’ the operation of thought, 




‘Prince Yuri Lubovedsky,’ the summons to leave our darkness.” The lessons 




they teach and the indications they offer as to where Gurdjieff drew his 




material are the things of most value. 




Gurdjieff begins by acknowledging the debt he owed to his father. Ivan 




Gurdjieff was a traditional poet and storyteller of the type his son calls




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   3 1




 

ashokh, 

 who was in demand at the competitions where the peoples of the 




Caucasus met to judge the quahty of their bards. As an  

ashokh

 he was the 




repository of much traditional lore. GurdjieflF remembers how one night he 




heard his father repeat one verse of the legend of Gilgamesh so often that its 




words were imprinted on his memory. Then just before the First World 




War, Gurdjieff relates, he read in a magazine about the discovery in the 




ruins of Babylon of ancient tablets engraved with the story of Gilgamesh. 




The particular stanza which his father had repeated was printed in almost 




the same form as Gurdjieff remembered it. As a boy he was thus under the 




influence—^all the more powerful for being unperceived—of traditions 




which had survived virtually unchanged for millennia. 




Gurdjieff’s  father  had  a  friend  in  “Dean  Borsh”  of  the  Kars  Military 




Cathedral. According to  

Meetings with Remarkable Men, 

 it was the Dean 




who superintended the young Gurdjieff’s education. The boy was at first 




sent to the Greek school in Kars, and then to the Russian municipal school. 




He attracted the attention of the Dean because he sang in the Cathedral 




choir—and a fine voice as a child may have inspired his lifelong interest in 




music.  On  Dean  Borsh’s  advice,  Gurdjieff  was  taken  away  from  the 




municipal school and educated at home by a series of tutors. It was decided 




that he was to be both a priest and a physician. “I myself, however, was 




dravra towards quite another way of life,” records Gurdjieff. “Having from 




my early childhood an inclination for making all sorts of things, I dreamed 




of technical specialization. ” 




In other words he became a convinced Westernizer, and developed the 




interest  in  mechanical  gadgets  which  lasted  all  his  life.  In  Gurdjieff’s 




childhood,  the  wonders  of  Western  science  were  just  beginning  to 




penetrate the Caucasus. By 1870 the main towns were linked by telegraph 




and two years later, the railway was completed between Poti on the Black 




Sea and Tiflis, the capital of Transcaucasia. The railway was an important 




factor  in  Gurdjieff’s  youth.  In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  he  tells  of 




how he once worked as a stoker in the Tiflis station yard, and in  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales

 there is the story of the “extremely sympathetic Karapet of Tiflis” who 




had the task of blowing the steam whistle which woke the Tiflis railway 




workers and also most of the town. Gurdjieff also claims to have acted as 




assistant to the engineer surveying the proposed railway route between 




Tiflis and Kars; apparently a most profitable venture. He writes—in his 




most gleeful impersonation of the Levantine shark—that he extracted a 




great deal of money from villages along the route by promising to have the 




railway track laid nearby. 




His fascination vdth mechanics continued to provide Gurdjieff with a 




source of income. In his essay, “The Material Question,” he describes how 




for a bet he started a “Universal Travelling Workshop” which “makes, alters




3 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




and repairs everything” in the country between the Caspian and the Aral 




Sea. The traveling workshop probably has an allegorical significance, but 




the description of the extraordinary objects which were handed in for repair 




shows the relish of Gurdjieff the handyman: “an apparatus for plucking out 




grey hairs, a machine for stoning cherries for jam, a grinder for grinding 




copper sulphate to sprinkle on the sweat zones of the body, a special iron 




for ironing wigs. . . . ”  Yet it seems that, despite his unconcealed joy in his 




first automobile, and the perpetual enchantment which small gadgets gave 




him, Gurdjieff’s early Westernizing ideas later became a source of regret. 




His scathing comments on the aping of European civilization by the people 




of the Transcaspian region would hardly reflect that his brother opened the 




first cinema in Tiflis or that Ouspensky’s first view of his leader in his native 




Caucasus was of Gurdjieff setting up a dynamo for his brother. “These 




newly-rich people,” he writes, “according to the inherency of all upstarts, 




imitated everything ‘cultured’ and ‘fashionable’—in the given case everything European. But, drawing all their information about this culture and fashion only from Russian papers and magazines compiled by persons 




themselves  ignorant  in  these  matters,  they  presented  to  the  impartial 




observer a comical and at the same time sad caricature.” 




In later life Gurdjieff denounced European civilization in the strongest 




terms as causing the destruction of religious feeling and partriarchal society. 




But  he  never  renounced  the  machine.  “Man  is  a  machine”  was  the 




beginning of his teaching, and although he may have chosen mechanical 




analogies only for facility in introducing his ideas to the mechanized West, 




he  used  the  framework  of  Victorian  science  with  a  certain  conviction. 




Beelzebub  tells  his  grandson;  “Objective  Science  says  that  ‘everything 




without  exception  in  the  Universe  is  material.’”  When  the  Universal 




TraveUng Workshop became the Institute for the Harmonious Development  of  Man,  its  director  would  tell  his  pupils:  “You  are  spoiled automobiles. You must be repaired. ” 




The tension between East and West which was felt by so many peoples as 




the colonial powers reached the limits of their expansion was experienced 




by Gurdjieff as an existential problem. Unusual circumstances of birth and 




upbringing enabled him to sense the dilemma in an unusual fashion. His 




solution was bound to be extraordinary. 




In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  he  describes  how  his  eyes  were 




gradually opened to the existence of happenings for which the impressive 




knowledge of the West had no explanation. He was bewildered by a stance 




during which the “spirits” rapped out messages, and further amazed when a 




wandering  

ashokh

 made predictions about him which were fulfilled. Then 




he witnessed the spectacle of a boy imprisoned by a circle drawn on the 




ground. The boy was a Yezidje—a member of a heterodox religious sect




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   3 3




inhabiting the Caucasus—^and apparently he was powerless to leave the 




circle unless released by a Yezidje priest. From what Ouspensky says, the 




Yezidjes did exercise a fascination over Gurdjieff, who claimed to have 




experimented on the phenomenon of the imprisoning circle during his later 




investigations into hypnotism;* and it is possible that in all his tales of the 




supernatural, only the incident of the Yezidje boy has any basis in fact. 




What we are to understand is that, despite the captivating effect of Western 




science, Gurdjieff found himself demanding explanations which the educated  men  around  him  could  not  supply.  The  boy  Gurdjieff  became disillusioned with the accepted partial versions of the truth and, conceiving 




that  truth  existed,  set  out  to  find  it.  The  result  was  “what  modern 




psychologists might term an ‘irresistible Mania ”:




This mania began to impose itself upon my being at the time of my 




youth  when  I  was  on  the  point  of  attaining  responsible  age  and 




consisted  in  what  I  would  now  term  an  “irrepressible  striving”  to 




understand  clearly  the  precise  significance  in  general,  of  the  life 




process on earth of all the outward forms of breathing creatures, and, 




in particular, of the aim of human life in the light of this interpretation. 




What does it all mean? What is humanity? Is there a purpose to life? Who 




am I? Such questions occur to most people at certain times in their lives, 




xisually to be shrugged off as irrelevant to the business of living. But there 




are always some individuals for whom life seems impossible without a clear 




understanding of its significance; for whom meaning is the fuel without 




which life itself flickers out. Sometimes—most often in late adolescence or 




at a tiiDe of personal crisis—^the lack of a definite rationale can induce an 




anguished condition which impels the sufferer to seek explanations. The 




search for meaning may eventually lead a person to a teacher of the sort 




which Gurdjieff later became, and as an adolescent Gurdjieff too was at the 




mercy of the sort of anxiety which drove those who became his pupils. In 




fact,  he  seems  to  have  experienced  the  meaninglessness  of  life  with  a 




peculiar intensity, and his “irresistible mania” led him to dash hither and 




thither, from one supposed authority to the next. 




His  search  turned  from  the  pundits  of  materialist  science  to  the 




recognized experts on spiritual matters:




Having become extremely interested in supernatural phenomena I 




had plunged into books and also applied to men of science for




♦This  phenomenon  is  not  unknown  ia  occult  literature.  The  Irish  poet  and  mystic  A.  E. 




(George  Russell)  was  immobilized  in  a  similar  way  by  his  guru,  the  American  Theosophist 




James Morgan Pryse. 




3 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




explanations  of  these  phenomena.  But  faihng  to  find  answers that 




satisfied  me  ...  I  began  to  seek  them  in  rehgion.  I  visited  various 




monasteries and went to see men about whose piety I had heard, read 




the Holy Scriptures and the Lives of the Saints, and was even for three 




months an acolyte of the famous Father Yevlampios in the monastery of 




Sanai'ne; and I also made pilgrimages to most of the holy places of the 




many different faiths in Transcaucasia. 




The racial mixture of the Caucasus resulted in the jumbUng together of 




every conceivable form of rehgion. There were the relatively established 




churches of Oriental Christianity: Greek, Russian, and Armenian. There 




were  Nestorian  and  Assyrian  Christians,  the  Manichean  Yezidjes,  and 




eclectic peoples like the Ossets, who were part Christian, part Mohammedan, part pagan. Even in the north of the Caucasus, around Vladikavkaz, Mohammedans  could  be  found;  and  to  the  northeast,  the  Buddhist 




Kalmucks wandered on the steppes of Stavropol and Astrakhan. Countless 




sects from the bewildering variety of Russian dissenters inhabited secluded 




valleys.  There  were  colonies  of  Doukhobors,  Molokans,  and  European 




Protestants. In the south could be found all the different shades of Islam. 




According  to  one  missionary,  writing  in  1896,  some  of  the  nominally 




Christian tribes of the mountains were “really polytheists, and worship, 




besides what they call the Christ-God, a god of war, and gods or ‘angels’ of 




the earth, the oak, the mountain and so forth. ” 




Even the Christian churches with which Gurdjieff’ came in contact were 




the result of an agelong mingUng of doctrines, and derived ultimately from 




traditions quite different from those which formed Western Christianity. 




Heresy  and  dissent  flourished  in  secret.  For  example,  after  the  Russo- 




Turkish  War  of  1828-29,  a  number  of  Turkish  Armenians  fled  to  the 




territories  which  Russia  had  recently  conquered.  In  1837  their  bishop 




warned the Synod of the Orthodox Armenian Church in Echmiadzin that 




some  of  these  families  were  really  Paulicians,  and  a  great  scandal 




developed. The migration of peoples sometimes considerably altered their 




rehgious practices. As late as 1920 Sir Harry Luke, the British Commissioner in Tiflis, recorded in his diary that he had received a deputation of Greeks who had emigrated eastward like Gurdjieff’s ancestors. “They were 




accompanied by their  

papas,” 

 wrote Luke, “who told me that he celebrated 




the  hturgy  in  Greek  but  preached  (when  he  had  occasion  to  do  so)  in 




Georgian.” 




It is possible to analyze Gurdjieff”s teaching and to point to features 




which  might  have  come  from  the  various  rehgious  traditions  of  the 




Caucasus. Some indications of his sources will be given at the end of this 




book. All that is important at this stage is that he had access to Greek, 




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   3 5




Russian,  and  Armenian  churches  by  the  simple  facts  of  his  birth  and 




upbringing. “Father Yevlampios” has disappeared in the mists of time, but 




the monastery of Sanaine or Sanahin is a celebrated foundation dating from 




the tenth century and situated just south of Tiflis. If the idea of Gurdjieff’s 




educators  was  to  bring  him  up  as  a  priest  and  a  physician,  it  may  be 




wondered how far along the path of the seminarian he traveled. He told his 




groups in Russia that his teaching might be called “esoteric Christianity,” 




and  several  of  the  characters  in  the  early  pages  of   

Meetings  with

 




 

Remarkable Men

 are priests or novices. Gurdjieff’s admission that he had 




been acolyte to Father Yevlampios permits speculation that he proceeded 




some way along the road to the priesthood before becoming disillusioned. 




In his account of the Gurdjieff family home in 1917, Ouspensky mentions 




a photograph which was kept in the house. It showed GurdjiefiF “when he 




was quite young, dressed in a black frock coat with his curly hair brushed 




straight back.” This “determined with undoubted accuracy,” Ouspensky 




writes, “what his profession was at the time the portrait was made—though 




Gurdjieff never spoke of it. This discovery gave me many interesting ideas. 




But since it was my own personal discovery I shall keep it to myself” There 




are few occupations which are readily indentifiable from a photograph, and 




Ouspensky later told his pupils that in this portrait Gurdjieff was wearing “a 




high hat.” Just possibly this might mean the white conical hat worn by the 




Mevlevi dervishes, but probably it refers to the familiar black headgear of 




the Orthodox priesthood. 




If Gurdjieff had been a “spoiled” priest this would explain his dislike of 




the religious professionals who in his view had usurped the name of priest. 




But the evidence is not conclusive, and all that can safely be said is that 




Gurdjieff made a thorough investigation of the exotic territory of Transcaucasian religion. He tells of miraculous cures brought about by icons; of a service to honor a particularly venerated icon which caused rain to fall in 




the middle of a drought; of his own pilgrimage to the Armenian holy city, 




Echmiadzin, southeast of Kars and Alexandropol, when he took his baggage 




“in the wagon of the Molokan sect.” “But in my stay at Echmiadzin,” he 




writes, “I did not find what I was looking for and, having spent enough time 




to realize that I could not find it there, I went away with a feeling of deep 




inner  disillusionment.”  This  is  Gurdjieff’s  general  comment  on  the 




relationship between the organized religions of his youth and the knowledge of which he was in search. His questioning mind turned in other directions. 




Gurdjieff was by no means the only seeker for hidden truth caught in the 




friction between old and new. Throughout all Western Europe, the last 




quarter of the nineteenth century witnessed an increasingly frantic search 




for security. This resulted in the creation of a number of new religions and a




3 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




burgeoning interest in the supernatural, magic, and the occult. Partly as a 




reaction against the menacing changes in society and the destruction of 




treasured beliefs, partly also as a protest against the extensive claims of 




materialist science, the occult revival was a powerful intellectual force. It 




penetrated  Russia,  where  the  half-Oriental  religious  conventions  of 




Orthodoxy  easily  absorbed  it,  and  the  gloriously  diverse  ideas  of  the 




Orthodox priesthood found in the occult more grist to their mill. At the 




same time, the conditions of disatisfaction and anxiety which attracted 




Western Europeans to mysticism and magic, turned Russians to their own 




luxuriant spirituality. From the point of view of Gurdjieff’s search two 




occult groups are important. The first is the Theosophical Society, which 




was  founded in  New  York  in 1875 by the redoubtable Russian Helena 




Petrovna Blavatsky and the American Colonel H. S. Olcott. The Theosophical Society transferred its base to Adyar, near Madras in India, and became extraordinarily  influential  among  the  seekers  for  truth  of  Europe  and 




America. Although H. P. Blavatsky’s books and her Society were banned in 




Russia,  small  groups  of  Theosophists  continued  to  meet.  They  were 




supplied with literature by travelers abroad; and the earliest and most 




dedicated of these Theosophical colporteurs was a Mme. Nina de Gernet, 




one of whose ports of call was a circle of Theosophists in Vladikavkaz, the 




capital  of  the  central  Caucasus.  It  is  certain  that  GurdjiefF  had  read 




Theosophical literature. He afterward said that it had cost him an immense 




amount  of  labor  to  track  down  the  erroneous  statements  in  Mme. 




Blavatsky’s  

The Secret Doctrine, 

 and delighted to tell a completely mythical 




story of how its author had fallen in love with him. It is not unlikely that 




Gurdjieff, realising he would not find the answers he sought in orthodox 




religion, came across Theosophical works which had traveled to Russia 




through Vladikavkaz. 




Another  mystical group which may have had some connection with 




Gurdjieff  originated  in  Tiflis  itself.  This  was  centered  around  Pavel 




Alexandrovitch Florensky (b. 1882), an eccentric genius whose mother, like 




Gurdjieff’s, was Armenian. With his friends A. V. Elchaninov (b. 1881), 




V.  F.  Em  (b.  1881),  and  the  child  prodigy  V.  P.  Sventitsky,  Florensky 




moved to Moscow and entered the priesthood. This group absorbed the 




influences of the occult revival and incorporated what in the West would 




have  been  called  occultism  with  Orthodox  theology.  They  began  to 




pubhsh—most  notably  Florensky’s   

The  Pillar  and  Foundation  of  Truth

 




(1914) and Sventitsky s book on the hermits of the Caucasus (1913)—about 




the time that Gurdjieff appeared in Moscow. The Florensky circle were all 




younger than Gurdjieff and it may be reading too much into the situation to 




see a direct connection in their Tiflis origins. But the ideas of contemporary 




occultism which influenced them were also current m Gurdjieff^’s milieu. 




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   3 7




and in  

Meetings with Remarkable Men, 

 he indicates the increasingly occult 




tone of his search for meaning in the chapters on “Captain Pogossian” and 




“Abram Yelov”—both of whom the story places among his Tiflis friends. 




“Abram Yelov” is introduced as a polyglot Assyrian bookdealer. Books 




must have become increasingly important to Gurdjieff in the pursuit of his 




“irresistible mania”: whether books on religious questions, books on the 




supernatural—in   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

  he  mentions  one  called   

Dreams  and

 




 

Witchcraft

 which “Karapet of Tiflis” acquired—or books on hypnotism, a 




subject with whose hterature he claimed a specialist’s familiarity. Science 




and the more easily accessible forms of religion had failed him; but here was 




the enormous and daily increasing library of occult texts, whose authors all 




dropped  tantalizing  hints  that  they  possessed  the  explanation  of  the 




universe which the priests and the scientists had failed to grasp. Gurdjieff 




succumbed  to  the  same  influences  as  many  of  his  less  remarkable 




contemporaries and immersed himself in occult literature. 




His reading made him familiar with the occultists’ most cherished idea: 




that there had existed from time immemorial an esoteric Tradition of secret 




knowledge, transmitted from initiate to initiate down through the centuries. Gurdjieff later gave the unwieldy name of “legominism” to what he considered  a  true  or  valid  item  of  Traditional  wisdom,  but  from  his 




incessant abuse of “occultists,” it is clear that he soon became disillusioned 




with  those  who  claimed  to  be  the  contemporary  guardians  of  esoteric 




wisdom. In  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 he calls them “criminal gangs” and refers to 




the “great initiates” they venerate as men who pass through “fire-water- 




copper-pipes-and-even-through-all-the-roulette-halls-of-Monte-Carlo.” 




But disillusionment with the occult did not mean that Gurdjieff abandoned all hopes of finding a secretly proved explanation of the universe. He decided  that  if  truth  were  accessible,  the  esoteric  Tradition  must  have 




degenerated  over  the  ages.  In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  he claims 




that he and his friend “Sarkis Pogossian ” decided to reconstruct what they 




could of its original form; 




Pogossian and I had come to the definite conclusion that there really 




was “a certain something” which people formerly knew, but that now 




this knowledge was quite forgotten. We had lost all hope of finding any 




guiding  clue  to  this  knowledge  in  contemporary  exact  science,  in 




contemporary books or from people in general, and so we directed all 




our attention to ancient literature. 




The earliest writings of humanity might hold the key to knowledge which 




had  existed  before  the  rot  set  in.  Other  seekers  for  wisdom  had  made 




similar deductions, but Gurdjieff was uniquely placed to proceed from




3 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




theory to practice. If the knowledge he sought was not to be found in books 




which  were  readily  available  or  even  in  the  spiritual  labyrinth  of  the 




Caucasus, he would travel further afield in search of it. 




 

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  gives  examples  of  this  search.  One 




episode begins when he and “Pogossian” settle dovm with a collection of 




rare  books  in  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Armenian  town  of  Ani,  near 




Alexandropol. They vary their diet of study with amateur excavation in the 




ruins. Here they find a collection of old letters from one monk to another, 




in which a society known as the “Sarmoun Brotherhood” is mentioned. 




Gurdjielf  and  Posgossian  have  already  stumbled  on  references  to  this 




society,  “a  famous  esoteric  school  which,  according  to  tradition,  was 




founded in Babylon as far back as 2500 B.C.” They decide that traditions 




stemming from this school will be preserved among the Assyrian Christians, and set off on a journey in search of its surviving tradition. On their way the pair stay at the house of an Armenian priest, who proves to have in 




his  possession  “a  map  of  pre-sand  Egypt.”  This  discovery  so  excites 




Gurdjieff that he burgles the priest’s locked chest and copies the map. With 




this in his possession, he decides at once to embark on a journey to Egypt. 




The story reads like a boy’s treasure-hunting adventure, and it gives only 




general indications of what Gurdjiefi" wanted to convey. He sought for 




traces  of  Traditional  knowledge  in  ancient  literature,  in  inaccessible 




manuscripts, in recent archaeological discoveries. The association of secret 




wisdom with the Assyrian Christians whom Gurdjieff calls “Aissors” is 




probably to be taken more seriously. “Abram Yelov” was an “Aissor,” and 




Gurdjieff mentions his contacts among members of this widely scattered 




group on more than one occasion. There would have been logical reasons 




for Gurdjieff to look for knowledge among the Aissors, and these will be 




discussed in connection with his doctrine. What he meant by his tale of the 




“map  of  pre-sand  Egypt”  is  a  matter  for  guesswork.  Most  probably  it 




signifies some guide to the state of human consciousness before it became 




perverted; but the expression might simply have been chosen to conform to 




the expectations of a mystery-loving audience. 




In   

Herald  of  Coming  Good, 

  Gurdjieff  writes  that  despite  all  his 




searching, he was unable to throw light on the questions which interested 




him until the year 1892. In the prospectus issued to mark the opening of his 




Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man at Fontainebleau, he 




places  the  foundation  of  the  society  of  the  Seeders  for  Truth  in  1895. 




Between these dates it can be inferred that Gurdjieffs search took on a 




more ambitious aspect; and perhaps his tale of dashing off to Egypt with an 




esoteric map in his pocket indicates that he extended his travels beyond the 




relatively local expeditions he had previously made. That Gurdjieff suddenly vanished from his home and was lost to the sight of his family is




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   3 9




confirmed  by  P.  L.  Travers;  “While  he  was  still  a  very  young  man, 




GurdjiefF, true to his role, ‘disappeared’—as Odysseus must have seemed to 




disappear from his local world of Ithaca—into that cauldron of history, 




tradition and ideas that we know as the Middle East.” 




GurdjiefF  is  usually  thought  to  have  first  left  home  about  the  age  of 




sixteen; but recently his follower J. G. Bennett published a story which 




suggests that his wanderings began even earlier. GurdjiefF told a Miss Anna 




Durco (whom he met as a child in 1934) that he had run away with the 




gypsies who passed through Kars each spring on their way to trade horses. 




At the age of eleven his friendships with the gypsy boys developed into a 




protracted period of truancy with a tribe of nomads from the Carpathians. 




As  he  later  told  the  story,  GurdjiefF  made  it  seem  that  he  was  more 




intrigued by the legends of hidden wisdom attached to the gypsies than by 




their romantic way of life. It would be too much to expect a child of eleven 




to have any interest in philosophical matters; but there is nothing against 




believing that the young GurdjiefF was enthralled by the more romantic 




aspects of gypsy lore. His precocious appetite for adventure is confirmed by 




William Seabrook’s impression that he “ran away to sea at an early age.” 




He was ridden by a particularly merciless daemon. From childhood, he 




writes, he had “an ‘irresistible urge’ to do things not as others do them.” So 




“if all the other children slid down the hill head first, I tried to do it, and 




moreover,  each  time  better  and  better,  as  the  children  then  called  it, 




‘backside-first.’” The deliberate contrariness of the child was reflected in 




the obstinacy of the youth and the matured philosophy of the man, whose 




entire  rationale  ran  cross-grained  to  his  surroundings.  To  this  natural 




muhshness was added a sense of urgency which must have had some basis 




in the facts of his early life. One story in  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 




suggests an explanation. He and his schoolfellow “Peter Karpenko” fell in 




love with the same girl. They decided to spend a day on the local artillery 




range  while  firing  was  in  progress,  and  let  the  gunners  settle  their 




differences for them. Both survived their harrowing experience to become 




fast fi-iends. In early manhood Gurdjieff was no stranger to the chances of 




sudden death,  and a number of narrow escapes may have been partly 




responsible for his later conviction that the only way of saving mankind 




would be to implant in each human being the consciousness of his own 




mortality. 




We know further that this young man once commiserated with a group of 




ladies from the literary world with the words; “I too was once sick for art.” 




In Europe and the United States he was surrounded by Bohemians and 




“artistic” people; and he was reported in 1919 to be on familiar terms with 




the  Georgian  poets  and  artists  of  the  day.  If  he  associated  with  any 




particular group of artists during his early life, we know nothing of it. 




4 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




although his chosen art would beyond all doubt have been the theater. Yet, 




even if Gurdjiefi" were really “sick” for art, his sickness was subordinated to 




the demanding irritation of his “itching-itch,” the pursuit of meaning. At 




some time or another he concluded that the knowledge he sought existed 




not only in the form of secrets handed down among “genuine initiates, ” but 




in works of art constructed according to a definite purpose by the ancient 




guardians of the esoteric Tradition. The feeling that the wonders of the 




ancient world  

meant

 something, were actually capable of revealing to man 




secrets known to their makers, was common among nineteenth-century 




occultists influenced by Blavatsky; and Gurdjieff was not immune to this 




sort of speculation. But he went further, and his view of the role of art was 




more extensive. In  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 he describes an imaginary club called 




“The-Adherents-of-Legominism” dedicated to passing on wisdom by artistic 




means. The members of this club are supposed to have decided that they 




should construct their works of art—be they paintings, statues, or dances— 




on the basis of the universal “Law of Sevenfoldness,” one of the laws on 




which Gurdjieff based his cosmology. Into works made according to this 




system of relation and proportion, the artists would introduce “intentional 




inexactitudes”  or  deliberate  departures  from  the  canon.  These  were 




intended  to  point  the  message  which  the  work  of  “objective  art”  was 




designed to convey. 




Perhaps we are to imagine Gurdjieff inspecting the wonders of the world 




in  the  light  of  his  own  later  teaching  about  art  as  a  transmitter  of 




legominism. In this spirit he once described his discovery of a “strange 




figure in the desert at the foot of the Hindu Kush—perhaps one of the 




famous Buddhas of Bamian. “At first,” he told Ouspensky, “it produced 




upon us simply the impression of being a curiosity. But after a while we 




began to  

feel

 that this figure contained many things, a big, complete and 




complex  system  of  cosmology.  And  slowly,  step  by  step,  we  began  to 




decipher this system. It was in the body of the figure, in its legs, in its arms, 




in its head, in its eyes, in its ears: everywhere. In the whole statue there 




was  nothing  accidental,  nothing  without  meaning.  And  gradually  we 




understood the aim of the people who built this statue. We began to feel 




their thoughts, their feelings. Some of us thought that we saw their faces, 




heard their voices. . . . ” 




Where  did  Gurdjieff  travel  in  his  search  for  the  knowledge  which  so 




obsessed him? Three times he made unheralded appearances in the centers 




of European civilization, and each time the tale was vague yet apparently 




circumstantial. To Ouspensky in Moscow he spoke of “Tibetan monasteries, 




the Chitral, Mount Athos; Sufi schools in Persia, in Bokhara, and eastern 




Turkestan; he mentioned dervishes of various orders; but all of them in a 




very indefinite way.” Cecil Sharp, the editor of the London Uew  

Statesman, 




T H E   S E E K E K   F O R   T R U T H   4 1




located the area of GurdjiefF’s search in “that little-known region which lies 




between Eastern Persia and Tibet.” William Seabrook, who knew GurdjiefF 




in  New  York,  wrote  that  he  “spent  many  years  in  Outer  Mongolia 




and  Tibet,  where  he  is  said  to  have  been  at  one  time  a  Tibetan  monk, 




and  to  have  absorbed  the  mystical  practices  and  teachings  of  the 




Sufis, Yogis, Melewi, Rufiah, and Persian dervishes. I can testify of my own 




knowledge,”  concluded  Seabrook,  “that  Gurdjieff  knows  more  about 




dervish  mysticism  and  magic  than  any  man  I  have  ever  met  outside  a 




dervish monastery.” 




All the rumors concerning the source of his knowledge point to Central 




Asia; and of course, to its most inaccessible parts. Sometimes it seems that 




every mystical philosopher has claimed to have been in Tibet. The origin of 




the Tibetan obsession lies in Mme. Blavatsky’s invention of the “Tibetan 




Mahatmas” who watched over the Theosophical Society. But in GurdjiefF’s 




case the legend is almost certainly based on fact. The stories of his travels 




almost always contain circumstantial evidence—like the idea of using sheep 




as baggage animals—^which supports their accuracy. His teaching certainly 




incorporated elements from Tibetan Buddhism, and many of his earliest 




followers were convinced that he had been in Tibet. G. S. Nott even tells us 




that Gurdjieff had himself been made collector of revenues for the Dalai 




Lama;  and  other  disciples  remember  that  Gurdjieff’s  establishment  in 




France was sometimes visited by inscrutable guests from Central Asia. 




Gurdjieff first became known in the West as a “teacher of dancing”; and 




the  names  of  the  places  where  his  dances  are  said  to  have  originated 




provide further evidence that he had been where he claimed to have been. 




There  are  several  helpful  indications  in  the  program  of  dances  and 




movements which Gurdjieff presented at Christmas 1923 in Paris. On the 




one hand places are mentioned which are easily identifiable, like the city of 




Mazar-i-Sharif in northern Afghanistan, or Yangi Hissar, a sizeable town 




south of Kashgar in Central Asia. Then there are more general references to 




Chinese Turkestan and Kafiristan which cannot be checked. Lastly, there 




are names difficult to find on any map, but which provide the best evidence 




of  all  that  Gurdjieff  was  in  Central  Asia.  We  learn  of  the  “monks  of 




Matchna,” at the monastery of “Kisil-Djan” at the “Oasis of Keril” [ Chinese 




Turkestan]; the monastery of “Souxari” near “Outchan-Su in Kashgaria,” 




the medical temple of “Sari” in Tibet, and “the Sanctuary of Houdankr, 




Lotko country in the Chitral.” It may be possible to find these locations on 




unusually detailed maps, and it is certainly possible that Gurdjieff’s dances 




did not come from the sources he indicated—^although, he also specifies 




other out-of-the-way places like Sessi Madane in Transcaucasia which do 




exist. But what is peculiarly interesting in the references to “Kisil-Djan,” 




“Outchan-Su,”  “Sari,”  and  “Houdankr,”  is  that  although  they  resist 




identification, in each case the etymology of the name is consistent vdth the




4 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




language of the area in which they are supposed to be. The conclusion is 




inevitable either that Gurdjieff had been there, as he said, or that he was 




closely associated with men who had traveled in those regions. 




GurdjieflF  told  Ouspensky  that  his  journeys  in  the  East  had  been 




undertaken in the company of “all sorts of specialists.” Some were working, 




he said, some had since died, others were “in seclusion.” After Ouspensky 




arrived in London in 1921, Cecil Sharp pubhshed in the iVeo;  

Statesman

 




some further information on the Seekers for Truth which was probably 




derived from Ouspensky  himself, or from  pupils at Fontainebleau like 




Sharp’s wife. 




The  movement  originated  some  thirty  years  ago  in  an  expedition 




organised  by  Mr.  Gurdjieff—then  very  young—^and  two  Russian 




savants, with the object of discovering what, if possible, lay behind the 




fabled “wisdom of the East.” Five years were spent in gathering and 




training a band of about thirty investigators, mostly Russians, who 




between them might claim to know all that Europe knew of science 




and art. They then set out . . . and . . . separated, each to seek entry 




into  some  “school”  where  esoteric  knowledge  might  be 




found. . . . After several years a few of them returned and organised a 




second expedition. Some of the members of both expeditions are still 




in Central Asia and will probably never return. Others including Mr. 




Gurdjieff,  after  spending  the  best  part  of  twenty  years  in  various 




Eastern schools, came back to Europe and are now engaged in working 




upon  the  masses  of  material  that  they  brought  with  them,  while 




maintaining communication with those who have remained behind. 




The prospectus for Gurdjieff’s Institute at Fontainebleau—^which contains  a  quantity  of  false,  not  to  say  fraudulent  information—talks  of  a company of “doctors, archaeologists, priests, painters, etc., etc., with the 




aim of mutual assistance in research into so-called  

supernatural

 phenomena 




which  interested  each  one  from  a  particular  point  of  view.”  Gurdjieff 




frequently told outrageous lies, even when it was clear that the listener had 




no thought of believing him: Thus, to an American doctor and pupil whom 




he knew to be familiar with his personal circumstances, he announced 




blandly that in France he had “two hundred pupils—^all  

docteurs.” 

 The 




picture of a sort of combined Society for Psychical Research and Royal 




Central Asian Society is certainly exaggerated. But‘on balance it is probable 




that Gurdjiefif did have some collaborators in his quest, even if they were 




only traveling companions or chance acquaintances. 




There is an outside possibility that a regular group did form for certain 




expeditions;  in   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  Gurdjieff  mentions  an




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   4 3




expedition of 1898 in the Gobi Desert and another of 1900 in the Pamirs. 




The  “savants”  to  whom  Sharp  refers  may  have  been  the  characters 




portrayed  as  “Prince  Lubovedsky”  and  “Professor  Skridlov.”  In  two 




different places GurdjiefiF talks of meeting two Russian savants beside the 




Pyramids, and although such a meeting might represent only a continued 




“quest for the inexplicable,” the repetition of this incident may indicate a 




real experience. On each occasion one of the figures is said to have been 




“Skridlov,” the Professor of Archaeology. In  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 the other is 




unnamed;  but  in   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  the  second  Russian  is 




named as “Prince Lubovedsky,” “my elder comrade and closest friend.” 




There is a strong tradition that Gurdjieff’s aristocratic patron was a real 




person, and Ouspensky thought that he had met the archaeologist. But it is 




safest to regard the Seekers for Truth as a body in which Gurdjielf’s friends 




would be included but which comprehends all those in pursuit of eternal 




things; just  as the  World Brotherhood  which the group is said to have 




contacted, is composed of all those practicing the right methods to spiritual 




attainment:




Among the adepts of this monastery there were former Christians, 




Jews, Mohammedans, Buddhists, Lamaists, and even one Shamanist. 




All were united by God the Truth. 




All the brethren of this monastery lived together in such amity that, 




in spite of the specific traits and properties of the representatives of the 




different religions, Professor Skridlov and I could never tell to which 




religion this or that brother had formerly belonged. 




Where then did Gurdjieff travel? He mentions Turkey, Athos, Crete, 




Jerusalem,  and  Egypt,  where  he  was  a  tourist  guide  at  the  Pyramids. 




According  to   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  he  went  as  far  south  as 




Ethiopia, and at the end of his life he professed an undying affection for that 




part of the world. He claimed to have penetrated Mecca and Medina, but 




was disappointed in the holy places of Islam. He considered the center of 




“real” knowledge preserved in Islamic form to be in Central Asia, near 




Bokhara, Merv, and Samarkand, and above all.  

Meetings with Remarkable

 




 

Men

 is filled with the gusto of the Central Asian khanates approached up 




the River Oxus. 




The next chapter will show that Gurdjieff visited India, Tibet, and China; 




he claimed also to have taken part in a journey through Siberia; and at a 




later  period  of  his life  he spent much  time  in Turkestan  and the  lands 




around Kashgar. It seems that he probably knew sufficient languages for his 




purpose. Greek, Armenian, Tacyik, and Turkish he would have knovm from 




early youth. He is supposed also to have spoken Arabic and Italian—the




4 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




common languages of the Mediterranean at the turn o£ the century—and he 




probably picked up some French and English. His claims to fluency in 




eighteen dififerent languages should be taken with a pinch of salt, but these 




claims were probably more nearly true than false. 




What  Gurdjieff  brought  back  from  his  journeys  will  be  considered 




separately. Apart from various Sufi orders and monasteries both Christian 




and Buddhist, he mentions that he was a member of a society of Persians 




which met at Baku to study magic, and also that he was at one time a 




practitioner of yoga. However, some of his energies may well have been 




absorbed by less esoteric studies. 




In the Middle East, the years of Gurdjieff’s search were those of the most 




romantic  period  of  archaeology.  By  1890  archaeological  exploration  of 




Assyria—Gurdjieff’s  personal  interest—had  reached  a  peak.  Gurdjieff 




speaks of a journey to Thebes with “Professor Skridlov” which continued via 




the  Red  Sea  to  Babylon,  where  he  left  his  friend  “to  continue  his 




excavations.” The exciting discoveries of contemporary archaeologists, 




among them Flinder Petrie, undoubtedly spurred on his search for the 




knowledge which he believed had been buried by the generations. 




In Central Asia the great age of Russian exploration had been inaugurated 




by N. M. Prjevalsky’s expedition through Mongolia in 1870. In 1888, on his 




fifth journey, Prjevalsky died; but in the early 1890s his successor, P. K. 




Kozlov, mounted expeditions in Turkestan and in the later part of the 1890s 




in Mongolia and the middle Gobi. Non-Russian explorers like Sven Hedin 




and Aurel Stein entered the field, and Central Asia became the favorite area 




for adventurous scholars. When Gurdjieff talks of an expedition into the 




Gobi Desert to find a city rumored to be buried beneath the sands, he may 




well be dealing in symbols; but such rumors did draw archaeologists te the 




Gobi, and reports of sand-buried cities came from Sven Hedin himself. The 




disinterring of ancient knowledge and the uncovering of the true nature of 




man are undoubtedly intended, but the symbolism is prompted by the 




conditions surrounding Gurdjieff’s personal quest. 




Gurdjieff  might  have  been  able  to  satisfy  his  interest  in  ancient 




civilizations and gain access to distant and inaccessible lands by joining 




scientific expeditions in Central Asia; and a gifi for languages would have 




been highly prized. The idea helps to explain how a young man from a 




penniless family was able to make ends meet in unfamiliar country. If we 




discount  the  idea  of  financial  backing  from  the  Seekers  for  Truth, 




Gurdjieff’s initial forays into Central Asia require^some plausible grounding. A possibility which provides a more convincing explanation of his early mobility is that from an early age he was an agent of the Russian secret 




service. 




This possibility has been responsible for certain portrayals of Gurdjieff as




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   4 5




a  Black  Magician  straight  from  the  pages  of  Dennis  Wheatley.  Louis 




Pauwels, editor of the anthology  

Monsieur Gurdjieff, mixes

 the occult and 




politics into an impossible conspiracy involving both Hitler and Stalin. 




Stalin and Gurdjieff, says Pauwels, “were at school together,” and J. G. 




Bennett  claims  to  have  heard  Gurdjieff  endorse  this  tale  himself  It  is 




certainly true that the young Joseph Dzhugashvili—who became Joseph 




Stalin—^was a lodger with the Gurdjieff family at some time during his 




career at Tiflis Theological Seminary from 1894 to 1899; and that he left 




owing  them  a  substantial  sum  of  money.  It  has  been  said  by  Stalin’s 




enemies that he acted at one time as an agent for the Tsarist authorities, and 




possibly some confused thinking led to the connection with Gurdjieff being 




distorted. What is interesting is that the charges against Stalin originate in 




the well-known habit of the Tsarist Intelligence Service of offering a suspect 




the choice of serving with them as an alternative to punishment. 




A story about Gurdjieff which used to circulate in London emigre circles 




was that he had been imprisoned for evading military service. Hie source 




was Prince Mikail Sumbatov, who in the early 1890s was Commissioner for 




Special Duties attached to the Governor of Kars; and it is totally in keeping 




vdth our knowledge of Gurdjieff that he should have tried to dodge the 




draft. There is not a shred of evidence to support the speculation, but it is 




tempting to wonder whether he was offered the sort of choice which the 




authorities held out to others. Even if this possibility is discounted, some 




sort of government backing best explains Gurdjieff’s confusing statement in 




 

Herald of Coming Good

 about the great advantages his “peculiar conditions”  of  life  gave  him  over  the  ordinary  man.  The  pronouncement otherwise reads like a symptom of paranoia, and it does not have the same 




ring as the deliberately boastful passage about its author’s endowment with 




“the highest degrees of comprehension attainable by man,” which precedes 




it. 




I  had,  in  accordance  with  the  peculiar  conditions  of  my  life,  the 




possibility of gaining access to the so-called “holy-of-holies” of nearly 




all  hermetic  organisations  such  as  religious,  philosophical,  occult, 




political  and  mystic  societies,  congregations,  parties,  unions,  etc., 




which were inaccessible to the ordinary man . . . 




'There  is  only  one  sort  of  job  which  secures  rapid  entrance  into  all 




organizations, whether pohtical, religious, or intellectual, and that is the 




task of the agent who can rely on the contacts built up by his organization to 




establish his good faith. 




In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  Gurdjieff  describes  how  he  and  his 




friend “Pogossian” had themselves appointed the agents of an “Armenian




4 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Committee” in order to finance their travels in search of knowledge. This 




Armenian Committee was presumably connected with the Armenian Social 




Revolutionary Party known as the Dashnaktsutiun, which was established 




in Tiflis in 1890 and adopted a political program two years later. GurdjiefF 




places  his  expedition  with  Pogossian  in  a  year  of  militant  Armenian 




nationalism when the hero “Andronik” (alias Ozanian) first began to attract 




attention. Although it is impossible to identify the year exactly, if there is 




any historical basis for this episode, it probably occurred in the early 1890s. 




It was not the last of Gurdjieff ’s ventures into politics. 




In the  

Third Series

 GurdjiefF relates that three times in his life he was 




seriously wounded by stray bullets. The first time was in Crete in the year 




1896, “the year before the Graeco-Turkish war.” It may have been the year 




before war actually broke out between the two nations, but it was the year 




of the Greek rebellion against the Turks which provoked the war. Gurdjieff 




was evidently involved with the revolutionaries, as he was transported out 




of the island by certain Greeks who were strangers to him and brought to 




Jerusalem  to  recover  from  his  vvound.  We  may  ascribe  GurdjiefF’s 




involvement in this political squabble solely to his Greek ancestry and the 




exhortations  of  “true  patriots”  of  the  sort  he  describes  elsewhere  in 




connection with the Cretan uprising; but this seems most unlikely. Russia 




had an interest in the war, as for various reasons it opposed the union of 




Crete with Greece. While Gurdjieff may simply have been using politicd 




occasions for his private ends, a career associated with both Greek and 




Armenian nationalism simply invites speculation. 




Besides  being  the  great  age  of  archaeology  and  exploration,  the  last 




quarter of the nineteenth century was the high point of the expansion of 




Imperial Russia. The capture of Kars shortly before the Gurdjieff femily 




moved there was the culmination of the Russian drive south; but the empire 




builders even had their eyes on Africa. Ideas of founding an Abyssinian 




colony were combined with a suggestion that the Abyssinian Church be 




brought into a union with Russian Orthodoxy. The head of the Abyssinian 




Church decided that Russia ought to take not only the Abyssinian Church 




under her protection, but also the related Coptic and Armenian Churches. 




This resulted in a series of embassies exchanged between St. Petersburg 




and the Emperor Menelik; and the Russian delegations usually comprised 




both military and ecclesiastical personnel. At the Fashoda incident in July 




1898, a Russian colonel commanded the Abyssinian army in support of the 




French  challenge  to  Britain.  In  the  context  of  this  peculiar  military- 




ecclesiastical situation, Gurdjieff’s supposed visit to Abyssinia takes on a 




very different coloring. 




The chief area of Russian expansion, however, was Central Asia. Russian 




occupation of the khanates at the head of the Oxus had been followed by a




T H E   S E E K E R   F O R   T R U T H   4 7




steady push into the sparsely populated areas of Kashgar and Turkestan. In 




this context, Gurdjieff makes one quite remarkable admission about his 




travels  in  Central  Asia.  “Of  course,”  he  writes,  “for  journeys  taken  on 




behalf of some government or other for a certain political aim and for w^hich 




large sums are allocated, . . . one might hire as many porters as one wishes 




to pack and unpack everything.” This is an almost explicit statement that he 




did undertake political missions in Central Asia, and it fits very neatly with 




the  most  persistent  rumors  about  his  work  on  behalf  of  Russian  Intel- 




hgence. 




In 1892—the year which Gurdjieff himself selects as a watershed in his 




activities—^he would have turned eighteen. This coincides too closely with 




the advent of military age to avoid reemphasis in the light of the rumor 




about his evasion of military service. From this year onward, Gurdjieff’s 




activities must all lie under suspicion of being associated with political 




intrigue; and his involvement with the Cretan revolt at the age of twenty- 




two may have been the exploit of an already seasoned campaigner. This 




means that his own version of his early years is probably misleading in 




countless nonphilosophical ways, and only when evidence is available from 




other sources can anything be said for certain. The trail, which begins when 




we take for granted GurdjieflF’s career in espionage, does lead to such 




evidence; and this provides the date of birth which has been assumed in 




this chapter, as well as other personal details. It was in Tibet—that most 




obvious of places from which a bogus mystic might flaunt his credentials, 




and  therefore  a  fitting  port  of  call  for  a  man  who  later  delighted  to 




impersonate the charlatan—that GurdjiefiF broke cover. The invisible man 




appears in the annals of the history of crime. 




The Great Game




By 1900 the regions through which the Seekers for Truth are supposed to 




have traveled had become areas of anxious concern to Imperial Russia and 




the British Raj. The remoteness of those mountainous frontier lands which 




spoke to Theosophists of divine wisdom meant sleepless nights for English 




and  Russian  empire  builders  alike.  In  Afghanistan  and  Tibet,  agents 




recruited by either side collected intelligence or attempted to win over the 




inhabitants to the cause of Delhi or St. Petersburg. As well as being the age 




of the great explorers, the turn of the century was the high point in the 




clandestine battle for India which became known to the British as the Great 




Game. Exploration was easily used as a cover for activities of another sort. 




For example, a geologist supposedly named “Bogdanovitch,” who was a 




member of Prjevalsky’s last expedition, was widely rumored to be in reality 




Colonel Alexei Nikolaievitch Orlov of the Russian General Staff. 




Oflicials of the Government of India kept a watfchful eye on the states of 




the Himalaya and the Pamirs. The picture of undercover rivalry given by 




Rudyard Kipling’s  

Kim

 is not far from the truth. In response to the Russian 




overtures  to  Tibet,  the  British  in  India  sent”  out  agents  known  as 




“pandits”—^like Kipling’s “fearful man” Huree Babu—of whom the most 




famous was Sarat Chandra Das who actually spent several weeks in Lhasa. 




 

Kim

 was published in 1901 when the Game had been in progress for some 




time. Two years later, the expedition of Colonel Younghusband set out from




4 8




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   4 9




India for Tibet. The small British force entered Lhasa in 1904, after the 




Dalai Lama had fled north into the Gobi Desert with a mysterious figure 




known to British Intelligence as “the Lama DordjiefF.” This Dordjieff was 




believed to be the main Russian agent in Tibet, and his great influence on 




the Dalai Lama had been used by Lord Curzon to persuade a reluctant 




government to agree to Younghusband’s expedition in the first place. One 




of the most intriguing rumors to attach themselves to Gurdjieff is that he 




and Dordjiefif were the same man. 




Stories  that  Gurdjieff  had  been  vaguely  connected  with  the  Tsarist 




Intelligence  Service  in  Tibet  began to  circulate soon  after his  arrival in 




Europe. J. G. Bennett, who met him while serving as an officer in British 




Intelligence in Constantinople in 1920, has recorded that his first information about Gurdjieff came in a file from the Government of India warning him about Gurdjieff’s shady past. On one of the visits which Gurdjieff made 




to  London  early  in  1922,  he  was  interviewed  by  a  police  or  security 




organization  and  accused  of  having  been  a  Tsarist  agent.  Gurdjieff,  of 




course, denied the charge, but it is possible that this old score was behind 




the failure of his eminent supporters to secure him a permit of residence in 




Britain  and  their  subsequent  difficulties  in  persuading  the  French  authorities to let him stay in France. The legend that Gurdjieff was the Lama Dordjiefif was widely believed by his Western disciples. 




The evidence which made the idea of GurdjieflF-DordjiefiF widely known 




was  pubhshed  by  Rom  Landau  in  1935  in  a  book  called   

God  Is  My

 




 

Adventure, 

 a bestselling survey of contemporary spiritual leaders. Landau’s 




source was the writer Achmed Abdullah, who met Gurdjiefif at a New York 




luncheon given by John O’Hara Cosgrave, a former editor of the  

New York

 




 

World

 and a follower of GurdjiefiF’s disciple, Orage. Abdullah was astounded to find that the famous guru had been one of his opposite numbers in Tibet in 1903. “I was convinced that he was Lama Dordjiefif,” he wrote to 




Rom Landau. “I told him so—and he winked. We spoke in Tadjik. ” Claude 




Bragdon,  another  writer  who  wdtnessed  this  incident,  recorded  that 




“Gurdjiefif, through Orage, acknowledged that he had been in Lhasa, saying 




that his political activities had been but a cloak to his religious interests; he 




was there studying Buddhist theology, he explained.” 




“Achmed Abdullah” was the pseudonym used by a writer and adventurer 




who would never reveal his true name. His autobiography was published 




the year before  

God Is My Adventure, 

 and it is as colorful and romantic as 




any of his novels. Abdullah (1881-1945) was the son of a Russian father and 




an  Afghan  mother.  His  great-uncle  was  Abdur  Rahman,  and  he  had  a 




brother who was a Cossack colonel. He was in Tibet as a regular ofiBcer with 




the Younghusband Expedition and implies that he had also operated in 




Central Asia in other capacities. A man of many talents, he contrived to




5 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




obtain a Turkish commission in the Balkan War of 1912-13 on the orders of 




the Indian Army. His romances come out of the same stable as the more 




novelistic  passages  in   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men. 

  To  play the  Great 




Game evidently demanded imagination as well as courage. 




It is possible that  GurdjiefF had  made some  prior arrangement with 




Achmed Abdullah. In some respects they were birds of a feather, used to 




the subtleties of Oriental intrigue and exaggeration. But the story has many 




marks of authenticity. Abdullah knew much more about the Lama Dordjieff 




than was common property in the 1930s, and he had certainly been in the 




right place at the right time. Although he was mistaken, his story is the first 




real  clue  to  finding GurdjiefiF’s  trail. In  the  Great Game, smoke  rarely 




occurred  without  fire,  and  Abdullah  gave  a  circumstantial  picture  of 




Gurdjieff-Dordjieff. “He spoke Russian, Tibetan, Tartar, Tadjik, Chinese, 




Greek, strongly accented French and rather fantastic English. As to his 




age—^well—I would say ageless. A great man who, though he dabbled in 




Russian imperialistic politics, did so—I have an idea—more or less in the 




spirit of jest.” He concluded with a verdict on GurdjiefF which has become 




famous.  “I  am  a  fairly  wise  man.  But  I  wish  I  knew  the  things  which 




Gurdjiefi"had forgotten.” 




What romantic could resist the vision of the master of both spiritual and 




temporal things which Abdullah conjured up? Gurdjieff’s reputation as a 




political maestro had reached epic proportions. Louis Pauwels even records 




rumors that he was in Tibet “in 1903, and again in 1905, 1906, 1907 and 




1908”  together  with  Professor  Karl  Haushofer,  the  mentor  of  Rudolph 




Hess. Pauwels and his collaborator Jacques Bergier devote a long section of 




their bestselling  

The Dawn of Magic

 (1960) to arguing the existence of an 




occult  plot  involving  Gurdjieff,  Haushofer,  and  certain  eccentrics  who 




presided over the birth of the Nazi Party. Various aberrations taken from 




nineteenth-century Theosophy are used to manufacture a sinister center of 




diabolism located in Tibet and to create a new picture of Gurdjieff as the 




agent of the “King of Fear,” in Shamballa, whose mystical mission was to 




destroy the intellectuals of the West . . . . 




Unfortunately, this theory will not do, although the idea even passed—in 




a dignified, academic form—into a scholarly work by K. M. Pannikar,  

Asia

 




 

and Western Dominance

 (1953). The occult ravings*apart, it was very soon 




after the publication of  

Monsieur Gurdjieff

 that Alexandra David-Neel, who 




had spent several years in Tibet and had adopted a Tibetan lama as her son, 




published  an  article  directly  denying  that  Gurdjieff  and  Dordjieff  had 




anything in common. She attributed the confusion to the similarity of the 




two names and published a photograph of Dordjieff to prove that by no 




stretch of the imagination could one face develop into the other. Gurdjieff 




himself told his pupils that he had once been given a Tibetan pass by an 




official who mistook the initial syllable of his name and described him as




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   5 1




“DordjiefF.” Somewhere among files long since vanished may lie a clue to a 




mistake which resulted in British Intelligence organizations confusing—as 




Achmed Abdullah himself may have confused—the master and the pupil. 




A case based solely on the available documents of the Great Game could 




leave the impression that there was no doubt about the matter; however, 




the evidence also includes a collection of photographs which is particularly 




perplexing. Some could well be pictures of the young Gurdjieff, others 




apparently could not,  and  at least one photograph has obviously been 




tampered with before publication. Although all are supposed to show the 




same man, there must be considerable doubt whether they in fact do so. 




This presents a peculiar problem. It is stretching coincidence too far to 




argue that another adventurer, resembling Gurdjieff in many particulars, 




was in the same area at the same time. On the other hand, a case which 




accepted all the photographs at their face value could not stand. There seem 




to be good reasons for suggesting that some of the photographs have been 




confused or made to lie for subterranean purposes; but a reader might 




plausibly retort that this belief was the result of an  

idee fixe

 on the author’s 




part. The only solution seems to be to describe the inquiry step by step and 




to leave the verdict open. 




It  is,  first  of  all,  certain  that  any  traveler,  however  innocent,  who 




ventured into so sensitive an area would be investigated and his name pass 




into the files of the Great Game at Delhi, Simla, and Whitehall. By his own 




admission Gurdjieff was in Tibet while these files were open. Then, there 




are  significant  resemblances  between  the  sacred  dances  of  Tibet  and 




Gurdjieff’s own. Next, halfway through the thicket of  

Beelzebub’s Tales to

 




 

his Grandson, 

 the reader stumbles across an outburst directed specifically 




at  the  Youn^usband  Expedition.  The  genial  exasperation  of  Beelzebub 




with human folly is directed at denouncing the way mankind infallibly 




overturns the social organizations created by the great religious teachers. 




Things were going quite well in Tibet, says Beelzebub, owing chiefly to its 




isolation; and a part of the teaching of “Saint Lama” was actually applied in 




daily life. The result was rejoicing among certain cosmic authorities that 




some aims of the founder of Lamaism might actually be achieved. 




But your favourites did not allow even this to happen, but by their 




“mihtary expedition” or Anglo-Tibetan war, without so much as a 




thought, knocked this possibility soundly on the head. 




About this “military expedition” I vdll tell you a httle later. 




And I shall tell you about it chiefly because I myself happened by 




chance to be an eyewitness of all those lamentable events. 




This passage about Tibet also occurs in a typescript version of  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales

 which dates firom before Achmed Abdullah’s letter to Rom Landau. 




5 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




With these various indications it was almost certain that a thorough 




search would reveal something. To anyone familiar with  

Meetings with

 




 

Remarkable Men

 and the identifiable style of Gurdjieffian cunning, it viall 




not  come  as  a  surprise  that  the  first  clue  to  a  possible   

nom  de  guerre

 




adopted by GurdjielF had to do with  

phonographs

 and led to the discovery 




of  a  highly  suspicious  character  coming  from  the  general  area  of  the 




Caucasus, using an unnecessary number of false names and carrying to 




DordjiefF  and the  Dalai Lama a strange assortment of baggage, which 




included a phonograph and its blank wax rolls for recording. Two rumors 




current among the followers of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky provide some 




confirmation of the identification which follows. The first is that GurdjiefF’s 




mistrust of the British resulted from their having interned him in India. 




The second—for which the source is P. D. Ouspensky—is that Gurdjieff 




had a wife and children “elsewhere.” (This latter piece of gossip accounts 




for the fact that the woman later known as Gurdjieff s “wife” never took the 




name of “Gurdjieff” but always remained “Madame Ostrowsky.”) Both 




conditions  are  fulfilled  by  the  man  who  called  himself  Ovshe  or  Ushe 




Narzunoff,  although  the  existence  of  his  family  is  bound  up  vnth  the 




perplexing question of the photographs. Even if Ushe Narzunoff were not 




the same person as G. I. Gurdjieff, it is hard to believe that his activities 




were not related to Gurdjieff’s own exploits in “those for me extremely 




memorable places,” the mountains of Tibet. 




The Government of India first took notice of Narzunoff in March 1900. It 




is not clear whether this was as the result of definite information or simply 




because  of  a  security-conscious  attitude  toward  Russian  travelers. 




Narzunoff’s  suspicious  contacts  were  later  disclosed  by  the  Reverend 




Graham Sandberg, the Anglican chaplain at Darjeeling. Sandberg was the 




author of a Tibetan grammar and an expert on Tibetan affairs; on behalf of 




the Government of India and the Great Game, he kept his ear very close to 




the ground. He connected Narzunoff with the Lama Dordjieff and with an 




equally mysterious Tibetan called Badmaieff who was closely linked to the 




Tsar of Russia. Before Narzunoff landed in India, the word had already been 




passed that he should not be allowed to cross the frontier to Tibet. 




On March 6, 1900, there arrived in Calcutta from Marseilles aboard the 




S.S.  

Dupleix

 a man bearing a passport issued by General Nipi Khoraki, the 




Governor of Stavropol, dated September 29, 1899. This described him as

“Ovshe Moutchkindoff Norzunoff”—the name was at other times spelled 




Narzunoff, Norzanaff and Norzanong—but when 'Narzunoff registered at 




the  Continental  Hotel,  Calcutta,  it  was  under  the  name  of  Myanoheid 




Hopityant, who was described as belonging to “the Post and Telegraph 




Department,  Sangata,  Stavropolsk  Government.”  He  had  a  letter  of 




introduction to the French consul from a professor in Paris—^this was




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   5 3




probably a M. Joseph Deniker of whom there will be more to say. But as he 




spoke only Mongolian and Russian, the French consul sent him to a Mr. 




Branson, the Accountant-General for Bengal, who knew the latter language 




and could be expected to help him on his way. Narzunoff told Branson that 




he had once before been through Calcutta to Tibet via Darjeeling and that 




he now intended proceeding again to Tibet with a case of presents for the 




Dalai Lama. He explained that the presents were from himself in gratitude 




for previous kind treatment and as an offering to the head of the Buddhist 




Church.  On  March  10,  Narzunoff  left  Calcutta  for  Daijeeling—in  a 




considerable panic, as it later appeared—^and on the way, stayed at Ghoom 




with a lama from Bhutan named Serap Gyatsho. On March 12, the traveler 




was interviewed at Ghoom by the Darjeeling Police. Under questioning, he 




proved undeniably shifty, although some trouble probably arose merely 




because of language difficulties. 




At his first interview in March Narzunoff—unaccountably dressed as a 




Chinese—^told the following story. In January of the previous year “he had 




passed  through  the  Darjeeling  district  on  his way to Peking,  where  he 




purchased some 9,000 rupees’ worth of goods for trading purposes, and 




returned with them by a French steamer to Calcutta, left the goods in the 




Calcutta  Custom  House,  and  proceeded  to  Ghoom enroute to Yatung, 




where he intended remaining until he received remittances from his agents 




in Tibet and Mongolia; he averred that he was a trader pure and simple, 




and disowned the names of Norzunoff and Myanoheid Hopityant, stating 




that he had never made use of them.” His real name, he said, was Obishak, 




and he was evidently trying to give the impression that he was a merchant, 




concerned chiefly with the trade between Tibet and China. But on March 




27} fete changed his tune and admitted that he had come from Paris and had 




also visited St. Petersburg and Berlin. A week later he confused his story 




yet again by muddUng the ships on which he had traveled. He was detained 




at Ghoom until the end of August. 




Meanwhile the Calcutta Customs had investigated the baggage which 




Narzunoff  had  left  behind  in  bond.  His  personal  effects  included  a 




telescope, two phonographs, a camera, and  

“one rifle

"—this last officially 




italicized. The weapon, a .45 caliber sporting rifle sighted up to 450 yards, 




was confiscated, and Narzunoff was allowed to take away his personal 




luggage.  But  he  was  also  in  charge  of  thirty-one  cases  which  he  had 




imported as cargo and which evidently caused the customs officials a certain 




amount of perplexity. A single case contained some spirit lamps, a quantity 




of coral, photogr^hic film, and silk. The remaining thirty held 590 metd 




bowls together with apparatus for suspending them, and their use was a 




matter  for  guesswork.  At  some  time  during  Narzunoffs  detention,  his 




agents, Thomas Cook and Son, took these cases in charge and apparently




5 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




delivered them to several lamas, including “a Tsanite Khamba (who is 




believed to be no other than DordjieS)” whom NarzunofiF had summoned 




from Lhasa. The friendly lamas failed to persuade the Darjeeling Police to 




allow Narzunoff into Tibet, and for five months he had to await the pleasure 




of the Queen-Empress. He applied to the Deputy Commissioner of Police 




at Darjeeling for the subsistence allowance which the Bengal Government 




had ordered be provided for him, but refused to accept the meager stipend 




of one rupee a day which he was offered. 




While Narzunoff was cooling his heels at Ghoom, the Darjeeling Police 




took detailed notes about him. The description circulated was of a man, 




“height about 5 feet 10 inches, broad and well built, head now shaved, 




Mongolian  features,  slight  moustache  twisted  down  Chinese  fashion, 




medium complexion.” He gave his age as twenty-six. This appears to have 




been correct, as the wily Police Commissioner discovered a photograph 




given by Narzunoff to a Mongolian lama during the period of his detention, 




on the back of which was vmtten; “In kind remembrance to the Mongolian 




Lama Yarphel from Ovisha Muchknoff Norsunoff, 26th July 1900, on the 




26th  year  of  his  age.”  Not  much'  reliance  can  be  placed  on  a  single 




preposition, “on,” which has had to survive translation from Narzunoff’s 




inscription and probable mauling by Anglo-Indian English, otherwise we 




might think that this revealed Gurdjieff s exact birth date. The photograph 




was reproduced and circulated by the Darjeeling Deputy Commissioner, 




who was later able to identify Narzunoff—looking most un-Mongolian— 




from this print. 




For Narzunoff was officially declared persona non grata. On August 2, 




1900, the Government of India decided to deport him to Russia “on the 




ground that it was undesirable that a Mongolian or quasi-Russian adventurer with several aliases should trade with Tibet through British India, and that though Norzanoff’s goods seemed to be harmless, his intentions might 




be the reverse.” He left India for Odessa on August 31, in the very ship 




which  had  brought  him.  In  a  final  examination  before  his  departure, 




Narzunoff disclosed three of the four names which enable a reconstruction 




of his affiUations in the Great Game. Besides his passport and a letter of 




introduction from the General Secretary of the Paris Geographical Society, 




he carried a letter from Prince Ukhtomsky, the editor of the newspaper, 




Riga  

Viedomosti. 

 Ukhtomsky described Narzunoff as a  

zaissan

 or noble of 




the Kalmuck Buddhists, and declared that he was a member of the Imperial 




Russian Geographical Society who was “undertaking a journey to Tibet both 




on a religious pilgrimage and in the interests of science and commerce.” 




Narzunoff seems to have decided to make a clean breast of his concerns to 




the Calcutta Police; he was, he said, “travelling at the expense of a very rich




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   5 5




Lama of Chinese Mongolia who hves in Urga, about 350 miles south of 




Irkutsk.” The name of this lama was “Akchwan DarjilicofF”—^whom the 




British authorities at once identified with Dordjieff. DordjiefF had visited 




London and Paris and wished to make presents to the lamas in Tibet of 




“special utensils”—the mysterious bowls—^which he had failed to obtain in 




St. Petersburg and so ordered from “J. Denmiker and Cie., 8 Rue Buffon, 




Paris.” Narzunoff was acting as courier on Dordjieff’s behalf. 




A fourth name must be added to the names “Ukhtomsky,” “Dordjieff” 




and “Deniker” before the full tally of Narzunoff’s sponsors is complete. 




This  name  is  that  of  the  strange  character  Shamzaran  Badmaieff,  who 




appears  frequently  in  the  archives  of  the  Great  Game  and  whom  the 




suspicious British considered to be NarzunofF’s spymaster. The concerns of 




Gurdjielf paralleled those of Badmaieff in many respects, and this similarity 




of interests is another good argument for assuming Gurdjieff and Narzunoff 




to  be  the  same  person.  To  make  the  relationship  of  these  unfamilar 




characters intelligible, their history must be reconstructed. 




The common interest of the group was in Russian expansion in Central Asia. 




Both Badmaieff and Dordjieff were Buryat Mongols from Russian territory 




around Lake Baikal. The Buryats assumed great importance in the Russian 




plans to penetrate Tibet, because their Buddhist faith allowed them access 




to the Forbidden City of Lhasa, whereas Europeans were turned back at 




the  Tibetan  border.  As  the  political  importance  of  Russian  Buddhists 




Increased,  the  Buryats  themselves  developed  a  degree  of  self-consciousness.  Their  intellectuals  came  to  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow  for education  and  a  printed  literature  sprang  up.  Such  happenings  were 




^»s0<dated with the activities of Dordjieff and Badmaieff, both of whom 




were concerned with developments that were political as well as cultural. 




The long arm of the Russian Government stretched across Central Asia 




with the building of the Trans-Siberian Railway. The first stone of the sector 




inland from Vladivostok was laid in 1891 by Nicholas II when as Tsarevitch 




he traveled round the world. By 1898 the line was open with the exception 




of  the section  around Lake Baikal—about which Badmaieff had strong 




views—^and a stretch along the Amur river. Eighteen ninety-eight is the 




year in which Ushe NarzunoflF steps into recorded history. 




Shamzaran  BadmaiefiF  (1851-1919)  was  educated  at  Irkutsk  and  St. 




Petersburg University, where he studied Chinese-Mongolian languages. 




He  became  converted  from  Buddhism  to  Orthodox  Christianity  and 




changed his name to Peter Alexandrovitch, at a ceremony where the Tsar 




Alexander III acted as godfather. From this time on, Badmaieff enjoyed a 




relationship of extraordinary &vor vwth Alexander and his son Nicholas II, 




5 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




both of whom leaned heavily on his advice on Eastern questions. In 1875 




Badmaieff left his lecturing job at the University and held a post in the Civil 




Service until 1893. 




His value to Nicholas II was not simply that of a political advisor. He 




practised “Tibetan  medicine” in  an apothecary’s  shop which  became a 




resort  of  fashionable  St.  Petersburg.  On  the  birth  of  the  hemophiliac 




Tsarevitch,  Nicholas  and  his  wife  Alexandra  found  a  new  use  for  the 




mysterious Badmaieff and his medicines. Even the advent of Rasputin— 




with whom Badmaieff was on excellent terms—never weakened his position 




at court, although outside the circle of the Tsar and the Tsaritsa, he made 




many enemies. It was rumored that the patients at his clinic had political 




information recorded on their files, and his name was often coupled with 




those of Rasputin and the other gurus who attempted to establish a hold 




over  the  credulous  Imperial  couple.  But  Badmaieff  stood  head  and 




shoulders above the crowd of magi and holy fools who clamored round the 




steps to the throne. This was simply because of his very obvious abihties. In 




1917  he  was  arrested  by  the  Bolsheviks  on  his  way  to  join  monarchist 




sympathizers in Finland; and in jail he made a deep impression even on his 




sceptical captors. 




Agwan Dordjieff (d. 1938) was another remarkable Buryat, very close in 




age to Badmaieff. He was born about 1850 at Cherniskaia in the Russian 




province of Verknie-Udinsk, and educated successively at Gandan (the 




lamaic college at Urga in Mongolia) and at the huge monastery of Drepung, 




a few miles northwest of Lhasa. Here he acquired the degree of Tsanit 




Khanpo, which is roughly translated as Professor (or Abbot) of Metaphysical 




Theology. His career blossomed when he became tutor to the thirteenth 




Dalai Lama. It seems likely that it was Dordjieff’s care which prevented the 




early death by poison or unexplained accident which had been the fate of so 




many of his pupil’s predecessors, and when the Dalai Lama attained his 




majority,  Dordjieff’s  vigilance  was  rewarded.  He was  given the  title of 




“Work-Washing Abbot,” a post which carried the duty of censing the Dalai 




Lama’s chambers with perfumed water. Thus he was still closely attached to 




the person of the Dalai Lama after his period of tutorship was over. The 




British Secret Service, who saw him as a rich and powerful gray eminence, 




were  not  inaccurate  in  their  assumptions.  According  to  the  German 




explorer Wilhelm Filchner, Dordjieff became a Russian agent in 1885, two 




years after the fourth expedition of Prjevalsky in which he took part. 




Dordjieff’s influence extended outside the borders of Tibet and over the 




hundreds of thousands of Russian Buddhists—the Buryats of Central Asia 




and the Kalmucks of the region round Astrakhan at the head of the Caspian 




Sea. The Dalai Lama appointed him as the agent who traveled through




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   5 7




these areas preaching, distributing “Hfe pills” and collecting tribute for the 




exchequer.  DordjiefF’s  particular  concern  was  to  establish  institutes  of 




higher education in the various Kalmuck districts where these were lacking, 




and in 1906, a declaration supporting this plan was issued by the Russian 




Department of Foreign Creeds. Not content with establishing schools for 




his own faith, Dordjieff executed an audacious coup by building a Buddhist 




temple  in  St.  Petersburg  itself.  When  this  project  became  public  about 




1911, a scandal of ferocious proportions broke out as the clergy of Holy 




Russia fulminated against the incursion of heathendom, and the plan was 




completed only with the support of powerful sympathizers. One of these 




was Prince Ukhtomsky of the Department of Foreign Creeds. 




Dordjieff was a man of exceptional abilities. Apart from his political and 




religious activity, he found time to adapt the Tibetan alphabet to Buryat 




needs. He was a member of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society and 




contributed notes to its publications. He spoke French as well as Asian 




languages and traveled through Western Europe where he held Buddhist 




services  in  Paris,  Vienna,  and  Rome  and  visited  the  Vatican.  Alter  the 




Russian Revolution, he was exiled to Leningrad where he spent most of his 




time in the temple he had built, until his arrest and imprisonment a year 




before his death in 1938. The picture of the Master of Heaven and Earth 




has—it must be admitted—a basis in reality. 




The Government of India was perfectly correct in assuming that Dordjieff 




intended them no good. Although it is not clear whether he and Badmaieff 




agreed completely on the destiny of Central Asia, it was certainly in the 




interests of both to cooperate in attaching Tibet securely to the Russian 




sphere of influence. The Tibetans—or at least those of Dordjieffs party, 




which included the Dalai Lama himself—^were apprehensive of the vast 




British power which had already established itself in Kashmir and was 




tangling  with  the  Russians  in  Afghanistan.  Dordjieff  began  diplomatic 




moves to encourage the Russians to act as a counterforce, while Badmaieff 




made propaganda on the Tsar’s behalf Their campaign is best approached 




through the-figure of Prince Esper Esperovitch Ukhtomsky, who was a 




good friend to both of them. 




Ukhtomsky was an Orientalist and came of a family with interests in 




Central Asia. He made an extensive collection of objects and manuscripts 




relating to the Buddhism of Mongolia and Tibet, most of which he housed 




in  Irkutsk,  and  this  deep  interest  in  Buddhism  led  him  to  enter  the 




Department of Foreign Creeds (which controlled non-Christian religions 




within the Empire). Besides being editor of the  

Riga Viedomosti, 

 he was a 




director of the Russo-Chinese Bank. Most significantly, Ukhtomsky was of 




the extremely mystical temperament common to the Russian intelligentsia




5 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




of the turn of the century, and claimed—in a catalogue of his Tibetan and 




Mongolian  collection  published  outside  Russia—that  he  had  been  a 




practicing Buddhist since the age of fifteen. 




In  1890  and  1891  Nicholas  II,  while  still  Tsarevitch,  undertook  the 




journey around the world during which he opened construction on the 




Trans-Siberian Railway. Ukhtomsky was seconded from the Department of 




Foreign Creeds to act as recorder to the expedition. In his huge and lavish 




account of the journey, the chronicler betrays his expansionist sentiments at 




every opportunity. Russia was more Oriental than Western, he insisted, 




and emphasized the “inner” kinship of Indian and Russian peasants. The 




reason for all this fellow feehng was crystal clear. “We are, and must be,” 




declared Ukhtomsky, “supported by the idea of an ever-possible advance of 




the irresistible North over the Hindu Kush.” 




It may have been because of the personal sympathies of this mystical 




imperialist or because of the natural inchnation of Nicholas that the party 




visited the headquarters of the Theosophical Society at Adyar on February 




7,  1891.  Ukhtomsky  knew  all  about  Mme.  Blavatsky,  “our  talented 




countrywoman,” and translated her colleague Colonel Olcott’s Buddhist 




catechism into Mongolian. His description of the Theosophical Society is 




significant. “At the insistence of H. P. Blavatsky, a Russian lady who knew 




and had seen much, the idea sprang up of the possibility, and even the 




necessity, of founding a society of theosophists, of  

searchers for the truth*

 




in the broadest sense of the word, for the purpose of enlisting adepts of all 




creeds and races, of penetrating deeper into the most secret doctrines of 




oriental religions, of drawing Asiatics into true spiritual communion with 




educated  foreigners  in  the  West,  of  keeping  up  secret  relations  with 




dififerent high priests, ascetics, magicians, and so on.” 




Ukhtomsky  saw  support  for  his  ideas  of  Russian  expansion  in  the 




“readiness of the Indians to group themselves under the banner of this 




strange  

northern

 woman.” He argued that Mme. Blavatsky had been forced 




to leave India by “the suspiciousness of the English.” Although this may 




simply  represent  a  protest  by  the  Theosophical  Prince  against  unkind 




rejection of Mme. Blavatsky’s very dubious “miracles,” it raises the specter 




of the notorious accusations that the foundress of Theosophy was in India as 




a Russian spy. These accusations came not only from paranoid colonial 




officials, but also from one of the lady’s own countrymen, and there is some 




evidence that Badmaieff himself was in contact with Mme. Blavatsky. The 




combination of an occult quest and intelligence work was not as improbable 




as it may sound, and if Mme. Blavatsky or Gurdjieff became mixed up in




* My italics. 




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   5 9




such activities, they would by no means have been the only seekers for 




truth who were also spies. 




The campaign of Russian expansion in which Badmaieff, Dordjieff, and 




Ukhtomsky played a part was the same as that in which Ushe NarzunofF 




became swept up. Some documents from Badmaieffs own archives enable 




us partially to reconstruct its progress. 




In  April  1894,  Badmaieff  began  what  he  referred  to  as  his  “real 




activities,” building up Russian influence in Central Asia. He kept in touch 




with Dordjieff and Ukhtomsky, and all three shared a brand of mystical 




imperialism. Dordjieff had visions of a pan-Mongol state under Russian 




protection. In his efforts to bring this about, he made use of the Mongolian 




belief in the coming of the Kingdom of Shamballa (“source-of-all-luck”), 




traditionally said to be situated in the north and therefore, to be equated 




with Russia. In 1896 Ukhtomsky was writing that the Mongols saw the Tsar 




as an incarnate Buddha. “The Tibetans,” he hinted, “who keep up very near 




relations with our Buryats, are gradually but deeply imbibing identical 




ideas.” As the campaign among the Mongols gathered momentum, Badmaieff  began  to  trumpet  success.  “My  arrival  on  the  frontier,”  he announced to Nicholas II on January 15, 1897, “has shaken the whole of the 




Buddhist  world  .  .  .  Buryats,  Mongols  and  especially  lamas  .  .  .  were 




always repeating that the time had come to extend the frontiers of the 




White Tsar in the east . . . .” 




Not long afterward Prince Ukhtomsky turned up in Ceylon. On April 23, 




he  met  the  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  Colonel  Olcott,  at 




Colombo, and the pair went joyriding in an outrigger canoe. The Prince 




told Olcott that he was on his way to China with presents for the Emperor 




and a message from the Tsar, and invited him to join him on the return trip 




which he intended to make via the lamasaries of Mongolia. 




Dordjieffs role at this stage of the Great Game is equivocal. It seems 




most likely that he was not the direct agent of Russia like Ukhtomsky or 




Badmaieff, but that he found it convenient to cooperate with their schemes 




to  ensure  the  continued  independence  of  Tibet.  But  as  time  wore  on, 




Badmaieff increased his pressure on the Tsar to support a policy of direct 




annexation. “Am I,” he inquired, “merely to organise trade, in order to 




widen our commercid-political influence in the East for further needs, or 




am  I  to  prepare  the  ground  for  a  final  annexation  .  .  .  systematically 




occupying important points with the help of Buryats and Mongols?” His 




recommendation was quite open. “Tibet, being the highest plateau in Asia, 




dominating the Asian continent, should obviously be in Russian hands. 




With Tibet in her power, Russia will certainly be able to force England to 




be more compliant.” 




6 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




From London, Lord Curzon was pursuing a similar policy with regard to 




the  Government  of  India.  He  too  argued  that  Tibet  was  a  key  point 




dominating Central Asia and that his own government must beware of the 




machinations of the rival empire. It has been the fashion to write ofiF such 




suspicions as proceeding from the imagination of an ambitious imperialist, 




but evidence shows that his inteUigence service was correct in pointing the 




finger at Dordjieff and Badmaieff. In fact, the vigilance of the British simply 




resulted in driving Tibet further into the embrace of the White Tsar; and 




Dordjieff’s anxious search for a protector provided the final lever which 




Curzon was able to use to persuade his own government to intervene. 




Dordjieff made his first visit to St. Petersburg in 1898. Younghusband 




later heard a rumor that he had made contact with the Tsar and Tsaritsa 




through Rasputin, but  Badmaieff is the more obvious channel. In 1900 




Dordjieff was presented to the Tsar, and in the following year, he returned 




to Russia at the head of a mission from Tibet. The Mission of 1901 became a 




red rag to the British. Russia had obviously stolen a march on Britain and a 




military expedition was the only answer. 




The Younghusband Expedition crossed the Tibetan frontier in July 1903. 




Two  years  had  elapsed  since  the  Dordjieff  Mission  to  St.  Petersburg. 




During this time reports kept reaching the Government of India of renewed 




Russian activity in Central Asia, and when the British expedition finally 




reached Lhasa, rumors came back that Dordjieff had established an arsenal 




there and was manufacturing rifles. But before the arrival of the British, he 




and the Dalai Lama had vanished into the Gobi Desert. They are supposed 




to have arrived at the monastery of Gandan in November 1904. After this 




point the attention of the Russian agents in Central Asia was diverted by the 




Russo-Japanese  War;  and  Badmaieff  and  Ukhtomsky  redirected  their 




energies to ensuring that the Buddhist tribes remained loyal to the Tsarist 




regime. 




“Ushe Narzunoff” was in the thick of the plotting and counterplotting 




which  surrounded  Dordjieff’s  mission  to  St.  Petersburg  in  1901.  His 




exploits should be seen against the general background of Russian espionage in Central Asia and the specific efforts of Badmaieff to recruit likely candidates for his intelhgence network. “I am training young men in two 




capitals—Peking and Petersburg—^for further activities,” Badmaieff informed the Tsar; and if Gurdjieff had wanted to penetrate Tibet, the context in which he could most easily have done so was in that of this operation. In 




1924  Wilhelm  Filchner  published  the  memoirs  of  one  of  Badmaieff’s 




“young men," the Buryat Tserempil, who claimed to have been recruited 




by Dordjieff at an early age. Tserempil was trained in the Indian Section of 




the Russian General Staff for “exploration and intelligence work” and sent 




on missions to Calcutta and Peshawar. It is significant that at the exact time




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   6 1




when NarzunofiF fell foul of the British authorities, Tserempil was also 




engaged in a mission through India, and like NarzunolF, he went disguised 




as  a  Chinese.  Tserempil’s  identity  was  created  for  him  by  the  Russian 




Colonel Orlov, who had given him his orders in St. Petersburg where he 




maintained  a  suite  in  the  Hotel  Europe  under  his  cover  name  of 




Bogdanovitch. His more immediate controller was known as “Professor 




Stungevitch,”  and  worked  from  a  base  in  the  Pamirs.  According  to 




Tserempil, the Professor was the head of the Indian Section of Russian 




Intelligence;  and  it  is  worth  recalling  here  GurdjiefF’s  friendship  with 




another professor, the archaeologist “Skridlov.” 




We possess the reports on Ushe Narzunoff which reached the Foreign 




Office in London; and also his own side of the story, which was edited by 




the French scholar Joseph Deniker. By the time this version of events was 




made public, Narzunoffhad been exposed by the Government of India. He 




had been detained for a long period, and his physical appearance had been 




noted  in  minute  detail  by  the  Police  Commissioner  at  Daijeeling. 




Narzunoff knew that his description had been taken down, and he mentions 




this fact in his diaries. For undercover work, he had become a decided risk, 




and it is quite possible that the reminiscences which he allowed Joseph 




Deniker to publish were designed to repair his damaged cover story and 




distract attention from the nonreligious activities of his master, Dordjieff. 




Joseph Deniker (1852-1918) was of French origin but born in Astrakhan. 




He studied chemistry in Moscow and St. Petersburg, became interested in 




anthropology, and moved to Paris where he obtained his doctorate and was 




appointed librarian of the Museum of Natural History. Apart from his work 




on  scientific  bibliography,  he  published  a  series  of  books  on  racial 




characteristics,  most  notably   

Races  and  Peoples  of  the  World

  (1900). 




Because  of  his  upbringing,  he  spoke  Russian, and  made a speciality  of 




Buddhism and Oriental languages. This resulted in his becoming the chief 




means of communication between the Russian experts on Central Asia and 




the  Western  world;  Deniker  would  translate  articles  appearing  in  the 




Russian scientific press into French and was in constant correspondence 




with  V.  V.  Grigoriev,  the  Secretary-General  of  the  Imperial  Russian 




Geographical  Society.  He  knew  Prince  Ukhtomsky,  and  his  interest  in 




Buddhism led to his introduction to Agwan Dordjieff through the distinguished  Orientalist,  Sylvain  L^vi.  Deniker  remained  in  touch  wdth Dordjieff and did him many favors. When the  

Times

 correspondent with 




the Younghusband Expedition published his account of the sinister role 




attributed to Dordjieflf, Deniker criticized this as “much exaggerated.” 




In 1898 DordjiefiF made his first visit to St. Petersburg and passed on to 




Paris  where  he  met  Joseph  Deniker.  On  June  27,  the  Tsanit  Khanpo 




celebrated a Tibetan  ceremony  in  the Mus^e  Guimet with Dr. Deniker




6 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




acting as interpreter. On this visit Dordjieff was asked in the interests of 




science to record some prayers on a phonograph—the old-fashioned kind 




with wax cyhnders. He became enthusiastic and bought a machine with 




many  cyhnders,  saying  that  for  purposes  unspecified  this  magnificent 




invention  could  be  of  great  use.  On  a  second  visit  to  Paris,  Dordjieff 




entrusted Deniker with a most unusual commission. The Tibetan priest was 




in search of steel, begging bowls for his monks, but these had by custom to 




be  made  from  a  single  piece  of  metal.  An  experiment  with  a  German 




company had failed, as welding had been used on the bowls, and it was 




Deniker’s task to find a firm which would cast large numbers of vessels in 




accordance with lamaistic precepts. Ushe Narzunoff arrived in Paris in 1900 




to fetch these bowls, which formed the mysterious cargo that so puzzled the 




Indian Customs. 




This  was  the  beginning  of  his  acquaintance  with  Deniker,  which 




culminated when Deniker published the narrative of his expeditions to 




Lhasa, based partly on NarzunoflF’s diaries and partly on conversations 




which took place in Paris in 1902, in the magazine  

Le Tour du Monde

 for 




1904. Narzunoff may then have been collecting the special lightweight  

tse-

 




 

boum—A

 ritual object—which Dr. Deniker was having made by French 




craftsmen for the Dalai Lama. His presence in Paris in 1902 shows without 




any doubt that his journeys in central Asia did not end with the last journey 




he described to Joseph Deniker, that of 1901. It may well have been that he 




wished to establish his bona fides by releasing an explanation of his ill-fated 




journey with the begging bowls. While a brief account might indeed have 




allayed  some  suspicions,  the  quantity  of  detail  published  by  Deniker 




provides countless reasons for considering that Narzunoff was not what he 




seemed. His story simply will not stand up. By the time it appeared in the 




press, the Government of India had more information connecting Narzunoff 




with  Dordjieff  and  the  operations  of  Russian  Intelligence.  And  the 




reminiscences pubhshed by Joseph Deniker are packed with details which 




point to the conclusion that this suspicious customer—half pilgrim, half 




adventurer—^was Gurdjieff himself. 




The question of the photographs which Deniker published—and of others 




which he did not publish—^will be considered separately. For the moment 




we shall concentrate on the diary and conversations which Deniker edited, 




and which he introduced with the remark that Agwan Dordjieff was “to 




some extent the sponsor of Narzunoff’s journeys.” Deniker’s conversations 




with  Narzunoff  had  been  conducted  in  Russian—in  which  language 




Narzunoff s diaries were written—^with a few Kalmuck expressions thrown 




in which Deniker recognized from his childhood acquaintance with the 




language. 




Ushe Narzunoff began with the story of his upbringing as a Kalmuck




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   6 3




squire in tihie province of Stavropol, his education in a Cossack school and 




his nomadic life with his family on the steppes. He claimed to have met 




Dordjieff on one of his preaching trips among the Kalmucks. By his own 




account Narzunoff was a pious young man who was disgusted by the 




drunkenness of his fellows; and Dordjieff had “advised him to make a 




pilgrimage to Lhasa.” In the light of his later activities it is quite clear that 




Dordjieff’s interest in NarzunoflF was much more than that of a general 




rehgious  duty,  and  that  the  education  Narzunoff  possessed  was  more 




extensive  than  that  of  a  Cossack  school.  However  they  came  together, 




Narzunoff and his protector left Russia in Aiigust 1898, and traveled on the 




Trans-Siberian Railway as far as Verknie-Udinsk on Lake Baikal. From 




there they continued to Urga, and on October 5, Narzunoff was dispatched 




to Lhasa with a letter and gifts for the Dalai Lama from Dordjieff. 




Narzunoff’s  journey  toward  the  Gobi  Desert  was  not  always  by  the 




obvious route. He called at several secluded monasteries, including the 




convent of Youndoun-beissin-kure—^which, he emphasized to Deniker, was 




not to be found on any maps of Mongolia—apparently in order to watch the 




ceremony known as “tsam.” This service was accompanied by mime and 




dancing, for which the lamas don masks representing terrifying deities who 




appear to them in the state of dream or ecstasy called “xan-tohi” in Tibetan. 




Narzunoff, therefore, displayed an interest in sacred dances very shortly 




after beginning his expedition. He proceeded by camel across the Gobi and 




on the south side of the desert fell in vwth a party of Mongols who offered to 




guide him  into  Tibet.  Narzunoff’s  account  of  his  adventure  with  these 




guides makes it quite certain that he was not what he seemed, and was 




European to boot:




On the way I told my guides that I was a Mongol, a Chinese subject, 




and that I was going to Lhasa on a pilgrimage. Nonetheless, towards 




the end of the journey, my guides discovered my secret, and for two 




reasons: L In order to conceal the fact that I was a Russian subject, 




knowing how to read Russian, I also took notes in the diary of my 




journey in Kalmuck. But, because Kalmuck writing is slightly different 




to  Eastern  Mongol  script,  my  companions  noticed  it  ...  2.  To  keep 




warm I was wearing under my furs a jacket of European cut, [and] as I 




undressed during a halt the Mongols noticed my jacket. No doubt 




because  of  all  this  when  we  arrived  in  their  native  country,  the 




Mongols began to say that I was a Russian subject, that I was wearing 




Russian clothes and was keeping a travel-diary. In consequence, they 




refused to lead me to the agreed place . . . 




Why was a devout Kalmuck traveling under the protection of a Buryat 




dignitary wearing Western clothes? The inquirer might be forgiven for




6 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




doubting whether the diflFerences between Kalmuck and Buryat script were 




as great as those between any form of script and the Russian in which 




NarzunoflF was undoubtedly keeping his diary—only this can explain the 




obtrusive “also” in the extract quoted above. The “also” is directed either at 




Deniker, the recorder of the conversation, or by Deniker at his audience. 




Besides  the  Russian—^“which  you  see  here, my  dear Dr.  Deniker,” or 




“which I have before me, my dear readers”—Narzunoff was “also” keeping 




his diary in Kalmuck. He must have let his tongue run away with him in the 




memory of his narrow escape. According to Narzunoff he managed to bribe 




his companions, and their goodwill was secured when he burned his jacket 




before their eyes. 




Without further mishap he crossed into Tibet and reached Lhasa, where 




he stayed a little over a month. He had an audience with the Dalai Lama, to 




whom he presented the gifts and letters he was carrying. The splendid 




ceremonial of the reception—Narzunoff claims that he passed through an 




escort of a hundred men—seems a little lavish for the private emissary of 




the Dalai Lama’s old tutor, and it is possible that NarzunofF’s embassy was 




on behalf of others. He was entertained and rewarded with money. In his 




account  of  the  episode,  Narzunoff  twice  refers  to  Dordjieff  as  “my 




master”—no doubt in the sense of “spiritual master”—^and this expression 




does seem to indicate the nature of the relationship between them. 




NarzunofF’s description of Lhasa is packed with observations on Tibet 




and its customs. He left the holy city in April 1899, and in May arrived at 




Daijeeling where he hired a Chinese-speaking Mongol to act as his guide to 




Peking.  Narzunoff  was  made  extremely  nervous  by  his  guide’s  calm 




announcement that most others would have poisoned him for the money he 




carried, and had to submit to being grossly overcharged for all the services 




his companion performed. In Peking he escaped from his guide’s clutches 




and made his way through Mongolia to Urga, which he reached at the end 




of July. 




According to Narzunoff, he arrived back in his native steppes in August. 




Let us say that he traveled to the general area of the Caucasus. The passport 




which the Governor of Stavropol issued to him was dated September 29, so 




it is possible that further journeys were contemplated immediately. We 




know nothing of Narzunoff until his departure for Paris in January 1900, in 




the capacity of Dordjieff’s messenger boy. He also had a commission firom 




the Russian Geographical Society to take photographs of Lhasa. On his 




arrival on January 25, Joseph Deniker took him to a meeting of the Paris 




Geographical Society and introduced him to the secretary. Deniker’s son, 




M. Georges Deniker, who as a boy of fifteen, met Ushe Narzunoff on this 




occasion, remembers that he was gadget-crazy; he bought electric lamps, a 




camera,  a  tie  pin  which  lit  up,  and,  of  course,  a  phonograph  and  its 




cylinders. 




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   6 5




The love of mechanical marvels v^ras something which Gurdjieff never 




lost; even the touch of the illuminating tie pin seems characteristic. But it is 




the phonographs vi^hich seem to say most clearly, “Here is Gurdjieff!” The 




phonograph  pervades  his  writings.  For  example,  in   

Meetings  with  Remarkable Men, 

 he recalls how he was forced to leave in Moscow “a few hundred” of the songs his father sang, “recorded on phonograph rolls.” 




Almost  certainly  he  intended  to  use  this  new  invention  for  collecting 




traditional music in Asia. In   

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 Gurdjieff gives a fatuous 




account of his birth in which an Edison phonograph is one of the actors; in 




 

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  he  describes  how  he  once  achieved  a 




striking commercial success by recording popular songs and bawdy stories 




on the blank rolls of “an Edison phonograph” and renting out ear-phones in 




the bazaars. Whether this story is true is neither here nor there—there is a 




possible moral attached—but it shows the impact the phonograph made on 




GurdjieflF’s mind. It even found its way into his teaching as one of his 




mechanical analogies. By the time  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 was written, phonographs with rolls had given place to those with disks, and Gurdjieff used the comparison—^at least as early as 1919—to describe the registration of sense 




impressions on the three apparatuses which he said were responsible for 




preserving past experiences. “They consist in adaptations recalling clean 




wax phonograph disks; on these ‘disks’ or, as they might otherwise be 




called, ‘reels,’ all the impressions received begin to be recorded from the 




first days after the appearance of a man in the world, and even before, 




during the period of his formation in his mother’s womb. ” 




At the beginning of March 1900, NarzunofF disembarked in Calcutta with 




his cargo of begging bowls. His story goes that he learned from a Russian- 




contact that he would be prevented from reaching Tibet. “Moved 




by the emotion of fear,” as he puts it, he donned his Chinese disguise and 




left  for  Darjeeling  with  the  object  of  sending  word  to  Tibet.  He  was 




detained by the authorities in Darjeeling, near which place he stayed with a 




Mongolian lama. In May three Tibetans arrived with a certificate that he 




was an innocent Buddhist pilgrim, and he felt free to take photographs 




without being clapped in prison. In August he was sent under armed escort 




to Calcutta where he was imprisoned for a week and then informed that he 




was to be deported. Meanwhile his efforts to dispatch the begging bowls to 




Tibet were frustrated at every turn. He had managed to send three cases in 




charge of a trusted emissary, but the man died en route and his wife refused 




to  surrender  the  goods.  In  Calcutta  he  suffered  agonies  because  the 




remaining twenty-eight cases had been reclaimed from the Customs by a 




“powerful and unknovra” man during his detention in Darjeeling. The 




difficulty arose from the translation through several languages of the name 




of the powerful man—“Koukanssen,” who proved to be Narzunoff’s agent, 




Thomas  Cook  and  Son,  whose  capable  services  not  only  whisked  the




6 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




begging bowls ofif to Lhasa, but forced the recalcitrant widow to disgorge 




her cache of loot. 




At his own request, the “quawi-Russian adventurer” was shipped ofiF to 




Odessa rather than Paris or Peking. He arrived in Russia on October 3, 




1900.  The  Government  of  India  received  information  through  Graham 




Sandberg that Dordjieff himself had passed through India and traveled 




separately to Odessa, where he and Narzunoff met Badmaie£f and all three 




proceeded  to  Livadia  in  the  Crimea.  On  October  15,  the   

Journal  de  St. 

 




 

Petersbourg

  announced  the  Tsar’s  reception  of  Dordjieff  at  Livadia. 




Somewhat naturally, the diaries of Ushe Narzunoff make no mention of this 




association  with  royalty  and  instead  offer  a  version  which  reeks  of 




implausibility. “As soon as I arrived back in  

my

 encampments, ” he writes— 




one wonders who was looking after the stock all this time—^“I had no further 




thought  than  to  return  again  to  Tibet.  By  a  happy  combination  of 




circumstances, the Tsanit Khanpo Agwan Dordjieff was in Siberia, in the 




Transbaikalia, his native land, and on the point of leaving for Lhasa. All that 




was  necessary  to  make  my  master  decide to  wait for  me in  Urga were 




several  exchanges  of  telegrams.”  Such  a  coincidence  and  Narzunoff’s 




hearing about it are manifestly impossible, and the gallant teller of tales was 




unlucky in the informants of the Government of India. To rephrase the 




narrative in what was most probably its real sequence: Narzunoff accompanied Dordjieff from Livadia to Urga, which they left with six companions on January 5, 1901. 




This was a remarkable journey by any standards. If Narzunoff is to be 




believed, they arrived in Lhasa on February 28, having crossed the Gobi in 




a  record  time  of  two  months,  twenty-four  days.  If  we  allow  for  some 




exaggeration, it was still a vastly quick time (“not for forest am I specialist, 




but for sand,” said Gurdjieff later) and there must have been some urgency. 




The reception of Dordjieff by the Tsar and his contact with Badmaieff could 




have provided the immediate causes. The necessity for speed was almost 




certainly because the plans of Dordjieff and Badmaieff now called for the 




open reception by the Tsar of a Tibetan mission. Having decided on this 




irrevocable course, no doubt it was best to consult the Dalai Lama and send 




the mission on its way before the English somehow circumvented the plan. 




Dordjieff and Narzunoff spent only a month in Lhasa before setting off again 




on their travels. 




During this time Narzunoff was once more presented to the Dalai Lama 




who  inquired  how  the  British  had  treated  him  in  captivity.  He  was 




rewarded for his privations by the gift of a ceremonial tiger skin. Once a 




man had been allowed to sit on such a seat of honor in the presence of the 




Dalai Lama, his name was inscribed in a register and from then on the 




privilege was his by right. During his stay, Narzunoff could at last make use




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   6 7




of the camera which Grigoriev of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society 




had given him, although he was forced to be circumspect because of the 




Tibetan  ban  on  photography.  He  managed  to  photograph  some  of  the 




principal buildings in Lhasa and on excursions outside the town he took 




several more pictures. One of these trips took him to the Drepung, with its 




two thousand monks; another to the monastery of Sera vrith its surrounding 




hermitages and a third to Galdan which preserved the largest collection of 




relics ofTsong Kapa, the founder of the Yellow Hat sect of Buddhist lamas. 




On his way back from this last expedition, NarzunoflF saw and photographed a remarkable local custom—of which, as Gurdjieff, he makes particular note. This was the spectacle of pilgrims measuring their length 




round the perimeter of Lhasa. “They let themselves fall full-length, get up 




and prostrate themselves again,” writes Narzunoff, “having placed their feet 




on the spot which they had earlier touched with their head. In this manner 




they go round the tovra in two or three days.” A more extreme form of 




devotion was practiced by those who followed the same procedure—^but 




measured the distance they could advance by the length of their faces. In 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales

 Gurdjieff inserts a completely isolated paragraph commenting on the practice, and one of the dances which he taught his pupils was  based  on  this  uncomfortable  maneuver—only  it  was  said  to  be  a 




Christian custom, native to the Caucasus. 




On  March  28,  Narzunoff  left  Lhasa  for  Tashi-Lumpo  where  he  was 




presented to the Panchen Lama. At first his account is given in the first 




person, as if he was the sole or principal traveler, but it soon appears that 




Dordjieff was one of the party. Because of the mountainous terrain, horses 




were out of the question and Narzunoff was forced to walk. In contrast, 




DordjiefiF behaved as a true Mongol, and hired a sherpa to carry him on his 




back into Nepal. It was an incongruous start to the famous Dordjieff Mission 




which so annoyed the British. In Nepal they spent five days, Narzunoff told 




Deniker, “disguised as pilgrims.” From the King of Nepal they obtained 




permits to visit the holy places of Buddhism in the south and, armed with 




tiiese documents, diey succeeded in entering India. Between the Nepalese 




frontier and the Indian border they survived three customs inspections. 




Narzunoff had hidden half his photographic film in a box taped to his thigh, 




and the other half in ajar of flour. His Russian passport was in the sole of his 




boot. On May 10, the party reached the railhead where they had to submit 




to an interrogation about their purpose in visiting India. Tliis inquisition, 




they were told, was because of the efforts of a certain Russian agent to 




penetrate Tibet the previous year. “My life,” records a nervous Narzunoff, 




“was hanging by very thin threads.” 




The mission was allowed their tickets to Bombay and proceeded from 




Bombay to Colombo where they embarked on the Russian steamer  

Tambof, 




6 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




which reached Odessa on June 12. The  

St. Petershmg Gazette

 announced 




the arrival of DordjiefF with an official embassy and carried an article by 




BadmaiefF  describing  “Owshe  Norsinof”  as  Dordjieff’s  “secretary  and 




translator.”  According  to  NarzunolF’s  journal,  Dordjieff  and  he  parted 




company at Odessa—presumably to allow the homesick NarzunofF to return 




to his encampments. Unfortunately for this story, the Deputy Commissioner at Darjeeling had obtained the photograph NarzunofF had given to his Mongolian friend during his detention. From this he identified him in a 




picture of a landau containing members of the Dordjieff Mission in St. 




Petersburg, published in  

The Graphic. 

 Ushe NarzunofF is bare headed, and 




in formal dress with a medal on his chest. 




Wise  after  the  event,  the  Deputy  Commissioner  plodded  on  his 




investigations. He suborned a Tibetan guide called Pat-ma-wang-cha, who 




had  acted  as  courier  to  the  mission  from  Katmandu  to  Bombay,  and 




discovered evidence which proved to his satisfaction that the four allegedly 




Mongolian members of the Dordjieff party had in fact been Russians. The 




reasons which he gave for these suspicions were as follows:




1.  They were not able to understand Tibetan, or to make themselves 




understood to Tibetans, which they would have been if they had 




been Mongolians. 




2.  One of them had a curious watch, which he showed to the Lama of 




the Buddhist Chorten at Katmandu, and which he informed him 




had been bought in Russia, and was worth Rs 300. The lama also 




told him that they were really “u-ru-su” Russians. 




3.  They ate meat largely whenever they could get it. 




4.  One of them (the youngest) knew English, as he was always able to 




read the railway tickets and detect when they were overcharged. 




The  youngest  of  these  “Mongolian  lamas,”  when  they  got  to 




Bombay, procured a suit of European clothes from somewhere, and 




shaved himself, and went on board the ship as a European. 




There is something about that youngest lama—undoubtedly NarzunofF-




which rings warning bells. A Gurdjieffian cunning, the Sly Man himself, the 




adept—^how would one learn better except on the professional stage—of 




 

acting in life, 

 of playing a role . . . ? 




Alter July 1901, when Dordjieff was officially presented to the Tsar, he 




and his associates were fixed in the official mind as the opposition. Francis 




Younghusband  was  convinced  by  rumors  which  reached  him  that  the 




outcome of the mission was a proposal to send Badmaieff to Tibet, and in 




February 1902, reports from the pandit Sarat Chandra Das told him of a 




“so-called Mongolian Mission,” with a Russian at its head, which had been




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   6 9




received in Lhasa. Suspicion continued to mount until the British mihtary 




expedition of July 1903. 




Like Dordjieff, NarzunofiF came into the open after the reception of the 




mission  from  Tibet.  In  October  1901,  Joseph  Deniker  published  his 




photograph of the Potala at Lhasa. It was the first photograph of Lhasa to be 




published and narrowly missed being the first taken. In 1902 NarzunofF 




visited Deniker in Paris, where he volunteered the information which the 




scholar  published  in  two  articles,  one  in  the  American  magazine  the 




 

Century

  in  August  1903,  and  another  the  following  year,  in   

Le  Tour  du

 




 

Monde. 

 In the autumn of 1903, the Imperial Russian Geographical Society 




published a selection of NarzunofF’s photographs together with descriptions 




of those by the Buryat professor Tsybikov, another of Badmaieff’s agents. 




None of the photographs of Narzunolf himself was published until after 




the British had reached Lhasa, by which time the news value of the story 




was immense. And although Deniker had the notes of his conversations 




with NarzunofiF since 1902, he published nothing based on them until after 




the Younghusband Expedition. The evidence seems overwhelming that 




NarzunofiF was, among other things, a Russian agent; and the appearance of 




his self-portrait as an innocent pilgrim and traveler was astutely timed to 




coincide with anti-British feeling after the flight of the Dalai Lama. 




There is one further point which is relevant to Ushe NarzunofiF and G. I. 




GurdjiefiF. In November 1904, a large collection of Orientalia was sold in a 




Paris auction room. One part of this sale was devoted entirely to Tibetan 




items: over one thousand lots of statues, pictures, and manuscripts. For this 




Tibetan sale, Joseph Deniker and a colleague of his at the Mus6e Guimet 




wrote the catalogue. Deniker hinted that the collection might have been 




formed in Peking. But it was sold under the name of “Collection G. . . 




The business I preferred above all others,” writes Gurdjieff in his essay, 




“The Material Question,” “which never required my specially devoting to it 




any  definite  time  or  needed  any  fixed  place  of  residence,  and  which 




moreover was very profitable was the trade in carpets and antiques of all 




lands.” Badmaieff’s agent Tsybikov returned from Lhasa in 1901 with a 




huge collection of manuscripts, and if Gurdjieff was in Tibet at the time of 




the  Younghusband  Expedition  in  1903-04,  it  would  have  been  quite 




feasible for him to withdraw from the country after the disruption caused by 




the British invasion and to realize his assets. It is also possible—if Gurdjieff 




was Narzunoff—that he may have acted as an intermediary for the sale of 




the “Collection G . . . ,” and that his principal was the antique collector, 




Ukhtomsky. 




On this evidence alone, it would be hard to believe that Ushe Narzunoff 




was not Gurdjieff. If Gurdjieff had wanted to penetrate Tibet, he would




7 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




have had to go as a Buddhist, and to disguise himself as a Kalmuck was the 




obvious choice. Stavropol, where Narzunoff s passport was issued, is a tovm 




in the north of the Caucasus, and it is as near GurdjiefiF’s home in the 




Caucasus  proper  as  a  Kalmuck  might  have  been  expected  to  come— 




Astrakhan would have been a more likely province to issue a passport to a 




Kalmuck. NarzunoflF was exactly the right age, and his birthday in 1874 even 




falls directly between the two dates most favored for GurdjiefiF—1872 and 




1877. He was the right build and height; and if it is thought that the Indian 




police’s description of his “Mongolian” features puts him out of court, it 




should  be  emphasized  that  they  later  changed  their  minds  about  his 




Mongolian nationality, and that both Ouspensky in 1915 and Carl Bech- 




hofer Roberts in 1919 remarked on Gurdjieff’s “oriental” appearance. 




These considerations are  important, because the latest photograph of 




Ushe NarzunolF was taken in 1908, and almost a decade separates it from 




the first knovra photograph of Gurdjieff in his role as teacher. In ten years a 




man can change greatly, irrespective of any considerations of fraud. Some 




features—in particular the size of the feet and the long, sensitive fingers— 




are very GurdjiefBan; others, including the more fleshy appearance of the 




whole head in some of the photographs, seem to rule out the identification 




altogether. The photographs, however, are so disparate as to suggest either 




that their subject was a master of disguise or that some very fiinny business 




was going on. 




The first photograph of Narzunoff published by Joseph Deniker was 




supposedly taken in 1898. This is a formal portrait, showing a young man 




with a rosary or chaplet in one hand and the other holding a book on a table. 




Even in the badly defined face Gurdjieff’s most j)rominent characteristics 




can be seen; the protruding chin, the distinctivdTy shaped—and undisguisa- 




ble—ears, the small flat triangular patch at the bridge of the nosp. It is feirly 




clear  that  this  picture  has  been  doctored.  The  real  depth  of  the  eye 




sockets—note the shadow above the right eye—may have been disguised 




by highlighting the eyelids to produce a more “Mongolian” effect. The hair 




is quite obviously painted in. No human being of whatever nationality ever 




had hair which could lie in the way Narzunoff’s hair is supposed to lie in the 




photograph. Two strokes of a paint brush would produce a similar effect. 




The  reason  for  this  tampering?  Perhaps  a  shaven  head,  indicating  that 




Narzunoff had already impersonated a Mongolian lama, or Gurdjieff’s own 




naturally curly hair which was totally un-Mongolian. 




Further photographs were published by Joseph Deniker in  

Le Tour du

 




 

Monde. 

 A small portrait with a shaven head shows ears and brow ridge 




approximating  Gurdjieff’s,  but  it  is  quite  unlike  another  portrait  of 




Narzunoff  in  Chinese  dress,  said  to  have  been  taken  in  Peking.  Either 




Narzunoff was trying to look “Chinese” or this is a picture of a different




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   7 1




person. It may be that this is further evidence of shiftiness on Narzunoff’s 




part, as Deniker preserved, but did not publish, another photograph of his 




friend  in  the  same  Chinese  costume which  he identified  specifically as 




having been taken in St. Petersburg. Neither in these “Chinese” pictures 




nor in another published in the  

Century Magazine

 (and supposed to show 




NarzunofiF and his guides in the Himalayas) is there any possibihty of 




making out GurdjieflF’s face in that of the man said to be Narzunoff On the 




other hand, it cannot be said for certain that these Oriental pictures show 




the same man as appears in the full-length portrait or the small portrait with 




the  shaven  head.  The  suspicion  begins  to  germinate  that  perhaps  this 




embarrassment  of  portrait  studies  was  designed  purposely  in  order  to 




confuse. 




This impression is not dispelled by a collection of portraits of himself, his 




wife, and his children sent by Narzunoff to Deniker and never published. 




There is one of his eldest son, Daidan or Datsun, dressed in a sailor suit and 




holding a chaplet, said to have been taken in Moscow in 1904. Another 




shows Daidan, aged twelve, his younger brother Dordje, aged eight, and 




their lama “educator” in Verknie-Udinsk by Lake Baikal. It is undated, but 




might be a year or so earher than the photograph of the elder son taken in 




1904. On the back of the Verknie-Udinsk photograph, NarzunofiF scribbled a 




petition to Deniker to be “as good a friend” to his children as he had been 




to himself. In view of Deniker’s earlier role as the editor of Narzunoff’s 




misleading memoirs, it might not be over cynical to read a double meaning 




into  this  request.  On  the  other  hand,  it  might  be  the  polite  gesture  of 




thanks which it appears to be. 




Additional difficulties are presented by a photograph of Narzunoff and his 




taken in Verknie-Udinsk on November 6, 1908. Narzunoff has larger 




and more cosmopolitan mustache than in his earlier photographs, and a 




physiognomy considerably different from the Asiatic type of the lady beside 




him. At first sight there is little in the face to suggest Gurdjieff, although it 




is possible to point to a number of resemblances to Gurdjieff’s face in later 




Hyfe. There are the strong hnes etched from the comers of the nose to the 




mouth, the beginnings of the dimple which was to mark Gurdjieff’s chin, 




and—^most telling of all—the eyes. First, they are not Mongolian eyes 




which conceal the tear-duct under the skin at the comer; and second, they 




show the  squint in the  left  eye  which becomes  increasingly obvious in 




Gurdjieff’s later photographs. The direct studio lighting might have been 




arranged to flatten out Narzunoff’s face, and a bone stmcture similar to 




Gurdjieff’s can be detected by a study of the shadow contours along the 




nose  and  around  the  top  of  the  eyes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  general 




£^pearance of the face is not that of Gurdjieff—nor of the “Narzunoff” of 




the shaven-headed portrait or the figure with the rosary. This Narzunoff




7 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




does seem to resemble the pictures of the “NarzunofF'’ in Chinese dress. Is 




this evidence of a similarly effective disguise, or were two or more men 




photographed in the Narzunoff identity? 




We do not possess the photograph which would settle the matter. This is 




the portrait which Narzunoff gave the lama Yarphel at Ghoom in 1900, and 




which presumably showed him as he was, with no possibility of deception. 




However, the  

Graphic

 photograph of the Dordjieff mission is almost as 




good, because the Deputy Commissioner of Police at Darjeeling was able to 




identify Narzunoff as one of the party by comparison with the Yarphel 




photograph in his possession. This is the only photograph of Narzunoff 




taken without the benefit of studio conditions and the cosmetic accessories 




of the photographer’s art. It is the only photograph which does not emanate 




from NarzunoflF himself, through Deniker. It is the only photograph which 




can be said with reasonable certainty to show the historical Narzunoff who 




was in trouble in British India in 1900. And of all the photographs it is the 




one which most resembles Gurdjieff. 




In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  Gurdjieff  describes  how  he  and 




“Pogossian” disguised themselves as “Caucasian Tartars, ” and in another 




place how he and “Skridlov” spent an extensive period of preparation for an 




attempt  to  impersonate  a  Persian  dervish  and  a  Sayyid.  These  explicit 




admissions that Gurdjieff had adopted exotic disguises must be coupled 




with his enthusiasm for the trick of the actor’s trade. Disguises are to be 




expected from Gurdjieff; but some of the photographs of Narzunoff do seem 




to exceed all acceptable limits of the idea of disguise. The theory that some 




of the photographs were planted and others doctored to cover the tracks of a 




leading Tsarist agent is more likely. But such an argument is open to the 




powerful criticism that it can be used to explain away as concocted any 




inconvenient item of evidence. It must be admitted that if this theory were 




held dogmatically, it would be extremely dangerous. However, the same 




reasons which made it necessary to examine the possibility that Gurdjieff 




was Narzunoff also mean that the idea of deliberate falsification must be 




kept seriously in mind. We need not accept it, but we are compelled not to 




dismiss it out of hand. 




Although further comparison between Gurdjieff and Narzunoff must be 




categorized as suggestive speculation only, a number of other points of 




contact  should  not  be  ignored.  For  example,  there  are  the  apparently 




troublesome photographs from Verknie-Udinsk, showing the wife, the lama 




“educator, ” and the boys Daidan and Dordje. GurdjiefF’s Beelzebub has 




two sons called Tooilan and Tooloof, whose “educator” is mentioned with 




special affection. According to J. G. Bennett, Gurdjieff later claimed that 




his eldest son became the abbot of a Buddhist monastery at a precociously 




early age, so that it is quite natural to find the twelve-year-old Daidan 




already wearing the robes of a novice monk. 




T H E   G R E A T   G A M E   7 3




It  is  significant  that  the  younger  child  is  called  Dordje.  In  Tibetan 




Buddhism, the  

dordje

 is the symbol of the lightning, of power flowing from 




heaven to earth, and thus of the fully realized man, the agent of heaven. 




The expression also has a ritual significance, and the  

dordje

 itself is often 




referred to as the “lamaic sceptre”: a metal object gripped in the fist, with 




the projecting ends becoming first bulbous, then tapering to a point. This is 




the concrete symbol of power descending from heaven, and is also said to 




be the symbol of  

method. 

 A story told by Maurice Nicoll, one of Gurdjielf’s 




leading followers, relates that once, in a New York hotel, when Gurdjiefi" 




thought he was quite alone, he was overheard repeating to himself: “I am 




 

dordje

 ... I am  

dordje

 . . . ”  Presumably he meant to affirm his function as 




the lightning flash between heaven and earth, and the incident is one small 




piece  of evidence among many which demonstrate Gurdjieff ’s debt to 




Tibetan Buddhism. 




This indebtedness is clear from  

Beelzebub’s Tales; 

 and it may well be the 




greatest single debt Gurdjiefl" owed to any existing system. If the young 




seeker for truth had become interested in Buddhism in his native Caucasus, 




the nearest large communities of Buddhists would have been the Russian 




Kalmucks. It is not beyond the bounds of belief that his investigations led 




him across the path of Agwan Dordjieff and Prince Ukhtomsky. If Gurdjieff 




had wanted to study Tibetan Buddhism at the source, he could have had no 




better tutor than DordjielF, a Tsanit Khanpo at the right hand of the Dalai 




Lama.  Prince  Esper  Ukhtomsky,  with  a  personal  and  long-standing 




commitment to Buddhist practice, and his belief in the “necessity” of a 




brotherhood of seekers for the truth, would also have been able to further 




the  young  man’s  quest.  Ukhtomsky  is  the  most  likely  original  of  the 




character  “Prince  Lubovedsky”  in   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men. 

  Like 




that prince, Ukhtomsky had occult and Oriental interests; and when “Ushe 




Narzunoff” was searched in India, he had a letter of introduction from 




Ukhtomsky in his pocket. 




It was never really possible to consider Gurdjieff an adventurer pure and 




simple, and as “Ushe Narzunoff,” he is even more difficult to discount as a 




fraud. Clearly he was engaged in work on behalf of Russian Intelligence, 




and even received a medal for it if the  

Graphics

 picture of the DordjieflF 




Mission is any guide. But this in no way excludes a more earnest side to his 




career. The imperialism of Ukhtomsky and Badmaieff was of a distinctly 




mystical nature, and who is to say where Gurdjieff ’s intelhgence activities 




stopped and his spiritual quest began? Stories which he told during the 




1930s hint that for a time he became the Buddhist monk which his shaven 




head perpetually suggested. The evidence impHes that with Dordjieff as his 




spiritual director, Gurdjieff combined politics with his personal search. To 




see him as a Russian Kim might not be far from the truth—and Kim also had 




his lama. 







The Professional Hypnotist




As “Ushe Narzunoflf,” Gurdjieff would have been intimately concerned with 




Tibet,  at  least  until  1904.  According  to  extracts  from  the   

Third  Series

 




quoted by J. G. Bennett, it was in Tibet that he was accidentally wounded 




for the second time. This happened in 1902, and Gurdjieff was taken by 




fhends to convalesce at the edge of the Gobi Desert near Yangi Hissar. We 




know little about his movements for the next two years. Like the Buryat 




agent Tserempil, he might have joined the party of Dordjieff and the Dalai 




Lama as they withdrew northward into the Gobi. Certainly, by the end of 




1904—about the time when the “Collection G . . .” went on sale in Paris— 




GurdjiefiF was back in the Caucasus, where he had his contretemps with the 




tiiird stray bullet. On this occasion the disaster took place at Chiatur, on the 




southern slopes of the Caucasus between Tiflis and the Black Sea. When he 




had recovered, GurdjiefiF wandered back through the Transcaspian toward 




Central Asia and returned to the place near Yangi Hissar to which he had 




been brought two years before. 




Apparently it was here, on the southeastern fringes of the desert, that he 




reached his conclusions about the important role played by hypnotism in 




human  afi^rs.  Tliis  train  of  thought  was  directly  associated  with  the 




turbulent nature of his career to date. Bennett suggests that the skirmish in 




which GurdjiefiF was hit for the third time was connected vwth the social 




unrest which culminated in the abortive Russian revolution of 1905. He




7 5




7 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




argues that GurdjiefF had penetrated the revolutionary movement on behalf 




of the authorities, and was possibly even acting as a double agent. Although 




he  may  have  spied  for  the  Tsarist  Government,  Gurdjieft’s  political 




sympathies were later known to be at the opposite end of the spectrum to 




those of his more aristocratic Russian pupils, and the boy from the deprived 




background could have played the part of a social revolutionary with some 




conviction. But by Gurdjieff’s own account, the chief result of his close 




acquaintance with political intrigue was to surfeit him with rhetoric and fill 




him with horror at the ease with which ordinary people allowed themselves 




to be led by the nose. Partly in reaction against the violence he had seen 




and partly as a result of conversations with “various revolutionists” he had 




met  in  Italy,  Switzerland,  and  the  Caucasus,  Gurdjieff  decided  that  he 




“must discover, at all costs, some manner or means for destroying in people 




the predilection for suggestibility which causes them to fall easily under the 




influence of‘mass-hypnosis.’” 




Hypnotism had come increasingly to occupy the forefront of his thoughts. 




His  quest  for  meaning  had  halted  before  the  blank  conclusion  that  no 




existing knowledge could help him. The sole remaining possibility was the 




discovery of something new, not in the sense of “lost wisdom,” but new 




facts about the nature of man, resulting from a pioneering analysis of the 




psyche. He decided that “the answers for which I was looking . . . can only 




be  found,  if  they  are  at  all  accessible  to  man,  in  the  sphere  of  ‘man’s 




subconscious-mentation. ” In search of a key to the subconscious mind, he 




began to collect all the data he could on Asiatic theories of hypnotism. 




In  Bennett’s  view,  this  reorientation  was  the  result  of  an  important 




change  in Gurdjielf’s psychological attitude. No longer was he seeking 




knowledge or power for himself, but he was proposing to liberate humanity 




from the illusions under which it labored. This is true so far as it goes, and 




perhaps GurdjiefF’s decision does represent a newfound altruism. But his 




conclusions bore the same relation to his search for wisdom as the chicken 




to the egg. They also—given GurdjiefF’s unusual tenacity—represented the 




only possible outcome. 




In  

Herald of Coming Good

 there is a skeleton chronology which covers 




the half-dozen years following 1904; but the wording is so ambiguous that 




little can be made of it, and the whole sequence of events may well be 




spurious. Gurdjieff claims that for two years he stayed in a Central Asian 




monastery, occupied in a theoretical study of hypnotism. He then decided 




to carry his investigations into the sphere of practical experiment. 1 began 




to give myself out to be a ‘healer’ of all kinds of vices and to apply the 




results of my theoretical studies to them, affording them at the same time 




real  relief.”  For  the  next  few  years  he  was  experimenting  with  actual 




purpose in order to explain the psychological questions which interested




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   7 7




him personally, and to discover a satisfactory way of freeing people from 




their  liability  to  suggestion.  The  experimental  nature  of  his  activities 




created certain moral problems, and in  

Herald of Coming Good

 GurdjiefiF 




was concerned to justify himself:




To make use of people, who display a special interest in an Institute 




founded by me, for purely personal ends would surely strike those 




around me as a manifestation of “egotism,” but at the same time the 




people, who had anything to do with such an Institute . . . could in this 




way alone, profit by the result of knowledge amassed by me due to 




exceptional circumstances of my life and which had regard to nearly all 




the aspects of reality and objective truth, and thus use them for their 




own benefit. 




If the idea of establisliing an Institute had crossed Gurdjieff’s mind by 




the late 1900s, that prospect must have been distant. For the moment he 




confined himself to observation and experiment. The passage in  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales

 which describes his activities as a “healer” is one of those in which the 




character Beelzebub represents GurdjiefF himself. He became, says Gurd- 




Jieff, a “professional hypnotist” in the towns of Chinese Turkestan. 




Turkestan is the area which extends roughly from the Aral Sea eastward 




into  China.  East  or  Chinese  Turkestan  corresponds  to  the  present-day 




Chinese province of Sinkiang, which separates Mongolia from Tibet. At the 




westernmost end lies the city of Kashgar, and the central area is occupied 




entirely by the desert of the Takla-Makan. To the south are the Himalayas 




and north of the desert, the Mongolian Altai. It is even now a very isolated 




part  the  world,  with  the  few  communities  pinned  to  river  valleys  and 




oases. It was even more isolated when Gurdjieff lived there. In 1905 the 




American traveler, Oscar Terry Crosby, found only “half a dozen Russian 




telegraph engineers, two small garrisons in Russian Turkestan, one small 




garrison in Chinese Turkestan,” in the 200 miles between Osh and Kashgar. 




In feet, GurdjiefiF simply used the area as a base. In Beelzebub’s words, 




he “also travelled a good deal, visiting almost all the continents, and during 




these travels I encountered beings of most, as they say, ‘peoples.’ During 




these travels of mine I remained nowhere for long excepting in certain 




independent countries on the Continent Asia called ‘China,’ ‘India,’ ‘Tibet’ 




and, of course, also that lately largest half-Asiatic, half-European community  called  ‘Russia.’”  J.  G.  Bennett’s  fnend,  the  Turkish  Prince Sabaheddin,  told  him  that  he  had  met  Gurdjieff  in  1908  when  he  was 




returning from Europe to Asia. It is quite possible that Gurdjieff visited 




America as well as Eurtq)e, and no doubt he kept up his contacts with 




Agwan  Dordjieff,  Shamzaran  Badmaieff,  and  Esper  Ukhtomsky.  The




7 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




photograph of “Ushe Narzunoff” and his Chinese wife was taken by a 




photographer named Kosarev in Verknie-Udinsk—DordjiefiF’s MongoUan 




headquarters  and  the  chief  Russian  garrison  town  for  the  area—on 




November 6, 1908. 




If GurdjiefF’s travels were as Beelzebub describes them—in India, Tibet, 




and  China—it  is  possible  that  he  continued  to  work  for  the  Tsarist 




Intelligence Service. In “The Material Question” he represents himself as a 




businessman specializing in the antique trade, but able to turn his hand to a 




multitude of other projects. 




I engaged in the most varied enterprises, sometimes very big ones. 




For instance: I carried out private and government contracts for the 




supply and construction of railways and roads; I opened a number of 




stores, restaurants and cinemas and sold them when I got them going 




well. I organised various rural enterprises and the driving of cattle into 




Russia from several countries, chiefly from Kashgar; I participated in 




oil-wells and fisheries; and sometimes I carried on several of these 




enterprises simultaneously. 




Gurdjieff always refers vdth the greatest affection to Turkestan, “concerning  which  place  there  are  and  will  be  preserved  in  my  common presence the data then fixed for pleasant memories.” Perhaps his pleasant 




memories were of family life with the lady of the photograph. Whether or 




not he still acted as a secret agent, his government connections cannot have 




hindered his business activities—^which would have harmonized nicely with 




BadmaiefiF’s economic war—although those to which he refers in “The 




Material Question” are said to have taken place as a concentrated effort to 




raise a large sum of money before he left for Moscow. For once, he was 




probably in easy circumstances, and able to devote time to his occupation as 




a “physician-hypnotist.” 




Like  some  of  his  European  contemporaries—Freud  and  Jung  among 




them—^he was trying to use hypnosis to break through man’s “normal 




waking consciousness” to the subconscious mind, “which ought in my 




opinion,” Gurdjieff wrote, “to be the real human consciousness.” He saw 




the appalling situation of humanity as caused by the division of human 




consciousness into waking consciousness and subconsciousness. Human 




beings, thought Gurdjieff, had largely lost the capacity for faith, hope, and 




love,  but  buried  in  their  subconscious  was  what  he  called  “Objective- 




Conscience.” This was for Gurdjieff the characteristic which alone distinguished man from lower creatures. To Ouspensky he explained that the idea of “conscience” was equivalent in the realm of the emotions to the idea 




of consciousness in that of thought.  

“Conscience

 is a state in which a man




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   7 9




 

feeb all at once

 everything that he in general feels or can feel. ” It became 




the basic aim of Gurdjieff’s Method to prod this conscience into operation. 




If a man whose entire inner world is composed of contradictions were 




suddenly to feel all these contradictions simultaneously within himself, 




if he were to feel all at once that he loves everything he hates and hates 




everything he loves; that he lies when he tells the truth and that he 




tells the truth when he lies; and if he could feel the horror of it all, this 




would be the state which is called “conscience.” 




Man, Gurdjieff taught, has developed mechanisms called “buffers” to 




prevent his ever entering such an intolerable state of contradictions. They 




keep  him  in  the  state  of  “normal  waking  consciousness”  and  suppress 




conscience altogether. 




In Gurdjieff’s view, the normal waking consciousness operates under 




continuous hypnotic influence, noticeable only in particularly intensified 




cases. Man is almost always  

asleep. 

 This is because in adolescence, when his 




consciousness divides into two—and the “real” part of this consciousness 




becomes the  

subconscious

—the human being is subject to great pressure 




from his parents and teachers to adopt the state of consciousness “normal” 




for man; that is, to fall asleep. At the same time, so Gurdjieff declared, an 




alteration in the blood circulation results in a new tempo of circulation 




developing for the normal waking consciousness as well as that which 




corresponds to the functioning of the subconscious or real consciousness. 




He claimed to have invented a new method of hypnosis—an advance on the 




method by which the subject is hypnotized by staring at a bright object— 




whidli ctmsisted in altering the tempo of the blood circulation “by means of 




a certain hindering of the movement of the blood in certain blood vessels.” 




The  result  was  that  although  the  circulation  continued  at  the  normal 




mechanical  tempo,  he  could  evoke  the  properties  of  the  buried  subconscious as well. 




Only the story of Gurdjieff’s relations with his pupils can explain what his 




new form of hypnosis in fact was, or how he went about breaking down 




man’s normal waking consciousness and encouraging the growth of conscience instead. As for the circulation of the blood, his uncompromising materialism naturally extended to explanations of hypnosis. He approved 




wholeheartedly of Mesmer and the early theorists of animal magnetism, 




and  poured  scorn  on  James  Braid,  Charcot,  and  other  specialists  who 




denied the material basis of hypnotic phenomena. Medically speaking, this 




may be ridiculous, but Gurdjieff never claimed to be an orthodox doctor. 




According to Beelzebub, he chose to adopt the disguise of a “healer” in 




order to further his psydbiological researches. He had observed that people




8 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




speak frankly only to doctors and priests, and he had no desire to restrict his 




liberty  by  impersonating  a  holy  man.  Although  he  joined  the  medical 




profession in a spirit of experiment, he acquired considerable skill at his 




new calling. In Chinese Turkestan the chief disabilities which came within 




his province were opium addiction and the chewing of hashish. When, in 




about  1910-11,  he  transferred  his  activities  to  Russian  Turkestan,  he 




concentrated on the equivalent Russian vice: addiction to vodka. “This 




maleficent means,” explains the sagacious Beelzebub to his grandson, “is 




obtained  there  chiefly  from  the  surplanetary  formation  they  call  the 




‘potato.’” 




Gurdjieff’s skill as a hypnotist was to stand him in good stead when he 




was forced to earn money in the West; and it was probably in Turkestan that 




he acquired his knowledge of the effect of drugs on human beings. His later 




use of alcohol is well known, and the nature and composition of opium 




remained  one  of  his  interests  up  to  the  time  when  he  was  writing 




 

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  Western  medicine  was  for  Gurdjieff  an  object  of 




contempt. He afterward identified only three useful drugs from the whole 




pharmacopoeia—opium, castor oil, and a substance obtained fi'om a certain 




tree. 




There are several reasons for linking Badmaieff with Gurdjieff ’s activities 




as  a  “physician-hypnotist.”  For  someone  interested  in  non-European 




medicine, the Badmaieff dispensary would have been a natural port of call 




in  St.  Petersburg,  particularly  if  that  someone  were  associated  with 




DordjiefiF.  In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  Gurdjieff  introduces  his 




fnend “Soloviev” as a patient whom he cures of alcoholism in Central Asia. 




Soloviev was “an authority on what is called eastern medicine in general, 




and on Tibetan medicine in particular, and he was also die world’s greatest 




specialist in the knowledge of the action of opium and hashish on the psyche 




and  organism  of  man.”  He  probably  never  existed,  but  the  Hst  of  his 




specialities  is  significant:  “Eastern  and  Tibetan  medicine,  opium  and 




hashish.” As far as is known, Shamzaran Badmaieff was the greatest expert 




on such subjects in the Western world. 




BadmaiefiT had consolidated his position at the Russian court with a 




prescription which cured the Tsar’s stomach complaint—this was said to be 




a mixture of henbane and hashish. The ill will stimulated by his privileged 




position gave rise to an absurd legend that he, Rasputin, and the Tsaritsa’s 




confidante, Anna Virubova, were trying to poison the Tsarevitch with “a 




yellow powder.” A memorandum of Badmaieff’s survives, dated October 9, 




1912,  which  recommends  treatment  for  the  sick  child.  “Europe  has  no 




treatment against internal or external blows,” he wrote, “except ice, iodine, 




and massage. ... If you succeed in persuading them to try my medicine, 




please ask them to give no other medicine, either internally or externally, 




this includes ice. As food, only oatmeal, bouillon and milk.” The remedies




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   8 1




themselves were enclosed in small envelopes. There were “boiled Dabsen- 




Tan, against knocks,” a stomach medicine for constipation, and a preparation called “Gabir-Nimga,” a specific against high fever. 




Badmaieif was therefore still closely in touch with the court about the 




time that Gurdjieff returned to Russia, and it is likely that Gurdjieff was in 




contact with him throughout his career as a hypnotizing doctor. GurdjiefiF 




describes  a  visit  which  Beelzebub  pays  to  Russia  in  his  capacity  as  a 




“physician-hypnotist,” which is supposed to have taken place well before 




the First World War. The incentive is given by an elderly Russian, who 




invites  him  to  St.  Petersburg  to  help  in  the  unending  war  against 




alcoholism. The Russian explains that he is the head of a foundation to 




combat the problem, and hopes that the specialist Beelzebub will join, to 




help consolidate the organization. Beelzebub accepts the invitation. 




One of his motives is that he has already decided “to set up in one or 




another of their great inhabited spots a ‘something’ of the kind they call 




there a ‘chemical laboratory ”—^with Gurdjieff, “chemistry” always meant 




his special brand of alchemistry—“in which I intended, by means previously decided beforehand to proceed with special experiments on several deeply concealed aspects of their ever the same strange psyche.” This is 




very  much  what  he  said  in  plainer  language  in   

Herald  of Coming Good. 

 




Making allowances for the fact that Gurdjieff may here be fusing two or 




more visits to the Russian capital to provide background for Beelzebub’s 




caustic remarks about the folly of Russians and of humanity in general, his 




story  is  not  unbelievable.  Beelzebub  travels  to  St.  Petersburg  with  the 




elderly Russian but finds himself left much to his own devices. He decides 




to use his free time to try to secure a permit for his projected “laboratory,” 




but  becomes  lost  in  the  impenetrable  jungle  of  Russian  bureaucracy. 




Eventually, Beelzebub balks at undergoing an examination by a doctor— 




which would, of course, reveal his tail. This is a stock metaphor in Gurdjieff 




for a tricky situation in which he would be forced to reveal his real purposes 




unwillingly.  Beelzebub  accordingly  abandons  his  “foolish  bustlings 




around.” 




During his  stay in St.  Petersburg  he has also been giving his elderly 




acquaintance various suggestions on running the foundation. At first these 




are accepted and put into practice, but when the news leaks that Beelzebub 




is the source of such proposals—^“some foreign doctor or other, not even a 




European”—a serious dispute arises. Without a laboratory of his own, and 




unable to use the foundation for his experiments “on the psyche of the 




terrestrial beings  

en masse,” 

 Beelzebub decides to go elsewhere. However, 




news of his work on alcoholism reaches the Tsar, and Beelzebub is first 




subjected to a long ceremonial presentation which leaves him quite blank as 




to what the Tsar even looked like. 




Gurdjieff had probably been presented to the Tsar as a member of the




8 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




DordjiefiF  Mission  of  1901,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  idea  of  a 




foundation to combat alc»holism had Imperial approval. Pavlov’s colleague, 




V. M. Bekhterev (1857-1927) had long been interested in using hypnotic 




techniques for this very purpose, and in 1912-13 he pubhshed a number of 




pamphlets on the problems of alcoholism. According to Bennett, GurdjieflF 




later told his pupils that he had met Nicholas II several times and had been 




“in direct contact with Rasputin.” Neither of these claims is improbable, if 




he had had the patronage of Badmaieff; and their likelihood is reinforced by 




the fact that GurdjieflF had now decided to extend his activities into the 




world of the occult. 




In  

Herald of Coming Good

 he explains the reasoning behind this change 




of direction. He had convinced himself that the solution to the problems 




which interested him must be sought in the conditions of man’s waking 




consciousness  as  well as  in  the subconscious  mind. In  other words, he 




wanted to study the mechanisms which kept humanity in a state of sleep. 




The result was a decision to appoint himself a “professor-instructor” of the 




so-called occult sciences. 




Gurdjieff  had  without  doubt  become  familiar  with  most  aspects^— 




including  the  trickery—of  supposedly  supernatural  phenomena.  In 




 

Beelzebub’s  Tales

  he  refers  to  a  time  when  he  had  been  a  “professional 




Indian Fakir,” and in  

Meetings toith Remarkable Men, 

 the character “Ekim 




Bey,” whose life “was arranged down to the smallest detail like my own, ” 




stands partly as a personification of Gurdjieff as the “great maestro of the 




supernatural.” According to  

Herald of Coming Good, 

 Gurdjieff worked for 




over two years in his role as occultist—and again he was experimenting. 




During the “so-called ‘manipulations’ in the realm of the beyond” which he 




demonstrated  to  members  of  one  occult  society,  he  writes,  “I  began  to 




observe and study various manifestations in the waking state of the psyche 




of these trained and freely moving Guinea-Pigs, allotted to me by Destiny 




for my experiments. . . . ” 




He realized that Europe was suffering from an epidemic of occultism. As 




he  put  it:  “At  that  time  there  was  among  men  a  widely  prevalent  and 




specific psychosis which, as has been long established, attains periodically a 




high degree and is manifested by people giving themselves up to various 




‘woeful’ ideas in those spheres of quasi-human knowledge . . . which today 




are called ‘occultism,’ ‘theosophism,’ ‘spiritualism,’ etc.” Gurdjieff had read 




widely  in  the  literature  of  such  cults,  and  he  knew  the  language  of 




contemporary occultism like the back of his hand. When he discovered that 




his ideas were particularly attractive to “such people as were already in the 




highest degree ‘possessed’ of the before-mentioned ‘specific-psychosis,’” he 




altered his tactics accordingly. 




When Gurdjieff returned to Russia, the occult fever had reached heights




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   8 3




unknown in the West. Popular churchmen, like Father John of Kronstadt, 




attracted the huge followings associated with Indian gurus. Saintly hermits 




like Ambrose of the Optina monastery played confessor to an endless chain 




of  pilgrims.  At  court  the  influence  of  Orthodox  holy  men  had  been 




replaced,  first  by  that  of  the  French  occultists  “Papus”  (Dr.  Gerard 




Encausse)  and  his  spiritual  master  “Monsieur  Philippe,”  then  by  the 




predominance of Rasputin. In polite society spiritualism and legend were 




interminable topics of conversation. The intelligentsia pounced eagerly on 




Theosophical and occult literature imported from the West, confounded it 




with  philosophy  and  a  dash  of  aesthetics,  and  created  an  intoxicating 




potpourri  of  intellectual  superstitions.  The  hysterical  atmosphere  was 




intensified by anxiety generated by social discontent. On the outbreak of 




the  1917  Revolution,  the   

skoptsy, 

  a  bizarre  cult  of  self-castrators,  are 




thought to have numbered one hundred thousand. There is little more 




teUing evidence of the way the wind blew. 




GurdjiefiF appeared as a man of mystery in an atmosphere of mystery. 




Although he inevitably came into contact with occultists of many descriptions, he remained invisible. His origins, his ideas, and his motives were hidden in the deepest doubt. 




In   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  Gurdjieff  describes  how  he  at  first  contented 




himself  with  establishing  an  ascendency  over  several  existing  occult 




societies.  However,  he  explains,  he  was  unable  to  find  a  large  enough 




selection  of  human  types  for  his  psychological  observations,  and  so 




established  occult  groups of  his own “in  three different  cities.” Still  he 




fiuled to attract a sufficiently broad cross section of humanity. He therefore 




realized all his assets with a view to founding an oi^anization of his own, 




and  moved  to  Russia.  In   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  he  dates  his  arrival  in 




1911, and in various prospectuses issued to advertise his Institute for the 




Harmonious Development of Man, states that his first Russian headquarters 




was  Tashkent.  In  the  strange  document  known  as   

Glimpses  of  Truth, 

 




written at his instigation in the winter of 1914, Gurdjieff is said to have 




come to Russia “two or three years ago” and at first to have lived in St. 




Petersburg  (in  an  alternative  unpublished  translation,  the  time  span  is 




extended to three or four years). 




The  approximate date of his move was therefore 1910-11, and this is 




suggestive,  both  because  it  coincides  with  Dordjieff’s  plan  for  a  St. 




Petersburg temple, and because these years were a time of great crisis in 




the affiurs of Tibet. 




In 1910 the Chinese invaded the country and the Dalai Lama fled to the 




protection of the British in India. This choice of protection was forced on 




him—^he was cut off from Russian territory by the invading army—^but it




8 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




was still a defeat for the pro-Russian party. In India he issued a statement 




declaring that Dordjieff was “a purely spiritual advisor.” When a Russian 




professor who had been on the committee of the St. Petersburg Buddhist 




temple  approached  the  Dalai  Lama  with  a  letter  of  introduction  from 




DordjieflF, his request for help in reaching Tibet was refused on the grounds 




of his obligation to the British. In June 1912, Dordjieff himself apphed to 




the British agent in Tibet for permission to travel to Russia through India, 




and when this was denied, had to make his way circumspectly through 




Mongolia. This journey was probably to announce the formal secession of 




Tibet from China which DordjiefiF reported next year to St. Petersburg and 




Paris.*




It is difficult not to Hnk GurdjiefiF’s abrupt transition to Muscovy with the 




Tibetan policy of Dordjieff and Badmaieff. His withdrawal to Tashkent— 




from Chinese territory to Russian Turkestan—coincides with the invasion of 




Tibet. In  

Glimpses of Truth

 his initial stay in St. Petersburg is said to have 




lasted from 1910-11 to 1914, during which period he devoted “his efforts 




and his knowledge to some work of his own.” This “work of his own” may 




have been connected less with Gurdjieff’s unfathomable “work on himself’ 




than with Tibetan diplomacy. It is possibly significant that according to 




 

Glimpses of Truth, 

 GurdjieflF moved to Moscow in 1914, by which time 




events in Western Europe had begun to outweigh in diplomatic importance 




those in Central Asia. 




One  account,  which  seems  to  describe  Gurdjieff—on  a  mysterious 




errand, accompanied by a “slant-eyed” friend—in St. Petersburg during the 




winter and early spring of 1913-14, is contained in the autobiography of Sir 




Paul  Dukes  (1^9-1967).  Dukes  received  his  knighthood  for  intelligence 




work in Russia after the Revolution, and later became a regular dining 




companion of Ouspensky; Before the outbreak of the First World War, 




Dukes was a music student at the St. Petersburg Conservatoire, where the 




pianist Anna Essipova introduced him to the works of H. P. Blavatsky. He 




continued  his  education  in  occult  matters  through  Spiritualist  stances 




organized  by  Sidney  Gibbes,  the  English  tutor  to  the  Imperial  family. 




Then,  through  his  occult  contacts,  he  met  a  professional hypnotist  and 




healer known as “Lev Levovitch” or “the Lion,” a man who was said to have 




served many years in the army in Central Asia, and to have once been




♦Some time  in  1913  Joseph Deniker  had  to organize  an  interview with Philippe Berthelot at 




the Quai d’Orsay. For this DordjletF insisted on wearing European clothes. The only garments 




which  could  be  found  in  time  included  a  tweed  sport  jacket,  violently  patterned  in  red  and 




brown  checks.  M.  Georges  Deniker  was  astounded  to  see  his  friend  wearing  this  eye-catching 




creation  on  the  railway  platform  at  Verknie-Udinsk  in  the  first  week  of  August  1914.  They 




traveled together as &r as St. Petersburg, where the train arrived on August 15—thus locating 




Dordjieff fairly accurately at the outbreak of war. 




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   8 5




pronounced medically dead. He was supposed to have been brought back 




to life by a Siberian shaman who sent him into the world with a healing 




mission.  Through  Lev  Levovitch,  Dukes  met  the  man  who  he  called 




“Prince Ozay.” The resemblance between Gurdjieff and Ozay is marked, 




and that between the picture of Gurdjieff given by  

Glimpses of Truth

 and 




Dukes’s own account of his meeting even more so. 




Paul Dukes spent the summer of 1913 on an estate in Tula, where he 




decided  to  practice  hypnotism  on  the  villagers.  On  his  return  to  St. 




Petersburg, he got in touch with Lev Levovitch, with whom he discussed 




his experiments. Levovitch approved and took him to see the man he called 




Prince Ozay in a house at the bottom of a small street “not far from the 




Nicolas  station.”  The  manner  of  their  arrival  was  unusual.  They  first 




entered  “a  very  plain  apartment”  but  passed  through  this  to  another 




adjoining apartment, which was “larger and more sumptuous. There was a 




marked Oriental touch in its decorations. The walls of the hall were adorned 




with  carpets,  wrought-iron  lamps  wdth  coloured  glass  hung  from  the 




ceiling. . . . The room, fairly large, was draped with curtains and other 




hangings,  with  lamps  to  match.”  The  “Oriental”  room  matches  the 




description given by Ouspensky of Gurdjieff’s room in Moscow; it also 




matches the description of the dacha near Moscow given by the authors of 




 

Glimpses  of  Truth. 

  The  lamps,  when  compared  with  the  glittering 




decorations made by Gurdjieff for his flat in Paris, are suggestive. And the 




circumspect  entrance  through  a  virtually  empty  apartment  hints  at  a 




possible connection with the melodramatic trappings of the Great Game. 




Ozay’s appearance is similar to that of Gurdjieff as he is described in 




 

Glimpses of Truth. 

 In both cases, the stranger discovers a man sitting cross- 




legged on a low divan with coffee beside him on a table. The Gurdjieff of 




 

Glimpses of Truth

 is alone and smoking a nargileh, while the Ozay of Paul 




Dukes is playing chess with a man with slanting eyes. Ozay is “wearing a 




patterned silk dressing-gown and a turban” and is “dark, thickset, with a 




short,  bushy  black  beard.”  Later  Dukes sees  that he  is “about  medium 




height, sturdily built.” Gurdjieff wore a beard for some time in the 1930s. 




Dukes’s first encounter with Ozay has the tone of Gurdjieff’s jocularity. 




He is invited to sit down and play chess vnth his host. 




“Take off your shoes if you would be more comfortable,” said my host. 




I did so, and was ashamed to find I had a hole in my sock. I tried to 




hide it when I doubled my feet under me, but to my embarrassment he 




pointed  at  it,  smiled,  and  said:  “You  believe  in  ventilation!  Good 




thing—nothing like fresh air! . . . Black or white?” and he held out his 




closed hands with two pawns in them. When I had picked white I 




noticed that the other hand had held a white pawn too. 




8 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




There are other aspects of Ozay which remind the reader of Gurdjieff. He 




drinks his own powerful brew, and on “a kind of guitar” plays Dukes’s 




“plaintive oriental tunes, sometimes humming, sometimes singing softly in 




a rich baritone. ” Dukes used to visit him at night—always accompanied by 




Lev Levovitch—and stay until three in the morning. Ozay had a stock of 




ribald  stories  and  could  rarely  be  induced  to  tell  Dukes  anything  in  a 




straightforward manner—he was “provokingly evasive.” His visitor had to 




probe and endure before Ozay could be induced to answer his questions. 




The two topics on which Dukes records Ozay’s pronouncements were 




closely linked. The first concerned the nature of prayer and the meaning of 




the  Christian  Scriptures.  For  Ozay  prayer—^with  which  he  coupled 




fasting—^was a physiological exercise. Dukes had made use of the English 




Lord’s Prayer as a “magical” charm to impress the simple Russian peasants. 




“Very int-er-esting,” remarked Ozay, and demonstrated how the English 




Lord’s  Prayer  had  been  designed  as  a  breathing  exercise  to  be  said 




uninterruptedly  on  a  single  bass  note.  You had  to pay  attention to  the 




regulation of the breath, to the words of the prayer, and to the sound, to 




derive the full benefit from the exercise. The function of prayer was to 




attune “the body—or the soul, if you prefer that metaphor.’’ “You are a 




musical instrument, as a piano is,” said Ozay, “and you need to be kept in 




tune. That’s where fasting and other exercises come in; you can’t possibly 




reflect finer vibrations when your body—or soul if you prefer—is loaded 




with a lot of food gurgling in the stomach, or while the blood makes a din 




chasing about veins and arteries.” To Dukes this opened up new horizons, 




new visions of  

meaning

 to be found in the Christian Scriptures. The Bible 




became a book of personal instruction, to be decoded, “beginning first of all 




vdth the training of the physical body to become a fit temple of the spirit.” 




Fasting and breath control were part of this “esoteric Christianity”—Dukes 




uses the same phrase as Gurdjieff—as was compulsory celibacy at certain 




stages of the training. “But,” Ozay warned, “the fanatic who becomes a 




permanent  celibate  is  like  a  musician  who  spends  his  life  doing  one 




exercise.” 




God, is achieved not through activity but through cessation of activity. 




Cessation to the utmost limit of diet, breath aad sex. These are the 




three  pillars  on  which  prayer  is  built.  Each  has  to  be  trained  and 




disciplined by restraint—there is no other way because they are all 




runaway horses. Only when the ground is cleated can true building 




commence. Only from that point can you begin to act consciously. 




During  the  chaos  of  the  Revolution,  Paul  Dukes  lost  touch  with  the 




mysterious Prince Ozay and never saw him again. Was he Gurdjie£F? It




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   8 7




seems difficult to believe that there were two such teachers in the same 




area at the same time. Ozay spoke English better than he spoke Russian, 




which in his mouth was markedly accented. To his slant-eyed friend, the 




Prince spoke a language Dukes could not identify. He claimed to have been 




“in many churches in England and America.” Dukes “had reason to think 




that my strange host was, nominally at least, a Moslem or a Parsee,” but he 




acquired very little definite information. Ozay was “very learned and much 




travelled” and Dukes knew nothing of his formal profession, although he “at 




one time suspected” that the Prince was “visiting the Russian capital on 




some religious errand.” If we choose to regard Gurdjieff as resident in St. 




Petersburg at Easter 1913, this is confirmed by  

Glimpses of Truth. 

 It is also 




significant that Ozay was associated with the professional hypnotist and 




healer Lev Levovitch, whose argument about charging high fees for his 




cures by suggestion was exactly that used by GurdjiefiF to justify a high 




admission  charge  to  his  groups.  People  do  not  value  something,  he 




explained, unless they are made to pay for it. 




It is tempting to construct a chain of events linking BadmaiefiT, Paul 




Dukes, Lev Levovitch, Gurdjieff, and any other practitioners of unorthodox 




medicine in St. Petersburg. GurdjiefiF probably did move in the occult 




society  of  the  capital,  and  through  Badmaieff  he  may  well  have  met 




Rasputin and the Tsar. But it is doubtful whether he had anything to do 




with  the  complex  web  of  plot  and  counterplot  which  surrounded  the 




Russian throne. Such intrigues were not foreign to his nature, but the vision 




of Gurdjieff as a Rasputin  

manquS

—the description was already in use when 




Carl Bechofer Roberts met him in Tiflis in 1919—^belongs to the sort of 




mythologizing which delights in seeing him as the occult advisor to the 




Tsar,  the  Dalai  Lama,  and  Adolf  Hitler.  The  name-calling  might  have 




nothing more behind it than the mere fact of GurdjiefiF’s presence in St. 




Petersburg  during  the  Indian  summer  of  the  autocracy,  with  whose 




mystical interests he was associated. 




According to  

Glimpses of Truth

 GurdjiefiF moved to Moscow in 1914 and 




took a country house nearby where he could work undisturbed. The very 




existence of this house is said to have remained unknown to most of his 




associates. “Maintaining in his work a certain rhythm understood only by 




himself, he sometimes leaves it and comes to town, and again returns to his 




work after a certain time.” This house is the setting for the conversation 




recorded  in   

Glimpses  of  Truth, 

  a  document  which  in  its  printed  form  is 




some forty pages long. It purports to tell the story of its author’s meeting 




with GurdjiefiF; but according to Ouspensky, the idea of the story belonged 




to  GurdjiefiF  himself,  and  it  was  actually  vmtten  by  two  members  of 




GurdjiefiF’s Moscow group. Ouspensky remarks that the original version 




was “evidently written by a man with no literary experience.” He himself




8 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




edited and rewrote a copy which GurdjiefF gave him, and it seems probable 




that the pubHshed version of  

Glimpses of Truth

 is also the work of several 




hands. Ouspensky’s translation is dated “Moscow, December 1914.” On the 




last page are the words “end of first chapter,” but we should beware of 




assuming that it was actually intended to carry the story further. When 




Ouspensky first heard it read, he criticized it for lack of clarity—^he had 




found it interesting, but exactly what was this doctrine which the story 




expounded? He was immediately told by Gurdjieff ’s pupils that he had 




“missed the most important part of it. ” 




The story begins with the imaginary narrator’s search for wisdom, which 




he sees as having been guided by an external providence whose workings 




appear  coherent  only  to  himself.  The  narrator  discovers  occultism  and 




becomes immersed in it, until suddenly he loses his occult contacts. He 




embarks on a course of personal investigation, and makes friends among 




people with similar interests. Eventually, his particularly close companion 




in  this  search  seems  to  be  growing  away  from  him,  and  the  narrator 




becomes angry at his apparent lack of friendliness. A point of crisis comes 




when the seeker finds in the paper a notice of a ballet called, “The Struggle 




of the Magicians,” written by one G. I. Gurdjieff, “an orientalist well known 




in Moscow.” He determines to run Gurdjieff to ground, but his faithless 




fnend attempts to dissuade him. Eventually this friend. A., admits that he 




knows  Gurdjieff  and  departs  without  promising  anything,  leaving  the 




author of the story in a state of nervous expectation. 




Next day he is telephoned by A. and told curtly to be at a certain railway 




station at a certain time. He arrives early—A. arrives late, bearing two huge 




and  mysterious  trunks—and  they  entrain  for  the  country  house  which 




Gurdjieff has taken for the winter. On the way the narrator leams that A. 




had discussed bringing him to Gurdjieff earlier, but was told that it was not 




yet time. The pair drive by sledge to the large two-story house where the 




Master awaits them; and they have to carry the heavy trunks. The actual 




introduction  to  Gurdjieff  takes  place  in  circumstances  which  suggest 




Freemasonic ritual: the two visitors enter a room in complete darkness, and 




only when A. sweeps aside a heavy tapestry does the figure of Gurdjieff 




appear, smoking his nargileh, seated cross-legged on a divan in a brightly lit 




room.  Gurdjieff’s  “oriental  origin”  is  at  once  obvious,  and  his  eyes 




immediately impress the new arrival—^“not so much the eyes themselves 




as the look with which he met me. It was a look given to one whom one has 




known long and well.” The impact made by the man was intensified by that 




of the room in which he sat. 




“There was no area not covered, either by carpets or hangings of some 




sort,” writes the fictitious author. Carpets and tapestries cover the walls so 




as to obscure the windows and doors. The ceiling is hung with a mosaic of




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   8 9




colored shawls and from its center is suspended a brass lamp. A piano is 




piled with old embroidered silks so as to be scarcely recognizable; and the 




Dutch stove is similarly draped. A single carpet covers the floor and the 




seating is low and Oriental. Three collections of objects decorate the walls: 




one of strange musical instruments, another of Oriental weaponry, a third of 




carved  pipes.  In  one  corner  is  a  particularly  splendid  combination  of 




colored silks, in the middle of which hangs an icon of St. George; below the 




icon on a series of shelves stand several ivory stautettes. Those named are 




Christ, Buddha, Moses, and Mohammed. In this exotic setting a night-long 




conversation  takes  place  between  Gurdjieff  and  his  visitor,  with  A. 




occasionally acting as an intermediary. “He served,” says the narrator, “as a 




sort of transmitter between G. and myself. ” At the beginning of their talk, 




Gurdjieff speaks haltingly, in poor Russian, often turning to A. for the 




completion of a sentence or a thought. But as the conversation becomes 




increasingly rarefied, Gurdjieff is represented as relying on A. less and less. 




“His speech flowed more freely and naturally, the necessary words seemed 




to  come  of  themselves,  and  I  could  have  sworn  that  by  the  end  of  the 




conversation, he was speaking the clearest, unaccented Russian. . . . ” 




In this contrived description of an imaginary meeting, much of Gurdjieff  s  technique  is  already  obvious.  The  difficulties  created  by  A.,  the abruptness  of  the  appointment,  the  heavy  trunks—^which  may  have 




contained priceless antiques, scientific instruments or lumps of stone—^are 




all of a piece with Gurdjieff s later tactics. The deliberate theatricality of the 




room  in  which  the  guest  is  received  corresponds  to  that  of  Gurdjieff’s 




Moscow apartment, where the unusual decoration helped to create the 




“special atmosphere” described by Ouspensky. Gurdjieff used often to 




eiaploy a third party—sometimes as a straightforward interpreter—^in his 




teaching conversations. This device served to familiarize his listeners with 




his ideas, as well as being a valuable exercise for the intermediary and a 




means  of  gauging  the  pitch  of  his  discourse  by  watching  how  his 




“transmitting station” conveyed his meaning to an audience which he knew 




better than Gurdjieff himself. The gradual perfection of Gurdjieff ’s Russian 




could mean one of several things, but it was a phenomenon also noticed by 




pupils who spoke French or English. 




The conversation which forms the body of the chapter contains little 




which does not appear in a more expanded form in Ouspensky’s  

In Search

 




 

of the Miraculous. 

 Gurdjieff talks of the unity of all things descending into 




plurality; he describes the Law of Seven and the Law of Three on which his 




cosmology is based—^and which will shortly be outlined; he analyzes the 




Ray of Creation which Ouspensky describes. But the fragmentary character 




of the description bears out Ouspenky’s criticism: it is difficult to discover 




the real nature of the doctrine which the protagonists are discussing, and it




9 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




is certain that the story would not make sense if the reader were unfamiliar 




with the outline given in  

In Search of the Miraculous. 

 From the clamor of 




GurdjiefiF’s pupils it seems that this must have been dehberate.  

Glimpses of

 




 

Truth

 was written for a particular purpose: to give  

glimpses

 only of the 




majestic building whose outlines the conversation had allowed the narrator 




to grasp. This may have been in order to encourage a reader to find out 




more for himself, or simply to tantalize him. GurdjiefF asked Ouspensky 




whether the story could be published in a newspaper, and in the tale itself, 




the narrator asks if the ideas he has heard cannot be made more v/idely 




known. GurdjiefiF answers that the previous summer he and his friends 




decided to try to disseminate their ideas through the press, but that the 




outbreak of war prevented the attempt from being properly made. 




 

Glimpses of Truth, 

 with its rubric “end of first chapter,” may therefore 




have  been  an  abortive  attempt  to  gain  publicity  for  Gurdjieff’s  ideas. 




Alternatively, it may simply have been a sketch which was intended for a 




particular use at a particular time. For it is quite clear that GurdjiefF—ever 




experimenting, perhaps balked in his attempts to estabUsh his work under a 




“scientific” umbrella in St. Petersburg—^was fishing.  

Glimpses of Truth

 is 




bait, and with the realization of this fact, many of Gurdjieff ’s later activities 




tdce on a new aspect; as of brightly colored floats dotting the surface of a 




murky river. 




Gurdjieff was trailing his coat. If he were “Ozay,” he discussed music 




with the young musician, Paul Dukes. He talked of “the miraculous” to 




Ouspensl^.  With  others,  he  discussed  dancing—or  love.  Many  a  hard- 




headed “dollar-holder” heard from him the smirking remark of the greasy

Levantine: “I, too, am businessman.” Some of his later attacks on particular 




professions—doctors, writers, artists—can be pinned down to the feet that 




he was surrounded by such people, and in order to lead them into the maze 




of his ideas, he had first to engage their interest by showing where the 




particular questions in which they were interested impinged on the view of 




the world which he designed that they approach for themselves. Once well 




in and engaged in the cosmic machine, their props were knocked from 




under them. They must then leam to swim in good earnest. 




In  

Glimpses of Truth

 Gurdjieff emphasizes that occultism is not necessary 




as a jumping-off point. It was a warning he repeated later to his p*ipils in 




Europe. But faced by his imaginary visitor, embarked on an occult quest, 




he began their talk with the formula from the Emerald Tablet of Hermes: 




“As above, so below.” “At the same time I must say that there is no need to 




use occultism as the base from which to approach the understanding of 




truth,” Gurdjieff is made to say. “Truth speaks for itself in whatever form it 




is mwifested. . . . Well, I repeat, I begin vwth the occult formula because I 




am speaking to  

you” 

 During the discussion Gurdjieff applies his compli




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   9 1




cated cx)smic laws to the principles of modem science. The narrator asks 




him whether an uneducated man could understand his ideas. Gurdjieff 




replies that an uneducated shepherd might acquire, in the course of one 




day’s profound meditation, what it would take a scientist many years to 




discover. “The material you refer to was quoted only because I spoke to 




you. . . . Forms may be very different.” 




So they proved to be. Gurdjieff advises his questioner, when he asks 




about  the  occult  idea  of  initiation,  to  forget  it  altogether.  “All  your 




researches in this area were good exercises for your mind; therein lies their 




great value, but only there. ” 




 

Glimpses  of  Truth

  is  surprisingly  frank  about  Gurdjieff’s  reasons  for 




acting in what was often an incomprehensible way. It would have been 




open to any reader to put two and two together from the description of his 




remarkable room, with its “delicate scent that mingled agreeably with an 




aroma of tobacco, ” the riot of colored silk, and the hangings which so shut 




out the everyday world that the character A. can remark, when he opens 




the curtains on broad daylight, “As you can see, time does not exist here.” 




All the cards are on the table, but not face up. It is the task of the reader or 




the listener to discover their denominations. 




One critic thinks that  

Glimpses of Truth

 gives a “melodramatic picture of 




a  sort  of  stage  superman,”  and  there  is  undoubtedly  something  overproduced about the Gurdjieff whom the story presents. If he really does possess such fundamental knowledge, the reader is inclined to ask, why all 




the obvious stage management, why the cat and mouse tactics with the 




pathetically eager narrator? An important problem is raised by the rather 




dubious  first  impression  which  Gurdjieff  made  on  many  people  who 




afterward became his devoted disciples. 




In   

Herald  of  Coming  Good, 

  Gurdjieff  says  that  twenty-one  years 




earher—that is, in 1912—he took an oath to live for that period “in some 




ways  an  artificial  life,  modelled  upon  a  programme  which  had  been 




previously planned in accordance with certain definite principles.” The 




“artificial life” had to do with a renunciation of the skill he had developed as 




a hypnotist. In 1933 he spoke to the American author Jean Toomer of the 




oath he had taken. “I tell you something secret,” he said, “only for yourself 




Twenty-one years ago I vowed never to use hypnotism to effect my aims. 




Recent circumstances have made me struggle with myself to keep my vow 




... I do not want to break it.” The reasons he gives for embarking on this 




program  in   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  are,  first,  that  he  recognized  that  he 




was what would now be called a charismatic figure; and second, that he 




wanted his pupils, at all costs, to display their personal initiative, which 




might be stifled if he emj^oyed his full personal magnetism and strength of 




character.  J.  G.  Bennett  connects  this  decision  with  the  Sufi  doctrine  of




9 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“the path of Malamat” or “blame-taking,” in which the aspirant to spiritual 




development acts in such a way as to attract to himself calumny and the ill 




opinion of his fellowmen. There is evidence that Gurdjieff’s artificial life 




was indeed governed by some such plan; although the idea can clearly be 




used to excuse every slip he made. 




The vaguely fraudulent impression induced by  

Glimpses of Truth

 may 




therefore be one result of the tactics which Gurdjieff deliberately adopted 




in 1912. But to what end was such deviousness directed? Gurdjieff had 




been a seeker for esoteric knowledge, a student of the unconscious mind, a 




“physician-hypnotist,”  a  professional  occultist—intermittently,  a  secret 




agent and dealer in Orientalia—and apparently by 1912, at the start of his 




“teaching” proper, he was something else again. We may disbelieve in the 




story of his oath—it is always wise to be chary of accepting Gurdjieff’s every 




statement—but  at  first  sight  it  is  difficult  to  see  what,  if  anything,  he 




intended by his teaching. The narrator of  

Glimpses of Truth

 is given hints 




about the “Great Knowledge” which Gurdjieff possesses and is told that in a 




year’s time he will understand more than is at present possible for him to 




know. Meanwhile, although he has the sensation of having lifted the outer 




veil of the mysteries, he has no idea at all of what the inner tabernacles 




hold. 




What  was  the  aim  of  Gurdjieff’s  teaching?  asked  one  of  his  Russian 




pupils. Ouspensky recorded the answer:




“I certainly have an aim of my own, ” said G,, “but you must permit me 




to keep silent about it. At the present moment my aim cannot have any 




meaning for you, because it is important that you should define your 




own aim.  

The teaching by itself cannot pursue any definite aim . 

 It can 




only show the best way for men to attain whatever aims they may 




have.” 




The men and women who came to Gurdjieff in Russia were desperately 




uncertain, scared of the future, plagued by myths and expectations of the 




miraculous. That is, they were as men and women have always been in 




every  land  and  every  generation—^although  the  place  and  the  time 




generated particular problems. Gurdjieff entered a historical situation in 




which the normal hopes and fears of mankind were given an unnatural 




intensity,  and  his  teaching  was  therefore  experienced  by  his  Russian 




followers with particular vividness. When everything seemed lost, Gurdjieff appeared as the guide and mentor: the Man Who Knows. 




They beheld the Great Magician. 




Each pupil experienced Gurdjieff in a different way, and differing reasons 




brought people to him. He appears to have begun his first Moscow circle




T H E   P R O F E S S I O N A L   H Y P N O T I S T   9 3




through a series of personal contacts. One of his childhood friends was a 




cousin named Dmitri Merkouroff, who by 1914 was a successful sculptor in 




Moscow. Through MerkouroflF, GurdjiefF met Vladimir Pohl, a musician 




who was close to him during the pre-Revolutionary period. Pohl in his turn 




introduced him to P. D. Ouspensky. Ouspensky is the most significant 




figure after GurdjiefF in the history of the Work, and the meeting of the two 




men  proved  to  be  the  beginning  of  many  developments.  In  itself,  the 




occasion was just one more encounter between a man who was anxious to 




learn and another who had something to teach. But in a historical—even 




scriptural—^perspective, the event was momentous. 




Ouspensky recorded the progress of his relationship with GurdjiefF in his 




book  

In Search of the Miraculous, 

 and from the date of their meeting in the 




spring  of  1915,  Gurdjieff  appears  to  become  a  fact  of  history.  But, 




paradoxically,  it  is  just  when  the  uncertainties  seem  on  the  point  of 




resolution  that  all  becomes  most  uncertain.  The  invisible  man  gives 




hostages to fortune in every one of his roles, and it must be remembered 




that he  

is

 playing a role. Any of his actions—^from the amazingly benevolent 




to the unutterably obscene—may be “acting. ” The multicolored cloak of the 




Master, iridescent in the sun’s rays, takes on the whole procession of the 




spectrum, and vanishing through infrared becomes—invisible again. 




Life Against Life




 

“One  life  ends  and  another  begins.  One  time  ends  and  another  begins. 

 




 

Death is really a return to the beginning.” 




Pyotr Demianovitch Ouspensky was born in Moscow on March 5, 1878, 




Old Style. His father was an officer in the Survey Service, and a talented 




spare-time mathematician whose particular hobby was the fashionable topic 




of the fourth dimension. Although Demian Ouspensky died when his son 




was  quite  young  and  all  his  writings  were  lost,  he  passed  on  his 




mathematical enthusiasms. The manner in which Pyotr Ouspensky was to 




apply such ideas had little to do with academic mathematics; and a mistake 




made by the translators of his first book to appear in English has meant that 




he is still represented as a severe figure who escaped by accident from the 




established academies to found his own Stoa. Ouspensky was an artist 




rather than a scholar—^potentially a good one, as is shown by his novel, 




 

Strange Life of Ivan Osokin

—and he became instead a romantic philosopher. He was very much a child of his time and place. 




His parents had shared artistic interests; Ouspensky’s mother was herself 




a painter and an amateur of French and Russian literature. Ouspensky grew 




up  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  Russian  intelligentsia,  and  his  earliest 




memories were of his mother’s parents’ house, which was a center of artistic 




society.  His  maternal  grandfather  was  an  artist  who  had  turned  from 




specializing in portraiture to painting for churches, a branch of art which in




9 4




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   9 5




Holy  Russia  had  a  peculiar  importance  and  its  own  mystique.  His 




grandfather died in 1882, and his grandmother became the chief influence 




on the young Ouspensky. She was clearly a remarkable and intelligent 




woman: Ouspensky would later recall the pleasure she had given him and 




his  younger  sister  with  her  stories  of  old  Moscow  days.  Her  house  on 




Pimenovskaya Street was frequented by all sorts and classes of people. 




Ouspensky remarks that it was “in many ways a very old-fashioned house, 




and in other ways very much ahead of its time”; it may not be reading too 




much into this to see the house as connected with the movement in Russian 




art which was resurrecting traditional styles and folk motifs so as to make 




them the essence of the contemporary. The art of the icon played a leading 




part in this revival, and as a church painter Ouspensky’s grandfather may 




have been associated with the fashion. 




Ouspensky’s brief accounts of his early life are vivid and evocative. When 




his A  

New Model of the Universe

 was published in 1931, reviewers were 




quick  to  note  the  excellence  of  the  passages  which  described  his  own 




adventures. But because of the nature of his work, Ouspensky must always 




seem to suffer at the hands of a biographer; for much of what he wrote or 




said on any topic was based on a rigorous analysis of his own failings. To 




criticize Ouspensky is often merely to echo his own self-criticism and to 




honor a sometimes enviable degree of self-knowledge. 




There is a particular difficulty in treating the stray personal references in 




his writings as evidence of a documentary sort. Ouspensky revised his early 




publications several times, and the screen of his later psychological ideas— 




whether  those  he  learned  from  Gurdjieff  or  those  of  his  own  later 




development—interposes  between  the  recorded  experience  and  the 




teiKier. For example, his account of dreaming was begun in 1905, revised 




several times in accordance vdth his changing ideas and published in 1931 




as an adjunct to a body of thought to which Ouspensky then referred as a 




“system.”  In  some  cases  it  is  possible  to  trace  the  development  of  his 




thinking, but in others the dividing line between reportage and hindsight is 




not so clearly marked. Although this need not affect an assessment of his 




ideas, it limits the scope of a biographer. 




At about the age of five, Ouspensky learned to read. A year or so later he 




discovered Lermontov’s  

A Hero of Our Time

 and Turgenev’s  

Notes from a

 




 

Sportsmans  Album. 

  In  a  household  of  Russian  “intelHgents”  there  was 




nothing  odd  in  such  books  being  available  to  a  six-year-old,  and 




Ouspensky’s precociousness in taking to the classics at such an early age was 




the  beginning  of  a  largely  self-conducted  education.  The  “enormous 




impression” produced by these two books was a lasting influence on the 




boy.  A   

Hero  of  Our  Time, 

  veith  its  protagonist  the  very  type  of  the 




disillusioned romantic, its exotic Caucasian background, and its occasional




9 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




hints of the numinous, had made the book a cult among youth. Turgenev’s 




gentle  tales  of  country  life  directed  the  attention  of  the  literary  world 




toward the realities of peasant existence. Both books would have formed 




part of the required reading of the generation to which Ouspensky’s parents 




belonged;  and  they  stood  in  the  naturalistic  tradition  which  was  then 




fashionable. Ouspensky was to make a name for himself on the crest of the 




Symbolist wave which overwhelmed such standards; but, as his only novel 




shows, he never lost the gifts of precise observation and a romantic attitude 




to nature which characterized his early masters in literature. Soon after his 




literary explorations had begun, he discovered poetry and painting, started 




to draw, and developed a lasting enthusiasm for engravings and old prints 




like those which hung on the walls of the house at Pimenovskaya Street. 




Two  peculiar  features  about  Ouspensky’s  earlier  years  were  directly 




connected with his later interests. The first was his extraordinarily vivid 




memory of childhood. He later maintained that he could remember several 




incidents which had happened before he was two years old. “From the age 




of  three,  ”  he  wrote,  “I  remember  myself  quite  clearly.”  Among  such 




memories  was  Moscow  of  the  early  1880s,  and  an  old  town  called 




Zvenigorod,  thirty  miles  west  of  Moscow  on  the  Moscow  River.  “I 




remember  the  river  there,  boats  with  a  smell  of  tar,  hills  covered  with 




forests,  the  old  monastery,  etc.  I  remember  the  exhibition  of  1882  in 




Moscow, and the coronation of Alexander III, chiefly the illuminations. ” 




The  unusual  clarity  of  his  early  memories  later  became  connected  in 




Ouspensky’s  mind  with  the  frequent  sense  of   

(Ujd  vu

  which  he  had 




experienced as a child. “With me,” he wrote, “these sensations . . . began 




when I was about six years old. After eleven they became much rarer. One 




of them, extraordinary for its vividness and persistence, occurred when I 




was  nineteen.  The  same  sensations,  but  without  a  clearly  pronounced 




feehng of repetition, began still earlier, from very early childhood, and 




were particularly vivid during the years when the sensations of repetition 




appeared, that is, from six to eleven; and they also came later from time to 




time in various conditions.” 




During childhood Ouspensky shared these experiences with his younger 




sister, to whom he was very close. Later he described to his pupils how 




they used to sit at their nursery window and make accurate predictions of 




events which took place in the street below. The children concealed their 




ability from the grown-up members of the family, because—^as Ouspensky’s 




sister contemptuously remarked—“They don’t understand anything. ” 




The sensation of “I have been here before ” was to prove the greatest 




single impulse in Ouspensky’s life, and it is one of the pervading themes of 




the novel.  

Strange Life of Ivan Osokin, 

 which he drafted in 1905. The novel 




deals  vwth  the  schooldays  and   

Wanderjahre

  of  Ivan  Osokin,  and  the




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   9 7




impression that it is strictly “autobiographical” should be qualified.  

Ivan

 




 

Osokin

 was written to illustrate the theme of eternal recurrence, and the 




incidents are shaded according to the author’s didactic purpose. Ouspensky 




later said that he was “never such a fool as Osokin” and that many of the 




events of the novel were borrowed from the lives of his acquaintances. 




Despite these qualifications and despite the fact that the English edition of 




 

Ivan Osokin

 was considerably rewritten before publication, there is much 




of purely biographical value in the novel. Ouspensky admitted that the 




heroine, Zinaida, was a real person, and, like Ivan Osokin, Ouspensky was 




expelled from school. This last fact dominated his early life. 




The Second Moscow Gymnasium at which Ouspensky (and his alter ego 




Osokin) studied was a school arranged on the standard Russian government 




pattern based on the classical curriculum. Ouspensky loathed the school 




routine, and  

Ivan Osokin

 is redolent of the atmosphere of petty regulations, 




boredom and ink-stained squalor which the boarders at the Gymnasium had 




to endure. He hated Latin and Greek and found the work as irksome as the 




discipline. In the novel the only classes in which Osokin avoids disgrace are 




the French lessons, because his French is already far beyond the abilities of 




his contemporaries. He finds solace in a series of “fantastic dreams which, 




in the past, were responsible for many unprepared lessons and for many 




bad marks. The dreams are called ‘Travels in Oceanis.’ They are his best 




method of running away from reality.” These daydreams take Osokin on 




adventurous Pacific voyages inspired by Captain Marryat, and they are 




evidently based on Ouspensky s own boyhood dreams of travel and the sea. 




Ouspensky’s main purpose in his account of Osokin’s daydreams was to 




show the delusory effects of the imagination. But his description of the 




“Travels in Oceanis” demonstrates another aspect of his fantasy-life which 




he noticed in his studies of dreaming some years later. “There was in me an 




artist, sometimes very naive, sometimes very subtle, who worked at these 




dreams and created them out of the material which I possessed but could 




never use in full measure while awake.” 




But he was “never such a fool as Osokin,” and as the pupils were left very 




much to themselves, he continued surreptitiously to educate himself along 




his  own  lines.  At  the  age  of  twelve,  he  became  interested  in  scientific 




subjects:  first  it  was  natural  history  and  biology,  then  physics.  In  the 




Introduction to  

A New Model of the Universe, 

 he evokes the memory of a 




preparation class in 1890 or 1891. Instead of the prescribed Latin grammar 




he  is  reading  a  physics  textbook,  overwhelmed  with  wonder  at  the 




magnificence of the idea of levers—the phenomena which the principle 




explains, and the very class of lever strike him as a revelation of the unity of 




things. He falls foul of the German proctor, who confiscates his book. “I 




hear round me ironical whispers and comments that Ouspensky reads




9 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




physics. But I don’t care. I shall have the ‘Physics’ again tomorrow; and the 




tall German is all made up of large and small levers!” 




Private studies did not compensate for public disgrace. His character, 




Ivan Osokin retreats from reality and—^almost deliberately, Ouspensky 




hints—^breaks a succession of rules. The authorities are more and more 




annoyed at his conduct, and eventually, a harmless practical joke during the 




visit of an inspector of schools results in Osokin’s expulsion. Like Osokin’s, 




Ouspensky’s career in formal education ended about the age of fourteen or 




fifteen. Osokin’s greatest emotion in the novel is remorse for the pain vs^hich 




his expulsion has inflicted on his mother. He immediately promises to work 




hard under a tutor in order to pass into university even more quickly than 




he would have done from school, and the university is the great goal which 




Osokin promises himself. Ouspensky never obtained a university degree, 




and it is possible to see in some of his work—in the length of his pubhshed 




books, in the ambitious nature of his ideas, and in the later structure of his 




own activities 

—a

 pressure for some compensating achievement. 




An important consequence of Ouspensky’s expulsion from the Gymnasium found its way into his later teaching. This was his insistence on the necessity of submitting to the discipline of a school. The word “school,” 




shorn of its article in the Russian manner, is still part of the jargon of his 




followers, and Ouspensky’s search for an “esoteric school” became one of 




his  greatest  drives.  The  discipline  which  he  imposed  on  his  pupils  he 




learned from Gurdjieff, but the insistence on  

rules

 was his own. “A man is 




unable   

to  keep  watch

  on  the   

whole  of  himself, 

  that  is,  on  all  his  different 




sides,” Gurdjieff told him. “Only school can do this, school methods, school 




disciphne—a man is much too lazy, he will do a great deal without the 




proper intensity, or be will do nothing at all while thinking that he is doing 




something; he will work with intensity on something that does not need 




intensity and will let those moments pass by when intensity is imperative. 




Then he spares himself; he is afraid of doing anything unpleasant. He will 




never  attain  the  necessary  intensity  by  himself.  If  you  have  observed 




yourselves in a proper way you will agree with this.” Gurdjieff certainly 




meant the statement to be taken generally, but the emphasis given to the 




idea by Ouspensky was entirely personal. 




Another  result  of  his  expulsion  from  school  was  that  Ouspensky’s 




education continued along its eclectic and self-willed course. From this fact 




came aspects of his character both attractive and forbidding. His occasional 




arrogance and dictatorial manner—^although no doubt sometimes assumed—are very much part of the self-educated philosopher. On the other hand, from his lack of orthodox schooling came a breadth of interests and a 




wide  culture  which  belong  to  the  polymath  and  not  to  the  academic 




specialist. Ouspensky enrolled as a “free listener” at Moscow University, a




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   9 9




status  which  allowed  him  to  attend  what  lectures  he  pleased  without 




working for a formal degree. He may also have studied with a tutor for a 




time after leaving school; but it is impossible to distinguish any set course of 




instruction. In 1894, at the age of sixteen, he discovered Nietzsche. Two 




years  later  he  started  to  write.  He  studied  biology,  mathematics  and 




psychology  “very  intensely.”  In  mathematics  he  became  “enormously 




excited” by theories of the fourth dimension, and in psychology his chief 




interest was a topic which had intrigued him from the age of thirteen—the 




study of dreams. 




In all these avenues of inquiry, Ouspensky’s attitude was that of the 




rebel.  “I  was  very  anarchistically  inclined  at  that  time,”  he  wrote.  “I 




particularly distrusted all forms of academic science and took a firm decision 




never to pass any examinations and never to take any degrees.” This has the 




savor of sour grapes, and it is a common attitude to find among adepts of the 




occult arts. But it is also the sort of attitude which can lead a man to see 




beneath appearances—always assuming that there is something to see. At 




the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  scientific  materialism  had  begun  to 




appear as constricting a series of dogmas as the religions it had displaced. 




The epidemic of occultism arose as a form of overreaction to this fact. A less 




hysterical attitude was displayed by many farsighted men; for indeed if 




science had remained crudely mechanistic, had failed to develop concepts 




like  relativity  and  the  uncertainty  principle,  there  were,  by  definition, 




limits to the expansion of knowledge. Ouspensky was dissatisfied with the 




stagnant state of affairs. “I felt that there was a dead wall everywhere, even 




in mathematics, and I used to say at that time that professors were killing 




science  in  the  same  way  as  priests  were  killing  religion.”  He  saw  his 




titeasured idea of the fourth dimension trampled beneath scientific feet. 




Instead of the liberating possibilities he sensed in the concept, it was turned 




into an academic game. At the same time, he did not yet dare to abandon 




the materialist standpoint and remained for the time being an orthodox 




rationalist. 




In  1896  Ouspensky  undertook  what  he  calls  “my  first  independent 




travels.” He had already visited Paris with his family for the Exposition of 




1888, and his newfound independence probably related to his mother’s 




death. Between 1896 and 1905 there is little known with certainty about his 




movements. The early part of this period was taken up vwth studies and 




traveling. He later told Rom Landau that he attended lectures at various 




Russian and European universities, but it is impossible to find out which. 




He knew Paris well, and his fluent French would have made it easy for him 




to form—like a character in  

Ivan Osokin

—^part of Georges Sorel’s audience 




at the Sorbonne. He also explored the wilder parts of Russia, visiting the 




remotie monasteries of the far north, and once described to Maurice Nicoll




1 0 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




how he had managed to repay the Circassian villages through which he 




traveled for their ruinously generous hospitality. The technique was to 




admire a small object of no value, whereupon the host would be bound 




under his code of honor to give it to you. The guest then insisted that his 




host accept a gift in exchange; and Ouspensky carried a number of cheap 




revolvers with which to reimburse his benefactors. 




About 1900, soon after he was twenty-one, Ouspensky’s long-standing 




interest in dreams led him to make a series of observations. He had already 




devoured most of the psychological literature on the subject, so he began by 




attempting to write down his dreams on waking. “I said to myself that if I 




could   

know  in  sleep  that  I  was  asleep

  I  should  find  the  possibility  of 




continuing the dreams, or of going behind them and perhaps finding their 




cause.” He very soon found that his attempts to record dreams produced 




distortion  and  alteration  of  the  dream  experience  itself  This  led  to  the 




discovery of a method of observing dreams in what Ouspensky called a 




“half-dream state,” which was brought about by deliberate effort either just 




before  falling  asleep  or  after  awakening.  His  observations  convinced 




Ouspensky that in the majority of cases—^what he called “simple dreams”— 




a  dream  was  the  product  of  associations—either  physical  associations 




resulting from the position of the dreamer’s body, or psychical associations 




resulting from unconscious preoccupations. 




He found occasional examples of dreams which seemed to have almost 




boundless significance for the dreamer; but the most interesting conclusion 




he reached—and which was to be of great importance in preparing him for 




the ideas of Gurdjieff—was the conviction that dreams continue in waking 




life.  Therefore,  he  could  afterward  say,  there  was  little  justification  for 




making a sharp difference between being asleep and being awake. To the 




state of sleep was added what was called “the waking state” but which 




should really be known as “sleep plus waking state.” 




How long this scholar-gypsy life lasted is uncertain. Ouspensky was 




attracted by journalism and by 1905 it had become his profession. His job 




gave him the chance to travel to Europe and the Ea^t Coast of the Uriited 




States,  journeys  which  may  have  taken  place  at  any  time  up  to  1912. 




America  provides  the  setting  for  an  unsuccessful  story  called  “The 




Inventor,”  which  tells  the  reader  little  about  its  author  apart  from  his 




distaste for the cruder forms of capitalism. 




During the pohtical troubles which culminated in the revolution of 1905, 




Ouspensky wrote the original version of  

Ivan Osokin, 

 entitled  

The Wheel of

 




 

Fortune, 

  which  was  published  ten  years  later  under  the  title   

Kinema-

 




 

drama. 

 Only general ideas can be gleaned from the novel about what he 




had been doing, but  

Ivan Osokin

 does provide flesh to cover the bare bones 




of ten years of studies and journalism. It reveals the man Ouspensky—the




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 0 1




charming, romantic, convivial artist—who became hidden by the teacher’s 




severity  and  the  facade  of  serious  intellectuahsm  built  up  by  his  inner 




compulsions. 




The charming Tanechka idyll and the military episode in  

Ivan Osokin

 have 




little  to  associate  them  with  what  we  know  of  Ouspensky  from  other 




sources, but like all Osokin’s disasters, these involve a woman. Susceptibility is part of his Achilles heel—as Gurdjieff would have said, his  

Chief

 

Feature

—but it is an attractive susceptibility stemming from an incorrigibly 




romantic attitude to life. He feels the experience of his night with Tanechka 




as magic, as a poetic truth naturally apprehended. It has nothing to do with 




the physical explanation of the act of love. By the time Ouspensky came to 




write  

Tertium Organum

 (1912), his early lyricism had abated not at all. If 




anything,  it  had  increased,  and  the  chapter  on  “Occultism  and  Love” 




occupies a key place in that book. 




Ouspensky  had  great  trouble  with  this  chapter,  and  the  concern  he 




showed  for  it  demonstrates  the  importance  he  attached  to  the  subject. 




Between  the  first  Russian  edition  of  1912  and  the  second  of  1916,  the 




section was considerably revised and expanded; and it was the only chapter 




to be significantly altered in the second English edition of 1922. Even in his 




final version, Ouspensky retained the same poetic association between love 




and the world of nature as he had implied in the Tanechka passages of  

Ivan

 




 

Osokin. 

 “In the springtime with the first awakening of love’s emotions the 




birds begin  

to sing

 and  

build nests,” 

 he writes. Perhaps, he suggests, bird 




song is not just the means of attracting a mate—as scientists would have us 




believe—but  “the  principal  function  ”  of  a species, necessary  for some 




unrecognized natural harmony. In the 1916 version of  

Tertium Organum, 

 




revised with no reference to Gurdjieff’s ideas, Ouspensky declares explicitly that the hidden purposes of love provide the key to the mysteries: It is difficult to understand all this and to make it seem rational. But by 




seeking to understand these mysterious purposes and by departing 




from mundane interpretations, man, without even being conscious of it 




at first unites himself with  

the higher purposes

 and finds that thread 




which in the end of all ends will lead him out of the labyrinth of earthly 




contradictions. 




The Ouspensky of 1905 found his consolations in the mysteries of love. 




He had not completely broken from the materiahsm of the age when he 




completed the first draft of  

Ivan Osokin, 

 but the romantic vision of love had 




evidently  come  to  replace  his  schoolboy  fantasy  life  as  the  “magical” 




element in his world. The chivalrous attitude to women which this evoked




1 0 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




persisted till  the end of Ouspensky’s life, and became part of his basic 




outlook. Ivan Osokin sees women as “more interesting” than men. The later 




Ouspensky was to see them as belonging to a higher caste altogether, and 




the courtesy which he showed his women followers is at one with this 




attitude. In the days when the word “normal” meant  

superhuman

 in the 




language of his groups, love remained an example of glorious normality; and 




when two of his pupils announced their engagement, he wrote to them of 




his pleasure at hearing of something really normal in a perverted age. 




Connected with the hints of something  

more

 which the young Ouspensky 




found in sex were the promptings of other things felt by the artist in him. 




Toward the end of  

Ivan Osokin, 

 the hero and Zinaida discuss literature. 




Osokin writes poems, about which he is very sensitive. He prefers those of 




one hne only, for then the reader must experience the rest of the poem in 




himself Zinaida’s friends cannot understand this, and are scathing about 




Osokin’s “impressions from beyond.” Between such conventional attitudes 




and those of Osokin’s creator, there was an ever-widening gulf; for the 




notion of the complete autonomy of the poem itself and the idea of poetry 




coming from “beyond” betray the influence of Symbolist theories to which 




Ouspensky was exposed at the time he wrote  

Ivan Osokin. 




The various occult and religious groups which sprang up in turn of the 




century  Russia  were  closely  linked  with  the  Symbolist  movement  in 




literature. Just as mystics and magicians traveled from Paris to hawk their 




wares in the incense-filled gloom of Slavic piety, artistic fashions were 




imported from the cultural capital of the world. Paris of the 1880s and 1890s 




had reacted against naturalism in art and materialism in philosophy; and the 




occult  doctrines  of  the  magi  directly  influenced  artistic  practice.  In 




particular, the idea of the symbol as a link between the dimly apprehended 




magical universe  and the  world of  everyday found a place in the new 




antinaturalist literature. The Russian intelligentsia eagerly adopted such 




concepts. Their flight into mysticism was encouraged by an exclusion from 




their natural part in the social agitation which culminated in the revolution 




of 1905—during which Ouspensky wrote his novel—and it forms part of a 




luxuriant crop of near-mystical literature, much of which simply obeyed the 




fashionable forms, but some of which indicated a real religious striving. 




The high priest of the Russian intelhgentsia was Vladimir Ser^eivitch 




Soloviev  (1853-1900)  who  contrived  to  fuse  Symbolist  occultism  with 




Russian piety and make the resulting mixture intellectually palatable. He 




predicted the coming of the “God-man ”—man perfected by his own efforts 




toward divinity. After his death there was a mushroom growth of societies 




with names like “The Circle of Seekers of Christian Enlightenment” and 




“The Religious-Philosophic Society in Memory of Vladimir Soloviev.” It 




became difficult to distinguish the poets from philosophers, and philoso




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 0 3




phers from priests. The most famous literary names include: Andrei Bely, 




Konstantin Balmont, Valery Bryusov, Vyacheslav Ivanov, and Alexander 




Blok.  Halfway  between  the  writers  and  the  occultists  proper  came 




unconventional philosophers like Dmitri Merezhkovsky, Nicholas Berdyaev, and V. V. Rozanov. They represent a tradition of thought which is almost completely forgotten in the West, and a closer acquaintance with 




their work makes Ouspensky’s ideas a little less extraordinary than they 




seemed when he first became known outside Russia. 




The idea of eternal recurrence on which the book is based is taken chiefly 




from Nietzsche; and all over Europe at the turn of the century Nietzsche 




had become inextricably entangled with the occult and Symbolist literature, 




[ndeed,  the  Russian  Decadence  began  with  Nietzsche,  when  in  1890 




Nikolai Minsky published a Zarathustra-like thesis on the liberty of the 




individual. But it was characteristic of Ouspensky’s approach to intellectual 




fashions that, whereas other intellectuals hailed Nietzsche as a liberator 




firom the prison of bourgeois morality, he was fascinated by the theory of 




eternal  recurrence,  which  even  some  ardent  Nietzscheans  preferred  to 




regard as an aberration. The thought that time repeats itself in identical 




cycles  is  to  be  found  in  antiquity.  Nietzsche  probably  took  it  from 




Pythagoras and Heraclitus, and Ouspensky himself unearthed it in the 




Alexandrian Fathers. Ouspensky’s description of its implications is found in 




A  

New Model of the Universe. 




This means that if a man was born in 1877 and died in 1912, then, 




having died, he finds himself again in 1877 and must live the same life 




all over again. In dying, in completing the circle of life, he enters the 




same life from the other end. He is born again in the same town, in the 




same street, of the same parents, in the same year and on the same 




day. He will have the same brothers and sisters, the same uncles and 




aunts,  the  same  toys,  the same  kittens, the  same friends, the same 




women. He will make the same mistakes, laugh and cry in the same 




way, rejoice and suffer in the same way. And when the time comes he 




will die in exactly the same way as he did before, and again at the 




moment of his death it will be as though all the clocks were put back to 




7.35 A.M. on the 2nd September 1877, and from this moment started 




again with their usual movement. 




To Nietzsche the problem posed by recurrence was simple. He accepted 




it in his capacity as Superman. “Who can  

desire

 the recurrence of life? ” he 




asked,  and  answered:  “The  great,  strong,  happy  man,  whose  life  is  so 




valuable in his estimatiap that a repetition and continually a repetition will 




be a pleasant thought to him. To everyone else, to everything miserable, 




1 0 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




misbegotten, which only looks upon its own life wift dissatisfaction and 




repugnance, the thought must be frightful. ” 




Ouspensky’s  use  of  the  idea  was  anything  but  a  slavish  copying  of 




Nietzsche. Later he was to transform the Nietzschean idea of the Superman 




in a similar fashion. For Nietzsche, “the great, strong, happy man” with the 




successful will to power might reconcile himself to eternity repeating and 




repeating in endless cycles, “the worm Ourobouros who eateth his own 




tail.” But Ivan Osokin lives his life again in an atmosphere of regret for 




missed opportunities. His final crushing disappointment in the love aflFair 




with Zinaida ends with him contemplating suicide. His life lived over again 




has the same results: and the more hopeful ending of the later English 




version did not form part of  

The Wheel of Fortune

. Ouspensky later used to 




tell his pupils that Robert Louis Stevenson had taught him as much as 




Nietzsche about recurrence, and Stevenson’s view of the coils of time is 




pessimistic. The haunting “Song of the Morrow”—published posthumously 




in  Stevenson’s   

Fables

  of  1896—is  a  recurring  theme  in   

Ivan  Osokin. 

  It 




would have been natural reading for a young romantic—^and Stevenson’s 




tale of the King of Duntrine’s daughter, who had “hair like the spun gold 




and . . . eyes like pools in a river,” ends with the princess as an ancient 




crone warning her younger self that she has “no thought for the morrow and 




no power upon the hour, after the manner of simple men.” Writing, as he 




did, at a time of civil and personal chaos, Ouspensky’s life seemed not at all 




worth repeating, and eternal recurrence can only have presented itself as an 




assurance of eternal damnation. 




For in 1905 he was evidently in a very depressed state. His affair with the 




original of Zinaida had ended unhappily, and if his financial circumstances 




were anything like Osokin’s, he was very pressed for money. Poverty and 




refusal to take a secure job are two of the reasons which Osokin gives for the 




collapse of his affair. “I’m a stranger and an outsider,” he complains, “and 




it’s the same everywhere. ” In the middle of great political upheavals, which 




ended in armed revolution in Moscow and led the Tsar at last to grant a 




constitution,  Ouspensky’s  disillusionment  with  politics  was  complete. 




 

Strange  Life  of  Ivan  Osokin

  is  full  of  denunciations  of  the  futility  of  the 




“comrades,”  whose  cabals  confront  Osokin  in  Switzerland,  Paris,  and 




Moscow. He does not believe in revolution, although he shares the “almost 




obligatory” antigovernment attitude of the intelligentsia. He sees other 




possibilities “if only those in official positions would not be so childishly 




selfish  and  stupid.”  Ouspensky  later  described  his  dilemma   

in  propria

 




 

persona:

 “I mistrusted and disliked all kinds of socialism even more than 




industrialism or militarism. . . . But when I became interested in journalism I could work only on ‘left’ papers because ‘right’ papers did not smell good. It was one of the complexities of Russian life.” 







1 0 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




The 1905 revolution led to a personal tragedy. His beloved younger sister 




had  joined  an  extreme  left-wing  organization  and  was  imprisoned  for 




revolutionary activities in the Boutirsky prison in Moscow, where in 1908, 




she died. 




Disillusioned with orthodox science, with politics, both established and 




revolutionary, recovering from an unhappy love affair, Ouspensky may have 




had little to sustain him; but the innate romantic is not easily cast down. His 




real search began in the autumn of 1907; and before following him on this 




new chapter of his existence, we must try to see more of the man behind 




the questing spirit. 




Physically, the young man of 1905 was a more fragile version of his later 




short and thickset self A heavy jaw emphasized the dogmatic or domineering side of his nature, a facet which was to alienate several people who met him. A severe mouth, largish nose, and receding hair made up the rest of a 




not extraordinary face which, apart from the high Slav cheekbones, might 




have been Teutonic. The most noticeable aspect of his appearance was the 




pince-nez which his very short sight invariably demanded, and in later 




years he usually carried about with him a whole armory of glasses and 




binoculars.  Thie  fascination  with  precision  instruments—in  the  case  of 




optical glasses, of necessity—extended to weapons. The story of his carrying 




cheap revolvers with him through the Caucasus may show that the interest 




in guns which he demonstrated in England took root early, and in India he 




carried both camera and revolver. 




Ouspensky  s  romanticism  expressed  itself  in  a  love  of  nature.  His 




description of Ivan Osokin’s ride in the country is the detailed observation 




of a keen horseman, and Ouspensky in the saddle was a common sight in 




later life. But cats were his chief love, and he noticed them wherever he 




went. In  

Tertium Organum

 he made several points about the difference in 




consciousness between man and animals which were based on his observation of cats. In his letters from the Caucasus in the midst of revolution, he had time to observe a dead cat. The ending of  

Ivan Osokin

 refers to two 




obscurely significant cats. Ouspensky brought a cat with him to England or 




acquired one very soon after his arrival, and toward the end of his life, he 




could scarcely be separated from his pets, which came to his meetings. He 




said that they had astral bodies, and might benefitSirom instruction. On his 




last strange journeys his cats accompanied him. 




J. G. Bennett records a tradition that in the Ouspensky family the names 




Peter and Damian had passed alternately from father to son. The Damians 




were supposed to be world-rejecting ascetics and the Peters to enter with 




zest into the joys of life. Ouspensky thought that both Peter and Damian 




had influenced his character. The conflict between the ascetic side of his 




nature and the part which made him a heavy drinker and a connoisseur of




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 0 7




food was a battle he never resolved. A powerful ascetic drive lay behind his 




spiritual quest and his intellectual rejection of the material world; but it was 




the bon viveur who told Maurice Nicoll that he thought he had been born 




with  the  noise  of  a  tavern  in  his  blood.  For  all  his  feelings  of  “not 




belonging,” the young Ouspensky most certainly tried to enjoy himself. 




Several scenes in  

Ivan Osokin

 are set at parties, and when Carl Bechhofer 




Roberts ran across Ouspensky in the wreck of the White Armies in 1919, he 




made  a  record  of  an  evening  they  spent  together  during  which  his 




companion reminisced about his early Moscow days. The circumstances 




were something out of the ordinary—all those concerned were probably 




tired and very hungry, and had been celebrating their acquisition of coal 




with  “vodka”  made  from  raw  spirit.  Ouspensky  remembered  another 




occasion on which the miraculous effects of improvised spirits had been 




noticeable. 




“It was when I was a young man in Moscow,” he was saying, “and my 




cousin once gave a party. We brewed the vodka together. It was a 




marvellous brew. There was one man there, the sort of type one sees 




only  in  Russia;  a  young  man  with  long  hair,  a  long  beard,  long 




moustaches, and a sad, far-away look in his eyes. Well, after he had one 




glass of our vodka, he got straight up from his chair and walked out of 




the house and into the nearest hairdressers. There he made them run 




the chppers over his head, and shave him, and he came out as bare of 




hair as an egg, and went straight home to bed. That shows you what 




good vodka can do!” 




The conversation changed tack, by way of a story of Ouspensky’s and the 




intervention of another member of the party. Then Ouspensky returned to 




his theme of the gay life of Moscow:




“Don’t interrupt me,” said Ouspensky. “I was remarking that every 




policeman in Moscow in the old days knew me by my Christian name, 




because,  unlike  most  people,  when  I  was  drunk,  I  always  tried  to 




compose quarrels and not to start them. Besides, I used to give them 




big tips. And all the porters at the restaurants used to know me, and 




when there was a row on, they used to telephone me to come round 




and stop it. One night I remember I got home with the left sleeve of 




my  overcoat  missing.  How  I  lost  it,  and  where,  I  have  never 




discovered, although I have given the matter very careful thought. 




Indeed, I once thought of writing a book about it.” 




This subject would have suited his quirkish turn of mind, and the literary 




world in which he moved might have received it well. The combination of




1 0 8   T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I B C L E




roistering and spiritual search was a pattern familiar in Symbolist Russia, 




and indeed, the conflict between the Peter and the Damian was a typically 




Russian  struggle.  Like  many  romantics,  Ouspensky  retained  an  inner 




Puritanism as part of his romantic attitude. This showed itself in a refusal to 




be taken in by the cheap and shoddy, and developed into an inability to 




compromise. It was a temperament not uncommon among the Russian 




intellectuals. The mystical bent of the intelligentsia has already been noted, 




but there was another consequence of their alienation which is relevant to 




Ouspensky.  Harold  Williams,  who  was  for  a  long  period   

The  Times’s

 




correspondent in Russia and married an “intelligent,” put his finger on the 




spot:  “The  life  of  the  intelligents  was  simple,  but  not  ascetic.  Many 




members drank to excess, and there were some who drank themselves to 




death in search of a refuge from the terrible depression that hung constantly 




over the  Russian  educated  man,  and  made  the  life  of the  intelligentsia 




essentially a sad one.” 




Ouspensky  s  personal  situation  increased  the  sense  of  hopelessness 




induced  by  his  milieu.  His  friend  Boris  MouravieiF  once  summed  up 




Ouspensky’s state of inner weakness. “Charming—although subject to fits 




of temper, kind, very skilful in argument, he was not a strong man ... Full 




of ideas, tender-hearted, a talented writer, he was not protected internally 




by the valuable armouring of the scientific method. Everything in him was 




unanchored, and so open to outside influences. And he was very isolated in 




life,  which  did  not  spare  him  disappointments.”  Criticism  of  his  own 




vulnerability  is  a  strong  theme  in   

Imn  Osokin, 

  and  it  agrees  with 




GurdjiefF’s estimate of Ouspensky’s character: “Very nice man to drink 




vodka with, but weak man. ” 




But this weakness accounts for the nature of much of his work, and in his 




work it becomes a source of strength. Ouspensky was more of an original 




thinker than most of Gurdjieff’s followers, but he always needed material 




on which to operate, whether it was eternal recurrence, the Superman, 




occultism, or the fourth dimension. All these ideas received twists at his 




hands  which  made  them  seem  completely  original,  but  they  did  not 




proceed from him in the first place. They were “outside influences” like 




those to which MouraviefF refers, and Ouspensky ’s treatment of his material 




always had more the flavor of art than of philosophy. His most striking ideas 




are flashes of inspiration, which he emphasizes by italics in his text; his 




completed structures have the autonomy of works of art rather than the 




balance of reasoned argument. In this lies both hi» value and the secret of 




his success. As the subjective artist, he responded to preoccupations or 




waves of feeling which were in the air and drew out of the ideas he used 




implications which their originators did not know they possessed. 




The Ouspensky of 1905 was the typical outsider figure of his time and




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 0 9




place. At the beginning of this novel, Osokin bewails his lack of prospects 




and his social isolation, and toward the end of  

Ivan Osokin, 

 Zinaida and her 




lover discuss the responsibilities of women. Osokin argues the Ouspenskian 




theory that woman must be extremely fastidious in her choice of a mate, 




because she bears the responsibility for natural selection. “Woman,” he 




says, “does not demand enough from man/or  

his own sake.” 

 Can she not 




“demand a great deal for herself?” asks Zinaida. “That is quite another 




question,” says Osokin. “That is  

life. 

 I was never interested in this. ” 




What Ouspensky means by  

life

 is explained in a much later work,  

A New

 




 

Model of the  Universe. 

 For this  gray existence—“deeply-rooted  petrified 




routine life”—^he uses the Russian word  

byt. Byt

 refers to life in external 




forms, or to firmly established circumstances. Ouspensky tells us that one 




may speak of “peasants’  

byt, 

 merchants’  

byt, 

 country landowners’  

byt”; 

 also 




of a  

“byt

 actor” in a play. For people of  

byt

 “there can be in their lives 




nothing unexpected, nothing accidental, no adventures.” Such monotony 




seemed unbearable to the young Ouspensky. The horror of a featureless 




existence would have been redoubled in the mind of a man who had just 




discovered eternal recurrence by the prospect of that life repeating . . . and 




repeating and repeating. . . .  

The trap was closing in. 




He  continued  to  feel  that  sexual  experience  held  the  key  to  a  better 




world, and preserved a dogged faith in a life other than this  

life

 which 




appalled him and from which he was separated by such a distance. He was 




confronted with the irritating fatalism of the people of  

byt, 

 “in some cases 




passing into a kind of ironical contempt for people who are restless, seeking 




for something, striving after something. ” So Ouspensky rejected  

life

 and set 




out to discover a larger and fuller life. Vague hints of a magical universe 




 

beyond

 resolved themselves into a specific quest. An undirected striving 




became a search for the miraculous. 




In the autumn of 1907, Ouspensky discovered the Theosophists and their 




literature. Life in the newspaper office where he worked began to resemble 




his days at the Second Moscow Gymnasium. 




The editorial office of the Moscow daily paper  

The Morning. 

 I have just 




received the foreign papers, and I have to vinrite an article on the 




forthcoming  Hague  Conference.  French,  German,  English,  Italian 




papers. ... I have to make a survey of all these words and opinions, 




pretending to take them seriously, and then, just as seriously to write 




something  on  my  own  account.  But  what  can  I  say?  It  is  all  so 




tedious. . . . 




Pushing aside the papers I open a drawer in my desk. The whole 




desk is crammed vdth books vdth strange titles.  

The Occult World, Life




1 1 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




 

After  Death,  Atlantis  and  Lemuria,  Dogme  et  Rituel  de  la  Haute

 




 

Magie,  Le  Temple  de  Satan,  The  Sincere  Narrations  of  a  Pilgrim

  and 




the  like.  These  books  and  I  have  been  inseparable  for  a  whole 




month. . . . 




I open one of the books at random, feeling that my article will not be 




written today. Well, it can go to the devil! Humanity will lose nothing 




if there is one article the less on the Hague Conference. 




His clandestine library consisted of recognized ocult classics: works by 




A. P. Sinnett (the journalist who first published H. P. Blavatsky), Rudolph 




Steiner (originally a member of the Theosophical Society), Eliphas Levi (the 




French  reviver  of  magic),  Stanislas  de  Gauita  (the  doyen  of  the  Paris 




Rosicrucians),  as  well  as  a  Spiritualist  text,  and  the  inevitable  work  of 




Orthodox  piety. The autumn of 1907 was a time of great Theosophical 




activity in Russia. Although the Society itself was still officially banned, two 




regular groups with their own publishing house had been founded in 1905, 




and in November 1908, Theosophy at last became tolerated officially. At the 




same time, the revolution of 1905 had sent numbers of the intelligentsia 




scuttling  across the  frontier to Paris  where,  in  the following year, they 




attended  lectures  by  the  rapidly  rising  star,  Rudolph  Steiner.  Steiner’s 




mistress, Marie von Sivers, was a Baltic Russian and through her Steiner’s 




influence  was  transmitted  to  the  Russian  intelligentsia.  A  number  of 




conversions  resulted,  among  them,  the  poet  Andrei  Bely.  Ouspensky’s 




Theosophical contacts came about as the intelligentsia swung even more 




directly to occultism in the aftermath of the abortive revolution. 




Suddenly the shades of the prison house lightened. Ouspensky began to 




see more clearly that there was a way out of the trap, a way, what was more, 




that asserted the real value of the poetic and mysterious world of which he 




had only preserved the hope. In a rush, he abandoned the materialist view 




of life. “For so long I have held myself in,” he wrote, “have denied myself 




all dreams about things that could not be held within these bounds.” 




 

Meaning

 poured itself out upon him from so many unnoticed portions of 




the universe. Fairy tales and superstitions began to disclose their proper 




significance. The natural world became animate to his perception. The 




traditions of Russian Orthodoxy again acquired the aspect of comprehensible truth. “And the greatest mystery and the greatest miracle was that the thought became possible that death may not exist. . .” It is clear from  

Ivan

 




 

Osokin

 that Ouspensky was deeply affected by the* death of his mother, and 




who knows of what other friends he may not have been thinking? There 




might  be  a  life  beyond,  within,  or  through  the  life  of   

byt

—^it  was  the 




impulse toward this realization which made his occult books important to




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 1 1




him and not the “very naive” speculations which they advanced. He must at 




some time have investigated various spiritualistic and occult groups in 




Moscow and St. Petersburg and rejected what he found; for his writings are 




littered  with  denunciations  of  the  “subjective”  nature  of  spiritualistic 




phenomena. Later he claimed that he had “at once” seen that the weak side 




of Theosophical literature was that “it had no continuation.” Presumably 




this means that it had taken on dogmatic form, and could therefore not 




continue to provide the life-giving impulse which it had originally delivered. 




Although at first he did swallow some of the more fantastic flights of 




fancy, Ouspensky sucked out the yolk from his Theosophical reading. He 




learned that there was a way to study religion as a body of knowledge which 




 

meant

 something.  Like Gurdjieff,  he discovered the idea of the esoteric 




Tradition of secret wisdom. This all pointed onward to the life beyond life of 




which Ouspensky had intimations. He decided that if consciousness could 




be proved to exist apart from the body, this would open the way to proving 




many other things. In default of such a demonstration, he returned to his 




early studies of the fourth dimension. If—he suddenly saw—the fourth 




dimension was considered from a psychological point of view rather than 




from the standpoint of mathematics, it could provide a justification for the 




universe beyond the material universe, a door into the life beyond life. 




Before,  he  had  shied  away  from  the  idea;  now  he  plunged  into  fresh 




researches which linked the fourth dimension with esotericism. 




He  resolved  to  write  a  book  which  would  tell  the  world  of  the 




connections he had discovered, but this was hardly begun when he gave up 




in despair. “I cannot make myself write about the hmitless possibilities of 




Ifflowledge when for myself I already see the limit. The old methods are no 




good; some other methods are necessary.” The question had become: “how 




to go beyond?” The answer lay in the going—a journey into the self, and a 




search for present-day custodians of the esoteric Tradition in lands where 




the occultists thought they might be found. 




In 1908 he made an expedition through the Middle East with a friend 




called Sherbakov. In Constantinople he visited the Mevlevi dervishes in 




Pera and was mystified by their whiriing. What was the secret of the dance, 




and what was the nature of the intense mental effort which seemed to 




accompany it? He visited other dervish  

tekkes, 

 including that of the Rifa’i or 




“howling” dervishes in Scutari, and passed on through Smyrna and Greece 




to Egypt. He sat before the Sphinx and experienced his ovm transitoriness 




in  the  face  of  its  impassive  endurance  of  the  centuries.  “I  felt  that  it 




represented ‘Humanity,’ or the ‘human race’ or ‘Man’ in general—^that 




being with the body of a nightingale and the face of a superman.” By the




1 1 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Sphinx and the dervishes he was intrigued but not enlightened, and he 




returned to Russia feehng that there were secrets which had eluded all but 




the probing edges of his consciousness. 




Some time during this trip in the winter of 1908, he had an intimation of 




the expanded consciousness which his later experiments were to induce. It 




happened on a steamer in the sea of Marmora; 




A wave would run at the ship, raised as if desiring to hurl its crest upon 




it, rushing up with a howl. The steamer heeled, shuddered, and slowly 




straightened back; then from afar a new wave came running. I watched 




this  play  of  the  waves  with  the  ship,  and  felt  them  draw  me  to 




themselves. It was not that desire to jump dovra which one feels in 




mountains  but  something  infinitely  more  subtle.  The  waves  were 




drawing my soul to themselves. And suddenly I felt it went to them. It 




lasted an instant, perhaps less than an instant, but I entered into the 




waves and with them rushed wnith a howl at the ship. And in that 




instant   

I  became  all. 

  The  waves—they  were  myself:  the  far  violet 




mountains, the wind, the clouds hurrying from the north, the great 




steamship, heeling and rushing irresistibly forward—all were myself. . . . 




It was an instant of unusual freedom, joy and expansion. A second— 




and the spell of charm disappeared. 




In  early  1909  Ouspensky  left  Moscow  for  St.  Petersburg.  He  was  now 




reading intensively in occult and mystical literature, and by 1911, when he 




began to write  

The Symbolism of the Tarot

 and  

Tertium Organum, 

 he had a 




thorough knowledge of Theosophy and the French magical revival. He had 




investigated seventeenth-century mysticism in the shape of Jacob Boehme 




and his pupil Gichtel, had delved into the mysteries of Neo-Platonism and 




Alexandrian  Christianity,  and  rediscovered  the  mystical  traditions  of 




Russian  Orthodoxy  and  the  monks  of  Athos.  This  reading  must  have 




influenced the results of the experiments which he carried out in 1910 and 




1911, but Ouspensky himself found nothing for which he was prepared in 




the beyond he was so earnestly seeking. Instead, he was “carried far beyond 




the limits of the known and possible.” His experiments consisted of an 




attempt to alter the state of normal consciousness by means of yogic and 




magical methods. He does not say so explicitly, but it is obvious from the 




nature of his experiences and from his interest in n'Eircotics that a chief agent 




was some sort of drug. This was almost certainly hashish, although he may 




also have used nitrous oxide. 




Ouspensky’s mystical experiments remain extremely valuable for anyone 




interested in the borderlands of psychology. It is possible to disagree with




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 1 3




the  classification  he  made  at  the  outset  and  still  discover  suggestive 




material.  He  divided  the  phenomena  in  which  he  was  interested  into 




“objective magic,” “subjective magic,” and “mysticism.” By objective magic 




he meant the class of directly magical phenomena which science broadly 




speaking denied: the ability to influence things or people at a distance, 




through time, or beyond the grave; and the “mental phenomena” of the 




psychic  researcher:  clairvoyance,  telepathy  and  the whole  apparatus of 




Theosophical seership which included seeing the aura and thought forms. 




Subjective magic comprised the matter of self-hypnosis, hallucinations, and 




dreams taken as reality. Mysticism, he thought, was always subjective, and 




associated  with  the  intensified  emotional  states  provoked  by  reUgious 




practices.  The  main  object  which  he  set  himself  was  to  see  whether 




objective  magic  had  any  real  existence  apart  from  the  phenomena  of 




subjective magic or mysticism. 




He achieved results much more quickly than he expected. But in his first 




contact with the  

unknown, 

 he encountered an unexpected difficulty. The 




unknown 

—was

 unknown. No familiar categories could be applied to it, no 




everyday language could describe it. In the beyond, all phenomena were 




linked with other phenomena, every aspect of the unfamiliar explained and 




was explained by some other facet of the great whole. The experimenter 




began to see why accounts of mystical experience had seemed to him so flat 




and contrived; the beyond was no place for words, and if words were used 




to try to convey something of the experience, they would be in the jargon to 




which the writer was accustomed; Theosophist, philosopher, or man of 




religion, each would use the language of his inheritance. In this observation, as in his accounts of alterations in the time sense and the difficulty in communicating with others, Ouspensky’s reports tally with those of much 




later investigators. He was years ahead of his time, and the clarity of mind 




which he subsequently brought to bear on his experiences might profitably 




have been taken as an example by later experimenters. 




The first result of his experiments was to give Ouspensky a sense of the 




duality of himself: he found he was able to observe his own reactions. 




Under favorable circumstances, this state heralded his entrance into a world 




“entirely new and entirely unknown to me, which had nothing in common 




with the world in which we live.” This universe might be described as “a 




world of mathematical relations” in which there was no division between 




subject and object, observer, and observed. 




Passage to this ultimate apprehension was not immediate or assured. 




Ouspensky distinguished between several states of drug-induced consciousness. There was a transitional state, of which he became very wary, especially after the voices which spoke to him during this stage started to 




haunt his ordinary life. He found he could ask the voices questions like




1 1 4   T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




those  asked  of  spirit  mediums  at  seances,  and  occasionally  discovered 




clairvoyant effects. Often his experiments stopped here; but sometimes he 




passed to a “second threshold” which led to the universe of mathematical 




relations. This contained the answer to all questions and was in a perpetual 




state of flux. In this world, concepts could only be expressed by hieroglyphs,  what  Jacob  Boehme  had  called  “the  signatures  of  things,”  and Ouspensky came to regard it as the source of all real phenomena. A great 




part was played beyond the second threshold by the activity of the number




3,  which appeared as the creative agitation of the universe. The universe 




itself was “like some great trefoil.” No merely verbal expression, wrote 




Ouspensky (once more exasperated at the deficiencies of language), could 




give any accurate idea of what he saw. 




Another result of his experiments was to wean him from Theosophical 




literature. Later he decided that at the time he had probably been more 




under Theosophical influence than he imagined. He was astonished to find 




that the astral world described by occultists did not exist at all. Neither 




could he induce any effects of “objective magic.” The states which his drugs 




created were beyond his control, and thought was a poor instrument with 




which  to  grasp  the  profound  realities  he  sensed  beyond  the  second 




threshold.  Deep  insights  recorded  in  another  state  of  consciousness 




vanished in the ambiguities of memoranda like “Think in other categories” 




which merely tantalized his normal self One new concept did emerge from 




the period of experiment: the vision of Linga Sharira, the Long Body of 




man. Ouspensky came upon this insight while thinking of a relative who 




had died. Suddenly he saw that human life must be considered as a whole, 




and that a human being  

was

 his life extended in time: that it was a wrong 




definition  of  man  which  saw  him  as  a  creature  bounded  by  the  three 




dimensions which confined his physical body. To describe the phenomenon 




“man,” the whole extent of his life must be taken into account, which meant 




adding a fourth dimension . . . of Time. 




He was illuminated. His everyday experience was partial and mistaken; 




he  had  been  failing  to   

make  the  right  connections. 

  Walking  down  the 




Nevsky Prospekt, he was suddenly transfixed by “an ordinary cab-horse.” 




“Looking at the horse’s face I understood all that could be known about a 




horse. All the traits of horse nature, all of which a horse is capable, all that it 




can do, all that it cannot do, all this was expressed in the lines and features 




of the horse’s face.” Next, a dog revealed itself to him in the same manner. 




Animals began to seem fragments of larger beings—the “great horse,” the 




“great  dog”—and  in  amazement,  Ouspensky  applied  his  revelation  to 




humanity: “I understood then that we also are atoms of a great being, the 




great man.’” 




However, barriers still raised themselves before him. His vague belief in




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 1 5




a life better than that of ordinary men had led him to occultism; now he 




passed through occultism to a direct apprehension of the world beyond. He 




had  experienced  things  for  himself.  But  although  he  now  knew  of  the 




existence of what he was coming to call “the miraculous”—“the  

real

 world 




that lies behind the wavering mirage of the visible world”—^he lacked exact 




conclusions. How was he to hnk the world of human affairs with that other 




level which created and subsumed it? 




During the period 1909-12, he continued his journalistic work, probably 




as a freelance. He gave public lectures on occult and mystical subjects, and 




successfully published the results of his investigations. He was evidently 




much  in  contact  with  the  mystically  inclined  intelligentsia.  From  1909 




began his intimacy with A. L. Volinsky, and it is possible that one of the 




reasons for Ouspensky’s leaving the more orthodox atmosphere of Moscow 




for the exotic air of St. Petersburg was that in the capital, the new occultism 




associated with the Symbolists was more accessible. In  

Tertium Organum

 




he mentions meeting M. V. Lodizhensky, the editor of an anthology called 




 

Superconsciousness

 of which Ouspensky made much use. Lodizhensky had 




visited  Leo  Tolstoy  at  Yasnaya  Polyana  and  discovered  coincidences 




between  Tolstoy’s  thought  and  the  religious  experience  of  Orthodox 




mystics. Ouspensky tried to interest Tolstoy in his own experiments and 




may have made use of this connection. Another investigator of unorthodox 




religion whom he met was V. A. Daniloff, whose influence may have led 




him to include some doubtful passages about the perception of animals in 




 

Tertium  Organum. 

  And  about  the  same  time  he  exchanged  the  more 




conventional atmosphere of “holy Moscow” for what Madame Blavatsky 




liked  to  call  “mystic  Petersburg.”  Soon  he  was  a  member  of  the  St. 




Petersburg Theosophical Society and had begun to move in the literary and 




artistic circles which made their headquarters in the famous St. Petersburg 




cabaret, The Stray Dog. 




The Stray Dog had become an institution in St. Petersburg’s Bohemia. It 




was the scene of impassioned dialogue, impromptu poetry readings, and 




what would now be called “happenings” of all sorts. Here Andrei Bely, 




Alexander Blok, or Anna Akhmatova might be heard reading their poems, 




and  here  the   

femmes  fatales

  of  the  Progressive  world  held  court   

among

 




their admirers. Here after the theaters had closed, the actors, singers, and 




musicians would join the literati. Here, as Ouspensky fondly remembered, 




"nothing  wrong  could  happen,”  and  he  looked  back  on  his  period  of 




sociability, carousing, and impassioned exchange of ideas as a golden age. 




The  Stray  D(^  was  his  university,  where  he  talked  all  night,  drank 




champagne,  and  met  some of  the writers  who had  already made  their 




names. Among these were Valery Bryussov and A. L. Volynsky, the latter 




of  whom  had  a  claim  to  be  considered  the  founder  of  the  Symbolist




1 1 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




movement in Russia. After 1909 Ouspensky became a regular partner in 




discussions with Volynsky (“whose opinions,” he writes, “I valued very 




much”) and his decisive turn toward mysticism undoubtedly took place 




under the influence of the occult fashions so much in vogue among the 




coteries who inhabited The Stray Dog. 




His new contacts may have provided the stimulus to a period of intense 




literary activity. Apart from some unpubhshed writings of dreams and his 




early work on the Fourth Dimension, all the more solid writings which 




Ouspensky afterward republished in  

A New Model of the Universe

 were 




begun during the years 1911 and 1912. These include  

The Symbolism of the

 




 

Tarot,  Superman,  What  is  Yoga? 

  and  a  work  called   

The  Inner  Circle, 

  the 




ideas  of  which  are  incorporated  in  the  chapters  of   

A  New  Model  of  the

 




 

Universe

 called “Esotericism and Modern Thought” and “Christianity and 




the  New  Testament.”  This  burst  of  activity  strove  to  communicate 




Ouspensky’s breakthrough into the world of the beyond. All the accumulated reading of a life spent in hard and unorthodox study was pressed into the  service  of  the  new  revelation.  The  topics  were  very  much  those  to 




which he had tried to give literary form before his expedition of 1908, and 




they  compose a body of ideas which he almost took for granted while 




writing the book  

Tertium Organum

 which made his name. 




Ouspensky took over the idea of esotericism from Theosophical and 




occult  literature.  That  is  to  say,  he  believed  in  a  Tradition  of  hidden 




knowledge preserved by an “inner circle” of humanity, which concealed 




itself from the main body of mankind, either, as the Theosophists said, by 




living  in  remote  areas  like  Tibet,  or  by  adopting  obscure  ways  of  life. 




Ouspensky  expanded  this  idea  of  the  inner  circle  until  the  esoteric 




succession became responsible for the major achievements of mankind. It 




was “the brain, or rather the immortal soul, of humanity, where all the 




attainments, all the results, all the achievements, of all cultures and all 




civilisations  are  preserved.”  Behind  the  outward  show  of  established 




religions there was always the esoteric religion; for example, the teaching of 




Christ was esoteric and exclusive, intended for those who were seeking 




salvation—the road to which was known by the inner circle. 




So much was purely occult thinking; but Ouspensky allied Nietzsche’s 




concept of the Superman to the esoteric point of view. Humanity, he felt, 




was only a transitional stage; and the evolution of consciousness led toward 




the  Superman  state.  This  necessarily  implied  an  increasing  interest  in 




things inexplicable and occult; a broadening of the mental spectrum as man 




realized the inadequacies of his existing knowledge. Ouspensky compared 




the ascent to Superman with the progress of a candidate through the various 




initiations of the Greek mysteries—the archetypal esoteric religions. The 




coupling of Nietzsche to ideas of the spiritual evolution of man was not




L I F E   A G A I N S T   L I F E   1 1 7




entirely new. Many Theosophists made use of Nietzsche, and the notion of 




a coming Superman consciousness had been powerfully elaborated by A. R. 




Orage in England some five years earlier. 




The early passion that the fourth dimension had inspired in Ouspensky 




returned with renewed force as a rational justification for the beyond. Even 




here,  he  was  not  really  original;  he  was  following  a  line  of  argument 




pioneered in England by C. H. Hinton and E. A. Abbott: but unlike them, 




Ouspensky took the fourth dimension as Time, duration. Because this idea 




is  central  to   

Tertium  Organum

  there  is  little  point  in  discussing  it 




separately; but among his less systematic writings on the subject, there is a 




passage which demonstrates Ouspensky’s uncritical acceptance of Hinton’s 




arguments, and which shows how he proceeded from the mere possibility of 




a fourth dimension to arguing its necessity; 




If the fourth dimension exists, one of two things is possible. Either we 




ourselves  possess  the  fourth  dimension,  i.e.,  are  beings  of  four 




dimensions, or we possess only three dimensions and in that case do 




not exist at all. 




If the fourth dimension exists while we possess only three, it means 




that  we  have  no  real  existence,  that  we  exist  only  in  somebody’s 




imagination and that all our thoughts, feelings and experiences take 




place in the mind of some other higher being, who visualizes us. We 




are but products of his mind and the whole of his universe is but an 




artificial world created by his fantasy. 




If we do not want to agree with this we must recognise ourselves as 




beings of four dimensions. 




This argument is neat, and it has a superficial charm, but why, in the 




name of the beyond itself ? Why, if we do not possess the fourth dimension 




do  we  not  exist  at  all?  Why,  if  we  only  exist  in  the  mind  of  a  fourthdimensional somebody, do we have no “real” existence? To what does that 




‘Veal”  refer?  In  this  passage  Ouspensky  was  doing  little  more  than 




summarizing Hinton, and his personal assumptions remain hidden. The 




fourth dimension had the attractiveness of seeming to “prove” his intuitions 




scientifically,  and  this  probably  meant  a  great  deal  to  the  self-taught 




philosopher. Under the stimulus of his mystical experiences and with the 




background of occult theory which his reading had given him, Ouspensky 




set out to resolve his personal equation. Being a clear writer, a man with 




heart, and in a condition of near ecstasy while he did so, he produced a 




remarkable solution. 




The Search for the Miraculous




A  story  told  by  Boris  Mouravieff  epitomizes  the  world  into  which 




Ouspensky let himself with the key of  

Tertium Organum. 

 The incident took 




place  in  the  1920s  at  the  Paris  home  of  Baroness  Olga  Rausch  de 




Traubenberg, who was helping to translate Ouspensky’s account of his years 




with Gurdjieff. 




When leaving the table, the son of the baroness, a little boy of twelve, 




came up, with his album and asked us to write something in it. He 




gave me his album first, I wrote this:  

“Whatever happens to you in life, 

 




 

never  lose sight of the fact that twice two is four.” 

 I passed the album 




to Ouspensky. He wrote underneath my sentence;  

“Whatever happens

 




 

to  you  in  life,  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  twice  two  never  make

 




 

four . . . 




He smiled and shot me a malicious glance. Alec read what we had 




written, showed the album to his mother, . . . who knew Ouspensky 




extremely well, lightly shrugged her shoulders, looked at each of us in 




turn and said: “Well!—in your mottoes I can recognise both of you 




perfectly.” 




 

Tertium Organum is

 a work of revelation. It was written in 1911, while 




Ouspensky was engaged in his experiments in changing consciousness, and




1 1 8




T H E   S E A R C H   F O R   T H E   M I R A C U L O U S   1 1 9




his direct apprehension of the world beyond was incorporated in the book. 




He has been criticized for his choice of a title:  

Tertium Organum, the Third

 




 

Canon of Thought, 

 because it seemed that he was placing his work on a 




level higher than the  

Organon

 of Aristotle and the Novum Organum of 




Francis  Bacon—the  first  two  canons  of  thought  which  the  third  canon 




supplements. This is a misunderstanding, which Ouspensky did his best to 




dispel in a letter published in G. R. S. Mead’s magazine,  

The Quest, 

 ten 




years  after  the  book  was  written.  “By  my  title,”  he  wrote,  “I  simply 




intended  to  say  that  a  much  deeper  and  larger  understanding  of  the 




possibilities of  

logic

 had existed far earlier than the narrow frames given us 




by Aristotle and Bacon, in which almost all subsequent thought has been 




confined leaving that which could not be there included as illogical.” The 




Russian word, which was eventually translated as “canon,” means “weapon” 




or “instrument, ” and Ouspensky’s book was intended to show how habitual 




patterns of thought—^particularly those created by the development of 




materialist science—have imprisoned thought itself In his view, human 




consciousness  had  voluntarily  limited  the  territory  in  which  it  could 




exercise itself—when beyond its cramped backyard was an entire countryside in which to rove and the prospect of the noumenal world beyond the hills. 




According to Ouspensky, positivist philosophy denied the existence of 




certain fects—^facts like those he was personally experiencing. The need was 




for a new system of logic, in which he declared that  

“Science must come to

 




 

mysticism." 

  His  starting  point  was  Kant’s  proposition  about  how  man 




perceives the world; that “the things which we intuit are not in themselves 




the same as our representation of them in intuition.” What do we know, and 




i(aw  do  we  know  it?  The  uncertainties  implicit  in  the  idea  that  our 




perception of the world cannot be said to correspond to things as they are 




allows infinite scope for discussing the possibilities of how things are in fact. 




It was here that the fourth dimension came in. Ouspensky took his stand 




cm the theories of C. H. Hinton, an Englishman whose  

Scientific Romances

 




(1884-1904)  provided  H.  G.  Wells  with  the  idea  of  the  time  machine. 




Ouspensky’s ovra  

Ivan Osokin

 may have been inspired by Hinton’s stories 




based on the idea of recurrence; and it was Hinton’s fete to provide material 




for  others  to  work  on.  His  books  A   

New  Era  of  Thought

  (1888)  and   

The

 




 

Fourth Dimension

 (1904) argued that man apprehended reality by means of 




space. “Space is the instrument of the mind.” Hinton postulated a fourth 




dimension of all apparently three-dimensional objects, claiming that it was 




merely  the  structure  of  the  human  mind  which  prevented  man  firom 




perceiving the fourth dimension. He even declared that it was possible to 




educate  the  senses  into  making  out  a  £}ur-dimensional  cube—the 




tesseract—^by means of complicated stacks of ordinary cubes with their




1 2 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




surfaces specially colored. Exercises with Hinton’s cubes became popular in 




Theosophical circles. 




Ouspensky’s experiments had given him the vision of the Long Body of 




man. He now used this insight to argue that the fourth dimension was 




Time. A point in motion becomes a hne, a line in motion becomes the two- 




dimensional plane surface, and a plane surface in motion creates a cube of 




three dimensions. Man in motion—not walking from one place to another 




in  three-dimensional  space,  but  man  moving  through  life,  through  his 




personal time—is a being of four dimensions; in his Long Body. Ouspensky 




thought that his experiments had induced the experience of higher space. 




Higher dimensions could be apprehended, but they must not be thought of 




as geometrical dimensions. If space, as Hinton argued, were an instrument 




of the mind, two different forms of space—three- and four-dimensional— 




were two differing modes of consciousness, “two methods of receptivity of 




one and the same unique world of a space which is unique.” Here the 




illumination which had flashed across Ouspensky’s mind and had so puzzled 




him took on its full significance: “think in other categories.” “It is necessary 




to understand,” he wrote, “that all objects knovra to us exist not only in 




those  categories  in  which  they  are  perceived  by  us,  but  in  an  infinite 




number of others in which we do not and cannot sense them. And we must 




leam first  

to think

 things in other categories, and then so far as we are able, 




to imagine them therein. Only after doing this can we possibly develop the 




faculty to apprehend them in higher space—and to sense ‘higher space 




itself.” 




The problem therefore remained the development of higher forms of 




consciousness. Proceeding by analogy, Ouspensky considered how worlds 




of higher dimensions would appear to beings of one and two dimensions 




only.  This  was  a  line  of  argument  deriving  from  the  celebrated  book, 




 

Flatland, 

 published in 1884 by Dr. E. A. Abbott, a famous preacher and the 




headmaster of the City of London School, who had himself been inspired by 




Hinton.  Abbott  described,  for  example,  how  a  square—a  being  of  two 




dimensions—^was visited by a sphere—a being of three dimensions—^who 




appeared  to  the  perception  of  the  flatlander  to  be  a  circle.  Ouspensky 




applied this analogy to the differences he found between animal and human 




consciousness. He decided that the space sense of an animal might be two- 




or even one-dimensional, and concluded that if the existence of lower space 




senses than the human could be demonstrated it must follow that a higher 




consciousness was also possible. Ouspensky now brought into his argument 




support from mathematics and occultism. On the one hand, Einstein and 




Minkovski were called in to reinforce the idea of the relevance of the fourth 




dimension to human consciousness; and on the other, H. P. Blavatsky and




T H E   S E A R C H   F O R   T H E   M I R A C U L O U S   1 2 1




lesser Theosophists testified in Ouspensky’s favor about the nature of the 




world beyond appearances. 




On this foundation, Ouspensky erected a vision of the world as a gigantic 




hieroglyph which must be decoded. This was very much the concept of the 




Symbolists, but Ouspensky’s interpretation of the symbols was based on his 




own mystical experiments. He repeated the Platonic myth of the cave; and 




maintained that in art, and particularly in sex, there were hints of the sunlit 




world beyond the cavern. He analyzed the various habits of thought and 




language which trapped man in a three-dimensional universe, and discussed 




the possibility of higher consciousness as described in Hindu literature. His 




own experience combined with his wide reading to convince Ouspensky that 




the nature of the real world was known to the mystics. The attainment of 




higher consciousness might be described as “unity with the all.” He printed 




long extracts fi-om Orthodox and Theosophical anthologies of mysticism, and 




made great use of the works of William James and the American Transcenden- 




talist Dr. R. M. Bucke’s  

Cosmic Consciousness

 (1905). He was particularly 




concerned to point out the complete illogicality of mystical experiences. “They 




are  super-logical,  i.e.,  

Tertium  Organutn, 

  which  is  the  key  to  mystical 




EXPERIENCE, is applicable to them in all its entirety.” 




In one important way Ouspensky differed from the Theosophical authors 




whose  books  he  so  freely  used.  They  were  mostly  content  to  see  the 




evolution of humanity toward higher consciousness as a process occupying 




millennia.  Ouspensky  mistrusted  the  theory  of  evolution  and  had  the 




urgency  of  his  own  experience  to  impel a devotion to  Nietzsche. “The 




future belongs not to man, but  

to superman, 

 who is already born and lives 




^ong us. A higher race is rapidly emerging among humanity, and it is 




emerging by reason of its quite remarkable understanding of the world and 




of life.” 




 

Tertium  Organum

  is  an  extraordinary  book,  giving  the  impression  of 




having been written at white heat. Many devotees of Ouspensky still find it 




the best piece of work he ever did, and it was certainly the book which 




liaade his reputation. It is lucidly written and, in the best sense of the word, 




“liberating.” Ouspensky's central theme of the artificial limitations imposed 




by accepted categories on human consciousness is important and convincing; and whether his analogies with higher dimensions of space are in any sense more than analogies does not matter at all. 




Neither does it matter that in at least two places, his argument is very 




shaky indeed. His section on the mathematics of infinite magnitudes does 




not stand up to scrutiny. And the chapters in which he tries to argue about 




tlie differences between animal and human consciousness could be demolished completely. Such criticisms begin to matter only if every word




1 2 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Ouspensky wrote is taken as holy writ. By the time that he published  

A

 




 

New  Model  of  the  Universe

  in  1931,  there  were  already  distressing 




tendencies in this direction, and Ouspensky’s own habit of regarding his 




personal truths as universally valid—^we have noticed this in his remarks on 




the  fourth  dimension—no  doubt  encouraged  the  trend.  Ouspensky  is 




always  least  impressive  where  he  is  trying  to  be  most  “scientific.”  He 




 

proved

 nothing—indeed he always insisted that his argument was incapable 




of proof—but he indicated astonishing possibilities. As a presentation of the 




idea  that  man  must  try  to  expand  his  consciousness,  

Tertium  Organum

 




remains triumphantly successful. 




Ouspensky did not claim great originality; rather, he claimed to have 




rephrased a truth known to all men of “cosmic consciousness” from time 




immemorial.  “In  the  world’s  literature  there  exist  books,  usually  little 




known,” he wrote, “which accidentally or by design may happen to be 




assembled on one shelf in one library. These, taken together, will yield so 




clear and complete a picture of human existence, its path and its goal, that 




there will be no further doubts about the destiny of humanity. . . . ”  The 




experience of the beyond had been a catalyst. The various authors whom he 




had been so avidly studying seemed to unite their voices, and Ouspensky 




 

saw connections. 

 “Books are appearing which it is impossible to refer to any 




accepted  library  classification,  which  it  is  impossible  to  ‘enroll’  in  any 




faculty. These books are the forerunners of a new literature which will 




break down all fences built in the region of thought . . . ”  His accumulated 




experience broke, reordered itself, and reformed into  

meaning. 

 The fact 




that  his  sources  were  familiar  reading  to  the  mystically  inclined  intelligentsia of Europe meant that his book would itself have something of the effect on its readers that Ouspensky’s private experiences had had on him. 




The vortex in which swirled Nietzsche, occultism, and a dissatisfaction with 




the scientific pundits might resolve itself for a reader, as it had for the 




author, and the buyers of  

Tertium Organum

 themselves would perceive the 




connections which Ouspensky had found in a flash of enUghtenment. Not 




only had Ouspensky achieved the reformation of experience which is the 




mark of all good hterature, but he had ehminated from his sources the more 




crazy occult vaporings: had cracked the code and translated the aspirations 




of the occultists into ordinary speech. 




It is this factor of clarity and reinterpretation which distinguishes  

Tertium

 




 

Organum

 from similar productions of the Russian mystical intelligentsia. 




But  even  in  the  second  edition  of  1916,  from  which  the  first  English 




translation was made,  

Tertium Organum

 remains very much the book of a 




Russian intellectual. For example, there are the inevitable quotations firom 




Vladimir Soloviev, who began the whole religious revival; and Ouspensky’s




T H E   S E A R C H   F O R   T H E   M I R A C U L O U S   1 2 3




thoughts  on  “Occultism  and  Love”  are  heavily  influenced  by  Vasily 




Rozanov, that satyrlike prophet of the cosmic orgasm. Originally the book 




also contained a lengthy refutation of the sexual ideas of the eccentric Polish 




guru Wincenty Lutoslawski, w^hich was later excised. Ouspensky concluded 




 

Tertium Organum

 with a quotation from Revelations in which an angel 




proclaims that “there shall be time no longer.” He had found the passage in 




a book by the poet Alexander Dobrolyubov, a hero of the mystical Russian 




intelligentsia, who after his expulsion from Moscow University had set off to 




wander round Russia with his body encased in iron hoops, like certain 




Orthodox holy men. For all the inspiration of  

Tertium Organum, 

 it was part 




of  a  recognizable  tradition,  and  its  arguments  become  more,  not  less 




impressive, when allowance is made for the particular pressures of time and 




place. 




In 1912 the book was published, and the next year Ouspensky succeeded 




in persuading three of the newspapers for which he worked to finance a 




journalistic trip to India. A journey to the East had become increasingly 




important for him, for the results of his mystical experiments were neither 




complete enough nor permanent. He noted “the helplessness that I feel in 




the face of the wall behind which I can look for a moment, but never long 




enough to account to myself for what I see.” He vacillated uneasily between 




the feeling that he must delay no longer in making experiments with fasting 




or meditational techniques, and the idea that he should abandon further 




attempts at occult practice until he knew what he was doing. Despite the 




tremendous power behind the revelation of  

Tertium Organum, 

 he had been 




forced to end the book on a note of interrogation. “The meaning of life is in 




eternal search.  

And only in that search

 can we find something truly new. ” 




His own search reverted to the pursuit of hidden vtisdom. 




Occult  literature  made  him  think  that  he  might  find   

men  who  knew

 




among the Hindu yogis or the Sufis of Islam. “The question of  

school

 and of 




a method acquires for me a predominant significance, though it is still not 




clear  and  connected  with  too  many  fantasies  and  ideas  based  on  very 




doubtful theories,” he wrote later. “But one thing I see clearly, that alone, 




by myself, I can do nothing.” He needed help. 




Ouspensky is quite open about the “fantasies” in which he indulged when 




he set off to the East. The trouble was that the third weapon of thought was 




a  two-edged  sword.  It  could  cleave  a  passage  through  the  cobwebs  of 




materialism; but just because  

Tertium Organum

 so satisfactorily destroyed 




accepted logic, it opened the way to a state of mind where anything was 




possible. “Let us remember,” Ouspensky had written, “that the  

world of

 




 

causes

 is the world of the marvellous; that what appears simple to us can 




never be real. The  

real

 appears to us as the marvellous.” He left for India in




124 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the hopes of penetrating to the real world—the life beyond life. He said he 




was going to the East “in search of the miraculous. ” 




I  could  not  explain  it  clearly,  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  even  the 




beginning of contact with a school may have a  

miraculous nature. 

 I 




imagined, for example, the possibility of making contact with schools of 




the distant past, with schools of Pythagoras, with schools of Egypt, 




with the schools of those who built Notre Dame, and so on. It seemed 




to me that the barriers of time and space should disappear on making 




such a contact. The idea of schools in itself was fantastic and nothing 




seemed to me too fantastic in relation to this idea. 




Despite the discouragement of clever men in St. Petersburg who scoffed 




at the idea of the mysterious East, Ouspensky set off on his occult quest. 




The universe of the miraculous was only a hairsbreadth away, and anywhere 




he might find the rent in the fabric which kept him from it. He had planned 




to go with his friend and traveling companion, Sherbakov, but Sherbakov 




died just before he set out. On the journey, Ouspensky twice heard his 




voice speak to him. 




He  was  thrown  back  on  his  Theosophical  contacts.  From  Russia  he 




traveled to London where he met A. R. Orage, the editor of the influential 




magazine, the  

New Age; 

 and possibly he also met Mme. Blavatsky’s old 




secretary, G. R. S. Mead. It was probably in connection with Ouspensky’s 




visit to London that Mme. A. L. Pogossky—^who kept a shop in Bond Street 




which sold Russian arts and crafts and was prominent in Russian Theosophy—made an English translation of his book.  

The Symbolism of the Tarot. 

 




This was published in English in St. Petersburg in 1913 and introduced in 




Ouspensky’s  name  to  the  English-speaking  public,  From  London  the 




seeker continued to Paris, where he reflected on the esoteric schools of 




masons who he believed had built Notre Dame. Next, he went to Genoa, 




where an active branch of the Theosophical Society was headed by the 




German-Italian botanist, Professor Ottone Penzig. From Genoa he took 




ship for Cairo where he stayed for three weeks and visited the Pyramids 




almost daily. Then to Ceylon, where his quest proper began. 




He arrived in the East, if anything, more elated than when he had set 




out, for his journey appeared to provide confirmation of his new beliefe. In 




 

Tertium  Organum

  he  had  proclaimed;  “On  earth  there  are  living  two 




different species of men. The possibility of the appearance or development 




of cosmic consciousness is the distinguishing mark of one of these species— 




numerically small. In the other, infinitely more numerous, cosmic consciousness does not appear, and can never appear.” The embryo Supermen were already able to recognize one another and might soon assume their




T H E  S E A R C H   F O R   T H E  




M I R A C U L O U S   125




responsibilties: “a new race conscious of itself 




. . . will judge the old




races.” 




As 




he traveled through Europe among his  Theosophical friends, 




Ouspensky discovered all around him hints that his prophecy was coming 




true. The European intelligentsia—^particularly of a Theosophical sort— 




formed the nucleus of a new order; 




St. 




Petersburg, London, Paris, Genoa, Cairo, Colombo, Galle, 




Madras,  Benares,  Calcutta,  were  connected  by  invisible  threads  of 




common hopes and common expectation. And the more people I met, 




the more this side of my journey took hold of me. It was as though 




there grew out of it some secret society, having no name, no form, no 




conventional laws, but closely connected by community of ideas and 




language.  I  often  thought  of  what  I  myself  had  written  in   

Tertium

 




 

Organum

 about people of a “new Race.” And it seemed to me that I 




had not been far from the truth, and that there is actually carried on 




the process of the formation, if not of a new race, at least of some new 




category of men, for whom there exist different values than for other 




people. 




In  Ceylon  he  stayed  at  a  hotel  on  the  seashore  near  Colombo,  and 




traveled throughout the island. He visited  

bhikkus

 and made inquiries into 




Buddhism,  convinced  that  behind  what  seemed  to  him  an  “arid  and 




materialistic”  theory  of  liberation  from  suffering,  there  lay  an  esoteric 




Buddhism concerned with the methods of attaining enlightenment. He was 




less  concerned  with  doctrine  than  with  the  world  of  the  miraculous,  a 




subject which official Buddhism had apparently made taboo. The intellec- 




tualism  of  his  Buddhist  acquaintances  irritated  him  beyond  measure. 




Where  was  the  miraculous,  the  center  of  all  religions?  He  sensed  that 




nevertheless  there  was  something   

there,  something,  overshadotving;  there

 




 

the  gap  in  the  curtain,  the  intrusion  of  the  miracle  into  the  world.  .  .  . 

 




And then he found it. 




In a small temple near Colombo there was an image of the Buddha with 




sapphire  eyes.  It  seemed  that  the  image  was  not  locally  considered 




remarkable, and it was not mentioned in any of the guidebooks. Ouspensky 




was led to it only after lengthy circumambulations around the sights more 




favored by tourists, and his garrulous guide eventually left him alone before 




the shrine. “A second or two passed, and I understood that I was in the 




presence of a miracle. . . . The Buddha  

saw

 me, saw in me that which I 




could not see myself, all that was hidden in the most secret recesses of my 




soul. And under his gaze, which as it were passed me by, I began to see all 




this myself.” It was like the picture of the Great Magician he had drawn in




126 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




his pen portraits of the Tarot cards:  

“I saw myself reflected in him as in a

 




 

mirror  and  in  his  eyes  I  seemed  to  look  upon  myself.” 

  The  gaze  of  the 




sapphire  eyes  ordered  and  calmed  the  inner  disquiet  of  the  beholder, 




conferred  enlightenment and understanding. The learned  

bikkhus

 were 




irrelevant to his quest. The miraculous was  

there . . . there . . . 

 and  

there, 

 




if only the trick could be learned of breaking out from this heavy  

matter

 




which so imprisoned and oppressed the soul. 




From Ceylon the traveler went on to Madras and stayed for six weeks at 




Adyar, the headquarters of the Theosophical Society. This was a traditional 




place of pilgrimage for Westerners in search of enlightenment. In 1913 the 




birds of passage numbered, besides Ouspensky, the Baltic Count Keyser- 




ling on the journey around the world which he recorded in his  

Travel Diary

 




 

of a Philosopher; 

 Carl Bechhofer Roberts, who was in search of Mahatmas 




and was warned by a Brahman visitor to Adyar against the moral corruption 




of his hosts; and the enigmatic figure of Boris Soloviev, who later married 




the daughter of Rasputin and played a dubious role in the murder of Tsar 




Nicholas  II  and  his  family  at  Ekaterinburg.  J.  G.  Bennett  records 




Ouspensky’s story of the pecking order at Adyar; on the ground floor of the 




headquarters building were the hangers-on and those Theosophically of no 




account; above them lived the pillars of the Society’s funds and organization; on the top floor was the esoteric group—to which Ouspensky was at once admitted. 




His stay does not seem to have impressed him, although he was not yet 




quite weaned from Theosophical ideas. A book just published when he 




arrived at Adyar, Johann van Manen’s  

Some Occult Experiences, 

 found a 




place  in  the  second  edition  of   

Tertium  Organum; 

  and  soon  after  he  left 




Adyar, he met die Theosophist Bhagavan Das at Benares and discovered 




striking similarities to his ovra thought in Das’s book.  

The Science of Peace. 

 




Ouspensky  preserved  till  the  end  of  his  life  a  respect  for  the  earliest 




Theosophical literature, but his verdict on later Theosophy—in particular 




his scathing comments on Bishop Leadbeater’s technicolored descriptions 




of the astral world—have the flavor of a man condemning the illusions of his 




youth. His ideas of the miraculous were changing, and his contact with 




some of the more ftitile aspects of Indian Theosophy was probably one of 




the reasons for this change. “Beginning with a bold, revolutionary search 




for the wondrous,” he wrote shortly after, “theosophy soon started to fall 




away  from  that  and  to  stop  at  some  ‘found’  truths  which  it  gradually 




converted into indisputable dogmas.” 




His own search for men in possession of esoteric knowledge continued. 




He visited many of the established gurus, the followers of Ramakrishna 




among them. By all of these he was dissatisfied. “Schools” perhaps they 




were, but not what he was looking for. Later, on his way back from India, 




T H E   S E A R C H   F O R   T H E   M I R A C U L O U S   127




he analyzed his feehngs. The frankly devotional schools were useless, for he 




could have found many such religious “ways” in Russia. There were schools 




based on yogic exercises, about which he already knew something, but 




these he mistrusted because they depended on the creation of trance states. 




This smacked to him of spiritualism, and suggested possibilities of self- 




deception.  He  met  “nice  people”  connected  with  schools  like  the 




Ramakrishna Vedantists, but did not feel they possessed “real knowledge.” 




There remained rumors of schools with which he could not make personal 




contact; schools which appeared to have real knowledge, but which made 




extraordinary demands on the pupil. If he had submitted himself to such a 




school, he would have had to stay in India and make a clean break with his 




former life. This he did not want to do. 




Then the miraculous intruded again. 




At the beginning of the rainy season in the summer of 1914, Ouspensky 




left Bombay for Agra and Delhi. A visit by moonlight to the Taj Mahal 




continued his pilgrimage to those holy and enigmatic places where he might 




decode the hieroglyph of the world. The point about the hieroglyph—the 




point  about  the  whole  Symbolist  approach—was  that  one  never  knew 




exactly when the numinous would reveal its overshadowing presence. The 




cab  horse  on  the  Nevsky,  or  the  Buddha  with  the  sapphire  eyes;  the 




mundane and the sublime might equally reveal universal truths. “A grain of 




sand can become a system of the astral world,” one Russian Symbolist had 




written, and Ouspensky’s vision of the new consciousness which he saw 




developing was greatly influenced by this attitude. In  

The Symbolism of the

 




 

Tarot, 

  he  tried  to  describe  the  shift  in  perception,  the  apprehension  of 




 

meanings, 

 that slantwise, squinting vision which suddenly becomes clarity 




itself. “Symbolism cannot be learned as one learns to build bridges or speak 




a foreign language,” he wrote, “and for the interpretation of symbols a 




special cast of mind is necessary; in addition to knowledge, special faculties, 




the power of creative thought and a developed imagination are required.” 




The Tarot, like nature itself, contained ‘all potential meanings.’ Meanings 




suddenly composed themselves out of this fabric and the very existence of 




the Taj Mahal. 




As Ouspensky sat and gazed at the luminous shape of the great building, 




the scent of jasmine in his nostrils and the cries of peacocks in his ears, he 




had only a brief warning—a sense of two worlds existing concurrently— 




before the miraculous broke through. In a flash of insight, he solved the 




riddle of the Taj Mahal. He experienced “the wonderful joy of liberation, as 




if I had come out into the light from some deep underground passage.” 




The Taj Mahal represented the secret of death. From where he sat, he 




saw the small light burning within the building above the tomb of the 




Empress Mumtaz-i-Mahai. This tiny glow, so feeble and so transitory, was




128 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the petty life of man on earth. The graceful, shining edifice which enclosed 




it represented eternal life, which was the same thing as saying “the soul.” 




Suddenly there was revealed to Ouspensky the hidden meaning of the Sufi 




builders of the mausoleum—he was surrounded by the soul of the Empress, 




which  merged  with  creation  just  as  the  Taj  Mahal  itself,  enclosing  the 




Empress’s body, seemed to flow into the sky and the surrounding gardens. 




Ouspensky  understood  that  the  soul  of  man  was  not  contained  in  his 




physical body, but that “the body lives and moves in the soul. ” The insight 




was so important to him and seemed so profound that he afterward felt 




incapable of giving it adequate expression. 




The  rest  of  his  nocturnal  visit  confirmed  the  impression  that  the  Taj 




Mahal was a Sufi allegory. He marveled at its workmanship and rejoiced at 




the way in which the architecture returned countless echoes of the shout of 




“Allah!” repeating “for ever, the name of God. ” The next day he visited the 




gardens again, and saw in the spectacle of all sorts and conditions of men 




mingling around the tomb part of the grand symbolism of its designers who 




had vwshed to demonstrate the unity of all things. “As above, so below.” 




Toward  the  end  of  1914,  Ouspensky  returned  to  Ceylon  by  ship  from 




Madras. He expected to find out whether his newspapers wanted him to 




return to Russia or to continue his journey to the Far East and America. 




Also, his search for the custodians of esoteric knowledge seemed on the 




point of bearing fruit, and he hoped to find in Colombo an acquaintance 




who had offered to introduce him to “certain Yogis.” Instead, he was met on 




landing by the news of the outbreak of the First World War, and all his 




plans were disrupted. 




The war meant that Ouspensky could not continue his search and had to 




postpone other journeys he had planned in Russian Central Asia and the 




Middle East. On his return trip, during which he spent several weeks on 




London, he found himself infected by the war fever. “Everything I had 




thought about the results of my search was thrown into confusion by the 




wild absurdity of the war and by all the emotions which filled the air, 




conversation and newspapers, and which, against my will, often affected 




me.” But when at last he reached St. Petersburg through Norway, Sweden, 




and Finland, his old associations revived. He again felt that his search for 




the miraculous was more important than the hysterias of politicians, and the 




war  began to assume  a particular significance in  the universe of fourdimensional logic. In the first place, it explained to Ouspensky why he had felt it necessary to hurry in his search for the miraculous. At the same time 




the reality of war, death, and destruction provided an ominous reminder of 




the necessity of hurry in the future “and that it was impossible to believe in 




‘life’ which led nowhere.” 




T H E   S E A R C H   F O R   T H E   M I R A C U L O U S   129




There was an even more sinister significance which Ouspensky described 




in a story. “The Benevolent Devil,” published in the early days of the war. 




The story uses his Indian travels as a background, and begins with the 




narrator’s  encounter  with  the  devil  in  the  cave  temples  of  Ellora.  In  a 




manner which C. S. Lewis was to popularize in  

The Screwtape Letters, 

 the 




devil describes the various shifts to which his infernal brethren are put to 




keep mankind from attaining knowledge of the real world beyond the world 




of matter. “The kingdom of matter is eternal!” shouts the devil, and he 




explains how certain magical, transcendental or religious ideas constitute 




the chief danger to diabolic domination of mankind. As an illustration of his 




methods, he takes the case of a young Englishman called Leslie White, 




whom the  narrator  of  the  story  has met  in Ceylon.  Ouspensky—^who 




loathed Englishmen of the type he imagined to be the Kipling variety and 




indeed he seems sometimes never to have understood the English at all— 




describes  Leslie  White  as  a  type  most  uncommon  in  India:  one  who 




fraternizes with the Indians, and is fascinated by Buddhism; but he has 




attached to him a personal devil, whose task is to distract his mind from his 




transcendental interests. Whenever Leslie White determines to meditate 




or to study Buddhism, the devil suggests he go sailing, or attend a social 




engagement or most particularly—and there may be something of self- 




analysis here—that he eat a large Indian meal. 




Unfortunately for his devil, Leslie White may fall by the wayside, but he 




always picks himself up again, and at the end of the devil’s tale is not only 




living  on  a  meager  diet  but  has  made  contact  with  other  seekers  like 




himself.  The  existence  of  large  numbers  of  such  people  aggravates  the 




devil, and he leaves the narrator of the story hinting that he will be forced




iise “special methods” against them. What these methods are is revealed 




at the end of the story, when the narrator is in London and sees Leslie 




White march past in the street at the head of a Scottish regiment. “ ‘What 




has Leslie retained from Yoga, from Buddhism?’ I asked myself Now he 




must think, feel, and live like a Roman legionnaire, whose duty is to defend 




the  Eternal  City  from  barbarians.  An  entirely  different  world,  another

psychology. Now all these refinements of thought seem an unnecessary 




luxury. Probably he has already forgotten about them, or will soon forget.” 




“The Benevolent Devil ” expresses its author’s bitter disappointment that 




the select band he had imagined capable of cosmic consciousness was to be 




dispersed and its possibilities shattered by the brute nature of war. At the 




end of the story Ouspensky’s self breaks in: “What chance had they now of 




recognising each other? ... I now felt the possibility for any kind of mutual 




understanding had been shattered for some time ahead.” 




As for the devil, who appears both in this story and in “The Inventor,” 




which  was  published  with  it  in  an  edition  of  1916,  he  is  of  course  no




130 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




fundamentalist creation. Ouspensky makes it clear, both in the story and in 




his pen portrait of the card, “The Devil” in the Tarot pack, that his “devil” 




is created by man himself. “I am the Evil which men say is the cause of all 




evil,” says the Tarot Devil, “and which they invented as an excuse for all 




the evil that they do. They call me the Prince of Falsehood, and truly I am 




the  Prince  of  Lies,  because   

I  am  the  most  monstrous  creation  of  human

 




 

lies." 

  In  “The  Benevolent  Devil,”  Leslie  White  disappears  from  his 




tormentor’s  vision  when  he  is  immersed  in  higher  things,  dreaming 




romantically of a girl, or even reading with full absorption. “To get away 




from reality means to get away from the devil.” 




For Ouspensky’s search for a life beyond life had led him to deny the 




existence of  

byt

 altogether. In the prologue to the story, the narrator dreads 




a sleepless night which will give him the sensation he calls “immersion in 




matter.” Ouspensky’s occult reading had led him to a Gnostic viewpoint 




from which he proclaimed that man must free himself from “Great Matter,” 




and in the 1916  

Tertium Organum, 

 the world of matter is equated with the 




“unreal” world of three-dimensional consciousness which prevents knowledge of infinity beyond. “To feel this infinity it is necessary to understand the unreahty of everything material and factual, and the reality of fantasy 




and the world of the imagination.  

The material world does not exist.” 




The  Great  War  represented  the  victory  of  the  devil  in  man,  and  the 




immersion of European civilization in Great Matter. The imperatives of 




survival would prevent the birth of the new race which Ouspensky had so 




confidently expected. The war—^“the great European war in the possibility 




of which I had not wanted to believe, and the reality of which I did not for a 




long time wish to acknowledge”—^was evidently a blow which he took 




almost personally. At the same time his year in India had rid him of many of 




the illusions with which he had started out. 




No longer did he indulge in fantasies of contact with esoteric schools “on 




another plane.” He saw that these were mere daydreams, and although he 




was more than ever convinced that there was something to be found in the 




East, he saw that his search must be directed toward schools whose masters 




were flesh and blood. Neither had he discovered “facts”—concrete evidence of the miraculous—^which would give substance to the legendary miracles  of  Hind.  He  had  hoped  to  see  mass  hypnosis  exercised  by 




practitioners of the Indian rope trick, but had found only some uninteresting conjurers in Ceylon. At Benares on the Ganges, he had met a fakir who for  a  single  rupee  lay  on  his  bed  of  nails  aild  allowed  himself  to  be 




photographed;  but  Ouspensky  found  nothing  in  the  “dull,  bored  and 




indififerent expression” of the man to indicate that he practiced his painful 




art as a fons of religious asceticism. 




Yet the search for the miraculous remained his motive passion. It now




T H E   S E A R C H   F O R   T H E   M I R A C U L O U S   131




proceeded with slightly different premises, but Ouspensky was still in 




pursuit of what he called “facts.” He had as inalienable possessions the facts 




he had already discovered. His mystical experiences, the inquisition of the 




Buddha with the sapphire eyes, and the revelation of the Taj Mahal, were 




after all more important than the lunacies of pohticians. And if the war had 




broken the hnks which held together the chain of the new race, it had also 




given a powerful impulse to the traditional aspirations of Holy Russia. 




Ouspensky’s quest suddenly become relevant to many others who took the 




war “as a gigantic  

memento mori.” 




He  had  confirmation  of  this  soon  after  his  return.  For  six  weeks  he 




worked in Moscow for one of the newspapers which had sent him abroad. 




Then he went to St. Petersburg where, in February and March 1915, he 




gave lectures on his travels in the hall of the Town Duma. The titles of 




these lectures were, “In Search of the Miraculous,” and “The Problems of 




Death.” At each lecture, his audience numbered over a thousand. He was 




besieged by letters and callers, and “I felt,” he wrote, “that on the basis of a 




‘search for the miraculous’ it would be possible to unite together a very 




large number of people who were no longer able to swallow the customary 




forms of lying and living in lying.” 







6




The Inner and the Outer Revolutions




Soon  after  Easter  1915,  Ouspensky  traveled  to  Moscow  to  repeat  his 




success as a lecturer. As a result, he met Pohl and Merkourofif, who told 




him of a mysterious Caucasian Greek who directed an “occult” group in 




Moscow. In his new critical attitude toward the occult, Ouspensky was not 




impressed by the rather Theosophical miracles of which they told him; 




these seemed “all sorts of self-suggested wonders.” He only agreed to meet 




GurdjieflFafter Merkouroff’s “persistent efforts.” 




This  is  important,  because  it  shows  that  Gurdjiefif  was  out  to  catch 




Ouspensky.  If  so,  he  was  far  from  the  only  disciple  whom  Gurdjieff 




deliberately ensnared.  

Glimpses of the Truth

 represents Gurdjieff as urging 




his  friend  “P”—^perhaps  Pohl—to  draw  the  narrator  out  on  esoteric 




subjects, in order to discover whether they had any real meaning for him. 




Some eighteen months after Ouspensky had met him, Gurdjieff was quite 




explicit  about  the  composer,  Thomas  de  Hartmann.  “He  has  to  be 




entangled,” he told his follower. Dr. Stoerneval, in de Hartmann’s hearing. 




“Entangle him, Doctor!” It is clear that Gurdjieff was keeping watch for 




people who could be of use to him, and he may have marked Ouspensky 




down as early as 1912. He later said—^although the remark may have been 




intended for Ouspensky alone—that when the newspapers had reported 




Ouspensky’s departure for thfe East, he had given his pupils the task of




133




134 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




reading his books and determining from them the nature of their author and 




what he would be able to find in India. 




Ouspensky’s doubts were dissipated by his first meeting with Gurdjieff. 




They  were  replaced  by  other  doubts,  of  a  quite  novel  sort.  GurdjiefiF 




answered his questions precisely and neither stumbled nor prevaricated. 




But there were some strange inconsistencies. Ouspensky’s description of 




this first encounter is probably the most famous portrait of Gurdjieff:




We arrived at a small  

ca£6

 in a noisy though not central street. I saw a 




man of an oriental type, no longer young, with a black mustache and 




piercing eyes, who astonished me first of all because he seemed to be 




disguised  and  completely  out  of  keeping  with  the  place  and  its 




atmosphere. I was still frill of impressions of the East. And this man 




with the face of an Indian raja or an Arab sheik whom I at once seemed 




to see in a white burnoose or a gilded turban, seated here in this little 




caf6, where small dealers and commission agents met together, in a 




black overcoat with a velvet collar and a black bowler hat, produced 




the strange, unexpected, and almost alarming impression of a man 




poorly disguised, the sight of whom embarrasses you because you see 




he is not what he pretends to be and yet you have to speak and behave 




as  though you did not  see  it. He spoke Russian  incorrectly  with a 




strong Caucasian accent; and this accent with which we are accustomed 




to associate anything apart from philosophical ideas, strengthened still 




frirther the strangeness and the unexpectedness of this impression. 




They talked of Ouspensky’s travels and his interest in narcotics. Then 




they went together to a meeting of Gurdjieff’s pupils, which was to take 




place, Ouspensky gathered, in an apartment which had caused Gurdjieff 




great  expense,  as  was  only  fitting  for  an  undertaking  in  which  many 




“professors” and “artists” were concerned. Gurdjieff refused to say precisely who amgng the intelhgentsia were intrigued by his work; and it emerged that the meeting was to be held in the sort of barely frirnished flat 




Ouspensky recognized as probably belonging to a municipal schoolteacher, 




with an audience dravra from the poverty-stricken lesser intellectuals. He 




was  read  the  story.  

Glimpses  of  Truth, 

  and  noticed  a  reference  to   

The

 




 

Simple of the Magicians, 

 which he too had seen advertised in the press. 




About the actual work which went on in the group he could leam little. 




Gurdjieff had said that it was something to do with chemistry, and the 




schoolteacher types talked indefinitely of “work on oneself.” Despite the 




absence of the professors and artists, and despite Gurdjieff’s refusal to 




identify the “famous dancers” who would appear in his ballet, Ouspensky




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   135




was fascinated by the evening. He had the conviction that he must at all 




costs arrange to meet GurdjieflFagain. He was  

caught. 




I felt myself very strange—a long reading which I very little understood, people who did not answer my questions. G. himself with his unusual manners and his influence on his people, which I all the time 




felt produced in me an unexpected desire to laugh, to shout, to sing, as 




though I had escaped from school or from some strange detention. 




For the next week he continued to meet Gurdjieff in the same shabby 




cafe. He rapidly came to see that Gurdjieff deliberately created unfavorable 




conditions for such conversations, and that over ideas which Ouspensky felt 




to  be  profoundly  true  would  take  pains  to  spread  a  gloss  of  apparent 




shiftiness. For example, they were talking about money. GurdjiefiF said that 




his fee for a year’s work was a thousand roubles. To Ouspensky this seemed 




a large sum for someone who did not have private means. Gurdjieff replied 




that he could not have many pupils and ought not to spend his own money 




on “the work.” People who could not provide such a sum, he said, were 




probably weak in life and therefore might be weak in the work. Knowledge 




was not valued unless it was paid for. Ouspensky assented to all these 




propositions, yet with a sense that Gurdjieff was overacting a part. “I was 




surprised at G.’s apparent desire to  

convince

 me of something in connection 




with the question of money  

when I needed no convincing.” 




When the week was past, Ouspensky returned to St. Petersburg where 




he had to prepare books for the press, including a new edition of  

Tertium

 




 

Organum

  and  his   

Occult  Tales. 

  Gurdjieff  had  let  him  know  that  he 




sometimes traveled to St. Petersburg and would contact Ouspensky if he 




did come. The war went badly, and Ouspensky buried himself in his work, 




consoling himself that if necessary, he could always go to Gurdjieff. Then in 




the autumn of 1915 he was telephoned by Gurdjieff, who was on one of his 




periodic visits from Moscow. From this renewal of contact with the man 




who  had  almost  imperceptibly  become  his  Master,  sprang  the  “St. 




Petersburg  group,”  a  group  whose  activities  during  the  next  eighteen 




months are chronicled by Ouspensky. The internal revolution which he 




records was paralleled with an extraordinary exactness by the events of the 




outer world. 




It was Ouspensky who was chiefly responsible for creating Gurdjieff’s 




following in St. Petersburg. In 1937 he told his pupils that there had been 




an explicit understanding that he should screen prospective recruits. By his 




own account it was largely through his material support that the groups 




could exist at all, and his new prestige as author and lecturer made him an 




ideal channel through which people infected by war weariness and  

ennui




136 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




could  pass  to  GurdjiefF.  An  account  of  this  period  has  recently  been 




published  which  bears  out  the  impression  that  GurdjieflF  was  using 




Ouspensky as his second-in-command and front man. 




This account is by Anna Butkovsky, who had become Ouspensky’s close 




companion even before his journey to India. She had met him at a meeting 




of the St. Petersburg Theosophical Society, and soon found herself at the 




center of the group of mystically inclined intellectuals who met at The Stray 




Dog. She accompanied Ouspensky and Volynsky on their nocturnal sorties 




through St. Petersburg, during which Ouspensky would enlarge on the 




theme of the “search for the miraculous,” a topic to which he returned in 




daylight in Phillipoflf’s Cafe on the Nevsky Prospekt, not far from his own 




apartments. After Ouspensky’s meeting with GurdjiefF, Anna Butkovsky 




found herself rapidly introduced to this intriguing figure whom Ouspensky 




believed  might  lead  them  both  to  what  he  had  failed  to  find  in  India. 




Around the pair of them and their teacher a group began to form, which 




met to hsten to GurdjiefF in PhillipofF’s Cafe. 




First there were Ouspensky and Anna Butkovsky, the “favorite pupils,” 




although neither of them exempt from the Master’s stinging rebukes. Then 




Anthony Charkovsky, an engineer in his fifties, and a younger engineer




named Andrei Z------- . Next there was Dr. Leonid Stoerneval, a Finnish




specialist  in  mental  illness  who  may  have  arrived  in  Gurdjieff’s  circle 




independent of Ouspensky. Stoerneval had interests in hypnotism which 




may have resulted in some earlier contact with GurdjiefF, for whom he 




harbored an almost fanatical devotion, “almost slave-like,” his wife reports. 




He was second only to Ouspensky in drumming up recruits. An elderly 




patient of his made up the sixth of the PhillipofiF’s group which GurdjiefF 




seems  to  have  regarded  as  his  inner  circle.  Meetings  were  held  in 




Stoemeval’s house, in the homes of his patients, and occasionally in the 




Finnish  

dacha

 of one particularly well-off lady, a Madame Maximovitch. By 




January 1916, thirty to forty people had gathered, and GurdjiefF began to 




visit St. Petersburg regularly, sometimes with pupils from his Moscow 




groups. 




Among GurdjiefF’s pupils at this time, two important figures remain 




puzzling. One of thase is the lady who became Mme. Ouspensky—Sophia 




Grigorievna. Very little is known about her. She was born in 1874 and was 




twice married. The first marriage was to a student when she was sixteen, 




and the second was to a mining engineer with whom she traveled to remote 




areas of Russia. She had a son who was killed comparatively early in life, 




and a daughter old enough to provide Ouspensky with a step-grandchild in 




1919. Ouspensky brought her to GurdjiefF’s teaching and she was always 




known in the West as “Mme. Ouspensky”; but it is doubtful that the pair 




were ever legally married. It is rumored that Gurdjieff advised Ouspensky




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   137




strongly against a marriage; and a fiction may have been propagated in 




order to secure certain rights or privileges for “Mme. Ouspensky” and her 




daughter during the chaos of civil war and emigration. The situation was 




generally known and accepted by their pupils in the 1920s; and the couple’s 




relationship became increasingly one of convenience. 




The other mysterious figure is the woman who was always known as 




GurdjiefF’s “wife, ” although she kept her own name of Ostrowsky. Her 




early life is a complete blank. J. G. Bennett claims that she was “a noble 




Polish lady from the Imperial court, ” and the “Polish ” at least is true if not 




the  “noble.”  There  may  be  some  reference  to  Mme.  Ostrowsky  in 




Gurdjieff’s  portrait  of  the  Polish  “Mme.  Vitvitskaya”  in   

Meetings  with

 




 

Remarkable  Men. 

  Vitvitskaya  was  a  reformed  prostitute  and  the  de 




Hartmanns hint that Mme. Ostrowsky had a mixed and unhappy past. A 




legend used to circulate among Gurdjielf ’s disciples that she kept her own 




name because she wished to be considered as an ordinary pupil, rather than 




GurdjiefF’s  wife;  but  other  reasons  spring  to  mind  if  we  accept  that 




GurdjiefF probably still had a wife living somewhere in Central Asia. And 




far  from being an  ordinary pupil, Mme.  Ostrowsky always occupied a 




privileged  position  in  the  Work  and  later  often  took  leading  roles  in 




GurdjieflF’s dances. 




At first Gurdjieff’s methods caused confusion in St. Petersburg. He liked 




to spring meetings on his pupils at short notice. He would change his plans 




without warning; for example, he might announce his imminent departure, 




then spend the whole day seeing pupils in cafes and decide at the last 




possible  moment  to  hold  a  meeting.  “.  .  .  He  considered  that  only  by 




overcoming difficulties, however irrelevant and ateidental, could people 




’^ue his ideas,” wrote Ouspensky. The confusion was increased by the 




 

acting

 which Ouspensky and his friends noticed in Gurdjieff. He would 




play, for example, the part of a simple carpet seller, telling his pupils that 




during his Eastern travels he had acquired a collection of carpets which 




could be disposed of most advantageously in St. Petersburg—^but other 




people said that he bought the carpets in Moscow and transported them to 




St. Petersburg to sell. Or he presided over huge dinners which earned him 




the reputation of a bou viveur—^although Ouspensky noticed that he ate 




little himself, and it was obvious to all his pupils that this was “acting.” 




Occasionally his tactics seemed brazenly perverse. The American art 




critic, Carl Zigrosser, has recorded a story of Gurdjieff at this period which 




Ouspensky told Orage. Ouspensky had arranged a lecture for Gurdjieff 




before the Moscow Geographical Society. Gurdjieff lectured on the Gobi 




Desert with great authority and to great effect. TTien he described how he 




had once discovered a valley whose sides were so steep that no one could 




reach the bottom. The valley floor was covered with diamonds, said




138 T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjieflF, and the local inhabitants trained vultures to fly down to retrieve 




lumps of meat which they flung dovm in the hopes that the diamonds would 




become  embedded  in  them.  His  learned  audience  was  thrown  into 




consternation—some suspecting simple fraud, others perhaps recognizing 




the tale from the  

Arabian Nights

 which Gurdjieff had repeated. The lecture 




turned into a fiasco. Gurdjieff explained to Ouspensky that he had seen that 




the  valuable  information  which  he  had  given  the  scholars  was  going 




unappreciated, so he decided to cast doubts on the whole substance of his 




talk. 




A lesson for the academics? Or a lesson for Ouspensky, the intellectual, 




jealous of his standing with his fellows? 




Under this unsettling tuition, the St. Petersburg group felt their way into 




the dense texture of Gurdjieff’s ideas. Ouspensky recorded their struggles 




in  

In Search of the Miraculous. 




The peculiar nature of  

In Search of the Miraculous

 has never been fully 




defined. It is a book which is both extraordinarily honest and extraordinarily 




deceptive. Just before his death Gurdjieff was persuaded by his pupils to 




read Ouspensky’s manuscript, and it is said that he pronounced blessings on 




his former disciple whom for years he had publicly vilified. The book is 




generally agreed to be an extremely scrupulous piece of reporting, and it 




can be approached as an accurate picture of what Gurdjieff taught in Russia 




in 1915-18.  

In Search of the Miraculous

 refers as much to Ouspensky as to 




Gurdjieff. When the book was first published in 1950, a reviewer in  

The

 




 

Times Literary Supplement

 remarked that “this seems one of the rare cases 




where the commentator proves almost more important than the subject of 




his observations.” We have what is one aspect of a unique example of the 




process of “self-observation” which plays such a large part in Gurdjieff’s 




ideas. Gurdjieff mirrors Ouspensky, and Ouspensky reflects Gurdjieff. The 




Gurdjieff represented is called into being by his pupil: a Gurdjieff whose 




teaching was angled toward the mystical Russian intelligentsia and—^from 




the point of view of the only record we possess—at Ouspensky in particular. 




The intensely personal nature of the record is emphasized by its title. 




Ouspensky always referred to his manuscript about his years vdth Gurdjieff 




as   

Fragments  of  an  Unknown  Teaching, 

  and  this  is  the  subtitle  of  the 




published  book.  But  the  frill  title  is  very  significant.  Ouspensky  had 




published two series of sketches describing his Eastern travels as  

In Search

 




 

of the Miraculous:

 volumes I and II. To use the same title for his record of 




Gurdjieff’s  teaching  is  to  place  it  where  it  belongs,  in  the  historical 




sequence of Ouspensky’s ovm search. This may seem a pedantic point, but 




it  is  important.  “I  even  thought,”  says  Ouspensky  of  the  members  of 




Gurdjieff’s Moscow group, “that it was very strange to meet them on the 




way to the miraculous.” In his first conversations wdth Gurdjieff, Ouspensky




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   139




spoke to him of his plans for returning to the Orient. ‘“It is good to go for a 




rest, for a hoHday,’ said G., ‘but it is not worth while going there for what 




you  want.  All  that  can  be  found  here.’”  Ouspensky’s  record  of  what 




followed  is  the  record  of  his  passage  through  the  fire  of  Gurdjieff’s 




purgative  system.  He  embarked  on  this  adventure  as  the  logical  continuation of his quest for suitable “schools” in the East. 




Because   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  seems  to  be  the  clearest  existing 




account of Gurdjieff’s teaching, it is widely read, and some of the results 




have  been  very  odd.  The  hieratic-rehgious  tone  which  provided  the 




background to Gurdjieflf’s talks belongs entirely to the Russian phase of his 




activity and is directed to the people among whom he was working. It 




belongs particularly to Ouspensky, whose personal preoccupations naturally 




influenced the questions he asked GurdjiefF and the items of Gurdjieflf’s 




conversation he snapped up. And the book is packed with references to 




topics of quite transitory interest. How many readers will now recognize 




the reason for the talks on a universal language which have been found so 




significant? This almost certainly began with a reference to the artificial 




language, Esperanto, devised by L. L. Zamenhof (1859-1917). Zamenhof’s 




inspiration came from the linguistic chaos of his birthplace on the Polish- 




Russian frontier, and from about 1905, universal languages were matters of 




concern to the intelligentsia of all the Russias. Gurdjieff’s skill immediately 




turned a topical question into a study of universals. There already existed 




three universal languages, he replied. They related to levels of being and 




understanding. 




With questions of being and understanding, we move into the territory of 




GurdjieflF’s ideas themselves. They were released piecemeal, in a manner 




deliberately self-contradictory or misleading, and had to be fitted together 




by  his  pupils,  and  even  completed  by  the  pupils’  investigations.  This, 




together with Gurdjieff’s ability never to seem the same person twice, gave 




rise to numerous disputes and misunderstandings. But despite the tantalizing,  crabwise  approach,  the  body  of  ideas  which  Gurdjieff  gradually revealed presented a strange coherence. The group in St. Petersburg began 




to talk of “the System.” It comprised a cosmology, a psychology, ideas of 




evolution and the structure of matter—it seemed in a puzzUng world to 




explain everything, and yet to lead to a point at which thought itself was 




annulled, and explanations became unnecessary. Step by step the pupils 




^proached what the Gurdjieff of  

Glimpses of Truth

 calls “the abyss which 




can never be bridged by ordinary human reason.” 




Gurdjieff was the Man Who Knows, and in  

In Search of the Miraculous, 

 




Ouspensky never quite conveys the intensity of a relationship with such a 




superbeing. However, what ^ taught Ouspensky during 1916 and 1917 




went something as follow;:




140 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Man is asleep. He must wake up. 




Nothing he thinks or feels or senses is conscious. He is hypnotized, like 




the sheep whom an Eastern wizard once mesmerized into believing that 




their procession to the slaughterhouse was both inevitable and good. Man is 




a machine. 




The  universe  also  is  a  machine.  Everything  happens.  No  one  can  

do

 




anything. They are  

done to

 as the forces which move the universe operate 




in them and the world around them.  

It

 hails,  

it

 snows; in the same way  

“it

 




laughs in me.” Over such processes man thinks he has control. He has 




none. The Great War now in progress: an example of sleep, the hypnotic 




state in which we are lived rather than live our lives. Such disasters are 




inevitable in a world of  

mad machines. 




WAKE UP




You do not realise your own situation. You are in prison. All you can 




wish for, if you are a sensible man, is to escape. But how escape? It is 




necessary to tunnel under a wail. One man can do  

nothing. But let us

 




suppose there are ten or twenty men—if they work in turn and if one 




covers another they can complete the tunnel and escape. 




Furthermore no one can escape from prison without the help of 




those  

who have escaped before. 




Under the direction of a Man Who Knows, it is possible to escape from 




prison. A group must be formed which obeys certain rules. Its members can 




help each other to fathom the working of their machines. They must keep 




secret  what  they  learn  because  of  the  impossibihty  of  transmitting 




accurately  what  is  said  in  such groups: this  silence is in itself  a useful 




exercise  because  of  the  tendency  of  the  human  machine  to  jabber 




automatically of what most interests it. They must tell the teacher of the 




group the whole truth, and this is difficult, because the human machine has 




a horrifying compulsion to lie. Although the teacher of the group cannot be 




deceived, he can deceive his pupils as much as he wants. It is for their own 




good. 




In order to wake up, members of a group under a teacher must “work on 




themselves.” This “work” includes several basic exercises. At first, a man 




must observe himself, study the working of the human machine. Then he 




must try to “remember himself,” be conscious of his own being. He must 




work  on  what  Gurdjieff  called  “considering,”  which  takes  two  forms. 




Internal considering is being concerned or guided by what other people 




think of us, and is to be avoided. External considering is to be cultivated 




and involves taking other people’s feelings into account, not expressing




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   141




what Ouspensky called “negative emotions.” This exercise was an exercise 




for the emotions, and work on the emotions—as the most dormant part of 




unconscious man—^formed an important part of Gurdjieff’s teaching. There 




are other exercises for the other centers. 




Centers? The structure of the human machine can be diagrammatically 




represented. Man, Gurdjieff began by saying, has three centers governing 




his  activity:  an  intellectual  center,  an  emotional  center,  and  a  moving 




center. These are located separately in the body and exist independently of 




each other. Later Gurdjieff was to refer to man as a “three-brained being.” 




It  was  part  of  work  on  oneself  to  harmonize  the  functioning  of  these 




hopelessly discordant centers. It became apparent that the description of 




three centers was one of convenience, for Gurdjieff eventually defined 




seven. The “moving centre,” together with the “instinctive centre” and the 




“sex centre” form the “centres of the lower story.” Above the “intellectual” 




and “emotional” centers are the “higher intellectual” and “higher emotional” centers, which represent functions present and perfectly developed in man, but which he does  

not know

 how to  

use. They can be used only by

 




higher sorts of man. 




There are seven numbers of man. Man number one has his center of 




gravity in the moving center, man number two in the emotional center, and 




man number three in the intellectual center. These are the men we know. 




Man number four results from work in groups. He has begun to balance his 




centers and has a permanent center of gravity in his attachment to the work 




of  self-development.  Men  numbers  one,  two  and  three  have  no  such 




permanent element in their being; all they consist of is a hundred little 




“I’s,” each with its different demands, likes and dislikes. At any moment 




“Webb” or “Ivanov” or “Ouspensky” can alter into “Petrov” or a stranger 




called, say, E. Hamilton Jones. Ordinarily, we “identify” with whichever 




imaginary “I” happens to be dominant. Men below man number four have 




no “I”; just a multitude of conflicting tiny selves. But man number four 




knows  where  he  is  going,  and  in  man  number  five,  the  permanent 




attributes are becoming crystallized, for he has attained unity. Man number 




six is a less perfected form of man number seven, “who has reached the full 




development possible to man and who possesses everything a man can 




possess,  that  is,  will,  consciousness,  permanent  and  unchangeable  ‘I,’ 




individuality,  immortality,  and  many  other  properties,  which  in  our 




blindness and ignorance, we ascribe to ourselves.” 




The seven numbers of man represent a functioning of one of the two 




fundamental  cosmic  laws.  These  are  the  Law  of  Three  and  the  Law  of 




Seven. They operate both in the structure of the human machine and in the 




greater machine of the universe. The Law of Three is the working of the 




universe which creates all phenomena of whatever order. “Every phe




142 T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




nomenon, on whatever scale and in whatever world it may take place, is the 




result  of  the  combination  or  meeting  of  three  different  and  opposing 




forces.” In relation to each other, these are expressed as active, passive and 




neutralizing forces, which Gurdjieff would later term “Holy Affirming, 




Holy Denying, and Holy Reconciling.” In a man who wants to work on 




himself,  said  Gurdjieff,  the  Law  of  Three  would  manifest  itself  in  the 




following fashion: his desire to work for a higher level of being forms the 




active force; his habitual inertia and mechanicalness, the passively resisting 




second force; and the reconciling aspect of the triad might be provided by 




 

new knowledge

 showing him the pressing need for such work and resolving 




the stalemate between his good intentions and his innate laziness. 




In the great machine of the universe, the Law of Three “is a property of 




the  real  world.”  The  Absolute,  from  which  all  creation  emanates,  is 




composed of three forces—^which give rise to such concepts as the Christian 




idea of the Trinity. The will of the Absolute creates worlds of a second 




order; and by the creative action of triads of active, passive, and reconciling 




forces,  passes  into  worlds  of  different  orders  far  removed  from  their 




sources. As the will of the Absolute is diffused further and further along 




what Gurdjieff called the Ray of Creation, the number of mechanical laws to 




which created worlds are subject increases. The expression “world” meant 




for  Gurdjieff  something  like  “sphere  of  being,”  “plane  of  matter,”  or 




“intensity of vibration. ” The second fundamental cosmic law is the Law of 




the  Octave  or  the  Law  of  Seven.  This  governs  the   

development

  of 




processes—^for example, the course of a man’s life. It determines that there 




shall be seven worlds along the octave of the Ray of Creation. Directly from 




the Absolute comes a degree of matter containing all created worlds leading 




to a less refined stage comprising “all suns” which gives place to the order of 




things existing in all planetary worlds. The Earth comes next to last on the 




Ray of Creation: it is a very bad place in the universe—^very heavy matter— 




subject to a huge number of mechanical laws. This is why a correspondingly 




intense effort has to be made by man to overcome his mechanicalness. 




Everything which happens to a man in his ordinary life as part of this 




machine  is  produced  by  the   

law  of  accident. 

  Only  by  submitting  to 




influences which come as it were from “outside” the mechanism and are 




transmitted through esoteric channels, can man hope to free himself from 




the  “accidents”  which  are  produced  by  the  automatic  working  of  the 




machine. 




WAKE UP




Organic life on earth, of which man is a part, has a particular cosmic task 




to perform. To describe this operation of the Law of Seven, Gurdjieff used 




the  metaphor  of  the  musical  octave.  This  requires  that  there  be  two




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   143




intervals in the orderly progression of created worlds: for such intervals 




occur  in  the  musical  octave  at  the  stages  where  the  rate  of  increase  of 




vibrations becomes retarded. In an ascending octave these intervals occur 




between the notes  

mi

 and/a and between  

si

 and <fo. On the descending 




octave of the Ray of Creation, human life helps to fill the second interval. 




The  cosmic  function  of  humanity  is   

to  transmit  and  transform  energies

 




 

across  this  interval. 

  The  proud  creature  man  is  a  thing  with  a  lowly 




purpose. There is nothing he can do about it, except to choose between 




cooperating consciously with the process of transforming energies, thereby 




acquiring something for himself, and performing his unavoidable function 




in a way which will satisfy the cosmic machine but profit him nothing. 




The  status  of  organisms  in  the  universe  can  be  determined  by  the 




classification of the substance on which they feed. Man feeds on three sorts 




of  food:  the  ordinary  food  that  he  eats,  the  air  he  breathes,  and  his 




impressions. From these foods he manufactures other substances, which in 




turn can serve as food for organisms which exist on diflferent orders of 




substance. By work on himself he has the possibihty of manufacturing 




substances of a higher classification, of transforming coarse matter into fine. 




This  process  is  what  the  alchemists  called  transmutation;  it  was  the 




“chemistry” of which Ouspensky had heard. If from the outside it could be 




said that work on oneself gives the possibility of attaining higher consciousness, of becoming man number four, it is GurdjiefF’s cosmology that e:q>lains this inner alchemy and provides the reason why. By work on 




himself man can not only perform his cosmic function but manufacture the 




substances necessary for immortality. 




Man has no soul—he must get up and  

make

 one. 




‘ Otherwise he goes to feed the moon. 




The moon is the last and most mechanical world on GurdjieflF’s Ray of 




Creation. It is a degree of matter in which vibrations have almost ceased. It 




corresponds to inert mineral life on earth. It is “matter without the Holy 




Ghost.” This is the destiny of automatic man. 




Tile process of transmutation, of manufacturing the substances necessary 




to give man immortality within the Hmits of his capacity as an organism, is 




connected with the acquisition of “higher bodies.” There are four bodies 




possible for the “three-brained being.” Three are the carnal or physical 




body, the natural body of emotions and desires, and the spiritual body of 




mental functionings. Work on oneself is necessary to produce even the 




natural and the spiritual bodies. The natural body grows out of the physical 




body  and  the  spiritual  body  out  of  the  natural  body.  If  a  man  has 




accomplished the transformatioips of substances necessary to acquire a 




spiritual body, he can prooeed to the acquisition of a fourth body, the divine




144 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




body  of  consciousness,  will,  and  a  real  “I.”  GurdjiefF  followed  the 




 

Upanishads

  and  Plato  in  comparing  the  four  bodies  to  a  carriage  (the 




physical body), the horse (feelings and desires), the driver (the mind), and 




the master of horse, carriage and driver (the real “I”). The fourth body is 




composed of substances much finer than the others and is thus subject to 




fewer mechanical laws. Man begins to acquire higher bodies by transmuting the finest substance manufactured automatically by his organism. This is 




“the substance with which sex works.” Much later Gurdjieff made it clear 




that this is sperm itself, rather than some imperceptible corollary. Abuse of 




sex makes it impossible to begin transmutation. 




Something has gone wrong with the functioning of the human organism 




and has prevented man’s orderly evolution to higher states. The “line of 




knowledge” has outstripped the “line of being.” What man actually  

is

 has 




been left behind by what he thinks he  

knows. 

 In fact, he even knows very 




little, because “objective knowledge” is possible only for a man of higher 




consciousness. This division between the Hne of knowledge and the line of 




being corresponds to the division in the psyche between false personality 




and essence. False personality is what a man thinks he is, and his essence is 




what he is in fact. Personality is an illusion, maintained by sleep and what 




Gurdjieff  called  “buffers,”  which  are  mechanisms  acquired  in  order  to 




soften  the  impact  of  rare  glimpses  of  the  truth.  Underneath  are  all  the 




conflicting “I’s” of man and an essence—the core and basis of what he is— 




which may have stopped growing in infancy. Whereas personality is subject 




to the law of accident, a man’s essence is always of a particular and definable 




 

type, 

  subject  to  the  law  of  fate,  which  can  at  least  be  allowed  for  and 




predicted. A beginning can be made toward liberating oneself from false 




personality by struggling not to “identify” too closely with momentary 




preoccupations; a man must learn to “play a role.” Eventually, he may 




discover his “Chief Feature the most important of the automatisms, which 




hold him in bondage. 




This complex and closely connected body of ideas was summed up in a 




symbol Gurdjieff called the enneagram. This is based on a circle whose 




circumference is divided by nine points, connected by lines to give a six- 




sided figure and a triangle. The enneagram contains and symbohzes the 




whole universe and Gurdjieff’s explanation of it, including the Laws of 




Three and Seven and the relationship of all substances to one another. In 




this symbol Gurdjieff altered his musical analogy by an arbitrary redisposition of the intervals in the octave. If the enneagram is taken as a diagram of possible human evolution, it shows how something is needed to help a man 




across these intervals. This can be provided only by “shocks” administered 




by a Man Who Knows. 




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T J O N S   145




GurdjiefF’s ideas made an extraordinary impact on his pupils. Those who 




were  interested  in  ocxiultism were  confronted  by an  apparently occult 




system which seemed to contradict almost every known body of occult 




ideas. Gurdjieff did relate his teaching to known mystical philosophies, but 




always in a way which emphasized the differences between what he taught 




and the object of comparison. For example, the term “Kundalini” is found 




in much Theosophical hterature as the name for a force latent in man which 




must  be  awakened.  Gurdjieff  used  the  expression  to  stand  for  the 




imagination, the power of fantasy which keeps man asleep and prevents him 




from  participating  in  the  real  world.  Later,  in   

Beelzebub’s  Tales, 

  he 




connected  this  with  his  doctrine  of  “buffers”  and  invented  a  word, 




“Kundabuffer,” to signify the same hypnotic influence. So much for the 




romantic dreams of believers in occult tradition. As for the source of his 




ideas, he would refer vaguely to the researches of the Seekers for Truth. 




His teaching was “completely self-supporting . . . and it has been completely unknown up to the present time. ” Once Gurdjieff said that it could be called “esoteric Christianity,” but chiefly he preferred the phrase, “The 




Fourth Way,” or “The Way of the Sly Man.” The Sly Man, the cunning 




man—^and has not one of his followers compared Gurdjieff to Odysseus?— 




used every possible trick to keep himself awake. The man of the Fourth 




Way avoided the pitfalls of imbalanced development which gaped for the 




followers of the other three “ways”—the intellectual way of the yogi, the 




emotional  way  of  the  monk,  the  physical  way  of  the  fakir.  He  was 




harmoniously developed with all his centers in phase. 




If, on the other hand, a pupil was a refugee from positivistic science, 




Gurdjieff’s  ideas  set  the  virtues  of  materialism  against  the  materialists 




themselves. One example is the process of the transformation of energies 




which Gurdjieff expressed in terms of forces he named after the chemical 




elements. “Carbon,” “oxygen,” and “nitrogen” stood for the active, passive, 




and neutralizing forces which combined to produce the “hydrogen,” the 




phenomenon or grade of matter in the universe. Each of the “elements”— 




including the “hydrogen”—had a numerical cipher attached to indicate its 




position  in  the  scale  of  the  density  of  matter.  In  theory,  therefore,  the 




designation “hydrogen 24” enabled the student to place a form of matter or 




energy—^for Gurdjieff made no distinction between them—in its cosmic 




relationship wdth all other substances; and Ouspensky worked out complicated mathematical tables to elaborate the hints he was given of this already complex cosmology. 




Ouspensky’s record naturally emphasized the topics which most interested him, and among these were several of his old hobbyhorses. One was




146 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




eternal recurrence, and he at last succeeded—after some six months—in 




extracting  from  his  teacher  a  quahfied  endorsement  of  the  idea  (later 




GurdjiefiF  himself  used  the  concept  in  an  unpublished  lecture,  “On 




Symbols”). Ouspensky’s questions about art provided Gurdjielf’s teaching 




on “objective” art. A question about the relation of men to the sources of 




esoteric knowledge gave Ouspensky the chance to expand Gurdjieff ’s quite 




straightforward answer into a beautiful diagram with men numbered like 




geometrical points. And, when Gurdjieff elaborated his doctrine of the 




different worlds on the Ray of Creation into a vision of cosmoses arranged in 




an ascending hierarchy of dimensions, he actually asked his pupil to expand 




the material from his own point of view. This greatly excited Ouspensky, 




who at once saw correspondences between Gurdjieff’s teaching and the 




more advanced speculations on multidimensionahty which he had been 




pursuing since  

Tertium Organum. 




We can identify the precise time when Ouspensky passed from fascination with Gurdjieff’s ideas to a deeper commitment to the practical activity proposed. About a quarter of the way through  

In Search of the Miraculous

 




he records a conversation about personal objectives. What, asked Gurdjieff, 




did each member of the group really want? Ouspensky’s aim had, of course, 




to  do  with  his  fourth  dimension.  Time.  He  was  convinced  that  it  was 




possible to know the future and claimed success in practical prediction. This 




obsession  with  the  future  course  of  events  led  to  resentment  at  the 




indignity of a life which might at any second be abruptly ended. It was futile 




to  begin  a  project  without  any  certainty  that  it  could  be  completed. 




Ouspensky told Gurdjieff that at all costs he wanted  

“to know the future.” 




Gurdjieff’s response shows how his angling worked. He replied that the 




future would be exactly the same as the past—^for what was the use of 




knowing the future if a man could not call himself his own master? Before 




trying anything so ambitious as knowledge of the future, a man must pay 




attention to his own machine. 




The beginning of the road was self-observation. Gurdjieff asked his pupils 




what was the most important thing they noticed when they tried to observe 




themselves. He appeared dissatisfied wath the answers given by the group, 




and he declared that the most important result of self-observation was the 




realization  that  one  cannot   

remember  oneself. 

  Oospensky’s  experience 




seemed at first to confirm this, but with increasing practice, he found that 




for  short  periods  he  did  succeed  in  attaining  the  condition  of  “selfremembering.” He describes one walk through St.‘Petersburg which he took with the firm resolution at all costs to “remember himself.” He began 




by finding the life around him too distracting, and to prevent his attention 




from wandering, he took to the sidestreets. With greater success he became 




bolder and tum«l into the Nevsky Prospekt in order to test his abilities




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   147




against the crowds. He decided to order some cigarettes—and as he writes, 




“Two hours later I woke up .. .far away.” In between “forgetting himself’ 




and again emerging into the state of “self-remembering,” he had telephoned,  written  letters,  and  conducted  himself  quite  properly  as  a normal—^that is, a sleeping—man. 




What is this state of self-remembering which is so difficult to attain and 




hold? Ouspensky thought of it as a double-headed arrow indicating that 




attention was directed both at an object and on oneself—fowf man  

has no

 




 

“I”! 

  One  of  the  achievements  of   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  is  that  it 




manages to lay stress on this central aspect of Gurdjieff’s teaching without 




being  specific  about  the  non-existent  “self”  which  we  are  supposed  to 




“remember.” The double-headed arrow, yes; but what is this curious and 




vivid state it induces for that 

—“instant in and out of time?’’

 “I have striven 




at it for over a quarter of a century,” writes Henri Tracol, “and I admit, I 




feel myself as unable to define it in a way which fully satisfies me as on the 




first day.” However, Maurice Nicoll has provided a preliminary description:




...  all  real  Self-Remembering  is  simply  forgetting  yourself,  your 




ordinary self, your ordinary negative “I’s,” your ordinary forms of 




internal considering, and all the rest of it, and feeling certain that some 




farther state of yourself exists above all this personal uproar that takes 




place  all  day  long  in  each  one  of  you,  with  which  you  keep  on 




identifying, and when the Work says that we have Real “I” above us 




you must understand that this act, so to speak, of separating from False 




Personality, dehberately at some moment every day, is designed to 




make it possible for us to come in contact with the first traces of Real 




“I” which is already there and which is our real goal. 




Henri Tracol has tried to describe his own experience. This is what the 




exercise of self-remembering feels like to perform; 




My  attention  is  no  longer  the  same,  its  power  accumulates,  its 




penetration and its freedom make it both larger and more alive. It 




mobilises in me latent forces, kept until this time in a dormant state. It 




activates  an  alteration  in  the  force  and  the  regulation  of  certain 




fanctions, releasing in this way a chain-reaction, through which in the 




self-same moment there is intensified the global perception I have of 




myself, a perception which is located far above the plane of perception 




proper and whose taste could not be confased with any other. 




This general activity coincides with the appearance of the intensest




148 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




feeling of renewal, a sensation of opening and belopging to the external




as much as the internal world, inasmuch as in me they are united. 




Ouspensky began to see the practice of self-remembering as the central 




point of Gurdjieff’s teaching, and tried unsuccessfully to transfer some of 




his enthusiasm to his literary friends. His experiments had proved to his 




own satisfaction that although mankind did indeed exist as a society of 




sleepwalkers,  

there was a way out. 

 He may not have realized it at the time, 




but his attitude had altered considerably since he first met GurdjiefF. “I did 




not even vdsh for any changes in myself,” he writes about his setting out for 




India.  But  now  his  efforts  were  concentrated  on  “waking  up.”  The 




watchword of GurdjieflF’s pupils had become “work on oneself,” and soon 




their efforts were referred to simply as “the Work.” Only one thing seems 




definite about this elusive activity. It involves  

change. 




Ouspensky was still in search of the miraculous, but the miraculous had 




altered its complexion. It had come to be associated v«th “waking up”; and 




as 1916 wore on, he and his companions found that Gurdjieff applied more 




and more pressure on them as he extended their activities. He now spent 




most of his time in St. Petersburg and began to arrange expeditions into the 




country.  Ouspensky  came  to  realize  that  during  these  adventures  and 




picnics, Gurdjieff was observing his pupils in roles which they did not adopt 




during a formal meeting. 




By now Ouspensky’s relationship with Gurdjieff’s Moscow group had 




become much closer. At first he had seen them as hopelessly artificial or 




“playing a part which had been learned beforehand.” Now he thought that 




he knew why this had seemed to be so, and why they had originally refused 




to answer his questions about the nature of the Work. “I understand now,” 




he wrote, “that these questions could not be answered.” "One must  

learn

 




in order to begin to understand this.” And with this annoying piece of 




mystification, all the keys are in our hands. 




Ouspensky began a series of experiments in fasting and the exercise of 




repetitive prayer known to the Orthodox Church as “prayer of the mind,” 




which had helped him in his attempts at self-remembering. He was keyed 




to a very high emotional pitch when, in August 1916, he arrived to stay at a 




Finnish dacha—^probably the one belonging to Madame Maximovitch. The 




events of the few days he spent in Finland were in many ways the strangest 




of his time with Gurdjieff. Ouspensky was reminded of his first meeting 




with his Master, when he had asked Gurdjieff gbout  

“facts

.” He had in 




mind facts of a “miraculous” nature, the sort of miracles which he had gone 




to India to find. Gurdjieff had promised that there would  

he facts. 

 But now 




Ouspensky’s ideas were different, and the word “facts,” with its significant 




stressing, related like the miraculous to self-remembering and waking up. 




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   149




Ouspensky  describes  what  happened  with  many  protests  that  his 




experiences  are  incommunicable—the sort  of riders which  had  always 




annoyed him in reading the mystics. He emphasizes that he arrived in 




Finland in an excitable condition, which was aggravated by Gurdjieff’s 




shock  tactics.  Gurdjieff  was  particularly  harsh  to  the  group  and  put 




Ouspensky severely out of countenance by repeating some unfavorable 




gossip Ouspensky had told him in confidence about Dr. Stoerneval. Then at 




about ten o’clock in the evening, Gurdjieff took Ouspensky apart with 




Stoerneval and the mathematician A. A. Zaharoff, and began to demonstrate certain movements of a type which became important later in his teaching. Ouspensky says that Gurdjieff neither hypnotized him “by any of 




the known methods” nor did he give him a drug. But he began to hear his 




teacher’s thoughts. 




At first this took the form of Ouspensky detecting “thoughts” directed 




specifically at him from among the general instructions Gurdjieff was giving 




to all three men. Then Gurdjieff’s voice started asking questions from a 




position somewhere inside Ouspensky’s chest; and to the astonishment of 




the other pupils, he began responding vocally to an interrogation which 




they could not hear. Gurdjieff ’s questions caused Ouspensky a great deal of 




agitation. He does not say what they were, but merely that they concerned 




“certain conditions which I had either to accept or  

leave the work.” 

 After 




half an hour’s conversation, Ouspensky reacted to a particular barb from 




Gurdjieffby rushing outside into the forest. For some time he walked about 




“wholly in the power of the most extraordinary thoughts and feelings.” 




From  this  tumult  he  emerged  with  the  conviction  that  all  Gurdjieff’s 




criticisms of him were correct. At this point he makes his first important 




statement on the results he obtained from his “miracle. ” “But I had found 




something else. I knew that he would not believe me and that he would 




laugh  at  me  if  I  showed  him  this  other  thing.  But  for  myself  it  was 




indubitable, and what happened later showed I was right. ” 




The miracle continued. In bed that night Ouspensky resumed mental 




contact with his teacher. Gurdjieff broke oflF communication when something  he  asked  Ouspensky  set  the  pupil  trembling  with  fear.  The  next morning the apparently telepathic conversation continued. For the three 




days more that the group stayed in Finland, Ouspensky felt himself “in an 




unusual  emotional  state  all  the  time,  which  sometimes  began  to  be 




burdensome.” In exasperation he asked Gurdjieff how this condition could 




be made to disappear. GurdjieflF replied that now he had what he wanted; 




he  was  no  longer  asleep.  Ouspensky  did  not  think  that  this  was  quite 




accurate. “I undoubtedly ‘slept’ at some moments.” 




The  miracle  did  not  come  to  an  end  with  the  stay  in  Finland.  Afi;er 




GurdjieflF left St. Petersburg for Moscow, Ouspensky “conversed” tele-




150 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




pathically with him while receiving a visual image of Gurdjieff in the train. 




And, for the next three weeks as he walked around St. Petersburg, he was 




continually conscious that everyone around him was asleep. 




Ouspensky’s “miracle” can be explained in a number of ways. The most 




important fact is that, as a result of the episode, he observed a change 




taking  place  in  himself.  Because  he  felt  that  the  personal  nature  of  his 




conversations with GurdjieflF precluded publication, it is impossible to be 




specific.  But  he  came  to  conclusions  which  in  the  light  of  later  events 




appear as a statement of principle:




The  first  thing  I  could  record  was  the  weakening  in  me  of  that 




extreme individualism which up to that time had been the fundamental 




feature in my attitude to life. I began to see people more, to feel my 




community with them more. And the second thing was that somewhere very deep down inside me I understood the esoteric principle of the impossibility of violence, that is, the uselessness of violent means 




to attain no matter what. I saw with undoubted clarity, and never 




afterwards  did  I  wholly  lose  this  feeling,  that  violent  means  and 




methods   

in  anything  whatever

 would  unfailingly  produce  negative 




results, that is to say, results opposed to those aims for which they 




were applied. What I arrived at was like Tolstoi’s non-resistance in 




appearance but it was not at all non-resistance because I had reached it 




no| from an ethical but from a practical point of view; not from the 




standpoint of what is  

better

 or what is  

worse

 but from the standpoint of 




what is more effective and expedient. 




It was after the intrusion of the miraculous into the Finnish dacha—that 




is, during the autumn and winter of 1916—that Gurdjieff began greatly to 




expand his cosmology. Then he left the St. Petersburg group largely to 




their own devices. The progress of the war and the social discontents arising 




from it had begun to penetrate even their charmed circle. By November 




1916, external circumstances—^what Ouspensky called “events”—could no 




longer be ignored; one result was that many new recruits arrived in the 




group.  Ouspensky  admits  that  the  sense  of  imminent  disaster  which 




engulfed his friends added to their concern with Gurdjieff’s ideas. For the 




System explained everything. Gurdjieff taught that war was the I'esult of 




man  not  producing  certain  energies—in  other  words,  becoming  conscious—and that instead, nature was forced to obtain such energies from the expenditure of human life. His pupils began to compare the System to 




Noah’s Ark. The Bible story appeared as a parable signifying the way in 




which  men  could  be  saved  from  the  world  of  “events”  by  esoteric 




knowledge. “We could not imagine,” Ouspensky writes, “how we could live




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   151




without it and find out our way in the labyrinth of all existing contradictions.” 




In the 1950s one reviewer of  

In Search of the Miraculous

 remarked that 




in no other book about the years 1914-19 was there so little reference to the 




Russian Revolution. Of course, Ouspensky and his friends took note of 




political developments, but the history of crime was what they were trying 




to escape. By diminishing personally, they were to become invisible, veiled 




by their detachment from the outer world. They were growing small like 




Alice in Wonderland, and the Ark in which they drifted on the ocean of 




“events” was a raft on the Sea of Tears. 




One of the new recruits to Gurdjieff’s teaching in the gloomy time just 




before  the  Revolution  was  Thomas  Alexandrovich  de  Hartmann.  De 




Hartmann, born in 1886, had already achieved some fame as a composer. In 




1906 his ballet  

Beauty and the Beast

 had been performed in St. Petersburg. 




In 1907 another ballet.  

The Pink Flower, 

 was performed at the Opera, in 




the presence of the Tsar, with Pavlova, Fokine, and Nijinsky in the cast. 




From  1908  to  1911,  de  Hartmann  lived  in  Munich  where  he  studied 




conducting. He believed with Beethoven that “music is a higher revelation 




than philosophy and science” and he too embarked on the search for Higher 




Powers. He says nothing about the early years of his quest, except that he 




“came in contact with many ‘ways’ and met many exceptional people, but 




they never seemed to be what I was looking for.” The direction of his search 




can only be intimated. In Munich, he frequented the Kandinsky circle, 




which was seriously concerned with Anthroposophy. In Russia, he was a 




fnend of Scriabin, the most Messianic of all the Russian composers, and 




studied piano under the Theosophist Essipova, who introduced Paul Dukes 




 

wThe Secret Doctrine. 




Tte de Hartmanns were members of the Russian aristocracy. Thomas 




the  great-nephew  of  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  the  author  of   

The

 




 

Philosophy of the Unconscious; 

 and he was released from military service to 




devote his time to music after a personal meeting with the Tsar. His wife, 




Olga Arcadievna de Schumaker, was the daughter of a senior government 




o£Bcial. The couple were living at Tsarskoye Selo when de Hartmann’s 




search  led  him  to  a  member  of  Gurdjielf’s  St.  Petersburg  group;  A.  A. 




Zaharoff. 




In the autumn of 1916 Zaharofif told de Hartmann that he had at last 




found a teacher. The composer was skeptical, having already met his fair 




share  of  quacks.  But  Zaharoff  intrigued  him  by  refusing  to  reveal  his 




teacher’s name and teUing him of the thousand roubles entry fee to the 




Work. Although the sum was large, de Hartmann could have paid it, and 




eventually that December he w^ given an appointment to meet Gurdjieff. 




Hie  composer  had  been  recalled  to  the  colors,  and  the  meeting  was




152 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




arranged at a restaurant on the corner of the Nevsky Prospekt in which no 




Guard’s oflScer would dare to be seen. When Zaharoff appeared, he led 




poor de Hartmann to an even more disreputable spot, a second-floor cafe 




frequented by prostitutes, where discovery would have meant forfeiting his 




commission. GurdjiefF arrived with Dr. Stoerneval and another man who 




was possibly Merkouroff. He presented a seedy appearance, with his filthy 




detachable shirt cuffs, his Caucasian features, and his offensive remarks. At 




one point Gurdjieff looked round the cafe and shocked the composer by 




observing: “There are usually more whores here.” 




Like  Ouspensky,  de  Hartmann  was  impressed  by  Gurdjieff,  almost 




despite himself And he had never seen such  

eyes

. . . .  He stuck to his guns 




and asked to be admitted to Gurdjieff’s Work. But when he offered his 




thousand roubles, Gurdjieff refused them, saying that although he had no 




need of help at the moment, the time would come when de Hartmann 




would be glad to hand over all his worldy goods. 




The composer had met his Master at the very last minute. Gurdjieff was 




no longer to be often in St. Petersburg, and the demands of the war were 




soon to disrupt the little group of disciples. Even Ouspensky had been 




called  up,  and  spent  four  months  in  the  Guards  Sappers  before  being 




discharged because of weak eyesight. In February 1917, Gurdjieff paid his 




last visit to St. Petersburg, and soon afterward de Hartmann left for the 




front. With him went his wife, who had met Gurdjieff on only one occasion, 




but that single encounter and a reading of  

Glimpses of Truth

 had decided 




her to follow her husband to Gurdjieff as soon as circumstances allowed. 




Gurdjieff left for Moscow by train for the last time—and to some of his 




pupils, he seemed to be transfigured in the window of his railway carriage. 




In  the  same  carriage  a  celebrated  journalist  was  traveling.  This  man 




assumed that Gurdjieff was of the same type as the war profiteers and 




Caucasian oil magnates who filled the coach. Gurdjieff encouraged his 




companion in this belief, but disquieted him by the cynical amusement 




vdth which he surveyed the hubbub of the money-makers. Was Gurdjieff 




also not anxious for his profits, asked the journalist? 




He smiled in a particularly calm way and answered gravely: “We profit 




from everything. Nothing can stop us. War or no war, it’s all the same 




to us. We always profit. ” 




“What do you deal in, then?” 




“In Solar energy. ” 




On March 8 and 9 strikers crossed the Neva into St. Petersburg. The 




Government  reacted  in  panic.  A  general  strike  was  called  and  three 




hundred thousand took to the streets. On March 11, the first casualties took




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   153




place, and the next day desertions from the army began. On March 15, the 




Tsar abdicated in favor of the Grand Duke Michael. Next day the Grand 




Duke also resigned the throne. 




Ouspensky read the news of the abdication on a flyer and felt that Russian 




history had ended. About a week later he called the leading members of the 




group to Dr. Stoerneval’s house and proposed that they emigrate. There 




was no sense in staying in a country where they could not  

work. 

 Since most 




of his companions disagreed, matters went no further. Soon afterward, a 




postcard arrived from Gurdjieff which said that he was going to Alex- 




andropol in the Caucasus. He asked Ouspensky to continue the work of the 




group and promised to return by Easter. The card had been written before 




the Revolution took place, and it was plain that Gurdjieff knew nothing of 




events. What were they to do? 




A week after Easter a telegram came announcing Gurdjieffs arrival in 




May. 




On April 16, Lenin arrived at the Finland Station. 




At  last,  in  early  June,  Ouspensky  had a second telegram  from Alex- 




andropol. It read: “If you want to rest, come here to me.” 




Ouspensky set off for the Caucasus through a country still dazed and 




unsure of what was happening. His train took two days longer than usual to 




reach Alexandropol because he had to run the gauntlet of drunken deserters 




and drumhead courts-martial. He arrived to find Gurdjieff assembling a 




dynamo for his brother. 




He liked Alexandropol. Despite the taint of provincialism, which had 




made the more snobbish of Gurdjieff s Muscovite followers look doubtfully 




at him, Caucasia was an area of romance. To Ouspensky particularly, as a 




devotee  of  Lermontov’s   

Hero  of  Our  Time, 

  the  Caucasus  would  have 




carried all the associations of adventure. The main mountain range is about 




750 miles long and at its broadest, over 100 miles wide. The highest peak. 




Mount Elbruz, is over 18,000 feet high. There are glaciers, forests, rain, 




snow, and appalling transport difficulties. The inhabitants represent an 




Opposite  pole  to  European  townspeople.  And  here,  the  torments  of 




Lermontov’s hero in the countryside with its frivolous watering places 




provided a fine precedent for the spiritual battles which developed under 




GurdjiefF’s direction. The romantic associations of the Caucasus may partly 




explain  the  special  atmosphere  of  GurdjiefF’s  work  there,  which  the 




participants remembered. 




After a fortnight in Alexandropol both Ouspensky and Gurdjieff set ofiF for 




St. Petersburg, but on the way GurdjiefiF changed his plans and Ouspensky 




went on alone. He had instructions not to stay long, but merely to gather 




any  other  pupils  who  wanted  to  come  from  Moscow  and  the  capital. 




Ouspensky  had  tried  to  persuade  Gurdjieff  to  emigrate,  but  without




154 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




success. In Alexandropol he had had the impression that his Master was 




waiting  for  something,  and  it  might  have  been  that  Gurdjieff  was  still 




listening to the grapevine leading through his intelligence contacts. He told 




Ouspensky that what appeared to be unfavorable circumstances would in 




the end prove to have worked to their advantage; and instead of leaving for 




Europe, he took a house on the outskirts of Essentuki, a spa district in the 




central  Caucasus  northeast  of  Mount  Elbruz  and  quite  near  the  main 




railway line running north and south. 




For  six  weeks  Gurdjieff  worked  with  his  pupils  in  this  small  rented 




house.  He  explained  that  the  Work  demanded   

“super-efforts

 These 




meant forcing oneself to make exertions beyond what was strictly necessary; 




for  example,  chopping  wood  in  half  the  time  normally  required,  or 




persuading the body to face unpleasant conditions when there was really no 




need. This super-effort would connect a particular center with an almost 




unlimited  source  of  energy,  which  Gurdjieff  described  as  a  “Great 




Accumulator.” The Work was beginning to take on an increasingly practical 




aspect; for one thing, the pupils did all the household chores. Gurdjieff 




showed them exercises for removing muscular tension and introduced them 




to  another exercise for which he became famous. This was the “Stop.” 




When the teacher called “stop,” the pupils had to freeze in the position in 




which they found themselves, no matter how uncomfortable or dangerous. 




This  provided  an  opportunity  to  study  one’s  machine  which  would 




otherwise not occur. An engineer, who occasionally performed the function 




of pupil-teacher and whom Ouspensky simply calls P., was caught with a 




hot glass of tea in his hand. Zaharoff heard the order just after inhaling a 




cigarette and endured what he described as the most unpleasant experience 




of his life. 




Physical  exercises  of  an  entirely  new  pattern  were  introduced. 




Ouspensky has described one. 




A man sits on the ground with knees bent and holding his arms, with 




the palms of the hands close together, between his feet. Then he has to 




lift one leg and during this time count:  

om, om, om, om, om, om, om, 

 




 

om

 up to the tenth om and nine times om, seven times om and so on 




down to one then again tvdce  

om, 

 three times  

om, 

 and so on, and at the 




same time “sense” his left ear and his right eye. Then separate the 




thumb and “sense” his left ear and so on, and so on. 




The order of the movements had to be remembered and coordinated 




with  the  counting;  and  both  activities  taken  by  themselves  were  quite 




difficult enough. Gurdjieff would complicate the affair with a breafbing 




exercise;  not  content  with  this,  he  introduced  a  fast  during  which  he




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   155




exercised  his  pupils  mercilessly.  And  these,  he  said,  were  only  the 




preparatory exercises. 




More people arrived. Thomas de Hartmann managed to procure a pass to 




leave St. Petersburg for Rostov on Don on the pretext of working at military 




inventions. He and his wife went nowhere near Rostov, but headed straight 




for Essentuki. The morning after they left St. Petersburg, soldiers called at 




the home of Mme. de Hartmann’s parents to arrest her husband. The de 




Hartmanns arrived in Essentuki on August 28 and were pitchforked into the 




extraordinary conditions under which the colony existed. They were so far 




from appreciating the sort of life they were to experience at the hands of 




those twin agents of havoc, Gurdjiefif and the Revolution, that they brought 




their chambermaid. 




Olga de Hartmann’s first glimpse of the assembled disciples reminded 




her  of  a  scene  from  Gorky’s   

Underworld. 

  She  and  her  husband  were 




introduced to the “Stop” exercise, and also to Gurdjieff’s talent for driving 




his  followers  to  desperation.  No  sooner  had  the  couple  arrived  tiian 




Gurdjieff began talking of giving up all work and going to Persia. To earn 




the money to do this, he proposed to break stones on the roads. He seemed 




to feel that the main obstacle to the de Hartmanns’ following him was that 




after a day of stone-breaking the women must wash their husbands’ feet. 




Now Zaharoff’s feet would smell awfiil, and while there were some women 




who could wash feet with equanimity, what about Olga de Hartmann who 




could not do without a chambermaid . . . ? 




GurdjiefF’s talk of abandoning work discouraged some of the pupils who 




were still not fully committed. Ouspensky himself was becoming confiised 




by his teacher’s erratic changes of mood. Gurdjieff announced his departure 




for Persia, but in fact left with Zaharoff and Mme. Ostrowsky to stay at 




Tuapse on the Black Sea coast. Ouspensky followed them there and then 




decided to pay a visit to St. Petersburg before the winter. 




The de Hartmanns stayed with Gurdjieff. One Sunday afternoon they set 




out with Zaharoff, Gurdjieff, and his wife to walk in the direction of Sochi, 




further down the coast, taking their luggage in a cart. Gurdjieff decided on 




a short cut over the mountains. The expedition walked until 2 a.m., and 




Thomas de Hartmann was deprived of sleep because he was selected for 




guard duty. Next day he was awarded the privilege of riding in the cart; and 




he  soon  discovered  why.  If  he  had  been  walking,  it  would  have  been 




comparatively easy to stay awake, but on top of the pile of luggage, there 




was the constant temptation to fall asleep—^which meant the certainty of 




tumbling to the ground. At the end of the second day they were allowed 




two  days’  rest,  but  soon  the  caravan  was  on  its  way  again.  Olga  de 




Hartmann had started oiA in a pair of fashionable shoes and finished the trip 




with bare and bleeding feet. The five members of the expedition halted




156 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




fifteen miles from Sochi at a village called Uch Darye, where GurdjiefF had 




rented a house. Almost at once de Hartmann collapsed with typhoid, and 




during his delirium, a letter arrived informing him of the confiscation of his 




estates. 




Ever afterward Thomas de Hartmann was to attribute his recovery to 




Gurdjieff. It was Gurdjieff who soothed him and prescribed placebos; it 




was  Gurdjieff  who  removed  him  to  a  hospital.  When  he  first  became 




delirious, Gurdjieff had been left alone with him and was discovered by 




Olga de Hartmann with “his face as white as his suit.” “I have no more fear 




for his head,” were his first words, and the implication is that the Master 




had done something—^Tibetan medicine? Hypnotism? Magic?—^which had 




slackened the grip of the illness. 




At Uch Darye, the crisis among GurdjieflF’s pupils was greater than that 




caused by the sickness of a single man. Ouspensky arrived to find even the 




devoted Zaharoff discouraged. The mathematician had seen him off to St. 




Petersburg with exhortations not to become trapped in the capital. He 




himself had burned his boats, he said. But now something had happened— 




Ouspensky suggests that whatever happened, happened as the result of a 




quarrel between Gurdjieff and his neighbors which Zaharoff had overheard—^and Gurdjieff was behaving in a manner which practically forced Zaharoff to leave. Ouspensky considered that this would be pure idiocy on 




his part, “I would not have sent a dog to St. Petersburg at that time.” But 




Zaharoff left. 




Dr.  Stoerneval  and  his  wife  had  arrived,  after  receiving  a  telegram: 




“Realise everything you can and come at once.” Mme. Stoerneval was 




reluctant to leave her family and the relative comforts of St. Petersburg, 




even  at  that  late  juncture,  but  eventually  her  husband’s  arguments 




prevailed. Dr. Stoerneval managed to withdraw his bank deposits, and the 




couple left St. Petersburg two weeks before the Revolution broke out. 




Early on the morning of October 25, Bolshevik forces went into action in 




St. Petersburg; and in the evening, the transfer of power to the Soviets was 




proclaimed. It was an event which could not fail to have repercussions even 




on a small band of seekers for truth on the shores of the Black Sea. In the 




Caucasus the political situation was becoming very confused. In addition to 




the Soviet-inspired “Trans-Caucasian Commissariat,” the White forces had 




to contend with Caucasian separatists—Georgians, Armenians, and Azerbaijanis—^who were not content with establishing claims to their resurrected nations, but vied incessantly with one another. In the south, the Turks, who were still at war with Russia, occupied Batum. The issue was 




further complicated by troops of the Allied Powers which were attempting 




to  help  the  anti-Bolshevik  elements  and  at  the  same  time,  prevent  the 




Turks from advancing further into Russia. 




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   157




At first GurdjiefF moved his household from Uch Darye to another village 




near Tuapse, lest the colony should be cut ofiF from supplies. Then in 




December, a rumor was heard that a Caucasian army was moving up the 




shores of the Black Sea. GurdjiefF decided to return to Essentuki and begin 




work again. On February 12, a circular letter was sent out over Ouspensky’s 




name to the Moscow and St. Petersburg groups, and in March about forty 




people collected in Essentuki, including once more Zaharoff. 




The life of the colony at Essentuki was a foretaste of what Gurdjieflf 




created on a larger scale at Fontainebleau. His followers rose early. They 




were allowed a pound of bread a day and had tea in the morning and the 




evening. At lunch they ate soup, meat, and vegetables out of communal 




dishes.  GurdjiefF  never  ceased  to  make  difficulties.  He  changed  the 




arrangement of the rooms in the house, moved the furniture around, and 




discountenanced members of the Moscow group who were new to this 




phase of his work. For some time he had been carrying with him a quantity 




of silk thread; he now decided that this must be sold to obtain funds. De 




Hartmann was asked to provide sheets of the special paper he kept for his 




compositions—it had become so rare that Prokofieff had traveled from 




Kislovodsk for the gift of a quire—^which were promptly torn up to make 




spools  on  which  the  silk  was  wound.  The  composer  was  then  sent  to 




Kislovodsk to sell the silk. He had many acquaintances in the town, and in 




acute embarrassment crept off to discharge his obligation under cover of 




darkness. His attempts were successful—until, on entering yet another 




shop, he encountered Gurdjieff who called a halt to de Hartmann’s salutary 




lesson in extent of his class pride. 




Gurdjieff elaborated the difficult movements he had begun to teach. At 




one  stage  the  members  of  the  group  were  taught  an  alphabetic  code 




expressed through the positions of the body. Then they were forbidden to 




communicate in any other way. Once Gurdjieff ordained a fast, and moved 




men and women on to separate floors of the house. There came a time when 




the  women  were  asked  to  give  Gurdjieff  all  their  jewelry.  Olga  de 




Hartmann cried all night, and, completely drained of any affection for her 




femily jewels, delivered them to her Master. Gurdjieff scarcely acknowledged the gift—^but as she was leaving, he called her back and returned her property. On the other hand, someone to whom Mme. de Hartmann later 




told her story blithely surrendered a valuable item to Gurdjieff and never 




received it back. With such devices Gurdjieff played on his pupils’ lives like 




an artist on an instrument. In the evenings, he talked to them in his own 




carpet-hung room and occasionally prescribed individual exercises. In the 




mornings, he sat to watch how his pupils took the announcements of the 




*Aen unpleasant activities fcr the day which he posted on the notice board. 




The difficulty in trying to describe what was going on at Essentuki is




158 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




almost insurmountable at this stage. Not only is the Man Who Knows 




impossible to know himself, but the Work itself is invisible. The story of 




Olga de Hartmann and her jewels seems a trite morality, and in certain 




respects it was. But it undoubtedly had its place in the context of the total 




situation at Essentuki and in the context of Mme. de Hartmann’s private 




situation. What the experience  

meant, 

 what meaning there was in it for her, 




is the only thing which matters—and there is no way of following up a series 




of such developments because the necessary frankness would rarely be 




forthcoming. All the historical observer can do is to concentrate on various 




points in the Work in a way which may gradually build up a picture of what 




the process may be. 




There is a similar difficulty in discussing GurdjiefF’s “movements ” and 




“sacred  dances.”  We  can  gather  from  Ouspensky  that  the  immensely 




difficult movements which required the coordination of separate and wildly 




complicated tasks for head, heart and hands, must have been connected 




with the idea of developing the activities of intellect, emotions, and the 




physical  body  into  one  harmonious  union.  No  doubt  the  pupil  would 




acquire more conscious control of his organism. But was this the sole or 




even  the  chief  purpose  of  the  exercises?  Almost  certainly  not.  Some  of 




GurdjiefiF’s movements—like the music which he later dictated to Thomas 




de Hartmann—^were given not as if completed for a particular purpose, but 




almost as problems to be worked out. The principles would be outlined and 




the skeleton had to be clothed. What then was the object; what were they 




all doing in the middle of a civil war pretending to be characters from Gorky 




or Lermontov or Dostoievsky? The spell of GurdjiefiF does not explain the 




intensity of the experiences through which some of his pupils passed, and 




until the experiences of other followers provide data for comparison, there 




is no way of conveying the nature of what was actually in progress. Beneath 




the pupils’ accounts runs another level of events at which they may not 




even hint. This is probably not because their experiences are in any real 




sense incommunicable, but because a full confession might well be too 




painful—and would have no chance of conveying the depth of personal 




meaning which a particular event contained. 




Even those activities which were recorded during the time at Essentuki 




soon became overwhelmed by the demands of survival. In  

Meetings with

 




 

Remarkable Men, 

 GurdjiefiF describes what must have been one of the most 




tragic events in his whole life. This was the unexpected arrival of nearly 




thirty of  his relations who had fled from Alexandropol to avoid being 




massacred by the advancing Turks. His father did not escape and was killed 




by the invading army. Gurdjieff was already supporting a colony of destitute 




aristocrats and intellectuals, and the appearance of his emaciated family 




increased still further his material responsibilities. 




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   159




During the summer of 1918 the pohtical situation in the spa area around 




Essentuki gradually deteriorated. Life grew increasingly difficult for the 




bands of refugees from central Russia. There was no news from the capital 




and conditions of simple hardship gave way to those of civil war. 




Internal conditions were changing also, perhaps as a result of the two 




months’ period of intensive work under Gurdjieff. New perspectives may 




have  been  opening  up  as  the  results  of  self-observation  and  discipline 




created new meanings—^and destroyed old ones. 




The destruction of old meanings may have had many different results. It 




all depended on the person, his aims and attitude toward the process by 




which he had been forced to discard the meanings which animated him 




before.  Our  sole  witness  for  the  changes  of  the  summer  of  1918  is 




Ouspensky but, as he himself was a leading figure and the events of which 




we are certain took place almost entirely inside him, he is the best possible 




witness we could have. And it should be noted that Ouspensky thought that 




most of the group which had worked with Gurdjieff for any length of time 




were experiencing similar processes. 




Ouspensky’s  account  of  his  break  with  Gurdjieff  is  extraordinarily 




important. It was not his only statement on his reasons for parting with his 




teacher—^and the parting was not yet final. His later pronouncements and 




their significance must wait until the glyph has unfolded a little further and 




there is more material for assessing the possibilities; but it may begin to 




appear that  

In Search of the Miraculous

 is a remarkably subtle book, and 




that beneath the surface discussions of Gurdjieff’s doctrine is concealed 




another layer of information which may more truly be said to form its 




subject matter. 




“For a whole year,” Ouspensky wrote, “something had been accumulating, and I gradually began to see that there were many things I could not understand and that  

I had to go




^  . I had for some time begun to separate G. and the  

ideas. 

 I had no




doubts about the  

ideas. 

 On the contrary, the more I thought of them, 




the deeper I entered into them, the more I began to value them and 




realise their significance. But I began very strongly to doubt that it was 




possible for me, or even for the majority of our company, to continue 




to work under G.’s leadership. I do not in the least mean that I found 




any of G.’s actions or methods wrong or that they failed to respond to 




what  I  expected.  ...  All  work  consists  in  doing  what  the  leader 




indicates, understanding iri conformance with his opinions even those 




things that he does not say plainly, helping him in  

everything

 that he 




does. There can be no other attitude towards the work. And G. himself




160 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




said  several  times  that  a  most  important  thing  in  the  work  was   

to

 




 

remember  that  one  came  to  learn

  and  to  take  no  other  role  upon 




oneself. 




At the same time this does not at all mean that a man has no choice 




or that he is obliged to follow something which does not respond to 




what he is seeking. 




GurdjiefF himself had admitted that all teachers worked through their 




different specialities; but what, Ouspensky wondered, if these activities 




were quite alien to a pupil? He compared his situation to that in which he 




would have found himself had he discovered that Gurdjieff had all the time 




been leading him toward a religious attitude—the way of the monk. Then, 




he would have felt fully justified in leaving the Work. This would not have 




been because of any prejudice against the ethics of the monastery, which 




might well be superior to his own; but they were not his ethics, and the way 




of the monk was not his way. “I had nothing to say against G. ’s methods,” 




he writes, “except that they did not suit me.” What was the cause of this 




disillusionment? 




Ouspensky says nothing further in  

In Search of the Miraculous

—which 




was  completed  twenty  years  before  his  death.  He  states  bluntly  that 




Gurdjieff was leading him in a different direction from the one he had at 




first  seemed  to  indicate.  But  whatever  he  thought  about  Gurdjieff’s 




intentions, he does not say; he disguises his suspicions with the metaphor of 




the monastery walls closing about him. Whether this is the whole truth is 




another matter, and the inquirer may well decide that further investigation 




makes this doubtful; for  

In Search of the Miraculous

 is a book whose clarity 




is deceptive. 




What is clear is that Ouspensky decided after a great struggle to leave 




Gurdjieff and begin work independently. He left the community and went 




to live by himself. Although he maintained friendly relations with Gurdjieff, 




he returned to work on the material which he had begun to arrange in 1911 




and  which  was  later  published  under  the  title  of   

A  New  Model  of  the

 




 

Universe. 

 The working title of this book was “The Wisdom of the Gods”—a 




translation of the term “theosophy”—and Ouspensky’s reversion to his 




former concerns is typical of the effect of Gurdjieff’s teaching on many of 




his  pupils.  Ouspensky  was  still  in  search  of  the  miraculous,  and  still 




believed that through it lay his way. 




As the political situation grew even more dangerous, it became clear that 




the only prudent course was to leave Essentuki. The town had a Bolshevik 




government, and Gurdjieff had camouflaged his activities under the Soviet- 




sounding title of an “International Idealistic Society.” Cossacks of the White 




forces began to raid the railway and eventually to attack the town itself. 




Refugees started to make for Novorossisk across the mountains on the Black




T H E   I N N E R   A N D   T H E   O U T E R   R E V O L U T I O N S   161




Sea coast. But Ouspensky hung on, although he had already decided to 




head for London where he had originally planned to pubhsh his “Wisdom of 




the  Gods.”  He  waited  until  Gurdjieff  himself  left  Essentuki.  “In  this 




respect, ” he wrote, “I had a strange kind of feeling. I wanted to wait until 




the end; to do everything that depended upon me so that afterwards I could 




tell myself that I had not let a single possibility escape me. It was very 




difficult for me to reject the idea of working with G. ” 




Events made the break for him. Gurdjieff himself was worried by the 




threatening conditions which surrounded his group, and particularly by the 




danger for his pupils of military age. The Bolsheviks, the White Army, and 




partisans of every description were conscripting all the ablebodied men 




they could find, and if the war were moving nearer to Essentuki, they must 




then be moved out of the combat zone as soon as possible. According to 




Gurdjieff’s account in  

Meetings with Remarkable Men, 

 he then decided to 




make the escape of his party the occasion for an expedition. He wanted 




to find certain prehistoric dolmens in which he was interested, and applied 




to the Essentuki Soviet for permission to mount an archaeological expedition in the mountains. The expedition was to have a secondary aim in searching for gold. Ouspensky told Gurdjieff that, for washing the gold, 




alcohol  would  be  necessary  in  large  quantities.  The  higher  Soviet  in 




Pyatigorsk was so impressed by Gurdjieff’s application that they not only 




provided equipment for the expedition in the shape of tents and tools, but 




the alcohol as well. Gurdjieff’s efficiency and his choice of cover for his 




escape  argue  great  familiarity  with  the  ways  and means  of organizing 




“scientific” expeditions. 




By infiltrating the Soviet passport office, Gurdjieff secured passes for the 




colony. He gave lessons in finding one’s way by the stars and in movement 




by  night.  It  was  apparent  that  the  trial  at  hand  was  not  merely  one  of 




physical endurance and good fortune. The journey would be both internal 




and external, a mountaineering expedition which was allegorical, yet in 




desperate  earnest.  For  the  de  Hartmanns,  who  had  the  opportunity  to 




emigrate in comfort under the protection of powerful friends, the coming 




privations presented real difficulties, especially as Olga de Hartmann was 




exhausted by the earlier austerities. The rules which Gurdjieff laid down 




were ferocious. Absolute obedience was demanded. Infringements of the 




code would be punishable by death. And Gurdjieff placed a large revolver 




on the table. 




The de Hartmanns already knew something of his methods. But they had 




been with their teacher for a very short time compared to some of the other 




pupils  whom  Ouspensky  watched  leave  with  forebodings.  He  clearly 




63q)ected that those who had worked with Gurdjieff for the same length of 




tiJne as he himself had would discover identical problems; and to a large 




extent, he was right. But his hesitations cost him dearly. GurdjieflF’s party




162 T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




left  at  the  beginning  of  August  1918.  Ouspensky  decided  to  go  to 




Novorossisk. A week after GurdjieflF’s departure, raiding Cossacks cut the 




railway line. The civil war enclosed Essentuki, and Ouspensky was trapped 




with the ten or so pupils of GurdjiefF who had remained behind. “I must 




confess I felt very silly,” he writes ruefully. “I had not gone abroad when it 




was possible in order to work vwth G. and the final outcome was that I had 




parted from G. and stopped vdth the bolsheviks.” 




History had overtaken him. Like his character, “Leslie White,” he was 




trapped in the battle for survival. ‘“Events’ gave little time,” he wrote, “for 




philosophical  speculations.”  While  GurdjiefF  was  riding  the  wave, 




Ouspensky  seemed  to  be  temporarily  engulfed.  This  may  have  been  a 




blessing in disguise, or it may have been the curse it appeared to be. It 




depends on what interpretation is given to his break with Gurdjieff The 




parting from a Man Who Knows, even if the pupil’s ideas are changed out of 




all  recognition  by  his  period  of  learning,  may  be  a  painful  process. 




Ouspensky had concluded that Gurdjieff was not the Master for whom he 




had hoped. He had partially withdrawn the meaning he had projected into 




the relationship, but it was the physical separation which began to make his 




choice for him. The outer revolution gave the axis of his inner life another 




half-tum. 




The Traveling Circus




GurdjiefiF and his expedition started in two groups from Essentuki and the 




nearby town of Pyatigorsk. They traveled in two railway cars which he had 




somehow  inveigled  from  the  Soviet  authorities.  After  two  days,  they 




reached the town of Maikop, at the edge of the mountains on a branch line 




southwest of the main railway from the Caucasus to Tsaritsyn (Volgagrad) 




aad central Russia. The tovra was the center of a pitched battle between 




Red and White forces, and all their official papers from the Bolsheviks were 




useless. Gurdjieff had originally intended to continue by rail from Maikop 




to the coastal region near Tuapse, and meant to begin his expedition proper 




with a hne of march roughly parallel to the sea in a southerly direction. But 




“events” made such a plan unfeasible, and for a time, the company halted in 




an abandoned farm near Maikop. 




They tumbled into an unexpected idyll, for the farm even included a 




swimming place in the White River, and they were able to relax sufficiently 




to ignore the bullets whistling overhead. 




However, GurdjiefiF devised means—even in Arcadia—of creating fiic- 




tion among his followers. The expedition was divided into small parties, 




each of which had a member responsible for buying and preparing food for 




the others. Then Thomas de Hartmann was ordered to leave his group of 




four and to eat with GurdjiefF’s own circle. Olga de Hartmann was left to 




cook first  for  two other  men,  and then  for  just one, whom she did not




163




164 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




particularly like. Finally she was left to eat alone. The day was filled with 




farm work, which provided many opportunities for Gurdjieff’s ingenious 




brand of needling. De Hartmann writes of the appointment of a lady to 




supervise  the  grooming  of  the  horses,  whose  duties  did  not  extend  to 




helping with the work. “And so, when we were scrubbing away with all our 




might,  this  lady  would  appear  and  say:  ‘Here  you  have  not  scrubbed 




enough,’ or ‘a little more there.’ This was calculated to irritate us but we 




would  not  show  our  annoyance.  Besides,  life  at  the  moment  was  so 




wonderful that it was impossible to be angry.’’




The battle for Maikop ended with a temporary victory for the White 




forces, and Gurdjieff’s party left their oasis for the hills. The day after their 




departure Maikop was recaptured by the Bolsheviks, They had escaped 




through the last possible gap in the net which had trapped Ouspensky. For 




a few days their route lay through populated farmlands before striking up 




into the mountains on a southwesterly course which would take them 




through sparsely settled highlands and down to the town of Sochi on the 




Black Sea. 




The journey became adventurous. Every so often they had to show their 




papers—whether these were White Russians or Bolshevik depended on 




which side of his moustache GurdjiefF twirled. In “The Material Question,” 




Gurdjieff reproduces a certificate which entitled him to carry a revolver. On 




one side it was signed by the officials of the Essentuki Soviet, and on the 




other by a White general in Maikop. Gurdjieff himself marveled at the ease 




with which he managed to extricate his party from the various difficult 




situations into which they stumbled: “It was not due entirely to my well- 




developed ability to discern and play upon the slightest changes in the 




weaknesses of the psyche of people in a psychosis of this kind. ” But  

to

 




followers like the de Hartmanns, who hung upon the Master’s every word, 




their good fortune seemed nothing short of “inspired guidance.” 




Although the direct influence of the war was left beneath them, the party 




encountered danger from the flotsam and jetsam cast up by the conflict in 




the hills. They met a monk, fleeing from the Bolsheviks, whose community 




had established itself in a cave with as much of its church furniture as could 




be  salvaged.  Once,  a  group  which  included  the  de  Hartmanns  was 




ambushed by bandits with whom Mme. de Hartmann coped resourcefully, 




even inducing them to sign a piece of paper stating that they had taken all 




useful possessions. The chmb through the mountains with their baggage 




carried on their backs taught a degree of practicality, even to a collection of 




city intellectuals. Toward the end of the grueling journey they did find a 




dolmen. Gurdjieff announced that dolmens might once have been road 




signs to places of initiation, and asked a party of hunters encountered by the 




expedition whether they knew of other monuments in the area. The answer




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   165




was negative; so GurdjiefF embarked on an experiment. He made some 




calculations, and set ofiF through the woods in a precise direction. Sure 




enough, another dolmen was found, and a third where Gurdjieff indicated. 




At length the scientific expedition emerged on the Black Sea coast at Sochi, 




well outside the batde zone. They had a celebratory dinner in a good hotel; and 




Thomas de Hartmann, who had finished the trek with his feet all but useless 




through septicaemia, had his visions of uninterrupted slumber shattered by a 




command from Gurdjiefi" to rise at six o’clock and feed the horses. 




The  storm  which  had  been  gathering  now  broke.  “In  Sochi,”  writes 




Ouspensky, “the greater part of the company, as I had foreseen, parted 




company  with  G.”  Gurdjieff’s  own  version  of  events  is  that  “certain 




members  of  the  expedition,  during  what  might  be  called  our  ‘Way  of 




Golgotha,’ were not equal to the situation, but manifested properties not 




corresponding at all to the high aim we had in view; I decided to part with 




them . . . ”  The de Hartmanns say nothing of the cause of this rupture. “Mr. 




GurdjiefiF suddenly announced that the expedition was finished. He advised 




us to make plans for the future as he had no more money to support any of 




us.”  The  result  was  that  only  Gurdjieff,  Mme.  Ostrowsky,  the  de 




Hartmanns, the Stoernevals, and possibly one or two others remained in 




Sochi.  Members  of  Gurdjieff’s  former  Moscow  group  left  for  Kiev  or 




returned  to  Essentuki,  which  had  been  retaken  by  the  White  forces. 




Among the defectors were P., the engineer, and Zaharoff. The former left 




for Maikop, where he became the director of a state school. Zaharoff went 




to Kiev, but later moved to Rostov-on-Don. 




What was the meaning of this dispersal? Was it that Gurdjieff was simply 




tired of his pupils? Or had they ceased to understand and therefore could 




be taught? Perhaps it was a test which the majority of the pupils failed 




by  demonstrating  that  they  placed  a  low  valuation  on  the  Work.  But 




perhaps the pupils who left were the ones who understood? Those who 




remained were, as Ouspensky said, still “young in the work,” with the 




exception of Dr. Stoerneval, and they may still have had a lot to learn. 




Possibly Gurdjieff had separated the sheep from the goats deliberately; 




possibly his conduct was really insupportable for one reason or another, or 




it may be that the money had indeed run out and circumstances dictated a 




policy of  

sauve qui peut. 

 The problem is the same as that of Ouspensky’s 




breach with Gurdjieff, and must await a resolution. 




In the middle of January 1919, Gurdjieff’s diminished company embarked at Sochi for the Georgian port of Poti and so arrived in Tiflis. 




The autumn and winter of 1918-19 which Ouspensky passed in Bolshevik- 




occupied  Essentuki  were  seasons  of  great  difficulty.  “For  me  and  my 




femily,” he wrote, “things turned out comparatively favourably. Only two




166 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




people out of four got ill with typhoid. No one died. Not once were we 




robbed. And all the time I had work and earned money.” He does not say 




that he was supporting Sophia Grigorievna, her daughter Mme. Sventitsky, 




and Mme. Sventitsky’s two children, a heroic endeavor which earned him 




the undying gratitude of his adopted daughter. He became a house porter 




and then a teacher at a state gymnasium. When he discovered that the 




Bolsheviks had requisitioned all the books in the town, he cowed the local 




Commissar, who “was a simple man and began to be almost frightened of 




me when I told him that I had written books of my own.” Ouspensky had 




himself made Hbrarian and established a library in the school where he had 




previously taught. His idea was to preserve the books until better days 




when they could be returned to their owners. He fortified himself behind a 




large  notice  reading  essentuki  soviet  library  and  spent  his  time  reading 




his  collection.  One  night  in  January  1919,  the  Cossacks  recaptured 




Essentuki for the White Army. The Hbrarian was galvanized into activity. “I 




ran round to the school in spite of the firing and tore down the word ‘Soviet’ 




for fear the Cossacks came and destroyed everything, and so it read simply 




‘essentuki  library.’  And  next day I  started to hand back the books to  their 




owners.” 




Despite this temporary liberation, Ouspensky was not able finally to 




leave  Essentuki  until  June  1919.  At  this  point,  the  Volunteer  Army  of 




General Denikin was still engaged in the advance it had begun in May, and 




conditions in south Russia were temporarily brighter. Ouspensky based 




himself in Ekaterinodar 

—a

 city he came heartily to loathe—and through 




the intervention of Orage in London made contact with Major F. S. Pinder, 




the head of the British Economic Mission to Denikin’s forces. Pinder took 




Ouspensky on to his staff, even though he had to pay his salary out of his 




own pocket. Ouspensky’s duties consisted chiefly of writing press summaries for the British Mission. He moved to Ekaterinodar from Rostov-onDon,  and  from  Ekaterinodar  to  Novorossisk  and  back  again,  a  weary 




pilgrimage up and down the railway line as the fighting swayed to and fro. 




Either  through  Major  Pinder  or  via  his  own  lines  of  communication, 




Ouspensky was by now in fairly regular contact with Orage, who published 




in the  

New Age

 a series of his “Letters from Russia.” The first is dated from 




Ekaterinodar, on July 25, 1919, and is the  

cri-de-coeur

 of a man who has 




lost hope in the state of the external world:




It is now two years since I last saw the new age, and I do not know 




what is being said and thought and written in England and what you 




know. 1 can only guess. During this period we here have lived through 




so many marvels that I honestly pity everybody who has not been here, 




everybody who is living in the old way, everybody who is ignorant of




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   167




what we now know. You do not even know the significance of the 




words, “hving in the old way.” You have not the necessary perspective; 




you cannot get away from yourselves and look at yourselves from 




another point of view. But we have done so long ago. To understand 




what “Hving in the old way” means, you would need to be here, and to 




hear people saying, and yourself too, from time to time, “Shall we ever 




live again in the old way?” . . . For you this phrase is written in a quite 




unintelligible language—do not try to understand it! You will surely 




begin to think that it is something to do with the re-establishment of 




the old regime or the oppression of the working classes, and so on. But 




in actual fact it means something very simple. It means, for example: 




when shall we be able to buy shoe-leather again, or shaving-soap, or a 




box of matches? 




Ouspensky was deeply marked by the experience of the political revolution. His insistence on the chasm between his own hard-won understanding and the knowledge of the West where conditions were so totally different, 




is not merely a literary affectation. The influence of his time with Gurdjieff 




is clearly evident in the way he tried to explain why the inexperienced can 




never appreciate the nature of the history of crime. “We know too much to 




be able to speak to you on equal terms. We know the true relation of history 




and words to facts. We know what such words as ‘civilisation’ and culture’ 




mean; we know what ‘revolution’ means, and ‘a Socialist State,’ and ‘winter’ 




and ‘bread,’ and ‘stove,’ and ‘soap,’ and many, many more of the same 




kind.” The view of history which he elaborated was of a huge biological 




machine. “Nations” and “States” were “big two-dimensional creatures” 




Adhich existed in an unreal world of “politics” and “economics.” “We know 




now that the whole life of individual men and women is a struggle against 




these big creatures. We are able to understand without difficulty that a 




Nation is a creature standing on a far lower stage of development than 




individual men and women; it is about on the level of the zoophytes, slowly 




mpying in one direction or the other and consuming one another.” 




In  Ouspensky’s  mind  the  System  which  had  served  him  and  his 




companions as a sheet anchor through the storms they had weathered, 




could explain many of the dementing facts of life in a civil war. He denied 




“preparing to set out an esoteric philosophy,” but promptly proposed an 




examination of the “life of the great forces” in contemporary Russia. “We 




observe primarily,” he commented, “that everything in it acts according to 




one general rule, which I may call the Law of Opposite Aims and Results. 




In other words everything leads to results that are contrary to what people 




intend to bring about and towards which they strive.” This is nothing else 




but  Gurdjieff’s  Law  of  Otherwise—and  in  the  life  of  the  Great  Forces, 




168 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




speaking  synchronistically,  the  Enantiodromia  of  C.  G.  Jung—^and 




Ouspensky applied it with substantial effect to show that such factors were 




the real arbiters of history, not the will of impotent man. Supporters of the 




Great War had not meant to overthrow the monarchy, reformers intended 




nothing  so  little  as  Kerensky’s   

faineance, 

  the  liberals  did  not  mean  to 




encourage Bolshevism. All the independent states which had sprung up 




since 1917 were in theory an attractive idea, and no doubt they did not 




mean to foster crime and speculation, but. . . . 




On  his  journey  from  Mineralny  Vodi  to  Rostov  and  Novorossisk, 




Ouspensky had passed through “four States, each with different laws, 




different prices, different sorts of police, united only by a single common 




quality, namely, that without bribes . . . you cannot go far. ” Inflation was 




the chief source of hardship, particularly for brainworkers, who did not rank 




as “workers” in the new society and whose wages therefore did not keep 




pace with rising prices. In Ekaterinodar, supposedly the cheapest place in 




Russia, the price of bread had doubled in a fortnight. Ouspensky anticipated the disbelief of his English audience. 




You will ask how it is possible to live under such conditions. And this is 




the most occult aspect of the whole question. 




I will answer for myself: I personally am still alive only because my 




boots  and  my  trousers  and  other  articles  of  clothing—all  “old 




campaigners”—are still holding together. When they end their existence I shall evidently end mine. 




By  the  time  of  his  second  letter  of  September  18,  Ouspensky  had 




obtained  copies  of  old  English  newspapers  and  was  more  than  ever 




convinced of the utter incomprehension of the world outside Russia. In this 




letter,  in  a  third  dated  September  25,  and  in  two undated  letters from 




Ekaterinodar which  the  

New Age

 published in December, he set about 




trying to bridge the gap, although with no illusions as to any possible effect. 




He did not believe, he wrote, that a single voice could have any effect on 




politics. Anyway, he was no politician. And events had long since passed 




the point at which anything could be done. “At present, while I am writing 




this, a fire is breaking out and spreading over Italy. The reason for this, as 




well as for many other things that will happen in Europe, lies in the fact that 




when peace was made no decision was taken about extinguishing the fire in 




Russia.” 




The fire was, of course, the Bolshevik menace, and Bolshevism was a 




menace, Ouspensky believed, particularly because the West in general did 




not understand—as Russia had earlier not understood—its real nature. He




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   169




rightiy guessed that an influential body of Western opinion was laboring in 




the  grip  of  an  illusion  which  the  Russian  intelligentsia  had  lost  in  the 




autumn of 1917. This was the confusion of Bolshevism with “a socialistic and 




revolutionary movement.” “Persons inclined to abstract thinking,” wrote 




Ouspensky, “persist in seeing in Bolshevism not what it actually is, but 




^yhat  it  ought  to  be  according  to  their  theoretical  deductions.”  He 




proceeded to enlighten his readers on the history of Russian socialism, and 




put forward the sweeping condemnation of Bolshevism which he incorporated  in  his   

A  New  Model  of  the  Universe. 

  He  had  begun  work  on  the revised  version  of  this  book  the  year  before  his  “Letters  from  Russia” 




appeared in the  

New Age, 

 and in it, there is much of the bitterness of this 




period of famine and despair. 




In the  

New Age

 Ouspensky defined Bolshevism as “the dictatorship of the 




criminal elements.” He proposed a new term for Soviet rule to denote its 




criminal nature, “something like ‘kakourgocracy’ or ‘paranomocracy. ’ ” The 




weakness of the intelligentsia and its belief that Bolshevism was a real 




reforming movement had allowed this unnatural phenomenon to come to 




power. As soon as the Bolsheviks attained a dominant position, they began 




to attack the intelligentsia, who alone could have penetrated and reformed 




the movement from within. Ouspensky described with horror how doctors 




could  not  prevent  the  spread  of  infection  because  their  actions  were 




dictated by Soviets of medical orderlies; how the press had been virtually 




supplanted by Soviet news sheets; how “science, art, literature were put 




under suspicion and were handed over to the watchful control of illiterate 




bodies of workmen.” The good of the proletariat excluded the good of 




anybody else, and ended by preventing any good at all. Ordinary writing 




paper cost three pounds ten shillings for twenty-seven sheets, all around 




were cholera, typhoid, and starvation, and Ouspensky’s thoughts were 




already  turning  in  the  direction  of  the  Laws  of  Manu.  Although  he 




published nothing on the subject until 1929, the edition he used appeared 




in St. Petersburg in 1913, and A  

New Model of the Universe

 cites several 




precepts of the legendary Hindu lawgiver which have a definite application 




to Ouspensky’s view of Russia during the Civil War; 




 

Verse 31. Chapter I. 




For the prosperity of the worlds he created from his mouth, his 




arms, his thighs and his feet the Brahmin, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya 




and the Sudra.

Verse 22. Chapter VIII. 




A kingdom peopled mostly by Sudras, filled with godless men and 




deprived of twice-bc^m inhabitants, will soon wholly perish, stricken 




by hunger and disease. 




170 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




The “Letters from Russia” expressed the desperation of the times, and 




Ouspensky was not wholly free from the more panic-stricken speculations 




which  led  some  White  Russians  to  the  delusion  of  conspiracy-theory 




politics. He saw a devilish German plot behind the Communist successes in 




China. He made strange and desperate statements like the one about Mrs. 




Pankhurst: “The personal staff of the advocates of Bolshevism is also a 




peculiar  thing.  It  consists  in  its  greater  part  of  neurasthenics.  .  .  .  Hie 




Bolshevik literature was brought over to England by Mrs. Pankhurst. There 




are names that always mean a lot.” And more sinister still—although in all 




fairness to Ouspensky it should be said that he appears never to have been 




an anti-Semite—^was the reference to “the right to live,” “i.e., a written 




certificate authorising you to reside in any particular place 

—a

 measure 




which  used  to  be  applied  before  to  Jews—[which]  is  now  a  rule  for 




everybody. I do not know whom we have to thank for such a brilliant 




solution of the problem of personal rights, but facts remain facts.” 




The scars caused by the desolation of 1919 never completely healed, and 




the essentially gentle Ouspensky preserved a hatred for Bolshevism which 




was all but fanatical. As he wrote his letters to Orage in London, things 




were  going  from  bad  to  worse.  AlHed  aid  was  being  withdrawn,  and 




Caucasian partisans were making life difficult for the White forces, which 




were eventually reduced to about eight thousand men against the sixty- 




thousand-strong Red Army. Corruption, neglect, debauchery and drunkenness  sapped the officers. At  the  beginning of  winter, General  Wrangel informed Denikin that his army had ceased to exist as a fighting unit. About 




the same time, Ouspensky described the White headquarters at the filthy 




and disease-ridden town of Ekaterinodar as “the most God-forsaken place 




one can imagine.” 




The  year  since  Ouspensky  had  parted  from  Gurdjieff  had  produced 




internal as well as external changes. In Ekaterinodar he decided that he had 




“acquired a  

strange confidence, 

 one which I could not define in one word.” 




This was a confidence in the complete insignificance of “the self which we 




usually know.” Behind this petty creature of the imagination, Ouspensky 




felt  the  presence  of  “another   

I” 

  which  would  be  able  to  surmount  the 




appalUng disasters which some of his friends had had to face. Two years 




previously, he wrote, Gurdjieff had asked him whether he could not feel a 




“new I” inside him, and he had been forced to answer no. Now he did feel 




the presence of this “I” and knew that it existed definitely as the result of 




his  work  with  Gurdjieff,  not  because  of  greater  experience  of  life.  In 




ordinary circumstances, the customary domination of all the irritating small 




“I’s”  went  on;  but  given  a  big  challenge,  Ouspensky  felt  that  his  new 




individuality would be able to meet it. A definite result had been attained. 




In the midst of the squalor and the sickness, Ouspensky gathered around




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   171




him a small group and gave a series of lectures on GurdjiefiF’s System and 




“the  things  from  ordinary  life  which  lead  up  to  it.’’  He  discovered  an 




amount of interest which set him thinking. The ideas “obviously answered 




the needs of people who wanted to understand what was taking place both 




in  them  and  around  them.”  The  engineer  P.  came  to  see  him  in 




Ekaterinodar,  and  Ouspensky  tried  to  improve  his  “negative  frame  of 




mind” by emphasizing the distinction which he himself now made between 




GurdjiefF and the ideas. Gurdjieff had tried to persuade P. to join him in 




Tiflis; but, like Ouspensky, the engineer resisted Gurdjiefif’s attempts to 




lure him back into the fold. Ouspensky’s own reasons for refusing to go to 




Tiflis were partly the huge material obstacles and partly the “very real” 




difficulties which had confronted him in Essentuki. “My decision to leave 




G. had cost me very dear and I could not give it up so easily, the more so as 




all his motives were to be seen.” 




By the time winter had begun in earnest, the only considerations which 




meant anything were those of survival. The Volunteer Army was disintegrating. In December, Wrangel began his long retreat on Rostov-on-Don, in which over 200,000 people died. As the military headquarters moved to 




Rostov, Pinder’s Economic Mission moved too, taking with it Ouspensky. 




In Rostov he met several former members of the St. Petersburg group and 




also A. A. Zaharoff, who was completely disillusioned with the Work. The 




two friends shared quarters in the overcrowded city, and Ouspensky’s 




conversations with Zaharoff seemed to lift the mathematician out of his 




depression. Once again Zaharoff’s feelings altered, but he was apparently 




unable to follow Ouspensky in distinguishing the Work from the person of 




its teacher. He began making plans to get through to Gurdjieff in Tiflis. 




Hie  pair  of  them  were  living  in  a  bam  near  Rostov  when  they  were 




visited  for  two  weeks  around  Christmas  by  Carl  Bechhofer  Roberts 




(1894-1949), a talented and irrepressibly cheerful writer connected with 




Orage’s 2Veu>  

Age. 

 He had met Ouspensky in India, possibly at Adyar, and 




again in St. Petersburg at the outbreak of the war. Bechhofer Roberts had 




translated some of Ouspensky’s articles for the  

T^ew Age, 

 and was surveying 




the situation as a freelance journalist. He received a rude awakening into 




the rigors of life in a country at civil war; 




Ouspensky showed me his possessions. They consisted of the clothes 




he was wearing (principally a rather ragged frock-coat, a remnant of 




former  fortunes),  a  couple  of  extra  shirts  and  pairs  of  socks,  one 




blanket, a shabby overcoat, an extra pair of boots, a tin of coffee, a 




razor,  a  file  and  whetstone,  and  a  towel.  He  assured  me  that  he 




considered himself exceptionsJly fortunate to have so much left. On the 




next day we transferred our belongings to a new dwelling he had




172 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




discovered for us. This consisted of two small rooms over a kind of




barn . . . 




While staying there, Bechhofer Roberts managed to obtain a quantity of 




coal, and the three celebrated vnth vodka, manufactured by Ouspensky— 




much to Zaharoff s dismay—from some neat spirit he had found in the bam, 




adulterated with orange peel. A hilarious conversation ensued during which 




Ouspensky  told  stories  of  his  youth  in  Moscow.  Bechhofer  Roberts 




introduced  an  unwelcome  note  of  sobriety  into  the  proceedings  by 




wondering where they would all be in a month’s time. Both Russians turned 




on the English journalist, and told him that the uncertainty of the times 




made it impossible to guess. A month later, Bechhofer Roberts entered in 




his diary the answer to his question: “I am at Novorossisk, writing this. 




Ouspensky is, I believe, at Ekaterinodar, trying to get his wife away to the 




comparative safety of the seashore. I do not know if I shall ever see him 




again, or where. Zaharov died three days ago of small-pox, contracted at 




Rostov at the very time when we were living with him. And the Bolsheviks 




are at Rostov.” 




The year which ended so disastrously for Ouspensky in the north Caucasus 




had begun quite favorably for Gurdjieff in the south. By the end of 1918, 




the Turks had withdrawn from Georgia, and the collapse of Germany led to 




the evacuation of German troops in the Transcaucasus. The small nations of 




Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan noisily obtained their independence. 




When Gurdjieff and his little party arrived in Tiflis in January 1919, the 




population of the Georgian capital—already a melting pot of races—had 




long been augmented by streams of refugees firom the fighting. Bechhofer 




Roberts reached the town fifteen months later, and observed that it had 




“become  a  centre  for  what  was  left  of  Russian  society.  One  found  the 




strangest people there. Poets and painters from Petrograd and Moscow, 




philosophers,  theosophists,  dancers, singers,  actors  and  actresses.  Paul 




Yashvili, the leader of the younger Georgian poets, was once moved, after a 




hearty  meal,  to  climb  on  a  chair  in  the  Caf6  International,  in  the  chief 




boulevard of Tiflis, and declare, in a loud voice, that ‘Not Paris, but Tiflis, is 




the centre of the world’s culture.’” 




Olga and Thomas de Hartmann were two of the additions to the cultural 




life of Tiflis. Olga had a trained voice and began to sing in the Opera, while 




her husband became Professor of Composition at the Conservatoire. Their 




connection  with  the  theater  resulted  in  a  meeting  which  was  to  have 




considerable consequence for the spread of Gurdjieff^’s ideas. The scene 




painter for the first operatic production in which Thomas de Hartmann took 




part was an artist called Alexander de Salzmann, whom de Hartmann had




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   173




met  in  Munich,  and  whose  wife  Jeanne  was  a  teacher  of  Dalcroze 




Eurythmics. 




Alexander de Salzmann was born in Georgia in 1874. His family was of 




Baltic origin and his father had been a Councillor of State. The son’s youth 




was eventful and is said to have included a kidnapping by brigands; but as 




de Salzmann’s joker-like temperament rivaled Gurdjieff’s in the practice of 




making fictitious claims about his personal history, we should beware of 




taking every such story literally. Another trait he shared with his Master-to- 




be was versatility; the French writer Michel Random described him as 




“enthusiastic  about  everything  ...  as  interested  in  Chinese  script  and 




calligraphy as in Sanskrit, as in studies in rhythm and music, as in canons of 




proportion and investigations into the Golden Number. ” Carl Zigrosser 




remembers him at the end of the 1920s:




His face with its weather-beaten skin, sunken cheeks and gaps and 




stumps of teeth, was not easily forgotten. He told me that he had lost 




his teeth through a fall from a cliff in the Caucasus Mountains when he 




was chief forest ranger to some Russian Grand Duke. Fortunately he 




fell into a tree and saved his life. In spite of his artistic sophistication, 




there was something wild and savage in him, a breath of his native 




Caucasus  perhaps,  in  his  taste  in  food,  in  the  primitiveness  of  his 




personal wants. His method of shaving was simplicity itself: he took a 




dry razor and scraped his face. Even this was a concession . . . 




After studying in Tiflis and Moscow, de Salzmann left Russia for Munich 




where he worked for many years as an artist and became friendly with Rilke 




and Kandinsky. De Salzmann became a member of the  

Jugendstil

 group, 




and contributed copiously to the periodicals  

Jugend

 and  

Simplicissimus. 

 In 




its early numbers,  

Jugend

 rarely carried fewer than eight of his drawings or 




paintings a year. De Salzmann used an extraordinary variety of styles which 




embraced  a  mannered  Art  Nouveau,  grotesquerie,  caricature,  and  a 




superbly blatant posterlike technique. By late 1909 his output in  

Jugend

 




had fallen off considerably, and in 1911 he left Munich for Hellerau near 




Dresden,  where  Emile  Jaques-Dalcroze  (1865-1950)  had  founded  an 




institute for teaching his system of Eurythmics. At Hellerau, de Salzmann 




developed another of his many talents. He was in charge of lighting the 




extremely  advanced  theater  designed  by  the  architect  Tessenow,  and 




invented  for  the  purpose,  a  unique  system  of  diffused  hghting  which 




captivated, among others, Paul Claudel. 




One fnend of Claudel thought that the playwright had been bewitched by 




de Salzmann, and to Jaques-Dalcroze he seemed “a real artist!” He was 




something of an enfant terrible. Conceiving a dislike for Hegener, the




174 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




German translator of Claudel’s play,  

L’Annonce faite a Marie, 

 de Salzmann 




proposed a walk in the forest to resolve a dispute about the production. 




There he had tied Hegener to a tree and returned to direct rehearsals to his 




own satisfaction. At Hellerau he met his wife, Jeanne Allemand, who was a 




pupil of Jaques-Dalcroze and, like him, from Geneva. In 1914 the couple 




left Germany for Moscow, where de Salzmann’s system of lighting was in 




use, and by 1919 the fortunes of war had brought them back to Alexander 




de Salzmann’s birthplace. 




Some time after he and de Hartmann renewed their acquaintance at the 




Tiflis Opera, a conversation took place between them and their wives about 




the necessity of a spiritual director. This resulted in the de Salzmanns’ 




introduction to Gurdjieff, who was impressed. “He is a very fine man,” he 




is reported to have said, “and she—is intelligent.” 




Jeanne de Salzmann, who was only twenty-two or twenty-three, was 




schooled by the Dalcroze Method and very much in love with Art. In her 




attempts to vmte, she began to find that all her ideas seemed to derive from 




what she had read elsewhere; that when honed down, there was only a 




scrap which originated in her personal inspiration. She examined the works 




of the great masters to see where their secret lay. But the great composers 




and the great writers turned out on inspection to be in their degree as 




derivative as herself Why had man so little he could call his own? Her 




disillusion with the human creative powers which she had idolized became 




acute—^and suddenly here was Gurdjieff, a teacher who could explain 




exactly why man could  

do nothing

 of himself




For a decade longer a few torches would glimmer on the shrine of the 




great god Art. But the days of his worship were numbered, and the bubble 




containing the first fine enthusiasms of the turn of the century, when artists 




became mystics and strove for the Absolute, had been pricked by the First 




World  War.  The  visionary  time  had  passed,  and  the  visionaries  were 




growing tired. Life had so definitely triumphed over art—and to prove the 




horrors of this vile dominion, Rheims Cathedral lay in rubble and the Cloth 




Hall at Ypres was burned—that it became increasingly difficult to believe in 




the new world which the new art had hoped to inaugurate. The alternatives 




appeared to be either an immersion in “events” or a withdrawal from them; 




and  to  those  of  a  quietist  disposition,  Gurdjieff’s  teaching had a direct 




appeal. As Gurdjieff himself wrote, “among the inhabitants of Tiflis, many 




people had been deeply affected by the change in their conditions of life 




and  felt  the  need  to  turn  to  other  values.  ”  Some  version  of  Jeanne  de 




Salzmann’s problem was to strike many intellectuals after the War, and 




events in Tiflis foreshadowed Gurdjieff’s ftiture success. 




Gurdjieff arrived one day in Mme. de Salzmann’s class to watch her 




pupils pursue the search for rhythmical beauty according to the system of




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   175




Dalcroze.  He  was  invited  to  demonstrate  his  “sacred  dances”  and  the 




movements he had taught at Essentuki. Gurdjieff lined the girls up and 




made  them  practice  mihtary  turns,  which  he  said  were  an  essential 




preliminary to any work on “Sacred Gymnastics.” Curiously, the class took 




to it, and GurdjiefiF’s movements formed a part of the Dalcroze pupils’ next 




public demonstration. Then Gurdjieff decided that there must be a second 




performance,  which  was  to  consist  entirely  of  his  movements  with  no 




Dalcroze at all. Rubbing salt in the wound, he directed Mme. de Salzmann 




to tell her pupils that they would all be paid. To the Dalcroze students this 




was the last straw, and about two-thirds walked out, but somehow, enough 




were  persuaded  to  take  part.  “With  those  who  are  left,”  Gurdjieff 




announced, “we’re going to be able to work. ” 




During  the  summer  of  1919,  the  de  Hartmanns  traveled  and  gave 




concerts. Gurdjieff returned to his favorite trade as a carpet dealer. His 




brother Dmitri arrived from the north with the news that most of the valuables which the group had left hidden in their house at Essentuki had been discovered and either destroyed or dispersed. Olga de Hartmann was 




sent  on  a  hair-raising  solo  journey  to  recover  what  she  could.  The 




expedition was doubly frightening because—regardless of the high probability  that  she  would  not  return—she  had  never  before  even  walked unaccompanied in the street. She went, fortified by a box containing a pill 




which Gurdjieff said was to be taken in case of grave necessity, and soon 




returned to Tiflis having managed to salvage two of Gurdjieff’s carpets and 




a few personal possessions. She realized that neither the carpets nor her 




own effects were important: “They were just a pretext to have me thrown 




ak)ne into life, to see how I could manage in conditions far more difficult 




tfian anyone, even Mr. Gurdjieff, could imagine in advance.” 




In the autumn of 1919, Gurdjieff’s small group—the Stoernevals, the de 




Hartmanns and the de Salzmanns—gathered in Tiflis. Gurdjieff’s carpet 




business had apparently prospered so well that he could now afford to give a 




niore permanent form to his activities. Newly independent Georgia was 




mtensely  chauvinistic,  and  well  disposed  to  offer  support  for  vaguely 




cultural  movements  which  were  assumed  to  confer  status.  Gurdjieff 




directed his pupils to puzzle out a name which would describe his proposed 




estabUshment.  “Afterwards  it  was  clear  to  me,”  writes  Thomas  de 




Hartmann, “that Mr. Gurdjieff had decided on this name some time earlier, 




b u t . . .  he forced us to look for it, pushed us, tried to bring us closer to the 




main  thought,  till  this  word  emerged.  Finally,  we  had  the  name.  ...  It 




was: the Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man.” 




Gurdjieff sent a prospectus for his Institute to Ouspensky in the north 




Caucasus. This made his 'former disciple “very thoughtful indeed.” On its 




cover, Gurdjieff’s face was encircled by the enneagram. The prospectus




176 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




stated that GurdjiefF’s system was “already in operation in a whole series of 




large  cities  such  as  Bombay,  Alexandria,  Kabul,  New  York,  Chicago, 




Christiana, Stockholm, Moscow, Essentuki, and in all departments and 




homes of the true international and laboring fraternities.” The subjects 




studied were said to be “gymnastics of all kinds (rhythmical, medicinal and 




others). Exercises for the development of will, memory, attention, hearing, 




thinking, emotion, instinct, and so on.” Ouspensky found attached to the 




prospectus a list of specialist teachers, which included his own name, as 




well as those of P. the engineer, and Joukoff, another disaffected pupil. 




None of the three had any intention of going to Tiflis at all. Ouspensky 




himself resisted Gurdjieff’s invitation to join him. “I realised, of course, 




that it meant that G. was obviously obliged to give some sort of outward 




form to his work ... I also realised that behind this outward form stood the 




same thing as before and that  

this

 could not change. I was doubtful only of 




my own ability to adapt m y s e l f . . . ” 




Ouspensky had already made his separation between the man GurdjiefF 




and his ideas. Now he made another between the form and the content of 




Gurdjieff’s  teaching.  He  considered  the  idea  of  the  Institute  for  the 




Harmonious Development of Man to be of merely incidental significance. 




And despite all his misgivings about the eventual outcome of Gurdjieff’s 




altered tactics, he was prepared to overcome them for the sake of a—still 




obscure—common cause. He was “confident, ” he writes, “that I should 




soon have to meet G. again.” 




In Tiflis, the house where Gurdjieff and his immediate followers were 




living rapidly became too small for the crowd of pupils who wanted to take 




part in the movements, so Gurdjieff extracted a promise from the Georgian 




authorities  to  provide  a  building  for  his  work.  The  fulfilment  of  this 




undertaking  was  perpetually  delayed—until  de  Salzmann  published  a 




cartoon of Gurdjieff and his followers cast upon the streets. The result was a 




sizable house with a hall for the movements. 




A piano—deliberately not a good one—^was acquired for de Hartmann to 




play. The members of the Institute were set to making furniture to seat 




sixty  people. Every evening  the  movements took  place. A pattern was 




emerging, which grew familiar in the days of Gurdjieff’s Institute at the 




chateau du Prieure. Later Carl Bechhofer Roberts even thought that “to 




one who like myself knew the baby institute at Tiflis, there is httle new 




about Fontainebleau.” As Ouspensky saw, Gurdjieff seemed now to be 




basing his efforts on “art ”—although he might well have added the category 




of manual labor. 




The theatrical connections of the de Hartmanns and the de Salzmanns 




dictated another outward form of activity. Gurdjieff was given a room in the 




Tiflis Opera, and he announced that they would begin work on his ballet 




 

The  Struggle  the  Magicians, 

  which  had  been  advertised  in  St.  Pe




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   177




tersburg. He began to dictate the scenario, and his followers started work 




on the staging. De Salzmann designed a stage set, and de Hartmann wrote 




the music for the first act. For the second act, Gurdjieff began to whistle 




music which de Hartmann took down. It was clear that there was no real 




prospect of staging the ballet, as the income of the Institute could not even 




have financed costumes. What then was the point? Work. The Institute 




itself, the movements, the project for the ballet: everything was intended to 




provide  a  matrix  for  “work  on  oneself”  The  ethic  is  embodied  in  de 




Hartmann’s story of how Gurdjieff made a dummy supposedly for use in 




 

The  Struggle  of  the  Magicians.  At

  one  point  in  that  magical  battle,  the 




scenario  calls  for  the  dummy  to  glow  with  light  and  fade.  Gurdjieff 




contrived the effect with a rheostat he had made himself; but the morning 




after having demonstrated his ingenuity, he was discovered by Mme. de 




Hartmann smashing the dummy with an axe. “We have made it,” he told 




her, “so we do not need it any more.” 




Christmas  1919  was  celebrated  in  humble style by  Gurdjieff and  his 




followers. The Institute failed to cover its expenses, and no one had any 




time left from Gurdjieff’s strenuous program to earn money. Meanwhile, 




even in Tiflis, which had at first seemed a sanctuary, conditions of life were 




unsettled. The Georgian government was expert at nothing but maladministration and Unguistic confusion. In 1919 it had issued banknotes in denominations between 50 kopecks and 500 roubles. By the beginning of 




1921, the face value of currency was anything up to 100,000 roubles. When 




in the spring of 1920 Gurdjieff let his Institute dissolve, it was clear that if 




he were to continue his work, it would have to be abroad. 




Before his activities moved into a new phase, he was visied by Carl 




Bechhofer Roberts, who had escaped from Rostov-on-Don a week before it 




feel to the Red Army on January 11. He passed through Ekaterinodar and 




requisitioned a room for Ouspensky and his family if they succeeded in 




leaving Rostov. He covered the melancholy retreat of the White forces to 




Ekaterinodar  and  Novorossisk on the coast, observing with horror the 




corruption and chaos of the emigration, the bribery which alone secured a 




passage  by  regular  steamer,  the  incompetence  with  which  the  official 




embarkation  was  administered.  “However,”  he  noted,  “a  lot  of  decent 




people did get away, Ouspensky and his family (rescued with difficulty from 




a suburb of Ekaterinodar) among them.” Ouspensky was more fortunate 




then  his  benefactor,  Major  Pinder,  who  had  been  captured  by  the  Red 




Army in Rostov and condemned to death. The sentence was, however, 




never executed, and in the spring of 1920 Pinder was able to visit Gurdjieff. 




Around April, Bechhofer Roberts reached Tiflis also. He carried a letter of 




introduction from Ouspensky to the man from whom the writer had not yet 




quite been able to escape. 




Bechhofer frequented Bohemian circles which he entered through the




178 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




friendship of the Georgian poet, Paolo Yashvili. One afternoon he found 




himself sitting at a cafe with Yashvili and a collection of poets, sculptors and 




dmigr^ politicians; with them was “a curious individual named Georgei 




Ivanovitch GurdjiefiF.” 




He had a circle in Moscow in the old days, and many members of it had 




followed him to the Caucasus in 1917 and wandered about vtith him 




ever since. He was still surrounded by this entourage of philosophers, 




doctors,  poets  and  dancers.  He  was  not  exploiting  them;  on  the 




contrary, several of them were Hving on his diminishing means. And 




by them all he was esteemed, almost worshipped, as a guide to the 




eternal  mysteries  of  the  universe.  ...  He  was  a  man  of  striking 




appearance. Short,  dark and  swarthy, with penetrating and clever 




eyes; no one could be in his company for many minutes without being 




impressed by the force of his personality. One did not need to believe 




him to be infallible, but there was no denying his extraordinary allround intelligence. 




Bechhofer had been afraid that Gurdjieff would “talk theosophy” to him, 




but was relieved to find that his new acquaintance was content to show him 




around Tiflis. Together they went to “many obscure restaurants, Georgian 




and  Persian, where we ate appetising food in sometimes unappetising 




surroundings.” Gurdjieff’s gastronomic expertise summoned up “unaccustomed and piquant dishes” for his EngUsh guest, and Bechhofer was treated to a luxurious hour or two in a bathhouse run by a “tall, bearded 




Persian” where the guests lay in stone basins of sulphurous water and were 




soaped and massaged by the attendant. 




In the evenings Bechhofer sometimes dropped in at the Institute for the 




Harmonious Development of Man to watch rehearsals for  

The Struggle of

 




 

the Magicians. 

 Gurdjieff was quite open about the provenance of his ballet. 




The  dances,  he  declared,  were  based  on  movements  and  gestures 




which had been handed down by traditions and paintings in Tibetan 




monasteries, where he had been. The music, also, was of mysterious 




tradition.  He  himself  could  not  play  a  note,  and  knew  nothing  of 




composition; but the academician who interpreted his ideas assured 




me that he had learned more of the theory of jnusic from Georgei 




Ivanovitch than in any of the schools. The decorations and costumes 




were also the work of Georgei Ivanovitch; he had even painted and 




sewn them himself. 




Although Bechhofer later called one of Gurdjieff’s Tiflis lectures “a vapid 




and half-hearted affair,” this was not really changing his tune; for the




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   179




Gurdjieff he had met and accompanied to restaurants and the baths was not 




the teacher but the Greek Armenian enjoying the pleasures of his native 




land. Bechhofer had been sadly disillusioned by his experiences with Indian 




Mahatmas,  and  Paul  Selver  of  the   

TSlew  Age

  circle  described  him  as 




invincibly prejudiced “against all forms of higher thought.” The Gurdjieff 




he found in Tiflis was the  

homme sensuel. 




But was this any more the “real” Gurdjieff than the puritanical Master 




whom other witnesses describe? The only other outside report of Gurdjieff 




in Tiflis in 1919 is a hazy reference contained in an attack by the CathoHc 




Roger Bezault who claims to have information from an acquaintance who 




knew Gurdjieff in this period. “In Armenian circles themselves,” Bezault 




writes, “Signor Gurdjian  

[sic]

 did not rejoice, on the moral plane at least, in 




an enviable reputation.” What this implies is a matter for guesswork; yet if 




there is any substance in the allegation, it is merely another example of the 




equivocal appearance which Gurdjieff displayed to the outside world. 




What,  anyway,  was  morality?  He  had  explained  to  Ouspensky  in  St. 




Petersburg that in his view morality was a relative affair, except for a man 




who was “working on himself” Then moral questions resolved themselves 




according to whether or not an event helped him in his struggles. 




The values of the Work were the only admissible standards. What served 




the aims of the Work was good, what hindered, evil. The individual disciple 




had to decide how he should react to Gurdjieff’s apparently capricious or 




cruel conduct. The single assumption required of him was that he should 




remember that, in all cases, the Master acted for his benefit. So how do we 




take Bechhofer’s report that when he left Tiflis, Gurdjieff was growing 




“weary” of his pupils and looked forward to a journey to Europe or to the 




East without them? Is this another case of the going to Persia with which he 




had frightened the de Hartmanns? The task of the pupil, as Thomas de 




Hartmann  understood  it,  w£k  to  stick  to  Gurdjieff  whatever  the  cost, 




paking use of the unpleasant parts of the experience for “work. ” But this 




did not mean that it was always clear when to obey or when to disobey the 




Teacher’s command. In the spring of 1920, Gurdjieff suddenly began to act 




toward de Hartmann in a hypercritical and imperious fashion, and ordered 




him to abandon the work wdth the Moscow Art Theatre which had become 




his livelihood. De Hartmann decided that he could not possibly give up his 




only source of income—that the test here was of his ability to make a logical 




decision for himself, not of whether he could obey his Master’s every word. 




He continued his association with the Theatre, whose personnel Gurdjieff 




affected to despise, and at a concert de Hartmann gave in Tiflis, he was not 




surprised  to  see  Gurdjieff  in  the  audience  and  to  hear  his  favorable 




verdict—although the entire staff of the Moscow Art Theatre was present. 




The increasing difficulties of life around him again forced Gurdjieff to




180 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




move. Georgia was not attacked by the Bolsheviks until the beginning of 




1921, but the perpetual misgovernment of the country and the incessant 




squabbling  with  the  neighboring—and  equally  bellicose—countries  of 




Armenia and Azerbaijan, had ruined economic life and made physical 




survival problematic. Distributing his capital among his followers in the 




form of carpets, Gurdjieff set off for the Black Sea port of Batum. For a 




second time, it was an expedition on foot; and as always, Gurdjieff made use 




of the hazards of the route to drive his points home. For example: there 




were four horses which the men usually handled. Once there appeared a 




large cleft in the ground, one particularly difficult to negotiate while leading 




an animal. A horse was taken from its male keeper and given to Mme. de 




Stoemeval—^who had just given birth to a son in Tiflis and was in any case 




not greatly taken with the Work—to lead around or over the obstacle under 




Gurdjieff’s gaze. 




When the traveling circus reached Batum, about thirty people took ship 




for Constantinople, where they arrived in June 1920. Almost immediately, 




Gurdjieff  and  his  companions  were  again  in  desperate  straits;  for  the 




precious  carpets  which  were  to  serve  instead  of  worthless  Georgian 




currency as negotiable funds had almost all been confiscated en route by 




one of the many makeshift armies which roamed the Caucasian states. 




Constantinople was not the easiest of cities for a refugee. About the time of 




Gurdjieff’s  arrival,  the  British  General  Harrington  was  reporting  to 




Winston  Churchill  in  London  that  “the  streets  of  Constantinople  are 




crowded with Russians—all without money.” The crowds which concentrated on the former Russian embassy were “literally starving. ” The flow of emigrants had been in progress since the defeat of General Wrangel at the 




beginning  of  1920,  and  among  those  who  had  been  some  months  in 




Constantinople was Ouspensky. He was living with his family in one of the 




refugee camps on the Princes Isles in the Bosphorus, supporting himself by 




tutoring in mathematics and teaching English to Russian exiles. He had also 




started a series of lectures on Gurdjieff’s ideas at the Russky Mayak, or 




White Russian Club, in Pera, the European quarter of Constantinople. Not 




for the last time, Gurdjieff found a group of people prepared by Ouspensky 




to cooperate in his designs. 




Once more Gurdjieff threw himself into commercial undertakings. He 




mentions the sale of a ship and a deal in caviar. He also returned to his 




activities as a “physician-hypnotist ” which involved him in an improbable 




relationship with a Turkish pasha who was determined that his son should 




become a champion wrestler. The de Hartmanns began to earn money by 




giving concerts. In the intervals wrested from the struggle for existence, 




Gurdjieff attended to the group which Ouspensky had formed and—in




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   181




obedience to his resolve to forget “all former difficulties”—^had made over 




to his Master on his arrival from Batum. 




Ouspensky devoted himself to helping GurdjiefF prepare to open an 




Institute in Constantinople. The relationship was interesting and satisfying 




for him, but it continued with mounting unease; and there is some evidence 




that GurdjiefF already enjoyed a generally sinister reputation in Emigre 




society. Boris Mouravieff met him at this period and observed one of the 




schemes  he  devised  for  making  money  for  his  Institute.  This  was  to 




associate with it a celebrated clairvoyant who was married to a Russian 




diplomat.  “From  the  first  contacts,”  claims  Mouravieff,  “she  refused 




peremptorily to have anything to do with him.” Mouravieff implies that 




some darkly occult motive lay behind the lady’s refusal to cooperate, but 




says no more about why GurdjiefF seemed to be making his bow in the role 




of Black Magician. 




He  clearly  intended  to  continue  the  pattern  begun  in  Tiflis.  In  the 




months before his Constantinople Institute opened in the autumn of 1920, 




work resumed on the scenario of  

The Struggle of the Magicians, 

 and once 




more  Ouspensky  and  the  others  were  made  to  rack  their  brains  in  the 




service of the Master’s intentions. Ouspensky has described how they spent 




a whole night translating a dervish song for the ballet. “This translation took 




the form of G. recalling the Persian verses, sometimes repeating them to 




himself in a quiet voice, and then translating them for me into Russian. 




After a quarter of an hour, let us say, when I had completely disappeared 




beneath forms, symbols and assimilations, he said: ‘There now, make  

one

 




 

line

 out of that.’” 




The  composition  which  resulted  contains  a  statement  of  the  Laws  of 




iSe^en and Three, together with an affirmation of the sacredness of all points 




of viesw It is twenty-two lines long, and to this day it remains unfinished. In 




the ballet the dervish sings this hymn to the fountain of his gnosis in the 




hubbub of an Eastern marketplace, and a stage direction breaks in where 




Gurdjieff and Ouspensky were unable to cudgel their brains any further to 




conceal the missing ending in the brouhaha round a quack doctor. 




The ballet itself is not really a ballet, but more of a symbolic play with 




GurdjiefiF’s movements and music. From one point of view, it is the purest 




melodrama;  but from another.  

The Simple of the Magicians

 has a certain 




beauty irrespective of its effectiveness in stage terms. The first act takes 




place in a crowded Oriental town, where the rich and satiated noble Gaffar 




fells  in  love  with  the  heroine  Zeinab.  In  the  second  act  it  appears  that 




Zeinab is the pupil of a White Magician whose pupils study the cosmoses— 




the “worlds” of GurdjieflP—and whose symbol is the enneagram. His pupils 




perform GurdjiefF’s movements. In the third act GafFar’s infatuation reaches 




a point where he is persuaded to call in a Black Magician to overcome the




182 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




stubbornness of Zeinab. Next, the audience is shown the cave of the Black 




Magician, whose pupils are ugly and deformed and who dance in a frenzied 




and  uncontrolled  fashion.  The  Black  Magician  casts  a  spell  on  Zeinab 




compelhng her to submit to Gaffar, but in the last act, the White Magician 




magically destroys his evil counterpart and forces Gaffar and Zeinab to 




come to him. They arrive like zombies and are aroused by the Magician. A 




great reconciliation takes place with a final benediction from the White 




Magician and a prayer to the Creator to help men to avoid involuntary 




actions. 




In Gurdjieff ’s terminology there is no “magic” in the sense of leaping the 




bounds of natural law. But someone who has overcome mechanicalness and 




can  

do

 consciously—is a real magician. “Black Magic” Gurdjieff defined as 




“a falsification, an imitation of the outward appearance of ‘doing. ” In this 




way the Black Magician and his pupils are the hollow replicas of the White. 




The White and Black schools also represent the struggle between the forces 




of mechanicalness and the will to be. What has happened to Zeinab when 




she succumbs to the spell of the Black Magician is that she has fallen back 




into the machine state and is reacting automatically. Gurdjieff intended that 




the same pupils should dance the parts of the pupils of both White and 




Black Magicians. Although Ouspensky possessed a text, his followers rarely 




performed the play because Mme. Ouspensky disapproved of the movements of the Black Magician’s school. On the other hand, Gurdjieff himself once seriously frightened at least one American pupil by forcing her to 




perform the depraved antics of the Black  

corps de ballet. 




Despite  the  stimulus  which  Ouspensky  derived  from  working  with 




Gurdjiefif again, his doubts about their association were rekindled. “Gradually,” he records, “the same difficulties arose before me as in Essentuki,” 




and  so  as  not  to  hinder  Gurdjieff,  he  returned  to  the  Prince’s  Isles. 




Although he had withdrawn from all active cooperation, he continued to see 




Gurdjieff, and they went together to visit the Mevlevi dervishes. Gurdjieff 




explained that the whirling dance was an exercise based on counting, like 




the movements he had started to teach at Essentuki. 




After giving Gurdjieff a couple of months to establish himself, Ouspensky 




resumed  his  lectures  in  the  Russky  Mayak,  where  his  audience  soon 




reached such proportions that he needed a larger room. Through another 




6migr6—^an aristocratic Tolstoyan—Ouspensky approached an English lady 




named Mrs. Winifred Beaumont for the use of her drawing room. A young 




British officer called John G. Bennett was at that time living with Mrs. 




Beaumont, whom he later married. Ouspensky’s meetings sounded to him 




like “pandemonium.” 




Bennett’s name will recur in the story of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky. He 




was bom in 1897 and, after service in the First World War, found himself




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   183




by 1921 head of a section of British Intelligence in Constantinople and in 




the thick of international intrigue. The account of the period which he gives 




in his autobiography,  

Witness

 (1962), must have been discreetly glossed 




over, for later, he admitted that his first introduction to the name Gurdjieff 




came  in  a  notification  from  the  Government  of  India  that  a  notorious 




Russian agent was on his way. His original version was that he had been 




invited to meet a mysterious occultist and explorer by a Theosophically 




inclined friend, the Turkish Prince Sabaheddin. The young intelligence 




officer had recently become interested in hypnotism and was preoccupied 




with  theories  of  a   

fifth

  dimension,  both  topics  admirably  suited  to 




GurdjieflF’s unusual point of view. GurdjiefF explained various hypnotic 




phenomena as control exercised over the finer substances in nature, and 




endorsed Bennett’s guess that his fifth dimension was the dimension of free 




will. Such free will could only be attained in this present life, he continued, 




and if Bennett wanted to attain this higher state he must start to work for it 




now. However, it is more than likely that a professional interest in the 




former  Tsarist  agent  preceded  Bennett’s  intellectual  absorption  in  his 




philosophy. 




At all events, he attended a session of the Institute in Pera. He watched 




the pupils, dressed in white with colored sashes, perform movements, 




including the one known as “The Initiation of a Priestess.” Then GurdjiefF 




gave the “Stop” exercise in an impressive and dramatic form:




Everyone lined up at the back of the room while Hartmann played a 




series of chords. GurdjiefF shouted an order in Russian and all the 




dancers  jumped  in  the  air  and  rushed  at  full  speed  towards  the 




spectators. Suddenly GurdjiefiF in a loud voice shouted “Stop!” and 




everyone froze in his tracks. Most of the dancers, being carried by the 




momentum of their rush, fell and rolled over and over on the floor. As 




they came to rest they became rigid like people in a cataleptic trance. 




There was a long silence. 




Another visitor to the Institute in Pera was the German writer, Alphons 




Paquet,  who  recorded  his  impressions  in  his  book,  

Delphische  Wan-

 




 

derungen

. Paquet (1881-1944) is not well known outside Germany. He was 




a Quaker and a poet in the tradition of Whitman. In the years before 1921, 




he had published several books on Russia and the Revolution, and was now 




on an expedition through Turkey and the Balkans in an effort to escape the 




atmosphere of pessimism and occultism” in Germany, and in the hope of 




recovering some inspiration from the clarity of classical Greece. Strolling up 




the hill at Pera one day, he noticed the signboard of the Institute for the 




Harmonious  Development  of  Man.  While  peering  at  this  intriguing




184 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




comehither,  he  was  accosted  by  a  voice  speaking  with  the  broadest  of 




Munich accents. It was Alexander de Salzmann, whom he had known in 




Munich  before  the  war.  That  evening  Paquet  was  introduced  to  the 




Institute. 




It was in the ground floor of a maze-hke house swarming with Russians. 




I got to know the Director of the school, a Caucasian who in the course 




of journeys lasting several years in the mountainous lands of Central 




Asia, visited monasteries and learned the rituals, dances and knowledge of the monks. This man maintained that the home of wonders was not  India.  He  talked  of  the  Pamir  highlands,  of  which  the  West 




scarcely knows the names, and of whose marvels the explorers will 




never tire of telling. I watched the dances, which his pupils practised 




in this shabby, black-and-white-tiled hall; there were scarcely several 




dozen men and women. ... In the curriculum of this Institute there 




were lectures from the traditions of Asian schools on religious myths, 




on rhythm, on the Law of the Octave, on the science of numbers and 




everything that has to do with the Cabala and the magical arts. Here 




one  learned  an interpretation of the remarkable stone monuments 




known as dolmens which stretch in an enormous belt from the central 




parts of Asia through the Caucasus, South Russia and Poland, over the 




northern moors to Scandinavia and England; which can be found in 




Brittany, in the Pyrenees, and North Africa, and end their pattern in 




Egypt; the secret symbols of an enlightened race from Bactrian and 




Atlantean prehistory—forgotten by astronomy and geology. . . . 




The Pera Institute did not last very long. Once more pohtical conditions 




looked threatening. As Gurdjieff wrote, “The wiseacring of the Young Turks 




began to have a peculiar smell,” and the ringmaster had seen his show 




stopped too often to commit himself prematurely. At the beginning of the 




summer of 1921, Gurdjieff closed the Institute. His best-qualified pupils 




were placed in charge of groups in Asiatic coastal districts. GurdjiefiF himself 




began planning to move to Germany, which seemed to him, “owing to its 




central position and cultural level,” to provide the most hopeful field for his 




activities. Undoubtedly the connections of the de Salzmanns influenced this 




choice, and judging from his later remarks about the Depression in the 




United States, Gurdjieff may well have picked on Germany because of the 




prevailing conditions of material hardship. 




He tried to persuade Ouspensky to come, but Ouspensky—probably 




with the conventional White Russian prejudice against the Germans—^had 




no wish to join him, and in June had a stroke of luck which made it possible 




for him to act independently. Out of the blue there arrived a check for




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   185




royalties for an American translation of  

Tertium Organum, 

 made without 




his  knowledge  while  Russia  had  been  cut  off  during  the  Civil  War. 




Ouspensky  replied  to  his  unknown  publisher,  one  Claude  Bragdon, 




thanking him for the translation, but protesting that  

Tertium Organum

 was 




“to a certain extent my weakness.” He asked whether Bragdon could help 




him and his family to reach England or the United States. This was beyond 




the American’s powers, but a second stroke of luck was in store. On May 




14,  1921,  Bragdon,  in  Washington,  received  a  cable  from  Viscountess 




Rothermere, the wife of the powerful English press baron. It read: tertium 




OBGANUM  INTERESTS  ME  PASSIONATELY.  DESIRE  VERY  MUCH  TO  MEET  YOU 




IF  POSSIBLE.  LEAVING  ENGLAND  END  OF  MONTH.  Lady  Rothermere 




followed up her enthusiasm with a visit to Ouspensky’s publisher, which 




resulted in a cable of 100 pounds to Ouspensky in Constantinople and 




another of Lady Rothermere’s telegrams to the author of the book which so 




engrossed her. This one read; deeply impressed by your book tertium




ORGANUM WISH MEET YOU NEW YORK OR LONDON WILL PAY ALL EXPENSES. 




There  remained  the  problem  of  visas.  These were  hard to  secure  for 




refugees,  and  eventually  J.  G.  Bennett  used  his  authority to obtain  the 




necessary  permits.  He  was  unable  to  perform  the  same  service  for 




Gurdjieff, who was probably still dogged by his reputation as a spy. Not 




until August were Ouspensky’s papers at last in order; and by that time, 




Gurdjieff had reached Germany. 




Gurdjieff’s  party  arrived  in  Berlin  in  the  early  summer  of  1921.  It 




included the de Salzmanns, the de Hartmanns, and Mme. Ouspensky with 




her daughter and grandchildren. The Stoernevals had been sent home to 




Finland to sell their property, and rejoined Gurdjieff somewhat later in 




Berlin.  A  large  hall  was  hired  in  the  suburb  of  Schmargendorf  as  a 




temporary headquarters, and Gurdjieff started to travel through Germany 




to inspect various possible sites for establishing an Institute. The period 




which the traveling circus spent in Berlin lasted until June 1922 and seems 




to  have  been  something  of  a  hiatus  in  the  development  of  Gurdjieff’s 




^vities. Thomas de Hartmann was “sure that when we arrived in Berlin 




even Mr. Gurdjieff did not know what would occur there and in which 




directions we would have to turn our efforts.” 




Gurdjieff’s activities in the latter half of 1921 dissolve into the shadows of 




general statements. There are some stray pieces of evidence which suggest 




that Gurdjieff’s ideas did filter through to German mystical circles. In a 




draft of his  

Third Series, 

 written in the mid-1980s, Gurdjieff talks of a group




followers in Bavaria; nothing else is known for certain of these followers. 




Gurdjieff’s party arrived in BerUn as one small group of refugees in the 




immense exodus from Soviet Russia. The capitals of the Russian emigration 




were initially Berlin and Paris, and to a lesser extent Munich and Sofia. The




186 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Russians brought with them the mystical traditions of their homeland and a 




hatred  of  Bolshevism  which  was  often  couched  in  terms  of  religious 




fitnaticism. All too often this was coupled with a paranoid distaste for Jews, 




who were seen as the representatives of the new materialist society which 




had  overturned  Holy  Russia.  It  is  well  known  that  the  notorious  anti- 




Semitic  forgery.  

The  Protocols  of  the  Learned  Elders  of  Zion, 

 was  brought 




from  Russia  in  the  baggage  of  White  officers.  Defeated  Germany—as 




Alphons Paquet observed—^was itself riddled with occultism of every 




description, and also inclined to manufacture conspiracy-theories which 




blamed  the  Jews  for  the  evils  attending  the  defeat  of  the  Fatherland. 




Disgruntled  

6migr6

 politicians of the Russian right wing found a ready 




hearing in Germany; and Munich in the early 1920s saw a notable instance 




of this combination when Alfred Rosenberg and other reftigees from the 




Revolution gathered around the circles—including Sebottendorff’s Thule 




Bund—^which preached a mystical nationalism. So much is perfectly true.*




It is therefore well within the bounds of possibility that Gurdjieff’s ideas 




did interest some Germans whose eyes were fixed on what they imagined to 




be spiritual values. It is even possible that his ideas penetrated to the Nazi 




hierarchy. Hitler, Himmler, and Hess were all mystics of one or another 




description—Rudolf Hess was a devotee of Rudolf Steiner—and among 




Alfred Rosenberg’s contacts in the Russian emigration, there were doubtless several who had heard of Gurdjieff. I have examined in detail much of the evidence relating to Nazism and the occult and found no support for the 




idea that Gurdjieff had any direct contact with any of the more prominent 




Nazis. There is, however, one consistent rumor which is far removed from 




notions of an occult conspiracy and is even fairly likely. This is that Alfred 




Hosenberg attempted to practice the ideas of Gurdjieff. 




I have myself talked to a former Nazi party member who once lived in the 




same house as Rosenberg and who confirmed that Rosenberg was interested 




in the ideas of Gurdjieff with the words, “that was his private study.” More 




than this he did not know. However, there is a further piece of evidence 




contained in an attack on Rudolf Steiner by Gregor Schwartz-Bostunitch. 




Schwartz-Bostunitch was an 6migr6 who had been born Grigori Bostunitch 




in  Kiev  in  1883.  In  Russia  he  published  articles  on  Rasputin  and 




Freemasonry, and, after the Revolution, fled to Germany where he decided 




that he was an Aryan, changed his name to Schwartz-Bostunitch, and soon 




became the chief Nazi propagandist against occultism, Anthroposophy, 




Freemasonry, and the Jews. A talent for personal survival led him to switch 




allegiance from Rosenberg to Himmler, and he ended his career as an SS 




 

Standartenfuhrer. 

 He was beyond doubt lunatic, and had more than




*For  a  discussion  of  Russian  and  German  occultism  and  their  conjunction  after  the  First 




World War, see my  

The Occult Establishment

 (La Salle, Illinois; Open Court, 1976). 




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   187




dabbled in the cults like Anthroposophy which he later attacked. In his 




pamphlet,  

Doktor  Steiner ein Schwindler wie keiner

 (1930), he claims that 




“my  first  Teacher  in  esoteric  matters—that  was  in  the  Caucasus  in 




1917-18—^warned me against Steiner.” Possibly there were other esoteric 




teachers in the Caucasus in 1917, but it seems probable that Bostunitch is 




referring to GurdjiefF, who roundly condemned all “theosophism,” “an- 




throposophism,” and other occultisms as teachings which helped to deprive 




man of the small percentage of genuine humanity he had contrived to 




retain. 




If this is so, there is a strong possibility that the ideas of GurdjiefF were 




brought to Rosenberg either by Bostunitch himself, or by similar characters 




in the underworld of the Russian emigration. Rosenberg might, of course, 




have made contact with the ideas in Russia, or through his first wife, Hilda 




Leesmann, who was herself a dancer and a pupil of Jules d’Undine, a friend 




of Dalcroze. It is probable that Rosenberg did bebng to Gurdjieff’s elusive 




Bavarian group, but there is nothing to show that he made contact with the 




ideas when GurdjiefF was touring Germany in 1921—he might not have 




become interested until GurdjiefF’s German visits began in the late 1920s. 




And, it is doubtful whether any other of the Nazi leaders—^with the possible 




exception of Hess—^would have had the impulse or the application to attend 




to GurdjiefF. The activities of GurdjiefF remain in the unmapped hinterland 




of the Russian emigration—^where almost anything might have happened. 




In later years GurdjieflF was always extremely sensitive about offending 




the police. His circumspection extended to the most scrupulous observation 




of the rules governing the amount of fuel in automobiles entering Paris, and 




it is unlikely that an emigr^ in a precarious position and with a dubious past 




would  risk  being  deported  by  associating  with  subversive  politicians. 




Gurdjieff s chief German contacts were probably with the circles of artists 




and intellectuals who were attracted to his ideas like moths to a candle, and 




the single episode of which we know anything before the spring of 1922 




reveals him in just such a situation. 




His quest for a permanent home led him to the Dalcroze Institute at 




Hellerau near Dresden, where the de Salzmanns had worked before the 




war. The choice of the lavishly equipped buildings of the Dalcroze Institute 




must have been prompted by the de Salzmann connection, but Hellerau 




would anyway have been an ideal site for attracting attention to his ideas. 




The  little  town preserved some of the atmosphere of the days of hope 




before the war; but the prophet Dalcroze had departed, and the colony of 




Progressives was lefi without a leader. 




Jaques-Dalcroze’s system of “Rhythmische Gymnastik”—anglicized “Eu- 




fythmics”—is designed to develop a sense of rhythm in children by training 




them to express a musirail line with their limbs. Upton Sinclair called it




188 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“music made visible” and described how “with yoiir arms you kept the 




time; a set of movements for three-part time, another for four, and so on. 




With your feet and body you indicated the duration of notes. . . . You 




would learn to analyze and reproduce complicated musical structures; 




expressing the rhythms of a three-part canon by singing one part, acting 




another with the arms, and a third with the feet.” At Hellerau—notably in 




the performance of Gluck’s  

Orphee

 which Sinclair describes in his novel 




 

World’s End

—Dalcroze achieved not only a reeducation of his pupils, but 




impressive artistic effects. 




In this atmosphere Jeanne de Salzmann had worked as a rhythmician and 




Alexander de Salzmann achieved his extraordinary lighting effects. But the 




dynamic quality of the prewar colony—it seems to have been scarcely less 




ecstatic  than  that  other  center  of  the  Progressives  on  Monte  Verita  at 




Ascona—was not of this world. Upton Sinclair’s  

World’s End

 incorporates a 




telling parable of the Dalcroze Institute’s isolation from everyday reality. 




On a plain below Hellerau, Sinclair writes, was “an exercise ground of the 




German army.” The drilling and maneuvering which took place daily were 




ignored  by  the  devotees  of  Dalcroze  as  irrelevant  to  the  Utopia  “of 




cultivated and gracious aesthetes in which they were preparing to pass their 




days.” But field-gray and cannon triumphed over Greek tunics and the 




symphony  orchestra.  At  the  outbreak  of  war  in  August,  the  Hellerau 




Institute was turned into a hospital. Next month, Jaques-Dalcroze signed a 




petition organized by Geneva intellectuals against the German bombardment  of  Rheims  Cathedral.  For  his  part,  he  decided  not  to  return  to Germany; and on theirs, the German critics, who had once showered him 




wdth praises, became rather scathing about the work of a man they regarded 




as a turncoat. 




For some time the Dalcroze buildings lay derelict, until they were leased 




to  three  separate  estabhshments;  a  less  ambitious  Dalcroze  school,  a 




German high school run by Karl Baer, and a school run on Progressive lines 




by A. S. Neill, the founder of Summerhill. The poet Edvnn Muir arrived to 




teach there in March 1922, soon after Gurdjieff’s appearance. He found a 




chmate of “new ideas” and an expectation of a “new life” which was to result 




from “the simple exercise of freedom.” 




Hellerau itself had turned from being a craftsman’s Utopia into a refuge 




for what would now be called radical chic: “government officials from 




Dresden and faddists of all kinds had settled in the place.” In the vacuum 




left by the absence of Dalcroze, all sorts of prophets made their appearance. 




Muir  remembered  how,  sitting  one  evening  in  a  garden,  “I  saw  a  tall 




handsome man in flowing robes, a fillet round his head, passing majestically 




with a beautiful subservient young woman on either side. I never saw him 




again, and hardly know whether he was a visiting prophet or an apparition.” 




T H E   T R A V E L I . N G   C I R C U S   189




If GurdjiefF had succeeded in establishing himself at Hellerau, he might 




easily  have  swept  the  board  of  such  trumpery  magi  and  given  a  new 




conception of “freedom” and “unfreedom” to the Progressive educators— 




he would in fact have attacked the people who were to show most interest 




in his ideas from within one of their own most hallowed citadels. The coup 




was  evidently  worth  taking  trouble  over.  “Finding  this  house  and  its 




installations more or less suitable for the founding and further development 




of the headquarters of the Institute, ” Gurdjieff wrote, “I resolved to acquire 




the complete establishment. ” What then took place has remained shrouded 




in  Ouspensky’s  hints  of  “strange  events  .  .  .  which  ended  in  legal 




proceedings.” The sole traceable witness of the affair is the late A. S. Neill; 




There was a big Krach [row] but in German which I hardly knew then. 




Karl Baer and a few others and I made a Vertrag [agreement] with the 




owner of the Dalcroze Anstalt I think for five years occupation. Then 




G. came along and told the owner, Harold Dohm, that he wanted the 




building. Dohm agreed to give it to him in spite of our lease. We said 




we would fight it by law, and Harold then came round to our side. The 




story went that G. took him to law in Dresden and in court Dohrn said 




G.  had  hypnotised  him,  saying  that  his,  G.’s  work  was  of  greater 




importance than ours. G. lost the case. 




The  legal  records  are  not  available,  but  the  facts  are  not  in  dispute. 




Against a legally binding agreement, Dohrn was persuaded to lease his 




property to Gurdjieff, and when he came to himself, he claimed he had 




been  hypnotized.  Dohrn  might  have  been  trying  to  find  an  excuse  for 




rtx^uct which he had belatedly realized was indefensible; but in view of 




GurdjiefiF’s known skill as a hypnotist, it seems likely that he was telling the 




truth. If so, this obliges us to look again at Gurdjieff’s repeated declarations 




about the oath he had taken to refrain from using his hypnotic powers. 




Either he was lying when he described this oath to his pupils, or he was 




lying when he gave them to understand that he had kept it. In  

Glimpses of

 




 

truth

 he is represented as warning his pupils to take nothing on trust; and 




it was an injunction which might usefully have been taken to heart by some 




of the Westerners who gravitated into his orbit. 




GurdjieflF’s stay at Hellerau was not entirely without results. He failed to 




acquire  his  building,  but  he  captured  some  of  its  inmates.  Some  of 




Dalcroze’s best rhythmicians were still at Hellerau, and several, including 




Jessmin Howarth and Rosemary Lillard, were so impressed by Gurdjieff s 




movements that they abandoned Eurythmics to follow the new Master. At 




Hellerau, there were few signs of the far-reaching changes once dreamed of 




by  Dalcroze—^who  had  hoped  to  induce  in  each  rhythmician  a  clear




190 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




perception of “what he really is.” Gurdjieff would have found it child’s play 




to adapt the occult vision of self-mastery which had served in Russia to a 




less superstitious setting, and present his System as a method of attaining 




the goals which Eurythmics had failed to reach. 




Some  hints  of  the  magician’s  aura,  the  habit  of  a  master  of  novices, 




increasingly  the  subfusc  of  the  psychologist—^all these accoutrements 




belonged to the “Gurdjiefi” who materialized in Europe in 1922. But his 




outer garments were those of the teacher of dancing, and the successful 




conversion of the Dalcroze rhythmicians probably decided him on this 




disguise. The terms in which his teaching was described in the prospectus 




for  the  Institute  at  Fontainebleau—and  therefore  the  way in which  his 




English and American pupils first perceived the Master—owed a lot to the 




brief adventure of Hellerau. 




The variety of Gurdjieff s changing forms and the subtle differences in 




the way his teaching was presented leave the inquirer confused as to the 




consistency of his methods. The strange dynamic of the man never alters, 




but  presents  itself  at  different  periods  as  a  mission  to  the  occultists,  a 




mission to the intellectuals—^and now, at his entrance to Western Europe, 




as a mission to the Progressives, with Gurdjieff as a  

Meister des Urseins

 who 




will return humanity to the state of grace before the Fall. He is playing 




quite a number of roles at any one moment; the big role of the Teacher, the 




small immediate role which is designed to produce a particular effect on a 




particular pupil, and a generalized role to ensure a relationship of  

meaning

 




with the whole milieu in which he chances to be operating. The confusing 




side effects of this method were not ignored by Gurdjieff, who could make 




use of them to enhance his mystique. As he says at the end of the first 




chapter of  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 “with a signature there must be no joking” 




and so halts the pen about to set his name on paper. Then being “very, very 




careful,” he writes not a name but a number of descriptions. 




He who in childhood was called “Tatakh”; in early youth “Darky;” later 




the “Black Greek”; in middle age, the “Tiger of Turkestan”; and now, 




not just anybody, but the genuine “Monsieur” or “Mister” Gurdjieff, 




or the nephew of “Prince Mukransky,” or finally simply a “Teacher of 




Dancing.” 




But  despite  the  fluidity  which  his  changes  of  role  allowed  him, 




Gurdjieff's progress through the world as a teacher  

accumulated form. 

 In 




Russia his role as magus had been conveniently broken by the Revolution, 




and it is Ouspensky’s writings which have preserved a record of this act of 




the  play.  When  he  detached  most  of  his  pupils  from  him  after  the 




expedition  across  the  Caucasus,  when  Bechhofer  Roberts  found  him




T H E   T R A V E L I N G   C I R C U S   191




apparently weary of his disciples in Tiflis, could this have meant exactly 




what it seems to mean? Was Gurdjieff in fact trying to divest himself of the 




pupils who, as it were, had played a role in one production and would be 




mere extras or impossible to cast in the next? To Ouspensky the program of 




the Tiflis Institute had seemed to “caricature” Gurdjieff’s work; but his 




understanding of that work had been influenced by his director’s previous 




production. Although no doubt similar truths are hinted at in  

The Tempest

 




and  

Peter Gynt, 

 there are critics who respond more readily to Shakespeare 




than to Ibsen. No one will object if they announce this fact; only if they 




claim that Ibsen ought always to have written like Shakespeare. 




On the other hand, a successful theatrical director can have his failures, 




and may indeed lose his touch altogether. 




Historical  circumstances  ensured  that  when  Gurdjieff  made  his  appearance in Western Europe, the earlier forms of his work still hung like a ghostly chrysalis about him. He had not succeeded in ridding himself of all 




his pupils and most probably only wished to dispense with the minor 




characters. Gurdjieff ’s Method demands that the teacher have assistants; 




and most of his general staff had already collected. Dr. Stoerneval was still 




with him from the early days in St. Petersburg, the de Hartmanns from 




Essentuki, the de Salzmanns from Tiflis. But there were others—less close 




to the Master and sometimes less capable of understanding his intentions— 




who remembered the earlier stages of Gurdjieff’s work with which they had 




been connected. And so, there inevitably grew up around the invisible 




Master  a  cocoon  of  visible  form—not  merely  the  form  in  which  he 




happened at any given time to be working, but the form in Time, the Long 




Body of the Work, the oeuvre of all past productions. 




His search for a suitable framework for his activities had halted for the 




moment at the Tiflis conception of an “Institute.” Institutes—like that of 




Dalcroze—were very much the fashion. Gurdjieff’s Institute was at first 




taken at its face value by his English converts—although it bore a puzzling 




complexion. His public entry to Western Europe was as mysterious an afiair 




as  his  arrival  in  Moscow,  and  the  long  period  waiting  in  the  wings in 




Germany was forgotten. His past was as unknown to his English pupils as it 




had been to the Russians; the myth of Gurdjieff had not yet had time to 




grow, and the glyph was only just beginning to elaborate itself. Once more, 




for his pupils, he was the invisible man, although to conceal his “tail”—the 




Long Body of his Work—he needed the agility of a Beelzebub. 







Beelzebub and his Grandchildren




These  ordinary  three-brained  beings,  who  acquire  information 




about every kind of genuine cosmic fact exclusively only thanks to 




their being-Partkdolg-duty, are more competent than the Angels or 




Cherubim  with  their prepared  Being, who  though perfected in 




Reason to high gradations, yet as regards practical confrontation 




may appear to be only such Individuals as our always respected 




Mullah Nassr Eddin defines in the following words:




 

Never  will  he  understand  the  sufferings  of  another  who  has  not

 




 

experienced  them  himself  though  he  may  have  divine  Reason  and

 




 

the nature of a genuine Devil. 




— 

Beelzebub’s Tales to his Grandson




(my italics)




When I die you vdll find Gurdjieff written on my heart? Yes? No? 




—MS note (undated) of  

Jean Toomer




193







The Maestro of the Musical Glasses




Gurdjieff’s initial success in the West was not brought about by the impact 




of the man himself nor by the forbidding intellect of Ouspensky, but by the 




personal  magnetism  of  A.  R.  Orage.  The  pleasure  and  the  intellectual 




stimulus Orage gave his friends denote a character of an unusual sort; 




however, this surface charm is the most difficult aspect of his personality, 




for it makes him singularly elusive. Like Gurdjieff or Ouspensky, he was 




the type  of  man  who  acquires  disciples,  but  unlike  them,  he made  his 




disciples his friends. They were sometimes blind to his faults, many of 




which arose from the facility with which he charmed his listeners, and 




despite the chorus of praise which arose after his death, his career was 




never smooth. 




Orage was a seducer. Himself seduced by an apparently endless series of 




causes and intellectual fashions, he seduced these causes to an Oragean 




purpose. He made disciples not only in esoteric matters but in literature, 




politics and economics, with theories which were never his own, but all of 




w^iich he animated. He was an editor of genius, because he possessed, in 




the words of the Freudian pioneer. Dr. David Eder, “the gift of returning 




another’s halting, half-expressed ideas with a force, a completeness that 




made one receive it as a word from Heaven.” 




Orage is remembered in Europe as the editor of the weekly paper, the 




 

New Age, 

 in which he published—often for the first time—such writers as




195




196 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Ezra  Pound,  Richard  Aldington,  John  Middleton  Murry,  and  Herbert 




Read. Its contributors liked to consider it “the paper for those who write 




the others, ” and the giants of the literary establishment like Shaw, Wells, 




and Chesterton were as content to write for it without payment as were the 




pygmy hopefuls. Of the editor, T. S. Eliot said that he was “the best literary 




critic of that time in London,” and despite the limited circulation of the 




 

New Age

 and the equally limited circle of contributors, Orage undoubtedly 




exercised an important influence on English letters in the early years of this 




century. 




In America a different and more restricted impression of Orage remains. 




He is thought of as a guru pure and simple, one of the esoteric pantheon: 




thus in a list of psychedelic beatitudes, Timothy Leary thanks “William 




Blake and A. R. Orage for Alan Watts.” Critics of Orage tend to praise the 




editor and condemn the guru. “How could he have fallen for such mumbo- 




jumbo?”  asks  John  Gross  in  his   

The  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Man  of  Letters. 

 




“The thought of him spreading the word of Gurdjieff among rich discontented New Yorkers is a profoundly depressing one. And what is the point of  having  the  finest  critical  intelligence  of  the  day  if  you  devote  it  to 




expounding the cosmology of  

All and Everything?” 

 Such a verdict makes 




the mistake of assuming that Orage’s interest in the “mystical” could be 




separated from his other concerns. It was a mistake not made by those who 




knew him, even if, like Ezra Pound, they did not share his preoccupations. 




“I had no interest in Orage’s mysticism and am unqualified to define it,” he 




wrote in T. S. Eliot’s  

Criterion

 after the death of Orage. “I was thankful he 




had it simply because it kept him in action. . . .’’




Alfred Richard Orage was born in 1873 in the Yjorkshire village of Dacre 




near Bradford. He was the last of four children, and his father died at the 




age of forty, only a year and a half after the boy was bom. The family was 




left  in  difficult  circumstances,  as  William  Orage  had  lost  his  farm  in 




Cambridgeshire and gambled or drunk away his money before moving to 




Yorkshire to become a schoolmaster. The youngest son may have inherited 




from his father some of the famous charm together with the freebooting 




qualities observed by Shaw when he described Orage as a “desperado of 




genius.”  But  the  most  obvious  influence  on  Orage’s  character  was  the 




experience  of  his  childhood  poverty  in  the  Cambridgeshire  village  of 




Fenstanton where the family returned soon after the father’s death. 




The  Orages  of  Fenstanton  liked  to  suppose  themselves  of  Huguenot 




origin—^although the name had been anglicized to rhyme with “porridge.” 




It was probably Bernard Shaw who started the more modish pronounciation 




with a French stress. Orage was later knovra even to close friends by his 




surname  alone,  and  it  became  a  sure  passport  to  failure  if  someone




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   197




presumed to call him “Alfred.” Even the “Richard” was an addition at his 




confirmation, based on his schoolboy nickname of “Dicky” and replacing 




the original “Alfred James. ” In this juggling with names and in his later love 




of anonymity—most of his contributions to the  

New Age

 were signed with 




different sets of initials—may lie a clue to understanding the man. As his 




reaction to Ouspensky was to show, one of Orage’s great fears in practicing 




the GurdjiefF Method was that he might discover that everything he had 




assumed to be himself—the artist, the editor—was not his real self at all. 




Not because he was ashamed of his early privations but because he had 




loathed them, the charismatic intellectual Orage—“whose very name was 




the Storm,” as Chesterton wrote—submerged the memory of Dicky Orage, 




the poor scholar of Fenstanton. 




Howard Coote, the son of the local squire, marked the boy out as a pupil 




of promise in the class he taught at a Non-Conformist Sunday School. Coote 




allowed him the run of his library, introduced him to the works of Ruskin, 




Carlyle, Matthew Arnold, and Morris—^who left their ponderous traces all 




over Orage’s less accompUshed prose—and subsidized his education after 




the age of fourteen. Under Coote’s supervision, Orage acquired French and 




Italian,  both  of  which  he  read  with  fluency,  although  despite  the  long 




periods  he  spent  in  France,  his  spoken  French  never  lost  its  execrable 




accent.  The  young  man’s  zeal  for  self-improvement  led  him  to  study 




drawing and to trudge the ten miles into Cambridge to art college. In the 




village school at Fenstanton, he so outshone his fellow pupils that a special 




prize  was  set  aside  for  him  to  prevent  his  competitors  from  becoming 




demoralized. Eventually he was appointed pupil-teacher, and the Coote 




&mily paid for his training as a schoolmaster proper at Culham College near 




Oxford. In 1893 Orage left Fenstanton for a teaching job in Leeds which the 




Cootes had found for him. 




About this time he met his future wife, Jean Walker, a student at the 




Royal College of Art. They were not to be married until 1896, and their 




friendship  was  sustained  chiefly  by  correspondence.  According  to  his 




biographer, Philip Mairet, Orage’s decision to marry cost him the support 




ttf his patron, who objected to the marriage as putting a stop to a promising 




career. But there were additional reasons for the quarrel. Coote himself had 




married and had a son, whom he proclaimed a future Prime Minister of 




England. All Fenstanton knew that Orage’s hopes were blighted; and later 




Orage himself used wrily to end the story with the reflection, “Ce sont les 




premiers pas qui Coote.” 




Orage had thus to abandon his hopes of a Cambridge education. He 




remained to the end of his days a don  

manque, 

 and during the decline of the 




 

New English Weekly, 

 he was debating with himself the possibility of getting




198 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




a  job  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  In  the  event,  the  intellectual  world  he 




entered was of a peculiar kind, and Orage became a leading exponent of its 




tradition of thought. 




The most superficial part of this world was its Socialism. Orage became 




involved with openair poHtical meetings in Leeds and worked for a time 




with  the  Independent  Labour  Party.  He  met  Tom  Mann  and  other 




Sociahsts; Mairet dates Orage’s real break from the life at Fenstanton from 




his arrival at his mother’s funeral wearing a tie of a revolutionary red. 




Orage’s politics seem to have put him in disfavor with the educational 




authorities; but in the main he was interested in what his friend Holbrook 




Jackson called “Socialism, not Socialists, ” and his Socialist phase represented the first stirrings of rebellion, the emergence of the thinking man. It also coincided vdth his marriage to Jean Walker and his escape from the 




tutelage of Coote. In any case, as Orage himself wrote in 1926, “Socialism 




was not then either the popular or unpopular vogue it has since become; 




but it was much more of a cult, with affiliations in directions now quite 




disowned—^with theosophy, arts and crafts, vegetarianism, the ‘simple life,’ 




and almost, as one might say, the musical glasses.” 




On all these tympani Orage learned to play wath scintillating effect. It was 




the  age  of  Fabianism,  of  anti-vivisection,  of  Rational  Dress;  of  William 




Morris and craftsmen’s Utopias; of Nietzsche and the Superman; above all, 




of  the  occultists.  In  England  the  Theosophical  Society  combined  H.  P. 




Blavatsky’s occultism with the emphasis placed on social reform by her 




successor, Annie Besant. It was an atmosphere in which Ouspensky would 




have  been  perfectly  at  home.  The  influence  of  this  milieu  remained 




surprisingly strong up to the 1930s and produced a sort of intellectual- 




D. H. Lawrence and Charles Williams are two other examples of the type-




who remained isolated from the mainstream of thought in London or the 




universities. Orage was not the only thinker to have received his further 




education at Theosophical hands; what was remarkable was the speed with 




which he came to dominate his field of activity and the critical mind which 




refused to become the slave of Tibetan Mahatmas. 




Orage  had  no  particular  religious  upbringing.  His  mother  was  not 




religious, and his attendance at the Non-Conformist Sunday School does 




not appear to have produced any extraordinary piety. “I remember,” he 




wrote  in  1907,  “years  ago  boo-ing  through  the  keyhole  of  a  Methodist 




meeting in which a Revivalist was singing, ‘Where is my wandering boy 




tonight?’  And  I  remember  the  Revivahst  boupding  to  the  door  and 




shouting: ‘Get away, you httle fiend!”’ But he clearly had a natural bent for 




mystical and esoteric works which his marriage to Jean Walker greatly 




strengthened—as his wife herself was a keen Theosophist. About 1896 




Orage became a member of the Theosophical Society and soon created




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   199




consternation by what the neophytes considered his “destructive” tendencies and an unorthodox enthusiasm for Plato and the  

Mahabharata. 




Before long Orage felt descending on his shoulders the folds of the guru’s 




mantle. His first personal forum outside Theosophical lecture platforms was 




a small “Plato Group” in Leeds which met weekly for several years. From 




the point of view of some of his listeners, Orage might just as well have 




talked about gardening, for in Holbrook Jackson’s words: “The attraction 




was ultimately Orage, not Plato, or Nietzsche, or Blavatsky, or whatever it 




might be at a particular moment. He used philosophy as the jumping-off 




place for the display of his own powers and personality.” Orage’s personal 




magnetism  began  to  attract  devotees,  and  his  long-boned,  handsome 




physique did nothing to put them off. Holbrook Jackson remembers him as 




he was in 1901:




In appearance Orage was tall and at that time slim and dark-haired. He 




dressed conventionally, except for a soft felt hat, then unusual, and 




probably an indication of social and aesthetic revolt. He had an  

aura, 

 




and impressed so much by his presence that you forgot details, even 




the vague birthmark which broke into his complexion like an irregular 




sunburn, and seemed to become deeper when he was bored or out of 




humour.  ...  You  expected  a  man  who  looked  like  that  to  talk 




well. . . . Even his small talk was fascinating. 




Jackson, who loathed the “yoga-stricken mugwumps of Leeds,” was not the 




only person to comment on Orage’s “aura”—^and his eyes. The Nietzschean 




Anthony Ludovici, who first met Orage in London in the late 1900s, noticed 




both




I  was  struck  then,  as  I  never  ceased  to  be  struck  every  time  I  met 




Orage, by the intense intellectuality that radiated from every part of 




his being, particularly, of course, his eyes. A curious disparity between 




the  latter,  whether  in  their  pigmentation  or  form,  only  served  to 




enhance the uncanny expression of resolute and penetrating wizardry 




which always sufifused his face when he was speaking, and many a 




defeated debater must have left the bewildering man’s presence with 




an uncomfortable feeling of having been routed as much by what he 




had seen as by what he had heard. 




Orage’s mental fireworks often had miraculous results. Jackson noted 




their  invigorating  effect  on  diffident  young  men.  “And  women  in  his 




presence were liable to develop what Marchbanks in  

Candida

 calls ‘Prossy’s 




complaint.’” But not until Holbrook Jackson himself appeared on the scene




2 0 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




did Orage find the larger platform from which to ^approach his willing 




devotees. 




In 1901 the two men met in a Leeds bookshop. Jackson had lived for a 




year in the town, where he was involved in lace manufacture. He was about 




the same age as Orage and like him found the lack of mental stimulus 




depressing. An immediate friendship sprang up, and a week after their 




meeting, a torrent of conversation was unleashed, which culminated in 




Orage’s expounding the  

Bhagavad Gita

 to Jackson, and Jackson preaching 




on texts from Nietzsche. Orage lent Jackson the  

Gita, 

 and Jackson riposted 




with   

Thus  Spake  Zarathustra. 

  “Next  morning,”  remembers  Jackson,  “he 




walked from his cottage at Chapel Allerton to mine at Headingley with a 




new light in his eye. He had spent the night with ‘Zarathustra,’ and the 




time for action had come—and the Leeds Art Club was born.” Nietzsche 




had supplied the keystone for Orage’s first synthesis, and Orage “went over 




the top.” “We all developed supermania. He wanted a Nietzsche circle in 




which Plato and Blavatsky, Fabianism and Hinduism, Shaw and Wells and 




Edward Carpenter should be blended, with Nietzsche as the catalytic. An 




exciting brew.” 




The Leeds Art Club was the cauldron in which the mixture simmered. 




The  precise  ingredients  were  a  matter  of  dispute  among  the  more 




Theosophically inclined Orage, the Fabian Jackson and a third collaborator, 




A. J. Fenty, an architect whose researches into the medieval guild system 




were to have significant political results. Later the Arts Club was stated to 




have  “no  written  object,”  and  at its foundation in  1903 the terms  were 




already beautifully loose. Its members were to “affirm the mutual dependence of Art and Ideas. The separation of beauty from use, or use from beauty, proves in the long run disastrous to both; and only their union in a 




single clear purpose can restore to us the value of either. To this end it is 




necessary that real and enduring standards should be created anew . . .’’To 




begin their revolution in taste, the Club held exhibitions of arts and crafts, 




provided a gathering place for kindred spirits and arranged open meetings 




in the Leeds Museum to which eminent figures—^including Yeats, Chesterton and Shaw—^were persuaded to come. The more intimate proceedings were dominated by Jackson and Orage, who shared, for example, a series of 




Friday evening lectures in April and May 1905, at which the topics were 




distributed as follows:




“Imaginary Portrait: The Superman as Saint” 




Holbrook Jackson 




“Sentimentalism, Romanticism and Realism ” 




Alfred Orage




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   201




“Art and Conduct” 




Holbrook Jackson 




“The Principles of the Arts Club” 




Alfred Orage




The Leeds Arts Club possessed a library largely assembled by Orage, and 




as  its  premises  also  housed  the  local  Fabian  Society  and  Theosophical 




Society, the collection reflected the whole scope of his interests. Members 




of one society were quite likely to belong to another or all three. Mary 




Gawsthorpe, a suffragette who was a member of the Arts Club and later 




contributed  to  the   

New  Age, 

  recalls  in  her  autobiography,  

Up  Hill  to

 




 

Holloway, 

 how one afternoon in the clubrooms, as she cast about among the 




shelves, she stumbled unwittingly from social reform to Annie Besant on 




karma. Regardless of how famous they later became, Mary Gawsthorpe 




found the members of the Club “as unique, as distinguished a group then, 




then not later in their lives, as I have met anywhere since. Not easy mixers, 




not  peppy,  not  pollyanas,  not  smart,  not  merely  brainy,  they  had  an 




unmistakable quahty of being mature mentally, even then, over thirty years 




ago. It was stimulating, refreshing, and nourishing to be a member of the 




Leeds Art Club circa 1904.” The music and drama critic Gerald Cumberland was another member of Orage’s audiences. He was less certain of the quality of his companions, which was apt to fluctuate, particularly on the 




occasions when Orage lectured “rather dangerously” on Nietzsche:




His gospel, always preached with his tongue in his cheek, that every man 




^ woman should do precisely what he or she desires, acted like heady 




Vvlne on 6ie gasping and enthusiastic young ladies who used to sit in rows 




worshipping him. They wanted to do all kinds of terrible things, and as 




On^e, backed by “that great German,” Nietzsche, had sanctioned their 




most secret desires, they were resolved to begin at once their career of 




licence. They used to “stay behind” when the lectures were over, and 




question Orage with their eyes, and it used to be most amusing and a litde 




pathetic to listen to the gay and half-hearted insults vdth which Orage at 




once thwarted and bewildered his silly devotees. 




He  had  in  those  days  a  wonderful  gift  of  talking  a  most  divine 




nonsense— 

2l

 spurious vnsdom that ran closely along the border-hne of 




rank absurdity. The “cosmic consciousness” of Walt Whitman was a 




great theme of his, and Orage, in his subtle devilishly clever way, 




would lead his hsteners on to the very threshold of occult knowledge 




and leave them there wide-eyed and wonder-struck. 




This  idolatry  could  not  but  have  its  effect  on  someone  of  Orage’s




2 0 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




temperament. If he was a seducer, it was not only witR ideas. Nietzsche and 




the rebellion against Victorianism had something to do with it, as did the 




Arts Club which became a center for what Philip Mairet calls “not a little 




flouting of conventions and libertarian experiment.” But Orage himself was 




at least as much the cause as the atmosphere he had helped engender. “He 




wasted  his  substance  in  talking  and  falHng  in  love,”  wrote  Holbrook 




Jackson. “He allowed himself to fall in love too often in those early days 




both in Leeds and London, and until he learnt how to canalise his passions 




his  work  suflFered.”  Later  Orage  was  to  list  “Falling  in  love,”  as  his 




recreation in  

Who’s Who, 

 but apparently even in Leeds he had recognized a 




“scattering of force” which resulted from his frequent affairs. Jackson recalls 




a suggestive incident on the beach at Whitby, when unexpectedly he came 




upon Orage making a bonfire of poems and love letters. 




How seriously to take his Don Juanism is uncertain. Mary Gawsthorpe 




records a visit to the Orage’s tiny house in the Pottemewtons at Leeds. She 




was at that time engaged, and Orage knew her fiance as well as herself




This  did  not  prevent  him  from  suddenly  drawing  me  to  him  as  I 




prepared to go. Without any warning and before I knew it, he had 




pulled me to him and had said, “Kiss me.” I have heard the theory that 




“there is no seduction” discussed with warmth, but I shall stoutly 




declare however, that if there is such a thing as the spirit of the thirig 




that must have been a perfect example, for I was led, and in spite of all 




laughs to the contrary, to do exactly what Orage asked, or commanded, 




that is, I kissed him. 




This  innocent  or  unconscious  response,  the  reader  making  the 




choice, was accompanied by something so arresting I could not fail to 




take note of it. Swift as lightning, the taker of the kiss gave a little 




laugh, an elated, triumphant laugh. 




It may be thought that this tells us more about the prim and prudish 




atmosphere of Leeds than about the motives which swayed Orage. But the 




question remains: underneath the urge to assert himself, was Orage really 




looking for a more ideal love—or a correct understanding of love? It is 




significant that his best-known exposition of Gurdjieff’s ideas is an essay on 




the topic. 




The marriage of Orage and Jean Walker was childless, and Jean—^who 




had been used to living in more expansive surroundings than their cramped 




cottage—^found the strain of poverty hard to bear. As Orage became more 




and more widely known as a Theosophical lecturer and the moving spirit of 




the Leeds Arts Club, the pressure of his adoring acolytes had a bad effect. 




Holbrook  Jackson  has  recorded  Orage’s  tendency  to  sulk  if  he  were




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   2 0 3




contradicted, and Mary Gawsthorpe confirms the impression that his wife’s 




critical acumen was too developed for the budding prophet. Any blame for 




the separation which eventually took place was by no means one-sided; but 




Jean Orage’s increasing intimacy with Jackson was the immediate cause of 




husband and wife going their different ways. Apparently, despite a series of 




minor crises, the marriage did not break down until Orage finally settled in 




London. Leeds was proving too small a stage for the self-confidence Orage’s 




success had given him. His teaching had become irksome, his private life 




complicated. The Leeds Arts Club had been astonishingly successful and 




had spread from Leeds to Hull and Bradford, but its membership never 




exceeded 100, and this could not give Orage the audience he needed. At 




the end of 1905 he left Leeds for London, where he was joined by Jackson 




and  Penty.  For  luggage  he  took  only  his  three-volume  translation  of 




Nietzsche. 




The world he had left behind was the greatest influence on his thought 




until he met Ouspensky and Gurdjieff. Jean Orage remained within that 




world, retaining Theosophical interests and working as an embroideress for 




William Morris’s  firm of  decorators. Orage himself  never lost his deep 




concern with the occult, and in London as in Leeds, the groups of idealistic 




Progressives clustered round the Theosophical Society and the fringes of 




Fabianism, giving him his first public. But in Nietzsche he had found both a 




personal  justification  and  a  bridge  between  the  restricted  world  of 




esotericism and matters of general intellectual concern. During the bleak 




depression of his first months in London, when he was failing to support 




himself by freelance writing and living on the charity of friends, Orage 




wrote two small books,  

Friedrich Nietzsche, the Dionysian Spirit of the Age

 




(1906) and  

Nietzsche in Outline and Aphorism, 

 published the next year. In 




the first book, the author hailed Nietzsche as “the greatest European event 




since Goethe”; and his analysis of the salient points of “the philosopher with 




the hammer” proves how greatly this influence prepared him—as it did 




Ouspensky—^for certain aspects  of  Gurdjieff’s  ideas. Orage hailed  the 




coming of the Superman. But what of the rabble, the  

canaille, 

 with their 




lack of taste and their gilded idols? “The multitude with their gods are 




indispensable to the creation of the powerful man. As a sort of battlefield 




and place of exercise, the populace serve the needs of the aristocrat.” 




Orage and Jackson began to agitate in the Fabian Arts Group, a body 




formed in 1907 by Fabians disenchanted viath the ideas of Sidney and 




Beatrice Webb. Together with Penty they made overtures to the Junior Art 




Workers Guild, in which the architect was lecturing on the revival of the 




guild system. These societies provided Orage’s earliest opportunities to 




shine in the public eye, but at the same time his Theosophical activities 




made him a source of controversy in the esoteric world. 




2 0 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




By  July  1905,  Orage  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  the  British 




Section  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  on  his  arrival  in  London  he 




resumed the Theosophical lectures which had been so successful in the 




north. Soon his unorthodox brand of Theosophy began to attract criticism. 




It was not only its Nietzschean iconoclasm which shocked the Theosophists, 




 

but  its

  irreverent   

treatment  of  the  tin  gods,  Bkvatsky  and  Besant. 

  Orage 




made his debut in London Theosophical circles at a time when these were 




considerably  agitated.  In  1906  a  celebrated  row  broke  out  over  the 




immoralities of Mrs. Besant’s friend, C. W. Leadbeater; the following year, 




those who attacked Mrs. Besant for her support of Leadbeater found more 




ammunition in questionable goings-on at the deathbed of the President of 




the Society, Colonel Olcott. The Himalayan Masters who were supposed to 




be the powers behind the scenes were said to have appeared and appointed 




Mrs. Besant as his successor; there were, however, rival claimants, and 




skirmishing  resulted  in  permanent  divisions  within  the  Theosophical 




Society, as well as the secession of several independent groups. Naturally, 




Orage ranged himself with the critics of the establishment. 




The first of a series of articles he published in the  

Theosophical Review

 




between the end of 1905 and the end of 1907 was an attack on the Society 




which was giving him column space for not living up to its principles. The 




last word had not been said on Theosophical matters, he reminded the 




more cultist of his readers. “Once one took the literature of the Society as 




the  revelation  of  exact  knowledge.  Now  one  sees  the  literature  as  the 




forerunner of a still more splendid revelation of worlds unimagined before. ” 




As for  

The Secret Doctrine, 

 “what in the name of Oeaohoo the Younger, 




does it all mean?” Was one Theosophist like any other, and was there really 




a  “Theosophical”  point  of  view?  “Doubtless,” he taunted,  “with  many 




others  in  the  Society,  I  am  not  religious,  I  am  not  psychic,  I  am  not 




scientific.  I  am  not  even  ethical,”  He  proposed  a  sort  of  Theosophical 




agnosticism which would prevent people from wasting their time “winding 




those giddy useless mazes” of  

The Secret Doctrine. 




On reviewing my ten years of Theosophical reading concerning Man, I 




do  not  regret  it.  Certainly  I  have  lost  the  hope  of  finding  certain 




answers, but I have also lost the wish to find them ... I like to live in a 




world of miracles and to be a miracle myself I like to think that every 




pat little complacent scientific definition of man, every tin-tabernacle 




description of him, is superficial and ridiculous. I even like to think 




that the Theosophical views, the defined views that is, are ridiculous 




too. Man is not definite, for he is still defining himself. 




This was inviting attack, and Orage was furiously assailed. Why, it was




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   2 0 5




asked, did he bother to call himself a Theosophist? The future Bishop J. I. 




Wedgwood mocked “the Nietzschean vagaries” of “my good fnend, Mr. 




Orage.” A certain Dr. Wells told him in print that he was “not old enough.” 




In answer to these counters, Orage further defined his position. “I am in 




this quandary,” he explained. “I find myself believing certain things in the 




face  of  my  contemporaries,  in  the  face  of  a  good  deal  of  Theosophical 




literature and (most strange of all) in the face of my own mind. In other 




words,  I  have  in  some  respects  returned  to  an  attitude  of  faith.  Now 




temperamentally and by training I am incapable of appreciating faith at its 




fe.ce  value.  ...  I  hate  to  believe  without  evidence,  and  still more  to feel 




myself compelled to beheve without evidence. ” But Orage’s faith enjoined 




a skepticism which was too much for many Theosophists and in an article, 




“Occult Arts and Occult Faculty,” published in January 1907, he defined 




more clearly his attitude toward the miraculous. 




Ten years before, he wrote, such a title would have made his mouth 




water. “I see myself in those remote days impatiently cutting the pages, and 




turning  the  leaves  to  find  the  article  itself.  I  see  myself  greedily, 




credulously and uncritically gulping down the rigmarole and abracadabras, 




the slovenly sentences and the unlovely terminologies.” All this had been in 




the hope of miracles, of “the easy, certain and simple road to the whole 




cosmic conundrum.” Such hopes had faded, “miracles did not happen. And 




as one by one the mares rose from their mysterious nests, flapped their 




mysterious wings and disappeared into the ridiculous void, the impression 




began to grow upon us that there were no secrets hatching at all . . .” In 




this search through mares’ nests for the egg of the phoenix, Orage discarded 




the whole list of magical superstitions, mystery-mongering devices from 




astrology to zoomancy. Note I do not deny the reality of these arts.” But 




absorbing as such “occult arts” were, they “caught and devoured” people. 




“A caught and devoured person is called a crank.” In contrast to the “occult 




arts,” he defined three “genuine occult faculties”: intuition, insight and 




ini£^nation.  These  were  all  “our  present  faculties  raised  to  another 




dimension.” Thus, “intuition is winged thought. In an act of intuition the 




rational  mind  flies.”  Insight  was  “winged  judgment”  and  imagination 




“winged sympathy.” Orage wrote that he would respect the occultist who 




excelled in such qualities. He was “turning away from the older magic, the 




magic of the occult arts, wdth something like loathing. If to be wise I must 




know these things, then blessed be ignorance . . . what has been learned 




may  be  forgotten  .  .  .  faculties  must  be  acquired,  therefore  they  are  an 




imperishable possession.” 




In the autumn of 1907 he was still writing for the  

Theosophical Review, 

 




but by that date he had more pressing concerns. On May 2, 1907, he and 




Holbrook Jackson made their debut as editors of a magazine of their ovra. 




2 0 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




From the moment that Orage and Jackson took over, the  

New Age

 was a 




peculiar paper. Its historian Wallace Martin refers to “its unprecedented 




form.” The distinguished contributors and the various causes for which 




Orage made propaganda are fairly well known, but the original purpose of 




the paper has been buried by Orage’s later enthusiasms. In the first number 




of the  

New Age, 

 the editors printed as their creed a hymn to the Life Force:




Believing that the darling object and purpose of the universal will of 




life is the creation of a race of supremely and progressively inteUigent 




beings, the new age will devote itself to the serious endeavour to cooperate with the purposes of life and to enlist in that noble service the help of serious students of the new contemplative and imaginative 




order. 




It was the feeling which Ouspensky experienced half a dozen years later. 




A new race of men was on the earth—^and there was no limit to their 




potentialities. In some ways the  

New Age

 was the Leeds Arts Club writ 




large, and its stated objects bear a distinct relation to the ideas of raising 




human faculties to another dimension which Orage was elaborating in the 




Theosophical  press.  Soon  after  Orage  had  moved  into  his  half  of  the 




editorial  chair,  the  Theosophical  Publishing  Society  issued  his 




 

Consciousness,  Animal,  Human  and  Superhuman

  which  states  positively 




the Nietzschean occultism at which he had been hinting in his Theosophical 




articles. The book consists of lectures which Orage originally delivered to^ 




Theosophists in Manchester and Leeds, and the man who wrote it had little 




to learn firom the basic argument of  

Tertium Organum. 

 In many vrays his 




analogies are more acceptable than those of Ouspensky. 




Orage begins by assuming “a perfectly continuous and essentially similar 




underlying consciousness common to all living things visible and invisible.” 




This “universal awareness . . . only by the particularised activities of beings 




becomes defined and limited into specifically human, animal, vegetable 




modes.” Animal consciousness is a “one plane consciousness,” receptive 




like a sheet of sensitive paper; but there is no knower of the impressions 




received.  “In  feet,”  states  Orage,  “there  may  be  memory  without  a 




memoriser.” Human consciousness can be represented by the sensitive 




paper folded once, so that the second plane surface formed stands for an 




observer of the impressions received by simple, “6ne plane consciousness.” 




We decline into animal consciousness, warns Orage, in striking anticipation 




of GurdjiefiF’s terminology, “when we are not observing ourselves.” The 




upper limit of human consciousness is illustrated by folding the paper into a 




sphere, symbolizing the vigilance of the ego. It is important to Orage to




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   2 0 7




stress that the human mode of consciousness had been iFormed out of the 




original animal consciousness “like the embryo within the shell,” because 




his  real  purpose  is  to  predict  the  emergence  of  a  Superman  whose 




consciousness  “should  compare  with  man  as  man  compares  with  the 




animal.” 




Using his analogy of the folded paper, Orage asks his readers to imagine a 




third fold to represent Superman consciousness. If the ego creates a human 




mode of consciousness by observing pure animal sensitivity to impressions, 




a still higher mode might be attained by contacting the higher self which 




can observe the ego. This is the directing overmind responsible for creative 




thought, and the birth of this new observer takes place in the womb of 




human  consciousness  just  as  human  consciousness  develops  from  the 




animal: an emergence represented in mystical doctrines as a rebirth or an 




awakening from sleep. Just as the “interiorizing” of man has resulted in the 




growth  of  mental  faculties,  Orage  prophesies  that  the  emergence  of 




Superman  consciousness  will  be  accompanied  by  the  growth  of  new 




“ecstatic faculties.” He stops short of laying down the law on how this 




growth is to be achieved: to seek to grow in this way is dangerous and the 




choice of means must be an individual responsibility. The tone of the book 




is  that  of  a  man  nursing  a  general  hope  for  the  promised  land,  but 




disillusioned with his own attempts to reach it. “Perhaps the sure way is to 




iraise, to deepen, and to extend our human faculties,” Orage concludes. He 




set about contributing to this aim in the columns of the  

New Age. 




He and Jackson bought the  

New Age

—then an old established weekly in 




severe financial difficulties—^with the aid of a subsidy of 500 pounds from 




George Bernard Shaw and a similar sum from a Theosophical friend of 




Orage called Levrts Wallace. Wallace had made money sheepferming in 




New Zealand and, according to the translator Paul Selver, “had white silky 




hair, a drooping moustache to match, a rosy face and a general air of selfdepreciation no matter whom he was talking to. ” He wrote frequent articles rfan occult cast for the  

New Age

 under the pseudonym of “M. B. Oxon”— 




^ allusion to the pen name, “M. A. Oxon,” of the famous Victorian spirit 




iftedium, the Reverend W. Stainton Moses. For several years he contributed 100 pounds a month to shore up the rickety finances of the magazine. 




The pool of talent firom which the new editors drew was that centered on 




the Fabian Arts Group and its allied lobbies. G. K. and Cecil Chesterton, 




Hilaire Belloc, Bernard Shaw, and H. G. Wells were among the earliest 




recruits; and their tussles in print established one thing important to the 




character of the paper—^it was not tied to any sectional interest. Soon it 




feecame clear that the only fixed star in the  

New Age

 galaxy was Orage 




nimself. In January 1906, he became sole editor when Holbrook Jackson




208 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




bowed  out  of  an  undertaking  which  his  colleagile  insisted  on  keeping 




independent—and, of course, Oragean—at the expense of financial sta- 




bihty. The “desperado of genius” had arrived. 




Orage now entered on the days of his greatness which lasted until the 




middle of the First World War. His long apprenticeship in the provinces—^ 




he was thirty-three when he arrived in London—had developed in him the 




qualities which he now deployed so skillfully. As editor, he was naturally a 




focus of intellectual activity, but the groups which formed around him at 




this time greatly extended the editorial function. In the words of Professor 




Janko Lavrin: “One could not find so high a level of conversation anywhere 




in  London.”  On  Monday  afternoons  the  circle  would  gather  in  the 




basement of the Chancery Lane ABC caf§, where the proofs of the next 




issue were read and the talk ranged far and wade. Once a week Orage would 




leave his tiny office and become the center of discussions at the Kardomah 




caf(6 in Fleet Street. Those who met in print in the  

New Age

 met in person 




in the editor’s company. In the early days, the group would include Clifford 




Sharp,  S.  G.  Hobson,  the  Chestertons,  sometimes  Wells  and  Arnold 




Bennett;  later  perhaps,  J.  C.  Squire,  Katherine  Mansfield,  F.  S.  Flint, 




T. E. Hulme, and the Imagist poets were included. Orage’s love of debate 




encouraged him to stir up disagreement both in verbal discussion and in 




print. The only cloud on the horizon was his occasional prickliness when he 




felt his dignity threatened. It was the same Achilles’ heel that Jackson had 




noticed in Leeds. Under Orage’s successful exterior was a latent insecurity 




which craved the applause of others; and when the trappings of succes^ 




were denied him, this self-doubt came to dominate him entirely. 




The causes for which the  

New Age

 is chiefly remembered bear witness to 




his success. There were, of course, the literary or aesthetic discussions—on 




“the new drama ” or the realistic novel—^and individual publications, like 




Arnold Bennett’s “Books and Persons” column or the stories of Katherine 




Mansfield,  which  were  achievements  in  gathering  copy  rather  than 




intellectual midwifery. But the National Guilds movement, which owed its 




origin to the ideas of A. J. Penty and S. G. Hobson, and the later doctrine of 




Social Credit, the brainchild of Major C. H. Douglas, received a great part 




of their impulsion from Orage’s magpie brain. He was never an original 




thinker, and even the Swiftean prose style on which he so prided himself 




sometimes makes heavy reading. Orage was preeminently a man of the 




moment, whose chief facility was to  

be there, 

 a snapper-up of unconsidered 




inspirations. Under his management, the  

New Age

 and its circle became the 




most articulate section of Progressive idealism in Britain. 




The always Platonic idealism of Orage must be stressed, because it can 




easily  be  lost  sight  of  under  theories  of  the  Guild  State  or  a  National 




Dividend. Ezra Pound compared him favorably with other literary fig




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   209




ures—^Yeats, Wyndham Lewis, and T. S. Eliot. They, said Pound, had “no 




bottom. ” “Orage had. ” A. E., who met him only in the last years of his life, 




recognized the voice of a fellow idealist even in Orage’s prewar political 




“Notes of the Week. ” Orage began with a self-dedication to “the universal 




will of life,” and although he may seem in retrospect to have been absorbed 




in the artistic and political questions of the day, the causes he adopted all 




took as their basis the idea of changing the nature of man in society, rather 




than accepting man as fallen and changing society to fit his unworthy needs. 




In the Theosophical articles of 1907, he had proclaimed his disillusionment with the traditional occult arts and took refuge in Nietzsche. But by 1917 the Nietzscheanism of his  

New Age

 articles had faltered, and occultism 




began  to creep  back  into the paper in  the company  of  psychoanalysis. 




Orage’s earlier change of attitude had reflected less a change of direction 




than a new personal influence, and his return from the realms of general 




ideals to those more specifically esoteric coincided with the removal of that 




influence from his life. 




This influence was Beatrice Hastings, one of the principal contributors to 




the  

New Age

 from 1908 till 1914. Born Emily Alice Haigh in 1879, the girl 




who preferred to be called “Beatrice” had led an eventful early life. Philip 




Mairet writes of the time when she met Orage, that she was “dark, browneyed and vivacious, with a manner revealing intensity both mental and emotional.” A South African, she had been married unsuccessfully to a 




professional boxer, and first met Orage at a Theosophical lecture he gave in 




London  in  1906.  She  had  been  one  of  the  young  ladies  who  “stayed 




behind,” and her appearance in Orage’s life coincides with the irretrievable 




breakdown of his first marriage. 




Beatrice Hastings possessed considerable literary talent in addition to her 




physical attractions. Her contributions to the  

New Age

 are prodigious in 




volume, although erratic in quality. Her specialty was malevolent criticism, 




and she exercised her abilities to such effect that several London publishers 




stopped sending the paper books for review. She became not only Orage’s 




Constant  companion,  but  his  literary  conscience;  and  her  flamboyant 




presence was a necessary part of the setting at the  

New Age

 offices or the 




cafe gatherings. After Orage’s death, she published a splenetic pamphlet 




whose bitterness and extravagance have been made the excuse for ignoring 




it altogether. She claimed, for example, to have been responsible for most 




of  the  actual  editing  of  the   

New  Age

  until  she  left  Orage,  and  this  has 




naturally  aroused the ire of latter-day Orageans. But even the devoted 




Philip Mairet admits that she had a large hand in Orage’s literary decisions, 




and it is obvious that the quality of the editing did improve markedly as 




soon as she arrived. The days of Beatrice Hastings were the days of Orage’s 




greatest success. There is some element of coincidence in this, and while

210 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




several of her later allegations are preposterous, her pbrtrait of Orage is so 




true to indications from other sources, as to repay the most careful study. 




It says much for the temper of the times that the presence of Beatrice 




Hastings at a Theosophical gathering did not mean that this formidable 




young woman approved of the occult. Later she was to accuse Orage of 




“paranoiac mystagoguery,” while at the same time herself writing a defense 




of Mme. Blavatsky. But it seems that Orage’s deep occult interests had 




early on given her quite a jolt. About a year after their meeting, she writes, 




“when Aphrodite had amused herself at our expense, I found in his rooms a 




collection of works on sorcery. Up to this time, Orage’s intimate friend was 




not  Mr.  Holbrook  Jackson,  who  thought  he  was,  but  Mr.  Aleister 




Crowley. . . . Well, I consigned all the books and ‘Equinoxes’ and sorcery 




designs to the dustbin. But the affair gave me such a shock that, for years, I 




would not hear of theosophy, spiritualism or anything to do with the occult. 




During my period on the  

New Age, 

 few references, even, will be found to 




such  things  unless  on  a  tone  of  superb,  and  I  add  superbly  ignorant 




contempt.” 




Orage did know Aleister Crowley; and he told C. S. Nott that he had met 




him while Acting Secretary of the Society for Psychical Research, a post he 




had filled on first coming to London. Psychical research was an old interest 




of Orage, who had published on the subject in his Leeds days and edited a 




rather critical examination of Frederic Myer s  

Human Personality and Its

 




 

Survival of Bodily Death

 in 1904. Edwin Muir, who as “Edward Moore ” 




contributed to the  

New Age, 

 claims that Orage “was a member of a magic 




circle which included Yeats.” By this he means the femous Hermetic Order 




of the Golden Dawn which had split up into various quarreling factions in 




the year 1900, with Yeats and Crowley on opposite sides of the fence. The 




Golden Dawn had a temple at Bradford, and although there is no record of 




Orage’s name in the membership lists of that organization, the leading 




Theosophical lecturer in the north could hardly have avoided coming into 




contact with some of its members. Yeats had been one of the hterary lions 




to appear before the Leeds Arts Club; and his companion had been another 




member of the Golden Dawn, the actress Florence Farr, who added a lute 




accompaniment to the poet’s recitation. 




Until  the  advent  of  Beatrice  Hastings,  Florence  Farr  was  the  chief 




woman  contributor  to  the   

New  Age. 

  In  June  1907,  she  had  reviewed 




Orage’s  ovra   

Consciousness

  with  the  remark  that  “Mr.  Orage’s  mind  is 




equipped by nature and subtle Eastern practices to give a better idea of 




Superman Consciousness than Shaw or Nietzsche. ” This confirms Beatrice 




Hastings’s statement that in Leeds Orage had taken to Hatha yoga and 




breathing exercises. In the autumn of 1907, about the time that Orage was




T H E   M A E S T R O   O F   T H E   M U S I C A L   G L A S S E S   211




avowing his disillusionment with the “occult arts,” the  

New Age

 published 




an unsigned review of  

The Star in the West, 

 a panegyric of Aleister Crowley 




written  by  the  future  Major-General  J.  F.  C.  Fuller.  The  reviewer  was 




concerned  chiefly  with  Crowley,  not  his  disciple,  and  made  frequent 




references to chapter and verse which revealed him to be in possession of a 




set of Crowley’s  

Equinox. 

 Despite a half-hearted attempt to make Crowley 




appear a silly season frolic, the reviewer conceded—in markedly Oragean 




cadences—that he dealt “admirably ” with the problems of superconsciousness. And some six months later, at the end of February 1908, David Eder contributed an obscure but apparently favorable review of Crowley’s  

Konx

 




 

Om Tax. 




This is the last that the readers of the  

New Age

 heard of Crowley, and it 




may  be  presumed  to  coincide  with  the  purge  of  Orage’s  magical  texts 




carried  out  by  Beatrice  Hastings.  It  is  not  going  too  far  to  see  Orage’s 




condemnation of the occult arts as the beginning of her influence over him, 




and in the silence thereafter observed by the  

New Age

 on occult topics, her 




hand firmly on the reins. Crowley’s “Do what thou wilt shall be the whole 




of the laws ” came very close to Orage’s own Nietzschean morality; but 




judging  by  the  tones  in  which  Orage  referred to the  Great Beast when 




talking to C. S. Nott, he had never been in any danger of falling under the 




spell of the man. 




The arrival of Beatrice Hastings and the downfall of magic coincided with 




Holbrook Jackson’s departure. The  

New Age

 gradually changed its character 




from a Nietzschean-Fabian magazine to a literary and aesthetic review. Its 




triumphs were now of a different sort. In the period up till the outbreak of 




^  war,  the   

New  Age

  dealt  most  notably  with  aesthetic  problems,  and 




distinguished itself by discovering talented young writers. Orage began to 




emerge  as  a  literary  critic;  and  the  successes  of  this  era  include  the 




discovery of Katherine Mansfield and the elaboration of a “conservative 




philosophy of culture ” by Orage, T. E. Hulme, and the Spanish educationalist Ramiro de Maeztu. 




Orage is not diminished by insisting on the influence exercised over him 




by Beatrice Hastings. It was usually a personal encounter which excited 




him  to  a  new  phase  of  activity.  Her  beauty,  verve,  and  fundamental 




amorality gave Mrs. Hastings advantages which she did not hesitate to 




exploit,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  Orage,  who  usually  succeeded  in 




dominating his surroundings, was intrigued by encountering an equally 




strong personality. Even at their first meeting, Beatrice Hastings claimed to 




have “ralhed him, on his perverse loquacity.” Under her tutelage Orage 




was very much the man of letters, his Nietzscheanism in abeyance, his 




occultism damped down. 




212 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Her departure from his life removed the inhibitions on his fundamental 




preoccupations. It also coincided with a series of crises in the life of the  

New

 




 

Age. As

 a result of this combination of factors, Orage was ready for another 




crossing of the Rubicon when Ouspensky arrived in London. This time he 




was to drag a whole flotilla of souls after him. 




Suspensk




When Orage and Jackson took over the  

New Age, 

 they could count on a 




virtual monopoly of Progressive winters. The success of the magazine bred 




imitations: in 1911, Hilaire Belloc founded his paper,  

The Eye-Witness, 

 and 




next year the Chesterton brothers left the  

New Age

 to join him. In 1913 




pressure launched the  

New Statesman, 

 with tvs^o  

New Age

 men at 




the  helm:  J.C.  Squire  as  literary  editor  and  Clifford  Sharp  as  political 




editor. These defections deprived Orage of some of his best writers and 




established  substantial  competition  to  the   

New  Age. 

  The  circulation 




dropped to less than 5,000. Nothing daunted, Orage increased the size of 




Ihe paper and continued to encourage nev»^ writers. But at the end of 1913, 




the regular subsidy paid by Lewis Wallace ceased, and during the war 




printing costs rose to a level which the  

New Age

 could ill afiFord. This 




alteration  in  his material fortunes ran parallel with changes in Orage’s 




private life. 




If we are to believe Beatrice Hastings, Orage was suffering just before 




^e war from a form of nervous prostration, which he attempted to conceal 




^ passing it off as “overwork.” He had “periodic fits of a curious mental 




illness.” 




Philip Mairet suggests that a sense of dissatisfaction was germinating in 




Orage; that his worldly success came increasingly into conflict with his 




peeper inclinations. “Tales for Men Only,” of which Orage wrote and




2 1 3




214 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




published at least six in the short period 1911-12, arise directly out of his 




inner  conflict:  his  sense  that  he  had  allowed  a  stern  dedication  to  the 




purposes  of  Art  and  the  Life  Force  to  be  diverted  into  the  channels  of 




literary fame. 




The  plots  of  the  “Tales  for  Men  Only”  concern  the  efforts  of  the 




narrator—Orage’s favorite pseudonym R. H. Congreve (later abbreviated to 




R. H. C.)—^to break up various love affairs which threaten to absorb his 




friends. By the time of the sixth tale, pubUshed in November 1912, the tone 




is vitriolic, and the writer seems to be trying to free himself altogether from 




the need for female companionship. 




Long after  the liability to  complete subjection to female illusion is 




over, men sometimes continue to experience perturbations of their 




equilibrium  in  the  presence  of  women.  In  few  instances  are  these 




perturbations violent enough to overthrow the mind entirely, but for 




the moment they undoubtedly do cause the judgement to reel and 




stagger and the resulting conversation and actions to become distorted. 




These residual phenomena, however, are to be distinguished from the 




similar  phenomena  of  adolescence  by  the  fact  that  they  no  longer 




inspire hope but disgust or, at least, annoyance. 




Beatrice Hastings was not the type to take even an implied attack lying 




down.  A  satirical  sketch  which  she  published  in  late  1913  under  the 




pseudonym “Robert a Field,” is apparently a reply to the “Tales for Men 




Only.”  Aldiough  she  refers  to  the  piece  under  the  title  of  “The  Non- 




Committal Man,” it is obviously the one printed as “Courtley Poole 

”—n

 




character presented as “a fanatical bigot” vdth “a self-opinionated name.” 




He is hypochondriac, neurotic, and stubborn. And there is one pertinent 




criticism of a foiling which Orage himself may have felt keenly. This might 




be  expressed  as  a  “lack  of  follow-through.”  In  a  lawsuit,  he  refuses  to 




appeal; when he takes lottery tickets, it is only a single one. “Everything 




which Courtley does turns out to be moonshine. Moonshine is the reward 




of all bigots.” 




Finally,  “In  May,  1914,  domestic  affairs  having  become  intolerable,” 




writes Beatrice Hastings, “I left for a few months’ tour in order to make a 




break.” At the outbreak of war she was living in 

Pmis 

and remained as “war 




correspondent” for the  

New Age. 

 But the break was not clean; bickering 




continued in a series of acrimonious letters. 




The collapse of the relationship in 1916 was a blow to Orage’s pride. 




Despite  the  vehemence  of  “Tales  for  Men  Only,”  it  seems  that  it  was 




Beatrice Hastings who left  

him. 

 To a man of overpowering attractiveness to 




most women—and a Nietzschean by public confession—this was a bitter




S U S P E N S K   215




sop. In this period of crisis he began to frequent the Cafe Royal where, as 




G.K. Chesterton wrote, “he presided in a sort of club.” Augustus John, 




Walter  Sickert,  Jacob  Epstein,  and  Orage’s  close  friend,  the  Australian 




caricaturist Will Dyson, were members of this circle. It was more worldly 




Bohemianism than Orage had previously known, and the companionship of 




the  Cafe  Royal  may  have  solaced  a  life  which  had  grown  lonely.  His 




emotions seem to have been further confused by the attentions of a girl who 




refused to surrender to the famous charm, but preferred, in the words of 




Philip Mairet, “a Platonic attachment. ” The failure of the  

New Age

 to attract 




more  new  writers  must  also  have  contributed  to  lowering  his  self- 




confidence, and the poHtical schemes in which he became involved brought 




him equally little success. 




After Orage became converted to the Social Credit theories of Major




C.H. Douglas, which failed to gain acceptance from the Labour Party or the 




National Guilds League, the  

New Age

 pounded out the message of Social 




Credit to a largely deaf nation, and the disillusionment of its editor grew. 




Much  earlier,  he  wrote  in  1926,  he  had  begun  to  doubt  whether  any 




movement of ideas was possible among the proletariat; now he became 




convinced that if Douglas, “the Einstein of economics, ” could be rejected, 




“reform in any drastic sense is impossible.” 




Orage emerged from the war years facing frustration, insecurity, and a 




sense of failure. “He became unable to miss a shot at golf,” writes Philip 




Mairet, “without glancing round anxiously in fear that some stranger had 




noticed the mistake.” In 1919 physical troubles were added to others when 




he had to undergo an operation for appendicitis. His mind began to return 




to the more metaphysical preoccupations which the presence of Beatrice 




had for a time suppressed. This reviving interest in psychology 




amd the occult made Ouspensky’s teaching instantly appealing, because it 




Sisemed to answer the questions which he and his friends had been so 




«tnuously asking: in effect, the same questions he had shelved as insoluble 




Si^e fifteen years before. 




The  

New Age

 published Ouspensky’s “Letters from Russia,” and Orage 




himself turned violently against Bolshevism, as a succession of Slav mystics, 




fearing their exotic gospels out of a Europe torn by war and revolution, 




TOgan to appear in the  

New Age

 circle. Janko Lavrin discovered Nicolai 




^ehmirovid.  Bishop  of  Zica  in  Serbia,  who  contributed  a  series  of 




^iocalyptic  meditations  to  the   

New  Age

  under  his  own  name  and  the 




^eudonym R.A. Vran-Gavran.  As early as  1915, Paul  Selver had  intro- 




&ced Orage to Dmitrije Mitrinovic, at that time an attache at the Serbian 




l^mbassy. Mitrinovi6 subscribed to a composite occultism based on the 




Vision of a united ChristMtn Europe; he occupied himself in London by 




trying to persuade people in positions of some influence to join him in an 




%pen conspiracy” for the salvation of “Pan-humanity.” On August 19, 1920, 




216 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Orage began a series of articles on “World Affairs” in collaboration with 




Mitrinovic,  under  the  pen  name  “M.  M.  Cosmoi.”  For  a  time  his 




disciplined hand held Mitrinovic’s near incomprehensible rhapsodies in 




check;  but  in  December,  Orage  unleashed  the  prophet  who  rampaged 




through the columns of the  

New Age, 

 mystifying its readers and wreaking 




havoc with the already tiny circulation. Mitrinovic’s articles considered the 




various nations of humanity as different organs of one great World-body; 




thus  Germany  might  represent  the  scientific  intelligence,  Russia  the 




intuition of mankind, and Britain—^which Mitrinovic always called “Albion”—^the function of common sense. Few contrived to make sense of his ecstatic parentheses, and fewer still can have come away feeling greatly 




enlightened about world affairs. 




Another  innovation  in  the   

New  Age

  was  an  extended  discussion  of 




psychoanalysis,  and  this  inquiry  represented  the  true  continuation  of 




Orage’s search for meaning. Psychoanalysis was still an unfamiliar subject in 




England, although the days of its complete disregard were over. There had 




been a time when mention of Freud’s name was enough to incur censure. 




In 1911, when Dr. David Eder had read a paper on Freud’s methods to a 




section  of  the  British  Medical Association, his  chairman and the  entire 




audience  walked  out  in  disgust.  By  contrast,  Eder’s  own  circle  saw 




psychoanalysis as the harbinger of a golden age. 




The  group  which  responded  enthusiastically  to  Freud  was  the  same 




section of the intelligentsia which a dozen years earlier had combined social f 




reform with Theosophy and the occult. Orage was not the only thinker to 




tire of the glamor and fraudulence of the “occult arts ” and yearn for a 




secular occultism which could explain man, his soul, and the universe in 




terms  which  did  not  revolt  the  rational  mind.  He  had  no  difficulty  in 




forming a group with the aim of constructing a “psycho-synthesis”: a solid 




edifice to oppose the psychic rubble generated by the analysts’ quarrying. 




But on closer acquaintance it began to appear that psychoanalysis as it stood 




was not going to provide the liberating impulse for which the Progressives 




were  looking.  One  of  the  group,  Bowland  Kenney,  has  recorded  the 




disappointment of its members when they concluded that psychoanalysis 




contained no “possibihties for the building up of a new way of life”:




Perhaps because we had not grasped its deeper significance, it seemed 




to us that, while it might heal many psychic wounds, it would never 




help one to re-create one’s own inner being. (It should be remembered 




that  I  am  writing  of  the  autumn  of  1921.)  What  we  wanted,  we 




decided, was a psychosynthesist—^probably what we wanted was a 




change, a new interest or excitement—^and we tried to formulate a kind




S U S P E N S K   217




of programme or scheme for the building up of the psyche on new 




hnes. 




The psychosynthesis group included Havelock Ellis, David Eder, James 




Young, and Maurice Nicoll. Mitrinovid sometimes attended, and other 




members of the  

New Age

 circle like Kenney and Dr. J. A. M. Alcock were 




also involved. Ellis, Eder, and Orage had all been Fabians; of the younger 




generation, both Maurice Nicoll and James Young had studied with Jung at 




Zurich. Alcock, in Kenney’s words, was “a young medical man . . . who had 




never been able to take  

materia medica

 seriously. He believed that in an 




enormous number of cases the value of a bottle of medicine depended on 




the faith the patient had in it.” Rowland Kenney himself had been the first 




editor of  

The Daily Herald

 and was a long-standing member of the group 




around Orage. An air crash had left him broken in spirit as well as in body, 




and  he  hoped  to  find  in  psychoanalysis  some  solution  to  his  personal 




problems. 




The sort of psychoanalysis which the  

New Age

 favored was never very far 




from the occult. Maurice Nicoll had connections with Theosophy as well as 




strong links with Jung. Young hoped that occultism, understood as “selfdevelopment  through  deepening,  or  expanding  the  limits  of  self-consciousness,” might merge with the new psychology. David Eder’s Freudianism had anchored in a spirit which could also—as his review in the  

New

 




 

Age

 of 1908 shows—^play host to Aleister Crowley. Alcock had been born in 




India, and in Kenney’s words, “was delighted to find that psychoanalysis 




linked up with yoga and other Eastern philosophies.” 




Orage himself was reviving old contacts. Shortly after he had abandoned 




Ptesophy  to  concentrate  on  the   

New  Age, 

  the Theosophical  Society  had 




fiagmented.  In  1909,  G.  R.  S.  Mead,  who  had  published  Orage’s  final 




articles  in  the   

Theosophical  Review, 

  resigned  to  found  his  own  Quest 




Society.  This  issued  a  magazine.  

The  Quest, 

  devoted  to  occultism. 




Theosophy, and scholarly work on the history of religions; Ezra Pound, 




Masefield, and Professor Wilson Knight were among the contributors. 




It  was  to  Mead  that  Orage  naturally  turned  when  he  again  became 




concerned with questions of the spirit. “What the circulation of  

The Quest

 




is, I have no idea,” he wrote in the  

New Age, 

 “but it should be ten times 




greater.” The psychosynthesis group and the Quest Society exchanged 




views:  Alcock  contributed  to   

The  Quest, 

  while  Mead  himself  became 




interested in psychoanalysis and wrote articles based on books lent him by 




David Eder. Two articles on yoga and psychoanalysis published under the 




name  of  “F.I.  Winter”  may  possibly  have  been  by  Orage himsetf.  

“The

 




 

Quest,” 

 announced Orage, “is the literary Platonic Academy of our day.” 




218 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




During this period of undirected speculation Lewis Wallace returned to 




the  

New Age. 

 As “M.B. Oxon,” he published two articles in February 1920, 




at the height of discussion about psychosynthesis. These were eccentrically 




entitled “Psycho-Egyptology,” and their train of thought was soon to be 




incorporated in Wallace’s extraordinary book,  

Cosmic Anatomy. 

 His ideas 




would have been quite familiar to Gurdjieff, for example, he saw man as “a 




common chord” in touch with an upper and a lower world: “The fact that he 




is man depends on the power he has to link these two octaves.” When 




Ouspensky  arrived  in  London,  he  found  the  intellectual  world  which 




centered on Orage in a state of ferment and the focus of attention unsteadily 




shifting between psychoanalysis and mystical philosophy. Circumstances 




could have provided no material more aptly molded to his hand. 




The impasse in which the Orage circle found itself was a particularly intense 




form of a condition which was affecting most thinking men and women. The 




Great  War,  that  crowning  futility,  had  just  ended,  and  intellectuals 




everywhere were feeling their way in a vacuum. In his essay “The Republic 




of  the Spirit,”  published in 1920 in   

The Evolution of an Intellectual, 

 John 




Middleton Murry gave expression to a whole army of opinion which saw the 




war as an object lesson in the follies of materialism. This section of the 




community felt, but was not able to articulate, the four years of horror, felt 




it  as  a   

sin, 

  experienced  the  shame  of  being  less  than  human.  “We  are 




somehow maimed,” wrote Murry, “yet how we do not know.” He appealed 




for a new “aristocracy of the spirit” disregarding worldly rewards. These it 




must “replace by titles more arduous. ” The declaration of principle seemed 




absolute: “In order that it may have the strength to refuse to compromise 




without, it must refuse to compromise within.” 




Among the Orageans, the late summer of 1921 was a bleak season. On 




September 22, Orage warned that the  

New Age

 could only just cover its 




costs and was in danger of having to suspend publication. On October 13, 




the last of Mitrinovic’s articles appeared. The psychosynthesis group was 




already in difficulties. In early August, Maurice Nicoll had written in his 




diary a “Prayer to Hermes”: “Teach me—instruct me—shew me the Path so 




that I may know certainly—help my great ignorance, illumine my darkness? 




I have asked a question.” 




As if in answer to that question, Ouspensky made his entrance. In June, 




Claude Bragdon had made contact with him in Constantinople. By July, 




Theosophical circles had some advance notice of his coming through an 




article on the fourth dimension by Mead in  

The Quest, 

 perhaps stimulated 




by  Lady  Rothermere  who  at  this  time  was  scattering  about  copies  of 




 

Tertium  Organum. 

  Ouspensky  arrived  in  August  1921,  and  stayed  at  a 




Bloomsbury  hotel.  Almost  immediately  he  began  holding  meetings  to




S U S P E N S K   219




expound the ideas of Gurdjieff. Orage was the chief mover in securing 




him an audience, and Ouspensky’s other Theosophical contacts proved 




useful.  He  spoke  to  Mead’s  Quest  Society  and  to  another  breakaway 




group of Theosophists led by D.N. Dunlop—an early friend of Yeats and 




A.E. 




The psychosynthesis group pricked up its ears. J.A.M. Alcock WTOte to 




Rowland Kenny to tell him that the psychosynthesist had arrived. Orage 




went one better and sent a telegram summoning Kenney to his flat to meet 




Ouspensky. It became obvious that whatever Ouspensky was about, he was 




extremely sure of himself. He spoke not as a man inviting discussion, but as 




a  Man  Who  Knows.  Kenney’s  first  meeting  with  Ouspensky  left  him 




“puzzled” but intrigued; 




His looks did not impress me. Nevertheless, when he smiled his 




eyes lit up with a warm twinkle which encouraged confidence and 




confidences. His nose made one think of a bird’s strong beak; indeed, 




when sitting in reflection or repose he hunched himself together and 




looked  like  a  dejected  bird  huddling  up  in  a  rainstorm.  He  was 




obviously a man of a dominant if not domineering type of character, 




with determination—or obstinacy—^written over his every feature. 




I launched out with my views on certain recent developments in 




psycho-analysis and a need for a revaluation of certain psychological 




principles. Orage followed on until he was brought to a dead stop by a 




snort from Ouspensky. “Why waste time, Orage? Tell Kenney what we 




are meeting for.” 




The  meeting  was  to  establish  a  group  to  be  taught,  not  a  forum  for 




discussion; and to the collection of dedicated talkers gathered round Orage, 




this dictatorial attitude was hard to swallow. Paul Selver found Ouspensky 




“quite monumentally boorish. He was one of those exasperating Russians 




who doggedly refuse to credit any other Slav nation with artistic ability. He 




sneered  when  I  expressed  the  view  that  there  were  several  Czech  or 




Serbian poets of outstanding greatness. I had read them and he had not, but 




he  contemptuously  dismissed  my  remark  with  a  sweeping  gesture,  as 




though  consigning  those  unspeakable  rhymesters  to  a  garbage-heap.” 




Ouspensky once more found himself in a society of intellectuals. In his last 




five years, he had learned much about “wiseacreing” and was evidently in 




no mood to tolerate it. 




From  the  beginning  of  November  1921,  Ouspensky  began  to  hold 




meetings of his ovra, at first in a studio owned by Lady Rothermere in 




Circus Road, St. John’s Wood. The initial audience numbered about twenty




2 2 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




and consisted chiefly of readers or contributors to the iVeuj Age. After a time 




Lady  Rothermere  tired  of  her  new  interest,  but  not  before  she  had 




estabhshed Ouspensky in a small flat in Gwendwr Road in Baron’s Court. 




The meeting place oscillated between the rooms of the Quest Society, and 




the house shared by Maurice Nict)ll and James Young at 146 Harley Street; 




then  eventually,  it  became  settled  at  38  Warwick  Gardens  in  South 




Kensington. And with Lady Rothermere’s departure, the salon atmosphere 




created by her patronage vanished. 




Gradually, Ouspensky’s reputation spread. The October number of  

The

 




 

Quest

  carried  a  long  review  by  Mead  of  Claude  Bragdon’s  edition  of 




 

Tertium  Organum, 

  still  the  only  available  translation.  

Tertium  Organum

 




seemed to him “over-ambitious, too flamboyantly titled, and introduced 




with a superfluity of puff by the American editor. Nevertheless, Ouspensky 




is a serious thinker. . . . ”  For Mead the book fell short of the necessary 




subhmities. “He has thought himself deeply into things,” he wrote, “but 




only apparently at last to make shipwreck on the bare rocks of an ‘immobile 




universe.’ He leads up gallantly to a conclusion, and then falls back, short of 




the beatific vision. . . . ”  Ouspensky replied in a letter dated October 25, 




defending  himself  against  charges  of  pretentiousness.  Neither  was  he, 




explained Ouspensky, the eminent professor of mathematics to whom his 




translators had ascribed the book. 




His small audience grew slowly: the socialites and the merely inquisitive 




departed, and those who had heard of Ouspensky through the grapevine 




replaced  them.  From  the  psychosynthesis  group  came  Alcock,  Nicoll, 




Eder, and Young. Other friends of Orage, like Rowland Kenney and Carl 




Bechhofer Roberts, also attended Ouspensky s lectures. Orage whipped up 




more support from those to whom he had been a minor guru. There was 




interest from the Theosophists: Maud Hofimann, who was a fnend of Mabel 




CoUins, the author of the Theosophical “classic,”  

Light on the Path, 

 and 




who shared the house at 146 Harley Street with Maurice Nicoll and James 




Young, seems to have told Nicoll about Ouspensky even before Orage. 




Ouspensky’s audiences were composed generally of the better-off among 




the intellectuals; as Bechhofer Roberts wrote, “One saw doctors, psychologists, psycho-analysts, editors, writers, civil servants, theosophists of both sexes, clergymen and a sprinkling of the men and women who are always 




attracted by the lure of the mysterious.” 




Orage himself clearly expected that his relationship v^dth Ouspensky 




would  be  along  the  lines  of  an  editorial  collaboration  with  a   

New  Age

 




contributor. Indeed, his relationship with Mitrinovid had been conducted 




on just these terms; and the forceful personality of Ouspensky, bearing a 




message which demanded acceptance of a master-pupil relationship, was a 




profound shock. Mitrinovi6 himself came to some of Ouspensky’s meefings




S U S P E N S K   221




and fought hard to retain Orage’s allegiance. But the total commitment 




demanded by Ouspensky overwhelmed his less impressive arguments; for 




although Orage may not have known it, such a commitment was what he 




sought. 




The teaching which produced such cataclysmic eflFects was the teaching 




Ouspensky had absorbed from Gurdjieff. Man is asleep, mechanical; he has 




no “I” of his own. He must try to awsdce, observe himself, and realize his 




own mechanicalness and the illusory nature of the personality with which 




he identifies and which manipulates his life. He can do nothing, but must 




join a group dedicated to waking up. Perhaps then he vnll discover his “real 




I” and acquire a soul which he most certainly does not possess. 




Those who responded to Ouspensky did so according to their dijfferent 




natures and their differing problems. Nicoll saw the new system as the 




continuation of his quest. Young as the next step in a scientific inquiry, and 




to  Orage,  it  may  have  appeared  as  a  hammer  to  smash  throu^  the 




unsatis&ctory life he had created and penetrate to some truth. To Rowland 




Kenney, whose air crash had left him “an insomniac, a writer unable to 




write,  a  quivering  jelly  of  fears,  worries,  doubts  and  apprehensions,” 




Ouspensky’s broken EngUsh opened doors into new rooms of thought. “My 




first interest was the purely practical one of the neurotic who wants healing 




and reassurance that not only is life going to be worth living, but that he is 




again going to be fit for active life. I am afraid I did not find the drastic 




methods of Ouspensky immediately effective. The devastating emotional 




upset was not a sedative for jangled nerves.” The brusque treatment of 




irrelevant questions and the shocks administered by Ouspensky to personal 




vanities did, in the long run, work for Kenney who began to find his needed 




support in “the esoteric side" of Ouspensky s teaching. He reached the 




conclusion that no liberation in the social sense was possible until there had 




been a liberation firom “the tyranny of internal things.” 




Ouspensky’s teaching methods at this time already resembled those he 




would continue to use until the beginning of the Second World War. He 




held meetings several times a week and conducted at least two groups: a 




small body of hard-core enthusiasts and a larger one, probably to act as a 




magnet  and  a  screeniog  device.  He  also  saw  pupils  privately.  At  his 




meetings, he expounded Gurdjieff’s ideas and then invited questions and 




answers. This constituted the really important part of the meeting—or so 




Ouspensky would say in the 1930s—^because the right sort of question, 




which was based on personal experience and sprang from a real desire for 




knowledge, meant that the teacher would answer from his own experience. 




The questioner would receive hints of where his problem fitted into the 




vast  scheme  of  human  psychology  and  the  universe  which  was  being 




unfolded gradually and with an irritating arbitrariness before him. 




222 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Ouspensky’s methods were those of Gurdjieff in more than the system of 




question  and  answer.  He  would  create  confusion  and  uncertainty  by 




changing the dates of meetings, or by teUing pupils like Rosamund Sharp 




that he wanted to see less of them, only without warning to subject them to 




a  battery  of  personal  interviews.  In  Ouspensky’s  mouth,  the  system 




assumed the aspect of a scientific, rational approach to the universe and lost 




much of the eccentricity and exoticism which characterized Gurdjieff’s ovra 




teaching. 




James Young recorded the various exercises devised by pupils to assist 




the  process  of  self-observation.  “Some  people  took  to  doing  counting 




exercises in the Underground, instead of staring at their fellow passengers 




or reading their daily papers; others tried to overcome the ‘mechanism’ of 




their dislikes in the matter of food by eating what they would not otherwise 




have eaten, or the ‘mechanism’ of their likes by abjuring favourite dishes.” 




He thought that “on the whole, sincerity gained at the expense of material 




politeness,  ”  and  that  conversation  became  “more  alive  and  real,”  but 




noticed that there was a distinct tendency to observe the mechanicalness of 




others rather than one’s own automatism. 




A fascinating glimpse of how a member of Ouspensky’s audience might 




progress from poUte interest to a complete commitment to the System is 




given by a series of letters which Rosamund Sharp wrote to an unnamed 




correspondent from October 21 to December 7, 1921. In many ways, Mrs. 




Sharp  provides  an  excellent  example  of  the  sort  of  person  attracted  to 




Ouspensky’s lectures. She was the daughter of E. Nesbit’s husband, Hubert 




Bland, a former leading light of the Fabian Nursery, and—^after an affair 




with H.G. Wells—^had married Clifford Sharp who, by all accounts, was an 




unsatisfactory husband. Orage telephoned her and told her that he had 




found “a man I could believe in. ” 




Expecting a psychoanalyst, she was surprised by Ouspensky, whose 




teaching seemed religious, philosophical, and analytical all in one. At first 




she felt that Orage “had let me in for a lot of stuff that I couldn’t understand 




and  that  was  quite  probably  useless  to  me.”  To  her  great  horror, 




Ouspensky, evidently imitating the practice of Gurdjieff, asked to see her 




alone. She talked to him in a  

ca£6

 for two hours and quelled some of her 




disquiet. Ouspensky was “a wonderful person. Incidentally he has the 




sweetest smile in the world, but that is his only atttaction from an ordinary 




point of view, counting out his brains, of course.” Suddenly she discovered 




an  access  of  energy,  and  despite  hngering  doubts  about  her  ability  to 




understand the details of Ouspensky’s exposition, life began to seem more 




worth living. She wrote; “If there is one grain of truth in it I’m not going to 




reject it whatever nonsense may surround it.” 




The feeling of well-being continued, but her worries were by no means




S U S P E N S K   2 2 3




stilled. Ouspensky’s method of question and answer meant that the pupil 




must painfully piece together the complete system of thought. Rosamund 




Sharp worried about her own capacity to winkle out the information she 




needed  and  envied  intellectuals  like  Orage  their  abihty  to  formulate 




questions. She called the System “Suspensk.” Her teacher became more 




human;  the  stern  exterior  of  the  lecturer  with  his  very  short  sight  and 




innumerable  pairs  of  spectacles  was  softened  by  a  visit  to  the  flat  in 




Gwendwr Road and the discovery of his notorious devotion to cats. Cats 




apart, there were also moments when she achieved real contact with the 




teacher, like that at the very first meeting when she had blurted out, “How 




can we get a will?” and “Ouspensky sort of switched round in his chair and 




looked straight at me and began talking about the possibility that man had 




to awake and for a few minutes everything became really thrilling, sort of 




vibrating with life.” 




Her anxiety mounted about the eventual outcome. She felt herself at one 




end of a long, dark tunnel without the certainty of light at the other. It 




became apparent that the disciphne was changing her, and she worried 




about  losing  her  friends.  At  the  very  outset,  she  had  suspected  this 




possibility;  now she felt them slipping away. Then the real test began: 




Ouspensky—^perhaps playing the part that Gurdjieff had played in Uch 




Darye—seemed depressed, talked of returning to Constantinople because 




things were not going well, gave her to understand that she was the only 




member of the group who responded more than intellectually to the true 




significance of his work. Rosamund Sharp hoped that if he did decide to go 




he would go quickly, while it was still possible for her to return to her old 




interests. She wondered whether she could face this. Her correspondent 




began feehng “change” in her, accused her of unfriendly behavior. He, too, 




was slipping away. She knew this and faced up to it. Her friendship with 




Orage was also a thing of the past, for she had stopped identifying with him. 




“Killed by changes in me and in him. We both know this without speaking a 




word. . . . ” 




In all his teaching, Ouspensky made no secret of the facts that the System 




he taught derived from Gurdjieff, that Gurdjieff was somewhere on the 




continent of Europe trying  to establish a permanent  base, and that  the 




London lectures, the questions and answers, and the basic exercises which 




included “self-remembering,” were only the preliminaries to proper work 




in  a  “school.”  In  the  winter  of  1921-22,  Gurdjieff  was  still  in  Hellerau, 




convinced of the possibility of starting work in Germany; but when the 




Hellerau project failed, he returned to Berlin. It seems to have been agreed 




that, because Ouspensky was having some success in London, England was 




the  next  best  place  to  try  to  establish  a  permanent  Institute.  In  Berlin, 




GurdjiefiF  made  his  pupils  learn  English,  and  in  London  Ouspensky




2 2 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




prescribed Russian lessons for some of his pupils. It was GurdjiefF’s own 




idea that he visit England, and he arrived in London in February 1922, with 




Mme. de Hartmann as his secretary. “I at once invited him, as a matter of 




course, to my lectures,” says Ouspensky, “and introduced him to all who 




were coming to them.” 




Gurdjieff’s  first  introduction  to  Ouspensky’s  pupils  took  place  on 




February 13. According to Orage’s notes of the occasion, GurdjiefF talked 




chiefly about “impressions” and “energy.” As children we acquire new 




impressions,  he  said,  but  as  we  grow  older,  our  sensitivity  to  new 




impressions weakens, and they can only be obtained by force. Similarly, 




energy  is  mechanically  acquired  and  mechanically  used;  but  there  are 




methods for obtaining new energy. At this Orage commented, “pickaxe and 




pounder,  eh?”  A  number  of  interesting  observations  were  made  by 




GurdjiefF that do not seem to appear elsewhere. You may study men by 




their  postures  and  judge  nationality  by  methods  of  dancing.  Each  nationality has a different number of movements and therefore of thoughts. In the same way, all our moods are the result of our experiences, and the 




trained eye can read them. If a man’s original associations can be traced, we 




can  create  in  him  any  emotion.  These  topics  had  obvious  reference  to 




Gurdjieff’s plans for an Institute on a large scale. 




Some  of  Gurdjieff’s  audience  took  fright.  “A  few  timid  people  were 




scared away,” wrote James Young, “perhaps by his completely shaven 




head.” It may have been at this first meeting that only one member of the 




overawed group dared to ask the Master a question— “What would it be 




like to be conscious in essence?” He received the reply; “Everything more 




vivid.  ”  There  were  no  more  questions,  and  Gurdjieff  left.  The  second 




meeting at which he confronted Ouspensky’s group was on March 15. 




Gurdjieff talked about personality and essence. He said that in Europe the 




term  “hypnotism  ”  referred  only  to  personality.  One  center  might  be 




hypnotized by the others. Again there was talk of a permEuient Institute. 




Individual programs in such an organization, Gurdjieff said, could only be 




arranged after long study by others and by oneself 




The London Institute was destined never to materialize, although a large 




building  in  Hampstead  had  been  found  to  house  it.  The  reason  was 




Gurdjieff’s failure to obtain a visa, although Bechhafer Roberts says that he 




would  have  been  allowed  to  enter  Britain  if  he  had  left  behind  all  the 




Russians who followed him from Tiflis and Constantinople. A deputation 




was organized by Orage, Maurice Nicoll, and some of the other doctors— 




including  a  bemused  surgeon  called  Kenneth  Walker  who  had  been 




whisked from Harley Street by Nicoll and made to testify before the Home 




Secretary in favor of a man whose name itself was still new to him. Lady 




Rothermere attempted to exert pressure covertly, and another follower of




S   U   S   P   E   N   S   K   225




Ouspensky even mobilized a High Court judge to buttress GurdjiefF’s case. 




The Londoners still seem to have been hopeful in late June, but by this 




time the Home Office was even causing trouble over a brief visit w'hich 




GurdjiefiF proposed to make from Berlin. On the main issue it remained 




adamant. The traveling circus could not enter Britain. 




Part of the reason was probably Bolshevophobia. The specter of Red 




Revolution frightened many governments at that time, and there was a 




tendency  to  see  in  every  Russian  a  bearded,  bomb-secreting  anarchist 




intent on disrupting society. No country in Europe was anxious to admit 




more than it could absorb of the huge numbers of White Russians pouring 




out  of  the  Slavic  depths.  Even  though  Ouspensky  s  own  position  was 




secure, it might be that his visit to Theosophical headquarters in Adyar had 




somehow tainted him with the brush of sedition. Bechhofer Roberts, who 




had  visited  the  Theosophists  at  the  same  time—^when  he  was  only 




nineteen—had been forced to demand an inquiry when he returned home 




in order to free himself from unpleasant surveillance. Neither can Orage’s 




reputation have been exactly free from blemish. There had been a plot to 




kidnap a Member of Parliament, and the government had thought it worth 




while to suborn Orage’s friend and colleague, J. M. Kennedy, to act as an 




informer on the  

New Age

 group. 




Outweighing all considerations of logic was the fact that Gurdjielf was 




known to have spied for the Tsarist government in Tibet. It was in Britain 




on one or another of the trips he made early in 1922, that Gurdjieff was 




interviewed by security men, but no records are available to clarify the 




situation. Neither is there any evidence for Louis Pauwels’s claim that the 




former French President Poincare intervened personally to procure for 




Gurdjieff the permit which allowed him to settle in France; although, in 




view of Ushe Narzunoff’s status as an ally of France, there would have been 




nothing  illogical  in  his  doing  so.  Somehow  the  permit  was  obtained. 




Gurdjieff moved his Berlin group to Paris, and again began to look for a 




suitable home. Very soon one was found in the Prieur6 des Basses Loges, a 




chSteau some forty miles from Paris, near Fontainebleau. The Institute for 




the Harmonious Development of Man had at last found a roof The money 




to pay first for renting, and then for the purchase of the ch&teau, came from 




Ouspensky’s friends and pupils in London. Lady Rothermere once more 




provided funds, but the leading contributor was a rich Yorkshire industrialist named Ralph Philipson. Mrs. Philipson even handed over a valuable string of pearls to Gurdjieff, who gave them back. 




Ouspensky’s own attitude toward Gurdjieff was ambivalent: he “still 




expected a very great deal more from his work” but saw a recurrence of “all 




the former obstacles which had begun to appear in Essentuki.” For the 




moment he devoted his energies to supporting Gurdjieff’s plans. Some of




226 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




his London pupils, particularly the ones who had been most forward in 




trying to estabhsh GurdjieflF in England, decided to “give up everything” 




and go to Fontainebleau. “In my opinion,” wrote Ouspensky,” some had 




been  in  far  too  great  a  hurry  to  give  up  their  ordinary  occupations  in 




England in order to follow G.” Others, who wanted their Master to make 




the decision for them, he told to wait until he himself had been to the 




Prieure. 




In the first week in July, Ouspensky went to Paris where he stayed at the 




Hotel Solferino in the Rue de Lille. He sent back encouraging messages, 




but warned his pupils that GurdjieflF’s establishment was not yet fully 




organized. Then in mid-August, he received disquieting news from Orage, 




whom he had left in charge of the groups in London. Ill-disposed or panic- 




stricken people had been sowing rumors among the new recruits who were 




terrified by tales of madness, sexual scandals, and the dangers said to be 




attendant on self-observation. Ouspensky wrote to his senior pupils, asking 




them to suppress the gossip and warning Orage to keep strictly to his 




instructions. However, the exodus had already begun, although few of the 




visitors to Fontainebleau can have departed without qualms. 




Almost the first to go was James Young, who left Harley Street in some 




confusion of mind. Was he going simply to improve his technique as a 




psychotherapist? Afterward he declared that he had seen in Ouspensky’s 




exposition of the System a possible way of overcoming the problem of 




“failure of the will” in which he was interested. On the other hand, as an 




honest  man,  he  had  to  admit  that  he  could  not  “lay  claim  to  such  an 




impersonal motive.” Maurice Nicoll abandoned his practice, borrowed 




money from his expectations under his father’s will, and left for France with 




his  wife,  his  sister-in-law,  his  young  daughter,  and  a  nanny.  Several 




patients of Young and Nicoll followed their analysts across the Channel. 




Rosamund Sharp left for Fontainebleau, as did Rowland Kenney, who 




arrived in a mood of great surprise that he should be in such a place at all. 




There were numerous people whose circumstances permitted only weekend  visits  or  short  trips.  One  of  these  was  J.G.  Bennett,  the  young intelligence officer from Constantinople, who had joined Ouspensky’s circle 




on his return to England. 




The growth of interest in Gurdjieff’s ideas was like the spreading out of 




ripples in a pool; Ouspensky’s arrival in London had produced an eddy 




which enclosed Orage and his friends; and their conversion—^for conversion 




it most certainly was—set off fresh waves through the intellectual world. 




After Orage had been won over, Gurdjieff and Ouspensky would have been 




names to conjure within the close-knit intellectual society of the day; but 




there is no doubt that it was Katherine Mansfield’s death at Fontainebleau 




which introduced them to a vdder public. 




S U S P E N S K   2 2 7




Katherine  Mansfield  was  the  daughter  of  a  prosperous  New  Zealand 




banker. She came to Europe for education and stayed to experience life. 




Her  tempestuous  and  theatrical  prospecting  for  experience  led  to  a 




succession of lovers, a miscarriage, an abortion, and an operation which 




permanently  damaged  her  health.  Somehow  she  contrived  an  area  of 




equilibrium in the midst of all this turbulence, out of which emerged a 




series  of  meticulously  observed  short  stories.  In  1912  she  met  John 




Middleton  Murry,  then  a  hopefiil  young  writer  and  editor  of  his  own 




magazine,  

Rhythm. 

 They struck up an intense and unstable relationship. 




They lived together, lived separately but near at hand, then each took flight 




from the other in order to work. Katherine Mansfield’s hysterical temperament,  her  insistence  on  subordinating  the  responsibilities  of  personal relationships to a relentless pursuit of experience—an aspect caricatured by 




D.H. Lawrence in the character of Gudrun in  

Women in Love

—complicated  their  lives  unbearably.  In  1916  they  lived  for  a  while  with  the Lawrences in Cornwall in an abortive experiment in communal life. After 




the war Katherine Mansfield’s health began to break down in earnest with 




the onset of tuberculosis; and in the autumn of 1921, she and Murry—at last 




married—were living in Switzerland because of the supposedly beneficial 




effect of the mountain air. From their friend, S. S. Koteliansky, K.M. heard 




about a Russian doctor in Paris who had a new treatment for tuberculosis, 




and she became convinced that a cure was possible. To the great distress of 




Murry, who thought that her only chance lay in remaining in Switzerland, 




she left for London in July 1922, ostensibly in order to see a heart specialist 




before going on to Paris to begin treatment for her diseased lungs. In fact 




she had a perfectly sound heart and the real reason—^as Murry aftenvard 




believed—^was to renew her contact with Orage. 




The relationship of the Murrys with the Lawrences is well known, but that 




with Orage and Beatrice Hastings was almost equally important. It was Orage 




who had published Katherine Mansfield’s first stories in the  

New Age

 in 1910. 




Later Beatrice Hastings was to claim the responsibiUty. Whatever the truth, 




Katherine Mansfield fell for a time under the influence of the powerfiil Mrs. 




Hastings, and it was to her that she is supposed to have turned in 1911 for help 




in arranging her abortion. After she met Murry, her connection with Orage 




lapsed; for Orage had also been Murry’s first publisher, and Murry’s magazine. 




 

Rhythm, 

 was in some ways a rival to the  

New Age

 in which it was bitterly 




attacked. However, when Beatrice Hastings left Orage and went to Paris, the 




two women again resumed their relationship. 




When the breakup with Orage removed Beatrice Hastings from the scene 




in 1916, the relationship of the Murrys and Orage altered once again. Next 




year Orage published some stories of Katherine Mansfield’s, and Middleton




228 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Murry met him for what was only the second time in his life. Relations 




between the two men remained affable but distant. Murry was conscious of 




a relationship with Orage which resembled that of opposed magnetic poles. 




“He, far more than many other men whom I knew far better,” Murry wrote 




in 1934, “was an influence in my life: a queer kind of negative influence, no 




doubt, for I was always resisting Orage, but a very real one.” 




In the autumn of 1921, Orage—probably remembering Murry’s bouts of 




mysticism—suggested that the newly published book of Lewis Wallace, 




 

Cosmic Anatomy, 

 be sent to him in Switzerland. “To such speculations,” 




wrote Murry eight years later, “I have since learned to attach a meaning, as 




a sometimes useful method (if used warily) of making the borderlands of 




psychology accessible to thought; but at that time they meant nothing—less 




than nothing; they were positively repellent. I put the book aside. K.M. 




picked it up.” 




 

Cosmic  Anatomy

  is  a  curious  book.  It  is  an  open  question  how  much 




Lewis Wallace was in fact the author and how much the book was cobbled 




together by Orage and the psychosynthesists to serve as an introduction to 




Ouspensky’s lectures. It describes an occult system derived from Oriental 




religions, Rosicrucianism, and similar sources which is supposed to be 




linked to contemporary science—^psychoanalysis, of course, and relativity. 




There are striking parallels with Gurdjieff’s own teachings. At all events the 




book answered the metaphysical hunger of the times in general, and of 




Katherine Mansfield in particular. 




From her Russian wonder doctor in Paris, K. M. fled to London, with the 




hapless Murry following. The goal was Orage, both as mediator of  

Cosmic

 




 

Anatomy

 and as the magnetic personality who had dominated the  

New Age

 




gatherings. She saw him on August 30, 1922, by which time he had almost 




certainly resolved to go to Fontainebleau. “She said it had been wonderful,”  recalled  her  friend,  Ida  Baker,  “he  had  been  so  affectionate, embracing her and calling her ‘darling,’ as though in a return to eariier, 




happier days.” K. M. recorded the interview in her journal. It typifies the 




attitude  of  many  people  who  came  to  Gurdjieff—a  general  attitude, 




irrespective of personal problems, but here expressed with the customary 




Mansfield powers of observation. 




On that occasion I began by telling him how dissatisfied I was with the 




idea  that  Life  must  be  a  lesser  thing  than  we  were  capable  of 




“imagining” it to be. I had the feeling that the same thing happened to 




nearly everybody whom I knew and whom I did not know. No sooner 




was  their  youth,  with  the  little  force  and  impetus  characteristic  of 




youth, done, than they stopped growing. At the very moment that one 




felt  that  now  was  the  time  to gather  oneself  together,  to use one’s




S U S P E N S K   229




whole strength, to take control, to be an adult, in fact, they seemed 




content to swop the darling wish of their hearts for innumerable little 




wishes. Or the image that suggested itself to me was that of a river 




flowing away in countless little trickles over a dark swamp. 




They  deceived  themselves,  of  course.  They  called  this  trickling 




away—greater tolerance—^wider interests—a sense of proportion—so 




that work did not rule out the possibility of “life.” Or they called it an 




escape from all this mind-probing and self-consciousness—a simpler 




and therefore a better way of life. But sooner or later, in literature at 




any rate, there sounded an undertone of deep regret. There was an 




uneasiness, a sense of frustration. One heard, one thought one heard, 




the cry that began to echo in one’s ovra being: “I have missed it. I have 




given up. This is not what I want. If this is all, then Life is not worth 




living.” 




But I  

know

 it is not all. How does one know that? Let me take the 




case  of  K.  M.  She  has  led,  ever  since  she  can  remember,  a  very 




typically  false  life.  Yet,  through  it  all,  there  have  been  moments, 




instants, gleams, when she has felt the possibility of something quite 




other. 




At this point, Katherine Mansfield was living in the house of her friend, 




the artist Dorothy Brett, while Murry rented a room next door from Boris 




Anrep. K. M. became completely involved with the group around Orage. 




This now included another old friend, the novelist J. D. Beresford, who was 




also attending Ouspensky’s meetings. The spiritual quest on which they 




were embarking was contagious, but Murry remained unaflFected. “I felt 




feat the only thing that remained to me—my own integrity—^was at stake. It 




was not that I felt superior to Orage, or J. D. Beresford, or James Young, or 




Maurice Nicoll, who were among Ouspensky’s disciples: still less did I feel 




superior to Katherine. But I was certain that it would be treachery to myself 




to follow them. I could scarcely bear to discuss the doctrines of Ouspensky 




with  Katherine.”  In  despair,  he  began  to  turn  more  and  more  to  the 




teachings  of  a  mystic  named  Millar  Dunning,  whom  he  had  met  at 




Garsington,  and  who  also  counted  J.  W,  N.  Sullivan—still  not  yet 




emancipated  from  Aleister  Crowley—among  his  devotees.  Eventually, 




feeUng life “a kind of torture,” Murry took flight to Selsfield, the country 




house of his friend Vivian Locke-Ellis. 




Katherine  Mansfield  had  not  quite  given  up  hope  of  making  him 




understand. She saw Orage again on September fifth and tenth; on the 




fourteenth she went to a lecture by Ouspensky at Warwick Gardens and 




met Orage on the sixteenth. Four days later, she attended a luncheon at J. 




D.  Beresford’s, about which she wrote to Murry. 




2 3 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




K.  M.  absorbed  Gurdjieff’s  ideas  from  Orage  rather  than  from 




Ouspensky. She attended a few of Ouspensky’s lectures and then came to 




tell him that she was oflF to continue her treatment with the Paris specialist. 




To  Ouspensky,  she  did  not  seem  to  have  long  to  live,  but  he  gave  her 




GurdjiefF’s address, and on October 3 she left for Paris. The next day she 




protested in a letter to Murry: “I don’t feel influenced by Ouspensky or 




Dunning. I merely feel I’ve heard ideas like my ideas, but bigger ones, far 




more definite ones. And that there really is Hope—real Hope, not half- 




Hope . . . ” 




Orage himself arrived in Paris on October 14. He was still trying to sell 




his share of the Neuj  

Age, 

 but had received a subsidy from Lewis Wallace to 




speed him on his quest for truth. In his brilliant variations on literature, the 




arts. Theosophy, and social reform, he had simply been postponing the 




inevitable reckoning which his nature had long since decreed. Fifteen years 




earlier,  he  had  written  in  his  speculations  on  the  higher  forms  of 




consciousness: “Perhaps the great ways of Religion, Art and Love are also 




the safe and certain ways. Perhaps it is the racial experience that has named 




these as the chosen means, the humanly effective means. Special means 




doubtless exist; but special means involve special difficulties.” Now special 




means confronted him which had none of the rigmarole attached to them of 




the occultism which he had earlier abandoned; and he could no longer put 




off the attempt. 




The impact of Ouspensky’s teaching on him had simply deepened after 




the first shock. On May 30, 1922, he had written to Claude Bragdon: “Ever 




since Mr. Ouspensky came to London under Lady Rothermere’s auspices 




last August, I have been attending his lectures, and more and more and still 




more I find myself absorbing his teaching . . . Mr. Ouspensky is the first 




teacher I have met who has impressed me with ever-increasing certainty 




that he knows and can do.” All his resistance had crumbled. C. S. Nott 




reports that later Orage compared his ovra situation in 1921-22 with that of 




a  character  called  Hamolinadir  in   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  This  character 




represents the man who has “learned everything” and found no solutions in 




the knowledge of the schoolmen. “Hamolinadir,” said Orage, “is a cartoon 




of  the  disillusioned  modem  thinker,  whose  reason  is  insufficient  for 




objective conclusions. ” 




Yet one cannot but feel that the intellectual baggage of Orage—like that 




of Ouspensky and of many of Gurdjieff’s followers—had been insufficient to 




weigh him down. The gadfly mind seldom penetrates deeply enough into 




the disciplines from which it draws sustenance to deliver any sort of verdict 




upon them. Philip Mairet quotes a remark of Ramiro de Maeztu: “Orage 




knows the shages of everything and the weight of nothing.” He suggests 




that  Orage  felt  the  absence  of  a  solid  core  of  truth  to  be  a  flaw  which




S U S P E N S K   231




afiFected both society and himself. After the flight of his mistress and in the 




absence of a cause to dominate, Orage sought a master and a dominating 




interest.  The  sovereign  alkahest  which  would  reconcile  all  social  and 




personal contradictions must be God. 




“Since  in  my  experience,”  he  wrote  after  his  time  at  Fontainebleau, 




“every attempt to establish an ideal and conscious relation between man 




and man, without taking God into account, has failed, the only remaining 




hope of the serious social reformer is to ‘find religion,’ that is to say, find 




God.” This has been criticized as rationalizing after the event; but it is 




perfectly in Hne with what he had accepted of Gurdjieff’s ideas. How can 




you reform society, the argument runs, when man himself is unregenerate? 




Man is asleep, and you can help at best to wake up only a few. Altruists are 




self-indulgent people—^and, of course, asleep. All you can do is try to find 




your  “real  I.” “Why  must you go?” asked his devoted  secretary, Alice 




Marks; and Orage returned simply: “I am going to find God.” 




Orage’s departure from London was viewed by a far wider circle than that 




of  the   

New  Age

  office  as  a  tragedy  from  which  the  causes  he  had 




championed  would  not  recover.  Criticism  began.  Dmitrije  Mitrinovid 




disconsolately, but humorously, watched the man he had hoped to make his 




own Saint Paul submit to the dictates of another gospel. He complained to 




Wilma Muir that too many clever men in London were throwing up their 




jobs and migrating to Fontainebleau because Gurdjieff had promised that 




he  could  raise  into  full  bloom  the  merest  bud  of  a  soul.  Yet,  after 




melancholy  shakings  of  the  head,  Mitrinovi6  would  then  gurgle  with 




laughter and cry: “London is Looney-bin, no?” 




The  contrast  between  the  view  from  “within”  and  the  view  from 




“without” is absolute. From one point of view, Orage’s conversion was 




incomprehensible, or a matter for censure. From another, it was simply 




necessary. Once more he made a clean break with his past. The last time he 




had  burned  his  boats,  he  salvaged  from  the  ashes  three  volumes  of 




Nietzsche. This time his luggage was less bulky. It consisted, as he later 




said, of  

Alice in Wonderland

 and a toothbrush. 




The Institute for the Harmonious

 




Development of Man




The chateau known as the Prieure des Basses Loges stands at the bottom of 




a small hill in the village of Avon on the outskirts of Fontainebleau. The 




building—said to have been designed for Mme. de Maintenon—is three 




stories high and low in proportion to its length. The windows of the two 




lower stories are flanked by shutters, while those of the upper story project 




from a gray slate roof Inside, the ground floor contains the once ornate 




Empire  drawing  room,  salon,  and  library;  the  second  floor,  a  set  of 




luxurious bedrooms known by the pupils as “the Ritz,” where GurdjieflF and 




Mme. Ostrowsky had their quarters and where visitors and new arrivals 




were generally lodged; and the third floor—or “Monks’ Corridor”—holds 




attic bedrooms where most of the pupils slept. 




In the courtyard at the chateau entrance is a fountain—out of whose 




circular basin Gurdjieff once heaved a car single-handedly—and on the 




other side of the house, beyond a terrace, is a garden supposed to have 




been  designed  by  Lendtre.  In  Gurdjielf’s  day  the  garden  included  an 




impressive lime avenue and another fountain used as a swimming pool. 




When Gurdjieff bought the property, the grounds extended beyond the 45 




acres around the house to some 200 acres, bounded by a stone wall outside 




of which rose the trees of the Forest of Fontainebleau. Inside the demesne 




were  various  auxiliary  buildings:  a  complex  of  kitchens  and  serv^ts’ 




quarters attached to the ch&teau in an ugly wing; an enormous orangery




2 3 2




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   2 3 3




built almost entirely of glass; and a small house in the gardens known as “Le 




Paradou.” Under GurdjiefF’s regime the Paradou housed the children of the 




colony, who were supervised in a rota by one mother a week. 




The Prieure was owned by the widow of the advocate Maitre Laborie, 




who had been given the chateau in payment for his defense of Dreyfus. 




After various negotiations carried out by Mme. de Hartmann, Gurdjieff first 




leased,  then  bought  the  Prieure  for  700,000  francs.  But  his  hopes  of 




immediate occupancy were frustrated, and it was not until October 1922, 




that he was able to move the caravanserel into his new headquarters. 




The first English pupils found GurdjiefF temporarily established in Paris 




where he hired a house in Auteuil and used the Dalcroze Institute in the 




Rue de Vaugirard for teaching his movements. In August, James Young 




arrived  to  find  the  pupils  occupied  in  making  costumes  for  public 




performances which GurdjiefF planned to give. Metalworking, embroidery 




and shoemaking were some of the tasks imposed; and many of the new 




arrivals were strangers to any form of manual labor. As Young wrote, they 




suddenly had to pick up the techniques of several different handicrafts, 




“which meant overcoming" one’s awkwardness and diffidence, and sometimes, be it confessed, one’s indifference or even dislike. This work was carried on with feverish activity, and occupied, together with the exercises, 




thirteen  or  fourteen  hours  every  day.  The  keynote  was  ‘Overcome 




difficulties—Make effort—Work.’ . . . You may imagine that this kind of 




communal work, together with misunderstandings that arose from language 




difficulties, called upon one’s exercise of the virtues of self-remembering, 




non-identifying and non-considering to the utmost.” 




The Prieure was fully furnished, except for the former servants’ quarters, 




but had not been lived in since 1914. The advance party from Paris had the 




task of hacking the grounds into shape and renovating the inside of the 




building. “We weeded and trimmed up the almost indistinguishable paths,” 




Young remembered, “washed all the glass of a large ‘orangerie’ or vinery, 




which afterwards became a workshop and smithy—and, in general, worked 




like demons.” When the chateau and the grounds had been made more or 




less habitable, GurdjiefF and the main body of pupils arrived. 




A  peculiar  prospectus  was  issued  in  French,  entitled,  

L’Institut  du

 




 

Diveloppement  Harmonique  de  I’Homme  de  G.  Gurdjieff, 

  in  which 




Ouspensky claimed to have had a hand. It began with an account of the 




expeditions  of  the  Seekers  for  Truth  in  the  Orient  and  of  Gurdjiefi^’s 




adventures while trying to establish himself in Russia. “The number of 




people interested in the basic ideas of the Institute,” it claimed, “is clearly 




^wing: there are not far ofiF 5,000 members, scattered about throughout 




tiie world.” Bechhofer Roberts, who visited Fontainebleau as an interested 




spectator, remarked that the numbers could safely be reduced to 500; and




234 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




in  fact,  the  inhabitants  of  the  Institute  numbered  between  sixty  and 




seventy. At least half of these were Eastern Europeans; according to Young, 




“Russians, Armenians, Poles, Georgians, and even a Syrian.” They kept 




themselves aloof, eating in their own dining room and separated for the 




most part from the English pupils by an impassable language barrier. Of the 




thirty-odd English residents, many are knovra by name. There were the 




doctors; Nicoll, Alcock, Young, and another psychoanalyst named Dr. Mary 




Bell; half a dozen Theosophically inchned ladies; Orage, Katherine Mansfield, and other literary converts like Rowland Kenney and Rosamund Sharp. There were a couple of civil servants, among them R. J. G. Mayor, 




and a diplomat or two. A larger floating population of weekend visitors 




included the &ithful like J. G. Bennett, the intrigued like CliflFord Sharp, 




and the merely inquisitive like Bechhofer Roberts. It should be emphasized 




that  GurdjieflF’s  Institute—the  achievement  for  which  he  is  generally 




remembered—^was a hmited concern with a finite number of pupils, and 




that  strict supervision was  exercised over admission.  For example, the 




skeptical psychical researcher. Dr. E. J. Dingwall, was refused access to 




Fontainebleau. 




According to the prospectus, Gurdjieff accepted pupils of three categories; those who wished to undergo his educational program, those who merely wanted theoretical instruction, and those who were his patients in 




his capacity as physician-hypnotist. Gurdjieff later published a revised 




translation  of  parts  of  his  prospectus—but  with  the  idiom  and  the 




presentation  somewhat  altered.  In  the  winter  of  1922-23,  he  expressed 




himself in the style of the new psychology, in the tones of a prophet who 




would have been at home in Edwin Muir’s Hellerau:




Because  of  the  conditions  of  modem  life,  contemporary  man  has 




deviated from his original type; that is to say, from the type which 




should have been produced by the influence of his environment; the 




circumstances of the place, the surroundings and the culture in which 




he is bom and grows up. 




. . . instead of raising man completely to a new degree of development, civilization has encouraged the evolution of certain faculties at the expense of others, some of which have been utterly destroyed;. . . 




Man has become an uprooted creature unable to adapt himself to life 




and alien to all the circumstances of his present existence. 




This is what the psychological system of M. Gurdjieff asserts by 




means,  of   

psycho-analysis, 

  showing  by  experiment  that  the  world- 




picture of a modem man and its own effect on life are not the personal 




and voluntary expression of his entire being, but that on the contr^




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   2 3 5




are only the acx:idental and automatic manifestations of several parts of 




him. 




The prospectus continued with a summary of GurdjiefF’s doctrine of the 




three  centers,  but  presented  in  a  completely  different  way  from  the 




“occult” version familiar to readers of Ouspensky. Emphasis was placed on 




the fact that self-observation showed the centers to be uncoordinated, in 




perpetual conflict, and with different degrees of development. Man must 




bring his centers into a state of harmonious cooperation. Such a struggle 




could  not  be  carried  out  alone,  as  its  dangers  demanded  specialist 




instruction.  

“It  is  indispensable,” 

  the  prospectus  concluded,  

“to  develop

 




 

new  faculties  which  are  not  given  to  man  in  life  and  which  cannot  be

 




 

developed  in  him  by  general  methods

 




Gurdjieff  announced  an  elaborate  program  which  he  divided  into 




theoretical,  practical,  and  medical  sections.  The  theoretical  side  was 




represented by an extensive series of lectures. 




Science  of   

the  harmonious  development  of  man; 

  Psychology  of  man’s 




inner  development.  Study  of  methods  of  knowledge  and  of  the 




perfecting of the  

I

 according to the theories of European science and 




Oriental schools. Experiments and practical work. Application of the 




psychological method to different sciences; cosmological philosophy; 




universal mechanics. Science of relativity. Science of number. Science 




of Symbols. Astrophysics, mathematics, chemistry ancient and modern 




(alchemy); ancient medicine, modern Oriental medicine. Comparative 




study of religions. Mythology. Idolatry. Ancient esoteric schools and 




modem  Oriental  schools.  Psychology  of  art.  Ancient  and  modem 




philosophy. 




The practical section comprised “harmonic rhythm,” “special exercises 




for the development of memory, will, concentration of thought, perception, 




etc.”; “Music, song, modelling. Oriental dances (sacred), drawing, painting, 




sculpture”; “Trades and applied arts—^agriculture, horticulture, market- 




gardening; languages.” It was added that “the teaching and the practice of 




all these subjects is carried out according to  

special

 methods.” 




Under  the  ‘medical  section’  were  listed  an  extraordinary  number  of 




“therapies,” including “hydrotherapy,” “phototherapy,” “electrotherapy, ” 




“magnetotherapy,” “psychotherapy,” “dietotherapy,” and something called 




“duliotherapy.”  Gurdjieff  also  proclaimed  that  the  Institute  contained 




“physico-metric,” “chemico-analytic” and “psycho-experimental” cabinets. 




What these were was anybody’s guess, but presumably they were part of




236 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the well-equipped medical department of the Institute which the prospectus  announced  side  by  side  with  a  Journal  of  the  Institute,  “printed  in appropriate  characters.”  As  Bechhofer  Roberts  observed  in  1924,  the 




“cabinets” had no visible existence, and the “Medical Section” was confined 




to “a few pieces of electrical apparatus of ordinary type. ” 




Some  of  the  claims  in  the  prospectus  could  be  justified  as  being 




allegorical. One of GurdjiefF’s followers has explained “duliotherapy” as 




being “slave-therapy;” that is, the total submission to the will of the Master. 




No doubt the various “cabinets” could be similarly explained—and even the 




Journal “printed in appropriate characters.” But it is difficult to explain 




away  the  oddest  part  of  Gurdjieff’s  prospectus:  the  “Individual  Histo- 




rometric Record” designed for “patients” who were engaged on practical 




work on themselves, and were following a program laid down for them 




individually. This strange document consists of a series of blank forms on 




which various medical and psychological particulars were supposed to be 




entered. On the bottom of each page is the rubric: “For the terminology of 




schematic and conventional expressions see the special instructors’ manual.” 




As far as is known, the elaborate “Record” was never used. This does not 




necessarily mean that it was mere window dressing—although, of course, it 




is quite probable that GurdjiefF was simply trying to blind the intellectuals 




of the West with their own science. Few detailed medical examinations 




ever  seem  to  have  taken  place;  but  the  divisions  which  the  form 




distinguishes bear a definite resemblance to stages through which a pupil 




might pass under Gurdjieff’s supervision. A preliminary assessment, then a 




two-month  period  of  observation,  during  which  the  pupil  would  be 




switched rapidly from task to task in order to determine his problems and 




capacities; a revised assessment based on how the pupil behaved during the 




period of probation; and a definite recommendation from GurdjiefF of a 




particular line of work. It is interesting that the course was conceived in 




terms of nine months—the period of gestation, which also corresponds to 




the points on Gurdjieff’s enneagram. It may be that the Record was never 




used because it was intended for pupils following an individual program— 




and that Gurdjieff never proceeded beyond the collective methods which 




he found necessary for large numbers of people. As he told Maurice Nicoll, 




he saw the Institute as “a hatching place for eggs. It supplies the heat. 




Chicken inside must try to break shell, then help and individual teaching 




possible. Until then only collective method.” 




The  collective  method  included  intense  application  to  manual  tasks. 




Building and carpentry—at both of which Gurdjieff excelled—^were perpetually in progress. Gardening proceeded from morning to night; and if no work was needed, it was manufactured. When Professor Denis Saurat, head




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   2 3 7




of the Institut Frangais in London, came to visit Orage, he found that his 




friend had been made to dig an extensive ditch in the garden—but almost at 




once  was  directed  to  fill  it  in.  The  pupils  did  the  housework,  made 




costumes  for  the  dances,  and  took  their  turn  at  the  onerous  duty  of 




“kitchen-boy”  for  which  the  incumbent  had  to  rise  at  5  a.m.  and  be 




responsible  for  feeding  the  entire  community.  A  Russian  bath  was 




constructed, with steamroom, hot-room and cold-room; and during most of 




the first winter at the Prieure, the pupils were occupied in erecting the 




building in the Institute gardens which was afterward known as the Study 




House.  This  construction  was  based  on  an  old  aircraft  hangar  which 




Gurdjieff had bought from the French army and which, in the fashion of the 




day, James Young calls an “aerodrome”:




The walls were lined within and without between the uprights with 




rough laths. The space between the laths was stuffed with dead leaves. 




The laths were then covered over inside and out with ... a mixture of 




mud and straw, or hay chopped very small. Stoves were then put in the 




building and the walls dried and hardened before painting them. The 




roof was made of tarred felt nailed on to the joists; glass extended all 




the way round the upper half of the walls. This glazing was improvized 




from cucumber frames—a really good piece of work. After these had 




been fixed in position the glass was painted with various designs. The 




lighting  effect  was  very  pleasing.  The  floor,  which  was  the  naked 




.  earth  pounded  thoroughly  and  rolled,  and  dried  by  means  of  the 




stoves, was covered with matting, on which were placed handsome 




carpets; "the walls below the windows were hung with rugs in the 




Oriental feshion. . . . 




Sometimes . . . Gurdjieff would have us out to work at the building 




until two or three in the morning with the aid of big electric lamps 




hanging  from  the  rafters.  .  .  .  Everything  was  arranged,  or  rather 




disarranged, so that nobody should be allowed to fall into a routine. 




. . For a week at a time we would not have more than three or four 




hours sleep at night, and sometimes even only one. My hands were 




often so sti£F in the morning from digging or pick-axeing or harrowing 




or sawing or felling trees that the fingers exhibited the phenomenon 




which is known surgically as “snap-finger”; when one had coaxed them 




to a certain point they suddenly straightened out with a kind of snap. 




Every night in the study-house people would fall asleep during the 




mental exercises. 




On one occasion a pupil who had been working on the Study House roof 




fell asleep between two beams, and only prompt action by GurdjiefiF




238 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




prevented a tragedy. It was small wonder that the day at the Institute began 




at eight or nine o’clock in the morning. “This may sound a fairly late hour 




for so monastic an institution,” Bechhofer Roberts admitted, “but you must 




remember that they probably went to sleep only about four or five o’clock. 




It is one of GurdjiefiF’s doctrines that out of the seven or eight hours sleep of 




the normal man half are wasted in the process of ‘falHng asleep,’ whereas 




the  only  period  that  niatters  is  passed  in  ‘deep  sleep.’  This  last  can  be 




gained equally by spending less time abed and being more prepared to fall 




quickly into it from fatigue.” Pupils sometimes slept four to a room, on 




mattresses on the floor, vdth no comforts—and to many of the English 




pupils this was unheard-of privation. Until noon there was work: in the 




house, with the farm animals—cows, goats, sheep, pigs and poultry—^which 




were acquired, or in the grounds. At noon there was a meal consisting 




usually of bread and soup, a spare diet which greatly shocked most of the 




English arrivals, and which, a  

Daily News

 reporter complained, “an English 




working man would scorn.” 




After  the  meal  and  a  short  rest,  the  pupils  returned  to  work  for  the 




afternoon. In the early evening, they had some time to themselves before 




gathering at nine or ten o’clock, occasionally for a session of questions and 




answers held by Gurdjieff, but mostly for instruction in his movements. At 




first  these  classes  were  held  in  the  salon  of  the  chateau,  but  after  the 




completion of the Study House that building became the center of the most 




eye-catching aspect of Gurdjieff’s teaching. 




The Study House could hold some 300 people. Gurdjieff' decorated it in a 




style probably based on a dervish  

tekke. 

 Immediately in front of the stage 




stood a fountain which was illuminated during performances. Facing the 




stage at the far end of the Study House was a curtained bwth in which 




Gurdjieff"  could  sit  partially  concealed.  On  the  balcony  above  hung  a 




collection of musical instruments. Around the walls ran a continuous low 




divan covered with Oriental carpets on which the pupils sat to watch the 




others perform—men on one side and women on the other. The audience 




was separated from the central area of the Study House by a gangway and a 




low wooden raiUng. Above them, the ceihng was covered in swathes of 




material decorated by de Salzmann with a pattern in which the enneagram 




occupied a central position. Around the eaves of the building Gurdjieff 




placed a series of texts written in a peculiar script: “Here one can only 




direct and create conditions but not help,” one ran; again: “We can only 




strive to be able to be Christians”; or, “Remember that work here is not for 




work’s sake but a means.” 




It was the Study House which visitors remembered, whether those who 




came from Fontainebleau to attend demonstrations of the movements, or 




the  interested  spectators  from  England  who  were  trying  to  learn  more




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   239




about GurdjiefF’s work. In February 1923, a  

Daily News

 reporter interviewed GurdjiefF in the Study House and found him uncharacteristically explicit about the purpose of the exotic surroundings. 




The  Study-House  is  not  yet  complete,  gorgeous  as  is  the  interior. 




Gurdjieff told me that he is having built a special organ, unique in 




Europe, with the octaves in quarter tones. 




Much also remains to be done in other parts of the House. Soon the 




fountain will diffuse a different perfume for every hour, and other 




fountains are yet to be installed. 




By this elaborate combination of appeals to the senses, Gurdjieff 




believes he is providing so many aids to meditation. 




“The senses should be gently distracted,” he said, “and then the 




mind itself untrammeled by the senses is free to work. Only by such 




means can it be brought into the way of harmonious development 




together with the body and with the emotions.” 




By this time it was clear that Gurdjieff’s “dances” could be divided into 




three groups. There were the dances, rituals, and fragments of traditional 




lore which he claimed to have collected during his Eastern travels; then 




there were some broadly dramatic interpretations like the one called the 




"Initiation of the Priestess”; the third category of “movements” or exercises 




was based on the principle of keeping the various “centres” working at full 




stretch. James Young compared the effect of such exhausting undertakings 




to the children’s game in which you try to pat the top of the head at the 




same time as rubbing the stomach with a circular motion. “The will finds it 




«Siffic«lt,” he remarked, “to combine two such unaccustomed movements 




and to keep them clear-cut and regular at the same time. The exercises 




were  mostly  devised  on  these  hnes,  and  some  of  them  required  the 




combination of four different movements, each of which had its own distinct 




rhythm. To attempt these exercises involved great strain, and to continue 




for any length of time was very fetiguing.” 




It was not the body alone which was exercised in this way. Some of the 




movements were governed by complex counting exercises which the pupils 




had  to  perform  in  order  to  keep  in  time  with  the  others.  The  exercise 




described by Ouspensky which entailed the repetition of a series of “0ms” 




is one example; although Gurdjieff could be much more adroit in devising 




aids to mental agility. As purely mental exercises, he would make pupils 




learn Morse Code, or memorize lists of Tibetan words, or expect them to 




know the script in which his texts were written on the Study House roof. 




Hiey were also compelled to learn an arithmetic where all the laws were 




distorted. “A series of statements was made,” James Young remembered. 




2 4 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“such  as  2  X  1  =  6,  2  X  2  =  12,  2  X  3  =  22,  2  X  4  =  40,  2  X  5  =  74. 




Find the process by which these results are arrived at. In this case, to the 




first product 4 is added, to the next 8, to the next 16, and so on.” Operations 




of this sort determined the movements of individual dancers who were thus 




forced to exercise both mental and physical “centres” simultaneously. 




“No great value was attached to these things in themselves,” Young 




wrote  of  the  mental  exercises.  “The  value  lay  in  the  amount  of  effort 




expended on them. ” But did the dances in fact transcend this limited goal of 




“making effort”? To some it seemed not merely that they had a validity in 




themselves—as  an  “artistic”  achievement—but  that  in  some  way  they 




aligned the pupil with the harmonies of the universe. A writer who has 




taken part in Gurdjieff ’s movements has explained this in terms of what 




seems a very strange coincidence. As well as the mental exercises and the 




physical movements, GurdjiefF would give a subject for meditation: an 




exercise for the “emotional centre.” Once, this particular pupil was being 




instructed in a movement for which the meditation had not yet been given. 




Quite unbidden, there overcame her a feeling of extraordinary regret that 




her relationship with her mother had not been one of greater understanding. Then the instructor gave the subject for meditation: “the grief we have caused our parents” . . . 




Yet Gurdjieff often gave only the bare bones of a movement and left his 




senior pupils to work out his intentions.* The same was true of the music, 




which was interpreted by Thomas de Hartmann from Gurdjieff’s skeletal 




indications of melody, rhythm, and harmony. But the music, too—played 




either  by  de  Hartmann  or  by  Gurdjieff  himself  on  his  hand-operated 




portable organ—has been experienced as the music of the spheres: people 




have claimed that Gurdjieff ’s “Temple Music ”—resembling plainsong—can 




provoke  precise  reactions  in  its  hearers.  In  1927  Carl  Zigrosser  visited 




Fontainbleau and later described the effect which the music had on him. 




“Usually,’’ he wrote, “music prompts me to day-dreams and lovely fancies 




. . . this music did not carry me out of myself at all; it centered its effect 




upon my very essence, it appealed directly to my emotions. It sang as if it 




had a message for me alone in the world—yet others have since told me that 




they had precisely the same feeling. It aroused in me at will the feelings of 




joy,  pity,  sorrow,  fear,  struggle,  and  above  all  an  exquisite  yet  terrible 




yearning . . . ”  However it must be said that at least to one music critic 




sympathetic to the Work, the Gurdjieff-de Hartmann music has very little 




to recommend it; and far from lifting the mind to a higher plane, anchors it




*This  fact  has  recently  been  made  the  basis  of  a  defense  in  a  lawsuit  between  Gurdjieff’s 




family  and  those  who  carry  on  his  work.  If  Gurdjieff  gave  only  indications  of  a  completed 




movement,  it  was  argued,  can  he  be  said  to  have  any  proprietary  rights  over  the  finished 




article? 




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   2 4 1




firmly in the late nineteenth-century tradition influenced by Scriabin. It is 




certainly instructive to compare the pieces based on Oriental themes with 




those of de Hartmann’s contemporaries—such as Dvorak—^who devoted a 




less “esoteric ” touch to compositions based on folk motifs. 




To many of those who have taken part in Gurdjieff’s movements, they 




and the music together provide the key to his teaching. Even those who 




were merely spectators have been transfixed. In November 1922, Katherine Mansfield described a dance of some seven minutes duration: “it contains  the  whole  life  of  woman,”  she  wrote  to  her  husband,”—but 




everything! Nothing is left out. It taught me, it gave me more of woman’s 




life than any book or poem. There was even room for Flaubert’s  

Coeur

 




 

Simple

 in it, and for the Princess Marya . . . Mysterious.” 




The Prieure was a house of meanings, isolated from the surrounding 




world by a wall and a philosophy of detachment. To the village of Avon the 




inmates seemed to be a collection of millionaire neurasthenics and, apart 




from the tradesmen, they dismissed the Institute as a  

maison desfous. 

 On 




Saturday evenings, Gurdjieff held public performances of his movements 




and could often count on an audience drawn by curiosity. But he attracted 




no real interest from the local community or the town of Fontainebleau. 




Sometimes the Mayor or the Prefect of Police would be lavishly entertained 




at one of Gurdjieff’s Oriental banquets—the Master was always concerned 




to keep on good terms with the authorities—but in general, the house and 




its inhabitants were cut off from the outside world. When a new arrival 




approached the little gatehouse of the Prieure and tugged at the bell-pull 




labeled  

“Sonnez fort,” 

 he was deliberately leaving one attitude to life for 




another. “I cannot develop you, ” said Gurdjieff. “I can only create the 




conditions for you to develop yourself.” Upon the pupil’s ability to adopt a 




new attitude to his experiences depended his vision of the Prieure. 




To put into words what a pupil felt went on at the Prieure is difficult. The 




proximity of the Master gave an extra charge to the atmosphere, an added 




intensity  of  perception,  and  when  coupled  with  the  teaching  of  selfobservation, might indeed be said to raise the consciousness of the pupils in the  sense  of  making  them  more  aware  of  their  functioning  as  human 




machines.  There  was   

meaning

  in  everything,  particularly  in  one’s  own 




reaction—if the dancing of a mechanical toy could be called its own—^to 




unusual situations, hard work, and extraordinarily complicated exercises. 




From  the  moment  of  entrance  into  the  community,  conditions  were 




arranged so as to grate against a pupil’s “mechanism.” Maurice Nicoll was 




forbidden to read; another pupil who could not bear the sight of blood was 




given the task of slaughtering animals for food. And the most humdrum 




situation—^which in ordinary life would have been ignored or accepted— 




could provide material out of which to build new meanings. Dislikes to be




2 4 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




overcome, pettiness borne in silence, one’s own worst impulses encountered face to face; every event of the day provided material for “work on oneself.” 




This was what Gurdjieff meant by his catchword, “intentional suffering”—voluntarily opening the psyche to those aspects which it would rather have forgotten or glossed over. “One suffers terribly,” Katherine Mansfield 




wrote to Murry, “ ... it takes very severe measures to put one right. But 




the point is there is hope. One can and does believe that one will escape 




from living in circles and will live a conscious life. One can, through work, 




escape from falsity and be true to one’s own self—not to what anyone else 




on earth thinks it is.” 




Self-observation has been defined by one of Gurdjieff’s followers as doing 




everything “as if God were watching. ” The activity was undoubtedly easier 




in the presence of God’s deputy, the ever-present, awful Mr. Gurdjieff. A 




sober British businessman attended a demonstration in the Study House 




and found himself inspected by the Master. “During the performance I was 




confronted by Gurdjieff himself; and for one whole minute I felt myself 




examined and alone. All this sounds fanciful as I record it, but at the time it 




was a unique experience. ” At the same time as forcing his pupils to self- 




examination, Gurdjieff’s mercurial changes of character baffled those who 




had first come in contact with the more straightforward Ouspensky. “I have 




^en him perform marvels, ” wrote Rowland Kenney, “I have known him to 




act like a petulant, spoilt child. ” 




Gurdjieff was everywhere and all-powerful. He delegated the classes in 




movements to younger pupils, and his personal staff—the de Salzmanns, de 




Hartmanns and Dr. Stoerneval—^acted as his deputies. Yet he did so much 




himself that accounts of the Institute often leave as their chief impression 




that of its director’s manic activity. When in late December 1922, there was 




a  fire  in  the  Prieure  which  burned  out  two  of  the  rooms,  Katherine 




Mansfield described to Murry how Gurdjieff had appeared in the midst of 




the chaos with a hammer, knocking down the burning wall. In February 




1923, Denis Saurat watched him trying valiantly to save a burst boiler by 




bombarding it with lumps of clay which might plug the crack in its side. 




Besides  these  feats  of  inspired  improvisation,  Gurdjieff supervised the 




building projects, interviewed pupils personally, and at any moment might 




appear in the house or gardens encouraging the workers to “super-efforts ” 




with cries of “Skorry!” “Queeker!” He spared no one and might rouse the 




whole household in the early hours of the morning to perform some newly 




devised task. 




Gurdjieff’s remarkable abilities, his ubiquitousness, and his methods of 




confusion gave rise to feehngs of dependence which were more than a little 




superstitious.  

Everything

 was intentional,  

all

 difficulties were manufac




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   2 4 3




tured. Some pupils like James Young remained immune from the infection, 




and Maurice Nicoll wondered “whether the difficulties Gurdjieff knows he 




creates are equal in value for work with those he does not know he creates.” 




Yet to many otherwise intelligent men and women the Master was little 




short of divine, and no doubt the presence of a large Theosophical element 




among his followers encouraged the less strong willed to couple Gurdjieff ’s 




name with those of Himalayan Mahatmas. An account of the Prieure which 




Maud Hoffman published in the  

New York Times

 in February 1924 is so 




studded with enthusiastic expressions—“luxurious,” “heavenly,” “beautiful,” and the rest—that an inquirer might feel justified in believing the worst. 




Such reactions have been responsible for much of the hostile criticism 




which Gurdjieff encountered. When a man’s powers have been exalted to 




the skies, when his too  

schwdrmerisch

 supporters insist on viewing him 




through rose-colored glasses, critics who decide that he does not live up to 




the image created by the faithful are likely to be virulent. Partly this was 




the fault of Gurdjieff’s sillier followers; but partly, also, it was a danger of 




his method. In 1924, Bechhofer Roberts satirized the reactions of some of 




the over hopeful:




I used to hear what a wonderful worker Gurdjieff was. Rapt disciples 




told me with bated breath of the abnormal speed and skill with which 




he built paths, for example, or sawed wood, laid bricks and designed 




ovens  and  even  a  kippering-kiln.  But  recenly  I  have  noticed  an 




element of doubt in these accounts. The paths wear badly, the walls 




crack, the ovens do not function and the kiln no longer kippers. Is it 




possible that GurdjiefiF is not the super-artisan he is supposed to be? 




Perhaps; but there is also another explanation for these mischances, 




which has often been put forward by the editor [Orage]. 




“It is a test,” he declares, explaining that Gurdjieff could, of course, 




do it all much better if he wished, but he is anxious to test the faith and 




devotion of his pupils. 




In such an atmosphere it was difficult to make any balanced assessment of 




Gurdjieff. His rages might very well be a “test”—and more than one person 




has reported that Gurdjieff might abruptly switch off a flow of abuse and 




turn to wink at a bystander—^but equally they could be real. A complete 




outsider  might  feil  to  grasp  that  anything  apart  from  the  obvious  was 




happening  at  all.  Or  if  he  sensed  something  .  .  .  

below  the  surface

  ...  he 




felt shut out, deprived, the butt of a private joke. The businessman who had 




been “examined” by Gurdjieff in the Study House “felt like an outsider; like 




a visitor to a sanatorium.” The feeling of exclusion might grow until




2 4 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjieflF’s influence over his pupils appeared sinister and potentially 




harmful; the hypnotized sheep of a Black Magician. Eventually some of the 




pupils themselves would begin to vi^onder . . . and this was an efiect which 




did not displease Gurdjieff. “Do you know,” asked Denis Saurat, “that 




some  of  your  disciples  are  close  to  despair?”  “Yes,”  Gurdjieff  replied, 




“there’s something sinister in this house, and that is necessary.” 




The contradictory nature of the Institute could be caught in a visit of a 




single weekend. One pupil who arrived from Ouspensky’s London group 




had  her  first  glimpse  of  Gurdjieff  in  the  Study  House  directing  the 




movements. The pupils had to hold their arms outstretched parallel with 




the ground; hold them steady for several minutes, hold them, hold them 




— and the brutal taskmaster did not let the poor creatures relax their taut 




muscles until the nerves of the visitor from London were screaming their 




own protest, and her anger at the director of this torture chamber burst into 




a smouldering rage. The next morning the visitor was gathering wood in the 




garden when she suddenly felt the presence of  

someone

 behind her. It was 




Gurdjieff, who smiled—not just charmingly, but kindly, with his eyes—as 




he wished her good morning. She had the sensation of being confronted by 




two different creatures—or were they merely two aspects of the same man, 




whose ability to don masks at will or to mobilize functions of the human 




being to order, began to edge her mind toward a new comprehension of 




what the individual might do to become his own master? 




What was going on? It took several highly intelligent men many months 




to  discover,  and  in  some  cases  to  resolve  their  perplexity.  During  the 




construction of the Study House, Maurice Nicoll asked Gurdjieff why he 




did not build more solidly. Gurdjieff replied: “This is only temporary. In a 




very short time everything will be different. Everyone vrill be elsewhere. 




Nothing can be built permanently at this moment.” Then why the whole 




elaborate  structure  of  an  Institute,  why  the  publicity  which  Gurdjieff 




seemed increasingly to seek? The answers to these questions can only be 




suggested in terms of individual pupils who stayed at Fontainebleau. The 




nature of Gurdjieff’s Institute cannot really be conveyed in generalities, 




because it dealt in specifics. 




“For some of us the building is a temple; for others a theatre,” the  

Daily

 




 

News

 reporter was told by a Russian who showed him the Study House. 




“Some of us meditate; others dream, and many worship, but we all learn.” 




The Institute, like its Master, is sometimes scarcely visible: now a palace, 




now  a  pigsty;  sometimes  an  elegant  chMeau  infested  by  a  crew  of 




intellectual  riffraff,  sometimes  a  spiritual  Neuschwanstein  or  Fonthill, 




crowned with pinnacles and battlements which disappear into the mist. 




Materializing  out  of  the  beyond,  Gurdjieff  and  his  magic  castle  were 




somehow waiting—^for particular individuals faced with particular prob




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   245




lems. You could ring the bell of the Prieure and enter with no particular 




commitment;  but  if  you  stayed  you  became—^for  a  time  at  least— 




“entangled. ” 




CASE: 




 

Katherine  Mansfield. 

  problems:   

A  surfeit  of  “life,”  dissatisfaction  with  human  relationships,  consciousness  of  an  inevitably  approaching death. 




On  Friday,  13,  October  1922,  Katherine  Mansfield  reached  Paris  with 




her devoted companion, Ida Baker. She was still undecided whether or not 




to go to Fontainebleau and still concealing from Middleton Murry the real 




purpose of her flight to France. She took rooms in a hotel in the Place de la 




Sorbonne  and  wrote  as  cheerfully  as  she  could  to  Murry  at  Selsfield, 




encouraging him to enjoy the pleasures of human companionship and living 




with wealthy friends. Yet on the very day of her arrival, she had confided to 




her journal that she and Murry were “no longer together”—but was she 




now “in the right way”? Her answer is based on a self-analysis according to 




Ouspensky’s teaching of the “many I s. ” “No, not yet. ... I feel a bit of a 




sham . . . And so I am. One of the K.M. ’s is so sorry. But of course she is. 




She has to die.  

Don’t

 feed her.” Her physical distress had produced an 




inability to work; and gradually the cultivation of the “I” which wanted to go 




to Gurdjieff produced a conscious decision. This was still bound up with her 




hopes of a physical cure, and she wrote to Murry; 




I am going to Fontainebleau next week to see Gurdjielf. I will tell you 




about it. Why am I going? From all I hear he is the only man who 




understands there is no division between body and spirit, who believes 




how they are related. You remember how I have always said doctors 




only treat  

half. 

 And you have replied: “It’s up to you to do the rest.” It 




is. That’s true. But first I must learn how. I believe Gurdjieff can teach 




me. 




Next day was her birthday and she replied to Murry’s invitation to join 




him at Selsfield. “I do think Selsfield sounds perfect, but it’s no good my 




Coming there while I am a creeping worm. When I can fly I will come . . . ” 




Flying  meant  being  “conscious  of  a  purpose,”  refusing  to  live  life 




mechanically “just as the pendulum swings.” Her old striving for experience  now  appeared  only  the  manifestation  of  unconscious,  mechanical existence. 




That day  F. S. Finder  arrived to see  her with James Young, who had 




come up from Fontainebleau to meet Orage off the boat-train. He gave her 




a medical examination—probably at the insistence of Gurdjieff, who had




246 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




had a private letter from K. M.’s own doctor advising him to turn her down 




as a pupil. “He spent a couple of hours with me, talking about Gurdjieff and 




the  Institute.  If  I  were  to  write  it  all  to  you,”  she  informed  Murry,  “it 




sounds fabulous and other-worldly. I shall wait until I’ve  

seen

 it. I still hope 




to go on Monday and I’ll take a toothbrush and  

peigne

 and come back on 




Wednesday morning, only. ” 




This was equivocation; for she was at last clear in her own mind. On the 




same day she made a lengthy entry in her journal, to try and organize her 




thoughts. “Ever since I came to Paris I have been as ill as ever. In fact, 




yesterday  I  thought  I  was  dying.  It  is  not  imagination.  My  heart  is  so 




exhausted and so tied up that I can only walk to the taxi and back. I get up 




at  

midi

 and go to bed at 5:30. I try to work’ by fits and starts, but the time 




has gone by.” She faced the fact that she lived the “life of a corpse,” and that 




she was still “an absolutely hopeless invalid.” “What is my life?” she asked 




herself, and answered; “It is the existence of a parasite.” Then out of her 




misery burst a cry from the inner depths. “I am so terrified of what I am 




going to do.” 




“Why hesitate?” she demanded. Was it not because she feared to lose 




Murry? But what was their relationship anyway? Murry knew her only as a 




dream—a dream of the day when she would be better. “Therefore, ” she 




encouraged herself, “if the Grand Lama of Thibet promised to help you— 




how can you hesitate? Risk! Risk anything! Care no more for the opinions of 




others,  for  those  voices.  Do  the  hardest  thing  on earth  for you. Act  f6r 




yourself.  Face  the  truth.”  At  first  she decided that  she would send  her 




conclusions to Murry and tore the pages from her journal, adding phrases to 




reassure him. “And when I say T fear’—don’t let it disturb you, dearest 




heart. We all fear when we are in waiting-rooms. Yet we must pass beyond 




them . . .” 




On the seventeenth, K. M. took what she called “my first Leap in the 




Dark. ” She and Ida Baker traveled to Fontainebleau where they were met 




by James Young and installed in a temporary room. From afar Katherine 




Mansfield observed the Master. “He looks exactly like a desert chief. I kept 




thinking of Doughty’s  

Arabia.” 

 Next day she was moved to ‘the Ritz and it 




was decided that she could stay for a fortnight under observation, GurdjieflF 




himself was fully occupied vdth the preHminary organization of the Institute 




and had only time for a few words spoken through an interpreter. “Mr. 




GurdjiefiF is not in the least what I expected,” she told Murry. “He’s what 




one wants to find him, really. But I do feel  

absolutely confident

 he can put 




me on the right track in every way, bodily and t’other governor.” She was 




very well looked after. “I have a lovely sumptuous room 

—si

 kind of glorified 




Garsington—^for the fortnight. As for the food, it’s like a Gogol feast.” The 




day follovnng—^Thursday, October 19—Ida Baker made her escape in a




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   247




state which she described as “emotional centres entirely out of control.” 




She  had  been  K.  M.s  last  hnk  with  her  old  life,  and  on  the  day  of  her 




departure,  K.  M.  wrote  to  S.  S.  ICotehansky  of  her  own  “private 




revolution.” She had moved from the world of ordinary life into Gurdjieff’s 




realm. Probably she had long ago abandoned any real hope of a physical 




cure. But if Prospero could not raise Miranda from the dead, he might be 




able to  

wake her up. 




The world as I know it is no joy to me and I am useless in it. People are 




almost non-existent. This world to me is a dream and the people in it 




are sleepers. I have known just instances of waking but that is all. I 




want  to  find  a  world  in  which  these  instances  are  united.  Shall  I 




succeed? I do not know. 




In contrast to the ordinary world, immersed in its dreams, life within the 




walls of the Prieur6 was more intense than she had ever known it. “One 




has,  all  the  time,”  she  wrote  to  Murry  on  October  20,  “the  feeling  of 




having  been  in  a  wreck  and  by  the  mercy  of  Providence  got 




ashore . . . somewhere. Simply everything is different. Not only language, 




but food, ways, people, music, methods, hours— 

all. 

 It’s a real new life.” At 




first she was officially on her fortnight’s probation, and because her physical 




condition prohibited any great exertion, Gurdjieff instructed her to observe 




the other pupils at work. She surveyed the trench digging in the garden, 




watched GurdjiefiF and de Salzmann perform expertly in the carpenter’s 




shop, and sat amid the turmoil of the kitchen while the cooks clattered 




utensils and sang, Gurdjieff and a dog intervened to complicate the action, 




and at least 20 pots” bubbled on the stove. 




Gradually  she  was  drawn  into  a  more  active  role.  She  studied  rug 




making, looked after the indoor flowers, learned Russian, and watched the 




movements classes in the salon where she also took part in Gurdjieff’s 




counting  exercises.  “In  fact,  at  34  I  am  beginning  my  education,”  she 




iaibnned Murry in late November; and then, ruefully, when faced with the 




i>rospect of making costumes for Gurdjieff’s projected demonstrations: “All 




the things I have avoided in life seem to find me out here.” She recorded 




external  events  for  Murry’s  benefit,  but  despaired  of  conveying  their 




interior  content.  “I  cannot  express  myself  in  writing  just  now,”  she 




admitted on October 27. “The old mechanism isn’t mine any longer, and I 




can’t control the new.” Literary ambitions occasionally resurfaced—but 




always in the distant future, when she should be fit to write. 




Her relationship with her husband—conducted entirely through their 




letters—^veered wildly around every point of the emotional compass as 




K. M. tried to come to terms with the questions posed by life at




248 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Fontainebleau, and Middleton Murry in England attempted to define his 




own attitude to the life she was attempting to lead. On October 27, she 




suggested that Murry invite Ouspensky to dinner; then came an exhortation: “Suppose you throw up every single job in England, realize your capital, and come over here to work for Gurdjieff. Burn every single boat 




for once!” Next day she wrote severely about the lack of a real relationship 




between them; there existed only “the possibility” of a relationship. But by 




November 2, this was retracted in a fit of remorse, as she insisted that she 




was dramatizing the existence at Fontainebleau. Five days later the sense of 




living outside the world had returned.  

“In

 three weeks here I feel I have 




spent years in India, Arabia, Afghanistan, Persia . . . And how one wanted 




to voyage like this . . . ”  Part of the extraordinary atmosphere was produced 




by the intensity of personal contact between the inmates of the colony. She 




was irritated by “some of the EngHsh, ‘arty’ and theosophical people,” but 




enthused over the “truly wonderful” “advanced men and women” and 




wrote  telhng  Murry  of  her  encounters  with  the  de  Salzmanns,  the  de 




Hartmanns and “Olgivanna”—Olga Ivanovna Lazovich Milanov Hinzen- 




burg, who had joined Gurdjieff in Tiflis as a society lady with a houseful of 




servants and now found herself cleaning out her Master’s pigs. “Friendship. 




The real thing that you and I have dreamed of. Here it exists . . . ” By mid- 




November, Murry was becoming concerned that his wife was “hypnotised.” 




She replied trying to explain her situation. 




Dear Bogey, I’m not “hypnotized. ” But it does seem to me there are 




certain people here who are far beyond any I have met—of a quite 




different order. Some—most—of the English here don’t even catch a 




glimpse of it. But I am sure. I remember I used to think—if there was 




one thing I could not bear in a community, it would be the women. 




But now the women are nearer and far dearer than the men. Of course, 




I don’t speak of Mr. Gurdjieff. I couldn’t say he was  

near

 or  

dear

 to me! 




He is the embodiment of the life here, but at a remote distance. 




Toward the end of November, Murry became irritated by the luxury of 




Selsfield.  He  decided  to  try  and  find  a  cottage  to  share  with  J.W.N. 




Sullivan, whose wife had left him after the coupie had become entangled 




vwth Aleister Crowley the previous year. He and Sullivan drifted closer to 




Millar Dunning and began to look for a cottage near the artist’s colony in 




the village of Ditchling where, besides Dunning, Eric Gill and his Guild of 




Craftsmen had settled. 




Dunning was a mystic in a Whitmanesque mould. His one published 




volume,  

The Earth Spirit

 (1920), contains a series of meditations on natural 




landscapes interspersed with prophecies of a coming New Age. For Murry, 




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   249




Dunning’s importance was that he practiced Raja-yoga and provided some

practical discipHne which could be seen as a counterpart to the austerities 




which K. M. was undergoing at the Prieure. On December 9, Katherine 




Mansfield wrote to her husband about a conversation she had had with 




Alexander  de  Salzmann  on poverty  of  spirit—“To be poor  in ideas, in 




imagination, in impulses, in wishes—to be simple, in fact.” “I hope you will 




meet this man one day,” she wrote; and Murry replied from Ditchling:




... if you have your Salzmanns, whom I should dearly love to know, I 




have my Dunnings, whom I would dearly love you to know. And every 




letter of yours that I get makes me feel more than ever that we are 




marching along p^allel paths—parallel paths which converge, and that 




the day is not so terribly far distant when we shall be ready for one 




another. 




Despite K. M.’s earlier attempts at proselytizing, Murry’s new occult 




interests rang a little strangely in her ears. At the end of November she 




wrote that she was glad that he was going to live near Dunning. But had he 




not been joking when he told her that the Prieure might be “his Way”? 




“One can only come here  

via

 Ouspensky, ” she warned,  

“and it is a serious

 




 

step.” 

 Before Christmas she had accepted “your Dunnings ” and Murry’s 




aspirations. But her first reaction had been based on a surer knowledge of 




her husband, whose devotion to yoga proved a temporary phase. Under 




Dunning’s tuition he experienced a vision of the  

crux ansata, 

 but was left 




unmoved  on being told that it was a symbol of immortality. In a fit of 




revulsion he abandoned all mystical practices. 




He had wanted to spend Christmas with his wife at Fontainebleau, but 




she hastened to put him off. The hotels in the town would be closed, and 




die Institute itself was still in chaos, so he could not stay as a guest. She 




herself had been moved from “the Ritz” into a tiny room in the Monks’ 




Corridor which she shared with Olgivanna. Her letters tread a wary path 




beitween trying to give Murry a true picture of the discomforts of her life— 




that first winter the cold was intense and fuel was scarce—and continuing to 




Wmmunicate the benefits which she felt she derived from her stay. She 




explained that her change of room was part of Gurdjiefi^’s disciphne: “It is a 




fevourite habit of his to set the whole house walking. Easy to see why when 




one saw the emotions it aroused.” But her exile from “the Ritz” lasted only 




for a month. On December 17, she wrote that the room had taught her “to 




rough it in a way you and I have never done,” and continued in amazement: 




But how did Mr. Gurdjielf know how much I needed that experience?” 




What was more, just as she felt that she had learned her lesson and was 




lounging into real despair, Gurdjieff himself had appeared with words of




250 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




comfort and ordered her back to “the Ritz.” “Sometimes I wonder if we 




‘make up’ Mr. GurdjiefiF’s wonderful understanding. But one is always 




getting a firesh example of it. And he always acts at precisely the moment 




one needs it. That is what is so strange . . . ” 




Gurdjieffhad directed a balcony to be built for his invalid pupil above the 




animals—three cows and a mule—in the cowshed of the Institute. On this 




balcony, Katherine Mansfield now spent the day lying on a divan, receiving 




visits fVom her fnends and watching the cows being milked. What was the 




reason for this strange regime? Animal magnetism? The smell of manure? 




Because Indian medicine recommends the breath of cows—those bacillus- 




carrying animals—^as a specific for tuberculosis? All these possibilities have 




been suggested; but not the simplest one. It had been clear to Ouspensky 




(and would have been even clearer to GurdjiefF, with his greater medical 




knowledge), that Katherine Mansfield had not long to Hve. GurdjieflF had 




agreed to admit her to his community; but although she was in need of 




spiritual help as well as physical, her invalid condition disqualified her from 




full participation. Her everyday contact vdth other people provided an 




opportunity to “work on the emotions”; but in Gurdjieflf’s opinion, she 




probably needed, as much as the latter, to regain contact with the soil and 




her  body.  She  had  herself  felt  the  need  to  learn  to  look  after  animals, 




though a view from the stable balcony was as much as could be managed. 




Her gallery was decorated by de Salzmann with caricatures of members 




of the Institute, camouflaged as birds and beasts. The canopy above was 




painted with suns, moons, and stars edged in red and blue. After K. M.’ s 




death, critics singled out the apparently grotesque circumstances of her last 




days. Her friends at the Institute reacted by stressing how happy she had 




been. Some of their reports are overreactions to criticism of the “Gurdjieff 




killed Katherine Mansfield” variety; but it seems certain from the accounts 




of  Olgivanna  and  the  young  Lithuanian,  Adele  Kafian,  that  the  dying 




woman was indeed determined to find “sermons in stones and good in 




everything.” At the same time there is an undertone of sorrow, masked a 




little by the festivities of Christmas which was celebrated with GurdjiefF’s 




customary exuberance. 




On December 23, Murry was told of Gurdjieff’s decision that, “although 




there are so few of them,” the English should celebrate Christmas on the 




twenty-fifth and not wait until the Russian Christmas in the New Year. At 




the Master’s expense they were to invite the Russians to a feast. “And he 




has given us a sheep, a pig, two turkeys, a goose, two barrels of wine, 




whiskey, gin, cognac, etc., desserts of all kinds, an immense tree and carte 




blanche  vnth  which  to  decorate  it.”  K.  M.  felt  compelled  to  watch  the 




slaughter of the animals for food. “I attended the obsequies of the pig this 




morning. I thought I had better go through with it for once and see for




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   251




myself.  One  felt  horribly  sad  .  .  .  And  yesterday  I  watched  Madame 




Ouspensky pluck, singe and draw our birds. In fact these have been gory 




days, balanced by the fairy-like tree. There is so much life here that one 




feels no more than one little cell in a beefsteak, say. It is a good feeling.” 




Katherine Mansfield took part in the Christmas celebrations and watched 




the distribution of presents to the children of the community—always a 




high point in Gurdjieff’s year. On her return to her room, she discovered 




that Adele Kafian had arranged a private Christmas tree which she had dug 




up in the forest. On it were burning three candles, which she had lit to 




symbolize herself, her friend, and Middleton Murry. The two friends sat 




“in silence”—in Adele’s words—“looking at our Christmas tree. One candle 




burnt badly, it flickered and began to go out.—‘That’s me,’ she whispered. 




No,  No!  I  jumped  up  and  put  the  others  out  first.  This  was  her  last 




Christmas tree. I did not know then the superstition about three candles.” 




At least half-consciously anticipating her death, K. M. wrote again to 




Middleton Murry on Boxing Day. She felt her letter to be “flat and dull,” 




but it gives the impression of a report from some far outpost of the world—a 




strange place where she drank  

koumiss

 on her gallery while discussing 




astrology or watching Gurdjieff milk a goat in Arab fashion by securing its 




hind  legs  across  his  knees  with  an  unbreakable  grip.  Somehow  her 




experiences had produced in her an attitude of faith. 




... If I were allowed one single cry to God, that cry would be:  

I want

 




 

to be

 REAL. Until I am that I don’t see why I shouldn’t be at the mercy 




of the old Eve in her various manifestations for ever. 




But this place has taught me so far how unreal I am. It has taken 




fixjm me one thing after another (the things never were mine) until at 




this  present  moment  all  I  know  really,  really  is  that  I  am  not 




annihilated and that I hope—more than hope—believe. 




It was the final letter to Murry in which she described the life of the 




Cbtnmunity  at  Fontainebleau.  Her  last  letter  of  all  concerns  Murry’s 




traveling arrangements. Gurdjieff had agreed that he should come to stay 




for a week in January; a week which was to include the opening of the Study 




House on the thirteenth—^the Russian New Year. K. M. waited in growing 




excitement for the visit to take place; and shortly before Murry arrived, she 




made  a  breakthrough  which  was  to  present  her  husband  with  a  more 




complete person than he had previously known. 




' Orage recorded the nature of this breakthrough in his article, “Talks with 




Katherine Mansfield,” which he wrote the following year. He remembered 




how  ofien  during  their  first  months  at  the  Institute  he  and  K.  M.  had 




discussed the strange phenomenon of their vanished interest in literature. 




252 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




‘“What has come over us?’ she would ask whimsically. ‘Are we dead? Or 




was our love of literature an affectation, which has now dropped off like a 




mask?’” Occasionally he had  been shown a fragment of some work in 




progress—^which was always torn up before completion. Then very near the 




end, Katherine Mansfield sent for her old editor and confided to him a 




revelatory insight: she had discovered that a new approach to literature was 




possible. In his account, Orage is careful not to use Gurdjieff ’s terminology; 




but it obviously underlies the whole essay, and it was almost certainly in the 




language of the System that Katherine Mansfield expressed her aspirations. 




Her former attitude to writing had been the mechanical reaction of certain 




“I’s. ” Now she proposed something new. 




I’m aware ... of a recent change of attitude in myself; and at once not 




only my old stories have come to look different to me, but life itself 




looks different. I could not write my old stories again, or any more like 




them:  and  not  because  I  do  not  see  the  same  detail  as  before,  but 




because somehow or other the pattern is different. The old details now 




make another pattern; and this perception of a new pattern is what I 




call a creative attitude towards life. 




She  had  reached  a  certain  stage  in  the   

process

—and  suddenly  new 




meanings had fallen into place like the tumblers in a lock.  

There were other

 




 

ways of dividing up the world. 

 The details of how she proposed to apply her 




new discovery are not encouraging; she wanted, for example, to use the 




subtlety with which she had previously poked fun at human failings to 




depict a hero and heroine overtopping each other’s bids in a contest of love. 




But  the  nature  of  her  insight  is  much  more  important  than  its  consequences. She had integrated the newfound faith of which she had written to Middleton Murry with the intellectual demands of her profession; and at 




last head and heart were acting in concert. 




It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  French  critic  who  accused  Gurdjieff  of 




making Katherine Mansfield “die badly” can have been familiar with the 




evidence.  She  had  arrived  at  Fontainebleau  in  a  state  of  terror  and 




depression. A week before her death Gurdjieff’s alchemy had turned this 




into a sense of purpose and near tranquillity. In V!ew of what she so clearly 




sensed about her physical condition, complete tranquillity was impossible; 




and it was her body—about which Gurdjieff could do nothing—which failed 




her. 




Middleton Murry arrived at the Institute on the afternoon of January 9, 




“Before I had time to kiss her, ” he wrote later, “the thought passed through 




my head: something has happened. By that ‘something’ I meant something 




decisive in the spiritual struggle in which she had been engaged. She had




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   253




changed profoundly in the three months since I had seen her; she seemed 




unearthly, and I had never seen anyone more lovely than she appeared to 




me  that  day.”  K.  M.  told  him  that  although  she  had  gained  from  her 




experience,  she  did  not  know  whether  she  would  stay  much  longer  at 




Fontainebleau. “But she had not, she said, really made up her mind about 




M. Gurdjieff. ” The couple made plans to live together in a country cottage, 




and  during  the  afternoon  and  evening  Katherine  Mansfield  led  Murry 




round to inspect the work in progress, to meet her friends, and to take a 




hand  in  painting  the  Study  House.  After  supper  some  of  the  pupils 




assembled in the salon for the nightly session of exercises. According to 




Olgivanna, K. M. was withdrawn and nervous, hoping rather desperately 




that  the  dancers  would  perform  Gurdjieff’s  “The  Initiation  of  the 




Priestess”—^from which she always seemed to derive energy and exaltation. 




Halfway through this movement Gurdjieff stopped the dancers and ordered 




them back to the Study House. K. M. left the salon to go to bed. As she 




cUmbed the stairs, followed by Murry, a coughing fit began; in her room it 




became  clear  that  she  had  had  a  hemorrhage.  Blood  gushed  from  her 




mouth, and the doctors g£^thered around; but by 10-.30 that night, she was 




dead. 




Murry’s feelings about Gurc^ieff remained for a long time very mixed, 




but at the end of his own life, he permitted himself a definite statement. He 




refused to judge the Institute. “But I am persuaded of this,” he wrote; “that 




Katherine made of it an instrument for that process of self-annihilation 




which is necessary to the spiritual rebirth, whereby we enter the Kingdom 




of Love. I am certain that she achieved her purpose, and that the Institute 




lent itself to it. More I dare not, and less I must not say.” Murry did appoint 




Itimself the hagiographer of his dead wife, and this must be taken into 




account  when  considering  his  verdict.  But  K.  M.’s  adventure  at  Fontainebleau seems to have left her a being who, if she had lived, would have been a ship refitted for new voyages rather than a leaking tub sailing under 




ragged canvas. As Olgivanna wrote, she had destroyed the world in which 




she 

had lived and in which she no longer believed. She had built another 




one—^where there was still a place both for literature and for her love for 




Murry.  

If  she  had  lived  .  .  . 

  and  surely  that  is  the  criterion?  She  left  the 




world  of  the  Institute  in  a  plain  coffin,  but  even  if  she  had  known  the 




inevitable form of her journey out, would not the journey in have been 




the only thing to do? Those who believe in the “other side” would scarcely 




deny her trumpets. 




H»e romantic circumstances of Katherine Mansfield’s death increased the 




curiosity  of  the  British  press  about  Gurdjieff  and  his  Institute.  Lady 




Rothermere  visited  Fontainebleau  in  the  New  Year  of  1923,  and  her




254 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




presence added to the newsworthiness of the Prieure. On February 19, the 




 

Daily  Mirror

  devoted  its  entire  front  page  to  photographs  of  the  Study 




House, Lady Rothermere, and various aristocratic Russian inmates. The 




more  intellectual   

Daily  News

  ran  a  long  series  of  articles  by  a  special 




correspondent,  E.  C.  Bovifyer.  The  first  was  headhned:  new  cult—forest 




TEMPLE  OF  HARD  WORK  AND  ROUGH  FOOD—FAMOUS  DISCIPLES,  and  made 




great  play  with  the  names  of  Orage  and  Katherine  Mansfield.  Bowyer 




described  Middleton  Murry  as  “a  constant  attendant  at  Ouspensky’s 




London lectures” and claimed that J. D. Beresford, Algernon Blackwood, 




and  J.  W.  N.  Sullivan  were  all  “deeply  interested.”  In  fact,  of  all  those 




named, only Algernon Blackwood could be described as a devotee, and 




although  he  visited  the  Prieure  several  times,  he  remained  true  to  his 




reticent  nature.  Even  his  unpublished  papers  tell  nothing  more  of  his 




interest. 




The  

News

 articles ran continuously from February 15, describing quite 




fairly the life at Fontainebleau. On the nineteenth, Ouspensky, described 




as “a middle-aged, much travelled and learned Russian” and “the chief 




missionary for GurdjielF’s academy,” was interviewed in London. He struck 




an eminently sober note. “I don’t like to see the word ‘cult’ applied to the 




movement,” he said. “We are not trying to found a church or sect, but 




simply to promote a method of education and study.” Ouspensky was at 




pains to emphasize that the manual labor described at Fountainebleau had 




“nothing to do with a Tolstoyan love of work for work’s sake. ” It was 




“merely one—often a brief—stage in the education of the student.” 




The  

Daily News

 published a half-page of photographs of pupils at the 




Institute  engaged  in  dancing,  sewing,  cooking  and  building  the  Study 




House. Discussion invaded the correspondence columns. An anonymous 




article took issue with Gurdjieff’s proclaimed intention of divesting the 




pupil of his personality and liberating his essence. The writer compared 




Gurdjieff’s “essence” to the subconscious of psychoanalysis, and noted that 




not the “essence ” but the “personality” was the repository of all civilized 




values.  “Would  it  be  unfair  to  ask  Mr.  Gurdjieff  bluntly  whether  desocialisation of the individual is the aim of his system of training?” Why, this critic  asked,  had  the  “essence”  been  “thrust  below  the  surface”  in  the 




evolutionary  process?  “Every  scientific  inquirer*  into  the  nature  of  the 




subconscious  has  been  impressed  above  all  else  by  the  strength  of  its 




primitive desires. If wisdom, insight and even genius also reside there, it is 




in  association  with  these  powerful  forces.”  The  writer  argued  that  this 




accounted for the failure of previous attempts to mobilize the unconscious, 




and he ended his article on a note of warning. He did not suggest that 




Gurdjieff  was  unaware  of  the  dangers  confronting  him.  He  and  his 




colleagues appeared to be “able and honest men. But the history of not




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   255




dissimilar experiments in the past suggests the need for vigilance and the 




advisability of suspending judgment for the present. ” 




On  February  22,  letters  from  J.  D.  Beresford  and  J.  W.  N.  Sullivan 




appeared dissociating themselves from Gurdjieff and Ouspensky. Sullivan 




pronounced himself unsympathetic to GurdjiefF’s aims and possessing “not 




the  faintest  intention  of  forming  any  connection  with  his  Institute.” 




Beresford  followed  up  his  own  letter  with  an  account  of  why  he  had 




withdrawn from Ouspensky’s lectures the previous autumn. 




Beresford accompanied Katherine Mansfield to Ouspensky’s lectures and 




took part in discussions with her and Orage about the Fourth Way. 




He  describes  how  he  explained  the  principles  of  the  Fourth  Way  to 




Millar Dunning, the yogi from Ditchling. Dunning listened with interest, 




then “without gesture or emphasis” informed the novelist that the Fourth 




Way might “produce the result desired; but that it was evil. He then went 




on to say that the successful followers of this road were those spoken of in 




Christ’s parable as coming to the wedding of the King’s Son without a 




wedding garment—the mystical garment of love.”* Beresford admits that 




this statement might not impress many readers as one of great significance; 




but for him, it came “with a sense of revelation,” and he began to feel that 




the teaching was  “repugnant”  to him.  The central  point of  Beresford’s 




article in the  

Daily News

 was a warning that the soul without the wedding 




garment would “suffer in the hereafter. ” He made a distinction between 




occultism—as represented by Gurdjieff and Ouspensky—and mysticism— 




whose representative for him was Dunning. Later he contrasted “personal 




and impersonal methods ” and admitted that “in my own mind they have 




much the same connotation as Black and White Magic.” 




Meanwhile the Fontainebleau Institute exercised an undiminished fas- 




cmation. At the beginning of March, the  

New Statesman

 carried an article 




signed “C.” and entitled, “The ‘Forest Philosophers.’” This was by the 




editor, Clifford Sharp, and was designed, so he wrote, to counteract the 




misleading impressions given of the Fontainebleau colony in the press, 




iiike  the   

Daily  News

  reporter,  he  denied  that  the  Institute  bore  any 




ffelationship to the various “experimental colonies” with which his readers 




were  ^miliar.  The  only  comparison  that  could  be  made  was  with  the 




immunity estabUshed by Pythagoras at Samos in 500 B.C. 




Sharp had been completely carried away by Gurdjieff and Ouspensky. 




His wife and many of his friends were at Fontainebleau, and the comparison 




'«Wth Pythagoras most probably originated with Orage. He himself had




’Beresford  does  not  name  his  friend,  the  “poet  and  mystic.”  For  some  time,  I  thought  that 




ti»is  was  A.  E.  Waite,  whom  J.  G.  Bennett  remembers  stalking  out  of  Ouspensky’s  meetings 




with  the  sententious  phrase,  "Mr.  Ouspensky,  there  is  no  love  in  your  system”;  but  Mr. 




Tiistaiii Beresford believes it was Dunning. 




256 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




visited the Institute and may have contemplated taking the plunge; for he 




was convinced that “Mr. Gurdjieff and his colleagues possess knowledge 




which is far in advance of anything that is known to European science.” 




Gurdjieff’s psychological analysis was “infinitely more subtle, more comprehensive and  more scientific than the work of, for instance, William James.” Gurdjieff’s musical expertise indicated “a knowledge of the precise 




emotional effects of rhythm and tone that was never dreamed of, even by a 




Mozart.”  Sharp  even  swallowed  whole  Gurdjieff’s  claims  about  the 




Institute’s medical section and declared that at Fontainebleau, there was 




“what  is  perhaps  the  most  complete  installation  of  medico-electrical 




apparatus in the world. ” 




The tone of this article caused Sharp’s readers some concern, and the 




week following its appearance, Edwyn Bevan wrote firmly to bring the 




erring editor to heel, Bevan (1870-1943) was a former head of the British 




School of Archeology in Athens, who at the time was lecturing at King’s 




College, London. During the early 1930s, he twice delivered the Gifford 




Lectures and the spiritual problems which had so exercised Sharp’s hero, 




William James—another Gifford Lecturer—^were by no means foreign to 




him. If Gurdjieff ’s teaching proved its worth, he argued, it would “stand or 




fall  on  its  own  merits,  like  any  other  scientific  theory.”  But,  “the 




introduction of this ‘esoteric tradition’ business” aroused his suspicions. “It 




has been associated in the past with so much humbug.” There was no 




evidence that Gurdjieff possessed any knowledge with which orthodox 




scientists or scholars were unfamiliar. “No doubt a supposed origin in a 




secret Oriental tradition tends to secure a much wider popularity in certain 




circles  for  any  teaching,”  Bevan  wrote;  and  he  pounced  on  the  very 




difficulty which Gurdjieff later admitted had spoiled his work: “popularity 




with  

just the

 wrong kind of people—the people whose adherence is  

not

 a 




recommendation. ” 




In a second article, published on March 17, Sharp made no reply, but 




instead summarized Ouspensky’s teaching and invited those who were 




interested to go to Fontainebleau and find out more for themselves. It was a 




valiant  attempt  to  beat  the  drum  for  the  Institute  for  the  Harmonious 




Development  of  Man;  and  Sharp  clearly  recognized  that  Gurdjieff’s 




teaching might have a mass appeal—to those Irterally or metaphorically 




shellshocked, whom Middleton Murry had described as “maimed ” by the 




experience of war. Ouspensky had emerged from the European holocaust 




with  a teaching which had  apparently sustained him in  the eye of the 




hurricane, and Sharp placed particular emphasis on his explanation of war 




as the necessary consequence of man’s unconscious state. 




CASE: 




Dr.  

James  Young. 

 problems: 




 

intellectual  curiosity, dissatis-




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   257




 

faction  with  psychoanalysis,  a  vague  suspicion  that  Gurdjieff  the  Master

 




 

does after all possess Powers. 




Once the Institute was fairly launched, James Young was able to look about 




him and analyze what he found. He was distressed by his fellow pupils who 




“fell short of the standard of culture which Ouspensky had led me to expect. 




However, I  tried  to  reassure  myself  with  the thought that  we  were all 




‘machines’, and that one machine is as good as another so far as ‘mechanical’ 




life is concerned. I don’t think I quite succeeded, and certainly I had grave 




doubts when I listened to the never-ending chatter of some of the women, 




which struck me as the essence of‘mechanism.’” For some time he let his 




scientific conscience sleep undisturbed; but after six mbnths, he found it 




impossible to go on pretending to himself that he was observing GurdjiefiF^ as 




a psychological phenomenon. 




Gurdjieff decided to buy a car. There was a certain subdued excitement about this for many, probably because unconsciously it stood for the inclusion of something human and commonplace in a world which 




was rapidly becoming inhuman and outside reality. It was understood 




that Gurdjieff had never before driven a car, which was probably true. 




It was believed by many, including presumably intelligent English 




women, that Gurdjieff would not have to learn to drive in the ordinary 




way. He would be able to drive, so to speak, by inspiration. . . . When 




there was a ghastly noise suggestive of tearing of gear-wheel cogs, the 




£dthful insisted that it was a test of faith for sceptics such as myself. . . . 




I soon discovered that it was impossible to cope with such sophistry 




aad wiU-^to-believe. ” ... I could not but be impressed by the power 




which accrues to a man once he has been invested with the magical 




attributes  of  the  “all-powerful  father”  or  has  had  the  “magician” 




archetype projected into him, as Jung would say. People in the grip of 




such a transference are oblivious to criticism. . . . 




j Another example: the parents of an imbecile child got it into their 




heads  that  Gurdjieff  might  be  able  to  help  this  child  in  some 




mysterious way, and brought it all the way from England. It had an 




tttack of diarrhoea soon after arrival, probably due to change of diet. In 




this case I was really astonished to find that people who might have 




known better said that GurdjiefiF had begun to “work” on him. They 




meant that by some mysterious means best known to himself he had 




produced the diarrhoea. 




Young’s skepticism provoked accusations of spiritual pride from his fellow 




^pils, and the doctor confided his disillusionment to a fnend, “a man of




258 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




letters,” who occasionally came to stay at Fontainebleau. This was almost 




certainly  Bechhofer  Roberts.  Their  correspondence  confirmed  Young’s 




suspicions  of  the  Institute.  Bechhofer  was  clearly  influenced  by  the 




warnings  of  Dunning  and  Beresford  but  felt  that  ‘the  place  is   

real.” 

  He 




thought  that  Gurdjieflf  was  probably  able  to  teach  methods  of  selfdevelopment, but only to those who would cooperate with his personal plans. After awhile he became seriously alarmed. “In my own mind lies no 




longer any faintest doubt about Gurdjieflf and his Institute. Signs of hoofs 




and horns are all over the place, and my deep and instant distrust, which 




increased  vnth  every  day  I  spent  there  finds  confirmation  whenever  I 




return . . . ” 




A specific incident was needed to catalyze Young’s decision to leave 




Fontainebleau.  A  woman  member  of  the  Institute  was  taken  ill  and, 




according to Young’s observation, vomited blood. Young diagnosed an 




intestinal ulcer. Gurdjieff denied that the woman had vomited blood at all 




and produced, in Bechhofer’s words, “quite a difiFerent diagnosis”—^his 




reticence  might   

conceal  every  sort  of

  obscenity  or  irrelevancy.  Shortly 




afterward an operation in London proved that Young was right. When the 




doctor taxed Gurdjieff with the affair, he was upbraided for lack of trust; and 




Orage, with whom Young shared a room, maintained that it had merely 




been another test. Young could take no more and left at once. 




This seems to be an open and shut case. Even if Gurdjieff had intended 




his remarks to Young as a “test,” he must have realized that in the climate 




which  he  had  deliberately  created  such  a  gambit  might  substantially 




decrease  the  sick  woman’s  chances  of  a  cure.  But  soon  after  Young’s 




departure, Maurice Nicoll noted in his diary: “Jimmy has left. G. gave 




lecture on importance of remembering that we came here with a definite 




object...” This lecture was delivered on August 21, 1923, and it answers 




almost all Young’s objections to the life at Fontainebleau. 




Gurdjieff began by attacking one section of his pupils—^those who had 




forgotten why they came, They were supposed to be at the Institute to 




“work on themselves” and they were supposed to have come because they 




realized that ordinary life could not provide the special conditions necessary 




for such work. But once at the Institute they forgot all their resolutions and 




refused to see that Gurdjieff was actually creating the necessary conditions 




around them. Gurdjieff proposed that pupils unable to make use of this 




opportunity leave at once and stop wasting his time. Those who stayed must 




use everytiiing which happened as a means to work on themselves—and 




this  meant  not  caring  for  the  opinions  of  fellow  pupils  or  for  those  of 




Gurdjieff himself. He emphasized that many states were produced artificially in people by the unusual conditions he created for them, and that




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   259




attempts to “help” people over their emotional crises might nullify all the 




work which had gone into creating them. It didn’t matter, he explained— 




answering James Young’s as yet unvoiced objections to the “mechanically- 




twittering” ladies—^who was mad, who was clever, who was a decent sort, 




and who a bounder. If they were tempted to think that their fellow pupils 




were a collection of fools, GurdjiefiF told his audience, this was because the 




Institute existed to create the sort of conditions which would expose the 




worst sides of people, principally so that a pupil would see his defects for 




himself.  When  someone  came  to  Fontainebleau,  he  left  a  world  which 




accepted a man’s valuation of himself No wonder, when he first found 




himself in an atmosphere which encouraged a deeper examination of human 




behavior, he imagined that he was locked up with a band of rogues and 




idiots. 




GurdjiefF ended by saying that the Institute, instead of being a corrective 




to everyday life, had turned into something worse than everyday life. His 




pupils were occupied with scandalmongering, judging others, “considering,”  and  forming  cliques.  In  fact—although  he  did  not  say  this—his Institute had become like institutes the world over. 




Thus,  the  case  of  Dr.  Young  is  not  entirely  open-and-shut.  It  still 




demanded a large amount of trust from a medical practitioner to assume 




that Gurdjieff’s medical knowledge was as great as his own. 'But it could 




well have been that the lesson GurdjiefiF was trying to teach was that You 




should assert himself more—rely on his professional competence when he 




knew  himself  to  be  right.  There  remains  an  element  of  doubt;  but  the 




evidence is weighted on GurdjieflF’s side. It was not necessarily Young’s 




diagnosis with which he took issue, but with the doctor’s own psychology. 




&ct is that, whatever GurdjiefF said, the sick woman was operat^ 




upon, and his pronouncement did not prevent her from having medical 




treatment.  It  may  have  delayed  treatment;  in  which  case  GurdjiefiF  is 




certainly to be blamed—^but, as he told his pupils, they were supposed to 




take no account of his expressed opinions except as a stimulus to their 




|»ychological work. The trouble was, as he himself recognized, that he was 




naturally a figure who inspired uncritical obedience and attracted to himself 




people in search of a pair of shoulders broad enough to carry their burdens. 




Young admits that he was not completely free from the hypnotic trance in 




which many of GurdjieflF’s pupils lived. His search for a Master did not end 




with his leaving GurdjiefiF, and for a time, he was closely connected with 




Dmitrije Mitrinovid. He became Middleton Murry’s closest friend, and for 




the rest of his life practiced as an eclectic psychiatrist in London. He did not 




regard his time at Fontainebleau as wasted. “I am convinced,” he wrote, 




that much that was valuable was met with on the way”; and it was Young




260 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




whom Dorothy Brett selected to enlighten D. H. Lawrence on the Institute 




for the Harmonious Development of Man. * It is a moot point whether 




Young was a “failure” from Gurdjieff’s point of view or whether Gurdjiefif 




was a failure from Young’s. 




CASE:  

A.R.Orage. 

 problems:  

as stated in previous files. 




When Orage arrived at the Prieur^ with  

Alice in Wonderland

 in his pocket, 




he found that, far from disappearing down magical rabbit holes, he was 




expected to dig  them. Gurdjieff forbade  him to smoke  which,  he said, 




“almost killed” him. “I was told to dig,” he told C. S. Nott, “and as I had 




had no real exercise for years I suffered so much physically that I would go 




back to my room, a sort of cell, and literally cry with fatigue. No one, not 




even Gurdjieff, came near me. I asked myself, Is this what I have given up 




my whole life for? At least I had something then. Now what have I?’” The 




 

Daily News

 correspondent contrasted the corduroys and calloused hands of 




this new Orage with the elegant Bohemian of the Cafe Royal. Denis Saurat, 




who  came  to  see  his  friend  on  February  17,  1923,  was  amazed  by  the 




physical change he found. “I used to know him when he was almost fat,” he 




wrote, “when his tall, bony frame supported a body of some 85 kilos weight. 




But to meet me came a thin, almost emaciated Orage with a troubled face. 




Seemingly a taller Orage, whose movements were quicker and stronger; in 




better health, but unhappy.” 




In early 1923, puzzlement seems still to have been Orage’s prevailing 




emotion. He was resolute enough to give the  

Daily News

 correspondent an 




account of what he believed to be Gurdjieff’s objectives, but hinted that he 




had become a member of the Institute more out of hope than from any 




definite expectation. “There are men in London who are already as ‘clever’ 




as it is possible to be for men under ordinary conditions,” he told Bowyer, 




“and who are asking themselves whether this is the ultima thule—^whether 




they have reached the final Umits of their evolution. We believe that there 




is something more, and so we are here. ” Bechhofer Roberts approved of 




Orage’s “half-tolerant, half-sceptical tone” when confronted with certain 




irregularities at the Institute, but later became impatient with the editor’s 




insistence on explaining away every one of Gurdjieff’s inconsistent actions. 




He  decided  that  Orage  and  most  of  the  English  intellectuals  at  Fontainebleau were waiting “like mystical Micawbers—^for something superconscious to turn up.” 




Denis Saurat’s story of his visit to the Institute reinforces the impression




*An  unsuccessfiil attempt, like all those of Lawrence’s friends, to interest him in Gurdjiefif. 




Brett’s tea party was interrupted by the arrival of Carrington and her brother Noel, who talked 




at such length about bdia that the party broke up. 




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   261




that Orage and his friends were confused. On the night of the Frenchman’s 




arrival, GurdjieflF sent him a bottle of vodka to share with Orage and the 




other  Enghsh.  No  one  wanted  the  vodka,  but  because  the  pupils were 




scared of Gurdjieff, they refused to let Saurat tip half the bottle out of the 




window, and instead, forced the spirit down their reluctant throats. “All 




these people were disconcerted,” Saurat recalled, “prey to a mixture of 




shame, fear and inarticulate hope.” Saurat had an interview with Gurdjieff, 




after  which  he  repeated  to  his  friends  the  Master’s  admission  that  the 




Seekers  for  Truth  had  made  some  of  their  discoveries  in  books.  This 




irritated the English pupils. One of the doctors wondered what they were 




all doing at Fontainebleau if the tradition was to be found in books. Another 




Enghshman suspected that perhaps there was no secret tradition after all. 




They  were  all  very  struck  by  Gurdjieff’s  admission  that  “there  was 




something sinister” about the Prieure. “They wondered a little whether 




they were dupes,” reported Saurat, “but they still preferred to be victims. 




However, they were afraid of being exploited by Gurdjieff for his occult 




ends.” 




Depressed, confused, and suspicious Orage may have been, but he still 




believed sufficiently in Gurdjieff’s ideas to resent a joke at their expense. 




Saurat confided in a reporter that he was a professor at the University of 




Bordeaux and could assure him that all the inmates of the Institute were 




mad. The journalist repeated this to Orage, who took ten years to forgive 




Saurat his act of betrayal. And Orage’s commitment was in no doubt to 




Middleton Murry when he had to refuse the editor’s offer of the  

New Age. 

 




Murry saw the older man as reduced to essentials. “It seemed to me,” 




he wrote, “that a very fine simplicity had descended upon his complex 




Bature . . . ” 




The  period  of  uncertainty  and  despair  must  have  lasted  at  least  for 




Orage’s  first  four  or  five  months  at  the  Prieur^.  Then  he  made  a 




breakthrough. “When I was in the very depths of despair,” he told Nott, 




“feeling that I could go on no longer, I vowed to make extra effort, and just 




Ihen something changed in me. Soon, I began to enjoy the hard labour, and 




a week later Gurdjieff came to me and said, ‘Now Orage, I think you dig 




enough. Let us go to cafe and drink coffee.’ From that moment things began 




to change.” 




Presumably this means that Orage entered a new phase of his instruction. 




In whatever manner, “things began to change” for him, and the alteration 




concerned  his  relationship  with  the  Master.  From  quite  early  in  their 




association, Gurdjieff developed an affection for Orage, whom he later said 




he  had  “loved  as  a  brother.” Orage no  doubt  “worked,” in  Gurdjieff’s 




sense, very hard; his background in Theosophy gave him certain common 




interests with Gurdjieff; he had also, as Murry said, “burned his boats,” and 




was  prepared  to  dedicate  himself  to  spreading  Gurdjieff’s  ideas.  But




262 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




underneath the professional relationship between the two men grew up a 




certain camaraderie, apparently based on Curdjieff’s side upon a genuine 




feeling of friendship. One result was that Orage—^whose mind could gallop 




where GurdjiefiF’s could merely canter—soon held something of a privileged position at the court of Fontainebleau. During the later 1920s he was even known to exploit this at GurdjiefiF’s expense. “You know, Orage,” 




Gurdjie£P would say portentously, “oranges grow on trees.” “Do they 




really?”  Orage would drawl. “I thought  they came from  boxes.” From 




under their simian brow ridge, Gurdjieff’s eyes would look momentarily 




puzzled; had the favorite son really been so stupid? 




By what stages Orage progressed from a relationship of awed obedience 




to one of banter, we cannot know; but the first steps in his future intimacy 




with his teacher must have been taken during the spring and summer of 




1923. Orage was certainly among the most able of Gurdjieff’s pupils in a 




conventional sense, and his skill as a propagandist was to prove invaluable. 




When GurdjiefiF selected him to accompany Dr. Stoemeval—^his oldest 




follower—^to  the  United  States,  he  was,  in  fact,  the  obvious  choice  as 




ambassador. He set sail for New York in the autumn of 1923 to edit souls. 




America  had  begun  to  appear  to  Gurdjieff  as  a  necessary  step  for  two 




related reasons. The first was financial. Although most of the cost of buying 




and  refurbishing  the  Prieur^  had  been  met  by  Ouspensky’s  pupils, 




Gurdjieff was still faced with a considerable financial burden. According to 




the  

Daily News, 

 the general rate for a pupil at the Institute was seventeen 




pounds ten shillings per month, although visitors who stayed in relative 




luxury in “the Ritz” or came simply to be cured by Gurdjieff of various 




ailments,  might  be  ch^ged  as  much  as  forty  or  fifty  pounds.  But  the 




majority of Gurdjieflf’s pupils, though comfortably ofiF, were not rich, and 




well over half the total complement of the Prieur6 were Russians who relied 




entirely on the Master’s charity. Into the bargain, since the Prieur6 had 




become his home, Gurdjiefif had sent for his family from Georgia, and they 




arrived in the summer of 1923 to increase the number of his dependents. 




To  supplement  his  income,  Gurdjiefif  had  resumed  his  profession  of 




“physician-hypnotist” and spent considerable time in Paris—^where he 




established an “ofifice” in the Caf6 de la Paix—^plying his trade for the 




benefit of drug addicts and alcoholics. At the same time he undertook 




various business activities, including a profitable deal in oil shares and the 




establishment and sale of two restaurants in Montmartre. 




Together vtdth the organization of the Institute and the demands of the 




pupils who arrived there, it is not surprising that all this activity wore him 




down. In “The Material Question,” Gurdjieff writes that his health began to 




concern him, and he realized that he would have to take a rest. He had




I N S T I T U T E   F O R   H A R M O N I O U S   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   M A N   263




been planning a trip to the United States in the more distant future; but he 




now decided that if he made the expedition sooner, it could serve the dual 




purpose of ftind raising and holiday. “I was beginning to hope,” he writes, 




“that my pupils would now be capable of organizing various lectures and 




demonstrations in America by themselves.” 




As a dress rehearsal for his transatlantic venture, Gurdjieflf decided to risk 




his  remaining  capital  on  a  series  of  demonstrations  in  Paris  over  the 




Christmas season of 1923. These were organized through Alexander de 




Salzmann’s acquaintance with Jacques H^bertot, the director of the Th^&tre 




des  Champs-Elys^es,  where  the  performances  took  place  irregularly 




between  December  thirteenth  and  twenty-fifth.  Expansive  as  always, 




GurdjiefF had the small fountains in the foyer run with red and white wine. 




“Hie Art of the Antique Orient Revived,” proclaimed the  

Echo des Champs

 




 

Elysies, 

 and promised further revelations from “the mysterious heart of 




Asia” in seasons to come. For the moment, the publicity announced, the 




Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man was confining itself to 




three  programs:  a  demonstration  of  movement,  a  program  of  music 




performed  on  Gurdjieff’s  collection  of  Oriental  instruments,  and  an 




exhibition of “religious phenomena, consisting of tricks, half-tricks and real 




phenomena observed in religious ceremonies of the ancient East.” The 




“tricks” of which the advertisement spoke were conjuring tricks of the sort 




performed by stage illusionists, and Gurdjieff had already used them to 




enliven his Saturday night demonstrations in the Study House. Apparently 




Ae members of the Institute were proficient conjurers—as anyone must be 




who is interested in “psychical phenomena.” It is unclear what Gurdjieff 




|Qeant by “half-tricks”; and the “real phenomena”—sustained exercises in 




III direction of consciousness—were not obvious to the general public. 




The  demonstrations  of  movement  created  great  interest.  Gurdjieff’s 




program included the “Stop” exercise, “The Initiation of the Priestess,” and 




gymnastic exercises said to derive from a “school called The Seers’” which 




|ad “existed from antiquity in large artificial caverns in Kafiristan, on the 




feghts  of  Kijera.”  iTiere  were  “movements”  from  monastic  orders  in 




Chinese  Turkestan,  Kafiristan,  Tibet,  Caucasia,  and  Kashgar;  "work- 




l^ces,” prayers and fragments of ritual. The program concluded with an 




11^ called  

Pythia

 described as “part of a ceremony like that M. Gurdjieflf 




l^itnessed  in  the  Sanctuary  of  Houdankr  in  the  Lotko  country  in  the 




jChitral.” 




I,. The interest which Gurdjieflf aroused was of a rather ambivalent sort. Yet 




despite an equivocal press, the very fact of the performances—together 




^th the mystery attached to Gurdjieff himself, and the impact of the “Stop” 




pxercise wherever it was demonstrated—made the Fontainebleau Institute 




once  more  a  talking-point.  From  the  almost  furtive  character  he  had




264 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




impersonated in Moscow, Gurdjieff had apparently turned himself into a 




publicity-seeking—though no less mysterious—^impresario. 




Ouspensky observed the transformation with mixed feelings, as once 




more all the doubts which had assailed him in Essentuki and Constantinople reasserted themselves. In January 1924, he watched GurdjieflF leave with his troupe for the United States; and in his mind was the memory of 




their parting in Essentuki. On his return to London, he told his pupils that 




the association with Gurdjiefif had ended. To those who asked whether they 




should go to Fontainebleau or stay in London, he replied that the break was 




total: “Either go to him or stay with me. If you go you not see me again. If 




you stay and I am wrong you will pay for it and I too.*' Ouspensky did not 




specify the reasons for his renewed mistrust of Gurdjieff, and his public 




statement  in   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  is  the  bare  record  of  his 




announcement “that my work in future would proceed quite independently 




 

in the way it had been begun in London in 1921




Meanwhile Beelzebub, twirling his mustaches and with his karakul cap 




perched jauntily on the side of his head, sailed indomitably ofiF to America. 




A Crack in the Times




The New York in which GurdjieflF arrived with Orage as his herald was a city 




which, intellectually speaking, was living on capital borrowed from Europe. 




A &vorable exchange rate had i)ersuaded many writers and artists to leave 




an exclusively business-oriented society. The 1920s were the great years of 




Ihe American in Europe: the time of gatherings of intellectual expatriates in 




Pans  and  the  fluttering  of  social  butterflies  along  the  Riviera.  The 




Bohemians and the cosmopolitans could not always be told apart; for the 




artists needed the patronage of the wealthy, and the rich socialites enjoyed 




the cachet of being considered patrons of the arts. Europe was a cloud on 




die horizon of Washington Square. 




It was the age of the great Atlantic liners, symbolizing the proximity of 




Europe to the United States: Jean Toomer, who became a leading exponent 




<rf Gurdjieff’s ideas, wrote an abortive novel called  

Transatlantic

 set on 




such a ship. It was the age of prohibition, when, “if you point your fourth 




finger,” wrote GurdjieflF, “and covering one half of your mouth with your 




right palm, utter the name of any liquid you fancy, then, immediately and 




without  more  words,  that  liquid,  is  served  at  table—only  in  a  bottle 




purporting to be lemonade or the femous French Vichy.” It was the age of 




jazz, and of GurdjiefiF’s phobia, the foxtrot. A time of characteristics sharply 




defined in retrospect but in feet as evanescent as champagne. 




For those intellectuals who were unable to emigrate or who resisted the




265




266 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




pressures to do so, there were less obvious temptations in the sort of “inner 




emigration” which became famiUar in Germany during the 1930s. Malcolm 




Cowley writes in  

Exile’s Return, 

 “The bohemian tendency triumphed in the 




Village, and talk about revolution gave way to talk about psychoanalysis. 




. . . After the War the Village was full of former people. There were former 




anarchists who had made fortunes manufacturing munitions, former Wob- 




blies about to open speakeasies. . . . ”  The general turning away firom 




politics was occasioned partly by left-vwng disgust at the war and the 




Versailles peace, partly by right-wing horror of moral chaos and Bolshevism.  Psychoanalysis  was  only  one  of  the  panaceas  which  captured  the attention of the intellectuals and, as Cowley realized, “the implication of all 




these  methods  is  the  same—that  the  environment  itself  need  not  be 




altered.  This  explains  why  most  radicals  who  became  converted  to 




psychoanalysis or glands or Gurdjieff gradually abandoned their political 




radicalism.” 




An  entire  milieu  was  introverting,  as  the  nation  itself  veered  into 




isolationism. In the late 1920s, an extraordinary underground influence was 




exercised by Orage’s teaching of GurdjieflF’s ideas. Although psychoanalysis 




was  a  more  enduring  movement,  in  Orage’s  New  York  heyday  the 




revelations of Professor Freud were no match for his captivating charm. 




The ground for Orage’s mission had been prepared by Claude Bragdon’s 




publication  of   

Tertium  Organim. 

  On  its  publication  in  1920,  

Tertiujn

 




 

Organum

 sold so well that Bragdon had to turn over the hst of his Manas 




Press to Alfred Knopf for fear that his other activities would be swamped by 




his spare time publishing. Meanwhile through Ouspensky’s “Letters from 




Russia” in the  

New Age, 

 he made contact with Orage, who replied that he 




himself had lost touch with Ouspensky after his flight from Ekaterinodar. 




Eventually an American devotee of  

Tertium Organum

 called at the London 




headquarters of the Theosophical Society, where a fnend of Ouspensky told 




him that Ouspensky was in Constantinople. Bragdon was able to open 




communications and to send Ouspensky a check for royalties. 




It rapidly became known among the devotees of Ouspensky’s book that 




the author was associated with Gurdjiefi". The vagueness of most people 




about this association is illustrated by Bragdon’s reaction when he heard 




from Orage—^with whom he had corresponded siiibe his first inquiry about 




Ouspensky—^that Gurdjiefif was arriving in the United States. Orage wrote 




from Fontainebleau, on November 26, 1923:




I expect to be saihng for New York on Dec. 15 to spend a few weeks in




preparing the way for Mr. GurdjieflF’s visit in January (you know of




course all about Mr. GurdjieflF and Mr. Ouspensky). Naturally I look




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   267




forward to meeting you, and, in feet, I should come with even more 




timidity if I did not expect to find you there. 




Bragdon  wrote  later,  in  his  autobiography.  

The  Secret  Sprites, 

 




“Although I knew nothing of GurdjiefiF and his Institute, I did laiow of 




Ouspensky’s connection with it in some capacity or other, and that by my 




publication  of   

Tertium  Organum

  I  stood  more  or  less  committed  to  its 




general philosophy. Nevertheless something deep within me demurred, 




and so I did not take any action, even to the extent of meeting Orage at the 




dock as he had suggested.” However, as soon as Orage landed, he came to 




see Bragdon and spent “several hours” trying unsuccessfully to persuade 




him to  support GurdjieflF’s demonstrations in New York. Despite this 




reverse, Orage and Stoerneval managed to excite some interest among 




intellectuals and the press. 




The program of GurdjieflF’s displays was an expanded version of that 




given in France. The first demonstration was held on January 23, 1924 in a 




ballroom known as Leslie Hall at 260 West 83rd Street, and was followed by 




other performances at the Lenox Theatre (end of January), the Neighborhood  Playhouse  in  Greenwich  Village,  and  a  grand  demonstration  at Carnegie  Hall  on  February  9.  There  may  also  have  been  other  performances in the Astor Hotel and a “Webster Hall.” Orage then left to prepare the way for demonstrations in Boston and Philadelphia, and GurdjieflF 




followed with his pupils. They performed in Chicago and returned to New 




York for a final demonstration at Carnegie Hall on March 3. 




The demonstrations were the sensation of the hour. Reports varied from 




the partisan article by Maud Hofiinann which appeared in the  

New York

 




 

Times

  of  February  10,  to  the  most  extravj^ant  sensationalism.  

The

 




 

Bookman

 occupied the middle ground; 




We were very much puzzled and a little impressed by sacred temple 




dances,  ritual  movements,  dervish  dances,  etc.  While  the  dancers 




exhibited  great  muscular  control,  the  music  oppressed  us  and  the 




movements themselves seemed jerky and utterly lacking in grace. 




However,  many  other  persons  seemed  moved,  and  the  audience 




represented widely diverse interests. In the large and darkened hall 




one caught glimpses of Theodore Dreiser, Fannie Hurst, John O’Hara 




Cosgrave, Gloria Swanson, Rebecca West, Elinor Wylie, Mrs. Thomas 




Lamont,  young  Alan  Rinehart,  etc.,  etc.  How  important  such  a 




movement caii be we are not capable of judging. Somehow, we suspect 




that the greatest artistic work is never done by the man who becomes a 




complete disciple of any cult. 




268 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




This more or less open-minded comment was in marked contrast to the 




stories invented by the sensational press. The  

American Weekly

 carried a 




story  under  the  headline:  “dr.”  gurdjieff  and  his  magical  secret  of 




LIFE—how  to  be  a  SUPER-MAN  OR  SUPER-WOMAN  BY  FEEDING  PIGS, 




DANCING  WEIRD  DANCES  ALL  NIGHT  AND  OTHER  FANTASTIC  ANTICS.  The 




journalist’s climax was an account of how in the evenings at Fontainebleau 




“scores of patients of the asylum—institute—eddy out like gentle ghosts at 




twilight.” To the strains of music—“exotic, sensuous, mystical, provocative”—played by hidden musicians, Gurdjieff apparendy gave commands from within his curtained booth in the Study House, “‘Dance!’ he cries 




from behind the curtain. ‘Dance as your souls dictate! Dance—dance— 




dance to freedom!’” 




The journalist William Seabrook attended the demonstrations out of a 




fascination with matters mystical and occult. He was mildly interested in 




the conjuring parts of the program, although he found them little different 




from the feats performed by Houdini, who claimed no supernatural powers. 




But he was deeply impressed by Gurdjieff himself, whom he met the night 




after his arrival and engaged in an all-night conversation. “Whether his 




power lay simply in the fields of hypnotism and autosuggestion, or went 




beyond it into authentic telepathy and clairvoyance,” Seabrook mused, “or 




even further into the Tibetan and Yoga fields of alleged occult miracle- 




working, I never became convinced—^for the reason that I’ve never yet 




become convinced that power in these latter categories can exist at all. But 




whatever category Gurdjieff’s power may have lain in—in those days he 




had power.” Seabrook was disconcerted by the discipline of GurdjiefF’s 




pupils. “They were like a group of perfectly trained zombies, or like circus 




animals  jumping  throu^  hoops  ringed  with  fire,  or  like  the  soldiers  of 




Christophe  who  marched  without  breaking step off  the parapet  of the 




citadel on that sheer mountainside in Haiti. ” 




The  most  spectacular  demonstration  of  Gurdjieff’s  authority  was  a 




breathtaking variation on the “Stop” exercise:




The troupe was deployed extreme back stage, facing the audience. At 




his command they came racing full tilt towards the footlights. We 




expected to see a wonderful exhibition of arrested motion. But instead 




Gurdjieff calmly turned his back, and was lighting a cigarette. In the 




next split second an aerial human avalanche was flying through the air, 




across the orchestra, down among empty chairs, on the floor, bodies 




pell-mell, piled on top of each other, arms and legs sticking out in 




weird postures—^frozen there, fallen, in complete immobility and 




silence. 




Only after it had happened did Gurdjieff turn and look at them as




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   269




they  lay  there,  still  immobile.  When  they  presently  arose,  by  his 




permission, and it was evident that no arms, legs, or necks had been 




broken—no one seemed to have suffered even so much as a scratch or 




bruise—there were storms of applause, mingled with a little protest. It 




had been almost too much. 




The  vision  of  the  Master  as  a  Man  of  Power,  which  had  proved  so 




attractive in Russia, left in the United States an impression of mild distaste. 




The British writer, Llewellyn Powys, visited the Neighborhood Playhouse 




and  observed  Gurdjieff:  “His  general  appearance  made  one  think  of  a 




riding-master, though there was something about his presence that affected 




one’s nerves in a strange way. Especially did one feel this when his pupils 




came on to the stage, to perform like a hutchful of hypnotized rabbits under 




the gaze of a master conjuror.” 




Claude Bragdon approved wholeheartedly of Powys’ imagery, and agreed 




that there was “something disturbing” about Gurdjieff. “He impressed me 




as a man of power,” he wrote, “but at the same time I was a little repelled; I 




did  not  want  to  be  drawn  into  that  particular  net.”  The  actor,  Walter 




Hampden, was even more outspoken. He had attended a late night session 




of questions and answers conducted by Gurdjieff, and remarked afterward 




to Bragdon: “Claude, no one need tell me that this man is a Master. The 




mark  of  a  Master  is  mastery,  and  Gurdjieff  cannot  even  make  himself 




understood—no Master would come here so unprepared as that.” 




The demonstrations did serve a purpose, alAough not that of raising 




funds. The last performance at Carnegie Hall was the only occasion on 




which seats were sold, and this was not a financial success. But the irritating 




i^^tions posed by Gurdjieff himself had been enlarged by the unfamiliar 




quality of his music and the movements. And in New York—^as earlier in 




Russia and London—the Work split into two parts. There was the puzzling 




figure of the Master himself, the source of knowledge and the creator of 




confusion;  the  glyph  incarnate,  a  living  parable.  And  there  was  the 




reasonable voice of Orage to explain the inexplicable. To one recalcitrant 




pupil who objected that Gurdjieff would not answer her questions, he once 




burst out: “Can’t you just watch him?” 




To supplement Gurdjieff’s teaching there always emerged explicators, 




who repeated what they themselves had understood—perhaps what they 




had  gleaned  from  Gurdjieff’s  hints and chance  droppings of  advice or 




remembered from talks he had_ given when it had suited him to teach 




explicitly. Orage was there in one sense to tell his pupil to watch Gurdjieff, 




to seek for something behind the Hteral understanding which he imagined 




to be the limit of comprehension. He was responsible for interpretation and 




administration, as well as beating the drum. As in England, it was he who




270 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




made the contacts which gained GurdjieflF a following. The responsibilities 




which he had assumed of necessity were to hang like an albatross around his 




neck for the next seven years. 




The view from outside—of the mission of Orage and Gurdjieff, of the 




sensation caused by the dances, of the subsidence of a nine days’ wonder— 




is again quite different from the internal landscape which the two men 




really inhabited. They stepped through a crack in the times. 




During the decade which separated the end of the First World War from 




the  stock  market  crash  of  October  1929,  American  intellectuals  tried 




uneasily to find a compromise with the disturbingly successful philistines 




riding the business boom. In an article written in March 1932, from the far 




side of the Depression, Edmund Wilson analyzed the “superficial” nature of 




such intellectual attitudinizing:




We can see now that they all represented attempts on the part of the 




more thoughtful Americans to reconcile themselves to a world dominated by salesmen and brokers—^and that they all involved compromises with the salesman and the broker. Mencken and Nathan laughed at the broker, but they got along with him very well, provided he 




enjoyed George Moore and had pretensions to a taste in hquor; . . . 




the poets and philosophers hid from him—and the physicists grew 




more and more mystical in the laboratories subsidized mainly by the 




profits from industrial investments; the humanists, in volume after 




volume, endeavoured by sheer hollow thunder to induce people to find 




in the stock exchange the harmony and dignity of the Parthenon. 




Wilson  later  reprinted  this  article  as  part  of  a  longer  piece  on  “Hie 




Literary Consequences of the Crash” in which he associated the success of 




Gurdjieff and Orage with the schizophrenic climate he described. But the 




“more thoughtful” Americans whom he pilloried as unhappily straddling 




the  gulf  between  Fantasy  and  Mammon  must  sometimes  have  been 




conscious of the precariousness of their stance. It was unsatisfying, it was 




compromised from the points of view both of culture and of cash, and it 




provided no real solution to what Gorham Munson was to call “the dilemma 




of the liberated.” In the book which Munson published under that title in 




1930, he summarized the problem confronting a generation which had lost 




feith  in  its  early  enthusiasms  and  was  discontented  with  superficial 




rebellion. “The intelligent modern man feels liberated from petty social 




conventions, narrow theological views, discredited authorities, the grosser 




popular superstitions,  but liberated for what? Only, it seems, to face a 




darkened problem of choices, with many strong reasons for distrusting 




every alternative offered.” 




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   271




The  appeal  of  a  theory  which  seemed  to  advocate  hannony  and 




integration—^which pointed the way toward some ultimate synthesis—^was 




strong.  The  New  World  was  still  in  the  process  of  establishing  a  solid 




identity vis-d-vis the Old; and despite the birth pangs of a new literature, it 




had scarcely begun to compete in the cultural field. It appeared to some 




intellectuals—and  Orage  fostered  this  belief—that  the  next  step  might 




prove to be the Gurdjiefif Method; that in some way, there was a specifically 




American mission to adopt the strange discipline which GurdjiefF advocated 




and bring it to an unimaginable fhiition. Conditions for Orage’s success in 




New York were similar to those which had favored Ouspensky in London. 




Within a general climate of opinion, there were particular groups whose 




own search for values had approached the point at which they might rise to 




the bait thrown out by the Master and the steady fishing of his disciple. The 




three most aflFected were the Uterary group which in 1923 was more or less 




under the influence of Waldo Frank; the circle of writers and publicists 




centered on Herbert Croly and the  

New Republic; 

 and the staff of the avant- 




garde   

The  Little  Review, 

  edited  by  Margaret  Anderson  and  Jane  Heap. 




These groups were in close contact—Waldo Frank published in both  

The

 




 

Little  Review

  and  the   

New  Republic

—^and  Orage’s  success  cut  a  broad 




swathe through the intelligentsia of New York. 




The Frank circle of 1923 included Hart Crane, Gorham Munson, Jean 




Toomer, and Kenneth Burke. All were in some way affected by Gurdjiefif 




and  Orage,  although  Crane  very  quickly,  and  Frank  later,  rejected  the 




influence of Fontainebleau and its Master. Waldo Frank (b. 1889) was the 




literary lion at the time of Gurdjieff”s arrival. He had graduated from Yale 




in 1911 and worked in New York as a journalist before taking to the life of a 




feelance  writer.  In  1916  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  review.  

The

 




 

Seven  Arts, 

  and  soon  his  novels  began  to  earn  him  a  reputation  as  a 




p'ophet. In France, he was looked upon as the voice of the new American 




literature and became the American correspondent of the  

Nouvelle Revue

 




 

Prangaise. 

 At the end of 1916, he married Margaret Naumburg, who two 




years 

earlier had founded the progressive Walden School in New York, 




where the teaching was based on the principles of psychoanalysis and the 




New  Education.  But  even  at  the  time  of  his  greatest  success  as  an 




interpreter of America to itself and to Europe, Frank was turning toward 




mysticism. 




At Yale he had investigated the mystics. Oriental rehgion, and the new 




psychology. His marriage increased his interest in the internal world, and at 




the very tittie (1919-20) when his book Our  

America

 was enjoying a huge 




success, Frank was traveling the country absorbed in the study of medieval 




Cabalists.  

Our America

 established his reputation; and it was the book of a 




seer of eternal values. “Ours is the first generation of Americans consciously




272 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




engaged in spiritual pioneering,” he proclaimed. His contemporaries were 




in search of a “mystic Word.” “We go forth to seek America. And in the 




seeking we create her.” Under this influence of Whitman he declared: “The 




one true hierarchy of values in the world is the hierarchy of consciousness”; 




and implied that his generation was reacting towards a “four-dimensional” 




consciousness—^an idea he must have derived from the books of Claude 




Bragdon. 




In February 1920, he had a series of visionary experiences in Richmond, 




Virginia, which induced a burst of creative activity resulting in his novels 




 

Rahab

  and   

City  Block

—both  pubhshed  in  1922.  Some  time  after  his 




illuminations, Frank read  

Tertium Organum, 

 and lost no time in passing on 




his  enthusiasm  to  his  friends.  The  group  adapted  catchwords  from 




Ouspensky in phrases like “the new slope of consciousness, ” “the superior 




logic of metaphor,” and “noumenal knowledge”;  

Tertium Organum

 seemed 




to provide the basis for the leap into that American superconsciousness 




which Frank so hopefully expected. 




It  is  not  clear  whether  Frank  discovered  Ouspensky  for  himself,  or 




whether he was directed to  

Tertium Organum

 by one of the book’s leading 




propagandists,  the  poet  Hart  Crane.  Crane  became  eloquent  over  the 




virtues  of   

Tertium  Organum, 

  and—perhaps stimulated  by  Ouspensky’s 




arguments—^he too underwent mystical experiences. In June 1922, he was 




writing to his friend, Gorham Munson, about his experience of “the higher 




consciousness” under anaesthetics the previous winter. Munson told the 




poet’s  biographer,  John  Unterecker:  “You  cannot  overemphasize  the 




importance of that book. Crane hounded me to read it. And he kept after 




me to read it until I finally did. ” 




Munson himself was bom in 1896 and graduated in 1917 from Wesleyan 




University.  In  1921  he  married  the  dancer  Ehzabeth  Delza.  Like  his 




associates, he made his name in the world of the little magazines. In the 




spring of 1922 he founded  

Secession

 which he published from various towns 




in  Austria,  Germany,  and  Italy  before  returning  to  the  United  States, 




where the last number of his magazine appeared in April 1924. At the time 




of Gurdjieff’s arrival in New York, Munson was Waldo Frank’s closest 




follower,  and  in  1923  had  published   

Waldo  Frank,  a  Study, 

  a  laudatory 




essay which he afterward described as “premature"? ” He was to become one 




of Orage’s right-hand men. 




The American who most fully committed himself to GurdjiefiF was another 




disciple of Frank, Jean Toomer. Toomer is now remembered only for his 




one published novel,  

Cane, 

 an account of life in the southern United States. 




Critics  of   

Cane

  bemoan  the  fact  that  its  always  elusive  author  seemed 




almost to disappear soon after his impressive debut in the world of letters. 




The lack of creative writing during the last third of Toomer’s life can be




a ' c r a c k   i n   t h e   t i m e s   273




explained by perpetual illness; but his earlier disappearance was into the 




Work. Until the mid-1980s, he remained the most important figure after 




Orage in the teaching of Gurdjieff’s ideas in America. 




Jean Toomer (1894-1967) was born Nathan Eugene Toomer. Through his 




mother he derived his ancestry from P. B. Pinchback (1837-1921), who was 




briefly Governor of Louisiana in the 1870s. Toomer is thought of as a Negro 




novelist although, in fact, his ancestry also included Welsh, Dutch, French, 




German, Jewish, and Indian blood. This mixture of so many races of the 




earth produced in Toomer a human being of great attractiveness. Like his 




mentor  Orage,  he  seems  to  have  found  his  path  strevra  wath  willing 




conquests, although his graceful physical type was at the opposite pole to 




the angular Englishman. Like Orage too—like almost all men of impressive 




personality—he provoked opposition. 




In the unpublished book “From Exile into Being,” which Toomer began 




in 1938, he analyzes the reasons why he entered the Work. The metaphor 




which  governs  his  account  is  one  which  Gurdjieff  took  from  Buddhist 




imagery. Life consists, he said, of two rivers in one or another of which a 




man belongs. One of these rivers flows into the common pool of unevolved 




life force which is distributed throughout newly created beings. The other 




river flows into the ocean, otherwise the energy source from which the 




water is transformed to higher grades of being. “A man who has in his 




common presence his own T’ enters one of the streams of the river of life; 




and  the man who has not, enters the other.” Toomer sees his progress 




toward Gurdjieff in terms of the drop of water to which Gurdjieff compared 




the would-be individual trying to move from one stream to the other. The 




second chapter of “From Exile into Being” is entitled “Unease in the First 




:  River.”  Although  it  was  written  after  a  long  period  spent  under  the 




Gurdjiefif discipline, the tone of moral earnestness seems to have been 




characteristic of Toomer at all stages of his life. 




At the age of nineteen, Toomer wrote, he experienced a great “moral 




awakening.” What  

ought

 he to do? What were the moral imperatives which 




should govern his life? He decided to try to learn scientific agriculture, but 




neither  this  nor  attempts  to  study  law  proved  successful.  He  left  the 




universities of New York and Wisconsin because they failed to provide what 




he  was  looking  for,  and  only  several  colleges  later  did  he  succeed  in 




recovering a sense of purpose. His unanchored situation was made even 




more insecure when he was rejected for military service in the First World 




War on grounds of physical fitness. “So I looked,” he wrote, “so I tried. I 




tried this. I tried that. Not this. Not that. I got jobs. I quit jobs. I rejected 




and was rejected.” He decided that the world was engaged in a conspiracy 




to pretend that people “were making the best of an inevitably bad lot” in 




order to hide “the certain knovwng that they were misfits and  

should

 be




274 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




misfits in this world-as-it-is, in this life-as-it-is.” As he put it in his privately 




published book,  

Essentials

 (1931), “The open conspiracy: ‘Let’s do outside 




things; inside things are too difficult.’” 




At the end of the war, Toomer “overnight” lost his faith in God under the 




influence of scientific and evolutionary thought. But “a month or so after I 




lost God I found my mind.” He discovered Whitman and Goethe and began 




to make contact with American writers, including Lewis Mumford and 




Waldo Frank. At last he had an objective, and he began a period of intense 




work in order to learn to write, although writing alone could not satisfy his 




hunger for fundamentals. He began to feel that “higher attainment” was the 




goal of existence, and for such attainment a technique was necessary—as 




hterary technique had to be learned, so he must find a teacher of higher 




consciousness. Toomer found himself “reading the mystics, the philosophers  and  reUgious  writers  of  America  and  Europe,”  as  well  as  those modem authors “whose books were creating a new literature, and indeed a 




new culture in this land.” The greatest influence on this curriculum was 




undoubtedly Waldo Frank; and Toomer’s catalogue makes it clear how the 




Frank group could see the new literature which they were striving to create 




as  inseparable  from  an  extension  of  personal  consciousness.  

Tertium

 




 

Organum

  had  answered  what  it  was  possible  to  see  as  a  specifically 




American need. 




And then there was  

Cane. 

 Waldo Frank was Toomer’s literary sponsor, 




and in the last half of 1922 spent some time with his prot6g6 in the South, 




where  Toomer  in  his  turn  helped  Frank  with  the  dialogue  and  speech 




rhythms of his novel  

Holiday. 

 The follovwng year  

Cane

 appeared and had an 




instant critical success. Toomer was not really a natural novelist, and his 




unpublished works are chiefly remarkable for their psychological insight. 




When  he  spreads  himself,  he  has  a  tendency  to  become  turgid  and 




imprecise. Yet his feeling for words is still evident in the book of aphorisms. 




 

Essentials, 

 which was provoked by his GurdjiefF experience, and compression and discipUne worked in his favor.  

Cane

 showed these virtues, and its impressionistic account of Negro life is vivid, rich as molasses, and filled 




witii a sense of natural beauty. Although Toomer may have lost his early 




faith, he retained—or had possibly regained—^an appreciation of the highly 




emotional Christianity of the American South. It on its own merits and 




not as a result of Waldo Frank’s foreword that  

Cane

 earned its success. As a 




result,  its  author  found  himself  engulfed  in  the  excitement  of  the  new 




literary movement. He had arrived. 




“To arrive” meant a great deal in those days of the early ’20s. If you




were doing anything worthwhile in any of the arts and in the modehi




idiom, to arrive meant that you were welcomed into the most




A   C R A C K   IN T H E   T I M E S   275




remarkable upsurge yet to occur in our national culture. . . . You were 




part of a living world of great promise. And in this world, if you so felt 




it, there was not only art but something of religion. A number of us, 




including Gorham Munson and Hart Crane, came to sense that we 




were as men with missions pioneering up “the new slope of consciousness.” 




Like Crane and Frank, Toomer entered the life beyond life. He went 




through an extraordinary experience in which he felt at one with  

his

 people, 




with  

all

 people, with all the world. “I was  

in,” 

 he wrote. “All I had formerly 




thought and felt  

about

 a larger being and a higher consciousness became for 




me a living reahty of higher experience. ” The experience was so intense 




that it became “unbearable,” and Toomer was thankful when it departed, 




leaving “an unforgettable taste, a burning memory of how it had been when 




my soul visited me.” 




Toomer began to see life as a religious process. He rediscovered God, 




and wondered how he could ever have had the temerity to put pen to 




paper. “In my present condition I simply wasn’t up to writing. Writing, real 




writing, it now seemed to me, presupposed the possession of the very 




things I knew I lacked, namely self-purity, self-unification, self-development. I wasn’t fit to write.” His success had turned to ashes as he tasted it. 




One day his self-analysis reached the point at which he asked the question, 




 

“Who

  am  I?”  At  once  this  “perfectly  natural  .  .  .  but  very  startling 




question ” became the center of gravity in his discussions with his friends. 




The conclusion which he reached was that “one must become a man before 




he can become an artist.” After a succession of failed attempts to persuade 




las friends to join him in an efiFort to achieve self-mastery, he decided that 




the only solution was to seek a master himself He saw “a trip to Europe 




and to India as the next logical inevitable step.” But at this point Orage 




arrived in New York and—miracle of miracles!—the mountain came to 




Mohammed sailing in a first class cabin on the French Line. 




The  Frank  circle  was  the  most  obviously “prepared” segment  of  the 




intellectual world to respond to the message of Orage. However, there 




Were other groups of literary men who were also “looking for something” 




and could not in all honesty ignore GurdjiefF’s ideas. One responsive lobby 




was formed by the disappointed liberals of Herbert Croly’s  

New Republic. 

 




Croly (1868-1930) is best known for his two books.  

Promise of American

 




 

Life

 (1909) and  

Progressive Democracy

 (1914), which earned him respect as 




a theorizer on the new America but small commercial success. In 1914 he 




founded the  

New Republic

 with the aid of wealthy backers. During the war 




years, his magazine was popularly regarded as the mouthpiece of President 




Woodrow Wilson, and Croly played a leading part in securing United States




276 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




intervention in the First World War. He lost much of his popularity by 




opposing the signing of the Versailles agreement. This break with the policy 




of the Wilson administration cost the  

^ew Republic

 half its circulation and 




much of its prestige, so that in 1919, Croly found himself in a position 




similar to that of Orage in London. 




Disillusioned with politics, he turned his attention to the prospects of 




reconciling religion and science. Edmund Wilson—^who was the literary 




editor of the  

New Republic

 and set his face firmly against the influence of 




Orage and GurdjiefiF—refers scathingly to the “inhibited personality and 




unsatisfied religious instincts” which laid Croly open to conversion; long 




before the advent of Orage, Croly’s  

New Republic

 articles had begun to 




discuss topics of a more or less religious nature, and he had even assembled 




the materials for a religious book. Orage’s approach to similar problems—as 




a fellow publicist and literary man—was naturally attractive. Other associates  of  Croly  were  ready  for  Gurdjieff’s  ideas. Among these were T.S. 




Matthews, son of the Episcopal bishop of Princeton, who was then working 




on the  

New Republic

 and later became editor of  

Time, 

 and Amos Pinchot, a 




lawyer and publicist, whose brother Gifford Pinchot had been a member of 




Woodrow Wilson’s cabinet. Edmund Wilson’s criticism of the vogue for 




Orage occasionally assumes an embattled tone. 




There  were  other  groups  who  came  to  Gurdjieff  chiefly  by  default. 




Perhaps their personal idols had crumbled, or they apprehended in a d,im 




way that their gods were substitutes. Perhaps they had been soured by 




success and had lost their sense of purpose. One such circle was formed by 




the  staff  of   

The  Little  Review. 

  Essentially  this  consisted  of  the  editors, 




Margaret Anderson and Jane Heap, and whatever friends they were able to 




influence.  If  in  capturing  the  attention  of  the  Frank  circle,  Gurdjieff 




secured a hearing for his ideas in America, the friends of  

The Little Review

 




made his name a byword among the studios and studies of cosmopolitan 




Bohemia. 




Margaret Anderson founded  

The Little Review

 in Chicago when she was 




twenty-five. Born in Indianapolis in 1889, she went to college in Ohio, and 




escaped  from  her  country  club  background  to  work  on  a  magazine  in 




Chicago. There followed a brief career in journalism and a period on the 




staff  of   

The Dial

 before  

The  Little Review

  burst aut Athena-like in 1914. 




From  the  start  the  magazine  bore  the  unmistakable  imprint  of  its 




originator’s enthusiasm for Art; it was as if the whole fabric of dullness, 




prudishness, and rectitude which American artists felt encumbering them 




had been banished by the force of her lone enthusiasm. The first volume of 




Margaret Anderson’s autobiography.  

My Thirty Years War, 

 begins with her 




self-appraisal: “My greatest enemy is reality. I have fought it successfully 




for  thirty  years.”  Throughout  the  life  of   

The  Little  Review, 

  its  founder 




crusaded valiantly in all directions. 




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   277




 

The Little Review

 was, if anything, more astonishing than Orage’s  

New

 




 

Age. 

 Unhampered by any consistent editorial pohcy, it simply concentrated 




on  publishing  what  its  editors  found  worth  pubHshing—and  on  one 




occasion, when Margaret Anderson and Jane Heap decided that literature 




was temporarily moribund, there appeared a sixty-four-page blank number 




prefaced by an announcement that there was nothing fit to print. There 




were other little magazines—and as 1920 approached, many more, like 




Waldo  Frank’s   

Seven  Arts

  and  Munson’s   

Secession, 

  were  founded  in 




imitation of  

The Little Review

—but few approached the success of their 




model, and none gathered so distinguished a list of contributors. The first 




poems ofT. S. Eliot, the serial publication of James Joyce’s  

Ulysses, 

 and the 




poetry of Ezra Pound (who for some time was the magazine’s European 




editor), appeared alongside the work of Wyndham Lewis, William Carlos 




Williams, and later of Frank, Kenneth Burke and Jean Toomer.  

The Little

 




 

Review

 was indispensable in bringing the culture of Europe to America and 




in assisting the new literature which America was incubating. It may seem a 




jaundiced and European view to say that  

The Little Review

 and modern 




American letters were released together on an unsuspecting public, and it 




is of course exaggerated; but the remark is in the spirit of the magazine, and 




in certain moods, its editors would probably have agreed. 




Margaret Anderson was a young woman of striking good looks. Ezra 




Pound’s good angel, John Quinn, who helped  

The Little Review

 financially 




in 

New York, thought Jane Heap “a typical Washington-Squareite,” but 




wrote that Margaret Anderson was “a damned attractive young woman, one 




of the handsomest I have ever seen, very high-spirited, very courageous 




and very fine. ” The attentions to which she was no doubt subjected simply 




lacreased her sense of independence. “I am no man’s wife, ” she thundered 




in  

My Thirty Years War, 

 “no man’s delightful mistress, and I will never, 




never, never, be a mother. ” Her energies were entirely devoted to the life 




of art, which she later defined in Jane Heap’s  

Little Review

 motto; 




TO EXPRESS THE EMOTIONS OF LIFE IS TO LIVE 




TO EXPRESS THE LIFE OF EMOTIONS IS TO MAKE ART. 




The temperament of its founder made  

The Little Review

 both invaluable 




and 

infuriating.  

Its joie-de-vivre

 did not exclude a serious purpose, although 




in the early numbers that purpose was somewhat in doubt. For a time 




Emma Goldmann and anarchism provided a center of gravity, but although 




 

JFhe Little Review

 always remained sympathetic to the anarchists, its real 




direction was dictated by the forceful personality of Jane Heap. 




More successfully than any of Gurdjieff’s famous followers, Jane Heap 




contrived to disappear. Once she committed herself to the Work, she made 




a remarkable break with her past life—and became invisible. Academics in




278 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




search of information never persuaded her to divulge her personal history, 




and it is impossible even to discover the exact year of her birth. The date, 




November 1, was not knovra until after her death in June 1964, and her age 




she kept a closely guarded secret. She v^^as probably born around the 




middle 1880s in Kansas. Both her parents had emigrated from Europe to 




the United States; her father from Cheshire and her mother from Norway. 




Her grandmother was a Lapp, and that branch of the family had lived three 




days’ journey beyond the Arctic Circle. 




“There were many fascinating stories of her earliest life in the Middle 




West,” writes one pupil,”—the hard conditions—the fierce weather—and 




many unusual experiences of great range and intensity.” One particular set 




of experiences was provoked by her father’s job. He was the warden of a 




lunatic asylum. In March 1917, Jane Heap published an article in  

The Little

 




 

Review

 describing the loneliness and isolation of her upbringing. 




“There were no books to read in this place except the great volumes in 




the Patients’ Library,” she wrote; “and I had read them all. There was no 




one to ask about anything. There was no way to make a connection with 




‘life.’ Out there in the world they were working and thinking; here we were 




still. Very early I had given up every one except the Insane.” In this stifling 




and hallucinatory environment, one thing alone supported her: Art. “Who 




had made the pictures, the books and the music in the world? . . . And how 




could you tell the makers from just people? Did they have a light around 




their heads?” Then one day a real live Artist visited the United States— 




“‘Sarah Bernhardt.’ Even when  

they

 said it the name had a light around it!” 




The little girl decided to walk all the way to St. Louis where the “wicked 




French  actress”  was  appearing;  but  thought  better  of  it,  and  resolved: 




“Some day I would go to Paris. Other people had got that for. I would go on 




living for that. ” 




And then she came again! I was there, the first night, sitting in the




balcony with some other art students. We had sold our futures to sit so




close . . . 




It was only the beginning. Jane Heap succeeded in reaching Europe and 




she succeeded in making art. The details of her education remain obscure, 




but she and Margaret Anderson met in Chicago in 1916. “Jane and I began 




talking,” Margaret Anderson wrote. “We talked for days, months, years . . . 




We formed a consoHdation that was to make us much loved and even more 




loathed.” Eventually Jane was persuaded—much against her will—to write 




for  

The Little Review. 

 The relationship of the two editors was conducted 




through a volcanic eruption of conversation. “There is no one in the modem 




world whose conversation I haven’t sampled, I believe,” wrote Margaret




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   279




Anderson in 1930, “except Picasso’s. So I can’t say that it isn’t better than 




Jane Heap’s. But I doubt it in spite of his reputation.” 




The topic of conversation, of course, was “Art”; or rather, the psychology 




of artists. Jane Heap’s “uncanny knowledge of the human composition” 




steadily  pushed  their  dissection  of  the  artist-type  toward  a  study  of 




universals. As Margaret Anderson later put it: “We had never thought of art 




simply  as  painting,  poetry,  music,  sculpture.  We  thought  art  was  an 




expression, through  the  arts, of  a need for  something else.”  To  both of 




them, art had represented an escape from childhood; now it began to seem 




a beginning. 




Jane  Heap was  far from  what would be called a “happy” person. In 




California during the summer of 1916, she delighted in keeping Margaret 




Anderson on edge by constant threats of suicide. The next year, when the 




pair moved  

The Little Review

 from Chicago to New York, “jh” was plunged 




into  such  despair  that  she  spent  most  of  the  eighteen  hours  after  their 




sorrival face-dovra on her bed. But in Margaret Anderson’s opinion, it was 




the state of desperation which gave Jane Heap her drive. 




This unhappiness was not just a fashionable  

Angst

 about the human 




condition,  but  had  its  personal  aspects.  In  the  blunt  phrase  of  T.  S. 




Matthews, “she was the first full-blown Lesbian case I ever saw. ” Part of 




her legend lay in her unusual appearance—^in Margaret Anderson’s words: 




“handsome features, strongly cut, rather like those of Oscar Wilde in his 




only beautiful photograph.” For evening dress she would appear in tuxedo, 




black bow tie, and long black skirt. It was making an eccentric virtue out of 




necessity; but even in the early 1920s, the strain must have been excessive, 




and was probably responsible for the frustrations and bursts of spleen for 




«4ich she was noted. Something of this emerges from the pen-portrait of 




jh by C. S. Nott, who met her in New York in 1924. She “had the most 




Stimulating and penetrating mind of any American woman I have ever met, 




Itad like all people with strong positive vibrations her negative ones were 




^ually strong. She could be quite ruthless and regardless of near friend or 




foe when she wanted something. She had a strong masculine side; as 




she said to me, ‘I’m not really a woman.’...” Margaret Anderson explains 




&e deflationary tactics of her friend: “She never had the sardonic pleasure 




in  it  that  was  often  attributed  to  her.  She  regarded  the  pricking  of  the 




bubbles of self-illusion—Whelping people to distinguish between wish- 




ftdfilment and reality—as essential to the race.” 




In New York  

The Little Review, 

 jvith its oddly assorted directorate, went 




from  strength  to  strength.  But  the  value  placed  by  posterity  on  the 




Magazine is in inverse proportion to its financial success. Sometimes there 




was very httle money. Trouble with the Society for the Suppression of Vice 




over the publication of James Joyce’s  

Ulysses, 

 a poor diet and—despite the




280 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




importance of  

The Little Review

 in avant-garde circles 

—a

 predictable lack of 




response from a hostile environment at last took their toll. Matters came to 




a  head  in  the  winter  of  1922.  Jane  Heap  complained  that  artists  in  the 




United  States  had  still  to  make  any  recognizable  impact;  for  Margaret 




Anderson, it was the last straw. “For a number of years life had had the 




aspect of a polar expedition, ” she wrote, “—all life serving only to maintain 




life. It was time to change such an existence. It was time to bring  

The Little

 




 

Review

 to an end.” 




Jane Heap refused to accept this decision; and so Margaret turned the 




direction of the review over to her co-editor. “I didn’t know what to do 




about life,” she admitted, “—so I did a nervous breakdown that lasted many 




months.” To one who had always given thanks for her “unaccountable inner 




happiness,” the experience must have been both painful and puzzling. In 




her autobiographical  

The Fiery Fountains, 

 she records her transition from a 




state of supposed euphoria to a confrontation with her “enemy,” reality. 




“The  impression  persisted;  T  am  so  happy,  I  have  always  been  so 




desperately happy.’ (As unhappy as that?) Orage said.” In 1922 she was 




confused and directionless, her questionings were inchoate, and only by 




degrees did a positive aspiration take form. 




An encounter with W. B. Yeats—^an early and constant contributor to  

The

 




 

Little Review

—ignited a new enthusiasm for Europe, and a meeting with 




Georgette Leblanc, who for twenty years had been the mistress and the 




inspiration  of  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  resulted  in  a  new  friendship  that 




stimulated Margaret Anderson’s religious instincts. 




Greenwich Village was discovering French Symbolism for itself at about 




this time, and  

The Little Review

 had begun to draw on esoteric sources. 




Margaret Anderson and Georgette Leblanc began to pursue their interrogation of the cosmos in terms more directly religious. They were inspired by the Bible but not to any positive activity; they recoiled in alarm from the 




terminology of Eastern religion. But both editors of  

The Little Review

 had 




read Claude Bragdon’s edition of  

Tertium Organum

 and considered that 




“we had found a contemporary author with a great mind. ” They heard a 




rumor  that  Ouspensky  was  writing  a  book  to  be  called   

The  Unknown

 




 

Doctrine

 about his association with GurdjiefF. Then GurdjieflF’s personal 




emissary arrived. 




When Orage landed in New York his task appeared unenviable. As he had 




failed to persuade Claude Bragdon—^his only apparently solid “esoteric” 




contact in the city—to lend his support, he was forced to fall back on his 




literary reputation. He somehow discovered the Sunwise Turn Bookshop at




2  East 3Ist Street, which is described by Carl Zigrosser as having been 




“much more than a bookshop; it was a clearing house for ideas, a meeting




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   281




place  for  free  spirits.”  Its  proprietors  were  a  retired  English  teacher, 




Madge Jenison, and a retired art teacher, Mary Mowbray-Clarke. They 




pubhshed  Coomaraswamy’s   

The  Dance  of  Siva,*

  and  advertised  in   

The

 




 

Little Review. 

 “The shop was animated more by crusaders than commerce,” 




writes Zigrosser. “The sagging financial structure was shored up by taking 




in a succession of moneyed people as partners.” From this center of the 




Progressive world, Orage made propaganda. 




It is ironical that at the very outset of his mission in the United States, 




Orage met the person with whom he was to find the ordinary and important 




fulfilments  of  life,  and  who  would  eventually  prove  to  be  the  most 




important influence in detaching him from his Master. Jessie Dwight had 




bought a share in the Sunwise Turn, and happened to hear Orage’s initial 




lecture on Katherine Mansfield. Next day Orage met her in the shop and 




asked whether she had enjoyed the talk. According to Philip Mairet, the 




reply was, “No, not at all.” From this promising beginning a friendship 




developed which culminated in Jessie Dwight’s becoming, first Orage’s 




secretary, and afterward his vwfe. 




A prospectus for the Institute was circulated—a translation of the French 




original. Margaret Naumburg found a copy at the Sunwise Turn, and passed it 




to Jean Toomer who was intrigued and wanted to examine the doctrine of Ous- 




pensky’s teacher. His projected journey to the East was now unnecessary; 




equally, it had just begun. “I began reading it,” he writes of Gurdjieff’s 




prospectus. “The first words made me feel that I was close to what I sought. I 




read with eagerness. I read with glow. I gave cries of joy as I came upon statement after statement that said what I wanted to hear said. Here it was. This was it. At last I had come upon something that spoke to my condition. ” 




Margaret Anderson gives an account of “Orage’s first lecture’’ in New 




York, which seems to refer to an occasion which preceded the arrival of 




GurdjiefF and his pupils:




Orage walked out upon the stage. He was tall and easy, but quick and 




sure—the most persuasive man I have ever known. He sat down and 




began to tell, simply, why he had come. Claude Bragdon interrupted 




by standing up to say that he had a letter from Ouspensky which he 




would like to read. It was a conventional letter, everyone was bored, 




Bragdon was unaware of boredom as he began commenting on the 




letter. Orage stopped him expertly and went on with his talk. But the 




ease and flow of the evening had.been broken. “Talk louder,” someone 




called out. “And be more interesting,” Mrs. Lydig said loudly. This




♦Coomaraswamy  became  a  friend  of  Orage,  although  according  to  Mrs.  Jessie  Orage,  he 




thought Curdjieff "a bit of a charlatan.” 




282 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




made me angry. “Don’t do that,” I whispered to her—“What’s the 




matter?” she said, still loudly, “don’t you agree?”—“Of course not,” I 




said, “just wait, he’ll be so interesting he’ll be incomprehensible.” But 




he wasn’t. He had no intention of being merely “interesting.” 




It  was  the  ideas  they  heard  from  Orage  which  impressed  Margaret 




Anderson and her friends, not the dances which fascinated the town. Jean 




Toomer’s reaction to the prospectus had also been primarily intellectual; 




but this did not exclude a highly emotional reaction to the movements. A 




slightly  damaging  fact  was  that  Waldo  Frank’s  literary  patronage  had 




resulted in an intimate association between Frank’s wife, Margaret Naum- 




burg,  and  Frank’s  prot6g6,  Jean  Toomer.  The  pair  attended  one  of  the 




demonstrations together which, according to Toomer, was held in Webster 




Hall.  He  was  impressed  by  the  figure  of  Thomas  de  Hartmann  at  the 




piano 

—“a

 monk in a tuxedo,” he thought. More impressive still was the 




figure  of  Gurdjieff,  walking  up  and  down  the  aisles,  inspecting  the 




audience. Toomer had tried German and Swedish gymnastics as well as the 




system of F. Mathias Alexander; and he and Margaret Naumburg decided 




that Gurdjieff was “co-ordinated” in Alexander’s sense. 




I saw this man in motion, a unit in motion. He was completely of one 




piece. From the crown of his head down the back of the head, down 




the neck, down the back and down the legs, there was a remarkable 




line.  Shall  I  call  it  a  gathered  line?  It  suggested  co-ordination, 




integration, knitness, power ... I was fascinated by the way the man 




walked. As his feet touched the floor there seemed to be no weight on 




them at all—a glide, a stride, a weightless walk. 




The unusual nature of GurdjiefF’s deliberate gait impressed many who 




met him, “Like the hind legs of a cat,” says Mrs. Jessie Orage. “He looked,” 




recalls a man who knew him during the 1930s, “as if he were walking at the 




head of a parade.” Was this the new kind of man of which  

Tertium Organum

 




had spoken? “I was already convinced,” writes Toomer, “that some men, 




men never heard of by the general world of men, had attained various of 




these higher states, had come into possession of a superior knowledge and 




wisdom,  a  superior  power,  an  almost  incredible  mastery.  They  were 




variously called Masters, Adepts, Mahatmas. I believed that men of this 




category had existed in ancient times and that there must be some existing 




at this time. G., I felt, could be a Master. Certainly not a saint . . . Not a 




holy man, not a yogi, but—a Master?” 




In the dancing itself, Toomer found an unexpected release of emotion:




To my mind they were amazing events that satisfied and exceeded




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   283




anything that I could have asked for. I was in the audience but I saw 




and felt what went on as if I were already one of the participants. The 




performances began at theatre time and continued on and on as though 




the pupils were capable of endless endurance. By 12 o’clock most of 




the onlookers had left. The demonstrations continued. I stayed to the 




very last, for I was endlessly fascinated, and would have been happy if 




the performance had gone on through the night, every night. 




As when Ouspensky came to London, the test of commitment seemed to 




be the giving up of everything and a pilgrimage to Fontainebleau. Toomer 




was still unconvinced that he could not succeed independently in the sort of 




“work” advertised by Gurdjieff. He projected his feelings outward, in the 




form of a mild distaste for Orage and a sneaking mistrust of Gurdjieff, the 




Man of Power. He had a number of talks with Orage, who after enlarging on 




the miserable condition of mechanical man, slipped his qualification into 




the  conversation:  “Yes,  

but  there  is  a  way  out.” 

  “That  was  just  what  I 




wanted to hear,” wrote Toomer, “in just so many words, from him. I myself 




was intuitively certain that there was a way out, but I wanted it said by 




someone who impressed me as having found it.” Such reassurance could 




not conquer the fear he felt of Gurdjieff. “He seemed to have everything 




that could be asked of a developed human being, a teacher and a master. 




Knowledge, integration, many-sidedness, power—in fact he had a bit too 




much power for my comfort. ... I held back, G.’s power disturbed me. I 




was not sure of it, and I wanted to be sure before I placed myself wholly in 




his hands. This at any rate was how I explained it to myself ” He reacted in 




tiie fashion which Jane Heap later called “the bolting of beginners,” and 




Bed New York while the demonstrations were still in progress. 




Gurdjieff moved his troupe to the small Neighborhood Playhouse in 




Greenwich Village, which had been lent to him by a wealthy family who 




were  friends  of  Mary  Mowbray-Clarke  of  the  Sunwise  Turn.  Here,  he 




began to concentrate on screening likely candidates for the Institute. The 




JiJeighborhood Playhouse was well known to New York intellectuals— 




tJorham Munson’s vnfe, Elizabeth Delza, had danced there—and admission 




Was by invitation only. Gurdjieff stood in the foyer of the theater scanning 




his audience. Again, the susceptible were impressed by his mere presence. 




rHe had a presence impossible to describe,” writes Margaret Anderson, 




“because I had never encountered another with which to compare it. ” 




The Neighborhood Playhouse denjonstrations separated the likely candidates  from  the  less  hopeful  prospects.  Once  again  Orage  acted  as  the interpreter,  and  from  the  small  audiences  of  100-150  there  began  to 




emerge  those  who  became  his  chief  supporters.  The  Munsons  were 




overwhelmed; on the night of her first visit, Elizabeth Delza could scarcely 




sleep for the “revivifying” effect of the dances in which she discovered “a




284 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




unique theatrical experience.” Hart Crane arrived, and some witnesses 




thought he was drunk, although it may have been excessive devotion to 




GurdjiefF which exaggerated his condition. His companion of the evening, 




Susan Jenkins Brown, remembers merely that “Hart and I were irreverent 




but well-behaved. . . . ” 




Irreverent or not. Crane was, at the time, extremely impressed; “Things 




were done by amateurs,” he informed his mother, “which would stump the 




Russian ballet. I’m sure.” 




It is easy to give the false impression that “all New York”—to quote 




Margaret Anderson—^was reeling under the impact of Gurdjieff. “All New 




York” was interested in the initial sensation, but the lasting impact of the 




1924 visit was limited to the small groups of intellectuals who have been 




mentioned. Conditions were, in fact, not very bright for GurdjiefF and his 




pupils in February 1924. “As time passed,” Thomas de Hartmann wrote, 




“there were fewer and fewer people in our audience; and we had no further 




prospects. Our food ration diminished day by day.” GurdjiefF ordered 




everyone to find work. In the nick of time, de Hartmann renewed an old 




acquaintance which enabled him to make a booking for Chicago. Orage was 




dispatched with C. S. Nott, a young assistant from the Sunwise Turn, to 




prepare the ground in Chicago and in Boston and Philadelphia on the way. 




The pupils followed, and Jessie Dwight offered GurdjiefF a large contribution to the Institute in exchange for permission to accompany him. 




Despite the tours, and even a letter printed by the  

New York Times

 from 




novelist Zona Gale appealing to the public to support the final demonstration  at  Carnegie  Hall,  the  expedition  had  been,  in  Claude  Bragdon’s phrase, “disappointing, even disastrous,” and as Bragdon noted, when the 




party returned to Fontainebleau, Orage was left “to devise ways to pay their 




debts and to continue the campaign.” At least he was left with a base on 




which to build. Groups began to form for the study of GurdjiefF’s ideas. 




One began to meet in the Jane Heap house on East 9th Street. Membership 




cards  were  issued  to  those  who  subscribed  to  the  Institute  For  the 




Harmonious Development of Man. They read as follows:




G. GurdjiefF’s Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man 




Certificate of Membership Nq. . . .*




Valid for one year from June 1st, 1924-1925




The bearer of this, a member of the GurdjiefF Institute has the 




following privileges:




Free residence, with ail the rights of permanent members, at the 




chief centre of the Institute at Fontainebleau, as well as at the




* Jessie Dwight was No. 606, Jean Toomer, No. 619. 




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   285




Institute’s  boarding  houses  in  other  places;  free  attendance  at  all 




classes, lectures and conferences whenever held under the auspices of 




the Institute, except those lectures, etc. specially held for permanent 




members;  free  subscription  to  the  Institute’s  journal  and  all  the 




literature issued by the Institute. 




The right of enquiry and reply concerning the ideas of the Institute. 




Any member may, if he or she wish, use any of the sanatoria or 




hotels of the Institute for him or herself, and family, at one half the 




regular rates. 




Annual subscription $120. 




(Signed) Founder G.  

Gurdjieff

 




Person issuing A.  

R. Orage

 




This document is authorised for American citizens only over the 




personal signature of one of the following persons; 




Mrs. Rublee, 242, E. 49th Street, New York. Professor Comstock, 




Harvard  University,  Boston.  Edgar  Hamilton,  245,  N.  Kenilworth 




Avenue, Oak Park, Chicago Mr. A. R. Orage,  

do

 Mr. F. R. Whiteside, 




1510 Waverly St., Philadelphia. 




The  reference  to  “sanatoria”  and  “boarding  houses”  was  no  doubt 




intended to reinforce the illusion which Gurdjieff loved to perpetuate, that 




he had opened branches of his Institute in “the chief European cities. ” Was 




this  fraudulence, a test, or for some unfathomable purpose? There is a 




suspicious likeness to Aleister Crowley’s famous advertisement for his 




magical order of the Astrum Argentinum, which also refers to sanatoria and 




»ther imaginary facilities. . . . And is this likeness intentional? 




It The crack in the times swallowed people up, as recruits mustered the 




ik)urage  to travel to  Fontainebleau. Margaret Anderson and Georgette 




Leblanc  left  for  France  and  took  a  farmhouse  at  Passy  from  which  they 




pould commute to the Prieur^. For the moment Jane Heap bided her time. 




She was still attached to the world of Art; that very year she opened The 




little Review Gallery. G. S. Nott decided to go to Fontainebleau. On the 




Other  hand,  when  Gurdjieff  directed  Jessie  Dwight  to  follow  suit,  she 




tetumed to Orage and scoffingly told him of the magisterial command. She, 




go to France? Orage looked at her sadly and said; “But you must.” So she 




itnade the crossing in the company of Olgivanna. 




Jean Toomer postponed the evil day as long as he could, and a letter he 




Wrote to Gorham Munson betrays his attempts at temporizing. At the same 




time as he asked for information about Gurdjieff and the Institute, he tried 




to cover himself by telling his friend that “I just may have a chance to learn 




something  of the  Rosicrucians, first hand. ” Eventually he overcame his 




revulsions and returned to New York. On July 9, he wrote to Orage that he




286 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




regretted having missed “the most intensive work of the Institute, together 




v«th your evening at the Munsons.” The impulses which had been warring 




within him had settled their difierences. “I have now ended a phase of 




many years’ duration,” he told Orage, “and am open with no backward 




reservation whatsoever, to the next discipline.” At this stage he intended to 




book himself on the first possible ship to Europe. He had taken six months 




to make up his mind, and was eager to be off. 




Most of his friends were unavailable. Margaret Naumburg was in Reno 




from where she wrote him agitated leters, inquiring whether Orage knew of 




the relationship between her and Waldo Frank, and informing Toomer that 




she had just finished reading  

his Unveiled. 

 The various obstacles in the 




path of her own projected visit to Fontainebleau were gradually being 




cleared away. Toomer did seek out Hart Crane. “My feeling for Hart was as 




warm as ever,” he later noted, “and I had a sense that this might be the 




parting of our ways. Crane was moving further away from Gurdjieff and was 




soon to start an attempt to dissuade his friends from having anything to do 




with the Institute or with Orage. Gorham Munson and his wife were out of 




town for several weeks, and a tortured correspondence flew between him 




and Toomer. How did the discovery of a Master affect relations with the 




doyen of their literary circle, Waldo Frank? Frank, after all, had assumed 




the airs of a prophet and they were in a sense deserting a standard to which 




Hart Crane was remaining loyal. Was all their writing, Munson wondered, 




based on self-deception? Toomer was little help; for now that he had made 




his commitment, he rested in its security. On July 17, Toomer wrote to 




Munson; “I did not ask you to choose between Waldo and Gurdjieff. I 




simply stated an opposition as I saw i t . . .  to me Waldo stands for what  

not

 




to do, whereas Gurdjieff stands for what  

to do.” 

 This was an opinion to 




which Munson soon became converted, and in a few years’ time he would 




be broadcasting his convictions from the housetops. 




Orage replied “promptly ” to Toomer’s request for an interview, and the 




novelist was quickly enrolled as a member of the Institute. He passed the 




time before his boat sailed by attending Orage’s groups as a preparation for 




the Frieure. His originally cool attitude to Orage grew steadily warmer, 




until  just  before  his  departure,  he  was  inspired  by  the  older  man’s 




exhortations about the value of his forthcoming experience. “I can still see 




him seated there in that hot New York room, ” Toomer wrote, “he in shirt 




sleeves and wearing suspenders. His eyes were keen and sparkling and his 




face aglow, all of him alive with zest for the ideas and the work. ” 




Unfortunately for those intent on penetrating Fontainebleau itself, an 




event—quite unknown in New York—had occurred before Toomer set sail 




which profoundly affected Gurdjieff, all his pupils, and would-be pupils. It 




altered the entire tenor of his work. The reverberations settled the course




A   C R A C K   I N   T H E   T I M E S   287

of Orage’s life for the next half-dozen years and were as influential for 




Ouspensky and his followers in England. In the afternoon of July 5, 1924, 




Gurdjieff’s car left the road from Paris to Fontainebleau at the junction with 




the N 168 road from Versailles to Choisy-le-Roi, and crashed into a tree. 




 

The Master was dangerously ill. 




A Chapter of Accidents




Gurdjieff’s accident had a significance for his followers far beyond the 




material and philosophical difficulties which were its natural result. A 




simple car crash—and the lives of a number of people seemed to hang in 




the  balance,  poised  dizzily  between  reality  and  unbelief  Within  the 




framework of GurdjiefF’s System the accident assumed a new meaning, an 




embarrassment of meanings, a confusion in which many possible interpretations took root and sprouted consequences like tropical vines. 




It was Gurdjieff’s custom to spend two days in the week away from 




Fontainebleau and to drive back to the Prieure in the afternoon. During the 




hectic period after the purchase of the Prieure, he often made this journey. 




In  “The  Material  Question,”  he  tells  how  the  organization  of  his  new 




establishment and the demands of his practice as a hypnotist so tired him 




that he fell asleep at the wheel one afternoon and awoke in his stalled 




vehicle at ten o’clock the next morning. Perhaps what Gurdjieff called his 




" ‘charge-and-crash’ with my automobile at full speed into a tree standing 




silently, like an  observer and  reckoner of  the passage  of centuries at a 




disorderly tempo” was the result of another such incident. On the other 




hand, he was an appalling driver, and this was only the first of at least four 




crashes. “He drove like a wild man,” wrote Kathryn Hulme of her meeting 




with Gurdjieff in 1932, “cutting in and out of traffic without hand signals or 




even space to accommodate his car in the lanes he suddenly switched to




288










A   C H A P T E R   O F   A C C I D E N T S   289




... the chances he took overtaking buses and trucks were terrifying.” On 




the day of his accident, Gurdjieff had had lunch in an Armenian restaurant 




before leaving Paris for Fontainebleau; and, if large quantities of spirits had 




accompanied the meal, perhaps the consequences w^ere predictable. Mme. 




de Hartmann blames the accident on the steering wheel which was found to 




be broken after the crash. She is the chief witness to the events of that day. 




And very odd they were. 




Mme. de Hartmann was still acting as Gurdjieff s secretary and steward. 




On the morning of July 5, 1924 she called for Gurdjieff at his new Paris 




apartment on the Boulevard Pereire. They had planned an expedition from 




Paris to inspect some equipment which she had ordered for the Prieure, 




but Gurdjieff abruptly postponed the tour of inspection. This astonished her 




because  of  his  customary  considerateness  to  those  with  whom  he  had 




dealings outside his work. She was then told to persuade her parents to 




emigrate from Russia to avoid a famine which Gurdjieff predicted. More 




interesting still, she was given Gurdjieff s power of attorney. She was to tell 




the mechanic in the garage where Gurdjieff kept his Citroen to check the 




car thoroughly, especially the steering wheel. Then her plans for the day 




were further disrupted. Instead of traveling with Gurdjieff to the Prieure by 




car, she was told to make an inventory of his apartment and to return by 




train.  Gurdjieff  departed,  leaving  her  disgruntled  at  the  prospect  of  a 




stifling railway journey in midsummer. 




During the afternoon she fell asleep at her task and was awakened by 




what sounded like Gurdjieff s voice calling her name, “Olga Arcadievna!” 




By her watch it was 4:30, half an hour before she had to catch her train to 




Fontainebleau. On her arrival she learned that Gurdjieff had been taken to 




|lte hospital, and at the hospital she found her husband and Dr. Stoerneval. 




It appeared that Gurdjieff had “severe head injuries and lacerations of the 




hands.” No bones had been broken and the skull was sound. Gurdjieff’s 




case was turned over to two Russian doctors, and the next morning he was 




brought home—apparently still concussed and unconscious—in which state 




be remained for five days. 




While helping to nurse Gurdjieff, Mme. de Hartmann had to hold his 




wrist. Although he was unconscious, she felt “his fist clench with great 




Sjrce.” There are other rumors that even while unconscious Gurdjieff told 




iiis attendants where to massage him. Jessie Dwight was present when 




Gurdjieff arrived back from the hospital and saw him look at her. A passage 




from  C.  S.  Nott’s  book,  

Teachings  of  Gurdjieff, 

  describes  the  immediate 




impact of the news:




Gurdjieff  was  brought  out  on  a  stretcher,  his  head  covered  with 




bandages; he was unconscious, but he murmured, “Many people, 




many people.” He was carried upstairs to his room. 




290 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




A hush descended on us; everyone went about his work quietly and 




seriously. A few were weeping, though there was a complete absence 




of conventional expressions of sorrow. GurdjiefF’s condition was very 




serious; the doctors were not very hopeful for his recovery; the wonder 




was that he had not been killed instantly. 




Later in the day I went up to the garage in Fontainebleau to get 




something from his car, a small Citroen, which had been towed there. 




The radiator was crushed, the engine was ofiF its seating, the steering 




column was broken, screen and doors and windows smashed, the front 




axle and wings crumpled. GurdjiefiF had been found lying on the grass 




verge on the road that runs from Paris to Fontainebleau, his head on a 




cushion of the car. How he had got out of the car, whether he had got 




himself out or was carried, was not clear. 




The  life  of  the  Institute  was  dislocated.  “There  was  silence  in  the 




Prieure,” writes Nott, “we spoke with lowered voices; the bell in the belfiy 




no longer rang; there were no dances or music in the Study House and 




everyone wished with his whole being for Gurdjieff’s recovery ... it was as 




if the mainspring of a great machine had broken and the machine was 




running on its momentum. The force that moved our lives was gone.” The 




real extent of the crisis for the Institute’s inhabitants is shown in the account 




of Margaret Anderson’s young nephew, Fritz Peters. Fritz and his brother 




Tom had been adopted by Jane Heap after the breakup of their parents’ 




marrriage  and,  with  the  conversion  of  the  editors  of   

The  Little  Review, 

 




found themselves living at the Prieure—a somewhat extraordinary boarding 




school. The brothers had arrived just before the crash and had time to see 




something of the ordinary operations of the Institute. “The very existence of 




the Institute depended entirely on G.’s presence,” wrote Fritz Peters. “It 




was he who assigned work to every individual—^and up to that moment he 




had supervised personally every detail of the running of the school. Now 




the imminent possibility of his death brought everything to a standstill. It 




was only thanks to the initiative of a few of the older students, most of 




whom had come to him from Russia, that we continued to eat regularly.” 




The boy had been told to mow the lawns every day, and continued to 




perform what he regarded as a sacred obligation despite the threats and 




ostracism  from  the  pupils  in  authority.  Having  given  their  wills  into 




GurdjiefF’s keeping, it seems that the disciples had little common sense left 




... or was there some deeper reason? As Peters writes: “What surprises 




me  now  is  that  I  was  not  categorically  forbidden  to  continue,  or  even 




forcibly restrained. The only explanation that I can find is that his power 




over his pupils was such that no single individual was willing to take the 




responsibility of totally denying what he had told me. 




A   C H A P T E R   O F   A C C I D E N T S   291




Mme. de Hartmann took over the administration of the Prieur6, while 




her  husband  and  Mme.  Ostrowsky  helped  Dr.  Stoerneval  to  nurse 




Gurdjieff for the month or so before he was up and about. Jean Toomer, 




who arrived in the aftermath of the tragedy, found that “gloom hung over 




the place. Little or no work was going on and that half-heartedly.” The 




responsibility of deputizing for the Master, and even of caring for him, 




almost  overwhelmed  the  older  disciples.  According  to  Thomas  de 




Hartmann, “We felt we had to protect him, though we might be wrong. We 




did  not  know  his  real  condition.  How  could  we?  But  to  let  him  do 




everything like a healthy person—as for instance, to drive a car again quite 




soon—^we felt obliged to stop him. We had to do it and to try to do it in such 




a way that no one could notice it and that he himself would not reahse our 




intention if he really were still not quite recovered. ” 




Gurdjieff at length appeared in the gardens. “His head was bandaged and 




his eyes concealed behind dark glasses. His sight was so impaired that he 




did not recognise us,” writes Nott. “Against the doctor’s instructions and 




w^arnings he had made a tremendous effort to get up. At first he would take 




a few steps, then stop. After fifteen minutes he was taken back to bed. But 




each day he stayed a little longer and walked a little further. ” It seemed that 




Gurdjieff’s proverbial contempt for his body’s demands was once more 




being demonstrated as he urged it on its unwilling passage. Jean Toomer 




felt a terrible disappointment when he compared the man of power he had 




admired  in  New  York  with  this  pathetic  figure  “who  bore  almost  no 




resemblance to the Gurdjieff I had seen moving around. . . . Once begun, 




Gurdjieff’s daily walks with his two companions continued rain or shine. 




My impression was that he took each walk as he took each step, deliberately 




and with unswerving determination. He did not speak to anyone—or show 




any recognition of their existence, if he saw them at all. ” 




The second phase of Gurdjieff’s recovery, as his pupils saw it, began 




when he was able to superintend work from his chair. He directed that 




large numbers of trees be felled and burned before him; and it was thought 




fliat he drew a form of strength from the blaze. “This continued, ” in Nott’s 




■words, “until it looked as if we should have to cut down half the forest to 




fceep the fires going.” At length Gurdjieff called a halt, and more general 




Work  began.  The  Prieure  regained  something  of  its  former  animation. 




Toomer found that “things began to hum. ” 




It was perfectly amazing what his presence did. Extra life, extra zest, 




extra power, extra will sprang up in us. Everybody worked hard all day 




long and sometimes into the night. The project was to clear a space in 




the woods along the road for a new kitchen garden. I sawed the trunks 




of felled trees into three-foot lengths. At the other end of the two-man




292 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




saw was an Englishwoman with more stamina than five men. She was 




the pacemaker, and I had to keep up. 




By  the  autumn,  Toomer  felt  in  magnificent  physical  condition.  He 




wanted  no  other  life.  Nott  reports  that  everyone  was  hoping  that  the 




Institute would resume its normal functioning. But there was another shock 




in store, what Toomer called “a bolt”:




Gurdjiefi" one fine day called every person on the place to gather round 




him. Then he simply announced that he would close the Institute— 




“liquidate” it was his word. Would we please never again refer to it as 




the Institute. That was finished. It was to be known from now as  

Le

 




 

Prieure

 only, his home where he would invite those sympathetic to 




him personally. “All my life I have lived for others,” he said. “Now I 




will live for myself a while. ” 




The pupils were given two days to move out. Nott and his friends were 




flabbergasted: “We did no more work that day, but talked among ourselves, 




trying to discover if anyone understood what it was all about. ‘Is this,’ we 




asked, ‘the end of all the hopes that have been raised in us? Has everything 




really  come  to  an  end?  Is  his  work  really  finished?’  Everyone  was 




mystified—old pupils as well as young. ” 




According to Nott, most of the Russians and some Americans left the 




Prieure for good. “They took him literally.” Everyone, except for Gurd- 




jielf’s  family  and  his  closest  associates,  did  leave  for  a  short  time;  but 




gradually the more obstinate came drifting back. Nott’s account treats the 




dispersal as an obvious “test”—rather as Thomas de Hartmann had treated 




Gurdjieif ’s announcements in the Caucasus that he was going to abandon 




work. But despite the Chekhovian sadness of the Russian pupils, it may be 




wondered  whether  Gurdjieff’s  directive  was  not—at  least  as  far  as  it 




concerned them—intended to be taken at its face value. He was undoubtedly still supporting many of the general mass of Russians at the Prieure; some had no great interest in his work, but for a Russian emigrant in the 




early 1920s it was next to impossible to find lucrative employment. Life 




inside  the  chateau  walls  was  almost  certainly  more  tolerable  than  life 




outside  it,  even  if  the  provider  of  life’s  necessities  exercised  an  incomprehensible discipline within his domain. Jessie Dwight’s memory of the dismissal is that Gurdjieff’s sense was clear: he would have no more 




parasites. And indeed, those summarily evicted had quickly to find jobs in 




Paris. Olgivanna became an attendant in a women’s lavatory. 




The “test” aspect was certainly present. As the more obstinate pupils 




drifted back, it emerged that Gurdjieff would allow the Americans to stay. 




A   C H A P T E R   O F   A C C I D E N T S   293




Jessie Dwight had been directed not to take part in the general exodus, and 




both Nott and Toomer remained with some half-dozen younger recruits 




from the United States. It was announced that GurdjiefF was to go away to 




take a cure, and that the remaining faithful would be granted interviews 




before  he  left.  Toomer’s  apprehensiveness  overcame  him:  “I  was  to 




confront a man whose knowledge and power I reverenced, who was not 




himself I had no means of measuring to what degree he was not himself.” 




In his terror, his questions vanished—a common occurrence with pupils 




who confronted Gurdjieff, and one which happened on this occasion to Nott 




also. It was decided that Toomer might stay, but after reflection the novelist 




concluded  that,  as  the  situation  stood,  he  would  gain  more  from  an 




association with Orage in New York. He “was hungry for ideas, real ideas.” 




Nott  had  decided  to  leave  in  order  to  establish  himself  in  business. 




Gurdjieff apparently succeeded in persuading even the most tenacious that 




their proper place was not in the Prieure. 




The  obvious  reluctance  of  Gurdjieff  to  continue  teaching  as  before 




prevented further neophytes from crossing the Atlantic. Margaret Naum- 




burg  had  spent  most  of  the  summer  trying  to  leave;  and  now,  by  the 




autumn, found that events had forestalled her. Until the last minute, she 




was hoping to sail, despite her knowledge of the accident and the possibility 




that Orage—^who had gone to France to see Gurdjieff—would forbid any 




further visitors to Fontainebleau. On October 3, 1924, she wrote to Jean 




Toomer  who  was  still  at  the  Prieur6  that  she  was  on  tenterhooks  lest 




Orage’s return prevent her own departure. She was apprehensive about the 




efifect the news of Gurdjieff ’s condition might have on the converts in New 




York, but expected that Orage would say as little as possible. 




Orage’s position was decided for him by necessity, which meant money. 




For the work to continue, an incapacitated Gurdjieff must be kept in funds 




and sometime in the autumn after the great dispersal, Orage set sail for 




France to discover how matters stood. He was probably at the Prieure by 




the end of September or the beginning of October. On what basis affairs 




proceeded between him and GurdjieflF, we can only guess, but the upshot 




was that he returned to New York in November with Jessie Dwight to carry 




on groups started by Orage after the demonstrations of the winter and early 




Spring. 




Between midsummer and autumn of 1924, the fact of Gurdjieff ’s accident 




completely altered the complexion of his work. The interpretation of the 




accident sJtered it still further. 




Was it an accident? Gurdjieff ’s reputation as a dangerous driver, his 




heavy  meal,  and  the  possibility  of  overwork  could  all  point  to  pure 




mischance. He may have had the car checked carefully because he had




294 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




simply  felt  that  there  might  be  something  wrong  with  the  steering. 




Innumerable causes of a completely accidental nature could have sent him 




off the road into the tree. 




If it was an accident, this was a real shock. Jean Toomer’s reaction was 




shared by most of the disciples. “I did not believe it,” he wrote. “I did not 




believe that a man of G.’s order was subject to the accidents that befall 




ordinary  men.”  This  was  not  mere  hero  worship,  but  followed  from 




Gurdjieff’s  proclaimed  doctrine.  “Man  lives  in  life   

under  the  law  of

 




 

accident,” 

 he had told Ouspensky in Russia. Ordinary sleeping man could 




begin to free himself from all the mechanical influences which determined 




his actions only through other influences which had their source “outside 




life”  in  the  “inner  circle”  of  humanity.  This  meant,  to  all  intents  and 




purposes, GurdjieflF’s Work. By “work on himself,” man could escape from 




the mechanical law of accident and place himself under the law of fate which 




governed his real essence. Surely the Master himself had escaped from 




mechanical laws? 




Ouspensky remembered what Gurdjieff had taught, and his own teaching 




transmitted the doctrine of accident and fate. His later position is recorded 




in the book.  

The Fourth Way. 




 

Questioner:

 When do we cease to be under the law of accident? 




 

Ouspensky:

 When we develop will. To be completely free from the law 




of accident is very far, but there are different stages between complete 




freedom and our present position. . . . The theory of accidents is very 




simple. They happen only when the place is empty; if the place is 




occupied,  they  cannot  happen.  Occupied  by  what?  By  conscious 




actions. 




Some days after the car crash of July 5, Ouspensky came to France. His 




stepdaughter  and  Mme.  Ouspensky  were  still  at  the  Institute,  but  as 




Ouspensky himself had now broken publicly with GurdjiefiF, he had to 




content himself with telephoning them. He visited the crossroads where 




the  Citroen  had  crashed,  in  the  company  of  Boris  MouravieflF,  who 




remembered him as:




. . . despondent and crushed. AAer a prolonged silence, he said to me: 




“I’m frightened. . . . This is dreadful . . . Georgeivanitch’s Institute 




was established to escape from the influence of the law of accident 




under which men spend their lives. Well, see how he himself has &llen 




under  the  influence  of  this  very  law  ...  I  still  wonder  whether  it's 




really a pure accident?—Gurdjieff used always to make light of honesty




A   C H A P T E R   O F   A C C I D E N T S   295




together with all the rest of human personality. Has he not gone too 




far?—I tell you, I’m terribly afraid!” 




MouravielBF lunched with Ouspensky in Fontainebleau, and during the 




meal his friend kept returning to the question of integrity. “Obviously,” 




wrote MouravieflF, “the problem formed for him a sort of axis. And in 




consequence of for me unfathomable reasons, he would link the question of 




integrity  and  the  accident  which  befell  Gurdjieff.”  Later  MouravieflF 




remembered  a  conversation  which  he  connected  with  this  concern  of 




Ouspensky’s.  They  had  dined  well  in  the  Place  Saint-Michel  and  had 




adjourned, as was Ouspensky’s custom when in Paris during the 1920s, to 




tiie bars of Montmartre. Since his breach with Gurdjieff, MouravieflF had 




been trying in vain to persuade Ouspensky to discuss his former Master. 




Without warning, he asked him directly why he avoided such a discussion. 




Suddenly, his expression changed. I had the impression that before me 




there was  

another man, 

 and no more the one with whom I had spent 




the whole of a pleasant evening in the most interesting discussions. He 




turned  abruptly  back  to  me  and  said  in  a  strange  tone  of  voice: 




“Imagine that a member of the family has committed a crime. In the 




femily, one doesn’t talk of it!” 




MouravieflF  is  certain  that  the  question  was  intimately  related  in 




Ouspensky’s mind to the accident; and it seems as if Ouspensky thought it 




possible that the disaster was in some way a punishment for Gurdjieff 




havmg oflFended against heaven. Had they been wrong all this time, had 




Sbey felled to recognize something fundamentally evil in this teaching? 




Gurdjieff had said that his Fourth Way was “against Nature, against God.” 




Was this “accident” a proof of his infallibility—or was it divine punishment 




tor his distortion of the truth? 




Whatever interpretation is put on Ouspensky’s strange conduct, even a 




sfeictly materialist view of the accident itself could lead his followers into 




the empyrean. Another explanation went the rounds: Nott attributes it to a 




&nciful  lady,  a  theosophist,”  who  “spoke  mysteriously  of  the  ‘dark 




l»ethren’ who were trying to destroy GurdjieflF’s work.” He does not reveal 




fte full details of the plot; but it has been enlarged by word of mouth until 




4ie dark brethren are said to have suborned the trees themselves to bend 




down and sweep GurdjieflF oflF the road. It is an uncomfortable fact that in 




his  

Third Series, 

 GurdjieflF gave some countenance to the babblings of the 




lunatic  fringe;  but  the  question  of  why  he  did  so  is—as  always  with 




GurdjieflF—^problematic. Apparently, it suited him once more to play the




296 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“maestro of the supernatural. ” He may have wanted to batten on to one 




particular fantasist. Or it may have been a test to single out sheep from 




goats. Or, of course, he may have meant it, and we may all be finding 




excuses for him to save our own self-images. 




Accept a completely normal interpretation of the accident—mechanical 




failure, bad driving, bad luck, or drowsiness. There is no puppet master 




pulling the strings, no cosmic significance attached to the crash. Gurdjieff 




has collided with a tree, severely lacerated his hands and is concussed for 




five days. Afterward he is seen not to be the same man; virtue has gone out 




of  him,  and  he  completely  changes  the  pattern  of  his  life.  There  is  a 




perfectly simple explanation for this, and it has been eagerly adopted by 




certain followers of Ouspensky who wish to justify their teacher’s break with 




his master: GurdjiefF sustained severe injuries to his head, and was never 




the same man again. His mind deteriorated and he ended in delusion. 




Even so, there are some inexplicable features of Olga de Hartmann’s 




story of July 5. GurdjiefF seemed to make provision for work to go on in his 




absence, he required a careful check of his vehicle and he sent Mme. de 




Hartmann home by herself Did he foresee the accident? The voice, too; 




what about the voice which called “Olga Arcadievna"? The Great Magician 




has crashed, and anything is possible. 




None of the accounts of the incident has ever been fully explicit, but 




through them all runs a suspicion that everything was not what it seemed. 




The evidence points to the fact that GurdjiefF knew he was going to crash. 




He made his legal disposition and sent home the secretary who in the 




normal  course  of  events  would  have  traveled  with  him.  Thomas  de 




Hartmann  remembers  that  when  he  returned  from  the  United  States, 




GurdjiefiF  regarded  his  pupils  “vrith  a  very  serious  expression.”  The 




composer connects this with the accident which followed: “We did not 




know then what awaited us.” This is typical of the masterly equivocation 




with which some of the memoirs of GurdjiefF are written. 




GurdjiefF must have arranged his accident himself




The  crash  itself  is  easily  explained,  but  not  certain  aspects  of  it. 




Gurdjie£F’s car had after all been checked thoroughly—^particularly the 




steering gear which Mme. de Hartmann suggests caused the accident. If 




GurdjiefF had been proposing to crash his own car, he would have had to be 




quite sure that it was in perfect working order. A slight misjudgment, and 




he  would  have  been  killed.  Nott’s  account  of  the  state  of  the  Citroen 




admittedly shows that if GurdjiefF staged an accident, he did it thoroughly; 




although what else would one expect from a man who used the Russian 




Civil War as a backdrop to his productions? He was found lying by the side 




of the road with his head on a cushion and supposedly no memory of how he 




had gotten there. The Sly Man would not have been above a little comfort




A   C H A P T E R   O F   A C C I D E N T S   297




while he waited. His injuries are rather mysterious. Lacerated arms and 




hands could be inflicted on himself by a particularly strong-willed man; and 




there should be no doubt that if GurdjiefF was no magician, he was at least 




extraordinary enough to disregard physical pain for the sake of his work. 




Head  injuries  appear  to  have  been  limited  to  severe  concussion.  Note 




well—^there was no objection to Gurdjieff’s leaving the hospital; and there 




were no bones broken. Then, as soon as possible, he was removed from 




external medical care and placed, first under the supervision of two Russian 




doctors  from  Paris,  next  under  the  charge  of  Mme.  de  Hartmann,  Dr. 




Stoemaval, and Mme. Ostrowsky. Apart from the possibility of collusion 




with his staff and the doctors, Gurdjieff’s own medical knowledge probably 




extended to counterfeiting the symptoms of concussion for a nonmedical 




audience, and may even have helped him to judge the impact of his car 




against the tree. 




Now reconsider the events of his arrival back at the Prieure. He looked 




directly at Jessie Dwight, who also remembers Dr. Stoerneval slamming 




the door of the car which brought him home—in a manner not calculated to 




help  a patient suffering from concussion. Jean Toomer’s comments on 




Gurdjieff ’s recovery are couched in suggestive language. The italics are 




mine. “What I saw,  

as my impressions registered it, 

 was not a strong man, 




not a great man, not a man.  

I saw

 a little shrunken old person. . . .” Some 




people may have wondered whether the accident was genuine, but we are 




not  told  directly.  At  least  to  the  sharp-eyed  Fritz  Peters,  there  was  an 




element of doubt. He thought he had seen Gurdjieff watching his stubborn 




lawn mowing from a window. Some months after the great man emerged, 




Peters was detailed to walk behind him carrying a chair on which he could 




Sest. Gurdjieff told his attendant that he was “almost blind” and that he did 




not want to worry the others. In his  

Boyhood with Gurdjieff, 

 Fritz Peters 




wonders whether or not this was the case, although at the time, he writes, 




“I  was  sufficiently  convinced  of  his  blindness,  because  he  frequently 




wandered from the path.” 




The accident was a large-scale test for all Gurdjieff’s pupils and camp 




followers. If the de Hartmanns are sincere in recording their consternation, 




it seems to have worked even on those close to Gurdjieff. An experiment, 




then, to see how the menagerie would function without its keeper; to see 




who would obey instructions given them before the accident and who 




would forget in the crisis induced by the tragedy. It does not seem that 




many people passed the test, and this must have interested the Sly Man 




profoundly. How would his personal staff behave; An Armenian pupil called 




Mme. Galumnian, in fact, started classes in movements, and Thomas de 




Hartmann played Gurdjieff’s music. The rest seem to have waited upon the 




Master. How would the younger pupils behave? It is clear that without




298 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjieflF’s physical presence few intimations of new meaning could be 




extracted from physical tasks. 




On a broader canvas, the accident furnished a magnificent source of 




worry  and  friction  to  the  more  credulous.  Who  had  in  fact  learned 




anything?  Gurdjieff  would  be  able  to  see  the  position  of  many  of  his 




disciples more clearly than before; and by such a large shock, he would be 




able to test the temperature of his work as a whole. Who needed it, who 




were freeloaders, who were devoted to him personally and who to his 




ideas? 




A  thought  that  is  perhaps  unworthy—but  maybe  merely  realistic— 




crosses the mind. It might have been very convenient for Gurdjieff, just at 




this juncture, to change his spots. He had overworked himself to bring his 




pupils up to the standard required for a fund-raising and publicity tour. This 




had not been a huge success from the material point of view. It was time for 




a number of his subordinates to take some responsibility for the Work, and 




he would “live for himself” for a period. He now had a pleasant house and a 




possible  source  of  income  which  could  be  tapped  at  any  time  by  his 




appearance as the Great Magician. 




Or simply, he may have wanted a change in the repertory. Perhaps he 




had seen that the methods which he had intended to use would not prove 




effective  in  the  delicate  business  of  enlightening  the  West.  His  brief 




acquaintance with Europe and the United States may have caused him tp 




revise his plans—^what were his plans?—and decide that his methods would 




turn his disciples into a troupe of performing animals. The silly sheep did as 




they were told. Another production was called for, with a much smaller 




cast. It may be, after all, that the burst of publicity which Gurdjieff had 




invited was designed to attract a large number of people for a short time, so 




that he could filter them quickly through a fine mesh. Who would commit 




themselves wholeheartedly to the task which he proposed? 




All these possibilities are implied by the idea that Gurdjieff faked his 




accident, and by its predictable results. On the widest scale the changes 




were decisive. For Gurdjieff himself it meant a completely altered pattern 




of  activity,  for  Ouspensky  an  intense  inner  crisis,  for  every  pupil  or 




prospective pupil agonized heart-searching as all the conflicting possibilities 




were passed in review. For Orage it meant that he was on his own in a 




foreign country. 




Gurdjieff’s own comment on the incident, in  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 refers to 




his deliberations three months after the crash. “I then reflected,” he writes, 




“that the attempt to preserve the existence of this institution would, in the 




absence of real people round me and owing to the impossibility of procuring 




without me the great material means required for it, inevitably lead lo a 




catastrophe the result of which, among other things for me in my old age as




A   C H A P T E R   O F   A C C I D E N T S   299




well as for numerous others wholly dependent on me, would be, so to say, a 




‘vegetation.’” 




So variety is the spice—^the red pepper—^also of the spiritual life? Or did 




he not mean what he said? There is a final possibility more confusing than 




any yet mentioned. Gurdjieff may have arranged his “accident” badly. The 




evidence  indicates  that  he  had  staged  the  scene—but  perhaps  he  had 




miscalculated and hurt himself in sober fact. 




6




Per Americam ad Beelzebub




For the second time in his life Orage found himself a “pupil-teacher. ” The 




phrase was his own; and his early experience as a schoolmaster should not 




be forgotten. For all the brilliance of his career in the great days of the  

New

 




 

Age, 

 it is the late 1920s which appear as Orage’s apotheosis—the time when 




his real inclinations operated at their greatest power and to maximum 




effect. For nearly five years, he had the American field to himself and built 




up a personal following as devoted as any he had inspired in Leeds or 




London. 




For much of the 1920s, Gurdjieff existed for American followers of his 




ideas chiefly as a subject of rumor and speculation. Some people had met 




him on the 1924 trip, and a few paid visits to Fontainebleau; but it was only 




the Master’s shadow which stretched across the Atlantic to reinforce with its 




obscurely menacing authority Orage’s own. Orage’s teaching was quite 




individual, and one of his pupils dubbed it, “the 5ragean Version.” 




In November 1924, Orage began his career as an independent teacher of 




Gurdjieff’s ideas. That month  

Century

 magazine published his “Talks with 




Katherine Mansfield,” and on December 3 the  

New Republic

 printed his 




essay “On Love.” Before Orage’s visit to Fontainebleau, Herbert Croly had 




published two scenes of “Unedited Opinions ” in which the Englishman had 




confined himself to literary matters, and on December 31, Orage contributed another column under this heading. This time the motive was frankly 300




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   301




propagandist. His topic was “Religion in America.” As Orage saw it, the 




Americans  had  confused  humanitarianism  with  the  central  object  of 




religion,  which  was  “the  divinisation  of  man.”  By  this  he  meant  “the 




development in man of relatively divine qualities and, particularly, of a 




relatively transcendent and divine state of consciousness.” 




The assumptions, implicit and explicit, of all religions are, first, that 




our present normal state of consciousness is not enough, however 




developed, to satisfy the demands of the perfect life; and second, that 




there are special means or, if you will, exercises and modes of living, 




comprehended as religion, designed to enable man to attain a higher 




state of consciousness in this life. 




America did not seem prepared, Orage remarked, to  

“risk" 

 very much on 




religion; all the disciplines which achieved popularity—such as psychoanalysis and Christian Science—promised immediate benefits. He admitted that no European country had adopted religion in his sense of the term, 




“but the tradition lingers like the warm ashes of an old fire. An individual 




can still catch a flame from it. . . Europe is rapidly losing what America has 




never had. The only question is whether America can snatch the torch 




before it is cold.” There may have been more to this appeal than Orage’s 




immediate mission. GurdjiefF himself later placed great stress on America 




as a field for spreading his ideas, and it may be that even at this stage— 




perhaps particularly because of the unsettled political condition of Europe—the United States had assumed this importance in his eyes. 




An undated circular among the Toomer papers sets down the principles 




on which Orage based his organization. “It is proposed to form a number of 




small groups for the study of the GurdjiefF system,” it begins. The groups 




were to consist of both men and women and number between six and ten 




people. Meetings were to be held weekly, and Orage would “attend as 




many meetings as possible.” There was one strong prohibition; “Nobody 




should attend more than one group.” 




The greatest success of the spring demonstrations had been to interest 




the duennas of the salons, and Orage built on these earlier conquests. He 




numbered among his devotees Mrs. Meredith Hare, Muriel Draper, and 




the  ubiquitous  Mabel  Dodge  Luhan,  who  for  a  dozen  years  had  been 




superintending a literary salon intended to rival that of Gertrude Stein in 




Paris. Groups met in Jane Heap’s house on the Lower East Side, in the 




homes  of  Meredith  Hare  and  Mabel  Luhan,  and  also  in  Margaret 




Naumburg’s Walden School. Sometimes Orage supervised weekends at 




Mabel Luhan’s house at Croton-on-Hudson. In the event, his groups were 




considerably larger than the cells of six to ten people which the circular had




302 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




envisaged, and his audiences numbered between thirty and fifty. Gorham 




Munson has described one assembly at Muriel Draper’s which included 




himself  and  his  wife,  Mabel  Luhan  and  her  husband  Tony,  the  artist 




Boardman Roginson, the art critic Carl Zigrosser, the poets R. Elsworth 




Lawson  and  Schuyler  Jackson;  Rita  Romilly,  Edwin  Wolfe,  and  Helen 




Westley from the theatrical world; and such oddly assorted characters as 




Edna Kenton, Jean Toomer and the Pinchot brothers; Herbert Croly and 




T.  S.  Matthews;  Jane  Heap  and   

The  Little  Review

  “office  boy,”  Caesar 




Zwaska. At the same time, writes Munson, another group which included 




Waldo  Frank  and  John  O’Hara  Cosgrave  was  meeting  at  the  house  of 




Meredith Hare. 




The roll call includes both the eminent and the eccentric. Jeffrey Mark, 




another member of the groups, who at the time was head of the music 




section at the New York PubHc Library, decided that he and his associates 




had a better claim to the title of “the hundred neediest cases” than the usual 




beneficiaries  of  Christmas  charity.  An editorial in the   

New Republic

 for 




January 14, 1925 took up the remark shortly after Orage had begun his 




ministry.  “At  some  future  time  when  the  world  has  grown  wiser,  the 




hundred  neediest  cases  for  whom  aid  and  sympathy  are  asked  at  the 




Christmas season, will not be composed of those suffering merely material 




and physical ills. It will be realized that spiritual misery is the truly heartrending form of need, and its victims have the greatest claim upon human sympathy.” 




The meetings presented a bizarre appearance. Some of the participants 




remember Jane Heap arriving in tuxedo smoking a cigar, Muriel Draper 




wearing a turban of silk stockings and—the totem and prize exhibit of the 




groups—Mabel  Dodge  Luhan’s  exotic  Indian  husband,  Tony.  Claude 




Bragdon recalled him “wrapped in his imperturbable dignity and bright red 




blanket. I could not but contrast the made-up, strained faces of most of the 




women present with his bronzed, calm, inscrutable mask. The air was thick 




with cigarette smoke, the raucous noises from the street competed with the 




voice  of  Orage  as  he  lighted  one  cigarette  after  another—and  from 




another—^while he told about (sic) the necessity of self-observation to the 




rest  of us—including Tony. It was primitive man and civilised man in 




dramatic juxtaposition. ” 




For three years Waldo Frank attended one of Orage’s groups. In a sketch 




entitled  “Mystery  in  a  Sack  Suit,”  published  under  the  pseudonym 




“Searchlight,” Frank directed the attention of  

New Yorker

 readers to:




. little knots of people scattered about town in comfortable places




very  intent,  largely  silent  . . . .   editors,  wives  of  Wall  Street, 




professors, novelists, single girls, restless businessinen, artistic youths. 




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   303




Here were true intellectuals who despised Greenwich Village. Here 




were socially elect who looked down upon Park Avenue as a gilded 




slum. . . . listening with passionate concern to a man they call Orage 




(pronounce it precisely like the French for  

storm). . . . 




“With a most humane smile,” writes Frank, “Orage blights the claims of 




humaneness. With valedictory sentiment, wipes sentiment off the slate. 




With logic swift as a machine, he discredits logic. With courteous manner, 




drops spiritual bombs into the laps of ladies who adore him.” In the words 




of Elizabeth Munson, Orage had “a terrible eye for the otiose”: a trait which 




Frank noticed also. “Orage looks like a boy and his shoulders are sharp. 




They have a way of shrugging—shrugging ofiF fads and facts and systems at a 




pace poor slow old England could not hope to keep up with.” 




Although the lecturer’s charm was having its customary effect, there 




were a few dissenting voices. Frank had to defend Orage against critics who 




despised the worldly brilliance of his following, and reminded them that the 




Buddha had been supported by “snobbish Brahmins and the rich youth of 




Benares.” The more disillusioned Orageans—those who wryly considered 




themselves “the hundred neediest cases” or in T. S. Matthews’ phrase, “a 




pretty job lot”—might wonder a little about the degree of consciousness 




exhibited by their spell-binding instructor. The chain smoking which 




nicotined his fingers, his manner of lighting one cigarette from another with 




“slightly trembling hands”—was Orage entirely conscious of these deeply 




ingrained habits? 




Among Orage’s critics was Edmund Wilson, who resisted the pressures 




put on him by the  

New Republic

 circle to join a group. Orage appeared “a 




feereal  and  to  me  distasteful  person.”  Another  critic  was  Orage’s  old 




companion of the Caf6 Royal, Jacob Epstein, who arrived in New York in 




1927 and was most unfavorably impressed by the adulation given to his 




friend by “cranks of all sorts.” 




The  audiences  which  came  under  Orage’s  goad  in  fact  represented, 




•considerably more than the predictable collection of Theosophists, camp 




followers,  and adoring  spinsters. Besides the  more or less literary and 




artistic  celebrities,  there  were  a  number  of  men  of  a  scientific  bent, 




including John Riordan, a young engineer who was a friend of William 




Carlos Williams, and Charles Daly King. Daly King (1895-1962) became an 




important commentator on Gurdjieff and Orage; and in fact was one of the 




few people to develop the ideas derived from Gurdjieff in a novel direction. 




He is described by Dr. William Welch, who became his pupil in the 




mid-1930s, as “at heart a romantic, a lovable, pugnacious, well-to-do semidropout from the world of conventional ideas.” “Daly”—^as he was known— 




had first been attracted by the demonstration of Gurdjieff s movements. 




304 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




and  was  encouraged  by  Jessie  Dwight  to  attend  Orage’s  groups.  He 




presents the interesting spectacle of a psychologist—a maverick, it is true, 




but still a psychologist—^who chose his profession as a result of the Work. 




He appointed himself the custodian of Orage’s teaching, and in 1951 issued 




a summary under the title of  

The Oragean Version. 

 One hundred copies 




were printed, most of which were given to former Orageans or presented to 




pubhc libraries. Apart from some jottings made by C. S. Nott, it is through 




Daly King that Orage’s technique has been preserved. 




The lucid and contemporary form in which Orage presented GurdjielF’s 




ideas gave an unnerving complexion to his meetings; for whoever heard of a 




guru more concerned with Eddington and Whitehead than with mystic 




verbiage and asceticism? There was little of the wild-eyed desert father or 




the sitter on bo trees in Orage; yet he spoke familiarly of the wisdoms of 




antiquity  and  brought  into  the  conversation  Christianity  or  the 




 

Mahabharata. 

 In his  

New Yorker

 article, Waldo Frank hit on the uncanny 




effect which this created; Orage was “mystery  

in a sack suit,” 

 a contradiction in  terms. There  was something  slightly terrifying  about him. “He believes in literally nothing.  

Nothing that is, 

 I mean. This is what makes 




him so detached. . . . ” 




The teacher was playing a role and impressions of him varied. One pupil 




remarked on his “steely toughness, ” another on the “quiet brilliance ” which 




taught “pacifically” without undue pressure. Another noted his “ease of 




manner” and the simplicity of presentation which concealed the depths of 




what he taught. Yet to another he seemed a man vwth “great patience and 




understanding” but “terribly involved.” 




The meetings were usually scheduled for eight o’clock, although Orage 




rarely made his appearance until an hour later. They lasted for two or three 




hours and took the form of an extended discussion—sometimes prolonged 




for  a  select  band  into  the  early  hours  of  the  morning.  Orage  never 




“lectured,” although he “talked” at length, and his old skill—developed in 




the  

New Age

 gatherings—at subtly organizing debate came back into play. 




His technique is outlined in a note of Toomer’s intended as an  

aide-memoire

 




for his ovra teaching; 




In special terms the effort should be to impregnate a conception. Since 




the terms that are familiar to those present are unknown, since the 




special type of ideas that appeal to each are likewise unknown, it is 




necessary to broadcast, to speak with many terms and ideas in the hope 




that conception will take place in all. I should hold clearly in my mind 




the attitude of the “I ” that is to be conceived, this being separate from




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   305




and capable of development separate from the organism—the aim 




being  to  conceive  it,  develop  it,  in  order  that  it  may  control  the 




organism. 




Gorham Munson remembers that Orage’s cunningly hidden hand gave 




the discussions “much more shape than is common ... he usually kept 




things related to a basis for discourse and manipulated them towards a 




definite conclusion. ” Because of this fluid approach, we can form no idea of 




the sequence of Orage’s exposition; and  

The Oragean Version

 is no help, 




because Daly King was unable to do more than synthesize the essentials. 




How Orage began a session would probably depend on the mood of the 




group. Perhaps it would be a striking phrase like that remembered by T. S. 




Matthews:  “There  is  not  a  soul  in  this  room.”  One  of  his  favorite 




introductions is recorded by Daly King, and it is straightforward Aristotle. 




Jliis is the division of reality into categories of the Actual and the Potential. 




At one particular moment, for example, we are occupied in reading a book. 




But we might be holding, instead of the book, a glass of beer, a fishing rod, 




or a rifle. In certain circumstances these are all possible objects for us to 




hold, and we are even quite likely to take part in the activities which they 




Suggest. Thus in Orage’s distinction, if the Actual state of reality consists in 




our holding a book and engaging in the activity of reading, all these other 




objects and activities form part of the Potential state. Excluded from the 




Potential are examples of the manifestly impossible—^for example, the idea 




that  we  are  holding  a  railway  engine  or  the  remarkable  interstellar 




communicator invented in the year 3000 on Procyon 4. Reality, in Orage’s 




definition, includes both that which is happening and that which may 




happen; while unreality includes all impossibilities—^whether actual impossibilities or potential. Accepted science treats man only as he actually exists, tod takes no account of his potential existence. In the syllogism, science, 




Iflierefore, only considers one part of human reality and ignores the other, 




©rage admitted that this might be quite right and proper, but insisted that 




GurdjieflF’s singularity was to consider man also  

as he may become. 

 Not as 




man in quotation marks,” in other words, but as Potential Man. 




 

The Oragean Version

 begins with a brief introduction to Gurdjieflf’s Laws 




ut  rhree  and  Seven,  and  with  a  vague  reference  to  the  source  of  this 




knowledge in “Esoteric Schools.” This sets the tone of Orage’s treatment of 




the forms of the ideas themselves: Gurdjieff plus Ouspensky. Orage had 




absorbed Gurdjieff’s ideas at the source, but had also experienced them 




filtered through Ouspensky, and some of Ouspensky s ovm preoccupations, 




such as eternal recurrence, found a place in his exposition. He was sparing




306 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




with his material, but his treatment of the structure of the human machine 




and the plan of the universe follows his teachers in almost every detail. 




His presentation, however, was founded on a metaphor of his own. The 




image is that of explorers setting out to investigate an unknown continent. 




They have never been there; in the last resort all they have to prove the 




existence of the  

terra incognita

 is a map, and they cannot test its accuracy 




until they undertake the voyage and can match the features of the landscape 




against  the  printed  contour  lines.  But  a  map  they  must  have,  even  to 




execute a landing, and the expedition would be impossible without it. 




Orage provided his followers with two “maps.” The first was Gurdjielf’s 




account of the human machine: the three centers, with their different parts; 




the mechanicality of man; the various sorts of “food” which the organism 




must  ingest.  The  second—a  larger  projection  altogether—consisted  of 




Gurdjieff’s cosmology with additional material in the form of Ouspensky’s 




speculations on time and recurrence. But the distinguishing mark of the 




Oragean  version  was  the  vessel  in  which  his  disciples  were  to  sail. 




Explorers must have a ship to transport them; and the ship of which Orage 




was captain was called “the Method.” 




He customarily led up to the Method by stressing the mechanicality of 




man. He was greatly helped by the popularity of behaviorist psychology as 




purveyed by Dr. John B. Watson; and newcomers would be cast into the 




depths of despair by Orage’s picture of man as a machine. Then came the 




punch line: the Method provided a way out of man’s desperate situation. 




The  Method  was  the  center  of  gravity  of  Orage’s  teaching,  and  as  a 




catchword, it came to be synonymous with his name or that of Gurdjieff. In 




Daly King’s record, it is divided into two parts which the psychologist 




assumed were not complete. 




The  first  part  consisted  of  the  activity  which  Ouspensky  has  made 




familiar—self-observation.  But  according  to  the  Oragean  version, 




Ouspensky  left  out  most  of  the  details  of  this  process.  Simple  “selfobservation” is only the first of three processes which must be experienced. 




Orage began by stressing the Pythagorean precept of “Know thyself’ and 




holding his pupils to it most Hterally. He advised them to get on terms with 




the self with whom they would have to live most of their life. They were to 




start with basics—^what did they look like, for example? They were told to 




list their physical characteristics, and if possible to. have a friend film their 




movements. A questionnaire was suggested—^what does this creature X 




(yourself) like, dislike, look forward to, fear? What would he like to be, to 




know or to do? What have been his happiest and unhappiest moments, 




what are the characteristics of his personality, and how does he assess 




them? Why does he fear to die? There were further tasks: such as a Survey 




of  one’s  life  conducted  as  impartially  as  possible,  and  another  Which




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   3 0 7




involved a nightly review of the events of the day imagined as the unrolling 




of a cinema film. These exercises were designed to give the pupil an idea of 




himself  in  his  mechanical  state  and  were  mere  preliminaries  to  Self- 




Observation. 




The  technique  was  usually  known  among  the  Orageans  as  “Self- 




Observation without identification”; but the phrase, “without identification” was only one of a number of strictures by which Orage defined this very troublesome activity. Self-Observation implies the separation of the 




sense  of  “I”  from  the  physical  body.  The  observing   

“I” 

  must  not 




“identify”—in Gurdjieff’s phrase—^with the thing observed. Neither must 




there be any inclination for the observer to criticize what it sees, to alter 




what it dislikes, or to analyze what it finds. Self-Observation must take 




place in all conditions at all times; for this is the Method of the man in the 




world, the Fourth Way. Orage enumerated the various aspects of human 




activity to which Self-Observation might be applied. The recommended 




categories were posture, gesture, movement, facial expression, and tone of 




voice. The exercise was also to be conducted with all possible senses. An 




example given in  

The Oragean Version

 is the observation of one’s crossed 




legs. They are easily observed visually; but another source of information is 




provided by muscular tension. Orage’s catalog of senses spilled over from 




the accepted five to include temperature, pain, the sense of balance, and 




the pulse. The core of the matter was that the observing “I” should not 




identify with the data which it contemplated. The technique applied only to 




the physical body and, at least to begin with, the pupils were not deemed 




advanced  enough  to  be  able  to  observe  an  emotion  or  a  thought.  An 




undated note by Jean Toomer on the sort of activity attempted is glossed, 




All in all, the most vivid bit of observation to date.” 




I had been trying to pay attention to what Orage was saying and at the 




same time to do another thing. This effort rendered some part of the 




organism quite sensitive. Then Grace Potter asked Orage if he would 




mind repeating what he had just said. I remembered what he said. 




Orage implied refusal to do this by stating that she, Grace, was at 




perfect liberty to ask anyone present ... to do this. The prospect of 




being  called  on  neither  alarmed  me  nor  caused  the  pattern  and 




essential conduct of his discourse to fade from my mind. Grace turned 




around and named Jean Toomer. This act shocked the organism, made 




it tremble, quiver, grow extremely nervous. But still my mind retained 




the  necessary  data.  But  I  experienced  considerable  difficulty  in 




speaking. And at the same time, quite outside the organism I observed 




it, the whole scene, with unusual clarity (I doubt that the observation 




itself came firom conscious effort). I observed the effort made. The first




3 0 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




words  spoken.  I  observed  the  quiver  in  the  voice.  

[A  footnote:

  the 




posture of the body. The movement of an arm, holding a cigarette, to 




knock the ashes in an ash tray. The lampshade. The table. Surrounding 




faces.]  I  observed  the  organism’s  nervousness  as  the  formulation 




proceeded. I was aware of instinctive interference with the mental 




processes. I observed the cerebral center try to subdue and control the 




instinctive.  I  observed  the  cerebral  being  worsted  in  this  battle. 




Finally some word was needed. The mind could not find it. Pause. 




Blank. I and everything was drawn to find this word. After a while it 




came from nowhere. Not the right word; but an appropriate one. And 




soon the task had been completed. Then I made the effort to listen to 




Orage. I caught his comment. But what he said immediately after that 




was not recorded. The organism was still all a-tremble. The cerebral 




still seeking to control it. I could hear or see nothing of externality 




because of this conflict. Nevertheless I did observe it, and this time 




consciously. Finally the trembhng subsided, the stupor passed away. 




Again the organism functioned in the group. 




Self-Observation  was  only  the  first  part  of  the  first  stage  of  Orage’s 




Method. It was supposed to be carried on while the further steps were 




practiced. The second of these was known as Participation, and was subject 




to the same qualifications as Self-Observation; that is, it had also to be 




practiced without identification, vdthout analysis, and in accordance with all 




the other precepts which defined the first activity. Participation meant not 




merely observing a given notion, movement or position, but consciously 




taking  part  in  it,  consciously  inhabiting  the  action  which  was  being 




observed. A third step marked the end of the first stage of the Method. This 




was  called  Experiment.  Experiment  concerned  change—or  at  least  attempted change—of the mechanized functioning of the human being. This was change not for the purpose of reform, but for Experimental purposes 




only; to gain more knowledge and thus a greater consciousness. Suggested 




subjects for Experiment were drinking habits, smoking, and the number of 




hours of sleep taken at night; even the order in which the shoes were put on 




in the morning could be altered—^and then, when the reverse order became 




customary, the original unconscious habit could be reinstated as a conscious 




activity. Another form of Experiment, directed to building up an effective 




Will, was the taking and keeping of vows. 




Experiment in its fullest sense meant the playing of roles. Within the 




structure of the Oragean Method this activity can be seen in its logical and 




necessary place, not merely as an example of Gurdjieff’s erratic virtuosity. 




In  order  to  discover  his  own  nature  and  that  of  other  peoplfe,  the 




experimenter adopted roles quite alien to his normal inclinations. Extend




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   3 0 9




such activity into dramatic terms, and it is possible to see Gurdjieff s car 




crash, his sometimes inexplicable  conduct, and  other strange events in 




different terms. 




The second part of Orage’s Method is much quicker to describe than the 




first, and consists of the two activities which Gurdjieff called “Voluntary 




Suffering” and “Conscious Labour.” The first stage of Voluntary Suffering 




was the suppression of the symptoms of negative emotion—an activity 




stressed by Ouspensky. An example is to remain externally calm in the face 




of preposterous insults. The object of this exercise of severe self-restraint is 




to  produce  friction,  which  is  said  to  promote  otherwise  unobtainable 




changes in the personality. The category of Conscious Labor seems at once 




more  definite  and  more  specious.  The  first  step  is  said  to  consist  of 




“Pondering,”  of  weighing  intellectually  the  sort  of  problems  normally 




thought of as “imponderable” and arriving at a solution which is entirely 




one’s ovra. Orage dictated a list of subjects for Pondering, which included 




Jflie questions—“man,” “sex,” “consciousness,” “the world,” “the universe,” 




“nature,” “God”; Gurdjieff’s ideas—“the octave,” “essence and personality”; and topics which seem simply to have interested him personally— 




“the  Bible  and  other  Sacred  Books,”  “Incarnation  and  Reincarnation,” 




“Spiritualism.”  The  object  was  to  arrive  at  an  interpretation  of  these 




questions which satisfied the essential man; to resist the opinions implanted 




by associations, by upbringing, by education—and perhaps by the system of 




unlearning provided by Gurdjieff himself




Other branches of Gurdjieffian knowledge entered the curriculum of 




Orage’s  pupils.  Classes  in  Gurdjieff’s  movements  were  conducted  by 




Jesimin  Howarth,  who  had  been  at  Fontainebleau,  and  in  1927  Orage 




introduced  a  series  of  “psychological  exercises”  based  on  Gurdjieffian 




principles and designed to flex the unused muscles of the mind. A simple 




example is the sort of counting in unaccustomed ways which Gurdjieff 




imposed on the performers of his movements. Such a series might vary 




from  the  comparative  simplicity  of  1-2-3-4-  4-3-2-1-  2-3-4-S-  S-4-3-2- 




3-4-5-6- 6-S-4-3 to the increasingly complex 1-100, 2-99, 3-98, 4-97. In April 




1927 Orage wrote to Jean Toomer announcing that he was beginning classes 




fe his exercises that June—“two nights a week of three hours each”—and 




Inviting him to attend. After these classes, fortified by halva, black coffee, 




and  chili  con  carne,  the  Orageans  became  absorbed  in  discussion.  The 




morning after such a conversation, one participant discovered she had left 




her car near Orage’s flat and somehow found her way home without it. Such 




absorption was not purely intellectual; it extended to the person of Orage 




himself. His magnetism at times produced unwelcome results. “He seemed 




to know the answer to every question,” Nott writes; “his replies were so 




right that many of us got into the habit of talking everything over with




3 1 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




him—mundane problems as well as psychological ones. In the beginning 




this helped very much, but some of the weaker ones came to rely on him 




entirely, and consulted him in everything.” Philip Mairet describes how a 




woman pupil “insisted on his prescribing a diet for her indigestion, and he, 




either in desperation or drollery suggested stout and oysters which, as it 




turned out, actually did her good.” Orage was often exasperated with his 




pupils’ demands, and in April 1927, he was complaining to Jean Toomer 




that “a professional ‘psycho-analyst’ would make a fortune in my situation; 




but it brings me nothing whatever except experience.” 




Placed on a pedestal though he might be, Orage taught with Gurdjieff’s 




unavoidable gaze peering over his shoulder, and the strange Caucasian 




accents of his Master began to mingle rather oddly vdth the voice of reason. 




Between November 1924 and the spring of 1929, Orage was responsible to 




himself alone for the conduct of his groups in New York. In self-imposed 




isolation, Gurdjieff maintained a reduced estabhshment at Fontainebleau, 




answering—as he later explained—only those letters with enclosures whidh 




bore figures ending in a satisfactory number of zeros. He was immersed in 




literary activity. This new venture had begun soon after the car crash, and 




his  American  followers  were  first  to  feel  the  effects  of  their  Master’s 




industry. Gurdjieff was writing what proved to be  

Beelzebub’s Tales to his

 




 

Grandson. 

  Sometimes  he  dictated  in  Russian  to  Mme.  de  Hartmann, 




sometimes he scribbled in notebooks in Armenian. His efforts were roughly 




translated by Russian- and Armenian-speaking pupils, and sent aeross the 




Atlantic to Orage. Orage improved the English of the translations and made 




use of Gurdjieff’s bottomless allegory in his groups. 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales

 is a leviathan of a book. The printed edition is over 




1,200 pages long. P. L. Travers has described it as “a great, lumbering, 




flying  cathedral”  and  the  prose  as  “labyrinthine.”  The  subject  matter 




comprises the explanations given by Beelzebub—a wise and ancient being 




who is at last returning to “the place of his arising” after expiating the sins of 




his youth—to his favorite grandson Hassein. The pair are traveling through 




the universe in a space ship with Beelzebub’s faithful servant Ahoon, and 




Beelzebub whiles away the lengthy flight by answering his grandson’s 




questions  about  the  nature  of  the  cosmos.  HaSsein  has  developed  a 




particular  interest  in  the  state  of  affairs  on  the  .planet  Earth  where, 




according  to  Beelzebub,  conditions  of  life  are  quite  peculiar,  wdth  the 




natural order turned topsy-turvy because of a mistake on the part of certain 




cosmic authorities. The language used by Beelzebub is labored, the periods 




are few and far between, and to reach Gurdjieff’s meaning, the reader has 




to hack through a jungle of verbiage apparently arranged so as to lose him in 




a  thicket  of  subordinate  clauses.  The  whole  is  spiced  vwth  Gurdjieff’s




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   311




cumbrous sense  of humor  and flavored with terms coined from every 




language  under  the  sun.  If  the  reader  were  patient  enough,  he  would 




discover the doctrine which Gurdjieff had stated simply in Russia camouflaged under a mass of new terms. The book can have no casual readers because it is frankly impenetrable; and although Orage’s followers might 




have found both the form and the substance of GurdjiefF’s teaching in 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 the dim religious light of Gurdjieff^’s “flying cathedral” 




must have come as a shock after the bright illumination in the orderly 




building of Orage’s mind. 




Orage himself was baffled by Gurdjieff’s first attempt to give literary 




form to his vision. Nott—^who is often far from accurate—says that the first 




installment of  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 arrived from France in March 1925, and 




that Orage sent it back as completely unintelligible. Then a revised version 




arrived which Orage read to his pupils, remarking that this was an entirely 




different matter. “We could not make much of it,” admits Nott. “Soon, 




however, something began to work in us; and as more chapters came over, 




the impact on our feelings became stronger.” Orage suggested interpretations of the puzzling text and emphasized the overriding importance of subsidizing Gurdjieff while he completed his great work. A memorandum 




of Jean Toomer’s, dated December 28, 1925, records Orage as stating that 




such support was perhaps the most important task for any of Gurdjieff’s 




followers.  Of  the  chapter  in   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

  called  “The  Holy  Planet 




Purgatory,” Toomer noted; “Orage says that he has read thousands of books 




and nothing in philosophy, nor Plato nor Plotinus, compares in lucidity, 




concentration,  subtlety,  etc.,  with  this chapter.  It leaves  all philosophy 




fehind.” 




At first, Orage or Jessie Dvright read  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 to the groups, but 




in  later  years,  Orage  confounded  the  book’s  confusion  by  making  his 




pupils—quite literally—fit it together piece by piece. A set time would be 




s^ppointed when he would leave his office door unlocked. The pupils were 




Ijtade to come and steal” cyclostyled copies of the translation which were 




scattered around the room in disorder. In fact, they would have paid a fee of 




ten dollars before performing this act of “theft.” In consequence, copies of 




became  known  simply  as  the  book  were  highly  prized,  and  a 




^mplete copy was a rarity to be treasured. It was a tragedy when Schuyler 




Jadcson left his laboriously collected typescript on a train from New York to 




Trenton  and never recovered  it. Reference  to the  book  became common 




|n  some  intellectual  circles  as  dark  hints  about  the  Method.  Edmund 




Wilson was supremely irritated:




I did not read  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 but I did read  

Das ECapital. 

 Not that I




want to compare the two works, but there  

was

 a certain similarity in




312 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the way in which people then approached them; and I was surprised to 




find that an apparently social evening that would turn out to be a 




conspiracy to involve one in some Communist organization resembled 




a dinner I had once attended at which I was chilled to discover that the 




springes of Orage had been laid for me—and these both recalled to me 




an earlier occasion on which a literary conversation in the rooms of the 




proselytizing rector of the Episcopal Church at Princeton, had been 




prodded by amusing remarks in the direction of the Christian faith. 




People did want faiths and churches badly. . . . 




As  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 crossed the Atlantic in one direction to create fresh 




problems for the eager student, Orage’s pupils made the crossing in the 




other. Orage himself was reluctant to send pupils to Fontainebleau, and 




even when he relented sufficiently to give them a letter of recommendation, he usually began by trying to discourage the man or woman who was eager to “give up everything” to live at the Prieure. For one thing, 




Gurdjieff' had officially closed the Institute and discouraged visitors. For 




another, a request for an introduction to Gurdjieff^ might show what Orage 




called “the fallacy of Going-to-Tibet.” To one pupil—^who eventually lived 




at the Prieure for some four or five years—he asked tellingly; “Why do you 




want to go? I’m teaching you here.” 




On the other hand there were those, like Margaret Naumburg, who had 




been fascinated by the spectacle of Gurdjieff himself, and whom only ill 




luck had prevented from traveling to France. The wish to sit at the Master’s 




feet was one which Orage himself certainly understood; for this was exactly 




what he had done when he left: Ouspensky for Gurdjieff". During his first 




four years in the United States he regularly closed his own groups in the 




summer and left for the Prieure, where he renewed his own contact with 




Gurdjieff and worked on the translation of his writings. Not just Orage’s 




authority, but his very life was rooted in the soil of Fontainebleau. His 




letters  to  Toomer  show  that  he  dreaded  the  prospect  of  returning  to 




America from his French retreat. At the Prieure—as Gurdjieff^ was later to 




say of his flat in Paris—^was “quintessence,” a rarified atmosphere; a far 




country of the spirit as well as of geography. The exotic associations of the 




only non-English-speaking country Orage ever visited could only have 




heightened his sense that the Prieure was “special place.” 




The summer of 1925 was the first after Gurdjieff”s car crash and visitors 




were few. When the Irish poet. Monk Gibbon, arrived, the chateau and its 




grounds presented a desolate appearance. He found only two disciples, “a 




very  serious-looking  young  man,  with  sandy  hair,  from  the  Enghsh 




Midlands, and a young girl with flaming red hair from America. They were 




both in their early twenties, slightly lost lambs, typical of hopefiil, questing




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   3 1 3




youth in search of the philosopher’s stone. ” Gibbon was told that GurdjiefF 




was  in  bed  and  writing.  He  was  shown  the  Institute’s  prospectus and 




lectured on the happiness of Katherine Mansfield. Then he was taken by 




the Enghshman—^probably a pupil called Bernard Metz—to see the Study 




House. 




The interior suggested a Turkish bath that had fallen on evil days. 




Someone had whitewashed the walls and strewn a few worn carpets 




about the floor. Someone else had begun a series of garish, oriental 




wall-decorations which had not got very far. Despite the brightness of 




the  colours  an  air  of  intolerable  melancholy  streamed  from  those 




uneven white surfaces, those brilliant garish blues and sombre reds. 




This  depressing  picture  of  neglect  and  inactivity  is  confirmed  by 




Margaret Naumburg’s letters to Jean Toomer, in which she reported on the 




(»matose condition of the Prieure, and the equivocal status of the summer 




visitors. 




Margaret Naumburg arrived on June 14, 1925 to find that her coming had 




been announced by Orage. She was met by Mme. de Hartmann who told 




her that she would probably be able to stay, but that this depended on 




GurdjiefF. In the upshot, Gurdjieff’s reaction was: if Orage approved, so did 




he. Margaret Naumburg heard his voice dictating late at night when she 




was in bed, but her first sight of the Master was almost as worrying as 




Toomer’s had been. She was told he was recovering, but he looked dreadful 




and moved with difficulty. However, he clearly retained all his old relish for 




discomfiting his pupils, and made Margaret Naumburg’s first meal a misery 




by filling her full of whisky. 




Just before her arrival, the practice of movements had started in the 




Study House directed by Mme. de Salzmann; and there were readings from 




Gurdjieff’s writing in progress, including the tale of his Universal Travelling  Workshop.  Gurdjieff’s  nephews  and  nieces,  Mme.  de  Salzmann’s daughter  and  Mme.  Ouspensky’s  grandson  were  being  instructed  in 




movements. The children disliked this and became bored and fractious. 




Gurdjieff’s method of dealing with insubordination was original. He did not 




punish the children, but put Bernard Metz on the stage of the Study House 




and made him hold a difficult position for a considerable time. The children 




were told that this would be their own fate if they misbehaved again. 




To  Margaret  Naumburg,  impatient  for  “practical  work,”  everything 




seemed lackadaisical. She felt that her own instruction in the movements 




from the Englishwoman Elizabeth Gordon was rudimentary. Work was 




further impeded by the death of Gurdjieff’s mother, which necessitated a 




Complicated ritual carried out in the Study House during a storm. 




3 1 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Margaret Naumburg eventually had a conversation with GurdjiefF, who 




was lying in bed. He seemed to confuse the relationship between her and 




Toomer—perhaps on purpose. He had been announcing for the past five 




months that his book would be finished in a few days’ time. “What would he 




do when it was completed?” she asked him. GurdjiefF answered that he did 




not know. Perhaps he would go away and rest, perhaps he would go to 




Egypt—^perhaps, just  

perhaps, 

 he might take some people at the Prieure, 




only not—like the year before—^those not seriously interested. 




Orage and Jane Heap arrived in mid-July, but Margaret Naumburg still 




felt deprived of what she had come for. She informed Toomer that both 




Jane and Orage were complaining that everything was rundown. Apart from 




these old friends, she moaned, there was no conversation to be had. The 




older  pupils  were  arrogant.  They  seemed  to  consider  everyone  else 




mentally defective, and their criticism of Orage smacked of jealousy. 




As  the  summer  wore  on,  her  disappointment  increased.  There  had 




evidently been some doubt as to whether Orage would return to New York 




to carry on his teaching for a second year. On August 18, she informed 




Toomer  that  this  had  now  been  resolved,  and  Orage  would  after  all 




continue. But she suspected he would try to divert the New Yorkers from 




work in a practical sense, and talked of going off to Ouspensky next spring. 




Her time had been wasted, and she wrote resignedly that Toomer had been 




right to stay in the United States. 




Orage and Jessie Dwight returned to New York via England, sailing on 




October 3. The teaching continued, but next summer there were no new 




residents at the Prieur6. The chSteau remained wrapped in an enchanted 




slumber, and when Daly King tried to gain admission he found no one who 




seemed to be in authority. 




Two events of some importance took place that year. The first was the 




visit of Aleister Crowley. Crowley knew the town of Fontainebleau well—in 




1924 he had spent a tormented period there in an attempt to cure himself of 




heroin addiction. The Great Beast was a familiar figure in Paris expatriate 




circles, and Nott met him in the capital while himself staying at the Prieur6. 




Crowley’s interest was aroused either by a general occult curiosity or by 




Gurdjieff’s reputation as a specialist in curing drug addiction; and he soon 




afterward turned up at Fontainebleau, where he was the object of some 




amazement.  To  one  of  the  inmates,  the  Wickedest  Man  in  the  World 




seemed overfed and inoffensive—^with the exception of his almost colorless 




eyes, the antipodes to Gurdjieff’s heavy gaze. The published accounts of 




Crowley at the Prieure speak only of a brief visit and a vaguely sinister 




impression. Nott records that Crowley spoke to one of the children present 




about his son whom he was teaching to be a devil. “GurdjiefiF got up and 




spoke to the boy, who thereupon took no further notice of Crowley.” But




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   315




the magician’s visit was extensive, and his confrontation with GurdjiefF of a 




more epic nature. 




Crowley arrived for a whole weekend and spent the time like any other 




visitor  to  the  Prieure;  being  shown  the  grounds  and  the  activities  in 




progress, listening to GurdjiefF’s music and his oracular conversation. Apart 




from some circumspection, GurdjiefF treated him like any other guest until 




the evening of his departure. After dinner on Sunday night, Gurdjieff led 




the way out of the dining room with Crowley, followed by the body of 




pupils who had also been at the meal. Crowley made his way toward the 




door and turned to take his leave of Gurdjieff, who by this time was some 




way up the stairs to the second floor. “Mister, you go? ” Gurdjieff inquired. 




Crowley assented. “You have been guest 

?”—a

 fact which the visitor could 




hardly deny. “Now you go, you are no longer guest?” Crowley—no doubt 




wondering whether his host had lost his grip on reality and was wandering 




in a semantic wilderness—humored his mood by indicating that he was on 




his way back to Paris. But GurdjieflF, having made the point that he was not 




violating  the  canons  of  hospitality,  changed  on  the  instant  into  the 




embodiment  of  righteous  anger.  “You  filthy,”  he  stormed,  “you  dirty 




inside! Never again you set foot in my house!” From his vantage point on 




the stairs, he worked himself up into a rage which quite transfixed his 




watching pupils. Crowley was stigmatized as the sewer of creation was 




taken apart and trodden into the mire. Finally, he was banished in the style 




of   

East  Lynne

  by  a  Gurdjieff  in  fine  histrionic  form.  Whitefaced  and 




shaking, the Great Beast crept back to Paris with his tail between his legs. 




The second significant event of the summer of 1926 was the death of 




Mme. Ostrowsky. Fritz Peters calls her “the most impressive permanent 




!®^ident at the Prieur^.” Katherine Mansfield had written that “she walks 




about like a queen exactly”; and Peters confirms this observation:




I remember being particularly fascinated by the way she moved; she 




walked without any perceptible movement of her head and without the 




slightest jerkiness in her movements; she was never hurried, but at the 




same time she moved at incredible speed; every movement she made 




in whatever she was doing was absolutely essential to that particular 




activity. 




During  the  early  summer  of  1926,  this  silent  but  imposing  woman 




became increasingly ill. She took to her bed and was put on a special diet 




; Aat included large quantities of blood pressed from meat. It became known 




lliat she had terminal cancer, and Gurdjieff told his pupils that she was 




Jiving “through him.” Her doctors had put her under sentence of death, he 




said, and he had been able to extend the time limit through his own efforts. 




3 1 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“She live many lives, is very old soul; she now have possibiHty ascend to 




other  world,” he told  Fritz  Peters. “But sickness come and make more 




difficult, make impossible for her to do this thing alone. If can keep alive 




few months more will not have to come back and live this life again.” 




An episode in  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 must refer to Mme. Ostrowsky’s death. 




In the chapter called, “The Bokharan Dervish Hadji-Asvatz-Troov,” the 




dervish tells Beelzebub of a European friend who succeeded in discovering 




a cure for cancer, but almost immediately became the victim of tragedy. 




Cancer was diagnosed in his wife, but he himself had a road accident which 




prevented him from putting his cure into effect. When he recovered from 




his accident, he saw with horror that his wdfe was so far advanced in the 




disease that all he could do was to try European medicine. The European 




doctors  recommended  X-ray  treatment,  but  this  only  resulted  in  fresh 




outbreaks in other parts of his wife’s body. Casting caution to the winds, the 




husband  decided  not  to  spare  himself  and  channeled  his  energies  to 




effecting some slowing down of the cancer. He managed by this means to 




keep his wife alive for almost two years. 




This  tale  so  closely  corresponds  to  the  circumstances  of  Mme.  Ostrowsky’s death as to leave no doubt that Gurdjieff is referring to himself Olga de Hartmann claims that once during Mme. Ostrowsky’s last days, 




Gurdjieff  caused  a  marked  improvement  in  the  invalid’s  condition  by 




making her drink a glass of water which he had held for a few minutes in his 




hands.  Are we to understand that he really believed he had a cure for 




cancer, that his knowledge of vibrations or Tibetan medicine was in fact 




superior to Western science? What is clear from his manner of telling the 




story is that Gurdjieff felt great affection for his “wife” and that her death 




was a personal tragedy for him. Fritz Peters had described how, after her 




death on June 26, 1926, Gurdjieff retired to his room and saw no one for 




two days. He emerged to greet the archbishop who came to preach the 




funeral service. “There were no manifestations of sorrow, no tears, just an 




unusual heaviness about him, as if it required a great effort for him to 




move.” 




Gurdjieff further confused his pupils by devoting the day of the funeral to 




embarrassing  the  archbishop  and  preventing  expressions  of  grief  over 




Mme. Ostrowsky’s death. He described what he said was a traditional 




funeral  custom  from  more  enlightened  times.  After  a  death,  Gurdjieff 




claimed, the friends of the dead person would spend three days remembering the evil deeds committed by their acquaintance during his life. They would then begin to concentrate on the fact of their own mortality. A newly 




arrived recruit to the Prieure was completely bewildered by the funeral 




feast, during which Gurdjieff kept up a running stream of curses on God. 




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A 0   B E E L Z E B U B   3 1 7




Very  soon  afterward  he  began  living  with  another  woman,  who  soon 




became pregnant. 




It was the following summer that the real influx of visitors from the 




United States began. American memories of the Prieure are usually of the 




years 1927 and 1928. The real reason why Orage persuaded GurdjiefF to 




allow visitors during these years was financial. The master was concentrating on literary work which excluded other money-making activity; and at the same time, the cavalier attitude he showed to substantial sums he did 




receive from his supporters made it seem that subsidizing his activities was 




like trying to fill a bottomless pit. Until his marriage in 1927, Orage lived in 




what seemed to many of his New York pupils very straitened circumstances 




in  a  tiny  apartment  in  Chelsea.  Money  from  admission  charges  to  his 




meetings went largely to the Prieure. But by the spring of 1927, Orage— 




perhaps slightly annoyed that friends like Daly King had been refused 




admittance, and certainly determined that GurdjiefF could do something 




toward his own keep—^was writing to Jean Toomer:




As for American visitors to the Prieur6 this summer, I have written 




finally to G. for an official permit to authorise such proposals. Lots of 




people want to go from here; but so far I have said neither yes nor no 




. . . I’m not disposed to countenance formally any such visitations 




without  

some

 assurance from G. that at least they will be admitted or at 




least considered. 




He told Gurdjieff that an American would pay an average of 100 dollars 




per week, and this was the decisive factor. For the next four years, a small 




birt steady trickle of pupils crossed the Atlantic with letters of introduction 




from Orage—or sometimes from Toomer, who was prone to announce his 




prot6g6s  in  the  style  of  a  minor  prophet,  “to  george  ivanovitch 




GURDJIEFF—greeting!”  began  one  hortatory  letter  with  which  the  Chicago poet, Mark Turbyfill 

—a

 contributor to  

The Little Review

—^arrived at Fontainebleau.  Despite  such  impressive  credentials,  a  candidate  for 




admission could never be certain, when he walked up to the doorway with 




“Sonnez Fort” written beside it, that he would penetrate the enchanted 




castle itself




A new arrival at the Prieur6 would be greeted by one of the senior pupils 




and probably—unless there was a particularly full house in summer—given 




i  room  in  “the  Ritz.”  He  was  now  in  a  place  where  everything  was 




Uncertain, where the possible meanings jarred in hideous confusion, where 




lie never knew precisely what might happen at any moment. When




3 1 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjieflF deigned to take notice of a newcomer, he might meet him in any 




one  of  his  unpredictable  roles.  One  of  the  1927  arrivals  was  unable  to 




approach the Master during the first twenty-four hours of his stay because, 




whenever he came anywhere near, GurdjiefiF turned and shouted at him. 




Then at the first of the lavish dinners which the pupil attended, he suddenly 




felt that Gurdjieff’s eye was on him, and on looking up received a beatific 




smile of welcome. Or, Gurdjieff might be in a more quizzical vein. When 




Carl Zigrosser first encountered him in June 1927, he had just been given a 




conducted tour by Thomas de Hartmann. 




When we came near, he opened the conversation by saying, “I smell 




American.” I had been prepared for this sort of greeting by the reports 




of previous visitors, so I was not as startled as I might have been. He 




went on to explain in his curious English; “You no take bath here last 




night; I smell American smell.” After some conversation he asked if I 




could drink. When I replied that I hoped I could, he invited me to sit 




beside him at dinner—a place which I learned later was reserved for 




those who drank. He laughed and added that he liked three kinds of 




people; those who could drink, those who could tell stories—and the 




third he would tell me about some other time. A few minutes later, he 




left us and went to his room. 




Almost as disconcerting as the Master himself were encounters with 




other pupils. What did they know that the neophyte did not? How should 




the newcomer behave toward them? A new arrival often felt in the position 




of a specimen under examination. Nott records that his every action after he 




arrived was reported to Gurdjieff. Alternatively, like Toomer in 1925, the 




neophyte could approach his new acquaintances from a superior height:'he 




was one of the chosen; most of the others could not possibly be.” 




In the late 1920s the permanent population of the Prieure was about 




thirty  people.  Until  1929  the  de  Hartmanns  and  Mme.  de  Hartmann’s 




parents, the Schumakers, lived in the chateau. The Stoernevals with their 




son Nikolai, and Mme. de Salzmann with her two children lived in the 




Paradou. Alexander de Salzmann worked in Paris during the week and 




commuted to the Prieur^ on weekends. Another visitor from Paris was 




Adele KafBan, who had been such a friend of Katherine Mansfield. A more 




infrequent  bird  of  passage  was  Mme.  Galumnian  or  Ghaverdian,  an 




Armenian who took a leading part in the translation of  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 

 




Although her husband lived in Soviet Russia, she was able to visit Gurdjieff 




for long periods until the early 1930s. Then there was Gurdjieff’s family— 




his  sister  and  her  husband,  his  brother  Dmitri  with  his  wife  and  four




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   3 1 9




children; also another nephew, Valya, who had made his way alone from 




Georgia to Fontainebleau. 




A few other Russians remained from the great dispersal. The duties of 




concierge  and  mechanic  were  performed  by  the  Merkouroffs,  and  the 




Prieure horse had as its attendant, one Andrei Andreivitch—upon whom 




Gurdjieff  once  performed  an  extraordinary  cure  for  sciatica  after  anaesthetizing  him  with  Armagnac.  Then  there  was  the  former  barrister Rachmilievitch, in whose flat the Moscow groups had at one time met. He 




was  an  eccentric  who  Gurdjielf  claimed  to  keep  at  the  Prieur^  for  the 




express purpose of annoying everyone else. Rachmilievitch must have been 




the only pupil who ever tried to extract the truth from Gurdjielf by force. 




On one occasion he chased Gurdjieff up a tree, and on another, when a 




party were bathing in the River Loing, he grasped the Master’s head and 




threatened to hold him under the water until he was enhghtened. 




A  few  English  remained  with  Gurdjieff  from  the  period  when  his 




following had been recruited by Ouspensky. Three single ladies—Misses 




Gordon, Merston and Alexander—attended to household duties or supervised the gardens. Bernard Metz, who made the original English translations of  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 which Orage reworked, was the only Englishman among the permanent residents. From America several young men arrived 




to stay for different periods, including Caesar Zwaska, the “office boy” of 




 

The Little Review. 

 Jane Heap’s adopted sons, Tom and Fritz Peters, added 




to the population, and other visitors arrived for weekends or for longer 




periods. Some of these came because of an interest in the teaching, but 




others came to be cured by Gurdjieff of various complaints. During the 




later 1920s, the life of the Prieur^ revived. 




atmosphere was less frenzied than during the period of the Institute 




for the Harmonious Development of Man. Pupils were less likely to be 




dragged from their beds in the middle of the night to practice movements, 




and indeed instruction in the movements often completely lapsed. The 




course of the week ran to a more leisurely pattern, vvith Saturday night an 




^«ning  of  festivity.  All  afternoon,  Dmitri  Gurdjieff  stoked  the  boilers 




which heated the water for the Russian baths, and in the evening men and 




Wimen separately visited the bathhouse. One weekend Zigrosser joined the 




1

^:




The women took their bath at five o’clock. When they had finished, 




and everybody had eaten a hght supper, all adjourned to the study- 




house for coffee, some time between eight and nine o’clock. There 




everyone sat about while a chapter from Mr. Gurdjieff’s book was read 




aloud or—as happened the first time I was there—Mr. de Hartmann




3 2 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




played the organ. Then, when Mr. GurdjiefF gave the signal, men and 




boys went to the bath-house. The bath was the regular Russian steam 




bath, accompanied with much joking and story-telling; but sometimes 




Mr. Gurdjieff’s most valuable remarks came out in the course of this 




apparently casual conversation. He used to call upon each newcomer to 




tell two or three stories as a payment for his bath. 




On  more  than  one  occasion  these  storytelling  bouts  provided  an 




opportunity for Gurdjieff to insert a couple of barbs through the chinks in a 




pupil’s armor. A monk from Mount Athos was a guest in the bathhouse, and 




Gurdjieff persuaded him to take part in a battle of “anecdotes. ” These grew 




more and more ribald until Gurdjieff turned on the visitor and denounced 




him for obscenity. The monk was struck dumb; and Gurdjieff s comment to 




Orage was, “I wished to show him he was no monk. ” 




At about midnight the feast would be held in the dining room of the 




Prieure. Gurdjieff sat in the middle on one side of a long oval table with his 




pupils ranged around him. Exotic dishes appeared, beginning with large 




quantities of Russian hors d’oeuvres accompanied by raw herbs—tarragon, 




fennel, mint, or parsley—^which were eaten by hand. Often a sheep’s head 




would be placed in front of Gurdjieff—who would extract the eye and offer 




it to a newcomer. Those familiar with his stratagems watched as eagerly as 




the Master to see how the hapless guest would react. Would he reftise 




brusquely? Would he try to be polite? When pressed by Gurdjieff, would 




he cave in abruptly or become angry? More important than the sheep’s 




head were the spirits which circulated with the meal. Gurdjieff disliked 




wine  and  frequently  played  the  trick  of  decanting   

vin  ordinaire

  into 




superior bottles to deceive important guests. He preferred Armagnac or, if 




that was unobtainable, Vieux Marc. In these fiery spirits were drunk the 




famous “toasts to the idiots.” 




The duty of proposing the toasts was usually delegated to Mme. de 




Hartmann’s father. Each member of the company was assigned a category 




of “idiot. ” Gurdjieff used the expression in a dual sense to denote both the 




various brands of stupidity to which his followers were individually prone 




and the Greek meaning of idiot signifying a “private person.” Zigrosser 




records a sequence of seven “idiot toasts ” which was used consistently when 




he visited the Prieure: “all idiots,” “ordinary idiots,” “the candidate for 




idiocy,”  “the  superidiot,”  “the  archidiot,”  “the  hopeless  idiot,”  “the 




compassionate idiot.” In addition, there were “squirming idiots” and idiots 




both “round” and “square,” each category supposedly conveying something 




to the people to whom they were applied. For example, at one period in the 




late 1920s, Dr. Stoerneval was an “arch-idiot,” and Orage was the “superidiot.” A “squirming idiot’’ was supposed to be someone confronted with a




P E R   A M E R I C A N !   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   321




particularly unpleasant personality trait; while the round and the square 




idiots  might  be  identified  by  reference  to  GurdjiefF’s  teaching  on  the 




symbols used to denote the developing man. 




“Always when presiding at a table,” Jean Toomer wrote, “G. has a certain 




charm and lordliness. He devours his food and thinks well of you if you do 




likewise.”  From  Toomer’s  notes  it  seems  that  he  took  part  in  more 




expansive dinners than many other followers of Gurdjieff, for he records 




some interesting information about the upper reaches of the idiot range— 




even about the twenty-first idiot whom Gorham Munson understood to be 




“His Endlessness” or God himself But Gurdjieff, recalled Toomer, called 




himself “the unique idiot. The unique idiot is twenty-one on the scale. You 




seldom reach a toast to it. Should you, G. guarantees that while everyone is 




under  the  table,  he  will  dance  on  the  tabletop.  Also,  by  the  way,  it  is 




generally understood by those who dine and drink with him that God is his 




heir and that when he dies God will then become the unique idiot.” 




Only  once  did  a  pupil  dare  to  interrupt  the  sequence  of  toasts  and 




propose one himself Predictably, this was Rachmilievitch, and his toast was 




to the Master who so infuriated him. The dinner party was larger than usual 




and had failed to respond to Gurdjieff’s prodding. In the middle of the 




toasts, Rachmilievitch raised his glass and addressed Gurdjieff; “God give 




you  the  strength  and  the  manhood,”  he  said,  “to  endure  your  lofty 




solitude.”  Gurdjieff  looked  at  him—in  the  words  of  a  pupil  to  whom 




Rachmilievitch wrote describing the incident—“kindly, without smiling.” 




After a momentary silence, the toasts to the idiots resumed. 




The  society  of  the  Prieure  has  often  been  called  patriarchal,  and  the 




patriarch ruled with a rod of iron. At first Gurdjieff even banned women 




from his Saturday feasts until two, less in awe of him than the rest, decided 




to organize a women’s feast among themselves. They sat down to eat in one 




of  the  bedrooms—having  sent  the  redoubtable Jane  Heap to  persuade 




Mme. Ouspensky (who for a long time was a permanent resident) to join 




them.  As  the  feast  began,  the  door  opened  and  Gurdjieff’s  portentous 




figure  appeared  in  the  doorway.  Looking  surprised  to  see  Mme. 




Ouspensky, he promptly identified the culprits and denounced their illicit 




tselebration. “Never such thing again in my house,” he proclaimed. Next 




Saturday the women joined the company in the dining room. 




Certain  pupils,  Hke  Orage  and  de Salzmann, enjoyed  the privileges 




accorded to court jesters, and Gurdjieff’s response to a real challenge from 




another quarter was usually delighted surprise. At dinner one night Mme. 




"Stoerneval disgusted him by remembering at great length the excellence of 




chocolate  as  it  was  made  in  St.  Petersburg  under  the  old  regime.  He 




embarked on a tirade against the follies of a St. Petersburg education and 




the trivialities which it encouraged. Mme. Stoemeval left the room; shortly 




afterward Schumaker, who announced that he could not approve of




3 2 2   T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjiefF’s discourtesy, followed her. Schumaker must have told his wife, 




who had not been at the meal, for she soon appeared in front of Gurdjieff, 




highly enraged. “I will wager you,” she said, “that if someone had brought 




you your Perrier  water even five  minutes earlier, this would not have 




happened.” Gurdjieff looked up, “absolutely delighted,” and at the first 




opportunity  took  her  into  Fontainebleau  where  he  loaded  her  with 




delicacies at the finest patisserie in town. 




GurdjieflF was now a writer, as well as being a “teacher of dancing” and of 




other things not in the curriculum of a normal educational establishment. It 




was to be expected that his writing methods would be as unconventional as 




the rest of his activities. During the period after his accident he had written 




chiefly at night, but as people once more began to dog his footsteps, they 




were swept up into his irregular routine. He might work at home at the 




Prieure—in his room if it were winter, or outside on the terrace in the 




summer. Or, he might take it into his head to go into Fontainebleau, where 




he sat in the Cafe Henri IV—scribbling illegibly in notebooks. He claimed 




that the spectacle of the world as a passing show encouraged concentration 




and detachment. 




In addition, he led another life quite independent of the Prieur6. During 




the 1920s, he had an apartment in the seventeenth arrondissement of Paris 




where he spent two nights a week. Carl Zigrosser once ate a picnic supper 




there with the Master and Alexander de Salzmann: “I shall never forget the 




picture of Mr. Gurdjieff reclining on the bed, as only an Easterner can, a 




ghmpse of his hairy chest showing through his open shirt, his frame shaking 




with  laughter  at  some  story  told  by  Mr.  Salzmann.”  When  in  Paris, 




Gurdjieff did his writing in the Caf6 de la Paix, sustained by Armagnac and 




coffee taken with lemon. He liked to spend the evening at a Montmartre 




restaurant called L’Ecrevisse where he invited groups of fnends to eat 




crayfish, of which he was particularly fond. 




The  exoticism  and  inspired  chaos which  surrounded Gurdjieff  were 




raised to new heights when, after Mme. Ostrowsky’s death, he began taking 




pupils on motor trips through the French countryside. After his “accident,'” 




many people might have had doubts about the Master’s driving ability, and 




if they remained sanguine, a single expedition would have disabused them 




of that confidence. As Ouspensky said, Gurdjieff drove a car as if he were 




riding a horse, and Jane Heap’s fright when she discovered that he had 




locked the doors from the outside was not at all assumed. Gurdjieff did 




come to grief, but although on one occasion he collided with “a poplar at fifty 




miles  an  hour,  the  most  severe  injury  among  his  pupils  was  a  broken 




shoulder blade. From the Citroens of his early motoring days, Gurdjieff 




graduated to a big, heavy Fiat in which the back seat could be curtained off 




so that the staff of secretaries and translators might labor undisturbed by the 




passing landscape. 




P E R   A M E R I C A M   A D   B E E L Z E B U B   323




For THE BOOK went with them. Perhaps with Mme. de Hartmann acting 




as  GurdjiefF’s  amanuensis,  Jessie  Dwight  typing  on  a  small  portable 




typewriter, those temporarily responsible for the translations disputing the 




correct  word  for  some  abstruse  expression,  and  assorted  other  pupils 




confusing the issue, the Fiat would lurch forth on to the high road. (“How 




very convenient, ” de Salzmann once remarked as he surveyed a neatly laid 




out cemetery several thousand feet below the car window in a vertical 




drop.) As was usual when GurdjieflF was writing, he invited reactions from 




his audience and was particularly insistent that the translators find the right 




equivalent  for  a  Russian  or  Armenian  phrase.  On  one  occasion  the 




expression at issue was the English “so to speak.” The young American who 




had  charge  of  the  English  translation  stuck  to  his  guns  in  the  face  of 




GurdjiefF’s vehement declaration that he meant “so to say.” “I read famous 




English writer, Algernon Blackwood,” he proclaimed. “He say, ‘so to say. 




“It is ‘so to speak,’ Mr. Gurdjieff,” insisted the young man in frosty tones. 




Tempers  mounted.  Then  Gurdjieff  broke  the  tension.  “Idiot,”  he  said 




quietly. “For you I tell.” 




“Short of any mechanical breakdown,” Fritz Peters writes, “we seemed 




to have an unusual number of unnecessary experiences on the road. ” 




Gurdjieff would appoint a map reader—and decline to consult him. He 




would refuse to stop for gas until he ran out—^whereupon one of the 




passengers would have to trudge back to the nearest village. He never 




carried  a  spare  tire,  and  so,  if  a  puncture  occurred,  the  tire  had  to  be 




repaired, not replaced. During all these complications, Gurdjieff sat by the 




side of the road working on  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 




Food—in huge quantities and unfamiliar shapes and sizes—accompanied 




die expeditions. GurdjieflF loved picnicking and was skillful at discovering 




Russian and Oriental delicacies in Paris. He carried strips of bear’s meat 




which he pressed upon his companions—although he seldom ate much 




himself. On the other hand, if a pupil particularly liked a delicacy, he or she 




would be lucky to be offered it. 




When the party arrived at a hotel, life became even more complicated. It 




would undoubtedly be too late for the hotel management, and a respectable-looking ambassador had first to soothe those In authority and reserve tile rooms. Then the party disgorged itself from the Fiat, festooned with 




fragments of cold meat and  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 

 On one occasion, at a very 




smart hotel, the hall porter opened the trunk of the car to take out, as he 




thought, the luggage. He was met by the debris of a Gurdjieffian picnic, 




^d  a half-melon rolled  out on to  the ground at his feet. Then Gurdjieff 




himself  emerged,  unbuttoned,  shabby,  clutching  a  battered  briefcase 




containing heaven knew what. . . . 




In  the  dining  room  of  the  hotel,  things  would  not  be  much  better. 




Gurdjiefif—as on one occasion in Vichy—might be even more unbuttoned




3 2 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




than he had been when he entered the hotel. Dinner progressed as it did at 




the  Prieure:  with  particular  tidbits  reserved  for  favored  pupils,  with 




GurdjiefF haranguing his companions, with the toasts to the idiots drunk in 




Armagnac. By the end of the meal the entire dining room was silent with all 




ears  tuned  to  catch  everything  that  was  said.  Then  the   

coup  de  grace. 

 




GurdjiefF belched loudly and looked around. This was the cue for others to 




do the same. Seated at his right hand Orage followed suit—and so on 




around the table until a fusillade of belches had emptied the dining room. 




How did he get away with it? One reason is that he was a very heavy 




tipper. Sometimes colossal sums would be added to the bills of very modest 




restaurants—sums exceeding the total of the bill itself On one occasion 




GurdjiefF  bestowed  an  unthinkably  large  tip  on  the  head  waiter  of  a 




restaurant which produced an execrable lunch. Afterward he explained that 




he had his reasons. If the lesson struck home, the waiter would encourage 




the cook to serve other parties as they had served his entourage. People 




would soon stop visiting the restaurant and Gurdjieff would be magnificently revenged by ruining the man who had ruined his meal. 




It was not entirely a matter of money, although when he had money, he 




was  very  free  with  it.  There  was  undoubtedly  a  certain  magnetism, 




compounded of charm and sheer bravado, which allowed Gurdjieff to sail 




unscathed through most social irritations. Tipping of elevator men and 




porters, for example, was often accomplished with a handful of pistachio 




nuts—mingled  with  fluff  and  old  pieces  of  tobacco—which  Gurdjieff 




produced from his pockets. The cheek of the man—for his self-assurance 




was sometimes less than absolute—was more than that of a mere flouter of 




convention. Gurdjieff entered the conventions and somehow bent them in 




his direction, leaving behind him some very puzzled guardians of things as 




they should be done. There is an absurd magnificence in a man who decides 




that alcohol is necessary to keep his car radiator from freezing in the Swiss 




mountains—but it must be alcohol in its sweetest, stickiest, most expensive 




form; green Chartreuse. 




Gurdjieffs motor tours were usually to Vichy, the South Coast tovras.'or 




Switzerland—for he loved the mountains—^and to Normandy and Brittany. 




Once it was arranged that a party would leave for Algiers. They reached 




Marseilles \\jth no more than the usual complisations, but in Marseilles 




Gurdjieff decided that they would not go on board ship. After he returned 




to the Prieure, he wrote a piece of music about the journey. It was called, 




“Departure for Algiers.” 




The Prior of Avon




Are we dealing with a mere joker, an inspired zany with a marvelously 




developed knack of persuading other people to pay for his amusements? 




There was a part of Gurdjieff which relished the pleasures of the game and 




the deception, but he cannot be explained away so easily. At the risk of 




anticipating the final verdict, we must make some partial assessment of 




what Gurdjieff was trying to do. 




He said that one stage of his operations was intended to produce in his 




victims the sensation of their own nothingness: he wanted a pupil “not to be 




nonentity,” so first he made him “feel nonentity.” Frequently people came 




to him because they sensed that something was out of joint, whether they 




located  the  trouble  within  themselves,  or  projected  it  outward  on  the 




ikture of the world and indulged in a fit of prostration at the universal 




Misery.  Out  of  the  ashes  of  the  old  personality  with  which  they  were 




identified,  a  new  individual  might  grow.  The  insults,  the  occasionally 




^ildish behavior, and the elaborate jokes were not only part of Gurdjieff’s 




rapansive individuality, but helped to create around him the atmosphere of 




double meanings, extraordinary significance, withdrawal from the ebb and 




flow of ordinary living. Within Gurdjieff’s orbit all things were possible, 




TOcause reahty was marginally shifted out of phase so that the connections 




^ cause and effect were altered and the pupil could eliminate conditioned 




reflexes and—in an effort to find his way through the maze of paradox— 




become himself. 




325




326 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




It was possible to ignore this side of his work altogether, or to be totally 




repelled by it. Georgette Leblanc had a disastrous first weekend at the 




Prieur6. Afterward she was driven to the station at Avon by a visitor who 




had been summoned by GurdjiefFto act as chauffeur. “Impossible walk,” he 




had informed her. “She too angry.” All the way to the station the irate 




Mme. Leblanc wondered volubly how anyone could stay at the Prieure 




under that unpleasant charlatan Gurdjieff: but later she came back and 




became one of his most devoted followers. Her friend Margaret Anderson 




prints an account by the American novelist and publisher’s editor, Solita 




Solano—who  met  Gurdjieff  for  the  first  time  in  1927—of  a  similar 




experience, pitched in a lower key. 




I hoped for a demigod, a superman of saintly countenance, not this 




“strange” ecru man about whom I could see nothing extraordinary 




except the size and power of his eyes. The impact everyone expected 




him to make upon me did not arrive. In the evening I hstened to a 




reading from his vaunted book. It bored me. Thereupon I rejected him 




intellectually, although with good humour. Later in the study house 




(how annoyed I was that women were not allowed to smoke there) I 




heard the famous music, played, I beheve, by M. de Hartmann. This, 




almost from the first measures, I also rejected. A week or so later in 




Paris I accompanied Margaret and Jane, who had not quite given me 




up,  to  a  restaurant  where   

Screvisses

  were  the  specialty  which  Mr. 




Gurdjieff was coming to eat with about twenty of his followers. He 




seated me next to him and for two hours muttered in broken English. I 




rejected his language, the suit he was wearing and his table manners; I 




decided that I rather disliked him. 




Seven years later Solita Solano also went back to Gurdjieff “in a crisis of 




misery.” There undoubtedly had to be a need—although the nature of this 




need might be quite undefined—^before a pupil would commit him or 




herself to his rugged ministry. The testimony of his pupils shows that they 




believed themselves to have discovered much that was of value in their 




contact with him. To history it may seem that nothing very much was going 




on;  but  if  the  pupil  opened himself  to the  new meanings, and  tried to 




balance on the knife-edge between yes and no, he might discover within 




the fabric of historical “events” another texture, other potentialities: new 




uses for the input of human experience. Perhaps buying a bottle of green 




Chartreuse to use as an antifreeze seems a schoolboyish prank; but it was a 




fragment of a larger characterization, part of the regalia of the invisible 




man. 




You cannot come out if you have never been in. The experience of two




T H E   P R I O R   O F   A V O N   3 2 7




Americans as different from each other as chalk from cheese, who lived for 




periods at the Prieur^, shows how life with Gurdjieff could be conducted on 




completely different levels. 




One spent the time from spring to autumn of 1931 at Fontainebleau. He 




had joined Orage’s groups in New York chiefly because he was in hot 




pursuit of a girl who went on to become a pillar of the Work. He had a 




healthy respect for Gurdjieff as a practical psychologist and certainly as a 




man  who  was  able  to  “get  his  number.”  He  suffered  from  no  great

existential anxiety, and took no deep interest in the philosophical problems 




raised by Gurdjieff s ideas. But once at the Prieure, his money ran out, and 




he  was  marooned—a  rather  irreverent  acolyte—^within  the  chateau 




grounds. Quite cheerfiilly he would weed paths and perform his share of 




the work—after all, it was summer, wine was cheap, there were companions of his own age, and the Master was often away. He became known chiefly for composing a Prieur6 song with a chorus which ran: “Trootitoot-toot; rootitoot-toot, we are the boys of the Institute!” Then one day while 




washing up, he confided to the woman pupil who was helping him that he 




personally was “not going anywhere.” The woman promptly informed 




Gurdjieff, who sent for him next morning. When the summons came, the 




composer of Institute songs was amusing himseff by trying to catch the 




goldfish in the fountain. Gurdjieff seated him, gave him a cup of coffee and 




remarked: “I think you leave now. I think you try somewhere else.” The 




young man left the Prieur6 within the hour. In Paris he found a job playing 




professional hockey, and with his first pay check went to see Gurdjieff at the 




Cafe de la Paix. Their relations remained amicable for some time, and the 




renegade received practical advice which he valued from a man whose 




|»retensions to cosmic knowledge concerned him not at all. 




A  complete contrast  is provided  by the story of how another young 




American left the Prieure. He had become interested in Orage’s groups 




while still at the university, and being of a literary and philosophical turn of 




wind belonged to the generation influenced by  

The Little Review

 and its 




f^mpt to penetrate the thick skin of American philistinism. He became 




dfeeply committed to the practice of Gurdjieff’s ideas and lived at the 




Prieure almost continuously from the autumn of 1927 to that of 1931, taking 




over the English translation of  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 from Bernard Metz. When 




he decided that it was time for him to leave, he approached Gurdjieff and 




told him that he wanted to go and live by himself in Paris. “This all right,” 




replied  Gurdjieff,  “only  I  give  you  exercises.”  The  pupil  wanted  no 




©cercises and refused them. Gurdjieff flew into a passion. He was wasting 




everything he had done, he cried. The results of four years’ work would be 




wssipated. When the pupil showed no signs of giving in to this line of 




attack, Gurdjieff changed his strategy. From a drawer in the table at which




3 2 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




he was sitting, he took out an automatic. “Take with you,” he commanded, 




“you will want to shoot yourself. ” The pupil threw the revolver back to the 




other side of the table and stalked out. 




He had no communication with GurdjiefF for several years, and his 




interests  turned  to  nonesoteric  subjects.  But  from  Rachmilievitch,  he 




received a letter describing an occasion when he and GurdjiefF had been 




discussing “good pupils” and “bad pupils.” Rachmilievitch had put his name 




forward  as  that  of  a  “good  pupil.”  Gurdjieff  had  not  answered,  but 




“benevolently smiled.” 




From one point of view this story contains everything. But in the last 




resort,  the  possibility  of  any  verdict  on  the   

process

  depends  on  our 




assessment of Gurdjieff ’s motives. We may concede that pupils did derive 




benefits from his instruction, possibly that they found what they were 




looking for. We may even admit that it is possible to catch a hint of the 




nature  of  their  experience.  But  in  the  last  resort,  the  personality  and 




motives  of  Gurdjieff  must  be  brought  into  question,  for  it  was  on  his 




manipulative  skills  that  the  process  depended.  It  could  and  did  go 




drastically wrong. 




The  many  conflicting  Gurdjieffs  who  appeared  to  different  disciples 




theoretically ensured that the teacher himself remain invisible. But instead, 




these mysteries, doubts, and contradictions produced a composite- “Gurd- 




jieff’—a slightly bearlike animation of the archetypal Fool, the Jester, the 




Trickster, a man with whom no one was ever entirely safe. Thus a man who 




had  made his business the  destruction of  illusions was to some extent 




defined by his public image; and in considering Gurdjieff, of all people, it is 




important to distinguish between image and reality. 




Gurdjieff acquired a reputation, and often rumor rather than experience 




etched its outlines. In 1952  

Time

 commented that he “seems to have been a 




remarkable blend of P. T. Barnum, Rasputin, Freud, Groucho Marx and 




everybody’s grandfather.” As a snap judgment this is not inaccurate, and it 




sketches the sort of image which now confronted those who approached the 




Master.  The  production  was  no  longer  the  play  of  the  professional 




hypnotist—unless a particular candidate opted for that play—but its central 




character was no less enigmatic than the magicism of St. Petersburg. The 




Fontainebleau  papers  called   

him

  “the  Magus  of  Valvins”;  and  when 




Zigrosser  published  his  account  of  how  Gurdjieff  had  met  him  with a 




deflating “I smell American,” the  

New York Times

 described this as “Fe-Fo- 




Fumism.”  The  comment  was  jocular,  of  course,  but  it  indicated  the 




unconscious image of Gurdjieff as the ogre at the top of the beanstalk. 




The image was one of great power, even among those who were kept 




informed  of  the  Master’s  activities.  By  1929,  D.  H.  Lawrence  was




T H E   P R I O R   O F   A V O N   3 2 9




endorsing Mabel Luhan’s verdict that GurdjieiF was “an imaginary incarnation of Lucifer.” Rumor was quite specific about Lucifer’s misdemeanors. 




The poet H.D. (Hilda Dolittle) was said to have extemporized:




In the house of your Sphinx 




The whores 




Scrub the floors 




And buy their own drinks. 




Although GurdjiefF’s reputation was always equivocal, the effect of his 




personal  presence  never  diminished.  One  former  Oragean  remembers 




how,  before  Gurdjielf’s  visit  to  New  York  in  1929,  rumors  had  been 




circulating about the “mysterious and wicked” figure of the Master of 




Fontainebleau. The groups had heard of his “wickedness with women” and 




his ceaseless demands for money. But when Gurdjieff faced Orage’s New 




York groups for the first time, all the rumors “were erased like chalk ofiF a 




blackboard.” The reaction which this particular pupil experienced was 




exactly that of Ouspensky fourteen years before. She put it in different 




words; “He’s hiding.” 




Gurdjieff was hiding behind the various roles which he assumed, but he 




was  also  concealed  behind  the  leading  role  of  the  Master.  His  own 




personality quite naturally affected his functioning as a teacher; and puzzled 




disciples have often followed Ouspensky in separating Gurdjieff the human 




being with all his many defects from the system of ideas which he taught. 




Zigrosser warned in 1929:




If one places too much emphasis on Gurdjieff the man, responding, 




pleasantly  or  otherwise,  to  his  rich,  incalculable  personality,  but 




making no attempt to divine his ideas, one misses practically everything of value in the contact ... he is also expounding certain ideas, a certain  standard  of  values,  certain  attitudes  to  life,  and  a  certain 




technique for meeting it, which I, among others, have found extremely 




interesting and, as far as I have been able to try them out, sound. 




The “rich, incalculable personality” was on occasion purely mischievous. 




Fritz  Peters,  whose   

Boyhood  with  Gurdjieff

  conveys  the  impression  of 




Gurdjieff the man, calls his private character “complex.” “At times,” he 




JWrites, “it seemed to me that. . . playing with people was literally nothing 




more  than  a  diversion  for  him,  something  to  take  his  mind  off  the 




continuous pressures under which he worked.” If he had no other claims to 




feme, Gurdjieff would still be justly celebrated as one of the great masters 




of the practical joke. 




330 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




The exaggerated respect shown to Gurdjieff did not conceal a certain 




shiftiness which occasionally characterized the man. His most alert pupils 




were  by  no  means  uncritical.  Beryl  Pogson  speaks  of  the  “curious 




impression” given by Maurice Nicoll’s diary of his time at the Institute. The 




doctor noticed Gurdjieff’s “weightless eyes, his blushes, his hesitation, his 




strange power.” T. S. Matthews noticed that “everyone, including Orage, 




was afraid of him, didn’t understand him, and never knew what he would do 




next.” Matthews identifies an important feature of Gurdjieff’s character 




vwth his description of the “sly, peasant-shrewd sayings” of  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales:

 for there was in Gurdjieff a considerable element of peasant cunning, 




which compensated for a mind which was not of the first order. “Thinking,” 




says one former resident at the Prieure, “was not G.’s thing. ” The wily 




Levantine, the haggler over prices, the man constrained by circumstances 




to become an acute practical psychologist—there was much of his origins in 




Gurdjieff. Toward the end of his tenure at the Prieure, one of the inmates 




remembers him returning from America very short of money. The baker in 




Avon had become pressing about the settlement of his small account. Miss 




Merston tried fruitlessly to postpone the reckoning; but just then, Gurdjieff 




walked by, discovered the situation, and quickly charmed the irate baker 




into submission—^although he admitted to the tradesman’s face that he had 




no money. The witness was astounded: “It was pure artistry.” 




If the virtues of the Sly Man were larger-than-life adaptations of those he 




had acquired in his native Caucasus, his vices were equally the vices of his 




native land. The pashalike manners which T. S. Matthews observed, his 




reputation as a connoisseur of wine,  

women

 and song, his insistence on 




traveling accompanied by a train of followers, show that Gurdjieff brought 




the manners of a successful Middle Eastern businessman to Europe. The 




man  behind  the  mask  could  sometimes  be  seen  peering  through  the 




eyeslits. But granted his natural cunning, his coarseness, his sensuality— 




why should these  

per se

 disqualify him from the task he was attempting? 




The charges against him must be considered one by one. 




He was a gormandizer, a fleshly man, not a spiritual teacher. Gurdjieff" 




certainly always enjoyed his food and drink, although he was never the 




bibulous  glutton  of  popular  imagination.  Ever  since  the  early  days  in 




Russia, observers noted that he sometimes ate very little at the feasts over 




which he presided, and he undoubtedly used the euphoric effects of alcohol 




to loosen up the company for his inspection. Several pupils have noted a 




peculiar effect of the alcohol consumed at Gurdjieff’s table; no one became 




drunk until the Master had left the room. On one occasion, Gurdjieff even 




threw a glass down the table at a woman pupil who had helped herself to a 




drink out of turn. But it is true, on the face of things, that Gurdjieff does not




T H E   P R I O R   O F   A V O N   331




measure up to conventional standards of how spiritual leaders ought to 




behave. 




Another charge against him is that of cupidity. Was he out for money? He 




may have needed large sums for his work, but it is undeniable that he did 




somehow acquire a chateau—which he called “my house.” At different 




times he maintained various flats in Paris, and except for short periods, he 




did live off his pupils. But is this so very reprehensible? His profession was 




that of “teacher”—whatever we may think about what he taught—and it was 




logical that his pupils should support him. As a writer in  

The Times Literary

 




 

Supplement

 once remarked, it is impossible to imagine him piling up loot in 




some  Swiss  bank.  For  long  periods  he  supported  hordes  of  indigent 




Russians; and followers unable to pay for themselves were often maintained 




at the common expense. After Gurdjieff’s death his family were by no 




means  left  in  easy  circumstances,  a  fact  which  is  at  once explained by 




Gurdjieff’s seignorial attitude to any funds he happened to have in his 




possession. After constant pressure and reminders of the dire straits in 




which the Master was placed, a supporter might contribute a large sum only 




to find it dissipated on what appeared to be some quite trivial undertaking. 




Once Gurdjieff bought the whole population of the Prieure bicycles—and 




made them learn to ride. Another time he gave all his followers opera 




glasses. He installed intercoms throughout the Prieure; and on more than 




one occasion spent the whole of a generous subsidy on a gargantuan meal 




for his followers. 




Nevertheless, the impression remains that he was, as J. G. Bennett once 




admitted, “by Western standards, a shark. ” This is possibly because of his 




undoubted cunning in wheedling money out of people—^not because of 




suspicion that he operated as a shearer of sheep through base motives. 




Sometimes he may have been teaching the penny-pinching or the gullible 




lessons in the use of money; sometimes, no doubt, the sheer pleasure of the 




game impelled him to see how far he could push his luck. Material survival 




Was never greatly in question; for Gurdjieff could have earned his living in 




My one of a half-a-dozen ways. 




Then there is Gurdjieff’s conduct with women. This is less likely to shock 




people today than it did in the 1920s and 1930s when the avant-garde 




sometimes hid beneath its daring cleavage the heart of a Victorian prude. 




And perhaps Gurdjieff was not as black as he is painted. At least twice he 




«ked women to marry him (although one was the wife of the Svwss consul




New York). But there is no doubt at all that Gurdjieff had sexual relations 




^th  many  of  his  pupils.  The  important  questions  are:  under  what 




conditions did these relationships take place and what was the effect of 




Gurdjieff’s promiscuity on the women who became his sexual partners? 




332 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




If Gurdjieff merely used the power of his position to persuade girls to 




sleep with him, is this a serious offence? This of course depends on who the 




girl was and on the degree of her willingness. Some women asked for 




nothing better than to throw themselves at the Master’s feet; but failure to 




comply  with  Gurdjieff’s  plans  often  led  to  exclusion  from  the  Work 




altogether.  Gurdjieff  was  certainly  a  sensual  man,  and  enjoyed  the 




pleasures of the bed as much as those of the table. Fritz Peters was familiar 




with the aspect of his room at Fontainebleau:




There were rumors at the time, and I am in no position to deny them, 




that a great deal more went on in his rooms other than drinking coffee 




and Armagnac. The normal state of his rooms after one night indicated 




that almost any human activity could have taken place there the night 




before. 




As  any  reader  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

  will  become  aware,  GurdjieflF 




disapproved of contraceptives, and the natural result of his sexual athleticism was a fair-sized family of natural children. Weighing certainty with gossip, it is clear that there are now living about half-a-dozen of his children 




by various women in his circle. Again Fritz Peters is fairly specific in a 




reference to the children at the Prieure. “With the exception of my brother 




and  myself,”  he  writes,  “all  the  other  children  were  either  relatives— 




nieces,  nephews,  etc.,  of  Mr.  Gurdjieff—or  his  natural  children.”  T.  S. 




Matthews confirms that the size of Gurdjieff’s extended family was quite 




obvious  to  members  of  the  New  York  groups.  “His  women  followers 




obviously adored him, and some of those who had found favor in his sight 




had visible mementos; swarthy and liquid-eyed children.” 




Gurdjieff did heap presents on his “calves ”—as he called his children 




(their mothers were “cows’’)—when he remembered. But his attitude was 




at  bottom  careless  and  negligent.  Of  course,  there  may  have  been  an 




esoteric reason to justify the magisterial antics. One woman follower of 




Gurdjieff has been reported as saying that “Gurdjieff used to take us gitls 




into intimacy with him. It was his way of helping us.” Other suggestions 




have  been  made  that  GurdjiefT’s  sexual  activities  were  a  result  of  his 




“secret” sexual teachings—^perhaps a form of Tantrism which he had picked 




up in the East—^but this seems intrinsically unlikely. Without knowing any 




more details, it is difficult to avoid the suspicion that, after all, physical 




gratification did play a large part in his motives. There may even creep back 




suggestions of that otherwise inaccurate comparison with Rasputin. 




Criticism of GurdjieflF as a cynical materialist takes no account of what he 




said he was trying to do, and far more serious questions are raised when we 




come to consider his methods of “awakening” his pupils. In administering




T H E   P R I O R   O F   A V O N   333




his “shocks,” he could often be brutally harsh—and sometimes he overstepped the limits. Even if we admit the validity of his objectives, it must also be admitted that in a number of cases Gurdjieff’s methods ended in 




tragedy. Either he made a false assessment of a particular pupil, or he was 




guilty of criminal negligence toward him. He was playing with fire and the 




game in which he invited his pupils to take part was a dangerous one. In 




GurdjieflF’s view it was better to die than to remain asleep. 




But a great deal of nonsense has been put forth about his ruthlessness. 




Ranging from the accusations that he killed Katherine Mansfield to the 




latest notion of him as “a strange Messiah who let others die in his place,” 




these  visions  represent  the  idea  of  Gurdjieff  as  Lucifer  pushed  to  the 




ultimate. Although a number of people may have killed themselves as a 




result of contact with him, there is no way of telling how many desperate 




folk were saved from self-destruction by the mere fact of having a Master- 




figure to lean upon. If casualties and salvage jobs were placed on the scales, 




it is probable that the balance would tilt significantly in Gurdjieff s favor. 




This in no way excuses unprincipled conduct toward a pupil at any time. 




There  are  two  definite  cases of  suicide from  the 1920s  which  clearly 




illustrate the problems with which the moral censor must deal. I have cut— 




both here and in later references—any information which would enable a 




casual  inquirer  to  identify  the  persons  concerned.  It  would  be  quite 




possible  for  a  seriously  interested  researcher  to  discover—in  time—to 




whom the names “Mr. X” and “Mrs. Y” refer. 




Mr. X was a British diplomat, described by a man who knew him as “the 




Harold Nicolson of the F.O. of these days. ” He was born in the late 1880s, 




took a Double First at his university and led the field in the Foreign Office 




exams of his year. His chief work took place during the series of peace 




conferences which followed the First World War, and his achievements 




were recognized by the award of a decoration. It is clear that he was a 




brdliant man and might confidently have expected to add a knighthood to 




tiie  letters  which  he  placed  after  his  name.  It  may  have  been  through 




Rowland Kenney—^who went from journalism to the Foreign Office—^that 




he  came  into  contact  with  Ouspensky  and  Orage.  At  all  events,  the 




diplomat was possibly the most distinguished recruit to the Prieure, which 




he seems to have visited during 1924. 




This means that he would have been there at the time of Gurdjieff’s 




’accident” and the resulting confusion. In describing life at the Institute, 




J. G. Bennett writes: “Some people went mad. There were even suicides. 




Many gave up in despair.” When pressed on the question of suicides,* he 




mentioned, without naming him, the figure of Mr. X, and hinted that the




* In an interview with the author. 




3 3 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




effects of GurdjiefF’s closing his Institute were even more shattering than 




can be gathered from Nott or the de Hartmanns. It may well have been the 




depression caused by GurdjiefF’s announcement that he was shutting up 




shop which drove the less well-balanced of his pupils over the brink. This 




makes sense in terms of what little more we know about Mr. X, and it 




emphasizes the point that, with a large number of pupils, Gurdjieff could 




not keep track of each individual’s personal situation. Enough is now known 




about the dangerous effects of breaking off a psychoanalysis while the 




patient  is  still  in  a  dependent  state  to  make  it  clear  that  even  an 




exceptionally intelligent man like Mr. X would not be immune from the 




feeling that the sun had gone out. His obituary stated that all his friends and 




colleagues had been surprised by his urgent request for transfer to the 




Middle East. They would have been even more surprised if they had known 




that Ouspensky had given him the task of contacting the Mevlevi dervishes 




and finding out all he could. 




On his way to his new posting in the summer of 1925, the diplomat and 




his wife stayed for a few days at the Prieure, which was at this time in a state 




of suspended animation. They were befriended by Margaret Naumburg 




who  saw  Mr.  X  as  a  “typical  ”  member  of  the  English  upper  class;  he 




possessed, she thought, one side of complete conventionality and another 




which was uncertain and questing. From her letters to Jean Toomer, it is 




plain that the diplomat was distraught, although there is little to show what 




was really responsible. Margaret Naumburg succeeded in shocking him 




severely with the bland statement that his profession must give him an 




unrivaled opportunity of practicing Gurdjieff’s theory of role playing. But 




despite her feeling that Mr. X was trapped, even she was unprepared for 




the news reported by a London daily newspaper that he had shot himself 




two days after his arrival in the East. 




We do not know what motives were behind this, although acquaintances 




hint at prior unbalance. It may even be that his conversation with Margaret 




Naumburg was the straw which broke the back of his tottering self-esteem. 




Gurdjieff’s teaching cannot be shown to have played any specific part in this 




suicide; and Gurdjieff might merely have been one ingredient in a personal 




crisis whose main constituents were quite different. But it is at least highly 




probably  that  Gurdjieff’s  standards  and  orientation  induced  a  state  of 




desperation in which a brilliant man took his own life. The episode does 




provide a warning that not even the most highly trained intellect was proof 




against the gloom which attacked less endowed disciples. 




A second tragedy took place in the summer of 1927. This was the death of 




Mrs. Y, a former dancer at the Paris Opera, who had become intrigued with 




Gurdjieff’s ideas through an interest in the movements. She stayed at the 




Prieur6 until the demonstration in the Th^Mre des Champs-Elys^es at




T H E   P R I O R   O F   A V O N   3 3 5




Christmas 1923, and was then persuaded by her husband to abandon the 




American expedition and to return to London. It was probably in late 1923 




that Mrs. Y was involved in an incident with GurdjiefF which has been 




described as “near rape.” Her husband came to Ouspensky’s lectures in 




Warwick Gardens, had nearly entered the Prieure himself, and is discreet; 




“There were strange rumours about G.,” he writes, “. . . I had a profound 




mistrust  of  the  whole  venture.”  Behind  this  reticence  is  concealed  the 




gravest scandal to trouble the Work until the mid-1930s. The reverberations were echoing round the walls of the Institute when the first Americans arrived in the spring of 1924. Even if we excuse GurdjiefF’s conduct by the 




sort of double-thinking which rationalizes him out of so many scrapes, the 




results in this case were appalling. Mrs. Y seems to have been rendered 




permanently unstable by her experience, and may have made an attempt to 




return to Fontainebleau. Certainly, during 1927 she was again in France. 




Her husband met her abroad and was shocked to discover how “ill” she 




was. Mrs. Y returned to England, where in the late summer of 1927, she 




fell from an upper-story window in a south coast boardinghouse and was 




killed. The coroner recorded a verdict of suicide “whilst of unsound mind. ” 




Mr. Y refers guardedly to his wife’s condition; “Most of those who left the 




Prieure, or were banished from it by GurdjiefF himself, had the greatest 




difficulty in readjusting themselves to ordinary life. It was as if they had 




seen the vision of the new world, only to be rejected and thrown back into 




the chaos from which they had tried to escape. This too often resulted in 




tragedy in their own lives.” 




Mrs. Y’s death occurred some eighteen months after she had given birth 




to a child. We do not know whether her final rejection by Gurdjieff took 




place  before  or  after  the  birth.  Under  other  circumstances  it  might  be 




argued that if Gurdjieff had banished her from the Prieure, this was because 




he considered it her role to look after her husband and family—indeed cases 




cowld be cited in which he did exactly this. But there is also the “near-rape” 




to be taken into account, and its effect on a young woman who, as Mr. Y 




Wwte,  thought  she  had  “seen  the  vision  of  the  new world,  only to be 




rejected.” Gurdjieff certainly showed a hardness of heart which was quite 




bat of the ordinary. Later he referred to Mrs. Y as someone who “made 




trouble” for him. 




It is always possible that by his own remorseless ethic Gurdjieff had 




committed  no  sin.  

Wake  up

—or   

be  damned:  it  is  better  to  die  than  be

 




 

^mned. 

  The  trouble  is  that  it  was  not  only  to  his  pupils  that  Gurdjieff 




ittright appear capable of no wrong. It was an inevitable risk of the fiinction 




he had taken upon himself that he might come to believe his every action 




lustified by the ends it was designed to attain. If the pupil accepts that the 




Master is necessary to shock him out of his mechanical state, it is possible to




3 3 6   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I B C L E




see how he can also accept the need for impUcit obedience; for without such 




docihty, how is the Master to engineer the artificial crises which are such an 




important part of his discipline? But for the Master there are dangers in 




receiving such complete devotion. He may come to believe that it is his 




right and due. Then his conviction that such methods are necessary to help 




people “wake up” may grow progressively stronger—together with the 




accumulating pressures which encourage him to half accept a reflected and 




exaggerated estimate of his own powers. 




Did the ogrish side of the enigmatic Mr. Gurdjielf sometimes take over— 




as  if  Mr.  Hyde  had  been  the  deliberate  creation  of  Dr.  Jekyll,  or 




Frankenstein’s monster a projection of part of Frankenstein? Had Gurdjieff 




invented  his  role  and  then  begun  to  identify  with  it  in  earnest?  It  is  a 




question  which  some  of  his  disciples  must  occasionally  have  asked 




themselves. What conclusions they reached largely depend upon their 




answers to that incessantly recurring enigma; “What is the Work?” 




8




Art, Science, Religion and Gymnastics




The conversion of Orage, the death of Katherine Mansfield, and the success 




of Gurdjieff ’s ideas in the United States all meant that Fontainebleau and 




its Master were topics for discussion in cafe society. Outside the circle of 




the  converted,  there  was  not  likely  to  be  much  comprehension,  and 




GurdjiefF’s tactics were designed to discourage casual inquirers. Nott has 




told the story of how two visiting psychologists were kept at arm's length by 




GurdjiefF’s impersonation of a genial but bumbling idiot, and it is scarcely 




surprising that the most curious stories circulated in the artistic world. 




Before  Monk  Gibbon  paid  his  visit  to  the  Prieur6,  he  had  discussed 




Orage’s conversion with A. E. and W. B. Yeats. Yeats too, had played the 




of Doubting Thomas and tried to communicate to Gibbon something of 




hi' own disillusionment with his magical adventures. “I have had a lot of 




experience of that kind of thing in my time,” he told the young man, “and 




toy advice to you is—leave it alone. I know how such sects become priest- 




ndden and fall into the hands of charlatans.” But even well-intentioned 




warnings sometimes stirred the curiosity, and through the society of the 




^ons and the cafes, GurdjiefiF’s ideas found their way to potential converts. 




One pupil first heard the phrase “self-observation without identification” at 




A weekend party given by Dorothy Coates, the mistress of John Quinn. 




Another—^who spent several years living at the Prieure—became intrigued 




by a story he heard from a fnend who was a devotee of Gertrude Stein. One




3 3 7




3 3 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




evening the great lady was said to have sat fixedly in her chair without 




turning  her  head  to  left  or  right.  “Perhaps,”  said  the  friend,  “this  was 




something Gurdjieff had told her to do. ” 




This was not entirely improbable. When Jane Heap moved to France in 




the  late  1920s,  she  became  close  friends  with  Gertrude  Stein,  and  Leo 




Stein—although he remained critical—^was familiar with the content of 




GurdjieflF’s ideas. Gertrude Stein and Gurdjieff once met. According to 




Alice B. Toklas, “She had nothing against him.” That the rumor of some 




connection  between  the  two  may  well  have  been  true  shows  how  the 




mediation of Orage had made the ideas of his Master common currency 




among the influential avant-garde. 




Orage’s teaching was a lucid presentation of a practical discipline; but it 




also had about it a self-justificatory flavor. He was advocating a philosophy 




to which he had been drawn for reasons which were by no means purely 




intellectual; and of this he was probably aware. This does not mean that his 




reasons were in some way invalid; his own nature, and that of the audiences 




whom he had to interest, demanded a justification of the way of life he 




recommended in terms of contemporary rationalism. The result was the 




creation of a body of literature, part propaganda, part apologetics, which 




formed a definite “Oragean” school of thought. The theme was always the 




same. Why should writers, scientists, or publicists abandon their absorbing 




occupations  and  fix  their  gaze  on  the  stars?  The  answers  were  always 




similar: we need a return to first principles. 




Approaches varied; and in the end, some of the intellectuals who had 




surrendered  to  Orage’s  persuasiveness  concluded  that  they  had  been 




mistaken,  that  for  all  his  logic,  Orage  was  wTong.  They  returned  to  their 




former occupations, although not entirely unmarked. Their situation was 




similar to that of Middleton Murry and the  

Adelphi

 group in England who, 




after teetering perilously on the edge of the abyss, had fled in alarm. The 




influence of Gurdjieff, Ouspensky, and Orage as forces to reject is often as 




significant as their positive role. 




Jean Toomer was—^at least apparently—^a model for all thinking men and 




women of the Oragean persuasion. He had become seriously involved with 




the ideas at the height of his literary success with  

Cane. 

 He had accepted 




one of  the  standard arguments—that the writer should become a man 




before  he  write—and  his  dedication  seemed  to  be  absolute.  But  even 




Toomer wavered at times from the narrow way on which he had set his feet; 




and  the  story  of  his  association  wdth  Gurdjieff  is  a  paradigm  of  the 




relationship of the spirit and the world. 




In November 1924, Toomer returned to the United States with a hunger




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   3 3 9




for “real ideas” which he feh Orage could satisfy. His impatience evidently 




got the better of him for, on December 8, Orage was admonishing him that 




“for a long time our  

chief

 concern is to hsten, to learn to listen, as G. used 




to say.” By January 9, 1925, Toomer was writing repentently to Orage that 




he  would  “like  to  learn  from  you,  to  work  with  you,  more  than  formerly. . . . Substances in me are turning to Gurdjieff, and, more immediately, to you. ” His ambitions changed direction. He wanted to become an esoteric teacher. Specifically, he wanted to be like Gurdjieff. 




The first reward of his new commitment was permission to conduct a 




group in Harlem. This was not a success, and toward the end of 1925, 




Toomer left New York for Chicago. When Orage returned from spending 




the  summer  and  autumn  of  1925  at  the  Prieure,  he  wrote  to  his  prize 




subordinate: “I am very much interested how affairs are proceeding with 




you in Chicago. Very little indeed of what you are doing has come to my 




knowledge; and a little of even that is only gossip about a girl! What I 




should like to hear is how many groups you have, their numbers and 




quality. . . . ” 




Toomer’s main achievement was not in building up a circle of proselytes, 




but rather in playing a fish long-since hooked by Orage. The pair had 




designs on Mabel Dodge Luhan and her house in Taos, New Mexico, where 




she and her husband lived in an isolation sometimes shared by the D. H. 




Lawrences—and  an  increasing  number  of  intellectuals.  Taos  was  fast 




becoming an artist’s colony, filled with refugees from the big cities who 




were  concerned  to  return  to  the  primitive  virtues.  The  Harlem  poet, 




Langston Hughes, wrote a sultry evocation of the place called “A House in 




Taos,” and at once it was assumed that this house was Mabel Luhan’s. 




Mabel Luhan had been caught by the mission of Orage and Gurdjieff in 




early 1924. When she had first heard of Gurdjieff’s Institute, she wrote to 




D. H. Lawrence, who at that time was in his most splenetic mood against 




all things Gurdjieffian. He had replied in January 1924, that he had “heard 




enough about that place at Fontainebleau ... to know that it is a rotten, 




Mse, self-conscious place of people playing a sickly stunt. One doesn’t 




wonder  about  it  at  all,”  he  emphasized.  “One  knows.”  Nevertheless, 




sometime  toward  the  end  of  January  1924,  the  Lawrences  visited  the 




Institute on their way to Baden-Baden. The expedition did nothing to allay 




Lawrence’s mistrust of Gurdjieff, and Mabel Luhan devoted reams of paper 




to an attempt at persuading him to try again. These letters read as an appeal 




for  information;  but  in  fact  they  were  probably  an  artfully  conceived 




Campaign to draw Lawrence into the net. For by the spring of 1926, the 




writer  had  long since gone beyond  providing house-room  for Orage’s 




nestings in New York. 




Her enthusiasm for Gurdjieff’s ideas had a personal aspect: Jean Toomer, 




3 4 0   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




who she had probably met at Orage’s meetings. A letter of January 8, 1926, 




which she wrote to Toomer from a hotel in Santa Fe, shows to what lengths 




her infatuation had gone. It had become entangled with her interest in the 




ideas which Toomer represented, and she suddenly decided that it was vital 




to start a branch of GurdjiefF’s Institute in Taos with Toomer as the chosen 




instructor. 




The practical outpouring of her devotion becomes clear in the correspondence between Toomer and Orage. Mabel Luhan had offered her ranch to Gurdjieff to house a full-scale Institute on the Hnes of Fontainebleau. She 




had probably also given—or been one of the leading spirits in raising—the 




sum  of  15,000  dollars,  which  had  been  handed  over  to  Toomer  as 




GurdjiefF’s representative. Toomer was in communication with Mme. de 




Hartmann, who was still Gurdjieff’s secretary and administrator. He sent 




1,000 dollars to her and asked what he should do with the remaining 14,000 




dollars. His own suggestion was to start a branch of the Institute in Taos. 




He  wrote  to  Gurdjieff  that  he  had  inspected  the  property,  which  was 




suitable for encouraging hard work, although too isolated from ordinary life 




for a school of the Fourth Way. Of Mabel Luhan he wrote; “I can hope for 




her, just in so far as she will persist in her present idea of following your 




method—but I could not persuade myself to certainty in regard to her 




constancy.” 




On February 1, Gurdjieff broke his self-imposed silence with a long letter 




of thanks to Mabel Luhan. He wrote in the lengthy Armenian sentences of 




Beelzebub,  and  the  letter  was  translated  by  Mme.  Galumnian.  He 




explained his rule about not answering letters and said that nevertheless, 




when Mme. de Hartmann handed him the money, he felt he must write 




personally.  He  explained  that  he  was  at  last  struggling  free  from  the 




problems created by the liquidation of the Fontainebleau Institute—and 




maintained the fiction that he was also liquidating its various branches 




throughout the world. He had no time to devote to the money-making 




activities which could support an Institute, he explained; neither could his 




writing be interrupted. He was therefore compelled to refuse the offer of 




the Taos house. 




Toomer had lost his chance to establish the well-endowed Institute of his 




dreams.  The  14,000  dollars  went  into  a  fund  for  the  publication  of 




 

Beelzebub’s  Tales, 

  and  the  Taos  plan  was  abandoned.  This  no  whit 




diminished the enthusiasm of Mabel Luhan. On April 3, she replied to a 




letter from  Lawrence which  ended with the reflection that “we are all 




changing  pretty  drastically”;  and  again,  her  tone  is  eager  to  engage 




Lawrence. 




Her letter makes suggestive riding and explains Gurdjieff’s enotamous 




appeal to those jaded by life’s more obvious stimuli. The attempt to convert




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   3 4 1




Lawrence was made very much in terms of the Oragean version. “So that’s 




his  Method,”  Mabel  Luhan  wrote.  “Self-observation.  First  with   

non-

 




 

identification, 

  then   

participation, 

  then   

experiment.” 

  She  tried  to  persuade 




her friend to sound out Gurdjieff for her; and as she suspected that the 




Master was at that moment on the French Riviera on one of his chaotic 




expeditions, might not Lawrence be able to cross the Italian frontier and 




interview him? Keeping up the pretense that she was asking a favor, she 




cajoled  Lawrence  by  protesting  her  trust  in  him.  She  might  visit  Fontainebleau “for a week or two in May,” she wrote; “but I’d rather wait to hear from you first.” 




Lawrence  had  no  intention  of  succumbing.  He  was  tolerant  of  her 




interest, and even prepared to investigate it. But he was fundamentally 




opposed to the ideology of expanded consciousness, believing that the way 




to  cosmic  awareness  lay  through  the  unconscious.  His  annotations  of 




 

Tertium  Organum

  show  a  total  opposition  to  Ouspensky,  and  “As  for 




Gourdjieff and Orage and the awakening of various centres and the ultimate 




 

I

 and all that,” he wrote, “—to tell you the truth, plainly, I don’t know . . . 




There is no way mapped out, and never will be. ” Mrs. Luhan could retrieve 




her ovra game; Fontainebleau might do her good. The last word from the 




Lawrence side of the correspondence came from Frieda Lawrence, who 




wrote discouragingly in July; “I don’t like the Gurdjieffs and the Orages and 




the other little thunderstorms.” 




Meanwhile, Toomer continued his spiritual odyssey. Increasingly, he felt 




himself detached from life, his values rooted in the values of the Work. A 




memorandum, dated April 10 and 11, 1926, indicates the state which he 




was  seeking:  “the  planet  Karatas”  to  which  he  refers  is  mentioned  in 




 

Bedzebub’s Tales

 as Beelzebub’s home planet from which he was exiled for 




presumption, and to which he has painfully won the right to return. 




I  have  an  intimation  that  this  Earth,  instead  of  being  my  home 




planet—as  Toomer assumes and  feels that it is and as it is for the 




planetary body—^will become strange, foreign and remote, while at the 




same time I will increasingly feel Karatas or the Sun-Absolute to be my 




home. This, in the reality of fact, knowledge, attitude, realisation; not 




in mere words or fancy. . . . 




Let me observe where  

this

 remote being, Toomer, dwells, what he 




does,  where  he  goes,  what  things  he  uses,  and  how  he  lives,  in 




general. Let me likewise observe the life of these other remote beings, 




bipeds, quadrupeds, insects, etc., seeing them all as  

remote, 

 distant 




from my native planet, friends, associates and surroundings. If I can 




hold this state, wherein this Earth—all of it. New York and Toomer’s 




room and friends in New York included—is  

really

 the remote place. 




3 4 2   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




whereas Karatas is  

really

 home, the chief feature will then at once wish 




to  leave  this  place  and  will  become  nostalgic,  will  wish  to  reach 




Karatas. And in this way, it can be used to aid my return. 




In his notes for conducting his own group, Toomer had reminded himself 




to bear in mind “the nature of the I that is to be conceived.” Now, in his 




increasing internalization, he admonished himself; “Transfer all dependence and expectancy from the external world, and from organism, to I.” 




He became awed with the idea which Orage transmitted as “man can 




become a cell in the mind of God.” 




Hitherto I have held the attitude that life would help the organism, 




that the organism must be helped by something external: this has been 




my dearest attitude. Now I say that I must help it, and must prepare 




myself in order to help God. This prospect is at once terrifying and 




liberating. 




He is a remote being.  

I

 am responsible for him and I am responsible 




for myself throughout all time. I arti obliged to make all possible effort 




in  all  circumstances  to  preserve,  improve  and  develop  him.  I  am 




responsible for my own realisation. 




The nearest practical equivalent to “the planet Karatas” was the Prieur^, 




where  Toomer  spent  the  summer  of  1926.  He  returned  to  Chicago  in 




September, and a circular announced his first meeting on October 3. There 




were to be groups for both old and new members and a special group to 




listen  to  readings  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  “Events  at  Fontainebleau  this 




summer which have a bearing on the work in America will be mentioned.” 




The  nature  of  these  mysterious  events  is  not  stated;  and  probably  the 




sentence was used by Toomer simply to excite interest in his return from 




France. A month or so later Orage wrote urgently from the Prieur6—or 




“Chateau Gurdjieff,” as he liked to call it—in the terms of  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 




to ask “how you are getting on during your first descent to the planet 




‘Earth’?”  Toomer  replied  that  he  confronted  “a  strange  composite  of 




positive  and  negative  feehngs  towards  the  work,  with  very  few  clear 




conceptions of what it is about or how it is conducted in groups.” He found 




that  many  people  were  friendly  to  him  personally,  but  balked  at  the 




mention  of  his  mission  in  Chicago.  The  “planet  ‘Earth’”  was  not  a 




hospitable place for a pupil-teacher of GurdjiefF’s ideas. 




Next summer he returned to Fontainebleau, partly 




at  the 




request of




Orage, who had decided not to cross the Atlantic that year 




and 




wrote that




he would feel “easier in his mjjid” if Toomer were 




at 




the 




Prietwe to




superintend the summer visitors. In 1927 there were a great many




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   3 4 3




Americans at Fontainebleau, and Toomer was the senior American pupil 




present. 




It  seems  that,  in  his  elliptical  fashion,  Gurdjieff  indicated  that  great 




things were in store for him; but there is little further information about his 




relationship with Gurdjieff until the summer of 1929 when he was again at 




the Prieure. He was suffering from a prolonged bout of depression which 




had begun when his novel  

Transatlantic

 had been rejected the previous 




year; and in a note dated September 20, 1929, he analyzed his feelings. He 




had  returned  to  Fontainebleau  “after  some  months  of  having  been 




comparatively  asleep  in  the  objective  world.”  The  French  Line  turned 




down a scheme, which he had hoped to arrange, for him to write factually 




about life aboard one of their ships. This jolted him “from my comparative 




state of not feeling reality and made me again conscious of life as it is, of the 




real difficulties involved in managing this organism named Toomer.” He 




was depressed about sex problems and money. He got drunk repeatedly 




and wrote of vomiting and nausea in a paroxysm of self-disgust. While 




waiting  for  the  publishers  Harcourt  Brace  to  pass  verdict  upon  the 




rewritten version of  

Transatlantic, 

 he made an entry in his notebook which 




shows how “the planet Karatas” was now becoming the alien world. His feet 




were once more touching the surface of that much despised planet Earth. 




In the midst of my great work I am becoming literary. 




This idea was formulated one chill rainy twilight as, with two grogs 




aux [sic] rum under my belt, I walked through the avenue of plane 




trees from the gare at Avon to Le Prieure. 




It was caused (1) by a recognition of the increasing value I am giving 




to all that has to do with vrating, (2) by a realisation that many of my 




mner experiencings are automatically relating themselves to literary 




forms, (3) that I again see, sense, feel, understand the world from the 




ppint of view of a literary artist, (4) that my literary work again has a 




living atmosphere. 




[ accept it. I accept it because I understand it is an aspect of my 




necessary contacting with the ordinary and practical worlds. 




This begins the period of my great writing. 




Years hence I will again emerge into the world of pure being. 




This is an eclipse of Jean the saint, an emergence of Jean the man in 




the world and artist. 




Salzmann: “Once you were an eagle. Now you are a sheep.” 




The mood of jubilation was shattered by the renewed rejection of 




 

'^transatlantic, 

 and his problems came crowding in on him. He felt that he 




cut himself off from human experience. All his plans were being




3 4 4   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




delayed, in particular his wish to project an image of himself as an American 




novelist, not the Negro author of  

Cane. 

 Worse still, he saw things  

repeating

 




 

.  .  .  and  repeating

  in  the  pattern  of  his  life,  in  a  minuscule  reminder  of 




eternal recurrence. Once more he would be returning to Chicago from 




Fontainebleau,  having  failed  to  have  a  novel  accepted.  Resignedly,  he 




sailed for the United States in October to resume his groups, “Imperfect 




though it is,” he wrote, “I leave my form in Chicago. In Chicago I am and 




possess all that having a form implies. The minute I leave Chicago, my form 




tends to dissolve.” 




Just as he had reconciled himself to the world in the hopes of success vwth 




his novel, he accepted his role as a spiritual director when that success was 




denied him. Although he was far from downing his pen.  

Transatlantic

 was 




Toomer’s  attempt  at  the  sole  literary  form  in  which  he  had  achieved 




success. Afterward he burrowed deeper into the core of Gurdjieff’s ideas, 




and his later writings almost all relate to the discipline which he continued 




to teach. He made his most original contribution to the Work in 1932— 




some three years after he had temporarily folded his wangs and decided to 




join the common herd. 




With unintentional irony—for he was necessarily ignorant of the battle with 




literary ambition which Toomer was fighting—Gorham Munson published 




an essay on “The Significance of Jean Toomer” in his book  

Destinations

 




(1928). He held up his friend as an example to all American writers. An 




artist fully conscious of the responsibility which his gifts entailed, Munson 




wrote,  was  forced,  like  Toomer,  to  seek  the  solution  to  the  universal 




questions. He was morally bound to seek for unity in himself, so that the 




voice his readers heard would be genuinely his own. Harking back to the 




days when they sat together at the feet of Waldo Frank and looked on 




 

Tertium Organum

 as their Bible, Munson wrote of the potential of this new 




sort of artist, and the reader of  

Destinations

 is left in no doubt that in its 




author’s eyes the correct destination was Toomer’s indefinable goal. 




In another essay in the book, “American Literature and the Unattaifta- 




ble,” Munson pointed the way in more general terms. He appealed to the 




disillusioned but not disheartened man; “the man who has lost his illusions 




concerning wealth and sex and art and social reform, but who has turned 




searcher with a vengeance, who is desperate and practical, skeptical of 




himself, energetic to the point of gratuitous effort and unified by his object, 




which is self-knowledge and self-development towards a clear but utterly 




remote standard.” This might stand as a definition of Oragean Man, and 




Munson proposed it in direct opposition to the ideal of the whole man 




embodied in the romantic vision of the artist. As a leading supporter of the 




romantic heresy, he selected Waldo Frank. This onslaught on his former




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   345




mentor was the first of several; for the coining of Orage had fairly spht the 




“Art as Vision” circle, and Munson conceived it his duty to show Frank the 




error of his ways. 




Munson was less prominent than Toomer in the Work hierarchy, but was 




very active on Gurdjielf s behalf and became the unofficial treasurer of the 




GurdjielF fund in New York. Kenneth Burke was certainly interested in the 




ideas and may have conducted a group at some time before he turned 




Marxist in the 1930s. Hart Crane was the only one of the original circle to 




hold  out  staunchly  for  a  more  personal  vision.  “Your  comments  on 




Gorham’s shrine and gland-totemism, ” he wrote to Allen Tate early in 1927, 




“convince me that Orage talked as vaguely and arbitrarily in your presence 




as he did in mine on a similar occasion.” A longer letter to Ivor Winters, 




written on May 29 of the same year, complains that his friends’ missionary 




zeal has broken the ties between them. For even Waldo Frank had become 




swept up by the Oragean tide. 




A month or so after Crane decided that he could no longer understand his 




fiiends, Frank arrived at the Prieur^ to stay for a weekend with his second 




wife, Alma; both Toomer and the Munsons were at Fontainebleau, and 




Frank’s discomfiture was widely observed. According to Munson, he was 




little the vdser for his experience in Orage’s groups and seemed unaffected 




by Gurdjieff’s scorn for intellectual posturing; he appeared to believe that 




the  Master  would  welcome  him  as  a  fellow-sage.  Instead  of  meeting 




Gurdjieff as an equal, he had found himself led on a lengthy tour of the 




Prieure grounds by Russian pupils. Eventually, Frank was introduced to 




Gurdjieff, who thoroughly confused him by talking in his usual garbled 




English about the still less comprehensible  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 




The Saturday routine wore on, wdth the bath in the late evening and the 




feast held at midnight in the “English” dining room. The Franks were 




seated  on  each  side  of  Gurdjieff,  who  presided  patriarchally  over  a 




gathering sixty strong. During the meal there was a lull in the conversation, 




into this Gurdjieff interjected a passage which in Munson’s account is 




sii^tly confused. However, the incident was recorded by another pupil, 




and Gurdjieff seems to have been implying that Frank treated Alma as a 




substitute for Margaret Naumburg, not as an individual in her own right. 




You not marry Blondine,” he said to Frank, “why you tell me so? Better 




you stay with Jewish wife. For Jewish man only Jewish woman corresponding. In bed he take woman like handkerchief. Truth I tell, woman squirm, she know, truth I tell.” 




This is strong medicine—unless Gurdjieff is to be considered infallible— 




and it may be thought questionable. It is all very well for Munson to write 




that “Gurdjieff’s diagnosis was confirmed by their separation two years 




later,” and for another pupil to claim that he never knew Gurdjieff to be the




346 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




cause  of  a  broken  marriage.  Granted  that  GurdjiefF  had  achieved  his 




customary psychological precision in his assessment of the Frank’s relationship, by what standards was he acting? Was it in the best interests of either Waldo  or  Alma  Frank  to  have  their  troubles  aired  in  public?  By  the 




standards of his Work, the standards of impartial self-assessment and self- 




development, GurdjiefF may have been perfectly correct. But we have no 




guarantee that the drastic treatment at Fontainebleau did not contribute of 




itself to the breakdown of Frank’s marriage. 




The moral question aside, this thrust undoubtedly told. The rest of the 




evening seems to have been devoted to testing the Franks. A reading of 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales

 dragged on until nearly four in the morning. Eventually 




Waldo Frank cracked and asked permission to go to bed. GurdjiefF instantly 




gave it and invited both Franks to one of his crayfish dinners. A very short 




time after the couple had gone to bed, GurdjiefF stopped the reading and 




dispersed the company. 




According to Gorham Munson, Frank’s final brush with GurdjiefF took 




place in L’Ecrevisse. A companion oF GurdjiefF was witness to this scene. 




GurdjiefF was nervous, she records, and his writing was apparently going 




badly. He was so distracted that he began to sharpen a pencil, although his 




breast pocket was full of pencils which were already sharp. Waldo Frank 




was expected, and eventually arrived. “Shaking with rage, he raised his fist 




and, shaking it at GurdjiefF, yelled, ‘Go back to your hell, you devil, and 




leave us alone.’” “Unfortunately,” remarks Munson, who heard a version of 




the story from Alma Frank, “Frank’s voice tended to be light and high and 




the performance was shrill.” GurdjiefF looked up innocently. “What angry 




man  say?  I  not  understand.”  Waldo  Frank  made  a  dramatic  exit,  and 




GurdjiefF turned to his companion with whom he had planned a shopping 




expedition, “Miss, you pay, eh?” 




Munson’s epilogue to this story consists of a remark made by Gurdjieff on 




an expedition to Mont-Saint-Michel a few days later. Talking of Waldo 




Frank and Margaret Naumburg, he made the comment: “Her I like. But he 




is squared idiot.” 




The squared idiot had had enough of Gurdjieff—and took refuge in his 




former  interests.  The  novel  which  he  planned  to  complete  during  the 




summer of 1927 was never finished, and his notebooks merely contain what 




one critic describes as jottings on mysticism. It may be that the shock of his 




weekend at the Prieur^ was responsible for Frank’s re-emergence as the 




prophet of the New America. Investigation of the possibilities of becoming a 




more perfect individual had halted, and he reverted to the possibilities of 




the nation as the more perfect communion of the individual with his kind. 




During  1928  he  produced   

The  Rediscovery  of  America, 

  which  the   

New

 




 

Republic

 printed chapter by chapter vdth Frank’s ink scarcely dry on the




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   3 4 7




manuscript. His new vision was based on an analysis of the American 




situation from a neo-Oragean viewpoint, although the influence of his wide 




mystical reading was also marked. Frank saw in true Oragean fashion “a 




uniform people, an unconscious people, a people enslaved to the monotone 




of  industrial  ‘advance’  which  is  the  domination  of   

things.” 

  To  this  he 




opposed his ideal nation composed of “a conscious people, a varied and 




integral people, the symphonic nation in whom all selves adumbrate to 




wholeness.” 




The whole trouble, he thought, lay in the fickleness of the self. He took 




his stand on Gurdjieff’s teaching of man’s “many I’s.” “The usual ‘self’ is a 




flashing and fusing of words, a flux of memories and behaviours split from 




the unity of life.” No nation could be composed from such impermanent 




individuals. In order to create a group, the individual first needed to reform 




himself. His argument was that which Munson had used a year earlier in 




 

Destinations. 

 “What is needed,” wrote Frank, “is a method for achieving 




specific controls vdthin us, as sure as the method of the modern chemist. ” 




He  debated  Buddhism,  Pythagoras,  and  the  Cabala  as  disciplines  for 




achieving self-knowledge and unity with the whole. “The archaic methods 




are barred,” he concluded, “for their values and ends are not ours.” But 




America could learn from the East the “applied science” of which it stood in 




need. Frank then outlined a vague and inflated method for achieving what 




he called “the image of wholeness. ” He warned his readers that there were 




various dangers to the semi-mystical practices which he recommended. As 




an  example,  he  criticized  the  Method  derived  from  Gurdjieff,  whose 




followers formed the only “Eastern cult” with which he had had contact. “It 




IS vitiated, ” he wrote, “by the doctrinal separation of the observing ‘I’ from 




Ae observed organism.” He ended by acknowledging “my debt to Mr. 




Prage,  whose  dialectic  stimulated  me,  often  through  disagreement,  to 




come to my own conclusions. ” 




Frank’s more detailed criticism of the Gurdjieff technique is very acute; 




he had in fact stumbled on the central trick of the Method and decided that 




be did not like the direction in which it was leading him. To those who 




t^mained in every sense disciples, this exhibition of—dare one say—^free 




!^H, appeared as a return into mechanicalness. They began to accuse Frank 




^ plagiarizing Gurdjieff Having come  

in

 he was now going  

out

 again; but 




id^vm and out from the point of view of a true believer. It was clear that he 




njust be censured. 




In  1930, the year after  

The Rediscovery of America

 was issued in book 




;form, Gorham Munson pubhshed  

The Dilemma of the Liberated. 

 In many 




ways this was a covert reply to Frank’s apostasy; but whereas Frank had 




used  Orage’s  Method  as  a  possible  aid  in  his  self-imposed  task  of 




constructing a distinctive “Americanness,” Munson argued from current




3 4 8   T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




intellectual questions to the necessity of the Method. The Oragean attitude 




appeared  to  him  as  a  necessary  outcome  of  the  Humanist  philosophy 




propounded by Irving Babbitt and Paul Elmer More. 




Munson opposed the Humanist position to the conventional attitudes of 




the Romantic. The Romantic “resigns his Ego to his organism” and “like a 




child led by its nurse” he travels along the road mapped out for him by 




nature. The logical end of this progress was Freud, whom Munson rather 




oddly saw as a prophet of sensuality. Munson addressed those attracted by 




Babbitt’s doctrines of “restraint” in tones which only a knowledge of the 




Work can discern as a sales pitch. “The New Humanist feels that his real, 




deepest self is somewhat apart from his natural mechanical self He wants to 




be the driver of his machine, not a mere intoxicated passenger in a runaway 




vehicle.” 




The Humanists, Munson felt, were obviously halfway to his own position. 




They appreciated the need for a salutary discipline; but they stopped short 




of taking the vital step. The liberated man would consider Humanism with 




sympathy,  but  his  own  aspirations  were  set  on  higher  things.  For  the 




Humanists in the last resort were only “pseudo-liberated” and—of course— 




they  lacked  a  Method  for  developing  the  Will  which  was  to  exert  the 




discipline they preached. Munson thought the Humanists had restricted 




“the length of our tether.” His appeal would be familiar nowadays, and in 




Europe the phrase, “expansion of consciousness, ” had long been current in 




the society frequented by Ouspensky and Orage. Munson put his “disagreeable” proposition in more homely terms. “The Great Revolt will be the revolt against the limits of Humanism as new vistas of action, thought 




and  being  become  discernible  beyond  the  end  of  the  tether.”  The  real 




lesson was to be learned from “the resolute disposition of the genuinely 




religious to go to any lengths, if necessary.” A truly liberated human being 




was religious by definition. 




 

The Dilemma of the Liberated

 was an appeal to the man who had freed 




himself from convention and inheritance, but who had come to see that self- 




indulgence was not the way out. In many ways it is a remarkable book 




which  would  have  been  prophetic  if  it  had  been  less  shackled  to  the 




intellectual controversies of the time. As it stands, it is the attitude alone 




which remains prophetic; and the attitude is derived almost entirely from 




Orage.  

The Dilemma of the Liberated

 is yery much the sort of book Orage 




would have written if he had written sustained criticism. It was Gurdjieff 




and Orage applied; a sort of public version of the appeal vC^ith which every 




teacher of the Gurdjiefif ideas begins his campaign: “What do you want? 




Humanism, as a civilized doctrine which joins ethics and common sense? 




Hmmm,  very  well.  How  will  you  exert  that  discipline?  You  need  a 




technique. . . . ” 




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   3 4 9




By  the  time  Munson  published   

The  Dilemma  of  the  Liberated,  The  Little

 




 

Review

 was no more. Again the Oragean magic had convinced a group of 




intellectuals that art was not enough. Among them, Margaret Anderson 




leaves no doubt that it was Orage, rather than the “baffling” Gurdjieff, who 




initiated her into “the art of life.” When in 1925 she visited the Prieur6, 




Gurdjieff was still almost incommunicado, and Orage’s adroit manipulation 




left her “shghtly hysterical”; “I wanted to shake Orage and shout; tell me 




what it is you know that I don’t! Next I wanted to weep, as a token of my 




admiration.”  Instead  they  discussed  her  reactions,  and  Orage  dangled 




before her the carrot of a less “subjective” state of being. Then he cross- 




examined her on what she wanted from life:




What is your object in playing the piano? 




As nearly as I can define it, playing the piano is the logical way to 




recapture continuously that state of ecstasy without which life is not 




worth living. 




That is not an object, corrected Orage. If you say you are playing the 




piano to make money or to give concert tours you have named objects. 




And then he added the five words that have changed my outlook 




upon life; 




Act, said Orage, don’t be acted upon. 




* * * *


I saw Orage again. This time he said seven words; 




Remember you’re a pianist and not a piano. 




Orage’s influence was also the deciding factor for Jane Heap. In 1926, 




siter  visiting  the  Prieure  several  times,  she  allowed  space  in   

The  Little

 




 

Review

 for a rather heavy-handed article by Orage called  

“A Theatre for

 




 

Us,” 

 in which Orage described Gurdjieff’s theory of the three centers of 




man. 




Orage added that he did not undertake to write a Gurdjiefflan play, but 




be would go to see it. It is small wonder that his English friends considered 




that  his  judgment  had  faltered;  for  if  they  took  this  covert  piece  of 




{Mropaganda at its face value, they must have formed a poor opinion of 




Orage’s artistic standards. Literature and art had been completely subordi- 




aated to the world view of Gurdjieff; and the appearance of this article in 




 

The  Little  Review

—the  magazine  of all  the little  magazines which  most 




exalted the role of the artist—shows clearly how the artist was coming to 




^strust  his  own  most  cherished  illusions.  The  article  speaks  “as  an 




intelligent  to  the  intelligent,”  it  addressed  an  “in-group,”  and  with 




hindsight it appears as the forerunner of  

The Little Review's

 capitulation to 




me pressure of the times and Orage’s remorseless logic. 




350 T H E   H a K M O N I O U S   c i r c l e




During the years 1928-30, Margaret Anderson and Georgette Leblanc 




lived in a lighthouse at Tancarville in Normandy and wrote their memoirs. 




Georgette  Leblanc  admitted  that  her   

Maeterlinck  and  I

  was  an  act  of 




exorcism, but Margaret Anderson’s  

My Thirty Years War

 was equally an 




attempt to annihilate the past by comprehending it. “Each day,” wrote the 




creator of M^lisande, “I feel that I leave myself a little more, the better to 




go towards my encounter with myself.” The founder of  

The Little Review

 




put it more simply; “I am trying to become a new human being.” Then at 




last Jane Heap agreed with Margaret Anderson that  

The Little Review

 must 




end.  All  their  strivings  and  aspirations  had  become  transmuted.  Their 




attention had passed through the glass of art and fixed itself on the view 




beyond the window. 




Margaret Anderson returned to her magazine to write a last editorial in 




the spring of 1929. She had begun  

The Little Review, 

 she v»rote, because 




she “wanted an intelligent life.” Qnly the very best artists could give her 




this life; and so she created a magazine for them. But now she had come to 




the conclusion that “even the artist doesn’t know what he is talking about. 




And I can no longer go on publishing a magazine in which no one really 




knows what he is talking about. It doesn’t interest me.” She could imagine 




only one sort of magazine which would be interesting to publish, one which 




would be “about people. ” 




Only,  don’t  let  me  hear  any  more  about  “it’s  the  artist  who 




transforms life.” I know it. But I’m not particularly interested at the 




moment in transformation. I want a little illumination. 




Of course I won’t start that other kind of review. I wouldn’t really 




have the patience: everyone becomes too angry when expert opinion is 




brought to bear upon his pretences, his satisfaction in living the human 




cliches. It would take years to get down to a little decent discussion of 




the world psyche. 




In the meantime I shall search psychological conversation. 




Jane Heap’s farewell was less tumultuous and more concerned with the 




artist’s predicament. Headed, “Lost: a Renaissance,” it recalled that  

The

 




 

Little Review

 had been the standard-bearer of “the revolution in the arts, 




begun before the war.” Hope of this renaissance had faded, she wrote, just 




as the hope of a better world after Armageddon had vanished soon after the 




signing  of  the  Versailles  peace.  Her  editorial  explains  better  than  any 




analysis why American intellectuals fell headlong into the arms of Orage; 




and it indicates that the reasons were not so different from those which 




drove Europeans into embracing totalitarian politics or the Catiiolic




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   351




Church. There was one obvious difference: the Gurdjieff discipUne 




promised a way of escape for individualists. 




We have given space in the Little Review to 23 new systems of art (all 




now dead) representing 19 countries. In all this we have not brought 




forward anything approaching a masterpiece except the “Ulysses” of 




Mr. Joyce. . . . 




Self-expression  is  not  enough;  experiment  is  not  enough;  the 




recording of special moments or cases is not enough. All of the arts 




have broken faith or lost connection with their origin and function. 




They have ceased to be concerned with the legitimate and permanent 




material of art. 




I have not come to this opinion hastily nor through any habitual 




pessimism, but only after years of observation, revaluing, and learning. 




I hold no disappointment, despair, or fears for the future. I hold no 




negative  emotions.  The  actual  situation  of  art  today  is  not  a  very 




important or adult concern (Art is not the highest aim of man); it is 




interesting only as a pronounced symptom of an ailing and aimless 




society. 




This is the situation as I see it. My “luminous certitude” that it could 




be changed made of me a victim of the Little Review. ... In spite of 




logic, deprivations, financial catastrophies and Mr. Sumner, we have 




gone on running the Little Review; or I thought I had until I found that 




it was running me. I was a victim as much as any saint, savant, or 




business-man. But my idea of victimization had been enlarged. It is 




this that now needs my attention . . . 




The final number of  

The Little Review

 in which these editorials appeared 




is an extraordinary document. The bulk of the issue was taken up by the 




replies  made  by  past  contributors  to  a  questionnaire  sent  them  by  the 




editors. This was an adaptation of the standard questionnaire which Orage 




^ve  to  his  pupils  as  a  preliminary  exercise  in  self-knowledge;  and  the 




editors printed a letter from Orage which correctly prophesied the sort of 




answers they received:




I doubt whether you will get any sincere answers to these questions. 




After all, the stuff of the answers is the stuff of which “literature” is the 




disguise—and  as  your  questioners  are  mainly  literary,  they  will 




naturally preserve their private capital. I wouldn’t answer the questions in public myself for anything. Why? The public doesn’t deserve my answers. And couldn’t make me any equivalent return. In a small




352 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




group, sworn to secrecy and eternal friendship, these mental confessions would be salutary and in fact necessary—but where, even, is such a group? 




The  contributors divided  themselves into several  factions: those like 




Picasso and Shaw who were too busy and eminent to reply; rumbustious 




correspondents  like  Ben  Hecht  and  Richard  Aldington  who  took  the 




questions at their face value, and others who filled in the answers in an 




excess of humor (some of the jokes were quite good; Question—^Why would 




you not change places with anyone?—Allen Tanner: “Ah, because I am 




myself and  

intensely

 under my influence”); a group which included Andre 




Gide and Aldous Huxley who caught some idea of the underlying intention; 




and the  

Little Review

 set who were pupils of Orage and Gurdjieff and wrote 




in the private language of their ideas. 




Of  these  some,  like  Munson,  answered  in  the  Oragean  mode.  Why 




should  he  make  strangers  privy  to  his  dearly  bought  self-knowledge? 




Others, like Solita Solano and Georgette Leblanc, answered straightforwardly that they wanted to be “more conscious” human beings, and the rest of their answers followed according to the canon. There was an astoundingly 




sophisticated—and Gurdjieffian—reply from Fritz Peters, aged fifteen. 




Mark Turbyfill contributed a dolorous lament for his will-less “puppet- 




hood.” Gertrude Stein was more than usually enigmatic (“Jane, Jane come 




away let the garden come and stay came late to stay in the morning came 




late to stay the first day in the evening”). Margaret Anderson regarded the 




answers as confirmation that even artists did not know what they were 




doing. Jane Heap announced that she had found her own answers to some 




of the questions and that these provided the best reason for abandoning art. 




But  none  of  the  really  eminent  contributors  followed  suit.  The  real 




creators—those who were still convinced that they could in fact create— 




remained unmoved by the arguments about the necessity of going “beyond 




art.” The critics were drawn to Orage by intellectual honesty; the minor 




writers perhaps because they lacked the final obsessive conviction which 




drove the greater artists. It was those who had been defeated by the 1920s 




who joined the Oragean caucus. 




The  release  experienced  by  the  intellectual  who  discards  his  rigorous 




standards is often of an intensely emotional nature; and the devotion which 




Orage  inspired  was  more  than  a  little  religious.  To  Herbert  Croly, 




GurdjiefF’s approach seemed to provide the contemporary philosopher’s 




stone, the union of religion and science. During 1925 and 1926, his  

New

 




 

Republic

 editorials made frequent concealed reference to Orage’s technique, and Croly moved into the open wnlth his article "Rehgion as




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   353




Method,” of June 30, 1926. “The only trustworthy knowledge of God,” he 




declared, “is derived from a kind of contemplation which includes and 




combines the results of mystical experience and scientific method.” He 




distinguished two possible ways of “being aware.” The first—in which the 




“individual organism” was supposed to deepen its contacts with the “total 




environment”—is related to the “method” of Waldo Frank. The second was 




simply the Method as taught by Orage. 




Croly  himself  seems  not  to  have  pursued  his  discipline  to  the  end. 




Perhaps the vacillation between Frank’s mysticism and the Method which 




can be seen in his writings of 1926 shows that he never committed himself 




wholeheartedly to Orage and GurdjiefF. In 1928 he bad a stroke which 




Robert Morse Lovett, in his own book.  

All Our Years, 

 connects with his 




practice  of  the  Gurdjieff  Method.  The  same  year  the   

New  Republic

 




published Waldo Frank’s  

The Rediscovery of America; 

 and when the work 




was issued in book form in 1929, it bore a fulsome dedication to Croly, 




whose association with the renegade Frank indicates that he had at last 




decided  against  Orage.  “Croly  was  a  fastidious  man,” writes  Edmund 




Wilson, “and in the long run he found Orage grating. ” The founder of the 




 

New Republic

 died in 1930, by which time Orage’s authority in intellectual 




circles was in any case on the wane. 




However, Croly s hope for a scientific religion was shared by committed 




Orageans. Jane Heap was fond of emphasizing the technical aspect of the 




discipline; in Orage’s words, it was “a technique of techniques. ” Margaret 




Anderson makes frequent references to “the Gurdjieff science.” The best 




apology for the scientific attitude of Gurdjieff s approach was made by the 




recorder of  

The Oragean Version, 

 Charles Daly King. 




In 1927, at the height of Orage’s success. Daly King published a short 




book called  

Beyond Behaviorism

 under the pseudonym of Robert Courtney. It begins with an acknowledgment to Orage and a dedication “to my old fiiend and frequent companion, M. N. Eddin”—the Mullah Nasr Eddin 




whose  unconventional  drolleries  pepper  the  pages  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

 




Hie Orage groups considered the book to be their justification in terms of 




contemporary psychology. Psychoanalysis was not worthy of their steel; it 




was merely another product of the Western life of illusions, but Behaviorism  and  its  leading  popular  prophet.  Dr.  John  B.  Watson,  were  other matters. If men were no better than Pavlov’s dogs and if psychology must 




confine  its  attentions  to  recording  observable  behavior,  the  position  of 




Western man might seem more hopeless than ever. This was where the 




Oragean stepped in. Of course, man is mechanical, ran the argument; of 




course,  he  is  conditioned  by  physique,  inheritance,  and  education:   

but

 




 

there is a way out . . . 




Like Croly, Daly King saw the Method as a possible junction of religion




354 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




and science. He began with the parable of the emergence of the butterfly 




from the chrysahs. In the course of his argument, this comparison was 




apphed to the new men who were to emerge from the old automatic men, 




and to the new science which was to spring from the ashes of the old. Daly 




wanted  “bigger  and  better  men”  as  the  only  possible  solution  to  the 




problems of industrial society. 




Presently,  so  it  is  said,  within  a  few  generations,  we  shall  face  a 




bankruptcy of brains that will cause our food and water supplies to 




become uncertain, epidemics to sweep our crowded cities, and our 




whole, vast, complicated fabric of life to decompose in such a welter of 




blood and misery as the world has never seen. 




He  accepted  many  of  the  Behaviorists’  arguments,  but  these  merely 




increased the sense of hopelessness. “Is our civilization doomed?” This 




question  was  dismissed  as  too  vast  for  individual  consideration.  The 




individual must therefore concentrate on himself Religions—^which had 




held  out  the  hope  of  a  soul  only  if  a  man  worked  to  obtain  it—had 




degenerated into mere altruism. “As if, forsooth, by a figurative enlargement of the visceral system a man could become a god!” Daly shaded the desperate situation of humanity in the darkest possible tones. If religions 




and psychologies provided no solution, where could the inquirer find hope? 




At  this  point  he  introduced  the  idea  of  self-observation.  “Here,”  he 




announced, “we have the very secret itself!” “That 1’ am indeed a thing 




distinct from my body (or any or all of its functioning parts) is evident from 




the  fact  that  it  is   

possible

  for  ‘I’  to  observe  its  behaving  body  with 




completely impersonal non-identification.” The practice of this method 




would result in the metamorphosis of the human butterfly. “This method is 




the technique of techniques. If we can make progress with this, all other 




processes, from play-writing to carpentering, will become  

ipso facto

 much 




easier for us to master.” 




The  summer  after  he  had  published   

Beyond  Behaviorism, 

  Daly—now 




vnth a degree in psychology—^went to California as assistant to Dr. William 




M. Marston, under whom he had studied at Columbia. Here he worked 




with  Marston  in  developing  the  system  of  “Integrative  Psychology.” 




Marston’s position was that, although the Behaviorists were correct in 




attempting to measure only what was measurable, this did not mean that 




the phenomena of consciousness should be excluded from the province of 




psychology. He argued that Behaviorism was a valid branch of physiology 




and not part of psychology at all. His own theory was that consciousness was 




what he called “psychonic energy” which resulted from the functionit^ of 




synapses in the brain. 




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   355




Daly collaborated with his former teacher in various papers and a book on 




the theory of Integrative Psychology. From his point of view, the most 




important aspect of Marston’s work was that it rescued the phenomena of 




consciousness from the Behaviorists, who had tried to exclude the topic 




from all academic consideration. He set to work to incorporate this helpful 




new approach within the structure of the Method. The result was another 




book,  

The Psychology of Consciousness, 

 published in 1932. 




This  is  “a  much  more  detailed,  technical  and  expanded  version”  of 




 

Beyond Behaviorism. 

 Gone are the literary conceits of the purely Oragean 




work; gone are the mournful reflections on approaching doom. In their 




place is a closely argued justification for the method of self-observation. The 




first part of the book contains a critique of Behaviorism and other schools of 




psychology. It ends with an outline of Marston’s ideas. Having restored 




consciousness to the center of attention, Daly parades across the field the 




question of the “I. ” He then pounces on the defects which he finds in all the 




current theories of the nature of the “I”—the soul-theory, the mind-theory 




and the body-theory” with all their variations. Then once more, taking care 




to distinguish it from “the fallacy of introspection,” he produces like a rabbit 




from a hat, the Method of Gurdjieff and Orage. 




Daly  King’s  description  of  the  technique  of  self-observation is taken 




directly  from the material which  he had  derived from Orage  and later 




published  in   

The  Oragean  Version. 

  The  importance  of   

The  Psychology  of

 




 

Consciousness

 is that it provides a rational justification for the process—^and 




a superficially impressive one. Daly liked to claim that self-observation was 




“the only extant proposal for psychology which is at the same time both 




scientific  

and

 psychological. ” Somewhat naturally, there is no evidence that 




lie derived any support from the psychologists at whom he directed his 




arguments; they were likely to be wedded either to the physiological or the 




philosophical schools. What he was proposing—and it must have seemed all 




the  more  extraordinary  to  readers  who  knew  nothing  of  Gurdjieff  or 




Orage—was an activity neither philosophical nor physiological, but which 




te claimed as truly scientific. The defects of his book are obvious enough; 




there is a suggestion of cultishness, and topics which only an Oragean would 




c»hsider  relevant  intrude  into  the  discussion.  But   

The  Psychology  of

 




 

Consciousness

 is an astonishing proof that it is possible to argue strongly for 




the “scientific ” status of the discipline brought to Europe and America by a 




man popularly considered as a crank and a charlatan. 




By  the  end  of  the  1920s  there  had  grown  up  a  distinctive  “Oragean” 




standpoint. No one could claim that this had much influence outside a small 




circle; but it was an honest—at times a painfully honest—attempt to come 




to terms with reality. If detached critics like Edmund Wilson could see the




356 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




attitudes  of  the  early  1920s  as  outworn  by  the  end  of  the  decade,  the 




situation for those who had been most deeply involved in that hopeful 




rebellion was both more personal and more desperate. The Augustan critic 




could call for new solutions; but to romantics who had experienced the 




poverty of their own former attitudes, there were few courses open in a 




sceptical  world.  Munson  saw  the  year  1929  as  a  turning  point  for  the 




twenties generation. He pointed to the final number of  

The Little Review, 

 




to the appearance of books like Walter Lippmann’s  

A Preface to Morals

 and 




Joseph Wood Krutch’s  

The Modern Temper, 

 which recognized the prevailing atmosphere of blighted hopes and called for new standards. Krutch’s book was influential in its day, and despite Munson’s subpoena on its 




arguments, these were in one place directed at the weakest spot in the 




Oragean armor. 




It is difficult to believe that Krutch did not have the Orageans in mind 




when he analyzed the pressures making for a new religiosity. He detected a 




general belief in a discontinuity between the human and the natural world. 




If this belief ever came to be accepted, he wrote, the door into the unseen 




world would be open once more and religion might well flourish quite as 




luxuriantly as it did in former times. But Krutch saw a basic implausibility 




in  this  attitude.  It  was  really  a  “philosophy  of  the  ‘as  if’”  “We  may 




reasonably doubt,” he wrote, “whether men can actually live by any faith so 




tenuous. ” He saw two results of the flight into materialism; to win for the 




old  creeds  a  small  number  of  troublesomely  vacillating  recruits;  and 




considerably to increase the number of people interested in metaphysics 




considered rather as a game than as a means of arriving at truths relevant to 




the life in which we live. 




It is noticeable that most of the Orageans came to their discipline—or at 




least argued in support of it—from despair.  

There was no hope. 

 Therefore 




they would try a more hopeful path. This approach seems very much a 




“philosophy of the ‘as if, ” and however Orage had begun his spiritual 




journey  from  the  office  in  Chancery  Lane,  such  an  attitude  of  willed 




acceptance  did  come  to  dominate  his  relationship  to  the  Work.  In  his 




posthumously published  

The Active Mind, 

 he makes a plea for adopting the 




Gurdjieffian point of view in an essay called “Life as Gymnastics.” 




Can we alter our attitudes at will? asks Orage. If we establish control over 




our emotions, we can feel about any event as we please. Any “method 




aiming towards betterment” must start by correcting the attitude to life. 




“What is our imagination of life? What do we take it to be? Ts it a coiled rope 




or a snake? It may prove in the end impossible to know for certain what life 




is; but in that case, we are free to imagine it to be something  

useful

 to us.” 




Orage  suggested  that  “in  the  present  epoch  the  image  of  life  as  a 




gymnasium is a greatly needed tonic.” The gymnasium, he reminded his




A R T ,   S C I E N C E ,   R E L I G I O N   A N D   G Y M N A S T I C S   3 5 7




readers, had been the symbol of life itself for the Pythagoreans, “whose 




God ran this planet as a gymnasium for the exercise of men.” 




It is difficult to see in what other direction we moderns can look for a 




new image and therefore attitude towards life. We have no longer the 




possibility of religion in the traditional sense. Ordinary goodness—in 




the sense of doing what others call good—^has no intelligent appeal. 




And  after  the  still  recent  Great  War,  the  belief  in  progress  is 




superstition. But the clean, strong, idea of life as a field of exercise for 




the development of all our muscles—physical, emotional and intellectual—^has still the unspoiled quality of manly or womanly Idealism. And life  lived  in  that  attitude  would  certainly  be  interesting  as  well  as 




profitable. 




Was the whole fabric of Oragean intellectualism built on so fragile a 




foundation? If the teacher were playing a role not out of an overriding sense 




of personal conviction but for the sake of encouraging a “right attitude” 




toward life—then perhaps this attitude was all that was taught? Or was 




Orage’s almost cynical point of view an act of superrealism? There is no 




indication when he wrote “Life as Gymnastics” but it is probable that he 




grew toward these opinions as his association with GurdjiefF progressed. So 




far we have seen Orage as the pupil-teacher, the figurehead, the Master in 




his own right. We have ignored the progress of the actor behind the role. 




He can no longer be neglected, for in 1929 Gurdjieff once more appeared in 




New York, and Orage’s very ability to perform his task was called into 




question. Two years later Orage left America to the mercy of Gurdjieff and 




^  Depression.  TTie  circumstances  of  this  parting  can  be  interpreted  in 




many different ways; sometimes, it seems, in several different ways at once. 




Time, taught Orage, following Ouspensky, is “the potentiality of experience.” In  

The Active Mind, 

 he wrote: “Time as succession is simply the aotualisation of one possibility out of each successive moment. Could we 




ptoalise two possibilities, or three or four at once, we should be living in 




 

wo

 or three or four different streams of time.” Go back to his introduc- 




|ion—the division of reality into the Actual and Potential. In terms of time, 




pending our potentiality must have something to do with simultaneity . . . 




iiere are so many possibilities. . . . 




9




The Dominion of Heropass




“The Heropass”—or to give the process its full fearsome title, “our allcommon  MASTER  THE  MERCILESS  HEROPASs”—was  GurdjieflF’s  term  for  the flow of time. Unlike many of the words he used in  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 the 




meaning is easily guessed. For Gurdjieff himself, for his leading followers, 




and for their pupils also, the years 1929-^ were a period of great changes. 




Perhaps these  resulted  from  the  natural  effects  of  the  passage  of  time. 




Perhaps they arose from an artificial disturbance in it. 




Orage’s letters to Jean Toomer provide a good index of his changing 




attitudes.  On  January  5,  1926,  he  wrote  to  Toomer  enclosing  ‘‘the 




remaining”  chapters  of  the  book.  There  was  one  section  still  unwritten, 




and the conclusion of the chapter on Art had to await Orage’s return to 




Fontainebleau. Gurdjieff did not propose to publish the first series of his 




writings until the second and third were complete in Russian and Enghsh 




translation. 




You will see that the Greek Kalends will come first! However it is 




nothing to us personally; and in fact, it is something of a privilege to be 




able  to  prepare  an  understanding  of  the  book  before  (if  ever)  it  is 




published. ... I haven’t plumbed the depths of G.’s thought and




358




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   359




probably never shall; but at last certain meanings and interpretations of 




the colossal parable I now begin to understand. 




Orage wrote that he was starting a group for all previous members of his 




and Toomer’s groups, and had already begun one for newcomers. There 




was a third group to occupy his attention; but even with some income 




coming from these sources he was hard pressed. “I already see,” he wrote, 




“that it will leave me far too short a time to worse than waste. In short, I 




must  have  something  to  do  that  will  be  profitable.”  When  he  left 




Fontainebleau around Christmas time, he had given Gurdjieff 500 dollars of 




his own money. “The Prieur^ was in debt, Gurdjieff had not a penny and 




nothing had arrived. ... 




Financing the importunate Gurdjieff was almost the chief subject of the 




correspondence between Orage and Toomer. Sometimes we may suspect 




Orage of passing on to his junior colleague the pressures which were put on 




him; but although a measure of acting may intrude into the situation, there 




is no doubt of the incessant demands made by the Prieur^. 




By late spring 1926, the question arose of Toomer's becoming responsible 




for the publication of  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 

 In May, Orage wrote putting at his 




disposal  3,000  dollars,  if  this  should  arise.  This  seems  to  have  been  in 




return for Toomer’s releasing approximately that sum from the publication 




fund established with Mabel Luhan’s donation. This sum found its way to 




Gurdjieff and his administrators, but it did not support the Prieur^ for long. 




On November 12, 1926, after Toomer had left the Prieure for Chicago, 




Orage  wrote  from  Fontainebleau  telling  him  how  much  Gurdjieff  had 




appreciated his “parting present” of money. This seems to have consisted of 




aoother 2,000 dollars from the printing fund, of which some had already 




been given to Gurdjieff and some was promised; and Orage wondered 




anxiously: “God knows how you are going to make up to the printing fund 




die  $2,000  you  have  given  to  G.  but  I  presume  that  you  like,  as  I  do, 




something  to  work  against.”  He  then  tightened  the  screws  further. 




“Anyhow, it went very quick, and just as a dog soon learns where he last got 




meat and expecting returns for more without enquiring  

how

 it got there, G. 




and Mme. H. sit as it were looking you-wards in their hunger.” 




On teaching matters Orage was still hopeful about the publication of 




 

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  He  wrote  that  Gurdjieff  proposed  to  go  to  Dijon  “to 




Consult about format, etc.” He advised Toomer “to begin at the beginning 




tod only to ‘rustle’ the book at first. Get along with the elements, just as 




you did in your New York group—^and in the meanwhile, create an interest 




HI the book by seldom speaking of it. Then a little later, as a special favour, 




you might consent to reading the chapters to groups specially collected and, 




as it were, privileged.” Orage wrote that Jessie Dvwlght, Jane Heap, and




360 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Elizabeth Gordon had left for New York to take temporary charge of his 




own groups. He himself had evidently had to stay to work on  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales. 

 There creeps into his letters a hint of frustration and the suspicion 




that Gurdjieff is “holding out” on him. 




I still am not sure of my return to New York at Christmas—but I hope 




to go, and to find much new material ready to my hand. All the same, 




my feet get very cold occasionally when I think of beginning groups all 




over a^ain—because I doubt whether the “ancient” groups would 




profit us or themselves by more attention. 




During late November and early December Orage wrote several times 




bemoaning GurdjiefF’s slow progress on the book and trying to squeeze 




money  out  of  the  unfortunate  Toomer.  GurdjielF  “quite  expects  the 




remainder of your nest-egg at any moment.” He “looks for the post, so to 




speak,  in  expectation  of  ‘America  send  cheque,  finish  $2,000!!!’  as 




Beelzebub would say.” On December 6, Orage announced his own return 




to  New  York  where  he  hoped  to  be  useful  in  attracting  income;  “and 




certainly I do not consider any money too high to pay—if only we can get 




it!” 




From his letters to Chicago in the early part of 1927, it is clear that Orage 




was becoming increasingly impatient of GurdjiefF’s incessant demands. His 




appeals during the previous months may have been an attempt to persuade 




Toomer to overcommit himself so that he should have “something to work 




against but in New York he was once again himself in the firing line. On 




January 17, he wrote that “things are  

not

 going with a mighty flourish here 




either. The wind has dropped a good deal since last June. . . . However, 




the work is to go on  

as if

 circumstances were completely favourable . . . ” 




The depression was only momentary and on February 11, he reported that, 




“with a good deal of effort,” the situation has improved. “Like a fool” he had 




sent more of his own money to Gurdjieff—and during the spring of 1927 the 




financial situation continued to dominate his correspondence. 




Gurdjieff is really quite extraordinary about money—but not, unfortunately, unique; we’ve known many people at college and in life equally extraordinary. However, I’m giving him still the benefit of the 




doubt, and I’m only sorry I cannot give him a million if only to see if he 




could be impecunious within a month or so of receiving it. 




Largely through Munson’s efforts, Gurdjieff was now receiving 1,000 




dollars a month from New York. Orage wrote that Toomer should save his 




contributions and take them with him when he went to Fontainebleau in




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S  361




the summer. His warning was not in time to prevent Toomer succumbing to 




the plaintive demands of the Prieure; and on April 8, Orage was writing 




again: “I still think you should have resisted the appeal. After all, $1000 a 




month is not starvation. . . . ”  Only eight days later, Toomer was informed 




that “there has been another wail last week from G. via Miss M[erston]. He 




has had to give up his Paris flat!” Despite his friendly warnings, Orage had 




not curtailed his personal contributions to GurdjiefiF’s upkeep. At the end of 




May he wrote that he had personally sent 2,500 dollars since January, and 




that he was having trouble making ends meet. He had been forced to turn a 




deaf ear to a cable appeaUng for more. The Prieure would have to take 




summer visitors to make up its cornucopian budget, and it was now that 




Orage held out to Gurdjielf the prospect of American disciples paying 100 




dollars each. 




Apart from the financial considerations, Orage’s letters of early 1927 




betray a certain uneasiness at his position in New York; an uneasiness which 




stemmed from the same sources as had made him doubt whether his groups 




would really benefit from his return in the winter of 1926. In February he 




was  writing  to  Toomer—perhaps  in  an  attempt  to  rally  his  spirits—“I 




tremble  to  anticipate  each  succeeding  week.  If  I  don’t  make  the  ideas 




interesting, the group would fall flat, but if I make them too interesting, the 




group would fall flatter, perhaps would never rise. G.’s noose-dance is no 




joke!” In early April his mood was of resigned determination; the sigh and 




the setting of the jaw can almost be heard; 




It is not plain sailing to interpret G.; and I’m usually in despair before 




the  lecture  and  in  a  state  of  self-disgust  after  it.  All the expressed 




admiration in the world doesn’t affect my feehngs. At the same time 




I’m glad to be up against anything so impossible and intriguing. 




May  12,  soon  before  the  summer  recess,  his  mood  was  even  blacker. 




“I'm  profoundly  dissatisfied  with  my  attempts  to  get  anywhere  near  the 




bottom of the damned book.” 




Tlie  summer  of  1927  was  significant  for  Orage’s  relationship  with 




Gurdjieff.  Instead  of  travehng  to  the  Prieure  with  the  main  influx  of 




summer visitors, he and Jessie Dwight went on holiday in Canada with the 




Daly Kings.  That  August Orage  sailed for France  alone, and  stayed at 




Fontainebleau for ten days, then returned to New York. Soon after his 




arrival—on September 24—^he and Jessie Dwight were married. 




Some Orageans noticed that their leader became less accessible after his 




Carriage. This was only natural, but it shows how Orage’s priorities had 




^gun to alter. His essay “On Love” was written while Jessie Dwight was at 




the Prieure in 1924, and it marks an important point in the development of




362 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




his ideas. The essay is based upon GurdjiefF’s teaching about the three 




kinds of love: instinctive, emotional, and conscious. Instinctive love is a 




matter of chemistry or biology. Emotional love is an aberration. Conscious 




love—rarely if ever attained—is the only true form of loving. A conscious 




lover works on himself in order to help the loved one: “If I am not sure what 




is proper to her perfection, let her at least have free way to follow her ovra 




bent. Meanwhile, to study—^what she is, and may become; what she needs, 




what  her  soul  craves  and  cannot  find  a  name, still  less  a thing for.  To 




anticipate today her needs of tomorrow. And without a thought all the while 




of what her needs may mean to me.” The attitude is the same as Katherine 




Mansfield’s when she planned to describe a “contest of loving. ” “On Love” 




takes up the idea, develops it, and applies it to the author’s own situation. 




Orage’s embarkation on a phase of happy family life was the natural 




outcome of this attitude; and it marked the end of his total dependence on 




GurdjieflF. But he was by no means free of his Master yet; and Gurdjieflf 




knew it. The Orages sailed again for Fontainebleau on New Year’s Eve 




1927.  When  they  arrived  in  France,  Gurdjieff  kissed  Jessie  Orage, 




declaring that she was half his now, whether she liked it or not. 




Mrs. Orage’s relationship with Gurdjieff was ambivalent. She had first 




gone to the Prieur6 only at her husband’s express urging, and although she 




took a leading part in the typing and translation of  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 she 




also  stubbornly  went  her  own  way.  She  overrode  Gurdjieff’s  rather 




schoolmasterly “rules ” and avoided the tasks which more conscientious 




converts fulfilled. So, for example, when all the other pupils removed their 




shoes for the movements in the Study House, she left hers outside the 




building so as not to be seen recovering them when she slipped away. 




Gurdjieff seems to have respected her attitude, and his eye was lasciviously 




fixed on her. After one occasion on which she evaded his invitation to his 




flat  in  Paris,  Gurdjieff  discovered  her  reading  letters  from  Orage,  and 




promptly issued an edict that all mail was to pass through his hands. She 




was  always  more  detached  from  the  Work  than  her  husband.  Her 




independence grated on some of Gurdjieff’s followers. When Gurdjieff 




introduced his idiot toasts, Mrs. Orage was put in the “squirming idiot” 




category; and Alexander de Salzmann once burst out in exasperation, “If 




you’d only admit that you’re a squirming idiot, what a marvellous initiate 




you’d be!” 




From one angle it seems as though Gurdjieff resented her claims on 




Orage and exerted himself to be unpleasant. Once, when the couple were 




returning from France to the United States, they went to say goodbye to 




the Master at the Cafe de la Paix. “Did you ever hear of a man called Y?” 




asked Gurdjieff (it had been Mr^ Y who threw herself out of the b6arding 




house window). “His wife make trouble for me. She commit suicide.” The




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   363




reference  was  to  a  real  suicide,  known  as  such,  and  the  impact  on 




Gurdjieff’s listeners was horrific. But was the remark dictated by jealousy 




and self-interest—or was this another “shock” administered for the Orages’ 




benefit? 




If Jessie Dwight had resented GurdjiefF’s influence over Orage, as Jessie 




Orage  she  resented  it  still more.  In  the days before they  were married 




Gurdjieff went out of his way to underline his ascendancy over his “superidiot”; and afterward he placed great strains on the relationship. Once in the early days Gurdjieff and the Orages were touring in Gurdjieff’s car on a 




chaotic journey with typewriters and picnic baskets. Gurdjieff discovered a 




four-day-old jar of caviar among his provisions and gave it to Orage to finish. 




To  Jessie  Dwight’s  annoyance,  Orage  meekly  ate  some  of  the  decrepit 




contents, and Gurdjieff underlined his victory with an airy; “I’ll give the 




rest  to  Lady  Rothermere.”  An  incident  from  the  winter  of  1927-28 




illustrates Gurdjieff ’s continual goading. The scene was the dining room of 




the Prieure, with Orage seated on Gurdjieff’s left. The “introduction of the 




noble French armagnac” into the systems of the diners had been rather 




more  concentrated  than  usual.  A  pupil  who was  present remembers a 




commotion around Gurdjieff which resolved itself into the Master dangling 




a  small  object  which  he  had  snatched—probably  a  watch  or  a  locket 




belonging to Jessie Orage. Orage, says the pupil, had a “tiger-like” look on 




his face and sat watching Gurdjieff play with the object he had captured 




with “polite patience.” Suddenly, he pounced to recover the locket; but 




Gurdjieff—although he was supposed to be very drunk—^was even quicker, 




and whisked his prize away from Orage’s lunge. 




This acting—or was it acting?—increasingly determined the relationship 




jbfetween the Orages and their Master. 




Gurdjieff  grew  increasingly  impossible,  and  the  final  straw  was  a 




terrifying experience when the couple were leaving Paris for New York in 




February 1928. Gurdjieff transfixed Jessie Orage with his gaze. He seemed 




to  immobilize  her,  and  she  could  not  breathe;  for  a  moment  she  was 




^vinced  that  he  was  going  to  make  her  lose  consciousness  altogether. 




H^en he spoke: “If you keep my super-idiot from coming back to me, you 




in boiling oil.” Orage had gone to sleep. But he was finally persuaded 




j^ his wife’s insistence that this time Gurdjieff had gone too far. It was the 




Itet visit he ever paid to Fontainebleau, and the Orages saw nothing of 




^rdjieff for almost a year. 




|if From the spring of 1928, they were back in the United States, and in the 




i^!y summer, Orage wrote two letters to Toomer which refer clearly to the 




P^mcial extremities in which Gurdjieff found himself and his own new 




il^tachment from the demands of Fontainebleau. “I have a feeUng that 




^bmething will happen to the Prieur^ this summer,” he wrote on May 5. 




364 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“Supplies are  

really

 short. . . the situation is slated for drastic change; and 




I should have liked one of us—and not me—to be there to witness it.” Just 




over a month later another resigned letter arrived in Chicago. “I suppose 




you  can’t  contribute   

immediately

  and  substantially  towards  the  sum  of 




$10,000 which G. has called for? No? Well, anyhow, I send the S.O.S.” 




In the middle of June 1928, the Orages left for California via Taos, and in 




the autumn Orage tried to start groups in San Francisco. But after two 




months of elBFort his audience was only thirty or forty for a weekly group, 




and by the end of October, he decided that it would take six months to 




arouse  any  general  interest.  He  had  heard  of  Jean  Toomer’s  renewed 




literary  ambitions  and  wrote  that  he  was  “reviving  my  own  interest 




strangely  enough.”  He  proposed  a  competition  to  see  whether  he  or 




Toomer could make more money by writing before June the following year. 




This is extremely significant, for next year (1929) Toomer was to write the 




memorandum which might—if  

Transatlantic

 had been successful—have 




signaled his emergence from the Work. In the event, Toomer returned to 




Chicago  reflecting  that  there  he  had  left  “his  form.”  Orage  now  had  a 




form—a marriage—apart from and even antagonistic to the Gurdjieff ideas, 




and to this he held. He was clearly beginning to feel that he had been  

in

 




long enough; and that it was time to come  

out. 

 Perhaps Gurdjieff had some 




inkling of this. Certainly he knew that the 10,000 dollars for which he had 




asked had not arrived. The only solution was a personal trip to New York. 




Gurdjieff arrived in New York on January 23, 1929. Three days later, 




Orage informed Toomer; “As you can guess, G.’s main purpose in being 




here is money; and he wants $10,000 within three weeks.” He himself was 




suggesting privately to several people that they borrow 10,000 dollars to 




provide “this colossal amount.” The Master was in top form. “G. is more 




himself than ever—that is to say, he is more impossible than ever. But 




certainly New York needed a shaking up; and I too must have needed 




it. . . . ”  Five days later, Orage wrote again to suggest that Toomer use the 




idea  of  financing  the  publication  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

  as  an  excuse  for 




levying contributions. The New York groups were nearly mutinous. “We 




are all making a special—and for most—final effort.” By the middle of the 




month Toomer had decided to come to New York, and Orage told him that 




he would be “twice welcome bearing gifts.” He was to raise 1,000 dollars in 




Chicago “so to say, as security for  

your

 return to Chicago with G.’s fresh 




material, etc.” Apparently Orage was still prepared to absorb the shock of 




Gurdjieff’s  demands  into  the  attitude  of  the  Work.  Oh  April  22,  after 




GurdjiefF’s departure for France, he wrote to Toomer that a monthly sum 




had been guaranteed him from the New York groups. “1 find myself no end 




pepped up by G. ’s visit; and I’m sure you find yourself the same. He got his 




‘roses,’ I may say . . . ” 




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   365




So  had  the  letter  writer;  but  in  a  different  sense.  On  April  5,  1929, 




Gurdjieff had sailed for France. After the ship moved out, Orage danced for 




joy on the quay. “Thank God I’m free again!” he said. A fortnight later his 




first child, Richard, was born, and this all but set the seal on his liberation 




from the Master. 




Orage’s personal interests were expanding again. In 1929 he began to 




conduct a writing class and revived his own literary efforts. He collected 




short passages of criticism from the  

New Age

 and published them with a few 




more recent essays under the title.  

The Art of Reading. 

 One of the  

New Age

 




articles he reprinted was an assault on the inadequacies of rationalism; and 




the final essay in the book advocated a return to the cultural standards of 




ancient India. Such ideas recalled the position he had occupied in pre- 




Gurdjieff days; the days of T. E. Hulme and his return to the irrational 




during  the  Great  War.  They  were  not  likely  to  strike  any  chord  in  his 




readers. Orage was staunchly out-of-date; and when  

The Art of Reading

 was 




published in the summer of 1930, the reviews showed it. There was general 




approval of Orage’s critical powers, but many reviewers began to ask what 




all  the  fuss  had  been  about.  C.  H.  Grattan  in   

The  Nation

  expressed  the 




prevailing disillusionment; “A. R. Orage has a vast reputation for profundity, and indeed is more than a literary critic in the eyes of his intimates: he is a sage. But I fail to see what it is that so interests our Columbuses of the 




spirit, for I can find nothing in the man except an Englishman who happens 




to be a fairly interesting critic. ” The feeling that the Orage bubble had burst 




was expressed even more powerfully when Farrar and Rinehart issued his 




 

Psychological Exercises

 in the autumn. Again it was  

The Nation

 which was 




most deflating:




This book ends a mystery in none too impressive a fashion. It reveals 




just  what  Mr.  Orage’s  initiates  meant  when  they  spoke  of  his 




“psychological exercises. ” For a long time those who have stood apart 




from the Orage furor have imagined that these were something pretty 




impressive, but now anyone can consult this book and find that they 




are no more remarkable than cross-word puzzles, anagrams, and other 




parlor  games  that  involve  a  certain  literacy.  One  can  imagine  idle 




people having  fiin with  Mr. Orage’s  exercises, but they won’t one 




fears, become much wiser in consequence. 




By  the  time  these  unflattering  notices  were  pubhshed,  Orage  had 




returned to England. Before he left, he had to submit to one last invasion 




jby Gurdjieff, who landed in New York on February 15, 1930. His arrival 




had been announced in two ambiguously worded cables. One—^which had 




probably been edited by a member of Gurdjieff’s entourage—read:




366 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E

Bremen 




brings 




thousand 




kilos 




disillusion; 




hundred 




kilos 




momentary  HAPPINESS,  AND  TEN  POUNDS  RETRIBUTION.  SIGNED:  AMBASSADOR 




FROM  Hell.  The  other—^addressed  personally  to  Orage—indicated  that 




Gurdjieff himself had been let loose among the liner’s telegraph equipment. 

If  

love  NOT  DISSIPATED  it  ran,  arrange  bath  and  party.  Signed: Grandson and unique phenomenal Grandmother. 




The chaos threatened by such communications quite naturally materialized. Orage wrote to Nott that Gurdjieff was once more in search of funds, “though I doubt whether this time he will get much. His coming has, 




of course, bust up my group meetings and left me desperately placed for 




income, but I must be ‘clever,’ I suppose and find a substitute.” At the end 




of May, he closed his meetings and left for England with his wife and son, 




intending to spend the next six months writing for American magazines. He 




told Nott that he would not hold “any groups whatsoever,” and it is difficult 




to  avoid  the  impression  that  one  reason  for  the  trip  was  to  avoid  the 




pressures imposed by Gurdjieff’s presence in New York. The family settled 




near Rye in Sussex, and although the writing went badly, Orage spent the 




summer and autumn unmolested by Beelzebub and his importunities. But 




by  the  beginning  of  December  1930,  Orage’s  indecisions  had  again 




propelled him across the Atlantic. 




Gurdjieff’s own account of his break with Orage is contained in the first 




chapter of his privately published  

Third Series. 

 Although there are several 




typescript versions of this chapter in circulation, the outline of events is not 




in doubt. 




Gurdjieff begins by recalling the circumstances of his “accident,” and the 




closing  of  the  Institute  at  Fontainebleau.  This,  he  writes,  dispersed  his 




pupils throughout Europe, and many of them became teachers of his ideas 




in order to support themselves. Because they were insufficiently prepared, 




this merely increased the misunderstandings which already existed about 




him. Eventually, he concluded that all the various groups which had grown 




up while he was writing his book had becomj more or less insane. 




GurdjieflF claims that when he arrived in America on November 13, 1930, 




he  saw  from  the  faces  of  his  reception  committee  that  they  too  had 




developed this form of madness. The American? had become concerned 




exclusively with a small part of his teaching on self-observation, which was 




itself a very preHminary exercise. Accordingly, Gurdjieff writes, tongue 




almost projecting from cheek, he reversed an earlier decision to exempt 




Orage’s pupils—to whose contributions he already owed so much—^from 




the sheep-shearing which was the purpose of his expedition. 




Gurdjieff then recalls how he summoned five of the leading members of 




the New York groups to a confidential meeting. He told them that as he had 




now finished the first book of his proposed writings, he was able to devote




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   367




his attention to reorganizing his work on the original plan which had been 




interrupted by the car crash. Because of the support they had given him, he 




was going to begin with the Americans. Gurdjieff informed the group of five 




that,  regrettably,  he  would  be  forced  to  reject  many  of  their  fellow 




Orageans.  He  proposed  to  treat  those  who  were  rejected  so  that  they 




should be completely disillusioned both with his ideas and with Orage 




himself. His five leading henchmen were warned not to tell anyone of this 




projected piece of theater. 




On November 21, when Gurdjieff delivered a lecture in the apartment 




where he was staying to all Orage’s pupils who could attend, he told them 




that  he  had  intended  to  divide  the  pupils  at  Fontainebleau  into  three 




categories. When Orage came to New York, he had become a candidate for 




the middle group—^but that was all. The results of Gurdjieff’s “accident” 




had left Orage high and dry in America and Gurdjieff without a source of 




income in France. Orage had behaved much better and with less cause than 




some of his other pupils, said Gurdjieff; he had immediately begun to send 




him money. For his part, he was compelled to turn a blind eye to various 




misinterpretations of his teaching until his health was fully restored and he 




could divert his attention from his writing. 




After this acknowledgment, Gurdjieff’s next words seem at first sight 




completely inexplicable. In an early version of this chapter he is especially 




virulent against Orage. Orage had made various collections, a portion of 




which he had sent on to Gurdjieff—Gurdjieff implies that he had kept large 




quantities  of  money for  himself—and  in order to  justify the  levying of 




contributions had started unauthorized classes for Gurdjieff ’s movements, 




directing his own groups, using only the various preliminary instructions 




fphich he had absorbed in his short time as a pupil. This was all the material 




With which Orage had to work, and his pupils had therefore been driven 




mad:  it  was  as  if  they  were  trying  to  become  generals  by  constantly 




practicing the introductory drill for raw recruits. Gurdjieff added some 




gratuitous insults about Mrs. Orage, a cause apparently of Orage’s vast 




expenses which obliged him to continue manipulating the small amounts of 




Inaterial already in his possession. . . . 




J  To  his  New  York  audience,  most  of  whom  must  have  been  baffled, 




5tonoyed, or shocked by his denunciations of their beloved leader, Gurdjieff 




then  announced  the  plan  of  which  he  had  told  five  selected  pupils; 




teorganizing his work in a new form. No one could join the new group, he 




^d, who failed to sign a form of obligation which he dictated. This forbade 




l&embers of his projected new group to associate with any of the Orageans 




^cept  those  who  were  named  in  a  list  which  Gurdjieff  proposed  to 




distribute. They were also prohibited from having anything to do with 




Orage himself




While Gurdjieff discoursed to the select band who had at once signed the




368 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




obligation,  his  original  audience  had  been  decimated  by  the  fervent 




Orageans who were suspicious of GurdjiefF and wanted to remain faithful to 




Orage alone. There was a third group which came in for Gurdjieff’s most 




ponderous irony: they sent a telegram, asking for the advice of Orage, who 




was  on  his  way  from  England.  These  ditherers  tried  to  postpone their 




decision whether or not to sign until Orage himself landed. He arrived at 




the beginning of December and promptly asked for an interview. 




Gurdjieff replied that, being a man of his word, he could not possibly 




meet Mr. Orage unless he also signed the obligation imposed on all the 




other members of the New York groups. 




To the astonishment of Gurdjieff ’s entourage, Orage at once signed the 




obligation, although it appeared quite absurd to ask him to promise to 




dissociate  himself  from  his  pupils—even  to  break  with  himself  But, 




according to Gurdjieff, Orage found nothing contradictory in the request. 




He explained that for a long time he had felt the contradiction between his 




inner uncertainties and the part of the omniscient Teacher he had to play. 




He had wanted to put an end to the charade much earlier, but circumstances had prevented him from making a final decision. Now he would take the opportunity of signing the obligation to make a clean break with the 




people whom he had lately taught—as a teacher; and to have nothing to do 




with A. R. Orage—the Orage who had formerly existed. He asked to be 




allowed to join the new group as an ordinary member. 




Gurdjieff  describes  his  reactions  on  hearing  of  Orage’s  surrealistic 




decision. He was concocting one of his exotic dishes when the news was 




brought to him, and when it had sunk home, he was so affected^ that he 




broke down completely. He rushed into his bedroom in a flood of tears, and 




had to be rescued by Dr. Stoerneval with whisky. Despite the ever-present 




possibihty that this story is one of Gurdjieff’s mystifying parables, there is 




evidence that for once he is speaking of real events. 




After Orage’s signature, those pupils who had been holding back rushed 




to sign the obligation, and Gurdjieff established a scale.of fines according to 




the resources of each defaulter. His next lecture was given to a full house, 




which included Orage and most of his disconsolate supporters, who had 




now been well and truly shorn. 




To Daly King, who had been among the diehard Orageans, the whole 




farrago seemed a pointless bluff, and he consigned GurdjiefF’s exercises to 




the kindergarten. He and the other recalcitrants were permitted to attend 




all Gurdjieff ’s meetings as usual, and he therefore concluded that Gurd- 




jieff ’s repudiation of Orage had no real significance. But later he changed 




his mind; and from the drama Gurdjieff staged in the winter of 1931 arose 




countless  confusions  which  nearly  submerged  the  Work in  the United 




States. 




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   369




GurdjiefF’s activities continued in their elliptical fashion. His apartment 




on West 59th Street was filled to bursting with pupils, acquaintances, and 




the smell of cooking. Readings of the first and second series of his writings 




were held in Studio 61 of Carnegie Hall, with Mme. de Salzmann in charge 




of the first book and Gurdjieff’s German secretary, Louisa Goepfert, in 




charge of the second. The  

Third Series

—^which may have consisted only of 




his lectures—was read in Gurdjieff’s apartments by Dr. Stoerneval. The 




fees  for  attending  public  readings  were  two,  three,  and  four  dollars 




respectively, and private readings were also held—at which presumably 




Gurdjieff presided—for higher fees. This wholesale takeover of his pupils 




left Orage in a by now familiar but still precarious position. “I’ve led the life 




of Jack-in-the-Box since my return here, ” he wrote to Nott on March 1. To 




make ends meet he “had to conduct four literary classes a week,” as there 




was no income from his old groups, and Gurdjieff had chased three-quarters 




of his followers away with his perpetual demands for money. 




G. talks as if he expects me to carry on as before; but in spite of my 




constant association with him, I’m not feeling even warm about group 




work. He has a miracle to perform in ten days. He has the intention, it 




really  appears,  of  publishing  part  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

 here in  New 




York. That will be something tangible if it comes off. But he is making 




such impossible conditions that no publisher will accept them; and, in 




fact, G. cannot really expect it. All the same, I do think we are near 




publishing something! 




It is doubtful whether Gurdjieff was serious about publishing  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales. 

 Orage had always wanted the book pubhshed, and it might be that 




Gurdjieff was simply humoring his subordinate. Nott tells a story about 




Alfred Knopf which seems to show that Gurdjieff was not exactly pressing 




hard  for  publication.  As  the  publisher  of   

Tertium  Organum, 

  Knopf 




approached Gurdjieff to see whether he could add  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 to his 




Hst. He was told by Gurdjieff: “First clean your house, then perhaps you 




can  have  my  book.”  This  story  may  well  be  apocryphal,  and  Notts 




statement that GurdjiefiFleft America without selecting a pubhsher because 




“the time for publication was not come” piously wishful thinking. On March 




20, Orage wrote to Toomer that Gurdjieff had left him with a selection of 




chapters “to get pubhshed  

or

 to publish.” He wrote that Knopf had the 




typescript and that “after him I will send it to others.” Eight days later, 




Toomer was told that Knopf had turned it down and that  

Beelzebub’s

 epic 




voyage  had  continued  to  Doubleday.  “I  share  your  opinion  that  no 




publisher will accept it. ” Orage concluded that they would have to issue it 




tiiemselves. 




370 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Despite his apparent cooperation with GurdjiefF’s plans, Orage himself 




had been irritated. “The situation is anything but bright, ” he wrote to Jean 




Toomer on March 28, “and I confess to a little fatigue with Gurdjieff and his 




ways. Perhaps that is because I’ve just had to find over two hundred dollars 




with which to discharge the debts he failed to remember!” By April 10, he 




had still not been able to hold a group meeting. He wrote to Nott of “the 




paralysis  left  by  G.”  This  was  only  cured  by  the  prospect  of  his  own 




permanent departure; and at the end of May he held his final meeting in 




Muriel Draper s apartment. Carl Zigrosser remembers this last exhibition 




of the maestro’s virtuosity: “He rang all the hortatory changes, he played on 




all the emotions. He was wdtty, subtle, ironic, sarcastic, noble. He was 




prodigal with memorable phrases and precise formulations. He beseeched 




and scolded like an elder brother. It was a brilliant performance.” On July 




1, a farewell party took place at Muriel Draper’s. Orage’s former pupils 




mingled with his literary friends, among whom Zigrosser mentions E. E. 




Cummings and Lincoln Kirstein. Two days later the Orages left New York 




to live permanently in England. 




Thanks to Gurdjieff s machinations, Orage left virtually nothing behind 




him—little, that is, of an organized sort, nothing except those intangible 




“influences. ” On his arrival in England, he had a conversation with Nott 




which that kindly Boswell has recorded. 




He said that he felt that his work with groups in America had come to 




an end, and another phase was beginning; that to every pupil the time 




comes when he must leave his teacher and go into life, and work out, 




digest, what he has acquired. Then he can return to his teap^er, if 




necessary, on another level. It was not that he had left Gurdjieff or the 




Teaching, but because of both he had reached a certain stage, and it 




was necessary for him to stand on his own feet. 




Nott s opinion provides the “orthodox” verdict from the viewpoint of a 




pupil of both Orage and Gurdjieff. Orage’s group had “got stuck” and 




needed to be shocked. Orage himself was not fired, repudiated or driven 




away by Gurdjieff, but brought to renounce his former self and to emerge a 




better and more self-reliant man. 




There is one item of evidence which this possibility ignores. Why did 




Gurdjieff collapse in a paroxysm of weeping when he heard of Orage’s 




subtle decision to have nothing to do with himself? Was it-because, despite 




unbearable  provocation,  Orage  had  understood  so correctly what was 




required of him? 




Or was it because Orage had not understood at all? 




Gurdjieff was clearly trying to destroy all traces of Orage’s work in New




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   371




York, and—^perhaps equally important to him—to send the Orages away for 




good. It may be that Gurdjieff was finding it next to impossible to relieve 




Orage of his dependence on him. This would explain his threats and insults 




to Mrs. Orage: they were attempts to provoke Orage into standing up for 




himself  and  his  wife;  ultimately  perhaps  into  leaving.  It  also  explains 




Gurdjieff’s collapse in New York. For by signing the obligation imposed on 




all his former pupils, Orage—slippery as a philosophic eel—had wriggled 




out of a position in which he seemed certain to be forced to break with 




Gurdjieff. He had detected a symbolic significance in Gurdjieff’s demands 




which  had  never  been  intended—GurdjiefF’s  account of  his request to 




Orage can be read to mean that he acted as a joke. Perhaps Gurdjieff broke 




down and cried because of his real affection for his super-idiot and his 




apparent inability to get that idiot to see two things: that he must take 




responsibility for himself, and that his quicksilver mind was not the answer 




to all problems. 




Orage said goodbye to Gurdjieff for the last time on May 24, 1931. Later 




in  England  he  received  a  number  of  communications  from  the  Master 




asking him over to France, such as a letter of August 1932 requesting him to 




come for a day, or at least to send Jessie. Orage replied: “There was a time 




when I would have crossed oceans at your bidding. Now I would not even 




cross the Channel.” 




There are a succession of postscripts to this story. An almost identical 




situation had arisen in GurdjielF’s relationship with the de Hartmanns—and 




at  virtually  the  same  time.  Both  husband  and  wife  had  accompanied 




Gurdjieff  to  New  York  on  the  trip  early  in  1929,  and  during  this  time 




Gurdjieff had spoken at length to Thomas de Hartmann about the need to 




establish his career independently of the Prieure. On their return from 




New York, he began to make life very unpleasant for the de Hartmanns. 




Eventually,  “after  a very strained and difficult conversation,” they felt 




forced to go. Thomas de Hartmann was so affected that he hovered on the 




brink of a nervous breakdown, and was never able to mention Gurdjieff ’s 




jaame again. But Olga de Hartmann continued to visit the Prieur6 and 




accompanied  Gurdjieff  to  Berlin  in  the  autumn  of  1929.  All  the  time 




Gurdjieff put her under pressure. 




One evening after their return from Berlin, she was with Gurdjiefif at the 




Prieure. He asked her to do something which she felt unable to do and told 




^r that if she refused some terrible event would befall her husband. She 




ttaveled back to Paris in great agony of mind to discover her husband 




i^mly asleep.  Then came the final parting. When Gurdjieff was on the 




j^int of leaving for New York in October 1929, he began to tell Mme. de 




Jftartmann how invaluable she and her husband were to him; they were to 




make  arrangements  and  sail  to  join  him  in  a  week.  This  was  clearly




372 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




impossible, and in response to Mme. de Hartmann’s anguished protests, 




GurdjiefF declared that if they did not come, she would never see him 




again. Poised in the carriage doorway, he made a dramatic exit as the boat- 




train steamed out of the station. Olga de Hartmann returned home and lay 




in bed for four days before she could face the reality of the world outside. 




The de Hartmanns do not specify what pressures GurdjiefF exerted on 




them, and it does not matter. Without minimizing the distress which his 




technique caused, it should be noticed that—if we admit the possibility that 




GurdjiefF was trying to engineer a break—his methods were very similar 




with the Orages. To the de Hartmanns also, he sent messages asking them 




to return. And although they remained faithful to Gurdjieff’s ideas, they 




too, resisted any attempts to entice them back. 




There  is  a  story  which  shows  that  Orage  took  his  separation  from 




GurdjiefF in the same positive sense—despite his angry telegram. A pupil 




was sent by GurdjiefF from Paris to London with a typescript for Orage to 




correct  or  translate.  She  was  directed  to  travel  by  train  and  boat,  as 




GurdjiefF had—or pretended to have—a great mistrust of aircraft. Despite 




the forceful courtesy with which GurdjiefF escorted her to the door oF her 




railway carriage, she was determined to save time by catching a plane to 




London. Dutifully climbing into the train, she climbed straight out again on 




the other side and made off in triumph to the airport. On her arrival in 




London, she delivered her parcel to Orage and told him of her exploit. To 




her surprise, instead of laughing or registering astonishment, he became 




ferociously angry, and left his visitor in no doubt that she should on no 




account have disobeyed GurdjiefF. On her return to Paris, she oonFessed 




her stratagem. Gurdjiefif appeared a little irked by her cunning. “So you 




think  

you

 smarter than GurdjiefF!” he repeated in the tones  

of

 a Chicago 




gangster. Then, becoming serious: “By this I know that Orage still friend.” 




But his verdict was not completely favorable, as Jessie Orage found when 




she visited GurdjiefF’s Paris flat after the Second World War. The usual 




Feast was in progress, and a short conversation took place during which 




Gurdjieff said to her: “Jessie, you have my plate, my dinner.” 




“No, I’ve had it,” she answered. 




Gurdjieff then began to talk about a man whom he did not name. This 




man knew everything but lacked “the simple understanding. ... He tried 




For such,” said GurdjiefF, “and was too intelligent to grasp it.” 




She began to cry. Gurdjieff never took his eyes off her. 




On returning to England, Orage’s first thought was to buy back the  

New

 




 

Age; 

  but  Arthur  Brenton,  who  had  edited  the  paper  since shortly  after 




Orage went to Fontainebleau, refused to sell. Orage’s old colleagues in the 




Social Credit movement were at first wary oF him. His articles on “An




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   373




Editor’s Progress”—^which had been published in the  

New Age

 during 




1926—seemed to argue that he had renounced political problems for good, and 




he was resented as an opportunist and a turncoat. A certain amount of lobbying 




took place on his behalf. According to the poet Hugh McDiarmid, the return of 




the prodigal was enveloped in mystery. “When news got about that he was 




back,” he writes, “a mutual friend offered to motor me down to the out-of-the- 




way Sussex fermhouse where he was living. Great secrecy was enjoined on me 




and  the  visit  was  given  all  the  trappings  of  melodrama.  But  I  was  not 




disappointed. Orage was well worth meeting under any circumstances.” 




What the doubters perhaps did not know was that Orage had returned to 




the cause of Social Credit in New York, and as a result, a New Economics 




group had been formed with Gorham Munson as the editor of its paper, 




 

New Democracy. 

 From his sympathizers in the United States, Orage raised 




a subsidy of 1000 pounds for a new magazine to be run from the Social 




Credit viewpoint. From offices in the building in Chancery Lane where he 




had edited the  

New Age, 

 Orage brought out the first number of his  

New

 




 

English  Weekly

  on  April  21,  1932.  His  “Readers  and  Writers  ’  column 




revived his old pen name of “R. H. C,” and the very first article began in a 




way which seemed to show that the old Orage was back in fighting form. 




“As I was saying ten years ago,” R. H. C. remarked, “when my literary 




studies were suddenly lifted to another plane, Mr. Ezra Pound is one of our 




very few men of letters.” 




To some people it seemed that this was indeed the same Orage. Paul 




Selver’s heart had sunk when reading the “bewildering” series of autobiographical articles on “An Editor’s Progress.’’ They appeared to him to show an intellectual and stylistic softening; and there is some truth in this 




iiiticism,  for  Orage’s  fastidious  prose  was  markedly  less  taut  in  the 




scattered articles which he wrote during his long sabbatical. But when 




Selver actually met Orage again, all his doubts vanished. “Yes, this was the 




Orage to  whom  I  had  always  paid  homage. No  decline whatever. Not 




changed in the slightest.” Others thought differently. Nott saw him as “a 




kurnbler, bigger, more understanding and a more youthful man.” 




This was not only the impression of those who were informed as to his 




^vities  since  1923.  Eric  Gill  wrote  after  Orage’s  death:  “I  do  not  know 




what gift or what grace he received at Fontainebleau. It is certain that his 




deep appetite for religion was there, in some manner, satisfied.” To Philip 




Mairet,  who  had  passed  the  years  since  Orage  left  England  close  to 




Dmitrije  Mitrinovi6,  the  new  Orage  “had  a  new  and  deeper  kind  of 




wisdom. If in conversation he showed less brilliance for the love of it, his 




fewer words had more weight. Of the more than occasional arrogance of 




former days there was scarcely a trace: his judgments were as quick and 




accurate, if delivered from a higher and more detached point of view. I




374 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




believe that he now thought always in GurdjiefF categories, except when he 




put himself in the frame of mind for writing his aggressive editorials.” 




Despite some minor successes, the  

New English Weekly

 was never the 




paper the  

New Age

 had been. Orage’s lucidity of mind earned the renewed 




applause of such natural sympathizers as T. S. Eliot; and he continued to 




discover young writers—including the eighteen-year-old Dylan Thomas. 




But he failed to mobilize support of the quality he had formerly commanded. “His return was the signal for a welcome,” wrote his old ally, Maurice Reckitt, “the extent of which may have surprised him, but the 




practical results of which did not amount to much. The prophet was not 




wholly without honour, but he was still almost without disciples.” Philip 




Mairet  reports  that  the   

New  English  Weekly

  started  life  vdth  a  larger 




circulation  than  the   

New  Age

  had  boasted  when  Orage  sold  it;  but  the 




earlier target would not have been difficult to match and, after his ten years 




of exile, Orage had lost touch with4iterary fashion. As before, he had now to 




depend on private subsidies to support his journalism, and the  

New English

 




 

Weekly

 consistently lost money. For contributions, he had often to rely on 




his American friends and former pupils—sometimes the products of his 




writing school. 




Lack  of  material  success  or  any  real  recognition  of  his  new  venture 




depressed Orage. Nott saw a great deal of him at this time and recalls that 




he  felt  trapped  by  his  political  “Notes  of  the  Week.”  Orage  slightly 




scandalized his friend—an ardent Social Creditor—by admitting that his 




interest in monetary reform was only a “pseudo-interest.” Philip Mairet had 




become sub-editor on the  

New English Weekly, 

 and he noticed th^ stresses 




under with Orage’s work as a publicist now placed him. “If the tension 




between this public work and his other-worldly aspirations had much to do 




with his previous flight from London, the gulf between them was now wider 




still. He was indeed better able to bear the strain; only once did he allow 




me to see something of what it cost him; but there can be little doubt that it 




shortened his life.” 




One  result  was  that  Orage  began  to  contemplate  the  chances  of  an 




academic post. Another was that his interests turned again toward the 




transcendental. 




During  its  first  year,  the   

New  English  Weekly

  had  avoided  anything 




which  suggested  the  occult.  Orage  had  received  a  warning  that  his 




unorthodox interests were unpalatable to the circles in England which he 




wished to influence; for soon after his return, he had greatly alarmed a 




Social Credit audience with a dogmatic statement about different human 




types. Apart from a lighthearted recommendation of the anthologist of 




inexplicable happenings, Charles Fort—Gorham Munson was also a Fort 




enthusiast  and  compared  him  to  GurdjiefF—-Orage  contented  himself




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   375




during 1932 with a single printed statement on his esoteric standpoint. 




Although  this  may  have  been  designed  to  placate  his  critics,  it  shows 




without any ambiguity the effects of his time with Gurdjieff. His credo took 




the form of a note on the Jubilee of the Society for Psychical Research:




After  years  of  search  and  research  my  conclusion  upon  the  three 




greatest and most important questions—survival after death, immortality, the meaning and aim of existence—is that I do not know. The worst of it is that I do not know either whether anybody has ever 




possessed  such  knowledge  or  even  whether  such  knowledge  is 




possible. 




Although  Candide-like  he  advised  his  readers  to  “cultivate  their 




gardens, ” in the last half of 1933 he gave increasing evidence of a return to 




the interests which predated Gurdjieff. For a brief period he was associated 




with Dmitrije Mitrinovic in the latter s ambitious “New Britain” movement. In the  

New English Weekly, 

 James Young made a reappearance— 




although with a savage attack on spiritualism. But by 1934, even “M. B. 




Oxon”  was  back  in  Orage’s  columns,  indomitably  discussing  the  time 




theories  of  J.  W.  Dunne.  From  August  1933,  Orage  also  began  to 




contribute regular articles to  

The Aryan Path, 

 the Theosophical magazine 




whose presiding spirit was J. D. Beresford, another old friend from the days 




of Ouspensky’s first arrival in London. These articles continued until the 




month before his death, and were cast in a familiar mold. 




To Philip Mairet the beginning of 1934 signaled the appearance of Orage 




in detached and philosophic mood. He spent much time listening to the 




long monologues of A. E., in whom he discovered a kindred spirit. He 




discussed immortality and Jung, and no longer always changed the subject 




when Gurdjieff and his ideas were mentioned. In the second edition of his 




 

Memoir, 

 Mairet cuts a passage which is remarkably interesting for the light 




it sheds on Orage’s philosophy immediately before his death. “I will not 




attempt to recall, for fear of misrepresentation,” he originally wrote, “some 




things he said of Jesus Christ, except that some of his supporters would 




have been shocked at their relative orthodoxy, theologically speaking—but 




not moralistically so, for he had no use for a humanist Jesus.” Such a simple 




attitude—the apprehension of new meaning in old truths—seems quite 




often to be adopted by those who pass through the Gurdjieff mill. 




Through Rosamund Sharp, Orage made contact with Ouspensky, but 




dechned the latter’s invitation to visit him and dubbed the typescript of A 




 

New Model of the Universe, 

 a “new muddle.” He did not hold completely 




aloof; for although he refiised a former pupil of his own in New York an 




introduction to Ouspensky himseff, he did pass her on to Ouspensky’*




376 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




secretary,  Mme.  Kadloubovsky.  Both  Mairet  and  Nott  were  under  the 




impression  that  during  the  last  year  of  his  hfe  Orage  hoped  to  alter 




completely the nature of the  

New English Weekly. 

 He spoke optimistically 




of the conclusion of the struggle for Social Credit and hinted that he was 




planning to introduce social and literary criticism based on Gurdjieff ’s 




ideas. 




What were Orage’s feelings toward the man who had dominated so much 




of his life? “He left Gurdjieff,” says Mrs. Orage, “but he stayed with the 




System.” One American pupil of both Orage and Gurdjieff remembers a 




conversation between the two men—probably in the winter of 1929-30— 




during which Orage appears to have told Gurdjieff that although he had 




helped the Work, he had not been given the help which he himself needed. 




If Nott is to be believed, Orage’s position in 1934 was still the same. He 




confessed that he had never been able to decide whether Gurdjieff was a 




saint, a charlatan, or a mixture of both. This fittitude seems to be reflected 




in a short sketch printed in the  

New English Weekly

 not long before his 




death. This is called “A Dealer in Immortality,” and is by one “Edward 




Farrell.” It is set in the United States and concerns a Gurdjieff-type figure 




who claims to confer immortality by leading his clients along a philosophical 




path toward a recognition of the mystic unity of things. The story ends with 




the arrival of a telegram accusing the dealer in immortality of fraud and the 




hurried departure of that individual for France. As a literary effort, it is 




poor stuff; and it is left unclear whether “Edward Farrell” thinks that his 




metaphysical huckster is a misunderstood genius or a crook. 




Nothing definite can be inferred from such ambiguous hints; but it wou^d 




probably not be far from the truth to say that Orage’s attitude to Gurdjieff 




approached the “reverent agnosticism” which he then found so admirable in 




Julian Huxley. Nott maintains that, for all his doubts, Orage was convinced 




that  “something  had  changed”  in  them  as  a  result  of  their  work  with 




Gurdjieff.  Together  they  speculated  about  recurrence.  Next  time  .  .  . 




perhaps they would be able to develop more quickly, perhaps their places 




in  the  cosmic  scheme  would  be  taken  by  others  and  they  themselves 




liberated from the demands of the machine. . . . Orage might not know the 




answers he had sought—and might admit to not knowing—^but he had no 




regrets. A week before his death he exclaimed to Nott; “You know, I thank 




God every day of my life that I met Gurdjieff. ” 




By this time it appears that Orage knew that he was under sentence of 




death.  His  health  had  deteriorated  in  the  early  part  of  1934,  and  he 




suspended  publication  of  the   

New  English  Weekly

  during  August.  On 




returning to work, he caught a cold and began to suffer from an acute pain 




below the heart. His exhaustion was apparent to Ezra Pound from the tone 




of his letters and from their uncharacteristic carelessness. 




D O M I N I O N   O F   H E R O P A S S   377




He had written to me during the last year when his hand was weary 




from physical labour of writing. A dozen others must have known the 




same thing, and known that he had a specific sense of his mission. That 




both he and I were fatigued should be apparent from an egregious 




typing  error  in  the  last  issue,  that  I  should  have  written  it,  from 




fatigue, and, as I had no proofs in Rapallo, that he should have passed 




it,  warned  me  that  I  needed  rest,  but  he,  apparently,  did  not  take 




similar warning. 




On October 10, Pound received a letter containing one of the mistakes of 




which he writes. It ended, “perhaps I write not for men, but for God! Yours 




ever,  A.  R.  Orage.”  “With  the  full  signature,  as  valediction,”  Pound 




remembered, “where he signed normally with initials.” 




Whether  or  not  Orage’s  heart  trouble  was  an  old  illness,  even  the 




skeptical Paul Selver found his death disturbing; “To describe it as merely 




tragic is not enough. If such an event had occurred in a novel, reviewers 




would have dismissed it as being too obviously contrived. ” 




Orage had  been asked to  broadcast  on Social Credit. This coup was 




regarded  both  as  a  personal  success  and  as  a  feather  in  the  cap  of 




Douglasites  generally.  He  prepared  his  speech  with  great  care,  and 




delivered it on the night of November 5. During the talk he was sharply 




attacked by the pain in his heart, but the broadcast was accounted a success. 




That night he died in his sleep. The play called “A. R. Orage” had ended 




with the precision of his own most mannered sentences. 




To Nott there had appeared signs and portents. About a fortnight before 




Orage’s death he had watched his friend talking to a group in the Chancery 




Lane ABC cafe. “A pale yellow light issued from Orage, a nimbus, not only 




round his head, but around his whole form . . . When Orage came back to 




my table, his face had a sort of radiance of youth.” And on the night when 




Orage died, Nott dreamed of his face, “smiling in a mass of glowing coals.” 




The shock of Orage’s death produced an eloquence of grief. Orage was 




sixty-one, and the period of his greatest editorial brilliance was twenty years 




behind him. His mourners were not lamenting the editor of genius or the 




publicist of Social Credit—however much they pretended that this was 




what they were doing. The “Memorial Number” of the  

New English Weekly

 




and  the  number  following  were  packed  with  tributes  to  a  remarkable 




human being, one who for all his failings had the capacity to inspire and 




then to justify affection. T. S. Eliot praised him as “a man who was seeking 




tlie essential things,” Llewelyn Pow^s wrote that he combined “the head of 




a man of science vnth the heart of a saint,” and A. E. testified to his many- 




sidedness:  “Almost  everywhere  I  explored  his  mind  I  found  the  long 




corridors lit.” Many obituarists praised his integrity, and Will Dyson spoke




378 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




for his friends when he called Orage “the secret standard by which we 




judged  ourselves.”  His  devotees  mourned  the  loss  of  their  guide  and 




mentor. David Eder caught the essentials:




Was he a mystic? Only in the sense that we are all mystics. At the 




bottom we know so little and the philosophies are all so futile; A. R. O. 




never deluded himself with knowledge when sense existed, never 




pretended that things were what they were not. The ugliness of the 




world was all his and he would not move a hair’s breadth towards 




glossing it over with a false word, or a pretended belief




The  

New English Weekly

 survived Orage and for a brief time an Orage 




Society  met  to  commemorate  him.  His  most  tangible  memorial  is  the 




impressive headstone for his grave in Hampstead Churchyard on which 




Eric Gill carved the enneagram and, underneath, a verse from Orage’s 




cherished  

Mahabharata. 




The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead. 




Never at any time was I not, nor thou. 




Nor those princes of men, nor shall they ever cease hereafter. 




The unreal has no being 




The real never ceases to be. 




10




what Struggle? What Magicians? 




The insubstantial quality of Orage’s last years may suggest a withdrawal 




from  the  world  into  disillusion.  If  so,  this  was  not  accompanied  by 




bitterness, but reflected a positive nature resting after the tumult of its 




Gurdjieff adventure. To allow Orage to sink into some pit of piety is to 




detract from the essential excitement of his time with Gurdjieff: he had 




been  

exercised, 

 made supple, stretched—until, according to some, the light 




shone through. 




The explicit character of Orage makes clearer, however, the problems 




which surround the more reticent Ouspensky. The accepted explanations of 




why  Ouspensky  and  Gurdjieff  parted  company  show  a  clear  division 




between  the  disciples  of  the  two  men,  and—particularly  among 




Ouspensky’s  more  superstitious  followers—the  situation  is  sometimes 




represented as a mysterious esoteric duel; a struggle of the magicians. But 




the complexities which surround Orage’s break with Gurdjieff should warn 




the inquirer against accepting too facile an interpretation. 




The case from Gurdjieff’s side has been made by Nott, who relies partly 




on  information  from  his  friend,  F.  S.  Finder.  It  appears  that  after 




Gurdjieff’s London visits in February 1922, he made another trip later that 




ivinter, taking Finder with him as interpreter. At a meeting of Ouspensky’s 




jupils,  Gurdjieff  dismayed  the  audience  by  turning  on  their  revered 




ieacher and tearing him to shreds. He was too intellectual, declared




379




380 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjiefF;  if  he  really  wanted  to  understand,  he  must  go  back  to  the 




beginning again, and “work on himself. ” A little later, when Ouspensky was 




visiting Fontainebleau, Gurdjieff used Finder to interpret a lecture in the 




Study House. When Ouspensky objected to some of Finder’s translations, 




Gurdjieff turned on him with, “Finder is interpreting for me, not you!” The 




Finder-Nott  version  of  the  break  is  that  Ouspensky  was  mistaken  in 




thinking that he understood “Gurdjieff s inner teaching. ” They argue that 




he  saw  himself  as  a  religious  philosopher  in  the  tradition  of  Vladimir 




Soloviev and was determined at all costs to found his own school and have 




disciples sitting at his own feet. Nott maintains that it was Gurdjieff ’s trip to 




London in late 1922 which really caused the break, and reports a remark 




made by Gurdjieff to Finder on their way back to France. “Now, ” he said, 




“they will have to choose a teacher.” 




There are several different interpretations of the “Gurdjieffian” school of 




thought. Ouspensky is sometimes seen as being both lazy and a thief. In 




Nott’s  words,  he  “had  a  perfunctory  fling”  at  the  movements,  then 




abandoned them as unproductive. He was a writer when he met Gurdjieff, 




and he remained a writer—^“stealing” Gurdjieff ’s material and manufacturing a “System” which was never intended to be systematized or even made public at all. In fact, he was what Gurdjieff called a “hasnamuss a man 




lacking conscience or any sort or scruples. 




More frequently Ouspensky is seen as someone who failed the tests 




which Gurdjieff set him. According to this interpretation, he could not 




withstand GurdjiefF’s onslaughts on his self-importance and over-intellec- 




tualism. The attitude treating Ouspensky as a “failure ” sometimes mellows 




into understanding and sympathy. Gurdjieff’s “shocks,” it is emphasized, 




were often really intolerable; and Ouspensky was essentially a nice man 




whose conscience might have been offended by any one of Gurdjieff’s 




outrageous actions. It should be clear by now that part of the Gurdjieff 




discipline consists in confronting the pupil with what for him are the worst 




things  in  the  world:  things  which  for  him  at  that  moment,  represent 




limitations of his nature to which he cannot admit—of which he is possibly 




even unable to conceive. It may be that there is no limit to how far this can 




be carried, and there have certainly been catastrophic failures. There may 




have been simple conflict between Ouspensky’s ^econceptions—^which he 




may never have recognized as such—^and the deliberate actions of his 




unpredictable teacher. Ferhaps, it is suggested, there was some action— 




immoral, unforgivable, criminal—^which Ouspensky recognized might have 




its place in the context of the Work, but which he could not himself accept. 




However, the suspicion that Gurdjieff had tried to drive away Orage and 




the de Hartmanns can lead to a very different interpretation of the evidence 




of Nott and Finder. Ouspensky’s withdrawal might have been exactly the




W H A T   S T R U G G L E ?   W H A T   M A G I C I A N S ?   381




result  for  which  GurdjiefF was  striving. Ouspensky broke  with him  at 




Essentuki,  rejoined  him  at  Constantinople,  and  once  more  returned  to 




work with him in London and Paris. Would he never learn to stand on his 




own two feet? It is conceivable that Gurdjieff reasoned in this fashion and 




forced his pupil into making the final separation for himself. There is also 




the consideration that Ouspensky’s followers might have been thoroughly 




confused by an apparent contradiction between their teacher’s methods and 




the  more  outlandish  tactics  of  Gurdjieff.  There  are  indications  that 




Ouspensky partly agreed with this estimate of Gurdjieff’s purpose. He 




writes that Gurdjieff asked him to come and live in Fontainebleau several 




times during the period between the acquisition of the Prieur^ and his 




departure for America. “There was a good deal of temptation in this.” The 




term “temptation ” is always used by Gurdjieff and Ouspensky to signify a 




process of deliberate deception carried on in “esoteric schools” to test the 




pupils; and both Orage and the de Hartmanns were exposed to the identical 




“temptation.” Ouspensky clearly made the same deduction as had Orage 




and the de Hartmanns: the break must be absolute. Thus he returned from 




France after Gurdjieff’s departure for the United States and told those who 




wanted to work with him that “my work in future would proceed quite 




independently  

in the way in which it had been begun in London in 1921

.” 




In the rather doctrinaire atmosphere of his London groups, the ominous 




“G.” was legislated out of existence, although Ouspensky never denied that 




what he taught derived from him. On a number of occasions he amplified 




what  he  said  in   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  about  his  break  with  the 




Master. It is necessary to examine in more detail the idea that Ouspensky 




was able to break away on his own as a result of what he learned from 




Gurdjieff, rather than as a reaction against it. 




 

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  concentrates  on  his  separation  of  the  man 




Gurdjieff from the ideas of Gurdjieff. From what we know of Orage’s life 




after his parting with the Great Magician, it seems that he too may have 




performed such a painful division. While the Man Who Knows still seemed 




to  know  a  lot,  he  himself  appeared  less  admirable  than  before.  “I  saw 




clearly at that time,” Ouspensky had written of his break at Essentuki, “that 




I  had  been  mistaken  about  many  things  I  had  ascribed  to  G.”  In  the 




language of psychoanalysis, we should say that the effects of the transference were wearing off. 




Ouspensky’s idea of the perfect master had been strongly influenced by 




Nietzsche. “Men who seek for a real, living superman in the present,” he 




Wrote in A Neu?  

Model of the Universe, 

 “somehow thereby reveal a higher 




principle in their souls.” Ouspensky’s discovery that the seeds of a new 




humanity were latent in the individual came as the result of his search for a 




superior breed of human being already in existence: “Man finds superman




382 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




within himself when he begins to look for him outside himself, and he can 




find superman outside himself when he has begun to look for him within 




himself.” Almost certainly the “things I had ascribed to G.” had to do with 




Ouspensky’s vision of Gurdjieff as a representative of superhumanity. 




Discussion with the visible superman threw him back on the superman 




within—his own higher forces, that superior self which he had felt assert 




itself during the sad and dangerous winter of 1919. 




When he broke with Gurdjieff in Essentuki, Ouspensky reverted to his 




earlier esoteric interests and continued his search for the miraculous. On 




the appearance of his  

A New Model of the Universe

 in 1931, he remarked to 




Kenneth Walker that he hoped to make contact with an “es'bteric school” as 




a result of its publication. This prompts the question: to what did he think 




he had belonged during his time with Gurdjieff? Orage considered the 




Prieure an “esoteric school, ” although Gurdjieff had always proclaimed that 




his groups were only an outer, or at best, a central ring on some occult 




target. Perhaps Ouspensky’s image of an “esoteric school” was destroyed at 




the same time as his image of the. Master. Or, perhaps he decided that 




Gurdjieff’s “school” was, as Gurdjieff claimed it to be, a preparatory school 




for higher things. 




By  February  1923,  when  the  London   

Daily  News

  interviewed  him, 




Ouspensky  had  become  careful  not  to  present  himself  as  in  any  sense 




Gurdjieff s subordinate. “GurdjieflF and I have reached our present stage of 




knowledge by long and hard work in many lands,” he was quoted as saying; 




and his interviewer reported that “in Gurdjieff he found a kindred spirit 




who  had  gone  farther  on  the  same  road.”  This  raises  a  second  crucial 




question:  now  that  we  are  more  familiar  with  Gurdjieff’s  tactics  in 




presenting his ideas favorably to those he considered likely to respond^ had 




Ouspensky ever been justified at all in thinking that he and Gurdjieff were 




in fact traveling the same road? Perhaps their objectives had only coincided 




for  a  time;  or  perhaps  Ouspensky’s  aims—the  attainment  of  “cosmic 




consciousness,”  the  achievement  of  freedom  in  a  universe^  of  many 




dimensions—^had never been the same as those of Gurdjieff? The Master 




had  emphasized   

“the  teaching  by  itself  cannot  pursue  any  definite  aim. 

  It 




can only show the way for men to attain whatever aims they might have.” 




Ouspensky had passed through a  

process, 

 reached a point at which, after 




protracted anguish, he made a decision and emerged on the other side of 




the  tunnel.  He  may  have  thought  that  Gurdjieff’s  more  experienced 




followers would leave after the expedition through the mountains from 




Essentuki because they, too, would recognize the nature of the process 




they had undergone. 




This possibility is supported by the fact that Ouspensky made a division 




between his own ideas—like those on eternal recurrence—and Gurdjieff’s




W H A T   S T R U G G L E   ?   W H A T   M A G I C I A N S ?   383




System. He and his pupils were engaged in dual activity. On the one hand, 




Ouspensky taught GurdjiefF’s System; and on the other, he enlisted his 




pupils’ help in his own search for the miraculous. The ideas of the System 




were sound, but the source from which he had received them had become 




tainted.  Accordingly,  they  must  all  search  for  the  Source  from  which 




Gurdjieff himself had received the ideas. In a private conversation in the 




winter of 1924, Ouspensky replied to J. G. Bennett’s enthusiastic affirmation that the System could lead to “Consciousness and Immortality” in terms of the most stoical pessimism:




We were in his little sitting room in Gwendwr Road, West Kensington. 




He stood with his back to the gas fire, peering at me as usual through 




his powerful pince-nez. He sighed deeply, and said; “You say that you 




are sure that this work can lead to consciousness and immortality. I am 




not sure. I am sure of nothing. But I do know that we have nothing, 




and therefore we have nothing to lose. For me it is not a question of 




hope, but of being sure that there is no other way. I have tried too 




much and seen too much to believe in anything. But I will not give up 




the struggle. In principle, I believe that it is possible to attain what we 




seek—but I am not sure that we have yet found the way. But it is 




useless to wait. We know that we have something that has come from a 




Higher Source. It may be that something more will come from the 




same Source.” 




Ouspensky had really made two separations: he had separated the man 




Gurdjieff from GurdjiefF ’s ideas, and he had separated his own theories and 




aspirations firom Gurdjieff s System. In public he never criticized his old 




teacher;  but  in  private,  he  found  fault  with  Gurdjieff’s  conduct,  on 




GurdjiefF’s own terms. In October 1935 and October 1937, he detailed his 




objections.  In  the  beginning,  he  said,  Gurdjieff  had  laid  down  three 




principles for the Work which he contradicted by his later behavior. The 




first was that no one must do anything without understanding why they 




were doing it. The second was that no one should take anything on trust, 




but must verify any statement of GurdjiefF’s from their own experience, 




llie third principle was that the leader of the Work must never produce 




infatuation in his disciples. Ouspensky stated bluntly that in Essentuki 




Gurdjieff had begun to ignore these principles by demanding and accepting 




faith and blind obedience. He had thereFore broken the contract which 




bbund his pupils to him by betraying his position oF authority. 




Ouspensky told his followers that, as well as his moral scruples about 




GurdjiefF’s conduct, there was a further problem which had made him 




decide on the break in January 1924. GurdjiefFhad begun accepting people




384 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




who were totally unprepared to benefit from the Work. Ouspensky said that 




the help he had given Gurdjie^f in 1922 was a final test, a gamble to see 




whether anything would come of the Institute <^dt Fontainebleau—a format 




about which he had all along had the gravest doubts. He had collected 




money and sent people to GurdjiefF, but in the resigned anticipation of 




failure. 




All  this  is  relatively  mild,  and  may  only  have  been  the  story  which 




Ouspensky related for general consumption. His public loyalty to Gurdjieff 




was extraordinary, and he permitted himself full liberty o£ expression only 




within his closest circle. Orage’s explanation of the split is therefore of great 




interest. He always maintained that it was GurdjielF’s near rape of Mrs. Y in 




1923-24 that finally decided Ouspensky. The date tallies, and the scandal 




was of such proportion that the explanation is very plausible. If Orage were 




right, this would explain Ouspensky’s obsession with Gurdjieff s “integrity” 




in his conversation with Boris Mouravieff after Gurdjieff s crash; and why— 




out of loyalty to his teacher, as a “member of the same family”—he refused 




to tell Mouravieff why he had decided to work alone. 




So  who  is the Black Magician—Ouspensky, the  thief; or Gurdjieff,  the 




monster of depravity? The situation is more complicated than is clear from 




any partisan point of view. For although Ouspensky implies that the break 




in  January  1924  was  complete,  he  quite  definitely  did  continue  to  see 




Gurdjieff  from  time  to  time.  He  often  traveled  to  Paris,  where  A   

New

 




 

Model  of  the  Universe

  and   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  were  being 




translated under the supervision of Baroness Rausch de Traubenberg, and 




these absences effectively concealed such contact from his own pupils. For 




his part, Gurdjieff became increasingly careful to hide Ouspensky’s arrival 




from the inmates of the Prieure. Margaret Anderson was surprised to find 




Ouspensky at Fontainebleau in the spring of 1924—after the supposed 




break had taken place. He was there again for Mme. Ostrowsky’s funeral in 




1926. At various other times during the 1920s, Ouspensky was seen at 




Fontainebleau, although Gurdjieff did not allow him to mix with his pupils 




and  saw  him  only  in  the  salon  behind  closed doors.  The  possibility  of 




collusion—even of some master plan—cannot be ruled out. 




In about 1930 Ouspensky told several of his older followers that for the 




previous seven years he had been lying quiet in the hopes that something 




might come of Gurdjieff’s work, much in the spirit that he had cooperated 




in the establishment of the Institute for the Harmonious Development of 




Man. Certainly, during the 1920s his activities had about them a quality of 




wait-and-see,  and  he  kept  them  on  a  very  modest  scale.  His  pupils 




numbered between forty and fifty, and his meetings continued to be held at 




38 Warwick Gardens in South Kensington. 




W H A T   S T R U G G L E ?   W H A T   M A G I C I A N S ?   385




Kenneth Walker, a Harley Street surgeon who joined the group in 1923, 




condenses his memories of the unvarying nature of Ouspensky’s meetings. 




The entry pait Mme. Eugenie Kadloubovsky, the wife of a former Russian 




diplomat, who acted as Ouspensky’s private secretary and administrator; 




the austere schoolroom atmosphere; the slightly uncomfortable and tense 




mood of Ouspensky’s audience as they waited for their lecturer—^who was 




inevitably late, as Gurdjieff and Orage were always late for their meetings— 




are all of a pattern. The silent and almost imperceptible appearance of 




Ouspensky—^as Rom Landau described him, “white-haired, clean-shaven, 




above middle-age, bespectacled, stout”—and the introductory, “Well” are 




later confirmed. It was always difficult to discover when the next lecture 




was scheduled, but the routine of the meeting itself scarcely varied. Some 




ten years after Walker’s introduction to Ouspensky’s lectures, Rom Landau 




found virtually the same arrangements. Ouspensky’s notes seemed to him 




to serve as “a focus for his eyes ” rather than as an aid for the memory; and if 




he ever, in fact, needed to refer to them he disconcerted his audience by 




removing his spectacles altogether and bringing the manuscript right up 




against his nose. His heavily accented English and his staccato delivery 




made it difficult to follow what he was saying, but somehow this did not 




detract from the total effect of his manner. 




If the meeting were devoted to one of the introductory lectures which 




Ouspensky wrote, he would speak for three-quarters of an hour. More 




commonly, the talk would last from five to ten minutes and be followed by 




another silence, apparently endless, until a pupil summoned up enough 




courage  to  ask  a  question.  When  he  was  once  asked  if  he  intended  to 




publish  his  lectures,  Ouspensky  replied,  “What  is  the  use?  What  is 




important is not the lectures, but the questions and answers,” and this 




warning note is inserted by Mme. Kadloubovsky at the beginning of her 




selection from Ouspensky’s talks entitled  

The Fourth Way. 

 Landau makes it 




clear  that  the  success  of  the  meeting  depended  on  the  nature  of  the 




question:




Mere literary or philosophical questions were not welcome, and the 




effect of such a question was invariably devastating. Ouspensky was 




never rude, nor even ironical—but he was cruelly matter-of-fact, and 




would not tolerate questions that did not betray an honest desire to 




know more. 




Someone would ask, after Ouspensky had discussed the various 




states  of  consciousness:  “Is  Buddha  the  seventh  state  of  consciousness?” 




Ouspensky, without  even looking up to see who had asked the 




unfortunate question, would only answer: “I don’t know.” He then




386 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




remained silent, and you felt that in his thoughts he probably




continued, “and I don’t care. ” 




This method of question and answer reproduced in a formal fashion the 




means by which Ouspensky and his companions had been forced to extract 




information from Gurdjieff in Russia. For although pupils might attend 




“lectures,” they were never spoon-fed, and Ouspensky emphasized that 




originally it had been no part of Gurdjieff’s plan to teach a “system.” As 




Rosamund Sharp found, a pupil had to probe and prod to complete each 




facet of the Ouspenskian universe. 




Undoubtedly this contributed to the excitement and the sense of purpose 




experienced by Ouspensky’s followers. Their teacher was doing his best to 




reproduce for them his own experience. But because of the conditions 




under which he worked, the ideas were easier to assemble than they had 




been when he learned them from Gurdjieff. As he told his pupils: when he 




first met the System, he had been urged to “remember himself” for two 




years before it was finally revealed that man does  

not

 remember himself. 




What  his  follower,  Rodney  Collin-Smith,  later  dubbed  “this  strange 




unfolding  of  possibilities  which  went  by  the  name  of  O’s  lectures  ’ 




proceeded quickly enough to provide a sense of achievement, the feeling 




that something had been accomplished in the knowledge of the human 




machine. Rom Landau came as a journalist, but stayed out of fascination. 




He noticed practical results “even within a single year’s work.” 




Ouspensky’s  conception  of  “the  System”  was  inseparable  from  his 




concept of “school. ” His obsession with the latter idea can be traced back to 




his own erratic education; and it was always associated for him with the idea 




of a definite structure. The System as taught in such a school demanded a 




discipline on the part of the pupils. “If there are no rules, ” said Ouspensky, 




“there is no school.” There were rules for a number of reasons. The first 




was to create friction so that the pupils would have to make efforts to 




overcome their negative emotions. Because the pupil must put himself in 




the hands of the teacher, “one can only enter a school when one has lost, or 




is prepared to lose, a certain amount of self-will.” And certain rules—such 




as that about not talking to strangers about their esoteric studies—^were 




designed to prevent the Work from suffering. If they talked, their own 




valuation of their activities would suffer, and they ran the risk not only of 




distorting  the  ideas  by  transmitting  them  ineptly,  but  of  broadcasting 




material which should be kept for schoolwork. 




Such  considerations  produced  the  rule-dominated  structure  of 




Ouspensky’s following. While some rules stemmed from the ideas of the 




Work itself, others seemed to have more to do with Ouspensky’s rather 




formal correctness—^perhaps a reaction against the flamboyance of Gurd-




W H A T   S T R U G G L E ?   W H A T   M A G I C I A N S ?   387




jieff. People were not  allowed  to address  each other by their Christian 




names, and the custom of “Misters,” “Madams,” and “Misses” continues 




today.  Other  rules  were  probably  the  result  of  Ouspensky’s  Russian 




upbringing, with its restrictions on free intellectual discussion, and his 




consequent fear of police of whatever nationality. Pupils attending meetings 




at Warwick Gardens had to leave their cars several blocks away, so as not to 




draw attention to the building. If they met each other in public—in the 




street or at a theater, for example—they were forbidden to recognize each 




other  for  fear  of  provoking  a  conversation  with  third  parties  about 




Ouspensky’s work. For similar reasons they were not to mix friends “in the 




Work” with friends outside it. 




The rules certainly served to provoke friction; and they produced the 




“secret society atmosphere” which grated on outsiders like Nott. They 




could result in ludicrous situations. A regular attender at Warwick Gardens 




who wished to lunch with a fellow Ouspenskian might feel compelled to do 




so in a suitably clandestine rendezvous; and one furtive publisher took to 




telephoning his acquaintances “in the Work” from public phone booths in 




order to circumvent possible eavesdropping from his office switchboard. 




The rules were open also to some potentially harmful applications. There 




was one, which had originated in St. Petersburg, that if a member of a 




group  decided  to  leave,  he  should  be  ostracized  by  the  remaining 




members. Gurdjieff had explained that the purpose of this regulation was to 




prevent errant pupils from being scared of returning. But in the later stages 




of Ouspensky’s own work and under his successors, this rule was applied so 




that the offenders found themselves cut dead by numbers of people whom 




they regarded as their friends. 




Nothing could have been further from Ouspensky’s own intentions. His 




essential kindliness overrode all other considerations. A pupil once came to 




him to  announce her engagement  to another of his followers. His face 




wreathed in smiles, Ouspensky said: “In that case, of course, there are no 




rules.” 




Indeed the hallmark of his teaching when contrasted with GurdjiefF’s was 




its gentleness. As one of his American followers expressed it: “Ouspensky 




omelette—not too tough.” He refused to batter his pupils, and this decision 




dates back as far as the preliminaries to his “miracle” in Finland, when he 




arrived at “the esoteric principle of the impossibility of violence. ” This did 




not mean that Ouspensky would not occasionally fry the omelette a little 




longer if the need arose. As one of his old pupils puts it: “He was unfailingly 




courteous,  but  when  it  was  absolutely  necessary,  he  could  also  shout 




‘Moscow-fashion’— 

3l

 sound which ‘split the air’ and shocked into awareness 




the day-dreaming pupil for whom it was intended.” 




To  all  appearances—apart  from  the  role  of  the  teacher—Ouspensky




388 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




seldom indulged in the more theatrical techniques used by Gurdjieff. But it 




is very difficult to know where to draw the line in terms of theatricality. The 




sensation that the teacher was playing a role was never so marked among 




Ouspensky’s pupils as it was among those of Gurdjieff; but Ouspensky 




possessed a verbal dexterity which could amount to the same thing. When 




combined with his skillful assessment of a pupil’s psychological state, this 




could produce effects similar to those -which Gurdjieff achieved with more 




toil, sweat and pyrotechnics. Ouspensky’s methods could be extremely 




subtle. For example, once during the 1940s he was telling his pupils in New 




York about the doctrine of the “many I’s”; “He scolded us severely,” one 




pupil writes, “saying that we must never say ‘I’ before we knew what we 




were saying”:




“Look what happened to the devil, ” he said. And I protested: “But Mr. 




Ouspensky, God said to Moses on Mount Tabor, ‘I am that I am!”’




I was sitting in the first row. He paused, and looked at me for a 




while, and then said tenderly and very softly:




“Yes. But you, you see, you are not God. In you there is no 1.’ You 




must work. Work hard to have I. ” 




“If only I had enough energy to work! ” I said sincerely. 




“You have it,” he assured me. “You waste it in arguments.” He gave 




me a long look, and then indulged in the shadow of a smile. 




Behind the stern figure of Warwick Gardens, there was still the charming 




and affable Ouspensky of earlier days. He was now “taking serious things 




seriously”—and this may account for the slight oppressiveness of his System 




when contrasted with the jovial performance of Gurdjieff—but he still 




enjoyed good food and wine, still took pleasure in art and poetry, still 




displayed the sense of humor which he had shown Bechhofer Roberts in 




Rostov. In London he patronized a Chinese restaurant in Oxford Street, 




and  his  taste  in  tea  became  so  celebrated  that  Twinings  of  the  Strand 




regularly invited him to their major tastings. 




Some of his pupils found it hard to realize that he was a man like any 




other. Bennett remembers an expedition to buy prints of St. Petersburg for 




Ouspensky’s flat, when he found himself unable to accept that this was not 




in some way a teaching expedition and that the Master needed relaxation 




like any other human being. By virtue of the teaching role, and the need to 




play a part to sustain it, the inevitable transference took place. One evening 




in Paris, Ouspensky and Mme. Ouspensky were sitting in a cafe with some 




of their pupils. Ouspensky was withdrawn, rugged, and Russian. “Very 




hard to make a friend of Mr. Ouspensky, ” said his wife; and what was




W H A T   S T R U G G L E   ?   W H A T   M A G I C I A N S   ? 




389




perhaps merely a dig at a husband’s moroseness thereafter came to be 




repeated as an element of the teacher’s mystique. 




Ouspensky saw his pupils privately in his flat in Gwendwr Road. The 




building is now demolished, but Kenneth Walker remembers it as “a rather 




somber Victorian house in an equally dismal road.” His description of 




Ouspensky’s rooms gives the impression of a vaguely rundown atmosphere. 




“There was a divan-bed; a bookcase, two chairs near to the gas-fire, and a 




large mahogany table on which rested a type-writer, writing materials, a 




camera, a galvanometer and some scientific apparatus of an unfamiliar 




nature. On the mantlepiece lay a half-finished tin of sardines, the remains of 




a loaf, a plate, knife and fork and a few morsels of cheese. . . . ”  Until the 




late  1920s,  this  unremarkable  haunt  of  bachelor  Bohemianism  was 




Ouspensky’s only home. 




Then  sometime  between  1929  and  1931,  he  came  to  a  decision.  His 




routine altered, and it was never the same again. In the autumn of 1930, he 




told J. G. Bennett and other leading followers that since the .results he had 




expected from Gurdjieff’s work had not materialized, he would therefore 




no  longer  apply  the  brake  to  his  own  activities.  His  last  visit  to  Fontainebleau was in 1931. On this occasion Gurdjieff did not even allow him as far as the village of Avon, and their conference took place in the Cafe Henri 




IV  at  Fontainebleau.  This  meeting  marked  more  decisively  than  the 




apparent break in 1924 Ouspensky’s complete separation of his work from 




GurdjiefF’s. From this time or, his disappointment with Gurdjieff was more 




openly—and  sometimes  bitterly—expressed.  He  spoke  of  Gurdjieff’s 




“failure” as a catastrophe greater than the Russian Revolution. On several 




occasions  he  was  even  more  emphatic.  To  one  pupil  who  asked  him 




privately what must have become a wearisome question, Ouspensky said 




quite simply; “Well, he went mad, you see. ” 




Another complication is created by the role of Mme. Ouspensky. It has 




already been mentioned that the Ouspenskys’ marriage was an unusual 




arrangement and that when Ouspensky first arrived in London, his wife did 




not  accompany  him.  Until  about  1924-25,  she  lived  at  the  Prieure. 




Gurdjieff is then reported to have sent her away, saying that her husband 




needed her. Mme. Ouspensky left Fontainebleau, but instead of going to 




England 

—a

 country she loathed and whose language she never made any 




great effort to learn—she took a flat for several years at Asnieres near Paris. 




She did establish a working relationship with her husband: some of the 




London pupils came to Paris to help with the translations of his books and 




formed a Work group under the direction of “Madame.” 




When, about 1927, Mme. Ouspensky at last nerved herself to cross the




390 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




English Channel, the relationship of husband and wife remained as distant 




as before. Mme. Ouspensky used to say that GurdjiefF was her teacher, and 




for his part, Ouspensky had at least one mistress. In the various country 




houses  in  which  the  couple  lived  during  the  1930s,  they  had  separate 




quarters. 




These  houses  were Mme.  Ouspensky’s  contributions  to the Work  in 




England, and gradually she drew in to her hands the reins of a communal 




activity of the sort that GurdjiefF had created at Fontainebleau. At first she 




came to England only for part of the summer, and the country houses which 




she supervised were taken in the names of one or other of Ouspensky’s 




pupils.  There  was  a  house  in  the  southeast  of  England,  another called 




Pound Scots at High Wycombe, next the Oast House at Trosley in Kent, 




and in 1930 an increased number of pupils gathered in Wendover. At this 




succession of establishments, Mme. Ouspensky set herself to reproduce 




Gurdjieff’s assaults on his pupils’ prejudices and self-images—in fact to 




provide the necessary friction for people to apply the principles which 




Ouspensky outlined. 




She still kept communications open with GurdjiefF in France, and Nott 




and  Mme.  de  Salzmann  were  among  those  who  acted  as  couriers. 




Ouspensky was as interested as his wife in tales of GurdjiefF’s activities; and 




his pupils remember how he sometimes turned a blind eye to emissaries 




who were “smuggled" into Mme. Ouspensky’s presence. But was this only 




a blind eye? It remains possible that the breach between the two Masters- 




even the apparently definite breach of 1931—^was deliberately arranged: a 




play, rather as GurdjiefF’s passage of arms with the Orageans that same year 




was a play. And perhaps the play was not even for the benefit of GurdjiefF’s 




or Ouspensky’s immediate followers, but for later generations. The idea of 




the struggle of the magicians creates an almost mythical polarity. To say that 




the pious comedy—the  

ludibrium

—^was designed to provide the focus of a 




new religion may not be too wide of the mark. 




Let us remember the lack of evidence we possess for the historical reality 




of events before 1919. How far does the play extend? Ouspensky’s role may 




have  been  conceived  as  in  some  way  mitigating  the  difficulties  which 




GurdjiefF’s  methods  inevitably  created.  Such  a  role  might  have  the 




appearance of treachery, and might even appear treacherous to GurdjiefF 




himself. It may have been that Ouspensky saw himself in the role of Judas 




to GurdjiefF’s Christ. 




GurdjiefF taught in Russia—and repeated in  

Beelzebub’s Tales

—that the 




accepted view oF Judas Iscariot was completely wrong. In reality, he said, 




Judas had been the closest and most Faithful disciple. The fact that Christ 




had to die was known to all the disciples beforehand: it was a necessary part 




of the mystery play which they had determined to act out. Withoift the




WHAT STRUGGLE? WHAT MAGICIANS? 391




selfless performance of the traitor’s role by Judas—^who knew he would go 




down in history as a villain—the Christian drama would not have reached 




its necessary conclusion. 




Gurdjieff’s favorite term of abuse for followers who began to teach his 




ideas was “Judas-Iscariots”; and we know that his vilification of Orage as a 




plagiarizer and as an ambitious man was not the condemnation which it 




sounds. Ouspensky was obviously another of the “Judas-Iscariots ” at whom 




Gurdjieff aimed his shafts. If they were in collusion to perfect their drama, 




it is possible that Ouspensky’s apparent defection was part of the design, 




that he was the closest and most trusted disciple despite all appearances— 




or even that it was on his initiative that the drama was played in the manner 




in which it was. 




Ouspensky  might  well  have  thought  that  Gurdjieff  needed  a  loyal 




opposition; and he might even have brought Gurdjieff himself around to 




this point of view. Shortly before his death Ouspensky told one of his pupils 




that “she would understand”—^what, he did not say—if she read  

Old Diary

 




 

Leaves. 

 This is Colonel H. S. Olcott’s six-volume history of the Theosophi- 




cal Society. Knowing Ouspensky’s methods—he once told a pupil to read 




the New Testament in every translation she could find, solely to draw her 




attention to a passage halfway through St. Matthew’s gospel—^we might 




expect the solution to be fairly near the beginning of Olcott’s saga. In the 




foreward  to  the  first  volume  of   

Old  Diary  Leaves

  (1895),  the  Colonel 




explains his reasons for speaking out. 




The controlling impulse to prepare these pages was a desire to combat 




a growing tendency within the Society to deify Madame Blavatsky, and 




to  give  her  commonest  literary  productions  a  quasi-inspirational 




character. Her transparent faults were being blindly ignored, and the 




pinchbeck screen of pretended authority drawn between her actions 




and legitimate criticism. Those who had least of her actual confidence, 




and  hence  knew  least  of  her  private  character,  were  the  greatest 




offenders in this direction. It was but too evident that unless I spoke 




out what I alone knew, the true history of our movement could never 




be written, nor the actual merit of my wonderful colleague become 




known. 




One must still explain the abuse on both sides: Gurdjieff’s castigation 




of Ouspensky as a “weak man,” and Ouspensky’s seeming anger against 




Gurdjieff ’s “paranoia. ” It may well have been a case similar to that of 




Gurdjieff and Orage—^but with a different and perhaps a larger end in view. 




Like  Gurdjieff’s  characters  “Yelov”  and  “Pogossian,”  Ouspensky  and 




Gurdjieff may have flung mud at each other with the tacit understanding




392 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




that they were acting for each other’s benefit. The opposition between the 




two figures has been made overacute by some of their followers, although 




such partisanship may in fact be designed to conceal the true nature of the 




game in progress. 




Of course, just as in the case of Gurdjieff ’s accident, it is always possible 




that  a  plan  was  made  and  then  miscarried;  that  both  Gurdjieff  and 




Ouspensky began to identify with their roles vis-^-vis each other; that 




Gurdjieff became in truth the strict chastizer of the erring disciple and 




Ouspensky grew more and more into the part of the disillusioned renegade. 




And although Ouspensky recorded Gurdjieff s teaching about Judas in  

In

 




 

Search of the Miraculous, 

 he himself maintained an opposite view in  

A New

 




 

Model of the Universe. 

 Does this counteract the previous argument; is it a 




deliberate  contradiction  inserted  by  the  author—or  is  it  his  indirect 




confession, left behind for those who run to read? 




Judas is simply a small man who found himself in the wrong place, an 




ordinary man, full of distrust, of fears and suspicions, a man who ought 




not to have been among the apostles, who understood nothing of what 




Jesus said to his disciples, but a man who for some reason or other was 




accepted as one of them and was even given a responsible position and 




a certain authority. Judas was considered one of the favourite disciples 




of Jesus; he was in charge of the apostles’ domestic arrangements, was 




their treasurer. Judas’ tragedy is that he feared to be exposed; he felt 




himself in the wrong place and dreaded the idea that Jesus might one 




day reveal this to others. And at last he could bear it no longer. He did 




not understand some words of Jesus; perhaps he felt a threat in these 




words, perhaps a hint of something which only he and Jesus knew. 




Perturbed and frightened, Judas fled from the supper of Jesus and his 




disciples and decided to expose Jesus. ... He needed to accuse Jesus 




and his disciples of crimes in order to feel himself in the right. Judas’ 




psychology is a most human psychology, the psychology of slandering 




what one does not understand. 




There may be no deceptions at all. Alternatively, everything may be 




deception. 




u




Real Psychology




When in 1930-31, Ouspensky told his senior pupils of his decision to wait 




no longer for results from GurdjiefF’s work, he added a strange corollary. 




Perhaps,  he  said,  the  expansion  which  he  planned  would  attract  the 




attention of the “Inner Circle,” the invisible esoteric hierarchy which he 




appeared to believe was the source of Gurdjieff’s teaching. How seriously 




he took this hope is hard to say. Was the “inner circle” of humanity merely 




another carrot dangled before the noses of his expectant donkeys? 




The formation of some sort of organization to support the Work was an 




old project of Ouspensky. He told his pupils that this was his contribution 




to what Gurdjieff called “the third line of work,” that is, “work for the 




benefit of the school.” “From the moment I met the system,” he said, “I felt 




that it was more important than anything I ever knew and, at the same time 




Qiat  it  was  known  only  to  a  small  group  of  people.  There  were  no 




organizations behind it, no help, no nothing ... 1 decided to work on this 




line.” But many of his associates thought that the pressure for expansion 




came largely from his wife. One former pupil writes; “She might have been 




said to have bullied all of us into pressing this idea on O., who gradually 




gave way.” As the Ouspenskys’ own organization expanded, all efforts to 




make contact with the “Inner Circle” were abandoned. Mme. Ouspensky 




succeeded in converting most of her husband’s pupils to a belief that they 




themselves would eventually constitute an “inner circle,” and that a large




394 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




organization was necessary to screen possible recruits. Ouspensky himself 




was never completely won over, and insisted that the idea was his pupils’ 




responsibility. However, in the autumn of 1930, he began the program of 




expansion with a series of public lectures under the title “The Search for 




Objective Consciousness. ” His audiences grew steadily. 




One result of the increasing number of pupils was that more people 




wanted to work with Mme. Ouspensky in her country establishments. In 




1931 a house called The Dell was taken at Sevenoaks; and although several 




pupils were driven away by the ferocity of “Madam’s” treatment, next year 




a  still  larger  house  was  found  to  be  necessary.  Sophia  Grigorievna 




Ouspensky was to all outward appearances a termagant. “She was, in every 




act,  a  great  lady,”  Bennett  writes.  Nott  calls  her  “always  the  Grand 




Duchess.” She would never accept the title of “teacher” but always referred 




to  herself  as  “nurse.”  Nevertheless,  her  methods  were  modeled  on 




GurdjielF’s; and she pulled no punches. Incongruously, her public mockery 




of her followers had at first to be carried out through an interpreter. 




This was GurdjiefF—^but GurdjiefF without the subtlety or the warmth 




which redeemed all but his most outrageous violations of conventional 




human relationships. It is true that Mme. Ouspensky took on her shoulders 




all the odium generated by the unpleasant aspects of the Work: Ouspensky 




even stopped seeing all but his closest followers privately in Gwendwr Road 




and sent those who came to him with personal problems to his wife. So the 




contrast  between  the  shrewish  exterior  of  Sophia  Grigorievna  and  the 




consideration shown by Pyotr Demianovitch is a little unfair. But there is 




no doubt that if Mme. Ouspensky assumed the martyr’s role, its vindictive 




side “did not,” in the words of one who suffered under her, “conflict with 




her private incHnations.” Neither was she above using people in Gurdjieff’s 




most unscrupulous manner. When toward the end of the 1930s she took to 




her bed, it became apparent that she had been training members of her 




entourage with just this eventuality in mind. 




Relieved of his tutorial activities, Ouspensky was able to devote more 




time to his literary work. In 1927 Ouspensky decided to revise  

In Search of

 




 

the Miraculous

 and eliminate from it all confusion between his ideas and 




those of Gurdjieff. This was a task in which he could never entirely succeed, 




but any developments of his own ideas—on the fourth dimension, eternal 




recurrence or the Superman—^found their way into the book which was 




eventually pubUshed as A  

New Model of the Universe; 

 a better subtitle than 




the  one  given  it  would  have  been,  “applications  of  the  third  canon  of 




thought.” 




Only one of Ouspensky’s changes in terminology is significant. This is the 




introduction of the phrase, “the psychological method. ” When  

A New

 




 

Model of the Universe

 was published in 1931, the expression gave reviewers




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   395




great trouble, and as the book was subtitled, “principles of the psychological method in its application to science, religion, and art,” this was serious. 




In the early editions of   

Tertium Organum

 Ouspensky had  not used the 




phrase at all. Instead, he talked of the limitations of scientific reasoning and 




the  necessity  of  going   

beyond

  in  terms  of  “objective”  and  “subjective” 




knowledge.  Scientific  investigation  proceeds  by  the  objective  method. 




Where this fails, the only solution is to transcend the limitations of the 




human psyche by expanding “the limits of receptivity.” He had originally 




discussed this process as “the possibihty of the expansion of subjective 




knowledge.” But by the 1923 edition of  

Tertium Organum

 this had become 




“the possibility of the expansion of the application of the psychological 




method. ” 




Thus  the  daunting  “psychological  method”  grew  out  of  the  earlier 




“subjective knowledge.” It was really an extension of Ouspensky’s memorandum to himself to “think in other categories,” just as  

A New Model of the

 

Universe

 was an outgrowth from  

Tertium Organum

 and the illumination 




which accompanied it. “The psychological method,” Ouspensky explained, 




“is nothing other than the revaluation of all values from the point of view of 




their   

oum

  psychological  meaning  and  independently  of  the  outer  or 




accompanying facts on the basis on which they are generally judged.” To 




take a literary analogy, this is an argument for revaluation of experience 




according  to  the  sort  of  standards  for  which  C.  S.  Lewis  argues  in   

An

 




 

Experiment in Criticism:

 that is, standards of literary appreciation referring 




only to the book under discussion. Kenneth Burke once gave an example of 




the psychological method from the realms of mystical experience. “If one 




under gas dreamed a metaphysical ‘revelation,’ we could not dispose of the 




‘revelation’  by  saying  that  the  man  was  under  gas;  it  would  remain  a 




revelation regardless of the ‘facts.’” The use of the psychological method 




eflFectively puts its user beyond criticism. 




In  the  second  edition  of   

A  New  Model  of  the  Universe, 

  Ouspensky 




attempted to clarify his alrgument. A logical mind is all very well and most 




useful  for  certain  operations.  But  as  soon  as  this  logical  mind  has  the 




courage to recognize its limitations, it becomes a “psychological mind.” 




This is what he had meant by saying that the psychological method “aims at 




keeping the mind itself constantly in its field of view, and at regarding all 




conclusions and discoveries  

relatively to the state or kind of mind.” 

 Then he 




makes one of his familiar paralogical leaps; 




The psychological method is first of all a method of distinguishing 




between  different  levels  of  thinking,  and  of  realising  the  fact  that 




perceptions  change according  to the  powers  and properties of the 




perceiving apparatus. The psychological mind can see the limitations of




396 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the ‘logical mind’ and ... it can understand the reality of the existence




of a higher mind and of esoteric knowledge and see it in its




manifestations. This is impossible for a merely logical mind. 




Up to a point his reasoning is clear. Always to keep in mind our state of 




mind at the time of making an observation; always to bear in mind the limits 




of logic; always to remember the possibility of the third canon of thought. 




We can see how he arrived at this position through the logic of  

Tertium

 




 

Organum

 and his ideas of the fourth psychological dimension. It is also 




quite in harmony with Gurdjieff ’s teaching on self-observation. But why 




must the psychological mind realize the reality of the existence of esoteric 




knowledge? Ouspensky is once more indulging in dogmatic imperatives 




where he should have only expressed possibilities. 




The clue lies in the original term, “subjective knowledge." The subjectivity with which the  

New Model

 deals is Ouspensky’s; and the arguments for the existence of esoteric knowledge which its author finds compelling 




need convince no one but himself “The idea of the existence of a hidden 




knowledge,” he writes, " . . .  must grow and strengthen in people’s minds 




from the realisation of the insolubility of many questions and problems 




which confront them. ” This expresses his own driving force in a single 




sentence. He never accepted the idea that, objectively, there might be  

no

 




solutions and, where logic failed him, he took refuge in a private world. As 




long as the  

New Model

 is read conventionally, as an expression of objective 




and universally valid truth, it must seem absurd. But if the reader applies 




Ouspensky’s “psychological method ” to the text, the book becomes merely 




an invitation to enter its author’s  subjective world. A  

New Model of the

 




 

Universe

 is Ouspensky’s application of the third canon of thought to his 




personal obsessions. As an indication of possibilities open to the untrammeled mind, it proved an intoxicating experience for many of its readers. 




As the author once remarked, it is “a very long book.” Most of the subject 




matter had been touched on in  

Tertium Organum, 

 and what is new is the 




manner of presentation. The book possesses little consecutive argument, 




but it is rather the introduction to a state of mind. Some of its original 




fascination  is  lost  today  in  a  world  familiar  with  the  mind-stretching 




concepts of science fiction; and it is significant that ideas derived from the 




 

New  Model

  have  formed  a  quarry  for  several  science  fiction  writers. 




Ouspensky evidently hoped that some of his readers would follow him into 




his personal universe, and because this was by definition a universe where 




ordinary  logic  did  not  apply,  he  had  to  provide  some  hypothetical 




framework to provide an illusion of security for those who took the bait. 




So—^very much on the principle by which Orage had dubbed Gurd[^eff’s




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   397




cosmology “the Greater Map”—Ouspensky projected such a framework in 




the title chapter, “A New Model of the Universe.” 




He began by discussing the ideas of Newtonian physics and showed how 




the universe of scientific laws had been upset by the Einsteinian universe of 




relativity. He then proposed “a new model” which could disrupt existing 




physics just as the old physics had earlier been overturned. This “model” 




had  in  fact  been  completed  by  1912,  and  Ouspensky  had  since  been 




encouraged by Gurdjieff in the belief that the “period of dimensions” which 




he postulated expressed the same idea as GurdjiefF’s Ray of Creation. In his 




earlier  writings,  Ouspensky  had  discussed  five  dimensions:  the  zero 




dimension, the conventional three, and the “fourth” of Time. In his “new 




model”  he  postulated  two  more.  If  we  imagine  Ouspensky’s  fourth 




dimension, the Long Body of Time, stretched like a clothesline before us, 




the  short  fifth  dimension  runs  perpendicular  to  it—like  a  series  of 




monstrously elongated clothespins, with each clothespin representing one 




particular moment—say 10 a.m. on April 10, 1980. This is the dimension of 




the Eternal  Now, and if each clothespin were crossed by other lines of 




Time, it would still and forever represent 10 a.m. on April 10, 1980. But at 




each moment in Time—at each moment when the clothesline is broken by 




the clothespin 

—a

 man’s actions may affect what happens next, and thus the 




structure of the clothesline, the shape of the Long Body, and also each 




subsequent moment of time, each Eternal Now, each clothespin following. 




But at each moment, there are also a number of possible courses of action 




open to us. Some are not selected and therefore are not actualized in the 




line  of  time  along  the  clothesline.  Ouspensky  then  postulated  a  sixth 




dimension, one at right angles to the clothesline and clothespin, which 




actualized all possibilities—^whether selected or not selected—at once. 




This ingenious piece of speculation was linked to the idea of eternal 




recurrence.  If  a  man  recurs  and  recurs,  the  only  means  of  altering  the 




remorseless cycle is to make different choices; that is, to select different 




possible courses of action at any moment in time. Thus by changing the 




 

future, 

 by altering the shape of the Long Body as it will reveal itself  

after

 




 

his choice, 

 a man will also be altering his past—the configuration of the 




body of Time as it existed the last time he traveled this way. Accordingly, 




the  next  time  around  more  new  choices  may  be  possible,  and  further 




change. 




And further on (it is implied)—^with unlimited change at each moment in 




time, when we are free of the tyranny of both past and future, when we 




arrive in the psychological dimension of absolute freedom and contain 




within ourselves all possible worlds—this is indeed the wisdom of the gods. 




 

A  New  Model  of  the  Universe

  had  a  mixed  critical  reception.  It  was




398 T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




agreed that Ouspensky’s essay on yoga was very fine, but the rest of the 




book met with general incomprehension, and the “New Model” chapter 




was severely criticized.  

The Times Literary Supplement

 remarked that the 




book was “very good when the author is telling us about himself; it is mostly 




very bad when he is telling us about anything else. . .  

.’’The Nation

 came 




even nearer the mark; “the only knowledge that a non-esoteric reader will 




derive  ...  is  about  the  psychological  workings  of  the  esoteric  mind.” 




Ouspensky had one panegyricist, John O’Hara Cosgrave in the  

Saturday

 




 

Review of Literature, 

 who wanted to force the  

New Model

 on “every college 




professor and author of books and writer for newspapers and magazines. ” In 




the  

New Republic

 Kenneth Burke recalled the impact of  

Tertium Organum

 




on his circle, but described the  

New Model

 as “beyond ‘argument.’” For his 




revised version of the universe he preferred Blake or Milton. 




In England there was a second edition in 1934, and despite the obvious 




intellectual  pitfalls,  the  book  served  very  well  what  might  easily  be 




supposed to be Ouspensky’s purpose. He had designed it for a popular 




audience and had hoped for a popular success; indeed he was dissatisfied 




with the high price of the handsome Routledge volume* and wanted a 




cheap  edition.  Who  would  bite  on  the  lures  he  had  strewn  about  so 




plentifully?  He  had  talked  in  terms  of  religion,  biology,  mathematics, 




occultism,  and  philosophy;  he  had  discussed  sex  and  politics;  he  had 




indulged the most romantic fancies of journeys to the East. Behind it all, 




however,  was  an  implication  that  there  were  particular  secrets  to  Ije 




learned. 




In a note prefacing the  

New Model, 

 Ouspensky promised the publication 




of another book telling of his discoveries “during the time from 1915 to 




1919.”  Three  times  he  referred  to  the  existence  of  a  “special  doctrine 




accessible only to a few” in places where his readers might make some 




connection with ideas of self-development. This was the opposite of the 




technique which he had used with his band of forty to fifty pupils in 1924. 




They had been given the task of distinguishing between Gurdjieff’s ideas— 




referred  to  as  “Special  Doctrine”—and  the  “New  Doctrine”  for  which 




Ouspensky was responsible. 




Ouspensky once answered the question whether he had “altered the 




teaching much” that he had not altered it at all. He went on: “But I prefer 




... to start with the psychological side.” He defined psychology as “study 




of oneself.” This leads first to the recognition of the multiplicity of “I’s”; and 




second to learning methods of self-observation—^for which a man needs to 




know GurdjiefiF’s working diagram of the human machine. “Real psychol




*A  

New Model of the Universe

 was published by Routledge and Kegan Paul largely through 




the influence of Herbert Read, a director of the firm. 




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   399




ogy,” Ouspensky said, begins when a man is told to “remember himself” 




and realizes that although he cannot do this in his present state, he might 




succeed with effort. This was the nub and axis of the System as he taught it, 




and even when he had led his pupils on some cosmological sally, he never 




tired of reminding them that “Only with the help of the psychological study 




shall we really increase our knowledge; without it we shall only be learning 




words. ” 




After the publication of the  

New Model

 in 1931, and still more after the 




second  edition  of  1934,  recruits  came  in  droves  to  Warwick  Gardens. 




Ouspensky instructed his pupils to approach friends who might respond to 




the System, and he began to hold meetings on more than one evening a 




week. In 1934 he wrote a series of introductory lectures, which were later 




published  under  the  title  of   

The  Psychology  of  Mans  Possible  Evolution. 

 




These served both as an introduction to the ideas of Gurdjieff and—because 




they were frequently repeated—as a means of reminding pupils of the 




principles they were studying. To repeat these lectures and also to save 




time  in  answering  questions  about  the  basic  outline  of  the  System, 




Ouspensky made use of his most senior pupils. These included one man 




who had been with him since 1924, a journalist who was one of his older 




followers and a member of the Royal College of Physicians named Dr. 




Francis Roles. 




At  the  same  time  Ouspensky  delegated  his  authority  to  two  other 




followers. The first was a very qualified delegation and simply involved the 




recognition  of  an  already  existing  situation.  J.  G.  Rennett—to  whom 




Ouspensky was indebted for having arranged his visas from Constantinople—enjoyed an ambiguous relationship with his teacher, and from 1925 to 1930 had no direct contact with him at all. Ry the summer of 1930, Rennett 




had established a small discussion group which met regularly, and of whose 




activities he sent reports to Ouspensky. 




The second delegation of authority was made by Ouspensky in a quasi- 




ofiicial manner. On September 9, 1931, he was talking to his closest pupil 




and  friend,  Maurice  Nicoll.  Then  he  said:  “Nicoll,  you  had  better  go 




away. . . .” In the silence after his words, Nicoll was left contemplating his 




boots. Ouspensky completed his sentence. “Go away,” he said, “and teach 




the System.” 




At  first  Nicoll’s  teaching  was  on  a  very  small  scale  and  had  to  be 




combined with the demands of his profession as a psychiatrist. His earliest 




pupils often found themselves sitting among the patients in the doctor s 




waiting room. The nucleus was formed by a few old followers of Ouspensky. 




These  brought  their  friends,  and  outsiders  might  be  introduced  to  the 




regular meetings. As the number of pupils grew, Nicoll divided his groups. 




There  were  meetings  in  his  consulting  rooms,  in  the  flats  of  group




400 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




members, in a physical culture studio run by a devoted follower named 




Fulford Bush, and in a dancing school in the Finchley Road. 




Nicoll’s experiences as a psychiatrist fitted him much better than Orage 




or either of the Ouspenskys to crack the whip if necessary, and it does not 




seem that his teaching ever incurred the casualties inflicted by Gurdjieff 




and  Mme.  Ouspensky.  The  impression  remains  that  the  doctor  was 




remarkably skillful in tempering the wind to the shorn lambs under his 




charge. 




We imagine the 1930s as a period dominated by industrial depression, 




unemployment, and mass political movements. But the slump affected 




intellectuals in different ways. Some turned toward the realities of this 




world, others withdrew from it precipitately. Ouspensky’s teaching seemed 




to provide a way of detachment from the world which did not require 




subscription  to  apparently  outmoded  creeds.  His  decision  to  expand 




coincided with the beginning of the recession, and his success certainly 




owed something to the troubled state of Europe. It was in this psychological 




climate that Rom Landau wrote a bestseller,  

God Is My Adventure, 

 and 




came  himself  to  hear  Ouspensky.  In  his   

New  Statesman

  review  of   

The

 




 

Fourth Way, 

 Rayner Heppenstall places Ouspensky s readers among that 




section of the avant-garde who had never been quite certain whether or not 




their place was in the arriere-ban:




For  quite  a  lot  of  people  the  years  before  Hitler’s  war  were  still 




dominated, not by the new Oxford communist poets, but by Central 




European mystagogues with more or less eye cocked on the mystic 




East.  ...  In  many  a  Garden  Suburb  sitting-room,  beside  the nature 




cure pamphlets and the outlines of Adlerian psychology, lay a copy of 




 

Tertium Organum

 or A  

New Model of the Universe. 

 People were bent 




on  awakening  their  higher  centres,  emerging  from  the  prison  of 




mechanicalness, being at one with the One, achieving synthesis and 




breathing correctly. 




After the publication of the  

New Model, 

 Ouspensky’s lectures began to 




attract the attention of the  

literati. 

 His shadowy presence in London was 




known  to  many  intellectuals,  and  despite  the  secrecy  of  meetings  at 




Warwick Gardens, the departure of Orage and Katherine Mansfield for the 




Prieur6 had inevitably placed Ouspensky on the literary map. Although 




 

Tertium Organum

 never achieved the success in England which it enjoyed 




in the United States, it had a vwde circulation in Progressive circles; and 




one of its most fervent devotees was Mrs. Bernard Shaw. But during the 




1930s the literary men who attended Ouspensky’s meetings came less




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   401




frequently from the Progressive camp than from the fringes of Bloomsbury. 




In  those  high  and  far-off  days,  contact  between  “intellectuals”  and 




“society” was very close, and there was still a small circle within which 




fashions traveled fast. Nicoll, with his literary connections and parties at the 




Cafe Royal, moved in several strata of society and was the natural choice 




when Edwin Muir needed psychiatric help. Kenneth Walker (d. 1966) was 




an eminent surgeon, fellow of innumerable Royal Societies, and three times 




Hunterian Professor—the last two occasions in 1922 and 1924. He was 




introduced to Warwick Gardens by Nicoll, whose friend he had been at 




Cambridge and whose neighbor he was in Harley Street. Walker himself 




was no stranger to Bloomsbury and was a friend of Goldsworthy Lowes 




Dickinson. Mrs. Beatrice Mayor was a friend of the Huxleys. Her husband, 




R.  J.  G.  Mayor  (1869-1947),  was  a  prominent  civil  servant  in  the 




Department of Education and was also a follower of Ouspensky. He was a 




member of the famous Cambridge “Apostles,” and a peripheral figure in the 




circle of Lytton Strachey, who disapproved violently of his attempts to 




discover Truth. Aldous Huxley, Gerald Heard, and Christopher Isherwood 




also attended Ouspensky’s lectures; both Huxley and Heard went several 




times to talk with Mme, Ouspensky in the country, although they never 




took part in the regular Work activities. 




Some traces of Ouspensky’s influence may be found in Heard’s  

The Third

 




 

Morality

 (1937), but Huxley was the most obviously affected of the group— 




although the impression remains that he reacted unfavorably to the Work, 




perhaps because he believed that Gurdjieff had been the cause of Katherine 




Mansfield’s death. One obvious example of Huxley’s borrowing is his use of 




the  term  “negative  emotions,”  which  occurs  in   

The  Doors  of  Perception

 




(1954), to describe the unpleasant states of mind which are accentuated by 




hallucinogenic drugs. While he was writing his  

Ends and Means

 (1937), 




Huxley consulted the bookseller John M. Watkins of Cecil Court about the 




sources  of  “the  perennial  philospophy,”  and  followers  of  Ouspensky 




maintain that his attendance at Ouspensky’s lectures was also in the nature 




of a research expedition. Certainly the argument, if not the details, of  

Ends

 




 

and Means

 with its declaration that “The ideal man is the non-attached 




man,” is strikingly similar to what Huxley might have heard at Warwick 




Gardens. 




The character of Mr. Propter in Huxley’s  

After Many a Summer

 (1939) is 




sometimes taken as a portrait of Ouspensky. Propter is a man capable of 




withdrawing  from  personality.  His  method  entails  helping  a  man  to 




“unlearn a lot of things he now regarded as self-evident and right. ” In Mr. 




Propter’s conversation can be found hints of Gurdjieff’s “objective morality.” “All personality is a prison. Potential good is anything that helps you to get  out  of  prison.”  And  in  his  lecturing  of  the  “middle-aged  English




402 T H E   H A K M O N I O U S   C I H C L E




scholar,” Jeremy Pordage, the reader finds a transposition into hterary 




terms of the Ray of Creation, with its successively increasing number of 




mechanical  laws.  “Most  of  us  live  on  the  mechanical  level,”  says  Mr. 




Propter, “where events happen in accordance with large numbers. The 




things we call accidental or irrelevant belong to the very essence of the 




world in which we elect to live.” 




The promiscuousness of intellectuals toward Ouspensky did not result in 




a literary  movement like that which Orage had inspired in the United 




States. The reason was Ouspensky’s inflexible ban on writing about the 




System without his permission. When his followers asked—as they did at 




regular intervals—^for news of when he intended to publish  

In Search of the

 




 

Miraculous, 

  Ouspensky  would  temporize  and  say  that  it  was  in  their 




interests to keep the ideas for their own work rather than to let the world 




into their  

secrets. 

 This prohibition was extended to prevent his pupils from 




writing altogether. One example is that of the novelist Bernadette Murphy, 




who was directed to abandon her writing and become secretary to Kenneth 




Walker. A few stray references did escape Ouspensky’s net; only in the case 




of Aldous Huxley was the leakage considered serious, and the faithfial 




erupted in loud cries against plagiarism of the Work. 




The writing which Ouspensky did permit is so allusive as to give nothing 




away. Frequently it would be impossible to tell that an author had been in 




touch with his teaching. Robert Mayor’s posthumously published  

Reason

 




 

and Common Sense

 (1952) is the sort of philosophical treatise one would 




expect from a former Fellow of King’s. Beatrice Mayor’s  

The Story without

 




 

an End

 (1940) is a mawkish allegory of spiritual progress dealing with the 




attempts of Betsy, denizen of Lowland, to climb the Great Slope. R. R. 




Merton, the translator of the  

New Model, 

 published a volume called  

Sons of

 




 

the King

 (1940) which contains Ouspenskian ideas filtered through a rather 




woolly mind. Almost nowhere is there to be found the life-giving impulse 




which animated the Orageans, and the contrast between Orage’s fertilizing 




influence and Ouspensky’s impersonation of a hen brooding on a clutch of 




eggs is telHng. 




The single exception to this melancholy rule was a book published in 




1936 by Kenneth Walker, whose only previous literary work had been a 




children’s story. Called  

The Intruder*

 and subtitled, “an unfinished self- 




portrait,” this is an interesting attempt to base an autobiography on the 




doctrine  of  man’s  “many  I  s.”  Walker  introduces  himself  as  his  own 




experimental rabbit, and declares that “the study of psychology should 




begin, not with the examination of the broken clockwork that is brought to 




the psychotherapist’s consulting room, but with a careful observation of the 




wheels and springs of action working within one.” He confines himself to




* Later rewritten as  

I Talk of Dreams. 




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   403




observing  four  different  “I’s,”  “so  immersed  in  their  dreams  that  they 




represent sleep rather than awareness”; but over and above his multiple 




ego, Walker makes out another entity whom he christens “the Intruder.” 




The Intruder corresponds to what Ouspensky called “Big I,” and Walker 




sees him as the agent of that fuller consciousness which alerts him to the 




cavortings of the marionettes who normally manipulate his life. 




Just  as  the  presence  of  Ouspensky  in  London  acted  as  a  compelling 




magnet for some intellectual circles,  

A New Model of the Universe

 provided 




a similar lodestone for a wider audience. In 1931, the year the  

New Model

 




appeared, Charles Williams—^whose secretary, a Miss Ripman, belonged to 




the Work groups and so had prior knowledge of Ouspensky’s ideas— 




pubhshed his novel  

Many Dimensions, 

 which contains much speculation on 




time and dimensions, and even a character who is trapped in a “perpetual 




recurrence.”  Britain  in  the  1930s  had  developed  an  appetite  for  the 




mysteries  of  time.  J.  W.  Dunne  published  his   

Experiment  with  Time

  in 




1927; and the same year Wyndham Lewis argued in  

Time and Western Man

 




that  time  was  the  obsessive  preoccupation  of  the  age  (and  even  the 




inspiration of Charlie Chaplin). John Buchan—^adept as always at picking 




incipient fantasies from the void—published  

The Gap in the Curtain

 in July 




1932. It is difficult to believe that he had not read the  

New Model

 and heard 




something of Ouspensky.  

The Gap in the Curtain

 tells of a house party at 




which the lion of the weekend is Professor August Moe. Moe selects five 




members of  the house  party for an experiment, all of whom are tired, 




nervous, or ill. They must not be men “too deeply sunk in matter.” After a 




period of fasting and drug taking, Moe’s subjects sit holding pieces of blank 




paper cut to the size of the  

Times. 

 The object is to visualize the text of the 




newspaper one year from the date when the experiment takes place; and 




#»e story is concerned with what the characters do wdth the information 




they receive. 




The interesting feature of  

The Gap in the Curtain

 is not the pseudotheory 




of reading the future, which is an amalgam of Dunne and Ouspensky. It is 




the character of Professor August Moe. Moe is the first appearance in the 




popular literature of the 1930s of a character who became archetypal for the 




decade. A brooding, powerful. Central European—or perhaps Scandinavian—genius with the ability to cast an intellectual spell over his listeners, Professor Moe is a sensationalized version of Ouspensky’s public image. He 




shares with Ouspensky the technique of presenting his case in different 




ways to different people; and he shares his fascination with time. Professor

Moe anticipates another fictional genius; in this case one whose ideas were 




admittedly borrowed from Ouspensky, and whose appearance gives substance to the idea that a vague image of Ouspensky himself formed part of the mental furniture of the late 1930s. 




Visitors to the Royalty Theatre in London for the first night of J. B. 




404 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Priestley’s   

I  Have  Been  Here  Before

  on  September  22,  1937,  would  have 




seen Lewis Casson in the role of Dr. Gortler, and read the unfamiliar name 




of  Ouspensky  in  the  program.  In  the  published  version  of  the  play, 




Priestley makes his acknowledgment as follows:




For  some  of  Dr.  Gortler’s  theories  of  Time  and  Recurrence,  I 




gratefully acknowledge my debt to P. D. Ouspensky’s astonishing 




book,  

A New Model of the Universe. 

 It must be understood however, 




that I accept full responsibility for the free use I have made of these 




borrowed ideas, and that it does not follow because I make use of them 




that I necessarily believe in them. 




J. B. Priestley




The  play  is  set  in  a  lonely  Yorkshire  inn  and  the  basic  plot  is  a 




contemplated adultery. The situation is complicated by the appearance of 




the  mysterious  Dr.  Gortler,  hinting  darkly  at  the  theories  of  eternal 




recurrence.  Some  of  the  characters  decide  that  they  have  “been  here 




before.”  It  emerges  that  Gortler  has  intervened  to  halt  a  succession  of 




misfortunes which will occur if the wife goes off with her lover. The affair 




will  end  disastrously,  the  lover’s  career  will  be  ruined,  the  forsaken 




husband will shoot himself, and various subsidiary characters who depend 




on the protagonists will be caught up in the general tragedy. In the last act 




it appears that Gortler failed, because the lovers elope as they had done 




“before.” But the wife returns repentant to find that Gortler has persuaded 




her  husband  not  to  commit  suicide.  The  result  is  that  the  husband  is 




reconciled to the loss of his wife; thus saving his own life and her happiness, 




as well as the career of his wife’s lover, and the well-being of those who 




would  also  have  been  affected.  It  is  a  neatly  moral  application  of 




Ouspensky’s theories. 




The play was commercially successful, and it certainly helped the sales of 




the  

New Model. 

 A common reaction must have been that of David Hughes 




in  his  book  on  J.  B.  Priestley:  “One  cannot  help  being  interested,”  he 




writes; “however much, for the sake of intellectual dignity, you pretend to 




wriggle in your seat, the attention is held throughout the piece, and you go 




away from the theatre muttering comments that sound vaguely like threats, 




determined to have a look at Ouspensky and see what possible truth it 




contains, even if you stick at the first thirty pages.” In Warwick Gardens 




there were outraged cries about plagiarism which Ouspensky met with 




equanimity. He was used, he said, to people stealing his ideas. Although 




Priestley  had  freely  acknowledged  his  source,  he  never  succeeded  in 




meeting Ouspensky, who regarded him as a potential menace to security. 




But the impact of the  

New Model

 had a lasting influence in turning




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   405




Priestley’s mind toward the books of GurdjiefF, Ouspensky, and Nicoll, with 




results which became apparent in his later fiction. 




Behind the mystery-making which produced such excellent entertainments, Ouspensky’s reputation grew. Regarded by outsiders as a mysterious underground eminence, he was increasingly revered by his disciples, and the strange sort of success he enjoyed by proxy in the personae of 




Professor Moe and Dr. Gortler, may unconsciously have colored the pupils’ 




images of the Master. 




The notoriety which the  

New Model

 and Ouspensky’s lectures brought 




the  Work  resulted  in  a  further  increase  in  the  number  of  people  who 




wanted to spend weekends under the eagle eye of Mme. Ouspensky at 




Gadsden. In the autumn of 1935, a larger house was taken at Virginia Water 




in Surrey. This was Lyne Place, a sizable Regency building with a farm. 




Perhaps harking back to the Tolstoyan fashions of his youth, Ouspensky 




decided that Lyne should be as self-supporting as possible. His pupils 




worked: making hay, growing fruit and vegetables, and keeping bees, with 




the dual objects of producing food and generating the friction which their 




discipline demanded. Later on, classes were held in Gurdjieff’s movements. Some twenty people lived in Lyne Place itself, others bought houses in Virginia Water, and by 1938 about a hundred people were arriving to 




work on Sundays. This expansion brought with it effects which some of the 




older pupils noted with chagrin, among them, Kenneth Walker; 




One of the most obvious losses was that because we were now so many, 




we saw much less of the two Ouspenskys. This meant that we received 




less personal guidance from them, and were left more to our own 




devices. We were no longer a big family, but were now acquiring the 




attributes of £ui Institute. Yes, the older amongst us were forced to 




accept the fact that we had lost something by becoming bigger. 




Lyne Place was organized with the mixture of elegance and austerity 




which was the Ouspensky trademark. Visitors complained of an atmosphere 




of tension. One was even convinced that the regime was vegetarian—^which 




was not true, although the impression can be explained in terms of its 




puritan associations. Little conversation at meals, no laughter, the deadly 




seriousness of the pupils immersed in their struggles to “self-remember”; 




this was undoubtedly one aspect of the life at Lyne Place. In contrast, if 




there was a celebration of some kind, no expense was spared: Ouspensky 




enjoyed large, formal dinner parties, and his country house provided an 




excellent setting. 




C.  S.  Nott  visited  Lyne  Place  in  the  late  1930s,  and  found  the 




Ouspenskys comfortably established. He had the impression that despite all




406 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the outward trappings of success, Ouspensky—^who was drinking heavily— 




was living in the past. This is an accusation also made by J. G. Bennett in 




connection with a drinking session in 1933: “He then had the habit of sitting 




up half the night drinking claret and, nearly always, of talking about his own 




early days in Russia. He seemed to have been obsessed with the need to 




put himself back into the life he was living before he met GurdjiefF in 




1915.” 




This may have been so; but Ouspensky’s manner of teaching and the 




material he used made him live not so much in the past as in a sort of 




continuing present. By the very fact that he was teaching a system which 




resulted from his time with GurdjiefiF, he had created a kind of canonical 




period  and  ceaselessly  reconcentrated  his  mind  on  its  events.  This 




impression  was  intensified  for  his  pupils  through  readings  from  the 




typescript of  

In Search of the Miraculous. 

 By inviting people to enter his 




private psychological world in the  

New Model, 

 Ouspensky created around 




him an atmosphere which reinforced the Russian associations of the  

New

 




 

Model’s

 subject matter—^which came chiefly from the years between 1908 




and 1912. As he gradually gave more prominence to his personal ideas, his 




pupils  heard  of  the  role  of  the  devil  in  preventing  human  evolution, 




discussed Ouspensky’s theory of an “esoteric school ” which had inspired 




Ibsen, Rossetti, and Alexis Tolstoy, and practiced exercises of “repetition” 




and “stopping thoughts” with which their teacher had experimented long 




before. For them Ouspensky’s own search was a historical glyph; yet that 




search had not ended, and perhaps Ouspensky had begun to look back 




toward the direction in which he had first set out. 




The impression that he was disappointed in the results of his personal 




quest  is  given  by  another  story  told  by  Bennett,  whose  wife  had  an 




interview with Ouspensky soon after she recovered from an overdose of 




drugs. The tale of her ecstatic experiences when close to death brought 




Ouspensky to the verge of tears. He told her that since his youth he had 




been  hoping  for  such  an  experience  but  that  he  had  remained  unenlightened. A sense of having been cheated by fate may have lain at the back  of  his  increasing  dogmatism.  It  had  always  been  a  feature  of  his 




character to entrench himself in strange positions, and as the 1930s wore 




on, his stubbornness grew. 




One frequent source of conflict was provided b^ Ouspensky’s views on 




evolution.  In  the   

New  Model

  he  describes  the.  universe  as  a  “Great 




Laboratory.” He believed devoutly in the inheritance of acquired characteristics and argued that certain forms of life had been created solely to develop a particular characteristic which was needed for the creation of the 




culminating life form—man. Man was the prize exhibit in the laboratory, 




for he was nature’s attempt to manufacture a self-evolving creature. 




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   407




Ouspensky followed a bizarre but common occult theory that animals are 




degenerated men—perhaps failed experiments. 




He had some equally unorthodox ideas about personal evolution. Three 




categories of men were distinguished according to sexual behavior; men of 




supra-sex, infra-sex and normal sex. Humans afflicted by infra-sex were 




symptoms of race-degeneration; and among these Ouspensky included both 




the sex-obsessed and the sexually “abnormal” of any description. Beings of 




supra-sex were those who had mastered the art of transmuting the sex- 




energy into a means of personal evolution, and Ouspensky printed a list of 




the “thirty-two signs of Buddha-hood”—actually deriving from a Chinese 




astrological manual—as an indication of what these supermen might look 




like. 




From his earliest days in London, Ouspensky’s refusal to admit orthodox 




concepts  of  evolution  had  brought  him  into  conflict  with  his  more 




scientifically trained followers. His views on the sexually “abnormal” were 




unshakable; “and may,” one former pupil writes, “have been genuinely 




naive.” In answer to a question about homosexuality, he once replied that 




he knew very little about it, because it did not exist in Russia; and in  

A New

 




 

Model of the Universe

 he inveighs against psychoanalysis for providing a 




justification for homosexuals. Such traits belong to the caricature reactionary, and it is evident that Ouspensky intensely and increasingly disliked his own time. It would be wrong to see this as a blind revulsion from a world 




which had turned against him. What was happening was that the psychological method had got out of hand. 




Ouspensky even used the latter to justify his hatred of Bolshevism. In  

A

 




 

New Model of the Universe

 there is a chapter called “Eternal Recurrence 




smd  the  Laws  of  Manu,”  in  which  Ouspensky  couples  his  theory  of 




recurrence to the caste divisions laid down by Hindu tradition. These laws, 




he  said,  represented  “an  ideal  social  organisation  in  accordance  vdth 




esoteric systems” because the division into four castes of Brahmins (priests 




and  scholars),  Kshatriyas  (warriors),  Vaisyas  (merchants),  and  Sudras 




(servants), was a natural division. Whether people liked it or not, they 




belonged to one or another of these classes. A man might move up a caste 




the  next  time  around  the  circle  of  recurrence.  Here  Ouspensky  could 




not have dififered more from GurdjieflF, who denounced the “maleficent 




castes” of society. Ouspensky admitted that modern society offered no 




examples of “correct” division into castes. But “the most brilliant periods of 




history” occurred by accident when the social order approached the caste 




system yet still allowed some flexibility. One of these periods had been “the 




beginning of the 20th century in Russia.” Ouspensky appeared to regard 




the Russian intelligentsia as potential Brahmins, characterized by the wash 




for  “disinterested  activity”  and  “personal  freedom.”  This  is  really  an




408 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




adaptation of his early presentiment that he belonged to “a new race of 




men.” In the 1931 edition of the  

New Model, 

 Ouspensky incorporated a 




long note denouncing the “pseudo-intelligentsia,” a class he described as 




“the  worst,  

outcaste

  element  of  Vaisyas  and  Sudras.”  He  characterized 




these—still using the Russian example and obviously with the Bolsheviks in 




mind—as intellectuals “who do not become the intelligentsia”; that is, 




intellectuals who disagreed with his concept of the role of an “intelligent.” 




By the time the second edition of the  

New Model

 appeared three years 




later, Ouspensky had obviously come under fire about this rather strange 




sociological theory. He altered the text of his chapter on the Laws of Manu, 




but inserted a new preface—whose purpose was chiefly to explain his ideas 




of the "psychological method”—a further condemnation of Bolshevism. It 




appeared that, according to the psychological method, Bolshevism was evil 




incarnate. But the merely “logical”—as opposed to “psychological”—mind 




would never see this. 




The man of logical mind who demands proofs for everything . . . looks 




for the cause of the world economic and political crisis everywhere 




except where it actually lies. 




And even if he were told that the causes ... lie in the existence of 




the Soviet government in Russia, and in the recognition and  

support

 of 




this government by other governments, he would never understand it. 




He is accustomed to think in a certain way and he is unable to think 




differently. For him the bolsheviks are a “political party” like any other 




party, and the Soviet Government is a “government” like any other 




government.  He  is  unable  to  see  that  this  is  a  new  phenomenon 




diflFerent from anything he knew before. 




Where are the proofs of this? he would ask. 




And he will never see that this needs no proofs. . . . “proofs” are by 




no  means  always  necessary  in  order  to  accept  or  to  deny  a  given 




proposition. There are “psychological proofs” which mean much more 




than facts because facts can lie and psychological proofs cannot lie. But 




one must be able to feel them. 




Why must one be able to feel them? The answer is because Ouspensky 




felt  them.  Because  he  regarded  Bolshevism  as  the  dominance  of  the 




criminal element in humanity and its leaders as renegade Brahmins, the 




psychological method—supported by esotericism—dictated that everyone 




else must feel this too. Ouspensky made a rule for his followers about not 




becoming involved in “criminal politics”—^which included not only fascism 




and Communism but the English Labour Party. This bore heavily on Some 




of his followers—for example, Bennett, who had been offered a parliamentary seat by Ramsay MacDonald. 




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   409




Dogmatism did not matter when Ouspensky was teaching the System, 




because he faithfully insisted that his followers must verify everything for 




themselves. But it came to mean an increasingly dictatorial attitude toward 




more  general  matters.  For  example,  Kenneth  Walker,  besides  being  a 




surgeon, was one of the pioneers of popular sexology, and in 1940 published 




one of the first paperback books on sex. Then on one occasion at Lyne it was 




discovered that he had given a young Ouspenskian advice on some sexual 




problem. Ouspensky’s rage was colossal—although it appeared to have little 




impact on a blandly smiling Walker. 




The influx of new disciples had repercussions for Ouspensky’s London 




lectures.  By  the  autumn  of  1937,  he  found  himself  overwhelmed  with 




meetings, and told his senior pupils that they must share the burden. Apart 




from delegating some of the routine work, he wanted to devote more time 




to writing. He was becoming anxious that he had not published anything for 




a long time and needed to keep his name before the public. He also had to 




find  a  larger  house  for  the  meetings,  if  possible  with  a  hall  where 




Gurdjieff s movements could be taught. By the spring of 1938 the problem 




had been solved. 




The building which Ouspensky and his followers acquired is known as 




Colet House and stands in Colet Gardens opposite the old site of St. Paul’s 




School. It had belonged to the ballet school of Nicholas Legat whose wife, 




Nadine Legat, was a pupil of Ouspensky and had evolved a gymnastic form 




of dancing incorporating Gurdjieffian principles of self-observation. The 




large hall was ideal for the movements, and there was ample room to hold 




much larger meetings. Ouspensky moved a private press, belonging to one 




of his pupils, into the basement where it functioned as a means of “work ” 




with a particularly pointed moral. For when the proofs were pulled—in the 




words of a pupil who was concerned in the project—“every literal [misprint] 




was an unmistakable example of sleep. ” 




Ouspensky insisted that this enlargement of his activities should have 




some outward cover to satisfy the police that nothing subversive was in 




progress. The result was the formation of a society called the “Historico- 




Psychological Society,” whose numbers were fixed at 300. The committee 




consisted of the two Ouspenskys, some half dozen supporters from Lyne, 




and  a  strong  medical  lobby  from  the  Harley  Street  district,  including 




Kenneth  Walker  and  Dr.  Francis  Roles.  Other  members  were  the 




journalist who had taken meetings for Ouspensky and Robert Mayor who 




acted as librarian and treasurer. The Society’s objects again hint at a vision 




of “real psychology”:




1) Tlie study of problems of evolution of man and particularly the idea 




of  

psycho-transformism. 




2)  The study of psychological schools in different historical periods and




410 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




in different countries, and the study of their influence on the moral 




and intellectual development of humanity. 




3)  Practical investigation of methods of self-study and self-development according to principles and methods of psychological schools. 




4)  Research work in the history of religions, of philosophy, of science 




and of art with the object of estabhshing their common origin where 




it can be found and different psychological levels in each of them. 




Under this rather unwieldy umbrella, Ouspensky’s organization took 




shape. By 1938 he seemed to have attained much of what he had set out to 




achieve  for  his  “third  line  of work.”  If Gurdjieff’s  Institute  had failed, 




Ouspensky now  had a substantial London base and an organizational 




framework; while at Lyne his wife put his pupils through the hoops about 




which  he  told  them  theoretically.  Despite  the  hints  that  he  was  a 




disappointed man, Ouspensky had many more material advantages than he 




could have hoped for twenty years earher. He had an estate where he lived 




the life of a country gentleman and indulged his hobbies. He kept horses 




and his increasingly portly figure was a familiar sight in the saddle. He 




made a collection of antique firearms and held sessions of target practice. 




His sense of irony prevented him from taking his organization too seriously. 




Neither  did  he  encourage  uncritical  adoration  of  himself  Once  at  a 




meeting he had a question about “invisibility”—^had he ever been “invisible”? he was asked. Ouspensky replied cuttingly that he could tell them anything he liked and they would still have to believe him. It was the same 




with people who tried to invest him with miraculous powers. Nevertheless 




some did so, and the circumstances surrounding his death were to give 




them cause to reassert their opinions. “Ouspensky had powers,” one young 




disciple  wrote.  “He  kept  his  powers  hidden,  however,  and  they  were 




manifested only very rarely, and then most subtly and never for show. His 




integrity in these and other matters was absolute, and he was incorruptible.” 




If there is something of Dr. Gortler and Professor Moe in this picture of 




Ouspensky, it is an image which was common to a number of his pupils. In 




contrast,  while  magical  powers  never  seem  to  have  been  attributed  to 




Mme. Ouspensky, she was not averse to a certain amount of adoration. This 




may  have  gathered  about  her  by  association;  for  although  Ouspensky 




sometimes discussed religious topics with his pupils, and went everywhere 




accompanied by a “much-thumbed New Testament,” he drew a definite 




boundary between religion and the System. This was not true of his wife. 




During  the  weekends  at  Lyne,  she  would  organize  readings  from  the 




sayings of Buddha, or the Sufi poet Rumi, or the Russian compilation of the 




Fathers known as the  

Philokalia, 

 which she had translated into Enghsh by




R E A L   P S Y C H O L O G Y   411




Mme. Kadloubovsky—all of which she accompanied by a commentary 




pointing out the resemblances to the System. 




People best remember the Ouspenslcys as they were in 1938 and 1939. 




These were the great days, when &eir work was outwardly successful, and 




apparently harmonious. But the distinct separation between Ouspensky’s 




personal following and “Madam’s people” encouraged some internal dissension 




and faction fighting. One recurrent problem was that of Mme. Ouspensky’s 




grandson, who lived with the community at Lyne. He made incessant demands 




on  the  patience  of  the  Ouspenskys’  pupils,  and  many  thought  Mme. 




Ouspensky blind to his faults. However, to some of “Madam’s people,” Lonya’s 




behavior seemed to be yet another deliberate provocation in the sense of the 




Work. Ouspensky himself admitted that his step-grandchild was a thorough 




nuisance, but in this—^as in other matters—allowed himself to be swayed by his 




wife. 




Ouspensky’s difficulties were compounded by his wife’s taking to her 




bed. He discussed her illness with a psychiatrist pupil and both concluded 




that the cause was a form of neurasthenia. Yet even though she spent an 




increasing amount of time in her room, Mme. Ouspensky’s influence grew 




increasingly powerful, and Ouspensky came under attack for his apparent 




subservience.  Maurice  Nicoll  once visited Gadsden and  once Lyne  for 




special celebrations; and on both occasions—after a large quantity of drink 




was consumed—Nicoll became highly critical. At Gadsden, the evening 




ended with Nicoll, Ouspensky, and a senior pupil of Ouspensky’s drinking 




together. Nicoll stated “violently” that Ouspensky had “gone soft ” and was 




too much under his wife’s influence. He tried unsuccessfully to persuade 




the third man present to break with Ouspensky and start a group of his 




own. 




It  is  known  that  Nicoll  kept  in  touch  with  Gurdjieff  despite  the 




appearance of complete separation. Was this a further act in the play? Was 




Nicoll playing Judas in his turn? Or was his role that of the slave who rode 




in the chariot of the Roman Emperor whispering: “You too are mortal”? 




Certainly, there was a suggestion of the imperial about the Ouspenskys in 




the late 1930s. They enjoyed the status which had belonged to Gurdjieff in 




the early days at Fontainebleau. The contrast between their circumstances 




and those of their old Master was considerable. It might almost be seen—^by 




those eyes peering at the historical glyph—^as a morality. 




 

12




The Bone Beneath the Mountain




GurdjiefF’s  

coup de thSdtre

 of 1931 nearly wrecked his work altogether. His 




material fortunes had been closely bound up with those of Orage; and most 




of his remaining pupils had been Orage’s also. Although his apparent ill- 




treatment  of  his  leading  henchman  did  not  of  itself  result  in  many 




defections, it introduced an element of doubt into the Master’s relations 




with  his  American  followers  which  had  not  been  present  when  the 




persuasive Englishman had been available as mediator. 




To those in close touch with Gurdjieff, there was really little doubt that 




there was “business as usual.” He carried his personal atmosphere around 




with him, and on his visits to New York the hotels in which he stayed were 




crowded with the apparatus of Oriental cooking. He rose early—about 6 or 




7 A.M.—^and spent the morning writing in the Childs restaurants which he 




used as “offices.” Then he went shopping for the ingredients of an exotic 




lunch. The meal, with its accompaniment of vodka and applejack, might last 




till about 2:30, after which Gurdjieff would rest for an hour. In the evening 




he would return to Childs and perhaps again play host to his pupils at 




dinner, prolonging the session into the small hours by recitations on his 




hand organ. 




Some former Orageans remember farewell ceremonies for Orage instigated by Gurdjieff both in New York and at the Prieure. There was a general impression that no division of interests separated the teacher and his pupil. 




412




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   413




Yet Orage had gone; and he had certainly expressed some doubts about his 




old Master to several of his American pupils. Because Gurdjieff now had to 




take responsibility for raising money himself, this meant trips to the United 




States at least once a year between 1930 and 1934. Personal contact with 




Gurdjieff in his role of sheep-shearer naturally increased whatever doubts a 




pupil might have had about entrusting himself to an “esoteric teacher.” 




Seen from the New World, Gurdjieff’s fortunes appeared to be undergoing 




a rapid dechne. 




In England historical circumstances seemed to play into the hands of the 




Ouspenskys. In America, although Gurdjieff quite obviously expected the 




Depression to bring many more recruits to the Work, economic hardship 




and uncertainty had precisely the opposite effect. This may have been 




partly because Orage’s success in New York was associated with the sort of 




intellectual attitudes which came to be considered particularly “Twen- 




tiesish”—the complex of humanism, hedonism, and unorthodox psychology 




which  Edmund  Wilson  denounced.  In  England,  Ouspensky  escaped 




identification with outmoded attitudes because he had begun on a very 




small  scale.  But  the  early  successes  of  Orage  in  New  York  effectively 




discredited Gurdjieff’s ideas for Americans of the 1930s. 




There was no one to replace Orage, although several small groups came 




into existence under directors like Schuyler Jackson. A number of Gurdjieff’s leading followers in the New York area formed a “Committee for the New York Group,” which took on the thankless task of trying to organize 




financial support for their prodigal Master. But after Orage’s final departure, the most senior “pupil-teacher” of Gurdjieff’s ideas in the United States  was  Jean  Toomer  in  Chicago.  It  was  during  1931  and  1932  that 




Toomer emerged with a personal initiative which attracted vndespread 




notice, as it was linked to a romantic and tragic development in his personal 




life. 




The expedition which he made to Fontainebleau in 1929 was to prove his 




last. Next year Gurdjieff visited the group in Chicago, and Toomer himself 




visited New York and Montreal. In 1931 he did not meet Gurdjieff, and the 




Toomer papers provide little information about his activities; but he once 




more appeared in print for the first time at any length since the publication 




of  

Cane. 




Toomer’s  

Essentials

 was issued privately in Chicago. Its author described 




it as “some 300 crystallizations in words of observations and understandings 




which have arisen in me during a five-year period. ” The book is a collection 




of aphorisms and would probably be inaccessible to anyone unfamiliar with 




Gurdjieff’s ideas. “We have many reformers, few transformers,” Toomer 




wrote;  and  “We  want  to  be  free  from  the  things  we  want.”  There  is 




something about the Work which encourages its devotees to make epigrams




414 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




about it. Jane Heap was another coiner of phrases; and the idea may be to 




provide  mnemonics  or  texts  to  be  mulled  over.  Those  contained  in 




 

Essentials

 are often well-turned or witty and provide enduring food for 




thought.  “While  an  increasing  number  of  materialists  are  committing 




suicide because they believe they have no soul,” Toomer proclaimed, “an 




increasing number of spiritualists are going crazy because they believe they 




have one.” There is much more in the same vein, and no single aphorism 




could be chosen as displaying the theme of the book. But one short passage, 




less epigrammatic than many, does seem to provide an indication of how 




Toomer  had  come  to  understand  the  Work.  He  wrote  that  he  saw  the 




emergence  of  a  new  type  of  man,  a  “psychological  type.”  “This  is  a 




psychological adventurer: one who, having had the stock experiences of 




mankind, sets out at right angles to all previous experience to discover new 




states of being.” 




There are no detailed records of how Toomer conducted his groups in 




Chicago.  Fritz  Peters  met  his  pupils  in  the  autumn  of  1931 when they 




numbered about twenty-five and was not impressed by their quality. “They 




seemed to me to have been attracted to his teaching for a variety of not very 




good reasons—^because of loneliness, or perhaps because they considered 




themselves  misfits  or  outcasts.  Most  of  them  had  dabbled  in  the  arts, 




theosophy, the occult or something of the sort, and had come to Gurdjieff as 




if in search of another ‘cure’ for their life problems . . . ”  Toomer’s meetings 




consisted of readings from  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 followed by discussions in 




which the participants tried to relate the book to their personal situations. 




Gurdjieff ’s “impartially objective criticism of the life of man” became a 




justification for anything avant-garde. “Any radical social behavior became 




almost automatically justified,” Peters writes, “. . . the prevailing attitude 




of this particular group of followers was that of substituting new values for 




old by rote.” What is clear is that Toomer’s group had struck out on their 




own hne; and this was not very acceptable to a fundamentalist. 




For  two  months  in  the  summer  of  1931,  Toomer  lived  with  several 




members of his group in a three-room cottage at Portage, Wisconsin. He 




began with four of his closest associates, and on weekends the numbers 




were increased to thirty by the addition of other pupils from Chicago and 




some interested locals. To the newspapers he described the object of his 




summer at  Portage—still  hazily referred to by hterary historians as “a 




cottage experiment”—^as being “to keep a number of ‘intellectual’ men and 




‘intellectual’  women  in  close  proximity  and  observe  the  psychological 




eflfects. ” 




Among  his  group  were  a  bank  cashier,  a  salesman,  a  reporter,  a 




clubwoman, a justice of the peace, and a businessman. There was also a 




native of Portage named Margery i<atimer. She had first become interested




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   415




in Orage’s groups in New York and had joined Jean Toomer’s in Chicago 




when  she  returned  to  Portage  from  leading  the  Hterary  Hfe.  Margery 




Latimer was a promising young writer, the author of We Are  

Incredible




(1928) and the even more highly regarded  

Nellie Bloom and Other Stories




(1929),  which  contains  several  traces  of  Gurdjieff’s  influence.  She  was 




probably responsible for the site chosen by Toomer for his experiment; and 




also for igniting a fresh spark of interest in Portage’s most celebrated lady of 




letters and her own literary godmother: Zona Gale. 




Zona Gale invited the tovrasfolk of Portage to her home to hear Toomer 




lecture and succeeded in arousing a degree of interest. A few sober citizens 




were persuaded to attend talks which Toomer delivered in the woods 




nearby, but a small number of interested locals did not prevent rumors 




circulating about the doings in the cottage by the river. About a year after 




the  experiment,  a  reporter  from  the   

San  Francisco  State  Journal

 




interviewed the acting Chief of Police in Portage. Did he remember Jean 




Toomer? 




“Yes,” said the chief, puffing at his pipe. “I remember him well. Tall 




fellow, pretty dark. Yesh, we had an idea he was part Negro all right. 




Lots of people here did.” 




“What kind of place did he run, chief?” 




The chief thought for a moment and replied: “1 don’t know much 




about it, but from reports we got there was some damn funny things 




going on out there. He was some kind of philosopher. I never did 




figure it out.” 




Over in the corner a man, hidden behind a newspaper, suddenly 




said:  “Why  I  heard  they  were  climbing  trees  out  there  just  like 




squirrels.” 




“Yes sir,” the chief said solemnly, “just like squirrels.” 




Apart  from  climbing  trees  and  shocking  the  bourgeoisie,  what  was 




Toomer doing? 




He called the account he wrote of the episodes “Portage Potential,” and 




subtitled it “An adventure in human development.” He constantly emphasizes that the experiment was his personal creation: “I was building a world. 




I  was  creating  a  form.  It  was  to  be  my  own.”  His  methods  bore  some 




relationship  to  those  of  Gurdjieff  but  are  recognizably  original.  He 




introduced  

games

—deck tennis and swimming in the nearby river—^which 




provided excellent material for observing the natures of group members. 




He  named  the  members  responsible  for  various  activities—cooking  or 




housework—“Chiefs”  (and how  did they respond to the suggestion of 




authority?). He delivered lectures on the particular sort of tail which each of




416 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




his pupils possessed. Short and curly? Twisted? Diabolically straight? His 




contribution was intended to be more than simply personal; Toomer being 




who  he  was,  with  a  particular  interest  in  creating  Americans  out  of  a 




bouillabaisse  of  peoples,  saw  it  as  a  particularly  American  form.  “The 




Portage cottage was a nursery school, and we its members. It was a school 




for Americans—a place where those who had been conditioned by America 




could work the bad of America out, the good of America in, and become 




human beings of the given types as developed in America. ” He had at last 




begun to give expression to the ideas of a nation of regenerated men which 




he had absorbed from Waldo Frank. 




It is a great loss that “Portage Potential” has never been published; it is 




unique in portraying the uncertainties and extemporizations on the part of 




the  teacher  as  well  as  the  reaction  of  the  pupils  to  the  shocks  he 




administers.  From  the  teacher’s  side,  it  is  clear  that  some  of  the  most 




powerful effects he produces are unintentional. Toomer admits that one talk 




he delivered—chiefly on “negative emotions”—had a completely unforeseen impact upon Margery Latimer. In the typescript she is referred to as 




“Marion Kilburn.” 




The effect of this talk was experienced most by Marion Kilburn; and in 




her there was produced a series of experiences considerably beyond 




anything that I had planned or could possibly have controlled. The 




results in her, indeed, came about only because my, for me concise 




formulations,  but  for  her  more  than  random  shots,  happened  to 




crystallize materials for certain experiences, materials gathered by her 




unusual person over a number of years. 




Judging by the list of testimonials from his pupils which Toomer attached 




to the text of “Portage Potential” he succeeded in inducing experiences of 




great intensity in a considerable number of people. He concluded that his 




experiment had shown four things: “That through self-knowledge man can 




become man”; “the possibility of change”; that “people can be consciously 




energized”; and that it was possible to create a “conscious form” in which all 




these  things  could  take  place.  For  public  consumption  he  put  it  more 




simply: “As a result of the experiment,” he told a reporter, “I am satisfied 




that it is entirely possible to eradicate the false veneer of civilization, with 




its unnatural inhibitions, its selfishness, petty meanness and unnatural 




behavior, under proper conditions. Adults can be reeducated to become as 




natural as httle children, before civilization stamps out their true subconscious instincts.” 




This  sort  of  language  was  not  calculated  to  soothe  the  critics  who 




suspected that, without the veneer of civilization, moral anarchy would




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   417




break loose. By the time this interview appeared, Toomer had come under 




heavy fire. 




As the summer of 1931 passed, the curiosity of the local press increased. 




It was hinted that the inmates of the cottage formed a “free love” colony, 




and increasingly vicious attacks were made on Toomer’s Negro ancestry. 




Whether or not Fritz Peters is right in attributing deliberate flouting of 




convention to the members of the Chicago group, Toomer’s associates were 




certainly used to more Bohemian standards of behavior than the citizens of 




Portage; and Toomer’s own attractiveness to women had before 1931 led to 




awkward situations. The result of the Portage experiment as far as the 




outside world was concerned was to make Toomer notorious as an arcanely 




corrupt “philosopher ”—although few readers of the many newspaper 




reports can have approached an accurate conception of what the experiment 




had been about. 




In October 1931, Toomer and Margery Latimer were married in Portage. 




Baulked of their free love scandal, the press began to make life in the tovm 




increasingly unpleasant for the Toomers and their protectress, Zona Gale. 




Everywhere the couple went they had to face hostile inquisitions from 




reporters. Even six months later, on their arrival in the artists’ colony at 




Carmel, California, they were subjected to a barrage of questions on the 




Portage  experiment.  How  had  chaperonage  been  observed?  Did  they 




believe  in  nudism?  And  pounding  away  beneath  the  more  salacious 




speculations was the drumbeat of a manufactured public opinion demanding the ostracism of the Toomers for marrying across the color line. It is considered that this persecution helped to cause Margery Latimer’s early 




death, which took place in 1932 after she had given birth to a daughter. Her 




husband called the child “Margery” and dedicated “Portage Potential” to 




“Margery of Portage. ” 




“Portage Potential” was finished in the autumn of 1931. But no publisher 




would  accept  it,  and  on  February  9,  1932,  Toomer  wrote  to  Gorham 




Munson asking his opinion of the manuscript and enclosing the verdict of 




one publisher’s reader: “I believe very deeply that since  

Cane

 (which had 




genius in it) you have traversed the wrong road.” 




In the correspondence which followed, Munson’s objections amounted to 




a request that Toomer suppress his work for political reasons. He disliked 




the testimonials which Toomer had appended to the book and advised his 




friend to cut all reference to emotional entanglements between members of 




the Portage group. He wrote forcefully about the unwisdom of mentioning 




GurdjieflF’s name in connection with the experiment. Toomer had loyally 




avoided connecting his unpopular activities vnth Gurdjieff in any interviews 




he gave to the press, but evidently felt that he could scarcely write a book 




about his summer colony wath no mention of the source of his ideas. As it




418 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




turned out,  

Portage Potential

 remained unpublished, although its author 




formally  registered  the  copyright.  He  may  have  been  influenced  by 




Munson’s urgent appeals against trying again for publication after a lapse of 




time. 




From Munson’s description of Gurdjieff ’s reputation in New York, his 




advice was justified. Munson also hinted that renegades from the Work 




were causing trouble for Gurdjielf’s loyal supporters. 




The sort of rumors spread by disillusioned Gurdjieffians can easily be 




imagined. Fritz Peters has recorded several incidents which blackened 




Gurdjieff ’s reputation. Two of these were the result of his unorthodox 




medical treatments. In one case GurdjiefF prescribed a limited amount of 




alcohol for a woman supposed to be a semi-alcoholic on the grounds that 




without it she would die. Her doctor had forbidden her to drink as part of 




his  treatment  for  another  illness  and  was  naturally  furious  when  he 




discovered  that  his  patient  had  forsaken  him  for  an  illicit  medical 




practitioner. He restored the regime of abstinence, and the woman duly 




died. A second  

cause celebre

 concerned another woman who was dying in 




the hospital. Gurdjieff diagnosed her trouble simply as a death wish and 




prescribed enemas of olive oil which she was to administer herself with a 




syringe  smuggled  into  the  ward.  Supposedly  this  was  to  remove  a 




particularly vile form of constipation from which the patient suffered; in 




fact—^as Gurdjieff might well have intended—^the syringe was discovered by 




the hospital authorities. When the woman eventually left the hospital, she 




bitterly attacked Gurdjieff for causing trouble. Gurdjieff on his side claimed 




that he had now given her cause to live—by provoking her to a positive 




hatred. 




Of course it is easy to claim responsibility after the event; and it may be 




wondered whether Gurdjieff ’s olive oil enemas did not fall into the same 




category as Orage’s stout and oysters. But although he may occasionally 




have  been  driven  to  prescribe  unlikely  remedies  by  the  clamor  of  his 




disciples, as the decade wore on—^and particularly after 1933—Gurdjieff 




came increasingly to rely on his unorthodox medical treatments as a source 




of income. He has always had his advocates as a physician, and during the 




later 1930s, he was virtually supported by contributions from one young 




American who had arrived at the Prieur6 to be cured of a drug addiction. 




The  role  of  the  physician-hypnOtist  which  had  served  him  so  well  in 




Turkestan, Constantinople, and Paris, was transferred to New York. Peters 




remembers Gurdjieff’s complaints that, because of lack of interest on the 




part of his disciples, he was forced to earn money for himself At this time 




he was Uving in a fifth-rate hotel, and the ambivalent tone of his activities 




depressed the young man who had known him as the Master of the Ch^tteau 




du Prieure. “I was glad,” he writes, “when he emerged from this rather




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   419




woebegone characterization of a kind of quack doctor living in shoddy 




circumstances. ” 




This progressive deterioration in GurdjiefiF’s circumstances was just 




beginning when Gorham Munson advised against the publication of  

Portage

 




 

Potential

 in 1932. A more serious cause for concern was provided by rumors 




of his sexual misdemeanors. Along with the usual stories of women being 




invited to his hotel room at unlikely hours of the night, there was a dinner 




party to which GurdjiefF asked a number of reporters and writers. Before 




the party he persuaded Fritz Peters to “teach” him all the most Anglo- 




Saxon terms he knew for sexual activity—^although afterward it appeared 




that he not only knew the four-letter vocabulary well, but had played this 




scene with other people. During the dinner party Gurdjieff subtly switched 




roles from that of perfect host to that of satyr, making use of the coarsest 




expressions he had been “taught.” The result was the beginning of an orgy. 




Gurdjieff  eventually  stopped  proceedings  by  ridiculing his guests  and 




directing them to see from their conduct what they really were. He told 




them that, as this was an important lesson, he deserved to be paid; and 




according to Peters collected several thousand dollars. 




Such  proceedings  were  open  to  grave  misunderstandings.  But  one 




specific  case  brought  home  to  America  the  possibile  consequences  of 




Gurdjieff s capacity to inspire devotion. This concerned a young woman 




who  met  him  in  Chicago  and  followed  him  to  New  York.  She  was 




considered a “semi-invalid,” and was evidently crippled by shyness and 




feelings of inadequacy. According to Peters, Gurdjieff told his associates 




that he could both help the girl with her problems and cure her infatuation. 




However, the girl’s family arrived firom Chicago, accused GurdjiefiF of 




seducing their daughter and had her committed to a mental hospital. In the 




hospital the girl committed suicide. GurdjiefF’s followers split into two 




camps; and at the instigation of his opponents, the Master was imprisoned 




for several days on Ellis Island. His supporters finally secured his release, 




but Gurdjieff had to return to France, and later found it difficult to reenter 




the United States. 




The steady decline of GurdjiefF’s reputation extended over several years. 




After the excitements of 1930-31, the New York group had been prepared 




for anything when Gurdjieff arrived for the winter of 1931-32, and it was in 




tones of amazement and relief that Gorham Munson described the visit to 




Toomer in Chicago. Gurdjieff was affable, approachable and open. This 




extraordinary improvement was maintained right up until his departure on 




the  

Bremen

 on January 16, 1932. If Gurdjieff had been intent on papering 




over the cracks caused by the fracas of the previous winter, he seems partly 




to have succeeded, although Munson, for one, had no illusions about the 




purpose of his Master’s visit. As he wrote to Toomer, Gurdjieff announced




420 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




his departure immediately after securing what he had come for. As in the 




days of Orage, sheep-shearing took priority over enlightenment. 




Next winter Gurdjiefif was again in the United States and visited New 




York and Chicago. The trip of 1932-33 marks the point at which relations 




between him and his American followers began to deteriorate in earnest, 




and several were driven away filled—in Toomer’s words—^“with disgust and 




anger and the  

conviction

 that he was using his power merely in order to 




obtain  money,  money  and  more  money  without  cease.”  Money  was 




urgently needed. In the spring of 1933 a shocking telegram arrived in New 




York announcing that Gurdjieff was “absolutely destitute” and that the 




Prieur6 was about to be sold. Nothing could be done, for Gurdjieff had 




exhausted not only the patience of his followers but the fund of goodwill on 




which they in turn could draw. Toomer was approached by the New York 




“Committee” about the large gift made by Mabel Luhan, for which he had 




acted as trustee in 1926, and replied that “the sum no longer exists.” He did 




not state how the money had been spent, but most of it must have dribbled 




from the publication fund into the coffers of the Prieure. 




The Gurdjieff who arrived to winter in New York in 1933-34 was a man 




with  all  the  accoutrements  of  failure.  The  noisome  reputation  he  had 




gathered,  the  seedy  appearance  of  his  doctoring  and  hypnotizing,  the 




feeling  that  the  Prieure  and  the  good  days  were  now  in  the  past,  all 




contributed to a slightly unhealthy atmosphere which impressed itself on 




some of those who met him. It seemed undeniable that his health was 




poor—he already looked terrible in the winter of 1932-33—and he had 




grown very fat. He had totally confused his pupils by publishing a strange 




book called  

Herald of Coming Good. 

 As far as the public was concerned, 




the image of Gurdjieff the ogre was in the ascendant. Rom Landau flew the 




Atlantic to see him and was almost frightened out of his wits. Before his 




interview he had lunch with an American writer who had followed the 




progress of the Work for several years and who confirmed Landau’s worst 




suspicions with an extraordinary piece of gossip. Landau’s informant had 




last seen Gurdjieff at a reception in the spring of 1933. He had been sitting 




at a table with a woman friend, a novelist. * Gurdjieff caught her eye and 




began to breathe in and out in a peculiar fashion. The novelist turned pale. 




After a few minutes, she recovered and admitted to him that whatever 




Gurdjieff had been doing had “struck her right through her sexual center.” 




In plainer language, she had been given an orgasm by remote control. 




Landau’s visit to the Great Northern Hotel on West 57th Street where 




Gurdjieff was Hving proved sufficiently alarming. He was admitted to the




* 




Landau does not name either of the characters, but the man was probably Bragdon and the 




woman Zona Gale. 




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   421




Master’s  shabby  rooms  by  a  young  man  with  eyes  which  “glowed 




feverishly” and who gave the journalist the impression of “having just seen 




a ghost.” The interview with Gurdjieff went badly. Landau was discomposed by having unwanted cigarettes pressed on him, and Gurdjieff clearly did not intend to answer his questions. Even worse, the journalist appeared 




to be falling under some “hypnotic influence” or “electric emanation” which 




deprived him of the power to move from his chair and gave him a feeling of 




“acute nervousness” in the pit of his stomach. Gurdjieff looked “the perfect 




Levantine, evasive in his answers, hyperbolical and anxious as to what 




effect he was producing. ” Released from his psychic disablement, Landau 




was sent home with a copy of  

Herald of Coming Good. 

 After the encounter, 




he returned to his hotel where he “felt a strong desire to wash my hands. I 




washed  them  in  very  hot  water  for  about  five  minutes,  and  then  felt 




better. . . . ” 




Gurdjieff could not be washed away by soap and water. He might be 




temporarily cast down; his appearance might have deteriorated; but even at 




his  seediest,  a  taste  of  the  old  mastery  was  still  in  evidence.  Claude 




Bragdon caught a glimpse of him in early 1934 through the plate glass 




window of the Hecksher Building Childs Restaurant which Gurdjieff was 




then using as his New York “office.” “He had grown fat,” Bragdon wrote, 




“he looked untidy; time had turned his long, black ringmaster’s moustache 




to  grey;  but  he  was  unmistakably  a  personage,  and  the  old,  arrogant, 




undaunted look shone forth from his eyes.” 




Toomer’s reaction to this mercurial Falstaff was confused. Perhaps what 




had appeared right and proper in the castle of the Great Magician seemed 




l^tean and petty in the United States. At all events, when he met Gurdjieff 




in New York in the spring of 1933, he was disconcerted. “He was in a bad 




way. His health was poor. He looked it, however, looked as if he had been 




through a mill. . . . ”  Gurdjieff s behavior was as appalling as his physical 




condition. It was unprincipled, unpleasant, and absurd. Toomer felt “a 




great relief when I left New York and thus left him. To me he seemed a 




changed man, changed for the worse. I felt his work was dead. Whether 




dead or not there was no place or function for me in it. It was a travesty and 




hollow mockery of the work I had entered in 1924 with all my heart. I 




would have nothing to do with what was going on at present. I would have 




something to do with future work—if there was a future work—on the 




critical basis as if I were meeting him and his work for the first time, taking 




nothing for granted.” 




During  the  summer  of  1933,  the  scandalous  rumors  about  Gurdjieff 




began to spread. Toomer recorded the speculations of some disillusioned 




disciples that Gurdjieff himself was out of control and smashing everything. 




“He seemed to be tearing down everything he had created,” he wrote




422 T H E   H A B M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




disconsolately. “His life seemed a blight, he was alienating people and 




throwing them off right and left. . . Yet he refused to condemn. He still 




possessed  a  legacy  which  he  treasured  in  the  form  of  the  ideas  and 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales. 

 He could not pass judgment on the man who had given 




him these; but he could stand aside. The lieutenant resolved not to bring 




any new recruits to his tricky general. 




This resulted in an ironical state of affairs. Those whom Toomer himself 




had introduced to the ideas began to lecture their former teacher. “I found 




myself in the role of a student to my own former pupils who had now risen 




above me,” he commented wryly, “because they saw and believed whereas 




I was blind and skeptical. The situation was not without its humor.” 




There  was  an  obvious  parallel  to  the  dilemma  which  Gurdjieff  had 




presented Orage two years earlier; and Toomer’s resolution of the problem 




recalls the fate of his old friend and former teacher. Orage s establishment 




as the father of a family had helped to loosen the ties which bound him to 




Gurdjieff; and in early 1934, Toomer had moved to New York where he met 




M^irjorie Content—one of the earliest partners in the Sunwise Turn—and 




the  pair  decided  to  marry.  Toomer  wrote  to  Gurdjieff  requesting  an 




interview.  He  explained  that  his  “center  of  gravity”  had  first  been  in 




Gurdjieff’s work, then in his first marriage. After this, he wrote, he had 




gravitated back into the Work; but now he proposed to marry again. He 




approached Gurdjieff in a valedictory mood, although he was still prepared 




to discover the old fascination. 




At their first meeting Gurdjieff told him that he was leaving for France 




the next day. Toomer knew that he was short of money and gave him 200 




dollars. Gurdjieff immediately began to work on him for more. They met 




again in Gurdjieff ’s apartment. Toomer found the rooms piled high with the 




normal rubble of Gurdjieffian living; it was clear that their occupant had not 




the  slightest  intention  of  leaving  America  for  many  weeks  to  come. 




Gurdjieff put pressure on his visitor for a sum of over 300 dollars, giving his 




“essence-word” that he would be paid back in four months’ time, and that 




he would have “a place in his future creations.” These tactics immediately 




reawakened all Toomer’s distaste of the previous spring, and the reasons 




which had driven him away again became compelling. 




What could be in the man’s mind? Who and what was he? What were 




his purposes? What aims did he have for me, if any? What aims for the 




people  of  the  world?  Was  I  a  mere  tool?  Was  I  not  even  that,  so 




nothing from his point of view that he need not even consider the way 




he used or misused me? Was he the supreme egotist? Was he, as some 




claimed, insane? Did he, as some also claimed, know psychic laws but 




was essentially stupid in his practical dealing with people? If he knew




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   423




anything at all about me, how could he fail to know that I was ready 




and willing to do all I possibly could as regards any real need of his that 




I could grasp and understand, whereas just these tricky manipulative 




tactics were sure to throw me off. 




Or, on the other hand, was he, under the guise of this, to me, 




distasteful proposal, trying to do something for my good? 




The  sickening  feeling  of  uncertainty  allowed  for  no  firm  decisions. 




Perched on his fence, Toomer wavered now this way, now that. 




This is what is so awful about the situation wdth G. The situations 




themselves are always taxing—and you can arrive at no sure reconciliation or fixed understanding because for every fact there is a counterfact, for every reason a counter reason, for every bit of “bad” behavior another bit of “good” behavior, for every son-of-a-bitching thing a 




counter saintly thing. 




All of a sudden his resistance collapsed. He felt that he himself was 




insignificant—so why not give the money? The Gurdjieff he now saw was in 




improved health, full of vitality, altogether a return to his former self




Insane? He was in full possession of every one of his extraordinary 




faculties. Debauched and slovenly? Nothing of the sort. Afraid of the 




dark  and  being  alone?  It  was  ridiculous.  Whatever  he  had  gone 




through, the thing that showed plainly was a decided improvement in 




every respect. 




Toomer admitted his bafflement over Gurdjieff’s antics. He decided that 




some of the deceptions were so transparent that those who fell for them 




deserved no sympathy. “Why does he work in this way?” he asked. “Might 




as  well  ask  the  sphinx.”  But  the  sphinx  had  become  a  little  more 




communicative, and as the result of answers GurdjieiBF gave to his pupils’ 




questions, it began to be rumored that he would begin a new phase of work 




on  his  “birthday,”  January  13.  He  had  ended  a  phase  of  writing  and 




recuperation which had begun with his accident in 1924. After the accident, 




said GurdjielF, he had been compelled to “produce energy artificially.” He 




announced expansively that he had consumed enough drink to fell ten men, 




and also forty pounds of opium. In order to restore his body, he said, he had 




been doing things which would make him suflFer when he remembered 




them. Toomer’s comment was that this explanation said nothing about “the 




benefits or distastes experienced by those others who were parties to his 




Gurdjieffian nights.” 




424 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




To  Toomer,  Gurdjieff  became  quite  confidential,  and  the  American 




plucked up courage to ask whether GurdjiefF remembered a time when he 




had promised to make him “ruler of Africa. ” Gurdjieff smiled: “Something 




went wrong,” he said. Toomer’s psyche was  

African. 

 At this Toomer was 




puzzled, remembering that at different times Gurdjieff had told him that he 




was both Enghsh and American. He quizzed the Master again. 




“You not as I counted,” he said. 




“How do you mean?” 




“In the very beginning I counted you.” I suppose he meant, “got my 




number.” He went on, “You not as I counted.” 




“How do you mean?” 




“You manifest differently at different times, different from what I 




expected. You not as I counted and I get angry. ” 




“Angry? Why?” 




“You not as I counted. ” 




Gurdjieff  remained  in  New  York  until  the  late  spring  of  1934,  and 




Toomer was approached for more money on at least one other occasion. But 




despite his renewed affection for the Master, he was not back in the fold. 




Like Orage before him, he had a sense that he was up against a brick wall. 




In 1935 he was married and detached from his roots in Chicago. He wrote: 




“I have reached the limit of my possibilities for the present. I can do no 




more for myself in the way of having new experiences. In the immediate 




ftiture I, myself, personally, do not exist.” In 1936 he and his wife moved to 




Doylestown, Pennsylvania, and for a time, all contact with Gurdjieff and his 




pupils ceased. It should be said, however, that late in life Toomer returned 




to the fold, and that his last years were spent working with a Gurdjieff 




group. 




By 1934 the Work in America was in a fragmented state. During the 




1920s, it had seemed that the Master and his subordinates were determined 




to  extend  their  activities  at  least  among  the  few  deemed  capable  of 




appreciating what they were up to. Now it began to seem that—since the 




break with Orage—everything that had been achieved had been sacrificed. 




In  New  York  there  was  a  divided  group  of  perhaps  fewer  than  thirty 




followers. Toomer no longer superintended affairs in Chicago, although a 




Chicago group continued to exist and Gurdjieff visited the town, trailing 




chaos  in  his  wake,  both  in  1932-33  and  in  1933-34.  In  various  other 




American  cities,  there  were  small  groups  who  remained  interested  in 




Gurdjieff’s  ideas.  But  the  most  impressive  result  of  his  influence  had 




appeared in the work of another man, Frank Lloyd Wright. 




The marriage of the distinguished architect to Olgivanna Hinzenberg in 




August 1928, resulted in a close telationship between the Lloyd Wrights




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   425




and GurdjiefF. The couple had attended Toomer’s Chicago groups, and 




Frank Lloyd Wright announced the foundation of his Taliesin Fellowship in 




1932—the  year  in  which  Toomer  left  Chicago.  The  Fellowship  was 




announced as teaching “essential architecture, ” and GurdjiefF was one of its 




first guests. Olgivanna Lloyd Wright’s book,  

The Struggle Within, 

 was not 




published until 1955, but the philosophy which it embodies, and which 




inspired  the  community  from  the  start,  derives  quite  obviously  from 




Gurdjieff. “Our survival,” she begins, “lies in the destruction of the false 




self.” And from this precept flows the familiar ideas of suffering, conscious 




effort, and self-knowledge which she had imbibed from her master. 




During the 1930s, Wright often accompanied his wife to Gurdjieff s table 




in New York or Paris, and Gurdjieff visited Taliesin several times. The 




relationship  of  the  two  men  was  one  of  mutual  respect  tinged  with 




suspicion; Wright did not willingly play second fiddle to anyone. Yet he 




cooperated loyally during the Master’s last visits to the United States. 




During the Second World War, Taliesin provided a congenial refuge for the 




de Hartmanns, the Notts, and other followers of Gurdjieff who fled Europe 




in  the  face  of  Hitler.  Taliesin  is  still  run  according  to  Gurdjieffian 




principles. It was largely because she disagreed with these that Stalin’s 




daughter Svetlana left the community after her flight to the United States. 




The  situation  foreshadowed  what  was  to  emerge  after  the  deaths  of 




Gurdjieff and Ouspensky. The influence of the Work has often been most 




pervasive  in  the  areas  where  it  is  least  obvious—not  in  the  groups  or 




societies formed to perpetuate the ideas, but through more underground 




connections. 




Gurdjieff had driven away the de Hartmanns, Orage, and most of his 




other close pupils. In America he behaved so badly that he reduced some of 




his former supporters to supporting a prosecution. And Ouspensky’s pupils 




agreed that it was at about this time that their teacher ceased to keep a 




weather eye on Gurdjieff. 




No one knew what Gurdjieff intended. Toomer was far from alone in his 




perplexity over the Master’s future plans. Rom Landau tried to find out 




something  in  1934  and  was  unsuccessful.  He  was  told  by  a  pupil  of 




Gurdjieff’s that many of his followers had been waiting for years for answers 




to such questions. 




No one was even sure what had happened already. Gurdjieff was as 




solated as a tight-rope walker who has ceased to believe in the tight-rope 




vhich supports him. 




rhe 

view from Europe provides no simple answers. The main problems are 




posed by the sale of the Prieure and the publication of  

Herald of Coming

 




 

Good. 




The  sale  of  the  Prieure  was  a  curious  affair.  It  does  not  seem  that




426 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




mortgages were the primary cause, although GurdjiefiF’s long-term financial 




obligations were probably irredeemable. The immediate reason for the sale 




was a bill from the local coal merchant: Gurdjieff owed 200 or 300 francs. 




He had managed to avoid paying much greater bills and could no doubt 




have sidestepped this one. But it seemed that he had ceased to care; the bill 




remained  unpaid,  and  the  debt  was  bought  by  a  Paris  banker,  who 




foreclosed. The Prieure—^with all its contents, including the furniture 




which had come with the original purchase from Mme. Laborie—^was sold. 




Gurdjieff appeared to have lost interest in his chMeau. His apathy was so 




complete  that  his  followers  had  to  rescue  trunks  filled  with  musical 




manuscripts from under the noses of the auctioneers. Had he really been 




planning “work on a big scale” for the next year as Alexandre de Salzmann 




had told Nott? Had the Prieure served its purpose and become a millstone 




round his neck? Or was the episode the result of that decline in Gurdjieff’s 




energies which was so noticeable to his American supporters? 




Nott  was  as  depressed  as  Gurdjieff’s  American  followers  with  the 




Master’s physical condition. He found him irritable, silent, and morose. 




But as always, there are contradictions. It seems from Nott’s account that 




Gurdjieff was quite aware he was ruining his health by eating too much fat, 




and he even had unflattering photographs taken which he stuck on packets 




of sweets and gave away. This supports the idea that, for reasons of his own, 




Gurdjieff had decided to place himself in as bad a light as possible, and at 




the same time, to make a clean break with the past phases of his activity. 




But if we accept that he had deliberately allowed the Prieure to slip from 




his grasp, we must explain away the fact that in 1934, the year after the sale, 




Gurdjieff was angling for a permanent base in America. He remembered 




Mabel Dodge Luhan’s offer of 1926 and delegated Toomer to see whether 




her house in Taos was still available. On August 18, 1934, Toomer had to 




report that the chatelaine of Taos now showed no noticeable enthusiasm for 




the  project.  During  the  mid-1930s,  Gurdjieff  made  at  least  one  other 




attempt to tap the bank balance of a rich woman in order to reestablish 




himself in a large house. Did he regard the loss of the Prieure in a serious 




light, or was this simply a stratagem to raise money? This question is crucial 




to the interpretation of that eccentric work,  

Herald of Coming Good. 




This first published writing of Gurdjieff is dated from the Caf6 de la Paix 




on  January  13,  1933.  It  is  subtitled,  “First  Appeal  to  Contemporary 




Humanity,” and was priced at “from 8 to 108 French francs.” The “good” 




which Gurdjieff announced to the world was the coming publication of the 




books on which he had been engaged over the past seven years, principally 




the (now completed) “First Series” known as  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 of which 




 

Herald of Coming Good

 included a synopsis. Appended to it were seven 




forms of registration on which the purchaser was supposed to write his




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   427




name  and  address,  how  he  had  acquired  the  book,  the  particulars  of 




whoever had recommended it to him, and the price he had elected to pay. 




The object of all this rigamarole was to give GurdjiefF some idea of the size 




of the audience he could expect for  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 and to make sure he 




would reach the people who had already responded to his ideas. Unfortunately,  there  is  no  doubt  that   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  was  one  of  the factors which substantially reduced his prospective readership. 




The  style  and  the  presentation  were  intimidating.  The  prose  was,  if 




anything, more rambling and less consequential than that of  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales. 

 GurdjiefF now had no Orage to structure his sentences for him, and 




an uninitiated reader like Rom Landau might well be forgiven for thinking 




that at best he had stumbled on the folly of a peculiar monomaniac. The 




little book was put together in haste, and its author had second, third, and 




fourth  thoughts.  A  substantial  section  merely  reproduces  the  English 




translation of the prospectus for the Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man. As well as the body of the text, there are two prefatory notes, a printed “circular letter,” added after the book had gone to press, and a 




“supplementary announcement” tacked to the end. 




The  opening  section  of   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  contains  the  first 




information  about  himself  which  GurdjiefF  made  public.  If  the  reader 




avoided  becoming  trapped  in  the  oxbow  lakes  sometimes  formed  by 




Gurdjieff ’s sentences, he would have discovered a sketchy narrative of the 




author’s search for knowledge in the East and his career as a professional 




hypnotist. This last piece of information caused great consternation when it 




became known among his followers; and it has often been insinuated that 




copies  of   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  are  rare  as  a  result  of  a  campaign  to 




suppress this damaging evidence. Even more shocking to GurdjiefF’s pupils 




was the admission that he regarded them as experimental animals. He 




stated bluntly that he had founded his Institute “for purely personal ends” 




and roundly abused the people who had supported him after his “accident. ” 




Coming in the midst of Gurdjielf’s apparently most unscrupulous behavior. 




 

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  seemed  to  confirm  the  worst  suspicions  of  his 




disillusioned followers, and its appearance in the spring of 1933 coincided 




with the biggest exodus of his American pupils. 




But if Gurdjieff were really the unprincipled cynic he seemed to be, why 




did he suddenly confess everything? It could be that he had tired of the 




game, that he proposed to let the illusion of his master dissolve altogether. 




It  could  also  be  that  this  was  a  deliberate  shock  gauged  to  “test”  his 




followers. Or, may it have been simple misjudgment? 




It  is  clear  that  at  the  time  of  his  writing  of   

Herald  of  Coming  Good, 

 




Gurdjiefif anticipated continued contact with his disciples. Apart from 




announcing the publication of  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 he provided an explana




428 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




tion of his idiosyncratic behavior—the story that for the past twenty-one 




years he had been Hving an artificial hfe in order to prevent his guinea pigs 




from idohzing him. “Believe me,” he writes, “during the whole period of 




my relations with you, my inner world never harboured either egotistical or 




altruistic impulses. ” He also announced plans for the continuation of his 




work; but as for any perceptible effect on his followers, these might as well 




have remained unvoiced. Aside from the details of the plans, there were 




one or two indications that Gurdjieff himself did not share the exaggerated 




view of his abilities held by some of his pupils. He admitted to possessing 




“weaknesses” and referred to “undesirable manifestations of my nature.” 




He also explained some of the principles of teaching and role playing upon 




which he claimed to have based his recent conduct. 




Gurdjieff talks of a principle which he expresses in a single hyphenated sentence: “To-be-patient-towards-every-being-and-not-to-attempt-by-the-possibilities-in-our-power-to-alter-the-consequences-of-the-evil-deeds-of-our-neigh- 




bours.” During the previous four months, he writes, he has tried to put this 




principle into practice himself and encouraged others to do the same. He chose 




three pupils for this experiment. One he influenced “by means of almost 




uninterrupted, kindly-intentioned persuasions and conscientious exhortations,” 




the second “by threats of the terrible future awaiting him,” and the third “by 




means of various hypnotic suggestions.” During the same period, while 




maintaining his “inner benevolence” to the best of his ability, Gurdjieff writes 




that he set himself the task of quarreling "ruthlessly” with all actions inspired 




by people’s vanity, but always “under a mask of serious irritation.” Whether the 




three subjects he describes ever existed is questionable, for  

Herald of Coming

 




 

Good

 is no freer firom preposterous and unverifiable statements than any other 




of Gurdjieff s writings. But the three different techniques of manipulation are 




tibose Gurdjieff consistently employed: for one man the carrot, for another the 




stick, for a third hidden persuasion. Any of Gurdjieff’s pupils might have found 




in  

Herald of Coming Good

 the keys to a dozen puzzling experiences. 




If  they  had  chosen  to  look,  that  is.  For  most  of  them  did  not.  It  is 




frightiening to think that one has wasted a great deal of time entirely under 




the influence of a skillful puppet master and much more consoHng to 




believe that one has been the dupe of the devil, or is immersed in a cosmic 




mystery  of  unfathomable  proportions.  The  most  significant  fact  about 




 

Herald of Coming Good

 is that it was ignored or rejected. Two attitudes 




were common: either Gurdjieff was seen as a phony of the most obnoxious 




sort or he was taken at face value, his every claim accepted. Whether he 




was thought to be a hero or a villain, the result for his followers was the 




same; oversimplification, stupefaction, and—^as he would have said— 




“sleep.” 




Gurdjieff had given away his secret; and perhaps the reaction made him




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   429




decide that his disclosures had been premature. In New York in 1934, only 




a year after publication, he was at work on an “Introduction” designed to 




replace the  

Herald

 and was recalling all unsold copies. Originally, he spent 




a  lot  of  money  on  the  production  and  hoped  to  market  the  book 




commercially, but later he simply gave it away. Nott and Elizabeth Gordon 




sent copies to  all Ouspensky’s  pupils, and  Ouspensky had it read to a 




gathering of his closest circle. The general opinion was that the tract was 




“almost paranoiac,” and Ouspensky suggested that perhaps GurdjiefFhad 




syphilis. All copies of  

Herald of Coming Good

 in England were rounded up 




and destroyed. 




There  is  a  widely  believed  story  that  Gurdjielf  intended   

Herald  of

 




 

Coming Good

 to shock Ouspensky. This does not seem to go far enough. 




The booklet would have served as a “shock,” not only to Ouspensky, but to 




other close followers whose dependence on him GurdjiefFhad not been able 




to  cure.  By  revealing  his  secrets  Gurdjieff  might  have  expected  to 




encourage a proper comprehension of his ideas in those who were able to 




understand him—and to disembarrass himself of followers whose credulity 




passed all bounds. 




Of  course,  it  might  have  been  a  quite  straightforward  appeal.  The 




“Supplementary Announcement” gives some support to this theory. It is 




dated March 7, 1933, from the Grand Cafe, Fontainebleau. Gurdjieff writes 




that this postscript is “evoked” by “the events of an economic, political and 




social character taking place in the past few weeks.” At first sight this seems 




to mean that the economic and political crisis—^which, for example, brought 




Hitler to power in Germany—had resulted in Gurdjieff’s addressing an 




appeal to former members of the Institute. He announces that from June 




first, he proposes to reestablish the activities of the Institute as they had 




existed  before  his  “accident”  and  to  resume  the  life  he  had  led  before 




deciding  to  concentrate  on  writing.  But  it  may  be  wondered  whether 




Gurdjieff’s notion of “economic and political crises” extended further than 




the coal bill and the mortgages on the Prieur6, and whether this last section 




of his odd pamphlet is not a simple appeal for money to save the chateau. 




And  of  course   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  might  have  been  simply  a   

jeu

 




 

(f esprit. 

 Gurdjieff announced a new and improved Study House which he 




claimed was to be erected that April. It was to be equipped with the most 




splendid  devices.  There  were  to  be  three  laboratories  dealing  with 




branches of science previously unknown on earth; “namely the ‘magnetic- 




Astral,' the ‘Thoughthanbledzoin,’ and the ‘Mentaloethero-winged.’” Two 




inventions  of  GurdjiefiF  were  to  be  set  up  in  the  new  building;  the 




“Luminous Keyboard” and the “Retro-rebounding-Echoraising Organ.” It 




is impossible to believe that Gurdjieff himself took these impressively titled 




inventions seriously, or that he expected others to do so. But, was there a




430 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




purpose in these absurdities? If GurdjiefFhad  

Beelzebub's Tales

 read aloud 




to his pupils and the meaning was too readily understood, he would alter 




the ofiending passage in the book, lengthen his already endless sentences, 




and  conceal  entirely  the  already  obscure  symbolism.  “Must  dig  dog 




deeper,” he would say; and his pupils would have to scrabble for the bone. 




GurdjiefF’s literary work and his personal teaching were very similar. He 




would help a pupil toward a valuable insight, and then try to confuse the 




issue by talking nonsense for hours on end. In  

Herald of Coming Good

 he 




revealed some of his trade secrets—and then buried the bone under some 




obviously fraudulent claims about his invention of the “Luminous Keyboard.” 




Whether  or  not   

Herald  of  Coming  Good

  had  any  significance  for 




Gurdjieff’s plans for the immediate future, it could not prevent the loss of 




the Prieur^. GurdjiefF retired to Paris, where he lived for a time in the 




Grand Hotel. The sale of the Prieure and his trip to America in 193S-34 




mark the end of a period of turmoil which had begun in 1929. 




About the year 1930, Gurdjieff wrote a piece of music called “As if the 




difficult years had passed.” Whether in his own estimation the difficult 




years  were  already  over  or  were  still  to  come,  the  1930s  were  trying 




enough. The decade took permanently some of his closest companions. 




 

Memento mori. . . 

 people had begun to die. Alexandre de Salzmann died 




in 1933, Orage in 1934; and during the later 1930s, Gurdjielf ’s brother 




Dmitri and Leonid Stoerneval also died. Gurdjieff’s personal circumstances 




were less favorable than at any time since his arrival in the West, and he 




seemed to have exhausted the energy which usually enabled him to rise 




above misfortune. 




After the sale of the Prieure he was more than ever dependent on his 




remaining American pupils. From midsummer 1933 until midsummer




1935,  he spent most of his time in the United States. For six months he 




stayed with Fred Leighton—a wealthy adherent whose allegiance dated 




back to the Oragean groups of the mid-1920s—and made several efforts to 




reestablish himself in the style to which he had become accustomed during 




his  occupancy  of  the  Prieure.  It  was  during  this  period  that  Toomer 




approached Mabel Luhan on his behalf and, according to J. G. Bennett, a 




number of other attempts were made to find support for his plans. One 




project foundered when the plane carrying a senator on his way to meet 




Gurdjie£F exploded in midair. Another was prevented by the refusal of the 




Soviet authorities to allow Gurdjieff to teach his System in the USSR. He 




sailed  for  Europe  some  time  in  the  summer  of  1935,  apparently  in  a 




despondent state of mind; after a visit to Germany, he returned to Paris. 




Bennett believed that between May and July 1935, GurdjiefiF succeeded




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   431




in  returning  to Central Asia.  He produces  no evidence to support this 




assertion,  beyond  his  own  recollection  that  toward  the  end  of  his  life, 




Gurdjieff spoke of a trip he had made to Persia—which Bennett somehow 




associated with this stage in his career. But we know for certain only that he 




returned to Europe after his plans had apparently been frustrated at every 




turn. 




In the late summer of 1935, Gurdjieff reappeared in Paris. For a time he 




lived in a flat in the Rue Marchand, then in one in the Rue Labis. In 1936 




he moved to his best-known address at 6, Rue des Colonels Renard, in what 




was then the Russian quarter just north of the Etoile. He was more elusive 




than before, and traveled widely; to Vichy, where there lived a number of 




Russians who had formerly been at the Prieure; to the hotels on the Riviera 




where he seemed to feel at home; to Normandy to visit the Stoernevals; also 




to  Germany  and  the  Low  Countries.  He  kept  in  touch  with  the  small 




number of followers left in New York and a few old pupils in England like 




C. S. Nott, who occasionally visited him in Paris. Ehzabeth Gordon from 




the Prieure remained with him; and a number of Americans, inspired by 




the teaching of Jane Heap, took the Master by storm. The Gurdjielf whom 




they knew was a man more obviously benevolent than his younger self. It 




was  as if,  having buried  his bone hundreds of meters deep to confuse 




history, he allowed his followers closer to the larder than they had been for 




a decade. 




The final number of  

The Little Review

 had symbolized a complete break 




with its editors’ previous lives. It was a confession of faith in the Work; and, 




once committed Jane Heap in particular devoted the whole of her powerful 




energies to the cause. She became the intermediary between Gurdjieff and 




tfie  expatriate  community  of.  Paris,  and  from  as  early  as  1927,  she 




supervised an “artist’s group.” In many ways she took over the function of 




Orage as the missionary to the intellectuals; and she came to occupy a place 




in the affections of her pupils not far removed from the niche reserved for 




her  initiator.  Margaret  Anderson  ranks  her  with  Orage  as  the  best 




“introducer”  to  the  System,  and  it  was  largely  Jane  Heap’s  doing  that 




Gurdjieff’s “reputation loomed in Left Bank conversations ” (to quote his 




follower Kathryn Hulme) “in a persistent hush-hush way, hke a cloud 




enveloping a Jehovah.” 




From 1932 Jane Heap’s group began to meet in a more regular fashion in 




her  apartment  in  Montparnasse.  It  included  Solita  Solano  and  also 




Georgette Leblanc and Margaret Anderson, when they visited Paris. In  

The

 




 

Vnktunoahle  Gurdjieff

  Margaret  Anderson  prints  a  series  of  aphorisms 




made by Jane Heap in her exposition of the Work, and these remain the 




only  published  records  of  her  teaching.  Kathryn  Hulme—at  that  time 




writing her first two novels and acting as companion to a wealthy millineir




432 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




who wanted to see Europe—^was introduced to the group by Sohta Solano 




with the claim that in the Montparnasse flat “the only important thing in 




Paris” was going on. The size of Jane Heap’s group and the names of others 




who comprised it remains a mystery. Janet Planner—^author of the “Genet” 




columns  for  the   

New  Yorker

  and  translator  of  Georgette  Leblanc’s 




 

Maeterlinck and I

—and Djuna Barnes—the author of  

Nightwood

—^were 




friends of  

The Little Review

 circle, and may possibly have been among her 




group. For just as the Prieure had been part of “Paris in the Twenties” first 




Jane Heap, and then Gurdjielf himself, were part of “Paris in the Thirties”: 




a Paris where the wine tasted a little sourer than in the previous decade; the 




Paris  of   

Nightwood, 

  which  T.  S.  Eliot  published  in  1936,  with  an 




introduction hinting that the perversions of the novel’s characters stood 




only for the wider situation. 




Jane Heap—^whose “personal magnetism was almost visible”—provided a 




sheet anchor for a number of displaced persons. In late October 1936, she 




left Paris for London on Gurdjieff’s orders to begin teaching there. Her 




Paris group was left, as Kathryn Hulme writes, “high and dry”; she had 




always  discouraged  them  from  meeting  Gurdjieff  personally,  on  the 




grounds that his role playing would put them off the Work. But three or 




four of her stranded pupils, including Solano and Hulme herself, refused to 




be daunted, and bearded the Master in the Gafe de la Paix. Gradually, with 




the  addition  of  Elizabeth  Gordon,  and  later  Margaret  Anderson  and 




Georgette  Leblanc,  this  circle  became  a  regular  group  under  formal 




instruction from Gurdjieff. It was a group which Gurdjieff kept strictly to 




itself, a group composed of women of a certain type—literary, sophisticated, and single—^whether divorced, deserted, unmarried, or frankly Lesbian. Casual visitors who asked to be allowed to join the Work were met 




vwth a blank refusal. 




Kathryn Hulme in Undiscovered  

Country

 and Margaret Anderson in  

The

 




 

Fiery Fountains

 have both described the Gurdjieff of 1936-38. The Master 




who emerges is essentially a kind and charitable man. He could be terrible; 




raging at his pupils for some fault real or imaginary; exacting; giving them 




strenuous  exercises  for  the  development  of  their  “inner  worlds”;  or 




contradictory in familiar fashion. But an atmosphere of mellovmess surrounds him—as if the difficult years had indeed passed. He was no longer the grasping entrepreneur, but the charitable man, consoling the lonely 




women for what was lacking in their lives; no longer the ogre, but the man 




known as “Monsieur Bonbon” from his habit of giving away sweets to shop 




assistants, lift boys, and casual passersby. His hospitality was as extravagant 




as ever, his charity overstepped the bounds of his pupils and friends, and 




gradually the walls of his flat began to fill with oil paintings of all sorts—




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   433




most of them excruciatingly bad—^which he bought in order to keep the 




artists alive. Until the end of his life, the traffic of pupils and patients in and 




out of his apartment was swollen by those to whom he referred as “mes 




parasites.” 




If he was more genial, he was also more straightforward than before. It 




may be that the records of this period are written by people who were in 




particularly close contact with him, but the Gurdjieff of their accounts is 




less confiising and more paternal: he gave direct instructions for performing 




exercises—for example, with rosaries such as the ones “Ushe Narzunoff” is 




holding in his photograph; he was concerned less with the intricacies of 




cosmology—^he had abandoned his writing for good—^and more with 




practical instruction. There were still the familiar, enormous, and taxing 




lunches with the traditional idiot toasts. The same extraordinary abihty to 




assess psychological states was brought into play as Gurdjieff christened his 




pupils with animal names, names which he said expressed their “inner 




natures.” Once more the hair-raising motor expeditions set off for Vichy or 




the South Coast—^where in Monte Carlo Gurdjieff gave all his “children” 




money and sent them off to play at the Casino. In the Rue des Colonels 




Renard, his eccentric scheme of decoration, his Oriental cooking, and his 




perpetually shuttered windows plucked his pupils from the heart of Paris 




into another world. 




At about the same time that Jane Heap’s group of Americans began to 




meet regularly in her apartment in Montparnasse, the Work at long last 




began to penetrate the Parisian intelHgentsia. This was the responsibility of 




Alexandre and Jeanne de Salzmann. 




The group which Alexandre de Salzmann gathered round him in 1932 




was the second which he and his wife brought to Gurdjieff. About 1928 the 




de  Salzmanns  visited  Alphons  Paquet  in  Frankfurt,  and  together  with 




Louisa Goepfert, they began group readings from  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 in the 




Paquet  household.  Paquet  himself  visited  Gurdjieff  only  once,  shortly 




before the closure of the Prieur^; but in the autumn of 1932, his wife and 




one of his daughters came to Paris to study with the Master. 




In his turn, Gurdjieff visited Germany on several occasions. Paquet’s 




daughter, Frau Henriette Klingmiiller, remembers his first appearance in 




Frankfurt, when all her sisters were tipped by Gurdjieff—but she herself 




left  out. “You not  necessarily money,” remarked  the Master, “you my 




godchild”; and proceeded to concern himself especially wdth his goddaughter whose dowry he apparently withheld. 




Apart from the Frankfurt group, de Salzmann’s services were rendered 




chiefly at the Prieure. As the life of the Institute ran down, de Salzmann left 




Fontainebleau and went to live in Paris, where he at first made his living by




434 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




interior decorating, then went to work for an antique dealer. The group 




which collected round him in the two years before his death in 1933 arrived 




largely by accident. 




The literary-philosophical group known as the Grand Jeu originated in 




the friendship of four Rheims schoolboys, Rene Daumal, Roger-Gilbert 




Lecomte, Roger Vailland, and Robert Meyrat. All except Daumal—the 




youngest by a year—^were born in 1907. They became bored and world- 




weary at a precociously early age. They called themselves the “Phreres 




simplistes,” cultivated a morbid sense of humor, and experimented with 




alcohol and the occult. 




By  1927  the  group  were  living  in  Paris  and  had  made  contact  with 




kindred spirits. The enlarged circle decided to publish a review. This was 




called Le  

Grand Jeu

—but significantly, it had originally been entitled  

La

 




 

Voie. 

 “We believe in all miracles,” proclaimed the manifesto. “Attitude: 




one must enter into a state of complete receptivity, be pure in order to do 




this, having created a void within oneself.  

From this stems our ideal wish to

 




 

place  everything  in  question  at  every  moment.  . 

  .  .  We  do  not  accept 




because  we  no  longer  understand  anything.”  The  signatories  of  the 




manifesto sought the “eternal moments” which nourished the spirit. “It is 




in such moments that we absorb everything, that we swallow God so as to 




become transparent enough to disappear.” 




By the end of 1930, the Grand Jeu was in a state of decay. Vailland and 




Lecomte were continually in and out of the hospital; the Surrealists had 




finally withdrawn the hand of friendship; and there was a conflict between a 




left-wing political element and the esotericists within the group. Daumal 




himself was living in poverty, drifting from place to place, beginning to lose 




his teeth, and taking to his bed. He later admitted that he was “close to 




madness and death.” At this critical point, he was introduced to Alexander 




de Salzmann. 




The intermediary was the Czech artist Josef Sima, who was one of the 




signatories to the  

Grand Jeu

 manifesto. One evening, after a meeting of the 




Grand Jeu at Sima’s, the group encountered de Salzmann in his usual cafi§ 




on the Boulevard St. Germain. The artist always sat alone, smoking from a 




long cigarette holder, drinking a mixture of calvados and beer—of which he 




would consume perhaps a dozen glasses each evening. His hands would be 




occupied with a pencil—continuously designing what looked like Oriental 




calligraphy. Daumal was bowled over, and de Salzmann came to seem—in 




the words of the poet’s biographer, Michel Random—“the man who could 




save  everything.”  De  Salzmann’s  puckish  sense  of  humor  evidently 




influenced his relationship with the younger man—and Daumal wrote 




enthusiastically that the artist was “a former dervish, former Benedictine, 




former professor of jiu-jitsu, healer, stage-designer, not a tooth left hj his




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   435




head, an incredible man.” “We no longer understand anything,” the  

Grand

 




 

]eu

 manifesto had declared. In contrast, for Daumal, de Salzmann was the 




Man Who Knows. Other members of the Grand Jeu were less sure of the 




Russian’s omniscience, and Daumal reproached a friend for his lack of 




perception; “You still have only the reflection of a shadow of a vague feeling 




of the  

Personage

 he is. I look forward (wrongly) to witnessing the moment at 




which you realise this. But it is certain that you will find him on your way— 




as if by chance—the very day on which you need him. . . . ” 




The advent of de Salzmann hastened the breakup of the Grand Jeu. This 




finally came about at the beginning of 1932, when the political and mystical 




wings of the group clashed over the question of militarism. By this time, 




Rene Daumal was living with Vera Milanova, the young Russian whom he 




subsequently married; together the couple spent entire nights discussing 




the Work with de Salzmann. In 1932 Vera traveled to the United States and 




Daumal took a job as a press agent to the Indian dancer Uday Shankar in 




order  to  tour  America  with  his  troupe.  In  New  York  he  composed   

La

 




 

Grande Beuverie

 (“The Great Drunk”) as his farewell to the complicated 




literary and occult world of the Grand Jeu. It comprises a denunciation of 




the ordinary apparatus of communication; a description of the “artificial 




paradises”  created  by  those  who  see  through  such  illusions;  and  a 




recommendation of a superior world of reality. This is the world of the 




awakened man of the Work, and it is not to be gained without a struggle. 




The agent of this struggle is the Master Totochabo—perhaps de Salzmann, 




perhaps what Daumal had heard of Gurdjieff from de Salzmann—who 




appears with the familiar message;  

“There is a way out.” 




In 1933 Alexander de Salzmann died of tuberculosis. The Prieure had not 




yet been sold, but he was living in a hotel in Fontainebleau. He was quite 




alone, and Gurdjieff refused to visit him. One of the inmates of the Prieure 




used  to  call  on  him  in  the  evenings  with  presents—halva  and  other 




delicacies—smuggled out from Gurdjieff’s table. De Salzmann lay in a 




darkened  room,  his  skin  a  bluish-gray.  He  was  clearly  dying,  but  still 




Gurdjieff would not come to see him. Eventually, the sick man summoned 




up the strength to rise from his bed and sought out Gurdjieff in the Cafe 




Henri IV. The pupil who had brought him halva was sitting at the next 




table, and it seemed to her that Gurdjieff was “not very kind” to the man 




who had made such an effort to see him. A few days after the interview, de 




Salzmann died. It is said—but also vehemently denied—that his last words 




were: “I’ll know on the other side whether he’s a Master or a demon. ” 




Gurdjieff’s  apparent  cruelty  may  have  conveyed  something  to  de 




Salzmann which is closed to outsiders, but to an outsider it cannot seem 




that he acted in a particularly admirable fashion. What passed between the 




two men is unknovra; but the incident must remain one of the blackest




436 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




marks against the Gurdjieff of “the difficult years.” Neither is it known what 




effect the death of the Man Who Knows had on Rene and Vera Daumal; for 




by 1933, their loyalty had passed beyond devotion to a man and become 




devotion to a teaching. 




On their return to France from the United States, they settled down in 




Paris, where Daumal worked on the  

EncyclopSdie Frangaise

 and achieved 




some fame in 1936 with the publication of his volume of poetry,  

Le Contre-

 




 

Ciel. 

  In  1935  they  visited  Geneva  to  work  with  Mme.  de  Salzmann, 




accompanied by the Orientalist Philippe Lavastine—at that time a pub- 




hsher  and  the  first  French  recruit  to  the  Work  from  outside  Daumal’s 




immediate  circle.  But  from  1934  until  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  the 




headquarters of the new group which formed around Mme. de Salzmann 




was in Sevres. 




The house at Sfevres, writes Jean Bids, “reproduced in miniature the 




Prieur^ of Avon.” The building stood in the middle of a derelict park and 




contained a large room for the movements and semi-permanent quarters for 




Mme. de Salzmann, Daumal, and Lavastine. Every evening the Daumals 




would travel out from Paris to take part in movements classes—which lasted 




far into the night, like Gurdjieff’s at the Prieur6. There were readings from 




the chapters of  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 which had been translated into French; 




there was housework; and on weekends the house filled with visitors. 




According to Bies, the group began to disintegrate about 1937, although it 




did not finally break up until two years later. 




When the Sfevres group had been established for some time, Gurdjieff 




reappeared in Paris, and Mme. de Salzmann began to bring her pupils to 




him. Gurdjieff sat— 

a. 

 Caucasian minotaur—at the center of a labyrinth of 




initiations. Pupils approached him through “exoteric,” “mesoteric,” and 




“esoteric” groups. The favored, like Daumal and Lavastine, were sometimes invited to meals at the flat in the Rue des Colonels Renard. By the outbreak of war the pattern of future activities had become established: a 




pupil would be introduced to the Work by Mme. de Salzmann, and only 




after some months—or even years—might be selected to meet the Master 




himself It was an external form for an idea which animated each pupil, 




however he or she expressed it; that gradually they were penetrating to the 




center of the secrets of the universe. 




Later, Daumal constructed an allegory of this spiritual progress in his 




most famous work,  

Mount Analogue, 

 which he did not live to complete. 




 

Mount Analogue

 is described as “a novel of symbolically non-Euclidean 




adventures in mountain climbing,” and in its allegorical and elliptical style, 




there  are  frequent  traces  of  Daumal  the  ‘pataphysician.  The  book  is 




dedicated to Alexander de Salzmann, who may be portrayed under the 




name of Pierre Sogol (Sogol = Logos), a “Professor of Mountaineering.^ In




T H E   B O N E   B E N E A T H   T H E   M O U N T A I N   437




the  story,  Sogol  assembles  a  band  of  would-be  mountaineers  to  climb 




Mount Analogue, which stands on an island hidden from observation by the 




curvature of space. “Everything takes place as if Mount Analogue did not 




exist.” In order to reach the island “one must assume the possibility and 




even the  

necessity

 of reaching it. ” 




The ‘pataphysics with which Sogol “reasons” himself and his team on to 




the  island  are  expertly  deployed;  and  the  characters  of  the  various 




mountaineers are described in the same tradition. The rewards of climbing 




Mount  Analogue  are  represented  in  “peradams,”  precious  and almost 




invisible pieces of crystal. Clearly they are spiritual rewards, and for that 




reason indefinable—except in allegorical terms. But what if Daumal had all 




along been deluding himself? What if there were no peradams—no bone 




beneath the mountain at all? 




If  Sogol  does  represent  de  Salzmann,  and  not  some  more  abstract 




figure—say  a  composite  of  Gurdjieff  and  de  Salzmann,  or  simply  an 




archetype of the Work teacher—the beginning of  

Mount Analogue

 provides 




some  interesting  indications  of  how  the  painter  might  have  become 




estranged from GurdjielF. Sogol tells his prospective pupil that he had 




yearned for “something more” in life and that at one stage he thought that 




he had found this in religion. He “entered a monastery; a very strange one 




...  it  belonged  to  a  distinctly  heretical  order.”  Every  day  one  of  the 




brothers was selected—unknown to the others—to play the role of the 




Tempter. “One thing proves to me,” Sogol says, “the diabolical nature of 




this  custom;  not  one  of  the  brothers  ever  refused  to  accept  the  role  of 




Tempter.  .  .  .  The  Tempter  was  himself  the  victim  of  a  monstrous 




temptation.”  Sogol  is  persuaded  by  a  Tempter  to  design  machines  for 




waking people up; but when he himself becomes Tempter, he realizes the 




childishness of his inventions and the ignominy of his role in the monastery. 




He goes to the Superior and tells him that he can no longer play the devil: 




“He spoke to me with mild severity, perhaps sincere, perhaps professional. 




‘My son,’  he concluded, ‘I see  that  there is in you an  incurable  

need  to

 




 

understand, 

 which must prevent you from remaining any longer in this 




house. We shall pray God to call you to him by other paths.’” 




Might this not, in the language of  

Mount Analogue, 

 be Daumal’s record 




of how de Salzmann parted from Gurdjieff? If so it does not seem that the 




artist’s difiierence of opinion with his Master was over much more than 




methods. But if the quarrel was a more serious afifair, it is ironic that it was 




through de Salzmann, and afterward through his wife, that Gurdjieff was 




left with any pupils at all, 




Gurdjieff—at least in the opinion of one person who knew him well 




during the late 1920s and early 1930s—^was growing old and tired; and he 




certainly had little inclination to proselytize for himself After the United




438 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




States entered the Sec»nd World War, the group which included Kathryn 




Hulme and Margaret Anderson scattered to the four winds. EHzabeth 




Gordon remained in Paris until she was interned by the invading Germans. 




Jane Heap, in England, was as cut off from Paris as if she had been in New 




York. According to Nott, Gurdjieff had made plans to visit Lyne Place, in an 




attempt  to  cure  Mme.  Ouspensky  of  her  illness.  But  the  outbreak  of 




hostilities prevented all contact with his followers abroad. On the other 




hand, the disastrous course of the fighting in France helped to turn the 




minds of French intellectuals to things of the spirit. It was through the 




group which formed around Daumal and Lavastine that pupils were led to 




Mme. de Salzmann, and then to the old magician of the quartier du Ternes. 




Wartime conditions once more acted—in Ouspensky’s words—as “a gigantic  

memento mori

”—a reminder that time was always running out. 




13




The Strange Death of Pyotr Ouspensky




The time of the Munich crisis must have presented a famihar sensation to 




Ouspensky. It was almost as if events were repeating, and repeating, and 




the cycle of recurrence could not be broken. When several intellectuals— 




including Aldous Huxley, W. H. Auden, and Christopher Isherwood— 




made emigration fashionable around 1938, Ouspensky resisted the persuasion of his supporters to follow suit. You could be too clever, he said, in anticipating political events. He had in any case his own theory of what 




might happen. If England and France declared war on Soviet Russia, who 




by the Pact of Steel had revealed herself as Germany’s ally, everything 




would be over within a year. Neither did he like the idea of behaving like a 




rat leaving a sinking ship. He quite obviously enjoyed his way of life in 




England, and his stoicism in the face of physical dangers was in marked 




contrast to that of his wife. When the first air raid sirens blew over Virginia 




Water, she made precipitately for the cellars and needed no inducement to 




leave for America. 




But for all his reluctance, Ouspensky again found himself overtaken by 




“events.” The sensitiveness to official disapproval which he shared with 




Gurdjieff had to withstand constant exposure. Although he probably did not 




know it, from 1937 he was under Home Office surveillance, and after the 




German attack on Russia his position as an anti-Bolshevik Russian made 




him potentially suspect of treasonable activities. In fact, he narrowly




439




440 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




avoided being interned and had to live permanently at Lyne when the flat 




at Gwendvi^r Road was totally destroyed by a bomb. 




So it was that, just as the effects of Ouspensky’s decision to expand began 




to  make  themselves  felt  in  increased  interest  in  his  teaching,  events 




conspired to prevent any real exploitation of these gains. Insecurity created 




a  situation  very  like  the  early  days  of  Ouspensky’s  own  contact  with 




Gurdjieff,  and  gradually  even  the  questions  at  his  meetings  became 




devoted to the problems of war. Could war be stopped? he was asked. 




Ouspensky repeated what he had been told by Gurdjieff in 1915. Man can 




 

do

 nothing. Everything  

happens. 

 To people who were convinced that the 




war was a simple case of right and wrong, he answered that there was no 




question of this, but that they had seen only a fraction of the truth. Hitler 




was the necessary outcome of the failure of the West to stop Bolshevism in 




Russia. Both Fascism and Communism were “criminal” parties. He recalled 




how, when he had returned to St. Petersburg on the outbreak of the First 




World War, everyone had been concerned with what they would do when 




the fighting ended. But an end to hostilities had not meant that the war was 




over. 




Gradually,  his  bitter  anger  against  the  Bolsheviks  developed  into  a 




pessimism which saw Europe being engulfed by “criminal elements, ” even 




if the Allies should win. His ideas seemed, if anything, to have hardened 




since 1919, and doubtless the memory of past hardships rose to the surface 




of his mind. Bolshevism had always existed everywhere in different forms, 




he proclaimed, sweeping Herriot, Daladier, Blum, H. G. Wells, Bernard 




Shaw,  and  the  Labour  Party  into  one  cosmic  incinerator.  He  defined 




Bolshevism as essentially a will to use violent methods to compel other 




people to accept one’s ideas. Ouspensky’s abhorrence of violence and his 




fear of a society dominated by “criminals” and Sudras combined with the 




disruptive effects of the war to force him inexorably toward America. 




On January 4, 1941, Mme. Ouspensky left for the United States. J. G. 




Bennett’s wife was one of the farewell party at the station, and returned 




depressed by the total dependence exhibited by “Madam’s people” on their 




teacher. Then on January twenty-fifth, Ouspensky announced his own 




departure. He told his assembled pupils that he could do nothing more in 




England; the outbreak of war had finally put an eftd to the possibilities of 




continuing. He compared conditions to those he had experienced in the 




Caucasus. Quite possibly they were witnessing the end of one particular 




historical period and the beginning of another. 




Although they must have expected it, the announcement hit his followers 




like a physical blow. The record of the farewell meeting shows how hard 




they  found  it  to  accept  the  idea  of  taking  any  individual  initiative. 




Ouspensky told them that they must try to maintain both Lyne Place and




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   P Y O T R   OUSPENSKY 441




Colet Gardens; if they could keep up some level of activity under wartime 




conditions,  this would in itself be a useful exercise. He would keep in 




contact  by  letter  and  might  send  them  some  material  to  read.  If  they 




wanted to engage in any personal work, he advised them to try “stopping 




thoughts.” It was little help to the lost sheep he was leaving behind. 




Mme. Ouspensky had equipped Lyne Place so that when the war broke 




out as many families as possible could be evacuated from central London; 




and under the direction of a couple who had joined Ouspensky in 1924, a 




small community assembled to wait out the war. At much the same time, 




Maurice Nicoll’s followers were evacuated to Gloucestershire from their 




farm in Essex. In London, J. G. Bennett and Kenneth Walker continued to 




hold small groups to discuss the System. But to all intents and purposes— 




and with the exception of the Nicoll household in Gloucestershire—the 




departure of the Ouspenskys left a vacuum in England. 




Some of Ouspensky s followers began maneuvering for jobs which would 




allow them to follow their teacher to America. Ouspensky’s directorate was 




split  between  the  emigrants  and  those  who  stayed  at  home.  Besides 




Walker, Bennett, and the couple who had taken charge of Lyne, the home 




guard included Dr. Francis Roles. The disciples who succeeded in finding 




jobs in America included Lord Pentland, the journalist who sometimes 




deputized for Ouspensky, and a comparatively new recruit to the circle at 




Lyne Place named Rodney Gollin-Smith, better known under his pen name 




of Rodney Collin. 




Rodney Collin was born in Brighton in 1909, the eldest son of a retired 




wine importer. During childhood he became an omnivorous reader. At the 




age of eighteen, he spent several months walking in Andalusia and gathered 




the material for a book of travel sketches pubhshed in 1931 under the tide 




of  

Palms and Patios. 

 During the three years he spent at the London School 




of Economics, he began to write for newspapers, and when he graduated, 




he became a freelance writer. He founded  

The Rucksack, 

 the journal of the 




Youth  Hostels  Association of  which  he was  secretary, and  worked for 




the  

Toe H Journal. 

 On a pilgrimage organized by Toe H in 1930 to attend 




the Passion Play at Oberammergau, he met his future wife, Janet Buckley, 




who was eight years older than he. 




Although they did not marry until 1934, this meeting seems to have 




marked an alteration in Rodney Collin-Smith’s interests. All his loves seem 




to have been idealistic; his involvement with Toe H and the Youth Hostels 




movement gave place to a devotion to the Peace Pledge Union and its  

Peace

 




 

I^ews; 

 and in 1932 he contributed an article to  

The Aryan Path

 appealing in 




a very Ouspenskian fashion for a sane world government by a spiritual 




aristocracy.  This  probably  means  that  he  had  come  in  touch  with  the 




Theosophical wing of the Peace Pledge Union—of which J. D. Beresford




442 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




was a member—and it is certain that it was a member of the P.P.U. who 




introduced the Collin-Smiths to Ouspensky’s lectures in the autumn of




1936.  The  previous  year  they  had  attended  several  lectures  given  by 




Maurice Nicoll, which had not roused in them any particular enthusiasm. 




But from the time of their meeting with Ouspensky, both husband and wife 




devoted themselves entirely to the Work. 




They bought a house at Virginia Water in order to be close to Lyne Place. 




Janet Collin-Smith worked in the house, and her husband returned to work 




in the gardens at Lyne during the evenings. He spent his spare time in the 




British Museum studying the history of psychological systems on the lines

worked out in the program of the Historico-Psychological Society. At Lyne 




he developed a taste for “super-effort” in Gurdjieff ’s sense; and this was to 




color his later application of the ideas which he learned from Ouspensky. 




“Rodney had a leaning towards effort, struggle and self-discipHne,” writes 




his sister-in-law, the novelist Joyce CoUin-Smith. “He was by nature a 




school man and he took to the Fourth Way teaching with enthusiasm. . . . ” 




When the war came, his vnfe traveled with Mme. Ouspensky to the 




United States. At first the group took a series of temporary houses in New 




York, and for a time based themselves at Rumson on the New Jersey coast. 




Then, with the help of Schuyler Jackson and other former Orageans who 




had already scoured New Jersey to find a refuge for Gurdjieff, a substitute 




for Lyne was found. Eventually Franklin Farms at Mendham—a former 




residence of the Governor of New Jersey—^was bought, largely out of 




money provided by Janet Collin-Smith. Her husband secured a job on the 




British Purchasing Commission, which sent him to Bermuda and Mexico 




before finally producing, about 1942-45, the hoped-for transfer to New 




York. Collin joined his vwfe and the daughter who had been bom in 1937 at 




Mendham and began again the routine of commuting to his office and 




returning to work in the gardens of the community. 




He was still very much a junior member of Ouspensky’s circle, although 




chance had given him an opportunity to approach his teacher more closely 




than  he  would  otherwise  have  done.  By  a  coincidence,  both  he  and 




Ouspensky traveled from Liverpool to New York on the  

Georgic. 

 Because 




the ship had to zigzag to avoid U-boats, the voyage was longer than usual, 




and the young man came to know Ouspensky moderately well during the 




passage. However, for some time after his arrival at.Frankhn Farms, Collin 




was shy of presuming too much on this acquaintance. Frequently, his office 




work combined with the physical labor of gardening wore him out so that he 




felt incapable of attending Ouspensky’s evening lectures in New York. “He 




normally  lay  awake,”  writes  his  sister-in-law,  “until  the  lights  of  the 




returning car swung into the long drive. Ouspensky would then go intQ the 




big kitchen and sit drinking wane and talking philosophy until the early




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 443




hours.” Then, one night CoUin reahzed that his lassitude was not simply the 




result of physical exhaustion:




I jumped out of bed and flung on my dressing gown . . . and with the 




cord trailing behind me, I ran downstairs in a way quite contrary to the 




controlled discipline of the household. Before my courage failed me, I 




flung open the kitchen door. I expected to see a number of people 




more important than myself, sitting at the long table. Instead, “O” was 




alone, drinking wine.  Before I could stop myself I shouted at him 




loudly:  “Why  am  I  afraid  of  you?”  He  looked  at  me  calmly  and 




answered: “Why did you say 1?” 




There are two interpretations of the subsequent rapproachment between 




the  two  men.  One,  which  emanates  more  or  less  from  Ouspensky’s 




directorate, maintains that Rodney Collin took advantage of the circumstances which thrust him into Ouspensky’s company from the time they sailed together on the  

Georgic

 and that the apparently close relationship 




which grew up between them was unwished for by Ouspensky. The other 




holds that as a result of the incident in the Kitchen at Franklin Farms— 




which, as Joyce Collin-Smith writes, Rodney Collin “looked back on ... as 




a time of revelation”—Ouspensky began to take particular note of his young 




follower. “Thereafter he gradually drew Rodney nearer himself, as his 




chauffeur, personal attendant and intimate pupil. Ultimately almost as his 




son.” The truth may lie somewhere in between the two versions, and— 




predictably—on the truth may depend yet further conflicting possibilities. 




What is indisputable is that Rodney Collin saw a great deal of Ouspensky. 




His ovra view of the developing relationship is given in a biographical note, 




probably based on information provided by his wife:




... he spent more and more time with Mr. Ouspensky, driving him to 




and from New York for his meetings and usually spending the evening 




with him in a restaurant or in his study at Franklin Farms. He became 




deeply attached to Mr. Ouspensky in a way that included without 




being hmited by, personal affection and respect. While formerly he 




had concentrated on Mr. Ouspensky’s teaching, it was now the teacher 




and what he was demonstrating which occupied Rodney’s attention. 




As  the  wording  of  this  note  implies,  the  Ouspensky  who  arrived  in 




America was a little more accessible, a little less the magisterial source of 




wisdom of whom everyone in England stood in awe. Partly this was because 




he was in the United States (Russians are crows, Gurdjieff remarked about 




his supporters, English sheep, and Americans burros), and the role which




444 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




he had to play was different. Partly there may have been a sense of relief at 




escaping from his large organization. 




In America Ouspensky had his own reputation apart from any association 




with Gurdjieff.  

Tertium Organum

 still lingered in the minds, and in the 




libraries, of a whole generation of intellectuals. In an article which appeared 




in the  

South Atlantic Quarterly

 in October 1941, nicely timed to coincide 




with the beginning of Ouspensky’s lectures in New York, Sarah Newmayer 




described how  

Tertium Organum

 had provided a rational justification for 




her belief in immortality. She recommended the book “to all those who . . . 




must bring even the hope of immortality to the bar of reason”; a powerful 




argument in time of war. Also, the  

New Model

 had been received more 




sympathetically in the United States. But on the one hand, Ouspensky was 




meeting less reverent questioners—Hke the one soon after his arrival who 




asked what evidence there was that a cat really did have an astral body (to 




which Ouspensky answered unconcernedly that it all had to do with the 




connection of centers)—and on the other, there was some trouble vdth 




former supporters of Orage. 




C. S. Nott had also emigrated from England and set about collecting 




Orageans  for  Ouspensky’s  lectures.  Both  the  Ouspenskys  banned  any 




mention  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

—^the  book  wdth  which  both  Gurdjieff  and 




Orage were identified in New York. And there were times when Orage’s 




teaching clashed directly with what Ouspensky now taught. For example, in 




mid-July 1941, Ouspensky was faced with a question which centered round 




Orage’s dictum that “individuality is consciousness of will.” He replied that 




this was a mere form of words unrelated to what Gurdjieff had said. The 




remark was Orage’s alone; and Orage had forgotten a lot and had had to 




make things up. 




Ouspensky arrived in New York in March 1941, and his lectures seem to 




have begun that summer. They took place in a studio in an apartment house 




on 78th Street between Lexington and Third Avenues where the incessant 




noise  from  the  Third  Avenue  El  provided  a  jarring  accompaniment  to 




Ouspensky’s heavily accented voice. His audiences numbered between 




thirty and fifty; but he found great difficulty in collecting a permanent group 




of followers. In the first year perhaps only haff a dozen lasted the course. 




Gradually the Ouspenskys’ activities once more expanded. In late 1942, 




Franklin Farms was acquired, and Ouspensky began to select people from 




his audience to spend weekends at Mendham. The pattern of life at Lyne 




was reproduced, with farmwork and housework for the pupils. Gurdjieff’s 




movements  were  taught  by  two  former  colleagues  of  Orage.  Even  the 




magnificence of the dinners at Lyne was translated to the New World, and a 




party for Mme. Ouspensky s name-day would see all the guests in formal 




evening dress. As in England, there was a definite split between “Mr. 




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 445




Ouspensky’s people” and “Madam’s people”; and once more, Ouspensky 




seems only with reluctance to have accepted his wife’s insistence on a large 




organization. At Mendham, he kept to himself and did not even appear for 




the meals at which his wofe would apply the lash of her tongue to selected 




victims. One of her pupils, who also met GurdjieflF, has remarked on the 




similarity between Mme. Ouspensky and her Master:




I can still feel the sensation that crept along my spine when I heard 




Madam approaching, her cane announcing her as she came closer and 




closer to the terrace of the dining room. Although small in stature, she 




looked and towered above us all through the sheer strength and poise 




that radiated from her presence. When she reached the long narrow 




tables at which we sat, everyone remained motionless, eyes glued to 




one spot, simultaneously wishing to draw her attention and yet to 




become invisible to her. 




To  some  of  those  who  were  closer  to  the  milder  and  more  sinuous 




approach of her husband, Mme. Ouspensky appeared as a terrible and 




vengeful  mother.  In  America  the  contrast  between  her  ferocity  and 




Ouspensky’s  “elegance  and  eloquence”  as  a  human  being  became  increasingly marked. One pupil, who used to dine on pravras with Ouspensky in one of the Longchamps restaurants, remembers him chiefly not as a 




teacher,  but  as  a  gracious  host,  a  kind  and  feeling  person,  of  “infinite 




charm.” “There was a refinement and a lovely decency about him.” In 




contrast, Sophia Grigorievna appeared to be a dark manipulator of occult 




forces, and Ouspensky’s own “innocent” disposition seemed “bewildered 




and terrified” by his wife. His dining companion of the war years recalls “a 




man still in search” of something he had not found: “He died in sadness.” 




As he grew older, Ouspensky withdrew more and more from human 




contact. He would sit for hours with a few of his pupils, drinking wine in 




total silence. Some pupils considered this a teaching gambit; but it could as 




well be seen as the watch spring running down. And Ouspensky’s calm was 




broken by outbursts of a frustration which had been mounting since before 




he left England. He had been very gloomy during his last months at Lyne, 




questioning whether he would ever make contact vdth the elusive “Inner 




Circle.” On one occasion when his step-daughter was very depressed, she 




asked him for advice.’ Ouspensky shouted at her, “Pray, Lenotchka, pray!” 




If he had begun to believe that his ovra objective—the attainment of the 




higher consciousness which he had so restlessly pursued in Russia—^was 




unattainable, prayer may have come to seem the only way out. 




Nott used to visit him during the war in his New York apartment. He 




found that Ouspensky’s drinking had become even heavier:  .  .  he was




446 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




drinking strong concoctions that I could not take. ‘You must have a stomach 




of iron,’ I said one day when he ofifered me one of them. ‘It’s too strong for 




me.’ He said, ‘It’s the only thing that reheves the boredom and depression 




that comes over me at times.’” 




A  new  printing  of   

A  New  Model  of  the  Universe

  appeared  with  a 




publisher’s notice stating that Ouspensky was working with GurdjielF in a 




community near London. Ouspensky was furious and wanted to withdraw 




the book or give a press conference to correct the false impression. His 




outbursts of temper became more frequent, and a challenge to his position 




in England by J. G. Bennett did not improve matters. In 1941 Bennett and 




some of his pupils spent a holiday in the Welsh mountains where Bennett 




had undergone a series of visionary experiences. These seemed to him to 




reveal the secrets of universal order, and he began to explain the visions to 




his group, making use of the terminology of the System. Reports of this 




reached Ouspensky in America, and a letter of May 1942 reminded Bennett 




of  the  rule  that  no  one  was  to  write  anything  without  permission. 




Ouspensky forbade public use of the System and disparaged Bennett’s 




speculations in multidimensional mathematics. “He then went on to say,” 




Bennett writes, “that nothing new can be found by intellectual processes 




alone, and that there is only one hope: that we should find the way to work 




with the higher emotional centre. To this he added the sad comment: ‘And 




we do not know how this is to be done.” 




Reverberations of this quarrel reached New York. People who attended 




Ouspensky’s meetings heard loud condemnations of Bennett’s plagiarism 




and  perfidy.  Ouspensky’s  suspicions  were  fanned  by  distance,  and  as 




Bennett continued to follow his own line, the reports from those in England 




who were content merely to wait for their Master’s return made matters 




worse. The cUmax of the quarrel came in the middle of 1945, when Bennett 




was unable to contain his frustration at the lack of initiative shown by the 




guardians of Lyne Place, and positively invited repudiation by giving a 




series of public lectures on the System to a large audience. At Ouspensky’s 




command he was summoned to Lyne, where the senior members of the 




directorate took him to task. He then received a letter from Ouspensky’s 




solicitor demanding that he return all the material—in the form of lectures 




and manuscripts—^which he had received from Ouspensky. The Lyne 




contingent were forbidden to have any contact with him on any subject 




whatsoever. 




This seems the act of a failing and jealous man, even though it is quite 




clear that Bennett had transgressed. But was he the plagiarist and “thief” 




whom Ouspensky vilified in New York? In Bennett’s protest against the 




stagnant attitude adopted by the orthodox lies the germ of conflict between 




those who were to struggle during the next ten years to “keep the System




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 447




pure” and those like Bennett who saw the material they had been given as 




incomplete and demanded the right to supplement it. This shows more 




clearly than anything that Ouspensky’s presentation encouraged at least two 




views as to the nature of the System. Orage saw a Method at the root of the 




teaching.  Ouspensky  saw  a  System;  but  systems  can  either  be  ends  in 




themselves or foundations for new and improved systems: true pictures of 




the world or means to attaining a true picture. It is always possible that 




Ouspensky was taking steps to ensure that Bennett struck out on his own. 




In  

Witness, 

 Bennett describes several occasions when he was told by Mme. 




Ouspensky that he must try to be more himself; that in his work with his 




group he was not to imitate his teacher’s methods. It is not outside the 




bounds of possibility that this was the sort of dismissal received by Maurice 




Nicoll. 




There is also the possibility that Ouspensky was what he appeared to be; 




an old and disillusioned man, suffering from insecurity and illness. But what 




are we to make of this semblance of age and disappointment? Near the end 




of the war the couple who had superintended the community at Lyne made 




their  way  to  Mendham  against  innumerable  difficulties.  They  found 




Ouspensky disabled “as if by a stroke” and “a sort of prisoner” at FrankUn 




Farms. He told the husband that he had little time left to live. He was to 




return to England, derequisition Colet Gardens from the Navy who had 




occupied the building, and restore it as quickly as possible in preparation 




for Ouspensky’s arrival. There were considerable obstacles in the way of 




this  project;  but,  to  the  accompaniment  of  incessant  complaints  from 




Ouspensky that the task was taking too long, it was eventually carried out. 




Ouspensky gave his last lectures in New York in the summer of 1946, and 




announced to his followers—^who by this time numbered about sixty—that 




he was returning to England. Those who went to Mendham would be 




taught by Mme. Ouspensky, but the others would have to “find their own 




bearings.”  The  effect  on  his  pupils  was  cataclysmic;  several  ambled 




aimlessly from philosophy to philosophy until finally coming to rest with the 




remaining New York followers of Gurdjieff. From evidence of the pupil 




who was directed to restore Colet Gardens, it is clear that Ouspensky’s 




return was long premeditated and part of a deliberately conceived plan. But 




there are other rumors that he decided to base himself in Britain because 




his  vsdfe  had  invited  Gurdjieff  to  Mendham;  and  if  she  had  done  so, 




Ouspensky’s reaction would have been consistent with his decision in 1922 




that if Gurdjieff settled in London, he would go to Paris or the United 




States. 




Ouspensky  landed  in  England  in  January  1947.  His  state  of  health 




profoundly shocked his closer disciples. They had heard that he was ill, 




then that he was better again. Kenneth Walker saw him as “aged” many




448 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




years, “both in mind and in body, and there were other changes in him as 




well. ... It was . . . obvious to us that Ouspensky would be unlikely to be 




able to carry out whatever he intended to do . . .he appeared to me to be a 




man who had lost all of his former enthusiasm and drive.” The nature of 




Ouspensky s illness was not known at the time, as he refused to submit to 




treatment; but it was in fact a form of kidney failure exacerbated by his 




drinking habits. He was driven directly to Lyne Place from the ship at 




Southampton and emerged into the public gaze only for six momentous 




meetings at Colet Gardens. 




The question which faced his pupils was: what would become of the 




teaching which they had used as a life belt for so long? They had rehed 




completely on their teacher and obeyed his prohibitions on taking in new 




recruits. With the exception of Bennett, they had waited patiently for their 




Master’s return. Since 1941 very little had happened. Kenneth Walker, 




feeling some of the same pressures that afiected Bennett, had published 




three books which referred peripherally to the System. His  

Diagnosis of

 




 

Man

  (1942)  had  been  written  during  the  Blitz  and  appealed  for  world 




reform by means of internal rather than external change. The same year  

The

 




 

Circle of Life

 discussed “the circle of recurrence”; and both books made 




great use of the  

New Model. 

 By 1944, in  

Meaning and Purpose, 

 Walker was 




already beginning to repeat himself, and all three books merely posed 




gigantic questions that revealed an underlying desperation on their author’s 




part. Ouspensky’s British followers were in a bad way, and the return of the 




Master was to have provided artificial respiration. 




Dr. Francis Roles had collected three hundred people—the number at 




which the membership of the Historico-Psychological Society had been 




fixed—^and the shock which Ouspensky’s appearance gave this wider 




audience was as great as that to the inner circle of his pupils. Perhaps 




because of infirmities which prevented him from hearing correctly, perhaps 




because of some purpose of his own, Ouspensky used a Miss Quinn, who 




had accompanied him from America, as a “transmitting station ” between 




himself and his pupils. If she could not understand a particular question, it 




was deemed unanswerable; and very few questions met with approval. 




Ouspensky  appeared  to  be  administering  to  his  audience   

en  bloc

  the 




treatment which overimaginative or pretentious inquirers had received 




before the war. Questions were bounced back like balls hitting a blank wall. 




Added  to  this  was  the  difficulty  of  hearing  Ouspensky,  who  spoke  in 




fragments and even more ungrammatically than usual. What precisely did 




he mean by his conduct at these final meetings? 




The writer J. M. Cohen had first heard of the System during the war 




years  and  was  one  of  the  newcomers  who  were  prepared  to  meet  the 




exalted figure of prewar legend. In a broadcast talk entitled, “In the Work,” 




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 449




he has described his impressions of the first three of Ouspenslcy’s last series 




of meetings; 




The room contained upwards of three hundred people, all of them 




middle  class.  The  atmosphere  was  tense  in  a  way  that  I  came  to 




recognise as characteristic; the ticking of names on attendance sheets 




was performed with ritual gravity. When we had been sitting silently 




for perhaps ten minutes, Ouspensky mounted the two steps to the 




stage. He was short, iron-grey with a very stern and straight glance, 




and he walked with a stick. Every movement was clearly a painful 




efifort. He was a very sick man. . . . Ouspensky asked for questions. 




They  came  in  the  jargon  of  the  System,  .  .  .  but  each  one  was 




stonewalled. “Be simpler,” rapped the commanding voice with the 




strong Russian accent. “Start from what you know.” “What do you 




want? Be simpler and we can begin.” But nothing did begin . . . one 




question  stands  out  from  those  three  evenings.  It  was  asked  by 




Kenneth Walker, the surgeon, who was one of Ouspensky’s oldest 




pupils. “Do you mean, Mr. Ouspensky, that you have abandoned the 




System?” The answer was a thunderbolt; “There is no System.” 




What did the Master—or the sick man—require of his pupils? 




The first three meetings took place on February 24, March 5, and March 




12. At the first, Ouspensky refused to tell his questioners what he wanted 




from  them.  He  had  given  them  no  plan  of  activities  when  he  left  for 




America. What was this “teaching” to which they referred? He had given no 




teaching. He refused absolutely to answer any questions posed in the terms 




which  he  had  used  before  the  war.  He  asked  his  audience  what  they 




wanted; if they told him, if they gave him material to work on, he might be 




able to do something. At the second meeting, the audience tried hard to 




discover  the  terms  in  which  they  must  put  their  questions  in  order  to 




receive an answer. Again, Ouspensky scoffed at questions about “mechanicalness” and “self-remembering.” What did these terms mean? Who had told  them  that  they  were  mechanical,  he  inquired,  and  why  did  they 




believe this? They must not believe anything. Questions posed in more 




general or more indefinite ways were treated with similar sarcasm. Those 




about the meaning of Christianity were dismissed as great imponderables. 




No one would ever know what Christ really taught, just as no one would 




ever  know  what  life  was  all  about.  He,  Ouspensky,  could  not  go  on 




repeating the same things over and over again. He possessed nothing of any 




importance to give them; indeed, he said, he owned nothing at all. 




In one of his published letters, Rodney Collin recalled how his Master 




answered a pupil who asked, “How can one find harmony?” Ouspensky




450 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




replied: “This is your question? This is my question now, and I have no 




answer.” Another questioner: “What is meant by harmony?” Ouspensky: 




“It is a musical term, nothing more.” 




From  the  first  two  meetings,  two  themes  emerged  which  threw  the 




pupils  back  upon  their  own  resources.  They  must  have  an  aim,  a 




straightforward everyday aim. And only  

by oneself

 could any effort be made 




to achieve anything. This seemed to overthrow the whole elaborate idea of 




“school” and “rules” which had existed before the war; and by the third 




meeting, the implications of this train of thought were becoming clearer. 




Some years ago, said Ouspensky, they had had a “system” which they 




discussed; but at the outbreak of the war they had come to the conclusion 




that this would not help. He had never knovm even what the first step along 




the  road  to  self-mastery  should  be.  Now  he  no  longer  believed  in  the 




possibility of change. And to a worried lady who asked why he would not 




help them, Ouspensky returned bleakly that he could help no one, because 




he had no help to give. Finally, he closed the meeting because he said that 




there were no simple questions and that therefore he could not answer 




anything to the purpose. He might come again if his audience wished it. 




After a long gap, two more meetings were held on May seventh and 




twenty-first. These were much shorter than the first three, but Ouspensky 




seemed better pleased vdth the questions which were asked. Then came 




the  last  meeting  on  June  18.  Although  obviously  failing  and  unable  to 




answer clearly, Ouspensky did appear to provide one guideline: a simple 




reinforcement of his instruction to each person to find out what he or she 




wanted: to try, test, and sample life to discover one’s true inclinations. He 




closed this final meeting with the hope that he might see them again if he 




remained in England. Perhaps, he said, some time was left him. Afterward 




he  had  to  be  helped  from  the  lecture  room  and—out  of  sight  of  his 




audience 

—was

 given an injection. 




The plan of returning to The United States must have already formed in 




his mind, and it has been suggested that he had resolved to try the same 




gambit in New York which had so disconcerted his English pupils. He shut 




himself up at Lyne Place and announced that he would sail to America on 




September 4. “On that day,” v^Tites Rodney Collin, “we went to Southampton, put our luggage on board, and were ready to leave. A few hours before the boat was due to sail, he arrived at the dock and suddenly said 




quietly, “I am not going to America this time.’ It was like the ‘stop’ exercise 




on the scale of the whole Work. A stop was made in many lives, everyone’s 




personal  plans  were  turned  upside  down,  and  a  space  made  in  the 




momentum of time where something quite new could be done.” 




The  last  month  of  Ouspensky’s  life  is  the  most  extraordinary  and 




problematic time in his entire existence. To say that his followers were




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 451




shaken and puzzled after the meetings at Colet Gardens is understating the 




case. The sudden countermanding of the American trip was left until the 




last minute; the dock gates had even been opened so that the invalid’s car 




could drive directly up to the liner. It was yet another dislocation in the 




expected pattern of events; and already among those who hoped to begin 




again where they had left off in 1940, a number of conflicting interpretations 




of what Ouspensky meant at his final meetings had begun to gain ground. 




And possibilities multiply once more. . . . 




The differences of opinion were supplemented by private conversations 




which  members  of  the  old  directorate  had  with  Ouspensky.  Kenneth 




Walker felt that Ouspensky’s private utterances confirmed the impression 




that “he was a very deeply disappointed man. Something had gone wrong, 




and somebody had failed but who it was that had failed was never very clear 




to  me.  In  all  probability  we  were  all  implicated  in  the  failure  which 




Ouspensky seemed to be feeling so deeply.” Had the System failed to come 




up to Ouspensky’s expectations? Had his pupils failed to make proper use of 




it? Or had they failed to understand anything at all? 




On the other hand, to the pupil who had organized the restoration of 




Colet House, it appeared that sometimes Ouspensky could overcome his 




physical disabilities and make contact with a deeper and more powerful sort 




of knowledge than ever before. He felt that Ouspensky had wanted to 




ensure that no activities would ever be carried on in his name; that in fact 




he had meant what he said when he denied the usefulness—^and even the 




very  existence—of  the  System.  This  point  of  view  was  supported  by 




Ouspensky’s emphatic declarations that  

In Search of the Miraculous

 was 




not to be published. Others agreed that Ouspensky had wished to call a halt 




to activity of the kind which had become familiar, but argued that this was 




because he wanted to give his followers a fresh start and encourage new 




approaches. During the last month of the Master’s life, the uncertainty 




generated by his last meetings produced a uniquely charged atmosphere 




among his followers. 




To Rodney Collin the dying man was transformed into a repository of 




new meanings, significance incarnate. Even before the abortive expedition 




to America, the force had been accumulating around Lyne. Ouspensky 




"hardly spoke at all even to the people who were eating and sitting with 




him,” Rodney Collin writes. “Yet one had the sense that everything that 




was  done  was  a  kind  of  demonstration,  and  gradually  an  atmosphere 




developed  which  can hardly be  described. ... He showed the few who 




were  with  him,  without  explanation,  what  it  means  for  a  man  to  pass 




consciously into the realm of the spirit.” 




The strangest feature of Ouspensky’s last month was that he and his 




followers took long car journeys—often through the night, always v^ithout




452 T H E   H A a M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




food, and with the Master’s cats accompanying him—to parts of England 




which he had previously known. He drove to West Wickham, to Seven- 




oaks,  to  Gadsden,  and  to  Maurice  Nicoll’s  old  seaside  cottage.  The 




expeditions were seen as of portentous significance by some members of the 




entourage. On one occasion the group returned to Lyne and parked in front 




of the house. Ouspensky did not climb out with the others but stayed in his 




seat surrounded by his cats. He remained in the car all night, and one of the 




more dramatic ladies looking after him stood motionless at the window, her 




arm ceremoniously raised in salute. 




Two prominent followers of Gurdjieff visited Ouspensky in his last days 




and came away with the impression of an invalid making prodigious efforts 




to overcome physical disabiUty. If meaning is read into everything, there is 




a risk that it may be read wrongly. And there is a version of Ouspensky’s 




death  which  holds  that  he  did  not  agree  to  the  lengthy  and  laborious 




expeditions, that he was too ill to know what he was doing, and that it was 




largely the idea of Rodney Collin to make those curious pilgrimages. 




The generally accepted view is that Ouspensky wanted to fix in his mind 




the places he had known with a view to “remembering” them in his next 




recurrence. Kenneth Walker writes that he often spoke of recurrence to his 




pupils in the last weeks of his life. They had the impression that there was 




something Ouspensky “wished fervently to change” the next time around. 




Ever since the publication of A  

New Model of the Universe, 

 Ouspensky 




had been plagued by questions about recurrence. He always emphasized 




that  the  theory  was  not  essential  to  the  System,  although  he  had 




synthesized it satisfectorily with GurdjiefF’s ideas. The condition of mechanical 




man is that of ceaseless repetition; but someone who wants to wake up may 




perhaps be able to dbange the cycle. His ideas had altered considerably since 




writing  

Ivan Osokin, 

 and the pessimism inherent in the idea of recurrence was 




harnessed to the System. It provided both the stick and the carrot: the motive 




for waking up and the goal at which to aim. The prison house in which man was 




confined could be seen as a fortress constructed of recurring lives. Like “people 




of  

byt,” 

 people connected with the “events” of history could never hope to 




escape fi^m the place they occupied in the gigantic construction, otherwise the 




whole edifice would collapse. But the “invisible” man, who had avoided 




becoming a cornerstone of history, would have comparatively littie difficulty in 




escaping. No one would notice a pebble dislodging itself firom the mortar 




between the massive blocks. 




Ouspensky taught that the possibility of escape from recurrence came 




when a man met an esoteric school. He rewrote the early draft of  

Ivan

 




 

Osokin

 inserting the character of a magician to whom Osokin goes after his 




love affair appears to be ending unhappily. The magician represents the 




Work. He has certain characteristics of Gurdjieff and some of Ouspensky’s




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 453




own:  he  is  something  of  a   

bonviveur; 

  his  room  is  hung  with  Oriental 




carpets, and he favors cats. It is this magician who sends Osokin back in 




time and allows him to watch himself make the same mistakes all over 




again.  Ouspensky  recommended  an  analogous  practice  to  his  pupils, 




advising  them  to  relive  the  events  of  their  lives  in  order  to  avoid  the 




repetitions—or “recurrences”—^which provide each person with his personal  blind  alleys.  His  character  Osokin  decides  after  all  not  to  shoot himself, and the magician gives him the opportunity to escape from his 




cycle of languid failures. The solution for Osokin is to devote fifteen years of 




his life to study with the magician. And he is warned that, for those who 




have guessed “the great secret,” “time is counted.” They either evolve or 




degenerate very quickly in their cycles of recurrence—and finally they 




cease to be born. 




What was it that Ouspensky wanted to change in his next recurrence? 




Did he want to take up “school work” at an earlier period next time around? 




Walker half implies that his break with GurdjiefF lay on his conscience, but 




other witnesses declare that Ouspensky wished to free himself from the 




specter of Gurdjieff in any future life. At the beginning of  

Ivan Osokin, 

 the 




disconsolate hero tells a friend of his feeling of being “cut off from life.” 




“You have your life now,” Osokin says “and a future ahead of you. I tried to 




climb over all the fences and the result is that I have nothing now and 




nothing for the future! If only I could begin again from the beginning!” This 




is the statement of a man disillusioned both with “life” and his attempts to 




reach beyond it. Did he simply want to relapse into conventional existence? 




This  is  doubtful,  because  the  whole  idea  of  recurrence  had  by  1947 




become indissolubly linked to Gurdjieff s teaching on self-remembering. In 




System  terms,  Ouspensky  declared  that  what  recurred  was  a  person’s 




essence.  But  although   

essence

  could  only  recur,  

memory

  could  become 




immortal.  Mere  moments  of  self-remembering were relatively  useless. 




“The whole thing is to create a continuity.” A continuous memory might 




help  in  remembering,  in  waking  up  next  time.  It  was  here  that  the 




Vividness of his own childhood memories assumed a particular importance. 




During his last years in New York, Ouspensky was preoccupied with the 




tiheme of developing memory in recurrence. In the fragmentary records of 




his talks from late 1944 to late 1945, the topic predominates. He said that he 




was  preparing  a  book  on  memory  and  declared  that  even  theoretical 




knowledge  of  recurrence could alter  the facts.  On another occasion he 




revealed that he had once advocated teaching the System to imaginative 




people who could acquire some understanding of the concept. He even told 




one group that for them, recurrence was the most important idea of all. 




At what stage do we step off the endless belt? When do we become free? 




For the members of the directorate and for the helpers who lived at




454 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Lyne, the tensions mounted. The sick Master ended his expeditions and 




retired to his room. It is hardly possible to call what took place “events”; for 




whatever was going on became confijsing, even distressing, to those who 




were present. Memories of the period are clouded; more than one person 




has claimed that Ouspensky died in their arms; and as to what it all meant, 




no one not present would be able to pass judgment. Several interpretations 




of the circumstances surrounding Ouspensky’s death sprang up—^but 




because these are based on participation in an unimaginable atmosphere, it 




is quite impossible to say what really happened. One passage in literature 




seems to correspond to the hints and brief writings about the period. It is 




the section of  

Memories, Dreams, Reflections, 

 in which C. G. Jung records 




the circumstances in which he began his  

Seven Sermons to the Dead:

 “The 




whole house was filled as if there was a crowd present, crammed full of 




spirits. They were packed deep right up to the door, and the air was so thick 




it was scarcely possible to breathe. . . . ”  The forces which had taken Lyne 




Place  in  their  grip—whether  they  were  subjective  or  in  any  sense 




“objective”—came from the world of the miraculous which the dying man 




had sought so long. 




Communication went beyond the verbal threshold. Some people felt that 




knowledge came seeping through the limits of the three-dimensional world 




by some divine osmosis, that they were in touch with “the inner circle of 




humanity.”  The  dying  man  seemed  able  to  communicate  his  ideas 




telepathically,  to  such  an  extent  that  one  of  his  attendants,  scared  of 




becoming the victim of her own imagination, asked that he use words alone. 




Ouspensky accepted this reasoning and complied. 




 

The  house  was  overshadowed. 

  One  witness  remembers  Ouspensky 




sitting in the Green Drawing Room, when a powerful presence seemed to 




press upon his companions. Ouspensky spoke: “You notice?” he said. Was 




he the vehicle for forces greater than man? “What was going on,” says one 




pupil, “was God’s business. ’ In the words of another; “He was an  

angel:

 




don’t you understand that?” In the terms of the System, Ouspensky had 




equated the “angels ” of the Christian hierarchy with the degree of being 




represented as “planets” on Gurdjieff’s Ray of Creation. There was a sense 




that in some way those at Lyne were participating in an ascension. 




Also that it had been planned before. In the day^ of 55a Gwendv»T Road, 




a pupil had gone to the flat to find the door opened by Ouspensky himself. 




“I only know,” said the pupil, “that I have to be with you when you die.” 




“Quite right,” said Ouspensky, and so it proved. In his later New York 




lectures he had often returned to the theme of “miracle,” defined in the 




terms of the System as “the laws of a higher cosmos operating in a lower. ” 




There was a sense that in the miracle of his death, Ouspensky was somehow 




creating a mystical body of which his followers were part. “ ‘I will always be




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 455




with you,’ he too could say,” Rodney Colhn remembered, “but Ughtly and 




smoking a cigarette so that none noticed.” 




One of those present at Lyne declares that he “saw him succeed during 




the  last  month  of  his  life  in  his  life-long  aim  of  experiencing  ‘cosmic 




consciousness.’ During and after this experience two more eye-witnesses 




agree with me that he was a completely changed man—no longer the man 




who wrote the books or conducted the groups in London and New York.” 




But  to  Rodney  Collin,  the  miracle  appeared  to  be  enacted  also  for  the 




benefit of Ouspensky’s pupils. It was partly the culmination of the teaching 




which Ouspensky provided merely through existing, partly the last act in a 




gigantic mystery play. 




The idea of the mystery play derives from Ouspensky himself, but is 




indirectly influenced by Gurdjieff’s teaching of the uses of the stage in 




antiquity. When in  

A New Model of the Universe

 Ouspensky discusses the 




parts men play in the cycles of recurrence, he refers to the particular sort of 




roles acted by men who are members of “esoteric schools.” These men are 




more conscious than the  

corps-de-ballet

 of mechanically repeating people, 




and their roles are consciously directed. The perfect instance of a drama 




connected with an esoteric school is “the drama of Christ.” Ouspensky 




connected the Gospel drama with the Greek mystery plays, which for him 




represented the outer courts of an esoteric school which trained candidates 




by “a consecutive and gradual introduction to a new cycle of thought and 




feeling.  ”  The  purpose  of  the  theatrical  representation  of  the  mystery 




schools and the historical drama of Christ was the same; the difference was 




“that the latter was played in real life.” 




Under the circumstances it was not unnatural to compare the death of a 




fevered teacher in apparently miraculous circumstances to the Crucifixion 




scene  of  the  Gospel  drama.  Rodney  Collin  saw  Ouspensky’s  death  as 




providing  an  equivalent  experience  in  the  drama  of  the  Work,  and  he 




applied his Master’s dicta about Christ to Ouspensky himself. He wrote an 




account of Ouspensky’s last days called  

Last Remembrances of a Magician, 

 




which  still  exists  but  is  inaccessible.  After  Ouspensky  died  this  was 




circulated in typescript until objections—quite possibly to the part allotted 




to its author—^forced Rodney Collin to withdraw it. He then issued another 




version with the offending passages blocked out in the style of a wartime 




censor. This account has never been published. 




Rodney Collin’s version of events is complicated by the fact that he saw 




himself as having an important part to play in the drama of Ouspensky’s 




death. This part demanded that he supplement the failing resources of his 




Master with his own. Just as the Work teacher created situations which 




would tax his pupils’ predispositions to the utmost, Collin saw it as his duty 




to force Ouspensky to act counter to his “automatic” instincts—the feelings




456 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




and sensations of a very sick man. By resisting the “normal,” mechanical 




imperatives of a diseased body, Ouspensky might remain conscious in his 




last  hours,  and  at  the  last  “die  consciously.”  The  struggle  for  full 




consciousness was an additional reason for the long motor drives and the 




minor exertions which filled Ouspensky s last days. Collin believed that his 




teacher had explicitly delegated this task to him; but those who object that 




Ouspensky was bamboozled into taking his motor expeditions would also 




object that Rodney Collin’s behavior just before Ouspensky’s death bore 




little  relationship  to  the  facts  of  what  occurred.  

Last  Remembrances  of  a

 




 

Magician

 is a title, one of Ouspensky’s former followers writes, “which at 




any  rate  until  he  was  too  ill  to  know  what  he  was  doing  or  saying, 




Ouspensky would have loathed and repudiated.” What we know of Collin’s 




conduct gives a certain weight to this idea. 




He returned to England with Ouspensky in January 1947, temporarily 




leaving  his  wnife  with  Mme.  Ouspensky  at  Mendham.  There  is  some 




evidence that his attentions were unwelcome—that the intimate position 




which he felt himself to occupy was not a matter of choice on Ouspensky’s 




part. One particular incident demonstrates this. Sitting in the drawing room 




at  Lyne,  Ouspensky  became  extremely  angry  with  Rodney  Collin  and 




started  shouting  at  him,  ending  by  hitting  him  across  the  face.  Collin 




interpreted this in his own fashion, and “completely slap-happy,” turned 




around and delivered a stinging blow to the head of Dr. Francis Roles, 




which broke the doctor’s eardrum. 




The episode was construed by Collin as a form of initiation, and shortly 




afterward,  he  acted  on  this  assumption.  He  caught  a  plane  across  the 




Atlantic and went posthaste to Mendham. Later he wrote that Ouspensky 




“possessed” him “with his ovra mind” during the flight. On his arrival at 




Franklin Farms, he considerably scared Mme. Ouspensky by assuming the 




manners and voice of her husband and implying that the mantle of the 




dying  Master  had  fallen  on  him.  Nothing  more  is  known  about  this 




interview, except that, after it had taken place, ColHn returned to England 




and the house of miracles at Lyne. 




 

Lyne  Place  was  overshadowed. 

  ...  In  November  1951,  Collin  wrote: 




“Among the many extraordinary impressions at the time of Ouspensky’s 




death there was—particularly at one period—the Immensely strong feeling 




of  some  great  power  or  being,  some  Christ-like  being,  as  far  above 




Ouspensky as Ouspensky was above us, presiding over all that was being 




done.” And in March of that year, he summed up in a single letter the 




theology which he developed from Ouspensky’s last days:




All the literally miraculous things that happened at Ouspensky’s death, 




and everything that has developed since—both for me personally and




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 457




in relation to his work as a whole—convince me that he did not die as 




ordinary men die, but that he reached a level where a man becomes 




immortal, or at any rate where he is not confined to time as we know it, 




but can act and make connections through time. . . . 




Further,  if  he  did  so  become  independent  of  time,  or  if  he  had 




acquired fourth body (if you Hke to be technical) then he is accessible 




now to anyone who desires his help vwth sufficient urgency and belief. 




The lectures, the whole system as he explained it, were indeed the 




explanation of how to do the impossible, of how miracles are achieved. 




How then should we be surprised that Ouspensky himself actually put 




this knowledge to the use for which it was intended, and evidently 




expected those who followed him to take it the same way? Looking 




back I am appalled to remember how we took it all as a method of 




making slight adjustments to our personal psychology. . . . 




But what actually happened? Without a blow-by-blow account of events, 




there is little to be said. Few people know the answer, and some of those 




who do have put forward the most disturbing ideas. Rodney Collin, of 




course,  described  Ouspensky’s  conduct  as  an  example  of  “work”—of 




“super-effort,” as Gurdjieff would have said—a demonstration of how to 




turn the most adverse circumstances to good account. “One of the most 




extraordinary things was to see how he turned every unfavourable trick of 




fate—separation from his friends, distortion of his ideas, physical weakness 




and pain, into advantages, and by willingly abandoning normal powers and 




faculties was enabled to achieve supernormal ones of infinitely greater 




value.” 




Even if we do not dispute the miraculous which engulfed Lyne Place, it 




is  easy  to  see  how  Rodney  Collin  might  have  read  into  Ouspensky’s 




slightest actions the sense of an event which he already half-expected. For 




example, if Ouspensky had been trying to keep him at arm’s length, the 




following sentence from a letter of July 15, 1949 is easily explained: “In 




Ouspensky’s last months one saw how he accepted being old, sick, ugly, 




helpless, in pain, misunderstood, and indeed did everything to prevent 




others comforting him, to suffer consciously, to make it more difficult for 




him to be understood. . . . ”  Was it not simply that the disciple’s advances 




had been rebuffed in irritation? Collin admits that faith alone kept at bay 




disillusion and bewilderment. “While if for a moment that faith was lost, 




what was being done actually became for the doubter no more than the 




vagaries of an old man who had lost his mind.” 




Whatever possibility is accepted, it is clear that Ouspensky was making 




stupendous efforts to force his weakening body into extended activity. In




458 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




 

The Theory of Eternal Life

 Rodney Collin describes how, after his journeys 




through England, his Master continued to exert himself gratuitously. 




When almost unable to set one foot before the other he would make his 




dying body walk step by step for an hour at a time through the rough 




lanes; force it to rise in the small hours, dress, descend and climb long 




flights of stairs; turn night into day; and require of his companions in 




order  to  remain  with  him,  such  feats  of  endurance  as  they  in  full 




possession of health and strength were scarcely able to accomplish. 




And again in a letter of August 23, 1952:




A httle before his death Ouspensky after having spent a whole night 




forcing his dying body to walk, and waking us in order to make many 




experiments, said to me; “Now do you understand that everything has 




to be done by eflfort or do you still think that things come right by 




themselves?” 




A fortnight before his death, Ouspensky assembled his inner circle and 




told them that they must “not be afraid to take second step.” They must 




reconstruct everything for themselves”—from the very beginning. ” 




His companions were convinced that their Master was undergoing the 




transmutation before their eyes. The unseen presences attended them; for 




the  wall  between  here  and   

there

  had  been  breached.  Telepathic  effects 




reached far beyond Lyne itself, as dimensions and cosmoses merged to 




produce  their  miracles.  The  epigraph  to   

Tertium  Organum

  had  looked 




forward to a day when “there shall be time no longer.” The words of one 




Apocalypse contained the shadow of another. 




On the last day of his life, Ouspensky got up and dressed. Brushing aside 




all restraint, he came downstairs and summoned the household for a final 




briefing. To Rodney Collin it seemed that “he was able to communicate 




many ideas in such a way that each perceived in them the solution of his 




own problem.” 




Ouspensky returned to his room. At dawn the next day, October 2, 1947, 




he died. In the opinion of his companions this was a “conscious death.” 




When his body had been removed for burial at Lyne Church, Rodney 




Collin went to the bedroom where his Master had died and locked himself 




in. He refused to come out, despite persuasions which became increasingly 




angry  and  hostile.  The  household  was  already  prostrated  before  the 




blankness  of  the  future  and  had  no  time  for  an  absurd  young  man 




compounding their grief. A ladder was placed against the wandow ledge, 




and an attempt was made to reach the man inside. The ladder was pushed




T H E   S T R A N G E   D E A T H   O F   PYOTR OUSPENSKY 459




away  from  the  wall.  Six  days  later  the  bell  of  Ouspensky’s  room  rang 




downstairs in the kitchen. Janet Collin-Smith, who had by now arrived from 




America, was sent to her husband. She found him sitting cross-legged on 




Ouspensky’s  bed,  in  the  words  of  his  sister-in-law,  “emaciated,  dirty, 




unshaven. He bore all the signs of having been through a tremendous 




traumatic experience. He had had neither food nor drink during his time of 




solitude. He asked for lime juice. He adopted a gentle, child-like attitude to 




those who came to look after him, unlike his usual forthright manner. ” 




Patently something had happened to him; but what he thought this was 




became clear only later. From this six-day fast a whole new development 




was to result. For a time, however, there was only confusion and dismay. 




Ouspensky had departed. What were his followers to do? To some, the sun 




had suddenly ceased to shine; but to others, it seemed that the sacred time, 




the time of the miracles, might not be over. The miraculous had extended 




its influence beyond Lyne, both before and after Ouspensky’s death. “That 




morning dead,’’ Rodney Collin wrote of his teacher, “he walked with a 




traveller  crossing  London Bridge; and to another at the wheel of a car 




showed the secrets of this universe. ” 




Neither  was  he  the  only  member  of  the  group  at  Lyne  who  felt  the 




continuing  presence  of  Ouspensky.  The  strangeness  of  the  attendant 




phenomena  continued  to  haunt  one  participant  long  after  1947.  She 




discovered certain parallels in sacred literature and decided that Dr. W. Y. 




Evans-Wentz, the editor of  

The Tibetan Book of the Dead, 

 spoke with the 




voice of authority. Eventually, she ran Evans-Wentz to earth; he lived on a 




mountain  sacred  to  the  Indians  on  the  Mexican  border.  During  their 




conversation  Evans-Wentz  tried  to  give  his  mountain  away;  but  this 




concerned Ouspensky’s old pupil less than his reaction to her account of 




Ouspensky’s death. “I always thought Ouspensky was an Arhant,” he 




remarked; “now I know that he is. ” 




Just before Ouspensky died, the printing of  

Strange Life of Ivan Osokin

 




on the private press used by his followers was completed. Although a copy 




was taken posthaste to Lyne by the printer, Ouspensky died before he 




could see it. At his funeral the printer discovered the novel in the glove 




compartment of the car. 




“Do you remember the end, the very end?” asked Osokin. 




“Yes, I remember,” and slowly she recites the end of the tale:  

And

 




 

the  King’s  daughter  ofDuntrine  got  her  to  that  part  of  the  beach  where

 




 

strange  things  had  been  dom  in  the  ancient  ages;  and  there  she  sat  her

 




 

down.  The  sea  foam  ran  to  her  feet,  and  the  dead  leaves  swarmed

 




 

about  her  back,  and  the  veil  blew  about  her  face  in  the  blovoing  of  the

 




 

wind. And xphen she lifted up her eyes, there was the daughter of a




460 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




 

King  come  walking  on  the  beach.  Her  hair  was  like  the  spun  gold,  and

 




 

her  eyes  like  pools  in  a  river,  and  she  had  no  thought  for  the  morrow

 




 

and no power upon the hour, after the manner of simple men




Ouspensky had told his pupils to “begin all over again,” to “reconstruct 




everything from the beginning.” When they had recovered from shock, 




there would be various interpretations of what this meant. Had they been 




freed from the repetition of fixed forms or not? And for a few, who had been 




affected by the sense of the miraculous, the same question posed itself for 




the  Master.  How  to  account  for  this  sense  of  his  continuing  presence? 




Perhaps his last heroic days had freed him from recurrence. Perhaps he had 




gone  

further on, 

 to some inconceivable new beginning. 




 

“One  life  ends  and  another  begins.  One  time  ends  and  another  begins. 

 




 

Death is really a return to the beginning




14




The Last Suppers




During the period of indecision after Ouspensky’s death groups gathered 




round two figures, Dr. Francis Roles and Rodney CoUin. The directorate 




could see only one course open; to ask Mme. Ouspensky for help. Mme. 




Ouspensky’s own wishes were clear, but shocking: they were to contact 




GurdjiefiF in Paris. There was renewed dissension. Then Mme. Ouspensky 




^ote to say that plainly, no one had understood anything; it was nonsense 




that Ouspensky had abandoned everything by which he had lived since 




meeting  Gurdjieff.  They  were  to  sell  Lyne  Place  and  end  their  own 




activities. 




Gurdjieff himself took a hand in the game. A communication arrived at 




Lyne reading: “You are sheep without a shepherd. Come to me.” 




This  new  development  caused  almost  as  much  consternation  as  the 




successive blows of Ouspensky’s last meetings and death. His pupils had 




been forbidden to think of GurdjiefiF for so long that those who did think of 




him  at  all  imagined  that  he  was  probably  dead.  Others  decided  that 




Ouspensky really had meant that GurdjiefiF was mad. To others he was 




something  approaching  the  devil  incarnate;  at  the  very  least  a  Black 




Magician. When an artist sketched Ouspensky’s death mask, one of the 




Russian’s devoted followers suppressed the picture for fear GurdjiefiF might 




acquire it and so obtain a magical hold over Ouspensky’s soul. At all events, 




Ouspensky had parted from GurdjiefiF for reasons which no doubt seemed




461




462 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




good to him; and who were his pupils to question the decisions of a man 




from whom they had learned so much? The section which was united in 




devotion to Ouspensky divided into two main bodies of opinion; those who 




supported Roles’s view that he had a mandate to carry on Ouspensky’s 




work, and those who beheved that Ouspensky had tried to put an end to 




everything. But about half of Ouspensky’s former disciples, under Kenneth 




Walker, decided to obey the instructions from Mendham. 




In the spring of 1948, Mme. Ouspensky herself decided to reestablish 




contact with Gurdjieff and dispatched presents of 300 dollars and a roll of 




silk. These were regarded as grossly inadequate; but in answer to a query 




whether  Mme.  Ouspensky  should  be  written  to  and  trounced  for  her 




niggardhness, Gurdjieff replied: “No. You out of mouse make elephant.” 




The lines were open between Paris and Franklin Farms. 




Ouspensky’s death also affected J. G. Bennett, who had expanded his 




teaching activities. In 1941 he had acquired a large house called Coombe 




Springs, standing in extensive grounds in the London suburb of Kingston- 




on-Thames. This became the center of his group which styled itself “The 




Institute  for  the  Comparative  Study  of  History,  Philosophy  and  the 




Sciences. ” By the mid-1940s, two to three hundred pupils were visiting 




Coombe Springs for the sort of activities which had prevailed at the Prieure 




or Lyne Place. 




Bennett  had  resolved  to  take  the  bold  step  of  publishing  a  book 




mentioning the System. At the inauguration of his Institute in 1946, he had 




delivered a series of lectures entitled  

The Crisis in Human Affairs, 

 based 




partly on a private theory of history and partly on the System.  

The Crisis in

 




 

Human  Affairs

  appeared  in  July  1948—at  the  precise  moment  when 




Bennett learned that Gurdjieff, for from being dead or relapsed into senihty 




as was the common assumption, was very much alive and kicking. On a 




business trip to the United States he visited Mme. Ouspensky at Mendham 




and received the same advice as had been given to the emissaries from 




Ouspensky’s English groups. Trembling inwardly at the thought of confronting the terrifying phenomenon he had last known at Fontainebleau, he returned to England and left vwth his wife for Paris. 




Bennett  and  the  Ouspenskians  were  Johnny-come-latelies  as  far  as 




Gurdjieff’s personal following was concerned. As soon as wartime conditions permitted, Gurdjieff ’s pupils had begun to converge from every point of the compass on the Rue des Colonels Renard. Two of the earliest comers 




had strange tales to tell. 




Fritz Peters was serving in the American forces in Luxembourg. He had 




fallen  into  a  trough  of  depression  induced  by  a  series  of  apparently 




miraculous escapes from death and a mounting disgust at the horrors of 




warfare. Eventually he secured leave and headed for Paris “very close to




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   463




what I would have to call a form of madness.” Gurdjieff welcomed him with 




literally open arms, took in his condition at a glance, and directed him to lie 




down and rest. Peters was refused aspirin for his headache and was given 




scalding coffee instead. 




I remember being slumped over the table, sipping at my coffee, when 




I began to feel a strange uprising of my energy within myself—I stared 




at him, automatically straightened up, and it was as if a violent, electric 




blue light emanated from him and entered into me. As this happened, 




I could feel the tiredness drain out of me, but at the same moment his 




body slumped and his face turned grey as if it was being drained of life. 




I looked at him, amazed, and when he saw me sitting erect, smiling 




and full of energy, he said quickly: “You all right now—^watch food on 




stove—I must go. ” There was something very urgent in his voice and I 




leaped to my feet to help him but he waved me away and limped 




slowly out of the room. 




A quarter of an hour later Gurdjieff returned to the room. “He looked 




hke a young man again,” Peters writes, “alert, smiling, sly and full of good 




spirits.” The reunion was celebrated uproariously and accompanied by 




copious quantities of armagnac. Gurdjieff sent Peters away “convinced . . . 




that he knew how to transmit energy from himself to others ... at great 




cost to himself.” 




In the summer of 1946, Kathryn Hulme visited Gurdjieff. She took with 




her a young Belgian nurse—an ex-nun—with whom she had been doing 




relief work in Germany. During their conversation, Gurdjieff appeared to 




Ml asleep, and the Belgian girl whispered that perhaps they had better go. 




Gurdjieff awoke, smiled at her and—in spite of his total ignorance of her 




past—named the precise Order of which she had been a member: “Petite 




soeur  de  .  .  .”  As  Kathryn  Hulme  writes,  he  could  have  just  been 




commending his visitor’s compassion; but this was not an explanation which 




she would readily accept. 




Entire  groups  of  pupils  arrived  at  the  Rue  des  Colonels  Renard.  An 




ambassador from Jane Heap’s London group arrived in 1946, and in the 




autumn of that year, Gurdjieff was surprised by roars of laughter which 




greeted his onslaught on a hapless newcomer who had endured identical 




treatment at the hands of Jane Heap in London. 




Building up gradually to a crescendo toward the end of 1948, Gurdjieff’s 




former pupils—with  

their

 pupils, and their friends, relations, and children—poured into Paris to sit at the Master’s feet. They found him a little older, a little more tired, but recognizably the same man. Indeed, to Fritz 




Peters it seemed that, except for the lack of a house and grounds in which to




464 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




work,  the  teaching  was  proceeding  exactly  as  he  had  known  it  in  the 




ChSteau du Prieure. But comphcations were created by the arrival of so 




many former disciples. There was considerable agitation among GurdjiefF’s 




French pupils, who were reminded that the play in which they had taken 




part was only the latest in a line of long-running successes. The new arrivals 




created  a  crowd  scene  where  before  there  had  been  tasteful   

soupers

 




 

intimes. 




Gurdjieff’s  wartime  teaching  had  not  been  exactly  clandestine,  but 




neither had it been widely advertised. Rumors branching from the circle of 




Daumal and Lavastine invaded the intellectual community. “His name 




passed from mouth to mouth, ” explains Pierre Schaeffer, who met Gurdjieff 




in 1943; and although no single approach to Gurdjieff was ever exactly like 




another, Schaeffer’s situation at the time may indicate the more general 




reasons which brought others to Gurdjieff. Within the space of a few years, 




he had had to withstand “a war lost, a general mistake in orientation, a 




naive belief in the possibility of changing the world.” Gurdjieff saved him 




from despair. “You didn’t go to Gurdjieff because you wanted to meet him, ” 




Schaeffer told the writer Elizabeth Antebi, “it happened to you to meet him 




through a third person.” 




With  a  relatively  small  number  of  pupils  gathered  in  this  fashion, 




Gurdjieff  had  returned  during  1943  and  1944  to  holding  sessions  of 




questions and answers—as he had in Russia and as Ouspensky had done in 




his memory for so many years at Warwick Gardens. “He would propose a 




field of observation, ” says Henri Tracol, who came to him during the war. 




Discussion of the results formed the basis of meetings, and the Master 




might occasionally recommend exercises for particular individuals. He 




seems to have abandoned the occult cosmology recorded in Zn  

Search of the

 




 

Miraculous, 

 but he was never averse to flashes of Magery—to playing the 




Man Who Knows, allowing his hieratic manner full rein. There was one 




pupil, for example, who had scarcely begun a question—“M. Gurdjieff,” 




whom the Master interrupted, grandly and mysteriously: “It is a long time 




now, since I was Gurdjieff...” 




With the increasing demands on his time and on the floor space of his 




tiny flat, Gurdjieff reverted to more general methods—as he had done 




when he first arrived in Western Europe. He was, now teaching in a more 




sedentary fashion than before, presiding as a domestic patriarch over a 




rapidly increasing family. To make up for the lack of a Study House there 




was the Salle Pleyel, where nightly sessions of the movements were held, 




which Gurdjieff rarely missed. He retained all his old skill as a “teacher of 




dancing” and his poise and presence in the classes never failed to make an 




impression.  “He  came  in,”  one  remembers,  “like  a  great  red  light.  .  .” 




With minor variations his routine was the same as it had been for twenty




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   465




years, though by the late 1940s it had attained the sacrosanctity of ritual. 




There  was  the  flat  itself—of  which  every  detail  impressed  itself  on 




visitors. It stood on the first floor in the Rue des Colonels Renard, on the 




right  as  one  entered  the  building.  The  block  itself  was  massive  and 




functional, a warren of small flats like Gurdjieff’s own, the street a high- 




walled gulley admitting little light—even supposing that Gurdjieff did not 




close the shutters, in order (as he once wickedly explained) “to prevent the 




vibrations from escaping.” The flat itself was unprepossessing. A hallway, 




which bent to the left, turned into a passage leading to Gurdjieff s room and 




a  spare  bedroom.  On  the  right  of  the  hallway  was  the  sitting  room, 




decorated in the most extraordinary fashion. Its walls, like the walls of the 




hallway, were covered with the paintings of his “parasites”—not a square 




inch of wall space was untenanted. 




On each side of the sitting-room fireplace hung twin representations of 




the enneagram, made of mother-of-pearl, sewn to fabric-covered black 




disks. Under one of  these, the  Master himself would sit, observing his 




disciples as they crouched on low, uncomfortable stools during interminable readings from  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 

 Behind them, in the corners abutting the  street,  were  two  strange  and  glittering  artifacts.  One  was  a  sort  of 




stylized Christmas tree, made out of some gold-colored metal or gilded 




wood, which gleamed in the light reflected from countless prisms of glass. 




The other was a cabinet containing a large collection of dolls dressed in 




different national costumes and an assortment of keepsakes: pipes, musical 




instruments,  Orientalia.  When  the  room  was  properly  lit,  the  skill  of 




Gurdjieff as a stage designer became as obvious as it had been in the Study 




House at Fontainebleau. The cheap materials scintillated and sparkled like 




Aladdin’s cave. 




Encased in their private fantasies—more like the Forty Thieves in their 




jars than Aladdin’s genii—the pupils sat under the Master’s eye. That is, if 




they  were  not  next  door,  in  the  dining  room,  where  the  pictures  still 




clustered thickly on the wall, and there was scarcely room to breathe if 




Gurdjieff had a full house. This was where the toasts to the idiots were 




drunk,  as  they  had  been  ever  since  Fontainebleau.  The  toasts  were 




proposed  by  a  director—not  now  the  long-dead  Schumaker,  but  an 




incongruous Paris banker or an English technologist. It was at GurdjiefF’s 




table that some pupils felt most keenly the intensity of the experience—^and 




an extraordinary parallel was born in the mind of more than one. Here 




Gurdjieff would make ritual offerings of dainties to his guests, abuse or 




comfort his visitors, compel the drunkards to abstain from alcohol and the 




teetotalers to down glass after glass of armagnac or peppered vodka. 




The food for Gurdjieff’s feasts would proceed across the hall to the dining 




room by meaps of a human chain, which originated in the diminutive




466 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




kitchen. Here Gurdjieff cooked his highly spiced dishes on a coal stove, and 




his  pupils  washed  up  in  the  most  primitive  of  sinks.  Next  door  to  the 




kitchen, and directly to the left of the entrance to the flat, was what for 




many pupils was the most significant room in the house; Gurdjieff’s pantry. 




This room was a study, storeroom and confessional combined. Its shelves 




were  crammed  with  bottles  and  jars,  and  from  them  dangled  rings  of 




sausages and  sheaves  of  dried  herbs.  Nudging  the delicacies  were reminders of Gurdjieff’s occupation; rosaries or chaplets hanging from nails. 




On the little table beneath might lie a pile of papers, relics of GurdjiefF’s 




literary work, and a vacuum flask of hot coffee. Kathryn Hulme first knew 




the  pantry  during  the  1930s;  on  her  return  in  1946,  she  found  it  “a 




Lucullian treasure room, its tiers of shelves stacked with boxed, bagged and 




tinned goods, while overhead hung from the ceiling were garlands of spice 




bouquets, strung red peppers and imported sausages of every size and 




colour.” In this aromatic confusion Gurdjieff'would give advice to individual 




pupils, prescribe exercises or listen to their problems. 




If  the  French  had  to  reconcile  themselves  to  sharing  Gurdjieff  with 




others, the English and Americans, who had been receiving his teaching 




irregularly or at second or third hand, were forced to adapt themselves to 




his  unpredictable behavior.  Those who  had been  familiars  of Gurdjieff 




before the war noticed few changes—but several faces were missing from 




his board. Georgette Leblanc, for example, had died in 1941, watched over 




by Margaret Anderson. In  

The Fiery Fountains

 her friend has recorded how 




the dying woman made prodigious efforts to “die consciously”—to watch 




the core of her being through death. Just before the end she was told that 




Gurdjieff  had  called  her  “friend”  and  seemed  overjoyed  by  the  news. 




“Alors,” she inquired, “nous allons mourir sans mourir?” 




 

Memento mori

—and there was Gurdjieff himself, widely believed to be in 




his eighties. “What shall we do when you die, Mr. Gurdjieff?” asked one of 




his pupils. “I Gurdjieff,” the Master replied furiously, “I  

not

 will die.” But 




the question remained. Pierre Schaeffer attended the meetings with the 




perpetual conviction that the Master would die before he, Schaeffer, would 




have time to ask him his own question. The fact of death and Gurdjieff’s 




attitude toward it hung suspended over the whole company. 




A complicated relay of cause and effect was set off by the death of Rene 




Daumal in 1944. Daumal had finally been conquered by tuberculosis and 




malnutrition—Max-Pol Fouchet, who visited the Daumals in 1942, found 




them drinking hot water to fill their stomachs. Daumal died in the faith, in 




the middle of composing  

Mount Analogue

 while believing himself to be 




only a beginner on the slopes of his mountain. But he died pitied by his 




former friends, who saw him as betrayed into folly ^y the Work. He*may




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   467




have believed that the Work disciphnes would save his life; and certainly 




the contemplation of his death caused others to reconsider their attitude 




tow^ard the remorseless ethic which they believed had compounded his 




ruin. 




A few days before he died, Daumal was photographed by another group 




member, Luc Dietrich. Dietrich was so affected by the death of his friend 




that he underwent a crisis, as a result of which he abandoned everything 




and rushed off to Normandy to study the behavior of madmen in a mental 




hospital. During the Allied bombardment of the village in which he was 




working, he developed an abscess on the brain. He died in August 1944, 




after three weeks of agony. Gurdjieff came to visit him in the hospital and 




brought him two oranges. He placed one in each hand of the invalid with 




the benediction: “All your life has been a preparation for this moment.” 




One of Dietrich’s friends was struck by the last tortured glance which the 




dying man cast at his teacher who stood at his bedside, calmly engaged in 




his favorite pastime of handing out sweets. 




This  friend  was  Lanza  del  Vasto,  and  the  sinister  impression  which 




Gurdjieff made on him had considerable consequences for the Master’s 




reputation. Lanza and Dietrich had been close friends in the days when 




Dietrich was a poverty-stricken young writer seeking a mentor. Lanza held 




a degree in philosophy and tended toward mystical speculation; he was soon 




to become known for founding the mystical order “L’Arche ” and publishing 




a celebrated narrative of his journey to India,  

Pelerinage aux sources

 (1943). 




While Lanza was in India, Dietrich met Philippe Lavastine, who introduced him to Mme. de Salzmann, and eventually to Gurdjieff. On Lanza’s return  he  found  Dietrich  converted  to  the  Work;  and  for  a  time,  he, 




Dietrich, and Lavastine formed a group under Gurdjieff s instruction. Then 




he became uneasy and tried unsuccessfully to drag Dietrich away. 




Lanza del Vasto’s suspicions of Gurdjieff were significant because of his 




mystical proclivities. There was already some disquiet about the Work in 




the  French  occult  world.  This  may  have  originated  in  a  feud  between 




Alexander de Salzmann and the leading French esotericist, Rene Guenon 




(1886-1951). Guenon is said to have admired de Salzmann and sought a 




meeting;  but  all  attempts  at  a  rapprochement  were  spoiled  by  de 




Salzmann s wicked sense of humor. Guenon was fond of parading his lack of 




concern for his selfish ego—^“11 n’y a pas de Ren^ Guenon,” he would say, 




implying that he was at one with the infinite and personally unworthy of the 




reverence  which  his  disciples  bestowed  on  him.  “Il  n’y  a  pas  de  Rene 




Guenon? Helas,” said Alexander de Salzmann, the follower of Gurdjieff in 




search of his “Big I.’’ It is uncertain whether this tale had anything to do 




wdth Guenon’s injunction to his disciples to “flee GurdjiefiFlike the plague,” 




but relations between the Work and the French esotericists were already




468 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




strained by the 1940s. When Lanza became eminent in French mystical 




circles after the publication of  

Pelerinage aux sources, 

 the addition of his 




voice to those of Gurdjieff ’s other opponents meant that the whispering 




campaign against the Work increased in volume. 




There vt?as another disturbing death—closely connected with the death of 




Luc Dietrich. Gurdjieflf had singled out Dietrich as a compulsive Don Juan 




and condemned him to have one woman a day “and not prostitutes, that’s 




too easy.” In the early spring of 1942, Lanza, Dietrich, and the Daumals 




were  together  on  the  plateau  of  Assy  in  Savoy,  in  an  atmosphere 




reminiscent  of  Thomas  Mann’s   

The  Magic  Mountain. 

 Assy was  an area 




where consumptives came to be cured and this was the reason for Daumal’s 




presence  there.  A  young  convalescent  named  Irene-Carole  Reweliotty 




arrived at the spa: a woman of twenty-one who had suffered from heart 




trouble since puberty. She had literary ambitions and fell quickly under the 




spell  of  Dietrich,  the  published writer and the  accomplished charmer. 




Dietrich introduced her to the Gurdjieff groups, an event which Irdne, at 




the  time,  regarded  as  the  turning  point  in  her  life.  She  recorded  her 




struggles in a diary, published in 1946 as the  

Journal d’unejeunejille. They

 




are struggles familiar enough from the writings of Margaret Anderson and 




the papers of Jean Toomer. She was a machine, she could not write—^for 




what  should  she  write  about?  She  hated  herself  and  next,  by  a  swift 




reversal, hated the Gurdjieff groups. Then Daumal died and after him 




Dietrich, her protector and “elder brother” in the Work. Shortly before his 




death he had written to his prot^g^e advising her to distance herself from 




the Work; but despite her doubts, Irdne-Carole continued to attend the 




groups. Eventually in 1945 she received an invitation to dinner at the Rue 




des Colonels Renard. 




During  the  course  of  the  meal  GurdjieflF  spoke  to  her  in  Russian,  a 




language which none of the others present could understand. He directed 




her  to  pretend  to  leave  with  the  others  and  then  to  return  to  the  flat. 




Accordingly she left, but instead of returning, she telephoned Gurdjieff 




from  a  caf6  and  told  him  that  she  could  not  come  as  her  mother  was 




expecting her. Gurdjieff insulted her “in terms,” Louis Pauwels writes, 




“which seemed to conceal nothing of his intentions.” The next day, Ir^ne, 




in a state of shock, went to the disciple who had introduced her to Gurdjieff 




and announced her departure from the Work. She was turned away in a 




manner which Pauwels does not specify and thrown back on her ovra 




resources, which threatened to abandon her altogether. The bottom had 




fallen out of her world. In the hopes of reconstituting her universe she 




returned to Assy where she died unexpectedly of a heart attack. Her last 




letter to her mother contained the sentence, “I’ll end by thinking tlwt G. 




has cast a spell on me.” 




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   469




The  wildest  rumors  circulated  after  her  death.  It  was  said  that  her 




brother had had a vision of Gurdjieff—^whom he had never seen, but whom 




he nevertheless recognized—^when he entered the room where his sister 




had  died.  There  were  rumors  that  inquiries  into  the  case  had  been 




suppressed. The image of the Black Magician rose like some diabolical 




phoenix out of the ashes. 




Once  more—as  in  the  examples  of  questionable  conduct  during  the 




1920s—there  is  an  element  of  uncertainty.  Even  if  we  discount  the 




recurrent  vision  of  Gurdjieff  as  Bluebeard  or  Rasputin,  there  are  still 




disturbing  factors  about  this  case.  It  does  seem  that  someone  had 




bungled—^whether Gurdjieff or the pupil-teacher does not matter. It may 




be that Gurdjieff did want to sleep with Irene-Carole, but that is not in 




itself a crime. Neither can it be said that he directly caused her death. But 




there can be little doubt that the Work in general and the contretemps with 




Gurdjieff in particular caused a nervous breakdown; and that this reactivated a dormant physical or psycho-physical ailment. The dark side of the Work was again in evidence. And, of course, suspicion of Gurdjieff was 




strengthened in occult and mystical circles. 




It was not as if his reputation was spotless, even on a strictly material 




plane. Wartime conditions had provided Gurdjieff with a superb opportunity to stir the pot of violent emotions; and at the same time, no doubt, to indulge his roguish temperament. His lavish hospitality struck a jarring 




note at a time of material privation: for even if the Master expended a great 




deal of time and money on his pupils, just how, in that occupied city, had 




he  acquired  the  vodka  and  the  dehcacies  which  gave  his  feasts  their 




memorable flavor? He did of course levy dues on his followers—but on at 




least one occasion he lived fully up to the precepts which he embodied in 




the story of “Abram Yelov” and “Peter Karpenko.” Looking at the company 




around his board, he lashed out; “You eat good soup, cost eighty dollars. 




And you nothing give. You parasites.” The instructor of the group reminded 




the Master of a 2,000 franc contribution which had been handed to him on 




|he group’s behalf. Far from being ashamed, Gurdjieff launched into the 




most withering verbal assault, and acted his role with such conviction that 




one of the instructors seceded altogether from the Work, taking along a 




body of pupils. 




But was he acting? There were objections on the grounds of patriotism as 




well. Gurdjieff admitted to working the black market and collaborating with 




the Germans. He could feel no particular loyalties to either side in the 




conflict and had enough experience of war and revolution to give him an 




enviable sangfroid in dealing with the problems of material survival. When 




his American pupils returned after the war, they expected to find him ill 




and starving; instead, they found the pantry fully stocked and Gurdjieff well




470 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




supplied  with  cigarettes.  He  had  indeed  taken  one  gamble—that  of 




mobilizing as much credit as he could. He told shopkeepers that he had 




inherited an oil well in the United States, and that after the war he would 




pay them everything he owed. The returning Americans bailed him out— 




and Gurdjieff was able to stalk proudly into his creditors’ shops or offices 




and announce the arrival of his legacy. 




But  he  was  saiUng  close  to  the  wind.  Soon  after  the  war  the  police 




searched his flat and discovered under his mattress quantities of foreign 




currency—gifts from pupils which he had hoarded illegally. The mystery 




was that Gurdjieff had been warned of the authorities’ intention to search 




the  flat,  and  not  only  had  he  done  nothing  about  the  warning,  but  he 




announced to all and sundry that nothing compromising would ever be 




found. J. G. Bennett, who tells the story, repeats Gurdjieff’s statement that 




his motive had been to experience prison from the inside—although his 




experiences in both India and Georgia might well have given this tale the 




lie—^and adds that Gurdjieff’s “dossiers with the Surete Publique and the 




Prefecture of Paris were bulging with reports of unlawful activities of all 




kinds.” This was the Sly Man’s ambiguity on a quite basic level. 




There was also the ambiguity of the man-monster. Gurdjieff, after all, 




was the Great Magician, the Man Who Knows and the fountainhead of the 




teaching. Numbers of Bennett’s pupils were shocked and distressed by 




Gurdjieff’s bad language and his terrorizing tactics. One lady who had 




made the trip from England was so overcome by her first impressions that 




she  stayed  away  from  her  next  appointment  in  the  Rue  des  Colonels 




Renard. Eventually she summoned up her courage and returned, apologizing to Gurdjieff for not staying the course. “Your loss, ” said Gurdjieff, severely, bidding her farewell, “your loss.” 




 

Memento mori

—^would you save your life or lose it? Propelled once more 




by the friction of affirmation and denial, the timorous and the foolhardy sat 




and sweated—both literally and metaphorically—through the ordeals in 




Gurdjieff’s flat. But Gurdjieff could wear another face. The French called 




the lunches and dinners  

agapes, 

 or love feasts. Pierre Schaeffer’s essay “A 




Modern Thaumaturge,” provides the best evocation of their atmosphere. “I 




feel obUged to state,” Schaeffer writes about Gurdjieff’s hospitality, “that 




anything (gherkin or pimento) can, with the necessary concentration and 




human tension, become the way to communion . . . ” 




This  great  feast—can  I  say  it  without  shocking?—reminded  me  of 




another. It was impossible not to think of the Last Supper. Bludgeoned 




into life, we were taking part in tragic agapes. We dipped our hands in 




the dish with a Master. The figure of Judas or of the favourite disciple 




was enough to give one a fit. Our indomitable friend, the Banker, 




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   471




whose face was aglow with the vodka that he detested (“you drink 




another toast, Director, you not drink anything!”) was Peter. There 




were  swooning  Mary  Magdalens,  incorrigible  Marthas  and  Nic- 




odemuses painfully full of goodwill. Was Gurdjieff himself aware of 




these resemblances? The very act of eating, if surrounded by rites, 




however  incongruous,  could  not  fail  to  make  us  think  of  Holy 




Communion. 




The  quality of the occasion, the intense meaning which suffused the 




suffocating,  aromatic  flat,  Gurdjieff^’s  conduct  at  the  table—these  are 




indications of the many levels on which life at the Rue des Colonels Renard 




was conducted. As at Fontainebleau, the Master’s presence brought extra 




significance to every remark, every minor incident. Gurdjieff^’s last suppers 




were Last Suppers in the Biblical sense. What else could they be? After 




Gurdjieff^’s death, Schaeffer became a Catholic. He later confessed that he 




could never go to Mass without thinking of Gurdjieff". “Had he not invited 




me to the last hours in the Upper Room?” He laments: “Last Suppers, alas, 




are  always  among  the  last  moments  of  the  Masters,  they  will  be  their 




memorials.” 




As the remark implies, Gurdjieff was moving on to an ecclesiastical plane. 




There were so many people; former Ouspenskians, former Orageans, those 




who had known Gurdjieff^ personally or through his disciples, pupils of J. G. 




Bennett whose connection with the Work was more peripheral. Whether or 




not Gurdjieff' wished it to happen, they formed what one commentator has 




(^led a “spiritual empire.” The lone adventurer of the Himalayas, “the 




iiger of Turkestan,” was a long way away. Now there was an old man, a Man 




of  Power,  who  inspired  both  terror  and  affection  and  controlled  the 




allegiance of a sizable number of people. 




It seemed that the emperor was taking steps to consolidate his dominions 




^d fiiat he intended to leave behind him some organization to perpetuate 




his teaching. After the war Gurdjieff made at least two plans to establish 




himself in large houses in the country: once in a vast nineteenth-century 




tehiteau  and  once  in  a  disused  hotel  on  the  Seine.  His  pupils  remain 




doubtful how seriously he intended these projects to be taken; perhaps, like 




the chores at the Prieur6, they were merely an excuse for “work.” Gurdjieff' 




also  decided  to  pubhsh   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  When  F.  S.  Pinder  asked  the 




Master  why  he  intended to issue a work  which—^for all the  repeated 




revisions—^was still riddled with mistakes, Gurdjieff" replied that it was a 




“rough diamond.” “Now necessary to publish.” 




He was slowing up perceptibly. When Dorothy Caruso, the widow of the 




great tenor, first met him in the summer of 1948, she saw “an old man, gray




472 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




with weariness and illness.” Why did he not give up? “I thought, ‘The kind 




of force he is using is wearing him out. Why must he go on doing it? Why 




do they let him? We should go home, we should not ask this tired man for 




anything. 




Another accident took place. Gurdjieff’s car was rammed by a drunken 




driver. Bennett saw him return home afterward and thought he had seen a 




corpse walking. Gurdjieff had fractured ribs, had cut and bruised himself 




severely,  and  had  sustained  dangerous  internal  injuries.  Despite  his 




doctor’s orders and in danger of death from countless different causes, he 




held a dinner that night as usual, telling his pupils that he must force his 




body to walk. For several days he was very ill, but continued to lever his 




battered frame into the dining room and play host. Gradually his bruises 




faded, and he was cured. The words of one follower—“cured himself"—do 




not seem too wide of the mark for this occasion. “His recovery was so 




complete,”  Dorothy  Caruso  writes,  “that  he  looked  younger  after  the 




accident than before . . . ”  The mishap did seem to reinforce whatever 




resolutions he had made about the future, for three or four days afterward, 




he summoned Bennett and directed him to bring as many pupils as he could 




to see him in Paris. 




A fresh influx began. Bennett brought some sixty of his pupils during the 




summer of 1948, and weekend visits to Paris became the rule for him and 




his wife. Bennett’s role in events was becoming crucial, for a variety of 




reasons. He was available, devoted to Gurdjieff, and possessed of extraordinary  energies.  In  England  he  had  an  established  center  at  Coombe Springs—a  body  of  pupils  as  extensive  as  any  Ouspensky  had  ever 




commanded—^and the organizational abilities which went with so large an 




undertaking. If C. S. Nott is to be believed, Gurdjieff told him that Bennett 




was “useful for money” but that the majority of his pupils would be useless 




for the purposes he had in mind. Gurdjieff might have had many different 




reasons for making this statement, but to take the cynical view, he might 




also have seen Bennett as a link with those who had been taught in the very 




different manner of Ouspensky. Such a conjunction was certainly in his 




mind, and he had even instituted readings from the typescript of  

In Search

 




 

of the Miraculous

 as a change from  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 




In the summer of 1949 Bennett was at a meal fn the Rue des Colonels 




Renard, when Gurdjieff began to talk to him “in rather a low voice” about 




the role of Judas at the Last Supper. He reminded Bennett of his teaching 




about Judas and asked him if he agreed. Bennett replied that he thought 




Gurdjieff was right. “I am pleased that you understand, ” said Gurdjieff; and 




in answer to another pupil who asked him to repeat what he had said, he 




returned; “I speak only for him.” Bennett calls Gurdjieff’s words “enigmatic, ’ but it is clear that they had great significance for him; and elsewhere




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   473




he commends the role of “Judases” in general. They are the “near-heretics” 




who make the work of their masters Hve. This is worth bearing in mind 




when considering the history of the Work after GurdjiefF’s death. 




On October 30, 1948, Gurdjieff sailed for America once more. His pupils 




had to bring very high-level pressure to bear on the French authorities 




before they would grant him a reentry permit, and there may also have 




been  difficulties  about  landing  in  New  York.  Once  there,  Gurdjieff 




ensconced himself in the Wellington Hotel and resumed his American 




routine. The meals in the hotel, the sessions in various Childs Restaurants, 




and the visits to the baths in the company of the men unrolled as before. 




Gurdjieff scandalized devoted Ouspenskians by his apparently ungrateful 




attitude toward their teacher who he said had “perished like a dog. ” Others 




again were prepared to be terrified by a man whom they knew simply by 




the  reputation  he  had  acquired  during  the  early  1930s.  Most  were 




pleasantly surprised by the mellow Gurdjieff they encountered. 




During his visit, Gurdjieff addressed an appeal “to all my present and 




former  adepts”  on  the  subject  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  He  announced  its 




forthcoming  publication  and  asked  all  of  those  who  felt  that  they  had 




derived benefit from the study of his ideas to pay 100 pounds for a copy of 




the first printing. The appeal was written by Bennett, who claims that he 




was not aware of what he was writing and that the manner and vocabulary 




were completely alien to him. He concludes that he “had been made the 




victim of one of those tricks of thought transference, or suggestion, that 




Gurdjieff loved to play.” 




There were just over nine months of Gurdjieff’s life to run. In the New 




Year  he  returned  to  France  and  resumed  the  familiar  pattern  of  his 




Existence. Hordes of pupils crowded into his flat, or took part in chaotic 




motor expeditions so like those of the 1920s that only Gurdjieff’s age and 




corpulence betrayed the difference. All this time he continued his practice 




as a “physician-hypnotist” and the constant procession of his patients was a 




£amiliar sight to those who visited him in his capacity of Master. 




Throughout the summer of 1949, Gurdjieff drove himself against what 




was clearly a mounting burden of pain. He grew thin and pale. To the 




question of a pupil about whether he would not go to California for a rest— 




“the kind of question Gurdjieff never answered,” says Dorothy Caruso—he 




replied: “Perhaps California, perhaps further.” 




Those around him refused to accept the nature of his illness. He had 




weathered so many storms that he seemed to be indestructible. Surely he 




would cure himseff again?  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 was on the point of publication, and negotiations for the chateau were on the brink of success. There were so many people who wanted to see him and so many who hoped for 




great things from his work. An atmosphere of high expectation developed. 




474 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




In  London Bennett gave weekly lectures  from the third to  the twenty- 




fourth of October 1949, ambitiously entitled “Gurdjieff—The Making of a 




New World.” He appealed to “a world on the brink of disaster, unable to 




believe and not daring to hope” and offered Gurdjielf as the guide through 




the perplexities of life in the shadow of nuclear destruction. In connection 




with  Bennett’s  lectures,  Mme.  de  Salzmann  flew  to  London  to  give 




instructions in the movements. The response was gratifyingly large. 




GurdjiefiF had been booked to leave for the United States on October 




twentieth, four days before Bennett delivered his last lecture. But, as in the 




case of Ouspensky on a very similar occasion, the sea voyage never took 




place. 




From what Gurdjieff said to followers like Fritz Peters, it seems that he 




must have known for some time that death was approaching. William 




Welch records an odd incident, about two weeks before Gurdjieff’s death, 




when the Master drove to the Russian church in the Rue Daru with four or 




five companions, and for an hour sat silently outside it. “They remembered 




it only later and wondered about it when they found themselves in that 




same cathedral standing around his bier.” 




Gurdjieff  treated  his  doctors  abominably,  ignoring  or  refusing  their 




advice. Eventually the newly qualified Dr. William Welch was sent for 




from America to take over from the corps of distinguished physicians who 




had been repulsed by the Master. Gurdjieff now seemed to have little will 




to live, and the doctor removed him without difficulty to the American 




Hospital at Neuilly. There he prepared to tap Gurdjieff’s dropsy. “Only if 




you not tired, Doctor,” the Master told him. 




Gurdjieff died at 11 a.m. on October 29, 1949. 




“Do you want to die like a dog?” he had thundered at his quivering 




pupils; and Pierre Schaeffer asserts that Gurdjieff’s ovra death was far from 




the bestial fate he predicted for the ma^s of mankind. “He didn’t die Hke a 




dog,” Schaeffer writes. “In death he made a difficult, indefinable movement 




with his extraordinarily contorted muscles. There was a force behind the 




mask, apparently so calm, a gaze behind those lids that would never open 




again. This gaze imprinted itself on our pupils. Every eye caught a gleam 




and we assimilated this food too.” Dr. Welch was at the death bed, but he 




excuses himself from giving a medical opinion on the facts. “Although I was 




present,”  he  writes,  “and  the  Events  that  occurred  were  unique  in  my 




experience, I do not know their significance and have no way of expressing 




them in a proper context. . . . For myself what I must acknowledge is that 




the death of Gurdjieff was the death of a man ‘not in quotation marks.’ And I 




have seen many men die.” 




It is said that as he lay dying he murmured to the crowd by his bedside:




T H E   L A S T   S U P P E R S   475




‘'I’m leaving you all in a fine mess!” When I asked Henri Tracol if this story 




were authentic, he smiled and spread his hands. 




“He  did   

not

  say  that,”  he  answered  and  paused,  before  continuing; 




“—but it was true!” 




It  was  the  final  coup.  The  old  blister,  the  sainted   

gaffar, 

  the  Great 




Magician had 

—in his death, 

 done it again! 




15




The Quest for Harmony




Gurdjieff’s obsequies were celebrated by a crowd of devotees, who were 




left wondering what the next step was to be. According to Dr. William 




Welch, on the Thursday before his death Gurdjieff had summoned Mme. 




de Salzmann to his bedside and issued instructions for the continuation of 




his work. On the evening of the Master’s burial in Avon—^where he lies 




between two great menhirs of undressed stone—she spoke to about fifty 




pupils  and  announced  her  program.  She  told  them  that  a  teacher  of 




GurdjielF’s stature could never be replaced. Their one chance was to work 




together:  to  create  the  conditions  which  Gurdjieff  had  been  able  to 




manufacture by himself, but which could not now be engineered by a single 




person.  J.  G.  Bennett  had  already  been  approached  by  French  rebels 




against her authority, and he knew full well the differences of opinion which 




divided both the Enghsh and the American followers of Gurdjieff and 




Ouspensky. “Having seen the friction between those who had been closest 




to Gurdjieff,” Bennett writes, “I could not but marvel at her optimism; yet I 




was bound to agree that in unity lay our only hope.” 




The  Masters  might  be  gone;  but  there  were  Mistresses  to  take  their 




place.  The  forces  attempting  to  weld  Gurdjieff’s  fragmented  legacy 




together  were  dominated  by  four remarkable  women. Two—Mme.  de 




Salzmann and Mme. de Hartmann—^have been active, up to the present 




time (Mme. de Hartmann died in September 1979^ while Mme. Ou^en- 




sky died in 1963 and Jane Heap the folloviing year. The organization which




476




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   477




they jointly created owes general allegiance to Mme. de Salzmann in Paris 




and has increasingly developed the characteristics of a church. It is known 




simply as “the Work” and has been able to bring multifarious points of view 




under  a  common  umbrella.  For  example,  attempts  to  bridge  the  gap 




between Maurice Nicoll and the orthodox Gurdjieffians had been made 




even before the doctor’s death from cancer in 1953. This was important, 




because after the deaths of his own two teachers, Nicoll had increasingly 




come  into  the  open.  With  a  following  of  about  six  hundred  people,  a 




headquarters at Great Amwell House in Hertfordshire, and some influence 




on the journalistic world, his support was significant. Volumes I-HI of what 




eventually became Nicoll’s five-volume  

Psychological Commentaries on the

 




 

Teaching of G. I. Gurdjieff and P. D. Ouspensky

 was first privately printed 




in  1949.  These  were  followed  by  his   

The  New  Man

  (1950),  a  volume  of 




Gospel interpretations inspired by the psychoanalytical interpretation of 




dreams,  and   

Living  Time

  (1952),  an  extension  of  Ouspensky’s  time 




speculations  with  the  aid  of  classical  philosophy.  The   

Commentaries

 




received an enthusiastic endorsement from Mme. de Salzmann, and for his 




part Nicoll was careful to deny that his own works had any authoritative 




nature. They were mere “personal contributions.” In view of their teacher’s 




attitude it is not surprising that by 1960 Nicoll’s successors had joined the 




Paris-oriented London Gurdjieff Society. 




On the other hand there were the bodies of opinion which would have 




nothing  to  do  with  Gurdjieff’s  successors  and  were  mostly  headed  by 




Ouspensky’s former pupils. There were the Society for the Study of Normal 




Man—^founded in 1951 by the adherents of Dr. Francis Roles—the London- 




based School of Economic Science; and by 1955 the supporters of J. G. 




Bennett, who had seceded from the Paris-controlled groups. Some disciples 




in the Ouspenskian line of succession have wanted to preserve the teaching 




as they received it from their Master—in their phrase, to “keep the System 




pure”—^while others beheve that Ouspensky’s exposition of Gurdjieff’s 




ideas had all along had “something missing.” Still others have been inspired 




to add their own contribution to the Work ideas. It would be possible to 




write another entire book about the bewildering variety of quests on which 




the independent groups have embarked; and here it can only be said that 




these  have  embraced  Greek  Orthodoxy,  Hinduism  and  the  Whirling 




Dervishes, as well as resulting in a four-volume survey of the whole human 




knowledge by Bennett and the introduction to the West of the Indonesian 




religion  Subud  and  the  Transcendental  Meditation  of  the  Maharishi 




Mahesh Yogi. 




It would also be possible to trace the widespread literary influence of the 




Work,  ranging  from the  outright condemnation and  bitterness  of Paul 




Serant’s  

Le Meurtre Rituel

 (1951) through the covert influence of the idea of




478 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




“awakened men”  in  the Zimiamvian  fantasies of E. R. Eddison, to the 




permeation by Work theory of the later poems and plays of T. S. Eliot. But 




a halt must be made somewhere: although even a book which takes the 




deaths of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky as its historical conclusion would be 




incomplete without at least one postscript indicating some of the directions 




in which it was possible to travel after the great men were gone. One of the 




most  intriguing  journeys—incorporating  within  itself  so  many  possibilities—^was the personal odyssey of Rodney Collin. If any one of the disciples’ spiritual journeys suggested ways of fashioning harmony out of 




discords, it was this extraordinary pilgrimage. 




For Rodney Collin the time of Ouspensky s death remained the focal 




point in the history of the Work, the core of all meanings and the source of 




future inspiration. Long afterward he still found himself “looking back at all 




those  years  of  Ouspensky’s  work  between  the  wars  as   

preparation

— 




preparation for something that was actually conceived in the end. . . .’’In 




November  1949,  he  had  expressed  the  sense  that  all  times  and  all 




possibilities were somehow contained in Ouspensky’s passage from this 




world to another. Death, he wrote, was “the greatest mystery, in which 




everything becomes possible,  

nothing is impossible

.” 




The miracles surrounding Ouspensky’s death had proved the quality of 




the event; and Collin had experienced his own personal miracle. When he 




had locked himself into the room where Ouspensky had died something had 




happened to him—or, more precisely, something  

came

 to him. 




I always disliked and still do dislike the idea of “communications. ’ For 




although such things are certainly possible from higher man they are 




inevitably understood wrongly, and immediately they are spoken 




about give rise to superstition in some and incredulity in others. And in 




due course the superstitious and the incredulous inevitably quarrel. 




But I have to tell you a story. Not long after Ouspensky’s death I 




went  to  his  bedroom  and  sat  dovm  there  in  a  rather  curious, 




superstitious mood. After a minute or two a voice in me—it could have 




been a memory of Ouspensky’s voice—said with the chuckle which I 




also remember very well; “You want a communication from the dead. 




Well, you won’t get one!” 




During his six days of isolation Rodney ColHn clearly thought that he had 




received, if not a “communication,” at least some insight or information into 




the  state  of  the  universe.  He  moved  into  a  flat  in  central  London  and 




completed a book he called  

The Theory of Eternal Life. 




This was based on the visions which had come to him during the six days 




at Lyne. It possesses the extremely brittle coherence of many visionary




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   479




works—like, for example  

Tertium Organum, 

 with which it can be compared.  Some  tremendous  upheaval,  some  gigantic  implosion  of   

new

 

meanings

 has transformed the author’s universe, and suddenly everything 




he ever knew realigns itself to support his new vision of the world. Like 




 

Tertium  Organum,  The  Theory  of  Eternal  Life

  can  be  frequently  faulted 




where it tries to be most “scientific”—a mistake in the first chapter ruins 




the supposed mathematical basis of the argument—but its author’s intense 




conviction of the importance of his miracle provides—as it provides for 




 

Tertium Organum

—a justification for the book. 




 

The Theory of Eternal Life

 in a sense  

was

 Rodney Collin’s miracle, or a 




central  part  of  it.  The  first  edition  was  printed  privately  and  issued 




anonymously in 1950. CoUin could not be induced to put his name to it, as 




he maintained that he had no right to claim authorship. The unanticipated 




result  was  that   

The  Theory  of  Eternal  Life

  sold  heavily  on  the  basis  of  a 




rumor that it was by Ouspensky. Many people who knew CoUin have 




asserted that he rose above his natural capacities to write this book, and the 




conclusion of  

The Theory of Eternal Life

 shows that he agreed. Referring to 




Ouspensky, he writes: “Of his achievement then let this present book stand 




witness, written this year following his death, of knowledge undeserved by 




me. Let him who can understand understand. For so it is.” 




He begins  

The Theory of Eternal Life

 by dividing human life into nine 




periods,  which  he  imagines  to  be  related  on  a  logarithmic  scale.  The 




enneagram is clearly in the back of his mind. Each period of human life is 




used to develop a higher function: thus the period of gestation produces the 




physical body, the first seven years of life elaborate the personality, and 




maturity is the time when the soul should be developed. Then comes the 




first  covert  reference  to  Ouspensky’s  death:  “We  have  every  reason  to 




believe that the impact of ever higher energies at successive stages of life 




does  not  end  at  .  .  .  the  prime  of  life.  ”  The  “prime  of  life  ”  is  the 




penultimate point on his scale; and the last point is death. At death—^when 




according  to  Ouspensky  the  death  agony  merges  with  the  ecstasy  of 




conception for the next recurrence—^the energy released is  

“too intense

 to 




be contained within a body of cellular structure, ” which naturally dissolves. 




With  these  principles  established,  the  author  turns  to  religious  and 




mythical writings. Traditional wisdom teaches that a period of time elapses 




between death and the allotting of a new body to the soul. St. Makary of 




Alexandria,  

The Tibetan Book of the Dead, 

 and the Platonic myth of Er, all 




demonstrate that the soul does not immediately reincarnate. To discover 




what happens in the intervening time, Collin projects his logarithmic scale 




into a diagram of what he calls “the invisible worlds,” which had come to 




him during his vigil at Lyne. This diagram consists of four circles or rings 




interlinked as if a figure eight had been transfixed by the sign for infinity— 




or another figure eight at right angles to the first, joining it at the central




480 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




point. These four circles represent the four possible worlds. The first circle 




is the “cellular” world in which we live; its sibling on the lateral figure of 




eight is a world of higher energy, the “molecular” world; above both soars 




the “electronic” world of extremely rarified matter; and below everything at 




the bottom of the vertical figure eight lies a heavy, nearly inert world of 




mineral existence. In religious terms these worlds correspond to Earth, 




Purgatory, Heaven, and Hell. In the interval between death and birth, a 




man lives in the invisible worlds. 




The “soul” is born at the physical death of a man and serves as the vehicle 




of consciousness in the molecular world, or Purgatory. Before death, some 




men develop a soul, which has “the freedom of the Earth world”; that is, it 




can  pass  through  physical  objects.  Similarly  the  “spirit”  is  the  body  or 




vehicle of consciousness in the electronic world. The spirit is composed of a 




degree of matter equivalent to light and possessing similar freedoms; for 




example, travel in three dimensions. By projecting the logarithmic scale 




which governs his division of the visible life of man into different periods, 




Rodney Collin even arrives at the average lifetime of these more rarified 




bodies. “Man’s individuality,” he writes, “which inhabits a physical body for 




76 years, has previously inhabited a soul for one month and before that a 




spirit for forty minutes. And birth into that spirit was simultaneous with the 




death of the previous physical body.” 




But entry to the electronic of Heaven-world presents such a shock to the 




individuality that most men awake from death only in the latter stages of 




their  sojourn  in  the  world  which  follows  (the  world  of  the  soul,  or 




Purgatory). Apparently deriving his idea from Plato, Collin maintains that 




in Purgatory time is reversed. The originality of this conception staggers 




him. “It is an idea of such power, intensity and far-reaching effect that it 




could not be invented. It is too strong for human imagination, which of 




itself can only produce weak ideas, enervating thoughts.” In the world of 




Purgatory causes become effects. “I create the kind of world in which I live 




. . . the murderer gives birth to the murdered man and  

is responsible for

 




 

the latters life.” 

 This unnerving prospect has been exploited in Philip K. 




Dick’s science fiction novel,  

Counter-Clock World

 (1968). Memory of the 




counter-clock experience, Collin thinks, would explain why the saviors of 




humanity feel that they were responsible for all the'suffering and evil in the 




world, when from the opposite direction of time they appear to assimilate 




it. 




The Heaven-world stands above Earth and Purgatory—at right angles to 




all Time, outside Time and contemplating its flow. Beneath the worlds of 




Time lies Hell, the destination of degenerating souls, where Time flows 




slowly and interminably. 




Legends of the Last Judgment in fact represent the moment when a soul. 




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   481

having traveled through the invisible worlds, passes into a new physical 




body. The stumbling block to the whole argument is the absence of memory 




in the ordinary man, reborn man 

—a

 fact to which legends of the River 




Lethe refer. The problem, as Rodney ColHn saw it, is to develop memory 




so that it can survive the shock of the transition into the invisible worlds. 




First a man must “develop the film” of his own memories—a doctrine which 




the author derived through Ouspensky directly from Gurdjieff. “Memories—of people, places, critical and trivial incidents—^which are ordinarily evoked in him only by association, must be brought back sequentially and 




by  will.”  A  man  must  concentrate  on  every  single  event  in  his  life: 




“Particularly  those   

which  he  is  reluctant  to  recall.” 

  It  is  the  unpleasant 




memories, the memories of mistakes and weaknesses, which will lead a man 




to remember the reasons for his embarrassments and failures, and therefore 




give him the possibility of change in the next recurrence. This is linked to 




Ouspensky’s teaching that every life has its “cross-roads”: points where 




different courses of action can make or mar the life. The man desiring to 




change his next recurrence must clearly note these crossroads in his newly 




developed memory:




Perhaps  he  may  go  back  to  the  actual  scene  of  some  mistake  or 




opportunity,  and  striving  with  all  his  force  to  remember  himself, 




endeavour to attach to some wall or tree engraved upon his memory 




the understanding which he wishes to transmit. He may tell himself 




that when he stands there  

in his next life

 the sight of this tree must 




 

remind him to remember. 




It will then be borne upon him that his only chance is to become 




conscious  

novo. 

 He will understand practically the principle that our 




only way of communicating memory to another life is by the force of 




consciousness in this. And he will see that the purpose of acquiring 




consciousness in life, is  

to remain conscious through death. 




In the colossal task of maintaining the thread of consciousness through 




death, only the most severe measures are likely to succeed. Rodney Collin 




suggests that  

suffering

 provides the necessary fixative. Christ, Socrates, 




Buddha, and the Tibetan yogi Milarepa all seemed to invite martyrdom. 




This then was the explanation for the curious activities of Ouspensky’s last 




days:   

they  were  a  preparation  for  self-remembering  through  death. 

  To 




Collin it seemed that if Ouspensky had been preparing for the conscious 




acquisition of spirit, he must also be helping his followers to acquire souls. 




This  was  an  application  of  the  principle  which  the  Master  had  often 




repeated: in order to move up the ladder of being a man must put someone 




in his place. Everyone concerned is therefore “moving up one”—^being




482 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




dragged  up  by  the  teacher’s  cosmic  ascent.  This  comphcated  process 




shatters the world fixed in its normally unalterable recurrence. It can take 




place only at the death of the teacher and—it is never clear precisely why, 




except that Ouspensky had thrown out the idea in the  

New Model

—this 




requires the performance of “a tremendous cosmic drama” in which “the 




chief event will be the death of the producer. ” 




Ouspensky s name is never mentioned. During one short section the 




Russian appears as “a man I knew”; but it is doubtful whether  

The Theory

 




 

of Eternal Life

 would make sense to anyone unaware that it sprang fully 




fledged from Ouspensky’s deathbed. The statement that the drama which 




precedes “transfiguration into the electronic world” can only be organized 




telepathically, remains an additional extravagance if the reader does not 




know  that  telepathy  was  commonplace  at  Lyne  in  September  1947. 




References to the miraculous appearance of Christ after the Crucifixion 




seems  to  be  gratuitous  wonder-making—until  we  remember  that 




Ouspensky was thought by some of his followers to have appeared or at 




least made his presence felt after his death. 




Rodney Collin drew several conclusions from his continuing sense of the 




miraculous. The first was that miracles occurring after a transfiguration 




were a sign that the experiment had succeeded. They were also designed as 




a  final  test  for  a  teacher’s  disciples—to  see  whether  they  possessed 




sufficient faith to follow where the teacher led. The transfiguration had 




opened “a crack through all levels of matter, ” through which “for all beings 




there  now  lies  a  way  of  escape  which  did  not  exist  before.”  On  these 




principles he proposed to organize the rest of his life. 




While her husband was writing, Janet Collin-Smith had been standing 




guard over him, preventing him from being overwhelmed by visitors who 




sought in his newly discovered certainties an authority to replace that of 




Ouspensky. But he seemed to have little wish to teach, although at least 




one friend felt that he was “going somewhere very fast.” In a letter of July 




30, 1948, he wrote




It is interesting . . . that people say: “Collin-Smith is teaching, will 




teach, won’t teach. They don’t understand that I am  

learning

 and this is 




the only way that I or anyone else can do so. I r^ember very clearly 




sitting with Ouspensky at Longchamps in New York sometime about 




1942, I think, and asking why everything seemed to have come to a 




stop. He said: “You forget one thing; many people forget it—to learn 




more you have to teach.” 




By the time this was written, Colhn was in Mexico. In the drab peiiod 




following  the  end  of  the  war,  many  of  Ouspenskv’s  former  followers




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   483




considered emigration. There was rationing at home, a Labour Government 




which some of the better-ofF no doubt wished fervently to avoid, and after 




their teacher vanished, there seemed little reason to stay. Some emigrated 




to South Africa, others to the United States—^where Mendham still held 




open its doors. Rodney Collin had grown to love Mexico during his wartime 




stay in America, and after a period of indecision, he left with his family and 




a small number of followers for Guadalajara, where  

The Theory of Eternal

 




 

Life

 was finished in November 1948, and then moved into an old hacienda 




in Tlalpam on the outskirts of Mexico City. They rented a flat in the center 




of Mexico City where meetings were held which attracted Mexicans and 




members of the local expatriate society. Their community at Tlalpam was 




joined by a few more disoriented Ouspenskians from England. 




Until 1954 Rodney Collin did his best to project the vision of a sacred 




drama and to take the role in it which he understood had been allotted to 




him.  Underneath  the  part  he  was  playing—and  this  was  a  role  half- 




delvberately conceived on a grand theological scale—^what was there? “A 




very fine man,” says one person who knew him. To a woman who knew 




both  Nicoll  and  Ouspensky,  Collin  seemed  “the  most  lovable  and  the 




warmest of them all. He had charity to the tips of his fingers.” He seems 




always to have found it easy to attract friends; yet until he met Ouspensky, 




he had no fixed center of gravity. From then on a great earnestness drove 




him. 




It  may  have  driven  him  too  far.  There  are  critics  who  say  that  he 




eventually  went  mad. Another  faction maintains  that  earlier in  his life 




Rodney Collin had been a skillful hypnotist and accused him of using 




hypnotic powers on people “in the Work. ” Tall, charming, and considerate, 




the contours of his face particularly English, he seems the most unlikely 




figure to invest with the cloak of a Svengali; and the accusation is denied by 




those who knew him best. But outside the closed circle of “Work” values, 




divorced from the intensity of his private experience, what sense does he 




make? The conclusion is inevitable: only within the context of the role he 




envisaged for himself can he be understood. 




In the letters he wrote from Mexico to his numerous correspondents, he 




enlarged upon the theme of the miraculous. Ouspensky had gone in search 




of the miraculous and had enabled others to experience the miraculous for 




themselves. Just as Ouspensky’s death was for him the key point in time, 




the  state  of  mind  he  had  experienced  with  some  of the  others at Lyne 




remained the key attitude to life. In one aspect he saw his mission as being 




to break down resistance to the miraculous. In November 1951, he wrote: 




“My own aim is to live permanently in this miraculous atmosphere; or at 




least permanently in the knowledge and memory of it. At such times it is 




less  and  less  the  need  of   

personal  work

  I  feel,  and  more  and  more  the




484 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




urgency of acting as a pure and understanding instrument in the realisation 




of a great plan. ” In July 1953, he used a metaphor which leaves no doubt of 




how he saw the situation; “All work for the creation of groups on earth is 




concerned with the building of arks to be navigated from a higher level. But 




my experience is that navigation may be far more exact and meaningful after 




the Teacher achieves and dies. For then he sees further and wider; yet his 




work  must  still  be  vdth  the  ark  he  made.  .  .  .  The  difference  is  like 




navigating with a great captain, and then navigating under the first mate 




with radio.” 




Rodney Collin was content to be an instrument, and to encourage in 




others  an  apprehension  of  the  realm  of  wonders  he  himself  had  contemplated. The great energy released by Ouspensky’s death could still give 




“understanding and direction” to those who had felt its effects. By June 




1951, he had come to consider that “the question of actual contact with 




Ouspensky—through time or however it is—seems to be the key question, 




and no longer for a few lucky individuals but on a larger scale.” His part of 




the Work could form part of a mystical body connected with Ouspensky 




through  the  crack  in  matter  which  his  death  had  opened  up,  and 




maintaining its connection through the emotional support it gave to the 




teacher who had gone ahead. “Those who believe in him become part of his 




work, and he in turn becomes responsible for them.” 




The essential for this was what Ouspensky called “positive attitude,” 




which is nothing more nor less than faith. Rodney Collin’s advice to more 




orthodox Ouspenskians was in the uncompromising terms of a fundamentalist, berating Doubting Thomas. To those who floundered about wailing that their  teachers  had  been  taken  from  them,  he  wrote  in  tones  of  incomprehension. “If we ever had a teacher we have one now. If we have not one now, did we ever have one?” 




His answer to the more staid—those without “positive attitude” toward 




the facts of Ouspensky’s death and who by implication questioned his ovra 




sanity—applied both to the last days of his departed teacher and to his own 




condition at the time of writing:




All that Ouspensky said and did at that time seemed to me to have 




exactly  this  purpose  and  effect—to  sort  out the people who  could 




respond to the miraculous from those who could not. ... It was very 




clear that if a man in a higher state of consciousness acts directly from 




the  perceptions  of  that  state,  ...  he  will  seem  mad  to  men  in  an 




ordinary state. 




By  July  24,  1953,  his  impatience  with  the  custodians  of  inherited 




tradition had broken all bounds and he rebuked th^ reactionaries who 




refused to take up the challenge of the new age:




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   485




It was put into our hands to be the agents of miracles. And we tell 




people to control the expression of their negative emotions, not to 




push, and to form an orderly queue for an unknown bus, which may 




one day take them a twopenny stage nearer heaven. I wonder that a 




great voice doesn’t come out of heaven thundering: “O ye of little 




faith!” 




When will people understand that a new age has really dawned? 




When will they stop sealing up the terrible crack in heaven which 




Ouspensky has made with precautions and good behaviour? We must 




allow divine madness to take possession of us now, before hell freezes! 




With Rodney Collin’s increasing emancipation from the letter of the law 




as  Ouspensky  preached  it,  the  routine  of  the  community  at  Tlalpam 




departed  from  the  pattern  of  Lyne  Place.  Activity  centered  around  an 




extraordinary project which originated in the visions experienced by its 




designer  in  the  week  after  Ouspensky’s  death.  This  was  for  a  “three- 




dimensional diagram ” to symbolize the laws governing universal harmony. 




In 1949 a field in the mountains outside Mexico City was bought, and work 




began on a building which became known as the Planetarium of Tetecala. 




Tetecala—meaning “stone house of God”—^was the name of the field on 




which the building stood. The site was perched dramatically 9,000 feet 




above sea level, with a magnificent view over the valley in which Mexico 




City  lay  2,000  feet  below,  and  the  design  of  the  building  was  equally 




remarkable. The ground plan was based on two chambers hollowed from 




the lava rock on which the Planetarium was to stand. The larger area— 




Jforty-three feet in diameter—^was named the Chamber of the Sun. Linked 




to it was the smaller Chamber of the Moon. “Between the two in a small 




space,” Joyce CoUin-Smith writes, “a great upturned shell received the 




sun’s rays through an aperture, at the Summer Solstice. Round the chamber 




ran a passage-way, the walls of which were Uned with mosaic designs drawn 




and laid by himself, depicting all levels of organic life, from the primordial 




to the perfect Man. Above ground, the planetarium itself was to have been 




flanked by the library, and a room for Mexican dancing, lectures or theatre 




performances.” 




The community at Tlalpam planned to build their own houses beside the 




Planetarium. A clinic and dispensary were established for the local  

peons. 

 




The strange immigrant band began to integrate themselves with the life of 




the country. Rodney Collin established an English bookshop in Mexico City 




and  made  plans  for  marketing  Mexican  arts  and  crafts.  He  set  up  a 




publishing  firm,  Ediciones  Sol,  to  issue  his  own  books  and  Spanish 




translations of Ouspensky and Maurice Nicoll. He felt that he, the Work, 




and Mexico were all on the edge of a new beginning. On February 22, 




1950, he wrote: “It is very difficult to convey the strange springtime feeling




486 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




of certainty, of beginning from the beginning, of a new unspoiled start, 




which one gets in Mexico just now. Everything is growing, expanding, 




developing  . . . ”   By  abandoning  the  System,  Ouspensky  had  set  his 




followers free to travel their own paths. “The idea of reconstruction seems 




to be endless,” CoUin felt. “It vdll be different for each person according to 




his knowledge and capacity.” 




The new beginning in Mexico was watched with some trepidation from 




the Old World. To some it seemed that by erecting the Planetarium, Collin 




was embalming the Work in a stone coffin. On the principle that there 




should be no permanent forms, no tangible monuments, no direct literary 




representations  of  the  teaching,  this  was  unanswerable.  Yet  when  the 




Collin-Smiths  traveled  to  Europe  in  1952-53,  few  voices  were  raised 




against them. Rodney Collin was invited by Maurice Nicoll to lecture at 




Great Amwell, and he remained in contact vdth Francis Roles and the more 




orthodox Ouspenskians. He also visited Paris where, through the Librairie 




Vega, he bought a large private library of occult books to be housed at the 




Planetarium. He took part in the work of the Paris groups; and with the 




single  exception  of  J.  G.  Bennett—^with  whom  he  appears  to  have 




quarreled—he  was  in  contact  with  all  the  different  strands  of  activity 




deriving from Gurdjieff or Ouspensky. His own task began to seem more 




and more a work harmonizing apparently conflicting points of view. 




Harmony! What to others appeared schism and dissension, seemed to 




Collin  a  necessary  division  of  functions,  the  extension  of  a  sphere  of 




influence rather than a proclamation of dogmatic “teaching”; the provision 




of many different but complementary points of view. At first, with the 




memory of the apocalypse of Lyne upon him, his perception of the imity 




underlying  all  things  had  been  expressed  in  terms  of  the  union  of 




Ouspensky’s followers vdth their transfigured Master. As the impact of the 




experience faded with time, his sense of harmony seemed more and more 




to  refer  to  the  Work  as  a  whole,  to  all  the  influences  stemming  from 




Gurdjieff and Ouspensky. This larger idea of harmony had in fact been bom 




soon  after  Ouspensky’s  death.  In  August  1948,  he  had  answered  one 




inquirer that progress was necessary—^but at the same time, that the growth 




of a living organism had been in the plan of the Work from the beginning. 




What he was doing was providing the theology to support the work of 




Mme. de Salzmann and Mme. Ouspensky in bringing the scattered groups 




together—although he saw more unity in diversity than other leaders of the 




Work. He set out deliberately to write scripture, revelation, and commentary  all  at  once;  and  he  found  his  inspiration  in   

A  New  Model  of  the

 

Universe. 

  When  Ouspensky  refers  in  the   

New  Model

  to  “the  draina  of 




Christ”—^the mystery play acted out on the stage of the world—^he says that 




no one can now tell if any of the actors in that play stumbled over their lines




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   487




or missed their cues. All mistakes were corrected in the Gospels, which 




presented a perfect picture so that the play should have its intended effect. 




As early as February 1949, Rodney Collin had committed himself to the 




task of ensuring that the drama of Ouspensky was presented as flawlessly as 




possible. 




I am sure that it is in some way an esoteric principle that records have 




to  be  “made  right.”  It  is  not  a  question  of  hiding  mistakes  or 




unpleasantness or anything like that. But if someone in the play acts 




outside of character, so to speak, the record has to correct it. The text 




of the play has to be more perfect than the play itself How this can be 




is  practically  impossible  to  say.  The  New  Testament  must  be  the 




perfect example:  

everything

 is right. 




Collin embodied his convictions in a pamphlet,  

The Herald of Harmony, 

 




which  Ediciones  Sol  published  in  1954.  With  its  title  harking  back  to 




 

Herald of Coming Good, 

 it proclaimed that its author’s allegiance was no 




longer  simply  Ouspenskian.  The  pamphlet  made  huge  claims  for  the 




mission of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky. Each age had had a messenger sent 




out by “the Hierarchy,” which Collin also called “Great School.” The last 




age was that of Christ with his message of love; but that age had lacked the 




element of harmony. Gurdjieff and Ouspensky were the messengers of the 




Hierarchy for the new era, and their complementary qualities formed a 




polarity on which their work was based. 




The deaths of the two Masters still appeared of transcendental significance, although  

The Herald of Harmony

 was a little doubtful about that of Gurdjieff  who,  “joking  up  to  heaven,  escaped  with  but  the  slightest 




singeing of his wings, a drift of unearthly music echoing in his trail.” Both 




Gurdjieff and Ouspensky now took their places as spiritual influences on the 




coming  age.  The  destiny  envisaged  for  the  Work  was  enormous.  “Its 




interdependent parts—now single men, now groups—later must grow to 




nations, beliefs, whole races and their destiny.” It was to be the fertilizing 




agent for the whole new era. 




Everything, as Rodney CoUin had written in 1951, was “part of a great 




and foreseen plan.” His own role in the plan was to proclaim harmony, and 




in carrying out this task, he claimed the same poetic autonomy as in the 




creation of the Planetarium. As he wrote in the foreword to his play  

Hellas

 




—^written in 1949 and pubhshed the next year—“So much was put into the 




fashionable jargon of our day—in scientific terms, with electronic matter for 




divinity, and nuclear fission for its attainment. But not everyone is at home 




with molecules, and those that are grow tired of them at times. So now we 




must return to legend, striving to reanimate a more attractive form.” He




488 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




was  dramatizing  the  mythical  possibilities  inherent  in  the  historical 




situation; and in his own activities in Mexico, he tried to keep alive the 




sense of the miraculous and the perception of harmony by activating the 




oldest of all harmonic myths; the relationship between man and the stars. 




In 1954 his long book,  

The Theory of Celestial Influence, 

 was published 




in  English.  He  regarded   

The  Theory  of  Eternal  Life

  as  a  condensation  of 




some  ideas  contained  in  the  larger  book,  and   

The  Theory  of  Celestial

 




 

Influence

 also had its roots in his visions at Lyne. Its author even saw it as 




the fulfillment of a promise made to him by Ouspensky on the first occasion 




they had met privately in Gwyndwr Road. He had told the Master that he 




was a writer by nature and asked his advice about his journalistic career. 




Ouspensky’s reply had been, ‘“Better not get  

too

 involved. Later we may 




find  something  for  you  to  write.”’  It  was  a  rule  that  if  one  asked 




Ouspensky’s advice, that advice had the force of law, and Collin had written 




nothing for the next ten years. “But in the end, ” he noted, “O. kept his 




promise. And the outline of the present book was vsTitten in the two months 




immediately before his death ... as a direct result of what he was trying to 




achieve and show at that time. ” 




Written,  Collin  seems  to  have  believed,  under  the  direction  of 




Ouspensky,  

The  Theory  of  Celestial  Influence

  is  an  ambitious  attempt  to 




link the ideas of the System with the findings of science and to calculate the 




cycles which govern the workings of nature. But whereas Ouspensky had 




drawn Gurdjieff’s Ray of Creation as a diagram of various degrees of matter, 




Collin was concerned not with degrees of matter expressed as “all suns” or 




“all worlds,” but with the actual physical planets. He calculated the life of 




the  solar  system;  correlated  planetary  cycles  with  the  functions  of  the 




human  organism;  coordinated  cosmic  factors  with  the  rise  and  fall  of 




civilizations; and in general, attempted to produce a contemporary version 




of the Renaissance philosophy of the harmony of the spheres. The world is 




one united  organism, and  man is a corpuscle in  the world body. Such 




corpuscles are called “cosmoses”: “The possibility of self-evolution or selftranscendence  implies  a  very  special  plan  and  structure  which  some creatures  have  and  others  do  not  have.  Thus  man,  who  possesses  the 




possibility of perfecting and transcending himself, can be called a cosmos, 




whereas a dog, which seems to be a finished experiment with no further 




possibilities, cannot. ” 




The  designation  can  also  apply  to  groups  of  men.  Under  normal 




conditions, man develops in response to influences created in the conventional processes of nature. But these are much too slow to permit real growth. The result is the appearance of “schools of regeneration ’ which 




stimulate natural processes to encourage quicker development. The^ap- 




pearance of such schools is governed by the 165-year cycle of Neptune. By




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   489




calculating ifrom 30 B.C. Rodney Collin arrives at various dates which can be 




associated  with  “esoteric  schools.”  Thus  the  builders  of  the  Gothic 




cathedrals, who so interested Ouspensky, flourished circa 1125; and after a 




number of  165-year periods,  the Rosicrucians appeared about the year 




1620. Never stated, but always implied, is the most recent date on the cycle 




of Neptune; 1950. It is safe to imagine with what esoteric school this is 




associated. 




A  true  school,  Rodney  Collin  writes,  “endeavors  to  simulate  and  in 




successful cases  

actually creates a cosmos. ” 

 Members of the school act the 




parts which in the great body of the universe are taken, for example, by the 




planets. In this replica of the cosmic dance the teacher  

is the Sun. 




 

The Theory of Celestial Influence

 is dedicated to Ouspensky: “Magistro 




Meo, qui Sol fuit est et erit . . .”—Ouspensky, “who was, is, and will be 




the  Sun.”  In   

The  Theory  of  Eternal  Life, 

  Rodney  Colhn  argues  that  the 




world of the spirit is the world of electronic energy. In several places Collin 




elaborates on the role of the Sun. Most importantly he writes that although 




man can imagine an infinity of Absolutes, for all practical purposes, the Sun 




is  God.  The  implications  are  extraordinary,  especially  in  view  of  the 




astonishing dedication to Ouspensky,  

who was, is, and will be the Sun. 




It was Collin’s personal truth and quite “beyond argument.” Whatever 




may be thought of his harmonious universe, it has a poetic consistency 




which, although less compelling than Ouspensky’s, required a similar leap 




of the imagination to perceive and to sustain. But by 1954 something of his 




earlier frenzy was leaving Rodney Collin. The language of  

The Herald of

 




 

Harmony

 is false, stilted, and sugary, however real the convictions which 




inspired it. And,  

The Theory of Celestial Influence, 

 although written years 




earlier, shows the gaps in Rodney Colhn’s armor, which could be ignored in 




the eccentric ecstasy of  

The Theory of Eternal Life

. The longer work was 




written at high speed and is full of factual errors, but it is the nature of the 




mind behind it which is called into question. The book gives the impression 




of a man striving, and failing, to be a polymath. “He did not possess,” says 




one acquaintance, “the intellect for what he was trying to do.” Rodney 




CoUin had a journalist’s training and a large store of general knowledge: he 




hadj among other jobs, worked on the research staff of the  

Daily Express

 




 

Encyclopedia

 in 1934. But general knowledge does not produce generally 




convincing explanations of the universe. Rodney Collin is more impressive 




in his theological context, as the man who could live in the miraculous and 




who wished to inspire others with his version of harmony. 




Miracles still pursued him through the last two years of his life. For 




example: one evening in 1954 or 1955 a companion was seated wdth him in 




his study. In amazement she saw his features dissolve and reform into an 




“Oriental” face. Then it became difficult for her to focus on the face at all. 




490 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




and it seemed as if Rodney Collin were an old man with a fluffy white 




beard. “It’s only because I haven’t shaved for some days,” he said. Then his 




face became that of Ouspensky before shifting rapidly through a succession 




of  unfamiliar  masks—^some  Oriental,  some  simply  unknown.  When 




Ouspensky’s  image  appeared,  his  companion  cried  out,  “You  are 




Ouspensky!” “Very likely,” was the calm reply. 




And  again  in  a  restaurant,  the  same  companion  noticed  the  same 




phenomenon. “I can see a face again,” she said; it seemed to be Chinese. “I 




think,  Tibetan,”  said  Rodney  Collin.  Then:  “Don’t  be  frightened,  the 




curtain of time grows thin, that’s all.” 




But even in the realm of the miraculous, by 1954 something had failed; 




the batteries were running low. People began to speculate; had he lost his 




connection, was he mixing the levels of experience? Even—had he begun 




to  

pretend? 

 He had given up listening to his own voices and begun to rely 




on others. Compared to what had gone before, he had walked from the 




Chamber of the Sun into that of the Moon. 




Among those who were attracted to the meetings in Mexico City were an 




Englishman and his Mexican wdfe. Mrs. D. was a spirit medium, and soon 




after her arrival in the community at Tlalpam, she began to bring through 




messages from Ouspensky and Gurdjieff. How are we to account for the fact 




that the navigator hstens to her, unless his radio is not working? 




Mrs. D. was an impressive personality and a powerful medium. Her 




renderings  from  Gurdjieff'  and  Ouspensky  were  accompanied  by  the 




appropriate manifestations; she would walk like a man, her face would seem 




to contort into the outline of Gurdjieff’s or Ouspensky’s, and her voice grew 




harsh and guttural, even rendering Ouspensky’s famous chuckle. She had 




been known to exhibit the stigmata and, according to some reports, could 




open  the  wounds  “at  will.”  She  had  been  brought  up  in  the  intense 




atmosphere of Mexican Catholicism, and it was to be expected that her 




messages would contain the flavor of authoritarian Christianity. 




A whole mythology grew up from the stories told by her voices, which 




supplemented Rodney Collin’s interpretation of the mssion of Gurdjieff 




and Ouspensky. Behind the great Masters, and in some way supporting 




them,  were  a  pair  of  early  Christian  saints—Cosmas  and  Damian,  the 




medical saints who were the patrons of the Medici. Ouspensky, of course, 




was named “Pyotr Demianovitch” and it was rumored that the name of 




“Cosmas” was somehow associated with Gurdjieff. Behind St. Cosmas and 




St.  Damian  was  a  mysterious  character  called  “Ivan  Ivanovitch,”  who 




appeared at odd times in history, and inspired all Ouspensky’s heroes—the 




“Rome School,” Stevenson, Nietzsche, Gurdjieff, and Ouspensky’s gfand-




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   491




mother—^and eventually by some mystical subterfuge, turned out to be St. 




Luke himself. . . . 




In 1954 the house at Tlalpam was sold and the community dispersed into 




family units in Mexico City, although the Planetarium remained the focus of 




their activity. A Christian note, pitched in an uncertain key, began to be 




heard  in  the  publications  of  Ediciones  Sol.  In   

The  Herald  of  Harmony, 

 




Rodney Collin claimed his harmonious gospel as the “New Christianity.” 




The  same  year,  he  published  another  pamphlet  called   

The  Christian

 




 

Mystery, 

  which  included  a  “Litany  for  the  Enneagram.”  Yet  another 




pamphlet called  

The Pyramid of Fire

 was withdrawn after publication. * An 




encounter with Catholicism became inevitable. 




In  the  summer  of  1954  the  Collin-Smiths,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  D., 




made an expedition to Europe. The voices traveled with them; and the little 




group was directed from country to country on a mysterious occult quest. 




“We went looking for traces of schools in the past,” Rodney Collin wrote, 




. . and in a way difficult to describe, one seems also to make a living 




connection through time back to those experiments.” The quest was not 




altogether successful. They visited Seville, where the voices told them to 




look for a particular text in a specific book in a certain library; but the book 




was not there. After Holy Week in Seville, they traveled through the Greek 




islands,  Egypt,  Syria,  Lebanon,  Persia,  and  Turkey  before  returning  to 




Mexico  through  Rome,  Paris,  and  London.  “Although  we  didn’t  fully 




understand this when we started,” Rodney Collin wrote the following year, 




“it is now clear that this last trip was a journey in search of the Passion.” 




For the voices had not entirely failed, although they were not to be relied 




on  for the  exact page references  of  esoteric scholarship. The party had 




halted at Rome, and here Rodney Collin vras received into the Catholic 




Church. It may be suspected that the voices—although they appeared to be 




indicating  the  Pyramids  or  the  Mount  of  Olives—had  actually  been 




whispering “St. Peter’s” all along. 




On his return to Mexico, Rodney Collin found that many of his more 




educated followers had drifted away. He had to defend himself against 




charges of superstitious reliance on the voices of Mrs. D., and compared 




the lady’s mission to that of Joan of Arc. He also had to defend himself




* 




A fete which met several of the Ediciones Sol pamphlets. The earliest to be withdrawn was 




supposed  to  have  been  written  by  Ouspensky,  

Notes  on  Saint  Johns  Gospel. 

  This  was  a 




manuscript discovered by Rodney Collin among Ouspensky’s papers, but which was in feet the 




work  of  another  pupil  whp  had  submitted  it  to  him.  Collin  issued  it  believing  it  to  be 




Ouspensky’s  work,  but  withdrew  it  when  he  discovered  his  mistake.  Why  the  later  booklets 




were withdrawn is a matter for conjecture. 




492 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




against accusations of turning his coat. In October 1954, he issued what 




reads as a general statement on his conversion:




I realized many years ago that our work is not a substitute for religion. 




It is a key to religion, as it is a key to art, science and all other sides of 




human life . . . 




By temperament, inclination, study, and by the country in which I 




have to work, I became a Roman Catholic. I had already anticipated 




this several years ago. It only needed the right moment and opportunity. For this time is a crossroads. 




Other people, at the same crossroads, might join different religions, 




though it seems to me that Roman Catholicism has the greatest reserve 




of esoteric truth. In any case, whatever reUgion they chose, it would be 




the esoteric part which they joined. . . . For the esoteric parts of all 




rehgions are connected. . . . 




A year later he reassured a correspondent that although he was now a 




Catholic he still belonged to the Fourth Way, and “no one either in or out 




of the Church” could persuade him of a contradiction. But relations with 




the more orthodox followers of GurdjieflF and Ouspensky had by now 




become  strained.  Those  who  had  earlier  been  prepared  to  extend  an 




understanding tolerance now felt that he had lost his way. 




In South America, however, his influence was vwdespread. Besides the 




Mexico City group—^by now chiefly Mexican in nationality—groups had 




been started in Peru, Chile, Uruguay, and Argentina (to the last of which 




arrived  Jorge  Luis  Borges,  perambulating  the  corridors  of  his  eternal 




Library). In Mexico itself. Collin’^ joint activities vnth Mrs. D. entered the 




public eye, as they busied themselves in welfare work among the poor. At 




the  Planetarium,  movements  were  taught  and  theatrical  performances 




given—^which significantly, included Anouilh’s play about St. Joan,  

The

 




 

Lark

—and Rodney Collin involved himself in a ceaseless round of activity. 




He was becoming increasingly simple and childlike. Some people see him 




as  a  Schweitzer-figure;  others  would  say  that  he  became  increasingly 




suggestible.  He  drove  himself  harder  and  haijder,  tiring  himself  by 




responding to every call upon his time; sleeping little, growing exhausted in 




the thin atmosphere after long expeditions through uninhabited country 




with little food or rest. One such walk lasted for several days during which 




he  ate  only  a  handful  of  raisins.  His  personal  “super-efforts”  were 




intensified by prayer and meditation; and he began to take part in the 




traditional pilgrimages to the celebrated shrines of Mexico. 




He  issued  a  “Programme  of  Study”  directing  his  followers  to  study




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   493




themselves under different varieties of law—as unity, duality, trinity, as an 




interplay of the numbers seven and twelve, as multiplicity. The program 




explained what this all meant to him, and the results of his own inquiries 




are  to  be  found  in   

The  Theory  of  Celestial  Influence. 

  The  only  new 




development during 1955 was a pervasive emphasis on the term “Hierarchy.” The expression had appeared in  

The Herald of Harmony, 

 and in his letters of 1955 it became increasingly important as the bridge between the 




ideas of Ouspensky and the Catholic Church. It was “the Hierarchy” which 




had sent Gurdjieff and Ouspensky to earth; 




There exists an invisible Hierarchy of spirits who order and direct all 




the  different  aspects  of  life  on  earth  and  humanity.  That  which 




Ouspensky calls the Inner Circle of Humanity, that which the Church 




calls the Church Triumphant, that is what we call the Hierarchy. 




The  Hierarchy  consists  in  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  spirit  and 




redeemer of our universe, and all his conscious helpers, great and 




small. 




He was straining now to fit the old pattern on to the new, and even the 




attempts at synthesis grew more and more reluctant. He had found his own 




home  in  the  Catholic  Church,  and  his  letters  are  almost  free  of  the 




complicated terms of the System. There are strong suggestions that, having 




performed a long and complicated journey  

in, 

 Rodney Collin was at last 




coming  

out. 

 We might assume that he had emerged from the cavern into 




the hght of common day—but during the autumn and winter of 1955, a 




sense of urgency appeared to strike him. Something was at last going 




to happen, the new age was really going to dawn. On October 3, 1955, he 




wrote: “I think we have come to a cross-roads on many different scales. 




Some tremendous opportunity is preparing.” From his Planetarium he 




scanned the night skies and plotted an extraordinary astrological portent: on 




January 21, 1956 all the planets would be arranged in the form of a cross, in 




"the arch-sign and promise of harmony for the age to come.” That same 




January, he led a night pilgrimage from the Planetarium to the shrine of 




Our Lady of Guadelupe. The walk was thirty miles, and during Mass in the 




Basilica, he fainted. This may have been the first of a series of heart attacks 




brought on by overexertion. 




In March and April 1956, he concentrated on setting his business affairs 




in order, observing that all debts must be paid before embarking on a new 




undertaking. He told liis fnends that something momentous was about to 




happen, but he still did not know what it was. There had to be  

something

 




 

new:

 but what this was he could not see. When, at the end of April, he left




494 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




with his wife, and other followers for Lima, the expedition was made in an 




atmosphere of baffled anticipation. Rodney Collin expected great things 




from his visit to Peru; but his vision had clouded and he could not see 




 

beyond. 




His exhaustion was intensified by a week’s hard work with his Lima 




group.  He  held  classes  of  movements,  saw  pupils  individually  and 




superintended general meetings. On May 2, the party left for Cuzco in an 




unpressurized plane, and during the journey through the mountains, they 




had to take oxygen from tubes. Cuzco itself is at a height of 11,800 feet and, 




after  their  arrival,  the  Colhn-Smiths  had  to  rest  to  recover  from  the 




altitude. Rodney Collin remarked that he felt “rather strange,” and much to 




his wife’s surprise—^for usually he had no truck with medicines—he took 




several doses of the coramine that had been prescribed to relieve the effects 




of altitude sickness. 




That afternoon  he went out alone  into the streets of Lima, where he 




discovered an orphan beggar boy named Modesto. The boy had a deformed 




leg which caused him to walk on the toes of his right foot; nevertheless, he 




accompanied Rodney Colhn on a climb up to the huge statue of Christ 




which stands on the mountain overlooking the city. Here they prayed that 




Modesto  might  be  healed.  When  Janet  Collin-Smith  emerged  after  the 




siesta hour, she found a crowd gathered outside a draper’s shop where her 




husband was buying the boy clothes. It appeared that, after the expedition 




up the mountain, the two had gone together to the public baths where, in a 




ritual of purification, Rodney Collin had washed the beggar boy and dried 




him with his own shirt. In the street he spoke to the onlookers and told 




them  that  the  boy  was  their  responsibility.  “You  must  learn  what  is 




harmony,” hd told them, “you must learn to look after each other; you must 




leam  to  give—to  give.”  The  predictable  retort  came  from  the  crowd: 




“That’s  all  very  well  for  you,  you’re  rich.”  Rodney  Collin  replied: 




“Everyone can give something. Everyone can give a prayer. Even if you 




can’t give anything else, you can always give a smile; that doesn’t cost 




anytfiing.” Then he took the boy off to buy him shoes and feed him. 




That  night  he  woke  his  wife.  He  told  her  that  he  was  afraid.  It  had 




seemed so important that Modesto be cured that he had offered his own 




body in exchange for the boy’s. Afterward he had realized that he was 




intended to do other work. His wife asked whether he thought that God 




would change His plans at his request, and Collin replied that those who 




had invoked the Holy Trinity as he had done were certain to have their 




requests granted. 




On the morning of May 3, Rodney CoUin went to Mass and prepared for 




a trip to some Inca ruins in the hills. Before the party left, Modesto arrived




T H E   Q U E S T   F O R   H A R M O N Y   495




and took his benefactor off to show him where he Uved—^high up in the 




cathedral bell tower beneath the bells. The morning’s sightseeing went as 




planned, and the Collin-Smiths returned to their hotel. During the siesta, 




Rodney Collin went out again as he had done the previous day. 




From  various  accounts  which  his  wife  and  friends  pieced  together 




afterward, he seems to have gone straight to the cathedral to find Modesto 




in his belfry, ninety-eight steps above the cathedral square. He sat down on 




a ledge below the parapet, and began to tell Modesto how he was going to 




arrange for an operation to be carried out on his twisted leg. All the time he 




was talking, he kept his eyes fixed on the statue of Christ on the mountain 




opposite. Suddenly he stood up, gave a gasp, and lurched forward on to the 




top of the parapet, grasping with his hands the two beams which supported 




the arch above it. Then his head struck one of the beams, and he fell into 




the street below. An old woman who saw him fall said that he fell feet 




foremost, his arms outstretched in the form of a cross, and his head canted 




backward as if his gaze were still fixed upon the statue. He lay on the 




ground in a peculiar cruciform position, with his right leg drawn up just as 




the cripple boy’s had been. He was smiling. 




“It is not unusual,” Janet Collin-Smith remarks, “for a man to die of a 




heart attack after climbing a long flight of steep stairs at such an altitude 




after weeks of physical eflfort in a state of exhaustion. It is the natural 




consequence of physical conditions. It is also natural, on a different level, 




for a man who has believed with all his being that the object of life is to give 




all he has for the love of God, in the end to give himself” In what manner 




Rodney Collin may have “given himself’ she does not say. His death could 




have been an accident, act of God, or the grateful surrender of an exhausted 




Spirit  into  his  Savior’s  keeping.  It  could  have  been  a  death  chosen  in 




accordance  with  the  theories  of   

The  Theory  of  Eternal  Life:

  part  of  a 




mystery play, part of a process designed to fix his memories through the 




invisible worlds. Or, it could have been connected with his confession to his 




wife that he had offered his body in exchange for the health of the beggar 




boy. 




In November, the previous year, a correspondent had asked him about 




escaping from eternal recurrence. He replied that this could only be done 




“by sacrificing one’s unicellular ‘liberty’ and becoming absorbed into a 




higher organism with a higher aim. ” He had always considered that the 




httle human cosmos should join with a greater whole, and tried to live his 




life in a universal context. Somehow—in obedience to the laws of harmony 




he had so laboriously j)lotted—the universe demanded his death. 




The town of Cuzco requested that the foreigner be buried there, and in 




the presence of a fair-sized crowd, the body was interred in the graveyard of




496 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




the cathedral. His wife and friends arranged for a tablet to be laid in the 




square where he had fallen with the inscription: “Here Rodney Collin gave 




his life to project harmony.” 




After his death Mrs. D. assumed the direction of his Mexican followers. 




First one, then another, successor was tried; but no one had the magnetism 




to hold the group together. There were quarrels and doubts. A prominent 




member of the Mexico City group wrote letters to Europe claiming that 




Rodney Collin had gone mad. The voices ordered, countermanded, and 




ordered again. As a body of people following the Fourth Way, the group 




disintegrated, and the last book issued under Rodney Collin’s name is to be 




mistrusted.  

The Mirror of Light

 (1959) is supposed to consist of extracts 




from his notebooks; but even the editors admit that it is impossible to say 




which he wrote himself and which came from other sources. Eventually, 




Mrs. D. founded a Catholic lay order to do good works in Mexico City and 




became the inspiration of a circle of young Mexican priests. The Chamber 




of the Moon at Tetacala was turned into a Catholic chapel. 




On Rodney Collin’s grave in Cuzco blue flowers were planted. Straining 




for   

correspondences,  links,  perceptions  of  true  relationships, 

  the  devotee  of 




miracles had once sought the key to the operations of immortality. “It’s got 




something to do with blue flowers,” he said, “. . . but I can’t get further 




than that.” On the headstone was inscribed a prayer he had written two 




months before he died; 




I was sent to earth; 




My wings were taken; 




My body entered matter; 




My soul was caught by matter; 




The earth sucked me down; 




I came to rest. 




I am inert; 




Longing arises; 




I gather my strength; 




Will is bom; 




I receive and meditate; 




I adore the Trinity; 




I am in the presence of God. 




PART




3




First and Last Things




Timaeus:  Don’t  therefore  be  surprised,  Socrates,  if  on  many 




matters concerning the gods and the whole world of change we are 




unable  in  every  respect  and  on  every  occasion  to  render  a 




consistent  and  accurate  account.  You  must  be  satisfied  if  our 




account is as likely as any, remembering that both you and I who 




are sitting in judgment upon it are merely human, and you should 




not look for anything more than a likely story in such matters. 




—Plato,  

Timaeus, 

 29 




translated by H. D. P. 




Lee




(Harmondsworth, 1965)




497







1




The Sources of the System




I.  

Gurdjieff and Tradition




There  is  a  distinction  between  the  forms  and  content  of  GurdjiefF’s 




teaching—or to use the theological terms, “substance” and “accidents.” 




When Gurdjieff was actually engaged in teaching, the accidents may not 




have affected the substance of what he taught. But for anyone approaching 




his ideas in historical perspective, such accidents are a stumbling block. 




Although he varied the forms within which he worked, Gurdjieff did 




make consistent use of an elaborate cosmological scheme. This is expressed 




in  the  palate-shattering  language  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales, 

  but  it  is  better 




known  through  Ouspensky’s   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous. 

  Many  people 




fascinated by Gurdjieff approach him through this book. The result is that 




the cosmology which he taught to his groups in Holy Russia has become 




fixed in the imagination as an integral part of “what Gurdjieff taught.” 




Ouspensky was particularly interested in Gurdjieff’s theories on the cosmic 




relations;  and  successor  teachers  of  the  ideas  have  made  use  of  the 




enneagram, the Cosmic Octave, the Table of Hydrogens, and the rest of the 




esoteric paraphernalia vnth which the name of Gurdjieff is associated. 




Gurdjieff  “remains  one  of  the  great  enigmas  of  our  time,”  writes 




Professor Needleman. “What sources did he draw on for his ideas, his 




music, and sacred dances, his method of life?” Research into the sources of 




Gurdjieff’s System has been going on ever since he arrived in the West, but




499




500 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




very little has been published that is not deliberately misleading. J. G. 




Bennett writes that “95% of what he taught can be found elsewhere,” and 




followers of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky must at least have traced the sources 




of the cosmology. Discovering the sources of the cosmology makes it much 




clearer what Gurdjieff was about, although we must beware of assuming 




that the cosmology alone is “what Gurdjieff taught.” In  

Glimpses of Truth

 




Gurdjieff  cautions  the  narrator  against  imagining  that  he  would  have 




expressed himself in occult terms to everyone who came his way:




The fact of the matter is that in occult literature much that has been 




said is superfluous and untrue. You had better forget all this. All your 




researches in this area were a good exercise for your mind; therein lies 




their great value, but only there. They have not given you knowledge. . . . Judge everything from the point of view of your common sense. Become the possessor of your own sound ideas and don’t accept 




anything on faith; and when you, your self, by way of sound reasoning 




and argument, come to an unshakable persuasion, to a full understanding of something, you will have achieved a certain degree of initiation. 




The details of Gurdjieff’s cosmology belong primarily to the accidents of 




his teaching. Whether or not Gurdjieff himself took seriously his more 




occult ideas is another question. Any attempt to trace these ideas to their 




sources in occult tradition does show that Gurdjieff himself had read or 




studied deeply in such sources, or that he accepted the findings of people 




who  had  done  so.  When  the  cosmology  recorded  by  Ouspensky  is 




combined with various other hints dropped by Gurdjieff and what little we 




know of his life, a fairly accurate picture can be formed of the sources of 




Gurdjieff’s System. This suggests a surprisingly coherent and plausible 




interpretation of Gurdjieff’s intellectual development; although it is as well 




to remember that any particular feature of his teaching may have come from 




friends who were more expert in certain subjects—or languages—than he. 




Although the game of origins is fascinating and informative, it at once 




becomes futile when it is used to argue that Gurdjieff derived his ideas from 




any one particular source. This is why, for example, nothing will be said 




about the possibiUty that Gurdjieff took ideas from any Sufi order, though 




certain Sufi methods—most notably the “Stop” exercise—^were clearly 




important  to  him,  and  it  is  possible  that  several  ideas  which  will  be 




discussed in a European context—such as Cabala or numerology—^were 




first imbibed by Gurdjieff in an Islamic (that is to say Sufic) form. The 




apparatus of Traditional wisdom exists in all cultures and in every language. 




The idea of Tradition has been made familiar by poets and philosophers, 




and  disreputable by occultists of every description. The essence of the




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   501




concept is expressed in GurdjiefF’s word, “legominism”: knowledge transmitted not by written instructions but by personal contact—^too limiting to say by word of mouth—^from generation to generation. Very often there is a 




corollary  to  this:  what  might  be  called  the  theory  of  degeneration  of 




knowledge. In contrast with our normal ideas of acquiring knowledge 




through the orderly progression of inquiry and experiment we associate 




with the scientific method, the Traditionalist holds that our real knowledge—^and our understanding of what knowledge we still possess—is steadily diminishing. The inheritors of Traditional wisdom are illuminated 




by the eternal flame of ancient knowledge which they guard for a time and 




then pass on. 




In  this  century  there  have  been  several  attempts  to  make  this  idea 




respectable.  Philosophers  like  Rene  Guenon,  students  of  reUgion  like 




Mircea  Eliade  and  Henri  Corbin,  and  poets  hke  Kathleen  Raine  have 




argued movingly for the transmission of knowledge within closed groups. 




On the other hand there have been countless cultists and occultists—^what 




GurdjieflF called “initiates of new format”—^whose claims to possess Traditional wisdom are of the most doubtful nature. Some would place Gurdjieff and Ouspensky in this category. What is true is that twentieth-century 




Traditionalists—^whether phony or sincere—rely much more than they like 




to admit on the revival of occultism which took place during the last quarter 




of the nineteenth century. 




This phenomenon has been mentioned in connection with Gurdjieff s 




search for truth. The late Victorian occult revival drew the materials of its 




religious syntheses from sources beloved of Traditionalists throughout all 




Western  history.  In  a  sense  the  Victorian  occultists  were  correct;  their 




Traditions  did  represent  a  continuing  line  of  knowledge  which  had 




remained rejected from the mainstream of European culture because of 




historical accident. * They sought inspiration in a perennial underground of 




rejected knowledge” which has broken through the established culture of 




the West only at points of crisis. The turn of the century was one of these; 




another  was  that  of  the  Renaissance  and  Reformation.  The  earliest 




detectable crisis in which the Traditions broke the surface was the period of 




some 400 years centered on the birth of Christ. This is the real canonical 




period of occult tradition. Oriental mystery religions were engulfing the 




Roman  Empire;  in  Egypt  the  cult  of  iTirice-Great  Hermes  and  the 




science” of alchemy arose; Gnostic prophets of every description vied with 




each  other  for  a  receptive  audience.  Through  historical  accident,  it 




happened that one Oriental religion, institutionalized Christianity, won a




*See my  

The Fli^tfrom Reason

 (London, 1971), published as  

The Occult Underground

 (La 




SaHe, in., 1974). 




502 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




sweeping victory and in so doing annihilated not only its opponents but 




certain Traditionalist tendencies within its own ranks. 




Occult or Traditional positions have their roots in the systems of thought 




which the Christian Church conquered. It would take too long to describe 




the  common  characteristics  of  these  ideas.  They  often  appear  widely 




diverse, yet share some basic assumptions. The chief is that the soul or 




spirit is a spark of the divine entrapped in matter, and it is the business of 




the adept to exert himself by religious exercise and mystical practice to 




return his spirit to its divine condition  

(re-ligare, 

 “to reconnect”: compare 




the idea of  

yoga, 

 signifying “yoke”). 




There  is  a  great  difference  between  recognizing  the  existence  of  a 




continuous body of Traditional wisdom and deciding that this means that 




such ideas must be true in an absolute sense. Occultists often make this 




assumption unquestioningly—^and there is a depressing tendency to incorporate every fragment of rejected knowledge into individual versions of Traditional wisdom. GurdjieflP—witness his remark about the time he 




wasted on H. P. Blavatsky’s  

The Secret Doctrine

—^had as much trouble as 




any other inquirer in sifting the grain from the chaff. Nonetheless, he began 




with the Traditions, the supposed repositories of that “secret knowledge” to 




which he turned when disillusioned with both religion and science. 




There are therefore three main periods of history to be examined for 




parallel doctrines: the three known periods when occult ideas burst through 




from underground to influence the established culture of the West. 




2.  

Mystical Mathematics




“All things began in order, so shall they end, and so shall they begin again, 




according to the ordainer of order and the mystical mathematics of the city 




of  heaven.”  In   

The  Garden  of  Cyrus

  (1658),  Sir  Thomas  Browne  was 




expressing the vision of the universe common to modern Traditionalists and 




to all sections of educated opinion—both orthodox and heretical—in the 




prescientific age.  

Number

 was not seen just as the means of performing 




mathematical calculations but as a reflection of the divine ordering of the 




universe. The number 1 was not the mere integer but the Monad itself, the 




primordial unity which existed before, around, and through the diversification of things. 




The tradition of regarding the universe as composed of numbers is known 




as arithmology, and for the English-speaking reader the best exposition of 




the arithmological point of view is  

Theoretic Arithmetic

 published in 1816 




by  Thomas  Taylor,  the  Platonist.  Taylor  made  a  digest  from  the  more 




famous classical arithmologists, and gave his explanations a Platonic cast. 




He saw the basis of the “Pythagorean” position in the separation of the One 




from the Many in the world of form. “The Pythagoreans, turning from the




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   503




vulgar paths and delivering their philosophy in secret to those alone who 




were  worthy  to  receive  it,  exhibited  it  to  others  through  mathematical 




names.  Hence  they  called  forms,  numbers,  as  things  which  are  first 




separated from impartible union; for natures which are above forms, are 




also  above  separation.”  From  the  very  first  the  tradition  of  mystical 




mathematics  was  closely  bound  up  with  the  philosophical  sources  of 




Traditional doctrine: the Platonists, Neo-Platonists, and rank Gnostics of 




the first and second centuries a.d. 




The mysterious Pythagoras was the father of a long tradition of number 




symbolism. According to legend, he traveled in the East—perhaps to the 




further Orient, perhaps to the sanctuaries of Egypt—before founding his 




community at Crotona in Italy in the sixth century B.C. From Pythagoras 




one tradition of mystical mathematics passed through Plato and the famous 




calculations in the  

Timaeus

 into Judaism by way of Philo Judaeus and into 




Christianity through St. Augustine. Between the first and the fifth centuries 




A. D., the Pythagorean tradition influenced various schools of thought. One 




of the most occult writers on number was Nicomacus of Gerassa  

{c. 

 a.d. 




100), author of a work entitled  

Theologumena Arithmetica. 




The arithmological view of number sees  

meaning

 and not  

use

 in number. 




There  are  obvious  parallels  with  GurdjiefF’s  usage.  For  example,  the 




doctrine that three forces must be present to form any given phenomenon is 




an  arithmological  commonplace.  The  “octave”  of  the  Ray  of  Creation 




derives directly from Pythagoras. GurdjiefF’s diagram of the relationships of 




different substances in the universe was expressed in terms of “triads” of 




forces—carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen blending to form a given substance: 




the hydrogen. Arithmologists of a Gnostic or Neo-Platonic bent used the 




same symbolism. From the Monad—the Absolute in Gurdjieff’s terms— 




emanated various divine “hypostases” or forces, which in combination 




produced  other  forces  and  so  on  into  diversity,  with  each  successive 




emanation  passing  further  away  from  the  Source—or,  if  you  prefer  it, 




descending the Ray of Creation. GurdjiefF used arithmology to support his 




idea of a hierarchy of being: in one aspect this is what he meant with his Ray 




of  Creation  and  the  Table  of  Hydrogens.  In  the   

Theologumena

  of 




Nicomacus will be found a table of the numbers from 1 to 10 considered as 




various grades of being. 




We are approaching Gurdjieff ’s presentation of Traditional wisdom from 




the point of view of number. But Traditional ideas are so wddely difiused 




that  Gurdjieff’s  use  of  them  could  be  compared  first  of  all  to  the 




philosophical position of, say, Plato, Proclus, or Plotinus—all of whom 




made some use of arithmological argument. Gurdjieff was never primarily 




an arithmologist; however, a general philosophical position is less easily 




identified than a particular attitude to number. One final example may




504 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




make dear how Gurdjieff used his Traditional sources. This is a lecture on 




symbolism recorded by Ouspensky in  

In Search of the Miraculous

 which 




Gurdjieff also delivered in the days of the Institute for the Harmonious 




Development of Man. 




Ouspensky illustrates his record with pictorial symbols of the numbers 2, 




3, 4, 5, 6. These are a pair of straight lines, a triangle, a square, a pentagram 




(five-pointed star), and a hexagram (six-pointed star or Solomon’s Seal). In 




other  words,  the  numbers  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6  are  being  considered 




arithmologically  and  not  arithmetically;  the  symbols  represent  not  the 




arithmetical numbers, but the arithmological  

ideas

 of duad, triad, quater- 




nity, pentad, and hexad. Gurdjieff’s interpretation of the progression from 




duad to hexad was an allegory of human development. Normally man is a 




duality,  consisting  entirely  of  pairs  of  opposites.  When  he  begins  to 




recognize that his nature consists of mechanically conflicting impulses, he 




may set himself the conscious aim of overcoming them. “The creation of a 




permanent  third  principle  in  man  is  for  man  the   

transformation  of  the

 




 

duality into the trinity.” 

 A strengthening and application of this conscious 




resolution  results  in  the  trinity  becoming  the  quaternity.  The  next 




transformation—^from quaternity to quinternity—entails the construction of 




the pentagram; and Gurdjieff interprets this as the proper activation of all 




five lower centers. Once man achieves such harmony he is in contact with 




higher  consciousness.  The  symbolic  result  is  that  he  proceeds  from 




pentagram to hexagram; 




And  then  man  becomes  the   

six-pointed  star, 

  that  is,  by  becoming 




locked within a circle of life independent and complete in itself, he 




becomes  isolated  from  foreign  influences  or  accidental  shocks;  he 




embodies in himself the  

Seal of Solomon. 




This  interpretation  is,  of  course,  Gurdjieff’s  alone,  and  it  is  made  in 




accordance with his ideas about human development. But to show how he 




had framed his conclusions in accordance with Traditional doctrine, it is 




useful to compare what Nicomacus of Gerassa has to say about the hexad 




and the development of man in a passage from the  

Theologumena:




In another way soul is capable of articulating and arranging body in the 




same general way that psychic form is capable of doing so to formless 




matter; and in general no number is more able to fit the soul than the 




hexad; no other would be called so much an articulation of the universe 




set up as maker of soul and discovered also capable of instilling the 




condition  of  life,  whence  it  is  called  “hexad.”  That  every  soul  is  a 




harmonising  element  ...  is  evident;  for when  it is present it  makes




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   505




peace, and orders well and fits best together the mingled opposites in 




the living thing, which yield and follow it, and it instills in this way 




health into the combination . . . 




The most important use which GurdjiefiF made of number symbolism is 




the figure of the enneagram, which he said contained and symbolized his 




whole System. His enneagram consists of a circle with the circumference 




divided into nine points which are joined to give a triangle and an irregular 




six-sided figure. GurdjiefiF said that the triangle represented the presence of 




higher forces and that the six-sided figure stood for man. He also claimed 




that the enneagram was exclusive to his teaching. “This symbol cannot be 




met with anywhere in the study of ‘occultism,’ either in books or in oral 




transmission,”  Ouspensky  reports  him  as  saying.  “It  was  given  such 




significance by those who knew, that they considered it necessary to keep 




the knowledge of it secret.” Not only did the enneagram express what 




GurdjiefiF taught, but he claimed it as the final arbiter of esoteric knowledge; 




two men could decide by drawing the enneagram which was the master and 




which the pupil. 




Because of the emphasis which GurdjiefiF placed on this diagram, his 




followers have sought high and low for the symbol in occult literature. 




Bennett  claims  that  it  cannot  be  found  anywhere;  and  if  disciples  of 




GurdjiefiF have in fact discovered the figure, they have kept it very quiet. 




But GurdjiefiF himself was denying the truth of the matter when he said that 




the enneagram could not be found in occult literature. Representations— 




although not as GurdjiefiF drew it—can be found, and the figure would be 




quite well known to anyone who had bothered to study arithmology. 




The traditions of classical arithmology survived through the Middle Ages 




in various forms. The work of Boethius (early sixth century) was much 




translated, and from this source as well as the Christianized versions of 




arithmology, ideas of the significance of number passed into common usage. 




When  the  men  of  the  Renaissance  enthusiastically  rediscovered  their 




classical inheritance, those of a mystical bent pounced eagerly on Neo- 




Platonism,  Hermetism,  and  the  Cabala  to  justify  their  transcendental 




impulses. The arithmological tradition was resurrected beside the other 




aspects of “divine philosophy” beloved by thinkers of the sixteenth and 




seventeenth centuries. 




The enneagram forms the center of the magnificent frontispiece to the 




 

Arithmohgia

 pubhshed at Rome by the Jesuit, Athanasius Kircher, in 1665. 




Kircher  (1601-80)  is  a  figure  of  great  significance  for  the  origins  of 




GurdjiefiF’s ideas. He was typical of the Renaissance man of learning and a 




prototype of the scholarly Jesuit of later days. Kircher busied himself with 




experiments in the natural sciences: magnets, acoustics, and medicine all







CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY










T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   507




occupied his attention. He even had himself lowered down the crater of 




Vesuvius to investigate the effects of an eruption. His chief concern was 




Orientalism,  and he published records of the Nestorian inscriptions in 




China as well as rather fanciful attempts to decode Egyptian hieroglyphics. 




His Egyptology was overlaid with the customary reverence for the Cabala 




and Thrice-Great Hermes; and the whole had a further gloss of submission 




to the General of his Order and the Pope. It would be fair to describe him 




as presenting esoteric traditions in a Christian guise. 




In the  

Arithmologia, 

 there is a figure called an “enneagram” composed of 




three equilateral triangles. At the apex of the triangle which corresponds to 




the completed triangular figure in Gurdjieff’s enneagram—^where Gurdjielf 




places  the   

do

  of  his  octave  and  the  number  9—Kircher  has  the  Greek 




inscription: “hierarch.” Within the symbol there is a smaller equilateral 




triangle. 




Kircher’s explanation of “the mysteries of the ennead” is similar to that of 




Thomas  Taylor.  The  number  3  is  particularly  sacred  (“The  Holy  Tri- 




amazikamno”), and the 9 trebly so. 




The ennead results from the triad multiplied by itself, and has all the 




more arcane significance because it thrice contains the triad. While 




making  the  square  of  the triad  it  contains within  itself  the greater 




mysteries. 




The number 9, the Triple Ternary, has pride of place in Kircher’s occult 




system. In his  

Iter Extaticum coeleste

 (1660), he tells us that the universe is 




composed  entirely  of  triads,  and  that  the  ennead  governs  the  angelic 




worlds. Five years later the frontispiece to the  

Arithmologia

 expands this 




cosmology into a gorgeous emblem of the triadic operation of the universe. 




It should also clarify—^for those who have no idea what GurdjieflF and 




Ouspensky saw in their Rays of Creation—^what the cosmology of  

In Search

 




 

of the Miraculous

 is pointing at. Kircher’s explanation of his emblem would




508 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




have  been  quite  comprehensible  to  an  audience  educated  in  the  compressed vocabulary of esoteric convention, but today, itself needs interpretation. 




The Triune Monad, symboHsed by an equilateral triangle, flows by 




dififerentiation into the intellectual world, which consists of nine choirs 




of  angels  in  three  degrees,  represented  by  the  same  number  of 




imaginary equilateral triangles connecting them; these instill themselves through the intellectual or angelic world into the astral world and thence into the elements in a miraculous and ineffable fashion. For 




all things are constructed according to the three categories of number, 




weight and measure, according to the creative wisdom of the Three-in- 




One. The Jewish, Greek and Arab Sages of Antiquity sniffed out the 




mystery,  and  were  of  the  opinion  that  they  could  explain  the 




construction of both the intellectual and the physical world in no better 




fashion than by abstract numerical arguments of this sort. 




Kircher ends his description—and his book—^with an attempt to derive 




Scriptural support for his arithmological universe. And in case it is thought 




that his reference to the Sages of Antiquity is intended in a scathing as 




opposed to a complimentary light, his valediction leaves no doubt that he 




felt  himself  to  be  revealing  hidden  doctrine.  It  is  italicized,  as  is  the 




description  of  the  Triadic  universe—but  not  his  pious  reference  to 




Scripture.  

“And  I  have  exposed  to  the  curious  reader  things  which  are  told

 




 

to few. Farewell, and guard your tongue.” 




In fact Kircher’s description covers only the early stages of what GurdjiefiF 




would call the Ray of Creation, and he no doubt assumed that the rest of his 




emblem  would  be  understood  by  an  audience  alert  to  every  esoteric 




allusion. The Monad, which is also the Holy Trinity, is represented by the 




eye  in  the  triangle  at  the  center  of  the  enneagram.  The  “nine  choirs  of 




angels” are joined in three degrees of trinities by triangles of fire. 




The  engraver’s  art  is  used  to  lead  the  eye  from  the  element  of   

fire

 




through  the   

air

—in  which  there  are  birds  flying—above  the  ocean  on 




whose  

waters

 a ship is saiUng to the  

earth

 which forms the foreground. We 




have a complete picture of the Traditional doctrine of the four elements 




which Gurdjieff symbolized by the terms “carbon,” “oxygen,” “nitrogen,” 




and “hydrogen.” The astral or sidereal world is borne up by Jehovah’s 




wings—^a common symbol in Rosicrucian literature. The emanations from 




the hierarchy of the angelic world flow into nine planetary spheres. In the 




 

Iter Extaticum

 Kircher names these: first “Empyrean Heaven, the Court of 




the  Eternal  King,”  then  the  region  of  the  fixed  stars—Saturn,  Jupiter, 




Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the moon. Then there are the sublunary




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   509




grades of being. As for the Ancient Sages in the foreground, the one on the 




right demonstrating a well-known theorum is obviously Pythagoras; and the 




cherub above his head carries a Pythagorean magic square. The other might 




be any other noble pagan—Moses, Solomon, Zoroaster, or even the Thrice- 




Great Hermes himself. I cannot discover whether the cat is associated viith 




any one of them. 




There are many other representations of the Neo-Platonic cosmology of 




the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but Kircher’s has been neglected. 




We  have  by  no  means  done  with  his  fiery  enneagram  or  the  hurtling 




spheres of his astral world. The most obvious question is: if this is the figure 




known to Tradition as an “enneagram,” why is Gurdjieff’s different and 




what might this signify? 




3.  

The Harmonious Universe




Pythagoras  is  the  source  of  a  number  of  other  ideas  associated  with 




arithmology which have particular relevance to Gurdjiefif. All theories of 




“objective art” based on mathematical canons of proportion can be derived 




from  Pythagorean  principles,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  Gurdjieff’s 




conception of art came from the same ultimate source as his numerology. 




Pythagoras is supposed to have invented music to cure physical illness and 




what lamblichus calls “the passions of the soul.” Both in his writings and in 




his life, Gurdjieff gave ample proof that his own conception of “objective 




music” was Pythagorean. In  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 he discusses 




the  effects  of  music  on  human  beings  and  other  living  objects.  The 




companions  of  the  Seekers  for  Truth  were  almost  reduced  to  tears,  he 




writes, by the monotonous musie played in one particular monastery. These 




musical investigations—^which are all concerned vdth the efiFects of music on 




the human psyche—reveal Gurdjieff to have known a fair amount of musical 




history. 




No one knows where Pythagoras found his musical ideas. Scholars have 




guessed at both Babylon and Egypt. His theory was based on the discovery 




of  the  monochord—to  which  Gurdjieff  refers  in   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  The 




Pythagorean monochord was a single string stretched like the string on any 




modem stringed instrument and divided by seven frets. It was found that 




when the string was plucked and held at different frets to produce a musical 




note, the vibrations of the monochord increased or decreased in a precise 




mathematical ratio. From this discovery the Pythagoreans deduced far- 




ranging theories. 




The universe was thought of as a harmony composed of such vibrations. 




The sort of cosmos which Athanasius Kircher depicted was essentially 




 

harmonious

 as well as arithmological; for number expressed the nature of 




the  celestial  harmony  which  governed  and  maintained  all  things.  The




510 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




tradition of musical analogy went hand in hand with that of arithmology. 




From Plato the arguments spread throughout the Mediterranean, collecting 




certain  additions  and  alterations  on  the  way.  Proclus  had  the  idea  of 




simplifying the calculations of musical intervals by eliminating fractions. He 




therefore replaced the numbers from 1 to 7, which Plato had used to mark 




the divisions of the octave, vnth a scale whose highest number was 384. 




When the number 384 is divided into proportions corresponding to the 




ratio of vibrations which relates the notes in the octave, the resulting scale 




expresses their relationship in whole numbers. If this reform is compared 




with the Table of Hydrogens recorded by Ouspensky, GurdjiefF can be 




discovered performing a similarly usefril simphfication. 




Throughout the Middle Ages the idea of the harmony of the spheres was 




preserved and accommodated to a Christian universe. The various grades of 




angels—Seraphim,  Cherubim,  Thrones,  Dominations,  Principalities, 




Powers, and Virtues—^formed a descending octave from divinity, while the 




heavenly spheres of the planets could be manipulated into order, perhaps 




by assigning a special status to the moon and representing the earth as the 




silence after the echo has died away. Like the tradition of arithmology, the 




harmonial  view  of  the  universe  came  into  its  own  in  the  crisis  of 




Renaissance and Reformation. Francesco Giorgi 

—a

 canonist so eminent 




that Henry VHI wished to consult him about his divorce—^pubhshed in 




1525  the  work   

De  Hamwnia  Mundi

  which  served  as  an  underground 




influence on many of the thinkers of his time. 




 

De Harmonia Mundi

 is written in three “songs,” each divided into eight 




“notes.”  The  very  first  note  discusses  the  Pythagorean  view  of  the 




connection between number, music, and the symbolic interpretation of the 




universe. The ancients, writes Giorgi, sjwke enigmatically in parables. The 




universal harmony is “the concert of all strings in pure measures with no 




discords.” But disharmonies have crept into this cosmic plan, and remain a 




puzzle for philosophers. In  

De Harmonia

 are to be found all the essentials 




of Pythagorean world view, distilled from the arithmologists, the Platonists 




and Neo-Platonists, and spiced with Cabala. 




Countless examples show how the philosophy elaborated by Giorgi is the 




source of Gurdjieff’s cosmology. This does not mean that he had read the 




book; for the influence of  

De Harmonia Mundi

 seerfts to have been greatest 




indirectly, as the source for the late Renaissance harmonial philosophy. 




Francesco  Giorgi  incorporated  his  Pythagorean  views  into  a  deeply 




orthodox Christian piety; but others whom he influenced showed less 




respect for the Church. Among these were the Rosicrucians with whom 




Gurdjieff was certainly familiar and in whom the doctrines of  

De Harmonia

 




were widely diffused. 




During  the  1930s  several  pupils  of  Ouspensky  in  London  became




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   511




interested  in  the  origins  of  the  System  which  they  were  being  taught. 




Research in the British Museum soon brought them to Robert Fludd, the 




eccentric  EngUsh  mystic  whose  great  work,  

Utriusque  Cosmii  Historia

 




(1617-24), contains among other things two representations of the “monochord of the world.” Apart from the fact that Fludd specifically denied being a Rosicrucian, he did acknowledge his debt to Giorgi. Between 1619 




and 1622, he became involved in two controversies wdth opponents who 




denounced  his  use  of  the  octave  as  absurd  mystification.  One  was  the 




astronomer, Johannes Kepler, who was trying to show that the planets—^the 




physical,  astronomical  planets—moved  according  to  the  principles  of 




harmony.* Another was the French monk, Marin Mersenne, who, although 




a devotee of Giorgi, was concerned to purge Fludd’s ideas of their magical 




accretions. It is typical of some latter-day Ouspenskians that they have 




pounced on the most occult and eccentric use of a well-known idea. 




Although Athanasius Kircher does not acknowledge Giorgi as a source for 




his  

Arithmologia, 

 there can be Httle doubt that he borrowed extensively 




from his predecessor. From  

De Harmonia, 

 Kircher’s universe, dominated 




by the Triple Ternary of the enneagram, receives a fuller explanation: we 




learn that the first triad produces the angels, the second the heavens, and 




the third the four elements. On the authority of Plato, Giorgi maintains that 




the  octave  can  be  used  to  scrutinize  the  human  soul;  for  as  man  is 




constructed as an image of the greater world, the same laws apply to him as 




to the cosmos.  

De Harmonia

 argues the true Traditional position on the 




return  of  the  spirit  to  its  divine  source.  “Just  as  the  Supreme  Creator 




descends into us by the stairway of the angels ... so we may return up 




them to that from which we came.” 




Kircher’s experiments into the effects of sound on matter went further 




than any of his predecessors in arguing that the universe was based not only 




on number and harmony, but on sound itself In his  

Musurgia Universalis

 




(1622),  he  discusses  the  monochord,  the  question  of  intervals,  and  the 




effects of sound on matter and mind. In 1673 he pubhshed a work under the 




title of  

Phonurgia Nova, 

 which defines the science of “phonurgy” as that of 




"miraculous faculties working by means of sounds.” Apart from a predictable interest in the fall of Jericho, Kircher is chiefly concerned with musical inedicine. He maintains that music can cure werewolves and madmen and 




gives a musical cure for a tarantula bite. 




There is no doubt that Gurdjieff made thorough researches into musical 




literature,  and  although  he  might  have  picked  up  the  principles  of 




Pythagorean harmony from the classical texts, the version which he




* 




In the course of this, he drew diagrams based on the division of the circle resulting from the 




inscribed  regular  polygons.  These  diagrams  have  also  been  found  suggestive  by  followers  of 




Gurdjieff. As far as the enneagram goes, Kepler made no use of it, as it did not fit his theory. 










512




T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




expounded quite definitely derives from the revival and adaptation of that 




philosophy in the late Renaissance. The portable organ, like GurdjiefF’s 




own  but  with  an  assembly  of  pipes,  was  known  to  both  Fludd  and 




Mersenne;  while  many  of  the  miracles  which  Gurdjieff  attributed  to 




“Essene” music are discussed by Kircher. It is much more likely that the 




teacher of an “esoteric Christianity” would have taken his version of the 




harmonial  philosophy  from  the  more  orthodox  writers  and  practically 




certain that GurdjiefF’s interest in the effect of sound on matter would have 




led him to Kircher. What of the enneagram—the blazing Triple Ternary 




that dominates the frontispiece to the  

Arithmologia

 of that learned Jesuit? 




Kircher’s universe is governed—as Gurdjieff would have said—by the 




Law of Three. From the intellectual world the astral world depends—and 




such is the engraver’s skill that it seems to spin in the emanations from the 




ennead.  But  this  cosmos  is  governed  not  by  number  only,  but  also  by 




harmony and sound. 




Francesco Giorgi had admitted that there were inexplicable discords in 




the universal harmony. But surely the true canon of proportion according to 




Pythagoras  excluded  any  variation?  Gurdjieff,  the  twentieth  century 




Pythagorean, had his answer; “intentional inexactitudes.” The members of 




his  society  of  the  “Adherents  of  the  Legominism  ”—in  other  words, 




Traditionalists^had introduced into their works of art deliberate variations 




from the proportions which would have given perfect harmony. But the 




universe of the  

Arithmologia

 is a perfect universe and Kircher’s enneagram 




is  composed  of  three  self-contained  triangles  linking  heavenly  choirs 




belonging to the same angelic orders. If a circle is dravra through the points 




of the enneagram, it will be seen that Gurdjieff’s symbol uses the same 




divisions of the circle as Kircher: but that the two nethermost triangles have 




been opened out, and the lines which in Kircher’s diagram join points 6 to 5 




and 8 to 9, now join 6 to 9 and 8 to 5. 




Is this an “intentional inexactitude”? According to Ouspensky, Gurdjieff 




called his enneagram “an incomplete and theoretical form.” Perhaps he 




hoped that his pupils would themselves be able to complete the symbol and




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   513




restore the original harmony. He interpreted the hexagonal figure in his 




diagram as representing man, and the triangle as standing for the external 




principles: the completion of the enneagram could well have been intended 




as signifying the union of man with the divine. Gurdjieff also called his 




symbol “a moving diagram,” and based at least one of his dances on it. In 




Kircher’s enneagram, “motion” is possible only within each triangle, but in 




Gurdjieff’s, the six-sided figure allows continuous motion by reason of its 




isolation from the triangle in the center. Perhaps when the discords in 




creation—which so troubled the Renaissance Pythagoreans—^were healed 




by a complete conformity with the divine plan, the motion of humanity 




would cease to be isolated from the working of the eternal principles within 




it. 




Whatever Gurdjieff’s intention in adapting the enneagram to his own 




synthesis, or even whether he inadvertently destroyed its original significance, it seems clear that the function of the enneagram is linked closely to another esoteric diagram; the Cabalistic Tree of Life. 




4.  

The Tree of Life and the Art of Ramon Lull




In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men, 

  Gurdjieff  introduces  his  imaginary 




“Sarmoun Brotherhood” with the remark that he and his friend “Pogossian” 




had discovered the name in “the book called  

Merkhavat.” 

 If this refers to 




anything, it points to the Merkhabah texts of Jewish mysticism, which were 




the forerunners of medieval and Renaissance Cabalism. The Merkhabah 




mystics based their practices on an attempt to attain a vision of the throne of 




God which is described in the first chapter of Ezekiel; more accurately, 




they aspired to a vision of the  

“throne-world” 

 which Professor Gerschom 




Scholem equates with the Gnostic pleroma with its various potencies and 




powers. Scholem suggests that there was considerable contact between 




Jewish, Hellenistic, and Christian Gnostics; and there is little doubt that 




the universe of the Jewish “Descenders to the Throne” would have been 




easily recognized by the mystics of the first few centuries a.d.—or by their 




successors of the Renaissance. 




Although Cabalists claim to find their traditions in the Mosaic books, the 




text  on  which  later  Cabalists  have  mostly  rehed  is  called  the   

Sepher

 




 

Yetzirah

  or  Book  of  Creation.  This  was  elaborated  by  another  text,  the 




 

Sepher Ha-Zohar

 or Book of Splendor, written in thirteenth century Spain. 




These developed the ideas inherent in Merkhabah mysticism to the point at 




which they could be expressed in one elaborate but comprehensive symbol, 




known in  the West  as  the Tree of  Life.  This is a diagram—as the title, 




“Book  of  Creation,”  makes  clear—of  the  descent  of  divinity  from  the 




Godhead  to  Earth:  what  Gurdjieff  called  the  Ray  of  Creation  and  the 




process from which Kircher symbolized in his engraving in the




514 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




 

Arithmologia. 

 But the Tree of Life is a much more complex hieroglyph than 




the Ray of Creation. It also symbolizes the attributes of divinity and the 




forces which in combination form the universe. These elements of creation 




are called the  

Sephiroth

 (singular,  

Sephirah)

 and they form the symboHc 




“leaves” on the Tree of Life. Conventionally they are represented by nine 




or ten circles arranged in a particular pattern and joined by twenty-two 




“paths.” On one level the Tree of Life forms a map by which the aspiring 




mystic can attain a knowledge of the whole of creation and ascend to the 




Godhead; on another, the symbol can be said to represent the interaction of 




the  forces  which  produce  phenomena.  Each   

Sephirah

  is  identified  by  a 




system  of  correspondences  or  attributions  which  by  their  associations 




suggest the nature of the forces which the  

Sephirah

 conveys. 




Such a symbol corresponds to other definitions which Gurdjieff gave to 




his  enneagram.  It  was  “perpetual  motion”—the  Great  Dance  of  the 




universe. It was “the fundamental hieroglyph of a universal language, 




which has as many meanings as there are levels of men.” Twice in In SearcK 




 

of the Miraculous, 

 Ouspensky records Gurdjieff talking of Cabala, and in 




his  lecture  about  man’s  symbolic  progress  from  duality  to  the  hexad, 




Gurdjieff added a very suggestive comment which was deleted from the 




published account. After describing how his octave with its two shocks 




symbolized what Kircher would have called the Triple Ternary, Gurdjieff 




remarked that those of his audience who were familiar vwth the Cabala 




might compare the Cabalistic symbolism of ninefoldness. 




A recent book called simply  

Tree of Life, 

 written by Z’ev ben Shimon 




Halevi,  does  not  conceal  its  author’s  familiarity  with  the  terms  of  the 




System as taught by Ouspensky. In the text and in several of his diagrams, 




Halevi attempts to correlate Gurdjieff’s use of the terms triad, octave, and 




interval  with  the  traditional  interpretation  of  the  Tree  of  Life.  It  is 




significant that a modem interpreter of Jewish traditions has discovered 




similarities between his own attempts to reformulate traditional doctrine 




and the presentation of ancient wisdom in new guise made by Gurdjieff. In 




the   

Arithmologia, 

  Kircher  was  quite  explicit  that  his  enneagram  was 




equivalent to the Hebrew Tree of Life, and the diagram of the Tree places 




some  of  the  “correspondences”  which  he  lists  as  appropriate  to  each 




 

Sephirah. 




It is impossible to explain the fiinctioning of the Tree of Life in a few 




paragraphs. There is a vast literature on the subject. Above Kether, the 




Crown,  are  set  three  facets  of  Divinity.  They  may  be  compared  to  the 




divine triangle in the center of Kircher’s enneagram. Kether is the point at 




which  divine  energy  enters  the  highest  of  the  CabaUstic  worlds,  and 




descends into the lower degrees of matter along a zigzag course which 




modem Cabalists call the Li^tning Flash. The lowest point on the Tree is







The Tree of Life







516 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Malkuth, the Kingdom, the highest concentration of matter—to all intents 




and purposes the physical universe. Halevi’s book uses the idea of the 




monochord stretching from heaven to earth, and he applies GurdjielF’s Law 




of the Octave vdth its two intervals to the descent of the divine energy into 




matter  down  the  Lightning  Flash.  From  our  point  of  view,  a  reverse 




comparison is more significant: the application of the Tree to the ennea- 




gram. 




The key to this equation is found in the frontispiece to the  

Arithmologia. 

 




Around  the  points  of  the  enneagram  Kircher’s  engraver  has  placed 




numbers.  In  the  diagram  of  the  Tree  of  Life  numbers  are  traditionally 




allotted to all the  

Sephiroth

 except Daath, or Knowledge, a mysterious or 




“invisible”  

Sephirah

 which is often omitted. The particular numbers are 




fixed and certain; they form part of the system of correspondences which 




assigns,  for  example,  planets,  colors,  metals,  emotions,  or  personal 




characteristics,  to  the  influence  of  a  particular   

Sephirah. 

  So  if  we  have 




reason to believe that Kircher’s enneagram represents the Tree of Life in 




another form, it is likely that the numbers surrounding the symbol are 




simply the shortest way of denoting the different  

Sephiroth. 




In the  

Arithmologia, 

 Kircher explains the three triangles of his enneagram as representing the “three degrees ” into which the “nine choirs of angels” are divided. In this figure, the three  

Sephirah

 highest on the Tree 




of Life—Kether, Hochmah, and Binah—^form the triangle which stares 




directly out from the page. The other two triangles contain the triads of the 




Hesed-Geburah-Tiphareth and Netzach-Hod-Yesod. Malkuth, the Kingdom, is the sphere in which man views all the cosmic action; in GurdjiefF’s enneagram  it  would  be  represented  by  the  circle  joining  the  points. 




Kircher’s symbol signifies the descent of the divine energy into matter 




through the creative action of triads. The first triad of Kether-Chokmah- 




Binah, the second of Hesed-Geburah-Tiphareth, the third of Netzach-Hod- 




Yesod, make up the Triple Ternary of the divine descent contemplated 




from the Earth or Malkuth. 




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   517




When  the   

Sephiroth

  are  transferred  to  the  corresponding  points  on 




Gurdjieff’s  enneagram  there  is  a  peculiar  result  which  can  only  be 




intentional. Whereas Kircher’s diagram is a picture of “three degrees of 




angels,”  GurdjiefF’s  is  “a  moving  diagram,”  and  the  direction  of  the 




movement is marked by Ouspensky with  

arrows. The movement within

 the 




six-sided  figure  representing  man  runs  Hesed-Geburah-Hod-Netzach- 




Yesod-Tiphareth.  On  the  orthodox  diagram  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  this 




 

represents  motion

  round  the  paths  of  the  square  centered  on  the  sixth 




 

Sephirah, 

 Tiphareth: this is known to Cabalists as the Yetziratic World, and 




is sometimes said to represent archetypal man. There is no space to explain 




what these designations mean, as it could only be done by reference to the 




rest of the Tree of Life. The important thing to notice is that the six-sided 




figure in Gurdjieff’s enneagram refers to a particular division which makes 




sense on the CabaHstic Tree. 




The triangle which remains isolated in Gurdjieff’s “moving diagram” is 




that  of  Kether-Chokmah-Binah,  the  three  supreme   

Sephirah. 

  Together 




they form the world of Atziluth or emanations from the divinity. When 




GurdjiefF’s octave with its intervals is distributed around the outside of his 




enneagram of this supreme trinity, only Kether-— 

the Crown, 

 the point at 




which the divine emanations enter the worlds of the Tree of Life—^has a 




note allotted to it. Appropriately enough this is do which begins each new 




octave, and by beginning signals the end of the preceding one. The other 




points of the central triangle—said by Gurdjieff to represent the divine or 




eternal principles—are marked with the intervals in the octave. At these 




intervals, Gurdjieff taught that a shock was neces ary to help the process 




over  the  point  where  “vibrations  become  retarded.”  But  in  fact,  he 




displaced the second interval firom its natural position between the notes  

si

 




and  

do

 and inserted it between  

sol

 and  

la. 




 

At

  first  sight  this  appears  to  have  been  done  simply  to  satisfy  the 




demands of symmetry. In In Search  

of the Miraculous

 Ouspensky records 




Gurdjieff as justifying this adjustment by a series of abstruse arguments 




which may or may not make sense within the context of his cosmology. But 




he did state that “the apparent placing of the interval in  

its wrong place

 




itself shows to those who are able to read the symbol what kind of ‘shock’ is 




required  for  the  passage  of  si  to  do.”  An  “intentional  inexactitude,” 




 

perhaps, hut it is clear that

 Gurdjieff intended to signify the  

degree

 of force 




necessary.  The  adjustment  attributes  the   

do

  and  the  two  intervals  in 




Gurdjieff’s enneagram to the triad of Kether-Chokmah-Binah. This trinity 




of   

Sephiroth

  from  the‘world  of  emanations  inserts  its  influence  into 




Gurdjieff’s enneagram where he placed his intervals; which makes perfect 




sense in his terms, as he said that the first interval,  

mi-fa, 

 was filled by “the 




will of the Absolute.” Not only does this refer to the Triangle of divine




518 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




principles which his diagram isolates from human processes, but it should 




probably have been written by Ouspensky as “the  

Will

 of the Absolute.” On 




the Tree of Life Chokmah—^which fills the gap in Gurdjieff’s enneagram 




corresponding to the Will of the Absolute—is known as “Wisdom,” but it 




denotes the  

active

 intelligence, the dynamic or creative thrust of Will. 




One could explore endlessly the possibilities which are opened up by the 




discovery that Gurdjieff s enneagram is an adaptation of the Tree of Life. 




But  it  may  be  wondered  whether  Gurdjieff’s  alterations  resulted  in  a 




distortion from the original Tradition: in some cases in an oversimplification, in others a complication of an already complex symbol. 




Were these divergences invented by Gurdjieff, or did they come from a 




Traditional source? We cannot say for certain that Gurdjieff did take his 




cosmology  from  Athanasius  Kircher.  Kircher  believed  himself  to  be 




revealing a secret knowledge in his  

Arithmologia, 

 and it is quite possible 




that he simply represented a tradition which Gurdjieff could have encountered elsewhere. It must remain a matter of opinion. I believe that in the 

Arithmologia

  Kircher  was  expressing  a  final  synthesis  of  Renaissance 




mysticism and that Gurdjieff’s cosmology somehow derives from it. 




One  final  element  of Kircher’s  system must be  discussed, because it 




accounts for the form in which he chose to express his Tree of Life. This is 




the influence of Ramon Lull and his  

Ars Magna. 

 Both Kircher and Giorgi 




were devoted Lullians, and Kircher’s enneagram derives from one of the 




symbolic figures of the Lullian Art. 




Ramon  Lull  was  born  about  1232  in  Majorca,  which  had  only  just 




recovered from three centuries of occupation by Islam. After a riotous and 




conventionally misspent youth, he had a series of visions and decided to 




devote himself to Christ. In order to achieve his ambition of converting 




Mohammedans, he learned Arabic and set about a synthesis of Islamic and 




Christian  thought.  The  result  was  his  immense  Great  Art,  a  symbolic 




system owing much to Christian Neo-Platonism, something to the Moslem 




saint and Sufi al-Ghazzali, and something to the Jewish Cabala. Lull was in 




relations with both Sufis and Cabalists; in the words of a leading Lullian 




scholar, “Lull in preparing to combat Islam, had steeped himself for years 




in its literature and mysticism. He had taken many of his arms from his 




adversaries.” 




The  object  of  Lull’s  Great  Art  was  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of 




Christianity by means of symbolic diagrams illustrating the combination of 




forces which create phenomena. The background against which he worked 




was the cosmology accepted by Jew, Arab, and West European Christian 




alike: the descent of the Godhead into matter through various grades of 




being. The result was a symbolic system based on two main figures. In the 




final form  of  the Art,  the  

Ars generalis ultima

 of 1305-08, the principles 




which in combination govern the universe are said to number nine. They







T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   519




are known as the Dignities of God. The number 9 is suggestive to anyone 




with  even  a  shght  knowledge  of  Cabala,  and  the  nature  of  the  divine 




Dignities appears to be exactly the same as that of the Cabalistic  

Sephiroth. 

 




One of the two main diagrams used by Lull in demonstrating how the 




combinations of the Dignities operate in the universe is known as the figure 




T, and it is this figure which Kircher used as the basis of his enneagram. 




The second important Lullian diagram is called the Figure A, and it is based 




on  the  interconnection  of  all  points  on  a circle  whose circumference is 




divided by 9. It is easy to see that a particular conjunction of these points 




gives in one form Kircher’s, and in another, Gurdjieff’s enneagram. 




It  will  be  remembered  that  in   

In  Search  of  the  Miraculous

  Ouspensky 




records several conversations with GurdjielF on the subject of a universal 




language.  Gurdjieff  denounced  all  concocted  universal  languages,  and 




declared that in any case a valid universal language already existed. When 




he introduced his Russian groups to the enneagram, he defined it as “the 




fundamental hieroglyph of a universal language.” This description would 




apply very well to the Tree of Life; but it applies even more accurately to 




the  Art  of  Ramon  Lull.  The  Lullian  Art  was  known  to  GurdjiefF’s  St. 




Petersburg  group—it  had  been  rediscovered  by  Anna  Butkovsky  and 




Anthony Charkovsky—and this fact alone may have been responsible for 




Gurdjieff’s  use  of  the  enneagram  in  conversations  with  those  pupils. 




However, we do know that Lull deliberately constructed his Art to provide 




a universal language which would unite men of all creeds under a single 




God. If he did in fact make use of Cabalistic traditions—and although there 




is no final proof, it is almost certain—^he was in many ways anticipating the 




Christian Cabalists of the Renaissance. The synthesis of Lull precedes that 




of Kircher by three and a half centuries. 




5.  

Esoteric Christianity




In  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 Gurdjieff describes—allegorically or in 




historical truth, it does not matter—how he grew disappointed with the 




efficacy  of  Western  science  and  turned  to  religion,  only  in  the  end  to




520 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




become disillusioned with established churches. Yet to his pupils in Russia, 




he admitted that his System could be known as “esoteric Christianity,” and 




he told Boris Mouravieff that Christianity was “the ABC” of his teaching. In 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales

 the inquiring Hassein is informed that although most of 




the  great  religions  have  degenerated,  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  has 




secretly been preserved. It is the only occasion on which Beelzebub seems 




actually to recommend any religious group. 




.  .  .  among  a  rather  small  religious  group  of  terrestrial  beings  the 




teaching of Jesus Christ was preserved unchanged, and, passing from 




generation  to  generation,  has  even  reached  the  present  time  in  its 




original form. 




This smallish group of terrestrial beings is designated “the Brotherhood of the Essenes.” 




In   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  Gurdjieff  introduces  the  “Essenes” 




into his discussion about the miraculous effects of music. He claims that, 




thanks to an introduction from one of his childhood tutors, “I had been 




among  the  Essenes,  most  of  whom  are  Jews,  and  ...  by  means  of  very 




ancient Hebrew music they had made plants grow in half an hour.” The 




miraculous accelerated growth of plants is a marvel which Kircher mentions 




in his own comments on the effects of sound. It is highly unlikely that 




Gurdjieff had really discovered any “Essenes. ” Quite probably, Gurdjieff 




merely intended an allegorical brotherhood, although it seems that he did 




conceive  of  an  inner  teaching  within  Christianity  which  had  at  least 




informed the System which he taught. 




He could have found this idea in any of the Renaissance texts he might 




have studied; but another possible source is indicated in  

Meetings with

 




 

Remarkable Men. 

 Gurdjieff talks about his attempts to recover the secret 




knowledge of past times and his conclusion that if a school of the sort of 




knowledge which he sought had ever existed, it must have been among the 




Assyrians or “Aissors” among whom he had a number of friends. This form 




of Christianity had (and has) a claim to be considered the most ancient and 




the most pure. 




After the Jewdsh wars of c.  a. d .  70, Jewish Christianity ceased to exist. 




With one exception, all later Christian churches derive from the Church of 




Antioch in Syria, which was wholly Greek and within the Roman Empire. 




The exception was the Church of Edessa, the capital of a small principality 




called Osrhoene situated in the Euphrates valley east of the river. 




Tradition dates the beginning of the Church of Edessa to the coming of 




Mar Addai (the Apostle Thaddeus) in the first century. The Edessan Church 




was fairly certainly evangelized from Israel, and its liturgical tongue, Syriac, 




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   521




was similar to that of Palestine in the time of Christ. To Gurdjieff, a zealous 




seeker for the original and undistorted form of ancient wisdom, both the 




derivation of the Edessan Church and the language of its Assyrian members 




would have provided a powerful reason for thinking that an “Aissor school” 




might possess the solutions which he was seeking. 




The particular strangeness of the doctrine of the Edessan Church was 




that  it  confined  baptism  to  celibates.  All  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  were 




considered evil, and only gradually were married Christians admitted to 




Church membership. It must be conceded that Gurdjieff gave no sign of 




observing these standards—although there is an echo of severe asceticism 




in “Ozay’s” “cessation to the utmost limit of diet, breath and sex. ” But we 




are not looking for a single source of Gurdjieff’s teaching, merely at the 




signposts  on  the  way.  One  of  the  signposts  points  from  the  Church  of 




Edessa—^which could be seen as embodying an “esoteric” Christianity—to 




the “esoteric Christianity” of the late Renaissance. 




Because of an error in the earliest writings on the Edessan Church, it was 




widely believed until the early twentieth century that the Syriac of the 




Peshitta—that Church’s equivalent of the Authorized Version—was the 




very language spoken by Jesus himself The standard English work on the 




canon  of  the  Bible  was  still  perpetuating  this  mistake  in  1896.  Current 




scholarship would therefore have supported an interest in the Assyrians. 




What is more, the early 1890s were a time of great excitement in Syriac 




studies.  In  the  context  of  the  romantic  archaeology  of   

Meetings  with

 




 

Remarkable Men, 

 it becomes significant that in 1889, adventurous scholars 




penetrated the Syriac library of the Convent of Saint Catherine on Mount 




Sinai. Two years later, in this library there was discovered a palimpsest 




containing the Syriac version of the New Testament. While it would be 




wrong to see Gurdjieff as taking a scholarly interest in New Testament 




studies, he might well have taken the interest of an esoteric antiquarian. 




Stimulated either by personal acquaintance with his “Aissor” friends, or 




by contemporary interest in Syriac, Gurdjieff might have turned to the 




Peshitta itself Its first editor was the German humanist, J. A. Widmanstet- 




ter (1506-57), who originated the notion that the language of the Peshitta 




was that of Christ. With Widmanstetter we are back in the atmosphere of 




Renaissance mysticism of which Kircher was almost the last representative. 




Widmanstetter  studied  Hebrew  and  learned  Arabic.  Then  in  Italy  he 




accidentally met  an old  man who showed him the Syriac Gospels and 




claimed to be the sole remaining expert on the language. The result was an 




edition of the Peshitta which Widmanstetter published in Vienna in 1555 in 




collaboration with the legate of the Patriarch of Antioch. This text was 




certainly  known  to  Kircher.  His  fellow  Orientalist,  Andreas  Muller 




(1630-94)—a  correspondent  of  Kircher  who  successfully  exposed  the




522 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




fantastic nature of the Jesuit’s imagination—made a study of Syriac based on 




Widmanstetter’s Peshitta. Not only does Gurdjieff’s fascination with the 




Church  of  Edessa  fit  with  contemporary  interest  at  the  end  of  the 




nineteenth  century, but it  had also been  a preoccupation  of the seven- 




teenth-century  Jesuits  whose  work  almost  certainly  inspired  his  own 




cosmology. 




In Widmanstetter’s Peshitta there is an elaborate and suggestive diagram 




of the Tree of Life. It is all the more interesting because there seems no 




reason whatever for its inclusion in the text. The representation of the Tree 




is said to be that of “John, the apostle of Jesus Christ,” who was recalled 




“from Asia ” by his bishop. He then climbed a mountain near Ephesus and 




had a vision in which were contained the opening words of his Gospel: “In 




the beginning was the word . . . ”  The diagram shows the rest of his vision, 




in which the  

Sephiroth

 of the Tree of Life are associated with the wounds of 




Christ on the Cross. From the point of view of Gurdjieff’s teaching, the 




interesting feature of this Tree is that around Malkuth—the Kingdom, the 




physical world, the bottom  

Sephirah

—is curled the crescent moon. From 




 

In Search of the Miraculous

 and the whole tenor of Ouspensky’s teaching, 




we  know  that  for  Gurdjieff  the  moon  was  the  last  note  on  the  Ray  of 




Creation, deep in matter, the realm of inorganic life. Although in some 




Cabalistic systems the moon may be attributed to Malkuth, it is far more 




often given to Yesod—the  

Sephirah

 above Malkuth, the realm of reflection 




and imagination. Here, in the pages of the Syriac Peshitta, is a Tree of Life 




attributing the moon to Malkuth, and linking all at once Gurdjieff ’s Ray of 




Creation, the Christianity of the Aissors, and the Cabalistic mysticism of the 




Renaissance. 




It is most unlikely that Gurdjieff stumbled upon Widmanstetter s Tree— 




although there remains an outside chance that, surrounded by a bewildering  conflict  of  beliefs,  and  searching  for  an  unpolluted  tradition  of Christianity,  he  might  have  been  attracted  to  a  version  of  the  Great 




Hieroglyph  somehow  associated with  the Church of Edessa. What the 




coincidence  does  show  is  that  in  the  crisis  of  the  Renaissance  and 




Reformation, men concerned to mend the once seamless robe of Christ and 




retrieve meaning out of chaos made use of a syncretism based on Cabalistic 




and  Pythagorean  principles  which  it  seems  legitimate  to  call  “esoteric 




Christianity.” Confronted with a similar crisis of consciousness, Gurdjieff 




may  well  have  responded  in  a  similar  fashion—either  by  consciously 




imitating the example of that sort of esoteric Christianity represented by 




Kircher, or by making his own synthesis with similar motives and with 




similar results.

It is just possible that Gurdjieff did find some secretly preserved version 




of Christianity in his travels through the Middle East. The Mandaeans— 

a. 







CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY




524 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




sect of Gnostic Christians allotting a special role to John the Baptist—^were 




not  discovered by scholars until comparatively recent times. GurdjiefF 




himself tells us that, after he had exhausted the possibilities contained in 




the relatively obvious forms of Christianity with which he came in contact, 




he abandoned the present for “legominisms” from the past. In his quest for 




origins, he would certainly have pushed his inquiries as far back historically 




as he could go. And he could scarcely have avoided the reHgious and 




philosophical tumult of the first two centuries after the birth of Christ, 




when  the  sects  known  as  Gnostic  flourished  throughout  the  eastern 




Mediterranean. 




There is no agreement as to the origins of Gnosticism. Professor Hans 




Jonas insists that the distinctively Gnostic doctrines derived neither from 




the  established  philosophies  of  the  Hellenistic  world,  nor  from  the 




established religions of the East. The Gnostic faiths seem to be rooted in a 




syncretism of religions—^but the more occult, the more hidden, the more 




mystical currents of theological speculation. Professor Jonas thinks that 




there  is  a  definite  link  between  the  beginnings  of  Gnosticism  and  the 




beginnings  of  Cabala;  and whatever their  origins, the Gnostic  systems 




embody the doctrine of the divine ensnarement in matter. In the Neo- 




Platonic philosophies, this is found in an abstract and sophisticated form. In 




the Gnostic religions the idea occurs in a more magical and occult version. 




Both Margaret Anderson and C. S. Nott have traced Gurdjielf’s teaching 




back to the Gnostics, who in a sense provide the most obvious parallel, 




particularly if we are to take seriously Gurdjieff ’s statement that he taught 




“esoteric  Christianity.” For in the early years of the Christian rehgion, 




before Church councils and power struggles had codified theology, there 




was considerable doubt as to what Christianity was. Whereas virtually all 




theologians might accept some version of the hierarchical universe emanating from the Godhead, the conclusions to be drawn from this cosmology were a matter for dispute. The version of Christianity which triumphed was 




one which affirmed in a hmited fashion the virtues of the world; and the 




Gnostic Christians, the representatives of the more magical and world- 




rejecting points of view, were defeated. 




Of all the Gnostic systems, the most Christian and the most impressive is 




the powerful vision of Valentinus, whose thought Professor Jonas calls “the 




culmination of. . . the Syrian-Egyptian type of Gnostic speculation.” 




Valentinus taught in Rome for some twenty-five years before a.d. 160, 




and a succession of disciples elaborated his system. The Valentinians seem 




to have aimed at establishing an inner circle of “true Christians” within the 




orthodox  Church,  and  this  particular  version  of  esoteric  Christianity 




provides a suggestive parallel to the efforts of Gurdjieff nineteen centuries 




later.  One  of  the  most  notable  Valentinian  converts  was  Bardaissan  of 




Edessa, who had belonged to the "Aissor” Church and made a journey to




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   525




Armenia. His views on what GurdjiefF called “the law of fate and the law of 




accident” are virtually identical to Gurdjielf’s own teaching. 




GurdjiefF certainly knew much of what could be known in his day about 




the Gnostic systems. It is possible to find a great deal of what he taught in 




one or another of the great heresiarchs—or in the Christian writers like 




Origen and Clement of Alexandria, who inclined more than a little toward 




ideas of a Gnostic nature. How GurdjiefF became attracted to the Gnostics 




we cannot know for certain; for there were countless possible avenues down 




which his mind could have traveled. But the most likely possibility is that 




this quest for a primordial version of Christianity led him to the Gnostics via 




the “esoteric Christianity” of the nineteenth-century occult revival. 




In Western Europe the phrase “esoteric Christianity” is associated with 




the  names  of  Anna  Kingsford  and  Edward  Maitland.  Anna  Kingsford 




(1846-88)  was  a  leading  light  of  the  Victorian  occult  world,  an  ardent 




antivivisectionist, and a friend of Mme. Blavatsky. The visions which she 




experienced under ether were elaborated by Maitland and herself into an 




occult system based on alchemy and Gnosticism. To this they gave the 




name of “esoteric Christianity,” and the expression became a commonplace 




among the occult groups of London and Paris. As far as their system was 




Christian at all, it represented Jesus as a Gnostic magus who had sojourned 




in the wilderness of the Essenes and returned to preach an esoteric doctrine 




in Israel. In 1891 Maitland founded an “Esoteric Christian Union,” but the 




new  gospel  spread  chiefly  through  the  medium  of  the  Theosophical 




Society—in 1901 Annie Besant pubUshed a book of her own called  

Esoteric

 




 

Christianity

—and in Europe the theory became known through the hugely 




successful  

The Great Initiates

 (1889) of the French Theosophist Edouard 




Stehure. 




When he described his System as “esoteric Christianity,” Gurdjieff might 




merely have been bowing to the need to define himself in a way which 




could be accepted in Holy Russia. When the fashion for mysticism swept 




into St. Petersburg from Paris, the commonplaces of Western occultism 




became fused in an unlikely alloy with the more superstitious traditions of 




the Orthodox Church. The idea that there existed hidden  

startzy

 fascinated 




diose who were seeking for a Master, and the semi-occult vision which this 




produced led to the rumor that these “invisible” holy men represented the 




esoteric tradition in Orthodoxy. Gurdjieff was dealing in familiar ideas, and 




the associations of the phrase “esoteric Christianity” would have been 




perfectly well known to Ouspensky. 




6.  

Esoteric Buddhism




To a believer in “esoteric Christianity”—or to someone obsessed with the 




need to discover the original forms of religious traditions—a progression 




from Christianity to Buddhism was not the unlikely journey that it seems. 




526 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




In 1894, the year before the Seekers for Truth are supposed to have been 




founded, the Russian N. A. Notovitch pubHshed in Paris his  

The Unknown

 




 

Life  of  Jesus  Christ, 

  which  had  a  substantial  impact  on  Theosophical 




thought. Notovitch also wrote books on the political role of Russia and was 




much concerned with the conflict of interests between the Russian and 




British Empires in Central Asia. It is quite possible that he was involved in 




the Great Game. 




In   

The  Unknown  Life  of  Jesus  Christ, 

  Notovitch  claims  that  after  the 




Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78, he began a period of wandering “without 




any  definite  plan”  through  Central  Asia.  In   

Herald  of  Coming  Good, 

 




Gurdjieff uses almost the identical phrase about his own travels in the same 




parts  of  the  world;*  and  the  expression  chimes  all  too  well  with  the 




apparently  purposeless  meanderings  of  an  information-gatherer  to  be 




altogether ignored. Notovitch’s own route led him over the Caucasus and 




through  Persia  to  Afghanistan  and  India.  He  probably  made  several 




journeys,  for  the  trip  on  which  he  claimed  to  have  discovered  his 




controversial material supposedly took place in late 1887. Traveling through 




Ladakh, he injured his leg and made an enforced halt in the Buddhist 




monastery of Himis, near Leh. He discovered that this monastery had in its 




library copies of texts preserved at Lhasa concerning the activities of Jesus 




Christ  in  India.  Notovitch  claims  that  he  persuaded  the  abbot  of  the 




monastery to read him the texts, while he transcribed the translation made 




by his interpreter. 




Jesus,  whom  Notovitch’s  text  calls  “Issa,”  is  supposed  to  have  left 




Palestine at the age of thirteen and traveled with a group of merchants to 




Sind. He spent six years in Jagganath, Rejegriha, Benares, and “the other 




holy cities” where he studied the Vedas. He began preaching to the lower 




caste Vaisyas and Sudras, denouncing the caste structure and the many gods 




of Hinduism. This aroused the anger of the Brahmins and Kshatriyas who 




planned to kill him, but Issa was warned by the Sudras and fled to the 




Himalayas. Here he learned Pali and studied the Sutras for another six 




years. When he had completed his Buddhist studies he left the hills and 




traveled westward, denouncing sacrifices and idolatry. Notovitch’s account 




ends with the “Tibetan” version of Jesus’ trial and crucifixion. This asserts 




that Pilate sent his troops to remove the body of Jesus from the tomb which 




was becoming a symbol of resistance to Rome. 




The foreword to  

The Unknown Life of Jesus

 claims to describe the reactions of various dignitaries of the Church to Notovitch’s discovery; one and all, they tried to discourage him from publishing his material. It is quite 




probable that he was a hoaxer; for although the legend of Jesus’ Indian




♦In  another  book,  

Alexander  HI  et  son  entourage, 

  Notovitch  has  a  chapter  on  “Some 




Remarkable  Men.” 




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   527




journey is quite well known in Kashmir, such a publication fits suspiciously 




well into the anticlerical and Theosophical agitation of the 1890s. The book 




was immediately successful, appeared in English and American editions, 




and provided Theosophists with an effective argument for the theory that all 




religions derived from the East—perhaps ultimately from some hallowed 




center of occultism in the Himalayas. The Issa of whom Nikolai Notovitch 




informed the world appears in Annie Besant’s  

Esoteric Christianity. 




Whether  or  not   

The Unknown Life of  Jesus

 contains an accurate  transcription of material Notovitch found in Ladakh, GurdjiefF had certainly read the book or knew and believed its arguments. In Tiflis he told Carl 




Bechhofer Roberts as a fact that Jesus had studied in a Tibetan monastery. 




The romantic tone of the discovery in a remote monastery of documents 




vital to an understanding of the origins of Christianity would certainly have 




appealed  to  Gurdjieff;  and  Notovitch  would  undoubtedly  have  been 




discussed in Russian Theosophical circles even if no closer contact had 




existed between the two players of the Great Game. The idea that the real, 




the “esoteric,” Christianity had derived from Buddhism would explain 




precisely what Gurdjieff was doing in Tibet as the pupil of Agwan Dordjieff. 




It may also explain quite a lot about the relationship between DordjieflF, the 




convert to Orthodoxy Shamzaran BadmaiefiF, and Prince Ukhtomsky, the 




Theosophist—^who, although he announced himself as a practising Buddhist, was once described by Badmaieff in a letter to Nicholas II as a good Christian. 




At this point there is an unexpected Hnk between the esoteric Christianity of Athanasius Kircher and the exploits of “Ushe Narzunoff” in Tibet. 




Before  Narzunoff’s  photograph  of  the  Potala  was  published,  the  only 




picture which Europe possessed of that impressive building was a drawing 




in Kircher’s  

China Illustrate

 (1670). This volume formed part of the Jesuit’s 




work as an Orientalist and contained accounts of Tibet by missionaries 




belonging to his Order. Before the epidemic of Tibetan voyages at the close 




of  the  nineteenth  century,  Kircher’s  book  was  still  much  more  than  a 




curiosity for travelers to Central Asia, and it is quite possible that Gurdjieff 




first became interested in the Jesuit scholar by way of his  

China Illustrate. 

 




Joseph Deniker reproduced Kircher’s illustration of the Potala in his edition 




of Narzunoff’s travel diary in  

Le Tour du Monde. 




Waldo Frank thought that Gurdjieff’s system was “clearly derived” from 




Buddhism. He may have made his own investigations, but tnost probably 




based  this  opinion  on the idea current among Orage’s  groups that the 




technique of self-observation was outlined in a Pali scripture translated by 




F. L. Woodward in his  

Sayings of the Buddha

 (1935), where it is known as 




“The Only Way.” Orage’s friend, Professor Denis Saurat, thought Gurdjieff 




“a great connoisseur of Buddhism”:




528 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Some highly educated Orientals with whom I have discussed Gurdjieff 




go so far as to maintain that he was simply a Buddhist who for personal 




reasons settled in the West and tried to teach some of the simplest of 




the methods and truths known in the Far East. . . . GurdjiefF’s book 




shows no prejudice in favour of Buddhism, on the contrary he seems 




expressly to condemn the spread of Eastern ideas towards the West. 




He told me himself that he aimed at achieving a synthesis of Western 




science and technique on the one hand, and Eastern spirituality on the 




other, but he did not necessarily mean Buddhism, and was even of the 




opinion that all religions found in Asia today are degenerate forms of an 




ancient revelation. 




Ouspensky once told his followers that the ideas of the System could be 




recognized in Buddhism. A former pupil writes that “he did not say what 




kind  of  Buddhism,  but  I  supposed  that  he  referred  to  the  Pali  texts 




translated  by  Rhys  Davids  in  Volume  II  (Dialogues  of  the  Buddha)  of 




 

Sacred Books of the Buddhists, 

 because I thought I had seen that book on 




Mme. O.’s bedside table.” The European who became the Lama Angarika 




Govinda  quotes  Ouspensky  in  support  of  the  techniques  of  the  Pali 




scriptures for orienting oneself in a universe of many dimensions, and it 




would be natural to find correspondences in the Pali texts—of which “The 




Only Way” is one—because for several reasons these could have appeared 




to Gurdjieff as the repository of the earliest and most esoteric Buddhist 




teachings. 




For centuries after the death of the Buddha in 480 B.C.,  the scriptures 




were not vmtten downn and the Pali Canon took form in the first century 




A.D.  It  is  divided  into  three  groups,  of which  the most  “esoteric”  is  the 




 

Abhidamma-Pitaka, 

  a  collection  of  books  on  “further  doctrine”  or  “the 




super-doctrine.” Professor Edward Conze explains that these were meant 




for  “the  very  core  of  the  Buddhist   

6lite." 

  Anyone  familiar  with  the 




techniques outlined by Orage for the detailed practice of self-observation 




would recognize a less sophisticated form of the analysis decreed by the 




 

Abhidamma. 

 Anything a person may think of as his own is analzyed into its 




“ultimates” excluding any ego over and above these elements. The first five 




ultimates are known as the  

Skandhas

—the material attributes, feelings, 




perception, impulse, and act of consciousness. Professor Conze gives an 




example of an analysis of the phenomenon:  

“I

 have a toothache. ” 




1.  There is  

the form

 of the tooth as matter. 




2.  There is a painful  

feeling. 




3.  There is a sight-, touch-, and  

pain-perception

 of the tooth. 




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   529




4.  There is by way of  

volitional reactions:

 resentment at pain, fear of 




possible consequences, greed for physical well-being, etc. 




5.  There is  

consciousness

—and awareness of all this. 




While nothing we know of Gurdjieff ’s theory approaches the complexity 




and sophistication of the  

Abhidamma, 

 his general approach was based on a 




similar attitude, and possibly he borrowed certain specific ideas from the 




esoteric  teaching  of  the  Pali  texts;  for  example,  the  fourth  book  of  the 




 

Abhidamma-Pitaka

 is a treatise on human types. But he may have picked 




up theory from many different varieties of Buddhism, including odd sects 




like  the  Tantrics,  and  there  is  one  influence  on  his  technique  which  is 




glaringly obvious: the heterodox Buddhism known as Cha’an or Zen. 




When one of his pupils once asked him whether the System had anything 




in common with Zen, Ouspensky replied, “With Buddhism, but not with 




Zen  Buddhism.”  On  the  other  hand,  when  D.  T.  Suzuki  attended  a 




demonstration of Gurdjieff ’s movements in New York, he is said to have 




called  the  System,  “Zen  for  the  West.”  Margaret Anderson  writes  that 




Eugen  Herrigel’s  book,  

Zen in the Art of Archery, 

 parallels in a striking 




way the method of Gurdjieff ’s teaching. And once more, if Gurdjieff did 




take ideas from the Zen Masters, there might have been some stimulus for 




his believing that Zen represented an esoteric tradition within Buddhism. 




This point of view has been put forward by Alan Watts, and may represent 




the legacy of Theosophical opinion. 




In  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 Gurdjieff describes a game which he 




says that his father played with his friend Dean Borsh, and which he calls 




 

kastousilia. 

 This procedure is so much like that of the Zen stories known as 




 

mondo

  or  “question-answer”  as  to  be  no  coincidence— 

and  there  are  of

 




 

course  no  coincidences. 

  Gurdjieff’s  example  is  of  Dean  Borsh  suddenly 




asking his father where God was at that moment. Gurdjieff’s father replied 




that God was in the forest region of Sari Kamish. The Dean asked what God 




was doing there. The answer was that God was making double ladders on 




the tops of which “he was fastening happiness.” Gurdjieff remarks that the 




two men used sometimes to carry on long conversations in this idiom, 




which would have seemed quite mad to an outsider. He adds: “Many of 




these conversations which then seemed to me so meaningless grew to have 




a deep meaning for me later when I came across questions of the same 




kind. . . . ”  He might well have found such questions and answers in a 




Zendo in China or Japan. An example from Suzuki shows the similarity:




Shi, of Yang-shan, was washing his robe when Tan-yvian came along 




and  asked:  “Where  is  your  thought  at  this  moment?  ’  Shi  at  once 




retorted: “At this very moment what thought do you want me to have?” 




530 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




The correspondence between GurdjiefF and Zen seems to have been 




most pronounced toward the end of his life; but D. T. Suzuki’s description 




of an irate Master of “primitive” Zen equally well describes the inconsistent 




and  combative  character  of  Gurdjieff  at  Fontainebleau.  In  the  Zen 




monastery physical labor is considered important, a particular status is 




ascribed to those performing kitchen service, and there is constant sutra- 




reading, which does not require that the listeners grasp intellectually what 




they hear. Most interesting of all, the parallels between the routine of the 




Prieure  and  the  practice  of  the  Zendo  is  the  ritual  of  the  bath.  One 




Bodhisattva is said to have attained enlightenment while bathing, and 




several Zen Masters have made symbohc use of the bath in their teaching. 




Even the apparent conflict of opinion among Gurdjieff’s followers as to the 




significance  of  Gurdjieff’s  ritual  baths  corresponds  to  the  conflicting 




answers  of  two  Zen  Masters  to  the  question,  “Why  all  this  constant 




bathing?” One replies: “Even the idea of cleanliness is to be done away 




with.” And a second contradicts the first: “Just a dip, and no why.” 




When Gurdjieff" arrived in the West no knowledge of Zen existed in 




Europe  or  America.  On  the  other  hand,  the  origins  of  mainstream 




Buddhism in the “Eightfold Middle Path” taught by the Buddha would 




have  been  well  known;  and  the  idea  of  the  Middle  Way  transposes 




accurately into that of the harmoniously developed man, the apostle of the 




balance. Gurdjieff^ was not seeking a union of all religions, as were so many 




Theosophists of his day. Rather does he seem to have been reconstructing—as he told Denis Saurat—the “original revelation” from which he assumed all the great religions to have been derived. Pushing farther and 




farther back, following occult Traditions to their sources, he would have 




found  an  “esoteric  Buddhism”  as  he  would  have  found  an  “esoteric 




Christianity.” 




And although he was not seeking a union of all religions, his search for a 




primordial wisdom must have led him to the publications of the Theosophi- 




cal  Society.  From  their  headquarters  at  Adyar,  from  their  American, 




British, and French branches, from their underground cells in Russia, the 




Theosophists  acted  as  the  central  clearing  house  for  all  esoteric  ideas. 




Althou^ they snapped up Anna Kingsford’s “Esoteric Christianity,” their 




own teachings first came to the attention of Europeans under the name of 




“esoteric Buddhism.” In the book which he published under this title in 




1883, the journalist A. P. Sinnett summarized the cosmology which H. P. 




Blavatsky  later  embodied  in   

The  Secret  Doctrine. 

  The  idea  of  esoteric 




Buddhism was as well known to occult circles as that of esoteric Christianity, and Ouspensky’s stay in Ceylon in 1913 was dominated by the impression  that  he  could  discover  some  secret  teaching  beneath  the 




estabhshed religion of the Theravedins. Similar ideas probably influenced




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   531




GurdjiefF’s own search, and he certainly found inspiration in the conflicting 




theories of the nineteenth-century occultists. 




7.  

The Occult Revival




Most  of  the  materials  for  GurdjieflF’s  cosmology  can  be  found  in  the 




teachings of the late nineteenth-century occult revival; and contemporary 




occultism could easily have suggested lines of research leading to ideas 




which  other  investigators  ignored.  Number  symbolism  is  an  example: 




several tomes on the subject appeared in Germany during the nineteenth 




century. In 1882 the Austrian spiritualist Baron Hellenbach published his 




 

Magie  der  Zahlen, 

  which  could  have  led  the  seeker  at  one  remove  to 




Athanasius Kircher; for Hellenbach often refers to the  

Gesetz der Quadrat

 




of the Viennese surgeon, Franz Liharzic, which contains a reproduction of 




Kircher’s enneagram with a reference to the  

Arithmologia. 

 And far from 




being  as  unfamihar  to  his  contemporaries  as  Gurdjieff  pretended,  the 




enneagram was well knovra to the “magicians” of the Hermetic Order of 




the Golden Dawn, based in London. In their published rituals will be found 




the lecture given to initiates on “Polygons and Polygrams”—of course, from 




an arithmological-occult point of view. The lecture describes the magical 




attributes of the enneagram, which is associated with the moon and the 




 

Sephirah

 Yesod on the Tree of Life. 




This does not mean that Gurdjieff read Baron Hellenbach or was initiated 




into the Golden Dawn. It shows simply that others were working the same 




quarries, and that his cosmology was part of a general revival of interest in 




Traditional  doctrine.  For  example,  the  Golden  Dawn  lecture  on 




Pythagorean  figures  was  partly  based  on  the  researches  of  one  of  its 




founders,  the  London  coroner,  William  Wynn  Westcott.  His   

Numbers, 

 




 

Their  Occult  Significance  and  Power

  was  published  by  the  Theosophical 




Society in 1890 and contains a reference to Kircher. Westcott also used a 




symbolism  of  squares,  triangles,  and  geometrical  figures  to  indicate 




different stages of human knowledge. 




Such ideas were the common property of occultists in London, Paris, 




Vienna, Prague, and St. Petersburg. Everyone in these small circles knew, 




or knew of, each other; and every new contribution was eagerly assessed to 




see  how  it  could  be  fitted  into  the  huge  syntheses  which  most  of  the 




occultists  were  engaged  in  constructing.  A  couple  of  years  of  occult 




reading—^for he would not have been encumbered by much modern occult 




lunacy—^would certainly have equipped Gurdjieff with all the material 




which he was likely to nfeed. 




To  take a few examples  from many that could be given: GurdjiefF’s 




technique of disciplining his unharmonious pupils by assigning them to 




unwelcome tasks was anticipated by the strange occultist, Thomas Lake




532 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Harris, who established his community of “The Use” on the shores of Lake 




Erie  in  the  late  1850s.  Harris’s  most  famous  convert  was  the  Scottish 




Member of Parliament, Laurence Oliphant, whom he compelled to sew and 




to peddle food on the local train. Two genteel ladies were made to act as 




cook and chambermaid in a hotel, and a Quaker deputed to act as barman. 




Gurdjieff’s dehberately eccentric use of European languages was quite 




probably  modeled  on  the  tactics  of  the  eighteenth-century  occultist, 




Martines de Pasqually, who was a hero to the Symbolist mystics of the 




1890s. 




The most unexpected occult source for Gurdjieff 's ideas is the American 




“Rosicrucian,”  Paschal  Beverly  Randolph,  who  flourished  in  the  third 




quarter of the nineteenth century. Randolph was a talented and extraordinary figure. Half-Negro by birth, he made a reputation as a lecturer on the American Civil War and other patriotic subjects, but felt always that his 




ancestry prevented his real merits from being recognized. Eventually he 




relapsed into a welter of occultism and quack medicine. The essence of 




Randolph’s teaching was sexual. Gurdjieff sometimes gave personal advice 




on sexuality by word of mouth, but his general teaching was clear enough. 




Sex  was  a  sacred  function  of  which  there  should  be  two  results;  the 




procreation  of  children  and  the  “coating  and  perfection  of  .  .  .  ‘higher 




parts.’” In Russia he taught that the most refined substance produced by 




the body was sperm, and that it was the sperm which formed the fourth 




body which made man immortal. This is Randolph’s doctrine in all respects. 




The  detail which  really ties Randolph to Gurdjieff is the American’s 




constant references  to “Ansairetic Mysteries” said to be secrets of “the 




Syrian mountaineers. ” This associates him directly with Gurdjieff ’s emphasis  on  the  role  of  the  “Aissors”  in   

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men. 

 




Unfortunately for any theory which would make Gurdjieff and Randolph 




heirs to the same esoteric tradition, the latter decided to reveal the source 




of  his  wisdom  in   

The  New  Mola

  (1873).  “Early  in  life,”  he  wrote,  “I 




discovered that the fact of my ancestry on one side, being what they were 




[sic] was an effectual estoppal on my preferment... So I called myself The 




Rosicrucian, and gave my thought to the world as Rosicrucian thought; and 




lo! the world greeted with loud applause what it thought had its origin and 




birth elsewhere than in the soul of P. B. Randolph! . . . Precisely so was it 




with things purporting to be Ansairetic. I had merely ... got hold of a new 




name;  and  again  mankind  hurrahed  for  the  wonderful  Ansaireh,  but 




incontinently turned up its nose at the supposed copyist. ” 




At first it may seem obscurely shocking to find Gurdjieff linked to 




Randolph, who is an interesting and neglected figure, but very definitely an 




“occultist. ” The resurrection of Traditional wisdom by the late Victorians 




be tolerated—but what of the deliberate invention and peddling of




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   533




esoteric doctrines by the self-confessed fake? It is difficult to see where else 




GurdjieflF could have derived his doctrine; and from relatively respectable 




and  earnest seekers for truth, he evidently turned to the most dubious 




members of the esoteric fringe. The vision of Gurdjielf as the representative of centuries-old wisdom is once more clouded by doubt—^was he, after all, just another of the false prophets who were spawned by the turn-of-the-century passion for things occult? 




With the exception of sex magic, most occult ideas somehow found their 




way into the large body of literature published by the Theosophical Society. 




From the Theosophical presses poured volume after volume confounding 




Western Traditional knowledge with Buddhism and the religion of the 




Vedas.  Gurdjieff  used  the  Theosophical  terms  “astral  body,”  “mental 




body,” and “casual body,” and it was almost certainly through Theosophical 




references that he developed his teaching of the seven centers of man. 




Without much question these are based on the Tantric  

chakras, 

 the centers 




of force in the human body, which first became known in the West through 




the works of Sir John Woodroffe and which Theosophists like the notorious 




Bishop Leadbeater incorporated into the occult canon. There are examples 




of the seven centers in the works of Renaissance mystics, and near analogies 




like those of Francesco Giorgi who applied the octave to the human being; 




but the most likely route by which the seven centers arrived in Gurdjieff’s 




teaching is through Theosophical sources. 




It is also likely that the stray Hindu elements in his ideas arrived by way 




of Theosophy: such as the idea of food as the prime matter of the universe 




and the comparison of the Self with the owner of horse, carriage and driver; 




both  of  which  are  found  in  the   

Upanishads. 

  It  has  been  suggested  that 




GurdjieflF’s doctrine of the “three forces” impHes a debt to the Samkhya 




philosophy; but the three  

gunas

 of Samkhya were well known to Theosophists, and appear in the book which probably provided a starting point for Gurdjieff’s own occult synthesis. This is H. P. Blavatsky’s monumental  

The

 




 

Secret Doctrine

 (1888). In its weighty bulk are to be found references to the 




four  bodies  of  man,  to  the  “ray”  of  creation,  to  number  symbolism, 




including  a  reference  to  Heilenbach’s   

Magie  der  Zahlen

  which  would 




eventually have led the reader to Kircher, applications of the octave to the 




chemical elements and the musical scale. . . . And apart from Gurdjieff ’s 




admission that he did follow up Mme. Blavatsky’s references, there is one 




striking plagiarism. This is the renaming of the four elements “hydrogen,” 




“nitrogen,” “oxygen, ” and “carbon,” which was first accomplished on page 




593 of the second volume of Mme. Blavatsky’s masterpiece. 




When Ouspensky describes the lecture in which Gurdjieff first introduced this terminology, he notes that Gurdjieff confirmed that “carbon, ” 




“oxygen,”  “nitrogen,”  and  “hydrogen”  did  correspond  to  the  ancient




534 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




elements  of  fire,  air,  earth,  and  water.  He  adds  that  “although  G.  had 




definitely promised to explain precisely why these names were taken and 




not others, he never did so. . . . Attempts to estabhsh the origin of these 




names explained to me a great deal concerning the whole of G.’s system as 




well as its history.” 




We  may  begin  to  wonder  why  so  much  insistence  is  placed  on  the 




unprofitable nature of research into the origins of the System, and why 




several modern suggestions seem designed to divert inquiry on to the 




wrong track. Ouspensky’s inquiries must have turned up a great deal of 




evidence—he knew all the Theosophical literature and much other occult 




literature as well. Other researchers must also have stumbled on clues to 




the origins of  Gurdjieff’s  cosmology; and  despite some odd  antics, his 




followers are very far from all being fools or knaves. If this is kept in mind, 




we shall come very much nearer the nature of Gurdjieff ’s Method. 




8.  

Psychology, Religion and the Work




“There is nothing so explosive as old ideas restated in contemporary terms,” 




P. L. Travers has written of Gurdjieff. But was Gurdjieff expressing old 




ideas—in the sense of old theories—or was he in fact expressing something 




else, something far older; a series of wisdoms as old as the first wise man? 




Because the teaching was presented differently by different teachers, and 




because they all had to have regard to their own nature and the nature of 




their pupils, the introduction was made in different forms relating to the 




time and place. This simply means that the terms of the situation must 




always be contemporary; they must be those which seem to have meaning. 




If  the  pupil  finds  the  ambiguities  of   

The Secret  Doctrine

  relevant  to  his 




personal situation, that is where the teacher starts. 




The  Victorian  occult  revival  certainly  colored  Gurdjieff’s  own  early 




search for truth. But was it a flight from reason or a return from alienation? 




In one aspect, it was an attempt to transpose the topics which had been 




traditionally the province of religion and the priest into the age of science 




and the scientist. The whole spectrum of subjective experience—of being- 




in-the-world,  of  mental  phenomena  also—had  been  excluded  by  the 




uncompromising materialism of early Victorian science. The religiously 




inclined, and the few with a real interest in questions of being-in-the-world, 




struggled  with  the  task  of  translating  the  events  of  the  psyche  into  a 




language which would have meaning for a society conditioned by the 




scientific miracle. 




The continued advance of science has made the premature efforts of the 




occult revival both out of date and emotionally suspect. Science moved on 




from its primitive dogmatism, the theory of Relativity made its appearance, 




and  the  protests  of  occultists  against  materialism  no  longer  tempt  the




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   535




serious thinker. Yet the occult attempt to restate the perennial problems 




has had two important results. 




The first was the appearance of a small number of thinkers who tried to 




develop the approach of Victorian occultism in a more sophisticated way. 




There  were a bare half-dozen, of whom Gurdjieff may have been one. 




Hermann Keyserling and Rudolf Steiner are two others. Gurdjieff can be 




quite easily compared to Steiner, who also passed through the influence of 




nineteenth-century  occultism  before  extracting  the  material  which  he 




elaborated into his “spiritual science,” Anthroposophy. There are certain 




similarities in the approach of the two men; the search for a form to suit the 




times, the use of movements  

d la Dalcroze, 

 the theme of the Struggle of the 




Magicians. 




A second result of the internalizing of thought was the psychoanalytic 




movement.  There  is  evidence  which  suggests  that  Freud  had  a  closer 




contact with the occultists of Vienna than has ever been admitted,* and in 




the school of analytical psychology stemming from C. G. Jung, attention 




swung back to a consideration of topics treated by alchemy, Swedenborg, 




and the Gnostics. Although approaching from the opposite direction, the 




new psychologists were perplexed by the same sort of problems as troubled 




the spiritual teachers, and they were under similar influence. While the 




Steiners  and  the  GurdjiefFs  searched  through  tradition  for  forgotten 




knowledge, the psychologists rediscovered the forbidden area of being-in- 




the-world and proposed to subject it to the scientific method. In both cases 




there was bound to result a restatement of old ideas in contemporary terms. 




Because GurdjiefF s System was intended to be in a form “accessible to 




contemporary man,” and also because it had been worked out through the 




sources to which contemporary man naturally turned, it has some correspondence with other serious attempts to redefine intangibles. Ouspensky used  to  recommend  the  study  of  the  “older”  psychology  and  certain 




Theosophical works. The threefold division of man into body, emotions, 




and intellect was a commonplace of prescientific psychology. It is also found 




in Laurence Oliphant, Vladimir Soloviev, Papus, Steiner, and countless 




occult writers. In the interesting system called “Statuvolism,” constructed 




in the 1870s by the American hypnotist and phrenologist, William Baker 




Fahnestock, can be found many resemblances to Gurdjieff’s psychology. 




On a more occult level, Annie Besant’s  

A Study in Consciousness

 (1904) 




contains some interesting ideas as well as much talk of “ultimate atoms.” It 




is subtitled “a study in psychology.” 




More  conventional  psychology  has  left  fewer  traces  in  Gurdjieff’s 




teaching. The discussions of laughter in  

In Search of the Miraculous

 were




*See  

The Occult Establishment. 




536 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




probably inspired by Henri Bergson’s writings on humor. Gurdjieff and 




Ouspensky always gave psychoanalysis a very bad press, regarding it as 




further involving man in the unreal world, but Kenneth Walker in his  

The

 




 

Conscious Mind

 has compared Freud’s views on psychology with those of 




Gurdjieff. Apart from their agreement that “wrong sex” forms one of the 




chief sources of human misery, there is little to justify the comparison. The 




parallel  with  Jung  is  much  more  exact.  The  similarity  is  sometimes  so 




marked that the two are said to have met; but Arnold Keyserling once 




secured a denial from Jung himself. The parallel stems chiefly from Jung’s 




own occult reading, and particularly from his reliance on the Christian 




Gnostics. 




Of  all  the  twentieth-century  psychologies,  the  approach  apparently 




closest to Gurdjieff’s is Behaviorism. In its insistence on the mechanical 




conditioning of man—that man cannot  

do, 

 that he is  

done to

—and in its 




utter  materialism, the  System as  defined by  Ouspensky seems to have 




much in common with the theories made popular by J. B. Watson. It was 




not  entirely  wishful  thinking  which  made  Orage’s  followers  see  their 




Method as “the step beyond Behaviourism.” 




The origins of Behaviorism lay in Russia, in Pavlov’s famous dogs, and the 




language of Behaviorism belonged at first particularly to Russian thought. If 




Mme. Blavatsky was in one sense the protest of the religious conscience 




against Darwin, Gurdjieff representes the first adjustment of the “spiir 




itually-minded ” to Pavlovian psychology. 




All these similarities are in theoretical terms. It is when we move from 




theory to practice that the Gurdjieff Method appears most individual, and 




in so far as there  

is

 a consistent method, this is provided by the theatrical 




element, the philosophy of role playing which derives from Gurdjieff’s ovm 




impersonation  of  Everyman  and  Superman.  But  the  very  term  “role 




playing” is not peculiar to Gurdjieff’s System, and the emphasis which his 




followers place on the idea seems to be a relatively late development. It was 




in 1923 that the whole idea of role playing as an explanation of psychological 




problems and as a means of curing them was broached by the Rumanian 




psychoanalyst, Jacob L. Moreno. 




In that year Moreno published his book.  

Das Stegreifiheater

 (Theatre of 




Spontaneity), based on experiments which he had begun in Vienna two 




years  earlier.  He  had  started  with  the  idea  that  actors  on  the  stage 




experienced a great conflict between their own interpretations of a part and 




what Moreno called “role-conserves  

’—type

 roles artificially embalmed in 




the  text  of  the  dramatist.  “I  remember  the  struggle  in  Eleanora  Duse 




between herself as a private dramatis persona, and the roles she had to 




impersonate;  the  struggle  between  the  role-concepts  created  by  the 




playwright and the concepts she had of these characters.” From this starting




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   537




point, Moreno developed on the one hand a theory of roles in society, and 




on the other, a whole series of techniques based on the dramatization of the 




patient’s problems. Even the names of his techniques are suggestive: “role- 




reversal,” the “mirror-technique, ” “double ego,” “psychodramatic shock.” 




“Psychodrama,” Moreno writes, “is the science of the actor. . . . The actor 




must become an observer of himself. ” 




Moreno’s techniques and terminology are so similar to the vocabulary of 




“playing  a  role”  that  there  must  have  been  some  contact  between  the 




followers of GurdjiefiF and the theories of psychodrama. As to GurdjiefF 




himself, it is impossible to say. It does seem unlikely that he would pay 




much attention to a European who had developed for himself some of his 




own techniques; but without implying any debt to Moreno, Gurdjieff’s 




Method can be described as a particular form of psychodrama. 




And what is real in a universe where everything is theatrical? What is and 




what is not meant to be taken seriously? Gurdjieff’s world is one of doubts, 




of  the  shadows  of  ideas,  of  uncertainty  over  the  most  normal-seeming 




appearance. What is the role of the cosmology in this altered version? 




9,  

Theater and the World




Moreno’s psychodrama is not the only contemporary development with 




which Gurdjieff’s dramatic experiment can be compared. It seems certain 




that there must have been contact with the ideas of Konstantin Stanislavsky 




(1863-1938), whose book.  

An Actor Prepares, 

 was originally published in 




Russia as  

An Actors Work on Himself. 

 Stanislavsky’s Method involves, like 




GurdjiefF’s, concentration of the attention and relaxation of the muscles. 




“Our type of creativeness,” he writes, “is the conception and birth of a new 




being—the person in the part. It is a natural act similar to the birth of a 




human being.” In another book Stanislavsky holds out to his actor the possi- 




blity of expanding his awareness. “Only the actor whose development 




proceeds along harmonious lines can, quite independently and through his 




own  acquired  experience,  raise  himself  step  by  step  to  a  wider  consciousness.” 




Other  developments  in  the  Russian  theater  may  have  been  equally 




significant; in particular the work of N. N. Evreimoff (1879-1953). Carl 




Bechhofer Roberts met him in Petrograd in 1915 and published translations 




of two of his plays in the  

New Age. 

 EvreimofF is celebrated for his invention 




of “monodrama,” an idiom in which the internal drama of an individual’s 




conflicting impulses is externalized on stage. Orage’s  

Little Review

 article of 




1926, “A Theatre for Us,” suggesting a representation of the three centers 




of man, was derived entirely from a remembered performance of Evre- 




imofF’s monodrama  

The Theatre of the Soul

 at the Little Theatre in London 




on March 8, 1915. In theoretical terms, EvreimofF’s chief argument was




538 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




that  all  human  life  is  governed  by  the  theatrical  instinct;  and  here  he 




influenced  Ouspensky,  who  recommended  his  book   

The  Theatre  in  Life

 




(1927) in  

A New Model of the Universe. 

 Evreimoff ends  

The Theatre in Life

 




with a confession of faith in his God, “Theatrarch” : "I beheve that having 




played thousands of roles, more and more difficult, I approach closer and 




closer to him, my director, until, perfectly trained in the dramatic cycle of 




the cosmos, I became at last his inseparable and worthy colleague.” 




This idea of a theatrical universe is an old one. We can date it back at 




least as far as the Hindu idea that the universe consists of the “days and 




nights of Brahma,” of plays enacted by the god for his own amusement. 




E. R. Eddison bases the fictional world of Zimiamvia on the same poetic 




conception. Neither is the idea of a purgation by role playing confined to 




men of the theater. Herman Hesse uses it in very much the same sense as 




Evreimoff in his novel  

Steppenwolf

 (1927). Harry Haller, the Wolf of the 




Steppes, the lonely visionary Outsider, prowls around the palisades of life 




until he discovers the magic theater. There is a notice above the door. It 




reads:  magic  theatre:  entrance  not  for  everybody.  With  his  attempts 




to gain entrance to the theater, Harry begins a surrealistic spiritual quest. 




Toward the end of the book he enters a booth marked “Guidance in the 




building up of the personality.” Here he learns that “man consists of a 




multitude of souls, of numerous selves.” But he forgets the lesson that he 




plays many parts and begins to take things too seriously. In the end he 




commits a murder 

—a

 theatrical murder—and is found guilty of “the wilful 




misuse of the magic theatre.” 




Theater  in  the  unusual  sense  of  the  term  has  found  a  place  in  the 




communal activities of the various groups deriving from GurdjiefF. Presumably ordinary dramatic productions are thought to provide material for selfobservation as valid as that given by “spontaneous” theater. Kenneth Burke 




has inaugurated a whole new school of criticism based on the dramatic 




metaphor and probably deriving from Gurdjieff. At the same time there 




have been attempts to show that the use of theater to shock people, to 




disrupt  what  Moreno  would  call  their  “role-conserves,”  derives  from 




Traditional wisdom. 




GurdjiefiF’s “Society of the Adherents of Legominism” used the theater as 




a vehicle for self-development. Orage may have been repeating something 




he heard from GurdjielBF when, toward the end of his life, he referred in  

The

 




 

Aryan Path

 to “one of the lesser-knovm traditions of the Greek drama—that 




its actors lived to create it”; for it is a tradition quite unknown to historians. 




Two expressions from Greek theater are suggestive: the “persona” or  

mask

 




worn by  the  actor; and the  actor’s  original designation  as  “hypocrite,” 




meaning “one who answers” (the chorus). 




We do not know where Gurdjieff got his ideas about using dramatic




T H E   S O U B C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   539




situations. Every academic work on the history of the theater enshrines one 




or another theory about the relationship between reUgious ritual and the 




origins of the drama. A student of occult Tradition would find the image of 




the world as a theater a philosophical commonplace. It is to be found in 




Plato  and  Plotinus;  the  Renaissance  attributed  the  idea  to  Pythagoras. 




There is an ecclesiastical tradition which originates in St. John Chrysostom; 




and  by  the  late  Renaissance  the  rapid  growth  of  theaters  was  being 




defended against the self-righteous by the argument that the stage was a 




force for moral education—as Gurdjieff would have said, a “reflector-of- 




reality.” Dr. Frances Yates has shown how the idea of the world as theater 




was transposed into the idea of the theater of the world, and contends that 




the theaters of the late Renaissance were an integral part of the occult- 




philosophical world view. 




But the real justification for linking Gurdjieff’s use of theater to occult 




Tradition concerns the glyph—the “mystery-play” in Ouspensky’s sense— 




for the beholder at a distance in time the perception that  

everything falls

 




 

into place

 in the emblem of events; that the Passion of Christ happened in 




the only—emblematic—way which it could have happened; that the drama 




of Ouspensky’s death was in some way blazoning out the heraldry of the 




universe. It is a quality of perception which is genuinely experienced by 




substantial numbers of people. This idea, which leads us to the Rosicrucian 




fracas of the seventeenth century, is almost more incredible than a belief in 




indiscriminate miracles. The stage management of history is something 




which it is difficult to accept—even if the play being produced has in the 




relative sense a very small cast indeed. 




The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross announced itself to the world in a 




series  of  manifestoes  printed  in  Cassel  in  the  years  following  1614.  A 




barrage of literature and counter-literature sprang up from people denouncing, acclaiming, and seeking out the mysterious Rosicrucians, who proclaimed “a general reformation of the whole world. ” But the Brotherhood remained elusive, and it has often been wondered if it ever existed. Dr. 




Frances Yates in  

The Rosicrucian Enlightenment

 lays great stress on the use 




of the Latin term  

ludibrium

 to describe Rosicrucian activities. A  

ludibrium

 




could mean “a play scene,” “a farce,” or “a joke.” But, as Dr. Yates points 




out,  those  who  applied  the  epithet  to  the  Rosicrucians  thought  of  the 




theater  as  an  influence  for  good.  “The  theatricality  of  the  Rosicrucian 




movement,” writes Dr. Yates, . . is one of the most fascinating aspects of 




the whole affair.” And later she volunteers one possible interpretation of 




the Rose Cross  

ludibrium." noi

 as a hoax, but as a dramatic presentation of a 




profoundly interesting rehgious and philosophical movement.” 




The materials of the piece are similar to the case of Gurdjieff, Ouspensky, 




and the rest. The Rosicrucian manifestos describe how Frater Christian




540 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Rosencreuz traveled to the East in search of knowledge. In the Sly Man’s 




pilgrimage  there  was  material  in  hand  to  fashion  such  a  legend.  Most 




important, the Rosicrucians were also called “invisible”—^they inhabited an 




“invisible college,” they were an “invisible” brotherhood. Johann Valentin 




Andreae, a theologian who began by cooperating with the Rosicrucian 




comedy,  eventually  turned  against  the  whole   

ludibrium

 because  it  had 




become  a  “dubious  and  slippery  concern.”  There  were  imposters  and 




charlatans  in  the  field,  he  complained,  men  claiming  to  represent  the 




Rosicrucians. When in fact, Andreae implied, there had originally been a 




definite purpose behind the arrangement of a pious “joke,” “with regard to 




the fashion of the age which seizes avidly on new-fangled notions. ” 




The nature of this purpose must still be very much a matter of opinion, 




but those who pushed the Rose Cross Brothers on to the European stage 




were probably interested in a reformation of the world on lines which were 




at once Protestant, mystical, and scientific. Andreae suggested that the 




learned world stop blinding itself with mysteries and “learn the way of 




salvation” not from some occult society “hazy, omniscient only in the eye of 




its own boastfulness,” but from the Christ himself 




And I suspect that this is more than a parallel with the  

ludibrium

 of the 




Harmonious Circle. It may be that GurdjiefF himself made the plan, or it 




may have been suggested by someone else entirely. The play scene is a 




comedy played in the theater of the world, and the play is for a general 




purpose which the covert action of the drama may not make clear. It was 




certainly with “regard to the fashion of the age which seizes avidly on newfangled notions” that GurdjiefF at one time clothed his teaching in the garb of  contemporary  occultism.  His  introductory  play-scenes  were  always 




similar.  First  you  find  out  what  the  inquirer  wants  and  in  what  he  is 




interested. Then you temper your sales pitch accordingly. On a historical 




scale,  the   

ludibrium

  or  mystery  play  will  serve  the  function  of  such  an 




introductory comedy, until the inquirer is thoroughly “entangled.” 




Then who pushed GurdjiefF on to the stage and began the  

ludibrium? 

 




Was it GurdjiefF’s own idea, or was he one among many? Who translated 




material from languages he could not read himself? What sort of people 




were behind him? 




We can only consider possibilities. The least likely is that he was fulfilling 




a mission devised by some confraternity in Central Asia. Only shghtly less 




probable is the idea that he constructed his System entirely unaided. The 




more his theoretical teaching is studied, the more it divides itself into two 




 

sections:

 a definitely Oriental part, based largely on Buddhist thought with 




an  admixture  of  Sufi  lore;  and  a  definitely  Western  part,  founded  on 




European occultism  as derived  from the Gnostics, Neo-Platonists, and 




Rosicrucians. We know, or at least suspect, that GurdjiefF spent much of his




T H E   S O U R C E S   O F   T H E   S Y S T E M   541




life in Central Asia, and while he must have read widely in contemporary 




occult  literature,  it  may  be  doubted  if  he  would  have  the  time  or  the 




resources for scholarly research. It is likeliest that he was himself largely 




responsible for the Oriental side of his teaching: the Buddhist psychology, 




the theories of movement, and the Eastern aspects of those ideas clearly 




inspired by Theosophy. It is equally probable that he worked closely with 




more educated persons who were at home in the scholarly traditions of 




European occultism. The collaboration of Prince Ukhtomsky alone would 




confine Gurdjieff’s achievement within a more believable compass. 




There remains the possibility that the Seekers for Truth existed not as a 




band of esoteric explorers, but as Gurdjieff’s equivalent to the invisible 




Rosicrucians. However improbable such an organization may sound, it must 




be insisted that^n  

de sidcle

 Russia could have contained  

any

 philosophical 




grouping, including one dedicated to founding a new reUgion by undercover  means.  H.  P.  Blavatsky  was  a  Russian;  and  there  is more  than a suggestion of her tactics in Gurdjieff ’s own. Prince Ukhtomsky s conception 




of the Theosophical Society as a clandestine organization is also suggestive. 




It is because of the Russian Revolution that we know of Gurdjieff at all; but 




the Revolution may also have destroyed evidence of other men engaged in 




similar activities. 




Several  of  Gurdjieff’s  followers  have  alleged  that  after  Essentuki  he 




degenerated. This is often given some mysterious occult significance; but if 




the  observation  has  any  basis  in  fact,  it  may  simply  show  that  he  was 




handicapped by the loss of his friends. In  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 




he  describes  his  last  interview  with  the  possibly  historical  “Professor 




Skridlov” before leaving for the West. If “Skridlov” existed, he was cut off 




by the Revolution; and Gurdjieff would have been isolated from the moral 




and material support of any other colleagues he possessed. He had to rely 




on his own resources, and the  

ludibrium

 may have been forced on him by 




circumstances. In Russia he emphasized to Ouspensky that he could not 




and should not have many pupils; but financial considerations later drove 




him to revise this dictum. It is not surprising if there seems to be a dilution 




of quality in the means employed. But it remains possible that Gurdjieff was 




acting in accordance with some preconceived plan: not as the agent of any 




powerful occult society, but simply in accordance with what had been 




discussed  among  a  small  group  of  unusual  men,  whom  he  may  have 




encountered at any stage of his unconventional pilgrimage. The Seekers for 




Truth  and  the  Sarmoun  Brotherhood  are  fraternities  like  that  of  the 




Rosicrucians. And they are strictly invisible. 




How then did Gurdjieff become an “esoteric teacher”? It all depends on 




what that is thought to be. Personal reasons provide a partial answer—the 




sort of reasons that make a man search for truth at all—and this answer will




542 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




have to stand until we delve a little further beneath the surface of “what 




Gurdjieff taught.” His vast cosmology was a creation of the times. We will 




not be wide of the mark if we guess that Gurdjieff put it together himself, 




although with the help of friends, from what are really the obvious sources; 




and, of course, as he liked to imply (his head cocked heavenward for signs of 




supernatural approval) with the Archangel Looisos watching. 




A Short Space Voyage with the Grand

 




Inquisitor




The distinction between the forms and the content of Gurdjieff’s teaching 




corresponds to that between theory and practice. This fact has been blurred 




by the ambiguity of the term “the system” which Ouspensky adopted from 




the private language of GurdjiefF’s St. Petersburg group. “The System” 




might be taken by Ouspensky’s followers as referring to the vast combination of cosmological and psychological geography which their teacher had assembled.  Or  it  might  be  taken  as  the  methodical  sequence  of  his 




instruction—the “System” of teaching which he followed with his ovm 




pupils and had codified from the experience of his time with GurdjiefF. 




Orage made the distinction clearer by placing the accent on what he called 




the “Method,” and referring to the cosmological or psychological theories as 




the greater and the lesser “maps.” For the Work teacher may instruct his 




pupils in the outlines of cartography; but—as with all good teachers—^the 




bare facts of his material do not themselves comprise the lesson which he 




hopes his pupils will learn. 




Again we are confronted with the perennial question: what is the Work? 




The answer lies in the more theatrical side of GurdjiefiF’s activities, and the 




perspective of history gives us an advantage over the men and women who 




were in personal contact with the Master—often unsure whether they were 




on their heads or their heels, or whether the world itself had turned upside 




down. GurdjiiefiF himself was the last person to tell anyone what was going




543




544 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




on, and the few explanations he did give often increased the confusion. All 




that can be done is to question his writings. 




 

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 may have been heavily edited before its 




posthumous publication. It was certainly never completed as GurdjieflF 




originally  intended.  According  to  the  prospectus  printed  in   

Herald  of

 




 

Coming Good, 

 it should have consisted of at least three “books”—^which 




would  make  its  projected  length  similar  to  that  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

 At 




Gurdjieff’s  death  the   

Third  Series

  was  left  in  a  fragmentary  state.  Two 




chapters alone seem to have been completed, and others exist only in note 




form. A chapter on “The Four Bodies of Man” which GurdjiefF announced 




in   

Meetings  with Remarkable Men

 is said to  have been destroyed  by  the 




author himself What remains of the  

Third Series

 is too incomplete to give 




any real idea of Gurdjieff’s intentions for the book. That leaves us with the 




 

First Series, All and Everything: Beelzebub’s Tales to his Grandson. 




When  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 was published in the spring of 1950, American 




reviewers—who had no doubt heard of the underground reputation of the 




BOOK—were  markedly  scathing;  and  it  was  left  to  sympathizers  like 




Gorham Munson to apologize for Beelzebub. Gerald Sykes considered that 




“Gurdjieff’s reputation has been done an irreparable injury by this all but 




unreadable book.” He concluded sourly: “Mark Twain called ‘The Book of 




Mormon,’ ‘chloroform in print.’ We have much better anaesthetics now.” 




The   

Saturday  Review

  thought  the  style,  “even  apart  from  the  jargon 




. . . turbid to a degree that makes it nearly insufferable. ” There were, this 




critic said, “a few seeds of truth and wisdom buried in a vast midden of 




nonsense. ” British critics were more affable. In  

The Spectator

 D. S. Savage 




declared  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 to be “wholly fascinating”; and although in the 




 

New Statesman

 Kathleen Raine described the book as “something between 




 

Gulliver’s  Travels, 

  somebody’s   

Outline  of  Knowledge, 

  and  a  paranoiac 




fantasy,” she found it “strangely readable,” and concluded that it contained 




“passages of real wisdom.” 




According to Nott, the book is an “objective work of art” in Gurdjieff’s 




sense if in no one else’s; that is, a work constructed mathematically so as to 




produce a precise series of effects on its readers. The opportunities which 




this gives for a species of literary pyramidology scarcely bear thinking 




about. Orage and Jean Toomer both read and commented on  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales, 

 but Orage’s commentary sheds little light on the darkness of the text 




and claims that “everything has three meanings and seven aspects ”— 




whether or not derived from Gurdjieff himself—simply encourage absurdity.  It  may  be  true,  as  Orage  taught,  that  when  Gurdjieff  talks  about Atlantis, he means the submerged part of man’s consciousness with which 




he is trying to put his pupils in contact; but just as possibly, he had the




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   545




object of confusing the issue—or possibly GurdjiefF did believe in Atlantis 




and countless other disreputable theories. 




Analysis of  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 leads nowhere. GurdjiefF’s versatility as a 




linguist has been made the excuse for finding a profound significance in the 




jargon he invented. It may enlighten some readers to be told that “Parkt- 




dolg-duty” means “duty” in three languages—therefore “duty-duty-duty”— 




but if we burrow too deep and discover such clues as delight Baconian 




cryptographers, we will have fallen into one of the traps. GurdjiefF made 




use  of  whatever  peculiar  etymologies  came  to  hand,  with  no  other 




consideration than confusion: for example, there is the stellar system called 




“Salzmanino” which is especially dangerous because it is full of a gas like 




cyanic acid. Whether GurdjiefF intended any particular dig at Alexander or 




Jeanne  de  Salzmann  cannot  be  known;  quite  possibly  he  was  simply 




indulging  his  capricious  sense  of  humor.  A  reader  must  beware  of 




categorical  statements  about   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  For  example,  Bennett 




declares that the name “Karnak,” which GurdjiefF gives to Beelzebub’s 




spaceship, is derived from an Armenian word signifying that the body is the 




prison of the soul—but although this seems quite plausible, and there is in 




fact an Armenian root which could be bent to give this interpretation, 




Gurdjieff may just as easily have happened on the name on one of his motor 




trips through Brittany, the site of the famous prehistoric temple of Carnac. 




A  story  will  give  point  to  this  argument.  While  he  was  writing 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 Gurdjieff was in Vichy on one of his motor expeditions. 




He adjourned to a backstreet cafe with his work. In search of inspiration, he 




looked up and out of the window. Across the street was a shop, the name of 




which his companion cannot exactly remember—let us say, for the sake of 




illustration,  Picasso  et  Duchamp.  “Ve-rr-y  interesting,”  said  Gurdjieff 




slowly, and read out the name of the shop. His companion corrected his 




pronunciation. Gurdjieff ran the two names together, chopped ofF a syllable 




and  rearranged  his  word.  Then  he  started  to  laugh.  “Ah,  Miss,”  he 




chortled,  “you  read  chapter  such-and-such  and  you  see  I  put—very 




important man, his name will be Dupichampo.” Then he began to laugh 




again. His companion could not see the joke. Well, she asked, perhaps this 




was a good idea, but what was so funny? “Don’t you understand?” said 




GurdjiefF. “In New York, everyone who read will go to library, try to find 




name, make translation, everyone will have difFerent interpretation of what 




 

mean

 this name!” And he dissolved in laughter all over again. 




But  if  analysis  of  detail  gives  no  help,  the  same  broadly  symbolic 




interpretation which leWs to some understanding of  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 can be applied to  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 

 Once more GurdjiefF’s statements are neither-one-thing-nor-the-other. On the other hand, it is




546 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




dangerous  to  state  that  the  characters  Beelzebub,  Hassein,  and  Ahoon 




represent  various  human  faculties  and  functions  or  various  levels  of 




development. On the other, it is equally wrong to adopt the approach of 




Boris Mouravieff, who claims that the science fictional form of Gurdjieff’s 




epic was inspired by the literary productions of V. I. Kryshanovsky 

—a

 spirit 




medium who produced popular romances supposed to be dictated by the 




Earl of Rochester which were much in demand in St. Petersburg in the late 




nineteenth century. Both attitudes are simplistic—and not simple enough. 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales to his Grandson

 is about Beelzebub’s instructions to his 




favorite grandson Hassein. “It is not my book,” said Gurdjieff, “it is Mr. 




Beelzebub’s,” and he advised his pupils to address Beelzebub as “dear 




grandfather.” 




The reader, therefore, is to put himself in the position of Hassein, who is 




taking a trip in a psychological-space ship. There is no point in trying to 




follow the laborious twists and turns of his instruction; and if  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales

 were an allegory of “spiritual progress,” it would be better to turn 




straight  to   

Mount  Analogue

  or  the  works  of  T.  S.  Eliot.  Gurdjieff’s 




Beelzebub instructs directly, chiefly by attacking the absurd habits of life on 




the planet Earth which he has visited on several occasions. At various stages 




every one of Gurdjieff ’s followers might have felt himself singled out for 




criticism. There are chapters on the insanity of the Russians, the French, 




the Germans, and a huge chapter on “Beelzebub in America. ” Gurdjieff’s 




section on “Art” might have been entitled “Bad Art” and is directed against 




the intellectuals and Bohemians who formed such a large part of his circle; 




his general assaults on the medical profession and the learned ignorant are 




also specific denunciations of groups of people with whom he came in 




contact. All this is in line with Gurdjieff’s expressed intention in his book: 




“Mercilessly, without any compromise whatsoever, to extirpate from the 




mentation and feeling of man the previous century-rooted views and beliefs 




about everything existing in the world.” 




Besides destructive criticism,  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 contains a constructive 




aspect.  In  the  prospectus  which  Gurdjieff  printed  in   

Herald  of  Coming

 




 

Good, 

 he refers the task of providing “constructive” material to the second 




and third series of his writings; but in  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 itself, there are 




sufficient indications of what he intended. There is,TFor example, the series 




of chapters about the great prophet Ashiata Shiemash and the organization 




he proposes for the salvation of humanity. Ashiata Shiemash is one name 




from  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 which  

can

 be directly translated (for what that is 




worth)—it is a Zoroastrian term signifying the “Eternal Sun. ” In one aspect 




Ashiata stands for Gurdjieff himself He is the son of a poor family, who in 




his seventeenth year decides to prepare himself for his mission of freeing 




the world from the illusions under which it lives. He decides—as Gurdjieff




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   547




himself elsewhere tells us he decided—to make use of the innate faculty of 




human conscience, the traditional virtues of faith, hope, and love being 




totally atrophied. The deliberations of the great prophet—like the travels of 




Beelzebub  on  Earth—provide  something  of  the  material  “for  a  new 




creation” which Gurdjieff intended to give in  

Meetings with Remarkable

 




 

Men. 




Most  importantly,  Gurdjieff  has  a  chapter  called  “The  Holy  Planet 




Purgatory,”  in  which  he  describes  the  creation  of  the  world  and  the 




institution  of  the  laws  of  cosmic  harmony  which  he  expounded  to 




Ouspensky’s companions in Russia. Instead of outlining his cosmology 




clearly, he conceals its details beneath a welter of jargon; for example, the 




three forces which he had called affirming, denying, and reconciling are 




styled “Surp-Otheos,” “Surp-Skiros,” and “Surp-Athanatos.” “Must dig dog 




deeper”: yet the dog would have found the same bone. In 1934 Gurdjieff 




explained his account of the Creation to Toomer who recorded the Master’s 




comment. “Just so I create my world,” he said. “But my task more difficult 




than God’s. God have to destroy nothing first.” 




So what is the role of Gurdjieff’s cosmology in the  

process, 

 and did he 




believe in it himself? There is no doubt that he had made an intensive study 




of the various occult and religious cosmologies from which he constructed 




his own, and he most probably did believe—at least as a hypothesis—the 




laws of the harmonial tradition which he had reconstructed. But this was  

his

 




world—“my world”—and of a piece with the extraordinary atmosphere 




which he created around himself His role playing, his hints of possessing 




strange powers, his conscious posturing and exoticism formed a controlled 




personal environment which accompanied him wherever he went. Whatever the psychological temperature in Paris, New York, or Chicago, the weather near Gurdjieff was always Gurdjieffian. 




He was not above setting the stage to help him achieve his efiects. The 




house  outside  Moscow  which  is  described  in   

Glimpses  of  Truth, 

  the 




apartment on the Bolshoia Dimitrovka of which Ouspensky speaks in In 




 

Search  of  the  Miraculous, 

  the  entire  Prieure—^but  especially  the  Study 




House—and at the end his Paris flat, with its glittering decorations and its 




shutters firmly closed against the city: these were all isolated from the 




world of everyday—not sensory-deprivation chambers, but association- 




deprivation chambers where the normal conditioned reflexes of humanity 




ceased to operate because there was no code of conduct which covered the 




situation in which the pupil found himself. When, by his contradictory 




behavior, his  concentrated assaults  on the  self-confidence of would-be 




followers, and his acute psychological insight, Gurdjiefif had managed to 




destroy most of the conventions which dictated a pupil’s responses, he 




could start his work of creation. 




548 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Ouspensky felt that it was impossible to tell a lie in GurdjiefF’s Moscow 




flat. The narrator of  

Glimpses of Truth

 came from darkness into another 




world of color and light. The door of the Prieure was guarded—^you had to 




 

ring loudly

 to get in—and once  

in, 

 the strange combination of monastery, 




labor camp, and Mad Hatter’s Tea-Party excluded the world beyond the 




Institute’s walls; a world from which Gurdjieff’s Citroen arrived, as James 




Young remarked, like an intruder from reality. Gurdjieff knew all about the 




practical  uses  of  symbolism.  And  the  function  which  unaccustomed 




surroundings performed directly for those who had personal contact with 




the Master was performed in literary terms by the cosmology of  

Beelzebub’s

 




 

Tales. 

 After destruction—of fixed associations, of vanities, both existing and 




nonexistent, of the whole frame of reference which constitutes the pupil’s 




picture of the world—something must be put in its place. You cannot show 




a  man  that  the  bridge  on  which  he  is  standing  is  built  of  dreams  and 




fantasies without offering him a rope to cling to. This process of substituting 




one world picture for another is implied in Ouspensky’s title “A New Model 




of the Universe. ” Ouspensky had seen the physics of Newton destroyed by 




those of Einstein, and the apparently solid universe reduced to paradox. He 




therefore worked out his “new model” while admitting—at least in the 




beginning—its  provisional  nature.  In  the  same  way  Gurdjieff,  having 




destroyed  the  Newtonian  world  of  inherited  conditioning,  erected  an 




astonishing Einsteinian universe where nothing was what it seemed, and 




where relationships of cause and effect were blurred or rearranged in new 




patterns. 




This was “my world,” into which the pupil might slip by imperceptible 




stages until he found himself controlled by a different system of values, able 




to perceive  

new connections, 

 and to read meaning into previously meaningless operations of the cosmos.  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 cannot provide any real literary  sense  of  the  alternative  reality  which  Gurdjieff  manufactured, 




although it contains hints. This function was to be performed by  

Meetings

 




 

with  Remarkable  Men. 

  In  that  book  Gurdjieff  intended  “to  acquaint  the 




reader  with the material required for a new creation and to prove the 




soundness and good quality of it. ” The task of giving literary form to such an 




alternative reality was as difficult as the problem of expressing in words the 




preliminary stages of confusion and destruction, and for all its readability, 




 

Meetings  with  Remarkable  Men

  is  probably  even  less  successful  than 




 

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  The  “sense  of  another  reality”  which  one  reviewer 




attributes to it does exist, chiefly because literary conventions demand 




some suspension of disbelief In  

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 Gurdjieff 




attempts to use the theme of his search for wisdom to weave around the 




reader some of the net of “my world.” As it turned out, Ouspensky’s  

In




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   549




 

Search of the Miraculous

 has performed this function rather better for large 




numbers of people. 




But how is it done—^how is the transition achieved? GurdjiefiF explained 




in  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 and his explanation has already been mentioned when 




discussing  his  activities  as  a  professional  hypnotist.  Significantly,  it  is 




contained  in  two  paragraphs  which  were  omitted  even  from  Orage’s 




cyclostyled  edition  of  the  book.  They  were  circulated  among  the  New 




York groups as a separate fragment. Beelzebub is explaining to Hassein 




GurdjiefiF’s new method of hypnotism:




So, my boy, when the hypnotist, by modifying the tempo of the blood 




circulation, temporarily suspends the action of the localization of their 




false consciousness—now the ruling master of their common presence—the sacred data of their genuine consciousness can blend freely during  their  “waking”  state  with  the  entire  functioning  of  their 




planetary body. If then he rightly assists the crystallization of data 




evoking in that localization an idea contrary to what has been fixed 




there, and directs the results of that idea upon the disharmonised part 




of the planetary body, an accelerated modification of the circulation of 




the blood in that part can be produced. 




Gurdjieff may have intended to convey something by his claims to be 




able to modify the circulation of the blood; or it may be simply a blind. The 




point is that he refers to a  

new form

 of hypnotism which allows him to 




suspend “false consciousness.” He then implants suggestions of a conflicting 




nature.  In  other  words,  he  is  talking  about  the  process  of  destroying 




existing  values  and  providing  material  for  a  “new  creation”—that  is, 




GurdjiefF’s own “new model” of the universe. He admits that this is a form 




of hypnotism; but hypnotism used to counter the unperceived “hypnotism” 




of conditioning and conventional wisdom. 




At  the  very  beginning  of   

Beelzebub’s  Tales

  there  is  a  section  on  the 




mechanisms which power spaceships. The  

Karnak

 is a ship of advanced 




design.  Beelzebub  and  the  captain  of  the  ship  reminisce  about  the 




antiquated vehicles which they knew in their youth. The captain remembers how “very complicated and cumbersome” they were, and how their chief use was in transporting about the universe the fuel for their own 




propulsion.  These  primitive  models  were  replaced  by  ships  powered 




according to the “system*of Saint Venoma.” The principle of this drive was a 




method of destroying matter and thus creating a vacuum through which the 




ship could easily pass. There were grave drawbacks, says the captain, 




550 T H E   H A a M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




chiefly  because,  although  such  ships  worked  well  in  “atmosphereless 




spaces,” “when nearing some sun or planet it became real torture for the 




beings directing them, as a great deal of complicated manoeuvring was 




necessary  .  .  .  when  the  ships  were  passing  near  any  sun  or  planet 




whatsoever,  their  speed  of  locomotion  had  sometimes  to  be  reduced 




hundreds of times below their usual rate.” 




It takes some familiarity with Gurdjieff’s symboHc methods—and also a 




certain amount of guesswork—to see that he is referring to earlier methods 




for  disrupting  “false  consciousness.”  In  talking  of  planets  and suns  he 




probably means distracting influences which could so easily entice away 




recruits who had entered the “world” of the spaceship. But the system of 




Saint  Venoma  was  soon  superseded,  Gurdjieff  writes,  by  that  of  the 




Archangel Hariton. The great virtue of this method was that it operated 




best in conditions of dense matter. The principle Gurdjieff describes is 




something like the jet—and the point is that this engine makes use of the 




material obstacles in its path to generate its power. “The ship on which we 




are now flying belongs to this system,” remarks the captain. The  

Karnak

 




represents Gurdjieff s Fourth Way, the Way of the Sly Man. The captain 




describes  its  virtues  as  “simplicity  and  convenience”  and  Beelzebub 




compares it to “perpetual motion.” He pronounces what can safely be taken 




as Gurdjieff’s justification for his technique; 




It will work perpetually without needing the expenditure of any 




outside materials. 




And  since  the  world  without  “planets”  and  hence  without  atmospheres cannot exist, then it follows that as long as the world exists and in consequence, atmosphere, the cylinder-barrels invented by the 




great Archangel Hariton will always work. 




All you need, he might be saying, to practice this Method is yourself and 




the challenges of ordinary life. There is no need for the appalling difficulties 




of trying to maintain an entire society based on theological principles. The 




closed world of a cult holds fast only when unchallenged by a rival system of 




values. Neither  

system

 bears comparison with the way of the man in the 




world. 




But for all the System’s advantages, it is still countering one form of 




hypnotism with another; and there is no guarantee that the revised world 




picture  has  anything  to  recommend  it  over  the  first.  It  may  be  that  a 




magical or a religious view of the universe is just as tenable as that of the 




secondhand  car  salesman.  But  it  is   

no  more

  tenable.  The  verdict  here 




depends upon whether one believes that Gurdjieff took his harmonial vision




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   551




of the universe as a representation of absolute reality. Many of his followers 




have thought so—and have stuck in the alternative universe he proposed to 




them. But this is only half the story, one stage in the  

process. 

 It is the error 




pilloried by the classic Zen story of the man who sees only the pointing 




finger and not the moon at which it points. In New York, Orage had his own 




version of this monitory tale which Toomer recorded; “I am a signpost,” he 




said, “I indicate a way. But you do not follow the signpost, you follow the 




road. You are not to follow me; you are to practice the method I define.” 




When the pupil has made the psychological-space journey from Newtonian Space into Einsteinian space, what comes next? 




However we alter the picture of the world which our inheritance has 




given us—by drugs and by yoga like the young Ouspensky, or by confusion 




like GurdjiefF and the Masters of Zen—the great temptation is to assume 




that the new universe is by definition  

more real

 than the previously limited 




world one has inhabited. Immediately there are cries of “higher forces”— 




scarcely ever “different” forces or “other” forces. Our assumptions have 




been altered, that is all. The poor neophyte discovers that “a mountain is 




not a mountain”—and sometimes dashes round telling all his friends, in 




which case he may end up in a padded cell. Man wants to bow down to the 




lightning, as GurdjiefF came to be only too aware. But if he avoids this trap, 




he may discover when he returns that the world he has known as rigid is in 




fact infinitely flexible. 




A perception of new orderings may give a peculiar sharpness to old 




orderings. Old associations may be knocked away, encrustations of spurious 




meaning vanish. There is a case for considering that a journey out of this 




world and back is a necessary intellectual adventure, whatever verdict the 




return may bring; the point of the journey is not to impose upon the pupil 




an alien vision of the universe, although he will need a “new model” at one 




particular stage. For after the stages of  

destruction

 and the  

reconstruction

 




of an alternative world picture, the new vision which has replaced the old 




must in its turn be destroyed. Its purpose is served once it has shown the 




pupil that there are other possibilities, not to dictate to him which of those 




possibilities he should pursue. It may be that he will choose a lifetime of 




sampling and tasting, with no definite commitment ever made. “I’ve lived 




thousands of years,” said GurdjiefF to Toomer in 1934. “It is possible to 




know how to live thousands of years in one life.” 




GurdjiefF proclaimed that his object in the  

Third Series

 was to help 




the reader to form “a Veritable, nonfantastic representation ... of the 




world  existing  in  reality,”  and  it  may  be  significant  that  the  book 




remains unfinished. For how could it help an individual to come to this 




personal conclusions about reality? It could at the most represent




552 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




GurdjiefF’s own effort. Toomer recorded Orage’s terse demonstration 




of this point in his introductory remarks to one particular group. He 




asked his audience why they had all assembled. 




A; “To hear about a new psychology.” 




O; “What is the nature of this psychology? Whose is it?” 




A: “Gurdjieff’s.” 




O; “No” (the  

Method

 is Gurdjieff ’s). 




Orage then developed the point that it was one’s own individual 




psychology that was involved. 




In an essay called “Scholarship and the Spirit” (1928), which was heavily 




influenced  by  Orage,  Zona  Gale  makes  much  of  the  chemical  term 




“allotrope ’ An allotrope of a substance is composed of the same chemical 




constituents rearranged so as to form a different substance. Zona Gale 




suggested  that  men  should  form  “the  allotropes  of  themselves.”  This 




implies that the element of chance plays a large part in the process, that the 




shaking up of the pupil’s constituent parts is in reality no more than the 




rattling of the dice-box. Few of the Work teachers have been foolish enough 




to deny that they are engaged in an occupation which embodies an element 




of  risk.  It  does  not  depend  largely  on  the  teacher  how  the  process 




eventually turns out. Gurdjieff had to expend a great deal of energy to drive 




some of his closest pupils away; but sooner or later they made the break— 




and  made  it  for  themselves.  The  pupil  himself  must  escape  from  the 




alternative world with which he is presented; and this marks the entrance to 




a new stage in the process. In the revised edition of his memoir of Orage, 




Philip Mairet makes some comments which were inspired not only by 




Orage’s break with Gurdjieff, but his own parting from Mitrinovic. 




Once you are in a school, as in a religion, there is no other truth to live 




by than what it teaches. In one sense this is even more obligatory in an 




esoteric school than in an established religious discipline, for here both 




doctrine and method are dependent, even to the smallest details, upon 




the master’s  

ipse dixit. 

 Thus, if a pupil should be able, after training, to 




set up an independent group of his own, the new and the old masters 




will soon disown one another as heretical or untrustworthy; for no 




pupil must be exposed to the temptation to play off one master’s advice 




against another’s. There is elasticity in the discipline, too, but implicit 




obedience to the master’s generally unexpected interventions is all the 




more burdensome and disturbing because it remains voluntary. A 




pupil may simply pack up and go, as many did from Gurdjieff: many, 




perhaps all, were free to come and go upon their business or other




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   553




occasions. But upon any point that the master decreed essential for the 




good of the school or his own progress, a pupil was under compulsion 




by the fact that he had identified his hope of self-realization with the 




teaching, and the teaching with Gurdjieff. This is the powerful bond 




which has to be broken, in due course, if the pupil is ever to regain his 




individuality with a new confidence in life. The rupture can be a grim 




experience; it is itself an initiatory ordeal. 




Although the pupil, when he leaves the Master, may be an allotrope of 




his former  self, it is not chance alone which dictates the nature of this 




transformation. The nature of Gurdjieff’s Fourth Way is that it branches 




into different roads, and in his teaching Gurdjieff did broadcast material 




with which his pupils could make their first steps down their different 




paths.  Despite  the  assertions  that  the  Fourth  Way  is  a  way  for  the 




householder,  to  be  practiced  in  ordinary  life,  we  should  be  aware  of 




assuming that “ordinary life” retains the same significance for those who 




practice  it.  The   

conditions

  of  ordinary  life  are  used  as  a  means  of 




transformation, and this must completely alter the way of the man in the 




world. Gurdjieff told Ouspensky that there was no need to give up anything 




at the start. The Work begins as a  

via gradua, 

 an easy slope requiring no 




dramatic renunciations such as attend the monk’s vows, no strenuous 




exercises like those of the fakir, no imaginative or intellectual acrobatics like 




those of the magician or the yogi. The teachers begin by leading their pupils 




along a path of extreme reasonableness and ask them to verify everything 




they are told. But very soon the path gets stormier, and eventually the 




traveler is faced with a triple fork in the road. Like Thomas the Rhymour 




under the Eildon Tree, he must sit down and make his decision. 




One  track  is  the  religious  path,  the  road  toward God. Gurdjieff  was 




perpetually irreverent when referring to the Deity—“old Idiot who created 




such”—^and for all its absolutes, his System was agnostic. Once when 




Ouspensky was asked whether he could give a pupil religious faith, he 




replied “absolutely not.” And yet many of the people who came to Gurdjieff 




were in search of a God they had lost or never had. So it often happened 




that Gurdjieff found himself invested with divine attributes by what the 




anonymous writer in  

The Times Literary Supplement

 calls so aptly, “Silly 




men and even sillier women.” As this critic remarks, he became for some 




devotees the “God-substitute, which at least on a conscious level he did not 




want to be.” But for the less susceptible, their religious quest was an aim 




which Gurdjieff could use, and he helped them on their way. “I have many 




sons in monasteries,” he would rumble; and these monasteries need not all 




have been built of stone. 




The second road is that of the cultist, the pupil who finds a religion in




554 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




Gurdjieff’s  cosmology  and  a  God  in  the  teacher  himself.  These  are  the 




sheep who are content to be eaten: unfortunates who are trapped in the 




transfer situation and cannot extricate themselves. They have jumped from 




the frying pan into the fire and will sizzle into cinders. They may be quite 




happy as cinders but they will have been burned up. New religions are 




formed by those who have misunderstood, for the religious sheep are useful 




to the ones who do understand: the Grand Inquisitors . . . 




In the second act of T. S. Eliot’s  

The Cocktail Party, 

 Sir Henry Harcourt- 




Reilly puts the problem of the fork in the Fourth Way as that of a straight 




opposition between the religious quest and a reconciliation with the world. 




“Neither  way  is  better,”  he  says,  “Both  ways  are  necessary.  It  is  also 




necessary/To make a choice between them. ” To the character Celia, who 




asks to be cured “of a craving for something I cannot find/And the shame of 




never finding it, ” Sir Henry replies by describing what is in effect the third 




fork in the way; 




The condition is curable. 




But the form of treatment must be your own choice:




I cannot choose for you. If that is what you wish, 




I can reconcile you to the human condition. 




The condition to which some who have gone as far as you 




Have succeeded in returning. They may remember 




The vision they had, but they cease to regret it. 




Maintain themselves by the common routine, 




Learn to avoid excessive expectation, 




Become tolerant of themselves and others 




Giving and taking in the usual actions 




What there is to give and take. 




Whether the pupil goes on “up and out” or back into the world (but a 




more flexible world perhaps) or remains fixated on the operation of the 




Work depends chiefly on the degree of his initial desperation. Those who 




opt for the rehgious life are often very desperate people; as Sir Henry says, 




theirs is a way which requires “the kind of faith which issues from Despair.” 




But after their contact with the Work, they need aftother sort of discipline 




than that offered by the Fourth Way. 




Although Gurdjieff knew a great deal about both Christian and Buddhist 




monastic practices, it is doubtful whether he intended his System to be a 




pathway to mystical experience. One former inmate of the Prieure told me 




that  he  remembered  Gurdjieff  with  “the  greatest  possible  esteem  and 




affection,” and that he had found “everything which he had been looking for 




at the time” during his four years at Fontainebleau. But he emphasized that




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   555




he had achieved his “peak experiences” under the direction of another 




Master. Although there are reports of people attaining mystical insights 




under Gurdjieff s direction, he tended to belittle such occasions, and he was 




not—so far as we know—that sort of spriritual director. 




Again it may be wondered whether this was not in the last analysis the 




cause of Ouspensky’s personal disillusionment 

—a

 disillusionment which he 




passed  on  to  some  of  his  followers.  Perhaps  it  is  true  psychologically, 




spiritually,  or  existentially  that  there  is  “something  missing”  from  the 




System. If the sights of the pupil are fixed on a very lofty goal, Gurdjieff’s 




system  may  seem  incomplete  in  the  sense  of  spiritually  incomplete. 




Gurdjieff’s business was to help people to center on that psychological axis 




which Jungians call the Self, but it is evident that some of his pupils hoped 




he could lead them further. 




Those  who  take  the  way  of  reconciliation  may  continue  to  keep  the 




discipline of self-observation as advocated by Ouspensky—or they may 




simply plunge joyfully back into the maelstrom from which they had once 




desperately sought an exit. Gurdjieff could not control—nor did he want 




to—the precise allotrope which emerged from the period of confusion. His 




aim, he explained, was to put a man in touch with his real consciousness, 




which had been overlaid by a complex of mechanisms. As he never tired of 




repeating,  

“The  teaching  by  itself  cannot  pursue  any  definite  aim. 

  It  can 




only show the best way for men to attain whatever aim they may have.” The 




way in which it does this is by first forcing its participants to “take serious 




things seriously,” and then confusing the programmed “conscious” mind to 




a degree at which—so the unwritten theory goes—the subconscious, which 




for GurdjiefiF was the “real consciousness,” makes contact with the upper 




reaches of awareness. What the subconscious contains—unless one decides 




that we are dealing with a communal unconsciousness or God—has nothing 




to do with the teacher. Once the pupil has made the necessary contact, he 




has found, in Aleister Crowley’s phrase, his “true Will,” his function as a 




human being. 




The man who is reconciled to the world might compare the process with 




the three stages of the first part of Orage’s Method: Self-Observation: when 




you observe your mechanicality, your contradictions, your obedience to 




programmed commands. Experiment; when you discover the limits of what 




is possible within a new context. Participation: reconciliation with the world 




on a level of greater control. Or, in Timothy Leary’s admonition, “drop out, 




turn on, tune in,” In “Portage Potential,” Toomer expresses the idea not as 




part of an esoteric process but as an inevitable human development:




There are three stages—and one must pass through all three of them to




complete his cycle. One begins as an ordinary participator. One




556 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




withdraws—as  symbolized  by  the  apprentice  who  is  learning  his 




craft—^and develops a certain degree of philosophical knowledge and 




individuality. One reenters as a superior participator; and at the same 




time continues and advances the development of himself




Does the pupil know “who he is” at the end of this elaborate pilgrimage? 




If a new perception of relativity is all that results, it may be asked whether 




the game is worth the candle. But it is possible to justify the process simply 




as an experience—^and an extraordinary one. And on a moralistic level, the 




pupil may not know who he is—but he may have some idea of his correct 




address. 




 

So the secret is that there is no secret? 

 That the entire operation is a gigantic 




 

ludibrium? 

 The Man Who Knows does not know—or that he knows the 




extent of what it is possible to know and aims to educate others in his own 




disillusionment. . . . 




“In  the  present  period  of  my  life,”  Gurdjieff  wrote  in  1933,  “when 




declining  in  years,  after  having  had  everything  to  satiety  that  life  can 




offer to a human being, and having been thereby fully disillusioned in 




everything . . . ”  Gurdjieff’s pupils had to follow his own progress through 




the world of ideas and the spirit. Just as Ouspensky constructed a “system” 




out of his experience as Gurdjieff’s pupil, Gurdjieff could only construct a 




system out of his own experience. No pupil would reproduce exactly the 




resolutions, discoveries, and disillusionments which had been Gurdjieff’s 




lot; but he would be steered by Gurdjieff’s experience, directed within 




territory familiar to Gurdjieff—and make his foray into the other world 




within the context of a universe constructed by Gurdjieff from the debris of 




his own explorations. 




Of course, Gurdjieff’s tales of his early sense of mission and his search for 




knowledge  might  all  have  been  invented  for  the  benefit  of  particular 




audiences—but I do not think so. The facts fit too well together. Gurdjieff 




would have searched for truth in Christianity, Buddhism, and perhaps also 




in Islam and Hinduism, as well as in the science and occultism of his day. At 




the beginning, he informed his pupils, he was “psychopathic.” I believe 




that he meant this seriously. The journey of Hassein on the  

Karnak

 is a 




reflection of the progressive disillusionment of Gurdjieff himself 




We can now date the point at which he recognized the extent of his 




disillusion. This is the time he spent near Yangi Hissar in 1905, after he 




returned to Central Asia from the Caucasus. At the age of thirty-one, at last 




realizing  that  no  one  and  nothing  could  help  him  to  understand  the 




meaning of existence, Gurdjieff carried out a revision of the premises on




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   557




which he had based in life. He then set about perfecting a method which 




might  allow  his  pupils  to  undergo  the  disillusioning  process  at  “an 




accelerated tempo.” 




To say that Gurdjieff was “fully disillusioned in everything” does not 




mean that he abandoned all belief in an immemorial tradition of wisdom. 




But it calls in question the nature of that wisdom. In  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 he 




declares that the original forms of Christianity and Buddhism have been 




distorted out of all recognition. It is true that those who talk of “esoteric 




Buddhism”  and  “esoteric  Christianity”  are  often  the  prey  of  the  most 




elaborate  occult  fantasies.  But  Ouspensky  regarded  Christianity  and 




Buddhism as complementary, and GurdjiefF may well have seen the inner 




message of both religions as very different from either their public faces or 




the “esoteric” interpretations of the occultists. 




The  most  interesting  pointer  to  the  nature  of  Gurdjieff’s  “esoteric 




Christianity”  is  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  a  writer  of  the  preceding 




generation: Feodor  Dostoievsky. The  central problem of Dostoievsky’s 




view of Christianity is that of freedom. GurdjiefF also wanted men to be 




free. I think that it is impossible to doubt that for all his roguery, for all his 




occasionally  exploitive  tactics,  he  was  sincere  in  this  hope.  It  seems 




probably that he was to some extent inspired by Dostoievsky’s  

The Brothers

 




 

Karamazov, 

 which first appeared in 1880, when GurdjieflF was six. The 




novel is about three brothers, who represent mind, emotion, and body. 




GurdjiefF’s first attempt to give his ideas literary expression was a film 




scenario  entitled  “The  Three  Brothers,”  and  only  when  this  proved 




unsuccessful  did  he  turn  to   

Beelzebub’s  Tales. 

  There  is  no  doubt  that 




Gurdjieff ’s three brothers would also have stood for the three centers of 




man, and although he claimed that his scenario was inspired by a visit to the 




cinema, there was certainly some underground connection between his 




idea and Dostoievsky’s novel. The most famous passage in  

The Brothers

 




 

Karamazov

  is  the  poem  projected  by  the  intellectual  brother  Ivan,  and 




known as “The Legend of the Grand Inquisitor.” It is here that Dostoievsky 




poses most cogently the problem of Christianity as a road to freedom. 




GurdjiefF may have conceived his mission as being to rescue the gospel of 




freedom from the well-intentioned perversions of the Grand Inquisitor and 




his brethren: “God, whose service is perfect freedom.” Such an “esoteric” 




Christianity would know nothing of churches, and its practitioners would 




form an eUte able to tolerate the prospect which repels the rest of mankind. 




But if from one angle GurdjiefF appears as a follower of Dostoievsky’s 




Christ, from another he seems to be on the side of the Grand Inquisitor. 




The deceptions, the  

ludibrium, 

 the exasperating, meandering voyage of the 




 

Kamdk, 

 the process of mystification and demystification—GurdjieflF was




558 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




sometimes playing an Inquisitorial role. If  

Beelzebub’s Tales

 represents a 




literary  version  of  the   

process, 

  Beelzebub  in  one  sense   

is

  the  Grand 




Inquisitor,  although  this  role  is  not  voluntarily  assumed.  Beelzebub  is 




concealing a great deal from his grandson. Denis Saurat comments; “One 




does not tell children the whole truth, one gives them carefully prepared 




parts of the truth which one hopes will further the development of their 




souls.” Beelzebub even tells Hassein that it is forbidden from above “to 




communicate true information” to a human being because this will prevent 




his from acquiring the knowledge bom of experience which alone can free 




him from illusions. 




GurdjieflF may have been consciously following a tradition which was 




knovm to sections of the early Church. In fact the book which bears most 




resemblance  to   

Beelzebub's  Tales

  is  the   

Stromateis

  (“Carpetbags,”  i.e., 




“Miscellany”) of Clement of Alexandria, the saint who with Origen was one 




of the pillars of Alexandrian Christianity—that eclectic and sophisticated 




Christianity so frowned upon by orthodox churchmen and which took over 




so  much  from  the  Traditional  wisdom  of  antiquity.  The   

Stromateis, 

 




Clement  declares,  “will  contain  the  truth  mixed  up  in  the  dogmas  of 




philosophy, or rather covered over and hidden as the edible part of the nut 




in the shell. For in my opinion, it is fitting that the seeds of truth be kept for 




the husbandmen of faith and no others. ” A German critic, who disapproves 




of Clement as “suspiciously Alexandrine,” describes the  

Stromateis

 as “a 




deliberate thicket, a ‘spiritual park’ where fruitful and unfruitful trees are 




planted higgledy-piggledy so that the merely inquisitive and the hypocrite 




cannot steal the fruit.” Clement, he says, is concerned with “truth as an 




encounter.” 




Is this not exactly the arrangement and the purpose of  

Beelzebub’s Tales? 

 




Clement  claimed  to  have  inherited  a  secret  tradition derived from  the 




Apostles, and justified the diversionary tactics of the  

Stromateis

 by the 




authority of Christ himself “He did not certainly disclose to the many what 




did not belong to the many; but to the few to whom he knew that they 




belonged, who were capable of receiving and being moulded according 




to them. But secret things are entrusted to speech, not to writing, as is 




the  case  with  God.”  “Can  I  imagine,”  Margaret  Anderson  wonders, 




“. . . anyone so treacherous as to betray that part [of Gurdjieff’s knowledge] 




which can be revealed only by ‘word of mouth’?” At several centuries’ 




remove we have the same tradition of an esoteric Christianity and the same 




tactics. 




The central problem of the Grand Inquisitor, as he tells Christ, is that 




there  was  a  time  when  he  too  saw  himself  as  one  of  the  elect.  Then  it 




occurred to him that he was ignoring the meek and the humble in favor of 




the great and the strong who could tolerate freedom. Once he too had stood




A   S H O R T   S P A C E   V O Y A G E   W I T H   T H E   G R A N D   I N Q U I S I T O R   559




in the desert, but for all his devotion to the gospel of freedom, he had 




surrendered to the temptation of temporal power out of compassion for 




humanity. He joined those whose mission was to feed the sheep. 




This happened with GurdjiefF and it happened with most of his followers. 




It is only in part because of external pressures, because the Inquisitorial 




mentality must be strong from the first in anyone who sets himself up to 




teach his fellowmen. Even if the message is freedom—including freedom 




from  his  own  teaching 

—he  knows  best. 

  He  is  one  of  the  elect,  the 




shepherds of humanity. This attitude emerges clearly in the last recorded 




dream  of  Maurice  Nicoll;  the  “violence”  which  he  felt  that  he  must 




overcome arose from a feehng that his efforts to do good to his pupils were 




not appreciated. Ouspensky believed in an “inner circle” of humanity to 




which he sought admission. And Middleton Murry actually invoked the 




Grand Inquisitor by name in his estimate of Orage; 




I was always conscious of the existence of a barrier between Orage’s 




mind and my own, which—such was his importance for me—I made 




many attempts to analyse to my satisfaction. Finally, I came to the 




conclusion that in Orage there was an obstinate substratum of belief 




that there was some secret of control over the universe; a key by which 




one could unlock all the doors, and be a master of Power. There were 




veritable  Masters  in Tibet,  for instance; or, if the great ones of the 




earth would adopt Social Credit, the new age would begin; something, 




in short, of the mentality of the Grand Inquisitor in Dostoevsky’s great 




legend. I happen to belong, by nature, to the other side. 




Grand Inquisitors are out of fashion with our age, and today Middleton 




Murry’s point of view is likely to attract many more supporters than he 




attributes to Orage. In no age can a man who sets himself up to do good to 




others object to being judged by the severest standards; and any argument 




which  justifies  the  sometimes  unpleasant  tactics  of  GurdjieflF  and  his 




followers must be an argument of means being justified by ends. If the 




inquirer believes that there are no ends, and that only means exist, he may 




feel he needs to go no further. 




o




O




Of Masters and Men




The reader will ask: why, if the pupils of the Fourth Way are in effect taken 




for a ride by their teachers, are there not more open denunciations of their 




real methods? The most obvious reason is that the victims are afraid of 




looking ridiculous—although as every individual is ridiculous at almost 




every minute of the day, there is really no reason why such exposure should 




be feared. A second reason for the victims’ silence may be that they have 




been converted to a belief that the Grand Inquisitors are right; that with the 




passage of time they have come to value their experience. This argues that a 




justification can be found for the apparently brutal methods which the Work 




sometimes used; and that this justification goes beyond a superficial attempt 




to reform people’s personalities. What are the ultimate objectives of the 




teachers of the Fourth Way? 




In the last chapter it was suggested that if the follower of the Fourth Way 




avoided being trapped in the sheepfold of a new religion, two courses were 




open to him: that of reconciliation with the world on new terms, or on the 




road “up and out ” toward divinity. Let us now leave aside all considerations 




of some ascent toward a divine superlative, admitting with Eliot that we 




cannot  know  anything  of  a  hypothetical  way  by  which  “the  human  is 




transhumanised. ” We must allow the possibility to stand—at the least as a 




gesture toward the ultimate puzzle of the universe, if not from any personal 




conviction. But—are the transports of the mystics possibly an extraordinary




560




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   561




and intense experience of reconciliation, recorded by extraordinary and 




intense people? It all depends on what it is to which the individual beheves 




he is reconciling himself; and in certain senses the path toward God and 




that into the world are identical. As GurdjiefFs dervish appears to be saying 




in  

The Struck of the Magicians, 

 belief and unbelief can ultimately be very 




much the same thing. 




And it does not seem—despite all the accumulated divine attributes with 




which the unconscious minds of their pupils have endowed the teachers of 




the Work—^that there is anything conventionally religious about the ethic of 




the Fourth Way. Gurdjieff’s teaching belongs to the group of discipUnes 




known as “the way of liberation,” which may be camouflaged by a religious 




form for the reasons which will soon become apparent. The object of such 




disciplines is to engender a right perception of things and to encourage a 




reconciliation with reality. Such a state entails the recognition that no final 




explanations will ever be forthcoming from the universe, and that “making 




the best of things” is not a philosophy of resignation, but the only possible 




creative attitude to life. Such an attitude of acceptance is in one sense a 




juvenile insight to market as eternal wisdom; but in another it might be 




experienced as the salvation of a soul. To the man who seeks a guru the 




world may well be a dark and terrible place. If he is troubled about the 




conditions of human existence, the nature of consciousness, whether it is 




worth living, or a dozen other unimportant questions, he may be infinitely 




grateful for being brought to an understanding of the accepting attitude to 




life. And if he is in Ivan Osokin’s situation, with the revolver halfway to his 




temple, it is the mercy of heaven if he happens to meet a magician. 




In his  

Psychotherapy East and West, 

 Alan Watts demonstrates that the 




“liberation”  at  which  Zen  Masters  or  the  Hindu  gurus  are  aiming  has 




nothing to do vnth the sort of gnostic liberation so beloved of occultists. 




“Liberation” is from the conditioning imposed by social institutions, in 




particular from the illusion that man possesses an individual ego. The 




teacher performs his function by trying to make the pupil see that the 




piroblems from which he imagines he is suffering are not problems; they are 




simply the way things are. The teacher’s chief weapon is the situation which 




Gregory Bateson has called the “double-bind,” in which a person is placed 




in a position of apparent paradox, so that his conditioned behavior patterns 




break down under the strain of contradictory information. Let us say that 




the   

koan

  is  given,  “truth  is  the  sound  of  one  hand  clapping”—it  is,  of 




course, incapable of any “solution. ” The aim of the Master is to place the 




pupil  in  the  state  of  double*  bind;  his  ultimate  objective  to  induce  the 




realization that, in the conclusion of another Zen story, “there is nothing 




especially to perceive.” In other words, the ways of liberation are based on 




a  trick;  the  teachers  pretend  to  know  the  answers  to  their  students’




562 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




questions;  but  what  they  are  really  doing  is  trying  to  show  that  the 




questions are not. questions at all, being based on false premises about the 




nature of things. 




The plan of the GurdjiefF process follows tradition. At any time during the 




space voyage the pupil may cry “Eureka” and bail out of the ship, for such 




journeys are of varying duration. GurdjiefF is one of the most confusing 




masters of liberation because he appears to have used so many different 




methods.  What  he  was  doing  was  not,  as  some  of  his  followers  have 




asserted,  searching  for  means  to  adapt  Eastern  methods  for  Western 




consumption, but adapting the essence of the ways of liberation to different 




Western milieux. As these changed, Gurdjieff’s presentation had to alter. 




This is because, although the teacher of the way of liberation has strictly 




speaking nothing to say, he must appear to say something—otherwise no 




one will listen to him say nothing in his inimitable fashion. . . . He has two 




basic problems; that of exciting interest and that of asserting his authority. 




The pupil must be thoroughly entangled if the trick is to work, and the guru 




must first discqyer,the unconscious premises on which each student bases 




his  life.  

The  secret  that  there  is  no  secret.  The  Man  Who  Knows  does  not

 




 

know. 




In  

In Search of the Miraculous

 Ouspensky records GurdjiefF talking of 




the sin of “Black Magic,” the sin of “the pretence of doing” as opposed to 




“real doing.” But in a sense, this is what GurdjiefF was doing all the time— 




he  

was

 a Black Magician. Eventually the pupil might realize this—and his 




projections oF good and evil would be set in conflict. A “Struggle oF the 




Magicians” would begin in his own mind as he tried to reconcile the “black” 




and the “white” aspects oF GurdjiefF’s personality. It was another Form oF 




 

koan  .  .  . 

  but  at  first  there  was  only  the  occult  genius,  the  master 




psychologist, or the remarkable teacher oF dancing. The guru must be a 




great authority figure, although his only superiority to his students is that 




he realizes that the burning questions which torment them are completely

unreal.  But,  for  example,  if  the  pupil  seems  to  be  hoping  for  some 




metaphysical liberation from the condition of being human, the teacher will 




have to appear as if he himself has transcended the human condition. “It is 




thus,” Alan Watts comments, “that the guru who has a bad temper, or who 




likes to smoke or drink sake, gives the impression that he indulges in these 




‘little vices’ deliberately.” 




Another way to put it is as a cosmic allegory: the teacher stands for God. 




His role is to pose the riddle of life as often as he can from every possible 




angle. And because the teacher must be God for the pupil, the religious 




camouflage is the disguise most often adopted by the teachers of the way of 




liberation. 




By centuries of subtle maneuvers, such adepts have often persuaded the




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   563




societies in which they work that they are in fact the pillars of conventional 




values.  The  authority  of  the  Zen  Master,  the  Hindu   

sannyasi, 

  and  the 




Christian priest is backed by all the sanctions -of traditional society. In the 




fragmented societies of the modern West, however, traditional sanctions 




have lost  their meaning.  So the guru  of  the Fourth  Way must seem to 




possess  the  full  social  authority  of  whatever  is  the  milieu  in  which  he 




operates—quite often the appurtenances of material success. Hence the 




cachet  of  a  good  address  in  Paris,  London,  or  New  York,  for  certain 




contemporary  practitioners  of  the  Work.  I  have  even  heard  of  one 




GurdjiefBan  guru  who  demanded  the  loan  of  a  pupil’s  Rolls-Royce  to 




reinforce  his  authority.  But  material  success  may  have  outlived  its 




usefulness as a general catch-all for the Fourth Way, and those in need of 




what the teachers of liberation have to offer may be more impressed by 




other  sanctions.  At  the  turn  of  the  century  it  helped  to  refer  darkly  to 




esoteric societies with which the guru was supposedly connected. In the 




1970s the ploy was still being used, but today Amerindian sorcerers are 




more authoritative than Mahatmas from Tibet. 




Because of the lack of a commonly accepted code of social values, the 




Western guru has a much harder task than his Oriental counterpart. It is 




not only that he must constantly be seeking for fresh means of establishing 




himself as an authority. He lacks the security of a conventionally accepted 




framework  within  which  to  operate,  and  therefore  of  a  master-pupil 




relationship which can help the process toward a speedy conclusion. His 




activities will appear to be wildly inconsistent as he searches for a method of 




teaching the many different types who seek him out. Some may respond to 




the suggestion of hidden powers, others to the imphcations of material 




success. Eventually the whole process may become free-form—and perhaps 




even be sprung unsolicited on its subjects. 




This raises an important ethical point. In the more traditional forms of the 




ways of liberation—and in the West these may be hidden in the form of 




psychotherapy—the “pupil” or student comes to the guru or therapist 




either because he is conscious that he has a problem or because he has a 




general  anxiety  about  the  nature  of  life.  What  of  the  pupil  who  is  not 




conscious that he has a problem at all, but is simply faced with the ethic 




underlying the system; the illusory ego with which society provides all her 




children?  He  shares  the  fate  of  any  pupil  who  approaches  the  Work, 




whether in a spirit of puzzlement, devotion, or curiosity. What happens to 




him  is  never  what  he  expects.  In  his  memoir  of  Orage,  Philip  Mairet 




describes the inevitable disillu§ion which the “esoteric pupil” will suffer:




Each pupil projects, more or less unconsciously, his own human ideal, 




the image of what he would like to be, upon the teacher, who must be




564 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




able to sustain it. In short, the esoteric neophyte, far more than the 




religious one, is inspired by the hope of attaining a higher state of 




being through self-knowledge and self-discipline . . . What happens to 




the esoteric devotee who perseveres is not, however, what he expects: 




if his initial aspiration has been highly coloured by imaginations of 




acquiring abilitities he admires or envies in the teacher, the higher 




knowledge he at last attains may be that this is what he can never do in 




this  life;  so  that  he  may  end  up  a  simpler,  more  modest  person, 




perhaps in a lower walk of life than before. 




This is the attitude of the former devotee of “esotericism” who has come 




to see a value in the process through which he has passed. It is a tolerant 




and resigned attitude—the attitude which accepts the position of victim, 




and continues to discover meaning in what otherwise might be remembered only as a tragic mixture of folly and deception. But there are many reasons why the disillusioned “esotericist” may never attain this Olympian 




pinnacle of forgiveness; he may fall along the way, may drop out of the 




process before it has run its course and become autonomous, may regard 




the  trick  as  a  piece  of  knavery  pure  and  simple.  All these things have 




happened to pupils of the Fourth Way; and many of the attacks on GurdjiefF 




and his followers can be explained by this incomprehension. 




First come the criticisms which assume that the Work teachers were in 




fact teaching what they appeared to be teaching: that Gurdjieff was an 




instructor in “harmonious development,” that Ouspensky taught a method 




of “becoming less mechanical,” that Nicoll and Orage were past masters at 




guiding others to a knowledge of their own machine. Now, to say that these 




things  were  not  taught  by  gurus  of  the  Fourth  Way  would  be  untrue; 




Gurdjieff undoubtedly did believe that Western civilization encouraged an 




imbalanced type of human being, Ouspensky did wish to attain “cosmic 




consciousness,” and a pupil might learn a great deal about his minor faihngs 




by impersonal self-observation. Yet the matter of such character training is 




really  among  the  fringe  benefits  of  the  Fourth  Way,  and  the  study  of 




personality defects and psychological automatism is not conducted for its 




ovra sake, but to impose a discipline and to give the pupil an orientation 




which may lead to other things. If an outsider—say a reviewer of  

In Search

 




 

of the Miraculous

 or a reader of Nicoll’s  

Commentaries

—takes a fiatlander’s 




view of Work doctrine, he must pass a verdict which ignores the gradual 




unfolding and subsequent destruction of the strange “other-world” which it 




is the teacher’s business to create. Because he has never been involved in 




the process, he takes Ouspensky’s record of Gurdjieff’s conversation or 




Nicoll’s weekly exhortations as “what tiiey taught,” instead of as a record of 




the  material  which  they  used  to  build  up  their  alternative  frame  of




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   565




reference. The outside critic cannot avoid this pitfall; and it also catches the 




pupil who begins but does not stay the course. 




For example, there was Richard Rees, who became editor of the  

Adelphi

 




after Middleton Murry and remained convinced that “Gurdjieff undertook 




to  teach  his  pupils  how  to  secrete  God-stuff.”  Or  there  was  D.  H. 




Lawrence, who maintained a tolerant distance from Gurdjieff—but still 




assumed that the Master meant what he said:




In the end, if you GurdjieflF yourself to the very end, a dog that barks at 




you will become a dynamo sufficient to explode your universe. When 




you are final master of yourself, you are nothing, you can’t even wag 




your tail or bark. 




Lawrence could never have been “tricked” by Gurdjieff, because his 




revolt came too early. But what seemed for him the impossible obstacle— 




the fundamental unnaturalness of the Gurdjieff Method—is a basic characteristic of the Fourth Way, and one which it shares with the other ways of liberation. The pupil is directed to do something against nature; the ascetic 




must  mortify  the  flesh  which  cries  out  for  care  and  attention;  the  Zen 




student contemplates an insoluble paradox; the yogi studies the universe as 




an interplay of cosmic principles. Then—snap! The absurdity of the activity 




strikes him and he realizes that he  

cannot

 subdue the workings of his animal 




organism,  that  reality  is  an  insoluble  problem  and  that,  to  paraphrase 




Thomas Carlyle’s words to the lady who told him that she could “accept the 




universe,” “by God, he’d better.” 




“Man cannot remember himself, ” said Gurdjieff—and directed his pupils 




to try. “Man is mechanical,” he said—^and at once the neophytes attempted 




to nurture an infant superhumanity. Their lives became more and more 




stilted, more and more unnatural, until at last they were faced with the loss 




of their humanity—even of their lives—altogether. Colin Wilson argues 




that it is at this point that the Outsider, the religious misfit, may have his 




moment of illumination. The threat of death animates his sleeping will, and 




he  realizes  that  “he  wants  more  life,  not  less.”  Wilson’s  examples  are 




Ramakrishna and the Buddha: two extraordinary human beings endowed 




with  the  capacity  for  sainthood.  It  is  perhaps  here—at  the  furthest 




attenuation of life—^that the Fourth Way may lead its followers to the vision 




of life abundant. 




For the others, they have reached the fork in the way, the obstacle which 




they cannot surmount, the decision that, if they cannot attain whatever 




ideals they had unconsciously harbored, they must reconcile themselves to 




the world. But instead of realizing that this is exactly one of the objects of 




the teacher—did not Gurdjieff call his Institute a “workshop for spoiled




566 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




automobiles”—the automobile may now realize that its engine is working as 




well as ever it will and may even backfire in the face of the mechanic who 




has decoked it. The sensation of having had as much as one can take—and 




not merely from a personal relationship but from opposing oneself to an 




implacable universe— 

may

 produce a sharp about-face, and if the pupil 




forgets the state in which he approached the teacher, he may feel quite 




justified in accusing his former idol of defrauding and deceiving him, of 




taking his money and wasting his time. Of course, he will be partly right. 




Imagine the extent of Ouspensky’s chagrin when he realized that the man 




for whom he had sacrificed a promising career and allowed himself to be 




trapped in Bolshevik Russia was to all intents and purposes a fraud. If the 




pupil gives himself time to consider, he will realize that his own lunatic 




unconscious has trapped him, and not his guru. He may become grateful to 




the man who has shouldered the difficult burden of his projections, and 




returned him to life alive and kicking; although even Ouspensky had to 




separate Gurdjieff and the “ideas” before he found it possibile to forgive his 




teacher.  But  the  newly  “awoken”  pupil  may  not  give  himself  time  for 




thought, and the shock of disillusion results in the second largest group of 




criticisms of GurdjiefF’s Method. What such critics are really attacking are 




their own former selves. 




Alan Watts writes about the tricks of liberation:




The  technique  will  naturally  seem  to  be  dishonest.  But  this  is  a 




conscious and deliberate dishonesty to counter an unconscious and 




otherwise ineradicable self-deception on the homeopathic principle of 




 

similia sinUlibus curantur

—likes are cured by likes. Set a thief to catch 




a  thief.  Speaking  of  mutual  recognition  between  those  who  are 




liberated, a Zen Buddhist text says:




 

When two thieves meet they need no introduction:




 

They recognise each other without question. 




Did  the  Sly  Man  not  say  repeatedly  that  he  might  have   

stolen

  the 




System? 




And this leads to another of the remarkable characteristics of Gurdjieff s 




Method. If the pupil is to enter the “other world” cfeated by the Master, he 




must be encouraged to regard his teacher as a great authority figure. Yet, if 




the teacher of the Gurdjieff Method is doing his job, he vnll at the same 




time be planting the seeds of future doubt in the pupil’s mind; hence the 




ambiguous  impression  which  Gurdjieff  made  on  many  of  those  who 




encountered him. While encouraging the pupil to regard him as a great 




magician, the Master should be telling him all the time that he is cheating. 




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   567




There is a good example of GurdjiefF doing, just this in Kathryn Hulme’s 




 

Undiscovered  Country. 

  He  spends  considerable  time  instructing  her  in 




breathing exercises—then devotes an equal period to mocking her for doing 




as she is told. Surely she doesn’t really believe that she can extract the 




substances from the air which are necessary to create immortality? She 




does, of course, and bravely records the fact in her book. 




When the pupil “wakes up” his first reaction may be anger, his second a 




reluctant acceptance of the situation. This may be followed by a different 




sort of anger; an overpowering irritation at himself for having been so 




stupid. Here there is a definite danger that the newly “awoken” person will 




need some way of exorcising his vindictiveness; that because he has been 




through the process himself, he will then decide that it is his vocation to put 




others  through  it  in  turn.  The  guru-game  is  self-perpetuating,  and  the 




motives of Grand Inquisitors are always a little suspect. Although they may 




believe that they are acting for their quarry’s own good, their compassion 




may well be mixed with an unrecognized wish to see others wriggle where 




they have wriggled before. 




The winnowing of the unconscious which results from the process may be 




incommunicable  in  the  strict  sense—although  it  could  be  described. 




Perhaps only the passage of time will show the victim whether or not the 




episode  has  been  of  value;  and  the  experience  of  each  pupil  will 




undoubtedly be different not only in the obvious external ways, but in the 




interior psychological results. It is possible to make a ground plan of the 




process,  but  there  can  be  no  real  comparison  of  notes.  It  is  therefore 




impossible to judge when the process is “successful,” and unfairly easy to 




say when it has gone wrong. 




■nie cases of suicide which are from time to time linked with the Work do 




not prove a great deal. The unstable people attracted to “occult” theories 




include numerous potential suicides. On the other hand, the teacher must 




be considered responsible for any pupil whom he accepts and he must be 




aware that he will attract people in dangerous psychological states. The 




teacher should be able to monitor his pupils with the skill of a psychological 




technician; he has to know precisely what pressures to apply and when; he 




must be an exceptionally sensitive person, and he should certainly have 




undergone lengthy training in the skills needed by a manipulator of the 




Fourth Way. Little is known about how the Work teachers are trained 




except the famous adage, “to learn more you must teach,” and a rumor 




recalled by Louis Pauwels that it takes seven years to make a group leader. 




There  is  no  doubt  that  the  GurdjiefF  groups  are  conscious  of  their 




responsibilities. Nonetheless things do go wrong: they went very wrong for 




Gurdjieff himself on a number of occasions, and they have certainly gone




568 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




equally wrong for a number of his followers. This is not condemnation; 




merely a warning that although the Fourth Way may be an enlightening 




psychological adventure, it is also dangerous. 




It is dangerous because, although its practitioners claim that they warn 




prospective neophytes of the suffering which awaits them, they can never 




warn them sufficiently. For the Work to work, the pupil must be hit from 




his blind side; indeed part of the process will be to point out that he  

has

 a 




blind  side.  Gurdjieff  himself  had  an  exaggerated  disrespect  for  direct 




instruction; he was so busy creating confusion and playing his various roles 




that at times he seems rarely to have explained anything at all. The Work 




operates by surprise attack, and if this attack is overdone, it may merely 




shock the pupil into a position of dependence which he or she will never be 




able to break. There must have been numerous unfortunates temporarily or 




semi-permanently  warped  for  ordinary life  by their  experiences  in the 




Work. There should be no psychological snobbery here.  

No one

 can stand 




up to an astutely conducted campaign to implant in him the sense of an 




alternative reahty. If the teacher cannot attach the pupil to him, he risks the 




departure of his charge in a reconditioned but not rehabilitated state. This 




is equivalent to driving someone mad and renouncing responsibility for it. 




The  Fourth  Way  is  based  on  violence;  and  this  is  the  most  serious 




objection to its methods. Such violence might be justified by the specious 




counterargument  used  by  some  fashionable  anarchists:  that  the  tacit 




“violence” of the prevailing system—in this case an existential situation and 




the conditioning of social institutions—can only be corrected by violence in 




its turn. Violence is used to create the “other world”; violence is used to 




shock the pupil into realizations; it is by violence that he escapes from his 




imprisonment.  If  the  degree  of  force  necessary  is  not  gauged  very 




accurately,  either  the  process  will  be  ineffective  or  there  is  a  risk  of 




destroying the pupil altogether. 




MouraviefF sums up the possible adverse effects of the Fourth Way when 




its techniques are wielded by an incompetent or unlucky instructor. “A 




dissolution of the personality,” he writes, “is usually the result. Malaise, 




moral depression, black pessimism, persecution-mania are the symptoms of 




this progressive dissolution. In the gravest cases, this can lead to a complete 




state of imbalance leading to the denial of the Self, which opens the way to 




suicide.” Ouspensky probably felt the truth of this criticism and modified 




Gurdjieff’s methods accordingly. Maurice Nicoll further sugared the pill 




with a religious topping. But this process of watering down Gurdjieff’s 




strong  medicine  has  produced  an  apparently  inevitable  paradox:  that 




although  the  strongest  objections  to  the  Fourth  Way  turn  on  its  use  of 




violence,  efforts  to  make  it  more  charitable  may  simply  increase  the 




number of “sheep” who become trapped in the alternative world. If we are 




to admit any value at all in the whole “liberating” process, we must also




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   569




admit  that  its  most  violent  versions—although  they  may  result  in  the 




greatest tragedies—may also produce the greatest effects. 




Such a verdict seems to imply approval of the ethic behind the ways of 




liberation. But is this merely the quietest, Taoist “way of the straw dogs” 




which sees the universe as game or theater and counsels detachment from 




the gaudy show as the only salvation? If we are to believe Alan Watts, 




liberation is an even more specific state of being, and implies release from 




the duality of ego and universe. “There is,” he writes, “nothing occult or 




supernatural in this state of consciousness, and yet the traditional methods 




for attaining it are complex, divergent, obscure, and, for the most part, 




extremely arduous.” The harmoniously developed man, who feels himself 




in tune with the cosmos, who “goes with the flow,” accepts his own nature 




and  that  of  his  environment,  is  not  generally  considered  as  an  active 




creature; not that he is particularly inactive, but that the sound and fury 




which  result from the striving of the ego to impose its patterns on the 




universe are experienced as irrelevant because they are seen to stem from 




an identification with an illusory self As Jacob Needleman comments; “A 




system of serious ideas helps a man to become still. ” 




Yet it could be maintained that the whole concept of the Man of the Way 




is itself based on an unperceived illusion, which may have arisen because 




the majority of people who become interested in the ways of liberation are 




instinctive  world  renouncers,  driven  from  a  normally  active  life  by 




temporary setbacks or a desire for a permanently contemplative existence. 




It  is  not  possible  to  argue  about  the  sense  of  “cosmic  consciousness,” 




“universe as organism,” or “loss of ego.” This is a subjective and quite 




nonmystical experience; and the Work has certainly led people toward such 




a realization. But whether the experience is in any sense “objective,” or 




what should be a man’s relation to it are other questions. Even if a man is 




able to live out the philosophy of the universe as theater, he must see that 




innumerable roles are necessary in the theater of the universe. There can 




be no specific conclusion to the process; as by the end of his instruction the 




pupil’s  decisions  have  become  his  own,  and  he  no  longer  inhabits  a 




imiversal situation. His conscious life is in fact only just beginning, and 




although the question “what happens next?” cannot be strictly answered, it 




is the most important question to ask. 




GurdjiefiF dealt in the mechanics of human illusion. Sometimes he dealt in 




the general illusions, but the most important part of his work was concerned 




with those illusions which are ihdividual. He never claimed that he was able 




to give a pupil knowledge which he or she did not already possess; but said 




that all he did was to arrange the pupil’s knowledge in a new way. An added 




perspective brings the individual within his own field of observation—^but 




not in any trite sense of knowing whether he walks with a slouch, has a bad




570 T H E   H A R M O N I O U S   C I R C L E




temper, or prefers to put on his left sock first in the mornings. Such minor 




observations may serve as an aid to greater objectivity, but the relativiza- 




tion of self is an existential experience and involves the total organism. As a 




greater and more comprehensive detachment becomes possible, it is open 




to the individual to decide how extensive he feels that this should be. How 




will he take the theatrical universe? On the terms of the mystics, of those 




who are Puritans in the renunciation of their illusory ego—or in a more 




Nietzschean way like E. R. Eddison? For Eddison accepts the notion of the 




universe as theater, and yet finds it quite possible to will an acceptance of 




the play in progress. He suggests that there may be “no  

necessity

 for these 




peculiar and (to us) inconvenient arrangements, but that—^for the moment—they are amusing.” He explains the fact that “they are far from 

amusing

  to   

us

  here  and  now”  as  a  failure  of  human  faith  in  any  real 




immortality. But it is possible to adopt his attitude even if we believe that 




death is absolute. 




Watts and the semi-Theosophical writers of the ways of liberation tend 




toward  the  Puritan  interpretation.  They  approve  of  men  of  the  Tao, 




detached and unassertive; men who recognize the illusory nature of the ego 




and are content to allow themselves to be “existed in.” Yet if the ego is such 




a harmful human attribute, why was it developed? The answer is that most 




tasks—^among them the most essential tasks of physical survival—demand 




the sensation of “I” to carry them through. A man who really and in every 




particular lived out an ego-less philosophy would soon not trouble to feed 




himself; and societies pervaded by such passive philosophies are the static 




societies, in whose conditions an attitude of acceptance is the only way to 




approach an intolerable existence. It has often been remarked that Taoism 




was developed in a China where life was all but insupportable; where wars 




and natural disasters were everyday currency, and where a stoical acceptance of these inevitable tragedies was an invaluable aid to survival. The unsettled  condition  of  the  contemporary  West  has  seen  a  flight  to  the 




consolations of Oriental wisdom, and there is no doubt that the success of a 




discipline Hke that of the Work has come about partly in response to human 




necessity. It would be a hard man who condemned out of hand all such 




helpful philosophies. Yet to Western minds they vdll always have about 




them something of the effete. 




To be able to maintain an attitude of detachment in the face of great 




personal loss or hardship is a faculty to be envied. But to a man who wants 




to lead an active life, it will seem to be no more than a useful weapon in his 




psychological armory, to be brought out on occasion. By all means allow 




your “ego” to dissolve if it is overwhelmingly assailed by misfortune. But 




you  will  waste  the  very  short  time  at  your  disposal  if  you  live  semipermanently in a dispersed condition. If you want to make the most out of




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   571




the play in progress—^and for “you” there will be no other play—you should 




collect  about  you  the  shards  of  some  serviceable  persona  as  soon  as 




possible, literally  

pull yourself together

 and jump back into the ring. You 




may have learned in the Work that you can play many more roles than you 




had ever imagined were possible for you—^but unless you propose to devote 




your life to contemplation, you had better get out there and play them. 




And—^whatever the arguments of Watts and the proponents of a “unified 




field of consciousness”—you do appear to possess an organism which has to 




be manipulated. From time to time you may decide that, for example, your 




vision of the world is situated inside you rather than outside, that there is in 




fact no separation between observer and observed. But unless you are a 




very unusual person, your prevailing mode of consciousness is liable to 




maintain the illusion of separation. Even assuming that you could ever be 




certain that this  

was

 an illusion and not just another metaphor, you would 




still have to operate within the convention.  

Even an illusion of self creates

 




 

the reality. 




Let us suppose that we make our bow in the direction of the  

anima mundi

 




and obtain the taste of a “liberated consciousness.” What we do with it will 




be  entirely  a  matter  of  temperament  and  vocation.  (It  might  be  more 




accurate to say, what  

it

 does with  

us.)

 It is open to the individual player to 




rejoin the game with renewed zest and vigor. This may also be the Tao, the 




way “which is not the constant way.” If the game he is playing requires a 




high degree of ego-identification, the individual may even choose to regard 




the decision to play it as his own. Although the man who chooses “the way 




of the straw dogs” may be purer, calmer, more “in touch with himself’ than 




the man who chooses to play another game, other games  

must

 be played, 




perhaps with great energy, apparent submersion in events, and ultimate 




futility in the eyes of the philosopher. We are presented with a version of 




Pascal’s “Wager,” and the dice are loaded in favor of the man of action. If 




the philosopher of the Ways is “wrong,” the game-player will be “right.” 




But if the philosopher is right, the ga’ '»^-player must be right anyway. He 




cannot lose. 




Much of this history of the Work has concerned pathological material 




both in Gurdjieff’s and in the clinical sense of the term. This is because in 




order to rid a pupil of his delusions, the teachers of the Fourth Way have 




first to elicit a full expression of them, then to encourage the pupil to act 




upon his illusory concept of the world until he discovers his error. And 




because the teachers have to absorb the projections of successive generations of pupils, their images are inflated beyond all measure. Kathleen Raine has compared the relationship of Ouspensky to Gurdjieff with those 




of Trotsky to Lenin and Jung to Freud. She remarks that “the spiritual 




stature, or spiritual pride of these two men, invites ambitious comparison. ” 




572 t h e   h a r m o n i o u s   c i r c l e




To some extent she is correct: both Gurdjieff and Ouspensky sometimes 




nodded. The guru may occasionally believe in himself. But what Miss Raine 




is really criticizing are the accumulated projections of Work pupils, which 




compose the icons of Gurdjieff and the other teachers for posterity. Much of 




what is visible in the story of the Harmonious Circle is madness or the 




result of madness; deliberately induced so that it should destroy itself 




Much may appear to be madness which is not so in fact; for how can a 




teacher of the Fourth Way write books about Gurdjieff without reinforcing 




the legend of the source of his own authority? There are also madnesses 




which the Work has encouraged despite itself But all this—and numerous 




reservations about the methods of the Work—should not be allowed to hide 




the fact that underneath the apparent lunacy lies a technique of extraordinary interest. 




The achievements of Gurdjieff and his followers are large enough to 




escape devaluation by talk of “Gurdjieff’s mission” or “a new age.” The 




Work is a method of higher education which has been of great benefit to 




large numbers of people. If we consider it as “psychodrama,” it has an 




enormous advantage over all other forms in that for a considerable time the 




pupil may not suspect that the situations in which he finds himself are 




manufactured. Far from being inhuman, this is the Work’s final justification.  It  removes  the  possibility—which  invalidates  all  other  forms  of psychodrama—that  the  patient  will  respond  in  an  artificial  manner  to 




situations which he knows are themselves artificial. Because the teacher’s 




knowledge is unknown, his powers infinite, and his manifest nature elicited 




by his pupil’s unconscious, the situations in which a pupil is placed are 




more real to him than those he encounters day by day. As soon as he begins 




to suspect the true objective of the process—^he is waking up. 




The  enlightenment  offered  by  the  Work  can,  of  course,  be  as  easily 




obtained in the course of ordinary life. Gurdjieff’s objection was that it 




cannot be obtained quickly enough. The Sly Man takes “a little pill, ” and 




saves years of useless agony chasing daydreams. But it is also true that 




Gurdjieff, as Arnold Keyserling says, “described Hell.” We do not all of us 




live all the time in the nethermost regions. And it cannot really be argued 




that if someone approaches a teacher of the Fourth Way, he is automatically 




in need of help: for simply by practicing as an “esoteric teacher,” the guru 




creates the impression that there is something to be learned. As such he is a 




gigantic irrelevancy, a creator of sleep rather than wakefulness, and the 




chief enemy of his own function. On the other hand, he might reply that to 




disabuse a person of the illusion that he can learn from anyone at all was 




only the next step in a process of awakening which had already proceeded 




some way in the course of nature. 




And what of the biographer, puzzled by the historical glyph and the sense




O F   M A S T E R S   A N D   M E N   573




of sacred time? He also has withdrawn his projections. Some time ago we 




left him posing as a scribe contemplating the mysteries of the Christian 




Church as interpreted by Origen. In Ptolemy’s library at Alexandria he has 




set down his pen at the end of the last roll of vellum. For a moment he toys 




with the idea of shuffling the different sheets, chopping them in odd pieces 




and handing them in a bag to those who would have read his book. There 




would be a certain faithfulness in that, although little practicality. He sighs 




and begins to gather up the vellum sheets. He does not want to encourage 




anyone to enter the Fourth Way; but if a person is set on the encounter, he 




cannot prevent them. If this  is abdication,  it is the abdication which is 




always the only honest answer. 




In the corridors of the library at Alexandria it is dark and twilight-colored. 




Figures hurry along with a padding of sandals, and sometimes the scribe 




bumps into them. Glancing through a door he sees the stars are out, and 




beneath them the variety and promise of the night. Suddenly he laughs. As 




if  his  own  opinions  mattered  to  anyone  but  himself. Like  Pilate in  the 




Christian books he has just been reading, the scribe mentally washes his 




hands. He steps through the doorway and out of the cloistered gloom. 




On through the world outside. 




 

The  end  of  mystification

 




 

Is  not  the  end  of  mystery

 




 

And  the  mark  of  the  wise

 




 

Is not the search for wisdom:




 

Here at the junction of illusions

 




 

(Spirit and matter)




 

Rests that self-regarding episode

 




 

Called Man. 




Sources




In the preface I briefly explained that I was prevented from naming or 




acknowledging some of my informants. With the knowledge of the various 




schisms, personal  enmities,  and  conflicting  points of view  which  have 




bedeviled  the  “visible”  history  of  the  Work,  the  reader  is  in  a  better 




position to appreciate that certain people might not want their identities 




revealed; and that I therefore decided to suppress even the names of those 




vnth no objections to being cited, if their part in the story was relatively 




minor. I have kept a record of the source of all information derived from 




interviews and personal communications which is unattributed in the text, 




in case this should be of interest to scholars. 




Because there must be so much unpublished material which I have not 




seen—and which may never be published—the bibliography which follows 




cannot hope to be complete, and I have therefore been encouraged to be 




selective. 




 

A: Works of the major figures




 

Writings of G. I. Gurdjieff




The  writings  ascribed  to  Gurdjieff  present  a  number  of  problems.  His 




method of writing “in committee” in fact makes it difficult to assess his 




personal responsibility for any particular piece of work; and often—as in the 




cases  of   

Glimpses  of  Truth

  and   

The  Struggle  of  the  Magicians

—the  real 




execution of an idea was left to a pupil. The  

Third Series exists in

 a number




574




S O U R C E S   575




of forms, all incomplete, but some less so than others. (For example, I have 




seen two typescript versions, both of which differ considerably from one 




another, and neither of which includes much material contained in the 




published version.) There are also several different typescript versions of 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales. 




 

Herald of Coming Good

 (Paris, 1933). 




 

All  and  Everything:  First  Series:  Beelzebub’s  Tales  to  his  Grandson

  (first 




edition, London and New York, 1950) revised edition, 3 vols., London and 




New  York,  1974;  German  translation:   

Alle  und  Alles

 (Innsbruck,  1951). 




French translation:  

Du tout et de tout

 (Paris, 1956). 




 

Second Series: Meetings with Remarkable Men

 (London and New York, 




1963). 




 

Third  Series:  Life  is  Real,  only  then,  when  I  AM

  (incomplete:  private 




publication. New York, 1975). 




 

Lectures and Talks of Gurdjieff




 

Views  from  the  Real  World

  (London,  1974).  Preface  by  Jeanne  de 




Salzmann. A better translation of  

Glimpses of Truth

 than that printed here 




exists in typescript—probably by Ouspensky. 




 

Les  Comptes-Rendus. 

  Unpublished  talks  and  records  of  answers  to 




questions of Paris groups, March 1943-December 1946. Record of at least a 




dozen sessions. 




 

Narcotics  and  Hormones

  (Cape  Town,  1949).  Notes  by  Ouspensky  of 




Gurdjieff’s  pronouncements  on  these  subjects,  some  of  which  do  not 




appear  in  In   

Search  of  the  Miraculous. 

  Various  unpublished  talks  not 




Included  in   

Views  from  the  Real  World

  are  preserved  in  the  Toomer 




Collection in the Library, Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee. 




 

Gurdjieff Through His Pupils




 

The Struggle of the Magicians

 (Cape Town, 1957). The “ballet scenario,” 




Inspired by Gurdjieff with the cooperation of pupils in Tiflis and Constantinople. In its printed form, chiefly the literary work of Ous^jensky. 




 

Institute  for  the  Harmonious  Development  of  Man:

  prospectuses  for  the 




Tiflis, Constantinople and Fontainebleau Institutes. Extracts from the Tiflis 




prospectus are printed in  

In Search of the Miraculous; 

 Bennett prints the 




Constantinople  prospectus  in   

Gurdjieff:  Making  a  New  World; 

  and  the 




Fontainebleau prospectus (largely the work of Ouspensky) exists both in the 




French form of 1923 and the American translation of 1924. For the former, 




see  the  copy  in  the  Warburg  Institute,  for  the  latter,  the  Toomer 




Collection.  Gurdjieff  reproduced  part  of  this  prospectus  in   

Herald  of

 




 

Coming Good. 




“L’Art de I’Antique Orient Revivra,” in the  

Echo des Champs Elysees

 no. 




576 S O U R C E S




37, 1923. (Program of the demonstration of movements at Christmas 1923.) 




In 1950-51 the Societe Janus issued some of the Gurdjieff-de Hartmann 




music, and more is available privately. 




 

Writings o f P . D .  Ouspensky




By the time that Ouspensky’s  

Occult Tales

 were published in Petrograd in 




1916, he had also published  

Kinemodratna

 (the original version of  

Strange

 




 

Life  of  Ivan  Osokin),  The  Fourth  Dimension,  Superman

  and   

What  is  Yoga? 

 




In 1913 his  

The Inner Circle

 appeared. For remarks on the incorporation of 




the last four titles in A  

New Model of the Universe, 

 see Part 2, chapter 11. 




Ouspensky’s works published in English translation are; 




 

The  Symbolism  of  the  Tarot

  (translated  by  A.  L.  Pogossky,  St.  Petersburg,  1913).  Later  reprinted  with  alterations  in  A   

New  Model  of  the

 

Universe. 




 

Tertium  Organum

  (first  edition,  St.  Petersburg,  1912;  revised  edition, 




Petrograd, 1916). First English translation by Nicholas BessarabofF and 




Claude Bragdon, Rochester, N. Y. 1920; revised by Ouspensky, London, 




1923. New and revised translation by Eugenie Kadloubovsky, Cape Town, 




1950; abridged edition, Fairfax Hall, Cape Town, 1961. 




“Letters  from  Russia,”  in  the   

New  Age, 

  September  4,  November  27, 




December 4, December 11, December 18, December 25, 1919. 




A  

New Model of the Universe

 (first edition translated by R. R. Merston, 




London and New York, 1931; second revised edition, London and New 




York, 1934). 




 

In Search of the Miraculous

 (New York, 1949; London, 1950). 




 

Strange Life of Ivan Osokin

 (London, 1947). 




 

The  Benevolent  Devil

  (London  and  New  York,  1973).  Translation  of 




 

Occult Tales

 by K. Petroff, Petrograd, 1916, which also includes the short 




story “The Inventor.” 




 

The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution

 (first edition, London, 1947; 




new edition incorporating Ouspensky’s “Bibliographical Notes,” New York, 




1974). 




 

Lectures and Talks of Ouspensky

 




 

A Record of some of the Meetings held by P. D. Ouspensky between 1930

 




 

and 1947

 (Cape Town, 1951). 




A  

Further Record . . . 1928-1945

 (Cape Town, 1952). 




The  two   

Records

  provided  material  for  three  short  syntheses.  

Memory, 

 




 

extracts from the Sayings and Writings o f P . D .  Ouspensky about Memory, 

 




 

Self-Rememhering  and  Recurrence

  (Cape  Town,  1953),  

Negative  Emotions

 




(Cape  Town,  1953),  

Surface  Personality

  (Cape  Town,  1954),  and  for  the 




comprehensive synthesis edited anonymously by Eugenie Kadloubovsky, 




 

The Fourth Way

 (London and New York, 1957.)




S O U R C E S   577




 

Writings of A. R. Orage




This list excludes Orage’s writings on political and economic topics. For a 




survey of these, see the books by Wallace Martin and Philip Mairet in list B 




below. 




 

Frederick  Nietzsche,  the  Dionysian  Spirit  of  the  Age

  (London  and 




Edinburgh, 1906). 




 

Nietzsche in Outline and Aphorism

 (London and Edinburgh, 1907). 




 

Consciousness, Animal, Human and Superhuman

 (London and Benares 




1907). 




Articles in  

The Theosophical Review:

 “The Wise Way” and “Halt! What 




goes there?,” vol. 38; “The Comparative Study of Religions” and “What is 




man?,” vol. 39; these attacked by Dr. Montague Lomax, and the attack 




countered by Orage in ibid.; “After Ten Years,” “Occult Faculty” and “In 




Defense of Agnosticism,” vol. 39; “The New Romanticism,” “Theoretical 




and Real Morality” and “Wanted—Proofs of Reincarnation,” vol. 40. 




The  

New Age

 (London: see especially 1907-21). 




 

Readers and Writers, 1917-1921, 

 “by R. H. C.” (London, 1922). 




“Unedited opinions,” in  

The New Republic, 

 vols. 39, 41, 45. 




“An  Editor’s  Progress,”  four  articles  originally  published  in 




 

Commonweal, 

 3, and reprinted in the  

New Age

 in five parts in March-April 




1926. 




 

The Art of Reading

 (New York, 1930). 




 

Psychological Exercises

 (New York, 1930). 




 

Selected Essays and Critical Writings

 (edited by Herbert Read and Denis 




Saurat, London, 1935). Incorporates “On Love,” “On Religion,” and “Talks 




with Katherine Mansfield.” 




 

The New English Weekly

 (London: especially 1932). 




“My Note-Book,” in  

The Aryan Path, 

 August 1933-October 1934. 




 

Essays and Aphorisms

 (London, 1954). 




 

The Active Mind: Adventures in Awareness

 (London, 1954). 




 

Orage as Critic

 (edited by Wallace Martin, London, 1974). 




 

Orage Through his Pupils

 




Notes of Jean Toomer in the Toomer Collection. 




Charles Daly King,  

The Oragean Version

 (New York, 1951). 




C.  S.  Nott,  

Teachings  of  Gurdjieff

  (London,  1961).  Contains  Orage’s 




commentary on  

Beelzebub’s Tales. 




 

Writings of Maurice Nicoll

 




The “Martin Swayne” novels:




 

The Bishop and the Lady

 (London, 1909). 




 

Lord Richard in the Pantry

 (London, 1911). 




578 S O U R C E S




 

The Sporting Instinct

 (London, 1912). 




 

Cupid goes North

 (London, 1913). 




 

The Blue Germ

 (London, 1918). 




 

In Mesopotamia

 (London, 1917). 




 

Dream Psychology

 (first edition, London 1917; second edition, London 




1920). 




“Why is the ‘Unconscious’ Unconscious?,” symposium with Ernest Jones 




and W. H. R. Rivers, in  

British Journal of Psychology, 

 October 1918. 




 

The New Man

 (London, 1950). 




 

Living Time

 (London, 1952). 




 

Psychological Commentaries on the Teaching o f G . I .  Gurdjieff and P . D . 

 




 

Ouspensky

 (5 vols., London 1952-6). 




 

The Mark

 (London, 1954). 




 

Writings of Jean Toomer




 

Cane

 (New York,  1923; reprinted 1969 with an introduction by Arna 




Bontemps). 




 

Essentials

 (Chicago, 1931). 




 

Portage Potential

 (unpubhshed). 




 

From  Exile  into  Being

  (fragmentary  unpubhshed  autobiography,  in 




Toomer Collection). 




 

The  Flavour  of  Man

  (lecture  delivered  to  a  Quaker  youth  group, 




Philadelphia, 1949). 




 

The Toomer Papers




Besides  Toomer’s unpublished writings and his correspondence vsrith 




Orage,  Margaret  Naumburg,  Mabel  Dodge  Luhan,  Gorham  Munson, 




Waldo Frank and other prominent figures, the Toomer Collection at Fisk 




University,  Nashville,  Tennessee,  includes  Toomer’s  own  notes  on  his 




practice  of  the  Gurdjieff  Method,  fragmentary  notes  on  Gurdjieff,  and 




copies of typescript material circulated among Work groups. 




 

Publications of Rodney CoUin

 




 

Palms and Patios

 (London, 1931). 




 

The Theory of Eternal Life

 (first edition, London, 1950; Spanish edition, 




Tlalpam, 1951; second English edition, London, 1956). 




 

Hellas

 (Tlalpam, 1950; London, 1951). 




 

El Pyramide del Fuego

 (Tlalpam, 1953). 




 

The Christian Mystery

 (Tlalpam, 1953; English edition, 1954). 




 

The Whirling Ecstasy

 (Tlalpam, 1954). Translation form Fr. C. Huart’s 




French translation of Aflahi’s  

Lives of the Gnostics

 (Paris, 1944). 




S O U R C E S   579




 

The Herald of Harmony

 (Spanish and English edition, Tlalpam, 1954). 




 

The  Theory  of  Celestial  Influence

  (Spanish  edition,  Tlalpam,  1952;  first 




Enghsh edition, London, 1954). 




 

The  Theory  of  Conscious  Harmony

  (London,  1958).  Extracts,  from  the 




letters  of  Rodney  Colhn  with  a  “Biographical  Note”  and  a  section  on 




“Cuzco. ” I have been able to check certain unpublished letters against this 




edition and found it accurate. 




 

The  Mirror  of  Light,  from  the  notebooks  of  Rodney  Collin

  (London, 




1959). Unreliable selection, including material which the editor admits is 




probably not by CoUin. 




 

Unpublished Writings

 




“Last Remembrances of a Magician.” Memoir of Ouspensky and Rodney 




Collin’s interpretation of the last days at Lyne Place. 




“A Programme of Study.” Dated “Mexico, 1955.” 




 

Writings of J . G .  Bennett:




 

The Crisis in Human Affairs

 (London, 1948). 




 

What Are We Living For? 

 (London, 1949). 




 

Gurdjieff:  the  making  of  a  new  world

  (typescript  lectures  delivered  at 




Denison House, London, in October 1949). 




 

Concerning Subud

 (London, 1958). 




 

Approaching Subud

 (New York, 1962). 




 

Christian Mysticism and Subud, 

 (London, 1961). 




 

Witness

  (first  edition,  London,  1962;  enlarged  edition,  Kingston  on 




Thames, 1971). 




 

Gurdjieff: a Very Great Enigma

 (Kingston on Thames, 1963). 




 

Energies: Material Vital, Cosmic

 (Kingston on Thames, 1964). 




 

A Spiritual Psychology

 (London, 1964). 




 

Long Pilgrimage

 (London, 1965). 




 

The Dramatic Universe

 (4 vols., London, 1956-66). 




 

Gurdjieff: Making a New World

 (London, 1973). 




Various  minor  publications  consisting  chiefly  of  records  of  Bennett’s 




lectures have since appeared. 




 

B: Select bibliography of other Work literature or

 




 

literature of a general importance for the history of the

 




 

Work




 

The  Adelphi

  (London:  see  especially  1923-25  and  Murry’s  article  of 




November, 1950). 




580 S O U R C E S




Anderson,  Margaret,  

My  Thirty  Years’  War

  (New  York  and  London, 




1930);  

The  Fiery  Fountains

  (London,  1953);  

The  Unknowable  Gurdjieff

 




(London, 1962);  

The Strange Necessity

 (New York, 1969). 




Antebi, Elizabeth,  

Ave Lucifer

 (Paris, 1972). 




Bechhofer Roberts, Carl,  

In Denikin’s Russia

 (London, 1921); A  

Wanderer’s  Log

  (London,  1922);  “The  Forest  Philosophers,”  in   

The  Century,

 May 1924;  

Let’s Begin Again

 (London, 1940). 




Beresford,  J.  D.,  “Personal  and  Impersonal  Methods,”  in   

The  Aryan

 




 

Path, 

  October  1930;  “The  Discovery  of  the  Self,”  3  parts  in  ibid., 




March-May  1931;  “Automatism,”  in  ibid.,  November-December  1931; 




“Will  and  Wish,”  in  ibid.,  October  1934;  

The  Case  for  Faith-Healing

 




(London, 1934). 




Bland, Rosamund (Rosamund Sharp),  

Extracts from Nine Letters written

 




 

at the beginning o f P . D .  Ouspensky’s London work in 1921

 (London, 1952). 




Bowyer, E. C. et al.. Reports on the Fontainebleau Institute in  

The Daily

 




 

News, 

 February 15-27, 1923. 




Bragdon,  Claude,  Introduction  to  1920  edition  of   

Tertium  Organum; 

 




 

Merely Players

 (New York, 1929);  

The Secret Springs

 (London, 1939). 




Butkovsky-Hewitt,  Anna,  

With  Gurdjieff  in  St.  Petersburg  and  Paris

 




(London, 1978). 




Caruso, Dorothy,  

Dorothy Caruso: a personal history

 (New York, 1952). 




Cohen, J. M., “In the Work” (unpublished radio script, first broadcast 




January 5, 1966). 




Collin-Smith, Joyce, “Beloved Icarus,” in  

Astrological Journal, 

 vol. XIII, 




no. 4, autumn 1971). 




Cosgrave, John O’Hara,  

The Academy for Souls, 

 (New York, 1931);  

Man:

 




 

a citizen of the Universe

 (New York, 1947). 




Daumal,  Rene,  

La  Grande  Beuverie

  (Paris,  1939);  

Le  Mont  Analogue

 




(Paris, 1952), translated by Roger Shattuck as  

Mount Analogue

 (London, 




1959);  

Lettres a ses amis

 (vol. I, Paris, 1958);  

Essaies et notes

 (2 vols., Paris, 




1972). 




 

The Enneagram

 (Sherborne, Gloucestershire, March 1975—). 




Frank, Waldo,  

Our America

 (New York, 1919); as “Searchlight,” “Mystery in a Sack Suit,” in  

Times Exposures

 (New York, 1926);  

The Rediscovery

 

of America

  (New  York  and  London,  1929);  

Chart  for Rough Water

 (New 




York, 1940). 




 

Guide and Index t o G . I .  Gurdjieff’s All and Everything

 (Toronto, 1973). 




Harton, Marjorie von,  

A Way of Living

 (Kingston on Thames, 1974). 




Hartmann, Thomas and Olga de,  

Our Life with Mr. Gurdjieff

 (New York, 




1964). 




Hastings, Beatrice,  

The Old New Age: Orage and Others

 (London, 1936). 




 

Hermds

 (Paris), special number 1967-68,  

La Voie de Reni Daumal. 




S O U R C E S   581




Hoffman, Maud, “Taking the Life Cure in Gurdjieff’s School,” in  

New

 




 

York Times, 

 February 10, 1924. 




Hulme, Kathryn,  

Undiscovered Country

 (London, 1967). 




Jackson,  Holbrook,  “A.  R.  Orage;  personal  recollections,”  in   

The

 




 

Windmill

 (1948), vol. 3, no. 11. 




Kaffian, Adele, “The Last Days of Katherine Mansfield,” in  

The Adelphi, 

 




October-December 1946. 




King,  Charles  Daly,  as  ‘Robert  Courtney’   

Beyond  Behaviorism

  (New 




York, 1927);  

The Psychology of Consciousness

 (London, 1932);  

The Oragean

 




 

Version

 (New York, 1951);  

The States of Human Consciousness

 (New York, 




1963). Two unpubhshed MSS.,  

The Order of Decline, 

 and  

Heritage: a social

 




 

interpretation of the history of ancient Egypt, 

 as well as a collection of Daly 




King’s letters, are in the Warburg Institute, University of London. The 




unpublished works contain numerous references to Daly King’s papers 




contributed to learned journals during the 1940s. 




Kenney, Rowland,  

Westering

 (London, 1939). 




Keyserling,  Arnold,  

Geschichte  der  Denkstile

  (Vienna,  1968);  

Klaviatur

 




 

des  Denkens

  (Vienna,  1971);  

Chakrale  Musik

  (Vienna,  1972);  with 




Wilhelmine Keyserling,  

Das Rosenkreuz

 (Innsbruck, 1957). 




Koch, Walter, “Gurdjjew der Schwarzmagier, ” in  

Mensch und Schicksal, 

 




nos. 5-6, May/June 1957. 




Kohler, Marianne, A  

I’Ecole de Sagesse

 (Paris, 1961). 




Landau, Rom,  

God is My Adventure

 (London, 1935). 




Lea, F. E.,  

The Life of John Middleton Murry

 (London, 1959). 




Leblanc,  Georgette,  

Maeterlink  and  I

  (Translated  by  Janet  Flanner, 




London, 1932);  

La Machine a Courage

 (Paris, 1947). 




 

The Little Review

 (Chicago, New York and Paris, 1914r-29; especially final 




number, May 1929). 




Luhan, Mabel Dodge,  

Lorenzo in Taos

 (London, 1933). 




Mairet,  Philip,  

A.  R.  Orage,  a  Memoir

  (first  edition,  London,  1936; 




revised edition. New York, 1966). 




Mansfield,  Katherine,  

The  Letters  of  Katherine  Mansfield

  (2  vols., 




London,  1928);  

Katherine  Mansfield’s  Letters  to  John  Middleton  Murry, 

 




 

1913-1922

 (London, 1951);  

The Journal of Katherine Mansfield

 (London, 




1954). 




Martin, Wallace,  

The New Age under Orage

 (London, 1967). 




“Masierevitch,” Constance (writing anonymously).  

On the Four Quartets

 




 

o f T .  S .  Eliot

 (London, 1953);  

The Mysteries of the Seed

 (Mexico, 1954). 




Mouravieff, Boris,  

Ouspensky, Gurdjieff et les Fragments d’un Enseigne-

 




 

ment Inconnu

 (Geneva, 1956), reprint from  

Syntheses, 

 138;  

Gnosis

 (3 vols., 




Paris, 1961-65). 




582 S O U R C E S




Murry,  John  Middleton,  

God

  (London,  1929);  

Between  Two  Worlds

 




(London, 1935). 




Needleman, Jacob,  

The New Religions

 (London, 1972). 




 

The New English Weekly, 

 “A. R. Orage Memorial Number,” November 




15, 1934. 




 

The New Republic

 (New York; especially 1924-29). 




Nott,  C.  S.,  

Teachings  of  Gurdjieff  {London,  1961);  Journey  Through  this

 




 

World

 (London, 1969). 




“Olgivanna” (Lloyd Wright), “The Last Days of Katherine Mansfield,” in 




 

The Bookman

 (New York), March 1931;  

The Struggle Within

 (New York, 




1955). 




Pauwels,  Louis,  “Quelques  mois  chez  Gurdjieff,”  in   

Nouvelle  Revue

 




 

Frangaise, 

  December  1,  1953;  

Monsieur  Gurdjieff

  (Paris,  1954),  abbreviated  translation,  

Gurdjieff

  (Douglas,  Isle  of  Man,  1964);  

Saint  Quelquun

 (Paris 1946), translated by Bernard Miall as  

Not into Clean Hands

 (London, 




1948);  

Les voies de petite communication

 (Paris, 1949-50). 




Peters, Fritz,  

Boyhood with Gurdjieff

 (London, 1964);  

Gurdjieff Remembered

 (London, 1965). 




Pogson,  Beryl,  

Maurice  Nicoll,  a  Portrait

  (London,  1%1).  In  addition, 




her Shakespearean studies.  

In the East My Pleasure Lies

 (London, 1951), 




 

Three  Plays  by  Shakespeare

  (London,  1963)  and  a  volume   

Royalty  of

 




 

Nature

 (n. d.), have been issued. Some  

Work Talks

 have also been privately 




printed. 




PopofF,  Irmis  Barrett,  

Gurdjieff:  his work  on myself, with  others,  for the

 




 

Work

 (New York, 1969). 




Random, Michel,  

Les Puissances de dedans

 (Paris, 1966);  

Le Grand Jeu

 (2 




vols., Paris, 1970). 




Rewelliotty, Irene-Carole,  

Journal d’unejeunefille

 (Paris 1946). Selected 




extracts translated in Pauwels, M.  

Gurdjieff. 




Reyner,  J.  H.,  

The  Universe  of  Relationships

  (London,  1960);  

God

 




 

Beyond Time

 (London, 1965). 




Ropp,  Robert  de.  

Drugs  and  the  Mind

  (New  York,  1957);  

The  Master

 




 

Game, 

 (New York, 1968); Sex  

Energy

 (New York, 1969). 




Saurat,  Denis,  “Visite  £k  Gurdjieff,”  in   

Nouvelle  Revue  Frangaise, 

 




November 1933; “A study of Beelzebub’s Tales,” in Pauwels, M.  

Gurdjieff. 




Schaeffer,  Pierre,  “The  Old  Man  and  the  Children  of  the  Age,”  in 




Pauwels,  

Mr. Gurdjieff; Le Gardien de Volcan

 (Paris, 1969). 




Seabrook,  William,  

Witchcraft,  its  Power  in  the  World  Today

 (London, 




1941). 




Selver, Paul,  

Orage and the New Age Circle

 (London, 1959). 




Serant, Paul,  

Le Meurtre Rituel

 (Paris, 1951). 




Sharp, Clifford (writing as “C”), “The Forest Philosophers,” article in two 




parts in  

The New Statesman, 

 March 3-17, 1923. 




S O U R C E S   583




 

Systematics, 

  the  Journal  of  the  Institute  for  Comparative  Study  of 




History, Philosophy and the Sciences (Kingston on Thames, 1963—). 




Tracol,  Henri,  

Georges  Ivanovitch  Gurdjieff:  I’eveil  et  la  pratique  de

 




 

‘rappel-de-soi’

 (Paris, 1967). 




Travers, P. L., “GurdjieflF,” in  

Man, Myth and Magic

 (London, 1970-72), 




articles arranged alphabetically. 




Walker,  Kenneth,  

The  Intruder

  (London,  1936);  

Venture  with  Ideas

 




(London,  1951);  

A  study  of  Gurdjieff  s  Teaching

  (London,  1957);  

The

 




 

Making of Man

 (London, 1963). 




Welch, William,  

What Happened in Between

 (New York, 1972). 




Young, James, “An Experiment at Fontainebleau,” in  

The New Adelphi, 

 




September 1927. 




Zigrosser, Carl, “GurdjieflF,” in  

The New Republic, 

 June 5, 1929;  

Mine

 




 

Own Shall Come to Me

 (1971). 




C;  

Sources for particular episodes and selected

 




 

background reading (works adequately identified in the

 




 

text are not listed)




Generally on Georgia and Armenia, see D. M. Lang,  

A Modem History of

 




 

Georgia

  (London,  1962)  and  Sirarpie  de  Nersessian,  

The  Armenians

 




(London,  1969).  The  best  guide  to  the  circumstances  of  Gurdjieff’s 




childhood  is  James  Bryce,  

Transcaucasia  and  Ararat

  (fourth  edition, 




London, 1896). Richard G. Hovannisian,  

Armenia on the Road to Independence

 (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1967) is a good introduction to Armenian politics of the period; of Edvt^ard Ellis Smith,  

The Young Stalin

 (London, 




1968) for Stalin’s youthful political involvements. H. V. Hilprecht (ed.) 




 

Explorations  in  Bible  Lands  during  the  Nineteenth  Century

  (Edinburgh, 




1903) and A. Lobanov-Rostovsky,  

Russia and Asia

 (New York, 1933) are 




useful introductions to the archeological and imperialistic questions; David 




Fraser,  

The Marches of Hindustan

 (Edinburgh and London, 1908) is a nearcontemporary account of archeological and scientific exploration in Central Asia. A good idea of the rehgious chaos prevailing in the Caucasus during 




the nineteeth century can be gained from F. C. Conbeare’s introduction to 




 

The Key of Truth

 (Oxford, 1898). 




On Dordjieff, BadmaieflF, and Ukhtomsky, see W. A. Unkrig, “Aus den 




letzten  Jarhzehnten  des  Lamaismus  in  Russland,”  in   

Zeitschrift  fur

 




 

Buddhismus  und  verwandte  Gehiete, 

  vol.  VII  (1926);  Robert  A.  Rupen, 




“The  Buryat Intelligentsia,” in   

Far East Quarterly, 

 vol. 15; P. L. Mehra, 




“Tibet and Russian Intrigue,” in  

Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society, 

 




1958; Alastair Lamb, “Some Notes on Russian Intrigue in Tibet,” ibid.; 




Wilhelm Filchner,  

Sturm uber Asien

 (Berlin, 1924); (English summary in




584 SOURCES




 

JRCAS, 

 




1927); 




 

Zakulissnaya 




 

politischeskaya 




 

rabota 




 

Badmayeva

 




(“Badmaieff’s  political  work  behind  the  scenes”),  for  translations  from 




which I am indebted to Mrs. Marina Corby; Rene Fiillop-Miller,  

Rasputin, 

 




 

the Holy Devil

 (London and New York, 1928); Peter Fleming,  

Bayonets to

 




 

Lhasa

 (London, 1961); Sir C. A. Bell,  

Portrait of the Dalai Lama

 (London, 




1946); David MacDonald,  

Twenty Years in Tibet

 (London, 1932), Percival 




Landon,  

Lhasa

 (2 vols., London, 1905); Prince Esper Ukhtomsky,  

Travels

 




 

in  the  East  of  Nicholas  II,  Emperor  of  Russia,  1890-91

  (2  vols.,  London, 




1896 and  1900);  foreword  to the  catalogue by Albert  Griinwedel of his 




lamaistic collection,  

Mythologie des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei

 




(Leipzig, 1900); and H. S. Olcott,  

Old Diary Leaves

 (Madras, 1895-1935), 




series 4 and 6. 




The exploits of Ushe NarzunolF are recorded in J. Deniker, “La Premiere 




photographic  de  Lhasa,”  in   

La  Geographic, 

  vol.  IV,  no.  10,  October  15, 




1901-04.  (Deniker’s  further  articles  in   

La  Geographic, 

  July  15,  1901, 




November  15,  1903,  and  especially  February  15, 1906);  Deniker, “New 




Light on Lhasa, the Forbidden City,” in  

The Century, 

 August 1903; “Trois 




Voyages a Lhasa (1898-1901) par Ovche NarzunofiF, Polerin Kalmouk,” in 




 

Le  Tour  du  Monde, 

  vol.  10,  new  series,  1904.  From  the  British  side,  see 




the Foreign Office document, FO 17 1551 / 39, “Alleged Missions Between 




Russia and Tibet” (in the Public Record Office); and ‘Political and Secret’ 




file for 1921 in the India Office Library, L/PS/11 /195 / P146 / 8, which 




contains a report by Younghusband on DordjielF and Narzunoff; and the 




records of the Foreign Department, Government of India, for June 1900 




under  “Nurzynoff.”  See  also  the   

Blue  Book,  Tibet

  (London,  1904)  for 




extracts from the Russian press on the DordjiefF Mission;  

The Graphic, 

 




August  17,  1901,  for  photograph  of  the  Mission  in  St.  Petersburg;  and 




Alexandra David-Neel, “Gurdjieff et Dordjieff,” in  

Nouvelles Litterarires, 

 




April 22, 1954. 




On Russian occultism at the turn of the century, see my own  

The Occult

 




 

Establishment

  (La  Salle,  111.,  1976).  For  the  cultural  background,  see 




Nicholas  Zernov,  

The  Russian  Religious  Renaissance  of  the  Twentieth

 




 

Century

  (London,  1963);  Prince  D.  P.  Mirsky,  

Contemporary  Russian

 




 

Literature

  (London,  1926);  N.  O.  Lossky,  

History  of  Russian  Philosophy

 




(New York, 1951); cf. Camilla Gray,  

The Great Experiment

 (London, 1962). 




On  Anthroposophy  in  Russia,  see  e.g.  Nicholas  Berdyaev,  

Dream  and

 




 

Reality

 (London, 1950); on Theosophy, see “Alba,” “Theosophy in Russia,” 




in   

Theosophy  in  Scotland, 

  vol.  I  (1910-11).  See  also  E.  J.  Dingwall  (ed.) 




 

Abnormal  Hypnotic  Phenomena, 

  vol.  Ill  (London,  1968).  Ottone  Penzig 




was in close contact with Russian Theosophists: see his  

Die Theosophie und

 




 

die Theosophische Gesellschaft

 (Berlin, 1914). For “Ozay,” see Paul Dukes, 




 

The Unending Quest

 (London, 1950). 




For conditions in south Russia during the civil war, Bechhofer Roberts, 




SOURCES 585




 

In Denikin’s Russia, 

 is one of the best sources; see also George A. Brinkley, 




 

The  Volunteer  Army  and  Allied  Intervention  in  South  Russia  1917-1921

 




(Notre  Dame,  1966);  Sir  Harry  Luke,  

Cities  and  Men, 

  vol.  II  (London, 




1953);  and  General  Harrington’s   

Report  on  Russian  refugee  situation  at

 




 

Constantinople, 

 December 3, 1920 (PRO file WO 32 / 5726). 




On Salzmann, Dalcroze, Hellerau, and the Progressives, see the files of 




 

Jugend, 

 especially 1907-09; Emile Jaques-Dalcroze, “Rhythm as a Factor in 




Education” (translated from  

Le Rhythme, 

 December 1909); Frank Martin, 




Tibor Denes, Alfred Berchtold, Henri Gagnebin, Bernard Reichtel, Claire- 




Lise  Dutoit,  Edmond  Stadler,  

Emile  Jaques-Dalcroze

  (Neuchatel,  1965); 




 

Cahiers  Paul  Claudel, 

  no.  53  (Paris,  1961)  and  no.  5  (Paris,  1964); 




Alexander  de  Salzmann,  “Licht,  Belichtung  und  Beleuchtung,  ”  in   

Der

 




 

Rhythmus

 (Jena), 1912; Darius Milhaud,  

Notes Without Music

 (translated 




by  D.  Evans,  edited  by  Rollo  Myers,  London,  1952);  Edwin  Muir,  An 




 

Autobiography

 (London 1954). 




Additional material on Orage can be found in Mary Gaw^sthorpe,  

Up Hill

 




 

to  Holloway

  (n.d.);  Martin  Cumberland,  

Set  Down  in  Malice

  (London, 




1919);  Samuel  Hynes,  

Edwardian  Occasions

  (London,  1972);  David  S. 




Thatcher,  

Nietzsche in England, 1890-1914

 (Toronto, 1972);  

The Leeds Art

 




 

Club

 (program and list of objects in Leeds Public Library); see also Edwin 




Muir,  

An Autobiography

 (London, 1954), Willa Muir,  

Belonging

 (London, 




1968), and my own  

The Occult Establishment

 for Orage and Mitrinovic. On 




Crowley’s involvement with the Sullivan-Beresford group, see John Sym- 




onds,  

The Great Beast

 (revised edition, London, 1971); for early psychoanalysis,  J.  B.  Hobman,  

David  Eder,  memoirs  of  a  modern  pioneer

 (London,  1945).  Anthony  Alpers,  

Katherine  Mansfield

  (London,  1954), 




Roland  Merlin,  

Le  Drame  secret  de  Katherine  Mansfield

  (Paris,  1950),  J. 




Middleton  Murry  (ed.).  

The  Scrapbook  of  Katherine  Mansfield

  (London, 




1939),  

The Collected Letters o f D . H .  Lawrence, 

 (edited by H. T. Moore, 2 




vols.,  London,  1962),  

The  Quest  for  Ramanim

  (edited  by  G.  J.  Zytaruk, 




Montreal  and  London,  1970)  provide  further  information  on  Murry, 




Lawrence,  Katherine  Mansfield  and  their  response  to  Gurdjieff  and 




Ouspensky. On Ouspensky’s first arrival in London, see David Garnett, 




 

The Flowers of the Forest

 (London, 1955). John Carswell,  

Lives and Letters

 




(London, 1978) discusses Orage, Beatrice Hastings, Katherine Mansfield 




and Middleton Murry. For another impression of the Prieure, see Ian E. 




Black,  

A Friend of France

 (London, 1941). On the reaction to  

The Adelphi, 

 




see Hugh L. Anson Fausset,  

A Modern Prelude

 (London, 1933). Levinson’s 




comments are reproduced in Pauwels, M.  

Gurdjieff; 

 for the reception of 




the  dances,  see  also  Fernand  Divoire,  

Decouvertes  sur  la  danse

  (Paris, 




1924) and Jacques-Emile Blanche,  

More Portraits of a Lifetime, 1918-1938

 




(London, 1939). 




For Gurdjieff and Orage in the United Sates, Jean Toomer’s correspon




586 S O U R C E S




dence is of primary importance. For the 1924 expedition, see also John 




Unterecker,  

Voyager,  a  life  of  Hart  Crane

  (London,  1971);  

The  Letters  of

 




 

Hart Crane

 (edited by Brom Weber, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1965); Sue 




Jenkins  Brown,  

Robber  Rocks

  (Middletown,  Conn.,  1969);  Llewelyn 




Powys,  

The  Verdict  of  Bridlegoose

  (London,  1927);  John  Cooper  Powys, 




 

Autobiography

 (second edition, London, 1967). On the general background 




to Orage’s success in the United States, see Edmund Wilson, “The Literary 




Consequences of the Crash,” in  

The Shores of Light

 (London, 1953); T. S. 




Matthews,  

Name  and Address

  (London, 1961);  Robert Morse Lovett,  

All

 




 

Our Years

 (New York, 1948); Malcolm Cowley,  

Exile’s Return

 (first edition, 




London,  1935;  second  edition,  London  1967);  Charles  Forcey,  

The

 




 

Crossroads  of  Liberalism

  (New  York,  1961);  Frederick  J.  Hoffmann,  

The

 




 

Twenties

 (New York, 1955). On Gurdjieff as a legend of caf6 society, see 




Elizabeth  Sprigge,  

Gertrude  Stein

  (London,  1957);  Monk  Gibbon,  

The

 




 

Masterpiece and the Man

 (London, 1959); Kay Boyle and Robert McAlmon, 




 

On  Being  Geniuses  Together

  (revised  edition,  London  1970).  There  may 




also be a portrait of him in R. H. Ward, “Monsieur X: the Fortune Teller,” 




in A  

Gallery of Mirrors

 (London, 1956). On Taos, see Langston Hughes, 




 

The  Big  Sea

  (London,  1941)  and  E.  W.  Tedlock,  Jr.,  “D.  H.  Lawrence’s 




Annotation of Ouspensky’s  

Tertium Organum,” 

 in  

Texas Studies in Literature  and  Language, 

  vol.  II,  no.  2,  Summer  1960.  On  Jean  Toomer,  see Robert A. Bone,  

The Negro Novel in America

 (New Haven, 1958). On Zona 




Gale, Margery Latimer and Jean Toomer, see August Derleth,  

StiU, Small

 




 

Voice

 (New York, 1940) and Harold P. Simonson,  

Zona Gale

 (New Haven, 




Conn., 1962). For influence of the Work, see Zona Gale,  

Preface to a Life

 




(New  York,  1926)  and   

Portage,  Wisconsin  and  other  Essays

  (New  York, 




1928),  and  Margery  Latimer’s  story  “Original  Sin,”  in   

Nellie  Bloom  and

 




 

Other  Stories

  (New  York,  1929).  William  Bittner,  

The  Novels  of  Waldo

 




 

Frank

 (Philadelphia, 1958), contains biographical details on Frank. 




On Orage’s return to England, see Hugh Macdiarmid,  

The Company I’ve

 




 

Kept

 (London, 1966); for Nicoll’s background, see T. H. Darlow,  

William

 




 

Robertson  Nicoll,  Life  and  Letters

  (London,  1925),  Beryl  Pogson  prints 




Nicoll’s account of Jung and a ghost in her  

Maurice Nicoll, 

 and Jung’s side is 




given  in  Fanny  Moser  (ed.)   

Spuk

  (Baden  bei  Ziirich,  1950).  Further  on 




Nicoll,  see  David  Scott  Blackball,  

This  House  had  Windows

  (London, 




1961).  On  Mrs.  Bernard  Shaw’s  enthusiasm  for  Ouspensky,  see  Janet 




Dunbar,  

Mrs. GBS

 (London, 1963); for the Frank Lloyd Wrights, see Finis 




Farr,  

Frank  Lloyd  Wright

  (London,  1962)  and  Robert  C.  Twombly, 




“Organic Living: Frank Lloyd Wright . . . and Georgi Gurdjieff. . . ,” in 




 

Wisconsin Magazine of History, 

 Winter 1974-5; on the Daumals, see also 




Max-Pol Fouchet,  

Unjour,je m’en souviens

 (Paris, 1968); for an impression




S O U R C E S   587




of Gurdjieffjust before his death, see “Genet” (Janet Planner), “Letter from 




Paris,” in  

The New Yorker, 

 November 12, 1949. 




Among  the  reviews  and  scattered  critical  articles  on  Gurdjieflf, 




Ouspensky  and  their  followers  some  supply  information  not  found 




elsewhere, or provide particular insights into the subject. Some of the most 




important are: John O’Hara Cosgrave, “Time and Space,” in  

The Saturday

 




 

Review  of  Literature, 

  July  25,  1931;  Kenneth  Burke,  “In  Quest  of  the 




Way,”  in   

New  Republic, 

  September  9,  1931;  D.  S.  Savage,  “The  New 




Gnosticism,”  in   

The  Spectator, 

  April  28,  1950;  Kathleen  Raine,  “Golden 




Thigh or Feet of Clay,” in  

The New Statesman, 

 June 10, 1950; Rom Landau, 




“A  Modern  Esoteric  System,”  in   

The  Nineteenth  Century  and  After, 

  July 




1950;  

Time

  review  of  Kenneth  Walker,  

Venture  with  I^as, 

  January  28, 




1952; Robert Kemp, “Ames en quete,” in  

Nouvelles Litteraires, 

 March 18, 




1954;  Roger  Bezault,  “Ceremonie  d’Execration  sur  Gurdjieff,  ’  in   

Les

 




 

Cahiers de la Pierre-qui-vire, 

 July 1954; Yahya Abdullah, “New Lamps for 




Old,” in  

Hibbert Journal, 

 October 1956; Rayner Heppenstall, “A Mechanical Prison,” in the  

New Statesman, 

 June 8, 1957; Richard Rees, “Monsieur Gurdjieff,” in  

The Twentieth Century, 

 November 1958; Manuel Rainord, 




“Gurdjieff revele par lui-meme,” in  

Critique, 

 16:2 (1960); Edwin Seaver, 




“Solving the Human Enigma, ” in  

The Saturday Review of Literature, 

 May 




18, 1963; “Wisdom through Mystification,” in  

The Times Literary Supplement, 

  March  12,  1964.  An  interesting  lecture  delivered  in  New  York, March 1, 1961, by Henry Leroy Finch, “The Gurdjieff Perspective Today,” 




remains unpublished. Whitall N. Perry has published two parts of a three- 




part  article  on  “Gurdjieff  in  the  Light  of  Tradition,”  in   

Studies  in

 




 

Comparative Religion, 

 Autumn, 1974 and Winter 1975. The books of Hugh 




I’Anson Fausset,  

Towards Fidelity

 (London, 1952), Richard Rees, A  

Theory

 




 

of My Time

 (London, 1963) and Max-Pol Fouchet,  

Les Appels

 (Paris, 1967) 




present  particular  points  of  view.  For  the  popular  picture  of  Gurdjieff 




brought up to date, see Gilbert Guilleminault and Philippe Bernert,  

Les

 




 

Princes des Annies Folles

 (Paris, 1970). 




Further  on  Schaeffer  and  Gurdjieff,  see  Marc  Pierret,  

Entretiens  avec

 




 

Pierre Schaeffer

 (Paris, 1968). For Salmanov, see Ernst Jiinger,  

Das Zweite

 




 

Pariser  Tagebuch  (Werke, 

  Band  3,  

Tagebiicher  I I I , 

  Stuttgart,  1962)  for 




March  30,  1943;  on  J.  M.  Hauer,  see  Walter  Szmolyan,  

Josef  Matthias

 




 

Hauer

 (Vienna, *1965) and Monika Lichtenfeld,  

Untersuchungen zur The-

 




 

orie der Zwoftontechnik b e i j .  M .  Hauer

 (Regensburg, 1964). 




A typescript account of Rodney Collin’s death was circulated by Janet 




Collin-Smith soon after the events of Cuzco; the fullest biographical account 




is  Joyce  Colin-Smith,  “Beloved  Icarus.”  Anna  Logan (i.e.,  Janet Collin- 




Smith),  

Answering Gods

 (Tlalpam, 1951) and G. Zodec,  

Lessons in Religion




588 S O U R C E S




 

for a Skeptical World

 (Mexco City, 1956) provide additional material for the 




atmosphere of the Mexican group. 




On Hugh Romney, see  

East Village Other, 

 vol. 2, no. 17 and vol. 3, no. 




4.  For  how  Gurdjieff’s  ideas  on  theater  have  either  influenced  or  run 




mysteriously  parallel  to  those  of  the  avant-^rde,  cf.  Jerzy  Grotowski, 




 

Towards a Poor Theatre

 (London, 1970), and foreword by Peter Brook. 




Further reading on sources of and parallels with Gurdjieff’s cosmology 




and philosophy might start vdth the following books and articles: Christopher  Butler,  

Number  Symbolism

  (London,  1970);  Albert,  Freiherr  von Thimus,  

Die  Harmoniale  Symbolik  des  Altertums

  (2  vols.,  Cologne,  1868 




and 1876); Jacques Handschvin, “Ein mitterlalterlicher Beitrag zur Lehre 




der Spharenharmonik,” in  

Zeitschrift fiir Musikwissenschaft, 

 January 1927; 




F.  E.  Robbins,  “The  Tradition  of  Greek  Arithmology,”  in   

Classical

 




 

Philology, 

 April 1921; Nichomachus of Gerassa,  

Introduction to Arithmetic

 




(translated by Martin Luther D’Ooge, New York, 1926); Frances Yates,  

The

 




 

French Academies of the Sixteenth Century

 (London, 1947); Cesare Vasoli, 




“Francesco Giorgio Veneto,” in  

Testi Umanistici su L’Ermetismo

 (Rome




1955);  P.  J.  Amman,  “The  Musical  Theory  and  Philosophy  of  Robert 




Fludd,”  in   

Journal  of  the  Warburg  and  Courtauld  Institutes, 

  1967;  Alain 




Danielou,  

Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Musical  Scales

  (London,  1943) 




acknowledges the help of Ethel Merston of the Prieure. On Cabala, see 




Gerschom Scholem,  

Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism

 (London, 1955), and 




 

Gnosticism, Merkhaba Mysticism and Talmudic Tradition

 (New York, 




1960);  see also J. L. Blau,  

The Christian Interpretation of the Cabala in the

 




 

Renaissance

  (New  York,  1944)  and  Francois  Secret,  

Les  Kabbalistes

 




 

Chretiens de la Renaissance

 (Paris, 1964). On Lull and the Lullian Art, see 




J.  N.  Hillgarth,  

Ramon  Lull  and  Lullism  in  Fourteenth  Century  France

 




(Oxford, 1971) and E. W. Platzeck,  

Ramon Lull

 (2 vols. 1961). 




For the belief that Syriac was the language of Christ, see B. F. Westcott, 




A   

General  survey  of  the  History  of  the  Canon  of  the  New  Testament

  (7th 




ed., London 1896); for Armenian and Assyrian Christianity, see Archdeacon 




Dowding,  

The  Armenian  Church

  (London  1910);  F.  C.  Burkitt,  

Early

 




 

Eastern Christianity

  (London 1904);  W. A. Wigram,  

An Introduction into

 




 

the  History  of  the  Assyrian  Church

  (London  1910);  H.  J.  W.  Drijvers, 




 

Bardaissan ofEdessa

 (tr. G. E. van Baaren-Pape, Assen, 1966). 




On Gnosticism see Hans Jonas,  

The Gnostic Religion

 (2nd ed., Boston, 




1963); R. McL. Wilson,  

The Gnostic Problem

 (London, 1958); R. M. Grant, 




 

Gnosticism,  an  Anthology

  (London,  1961);  on  Victorian  esoteric  Christianity,  see  further  Zernov,  

Russian  Religious  Revival, 

  and  William Kingsland,  

The  Esoteric  Basis  of  Christianity

  (London,  1895);  Edward 




Conze,  

Buddhism, Its Essence and Development

 (Oxford, 1951) is a superb




S O U R C E S   589




introduction to Buddhism, and the  

Abhidhamma

 can largely be read in the 




translations published by the Pali Text Society; D. T. Suzuki’s  

The Training

 




 

of the Zen Buddhist Monk

 (Kyoto, 1934) is almost too well known to need 




mention;  cf.  the  Lama  Angarika  Govinda,  

The  Psychological  Attitude  of

 




 

Early Buddhist Philosophy

 (London, 1961). 




On  parallels  with  nineteenth-century  occultists,  see H.  W. Schneider 




and G. Lawton,  

A Prophet and a Pilgrim

 (New York, 1942) for Thomas Lake 




Harris,  A.  Viatte,  

Les  Sources  occultes  du  romantisme, 

 vol.  I  (Paris,  1928) 




for  Martines  de  Pasqually;  Israel  Regardie,  

The  Golden  Dawn, 

  vol.  IV 




(River Falls, Wisconsin, 1970) for the Golden Dawn’s use of the enneagram; 




on  the  chakras  see  “Arthur  Avalon”  (Sir  John  WoodrofFe)   

The  Serpent

 




 

Power

  (3rd  ed.,  Madras,  1931),  and  the  Theosophical  version  of  C.  W. 




Leadbeater,  

The Chakras

 (Adyar, 1927). 




On  psychodrama,  see  Jacob  L.  Moreno  (ed.)   

The  Sociometry  Reader

 




(Glencoe,  Illinois,  1960);  cf  S.  H.  Foukes  and  E.  J.  Anthony,  

Group

 




 

Psychotherapy

  (London,  1957)  on  the  esoteric  view  of  the  theater,  the 




essential work is Frances Yates,  

Theatre of the World

 (London, 1969); cf. 




also H. B. Hawkins, “All the World’s a Stage” in  

Shakespeare Quarterly, 

 




1966, and Jean Jacquot, “Le Theatre du monde ” in  

Revue de Litterature

 




 

comparSe, 

  1957;  on  the  Rosicrucians,  see  especially  Frances  Yates,  

The

 




 

Rosicrucian Enlightenment

 (London, 1972); and on the ways of liberation, 




Allan  Watts,  

Pyschotherapy,  East  and  West

  (New  York,  1961;  London, 




1971). 







INDEX




A. E., 209, 219, 337, 375, 377 




432, 




438, 466, 468, 524, 529, 558 




 

A. R. Orage: A Memoir

 (Mairet), 375 




Andreae, Johann Valentin, 540 




Abbott, E. A., U7, 120 




Andreivitch, Andrei, 319 




Abdullah, Achmed, 49-51 




“Andronik,” 46




 

Ahhidamma-Pitaka, 

 52S-29 




 

Annonce faite dt Marie, V

 (Claudel), 174 




Absolute, the, 142 




Anouilh, Jean, 492 




Abyssinian Church, 46 




Anrep, Boris, 229 




Accident, GurdjieflF and Ouspensky on, 294 




Ant^bi, Ehzabeth, 464 




 

Active Mind, The

 (Orage), 356, 357 




Anthroposophy, 151, 186, 187, 535 




 

Actor Prepares, An

 (Stanislavsky), 537 




Anti-semitism, 186 




 

Adelphi

 Group, 338, 365 




“Apostles,” Cambridge, 401 




“Adherents of Legominism,” 40, 512, 538 




“Arche, L’,” 467 




 

After Many A Summer

 (Huxley), 401-2 




Aristotle, 119, 305




“Aissors,” 38, 520 




 

Arithtnologia

 (Kircher), 505, 507, 512-16, 




Akhmatova, Anna, 115 




518, 




531 




Mcock, J. A. M., 217, 219, 220, 234 




Arithmology, 502-19, 531 




Aldington, Bichard, 196, 352 




Armenian Church, 46 




Alexander, Miss, 319 




Armenian Social Bevolutionary Party, 46 




Alexander III, Tsar, 55, 96 




Arnold, Matthew, 197 




Alexandra, Tsaritsa, 56, 80 




 

Ars Magna

 (Lull), 518 




 

Alexander III et son entourage

 (Notovitch), 




 

Art of Reading, The

 (Orage), 365 




 

52Sn




 

Aryan Path, The

 (periodical), 375, 441, 538 




Alexandrian Christianity, 103, 112, 558 




“As if the difficult years had passed” 




Alexandrovitch, Peter,  

see

 Badmaieff, 




(Gurdjiefif), 430 




Shamzaran 




 

Asia and Western Dominance

 (Panniker), 50 




 

Alice in Wonderland

 (Carroll), 231 




Astrum Argentinum, 285 




 

All and Everything

 (Gurdjie^, 196 




Athos, monks of, 112 




 

First Series

 of,  

see Beelzebub’s Tales to his

 




Auden, W. H., 439 




 

Grandson

 




Augustine, Saint, 503




 

Second Series

 of,  

see Meetings with

 




 

Remarkable Men

 




Babbitt, Irving, 348 




 

Third Series

 of,  

see Third Series All Our

 




Bacon, Francis, 119




 

Years

 (Lovett), 353 




Badmaieff, Shamzaran, 52, 55-56, 57-60, 




Allemand, Jeanne  

see

 Salzmann, Jeanne de 




68, 69, 73, 77, 78, 80-82, 84, 87, 527 




“American Literature and the Unattainable” 




Baer, Karl, 188, 189 




(Munson), 344 




Baker, Ida, 228, 245-47 




Anderson, Margaret, 20, 271, 276-85, 290, 




Balkan War, 50 




326,  349, 350, 352, 353, 384, 431, 




Balmont, Konstantin, 103




591




592




I N D E X




Bardaissan of Edessa, 524-25




Boethius, 505 




Barnes, Djuna, 432




“Bogachevsky,” 30 




Barnum, P. T., 328




Bogdanovitch,  

see

 Orlov, Col. Alexei 




Bateson, Gregory, 361




Nikolaievitch 




Beaumont, Winifred, 182




Bolshevism, 56, 156, 160, 161, 163-66, 




 

Beauty and the Beast

 (Hartmann), 151




168-70, 172, 180, 186, 215, 225, 266, 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales to his Grandson




407-8, 439, 440 




(Gurdjiefi),  18,  27-28,  37,  38,  40,  43, 




 

Bookman, The

 (periodical), 267 




51,  65,  67,  73,  77,  80,  82,  145,  190, 




Borges, Jorge Luis, 492 




193, 230, 298, 310-12, 318, 319, 323, 




Borsh, Dean, 30, 31, 529 




327,  330, 332, 340-42, 345, 346, 353, 




Bostunitch, Grigori, 186 




358,  359, 362, 364, 369, 390, 414, 




Bowyer, E, C., 254, 260 




422, 426, 427, 430, 433, 436, 444, 




 

Boyhood with Gurdjieff

 (Peters), 297, 329 




465, 




471, 472, 473, 499, 509, 544-46, Bragdon, Claude, 49, 184-85, 218, 220, 230, 




548-49, 557-58 




266-67, 269, 280, 281, 284, 302, 420 




Beethoven, Ludwig van, 151 




 

n, 

 421 




Behaviorist psychology, 306, 353-^5, 536 




Braid, James, 79 




Bekhterev, V. M., 82 




Branson, Mr., 53 




Bell, Mary, 234 




Brenton, Arthur, 372 




Belloc, Hilaire, 207, 213 




Brett, Dorothy, 229, 259-60 




Bely, Andrei, 103, 110, 115 




British Medical Association, 216 




“Benevolent Devil, The” (Ouspensky), 




British Museum, 442 




129-30 




British Purchasing Commission, 442 




Bennett, Arnold, 208




Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross, 539 See  

also

 




Bennett,  John  G.,  39,  45,  49,  73,  75-77,  82. 




Rosicrucianism 




91,  106,  126,  137,  182-83,  185,  226, 




 

Brothers Karamazov, The

 (Dostoievsky), 557 




234, 255n, 331, 333-34, 383, 388, 




Brown, Susan Jenkins, 284 




389,  406,  408,  430-31,  441,  446-48, 




Browne, Sir Thomas, 502 




462, 470, 472, 474, 476, 477, 500, 




Bryusov, Valery, 103, 115 




545




Buchan, John, 403 




Bennett, John G., Mrs., 440, 462 




Bucke, R. M., 121 




Berdyaev, Nicholas, 103 




Buddha, 481, 528




Beresford, J. D., 229, 254, 255, 258, 375, 




Buddhism, 21, 34, 44, 49, 53, 55, 67, 73, 




441-42 




125, 




303, 347, 556, 557 




Beresford, Tristam, 255n 




esoteric, 525-31 




Bergier, Jacques, 50 




Russian, 55-57, 59, 60, 73 




Bergson, Henri, 536 




“Buffers,” doctrine of, 145 




Berthelot, Philippe, 84n 




Burke, Kenneth, 271, 277, 345, 395, 398, 




Besant, Annie, 198, 201, 204, 525, 527, 535 




538




Bevan, Edwyn, 256 




Bush, Fulford, 400 




“Bey, Ekim,” 82




Butkovsky, Anna, 135, 519




 

Beyond Behaviorism

 (Courtney), 353-55




Bezault, Roger, 179




Cabala, the, 21, 271, 347, 500, 505, 507, 510, 




 

Bhagavad Gita, 

 200




513-19, 522, 524 




Bible, The, 86




CafS de la Paix (Paris), 262, 322, 327, 426, 




Bies, Jean, 436




432 




■*




Blackwood, Algernon, 254, 323 




Caf(5 Henri IV (Fontainebleau), 389, 435 




Blake, William, 196, 398 




Cafe Royal (London), 303, 401, 412-25 




Bland, Hubert, 222




 

Candida

 (Shaw), 199




Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna, 36, 40, 41, 58, 




 

Cane

 (Toomer), 272, 274, 338, 344, 413, 417 




84, 




110, 115, 120, 124, 198-200, 204, 




Carlyle, Thomas, 197, 565 




210, 391, 502, 525, 530, 533, 536, 541 




Carnegie Hall (New York), 267, 269, 284, 




Blok, Alexander, 103, 115 




369




Blum, Leon, 440 




Carpenter, Edward, 200 




Boehme, Jacob, 112, 114




Carrington, Leonora, 260n




I N D E X




593




Carrington, Noel, 260n 




"Congreve, R. H., ”  

see

 Orage, A. R. 




Caruso, Dorothy, 471-73 




Conscious Labor, 309 




Casson, Lewis, 404 




 

Consciousness, Animal, Human and

 




 

Century

 (magazine), 69, 71, 300 




 

Superhuman

 (Orage), 206 




Chakraphone, 12 




Content, Marjorie, 422, 424 




Chaplin, Charles, 403 




 

Contre-Ciel, Le

 (Daumal), 436 




Charcot, Jean Martin, 79 




Convent of Saint Catherine (Mount Sinai), 




Charkovsky, Anthony, 136, 519 




521




Chaverdian, Madame,  

see

 Galumnian, 




Conze, Edward, 528-29 




Madame 




Coomaraswamy, Ananda Kentish, 281 




Chesterton, Cecil, 207, 208, 213 




Coombe Springs (Kingston-on-Thames), 462, 




Chesterton, G. K., 196, 197, 207, 208, 




472




213-215 




Coote, Howard, 197, 198 




 

Chim lllustrata

 (Kircher), 527 




Coptic Church, 46 




Christ,  

see

 Jesus Christ 




Corbin, Henri, 501




 

Christian Mystery, The

 (Colhn), 491 




Cosgrave, John O’Hara, 49, 267, 302, 398 




Christian Science, 301 




Cosraas, Saint, 490 




Christianity, 34, 44, 304, 449, 501-2, 




 

Cosmic Anatomy

 (Wallace), 218, 228 




519-25, 556, 557, 563, 573 




 

Cosmic Consciousness

 (Bucke), 121 




Alexandrian, 112 




Cosmic Octave, 499, 503, 511, 516 




esoteric, 86, 519-525 




“Cosmoi, M.  

M.,” see

 Orage, A. R.,  

and

 




Chrysostom, St. John, 539 




Mitrinovi^, Dmitrije 




Churchill, Winston, 180 




 

Counter-Clock World

 (Dick), 480 




 

Circle of Life, The

 (Walker), 448 




“Courtney, David,”  

see

 Daly King, Charles 




Circle of Seekers of Christian 




Cowley, Malcolm, 266 




Enlightenment, 102 




Crane, Hart, 271, 272, 284, 286, 345 




 

City Block

 (Frank), 272 




Cretan uprising, 46, 47 




City of London School, 120 




 

Crisis in Human Affairs, The

 (Bennett), 462 




Claudel, Paul, 173-74 




 

Criterion

 (periodic^), 196 




Clement of Alexandria, 525, 558 




Croly, Herbert, 271, 275-76, 300, 302, 




Coates, Dorothy, 337 




352-53 




 

Cocktail Party, The

 (Eliot), 554 




Crosby, Oscar Terry, 77 




 

Coeur Simple, Un

 (Flaubert), 241 




Crowley, Aleister, 210-11, 217, 229, 248, 




Cohen, J. M., 448H19 




285, 314-15, 555 




Coiet Gardens (London), 409, 440-41, 




Cumberland, Gerald, 201 




447-51




Cummings, E. E., 370 




Collin-Smith, Janet  

(nee

 Buckley), 441-43, 




Curzon, Lord, 49, 60




456, 459, 482, 486, 491, 493-95 




CoUin-Smith, Joyce, 442, 443, 485 




D., Mrs., 490-92, 496 




Collin-Smith, Rodney, 441-12, 461, 478-96 




 

Daily Express Encyclopedia, 

 489 




Catholicism of, 491-93 




 

Daily Herald, The

 (London), 217 




European trips of, 486, 491 




 

Daily Mirror

 (London), 254 




Gurdjieffand, 487, 488 




 

Daily News

 (London), 238, 239, 244, 




in Lima, 493-95 




254-55, 260, 262, 382 




in Mexico, 482-93




Daladier, Edouard, 440 




Ouspensky and, 386, 441-43, 449-52, 




Dalai Lama, 41, 49, 52, 53, 56, 57. 60, 63, 




455-59, 478-79, 481-90 




64, 66, 69, 73, 75, 83-84, 87 




writings of,  

see specific titles

 




Daicroze Eurythmics, 173-75 




Collins, Mabel, 220 




Dalcroze Institute (Paris), 187-88, 233 




 

Commentaries

 (Nicoll), 564 




Damian, Saint, 490




“Committee for the New York Group,” 413, 




 

Dance of Siva, The

 (Coomaraswamy), 281 




420




Daniloff, V, A.,  

115




Communism, 440 




Daijilicoff, Akchwan,  

see

 Dordjieff, Agwan 




 

See also

 Bolshevism 




Darwin, Charles, 536 




Comstock, Professor, 285




Das, Bhagavan, 126




594




I N D E X




Das, Sarat Chandra, 48, 68 




Dwight, Jessie,  

see

 Orage, Jessie 




Dashnaktsutiun, 46 




Dyson, Will, 215, 377-78




Daumal, Ren6, 434-38, 464, 466-68 




Daumal, Vera  

(nee

 Milanova), 435, 436 




 

Earth Spirit, The

 (Dunning), 248 




David-Neel, Alexandra, 50 




 

East Lynne, 

 315




Davids, Rhys, 528




 

Echo des Champs ElysSes

 (paper), 263 




 

Dawn of Magic, The

 (Pauwels and Bergier), 




Ecrevisse, L’ (Paris restaurant), 322, 326, 




50




346




 

De Harmonia

 (Giorgi), 510, 511 




Eddington, Sir Arthur Stanley, 304 




“Dealer in Immortality, A” (“Edward 




Eddison, E. R., 477-78, 538 




Favell”), 376 




Eder, David, 195, 2U, 216, 217, 220, 378 




Deasy, Captain H. H. P., 29 




Edessan Church, 520-21, 524-^




Dell, The (Sevenoaks, Kent, house), 394 




Ediciones Sol (Mexico), 487, 491 




 

Delphische Wanderungen

 (Paquet), 183 




“Editor’s Progress, An” (Orage), 372-73 




Delza, Ehzabeth, 272, 283-84 




Einstein, Albert, 548 




Deniker, Georges, 64 




Elchaninov, A. V., 36 




Deniker, Joseph. 53, 55, 61-«4, 67, 69-71, 




Eliade, Mircea, 501




84n, 527 




Eliot, T. S., 196, 208-9, 277, 374, 377, 432, 




Denikin, General, 166, 170 




278, 546, 554 




"Departure for Algiers” (Gurdjieff), 324 




Elhs, Havelock, 217 




Dervishes, 111-12, 182, 334, 477 




Enantiodromia, 168 




 

Destinations

 (Munson), 344 




Encausse, Gerard, 83 




 

Diagnosis of Man

 (Wdker), 448 




 

Encyclopidie Frangaise, 

 436 




 

Dial, The

 (periodical), 276 




 

Ends and Means

 (Huxley), 401 




Dick, Philip, K., 480 




Enneagram, 144, 479, 491, 505-19, 531 




Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes, 401 




Epstein, Jacob, 215, 303 




Dietrich, Luc, 467, 468 




 

Equinox

 (Crowley), 211 




 

Dilemma of the Liberated, The

 (Munson), 




Er, myth of, 479 




270, 347-49 




Em, V. P., 36




Dingwall, E. J., 234 




Esoteric Christian Union, 525 




Dobrolyubov, Alexander, 123 




 

Esoteric Christianity

 (Besant), 525, 527 




Dohm, Harold, 189




Esperanto, 139 




 

Doktor Steiner ein Schwindler wie keiner

 




"Essenes,” 520




(Schwartz-Bostunitch), 187 




 

Essentials

 (Toomer), 274, 413-14 




Dolittle, Hilda (“H. D.”), 329 




Essipova, Anna, 84, 151 




 

Doors ^Perception, The

 (Huxley), 401 




Eternal recurrence, 103-4, 145-46 




Dordjieff, Agwan, 49-57, 59-64, 66-69, 73, 




Eurythmics, 173, 187,189-90 




75, 77, 78, 80, 82-84, 527 




Evans-Wentz, W. Y„ 459 




Dostoievsky, Feodor, 557 




 

Evolution of an Intellectual, The

 (Murry), 




Doubleday (publishers), 369 




218




Doughty, Charles Montagu, 246 




Evreimoff, N. N., 537-38 




Douglas, Clifford Hugh, 208, 215 




 

Exile’s Return

 (Cowley), 266 




Doukhobors, 34 




 

Experiment in Criticism, An

 (Lewis), 395 




Draper, Muriel, 301, 302, 370 




“Experiment” in Orage’s Method, 308-9 




Dreams, 100




 

Experiment with Time, An

 (Dunne), 403 




 

Dreams and Witchcraft

 (book), 37




 

Eye-Witness, fhe

 (periodic^), 213




Drieser, Theodore, 267




Dreyfus case, 233




Fabian Arts Group, 203, 207 




Dukes, Paul, 84-87, 90, 151




Fabian Nursery, 222




“Duliotherapy,” 235, 236




Fabianism, 198, 200, 201, 203, 211, 213, 217 




Dunlop, D. N„ 219




 

Fables

 (Stevenson), 104 




Dunne, J. W„ 375, 403




Farr, Florence, 210 




Dunning, Millar, 229, 230, 248-19, 255, 258




Fasting, 86




Durco, Anna, 39




 

Fiery Fountains, The

 (Anderson), 280, 432, 




Duse, Eleanora, 536




466




Dvofik, Antonin, 241




FifUi dimension, 183




I N D E X




595




Filchner, Wilhelm, 36, 60 




Gnosticism, 130, 501, 503, 513, 523-25, 535, 




 

First

 Series (Gurdjieff), 359, 369, 426 




540




 

See also Beelzebub’s Tales

 




 

God is My Adventure

 (Landau), 49, 400 




Planner, Janet, 432 




Goepfert, Louisa, 369, 433 




 

Flatland

 (Abbott), 120 




Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 203, 274 




Flaubert, Gustave, 241 




Goldmann, Emma, 277 




Flint, F. S., 208




Gordon, Elizabeth, 313, 319, 359-60, 429, 




Florensky, Pavel Alexandrovitch, 36 




431, 432, 438 




Fludd, Robert, 511, 512 




Gorky, Maxim, 155 




Fokine (ballet star), 151 




Graeco-Turkish War, 46 




Fontainebleau,  

see

 Institute for the




Grand CafS (Fontainebleau), 429 




Harmonious Development of Man 




Grand Hotel (Paris), 430 




‘“Forest Philosophers’, The” (Sharp), 255 




Grand Jeu Group, 434-35 




Fort, Charles, 374 




 

Grande Beuverie, La

 (Daumal), 435 




Fouchet, Max-Pol, 466 




 

Graphic, The

 (newspaper), 68, 72, 73 




Fourth dimension, 117, U9-20, 122, 146 




Grattan, C. H., 365 




 

Fourth Dimension, The

 (Hinton), 119 




“Great Accumulator,” 154 




“Fourth Way, The,” 145, 255, 295, 307, 550, 




Great Amwell House (Hertfordshire), 477, 




55a-54, 560-61, 563-65, 567, 568, 




486




571, 572




 

Great Initiates, The

 (Schur6), 525 




 

Fourth Way, The

 (Ouspensky), 294, 385, 




Great Matter, 130




400




Great Northern Hotel (New York), 420-21 




Frank, Alma, 345-46 




Greek Orthodoxy, 477 




Frank, Waldo, 271-77, 282, 286, 302-4, 




Greek rationalism, 21 




344^47, 353, 416, 527 




Grigoriev, V. V., 61, 67 




Franklin Farms (Mendham, N.J.), 442-45, 




Grigorievna, Sophia  

see

 Ouspensky, Sophia 




447, 456 




Grigorievna 




Free will, 183 




Gross, John, 196 




Freemasonry, 186




Guenon, Ren6, 467, 501 




Freud, Sigmund, 78, 216, 266, 328, 348, 




Guild State theory, 208 




535, 536, 571 




Gurdjieff, Dmitri, 175, 318, 319, 430 




 

Friedrich Nietzsche, the Dionysian Spirit of

 




Gurdjieff, Georgei Ivanovich, 11-15 




 

the Age

 (Orage), 203 




Aldous Huxley and, 401-2 




"From Exile into Being” (Toomer), 273 




allegory used by, 29-30 




Fuller, J. F. C., 211




application <rf cosmology of, general 




remarks on, 543-59 




autobiographical materia] from, 427-28 




Gale, Zona, 284, 415, 417, 420n, 552 




on Bennett’s utility, 472 




Galumnian, Madame, 297, 318, 340 




birth of, 25-26




 

Gap in the Curtain, The

 (Buchan), 403 




British refusal of residence to, 224-25 




 

Garden of

 Cyrus,  

The

 (Browne), 502 




car accident of, 287-90, 293-99 




Gauita, Stanislas de, 110 




character of, 228, 242-44, 320-36, 425-28, 




Gawsthorpe, Mary, 201-3 




432-33, 435-36 




Gemet, Nina de, 36 




Collin-Smith and, 487, 488 




 

Gesetz der Quadrat

 (Liharzic), 531 




compared to Moses, 11 




Gibbes, Sidney, 84 




in Constantinople, 180-83 




Gibbon, Monk, 312-;3, 337 




Coomaraswamy’s opinion of, 381n 




Gichtel (German mystic), 112 




Crowley’s visit to, 314-15 




Gide, Andr6, 352 




Daly King and, 303 




Gilgamesh, legend of, 31 




de Salzmann’s death and, 435-36 




Gill, Eric, 248, 373, 378 




death of, 466^7, 474-76 




Giorgi, Francesco, 510-12, 533 




death of mother of, 313 




"Giovanni, Father,” 28 




driving of, 257, 28^9, 293, 296, 322 




 

Glimpses of Truth

 (Gurdjieff), 83-85, 87-92, 




early fie of, 27-47 




133, 134, 139, 152, 189, 500, 547, 548 




art and, 39-40




Gluck, Christoph Williband von, 188




religious and spiritual influences, 34-37




596




I N D E X




early life  

(cont)




post-World War II, 461-64, 466, 




Western civilization and, 31-33 




470-75




education of, 31




Parisian  performances  of,  263 




family of, at Fountainebleau, 262, 318-19 




Peter's  postwar  visit  to,  462-64 




family background of, 26-27 




political involvements of, 44-47, 49-52, 




father of, 30-31




58, 60-62, 65-67, 69-73 




Fourth Way devotees and, general 




Revolution of 1905, 76-77 




remarks on, 560-73 




 

See also

 Narzunoff, Ushe 




Frank Lloyd Wright and, 424-25 




role-playing of 19-21 




in Germany, 186-91 




rumors about, 17-18




Heap’s group and, 431-33 




during  Russian  Revolution,  153-59,  163-65 




hypnotism and, 75-93, 234, 282, 418, 427, 




St. Petersburg group and, 135-40, 145-48, 




473




150-52




occultism and, 82-87 




self-isolation of (1924-29), 310-24 




renunciation of, 91, 189 




sexual conduct of, 331-32, 468-69 




Mabel Luhan and, 340 




sources of system of, 499-542 




Madame Ouspensky and, 389-90, 394, 




arithmology, 502-19, 531 




438, 445, 447, 461-62 




Cabala, 500, 505, 507, 510, 513-19, 522, 




Mansfield and, 245-53 




524




marriage of, 52 




esoteric Buddhism, 525-31 




move to Berlin of, 184-86 




esoteric Christianity, 519-25 




natural children of, 332 




harmonial philosophy, 510-12 




as Nazi collaborator, 469 




Jewish tradition, 503, 513-19 




Nicoll and, 411




psychology, 535-37 




Orage and. 196, 203, 206, 226, 230-31, 




Rosicrucianism, 539-40 




298, 320, 324, 349, 357-72, 375, 376, 




theatrical motions, 539-40 




379, 396-97, 412-13 




Victorian occult revival, 531-35 




adaptation of teachings, 305-10 




suicides among followers of 333-35 




 

Beelzebub's Tales, 

 310-11, 319  ' 




teachings of, 140-45 




break, 361-72, 380, 382, 41^13 




combating of “mechanism,” 241-42 




Orage as “explicator,” 269-70 




“dances,” 239-41 




Orage at Fontainebleau, 260-62, 293 




on discipline, 98




question of American visitors to 




doctrine of three centers, 235, 349 




Fontainebleau, 317 




“essence,” 254 




U.S. trip, 262, 26.5-67, 275, 280 




“intentional suffering,” 242 




Ostrowsky’s death and, 315-16 




Law of Otherwise, 167 




Ouspenskians and, after Ouspensky’s 




love, 362




death, 461-62, 471, 473 




“movements,” 239-41, 263 




Ouspensky and, 108, 218-19, 221-25, 




self-observation, 226, 235, 242 




266-67, 386-68, 394, 410, 411, 425, 




self-remembering, 146-48 




429, 440, 444, 446, 452, 455, 461-«2, 




“Temple music,” 240-41 




472




in Tiflis, 172-80




breaks, 140-62, 170-71, 264, 294h-96, 




Toomer and, 265, 273, 274, 281-83, 




379-84, 389-92, 461-62 




285-86, 291-92, 294, 297, 339^, 




first meeting, 132-34 




359, 417, 419-26 




Fontainebleau Institute, 254, 294-95, 




as Tsarist spy, 225 




384




in U.S., 262, 264-70, 282-84, 357, 




Gurdjieffs accident, 294-96, 298 




364-71, 412-13, 419-25, 430, 473 




Gurdjieffs London visit, 224-25 




performances, 267-70, 282-84 




London-Fontainebleau move, 225-26 




U.S. influence of, 264-87, 300-12, 337-71, 




move  

to

 Germany, 184 




412-25 




telepathy, 149-50 




Frank circle, 271-76 




in Paris, 431-38




 

The Little Review, 

 276-78, 34^2 » 




Rue des Colonels Renard apartment, 




 

New Republic, 

 275-76, 303 




322, 431, 433, 436, 462, 465-66 




 

See also

 Orage, A. R., in U.S.; Toomer, 




during World War II, 464-65, 467-70




Jean




I N D E X




597




U.S.S.R.’s  refusal  to  permit  entry  to,  430 




 

Hero of Our Time, A

 (Lermontov), 95, 153




Young and, 256-60




Herrigel, Eugen, 529




Waldo Frank and, 271, 344-47, 352-53 




Herriot, Edouard, 440




writings of,  

see specific titles

 




Hess, Rudolph, 50, 186, 187




 

See also

 Institute for the Harmonious 




Hesse, Hermann, 538




Development of Man 




“Hierarchy,” 487, 493




Gurdjieff, Ivan, 30-31 




Himmler, Heinrich, 186




Gyatsho, Scrap, 53




Hinduism, 123, 200, 477, 526, 533, 538, 




556, 561, 563 




H. D.,  

see

 Dolittle, Hilda 




Hinton, C. H., 117, 119-20 




Halevi, Z’ev ben Shimon, 514, 516 




Hinzenburg, Olga Ivanovna Lazovich




Hamilton, Edgar, 285 




Milanov (“Olgivanna”), 248, 249, 253, 




Hampden, Walter, 269 




285, 292, 424-25 




Hare, Meredith, 301, 302 




Historico-Psychological Society, 409, 442, 




Hare, Mrs. Meredith, 301 




448




Harmonial philosophy, 510-12 




Hitler, Adolph, 45, 87, 186, 425, 429 




Harrington, General, 180 




Hobson, S. G., 208 




Harris, Thomas Lake, 531-32 




Hoffman, Maud, 220, 243, 267 




Hartmann, Eduard von, 151 




 

Holiday

 (Frank), 274 




Hartmann, Olga de, 151, 155-58, 163-65, 




Hopityant, Myanoheid, 52 




172, 175-77. 180, 185, 191, 224, 233, 




“House in Taos, A” (Hughes), 339 




242, 248, 289, 291, 296, 297, 310, 




Howarth, Jessmin, 189, 309 




313,  316, 318, 323, 334, 340, 359, 




Hughes, David, 404 




371-72, 380, 381, 425, 476




Hughes, Langston, 339 




Hartmann, Thomas Alexandrovich de, 133, 




Hulme, Kathryn, 288-89, 431-32, 438, 463, 




151-52, 155-57, 161, 163-65, 172, 




466, 




567 




174-77, 179, 180, 183, 185, 191, 




Hulme, T. E., 208, 211, 365 




240-42, 248, 282, 284, 289, 291, 292, 




 

Human Personality and Its Survival of

 




296, 




297, 318, 31^-20, 326, 334, 




 

Bodily Death

 (Myer), 210 




371-72, 380, 381, 425 




Humanism, 348 




Hastings, Beatrice (Emily Alice Haigh), 




Hurst, Fannie, 267 




209-15, 227 




Huxley, Aldous, 352, 401, 439 




Hatha yoga, 210 




Huxley, Julian, 376




Haushofer, Karl, 50




Hypnotism, 75-93, 234, 282, 418, 427, 473




Heap, Jane, 271, 276-80. 283-85, 290. 301, 




314,  319, 321, 322, 326, 338, 34^2, 




359-60, 414, 431, 463, 476




 

I Have Been Here Before

 (Priestley), 403-4 




Paris group of, 431-33, 438 




Ibsen, Henrick, 191, 406 




Heard, Gerald, 401 




“Idiots,” categories of, 320-21, 465 




H6bertot, Jacques, 263 




Imagist poets, 208




Hecht, Ben, 352 




Imperial Russian Geographical Society, 54, 




Hedin, Sven, 44 




57, 61, 64, 67, 79 




Hegener (translator), 173-74 




 

In Search of the Miraculous

 (Ouspensky), 




 

Hellas

 (Collin), 487 




18, 89, 90, 93, 138-39, 146-47, 151, 




Hellenbach, Baron, 531, 533 




159, 264, 381, 384, 392, 394, 451, 




Henry VIII, King of England, 510 




464, 472, 499, 504, 507, 514, 517, 




Heppenstall, Rayner, 400 




519, 




522, 535-36, 547-49, 562, 564 




Heraclitus, 103




 

In Tibet and Chinese Turkestan

 (Deasy), 29 




 

Herald of Coming Good

 (Gurdjiefi), 27, 38, 




 

Independent Labour Party

 (Great Britain), 




45, 76-77, 81, 91, 420, 421, 425-30, 




197




487, 526, 544, 546 




"Initiation of the Priestess, The,” 183, 239, 




 

Herald of Harmony, The

 (Collin), 487, 489, 




253,  263




493




 

Inner Circle, The

 (Ouspensky), 116 




Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, 210, 




 

Institut du Developpement Harmonique de

 




531




 

VHomme de

 G.  

Gurdjieff, V, 

 233-36 




Hermetism, 505




Institut Fran9ais (London), 236-37




598




I N D E X




Institute for the Comparative Study of




Jonas, Hans, 524




History,  Philosophy  and  the  Sciences, 




 

Journal dunejeunefiUe

 (Reweliotty), 468 




The, 462




 

Journal de St. Petersbourg, 

 66 




Institute for the Harmonious Development 




Joyce, James, 277, 351 




of Man, 38, 42 




Judaism, 503, 513-19 




in Constantinople, 181-84 




Judas Iscariot, 390-92, 473 




at Fontainebleau, 78, 232-63 




 

Jugend

 (periodical), 173 




British press reactions, 238, 239, 244, 




 

JugendstU

 group, 173 




253-56 




Jung, Carl Gustav, 78, 168, 217, 257, 375, 




chateau acquired for, 225 




454, 535, 536, 571 




dislocation, following Gurdjieffs 




Junior Art Workers Guild, 203




accident, 290-99 




establishment of center, 225, 232-33 




Kadloubovsky, Eugenie, 376, 385, 410-11




James Young at, 256-60 




Kafian, Adele, 250, 251, 318




Katherine Mansfield at, 242, 245-53 




Kandinsky, Vassily, 151, 173




local community attitude, 241 




Kant, Immanuel, 119




membership card issued to Americans^




Kapa, Tsong, 67




284-86




 

Kapital, Das

 (Marx), 311




membership figures, 233-34 




“Karpenko, Peter,” 39




Orage at, 234, 237, 245, 251, 258, 




Kars Military Cathedral, 31




260-62




Kennedy, J. M., 225




organization of work, 233, 236-38, 254 




Kenney, Rowland, 216-17, 219-21, 226, 234, 




prospectus, 233-36, 313 




242, 333 




rates of, 262 




Kenton, Edna, 302 




Samat’s visit, 260-61 




Kepler, Johannes, 511 




Sharp’s defense of, 255-56 




Kerensky, Aleksandr Feodorovitch, 168 




Study House, 237-39, 244, 251, 253, 




Keyserling, Arnold, 536, 572 




254, 




313, 465 




Keyserling, Count, 126 




suicides and, 333-35 




Keyserling, Hermann, 535 




U. S. recruits, 284-87 




Khoraki, General Nipi, 52 




 

See also

 Prieur6 des Basses Loges 




 

Kim

 (Kipling), 48 




proposed Taos branch of, 340 




 

Kinemadrama

 (Ouspensky), 100 




in Tiflis, 175-78, 191 




King, Charles Daly, 303-5, 314, 317, 




Integrative Psychology, 354-55 




353-55, 361, 368 




International Idealistic Society, 160 




 

See also Oragean Version, The

 




 

Intruder, The

 (Walker), 402-3 




King, Mrs. Charles Daly, 361 




“Inventor, The” (Ouspensky), 129 




Kingsford, Anna, 525, 




Isherwood, Christopher, 401, 439 




Kipling, Rudyard, 48, 129 




Islam, 34, 43, 518, 556 




Kircher, Athanasius, 505-9, 511-16, 518, 519, 




 

Iter Extaticum coeleste

 (Kircher), 507-9 




521-22, 527, 531 




"Ivan Ivanovitch,” 490 




Kirstein, Lincoln, 370 




Ivanov, Vyacheslav, 103




Klingmiiller, Henriette, 433 




Knight, Wilson, 217 




Jackson, Holbrook, 198-203, 205-8, 210, 211, 




Knopf, Alfred, 266, 369 




213




 

Konx Om Pax

 (Crowley), 211 




Jackson, Schuyler, 302, 311 




Kosarev (photographer), 78 




James, William, 121, 256 




Koteliansky, S. S., 227, 247 




Jaques-Dalcroze, Emile, 173, 174, 187, 188 




Kozlov, P. K., 44 




Jenison, Madge, 281 




Krutch, Joseph Wood, 356 




Jesus Christ, 21, 392, 481, 482, 521 




Kryshanovsky, V. I., 546 




in India, 526-27 




“Kundabuffer,” 145 




Jews, 170, 186 




“Kundalini,” 145




Christian, 520 




 

See also

 Judaism 




Laborie, Madame, 426 




Joan of Arc, 491 




Laborie, Maitre, 233




John, Augustus, 215




Labour Party (Great Britain), 408, 440, 483




I N D E X




599




Lama Angarika Govinda, 528 




Little Review Gallery (New York), 285 




Lament, Mrs. Thomas, 267 




Little Theatre (London), 537 




Landau, Rom, 49, 51, 385-86, 400. 420-21, 




 

Living Time

 (Nicoll), 477 




425




Locke-Ellis, Vivian, 229 




Lanza del Vasto, 467-68 




Lodizhensky, M. V., 115 




 

Lark, The

 (Anouilh), 492 




London GurdjieEF Society, 477 




 

Last Remembrances of a Magician

 (Colhn), 




London School of Economics, 441 




455,456 




Long Body, 120 




Latimer, Margery, 414-19 




Lord’s Prayer, 87 




Lavastine, Philippe, 436, 438, 464, 467 




Lovett, Robert Morse, 353 




Lavrin, Janko, 208-215 




"Lubovedsky, Prince Yuri,” 29, 30, 43, 73 




Law of accident, 294 




Ludovici, Anthony, 199 




Law of Opposite Aims and Results, 167 




Luhan, Mabel Dodge, 301, 302, 339-41, 




Law of Otherwise, 167 




359, 




420, 426, 430 




Law of Seven 40, 89, 141, 142, 181 




Luhan, Tony, 302 




Law of Three, 89, 141-142, 181 




Luke, Saint, 490-91 




Lawrence, D. H., 198, 227, 260, 328-29, 




Luke, Sir Harry, 34 




339-41, 565 




Lull, Ramon, 518-19 




Lawrence, Frieda, 339, 341 




Lutoslawski, Wincenty, 123 




Laws of Manu, 169, 407-8 




Lydig, Mrs. 281-82




Lawson, R. Elsworth, 302 




Lyne  Place  (Virginia  Water,  Surrey),  405, 




Leadbeater, C. W., 127, 204, 533 




410,  440-42,  444,  448,  450,  452-57, 




Leary, Timothy, 196, 5K 




459, 461




Leblanc, Georgette, 280, 285, 326, 350, 352, 




431, 432, 466 




Macdiarmid, Hugh, 373 




Lecomte, Roger-Gilbert, 434 




MacDonald, Ramsay, 408 




Lee, H. D. P., 497 




 

Maeterlinck and I

 (Leblanc), 350, 432 




Ueds Art Club, 200-3, 206, 210 




Maeterlinck, Maurice, 280 




Leesmann, Hilda, 187 




Maeztu, Ramiro de, 211, 230 




Legat, Nadine, 409 




 

Magic Mountain, The

 (Mann), 468 




Legat, Nicholas, 409 




 

Magie der Zahkn

 (Hellenbach), 531, 533 




Leighton, Fred, 430 




 

Mahabharata, 

 199, 304, 378 




Unin, V. L, 571 




Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 477 




Lendtre, Andr6, 232 




Maintenon, Madame de, 232 




Lenox TTieatre (New York), 267 




Mairet, WiiUp, 197, 198, 202, 209, 213, 215, 




Lermontov, Michail Yurevich, 95, 153 




230, 281, 310, 373-75, 552 




Leslie Hall (New York), 267 




Maitland, Edward, 525 




"Letter to a Dervish, A” (Gurdjiefi), 19 




Makary of Alexandria, Saint, 479 




“Letters from Russia” (Ouspensky), 215, 266 




 

Man and Time

 (Priestley), U 




L6vi, Eliphas, 110 




Manas Press, 2%




L6vi, Sylvain, 61 




Mandaeans, 522-24 




Levovitch, Lev, 84-87 




Manen, Johann van, 126 




Lewis, C. S., 129, 395 




Mann, Thomas, 468 




Lewis, Wyndham, 208-9, 277, 403 




Mann, Tom, IsiS




librairie V6ga (Paris), 486 




Mansfield, Katherine, 18, 21, 208, 211, 




"Life as Gymnastics” (Orage), 356, 357 




226-30, 234, 241, 242, 245-55, 281, 




 

Light on the Path

 (Coilins), 220 




313, 




315, 318, 333, 362, 400, 401 




Liharzic, Franz, 531 




 

Many Dimensions

 (Williams), 403 




Lillard, Rosemary, 189 




Marcus Aurelius, 28 




Uppmann, Walter, 356 




Mark, Jeffrey, 302 




“Litany for the Enneagram” (Collin), 491 




Marks, Alice, 231 




“Literary Consequences of the Crash, The” 




Marston, William M., 354-55 




(Wilson), 270 




Martin, Wallace, 206 




 

Uttle Review, The, 

 20, 271, 276-81, 302, 




Martinis de Pasqually, 532 




317,  319,  327,  349-52,  356,  431,  432, 




Marx, Groucho, 328 




537




Masefield, John, 217




600




I N D E X




“Material Question, Hie” (Gurdjiefi), 31, 69, 




Mouravieff, Boris, 108, 118, 181, 294-95, 




78, 164, 263, 298 




384, 520, 546 




Matthews, T. S., 276, 302, 303, 305, 330, 




Mowbray-Clarke, Mary, 281, 283 




fc32




Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 256 




Maximovitch, Madame, 136, 148 




Muir, Edwin, 188, 210, 234, 401 




Mayor, Beatrice, 401, 402 




Muir, Wilma, 231 




Mayor, Robert J. G., 234, 401, 402, 409 




Muller, Andreas, 521-22 




Mead, G. R. S., 124, 217-20 




Mumford, Lewis, 274 




 

Meaning and Purpose

 (Walker), 448 




Mumtaz-i-Mahal, Empress, 127-28 




Medici, the, 490




Munson, Ehzabeth, 286, 302, 303, 345 




 

Meetings with Remarkable Men

 (Gurdjiefif), 




Munson, Gorham, 270, 271, 272, 277, 283, 




20, 27, 28-32, 35, 37-39, 42, 43, 45, 




285, 302, 305, 321, 344-49, 352, 356, 




50, 52, 65, 72, 73, 80, 82, 137, 158, 




360, 




373, 374, 417-19, 544 




161, 509, 513, 519-21, 529, 532, 541, 




Murphy, Bernadette, 402 




544, 545, 547, 548 




Murry, John Middleton, 196, 227-30, 241, 




 

Memories, Dreams, Reflections

 0ung), 454 




242, 245-53, 256, 259, 261, 338, 559, 




Mencken, Henry Louis, 270 




565




Menelik, Emperor of Abyssinia, 46 




 

Musurgia Universalis

 (Kircher), 511 




Merezhkovsky, Dmitri, 103 




Musil, Robert, 12




Merkhabah mystics, 513 




 

My Thirty Years War

 (Anderson), 276, 350 




Merkouroff, Dmitri, 93, 132, 319 




Myer, Frederic, 210 




Mersenne, Marin, 511, 512 




“Mystery in a Sack Suit” (Frank), 302-3 




Merston, Miss, 319, 330, 361 




Mysticism, Ouspensky’s definition of, 113




Merton, R. R., 402 




Metz, Bernard, 313, 319, 327 




 

Meurtre Rituel, Le

 (Serant), 477 




Narzunoff,  Daidan,  71-73 




Mexico City group, 483, 485-86, 491, 496 




Narzunoff,  Dordje,  71-73 




 

See aha

 CoUin-Smith, Rodney 




Narzunoff, Ushe, 52-54, 59-73,’75, 78, 225, 




Meyrat, Robert, 434 




433, 




527 




Michael, Grand Duke, 153 




Nathan, George Jean, 270 




Milanova, Vera,  

see

 Daumal, Vera 




 

Nation, The

 (periodical), 365, 398 




Milarepa, 481 




National Dividend theory, 208 




Milton, John, 398 




National Guild movement, 208 




Minkovski (mathematician), 120 




Naumburg, Margaret, 271, 281, 282, 286, 




 

Mirror of Light, The

 (Collin), 496 




293, 301, 312-14, 334, 345, 346 




Mitrinovifi, Dmitrije, 215-18, 220, 231, 259, 




Nazi Party, 50, 186 




373, 375




Needleman, Jacob, 499, 569 




 

Modem Temper, The

 (Krutch), 356 




Neighborhood Playhouse (New York), 267, 




“Modem Thaumaturge, A” (Schaeffer), 




269, 283-84 




470-71 




Neill, A. S., 188, 189




Mohammedans, 34 




Neo-Platonism, 112, 503, 509, 510, 518, 524, 




Molokans, 34




540




“Monk’s Corridor, the,” 232, 249




Nesbit, E., 222




 

Monsieur Gurdjieff

 (Pauwels), 45, 50




 

New Age

 (periodical), 124, 166-69, 171, 179, 




“Moore, Edward,”  

see

 Muir, Edwin, 210




19S-97, 201, 206-18, 220, 225, 227, 




Moore, George, 270




228, 230,'*261, 266, 276, 277, 304, 




More, Paul Elmer, 348




365, 372-74, 537 




Moreno, Jacob, L., 536-38




“New Britain” movement, 375 




Morris, William, 197, 198, 203




 

New Democracy

 (periodical), 373 




Moscow Art Theatre, 179




New Economics group, 373 




Moscow Geographical Society, 137




New Education, 271 




Moscow University, 99, 123




 

New English Weekly, 

 197, 373-78 




Moses, U, 509




 

New Era of Thought, 

 A (Hinton), 119 




Moses, W. Stainton, 207




 

New Man, The

 (Nicoll), 477 




 

Mount Analogue

 (Daumal), 436-37, 466, 546




 

New Model of the Universe, A

 (Ouspensky), 




I N D E X




601




95, 97, 103, 109, 116, 122, 160, 169, 




"Occult Arts and Occult Faculty” (Orage), 




375, 




381, 382, 384, 392, 394-400, 




205




402-8, 444, 446, 448, 455, 486, 548 




 

Occult Tales

 (Ouspensky), 135 




 

New Mola, The

 (Randolph), 532 




Occultism 




 

New Republic, The

 (periodical), 271, 275-76, 




Blavatsky’s, 198 




300, 302, 346-47, 352-53 




Crowley’s, 210-11 




 

New Statesman

 (periodical), 40, 42, 213, 255, 




 

New Age

 and, 209-11, 216, 218 




544




Ouspensky’s interest in, 109-17 




New Testament, Syriac, 521 




in post-World War I Germany, 186-87 




New York Public Library, 302 




Russian fascination with, 82-83 




 

New York Times, The, 

 243, 267, 284, 302-4, 




Victorian revival of, 501, 531-35 




328




Olcott, Colonel H. S., 36, 58, 59, 204, 391 




 

New York World, 

 49 




 

Old Diary Leaves

 (Olcott), 391 




 

New Yorker

 (magazine), 432 




Olgivanna, see Hinzenburg, Olga 




Newmayer, Sarah, 444 




Oliphant, Laurence, 532, 535 




Newton, Isaac, 548




"On Love” (Orage), 300, 361-62 




Nicholas II, Tsar, 55, 56, 58, 59, 80-82, 87, 




"On Symbols” (Gurdjie^, 146 




126, 




151, 153, 527 




Orage, A. R., 11, 12, 14, 18, 49, 124, 137, 




Nfcoll, Maurice, 14, 73, 99, 107, 147, 217, 




166, 170, 171, 195-231, 338-379, 400, 




218,  220, 221, 224, 226, 229, 234, 




551




236,  241,  243,  244,  258,  330,  399-401, 




on Actual/Potential distinction, 305, 357 




405, 411, 441, 442, 447, 452, 477, 




Anderson and, 349 




483, 485, 559, 564, 568 




Beatrice Hastings and 209-15 




Nicolson, Harold, 333 




on  

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 544, 549 




Nicomacus of Cerassa, 503, 504 




birth and family background of, 196-97 




Nietzsche, Friedrich, 99, 103-4, 116-17, 121, 




Bragdon and, 266-67, 280, 281, 302 




122, 198, 199-201, 203, 381, 490 




in California, 364




 

Nietzsche in Outline and Aphorism

 (Orage), 




collaboration with Mitrinovic of, 215-16, 




203




220-21, 231 




 

Nightwood

 (Barnes), 432 




conversion to CurdjiefTs ideas of, 226, 




Nijinsky, Vaslar, 151 




230-^1 




 

Notes on Saint John's Gospel, 

 491n 




Croly and, 352-53 




 

Notes From a Sportmans Album

 (Turgenev), 




Crowley and, 210-11 




95, 96




Daly King and, 300, 304-7, 353-55, 361 




Notovitch, N. A., 526-27 




death of, 377-78, 430 




Nott, C. S., 19, 40, 210, 211, 230, 260, 261, 




Don Juanism of, 201-2 




284,  285, 289-93, 295, 296, 304, 




education of, 197 




309-11,  314,  318,  334,  366,  369,  370, 




Eliot on, 196




373, 374, 376, 377, 379, 380, 387, 




at Fontainebleau, 234, 237, 245, 251, 258, 




390, 




394,  

405-6, 

 425, 426, 429, 431, 




260-62, 293, 314, 361-63 




438, 444-46, 472, 524, 544 




Frank and, 302-4, 345, 347, 352-53 




Nott, Mrs. C. S., 425 




Gurdjieffand, 196, 203, 206, 230^1, 298. 




 

Nouvelle Revue Frangaise, La, 

 271 




320, 324, 349, 357-72, 375, 376, 379, 




 

Nouvelles Litteraires, Les

 (periodical), 18 




396-97, 412-13 




Novum Organum, 119 




adaptation of teachings, 305-10 




 

Numbers, Their Occult Significance and

 




 

Beelzebub’s Tales, 

 310-11, 319 




 

Power

 (Westcott), 531 




break, 361-72, 380, 382, 412-13, 552 




Numerology, 500 




as “explicator,” 269-70 




 

See also

 Arithmology




question of American visitors to 




Fontainebleau, 317 




U.S. trip, 262, 26S-67, 275, 280 




Oast House (Trosley, Kent), 390 




Heap and, 349




Obishak, 53




Holbrook Jackson and, 198-203, 205-8, 




"Objective-Conscience,” 78 




210, 211, 213 




Objective magic, 113




in Leeds, 197-203, 206




602




I N D E X




Orage, A. R. (cont.)




285,  289, 292, 293, 297, 303-4, 311, 




 

Little Reviews

 demise and, 349-52 




314, 




323, 359-64, 366, 367, 370, 371, 




on love, 361-62 




372, 376 




Mairet on, 563




Orage, Richard, 365 




Mansfield and, 21, 227-30, 251-52, 255, 




Orage, William, 196 




281, 362 




 

Oragean Version, The

 (Daly King), 300, 




marriages of 




304-7, 353, 355 




Jean Walker, 197, 198, 202-3 




 

Organon

 (Aristotle), 119 




Jessie Dwight, 281, 293, 361-64 




Origen, 21, 525, 558, 573 




“Method" of, 543, 551, 555 




Orlov, Colonel Alexei Nikolaievitch, 48, 61 




psychological exercises, 309-10 




 

Orphie

 (Gluck), 188 




summary, 306-10 




Orthodox Armenian Church, 34 




Munson and, 272, 305, 347-48 




Ostrowsky, Madame, 52, 137, 155, 165, 291, 




Murry’s relationship with, 227-29, 559 




297, 




315-16, 322, 384 




names of, 196-97




 

Our America

 (Frank), 271-72 




 

New Age

 and, 195-97, 206-18, 230, 276, 




Ouspensky, Demian, 94 




277, 304, 365, 372-74 




Ouspensky,  

Pyotr

 Demianovitch, 11,  

12, 14, 

 




 

New English Weekly

 of, 373-78 




23, 30,  

78, 

 175-76, 179, 190-91, 198, 




Nietzscheanism of, 200-201, 203-6, 




233, 314, 379^11, 501, 504, 507, 510, 




209-U, 214 




514, 528, 534, 538, 547, 548, 551, 




Ouspensky and, 197, 203, 212, 215, 




553, 562, 564, 566, 568, 571 




219-21, 226, 305, 306, 312, 357, 




Bennett’s challenge to,  

446-47

 




375-76, 384, 402, 444 




Beresford and, 255 




physical appearance of, 199 




birth of, 94




“Plato Group” of, 199 




on Bolshevism, 407-8, 439, 440 




Platonic idealism of, 208 




Bragdon and, 266 




Pound on, 196 




character of, 387-89, 406, 445 




psychical research and, 210 




childhood of, 94-96 




on  

The Quest, 

 217




Collin-Smith and, 386, 441-43, 449-52, 




“R. H. Congreve" as pseudonym of, 214 




455-59, 461, 47^-79, 481-90 




on rehgion in America, 300-^301 




in Constantinople, 180-83 




return to England of, 365-66, 370, 372-78 




death of, 454-59, 461, 462 




Rosamund Sharp and, 223 




education .of, 97-99 




Saurat and, 260-61 




escape  

from Red Army of, 177

 




Shaw and, 196




on evolution, 406-7 




Social Credit and 206, 215, 372-74, 376, 




at Fountainebleau, 384, 389 




377




Frank and, 272




Socialist phase of, 198 




Gurdjieffand, 108, 218-19, 221-25, 




on Superman consciousness, 117, 206-7, 




 

266-67, 

 386-88, 394, 410, 4U, 425, 




210




429,  440,  444,  446,  452,  455,  461-62, 




technique of, 304-6 




472, 548




Theosophy and, 198-206, 209, 217 




break, 139-62, 170-71, 264, 294-96, 




on time, 357




379-84, 389-92, 461-62 




Toomer and, 273, 283, 285-86, 293, 




first meeting, 132-34 




307-U, 338-42, 358, 360, 361, 




Fontainebleau Institute, 254, 384, 




363-64, 369, 370, 551 




294-95




in U. S., 262, 265-67, 269-76, 280-87, 




Gurdjieffs accident, 294-96, 298 




300-^12, 337-71 




Gurdjieffs London visit, 224-25 




conditions of success, 271 




London-Fontainebleau move, 225-26 




“first lecture,” 281-82 




move to France, 225-26 




organizational arrangements, 284-85, 




move  

to Germany, 

 184  , 




301




telepathy, 149-50 




writings of,  

see specific titles

 




on GurdjiefiF, 18, 33, 35, 40, 42, 52, 70, 




Orage, Jean  

(nee

 Walker), 197, 198, 202-3 




85,  87-89,  92,  93,  329,  389,  505,  512, 




Orage, Jessie  

(nee

 Dwight), 281, 282, 284, 




533-34




I N D E X




603




on history, 20




Ozanian, 46




influence on English  

literati

 of, 400-5 




Ozay, Prince, 85-87, 90




“Inner Circle” and, 393, 445, 559 




as journalist, 100, 109, 115 




 

Palms and Patios

 (Collin), 441 




journey to East of, 123-28 




Panchen, Lama, 67 




Kenney’s first meeting with, 219 




Pankhurst, Mrs., 170 




Lady Rothermere as patron of, 185, 




Pannikger, K. M., 50 




218-20, 225, 230 




“Papus,” M, 535 




last months of, in England, 447-60 




Paquet, Alphons, 183-86, 433 




on law of accident, 294 




"Paradou, Le,” 233, 318 




London activities of, 212, 218-26, 335, 




Paris Geographical Society, 54, 64 




384-89, 399, 409-11, 413 




"Participation” in Orage’s Method, 308 




last meetings, 448-51 




Pascal, Blaise, 571 




organization of, 393-94, 405, 409-10, 




Pat-ma-wang-cha, 68 




440-41




Pauwels, Louis, 45, 50, 225, 468, 567 




Mansfield and, 229, 230, 250 




Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich, 82, 353, 536 




marriage of, 389-90 




Pavlova (ballet star), 151 




 

See also

 Ouspensky, Sophia Grigorievna 




 

Peace News

 (newspaper), 441 




Murry and, 254 




Peace Pledge Union, 441-42 




Nicoll and, 39&-400, 411 




 

Peer Gynt

 (Ibsen), 191 




occult researches of, 109-17, 118-23 




 

PSkrinage aux Sources

 (Lanza del Vasto), 




Orage and, 197, 203, 212, 215, 219-21, 




467, 468 




226, 305, 306, 312, 357, 375-76, 384, 




Pentland, Lord, 441 




402, 444, 447 




Penty, A. J., 200, 203, 208 




at outbreak of World War I, 128-31 




Penzig, Ottone, 124 




physical appearance of, 106, 385, 388 




Peshitta, 521




on “psychological method,” 394-96 




Peters, Fritz, 290, 297, 315-16, 319, 323, 




romanticism of, 101-9 




329, 332, 352, 414, 417-19, 462-64, 




Rosamund Sharp and, 222-23 




474




during Russian Revolution, 153-54, 




Peters, Tom, 290, 319 




156-59, 165-72 




Petrie, Flinder, 44 




St. Petersburg group and, 135-40, 145-48, 




“Philippe, Monsieur,” 83 




150-52




Philipson, Ralph, 225 




self-remembering and. 146-48. 386, 




Philipson, Mrs. Ralph. 225 




398-99 




Phillipoffs Caf^, 136 




Selver on, 219 




Philo Judaeus, 503 




on sex, 407, 409 




 

Philokalia, 

 410-11




six dimensions of, 397 




 

Philosophy of the Unconscious, The

 




on social class, 407-8 




(Hartmann), 151 




SulUvan and, 255 




 

Phonurgia Nova

 (Kircher), 511 




“System” of, 543, 555, 556 




“Phrferes simplistes,” 434 




technique of, 385-89 




Picasso, Pablo, 352 




Hieosophy and, 109-17, 121, 124-26, 136, 




 

Pillar and Foundation of Truth, The

 




219, 




220, 225 




(Florensky), 36 




on time, U7, 120, 146, 397, 403-t, 458, 




Pinchback, P. B. 273 




477




Pinchot, Amos, 276 




See  

also

 Recurrence 




Pinchot brothers, 302 




in U.S., 440, 442-47 




Pinder, F. S., 166, 171, 177, 245, 379, 380, 




writings of,  

see specific titles

 




471




Ouspensky, Sophia Grigorievna, 15, 136-7, 




 

Pink Flower, The

 (Hartmann), 151 




166, 182, 185, 294, 321, 388-90, 




Plato, 144, 199, 311, 480, 497, 503, 510, 511, 




393-94, 401, 405, 409-U, 438, 




539




440-42, 444-45, 447, 456, 461-62, 




“Plato Group,” 199 




476, 486, 528 




Platonism,  503,  510 




“Oxon, M. B.,”  

see

 Wallace, Lewis




Plotinus, 311, 503, 539




604




I N D E X




“Pogossian, Sarkis,” 28, 30, 37-38, 45, 72




Pythagoreanism, 502-3, 509-12 




Pogossky, Mme. A. L.,  

124




 

Pythia, 263




Pogson, Beryl, 330




Pohl, Vladimir, 93, 132




 

Quest, The

 (periodical), 119, 217, 218, 220 




Poincar^, Raymond, 225




Quest Society, 217, 219, 220 




Portage “experiment,” 414-19




Quinn, John, 277, 337 




 

Portage Potential

 (Toomer), 415-19, 555-56




Quinn, Miss, 448




Potter, Grace, 307




Pound, Ezra, 196, 208-9, 217, 277, 373, 




 

Races and Peoples of the World

 (Deniker), 




376-77




61




Pound Scots (High Wycombe house), 390 




Rachmilievitch (Prieur^ resident), 319, 321, 




Powys, Llewellyn, 269, 377 




328




Prayer of the mind, 148 




 

Rahah

 (Frank). 272 




 

Preface to Morals, A

 (Lippmann), 356 




Rahman, Abdur, 49 




Priestley, J. B., 11, 403-5 




Raine, Kathleen, 501, 544, 571 




Prieur^ des Basses Loges, 547, 548, 554 




Rainord, Manuel, 26, 30 




during Gurdjieff s period of self-isolation, 




Ramakrishna Vedantists, 126, 127 




310-24




Randolph, Paschal Beverly, 532 




permanent residents of, 318-19 




Random, Michel, 173, 434 




physical description of, 232-33 




Rasputin, Grigori Yetimovich, 56, 60, 80, 




purchase of, 233 




82, 86, 126, 186, 328, 332 




sale of, 420, 425, 426, 429, 430 




Rational Dress movement, 198 




U.S. visitors to, 317-18 




Ray of Creation, 89, 142-^3, 146, 397, 402, 




See  

also

 Institute for the Harmonious 




454, 488, 503, 507, 508, 513, 522 




Development of Man, at 




Read, Herbert, 196, 398n 




Fontainebleau 




 

Reason and Common Sense

 (Mayor), 402 




Prjevalsky, N. M., 44, 48, 56 




Reckitt, Maurice, 374 




Proclus, 503, 510




Recurrence, 103-4, 119, 404, 452-53 




 

Progressive Democracy

 (Croly), 275




 

Rediscovery of America, The

 (Frank), 




Progressives, 187-90




346-47, 353 




Prokofieff, Sergei, 157




Rees, Richard, 565 




 

Promise of American Life

 (Croly), 275




Relativity, theory of, 228, 397, 534 




Protestants, 34




“Religion as Method” (Croly), 352-53 




 

Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion. 




Religious-Philosophic Society in Memory of 




 

The, 

 186 




Vladimir Soloviev, 102 




Psychical research, 235 




“Republic of the Spirit, The” (Murry), 218 




Psychoanalysis, 209, 216-18, 228, 234-35, 




Revolution of 1905, 75, 102, 104, 106, 110 




266, 271, 301, 334, 353, 381, 407, 




Reweliotty, Irfene-Carole, 468-69 




535, 536 




 

Rhythm

 (periodical), 227 




Psychodrama, 536-37 




 

Riga Viedomosti

 (newspaper), 54, 57 




“Psycho-Egyptology” (Wallace), 218 




Rilke, Rainer Maria, 173 




 

Psychological Commentaries on the Teaching

  Rinehart, Alan, 267 




 

of

 G. I.  

Gurdjieff and P. D. 

 




Riordan, John, 303 




 

Ouspensky

 (Nicoll), 477 




Ripman, Miss, 403




 

Psychological Exercises

 (Orage), 365 




 

Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters, The

 




"Psychological method, the,” 394r-96 




(Gross), 196 




 

Psychology of Consciousness, The

 (Daly 




"Ritz,  the,”  232,  246,  249-50,  317 




King), 355




Roberts,  Carl  Bechhofer,  70,  87,  107,  126, 




 

Psychology of Mans Possible Evolution, The

 




171-72,  176-79,  190,  220,  224,  225, 




(Ouspensky), 399 




233,  234,  236,  258,  260,  388,  527, 




Psychosynthesis, 216-19 




537




 

Psychotherapy East and West

 (Watts), 561 




Rochester, Earl of, 546 




“Psycho-transformism,” 409 




Roginson, Boardman, 302 




Ptolemy, 573




Roles, Francis, 399, 409, 441, 448, 456 461 




 

Pyramid of Fire, The

 (Collin), 491 




462, 477, 486 




Pythagoras, 103, 255, 347, 357, 503, 509




“Rome School,” 490




I N D E X   6 0 5




Romilly, Rita, 302 




Schure, Edouard, 525 




Rosenberg, Alfred, 186-87 




Schwartz-Bostunitch, Gregor, 186 




Rosencreuz, Frater Christian, 539-40 




 

Science of Peace, The

 (Das), 126 




 

Rosicrucian Enlightenment, The

 (Yates), 539 




 

Scientific Romances

 (Hinton), 119 




Rosicrudanism, 110, 228, 489, 508, 510, 511, 




 

Screwtape Letters, The

 (Lewis), 129 




532. 539-41 




Scriabin, Aleksandr Nikolayevitch, 151 




Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, 406 




Seabrook. William, 25, 26, 39, 41, 268 




Rothermere, Viscountess, 185, 218-20, 225, 




“Searchlight,”  

see

 Frank, Waldo 




230. 253, 363 




Sebottendorff (German nationalist), 186 




Routledge and Kegan Paul (publishers), 398 




 

Secession

 (periodical), 272, 277 




Royal College of Physicians, 399 




Second Moscow Gymnasium, 97 




Royalty Theatre (London), 403-4 




 

Second Series

 (Gurdjiefl), 359, 369 




Rozanov, Vasily, 103, 123 




 

See also Meetings with Remarkable Men

 




Rublee, Mrs., 285 




 

Secret Doctrine, The

 (BJavatsky), 36, 151, 




 

Rucksack, The

 (periodical), 441 




204, 502, 530, 533, 534 




Rumi, 410 




 

Secret Springs, The

 (Bragdon), 267 




Ruskin, John, 197




Seekers for Truth, 28, 29, 42-44, 48, 145, 




Russian Orthodox Church, 46, 110, 112, 115, 




509, 526, 541 




121, 148




Self-observation, 226, 235, 242, 306-8, 341, 




Russian Revolution, 18, 57, 83, 84, 86, 




355, 396, 527 




151-72, 190 




Self-remembering, 146-48, 386, 399, 449, 




Russky Mayak, 180, 182 




453, 481




Russo-Chinese Bank, 57 




Selver, Paul, 179, 207, 215, 219, 373, 377 




Russo-Japanese War, 60 




 

Sepher Ha-Zohan

 (Book of Splendor), 513 




Russo-Turkish Wars, 27, 34




 

Sepher Yetzirah

 (Book of Creation), 513 




 

Sephiroth, 

 514-19 




Serant, Paul, 477




Sabaheddin, Prince, 77, 183 




 

Seven Arts, The

 (periodical), 271, 277 




 

Sacred Books of the Buddhists

 (Davids), 528 




Seven  

Sermons to the Dead

 Qung), 454 




St. Petersburg Conservatoire. 84 




Sevres group, 436 




 

St. Petersburg Gazette

 (newspaper), 68 




Shankar, Udi, 435 




St. Petersburg University, 55-56 




Shakespeare, William, 191 




Salle Pleyel (Paris), 464 




Sharp, Cecil, 40, 42, 43 




Salzmann, Alexander de, 17, 172-77, 184, 




Sharp. Clifford, 208. 213. 222, 234. 255-56 




185, 187, 188, 191, 242, 247-50, 318, 




Sharp, Rosamund, 222-23, 226, 234, 375, 




321-23, 343, 362, 426, 430, 433-37, 




386




467,  545




Shaw. Charlotte, 400




Salzmann, Jeanne de, 173-76, 185, 187, 188, 




Shaw, George Bernard, 196, 200, 207, 210, 




191, 247, 248, 369, 390, 433, 436, 




352,  440




437. 474, 476-77, 486, 545 




Sherbakov (friend of Ouspensky), 111, 124 




Samkhya philosophy, 533 




Sickert, W jter, 215 




San  

Francisco State Journal, 

 415 




"Significance of Jean Toomer, The” 




Sandberg, Graham, 52 




(Munson), 344 




“Sarmoun Brotherhood,” 38 




Sima, Josef, 434 




 

Saturday Review of Literature, 

 398, 544 




 

Simplicissimus

 (periodical), 173 




Saurat, Denis, 236^37, 242, 244, 260-61, 




Sinclair, Upton, 187-88 




527-28, 530, 558 




Sinnett, A. P., 110, 530 




Savage, D. S., 544




Sivers, Marie von, 110 




 

Sai/ings of the Buddha

 (Woodward), 527 




 

Skoptsy

 cult, 83




Schaeffer, Pierre, 12, 464, 466, 470-71, 474 




“Skridlov, Professor,” 43, 44, 61, 72 




“Scholarship and the Spirit” (Gale), 552 




Social Credit movement, 208, 215, 372-74, 




Scholem, Gerschom, 513 




376, 




377 




School of Economic Science, 477 




Socialism, 198




Schumaker, Olga Arcadievna de,  

see

 




Society for Psychical Research, 210, 375 




Hartmann, Olga de 




Society for the Study of Normal Man, 477 




Schumakers, the, 318, 321-22, 465




Socrates, 481, 497




606




I N D E X




Solana, Solita, 326, 352, 431-32 




Superman 




Solomon, 504, 509 




Orage on, 206-7 




Soloviev, Boris, 126




Nietzschian, 103-4, U6-17, 121 




Soloviev, Vladimir Sergeivitch, 102, 122, 




 

Superman

 (Ouspensky), 116 




380,535




“Supplementary Announcement” (Gurdjiefi), 




 

Some Occult Experiences

 (Manen), 126 




427, 429 




“Song of the Morrow” (Stevenson), 104 




Surrealism, 434 




 

Sons of the King

 (Merton), 402 




Suzuki, D. T., 529-30 




Sorbonne, 99 




Sventitsky, V. P., 36 




Sorel, Georges, 99 




Sventitsky, Mme., 166 




 

South Atlantic Quarterly, 

 444 




Swanson, Gloria, 267 




Soviets, transfer of powder to, 156 




Swedenborg, Emanuel, 535 




 

Spectator, The

 (newspaper), 544 




Sykes, GerSd, 544




Squire, J. C., 208, 213 




Symbolism, %, 102, US-16, 121, 127, 280, 




Stalin, Josef, 45, 425 




532




Stalin, Svetlana, 425 




 

Symbolism of the Tarot, The

 (Ouspensky), 




Stanislavsky, Konstantin, 537 




23, 112, 116, 124, 127




 

Star in the West, The

 (Fuller), 211 




“Statuvolism,” 535 




Table of Hydrogens, 499, 503, 510 




 

Stegreiftheater, Das

 (Moreno), 536 




Tanner, Allen, 352 




Stein, Aurel, 44




Taj Mahal, 127-28




Stein, Gertrude, 301, 337-38, 352 




“Tales for Men Only” (Orage), 213-14 




Stein, Leo, 338 




“Talks with Katherine Mansfield” (Orage), 




Steiner, Rudolf, 110, 186, 535 




251-52, 300 




 

Steppenwolf

 (Hesse), 538 




Taliesin, 425 




Stevenson, Robert Lxjuis, 104, 490 




 

Tamhof

 (steamer), 67 




Stoemeval, Leonid, 133, 136, 149, 152, 153, 




Tantrism, 332, 529, 533 




156, 165, 175, 185, 191, 242, 262, 267, 




Tate, Allen, 345 




289, 291, 297, 318, 320, 368, 369, 




Taylor, Thomas, 502 




430,  431




 

Teachings of Ourdjieff

 (Nott), 289-90 




Stoemeval, Mme., 12, 180, 185, 318, 321, 




 

Tempest, The

 (Shsiespeare), 191 




431




 

Tertium Organum

 (Ouspensky), 101, 106, 




Stoemeval, Nikolai, 318 




112,  115-19,  121-26,  130,  135,  184-85, 




"Stop” exercise, 154, 155, 183, 263, 268-69, 




206, 220, 266, 267, 272, 280, 282, 




500




341, 369, 395, 396, 398, 400, 444, 458 




Story  

without an End, The

 (Mayor), 402




Tessenow (architect), 173 




Strachey, Lytton, 401




Thaddeus, 520




 

Strange Life of Ivan Osokin

 (Ouspensky), 




Theatre des Champs-Elys^es (Paris), 263, 




94, 96-102, 104, 106, 108-10, 119, 




334-35




452-53, 459-60 




 

Theatre in Life, The

 (Evreimofi), 538 




Stray Dog cabaret, 115-16, 135 




 

Theatre of the Soul, The

 (Evreimofif), 537 




 

Stromateis

 (Clement of Alexandria), 558 




“Theatre for Us, A” (Orage), 349, 537 




 

Struggle of the Magicians, The

 (Gurdjiefi), 




 

Theohgumena Ariihmetica

 (Nicomacus of 




27, 88, 134, 176-78, 181, 561 




Gerassa), 503, 504 




 

Struggle Within, The

 (Wright), 425 




 

Theoretic Arithmetic

 (Taylor), 502 




 

Study in Consciousness, A

 (Besant), 535 




 

Theory of Celestial Influence

 (GoUin), 




Stungevitch, Professor, 61 




488--89 493 




Subjective magic, 113 




 

Theory of Eternal Life, The

 (Collin), 457-58, 




Subud, 477




478-83, 488, 489, 495 




Sufis, 44, 91, 123, 128, 500, 518, 540 




Theosophical Publishing Society, 206 




Sullivan, J. W. N., 229, 248, 254, 255 




 

Theosophical Review, 

 204, 205,'»217 




Sumbatov, Prince Mikail, 45 




Theosophical Society, 36, 41, 58, 59, 83, 121, 




Summerhill School, 188 




145, 266, 391, 525, 530, 531, 533, 541 




Sunwise Turn Bookshop (New York), 280-84 




fragmentation of, 217 




 

Supercomciousness

 (Lodizhensky), 115




Ouspensky and, 109-17, 121, 124-26, 136




I N D E X   607




Theosophy, 50, 210, 216, 217, 441-42, 527, 




Transcendentalism, 121 




530, 533^, 541 




Transmutation, 143, 144 




among Gurdjieffs followers, 243 




Traubenberg, Baroness Olga Rausch de, 118, 




Orage and, 19S-206, 209, 217 




384




Ouspensky and, 219, 220, 225 




 

Travels in Arabia Deserta

 (Doughty), 246 




Theravedins, 530 




Travers, P. L., 39, 310, 534 




 

Third Morality, The

 (Heard), 401 




Tree of Life, 513-19, 522, 531 




 

Third Series

 (Gurdjieff), 27, 46, 75, 185, 




Trotsky, Leon, 571




359, 366, 369, 544, 551 




Tsarist Intelligence Service, 45, 49, 78 




Thomas, Dylan, 374 




Tserempil (Russian agent), 60-61, 75 




Thomas Cook and Son, 53, 65 




Tsybikov, Professor, 69 




"Three Brothers, The” (Gurdjieff), 557 




Turbyfill, Mark, 317, 352 




Thrice-Great Hermes, cult of, 21, 501, 507 




Turgenev, Ivan, 95 




Thule Bund, 186




Twain, Mark,  

544




 

Thus Spake Zarathustra

 (Nietzsche), 200 




 

Tibetan Booh of the Dead, The, 

 459 




Ukhtomsky, Prince Esper Esperovitch, 54, 




Tiflis Theological Seminary, 45 




55, 57-59, 61, 69, 73, 77, 527, 541 




Tiflis Opera, 176 




 

Ulysses

 (Joyce), 277, 351 




 

Timaeus

 (Plato), 497, 503 




 

Underworld

 (Gorky), 155 




Time, Ouspensky on, 117, 120, 146, 397 




Undine, Jules d’, 187 




 

Time

 magazine, 276, 328 




 

Undiscovered Country

 (Hulme), 432, 567 




 

Time and Western Man

 (Lewis), 403 




“Unedited Opinions” (Orage), 300-1 




 

Times Literary Supplement, The, 

 138, 331, 




Universal languages, 139 




398, 551




“Universal Traveling Workshop,” 31, 331 




Tlalpam community,  

see

 Mexico City group 




 

UnhnouMble Gurdjieff, The

 (Anderson), 20, 




Toe H, 441 




431




Toklas, Alice B., 338 




 

Unknown Doctrine, The

 (Gurdjieflf), 280 




Tolstoy, Alexis, 406 




 

Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, The

 




Tolstoy, Leo, 115, 150 




(Notovitch), 526-27 




Tolstoyanism, 254, 405 




Unterecker, John, 272 




Toomer, Jean (Nathan Eugene Toomer), 20, 




 

Up Hill to Holloway

 (Gawsthorpe), 201 




91, 193, 265, 271-75, 277, 302, 313, 




 

Upanishads, 

 144, 533 




314, 317, 318, 321, 334, 338-45, 




 

Utriusque Cosmii Historic

 (Fludd), 511




359-61, 363-64, 369, 370, 413-26, 




468, 




544, 547, 551-52, 555 




Vailland, Roger, 434 




background of, 273 




Valentinus, 524 




Chicago group of, 413, 414 




Vedas, 526, 533 




at Fontainebleau Institute, 286, 291-94, 




Velimirovifi, Nicolai, 215 




413




Virubova, Anna, 80 




Frank and, 274, 282, 286, 416 




“Vitvitskaya, Mme.,” 28-30, 137 




Gurdjieff and, 265, 273, 274, 281-83, 




 

Voie, La, 

 434 




285-86, 291-92, 294, 297, 339-44, 




Voluntary suffering, 309 




359, 




417, 419-26, 430 




Volynsky, A. L„ 115-16, 136 




marriages of, 415-17, 422 




"Vran-Gavran, R. A., ’  

see

 Velimirovifi, 




Orage and, 273, 283, 285-86, 293, 307-11, 




Nicolai




338-42, 358, 360, 361, 363-64, 369, 




370, 551 




Waite, A. E., 255n 




Portage “experiment” of, 414-19 




Walden School (New York), 271, 301 




on self-observation, 307-8 




 

Waldo Frank, a Study

 (Munson), 272 




 

Tour du Monde, Le

 (magazine), 62, 69, 70, 




Walker, Jean,  

see

 Orage, Jean 




527




Walker, Kenneth, 224, 382, 385, 389, 401-3, 




Tracol, Henri, 147, 464, 475 




405, 409, 441, 447-49, 451-53, 462 




Trans-Caucasian Commissariat, 156 




Wallace, Lewis, 207, 213, 218, 228, 230 




 

Transatlantic

 (Toomer), 265, 343, 344, 364 




as “M. B. Oxon,” 207, 218, 375 




Transcendental Meditation, 477




Watkins, John M., 401




608




I N D E X




Watson, John B., 306, 353, 536 




Wrangel, General, 170, 171, 180 




Watts, Alan, W., 196, 561, 562, 566, 569 




Wright, Frank Lloyd, 424-25 




“Way of the Sly Man, The,” 145, 550 




Wright, Olgivanna Lloyd,  

see

 Hinzenburg, 




Webb, Beatrice, 203 




Olga




Webb, Sidney, 203 




Wylie, Elinor, 267




Wedgwood, Bishop J. I., 205 




Welch, William, 303, 474, 476 




“X, Mr.,” 333-34




Wellington Hotel (New York), 473 




Wells, H. G., 119, 196, 200, 207, 208, 222, 




440




"Y, Mr.,” 335, 362 




West, Rebecca, 267 




“Y, Mrs.,” 333-35, 362-63, 384 




Westcott, William Wynn, 531 




Yashvili, Paul (Paolo), 172, 178 




Westley, Helen, 302 




Yates, Frances, 539




 

What

 w  

Yoga? 

 (Ouspensky), 116 




Yeats, William Butler, 200, 208-10, 219, 




Wheatley, Dennis, 45




280, 337 




 

Wheel of Fortune, The

 (Ouspensky), 100, 104




“Yelov, Abraham,” 28, 30, 37-38 




White Russian Club, 180




"Yevlampios, Father,” 35 




Whitehead, Alfred North, 304




Yezidje sect, 32-33 




Whiteside, F. R. 285




Yoga, 217, 398 




Whitman, Walt, 201, 272, 274




 

See also

 Hatha yoga 




Widmanstetter, J. A., 521




Young, James, 217, 220-22, 224, 226, 229, 




Williams, Charles, 198, 403




233-34, 237, 239-40, 243, 245, 246, 




Williams, Harold, 108




256-60, 375, 548 




Williams, William Carlos, 277, 303




Younghusband, Colonel Francis, 48-49, 51, 




Wilson, Colin, 565




60, 61, 68, 69 




Wilson, Edmund, 270, 276, 303, 311-12, 




Youth Hostels Association, 441




353, 




355-56, 413 




Wilson, Woodrow, 275, 276 




Zaharofif, A. A., 149, 151, 154-57, 161, 165, 




Winters, Ivor, 345 




171-72 




 

Witness

 (Bennett), 183, 447 




Zamenhof, L. L., 139 




Wolfe, Edwin, 302 




 

Zen in the Art of Archery

 (Herrigel), 529 




 

Women in Love

 (Lawrence), 227 




Zen Buddhism, 529-30, 551, 561, 563, 565 




WoodroEFe, Sir John, 533 




Zoroaster, 509 




Woodward, F. L., 527 




Zwaska, Caesar, 302, 319 




World Brotherhood, 28, 43 




Zigrosser, Carl. 137, 173, 240, 280-81. 302. 




 

Worlds End

 (Sinclair), 188




318-20, 322, 328, 329, 370