The Importance Of Living
















Cover

The Importance Of Living 

Lin YuTang

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

 

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match;  page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers.  The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

 

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.5)

In English: (except the last five titles, the following are publishedin Shanghai'by the Commercial Press)

Letters of a Chinese AmazonReadings in Modern Journalistic ProseThe Liitle Critic: First St-riis (i930-1932)

The Little Critic: Second Series (1033-1935)

Conmtgius Saw Nancy (A Drama) and Essays About NothingA Nun of Talshan and Other TranslationsKaiming English Books

Kaiming English Grammar Based on Notional Categories

A History of the Press and Public Opinion in China {Universityof Chicago Pi ess)

My Country and My Peopx,k (John Day)

The Importance op Living (John Day)

In Chinese

Philological Essays (Ytiycnhsueh Lunts'ung)

Skirmishes (Chicnfuchi)

The Lone Wayfarer (Tahuangcht)

It Seems to Me (Woti Urn\ % vols.













THIS is a personal testimony, a testimony of my own experience ofthought and life. It is not intended to be objective and makes noclaim to establish eternal truths. In fact I rather despise claims toobjectivity in philosophy; the point of view is the thing. I shouldhave liked to call it “A Lyrical Philosophy,” using the word “lyri-cal” in the sense of being a highly personal and individual oudook.But that would be too beautiful a name and I must forego it, for fearof aiming too high and leading the reader to expect too much, andbecause the main ingredient of my thought is matter-of-fact prose, alevel easier to maintain because more natural. Very much con-tented am I to lie low, to cling to the soil, to be of kin to the sod.My soul squirms comfortably in the soil and sand and is happy.Sometimes when one is drunk with this earth, one’s spirit seems solight that he thinks he is m heaven. But actually he seldom rises sixfeet above the ground.

I should have liked also to write the entire book in the form ofa dialogue like Plato’s. It is such a convenient form for personal,inadvertent disclosures, for bringing in the significant trivialities ofcmr daily life, above all for idle rambling about the pastures of sweet,silent thought. But somehow I have not done so. I do not knowwhy, A fear, perhaps, that this form of literature being so little invogue today, no one probably would read it, and a writer after allwants to be read. And when I say dialogue, I do not mean answersand questions like newspaper interviews, or those leaders choppedup into short paragraphs; I mean really good, long, leisurely dis-courses extending several pages at a stretch, with many detours,and coming back to the original point of discussion by a short cutat the most unexpected spot, like a man returning home by climbingover a hedge, to the surprise of his walking companion. Oh, how













Vlll

PREFACE

I love to reach home by climbing over the back fence, and to travelon bypaths! At least my companion will grant that I am familiarwith the way home and with the surrounding countryside . ,. But Idare not.

I am not original. The ideas expressed here have been thoughtand expressed by many thinkers of the East and West over andover again; those I borrow from the East are hackneyed truthsthere. They are, nevertheless, my ideas; they have become a partof my being. If they have taken root in my being, it is because theyexpress something original in me, and when I first encounteredthem, my heart gave an instinctive assent. I like them as ideas andnot because the person who expressed them is of any account. Infact, I have traveled the bypaths in my reading as well as in mywriting. Many of the authors quoted are names obscure and maybaffle a Chinese professor of literature. If some happen to be well-known, I accept their ideas only as they compel my intuitive ap-proval and not because the authors are well-known. It is my habitto buy cheap editions of old, obscure books and see what I can dis-cover there. If the professors of literature knew the sources of myideas, they would be astounded at the Philistine. But there is agreater pleasure in picking up a small pearl in an ash-can than inlooking at a large one in a jeweler’s window.

I am not deep and not well-read. If one is too well-read, then onedoes not know right is right and wrong is wrong. I have not readLocke or Hume or Berkeley, and have not taken a college coursein philosophy. Technically speaking, my method and my trainingare all wrong, because I do not read philosophy, but only read lifeat first hand. That is an unconventional way of studying philosophy—•the incorrect way. Some of my sources arc: Mrs. Huang, an amahin my family who has all the ideas that go into the breeding of agood woman in China; a Soochow boat-woman with her profuseuse of expletives; a Shanghai street car conductor; my cook’s wife;a lion cub in the zoo; a squirrel in Central Park in New York; adeck steward who made one good remark; that writer of a columnon astronomy (dead for some ten years now); all news in boxes;













IX

and any writer who does not kill our sense of curiosity in life orwho has not killed it in himself ... how can I enumerate all?

Thus deprived of academic training in philosophy, I am lessscared to write a book about it. Everything seems clearer andsimpler for it, if that is any compensation in the eyes of orthodoxphilosophy. I doubt it. I know there will be complaints that mywords are not long enough, that I make things too easy to under-stand, and finally that I lack cautiousness, that I do not whisperlow and trip with mincing steps in the sacred mansions of phi-losophy, looking propel ly scared as I ought to do. Courage seemsto be the rarest of all virtues in a modern philosopher. But I havealways wandered outside the precincts of philosophy and that givesme courage. There is a method of appealing to one’s own intuitivejudgment, of thinking out one’s own ideas and forming one’s ownindependent judgments, and confessing them in public with a child-ish impudence, and sure enough, some kindred souls in anothercorner of the world will agree with you. A person forming hisideas in this manner will often be astounded to discover how an-other writer said exactly the same things and felt exactly the sameway, but perhaps expressed the ideas more easily and more grace-fully. It is then that he discovers the ancient author and the ancientauthor bears him witness, and they become forever friends in spirit.

There is therefore the matter of my obligations to these authors,especially my Chinese friends in spirit. I have for my collaboratorsin writing this book a company of genial souls, who I hope like meas much as I like them. For in a very real sense, these spirits havebeen with me, in the only form of spiritual communion that I rec-ognize as real—when two men separated by the ages think the samethoughts and sense the same feelings and each perfeedy under-stands the other. In the preparation of this book, a few of my friendshave been especially helpful with their contributions and advice:Po Chiiyi of the eighth century, Su Tungp’o of the eleventh, andthat great company of original spirits of the sixteenth and seven-teenth centuries—the romantic and voluble T’u Ch’ihshui, the play-ful, original Yuan Chunglang, the deep, magnificent Li Chowu, th«













X

PREFACE

sensitive and sophisticated Chang Ch’ao, the epicure Li Liweng, thehappy and gay old hedonist Yuan Tsets’ai, and the bubbling, jok-ing, effervescent Chin Shengt’an—unconventional souls all, menwith too much independent judgment and too much feeling forthings to be liked by the orthodox critics, men too good to be“moral” and too moral to be “good” for the Confucianists. Thesmallness of the select company has made the enjoyment of theirpresence all the more valued and sincere. Some of these may happennot to be quoted, but they are here with me in this book all thesame. Their coming back to their own in China is only a matter oftime. . . . There have been others, names less well-known, but noless welcome for their apt remarks, because they express my senti-ments so well. I call them my Chinese Amiels—people who don’ttalk much, but always talk sensibly, and I respect their good sense.There are others again who belong to the illustrious company of“Anons” of all countries and ages, who in an inspired moment saidsomething wiser then they knew, like the unknown fathers of greatmen. Finally there are greater ones still, whom 1 look up to moreas masters than as companions of the spirit, whose serenity ofunderstanding is so human and yet so divine, and whose wisdomseems to have come entirely without effort because it has becomecompletely natural. Such a one is Chuangtsc, and such a one is T’aoYuanming, whose simplicity of spirit is the despair of smaller men,I have sometimes let these souls speak directly to the reader, makingproper acknowledgment, and at other times, I have spoken for themwhile I seem to be speaking for myself. The older my friendshipwith them, the more likely is my indebtedness to their ideas to beof the familiar, elusive and invisible type, like parental influencein a good family breeding. It is impossible to put one’s finger on adefinite point of resemblance, I have also chosen to speak as a mod-ern, sharing the modern life, and not only as a Chinese; to giveonly what I have personally absorbed into my modern being, andnot merely to act as a respectful translator of the ancients. Such aprocedure has its drawbacks, but on the whole, one can do a moresincere job of it. The selections are therefore as highly personal as













PREFACE xi

the rejections. No complete presentation of any one poet or phi-losopher is attempted here, and it is impossible to judge of themthrough the evidences on these pages. I must therefore conclude bysaying as usual that the merits of this book, if any, are largely dueto the helpful suggestions of my collaborators, while for the in-accuracies, deficiencies and immaturities of judgment, I alone amresponsible.

Again I owe my thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Richard J. Walsh, first,for suggesting the idea of the book, and secondly, for their usefuland frank criticism. I must also thank Mr. Hugh Wade for co-operating on preparing the manuscript for the press and on theproofs, and Miss Lillian Peffcr for making the Index.

Lin Yutang

New York CityJuly 30,1937













Preface vii

I.

The Awakening

X 1.

APPROACH TO LIFE • I

* 11.

A PSEUDO-SCIENTIFIC FORMULA • 4

hi.

THE SCAMP AS IDEAL • II

II.

Views of

Mankind

X 1.

CHRISTIAN, GREEK AND CHINESE • 15

11.

EARTH-BOUND * 23

in.

SPIRIT AND FLESH • 25

* XV.

A BIOLOGICAL VIEW • 27

* V.

HUMAN LIFE A POEM • 30

£

III. Our Animal Heritage

rl. THE MONKEY E?IC • 33II. IN THE IMAGE OF THE MONKEY • 36

III. ON BEING MORTAL • 38

IV. ON HAVING A STOMACH • 42

V. ON HAVING STRONG MUSCLES • 51

VI. ON HAVING A MIND * 56

33

IV. On Being Human 65

I. ON HUMAN DIGNITY * 65

II. ON PLAYFUL CURIOSITY: THE RISE OF HUMAN

CIVILIZATION • 66

xiii













XIV

CONTENTS

III. ON DREAMS * 73

IV. ON THE SENSE OF HUMOR • 77

V. ON BEING WAYWARD AND INCALCULABLE • 83

VI. THE DOCTRINE OF THE INDIVIDUAL • 88

V* Who Can Best Enjoy Life?

I. find thyself: chuangtse • 95

II. passion, wisdom and courage: mencius • 98

III. CYNICISM, FOLLY AND CAMOUFLAGE: LAOTSE - 105

IV. “philosophy of half-and-half” : TSESSE -hi

V. A lover of life: t’ao yuanming * 115

VI. The Feast of Life

I. THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS * 122

II. HUMAN HAPPINESS IS SENSUOUS • 126

hi. chin’s thirty-three happy moments - 130

IV. MISUNDERSTANDINGS OF MATERIALISM * I36

V. HOW ABOUT MENTAL PLEASURES? * I4O

VIL The Importance of Loafing

I. MAN THE ONLY WORKING ANIMAL - 145II. THE CHINESE THEORY OF LEISURE • I48

IH. THE CULT OF THE IDLE LIFE - I52

IV. THIS EARTH THE ONLY HEAVEN - 1$6

V. WHAT IS LUCK? - l6o

VI. THREE AMERICAN VICES - l()l

VIII. The Enjoyment of the Home

1. on getting biological • 166

II. CELIBACY A FREAK OF CmLIZATTON • VJO

III. ON SEX APPEAL













CONTENTS

IV. THE CHINESE FAMILY IDEAL • 182^

V. ON GROWING OLD GRACEFULLYI92

IX. The Enjoyment of Living

1. on lying in bed • 202

II. ON SITTING IN CHAIRS • 2o6

III. ON CONVERSATION • 211

IV. ON TEA AND FRIENDSHIP • 221

V. ON SMOKE AND INCENSE • 23I

VI. ON DRINK AND WINE GAMES • 239

VII. ON FOOD AND MEDICINE - 248

VIII. SOME CURIOUS WESTERN CUSTOMS • 257

IX. THE INHUMANITY OF WESTERN DRESS • 261

X. ON HOUSE AND INTERIORS • 266

X. The Enjoyment of Nature 277

I. PARADISE LOST? - 277II. ON BIGNESS * 281HI. TWO CHINESE LADIES • 284IV, ON ROCKS AND TREES • 2p2

V. ON FLOWERS AND FLOWER ARRANGEMENTS - 302

VI. THE “VASE FLOWERS” OF YUAN CHUNGLANG * 3IO

VII. THE EPIGRAMS OF CHANG CH’aO • 316

XL The Enjoyment of Travel 329

1. ON GOING ABOUT AND SEEING THINGS • 329

XL “the travels of mingliaotse” • 338

a. THE REASON FOR THE FLIGHT ■ 338

b. THE WAY OF TRAVELING • 34IC. AT AUSTERE HEIGHTS - 343

XV

202













XVI

CONTENTS

d. BACK TO HUMANITY • 346

e. PHILOSOPHY OF THE FLIGHT • 354

XII. The Enjoyment of Culture 362

I. GOOD TASTE IN KNOWLEDGE • 362" il. ART AS PLAY AND PERSONALITY * 366

III. THE ART OF READING • 376

IV. THE ART OF WRITING • 385

XIII. Relationship to God 396

I. THE RESTORATION OF RELIGION • 396

II. WHY I AM A PAGAN • 4OO

XIV. The Art of Thinking 41 i

I. THE NEED FOR HUMANIZED THINKING • 4IIII. THE RETURN TO COMMON SENSE • 417

III. BE REASONABLE • 42I

Appendix A: certain Chinese names * 427Appendix B: a Chinese critical vocabulary * 430Index of Names and Subjects • 447













Chapter One

THE AWAKENING

I. Approach to Life

IN what follows I am presenting the Chinese point of view, be-cause I cannot help myself. I am interested only in presenting aview of life and of things as the best and wisest Chinese mindshave seen it and expressed it in their folk wisdom and their lit-erature. It is an idle philosophy born of an idle life, evolved in adifferent age, I am quite aware. But I cannot help feeling that thisview of life is essentially true, and since we are alike under the skin,what touches the human heart in one country touches all. I shallhave to present a view of life as Chinese poets and scholars eval-uated it with their common sense, their realism and their sense ofpoetry. I shall attempt to reveal some of the beauty of the paganworld, a sense of the pathos and beauty and terror and comedy oflife, viewed by a people who have a strong feeling of the limitationsof our existence, and yet somehow retain a sense of the dignity ofhuman life.

The Chinese philosopher is one who dreams with one eye open,who views life with love and sweet irony, who mixes his cynicismwith a kindly tolerance, and who alternately wakes up from life’sdream and then nods again, feeling more alive when he is dream-ing than when he is awake, thereby investing his waking life witha dream-world quality* He sees with one eye closed and with oneeye opened the futility of much that goes on around him and ofhis own endeavors, but barely retains enough sense of reality todetermine to go through with it. He is seldom disillusioned be-cause he has no illusions, and seldom disappointed because henever had extravagant hopes* In this way his spirit is emancipated.

For, after surveying the field of Chinese literature and philosophy,I come to the conclusion that the highest ideal of Chinese culturehas always been a man with a sense of detachment (jta\uan) to-ward life based on a sense of wise disenchantment. From this de-

x













THE AWAKENING

tachment comes high-mindedness (l(uanghuai), a high-minded nesswhich enables one to go through life with tolerant irony andescape the temptations of fame and wealth and achievement, andeventually makes him take what comes. And from this detachmentarise also his sense of freedom, his love of vagabondage and hispride and nonchalance. It is only with this sense of freedom andnonchalance that one eventually arrives at the keen and internejoy of living.

It is useless for me to say whether my philosophy is valid or notfor the Westerner. To understand Western life, one would haveto Joolc at it as a Westerner born, with his own temperament, hisbodily attitudes and his own set of nerves. I have no doubt thatAmerican neivcs can stand a good many things that Chinesenerves cannot stand, and vice versa. It is good that it should be so—that we should all be born different. And yet it is all a ques-tion of relativity. I am quite sure that amidst the hustle and bustleof American life, there is a great deal of wistfulness, of the divinedesire to lie on a plot of grass under tall beautiful trees o£ an idleafternoon and just do nothing. The necessity for such commoncries as “Wake up and live” is to me a good sign that a wise por-tion of American humanity prefer to dream the hours away. TheAmerican is after all not as bad as all that. It is only a ques-tion whether he will have more or less of that sort of thing, andhow he will arrange to make it possible. Perhaps the American ismerely ashamed of the word “loafing” in a world where everybodyis doing something, but somehow, as sure as I know he is also ananimal, he likes sometimes to have his muscles relaxed, to stretchon the sand, or to lie still with one leg comfortably curled up andone arm placed below his head as his pillow* If so, he cannot hevery different from Yen Huei, who had exactly that virtue andwhom Confucius desperately admired among all his disciples. Theonly thing I desire to see is that he be honest about it, and that heproclaim to the world that he likes it when he likes it, that it isnot when he is working in the office but when he is lying idly onthe sand that his soul utters, “life is beautiful”













APPROACH TO LIFE

We are, therefore, about to see a philosophy and art of living asthe mind of the Chinese people as a whole has understood it. Iam inclined to think that, in a good or bad sense, there is nothinglike it in the world. For here we come to an entirely new way oflooking at life by an entirely different type of mind. It is a truismto say that the culture of any nation is the product of its mind.Consequently, where there is a national mind so racially differentand historically isolated from the Western cultural world, we havethe right to expect new answers to the problems of life, or what isbetter, new methods of approach, or, still better, a new posing ofthe problems themselves. We know some of the virtues and de-ficiencies of that mind, at least as revealed to us in the historicalpast. It has a glorious art and a contemptible science, a magnifi-cent common sense and an infantile logic, a fine womanish chatterabout life and no scholastic philosophy. It is generally known thatthe Chinese mind is an intensely practical, hard-headed one, and itis also known to some lovers of Chinese art that it is a profoundlysensitive mind; by a still smaller proportion of people, it is ac-cepted as also a profoundly poetic and philosophical mind. At leastthe Chinese are noted for taking things philosophically, which issaying more than the statement that the Chinese have a great phi-losophy or have a few great philosophers. For a nation to have afew philosophers is not so unusual, but for a nation to take thingsphilosophically is terrific. It is evident anyway that the Chinese as anation arc more philosophic than efficient, and that if it were other-wise, no nation could have survived the high blood pressure of anefficient life for four thousand years. Four thousand years of effi-cient living would ruin any nation. An important consequence isthat, while in the West, the insane are so many that they are put inan asylum, in China the insane are so unusual that we worship them,as anybody who has a knowledge of Chinese literature will testify.And that, after all, is what I am driving at. Yes, the Chinese have alight, an almost gay, philosophy, and the best proof of their phil-osophic temper is to be found in this wise and merry philosophyof living.













THE AWAKENING

II. A Pseudo-Scientific Formula

Let us begin with an examination of the Chinese mental make-upwhich produced this philosophy of living: great realism, inadequateidealism, a high sense of humor, and a high poetic sensitivity to lifeand nature.

Mankind seems to be divided into idealists and realists, andidealism and realism are the two great forces molding humanprogress. The clay of humanity is made soft and pliable by thewater of idealism, but the stuff that holds it together is after all theclay itself, or we might all evaporate into Ariels. The forces ofidealism and realism tug at each other in all human activities, per-sonal, social and national, and real progress is made possible by theproper mixture of these two ingredients, so that the clay is keptin the ideal pliable, plastic condition, half moist and half dry, nothardened and unmanageable, nor dissolving into mud. The sound-est nations, like the English, have realism and idealism mixed inproper proportions, like the clay which neither hardens and so getspast the stage for the artist’s molding, nor is so wishy-washy thatit cannot retain its form. Some countries are thrown into perpetualrevolutions because into their clay has been injected some liquid offoreign ideals which is not yet properly assimilated, and the clay istherefore not able to keep its shape.

A vague, uncritical idealism always lends itself to ridicule andtoo much of it might be a danger to mankind, leading it round in afutile wild-goose chase for imaginary ideals. If there were toomany of these visionary idealists in any society or people, revolutionswould be the order of the day. Human society would be like anidealistic couple forever getting tired of one place and changingtheir residence regularly once every three months, for the simplereason that no one place is ideal and the place where one is notseems always better because one is not there* Very fortunately, manis also gifted with a sense of humor, whose function, as I conceiveit, is to exercise criticism of man’s dreams, and bring them in touchwith the world of reality. It is important that man dreams, but it is













A PSEUDO-SCIENTIFIC FORMULA 5

perhaps equally important that he can laugh at his own dreams.That is a great gift, and the Chinese have plenty of it.

The sense of humor, which I shall discuss at more length in alater chapter, seems to be very closely related to the sense of reality,or realism. If the joker is often cruel in disillusioning the idealist,he nevertheless performs a very important function right there bynot letting the idealist bump his head against the stone wall ofreality and receive a ruder shock. He also gently eases the tensionof the hot-headed enthusiast and makes him live longer. By pre-paring him for disillusion, there is probably less pain in the finalimpact, for a humorist is always like a man charged with the dutyof breaking a sad news gently to a dying patient. Sometimes thegentle warning from a humorist saves the dying patient’s life. Ifidealism and disillusion must necessarily go together in this world,we must say that life is cruel, rather than the joker who remindsus of life’s cruelty.

I have often thought of formulas by which the mechanism ofhuman progress and historical change can be expressed. They seemto be as follows:

Reality — Dreams = Animal Being

Reality + Dreams = A Heart-Ache (usually called Idealism)

Reality + Humor = Realism (also called Conservatism)

Dreams — Humor = Fanaticism

Dreams + Humor = Fantasy

Reality + Dreams + Humor = Wisdom

So then, wisdom, or the highest type of thinking, consists in ton-ing down our dreams or idealism with a good sense of humor, sup-ported by reality itself.

As pure ventures in pseudo-scientific formulations, we may pro-ceed to analyze national characters in the following manner. I say“pseudo-scientific” because I distrust all dead and mechanical for-mulas for expressing anything connected with human affairs orhuman personalities. Putting human affairs in exact formulas showsin itself a lack of the sense of humor and therefore a lack of wis-• dom. I do not mean that these things are not being done: they are.













THE AWAKENING

That is why we get so much pseudo-science today. When a psychol-ogist can measure a man’s I.Q. or P.Q.,1 it is a pretty poor world,and specialists have risen to usurp humanized scholarship. But if werecognize that these formulas are no more than handy, graphic waysof expressing certain opinions, and so long as we don’t drag in thesacred name of science to help advertise our goods, no harm is done.The following are my formulas for the characters of certain nations,entirely personal and completely incapable of pi oof or verification.Anyone is free to dispute them and change them or add his own,if he does not claim that he can prove his private opinions by amass of statistical facts and figures. Let “R” stand for a sense ofreality (or realism), “D” for dreams (or idealism), “H” for a senseof humor, and—adding one important ingredient—“S” for sensitiv-ity.2 * * * * * And further let “4” stand for “abnormally high,” “3” stand for“high,” “2” for “fair,” and “1” for “low,” and we have the followingpseudo-chemical formulas for the following national characters.Human beings and communities behave then differently accordingto their different compositions, as sulphates and sulphides or carbonmonoxide and carbon dioxide behave differently from one another.For me, the interesting thing always is to watch how human com-munities or nations behave differently under identical conditions. Aswe cannot invent words like “humoride” and “humorate” after thefashion of chemistry, we may put it thus: “3 grains of Realism, 2grains of Dreams, 2 grains of Humor and 1 grain of Sensitivitymake an Englishman.”8

RjjDaHgSi = The EnglishR2DsH3S, = The FrenchR3D3H2S2 = The AmericansR3D4H1S2 — The Germans

11 am not objecting to the limited utility of intelligence tests, but to their claimsto mathematical accuracy or constant dependability as measures of human personality.

2 In the sense of the French word sensibilitc.

8 Some might with good reason suggest the including of an UV* standing for

logic or the rational faculty, as an important element in shaping human progress.

This *%” will then often function or weigh against sensitivity, a direct perception

of things. Such a formula might be attempted. For me personally* the role of the

rational faculty in human affairs is rather low.













A PSEUDO-SCIENTIFIC FORMULA

RaD^xSj. = The RussiansRoDsHiSx = The JapaneseR4D1H3S3 = The Chinese

I do not know the Italians, the Spanish, the Hindus and otherswell enough even to essay a formula on the subject, realizing thatthe above are shaky enough as they are, and in any case are enoughto bring down a storm of criticism upon my head. Probably theseformulas are more provocative than authoritative. I promise tomodify them gradually for my own use as new facts are brought tomy knowledge, or new impressions are formed. That is all they areworth today—a record of the progress of my knowledge and thegaps of my ignorance.

Some observations may be necessary. It is easy to see that I re-gard the Chinese as most closely allied to the French in their senseof humor and sensitivity, as is quite evident from the way theFrench write their books and eat their food, while the more volatilecharacter of the French comes from their greater idealism, whichtakes the form of love of abstract ideas (recall the manifestoes oftheir literary, artistic and political movements). “R4” for Chineserealism makes the Chinese the most realistic people; ‘TV’ accountsfor something of a drag in the changes in their pattern or ideal oflife. The high figures for Chinese humor and sensitivity, as well asfor their realism, are perhaps due to my too close association andthe vividness of my impressions. For Chinese sensitivity, little justi-fication is needed; the whole story of Chinese prose, poetry andpainting proclaims it. . . . The Japanese and Germans are verymuch alike in their comparative lack of humor (such is the gen-eral impression of people), yet it is really impossible to give a“zero” for any one characteristic in any one nation, not even foridealism in the Chinese people. It is all a question of degree; suchstatements as a complete lack of this or that quality are not based onan intimate knowledge of the peoples. For this reason, I give theJapanese and the Germans “Hi ” instead of “H0,” and I intuitivelyfeel that I am right. But I do believe that the Japanese and the Ger*mans suffer politically at present, and have suffered in the past, for













THE AWAKENING

lacking a better sense of humor. How a Prussian Geheimrat loves tobe called a Geheimrat, and how he loves has buttons and metal pins!A certain belief in “logical necessity” (often “holy” or “sacred”),a tendency to fly too straight at a goal instead of circling around it,often carries one too far. It is not so much what you believe in thatmatters, as the way in which you believe it and proceed to trans-late that belief into action. By “D3” for the Japanese I am referring totheir fanatic loyalty to their emperor and to the state, made pos-sible by a low mixture of humor. For idealism must stand fordifferent things in different countries, as the so-called sense of humorreally comprises a very wide variety of things. . . . There is aninteresting tug between idealism and realism in America, both givenhigh figures, and that produces the energy characteristic of theAmericans. What American idealism is, I had better leave it to theAmericans to find out; but they are always enthusiastic about some-thing or other. A great deal of this idealism is noble, in the sensethat the Americans are easily appealed to by noble ideals or noblewords; but some of it is mere gullibility. The American sense ofhumor again means a different thing from the Continental senseof humor, but really I think that, such as it is (the love of fun andan innate, broad common sense), it is the greatest asset of theAmerican nation. In the coming years of critical change, they willhave great need of that broad common sense referred to by JamesBryce, which I hope will tide them over these critical times. I giveAmerican sensitivity a low figure because of my impression that theycan stand so many things. There is no use quarreling about this, be-cause we will be quarreling about words.... The English seem tobe on the whole the soundest race: contrast their “RJV* with theFrench “RJD3.” I am all for “R3D2.” It bespeaks stability. The idealformula for me would seem to be R3DsH3S2, for too much idealismor too much sensitivity is not a good thing, either. And if I give “S *for English sensitivity, and if that is too low, who is to blame for itexcept the English themselves? How can I tell whether the Englishever feel anything—joy, happiness, anger, satisfaction—when theyare determined to look so glum on all occasions?













A PSEUDO-SCIENTIFIC FORMULA

9

We might apply the same formula to writers and poets. To takea few well-known types:

Shakespeare4= R4D4H3S4Heine = R3D3HfcS3

Shelley = RiDJHiS*

Poe = RaDJHhS*

Li Po = RxDgHaSi

Tu Fu = R3D3H2S*

Su Tungp’o = RaDoH^Ss

These are no more than a few impromptu suggestions. But it isclear that all poets have a high sensitivity, or they wouldn’t be poetsat alk Poe, I feel, is a very sound genius, in spite of his weird, imag-inative gift. Doesn’t he love “ratiocination”?

So my formula for the Chinese national mind is:

R4D1H3S3

There we start with an “S3,” standing for high sensitivity, whichguarantees a proper artistic approach to life and answers for theChinese affirmation that this earthly life is beautiful and the con-sequent intense love of this life. But it signifies more than that;actually it stands for the artistic approach even to philosophy. It ac-counts for the fact that the Chinese philosopher’s view of life isessentially the poet’s view of life, and that, in China, philosophy ismarried to poetry rather than to science as it is in the West. It willbecome amply clear from what follows that this high sensitivity tothe pleasures and pains and flux and change of the colors of life isthe very basis that makes a light philosophy possible. Man’s senseof the tragedy of life comes from his sensitive perception of thetragedy of a departing spring, and a delicate tenderness toward lifecomes from a tenderness toward the withered blossoms that bloomedyesterday. First the sadness and sense of defeat, then the awakeningand the laughter of the old rogue-philosopher.

41 have hesitated a long time between giving Shakespeare “Si” and “S8”. Finallyhis “Sonnets” decided it No school teacher has experienced greater fear and tremblingin grading a pupil than I in trying to grade Shakespeare.













xo

THE AWAKENING

On the other hand, we have “R4” standing for intense realism,which means an attitude of accepting life as it is and of regardinga bird in the hand as better than two in the bush. This realism,therefore, both reinforces and supplements the artist’s affirmationthat this life is transiently beautiful, and it all but saves the artistand poet from escaping from life altogether. The Dreamer says“Life is but a dream,” and the Realist replies, “Quite correct. Andlet us live this dream as beautifully as we can.” But the realism ofone awakened is the poet’s realism and not that of the businessman, and the laughter of the old rogue is no longer the laughter ofthe young go-getter singing his.way to success with his head up andhis chm out, but that of an old man running his finger through hisflowing beard, and speaking in a soothingly low voice. Such adreamer loves peace, for no one can fight hard for a dream. He willbe more intent to live reasonably and well with his fellow dreamers.Thus is the high tension of life lowered.

But the chief function of this sense of realism is the eliminationof all non-essentials in the philosophy of life, holding life down bythe neck, as it were, for fear that the wings of imagination maycarry it away to an imaginary and possibly beautiful, but unreal,world. And after all, the wisdom of life consists in the eliminationof non-essentials, in reducing the problems of philosophy to just afew—the enjoyment of the home (the relationship between man andwoman and child), of living, of Nature and of culture—and inshowing all the other irrelevant scientific disciplines and futile chasesafter knowledge to the door. The problems of life for the Chinesephilosopher then become amazingly few and simple. It means alsoan impatience with metaphysics and with the pursuit of knowledgethat does not lead to any practical bearing on life itself. And it alsomeans that every human activity, whether the acquiring of knowl-edge or the acquiring of things, has to be submitted immediately tothe test of life itself and of its subserviency to the end of living.Again, and here is a significant result, the end of living is not somemetaphysical entity-—but just living itself.

Gifted with this realism, and with a profound distrust of logic













II

THE SCAMP AS IDEAL

and o£ the intellect itself, philosophy for the Chinese becomes amatter of direct and intimate feeling of life itself, and refuses tobe encased in any system. For there is a robust sense of reality, asheer animal sense, a spirit of reasonableness which crushes reasonitself and makes the rise of any hard and fast philosophic systemimpossible. There are the three religions of China, Confucianism,Taoism and Buddhism, all magnificent systems in themselves, andyet robust common sense dilutes them all and reduces them all intothe common problem of the pursuit of a happy human life. Themature Chinese is always a person who refuses to think too hardor to believe in any single idea or faith or school of philosophywhole-heartedly. When a friend of Confucius told him that he al-ways thought three times before he acted, Confucius wittily replied,“To think twice is quite enough.” A follower of a school of philoso-phy is but a student of philosophy, but a man is a student, or perhapsa master, of life.

The final product of this culture and philosophy is this: in China,as compared with the West, man lives a life closer to nature andcloser to childhood, a life in which the instincts and the emotions aregiven free play and emphasized against the life of the intellect, witha strange combination of devotion to the flesh and arrogance of thespirit, of profound wisdom and foolish gaiety, of high sophisticationand childish naivete. I would say, therefore, that this philosophy ischaracterized by: first, a gift for seeing life whole in art; secondly,a conscious return to simplicity in philosophy; and thirdly, an idealof reasonableness in living. The end product is, strange to say, aworship of the poet, the peasant and thewagabond.

III. The Scamp as Ideal

To me, spiritually a child of the East and the West, man’s dignityconsists in the following facts which distinguish man from animals.First, that he has a playful curiosity and a natural genius forexploring knowledge; second, that he has dreams and a lofty ideal-ism (often vague, or confused, or cocky, it is true, but neverthe-













THE AWAKENING

less worthwhile); third, and still more important, that he is ableto correct his dreams by a sense of humor, and thus restrain hisidealism by a more robust and healthy realism; and finally, thathe does not react to surroundings mechanically and uniformly asanimals do, but possesses the ability and the freedom to determinehis own reactions and to change surroundings at his will. This lastis the same as saying that human personality is the last thing to bereduced to mechanical laws; somehow the human mind is foreverelusive, uncatchable and unpicdictable, and manages to wriggle out,of mechanistic laws or a materialistic dialectic that crazy psycholo-gists and unmarried economists are trying to impose upon him.Man, therefore, is a curious, dreamy, humorous and wayward,creature.

In short, my faith in human dignity consists in the belief that manis the greatest scamp on earth. Human dignity must be associatedwith the idea of a scamp and not with that of an obedient, disci-plined and regimented soldier. The scamp is probably the mostglorious type of human being, as the soldier is the lowest type, ac-cording to this conception. It seems in my last book, My Countryand My People, the net impression of readers was that I was tryingto glorify the “old rogue” It is my hope that the net impression ofthe present one will be that I am doing my best to glorify the scampor vagabond. I hope I shall succeed. For things are not so simple asthey sometimes seem. In this present age of threats to democracyand individual liberty, probably only the scamp and the spirit of thescamp alone will save us from becoming lost as serially numberedunits in the masses of disciplined, obedient, regimented and uni-formed coolies. The scamp will be the last and most formidableenemy of dictatorships. He will be the champion of human dignityand individual freedom, and will be the last to be conquered. Allmodem civilization depends entirely upon him.

Probably the Creator knew well that, when He created man uponthis earth, He was producing a scamp, a brilliant scamp, it is true,but a scamp nonetheless. The scamp-like qualities of man are, afterall, his most hopeful qualities. This scamp that the Creator has













THE SCAMP AS IDEAL 13

produced is undoubtedly a brilliant chap. He is still a very unrulyand awkward adolescent, thinking himself greater and wiser thanhe really is, still full of mischief and naughtiness and love of afree-for-all. Nevertheless, there is so much good in him that theCreator might still be willing to pin on him His hopes, as a fathersometimes pins his hopes on a brilliant but somewhat erratic sonof twenty. Would He be willing some day to retire and turn overthe management of this universe to this erratic son of His? I^wonder. . . .

Speaking as a Chinese, I do not think that any civilization canJbe called complete until it has progressed from sophistication to un-I sophistication, and made a conscious return to simplicity of think-ing and living, and I call no man wise until he has made the prog-ress from the wisdom of knowledge to the wisdom of foolishness,'and become a laughing philosopher, feeling first life’s tragedy andthen life’s comedy. For we must weep before we can laugh. Outof sadness comes the awakening and out of the awakening comesthe laughter of the philosopher, with kindliness and tolerance totoot.

The world, I believe, is far too serious, and being far too serious,it has need of a wise and merry philosophy. The philosophy of the’Chinese art of living can certainly be called the “gay science,” if any-thing can be called by that phrase used by Nietzsche. After all,only a gay philosophy is profound philosophy; the serious phi-losophies of-the West haven’t even begun to understand what life is.To me personally, the only function of philosophy is to teach us tojtake life more lighdy and gayly than the average business man does,for no business man who does not retire at fifty, if he can, is in myeyes a philosopher. This is not merely a casual thought, but is a fun-damental point of view with me. The world can be made a morepeaceful and more reasonable place to live in only when men haveimbued themselves in the light gayety of this spirit. The modernman takes life far too seriously, and because he is too serious, theworld is full of troubles. We ought, therefore, to take time to ex-amine the origin of that attitude which will make possible a whole-













THE AWAKENING

hearted enjoyment of this life and a more reasonable, more peacefuland less hot-headed temperament.

I am perhaps entitled to call this the philosophy of the Chinesepeople rather than of any one school. It is a philosophy that isgreater than Confucius and greater than Laotse, for it transcendsthese and other ancient philosophers; it draws from these fountainsprings of thought and harmonizes them into a whole, and fromthe abstract oudines of their wisdom, it has created an art of livingin the flesh, visible, palpable and understandable by the commonman. Surveying Chinese literature, art and philosophy as a whole,it has become quite clear to me that the philosophy of a wise disen-chantment and a hearty enjoyment of life is their common mes-sage and teaching—the most constant, most characteristic and mostpersistent refrain of Chinese thought.













Chapter Two

VIEWS OF MANKIND

I. Christian, Greek and Chinese

THERE are several views of mankind, the traditional Christiantheological view, the Greek pagan view, and the Chinese Taoist-Confucianist view, (I do not include the Buddhist view because itis too sad.) Deeper down in their allegorical sense, these viewsafter all do not differ so much from one another, especially whenthe modern man with better biological and anthropological knowl-edge gives them a broader interpretation. But these differences intheir original forms exist.

The traditional, orthodox Christian view was that man wascreated perfect, innocent, foolish and happy, living naked in theGarden of Eden, Then came knowledge and wisdom and the Fallof Man, to which the sufferings of man are due, notably (i) workby the sweat of one’s brow for man, and (2) the pangs of laborfor women. In contrast with man’s original innocence and per-fection, a new element was introduced to explain his present im-perfection, and that is of course the Devil, working chiefly throughthe body, while his higher nature works through the soul. Whenthe “soul” was invented in the history of Christian theology I amnot aware, but this “soul” became a something rather than a func-tion, an entity rather than a condition, and it sharply separatedman from the animals, which have no souls worth saving. Here thelogic halts, for the origin of the Devil had to be explained, andwhen the medieval theologians proceeded with their usual scholas-tic logic to deal with the problem, they got into a quandary. Theycould not have very well admitted that the Devil, who was Not-God, came from God himself, nor could they quite agree that inthe original universe, the Devil, a Not-God, was co-eternal withGod. So in desperation they agreed that the Devil must have beena fallen angel, which rather begs the question of the origin of evil(for there still must have been another Devil to tempt this fallen

v>













i6

VIEWS OF MANKIND

angel), and which is therefore unsatisfactory, but they had to leaveit at that. Nevertheless from all this followed the curious dichotomyof the spirit and the flesh, a mythical conception which is still quiteprevalent and powerful today in affecting our philosophy of lifeand happiness.1

Then came the Redemption, still borrowing from the currentconception of the sacrificial lamb, which went still farther back tothe idea of a God Who desired the smell of roast meat and couldnot forgive for nothing. From this Redemption, at one stroke ameans was found by which all sins could be forgiven, and a waywas found for perfection again. The most curious aspect of Christianthought is the idea of perfection. As this happened during the decayof the ancient worlds, a tendency grew up to emphasize the after-life, and the question of salvation supplanted the question of happi-ness or simple living itself. The notion was how to get away fromthis world alive, a world which was apparently sinking into cor-ruption and chaos and doomed. Hence the overwhelming impor-tance attached to immortality. This represents a contradiction ofthe original Genesis story that God did not want man to live for-ever. The Genesis story of the reason why Adam and Eve weredriven out of the Garden of Eden was not that they had tasted ofthe Tree of Knowledge, as is popularly conceived, but the fear lestthey should disobey a second time and eat of the Tree of Life andlive forever:

And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one. of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his* hand, and ta\e also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever:

Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden ofEden, to till che ground from whence he was taken.

1 It is a happy fact that with the progress of modern thought, the Devil is thefirst to be thrown overboard. I believe that of a hundred liberal Christians today whostill believe in Ged in some form or other, not more than five believe in a real Devil,except in a figurative sense. Also the belief in a real Hell is disappearing before thebelief in a real Heaven.













So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of thegarden of Eden cherubims, and a flaming sword which turnedevery way, to \eep the way of the tree of life.

The Tree of Knowledge seemed to be somewhere in the centerof the garden, but the Tree of Life was near the eastern entrance,where for all we know, cherubims are still stationed to guard theapproach by men.

All in all, there is still a belief in total depravity, that enjoymentof this life is sin and wickedness, that to be uncomfortable is to bevirtuous, and that on the whole man cannot save himself exceptby a greater power outside. The doctrine of sin is still the basicassumption of Christianity as generally practiced today, and Chris-tian missionaries trying to make converts generally start out byimpressing upon the party to be converted a consciousness of sinand of the wickedness of human nature (which is, of course, thesine qua non for the need of the ready-made remedy which the mis-sionary has up his sleeve). All in all, you can’t make a man aChristian unless you first make him believe he is a sinner. Some onehas said rather cruelly, “Religion in our country has so narroweddown to the contemplation of sin that a respectable man does notany longer dare to show his face in the church.”

The Greek pagan world was a different world by itself andtherefore their conception of man was also quite different. Whatstrikes me most is that the Greeks made their gods like men, whilethe Christians desired to make men like the gods. That Olympiancompany is certainly a jovial, amorous, loving, lying, quarrelingand vow-breaking, petulant lot; hunt-loving, chariot-riding and jave-lin-throwing like the Greeks themselves—-a marrying lot, too, andhaving unbelievably many illegitimate children. So far as the differ-ence between gods and men is concerned, the gods merely had di-vine powers of hurling thunderbolts in heaven and raisingvegetation on earth, were immortal, and drank nectar instead ofwine—the fruits were pretty much the same. One feels one can beintimate with this crowd, can go hunting with a knapsack on one’sback with Apollo or Athene, or stop Mercury on the way and chat













i8 VIEWS OF MANKIND

with him as with a Western Union messenger boy, and i£ the con-versation gets too interesting, we can imagine Mercury saying,“Yeah. Okay. Sorry, but I’ll have to run along and deliver this mes-sage at 72nd Street.” The Greek men were not divine, but the Greekgods were human. How different from the perfect Chiistian God!And so the gods were merely another race of men, a race of giants,gifted with immortality, while men on earth were not. Out of thisbackground came some of the most inexpressibly beautiful storiesof Demeter and Proserpina and Orpheus. The belief in the godswas taken for granted, for even Socrates, when he was about todrink hemlock, proposed a libation to the gods to speed him on hisjourney from this world to the next. This was very much like theattitude of Confucius. It was necessarily so in that period; whatattitude toward man and God the Greek spirit would take in themodern world there is unfortunately no chance of knowing. TheGreek pagan world was not modern, and the modern Christianworld is not Greek., That’s the pity of it.

On the whole, it was accepted by the Greeks that man’s was amortal lot, subject sometimes to a cruel Fate. That once accepted,man was quite happy as he was, for the Greeks loved this life andthis universe, and were interested in understanding the good, thetrue and the beautiful in life, besides being fully occupied in scien-tifically understanding the physical world. There was no mythical“Golden Period” in the sense of the Garden of Eden, and no alle-gory of the Fall of Man; the Hellenes themselves were but humancreatures transformed from pebbles picked up and thrown overtheir shoulders by Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha, as they werecoming down to the plain after the Great Flood. Diseases and careswere explained comically; they came through the uncontrollabledesire of a young woman to open and see a box of jewels—Pan-dora’s Box. The Greek fancy was beautiful. They took humannature largely as it was: the Christians might say they were “re-signed” to the mortal lot. But it was so beautiful to be mortal:there was free room for the exercise of understanding and the free,speculative spirit. Some of the Sophists thought man’s nature good,













CHRISTIAN, GREEK AND CHINESE 19

and some thought man’s nature bad, but there wasn’t the sharpcontradiction o£ Hobbes and Rousseau. Finally, in Plato, man wasseen to be a compound of desires, emotions, and thought, andideal human life was the living together in harmony of these threeparts of his being under the guidance of wisdom or true under-standing. Plato thought “ideas” were immortal, but individualsouls were either base or noble, according as they loved justice,learning, temperance and beauty or not. The soul also acquired anindependent and immortal existence in Socrates; as we are told in“Phaedo,” “When the soul exists in herself, and is released fromthe body, and the body is released from the soul, what is this butdeath?” Evidently the belief in immortality of the human soul issomething which the Christian, Greek, Taoist and Confucianistviews have in common. Of course this is nothing to be jumped atby modern believers in the immortality of the soul. Socrates’ beliefin immortality would probably mean nothing to a modern man,because many of his premises in support of it, like re-incarnation,cannot be accepted by the modern man.

The Chinese view of man also arrived at the idea that man is'the Lord of the Creation (“Spirit of the Ten Thousand Things”),and in the Confucianist view, man ranks as the equal of heavenand earth in the “Trio of Geniuses.” The background was ani-mistic: everything was alive or inhabited by a spirit—mountains,rivers, and everything that reached a grand old age. The winds andthunder were spirits themselves; each of the great mountains andeach river was ruled by a spirit who practically owned it; eachkind of flower had a fairy in heaven attending to its seasons andits welfare, and there was a Queen of All Flowers whose birthdaycame on the twelfth day of the second moon; every willow treepine tree, cypress, fox or turtle that reached a grand old age, sayover a few hundred years, acquired by that very fact immortalityand became a “genius”

With this animistic background, it is natural that man is alsoconsidered a manifestation of the spirit. This spirit, like all life inthe entire universe, is produced by the union of the male, active,













VIEWS OF MANKIND

positive or yang principle, and the female, passive, negative or yinprinciple—which is really no more than a lucky, shrewd guess atpositive and negative electricity. When this spirit becomes incar-nated in a human body, it is called p'o; when unattached to a bodyand floating about as spirit it is called hwen. (A man of forcefulpersonality or “spirits” is spoken of as having a lot of pfoli, or p’o-energy.) After death, this hwen continues to wander about. Nor-mally it does not bother people, but if no one buries and offerssacrifices to the deceased, the spirit becomes a “wandering ghost,”for which reason an All Souls’ Day is set apart on the fifteenthday of the seventh moon for a general sacrifice to those drownedin water or dead and unburied in a strange land. Also, if the de-ceased was murdered or died suffering a wrong, the sense ofinjustice in the ghost compels it to hang about and cause troubleuntil the wrong is avenged and the spirit is satisfied. Then alltrouble is stopped.

While living, man, who is spirit taking shape in a body, neces-sarily has certain passions, desires, and a flow of “vital energy,” orin more easily understood English, just “nervous energy.” In andfor themselves, these are neither good nor bad, but just somethinggiven and inseparable from the characteristically human life. Allmen and women have passions, natural desires and noble am-bitions, and also a conscience; they have sex, hunger, fear, anger,and are subject to sickness, pain, suffering and death. Culture con-sists in bringing about the expression of these passions and desiresin harmony. That is the Confucianist view, which believes that byliving in harmony with this human nature given us, wc can becomethe equals of heaven and earth, as quoted at the end of Chapter VI.The Buddhists, however, regard the mortal desires of the fleshessentially as the medieval Christians did—they arc a nuisance tobe done away with. Men and women who are too intelligent, orinclined to think too much, sometimes accept this view and becomemonks and nuns; but on the whole, Confucian good sense forbidsit. Then also, with a Taoistic touch, beautiful and talented girlssuffering a harsh fate are regarded as “fallen fairies,” punished for













CHRISTIAN, GREEK AND CHINESE

having mortal thoughts or some neglect of duty in heaven and sentdown to this earth to live through a predestined fate of mortalsufferings.

Man’s intellect is considered as a flow of energy. Literally thisintellect is “spirit of a genius” (chingshen), the word “genius” be-ing essentially taken in the sense in which we speak of fox genii,rock genii and pine genii. The nearest English equivalent is, as Ihave suggested, “vitality” or “nervous energy,” which ebbs andflows at different times of the day and of the person’s life. Everyman born into this world starts out with certain passions anddesires and this vital energy, which run their course in differentcycles through childhood, youth, maturity, old age and death.Confucius said, “When young, beware of fighting; when strong,beware of sex; and when old, beware of possession,” which simplymeans that a boy loves fighting, a young man loves women, and anold man loves money.

Faced with this compound of physical, mental and moral assets,the Chinese takes an attitude toward man himself, as toward allother problems, which may be summed up in the phrase: “Let us bereasonable.” This is an attitude of expecting neither too much nortoo little. Man is, as it were, sandwiched between heaven andearth, between idealism and realism, between lofty thoughts andthe baser passions. Being so sandwiched is the very essence of hu-manity; it is human to have thirst for knowledge and thirst forwater, to love a good idea and a good dish of pork with bambooshoots, and to admire a beautiful saying and a beautiful woman.This being the case, our world is necessarily an imperfect world.Of course there is a chance of taking human society in hand andmaking it better, but the Chinese do not expect either perfect peaceor perfect happiness. There is a story illustrating this point of view.There was a man who was in Hell and about to be re-incarnated,and he said to the King of Re-incarnation, “If you want me to re-turn to the earth as a human being, I will go only on my ownconditions” “And what are they?” asked the King. The man re-plied, “I must be born the son of a cabinet minister and father of













VIEWS OF MANKIND

a future ‘Literary Wrangler’ (the scholar who comes out first atthe national examinations). I must have ten thousand acres of landsurrounding my home and fish ponds and fruits of every kind anda beautiful wife and pretty concubines, all good and loving to me,and rooms stocked to the ceiling with gold and pearls and cellarsstocked full of grain and trunks chockful of money, and I myselfmust be a Grand Councilor or a Duke of the First Rank andenjoy honor and prosperity and live until I am a hundred yearsold.” And the King of Re-incarnation replied, “If there was such alot on earth, I would go and be re-incarnated myself, and not giveit to you!”

The reasonable attitude is, since we’ve got this human nature,let’s start with it. Besides, there is no escaping from it anyway.Passions and instincts are originally good or originally bad, butthere is not much use talking about them, is there? On the otherhand, there is the danger of our being enslaved by them. Just stayin the middle of the road. This reasonable attitude creates such aforgiving kind of philosophy that, at least to a cultured, broad-minded scholar who lives according to the spirit of reasonableness,any human error or misbehavior whatsoever, legal or moral orpolitical, which can be labeled as “common human nature” (moreliterally, “man’s normal passions”), is excusable. The Chinese go sofar as to assume that Heaven or God Himself is quite a reasonablebeing, that if you live reasonably, according to your best lights, youhave nothing to fear, that peace of conscience is the greatest of allgifts, and that a man with a clear conscience need not be afraideven of ghosts. With a reasonable God supervising the affairs ofreasonable and some unreasonable beings, everything is quite allright in this world. Tyrants die; traitors commit suicide; the grasp-ing fellow is seen selling his property; the sons of a powerful andrich collector of curios (about whom tales are told of grasping greedor extortion by power) are seen selling out the collection on whichtheir father spent so much thought and trouble, and these samecurios are now being dispersed among other families; murderersare found out and dead and wronged women are avenged. Some-













EARTH BOUND

23

times, but quite seldom, an oppressed person cries out, “Heaven hasno eyes!” (Justice is blind.) Eventually, both in Taoism and inConfucianism, the conclusion and highest goal of this philosophy iscomplete understanding of and harmony with nature, resulting inwhat I may call “reasonable naturalism,” if we must have a termfor classification. A reasonable naturalist then setdes down to thislife with a sort of animal satisfaction. As Chinese illiterate womenput it, “Others gave birth to us and we give birth to others. Whatelse are we to do?”

There is a terrible philosophy in this saying, “Others gave birthto us and we give birth to others ” Life becomes a biological pro-cession and the very question of immortality is sidetracked. Forthat is the exact feeling of a Chinese grandfather holding his grand-child by the hand and going to the shops to buy some candy, withthe thought that in five or ten years he will be returning to hisgrave or to his ancestors. The best that we can hope for in thislife is that we shall not have sons and grandsons of whom we needbe ashamed. The whole pattern of Chinese life is organized ac-cording to this one idea.

II. Earth-Bound

The situation then is this: man wants to live, but he still mustlive upon this earth. All questions of living in heaven must bebrushed aside. Let not the spirit take wings and soar to the abode ofthe gods and forget the earth. Are we not mortals, condemned todie? The span of life vouchsafed us, threescore and ten, is shortenough, if the spirit gets too haughty and wants to live forever, buton the other hand, it is also long enough, if the spirit is a littlehumble. One can learn such a lot and enjoy such a lot in seventyyears, and three generations is a long, long time to see human folliesand acquire human wisdom. Anyone who is wise and has livedlong enough to witness the changes of fashion and morals andpolitics through the rise and fall of three generations should be













24

perfectly satisfied to rise from his seat and go away saying, “It was agood show,” when the curtain falls.

For we are of the earth, earth-born and earth-bound. There isnothing to be unhappy about the fact that we are, as it were, de-livered upon this beautiful earth as its transient guests. Even if itwere a dark dungeon, we still would have to make the best of it;it would be ungrateful of us not to do so when we have, insteadof a dungeon, such a beautiful earth to live on for a good part of acentury. Sometimes we get too ambitious and disdain the humbleand yet generous earth. Yet a sentiment for this Mother Earth, afeeling of true affection and attachment, one must have for thistemporary abode of our body and spirit, if we are to have a sense ofspiritual harmony.

We have to have, therefore, a kind of animal skepticism as wellas animal faith, taking this earthly life largely as it is. And we haveto retain the wholeness of nature that we see in Thoreau whofelt himself kin to the sod and partook largely of its dull patience,in winter expecting the sun of spring, who in his cheapest momentswas apt to think that it was not his business to be “seeking thespirit,” but as much the spirit’s business to seek him, and whosehappiness, as he described it, was a good deal like that of the wood-chucks. The earth, after all is real, as the heaven is unreal: howfortunate is man that he is born between the real earth and theunreal heaven!

Any good practical philosophy must start out with the recog-nition of our having a body. It is high time that some among usmade the straight admission that we are animals, an admissionwhich is inevitable since the establishment of the basic truth of theDarwinian theory and the great progress of biology, especiallybio-chemistry. It was very unfortunate that our teachers and philoso-phers belonged to the so-called intellectual class, with a character-istic professional pride of intellect. The men of the spirit were asproud of the spirit as the shoemaker is proud of leather. Sometimeseven the spirit was not sufficiently remote and abstract and theyhad to use the words, “essence” or “soul” or “idea,” writing them













SPIRIT AND FLESH

25

with capital letters to frighten us. The human body was distilledin this scholastic machine into a spirit, and the spirit was furtherconcentrated into a kind of essence, forgetting that even alcoholicdrinks must have a “body”—mixed with plain water—if they areto be palatable at all. And we poor laymen were supposed to drinkthat concentrated quintessence of spirit. This over-emphasis on thespirit was fatal. It made us war with our natural instincts, and mychief criticism is that it made a whole and rounded view of humannature impossible. It proceeded also from an inadequate knowledgeof biology and psychology, and of the place of the senses, emotionsand, above all, instincts in our life. Man is made of flesh andspirit both, and it should be philosophy’s business to see that themind and body live harmoniously together, that there be a recon-ciliation between the two.

III. Spirit and Flesh

The most obvious fact which philosophers refuse to see is that wehave got a body. Tired of seeing our mortal imperfections and oursavage instincts and impulses, sometimes our preachers wish that wewere made like angels, and yet we are at a total loss to imagine whatthe angels’ life would be like. We either give the angels a body anda shape like our own—except for a pair of wings—or we don’t.It is interesting that the general conception of an angel is still that ofa human body with a pair of wings. I sometimes think that it is anadvantage even for angels to have a body with the five senses. If Iwere to be an angel, I should like to have a school-girl complexion,but how am I going to have a school-girl complexion without askin? I still should like to drink a glass of tomato juice or icedorange juice, but how am I going to appreciate iced orange juicewithout having thirst? And how am I going to enjoy food, when Iam incapable of hunger? How would an angel paint without pig-ment, sing without the hearing of sounds, smell the fine morning airwithout a nose? How would he enjoy the immense satisfaction ofscratching an itch, if his skm doesn’t itch? And what a terrible loss













in the capacity for happiness that would be! Either we have to havebodies and have all our bodily wants satisfied, or else we are purespirits and have no satisfactions at all. All satisfactions imply want.

I sometimes think what a terrible punishment it would be for aghost or an angel to have no body, to look at a stream of cool waterand have no feet to plunge into it and get a delightful cooling sen-sation from it, to see a dish of Peking or Long Island duck andhave no tongue to taste it, to see crumpets and have no teeth tochew them, to sec the beloved faces of our dear ones and have noemotions to feel toward them. Terribly sad it would be if we shouldone day return to this earth as ghosts and move silently into ourchildren’s bedroom, to see a child lying there in bed and have nohands to fondle him and no arms to clasp him, no chest for hiswarmth to penetrate to, no round hollow between cheek andshoulder for him to nestle against, and no ears to hear his voice,

A defense of the angels-without-bodies theory will be found to bemost vague and unsatisfying. Such a defender might say, “Ah, yes,but in the world of spirit, we don’t need such satisfactions,” “Butwhat instead have you got?” Complete silence; or perhaps, “Void—Peace—Calm,” “What then do you gain by it?” “Absence of workand pain and sorrow.” I admit such a heaven has a tremendousattraction to galley slaves. Such a negative ideal and conception ofhappiness is dangerously near to Buddhism and is ultimately to betraced to Asia (Asia Minor, in this case) rather than Europe,

Such speculations are necessarily idle, but I may at least point outthat the conception of a “senseless spirit” is quite unwarranted, sincewe arc coming more and more to feel that the universe itself is asentient being. Perhaps motion rather than standing still will be acharacteristic of the spirit, and one of the pleasures of a bodiless angelwill be to revolve like a proton around a nucleus at the speed oftwenty or thirty thousand revolutions a second. There may be a keendelight in that, more fascinating than a ride on a Coney Island scenicrailway. It will certainly be a kind of sensation. Or perhaps the bodi-less angel will dart like light or cosmic rays in ethereal waves aroundcurved space at the rate of 183,000 miles per second. There must still













be spiritual pigments for the angels to paint and enjoy some formof creation, ethereal vibrations for the angels to feel as tone andsound and color, and ethereal breeze to brush against the angels’cheeks. Otherwise spirit itself would stagnate like water in a cess-pool, or feel like men on a hot, suffocating summer afternoon with-out a whiff of fresh air. There must still be motion and emotion (inwhatever form) if there is to be life; certainly not complete rest andinsensitiveness.

IV. A Biological View

The better knowledge of our own bodily functions and mentalprocesses gives us a truer and broader view of ourselves and takesaway from the word “animal” some of its old bad flavor. The oldproverb that “to understand is to forgive” is applicable to our ownbodily and mental processes. It may seem strange, but it is true,that the very fact that we have a better understanding of our bodilyfunctions makes it impossible for us to look down upon them withcontempt. The important thing is not to say whether our digestiveprocess is noble or ignoble; die important thing is just to understandit, and somehow it becomes extremely noble. This is true of everybiological function or process in our body, from perspiration andthe elimination of waste to the functions of the pancreatic juice, thegall, the endocrine glands and the finer emotive and cogitativeprocesses. One no longer despises the kidney, one merely tries tounderstand it; and one no longer looks upon a bad tooth as symbolicof the final decay of our body and ,a reminder to attend to thewelfare of our soul, but merely goes to a dentist, has it examined,explained and properly fixed up. Somehow a man coming out froma dentist’s office no longer despises his teeth, but has an increasedrespect for them—-because he is going to gnaw apples and chickenbones with increased delight. As for the superfine metaphysicianwho says that the teeth belong to the devil, and the Neo-Platonistswho deny that individual teeth exist, I always get a satirical delightin seeing a philosopher suffering from a tooth-ache and an opti-













mistic poet suffering from dyspepsia. Why doesn’t he go on withhis philosophic disquisitions, and why does he hold his handagainst his cheek, just as you or I or the woman in the next housewould do? And why does optimism seem so unconvincing to adyspeptic poet? Why doesn’t he sing any more? How ungratefulit is, of him, therefore, to forget the intestines and sing about thespirit when the intestines behave and give him no trouble!

Science, if anything, has taught us an increased respect for ourbody, by deepening a sense of the wonder and mystery of its work-ings. In the first place, genetically, we begin to understand how wecame about, and see that, instead of being made out of clay, we aresitting on the top of the genealogical tree of the animal kingdom.That must be a fine sensation, sufficiently satisfying for any manwho is not intoxicated with his own spirit. Not that I believe dino-saurs lived and died millions of years ago in order that we todaymight walk erect with our two legs upon this earth. Without suchgratuitous assumptions, biology has not at all destroyed a whit ofhuman dignity, or cast doubt upon the view that wc are probablythe most splendid animals ever evolved on this earth. So that isquite satisfying for any man who wants to insist on human dignity.In the second place, we are more impressed than ever with themystery and beauty of the body. The workings of the internalparts of our body and the wonderful correlation between them com-pel in u$ a sense of the extreme difficulty with which these correla-tions are brought about and the extreme simplicity and finality withwhich they are nevertheless accomplished. Instead of simplifyingthese internal chemical processes by explaining them, science makesthem all the more difficult to explain. These processes are incrediblymore difficult than the layman without any knowledge of physiologyusually imagines. The great mystery of the universe without issimilar in quality to the mystery of the universe within.

The more a physiologist tries to analyze and study the bio-phys-ical and bio-chemical processes of human physiology, the more hiswonder increases. That is so to the extent that sometimes it compelsa physiologist with a broad spirit to accept the mystic’s view of life,













A BIOLOGICAL VIEW

29

as in the case of Dr. Alexis Carrel. Whether we agree with him ornot, as he states his opinions in Man, the Unknown, we must agreewith him that the facts are there, unexplained and unexplainable.We begin to acquire a sense of the intelligence of matter itself:

The organs are correlated by the organic fluids and thenervous system. Each element of the body adjusts itself to theothers, and the others to it. This mode of adaptation is es-sentially teleological. If we attribute to tissues an intelligenceof the same kind as ours, as mechanists and vitalists do, thephysiological processes appear to associate together in view ofthe end to be attained. The existence of finality within theorganism is undeniable. Each part seems to know the presentand future needs of the whole, and acts accordingly. The sig-nificance of time and space is not the same for our tissues asfor our mind. The body perceives the remote as well as the near,the future as well as the present.2

And we should wonder, for instance, and be extremely amazed thatour intestines heal their own wounds, entirely without our voluntaryeffort:

The wounded loop first becomes immobile. It is temporarilyparalyzed, and fecal matter is thus prevented from runninginto the abdomen. At the same time, some other intestinal loop,or the surface of the omentum, approaches the wound and,owing to a known property of peritoneum, adheres to it. Withinfour or five hours the opening is occluded. Even if the sur-geon’s needle has drawn the edges of the wound together,healing is due to spontaneous adhesion of the peritoneal sur-faces.3

Why do we despise the body, when the flesh itself shows suchintelligence? After all, we are endowed with a body, which is a self-nourishing, self-regulating, self-repairing, self-starting and self-reproducing machine, installed at birth and lasting like a goodgrandfather clock for three-quarters of a century, requiring verylittle attention. It is a machine provided with wireless vision and

2 Man, the Unfytoum, p. 197,

2 Ibid, p. aoo.













30

wireless hearing, with a more highly complicated system o£ nervesand lymphs than the most complicated telephone and telegraphsystem of the world. It has a system of filing reports done by a vastcomplexus of nerves, managed with such efficiency that some files,the less important ones, are kept in the attic and others are keptin a more convenient desk, but those kept in the attic, which maybe thirty years old and rarely referred to, are nevertheless there andsometimes can be found with lightning speed and efficiency. Thenit also manages to go about like a motor car with perfect knee-action and absolute silence of engines, and if the motor car has anaccident and breaks its glass or its steering wheel, the car auto-matically exudes or manufactures a substance to replace the glassand does its best to grow a steering wheel, or at least manages todo the steering with a swollen end of the steering shaft; for we mustremember that when one of our kidneys is cut out, the other kidneyswells arid increases its function to insure the passage of the normalvolume of urine. Then it also keeps up a normal temperature withina tenth of a Fahrenheit degree, and manufactures its own chemicalsfor the processes of transforming food into living tissues.

Above all, it has a sense of the rhythm of life, and a sense oftime, not only of hours and days, but also of decades; the bodyregulates its own childhood, puberty and maturity, stops growingwhen it should no longer grow, and brings forth a wisdom tooth ata time when no one of us ever thought of it. Our conscious wisdomhas nothing to do with our wisdom tooth. It also manufacturesspecific antidotes against poison, on the whole with amazing suc-cess, and it does all these things with absolute silence, without theusual racket of a factory, so that our superfine metaphysician maynot be disturbed and is free to think about his spirit or his essence.

V. Human Life a Poem

I think that, from a biological standpoint, human life almost readslike a poem. It has its own rhythm and beat, its internal cycles ofgrowth and decay. It begins with innocent childhood, followed by













HUMAN LIFE A POEM 31

awkward "adolescence trying awkwardly to adapt itself to maturesociety, with its young passions and follies, its ideals and ambitions;then it reaches a manhood of intense activities, profiting from ex-perience and learning more about society and human nature; atmiddle age, there is a slight easing of tension, a mellowing of char-acter like the ripening of fruit or the mellowing of good wine, andthe gradual acquiring of a more tolerant, more cynical and at thesame time a kindlier view of life; then in the sunset of our life, theendocrine glands decrease their activity, and if we have a true philos-ophy of old age and have ordered our life pattern according to it, it isfor us the age of peace and security and leisure and contentment; fi-nally, life flickers out and one goes into eternal sleep, never to wakeup again. One should be able to sense the beauty of this rhythm oflife, to appreciate, as we do in grand symphonies, its main theme, itsstrains of conflict and the final resolution. The movements of thesecycles are very much the same in a normal life, but the music mustbe provided by the individual himself. In some souls, the discord-ant note becomes harsher and harsher and finally overwhelms orsubmerges the main melody. Sometimes the discordant note gainsso much power that the music can no longer go on, and the indi-vidual shoots himself with a pistol or jumps into a river. But thatis because his original leit-motif has been hopelessly over-shadowedthrough the lack of a good self-education. Otherwise the normalhuman life runs to its normal end in a kind of dignified movementand procession. There are sometimes in many of us too many stac-catos or impetuosos, and because the tempo is wrong, the music isnot pleasing to the ear; we might have more of the grand rhythmand majestic tempo of the Ganges, flowing slowly and eternally intothe sea.

No one can say that a life with childhood, manhood and old ageis not a beautiful arrangement; the day has its morning, noon andsunset, and the year has its seasons, and it is good that it is so.There is no good or bad in life, except what is good according toits own season. And if we take this biological view of life and tryto live according to the seasons, no one but a conceited fool or an













VIEWS OF MANKIND

32

impossible idealist can deny that human life can be lived like apoem. Shakespeare has expressed this idea more graphically in hispassage about the seven stages of life, and a good many Chinesewriters have said about the same thing. It is curious that Shake-speare was never very religious, or very much concerned with re-ligion. I think this was his greatness; he took human life largelyas it was, and intruded himself as little upon the general schemeof things as he did upon the characters of his plays. Shakespearewas like Nature heisclf, and that is the greatest compliment we canpay to a writer or thinker. He merely lived, observed life and wentaway.













Chapter Three

OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

I The Monkey Epic

BUT if this biological view helps us to appreciate the beauty andrhythm of life, it also shows our ludicrous limitations. By presentingto us a more correct picture of what we are as animals, it enables usto better understand ourselves and the progress of human affairs,A more generous sympathy, or even tolerant cynicism, comes witha truer and deeper understanding of human nature which has itsroots in our animal ancestry. Gendy reminding ourselves that weare children of the Neanderthal or the Peking man, and furtherback still of the anthropoid apes, we eventually achieve the capacityof laughing at our sins and limitations, as well as admiring ourmonkey cleverness, which we call a sense of human comedy. Thisis a beautiful thought suggested by the enlightening essay of Clar-ence Day, This Simian World. Reading that essay of Day’s, we canforgive all our fellowmen, the censors, publicity chiefs, Fascist edi-tors, Nazi radio announcers, senators and lawmakers, dictators, eco-nomic experts, delegates to international conferences and all thebusybodies who try to interfere with other people’s lives. We canforgive them because we begin to understand them.

In this sense, I come more and more to appreciate the wisdom andinsight of the great Chinese monkey epic, Hsiyuchi. The progressof human history can be better understood from this point of view;it is so similar to the pilgrimage of those imperfect, semi-humancreatures to the Western Heaven—the Monkey Wuk’ung represent-ing the human intellect, the Pig Pachieh representing our lower.nature, Monk Sand representing common sense, and the AbbotHsiiantsang representing wisdom and the Holy Way. The Abbot,protected by this curious escort, was engaged upon a journey fromChina to India to procure sacred Buddhist books. The story ofhuman progress is essentially like the pilgrimage of this variegatedcompany of highly imperfect creatures, continually landing in dan-

33













34

gets and ludicrous situations through their own folly and mischief.How often the Abbot has to correct and chastise the mischievousMonkey and the sensuous Pig, forever led by their sadly imperfectminds and their lower passions into all sorts of scrapes! The instinctsof human fraility, of anger, revenge, impetuousness, sensuality, lackof forgiveness, above all self-conceit and lack of humility, forevercrop up during this pilgrimage of mankind toward sainthood. Theincrease of destructiveness goes side by side with the increase ofhuman skill, for like the Monkey with magical powers, we are abletoday to walk upon the clouds and turn somersaults in the air(which is called “looping-the-loop” in modern terms), to pullmonkey hair out of our monkey legs and transform them into littlemonkeys to harass our enemy, to knock at the very gates of Heaven,brush the Heavenly Gate Keeper brusquely aside and demand aplace in the company of the gods.

The Monkey was clever, but he was also conceited; he had enoughmonkey magic to push his way into Heaven, but he had not enoughsanity and balance and temperance of spirit to live peacefully there.Too good perhaps for this earth and its mortal existence, he was yetnot good enough for Heaven and the company of the immortals.There was something raw and mischievous and rebellious in him,some dregs unpurged in his gold, and that was why when he enteredHeaven he created a terrific scare there, like a wild lion let loosefrom a menagerie cage in the streets of a city, in the preliminaryepisode before he joined the pilgrims’ party. Through his inbornincorrigible mischief, he spoiled the Annual Dinner Party given bythe Western Queen Mother of Heaven to all the gods, saints, andimmortals of Heaven. Enraged that he was not invited to the party,he posed as a messenger of God and sent the Bare-Footed Fairy onhis way to the feast in a wrong direction by telling him that theplace of the party had been changed, and then transformed himselfinto the shape of the Barc-Footed Fairy and went to the feast him-self. Quite a number of other fairies had been misled by him in thisway. Then entering the courtyard, he saw he was the first arrival,Nobody was there except the servants guarding the jars of fairy













THE MONKEY EPIC 35

wine in the corridor. He then transformed himself into a sleeping-sickness insect and stung the servants into sleep and drunk the jarsof wine. Half intoxicated, he tumbled into the hall and ate up thecelestial peaches laid out at table. When the guests arrived and sawthe despoiled dinner, he was already off for some other exploits atthe home of Laotse, trying to eat his pills of immortality. Finally,still in disguise, he left Heaven, partly afraid of the consequences ofhis drunken exploits, but chiefly disgusted because he had not beeninvited to the Annual Dinner. He returned to his Monkey Kingdomwhere he was the king and told the litde monkeys so, and set upa banner of rebellion against Heaven, writing on it the words “TheGreat Sage, Equal to Heaven.” There followed then terrific combatsbetween this Monkey and the heavenly warriors, in which theMonkey was not captured until the Goddess of Mercy knockedhim down with a gentle sprig of flowers from the clouds.

So, like the Monkey, forever we rebel and there will be no peaceand humility in us until we are vanquished by the Goddess ofMercy, whose gentle flowers dropped from Heaven will knock usoff our feet. And we shall not learn the lesson of true humility untilscience has explored the limits of the universe. For in the epic, theMonkey still rebelled even after his capture and demanded of theJade Emperor in Heaven why he was not given a higher title amongthe gods, and he had to learn the lesson of humility by an ultimatebet with Buddha or God Himself. He made a bet that with hismagical powers he could go as far as the end of the earth, and thestake was the title of “The Great Sage, Equal of Heaven,” or elsecomplete submission. Then he leaped into the air, and traveledwith lightning speed across the continents until he came to a moun-tain with five peaks, which he thought must be as far as mortalbeings had ever set foot. In order to leave a record of his havingreached the place, he passed some monkey urine at the foot of themiddle peak, and having satisfied himself with this feat, he cameback and told Buddha about his journey. Buddha then opened onehand and asked him to smell his own urine at the base of the middlefinger, and told him how all this time he had never left the palm.













OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

36

It was only then that the Monkey acquired humility, and after beingchained to a rock for five hundred years, was freed by the Abbotand joined him in his pilgrimage.

After all, this Monkey, which is an image of ourselves, is an ex-tremely lovable creature, in spite of his conceit and his mischief.So should we, too, be able to love humanity in spite of all its weak-nesses and shortcomings.

II. In the Image of the Monkey

So then, instead of holding on to the Biblical view that we aremade in the image of Gbd, we come to realize that we are made inthe image of the monkey, and that we are as far removed from theperfect God, as, let us say, the ants are removed from ourselves. Weare very clever, we are quite sure of that; wc are often a little cockyabout our ^cleverness, because we have a mind. But the biologistcomes in to tell us that the mind after all is a very late development,as far as articulate thinking is concerned, and that among the thingswhich go into the make-up of our moral fiber, wc have besides themind a set of animal or savage instincts, which arc much morepowerful and are in fact the explanation why we misbehave individ-ually and in our group life. We are the better able to understandthe nature of that human mind of which we are so proud. Wesee in the first place that, besides being a comparatively clever mind,it is also an inadequate mind. The evolution of the human skullshows u$ that it is nothing but an enlargement of one of the spinalvertebrae and that therefore its function, like that of the spinal cord,is essentially that of sensing danger, meeting the external environ-ment and preserving life-—not thinking. Thinking is generally verypoorly done. Lord Balfour ought to go down to posterity on thestrength of his one saying that “the human brain is as much anorgan for seeking food as the pig’s snout.” I do not call this realcynicism, I call it merely a generous understanding of ourselves.

We begin to understand genetically our human imperfections.Imperfect? Lord, yes, but the Lord never made us otherwise. But













IN THE IMAGE OF THE MONKEY 37

that is not the point. The whole point is, our remote ancestors swamand crawled and swung from one branch to another in the primevalforest in Tarzan fashion, or hung suspended from a tree, like aspider monkey by an arm or a tail.1 At each stage, considered byitself, it was rather marvelously perfect, to my way of thinking. Butnow we are called upon to do an infinitely more difficult job ofreadjustment.

When man creates a civilization of his own, he embarks upon acourse of development that biologically might terrify the CreatorHimself. So far as adaptation to nature is concerned, all nature’screatures are marvelously perfect, for those that are not perfectlyadapted she kills off. But now we are no longer called upon to adaptourselves to nature; we are called upon to adapt ourselves to our-selves, to this thing called civilization. All instincts were good,were healthy in nature; in society, however, we call all instinctssavage. Every mouse steals—and he is not the less moral or moreimmoral for stealing—every dog barks, every cat doesn’t comehome at night and tears everything it can lay its paws upon, everylion kills, every horse runs away from the sight of danger, everytortoise sleeps the best hours of the day away, and every insect,reptile, bird and beast reproduces its kind in public. Now in termsof civilization, every mouse is a thief, every dog makes too muchnoise, every cat is an unfaithful husband, when he is not a savagelittle vandal, every lion or tiger is a murderer, every horse a coward,every tortoise a lazy louse, and finally, every insect, reptile, bird andbeast is obscene when he performs his natural vital functions. Whata wholesale transformation of values! And that is the reason why wesit back and wonder how the Lord made us so imperfect.

1 Is this the reason why, when we are on a swing and about to swing forwardafter swinging backward, we get a tingle at the end of our spinal cord, where atail formerly was? The reflex is still there and we are trying to catch on to some-thing by a tail which has already disappeared.













OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

III. On Being Mortal

There are grave consequences following upon our having thismortal body: first our being mortal, then our having a stomach,having strong muscles and having a curious mind. These facts,because of their basic character, profoundly influence the characterof human civilization. Because this is so obvious, we never thinkabout it. But we cannot understand ourselves and our civilizationunless we see these consequences clearly.

I suspect that all democracy, all poetry, and all philosophy startout from this God-given fact that all of us, princes and paupersalike, are limited to a body of five or six feet and live a life of fiftyor sixty years. On the whole, the arrangement is quite handy. Weare neither too long nor too short. At least I am quite satisfied withfive feet four. And fifty or sixty years seems to me such an awfullylong time; it is, in fact, a matter of two or three generations. It isso arranged that when we arc born, we see certain old grandfathers,who die in the course of time, and when we become grandfathersourselves, wc see other tiny tots being born. That seems to make itjust perfect. The whole philosophy of the matter lies in the Chinesesaying that “A man may own a thousand acres of land, and yet hestill sleeps upon a bed of five feet” or sixty inches. It doesn’t seemas if a king needed very much more than seven feet at the outsidefor his bed, and there he will have to go and stretch himself atnight. I am therefore as good as a king. And no matter how rich aman is, few exceed the Biblical limit of threescore and ten. To livebeyond seventy is to be called in Chinese “ancient-rare,” because ofthe Chinese line that “it is rare for man to live over seventy sincethe ancient times.”

And so in respect of wealth. Of this life, everybody has a share,but no one owns the mortgage. And so we are enabled to take thislife more lightly; instead of being permanent tenants upon thisearth, we become its transient guests, for guests we all are of thisearth, the owners of the land no less than the share-croppers. Ittakes something out of the meaning of the word “landlord." No one













ON BEING MORTAL 39

really owns a house and no one really owns a field* As a Chinesepoet says:

What pretty, golden fields against a hill!

Newcomers harvest crops that others till.

Rejoice not, O newcomers, at your harvest;

One waits behind—a new newcomer still!

The democracy of death is seldom appreciated. Without death,even St. Helena would have meant nothing to Napoleon, and I donot know what Europe would be like. There would be no biographiesof heroes or conquerors, and even if there were, their biographerscertainly would be less forgiving and sympathetic. We forgivethe great of this world because they are dead. By their being dead,we feel that we have got even with them. Every funeral processioncarries a banner upon which are written the words, “Equality ofMankind.” What joy of life is seen in the following ballad that theoppressed people of China composed about the death of Ch’in Shih-huang, the builder of the Great Wall and the tyrant, who, while helived, made “libellous thoughts in the belly” punishable by death,burned the Confucian books and buried hundreds of Confucianscholars alive:

Ch’in Shih-huang is going to die! 2He opened my door,

And sat on my floor,

He drank my gravy.

And wanted some more.

He sipped my wine.

And couldn’t tell what for;

I’ll bend my bow,

And shoot him at the wall.

When he arrives at Shach’iu,

Then he is going to fall!

From this, then, a sense of human comedy and the very stuff ofhuman poetry and philosophy take their rise. He who perceives

2 By inversion, these ballads were reported by the Chinese historians as propheticoracles, giving expression to the voice of God through the voice of the people. Thatexplains the future tense. The Emperor did die at Shach’iu.













OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

4°

death perceives a sense of the human comedy, and quickly becomesa poet. Shakespeare became a deep poet, when he had Hamlettrace the noble dust of Alexander, “till he find it stopping a bung-hole”; “Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returnethinto dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why ofthat loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?” There is, after ail, no more superb sense of comedy inShakespeare than when he let King Richard II talk of graves, ofworms and epitaphs and the antic that keeps court within the hol-low crown that rounds the mortal temples of a king, or where hespeaks of “a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances,his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries,” with all his fines end-ing in a “fine pate full of fine dirt.” Omar Khayyam and* his Chi-nese counterpart, Chia Fuhsi {alias Mup’itsc, an obscure Chinesepoet), derived all their comic spirit and comic interpretation of his-tory from the sense of death itself, by pointing to the foxes makingtheir homes in the kings’ graves. And Chinese philosophy first ac-quired depth and humor with Chuangtsc, who based his cntiiephilosophy, too, on a comment on the sight of a skull:

Chuangtse went to Ch’u and saw an empty skull with itsempty and dried outline. He struck it with a horsewhip andasked it, “Hast thou come to this because thou loved pleasuresand lived inordinately? Wert thou a refugee running awayfrom the law? Didst thou do something wrong to bring shameupon thy parents and thy family? Or wert thou starved todeath? Or didst thou come to thy old age and die a naturaldeath?” Having said this, Chuangtse took the skull and sleptupon it as a pillow.. * .

When Chuangtse’s wife died, Hucitsc went to express hiscondolence but found Chuangtse squatting on the ground andsinging a song, beating time by striking an earthen basin. “Why,this woman has lived with you and borne you children. At theworst, you might refrain from weeping when her old body dies.

Is it not rather too much that you should beat the basin andsing?”

And Chuangtse replied, “You are mistaken* When she firstdied, I could not also help feeling sad and moved, but I re-













ON BEING MORTAL

fleeted that in the beginning she had no life, and not only nolife, she had no bodily shape; and not only no bodily shape, shehad no ghost. Caught in this everchanging flux of things, shebecame a ghost, the ghost became a body, and the body becamealive. Now she has changed again and become dead, and by sodoing she has joined the eternal procession of spring, summer,autumn and winter. Why should I make so much noise andwail and weep over her while her body lies quiedy there in thebig house? That would be a failure to understand the courseof things. That is why I stopped crying ”

Thus I see both poetry and philosophy began with the recognitionof our mortality and a sense of the evanescence of time. This senseof life’s evanescence is back of all Chinese poetry, as well as of agood part of Western poetry—the feeling that life is essentially buta dream, while we row, row our boat down the river in the sunsetof a beautiful afternoon, that flowers cannot bloom forever, themoon waxes and wanes, and human life itself joins the eternal pro-cession of the plant and animal worlds in being born, growing tomaturity and dying to make room for others. Man began to bephilosophical only when he saw the vanity of this earthly existence.Chuangtse said that he once dreamed of being a butterfly, and whilehe was in the dream, he felt he could flutter his wings and every-thing was real, but that on waking up, he realized that he wasChuangtse and Chuangtse was real. Then he thought and wonderedwhich was really real, whether he was really Chuangtse dreamingof being a butterfly, or really a butterfly dreaming of beingChuangtse. Life, then, is really a dream, and we human beings arelike travelers floating down the eternal river of time, embarking ata certain point and disembarking again at another point in orderto make room for others waiting below the river to come aboard.Half of the poetry of life would be gone, if we did not feel thatlife was either a dream, or a voyage with transient travelers, ormerely a stage in which the actors seldom realized that they wereplaying their parts. So wrote a Chinese scholar, Liu Tasheng, to hisfriend:













OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

0£ all the things in the world, that in which we are mostearnest is to be an official, and that which we call the most friv-olous is to be an actor in a play. But I think this is all foolishness.I have often seen on the stage how the actors sing and weepand scold each other and crack jokes, believing that they are realpeople. But the real thing in a play is not the ancient charactersthus being enacted, but rather these actors who enact them.They all have their parents, wives and children, all want to feedtheir parents, wives and children, and all do so by singing andweeping and laughing and scolding and cracking jokes. Theyare the real ancient characters that they try to portray. I havealso seen how some of these actors, who wear an official capand gown and by their own acting believe themselves to be realofficials, so much so that they think no one in the world eversuspects they are acting. They do not realize that while they bowand kowtow to each other and sit and talk and look about, andeven while they are the dignified officials before whom the pris-oners tremble, they are only actors who by their singing andweeping and laughing and scolding and cracking jokes arc try-ing to feed their parents, wives and children! Alas! that thereare people who stick to a certain play, a certain role, a certaintext and a certain accent or style of delivery, until the entire assetof their bowels and internal organs (Lc,, instincts and emotions)arc dominated by the play, without realizing once that theyare really actors!

IV. On Having a Stomach

One of the most important consequences of our being animals isthat we have got this bottomless pit called the stomach. This facthas colored our entire civilization. The Chinese epicure Li Liwengwrote a complaint about our having this bottomless pit, in the prefa-tory note to the section on food in his book on the general art ofliving.

I see that the organs of the human body, the ear, the eye, thenose, the tongue, the hands, the feet and the body, have all anecessary function, but the two organs which are totally unnec-essary but with which we are nevertheless endowed are themouth and the stomach, which cause all the worry am! trouble













of mankind throughout the ages. With this mouth and thisstomach, the matter of getting a living becomes complicated, andwhen the matter of getting a living becomes complicated, wehave cunning and falsehood and dishonesty in human affairs.With the coming of cunning and falsehood and dishonesty inhuman affairs, comes the criminal law, so that the king is notable to protect with his mercy, the parents are not able to gratifytheir love, and even the kind Creator is forced to go against Hiswill. All this comes of a little lack of forethought m His designfor the human body at the time of the creation, and is the con-sequence of our having these two organs. The plants can livewithout a mouth and a stomach, and the rocks and the soil havetheir being without any nourishment. Why, then, must we begiven a mouth and a stomach and endowed with these two extraorgans? And even if we were to be endowed with these organs,He could have made it possible for us to derive our nourishmentas the fish and shell fish derive theirs from water, or the cricketand the cicada from the dew, who all are able to obtain theirgrowth and energy this way and swim or fly or jump or sing.Had it been like this, we should not have to struggle in this lifeand the sorrows of mankind would have disappeared. On theother hand, He has given us not only these two organs, but hasalso endowed us with manifold appetites or desires, besides mak-ing the pit bottomless, $0 that it is like a valley or a sea that cannever be filled. The consequence is that we labor in our life withall the energy of the other organs, in order to supply inade-quately the needs of these two. I have thought over this mat-ter over and over again, and cannot help blaming the Creatorfor it. I know, of course, that He must have repented of Hismistake also, but simply feels that nothing can be done aboutit now, since the design or pattern is already fixed. How impor-tant it is for a man to be very careful at the time of the concep-tion of a law or an institution!

There is certainly nothing to be done about it, now that we havegot this bottomless pit to fill, and the fact of our having possesseda stomach has, to say the least, colored the course of human history.With a generous understanding of human nature, Confucius reducedthe great desires of human beings to two: alimentation and repro-duction, or in simpler terms, food and drink and women. Many













44

men have circumvented sex, but no saint has yet circumvented foodand drink* There are ascetics who have learned to live a continentlife, but even the most spiritual of men cannot forget about foodfor more than four or five hours. The most constant refrain of ourthought occurring unfailingly every few hours is, “When do I eat?”This occurs at least three times a day, and in some cases four orfive times. International conferences, in the midst of discussion ofthe most absorbing and most critical political situations, have tobreak up for the noon meal. Parliaments have to adjust their sched-ule of sessions to meal hours. A coronation ceremony that lasts morethan five or six hours or conflicts with the midday meal, will beimmediately denounced as a public nuisance. And stomach-giftedthat we all are, the best arrangement we can think of when wegather to render public homage to a grandfather is to give him abirthday feast.

There is a reason for it. Friends that meet at meals meet at peace.A good birds’ nest soup or a delicious chow mein has the tendencyto assuage the heat of our arguments and tone clown the harshnessof our conflicting points of view. Put two of the best friends togetherwhen they are hungry, and they will invariably end up in a quarrel.The effect of a good meal lasts not only a few hours, but for weeksand months. We rather hesitate to review unfavorably a book writ-ten by somebody who gave us a good dinner three or four monthsago. It is for this reason that, with the Chinese deep insight intohuman nature, all quarrels and disputes are settled at dinner tablesij^tead of at the court of justice. The pattern of Chinese life is suchthat we not only settle disputes at dinner, after they have arisen, butalso forestall the arising of disputes by the same means. In China,we bribe our way into the good will of everybody by frequent din-ners. It is, in fact, the only safe guide to success in politics. Shouldsome one take the trouble of, compiling statistical figures, he wouldbe able to find an absolute correlation between the number of din-ners a man gives to his friends and the rate or speed of his officialpromotion.

But, constituted as we all are, how can we react otherwise? I do













not think this is peculiarly Chinese. How can an American post-master-general or chief of department decline a private request fora personal favor from some friend at whose home he has eaten fiveor six good meals? I bet on the Americans being as human as theChinese. The only difference is the Americans haven’t got insightinto human nature or haven’t proceeded logically to organize theirpolitical life in accordance with it. I guess there is something similarto this Chinese way of life in the American political world, too,since I cannot but believe human nature is very much the same andwe are all so much alike under the skin. Only I don’t notice it prac-ticed so generally as in China. The only thing I have heard of is thatcandidates for public office give outings for the families in the dis-tricts, bribing the mothers by feeding their children with ice creamand soda pop. The inevitable conviction of the people after such apublic feeding is that “He’s a jolly good fellow,” which usuallybursts out in song. This is merely another form of the practice ofthe medieval lords and nobles in Europe who, on the occasion of awedding or a noble’s birthday, gave their tenants a generous feastwith liberal meats and wine.

So basically influenced are we by this matter of food and drinkthat revolutions, peace, war, patriotism, international understanding,our daily life and the whole fabnc of human social life are pro-foundly influenced by it. What was the cause of the French Revolu-tion? Rousseau and Voltaire and Diderot? No, just food. What isthe cause of the Russian Revolution and the Soviet experiment? Justfood again. As for war, Napoleon showed the essential depth of hiswisdom by saying that “an army fights on its stomach.” And whatis the use of saying, “Peace, Peace” when there is no peace belowthe diaphragm? This applies to nations as well as individuals. Em-pires have collapsed and the most powerful regimes and reigns ofterror have broken down when the people were hungry. Men refuseto work, soldiers refuse to fight, prima donnas refuse to sing, sena-tors refuse to debate, and even presidents refuse to rule the countrywhen they are hungry. And what does a husband work and sweatin the office the whole day for, except the prospect of a good meal













at home? Hence the proverb that the best way to a man’s heart isthrough his stomach. When his flesh is satisfied, his spirit is calmerand more at ease, and he becomes more amorous and appreciative.Wives have complained that husbands don’t notice their new dresses,new shoes, new eyebrows, or new covers for chairs. But have wivesever complained that husbands don’t notice a good steak or a goodomelette? . . . What is patriotism but love o£ the good things weate in our childhood? I have said elsewhere that the loyalty toUncle Sam is the loyalty to doughnuts and ham and sweet potatoesand the loyalty to the German Vaterland is the loyalty to Pfann-\uchen and Christmas Stollen, As for international understanding,1 feel that macaroni has done more for our appreciation of Italythan Mussolini. It is a pity that, in the minds of some people, atleast, who are not in favor of the Mussolini regime, what macaronihas done Mussolini has undone in the cause of understanding be-tween Italy and the outside world. That is because in food, as indeath, we feel the essential brotherhood of mankind.

How a Chinese spirit glows over a good feast! How‘apt is he tocry out that life is beautiful when his stomach and his intestinesarc well-filled! From this well-filled stomach suffuses and radiatesa happiness that is spiritual. The Chinese relies upon instinct andhis instinct tells him that when the stomach is right, everything isright. That is why I claim for the Chinese a life closer to instinctand a philosophy that makes a more open acknowledgment of itpossible. The Chinese idea of happiness is, as I have noted elsewhere,being “warm, well-filled, dark and sweet”—referring to the condi-tion of going to bed after a good supper. It is for this reason that aChinese poet says, “A well-filled stomach is indeed a great thing;all else is luxury.”

With this philosophy, therefore, the Chinese have no pruderyabout food, or about eating it with gusto. When a Chinese drinksa mouthful of good soup, he gives a hearty smack. Of course, thatwould be bad table manners in the West. On the other hand, 1strongly suspect that Western table manners, compelling us to sipour soup noiselessly and eat our food quietly with the least expres-













sion of enjoyment, are the true reason for the arrested developmentof the art of cuisine. Why do the Westerners talk so sofdy and lookso miserable and decent and respectable at their meals? Most Ameri-cans haven’t got the good sense to take a chicken drumstick in theirhand and chew it clean, but continue to pretend to play at it witha knife and fork, feeling utterly miserable and afraid to say a thingabout it. This is criminal when the chicken is really good* As forthe so-called table manners, I feel sure that the child gets his first in-itiation into the sorrows of this life when his mother forbids him tosmack his lips. Such is human psychology that if we don’t expressour joy, we soon cease to feel it even, and then follow dyspepsia,melancholia, neurasthenia and all the mental ailments peculiar tothe adult life. One ought to imitate the French and sigh an “Ah!”when the waiter brings a good veal cudet, and makes a sheer animalgrunt like “Ummm!” after tasting the first mouthful. What shameis there in enjoying one’s food, what shame in having a normal,healthy appedte? No, the Chinese are different They have bad tablemanners, but great enjoyment of a feast.

In fact, I believe the reason why the Chinese failed to developbotany and zoology is that the Chinese scholar cannot stare coldlyand unemotionally at a fish without immediately thinking of howit tastes in the mouth and wanting to eat it. The reason I don’t trustChinese surgeons is that I am afraid that when a Chinese surgeoncuts up my liver in search of a gall-stone, he may forget about thestone and put my liver in a frying pan. For I see a Chinese cannotlook at a porcupine without immediately thinking of ways andmeans of cooking and eating its flesh without being poisoned. Not tobe poisoned is for the Chinese the only practical, important aspect ofit. The taste of the porcupine meat is supremely important, if itshould add one more flavor known to our palate. The bristles ofthe porcupine don’t interest us. How they arose, what is their func-tion and how they are connected with the porcupine’s skin andendowed with the power of sticking up at the sight of an enemy arequestions that seem to the Chinese eminently idle. And so withall the animals and plants, the proper point of view is how we













humans can enjoy them and not what they are in themselves. Thesong of the bird, the color of the flower, the petals of the orchid,the texture of chicken meat are the things that concern us. The Easthas to learn from the West the entire sciences of botany and zoology,but the West has to learn from the East how to enjoy the trees, theflowers, and the fishes, birds and animals, to get a full appreciationof the contours and gestures of different species and associate themwith different moods or feelings.

Food, then, is one of the very few solid joys of human life. It isa happy fact that this instinct of hunger is less hedged about withtaboos and a social code than the other instinct of sex, and thatgenerally speaking, no question of morality arises in connection withfood. There is much less prudery about food than there is aboutsex. It is a happy condition of affairs that philosophers, poets, mer-chants and artists can join together at a dinner, and without a blushperform the function of feeding themselves in open public, althoughcertain savage tribes are known to have developed a sense of mod-esty about food and eat only when they are individually alone. Theproblem of sex will come in for consideration later, but here at leastis an instinct which, because less hampered, produces fewer formsof perversion and insanity and criminal behavior. This differencebetween the instinct of hunger and the instinct of sex in their socialimplications is quite natural. But the fact remains that here is oneinstinct which does not complicate our psychological life, but is apure boon to humanity. The reason is because it is the one instinctabout which humanity is pretty frank. Because there is no problemof modesty here, there is no psychosis, neurosis or perversion con-nected with it. There is many a slip between the cup and the lip,but once food gets inside the lips, there is comparatively little side-tracking. It is freely admitted that everybody must have food, whichis not the case with the sexual instinct. And being gratified, it leadsto no trouble. At the worst, some people eat their way into dyspepsia,or an ulcered stomach or a hardened liver, and a few dig their graveswith their own teeth—-there are cases of Chinese dignitaries among

ON HAVING A STOMACH

my contemporaries who do this—but even then, they are notashamed of it.

For the same reason, fewer social crimes arise from food than fromsex. The criminal code has comparatively little to do with the sinsof illegal, immoral and faithless eating, while it has a large sectionon adultery, divorce, and assault on women. At the worst, husbandsmay ransack the icebox, but we seldom hang a man for spiking aFrigidaire. Should such a case ever be brought up, the judge willbe found to be full of compassion. The frank admission of the neces-sity of every man feeding himself makes this possible. Our heartsgo out to people in famine, but not to the cloistered nuns.

This speculation is far from being idle because there is little publicignorance about the subject of food, as compared with public igno-rance on the subject of sex, which is appalling. There are Manchufamilies which school their daughters in the art of love as well as inthe art of cooking before their marriage, but how much of this isdone elsewhere in the world? The subject of food enjoys the sun-shine of knowledge, but sex is still surrounded with fairy tales,myths and superstitions. There is sunshine about the subject of food,but very little sunshine about the subject of sex.

On the other hand, it is highly unfortunate that we haven’t got agizzard or a crop or a maw. In that case, human society would bealtered beyond recognition; in fact, we should have an altogetherdifferent race of men. A human race endowed with gullets or giz-zards would be found to have the most peaceful, contented andsweet nature, like the chicken or the lamb. We might grow a beak,which would alter our sense of beauty, or we might have merelydone with rodent teeth. Seeds and fruits might be sufficient, or wemight pasture on the green hillsides, for Nature is so abundant.Because we should not have to fight for our food and dig our teethinto the flesh of our defeated enemy, we would not be the terriblewarlike creatures that we are today.

There is a closer relation between food and temperament—in Na-ture’s terms—than we thought. All herbivorous animals are peacefulby nature: the lamb, the horse, the cow, the elephant, the sparrow.













50

etc.; all carnivorous animals are fighters: the wolf, the lion, the tiger,the hawk, etc. Had we been an herbivorous race, our nature wouldcertainly be more elephantine. Nature does not produce a pugna-cious temperament where no fighting is needed. Cocks still fightwith each other, but they fight not about food, but about women.There would still be a little fighting of this sort among the malesin human society, but it would be vasdy different from this fightingfor exported canned goods that we see in present-day Europe.

I do not know about monkeys eating monkeys, but I do knowabout men eating men, for certainly all evidences of anthropologypoint to a pretty universal practice of cannibalism. That was ourcarnivorous ancestry. Is it therefore any wonder that we are stilleating each other in more senses than one—individually, socially andinternationally? There is this much to be said for the cannibals, thatthey are sensible about this matter of killing. Conceding that killingis an undesirable but unavoidable evil, they proceed to get somethingout of it by eating the delicious sirloins, ribs and livers of their deadenemies. The difference between cannibals and civilized men seemsto be that cannibals kill their enenras and eat them, while civilizedmen kill their foes and bury them, put a cross over their bodies andoffer up prayers for their souls. Thus we add stupidity to conceitand a bad temper.

I quite realize that we are on the road to perfection, which meansthat wc are excusably imperfect at present. That, I think, is what weare. Not until we develop a gizzard temper can wc cull ourselvestruly civilized. I sec in the present generation of men both carnivo-rous and herbivorous animals—those who have a sweet temper andthose who have not. The herbivorous men go their way through lifeminding their own business, while the carnivorous men make theirliving by minding that of others. If I abjured politics ten years ago,after having a foretaste of it during four months, it was because Iearly made the discovery that I was not by nature a carnivorousanimal, although I enjoy a good steak. Half of the world spends itstime doing things, and half the world spends its time making othersdo things for them, or making it impossible for others to do any*













thing. The characteristic o£ the carnivorous is a certain sheer delightIn pugilism, logrolling, wire-pulling, and in double-crossing, outwit-ting and forestalling the enemy, all done with a genuine interest andreal ability, for which, however, I confess I fail to have the slightestappreciation. But it is all a matter of instinct; men born with thispugilistic instinct seem to enjoy and revel in it, while real creativeability, ability in doing their own jobs or knowing their own sub-jects, seems at the same time usually to be underdeveloped. Howmany good, quiet herbivorous professors are totally lacking in ra-pacity and the ability to get ahead in competition with others, andyet how truly I admire them! In fact I may essay the opinion thatall the world’s creative artists are vasdy better at minding their ownbusiness than minding that of others, and are therefore of the herbiv-orous species. True evolution of mankind consists in the multipli-cation of the herbivorous homo sapiens over against the carnivorousvariety. For the moment, however, the carnivorous must still be outrulers. That must be so in a world believing in strong muscles.

V. On Having* Strong Muscles

Another important consequence of our being animals and of ourhaving mortal bodies is that we are susceptible to murder, and theaverage man doesn’t like murder. True, we have a divine desire forknowledge and wisdom, but with knowledge come also differencesof point of view and therefore arguments. Now in a world of im-mortals, arguments would last forever, for I can conceive of no wayof settling a dispute, if neither of the disputing immortals is willingto admit that he is wrong. In a world of mortals, the situation isdifferent. The disputing party generally gets so obnoxious in theeyes of his opponent—and the more obnoxious he will appear, themore embarrassingly right his arguments arer—so that the latter justkills him, and that setdes the argument. If “A” kills “B,” “A” isright; and if “B” kills “A,” “B” is right. This, we hardly need re-mind ourselves, is the old, old method of settling arguments amongbrutes In the animal kingdom, the lion is always right.













52 OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

This is basically so true of human society that it offers a good in-terpretation of human history, even down to the present time. Afterall, Galileo retracted as well as discovered certain ideas about theroundness of the earth and the solar system. He retracted because hehad a mortal body, susceptible to murder or tortuie. It would havetaken infinite trouble to have argued with Galileo, and if Galileo hadhad no mortal body, you could never have convinced him that hewas wrong, and that would have been an eternal nuisance. As it was,however, a torture chamber or a prison cell, not to speak of thegallows or the stake, sufficed to show how wrong he was. Theclergy and the gentlemen of the period were determined to havea showdown with Galileo. The fact that Galileo was convinced thathe was wrong strengthened the belief of the clergy of that periodthat they were right. That settled the matter very neatly.

There is something convenient and handy and efficient about thismethod of settling quarrels. Wars of depredation, religious wars,the conflict of Saladin and the Christians, the Inquisition, the burn-ing of witches, the more modern preaching of the Christian gospeland proselytizing of heathens by gun-boats, the bearing of the WhiteMan’s Burden by the same means, the spread of civilization to Ethi-opia by Mussolini’s tanks and airplanes—all these proceed upon thisanimal logic to which all mankind is heir. If the Italians have betterguns and shoot straighter and kill more people, Mussolini carriescivilization to Ethiopia, and if, on the other hand, the Ethiopianshave better guns and shoot straighter and kill more people, thenHaile Selassie carries civilization to Italy.

There is something of the noble lion in us that disdains argu-ments. Hence our glorification of the soldier because he makesshort shrift with dissenters. The quickest way to shut up a man whobelieves he is right, and who shows the propensity to argue, is tohang him. Men resort to talking only when they haven’t the powerto enforce their convictions upon others. On the other hand, menwho act and have the power to act seldom talk. They despise argu-ments. After all, we talk in order to influence people, and if we knowwe can influence people, or control them, where is the need for













talking at all? In this connection, is it not somewhat dishearteningthat the League o£ Nations talked so much during the last Manchu-rian and Ethiopian wars? It was altogether pathetic. There issomething ominous about this quality of the League of Nations.On the other hand, this method of settling arguments by force cansometimes be carried to absurdity, if there is no sense of humor,as when the Japanese actually believe they can stamp out anti-Japanese feeling among the Chinese by bombing and machine-gun-ning them. That is why I am always slow to admit that we arerational animals.

I have always thought that the League of Nations was an excel-lent School for Modern Languages, specializing in translationof the modern tongues, giving the hearers excellent practice by firstmaking an accomplished orator deliver a perfect address in English,and after the audience is thus made acquainted with the gist andcontent of the speech, having it rendered into fluent, flawless, classi-cal French by a professional translator, with intonation, accent andall. In fact, it is better than the Berlitz School; it is a school of mod-ern languages and public speaking to boot. One of my friends, infact, reported that, after a six months’ stay at Geneva, his lispinghabit which had bothered him for years was cured. But the amazingfact is that even in this League of Nations, consecrated to the ex-change of opinions, in an institution that conceivably has no otherpurpose than talking, there should be a distinction between BigTalkers and Small Talkers, the Big Talkers being those having BigFists, and the Small Talkers being those having Small Fists, whichshows the whole thing isi quite silly, if not a fake. As if the nationswith Small Fists couldn’t talk as fluently as the others! That is to say,if we mean just talking. ... I cannot but think that this inherentbelief in the eloquence of the Big Fist belongs to that animal heritagewe have spoken of. (I shouldn’t like to use the word "brute” here,and yet it would seem most appropriate in this connection.)

Of course, the gist of the matter lies in the fact that mankind isendowed with a chattering instinct as well as the fighting instinct.The tongue is, historically speaking, as old as the fist or the strong













OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

arm. The ability to talk distinguishes man from animals, and themixture of verbiage and barrage seems to be a peculiarly humantrait. This would seem to point to the permanency of institutionslike the League of Nations, or the American Senate, or a tradesmen’sconvention—anything that affords men an opportunity to talk. Itseems we humans are destined to chatter in order to find out who isright. That is all right; chattering is a characteristic of the angels.The peculiarly human trait lies in the fact that we chatter to acertain point until one of the parties of the dispute who has astronger arm feels so embarrassed or angered—“Embarrassmentleads naturally to anger,” the Chinese say—until that embarrassedand therefore angered party thinks that this chattering has gone farenough, bangs the tabic, takes his opponent by the neck, gives hima wallop, and then looks about and asks the audience, which is thejury, “Am I right or am I wrong?” And as we learn at every teahouse, the audience invariably replies, “You are right!” Only humansever settle a thing like that. Angels settle arguments all by chatter;brutes settle arguments all by muscle and claws; human beingsalone settle them by a strange confusion of muscle and chatter.Angels believe sheerly in right; brutes believe shecrly in might; andhuman beings alone believe that might is right. Of the two, thechattering instinct, or the effort to find out who is right, is of coursethe nobler instinct. Someday we must all just chatter. That willbe the salvation of mankind. At present, we must be contentwith the tea house method and tea house psychology. It doesn’tmatter whether we settle an argument in a tea house or at theLeague of Nations; at both places, we are consistently and char-acteristically human.

I have witnessed two such tea house scenes, one in 1931-32 andone in 1936. And the most amusing thing is, there was an admixtureof a third instinct, modesty, in these two squabbles. In the 1931affair, we were at the tea house and there was one party in dis-pute with another and we were supposed to be the jury in thematter. The charge was some sort of a theft or stealing of property.The fellow with the strong arm at first joined in the argument













ON HAVING STRONG MUSCLES 55

made an address to justify himself, spoke of his infinite patiencewith his neighbor—what restraint, what magnanimity, what un-selfishness of motive in his desire to cultivate his neighbor’s garden!The funny thing was, he encouraged us to go on with our chatterwhile he stole outside the room and completed the stealing bystaking up a fence around the stolen property, and then came into ask us to go and see for ourselves if he wasn’t right. We allwent, saw the new fence being steadily pushed farther and fartherto the West, for even then the fence was being constantly shifted.“Now, then, am I right or wrong?” We returned the verdict of“You are wrong!”—a little impudent of us to have said that. There-upon the fellow with the strong arm protested that he was publiclyinsulted, that his sense of modesty was injured and his honor be-smirched. Angrily and proudly he walked out of the room, wipingthe dust off his shoes with sneering contempt, thinking us notgood company for him. Imagine a man like that feeling insulted!That is why I say the third instinct of modesty complicates thematter. Thereupon the tea house lost a good bit of its reputationas a place for scientific settling of private quarrels.

Then in 1936 we were called upon to judge another dispute.Another fellow with a strong arm said he would lay the facts ofthe dispute before the table and ask for justice. I heard the word“justice” with a shudder. And we believed him-~-not without apremonition as to the awkwardness of the situation or our question-able capacity as a jury. Determined to justify our reputation asfair-minded and competent judges, we, almost to a man, told himto his face that he was wrong, that he was nothing but a bully. He,too, felt insulted; again his sense of modesty was injured and hishonor was besmirched. Well, then, he took the opponent by theneck and went outside and killed him, and then he came backand asked us, “Now am I right or wrong?” And we echoed, “Youare right!” with a profound bow. Still not satisfied, he asked us,“Am I good enough company for you now?” and we shouted likea regular tea house crowd, “Of course you are!” But what modestyon the part of the killer!













56

That is human civilization in the year of Our Lord 1936. I thinkthe evolution of law and justice must have passed through sceneslike the above in its earliest dawn, when we were little better thansavages. From that tea house scene to the Supreme Court of Justice,where the convicted does not protest that he is insulted by the con-viction, seems a long, long way of development. For some ten years,while we started the tea house, we thought we were on the roadto civilization, but a wiser God, knowing human beings and ouressential human traits, might have predicted the setback. He mighthave known how we must fail and falter at the beginning, beingonly half civilized as we are at present. For the present, the reputa-tion of the tea house is gone, and we are back to falling upon eachother and tearing each other’s hair out and digging our teeth intoeach other’s flesh, in the true grand style of the jungle. . . . Still Iam not in total despair. That thing called modesty or shame is afterall a good thing, and the chattering instinct also. The way I look atit is we are quite devoid of real shame at present. But let us continueto pretend that we have a sense of shame, and continue to chatter.By chattering we shall one day attain the blessed state of the angels.

VI. On Having a Mind

The human mind, you say, is probably the noblest product of theCreation. This is a proposition that most people will admit, par-ticularly when it refers to a mind like Albert Einstein’s that canprove curved space by a long mathematical equation, or Edison’sthat can invent the gramaphonc and the motion picture, or theminds of other physicists who can measure the rays of an advancingor receding star or deal with the constitution of the unseen atoms,or that of the inventor of natural-color movie cameras. Comparedwith the aimless, shifting and fumbling curiosity of the monkeys,we must agree that we have a noble, a glorious intellect that cancomprehend the universe in which we are born.

The average mind, however, is charming rather than noble. Hadthe average mind been noble, we should be completely rational













beings without sins or weaknesses or misconduct, and what aninsipid world that would be! We should be so much less charmingas creatures. I am such a humanist that saints without sins don’tinterest me. But we are charming in our irrationality, our incon-sistencies, our follies, our sprees and holiday gaieties, our preju-dices, bigotry and forgetfulness. Had we all perfect brains, weshouldn’t have to make new resolutions every New Year. Thebeauty of the human life consists in the fact that, as we reviewon New Year’s Eve our last New Year resolutions, we find wehave fulfilled a third of them, left unfulfilled another third, andcan’t remember what the other third was. A plan that is sure tobe carried out down to its last detail already loses interest for me.A general who goes to battle and is completely sure of his victorybeforehand, and can even predict the exact number of casualties,will lose all interest in the batde, and might just as well throwup the whole thing. No one would play chess if he knew his oppo-nent’s mind—good, bad or indifferent—was infallible. All novelswould be unreadable did we know exactly how the mind of eachcharacter was going to work and were we able consequently topredict the exact outcome. The reading of a novel is but the chaseof a wayward and unpredictable mind making its incalculable de-cisions at certain moments, through a maze of evolving circum-stanced. A stern, unforgiving father who does not at some momentrelax ceases to impress us as human, and even a faithless husbandwho is forever faithless soon forfeits the reader’s interest. Imaginea renowned, proud composer, whom no one could induce to com-pose an opera for a certain beautiful woman, but who, on hearingthat a hated rival composer is thinking of doing it, immediatelysnatches at the job; or a scientist who in his life has consistentlyrefused to publish his writings in newspapers, but who, on seeinga rival scientist make a slip with one single letter, forgets his ownrule and rushes into print. There we have laid our finger upon thesingularly human quality of the mind.

The human mind is charming in its unreasonableness, its invet-erate prejudices, and its waywardness and unpredictability. If we













haven’t learned this truth, we have learned nothing from the cen-tury of study of human psychology. In other words, our mindsstill retain the aimless, fumbling quality of simian intelligence.

Consider the evolution of the human mind. Our mind was orig-inally an organ for sensing danger and preserving life. That thismind eventually came to appreciate logic and a correct mathemati-cal equation I consider a mere accident. Certainly it was not cre-ated for that purpose. It was created for sniffing food, and if aftersniffing food, it can also sniff an abstract mathematical formula,that’s all to the good. My conception of the human brain, as of allanimal brains, is that it is like an octopus or a starfish with tenta-cles, tentacles for feeling the truth and eating it. Today we stillspeak of “feeling” the truth, rather than “thinking” it. The brain,together with other sensory organs, constitutes the feelers. How itstentacles feel the truth is still as great a mystery in physics as thesensitivity to light of the purple in the eye’s retina. Every time thebrain dissociates itself from the collaborating sensory apparatus andindulges in so-called “abstract thinking,” every time it gets awayfrom what William James calls the perceptual reality and escapesinto the world of conceptual reality, it becomes devitalized, dehu-manized and degenerate. We all labor under the misconceptionthat the true function of the mind is thinking, a misconception thatis bound to lead to seiious mistakes in philosophy unless we reviseour notion of the term “thinking” itself. It is a misconception thatis apt to leave the philosopher disillusioned when he goes out othis studio and watches the crowd at the market. As if thinkinghad much to do with our everyday behavior!

The late James Harvey Robinson has tried to show, in The Mindin the Maying, how our mind gradually evolved from, and is stilloperating upon, four underlying layers: the animal mind, the sav-age mind, the childish mind and the traditional civilized mind,and has further shown us the necessity of developing a more criti-cal mind if the present human civilization is to continue. In myscientific moments, I am inclined to agree with him, but in mywiser moments, I doubt the feasibility, or even the desirability, of













such a step of general progress- I prefer to have our mind charm-ingly unreasonable as it is at present. I should hate to see a worldin which we are all perfectly rational beings. Do I distrust scientificprogress? No, I distrust sainthood. Am I anti-intellectualistic? Per-haps yes; perhaps no. I am merely in love with life, and being inlove with life, I distrust the intellect profoundly. Imagine a worldin which there are no stories of murder in newspapers, every oneis so omniscient that no house ever catches fire, no airplane everhas an accident, no husband deserts his wife, no pastor elopes witha choir girl, no king abdicates his throne for love, no man changeshis mind and everyone proceeds to carry out with logical precisiona career that he mapped out for himself at the age of ten—good-byto this happy human world! All the excitement and uncertaintyof life would be gone. There would be no literature because therewould be no sin, no misbehavior, no human weakness, no upsettingpassion, no prejudices, no irregularities and, worst of all, no sur-prises. It would be like a horse race in which every one of the fortyor fifty thousand spectators knew the winner. Human fallibility isthe very essence of the color of life, as the upsets are the very colorand interest of a steeplechase. Imagine a Doctor Johnston withouthis bigoted prejudices! If we were all completely rational beings,we should then, instead of growing into perfect wisdom, degen-erate into automatons, the human mind serving merely to registercertain impulses as unfailingly as a gas meter. That would beinhuman, and anything inhuman is bad.

My readers may suspect that I am trying a desperate defense ofhuman frailties and making virtues of their vices, and yet it is notso. What we gained in correctness of conduct through the develop-ment of a completely rational mind, we should lose in the fun andcolor of life. And nothing is so uninteresting as to spend one’s lifewith a paragon of virtue as a husband or wife. I have no doubtthat a society of such perfecdy rational beings would be perfectlyfitted to survive, and yet I wonder whether survival on such termsis worth having. Have a society that is well-ordered, by all means—but not too well-ordered! I recall the ants, who, to my mind,













are probably the most perfectly rational creatures on earth. Nodoubt ants have evolved such a perfect socialist state that they havebeen able to live on this pattern for probably the last million years.So far as complete rationality of conduct is concerned, I think wehave to hand it to the ants, and let the human beings come second(I doubt very much whether they deserve that). The ants are ahard-working, sane, saving and thrifty lot. They are the sociallyregimented and individually disciplined beings that we are not.They don’t mind working fourteen hours a day for the state orthe community; they have a sense of duty and almost no sense ofrights; they have persistence, order, courtesy and courage, andabove all, self-discipline. We are poor specimens of self-discipline,not even good enough for museum pieces.

Run across any hall of honor, with statues of the great men ofhistory lining the corridor, and you will perceive that rationalityof conduct is probably the last thing to be recalled from their lives.This Julius Caesar, who fell in love with Cleopatra—-noble JuliusCaesar, who was so completely irrational that he almost forgot (asAnthony did entirely forget) an empire for a woman. That Moses,who in a fit of rage shattered the sacred stone tablets which hadtaken him forty days on Mount Sinai to inscribe in company withGod, and in that he was no more rational than the Israelites whoforsook God and took to worshiping the Golden Calf during hisabsence. That King David, who was alternately cruel and gener-ous, alternately religious and impious, who worshiped God andsinned and wrote psalms of repentance and worshiped God again.King Solomon, the very image of wisdom, who couldn’t do a thingabout his son .. . Confucius, who told a visitor he was not athome and then, as the visitor was just outside the door, sang up-stairs in order to let him know that he was at home . . . Jesus, withhis tears at Gethsemane and his doubts on the cross . . . Shake-speare, who bequeathed his “second-best bed” to his wife *. * Mil-ton, who couldn’t get along with his $eventeen-year-old wife andtherefore wrote a treatise on divorce and, being attacked, then burstforth into a defense of the liberty of speech in AreopagxYtca „ . *













Goethe, who went through the Church’s wedding ceremony withhis wife, their nineteen-year-old son standing by their side . . .Jonathan Swift and Stella . . . Ibsen and Emilie Bardach (he keptrational—good for him) ....

Is it not plain that passion rather than reason rules the world?And that what made these great men lovable, what made themhuman, was not their rationality, but their lack of rationality?Chinese obituary notices and biographical sketches of men andwomen written by their children are so unreadable, so uninterest-ing and so untrue, because they make all their ancestors appearabnormally and wholly virtuous beings. . . . The great criticism ofmy hook on China by my countrymen is that I make the Chinesetoo human, that I have painted their weaknesses as well as theirstrength. My countrymen (at least the litde bureaucrats) believethat if I had painted China as a paradise inhabited by Confucianistsaints only, living in a millennium of peace and reason, I couldhave done more effective propaganda for my country! There isreally no limit to the stupidity of bureaucrats. . . . But the verycharm of biography, its very readability, depends on showing thehuman side of a great character which is so similar to ours. Everytouch of irrational behavior in a biography is a stroke in convinc-ing reality. On that alone, the success of Lytton Strachey’s portraitsdepends.

An excellent illustration of a perfectly sound mind is providedby the English. The English have got bad logic, but very goodtentacles in their brains for sensing danger and preserving life. Ihave not been able to discover anything logical in their nationalbehavior or their rational history. Their universities, their constitu-tion, their Anglican Church are all pieces of patchwork, being thesteady accretions of a process of historical growth. The very strengthof the British Empire consists in the English lack of cerebration, intheir total inability to see the other man’s point of view, and intheir strong conviction that the English way is the only right wayand English food is the only good food. The moment the English-men learn to reason and lose their strong confidence in themselves,













the British Empire will collapse. For no one can go about conquer-ing the world i£ he has doubts about himself. You can make abso-lutely nothing out of the English attitude toward their king, theirloyalty to, and their quite genuine affection for, a king who isdeprived by them of the liberty of speech and is summarily told tobehave or quit the throne.... When Elizabethan England neededpirates to protect die Empire, she was able to produce enoughpirates to meet die situation and glorified them. In every period,England was able to fight the right war, against the right enemy,with the right ally, on the right side, at the right time, and call itby a wrong name. They didn’t do it by logic, did they? They didit by their tentacles.

The English have a ruddy complexion, developed no doubt bythe London fog and by cricket. A skin that is so healthy cannotbut help playing an important part in their thinking, that is, inthe process of feeling their way through life. And as the Englishthink with their healthy skin, so the Chinese think with their pro-found intestines. That is a pretty generally established matter inChina. We Chinese know that we do think with our intestines;scholars are said to have “a bellyful of ideas,” or “of scholarship,”“of poetry and literature,” or “a bellyful of sorrow,” or “of anger,”“remorse,” “chagrin,” or ‘longing.” Chinese lovers separated fromeach other write letters to say that “their sorrowful intestines are tiedinto a hundred knots,” or that at their last parting “their intestineswere broken.” Chinese scholars who have arranged their ideas foran essay or a speech, but have not written them down on paper,are said to have their “belly manuscript” ready. They have got theirideas all arranged down there. I’m quite sure they have. This is, ofcourse, all striedy scientific and capable of proof, especially whenmodem psychologists come to understand better the emotional qual-ity and texture of our thought. But the Chinese don’t need anyscientific proof. They just feel it down there. Only by appreciatingthe fact that the emotional quality of Chinese melodies all startsfrom below the diaphragm of the singers, can one understand Chi-nese music with its profound emotional color.













ON HAVING A MIND

63

One must never deprecate the capacity of the human mind whendealing with the natural universe or anything except human rela-tionships, Optimistic about the conquests of science, I am less hope-ful about the general development of a critical mind m dealing withhuman affairs, or about mankind reaching a calm and understand-ing far above the sway of passions. Mankind as individuals may havereached austere heights, but mankind as social groups arc stillsubject to primitive passions, occasional back-slidmgs and outcrop-pings of the savage instincts, and occasional waves of fanaticism andmass hysteria.

Knowing then our human frailties, we have the more reason tohate the despicable wretch who in demagogue fashion makes useof our human foibles to hound us into another world war; whoinculcates hatred, of which we already have too much; who glorifiesself-aggrandizement and self-interest, of which there is no lack;who appeals to our animal bigotry and racial prejudice; who deletesthe fifth commandment in the training of youth and encourageskilling and war as noble, as if we were not already warlike enoughcreatures; and who whips up and stirs our mortal passions, as ifwe were not already very near the beast. This wretch’s mind, nomatter how cunning, how sagacious, how worldly-wise, is itself amanifestation of the beast. The gracious spirit of wisdom is tieddown to a beast or a demon in us, which by this time we havecome to understand is nothing but our animal heritage, or ratherit ties this demon down by an old and worn leash and holds itbut in temporary submission. At any time the leash may snap, andthe demon be unleashed, and amidst hosannas the car of Jugger-naut will ride roughshod over us, just to remind us once more howterribly near the savage we have been all this time, and how super-ficial is our civilization. Civilization will then be turned into amagnificent stage, on which Moors will kill Christians and Chris-tians kill Moors and Negroes fall upon whites and whites stabNegroes and field mice emerge from sewers to eat human corpsesand hawks circle in the air over an abundant human feast—all just













OUR ANIMAL HERITAGE

64

to remind ourselves of the brotherhood of animals. Nature is quitecapable of such experiments.

Psychoanalysts often cure mental patients by making them re-view their past and see their life objectively. Perhaps if mankindwill think more of their past, they will also have a better masteryover themselves. The knowledge that we have an animal heritageand that we are very near the beasts might help to check our be-having like beasts. This animal heritage of ours makes it easier tosee ourselves as we are in animal fables and satires, as in Aesop’sFables, Chaucer’s Parliament of Fowles, Swift’s Gulliver's Travelsand Anatole France’s Penguin Island. These animal fables weregood in Aesop’s day and will still be good in the year A. D. 4000.

How can we remedy the situation? The critical mind is too thinand cold, thinking itself will help little and reason will be of smallavail; only the spirit of reasonableness, a sort of warm, glowing, emo-tional and intuitive thinking, joined with compassion, will insure usagainst a reversion to our ancestral type. Only the development ofour life to bring it into harmony with our instincts can save u$.I consider the education of our senses and our emotions rathermore important than the education of our ideas.













Chapter Four

ON BEING HUMAN

I. On Human Dignity

IN the preceding chapter, we have seen man’s mortal heritage, thepart he shares with the animal world, and its consequences on thecharacter o£ human civilization. But still we find the picture is notcomplete. There is still something missing for a well-rounded viewof human nature and human dignity. Ah, human dignity—that isthe word! There is a need of emphasizing that and there is a needof knowing what that dignity consists of, lest we confuse the issueand lose it. For there is a very evident danger of our losing thatdignity in the twentieth century and especially in the present andimmediate following decades.

“Don’t you think a man is the most amazing of animals, if youinsist that we are animals?” I quite agree. Man alone has inventeda civilization, and this is not something to be lighdy dismissed.There are perhaps finer animals with better forms and noblerstructures, like the horse; with finer muscles, like the lion; with afiner sense of smell and greater docility and loyalty, like the dog;or better vision, like the eagle; or a better sense of direction, like thehoming pigeon; with greater thrift and discipline and capacity forhard work, like the ant; with a sweeter temper like the dove or thedeer; more patience and contentment like the cow; better singers,like the lark; and better-dressed beings, like the parrot and the pea-cock. Still there is something in a monkey that makes me preferthe monkey to all these animals, and something of the monkeycuriosity and monkey cleverness in man that makes me prefer tobe a man. Granted that ants are more rational and better-disciplinedbeings than ourselves, as I have pointed out, and granted that theyhave a more stable form of government than present-day Spain,still they haven’t got a library or a museum, have they? Any timeants or elephants can invent a giant telescope or discover a newvariable star or predict a solar eclipse, or seals can discover the

6s













ON BEING HUMAN

science of calculus or beavers can cut the Panama Canal, I willhand them the championship as masters of the world and Lordsof Creation. Yes, we can be proud of ourselves, but we had betterfind out what it is that we have got to be proud of, what is the es-sence of human dignity.

This human dignity, as I have already hinted at the beginningof this book, consists of four characteristics of the scamp, who hasbeen glorified by Chinese literature. They arc: a playful curiosity, acapacity for dreams, a sense of humor to correct those dreams, andfinally a certain waywardness and incalculability of behavior. To-gether they represent the Chinese version of the American doctrineof the individual. It is impossible to paint a more glowing portrait ofthe individualist than has been done for the scamp in Chinese litera-ture, and it is certainly no accident that Walt Whitman, the greatestliterary champion of American individualism, is himself called the“Magnificent Idler.”

II. On Playful Curiosity: The Rise ofHuman Civilization

How did the human scamp begin his ascent to civilization?What were the first signs of promise in him, or of his developingintelligence? The answer is undoubtedly to be found in man’splayful curiosity, in his first efforts to fumble about with his handsand turn everything inside out to examine it, as a monkey in hisidle moments turns the eyelid or the ear-lobe of a fellow-monkey,looking for lice or for nothing at all—-just turning about for turningabout’s sake. Go to the zoo and watch a pair of monkeys pickingeach other’s ears, and there you have the promise of an IsaacNewton or an Albert Einstein.

This figure of the playful, fumbling activities of the exploringhuman hand is more than a figure. It is a scientific truth. The verybaas of human civilization started with the emancipation of thehands consequent upon man’s assuming an erect stature and be-coming a biped. Such playful curiosity we see even in cats, the













67

moment their front paws are relieved from the duty of walkingand supporting the body. It might have been quite as possible for acivilization to be developed from cats as well as from monkeys, ex-cept for the fact that in the case of the monkeys, the fingers werealready well developed through the clasping of branches, whereasthe cat’s paws were still paws—merely lumps of flesh and cartilage.

Let me for a moment forget that I am not a qualified biologistand speculate about the rise of human civilization from this emanci-pation of the hands, because I have a few things to say here, whichmay or may not have been observed by others. The assumption ofan erect stature and the consequent emancipation of the hand hadextremely far-reaching results. It brought about the use of tools,the sense of modesty, the subjection of women, and in this con-nection probably also the development of language, and finally aprodigious increase in playful curiosity and the instinct of ex-ploration. It is pretty well known that human civilization beganwith the discovery of tools and that this came from the developmentof the human hands. When the big anthropoid ape descendedpartially fi^om the tree, probably because his body was too heavy,he had two roads to follow, either that of a baboon, going on allfours, or that of the orang-outang, learning to walk on its hindlegs. Human ancestry could not possibly have come from thebaboon, a quadruped (or quadrumanum), because the baboon’sfront paws were too much occupied. On the other hand, with anerect posture more or less successfully acquired by the orang-outang,the hands acquired freedom, and how significant was this freedomfor all civilization! By that time, the anthropoid ape certainly hadlearned already to pick fruit with his hands, instead of with hisbig jaws. It was but a simple step, when he took to living in acave on a high cliff, to pick stones and pebbles and roll them downfrom the cliff on his enemies. That was the first tool man everused. There we must picture a constant fumbling and manipulatingactivity of his hands, grasping at things for some purpose or forno purpose. There would be sharp flints or jagged pieces of rockswhich through his aimless fumbling were accidently discovered to













ON BEING HUMAN

be more useful for killing than round pieces of stone. The mereact of turning things about, for instance, of looking at the back aswell as the front of an ear-lobe, must have already increased hispower for conceiving things in their totality and therefore also thenumber of images he carried in his brain, thus stimulating thegrowth of the frontal lobes of the brain.

I believe the mystery of the origin of sexual modesty in man,which is totally absent in animals, is also due to this erect posture.For by this new posture, which Father Nature in his scheme ofthings probably never intended, certain posterior parts of the bodyat one stroke came to occupy the center of the body, and whatwas naturally behind came in front. Allied to this terrible newsituation were other maladjustments chiefly affecting women, caus-ing frequent abortions and menstrual troubles. Anatomically, ourmuscles were designed and developed for the quadruped position.The mother pig, for instance, carries its litter of pig embryos logi-cally suspended from its horizontal spine, like wash hung on aline with its weight properly distributed. Asking the human preg-nant mother to stand erect is like tipping the wash line verticallyand expecting the clothes to remain in position. Our peritonealmuscles are badly designed for that: if we were originally bipeds,such muscles should be nicely attached to the shoulder, and thewhole thing would be a more pleasant job. Anybody with a knowl-edge of the anatomy of the human womb and ovaries should besurprised that they keep in position and function at all, and thatthere are not more dislocations and menstrual troubles. The wholemystery of menstruation has never yet been satisfactorily explained,but I am quite sure that, even granted that a periodical renewalof ova is necessary, we must admit that the function is carried outin a most inefficient, unnecessarily long and needlessly painfulmanner, and I have no doubt that this inefficiency is due to thebiped position.

This, then, led to the subjection of women and probably also tothe development of human society with Its present characteristics.I do not think that if the human mother could walk on all fours,













69

she would have been subjected by her husband at all. Two forcescame into play simultaneously. On the one hand, men and womenwere already by that time idle, curious and playful creatures. Theamorous instinct developed new expressions. Kissing was still notentirely pleasant, or wholly successful, as we can see it between twochimpanzees kissing each other with hard, clapping, protrudingjaws. But the hand developed new, more sensitive and softermovements, the movements of patting, pawing, tickling and em-bracing, all as incidental results of chasing lice on each other’sbody. I have no doubt that lyrical poetry would not have developedif our hairy human ancestors had had no lice on their bodies. This,then, must have helped considerably to develop the amorous in-stinct.

On the other hand, the biped human pregnant mother was nowfor a considerably longer period subjected to a state of grievoushelplessness. During the earlier period of imperfect adjustment tothe erect position, I can see that it was even more difficult forthe pregnant mother to carry her load and go about, especially be-fore the legs and heels were properly modified, and the pelvis wasproperly projected backwards to counter-balance the burden infront. At the earliest stages, the biped position was so awkwardthat a Pleistocene mother must have shamefacedly gone on all fourswhen nobody was looking, to relieve her aching spine. What withthese inconveniences and other women’s troubles, the human motherbegan to use other tactics and play for love, thereby losing someof her spirit of independence. Good Lord, she had need of beingpatted and pawed during those times of confinement! The erectposture prolonged, too, the period of infancy by making it dif-ficult for the human baby to learn to walk. While the baby calfor baby elephant can trot about practically as soon as it is born,the human baby took two or three years to learn the job, and whowas the most natural person to look after him except the mother? x

1 This parental care gradually became more and more lengthened in period, so thatwhile a savage child of six or seven is practically independent, the child in civilizationtakes a quarter of a century to learn to make his living, and even then has to learnit all over again.













ON BEING HUMAN

Man then went off into a completely new path of development.Human society developed from the single fact that sex, in the broad-est sense of the word, began to color human daily life. The humanfemale was more consciously and constantly a female than a femaleanimal—the negress more than the tigress, and the countess morethan the lioness. Specialization between men and women in the civi-lized sense began to develop, and the female, instead of the traditionalmale, began to decorate herself, probably by picking hair out of herface and her breast. It was all a matter of tactics for survival. We seethese tactics clearly in animals. The tiger attacks, the tortoise hides,and the horse runs away—all for survival. Love or beauty and thegentle cunning of womanhood had then a survival value. Theman probably had a stronger arm, and there was no use fightinghim; why not, therefore, bribe and flatter and please him? That isthe very character of our civilization even today. Instead of learn-ing to repel and attack, woman learned to attract, and instead oftrying to achieve her goal by force, she tried her best to achieve itby softer means. And after all, softness is civilization. I rather thinktherefore that human civilization began with woman rather thanwith man.

And then I also cannot help but think that woman played agreater role than'man in the development of chattering, which wecall language today. The instinct for chatter is so deep in womenthat I firmly believe they must have helped to create human lan-guage in a more important manner than men. Early men, Iimagine, were quite morose, silent creatures. I suppose humanlanguage began when the first male anthropoids were away fromtheir cave dwellings hunting, and two women neighbors were dis-cussing before their caves whether William was a better fellowthan Harold or Harold was a better fellow than William, and howHarold was disgustingly amorous last night, and how easily hecould be offended. In some such form, human language must havebegun. It cannot be otherwise. Of course the taking of food by hands,thus relieving the original double duty of the jaw in both takingand eating food, eventually made it possible also for the jaw













ON PLAYFUL CURIOSITY

7*

gradually to recede and diminish in size, and thus also helpedtoward the development of human language.

But, as I have suggested, the most important consequence of thisnew posture was the emancipation of the hands for turning thingsabout and examining them inside out, as symbolized in the pastimeof chasing lice by monkeys. From this chasing of lice, the develop-ment of the spirit of free inquiry into knowledge had its start. To-day human progress still consists very largely in chasing after someform or other of lice that is bothering human society. An instinctfor curiosity has been developed which compels the human mindto explore freely and playfully into all kinds of subjects and socialdiseases. This mental activity has nothing to do with seeking food;it is an exercise of the human spirit pure and simple. The monkeysdo not chase after hce in order to eat them, but for the sheer funof it. And this is the characteristic of all worthwhile human learning and human scholarship, an interest in things in themselvesand a playful, idle desire to know them as they are, and not becausethat knowledge directly or immediately helps in feeding our stom-ach. (If I contradict myself here as a Chinese, I am happy as aChinese thac I contradict myself.) This I regard as characteristicallyhuman and contributing very largely to human dignity. Knowl-edge, or the process of seeking knowledge, is a form of play; it iscertainly so with all scientists and inventors who are worth any-thing and who truly accomplish worthwhile results. Good medicalresearch doctors are more interested in microbes than in humanbeings, and astronomers will try to record or register the movementsof a distant star hundreds of millions of miles away from us, al-though the star cannot possibly have any direct bearing on humanlife on this planet. Almost all animals, especially the young, havealso the play instinct, but it is in man alone that playful curiosityhas been developed to an important extent.

It is for this reason that I hate censors and all agencies and formsof government that try to control our thought. I cannot but believethat such a censor or such a ruler is wilfully or unintentionallyinsulting human intelligence. If the liberty of thought is the highest













72

activity o£ the human mind, then the suppression of that liberty mustbe the most degrading to us as human beings. Euripides definedthe slave as a man who has lost his liberty of thought or opinion.Every autocracy is a factory for turning out gorgeous Euripideanslaves. Don’t we have fine examples of them, East and West, in thetwentieth century and at the very home of culture? Every auto-cratic government, no matter in what form, therefore, is intellectu-ally retrograde. We have seen it in the Middle Ages in general,and in the Spanish Inquisition in particular. Short-sighted politiciansor clergymen may think that uniformity of belief and thoughtcontributes toward peace and order, but historically the consequenceis always depressing and degrading to the human character. Suchautocrats must have a great contempt for the people in generalwhen they do not confine themselves to ordering a nation’s externalconduct, but proceed also to regiment the people’s inner thoughtsand beliefs. They have a naive assurance that human minds willput up with this uniformity and that they will like or dislike abook or a concerto or a moving picture exactly as the official propa-gandist or chief of publicity bureau tells them to. Every autocraticgovernment has tried to confuse literature with propaganda, artwith politics, anthropology with patriotism, and religion with wor-ship of the living ruler.

It simply can’t be done, and if the controllers of thought go toofar in running against human nature itself, they are thereby sowingthe seeds of their downfall. As Mencius put it, “If the ruler con-siders the people as blades of grass, then the people will considertheir ruler as a robber or enemy.” There is no greater robber inthis world than he who robs us of our liberty of thought. Deprivedof that, we might as well go down on all fours, call the whole bipedexperiment of walking on two legs a mistake, and revert to ourearlier posture of at least some 30,000 years ago. In Mencian terms,therefore, the people will resent this robber as much as the latterdespises the people, and exactly in the same proportion* The morethe robber takes away, the more the people hate him. And as noth-ing is so precious and personal and intimate as our intellectual,













73

moral or religious beliefs, no greater hatred can be aroused in usthan by the man who deprives us of the right to believe what webelieve. But such short-sighted stupidity is natural in an autocrat,because I believe such autocrats are always intellectually retrograde.And the resilience of human character and unconquerable libertyof the human conscience always spring back and hit the autocraticruler with a vengeance.

III. On Dreams

Discontent, they say, is divine; I am quite sure anyway that dis-content is human. The monkey was the first morose animal, for Ihave never seen a truly sad face in animals except in the chimpan-zee. And I have often thought such a one a philosopher, becausesadness and thoughtfulness are so akin. There is something in such,a face which tells me that he is thinking. Cows don’t seem to think,,at least they don’t seem to philosophize, because they look alwaysso contented, and while elephants may store up a terrific anger,the eternal swinging of their trunks seems to take the place ofthinking and banish all brooding discontent. Only a monkey canlook thoroughly bored with life. Great indeed is the monkey!

Perhaps after all philosophy began with the sense of boredom.Anyway it is characteristic of humans to have a sad, vague andwistful longing for an ideal. Living in a real world, man has yetthe capacity and tendency to dream of another world. Probably thedifference between man and the monkeys is that the monkeys aremerely bored, while man has boredom plus imagination. All of ushave the desire to get out of an old rut, and all of us wish to besomething else, and all of us dream. The private dreams of beinga corporal, the corporal dreams of being a captain, and the captaindreams of being a major or colonel. A colonel, if he is worth hissalt, thinks nothing of being a colonel. In more graceful phrase-ology, he calls it merely an opportunity to serve his fellow men.And really there is very little else to it. The plain fact is, JoanCrawford thinks less of Joan Crawford and Janet Gaynor thinks













74

less of Janet Gaynor than the world thinks of them. “Aren’t youremarkable?” the world says to all the great, and the great, if theyare truly great, always reply, “What is remarkable?” The world istherefore pretty much like an cl la carte restaurant where everybodythinks the food the next table has ordered is so much more invitingand delicious than his own. A contemporary Chinese professor hasmade the witticism that in the matter of desirability, “Wives arealways better if they are others’, while writing is always better if itis one’s own.” In this sense, therefore, there is no one completelysatisfied in this world. Everyone wants to be somebody so long asthat somebody is not himself.

This human trait is undoubtedly due to our power of imagi-nation and our capacity for dreaming. The greater the imaginativepower of a man, the more perpetually he is dissatisfied. That iswhy an imaginative child is always a more difficult child; he ismore often sad and morose like a monkey, than happy and con-tented like a cow. Also divorce must necessarily be more commonamong the idealists and the more imaginative people than amongthe unimaginative. The vision of a desirable ideal life companionhas an irresistible force which the less imaginative and less idealisticnever feel. On the whole, humanity is as much led astray as ledupwards by this capacity for idealism, but human progress withoutthis imaginative gift is itself unthinkable.

Man, we are told, has aspirations. They are very laudable thingsto have, for aspirations are generally classified as noble. And whynot? Whether as individuals or as nations, we all dream and actmore or less in accordance with our dreams. Some dream a littlemore than others, as there is a child in every family who dreamsmore and perhaps one who dreams less. And I must confess to asecret partiality for the one who dreams. Generally he is the sadderone, but no matter; he is also capable of greater joys and thrills andheights of ecstasy. For I think we are constituted like a receivingset for ideas, as radio sets are equipped for receiving music fromthe air. Some sets with a finer response pick up the finer shortwaves which are lost to the other sets, and why, of course, that













ON DREAMS

75

finer, more distant music is all the more precious if only because itis less easily perceivable.

And those dreams of our childhood, they are not so unreal aswe might think. Somehow they stay with us throughout our life.That is why, if I had my choice of being any one author in theworld, I would be Hans Christian Andersen rather than anybodyelse. To write the story of The Mermaid, or to be the Mermaid our-selves, thinking the Mermaid’s thoughts and aspiring to be oldenough to come up to the surface of the water, is to have felt oneof the keenest and most beautiful delights that humanity is capa-ble of.

And so, out in an alley, up in an attic, or down in the barn orlying along the waterside, a child always dreams, and the dreamsare real. So Thomas Edison dreamed. So Robert Louis Stevensondreamed. So Sir Walter Scott dreamed. All three dreamed in theirchildhood. And out of the stuff of such magic dreams are wovensome of the finest and most beautiful fabrics we have ever seen.But these dreams are also partaken of by lesser children. The de-lights they get are as great, if the visions or contents of theirdreams are different. Every child has a soul which yearns, andcarries a longing on his lap and goes to sleep with it, hoping tofind his dream come true when he wakes up with the morn. Hetells no one of these dreams, for these dreams are his own, andfor that reason they are a part of his innermost growing self. Someof these children’s dreams are clearer than others, and they have aforce which compel their own realization; on the other hand, withgrowing age, those less clear dreams are forgotten, and we all livethrough life trying to tell those dreams of our childhood, and“sometimes we die ere we find the language.”

And so with nations, too. Nations have their dreams and thememories of such dreams persist through generations and cen-turies. Some of these are noble dreams, and others wicked andignoble. The dreams of conquest and of being bigger and strongerthan all the others are always bad dreams, and such nations alwayshave more to worry about than others who have more peaceful













76

dreams. But there are other and better dreams, dreams of a betterworld, dreams of peace and of nations living at peace with oneanother, and dreams of less cruelty, injustice, and poverty andsuffering. The bad dreams tend to destroy the good dreams of hu-manity, and there is a struggle and a fight between these good andbad dreams. People fight for their dreams as much as they fightfor their earthly possessions. And so dreams descend from the worldof idle visions and enter the world of reality, and become a real forcein our life. However vague they are, dreams have a way of con-cealing themselves and leave us no peace until they are translatedinto reality, like seeds germinating under ground, sure to sproutin their search for the sunlight. Dreams are very real things.

There is also a danger of our having confused dreams and dreamsthat do not correspond to reality. For dreams are escapes also, anda dreamer often dreams to escape from the present world, hardlyknowing where. The Blue Bird always attracts the romanticist’sfancy. There is such a human desire to be different from what weare, to get out of the present ruts, that anything which offers achange always has a tremendous appeal to average humanity. Awar is always attractive because it offers a city clerk the chanceof donning a uniform and wearing puttees and a chance for travelgratis, while an armistice or peace is always desirable after threeor four years in the trenches because it offers the soldier a chanceto come back home and wear civilian dress and a scarlet necktieonce more. Some such excitement humanity evidently needs, andif war is to be avoided, governments may just as well recruit peoplebetween twenty and forty-five under a conscript system and sendthem on European tours to see some exposition or other, onceevery ten years. The British Government is spending five billionpounds on its Rearmament Program, a sum sufficient to send everyEnglishman on a trip to the Riviera. The argument is, of course,that expenditures on war are a necessity while travel is a luxury.I feel inclined to disagree: travel is a necessity, while war i& a luxury.

There are other dreams too. Dreams of Utopia and dreams ofimmortality. The dream of immortality is entirely human-note













its universality—although it is vague like the rest, and few peopleknow what they are going to do when they find eternity hanging ontheir hands. After all, the desire for immortality is very much akinto the psychology of suicide, its exact opposite. Both presume thatthe present world is not good enough for us. Why is the presentworld not good enough for us? We should be more surprised atthe question than at any answer to the question if we were out on avisit to the country on a spring day.

And so with dreams of Utopia also. Idealism is merely that stateof mind which believes in another world order, no matter whatkind of an order, so long as it is different from the present one.The idealistic liberal is always one who thinks his own countrythe worst possible country and the society in which he lives theworst of all possible forms of society. He is still the fellow in the& la carte restaurant who believes that the next table’s order ofdishes is better than his own. As the New Yor\ Time/ “Topics”writer says, only the Russian Dnieper Dam is a real dam in theeyes of these liberals and democracies have never built any dams.And of course only the Soviets have built a subway. On the otherhand, the Fascist press tells their people that only in their countryhave mankind discovered the only sensible, right and workingform of government. Therein lies the danger of Utopian liberalsas well as of Fascist propaganda chiefs, and as a very necessary cor-rective, they can have nothing better than a sense of humor.

IV. On the Sense of Humor

I doubt whether the importance of humor has been fully ap-preciated, or the possibility of its use in changing the quality andcharacter of our entire cultural life—the place of humor in politics,humor in scholarship, and humor in life. Because its function ischemical, rather than physical, it alters the basic texture of ourthought and experience. Its importance in national life we can takefor granted. The inability to laugh cost the former Kaiser Wilhelman empire, or as an American might say, cost the German people













ON BEING HUMAN

78

billions of dollars. Wilhelm Hohenzollern probably could laugh inhis private life, but he always looked so terribly impressive withhis upturned mustache in public, as if he was always angry withsomebody. And then the quality of his laughter and the things helaughed at—-laughter at victory, at success, at getting on top ofothers—were just as important factors in determining his life for-tune. Germany lost the war because Wilhelm Hohenzollern didnot know when to laugh, or what to laugh at. His dreams werenot restrained by laughter.

It seems to me the worst comment on dictatorships is that presi-dents of democracies can laugh, while dictators always look soserious—with a protruding jaw, a determined chin, and a pouchedlower lip, as if they were doing something terribly importantand the world could not be saved, except by them. Franklin D.Roosevelt often smiles in public—good for him, and good for theAmerican people who like to see their president smile. But whereare the smiles of the European dictators? Or don’t their peoplewant to see them smile? Or must they indeed look either fright-ened, or dignified, or angry, or in any case look frightfully seriousin order to keep themselves in the saddle? The best thing I haveever read about Hitler is that he is completely natural in private.It somehow restores my confidence in him. But something must bewrong with dictatorships, if dictators have to look either angry orelse vainglorious. The whole temper is wrong.

We are not indulging in idle fooling now, discussing the smilesof dictators; it is terribly serious when our rulers do not smile, be-cause they have got all the guns. On the other hand, the tremendousimportance of humor in politics can be realized only when we pic-ture for ourselves (by that faculty for dreaming known as “D”) aworld of joking rulers. Send, for instance, five or six of the world’sbest humorists to an international conference, and give them theplenipotentiary powers of autocrats, and the world will be saved. Ashumor necessarily goes with good sense and the reasonable spirit,plus some exceptionally subtle powers of the mind in detecting in-consistencies and follies and bad logic, and as this is the highest form













ON THE SENSE OF HUMOR 79

of human intelligence, we may be sure that each nation will thus berepresented at the conference by its sanest and soundest mind. LetShaw represent Ireland, Stephen Leacock represent Canada; G. K.Chesterton is dead, but P. G. Wodehouse or Aldous Huxley mayrepresent England. Will Rogers is dead, otherwise he would make afine diplomat representing the U. S.; we can have in his stead RobertBenchley or Heywood Broun. There will be others from Italy andFrance and Germany and Russia. Send these people to a conferenceon the eve of a great war, and see if they can start a European war,no matter how hard they try. Can you imagine this bunch of inter-national diplomats starting a war or even plotting for one? The senseof humor forbids it. All people are too serious and half-insane whenthey declare a war against another people. They are so sure thatthey are right and that God is on their side. The humorists,gifted with better horse-sense, don’t think so. You will find GeorgeBernard Shaw shouting that Ireland is wrong, and a Berlin car-toonist protesting that the mistake is all theirs, and HeywoodBroun claiming the largest share of bungling for America, whileStephen Leacock in the chair makes a general apology for mankind,gently reminding us that in the matter of stupidity and sheerfoolishness no nation can claim itself to be the superior of others.How in the name of humor are we going to start a war under theseconditions?

For who have started wars for us? The ambitious, the able, theclever, the scheming, the cautious, the sagacious, the haughty, theover-patriotic, the people inspired with the desire to "serve” man-kind, people who have a "career” to carve and an "impression” tomake on the world, who expect and hope to look down the agesfrom the eyes of a bronze figure sitting on a bronze horse in somesquare. Curiously, the able, the clever, and the ambitious andhaughty are at the same time the most cowardly and muddle-tieaded, lacking in the courage and depth and subtlety of the humor-ists. They are forever dealing with trivialities, while the humoristswith their greater sweep of mind can envisage larger things. As itis, a diplomat who does not whisper in a low voice and look













8o

ON BEING HUMAN

properly scared and intimidated and correct and cautious is nodiplomat at all. . . . But we don’t even have to have a conferenceof international humorists to save the world. There is a sufficientstock of this desirable commodity called a sense of humor in allof us. When Europe seems to be on the brink of a catastrophicwar, we may still send to the conferences our worst diplomats, themost “experienced” and self-assured, the most ambitious, the mostwhispering, most intimidated and correct and properly scared,even the most anxious to “serve” mankind. If it be required that,at the opening of every morning and afternoon session, ten minutesbe devoted to the showing of a Mickey Mouse picture, at which allthe diplomats are compelled to be present, any war can still beaverted.

This I conceive to be the chemical function of humor: to changethe character of our thought. I rather think that it goes to the veryroot of culture, and opens a way to the coming of the ReasonableAge in the future human world. For humanity I can visualize nogreater ideal than that of the Reasonable Age. For that after all isthe only important thing, the arrival of a race of men imbuedwith a greater reasonable spirit, with greater prevalence of goodsense, simple thinking, a peaceable temper and a cultured out-look. The ideal world for mankind will not be a rational world,nor a perfect world in any sense, but a world in which imper-fections are readily perceived and quarrels reasonably settled. Formankind, that is frankly the best we can hope for and the noblestdream that we can reasonably expect to come true. This seems toimply several things: a simplicity of thinking, a gaiety in philosophyand a subtle common sense, which will make this reasonable cul-ture possible. Now it happens that subtle common sense, gaiety ofphilosophy and simplicity of thinking ate characteristic of humorand must arise from it.

It is difficult to imagine this kind of a new world because ourpresent world is so different. On the whole, our life is too complex,our scholarship too serious, our philosophy too somber, and ourthoughts too involved. This seriousness and this involved complexity













8i

ON THE SENSE OF HUMOR

of our thought and scholarship make the present world such an un-happy one today.

Now it must be taken for granted that simplicity of life andthought is the highest and sanest ideal for civilization and culture,that when a civilization loses simplicity and the sophisticated donot return to unsophistication, civilization becomes increasinglyfull of troubles and degenerates. Man then becomes the slave ofthe ideas, thoughts, ambitions and social systems that are his ownproduct. Mankind, overburdened with this load of ideas and am-bitions and social systems, seems unable to rise above them. Luck-ily, however, there is a power of the human mind which cantranscend all these ideas, thoughts and ambitions and treat themwith a smile, and this power is the subdety of the humorist. Hu-morists handle thoughts and ideas as golf or billiard championshandle their balls, or as cowboy champions handle their lariats,There is an ease, a sureness, a lightness of touch, that comes frommastery. After all, only he who handles his ideas lightly is masterof his ideas, and only he who is master of his ideas is not enslavedby them. Seriousness, after all, is only a sign of effort, and effort isa sign of imperfect mastery. A serious writer is awkward and illat ease in the realm of ideas as a nouveau riche is awkward, ill atease and self-conscious in society. He is serious because he has notcome to feel at home with his ideas.

Simplicity, then, paradoxically is the outward sign and symbolof depth of thought. It seems to me simplicity is about the mostdifficult thing to achieve in scholarship and writing. How difficultis clarity of thought, and yet it is only as thought becomes clearthat simplicity is possible. When we see a writer belaboring anidea we may be sure that the idea is belaboring him. This is provedby the general fact that the lectures of a young college assistantinstructor, freshly graduated with high honors, are generally ab-struse and involved, and true simplicity of thought and ease ofexpression are to be found only in the words of the older professors.When a young professor does not talk in pedantic language, heis then positively brilliant, and much may be expected of him.













ON BEING HUMAN

What is involved in the progress from technicality to simplicity,from the specialist to the thinker, is essentially a process of digestionof knowledge, a process that I compare strictly to metabolism. Nolearned scholar can present to us his specialized knowledge insimple human terms until he has digested that knowledge him-self and brought it into relation with his observations of life. Be-tween the hours of his arduous pursuit of knowledge (let us saythe psychological knowledge of William James), I feel there ismany a “pause that refreshes,” like a cool drink after a long fati-guing journey. In that pause many a truly human specialist willask himself the all important question, “What on earth am Italking about?” Simplicity presupposes digestion and also maturity:as we grow older, our thoughts become clearer, insignificant andperhaps false aspects of a question are lopped off and cease todisturb us, ideas take on more definite shapes and long trains ofthought gradually shape themselves into a convenient formulawhich suggests itself to us one fine morning, and we arrive at thattrue luminosity of knowledge which is called wisdom. There isno longer a sense of effort, and truth becomes simple to understandbecause it becomes clear, and the reader gets that supreme pleasureof feeling that truth itself is simple and its formulation natural.This naturalness of thought and style, which is so much admiredby Chinese poets and critics, is often spoken of as a process ofgradually maturing development. As we speak of the growingmaturity of Su Tungp’o’s prose, we say that he has “gradually ap-proached naturalness”—a style that has shed off its youthful loveof pomposity, pedantry, virtuosity and literary showmanship.Now it is natural that the sense of humor nourishes this simplicityof thinking. Generally, a humorist keeps closer touch with facts,while a theorist dwells more on ideas, and it is only when one isdealing with ideas in themselves that his thoughts get incrediblycomplex. The humorist, on the other hand, indulges in flashes ofcommon sense or wit, which show up the contradictions of our ideaswith reality with lightning speed, thus greatly simplifying matters.Constant contact with reality gives the humorist a bounce, and also













a lightness and subtlety. All forms of pose, sham, learned nonsense,academic stupidity and social humbug are politely but effectivelyshown the door. Man becomes wise because man becomes subtle andwitty. All is simple. All is clear. It is for this reason that I believe asane and reasonable spirit, characterized by simplicity of living andthinking, can be achieved only when there is a very much greaterprevalence of humorous thinking.

V. On Being Wayward and Incalculable

It seems that today the scamp is being displaced by the soldieras the highest ideal of a human being. Instead of wayward, incalcu-lable, unpredictable free individuals, we are going to have ration-alized, disciplined, regimented and uniformed, patriotic coolies, soefficiently controlled and organized that a nation of fifty or sixtymillions can believe in the same creed, think the same thoughtsand like the same food. Clearly two opposite views of human dig-nity are possible: the one regarding the scamp, and the otherregarding the soldier, as the ideal; the one believing that a personwho retains his freedom and individuality is the noblest type, andthe other believing that a person who has completely lost inde-pendent judgment and surrendered all rights to private beliefs andopinions to the ruler or the state is the best and noblest being.Both views are defensible, one by common sense, and the other bylogic. It should not be difficult to defend by logic the ideal of thepatriotic automaton as a model citizen, useful as a means to serveanother external goal, which is the strength of the state, whichexists again for another goal, the crushing of other states. All thatcan be easily demonstrated by logic—a logic so simple and naivethat all idiots fall for it. Incredible as it may seem, such a view hasbeen upheld and is still being upheld in many “civilized” and “en-lightened” European countries. The ideal citizen is the soldier whothought he was being transported to Ethiopia and found himself inGuadalajara. Among such ideal citizens two classes, “A” and “B,”may again be distinguished. The “A” class, consisting of the better













ON BEING HUMAN

84

citizens from the point o£ view of the state or its ruler, are those who,on discovering that they have been landed in Spain, are still extremelysweet and amiable and offer up thanks to God directly or throughthe army chaplain for sending them, by a kind of providentialmiracle, to the thick of the battle to die for the state. Class “B”would be those insufficiently civilized beings who feel an innerresentment at the discovery. Now for myself, that inner resentment,that human recalcitrancy, is the only sign of human dignity, theonly spark of hope illuminating for me the otherwise somber anddismal picture, the only hope for a restoration of human decencyin some future more civilized world.

It is clear then that, in spite of all logic, I am still for the scamp.I am all for the scamp, or the tramp, and for “Mary, Mary, quitecontrary.” Our contrary-mindedness is our only hope for civilization.My reason is simple: that we are descended from the monkeys andnot from the cows, and that therefore we are better monkeys, noblermonkeys, for being contrary-minded. I am selfish enough as ahuman being to desire a sweet and contented temper for the cows,who can be led to the pasture or to the slaughter-house at humanbehest with equal magnanimity and nobility of mind, motivated bythe sole desire to sacrifice themselves for their master. At the sametime, I am such a lover of humanity as not to desire that we becomecows ourselves. The moment cows rebel and feel our recalcitrancy,or begin to act waywardly and less mechanically, I call them human.The reason I think all dictatorships are wrong is a biological reason.Dictators and cows go well together, but dictators and monkeysdon’t.

In fact, my respect for Western civilization has been considerablylowered since the nineteen-twenties. I had been ashamed of Chinesecivilization, and I had honored the West, for I regarded it as a stainupon Chinese civilization that we had not developed a constitutionand the idea of civil rights, and I decidedly thought that a constitu-tional government, republican or monarchical, was an advance inhuman culture. Now in the very home of Western civilization, Ihave the pleasure and satisfaction of seeing that human rights and













individual liberty, even the common sense rights of individual free-dom of belief that we in China enjoy and have always enjoyed, canbe trampled upon, that a constitutional government is no longerthought of as the highest form of government, that there are moreEuripidean slaves in central Europe than in feudalistic China, andthat some Western nations have more logic and less common sensethan we Chinese. What more easy than for me to play the trumpcard from my sleeve by producing the Chinese ideal of the happy-go-lucky, carefree scamp, tramp and vagabond, which is the highestcultural ideal of a human being according to the Chinese concep-tion? Has the West a trump card to match, something to show tharits doctrine of individual liberty and civil rights is a serious anddeep-rooted belief or instinct, with enough vitality to stage a come-back and swing the pendulum of thought in the other direction,after the present fashion for glorified, uniformed coolies is gone? Iam waiting to see it.

It is easy to see how the European tradition of individual libertyand freedom has been forgotten, and why the pendulum is swingingin the wrong direction today. The reasons are two: first, the conse-quences of the present economic movement toward collectivism,and second, a heritage from the mechanistic oudook of mid-"Victorian times. It seems that in the present age of rising collectiv-ism of all sorts—social, economic and political-mankind is naturallyforgetting and forfeiting its right to human recalcitrancy and losingsight of the dignity of the individual. With the predominance of eco-nomic problems and economic tHnking, which is overshadowingall other forms of human thinking, we remain completely ignorantof, and indifferent to, a more humanized knowledge and a morehumanized philosophy, a philosophy that deals with the problemsof the individual life. This is natural. As a man who has an ulceredstomach spends all his thought on his stomach, so a society with asick and aching economics is forever preoccupied with thoughts ofeconomics. Nevertheless, the result is that we remain totally indiffer-ent to the individual and have almost forgotten that he exists. Aman used to be a man for a’ that. Today he is generally conceived













ON BEING HUMAN

as an automaton blindly obeying material or economic laws. Weno longer think of a man as a man, but as a cog in a wheel, a mem-ber of a union or a class, an alien to be imported by quotas, a petitbourgeois to be referred to with contempt, or a capitalist to be de-nounced, or a worker to be regarded as a comrade because he is aworker. It seems that to label a man as a petit bourgeois or a“capitalist” or a “worker” is already to understand him completely,and he can be conveniently hated or hailed as a comrade accord-ingly. We are no longer individuals, no longer men, but only classes.May I suggest that this is an over-simplification of things? Thescamp has completely disappeared as an ideal, and so has the manwith his gloriously scamp-like qualities of reacting freely and incal-culably to his external surroundings. Instead of men, we have mem-bers of a class; instead of ideas and personal prejudices andidiosyncracies, we have ideologies, or class thoughts; instead of per-sonalities, we have blind forces; and instead of individuals, we havea Marxian dialectic controlling and foreshadowing all human activi-ties with unfailing precision. We are all progressing happily andenthusiastically toward the model of the ants.

Of course I realize that I am talking nothing but old-fashioneddemocratic individualism. But may I also remind the Marxists thatKarl Marx was himself a product of the Hegelian logic of a centuryago and of the English classical school of economics of the mid-Vic-torian period? And nothing is so old-fashioned today as Hegelianlogic or the mid-Victorian precision school of economic thought—nothing so unconvincing and untrue and so totally devoid of com-mon sense, from the Chinese humanist point of view. But we canunderstand how this mechanistic view of man came about at a timewhen mechanistic science was proud of its achievements and itsconquests over nature. This science was pilfered, its mechanisticlogic transferred to apply to human society, and the always imposingname of “natural laws” was very much sought after by the studentsof human affairs. Hence the prevalent theory that the surroundingsare greater than the man and that human personalities can be almostreduced to equations. That may be good economics, but bad biology.













ON BEING WAYWARD 87

Good biology recognizes the individual’s power of reaction as justas important a factor in the development of life as the physicalenvironment, as any wise doctor will admit that the patient’s tem-perament and individual reactions are an all-important factor in thefight against a disease. Medical doctors today recognize more andmore the incalculable factor of the individual. Many patients, whoby all logic and precedents ought to die, simply refuse to do so andshock the doctor by their recovery. A doctor who prescribes anidentical treatment for an identical disease in two individuals andexpects an identical development may be properly classified as asocial menace. No less a social menace are the social philosopherswho forget the individual, his capacity for reacting in a differentmanner from others, and his generally wayward and incalculablebehavior.

Perhaps I don’t understand economics, but economics does notunderstand me, either. That is why economics is still flounderingtoday and hardly dares pop up its head as a science. The sad thingabout economics is that it is no science, if it stops at commoditiesand does not go beyond to human motives, and if it does gobeyond to human motives, it is still no science, or at best apseudo-science, if it tries to reach human motives by statisticalaverages. It hasn’t developed even a technique suitable to theexamination of the,human mind, and if it carries over to the realmof human activities its mathematical approach and its love of draw-ing statistical averages, it stands in still greater danger of flounder-ing in ignorance. That is why every time an important economicmeasure is about to be adopted, two economic experts or authoritieswill come out exacdy on opposite sides. Economics after all goesback to the idiosyncrasies of the human mind, and of these idiosyn-crasies the experts have no ghost of an idea. One believed that,should England go off the gold standard, there would be a catas-trophe, while another believed, with equal cocksureness, that Eng-land’s going off the gold standard would be the only salvation.When people begin to buy and when people begin to sell are prob-lems that the best experts cannot reasonably foretell. It is entirely













ON BEING HUMAN

due to this fact that speculations on the stock exchange are possible.It remains true that the stock exchange cannot, with the best assem-blage of world economic data, scientifically predict the rise and fallof gold or silver or commodities, as the weather bureau can forecastthe weather. The reason clearly lies in the fact that there is a humanelement in it, that when too many people are selling out, some willstart buying in, and when too many people are buying in, a fewpeople will start selling out. Thus is introduced the element ofhuman resilience and human uncertainty. It is to be presumed, ofcourse, that every person who is selling out regards as a fool theother person who is buying in what he is selling out, and vice versa.Who are the fools only future events can prove. This is merely anillustration of the incalculableness and waywardness of human be-havior, which is true not only in the hard and matter-of-fact dealingsof business, but also in the shaping of the course of history byhuman psychology, and in all human reactions toward morals,customs, and social reforms.

VI. The Doctrine of the Individual

Man today may be living in a democratic country to a greater orlesser extent threatened by great social changes, or he may be livingin a communist country tending more and more to approach andcome back to the democratic ideal, or he may be living under adictatorship which may survive him or which more probably hewill survive. In any case, his individual life remains an integratedwhole, shaped by the currents of the times, but still retaining itsindividuality.

Philosophy not only begins with the individual, but also endswith the individual. For an individual is the final fact of life. He isan end in himself, and not a means to other creations of the humanmind. The greatest empire of the world, like the British Empire,exists in order that an Englishman in Sussex may live a fairly happyand reasonable life; a false philosophy would assume that the Eng-lishman in Sussex lives in order that there may be the great British













Empire. The best social philosophies do not claim any greaterobjective than that the individual human beings living undersuch a regime shall have happy individual lives. If there are socialphilosophies which deny the happiness of the individual life as thefinal goal and aim of civilization, those philosophies are the productof a sick and unbalanced mind.

As far as culture is concerned, I am inclined to think that thefinal judgment of any particular type of culture is what type of menand women it turns out. It is in this sense that Walt Whitman, oneof the wisest and most far-seeing of Americans, struggles in his essayDemocratic Vistas to bring forth the principle of individuality or“personalism,” as the end of all civilization:

And, if we think of it, what does civilization itself rest upon—and what object has it, with its religions, arts, schools, etc.,but rich, luxuriant, varied personalism? To that all bends; andit is because toward such result democracy alone, on anythinglike Nature’s scale, breaks up the limidess fallows of human-kind, and plants the seed, and gives fair play, that its claimsnow precede the rest. The literature, songs, esthetics, etc., of acountry are of importance principally because they furnish thematerials and suggestions of personality for the women andmen of that country, and enforce them m a thousand effectiveways.

Speaking of the individuality as a final fact, Whitman says:

There is, in sanest hours, a consciousness, a thought that rises,independent, lifted out from all else, calm, like the stars, shin-ing eternal. This is the thought of identity—yours for you, who-ever you are, as mine for me. Miracle of miracles, beyondstatement, most spiritual and vaguest of earth’s dreams, yethardest basic fact, and only entrance to all facts. In such devouthours, in the midst of the significant wonders of heaven andearth, (significant only because of the Me in the centre), creeds,conventions, fall away and become of no account before thissimple idea. Under the luminousness of real vision, it alonetakes possession, takes value. Like the shadowy dwarf in thefable, once liberated and look’d upon, it expands over the wholeearth, and spreads to the roof of heaven.













90

The temptation is strong to quote more from this typically Ameri-can philosopher’s most eloquent glorification of the individual,summed up in the following manner:

.... and, as an eventual conclusion and summing up (orelse the entire scheme of things is aimless, a cheat, a crash), thesimple idea that the last, best dependence is to be upon human-ity itself, and its own inherent, normal, full-grown qualities,without any superstitious support whatever.

The purpose of democracy ... is, through many transmigra-tions, and amid endless ridicules, arguments and ostensiblefailures, to illustrate, at all hazards, this doctrine or theory thatman, properly train’d in sanest, highest freedom, may and mustbecome a law, and series of laws, unto himself

After all, it is not our surroundings, but our reactions towardthem that count. France, Germany, England and America are allliving in the same machine civilization, yet their patterns and flavorsof life are all different, and all solve their political problems in dif-ferent ways. It is foolish to assume that man must be swamped bythe machine in a uniform, helpless manner, when we realize thereis such room for variety of life, when we see that two drivers onthe same truck will take a joke differently. A father of two sons whogives them the same education and the same start in life, will seehow they gradually shape their lives according to the inner lawsof their own being. Even if both turn out to be presidents of bankswith exactly the same capitalization, yet in all things that matter, inall things that make for happiness, they are different, different intheir address, accent and temperament; in their policies and ways ofhandling problems; in the way they get on with their staff, whetherthey are feared or loved, harsh and exacting or pleasant and easy-going; in the way they save and spend their money; and different intheir personal lives as colored by their hobbies, their friends, theirclubs, their reading and their wives. Such is the rich variety possiblein identical surroundings that no one can take up the obituary pageof a newspaper, without wondering how persons living in the samegeneration and dying on the same day have led entirely different













lives, how some plodded on in a chosen vocation with a singulardevotion and found happiness in it, how others had a checkered andvaried career, how some invented, some explored, some crackedjokes, some were morose and without a sense of humor, some sky-rocketed to fame and wealth and died in the cold, dark cinders ofthe rocket, and some sold ice and coal and were stabbed to death intheir cellar homes with a hoard of twenty thousand dollars in gold.Yes, human life is wondrous strange still, even in an industrial age.So long as man is man, variety will still be the flavor of life.

There is no such thing as determinism in human affairs, whetherpolitics or social revolution. The human factor is what upsets the cal-culations of the propounders of new theories and systems, and whatdefeats the originators of laws, institutions and social panaceas,whether it be the Oneida Community, or the American Federationof Labor, or Judge Lindsay’s companionate marriage. The quality ofthe bride and bridegroom is more important than the conventionsof marriage and divorce, and the men administering or upholdingthe laws are more important than the laws themselves.

But the importance of the individual comes not only from thefact that the individual life is the end of all civilization, but alsofrom the fact that the improvement of our social and political lifeand international relationships comes from the aggregate actionand temper of the individuals which compose a nation and is eventu-ally based on the temper and quality of the individual. In nationalpolitics and the evolution of a country from one stage to an-other, the determining factor is the temperament of the people.For above the laws of industrial development, there is the moreimportant factor of a nation’s way of doing things and solvingproblems. Rousseau as litde foresaw the course of the French Revo-lution and the appearance of Napoleon, as Karl Marx foresawthe actual development of his socialistic theories and the appearanceof Stalin. The course of the French Revolution was not determinedby the slogan of Liberty, Equality *and Fraternity, but by certain traitsin human nature in general and in the French temperament inparticular. Karl Marx’s predictions about the course of the socialist













92

revolution have failed miserably, despite his rigorous dialectic. Byall the laws of logic, as he predicted, a revolution of the proletariatshould have come where the industrial civilization was most ad-vanced and where there was a strong class of proletarian workers—first in England, perhaps m the United States and possibly inGermany. Instead, Communism had first a chance to be pul on trialin an agricultural country like Russia where there was no importantproletarian class at all. What Karl Marx forgot to calculate was thehuman factor in England and in the United States and the English-man’s or American’s way of doing things and of solving problems.The great omission in all immature economics is the neglect to pro-vide for a je ne sais quoi factor in national affairs. The English dis-trust of theories and slogans, the Englishman’s way of slowlybungling, if necessary, but in any case slowly finding his way, theAnglo-Saxon’s love of individual liberty, self-respect, good senseand love of order, are things which are more powerful m shapingthe course of events in England and America than all the logic ofthe German dialectician.

And so the conduct of a nation’s affairs and the course of its socialand political development are eventually based on the ideas whichgovern the individuals. This racial temperament, the thing we ab-stractly call “the genius of the people,” is after all an aggregate ofthe individuals who comprise that nation, for it is nothing but thecharacter of a nation in action, as it faces certain problems or crises.There is nothing more false than the notion that this “genius” is amythological entity like the “soul” in medieval theology, as if itwere something more than a figure of speech. The genius of a nationis nothing but the character of its conduct and its way of doingthings. So far from being an abstract entity with an independentexistence of its own, as we sometimes think of the “destiny” of anation, this genius can be seen only in action; it is a matter of choice,of certain selections and rejections, preferences and prejudices, whichdetermine the nation’s final course of action in a given crisis orsituation. Historians of the old school would like to think withHegel that the history of a nation is but the development of an idea,













DOCTRINE OF THE INDIVIDUAL 93

proceeding by a kind of mechanical necessity, whereas a more subtleand realistic view of history is that it was very largely a matter ofchance. At every critical period, the nation made a choice, and inthe choice we see a struggle of opposing forces and conflicting pas-sions, and a little more of this kind of sentiment or a little less ofthat kind might have tipped the scale in the other direction. Theso-called genius of a nation, as expressed in such a given crisis, wasa decision by the nation that they would like to have a little moreof one thing, or had had enough of it. For after all every nationwent ahead with what it liked, or what appealed to its sentiments,and rejected what it would not tolerate. Such a choice was based ona current of ideas and a set of moral sentiments and socialprejudices.

In the last constitutional crisis of England, eventually compellingthe abdication of a king, we see most clearly this thing called thecharacter of a people in action, revealed by its approvals and disap-provals, its tide of changing emotions, in a conflict among manyworking motives of assumed validity. Such motives were personalloyalty to a popular prince, the Church of England’s prejudiceagainst a divorcee, the Englishman’s traditional conception of aking, the question whether a king’s private affair was or could be aprivate affair, and whether a king should be more than a figurehead,or whether he should have definite Laborite sympathies. A littlemore of any one of these conflicting sentiments might have broughtabout a different solution of the crisis.

And so throughout current history, whether Zenoviev, Kamenevand Piatakoif might have been killed and Radek imprisoned,whether “counter-revolutionary” plots and rebellion against theStalin regime might or might not be so extensive, whether theGerman Catholic and Protestant churches might or might not holdtheir integrity in their resistance against the Nazi regime (that is,how much human resilience there is in Germany), whether Eng-land might turn truly Laborite, and whether the American Com-munist party might grow or lose in public favor, are things whicheventually are determined by the ideas, sentiments and character













ON BEING HUMAN

94

o£ the individual members of the states concerned. In all this mov-ing panorama of human history, I see only flux and change,determined by man’s own wayward and incalculable and unpredic-table choice.

In this sense, Confucianism connected the question of world peacewith the cultivation of our personal lives. The very first lesson thatConfucian scholars since the Sung Dynasty have decided should belearned by the child at school contains this passage:

The ancient people who desired to have a clear moral har-mony m the world would first order their national life; thosewho desired to order their national life would first regulate theirhome life; those who desired to regulate their home life wouldfirst cultivate their personal lives; those who desired to culti-vate their personal lives would first set their hearts right; thosewho desired to set their hearts right, would first make theirwills sincere; those who desired to make their wills sincerewould first arrive at understanding; understanding comes fromthe exploration of knowledge of things. When the knowledgeof things is gained, then understanding is reached; when under-standing is reached, then the will is sincere; when the will is sin-cere, then the heart is set right; when the heart is set right, thenthe personal life is cultivated; when the personal life is culti-vated, then the home life is regulated; when the home life isregulated, then the national life is orderly; and when thenational life is orderly; then the world is at peace. From theEmperor down to the common man, the cultivation of the per-sonal life is the foundation for all. It is impossible that whenthe foundation is disorderly, the superstructure can be orderly.There has never been a tree whose trunk is slender and whosetop branches are heavy and strong. There is a cause and a se-quence in things, and a beginning and end in human affairs.To know the order of precedence is to have the beginning ofwisdom.













Chapter Five

WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

I. Find Thyself: Chuangtse

IN modern life, a philosopher is about the most honored and mostunnoticed person in the world, if indeed such a person exists. “Phi-losopher” has become merely a term of social compliment. Anyonewho is abstruse and unintelligible is called “a philosopher.” Any-one who is unconcerned with the present is also called “a philoso-pher.” And yet there is some truth in the latter meaning. WhenShakespeare made Touchstone say in As You Like It, “Hast anyphilosophy in thee, shepherd?” he was using it in the second mean-ing. In this sense, philosophy is but a common, rough and readyoutlook on things or on life in general, and every person has moreor less of it. Anyone who refuses to take the entire panorama of real-ity on its surface value, or refuses to believe every word that appearsin a newspaper, is more or less a philosopher. He is the fellow whorefuses to be taken in.

There is always a flavor of disenchantment about philosophy. Thephilosopher looks at life as an artist looks at a landscape-througha veil or a haze. The raw details of reality are softened a little topermit us to see its meaning. At least that is what a Chinese artistor a Chinese philosopher thinks. The philosopher is therefore thedirect opposite of the complete realist who, busily occupied in hisdaily business, believes that his successes and failures, his losses andgains, are absolute and real. There is nothing to be done about sucha person because he does not even doubt and there is nothing in himto start with. Confucius said: “If a person does not say to himself‘What to do? What to do?’ indeed I do not know what to do withsuch a person!”—one of the few conscious witticisms I have foundin Confucius.

I hope to present in this chapter some opinions of Chinese phi-losophers on a design for living. The more these philosophersdiffer, the more they agree—that man must be wise and un-

95













afraid to live a happy life. The more positive Mencian oudook andthe more roguishly pacifist Laotsean outlook merge together in thePhilosophy of the Half-and-Half, which I may describe as the aver-age Chinaman’s religion. The conflict between action and inactionends in a compromise, or contentment with a very imperfect heavenon earth. This gives rise to a wise and merry philosophy of living,eventually typified in the life of T’ao Yiianming—in my opinionChina’s greatest poet and most harmonious personality.

The only problem unconsciously assumed by all Chinese philoso-phers to be of any importance is: how shall we enjoy life, and whocan best enjoy life? No perfectionism, no straining after the unat-tainable, no postulating of the unknowable; but taking poor,mortal human nature as it is, how shall we organize our life thatwe can work peacefully, endure nobly and live happily?

Who are we? That is the first question. It is a question almostimpossible to answer. But we all agree that the busy self occupiedin our daily activities is not quite the real self. We are quite surewe have lost something in the mere pursuit of living. When wewatch a person running about looking for something in a field,the wise man can set a puzzle for all the spectators to solve: whathas that person lost? Some one thinks it is a watch; another thinksit is a diamond brooch; and others will essay other guesses. Afterall these guesses have failed, the wise man who really doesn’t knowwhat the person is seeking after tells the company: “I’ll tell you.He has lost some breath.” And no one can deny that he is right.So we often forget our true self in the pursuit of living, like abird forgetting its own danger in pursuit of a mantis, which againforgets its own danger in pursuit of another prey, as is so beauti-fully expressed in a parable by Chuangtse:

When Chuangtse was wandering in the park at Tiao-ling, hesaw a strange bird which came from the south. Its wings wereseven feet across. Its eyes were an inch in circumference. And itflew close past Chuangtse’s head to alight in a chestnut grove.

“What manner of bird is this?” cried Chuangtse. “With













FIND THYSELF: CHUANGTSE 97

strong wings it does not fly away. With large eyes it does notsee.”

So he picked up his skirts and strode towards it with hiscross-bow, anxious to get a shot. Just then he saw a cicadaenjoying itself in the shade, forgetful of all else. And he sawa mantis spring and seize it, forgetting in the act its own body,which the strange bird immediately pounced upon and madeits prey. And this it was which had caused the bird to forgetits own nature.

“Alas!” cried Chuangtse with a sigh, “how creatures injureone another. Loss follows the pursuit of gain.”

So he laid aside his bow and went home, driven away by thepark-keeper who wanted to know what business he had there.

For three months after this, Chuangtse did not leave thehouse; and at length Lin Chii asked him, saying, “Master, howis it that you have not been out for so long?”

“While keeping my physical frame,” replied Chuangtse, “Ilost sight of my real self. Gazing at muddy water, I lost sightof the clear abyss. Besides, I have learnt from the Master asfollows:—'When you go into the world, follow its customs.’Now when I strolled into the park at Tiao-ling, I forgot myreal self. That strange bird which flew close past me to thechestnut grove, forgot its nature. The keeper of the chestnutgrove took me for a thief. Consequendy I have not been out.”1

Chuangtse was the eloquent follower of Laotse, as Mencius wasthe eloquent follower of Confucius, both separated from theirmasters by about a century. Chuangtse was a contemporaryof Mencius, as Laotse was probably a contemporary of Confu-cius. But Mencius agreed with Chuangtse that we have lostsomething and the business of philosophy is to discover and recoverthat which is lost—-in this case, “a child’s heart,” according toMencius. “A great man is he who has not lost the heart of a child,”says this philosopher. Mencius regards the effect of the artificiallife of civilization upon the youthful heart born in man as similarto the deforestation of our hills:

1From Professor H. A. Giles’s translation, Chuang Tzu (Quatrich, London),which is a complete translation of Chuangtse’s works.













9S WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

There was once a time when the forests o£ the Niu Moun-tain were beautiful. But can the mountain any longer be re-garded as beautiful, since being situated near a big city, thewoodsmen have hewed the trees down? The days and nightsgave it rest, and the rams and the dew continued to nourishit, and a new life was continually springing up from the soil,but then the cattle and the sheep began to pasture upon it.That is why the Niu Mountain looks so bald, and when peo-ple see its baldness, they imagine that there was never anytimber on the mountain. Is this the true nature of the moun-tain ? And is there not a heart of love and righteousness in man,too? But how can that nature remain beautiful when it ishacked down every day, as the woodsman chops down thetrees with his ax? To be sure, the nights and days do the heal-ing and there is the nourishing air of the early dawn, whichtends to keep him sound and normal, but this morning air isthin and is soon destroyed by what he does in the day. Withthis continuous hacking of the human spirit, the rest and re-cuperation obtained during the night are not sufficient to main-tain its level, and when the night’s recuperation does notsuffice to maintain its level, then the man degrades himself toa state not far from the beast’s. People see that he acts like abeast and imagine that there was never any true character inhim. But is this the true nature of man?

II. Passion, Wisdom and Courage: Mencius

The ideal character best able to enjoy life is a warm, carefree andunafraid soul. Mencius enumerated the three “mature virtues” ofhis “great man” as “wisdom, compassion and courage.” I shouldlike to lop off one syllable and regard as the qualities of a greatsoul passion, wisdom and courage. Luckily, we have in the Eng-lish language the word “passion” which in its usage very nearlycorresponds to the Chinese word ch'ing. Both words start out withthe narrower meaning of sexual passion, but both have a muchwider significance. As Chang Ch’ao says, “A passionate naturealways loves women, but one who loves women is not necessarilya passionate nature ” And again, “Passion holds up the bottom of













the world, while genius paints its roof” For unless we have pas-sion, we have nothing to start out in life with at all. It is passionthat is the soul of life, the light in the stars, the lilt in music andsong, the joy in flowers, the plumage in birds, the charm in woman,and the life in scholarship. It is as impossible to speak of a soulwithout passion as to speak of music without expression. It is thatwhich gives us inward warmth and the rich vitality which enablesus to face life cheerily.

Or perhaps I am wrong in choosing the word “passion” when Ispeak of what the Chinese writers refer to as ch’mg. Should Itranslate it by the word “sentiment,” which is gender and suggestsless of the tumultuous qualities of stormy passion? Or perhaps wemean by it something very similar to what the early Romanticistscall “sensibility,” which we find in a warm, generous and artisticsoul. It is strange that among the Western philosophers so few,except Emerson, Amiel, Joubert and Voltaire, have a good wordto say for passion. Perhaps we are arguing about words merely,while we mean the same thing. But then, if passion is differentfrom sentiment and means something tumultuous and upsetting,then we haven’t got a Chinese word for it, and we still have to goback to the old word ch’ing. Is this an index of a difference inracial temperament, of the absence among the Chinese people ofgrand and compelling passions, which eat up one’s soul and formthe stuff of tragedy in Western literature? Is this the reason whyChinese literature has not developed tragedy in the Greek sense;why Chinese tragic characters at the critical moment weep, giveup their sweethearts to their enemy, or as in the case of Ch’uPawang, stab their sweethearts and then plunge the knife into theirown breasts? It is a sort of ending that will be found unsatisfyingto a Western audience, but as Chinese life is, so is Chinese litera-ture. Man struggles with fate, gives up the battle, and the tragedycomes in the aftermath, in a flood of reminiscences, of vain regretand longing, such as we see in the tragedy of Emperor T’angMinghuang, who after granting the suicide of his beloved queento placate a rebellious army, lives in a dream world in memory of













WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

her. The tragic sense is shown in the remaining part of the Chi-nese play long after the denouement, in a swelling crescendoof sorrow. As he travels in his exile, he hears the distant musicof cowbells in the hills on a rainy day and he composes the “Songof Rain on Cowbells” in her honor; everything he sees or touches,a little perfumed scarf that still retains its old scent, or an old maidservant of hers, reminds him of his beloved queen, and the playends with him searching for her soul with the help of Taoist priestsin the abode of the Immortals. So then, we have here a romanticsensibility, if we are not allowed to speak of it as passion. But itis passion mellowed down to a gentle glow. So it is characteristicof Chinese philosophers that while they disparage the human “de^sires” (in the sense of the “seven passions”), they have never dis-paraged passion or sentiment itself, but made it the very basis of anormal human life, so much so that they regard “the passion be-tween husband and wife as the very foundation of all normalhuman life.”

It is unfortunately true that this matter of passion, or still better,sentiment, is something born in us, and that as we cannot chooseour parents, we are born with a given cold or warm nattuy. Onthe other hand, no child is born with a really cold heart, and itis only in proportion as we lose that youthful heart that we losethe inner warmth in ourselves. Somewhere in our adult life, oursentimental nature is killed, strangled, chilled or atrophied by anunkind surrounding, largely through our own fault in neglectingto keep it alive, or our failure to keep clear of such surroundings.In the process of learning “world experience,” there is many aviolence done to our original nature, when we learn to hardenourselves, to be artificial, and often to be cold-hearted and cruel,so that as one prides oneself upon gaining more and more worldlyexperience, his nerves become more and more insensitive and be-numbed—especially in the world of politics and commerce. As aresult, we get the great “go-getter” pushing himself forward tothe top and brushing everybody aside; we get the man of iron willand strong determination, with the last embers of sentiment, which













he calls foolish idealism or sentimentality, gradually dying out inhis breast. It is that sort of person who is beneath my contempt.The world has too many cold-hearted people. If sterilization of theunfit should be carried out as a state policy, it should begin withsterilizing the morally insensible, the artistically stale, the heavyof heart, the ruthlessly successful, the cold-heartedly determinedand all those people who have lost the sense of fun in life—ratherthan the insane and the victims of tuberculosis. For it seems to methat while a man with passion and sentiment may do many foolishand precipitate things, a man without passion or sentiment is a jokeand a caricature. Compared with Daudet’s Sappho, he is a worm,a machine, an automaton, a blot upon this earth. Many a prostitutelives a nobler life than a successful business man. What if Sapphosinned? For although she sinned, she also loved, and to those wholove much, much will be forgiven. Anyway she emerged out of anequally harsh business environment with more of the youthfulheart than many of our millionaires. The worship of Mary Mag-dalene is right. It is unavoidable that passion and sentiment shouldlead us into mistakes for which we are duly punished, yet there ismany an indulgent mother who by her indulgence often let herlove get the better of her judgment, and yet who, we feel sure, inher old age felt that she had had a more happy life with her familythan many rigorous and austere souls. A friend told me the storyof an old lady of seventy-eight who said to him, “As I look backupon my seventy-eight years, it still makes me happy to think ofwhen I sinned; but when I think I was stupid, I cannot forgivemyself even at this late day .”

But life is harsh, and a man with a warm, generous and senti-mental nature may be easily taken in by his cleverer fellowmaruThe generous in nature often make mistakes by their generosity,by their too generous regard of their enemies and faith in theirfriends. Sometimes the generous man comes home disillusioned towrite a poem of bitterness. That is the case of many a poet andscholar in China, as for instance that great tea-drinker, Chang Tai,who generously squandered his fortune, was betrayed by his own













WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

closest friends and relatives, and set down in twelve poems someof the bitterest verses I have ever read. But I have a suspicion thathe kept on being generous to the end of his days, even when hewas quite poor and destitute, being many times on the verge ofstarvation, and I have no doubt that those bitter sentiments passedaway like a cloud and he was still quite happy.

Nevertheless this warm generosity of soul has to be protectedagainst life by a philosophy, because life is harsh, warmth of soulis not enough, and passion must be joined to wisdom and courage.To me wisdom and courage are the same thing, for courage isborn of an understanding of life; he who completely understandslife is always brave. Anyway that type of wisdom which does notgive us courage is not worth having at all. Wisdom leads to cour-age by exercising a veto against our foolish ambitions and emanci-pating us from the fashionable humbug of this world, whetherhumbug of thought or humbug of life.

There is a wealth of humbug in this life, but the multitudinouslittle humbugs have been classified by Chinese Buddhists undertwo big humbugs: fame and wealth. There is a story that EmperorCh’ienlung once went up a hill overlooking the sea during his tripto South China and saw a great number of sailing ships busilyplying the China Sea to and fro. He asked his minister what thepeople in those hundreds of ships were doing, and his ministerreplied that he saw only two ships, and their names were 'Tame”and "Wealth” Many cultured persons were able to escape the lureof wealth, but only the very greatest could escape the lure of fame.Once a monk was discoursing with his pupil on these two sourcesof worldly cares, and said: "It is easier to get rid of the desire formoney than to get rid of the desire for fame. Even retired scholarsand monks still want to be distinguished and well-known amongtheir company. They want to give public discourses to a large au-dience, and not retire to a small monastery talking to one pupil,like you and me now” The pupil replied: "Indeed, Master, you arethe only man in the world who has conquered the desire for fame!”And the Master smiled.













PASSION, WISDOM AND COURAGE 103

From my own observation o£ life, this Buddhist classification oflife’s humbugs is not complete, and the great humbugs of life arethree, instead of two: Fame, Wealth and Power. There is a con-venient American word which again combines these three hum-bugs into the One Great Humbug: Success. But many wise menknow that the desires for success, fame and wealth are euphemisticnames for the fears of failure, poverty and obscurity, and that thesefears dominate our lives. There are many people who have alreadyattained both fame and wealth, but who still insist on ruling others.They are the people who have consecrated their lives to the serviceof their country. The price is often very heavy. Ask a wise manto wave his silk hat to a crowd and make seven speeches a day andgive him a presidency, and he will refuse to serve his country.James Bryce thinks the system of democratic government in Amer-ica is such that it is hardly calculated to attract the best men ofthe country into politics. I think the strenuousness of a presidentialcampaign alone is enough to frighten off all the wise souls ofAmerica. A public office often demands that a man attend six din-ners a week in the name of consecrating his life to the service ofmankind. Why does he not consecrate himself to a simple supperat home and to his bed and his pyjamas? Under the spell of thathumbug of fame or power, a man is soon prey to other incidentalhumbugs. There will be no end to it. He soon begins to want toreform society, to uplift others’ morality, to defend the church, tocrush vice, to map programs for others to carry out, to block pro-grams that other people have mapped out, to read before a conven-tion a statistical report of what other people have done for himunder his administration, to sit on committees examining blue-prints of an exposition, even to open an insane asylum (whatcheek!)—in general, to interfere in other people’s lives. He soonforgets that these gratuitous assumptions of responsibility, theseproblems of reforming people and doing this and preventing one’srivals from doing that, never existed for him before, perhaps hadnot even entered his mind. How completely the great problems oflabor, unemployment and tariffs leave the mind of a defeated presi-













dential candidate even two weeks after an election! Who is he thathe should want to reform other people and uplift their morals andsend other people into an insane asylum? But these primary andsecondary humbugs keep him happily busy, if he is successful,and give him the illusion that he is really doing something andis therefore “somebody ”

Yet there is a secondary social humbug, quite as powerful anduniversal, the humbug of fashion. The courage to be one’s own nat-ural self is quite a rare thing. The Greek philosopher Democritusthought he was doing a great service to mankind by liberating itfrom the oppression of two great fears: the fear of God and thefear of death. But even that does not liberate us from anotherequally universal fear: the fear of one’s neighbors. Few men whohave liberated themselves from the fear of God and the fear ofdeath are yet able to liberate themselves from the fear of man.Consciously or unconsciously, we are all actors in this life playingto the audience in a part and style approved by them.

This histrionic talent, together with the related talent for imita-tion, which is a part of it, are the most outstanding traits of oursimian inheritance. There are undoubted advantages to be derivedfrom this showmanship, the most obvious being the plaudits ofthe audience. But then the greater the plaudits, the greater also arethe flutterings of heart back stage. And it also helps one to make aliving, so that no one is quite to blame for playing his part in afashion approved by the gallery.

The only objection is that the actor may replace the man andtake entire possession of him. There are a few select souls who canwear their reputation and a high position with a smile and remaintheir natural selves; they are the ones who know they are actingwhen they are acting, who do not share the artificial illusions ofrank, title, property and wealth, and who accept these things witha tolerant smile when they come their way, but refuse to believethat they themselves are thereby different from ordinary humanbeings. It is this class of men, the truly great in spirit, who re-main essentially simple in their personal lives. It is because they do













not entertain these illusions that simplicity is always the mark ofthe truly great Nothing shows more conclusively a small mindthan a little government bureaucrat suffering from illusions of hisown grandeur, or a social upstart displaying her jewels, or a half-baked writer imagining himself to belong to the company of theimmortals and immediately becoming a less simple and less naturalhuman being.

So deep is our histrionic instinct that we often forget that wehave real lives to live off stage. And so we sweat and labor and gothrough life, living not for ourselves in accordance with our trueinstincts, but for the approval of society, like “old spinsters workingwith their needles to make wedding dresses for other women,” asthe Chinese saying goes.

III. Cynicism, Folly and Camouflage: Laotse

Paradoxically, Laotse’s most wicked philosophy of “the old rogue”has been responsible for the highest ideal of peace, tolerance,simplicity and contentment. Such teachings include the wisdom ofthe foolish, the advantage of camouflage, the strength of weakness,and the simplicity of the truly sophisticated. Chinese art itself, withits poetic illusion and its glorification of the simple life of the wood-cutter and the fisherman, cannot exist apart from this philosophy.And at the bottom of Chinese pacificism is the willingness to putup with temporary losses and bide one’s time, the belief that, in thescheme of things, with nature operating by the law of action andreaction, no one has a permanent advantage over the others and noone is a “damn fool” all the time.

The greatest wisdom seems like stupidity.

The greatest eloquence like stuttering.

Movement overcomes cold,

But staying overcomes heat.

So he by his limpid calm

Puts everything right under heaven.2

a This and the following quotations from Laotse’s Taotehching are from ArthurWaley’s excellent translation, The Way and Its Tower (Allen & Unwin, London).













Knowing then that in Nature’s ways no man has a permanentadvantage over others and no man is a damn fool all the time, thenatural conclusion is that there is no use for contention. In Laotse’swords, the wise man “does not contend, and for that very reasonno one under Heaven can contend with him.” Again he says, “Showme a man of violence that came to a good end, and I will take himfor my teacher.” A modern writer might add, “Show me a dictatorthat can dispense with the services of a secret police, and I will behis follower.” For this reason, Laotse says, “When the Tao prevailsnot, horses are trained for battle; when the Tao prevails, horsesare trained to pull dungcarts.”

The best charioteers do not rush ahead;

The best fighters do not make displays of wrath.

The greatest conqueror wins without joining issue;

The best user of men acts as though he were their inferior.

This is called the power that comes of not contending,

Is called the capacity to use men,

The secret of being mated to heaven, to what was of old.

The law of action and reaction brings about violence reboundingto violence:

He who by Tao purposes to help a ruler of men

Will oppose all conquest by force of arms;

For such things are wont to rebound.

Where armies are, thorns and brambles grow.

The raising of a great host

Is followed by a year of dearth.

Therefore a good general effects his purpose and then stops;he does not take further advantage of his victory.

Fulfills his purpose and does not glory in what he has done;

Fulfills his purpose and does not boast of what he has done;

Fulfills his purpose, but lakes no pride in what he has done;

Fulfills his purpose, but only as a step that could not beavoided.

Fulfills his purpose, but without violence;

For what has a time of vigor also has a time of decay.

This is against Tao,

And what is against Tao will soon perish.













My feeling is that, if Laotse had been invited to take the chair atthe Versailles Conference, there would not be a Hider today. Hitlerclaims that he and his work must have been “blessed by God,” onthe evidence of his miraculous rise to power. I am inclined to thinkthat the matter is simpler than that, that he was blessed by the spiritof Clemenceau. Chinese pacifism is not that of the humanitarian,but that of the old rogue—based not upon universal love, but upona convincing type of subtle wisdom.

What is in the end to be shrunkMust first be stretched.

Whatever is to be weakenedMust begin by being made strong.

What is to be overthrownMust begin by being set up.

He who would be a takerMust begin as a giver.

This is called “dimming” one’s light.

It is thus that the soft overcomes the hardAnd the weak, the strong.

“It is best to leave the fish down in his pool;

Best to leave the State’s sharpest weaponswhere none can see them.”

There has never been a more effective sermon more effectivelypreached on the strength of weakness, the victory of the peace-loving and the advantage of lying low than by Laotse. For waterremains for Laotse forever as the symbol of the strength of theweak—water that gently drips and makes a hole in a rock, andwater which has the great Taoistic wisdom of seeking the lowestlevel:

How did the great rivers and seas get their kingship overthe hundred lesser streams?

Through the merit of being lower than they; that washow they got their kingship.

An equally common symbol is that of “the Valley,” representingthe hollow, the womb and mother of all things, the yin or theFemale.

The Valley Spirit never dies.

It is named die Mysterious Female.

And the Doorway of the Mysterious Female

Is the base from which Heaven and Earth sprang.

It is there within us all the while;

Draw upon it as you will, it never runs dry.

It would not be at all far-fetched to say that Oriental civilizationrepresents the female principle, while the Occidental civilizationrepresents the male principle. Anyway, there is something terriblyresembling the womb or valley in China’s passive strength that,in Laotsean language, “receives into it all things under heaven,and being a valley, has all the time a power that suffices.”

Against the desire of Julius Caesar to be the first man in a village,Laotse gives the opposite counsel of “Never be the first in theworld.” This thought of the danger of being eminent is expressedby Chuangtse in the form of a satire against Confucius and hisdisplay of knowledge. There were many such libels against Confu-cius in the books of Chuangtse, for Confucius was dead whenChuangtse wrote, and there was no libel law in China.

When Confucius was hemmed in between Ch’en and Ts*ai,he passed seven days without food.

The minister Jen went to condole with him, and said, “Youwere near, Sir, to death.”

“I was indeed,” replied Confucius.

“Do you fear death, Sir?” inquired Jen.

“I do,” said Confucius.

“Then I will try to teach you,” said Jen, “the way not to die.

“In the eastern sea there are certain birds, called the i~erh.They behave themselves in a modest and unassuming manner,as though unpossessed of ability. They fly simultaneously; theyroost in a body. In advancing, none strives to be first; in re-treating, none venture to be last. In eating, none will be thefirst to begin; it is considered proper to take the leavings ofothers. Therefore, in their own ranks they are at peace, and theoutside world is unable to harm them. And thus they escapetrouble.

“Straight trees are the first felled. Sweet wells are soonest













CYNICISM, FOLLY AND CAMOUFLAGE 109

exhausted. And you, you make a show of your knowledge inorder to startle fools. You cultivate yourself in contrast to thedegradation of others. And you blaze along as though the sunand moon were under your arms; consequently, you cannotavoid trouble. . . .”

“Good indeed!” replied Confucius; and forthwith he tookleave of his friends and dismissed his disciples and retired to thewilds, where he dressed himself m skins and serge and fed onacorns and chestnuts. He passed among the beasts and birdsand they took no heed of him.3

I have made a poem which sums up for me the message ofTaoistic thought:

There is the wisdom of the foohsh,

The gracefulness of the slow,

The subdety of stupidity,

The advantage of lying low.

*

This must sound to Chrisdan readers like the Sermon on theMount, and perhaps seem equally ineffective to them. Laotse gavethe Beatitudes a cunning touch when he added: “Blessed are theidiots, for they are the happiest people on earth” Following Laotse’sfamous dictum that “The greatest wisdom is like stupidity; thegreatest eloquence like stuttering,” Chuangtse says: “Spit forthintelligence ” Liu Chungyiian in the eighth century called hisneighborhood hill “the Stupid Hill” and the nearby river “theStupid River.” Cheng Panch’iao in the eighteenth century madethe famous remark: “It is difficult to be muddle-headed. It is diffi-cult to be clever, but still more difficult to graduate from clevernessinto muddle-headedness.” The praise of folly has never been in-terrupted in Chinese literature. The wisdom of this attitude can atonce be understood through the American slang expression: “Don’tbe too smart.” The wisest man is often one who pretends to be a“damn fool.”

In the Chinese culture, therefore, we see the curious phenomenonof a high intellect growing suspicious of itself and developing, so

8 Giles’s translation.













no WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

far as I know, the only gospel of ignorance and the earliest theoryof camouflage as the best weapon in the batde of life. FromChuangtse’s advice to “spit forth intelligence,” it is but a shortstep to the glorification of the idiot, which we see constantly re-flected in Chinese paintings and literary sketches of the beggar, orthe disguised immortal, or the crazy monk, or the extraordinaryrecluse, as seen in The Travels of Mingliaotse (Chapter XI). Thewise disenchantment with life receives a romantic or religious touchand enters the realm of poetic fantasy, when the poor, ragged andhalf-crazy monk becomes for us the symbol of highest wisdomand nobility of character.

The popularity of fools is an undeniable fact. I have no doubtthat, East or West, the world hates a man who is too smart in hisdealings with his fellowmen. Yuan Chunglang wrote an essayshowing why he and his brothers chose to keep four extremelystupid and extremely loyal servants. Anyone can run over thenames of his friends and associates in his mind and verify this factfor himself, that those we like are not those we respect for distin-guished ability and those we respect for distinguished ability arenot those we like, and that we like a stupid servant because he ismore reliable, and because in his company we can better relax anddo not have to set up a condition of defense against his presence.Most wise men choose to marry a not too smart wife, and mostwise girls choose a not too smart husband as a life companion.

There have been a number of famous fools in Chinese history,all extremely popular and beloved for their real or affected crazi-ness. Among these, for instance, is the famous Sung painter, MiFei, styled “Mi Tien” (or “Mi the Crazy One”), who got this titlebecause he once appeared in a ceremonial robe to worship a pieceof jagged rock that he called his “father-in-law.” Both Mi Fei andthe famous Yuan painter, Ni Yiinlin, had a mild form of dirt-phobiaor fastidious cleanliness. There was the famous crazy poet-monkHanshan, who went about with disheveled hair and bare feet,doing odd kitchen jobs at different monasteries, eating the left-overs, and scribbling immortal poetry on the temple and kitchen













hi

walls. The greatest crazy monk who has captured the imaginationof the Chinese people is undoubtedly Chi Tien (“Chi the CrazyOne”), or Chi Kung (“Master Chi”), who is the hero of a popularromance steadily being lengthened and added to until it is aboutthree times the size of Don Quixote, and still seems endless. For helives in a world of magic, medicine, roguery, and drunkenness,and possesses the gift of appearing at different cities several hundredmiles apart on the same day. The temple to his honor still stands atHupao near the West Lake of Hangchow today. To a lesser degree,the great romantic geniuses of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-turies, while decidedly as normal as we, tended through theirunconventionalities of appearance and conduct to give people animpression of being crazy, such as Hsu Wench’ang, Li Chowu andChin Shengt’an (literally, “the Sigh of the Sage,” a name he gavehimself because he said that when he was born, a mysterious sighwas heard in the village temple of Confucius).

IV. “Philosophy of Half-and-Half”: Tsesse

I have no doubt that a philosophy which enjoins the carefreeand conscience-free life has a strong tendency to warn us awayfrom a too busy life and from too great responsibilities, and there-fore tends to decrease the desire for action. On the other hand,the modern man needs this refreshing wind of cynicism whichcannot but do him some good. Probably more harm is done by aforward-looking philosophy delivering man over to a life of futile,wasteful activities than is ever done by all the cynicism of the ancientand modern philosophies combined. There are too many physio-logical impulses for action in every man, ready to counteract thisphilosophy, and in spite of the popularity of this great Philosophyof the Scamp, the Chinese people are still one of the most industri-ous on earth. The majority of men cannot be cynics, simply becausethe majority of men are not philosophers.

As far as I can see, therefore, there is very little danger of cyni-cism being transformed into a general vogue followed by the herd.













1X2

WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

Even in China, where the Taoist philosophy finds an instinctiveresponse m the Chinese breast, and where that philosophy has beenat work for several thousand years, staring at us from every poemand every scroll of landscape painting, life still goes on merrily withlots of people believing in wealth and fame and power, quite de-termined and anxious to serve their country. Were it not so, humanlife would not be able to get along at all. No, the Chinese arecynics and poets only when they have failed; most of my country-men are still very good showmen. The effect of Taoistic cynicismhas been only to slow down the tempo of life, and in the case ofnatural calamities and human misrule, to promote trust in the law ofaction and reaction, which brings about justice in the end.

And yet there is an opposite influence in Chinese thought mgeneral which counteracts this carefree philosophy, the philosophyof the natural vagabond. Opposed to the philosophy of nature’sgentlemen, there is the philosophy of society’s gentlemen; opposedto Taoism, there is Confucianism. Insofar as Taoism and Confu-cianism mean merely the negative and positive outlooks on life, Ido not think they are Chinese, but are inherent in all human na-ture, We are all born half Taoists and half Confucianists. Thelogical conclusion of a thorough-going Taoist would be to go tothe mountains and live as a hermit or a recluse, to imitate as faras possible the simple carefree life of the woodcutter and the fisher-man, the woodcutter who is lord of the green hills and the fisher-man who is the owner of the blue waters. The Taoist recluse,half-hidden in the clouds on top of the mountain, looks down atthe woodcutter and the fisherman holding an idle conversation,remarking that the hills go on being green and the waters go onflowing just to please themselves, entirely oblivious of the twotiny conversationalists. From this reflection, he gets a sense ofperfect peace, And yet it is poor philosophy that teaches us toescape from human society altogether.

There is still a greater philosophy than this naturalism, namely,the philosophy of humanism. The highest ideal of Chinese thought













“PHILOSOPHY OF HALF-AND-HALF55

113

is therefore a man who does not have to escape from humansociety and human life in order to preserve his original, happynature. He is only a second-rate recluse, still slave to his environ-ment, who has to escape from the cities and live away in the moun-tains in solitude. “The Great Recluse is the city recluse,” becausehe has sufficient mastery over himself not to be afraid of his sur-roundings. He is therefore the Great Monk (the \aoseng) whoreturns to human society and eats pork and drinks wine and mixeswith women, without detriment to his own soul. There is, there-fore, the possibility of the merging of the two philosophies. Thecontrast between Confucianism and Taoism is relative, the twodoctrines setting forth only two great extremes, and between themthere are many intermediate stages.

Those are the best cynics who are half-cynics. The highest typeof life after all is the life of sweet reasonableness as taught byConfucius5 grandson, Tsesse, author of The Golden Mean. Nophilosophy, ancient or modern, dealing with the problems ofhuman life has yet discovered a more profound truth than thisdoctrine of a well-ordered life lying somewhere between the twoextremes—the Doctrine of the Half-and-Half. It is that spirit ofsweet reasonableness, arriving at a perfect balance between actionand inaction, shown in the ideal of a man living in half-fame andsemi-obscurity; half-lazily active and half-actively la2y; not so poorthat he cannot pay his rent, and not so rich that he doesn’t have towork a litde or couldn’t wish to have slighdy more to help hisfriends; who plays the piano, but only well enough for his mostintimate friends to hear, and chiefly to please himself; who collects,but just enough to load his mantelpiece; who reads, but not toohard; learns a lot but does not become a specialist; writes, but hashis correspondence to the Times half of the time rejected and halfof the time published—in short, it is that ideal of middle-class lifewhich I believe to be the sanest ideal of life ever discovered bythe Chinese. This is the ideal so well expressed in Li Mi-an’s “TheHalf-and-Half Song”: .













By far the greater half have I seen throughThis floating life—Ah, there’s a magic word—

This “half”—so rich in implications.

It bids us taste the joy of more than weCan ever own. Halfway in life is man’sBest state, when slackened pace allows him ease;

A wide world lies halfway ’twixt heaven and earth;To live halfway between the town and land,

Have farms halfway between the streams and hills;

Be half-a-scholar, and half-a-squire, and halfIn business; half as gentry live,

And half related to the common folk;

And have a house that’s half genteel, half plain,Half elegantly furnished and half bare;

Dresses and gowns that are half old, half new,

And food half epicure’s, half simple fare;

Have servants not too clever, not too dull;

A wife who’s not too simple, nor too smart—

So then, at heart, I feel I’m half a Buddha,

And almost half a Taoist fairy blest.

One half myself to Father Heaven IReturn; the other half to children leave—

Half thinking how for my posterityTo plan and provide, and yet half minding howTo answer God when the body’s laid at rest.4He is most wisely drunk who is half drunk;

And flowers m half-bloom look their prettiest;

As boats at half-sail sail the steadiest,

And horses held at half-slack reins trot best.

Who half too much has, adds anxiety,

But half too little, adds possession’s zest.

Since life’s of sweet and bitter compounded,

Who tastes but half is wise and cleverest.

We have here, then, a compounding of Taoistic cynicism withthe Confucian positive outlook into a philosophy of the half-and-half. And because man is born between the real earth and theunreal heaven, I believe that, however unsatisfactory it may seemon the first look to a Westerner, with his incredibly forward-look-

4 Literally, “Half thinking how to face King Yenlo of Hell.”













«5

ing point o£ view, it is still the best philosophy, because it is themost human. After all, a half Lindbergh would be better, be-cause more happy, than a complete Lindbergh, I am quite sureLindbergh would be much happier if he had flown only halfwayacross the Atlantic. After all allowances are made for the necessityof having a few supermen in our midst—explorers, conquerors,great inventors, great presidents, heroes who change the courseof history—the happiest man is still the man of the middle-classwho has earned a slight means of economic independence, whohas done a htde, but just a little, for mankind, and who is slightlydistinguished in his community, but not too distinguished. It is onlyin this milieu of well-known obscurity and financial competencewith a pinch, when life is fairly carefree and yet not altogethercarefree, that the human spirit is happiest and succeeds best. Afterall, we have to get on in this life, and so we must bring philosophydown from heaven to earth.

V. A Lover of Life: T’ao Yuanming

It has been shown, therefore, that with the proper merging ofthe positive and the negative oudooks on life, it is possible toachieve a harmonious philosophy of the “half-and-half” lying some-where between action and inaction, between being led by the noseinto a world of futile iusy-ness and complete flight from a life ofresponsibilities, and that so far as we can discover with the help ofall the philosophies of the world, this is the sanest and happiestideal for man’s life on earth. What is still more important, themixture of these two different oudooks makes a harmonious per-sonality possible, that harmonious personality which is theacknowleged aim of all culture and education. And significandy,out of this harmonious personality, we see a joy and love of life.

It is difficult for me to describe the qualities of this love of life;it is easier to speak in a parable or tell the story of a true loverof life, as he really lived. And the picture of Tao Yuanming, thegreatest poet and most harmonious product of Chinese culture,













inevitably comes to my mind.5 There will be no one in China toobject when I say that T’ao represents to us the most perfecdy har-monious and well-rounded character in the entire Chinese literarytradition. Without leading an illustrious official career, withoutpower and outward achievements and without leaving us a greaterliterary heritage than a thin volume of poems and three or fouressays in prose, he remains today a beacon shining through theages, forever a symbol to lesser poets and writers of what the high-est human character should be. There is a simplicity in his life, aswell as in his style, which is awe-inspiring and a constant reproachto more brilliant and more sophisticated natures. And he stands,today, as a perfect example of the true lover of life, because in himthe rebellion against worldly desires did not lead him to attempt atotal escape, but has reached a harmony with the life of the senses.About two centuries of literary romanticism and the Taoistic cultof the idle life and rebellion against Confucianism had been work-ing in China and joined forces with the Confucian philosophy ofthe previous centuries to make the emergence of this harmoniouspersonality possible. In T’ao we find the positive oudook had lostits foolish complacency and the cynic philosophy had lost its bitterrebelliousness (a trait we see still in Thoreau—a sign of imma-turity), and human wisdom first reaching full maturity in a spiritof tolerant irony.

T’ao represents to me that strange characteristic of Chinese cul-ture, a curious combination of devotion to the flesh and arroganceof the spirit, of spirituality without asceticism and materialism with-out sensuality, in which the senses and the spirit have come to livetogether in harmony. For the ideal philosopher is one who under-stands the charm of women without being coarse, who loves lifeheartily but loves it with restraint, and who sees the unreality of thesuccesses and failures of the active world, and stands somewhat aloofand detached, without being hostile to it. Because T’ao reached thattrue harmony of spiritual development, we see a total absence ofinner conflict and his life was as natural and effortless as his poetry.

*Tao Cb’ien (dtas “Yuanming”)* A. D. 372-427













T’ao was born toward the end of the fourth century of our era,the great grandson of a distinguished scholar and official, who inorder to keep himself from being idle, moved a pile of bricks fromone place to another in the morning, and moved them back in theafternoon. In his youth he accepted a minor official job in orderto support his old parents, but soon resigned and returned to thefarm, tilling the field himself as a farmer, from which he developeda kind of bodily ailment. One day he asked his relatives andfriends, “Would it be all right for me to go out as a minstrel singerin order to pay for the upkeep of my garden?” On hearing this,certain of his friends got him a position as a magistrate ofP’engcheh, near Kiukiang. Being very fond of wine, he com-manded that all the fields belonging to the local government shouldbe planted with glutinous rice, from which wine could be made,and only on the protestations of his wife did he allow one-sixth tobe planted with another kind of rice. When a government delegatecame and his secretary told him that he should receive the littlefellow with his gown properly girdled, T’ao sighed and said, “Icannot bend and bow for the sake of five bushels of rice.” And heimmediately reigned and wrote that famous poem, “Ah, Home-ward Bound I Go!” From then on, he lived the life of a farmerand repeatedly refused later calls to office. Poor himself, he livedin communion with the poor, and he expressed a certain paternalregret in a letter to his sons that they should be so poorly cladand do the work of a common laborer. But when he managed tosend a peasant boy to his sons when he was away, to help them dothe work of carrying water and gathering fuel, he said to them,‘Treat him well, for he is also some one’s son.” 6

His only weakness was a fondness for wine. Living very muchto himself, he seldom saw guests, but whenever there was wine,he would sit down with the company, even though he might notbe acquainted with the host. At other times, when he was the hosthimself and got drunk first, he would say to his guests, “I amdrunk and thinking of sleep; you can all go.” He had a stringed

6 Considered one of his greatest sayings by the Chinese.













n8 WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

instrument, the cKin, without any strings left. It was an ancientinstrument that could be played only in an extremely slow mannerand only in a state of perfect mental calm. After a feast, or whenfeeling in a musical mood, he would express his musical feelingsby fondling and fingering this stringless instrument. “I appreciatethe flavor of music; what need have I for the sounds from thestrings?”

Humble and simple and independent, he was extremely charyof company. A magistrate, one Wang, who was his great admirer,wanted to cutivate his friendship, but found it very difficult to seehim. With his perfect naturalness he said, “Fm keeping to myselfbecause by nature Fm not made for the life of society, and I amstaying in the house because of an ailment. Far be it from me toact in this manner in order to acquire a reputation for being highand aloof.” Wang therefore had to plot with a friend in order tosee him; this friend had to induce him to leave his home, by invit-ing him to a feast and an accidental meeting. When he washalfway and stopped at a pavilion, wine was presented. T’ao’s eyesbrightened and he gladly sat down to drink, when Wang, who hadbeen hiding nearby, came out to meet him. And he was so happythat he remained there talking with him the whole afternoon, andforgot to go on to his friend’s place. Wang saw that he had noshoes on his feet and ordered his subordinates to make a pair forhim. When these minor officials asked for the measurements, hestretched forth his feet and asked them to take the measure. Andthereafter, whenever Wang wanted to see him, he had to wait inthe forest or around the lake, so that perchance he might meet thepoet. Once when his friends were brewing wine, they took hislinen turban to use it as a strainer, and after the wine had beenstrained, he wound the turban again around his head.

There was then in the great Lushan Mountains, at whose foot helived, a great society of illustrious Zen Buddhists, and the leader, agreat scholar, tried to get him to join the Lotus Society. One day hewas invited to come to a party, and his condition was that he













A LOVER OF LIFE: YUANMING

119

should be allowed to drink. This breaking of the Buddhist rule wasgranted him and he went. But when it came to putting his namedown as a member, he “knitted his brows and stole away.” This wasa society that so great a poet as Hsieh Lingyiin had been veryanxious to join, but could not get in. But still the abbot courted hisfriendship and one day he invited him to drink, together withanother great Taoist friend. They were then a company of three;the abbot, representing Buddhism, T’ao representing Confucianism,and the other friend representing Taoism. It had been the abbot’slife vow never to go beyond a certain bridge in his daily walks, butone day when he and the other friend were sending T’ao home,they were so pleasurably occupied in their conversation that theabbot went past the bridge without knowing it. When it waspointed out to him, the company of three laughed. This incidentof the three laughing old men became the subject of popularChinese paintings, because it symbolized the happiness and gaietyof three carefree, wise souls, representing three religions united bythe sense of humor.

And so he lived and died, a carefree and conscience-free, humblepeasant-poet, and a wise and merry old man. But something in hissmall volume of poems on drinking and the pastoral life, his threeor four casual essays, one letter to his sons, three sacrificial prayers(including one to himself), and some of his remarks handed downto posterity shows a sentiment and a genius for harmonious livingthat reached perfect naturalness and never has yet been surpassed.It was this great love of life that was expressed in the poem whichhe wrote one day in November, A. D. 405, when he decided to laydown the burdens of the magistrate’s office.7

Ah, homeward bound I go! why not go home, seeing thatmy field and garden with weeds are overgrown? Myself havemade my soul serf to my body: why have vain regrets andmourn alone?

7 This poem is in the form of a ju, progressing in parallel constructions, likethe Psalms, and sometimes rhymed.













WHO CAN BEST ENJOY LIFE?

Fret not over bygones and the forward journey take. Onlya short distance have I gone astray, and I know today I amright, if yesterday was a complete mistake.

Lightly floats and drifts the boat, and gendy flows and flapsmy gown. I inquire the road of a wayfarer, and sulk at thedimness of the dawn.

Then when I catch sight of my old roofs, joy will my stepsquicken. Servants will be there to bid me welcome, and wait-ing at the door are the greeting children.

Gone to seed, perhaps, are my garden paths, but there willstill be the chrysanthemums and the pine! I shall lead theyoungest boy in by the hand, and on the table there stands acup full of wine!

Holding the pot and cup I give myself a drink, happy tosee in the courtyard the hanging bough. I lean upon the south-ern window with an immense satisfaction, and note that thelittle place is cosy enough to walk around.

The garden grows more familiar and interesting with thedaily walks. What if no one ever knocks at the always closeddoor! Carrying a cane I wander at peace, and now and thenlook aloft to gaze at the blue above.

There the clouds idle away from their mountain recesseswithout any intent or purpose, and birds, when tired of theirwandering flights, will think of home. Darkly then fall theshadows and, ready to come home, I yet fondle the lonely pinesand loiter around.

Ah, homeward bound I go! Let me from now on learn tolive alone 1 The world and I are not made for one another, andwhy drive round like one looking for what he has not found?

Content shall I be with conversations with my own kin, andthere will be music and books to while away the hours. Thefarmers will come and tell me that spring is here and therewill be work to do at the western farm.

Some order covered wagons; some row in small boats.Sometimes we explore quiet, unknown ponds, and sometimeswe climb over steep, rugged mounds.













A LOVER OF LIFE: YUANMING

There the trees, happy of heart, grow marvelously green,and spring water gushes forth with a gurgling sound. I admirehow things grow and prosper according to their seasons, andfeel that thus, too, shall my life go its round.

Enough! How long yet shall I this mortal shape keep? Whynot take life as it comes, and why hustle and bustle like one onan errand bound?

Wealth and power are not my ambitions, and unattainableis the abode of the gods! I would go forth alone on a brightmorning, or perhaps, planting my cane, begin to pluck theweeds and till the ground.

Or I would compose a poem beside a clear stream, or per-haps go up Tungkao and make a long-drawn call on the topof the hill. So would I be content to live and die, and withoutquestionings of the heart, gladly accept Heavens will.

T’ao might be taken as an “escapist,” and yet it was not so. Whathe tried to escape from was politics and not life itself. If he hadbeen a logician, he might have decided to escape from life alto-gether by becoming a Buddhist monk. With T’ao’s great love oflife, he could not have been willing to escape from it altogether.His wife and children were too real for him, his garden and thebough stretching across his courtyard and the lonely pines whichhe fondled were altogether too attractive, and being a reasonableman, instead of a logician, he stuck to them. That was his love oflife and his jealousy over it, and it was from this positive, but reason-able, attitude toward life that he arrived at the feeling of harmonywith life which was characteristic of his culture. From that har-mony with life welled forth the greatest poetry in China. Of theearth and earth-born, his conclusion was not to escape from it, but“to go forth alone on a bright morning, or perhaps, planting hiscane, begin to pluc\ the weeds and till the ground” T’ao merelyreturned to the farm and to his family. The end was harmony andnot rebellion.













Chapter Six

THE FEAST OF LIFE

I. The Problem of Happiness

THE enjoyment of life covers many things: the enjoyment of our-selves, of home life, of trees, flowers, clouds, winding rivers andfalling cataracts and the myriad things in Nature, and then theenjoyment of poetry, art, contemplation, friendship, conversation,and reading, which are all some form or other of the communionof spirits. There are obvious things like the enjoyment of food, agay party or family reunion, an outing on a beautiful spring day;and less obvious things like the enjoyment of poetry, art and con-templation. I have found it impossible to call these two classes ofenjoyment material and spiritual, first because I do not believe inthis distinction, and secondly because I am puzzled whenever Iproceed to make this classification. How can I say, when I see agay picnic party of men and women and old people and children,what part of their pleasures is material and what part spiritual? Isee a child romping about on the grass plot, another child makingdaisy chains, their mother holding a piece of sandwich, the uncleof the family bidng a juicy, red apple, the father sprawling on theground looking at the sailing clouds, and the grandfather holdinga pipe in his mouth. Probably somebody is playing a gramophone,and from the distance there come the sound of music and the dis-tant roar of the waves. Which of these pleasures is material andwhich spiritual? Is it so easy to draw a distinction between theenjoyment of a sandwich and the enjoyment of the surroundinglandscape, which we call poetry? Is it possible to regard the enjoy-ment of music which we call art, as decidedly a higher type ofpleasure than the smoking of a pipe, which we call material? Thisclassification between material and spiritual pleasures is thereforeconfusing, unintelligible and untrue for me. It proceeds, I suspect,from a false philosophy, sharply dividing the spirit from the flesh,and not supported by a closer direct scrutiny of our real pleasures.













Or have I perhaps assumed too much and begged the questionof the proper end of human life? I have always assumed thatthe end of living is the true enjoyment of it. It is so simply becauseit is so. I rather hesitate at the word “end” or “purpose.” Such anend or purpose of life, consisting in its true enjoyment, is not somuch a conscious purpose, as a natural attitude toward human life.The word “purpose” suggests too much contriving and endeavor.The question that faces every man born into this world is not whatshould be his purpose, which he should set about to achieve, butjust what to do with life, a life which is given him for a period ofon the average fifty or sixty years? The answer that he shouldorder his life so that he can find the greatest happiness in it is morea practical question, similar to that of how a man should spendhis weekend, than a metaphysical proposition as to what is themystic purpose of his life in the scheme of the universe.

On the contrary, I rather think that philosophers who start outto solve the problem of the purpose of life beg the question byassuming that life must have a purpose. This question, so muchpushed to the fore among Western thinkers, is undoubtedly giventhat importance through the influence of theology. I think we as-sume too much design and purpose altogether. And the very factthat people try to answer this question and quarrel over it andare puzzled by it serves to show it up as quite vain and uncalledfor. Had there been a purpose or design in life, it should not havebeen so puzzling and vague and difficult to find out.

The question may be divided into two: either that of a divinepurpose, which God has set for humanity, or that of a humanpurpose, a purpose that mankind should set for itself. As far as thefirst is concerned, I do not propose to enter into the question, be-cause everything that we think God has in mind necessarily pro-ceeds from our own mind; it is what we imagine to be in God’smind, and it is really difficult for human intelligence to guess ata divine intelligence. What we usually end up with by this sortof reasoning is to make God the color-sergeant of our army and tomake Him as chauvinistic as ourselves; He cannot, so we conceive,













THE FEAST OF LIFE

124

possibly have a “divine purpose” and “destiny” for the world, orfor Europe, but only for our beloved Fatherland. I am quite surethe Nazis can’t conceive of God without a swastika arm-band. ThisGott is always mil uns and cannot possibly be mit- ihnen. But theGermans are not the only people who think this way.

As far as the second question is concerned, the point of disputeis not what is, but what should be, the purpose of human life, andit is therefore a practical, and not a metaphysical question. Into thisquestion of what should be the purpose of human life, every manprojects his own conceptions and his own scale of values. It is forthis reason that we quarrel over the question, because our scalesof values differ from one another. For myself, I am content to beless philosophical and more practical. I should not presume thatthere must be necessarily a purpose, a meaning of human existence.As Walt Whitman says, “I am sufficient as I am.” It is sufficientthat I live—and am probably going to live for another few decades—and that human life exists. Viewed that way, the problem be-comes amazingly simple and admits of no two answers. What canbe the end of human life except the enjoyment of it?

It is strange that this problem of happiness, which is the greatquestion occupying the minds of all pagan philosophers, has beenentirely neglected by Christian thinkers. The great question thatbothers theological minds is not human happiness, but human “sal-vation”—a tragic word. The word has a bad flavor for me, becausein China I hear everyday some one talking about our “nationalsalvation.” Everybody is trying to “save” China. It suggests thefeeling of people on a sinking ship, a feeling of ultimate doom andthe best method of getting away alive. Christianity, which has beendescribed as “the last sigh of two expiring worlds” (Greek andRoman), still retains something of that characteristic today in itspreoccupation with the question of salvation. The question ofliving is forgotten in the question of getting away alive from thisworld. Why should man bother himself so much about salvation,unless he has a feeling of being doomed? Theological minds areso much occupied with salvation, and so little with happiness, that













THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 125

all they can tell us about the future is that there will be a vagueheaven, and when questioned about what we are going to dothere and how we are going to be happy in heaven, they have onlyideas of the vaguest sort, such as singing hymns and wearing whiterobes. Mohammed at least painted a picture of future happinesswith rich wine and juicy fruits and black-haired, big-eyed, passion-ate maidens that we laymen can understand. Unless heaven is mademuch more vivid and convincing for us, there is no reason whyone should strive to go there, at the cost of neglecting this earthlyexistence. As some one says, “An egg today is better than a hentomorrow” At least, when we’re planning a summer vacation, wetake the trouble to find out some details about the place we aregoing to. If the tourist bureau is entirely vague on the question, Iam not interested; I remain where I am. Are we going to striveand endeavor in heaven, as I am quite sure the believers in progressand endeavor must assume? But how can we strive and makeprogress when we are already perfect? Or are we going merely toloaf and do nothing and not worry? In that case, would it notbe better for us to learn to loaf while on this earth as a preparationfor our eternal life?

If we must have a view of the universe, let us forget ourselvesand not confine it to human life. Let us stretch it a litde andinclude in our view the purpose of the entire creation-—the rocks,the trees and the animals. There is a scheme of things (although“scheme” is another word, like “end” and “purpose,” which Istrongly distrust)—I mean there is a pattern of things in the crea-tion, and we can arrive at some sort of opinion, however lackingin finality, about this entire universe, and then take our place in it.This view of nature and our place in it must be natural, since weare a vital part of it m our life and go back to it when we die.Astronomy, geology, biology and history all provide pretty goodmaterial to help us form a fairly good view if we don’t attempttoo much and jump at conclusions. It doesn’t matter if, in thisbigger view of the purpose of the creation, man’s place recedes alitde in importance. It is enough that he has a place, and by living













THE FEAST OF LIFE

in harmony with nature around him, he will be able to form aworkable and reasonable oudook on human life itself.

II. Human Happiness Is Sensuous

All human happiness is biological happiness. That is strictly scien-tific. At the risk of being misunderstood, I must make it clearer: allhuman happiness is sensuous happiness. The spiritualists will mis-understand me, I am sure; the spiritualists and materialists mustforever misunderstand each other, because they don’t talk the samelanguage, or mean by the same word different things. Are we, too,in this problem of securing happiness to be deluded by the spiritual-ists, and admit that true happiness is only happiness of the spirit?Let us admit it at once and immediately proceed to qualify it bysaying that the spirit is a condition of the perfect functioning of theendocrine glands. Happiness for me is largely a matter of digestion.I have to take cover under an American college president to insuremy reputation and respectability when I say that happiness is largelya matter of the movement of the bowels. The American collegepresident in question used to say with great wisdom in his addressto each class of freshmen, “There are only two things I want you tokeep in mind: read the Bible and keep your bowels open.” What awise, genial old soul he was to have said that! If one’s bowels move,one is happy, and if they don’t move, one is unhappy. That is allthere is to it.

Let us not lose ourselves in the abstract when we talk of happi-ness, but get down to facts and analyze for ourselves what are thetruly happy moments of our life. In this world of ours, happinessis very often negative, the complete absence of sorrow or mortifica-tion or bodily ailment. But happiness can also be positive, and thenwe call it joy. To me, for instance, the truly happy moments are:when I get up in the morning after a night of perfect sleep andsniff the morning air and there is an expansiveness in the lungs,when I feel inclined to inhale deeply and there is a fine sensationof movement around the skin and muscles of the chest, and when,













therefore, I am fit for work; or when I hold a pipe in my hand andrest my legs on a chair, and the tobacco burns slowly and evenly;or when I am traveling on a summer day, my throat parched withthirst, and I see a beautiful clear spring, whose very sound makesme happy, and I take off my socks and shoes and dip my feet inthe delightful, cool water; or when after a perfect dinner I loungein an armchair, when there is no one I hate to look at in the com-pany and conversation rambles off at a light pace to an unknowndestination, and I am spiritually and physically at peace with theworld; or when on a summer afternoon I see black clouds gather-ing on the horizon and know for certain a July shower is comingin a quarter of an hour, but being ashamed to be seen going outinto the rain without an umbrella, I hastily set out to meet theshower halfway across the fields and come home drenched throughand through and tell my family that I was simply caught by therain.

Just as it is impossible for me to say whether I love my childrenphysically or spiritually when I hear their chattering voices or whenI see their plump legs, so I am totally unable to distinguish betweenthe joys of the mind and the joys of the flesh. Does anybody everlove a woman spiritually without loving her physically? And is itso easy a matter for a man to analyze and separate the charms ofthe woman he loves—things like laughter, smiles, a way of tossingone’s head, a certain attitude toward things? And after all everygirl feels happier when she is well-dressed. There is a soul-uplift-ing quality about lipstick and rouge and a spiritual calm and poisethat comes from the knowledge of being well-dressed, which isreal and definite for the girl herself and of which the spiritualisthas no inkling of an idea. Being made of this mortal flesh, the par-tition separating our flesh from our spirit is extremely thin, and theworld of spirit, with its finest emotions and greatest appreciationsof spiritual beauty, cannot be reached except with our senses. Thereis no such thing as morality and immorality in the sense of touch,of hearing and vision. There is a great probability that our loss of













THE FEAST OF LIFE

capacity for enjoying the positive joys of life is largely due to thedecreased sensibility of our senses and our lack of full use of them.

Why argue about it? Let us take concrete instances and cullexamples from all the great lovers of life, Eastern and Western,and see what they describe as their own happy moments, and howintimately they are connected with the very senses of hearing andsmelling and seeing. Here is a description of the high aestheticpleasure that Thoreau1 got from hearing the sound of crickets:

First observe the creak of crickets. It is quite general amidthese rocks. The song of only one is more interesting to me. Itsuggests lateness, but only as we come to a knowledge ofeternity after some acquaintance with time. It is only late forall trivial and hurried pursuits. It suggests a wisdom mature,never late, being above all temporal considerations, which pos-sesses the coolness and maturity of autumn amidst the aspira-tion of spring and the heats of summer. To the birds theysay: “Ah! you speak like children from impulse; Naturespeaks through you; but with us it is ripe knowledge. Theseasons do not revolve for us; we sing their lullaby.” So theychant, eternal, at the roots of the grass. It is heaven where theyare, and their dwelling need not be heaved up. Forever thesame, in May and in November (?). Serenely wise, their songhas the security of prose. They have drunk no wine but thedew. It is no transient love-strain hushed when the incubatingseason is past, but a glorifying of God and enjoying of himforever. They sit aside from the revolution of the seasons.Their strain is unvaried as Truth. Only in their sanermoments do men hear the crickets.

And see how Walt Whitman’s senses of smell and sight and soundcontribute to his spirituality and what great importance he placesupon them:

A snowstorm in the morning, and continuing most of theday. But I took a walk over two hours, the same woods and

1 Thoi eau is the most Chinese of all American authors in his entire view oflife, and being a Chinese, I feel much akin to him in spirit. I discovered him onlya few months ago, and the delight of the discovery is stall fresh in my mind. Icould translate passages of Thoreau into my own language and pass them offas original writing by a Chinese poet, without raising any suspicion.













HUMAN HAPPINESS IS SENSUOUS 129

paths, amid the falling flakes. No wind, yet the musical lowmurmur through the pines, quite pronounced, curious, likewaterfalls, now still’d, now pouring again. All the senses,sight, sound, smell, delicately gratified. Every snowflake laywhere it fell on the evergreens, hollytrees, laurels, etc., diemultitudinous leaves and branches piled, bulging-white, de-fined by edgelines of emerald—the tall straight columns ofthe plentiful bronze-topt pines—a slight resinous odor blend-ing with that of the snow. (For there is a scent to everything,even the snow, if you can only detect it—-no two places, hardlyany two hours, anywhere, exacdy alike. How different theodor of noon from midnight, or winter from summer, or awindy spell from a still one!)

How many of us are able to distinguish between the odors of noonand midnight, or of winter and summer, or of a windy spell anda still one? If man is so generally less happy in the cities than inthe country, it is because all these variations and nuances of sightand smell and sound are less clearly marked and lost in thegeneral monotony of gray walls and cement pavements.

The Chinese and the Americans are alike when it comes to thetrue limits and capacities and qualities of the happy moments.Before I translate the thirty-three happy moments given by aChinese scholar, I want to quote by way of comparison anotherpassage from Whitman, which will show the identity of oursenses:

A clear, crispy day—dry and breezy air, full of oxygen. Outof the sane, silent, beauteous miracles that envelop and fuse me—trees, water, grass, sunlight, and early frost—the one I amlooking at most today is the sky. It has that delicate, trans-parent blue, peculiar to autumn, and the only clouds are littleor larger white ones, giving their still and spiritual motion tothe great concave. All through the earlier day (say from 7 to11) it keeps a pure, yet vivid blue. But as noon approaches thecolor gets lighter, quite gray for two or three hours—then stillpaler for a spell, till sun-down—which last I watch dazzlingthrough the interstices of a knoll of big trees—darts of fire anda gorgeous show of light-yellow, liver-color and red, with a













THE FEAST OF LIFE

vast silver glaze askant on the water—the transparent shadows,shafts, sparkle, and vivid colors beyond all the paintings evermade.

I don’t know what or how, but it seems to me mostly owingto these skies, (every now and then I think, while I have ofcourse seen them every day of my life, I never really saw theskies before,) I have had this autumn some wondrously con-tented hours—may I not say perfectly happy ones? As I’veread, Byron just before his death told a friend that he hadknown but three happy hours during his whole existence.Then there is the old German legend of the king’s bell, to thesame point. While I was out there by the wood, that beautifulsunset through the trees, I thought of Byron’s and the bellstory, and the notion started in me that I was having a happyhour. (Though perhaps my best moments I never jot down;when they come I cannot afford to break the charm by indit-ing memoranda. I just abandon myself to the mood, and let itfloat on, carrying me in its placid extasy).

What is happiness, anyhow? Is this one of its hours, or thelike of it?—so impalpable—a mere breath, an evanescent tinge?I am not sure—so let me give myself the benefit of the doubt.Hast Thou, pellucid, in Thy azure depths, medicine for caselike mine? (Ah, the physical shatter and troubled spirit of methe last three years.) And dost Thou subtly mystically nowdrip it through the air invisibly upon me?

III. Chin’s Thirty-three Happy Moments

We are now better prepared to examine and appreciate the happymoments of a Chinese, as he describes them. Chin Shengt’an, thatgreat impressionistic critic of the seventeenth century, has givenus, between his commentaries on the play Western Chamber, anenumeration of the happy moments which he once counted to-gether with his friend, when they were shut'up in a temple for tendays on account of rainy weather. These then are what he considersthe truly happy moments of human life, moments in which thespirit is inextricably tied up with the senses:













*3*

1 2: It is a hot day in June when the sun hangs still in the sky

and there is not a whiff of wind or air, nor a trace ofclouds; the front and back yards are hot like an oven andnot a single bird dares to fly about. Perspiration flows downmy whole body in little rivulets. There is the noon-daymeal before me, but I cannot take it for the sheer heat. Iask for a mat to spread on the ground and lie down, butthe mat is wet with moisture and flies swarm about to reston my nose and refuse to be driven away. Just at thismoment when I am completely helpless, suddenly there isa rumbling of thunder and big sheets of black clouds over-cast the sky and come majestically on like a great armyadvancing to battle. Rain water begins to pour down fromthe eaves like a cataract. The perspiration stops. Theclamminess of the ground is gone. All flies disappear tohide themselves and I can eat my rice. Ah, is this nothappiness?

i: A friend, one I have not seen for ten years, suddenly

arrives at sunset. I open the door to receive him, and with-out asking whether he came by boat or by land, andwithout bidding him to sit down on the bed or the couch,

I go to the inner chamber and humbly ask my wife: “Haveyou got a gallon of wine like Su Tungp’o’s wife?” Mywife gladly takes out her gold hairpin to sell it. I calculateit will last us three days. Ah, is this not happiness?

i: I am sitting alone in an empty room and I am just get-

ting annoyed at a mouse at the head of my bed, andwondering what that little rustling sound signifies—whatarticle of mine he is biting or what volume of my bookshe is eating up. While I am in this state of mind, anddon’t know what to do, I suddenly see a ferocious-lookingcat, wagging its tail and staring with its wide open eyes, asif it were looking at something. I hold my breath andwait a moment, keeping perfectly still, and suddenly witha little sound the mouse disappears like a whiff of wind.Ah, is this not happiness?

2 When a Chinese draws up a set of seventeen or eighteen regulations, it is hiscustom (the idiom of our language) to set them down as “Articles i, i, i, i, i, i,”etc.













THE FEAST OF LIFE

132

1: I have pulled out the hait’ang and chihching 3 in front ofmy studio, and have just planted ten or twenty greenbanana trees there. Ah, is this not happiness?

1: I am drinking with some romantic friends on a spring

night and am just half intoxicated, finding it difficult tostop drinking and equally difficult to go on. An under-standing boy servant at the side suddenly brings in apackage of big fire-crackers, about a dozen in number, andI rise from the table and go and fire them off. The smellof sulphur assails my nostrils and enters my brain and Ifeel comfortable all over my body. Ah, is this nothappiness?

it I am walking in the street and see two poor rascals en-gaged in a hot argument of words with their faces flushedand their eyes staring with anger as if they were mortalenemies, and yet they still pretend to be ceremonious toeach other, raising their arms and bending their waists insalute, and still using the most polished language of thouand thee and wherefore and is it not so? The flow ofwords is interminable. Suddenly there appears a big huskyfellow swinging his arms and coming up to them, andwith a shout tells them to disperse. Ah, is this not happi-ness?

1: To hear our children recite the classics so fluently, like thesound of pouring water from a vase. Ah, is this not happi-ness?

1: Having nothing to do after a meal I go to the shops and

take a fancy to a little thing. After bargaining for sometime, we still haggle about a small difference, but the shop-boy still refuses to sell it. Then I take out a little thingfrom my sleeve, which is worth about the same thing asthe difference and throw it at the boy. The boy suddenlysmiles and bows courteously saying, “Oh, you are toogenerous!” Ah, is this not happiness?

1: I have nothing to do after a meal and try to go throughthe things in some old trunks. I see there are dozens orhundreds of I.O.U.’s from people who owe my familymoney. Some of them are dead and some still living, but

8 Hait’ang is of the pyrus family, bearing fruits like crab-apples, and chihchingblossoms in spring, with small violet flowers growing directly on the trunks andbranches.













I33

in any case there is no hope of their returning the money.Behind people’s backs I put them together in a pile andmake a bonfire of them, and I look up to the sky and seethe last trace of smoke disappear. Ah, is this not happi-ness?

i: It is a summer day. I go bareheaded and barefooted, hold-

ing a parasol to watch young people singing Soochow folksongs while treading the water wheel. The water comes upover the wheel in a gushing torrent like molten silver ormelting snow. Ah, is this not happiness?i: I wake up in the morning and seem to hear some one in

the house sighing and saying that last night some one died.

I immediately ask to find out who it is, and learn that it isthe sharpest, most calculating fellow in town. Ah, is thisnot happiness?

i: I get up early on a summer morning and see people saw-

ing a large bamboo pole under a mat-shed, to be used asa water pipe. Ah, is this not happiness?i: It has been raining for a whole month and I lie in bed in

the morning like one drunk or ill, refusing to get up. Sud-denly I hear a chorus of birds announcing a clear day.Quickly I pull aside the curtain, push open the windowand see the beautiful sun shining and glistening and theforest looks like having a bath. Ah, is this not happiness?i: At night I seem to hear some one thinking of me in the

distance. The next day I go to call on him. I enter his doorand look about his room and see that this person is sittingat his desk, facing south, reading a document. He sees me,nods quietly and pulls me by the sleeve to make me sitdown, saying “Since you are here, come and look at this.”And we laugh and enjoy ourselves until the shadows onthe walls have disappeared. He is feeling hungry himselfand slowly asks me “Are you hungry, too?” Ah, is this nothappiness?

i: Without any serious intention to build a house of my

own, I happened, nevertheless, to start building one be-cause a litde sum had unexpectedly come my way. Fromthat day on, every morning and every night I was toldthat I needed to buy timber and stone and tiles and bricksand mortar and nails. And I explored and exhausted everyavenue of getting some money, all on account of this













THE FEAST OF LIFE

house, without, however, being able to live in it all thistime, until I got sort of resigned to this state of things. Oneday, finally, the house is completed, the walls have beenwhitewashed and the floors swept clean; the paper win-dows have been pasted and scrolls of paintings are hungup on the walls. All the workmen have left, and my friendshave arrived, sitting on different couches in order. Ah, isthis not happiness?

i: lam drinking on a winter’s night, and suddenly note that

the night has turned extremely cold. I push open the win-dow and see that snowflakes come down the size of a palmand there are already three or four inches of snow on theground. Ah, is this not happiness?i: To cut with a sharp knife a bright green watermelon on a

big scarlet plate of a summer afternoon. Ah, is this nothappiness?

i: I have long wanted to become a monk, but was worried be-cause I would not be permitted to eat meat. If then Icould be permitted to become a monk and yet eat meatpublicly, why then I would heat a basin of hot water, andwith the help of a sharp razor shave my head clean in asummer month! Ah, is this not happiness?i: To keep three or four spots of eczema in a private part of

my body and now and then to scald or bathe it with hotwater behind closed doors. Ah, is this not happiness?i: To find accidendy a handwritten letter of some old friendin a trunk. Ah, is this not happiness?i: A poor scholar comes to borrow money from me, but isshy about mentioning the topic, and so he allows the con-versation to drift along on other topics. I see his uncom-fortable situation, pull him aside to a place where we arealone and ask him how much he needs. Then I go insideand give him the sum and after having done this, I askhim: “Must you go immediately to settle this matter or canyou stay a while and have a drink with me?” Ah, is thisnot happiness?

i: I am sitting in a small boat. There is a beautiful wind inour favor, but our boat has no sails. Suddenly there appearsa big lorcha, coming along as fast as the wind. I try tohook on to the lorcha in the hope of catching on to it,and unexpectedly the hook does catch. Then I throw over













THIRTY-THREE HAPPY MOMENTS

*35

a rope and we are towed along and I begin to sing thelines of Tu Fu: “The green makes me feel tender towardthe peaks, and the red tells me there are oranges.” And webreak out in joyous laughter. Ah, is this not happiness?i: I have been long looking for a house to share with a

friend but have not been able to find a suitable one. Sud-denly some one brings the news that there is a housesomewhere, not too big, but with only about a dozenrooms, and that it faces a big river with beautiful greentrees around. I ask this man to stay for supper, and afterthe supper we go over together to have a look, having noidea what the house is like. Entering the gate, I see thatthere is a large vacant lot about six or seven mow, and Isay to myself, “I shall not have to worry about the supplyof vegetables and melons henceforth.” Ah, is this not hap-piness ?

i: A traveller returns home after a long journey, and he sees

the old city gate and hears the women and children onboth banks of the river talking his own dialect. Ah, i$ thisnot happiness? * - 1

i: When a good piece of old porcelain is broken, you know

there is no hope of repairing it. The more you turn Itabout and look at it, the more you are exasperated. I thenhand it to the cook, asking him to use it as any old vessel,and give orders that he shall never let that broken por-celain bowl come within my sight again. Ah, is this nothappiness?

i: I am not a saint, and am therefore not without sin. In the

night I did something wrong and I get up in the morningand feel extremely ill at ease about it. Suddenly I remem-ber what is taught by Buddhism, that not to cover one’ssins is the same as repentance. So then I begin to tell mysm to the entire company around, whether they arestrangers or my old friends. Ah, is this not happiness?i: To watch some one writing big characters a foot high.Ah, is this not happiness?

i: To open the window and let a wasp out of the room. Ah,

is this not happiness?

i: A magistrate orders the beating of the drum and calls it

a day. Ah, is this not happiness?













136

1: To see some one’s kite line broken. Ah, is this not happi-ness?

1: To see a wild prairie fire. Ah, is this not happiness?

'"1: To have just finished repaying all one’s debts. Ah, is thisnot happiness?

1: To read the Story of Curly-Beard.4 Ah, is this not happi-ness?

Poor Byron, who had only three happy hours in his life! Hewas either of a morbid and enormously unbalanced spirit, or elsehe was affecting merely the fashionable Weltschmerz of his dec-ade. Were the feeling of Weltschmerz not so fashionable, I feelbound to suspect that he must have confessed to at least thirtyhappy hours instead of three. Is it not plain from the above thatthe world is truly a feast of life spread out for us to enjoy—merelythrough the senses, and a type of culture which recognizes thesesensual pleasures therefore makes it possible for us frankly to admitthem? My suspicion is, the reason why we shut our eyes willfullyto this gorgeous world, vibrating with its own sensuality, is thatthe spiritualists have made us plain scared of them. A nobler typeof philosophy should re-establish our confidence in this fine recep-tive organ of ours, which we call the body, and drive away firstthe contempt and then the fear of our senses. Unless these philoso-phers can actually sublimate matter and etherealize our body into asoul without nerves, without taste, without smell, and withoutsense of color and motion and touch, and unless we are ready togo the whole way with the Hindu mortifiers of the flesh, let usface ourselves bravely as we are. For only a philosophy that recog-nizes reality can lead us into true happiness, and only that kind ofphilosophy is sound and healthy.

IV. Misunderstandings of Materialism

Chin’s description of the happy moments of his life must havealready convinced us that in real human life, the mental and the

4 The hero, known as “Curly-Beard/’ aided the escape of a pair of elopinglovers, and after giving them his home in a distant city, then disappeared.













*37

physical pleasures are inextricably tied up together. Mental pleas-ures are real only when they are felt through the body. I wouldinclude even the moral pleasures, too. He who preaches any kindo£ doctrine must be prepared to be misunderstood, as the Epicu-reans and Stoics were. How often people fail to see the essentialkindness of spirit of a Stoic, like Marcus Aurelius, and how often theEpicurean doctrine of wisdom and restraint has been popularlyconstrued as the doctrine of the man of pleasure! It will at oncebe brought up against this somewhat materialistic view of things,that it is selfish, that it lacks totally a sense of social responsibility,that it teaches one to enjoy one’s self merely. This type of argu-ment proceeds from ignorance; those who use it know not whatthey are talking about. They know not the kindness of the cynic,not the gendeness of temper of such a lover of life. Love ofone’s fellowmen should not be a doctrine, an article of faith, amatter of intellectual conviction, or a thesis supported by argu-ments. The love of mankind which requires reasons is no true love.This love should be perfectly natural, as natural for man as for thebirds to flap their wings. It should be a direct feeling, springingnaturally from a healthy soul, living in touch with Nature. Noman who loves the trees truly can be cruel to animals or to hisfellowmen. In a perfecdy healthy spirit, gaining a vision of life andof one’s fellowmen and a true and deep knowledge of Nature, kind-ness is the natural thing. That soul does not require any philoso-phy or man-made religion tb tell him to be kind. It is because hisspirit has been properly nourished through his senses, somewhatdetached from the artificial life and the still more artificial learn-ing of human society, that he is able to retain a true mental andmoral health. We cannot, therefore, be accused of teaching un-selfishness when we are scratching off the earth and enlarging theopening from which this spring of kindness will naturally flow.

Materialism has been misunderstood, grievously misunderstood.In this matter I must let George Santayana speak for us, whodescribes himself as “a materialist—perhaps the only one living,”and who, nevertheless as we all know, is probably one of the













THE FEAST OF LIFE

*38

sweetest spirits of the present generation. He tells us that our preju-dice against the materialistic philosophy is a prejudice of onelooking at it from the outside. One gets a feeling of shock fromcertain, deficiencies which are only apparent by comparison withone’s old creed. But one can truly understand any foreign creed orreligion or country only when one enters to live in spirit in that newworld. There is a bounce and a joy, a wholesomeness of feeling inthis so-called “materialism” which we usually fail to see entirely.As Santayana tells us, the true materialist is always like Democritus,the laughing philosopher. It is we, the “unwilling materialists,” whoaspire to spiritualism but nevertheless live a selfish materialistic life,“that have generally been awkwardly intellectual and incapable oflaughter.”

But a thorough materialist, one born to the faith and not halfplunged into it by an unexpected christening in cold water, willbe like the superb Democritus, a laughing philosopher. His de-light in a mechanism that can fall into so many marvellous andbeautiful shapes, and can generate so many exciting passions,should be of the same intellectual quality as that which thevisitor feels in a museum of natural history, where he views themyriad butterflies in their cases, the flamingoes and shell-fish,the mammoths and gorillas. Doubtless there were pangs in thatincalculable life, but they were soon over; and how splendidmeantime was the pageant, how infinitely interesting the uni-versal interplay, and how foolish and inevitable those absolutelittle passions. Somewhat of that sort might be the sentimentthat materialism would arouse in a vigorous mind, active, joy-ful, impersonal, and in respect to private illusions not withouta touch of scorn.

To the genuine sufferings of living creatures the ethics thataccompanies materialism has never been insensible; on the con-trary, like other merciful systems, it has trembled too much atpain and tended to withdraw the will ascetically, lest the willshould be defeated. Contempt for mortal sorrows is reserved forthose who drive with hosannas the Juggernaut car of absoluteoptimism. But against evils born of pure vanity and self-decep-tion, against the verbiage by which man persuades himself thathe is the god and acme of the universe, laughter is the proper













MATERIALISM

139

defence. Laughter also has this subtle advantage, that it need notremain without an overtone of sympathy and brotherly under-standing; as the laughter that greets Don Quixote’s absurditiesand misadventures does not mock the hero’s intent. His ardourwas admirable, but the world must be known before it can bereformed pertinently, and happiness, to be attained, must beplaced in reason.5

What then is this mental life, or this spiritual life, of which wehave been always so proud, and which we always place above thelife of the senses? Unfortunately modern biology has a tendency totrack the spirit down to its lair, finding it to be a set of fibers, liquidsand nerves. I almost believe that optimism is a fluid, or at least it isa condition of the nerves made possible by certain circulating fluids.Whence does the mental life arise, and from what does it take itsbeing and derive its nourishment? Philosophers have long pointedout that all human knowledge comes from sensuous experience.We can no more attain knowledge of any kind without the sensesof vision and touch and smell than a camera can take pictures with-out a lens and a sensitive plate. The difference between a cleverman and a dull fellow is that the former has a set of finer lensesand perceiving apparatus by which he gets a sharper image of thingsand retains it longer. And to proceed from the knowledge of booksto the knowledge of life, mere thinking or cogitation is not enough;one has to feel one’s way about—to sense things as they are and toget a correct impression of the myriad things in human life andhuman nature not as unrelated parts, but as a whole. In this matterof feeling about life and of gaining experience, all our senses coop-erate, and it is through the cooperation of the senses, and of theheart with the head, that we can have intellectual warmth. Intellec-tual warmth, after all, is the thing, for it is the sign of life, like thecolor of green in a plant. We detect life in one’s thought by itspresence or absence of warmth, as we detect life in a half dried-uptree struggling after some unfortunate accident, by noting the green-ness of its leaves and the moisture and healthy texture of its fiber.

6 From the essay on “Emotions of the Materialist,” in Little Essays of Santayana*edited by Logan Pearsall Smith. The italics are mine.













THE FEAST OF LIFE

V. How About Mental Pleasures?

Let us take the supposedly higher pleasures o£ the mind and thespirit, and see to what extent they are vitally connected with oursenses, rather than with our intellect. What are those higher spiritualpleasures that we distinguish from those of the lower senses? Arethey not parts of the same thing, taking root and ending up in thesenses, and inseparable from them? As we go over these higherpleasures of the mind-literature, art, music, religion and philosophy—we see what a minor role the intellect plays in comparison withthe senses and feelings. What does a painting do except to give usa landscape or a portrait and recall in us the sensuous pleasures ofseeing a real landscape or a beautiful face? And what does litera-ture do except to recreate a picture of life, to give us the at-mosphere and color, the fragrant smell of the pastures or the stenchof city gutters? We all say that a novel approaches the standard oftrue literature in proportion as it gives us real people and real emo-tions. The book which takes us away from this human life, ormerely coldly dissects it, is not literature and the more humanlytrue a book is, the better literature we consider it. What novel everappeals to a reader if it contains only a cold analysis, if it fails togive us the salt and tang and flavor of life?

As for the other things, poetry is but truth colored with emotion,music is sentiment without words, and religion is but wisdom ex^pressed in fancy. As painting is based on the sense of color andvision, so poetry is based on the sense of sound and tone and rhythm,in addition to its emotional truth. Music is pure sentiment itself, dis-pensing entirely with the language of words with which alone theintellect can operate. Music can portray for us the sounds of cowbellsand fishmarkets and the batdefield; it can portray for us even thedelicacy of the flowers, the undulating motion of the waves, or thesweet serenity of the moonlight; but the moment it steps outside thelimit of the senses and tries to portray for us a philosophic idea, itmust be considered decadent and the product of a decadent world.

And did not the degeneration of religion begin with reason itself?













141

As Santayana says, the process of degeneration of religion was dueto too much reasoning: “This religion unhappily long ago ceased tobe wisdom expressed in fancy in order to become superstition over-laid with reasoning.” The decay of religion is due to the pedanticspirit, in the invention of creeds, formulas, articles of faith, doctrinesand apologies. We become increasingly less pious as we increasinglyjustify and rationalize our beliefs and become so sure that we areright. That is why every religion becomes a narrow sect, which be-lieves itself to have discovered the only truth. The consequence isthat the more we justify our beliefs, the more narrow-minded webecome, as is evident in all religious sects. This has made it possiblefor religion to be associated with the worst forms of bigotry, narrow-mindedness and even pure selfishness in personal life. Such a re-ligion nourishes a man’s selfishness not only by making it impossiblefor him to be broad-minded toward other sects, but also by turningthe practice of religion into a private bargain between God and him-self, in which the party of the first part is glorified by the party ofthe second part, singing hymns and calling upon His name on everyconceivable occasion, and in return the party of the first part is tobless the party of the second part, bless particularly himself morethan any other person and his own family more than any otherfamily. That is why we find selfishness of nature goes so well withsome of the most “religious” and regularly church-going old women.In the end, the sense of self-justification, of having discovered theonly truth, displaces all the finer emotions from which religion tookits rise.

I can see no other reason for the existence of art and poetry andreligion except as they tend to restore in us a freshness of vision anda more emotional glamour and more vital sense of life. For as wegrow older in life, our senses become gradually benumbed, ouremotions become more callous to suffering and injustice and cruelty,and our vision of life is warped by too much preoccupation withcold, trivial realities. Fortunately, we have a few poets and artistswho have not lost that sharpened sensibility, that fine emotional













142

response and that freshness of vision, and whose duties are thereforeto be our moral conscience, to hold up a mirror to our blunted vis-ion, to tone up our withered nerves. Art should be a satire and awarning against our paralyzed emotions, our devitalized thinkingand our denaturalized living. It teaches us unsophistication in asophisticated world. It should restore to us health and sanity of liv-ing and enable us to recover from the fever and delirium caused bytoo much mental activity. It should sharpen our senses, re-establishthe connection between our reason and our human nature, andassemble the ruined parts of a dislocated life again into a whole, byrestoring our original nature. Miserable indeed is a world in whichwe have knowledge without understanding, criticism without appre-ciation, beauty without love, truth without passion, righteousnesswithout mercy, and courtesy without a warm heart!

As for philosophy, which is the exercise of the spirit par excellence,the danger is even greater that we lose the feeling of life itself. Ican understand that such mental delights include the solution of along mathematical equation, or the perception of a grand order inthe universe. This perception of order is probably the purest of allour mental pleasures and yet I would exchange it for a well pre-pared meal. In the first place, it is in itself almost a freak, a by-product of our mental occupations, enjoyable because it is gratuitous,but not in any case as imperative for us as other vital processes. Thatintellectual delight is, after all, similar to the delight of solving acrossword puzzle successfully. In the second place, the philosopherat this moment more often than not is likely to cheat himself, tofall in love with this abstract perfection, and to conceive a greaterlogical perfection in the world than is really warranted by realityitself. It is as much a false picture of things as when we paint a starwith five points—a reduction to formula, an artificial stylizing, anover-simplification. So long as we do not overdo it, this delight inperfection is good, but let us remind ourselves that millions ofpeople can be happy without discovering this simple unity of design.We really can afford to live without it. I prefer talking with a col-ored maid to talking with a mathematician; her words are more













HOW ABOUT MENTAL PLEASURES

I43

concrete, her laughter is more energetic, and I generally gain morem knowledge o£ human nature by talking with her. I am such amaterialist that at any time I would prefer pork to poetry, andwould waive a piece of philosophy for a piece of filet, brown andcrisp and garnished with good sauce.

Only by placing living above thinking can we get away from thisheat and the re-breathed air of philosophy and recapture some of thefreshness and naturalness of true insight of the child. Any truephilosopher ought to be ashamed of himself when he sees a child,or even a lion cub in a cage. How perfectly nature has fashionedhim with his paws, his muscles, his beautiful coat of fur, his prick-ing ears, his bright round eyes, his agility and his sense of fun! Thephilosopher ought to be ashamed that God-made perfection hassometimes become man-made imperfection, ashamed that he wearsspectacles, has no appetite, is often distressed in mind and heart,and is entirely unconscious of the fun in life. From this type ofphilosopher nothing is to be gained, for nothing that he says canbe of importance to us. That philosophy alone can be of use to uswhich joins hands merrily with poetry and establishes for us a truervision, first of nature and then of human nature.

Any adequate philosophy of life must be based on the harmonyof our given instincts. The philosopher who is too idealistic is soontripped up by nature herself. The highest conception of human dig-nity, according to the Chinese Confucianists, is when man reachesultimately his greatest height, an equal of heaven and earth, by liv-ing in accordance with nature. This is the doctrine given in TheGolden Mean, written by the grandson of Confucius.

What is God-given is called nature; to follow nature is calledTao 6 (the Way); to cultivate the Way is called culture. Beforejoy, anger, sadness and happiness are expressed, they are calledthe inner self; when they are expressed to the proper degree,they are called harmony. The inner sdf is the correct founda-

6 There is a strong element of Taoism in Confucianism, perhaps due to theinfluence of Taoistic thought, a fact which is not usually noticed. Anyway, here thispassage stands m one of the Confucian Four Boo\s, and similar passages in theAnalects can be quoted.













THE FEAST OF LIFE

144

tion of the world, and harmony is the illustrious Way. When aman has achieved the inner self and harmony, the heaven andearth are orderly and the myriad things are nourished andgrow thereby.

To arrive at understanding from being one’s true self is callednature, and to arrive at being one’s true self from understand-ing is called culture; he who is his true self has thereby under-standing, and he who has understanding finds thereby his trueself. Only those who are their absolute selves in the world canfulfil their own nature; only those who fulfil their own naturecan fulfil the nature of others; only those who fulfil the natureof others can fulfil the nature of things; those who fulfil thenature of things are worthy to help Mother Nature in growingand sustaining hfe; and those who are worthy to help MotherNature in growing and sustaining life are the equals of heavenand earth.













Chapter Seven

THE IMPORTANCE OF LOAFING

I. Man the Only Working Animal

THE feast of life is, therefore, before us, and the only question iswhat appetite we have for it. The appetite is the thing, and not thefeast. After all, the most bewildering thing about man is his idea ofwork and the amount of work he imposes upon himself, or civiliza-tion has imposed upon him. All nature loafs, while man alone worksfor a living. He works because he has to, because with the progressof civilization life gets incredibly more complex, with duties, respon-sibilities, fears, inhibitions and ambitions, born not of nature, but ofhuman society. While I am sitting here before my desk, a pigeon isflying about a church steeple before my window, not worrying whatit is going to have for lunch. I know that my lunch is a more com-plicated affair than the pigeon’s, and that the few articles of foodI take involve thousands of people at work and a highly compli-cated system of cultivation, merchandising, transportation, deliveryand preparation. That is why it is harder for man to get food thanfor animals. Nevertheless, if a jungle beast were let loose in a cityand gained some apprehension of what busy human life was allabout, he would feel a good deal of skepticism and bewildermentabout this human society.

The first thought that the jungle beast would have is that manis the only working animal. With the exception of a few draught-horses or buffalos made to work a mill, even domestic pets don’thave to work. Police dogs are but rarely called upon to do theirduty; a house dog supposed to watch a house plays most of the time,and takes a good nap in the morning whenever there is good, warmsunshine; the aristocratic cat certainly never works for a living, andgifted with a bodily agility which enables it to disregard a neigh-bor’s fence, it is even unconscious of its captivity—it just goeswherever it likes to go. So, then, we have this toiling humanityalone, caged and domesticated, but not fed, forced by this civiliza-

145













tion and complex society to work and worry about the matter offeeding itself. Humanity has its own advantages, I am quite aware—the delights of knowledge, the pleasures of conversation and thejoys of the imagination, as for instance in watching a stage play.But the essential fact remains that human life has got too compli-cated and the matter of merely feeding ourselves, directly or indi-recdy, is occupying well over ninety per cent of our humanactivities. Civilization is largely a matter of seeking food, whileprogress is that development which makes food more and moredifficult to get. If it had not been made so difficult for man to obtainhis food, there would be absolutely no reason why humanity shouldwork so hard. The danger is that we get over-civilized and that wecome to a point, as indeed we have already done, when the workof getting food is so strenuous that we lose our appetite for food inthe process of getting it. This doesn’t seem to make very muchsense, from the point of view either of the jungle beast or thephilosopher.

Every time I see a city skyline or look over a stretch of roofs, Iget frightened. It is positively amazing. Two or three water towers,the backs of two or three steel frames for billboards, perhaps a spireor two, and a stretch of asphalt roofing material and bricks going upin square, sharp, vertical outlines without any form or order,sprinkled with some dirty, discolored chimneys and a few wash-lines and criss-cross lines of radio aerials. And looking down into astreet, I see again a stretch of gray or discolored red brick walls,with tiny, dark, uniform windows in uniform rows, half open andhalf hidden by shades, with perhaps a bottle of milk standing on awindowsill and a few pots of tiny, sickly flowers on some others.A child comes up to the roof with her dog and sits on the roof-stairsevery morning to get a bit of sunshine. And as I lift my eyes again,I see rows upon rows of roofs, miles of them, stretching in uglysquare oudines to the distance. More water towers, more brickhouses. And humanity live here. How do they live, each familybehind one or two of these dark windows? What do they do fora living? It is staggering. Behind every two or three windows, a













MAN THE ONLY WORKING ANIMAL

147

couple go to bed every night like pigeons returning to their pigeon-holes; then they wake up and have their morning coffee and thehusband emerges into the street, going somewhere to find bread forthe family, while the wife tries persistently and desperately to driveout the dust and keep the little place clean. By four or five o’clockthey come out on their doorsteps to chat with and look at theirneighbors and get a sniff of fresh air. Then night falls, they aredead tired and go to sleep again. And so they live!

There are others, more well-to-do people, living in better apart-ments. More “arty” rooms and lampshades. Still more orderly andmore clean! They have a little more space, but only a litde more.To rent a seven-room flat, not to speak of owning it, is considereda luxury! But it does not imply more happiness. Less financial worryand fewer debts to think about, it is true. But also more emotionalcomplications, more divorce, more cat-husbands that don’t comehome at night, or the couple go prowling together at night, seekingsome form of dissipation. Diversion is the word. Good Lord, theyneed to be diverted from these monotonous, uniform brick wallsand shining wooden floors! Of course they go to look at nakedwomen. Consequently more neurasthenia, more aspirin, more ex-pensive illnesses, more colitis, appendicitis and dyspepsia, moresoftened brains and hardened livers, more ulcerated duodenums andlacerated intestines, overworked stomachs and overtaxed kidneys,inflamed bladders and outraged spleens, dilated hearts and shatterednerves, more flat chests and high blood pressure^ more diabetes,Bright’s disease, beri-beri, rheumatism, insomnia, arterio-scierosis,piles, fistulas, chronic dysentry, chronic constipation, loss of appetiteand weariness of life. To make the picture perfect, more dogs andfewer children. The matter of happiness depends entirely upon thequality and temper of the men and women living in these ele-gant apartments. Some indeed have a jolly life, others simply don’tBut on the whole, perhaps they are less happy than the hard-work-ing people; they have more ennui and more boredom. But they havea car, and perhaps a country home. Ah, the country home, that istheir salvation! So then, people work hard in the country so that













they can come to the city so that they can earn sufficient moneyand go back to the country again.

And as you take a stroll through the city, you see that back ofthe main avenue with beauty parlors and flower shops and shippingfirms is another street with drug stores, grocery stores, hardwareshops, barber shops, laundries, cheap eating places, news-stands. Youwander along for an hour, and if it is a big city, you are still there;you see only more streets, more drug stores, grocery stores, hardwareshops, barber shops, laundries, cheap eating places and news-stands.How do these people make their living? And why do they comehere? Very simple. The laundrymen wash the clothes of the barbersand restaurant waiters, the restaurant waiters wait upon the laundry-men and barbers while they eat, and the barbers cut the hair of thelaundrymen and waiters. That is civilization. Isn’t it amazing? Ibet some of the laundrymen, barbers and waiters never wanderbeyond ten blocks from their place of work in their entire life.Thank God they have at least the movies, where they can see birdssinging on the screen, trees growing and swaying, Turkey, Egypt,the Himalayas, the Andes, storms, shipwrecks, coronation ceremo-nies, ants, caterpillars, muskrats, a fight between lizards and scor-pions, hills, waves, sands, clouds, and even a moon—all on thescreen!

O wise humanity, terribly wise humanity! Of thee I sing. Howinscrutable is the civilization where men toil and work and worrytheir hair gray to get a living and forget to play!

II. The Chinese Theory or Leisure

The American is known as a great husder, as the Chinese isknown as a great loafer. And as all opposites admire each other, Isuspect that the American husder admires the Chinese loafer asmuch as the Chinese loafer admires the American hustler. Suchthings are called the charms of national traits. I do not know ifeventually the West and the East will meet; the plain fact is thatthey are meeting now, and are going to meet more and more closely













149

as modern civilization spreads, with the increase of communicationfacilities. At least, in China, we are not going to defy this ma-chine civilization, and there the problem will have to be workedout as to how we are going to merge these two cultures, theancient Chinese philosophy of life and the modern technologicalcivilization, and integrate them into a sort of working way of life.The question is very much more problematical as to Occidental lifeever being invaded by Oriental philosophy, although no one woulddare to prophesy.

After all, the machine culture is rapidly bringing us nearer to theage of leisure, and man will be compelled to play more and workless. It is all a matter of environment, and when man finds leisurehanging on his hand, he will be forced to think more about the waysand means of wisely enjoying his leisure, conferred upon him,against his will, by rapidly improving methods of quick produc-tion. After all, no one can predict anything about the next century.He would be a brave man who dared even to predict about lifethirty years from now. The constant rush for progress must certainlyone day reach a point when man will be pretty tired of it all, andwill begin to take stock of his conquests in the material world. Icannot believe that, with the coming of better material conditionsof life, when diseases are eliminated, poverty is decreased and man'sexpectation of life is prolonged and food is plentiful, man will careto be as busy as he is today. I’m not so sure that a more lazy tem-perament will not arise as a result of this new environment.

Apart from all this, the subjective factor is always as important asthe objective. Philosophy comes in as a way of changing man's out-look and also changing his character. How man is going to reacttoward this machine civilization depends on what kind of a manhe is. In the realm of biology, there are such things as sensibility tostimulus, slowness or quickness of reaction, and different behaviorsof different animals in the same medium or environment Someanimals react more slowly than others. Even in this machine civi-lization, which I understand includes the United States, England,France, Germany, Italy and Russia, we see that different reactions













150 THE IMPORTANCE OF LOAFING

toward the mechanical age arise from different racial temperaments.The chances of peculiar individual reactions to the same environ-ment are not eliminated. For China, I feel the type of life resultingfrom it will be very much like that in modern France, because theChinese and the French temperaments are so akin.

America today is most advanced in machine civilization, and ithas always been assumed that the future of a world dominated bythe machine will tend toward the present American type and patternof life. I feel inclined to dispute this thesis, because no one knowsyet what the American temperament is going to be. At best we canonly describe it as a changing temperament. I do not think it at allimpossible that there may be a revival of that period of New Eng-land culture so well described in Van Wyck Brooks’ new book.No one can say that that flowering of New England culture was nottypically American culture, and certainly no one can say that thatideal Walt Whitman envisaged in his Democratic Vistas, pointingto the development of free men and perfect mothers, is not the idealof democratic progress. America needs only to be given a littlerespite, and there may be—I am quite sure there will be—newWhitmans, new Thoreaus and new Lowells, when that old Ameri-can culture, cut short literally and figuratively by the gold rush, mayblossom forth again. Will not, then, American temperament besomething quite different from that of the present day, and verynear to the temperament of Emerson and Thoreau?

Culture, as I understand it, is essentially a product of leisure. Theart of culture is therefore essentially the art of loafing. From theChinese point of view, the man who is wisely idle is the most cul-tured man. For there seems to be a philosophic contradiction be-tween being busy and being wise. Those who are wise won’t bebusy, and those who are too busy can’t be wise. The wisest manis therefore he who loafs most gracefully. Here I shall try to ex-plain, not the technique and varieties of loafing as practised inChina, but rather the philosophy which nourishes this divinedesire for loafing "in China and gives rise to that carefree, idle,happy-go-lucky—and often poetic—temperament in the Chinese













THE CHINESE THEORY OF LEISURE 151

scholars, and to a lesser extent, in the Chinese people in general.How did that Chinese temperament—that distrust of achievementand success and that intense love of living as such—arise?

In the first place, the Chinese theory of leisure, as expressed bya comparatively unknown author of the eighteenth century, ShuPaihsiang, who happily achieved oblivion, is as follows: time isuseful because it is not being used. “Leisure in time is like unoc-cupied floor space in a room.” Every working girl who rents asmall room where every inch of space is fully utilized feels highlyuncomfortable because she has no room to move about, and themoment she gets a raise in salary, she moves into a bigger roomwhere there is a little more unused floor space, besides those strictlyuseful spaces occupied by her single bed, her dressing table andher two-burner gas range. It is that unoccupied space which makesa room habitable, as it is our leisure hours which make life en-durable. I understand there is a rich woman living on Park Avenue,who bought up a neighboring lot to prevent anybody from erect-ing a skyscraper next to her house. She is paying a big sum ofmoney in order to have space fully and perfecdy made useless,and it seems to me she never spent her money more wisely.

In this connection, I might mention a personal experience. Icould never see the beauty of skyscrapers in New York, and itwas not until I went to Chicago that I realized that a skyscrapercould be very imposing and very beautiful to look at, if it had agood frontage and at least half a mile of unused space aroundit. Chicago is fortunate in this respect, because it has more spacethan Manhattan. The tall buildings are better spaced, and there isthe possibility of obtaining an unobstructed view of them from along distance. Figuratively speaking, we, too, are so cramped inour life that we cannot enjoy a free perspective of the beauties ofour spiritual life. We lack spiritual frontage.













THE IMPORTANCE OF LOAFING

III. The Cult of the Idle Life

The Chinese love of leisure arises from a combination of causes.It came from a temperament, was erected into a literary cult, andfound its justification in a philosophy. It grew out of an intenselove of life, was actively sustained by an underlying current ofliterary romanticism throughout the dynasties, and was eventuallypronounced right and sensible by a philosophy of life, which wemay, in the mam, descnbe as Taoistic. The rather general accept-ance of this Taoistic view of life is only proof that there is Tao-istic blood in the Chinese temperament.

And here we must first clarify one point. The romantic cult ofthe idle life, which we have defined as a product of leisure, wasdecidedly not for the wealthy class, as we usually understand itto be. That would be an unmitigated error in the approach to theproblem. It was a cult for the poor and unsuccessful and humblescholar who either had chosen the idle life or had idleness en-forced upon him. As I read Chinese literary masterpieces, and asI imagine the poor schoolmaster teaching the poor scholars thesepoems and essays glorifying the simple and idle life, I cannot helpthinking that they must have derived an immense personal satis-faction and spiritual consolation from them. Disquisitions on thehandicaps of fame and advantages of obscurity sounded pleasingto those who had failed in the civil examinations, and such sayingsas “Eating late (with appetite whetted) is eating meat” tended tomake the bad provider less apologetic to his family. No greatermisjudgment of literary history is made than when the youngChinese proletarian writers accuse the poets Su Tungpo’s andT’ao Yuanming and others of belonging to the hated leisure-classintelligentsia—Su who sang about “the dear breeze over the streamand bright moon over the hills,” and T’ao who sang about “thedew making wet his skirt” and “a hen roosting on the top of a mul-berry tree ” As if the river breeze and the moon over the hills andthe hen roosting on a mulberry tree were owned only by the capi-talist class! These great men of the past went beyond the stage of













*53

talking about peasant conditions, and lived the life of the poorpeasant themselves and found peace and harmony in it.

In this sense I regard this romantic cult of the idle life as essen-tially democratic. We can better understand this romantic cultwhen we picture for ourselves Laurence Sterne on his sentimentaljourney, or Wordsworth and Coleridge hiking through Europe onfoot with a great sense of beauty in their breast, but very littlemoney in their purse. There was a time when one didn’t have tobe rich in order to travel, and even today travel doesn’t have tobe a luxury of the rich. On the whole, the enjoyment of leisure issomething which decidedly costs less than the enjoyment of luxury.All it requires is an artistic temperament which is bent on seekinga perfectly useless afternoon spent in a perfecdy useless manner.The idle life really costs so very litde, as Thoreau took the troubleto point out in Walden.

The Chinese romanticists were, on the whole, men gifted witha high sensibility and a vagabond nature, poor in their worldlypossessions, but rich in sentiment. They had an intense love of lifewhich showed itself in their abhorence of all official life and a sternrefusal to make the soul serf to the body. The idle life, so far frombeing the prerogative of the rich and powerful and successful (howbusy the successful American men are*) was in China an achieve-ment of highmindedness, a highmindedness very near to the West-ern conception of the dignity of the tramp who is too proud toask favors, too independent to go to work, and too wise to takethe world’s successes too, seriously. This highmindedness camefrom, and was inevitably associated with, a certain sense of detach-ment toward the drama of life; it came from the quality of beingable to see through life’s ambitions and follies and the temptationsof fame and wealth. Somehow the highminded scholar who valuedhis character more than his achievements, his soul more than fameor wealth, became by common consent the highest ideal of Chi-nese literature. Inevitably he was a man with great simplicity ofliving and a proud contempt for worldly success as the worldunderstands it.













*54

Great men of letters of this class—T’ao Yuanming, Su Tungp’o,Po Chiiyi, Yuan Chunglang, Yiian Tsets’ai—were generally enticedinto a short term of official life, did a wonderful job of it, and thengot exasperated with its eternal kowtowing and receiving and send-ing off of fellow officials, and gladly laying down the burdens of anofficial life, returned wisely to the life of retirement. Yiian Chung-lang wrote seven successive petitions to his superior, when he wasmagistrate of Soochow, complaining of these eternal kowtowings,and begging to be allowed to return to the life of the free and care-less individual.

A rather extravagant example of the praise of idleness is foundin the inscription of another poet, Po Yiichien, written for hisstudio, which he called “The Hall of Idleness”:

I’m too lazy to read the Taoist classics, for Tao doesn’t reside inthe books;

Too lazy to look over the sutras, for they go no deeper in Taothan its looks.

The essence of Tao consists in a void, clear, and cool,

But what is this void except being the whole day like a fool?

Too lazy am I to read poetry, for when I stop, the poetry willbe gone;

Too lazy to play on the ch'in, for music dies on the stringwhere it’s born;

Too lazy to drink wine, for beyond the drunkard’s dream thereare rivers and lakes;

Too lazy to play chess, for besides the pawns there are otherstakes;

Too lazy to look at the hills and streams, for there is a paintingwithin my heart’s portals;

Too lazy to face the wind and the moon, for within me is theIsle of the Immortals;

Too lazy to attend to worldly affairs, for inside me are my hutand my possessions;













THE CULT OF IDLE LIFE

*55

Too lazy to watch the changing of the seasons, for within meare heavenly processions.

Pine trees may decay and rocks may rot; but I shall alwaysremain what I am.

Is it not fitting that I call this the Hall of Idleness?

This cult of idleness was therefore always bound up with a lifeof inner calm, a sense of carefree irresponsibility and an intensewholehearted enjoyment of the life of nature. Poets and scholarshave always given themselves quaint names, like “The Guest ofRivers and Lakes” (Tu Fu); “The Recluse of the Eastern Hillside”(Su Tungp’o); the “Carefree Man of a Misty Lake”; and “The OldMan of the Haze-Girdled Tower,” etc.

No, the enjoyment of an idle life doesn’t cost any money. Thecapacity for true enjoyment of idleness is lost in the moneyed classand can be found only among people who have a supreme contemptfor wealth. It must come from an inner richness of the soul in aman who loves the simple ways of life and who is somewhat im-patient with the business of making money. There is always plentyof life to enjoy for a man who is determined to enjoy it. If menfail to enjoy this earthly existence we have, it is because they donot love life sufficiently and allow it to be turned into a humdrumroutine existence. Laotse has been wrongly accused of being hostileto life; on the other hand, I think he taught the renunciation of thelife of the world exacdy because he loved life all too tenderly, toallow the art of living to degenerate into a mere business of living.

For where there is love, there is jealousy; a man who loves lifeintensely must be always jealous of the few exquisite moments ofleisure that he has. And he must retain the dignity and pride alwayscharacteristic of a vagabond. His hours of fishing must be as sacredas his hours of business, erected into a kind of religion as theEnglish have done with sport. He must be as impatient at havingpeople talk to him about the stock market at the golf club, as thescientist is at having anybody disturb him in his laboratory. And hemust count the days of departing spring with a sense of sad regret













156

for not Having made more trips or excursions, as a business manfeels when he has not sold so many wares in the day.

IV. This Earth the Only Heaven

A sad, poetic touch is added to this intense love of life by therealization that this life we have is essentially mortal. Strangeto say, this sad awareness of our mortality makes the Chinesescholar’s enjoyment of life all the more keen and intense. For ifthis earthly existence is all we have, we must try the harder toenjoy it while it lasts. A vague hope of immortality detracts fromour wholehearted enjoyment of this earthly existence. As Sir ArthurKeith puts it with a typically Chinese feeling, “For if men believe,as I do, that this present earth is the only heaven, they will striveall the more to make heaven of it.” Su Tungp’o says, “Life passeslike a spring dream without a trace,” and that is why he clung toit so fondly and tenaciously. It is this sentiment of our mortalexistence that we run across again and again in Chinese literature.It is this feeling of the impermanence of existence and the evanes-cence of life, this touch of sadness, which overtakes the Chinesepoet and scholar always at the moment of his greatest feasting andmerrymaking, a sadness that is expressed in the regret that “themoon cannot always be so round and the flowers cannot foreverlook so fair” when we are watching the full moon in the companyof beautiful flowers. It was in that poem commemorating a gor-geous feast on “A Spring Night amidst Peach Blossoms” that LiPo penned the favorite line: “Our floating life is like a dream; howmany times can one enjoy one’s self?” And it was in the midst of agay reunion of his happy and illustrious friends that Wang Hsichihwrote that immortal little essay, “The Orchid Pavilion,” which gives,better than anything else, this typical feeling about the evanescenceof life:

In the ninth year of the reign Yungho [A. D. 353] in the be-ginning of late spring we met at the Orchid Pavilion in Shanyin













of Kweich’i for the Water Festival, to wash away the evilspirits.

Here are gathered all the illustrious persons and assembledboth the old and the young. Here are tall mountains and ma-jestic peaks, trees with thick foliage and tall bamboos. Here arealso clear streams and gurgling rapids, catching one’s eye fromthe right and left. We group ourselves m order, sitting by thewaterside, and drink in succession from a cup floating downthe curving stream; and although there is no music fromstring and wood-wind instruments, yet with alternate singingand drinking, we are well disposed to thoroughly enjoy a quietintimate conversation. Today the sky is clear, the air is freshand the kind breeze is mild. Truly enjoyable it is to watch theimmense universe above and the myriad things below, travellingover the entire landscape with our eyes and allowing our senti-ments to roam about at will, thus exhausting the pleasures ofthe eye and the ear.

Now when people gather together to surmise life itself, somesit and talk and unburden their thoughts in the intimacy of aroom, and some, overcome by a sentiment, soar forth into aworld beyond bodily realities. Although we select our pleasuresaccording to our inclinations—some noisy and rowdy, andothers quiet and sedate—yet when we have found that whichpleases us, we are all happy and contented, to the extent of for-getting that we are growing old. And then, when satiety fol-lows satisfaction, and with the change of circumstances, changealso our whims and desires, there then arises a feeling of poign-ant regret. In the twinkling of an eye, the objects of our for-mer pleasures have become thmgs of the past, still compellingin us moods of regretful memory. Furthermore, although ourlives may be long or short, eventually we all end in nothingness.“Great indeed are life and death” said the ancients. Ah! whatsadness!

I often study the joys and regrets of the ancient people, andas I lean over their writings and see that they were movedexacdy as ourselves, I am often overcome by a feeling of sad-ness and compassion, and would like to make those things clearto myself. Well I know it is a lie to say that life and death arethe same thing, and that longevity and early death make nodifference! Alas! as we of the present look upon those of thepast, so will posterity look upon our present selves. Therefore,













have I put down a sketch of these contemporaries and theirsayings at this feast, and although time and circumstances maychange, the way they will evoke our moods of happiness andregret will remain the same. What will future readers feelwhen they cast their eyes upon this writing!1

Belief in our mortality, the sense that we are eventually goingto crack up and be extinguished like the flame of a candle, I say,is a gloriously fine thing. It makes us sober; it makes us a litdesad; and many of us it makes poetic. But above all, it makes itpossible for us to make up our mind and arrange to live sensibly,truthfully and always with a sense of our own kmitations. It givespeace also, because true peace of mind comes from accepting theworst. Psychologically, I think, it means a release of energy.

When Chinese poets and common people enjoy themselves, thereis always a subconscious feeling that the joy is not going to last for-ever, as the Chinese often say at the end of a happy reunion, “Eventhe most gorgeous fair, with mat-sheds stretching over a thousandmiles, must sooner or later come to an end.” The feast of life isthe feast of Nebuchadnezzar. This feeling of the dreamlike qualityof our existence invests the pagan with a kind of spirituality. He seeslife essentially as a Sung landscape artist sees mountain scenery, en-veloped in a haze of mystery, sometimes with the air dripping withmoisture.

Deprived of immortality, the proposition of living becomes asimple proposition. It is this: that we human beings have a limitedspan of life to live on this earth, rarely more than seventy years, andthat therefore we have to arrange our lives so that we may live ashappily as we can under a given set of circumstances. Here we are onConfucian ground. There is something mundane, something ter-ribly earth-bound about it, and man proceeds to work with a dogged

1 Incidentally, the manuscript of this essay, or rather its early rubbings, are todaythe most highly valued examples of Chinese calligraphy, because the writer and author,Wang Hsichih, is the acknowledged Prince of Calligraphy. For three times hefailed to improve upon his original handwriting, and so today the script is pre-served to us m rubbings, with all the deletions and additions as they stood in thefirst draft.













THIS EARTH THE ONLY HEAVEN

*59

commonsense, very much in the spirit o£ what George Santayanacalls “animal faith” With this animal faith, taking life as it is, wemade a shrewd guess, without Darwin’s aid as to our essentialkinship with animals. It made us therefore, cling to life—the lifeof the instinct and the life of the senses—on the belief that, as weare all animals, we can be truly happy only when all our normalinstincts are satisfied normally. This applies to the enjoyment oflife in all its aspects.

Are we therefore materialistic? A Chinese would hardly knowhow to answer this question. For with his spirituality based on akind of material, earth-bound existence, he fails to see the distinc-tion between the spirit and the flesh. Undoubtedly he loves creaturecomforts, but then creature comforts are matters of the senses. Itis only through the intellect that man attains the distinction be-tween the spirit and the flesh, while our senses provide the portalsto both, as we have already seen in the preceding chapter. Music,undoubtedly the most spiritual of our arts, lifting man to a world ofspirit, is based on the sense of hearing. And the Chinese fails to seewhy a sympathy of castes in the enjoyment of food is less spiritualthan a symphony of sounds. Only in this realistic sense, can we feelabout the woman we love. A distinction between her soul and herbody is impossible. For if we love a woman, we do not love hergeometrical precision of features, but rather her ways and gesturesin motion, her looks and smiles. But are a woman’s looks and smilesphysical or spiritual? No one can say.

This feeling of the reality and spirituality of life is helped byChinese humanism, in fact by the whole Chinese way of thinkingand living. Chinese philosophy may be briefly defined as a pre-occupation with the knowledge of life rather than the knowledgeof truth. Brushing aside all metaphysical speculations as irrelevantto the business of living, and as pale reflections engendered in ourintellect, the Chinese philosophers clutch at life itself and ask them-selves the one and only eternal question: “How are we to live?”Philosophy in the Western sense seems to the Chinese eminentlyidle. In its preoccupation with logic, which concerns itself with













the method of arrival at knowledge, and epistemology, which posesthe question of the possibility of knowledge, it has forgotten todeal with the knowledge of life itself. That is so much tomfooleryand a kind of frivolity, like wooing and courtship without comingto marriage and the producing of children, which is as bad as hav-ing redcoated regiments marching in military parades without goingto battle. The German philosophers are the most frivolous of all;they court truth like ardent lovers, but seldom propose to marryher.

V. What is Luck?

The peculiar contribution of Taoism to the creation of the idletemperament lies in the recognition that there are no such thingsas luck and adversity. The great Taoist teaching is the emphasison being over doing, character over achievement, and calm overaction. But inner calm is possible only when man is not disturbedby the vicissitudes of fortune. The great Taoist philosopher Liehtsegave the famous parable of the Old Man At the Fort:

An Old Man was living with his Son at an abandoned forton the top of a hill, and one day he lost a horse. The neighborscame to express their sympathy for this misfortune, and theOld Man asked “How do you know this is bad luck?” A fewdays afterwards, his horse returned with a number of wildhorses, and his neighbors came again to congratulate him onthis stroke of fortune, and the Old Man replied, “How do youknow this is good luck?” With so many horses around, his sonbegan to take to riding, and one day he broke his leg. Againthe neighbors came around to express their sympathy, and dieOld Man replied, “How do you know this is bad luck?” Thenext year, there was a war, and because the Old Man’s son wascrippled, he did not have to go to the front.

Evidently this kind of philosophy enables a man to stand a fewhard knocks in life in the belief that there are no such things ashard knocks without advantages. Like medals, they always have areverse side. The possibility of calm, the distaste for mere actionand bustle, and the running away from success and achievement













are possible with this kind of philosophy, a philosophy which says:'Nothing matters to a man who says nothing matters. The desirefor success is killed by the shrewd hunch that the desire for successmeans very much the same thing as the fear of failure. The greatersuccess a man has made, the more he fears a climb down. Theillusive rewards of fame are pitched against the tremendous ad-vantages of obscurity. From the Taoist point of view, an educatedman is one who believes he has not succeeded when he has, butis not so sure he has failed when he fails, while the mark of thehalf-educated man is his assumptions that his outward successesand failures are absolute and real.

Hence, the distinction between Buddhism and Taoism is this:the goal of the Buddhist is that he shall not want anything, whilethe goal of the Taoist is that he shall not be wanted at all. Onlyhe who is not wanted by the public can be a carefree individual, andonly he who is a carefree individual can be a happy human being.In this spirit Chuangtse, the greatest and most gifted among theTaoist philosophers, continually warns us against being too promi-nent, too useful and too serviceable. Pigs are killed and offered onthe sacrificial altar when they become too fat, and beautiful birdsare the first to be shot by the hunter for their beautiful plumage. Inthis sense, he told the parable of two men going to desecrate a tomband robbing the corpse. They hammer the corpse’s forehead, breakhis cheekbones and smash his jaws, all because the dead man wasfoolish enough to be buried with a pearl in his mouth.

The inevitable conclusion of all this philosophizing is: why notloaf?

VI. Three American Vices

To the Chinese, therefore, with the fine philosophy that ‘‘Nothingmatters to a man who says nothing matters,” Americans offer astrange contrast. Is life really worth all the bother, to the extentof making our soul a slave to the body? The high spirituality ofthe philosophy of loafing forbids it The most characteristic ad-vertisement I ever saw was one by an engineering firm with the big













words: “Nearly Right Is Not Enough” The desire for one hundredper cent efficiency seems almost obscene. The trouble with Ameri-cans is that when a thing is nearly right, they want to make it stillbetter, while for a Chinese, nearly right is good enough.

The three great American vices seem to be efficiency, punctualityand the desire for achievement and success. They are the thingsthat make the Americans so unhappy and so nervous. They stealfrom them their inalienable right of loafing and cheat them ofmany a good, idle and beautiful afternoon. One must start out witha belief that there are no catastrophes in this world, and that be-sides the noble art of getting things done, there is a nobler art of leav-ing things undone. On the whole, if one answers letters promptly,the result is about as good or as bad as if he had never answeredthem at all. After all, nothing happens, and while one may havemissed a few good appointments, one may have also avoided afew unpleasant ones. Most of the letters are not worth answering,if you keep them in your drawer for three months; reading themthree months afterwards, one might realize how utterly futile andwhat a waste of time it would have been to answer them all. Writ-ing letters really can become a vice. It turns our writers into finepromotion salesmen and our college professors into good efficientbusiness executives. In this sense, I can understand Thoreau’s con-tempt for the American who always goes to the post office.

Our quarrel is not that efficiency gets things done and very welldone, too. I always rely on American water-taps, rather than onthose made in China, because American water-taps do not leak. Thatis a consolation. Against the old contention, however, that we mustall be useful, be efficient, become officials and have power, the oldreply is that there are always enough fools left in the world whoare willing to be useful, be busy and enjoy power, and so somehowthe business of life can and will be carried on. The only point iswho are the wise, the loafers or the husders? Our quarrel withefficiency is not that it gets things done, but that it is a thief oftime when it leaves us no leisure to enjoy ourselves and that itfrays our nerves in trying to get things done perfecdy. An American













*63

editor worries his hair gray to see that no typographical mistakesappear on the pages o£ his magazine. The Chinese editor is wiserthan that. He wants to leave his readers the supreme satisfactionof discovering a few typographical mistakes for themselves. Morethan that, a Chinese magazine can begin printing serial fictionand forget about it halfway. In America it might bring the roofdown on the editors, but in China it doesn't matter, simply becauseit doesn't matter. American engineers in building bridges calculateso finely and exacdy as to make the two ends come together withinone-tenth of an inch. But when two Chinese begin to dig a tunnelfrom both sides of a mountain, both come out on the other side.The Chinese’s firm conviction is that it doesn’t matter so long as atunnel is dug through, and if we have two instead of one, why, wehave a double track to boot. Provided you are not in a hurry, twotunnels are as good as one, dug somehow, finished somehow and ifthe train can get through somehow. And the Chinese are extremelypunctual, provided you give them plenty of time to do a thing.They always finish a thing on schedule, provided the schedule islong enough.

The tempo of modern industrial life forbids this kind of gloriousand magnificent idling. But worse than that, it imposes upon usa different conception of time as measured by the clock, andeventually turns the human being into a clock himself. This sortof thing is bound to come to China, as is evident, for instance ina factory of twenty thousand workers. The luxurious prospect oftwenty thousand workers coming in at their own sweet pleasureat all hours is, of course, somewhat terrifying. Nevertheless, this iswhat makes life so hard and hectic. A man who has to be punc-tually at a certain place at five o’clock has the whole afternoonfrom one to five ruined for him already. Every American adultis arranging his time on the pattern of the schoolboy—three o’clockfor this, five o’clock for that, six-thirty for change of dress; six-fiftyfor entering the taxi and seven o’clock for emerging into a hotelroom. It just makes life not worth living.

And Americans have now come to such a sad state that they are













THE IMPORTANCE OF LOAFING

164

booked up not only for the following day, or the following week,but even for the following month. An appointment three weeksahead of time is a thing unknown in China. And when a Chinesereceives an invitation card, happily he never has to say whetherhe is going to be present or not. He can put down on the invitationlist “coming” if he accepts, or “thanks” if he declines, but in the ma-jority of cases the invited party merely writes the word “know,”which is a statement of fact that he knows of the invitation andnot a statement of intention. An American or a European leavingShanghai can tell me that he is going to attend a committee meet-ing in Paris on April 19, 1938, at three o’clock and that he will bearriving in Vienna on May 21st by the seven o’clock train. If anafternoon is to be condemned and executed, must we announceits execution so early? Cannot a fellow travel and be lord of him-self, arriving when he likes and taking departure when he likes?

But above all, the American’s inability to loaf comes direcdy fromhis desire for doing things and in his placing action above being.We should demand that there be character in our lives as we de-mand there be character in all great art worthy of the name. Un-fortunately, character is not a thing which can be manufacturedovernight. Like the quality of mellowness in wine, it is acquiredby standing still and by the passage of time. The desire of Ameri-can old men and women for action, trying in this way to gaintheir self-respect and the respect of the younger generation, is whatmakes them look so ridiculous to an Oriental. Too much action inan old man is like a broadcast of jazz music from a megaphoneon top of an old cathedral. Is it not sufficient that the old peopleare something? Is it necessary that they must be forever doingsomething? The loss of the capacity for loafing is bad enough inmen of middle age, but the same loss in old age is a crime com-mitted against human nature.

Character is always associated with something old and takestime to grow, like the beautiful facial lines of a man in middleage, lines that are the steady imprint of the man’s evolving char-acter. It is somewhat difficult to see character in a type of life where













THREE AMERICAN VICES

165

every man is throwing away his last year’s car and trading it infor the new model. As are the things we make, so are we ourselves.In 1937 every man and woman look 1937, and in 1938 every manand woman will look 1938. We love old cathedrals, old furniture,old silver, old dictionaries and old prints, but we have entirely for-gotten about the beauty of old men. I think an appreciation of thatkind of beauty is essential to our life, for beauty, it seems to me, iswhat is old and mellow and well-smoked.

Sometimes a prophetic vision comes to me, a beautiful vision ofa millennium when Manhattan will go slow, and when the Amer-ican “go-getter” will become an Oriental loafer. American gentle-men will float in skirts and slippers and amble on the sidewalksof Broadway with their hands in their pockets, if not with bothhands stuck in their sleeves in the Chinese fashion. Policemen willexchange a word of greeting with the slow-devil at the crossings,and the drivers themselves will stop and accost each other andinquire after their grandmothers’ health in the midst of traffic.Some one will be brushing his teeth outside his shopfront, talkingthe while placidly with his neighbors, and once in a while, anabsent-minded scholar will sail by with a limp volume rolled upand tucked away in his sleeve. Lunch counters will be abolished,and people will be lolling and lounging in soft, low armchairs inan Automat, while others will have learned the art of killing awhole afternoon in some cafe. A glass of orange juice will last halfan hour, and people will learn to sip wine by slow mouthfuls,punctuated by delightful, chatty remarks, instead of swallowing itat a gulp. Registration m a hospital will be abolished, “emergencywards” will be unknown, and patients will exchange their philoso-phy with their doctors. Fire engines will proceed at a snail’s pace,their staff stopping on the way to gaze at and dispute over thenumber of passing wild geese in the sky. It is too bad that thereis no hope of this kind of a millennium on Manhattan ever beingrealized. There might be so many more perfect idle afternoons.













Chapter Eight

THE ENJOYMENT OF THE HOMEI. On Getting Biological

IT has seemed to me that the final test of any civilization is, whattype of husbands and wives and fathers and mothers does it turnout? Besides the austere simplicity of such a question, every otherachievement of civilization—art, philosophy, literature and materialliving—pales into insignificance.

This is a dose of soothing medicine that I have always given tomy countrymen engaged in the head-racking task of comparingChinese and Western civilizations, and it has become a trick withme, for the medicine always works. It is natural that the Chinesestudent of Western life and learning, whether in China or studyingabroad, is dazzled by the brilliant achievements of the West, frommedicine, geology, astronomy to tall skyscrapers, beautiful motorhighways and natural-color cameras. He is either enthusiastic aboutsuch achievements, or ashamed of China for not having madesuch achievements, or both. An inferiority complex sets in, and inthe next moment you may find him the most arrogant, chauvin-istic defender of the Oriental civilization, without knowing whathe is talking about. Probably as a gesture, he will condemn thetall skyscrapers and the beautiful motor highways, although Ihaven’t yet found one that condemns a good camera. His plight issomewhat pathetic, for that disqualifies him for judging the Eastand the West sanely and dispassionately. Perplexed and dazzledand harrassed by such thoughts of inferiority, he has great needof what the Chinese call a medicine for “calming the heart” toallay his fever.

The suggestion of such a test as I propose has the strange effectof leveling all mankind by brushing aside all the non-essentials ofcivilization and culture and bringing all under a simple and dearequation. All the other achievements of civilization are then seenas merely means toward the end of turning out better husbands

166

167

and wives and fathers and mothers. Insofar as ninety per cent ofmankind are husbands or wives and one hundred per cent haveparents, and insofar as marriage and the home constitute the mostintimate side of a man’s life, it is clear that that civilization whichproduces better wives and husbands and fathers and mothers makesfor a happier human life, and is therefore a higher type of civiliza-tion. The quality of men and women we live with is much moreimportant than the work they achieve, and every girl ought to begrateful for any civilization that can present her with a betterhusband. Such things are relative, and ideal husbands and wivesand fathers and mothers are to be found in every age and country.Probably the best way to get good husbands and wives is by eugen-ics, which saves us a great deal of trouble in educating wives andhusbands. On the other hand, a civilization which ignores the homeor relegates it to a minor position is apt to turn out poorer products.

I realize that I am getting biological. I am biological, and so isevery man and woman. There is no use saying, "Let’s get biologi-cal,” because we are so whether we like it or not. Every man ishappy biologically, angry biologically, or ambitious biologically,or religious or peace-loving biologically, although he may not beaware of it. As biological beings, there is no getting around thefact that we are all born as babies, suck at mothers’ breasts andmarry and give birth to other babies. Every man is born of awoman, and almost every man lives with a woman through life andis the father of boys and girls, and every woman is also born of awoman, and almost every woman lives with a man for life and givesbirth to other children. Some have refused to become parents, liketrees and flowers that refuse to produce seeds to perpetuate theirown species, but no man can refuse to have parents, as no tree canrefuse to grow from a seed. So then we come to the basic fact thatthe most primary relationship in life is the relationship betweenman and woman and the child, and no philosophy of life can becalled adequate or even called philosophy at all unless it deals withthis essential relationship.

But the mere relationship between man and woman is not suffi-













dent; the relationship must result in babies, or it is incomplete. Nocivilization has any excuse for depriving a man or woman of hisor her right to have babies. I understand that this is a very realproblem at present, that there are many men and women todaywho don’t get married, and many others who, after getting married,refuse to have babies for one reason or another. My point of viewis, whatever the reason may be, the fact of a man or woman leavingthis world without children is the greatest crime he or she cancommit against himself or herself. If sterility is due to the body,then the body is degenerate and wrong; if it is due to the highcost of living, then the high cost of living is wrong; if it is due toa too high standard of marriage, then the too high standard ofmarriage is wrong; if it is due to a false philosophy of individualism,then the philosophy of individualism is wrong; and if it is due tothe entire fabric of social system, then the entire fabric of socialsystem is wrong. Perhaps men and women of the twenty-first cen-tury will come to see this truth when we have made better progressin the science of biology and there is a better understanding ofourselves as biological beings. I am quite convinced that thetwentieth century will be the century of biology, as the nineteenthcentury was the century of comparative natural science. Whenman comes to understand himself better and realizes the futilityof warring against his own instincts, with which nature hasendowed him, man will appreciate more such simple wisdom. Wesee already signs of this growing biological and medical wisdom,when we hear the Swiss psychologist Jung advise his rich womenpatients to go back to the country and raise chickens, children andcarrots. The trouble with rich women patients is that they arenot functioning biologically, or their biological functioning is dis-gracefully low-grade.

Man has not learned to live with woman, since history began.The strange thing is that no man has lived without a woman, inspite of that fact. No man can speak disparagingly of woman if herealizes that no one has come into this world without a mother.From birth to death, he is surrounded by women, as mother, wife













ON GETTING BIOLOGICAL 169

and daughters, and even if he does not marry, he has still to dependon his sister, like William Wordsworth, or depend on his house-keeper, like Herbert Spencer. No fine philosophy is going to save hissoul if he cannot establish a proper relationship with his mother orhis sister, and if he cannot establish a proper relationship even withhis housekeeper, may God have pity on him!

There is a certain pathos in a man who has not arrived at a properrelationship with woman and who has led a warped moral life,like Oscar Wilde, who still exclaims, “Man cannot live with awoman, nor can he live without her!” So that it seems humanwisdom has not progressed an inch farther between the writer ofa Hindu tale and Oscar Wilde at the beginning of the twentiethcentury, for that writer of the Hindu tale of the Creation ex-pressed essentially the same thought four thousand years ago.According to this story of the Creation, in creating woman, Godtook of the beauty of the flowers, the song of the birds, the colorsof the rainbow, the kiss of the breeze, the laughter of the waves,the gentleness of the lamb, the cunning of the fox, the waywardnessof the clouds and the fickleness of the shower, and wove them intoa female being and presented her to man as his wife. And theHindu Adam was happy and he and his wife roved about onthe beautiful earth. After a few days, Adam came to God and said,“Take this woman away from me, for I cannot live with her.”And God listened to his request and took Eve away. Adam thenbecame lonely and was still unhappy, and after a few days he cameto God again and said, “Give me back my woman, for I cannotlive without her” Again God listened to his request and returnedhim Eve. After a few days again, Adam came to God and asked,“Please take back this Eve that Thou has created, for I swear Icannot live with her.” In His infinite wisdom God again consented.When finally Adam came a fourth time and complained that hecould not live without his female companion, God made himpromise that he was not going to change his mind again and that hewas going to throw in his lot with her. for better and for worse,













and live together on this earth as best they knew how. I do notthink the picture has essentially changed much, even today.

II. Celibacy a Freak of Civilization

The taking o£ such a simple and natural biological viewpointimplies two conflicts, first, the conflict between individualism andthe family, and second, a deeper conflict between the sterile philoso-phy of the intellect and the warmer philosophy of the instinct. Forindividualism and worship of the intellect are likely to blind a manto the beauties of home life, and of the two, I think the first isnot so wicked as the second. A man believing in individualism andcarrying it to its logical consequences can still be a very intelligentbeing, but a man believing in the cold head as against the warmheart is a fool. For the collectivism of the family as a social unit,there can be substitutes, but for the loss of the mating and paternal-maternal instincts, there can be none.

We have to start with the assumption that man cannot livealone in this world and be happy, but must associate himself witha group around him and greater than himself. Man’s self is notlimited by his bodily proportions, for there is a greater self whichextends as far as his mental and social activities go. In whatever ageand country and under whatever form of government, the real lifethat means anything to a man is never co-extensive with his countryor his age, but consists in that smaller circle of his acquaintancesand activities which we call the “greater self.” In this social unithe lives and moves and has his being. Such a social unit may bea parish, or a school, or a prison, or a business firm, or a secretsociety or a philanthropic organization. These may take the placeof the home as a social unit, and sometimes entirely displace it.Religion itself or sometimes a big political movement may consumea man’s whole being. But of all such groups, the home remains theonly natural and biologically real, satisfying and meaningful unit ofour existence. It is natural because every man finds himself alreadyin a home when he is born, and also because it remains with one for













life; and it is biologically real because the blood relationship lendsthe notion of such a greater self a visible reality. One who doesnot make a success of this natural group life cannot be expectedto make a success of life in other groups. Confucius says, “Theyoung should learn to be filial in the home and respectful in society;they should be conscientious and honest, and love all people andassociate with the kindly gendemen. If after acting on these pre-cepts, they still have energy left, let them read boo\s/' Apart fromthe importance of this group life, man expresses and fulfilshimself fully and reaches the highest development of his personalityonly in the harmonious complementing of a suitable member of theother sex.

Woman, who has a deeper biological sense than man, knows this.Subconsciously all Chinese girls dream of the red wedding petticoatand the wedding sedan, and all Western girls dream of the weddingveil and wedding bells. Nature has endowed women with toopowerful a maternal instinct for it to be easily put out of the wayby an artificial civilization. I have no doubt that nature conceivesof woman chiefly as a mother, even more than as a mate, andhas endowed her with mental and moral characteristics which areconductive to her role as mother, and which find their true explana-tion and unity in the maternal instinct—realism, judgment, patiencewith details, love of the" small and helpless, desire to take care ofsomebody, strong animal love and hatred, great personal and emo-tional bias and a generally personal oudook on things. Philosophy,therefore, has gone far astray when it departs from nature’s ownconception and'tries to make women happy without taking intoaccount this maternal instinct which is the dominant trait andcentral explanation of her entire being. Thus with all uneducatedand sanely educated women, the maternal instinct is never sup-pressed, comes to light in childhood and grows stronger andstronger through adolescence to maturity, while with man, thepaternal instinct seldom becomes conscious until after thirty^five, or in any case until he has a son or daughter five years old.I do not think that a man of twenty-five ever thinks about be-













coming a father. He merely falls in love with a girl and acciden-tally produces a baby and forgets all about it, while his wife’sthoughts are occupied with nothing else, until one day in histhirties he suddenly becomes aware that he has a son or daughterwhom he can take to the market and parade before his friends,and only then does he begin to feel paternal. Few men of twentyor twenty-five are not amused at the idea of their becoming afather, and beyond amusement, there is little thought spent on it,whereas having a baby, even anticipating one, is probably the mostserious thing that ever comes to a woman’s life and changes herentire being to the point of affecting a transformation of her char-acter and habits. The world becomes a different world for herwhen a woman becomes an expectant mother. Thenceforth she hasno doubt whatever in her mind as to her mission in life or thepurpose of her existence. She is wanted. She is needed. And shefunctions. I have seen the most pampered and petted onlydaughter of a rich Chinese family growing to heroic statureand losing sleep for months when her child was ill. In nature’sscheme, no such paternal instinct is necessary and none is providedfor, for man, like the drake or the gander, has litde concern overhis offspring otherwise than contributing his part. Women, there-fore, suffer most psychologically when this central motive powerof their being is not expressed and does not function. No one needtell me how kind American civilization is to women, when itpermits so many nice women to go unmarried through no fault oftheir own.

I have no doubt that the maladjustment in American marriages isvery largely due to this discrepancy between the maternal instinctof women and the paternal instinct of men. The so-called “emo-tional immaturity” of American young men can find no other ex-planation than in this biological fact; the men being brought upunder a social system of oven-pampering of youth do not possessthe natural check of responsible thinking which the girls havethrough their greater maternal instinct. It would be ruinous ifnature did not provide women with sufficient soberness when they













are physiologically ready to become mothers, so nature just doesit. Sons of poor families have responsible thinking drilled intotheir system by harder circumstances, thus leaving only the pam-pered sons of rich families, in a nation which worships and pampersyouth, in an ideal condition for developing into emotional and socialincompetents.

After all, we are concerned only with the question: “How tolive a happy life?” and no one’s life can be happy unless beyondthe superficial attainments of the external life, the deeper springsof his or her character are touched and find a normal oudet.Celibacy as an ideal in the form of “personal career” carries withit not only an individualistic, but also a foolishly intellectualistictaint, and is for the latter reason to be condemned. I always suspectthe confirmed bachelor or unmarried woman who remains so bychoice of being an ineffectual intellectualist, too much engrossedwith his or her own external achievements, believing that he or shecan, as a human being, find happiness in an effective substitute forthe home life, or find, an intellectual, artistic or professional inter-est which is deeply satisfying.

I deny this. This spectacle of individualism, unmarried and child-less, trying to find a substitute for a full and satisfying life in“careers” and personal achievements and preventing cruelty to ani-mals has struck me always as somewhat foolish and comical. Itis psychologically symptomatic in the case of old maiden ladiestrying to sue a circus manager for cruelty to tigers because theirsuspicion has been aroused by whipmarks on the animals’ backs.Their protests seem to come out of a misplaced maternal instinct,applied to a wrong species, as if true tigers ever thought anythingof a little whipping. These women are vaguely groping for a placein life and trying very hard to make it sound convincing to them-selves and to others.

The rewards of political, literary and artistic achievement producein their authors only a pale, intellectual chuckle, while the rewardsof seeing one’s own children grow up big and strong are wordlessand immensely real. How many authors and artists are satisfied













with their accomplishments in their old age, and how many regardthem as more than mere products of their pastime, justifiable chieflyas means of earning a living? It is said that a few days before hisdeath, Herbert Spencer had the eighteen volumes of The SyntheticPhilosophy piled on his lap and, as he felt their cold weight,wondered if he would not have done better could he have a grand-child in their stead. Would not wise Elia have exchanged thewhole lot of his essays for one of his “dream children?” It is badenough to have ersatz-sugar, ersatz-butx.tr and ersatz-cotton, but itmust be deplorable to have ersatz-children! I do not question thatthere was a moral and aesthetic satisfaction to John D. Rockefellerin the feeling that he had contributed so much to human happinessover such a wide area. At the same time, I do not doubt that sucha moral or aesthetic satisfaction was extremely thin and pale, easilyupset by a stupid stroke on the golf course, and that his real, lastingsatisfaction was John D., Jr.

To look at it from another aspect, happiness is largely a matterof finding one’s life work, the work that one loves. I questionwhether ninety per cent of the men and women occupied in aprofession have found the work that they really love. The muchvaunted statement, “I love my work,” I suspect, must always betaken with a grain of salt. One never says, “I love my home,” be-cause it is taken for granted. The average business man goes tohis office in very much the same mood as Chinese women producebabies: everybody is doing it, and what else can I do? “I love mywork,” so says everybody. Such a statement is a lie in the case ofelevator men and telephone girls and dentists, and a gross exaggera-tion in the case of editors, real estate agents and stock brokers.Except for the Arctic explorer or the scientist in his laboratory, en-gaged in the work of discovery, I think, to li\e one’s work, findingit congenial, is the best we can hope for. But even allowing forthe figure of speech, there is no comparison between one’s love ofhis work and the mother’s love of her children. Many men havedoubts about their true vocation, and shift from one to another, butthere is never a doubt in a mother’s mind concerning her life













CELIBACY A FREAK OF CIVILIZATION 175

work, which is the taking care and guiding of the little ones.Successful politicians have thrown up politics, successful editorshave thrown up magazine work, successful aviators have givenup flying, successful boxers have given up the ring, and successfulactors and actresses have given up the stage, but imagine mothers,successful or unsuccessful, giving up motherhood! It is unheard of.The mother has a feeling that she is wanted; she has found a placein life, and has the deep conviction that no one in the world cantake her place, a conviction more profound than Hider’s that hemust save Germany. And what can give man or woman a greater,deeper happiness than the satisfaction of knowing he or she has adefinite place in life? Is it not common sense to say that whereasless than five per cent are lucky enough to find and be engaged inthe work they love, a hundred per cent of parents find the work oflooking after their children the most deep and engrossing of theirlife motives ? Is it not true, therefore, that the chance of finding realhappiness is surer and greater for a woman if she is engaged as a'mother rather than as an architect, since nature never fails? Is it nottrue that marriage is the best profession for women?

My feminist readers must have sensed this all along, and bit bybit have begun trembling with rage as I grew more and moreenthusiastic about the home, knowing that the cross of the homeeventually must be borne by women. Such is exacdy my intentionand my thesis. It remains to be seen who is kinder to women, forit is with women’s happiness alone that we are concerned, happinessnot in terms of social achievements, but in terms of the depths ofpersonal being. Even from the point of view of fitness or competency,I have no doubt that there are fewer bank presidents really fit fortheir jobs than women fit for mothers. We have incompetentdepartment chiefs, incompetent business managers, incompe-tent bankers, and incompetent presidents, but we rarely have incom-petent mothers. So then women are fit for motherhood, they wantit and they know it. I understand that there has been a swing in theright direction away from the feminist ideal among the Americancollege girls of today, that the majority of them are able to look













at life sanely enough to say openly that they want to get married.The ideal woman for me is one who loves her cosmetics alongwith her mathematics, and who is more feminine than feminist.Let them have their cosmetics, and if they still have energy left, asConfucius would say, let them play with mathematics also.

It is to be understood that we are talking of the average idealof the average man and woman. There are distinguished andtalented women as there are distinguished and talented men, whosecreative ability accounts for the world’s real progress. If I ask theaverage woman to regard marriage as the ideal profession and tobear babies and perhaps also wash dishes, I also ask the averageman to forget the arts and just earn the* family bread, by cuttinghair or shining shoes or catching thieves or tinkering pots orwaiting at tables. Since some one has to bear the babies and takecare of them and see them safely through measles and raise themto be good and wise citizens, and since men are entirely ineffectualin bearing babies and frightfully awkward in holding and bathingthem, naturally I look to the women to do the job. I’m not so surewhich is the nobler work—comparing the averages—raising babies,or cutting people’s hair or shining people’s shoes or opening doorsat department stores. I don’t see why women have to complainabout washing dishes if their husbands have to open doors forstrangers at department stores. Men used to stand behind counters,and now girls have rushed in to take their place behind counterswhile the men open the doors, and they are welcome to it, ifthey think it is a nobler kind of work. Considered as a means ofliving, no work is noble and no work is ignoble. And I am notso sure that checking men’s hats is necessarily more romantic thanmending husbands’ socks. The difference between the hat-checkgirl and the sock darner at home is that the sock darner has got aman over whose destiny it is her privilege to preside, while the hat-check girl hasn’t. It is to be hoped, of course, that the wearer of thesocks is worth the woman’s labor, but it would be also unwarrantedpessimism to lay down as a general rule that his socks are notworth her mending. Men are not all quite as worthless as that. The













177

important point is that the general assumption that home life, withits important and sacred task of raising and influencing the youngof the race, is too low for women can hardly be called a sane socialattitude, and it is possible only in a culture where woman andthe home and motherhood are not sufficiendy respected.

III. On Sex Appeal

Behind the facade of woman’s rights and increased social privi-leges for women, I always think woman is not given her due evenin modern America. Let us hope that my impression is incorrect,and that with the increase of woman’s rights, chivalry has notdecreased. For the two things do not necessarily go together, chiv-alry or true respect for women and allowing women to spend money,to go where they please, to hold executive jobs and to vote. It hasseemed to me (a citizen of the Old World with the Old Worldoudook) that there are things which matter and things which don’t,and that American women are far ahead of their Old World sistersin all things that don’t matter, and remain very much in the samesituation in all things that do. Anyway, there is no clear index ofa greater chivalry m America than in Europe. What real authoritythe American woman does exercise is still from her traditional oldthrone—the hearth—over which she presides as the happy minister-ing angel. I have seen such angels, but only in the sanctity of aprivate home, where a woman glides along in the kitchen or in theparlor, true mistress of a home consecrated to family love. Some-how she suffuses a radiance which would be unthinkable or outof place in an office.

Is it merely because woman is more charming and more grace-ful in a chiffon dress than m a business jacket, or is it merely myimagination? The gist of the matter seems to lie in the fact thatwomen at home are like fish in water. Clothe women in busi-ness jackets and men will regard them as co-workers with the rightto criticize, but let them float about in georgette or chiffon oneout of the seven office hours in the day and men will give up













any idea of competing with them, and will merely sit back andwonder and gasp. Submitted to business routine, women are dis-ciplined quite easily and make better routine workers than men,but the moment the office atmosphere is changed, as when as abusiness staff meet at a wedding tea, and you will find that womenimmediately come into their own by advising their men colleaguesor their boss to get a haircut, or where to get the best lotion forcuring dandruff. In the office, women talk with civility; outside theoffice, they talk with authority.

Frankly speaking from a man’s point of view—there is no usein pretending to speak otherwise—I think that the appearance ofwomen in public has added greatly to the charm and amenities oflife, life in the office and in the street, for the benefit of men; thatvoices in the offices are softer, colors gayer and the desks neater,I think also that not a whit of the sexual attraction or desire forsexual attraction provided by nature has changed, but that inAmerica, men are having a grander time because American womenare trying harder to please the men than, for instance, Chinesewomen, so far as attention to sex appeal is concerned. And myconclusion is that in the West, people think too much of sex andtoo litde of women.

Western women spend almost as much time fixing their hairas Chinese women used to do; attend to their make-up moreopenly, constantly and ubiquitously; diet, exercise, massage andread advertisements for keeping the figure more assiduously; kicktheir legs up and down in bed to reduce their waistline morereligiously; lift their faces and dye their hair, at an age at whichno Chinese women ever think of doing such a thing. Theyare spending more money, not less, on lotions and perfumes, andthere is a bigger businessinbeauty aids and day creams, night creams,vanishing creams, foundation creams, face creams, hand creams,pore creams, lemon creams, sun-tan oils, wrinkle oils, turtle oils,and every conceivable variety of perfumed oil. Perhaps it is simplybecause American women have more time and more money tospend. Perhaps they dress to please men and undress to please













179

themselves, or the other way round, or both. Perhaps the reasonis merely that Chinese women have fewer available modern beautyaids, for I hesitate very much to draw a distinction between raceswhen it comes to woman’s desire to attract men. Chinese womenwere trying hard enough to please men by binding their ownfeet half a century ago, and now they have gayly capered their wayfrom their “bow shoes” into high heels. I am not usually a prophet,but I can say with prophetic conviction that in the immediatefuture, Chinese women will be having their morning ten minutesof kicking their legs up and down in order to please their husbandsor themselves. Yet the obvious fact is there: American women atpresent seem to be trying harder to please the men by spendingmore thought on their bodily sex appeal and dress with betterunderstanding of sex appeal. The net result is that women as awhole, as seen in the parks and in the streets, have better figuresand are better dressed, thanks to the continuous tremendous dailyefforts of women to keep their figure—to the great delight of men.But I imagine how it must wear on their nerves. And when Ispeak of sex appeal, I mean it in contrast to motherhood appeal, orwoman’s appeal as a whole. I suspect this phase of modern civiliza-tion has stamped its character on modern love and marriage.

Art has made the modern man sex conscious. I have no doubtabout it. First art and then commercial exploitation of the woman’sbody, down to its last curve and muscular undulation and thelast painted toe-nail. I have never seen every part of a woman’sbody so completely exploited commercially, and find it hard tounderstand how American women have submitted so sweetly to thisexploitation of their bodies. To an Oriental, it is hard to square thiscommercial exploitation of the female body with respect for women.Artists call it beauty, theater-goers call it art, only producers andmanagers honestly call it sex appeal, and men generally have agood time. It is typical of a man-made and man-ruled society thatwomen are stripped for commercial exploitation and men almostnever, outside a few acrobats. On the stage, one sees women nearlyundressed, while the men still keep their morning coats and black













180 THE ENJOYMENT OF THE HOME

ties; in a woman-ruled world, one would certainly see the men halfundressed while the women kept their skirts. Artists study maleand female anatomy equally, but somehow find it difficult toturn their study of the male body beautiful to commercial account.The theater strips to tease, but generally strips the women to teasethe men, and does not strip the men to tease the women. Even inthe higher-class shows, where they try to be both artistic and moral,people allow the women to be artistic and the men to be moral,but never insist on the women being moral and the men artistic.(All men actors in vaudeville shows merely try to be funny, even indancing, which is supposed to be “artistic.”) The commercial adver-tisements pick up the theme and play it up in endless variations,so that today all a man needs to do when he wants to be “artistic”is to take a copy of a magazine and run through the advertisingsection. The result is, the women themselves are so impressedwith the duty of being artistic that they unconsciously accept thedoctrine and starve themselves or submit to massage and rigorousdiscipline, in order to contribute toward a more beautiful world.The less clear-minded are almost led to think that their only wayof getting a man and holding him is by sex appeal.

I consider that this over-emphasis on sex appeal involves an ado-lescent and inadequate view of the entire nature of woman, withcertain consequences upon the character of love and marriage,whose conception becomes also false or inadequate. Woman is thusmore thought of as a mating possibility than as a presiding spiritover the hearth. Woman is wife and mother both, but with theemphasis on sex as such, the notion of a mate displaces the notionof the mother, and I insist that woman reaches her noblest statusonly as mother, and that a wife who by choice refuses to becomea mother immediately loses a great part of her dignity and serious-ness and stands in danger of becoming a plaything- To me, anywife without children is a mistress, and any mistress with childrenis a wife, no matter what their legal standing is. The children en-noble and sanctify the mistress, and the absence of children degrades













ON SEX APPEAL 181

the wife. It is a truism that many modern women refuse to havebabies because pregnancy would spoil their figures.

The amorous instinct has its proper contribution to make tothe enrichment of life, yet it can be overdone to the detriment ofwoman herself. The strain of keeping up sex appeal necessarily fallsupon the nerves of women and not of men. It is also unfair, for byplacing a premium upon beauty and youth, middle-aged womenare confronted with the hopeless task of fighting their gray hairand time’s course. A Chinese poet has already warned us that thefountain of youth is a hoax, that no man can yet “tie a string tothe sun” and hold back its course. Middle-aged woman’s effortto keep up sex appeal thus becomes an arduous race with the years,which is quite senseless. Only humor can save the situation. Ifthere is no use carrying on a hopeless fight against old age andwhite hair, why then not call the white hair beautiful? So singsChu Tu:

I’ve gained white hairs, some hundreds, on my head.

As often as they’re plucked, still more grow in their stead.

Why not stop plucking, then, and let the white alone?

Who has the time to fight against the silvery thread?

The whole thing is unnatural and unfair. It is unfair to the motherand older women, because as surely as a heavyweight championmust hand over his tide in a few years to a younger challengerand an old champion horse must yield in a few years to a youngerhorse, so must the old women fight a losing batde against theyounger women, and after all they are all fighting against theirown sex. It is foolish, dangerous, and hopeless for middle-agedwomen to meet younger women on the issue of sex appeal. It is alsofoolish because there is more to a woman than her sex, and whilewooing and courtship are necessarily largely based on physical at-traction, maturer men and women should have outgrown it.

Man, we know, is the most amorous animal in the zoologicalkingdom. Besides this amorous instinct, however, there is anequally strong parental instinct, resulting in the human family life.













THE ENJOYMENT OF THE HOME

The amorous and paternal instincts we share in common withmost of the animals, but the beginnings of a human family lifeseem to be found among the gibbons. There is a danger, however,of the amorous instinct subjugating the family instinct in an over-sophisticated culture surrounding man with constant sexual stimuliin art, the movies and the theatre. In such a culture, the necessityof the family ideal can be easily forgotten, especially when in adi-tion there is a current of individualistic ideas. In such a society,therefore, we get a strange view of marriage, as consisting of eternalkissing, generally ending with the wedding bells, and a strangeview of woman, chiefly as man’s mate and not as mother. The idealwoman, then, becomes a young woman with perfect physical pro-portions and physical charm, whereas for me, woman is nevermore beautiful than when she is standing over a cradle, nevermore serious and dignified than when she is holding a baby inher breast and leading a child of four or five years by the hand,and never more happy than, as I have seen in a Western painting,when she is lying in bed against a pillow and playing with a babyat her breast. Perhaps I have got a motherhood complex, but thatis all right because psychological complexes never do a Chinese anyharm. Any suggestion of an Oedipus complex or father-and-daugh-ter complex, or of a son-and-mother complex, in a Chinese alwaysseems to me ridiculous and unconvincing. I suggest that my viewof woman is not due to a motherhood complex, but is due to theinfluence of the Chinese family ideal.

IV. The Chinese Family Ideal

I rather think that the Genesis story of the Creation needs to berewritten all over again. In the Chinese novel Red Chamber Dream,the boy hero, a sentimental mollycoddle very fond of female com-pany and admiring his beautiful female cousins intensely and allbut sorry for himself for being a boy, says that, “Woman is madeof water and man is made of clay,” the reason being that he thinkshis female cousins are sweet and pure and clever, while he himself













and his boy companions are ugly and muddle-headed and bad-tempered. If the writer of the Genesis story had been a Paoyii andknew what he was talking about, he would have written a differentstory. God took a handful of mud, molded it into human shapeand breathed into its nostrils a breath, and there was Adam. ButAdam began to crack and fall to pieces, and so He took some water,and with the water He molded the clay, and this water whichentered into Adam’s being was called Eve, and only in havingEve in his being was Adam’s life complete. At least that seems tome to be the symbolic significance of marriage. Woman is waterand man is day, and water permeates and molds the clay, and theclay holds the water and gives its substance, in which water movesand lives and has its full being.

The analogy of clay and water in human marriage was long agoexpressed by Madame Kuan, wife of the great Yuan painter ChaoMengfu and herself a painter and teacher at the Imperial CourtWhen in their middle age Chao’s ardor was cooling, or anywaywhen he was thinking of taking a mistress, Madame Kuan wrotethe following poem, which touched his heart and changed his mind:

’Twixt you and meThere’s too much emotion.

That’s the reason whyThere’s such a commotion!

Take a lump of clay.

Wet it, pat it,

And make an image of me,

And an image of you.

Then smash them, crash them,

And add a little water.

Break them and re-make themInto an image of you,

And an image of me.

Then in my clay, there’s a little of you.

And in your clay, there’s a litde of me.

And nothing ever shall us sever;

Living, we’ll sleep in the same quilt,

And dead, we’ll be buried together.













It is a well-known fact that Chinese society and Chinese life areorganized on the basis of the family system. This system deter-mines and colors the entire Chinese pattern of life. Whence camethis family ideal of life? It is a question that has seldom beenasked, for the Chinese seem to take it for granted, while foreignstudents do not feel competent to enter into the question. Confuciusis reputed to have provided the philosophical foundation for thefamily system as the basis of all social and political life, with itstremendous emphasis on the husband-wife relationship as the foun-dation of all human relationships, on filial piety toward parents,annual visits to ancestral graves, ancestor worship, and the insti-tution of the ancestral hall.

Chinese ancestor worship has already been called a religion bycertain writers, and I believe this to a very great extent is correct.Its non-religious aspect is the exclusion or the much less significantplace of the supernatural element. The supernatural is left almostuntouched, and ancestor worship can go side by side with beliefin a Christian, a Buddhist, or a Mohammedan god. The ritualsof ancestor worship provide a form of religion and are both nat-ural and justifiable because all beliefs must have an outward symboland form. As it is, I do not think the respect paid to square woodentablets about fifteen inches long, inscribed with the names of an-cestors, is more religious or less so than the use of the picture ofthe King on a British postage stamp. In the first place, these an-cestral spirits are conceived less as gods than as human beings,continuing to be served as they were in their old age by their de-scendants. There is no prayer for gifts and no prayer for cure ofsickness, and none of the usual bargaining between the worshiperand the worshiped. In the second place, this ceremony of worship isno more than an occasion for pious remembrance of one’s departedancestors, on a day consecrated to family reunion and reflections ofgratitude on what the ancestor has done for the family. At best,it is only a poor substitute for celebrating the ancestor’s birthdaywhen he was alive, but in spirit it differs in no way from the celebra-tion of a parent’s birthday, or of Mother’s Day in America.













The only objection which led Christian missionaries to forbidChinese converts to participate in the ceremonies and communalfeasting and merrymaking of ancestor worship is that the worshipersare required to kneel down before the ancestral tablets, thus infring-ing upon the first of the Ten Commandments. This is about themost flagrant instance of lack of understanding on the part of theChristian missionaries. Chinese knees are not quite as precious asWestern knees, for we kneel down before emperors, magistrates andbefore our own parents on New Year’s Day, when they are living.Consequendy Chinese knees are naturally more flexible, and onedoesn’t become a heathen more or less by kneeling before an in-scribed wooden tablet, resembling a calendar block. On the otherhand, Chinese Christians in the villages and towns are forced tocut themselves off from the general community life by being for-bidden to participate in the general feasting and merrymaking, oreven to contribute money toward the theatrical performances usualon such an occasion. The Chinese Christians, therefore, practicallyexcommunicate themselves from their own clan.

There is hardly a question that, in many cases, this feeling ofpiety and of mystic obligation toward one’s own family actuallyamounted to a deeply religious attitude. We have, for instance, thecase of Yen Yuan, one of the greatest Confucianist leaders in theseventeenth century, who in his old age started out on a patheticjourney of search for his brother, in the hope that his brother mightbe found to have a son, since he himself had none. This followerof Confucianism, who believed in conduct more than in knowledge^was living in Szechuen. His brother had been missing for years.Tired of teaching the doctrines of Confucius, one day he felt whatamong missionaries would be regarded as a “divine call” to searchfor this lost brother. The situation was practically hopeless. Hehad no idea where his brother might be, or even if he were living.Travel was a highly perilous undertaking in those days, and thecountry was in disorder because of the collapse of the Ming re-gime. Still this old man set out on this truly religious journey,with no better means of locating his brother than pasting placards













on city gates and inns wherever he went. Thus he traveled fromWestern China to the northeastern provinces, covering over athousand miles, and only after years of desperate search, was hebrought to the home of his brother through the latter’s son recog-nizing his name on an umbrella left standing against a wall whilehe was in a public privy. His brother was then dead, but heachieved his goal, which was to find a male descendant for hisancestor’s family.

Why Confucius laid such emphasis on filial piety nobody knows,but it has been suggested by Dr. John C. H. Wu in an illumi-nating essay 1 that the reason was that Confucius was born with-out a father. The psychological reason is therefore similar to thatof the writer of Home, Sweet Home, who never knew a home inhis entire life. Had Confucius’ father been living when he was achild, the idea of fatherhood could not have been invested withsuch romantic glamour, and if his father had been living afterhe grew up, the result might have been still more disastrous. Hewould have been able to see his father’s foibles, and he mighthave found the precept of absolute piety somewhat difficult tolive up to. Anyway his father was dead when he was born, andnot only that, but Confucius did not even know where his father’sgrave was. He had been born out of wedlock, and his motherrefused to tell him who his father was. When his mother died,he buried her (cynically, I suppose) at the “Road of the FiveFathers,” and only after he had found out the location of hisfather’s grave from an old woman, did he provide for the burialof his parents together at another place.

We have to let this ingenious theory stand for what it is worth.But for the necessity of the family ideal, there is no lack of reasonsin Chinese literature. It starts out with a view of man not as anindividual, but as a member of a family unit, is backed by theview of life which I may call the “strcam-of-life” theory, andjustified by a philosophy which regards the fulfillment of man’snatural instincts as the ultimate goal of morals and politics.

1 “The Real Confucius/* T’ien Hsia Monthly (Shanghai), Vol. I, No. i.













The ideal of the family system is necessarily dead set againstthe ideal of personal individualism. No man, after all, lives as anindividual completely alone, and the idea of such an individual hasno reality to it. If we think of an individual and regard him asneither a son, nor a brother, nor a father, nor a friend, then whatis he? Such an individual becomes a metaphysical abstraction.And being biologically minded as the Chinese are, they naturallythink of a man’s biological relationships first. The family thenbecomes the natural biological unit of our existence, and marriageitself becomes a family affair, and not an individual affair.

In My Country and My People, I have pointed out the evilsof this all-engrossing family system, which can become a form ofmagnified selfishness, to the detriment of the state. But such evilsare inherent in all human systems, in the family system, as wellas in the individualism and nationalism of the West, because ofdefects in human nature. In China, man is always thought of asgreater and more important than the state, but he is never thoughtof as greater and more important than the family, because, apartfrom the family, he has no real existence. The evils of nationalismare just as apparent in modern Europe. The state can be easilytransformed into a monster, as it already is in some countries,swallowing up the individual’s liberty of speech, his freedom ofreligious conscience and belief, his personal honor, and even thelast and final goal of individual happiness. The theoretical conse-quences of such a collectivistic view are quite apparent in bothFascism and Communism, and in fact have been already logicallyworked out by Karl Marx. A total annihilation of the parentalinstinct seems to be aimed at by the Marxian state, in whichfamily affection and loyalty are openly denounced as bourgeoissentiments, sure to become extinct in a different material sur-rounding.2 How Karl Marx was quite so cocksure about thispoint in biology, I do not know. Wise in his economics, perhapshe was a moron in common sense. An American schoolboy wouldhave guessed that five thousand years were too short for the

2 The Communist Manifesto













atrophy of an instinct which had the momentum of a millionyears of development behind it. But such an argument, strange asit may seem, could appeal to a Western intellect as strictly logical.It is, in the words of the writer of the New Yor\ Time/ “Topics,”“consistency gone mad.” The conception of man waging a classwar in obedience to certain mechanistic laws naturally deprivesman of individual freedom of belief and action. According tosuch an extreme view, therefore, we have even less individualismthan under the family system.

In place of this individualism and nationalism of the West,there is then the family ideal in which man is not regarded as anindividual but as a member of a family and an essential part of

the great stream of family life. That is what I mean by the

“stream-of-life” theory. Human life as a whole may be regarded asconsisting of different racial streams of life, but it is the stream

of life in the family that a man feels and sees directly. In ac-

cordance with both a Chinese and Western analogy, we speakof the “family tree,” and every man’s hfe is but a section or abranch of that tree, growing upon the trunk and contributing byits very existence to its further growth and continuation. Humanlife, therefore, is inevitably seen as a growth or a continuance, inwhich every man plays a part or a chapter in the family history, withits obligations toward the family as a whole, bringing upon itselfand upon the family life shame or glory.

This sense of family consciousness and family honor is probablythe only form of team spirit or group consciousness in Chinese life.In order to play this game of life as well as, or better than, anotherteam, every member of the family must be careful not to spoilthe game, or to let his team down by making a false move. Heshould, if possible, try to bring the ball further down the field.A derelict son is a shame to himself and to his family in exactlythe same sense as a quarterback who makes a fumble and losesthe ball. And he who comes out on top in the civil examinationsis like a player who makes a touchdown. The glory is his ownand at the same time that of his family. The benefits of one’s be-













coming a chuangyuan (“No. 1” in the Imperial examinations),or even a third-class chinshih, are both sentimentally and materi-ally shared by members of his immediate family, his relatives,his clan, and even his town. For a hundred or two hundred yearsafterwards, the townspeople will still boast that they produced achuangyuan in such and such a reign. In comparison with thefamily and town rejoicing when a man got a chuangyuan orchinshih and came home to place a golden-painted tablet of honorhigh upon his ancestral hall, With his mother probably sheddingtears and the entire clan feeling themselves honored by the greatoccasion, the getting of a college diploma today is a pretty dulland tame affair.

In this picture of the family life, there is room for the greatestvariety and color. Man himself passes through the stages of child-hood, youth, maturity and old age: first being taken care of byothers, then taking care of others, and in old age again being takencare of by others; first obeying and respecting others, and laterbeing obeyed and respected in turn in proportion as he growsolder. Above all, color is lent to this picture by the presence ofwomen. Into this picture of the continuous family life comes woman,not as a decoration or a plaything, nor even essentially as a wife, butas a vital and essential part of the family tree—the very thingwhich makes continuity possible. For the strength of any partic-ular branch of a family depends so much upon the womanmarried into the home and the blood she contributes to the familyheritage. A wise patriarch is pretty careful to select women ofsound heritage, as a gardener is careful to select the proper strainfor grafting a branch. It is pretty well suspected that a man’s life,particularly his home life, is made or unmade by the wife hemarries, and the entire character of the future family is determinedby her. The health of one’s grandchildren and the type of familybreeding that they are going to receive (upon which great em-phasis is laid) depend entirely upon the breeding of the daughter-in-law herself. Thus there is a kind of amorphous and ill-definedeugenic system, based on belief in heredity and often placing













great emphasis on menti (literally “door and home” or lineageor family standing), but in any case based on standards of de-sirability in the health, beauty and breeding of the bride as seenby the eyes of the parents or grandparents of the family. Ingeneral, the emphasis is upon family breeding (in the same sensethat a Westerner would choose a girl from a “good home”),representing the fine old traditions of thrift, hard work, goodmanners and civility. And when sometimes a parent discovers tohis sorrow that his son has married a worthless daughter-in-lawwith no manners, he always secredy curses the other family fornot training their daughter better. Hence upon the mother andfather devolves the duty of training their daughters so that theyshall not be ashamed of them when they marry into anotherhousehold—as, for instance, when they do not know how to cookor how fo make a good New Year pudding.

According to the stream-of-life theory as seen in the familysystem, immortality is almost visible and touchable. Every grand-father seeing his grandchild going to school with a satchel feelsthat truly he is living over again m the life of the child, andwhen he touches the child’s hand or pinches his cheeks, he knowsit is flesh of his own flesh and blood of his own blood. His ownlife is nothing but a section of the family tree, or of the greatfamily stream of life flowing on forever, and therefore he ishappy to die. That is why a Chinese parent’s greatest concern isto see that his sons and daughters are properly married beforehe dies, for that is an even more important concern than the site ofhis own grave or the selection of a good coffin. For he cannotknow what kind of life his children are going to have until hesees with his own eyes what type of girls and men his sons anddaughters marry, and if the daughters-in-law and sons-in-law lookpretty satisfactory, he is quite willing to “dose his eyes withoutregret” on his deathbed.

The net result of such a conception of life is that one gets alengthened oudook on everything, for life is no more regardedas beginning and ending with that of the individual. The game













THE CHINESE FAMILY IDEAL 191

is continued by the team after the center or the quarterback isput out of action. Success and failure begin to take on a differentcomplexion. The Chinese ideal of life is to live so as not to be ashame to one’s ancestors and to have sons of whom one need notbe ashamed. A Chinese official when resigning office often quotesthe line:

Having sons, I am content with life;

Without office, my body is light.

The worst thing that can happen to a man, probably, is to haveunworthy sons who cannot “maintain the family glory” or eventhe family fortune. The millionaire father of a gambling son seeshis fortune dispersed already, the fortune that he has taken a lifetime to build up. When the son fails, the failure is absolute. Onthe other hand, a farsighted widow is able to endure years ofmisery and ignominy and even persecution, if she has a good boyof five. Chinese history and literature are full of such widowswho endured all kinds of hardships and persecutions, but wholived for the day when their sons should do well and prosper,and perhaps even become prominent citizens. The latest case isChiang Kai-shek himself, who as a boy was persecuted with hiswidowed mother by their neighbors. The widow did not fail solong as there was hope in her son. The success of widows in giv-ing their children a perfect education of character and morals,through woman’s generally more realistic sense, has often led meto think that fathers are totally unnecessary, so far as the up-bringing of children is concerned. The widow always laughs theloudest because she laughs last.

Such an arrangement of life in the family then, is satisfyingbecause a man’s life in all its biological aspects is well taken careof. That, after all, was Confucius’ chief concern. The final idealof government, as Confucius conceived it, was curiously biological:“The old shall be made to live in peace and security, the youngshall learn to love and be loyal, that inside the chamber theremay be no unmarried maids, and outside the chamber there may













be no unmarried males.” This is all tie more remarkable becauseit is not merely a statement of a side issue, but of the final goalof government. This is the humanist philosophy known astaeh’mg, or “fulfillment of instincts Confucius wanted to bepretty sure that all our human instincts are satisfied, because onlythus can we have moral peace through a satisfying life, andbecause only moral peace is truly peace. It is a kind of politicalideal which aims at making politics unnecessary, because it willbe a peace that is stable and based upon the human heart.

V. On Growing Old Gracefully

The Chinese family system, as I conceive it, is largely an ar-rangement of particular provision for the young and the old, forsince childhood and youth and old age occupy half of our life, itis important that the young and the old live a satisfactory life. Itis true that the young are more helpless and can take less careof themselves, but on the other hand, they can get along betterwithout material comforts than the old people. A child is oftenscarcely aware of material hardships, with the result that a poorchild is often as happy as, if not happier than, a rich child. Hemay go barefooted, but that is a comfort, rather than a hard-ship to him, whereas going barefooted is often an intolerablehardship for old people. This comes from the child’s greatervitality, the bounce of youth. He may have his temporary sorrows,but how easily he forgets them. He has no idea of money andno millionaire complex, as the old man has. At the worst, hecollects only cigar coupons for buying a pop-gun, whereas thedowager collects Liberty Bonds. Between the fun of these twokinds of collection there is no comparison. The reason is thechild is not yet intimidated by life as all grown-ups are. Hispersonal habits are as yet unformed and he is not a slave to aparticular brand of coffee, and he takes whatever comes along.He has very little racial prejudice and absolutely no religiousprejudice. His thoughts and ideas have not fallen into certain













193

ruts. Therefore, strange as it may seem, old people are even moredependent than the young because their fears are more definiteand their desires are more delimited.

Something of this tenderness toward old age existed alreadyin the primeval consciousness of the Chinese people, a feelingthat I can compare only to the Western chivalry and feeling oftenderness toward women. If the early Chinese people had anychivalry, it was manifested not toward women and children, buttoward the old people. That feeling of chivalry found clear ex-pression in Mencius in some such saying as, “The people withgrey hair should not be seen carrying burdens on the street,”which was expressed as the final goal of a good government.Mencius also described the four classes of the world’s most help-less people as: “The widows, widowers, orphans and old peoplewithout children.” Of these four classes the first two were to betaken care of by a political economy which should be so arrangedthat there would be no unmarried men and women. What wasto be done about the orphans Mencius did not say, so far as weknow, although orphanages have always existed throughout theages, as well as pensions for old people. Every one realizes, how-ever, that orphanages and old age pensions are poor substitutes forthe home. The feeling is that the home alone can provide anythingresembling a satisfactory arrangement for the old and the young.But for the young, it is to be taken for granted that not muchneed be said, since there is natural paternal affection. “Waterflows downwards and not upwards,” the Chinese always say, andtherefore the affection for parents and grandparents is somethingthat stands more in need of being taught by culture. A naturalman loves his children, but a cultured man loves his parents. Inthe end, the teaching of love and respect for old people becamea generally accepted principle, and if we are to believe some of thewriters, the desire to have the privilege of serving their parentsin their old age actually became a consuming passion. The great-est regret a Chinese gentleman could have was the eternally lostopportunity of serving his old parents with medicine and soup













on their deathbed, or not to be present when they died. For ahigh official in his fifties or sixties not to be able to invite hisparents to come from their native village and stay with his familyat the capital, “seeing them to bed every night and greeting themevery morning/’ was to commit a moral sin of which he shouldbe ashamed and for which he had constantly to offer excuses andexplanations to his friends and colleagues. This regret was ex-pressed in two lines by a man who returned too late to his home,when his parents had already died:

The tree desires repose, but the wind will not stop;

The son desires to serve, but his parents are already gone.

It is to be assumed that if man were to live this life like apoem, he would be able to look upon the sunset of his life as hishappiest period, and instead of trying to postpone the much fearedold age, be able actually to look forward to it, and graduallybuild up to it as the best and happiest period of his existence.In my efforts to compare and contrast Eastern and Western life,I have found no differences that are absolute except in this mat-ter of the attitude towards age, which is sharp and clearcut andpermits of no intermediate positions. The differences in our at-titude towards sex, toward women, and toward work, play andachievement are all relative. The relationship between husbandand wife in China is not essentially different from that in theWest, nor even the relationship between parent and child. Noteven the ideas of mdividual liberty and democracy and the re-lationship between the people and their ruler are, after all, so verydifferent. But in the matter of our attitude toward age, thedifference is absolute, and the East and the West take exactlyopposite points of view. This is clearest in the matter of askingabout a person’s age or telling one’s own. In China, the firstquestion a person asks the other on an official call, after askingabout his name and surname is, “What is your glorious age?” Ifthe person replies apologetically that he is twenty-three or twenty-eight, the other party generally comforts him by saying that he













195

has still a glorious future, and that one day he may become old*But if the person replies that he is thirty-five or thirty-eight, theother party immediately exclaims with deep respect, “Good luck!”;enthusiasm grows in proportion as the gentleman is able to reporta higher and higher age, and if the person is anywhere over fifty,the inquirer immediately drops his voice in humility and respect.That is why all old people, if they can, should go and live inChina, where even a beggar with a white beard is treated withextra kindness. People in middle age actually look forward to thetime when they can celebrate their fifty-first birthday, and in thecase of successful merchants or officials, they would celebrate eventheir forty-first birthday with great pomp and glory. But the fifty*first birthday, or the half-century mark, is an occasion of rejoicingfor people of all classes. The sixty-first is a happier and granderoccasion than the fifty-first and the seventy-first is still happierand grander, while a man able to celebrate his eighty-first birth-day is actually looked upon as one specially favored by heaven.The wearing of a beard becomes the special prerogative of thosewho have become grandparents, and a man doing so without thenecessary qualifications, either of being a grandfather or beingon the other side of fifty, stands in danger of being sneered atbehind his back. The result is that young men try to pass them-selves off as older than they are by imitating the pose and dignityand point of view of the old people, and I have known youngChinese writers graduated from the middle schools, anywhere be-tween twenty-one and twenty-five, writing articles in the maga-zines to advise what “the young men ought and ought not toread,” and discussing the pitfalls of youth with a fatherly con-descension.

This desire to grow old and in any case to appear old is under-standable when one understands the premium generally placedupon old age in China. In the first place, it is a privilege of theold people to talk, while the young must listen and hold theirtongue. “A young man is supposed to have ears and no mouth,”as a Chinese saying goes. Men of twenty are supposed to listen













when people of thirty are talking, and these in turn are supposedto listen when men of forty are talking. As the desire to talk andto be listened to is almost universal, it is evident that the furtheralong one gets in years, the better chance he has to talk and tobe listened to when he goes about in society. It is a game of lifein which no one is favored, for everyone has a chance of becomingold in his time. Thus a father lecturing his son is obliged to stopsuddenly and change his demeanor the moment the grandmotheropens her mouth. Of course he wishes to be in the grandmother’splace. And it is quite fair, for what right have the young to opentheir mouth when the old men can say, “I have crossed morebridges than you have crossed streets!” What right have theyoung got to talk?

In spite of my acquaintance with Western life and the Westernattitude toward age, I am still continually shocked by certain ex-pressions for which I am totally unprepared. Fresh illustrationsof this attitude come up on every side. I have heard an old ladyremarking that she has had several grandchildren, but, “It was thefirst one that hurt” With the full knowledge that American peoplehate to be thought of as old, one still doesn’t quite expect to haveit put that way. I have made allowance for people in middle agethis side of fifty, who, I can understand, wish to leave the im-pression that they are still active and vigorous, but I am not quiteprepared to meet an old lady with gray hair facetiously switchingthe topic of conversation to the weather, when the conversationwithout any fault of mine naturally drifted toward her age. Onecontinually forgets it when allowing an old man to enter an ele-vator or a car first; the habitual expression “after age” comes upto my lips, then I restrain myself and am at a loss for what tosay in its place. One day, being forgetful, I blurted out the usualphrase in deference to an extremely dignified and charming oldman, and the old man seated in the car turned to his wife andremarked jokingly to her, “This young man has the cheek tothink that he is younger than myself!”

The whole thing is as senseless as can be. I just don’t see the













197

point. I can understand young and middle-aged unmarried womenrefusing to tell their age, because there the premium upon youth isentirely natural. Chinese girls, too, get a litde scared when theyreach twenty-two and are unmarried or not engaged. The yearsare slipping by mercilessly. There is a feeling of fear of being leftout, what the Germans call a Torschlusspanilthe fear of beingleft in the park when the gates close at night. Hence it has beensaid that the longest year of a woman’s life is when she is twenty-nine; she remains twenty-nine for three or four or five years. Butapart from this, the fear of letting people know one’s age is non-sensical. How can one be thought wise unless one is thought to beold? And what do the young really know about life, about mar-riage and about the true values? Again I can understand that thewhole pattern of Western life places a premium on youth andtherefore makes men and women shrink from telling peopletheir age. A perfecdy efficient and vigorous woman secretary offorty-five is, by a curious twist of reasoning, immediately thoughtof as worthless when her age becomes known. What wonder thatshe wants to hide her age in order to keep her job? But thenthe pattern of life itself and this premium placed upon youthare nonsensical. There is absolutely no meaning to it, so far as Ican see. This sort of thing is undoubtedly brought about by busi-ness life, for I have no doubt there must be more respect for oldage in the home than in the office. I see no way out of it untilthe American people begin somewhat to despise work and effi-ciency and achievement. I suspect when an American father looksupon the home and not the office as his ideal place in life, andcan openly tell people, as Chinese parents do, with absoluteequanimity that now he has a good son taking his place and ishonored to be fed by him, he will be anxiously looking forwardto that happy time, and will count the years impatiently beforehe reaches fifty.

It seems a linguistic misfortune that hale and hearty old men inAmerica tell people that they are “young,” or are told that theyare “young” when really what is meant is that they are healthy.













198 THE ENJOYMENT OF THE HOME

To enjoy health in old age, or to be “old and healthy,” is thegreatest of human luck, but to call it “healthy and young” is butto detract from that glamour and impute imperfection to what isreally perfect. After all, there is nothing more beautiful in thisworld than a healthy wise old man, with “ruddy cheeks andwhite hair,” talking in a soothing voice about life as one whoknows it. The Chinese realize this, and have always pictured anold man with “ruddy cheeks and white hair” as the symbol ofultimate earthly happiness. Many Americans must have seenChinese pictures of the God of Longevity, with his high forehead,his ruddy face, his white beard—and how he smiles! The pictureis so vivid. He runs his fingers through the thin flowing beardcoming down to the breast and gently strokes it in peace andcontentment, dignified because he is surrounded with respect,self-assured because no one ever questions his wisdom, and kindbecause he has seen so much of human sorrow. To persons of greatvitality, we also pay the compliment of saying that “the older theygrow, the more vigorous they are,” and a person like David LloydGeorge would be referred to as “Old Ginger,” because he gainsin pungency with age.

On the whole, I find grand old men with white beards missingin the American picture. I know that they exist, but they areperhaps in a conspiracy to hide themselves from me. Only once,in New Jersey, did I meet an old man with anything like a re-spectable beard. Perhaps it is the safety razor that has done it, aprocess as deplorable and ignorant and stupid as the deforestationof the Chinese hills by ignorant farmers, who have deprivedNorth China of its beautiful forests and left the hills as bald andugly as the American old men’s chins. There is yet a mine to bediscovered in America, a mine of beauty and wisdom that is pleas-ing to the eye and thrilling to the soul, when the American hasopened his eyes to it and starts a general program of reclamationand reforestation. Gone are the grand old men of America! Goneis Uncle Sam with his goatee, for he has taken a safety razor andshaved it off, to make himself look like a frivolous young fool













199

with his chin sticking out instead of being drawn in gracefully,and a hard glint shining behind horn-rimmed spectacles. Whata poor substitute that is for the grand old figure! My attitude onthe Supreme Court question (although it is none of my business)is purely determined by my love for the face of Charles EvansHughes. Is he the only grand old man left in America, or arethere more of them? He should retire, of course, for that is onlybeing kind to him, but any accusation of senility seems to me anintolerable insult. He has a face that we would call “a sculptor’sdream.”

I have no doubt that the fact that the old men of America stillinsist on being so busy and active can be directly traced to in-dividualism carried to a foolish extent. It is their pride and theirlove of independence and their shame of being dependent upontheir children. But among the many human rights the Americanpeople have provided for in their Constitution, they have strangelyforgotten about the right to be fed by their children, for it is aright and an obligation growing out of service. How can any onedeny that parents who have toiled for their children in theiryouth, have lost many a good night’s sleep when they were ill,have washed their diapers long before they could talk and havespent about a quarter of a century bringing them up and fittingthem for life, have the right to be fed by them and loved andrespected when they are old? Can one not forget the individualand his pride of self in a general scheme of home life in whichmen are justly taken care of by their parents and, having in turntaken care of their children, are also jusdy taken care of by thelatter? The Chinese have not got the sense of individual inde-pendence because the whole conception of life is based uponmutual help within the home; hence there is no shame attachedto the circumstance of one’s being served by his children in thesunset of one’s life. Rather it is considered good luck to havechildren who can take care of one. One lives for nothing else inChina.

In the West, the old people efface themselves and prefer to live













THE ENJOYMENT OF THE HOME

alone in some hotel with a restaurant on the ground floor, out o£consideration for their children and an entirely unselfish desire notto interfere in their home life. But the old people have the rightto interfere, and if interference is unpleasant, it is neverthelessnatural, for all life, particularly the domestic life, is a lesson inrestraint. Parents interfere with their children anyway when thejare young, and the logic of non-interference is already seen in theresults of the Behaviorists, who think that all children should betaken away from their parents. If one cannot tolerate one’s ownparents when they are old and comparatively helpless, parentswho have done so much for us, whom else can one tolerate in thehome? One has to learn self-restraint anyway, or even marriagewill go on the rocks. And how can the personal service and de-votion and adoration of loving children ever be replaced by thebest hotel waiters?

The Chinese idea supporting this personal service to old par-ents is expressly defended on the sole ground of gratitude. Thedebts to one’s friends may be numbered, but the debts to one’sparents are beyond number. Again and again, Chinese essays onfilial piety mention the fact of washing diapers, which takes onsignificance when one becomes a parent himself. In return, there-fore, is it not right that in their old age, the parents should beserved with the best food and have their favorite dishes placedbefore them? The duties of a son serving his parents are prettyhard, but it is sacrilege to make a comparison between nursingone’s own parents and nursing a stranger in a hospital. For in-stance, the following are some of the duties of the junior at home,as prescribed by T’u Hsishih and incorporated in a book of moral in-struction very popular as a text in the old schools:

In the summer months, one should, while attending to hisparents, stand by their side and fan them, to drive away theheat and the flies and mosquitoes. In winter, he should seethat the bed quilts are warm enough and the stove fire is hotenough, and see that it is just right by attending to it con-stantly. He should also see if there are holes or crevices in













ON GROWING OLD GRACEFULLY

20i

the doors and windows, that there may be no draft, to the endthat his parents are comfortable and happy.

A child above ten should get up before his parents in themorning, and after the toilet go to their bed and ask if theyhave had a good night. If his parents have already gotten up,he should first curtsy to them before inquiring after theirhealth, and should retire with another curtsy after the ques-tion. Before going to bed at night, he should prepare the bed,when the parents are going to sleep, and stand by until hesees that they have fallen off to sleep and then pull down thebed curtain and retire himself.

Who, therefore, wouldn't want to be an old man or an old fatheror grandfather in China?

This sort of thing is being very much laughed at by the prole-tarian writers of China as “feudalists,” but there is a charm to itwhich makes any old gendeman inland cling to it and think thatmodern China is going to the dogs. The important point is thatevery man grows old in time, if he lives long enough, as he cer-tainly desires to. If one forgets this foolish individualism whichseems to assume that an individual can exist in the abstract andbe literally independent, one must admit that we must so plan ourpattern of life that the golden period lies ahead in old age andnot behind us in youth and innocence. For if we take the reverseattitude, we are committed without our knowing to a race withthe merciless course of time, forever afraid of what lies ahead ofus—a race, it is hardly necessary to point out, which is quite hope-less and in which we are eventually all defeated. No one can reallystop growing old; he can only cheat himself by not admitting thathe is growing old. And since there is no use fighting againstnature, one might just as well grow old gracefully. The symphonyof life should end with a grand finale of peace and serenity andmaterial comfort and spiritual contentment, and not with thecrash of a broken drum or cracked cymbals.













Chapter Nine

THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

I. On Lying in Bed

IT seems I am destined to become a market philosopher, but itcan’t be helped. Philosophy generally seems to be the science o£making simple things difficult to understand, but I can conceiveof a philosophy which is the science of making difficult thingssimple. In spite of names like “materialism,” “humanism,” “tran-scendentalism,” “pluralism,” and all the other longwinded “isms,”I contend that these systems are no deeper than my own philoso-phy. Life after all is made up of eating and sleeping, of meetingand saying good-by to friends, of reunions and farewell parties,of tears and laughter, of having a haircut once in two weeks, ofwatering a potted flower and watching one’s neighbor fall off hisroof, and the dressing up of our notions concerning these simplephenomena of life in a kind of academic jargon is nothing but atrick to conceal either an extreme paucity or an extreme vaguenessof ideas on the part of the university professors. Philosophy thereforehas become a science by means of which we begin more and moreto understand less and less about ourselves. What the philosophershave succeeded in is this: the more they talk about it, the more con-fused we become.

It is amazing how few people are conscious of the importanceof the art of lying in bed, although actually in my opinion nine-tenths of the world’s most important discoveries, both scientificand philosophical, are come upon when the scientist or philoso-pher is curled up in bed at two or five o’clock in the morning.

Some people lie m the daytime and others lie at night. Now by“lying” I mean at tHe same time physical and moral lying, forthe two happen to coincide. I find that those people who agreewith me in believing in lying in bed as one of the greatest pleas-ures of life are the honest men, while those who do not believein lying in bed are liars and actually lie a lot in the daytime.

202













203

morally and physically. Those who lie in the daytime are themoral uplifters, kindergarten teachers and readers of Aesop'sFables, while those who frankly admit with me that a man oughtto consciously cultivate the art of lying in bed are the honest menwho prefer to read stories without a moral like Alice in Wonder-land.

Now what is the significance of lying in bed, physically andspiritually? Physically, it means a retreat to oneself, shut up fromthe outside world, when one assumes the physical posture mostconducive to rest and peace and contemplation. There is a certainproper and luxurious way of lying in bed. Confucius, that greatartist of life, “never lay straight*’ in bed “like a corpse,” but al-ways curled up on one side,1 I believe one of the greatest pleasuresof life is to curl up one’s legs in bed. The posture of the arms isalso very important, in order to reach the greatest degree ofaesthetic pleasure and mental power. I believe the best posture isnot lying flat on the bed, but being upholstered with big softpillows at an angle of thirty degrees with either one arm or botharms placed behind the back of one’s head. In this posture anypoet can write immortal poetry, any philosopher can revolutionizehuman thought, and any scientist can make epoch-making discov-eries.

It is amazing how few people are aware of the value of solitudeand contemplation. The art of lying in bed means more thanphysical rest for you, after you have gone through a strenuousday, and complete relaxation, after all the people you have metand interviewed, all the friends who have tried to crack sillyjokes, and all your brothers and sisters who have tried to rectifyyour behavior and sponsor you into heaven have thoroughly goton your nerves. It is all that, I admit. But it is something more.If properly cultivated, it should mean a mental house-cleaning.Actually, many business men who pride themselves on rushingabout in the morning and afternoon and keeping three desktelephones busy all the time on their desk, never realize that they

1 Analects, Chapter X.













could make twice the amount of money, if they would give them-selves one hour’s solitude awake in bed, at one o'clock in themorning or even at seven. What does it matter even if one staysin bed at eight o'clock?5 A thousand times better that he shouldprovide himself with a good tin of cigarettes on his bedside tableand take plenty of time to get up from bed and solve all hisproblems of the day before he brushes his teeth. There, comfortablystretched or curled up in his pyjamas, free from the irksomewoolen underwear or the irritating belt or suspenders and suf-focating collars and heavy leather boots, when his toes are emanci-pated and have recovered the freedom which they inevitably losein the daytime, the real business head can thin\f for only whenone’s toes are free is his head free, and only when one’s head isfree is real thinking possible. Thus in that comfortable position,he can ponder over his achievements and mistakes of yesterdayand single out the important from the trivial m the day’s pro-gram ahead of him. Better that he arrived at ten o’clock in hisoffice master of himself, than that he should come punctually atnine or even a quarter before to watch over his subordinates likea slave driver and then “hustle about nothing,” as the Chinese say.

But for the thinker, the inventor and the man of ideas, lyingquiedy for an hour in bed accomplishes even more. A writer couldget more ideas for his articles or his novel in this posture than hecould by sitting doggedly before his desk morning and afternoon.For there, free from telephone calls and well-meaning visitors andthe common trivialities of everyday life, he sees life through a glassor a beaded screen, as it were, and a halo of poetic fancy is castaround the world of realities and informs it with a magic beauty.There he sees life not in its rawness, but suddenly transformedinto a picture more real than life itself, like the great paintings ofNi Yiinlin or Mi Fei.

Now what actually happens in bed is this. When one is in bedthe muscles are at rest, the circulation becomes smoother and moreregular, respiration becomes steadier, and all the optical, auditoryand vaso-motor nerves are more or less completly at rest, bring-













ON LYING IN BED

205

ing about a more or less complete physical quietude, and thereforemaking mental concentration, whether on ideas or on sensations,more absolute. Even in respect to sensations, those of smell or hear-ing for example, our senses are the keenest in that moment. Allgood music should be listened to in the lying condition. Li Liwengsaid in his essay on Willows” that one should learn to listen to thebirds at dawn when lying in bed. What a world of beauty is wait-ing for us, if we learn to wake up at dawn and listen to the heav-enly concert of the birds! Actually there is a profusion of birdmusic in most towns, although I am sure many residents are notaware of it. For instance, this was what I recorded of the soundsI heard in Shanghai one morning:

This morning I woke up at five after a very sound sleepand listened to a most gorgeous feast of sounds. What wokeme up were the factory whisdes of a great variety of pitchand force. After a while, I heard a distant clatter of horse’shoofs; it must have been cavalry passing down Yuyuen Road;and in that quiet dawn it gave me more aesthetic delight thana Brahms symphony. Then came a few early chirps from somekind of birds. I am sorry I am not proficient in birdlore, butI enjoyed them all the same.

There were other sounds of course—some foreigner’s “boy,”presumably after a night of dissipation outside, appeared atabout half past five and began to knock at someone’s backdoor. A scavenger was then heard sweeping a neighboringalleyway with the swish-swash of his bamboo broom. All ofa sudden, a wild duck, I suppose, would sail by in the sky,leaving echoes of his \ung-tung in the air. At twenty-five pastsix, I heard the distant rumble of the engine of the Shanghai-Hangchow train arriving at the Jessfield Station. There wereone or two sounds coming from the children in their sleepin the next room. Life then began to stir and a distant hum ofhuman activities in the near and distant neighborhood grad-ually increased in volume and intensity. Downstairs in thehouse itself, the servants had got up, too. Windows were beingopened. A hook was being placed in position. A slight cough.

A soft tread of footsteps. A clanging of cups and saucers. Andsuddenly the baby cried, “Mamma!”













This was the natural concert I heard that morning in Shanghai,Throughout the whole spring that year my greatest delight wasto listen to a kind of bird probably called a quail or partridge inEnglish. Its lovecall consists of four notes (do. mi: re—:—. ttf) there lasting two or three beats and ending in the middle of a beat,followed by an abrupt, staccato ti in the lower octave. It is thesong I used to hear in the mountains in the south. The most beau-tiful part of it was that a male bird would start the call on top ofa tree about twenty yards from my place early at dawn, and afemale bird would counterpoint it at a distance of about a hundredyards. Then once in a while there would be a slight variation, aquickening as it were of tempo and of the bird’s heart, and the laststaccato note would be left out. This bird-song stands out pre-eminently among those of others, of which there is a great pro-fusion. I am at a loss to describe these songs except by resort tomusical notation, but I know they include the songs of orioles andmagpies and woodpeckers, and the cooing of pigeons. The spar-rows seem to wake up later, and the reason, I suppose, must be asour great epicure-poet Li Liweng gave it. The other birds have tosing early because they are continually afraid of men’s guns andchildren’s stones during the day. These birds, therefore, can singat ease only before this insufferable human species wake up fromtheir sleep. As soon as men wake up, the birds can never finishtheir song at ease. But the sparrows can, because they are notafraid, and therefore they can sleep longer.

II. On Sitting in Chairs

I want to write about the philosophy of sitting in chairs becauseI have a reputation for lolling. Now there are many lollers amongmy friends and acquaintances, but somehow I have acquired a spec-ial reputation for lolling, at least in the Chinese literary world. Icontend that I am not the only loller in this modern world andthat my reputation has been gready exaggerated. It happened likethis. I started a magazine called the Analects Fortnightly, in which













20 7

I consistently tried to disprove the myth of the harmfulness ofsmoking. In spite of the fact that we did not have cigarette adver-tisements in our magazine, I wrote and published essay after essaypraising the virtues of Lady Nicotine. Somehow, therefore, a legenddeveloped that I was a man doing nothing the whole day but lollingidly on a sofa smoking a cigar, and in spite of my disclaimers and myprotests that I am one of the hardest working men in China, thelegend had got about and was constantly used as an evidence of mybelonging to the hateful leisure-class intelligentsia. Two years after,the situation was aggravated by the fact that I started another maga-zine devoted to the familiar essay. Bored stiff by the dilatory, hypo-critical and pompous style of Chinese editorials, which is the resultof the method of teaching school composition a generation ago,making young boys of twelve or thirteen write essays on “The Sal-vation of the Country” and “The Virtue of Persistence,” I sawthat the introduction of a more familiar style of writing was themeans of emancipating Chinese prose from the strait) acket of Con-fucian platitudes. It happened, however, that I translated the phrase“familiar style” by a Chinese phrase meaning “leisurely style.” Thiswas a signal for attack from the Communist camp, and now I havethe indisputable reputation of being the most leisurely of all leisurelywriters in China and therefore the most unforgivable, “while weare living in this period of national humiliation.”

I admit that I do loll about in my friends’ drawing-rooms, butso do the others. What are armchairs for anyway, except for peopleto loll in? If gentlemen and ladies of the twentieth century weresupposed to sit upright all the time with absolute dignity, thereshould be no armchairs at all in the modern drawing-room, but weshould all be sitting on stiff redwood furniture, with most ladies’feet dangling about a foot from the ground.

In other words, there is a philosophy about lolling in chairs. Themention of the word “dignity” explains exaedy the origin of thedifference in the styles of sitting between the ancient and the mod-ern people. The ancient people sat in order to look dignified, whilemodern people tit in order to be comfortable. There is a philosophic













208 THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

conflict between the two, for, according to ancient notions only halfa century ago, comfort was a sin, and to be comfortable was to bedisrespectful. Aldous Huxley has made this sufficiently plain in hisessay on “Comfort” The feudalistic society which made the rise ofthe armchair impossible until modern days, as described by Huxley,was exactly the same as that which existed in China up to a genera-tion ago. Today any man who calls himself another’s friend mustnot be afraid to put his legs on top of a desk in his friend’s room,and we take that as a sign of familiarity instead of disrespect, al-though to put one’s legs on top of a desk in the presence of a mem-ber of the older generation would be a different matter.

There is a closer relationship between morals and architecture andinterior decoration than we suspect. Huxley has pointed out thatWestern ladies did not take frequent baths because they were afraidto see their own naked bodies, and this moral concept delayed therise of the modern white-enameled bathtub for centuries. One canunderstand why in the design of old Chinese furniture there was solitde consideration for human comfort only when we realize theConfucian atmosphere in which people moved about. Chinese red-wood furniture was designed for people to sit upright in, becausethat was the only posture approved by society. Even Chinese em-perors had to sit on a throne on which I would not think of remain-ing for more than five minutes, and for that matter the Englishkings were just as badly off. Cleopatra went about inclining on acouch carried by servants, because apparently she had never heardof Confucius. If Confucius should have seen her doing that, he wouldcertainly have “struck her shin with a stick,” as he did to one of hisold disciples, Yuan Jang, when the latter was found sitting in anincorrect posture. In the Confucian society in which we lived, gentle-men and ladies had to hold themselves perfecdy erect, at least onformal occasions, and any sign of putting one’s leg up would be atonce construed as a sign of vulgarity and lack of culture. In fact,to show extra respect, as when seeing official superiors, one had toait gingerly on the edge of a chair at an oblique angle, which wasa sign of respect and of the height of culture. There is also a close













ON SITTING IN CHAIRS

209

connection between the Confucian tradition and the discomforts ofChinese architecture, but we will not go into that now.

Thanks to the romantic movement in the later eighteenth andearlier nineteenth centuries, this tradition of classical decorum hasbroken down, and to be comfortable is no longer a sin. On the otherhand, a more truthful attitude towards life has taken its place, dueas much to the romantic movement as to a better understanding ofhuman psychology. The same change of attitude which has ceasedto regard theatrical amusements as immoral and Shakespeare as a<cbarbarian,” has also made possible the evolution of ladies’ bathingcostumes, clean bathtubs and comfortable armchairs and divans,and of a more truthful and at the same time intimate style of livingand writing. In this sense, there is a true connection between myhabit of lolling on a sofa and my attempt to introduce a more inti-mate and free and easy writing into modern Chinese journalism.

If we admit that comfort is not a sin, then we must also admitthat the more comfortably a man arranges himself in an armchairin a friend’s drawing-room, the greater respect he is showing to hishost. After all, to make oneself at home and look restful is only tohelp one’s host or hostess succeed in the difficult art of hospitality.How many hostesses have feared and trembled for an evening partyin which the guests are not willing to loosen up and just be them-selves. I have always helped my hosts and hostesses by putting a legup on top of a tea table or whatever happened to be the nearestobject, and in that way forced everybody else to throw away thecloak of false dignity.

Now I have discovered a formula regarding the comparative com-fort of furniture. This formula may be stated in very simple terms:the lower a chair is, the more comfortable it becomes. Many peoplehave sat down on a certain chair in a friend’s home and wonderedwhy it is so cozy. Before the discovery of this formula, I used tothink that students of interior decoration probably had a mathe-matical formula for the proportion between height and width andangle of inclination of chairs which conduced to the maximum com-fort of sitters. Since the discovery of this formula, I have found that













THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

it is simpler than that. Take any Chinese redwood furniture andsaw off its legs a few inches, and it immediately becomes morecomfortable; and if you saw off another few inches, then it becomesstill more comfortable. The logical conclusion of this is, of course,that one is most comfortable when one is lying perfectly flat on abed. The matter is as simple as that.

From this fundamental principle, we may derive the corollarythat when we find ourselves sitting in a chair that is too high andcan’t saw its legs off, all we have to do is seek some object in theforeground on which we can rest our legs and therefore theoreticallydecrease the difference between the levels of our hips and our feet.One of the commonest devices that I use is to pull out a drawer inmy desk and put my feet on it. But the intelligent application ofthis corollary I can leave to everybody’s common sense.

To correct any misunderstanding that I am lolling all the timefor sixteen waking hours of the "day, I must hasten to explain that Iam capable of sitting doggedly at a desk or in front of a typewriterfor three hours. Just because I wish to make it clear that relaxationof our muscles is not necessarily a crime, I do not mean that weshould keep our muscles relaxed all the time, or that this is the mosthygienic posture to be assumed all the time. That is far from myintention. After all human life goes in cycles of work and play, oftension and relaxation. The male brain energy and capacity forwork goes in monthly cycles just like women’s bodies. WilliamJames said that when the chains of a bicycle are kept too tight,they are not conducive to the easiest running, and so with the humanmind. Everything, after all, is a matter of habit. There is an infinitecapacity in the human body for adjustments. Japanese who have thehabit of sitting with crossed legs on the floor are liable to get cramps,I suspect, when they are made to sit on chairs. Only by alternatingbetween the absolutely erect working posture of office hours and theposture of stretching ourselves on a sofa after a hard day’s work canwe achieve that highest wisdom of living.

A word to the ladies: when there is nothing in the immediateforeground on which you can rest your feet, you can always curl













211

up your legs on a sofa. You never look more charming than whenyou are in that attitude.

III. On Conversation

“Talking with you for one night is better than studying books forten years,”—this was the comment of an old Chinese scholar after hehad had a conversation with another friend. There is much truth inthat statement, and today the phrase “a night’s talk” has become acurrent expression for a happy conversation with a friend at night,either past or anticipated. There are two or three books whichresemble an English “week-end omnibus,” bearing the title A Night'sTal\, or A Night's Tal\ in the Mountains. Such a supreme pleasureas a perfect conversation with a friend at night is necessarily rare,for as Li Liweng has pointed out, those who are wise seldom knowhow to talk, and those who talk are seldom wise. The discovery of aman up in a mountain temple, who really understands life and atthe same time understands the art of conversation, must therefore beone of the keenest pleasures, like the discovery of a new planet by anastronomer or of a new variety of plant by a botanist.

People today are complaining that the art of conversation arounda fireplace or on cracker barrels is becoming lost, owing to the tempoof business life today. I am quite sure that this tempo has somethingto do with it, but believe also that the distortion of the home into anapartment without a log fire began the destruction of the art ofconversation, and the influence of the motor car completed it. Thetempo is entirely wrong, for conversation exists only in a society ofmen imbued in the spirit of leisure, with its ease, its humor, andits appreciation of light nuances. For there is an evident distinctionbetween mere talking and conversation as such. This distinction ismade in the Chinese language between shuohua (speaking) andianhua (conversation), which implies the discourse is more chattyand leisurely and the topics of conversation are more trivial and lessbusiness-like. A similar difference may be noted between businesscorrespondence and the letters of literary friends. We can speak or













2X2

THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

discuss business with almost any person, but there are very few peo-ple with whom we can truly hold a night’s conversation. Hence,when we do find a true conversationalist, the pleasure is equal to, ifnot above, that of reading a delightful author, with the additionalpleasure of hearing his voice and seeing his gestures. Sometimes wefind it at the happy reunion of old friends, or among acquaintancesindulging in reminiscences, sometimes in the smoking room of anight train, and sometimes at an inn on a distant journey. There willbe chats about ghosts and fox-spirits, mixed with amusing tales orimpassioned comments on dictators and traitors, and sometimes be-fore we know it, light is shown by a wise observer and conversation-alist on things taking place in a certain country which are apremonition of the impending collapse or change in a regime. Suchconversations remain among the memories that we cherish for life.

Of course, night is the best time for conversation, because there isa certain lack of glamour in conversations during the daytime. Theplace of conversation seems to me entirely unimportant. One canenjoy a good conversation on literature and philosophy in an eigh-teenth-century salon, or sitting on barrels at a plantation of an after-noon. Or it may be on a windy or rainy night when we are travelingin a river boat and the lantern lights from boats anchoring on theopposite bank of the river cast their reflections into the water andwe hear the boatmen tell us stories about the girlhood of the Queen.In fact, the charm of conversation lies in the fact that the circum-stances in which it takes place, the place, the time and the personsengaged in it, vary from occasion to occasion. Sometimes we remem-ber it in connection with a breezy moonlight night, when the cassiaflowers are in bloom, and sometimes we associate it in memory witha dark and stormy night when a log fire is glowing on the hearth,and sometimes we remember we were sitting on top of a pavilionwatching boats coming down the river, and perhaps a boat was over-turned by the swift current, or again, we were sitting in the waitingroom of a railroad station in the small hours of the morning. Thesepictures associate themselves indelibly with our memory of thoseparticular conversations. There were perhaps two or three persons













213

in the room, or perhaps five or six; maybe old Chen was slightlydrunk that night, or old Chin had a cold in the nose and spoke witha slight twang, adding to the particular flavor o£ that evening. Suchis human life that “the moon cannot always be round, the flowerscannot always look so fine and good friends cannot always meettogether,” and I do not think the gods will be jealous of us whenwe engage in such simple pastimes.

As a rule, a good conversation is always like a good familiar essay*Both its style and its contents are similar to that of the essay. Suchtopics as fox-spirits, flies, the strange ways of Englishmen, the differ-ence between Oriental and Occidental culture, the bookstalls alongthe Seine, a nymphomaniac apprentice in a tailor shop, anecdotesof our rulers, statesmen and generals, the method of preserving“Buddha’s Fingers” (a variety of citron)—these are all good andlegitimate topics of conversation. The point it has most in commonwith the essay is its leisurely style. However weighty and importantthe topic may be, involving reflections on the sad change or state ofchaos of one’s own country, or the sinking of civilization itself undera current of mad political ideas, depriving man of liberty, humandignity and even the goal of human happiness, or even involvingmoving questions of truth and justice, still such ideas are expressedin a casual, leisurely and intimate manner. For in civilization, how-ever a man chafes and is angry at the robbers of our liberty, we areallowed only to express our sentiments by a light smile around ourlips or at the tip of our pen. Our really impassioned tirades, in whichwe give full reins to our sentiments, may be heard only by a few ofour most intimate friends. Hence the requisite condition of a trueconversation is that we are able to air our views at leisure in theintimacy of a room with a few good friends and with no peoplearound whom we hate to look at.

It is easy to see this contrast between the true genre of conversa-tion and other kinds of polite exchange of opinion by referring tothe similar contrast between a good familiar essay and the statementsof politicians. Although there are a good deal more noble sentimentsexpressed in politicians* statements, sentiments of democracy, desire













2I4 THE ENJOYMENT of living

for service, interest in the welfare of the poor, devotion to thecountry, lofty idealism, love of peace and assurances of unfailinginternational friendship, and absolutely no suggestions of greed forpower or money or fame, yet there is a smell about it which putsone off at a distance, like an over-dressed and over-painted lady. Onthe other hand, when we hear a true conversation or read a goodfamiliar essay, we feel that we have seen a plainly dressed countrymaiden washing clothes by the riverbank, with perhaps her hair alittle disheveled and one button loose, but withal charming and in-timate and likable. That is the familiar charm and studied negli-gence aimed at in a Western woman’s negligee. Some of thisfamiliar charm of intimacy must be a part of all good conversationsand all good essays.

The proper style of conversation is, therefore, a style of intimacyand nonchalance, in which the parties engaged have lost their self-consciousness and are entirely oblivious of how they dress, how theyspeak, how they sneeze, and where they put their hands, and areequally indifferent as to which way the conversation is drifting. Wecan engage in a true conversation only when we meet our intimatefriends and are prepared to unburden our hearts to each other. Oneof them has put his feet on a neighboring table, another is sitting ona window sill, and still another is sitting on the floor, upholstered bya cushion which he has snatched from the sofa, thus leaving one-third of the sofa seat uncovered. For it is only when your hands andfeet are relaxed and the position of your body is at ease that yourheart can be at ease also. It is then that:

Before my face are friends who know my heart.

And at my side are none who hurt my eyes.

This is the absolutely necessary condition of all conversation worthyof the name of an art. And smcc we do not care what we are talkingabout, the conversation will drift further and further, without orderand without method, and the company break up, happy of heart.

Such is the connection between leisure and conversation and theconnection between conversation and the rise of prose that I believe













215

the truly cultured prose of a nation was born at a time when con-versation had already developed as a fine art. This we see moatclearly in the development of Chinese and Greek prose. I cannototherwise imagine an explanation for the vitality of Chinese thoughtin the centuries following Confucius, giving birth to the so-called“Nine Schools of Thought,” than the development of a culturedbackground, in which there was a class of scholars whose businesswas only to talk. For confirmation of my theory, we find there werefive great rich noblemen, noted for their generosity, chivalry andfondness for guests. All of them had thousands of scholarly guestsat their homes, as for instance Mengch’ang of Ch’i Kingdom whowas reputed to have three thousand scholars, or “guests” wearing“pearled shoes,” being “fed” at his home. One can imagine theconversational hubbub that was going on in those houses. The con-tent of the conversation of scholars of those days is today reflected inthe books of Liehtse, Huainantse, Chan\uots’eh and Lilian. It isnoteworthy that with respect to the last one, which was a bookadmittedly written by Lii’s guests but published in his name (in asense similar to the “patrons” of English sixteenth-century andseventeenth-century authors), there was already developed the ideaof the art of living well, in the formula that it would be better to livewell or not at all. There was besides a class of brilliant sophists orprofessional talkers, who were engaged by the different warringstates and sent out as diplomats to avert a crisis or persuade a hostilearmy to retreat from the walls of a besieged city, or to bring aboutan alliance, as so many did. Such professional sophists were alwaysdistinguished by their wit, their clever parables and their generalpersuasive power. The conversations or clever arguments of suchsophists are preserved for us in the book Chan^uotJeh. From suchan atmosphere of free and playful discussion arose some of thegreatest names in philosophy, Yang Chu, noted for his cynicism,Hanfeitse, noted for his realism (similar to MachiaevellTs, but moretempered), and the great diplomat Yentse, noted for his wit.

An example of the cultured social life existing in the third centuryB. C., toward the end of this period, may be seen in the record of













how a certain scholar by the name of Li Yuan succeeded in present-ing his accomplished sister to the court of a rich patron in theKingdom of Ch’u. The patron in turn secured the favor of the Kingfor this girl, which was eventually responsible for the destruction ofthe Kingdom of Ch’u by the conquering army of the First Emperorof Ch’in, who united the Chinese Empire.

Formerly there was Li Yuan, serving as a subordinate ofPrince Ch’unshen, the Prime Minister of the King of Ch’u. Lihad a sister by the name of Niihuan who spoke to him one day,

“I hear that the King is without an heir. If you will present meto the Prime Minister, through him I will be able to see theKing.” “But the Prime Minister is a high official,” replied herbrother. “How dare I mention it to him?” “You just go andsee him,” said his sister, “and then tell him that you have tocome home because a noble guest has arrived. He will then askyou who is the noble guest and you can reply that you have asister, that the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Lu has heardof her reputation and has sent a delegate to ask for her fromyou, and that a messenger from home has just brought thenews. He will then ask, what can your sister do? And you willreply that I can play on the ch’in, can read and write, and havemastered one of the classics. He is certain to send for me thatway.”

Ii then promised to do as she said, and the next morning,after seeing the Prime Minister, he said, “A messenger fromhome told me that there is a guest from a distant country, andI must return to receive him.” The Prime Minister Ch’unshenthen actually asked him, “Who is this noble guest from a distantcountry?” And Li replied, “I have a sister, and the Prime Minis-ter of the Kingdom of Lu has heard of her reputation and hassent a delegate to ask for her.” “May I see her?” asked thePrime Minister. “Ask her to come and meet me at the LiPavilion.” “Yes sir,” replied Li, and he returned and told hissister that the Prime Minister expected to see her the nextevening at the Li Pavilion. “You must go there yourself first inorder to be there when I arrive,” said the girl.

The Prime Minister then arrived at the time and asked tosee Niihuan. She was presented and they drank a great deal.Niihuan played on the ch’in, and before her song was finished,













217

the Prime Minister was greatly pleased and asked her to stay

there for the night. . . *

This then, was the social background of cultivated ladies andleisurely scholars, which produced for us the first important devel-opment of prose in China. There were ladies who could talk andread and write and play on a musical instrument, making for thatpeculiarly light mixture of social, artistic and literary motives thatwas always found in a society where men and women mixedtogether. It was undoubtedly aristocratic in character and atmos-phere, for the Prime Minister Ch’unshen was difficult to see, butwhen he heard of a lady who could play on a musical instrumentand had mastered one of the classics, he insisted on seeing her.This was then the life of leisure which the early Chinese sophistsand philosophers lived. The books of these early Chinese philoso-phers were nothing but the results of leisurely conversation amongthese scholars.

It is clear that only in a society with leisure can the art of con-versation be produced, and it is equally clear also that only whenthere is an art of conversation can there be good familiar essays.In general, both the art of conversation and the art of writing goodprose came comparatively late in the history of human civiliza-tion, because the human mind had to develop a certain subtletyand lightness of touch, and this was possible only in a life of lei-sure. I am quite aware that today, from the point of view of theCommunists, to enjoy leisure or to belong to the hated leisureclass is already to be counter-revolutionary, but I am quite con-vinced that the aim of true Communism and Socialism is thatall people should be able to enjoy leisure, or that the enjoymentof leisure should become general. Therefore, the enjoyment of lei-sure cannot be a sin, but on the other hand the progress of cultureitself depends on an intelligent use of leisure, of which conversa-tion is only one form. Business men who are busy the whole dayand immediately go to bed after supper, snoring like cows, arenot likely to contribute anything to culture.













ai8 THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

Sometimes this “leisure” is enforced upon one and does notcome of one’s own seeking. All the same, many good works ofliterature have been produced in an atmosphere of enforced leisure.When we see a literary genius with great promise, dispersing hisenergy in futile social parties or writing essays on current politics,the best and kindest thing we can do to him is to shut him up inJail. For we must remember that it was in prison that the KingWen wrote his Boo\ of Changes, a classic of philosophy on thechanges of human life, and Ssema Ch’ien wrote his masterpiece,Shihchi (conventionally spelled Shi\t)9 the best history ever writtenin the Chinese language. Sometimes the authors were defeated intheir ambitions for a political career, or the political situation wastoo discouraging, and great works of literature or of art were pro-duced. That is the reason why we had such great Yuan paintersand Yuan dramatists during the Mongol regime and such greatpainters as Shih T’ao and Pata Shanjen during the beginning ofthe Manchu conquest of China. Patriotism in the form of a sense ofutter humiliation under foreign rule made their whole-hearteddevotion to art and learning possible. Shih T’ao is undoubtedly oneof the very greatest painters China has ever produced, and thefact that he is not generally known in the West is due to an accidentand to the fact that the Manchu emperors were not willing togive credit to these artists not in sympathy with their rule. Othergreat writers who had failed in the Imperial examination, beganto sublimate their energy and turn to creation, as in the case ofShih Naian who gave us All Men Are Brothers and P’u Liuhsienwho gave us Strange Stories From a Chinese Studio.

We have in the preface to All Men Are Brothers, attributed toShih, one of the most delightful descriptions of the pleasure of con-versation among friends:

When all my friends come together to my house, there aresixteen persons in all, but it is seldom that they all come. Butexcept for rainy or stormy days, it is also seldom that none ofthem comes. Most of the days, we have six or seven persons inthe house, and when they come, they do not immediately begin













ON CONVERSATION

219

to think; they would take a sip when they feel like it and stopwhen they feel like it, for they regard the pleasure as consistingin the conversation, and not in the wine. We do not talk aboutcourt politics, not only because it lies outside our proper occupa-tion, but also because at such a distance most of die news isbased upon hearsay; hearsay news is mere rumour, and to dis-cuss rumours would be a waste of our saliva. We also do nottalk about people’s faults, for people have no faults, and weshould not malign them. We do not say things to shock peopleand no one is shocked; on the other hand, we do wish peopleto understand what we say, but people still don’t understandwhat we say. For such things as we talk about lie in the depthsof the human heart, and the people of the world are too busyto hear them.

It was in this kind of style and with this kind of sentiment thatShih’s great work was produced, and this was possible becausethey enjoyed leisure.

The rise of Greek prose took place clearly in the same kind ofa leisurely social background. The lucidity of Greek thought andclearness of the Greek prose style clearly owe their existence tothe art of leisurely conversation, as is so clearly revealed in the titleof Plato’s Dialogues. In the “Banquet” we see a group of Greekscholars inclining on the ground and chatting merrily along inan atmosphere of wine and fruit and beautiful boys. It was becausethese people had cultivated the art of talking that their thoughtwas so lucid and their style so dear, providing a refreshing con-trast to the pomposity and pedantry of modern academic writers.These Greeks evidently had learned to handle the topic of philoso-phy lightly. The charming conversational atmosphere of the Greekphilosophers, their desire for talking, the value they placed uponhearing a good talk and the choice of surroundings for conversa-tions were beautifully described in the introduction to “Phaedrus.*'This gives us an insight into the rise of Greek prose.

Plato’s “Republic” itself does not begin, as some of the modemwriters would have it, with some such sentence as, “Human dvili-zation, as seen through its successive stages of development, is a













THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

dynamic movement from heterogeneity to homogeneity,” or someother equally incomprehensible rot. It begins rather with the genialsentence: “I went down yesterday to the Piraeus, with Glauco, theson of Aristo, to pay my devotion to the goddess; and desirous,at the same time, to observe in what manner they would celebratethe festival, as they were now to do it for the first time.” The sameatmosphere that we find among the early Chinese philosopherswhen thinking was most active and virile, we find in the pictureof Greek men, gathered to discuss the topic whether a great writerof tragedies should or should not be also a great writer of comedies,as described in “The Banquet.” There was an atmosphere of mixedseriousness and gaiety and friendly repartee. People were makingfun of Socrates’ drinking capacity, but there he sat, drinking orstopping as he liked, pouring a cup for himself when he felt likeit, without bothering about others. And thus he talked the wholenight out until everybody in the company fell asleep except Aristo-phanes and Agathon. When he had thus talked everybody to sleepand was thus the only one awake, he left the banquet and wentto Lyceum to have a morning bath, and passed the day as freshas ever. It was in this atmosphere of friendly discourse that Greekphilosophy was born.

There is no question but we need the presence of women in acultured conversation, to give it the necessary frivolity which is thesoul of conversation. Without frivolity and gaiety, conversationsoon becomes heavy and philosophy itself becomes foolish and astranger to life. It has been found in all countries and in all agesthat, whenever there was a culture interested in the understandingof the art of living, there always developed a fashion of welcomingwomen in society. This was the case of Athens in the time ofPericles, and it was so in the eighteenth-century French salons.Even in China, where mixed company was tabooed, Chinese menscholars still demanded the presence of women who could joinin their conversation. In the three dynasties, Chin, Sung and Ming,when the art of conversation was cultivated and became a fashion,there always appeared accomplished ladies, like Hsieh Taoyun,













221

Ch’oayiin, Liu Jushih and others. Far although Chinese mendemanded that their wives be virtuous and abstain from seeingmen, they did not on that account cease to desire the company oftalented women themselves. Chinese literary history after all wasvery much mixed up with the lives of professional courtesans. Thedemand for a touch of feminine charm in a company duringconversation is a universal demand. I have met German ladies whocan talk from five o'clock in the afternoon till eleven at night,and I have come across English and American ladies who frightenme by their familiarity with economics, a subject that I despairof ever having the courage to study. But it seems to me, even ifthere are no ladies around who can debate with me on Karl Marxand Engels, conversation is always pleasantly stimulated when thereare a few ladies who know how to listen and look sweetly pensive.I always find it more delightful than talking to stupid-lookingmen.

IV. On Tea and Friendship

I do not think that, considered from the point of view of humanculture and happiness, there have been more significant inven-tions in the history of mankind, more vitally important and moredirectly contributing to our enjoyment of leisure, friendship, socia-bility and conversation, than the inventions of smoking, drinkingand tea. All three have several characteristics in common: first ofall, that they contribute toward our sociability; secondly, that theydo not fill our stomach as food does, and therefore can be enjoyedbetween meals; and thirdly, that they are a 11 to be enjoyed throughthe nostrils by acting on our sense of smeE. So great are theirinfluences upon culture that we have smoking cars besides diningcars, and we have wine restaurants or taverns and tea houses. IaChina and England at least, drinking tea has become a social insti-tution.

The proper enjoyment of tobacco, drink and tea can only bt*developed in an atmosphere of leisure, friendship and sociability













THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

For it is only with men gifted with the sense of comradeship,extremely select in the matter of forming friends and endowed witha natural love of the leisurely life, that the full enjoyment oftobacco and drink and tea becomes possible. Take away the elementof sociability, and these things have no meaning. The enjoymentof these things, like the enjoyment of the moon, the snow andthe flowers, must take place in proper company, for this I regardas the thing that the Chinese artists of life most frequently insistupon: that certain kinds of flowers must be enjoyed with certaintypes of persons, certain kinds of scenery must be associated withcertain kinds of ladies, that the sound of raindrops must be enjoyed,if it is to be enjoyed fully, when lying on a bamboo bed in a templedeep in the mountains on a summer day; that, in short, the moodis the thing, that there is a proper mood for everything, and thatwrong company may spoil the mood entirely. Hence the beginningof any artist of life is that he or anyone who wishes to learn toenjoy life must, as the absolutely necessary condition, find friendsof the same type of temperament, and take as much trouble to gainand keep their friendship as wives take to keep their husbands, oras a good chess player takes a journey of a thousand miles to meeta fellow chess player.

The atmosphere, therefore, is the thing. One must begin with theproper conception of the scholar’s studio and the general environ-ment in which life is going to be enjoyed. First of all, there arethe friends with whom we are going to share this enjoyment.Different types of friends must be selected for different types ofenjoyment. It would be as great a mistake to go horseback ridingwith a studious and pensive friend, as it would be to go to a concertwith a person who doesn’t understand music. Hence as a Chinesewriter expresses it:

For enjoying flowers, one must secure big-hearted friends.For going to sing-song houses to have a look at sing-song girls,one must secure temperate friends. For going up a high moun-tain, one must secure romantic friends. For boating, one mustsecure friends with an expansive nature. For facing the moon.













223

one must secure friends with a cool philosophy. For anticipatingsnow, one must secure beautiful friends. For a wine party, onemust secure friends with flavor and charm.

Having selected and formed friends for the proper enjoyment ofdifferent occasions, one then looks for the proper surroundings.It is not so important that one’s house be richly decorated as thatit should be situated in beautiful country, with the possibility ofwalking about on the rice fields, or lying down under shady treeson a river bank. The requirements for the house itself are simpleenough. One can "have a house with several rooms, grain fields ofseveral mow, a pool made from a basin and windows made frombroken jars, with the walls coming up to the shoulders and a roomthe size of a rice bushel, and in the leisure time after enjoying thewarmth of cotton beddings and a meal of vegetable soup, one canbecome so great that his spirit expands and fills the entire universe.For such a quiet studio, one should have wut’ung trees in frontand some green bamboos behind. On the south of the house, theeaves will stretch boldly forward, while on the north side, therewill be small windows, which can be closed in spring andwinter to shelter one from rain and wind, and opened in summerand autumn for ventilation. The beauty of the wufung tree is thatall its leaves fall off in spring and winter, thus admitting us to thefull enjoyment of the sun’s warmth, while in summer and autumnits shade protects us from the scorching heat.” Or as another writerexpressed it, one should "build a house of several beams, grow ahedge of chin trees and cover a pavilion with a hay-thatch. Threemow of land will be devoted to planting bamboos and flowers andfruit trees, while two mow will be devoted to planting vegetables.The four walls of a room are bare and the room is empty, withthe exception of two or three rough beds placed in the pavilion.A peasant boy will be kept to water the vegetables and clear theweeds. So then one may arm one’s self with books and a swordagainst solitude, and provide a chfin (a stringed instrument) andchess to anticipate the coming of good friends.”

An atmosphere of familiarity will then invest the place. “In my













friends will be admitted. They will be treated with rich or poorfare such as I eat, and we will chat and laugh and forget ourown existence. We will not discuss the right and wrong of otherpeople and will be totally indifferent to worldly glory and wealth.In our leisure we will discuss the ancients and the moderns, andin our quiet, we will play with the mountains and rivers. Thenwe will have thin, clear tea and good wine to fit into the atmosphereof delightful seclusion. That is my conception of the pleasure offriendship.”

In such a congenial atmosphere, we are then ready to gratifyour senses, the senses of color and smell and sound. It is thenthat one should smoke and one should drink. We then transformour bodies'into a sensory apparatus for perceiving the wonderfulsymphony of colors and sounds and smells and tastes providedby Nature and by culture. We feel like good violins about to beplayed on by master violinists. And thus “we burn incense on amoonlight night and play three stanzas of music from an ancientinstrument, and immediately the myriad worries of our breast arebanished and all our foolish ambitions or desires are forgotten. Wewill then inquire, what is the fragance of this incense, what is thecolor of the smoke, what is that shadow that comes through thewhite papered windows, what is this sound that arises from belowmy fingertips, what is this enjoyment which makes us so quietlyhappy and so forgetful of everything else, and what is the con-dition of the infinite universe?”

Thus chastened in spirit, quiet in mind and surrounded byproper company, one is fit to enjoy tea. For tea is invented forquiet company as wine is invented for a noisy party. There issomething in the nature of tea that leads us into a world of quietcontemplation of life. It would be as disastrous to drink tea withbabies crying around, or with loud-voiced women or politics-talk-ing men, as to pick tea on a rainy or a cloudy day. Picked at earlydawn on a clear day, when the morning air on mountain top wasdear and thin, and the fragrance of dews was still upon the leaves,













225

tea is still associated with the fragrance and refinement of the magicdew in its enjoyment. With the Taoist insistence upon return tonature, and with its conception that the universe is kept alive bythe interplay of the male and female forces, the dew actuallystands for the “juice of heaven and earth” when the two principlesare united at night, and the idea is current that the dew is a magicfood, fine and clear and ethereal, and any man or beast who drinksenough of it stands a good chance of being immortal. De Quinceysays quite correctly that tea “will always be the favorite beverageof the intellectual,” but the Chinese seem to go further and assoc-iate it with the highminded recluse.

Tea is then symbolic of earthly purity, requiring the most fas-tidious cleanliness in its preparation, from picking, frying andpreserving to its final infusion and drinking, easily upset or spoiledby the slightest contamination of oily hands or oily cups. Conse-quently, its enjoyment is appropriate in an atmosphere where allostentation or suggestion of luxury is banished from one’s eyes andone’s thoughts. After all, one enjoys sing-song girls with wine andnot with tea, and when sing-song girls are fit to drink tea with,they are already in the class that Chinese poets and scholars favor.Su Tungp’o once compared tea to a sweet maiden, but a later critic,T’ien Yiheng, author of ChucKuan Hsiaop’in (Essay On BoilingSpring Water)1 immediately qualified it by adding that tea couldbe compared, if it must be compared to women at all, only to theFairy Maku, and that, “as for beauties with peach-colored facesand willow waists, they should be shut up in curtained beds, andnot be allowed to contaminate the rocks and springs.” For thesame author says, “One drinks tea to forget the world’s noise; itis not for those who eat rich food and dress in silk pyjamas.”

It must be remembered that, according to Ch’du, “the essence ofthe enjoyment of tea lies in appreciation of its color, fragrance and

1The classic on tea is Ch*aching, by Lu Yu (d. A. D. 804); other well-knowntreatises mentioned below are Ch’du, by Ts’ai Hsiang (1012-1067); Ck’asu, byHsu Ts’eshu; Ckuckuan Hstaop’tn, by Tien Yihing (c. 1570); Ch'achien, byTu Lung (c. 1592)-

flavor, and the principles of preparation are refinement, dryness andcleanliness” An element of quiet is therefore necessary for the ap-preciation of these qualities, an appreciation that comes from a manwho can 'look at a hot world with a cool head ” Since the SungDynasty, connoisseurs have generally regarded a cup of pale teaas the best, and the delicate flavor of pale tea can easily passunperceived by one occupied with busy thoughts, or when theneighborhood is noisy, or servants are quarreling, or when servedby ugly maids. The company, too, must be small. For, "it isimportant in drinking tea that the guests be few. Many guestswould make it noisy, and noisiness takes away from its culturedcharm. To drink alone is called secluded; to drink between two iscalled comfortable; to drink with three or four is called charming;to drink with five or six is called common; and to drink with sevenor eight is called [contemptuously] philanthropic” As the authorof Ch’asu said, “to pour tea around again and again from a bigpot, and drink it up at a gulp, or to warm it up again after awhile, or to ask for extremely strong taste would be like farmersor artisans who drink tea to fill their belly after hard work; itwould then be impossible to speak of the distinction and apprecia-tion of flavors.”

For this reason, and out of consideration for the utmost right-ness and cleanliness in preparation, Chinese writers on tea havealways insisted on personal attention in boiling tea, or since that isnecessarily inconvenient, that two boy servants be specially trainedto do the job. Tea is usually boiled on a separate small stove inthe room or directly outside, away from the kitchen. The servantboys must be trained to make tea in the presence of their masterand to observe a routine of cleanliness, washing the cups everymorning (never wiping them with a towel), washing their handsoften and keeping their fingernails clean. "When there are threeguests, one stove will be enough, but when there are five or sixpersons, two separate stoves and ketdes will be required, one boyattending to each stove, for if one is required to attend to both,there may be delays or mix-ups.” True connoisseurs, however,













227

regard the personal preparation o£ tea as a special pleasure. With-out developing into a rigid system as in Japan, the preparationand drinking o£ tea is always a performance o£ loving pleasure, im-portance and distinction. In fact, the preparation is half the fun ofthe drinking, as cracking melon-seeds between ones teeth is halfthe pleasure of eating them.

Usually a stove is set before a window, with good hard charcoalburning. A certain sense of importance invests the host, who fansthe stove and watches the vapor coming out from the kettle.Methodically he arranges a small pot and four tiny cups, usuallysmaller than small coffee cups, in a tray. He sees that they are inorder, moves the pewter-foil pot of tea leaves near the tray andkeeps it in readiness, chatting along with his guests, but not somuch that he forgets his duties. He turns round to look at thestove, and from the time the ketde begins to sing, he never leavesit, but continues to fan the fire harder than before. Perhaps hestops to take the lid off and look at the tiny bubbles, technicallycalled “fish eyes” or “crab froth,” appearing on the bottom of theketde, and puts the lid on again. This is the “first boil.” He listenscarefully as the gende singing increases in volume to that of a“gurgle,” with small bubbles coming up the sides of the ketde,technically called the “second boil.” It is then that he watches mostcarefully the vapor emitted from the ketde spout, and just shordybefore the “third boil” is reached, when the water is brought upto a full boil, “like billowing waves,” he takes the ketde from thefire and scalds the pot inside and out with the boiling water,immediately adds the proper quantity of leaves and makes theinfusion. Tea of this kind, like the famous “Iron Goddess of Mercy,”drunk in Fukien, is made very thick. The small pot is barelyenough to hold four demi-tasses and is filled one-third with leaves.As the quantity of leaves is large, the tea is immediately pouredinto the cups and immediately drunk. This finishes the pot, andthe ketde, filled with fresh water, is put on the fire again, gettingready for the second pot. Stricdy speaking, the second pot isregarded as the best; the first pot being compared to a girl of













228 THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

thirteen, the second compared to a girl of sweet sixteen, and thethird regarded as a woman. Theoretically, the third infusion fromthe same leaves is disallowed by connoisseurs, but actually onedoes try to live on with the “woman.”

The above is a strict description of preparing a special kind oftea as I have seen it in my native province, an art generallyunknown in North China. In China generally, tea pots used aremuch larger, and the ideal color of tea is a clear, pale, goldenyellow, never dark red like English tea.

Of course, we are speaking of tea as drunk by connoisseurs andnot as generally served among shopkeepers. No such nicety can beexpected of general mankind or when tea is consumed by thegallon by all comers. That is why the author of Ch’asu, HsuTs’eshu, says, “When there is a big party, with visitors coming andcoming, one can only exchange with them cups of wine, andamong strangers who have just met or among common friends,one should serve only tea of the ordinary quality. Only when ourintimate friends of the same temperament have arrived, and weare all happy, all brilliant in conversation and all able to lay asidethe formalities, then may we ask the boy servant to build a fireand draw water, and decide the number of stoves and cups to beused in accordance with the company present ” It is of this state o£things that the author of Ch’achieh says, “We are sitting at nightin a mountain lodge, and are boiling tea with water from a moun-tain spring. When the fire attacks the water, we begin to heara sound similar to the singing of the wind among pine trees. Wepour the tea into a cup, and the gende glow of its light playsaround the place. The pleasure of such a moment cannot be sharedwith vulgar people ”

In a true tea lover, the pleasure of handling all the paraphernaliais such that it is enjoyed for its own sake, as in the case of Ts’alHsiang, who in his old age was not able to drink, but kept onenjoying the preparation of tea as a daily habit. There was alsoanother scholar, by the name of Chou Wenfu, who prepared anddrank tea six times daily at definite hours from dawn to evening.













ON TEA AND FRIENDSHIP

229

and who loved his pot so much that he had it buried with himwhen he died.

The art and technique of tea enjoyment, then, consists of thefollowing: first, tea, being most susceptible to contamination offlavors, must be handled throughout with the utmost cleanlinessand kept apart from wine, incense, and other smelly substancesand people handling such substances. Second, it must be kept ina cool, dry place, and during moist seasons, a reasonable quantityfor use must be kept in special small pots, best made of pewter-foil, while the reserve in the big pots is not opened except whennecessary, and if a collection gets moldy, it should be submitted toa gentle roasting over a slow fire, uncovered and constantly fanned,so as to prevent the leaves from turning yellow or becoming discol-ored. Third, half of the art of making tea lies in getting good waterwith a keen edge; mountain spring water comes first, river watersecond, and well water third; water from the tap, if coming fromdams, being essentially mountain water and satisfactory. Fourth, forthe appreciation of rare cups, one must have quiet friends and not toomany of them at one time. Fifth, the proper color of tea in generalis a pale golden yellow, and all dark red tea must be taken withmilk or lemon or peppermint, or anything to cover up its awfulsharp taste. Sixth, the best tea has a “return flavor” (huetwet),which is felt about half a minute after drinking and after its chemkcal elements have had time to act on the salivary glands. Seven,tea must be freshly made and drunk immediately, and if goodtea is expected, it should not be allowed to stand in the pot for toolong, when the infusion has gone too far. Eight, it must be madewith water just brought up to a boil. Nine, all adulterants are taboo,although individual differences may be allowed for people whoprefer a slight mixture of some foreign flavor (e. g., jasmine, orcassia). Eleven, the flavor expected of the best tea is the delicateflavor of “baby's flesh.”

In accordance with the Chinese practice of prescribing the propermoment and surrounding for enjoying a thing, Ch’asu, an excellenttreatise on tea, reads thus:













THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

Proper moments for drinking tea:

When one’s heart and hands are idle.

Tired after reading poetry.

When one’s thoughts are disturbed.

Listening to songs and ditties.

When a song is completed.

Shut up at one’s home on a holiday.

Playing the ch’in and looking over paintings.

Engaged in conversation deep at night.

Before a bright window and a clean desk.

With charming friends and slender concubines.

Returning from a visit with friends.

When the day is clear and the breeze is mild.

On a day of light showers.

In a painted boat near a small wooden bridge.

In a forest with tall bamboos.

In a pavilion overlooking lotus flowers on a summer day.Having lighted incense in a small studio.

After a feast is over and the guests are gone.

When children are at school.

In a quiet, secluded temple.

Near famous springs and quaint rocks.

Moments tuhen one should stop drinking tea:

At work.

Watching a play.

Opening letters.

During big rain and snow.

At a long wine feast with a big party.

Going through documents.

On busy days.

Generally conditions contrary to those enumerated in theabove section.

Bad water.Bad utensils.Brass spoons.

"O oe*

Things to be avoided:













231

Wooden pails (for water).

Wood for fuel (on account of smoke)*

Soft charcoal.

Coarse servant.

Bad-tempered maid.

Unclean towels.

All varieties of incense and medicine.

Things and places to be \ept away from:

Damp rooms.

Kitchens.

Noisy streets.

Crying infants.

Hotheaded persons.

Quarreling servants.

Hot rooms.

V. On Smoke and Incense

The world today is divided into smokers and non-smokers. It istrue that the smokers cause some nuisance to the non-smokers,but this nuisance is physical, while the nuisance that the non-smokers cause the smokers is spiritual. There are, of course, a lotof non-smokers who don’t try to interfere with the smokers, andwives can be trained even to tolerate their husbands’ smoking inbed. That is the surest sign of a happy and successful marriage.It is sometimes assumed, however, that the non-smokers are morallysuperior, and that they have something to be proud of, not realizingthat they have missed one of the greatest pleasures of mankind. Iam willing to allow that smoking is a moral weakness, but on theother hand, we must beware of the man without weaknesses. Heis not to be trusted. He is apt to be always sober and he cannotmake a single mistake. His habits are likely to be regular, hisexistence more mechanical and his head always maintains itssupremacy over his heart. Much as I like reasonable persons, I hatecompletely rational beings. For that reason, I am always scaredand ill at ease when I enter a house in which there are no ash













trays. The room is apt to be too clean and orderly, the cushionsare apt to be in their right places, and the people are apt to becorrect and unemotional. And immediately I am put on my bestbehavior, which means the same thing as the most uncomfortablebehavior.

Now the moral and spiritual benefits of smoking have neverbeen appreciated by these correct and righteous and unemotionaland unpoetic souls. But since we smokers are usually attackedfrom the moral, and not the artistic side, I must begin by defend-ing the smoker's morality, which is on the whole higher than thatof the non-smokers. The man with a pipe in his mouth is the manafter my heart. He is more genial, more sociable, has more intimateindiscretions to reveal, and sometimes he is quite brilliant in con-versation, and in any case, I have a feeling that he likes me asmuch as I like him. I agree entirely with Thackeray, who wrote:"The pipe draws wisdom from the bps of the philosopher, and shutsup the mouths of the foolish; it generates a style of conversationcontemplative, thoughtful, benevolent, and unaffected.”

A smoker may have dirtier finger-nails, but that is no matterwhen his heart is warm, and in any case a style of conversationcontemplative, thoughtful, benevolent, and unaffected is such arare thing that one is willing to pay a high price to enjoy it. Andmost important of all, a man with a pipe in his mouth is alwayshappy, and after all, happiness is the greatest of all moral virtues.W. Maggin says that “no cigar smoker ever committed suicide,”and it is still truer that no pipe smoker ever quarrels with his wife.The reason is perfectly plain: one cannot hold a pipe between one’steeth and at the same time shout at the top of one’s voice. No onehas ever been seen doing that. For one naturally talks in a lowvoice when smoking a pipe. What happens when a husband whois a smoker gets angry, is that he immediately lights a cigarette,or a pipe, and looks glum. But that will not be for long. For hisemotion has already found an oudet, and although he may wantto continue to look angry in order to justify his indignation orsense of being insulted, still he cannot keep it up, for the gentle













233

fumes of the pipe are altogether too agreeable and soothing, andas he puffs the smoke out, he also seems to let out, breath bybreath, his stored-up anger. That is why when a wise wife seesher husband about to fly into a fit of rage, she should gently sticka pipe in his mouth and say, “There! forget about it!” This formulaalways works. A wife may fail, but a pipe never.

The artistic and literary value of smoking can best be appreciatedonly when we imagine what a smoker misses when he stops smok-ing for a short period. Every smoker has, in some foolish moment,attempted to abjure his allegiance to Lady Nicotine, and then aftersome wrestling with his imaginary conscience, come back to hissenses again. I was foolish enough once to stop smoking for threeweeks, but at the end of that period, my conscience irresistiblyurged me onto the right road again. I swore I would never relapse,but would keep on being a devotee and a worshiper at her shrineuntil my second childhood, when I might conceivably fall prey tosome Temperance Society wives. When that unhappy old agearrives, one is of course not responsible for one’s actions. But solong as I have a modicum of will-power and moral sense left, Ishall not attempt it again. As if I had not seen the folly of it all—the utter immorality of trying to deny oneself the spiritual forceand sense of moral well-being provided by this useful invention.For according to Haldane, the great English bio-chemist, smokingcounts as one of the four human inventions in the history of man-kind that have left a deep biologic influence on human culture.

The story of those three weeks, when I played the coward to myown better self and willfully denied myself something that I knewto be of great soul-uplifting force, was indeed a disgraceful one.Now that I can look back upon it in a matter-of-fact and rationalway, I can hardly understand at all how that fit of moral irrespon-sibility lasted so long. If I were to detail my spiritual Odyssey byday and by night during those three weeks in the Joycean man-ner, I am sure it Vrould fill three thousand good Homeric linesin verse, or a hundred and fifty closely printed pages in prose. Ofcourse, the object, to begin with, was ridiculous. Why, in the name













of the human race and the universe, should one not smoke? I can-not answer now. But such unreasonable moods do come to a mansometimes, when one, I suppose, wishes to do something againstthe grain just for the pleasure of overcoming resistance and in thisway use up his momentary excess of moral energy. Beyond this,I cannot account for my sudden and unholy resolution to cut outsmoking. In other words, I was giving myself a moral test muchin the same manner as people indulge in Swedish gymnastics—movement for the sake of movement, without actually accomplish-ing any work useful to society. It was apparently this kind of moralluxury that I was giving myself, and that was all.

Of course, in the first three days, I felt a queer sinking sensa-tion somewhere along the alimentary canal, especially in the upperpart of it. To relieve that queer sensation, I took Double-Mintchewing gum, good Fukien tea, and Montesserat Lime-Fruit Pas-tilles. I conquered and killed that sensation in exactly three days.This was the physical, and therefore the easiest and, to my mind,the most contemptible part of the batde. People who think thatherein lies the whole of the unholy struggle against smoking haveno idea of what they are talking about. They forget that smokingis a spiritual act, and those who have no idea of the spiritual sig-nificance of smoking ought never to meddle with the affair. Afterthree days, I encountered the second stage, when the real spiritualbattle began. Scales fell from my eyes and I saw that there weretwo races of smokers, one of which never deserved the name atall. For these people, the second stage never existed. I began tounderstand why we hear of the “easy conversions” of many smokerswho seem to have given up their smoking without any struggle atall. The fact that they could stop such a habit as easily as theycould throw away an old toothbrush shows that they have neverreally learned to smoke at all. People credit them with a “strongwill-power,” whereas the fact is these people are never true smokersand have never been so in their lives. For them, smoking is aphysical act, like the washing of their faces and brushing of their













235

soul-satisfying qualities. I doubt whether this race of matter-of-factpeople would ever be capable of tuning up their souls in ecstaticresponse to Shelley's “Skylark” or Chopin's “Nocturne.” Thesepeople miss nothing by giving up their smoke. They are probablyhappier reading Aesop’s Fables with their Temperance wives.

For us true smokers, however, a problem existed, of which neitherthe Temperance wives nor their Aesop-reading husbands haveeven an inkling. For us, the injustice to oneself and the senseless-ness of it all soon became apparent. Good sense and reason soonbegan to revolt against it and ask: for what reason, social, political,moral, physiological or financial, should one consciously use one’swill-power to prevent oneself from attaining that complete spiritualwell-being, that condition of keen, imaginative perception, and full,vibrant creative energy—a condition necessary to our perfect en-joyment of a friend’s conversation by the fireside, or to the creatingof real warmth in the reading of an ancient book, or to that bring-ing forth of a perfect cadence of words and thought from themind that we know as authorship? At such moments, one instinc-tively feels that reaching out for a cigarette is the only morallyright thing to do, and that sticking a piece of chewing gum inthe mouth instead would be criminally wicked. Of such moments,I can tell only a few here.

My friend B had arrived from Peiping and called on me.

We had not seen each other for three years. At Peiping, then calledPeking, we used to chat and smoke the evenings out, discussingpolitics and philosophy and modern art. And now he had come^and we were engaged in the fascinating task of rambling remi-niscences. We discussed the whole bunch of professors, poets andcranks we used to know in Peiping. At every pointed remark, Iwas mentally reaching out for a cigar, but instead inhibited myselfand only rose up and sat down again. My friend, on the otherhand, was rattling along amidst his cigar fumes in perfect con-tentment. I had told him that I had given up smoking, and I hadenough self-respect not to break down right in his presence. Butdown in my heart, I knew I was not at my best, and was only













unjustly making myself look coldly rational, when I wished topartake of the full communion of the two souls with a completesurrender of the emotions. The conversation went on, somewhatonesidedly, with half of myself there, and then my friend left. Ihad stuck it all out somewhat grimly. By that fiction of “will-power,” I had “won,” but I knew only that I was unhappy. A fewdays later, my friend wrote me on his voyage that he had foundme not the old, vibrant, ecstatic self, and suggested that perhapsliving in Shanghai had something to do with it. To this day, Ihave not forgiven myself for failing to smoke that night.

Another night, there was a club meeting of certain “intellectuals,”which was usually a time for some furious smoking. After thesumptuous repast, some one of us usually read a paper. This time,

the speaker was C , talking on “Religion and Revolution,” a

paper punctuated with many brilliant remarks. One was that whileFeng Yiihsiang had joined the Northern Methodist Church, ChiangKaishek had chosen to join the Southern Methodist Church. Someone therefore suggested that it would not be long before Wu Peifujoined the Western Methodists. As such remarks passed round, thedensity of the smoke grew, and it seemed to me the very atmosphere

was laden with wicked, fugitive thoughts. The poet H  was

sitting in the middle, and was trying to send successive smoke-rings up the heavy air, very much as a fish would let forth bubblesof air through the water—lost apparently in his own thoughts andhappy. I alone did not smoke, and felt like a God-forsaken sinner.The senselessness of it all was growing very apparent to myself.In that moment of clear vision, I saw that I was mad not to smoke.I tried to think up the reasons why I had decided not to smoke,and none could present itself to me with any validity.

After this, my conscience began to gnaw upon my soul. For, Isaid to myself, what was thought without imagination, and howcould imagination soar on the clipped wings of a drab, non-smok-ing soul? Then one afternoon, I visited a lady. I was mentallyprepared for the re-conversion. Nobody else was in the room, andwe were apparently going to have a real tite-fa-tite. The young lady













ON SMOKE AND INCENSE

237

was smoking with one arm resting on her crossed knee, slightlyinclined forward, and looking wistful and in her best style. I feltthe moment had arrived. She offered the tin, and I took one firmlyand slowly from it, knowing that by that act I had recovered frommy temporary fit of moral degradation.

I came back, and at once sent my boy to buy a tin of CapstanMmum. On the right side of my desk, there was a regular mark,burnt in by my habitually placing burning cigarette ends there.I had calculated that it would take somewhere between seven andeight years to burn through the two-inch desk top, and had re-gretted to observe that, after my last disgraceful resolution, it wasgoing to remain at about half a centimeter. It was with great de-light, therefore, that I had the pleasure of placing my burningcigarette on that old mark again, where it is happily at work now,trying to resume its long journey ahead.

In contrast with wine, there is comparatively litde praise oftobacco in Chinese literature, because smoking as a habit was in-troduced by Portuguese sailors as late as the sixteenth century. Ihave ransacked the entire Chinese literature after that period, buthave found only a few scattered insignificant lines, quite unworthyof the fragrant weed. An ode in praise of tobacco evidendy has tocome from some undergraduate of Oxford. The Chinese people,however, always had a very high sense of smell, as is evident intheir appreciation of tea and wine and food. In the absence oftobacco, they had developed the art of burning incense, which inChinese literature was always classified in the same category andmentioned in the same breath, with tea and wine. From the earliesttime, as far back as the Han Dynasty when the Chinese Empireextended its rule to Indo-China, incense brought as tribute fromthe South began to be used at court and in rich men’s homes. Inbooks on the art of living, sections have always been devoted toa discussion of the varieties and quality and preparation of incense.In the chapter on incense m the book K’aop'an Yushih, written byT’u Lung, we have the following description of the enjoyment ofincense:













The benefits of the use of incense are manifold High-mindedrecluse scholars, engaged in their discussion of truth and re-ligion, feel that it clears their mind and pleases their spiritwhen they burn a stick of incense. At the fourth watch of thenight, when the solitary moon is hanging in the sky, andone feels cools and detached toward life, it emancipates hisheart and enables him to whisde leisurely. When one is exam-ining old rubbings of calligraphy before a bright window, orleisurely singing some poetry with a fly-whip in his hand, orwhen one is reading at night in the lamp light, it helps todrive away the Demon of Sleepiness. You may therefore callit “the ancient companion of the moon/' When a lady in redpyjamas is standing by your side, and you are holding herhand around the incense burner and whispering secrets toeach other, it warms your heart and intensifies your love. Youmay therefore call it “the ancient stimulant of passion.” Orwhen one has waked up from his afternoon nap and is sittingbefore a closed window on a rainy day and practising calligraphyand tasting the mild flavor of tea, the burner is just gettingwarm and its subtle fragrance floats about and encircles ourbodies. Even better still is it when one wakes up from a drink-ing party and a full moon is shining upon the clear night, andhe moves his fingers across the strings or makes a whisde inan empty tower, with the green hills in the distance in fullsight, and the half-visible smoke from the remaining embersfloats about the door screen. It is also useful for warding offevil smells and the malicious atmosphere of a swamp, usefulanywhere and everywhere one goes. The best in quality ischianan, but this is difficult to obtain, not accessible to a manliving in the mountains. The next best is aloeswood or eagle-wood, which is of three grades. The highest grade has toostrong a smell, tending to be sharp and pungent; the lowestgrade is too dry and also too full of smoke; the middle grade,costing about six or seven cents an ounce, is most soothingand fragrant and can be regarded as exquisite. After one hasboiled a pot of tea, he can make use of the burning charcoalsand put them in the incense container and let the fire heatit up slowly. In such a satisfying moment, one feels like beingtransported to the heavenly abode in the company of the im-mortals, entirely oblivious of human existence. Ah, indeedgreat is the pleasure! People nowadays lack the appreciation of













239

true fragrance and go in for strange and exotic names, trying tooutdo one another by having a mixture of different kinds,not realizing that the fragrance of aloeswood is entirely nat-ural, and that the best of its kind has an indescribable subtletyand mildness.

Mao Pichiang in his Reminiscences of My Concubine, describ-ing the art of life of this rich poet and his accomplished and under-standing mistress, gives various descriptions of their enjoyment ofincense, of which the following is one:

My concubine often sat quietly with me in her fragrant bed-chamber to sample or judge famous incense. The so-called“palace incense” is seductive in quality, while the popular wayof preparing aloeswood is vulgar. The ordinary people oftenset aloeswood right on the fire and its fragrant fume is soonput out by the burning resin. Thus not only has its fragrancefailed to be brought out, but it also leaves a smoky, chokingodor behind around one’s body. The hard quality with hori-zontal grains called hengkpch'en, has a superb fragrance, beingone of the four kinds of aloeswood, but distinguished by havinghorizontal fibers. There is another variety of this wood, knownas p’englaihstcmg, which is the size of a mushroom and conicallyshaped, being not yet fully grown. We kept all these varieties,and she burned them on top of fine sand over a slow fire sothat no actual smoke was visible. Its subde perfume permeatedthe chamber like the smell of chiananm wood wafted by a breeze,or like that of dew-bedecked roses, or of a piece of ambernibbed hot by friction, or of fragrant liquor being poured intoa horn cup. When bedding is perfumed by this method, itsfragrance blends with that of the woman’s flesh, sweet and in-toxicating even in one’s dreams.

VI. On Drink and Wine Games

I am no drinker and am therefore totally unqualified to talk ofwines and liquors. My capacity is three cups of shaohsmg rice wine,and I am even capable of getting tipsy on a mere glass of beer.This is evidently a matter of natural gift, and the gifts of drinkingtea and wine and smoking do not seem to go together. I have













240

found among my friends great drinkers who get sick before theygo through half a cigar, while I smoke every waking hour of theday without any appreciable effect, but am not very good withliquors. Anyway, Li Liweng has put down on record his swornopinion that great drinkers of tea are not fond of wine, and viceversa. Li himself was a great tea connoisseur, but confessed thathe had no pretentions to being a drinker of wine at all. It is there-fore my special delight and comfort to discover so many distin-guished Chinese authors that I like who had really but a smallcapacity for wine, and who said so. It has taken me some time tocollect these confessions from their letters or other writings. Liwas one, Yuan Tsets’ai, Wang Yuyang, and Yuan Chunglangwere others. All of them, however, were people who had “the sen-timent for wine” without having an actual capacity for it.

In spite of my disqualification, I still cannot ignore this topic,because more than anything else, it has made an important con-tribution to literature, and in the same measure as smoking, wher-ever the custom of smoking was known, it has greatly helpedman’s creative power, with considerable lasting results. The pleasureof wine drinking, especially in what the Chinese call “a littledrink,” so constantly met with in Chinese literature, had alwaysseemed a mystery to me, until a beautiful Shanghai lady, whenhalf-drunk herself dilated upon its virtues with such convincingpower that I finally thought the condition described must be real.“One just babbles along and babbles along in the state of half-drunkenness, which is the best and happiest state,” she said. Thereseems to be a sense of elation, of confidence in one’s power toovercome all obstacles and a heightened sensibility, and man’spower of creative thinking, which seems to lie in the borderlandof fact and fancy, is brought up to a higher pitch than at normaltimes: There seems to be a force of self-confidence and emancipa-tion, which is so necessary at the creative moment. The importanceof this sense of confidence and emancipation from mere rules andtechnique will be made quite clear when we come to the sectionon art













241

There is a wise thought in the suggestion that the modern dic-tators o£ Europe are so dangerous to humanity because they don’tdrink. In my reading of current literature of the past year, I havecome across no better and wiser and wittier writing than an articleby Charles W. Ferguson on “Dictators Don’t Drink” in Harper’sfor June, 1937. The thought is worth pursuing, and the writingis so good throughout that I feel tempted to quote it in full buthave to refrain from doing so. Mr. Ferguson starts out with thethought that: “Stalin, Hitler and Mussolini are models of sobriety.. . . The men who symbolize tyranny in the modern manner, whoare up-to-date rulers of men, are fellows worthy of emulation by anyambitious young man who earnestly wants to get ahead. Every oneof the lot would make a good son-in-law and husband. They rep-resent an evangelist’s ideal of moral rectitude. . . . Hitler eats nomeat, does not drink, does not smoke. To these suffocating virtueshe adds the further and more notable virtue of continence. . . .Mussolini is more of a horse in his eating, but he abstains withgrim fortitude from spirituous liquors, now and then taking onlya tantalizing glass of light wine—but nothing which might seri-ously interfere with such high matters as the subjugation of aninferior people. Stalin lives frugally in a three-room apartment,dresses inconspicuously and in self-effacing taste, eats frightfullysimple meals, and sips brandy like a connoisseur.” The question iswhat do these facts signify for us? “Do they indicate that we aretoday in the grip of a coterie of men essentially smug, disastrouslyself-rightecftis, grimly aware of their tremendous rectitude, andhence so dangerous that the world at large would be better off ifit could entice them on a roaring drunk?” . . . “No man couldbe a dangerous dictator with a hang-over. His sense of God-almighty-ness would be wrecked. He would feel himself to havebeen gross and humiliated in the presence of his subjects. Hewould have become one of the masses—one of the lowest of them—and the experience would have done something to his insufferableconceit.” The writer thinks that should there be an internationalcocktail party, attended only by these chosen leaders, in which “the













main object would merely be to fry the dignitaries as smoodiiyand as quickly as possible,” the next morning, “Far from being theirreproachable supermen of today, the world’s best would havebecome ordinary fellows, afflicted like their meanest followers, andperhaps in a frame of mind to grapple with matters as men andnot as demigods.”

The reason I don’t like dictators is that they are inhuman, andanything which is inhuman is bad. An inhuman religion is noreligion, inhuman politics is foolish politics, inhuman art is justbad art, and the inhuman way of life is the beast’s way of life.This test of humanness is universal and can be applied to all walksof life and all systems of thought The greatest ideal that man canaspire to is not to be a show-case of virtue, but just to be a genial,likable and reasonable human being.

While the Chinese can teach the Westerners about tea. Western-ers can teach the Chinese about wine. A Chinese is easily dazzledby the variety of bottles and labels when he enters an Americanwine-shop for wherever he goes, in his own country, he seesshaoksing, again shaohstng, and nothing but shaohsing. There aresix or seven other varieties, and there are distilled liquors frommillet, the oliang, besides the class of medicinal wines, but thelist is soon exhausted. The Chinese have not developed the nicetyof serving different drinks with different courses of food. On theother hand, the popularity of shaohstng is such at the place givingits name to this wine, that there as soon as a girl is born, herparents make a jar of wine, so that by the time she marries, sheis sure to have at least a jar of wine about twenty years old aspart of her trousseau. Hence the name huatiao, the proper namefor this wine, which means “florally decorated,” from the jardecoration.

This lack in the variety of wine they make up for by greaterinsistence on the proper moment and surrounding for drinking.The feeling for wine is essentially correct. The contrast betweenwine and tea is expressed in the form that “tea resembles the recluse^and wine resembles the cavalier; wine is for good comradeship, and













243

tea is for the man of quiet virtue/’ Specifying the proper moods andplaces for drink, a Chinese writer says, “Formal drinking should beslow and leisurely, unrestrained drinking should be elegant and ro-mantic; a sick person should drink a small quantity, and a sad per-son should drink to get drunk. Drinking in the spring should takeplace in a courtyard, in summer in the outskirts of a city, in au-tumn on a boat and in winter in the house, and at night it shouldbe enjoyed in the presence of the moon ”

Another writer says, “There is a proper time and place forgetting drunk. One should get drunk before flowers in the day-time, in order to assimilate their light and color; and one shouldget drunk in snow in the night-time, in order to clear his thoughts,A man getting drunk when happy at success should sing, in orderto harmonize his spirit; and a man getting drunk at a farewell partyshould strike a musical tone, in order to strengthen his spirit. Adrunk scholar should be careful in his conduct, in order to avoidhumiliations; and a drunk military man should order gallons andput up more flags, in order to increase his military splendor. Drink-ing in a tower should take place in summer, in order to profitfrom the cool atmosphere; and drinking on the water shouldtake place in autumn, in order to increase the sense of elated free-dom, These are proper ways of drinking in respect of mood andscenery, and to violate these rules is to miss the pleasure of drink-ing/’

The Chinese attitude toward wine and behavior during a winefeast is partly incomprehensible or reprehensible to me, and partlycommendable. The reprehensible part is the custom of gettingpleasure out of forcing a man to drink beyond his capacity, I amnot aware that such a practice exists or is common in Westernsociety. It is usual among drinkers to place a mystic value upon themere quantity of drinking, whether by oneself, or by those in thecompany. No doubt there is a certain hilarity connected withit and such urging is done in a playful or friendly spirit, result-ing generally in a lot of noise and hubbub and confusion, whichadds to the fun of the occasion. It is beautiful to look at when the













company reach a state when they all forget themselves and theguests shout for more wine or leave or exchange their seats, andnobody remembers who is the host and who are the guests. Itusually degenerates into a drinking match, played with great prideand subtlety and finesse and always with the desire to see theother fellow under the table. One has to be on the lookout forfoul play, and guard against the other party’s underhanded tactics.Probably the fun lies there, in the spirit of contest.

The commendable side of Chinese drinking lies in the noise.Eating at a Chinese restaurant sometimes makes one imagine oneis attending a football match. How is the volume of noise pro-duced and whence come those noises with beautiful rhythm resem-bling cheers and yells at a football match ? The answer lies in thecustom of “guessing fingers,” in which each party puts up anumber of fingers simultaneously with his opponent and shoutsthe number of the total sum of fingers that he guesses will be putout by both parties. The numbers, “one, two, three, four,” andso on, are given in poetic, polysyllabic phrases like “seven stars”{Ch’ich’iao, the constellation “Dipper”), or “eight horses”or “eightimmortals crossing the sea.” The necessity for perfectly timed andsimultaneous action in putting out the fingers forces the phrasesinto definite musical beats or bars, into which the varying syllableshave to be compressed, and these are accompanied during the inter-val by a set introductory phrase occupying another musical bar,and the song is carried on without interruption rhythmically untilone party makes a correct conjecture and the other party has todrink a full cup, large or small, or two or three, as previouslyagreed. Guessing at the total is not mere blind conjecture, but isbased on observation of the opponent’s habit of sequence or alterna*tion of numbers and demands some quick thinking. The funand swing of the game depends entirely upon the speed and unin-terrupted rhythm of the players.

We have come to the real point about the conception of a wineparty, for this alone gives a satisfactory explanation of the lengthof a Chinese feast, its number of courses and its method of service.













245

One does not sit down at a feast to eat, but to have a good time,provided by telling of stories and jokes and all kinds of literarypuzzles and poetic games between the serving of different dishes.The party looks more like a time for oral games, punctuated everyfive or seven or ten minutes with the appearance of a dish on thetable and a bite or two by the company. This produces two effects:first, the vociferousness of oral games undoubtedly helps to letthe spirituous liquors evaporate from the system, and secondly, bythe time one comes to the end of a feast lasting over an hour, someof the food is already digested, so that the more one eats, themore hungry he becomes. Silence after all is a vice during eating;it is immoral because it is unhygienic. Any foreigner in China whohas lasting doubts about the Chinese being a gay and happypeople with a touch of Latin gaiety, who still clings to the pre-conceived notion that the Chinese people are silent, sedate andunemotional, should watch them while eating, for then the China-man is in his natural element and his moral perfections are com-plete. If the Chinaman does not have a good time when he iseating, when does he have a good time?

Famous as the Chinese are for their puzzles, their wine gamesare less well-known. With wine as forfeit, a great variety of gameshave been invented as excuses for drinking. All Chinese novelsdutifully record the names of dishes served at a dinner, and equallydutifully describe the contests of poetry which have no difficulty infilling an entire chapter. The feminist novel Chinghuayuandescribes so many games among the literary girls (including gamesin phonetics), as to seem to make these the main theme of thestory.

The simplest game Is shehfu. In which a syllable forming thebeginning of one word and the end of another is concealed byjoining the other syllables into a word, and the player has to guessat the missing syllable. Thus “drum” being the syllable common to“humdrum" and stick,” the puzzle is given in the combina-

tion “hum-stick” and the other party is to supply the missingsyllable. Or given “a-starch,” the other person is to find the missing













middle syllable “corn” in ceacorn-cornstarch .” Properly played, theperson who has guessed at the middle syllable is not to declare it,but to form a counter-puzzle with the syllable “corn” and simplyanswer “pop-er” (“pop-corn-corner”), or pop-muffin,” from whichthe original maker of the puzzle is able to tell whether he hasgot the correct answer, while it remains a mystery to the restof those present. Sometimes an answer not originally intended,but even better than the one the maker has in mind, has to beaccepted. Both parties can set syllable-puzzles for each other tosolve at the same time. Some puzzles are simple and some arecarefully concealed, as “a-ounce” for the missing syllable “pron,”while “cam-ephant” can be easily detected to contain “el” in camel-elephant” Rare and difficult words might be used, and in the prac-tice of scholars, rare historical names might be used, taxing one’sscholarship: e.g., names from one of Shakespeare’s plays or Balzac’snovels.

Variations of literary games are infinite. One popular amongscholars is for each person in turn to say a doggerel line of sevenwords for the other person to follow up with another rhymed line,the poem as a whole degenerating into pure nonsense at the end.Lines usually begin with some comment on some object or personin view, or the scenery. Every person is to say two lines, the firstone completing a couplet begun by the preceding person, and thesecond leading off a new couplet for the successor to finish. Thefirst line sets the rhyme, and the third, fifth, seventh (and so on)lines must keep to it. In the milieu of scholars, by whom every nameand sentence from the Four Boo\s or the Boo\ of Poetry has beenmemorized by heart, demands may be made by the toastmaster forapt quotations illustrating a topic, (e.g., “Girl shy,” “Girl happy,”“Girl cries”). Names of popular ditties, and lines from T’angpoems are often included. Or the party may be required to givenames of medicines or flowers that answer to the description in agiven tide of a popular tune, or, to make the matter appear simplerin English, to give names of medicines or flowers that refer to anarticle pertaining to women; e.g.. Queen Anne's lace, fox-glove, etc.













ON DRINK AND WINE GAMES

247

Possibility of such combinations depends on the beauty of namesgiven to flowers, medicines, trees, etc, in a language, English familynames might, for instance, be given to call up names of popularsongs, (as an instance, “Rockefeller'1 may suggest “Sit Down,You’re Rocking the Boat,” and “Whitehead” may suggest “SilverThreads Among the Gold”). The aptness of such juxtapositionsdepends on one’s ingenuity, and the fun of such games lies inspontaneity and fanciful, but not necessarily learned, associations.Names like “Tugwell,” “Sitwell” and “Frankfurter” can easilybe made to serve any humorous purpose (for the last I suggest“Non-cold Not-Pig”). College students can have a good time mak-ing wine games out of their professors’ names.

More elaborate games require specially designed chips. In thenovel An Orchid's Dream, one finds, for instance, a descriptionof the following game. Three sets of chips (which may be madeof paper) contain the following combination of six persons doingsix things in six places:

Dandy

go£s horse-riding

thoroughfare

Abbot

says prayers

abbot's room

Lady

embroiders

Lady’s chamber

Butcher

fights

streets

Courtesan

flirts

red-light district

Beggar

sleeps

cemetery

Chips drawn from the three sets by a person may form the weirdest

combinations: thus,

“Abbot flirts in a

lady’s room,” “Courtesan

says prayers in a cemetery,” “Beggar sleeps in the red-light dis-

trict,” “Butcher embroiders in a thoroughfare,” “Lady fights in anAbbot’s room,” etc., all of which would make good newspaper head-lines. With some such situation as the main theme, each personis to give a five-word line from a poem, followed by the name ofa song, and concluded by a line from the Boo\ of Poetry, the wholeto make an apt description of the situation.

It is no wonder therefore that a wine feast easily lasts two hours.The object of a dinner is not to eat and drink, but to join in merry-making and to make a lot of noise. For that reason, he who drinks













half drinks best. Like the poet Tao Yiianming playing upon astringless instrument, for the drinker the sentiment is the thing.And one may enjoy the sentiment for wine without the capacityto drink it. “There are people who cannot read a single word, buthave the sentiment for poetry; people who cannot repeat a singleprayer but have the sentiment for religion; people who cannot toucha drop but have the sentiment for wine; and people who do notunderstand a thing about rocks, but have the sentiment for paint-ing.” It is such people who are fit company for poets, saints,drinkers and painters.

VII. On Food and Medicine

A broader view of food should regard it essentially as includingall things that go to nourish us, just as a broader view of houseshould include everything pertaining to living conditions. As weare all animals, it is but common sense to say that we are what weeat. Our lives are not in the lap of the gods, but in the lap of ourcooks. Hence every Chinese gendeman tries to befriend his cook,because so much of the enjoyment of life lies within his powerto give or to take away as he sees fit. Chinese, and I suppose West-ern, parents always try to befriend the wet-nurse and treat her roy-ally, because they realize that the health of their baby depends onthe temper and happiness and general living conditions of the wet-nurse. Pari passu, we should give our cooks who feed us the sameroyal treatment, if we care as much for our own health as we carefor that of our babies. If a man will be sensible and one fine morn-ing, when he is lying in bed, count at the tips of his fingers howmany things in this life truly give him enjoyment, invariably hewill find food is the first one. Therefore it is the invariable test ofa wise man whether he has good food at home or not.

The tempo of modern city life is such that we are giving less andless time and thought to the matter of cooking and feeding. Ahousewife who is at the same time a brilliant journalist can hardlybe blamed for serving her husband with canned soup and beans.













249

Nevertheless, it is a pretty crazy life when one eats in order towork and does not work in order to eat. We need a certain kind-ness and generosity to ourselves before we learn kindness andgenerosity to others. What good does it do a woman to do somemuckraking for the city and improve general social conditions, ifshe herself has to cook on a two-burner range and allow tenminutes for eating her meal? Confucius undoubtedly would di-vorce her, as he divorced his wife for failure in good cooking.

The story is not exacdy clear as to whether Confucius divorcedher or she just had to run away in order to flee from the demandsof this fastidious artist of life. For him “rice could never be whiteenough and mince meat could never be chopped fine enough.”He refused to eat “when meat was not served with its propersauce,” “when it was not cut square,” “when its color was notright,” and “when its flavor was not right.” I am quite sure thateven then his wife could have stood it, but when one day, unableto find fresh food, she sent her son Li to buy wine and cold meatfrom some delicatessen and be through with it, and he announcedthat he “would not drink wine that was not homemade, nor tastemeat that was bought from the shops,” what else could she do exceptpack up and run away? This insight into the psychology of Confu-cius’ wife is mine, but the severe conditions that he imposed uponhis poor wife stands there today in the Confucian classics1

Taking then the broader view of food as nourishment, the Chi-nese do not draw any distinction between food and medicine.What is good for the body is medicine and at the same time food.Modern science has only in the last century come to realize theimportance of diet in curing diseases, and happily today all mod-em hospitals are well equipped with trained dietitians. If moderndoctors would carry it a step further, and send these dietitians tobe trained in China, they might have less use for their glass bottles.An early medical writer, Sun Ssemiao (sixth century, A. D.), says:“A true doctor first finds out the cause of the disease, and havingfound that out, he tries to cure it first by food. When food fails,

1 Analects, Ch. X.













then he prescribes medicine.” Thus we find the earliest existing Chi-nese book on food, written by an Imperial physician at the MongolCourt in 1330, regards food essentially as a matter of regimen forhealth, and makes the introductory remarks: “He who would takegood care of his health should be sparing in his tastes, banish hisworries, temper his desires, restrain his emotions, take good careof his vital force, spare his words, regard lightly success and failure,ignore sorrows and difficulties, drive away foolish ambitions, avoidgreat likes and dislikes, calm his vision and his hearing, and befaithful in his internal regimen. How can one have sickness if hedoes not tire his spirits and worry his soul? Therefore he whowould nourish his nature should eat only when he is hungry andnot fill himself with food, and he should drink only when he isthirsty and not fill himself with too much drink. He should eatlittle and between long intervals, and not too much and too con-stantly. He should aim at being a little hungry when well-filled, andbeing a little well-filled when hungry. Bemg well-filled hurts thelungs and being hungry hurts the flow of vital energy.” This cookbook, like all Chinese cook books, therefore reads like a pharma-copoeia.

Walking down Honan Road in Shanghai and passing throughthe shops selling Chinese medicine, one might find it hard to de-cide whether they sell more medicine than food or more foodthan medicine. For there one finds cinnamon bark standing sideby side with ham, tiger’s tendons and beaver kidneys along withsea slugs, and horns of young deer along with mushrooms andPeiping dates. All of them are good for the body and all of themnourish us. The distinction between food and medicine is posi-tively impossible in the case of a botde of “tiger-tendon and quincewine.” Happily a Chinese tonic does not consist of three gramsof hypophosphate and .02 grains of arsenic. It consists of a bowl ofblack-skinned chicken soup, cooked with rehmannia lutea. Thisis due entirely to the practice of Chinese medicine, for whileWestern medicines are taken in pills or tablets, Chinese medicinesare served as stews and literally called “soups” And Chinese













251

medicine is conceived and prepared in the same manner as ordinarysoup, with proper regard for mixing of the flavors and ingredients.There are anywhere from seven or eight to twenty ingredients ina Chinese stew, so designed as to nourish and strengthen thebody as a whole, and not to attack the disease solely. For Chinesemedicine essentially agrees with the most up-to-date Western medi-cine in thinking that, when a man’s liver is sick, it is not his liveralone but the entire body that is sick. After all, all that medicinecan do comes down to the essential principle of strengthening ourvital energy, through acting on this most highly complicated sys-tem of organs and fluids and hormones called the human body,and letting the body cure itself. Instead of giving patients aspirintablets, Chinese doctors would therefore ask them to take largebowls of medicinal tea to produce perspiration. And instead oftaking quinine tablets, the patients of the future world mightconceivably be required to drink a bowl of rich turtle soup withmushrooms, cooked with pieces of cinchona bark. The dieteticsdepartment of a modern hospital will have to be enlarged, and thefuture hospital itself will very nearly resemble a sanatorium-res-taurant. Eventually we have to come to a conception of healthand disease by which the two merge into each other, when meneat in order to prevent disease instead of taking medicine in order tocure it. This point is not stressed enough in the West, for the West-erners go to see a doctor only when they are sick, and do not seehim when they are well. Before that time comes, the distinctionbetween medicine which nourishes the body and medicine whichcures disease will have to be abolished.

We have, therefore, to congratulate the Chinese people on theirhappy confusion of medicine and food. This makes their medicineless of a medicine, but makes their food more of a food. Thereseems be a symbolic significance in the fact that the God ofGluttony appeared even in our semi-historical period, the GodT’ctotfieh being found today as a favorite motif among our earliestbronze and stone sculptures. The spirit of Taofieh is in us. Itmakes our pharmacopoeias resemble our cook books and our cook













books resemble a pharmacopoeia, and it makes the rise of botanyand zoology as branches of the natural science impossible, for theChinese scientists are thinking all the time of how a snake, amonkey, or a crocidile’s flesh or a camel’s hump would taste. Truescientific curiosity in China is a gastronomic curiosity.

With the confusion of medicine and magic, found in all savagetribes, and with the Chinese Taoists making the “nourishment oflife” and the search after immortality or long life their centralobject, we find that food and medicine often lie in their hands. Inthe Imperial Cook Book of the Mongol Dynasty referred to above,Yinshan Chengyao, there are chapters devoted to preserving longlife and warding off disease. With the Taoist passionate devotionto Nature, the tendency is always to emphasize fruits and food ofa vegetarian nature. There is a sort of combination of poetry andTaoist detachment from life, regarding the eating of fresh lotusseeds with their delicate flavor bom of the dew as the height of ascholar’s refined pleasure. He would drink the dew itself, if hecould. In this class belong the seeds of pine trees, arrowroot andChinaroot, which are all regarded as tending toward long life,because they clarify one’s heart and purify one’s soul. One is notsupposed to have mortal desires, like the desire for women, wheneating a lotus seed. More like medicine and constantly taken aspart of one’s food and highly valued for prolonging life are as-paragus htcidus, rehmannia lutea, lycium chinense, atratylis ovata,polygonatum giganteum, and particularly ginseng and astragalushoantely.

The Chinese pharmacopoeia offers an immense field waitingfor Western scientific research. Western medicine has only withinthe past decade discovered the blood-building value of liver, whileChinese have all along regarded it as an important tonic for oldpeople. I have a suspicion that when a Western butcher kills a pig,he throws away all the parts that have the greatest nourishingfood value—kidneys, stomachs, intestines (which must be full ofgastric juice), blood, bone marrow and brains. It is beginning tobe discovered that the bone is the place where the red corpuscles













253

o£ one’s blood are manufactured, and I cannot help thinking thethrowing away of mutton bones and pig’s bones and cow’s boneswithout stewing them into a fine soup is a terrific waste of foodvalue.

There are many Western foods that I like, and first of all Imust mention the honeydew melon, because its suggestion of dewis so Chinese. Also, if an ancient Chinese Taoist were given agrapefruit, he might imagine that he had discovered the elixir ofimmortality, for it was the exotic flavor of strange and unknownfruits that the Taoists were looking for. Tomato juice must beranked as one of the greatest Western discoveries in the twentiethcentury, for the Chinese, like the Westerners of a century ago,used to consider tomatoes not fit for eating. Next comes the eat-ing of raw celery, which comes nearest to the Chinese idea ofeating food for texture, as with bamboo shoots. Asparagus is fine,when it is not green, but it is not unknown in China. Finally Imust confess to a great liking for English roast beef, and for allroasts. Every food is good when cooked and tasted in its owncountry and in its proper season. I have always liked Americanfodd when it is served in American homes, but have never yet tastedfood that impressed me as good in the best hotels of New York.The fault is not due to hotels or restaurants, for even in Chineserestaurants, it is impossible to get good food unless with longnotice and unless it is prepared with individual care.

On the other hand, there are glaring deficiencies in Americanand European cuisine. Far ahead in bakery and the making ofsweets and desserts, Western cuisine strikes one as being prettydull and insipid and extremely limited in variety. After eating inany hotel or boarding house or steamship for three weeks, andafter one has had chicken a la \ing, prime ribs of beef and lambchops and filet for the thirteenth time, the food begins to pall onone’s palate. The most undeveloped branch of Western cooking isthat of preparing vegetables. In the first place, vegetables are ex-tremely limited in variety; in the second place, they are merely boiledin water; and in the third place, they are always over-cooked until













they lose their color and look mushy. Spinach, the calamity of allchildren, is never cooked properly; it is cooked until it becomesmushy, whereas if it is fried on a very hot pan with oil and saltand taken away before it loses its crispness, it is one of the mostpalatable of foods. Lettuce prepared in the same manner is alsodelightful, the only consideration being not to allow it to standin the pan for too long. Chicken liver is considered a delicacy inthe West, and even grilled lamb kidneys, but there is a largenumber of foods of the same class which have not even been ex-perimented upon. This explains the lack of variety in Westernfood. Fried chicken gizzard, along with fried chicken liver, dippedin salt, is among the commonest dishes in China. Carp’s head, withits delicate flesh around the cheeks and jowl, is served as a specialdish of great delicacy. Pig’s tripe is my favorite food, and for thatmatter, certain parts of the ox’s tripe. It makes a delicious soupwith noodles, or it may be thrown into boiling soup over an ex-tremely hot fire and immediately taken out, so that it has a crisp-ness almost like that of raw celery. Large snails (meaning onlythe thick covering at their mouth) are a delicacy much soughtafter in France, and they are also a delicacy in China. In tasteand texture and resistance to the teeth, they are practically thesame as abalones and scallops.

The lack of variety of soups is due to two causes. First, the lackof experiment on mixtures of vegetables with meat. By combi-nations and permutations, five or six ingredients, like dried shrimp,mushroom, bamboo-shoot, melon, pork, etc., can give a hundredvarieties of different soups. Melon soup is unknown in the West,and yet, made with different varieties and prepared with a dashof dried shrimp, it is one of the most delicious dishes in summer.Secondly, the lack of variety in soup is due to failure to make fulluse of sea food. Scallops are always fried in the West, but driedscallops are one of the most important elements for making goodsoup, and so is abalone. As for clam chowder, I never smell theclam in it, and one* of course, never sees turde flesh in turde soup.A real turde soup, cooked until it is sticky on the lips, is one of













ON FOOD AND MEDICINE

255

he favorite Cantonese dishes, sometimes being prepared with thevebbed feet of ducks or geese. The Shaohsing people of Chekiangxave a favorite dish called “the big corners,” consisting of the wingstnd legs of chicken, because there is a happy combination of skinind tendon and meat in chicken wings and feet. The best souphave tasted, however, is the soup of bastard carp and small soft-hell clams combined. The test of soup generally made from shellood is that it should not be oily.

As an instance of Chinese feeling about food, I may quote hererom Li Liweng’s essay on “Crabs” in the section on food in hisirt of Living.

There is nothing in food and drink whose flavor I cannotdescribe with the utmost understanding and imagination. Butas for crabs, my heart likes them, my mouth relishes them,and I can never forget them for a year and a day, but find itimpossible to describe in words why I like them, relish them,and can never forget them. Ah, this thing has indeed becomefor me a weakness in food, and is in itself a strange phenome-non of the universe. All my days I have been extremely fondof it. Every year before the crab season comes, I set asidesome money for the purpose and because my family say that“crab is my life,” I call this money “my life ransom.” Fromthe day it appears on the market to the end of the season, Ihave never missed it for a night. My friends who know thisweakness of mine always invite me to dinner at this season,and I therefore call October and November “crab autumn.”... I used to have a maid quite devoted to attending to thecare and preparation of crabs and I called her “my crab maid ”Now she is gone! O crab! my life shall begin and end withthee!

[Tie reason that Li finally gave for his appreciation of crab washat it was perfect in the three requisites of food—color, fragrancend flavor. Li’s feeling about crabs is quite generally shared byChinese of all classes today, the kind eaten being from freshwaterakes.

For me, the philosophy of food seems to boil down to threekings: freshness, flavor and texture. The best cook in the world













cannot make a savory dish unless he has fresh things to cook with,and any good cook can tell you that half the art of cooking lies inbuying. Yuan Tsets’ai, the great epicure and poet of the seven-teenth century, wrote beautifully about his cook as a man carryinghimself with great dignity who absolutely refused to cook a dishordered unless the thing was in its best season. The cook had abad temper, but confessed that he continued to serve the poetbecause the latter understood flavor. Today there is a cook oversixty years old in Szechuen who must be courteously invited toprepare a dinner for some special occasion, and who must begiven a week’s notice to collect and buy things and must be leftentirely free to be the sole lord and judge of the menu to be served.

For the common people who cannot afford expensive cooks,there is comfort m the knowledge that anything tastes good in itsseason, and that it is always better to depend upon nature thanupon culture to furnish us with the greatest epicurean delights.For this reason, people who have their own garden or who livein the country may be quite sure that they have the best food, al-though they may not have the best cook. For the same reason,food ought to be tasted in its place of origin, before any judgmentcan be pronounced upon it. But for a wife who does not knowhow to buy fresh food or a man who is willing to put up with coldstorage foods, any discussion of epicurean values is futile.

The texture of food, as regards tenderness, elasticity, crispnessand softness, is largely a matter of timing and adjusting the heatof the fire, Chinese restaurants can produce dishes not possible inthe home because they are equipped with a fine oven. As for flavor,there are clearly two classes of food, those that are best served intheir own juice, without adulteration except salt or soya bean sauce,and those that taste best when they are combined with the flavorof another food. Thus, in the case of fish, fresh mandarin fish ortrout should be prepared in its natural juice to get its full flavor,while more fatty fish like the shad tastes best with Chinese pickledbeans. The American succotash is an example of the perfect com-bination of tastes. There are certain flavors in nature which seem to













257

be made for each other and reach their highest degree of delec-tability only in combination with each other. Bamboo shoot andpork seem to make a perfect pair, each borrowing its fragrancefrom the other and lending it in return its own. Ham somehowcombines well with the sweet flavor, and one of the proudest dishesof my cook in Shanghai is ham with rich Peking golden dates*steamed together in a casserole. So does black tree fungus combineperfecdy with duck’s egg in soup, and New York lobster combinewith Chinese pickled bean-curd sauce (nanju). In fact, there isa large class of eatables whose chief function seems to be to lendtheir flavor to others—mushroom, bamboo shoots, Szechuentsat/ai, etc. And there is a large class of food, most valued by theChinese, which have no flavor of their own, and depend entirelyon borrowing from others.

The three necessary characteristics of the most expensive Chinesedelicacies are that they must be colorless, odorless, and flavorless*These articles are shark’s fin, birds’ nest and the “silver fungus.”All of them are gelatinous in quality and all have no color, taste orsmell. The reason why they taste so wonderful is because they arealways prepared in the most expensive soup possible.

VIII. Some Curious Western Customs

One great difference between Oriental and Occidental civiliza-tions is that the Westerners shake each other’s hands, while weshake our own. Of all the ridiculous Western customs, I think thatof shaking hands is one of the worst. I may be very progressive andable to appreciate Western art, literature, American silk stockings,Parisian perfumes and even British batdeships, but I cannot seehow the progressive Europeans could allow this barbarous customof shaking hands to persist to the present day. I know there areprivate groups of individuals in the West who protest against thiscustom, as there are people who protest against the equally ridicu-lous custom of wearing hats or collars. But these people don’t seemto be making any headway, being apparendy taken for men wha













make mountains of molehills and waste their energy on trivialities.I am one of these men who are always interested in trivialities. As aChinese, I am bound to feel more strongly against this Westerncustom than the Europeans, and prefer always to shake my ownhands when meeting or parting from people, according to the time-honored etiquette of the Celestial Empire.

Of course, everyone knows this custom is the survival of thebarbaric days of Europe, like the other custom of taking off one’shat. These customs originated with the medieval robber baronsand chevaliers, who had to lift their visors or take off their steelgauntlets to show that they were friendly or peacefully disposedtoward the other fellow. Of course it is ridiculous in modern days torepeat the same gestures when we are no longer wearing helmets orgauntlets, but survivals of barbaric customs will always persist, aswitness, for instance, the persistence of duds down to the presentday.

I object to this custom for hygienic and many other reasons.Shaking hands is a form of human contact subject to the finestvariations and distinctions. An original American graduate studentcould very well write a doctorate dissertation on a “Time-and-motion Study of the Varieties of Hand-Shaking,” reviewing it, inthe approved fashion, as regards pressure, duration of time, humidity,emotional response, and so forth, and further studying it under allits possible variations as regards sex, the height of the person con-cerned (giving us undoubtedly many “types of marginal differ-ences”), the condition of the skin as affected by professional workand social classes, etc. With a few charts and tables of percentages,I am sure a candidate would have no difficulty in getting a Ph.D.,provided he made the whole thing sufficiently abstruse and tire-some.

Now consider, the hygienic objections. The foreigners in Shanghai,who describe our copper coins as regular reservoirs of bacteria andwiH not touch them, apparently think nothing of shaking hands withany Tom, Dick or Harry in the street This is really highly illogical,for how are you to know that Tom, Dick or Harry has not touched













SOME CURIOUS WESTERN CUSTOMS 259

those coppers which you shun like poison? What is worse is, some-times you may see a consumptive-looking man who hygienicallycovers his mouth with his hands while coughing and in the nextmoment stretches his hand to give you a friendly shake. In thisrespect, our celestial customs are really more scientific, for m China,each of us shakes his own hand, I don’t know what was the originof this Chinese custom, but its advantage from a medical orhygienic point of view cannot be denied.

Then there are aesthetic and romantic objections to handshaking.When you put out your hand, you are at the mercy of the otherperson, who is at liberty to shake it as hard as he likes and holdit as long as he likes. As the hand is one of the finest and mostresponsive organs in our body, every possible variety of pressure ispossible. First you may have the Y. M. C. A. type of handshaking;the man pats you on the shoulder with one hand and gives you a vio-lent shake with the other until all your joints are ready to burstwithin you. In the case of a Y. M. C. A. secretary who is at thesame time a baseball player with a powerful grip, and the two oftengo together, his victim often does not know whether to scream orto laugh. Coupled with his straightforward self-assertive manner,this type of handshaking practically seems to say, “Look here, youare now in my power. You must buy a ticket for the next meetingor promise to take back with you a pamphlet by Sherwood Eddybefore I’ll let your hand go.” Under such circumstances I am alwaysvery prompt with my pocketbook.

Coming down the scale, we find different varieties of pressure^from the indifferent handshake which has utterly lost all meaning,to that kind of furtive, tremulous, retiring handshake which indi-cates that the owner is afraid of you, and finally to the elegantsociety lady who condescends to offer you the very tip of herfingers in a manner that almost suggests that you look at her red-painted fingernails. All kinds of human relationships, therefore,are reflected in this form of physical contact between two persons.Some novelists profess that you can tell a man’s character from histype of handshake, distinguishing between the assertive, the retir-













26o THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

ing, the dishonest and the weak and clammy hands which in-stinctively repel one. I wish to be spared the trouble of analyzinga person’s moral character every time I have to meet him, or read-ing from the degree of his pressure the increase or decrease of hisaffection towards me.

More senseless still is the custom of taking off one’s hat. Herewe find all kinds of nonsensical rules of etiquette. Thus a ladyshould keep her hat on during church service or during afternoontea indoors. Whether this custom of wearing hats in church hasanything to do with the customs of Asia Minor in the first centuryA. D. or not, I do not profess to know, but I suspect it comes from asenseless following of St. Paul’s injunction that women should havetheir heads covered in church while men should not, being basedthus on an Asiatic philosophy of sexual inequality which the West-erners have so long repudiated. For the men, there is that ridiculouscustom of taking off one’s hat in an elevator when there are ladiesin it. There can be absolutely no defense for this meaninglesscustom. In the first place, the elevator is but a continuation of thecorridor, and if men are not required to take off their hats in acorridor, why should they be made to do so in a lift? Any one wouldsee the utter senselessness of it all, if he happens to pass from onefloor to another in the same building with a hat on. In the secondplace, the elevator cannot by any logical analysis be distinguishedfrom other types of conveyance, the motor car, for instance. If aman can, with a free conscience, keep his hat on while driving ina motor car in the company of ladies, why should he be forbiddenfrom doing the same in a lift?

All in all, this is a very crazy world of ours. But I am not sur-prised. After all, we see human stupidity around us everywhere,from the stupidity of modern international relations to that of themodem educational system. Mankind may be intelligent enough toinvent the radio and wireless telephones, but mankind is simply notintelligent enough to stop wars, nor will ever be. So I am willingto let stupidity in the more trivial things go by, and content merelyto be amused.













INHUMANITY OF WESTERN DRESS 261IX. The Inhumanity of Western Dress

In spite o£ the popularity of Western dress among the modernTurks, Egyptians, Hindus, Japanese and Chinese, and in spite ofits universality as the official diplomatic costume in the entire world,I still cling to the old Chinese dress. Many of my best friends haveasked me why I wear Chinese instead of foreign dress. And thosepeople call themselves my friends! They might just a*s well ask mewhy I stand on two legs. The two happen to be related, as I shall tryto show. Why must I give a reason for wearing the only “human5’dress in the world? Need anyone who in his native garb prac-tically goes about the house and outside in his pyjamas and slippersgive reasons why he does not like to be encased in a system of suf-focating collars, vests, belts, braces and garters? The prestige ofthe foreign dress rests on no more secure basis than the fact thatit is associated with superior gunboats and Diesel engines. It can-not be defended on esthetic, moral, hygienic or economic grounds.Its superiority is simply and purely political.

Is my attitude merely a pose, or symptomatic of my progress inknowledge of Chinese philosophy? I hardly think so. In takingthis attitude, I am supported by all the thinking persons of mygeneration in China, The Chinese dress is worn by all Chinesegentlemen. Furthermore, all the scholars, thinkers, bankers andpeople who made good in China either have never worn foreigndress, or have swifdy come back to their native dress the momentthy have “arrived” politically, financially or socially. They haveswiftly come back because they are sure of themselves and nolonger feel the need for a coat of foreign appearance to hide theirbad English or their inferior mental outfit No Shanghai kidnaperwould think of kidnaping a Chinese in foreign clothes, for thesimple reason that he is not worth the candle. Who are the peoplewearing foreign clothes today in China? The college students, theclerks earning a hundred a month, the political busybodies whoare always on the point of landing a job, the tangpu1 young men,

1 Kuomintang party office.













THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

the nouveaux riches, the nincompoops, the feebleminded. . . . Andthen, of course, last but not least, we have Henry P’uyi, who hasthe incomparably bad taste to adopt a foreign name, foreign dress,and a pair of dark spectacles. That outfit of his alone will killall his chances of coming back to the Dragon Throne, even if hehas all the bayonets of the Mikado behind him. For you maytell any lies to the Chinese people, but you cannot convince themthat the fellow who wears a foreign dress and dark spectacles istheir “emperor.” So long as he wears that foreign dress and so longas he calls himself Henry, Henry will be perfectly at home in thedockyards of Liverpool, but not on a Dragon Throne.

Now the philosophy behind Chinese and Western dress is thatthe latter tries to reveal the human form, while the former tries toconceal it. But as the human body is essentially like the monkeys*,usually the less of it revealed the better. Think of Gandhi in hisloin-cloth! Only in a world of people blind in sense of beauty is theforeign dress tolerable. It is a platitude that the perfect humanfigure rarely exists. Let any one who doubts this go to Coney Islandand see how beautiful real human forms are. But the Western dressis so designed that any man in the street can tell whether yourwaisdine is thirty-two or thirty-eight. Why must one proclaim tothe world that his waistline is thirty-two, and if it happens to beabove normal, why can he not have the right to make it his privateaffair?

That is why I also believe in the foreign dress for young womenof good figure between twenty and forty and for all children whosenatural bodily rhythm has not yet been subjected to our uncivilizedform of livmg. But to demand that all men and women reveal theirfigure to the eyes of the world is another story. While the gracefulwoman in foreign evening dress shines and charms in a way noteven remotely dreamed of by the Oriental costume-makers, theaverage over-fed and over-slept lady of forty who finds herself inthe golden horseshoe at an opera premiere is also one of the eyesoresinvented by the West. The Chinese dress is kinder to them. Like













death, it levels the great and the small, the beautiful and the ugly.The Chinese dress is therefore more democratic.

So much for the esthetic considerations. Now for the reasons ofhygiene and common sense. No sane-minded man can pretend thatthe collar, that survival of Cardinal Richelieu’s and Sir WalterRaleigh’s times, is conducive to health, and all thinking men in theWest have repeatedly protested against it. While the Westernfemale dress has achieved a large measure of comfort in this respectformerly denied to the fair sex, the male human neck is still con-sidered by the Western educated public as so ugly and immoraland socially unpresentable that it must be concealed as much ashis waistline must be revealed. That satanic device makes properventilation impossible in summer, proper protection against coldimpossible in winter and proper thinking impossible at all times.

From the collar downwards, it is a story of continuous and un-mitigated outrage of common sense. The clever foreigner who caninvent Neon lights and Diesel engines has not enough commonsense to see that the only part of his body which is free is hishead. But why go into details—the tight-fitting underwear, whichinterferes with free ventilation, the vest which allows for no bend-ing of the body, and the braces or the belt which allow for nonatural difference in different states of nutrition? Of these, theleast logical is the vest. Anybody who studies the natural forms ofthe naked human body knows that, except when in a perfectlystraight position, the lines of the back and the front are neverequal. Anyone who wears a stiff shirt front also knows by experi-ence that it bulges every time the body bends forward. But thevest is designed on the assumption that these lines remain alwaysequal, which compels one to keep in a perfectly straight position.As no one actually lives up to this standard, the consequence isthat the end of the vest either protrudes or falls into creases pressingon the body at every movement. In the case of a male victim ofobesity, the vest describes a protruding arc and invariably ends inthe air, from which point the receding arc is taken up by the beltand the pants. Can anything invented by the human mind be













264 THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

more grotesque? Is it any wonder that a nudist movement hassprung up as a protest and a reaction against this grotesque bond-age o£ the human body?

But if mankind were still in the quadruped stage, there could besome justification for the belt, which then could be adjusted as thesaddle strap is adjusted on the horse. But, while mankind hasadopted the erect position, his belt is designed on the assumptionthat he is still a quadruped, just as anatomy of the peritonealmuscles shows that these are designed for the quadruped positionwith all weight suspended from the backbone. The disastrous con-sequence of this erect position is that, while human mothers areliable to miscarriage and abortion, from which animals are exempt,the belt of the male dress also has a tendency to gravitate down-wards. The only way to prevent this is to keep the belt so tightthat it does not gravitate, but also with the result that it interfereswith all natural intestinal movements.

I am quite convinced that when the Westerners have made moreprogress in the impersonal things, they will one day also come todevote more time to their personal things and exercise more com-mon sense in the matter of dress. Western men are paymg a severepenalty for their conservatism in this matter of dress and for theirfear of innovation, while Western women long ago achieved sim-plicity and common sense in their dress. To speak not for the imme-diate decades but for the distant centuries, I am quite convinced thatmen will eventually evolve a dress for themselves that is logicaland consistent with their biped position, as is already achieved inwomen’s dress. Gradually all cumbersome belts and braces will beeliminated and men’s dress will be so designed that it hangsnaturally down from the shoulder in a sort of graceful and fittingform. There will be no meaningless padded shoulders and lapels,and in place of the present design, there will be a much more com-fortable type of dress, more nearly resembling the house jacketAs I see it, the great difference then between men’s dress andwomen’s dress will be only that men wear pants while womenwear skirts. So far as the upper part of the body is concerned, the













INHUMANITY OF WESTERN DRESS

265

same essential consideration of ease and comfort will prevail. Men’snecks will be just as free as women’s, the vest will correspondinglydisappear and the jacket will be used exactly to the same extent aswomen’s coats are used today. Most of the time men will go aboutwithout their jackets as women are doing today.

This involves, of course, a revolution in our present conceptionof the shirt. Instead of being something to be worn inside, it willbe made of darker material and worn outside, from the lightest silkto the heaviest woollen material, according to the season, and cutaccordingly for better appearance. And then they can slip the jacketon, whenever they want to, but more for consideration of theweather than for formality, for this future apparel will be prac-tically correct and acceptable in any company. In order to destroythe insufferable belts and suspenders, there will be a kind of com-bination shirt and pants, to be slipped over the head as women’sdresses are slipped over now, with certain adjustments, pretendedor real, around the waist to bring out the figure better.

Even at present, a reform is possible for the elimination of thebelt or suspenders while maintaining the present pattern of men’sdress. The whole principle is: weight should be suspended fromthe shoulders and evenly distributed, and should not be clamped onto the vertical wall of the abdomen by sheer force of adhesion, fric-tion and compression, and the human male waist should, beliberated from its duty as a bottleneck, to the end that a system ofloose-fitting undergarments may become possible. If we start on theroad of progress without the vest, men can just have their shirts but-toned to the pants, as children’s dresses are today. In time, then, asthe shirt becomes outside apparel, it will be made of finer material,probably of the same color and quality as the pants, or matchingthem. Or if we start on dress reform with the vest as a necessarypart, we should have a combination vest and pants, preserving theirpresent form, but made of one piece, the back of the vest beingreduced to two diagonal straps. Even at the present time, belts andsuspenders can easily be eliminated by having six little appendages,four in front and two behind, sewed on to the inside of the vest,













THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

with buttonholes to fit into the buttons on the pants. As the vestcomes outside the pants, there will be no visible difference fromvests as they are worn at present. Once the innovations are startedand men begin to think that their present dress designs are not co-eternal with the universe, it will be possible to gradually modifyand eliminate the vest itself, by having this combination garment socut as to be better looking than an overall, but still going on thesame principle.

It requires no imagination to see that for adjustment to varyingclimatic conditions, the Chinese dress is also the only logical mode.While the Westerner is compelled to wear underwear, one shirt,perhaps one vest and one coat, whether the weather temperature isbelow zero or above a hundred, the Chinese dress is infintely flex-ible. There is a story told of the fond Chinese mother who putsone gown on her boy when he sneezes once, puts on another whenhe sneezes twice, and puts on a third when he sneezes thrice. NoWestern mother can do that; she would be at her wit’s end at thethird sneeze. All she can do is to call for the doctor, I am led tobelieve that the only thing which saves the Chinese nation fromextermination by tuberculosis and pneumonia is the cotton-paddedgown.

X. On House and Interiors

The word “house” should include all the living conditions or thephysical environment of one’s house. For everyone knows it ismore important in selecting a house to see what one looks out onfrom the house than what one sees in it. The location of thecountry and its surrounding landscape are the thing. I have seenrich men in Shanghai very proud of a tiny plot of land that theyown, which includes a fish pond about ten feet across and anartificial hill that takes ants three minutes to crawl to the top, notknowing that many a poor man lives in a hut on a mountain sideand owns the entire view of the hillside, the river and the lake ashis private garden. There is absolutely no comparison between thetwo. There are houses situated in such beautiful scenery up in the













267

mountains that there is no point whatsoever m fencing off a pieceof land as one’s own, because wherever he wanders, he owns theentire landscape, including the white clouds nestling against thehills, the birds flying in the sky and the natural symphony of fall-ing cataracts and birds’ song. That man is rich, rich beyond compari-son with any millionaire living in a city. A man living in a citymay see sailing clouds, too, but he seldom sees them actually, andwhen he does, the clouds are not set off against an outline of bluehills, and then what is the point of seeing clouds? The backgroundis all wrong.

The Chinese conception of house and garden is therefore de-termined by the central idea that the house itself is only a detailforming a part of the surrounding country, like a jewel in its set-ting, and harmonizing with it. For this reason, all signs of artifi-ciality must be hidden as much as possible, and the rectilinear linesof the walls must be hidden or broken by overhanging branches.A perfecdy square house, shaped like a magnified piece of brick, isjustifiable in a factory building, because it is a factory buildingwhere efficiency is the first consideration. But a perfectly squarehouse for a home to live in is an atrocity of the first order. TheChinese conception of an ideal home has been succinctly expressedby a writer in the following manner:

Inside the gate there is a footpath and the footpath must bewinding. At the turning of the footpath there is an outdoorscreen and the screen must be small. Behind the screen thereis a terrace and the terrace must be level. On the banks ofthe terrace there are flowers and the flowers must be fresh.Beyond the flowers is a wall and the wall must be low. By theside of the wall, there is a pine tree and the pine tree must beold. At the foot of the pine tree there are rocks and the rocksmust be quaint. Over the rocks there is a pavilion and thepavilion must be simple. Behind the pavilion are bamboos andthe bamboos must be thin and sparse. At the end of the bam-boos there is a house and the house must be secluded. By theside of the house there is a road and the road must branch off.

At the point where several roads come together, there is a













268 THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

bridge and the bridge must be tantalizing to cross. At the endof the bridge there are trees and the trees must be tall. In theshade of the trees there is grass and the grass must be green.Above the grass plot there is a ditch and the ditch must beslender. At the top of the ditch there is a spring and the springmust gurgle. Above the spring there is a hill and the hill mustbe deep. Below the hill there is a hall and the hall must besquare. At the corner of the hall there is a vegetable gardenand the vegetable garden must be big. In the vegetable gardenthere is a stork and the stork must dance. The stork announcesthat there is a guest and the guest must not be vulgar. Whenthe guest arrives there is wine and wine must not be declined.During the service of the wine, there is drunkenness and thedrunken guest must not want to go home.

The charm of a house lies in its individuality. Li Liweng hasseveral chapters on houses and interiors in his book on the Art ofLiving, and in the introductory remarks he emphasizes the twopoints of familiarity and individuality. Familiarity, I feel, is moreimportant than individuality. For no matter how big and preten-tious a house a man may have, there is always one particular roomthat he likes and really lives in, and that is invariably a small, un-pretentious room, disorderly and familiar and warm. So says Li:

A man cannot live without a house as his body cannot goabout without clothing. And as it is true of clothing that itshould be cool in summer and warm in winter, the same thingis true of a house. It is all very imposing to live in a hall twentyor thirty feet high with beams several feet across, but such ahouse is suitable for summer and not for winter. The reasonwhy one shivers when he enters an official’s mansion is becauseof its space. It is like wearing a fur coat too broad for girdlingaround the waist. On the other hand, a poor man’s house withlow walls and barely enough space to put one’s knees in, whilehaving the virtue of frugality, is suitable for the owner, but notsuitable for entertaining guests. That is why we feel crampedand depressed without any reason when we enter a poorscholar’s hut. ... I hope that the dwellings of officials will notbe too high and big. For a house and the people living in itmust harmonize as in a picture. Painters of landscape have a













ON HOUSE AND INTERIORS 269

formula saying, “ten-feet mountains and one-foot trees; one-inchhorses and bean-sized human beings.” It would be inappro-priate to draw trees of two or three feet on a hill of ten feet,or to draw a human being the size of a grain of rice or milletriding on a horse an inch tall. It would be all right for officialsto live in halls twenty or thirty feet high, if their bodies werenine or ten feet. Otherwise the taller the building, the shorterthe man appears, and the wider the space, the thinner the manseems. Would it not be much better to make his house a littlesmaller and his body a little stouter? . . .

I have seen high officials or relatives of officials who throwaway thousands and ten thousands of dollars to build a gardenand who begin by telling the architect, “For the pavilion, youcopy the design of So-and-So, and for the covered terrace over-looking a pond, you follow the model of So-and-So, down toits last detail.” When the mansion is completed, its owner willproudly tell people that every detail of the house, from its doorsand windows to its corridors and towers, has been copied fromsome famous garden without the slightest deviation. Ah, whatvulgarity! . . .

Luxury and expensiveness are the things most to be avoidedin architecture. This is so because not only the common people,but also the princes and high officials, should cherish the virtueof simplicity. For the important thing in a living house is notsplendor, but refinement, not elaborate; decorativeness, butnovelty and elegance. People like to show off their rich splen-dor not because they love it, but because they are lacking inoriginality, and besides trying to show off, they are at a totalloss to invent something else. That is why they have to put upwith mere splendor. Ask two persons to put on two new dresses,one simple and elegant and original, and the other rich anddecorative, but common. Will not the eye of spectators bedirected to the original dress rather than to the common dress?Who doesn’t know the value of silk and brocade and gauze,and who has not seen them? But a simple, plain dress with anovel design will attract the eyes of spectators because theyhave never seen it before.

There are points about house designs and interiors which LiLiweng goes into fully in his book. The subjects he deals withcover houses, windows, screens, lamps, tables, chairs, curios, cabi-













270 the enjoyment of living

nets, beds, trunks, and so on. Being an exceptionally original andinventive mind, he has something new to say on every topic, andsome of his inventions have become a part of the Chinese traditiontoday. The most outstanding contributions are his letter paper,which were sold in his life time as “ Chiehtseyuan letter paper,” andhis windows and partition designs. Although his book on the Artof Living is not so generally well-known, he is always rememberedin connection with the Chiehtseyuan Painting Patterns, the mostgenerally used beginner’s handbook of Chinese painting, and forhis Ten Comedies, for he was a dramatist, musician, epicure, dressdesigner, beauty expert and amateur inventor all combined.

Li had new ideas about beds. He said that whenever he movedinto a new house, the first thing he looked for and attended to wasthe bed. The Chinese bed has always been a curtained and framedaffair, resembling a large cabinet or a small room in itself, withpoles, shelves and drawers built around the pole, for placing books,tea-pots, shoes, stockings and odds and ends. Li conceived the ideathat one should have flower stands as well in the bed. His methodwas to build a thin, tiny piece of wooden shelf, over a foot wide butonly two or three inches deep, and have it fixed to the em-broidered curtain. According to him, the wooden shelf shouldbe wrapped up in embroidered silk to resemble a floating cloud,with certain irregularities. There he would put whatever flowerswere in season, or bum “Dragon’s Saliva” incense, or keep “Bud-dha’s Fingers” or quince for their fragrance. Thus, he says, “Mybody is no longer a body, but a butterfly flitting about and sleep-ing and eating 2 among flowers, and the man is no longer a manbut a fairy, walking about and sitting and lying in a paradise.I have thus once in my sleep felt in a half-awake state thefragrance of plum flowers so that my throat and teeth and cheekswere permeated with this subde fragrance, as if it came out frommy chest. And I felt my body so light that I almost thought I wasnot living in a human world. After waking up I told my wife,

2 A Chinese rich man having a good time with his concubine at night often hasfood and wine served in bed by attending maid servants.













27I

ON HOUSE AND INTERIORS

*Who are we to enjoy this happiness? Are we not thus “curtail-ing” the entire lot o£ happiness allowed to us?’3 My wife replied,‘Perhaps that’s the reason why we always remain poor and lowlThe thing is true and not a lie.’ ”

Lie’s most outstanding contribution, I believe, is in his ideasabout windows. He invented “fan windows” (for pleasure house-boats used on lakes), landscape windows, and plum-flower win-dows. The Idea of having fan-shaped windows on the sides of ahouseboat was connected with the Chinese habit of painting andwriting on fans and collecting such fan paintings in albums. Li’sidea was therefore that with the fan window on a boat as the frame,both the people inside the boat looking out on the scenery on thebanks and the people walking on the banks looking at those havinga wine or tea party in the boat would see the view like a picture ona Chinese fan. For the significance of the window lies in the fact thatit is primarily a place for looking out on a view, as when we say thatthe eye Is the “window” of the soul. It should be so designed as tolook out on the best view and also to enable one to see the view inthe most favorable manner, in this way introducing the element ofnature into house interiors by “borrowing” from the outside land-scape, as Li put it. Thus:

When a man is sitting in the boat, the light of the lake andthe color of the hills, the temples, clouds, haze, bamboos, treeson the banks, as well as the woodcutters, shepherd boys, drunkenold men and promenading ladies, will all be gathered within theframework of the fan and form a piece of natural painting.Moreover, it is a living and moving picture, changing all thetime, not only when the boat is moving, giving us a new sightwith every movement of the oar and a new view with everypunting of the pole, but even when the boat is lying at anchor,when die wind moves and the water ripples, changing its format every moment. Thus we are able to enjoy hundreds and

3 The Chinese idea is that every man bom into this world is predestined witha certain quantity o£ luck or happiness, which may not be changed, and i£ oneenjoys too much of something, his luck in other respects is curtailed, or he maylive a shorter life.













thousands of beautiful paintings of hills and water in a day bymeans of this fan-shaped window. . . .

I have also made a window for looking out on hills, calledlandscape window, otherwise known also as “unintentionalpainting.” I will tell how I came to make one. Behind my studio,the Studio of Frothy White (signifying “drinking”), there is ahill about ten feet high and seven feet wide only, decoratedwith a miniature scenery of red cliffs and blue water, thickforests and tall bamboos, singing birds and falling cataracts,thatched huts and wooden bridges, complete in all the thingsthat we see in a mountain village. For at first a modeller ofclay made a day figure of myself with a wonderful expression,and furthermore, because my name Liweng meant “an oldman with a bamboo hat,” also made me into a fisherman, hold-ing a fishing pole and sitting on top of a rock. Then we thoughtsince there was a rock, there must be also water, and since therewas water, there must be also a hill, and since there were bothbill and water, there must be a mountain retreat for the oldman with a bamboo hat to retire and fish in his old age. Thatwas how we gradually built up the entire scenery. It is deartherefore that the artificial hill grew out. of a clay statue with-out any idea of making it serve the purpose of a window view.Later I saw that although the things were in miniature, theirsuggested universe was great, and it seemed to recall the Budd-hist idea that a mustard seed and the Himalayas are equal insize, and therefore I sat there the whole day looking at it, andcould hot bear to close the window. And one day inspired Isaid to myself, “This hill can be made into a painting, and thispainting can be made into a window. All it will cost me will bejust one day's drink money to provide the ‘mounting’ for thispainting” I therefore asked a boy servant to cut out severalpieces of paper, and paste them above and below the windowand at the sides, to serve as the mounting for a real picture.Thus the mounting was complete, and only the space usuallyoccupied by the painting itself was left vacant, with the hillbehind my house to take its place. Thus when one sits and looksat it, the window is no more a window but a piece of painting,and the hill is no longer the hill behind my house, but a hill inthe painting. I could not help laughing out loud, and my wifeand children, hearing my laughter, came to see it and joined













273

in laughing at what I had been laughing at. This is the origin

o£ the “unintentional painting,” and the “landscape window ”

In the matter o£ tables and chairs and cabinets, Li also had anumber o£ novel ideas, I can only mention here his invention o£ aheated armchair for use in winter. It is quite a practicable anduseful invention wherever the rooms are not properly heated. Itis a long wooden settee on a raised wooden platform built intothe settee itself. The platform is two or three feet deep, with up-right wooden panels at the sides about the height of a low desk.The front of the settee is also provided with two wooden doorpanels,4 and as one goes up the platform, he closes the door, whichtogether with the upright panels on the side forms a perfect sup-port for a removable desk top. The sitter is thus encased behindthe desk. The platform itself is provided with a drawer containinghot ashes and well burned and smokeless charcoal. The settee is somade that one can sit and work there, and also lie down when heis tired. Li claimed that the cost of thus providing a perfectlywarm and comfortable place to work in was no more than fourpieces of charcoal a day, two being added in the morning andtwo in the afternoon. He claimed further that, when traveling,two strong bamboo poles could be tied to its sides and the setteecould be used like a regular sedan chair, with the certainty ofavoiding cold feet, and the added advantage of keeping warm what-ever food and drink was taken on the journey. For the summer, healso thought of a bench resembling a bathtub, with a porcelain tubspecially ordered to fit into it. The tub could then be filled withcold water, reaching to the back of the seat and cooling it.

The Western world has invented rotating, collapsible, adjustable,reversible and convertible beds, sofas and barber chairs, but some-how it has not struck upon the idea of detachable and divisibletables and curio stands. This is a thing that has had a long de-velopment in China, showing considerable ingenuity. The prin-ciple of divisible tables, known as “yenchi,” originated with a game

4 It would be more practical to have the door panel at one side, instead of in front.













similar to building blocks for Western children, according to whicha collection of blocks of wood forming a perfect square can be madeinto the most diverse symbolic figures of animals, human figures,utensils and furniture on a flat surface. A “yenchi” table of sixpieces could be arranged to form one or several tables of differentsize, square or rectangular or T-shaped, or with the tops at variousangles, making a total of forty ways of arrangement.5

Another type, called tiehchi, or “butterfly tables,” differ fromthe yenchi in having triangular pieces and diagonal lines, andtherefore the resulting shapes of pieces put together present agreater diversity of outline. Whereas the first type of yenchitables were largely designed for dinner or card-tables of differentsize, sometimes with a vacant space in the center for candle stands,this second type is designed for dinner tables and card tables andflower and curio stands as well, because flower and curio standsrequire a greater diversity of arrangement. This butterfly tableconsists of thirteen pieces, and together they form square tables,rectangular tables, diamond shaped tables, with or without vary-ing kinds of holes, the possibility of novel arrangements being lim-ited only by the ingenuity of the housewife.6

There is a great desire among housewives both of the East andWest to vary their interior arrangements, and divisible flowerstands or tea tables seem to provide the possibility for infinitevariety. The resulting shapes of such tables look strangely modern-istic, for modernistic furniture emphasizes the idea of simplicityof line, which is also characteristic of Chinese furniture. The art

e The first divisible tables were invented either by the great Yuan painter, NiYunlin, -who was also a great collector of curios and old furniture, or still furtherback by certain Huang Posse of the southern Sung Dynasty. A later man, HsuanKuch’ing, added one more piece, with the possibility of seventy-six different arrange-ments, for which pictures of the different arrangements exist. The design is simpleenough, consisting of seven pieces all one unit wide, of which three pieces are twounits long, two pieces are three units long and two pieces are four units long.The actual dimension given for the unit is one foot and three quarters, so that thetwo longest tables of four units are seven feet long.

* This was invented by a certain Ko Shan, at the end of the Ming Dynasty, andthe book giving sixty-two diagrams of its arrangements has been reprinted in variousold Chinese libraries on the art of living.













'ON HOUSE AND INTERIORS

275

seems to lie in. combining variety in line with simplicity. I haveseen, for instance, an old Chinese redwood flower stand so madethat its legs are not perfecdy straight, but there is a slight turn intheir middle. As for varying arrangements, the simplest way wouldbe not to order a round or square table, but to have the roundtable consist of two semi-circular halves, and the square tableconsist of two triangular tops, forming a square with the com-mon base of the triangles as its diagonal line. When not wantedfor playing cards, such round or square tables can be broken upin two and placed against the wall with the base of the triangleor of the semi-circle against it, and used for flower pots or books.With the “butterfly tables,” one can then have, instead of a tri-angular table against the wall, one similar to it but with a twinapex to the triangle, like two peaks of a hill. Card tables can bemade larger or smaller in size according to the company present.Tea tables can be made to look like two squares overlapping oneanother at one of their corners, or they may resemble a “T” shapeor a “U” or an “S” shape. It might be quite interesting to havea small party sitting at dinner around a “U” or “S” shaped tablein a small apartment.

There exists today a perfect copy of a detachable bookcase madeof hardwood, found in Ch’angshu, Kiangsu. Sectional bookcasesare common in the West, but the new feature about this detach-able bookcase is that its sections are so designed that, when takenapart, they can be put one inside another, the whole occupyingno more space than a large suitcase. As it stands, it looks like astrangely modernistic bookcase. But it is possible to vary it andmodify it so that one can break it up and have two or three smallbookcases, perhaps twelve, eighteen, or twenty-four inches long, tobe put at the head of sofas and beds, instead of one big bookcase,standing forever at one point in the room.

The ideal of Chinese interiors seems to consist of the two ideas,simplicity and space. A well arranged room always has few piecesof furniture, and these are generally of mahogany with extremelypolished surface and simple lines, usually curved around the ends.













276 THE ENJOYMENT OF LIVING

Mahogany is polished by hand, and the difference in polish, en-tailing enormous labor, accounts for a wide difference in price. Along board table without drawers generally stands against onewall, supporting one big “liver” vase. At another corner perhapsmay be seen one, two or three mahogany flower or curio stands,of different height, and perhaps a few stools with gnarled roots assupports. A bookcase or curio cabinet stands on one side, withsections of various heights and levels, giving a strangely modern-istic effect. And on the wall are just one or two scrolls, either ofcalligraphy, showing the sheer joy of brush movement, or ofpainting, with more empty space than brush strokes in it. Andlike the painting itself, the room should be J(mgling, or “emptyand alive.” The most distinctive feature of Chinese home designis the stone-paved courtyard, similar in effect to a Spanish cloister,and symbolizing peace, quiet and repose.













Chapter Ten

THE ENJOYMENT OF NATURE

I. Paradise Lost?

IT is a curious thing that among the myriad creations on thisplanet, while the entire plant life is deprived from taking anyattitude toward Nature and practically all animals can also haveno “attitude” to speak of, there should be a creature called manwho is both self-conscious and conscious of his surroundings andwho can therefore take an attitude toward it. Man’s intelligencebegins to question the universe, to explore its secrets and to findout its meaning. There are both a scientific and a moral attitudetoward the universe. The scientific man is interested in finding outthe chemical composition of the inside and crust of the earth uponwhich he lives, the thickness of the atmosphere surrounding it,the quantity and nature of cosmic rays dashing about on the toplayers of the atmosphere, the formation of its hills and rocks, andthe law governing life in general. This scientific interest has a re-lationship to the moral attitude, but in itself it is a pure desire toknow and to explore. The moral attitude, on the other hand,varies a great deal, being sometimes one of harmony with nature,sometimes one of conquest and subjugation, or one of control andutilization, and sometimes one of supercilious contempt. This lastattitude of supercilious contempt toward our own planet is a verycurious product of civilization and of certain religions in particu-lar. It springs from the fiction of the “Lost Paradise,” which,strange to say, is pretty generally accepted as being true today, asa result of a primitive religious tradition.

It is amazing that no one ever questions the truth of the storyof a lost Paradise. How beautiful, after all, was the Garden ofEden, and how ugly, after all, is the present physical universe?Have flowers ceased to bloom since Eve and Adam sinned?Has God cursed the apple tree and forbidden it to bear fruit be-cause one man sinned, or has He decided that its blossoms should

277













be made of duller or paler colors? Have orioles and nightingalesand skylarks ceased to sing? Is there no snow upon the mountaintops and are there no reflections in the lakes? Are there no rosysunsets today and no rainbows and no haze nestling over villages,and are there no falling cataracts and gurgling streams and shadytrees? Who therefore invented the myth that the “Paradise” was“lost” and that today we are living in an ugly universe? We areindeed ungrateful spoiled children of God.

A parable has to be written of this spoiled child. Once upon atime there was a man whose name we will not yet mention. Hecame to God and complained that this planet was not good enoughfor him, and said he wanted a Heaven of Pearly Gates. And Godfirst pointed out to the moon in the sky and asked him if it wasnot a good toy, and he shook his head. He said he didn’t want tolook at it. Then God pointed out to the blue hills in the distanceand asked him if the lines were not beautiful, and he said theywere common and ordinary. Next God showed him the petals ofthe orchid and the pansy, and asked him to put out his fingersand touch gently their velvety lining and asked if the color schemewas not exquisite, and the man said, “No.” In His infinite patience,God took him to an aquarium, and showed him the gorgeouscolors and shapes of Hawaiian fishes, and the man said he was notinterested. God then took him under a shady tree and commandeda cool breeze to blow and asked him if he couldn’t enjoy that, andthe man replied again that he was not impressed. Next God tookhim to a mountain lake and showed him the light of the water,the sound of winds whistling through a pine forest, the serenityof the rocks and the beautiful reflections in the lake, and the mansaid that still he could not get excited over it. Thinking that thiscreature of His was not mild-tempered and wanted more excitingviews, God took him then to the top of the Rocky Mountains, theGrand Canyon, and caves with stalactites and stalagmites, andgeysers, and sand dunes, and the fairyfinger-shaped cactus plantson a desert, and the snow on the Himalayas, and the cliffs of theYangtse Gorges, and the granite peaks of the Yellow Mountains,













PARADISE LOST

279

and the sweeping cataract of Niagara Falls, and asked him if Hehad not done everything possible to make this planet beautiful todelight his eyes and his ears and his stomach, and the man stillclamored for a Heaven with Pearly Gates. “This planet,” the mansaid, “is not good enough for me.” “You presumptuous, ungrate-ful rat!” said God. “So this planet is not good enough for you. Iwill therefore send you to Hell where you shall not see the sailingclouds and the flowering trees, nor hear the gurgling brooks andlive there forever till the end of your days.” And God sent him tolive in a city apartment. His name was Christian.

It is dear that this man is pretty difficult to satisfy. There is aquestion as to whether God can create a heaven to satisfy him. Iam sure that with his millionaire complex, he will be pretty sickof the Pearly Gates during his second week in Heaven, and Godwill be at His wits’ end to invent something else to please thisspoiled child. Now it must be pretty generally accepted that mod-ern astronomy, by exploring the entire visible universe, is forcingus to accept this earth itself as a very heaven, and the Heaven thatwe dream of must occupy some space, and occupying some space,it must be somewhere among the stars in the firmament, unlessit is in the inter-stellar void. And since this Heaven is to befound in some star, with or without moons, my imaginationrather fails to concdve of a better planet than our own. Of coursethere may be a dozen moons instead of one, colored pink, purple,Prussian blue, cabbage green, orange, lavender, aquamarine, andturquoise, and in addition there may be better and more fre-quent rainbows. But I suspect that a man who is not satisfiedwith one moon will also get tired of a dozen moons, and one whois not satisfied with an occasional snow scene or rainbow, will beequally tired of better and more frequent rainbows. There may besix seasons in a year instead of four, and there will be the samebeautiful alternation of spring and summer and day and night,but I don’t see how that will make a difference. If one doesn’tenjoy spring and summer on earth, how can he enjoy spring andsummer in Heaven? I must seem to be talking either like a great













fool or an extremely wise man now, but certainly I don’t share theBuddhist or Christian desire to escape from the senses and physicalmatter by assuming a heaven occupying no space and constructedout of sheer spirit. For myself, I would as soon live on this planetas on any other. Certainly no one can say that life on this planet isstale and monotonous. If a man cannot be satisfied with the varietyof weather and the changing colors of the sky, the exquisite flavorsof fruits appearing by rotation in the different seasons, and flowersblooming by rotation in the different months, that man had bettercommit suicide and not try to go on a futile chase after an impos-sible Heaven that may satisfy God himself and never satisfy man.

As the facts of the case really stand today, there is a perfect, andalmost a mystic, coordination between the sights, sounds, smellsand tastes of nature and our organs of seeing, hearing, smellingand eating. This coordination between the sights and sounds andsmells of the universe and our own perceptive organs is so perfectthat it forms a perfect argument for teleology, so much ridiculedby Voltaire. But we need not all be teleologists. God might haveinvited us to this feast, or he might not. The Chinese attitude isthat we will join in the feast whether we are invited or not. Itsimply doesn’t make sense not to taste the feast when the foodlooks so tempting and we have such an appetite. Let the philoso-phers carry on their metaphysical researches and try to find outwhether we are among the invited guests, but the sensible manwill eat up the food before it gets cold. Hunger always goes withgood common sense.

Our planet is a very good planet. In the first place, there is thealternation of night and day, and morning and sunset, and a coolevening following upon a hot day, and a silent and clear dawnpresaging a busy morning, and there is nothing better than that.In the second place, there is the alternation of summer and winter,perfect in themselves, but made still more perfect by being gradu-ally ushered in by spring and autumn, and there is nothing betterthan that. In the third place, there are the silent and dignifiedtrees, giving us shade in summer and not shutting out the warm













281

sunshine in winter, and there is nothing better than that. In thefourth place, there are flowers blooming and fruits ripening byrotation in the different months, and there is nothing better thanthat. In the fifth place, there are cloudy and misty days alternatingwith clear and sunny days, and there is nothing better than that.In the sixth place, there are spring showers and summer thunder-storms and the dry crisp wind of autumn and the snow of winter,and there is nothing better than that. In the seventh place, thereare peacocks and parrots and skylarks and canaries singing in-imitable songs, and there is nothing better than that. In the eighthplace, there is the zoo, with monkeys, tigers, bears, camels, ele-phants, rhinoceros, crocodiles, sea lions, cows, horses, dogs, cats,foxes, squirrels, woodchucks and more variety and ingenuity thanwe ever thought of, and there is nothing better than that. In theninth place, there are rainbow fish, sword fish, electric eels, whales,minnows, clams, abalones, lobsters, shrimps, turtles and more vari-ety and ingenuity than we ever thought of, and there is nothingbetter than that. In the tenth place, there are magnificent redwoodtrees, fire-spouting volcanoes, magnificent caves, majestic peaks,undulating hills, placid lakes, winding rivers and shady banks,and there is nothing better than that. The menu is practically end-less to suit individual tastes, and the only sensible thing to do is togo and partake of the feast and not complain about the monotonyof life.

II. On Bigness

Nature is itself always a sanatorium. If it can cure nothing else,it can cure man of megalomania. Man has to be “put in his place,”and he is always put in his place against nature’s background.That is why Chinese paintings always paint human figures sosmall in a landscape. In a Chinese landscape called “Looking ata Mountain After Snow,” it is very difficult to find the human figuresupposed to be looking at the mountain after snow. After a care-ful search, he will be discovered perching beneath a pine tree—his squatting body about an inch high in a painting fifteen high.













282 THE ENJOYMENT OF NATURE

and done in no more than a few rapid strokes. There is anotherSung painting of four scholarly figures wandering in an autumnforest and raising their heads to look at the intertwining branchesof majestic trees above them. It does one good to feel terriblysmall at times. Once I was passing a summer in Killing, and lyingthere on top of the mountain, I began to see two litde creatures,the size of ants, a hundred miles off in Nanking, hating andintriguing against each other for a chance to serve China, and itmade the whole thing seem a little comical. That is why a moun-tain trip is supposed by the Chinese to have a cathartic effect, cleans-ing one’s breast of a lot of foolish ambitions and unnecessaryworries.

Man is liable to forget how small and often how futile he is.A man seeing a hundred-story building often gets conceited, andthe best way to cure that insufferable conceit is to transport thatskyscraper in one’s imagination to a little contemptible hill andlearn a truer sense of what may and what may not be called“enormous.” What we like about the sea is its infiniteness, andwhat we like about the mountain is its enormity. There are peaksin Huangshan or the Yellow Mountains which are formed byangle pieces of granite a thousand feet high from their visiblebase on the ground to their tops, and half a mile long. These arewhat inspire the Chinese artists, and their silence, their ruggedenormity and their apparent eternity account partly for the Chi-nese love of rocks in pictures. It is hard to believe that there aresuch enormous rocks until one visits Huangshan, and there wasa Huangshan School of painters in the seventeenth century, de-riving their inspiration from these silent peaks of granite.

On the other hand, by association with nature’s enormities, aman’s heart may truly grow big also. There is a way of lookingupon a landscape as a moving picture and being satisfied withnothing less big as a moving picture, a way of looking upon tropicclouds over the horizon as the backdrop of a stage and being satis-fied with nothing less big as a backdrop, a way of looking upon themountain forests as a private garden and being satisfied with noth-













ON BIGNESS

283

ing less as a private garden, a way of listening to the roaring wavesas a concert and being satisfied with nothing less as a concert, anda way of looking upon the mountain breeze as an air-cooling sys-tem and being satisfied with nothing less as an air-cooling system.So do we become big, even as the earth and firmaments are big.Like the “Big Man” described by Yuan Tsi (A. D. 210-263), one ofChina’s first romanticists, we “live in heaven and earth as ourhouse.”

The best “spectacle” I ever saw took place one evening onthe Indian Ocean. It was truly immense. The stage was a hundredmiles wide and three miles high, and on it nature enacted a dramalasting half an hour, now with giant dragons, dinosaurs and lionsmoving across the sky—how the lions9 heads swelled and theirmanes spread and how the dragons9 backs bent and wriggled andcurled!—now showing armies of white-dad and gray-uniformedarmies and officers with golden epaulets, marching and counter-marching and united in combat and retreating again. As the battleand the chase were going on, the stage-lights changed, and thesoldiers in white uniform burst out in orange and the soldiers ingray uniforms seemed to don purple, while the backdrop was aflaming iridescent gold. Then as Nature’s stage technicians gradu-ally dimmed the lights, the purple overcame and swallowed upthe orange, and changed into deeper and deeper mauve and gray,presenting for the last five minutes a spectacle of unspeakabletragedy and black disaster before the lights went out. And I didnot pay a single cent to watch the grandest show of my life.

There is, too, the silence of the mountains, and that silence istherapeutic—the silent peaks, the silent rocks, the silent trees, allsilent and all majestic. Every good mountain with an enclosing ges-ture is a sanatorium. One feels good nestling like a baby on its breast*A disbeliever in Christian Science, I do believe in the spiritual, healring properties of grand, old trees and mountain resorts, not forcuring a fractured shoulder-bone or an infected skin, but for curingthe ambitions of the flesh and diseases of the soxil—kleptomania,megalomania, egocentridty, spiritual halitosis, bonditis, couponing,













284 the enjoyment of nature

managitis (the desire to manage others), war-neurosis, verse-phobia,spitefulness, hatred, social exhibitionism, general muddle-headednessznd all forms of moral distemper.

III. Two Chinese Ladies

The enjoyment of Nature is an art, depending so much on one’smood and personality, and like all art, it is difficult to explain itstechnique. Everything must be spontaneous and rise spontaneouslyfrom an artistic temperament. It is therefore difficult to lay downrules for the enjoyment of this or that tree, this or that rock andthis or that landscape in a particular moment, for no landscapes areexactly alike. He who understands will know how to enjoy Naturewithout being told. Havelock Ellis and Van der Velde are wisewhen they say that what is allowable and what is not allowable, orwhat is good and what is bad taste in the art of love between hus-band and wife in the intimacy of their bedroom, is not somethingthat can be prescribed by rules. The same thing is true of the art ofenjoying Nature. The best approach is probably by studying the livesof such people who have the artistic temperament in them. The feel-ing for Nature, one’s dreams of a beautiful landscape seen a yearago, and one’s sudden desire to visit a certain place—these thingscome in at the most unexpected moments. One who has the artistictemperament shows it wherever he goes, and writers who truly en-joy nature will go off in descriptions of a beautiful snow scene or aspring evening, forgetting entirely about the story or the plot. Auto-biographies of journalists and statesmen are usually full of reminis-cences of past events, while the autobiographies of literary menshould mainly concern themselves with reminiscences of a happynight, or a visit with some of their friends to some valley. In thissense I find the autobiographies of Rudyard Kipling and G. K.Chesterton disappointing. Why are the important anecdotes of theirlives regarded as so unimportant, and why are the unimportant anec-dotes regarded as so important? Men, men, men, everywhere, andno mention of flowers and birds and hills and streams!

285

The reminiscences of Chinese literary men, and also their letters,differ in this respect. The important thing is to tell a friend in one’sletter about a night on the lake, or to record in one’s autobiographya perfecdy happy day and how it was passed. In particular, Chinesewriters, at least a number of them, have gone to the length of writ-ing reminiscences about their married lives. Of these, Mao Pich-iang’s Reminiscences of My Concubine Shen Sanpo’s Six Chaptersof a Floating life, and Chiang T’an’s Reminiscences Under theLamp-Light are the best examples. The first two were written bythe husbands after their wives’ death, while the last was written inthe author’s old age during his wife’s lifetime.2 We will begin withcertain select passages from the Reminiscences Under the Lamp-Light with the author’s wife Ch’iufu as the heroine, and follow itwith selections from Six Chapters of a Floating Life, with Yun asthe heroine. Both these women had the right temperament, althoughthey were not particularly educated or good poets. It doesn’t matter.No one should aim at writing immortal poetry; one should learnthe writing of poems merely as a way to record a meaningfulmoment, a personal mood, or to help the enjoyment of Nature.

A. Ch'itjfu

Ch’iufu often said to me, “A man’s life lasts only a hundredyears, and of this hundred sleep and dream occupy one half,days of illness and sorrow occupy one half, and the days ofswaddling clothes and senile age again occupy one half.3 Whatwe have got left is only a tenth or fifth part. Besides, we whoare made of the stuff of willows can hardly expect to live ahundred years.”

One day when the autumn moon was at its best, Ch’iufuasked a young maid to carry a chin and accompany her to aboating trip among the lotus flowers of the West Lake. I wasthen returning from the West River, and when I arrived andfound that Ch’iufu had gone boating, I bought some melons

1 Quoted is the section on "Smoke and Incense.**

2 There are a number of others; for instance, Li Liwcng has also two sketchesabout his two concubines, who were good singers, personally trained by him.

8 This is merely Chinese mathematics.













and went after her. We met at the Second Bridge of the SuTungp’o Embankment, when Ch’iufu was playing the sad dittyof “Autumn in Han Palace.” Stopping to listen with my gowngathered in my hands, I listened to her music. At this moment,the hills all around were enveloped in the evening haze, and thereflections of the stars and the moon were seen in the water.Different musical sounds came to my ear so that I could notdistinguish whether it was the sounds of the wind in the air, orthe sounds of jingling jade. Before the song was completed, thebow of our boat had already touched the southern bank of theGarden of Swirling Waters. We then knocked at the gate of theWhite Cloud Convent, for we knew the nuns there. After sit-ting down for a while, the nuns served us with freshly pickedlotus seeds prepared in soup. Their color and their fragrancewere enough to cool one’s intestines, a world different from thetaste of meats and oily foods. Coming back, we landed at Tuan’sBridge, where we spread a bamboo matting on the ground andsat talking for a long time. The distant rumble of the city ratherannoyed our ears like the humming of flies.. . . Then the starsin the sky became fewer and fewer and the lake was blanketedwith a stretch of white. We heard the drum on top of the citywall and realized that it was already the fourth watch [about3 A. M.] and carried the ch’in and paddled the boat home.

The banana trees that Ch’iufu planted had already grownbig leaves which cast their green shade across the screen. Tohave heard raindrops beating upon the leaves in autumn whenlying inclined on a pillow was enough to break one’s heart. Soone day I playfully wrote three lines on one of the leaves:

What busybody planted this sapling?

Morning tapping.

Evening rapping!

Next day, I saw another three lines following them, which read:

It’s you who’re lonesome, fretting!

Banana getting.

Banana regretting I

The characters were delicately formed, and they came fromChlufu’s playful pen. But I have learnt something from whatshe wrote.

One night we heard the noise of wind and rain, and the pil-













lows and matting revealed the cooler spirit of autumn. Ch’iufuwas just undressing for the night, and I was sitting by her sideand had just gone through an album of hundred flowers withinscriptions that I was making. I heard the noise of severalyellow leaves falling upon the floor from the window, andCh’iufu sang the lines:

Yesterday was better than today;

And this year I’m older than the last.

I consoled her, saying, “One never lives a full hundred years.How can we have time to wipe the tears for others [the fallingleaves].” And with a sigh I laid aside the painting brush. Whenthe night was getting late, and Ch’iufu wanted to have some-thing to drink, I found that the fire in the earthen stove hadalready died out, and the maid servants were all in dreamland,drooping their heads. I then took the oil lamp on the table andplaced it under the little tea stove, and warmed up a cup of lotusseeds for her. Ch’iufu has been suffering from an affection inthe lungs for ten years, and always coughs in late autumn andsleeps well only when upholstered on a high pillow. This year,she is feeling stronger, and we often sit face to face with eachother deep into the night. Perhaps it is due to proper care andnourishment.

I made a dress with a plum-flower design for Ch’iufu, withfragrant snow all over her body, and at a distance she lookedlike a Plum Fairy standing alone in a world of mortal beings.

In late spring, when her green sleeves were resting on the bal-cony, butterflies would flit about her temples, not knowing thatthe season of the Eastern Wind was already gone.

Last year, the swallows came back later than usual, and whenthey came, half of the peach blossoms outside the screen had al-ready bloomed. One day, the clay from their nest fell down anda young swallow fell to the ground. Afraid that a wild cat mightget it, Ch’iufu immediately took it up, and made a bamboo sup-port for its nest. This year the same swallows have returnedand are chirping around the house. Do they perhaps rememberthe one who protected the young one last year?

Ch’iufu loves to play chess but is not very good at it. Everynight, she would force me to play “the conversation of fingers”with her, sometimes till daybreak. I playfully quoted the line of













Chu Chuchia, “At tossing coins and matching grass-blades youhave both lost. I ask you with what are you going to pay metonight?” “Are you so sure I cannot win?” she said, evadingthe question. “I will bet you this jade tiger.” We then playedand when, twenty or thirty stones had been laid, and she wasgetting into a worse situation, she let the cat upon the chess-board to upset the game. “Are you regarding yourself as YangKueifei [who played the same trick upon Emperor T’ang Ming-huang] ?” I asked. She kept quiet, but the light of silver candlesshone upon her peach-colored cheeks. After that, we did notplay any more.

There are several cassia trees at the Hupao Spring, stretchinglow over some rocks. During blossom, its yellow flowers coverup the stone steps, its perfume making one feel like visiting theKingdom of Divine Fragrance. I have a weakness for flowersand often boiled tea 4 under them. Ch’iufu plucked the flowersand decorated her hair with them, but sometimes her hairwould be caught or upset by the overhanging branches. I ar-ranged it and smoothed it with the spring water. On our depart-ure, we plucked a few twigs and brought them home, puttingthem on the back of our cart as we went through the city streets,that people might know the latest news of the new autumn.

B. Yun

In the Six Chapters of a 'Floating Life we have the reminiscencesof an obscure Chinese painter about his married life with Yun.They were both simple artistic souls, trying to snatch every momentof happiness that came their way, and the story was told in a simpleunaffected manner. Somehow Yun has seemed to me the most beau-tiful woman in Chinese literature. Theirs was a sad life, and yet itwas one of the gayest, with a gaiety that came from the soul. It isinteresting to see how the enjoyment of nature came in as a vitalpart of their spiritual experience. Below are three passages describingtheir enjoyment of the seventh of the seventh moon and the fifteenthof the seventh moon, both festivals, and of how they passed a sum-mer inside the city of Soochow:

4 Hupao Spring water is famous for making tea.













On the seventh night of the seventh moon of that year [1780]Yiin prepared incense, candles and some melons and fruits, sothat we might together worship the Grandson of Heaven5 inthe Hall called “After My Heart.” I had carved two seals withthe inscription, “That we might remain husband and wife fromincarnation to incarnation.” I kept the seal with positive char-acters, while she kept the one with negative characters, to beused in our correspondence. That night, the moon was shiningbeautifully and when I looked down at the creek, the ripplesshone like golden chains. We were wearing light silk dressesand sitting together with a small fan in our hands, before awindow overlooking the creek. Looking up at the sky, we sawthe clouds sailing through the heavens, changing at every mo-ment into a myriad forms, and Yiin said: “This moon is com-mon to the whole universe. I wonder if there is another pair oflovers quite as passionate as ourselves looking at the same moontonight?” And I said: “Oh, there are plenty of people who willbe sitting in the cool evening and looking at the moon, and,perhaps also many women criticising or enjoying the clouds intheir chambers; but when a husband and wife are looking atthe moon together, I hardly think that the clouds will form thesubject of their conversation.” By and by, the candle-lights wentout, the moon sank in the sky, and we removed the fruits andwent to bed.

The fifteenth of the seventh moon was All Souls’ Day. Yiinprepared a little dinner, so that we could drink together withthe moon as our company, but when night came, the sky wassuddenly overcast with dark clouds. Yiin knitted her brow andsaid: “If it be the wish of God that we two should live togetheruntil there are silver threads in our hair, then the moon mustcome out again tonight.” On my part I felt disheartened also.As we looked across the creek, we saw will-o’-the-wisps flittingin crowds hither and thither like ten thousand candle-lights,threading their way through the willows and smartweeds. Andthen we began to compose a poem together, each saying twolines at a time, the first completing the couplet which the otherhad begun, and the second beginning another couplet for theother to finish, and after a few rhymes, the longer we kept on,

5 The seventh day of the seventh moon is the only day in the year when the pairof heavenly lovers, the Cowherd (“Grandson of Heaven”) and the Spinster are al-lowed to meet each other across the Milky Way.













the more nonsensical it became, until it was a jumble of slap-dash doggerel. By this time, Yiin was buried amidst tears andlaughter and choking on my breast, while I felt the fragranceof the jasmine in her hair assail my nostrils. I patted her onthe shoulder and said jokingly, “I thought that the jasminewas used for decoration in women’s hair because it was roundlike a pearl; I did not know that it is because its fragrance isso much finer when it is mixed with the smell of women’s hairand powder. When it smells like that, even the citron cannotremotely compare with it.” Then Yiin stopped laughing andsaid: “The citron is the gendeman among the different frag-rant plants because its fragrance is so slight that you can hardlydetect it; on the other hand, the jasmine is a common fellowbecause it borrows its fragrance pardy from others. Therefore,the fragrance of the jasmine is like that of a smiling syco-phant.” “Why, then,” I said, “do you keep away from thegendeman and associate with the common fellow?” And Yiinreplied, “I am amused by the gendeman that loves the com-mon fellow ” While we were thus bandying words about, itwas already midnight, and we saw the wind had blown awaythe clouds in the sky and there appeared the full moon, roundlike a chariot wheel, and we were gready delighted. And sowe began to drink by the side of the window, but before wehad tasted three cups, we heard suddenly the noise of a splashunder the bridge, as if some one had fallen into the water.We looked out through the window and saw there was not athing, the water was a smooth as a mirror, except that weheard the noise of a duck scampering in the marshes. I knewthat there was a ghost of some one drowned by the side of theTs’anglang Pavilion, but knowing that Yiin was very timid,dared not mention it to her. And Yiin sighed and said: “Alas!whence cometh this noise?” and we shuddered all over.Quickly we shut the window and carried the wine pot backinto the room. A lamp light was then burning as small as apea, and the curtains moved in the dark, and we were shakingall over. We then put out the light and went inside the bedcurtain, and Yiin already had run up a high fever. Soon I hada high temperature myself, and our illness dragged on for abouttwenty days* True it is that when the cup of happiness over-flows, disaster follows, as the saying goes, and this was also anomen that we should not be able to live together until old age.













TWO CHINESE LADIES

291

The book is strewn literally with passages of such charm andbeauty, showing an overflowing love of nature, but the followingdescription of how they spent a summer must suffice:

After we had moved to Ts’angmi Alley, I called our bed-room the “Tower of Guests’ Fragrance,” with a reference toYiin’s name,6 and to the story of Liang Hung and Meng Kuangwho as husband and wife were always courteous to each other“like guests.” We rather disliked the house because the wallswere too high and the courtyard was too small. At the back,there was another house, leading to the library. Looking outof the window at the back, one could see the old garden ofMr. Lu, then in a dilapidated condition. Yiin’s thoughts stillhovered about the beautiful scenery of the Ts’anglang Pavilion.

At this time there was an old peasant woman living on theeast of Mother Gold’s Bridge and the north of Kenghsiang.Her little cottage was surrounded on all sides by vegetablefields and had a wicker gate. Outside the gate, there was apond about thirty yards across, surrounded by a wilderness oftrees on all sides. ... A few paces to the west of the cottage,there was a mound filled with broken bricks, from the top ofwhich one could command a view of the surrounding country,which was an open ground with a stretch of wild vegetation.Once the old woman happened to mention the place, andYiin kept on thinking about it. . . . So the next day I wentthere and found that the cottage consisted only of two rooms,which could be partitioned into four. With paper windowsand bamboo beds, the house would make quite a delightfullycool place to stay in, . . .

Our only neighbours were an old couple who raised vege-tables for the market. They knew that we were going to staythere for the summer, and came and called on us, bringingus some fish from the pond and vegetables from their ownfields. We offered to pay for them, but as they wouldn’t takeany money, Yun made a pair of shoes for them, which theywere finally persuaded to accept. This was in July when thetrees cast a green shade over the place. The summer breezeblew over the water of the pond, and cicades filled the air withtheir singing the whole day. Our old neighbour also made afishing line for us, and we used to angle together under the

6 #<Yun” in Chinese means a certain fragrant weed













shade. Late in the afternoons, we would go up on the moundto look at the evening glow and compose lines of poetry, whenwe felt so inclined. Two of the lines were:

Beast-clouds swallow the sinking sun.

And the bow-moon shoots the falling stars.

After a while, the moon cut her image in the water, insectsbegan to cry all around, and we placed a bamboo bed nearthe hedgerow to sit or lie upon. The old woman then wouldinform us that wine had been warmed up and dinner prepared,and we would sit down to have a litde drink under the moon.After we had a bath, we would put on our slippers and carry afan, and lie or sit there, listening to old tales of retribution toldby our neighbour. When we came in to sleep about midnight,we felt our whole bodies nice and cool, almost forgetting thatwe were living in a city.

There along the hedgerow, we asked the gardener to plantchrysanthemums. The flowers bloomed in the ninth moon,and we continued to stay there for another ten days. Mymother was also quite delighted and came to see us there. Sowe ate crabs in the midst of chrysanthemums and whiled awaythe whole day. Yiin was quite enchanted with all this and said:"Some day we must build a cottage here. We’ll buy ten mowof ground, and around it we’ll plant vegetables and melons forour food. You will paint and I will do embroidery, from whichwe could make enough money to buy wine and composepoems over dinners. Thus, clad in simple gowns and eatingsimple meals, we could live a very happy life together with-out going anywhere.” I fully agreed with her. Now the placeis sdll there while the one who knows my heart is dead. Alas,such is life!

IV. On Rocks and Trees

I don’t know what we are going to do now. We are buildinghouses square and are building them in a row, and we are havingstraight roads without trees. There are no more crooked streets, nomore old houses, no more wells in one’s garden, and whateverprivate garden there is in the city is usually a caricature. We havequite successfully shut nature out from our lives, and we are living













293

in houses without roofs, the roofs being the neglected end of abuilding, left in any old shape after the utilitarian purposes havebeen served and the building contractor is a little tired and in ahurry to get through his job. The average building looks likewooden blocks built by a peevish or fickle child who is tired of thegame before he finishes building, and leaves them unfinished anduncrowned. The spirit of Nature has left the modern civilized man,and it seems to me we are trying to civilize the trees themselves.If we ever remember to plant them on boulevards, we usuallynumber them serially, disinfect them, cut them and trim themto assume a shape that we humans consider beautiful.

We often plant flowers and lay them out on a plot so that theyresemble either a circle, or a star, or different letters of the alpha-bet, and we are horrified when some of the flowers so planted getout of line, as we are horrified when we see a West Point cadetmarch out of step, and we proceed to cut them down with scissors.And at Versailles, we plant these conically cut trees in pairs andarrange them with perfect symmetry along a perfecdy round circleor in perfectly rectilinear rows in army formation. Such is humanglory and power and our ability to train and discipline the treesas we train and discipline uniformed soldiers. If one tree of a pairgrows taller than the other, our hands itch to cut off its top so asnot to let it disturb our sense of symmetry and human power andglory.

There exists, therefore, the great problem of recovering natureand bringing nature back to the home. This is an exasperatingproblem. What can one do with the best artistic temperament,when one lives in an apartment and away from the soil? How isone going to have a plot of grass or a well or a bamboo grove evenif he is rich enough to rent a penthouse? Everything is wrong,utterly and irretrievably wrong. What has one got left to admireexcept tall skyscrapers and lighted windows in a row at night?Looking at these skyscrapers and these lighted windows in a rowat night, one gets more and more conceited about the power ofhuman civilization and forgets what puny little creatures humaq













beings are, I am therefore forced to give up the problem as hope-less of solution.

We must begin, therefore, by giving man land and plenty of it.No matter what the excuse, a civilization that deprives man ofland is wrong. But suppose in a future civilization every man isable to own an acre of land, then he has got something to startwith. He can have trees, his own trees, and rocks, his own rocks.He will be careful to choose a site where there are already full-grown trees, and if there are not already full-grown trees, he willplant trees that grow fast enough for him, such as bamboos andwillows. Then he will not have to keep birds in cages, for birdswill come to him and he will see to it that there are frogs in theneighborhood, and preferably also some lizards and spiders. Hischildren wiE then be able to study nature in Nature and not study na-ture in a glass case. At least his children wiU be able to watch howchickens hatch from their eggs and they need not be woefullyignorant about sex and reproduction as the children of “good”Boston families often are. And they will have the pleasure ofwatching a fight between lizards and spiders. And they will havethe pleasure also of getting comfortably dirty.

The Chinese sentiment for rocks has already been explained, orhinted at, in a previous section.7 That explanation sufficiently ac-counts for the love of rocky peaks in Chinese landscape painting.This explanation is basic, but it does not sufficiendy account forChinese rock gardens and the love of rocks in general. The basicidea is that rocks are enormous, strong and suggest eternity. Theyare silent, unmovable and have strength of character like greatheroes, and they are independent and detached from life like re-tired scholars. They are invariably old, and the Chinese love what-ever is old. Above all, from the artistic point of view they havegrandeur, majesty, ruggedness, and quaintness. There is thefurther sentiment of u/ei, which means “dangerous” but is reallyuntranslatable. A tall cliff that rises abrupdy three hundred feet

7 See above, Section IL













295

above the ground is always fascinating to look at because of itssuggestion of “danger.”

But then it is necessary to go further. As one cannot visit themountains every day, it is necessary to have rocks brought to thehome. In the case of rock gardens and artificial rock grottoes, asubject which is difficult for Western travelers in China to under-stand and appreciate, the idea is still to retain a suggestion of therugged, “dangerous” and majestic lines of rocky peaks. Westerntravelers are not to blame because most of the rockeries are donewith atrocious taste, and fail to convey the suggestion of naturalgrandeur and majesty. Artificial grottoes built out of several piecesof rock are usually cemented together, and the cement shows. Areally artistic rockery should have the composition and contrast- ofa painting. There is no question that the artistic appreciation ofartificial rock sceneries and that of mountain rocks in landscapepainting are closely associated, as we find the Sung painter. MiFei, was the author of a book on ink-stones, and there was a bookShihp’u on rocks by a Sung author, Tu Kuan, giving detaileddescriptions of the quality of over a hundred kinds of rocks pro-duced at different places and used for rockeries, showing that rock-eries were already a highly developed art in the time of the greatSung painters.

Side by side with this appreciation of the grandeur of rocks onmountain peaks, there developed then a different appreciation ofrocks in gardens, emphasizing their color, texture, surface, grainsand sometimes the sounds they produced when struck. The smallerthe stones, the more emphasis was laid on quality of texture andcolor of grains. The development along this direction was greatlyhelped by the hobby of collecting the finest ink-stones and seals,two things which the literary man in China daily associated with.Daintiness;, texture, light or translucence and shades of color be-came then of the first importance, as also in the case of stone, jadeand jadeite snuff botdes, which came later. A good stone seal or agood snuff botde could cost six or seven hundred dollars.

For the fullest appreciation of all uses of stone in the house and













gardens, however, one has to go back to Chinese calligraphy. Forcalligraphy is nothing but a study of rhythm and line and com-position in the abstract. While really good pieces of rock shouldsuggest majesty or detachment from life, it is even more importantthat the lmes be correct. By line one does not mean a straight line,or a circle or a triangle, but the rugged lines of nature. Laotse, “TheOld Boy,” always emphasized in his Taotehching the uncarvedrock. Let us not tamper with Nature, for the best work of art, likethe best poem or literary composition, is one which shows no signof human effort, as natural as a winding river or a sailing cloud,or as the Chinese literary critics always say, “without ax andchisel marks.” This applies to every field of art. The appreciation isof beauty in irregularity, in lines that suggest rhythm and move-ment and gesture. The appreciation of the gnarled roots of an oaktree, sometimes used as stools in a rich man’s studio, is based onthe same idea. Consequently most of the rockeries found in Chi-nese gardens are uncut rocks, which may be the fossilized bark ofa tree ten or fifteen feet high standing vertically alone and unmov-able like a great man, or of rocks found in lakes and caves, gen-erally bearing perforations and having the utmost irregularity ofoutline. One writer suggested that if the perforations happen tobe perfectly round, some litde pebble should be inserted to breakup the regularity of the circle. Rockeries near Shanghai and Soo-chow are mosdy built of rocks from the Taihu Lake, bearingmarks of former sea waves. Such rocks were dug out of the bottomof the lake, and sometimes when something was needed to correcttheir lines, they would be chiseled until they were perfect and letdown into the water again for a year or so, so that the chisel marksmight be obliterated by the movement of water.

The feeling for trees is easier to understand, and is, of course,universal. Houses without trees around them are naked, like menand women without clothing. The difference between trees andhouses is that houses are built but trees grow, and anything whichgrows is always more beautiful to look at than anything which isbuilt. There are considerations of practical convenience which force













us to build our walls straight and our stories level, although in thematter of floors, there is absolutely no reason why the floors ofdifferent rooms in a house should not be on different levels. Never-theless, there is an inevitable tendency to go in for straight lines andsquare shapes, and such straight lines and square shapes can bebrought into pleasurable relief only by the company of trees. Inthe color scheme, too, we dare not paint our houses green. Butnature dares and has painted the trees green.

The wisdom of art consists in concealing art. We are so anxiousto show off. In this respect, I must pay my tribute to a greatscholar of the Manchu Dynasty, Yiian Yuan, who as governor hadan islet built in the water of the West Lake, known today asGovernor Yuan’s Islet, and who refused to put a single humanedifice on the place, not a pavilion, not a pillar, not even a monu-ment. He completely obliterated himself as an architect. Todaythe Governor Yiian’s Islet stands in the middle of the lake, a levelpiece of land about a hundred yards across, rising barely a footabove the water and planted all around with willow trees. Andtoday as you stand looking at it on a misty day, the magic islandseems to rise out of the water, and the willow trees cast their reflec-tions in the water, breaking the monotony of the lake’s surface andharmonizing with it. Therefore Governor Yiian’s Islet is in perfectharmony with nature. It is not obtrusive to the eye, like the light-house-shaped monument next to it built by a student returnedfrom America, which gives me inflammation of the eyelids everytime I look at it. I have made a public promise that if one day Ishould emerge as a bandit general and capture Hangchow, my firstofficial act would be to direct a cannon and blow that lighthouse-shaped thing to pieces.

Out of the myriad variety of trees, Chinese critics and poets havecome to feel that there are a few which are particularly good forartistic enjoyment,* due to their special lines and contours whichare aesthetically beautiful from a calligrapher’s point of view. Thepoint is, that while all trees are beautiful, certain trees have a par-ticular gesture or strength or gracefulness. These trees are there-













fore picked out from among the others and associated with definitesentiments. It is clear that an ordinary olive tree has no ruggedmanner, for which we go to the pine, and while a willow is grace-ful, it can never be said to be “majestic” or “inspiring.” There arethen a small number of trees which are more constantly painted inpaintings and sung about in poems. Of these the most outstandingare the pine tree, enjoyed for its grand manner, the plum tree,enjoyed for its romantic manner, the bamboo tree, enjoyed for itsdelicacy of line and the suggestion of the home, and the willowtree, enjoyed for its gracefulness and its suggestion of slenderwomen.

The enjoyment of the pine tree is probably most notable andof the greatest poetic significance. It typifies better than other treesthe conception of nobility of manner. For there are trees noble andtrees ignoble, trees distinguished for their grand manner and treesof the common manner. The Chinese artists therefore speak ofthe grand old manner of the pine tree, as Matthew Arnold spokeof the grand manner of Homer, It would be as hopeless to lookfor this grand manner in willows among the trees, as it is to lookfor the grand manner of poetry in Swinburne among the poets.There are so many kinds of beauty, beauty of tenderness, of grace-fulness, of majesty, of austerity, of quaintness, of ruggedness, ofsheer strength, and of a suggestion of the antique. It is this antiquemanner of the pine tree that gives the pine a special position amongthe trees, as it is the antique manner of a recluse scholar, clad in aloose-fitting gown, holding a bamboo cane and walking on a moun-tain path, that sets him off as the highest ideal among men. Forthis reason Li Liweng says that to sit in an orchard full of peachtrees and flowers and willows without a pine nearby is like sittingin the company of young children and women without the presenceof an austere master or old man, whom we can look up to. It isalso for this reason that when Chinese admire pine trees, they go infor the old ones; the older the better, for then they become moremajestic. Classed with the fane tree is the cedar cypress which hasthe same manner, particularly the kind known as selaginela invol-













299

venSy with twisting, encircling and ruggedly downward-pointingbranches. While branches that stretch upwards toward heaven seemto symbolize youth and aspiration, downward-pointing branchesseem to symbolize the posture o£ old men bending down towardyouth,

I say the enjoyment of pine trees is artistically most significant,because it represents silence and majesty and detachment fromlife which are so similar to the manner of the recluse. This enjoy-ment is then associated with “stupid” rocks and with figures ofold people loitering around underneath its shade, as we so oftensee in Chinese paintings. As one stands there beneath a pine tree,he looks up to it with a sense of its majesty and its old age, and itsstrange happiness in its own independence. Laotse says, “Naturedoes not talk,” nor does the old pine tree. There it stands silentand imperturbable; from its height it looks down upon us, think-ing it has seen so many children grow up into maturity and somany middle-aged people pass on to old age. Like wise, old men, itunderstands everything, but it does not talk, and therein lie itsmystery and grandeur.

The plum tree is enjoyed partly for its romantic manner in itsbranches, and pardy for the fragrance in its flowers. It is curiousthat among the trees selected for our poetic enjoyment, the pinetree, the plum tree and the bamboo are associated with winter,being known as the “Three Friends of Winter,” for the bambootree and the pine tree are evergreens, while the plum tree blossomsat the end of winter and the beginning of spring. The plum tree,therefore, in particular, symbolizes purity of character, the puritythat we find in the crisp, cold winter air. Its splendor is a coldsplendor, and like the recluse, the cooler the atmosphere it findsitself in, the better it prospers. Like the orchid flower, it typifies theidea of charm in seclusion. A Sung poet and recluse, Lin Hoching,declared that he had married plum trees as his wives, and had astork for his son. Today the site of his seclusion on the Kushan inthe middle of the West Lake is an object of pilgrimage for poetsand scholars, and below his tomb is the tomb of the stork, his













“son.” Now the appreciation o£ the plum tree, of its type of frag-rance and its outline, is best expressed by this poet in his famousline of seven words:

An hsiang jou tung yin heng sheh

“Its dim fragrance floats around, its shadow leaning across.” It isadmitted by all poets that the essence of the beauty of the plum isexpressed in those seven words and cannot be improved upon.

The bamboo tree is loved for its delicacy of trunk and leaves,and being more delicate, it is more enjoyed in the intimacy of ascholar’s home. Its beauty is more a kind of smiling beauty and thehappiness it gives us is mild and temperate. Bamboos are best en-joyed when they are thin and slender and sparse, and for this reasontwo or three trees are as good as a whole bamboo grove, either inlife or in painting. The appreciation of its slender outlines makes itpossible to paint just two or three twigs of bamboo in a picture, as itis also possible to paint a single twig of plum flowers. Somehow itsslender lines go very well with the rugged lines of rocks, and henceone finds always one or two rocks painted along with a few bam-boos. Such rocks are invariably painted as having the beauty ofSlenderness.

The willow grows easily anywhere and often on a bank.2 It isthe feminine tree par excellence. That is why Chang Ch’ao countsthe willow among the four things in the universe which touchman’s heart most profoundly, and why he says the willow treemakes a man sentimental. Chinese ladies of slender waist are saidto have “willow waists,” and Chinese female dancers, with theirlong sleeves and their flowing robe, try to simulate the movementof willow branches swaying and bowing in the wind. As willowsgrow most easily, there are places in China where willows areplanted for miles around and then when a wind blows over them,the effect of the combination is spoken of as “willow-waves,” orUulang. Furthermore, as orioles love to perch on their hanging

*1 bave translated in My Country and My People a passage by Li Liweng on tbeenjoyment of the willow tree.













ON ROCKS AND TREES

30a

branches, they are associated in pictures or in life with the presenceof orioles, or with cicadas which also love to rest there. One of theten scenic spots of the West Lake is therefore called Uulang WenYing, or “Listening to Orioles among Willow-Waves,”

There are of course other trees, and a good number of themadmired for other reasons, like the wuiung (sterculia platanitolid),admired for the cleanliness of its bark and the possibility of carvingpoems on its smooth surface with a knife. There is also great loveof gigantic old creepers, two or three inches across at their roots,encircling old trees or rocks. Their encircling and undulatingmovement contrasts pleasurably with the straight trunks of erecttrees. Sometimes a particularly good creeper suggests a sleepingdragon and is given that name. Old trees that have zigzag andmore or less sloping trunks are also greatly loved and valuedfor this reason. At Mutu, a point on the Taihu Lake near Soochow,there are four such cypress trees which have been given the fourrespective names “Pure,” “Rare,” “Antique” and “Quaint.” “Pure”goes up by a long, straight trunk, spreading out a foliage on topresembling an umbrella; “Rare” crouches on the ground and rollsalong in three zigzag bands like the letter “Z”; “Antique” is baldand bare at the top and broad and stumpy, with its stragglinglimbs half dried up and resembling a man’s fingers; and “Quaint’s”trunk twists around in spiral formation all the way up to its high-est branches.

Above all, the enjoyment of trees is not only in and for them-selves, but in association with other elements of nature, such asrocks, clouds, birds, insects and human beings. Chang Ch’ao saysthat “planting flowers serves to invite butterflies, piling up rocksserves to invite clouds, planting pine trees serves to invite the wind,. . . planting banana trees serves to invite the rain, and plantingwillow trees serves to invite the cicada.” One enjoys the sounds ofbirds along with the trees, and enjoys the sounds of crickets alongwith the rocks, for birds sings where trees are, and crickets singwhere rocks are found. The Chinese enjoyment of croaking frogsvchirping crickets and intoning cicadas is immeasurably greater than













their love of cats and dogs and other animal pets. Among all theanimals, the only one which belongs in the same category with pinetrees and plum trees is the stork, because he, too, is the symbol ofthe recluse. As one sees a stork, or even a heron, standing motionlessin the marshes of some secluded pond, dignified, elegant and whiteand pure, the scholar wishes that he were a stork himself.

The final picture of man harmonizing with nature and happybecause the animals are happy is best expressed by Cheng Panch’iao(1693-1765) in his letter to his younger brother, pointing out hisdisapproval of keeping birds in cages:

In regard to what I said about not keeping birds in cages,

I wish to add that it isn’t that I don’t love birds, but there is aproper way of loving them. The best way of keeping birds isto plant hundreds of trees around the house, and let themfind in their green shade a bird kingdom and bird homes. Sothen, at dawn, when we have waked up from sleep and aresdll tossing about in bed, we hear a chorus of chirping songslike a celestial symphony. When we have got up and put onour gowns and are washing our faces or gargling our mouthsor sipping the morning tea, we see their gorgeous plumes flit-ting to and fro, and before we have time to look at one, oureyes are attracted by another—an enjoyment that is not to becompared with looking at a single bird in a single cage. Gener-ally the enjoyment of life should come from a view regardingthe universe as a park and the rivers and lakes as a pond, sothat all beings can live according to their nature, and greatindeed is such happiness! How does this compare in kindnessand cruelty and in the magnitude of enjoyment with the en-joyment of a bird in a cage, or of a fish in a jar!

V. On Flowers and Flower Arrangements

There seems to be a certain randomness about the enjoyment offlowers and flower arrangements, as we know it today. The enjoy-ment of flowers, like the enjoyment of trees, must begin with theselection of certain noble varieties, with a sense of grading of theirrelative standings and with the association of definite sentiments













3°3

and surroundings with definite flowers. To begin with, there isthe matter of fragrance, from the strong and obvious, like that ofjasmine, to the delicate, like that of lilac, and finally to the mostrefined and subde kind, like that of the Chinese orchid. The moresubde and less easily perceivable its fragrance, the more noble theflower may be regarded. Then there is the matter of color andappearance and charm, which again varies a great deal. Some arelike buxom lassies and others are like slender, poedc, quiet ladies.Some seem to pander their charms to the crowd, and others arehappy in their own fragrant being and seem contented merely todream their hours away. Some go in for a dash of color, while othershave a milder and more restrained taste. Above all, flowers arealways associated with the outward surroundings and seasons oftheir bloom. The rose is naturally associated in our minds with abright sunny spring day; the lotus is naturally associated with acool summer morning on a pond; the cassia is naturally associatedwith the harvest moon and mid-autumn festivities; the chrysan-themum is associated with the eating of crabs in late autumn; theplum is naturally associated with snow and together with thenarcissus it forms a definite part of our enjoyment of the NewYear. Each seems perfect in its own natural surroundings, and itis the easiest of all things for lovers of flowers to make them standin our mind for definite pictures of the different seasons, as theholly stands for Christmas.

Like the pine tree and the bamboo, the orchid, the chrysanthe-mum and the lotus are selected for certain definite qualities andstand in Chinese literature as symbols for the gendeman, the orchidmore particularly for an exotic beauty. The plum flower is probablymost beloved by Chinese poets among all flowers, and has beenpardy dealt with already in the previous section. It is said to be the“first” among the flowers, because it comes with the New Yearand therefore stands first in the procession of flowers in the courseof the year. Opinions differ, of course, and the peony has been tra-ditionally regarded as the “king of flowers,” particularly in theT’ang Dynasty. On the other hand, the peony being rich in its colors













and its petals, is rather regarded as the symbol of the rich and happyman, whereas the plum flower is the poet’s flower, and symbol ofthe quiet, poor scholar, and therefore the latter is spiritual as theformer is materialistic. One scholar voiced his sympathy for thepeony only because of the fact that, when Empress Wu of the T’angDynasty commanded one day, in one of her megalomaniac whims,that all the flowers in the Imperial garden should bloom on a certainday in mid-winter, just because she wanted it, the peony was theonly one that dared to offend her Imperial Majesty by blooming afew hours late, and consequently, all the thousands of pots of peonyflowers were banished by Imperial decree from Sian, the capital, toLoyang. Although falling out of Imperial favor, the cult of thepeony was still maintained and Loyang became a center for peonyflowers. I think the reason that the Chinese do not place more im-portance on the rose is because its color and shape belong in thesame class with the peony, but have been overshadowed by the lat-ter’s gorgeousness. According to early Chinese sources, there wereninety varieties of the peony distinguished, and each was given amost poetic name.

Unlike the peony, the orchid stands as the symbol of secludedcharm because it is often found in a deserted shady valley. It issaid to have the virtue of “enjoying its own lonely charm,” notcaring whether people look at it or not, and extremely unwillingto be moved into the city. If it consents to be moved, it must becultivated on its own terms, or it dies. Hence we often speak of abeautiful secluded maiden, or a great scholar living away in themountains with contempt for power and fame, as “a secludedorchid in a deserted valley.” Its fragrance is so subtle that it doesn’tseem to make a particular effort to please anybody, but whenpeople do appreciate it, how divine is its fragrance! This makes ita symbol for the gendeman not caring to cater to the public, andalso for true friendship, because an ancient book says, “After enter-ing and remaining in a house with orchids for a long time, oneceases to feel the fragrance,” when he himself is permeated withit* Li Liweng advised that the best way to enjoy orchids was not













to place them in all rooms, but only in one room and then toenjoy the fragrance when passing out and in. American orchids donot seem to have this subtle fragrance, but on the other hand, arebigger and more gorgeous in shape and color. In my native cityand province, we are supposed to have the best orchids in China,known as “Fukien orchids.” The flower is pale green with spots ofpurple and is of a very much smaller size, the petals being slightlyover an inch long. The best and most highly valued variety, theCh’en Mengliang, has such a color that it is barely visible whenimmersed in water, being of the same color as the water itself. Un-like the peony, whose varieties are known after their place of origin,the different famous varieties of the orchid are known, like manyAmerican flower varieties, after their owners, as “General P’u,”“Quartermaster Shun,” “Judge Li,” “Eighth Brother Huang,”“Chen Mengliang,” “Hsu Chingch’u ”

There is no question that the extreme difficulty of cultivatingorchids and the flower’s extreme delicacy of health contributed tothe idea of its nobility of character. Among all the flowers, theorchid is the one that most easily withers or rots away with theslightest mishandling. Hence an orchid-lover always attends to itwith his personal care and does not leave it to the servants, andI have seen people caring for their orchids like their own parents.An extremely valuable plant aroused as much jealousy as a partic-ularly good piece of bronze or vase, and hatred from a friend’srefusal to give away its new offshoots could be extremely bitter.Chinese notebooks record the case of a scholar who was refusednew offshoots from a plant and was sentenced to jail for stealingit. This sentiment is well expressed by Shen Fu in Six Chapters ofa Floating Life in the following manner:

The orchid was prized most among all the flowers becauseof its subdued fragrance and graceful charm, but it was difficultto obtain really good classic varieties. When Lanp’o died, hepresented me with a pot of spring orchids, whose flowers hadlotus-shaped petals; the centre of the flowers was broad andwhite, the petals were very neat and even at the “shoulders,”













and the stems were very slender. This type was classical, and Iprized it like a piece of old jade. When I was working awayfrom home, Yiin used to take care of it personally and it grewbeautifully. After two years, it died suddenly one day. I dugup its roots and found that they were white like marble, whilenothing was wrong with the sprouts, either. At first, I couldnot understand this, but ascribed it with a sigh merely to myown bad luck, which might be unworthy to raise such flowers.Later on, I found out that some one had asked for some of theflowers from the same pot, had been refused, and had there-fore killed it by pouring boiling water over it. Thenceforth Iswore I would never grow orchids again.

The chrysanthemum is the flower of the poet T’ao Yuanming,as the plum flower was the flower of the poet Lin Hoching, andthe lotus was the flower of the Confucian doctrmaire, ChouLiench’i. Blooming in late autumn, it shares the idea of “coldfragrance” and “cold splendor.” The contrast between the coldsplendor of the chrysanthemum and the gorgeous splendor, say, ofthe peony is easily seen and understood. Hundreds of varieties exist,and so far as I know, a great Sung scholar, Fan Ch’engta, startedthe fashion of recording its different varieties with the most beau-tiful names. Variety seems to be the very essence of the chrys-anthemum flower, both variety of shape and of color. The white andthe yellow are regarded as the “orthodox” colors of the flower,while purple and red are regarded as deviations and thereforegiven a low grading. The colors of white and yellow gave rise tothe names of the varieties like “Silver Bowl,” “Silver Bells,”“Golden Bells,” “Jade Basin,” “Jade Bells,” “Jade EmbroideredBall.” Some were given the names of famous beauties, like “YangKueifei” and “Hsishih.” Sometimes their shapes resemble a lady’sclose-cropped hair and sometimes their quills resemble flowinglocks. Some varieties have more fragrance than others, and thebest are supposed to have the fragrance of musk, or of an incensecalled “Dragon’s Brains.”

The lotus or water lily is in a class by itself and seems „to mepersonally the most beautiful of all flowers, when we consider the













flower, including its stem and its leaves floating on the water, as awhole. It is impossible to enjoy summer without having lotus flowersaround, and if one does not have a house near a pond, he cangrow them in big earthen jars. In this case, however, we miss muchof the beauty of a half a mile’s stretch of lotus flowers, theirperfume pervading the air, and their white and red tipped blos-soms contrasting with their broad green leaves with water runningon them like liquid pearls. (The American water lilies are differentfrom the lotus.) The Sung scholar Chou wrote an essay explainingwhy he loved the lotus and pointing out that the lotus, like thegendeman, grew out of dirty water but was not contaminated by it.He was talking like a regular Confucian doctrinaire. From theutilitarian point of view, every part of the flower is utilized. Thelotus root is used to make a cooling drink, its leaves are used forwrapping fruits or food to be steamed, its flowers are enjoyed fortheir shape and fragrance, and finally the lotus seed is regarded asthe food of the fairies, either eaten raw, fresh from the pod, or driedand sugared.

The hait’ang pyrus, resembling apple-blossoms, enjoys as great apopularity among poets as any other flower, although Tu Fu failedto make a single mention of this flower which grew in his nativeprovince, Szechuen. Various explanations have been offered, but themost plausible one was that the haiiang was his mother’s name andhe had avoided it out of deference to his mother. There are only twoflowers for whose fragrance I am willing to forego the orchid, andthey are the cassia and the narcissus. The last is also a special productof my native city, Changchow, and its import into the United Statesin the form of cultivated roots at one time ran to hundreds of thou-sands of dollars, until the Department of Agriculture saw fit todeprive the American people of this flower with a heavenly frag-rance, in order to protect them from possible germs. The notion thatthe white roots of the narcissus, as clean as a fairy itself, and in-tended to be planted not in mud but in a glass or china basin ofwater supported with pebbles, and prepared with the utmost care,could contain germs is most fantastic. The azalea is supposed to be a













tragic flower, in spite of its smiling beauty, because it was sup-posed to spring from the tears of blood of the cuckoo, who wasformerly a boy in search of his lost brother persecuted out of homeby a stepmother.

Quite as important as the selection and grading of the flowersthemselves is their arrangement in vases. This was an art thatcould be traced back at least as far as the eleventh century. Theauthor of Six Chapters of a Floating Life, written at the beginningof the nineteenth century, gives a description of the art of arrang-ing flowers to resemble a picture with good composition in hischapter on “The Litde Pleasures of Life”:

The chrysanthemum, however, was my passion in the autumnof every year. I loved to arrange these flowers in vases, but notto raise them in pots, not because I did not want to have themthat way, but because I had no garden in my home and couldnot take care of them myself. Those I bought at the marketwere not properly trained and not to my liking. When arrang-ing chrysanthemum flowers in vases, one should take an odd,not even number, and each vase should have flowers of onlyone colour. The mouth of the vase should be broad so that theflowers can lie easily together. Whether there be half a dozenflowers or even thirty or forty of them in a vase, they shouldbe so arranged as to come up together straight from the mouthof the vase, neither overcrowded, nor too much spread out, norleaning against the mouth of the vase. This is called “keepingthe handle firm.” Sometimes they can stand gracefully erect,and sometimes spread out in different directions. In order toavoid a bare monotonous effect, they should be mixed withsome flower buds and arranged in a kind of studied disorderli-ness. The leaves should not be too thick and the stems shouldnot be too stiff. In using pins to hold the stems up, one shouldbreak the long pins off, rather than expose them. This is called“keeping the mouth of the vase clear.” Place from three toseven vases on a table, depending on the size of the latter, for ifthere were too many of them, they would be overcrowded,looking like chrysanthemum screens at the market. The standsfor the vases should be of different height, from three or fourinches to two and a half feet, so that the different vases at dif-ferent heights would balance one another and belong inti-













ON FLOWERS AND ARRANGEMENTS 309

mately to one another as in a picture with unity o£ composition.To put one vase high in the centre with two low at the sides,or to put a low one in front and a tall one behind, or to arrangethem m symmetrical pairs, would be to create what is vulgarlycalled “a heap of gorgeous refuse.” Proper spacing and arrange-ment must depend on the individual’s understanding of pictorialcomposition.

In the case of flower bowls or open dishes, the method ofmaking a support for the flowers is to mix refined resin withelm bark, flour and oil, and heat the mixture with hot hayashes until it becomes a kmd of glue, and with it glue somenails upside down on to a piece of copper. This copper platecan then be heated up and glued on to the bottom of the bowlor dish. When it is cold, tie the flowers in groups by means ofwire and stick them on those nails. The flowers should beallowed to incline sideways and not shoot up from the centre;it is also important that the stems and leaves should not cometoo closely together. After this is done, put some water in thebowl and cover up the copper support with some clean sand,so that the flowers will seem to grow directly from the bottomof the bowl.

When picking branches from flower trees for decoration invases, it is important to know how to trim them before puttingthem in the vase, for one cannot always go and pick themoneself, and those picked by others are often unsatisfactory.Hold the branch in your hand and turn it back and forth indifferent ways in order to see how it lies most expressively.After one has made up one’s mind about it, lop off the super-fluous branches, with the idea of making the twig look thinand sparse and quaindy beautiful. Next think how the stemis going to lie in the vase and with what kind of bend, so thatwhen it is put there, the leaves and flowers can be shown tothe best advantage. If one just takes any old branch In hand,chooses a straight section and puts it in the vase, the consequencewill be that the stem will be too stiff, the branches will be tooclose together and the flowers and leaves will be turned in thewrong direction, devoid of all charm and expression. To makea straight twig crooked, cut a mark half way across the stemand insert a litde piece of broken brick or stone at the joint;the straight branch will then become a bent one. In case thestem is too weak, put one or two pins to strengthen it. By













means of this method, even maple leaves and bamboo twigsor even ordinary blades of grass and thisdes will look very wellfor decoration. Put a twig of green bamboo side by side with afew berries of Chinese matrimony vine or arrange some fineblades of grass together with some branches of thistle. They willlook quite poetic, if the arrangement is correct.

VI. The “Vase Flowers” of Yuan Chunglang

Probably the best treatise on the arrangement of flowers waswritten by Yuan Chunglang, one of my favorite authors m otherrespects, living at the end of the sixteenth century. His book onthe arrangement of flowers in vases, called P’mgshih, is highlyvalued in Japan, and there is known to be a “Yuan School” offlower arrangement. He began in his preface by noting that sincehills and water and flowers and bamboos luckily lay outside thescope of the strugglers for fame and power, and furthermore, sincesuch people were so busy with their engrossing pursuits and there-fore had no time for the enjoyment of hills and water and flowersand bamboos, the retiring scholar was enabled to snatch this op-portunity and monopolize the enjoyment of the latter for himself.He explained, however, that the enjoyment of vase flowers shouldnever be regarded as normal, but at best only as a temporary sub-stitute for people living in cities, and their enjoyment should notcause one to forget the greater happiness of enjoying the hills andlakes themselves.

Proceeding from a consideration that one should be careful inadmitting flowers for decoration in his studio, and that it would bebetter to have no flowers at all than to have promiscuous varietiesadmitted, he went on to describe the various types of bronze andporcelain vases to be used. Two types are distinguished. Those whoare rich and possess antique bronze vessels of Han Dynasty andhave big halls should have big flowers and tall branches standingin huge vases. On the other hand, scholars should have smallerbranches of flowers to go with smaller vases, which should also be













“VASE FLOWERS"

31*

carefully selected. The only exceptions allowed are the peony and

the lotus, which being big flowers should be placed in big vases.

In putting flowers in vases:

One should avoid having them too profuse, or too meager.At most, two or three varieties may be put in a vase, and theirrelative height and arrangement should aim at the compositionof a good picture. In placing flower vases, one should avoidhaving them in pairs, or uniform, or in a straight row. Oneshould also avoid binding the flowers with string. For theneatness of flowers lies exactly in their irregularity and natural-ness of manner, like the prose of Tu Sungpo, which flows onor stops as it pleases, and like the poems of Li Po, which do notnecessarily go in couplets. This is true neatness. How can itbe called neatness when the branches and leaves merely matcheach other and red is mixed with white? The latter resemble thetrees in the courtyard of minor provincial officials or the stonegateways leading to a tomb.

In selecting and breaking off the branches, one should choosethe slender and exquisite ones and should not have the branchestoo thick together. Only one kind of flowers should be used,and at most two, and the two should be so arranged togetherthat they seem to grow out of one branch. . . . Generally theflowers should match with the vases, and they may be four orfive inches taller than the height of the vase itself. Suppose thevase is two feet high and its shape is broad in the center andbottom, the flowers may be two feet and six or seven inchesfrom the mouth of the vase. ... If the vase is tall and slender,one should have two branches, one long and one short, andperhaps stretching out in curves, and then it is better that theflowers are a few inches shorter than the vase itself. What ismost to be avoided is that the flowers be too slender for thevase. Profusion is also to be avoided, as for instance whenflowers are tied up together like a handle, lacking all charm.

In placing flowers in small vases, one should let the flowerscome out two inches shorter than the body of the vase. Forinstance, a narrow vase of eight inches should have flowers ofonly six or seven inches. But if the vases are stout in shape,flowers may also be two inches longer than the vases.

The room in which flowers are placed should contain a simpletable and a cane couch. The table must be broad and thick and













should be of fine wood and have a smooth surface. Alllacquered tables with decorated margins, golden-painted couchesand stands with colored floral designs should be eliminated.

With regard to the “bathing” of flowers, or watering them, theauthor shows a loving insight into the moods and sentiments ofthe flowers themselves:

For flowers have their moods of happiness and sorrow andtheir time of sleep. If one bathes flowers m their morning andevening, at the proper time, the water is like good rain tothem. A day with light clouds and a mild sun and the sunsetand beautiful moon are morning to the flowers. A big storm,a pouring rain, a scorching sun and bitter cold are evening tothe flowers. When their stands bask in the sunlight and theirdelicate bodies are protected from wind, that is the happy moodof the flowers. When they seem drunk or quiet and tired andwhen the day is misty, that is the sorrowful mood of the flowers.When their branches incline and rest sideways as if unable tohold themselves erect, that is when the flowers are dreamingin their sleep. When they seem to smile and look about, witha shining light in their eyes, that is when the flowers havewaked up from their sleep. In their “morning” they should beplaced in an empty pavilion or a big house; in their “evening,”they should be placed in a small room or a secluded chamber;when they are sad, they should sit quiedy with abated breath,and when they are happy, they should smile and shout andtease each other; during their sleep, they should let down thecurtain, and when they have waked up, they should attend totheir toilet. All this is done to please their nature and regulatetheir times of getting up and going to bed. To bathe flowers intheir “morning” is the best; to bathe them when they are asleep,is second; and to bathe them when they are happy is the last.As for bathing them during their “evening,” or during theirsorrow, it really seems more like a way of punishing the flowers.

The way of bathing flowers is to use fresh and sweet waterfrom a spring and pour it down gently in small quantities,like a small shower awakening a drunken man, or like the gentledew itself permeating their body. One should avoid touchingthe flowers with his hands, or picking them with the tips offingers, and the work cannot be entrusted to stupid manserv-













3*3

ants or dirty maids. Plum flowers should be bathed by reclusescholars, the hait’ang by charming guests, the peony by beau-tifully dressed young girls, the pomegranate by beautiful slavegirls, the cassia by intelligent children, the lotus by fascinatingconcubines, the chrysanthemum by remarkable persons wholove the ancients, and the winter plum by a slender monk.On the other hand, flowers blooming in the cold season shouldnot be bathed, but should be protected by thin silk gauze.

According to Yuan, certain flowers go with certain other flowersas their minors or “maids” in a vase. As personal maids who at-tended to a lady for life were an institution in old China, theredeveloped the notion that beautiful ladies looked perfect when theyhad pretty maids by their side as their necessary adjuncts. Both ladiesand maids should be beautiful, but there is a je ne sais quoi whichstamps one type of beauty as belonging to a maid rather than toa mistress. Maids who were out of harmony with their mistresseswere like stables that did not match a manor house. Carrying thenotion over to flowers, Yuan found that, for their “maids” in thevase, the plum flower should have camelias, the hait’ang shouldhave apple blossoms and lilacs, the peony should have cinnamonroses, the paeonia albiflora should have poppies and Szechuen sun-flowers, the pomegranate should have crape myrtle and hisbiscussyriacus, the lotus should have white day lilies, the cassia shouldhave hisbiscus mutabihs, the chrysanthemum should have “autumnhait’ang” and the winter plum should have narcissus. Each maidis exquisite in its own way, and they differ in their voluptuous orelegant charms like their mistresses. Not that any slight wasintended upon these flower maids, for they were comparable tothe famous maids of history, the narcissus ethereal down to herbones like Liang Yiich’ing, the maid of the Spinster in heaven, thecamelia and the rose fresh and youthful like the maids Hsiangfengand Chingwan of the Shih and Yang families (of Chin Dynasty),the shanfan flower clean and “romantic” like the maid servant ofthe tragic nun-poetess, Yu Hsiianch’i, while the lilac was slender,the white day lily was cool and the “autumn hailtang' was coy, but













savored a little of pedantry like the maid of Cheng K’angch’eng(scholar of Han Dynasty and profuse commentator on Confucianclassics).9

Holding to his central idea that anyone who achieves notableresults in any line, even in such matters as playing chess, mustlove it to a point of craze, Yuan develops the same idea withregard to the love of flowers as a hobby:

I have found that all the people in the world who are dullin their conversation and hateful to look at in their faces areare those who have no hobbies. . . . When the ancient peoplewho had a weakness for flowers heard there was a remarkablevariety, they would travel across high mountain passes anddeep ravines in search of them, unconscious of bodily fatigue,bitter cold or scorching heat, and their peeling skins, and com-pletely oblivious of their bodies soiled with mud. When aflower was about to bud, they would move their beds andpillows to sleep under them, watching how the flowers passedfrom infancy to maturity and finally dropped off and died.Or they would plant thousands in their orchards to study howthey varied, or have just a few in their rooms to exhaust theirinterest. Some would be able to tell the size of flowers fromsmelling their leaves, and some were able to tell from theroots the color of their flowers. These were the people whowere true lovers of flowers and who had a true weakness forthem.

In regard to the “enjoyment” (or shang) of flowers, it is pointedout that:

Enjoying them with tea is the best, enjoying them withconversation second, and enjoying them with wine the third.

As for all forms of noisy behaviour and common vulgar pratde,they are an insult to the spirits of flowers. One should rathersit dumb like a fool than offend them. There is a properplace and time for the enjoyment of flowers and to enjoy themwithout regard to the proper circumstances would be a sacrilege.The flowers in the cold season should be enjoyed at the begin-

® Cheng’s maid was reputed to talk the classical language with her learnedmaster, which is somewhat like talking Latin among the medieval scholars.













“VASE FLOWERS”

3*5

ning of snow, or after the sky has cleared after a snowfall,or during crescent moon, or in a warm room. The flowers in thewarm [spring] season should be enjoyed on a clear day, or ona slightly chilly day, in a beautiful hall. The flowers of sum-mer should be enjoyed after rain, in a refreshing breeze, inthe shade of nice trees, beneath bamboos, or on a water ter-race. The flowers of the cool [autumn] season should beenjoyed under a cool moon, at sunset, on the brink of a stonehall pavement, on a mossy garden path, or in the neighbor-hood of rugged rocks surrounded by ancient creepers. If onelooks at flowers without regard to wind and sun and place,or when one’s thoughts are wandering and bear no relationto the flowers, what difference is it from seeing flowers m sing-song houses and wine taverns?

Finally, Yuan lists the following fourteen conditions as “pleas-ing” to the flowers, and “twenty-three”10 conditions as being dis-graceful or humiliating to them:

Conditions that please the flowers:

A clear windowA clean roomAntique tripods '

Sung ink-stones

“Pine waves” and river soundsThe owner loving hobbies andpoetry

Visiting monk understands teaA native of Chichow arrives withwine

Guests in the room are exquisiteMany flowers in bloomA carefree friend has arrivedCopymg books on flower cultiva-tion

Kettle sings deep at nightWife and concubines editing sto-ries of flowers

Conditions humiliating to the flowers:

The owner constantly seeingguests

A stupid servant putting in extrabranches, upsetting the arrange-ment

The family asking for accountsWriting poems by consultingrhyming dictionariesBooks in bad condition lyingabout

10 Chinese authors are apparently indifferent to arithmetic and figures in general.After comparing the best available editions of Yuan’s works, I stall cannot find thereputed “twenty-three” conditions It really doesn’t matter whether one’s figuresare correct. Mathematical exactitude worries only a petty soul.













Common monks talking zenDogs fighting before the windowSinging boys of Lientse AlleyYijang [Kiangsi] tunesUgly women plucking flowersand decorating their hair withthem

Discussing people’s official promo-tion and demotionFalse expressions of lovePoems written for courtesyFlowers in full bloom before onehas paid his debts

Fukien agentsKiangsu spurious paintingsFaeces of mice and ratsTrailing marks of slime left bysnails

Servants lying aboutWine runs out after one begms toplay wine gamesBeing neighbor to wine-shopsA piece of writing with phraseslike the “purple morning air”[common in imperial eulogies]on the desk

VII. The Epigrams of Chang Ch’ao

We have seen that the enjoyment of nature does not lie merelyin art and painting. Nature enters into our life as a whole. It isall sound and color and shape and mood and atmosphere, andman as the perceiving artist of life begins to select the propermoods of nature and harmonize them with his own. This is theattitude of all Chinese writers of poetry or prose, but I think itsbest expression is found in the epigrams of Chang Ch’ao (mid-seventeenth century), in his book Yumengying (or Sweet DreamShadows). This is a book of literary maxims, of which there aremany collections, but none comparable to those written by ChangCh’ao himself. Such literary maxims stand in relation to popularproverbs as the fairy tales of Anderson stand in relation to oldEnglish fairy tales, or as Schubert’s art songs stand in relation tofolk melodies. His book has been so beloved that a group ofChinese scholars have added comments of their own to each ofhis maxims, in a most delightful chatty vein. I am compelled,however, to translate only some of the best of his maxims aboutthe enjoyment of Nature. A few of his maxims on human lifeare so good and form such a vital part of the whole that I shallinclude some of them at the end.













3*7

On What is Proper

It is absolutely necessary that flowers should have butterflies,hills should have springs, rocks should have moss, water shouldhave water-cress, tall trees should have entwining creepers, andhuman beings should have hobbies.

One should enjoy flowers in the company of beauties, getdrunk under the moon in the company of charming friends,and enjoy the light of snow in the company of highmindedscholars.

Planting flowers serves to invite butterflies, piling up rocksserves to invite the clouds, planting pine trees serves to invitethe wind, keeping a reservoir of water serves to invite duck-weed, building a terrace serves to invite the moon, plantingbanana trees serves to invite the rain, and planting willowtrees serves to invite the cicada.

One always gets a different feeling when looking at hillsfrom the top of a tower, looking at snow from a city wall,looking at the moon in the lamp-light, looking at coloredclouds in a boat, and looking at beautiful women in the room.

Rocks lying near a plum tree should look “antique,” thosebeneath a pme tree should look “stupid,” those by the side ofbamboo trees should look “slender,” and those inside a flowerbasin should be exquisite.

Blue waters come from green hills, for the water borrowsits color from the hills; good poems come from flavory wine,for poetry begs its inspiration from the wine.

When the mirror meets with an ugly woman, when a rareink-stone finds a vulgar owner, and when a good sword is inthe hands of a common general, there is utterly nothing to bedone about it.

On Flowers and Women

One should not see flowers wither, see the moon declinebelow the horizon, or see beautiful women die in their youth.

One should see flowers when they are in bloom, after plantingthe flowers; should see the moon when it is full, after waitingfor the moon; should see a book completed, after starting towrite it; and should see beautiful women when they are gayand happy. Otherwise our purpose is defeated.













3i8 THE ENJOYMENT OF NATURE

One should look at beautiful ladies in the morning toiletafter they have powdered themselves.

There are faces that are ugly but stand looking at, and otherfaces that do not stand looking at, although not ugly; thereare writings which are lovable although ungrammatical, andthere are other writings which are extremely grammatical, butare disgusting. This is something that I cannot explain to super-ficial persons.

If one loves flowers with the same heart that he loves beauties,he feels a special charm in them; if one loves beautiful womenwith the same heart that he loves flowers, he feels a specialtenderness and protective affection.

Beautiful women are better than flowers because they under-stand human language, and flowers are better than beautifulwomen because they give off fragrance; but if one cannot haveboth at the same time, he should forsake the fragrant ones andtake the talking ones.

In putting flowers in liver-colored vases, one should arrangethem so that the size and height of the vase match with thoseof the flowers, while the shade and depth of its color shouldcontrast with them.

Most of the flowers that are seductive and beautiful are notfragrant, and flowers that have layers upon layers of petalsmostly are ill-formed. Alas, rare is a perfect personality! Onlythe lotus combines both.

The plum flower makes a man feel highminded, the orchidmakes a man feel secluded, the chrysanthemum makes a mansimple-hearted, the lotus makes a man contented, the springhaiiang11 makes a man passionate, the peony makes a manchivalrous, the bamboo and the banana tree make a man charm-ing, the autumn hcdt’ang makes a man graceful, the pine treemakes a man feel like a recluse, the widung {sterculia platani-folia) makes a man clean-hearted, and the willow makes a mansentimental.

If a beauty should have the face of a flower, the voice of abird, the soul of the moon, the expression of a willow, thecharm of an autumn lake, bones of jade and skin of snow,and a heart of poetry, I should be perfectly satisfied. [I shouldsay so!—Tr.] 12

11 This is a flowering- tree about ten feet high, belonging to the pyrus species,and bearing fruits like crab-apples.

12 This is in the manner of the Chinese commentators.













3i9

I£ there are no books in this world, then nothing need besaid, but since there are books, they must be read; if there is nowine, then nothing need be said, but since there is wine, it mustbe drunk; if there are no famous hills, then nothing need besaid, but since there are, they must be visited; if there are noflowers and no moon, then nothing need be said, but since thereare, they must be enjoyed and “played”; if there are no talentedmen and beautiful women, then nothing need be said, but sincethere are, they must be loved and protected.

The reason why a looking-glass doesn’t become the enemyof ugly-looking women is because it has no feeling; if it had,it certainly would have been smashed to pieces.

One feels tender toward even a good potted flower that hehas just bought; how much more should he be tender towarda “talking flower!”

Without wine and poetry, hills and water would exist forno purpose; without the company of beautiful ladies, flowersand the moon would be wasted. Talented men who are at thesame time handsome, and beautiful ladies who at the same timecan write, can never live a long life. This is not only becausethe gods are jealous of them, but because this type of personis not only the treasure of one generation, but the treasure ofall ages, so that the Creator doesn’t want to leave them in thisworld too long, for fear of sacrilege.

On Hills and Water

Of all the things in the universe, those that touch man mostprofoundly are: the moon in heaven, the ch’in m music, thecuckoo among animals, and the willow tree among plants.

To worry with the moon about clouds, to worry with booksabout moths, to worry with flowers about storms, and to worrywith talented men and beautiful women about a harsh fate isto have the heart of a Buddha.

One dies without regret if there is one in the whole worlda “bosom friend,” or one who “knows his heart.”

An ancient writer said that if there were no flowers andmoon and beautiful women, he would not want to be bornin this world, and I might add, if there were no pen and inkand chess and wine, there was no purpose in being born a man.

The light of hills, the sound of water, the color of the moon,the fragrance of flowers, the charm of literary men, and the













THE ENJOYMENT OF NATURE

expression of beautiful women are all illusive and indescribable.They make one lose sleep dreaming about them and loseappetite thinking about them.

The snow reminds one of a highminded scholar; the flowerreminds one of beautiful ladies; wine reminds one of goodswordsmen; the moon reminds one of good friends; and hillsand water remind one of good verse and good prose that theauthor himself is pleased with.

There are landscapes on earth, landscapes in painting, land-scapes in dreams, and landscapes in one’s breast. The beautyof landscapes on earth lies in depth and irregularity of oudine;the beauty of landscapes in painting lies in the freedom andluxuriousness of the brush and ink; the beauty of landscapesin dreams lies in their strangely changing views; and the beautyof landscapes in one’s breast lies in the fact that everythingis in its proper place.

For places that we pass by during our travel, we need not befastidious in our artistic demands, but for places where we aregoing to setde down for life we must be fastidious in suchdemands.

The bamboo shoot is a phenomenon among the vegetables;the lich’i is a phenomenon among fruits; the crab is a phe-nomenon among aquatic animals; wine is a phenomenon amongour foods and drinks; the moon is a phenomenon in the firma-ment; the West Lake is a phenomenon among hills and waters;and the Sung lyrics its’e) and Yuan dramatic poems (ch’u)arc phenomena in literature.

In order to see famous hills and rivers, one must have alsopredestined luck; unless the appointed time has come, one hasno time to see them even though they are situated within adozen miles.

The images in a looking-glass are portraits in color, but theimages [shadows] under a moonlight are pen sketches. The im-ages in a looking-glass are paintings with solid outlines, but theimages under a moonlight are “paintings without bones.” Theimages of hills and waters in the moon are geography in heaven,and the images of stars and the moon in water are astronomy onearth.













321

On Spnng and Autumn

Spring is the natural frame of mind of heaven; autumn is oneof its changing moods.

The ancient people regarded winter as the “extra” [or restingperiod] of the other three seasons, but I think we should regardsummer as the season of “three extras”: getting up at a summerdawn is the extra of the night; sitting at a summer night is theextra of the day; and an afternoon nap is the extra of socialintercourse. Indeed, “I love the long summer days,” as anancient poet says.

One should discipline oneself in the spirit of autumn, anddeal with others in the spirit of spring.

Good prose and “T’ang poems” should have the spirit ofautumn; good Sung lyrics and Yuan dramatic poems shouldhave the spirit of spring.13

On Sounds

One should listen to the sounds of birds in spring, to thesounds of cicadas in summer, to the sounds of insects in autumnand the sounds of snowfall in winter; he should listen to thesounds of playing chess in the daytime, the sounds of fluteunder the moonlight, the sounds of pine trees in the mountains,and the sounds of ripples on the waterside. Then he shall nothave lived in vain. But when a young loafer starts a racket inthe street or when one’s wife is scolding, one might just as wellbe deaf.

Hearing the sound of geese makes one feel like in Nanking;hearing the sound of oars makes one feel like in Soochow,Ch’angchow and Huchow;14 hearing the sound of waves on thebeach makes one feel like being in Chekiang; and hearingthe sound of bells beneath the necks of thin horses makes onefeel like being on the road to Sian.

All sounds should be listened to at a distance; only the soundsof the ch'in can be listened to both at a distance and nearby.

There is a special flavor about one’s ears when listening toch’in music under pine trees, listening to a flute in the moon-

1S Both these latter forms are highly sentimental poetry m form and feeling.14 The Lake District in Kiangsu.













light, listening to a waterfall by a brook, and listening toBuddhist chants in the mountains.

There are four kinds of sounds of water: the sounds ofcataracts, of gushing springs, of rapids, and of gullets. Thereare three kinds of sounds of wind: the sounds of “pine waves,”of autumn leaves, and of storm upon the water. There aretwo kinds of sounds of rain: the sounds of raindrops upon theleaves of wn’tung and lotus, and the sounds of rain watercoming down from the eaves into bamboo pails.

On Rain

This thing called rain can make the days seem short and thenights seem long.

A spring ram is like an Imperial edict conferring an honor; asummer ram is like a writ of pardon for a condemned criminal;an autumn rain is like a dirge.

A rainy day in spring is suitable for reading; a rainy day insummer is suitable for playing chess; a rainy day in autumnis suitable for going over things in the trunks or in the attic;and a rainy day in winter is suitable for drinking.

I would write a letter to the God of Rain and tell him thatrain in spring should come after the fifteenth of the first moon[when the Lantern Festival is over], and continue till ten daysbefore ch’ingming [the third day of the third moon, at whichtime the peach-trees begin to blossom], and come also at \uyu[time for planting rice]; that summer rain should come in thefirst and last ten days of every month [so as not to interfere withour enjoyment of the moon]; that autumn rain should comein the the first and last ten days of the seventh and the ninthmoon [leaving the eighth moon, or mid-autumn, entirely dry forenjoyment of the harvest moon]; and that as for the threemonths of winter, no rain is called for at all.

On the Moon, Wind and Water

One is exasperated at the crescent moon for declining soearly, and exasperated at the waning moon in its third quarterfor coming up so late.

To listen to a Buddhist lesson under the moon makes one’smental mood more detached; to discuss swordmanship underthe moon makes one’s courage more inspired; to discuss poetry













323

under the moon makes one’s personal flavor more charmingin seclusion; and to look at beautiful women under the moonmakes one’s passion deeper.

The method of “playing” the moon is to look up at it froma low place when it is clear and bright, and to look down atit from a height when it is hazy and unclear.

The spring wind is like wine; the summer wind is like tea;the autumn wind is like smoke; and the winter wind is likeginger.

On Leisure and Friendship

Only those who take leisurely what the people of the worldare busy about can be busy about what the people of theworld take leisurely.

There is nothing that man enjoys more than leisure, andthis does not mean that one simply does nothing during thattime. Leisure enables one to read, to travel to famous places, toform beneficial friendships, to drink wine, and to write books.What greater pleasures can there be in the world than these?

When a cloud reflects the sun, it becomes a colored cloud(hsia), and when a spring gullet flows over a cliff, it becomesa waterfall. By a different association, it is given a new name.That is why friendship is so valuable.

When celebrating the Lantern Festival on the fifteenth ofthe first moon, one should drink with nonchalant friends;when celebrating the Dragon Boat Festival on the fifth of thefifth moon, one should drink with handsome friends; whencelebrating the annual reunion of the Cowherd and the Spin-ning Maid in Heaven on the seventh day of the seventh moon,one should drink with friends who have charm; when lookingat the harvest moon, at the Mid-Autumn Festival, one shoulddrink with quiet or mild-tempered friends; when going upto high mountains on the ninth day of the ninth moon, oneshould drink with romantic friends.

To talk with learned friends is like reading a rare book;to talk with poetic friends is like reading the poems and proseof distinguished writers; to talk with friends who are carefuland proper in their conduct is like reading the classics of thesages; and to talk with witty friends is like reading a novelor romance.

Every quiet scholar is bound to have some bosom friends.













By “bosom friends” I do not mean necessarily those who havesworn a life-and-death friendship with us. Generally bosomfriends are those who, although separated by hundreds or thou-sands of miles, still have implicit faith in us and refuse to believerumors against us; those who on hearing a rumor, try everymeans to explain it away; those who m given moments adviseus as to what to do and what not to do; and those who at thecritical hour come to our help, and, sometimes without ourknowing, undertake of their own accord to settle a financialaccount, or make a decision, without for a moment question-ing whether by doing so they are not making themselves opento criticism of perhaps injuring our interests.

It is easier to find bosom friends (“those who know ourhearts”) among friends than among one’s wife and concu-bines, and it is still more difficult to find a bosom friend in therelationship between ruler and ministers.

A “remarkable book” is one which says things that havenever been said before, and a “bosom friend” is one whounburdens to us his family secrets.

Living in the country is only enjoyable when one has gotgood friends with him. One soon gets tired of the peasantsand woodcutters who know only how to distinguish thedifferent kinds of grains and to forecast the weather. Again,among the different kinds of friends, those who can writepoems are the best, those who can talk or hold a conversationcome second, those who can pamt come next, those who cansing come fourth, and those who understand wine games comelast.

On Boo\s and Reading

Reading books in one’s youth is like looking at the moonthrough a crevice; reading books in middle age is like lookingat the moon in one’s courtyard; and reading books in old ageis like looking at the moon on an open terrace. This is becausethe depth of benefits of reading varies in proportion to thedepth of one’s own experience.

Only one who can read books without words [/. <?., the bookof life itself] can say strikingly beautiful things; and onlyone who understands truth difficult to explain by words cangrasp the highest Buddhist wisdom.













All immortal literature o£ the ancients and the moderns waswritten with blood and tears.

All Men Are Brothers (Shuihu) is a book of anger, TheMon\ey Epic (Hsiyuchi) is a book of spiritual awakening, andGold-Vase Plum (Ckmp’ingmei) [a pornographic novel] isa book of sorrow.

Literature is landscape on the desk, and a landscape is litera-ture on the earth.

Reading is the greatest of all joys, but there is more angerthan joy in reading history. But after all there is pleasure in suchanger.15

One should read the classics in winter, because then one’smind is more concentrated; read history in summer, becauseone has more time; read the ancient philosophers in autumn,because they have such charming ideas; and read the collectedworks of later authors in spring, because then Nature is comingback to life.

When literary men talk about military affairs, it is mosdymilitary science in the studio [literally, ‘‘discussing soldiers onpaper”]; and when military generals discuss literature, it ismostly rumors picked up on hearsay.

A man who knows how to read finds everything becomesa book wherever he goes: hills and waters are also books, andso are chess and wine, and so are the moon and flowers. Agood traveler finds that everything becomes a landscape wher-ever he goes: books and history are landscapes, and so arewine and poetry, and so are the moon and flowers.

An ancient writer said that he would like to have ten yearsdevoted to reading, ten years devoted to travel and ten yearsdevoted to preservation and arrangement of what he hadgot. I think that preservation should not take ten years and twoor three years should be enough. As for reading and travel, Ido not think even twice or five times the period suggested wouldbe enough to satisfy my desires. To do so one would have tolive three hundred years, as Huang Chiuyen says.

The ancient people said that “poetry becomes good only afterone becomes poor or unsuccessful,”15 for the reason that an

15 By “anger” is meant one’s feeling mad reading in history about a good manbeing shot or a government falling into the hands of eunuchs and dictators. Thisfeeling mad is aesthetically a beautiful sensation

16 The idea is that poetry acquires depth through sorrow.













unsuccessful man usually has a lot of things to say, and it isthus easy to show himself to advantage. How can the poetryof the rich and successful people be good when they neithersigh over their poverty nor complain about their being unpro-moted, and when all they write about are the wind, the clouds,the moon and the dew? The only way for such a person towrite poetry is to travel, so that all he sees on his way, the hillsand rivers and people’s customs and ways of life, and perhapsthe sufferings of people during war or famine, may all go intohis poems. Thus borrowing from the sorrows of other people,for the purpose of his own songs and sighs, one can write goodpoetry without waiting to be poor or unsuccessful.

On Living in General

Passion holds up the bottom of the universe and genius paintsup its roof.

Better be insulted by common people than be despised bygentlemen; better be flunked by an official examiner than beunknown to a famous scholar.

A man should so live as to be like a poem, and a thingshould so look as to be like a picture.

There are scenes which sound very exquisite, but are reallysad and forlorn, as for instance a scene of mist and rain; thereare situations which sound very poetic, but are really hard tobear, as for instance sickness and poverty; and there are soundswhich seem charming when mentioned, but are really vulgar,as for instance the voices of girls selling flowers.

I cannot be a farmer myself, and all I can do is to waterthe garden; I cannot be a woodcutter myself, and afl} I cando is to pull out the weeds.

My regrets, or things that exasperate me, are ten: (i) thatbook bags are easily eaten by moths, (2) that summer nightsare spoiled by mosquitos, (3) that a moon terrace easily leaks,(4) that the leaves of chrysanthemums often wither, (5) thatpine trees are full of big ants, (6) that bamboo leaves fall ingreat quantities upon the ground, (7) that the cassia and lotusflowers easily wither, (8) that the pilo plant often concealssnakes, (9) that flowers on a trellis have thorns, and (10) thatporcupines are often poisonous to eat.

It is extremely pretty to stand outside a window and see













THE EPIGRAMS OF CHANG CH’AO 3:

someone writing characters on the window paper from theinside.

One should be the hsuan \hemerocdis flew a, a plant called“Forget-sorrow”] among the flowers, and not be the cuckoo[reputed to shed tears of blood which grow up into azaleas]among the birds.

To be born in times of peace in a district with hills andlakes when the magistrate is just and upright, and to live in afamily of comfortable means, marry an understanding wife andhave intelligent sons—this is what I call a perfect life.

To have hills and valleys in one’s breast enables one to livein a city as in a mountain wood, and to be devoted to cloudstransforms the Southern Continent into a fairy isle.

To sit alone on a quiet night—to invite the moon and tellher one’s sorrow—to keep alone on a good night—and to callthe insects and tell them one’s regrets.

, One living in a city should regard paintings as his landscapeminiature sceneries in a pot as his garden, and books as hisfriends.

To ask a famous scholar to teach one’s children, to go intoa famous mountain and learn the art of writing examinationessays, and to ask a famous writer to be his literary ghost—allthese three things are utterly wrong.

A monk need not abstain from wine, he needs only abstainfrom vulgarity; a red petticoat need not understand literature,she need only understand what is artistically interesting.

If one is annoyed by the coming of tax-gatherers, he shouldpay the land taxes early; if one enjoys talking Buddhism withmonk*!, he cannot help making contributions to temples fromtime time.

It is easy to forget everything except this one thought offame; it is easy to grow indifferent to everything except threecups of wine.

Wine can take the place of tea, but tea cannot take theplace of wine; poems can take the place of prose, but prosecannot take the place of poems; Yuan dramatic poems cantake the place of Sung lyrics, but Sung lyrics cannot take theplace of Yuan dramatic poems; the moon can take the placeof lamps, but lamps cannot take the place of the moon; the pencan take the place of the mouth, but the mouth cannot take













the place of the pen; a maid servant can take the place of aman servant, but a man servant cannot take the place of a maid.

A little injustice in the breast can be drowned by wine; buta great injustice in the world can be drowned only by thesword.

A busy man’s private garden must be situated next to hishouse; while a man of leisure may have his private gardenseparated from his house at a distance.

There are people who have the pleasures of a mountainrecluse lying before them and don’t know how to enjoy them—fishermen, woodcutters, farmers, gardeners and monks; thereare people who have the pleasures of gardens, pavilions andconcubines before them and don’t know how to enjoy them—rich merchants and high officials.

It is easy to stand a pain, but difficult to stand an itch; itis easy to bear the bitter taste, but difficult to bear the sourtaste.17

It is true that the ink-stone of a man of leisure should beexquisite, but a busy man’s ink-stone should equally be exqui-site; it is true that a concubine for pleasure should be pretty,but a concubine for the continuation of the family line shouldalso be pretty.

The stork gives a man the romantic manner, the horse givesa man the heroic manner, the orchid gives a man the recluse’smanner, and the pine gives a man the grand manner of theancients.

I want one day to give a grand nudist ball, first to propitiatethe spirits of the talented men of all ages, and secondly topropitiate the spirits of the beautiful women of all ages. WhenI have found a really high monk,18 then I am going to givethe ball and ask him to preside at it.

It is against- the will of God to eat delicate food hastily,to pass gorgeous views hurriedly, to express deep sentimentssuperficially, to pass a beautiful day steeped in food and drinks,and to enjoy your wealth steeped in luxuries.

17 The great idea that it is more difficult to stand an itch than to stand pain isnot original with this epigrammatist, but was found m the correspondence betweenSu Tungp’o and Huang Shanku, so far as I can remember.

18 A “high monk,” \aoscng, as distinguished from the common, everyday monks,is a person who returns to the world, eats pork and perhaps dog-meat, and drinksin the company of prostitutes, as Jesus did.













Chapter Eleven

THE ENJOYMENT OF TRAVEL

I. On Going About and Seeing Things

TRAVEL used to be a pleasure, now it has become an industry.No doubt there are greater facilities for traveling today than ahundred years ago, and governments with their official travelbureaus have exploited the tourist trade, with the result that themodern man travels on the whole much more than his grand-father. Nevertheless travel seems to have become a lost art. In orderto understand the art of travel, one should first of all beware of thedifferent types of false travel, which is no travel at all.

The first kind of false travel is travel to improve one’s mind.This matter of improving one’s mind has undoubtedly been over-done. I doubt very much whether one’s mind can be so easilyimproved. Anyway there is very little evidence of it at clubs andlectures. But if we are usually so serious as to be bent upon improv-ing our minds, we should at least during a vacation let the mindlie fallow, and give it a holiday. This false idea of travel has givenrise to the institution of tourist guides, the most intolerable chatter-ing kind of interfering busybodies that I can imagine. One cannotpass a square or a bronze statue without his attention being calledto the fact that So-and-So was born on April 23, 1792, and died onDecember 2, 1852.1 have seen convent sisters escorting school chil-dren to a cemetery, and as the group stopped before a tombstone,reading to them from a book the dates of the deceased, the ageat which he married, the name and surname of his wife, and suchlearned nonsense, which I am sure spoiled the pleasure of theentire trip for the children. The grown-ups themselves are turnedinto a group of school children being vociferously lectured to bythe guide, and in the case of travelers of the more studious type,also taking notes very assiduously like good school children. Chi-nese tourists suffer like American tourists at Radio City, withthe difference that Chinese guides are not professional, but are

329













fruit-sellers, donkey drivers and peasant boys, whose informationis less correct, if their personalities are more lively. Visiting Huch’iuHill at Soochow one day, I came back with a terrible confusion ofhistorical dates and sequence, for the awe-inspiring bridge suspendedforty feet over the Sword Pond, with two round holes in the stoneslabs of the bridge through which a sword had flown up as adragon, became, according to my orange-selling boy, the placewhere the ancient beauty Hsishih attended to her morning toilet!(Hsishih’s “dressing table” was actually about ten miles away fromthe place.) All he wanted was to sell me some oranges. But then Ihad a chance of seeing how folklore was changed and modified and“metamorphosed”

The second kind of false travel is travel for conversation, in orderthat one may talk about it afterwards. I have seen visitors at Hup’aoof Hangchow, a place famous for its tea and spring water, havingtheir picture taken in the act of lifting tea cups to their lips. To besure, it is a highly poetic sentiment to show friends a picture ofthemselves drinking tea at Hup’ao. The danger is that one spendsless thought on the actual taste of the tea than on the photographitself. This sort of thing can become an obsession, especially withtravelers provided with cameras, as we so often see on sight-seeingbuses in Paris and London. The tourists are so busy with theircameras that they have no time to look at the places themselves. Ofcourse they have the privilege of looking at them in the picturesafterwards when they go home, but it is obvious that pictures ofTrafalgar Square or the Champs Elysees can be bought in NewYork or in Peiping. As these historical places become places to betalked about afterwards instead of places to be looked at, it is naturalthat the more places one visits, the richer the memory will be, andthe more places there will be to talk about. This urge for learningand scholarship therefore impels the tourist to cover as many pointsas possible in a day. He has in his hand a program of places to visit,and as he comes to a place, he checks it off with a pencil on theprogram. I suspect such travelers are trying to be efficient even ontheir holiday.













33i

This sort of foolish travel necessarily produces the third type offalse travelers, who travel by schedule, knowing beforehand exactlyhow many hours they are going to spend in Vienna or Budapest.Before such a traveler departs, he makes a perfect schedule for him-self and religiously adheres to it. Bound by the clock and run bythe calendar as he is at home, he is still bound by the clock andrun by the calendar while abroad.

In place of these false types of travel, I propose that the truemotives of travel are, or should be, otherwise. In the first place,the true motive of travel should be travel to become lost and un-known. More poetically, we may describe it as travel to forget.Everyone is quite respectable in his home town, no matter whatthe higher social circles think of him. He is tied by a set of con-ventions, rules, habits and duties. A banker finds it difficult to betreated just as an ordinary human being at home and to forget thathe is a banker, and it seems to me, the real excuse for travel isthat he shall be able to find himself in a community in which heis just an ordinary human being. Letters of introduction are all verywell for people on business trips, but business trips are by definitionoutside the category of pure travel. A man stands a poorer chanceof discovering himself as a human being if he brings along with himletters of introduction, and of finding out exacdy how God madehim as a human being, apart from the artificial accidents of socialstanding. Against the comforts of being well-received by friends ma foreign country and guided efficiently through the social strata ofone’s own class, there is the greater excitement of a boy scout in aforest, left to his own devices. He has the chance to prove for him-self that he can order a fried chicken with the language of fingersalone, or find his way about town by communicating with a Tokyopoliceman. At least, such a traveler can come home with a lesstepderfootish dependence upon his chauffeur and butler.

A true traveler is always a vagabond, with the joys, temptationsand sense of adventure of the vagabond. Either travel is “vagabond-ing” or it is no travel at all. The essence of travel is to have noduties, no fixed hours, no mail, no inquisitive neighbors, no xe-













ceiving delegations, and no destination. A good traveler is one whodoes not know where he is going to, and a perfect traveler doesnot know where he came from. He does not even know his ownname and surname. This point has been emphasized by T’u Lungin his idealized sketch of the Travels of Mingliaotse—which I havetranslated in the next section. Probably he hasn’t got a single friendin a strange land, but as a Chinese nun expressed it, '“Not to carefor anybody in particular is to care for mankind in general.” Hav-ing no particular friend is having everybody as one’s friend. Lov-ing mankind in general, he mixes with them and goes aboutobserving the charms of people and their customs. This kind ofbenefit is entirely missed by those travelers on the sight-seeingbuses, who stay in the hotel, converse with their fellow passengersfrom the home country, and in the case of many American travelersin Paris, make a point of eating at the favorite rendezvous ofAmerican tourists, where they can be sure of seeing all their fellowpassengers who came over on the same ship all over again, and caneat American doughnuts which taste exacdy as they taste at home.English travelers in Shanghai make sure that they put up at anEnglish hotel where they can have their bacon and eggs and toastwith marmalade at breakfast, and hang about the cocktail loungeand fight shy of any inducement to get them to take a rickshawride. They are terribly hygienic, to be sure, but why go to Shanghaiat all? Such travelers never allow themselves the time and leisurefor entering into the spirit of the people and thus forfeit one of thegreatest benefits of traveling.

The spirit of vagabondage makes it possible for people takinga vacation to get closer to Nature. Travelers of this kind will there-fore insist on going to the summer resorts where there are thefewest people and one can have some sort of real solitude and com-munion with Nature. Travelers of this sort, therefore, do not intheir preparation for journeys go into a department store and takea lot of time to select a pink or a blue bathing suit. Lipstick is stillallowable because a vacationist, being a follower of Jean JacquesRousseau, wants to be natural, and no lady can be quite natural













333

without a good lipstick. But that is due to the fact that one goes tothe summer resorts and beaches where everybody goes, and theentire benefit of a closer association with Nature is lost or forgotten.One goes to a famous spring and says to himself, “Now I am en-tirely by myself,” but after supper at the hotel, he takes up a paperin the lounge and discovers that Mrs. B— came up to the placeon Monday. Next morning on his “solitary” walk, he encountersthe entire family of the Dudleys, who arrived by train the nightbefore. On Thursday night he finds out to his great delight thatMrs. S—and her husband are also having a vacation in this won-derful secluded valley. Mrs. S— then invites the Dudleys to tea, andthe Dudleys invite Mr. and Mrs. S— to a bridge party, and youcan hear Mrs. S— exclaim, “Isn’t it wonderful? It is just like beingin New York, isn’t it?”

I may suggest that there is a different kind of travel, travel tosee nothing and to see nobody, but the squirrels and muskrats andwoodchucks and clouds and trees. A friend of mine, an Americanlady, described for me how she went with some Chinese friends toa hill in the neighborhood of Hangchow, in order to see nothing.It was a misty day in the morning, and as they went up, the mistbecame heavier and heavier. One could hear the soft beat of dropsof moisture on the leaves of grass. There was nothing to be seenbut fog. The American lady was discouraged. “But you must comealong; there’s a wonderful sight on top,” insisted her Chinesefriends. She went up with them and after a while saw an ugly rockin the distance enveloped by the clouds, which had been heraldedas a great sight. “What is there?” she asked. “That is the InvertedLotus,” her friends replied. Somewhat mortified, she was ready togo down. “But there is a still more wonderful sight on top,” theysaid. Her dress was already half damp with the moisture, but shehad given up the fight already and went on with them. Finally theyreached the summit All about them was an expanse of mists andfogs, with the outline of distant hills barely visible on the horizon.“But there is nothing to see here,” my American friend protested.













“That U exactly the point.We come up to see nothing,” her Chinesefriends replied.

There is all the difference between seeing things and seeingnothing. Many travelers who see things really see nothing, andmany who see nothing see a great deal. I am always amused at hear-ing of an author going to a foreign country to “get material for hisnew book,” as if he had exhausted all there was to see in humanityin his own town or country and as if the theme could ever be ex-hausted. “Thrums” must be unromantic and the Island of Guernseytoo dull to build a great novel upon! We come therefore to the phi-losophy of travel as consisting of the capacity to see things, whichabolishes the distinction between travel to a distant country andgoing about the fields of an afternoon.

The two become the same thing, as Chin Shengt’an insisted. Themost necessary outfit a traveler has to carry along with him is “aspecial talent in his breast and a special vision below his eye-brows,” as the Chinese dramatic critic expressed it in his famousrunning comment on the drama Western Chamber. The point iswhether one has got the heart to feel and the eyes to see. If hehasn’t, his visits to the mountains are a pure waste of time andmoney; on the other hand, if he has got “a special talent in hisbreast and a special vision below his eyebrows,” he can get thegreatest joy of travel even without going to the mountains, by stay-ing at home and watching and going about the field to watch asailing cloud, or a dog, or a hedge, or a lonely tree. I translate be-low Chin’s dissertation on the true art of travel:

I have read the travel sketches of people and realize that veryfew people understand the art of travelling. Surely the man whoknows how to travel will not be frightened by a long journeyto see all the sights of the land and sea and explore all theirgrandeur and mystery. But a certain talent in his breast and acertain vision below his eyebrows tells him that it is not neces-sary to go to all the famous beauty spots of land and sea inorder to explore nature’s wonder and mystery. One day he goesto a stone cave after using up a great deal of the energy ofhis legs, his eyes and his mind, and when he has done that, the













335

next day he goes again to another blessed spot and uses up somemore of the energy of his legs, his eyes and his mind. Peoplewho do not understand him will say, “What a wonderful timeyou have been having, visiting places these days! Just afterseeing one stone cave, you have gone ahead to visit anotherblessed spot.” They have entirely missed the point. For there isa distance between the two places he visited, perhaps twenty orthirty li, or perhaps, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two li,or perhaps even one li or just half a It. With the special talentin his breast and the special vision beneath his pair of eyebrows,has he not looked at that little distance of a It or half a li in thesame way he looked at the stone cave and the blessed spot?

It is true that there is something which terrifies the eye andsurprises the soul to find that Mother Nature with her greatskill and wisdom and energy has suddenly produced a thinglike a stone cave or a blessed spot. But I have often staredcasually at litde things of this universe, a bird, a fish, a flower,or a small plant, and even at a bird’s feather, a fish’s scale, aflower petal and a blade of grass, and realized how MotherNature has also created it with all her great skill and wisdomand energy. As it is said that the lion uses the same energy toattack an elephant as to attack a wild rabbit, so does MotherNature truly do the same thing. She uses all her energy in pro-ducing a stone cave or a blessed spot, but she also uses all herenergy in producing a bird, a fish, a flower, a blade of grass, oreven a feather, a scale, a petal, a leaf. Therefore, it is not alonethe stone cave or the blessed spot that terrifies the eye and sur-prises the soul in this world.

Furthermore, have we ever thought how the stone cave andthe'blessed spot were produced15 Chuangtse has wisely said,“To comprehend the different organs of the horse is not tocomprehend the horse itself. What we call the horse exists be-fore its different organs.” To take another analogy, we see for-ests growing around the great lakes and timber and rocksspread all over the great mountains. It gives the travelerjoy to know that the great forests and timber and rocks areassembled together to form the great lakes and great moun-tains. But the towering peaks are formed by little rocks andthe falling cataracts are formed and nourished by litde springsof water. If we examine them one by one, we see that thestones are no bigger than the palm of one’s hand, and the













springs are no bigger than little rivulets. Laotse has said:“Thirty spokes are grouped around the hub of a wheel, andwhen they lose their own individuality, we have a function-ing cart. We knead clay into a vessel and when the clay losesits own existence, we have a usable utensil. We make a holein the wall to make windows and doors, and when the win-dows and doors lose their own existence,1 we have a house tolive in.” And so when we view a stone cave or a blessed spotand see the vertically uprising peaks, horizontally stretchingmountain passes, those that go up and form a precipice, thosethat go down and form a river, those that are level and form aprecipice, those that go down and form a river, those that arelevel and form a plateau, those that are inclined and form ahillside, those that stretch across and become bridges, andthose that come together and become ravines, we realize thathowever incomparably manifold they are in their greatnessand mystery, this mystery and grandeur arises when the partslose their individual existence. For when they lose their ownexistence, there are no passes, no precipices, no rivers and noplateaus, hillsides, bridges and ravines. But it is exactly in theirnon-existence that the special talent in our breast and thespecial vision below our eyebrows wander and float at ease.And since this special talent in our breast and this specialvision below our eyebrows can wander and float at ease onlywhen these things are non-existent, why then must we insiston going to the stone cave and to the blessed spot?

If, therefore with the special talent in my breast and thespecial vision below my eyebrows, I can still wander and floatabout at ease only when these things lose their individual ex-istence, isn’t it then unnecessary that I visit the stone cave andthe blessed spot? For as I have just said, in the distance oftwenty or thirty li, or even one or half li, are there not alsoeverywhere things that lose their existence? A crooked litdebridge—a shaggy lonely tree—a glimpse of water—a village—a hedge—a dog—how do I know that the mystery and thegrandeur of the stone cave and the blessed spot where I maywander and float about at ease are not even here ? . . .

Besides, it is not necessary that we have a special talent inour breast and a special vision below our eyebrows: should onerequire a special talent in order to float about and require a

1By being blanks in space.













ON GOING ABOUT 337

special vision in order to wander at ease, we might not finda single person in the world who understands the art of travel-ing. According to Shengt’an [the writer himself], there areno special talents and no special visions: to be willing to floatabout is already to have the special talent, and to be able towander about at ease is already to have a special vision. Thecriteria of Old Mi [Mi Fei] for judging rocks are hsiou, tsou,t’on and sou [delicacy, undulation, clarity and slenderness].Now a little patch of water, a village, a bridge, a tree, a hedgeor a dog at the distance of one li or half a li has each itsgreat delicacy, great undulation, great clarity and greatslenderness. If we fail to see this, it is because we do notunderstand how to look at them as Old Mi looked at therocks. If we only see their delicacy, their undulation, theirclarity and their slenderness, we cannot help but wander andfloat about at ease among them. What is there m the grandeurand mystery of peaks and mountain passes and precipices andrivers and the plateaux, the slopes, the bridges and the ravinesin the stone cave and the blessed spot outside their being deli-cate, undulated, clear and slender? Those who insist on visit-ing the stone caves and the blessed spots therefore have leftmuch that they have not visited; in fact, they have not visitedany place at all. For those who fail to see the mystery andgrandeur of a single hedge or a dog have seen only what isnot grand and what is not mysterious in the stone caves andthe blessed spots.

Toushan [Chin’s friend] said, “The one who understandsbest the art of travel in all history is Confucius, and the second,Wang Hsichih [acknowledged master of Chinese calligra-phy].” On being asked to explain, Toushan said, “I know thisof Confucius from the two sentences that for him ‘rice couldnot be white enough, and mincemeat could not be choppedfine enough,’ and I know this of Wang from seeing examplesof his calligraphy. There are things in it which his son Hsien-chih could not even understand.” “What you have just saidis devastating to the entire mankind,” said I. Toushan oncetold me, “When Wang Hsichih was at home, he often countedthe pistils of every flower on every branch in his yard, and hewould be thus occupied the whole day without saying a word,while his students stood by with towels at his side.” “Wheredid you find the authority for this statement?” asked Sheng-













t’an. “I found it in my own heart,” replied Toushan. Such amarvelous person is Toushan. Alas, that the world has not dis-covered Toushan and admired his romantic imagination!

II. “The Travels of Mingliaotse” 1a. The Reason for the Flight

Mingliaotse was once an official, and he was tired of the waysof the world, of having to say things against his heart and to per-form ceremonies against good form. What is “to say things againstone’s heart?” A host and his visitor make a low bow to each other,and after a few casual remarks about the weather, dare not makeanother comment. People we have met for the first time shakehands with us and insist they are our bosom friends, but afterthey have parted from us, we are totally indifferent to each other.When we praise a person, we compare him to the saint Poyi, andas soon as he has turned away, we talk behind his back and com-pare him to the thief Cheh. And when we are sitting at easeenjoying a conversation, we try to preserve a curt dignity, althoughwe have so much we should hke to say to each other; and wegabble about noble ideals, while we have immoral conduct. Beingafraid that to unbosom our heart would betray the truth and totell the truth would hurt, we lay these thoughts aside and let theconversation drift aimlessly on trivial topics. Sometimes we evenplay the actor and sigh or shout to cover up our thoughts, so thatour ears, our eyes, our mouth and our nose are no more our own,and our anger, our joy, our laughter and our condemnations areno longer genuine. Such is the established convention of society,and there is no way of rectifying it. And what is “to perform

1 This is a translation from a Chinese sketch, entitled The Travels of Mingliaotse,which draws a vivid picture of the glorified, cultured vagabond so much idealized byChinese scholars, and sets forth a happy, carefree philosophy of living, characterizedby love of truth, freedom and vagabondage. It was written by Tu Lung {alias TuCh’ihshui), a writer who lived toward the end of the sixteenth century and whotogether with Hsu Wench’ang, Yuan Chunglang, Li Chowu and others living at theperiod, have never been given their due by the orthodox Chinese critics.













339

ceremonies against good form?” In dealings with our fellowmen,no matter of what rank, we bow and kowtow the whole day, al-though they are our old friends. We dissociate ourselves withoutreason from some, as if they were our mortal enemies, and equallywithout reason try to get close to others, although they have noreal affinity to us. Hardly has a nobleman opened his mouth whenwe answer, “Yes, sir!” with a roar, and yet he need only raise anarm, and our heads may be chopped off. We see two people call-ing on each other, and although they hate to see each other’s faces,they spend their days busily dismounting from their horses andleaving their cards. Now calling on a friend to inquire after hiswelfare should not be merely an empty form. Did the ancientkings who established these ceremonies mean it to be this way?We put on our gowns and girdles, feeling like caged monkeys, sothat even when a louse bites our body and our skin itches, we can-not scratch it. And when we are walking at leisure in the streets,we are afraid of disobeying the law. Immediately our eyes lookat our nose and we dare not look beyond a short distance, and ifwe look beyond a short distance, other people will look at us andtry to detect what we are doing. When we want to ease ourselvesand the feeling is intense, we hardly dare to stop without some ex-cuse. The higher officials are ever mindful of the sword in frontand other people’s criticism behind. The cold and hot seasonsdisturb their bodies, and the desire of possession and the fear ofloss trouble their hearts. Thus they suffer greater loss than comesfrom the mere fear of being incorrect. Even the noblest and mostchivalrous spirits, who have a sense of wise disenchantment andare pleased with their own being, fall into this trap once theyhave become officials. So, wishing to emancipate his heart and liber-ate his will, Mingliaotse sets forth to travel in the Country of theNonchalant.

Some one may say: “I have heard that the follower of Tao livesin quiet and does not feel lonely, and lives in a crowd and doesnot feel the noise. He lives in the world and yet is out of it, is with-out bondage and without need for emancipation, and soon a













willow tree grows from his left armpit and a bird makes its neston the top of his head. This is the height of the culture of quiet-ism and emancipation. To be a servant in the kitchen, or to pickup the waste on the ground, is one of the lowest of professions, andyet the saint is not disturbed by it. Are you not making your spiritthe servant of your body, when you are afraid of the restrictionsof the official life, and desire to travel to unusual places?”

And Mingliaotse replies: “He who has attained the Tao can gointo water without becoming wet, jump into fire without beingburned, walk upon reality as if it were a void and travel on a voidas if it were reality. He can be at home wherever he is and be alonein whatever surroundings. That is natural with him. But I amnot one who has attained the Tao, I am merely a lover of Tao.One who has attained the Tao is master of himself, and the uni-verse is dissolved for him. Throw him in the company of the noisyand the dirty, and he will be like a lotus flower growing frommuddy water, touched by it, yet unstained. Therefore he doesnot have to choose where to go. I am yet unqualified for this, forI am like a willow tree following the wind—when the wind isquiet, then I am quiet, and when the wind moves, I move, too.I am like sand in the water—which is clean or muddy as the wateris. I have often achieved purity and quiet for a whole day andthen lost it in a moment, and have sometimes achieved purityand quiet for a year and then lost it in a day. It has not been pos-sible for me to let everything alone and not be disturbed bymaterial surroundings. If an emperor could follow the Tao, whydid Ch’ao Fu and Hsu Yu have to go to the Chi Hill and the YingRiver? If a prince could follow the Tao, why did Sakyamuni haveto go to the Himalayas? If a duke could follow the Tao, why didChang Liang have to ask for sick leave? And if a minor officialcould follow the Tao, why did T’ao Yiianming have to resignfrom his office? I am going to emancipate my heart and release myspirit and travel in the Country of the Nonchalant.”

“Let me hear about your travels,” the friend says, and Ming-liaotse replies:













34i

“One who travels does so in order to open his ears and eyesand relax his spirit. He explores the Nine States2 and travels overthe Eight Barbarian Countries, in the hope that he may gather theDivine Essence and meet great Taoists, and that he may eat o£ theplant of eternal life and find the marrow of rocks.8 Riding uponthe wind and sailing upon ether, he goes coolly whithersoever thewind may carry him. After these wanderings, he comes back, shutshimself up and sits looking at the blank wall, and in this way endshis life. I am not one who has attained the Tao. I would like tohouse my spirit within my body, to nourish my virtue by mild-ness, and to travel in ether by becoming a void. But I cannotdo it yet. I tried to house my spirit within my body, but suddenlyit disappeared outside; I tried to nourish my virtue by mildness,but suddenly it shifted to intensity of feeling; and I tried to wanderin ether by keeping in the void, but suddenly there sprang up inme a desire. And so, being unable to find peace within myself, Imade use of the external surroundings to calm my spirit, and be-ing unable to find delight within my heart, I borrowed a landscapeto please it. Therefore strange were my travels.

b. The Way of Traveling

“I go forth with a friend who loves the mountain haze and eachof us carries a gourd and wears a cassock, taking with us a hun-dred cash. We do not want more, but try always to keep it at ahundred to meet emergencies. And we two go begging throughcities and through hamlets, at vermilion gates and at white man-sions, before Taoist temples and monks’ huts. We are careful ofwhat we beg for, asking for rice and not for wine, and for vegetablesand not for meat. The tone of our begging is humble, but nottragic. If people give, we then leave them, and if people don’tgive, we also leave them; the whole object being merely to fore-stall hunger. If some people are rude, we take it with a bow.

2 Ancient nomenclature for parts of North and Central China.

2 Stalactites and stalagmites.













Sometimes when there is no place at which to beg and we cannotdo otherwise, we spend one or two from the hundred cash wecarry along with us, and make it up whenever possible. But wedo not spend any cash unless we are actually forced to it.

“We travel without a destination and stop over wherever wefind ourselves, and we go very slowly, perhaps ten li a day, per-haps twenty, or perhaps thirty, forty or fifty. We do not try to dotoo much, lest we feel tired. And when we come to mountainsand streams, and are enchanted with the springs and white rocksand water fowls and mountain birds, we choose a spot on a riverislet and sit on a rock, looking at the distance. And when we meetwoodcutters or fishermen or villagers or rustic old men, we do notask for their names and surnames, nor give ours, nor talk aboutthe weather, but chat briefly on the charms of the country life*After a while we part company with them without regret.

“In times of great cold or great heat, we have to seek shelter,lest we be affected by the weather. On the road, we stand aside andlet other people pass, and at a ferry, we wait to let other peopleget into the boat first. But if there is a storm we do not try to crossthe water, or if a storm comes up when we are already halfwayacross, we calm our spirit, and leaving it to fate with an under-standing of life, we say, If we should be drowned while crossing,it is Heaven’s will. Can we escape by worrying over it?’ If wecannot escape, there our journey ends. If fortunately we escape,then we go on as before. If we meet some rough young fellow onthe way or accidentally bump into him, and if the young man isrude, we politely apologize to him. If after the apology we stillcannot escape a fight, then there our journey ends. But if we es-cape it, then we go on as before. If one of us falls ill, we stop toattend to the illness, and the other tries to beg a litde for somemedicine, but he himself takes it calmly. He looks within himselfand is not afraid of death. And so a severe illness is changed intoa light illness, and a light illness is immediately cured. If it iswilled that our days are numbered, then there our journey ends*But if we escape it, then we go on as before. It is natural that













343

during our wanderings, we might arouse the suspicion of de-tectives or guards and might be arrested as spies. We then try toescape either by our cunning or by our sincerity. If we cannotescape, then there our journey ends. But if we escape, then we go onas before. Of course we stop over for the night at a mat-shed hutor a stone lodge, but if it is impossible to find such a place, we stopfor the night lying outside a temple gate, or beneath a rock cave,or outside people’s house walls or beneath tall trees. Perhaps themountain spirits and tigers or wolves may be looking upon us,and what are we to do ? The mountain spirits can do us no harm,but we are unable to defend ourselves against the tigers or wolves.But haven’t we a fate controlled up in heaven? We thereforeleave it to the laws of the universe, and we do not even changethe color of our face. If we are eaten up, that is our fate, and thereour journey ends. But if we escape it, then we go on as be-fore. . . .

c. At Austere Heights

“As for my destinations, I visit chiefly the Five Sacred Moun-tains and the Four Sacred Waters and generally the sacred placeson mountain tops, and secondarily include also the famous moun-tains and rivers of the Nine States. But I limit myself to only thoseparts within the jurisdiction of the Nine States and where humanbeings have set foot. As for those regions lying outside the Ce-lestial Empire, like the Himalayas and the Ten Small Islands andThree Big Islands of the China Sea, I do not think I should beable to go there, not being provided with a pair of wings. I expectalso to meet only traveling scholars of the lakes and rivers orretired men of the mountains; as for the various immortals, I donot think I shall be able to come across them, not being providedwith an immortal body myself.

“When I go up to the Five Sacred Mountains, there I standhigh above the celestial winds and look beyond the Four Seas, andthe myriad mountain peaks appear like little snails, the myriadrivers seem like winding girdles, and the myriad trees appear like

kale. The Milky Way seems to graze by my collar, white cloudspass through my sleeves, the eagles of the air seem within my arm’sreach, and the sun and the moon brush my temples and pass by.And there I have to speak in a low voice, not only for fear I mayfrighten away the spirit of the mountain, but also lest itbe overheard by God on His throne. Above us there is the purefirmament, without a single speck of dust in that vast expanseof space, while below us rain and thunder and stormy darknesstake place without our knowledge, and the rumbling of the thun-der is heard only as the gurgling of a baby. At this moment, myeyesight is dazzled by the light, and my spirit seems to fly out ofthe limitations of space, and I feel as if I were riding upon thefar-journeying winds, but do not know where to go. Or whenthe western sun is about to hide itself and the eastern moon isbursting out from below the horizon, there the light of the cloudsshines forth in all directions and the purple and the blue scintil-late in the sky and the distant and the near-by peaks change from adeeper into a lighter hue in a short moment. Or again in themiddle of the night, I hear the sound of the temple bells and theroar of a tiger, followed by a gust of rustling wind, and the doorof the main temple hall being open, I slip on my gown and getup, and lo! there the Spirit of the Rabbit4 is reclining, and someremains of the last snowfall still cover up the upper slopes, thelight of the night lies like a mass of undefined white, and the dis-tant mountains present a hardly visible outline. At such a moment,I feel my body steeped in the cool air and all desires of the fleshhave melted away. Or perhaps I see the God of the Sacred Moun-tain sitting in state, giving audience to the inferior spirits. There isa profusion of banners and canopies, and the air is filled with themusic of the flute and the bells, and the palace roofs are clothedin a mantle of clouds and scarfs of haze, seeming to have and yetnot to have a visible oudine, and giving the illusion of now beingso near and now being so far away. Ah, thrice happy is it to hear4 The moon.













the music of the gods, and why is it suddenly interrupted by agust of cold wind?

“Besides these Five Sacred Mountains, there are a number ofother famous mountains, like Szeming, T’lent’ai, Chinhua, Kua-ts’ang, Chint’mg, T’lenmu, Wuyi, Lushan, Omei, Chungnan,Chungt’iao, Wut’ai, T’aiho, Lofu, Kweich’i, Maoshan, Chiuhua,and Lmwu, and such sacred places without number, which havebeen called the dwellings of the fairies or the abodes of the spirits.I go forth in sandals, carrying a bamboo cane, and though I maynot be able to visit them all, I wander about as far as my energypermits. I drink the water of the Gods’ Faeces, inquire after thename of the Fairy Mouse, chew the rice of sesame and drink thedew of pine trees. When I come to a steep peak or overhangingprecipice which rises abruptly into the sky, never scaled by man,I tie myself to a rope and climb up to the top. Coming to a brokenstone bridge, or an old gate suddenly discovered open, I walk intoit without fear; or coming to a rocky cave so dark that one cannotsee its bottom, with but a single ray of light coming in through acrevice in its roof, I light a torch and go in by myself withoutfear, in the hope of finding some highminded Taoists, or im-mortal plants, or perhaps the bodily remains of some Taoists whohave gone up to heaven.

“I visit also the famous rivers and lakes, like the Tungt’ing, theYiinmeng, the Chiit’ang, the Wuhsia,5 the Chiich’u, the P’engli,the Yangtse, and the Ch’ient’ang. Such deep expanses of waterare the abodes of fish, dragons, and the water spirits. When theair is calm and the water smooth like a mirror, we know thatthen the Divine Dragon is peacefully asleep, holding a pearl in itsbreast. When the lights of the water merge with the color of thesky under a dear moon, we know then it is the Princess of theDragon King and the Mistress of the River coming out in a cano-pied procession, flute in hand and clad in their new scarfs of lightgauze, treading in embroidered shoes upon the rippling waves.This procession continues for some time and then disappears. Ah,

5 The Yangtse Gorges.













how cool it is then I Or a furious wind lashes upon the water andgigantic waves rise, and we know then it is the spirit of Ch’ihyi 6in anger, assisted by T’ienwu.7 Then the great earth churns aboutlike a mill and our earthly abode shakes and rolls like a sifter,and we seem to see Old Dragon Chang breaking his way intoheaven, carrying his nine sons in his arms. Ah, how magnificent itis then! Or if we go in for the gende beauty of well-dressed women,there is no better place than the West Lake of Hangchow, wherethe willows line the banks and the peach flowers look at theirown image in the water, and we know then it is the ImperialConsort Lihua opening her vanity box in the morning. When thewater-caltrops are in bloom and the lotus flowers look fresh andgay on a bright morning and the place is filled with a subtle fra-grance, we know then that the beauties Yichu and Hoteh arecoming out of their bath. When the sky is clear and the sun isshining and the things of the place have a bright charm, andpeople are leaning upon their balconies in the vermilion towers inthe morning, or boating on the lake with painted oars in theevening, we know then it is the Queen Yang Kweifei in hersmiling mood. When a mist and rain hang over the lake andthe many hills are enveloped in gray, changing into the most un-expected colors, it is also a source of great delight, for we knowthen it is Hsishih, Queen of the Wu kingdom, knitting her eye-brows.”

d. Bac\ to Humanity

Then Mingliaotse walks leisurely past the Six Bridges of Hsi-ling and goes up to T’lenchu and Lingch’iao, where after visitingsome ancient scholars, he comes out and looks for Wild Stork Tingin some stone cave amidst the clouds. Then there is Ch’aoyin (Poo-too) which is the monastic home of Mingliaotse, and where thetemple in honor of the Goddess of Mercy is situated. Mingliaotse

6 A mythical bird.

7 The Spirit of the Sea. with eight heads, eight legs and eight tails.













goes there to pick lotus flowers and look at the great sea. Ah, is thisnot a great delight!

And so wandering farther and farther, happy of heart, Ming-liaotse proceeds leisurely, covering a distance of ten thousand lion foot. And when he is pleased with what he sees or hears, hestays at a place for ten days.

[At a temple] he sits still with crossed legs to master the ThreePrecious Spirits. The five thousand words of Taotehching—is notthe philosophy subtle and fine? The Golden Casket of Taoistbooks—is it already lost or still to be found? The Jade Boo\ ofFusang—shall he not ask his neighbors concerning its where-abouts? The Two Books of Yin fit—does their secret lie right be-fore his eyes'5 The Supreme Ruler guides his perceptive mind, andthe Ancient Buddha directs his spiritual wisdom. And so tryingto understand the law of the changing universe, he is not lonelyduring his contemplation.

In the temple of Buddha, there is the gracious appearance ofhis golden body, irradiating a glorious halo. The candles havebeen lighted and the incense smoke fills the air with a light fra-grance, and there the Taoists or monks are seated in order on theirstraw cushions, drinking tea and eating fruit and perusing theclassics. After a while, when they are tired, they control theirrespiration and enter the stage of quietude. After a long time,they get up, and see the moon shining from behind the wisterias,while the universe lies hushed in silence. An acolyte is kowtowingwith his head against the ground, and a boy servant is taking anap near the stove where the medicine of fairies is being stewed.At this moment how can an earthly thought enter our minds, evenif it is there?

When out in the open country, he sees low walls enclosing mudhuts thatched with straw. A piercing wind is blowing throughthe door and a mild sun is shining upon the forests. The catde andsheep are returning home to the hillside, and hungry birds aremaking a noisy sound in the fields on the plain. An old farmer inragged clothes and disheveled hair is sunning himself beneath a













small mulberry tree, and an old woman is holding an earthenvessel filled with water and serving a wheat meal. When thelandscape and the mood of the moment are so sad, one feels toothat it is as beautiful as a picture. If a Taoist on travel should re-gard such views as too ordinary, he might just as well not travelat all.

On entering a big city, where crowds jostle and the traffic ofcarts and horses fills the streets, Mmgliaotse goes along singingand observing the people—storekeepers, butchers, minstrel singers,fortune-tellers, people occupied in a dispute, jugglers, animal train-ers, gamblers and sportsmen. Mmgliaotse looks at them all. Andwhen the spirit moves him, he enters a wine shop and orders somestrong wine with dried fish and green vegetables, and the twomen drink across a table. Thus getting warmed up, they sing theditty Gathering the Immortal Plant, and look about, supremelysatisfied with themselves. The people of the street wonder at thesight of these two ragged souls carrying themselves with such anair of charm and happiness, and suspect that they are perhapsfairies incarnated. After a short while, they suddenly disappearaltogether.

In the great mansions behind tall gates, dukes and princes orofficials of high ranks are having a wine feast. Food is being servedon jade plates, and beauties are sitting around the table. An orches-tra is playing in the hall and the sound of song pierces the clouds.An old servant with a cane in hand is watching the door. Ming-liaotse goes right in to beg for food. With his bright, wide-openeyes and a dignified air, he shouts to the company, “Stop all thisnoise and listen to a Taoist singing the song of ‘Dew Drops onFlowers'

Dew drops on floweryOh, how gay!

Fear not the cutting wind,

But dread the coming day!

Eastward flows the River,

Westward the Milky Way.













Farmers till the field whereOnce the Bronze Tower lay.

Better to have gotA day with this all-precious potThan future names remembered not.

Oh, make merry while ye may!

Dew drops on flowers,

Oh, how bright!

So long they last, they shineLike pearls in morning light,

Where grave mounds dot the wilds,

And winds whine through the night;

Foxes’ howls and screech-owlsOn poplars ghastly white.

See where red leaves blow,

Down on the Fragrant Gullet flow,

And mosses over Ch’inien Palace grow.

Oh, make merry while ye might!

After Mingliaotse has finished his song, one of the guests seemsto be angry and says: “Who is this Taoist to spoil our enjoymentin the midst of our wine feast? Give him a piece of sesame cakeand send him away!” Mingliaotse receives the cake and leaves.Then another guest speaks to his attendant, saying, “Quick! Askthat Taoist to come back!” “But we were just enjoying our wine,”says the former, “and he came to spoil our pleasure. That waswhy I sent him away with a piece of sesame cake. It’s just fine.Why do you want him to come back?” “It seems to me,” repliesthe latter, “there’s something unusual about this Taoist, and Iwant to ask him to return to have a good look at him.” “Why,he is only a beggar!” replies the former. “What is unusual abouthim? All he wants is a cold dish of left-overs.” Then another guestjoins in and says, “It doesn’t seem from the song he sang that he isjust a beggar.”

At this moment, a sing-song girl in red gauze rises up from herseat and says, “According to my humble opinion, this Taoist is afallen fairy from heaven. His eyes and forehead are delicately













formed and his voice is strong and clear. He is disguised as a beggar,but something in his behavior betrays his noble breeding. The songhe sang is graceful and deep in meaning, more like the song offairies in heaven than the song of men on earth. What beggar couldhave sung such a song! He is a fairy traveling among mortals indisguise. Please ask him to come back, for we must not lose him.”

“What has all this to do with him?” says the last one. “All hewants is perhaps a drink of wine. You ask him to come back andwe’ll find out that he is a common fellow after all.”

The girl in red gauze is still unconvinced and remarks, “Well, allI can say is, we haven’t the luck to meet with immortals.”

Then another girl in green gauze rises up from her seat and says,“Will the gendemen make a bet with me? Ask the Taoist to return,and if he is an extraordinary person8 then those who say he isextraordinary win the bet, and if we find that he is a commonfellow, then those who say he is a common fellow win.” “Good!”shout the gendemen together. They then send a servant to go afterMingliaotse, but he has completely disappeared, and the servant re-turns with the news. “I knew that he was no common fellow!” saysthe former. “Alas, we have just lost an immortal!” says the girl inred gauze. “Why, he just went out of the door and has completelydisappeared!”

Mingliaotse then proceeds with his cane and leisurely passes outof the outer city gate. He passes by a dozen big cides without enter-ing one of them, until he comes to a place where he sees a city wallnestling against a mountain range. There are fine, tall towers andspacious, magnificent temples, whose roofs overlap one another inirregular formations, overlooking a clear pond below. It is a beauti-ful spring day, birds are singing on splendid trees and all the flowersare in their full glory. The men and women of the city, clad in theirnew clothes and riding in carved carriages or sitting on embroideredsaddles, have come out of the city to “pace the spring.” Some aredrinking in the shade of tall trees, and some have spread a mat on

8 “Extraordinary person” is the regular phrase for some saint or Taoist or fairy,gifted with magic powers.













the fragrant grass, and others have climbed up to a high vermiliontower, or are rowing on “green sparrow” boats; again others are rid-ing shoulder to shoulder to visit the flowers, or are walking handin hand and singing folk songs. Mingliaotse feels extremely happyand hangs about for a long time.

By and by a scholar with a clean face and nice complexionappears, coming along gracefully in his long gown. Making a lowbow to Mingliaotse, he says, “Do Taoists come out to pace thespring, too? I have a few friends having a picnic over there, be-neath the cherry trees in front of the little tower across the river.It is a jolly company and I shall be much pleased if you can joinus. Can you come along?”

Mingliaotse gladly follows the young man, and when he arrives;,he sees six or seven scholars, all handsome and young. The firstyoung man introduces him to the company with a smile. “Myfriends, this is just a spring party among ourselves. I just met thisTaoist gentleman on the road and saw he was not at all vulgar, andI therefore propose that we share our cups with him. What do youthink?” “Good!” they all reply.

So then they all take their seats in order and Mingliaotse sits atthe end of the table. When sufficient wine has been served andeverybody is tipsy and happy, the conversation waxes more andmore brilliant, and they pass witty remarks about the different peopleand the gentry. Some declaim poems celebrating the spring, somesing the song of gathering flowers, some discuss the policies of thecourt, and some tell of the secluded charm of hills and woods. Thereis then an exciting conversation going on, with each trying to outdothe others, while the Taoist merely occupies himself by chewinghis rice. The first young man looks several times at Mingliaotseamidst his busy conversation, and says, “We must hear somethingfrom this Taoist teacher, too.” And Mingliaotse replies, “Why, Iam just enjoying the many fine and wise things you gentlemen havebeen saying, and have not been able to understand them all. Howcan I contribute anything to your conversation?”

After a while, the company rise up to take a walk in the rice













fields, some plucking flowers and others pulling willow branches onthe way. The place is full of beauties, and everywhere one’s eyesturn, one sees beautiful peonies and miwu? But Mingliaotse wandersalone into a hill path, and comes out again after a long while. “Whydid you go alone r1” the gentleman ask. “I was going with twooranges and a gallon of wine to listen to the orioles,” replies Ming-liaotse. “Why, this is a most extraordinary man, by the way hetalks,” says one scholar, and Mingliaotse replies by a courteous re-mark concerning his unworthmess.

So then the company sit down again, and one man says, “It won’tdo to go home from such an outing without writing some poems,”and another expresses his approval.

Soon one person has completed his poem first, which reads:

The willows drunk with ’circling haze,

And ram-bathed peach flowers brightly gleam.

Fear not thy fragrant cup be empty;

A tavern lies across the stream.

Another finishes his poem, which reads:

My kitchen shares the mountain green;

My tower is sprinkled wet with spray.

If ye drink not when spring is here,

Soon comes the windy, wintry day.

After three other persons have contributed their quatrains, Ming-liaotse is invited to make his contribution. He rises to his feet, andafter some expressions of his diffidence and the friends’ insistence,he sings:

I tread along the sandy bank,

Where clouds are golden, water clear;

The startled fairy hounds go barking—

Into the peach grove10 disappear.

Amazed by this poem, the company rise from their seats andmake a low bow to Mingliaotse. “Tut! Tut! To hear such celestial

9 A short flowering plant.

10 The “peach grove'' stands in Chinese literature for a fairies’ retreat.













353

words from a monk! We knew that you were an extraordinaryperson.” And they all come round to ask for his name and surname,but Mmgliaotse only smiles without giving reply. As they stillinsist, Mmgliaotse says, “What do you want to know my name for?I am merely a rustic person wandering among clouds and waters,and we’ve met with a smile. You can just call me £The RusticFellow of Clouds and Waters.’ ” This intrigues the company stillmore, and they express their desire to invite him to go into the citywith them. “I am merely a poor monk enjoying a vagabond’s travel,and all the world is my home,” replies Mmgliaotse with a smile.“But since you are so kind, I will come along.”

They then go back to the city together, and Mingliaotse stays attheir homes by turn. During the days that follow, he finds himselfnow in a rich man’s hall, and now in a well-hidden small studio,now enjoying a literary wine dinner and now watching perform-ances of dance and song, and Mmgliaotse goes to all the places towhich he is invited. The people of the city hear of the Rustic Fel-low of Clouds and Waters, and the socially active people showerhim with invitations, and he visits them all. When people give himdrink, he drinks; when people discuss poetry and literature, hediscusses poetry and literature with them; when people take him outfor an excursion, he goes with them; but when they ask for hisname and surname, he merely smiles without reply. In his dis-cussion of poetry and literature, he makes very apt remarks aboutthe ancient and modern writers and gives a penetrating analysis oftheir styles and forms. Sometimes he discusses the political orderof the ancient kings and makes passing comments on current affairsand enchants the people still more by his witty remarks.

Especially well-versed is he in the teaching of Taoism regarding“nourishing the spirit.” Sometimes, when he is watching dancingor singing which borders on the bawdy and people make ribaldjokes to find out his attitude toward these things, he seems to beenjoying himself, like the romantic scholars. But when it comes toextinguishing the candle and the host asks him to stay with somegirl entertainer, and when the party becomes really rowdy, he sits













upright with an austere appearance, and nobody can make anythingof him. When he takes a nap during the night, he asks for a strawcushion from the host and sits with crossed legs on it, and merelydozes off when he is tired. For this reason, admiration and wondergrow about him.

After more than a month’s stay, he takes leave suddenly one day,against the persistent entreaty of the people. His friends give himmoney and cloth for presents, and write poems of farewell to him.At the farewell party, the gentlemen all come to give him a send-off; sadly they hold his hands and some shed tears. Mingliaotsearrives at the outer city gate, and after having reserved a hundredcash for himself, lie distributes the gentlemen’s presents to the poorand goes away. When his friends hear of this, they sigh and marvelstill more, knowing not what to make of him.

e. Philosophy of the Plight

Mingliaotse then follows a mountain path, and finds himself indeep, rugged mountains. Thousands of old trees, with creepersgrowing on them, spread their deep shade so that one walkingunderneath cannot see the sky. There is not a trace of human habi-tation, and not even a woodcutter or a cowherd is in sight. He hearsonly the cries of birds and monkeys around him, and a gust of in-fernally cold wind makes him shiver. Mingliaotse proceeds with hisfriend for a long while, when they suddenly see an old man witha majestic forehead and a delicate face and green veins showingon his eyeballs. His hair falls down to the shoulders, and he issitting on a rock, hugging his knees. Mingliaotse goes forward andmakes a bow. The old man rises to his feet and looks at him steadliyfor a long time, but does not say a word. Going down on his knees,Mingliaotse speaks to him, “Is Father an extraordinary person whohas attained the Tao? How otherwise can I find the sound of foot-steps in this deep mountain solitude? Your disciple has always lovedthe Tao and in his middle age has not yet found it. I feel sad atthe vanity of this life which rapidly burns out like a flash from a













355

flint, or like oil in a pan. Will you please take pity on me and dis-perse my ignorance?” The old man pretends not to hear him. Butafter Mingliaotse insists upon his request, he merely teaches him afew words about being carefree and quiet and the idea of inaction,and after a little while, goes his way. Mmgliaotse’s eyes follow himfor a long while until he altogether disappears. How does oneexplain the existence of such an old man in this deep mountainsolitude?

Then wandering farther on, he chances to come upon an oldfriend of his. Sometimes when he thinks of those people with whomhe had formed a friendship on the basis of love of prose and poetry,or of respect for each other’s character, or of business relations, orof personal intimacy and mutual understanding of one another’shearts, or of a mutual confidence in one another’s future, he beginsto desire to see them again. Then he goes straight to the home ofhis friend, without concealing his indentity. The friend bows togreet him, and seeing that Mingliaotse is clad in such a strangedress, is surprised and asks him some questions. “I have already re-tired from the world, and Chichen of T’ungming is my master,”explains Mingliaotse. “Are your sons and daughters all married?”the friend asks. “No, not yet,” replies Mingliaotse. “When they areall married, then I shall be free of all cares, like the clearing up ofthe water of the Yellow River. Tsep’ing10 went away and neverreturned home, but I am still looking forward to returning to thehills of my homeland, in order to live in harmony with my originalnature.” The host then gives him vegetarian food, and they beginto talk of the days twenty or thirty years ago, and surveying thepast with a laugh, feel that everything has passed like a dream.The friend then bows his head and sighs, expressing his envy of thecarefree life that Mingliaotse is leading.

“Are you not indeed a carefree man1” his friend says. “Nowwealth and power and the glories of this world are things in whichpeople easily get drowned. I sometimes see an old man with whitehair on his head marching slowly with a stoop in an official pro-

10 An ancient Taoist who went up to heaven.













cession, still clinging to these things and unwilling to let them go.If one day he quits office, he looks about with knitted eyebrows,Inquiring i£ the carriage is ready, he is still slow to depart, andpassing out of the city gate of the capital, he still looks back. Whenback at his farm, he still disdains to occupy himself with plantingrice and hemp and beans, and morning and night he will be ask-ing for news from the capital. Or he will still be writing letters tohis friends at the court, and such thoughts flit back and forth inhis breast ceaselessly until he draws his last breath. Sometimes anImperial order for his recall to office arrives at the moment when heis breathing his last, and sometimes the official messenger arriveswith the news just a few hours after he closes his eyes. Isn’t thisridiculous? How have you trained yourself that you are able toemancipate yourself from such things in good time?”

“I have looked at life in my leisure,” replies Mingliaotse. “Itseems that I have come to an awakening through a sense of life’stragedy. I have looked at the skies, and wondered how the sunand the moon and the stars and the Milky Way rush westward dayand night like busy people. Today passes and never returns, andalthough tomorrow comes, it is no longer today. This year passesand never returns, and although there is next year, it is no longerthis year. And so the days of Nature are steadily lengthened or un-rolled, while the days of my life are daily shortened, and outsidethe thirty-six thousand mornings, time does not belong to me. Theyears of Nature are steadily unrolled, while the years of my life be-come steadily shortened, and beyond a hundred, they do not be-long to me. Furthermore, the so-called hundred’ and the so-called'thirty-six thousand’ in life are not always as we wish them to be,and among the days and years, most are passed in bad weather andsorrow and worry and running about. How many moments arethere when the day is beautiful and the company enjoyable, whenthe moon and the wind are good and our heart is at ease and ourspirit happy, when there is music and song and wine and we canenjoy ourselves and while away the hours!

“The sun and the moon pursue their courses, as fast as the bullet.













357

and when their wheels are about to go behind the Western Preci-pices , the arms of the strongest man on earth cannot hold them andmake them travel eastward, even the eloquence of Su Ch’in andChang Yi cannot persuade them to travel eastward, even the wit andthe strategy of Ch’uhtse and Yen Ying cannot change their mindsand make them travel eastward, even the sincerity of Chmgwei whoknocked herself against the Rainbow and was transformed into abird, trying to fill the sea of her regrets with pebbles, cannot touchtheir hearts and make them travel eastward. Writers throughoutthe ages who discussed this point have always held it as a matter ofeternal regret.

“And I have looked at the earth, where high banks have beenleveled into valleys and deep valleys have been heaved up intomountains, and the water of the rivers and lakes flows night andday eternally eastward into the sea. Fang P’ing11 has said, ‘Since Itook over my duty, I have seen the sea three times changed into amulberry field, and vice versa*

“Again I have looked at the living things cf this world, how theyare born and grow old and fall ill and die, being ground thus in themill of yin and yang, like oil in a frying pan which, being heated byfire from below, dries up in a short while; or like a candle whichflickers in the wind and soon goes out, its tears being dried up andits soot fallen to the table; or like a boat cut adrift on a big sea,washed forward by successive waves and floating it knows notwhither. Besides, the seven desires of man continue to burn himup and the pleasures of the flesh pare him down; he is sometimestoo much disappointed and sometimes too much elated, and usuallytoo much worried. Without more than a hundred years at his dis^posal, he plans to live for a thousand years, and while sitting likeoil on fire, his ambitions stretch beyond the universe. Why wonder,therefore, that his being quickly deteriorates when old age comesalong and his vital energy is used up and his spirit wanders awayfrom its abode?

“I have seen princes and dukes and generals and premiers whoseA Taoist fairy.













crowded roofs form a skyline like the clouds. When the dinner bellsounds, a thousand people are seen eating together, and when theirgates are opened in the morning, crowds of visitors rush in. Dayand night they give feasts and their halls are full of painted women.When a monk passes by, they shout at him with a thundering voiceand he dares not even to look at the house. But after twenty orthirty years, the monk passes by again, and he sees a stretch ofwild grass and broken tiles covered by dew and frost, and a coldsun is shining upon the place and a moaning wind passes by, withnot a roof left standing. What was once the scene of song and danceand merrymaking is today the pasture ground of a few cowherdboys. Did they ever realize, when they were at the height of theirprosperity and laughing and merrymaking, that this day wouldcome? And why did the great glories of this world pass away in thetwinkling of an eye? Was it alone, like the Garden of Chinku,12 theTower of T’ungt’ai,13 the Hall of P’lhsiang14 and the Pool ofT’aiyi15 that gradually became ruins after the passage of hundreds orthousands of years? On my leisure days, I have passed out of the cityand gone up on hills, where I saw a stretch of grave mounds. Dothese belong to Yen or Han or Chin or Wei? Or were these peopleprinces and dukes, or were they pages and servants? Or were theyheroes or were they fools? How can I know from this stretch ofyellow soil? I thought how they, when they were living, clung toglory and wealth, vied with one another in their ambitions andstruggled for fame, how they planned what they could neverachieve and acquired what they could never use. Which one ofthem did not worry and plan and strive? One morning their eyesclosed for the eternal sleep, and they left all their worries behind.

“I have stopped over at the residences of officials and wonderedhow many had taken another’s place as the host of the house. Ihave looked at the records of the personnel at court and wondered

12 Garden of the fabulously wealthy Shah Ts’ung.

13 Tower of Ts’ao Ts’ao.

14 Hall of the pampered Queen Fexyen.

16 Pool of Emperor Han Wuti.













how many times old names had been struck off and new names putin. I have been at mountain passes and at ferries, and have gone upa high hill to look down upon the plain, and I have seen continuousprocessions of boats and carriages and wondered how manytravelers they have carried away. And so I sighed in silence, andsometimes my tears dropped and my heart’s desires were turnedcold like ashes.”

“I have heard it said by Yentse,” replies his friend, “that Sangch’iuwas happy over the fact that there was no death, and that the KingChing of Ch’i shed tears and was grieved on account of death, andwise people criticized him for not understanding life. Are you notalso lacking in the wisdom of those who understand life, when youfeel sad and even shed tears because of the swift passing of timeand the instability of life?”

“No,” replies Mingliaotse. “I have felt sad from the sense of theinstability of life, and I have come to an awakening from this feel-ing of sadness. King Ching of Ch’i feared that his power and glorywere temporary and wanted to enjoy them forever and exhaust thehappiness of human life. On the contrary, I feel the instability ofwealth and power and wish to keep them at a distance, in orderto run my normal course of life. Our aims are different.”

“Have you already attained the Tao, then?”

“No, I have not attained the Tao. I am only one who loves it,”replies Mingliaotse.

“Why do you wander about, if you love the Tao?”

“Oh, no, do not confuse my wandermgs with the Tao,” repliesMingliaotse. “I was merely tired of the restrictions of the official lifeand the bother of worldly affairs, and I am traveling merely to freemyself from them. As for winding up the "great business of life,’16I shall have to wait until I return and shut myself up.”

“Are you happy, going about with a gourd and a cassock andbegging and singing for your living?”

“I have heard from my teacher,” replies Mingliaotse, ""that theart of attaining happiness consists in keeping your pleasures mild.16 Death.













36o THE ENJOYMENT OF TRAVEL

When people come to a feast where lambs and cows are killed andall the delicacies that come from land and sea are laid out onthe table, they all enjoy them at first, but when they come tothe point of satiety, they begin to feel a sense of repulsion. Muchbetter are meals of plain rice and green vegetables, which are mildand simple and good for one’s health and which will be found tohave a lasting flavor, after one gets used to them. People also enjoythemselves at first m parties where there are beautiful women andboys, where some beat the drum and others play the sheng and alot of things are going on in the hall. But after the mood is past,one gets, on the contrary, a sense of sadness. It is much better tolight incense and open your book and sit quiedy and leisurely,maintaining a calm of spirit, and the charm deepens as you goalong. Although I was at one time of my life an official, I had noproperty or wealth outside a few books. At first I traveled withthese books, but fearing that they might be the cause of envy onthe part of the water spirits, I threw them into the water. And nowI haven’t got a thing outside this body. Does not then the charm oflife remain for me long and lasting, when my burdens are gone,my surroundings are quiet, my body is free and my heart isleisurely? With a cassock and a gourd, I go wherever I like, staywherever I choose and take whatever I get. Staying at a place, I donot inquire after its owner, and going away, I do not leave myname. I do not feel ill at ease when I am left in the cold, and donot become contaminated when I am in noisy company. There-fore, the purpose of my wanderings is also to learn the Tao.”Having heard this, his friend says with a happy smile, “Yourwords make me feel like having taken a dose of cooling medicine.The disturbing fever has left my body without my knowing it.”[Here follows a discussion on the identity of the Three Religionsand the existence of God and Buddha and fairies and ghosts.]After a while a young man comes along and, pointing his fingerat Mingliaotse, shouts, “Get away from here, you beggar! A monkought to go away quietly when he receives his food. If you keep onbabbling nonsense, I must regard you as a sorcerer and prosecute













“THE TRAVELS OF MINGLIAOTSE”

361

you at court.” The young man rolls up his sleeve as if to strike atMingliaotse, but the latter merely smiles without making a reply.The quarrel is settled by some passer-by.

Mingliaotse goes away singing his songs. At night he stops at aninn, and there is a very well-dressed woman peeping m at the door.Gradually she approaches and begins slyly to tease him. Ming-liaotse thinks to himself that she must be an evil spirit, and remainssitting alone. “I am a fairy,” says the woman, “and I have cometo save you because I know that you have been trying very hard tolearn the Tao. Besides, I had an appointment with you in the pre-vious incarnation. Please don’t doubt me. I will accompany you tothe Enchanted Land.” Mingliaotse remembers that when LiiCh’engtse was learning the Tao at Chingshan, he was once thus de-ceived by a temptress and finally enslaved by an evil spirit. He losthis left eye, and died without being able to attain the Tao. Eventhe Classics regard the failure of Lii Ch’engtse as due to his lack ofcomplete control of his mind and to the existence of evil desires. It isnatural that, when ghosts and fox spirits tempt people, they destroytheir life, and they should therefore be avoided. But even if sagesand saints should make a mistake and be thus deceived, it would bea wrong way to control their mind and preserve their spirit. So hesits austerely as before and the woman all of a sudden disappears.Who can know whether she was a ghost or a fox spirit or atemptress ?

Thus for three years Mingliaotse continues in his travels, wander-ing almost over the entire world. Everything that he sees with hiseyes or hears with his ears, or touches with his body, and all thedifferent situations and meetings, are thus used for the benefit oftraining his mind. And so such vagabond travel is not entirelywithout its benefits.

He then returns and builds himself a hut in the hills of Szemingand never leaves it again.













Chapter Twelve

THE ENJOYMENT OF CULTURE

I. Good Taste in Knowledge

THE aim of education or culture is merely the development ofgood taste in knowledge and good form in conduct. The culturedman or the ideal educated man is not necessarily one who is well-read or learned, but one who likes and dislikes the right things.To know what to love and what to hate is to have taste in knowl-edge. Nothing is more exasperating than to meet a person at a partywhose mind is crammed full with historical dates and figures andwho is extremely well posted on current affairs in Russia or Czecho-slovakia, but whose attitude or point of view is all wrong. I have metsuch persons, and found that there was no topic that might come upin die course of the conversation concerning which they did nothave some facts or figures to produce, but whose points ofview were deplorable. Such persons have erudition, but no dis-cernment, or taste. Erudition is a mere matter of cramming offacts or information, while taste or discernment is a matter ofartistic judgment. In speaking of a scholar, the Chinese generallydistinguish between a man’s scholarship, conduct, and taste or dis-cernment.1 This is particularly so with regard to historians; a bookof history may be written with the most fastidious scholarship, yetbe totally lacking in insight or discernment, and in the judgmentor interpretation of persons and events in history, the author mayshow no originality or depth of understanding. Such a person, wesay, has no taste in knowledge. To be well-informed, or to accumu-late facts and details, is the easiest of all things. There are manyfacts in a given historical period that can be easily crammed into our

’fy^Hsuch (scholarship); bring (conduct); shih or shihehien (discernment, or realinsS||||L Thus one’s shih, or power of insight into history or contemporary events,may'be^Jaigher” than another’s. This is what we call ‘ipower of interpretation,” orinterpretative insight.

362













mind, but discernment in the selection of significant facts is a vasdymore difficult thing and depends upon one’s point of view.

An educated man, therefore, is one who has the right loves andhatreds. This we call taste, and with taste comes charm. Now tohave taste or discernment requires a capacity for thinking thingsthrough to the bottom, an independence of judgment, and an un-willingness to be bulldozed by any form of humbug, social,political, literary, artistic, or academic. There is no doubt that we aresurrounded m our adult life with a wealth of humbugs: fame hum-bugs, wealth humbugs, patriotic humbugs, political humbugs, reli-gious humbugs and humbug poets, humbug artists, humbugdictators and humbug psychologists. When a psychoanalyst tellsus that the performing of the functions of the bowels during child-hood has a definite connection with ambition and aggressivenessand sense of duty in one’s later life, or that constipation leads tostinginess of character, all that a man with taste can do is to feelamused. When a man is wrong, he is wrong, and there is no needfor one to be impressed and overawed by a great name or by thenumber of books that he has read and we haven’t.

Taste then is closely associated with courage, as the Chinese al-ways associate shih with tan, and courage or independence of judg-ment, as we know, is such a rare virtue among mankind. We seethis intellectual courage or independence during the childhood ofall thinkers and writers who in later life amount to any-thing. Such a person refuses to like a certain poet even if hehas the greatest vogue during his time; then when he truly likesa poet, he is able to say why he likes him, and it is an appeal tohis inner judgment. This is what we call taste in literature. He alsorefuses to give his approval to the curren. school of painting, if itjars upon his artistic instinct. This is taste in art. He also refuses tobe impressed by a philosophic vogue or a fashionable theory, eventhough it were backed by die greatest name. He is unwilling to beconvinced by any author until he is convinced at heart; if theauthor convinces him, then the author is right, but if the authorcannot convince him, then he is right and the author wrong. This













is taste in knowledge. No doubt such intellectual courage or inde-pendence o£ judgment requires a certain childish, naive confidencein oneself, but this self is the only thing that one can cling to, andthe moment a student gives up his right of personal judgment, heis in for accepting all the humbugs of life.

Confucius seemed to have felt that scholarship without thinkingwas more dangerous than thinking unbacked by scholarship; hesaid, “Thinking without learning makes one flighty, and learningwithout thinking is a disaster.” He must have seen enough studentsof the latter type in his days for him to utter this warning, a warn-ing very much needed in the modern schools. It is well known thatmodern education and the modern school system in general tend toencourage scholarship at the expense of discernment and look uponthe cramming of information as an end in itself, as if a greatamount of scholarship could already make an educated man. Butwhy is thought discouraged at school? Why has the educational sys-tem twisted and distorted the pleasant pursuit of knowledge into amechanical, measured, uniform and passive cramming of informa-tion? Why do we place more importance on knowledge than onthought? How do we come to call a college graduate an educatedman simply because he has made up the necessary units or week-hours of psychology, medieval history, logic, and “religion?” Whyare there school marks and diplomas, and how did it come aboutthat the mark and the diploma have, in the student’s mind, cometo take the place of the true aim of education?

The reason is simple. We have this system because we are educat-ing people in masses, as if in a factory, and anything which happensinside a factory must go by a dead and mechanical system. In orderto protect its name and standardize its products, a school mustcertify them with diplomas. With diplomas, then, comes the ne-cessity of grading, and with the necessity of grading come schoolmarks, and in order to have school marks, there must be recitations,examinations, and tests. The whole thing forms an entirely logicalsequence and there is no escape from it. But the consequences ofhaving mechanical examinations and tests are more fatal than we













GOOD TASTE IN KNOWLEDGE 365

imagine. For it immediately throws the emphasis on memorizationof facts rather than on the development of taste or judgment. I havebeen a teacher myself and know that it is easier to make a set ofquestions on historical dates than on vague opinions on vaguequestions. It is also easier to mark the papers.

The danger is that after having instituted this system, we areliable to forget that we have already wavered, or are apt to waverfrom the true ideal of education, which as I say is the developmentof good taste in knowledge. It is still useful to remember what Con-fucius said: “That scholarship which consists m the memorization offacts does not qualify one to be a teacher.” There are no such thingsas compulsory subjects, no books, even Shakespeare’s, that one mustread. The school seems to proceed on the foolish idea that we candelimit a minimum stock of learning in history or geography whichwe can consider the absolute requisite of an educated man. I ampretty well educated, although I am in utter confusion about thecapital of Spam, and at one time thought that Havana was thename of an island next to Cuba. The danger of prescribing a courseof compulsory studies is that it implies that a man who has gonethrough the prescribed course ipso facto knows all there is to knowfor an educated man. It is therefore entirely logical that a graduateceases to learn anything or to read books after he leaves school,because he has already learned all there is to know.

We must give up the idea that a man’s knowledge can be testedor measured in any form whatsoever. Chuangtse has well said,“Alas, my life is limited, while knowledge is limidess!” The pursuitof knowledge is, after all, only like the exploration of a new conti-nent, or “an adventure of the soul,” as Anatole France says, and itwill remain a pleasure, instead of becoming a torture, if the spiritof exploration with an open, questioning, curious and adventurousmind is maintained. Instead of the measured, uniform and passivecramming of information, we have to place this ideal of a positive,growing individual pleasure."Once the diploma and the marks areabolished, or treated for what they are worth, the pursuit of knowl-edge becomes positive, for the student is at least forced to ask him-













self why he studies at all. At present, the question is alreadyanswered for the student, for there is no question in his mind thathe studies as a freshman in order to become a sophomore, andstudies as a sophomore in order to become a junior. All such ex-traneous considerations should be brushed aside, for the acquisitionof knowledge is nobody else’s business but one’s own. At present,all students study for the registrar, and many of the good studentsstudy for their parents or teachers or their future wives, that theymay not seem ungrateful to their parents who are spending so muchmoney for their support at college, or because they wish to appearnice to a teacher who is nice and conscientious to them, or that theymay go out of school and earn a higher salary to feed their families.I suggest that all such thoughts are immoral. The pursuit of knowl-edge should remain nobody else’s business but one’s own, and onlythen can education become a pleasure and become positive.

II. Art as Play and Personality

Art is both creation and recreation. Of the two ideas, I thinkart as recreation or as sheer play of the human spirit is more im-portant. Much as I appreciate all forms of immortal creative work,whether in painting, architecture or literature, I think the spirit oftrue art can become more general and permeate society only whena lot of people are enjoying art as a pastime, without any hope ofachieving immortality. As it is more important that all collegestudents should play tennis or football with indifferent skill thanthat a college should produce a few champion athletes or footballplayers for the national contests, so it is also more important thatall children and all grown-ups should be able to create somethingof their own as their pastime than that the nation should producea Rodin. I would rather have all school children taught to modelclay and all bank presidents and economic experts able to maketheir own Christmas cards, however ridiculous the attempt maybe, than to have only a few artists who work at art as a profession.That is to say, I am for amateurism in all fields. I like amateur













philosophers* amateur poets, amateur photographers, amateurmagicians, amateur architects who build their own houses, ama-teur musicians, amateur botanists and amateur aviators. I get asmuch pleasure out of listening to a friend playing a sonatina ofan evening in an indifferent manner as out of listening to a first-class professional concert. And everyone enjoys an amateur parlormagician, who is one of his friends, more than he enjoys a pro-fessional magician on the stage, and every parent enjoys the ama-teur dramatics of his own children much more heartily than heenjoys a Shakespearean play. We know that it is spontaneous,and in spontaneity alone lies the true spirit of art. That is whyI regard it as so important that in China painting is essentially thepastime of a scholar and not of a professional artist. It is onlywhen the spirit of play is kept that art can escape being commer-cialized.

Now it is characteristic of play that one plays without reasonand there must be no reason for it. Play is its own good reason.This view is borne out by the history of evolution. Beauty is some-thing that cannot be accounted for by the struggle for existence,and there are forms of beauty that are destructive even to the ani-mal, like the over-developed horns of a deer. Darwin saw that hecould never account for the beauties of plant and animal life bynatural selection, and he had to introduce the great secondaryprinciple of sexual selection. We fail to understand art and theessence of art if we do not recognize it as merely an overflow ofphysical and mental energy, free and unhampered and existingfor its own sake. This is the much decried formula of “art forart’s sake.” I regard this not as a question upon which the politi-cians have the right to say anything, but merely as an incontro-vertible fact regarding the psychological origin of all artisticcreation. Hitler has denounced many forms of modern art as im-moral, but I consider that those painters who paint portraits ofHider, to be shown at the new Art Museum in order to please thepowerful ruler, are the most immoral of all. That is not art, butprostitution. If commercial art often injures the spirit of artistic













creation, political art is sure to kill it. For freedom is the very soulof art. Modern dictators are attempting the impossible when theytry to produce a political art. They don’t seem to realize that youcannot produce art by the force of the bayonet any more than youcan buy real love from a prostitute.

In order to understand the essence of art at all, we have to goback to the physical basis of art as an overflow of energy. This isknown as an artistic or creative impulse. The use of the very word“inspiration” shows that the artist himself hardly knows wherethe impulse comes from. It is merely a matter of inner urge, likethe scientist’s impulse for the discovery of truth, or the explorer’simpulse for discovering a new island. There is no accounting for it.We are beginning to see today, with the help of biological knowl-edge, that the whole organization of our mental life is regulatedby the increase or decrease and distribution of hormones in theblood, acting on the various organs and the nervous system con-trolling these organs. Even anger or fear is merely a matter of thesupply of adrenalin. Genius itself, it seems to me, is but an over-supply of glandular secretions. An obscure Chinese novelist, with-out the modern knowledge of hormones, made a correct guessabout the origion of all activity as due to “worms” in our body.Adultery is a matter of worms gnawing our intestines and im-pelling the man to satisfy his desire. Ambition and aggressivenessand love of fame or power are also due to certain other worms giv-ing the person no rest until he has achieved the object of his am-bition. The writing of a book, say a novel, is again due to a speciesof worms which impel and urge the author to create for no reasonwhatsoever. Between hormones and worms, I prefer to believe inthe latter. The term is more vivid.

Given an over-supply or even a normal supply of worms, a manis bound to create something or other, because he cannot helphimself. When a child has an over-supply of energy, his normalwalking is transformed into hopping or skipping. When a manhas an oversupply of energy, his walking becomes transformedinto prancing or dancing. So, then, dancing is nothing but in-













efficient walking, inefficient in the sense that there is a waste ofenergy from an utilitarian, not an aesthetic, point of view. Insteadof going straight to a point, which is the quickest road, a dancerwaltzes and goes in a circle. No one really tries to be patrioticwhen he is dancing, and to command a man to dance according tothe capitalist or fascist or proletarian ideology is to destroy thespirit of play and glorious inefficiency in dancing. If a Communistis trying to attain a political objective, or trying to be a loyal com-rade, he should just walk, and not dance. The Communists seemto know the sacredness of labor, and not the sacredness of play.As if man in civilization didn’t work too much already, in com-parison with every other species and variety of the animal king-dom, so that even the little leisure he has, the little time for playand art, must too be invaded by the claims of that monster, theState!

This understanding of the true nature of art as consisting inmere play may help to clarify the problem of the relationship ofart and morality. Beauty is merely good form, and there is goodform in conduct as well as in good painting or a beautiful bridge.Art is very much broader than painting and music and dancing,because there is good form in everything. There is good form inan athlete at a race; there is good form in a man leading a beauti-ful life from childhood and youth to maturity and old age, eachappropriate in its own time; there is good form in a presidentialcampaign well directed, well maneuvered and leading graduallyto a finale of victory, and there is good form, too, in one’s laughteror spitting, as so carefully practised by the old Mandarins in China.Every human activity has a form and expression, and all forms ofexpressions lie within the definition of art. It is therefore im-possible to relegate the art of expression to the few fields of musicand dancing and painting.

With this broader interpretation of art, therefore, good form inconduct and good personality in art are closely related and areequally important. There can be a luxury in our bodily movements,as in the movement of a symphonic poem. Given that over-supply













of energy, there is an ease and gracefulness and attendance to formin whatever we do. Now ease and gracefulness come from a feel-ing of physical competence, a feeling of ability to do a thing morethan well—to do it beautifully. In the more abstract realms, wesee this beauty in anybody doing a nice job. The impulse to do anice job or a neat job is essentially an aesthetic impulse. Even aneat murder, a neat conspiracy neatly earned out, is beautiful tolook at, however condemnable the act may be. In the more con-crete details of our life, there is, or there can be, ease and grace-fulness and competence, too. All the things we call “the amenitiesof life” belong in this category. Paying a compliment well andappropriately is called a beautiful compliment, and on the otherhand, paying a compliment with bad taste is called an awkwardcompliment.

The development of the amenities of speech and life and per-sonal habits reached a high point at the end of the Chin Dynasty(third and fourth centuries, A. D.) in China. That was the timewhen “leisurely conversations” were in vogue. The greatest sophisti-cation was seen in women’s dress, and there were a great number ofmen noted for their handsomeness. There was a fashion for growing“beautiful beards,” and men learned to wabble about clad in ex-tremely loose gowns. The dress was so designed that there was nopart of one’s body unreachable in case one wanted to scratch anitch. Everything was gracefully done. The chu, a bundle of hairfrom the horse’s tail tied together around a handle for driving awaymosquitoes or flies, became an important accessory of conversation,and today such leisurely conversations are still known in literaryworks as chut’an or “chu conversations.” The idea was that onewas to hold the chu in his hand and wave it gracefully about inthe air during conversation. The fan came in also as a beautifuladjunct to conversation, the conversationalist opening, waving anddosing it, as an American old man would take off his spectaclesand put them on again during a speech, and was just as beautifulto look at. In point of utility, the chu or the fan was only slightlymore useful than an Englishman’s monode, but they were all parts













37i

of the style of conversation, as a cane is a part of the style ofwalking. Among the most beautiful amenities of life I have seenin the West are the clicking of heels of Prussian gentlemen bowingto a lady in a parlor and the curtsying of German girls, with oneleg crossed behind the other. That I consider a supremely beautifulgesture, and it is a pity that this custom has gone out of vogue.

Many are the social amenities practised in China. The gestures ofone’s fingers, hands and arms are carefully cultivated. The methodof greeting among the Manchus, known as tach’ien, is also a beauti-ful thing to look at. The person comes into the room, and lettingone arm fall straight down at the side, he bends one of his legsand makes a graceful dip. In case there is company sitting aroundthe room, he makes a graceful turn around the axis of his unbentleg while in that position, thus making a general greeting to theentire company. One should also watch a cultivated chess-playerput his stones on the chessboard. Holding one of those tiny whiteor black stones carefully balanced on his forefinger, he gendy pushesit from behind by an outward movement of his thumb and an in-ward movement of the forefinger, and lands it beautifully on theboard. A cultured Mandarin made extremely beautiful gestureswhen he was angry. He wore a gown with the sleeves tucked upat the lower ends showing the silk lining, known as "horse-hoofsleeves,” and when he was gready displeased, he would brandishhis right arm or both arms downwards and with an audible jerkbring the tucked-up "horse-hoof” down, and gracefully wobble outof the room. This is known as fohsiu, or to <cbru$h one’s sleeves andleave.”

The speech of a cultured Mandarin official is also a beautiful thingto hear. His words come out with a beautiful cadence, and the musi-cal tones of the Peking accent have a graceful musical rise and fall.His syllables are pronounced gracefully and slowly, and in the caseof real scholars, his language is set up with jewels from the Chineseliterary language. And then one should hear how the Mandarinlaughs or spits. It is positively delightful. The spitting is donegenerally in three musical beats, the first two being sounds of draw-













mg in and clearing the throat in preparation for the final beat ofspitting out, which is executed with a quick forcefulness: staccatoafter legato. I really don’t mind the germs thus let out into the air,if the spitting is aesthetically done, for I have survived the germswithout any appreciable effect on my health. His laughter is anequally regulated and artistically rhythmical affair, slighdy artificialand stylized, and finishing off in an increasing generous volume,pleasandy softened by a white beard when there is one.

Such laughter is a carefully cultivated art with an actor as part ofhis technique of acting, and theater-goers always enjoy and applauda perfecdy executed laugh. This is of course a very difficult thing,because there are so many kinds of laughter: the laughter of happi-ness, the laughter at some one falling into one’s trap, the laughterof sneer or contempt, and most difficult of all, the laughterof despair, of a man caught and defeated by the force of over-whelming circumstances. Chinese theater-goers watch for thesethings and for the hand gestures and steps of an actor, the latterbeing known as t’aipu, or “stage steps.” Every movement of thearm, every inclination of the head, every twist of the neck, everybend of the back, every waving movement of the flowing sleeve,and of course every step of the foot, is a carefully practiced ges-ture. The Chinese classify acting into the two classes of singingand acting, and there are plays with emphasis on singing, andother dramas with emphasis on acting. By “acting” is meant thesegestures of the body, the hands and the face, as much as the moregeneral acting of emotions and expressions. Chinese actors have tolearn how to shake their heads in disapproval, how to lift their eye-brows in suspicion, and how to gently stioke their beard in peaceand satisfaction.

Now we are ready to discuss the problem of morality and artThe utter confusion of art and propaganda in fascist and com-munist countries and its naive acceptance by so many intellectualsin a democracy make it necessary for every intelligent person tocome to a clear understanding of the problem. The Communistsand Fascists make a false start at the very beginning by ignoring the













373

role of the individual, both as the creating personality and theobject of the creation, and placing in its stead the superior claims ofeither the state or the social class. While literature and art must bothbe built on personal, individual emotions, the Communists andFascists emphasize only group or class emotions, without postulat-ing the reality of emotions in varying individuals. With individualpersonality pushed out of court, one cannot even begin to discussthe problem of art and morality sanely.

Art has a relationship to morals only insofar as the peculiarquality of a work of art is an expression of the artist’s personality.An artist with a grand personality produces grand art; an artistwith a trivial personality produces trivial art; a sentimental artistproduces sentimental art, a voluptuous artist produces voluptuousart, a tender artist produces tender art, and an artist of delicacy pro-duces delicate art. There we have the relationship of art and moral-ity in a nutshell. Morality, therefore, is not a thing that can besuperimposed from the outside, according to the changing whimsof a dictator or the changing ethical code of the Chief of the Propa-ganda Department. It must grow from the inside as the naturalexpression of the artist’s soul. And it is not a question of choice, butan inescapable fact. The mean-hearted artist cannot produce a greatpainting, and a big-hearted artist cannot produce a mean picture,even if his life were at stake.

The Chinese notion of p’m in art is extremely interesting, some-times spoken of as jenp’in (“personality of the man”) or p’m\eh(“personality of character”). There is also an idea of grading, aswe speak of artists or poets of “the first ffin” or “second p’in"and we also speak of tasting or sampling good tea as “to p’in tea.”There are then a whole category of expressions in connection withthe personality of a person as shown in a particular action. In thefirst place, a bad gambler, or a gambler who shows bad temperor bad taste, is said to have a bad tup’in or a bad “gamblingpersonality.” A drinker who is apt to behave disgracefully after ahard drink is said to have a bad chiup’in or bad “wine personality.”A good or bad chess-player is said to have a good or bad ch’itfin













or “chess personality.” The earliest Chinese book of poetic criticismis known as Shihp’in2 (’Personalities of Poetry), with a gradingof the different poets, and of course there are books of art criticismknown as huap’in or “Personalities in Painting.”

Connected with this idea of p’in, therefore, there is the generallyaccepted belief that an artist’s work is stricdy determined by hispersonality. This “personality” is both moral and artistic. It tendsto emphasize the notion of human understanding, high-minded-ness, detachment from life, absence of pettiness or triviality orvulgarity. In this sense it is akin to English “manner” or “style.”A wayward or unconventional artist will show a wayward orunconventional style and a person of charm will naturally showcharm and delicacy in his style, and a great artist with good tastewill not stoop to “mannerisms.” In this sense, personality is thevery soul of art. The Chinese have always accepted implicitly thebelief that no painter can be great unless his own moral andaesthetic personality is great, and in judging calligraphy and paint-ing, the highest criterion is not whether the artist shows good tech-nique but whether he has or has not a high personality, A work,showing perfect technique, may nevertheless show a “low” per-sonality, and then, as we would say in English, that work lacks“character”

We have come thus to the central problem of all art. The greatChinese general and premier, Tseng Kuofan, said in one of hisfamily letters that the only two living principles of art in calligra-phy are form and expression, and that one of the greatest calli-graphists of the time, Ho Shaochi, approved of his formula andappreciated his insight. Since all art is concrete, there is alwaysa mechanical problem, the problem of technique, which has tobe mastered, but as art is also spirit, the vital element in all formsof creation is the personal expression. It is the artist’s individuality,over against his mere technique, that is the only significant thingin a work of art. In writing, the only important thing in a bookis the author’s personal style and feeling, as shown in his judg-

2 By Chung Yung, who lived about A. D. 500.













ART AS PLAY AND PERSONALITY 375

ment and likes and dislikes. There is a constant danger o£ thispersonality or personal expression being submerged by the tech-nique, and the greatest difficulty of all beginners, whether inpainting or writing or acting, is to let oneself go. The reason is,of course, that the beginner is? scared by the form or technique. Butno form without this personal element can be good form at all.All good form has a swing, and it is the swing that is beautiful tolook at, whether it is the swing of a champion golf-player’s club,or of a man rocketing to success, or of a football player carryingthe ball down the field. There must be a flow of expression, andthat power of expression must not be hampered by the technique,but must be able to move freely and happily in it. There is thatswing—so beautiful to look at—in a train going around a curve,or a yacht going at full speed with straight sails. There is that swingin the flight of a swallow, or of a hawk dashing down on its prey, orof a champion horse racing to the finish “in good form,” as we say.

We require that all art must have character, and character isnothing but what the work of art suggests or reveals concerningthe artist’s personality or soul or heart or, as the Chinese put it,“breast.” Without that character or personality, a work of art isdead, and no amount of virtuosity or mere perfection of techniquecan save it from lifelessness or lack of vitality.* Without that highlyindividual thing called personahty, beauty itself becomes banal,So many girls aspiring to be Hollywood stars do not know this,and content themselves with imitating Marlene Dietrich or JeanHarlow, thus exasperating a movie director looking for talent.There are so many banally pretty faces, and so litde fresh, individualbeauty. Why don’t they study the acting of Marie Dressier? All art isone and based on the same principle of expression or personality,whether it is acting in a movie picture or painting or literaryauthorship. Really, by looking at the acting of Marie Dressier orLionel Barrymore, one can learn the secret of style in writing. Tocultivate the charm of that personality is the important basis for allart, for no matter what an artist does, his character shows in hiswork.













The cultivation o£ personality is both moral and aesthetic, andit requires both scholarship and refinement. Refinement is some-thing nearer to taste and may be just born in an artist, but thehighest pleasure of looking at a book of art is felt only when itis supported by scholarship. This is particularly clear in paintingand calligraphy. One can tell from a piece of calligraphy whetherthe writer has or has not seen a great number of Wei rubbings.If he has, this scholarship gives him a certain antique manner,but in addition to that, he must put into it his own soul or per-sonality, which varies of course. If he is a delicate and sentimentalsoul, he will show a delicate and sentimental style, but if he lovesstrength or massive power, he will also adopt a style that goes in forstrength and massive power. Thus in painting and calligraphy,particularly the latter, we are able to see a whole category of aes-thetic qualities or different types of beauty, and no one will be ableto separate the beauty of the finished product and the beauty ofthe artist’s own soul. There may be beauty of whimsicality andwaywardness, beauty of rugged strength, beauty of massive power,beauty of spiritual freedom, beauty of courage and dash, beauty ofromantic charm, beauty of restraint, beauty of soft gracefulness,beauty of austerity, beauty of simplicity and “stupidity,” beauty ofmere regularity, beauty of swiftness, and sometimes even beauty ofaffected ugliness. There is only one form of beauty that is impossiblebecause it does not exist, and that is the beauty of strenuousness orof the strenuous life.

III. The Art of Reading

Reading or the enjoyment of books has always been regardedamong the charms of a cultured life and is respected and enviedby those who rarely give themselves that privilege. This is easy tounderstand when we compare the difference between the life ofa man who does no reading and that of a man who does. Theman who has not the habit of reading is imprisoned in his imme-diate world, in respect to time and space. His life falls into a set













377

routine; he is limited to contact and conversation with a fewfriends and acquaintances, and he sees only what happens in hisimmediate neighborhood. From this prison there is no escape. Butthe moment he takes up a book, he immediately enters a differentworld, and if it is a good book, he is immediately put in touchwith one of the best talkers of the world. This talker leads him onand carries him into a different country or a different age, orunburdens to him some of his personal regrets, or discusses withhim some special line or aspect of life that the reader knows noth-ing about. An ancient author puts him in communion with a deadspirit of long ago, and as he reads along, he begins to imaginewhat that ancient author looked like and what type of personhe was. Both Mencius and Ssema Ch’ien, China’s greatest historian,have expressed the same idea. Now to be able to live two hoursout of twelve in a different world and take one’s thoughts off theclaims of the immediate present is, of course, a privilege to beenvied by people shut up in their bodily prison. Such a change ofenvironment is really similar to travel in its psychological effect.

But there is more to it than this. The reader is always carriedaway into a world of thought and reflection. Even if it is a bookabout physical events, there is a difference between seeing suchevents in person or living through them, and reading about themin books, for then the events always assume the quality of aspectacle and the reader becomes a detached spectator. The bestreading is therefore that which leads us into this contemplativemood, and not that which is merely occupied with the report ofevents. The tremendous amount of time spent on newspapers Iregard as not reading at all, for the average readers of papers aremainly concerned with getting reports about events and happeningswithout contemplative value.

The best formula for the object of reading, in my opinion, wasstated by Huang Shanku, a Sung poet and friend of Su Tungp’o.He said, “A scholar who hasn’t read anything for three daysfeels that his tal\ has no flavor (becomes insipid), and his ownface becomes hateful to loo\ at (in the mirror).” What he means,













of course, is that reading gives a man a certain charm and flavor,which is the entire object of reading, and only reading with thisobject can be called an art. One doesn’t read to “improve one’smind,” because when one begins to think of improving his mind,all the pleasure of reading is gone. He is the type of person whosays to himself: “I must read Shakespeare, and I must readSophocles, and I must read the entire Five Foot Shelf of Dr.Eliot, so I can become an educated man.” I’m sure that man willnever become educated. He will force himself one evening to readShakespeare’s Hamlet and come away, as if from a bad dream,with no greater benefit than that he is able to say that he has“read” Hamlet. Anyone who reads a book with a sense of obliga-tion does not understand the art of reading. This type of readingwith a business purpose is in no way different from a senator’sreading up of files and reports before he makes a speech. It is askingfor business advice and information, and not reading at all.

Readmg for the cultivation of personal charm of appearance andflavor in speech is then, according to Huang, the only admissiblekind of reading^' This charm of appearance must evidently beinterpreted as something other than physical beauty. What Huangmeans by “hateful to look at” is not physical ugliness. There areugly faces that have a fascinating charm and beautiful faces thatare insipid to look at. I have among my Chinese friends one whosehead is shaped like a bomb and yet who is nevertheless always apleasure to see. The most beautiful face among Western authors,so far as I have seen them in pictures, was that of G. K. Chesterton.There was such a diabolical conglomeration of mustache^ glasses,fairly bushy eyebrows and knitted lines where the eyebrows met!One felt there were a vast number of ideas playing about insidethat forehead, ready at any time to burst out from those quizzicallypenetrating eyes. That is what Huang would call a beautiful face,a face not made up by powder and rouge, but by the sheer forceof thinking. As for flavor of speech, it all depends on one’s wayof reading. Whether one has “flavor” or not in his talk, dependson his method of heading. If a reader gets the flavor of books,













he will show that flavor in his conversations, and i£ he has flavorin his conversations, he cannot help also having a flavor in hiswriting.

Hence I consider flavor or taste as the key to all reading. Itnecessarily follows that taste is selective and individual, like the tastefor food. The most hygienic way of eating is, after all, eating whatone likes, for then one is sure of his digestion. In reading as in eat-ing, what is one man’s meat may be another’s poison. A teachercannot force his pupils to like what he hkes in reading, and aparent cannot expect his children to have the same tastes as himrself. And if the reader has no taste for what he reads, all the timeis wasted. As Yuan Chunglang says, “You can leave the booksthat you don’t like alone, and let other people read them?

There can be, therefore, no books that one absolutely must read.For our intellectual interests grow like a tree or flow like a river.So long as there is proper sap, the tree will grow anyhow, and solong as there is fresh current from the spring, the water will flow.When water strikes a granite cliff, it just goes around it; when itfinds itself in a pleasant low valley, it stops and meanders there awhile; when it finds itself in a deep mountain pond, it is contentto stay there; when it finds itself traveling over rapids, it hurriesforward. Thus, without any effort or determined aim, It is sureof reaching the sea some day. There are no books in this worldthat everybody must read, but only books that a person must readat a certain time in a given place under given circumstances andat a given period of his life. I rather think that reading, likematrimony is determined by fate or yinyuan. Even if there is acertain book that every one must read, like the Bible, there is a timefor it. When one’s thoughts and experience have not reached a cer-tain point for reading a masterpiece, the masterpiece will leave only abad flavor on his palate. Confucius said, “When one is fifty, onemay read the Boo\ of Changes,” which means that one shouldnot read it at forty-five. The extremely mild flavor of Confucius’own sayings in the Analects and his mature wisdom cannot beappreciated until one becomes mature himself.













Furthermore, the same reader reading the same book at differentperiods, gets a different flavor out of it. For instance, we enjoy abook more after we have had a personal talk with the author him-self, or even after having seen a picture of his face, and one getsagain a different flavor sometimes after one has broken off friend-ship with the author. A person gets a kind of flavor from readingthe Boo\ of Changes at forty, and gets another kind of flavor read-ing it at fifty, after he has seen more changes in life. Therefore, allgood books can be read with profit and renewed pleasure a secondtime. I was made to read Westward Ho! and Henry Esmond inmy college days, but while I was capable of appreciating WestwardHo! in my ’teens, the real flavor of Henry Esmond escaped meentirely until I reflected about it later on, and suspected there wasvasdy more charm in that book than I had then been capable of ap-preciating.

Reading, therefore, is an act consisting of two sides, the authorand the reader. The net gain comes as much from the reader’scontribution through his own insight and experience as from theauthor’s own. In speaking about the Confucian Analacls, the SungConfucianist Ch’eng Yich’uan said, “There are readers andreaders. Some read the Analects and feel that nothing has happened,some are pleased with one or two lines in it, and some begin towave their hands and dance on their legs unconsciously.”

' I regard the discovery of one’s favorite author as the most criticalevent in one’s intellectual development. There is such a thing as theaffinity of spirits, and among the authors of ancient and moderntimes, one must try to find an author whose spirit is akin with hisown. Only in this way can one get any real good out of reading.One has to be independent and search out his masters. Who is one’sfavorite author, no one can tell, probably not even the man him-self. It is like love at first sight. The reader cannot be told to lovethis one or that one, but when he has found the author he loves,he knows it himself by a kind of instinct. We have such famouscases of discoveries of authors. Scholars seem to have lived in differ-ent ages, separated by centuries, and yet their modes of thinking













and feeling were so akin that their coming together across the pagesof a book was like a person finding his own image. In Chinesephraseology, we speak of these kindred spirits as re-incarnations ofthe same soul, as Su Tungp’o was said to be a re-incarnation ofChuangtse or T’ao Yuanming, 3 and Yuan Chunglang was said tobe the re-incarnation of Su Tungp’o. Su Tungp’o said that when hefirst read Chuangtse, he felt as if all the time since his childhood hehad been thinking the same things and taking the same viewshimself. When Yuan Chunglang discovered one night HsiiWench’ang, a contemporary unknown to him, in a small book ofpoems, he jumped out of bed and shouted to his friend, and hisfriend began to read it and shout in turn, and then they both readand shouted again until their servant was completely puzzled.George Eliot described her first reading of Rousseau as an electricshock. Nietzsche felt the same thing about Schopenhauer, butSchopenhauer was a peevish master and Nietzsche was a violent-tempered pupil, and it was natural that the pupil later rebelledagainst the teacher.

It is only this kind of reading, this discovery of one’s favoriteauthor, that will do one any good at all. Like a man falling in lovewith his sweetheart at first sight, everything is right. She is of theright height, has the right face, the right color of hair, the rightquality of voice and the right way of speaking and smiling. Thisauthor is not something that a young man need be told about byhis teacher. The author is just right for him; his style, his taste, hispoint of view, his mode of thinking, are all right. And then thereader proceeds to devour every word and every line that the authorwrites, and because there is a spiritual affinity, he absorbs and readilydigests everything. The author has cast a spell over him, and he i$glad to be under the spell, and in time his own voice and mannerand way of smiling and way of talking become like the author’s

8 Su Tungp’o performed the unique feat of writing a complete set of poems onthe rhymes used by the complete poems of T’ao, and at the end of the collectionof Su’s Poems on T’ao’s Rhymes, he said of himself that he was the re-incarnation ofT’ao, whom he admired desperately above all other predecessors.













382 THE ENJOYMENT OF CULTURE

own. Thus he truly steeps himself in his literary lover and derivesfrom these books sustenance for his soul. After a few years, the spellis over and he grows a little tired of this lover and seeks for newliterary lovers, and after he has had three or four lovers and com-pletely eaten them up, he emerges as an author himself. There aremany readers who never fall in love, like many young men andwomen who flirt around and are incapable of forming a deep attach-ment to a particular person. They can read any and all authors, andthey never amount to anything.

Such a conception of the art of reading completely precludes theidea of reading as a duty or as an obligation. In China, one oftenencourages students to “study bitterly.” There was a famous scholarwho studied bitterly and who stuck an awl in his calf when he fellasleep while studying at night. There was another scholar who hada maid stand by his side as he was studying at night, to wake himup every time he fell asleep. This was nonsensical. If one has abook lying before him and falls asleep while some wise ancientauthor is talking to him, he should just go to bed. No amount ofsticking an awl in his calf or of shaking him up by a maid will dohim any good. Such a man has lost all sense of the pleasure ofreading. Scholars who are worth anything at all never know whatis called “a hard grind” or what <fbitter study” means. They merelylove books and read on because they cannot help themselves.

With this question solved, the question of time and place forreading is also provided with an answer. There is no proper timeand place for reading. When the mood for reading comes, one canread anywhere. If one knows the enjoyment of reading, he will readin school or out of school, and in spite of all schools. He can studyeven in the best schools. Tseng Kuofan, in one of his family lettersconcerning the expressed desire of one of his younger brothers tocome to the capital and study at a better school, replied that: “If onehas the desire to study, he can study at a country school, or evenon a desert or in busy streets, and even as a woodcutter or a swine-herd. But if one has no desire to study, then not only is the countryschool not proper for study, but even a quiet country home or a













THE ART OF READING 383

fairy island is not a proper place for study.” There are people whoadopt a self-important posture at the desk when they are about todo some reading, and then complain they are unable to read becausethe room is too cold, or the chair is too hard, or the light is toostrong. And there are writers who complain that they cannot writebecause there are too many mosquitos, or the writing paper is tooshiny, or the noise from the street is too great. The great Sung,scholar, Ouyang Hsiu, confessed to “three on’s” for doing his bestwriting: on the pillow, on horseback and on the toilet. Anotherfamous Ch’ing scholar, Ku Ch’ienli, was known for his habit of“reading Confucian classics naked” in summer. On the other hand,there is a good reason for not doing any reading in any of theseasons of the year, if one does not like reading:

To study in spring is treason;

And summer is sleep’s best reason;

If winter hurries the fall,

Then stop till next spring season.

What, then, is the true art of reading? The simple answer is tojust take up a book and read when the mood comes. To bethoroughly enjoyed, reading must be entirely spontaneous. Onetakes a limp volume of Lisao, or of Omar Khayyam, and goes awayhand in hand with his love to read on a river bank. If there aregood clouds over one’s head, let them read the clouds and forgetthe books, or read the books and the clouds at the same time.Between times, a good pipe or a good cup of tea makes it still moreperfect. Or perhaps on a snowy night, when one is sitting before thefireside, and there is a kettle singing on the hearth and a good pouchof tobacco at the side, one gathers ten or a dozen books on philoso-phy, economics, poetry, biography and piles them up on the couch,and then leisurely turns over a few of them and gently lights on theone which strikes his fancy at the moment. Chin Shengt’an regardsreading a banned book behind closed doors on a snowy night as oneof the greatest pleasures of life. The mood for reading is perfectlydescribed by Ch’en Chiju (Meikung): “The ancient people called













384 THE enjoyment of culture

books and paintings ‘limp volumes’ and ‘soft volumes’; thereforethe best style of reading a book or opening an album is the leisurelystyle.” In this mood, one develops patience for everything. As thesame author says, “The real master tolerates misprints when readinghistory, as a good traveller tolerates bad roads when climbing amountain, one going to watch a snow scene tolerates a flimsy bridge,one choosing to live in the country tolerates vulgar people, and onebent on looking at flowers tolerates bad wine.”

The best description of the pleasure of reading I found in theautobiography of China’s greatest poetess, Li Ch’ingchao (Yi-an,1081-1141). She and her husband would go to the temple, wheresecondhand books and rubbings from stone inscriptions were sold,on the day he got his monthly stipend as a student at the ImperialAcademy. Then they would buy some fruit on the way back, andcoming home, they began to pare the fruit and examine the newlybought rubbings together, or drink tea and compare the variants indifferent editions. As described in her autobiographical sketchknown as Postscript to Chinshihlu (a book on bronze and stoneinscriptions):

I have a power for memory, and sitting quietly after supperin the Homecoming Hall, we would boil a pot of tea and,pointing to the piles of books on the shelves, make a guess asto on what line of what page in what volume of a certain booka passage occurred and see who was right, the one making thecorrect guess having the privilege of drinking his cup of teafirst. When a guess was correct, we would lift the cup high andbreak out into a loud laughter, so much so that sometimes thetea was spilled on our dress and we were not able to drink. Wewere then content to live and grow old in such a world! There-fore we held our heads high, although we were living in pov-erty and sorrow ... In time our collection grew bigger andbigger and the books and art objects were piled up on tablesand desks and beds, and we enjoyed them with our eyes andour minds and planned and discussed over them, tasting a hap-piness above those enjoying dogs and horses and music anddance ....













385

This sketch was written in her old age after her husband haddied, when she was a lonely old woman fleeing from place to placeduring the invasion of North China by the Chin tribes.

IV. The Art op Writing

The art of writing is very much broader than the art of writingitself, or of the writing technique. In fact, it would be helpful to abeginner who aspires to be a writer first to dispel in him any over-concern with the technique of writing, and tell him to stop triflingwith such superficial matters and get down to the depths of hissoul, to the end of developing a genuine literary personality as thefoundation of all authorship. When the foundation is properly laidand a genuine literary personality is cultivated, style follows as anatural consequence and the little points of technique will takecare of themselves. It really does not matter if he is a little confusedabout points of rhetoric and grammar, provided he can turn outgood stuff. There are always professional readers with publishinghouses whose business it is to attend to the commas, semicolons,and split infinitives. On the other hand, no amount of grammaticalor literary polish can make a writer if he neglects the cultivationof a literary personality. As Buffon says, “The style is the man.”Style is not a method, a system or even a decoration for one’s writ-ing; it is but the total impression that the reader gets of the qualityof the writer’s mind, his depth or superficiality, his insight or lackof insight and other qualities like wit, humor, biting sarcasm, genialunderstanding, tenderness, delicacy of understanding, kindlycynicism or cynical kindliness, hardheadedness, practical commonsense, and general attitude toward things. It is clear that there canbe no handbook for developing a “humorous technique” or a “three-hour course in cynical kindliness,” or “fifteen rules for practicalcommon serine” and “eleven rules for delicacy of feeling.”

We have to go deeper than the surface of the art of writing, andthe moment we do that, we find that the question of the art ofwriting involves the whole question of literature, of thought, point













of view, sentiment and reading and writing. In my literary campaignin China for restoring the School of Self-Expression (hsingling) andfor the development of a more lively and personal style in prose, Ihave been forced to write essay after essay giving my views onliterature in general and on the art of writing in particular. I haveattempted also to write a series of literary epigrams under the generaltitle “Cigar Ashes.” Here are some of the cigar ashes:

(a) Technique and Personality

Professors of composition talk about literature as carpenterstalk about art. Critics analyze a literary composition by thetechnique of writing, as engineers measure the height and struc-ture of Taishan by compasses.

There is no such thing as the technique of writing. All goodChinese writers who to my mind are worth anything haverepudiated it.

The technique of writing is to literature as dogmas are tothe church—the occupation with trivial things by trivial minds.

A beginner is generally dazzled by the discussion of tech-nique—the technique of the novel, of the drama, of music andof acting on the stage. He doesn’t realize that the technique ofwriting has nothing to do with the birth of an author, and thetechnique of acting has nothing to do with the birth of a greatactor. He doesn’t even suspect that there is such a thing as per-sonality, which is the foundation of all success in art and litera-ture.

(b) The Appreciation of Literature

When one reads a number of good authors and feels that oneauthor describes things very vividly, that another shows greattenderness of delicacy, a third expresses things exquisitely, afourth has an indescribable charm, a fifth one’s writing is likegood whiskey, a sixth one’s is like mellow wine, he should notbe afraid to say that he likes them and appreciates them, ifonly his appreciation is genuine. After such a wide experience inreading, he has the proper experiential basis for knowing whatare mildness, mellowness, strength, power, brilliance, pungency,delicacy, and charm. When he has tasted all these flavors, then













he knows what is good literature without reading a singlehandbook.

The first rule of a student of literature is to learn to sampledifferent flavors. The best flavor is mildness and mellowness,but is most difficult for a writer to attain. Between mildnessand mere flatness there is only a very thin margin.

A writer whose thoughts lack depth and originality may tryto write a simple style and end up by being insipid. Only freshfish may be cooked in its own juice; stale fish must be flavoredwith anchovy sauce and pepper and mustard—the more thebetter.

A good writer is like the sister of Yang Kueifei, who couldgo to see the Emperor himself without powder and rouge. Allthe other beauties in the palace required them. This is the reasonwhy there are so few writers who dare to write in simpleEnglish.

(c) Style and Thought

Writing is good or bad, depending on its charm and flavor,or lack of them. For this charm there can be no rules. Charmrises from one’s writing as smoke rises from a pipe-bowl, or acloud rises from a hill-top, not knowing whither it is going. Thebest style is that of “sailing clouds and flowing water,” like theprose of Su Tungp’o.

Style is a compound of language, thought and personality.Some styles are made exclusively of language.

Very rarely does one find clear thoughts clothed in unclearlanguage. Much more often does one find unclear thoughtsexpressed clearly. Such a style is clearly unclear.

Clear thoughts expressed in unclear language is the style ofa confirmed bachelor. He never has to explain anything to awife. E.g., Immanuel Kant. Even Samuel Buder often gets soquizzical.

A man’s style is always colored by his “literary lover.” Hegrows to be like him more and more in ways of thinking andmethods of expression. That is the only way a style can becultivated by a beginner. In later life, one finds one’s own styleby finding one’s own self.

One never learns anything from a book when he hates theauthor. Would that school teachers would bear this fact inmind!













A man’s character is partly born, and so is his style. Theother part is just contamination.

A man without a favorite author is a lost soul. He remainsan unimpregnated ovum, an unfertilized pistil. One’s favoriteauthor or literary lover is pollen for his soul.

A favorite author exists in the world for every man, only hehasn’t taken the trouble to find him.

A book is like a picture of life or of a city. There are readerswho look at pictures of New York or Pans, but never see NewYork or Pans itself. The wise man reads both books and lifeitself. The universe is one big book, and life is one big school.

A good reader turns an author inside out, like a beggarturning his coat inside out in search of fleas.

Some authors provoke their readers constantly and pleasantlylike a beggar’s coat full of fleas. An itch is a great thing.

The best way of studying any subject is to begin by readingbooks taking an unfavorable pomt of view with regard to it. Inthat way one is sure of accepting no humbug. After havingread an author unfavorable to the subject, he is better preparedto read more favorable authors. That is how a critical mind canbe developed.

A writer always has an instinctive interest in words as such.Every word has a life and a personality, usually not recordedby a dictionary, except one like the Concise or Poc\et OxfordDictionary.

A good dictionary is always readable, like the P. O. D.

There are two mines of language, a new one and an old one.The old mine is m the books, and the new one is in thelanguage of common people. Second-rate artists will dig in theold mines, but only first-rate artists can get something out ofthe new mine. Ores from the old mine are already smelted, butthose from the new mine are not.

Wang Ch’ung (A. D. 27-c. 100) distinguished between “spe-cialists” and “scholars,” and again between “writers” and“thinkers.” I think a specialist graduates into a scholar when hisknowledge broadens, and a writer graduates into a thinkerwhen his wisdom deepens.

A “scholar’s” writing consists of borrowings from otherscholars, and the more authorities and sources he quotes, themore of a “scholar” he appears. A thinker’s writing consists ofborrowings from ideas in his own intestines, and the greater













thinker a man is, the more he depends on his own intestinaljuice.

A scholar is like a raven feeding its young that spits outwhat it has eaten from the mouth. A thinker is like a silkwormwhich gives us not mulberry leaves, but silk.

There is a period of gestation of ideas before writing, likethe period of gestation of an embryo in its mother’s wombbefore birth. When one’s favorite author has kindled the sparkin one’s soul, and set up a current of live ideas in him, that isthe “impregnation.” When a man rushes into print before hisideas go through this period of gestation, that is diarrhoea,mistaken for birth pains. When a writer sells his conscience andwrites things against his convictions, that is artificial abortion,and the embryo is always stillborn. When a writer feels violentconvulsions like an electric storm in his head, and he doesn’tfeel happy until he gets the ideas out of his system and putsthem down on paper and feels an immense relief, that isliterary birth. Hence a writer feels a maternal affection towardhis literary product as a mother feels toward her baby. Hence awriting is always better when it is one’s own, and a woman isalways lovelier when she is somebody else’s wife.

The pen grows sharper with practice like a cobbler’s awl,gradually acquiring the sharpness of an embroidery needle. Butone’s ideas grow more and more rounded, like the views onesees when mounting from a lower to a higher peak.

When a writer hates a person and is thinking of takingup his pen to write a bitter invective against him, but has notyet seen his good side, he should lay down the pen again,because he is not yet qualified to write a bitter invectiveagainst the person.

(d) The School of Self-Expression

The so-called “School of Hstngling” started by the threeYuan brothers 4 at the end of the sixteenth century, or the so-called “Kungan School” (Kungaa being the native district ofthe brothers) is a school of self-expression. Hsmg means one’s“personal nature,” and ling means one’s “soul” or “vital spirit.”

Writing is but the expression of one’s own nature or charac-

4 Yuan Hungtao (usually known as Yuan Chunglang), the second brother, isconsidered the leader o£ the school.













ter and the play of his vital spirit. The so-called “divine af-flatus” is but the flow of this vital spirit, and is actually causedby an overflow of hormones m the blood.

In looking at an old master or reading an ancient author,we are but watching the flow of his vital spirit. Sometimeswhen this flow of energy runs dry or one’s spirits are low, eventhe writing of the best calligraphist or writer lacks spirit orvitality.

This “divine afflatus” comes in the morning when one hashad a good sleep with sweet dreams and wakes up by himself.Then after his cup of morning tea, he reads the papers andfinds no disturbing news and slowly walks into his study andsits before a bright window and a clean desk, while outsidethere is a pleasant sun and a gentle breeze. At this moment, hecan write good essays, good poems, good letters, paint goodpaintings and write good inscriptions on them.

The thing called “self” or “personality” consists of a bundleof limbs, muscles, nerves, reason, sentiments, culture, under-standing, experience, and prejudices. It is pardy nature andpardy culture, pardy born and pardy cultivated. One’s nature isdetermined at the time of his birth, or even before it. Some arenaturally hard-hearted and mean; others are naturally frankand straightforward and chivalrous and big-hearted; and againothers are naturally soft and weak in character, or given over toworries. Such things are in one’s “marrow bones” and the bestteacher or wisest parent cannot change one’s type of personality.Again other qualities are acquired after birth through educationand experience, but insofar as one’s thoughts and ideas and im-pressions come from the most diverse sources and differentstreams of influence at different periods of his life, his ideas,prejudices and points of view present a most bewildering in-consistency. One loves dogs and is afraid of cats, while anotherloves cats and is afraid of dogs. Hence the study of types of hu-man personality is the most complicated of all sciences. -

The School of Self-Expression demands that we expfess inwriting only our own thoughts and feelings, our genuine loves,genuine hatreds, genuine fears and genuine hobbies. These willbe expressed without any attempt to hide the bad from thegood, without fear of being ridiculed by the world, and withoutfear of contradicting the ancient sages or contemporary authori-ties.













39i

Writers of the School of Self-Expression like a writer’s mostcharacteristic paragraph in an essay, his most characteristic sen-tence m a paragraph, and his most characteristic expression in asentence. In describing or narrating a scene, a sentiment or anevent, he deals with the scene that he himself sees, the sentimentthat he himself feels and the event as he himself understands it.What conforms to this rule is literature and what does not con-form to it is not literature.

The girl Lin Taiyii in Red Chamber Dream belonged alsoto the School of Self-Expression when she said, “When a poethas a good line, never mind whether the musical tones of wordsfall in with the established pattern or not.”

In its love for genuine feelings, the School of Self-Expressionhas a natural contempt for decorativeness of style. Hence it al-ways stands for the pure and mild flavor in writing. It acceptsthe dictum of Mencius that “the sole goal of writing is express-iveness.”

Literary beauty is only expressiveness.

The dangers of this school are that a writer’s style may de-generate into plainness (Yuan Chunglang), or he may developeccentricity of ideas (Chin Shengt’an), or his ideas may differviolendy from those of established authorities (Li Chowu). Thatis why the School of Self-Expression was so hated by the Con-fucian critics. But as a matter of fact, it is these original writerswho saved Chinese thought and literature from absolute uni-formity and death. They are bound to come into their own inthe next few decades.

Chinese orthodox literature expressly aimed at expressingthe minds of the sages and not the minds of the authors andwas therefore dead; the hsingltng school of literature aims atexpressing the minds of the authors and not the minds of thesages, and is therefore alive.

There is a sense of dignity and independence in writers ofthis school which prevents them from gomg out of their way tosay things to shock people. If Confucius and Mencius happento agree with them and their conscience approves, they will notgo out of their way to disagree with the Sages; but if their con-science disapproves, they will not give Confucius and Menciusthe right of way. They can be neither bribed with gold northreatened with ostracism*













Genuine literature is but a sense of wonder at the universeand at human life.

He who keeps his vision sane and clear will have always thissense of wonder, and therefore has no need to distort the truthin order to make it seem wonderful. The ideas and points ofview of writers of this school always seem so new and strangeonly because readers are so used to the distorted vision.

A writer’s weaknesses are what endear him to a hsinglingcritic. All writers of the hsingling school are against imitationof the ancients or the moderns and against a literary techniqueof rules. The Yuan brothers believed in “letting one’s mouthand wrist go, resulting naturally in good form” and held that“the important thing in literature is genuineness.” Li Liweng be%lieved that “the important thing in literature is charm andinterest.” Yuan Tsets’ai believed that “there is no technique inwriting.” An early Sung writer, Huang Shanku, believed that“the lines and form of writing come quite accidentally, like theholes m wood eaten by insects.”

(e) The Familiar Style

A writer in the familiar style speaks in an unbuttoned mood.He completely exposes his weaknesses, and is therefore dis-arming.

The relationship between writer and reader should not beone between an austere school master and his pupils, but onebetween familiar friends. Only in this way can warmth be gen-erated.

He who is afraid to use an “I” in his writing will nevermake a good writer.

I love a liar more than a speaker of truth, and an indiscreetliar more than a discreet one. His indiscretions are a sign of hislove for his readers.

I trust an indiscreet fool and suspect a lawyer.

The indiscreet fool is a nation’s best diplomat. He winspeople’s hearts.

My idea of a good magazine is a fortnightly, where we bringa group of good talkers together in a small room once in a fort-night and let them chat together. The readers listen to theirchats, which last just about two hours. It is like having a goodevening chat, and after that the reader goes to bed, and next













393

morning when he gets up to attend to his duties as a bank clerkor accountant or a school principal posting notices to the stu-dents, he feels that the flavor of last night’s chat still lingersaround his cheeks.

There are restaurants for giving grand dinners in a hall withgold-framed mirrors, and there are small restaurants designedfor a little drink. All I want is to bring together two or three in-timate friends and have a little drink, and not go to the dinnersof rich and important people. But the pleasure we have in asmall restaurant, eating and drinking and chatting and teasingeach other and overturning cups and spilling wine on dresses issomething which people at the grand dinners don’t understandand cannot even “miss.”

There are rich men’s gardens and mansions, but there arealso little lodges in the mountains. Although sometimes thesemountain lodges are furnished with taste and refinement, theatmosphere is quite different from the rich men’s mansionswith vermillion gates and green windows and a platoon ofservants and maids standing around. When one enters the door,he does not hear the barking of faithful dogs and he does notsee the face of snobbish butlers and gatekeepers, and when heleaves, he doesn’t see a pair of “unchaste stone lions” outside itsgate. The situation is perfectly described by a writer of the sev-enteenth century: “It is as if Chou, Ch’eng, Chang and Chu 5are sitting together and bowing to each other in the Hall ofFuhsi, and suddenly there come Su Tungp’o and Tungfang Suwho break into the room half naked and without shoes, andthey begin to clap their hands and joke with one another. Theonlookers will probably stare in amazement, but these gentle-men look at each other in silent understanding.”

(f) What is Beauty?

The thing called beauty in literature and beauty in thingsdepends so much on change and movement and is based on life.What lives always has change and movement, and what haschange and movement naturally has beauty. How can there beset rules for literature or writing, when we see that mountaincliffs and ravines and streams possess a beauty of waywardnessand ruggedness far above that of canals, and yet they were

5 Sung doctrinaires.













)4 THE ENJOYMENT OE CUEJLUKE

formed without the calculations of an architect? The constel-lations of stars are the wen or literature of the skies, and thefamous mountains and great rivers are the wen or literature ofthe earth. The wind blows and the clouds change and we havethe pattern of a brocade; the frost comes and leaves fall andwe have the color of autumn. Now do the stars moving aroundtheir orbits in the firmament ever think of their appreciationby men on earth? And yet the Heavenly Dog and the Cow-herd are perceived by us by an accident. The crust of the earthshrinks and stretches and throws up mountains and forms deepseas. Did the earth consciously create the Five Sacred Moun-tains for us to worship? And yet the T’aihua and the K’uen-luen Mountains dash along with, their magnificent rhythm andthe Jade Maiden and the Fairy Boy stand around us on awe-inspiring peaks, apparendy for our enjoyment. These are butfree and easy strokes of the Creator, the great art master. Canclouds, which sail forth from the hill-tops and meet the lashingof furious mountain winds, have time to think of their petti-coats and scarves for us to look at? And yet they arrange them-selves, now like the scales of fish, now like the pattern of bro-cade, and now like racing dogs and roaring lions and dancingphoenixes and gamboling unicorns, like a literary masterpiece.Can autumn trees that are feelmg the pinch of heat and coldand the devastation of frost, and that are busily occupied in slow-ing down their breath and conserving their energy, have time topaint and powder themselves for the traveller on the ancienthighway to look at? And yet they seem so cool and pure andsad and forlorn, and far superior to the paintings of Wang Weiand Mi Fei.

And so every living thing in the universe has its literarybeauty. The beauty of a dried-up vine is greater than the calli-graphy of Wang Hsichih, and die austerity of an overhangingcliff is more imposing than the stone inscriptions on ChangMenglung’s tomb. Therefore we know that the wen or literarybeauty of things arises from their nature, and those that fulfilltheir nature clothe themselves in wen or beautiful lines. There-fore wen, or beauty of line and form, is intrinsic and not ex-trinsic. The horse’s hoofs are designed for a quick gallop, thetiger’s daws are designed for pouncing on its prey; the stork’slegs are designed for wading across swamps, and the bear’spaws are designed for walking on ice. Does the horse, the tiger,













THE ART OF WRITING

395

the stork or the bear ever think of its beauty of form and pro-portions? All it tries to do is function in life and adopt a properposture for movement. But from our point of view, we see thehorse’s hoofs, the tiger’s daws, the stork’s legs and the bear’spaws have a striking beauty, either in their fullness of contourand suggestion of power, or in their slenderness and strengthof line, or in their dearness of oudine, or in the ruggedness oftheir joints. Again the dephant’s paws are like the lishu styleof writing, the lion’s mane is like the feipo, fighting snakeswrite wonderful wriggling ts’aoshu (“grass script”), and float-ing dragons write chuanshu (“seal characters”), the cow’s legsresemble pafen (comparativdy stout and symmetrical writing),and the deer resembles hsiaoJ^ai (degant “small script”). Theirbeauty comes from thdr posture or movement, and their bodilyshapes are the result of their bodily functions, and this is alsothe secret of beauty in writing. When the shih or posture ofmovement requires it, it may not be repressed, and when theposture or movement does not require it, it must stop. Hencea literary masterpiece is like a stretch of nature itsdf, wdl-formed in its formlessness, and its charm and beauty come byaccident. For this thing we call shih is the beauty of move-ment, and not the beauty of static proportions. Everything thatlives and moves has its shih and therefore has its beauty, force,and wen, or beauty of form and line.













Chapter ThirteenRELATIONSHIP TO GOD

L The Restoration of Religion

SO many people presume to know God and what God approvesand God disapproves that it is impossible to take up this subjectwithout opening oneself to attack as sacrilegious by some and asa prophet by others. We human creatures who individually are lessthan a billionth part of the earth’s crust, which is less than a bil-lionth part of the great universe, presume to know God!

Yet no philosophy of life is complete, no conception of man’sspiritual life is adequate, unless we bring ourselves into a satis-factory and harmonious relation with the life of the universe aroundus. Man is important enough; he is the most important topic of ourstudies: that i the essence of humanism. Yet man lives in a mag-nificent universe, quite as wonderful as the man himself, and hewho ignores the greater world around him, its origin and its destiny,cannot be said to have a truly satisfying life.

The trouble with orthodox religion is that, in its process of his-torical development, it got mixed up with a number of things strictlyoutside religion’s moral realm—physics, geology, astronomy, crimi-nology, the conception of sex and woman. If it had confined itselfto the realm of the moral conscience, the work of re-orientationwould not be so enormous today. It is easier to destroy a pet notionof “Heaven” and “Hell” than to destroy the notion of God.

On the other hand, science opens up to the modern Christian anewer and deeper sense of the mystery of the universe and a newconception of matter as a convertible term with energy, and as forGod Himself, in the words of Sir James Jeans, “The universe seemsto be nearer to a great thought than to a great machine.” Mathe-matical calculation itself proves the existence of the mathematicallyincalculable. Religion will have to retreat and instead of saying somany things in the realm of natural sciences as it used to do, simplyacknowledge that they are none of religion’s business; much less

39<5













397

should it allow the validity of spiritual experience to depend ontotally irrelevant topics, like whether the age of man is 4,000 oddyears or a million, or whether the earth is flat, or round, or shapedlike a collapsible tea-table, or borne aloft by Hindu elephants orChinese turtles. Religion should, and will, confine itself to the moralrealm, the realm of the moral conscience, which has a dignity of itsown comparable in every sense to the study of flowers, the fishesand the stars. St. Paul performed the first surgical operation uponJudaism and by separating cuisine (eating hoofed animals) fromreligion, immensely benefited it. Religion stands to gain immenselyby being separated not only from cuisine, but also from geologyand comparative anatomy. Religion must cease to be a dabbler inastronomy and geology and a preserver of ancient folkways. Letreligion respectfully keep its mouth shut when teachers of biologyare talking, and it will seem infinitely less silly and gain immeasur-ably in the respect of mankind. ' * -

Such religion as there can be in modern life, every individualwill have to salvage from the churches for himself. There is alwaysa possibility of surrendering ourselves to the Great Spirit in an at-mosphere of ritual and worship as one kneels praying without wordsand looking at the stained-glass windows, in spite of all that onemay think of the theological dogmas. In this sense, worship becomesa true aesthetic experience, an aesthetic experience that is one’s own,very similar in fact to the experience of viewing a sun setting behindan oudine of trees on hills. For that man, religion is a final fact ofconsciousness, for it will be an aesthetic experience very much akinto poetry.

But what contempt he must have for the churches, as they areat present. For the God that he worships will not be one that canbe beseeched for daily small presents. He will not command thewind to blow north when he sails north, and command the wind toblow south when he sails south. To thank God for a good wind issheer impudence, and selfishness also, for it implies that God doesnot love the people sailing south when he, the important individual,is sailing north. It will be a communion of spirits without one party













398

trying to beg a favor of the other. He will not be able to compre-hend the meaning of the churches as they are. He will wonder atthe strange metamorphosis that religion has gone through. He willbe puzzled when he tries to define religions in their present forms.Is religion a glorification of the status quo with mystic emotion? Oris it certain moral truths so mystified and decorated and camou-flaged as to make it possible for a priestcraft to make a living?Doesn’t revelation stand in the same relation to religion as <ca secretpatented process” stands in relation to certain advertised nostrums?Or is religion a juggling with the invisible and the unknowablebecause the invisible and the unknowable lend themselves so con-vemendy to juggling? Is faith to be based on knowledge, or doesfaith only begin where knowledge ends? Or is religioti a baseballthat Sister Aimee McPherson can hit with a baseball bat right intoan audience—something that Joe can catch and “get” in the waythat he catches a baseball? Or is religion the preservation of Aryan,Nordic blood, or is it merely opposition to divorce and birth controland calling every social reformer a “Red” and a “Communist?”Did Christ really have to receive Tolstoy in his arms in a blazingsnowstorm after he was excommunicated from the Greek OrthodoxChurch ? Or is Jesus going to stand outside Bishop Manning’s cathe-dral window' and beckon to the rich men’s children in their pewsand repeat His gende request, “Suffer litde children to comeunto me?”

So we are left with the uncomfortable and yet, for me, strangelysatisfying feeling that what religion is left in our lives will be a verymuch more simplified feeling of reverence for the beauty and gran-deur and mystery of life, with its responsibilities, but will bedeprived of the good old, glad certainties and accretions whichtheology has accumulated and laid over its surface. Religion in thisform is simple and, for many modern men, sufficient. The spiritualtheocracy of the Middle Ages is definitely receding and as for per-sonal immortality, which is the second greatest reason for the appealof religion, many men today are quite content to be justMead whenthey die.













THE RESTORATION OF RELIGION 399

Our preoccupation with immortality has something pathologicalabout it. That man desires immortality is understandable, but wereit not for the influence of the Christian religion, it should never haveassumed such a disproportionately large share of our attention. In-stead of being a fine reflection, a noble fancy, lying in the poeticrealm between fiction and fact, it has become a deadly earnest mat-ter, and in the case of monks, the thought of death, or life after it,has become the main occupation of this life. As a matter of fact,most people on the other side of fifty, whether pagans or Christians,are not afraid of death, which is the reason why they can’t be scaredby, and are thinking less of, Heaven and Hell. We find them veryoften chattering glibly about their epitaphs and tomb designs andthe comparative merits of cremation. By that I do not mean onlythose who are sure that they are going to heaven, but also manywho take the realistic view of the situation that when they die, lifeis extinguished like light from a candle. Many of the finest mindsof today have expressed their disbelief in personal immortality andare quite unconcerned about it—H. G. Wells, Albert Einstein, SirArthur Keith and a host of others—but I do not think it requiresfirst-class minds to conquer this fear of death.

Many people have substituted for this personal immortality, im-mortality of other kinds, much more convincing—the immortalityof the race, and the immortality of work and influence. It is suf-ficient that when we die, the work we leave behind us continues toinfluence others and play a part, however small, in the life of thecommunity in which we live. We can pluck the flower and throw'its petals to the ground, and yet its subde fragrance remains in theair. It is a better, more reasonable and more unselfish kind of im-mortality. In this very real sense, we may say that Louis Pasteur,Luther Burbank and Thomas Edison are still living among us.What if their bodies are dead, since 'body” is nothing but an ab-stract generalization for a constantly changing combination ofchemical constituents! Man begins to see his own life as a drop inan ever flowing river and is glad to contribute his part to the great













RELATIONSHIP TO GOD

400

stream of life. If he were only a little less selfish, he should be quitecontented with that.

II. Why I Am a Pagan

Religion is always an individual, personal thing. Every personmust work out his own views of religion, and if he is sincere, Godwill not blame him, however it turns out. Every man’s religious ex-perience is valid for himself, for, as I have said, it is not somethingthat can be argued about. But the story of an honest soul strugglingwith religious problems, told in a sincere manner, will always be ofbenefit to other people. That is why, in speaking about religion, Imust get away from generalities, and tell my personal story.

I am a pagan. The statement may be taken to imply a revoltagainst Christianity; and yet revolt seems a harsh word and doesnot correctly describe the state of mind of a man who has passedthrough a very gradual evolution, step by step, away from Chris-tianity, during which he clung desperately, with love and piety,to a series of tenets which against his will were slipping away fromhim. Because there was never any hatred, therefore, it is impossibleto speak of a rebellion.

As I was born in a pastor’s family and at one time prepared forthe Christian ministry, my natural emotions were on the side ofreligion during the entire struggle rather than against it. In thisconflict of emotions and understanding, I gradually arrived at a posi-tion where I had, for instance, definitely renounced the doctrine ofredemption, a position which could most simply be described asthat of a pagan. It was, and still is, a condition of belief concerninglife and the universe in which I feel natural and at ease, withouthaving to be at war with myself. The process came as naturally asthe weaning of a child or the dropping of a ripe apple on theground; and when the time came for the apple to drop, I would notinterfere with its dropping. In Taoistic phraseology, this is but tolive in the Tao, and in Western phraseology it is but being sincerewith oneself and with the universe, according to one’s lights. I be-













Iieve no one can be natural and happy unless he is intellectuallysincere with himself, and to be natural is to be in heaven. To me,being a pagan is just being natural.

“To be a pagan” is no more than a phrase, like “to be a Christian.”It is no more than a negative statement, for to the average reader,to be a pagan means only that one is not a Christian; and, since“being a Christian” is a very broad and ambiguous term, the mean-ing of “not being a Christian” is equally ill-defined. It is all theworse when one defines a pagan as one who does not believe in re-ligion or in God, for we have yet to define what is meant by “God”or by the “religious attitude toward life ” Great pagans have alwayshad a deeply reverent attitude toward nature. We shall thereforehave to take the word in its conventional sense and mean by itsimply a man who does not go to church (except for an aestheticinspiration, of which I am still capable), does not belong to theChristian fold, and does not accept its usual, orthodox tenets.

On the positive side, a Chinese pagan, the only kind of which Ican speak with any feeling of intimacy, is one who starts out withthis earthly life as all we can or need to bother about, wishes tolive intently and happily as long as his life lasts, often has a senseof the poignant sadness of this life and faces it cheerily, has a keenappreciation of the beautiful and the good in human life whereverhe finds them, and regards doing good as its own satisfactory re-ward. I admit, however, he feels a slight pity or contempt for the“religious” man who does gcod in order to get to heaven and who,by implication, would not do good if he were not lured by heavenor threatened with hell. If this statement is correct, I believe thereare a great many more pagans in this country than are themselvesaware of it. The modern liberal Christian and the pagan are reallyclose, differing only when they start out to tal\ about God.

I think I know the depths of religious experience, for I believeone can have this experience without being a great theologian likeCardinal Newman—otherwise Christianity would not be worthhaving or must already have been horribly misinterpreted. As I lookat it at present, the difference in spiritual life between a Christian













402 relationship to god

believer and a pagan is simply this: the Christian believer lives in aworld governed and watched over by God, to whom he has a con-stant personal relationship, and therefore in a world presided overby a kindly father; his conduct is also often uplifted to a level conso-nant with this consciousness of being a child of God, no doubt alevel which is difficult for a human mortal to maintain consistentlyat all periods of his life or of the week or even of the day; his actuallife varies between living on the human and the truly religiouslevels.

On the other hand, the pagan lives in this world like an orphan,without the benefit of that consoling feeling that there is alwayssome one in heaven who cares and who will, when that spiritualrelationship called prayer is established, attend to his private per-sonal welfare. It is no doubt a less cheery world; but there is thebenefit and dignity of being an orphan who by necessity haslearned to be independent, to take care of himself, and to be moremature, as all orphans are. It was this feeling rather than any in-tellectual belief—this feeling of dropping into a world without thelove of God—that really scared me till the very last moment of myconversion to paganism; I felt, like many born Christians, that ifa personal God did not exist the bottom would be knocked out ofthis universe.

And yet a pagan can come to the point where he looks on thatperhaps warmer and cheerier world as at the same time a morechildish, I am tempted to say a more adolescent, world; useful andworkable, if one keep the illusion unspoiled, but no more and noless justifiable than a truly Buddhist way of life; also a morebeautifully colored world but consequently less solidly true andtherefore of less worth. For me personally, the suspicion that any-thing is colored or not solidily true is fatal. There is a price onemust be willing to pay for truth; whatever the consequences, let ushave it. This position is comparable to and psychologically the sameas that of a murderer: if one has committed a murder, the best thinghe can do next is to confess it. That is why I say it takes a littlecourage to become a pagan. But, after one has accepted the worst,

one is also without fear. Peace of mind is that mental condition inwhich you have accepted the worst. (Here I see for myself theinfluence of Buddhist or Taoist thought.)

Or I might put the difference between a Christian and a paganworld like this: the pagan in me renounced Christianity out ofboth pride and humility, emotional pride and intellectual humility,but perhaps on the whole less out of pride than of humility. Outof emotional pride because I hated the idea that there should be anyother reason for our behaving as nice, decent men and women thanthe simple fact that we are human beings; theoretically and if youwant to go in for classifications, classify this as a typically humanistthought. But more out of humility, of intellectual humility, simplybecause I can no longer, with our astronomical knowledge, believethat an individual human being is so terribly important in the eyesof that Great Creator, living as the individual does, an infinitesimalspeck on this earth, which is an infinitesimal speck of the solarsystem, which is again an infinitesimal speck of the universe of solarsystems. The audacity of man and his presumptuous arrogance arewhat stagger me. What right have we to conceive of the characterof a supreme being, of whose work we can see only a millionth part,and to postulate about his attributes?

The importance of the human individual is undoubtedly one ofthe basic tenets of Christianity, But let us see what ridiculous arro-gance that leads to in the usual practice of Christian daily life.

Four days before my mother’s funeral, there was a pouring rain,and if it continued, as was usual in July in Changchow, the citywould be flooded, and there could be no funeral. As most of uscame from Shanghai, the delay would have meant some inconven-ience. One of my relatives—a rather extreme but not an unusualexample of a Christian believer in China—told me that she hadfaith in God, Who would always provide for His children. Sheprayed, and the rain stopped, apparently in order that a tiny familyof Christians might have their funeral without delay. But the im-plied idea that, but for us, God would willingly subject the tens ofthousands of Changchow inhabitants to a devastating flood, as was













4°4

often the case, or that He did not stop the rain because of thembut because of us who wanted to have a conveniently dry funeral,srtuck me as an unbelievable type of selfishness. I cannot imagineGod providing for such selfish children.

There was also a Christian pastor who wrote the story of his life,attesting to many evidences of the hand of God in his life, for thepurpose of glorifying God. One of the evidences adduced was that,when he had got together 600 silver dollars to buy his passage toAmerica, God lowered the rate of exchange on the day this so veryimportant individual was to buy his passage. The difference in therate of exchange for 600 silver dollars could have been at most tenor twenty dollars, and God was willing to rock the bourses in Paris,London, and New York in order that this curious child of Hismight save ten or twenty dollars. Let us remind ourselves that thisway of glorifying God is not at all unusual in any part of Christen-dom.

Oh, the impudence and conceit of man, whose span of life isbut threescore and ten! Mankind as an aggregate may have a sig-nificant history, but man as an individual, in the words of SuTungp’o, is no more than a grain of millet in an ocean or an insectfuyu born in the morning and dying at eve, as compared with theuniverse. The Christian will not be humble. He will not be satis-fied with the aggregate immortality of his great stream of life, ofwhich he is already a part, flowing on to eternity, like a mightystream which empties into the great sea and changes and yet doesnot change. The clay vessel will ask of the potter, “Why hast thoucast me into this shape and why hast thou made me so brittle?”The clay vessel is not satisfied that it can leave little vessels of itsown kind when it cracks up. Man is not satisfied that he has receivedthis marvelous body, this almost divine body. He wants to live for-ever! And he will not let God alone. He must say his prayers andhe must pray daily for small personal gifts from the Source of AllThings. Why can’t he let God alone?

There was once a Chinese scholar who did not believe in Bud-













405

dhism, and his mother who did. She was devout and would acquiremerit for herself by mumbling, “Namu omitabha!” a thousandtimes day and night. But every time she started to call Buddha’sname, her son would call, “Mamma1” The mother became annoyed.“Well,” said the son, “don’t you think Buddha would be equallyannoyed, if he could hear you?”1

My father and mother were devout Christians. To hear myfather conduct the evening family prayers was enough. And I wasa sensitively religious child. As a pastor’s son I received the facilitiesof missionary education, profited from its benefits, and sufferedfrom its weaknesses. For its benefits I was always grateful and itsweaknesses I turned into my strength. For according to Chinesephilosophy there are no such things in life as good and bad luck.

I was forbidden to attend Chinese theaters, never allowed to listento Chinese minstrel singers, and entirely cut apart from the greatChinese folk tradition and mythology. When I entered a mission-ary college, the little foundation in classical Chinese given me by myfather was completely neglected. Perhaps it was just as well—so thatlater, after a completely Westernized education, I could go back toit with the freshness and vigorous delight of a child of the West inan Eastern wonderland. The complete substitution of the fountainpen for the writing brush during my college and adolescent periodwas the greatest luck I ever had and preserved for me the freshnessof the Oriental mental world unspoiled, until I should become readyfor it. If Vesuvius had not covered up Pompeii, Pompeii wouldnot be so well preserved, and the imprints of carriage wheels onher stone pavements would not be so clearly marked today. Themissionary college education was my Vesuvius.

Thinking was always dangerous. More than that, thinking wasalways allied with the deviL The conflict during the collegiate-adolescent period, which, as usual, was my most religious period,

1In the prayer for sickness, it is evidently unreasonable to pray a dozen or ahundred times, as unreasonable as for a child to beg a dozen or a hundred timesto be taken to a movie theater. To ask once is enough, and a promise is a promise,if the father is a good father. The repetitious requests arc a botheration.













between a Heart which felt the beauty of the Christian life and ahead which had a tendency to reason everything away, was takingplace. Curiously enough, I can remember no moments of torment ordespair, of the kind that drove Tolstoy almost to suicide. At everystage, I felt myself a unified Christian, harmonious in my belief,only a little more liberal than the last, and accepting some fewerChristian doctrines. Anyway, I could always go back to the Ser-mon on the Mount. The poetry of a saying like “Consider the liliesof the field” was too good to be untrue. It was that and the con-sciousness of the inner Christian life that gave me strength.

But the doctrines were slipping away terribly. Superficial thingsfirst began to annoy me. The “resurrection of the flesh,” long dis-proved when the expected second coming of Christ in the firstcentury did not come off and the Apostles did not rise bodily fromtheir graves, was still there in the Apostles’ Creed. This was one ofthose things.

Then, enrolling in a theological class and initiated into the holyof holies, I learned that another article in the creed, the virgin birth,was open to question, different deans in American theologicalseminaries holding different views. It enraged me that Chinese be-lievers should be required to believe categorically in this articlebefore they could be baptized, while the theologians of the samechurch regarded it as an open question. It did not seem sincere andsomehow it did not seem right.

Further schooling in meaningless commentary scholarship as tothe whereabouts of the “water gate” and such minutiae completelyrelieved me of responsibility to take such theological studies seri-ously, and I made a poor showing in my grades. My professorsconsidered that I was not cut out for the Christian ministry, andthe bishop thought I might as well leave. They would not wastetheir instruction on me. Again this seems to me now a blessing indisguise. I doubt, if I had gone on with it and put on the clericalgarb, whether it would have been so easy for me to be honest withmyself later on. But this feeling of rebellion against the discrepancy













of the beliefs required of the theologian and of the average convertwas the nearest kind of feeling to what I may call a “revolt.”

By this time I had already arrived at the position that the Chris-tian theologians were the greatest enemies of the Christian religion.I could never get over two great contradictions. The first was thatthe theologians had made the entire structure of the Christianbelief hang upon the existence of an apple. If Adam had not eatenan apple, there would be no original sin, and, if there were nooriginal sin, there would be no need of redemption. That was plainto me, whatever the symbolic value of the apple might be. Thisseemed to me preposterously unfair to the teachings of Christ, whonever said a word about the original sin or the redemption. Anyway,from pursuing literary studies, I feel, like all modern Americans, noconsciousness of sin and simply do not believe in it. All I know isthat if God loves me only half as much as my mother does, he willnot send me to Hell. That is a final fact of my inner consciousness,and for no religion could I deny its truth.

Still more preposterous another proposition seemed to me. Thiswas the argument that, when Adam and Eve ate an apple duringtheir honeymoon, God was so angry that He condemned their pos-terity to suffer from generation to generation for that little offensebut that, when the same posterity murdered the same God’s onlySon, God was so delighted that He forgave them all. No matterhow people explain and argue, I cannot get over this simple un-truth. This was the last of the things that troubled me.

Still, even after my graduation, I was a zealous Christian andvoluntarily conducted a Sunday school at Tsing Hua, a non-Chris-tian college at Peking, to the dismay of many faculty members. TheChristmas meeting of the Sunday school was a torture to me, forhere I was passing on to the Chinese children the tale of heraldangels singing upon a midnight clear when I did not believe itmyself. Everything had been reasoned away, and only love andfear remained: a kind of clinging love for an all-wise God whichmade me feel happy and peaceful and suspect that I should not













408

have been so happy and peaceful without that reassuring love—andfear of entering into a world of orphans.

Finally my salvation came. “Why,” I reasoned with a colleague,“if there were no God, people would not do good and the worldwould go topsy-turvy.”

“Why?” replied my Confucian colleague. “We should lead adecent human life simply because we are decent human beings/’he said.

This appeal to the dignity of human life cut off my last tie toChristianity, and from then on I was a pagan.

It is all so clear to me now. The world of pagan belief is a simplerbelief. It postulates nothing, and is obliged to postulate nothing. Itseems to make the good life more immediately appealing by appeal-ing to the good life alone. It better justifies doing good by makingit unnecessary for doing good to justify itself. It does not en-courage men to do, for instance, a simple act of charity by draggingin a series of hypothetical postulates—sin, redemption, the cross,laying up treasure in heaven, mutual obligation among men onaccount of a third-party relationship in heaven—all so unneces-sarily complicated and roundabout, and none capable of direct proof.If one accepts the statement that doing good is its own justification,one cannot help regarding all theological baits to right living as re-dundant and tending to cloud the luster of a moral truth. Loveamong men should be a final, absolute fact. We should be able justto look at each other and love each other without being reminded ofa third party in heaven. Christianity seems to me to make moralityappear unnecessarily difficult and complicated and sin appear tempt-ing, natural, and desirable. Paganism, on the other hand, seemsalone to be able to rescue religion from theology and restore it to itsbeautiful simplicity of belief and dignity of feeling.

In fact, I seem to be able to see how many theological complica-tions arose in the first, second, and third centuries and turned thesimple truths of the Sermon on the Mount into a rigid, self-con-tained structure to support a priestcraft as an endowed institution.The reason was contained in the word revelation—the revelation of













WHY I AM A PAGAN 4°9

a special mystery or divine scheme given to a prophet and kept by anapostolic succession, which was found necessary in all religions,from Mohammedanism and Mormonism to the Living Buddha’sLamaism and Mrs. Eddy’s Christian Science, in order for each ofthem to handle exclusively a special, patented monopoly of salvation.All priestcraft lives on the common staple food of revelation. Thesimple truths of Christ’s teaching on the Mount must be adorned,and the lily He so marveled at must be gilded. Hence we have the“first Adam” and the “second Adam,” and so on and so forth.

But Pauline logic, which seemed so convincing and unanswerablein the early days of the Christian era, seems weak and unconvincingto the more subtle modern critical consciousness; and in this dis-crepancy between the rigorous Asiatic deductive logic and the morepliable, more subtle appreciation of truth of the modern man, liesthe weakness of the appeal to the Christian revelation or any revela-tion for the modern man. Therefore only by a return to paganismand renouncing the revelation can one return to primitive (and forme more satisfying) Christianity.

It is wrong therefore to speak of a pagan as an irreligious man:irreligious he is only as one who refuses to believe in any specialvariety of revelation. A pagan always believes in God but wouldnot like to say so, for fear of being misunderstood. All Chinesepagans believe in God, the most commonly met-with designation inChinese literature being the term chaowu, or the Creator of Things.The only difference is that the Chinese pagan is honest enough toleave the Creator of Things in a halo of mystery, toward whom hefeels a kind of awed piety and reverence. What is more, that feel-ing suffices for him. Of the beauty of this universe, the cleverartistry of the myriad things of this creation, the mystery of the stars,the grandeur of heaven, and the dignity of the human soul he isequally aware. But that again suffices for him. He accepts deathas he accepts pain and suffering and weighs them against the giftof life and the fresh country breeze and the clear mountain moonand he does not complain. He regards bending to the will of heaven













RELATIONSHIP TO GOD

410

as the truly religious and pious attitude and calls it “living in theTao.” If the Creator of Things wants him to die at seventy, hegladly dies at seventy. He also believes that “heaven’s way alwaysgoes round” and that there is no permanent injustice in this world.He does not ask for more.













Chapter Fourteen

The Art of Thinking

I. The Need of Humanized Thinking

THINKING is an art, and not a science. One of the greatest comtrasts between Chinese and Western scholarship is the fact that inthe West there is so much specialized knowledge, and so little hu-manized knowledge, while in China there is so much more concernwith the problems of living, while there are no specialized sciences.We see an invasion of scientific thinking into the proper realm ofhumanized knowledge in the West, characterized by high special-ization and its profuse use of scientific or semi-scientific terminology.I am speaking of “scientific” thinking in its everyday sense, and notof true scientific thinking, which cannot be divorced from commonsense on the one hand, and imagination on the other. In its every-day sense, this “scientific” thinking is strictly logical, objective,highly specialized and “atomic” in its method and vision. The con-trast in the two types of scholarship, Oriental and Occidental, ulti-mately goes back to the opposition between logic and common sense.Logic, deprived of common sense, becomes inhuman, and commonsense, deprived of logic, is incapable of penetrating into nature’smysteries.

What does one find as he goes through the field of Chinese litera-ture and philosophy? One finds there are no sciences, no extremetheories, no dogmas, and really no great divergent schools of phi-losophy. Common sense and the reasonable spirit have crushed outall theories and all dogmas. Like the poet Po Chiiyi, the Chinesescholar “utilized Confucianism to order his conduct, utilized Budd-hism to cleanse his mind, and then utilized history, paintings, moun-tains, rivers, wine, music and song to soothe his spirit.”1 He lived inthe world and yet was out of it.

China, therefore, becomes a land where no one is trying very hardto think and everyone is trying very hard to live. It becomes a land

1 From Po Chuyi's composition for his own tomb inscription.

4ii













412

where philosophy itself is a pretty simple and common sense affairthat can be as conveniently put in two lines of verse as in a heavyvolume. It becomes a land where there is no system of philosophy,broadly speaking, no logic, no metaphysics, no academic jargon;where there is much less academic dogmatism, less intellectual orpractical fanaticism, and fewer abstract terms and long words. Nosort of mechanistic rationalism is ever possible and there is a stronghatred of the idea of logical necessity. It becomes also a land wherethere are no lawyers in business life, as there are no logicians inphilosophy. In place of well thought out systems of philosophy, theyhave only an intimate feeling of life, and instead of a Kant or aHegel, they have only essayists, epigram writers and propounders ofBuddhist conundrums and Taoist parables.

The literature of China as a whole presents us with a desert ofshort poems and short essays, seemingly interminable for one whodoes not appreciate them, and yet as full of variety and inexhaustiblebeauty as a wild landscape itself. We have only essayists and letter-writers who try to put their feeling of life in a short note or anessay of three or five hundred words, usually much shorter than theschool composition of an American schoolboy. In these casual writ-ings, letters, diaries, literary notes and regular essays, one finds herea brief comment on the vicissitudes of fortune, there a record ofsome woman who committed suicide in a neighboring village, or ofan enjoyable spnng party, or a feast in snow, or boating on a moon-light night, or an evening spent in a temple with a thunderstormraging outside, generally including the remarks made during theconversation that made the occasion memorable. We find a host ofessayists who are at the same time poets, and poets who are at thesame time essayists, writing never more than five or seven hundredwords, in which a whole philosophy of life is really expressed by asingle line. We find writers of parables and epigrams and familyletters who make no attempt to coordinate their thoughts into arigid system. This has prevented the rise of schools and systems. Theintellect is always held in abeyance by the spirit of reasonableness,













and still more by the writer’s artistic sensibility. Actually the in-tellect is distrusted.

It is hardly necessary to point out that the logical faculty is avery powerful weapon of the human mind, making the conquestsof science possible. I am also aware that human progress in the Westis still essentially controlled by common sense and by the criticalspirit, which is greater than the logical spirit and which I thinkrepresents the highest form of thinking in the West. It is unneces-sary for me to admit that there is a very much better developedcritical spirit in the West than in China. In pointing out the weak-nesses of logical thinking, I am only referring to a particular de-ficiency in Western thought, and sometimes in Western politics also,<r.gv the Machtpohti\ of the Germans and the Japanese. Logic hasits charm also, and I regard the development of the detective storyas a most interesting product of the logical mind, a form of literaturewhich failed entirely to develop in China. But sheer preoccupationwith logical thinking has also its drawbacks.

The outstanding characteristic of Western scholarship is its spe-cialization and cutting up of knowledge into different departments.The over-development of logical thinking and specialization, withits technical phraseology, has brought about the curious fact of mod-ern civilization, that philosophy has been so far relegated to thebackground, far behind politics and economics, that the averageman can pass it by without a twinge of conscience. The feeling ofthe average man, even of the educated person, is that philosophy isa “subject” which he can best afford to go without. This is certainlya strange anomaly of modern culture, for philosophy, which shouldhe closest to men’s bosom and business, has become most remotefrom life. It was not so in the classical civilization of the Greeks andRomans, and it was not so in China, where the study of the wisdomof life formed the scholars’ chief occupation. Either the modern manis not interested in the problems of living, which are the proper sub-ject of philosophy, or we have gone a long way from the originalconception of philosophy. The scope of our knowledge has been sowidened, and we have so many “departments” of knowledge zeal*













414

ously guarded over by their respective specialists, that philosophy,instead of being the first of man’s studies, has left for it only thefield no one is willing to specialize in. Typical of the state of mod-ern education is the announcement of an American university that“the Department of Psychology has kindly thrown open the doorsof Psychology 4 to the students of Economics 3.” The professor ofEconomics 3 therefore commits the care of his students to the pro-fessor of Psychology 4 with his love and blessings, while as an ex-change of courtesy, he allows the students of Psychology 4 to treadin the sacred precincts of Economics 3 with a gesture of friendlyhospitality. Meanwhile, Philosophy, the King of Knowledge, is likethe Chinese Emperor in the times of the Warring Kingdoms, whoinstead of drawing tribute from the vassal states, found his authorityand domain daily diminishing, and retained the allegiance of only asmall population of very fine and loyal, but poorly fed subjects.

For we have now come to a stage of human culture in which wehave compartments of knowledge but not knowledge itself; special-ization, but no integration; specialists but no philosophers of humanwisdom. This over-specialization of knowledge is not very differentfrom the over-specialization in a Chinese Imperial kitchen. Onceduring the collapse of a dynasty, a rich Chinese official was able tosecure as his cook a maid who had escaped from the palace kitchen.Proud of her, he issued invitations for his friends to come and tastea dinner prepared by one he thought an Imperial cook. As the daywas approaching, he asked the maid to prepare a royal dinner. Themaid replied that she couldn’t prepare a dinner.

“What did you do, then?” asked the official.

“Oh, I helped make the patties for the dinner,” she replied.“Well, then, go ahead and make some nice patties for my guests.”To his consternation the maid announced: “Oh, no, I can’t makepatties. I specialized in chopping up the onions for the stuffing ofthe patties of the Imperial dinner.”

Some such condition obtains today in the field of human knowl-edge and academic scholarship. We have a biologist who knows abit of life and human nature; a psychiatrist who knows another bit













THE NEED OF HUMANIZED THINKING 415

of it; a geologist who knows mankind’s early history; an anthro-pologist who knows the mind of the savage man; an historian who,if he happens to be a genial mind, can teach us something of humanwisdom and human folly as reflected in mankind’s past history; apsychologist who often can help us to understand our behavior,but who as often as not tells us a piece of academic imbecility, suchas that Lewis Carroll was a sadist, or emerges from his laboratoryexperiments on chickens and announces that the effect of a loudnoise on chickens is that it makes their hearts jump. Some educa-tional psychologists always seem to me stupefying when they arewrong, and still more stupefying when they are right. But alongwith the process of specialization, there has not been the urgentlyneeded process of integration, the effort to integrate all these aspectsof knowledge and make them serve the supreme end, which is thewisdom of life. Perhaps we are ready for some integration of knowl-edge today, as is evidenced by the Institute of Human Relations atYale University and in the addresses at the Harvard Tercentenary.Unless, however, the Western scientists proceed about this task bya simpler and less logical way of thinking, that integration cannotbe achieved. Human wisdom cannot be merely the adding up ofspecialized knowledge or obtained by a study of statistical averages;it can be achieved only by insight, by the general prevalance of morecommon sense, more wit and more plain, but subtle, intuition.

There is clearly a distinction between logical thinking and reason-able thinking, which may be also expressed as the difference betweenacademic thinking and poetic thinking. Of academic thinking wehave a great deal, but of poetic thinking we find very little evidencein the modern world. Aristotle and Plato are strikingly modern, andthat is so, perhaps not because the Greeks resembled the moderns,but because they were stricdy the ancestors of modern thought. Inspite of his humanistic point of view and his Doctrine of the GoldenMean, Aristotle was strictly the grandfather of the modern text-book writers, being the first man to cut up knowledge into separatecompartments—from physics and botany to ethics and politics. Aswas quite inevitable, he was the first man also to start the imperti-













416

nent academic jargon incomprehensible to the common man, whichis being outdone by the American sociologists and psychologists o£today. And while Plato had real human insight, yet in a sense hewas responsible for the worship of ideas and abstractions as suchamong the Neo-Platonists, a tradition which, instead of being tem-pered with more insight, is so familiar among us today in writerswho talk about ideas and ideologies as if they had an independentexistence. Only modern psychology in very recent days is deprivingus of the watertight compartments of “reason,” “will” and'‘emotion” and helping to kill the “soul” which was such a realentity with the medieval theologians. We have killed the “soul,” butwe have created for ourselves a thousand odd social and politicalslogans (“revolutionary,” “counter-revolutionary,” “bourgeois,” “cap-italist-imperialist,” “escapist”) which tyrannize over our thoughts,and have created similar beings like the “class,” the “destiny” andthe “state,” and we proceed logically to transform the state into amonster to swallow up the individual.

It seems that a regenerated form of thinking, a more poetic think-ing, which can see life steadily and see it whole, is eminently desir-able. As the late James Harvey Robinson warns us: “Some carefulobservers express the quite honest conviction that unless thought beraised to a far higher plane than hitherto, some great set-back tocivilization is inevitable.” Professor Robinson wisely pointed outthat, “Conscientiousness and Insight seem suspicious of one another,and yet they might be friends.” Modern economists and psycholo-gists seem to me to have an overdose of conscientiousness and notenough of insight. This is a point which perhaps cannot be over-emphasized, the danger of applying logic to human affairs. But theforce and prestige of scientific thinking have been so great in themodern age, that in spite of all warnings, this species of academicthinking constantly encroaches upon the realm of philosophy, withthe jejune belief that the human mind can be studied like a sewer-age system and the waves of human thought measured like thewaves of radio. The consequences are mildly disturbing in oureveryday thinking, but disastrous in practical politics.













THE RETURN TO COMMON SENSE 417II. The Return to Common Sense

The Chinese hate the phrase ‘logical necessity” because there isno logical necessity in human affairs. The Chinese distrust of logicbegins with the distrust of words, proceeds with the abhorrence ofdefinitions and ends with instinctive hatred for all systems andtheories. For only words, definitions and systems have made schoolsof philosophy possible. The degeneration of philosophy began withthe preoccupation with words. A Chinese writer, Kung Tingan,said: “The Sage does not talk, the Talented Ones talk, and thestupid ones argue”—this in spite of the fact that Kung himself lovedvery much to argue!

For this is the sad story of philosophy: that philosophers belongedto the genus of the Talkers and not the Silent Ones. All philoso-phers love to hear dicir own voice. Even Laotse himself, who firsttaught us that the Creator (the Great Silent One) does not talk,nevertheless was persuaded to leave five thousand words to posteritybefore he retired outside the Hankukuan Pass to pass the remainderof his life in wise solitude and oblivion. More typical of the philoso-pher-talker genius was Confucius who visited “seventy-two king-doms” in order to get a hearing from their kings, or, better still,Socrates who went about the streets of Athens and stopped passers-by to ask them questions for the purpose of hearing himself givewise answers. The statement that the “Sage does not talk” is there-fore only a relative one. But still the difference exists between theSage and the Talented Ones, because the Sage talks about life, as heis directly aware of it; the Talented Ones talk about the Sage'swords and the stupid ones argue about the words of the TalentedOnes. In the Greek Sophists we have the pure type of Talkers whoare interested in the play and interplay of words as such. Philosophy,which was the love of wisdom, became the love of words, and inproportion as this Sophist trend grew, the divorce between philoso-phy and life became more and more complete. As time went on,the philosophers began to use more and more words and longerand longer sentences; epigrams of life gave place to sentences, sen-













418

tences to arguments, arguments to treatises, treatises to commen-taries, and commentaries to philological research; more and morewords were needed to define and classify the words they used andmore and more schools were needed to differ and secede from theschools already established; the process continued until the immedi-ate, intimate feeling or the awareness of living has been entirely lostsight of, and the layman has the perfect right to ask, “What are youtalking about?” Meanwhile, throughout the subsequent history ofthought, the few independent thinkers who have felt the directimpact of life itself—a Goethe, a Samuel Johnson, an Emerson, aWilliam James—have refused to speak in the jargon of the Talkersand always been intractably opposed to the spirit of classification.For they are the wise ones, who have kept for us the true meaningof philosophy, which is the wisdom of life. In most cases, they haveforsaken arguments and reverted to the epigram. When man haslost the ability to speak in epigrams, he writes paragraphs; whenhe is unable to express himself clearly in paragraphs, he develops anargument; and when he still fails to make his meaning clear in anargument, he writes a treatise.

Man’s love for words is his first step toward ignorance, and hislove for definitions the second. The more he analyzes, the more hehas need to define, and the more he defines, the more he aims atan impossible logical perfection, for the effort of aiming at logicalperfection is only a sign of ignorance. Since words are the materialof our thought, the effort at definition is entirely laudable, andSocrates started the mania for definitions in Europe. The dangeris that after being conscious of the words we define, we are furtherforced to define the defining words, so that in the end, besides thewords which define or express life itself, we have a class of wordswhich define other words, which then become the main preoccupa-tion of our philosophers. There is evidently a distinction betweenbusy words and idle words, words that do duty in our workadaylife and words that exist only in the philosophers’ seminary and alsoa distinction between the definitions of Socrates and Francis Bacon,and the definitions of our modern professors. Shakespeare, who













THE RETURN TO COMMON SENSE 419

had the most intimate feeling of life, certainly got along withouttrying to define anything, or rather because he did not try to defineanything, and for that reason, his words had a “body” which theother writers lacked, and his language was infused with that senseof human tragedy and grandeur that is often missing today. We canno more hold his words down to any one particular function thanwe can hold him down to any particular conception of woman.For it is in the nature of definitions that they tend to stifle ourthought and deprive it of that glowing, imaginative color character-istic of life itself.

But if words by necessity cut up our thoughts in the process ofexpression, the love of system is even more fatal to a keen aware-ness of life. A system is but a squint at truth, and the more logicallythat system is developed, the more horrible that mental squintbecomes. The human desire to see only one phase of truth whichwe happen to perceive, and to develop and elevate it into a perfectlogical system, is one reason why our philosophy is bound to growstranger to life. He who talks about truth injures it thereby; he whotries to prove it thereby maims and distorts it; he who gives it alabel and a school of thought kills it; and he who declares himself abeliever buries it. Therefore any truth which has been erected intoa system is thrice dead and buried. The dirge that they all sing attruth’s funeral is, “I am entirely right and you are entirely wrong,”It is entirely immaterial what truth they bury, but it is essential thatthey do the burying. For so truth suffers at the hands of its de-fenders, and all factions and all schools of philosophy, ancient andmodern, are occupied only in proving one point, that “I am entirelyright and you are entirely wrong.” The Germans, with their Grund-lich\eit, writing a heavy volume to prove a limited truth until theyhave turned it into an absurdity,2 are perhaps the worst offen-ders, but the same disease of thinking may be seen or noted moreor less in most Western thinkers, becoming Worse and worse asmore and more abstract they become.

2 A German writer devoted a whole thesis to proving that genius is due to eyestrain, Spenglar’s show of erudition 1$ splendid, but his reasoning childish and naive.













420

As a result o£ this dehumanized logic we have dehumanizedtruth. We have today a philosophy that has become stranger to lifeitself, that has almost half disclaimed any intention to teach us themeaning of life and the wisdom of living, a philosophy that has lostthat intimate feeling of life or awareness of living which we spokeof as the very essence of philosophy. It is that intimate feeling of lifewhich William James has called “the stuff of experience .” As timegoes on, I feel that the philosophy and logic of William James willbecome more and more devastating to the modern Western way ofthinking. Before we can humanize Western philosophy, we mustfirst humanize Western logic. We have to get back to a way ofthinking which is more impatient to be in touch with reality, withlife, and above all with human nature, than to be merely correct,logical and consistent. For the disease of thinking typified by Des-cartes’ famous discovery: “I thm\, therefore I exist” we have tosubstitute the more human and more sensible statement of WaltWhitman’s: “I am sufficient as I am.” Life or existence does nothave to go down on its knees and beg logic to prove that it exists orthat it is there.

William James spent his life trying to prove and defend the Chi'nese way of thinking, without knowing it. Only there is this differ-ence, that if William James had been a Chinese, he would not havewritten so many words to argue it out, but would have merelystated in an essay of three or five hundred words, or in one of hisleisurely diary notes, that he believed it because it is so. He wouldbe shy of the words themselves, for fear that the more words heused, the greater the chances for misunderstanding. But WilliamJames was a Chinese in his keen awareness of life and the varie-ties of human experience, in his rebellion against mechanistic ration-alism, his anxiety to keep thought constantly fluid, and hisimpatience with people who think they have discovered the oneall-important, “absolute” and universal truth and have enclosed it ina self-sufficient system. He was Chinese, too, in his insistence on theimportance of the artist’s sense of perceptual reality over and againstconceptual reality. The philosopher is a man who holds his sensibil-













421

ities at the highest point of focus and watches the flux of life, readyto be forever surprised by newer and stranger paradoxes, inconsist-encies, and inexplicable exceptions to the rule. In his refusal toaccept a system not because it is incorrect, but because it is a system*he plays havoc with all the Western schools of philosophy. Truly,as he says, the difference between the monistic conception and thepluralistic conception of the universe is a most pregnant distinctionin the history of philosophy. He has made it possible for philosophyto forget its beautiful air-castles and return to life itself.

Confucius said, “Truth may not depart from human nature; ifwhat is regarded as truth departs from human nature, it may notbe regarded as truth.” Again he says, in a witty line that might havedropped from James’s lips, “It is not truth that can make mengreat, but men that can make truth great.” No, the world is not asyllogism or an argument, it is a being; the universe does not talk,it lives; it does not argue, it merely gets there. In the words of agifted English writer: “Reason is but an item in the mystery; andbehind the proudest consciousness that ever reigned, reason andwonder blushed face to face. The inevitable stales, while doubt andhope are sisters. Not unfortunately, the universe is wild, game-flavored as a hawk’s wing. Nature is miracle all: the same returnsnot save to be different.” It seems what the Western logicians need isjust a little humility; their salvation lies in some one curing themof their Hegelian swelled-heads.

III. Be Reasonable

In contrast to logic, there is common sense, or still better, theSpirit of Reasonableness. I think of the Spirit of Reasonableness asthe highest and sanest ideal of human culture, and the reasonableman as the highest type of cultivated human being. No one can beperfect; he can only aim at being a likeable, reasonable being. Infact, I look forward to the time when the people of the world willbe informed with this reasonable spirit, both in their personal andtheir national affairs. Reasonable nations live in peace and reasonable













422

husbands and wives live in happiness. In the selection of husbandsfor my daughters, I shall have only one standard: is he a reasonableperson? We cannot imagine perfect husbands and wives who neverquarrel; we can only conceive of reasonable husbands and wiveswho quarrel reasonably and then patch up reasonably. Only in aworld of reasonable beings can we have peace and happiness. TheReasonable Age, if that should ever come about, will be the Age ofPeace. It will be the age in which the Spirit of Reasonableness pre-vails.

The Spirit of Reasonableness is the best thing that China has tooffer to the West. I do not mean that Chinese warlords are reason-able when they tax the people fifty years ahead; I mean only thatthe Spirit of Reasonableness is the essence and best side of Chinesecivilization. I had this discovery of mine accidentally confirmed bytwo Americans who had lived a long time in China. One, who hadlived in China for thirty years, said that the foundation of all Chi-nese social life is based on the word chiangh, or “talk reason.” In aChinese quarrel, the final clinching argument is, “Now is this rea-sonable?” and the worst and commonest condemnation is that aman “pu chianglF or “does not talk reason ” The man who admitsbeing “unreasonable” is already defeated in the dispute.

I have said in My Country and My People that: “For a Westerner,it is usually sufficient for a proposition to be logically sound. For aChinese it is not sufficient that a proposition be logically correct, butit must be at the same time in accord with human nature. In factto be "in accord with human nature/ to be chinch'ing (/. e.t to behuman), is a greater consideration than to be logical.” “The Chineseword for “reasonableness” is ch’ingli, which is composed of twoelements, ch’ing (jench’ing) 8 or human nature, and li (fienli) oreternal reason. Ch’ing represents the flexible, human element, while

8 Jench’ing is really an untranslatable word. Anything which helps to cementiocial affection or lubricate social friction is called jench'ing. Sending flowers andbirthday gifts is “to make jench'ing” and giving a friend’s nephew a job, or savinghim from the usual punishment for an offense, is to “present jench'ing* to the of-fender’s uncle. Anything which is normal in human passion, c. g., the desire forrevenge, is defended by saying that it is jench'ing or “merely human.’*













423

It represents the immutable law of the universe.” A cultured man isone who understands thoroughly the human heart and the laws ofthings. By living in harmony with the natural ways of the humanheart and of nature, the Confuciamst claims that he can become asage. But then the sage is no more than a reasonable person, likeConfucius, who is chiefly admired for his plain, common sense andhis natural human qualities, u e., for his great humanness.

Humanized thinking is just reasonable thinking. The logicalman is always self-righteous and therefore inhuman and thereforewrong, while the reasonable man suspects that perhaps he is wrongand is therefore always right. The contrast between the reasonableman and the logical man is often shown in the postscripts to letters.I always love the postscripts in my friends’ letters, especially thosethat entirely contradict what has been said in the body of the letter.They contain all the reasonable afterthoughts, the hesitancies, andthe flashes of wit and common sense. The genial thinker is onewho, after proceeding doggedly to prove a proposition by long-winded arguments, suddenly arrives at intuition, and by a flash ofcommon sense annihilates his preceding arguments and admits he iswrong. That is what I call humanized thinking.

We can imagine a letter, in which the logical man speaks in thebody of the letter and the reasonable man, the truly human spirit,speaks in the postscript. A father may be writing to his daughter,who has been begging him for a chance to go to college, and in theletter he proceeds to outline the various perfectly sound reasons,“firstly,” “secondly,” “thirdly,” why he cannot send her to collegewith a kind of consistent, cumulative, unanswerable logic, thosereasons being that he has already three sons to support at college,that her sick mother needs someone to keep her company at home,and so on. After signing his name he adds a little line: “Hang it,Julie, prepare to go to college in the fall. Somehow I will do it.”

Or let us imagine a husband writing to his wife, announcing hisdecision to arrange for a divorce and giving an unimpeachable arrayof reasons for it: firstly, that his wife has been unfaithful, secondly,that he can never get a hot meal when he comes home, and so on.













424

They are perfectly valid reasons, even righteous reasons, and if heengages a lawyer to do the job, the logic will be still more perfectand the tone more righteous still. But after writing the letter, some-thing happens in his mind, and he scrawls a barely legible note:“Damn it, darling Sophie, I’m a rotten dog myself. I’m cominghome with a bunch of flowers.”

While the arguments in both letters are perfectly sound and valid,it is the logical man who speaks there, while in the postscriptsthere speaks a truly human spirit—a human father and a humanhusband. For such is the duty of the human mind, that it is notcalled upon to make a stupidly logical argument, but should try tomaintain a sane balance in an ever-changing sea of conflicting im-pulses, feelings, and desires. And such is truth in human affairs thatthat is true which we will to make so. The unanswerable argumentcan always be answered with some compassion, and validity itselfinvalidated by love. In human affairs, it is often the illogical courseof conduct that is the most convincing. Law itself admits the incom-pleteness of its claim to absolute justice when it often has to fall backon “a reasonable interpretation” of a clause, or when it allows thechief executive the power of pardon, so well exercised by AbrahamLincoln to a mother’s son.

The reasonable spirit humanizes all our thinking, and makes usless sure of our own correctness. Its tendency is to round out ourideas and tone down the angularities of our conduct. The oppositeof the reasonable spirit is fanaticism and dogmatism of all sorts inthought and behavior, in our individual life, national life, marriage,religion and politics. I claim that we have less intellectual fanaticismand dogmatism in China. While a Chinese mob is quite excitable(witness the Boxers of 1900), the Spirit of Reasonableness hashumanized to a large extent our monarchical autocracy, our religion,and the so-called “suppression of women.” All this must be takenwith certain qualifications, but is nevertheless true. It makes our em-perors, our gods, and our husbands merely human beings. TheChinese emperor was not a semi-divine being like the Japaneseruler, and Chinese historians have evolved the theory that the













BE REASONABLE

425

emperor rules by a mandate from Heaven, and when he misrules,he forfeits that “heavenly mandate.” When he misrules, we justchop off his head, and we have chopped off the heads of too manykings and emperors in the many rising and falling dynasties for usto believe they are “divine” or “semi-divine ” Our sages are notcanonized as gods, but always regarded merely as teachers of wis-dom, and our gods are not models of perfection, but venal and cor-rupt and open to cajolement and bribery like our officials. Anythingwhich goes beyond reasonableness is immediately condemned asfuchi’n jencKing (“moving far away from human nature”), and aman who is too saindy or too perfect can be a traitor 4 because he ispsychologically abnormal.

In the sphere of politics, there is something terribly inhuman inthe logic of the minds of men and conduct of affairs in certain statesof Europe. And I am less terrified by the theories of Fascism andCommunism than by the fanatical spirit which infuses them andthe method by which men push their theories doggedly to logicalabsurdities. The result is a confusion of values, a weird mixing-up ofpolitics with anthropology, art with propaganda, patriotism withscience, government with religion, and above all an entire upsetof the proper relationship between the claims of the state and theclaims of the individual. Only an insane type of mind can erect thestate into a god and make of it a fetish to swallow up the individual’sright of thinking, feeling and the pursuit of happiness.

Communism and Fascism are both products of the same mind. AsAlbert Pauphilet says, “No type of mind is so like the extreme rightas the extreme left.” Characteristic of both regimes and ideologiesare, firstly, the sheer belief in force and power, which I regard asthe most stupid and shallow manifestation of the Western mind, andsecondly, the belief in logical necessity, for after all Fascism, as muchas Communism, is based on the Marxian dialectic, which ultimatelyis based on the logic of Hegel. Would that someone realized howman in the second quarter of the twentieth century is suffering for

4 A thought expressed in an essay directed against the social-reformer Premier,Wang Anshih, said to be written by Su TungpVs father.













THE ART OF THINKING

426

the sins in logic of his fathers, committed some hundred years ago!

In a sense we may say that today Europe is not ruled by the rea-sonable spirit, nor even by the spirit of reason, but rather by thespirit of fanaticism. Looking at the picture of Europe today givesone a feeling of nervousness, a nervousness which comes not somuch from the mere presence of conflicts of national aims and stateboundaries and colonial claims, which the spirit of reason should beamply able to deal with, but rather from the condition of mind ofthe men who are the rulers of Europe. It is like getting into a taxicabin a strange city and being suddenly overcome by a distrust of thedriver. It is not so bad that the driver doesn’t seem to be acquaintedwith the map of the city and cannot take one to his destination bythe proper route; it is more alarming when the passenger in theback seat hears the driver talk incoherently and begins to suspecthis sobriety. That nervousness is decidedly heightened when theinebriate driver is armed with a gun and the passenger has nochance of getting out. One has reason to believe that this caricatureof the human mind is not the human mind itself, that these aremere aberrations, mere stages of temporary insanity, which willburn themselves out like all waves of pestilence. One has reason toexpress a reassurance in the capacities of the human mind, to believethat the human mortal mind, limited as it is, is something infinitelyhigher than the intellect of the reckless drivers of Europe, and thateventually we shall be able to live peaceably because we shall havelearned to think reasonably.













APPENDIX A

Certain Chinese Names

Chinese scholars always have several names: a personal name(ming), a literary name or courtesy name (tse), and a fancy name(had), given by themselves or by others. In the course of life, as theirtaste develops and their wisdom deepens, they often take a fancy toa certain word or phrase fraught with meaning, and give themselvesanother name to indicate their spiritual progress or a particularmeaningful experience: hence a person may have several hao, orfancy names. In addition to this, an illustrious person is often ad-dressed by his birthplace, and the great have posthumous titles con-ferred upon them. Hence the bewildering confusion of names forstudents of Chinese history and literature. It is impossible to stickconsistently to either the personal name or the literary name in thisbook, because it is neither natural nor advisable. Some are betterknown by their fancy names, and others by their first names; thesethings simply happen, and the natural thing to do is to use thatparticular name which is the most common form of reference in Chi-nese. If one refers to Mi Fei as Mi Fei, he will have to, for consist-ency’s sake, refer to Su Tungp’o as Su Shih, or Li Chowu as Li Chih,which is simply not being done. And no one, of course, can consist-ently refer to Confucius as K’ung Chiu and Laotse as Li Erh.

Hence the following table for reference, which is not meant to becomplete, but gives only the more important historical persons re-ferred to in this book. I have thought it convenient to give theirdates also. Surnames are in capitals. (#) Indicates the name com-monly used in the book.

In Chinese usage, the surname stands before the personal name.

4V













Literary

and Surname Name Fancy Name, etc. Dates

rG Tai* Tsungtse T*ao-an Ca, 1600

fG Ch’ao* Shanlai Hsintsai Ca. 1676

428

APPENDIX A

ON

ro

IA

d

ro

O

VO

n~.

vo

00

0

«-w

M

CO

M

M

Hf

0

rt

VO

CO

1

GO

1

co

CA

rt

1

VO

8

Tt”

m

VO

o\

rv.

, ,

*”*

in

ir\

VO

<5d

T3

H3

00

M

M

M

w

CO

a

iS*|.9 | j

*4 U

#

bJQ

*

a

bJO

V

d

3d

c3

■2k

!£T

u 0bJD -o

d -jri A

1

S y jo ^ .yO w *4 <!

B ^ s 2

£3 *-CJ c/5 i-G

P O H U

-a s5J ffi K

2 * o o

^ ^ § |j § |j

HH HH HH HH HH

HH HH HH HH HH HH

LJ CL W ’H'

ffi ffi E2 £2

oooouooooffiEE^

LI Ghih Chowu* Wenling Ca. 1567

LI Ch’ingchao* Yi-an* (“Ease and Peace Recluse”) 1081-after 1141

LI Erh Jan Laotse*, Laojan b.c. 571?-?

LI Yii Liweng* (“Old Man with Bamboo Hat”) 1611-1679













LIN Pu Chunfu Hoching* (“Peace and Quiet”—posthumous) 967-1028

LI Po* Taipo Ch’inglien (“Green Lotus”) 701-762

LIU Tsungyiian* Tsehou Liuchou (official post) 773-819

MAO Hsiang Pichiang* Ch’aomin (“Cave-Dweller”) 1611-1693

CERTAIN CHINESE NAMES

429

o

ia

o

o

«

ON

OO

H

s

O

OO

d

U-l

(L)

W

O

CJJ

d

vo

OO

O

M

ON

?"

■<-

0

d

VO

4o

M

ia

O

ON

0

M

On

w

■s**

cd

W

Tt-

d

N

IA

H

<L)

d

M

CO

OO

co

A

H

r

M

M

4o

lA

IA

Cl

vo

cn

d

Cl

•

d

*?

w

. !

CO

0

r*>

w

0

r>

d

Vj

vo

rt

M

w

rt

CO

vj

M

d

CO

rt

M

s

<3

If

S

o

2

<■> *

£ .1, o

S 9CS S

§ ft

L & flP rj cd• <L) vJ

a s K

<u

-a

3

I

to

<u

10

3

#

o

"cn

ho

I

s

0

e

1

SL

ns

|

o

ho

aj

m

bdO

C3

3

•£3

a

t/J

J3

QJ

i

a

«

«

♦

I

bO

h3

a y p

ij-i

1 i j

WOO

j

"*3

.2

Ui

X

bO

a

cd

|

£

a • 9 «

•gj a -6 -6

flJ O c D D

S 3 eg £ £

¥

I

cd

:3

J*

a

• r-l

t

.9 H

*x3 j3 .—,

000

9

? §

3 -s

J=3

S rS

fr-9

H i*













00

Ph CO W

s

• r*46

*

rS

-C

to

v %

I ;§

S 3

o w

„_ . ^ § !i; § £ £8t3BES^g|

YUAN Hungtao Chunglang* Shihkung (“Master Rock”) Ca. 1600

YUAN Mei Tsets’ai* Suiyuan (“Let-It-Be Garden”) 1716-1797

YUAN Tsi* Ts’etsung Puping (military ran\) 210-263













APPENDIX B

A Chinese Critical Vocabulary

la my efforts at translation of Chinese literature, for instance inthe translation of The Epigrams of Chang Ch’ao, I have constantlyrun across phrases or terms that are extremely difficult to renderinto English. This has made me think that perhaps a list of Chi-nese critical terms with explanatory comments will be bothuseful and enlightening. It will also be enlightening because theChinese critics seem to have evolved a technique for the enjoymentof nature and art and literature, and an examinauon of their criti-cal vocabulary will reveal this technique and their aesthetic feel-ings about things. One is often forced to write bad English intrying to express such Chinese aesthetic ideas or notions, as for in-stance when one speaks of “enjoying the snow,” “singing thewind,” “awaiting the moon,” “playing water,” “facing wine,”“sleeping flowers,” “pacing the moonlight,” “pacing spring,” “pil-lowing water,” “lying down traveling,” and so on. One needs toexplain that "awaiting the moon” means that one goes out to thecourtyard after supper to look at the crescent moon, but it has notyet come up and so one has to wait for it, or that “lying downtraveling” means mentally traveling while lying in bed. And whenone speaks of “the moon being suspended at the roof corner” or“over the treetops,” of course the phrase is figurative. But there aremore abstract and elusive ideas that are more difficult to paraphrase,as for instance when a Chinese artist speaks of the “five grades ofch'ing” ("purity”): “pure and inspired,” as when one looks at themoon over the hills and is disgusted with the busy life and thinksof going away to be a recluse; “pure and charming,” as when onehas books in one’s study and has flowers well arranged in his vase;“pure and poor,” as when one is somewhat sad and forlorn livingout in a dreary valley and forsaken by his relatives; “pure andcrazy” as when one loves secluded spots and rare persons and

430













books; and “pure and rare” as when one has read the classics ofthe ages and finds himself at home among rocks and springs, and“his writing smells of haze and colored clouds, and his conduct isfar removed from the dusts of the busy world.”

I am trying in the following to interpret briefly some of theseaesthetic notions under seven heads. First, the emotions and per-sonality of the man; second, aesthetic notions borrowed from physi-cal objects in general; third, types of beauty characteristic of spring;fourth, types of beauty characteristic of summer; fifth, types ofbeauty characteristic of autumn; sixth, types of beauty characteristicof winter; seventh, the beauty of perfect naturalness, which is thehighest form of beauty attainable by human artists. The list is ofcourse far from complete and deals chiefly with the most char-acteristic aesthetic ideas. But while an intensive study of this criticalvocabulary will increase one’s understanding and enjoyment ofChinese paintings, a great majority of the terms have moral con-notations also. All human personalities can be described in aestheticterms, and they usually are in the Chinese language.1

j. The Perceiving Artist

All painting, all poetry and all art are based upon two elements,which are called in Chinese, ching (No. 31) or the scene, the pic-ture; the ch'ing (No. 16), or the sentiment or mood of man.

A. Expressions concerning man's style and specific charms ofculture:

1. |g yun: originally meaning “rhyme,” now meaning “charm.”

A man without charm is said to be without yun. It is usedin connection with word No. 2 in the phrase fengyun, or“wind charm,” meaning “charm of atmosphere” or “style ”In combination with ch’i in the phrase ch’iyun (ch'i, No.40, meaning “atmosphere”), it expresses the highest aim ofChinese painters, “rhythmic vitality.”

2, fang: wind or style. Fengtiao means “the style” of a personor of a work of art. FengyUeh (“wind and moon”) means

11 have not indicated the tone marks, as this book is for the general reader.













APPENDIX B

“sentimental subjects.” Feng\eh means “style and charac-ter.”

3. n tiao: tune or style, as explained under jengtiao (No. 2).

4. Jgg t’ai: expression of a man or a woman, particularly in the

phrase tset’ai or t’aitu, which means “attitude,” physical orspiritual.

5. tse: charm of expression, especially of a winning woman,but also of graceful writing.

6. gr chih: really impossible to translate, originally meaning “fine

and delicate lines,” now meaning “the quality of being inter-esting to look at,” also “beauty,” “flavor,” “whimsicalcharm,” “delicate charm.” When a man or a writing hasdelicate charm, we say that he or it has chih, or fengchih.Quite close to No. 19.

7. n ya: refined, elegant, not vulgar, exquisite. Yajen means “a

charming or cultured scholar ” In general, ya is contrastedwith shu or “vulgar.” When one drinks tea at a famousspring sitting on a rock with bare feet, it is said to be ya.This elegance is always genteel: teeny a, erhya, both mean“genteel elegance,”

8. gg sao: poetic, sentimental. A poet is called saojen, or “senti-

mental person.” Fengsao means “amorous.”

9- yi: romantic, detached from life, fugitive, leisurely. One canbe ch’ingyi or “pure and romantic,” \aoyi or “high andromantic,” J(uangyi or “expansive and romantic.” This isthe quality of people who have seen through life and beginto take it easy and leisurely. It is also an important qualityof painting. It is understood that all these words in this listcan be used indifferently as nouns or adjectives, and some-times as verbs. Ch'aoyi is “to be superior” or “to soar abovethe common man” or “to be eminent.”

10. gg ta: the quality of understanding and consequent ability totake things lightly. A man who takes anything too seriously,or is too deeply involved in business, is “not ta” or “puta”7a\uan means “to have seen through life,” which enablesa man to be less ambitious and put up with temporarydisadvantages or obscurity and poverty. But ta doesn’t neces-sarily mean “escape”; it simply means “understanding.” Onecan “ta the human heart” or “the ways of the world.” Againtach'ing represents the highest ideal of Confucian moral and













political philosophy and means “to enable men and womento satisfy their emotions or sentiments.”

11. jg t'ung: similar in meaning to ta, with specific variations.

T'ungta means “to have understanding” of the human heart,or of any particular subject. A man who has understandingis called either t’ungjen or tajen; fungjen also specificallyrefers to a man who has read a great deal and thought thingsthrough. Originally t'ung meant “to go through” or “havea clear passage.” A stupid man is said to have “an unclearpassage in his stomach or intestines.” It is interesting to notethat to be t'ung is regarded generally as the criterion andreal aim of education. We usually ask, “Has So-and-So readhis books t'ung?”, “Is his writing already t'ung?” meaningthereby whether he has reached a point where he has gothis ideas in order and adopted an intelligent attitude towardthings. Hence a piece of writing which shows muddledthoughts or superficial or involved ideas or is unidiomaticin language, is said to be “not fung” or “put'ungThis isthe quality of muddleheadedness. On the other hand, a manwho has thought things through and is able therefore totake things lighdy or who shows quick comprehension issaid to be t'ungt'uo (t'uo meaning “casting off”).

B. Concerning one's talent or character or spirit:

12. ts'ai: talent, inborn capacity. The notion is originally derivedfrom “timber,” from which wooden vessels are made. Thereare different kinds of talent, <?. g., poetic talent (shihts'ai),talent for painting (huat/ai). Ch'ingt/ai or “pure talent”corresponds to the English word “talent” and ch'its’ai or“rare talent” corresponds nearly to the English word “gen-ius,” which is also expressed by tienticd or “heavenly tal-ent.” T/aitse, “a talented man ” is an important notiongoing with chiajen or “a beautiful woman.” The notion isthat a talented scholar must go with a beautiful woman.Talented girls or women are known as t/ainii. T/aitiaomeans “talent and style.” TJaich'i (ch'iivessd) means “tal-ent with regard to its competence” for big or small jobs. Aman whose ts'aich'i is small is not qualified for big jobs,and will not be able to get or hold them simply because ofdeficiencies in his own character.

13. g ft in: character, personality, grade, quality. A painter must













APPENDIX B

have good jenp’in, or “human personality.” Fin\eh means“moral character.” Fin is also a verb; “to p’in tea” is tosample its flavor, or merely to drink in a quiet and leisurelymanner. More fully explained in the section, “Art as Playand Personality.”

14. jp]1 shen: spirit. When a man or a piece of writing lacks spirit

or expression, he or it is said to lack shent/ai (“spirit andcolor”). Shench't means “spirit and force” or “forceful ex-pression” or “dignity.” There was a school of Chinesepoetry, called “the school of shenyunwith emphasis onthe elusive qualities of charm and spirit. A man or womanwith a charming spirit is said to have shenyun.

C. Concerning human emotions and feelings:

15. yi: mood, inclination, intention. The intention of a painteror calligraphist, or his general conception preceding hisbrushwork, is spoken of as piyi or “intention of the brush.”This “intention” is often attributed to nature, as when wesay that “the skies have yuyi" or “intention to rain”; or that“there is a ch’iuyi or intention or spirit of autumn,” whenat the end of summer we feel there is a chill in the air andleaves are beginning to turn golden. Similarly there isch'unyi or “intention of spring,” when the ice begins to meltand the flowers are getting ready to put forth buds.

16. m ch'ing: sentiment, passion, love, sympathy, friendly feeling.

To be able to understand people or the human heart is “toknow jenchfing or human sentiments.” Any man who isinhuman, who is over-austere, or who is an ascetic is said tobe puchin jench’ing or “to have departed from human na-ture or human sentiments.” Any philosophy which has de-parted from human sentiments is a false philosophy, andany political regime which goes against one’s natural humaninstincts, religious, sexual, or social, is doomed to fall. Apiece of writing must have both beauty of language andbeauty of sentiment {wen ch'ing ping mou). A man who iscold or hard-hearted or disloyal is said to be wuch'ing or “tohave no heart.” He is a worm, or “he has a heart and intes-tines made of iron and stone ”

17. j|g ch’ang: intestines, feelings, emotions. One who is very sad

is said to have “his intestines broken,” or “tied up into ahundred knots.” These intestines are broad or narrow, de-













pending on whether a man is generous or mean. A manwhose ideas run dry and who constantly stops during writ-ing is said to have “dried-up intestines”

18. u hsing: inspiration, happy mood, enthusiasm to do some-

thing. One can have shth-hsing, or “mood for poetry,” orchiuhsing or “mood for drinking.” This mood is either deepor shallow. It is an important element of poetry,

19. g* ch’u: interesting, having flavor, the quality of being interest-

ing to look at. A scene or a man possesses or lacks this ch’u.In particular, ch’u denotes an artistic pleasure, like drinkingtea, or watching clouds. A vulgar person is not supposed to“understand ch’u ”

20. jgf sse: thought, longing, idea. In judging a piece of writing, we

say the author’s wcnssc, or “the flow of his thoughts” or“literary ideas” is good or bad. One can have “springthoughts or sentiments” (ch’unsse), or “autumn thoughtsor sentiments” (ch’iusse).

21. mu: "| closely related to this notion of sse are different pecul-

22. yuan: iar sentiments. Mu, loving admiration, longing from

23. lien: -a distance; yuan, fretting, complaining, hating; and

24. fji hen: particularly three charming words, lien, pity, tender

25. ^ hsi: J love, love for what is small and beautiful; hen, regret,

exasperation, hating the beloved; hsi, be tender, be carefulin spending, be worried lest something is spoiled or gone.All these verbs can be used with reference to women, chil-dren, flowers or spring. Thus one can “hate the spring”for being so short, “regret spring” for arriving so late, “besparing of spring,” lest it be spoiled, or “mourn the spring,”which means to be caught with “spring fever,” or feel lonelyand sad, or to long for the absent lover.

D. Some general ideas about culture:

26. jjg fu: luck, predestined happiness. A man born into this world

is supposed to have a definite quantity of luck awarded tohim for his enjoyment, and some people have more thanothers. A man whose children die young, or a man who hasa beautiful country home, but is unable to live in it, is saidto have “no luck to enjoy them ” On the other hand, a manwho enjoys too much, or who enjoys inordinately, or enjoyswhat is not appropriate, as for instance receiving a kowtow













436 APPENDIX B

from an elderly gentleman older than himself, is said thus tochehfu, or “curtail his luck,” or shorten his life.

27. yuan: a happy predestination, predestined matrimony be-between two persons. A man may desire to marry a girl, butunless he has yuan or yinyuan, he can never succeed. Otherpeople who have this yinyuan will fall in love at first sightand get married in spite of all obstacles. A yuanchia (yuanwritten with another character) means “predestined enemy,”i. e., lover.

28. shih: judgment, insight, taste. This is contrasted with merescholarship or learning, hsueh. A man who is learned andhas erudition but lacks insight or judgment or good taste inknowledge, is an inferior kind of a scholar, as explained inthe section “Good Taste in Knowledge.” It comes also in thephrase shihchien, or chienshih, which means still the samething.

29. $g[ Tao: the Way, truth, religion—really untranslatable. This is

the Tao of Taoism, generally signifying the ways or lawsof nature itself, and the object of human wisdom is to fallin line with Tao or the ways and laws of Nature and livein harmony with them. A man who achieves this happy stateis said “to have attained the Tao,” or tehtao. Closely relatedto tehtao is tseteh, or “to have found oneself ” One who hasfound Tao thereby finds himself also. Tseteh, or “to havefound oneself,” means “to be happy.”

In contrast to these approved cultured qualities, there are a fewexpressing disapproval worthy of mention. Some of these are: fu(rotten, musty), yu (straitjacket), sum (sour) all refer to the doc-trinaire and slavish follower of rules and conventions; suan or“sour” in particular refers to “pedantry.” Pan (wooden), chih(straight) and ted (stagnant) refer to “stiffness” of style or conduct.Lu (colloquially pronounced lou at Peking, meaning “exposed”)refers to “inartistic plainness” in writing, or painting, or diplomacy.A good boxer is said to be “not lou” or pulou, i. e., he never letspeople know how good he is until the occasion comes for puttinghis skill into use. The first condition in the training of a boxer is“never to swagger.” Fou, from the idea “floating on water” meanssuperficiality plus instability, lack of depth and lack of seriousness.













Lou, shu, p’i are common terms for “vulgarity” in contrast to ya,“refinement” or “elegance.” This seems especially to refer to the un-cultured state, like unweeded ground, as in the saying of a Chinscholar that “after having not seen a certain cultured friend forthree days, one’s p’ilou or vulgarity sprouts up again.”

II. Esthetic notions borrowed from physical objects in general:

30. % wen: originally “grains of pebbles, ripples on water, waving

lines of objects (e. g., brocade),” now meaning “literature.”The fundamental idea is the natural lines of movement orbeauty of lines and form, and when applied to writing, itrefers to the movement of one’s thoughts and language.We speak also of the “whirls” or “eddies” of one’s literarycomposition (wenchang p'olan), describing the curious over-lapping and back-and-forth twists and turns of the author’sthoughts. In addition, there is the idea of decoration or re-finement, as contained in the idea of “dress,” and particu-larly of brocade or embroidery. In connection with wen, theidea of tsao “water-cress” refers to the “embellishments” or“intrinsic beauties” of a writer’s language.

31. ching: a picture, a scene, particularly a beautiful scene, as ofsummer clouds or stars at night. This idea of “picture” ishighly subjective, and borrows its charm from humanthoughts and sentiments. If one determines to see a thing asa picture, then it becomes a picture. A story of convalescenceor of a night on the desert or storm at sea is often more beau-tiful than the experience itself.

32. \uang: light. This is an elusive quality, e. g., “the light ofwater,” or “light of spring.” Connected with the following.

33. yg t/cd: color, a group of bright colors, brilliance. A piece of

writing may be lacking in brilliance or \uangt/ai. One canhave of course “literary brilliance,” “moral brilliance” (“shin-ing virtue”) and brilliance in the quality of ink and pigmentin a painting.

34. wet: flavor, smell. Good flavor is what is good to “ruminateon”; it is “deep and long”; and it is usually mild. A super-ficial book or saying is therefore lacking in wet, because itdoes not stand “ruminating.” Hueiwei, or “back flavor” or“return flavor,” is felt a while after eating olives or tasting













APPENDIX B

tea. A man may lack “flavor” (or be uninteresting) andfriendship can smell sweet.

35. jg ying: shadow, image in a mirror, reflection in water; that

which suggests the original. In the novel Red ChamberDream, certain maids are the shadows, yingtse, of certainhigher-class girls, being alike in quality, like minor flowersbesides the chief flowers in a vase. A character in a novel isalso said to be the “shadow” of a real person, its original.

36. jg ching: a state, a condition, particularly of living, and as felt

by the person; atmosphere created in a painting or a poem;often chingchieh. Yidling (yi, No. 15), literally “condi-tion of mind,” is a mood or atmosphere created by art,which is very important in poetry; otherwise also expressedas shenching, or literally “spiritual atmosphere.”

37. Jg li: reason, inner order, inner form, inner nature of things.

Subjective painters (particularly of Sung Dynasty) wouldemphasize this li. Closely related to wen (No. 30), especiallyin the phrase wenli (also name of the classical language),wen denoting the form and li denoting the substance ofthought, or its movement.

38. flg’ ft: body, literally and figuratively, general shape, frame-

work, structure.

39* # ku: bone, skeleton, inner being, as contrasted with tem-porary appearances. The important thing is what a man hasgot “in his bones,” e. g., as a democrat or aristocrat, or hed-onist. The underlying philosophy or attitude of a writer pro-vides “the bones” for his writings, and a superficial writertouching on trivial topics may have no “bones” at all. Incalligraphy, \u, or \uchia, means the basic framework orpattern of a character, as contained in a few main support-ing strokes.

4°. fa chfi: spirit, force, ether, gas, general atmosphere. There arech’unch’i (spirit or atmosphere of spring), cKiuch’i (spirit oratmosphere of autumn), and an old man may have laoch'i,if he tries too often to remind people of his age and author-ity. Like the spirit of the seasons, the ch9i of a ruling dynastymay wax and wane; when this ch'i is on the decline, every-thing goes wrong, e. g., there may be no heirs. Yuanch’imeans “vital force” in the universe and in an individual,and one should do well to nourish or cherish it. A literary orartistic masterpiece is supposed to have stolen the secrets of













nature, thus “leaking out the yuanch’i? and it is a thing notto be attempted too often. In connection with yun (fate),ch'iyun or the dominant fate of a person or house is some-thing which “goes round,” precipitating different happen-ings at different appointed times (see also under No. 1).Thus a man may have tsaicKi (money ch’i) which is goodor bad for a certain year, determining whether he is going tomake or lose money. It is an important teaching both ofConfucianism and Taoism to yangcKi or “nourish thisch’i” by being kind, or generous, or not overworking one-self, or not talking too much.

li: energy, force. A writing or painting may or may nothave energy, shown as force, expressed as ch'tli.

42. shih: gesture, posture, social position, battle formation, thatwhich gives advantage of position in any struggle. Thisnotion is extremely important and is connected with everyform of dynamic beauty, as against mere beauty of staticbalance. Thus a rock may have a “rock posture,” an out-stretching branch has its own “branch posture” (which maybe good or bad, elegant or ordinary); and there are “strokeposture,” “character posture,” and “brush posture” in writ-ing and painting and “posture of a hill," “posture of acloud,” etc. A hill which has an embracing or encirclinggesture (huanpao) is said to be elegant. A situation is con-ceived as static, while a shih denotes that which the situationis going to become, or “the way it looks”: one speaks of theshih of wind, rain, flood, or battle, as the way the wind,rain, flood or battle looks for the future, whether increasingor decreasing in force, stopping soon or continuing indefi-nitely, gaining or losing, in what direction, with what force,etc.

III. Types of beauty characteristic of spring:

Of the types of beauty modally associated with the different sea-sons, those of spring and summer are comparatively less strikingand peculiar as esthetic notions than those of autumn and winter.Most of these words are used indifferently as adjectives and nouns.

43. gg ming: bright (a bright moon, a brightly dressed woman).

We speak of "bright hills and graceful waters,” shan mingshut hsiu. Cf. mei below.













440

44. met: seductive, enticing, beauty o£ softness. This quality isfrequently applied to women, the moon and flowers, andeven rivers. “When the rocks contain jade, the hill becomeshui (shining); and when the water contains pearls, theriver becomes met (enticing),” according to Lu Chi.

45. jjg chiao: beautiful and helpless, enticing—rather similar to the

above word meu

46. 55 hsiu: delicate, graceful, slender and beautiful. A type of

beauty symbolized by the bamboo. A girl or woman mustabove all have “an air of delicacy” or hsiucKi. For a womanwithout this air of delicacy (e. gone who talks in a loudvoice), time spent in beauty parlors is wasted. Nothing canbe done about a loud-voiced woman. Certain kinds of treesand rivers also have this delicate beauty.

47. yen: smilingly or elegantly pretty—mostly of flowers, also ofwomen and water or hills.

48. g£ yen: voluptuous, gorgeously beautiful, dazzlingly beautiful,

passionate. E. gthe peony, Mae West.

49- lun: lustrous, smooth to the touch, kind to the throat,nourishing as of liquids, not harsh. Thus the color or lightof good jade is said to be lun, or lustrous. As a verb, therain lun or nourishes the fields, and almond soup nourishesthe throat. A forest newly bathed in rain is then spoken ofas fytanglum, bright and lustrous. This is an atmosphericquality.

50* 8 ling (huo, shengch’i, shengtung): vitality characteristic of('g, spring. A picture is linghuo when it is vitally alive. “Stuffi-ness” of composition prevents this. Hence the important£tt) notion hfungling, “empty and alive,” a quality aimed at ingood paintings and rockeries by the generous use of space.

IV. Types of beauty characteristic of summer:

In general summer suggests luxuriance and full power. Some

of the notions classified under summer, like ch’i, t/iao (Nos. 57,59)

can just as well belong to autumn.

51. ^ hua: flowery, floral splendor. The “Flowery Kingdom.”A pretty composition without substance is said to be “flowerywithout seeds,” “seeds” being associated with the autumnharvest (see No. 72).

52- m mou: rich, luxuriant—of trees, forests and sentiments.













53. n ch'ang: luxuriant, forceful in expression, thoroughly enjoy-

able. Originally of plants, now of literary compositions.Such ch'ang compositions can cure one’s headache, as wassaid of Ch’en Lin’s philippic. One feels a pleasure of reliefwhen our instincts are satisified and feelings well expressed.

54. ^ wet: great, grand. In the usual English sense. This and the

following four words are usually used together in varyingcombinations.

55- # him: whole, strong, massive—of writing which is deepand mature and brushwork which is massive.

56. hsiung: heroic, powerful, majestic.

57. ch’i: rare—really an untranslatable word. Literally, it means“remarkable,” “strange,” “extraordinary,” but it has definiteassociations not fully expressed by the word “remarkable.”There must go with it a subjective love of the unusual,the unconventional and the unattainable by common men.A ch'tshu is more than a “remarkable book”: it is one ofthe few world masterpieces not to be duplicated. “Rare”comes nearest to it. Tired of the humdrum world and thecommon run of men and things, one is on the look outfor ch’i or “rare” books, rocks, peaks, flowers, perfumes,delicacies, jewels, curios, etc.

58. chuang: strong, powerful. The combination peichuang,“sad and strong,” denotes the tragic mood.

59. ftf ts'iao: steep, rugged, abrupt—of landscapes and literary

manner.

60. jg tuei: literally “dangerous,” but really “awe-inspiring.” Thus

a flimsy wooden bridge across a deep ravine or an over-hanging precipice is wei or delicious to look at.

61. M hao (fang): the chivalrous mood, free and nonchalant,(ft) unrestrained. Two types of poetic manner are distinguished,

the haofang or the romantic, expansive style of Li Po, andtuanyueh, or the quiet, restrained style of Tu Fu. In thisconnection there are a number of expressions rather oftenused in Chinese biographies in praise of romantic persons:t’it’ang, (“unconventional”), t'ungt’uo (“emancipated”),puchi (“unbridled”), etc. A poet or writer writing with thefull sweep and mastery of his powers is compared to “acelestial horse galloping in the sky.”













APPENDIX B

442

V. Types of beauty characteristic of autumn:

In general the autumn season stands for simplicity, maturity andconservation; in contrast to summer luxuriance, an autumn scenesuggests ethereal thinness, crispness and the penetrating, yet exhil-arating, coolness of the autumn wind. Here the image of a clearautumn moon and an enticing autumn lake undoubtedly plays animportant role. Autumn also suggests the tragic mood. In autumn,one is also supposed to have outgrown the luxuriance of summerand begun to love simplicity, peace and contentment. Like the far-mer, one no longer tills and no longer runs about in the scorchingsun, but begins to gather in and ta\e stoc\ of what he has got. Ifwe could only learn to live our life in harmony with the rhythm ofnature! But we will not. We want to run forever in the scorchingsun.

The feeling for the dreary beauty of autumn was perfectlyexpressed by one of the great Yuan dramatists:

Dry vines, old trees, evening crows—

Small bridge, flat banks, water flows—

Old road, slim horse, west wind blows—

And as the sun westward sets,

Forlorn love, far away, no one knows!

62. tan: mild, pale in color, as of a misty lake. Probably thequality in a painting or writing that gives the greatestpleasure to a man of mature taste is ch'ingtan (lucid andmild), p’ingtan (“even and mild,” the natural aroma ofsimple writing), or tanyuan {yuan, No. 65; mild-tonedand “distant” in perspective, either in painting or in styleof thought). A man of a retiring mild temperament ist'ientan (quiet and easily contented, or loving simple joys) ;he adopts an attitude toward money and fame described astanpo (mild and thin).

63. ^ p’u: simple in taste, unadorned, unsophisticated, close to

nature. Shunp'u (unspoiled and simple) describes the simplecharacter and ways of living of the ancient people, char-acterized by natural hospitality and kindness, being yetunspoiled by civilization. Its importance has been indicatedthroughout this book.













64. M \ao (shen): high, ethereal, fine (\ao), and deep (shen).(JSOOne speaks of “high autumn” which in sentiment is akin

to highmindedness (\aoyi, “high and romantic”), A man’sambition or interest is said to be \aoyuan, “high and dis-tant,” if he aims at the superior things of the spirit. Or itis \aol(uang (see No, 65), which can be used of an autumnlandscape and a high- and broad-minded person.

65. 9S Kuang (yuan): broad-minded, emancipated, expansive in(g)nature (of person) or in view (of landscape). Yuan means

distant, having a distant perspective. Kuanghuai is to havean “expansive breast” or to take a detached view of life.

66. J|gf hsiao (su): thin and sparse, like an autumn forest, dreary,(®0 Closely connected with the idea of tan or “mildness,” as in

the phrase sutan, “sparse and mild-toned,” as autumn treesought to be painted. Often an autumn landscape must beappreciated for its dreariness, as in the poem of MaChihyiian quoted above. What is often described asch’iuyi or “intention or spirit of autumn” is just this quality.

67. sou: thin, slender. This is a strangely beautiful word in theChinese language. Slender rocks and bamboos are alwayspainted together. It expresses non-sensuous beauty.

68. jjjj chien: simple, few in words or strokes. The ideal political

condition is described as a state when the “administrationis simple (chien) and punishments are light.” The oppositeconception is fan, or complicated, e. g., the income tax,Chientan again means “simple and mild.” A writer whodoes not use too many words is said to have the chientan(terse and mild) quality.

69. cWing: clear, lucid, pure, clean, not profuse, not obstructed,not burdened with details, like an autumn landscape.Ch’ingliang (clear and cool), ch'ingtan (lucid and mild),ch’ingp’in (pure and poor), are common combinations.Ch’inghsin (clean and novel) expresses the quality of“originality” or “freshness” in thought or expression.

70. fljj hsien: leisure, leisurely. A very much used word. Thus one’s

“hands” and “mind” can both be “leisurely,” or the handsmay be leisurely while the mind is busy, or the mind maybe leisurely while one’s hands are busy. Directions aregiven by Ch’en Meikung’s son on what scholars should doin the different situations. Other expressions are “leisurelyaffairs” (hsienshih), “leisurely conversation” (hsienfan)>













APPENDIX B

“leisurely sentiments” ('hsiench’ing), “leisurely gossip”([hsienhua), “luck of leisure” (hsienfu), “leisurely pleasures”(hsiencKu). Ch’inghsien means both to “enjoy the luckof leisure” and (euphemistically) “to be unemployed.” LiLiweng’s book on the art of living is called Hsiench'ingOuchi (Casual Occupations of Leisurely Sentiments). “Tokill time” is expressed by hsiaohsien, or to “consume” leisure.

71. hang (shuang): nice and cool, mainly associated with the(?& disappearance of heat or any sort of oppressiveness. A

philosophy of detachment is compared to a “dose of coolingmedicine.” A man who readily complies with a request forhelp, or signs a contract without too much negotiation overterms, is said to be shuangli, “direct and pleasandy sharp,”like the autumn wind.

72. % shih: substance, having substance; originally “seeds,” charac-

teristic of autumn. Floral language without thought is “huaand not shih”—flowers without seeds.

VI. Types of beauty characteristic of winter:

The beauty of winter is chiefly that of old age, of cold splendor,

of quiet and seclusion.

73. han (leng): cold, poor. Opposed to heat and excitement.Ofc)Lengyen means “cold splendor,” characteristic of the chry-santhemum and the plum flower. The white pear flowers,although appearing in spring, are said to have this qualityalso. Hunching is a comfortable state known as “cold andquiet ” In the sense of winter rigor, han also means “pov-erty.”

74* f? ching: quiet or quietness, solitude, serenity, a quality asmuch appreciated as the notion of “leisure,” and oftenused as part of a name for a girl or a private garden.Ch’ingching is to have quiet and privacy, or not to havetoo many callers.

75. £ \u: ancient, antique, of ancient times, of ancient manner,mature. Almost anything which is is good inChina. An old, rugged pine tree or a simple, kind oldpeasant is said to have the “manner of the ancients”

The notion “ancient” is also associated with “simplicity”(\utfu), with “elegance” {Jkuyd)> and with “eccentricity”(fahuai).













A CHINESE CRITICAL VOCABULARY 445

76. & lao (mat): old, mature, experienced. Laolien means “to be(jg) experienced.” A mature style is said to be laotao (“old and

having arrived”), and what seems ancient and precious issaid to be \ulao. There is a fascination about what is old,expressed by the phrase ts’anglao, as speaking of a big oldtree.

77. \u: dried-up, beautifully desolate or desolately beautiful,associated with the idea of \u (No. 75).

78. gg yu: secluded, charming in seclusion, having the manner of

a recluse, content with oneself. A charming secluded scholaris a yujen, and his charm is known as yuyun. “Secludedelegance” is expressed by yuya. Typical of this quality isthe “secluded orchid” growing in a deserted valley, “contentto smell its own lonely fragrance ”

79« wen (hanhsu): recluse, hidden from the world, hidden in(•gv meaning, not exposed to the public. True wisdom is thatwhich conceals wisdom; as Laotse expressed it, “Great wis-dom is like stupidity.” True art conceals art. Good writingleaves something unsaid for the reader to think about. Theopposite quality, lou, or “exposed” is a sign of immaturity,or of downright vulgarity.

8°. chiieh (yu): the beauty of stupidity as typified by rocks(jg) and tree roots, often selected for enjoyment. Rocks seem totypify an absolute return to nature. This is but an extremeformulation of the worship of non-sensuous beauty, as areaction to the worship of sensuous beauty, e. g., the beautyof flowers. There are types of calligraphy which purposelyaim at being chiieh (stupid), or \uchiieh (ancient andstupid), which shows really a greater refinement of spiritthan the love of sensuous calligraphy. This type of calligra-phy would imitate the lines of rocks, gnarled roots anddried-up vines.

VII. The beauty of complete naturalness:

The highest art is like nature. Hence all traces of “axe andchisel marks” must be obliterated. Such works can only be done bya master, with complete seeming artlessness and absence of effort,as in a poem where we feel there is no labor at embellishments,because the simple beauty of the sentiments is absolutely adequate.













446 APPENDIX B

81. 4tS hua: changed, transformed, with all artificiality oblit-erated. This is the highest praise that can be given a poemor a painting. Sometimes shenhua is used, meaning “divinelytransformed.” This is far higher praise than other epithetslike miao (exquisite), neng (clever). In grading differentmasters or works of art, the huap’in or shenp’in gradealways tops the list. One speaks of such work as done by“ghost’s axe and god’s craft.” The best prose, like that of SuTungp’o is compared to “sailing clouds and flowing water,”going or stopping according to their inner law.













Academic scholarship, 414Achievement, 162Action, 164Aesop’s Fables, 64Age, see Old ageAlimentation, 43

All Men Are Brothers (Shuiku), 318,325

Amateurism, 366American food, 253marriage, 172vices, 161women, 177

See also WesternAmici, Henri Frederic, 99Analects, 379, 380Analects Fortnightly, 206Ancestor worship, 184Andeisen, Hans Christian, 75Animal, carnivorous, 50faith, 24, 159herbivorous, 49heritage, 24, 33, 64, 159, 367Animism, 19Ape, 67Appetite, 145Aristotle, 415Arnold, Matthew, 398Art, 11, 140

and propaganda, 372as play, 366

physical basis of, 368, 431taste in, 363Art of Laving, 355, 268Autobiographies, 284Chinese, 285of literary men, 284Autumn, 321, 431, 442Azalea, 307

Baboon, 67Bacon, Francis, 418Balfour, Lord, 36Bamboo tree, 298, 300Beauty, 3*> 393of autumn, 442of perfect naturalness, 431of physical objects, 431

of seasons, 431, 439of spring, 439of summer, 440of winter, 444Bed, Chinese, 2, 270lymg in, 202

Behavior, incalculability of, 66Benchley, Robert, 79Biological view, 27, 166Body, 25, 27and spirit, 25rhythm of life, 30sense of time, 30Book, of Changes, 218, 379Books, 324

enjoyment of, 376Boredom, 73Botany, 47

Brooks, Van Wyck, 150Broun, Heywood, 79Bryce, James, 8, 103Buddhism, xi, 119, 161view of man, 20Burbank, Luther, 399Byron, George G., 136

Caesar, Julius, 60, 108

Calligraphy, 158 296, 374, 376

Camouflage, 105

Cannibalism, 50

Careers, 173

Carrel, Dr. Alexis, 29

Cassia, 307

Celibacy, 170

Censorship, 72

Ch’achich, 225 n., 228

Ck*aching, 225 n.

Chairs, sitting in, 206Ch'aXu, 225

Chang Ch*ao, x, 300, 301, 428Epigrams of, 3x6, 430Chang Tai, xox, 428Chanhuots’cJi, 215Chao Mengfu, 183Chdotitu, 409Ch’aoyun, 221Character, 164, 433in art, 375

449













INDEX

Characteristics, human, 68individuals, 4nations, 6Charm, 363, 431Ch’asu, 225 n226, 229Chattering instinct, 53, 56, 70Chaucer, Geoffrey, 64Ch’en Chiju, 383, 428Ch’en Meikung, see Ch’en ChijuCh’en Yun, 288, 428Cheng Hsieh, see Cheng Panch’iaoCheng Hsuan, see Cheng K’angch’cngCheng R’angch’eng, 314, 428Cheng Panch’iao, 109, 302, 428Ch’eng Yich’uan 380Chesterton, Gilbert K., 79, 284, 378Chi Rung, inChi Tien, see Chi RungChia Fuhsi, 40Chiang Raishek, 191, 236Chiang T’an, 285, 428Chiangli, 422Ch'ichiao, 244

Chiehtseymn (Painting Patterns), 370Ch’ienlung, Emperor, 102Chihching, 132 n.

Children, 167, 168, 180Ch’ln, 118, 285, 321Chin Shengt’an, x, in, 130, 334, 383,428

“Thirty-three Happy Moments,” 130Ch’m Shih-huang, 39Chin Wei, see Chin Shengt’anChinch*ing, 422Chinese architecture, 208characteristics, 7, 62civilization, 84critical vocabulary, 430cult o£ idle life, 152culture, 1, 20dress, 261, 370enjoyment of life, 158family ideal, 182furniture, 308houses, 266humanism, 159

landscape painting, 240, 281, 294,37^» 43*

literature, 411, 412, 430

medicine, 249

names, 427

national mind, 9

pagans, 409

philosophy, 9, 14, 411

definition of, 159

romanticists, 153

scholarship, 362, 411

social amenities, 371

Taoist-Confuciamst View of Man, 15,

19

temperament, 150theory of leisure, 150, 152wines, 242Chtng, 431Ch'ing, 98, 422, 431Chinghuayuan, 345Ch'mglt, 422Chingshen, 31Chingwan, 313

Chinp'tngmei (Gold-Vase Plum), 325Chinshih, 189Ch’iufu, 285, 428Chiup'in, 373Chivalry, 193Chou Liench’i, 306Chou Wenfu, 328Christian missionaries, 17, 185religion, 396, 400, 403salvation, 124Science, 409theologians, 407view of mankind, 15Christians, Chinese, 185Chrysanthemum, 303, 306Chu conversations, 370Chu Tu, 181

Chuang Chou, see ChuangtseChuangtse, X, 40, 95, 96, 108, x6x»

381, 428Chuangyuan, 189Chuch*iian Hstaop’in, 225Chung Yung, 374 n.

Churches, 397Chut*an, 370Cigar Ashes, 386













45i

:ivihzation, 146Chinese, 84, 108, 166machine, 149twentieth century, 52Western, 84, 108, 166ilemenceau, Georges, 107Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 153Comfort, 207, 208Common sense, 8, 80, 411return to, 417

Communism, 92, 187, 217, 425Compassion, 98

Conduct, good form in, 362, 369Confucius, 2, n, 60, 95, 97, 108, 171,176, 185, 186, 203, 208, 364,379. 417. 42i, 423wife of, 249

Confucianism, 11, 94, 112, 119, 143view of man, 19Contemplation, 203Conversation, 211and leisure, 214, 217and prose, 215art of, 217Cooking, 248Western, 253Courage, 98, 102intellectual, 363Creation, story of, 169, 182Creative impulse, 368Critical spirit, 413

vocabulary, Chinese, 430Cult of idle life, Chinese, 152Culture, 143, 435and leisure, 150and the individual, 89Chinese, I, 20enjoyment of, 10, 36aexpressions for, 431Curiosity, instinct of, 71playful, 66, 71Customs, Western, 257Cynicism, 105, litCypress trees, 301

Darwin, 24, 159, 367Daudet, L6on> 101David, King, 60Day, Clarence, 33

Death, 38

See also immortality, mortalityDefinitions, 418Democracies, 78Democratic Vistas, 89, 150Democritus, 103, 138De Quincey, 225Descartes, 420Detachment, 1, 153Determinism in human affairs, 91Devil, 15

Dictators, 78, 84, 241Diet, 249

Dignity, human, n, 65, 207, 408Discernment, 363Divine purpose, 123Dogmatism, 424Dreams, 5, 6, 73capacity for, 66national, 75

Dress, Chmese, 261, 370Western, 261Drinking, 43, 221and wine games, 239

Earth, 23, 156Eating, 42, 244Economics, 87mid-Victorian, 85Edison, Thomas A., 56, 399Education, aim of, 364modern, 364

Edward VIII, abdication of, 93Efficiency, 162Einstein, Albert, 56, 399Eliot, George, 381Ellis, Havelock, 284Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 99Emotions, 431, 434expressions for, 431English characteristics, 6, 8, 61Environment, 90Epicureans, 137Epigrams, 418

Epigrams of Chang Ch*aot 316Eugenic system, 189Euripides, 72Europe, 79, 187, 426Evolution, 24, 36, 67, 159













Fame, 102Family honor, 188ideal, Chinese, 182life, 182tree, 188

Fan Ch'engta, 306Fanaticism, 5, 424Fantasy, 5Fascism, 187, 425Fashion, 103Feasts, Chmcse, 244Feelings, 434Feng Yiihsiang, 236Ferguson, Charles W., 241Fighting instinct, 51Flavor, in reading, 379in writing, 386Flesh, see BodyFlowers, 302, 317and the seasons, 303arrangements, 302, 308enjoyment of, 314watering, 312Fohsiu, 371Folly, 105Food, 43, 146, 248American, 253and medicine, 248and temperament, 49as nourishment, 249Chinese, 253requisites of, 255Western, 253France, Anatole, 64Free speech, 72Freedom, individual, 85French characteristics, 6French Revolution, 45, 91Friendship, 323and tea drinking, 221Furniture, Chinese, 273Western, 273

Galileo, 52Games, Chinese, 244Gardens, Chinese, 267“Genius,” 19, 21German characteristics, 6,God, 396Goethe, Si

INDEX

Golden Mean, The, 113, I43> 4*5Gold-Vase-Plum, 325Government, constitutional, 85Governor Yuan’s Islet, 297Greek pagan view of man, 15, 17prose, 219

Guessing fingers, 244Gulitver’s Travels, 64

Hatt’ang, 132 n., 307Haldane, J B. S., 233Half-and-half Song, 113Handshaking, 257Hanfcitse, 215Hanshan, noHao, 427Happiness, 122individual, 426of the spirit, 126sensuous, 126Hat, removal of, 260Heaven, 125, 156, 278, 396Hegel, 86, 92, 425Heine, Heinrich, 9Hell, 396

Henry Esmond, 380Heredity, 188, 189High-mindedness, 2, 153Hills, 319

Hitler, Adolf, 78, 107Hohenzollern, Wilhelm, 77Home, 170

enjoyment of, 10, 166Ho Shaochi, 374House, Chinese, 2 6$

Hsiangfeng, 3x3

Hsieh Lingyun, ir 9, 428

Hsich Taoyiin, aao

HsingUng, 386

Hsiyuchi, 33, 32S

Hsu Ts’eshu, 225 n., 228

Hsii Wei, see Hsu Wench'ang

Hsii Wench’ang, in, 338 n., 381, 428

Hsiian Kuch’ing, 274 n.

Huainantse, 215Huang Fosse, 274 n.

Huang Shanku, 377, 428

4x9 Huang Tingchicn, see Huang Shanku

Huangshan school of painters, 282Huap’in, 374













453

VLuatiao, 242

Hughes, Charles Evans, 199Human body, 25, 27characteristics, 68civilization, rise of, 66dignity, 11, 65, 207, 408fallibility, 59hand, 66life, 30

mind, evolution of, 58nature, 23, 27purpose, 123

society, development of, 68See also ManHumanism, 112, 396Chinese, 159

Humanized thinking, 411, 423Humanness, 242Humor, 4, 5, 6, 77in life, 77in politics, 77in scholarship, 77Hunger, 48Husbands, 166Huxley, Aldous, 79, 208Hwcn, 20

Ibsen, Henrik, 61Idealism, 4, 77Ideas, aesthetic, 431, 437Immortality, 16, 19, 156, 190, 399Impulse, aesthetic, 370physiological, inIncense, 231, 237Independence, 363Individual, the, 87

characteristics of, pseudo-scientific for-mula, 4doctrine of, 88happiness, 426importance of, 403Individualism, 173, 187Inspiration, 368Instincts, and intellect, nChinese life closer to, 11harmony of, 143maternal, 171of hunger, 48parental, 17*

paternal, 171sexual, 48Intellect, 21, 59

and mental pleasures, 140Chinese distrust of, 11, 413education of, 64Interiors, Chinese, 266

James, William, 58, 82, 210, 420

Japanese characteristics, 7, 53

Jeans, Sir James, 396

Jench'mg, 422

Jenp’in, 373

Jesus Christ, 60, 398

Joubert, 99

Kaoliang, 242K’aop’an Yushih, 237Keith, Sir Arthur, 156, 399Kipling, Rudyard, 284Knowledge, good taste in, 362integration of, 415over-specialization of, 413specialized, 411Ko Shan, 274 n.

Ku Ch’ienli, 383Kuan Ch’iufu, 285, 428Kuan Ing, see Kuan Ch’iufuKuan, Madame, 183K'uanghuai, 2K’ung Chi, see TsesseKung Tingan, 417

Lamaism, 409

Laotsc, 97, 105, 155, 296, 299, 4x7* 428Leacock, Stephen, 79League of Nations, 53Leisure, 217, 3^3and culture, 150Chinese theory of, 148U, 422

Li Chih, see Li ChowuLi Ch’iagchao, 384, 428Li Chowu, x, in, 338 n*, 428Li Liweng, x, 42* 205, 211, 240, ^55,268, 298, 304, 428Li Mi-an, 113Li Po, 9, 1561 428Li Yi-an, see Li Ch’ingchaoLi Yu, see Ii Liweng













454

Li Yuan, si6Liang Yuch’mg, 313Liberty, 72, 85Liehtse, 160, 215Life, American view o£, 2Chinese view of, 1enjoyment of, 122purpose of, 123simplicity of, 80Lin Hoching, 299, 306, 428Lin Pu, see Lm HochingLincoln, Abraham, 424Literature, appreciation of, 386beauty in, 393Chinese, 411, 412, 430familiar style, 392personality of, 386style of, 387taste in, 363technique of, 386thought in, 387Liu Tsungyuan, 109, 429Liu Jushih, 221Liu Tasheng, 41Ltulang Wen Ying, 301Living, enjoyment of, 10, 202simplicity, 159Living Buddha, 409Loafing, 2importance of, 145Logic, 159, 411and common sense, 411dehumanized, 420Logical necessity, 417spirit, 413Lolling, 206“Lost Paradise,” 277Lotus, 303, 307Lu Yii, 225 n.

Luck, 160, 271Lulan, 215Lying in bed, 202

Machine civilization, 149Maggin, W., 232Man, and nature, 277and woman, relationship, x68animal being, 33attitude toward universe, 277biological view, 27, 166

characteristics of, 4, 12Chinese Taoist-Confucianist view,Christian view, 15Greek pagan view, 15earth-bound, 23emotions of, 431paternal instinct, 171personality of, 431relationship to God, 396working animal, 145Man the Unknown, 29Mao Hsiang, see Mao PichiangMao Pichiang, 239, 285, 429Marcus Aurelius, 137Marriage, 168, 171, 182American, 172childless, 180Chinese, 171Marx, Karl, 86, 91, 187Marxian dialectic, 425Materialism, 159and happiness, 122misunderstandings of, 136Maternal instinct, 171Mechanistic school of thought, 85Medicine, 248and food, 248and magic, 252Chinese, 249

Mencius, 43, 72, 97, 98, 193, 429Mengch’ang, 215Mental pleasures, 137Menti, 190Mermaid, The, 75Metaphysics, 10Middle Ages, 72, 398Mi Fei, no, 204, 295, 429Mi Tien, see Mi FeiMi Yuanchang, see Mi FeiMilton, 60Mind, 56Chinese, 61, 62critical, 63English, 61

evolution of human, 58quality of human, 57Mind tn the Maying, 58Ming, 427Minghaotse, 338Missionaries, Christian, 17, 185













455

Modesty, 55, 56sexual, 68Mohammed, 125Mohammedanism, 409Monkey, 65, 66, 73, 84Monkey Epic (Hsiyucht), 33, 325Moon, 322

Moral attitude toward universe, 277Morals, and art, 372and furniture, 208Mormonism, 409Mortality, 38, 41, 158Moses, 60Motherhood, 175Mup’itse, see Chia FuhsiMurder, 51Music, 140, 159Mussolini, 52Mutu, 301

My Country and My People, 12, 187,422

Names, Chinese, 427Napoleon, 45, 91Narcissus, 307National characteristics, 6destiny, 92

politics and racial temperament, 91Naturalism, 112, 187Naturalness, beauty of, 431, 445Nature, 143and man, 277and the home, 293benefits of, 281enjoyment of, 10, 277an art, 284Nco-platonists, 416New England culture, 150Nietzsche, 381

“Nine Schools of Thought,” 215Ni Yiinlin, no, 204, 274 n.

Old age, 192

Chinese attitude toward, 192, 193Western attitude toward, 196Old Man in the Fort, 160Old rogue, ir, 105Omar Khayyam, 40, 383Orchid, 303, 304

Orchid*s Dream, An, 247Ouyang Hsiu, 383

Pacificism, Chmese, 105Pagan, Chinese, 401, 409Paganism, 400, 403, 408conversion to, 400Painting, 140, 294, 376, 431Pai Yuchien, 154

Parent and child relationship, Chinese,193

Western, 199Parenthood, 166Parliament of Powles, 64Passion, 61, 98sexual, 98Pasteur, Louis, 399Pata Shanjen, 218Paternal instinct, 171Paul, St., 397Pauline logic, 409Peace, 94, 422Penguin Island, 64Peony, 303Perfection, 16Personalism, 89Personalities of Poetry, 374Personality, 431cultivation of, 376expressions for, 431in art, 366, 369, 374Philosophers, Chinese, 95German, 160, 419Philosophy, 41, 142and the individual, 88and words, 417attitude toward, 413Chinese, 9, 14, 159, 411function of, 13gay, 13

of half-and-half, inof humanism, 112of naturalism, 112of living, Chmese, 3, 11social, 89Western, 159

Physical objects, beauty of, 431pleasures, 122, 137Pin, 373Pine trees, 298













456

Fingshih (Vase Flowers), 310P’inkeh, 373Plato, 19, 219, 415Play, 366

Playful curiosity, 66Pleasures, mental, 140sensual, 126spiritual, 140Plum flower, 303tree, 298, 299Fo, 20

Po Chiiyi, x, 411, 429Poe, Edgar Allan, 9Poetic sensitivity, 4Poetry, 41, 140, 431Chinese, 41Western, 41Poets, Chinese, 82Postscript to Chinshihlu, 384Posture, development of, 67Power, 103Propagation, 168Pseudo-scientific formulasindividuals, 4nations, 6poets, 9writers, 9

Psychology, modern, 413P’u Uuhsien, 218Punctuality, 162Purpose, divine, 123human, 123of life, 123P’uyi, Henry, 262

Racial temperament, 91, 92Rain, 322Rationality, 53, 60Reading, 324art of, 376, 377object of, 377enjoyment of, 382Realism, 4, 5Reality, 5Reason, 61

Reasonable age, 8o, 422,attitude, n, 22naturalism, 23

Reasonableness, spirit of, 421Recreation, 366

Red Chamber Dream, 182Redemption, 16Refinement, in art, 376Religion, and moral conscience, 396and science, 396and theology, 407Christian, 396, 400, 403degeneration of, 141of China, northodox, 396restoration of, 396Religious experience, 401Reminiscences of My Concubine, 239,

. .z8s

Reminiscences Under the Lamp-light, 285Reproduction, 43Revelation, 408, 409Rhythm of life, 30, 31Robinson, James Harvey, 58, 416Rocks, 292gardens, 294

Rockefeller, John D., 174

Rogers, Will, 79

Roosevelt, Pres. Franklin D., 78

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 91, 332, 381

Russian characteristics, 7

Russian Revolution, 45, 91

Salvation, 124

Santayana, George, 137, 141, 159Sappho, 101Scamp, 11, 66, 83See also VagabondScholarship, academic, 414Chinese, 362, 411in art, 376Western, 411, 413School of Hsingling, 389School of Self-Expression, 386, 389Schopenhauer, 381Science, 28

Scientific attitude toward universe, 277Scott, Sir Walter, 75Seasons, 280, 321, 431, 439beauty of, 439Sense of humor, 4, 5, 6, 77Senses, 122, 129, 140, 224and Chinese life, irand intellect, 11













457

and nature* 122material pleasures, 122, 127mental pleasures, 140of hunger, 48, 145of sight, 122, 328of smell, 122, 128of sound, 122, 128parental, 171sensual, 126sexual, 48

spiritual pleasures, 122Sensibility, 99Sensitivity, 6, 9Sensuality, 126Sentiment, 99

Sermon on the Mount, 109, 408Sex, 44, 48appeal, 177in art, 179in theatre, 179modesty, 68passion, 98

Shakespeare, William, 9, 32, 40, 60, 95,158, 418Shame, 56Shaohsing, 242Shaw, George Bernard, 79Shehju, 245

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 9Shen Fu, see Shen ShanpoShea Shanpo, 285, 305, 429Shih, 363Shih Nai-an, 2x8Shih Tao,42r8Shihchi, 218Shihp’in, 374Shu Paihsiang, 151

Shuihu (All Men Are Brothers), 2x8,325

Shuohua (speaking), 2x1Simplicity, xi, 80Sin, doctrine of, 17

Six Chapters of a Bloating Life, 285,305* 308

Smoking, 207, 221, 231artistic value of, 233contribution to literature, 240literary value of, 233moral and spiritual benefits of, 232

Sociability, 221

atmosphere for, 222Social, amenities, Chinese, 371philosophies, 89Socialism, 217Socialist Revolution, 91Socrates, 19, 417Soldier, as ideal, 83Solitude, 203Solomon, King, 60Sophists, 18, 417Soul, 15Sounds, 321Spanish Inquisition, 72Spencer, Herbert, 174Spirit, 433and the body, 25happiness of, 122, 126Spirit of a genius {efungshen), 21Spring, 280, 321, 431, 439Ssema Ch’ien, 218, 429State, and the individual, 425Sterility, 168Sterne, Laurence, 153Stevenson, Robert Louis, 75Stoics, 137Stomach, 42Strachey, Lytton, 61

Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio,2x8

Stream-of-life theory, 186, 188Strip-tease, 180Style, and thought, 386familiar, 392in writing, 385Su Shih, see Su Tungp’oSu Tungp’o, x, 9, 82, 152, 154, 155,156, 225, 377, 381, 404, 429Success, 103, 162Suicide, psychology of, 77Summer, 431, 440Sun Ssemiao, 249

Sweet Dream Shadows (Yumengying),316

Swift, Jonathan, 6i, 64

Tach'ien, 371Tach'ing, 192Taipu, 372Takuan, x













INDEX

458

Talent, 433

Talking, and philosophy, 417instinct, 53Tan, 363

Tang Mmghuang, Emperor, 99T’anhtta (conversation), 211Tao (the Way), 143, 339> 354> 400See also TaoismTao Ch’ien, see T’ao YuanmingTao Yuanming, x, 96, 115, 152, 154,

248, 3o6> 381, 429

Taoism, 11, 19, 109, in, 119, 143 n,152, 160, 161view of man, 20Taotehching, 296T'aot'ich (God of Gluttony), 251Taste, 362in art, 363in reading, 379Tea, 221

and friendship, 221dnnking, 221, 225enjoyment of, 225art and technique, 229preparation of, 226Tea-house psychology, 54Temperament, 49American, 150Chinese, 150Flench, 150racial, 91

Ten Comedies, 270Thackeray, William Makepeace, 232Theology, and religion, 407Thinking, academic, 415art of, 411dehumanized, 420humanized, 411, 423logical, 415poetic, 415reasonable, 415, 423scientific, 411This Simian World, 33Thoreau, Henry, 24, 116, 128, 153Thought, simplicity of, 80Ttehchi, 274 n.

Tien Yiheng, 225T'ienli, 422Time, sense of, 30, 41Tobacco, 231

Travel, 76

enjoyment of, 329philosophy of, 334

Travels of Mingltaotse, no, 332, 338

Trees, 292, 296

“Trio of Gemuses,,, 19

Ts’ai Chunmou, 225 n228

Ts’ai Hsiang, see Ts’ai Chunmou

Tseng Kuofan, 374, 382

Tsessc, in, 113, 428

Tsing Hua, 407

Tu Ch’ihshui, see Tu Lung

Tu Fu, 9, 155, 307, 429

T’u Hsishih, 200

Tu Kuan, 295

Tu Lung, 225 237, 332, 429

Tup'm, 373

Universe, Chinese attitude toward, 280moral attitude toward, 277scientific attitude toward, 277view of, 125Utopia, dream of, 76

Vacations, 332

Vagabond, 12, 331

"Vase Flowers,” (P'ingshih), 310

Velde, Van dcr, 284

Vices, American, 161

Vocabulary, Chinese critical, 430

Voltaire, 99

Walden, 153

Wang Anshih, 425 n„ 429Wang Ch’ung, 388, 429Wang Hsichih, 156, 158 429

Wang Yuyang, 240War, 76, 79Water, 319, 322Water lily, 307Waywardness, 66, 83Wealth, 102Wei, 294Wells, H. G*, 399Wen, King, 2x8West Lake, 297, 301Western Chamber, 130, 334Western Chivalry, 193civilization, 84cooking, 253













INDEX

individualism, 187logic, 420nationalism, 187philosophy, 420scholarship, 411tabic manners, 46Westward Hot, 380

Whitman, Walt, 66, 89, 124, 128, 129,150, 420

Wilde, Oscar, 169Willow tree, 298, 300Wind, 322

Windows, Chinese, 271Wines, 239Chinese, 242

contribution to literature, 240games, 239, 244, 245Winter, 280, 431, 444Wisdom, 5, 80, 98, *02Wives, 166Wodehousc, P. G., 79Woman, and man, relationship, 167Women, 43, 317American, 177and marriage, 174Chinese, 178, 189maternal instinct, 171subjection of, 68Words, and thought, 417definitions of, 418Wordsworth, William, 153Work, 145

459

World peace, and the individual, 94

Worship, 397

Writing, art of, 217, 385

Wu, Empress, 304

Wu, John C. H., 186

Wu Peifu, 236

Wtit’ting, 301

Yang Chu, 215Yang (male) principle, 20Yen Hsitsai, see Yen YuanYen Huei, 2, 429Yen Yuan, 185, 429Yencht, 273Yentse, 215

Yin (female) principle, 20, 107Yinshan Chengyao, 250, 252Yu Hsuanchi, 313

Yuan Chunglang, x, no, 154, 240,338 n., 379, 381, 429"Vase Flowers/1 310Yuan Hungtao, see Yuan ChunglangYuan Jang, 208Yuan Mei, see Yuan Tsets’aiYuan Tsets’ai, x, 154, 240, 256, 429Yuan Tsi, 283, 429Yuan Yuan, 297

Yumengymg (Sweet Dream Shadows'),316

Yiin, 288, 428

Zen Buddhists, 118Zoology, 47