\m 


W 


MODERN    RUSSIA 


q^ 


MODERN    RUSSIA 


BY 

GREGOR    ALEXINSKY 

EX-DEPUTY    OF    THE    DUMA 


TRANSLATED    BY 
BERNARD    MIALL 


T.  FISHER  UNWIN 
LONDON  :  ADELPHI  TERRACE 
LEIPSIC:  INSELSTRASSE  20 


wmm^mm 


TO 

MY  MOTHER  AND  FATHER 
THE    AUTHOR 


English  Iraiislatiou  first  published  in  /o/J. 
{All  rights  rescrveii.) 


UNIVEilSl  1  V  Oi<  CAFJFORNU 
SANTA  B.\KBA1U 


Introduction' 


CONTENTS 


PAtiE 

7 


BOOK   I 

GENERAL    SKETCH    OF    THE    HISTORICAL    DEVELOPMENT 

OF    RUSSIA 

CHAPTER 

I.      The  Country  ..... 


II.     The  Races  of  Russia 

III.  The  State  and  its  Evolution 

IV.  The  Evolution  of  the  National  Mind 


13 

18 


34 
•     69 


BOOK   II 

THE    MODERN    PERIOD 

I.     The  Economic  Position  of  Russia    ...  97 

II.     The  Russian  People         .              .              .              .  .105 

III.  The  Development  and   Forms  of  Russian  Capital  .  114 

IV.  Rural  Economy  and  the  Agrarian  Question     .  -138 
V.     The  Family  and  the   Position  of  Women  .              .  155 

VI.      The  Intellectual  Classes — Nihilism      .               .  .162 


BOOK   III 

THE    ABSOLUTE     POWER,    ITS    ORGANIZATION    AND 

RESOURCES 

I.     The  Organization  of  the  Central  Power  . 
II.     The  Russian  Bureaucracy 


173 
178 


6  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

III.  The   Police — the  Law            .               .  .               .185 

IV.  Local  Self-Government:  the  Zemstvo  .              .    196 
V.     The  Finances  of  the  State  ,              .  .              .205 

VI.     Foreign  Politics  and  the  Army               .  .              .213 


BOOK    IV 

THE    POLITICAL    CONFLICT 

I.     The  Russo-Japanese  War  and  the  Revolutionary  Crisis  231 
II.     The     Elements    of    Russian     Society — their    Role     in 

the    Revolution    and    their     Political     Ideology  250 

III.     After  the  Revolution  ....  272 

BOOK    V 

THE    NATIONAL    OUESTION    AND   THE    RELIGIOUS   QUESTION 

I.      The   National  Conflict  and  the   Unity  of  the   State  297 
II.     The   Religious  Question        ....  307 

BOOK    VI 

RUSSIAN    LITERATURE    AND     I'OETRY 

I.     General  Character  of  Russian  Literature        .  -32  1 

II.     The  Evolution  of  Literature  in  the  Nineteenth   and 

Twentieth   Centuries  .  .  .  '33° 

Conclusion  .  .  .  .  .  -353 

Index  ......  355 


INTRODUCTION 
TO   THE    ENGLISH    EDITION 

One  of  the  most  notable  characteristics  of  the  life  of  contem- 
porary society  is  its  international  quality. 

The  fundamental  function  of  human  activity — the  production 
of  materials  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  masses — has  assumed  an 
international  form.  Capital,  the  organizing  force  of  production 
and  exchange,  passes  rapidly  from  one  country  to  another,  uniting 
them  by  indestructible  material  ties.  International  organizations 
of  capitalists  are  coming  into  being,  which  are  held  in  check  by 
labour  organizations  of  an  equally  international  type.  Every 
invention,  every  improvement  in  the  technique  of  production, 
every  scientific  discovery,  is  at  once  transmitted  to  every  portion 
of  the  globe.  Besides  the  exchange  of  products  we  observe  a 
mutual  interchange  of  ideas,  and  the  two  form  a  common  founda- 
tion, a  foundation  both  material  and  spiritual,  for  the  future 
development  of  human  culture.  The  separate  members  of  the 
great  family  of  the  peoples  and  States  of  the  modern  world  are 
like  the  various  portions  of  a  single  gigantic  organism,  or  the 
links  of  a  sino;le  chain.  When  one  of  these  links  is  moved  all 
the  others  promptly  feel  the  movement.  Every  event  that  occurs 
in  any  country  of  the  modern  world  is  to-day  an  international 
event. 

The  "good  old  days"  are  gone,  when  humanity  lived  in 
groups  ;  when  the  individual  might  live  all  his  life  in  his  native 
town  or  village  without  knowing  what  was  happening  at  a  few 
miles'  distance.     The  modern  man  is  a  citizen  of  the  world. 

7 


8  INTRODUCTION 

The  telegraph  cables  which   enmesh   the  globe  force  him   to 
keep  an  eye  upon  all  the  countries  of  the  world.     It  is  obvious 
that  to  the  modern  man  a  closer  knowledge  of  the  life  of  other 
peoples    appears   not   only  desirable,   but    necessary.     The    older 
nations — the  French,  Germans,  and  English — which  have  attained 
the    highest    degree    of    civilization,    are    in    this    respect    in    a 
favourable  situation.     Their  way  of  life  and  their  material  and 
spiritual  activities  serve  as  examples  to  other  nations,  and  are  the 
object  of  attentive  study.     But  a  knowledge  of  the  younger  and 
more  backward  nations  is  far  less  widespread.     This  ignorance  is 
most  perceptible  in   the  case  of  those  nations  which  are  divided 
from  Western  Europe  not  only  by  geographical  distance,  but  also 
by  linguistic  remoteness.     All  will  remember  how   Europe  was 
surprised  by  the  apparition  of  Japan  in  the  guise  of  a  first-class 
Power,  equipped   with    the  technical  methods   of  the  Occident. 
No  one  has  yet  forgotten  the  astonishment  evoked   by  her  army, 
so  powerful  and  so  highly  trained,  her  Press,  and   her  subtle  and 
capable  diplomacy. 

Russia  is  a  thought  less  strange  to  the  European  public,  but  the 
general  knowledge  of  Russia  leaves  much  to  be  desired. 

If  we  take  even  an  educated  European — provided  he  be  not 
a  specialist,  an  investigator  into  Russian  life — we  shall  find  that 
his  information  respecting  Russia  is  almost  inevitably  confined  to 
extremely  limited  impressions,  acquired  by  chance. 

As  a  French  critic  declared,  when  the  French  edition  of  this 
volume  was  published,  this  ignorance  is  deplorable,  and  might  well 
be  dangerous. 

The  English  public  is,  I  must  admit,  perhaps  the  best  informed 
in  Europe  upon  Russian  affairs.  But  its  knowledge  of  the  life  of 
our  country  is  yet  highly  imperfect.  The  English  newspapers 
and  reviews  offer  their  readers  information  respecting  Russia,  but 
as  separate  drops  of  water  do  not  make  an  ocean,  so  the  various 
facts  and  articles  provided  by  the  Press  cannot  give  a  general  or 
a  well-grounded  view  of  the  life  of  the  great  people,  or  the 
agglomeration  of  peoples,  which  inhabits  the  vast  plain  of  Eastern 
Europe.      I   trust  tins  book  of  mine  may  serve  as  a  guide  to  all 


INTRODUCTION  g 

those    who    wish   to    know    Russia    better,    and   who    are    often 
perplexed  by  the  amazing  complexity  of  her  life. 

I  have  no  wish  to  speak  as  a  prophet  unveiling  the  future  or 
revealing  the  enigmas  of  Destiny.  Nor  do  I  speak  as  a  political 
agitator  ;  my  aim  is  quite  otherwise.  I  hope  to  speak  the  calm 
language  of  facts  and  figures  and  exact  data.  This  book,  in  my 
intention,  should  be  a  small  encyclopaedia  of  Russian  life  in  all  its 
manifestations ;  an  unpretending  photograph,  which  seeks  to 
reproduce,  as  faithfully  as  possible,  the  contours  and  the  colours 
of  reality.  But  the  reader  will  readily  understand  that  such  a 
word-picture  presents  its  difficulties.  I  should  have  preferred  to 
reveal  to  him  a  little  corner  of  the  actual  life  of  my  country  ;  but 
to  present  in  a  single  volume  all  that  I  should  like  to  say  of 
Russia,  all  that  might  interest  the  foreign  public,  is  beyond  my 
means. 

I  shall  be  always  brief  in  my  explanations  :  non  multa,  sed 
multum !  To  say  many  things  in  a  few  words  :  that  is  the 
difficult  problem  before  me.  The  reader  must  judge  how  far 
I  have  solved  it. 

G.  A. 

(The  English  edition  differs  in  certain  points  from  the  French  ; 
the  economic  and  political  portion  of  the  book  has  been  enlarged, 
and  three  new  chapters  are  included  :  one  dealing  with  the 
Police  and  the  Law,  one  with  Self-government,  and  one  with 
Foreign  Politics  and  the  Army.) 


BOOK   I 

GENERAL   SKETCH   OF    THE    HISTORICAL 
DEVELOPMENT   OF    RUSSIA 


CHAPTER    I 

THE     COUNTRY 
The  Russian  Plain — Its  geological  structure. 

The  great  Russian  plain,  by  its  geographical  aspect,  is  emphati- 
cally distinguished  from  Western  Europe.  It  occupies  a  vast 
expanse  of  2,000,000  square  miles  :  a  surface  equivalent  to  ten 
times  the  area  of  France.  The  possibility  of  making  one  enor- 
mous State  of  this  expanse  has  been  greatly  facilitated  by  the 
remarkable  unity  of  its  surface.  While  Western  Europe  is  a 
land  of  mountains,  plateaux,  plains  and  valleys,  Eastern  Europe 
forms  one  single  undulating  plain,  the  interior  of  which  is 
traversed  by  only  two  elevated  tracts  of  any  importance.  One,  in 
the  centre  of  Russia,  commences  in  the  Government  of  Novgorod 
and  ends  at  a  distance  of  3^000  miles  from  the  Don  ;  the  other 
runs  southward  from  Nijni-Novgorod.  Along  these  two  water- 
sheds are  disposed  the  principal  river  systems  of  Russia,  the 
basins  of  the  Dnieper,  the  Volga,  the  Don,  etc. 

Since  antiquity  the  river  systems  of  the  Russian  plain  have 
attracted  the  attention  of  historians  and  geographers.  In  the 
fifth  century  before  Christ,  Herodotus  described  the  southern 
portion  of  Russia  (Scythia)  :  "  In  this  country  there  is  nothing 
extraordinary  excepting  the  rivers  that  water  it ;  they  are  many 
and  of  great  size." 

Indeed,   the  basin  of  the   Volga   alone  occupies    a    surface    of 
1,216,400  square  versts — about  800,000  square  miles. 

Russia  is  distinguished  not  only  by  the  unity  of  her  great  plain, 

13 


14  MODERN  RUSSIA 

but  also  by  the  small  extent  of  her  shores.  While  in  Western 
Europe  the  coast-line  is  highly  indented,  running  far  into  the 
mainland,  so  that  30  square  miles  of  continent  correspond  to 
I   mile  of  coast-line,  the  proportion  for  Russia  is  41   to   i. 

These  peculiarities  of  the  Russian  plain  caused  the  geographers 
of  ancient  Greece  to  include  therein  a  considerable  portion  of 
Asia,  regarding  the  Don  (the  Tanais)  as  the  frontier  between 
Europe  and  Asia,  instead  of  the  Urals,  as  to-day.  The  similarity 
between  the  geographical  and  geological  conditions  of  Russia  and 
those  of  Asia  is  especially  obvious  in  the  south  of  Russia,  The 
celebrated  Russian  historian,  V.  Klutchevslcy,  thus  describes  the 
southern  steppes  : 

"In  their  geological  structure  these  steppes  are  precisely 
similar  to  those  of  the  interior  of  Asia  ;  geographically  they  are 
merely  the  immediate  continuation  of  the  latter.  They  meet 
below  the  wide  gateway  formed  by  the  gap  between  the  Caspian 
and  the  Ural  mountains.  .  .  .  The  steppes  are  a  fragment  of 
Asia  buried  in  the  midst  of  the  European  Continent,  and  are 
closely  connected  with  Asia  both  by  their  history  and  their 
climatic  conditions.  From  the  remotest  times  the  steppes  have 
been  the  principal  route  of  the  terrible  nomad  hordes,  numberless 
as  the  sands  of  the  Asiatic  deserts,  who  came  from  the  depths  of 
Asia." 

The   ancient    Greeks    regarded    Russia    as    the    continuation 
of  Asia. 

"  Asia  herself,  the  old  nomadic  Asia,  century  after  century 
with  her  tents  and  herds  invading  the  south  of  Russia,  would  not, 
in  this  portion  of  Europe,  have  experienced  the  sense  of  having 
entered  another  continent.  But  immediately  the  Carpathians 
were  crossed,  once  Hungary  was  attained,  the  Asiatic  hordes, 
finding  it  impossible  to  continue  their  Oriental  way  of  life,  very 
shortly  became  sedentary.  In  the  wide  prairies  of  Southern 
Russia,  between  the  Volga  and  the  Dniester  and  on  either  bank 
of  the  Don,  they  were  far  from  experiencing  the  same  compul- 
sion, and  for  centuries  thev  lived  there  as  on  the  steppes  of 
Central  Asia." 


THE   COUNTRY  15 

And  the  climate  of  the  steppes  of  Southern  Russia  was  nearer 
to  that  of  the  Asiatic  plains  than  to  that  of  Western  Europe, 
which  "knew  nothing  of  the  exhausting  summer  droughts  nor 
the  terrible  snowstorms  of  the  Russian  plain  :  phenomena  imported 
from  Asia." 

"  How  much  of  Asia  there  is  in  European  Russia  !  "  cries 
Klutchevsky.  "  Historically  it  is  not  Asia,  but  again,  geographi- 
cally it  is  hardly  Europe.  It  is  a  country  of  transition,  midway 
between  the  two  worlds." 

The  uniformity  of  the  soil  is  reflected  in  the  climate.  When 
we  consider  the  vast  extent  of  Russia  it  would  seem  that  notable 
differences  of  climate  in  its  various  portions  must  be  inevitable. 
But  the  absence  of  lofty  inland  ranges  and  the  southerly  trend  of 
the  principal  watersheds  qualify  these  differences,  so  that  in 
travelling  from  one  portion  of  Russia  to  another  they  are  barely 
perceptible.  Of  all  the  seas  surrounding  Russia  the  Arctic  Ocean 
alone  has  a  sensible  influence  on  the  climate  of  the  extreme  north. 
The  Baltic  and  the  Black  Sea  are  too  insignificant  to  affect  the 
climate  of  so  vast  a  plain.  The  climate  of  Russia  is  therefore 
continental,  and  the  difference  between  the  mean  winter  and 
mean  summer  temperatures  amounts  to  40°Fahr,,  and  in  some 
parts  to  63° ;  a  difference  which  increases  slowly  and  evenly  from 
south  to  north,  the  increment  being  equivalent  to  about  g^oFahr. 
for  each  degree  of  latitude. 

More  marked  is  the  change  of  temperature  from  west  to 
east.  This  is  readily  understood  :  from  the  north-west  blow 
the  temperate  and  fruitful  winds  of  Western  Europe,  while  from 
the  south-east  issue  the  winds  of  Asia,  cold  and  destructive. 

A  study  of  the  geological  past  of  Eastern  Europe  informs  us 
that  the  superior  stratum  of  the  Russian  plain  was  formed  by  the 
deposits  of  melting  glaciers.  All  over  Northern  and  Central 
Russia  the  Glacial  Age  has  left  regular  layers  of  sand,  loam,  and 
clay,  while  the  southern  portion  of  the  Russian  plain  is  covered 
with  similar  strata,  but  of  different  origin.  They  are  left  by  the 
ocean,  which,  after  invading  all  Southern  Russia,  withdrew  to  the 
present  basins  of  the  Caspian  Sea  and  the  North  Sea. 


i6  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  sea  did  not  retire  suddenly,  but  at  intervals.  The  compo- 
sition of  the  soil  and  the  character  of  the  flora  enable  us  to  deter- 
mine the  two  latest  phases  of  the  history  of  the  ancient  Southern 
Sea.  We  may  suppose  that  during  the  first  of  these  phases 
the  northern  shore  of  this  sea  ran  along  the  50th  parallel  of 
latitude,  and  then  withdrew  some  4°.  Thus  the  northern 
coast  became  a  chain  of  hills.  The  space  thus  surrendered, 
comprised  between  the  55th  and  51st  degrees  of  latitude,  is 
to-day  covered  with  a  thick  bed  of  vegetable  mould,  while  the 
country  below  the  51st  parallel,  which  was  not  relinquished  by 
the  waters  until  a  later  date,  is  covered  with  an  alkaline  soil, 
forming  a  vast  grassy  plain  which  changes  to  an  almost  naked 
desert  by   the  salt  lakes  near   the   Caspian   Sea. 

The  other  portion  of  the  Russian  plain  may  be  called  the 
wooded  zone.  Even  in  188 1  this  zone  occupied  almost  39  per 
cent,  of  the  area  of  European  Russia.  In  the  north  and  the 
centre  of  the  country  the  great  glacier  left  an  enormous  quantity 
of  fresh  water,  split  up  into  marshes  and  lakes,  forming  the  region 
of  the  great  lakes  (the  Governments  of  Novgorod,  St.  Petersburg, 
and  Pskov).  Nearly  8,000,000  acres  are  occupied  by  marshes. 
In  Polesia  (the  Governments  of  Grodno,  Minsk,  and  Volhynia) 
the  marshes  cover  nearly  5,400,000  acres. 

In  1873  drainage  works  were  instituted,  but  in  twenty-five 
years  only  one-fourth  part  of  this  region  was  drained. 

A  very  important  peculiarity  of  the  Russian  plain  is  the  quan- 
tity of  ravines  and  moving  sands  contained  therein.  The  soil 
being  of  a  relatively  recent  origin,  its  upper  layer  is  highly  unstable 
and  friable.  When  the  snows  melt  or  the  rains  fall  the  waters 
easily  erode  the  surface,  forming  ravines  which  render  the  culti- 
vation of  the  soil  a  difficult  matter.  Both  the  northern  glacier 
and  the  southern  sea  left  a  covering  of  sand,  especially  in  the 
south  of  Russia.  The  winds  whirl  it  about,  blowing  it  over  the 
roads,  the  lakes,  the  rivers,  and  the  fields.  More  than  5,400,000 
acres  of  European  Russia  are  covered  by  these  destructive  moving 
sands,  and  this  area  is  annually  increased  by  I  percent.  The  con- 
flict with  this  incalculable  enemy  was  commenced  only  in  1898, 


THE   COUNTRY  17 

and  only  some  16,000  acres  have  been  consolidated  each  year. 
If  this  work  is  not  pushed  on  more  rapidly  the  sands  may 
"gradually  cover  the  vegetable  soil  and  make  Russia's  the  fate  of 
Turkestan." 

Such  are  the  geographical  peculiarities  of  the  Russian  plain, 
which  are  narrowly  allied  to  its  geological  past. 


CHAPTER  II 
THE    RACES    OF    RUSSIA 

First  colonization  of  the  country — The  results  of  geological  and 
geographical  conditions— The  Asiatic  tribes  of  the  South — Greek 
colonization — The  Scandinavians — The  Finns.  II.  The  advent  of 
the  Slavs — Their  distribution  over  the  Russian  plain — The  conflict 
with  the  nomads.  III.  Relations  between  Finns  and  Slavs — 
Reciprocal  influence  of  these  two  races  on  manners,  language,  and 
religion.    IV.  Modern  races  and  their  subdivisions. 


How  was  the  Russian  nation  formed,  and  what  was  its  origin  .'' 
Russian  scientists  and  scholars  have  long  discussed  the  question, 
and  a  false  sense  of  patriotism  has  induced  certain  of  them  to 
declare,  obstinately  and  in  the  face  of  all  the  facts,  that  the 
Russians  were  the  autochthonous  inhabitants  of  Eastern  Europe. 
They  sought  to  reconcile  the  anthropological  Russian  prototype 
and  the  fossil  human  remains  of  the  glacial  and  a  later  epoch. 
But  all  these  attempts  remained  fruitless;  patriotism  was  power- 
less to  prove  that  the  Russian  Slavs  were  the  aborigines  of  Eastern 
Europe  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  has  been  firmly  established  that  the 
Slavs  were  the  latest  invaders  of  Russia. 

The  primitive  trend  of  the  colonization  of  the  Russian  plain 
was  determined  by  the  geological  and  geographical  past  of  the 
country.  Geological  changes  opened  to  the  Asiatics  a  wide  gate- 
way into  Eastern  Europe,  between  the  southern  extremity  ot 
the  Urals  and  the  Caspian  Sea.  For  centuries  upon  centuries 
this  passage  saw  the  descent  upon  Europe  of  vast  Asiatic 
hordes. 

I8 


THE  RACES   OF  RUSSIA  19 

These  invasions  did  not  constitute  colonization  in  the  true 
sense  of  the  word.  Few  of  the  visitors  tarried  for  long  on  the 
southern  steppes;  the  majority  continued  on  their  way  to  Western 
Europe.  Of  the  people  who  did  remain  the  scholars  of  antiquity 
took  special  note  of  the  Scythians.  The  Greek  geographers  and 
historians  were  able  to  study  their  life,  for  the  Scythians  were  in 
close  communication  with  Hellenic  culture.  The  propagandists 
of  this  culture  in  Russia  were  the  Greek  colonies  strung  out  along 
the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  in  Tauris  (the  Crimean  Peninsula),  and 
in  certain  other  localities,  some  centuries  before  the  Christian  era. 
By  means  of  these  colonies  the  Scythians  were  brought  into  contact 
with  the  Greeks,  whence  that  mixture  of  Greek  and  Hellenic 
races  to  be  found  upon  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea.  In  the  Greek 
cities  palaces  were  built  by  the  Scythian  kings  ;  and  the  Scythian 
aristocracy  was  educated  in  the  Greek  schools. 

Even  to-day  works  of  the  Greek  masters  remain  in  the  silent 
kurgans  of  Southern  Russia  ;  the  sole  relics  of  the  civilized  life  of 
the  kingdom  of  Scythia. 

After  the  Scythians  the  Sarmatians  invaded  the  Russian  steppes ; 
they  also  belonged  to  the  Aryan  group,  and  appeared  in  the  first 
century  after  Christ.  The  Sarmatians  left  behind  them  a  living 
remnant  of  their  race,  whose  descendants,  forming  the  little  tribe  of 
the  Ossetes,  live  to  this  day  on  the  northern  slopes  of  the  Caucasus. 
Then  the  Aryan  flood  gave  place  to  a  wave  surging  from  the 
very  heart  of  Asia,  and  the  Turkish  tribes  appeared  on  the  scene. 
According  to  the  chronicles  of  the  Chinese,  the  western  frontier 
of  China,  from  the  commencement  of  the  third  century  of  our 
era,  witnessed  numerous  social  catastrophes  and  political  trans- 
formations, which  continued  until  the  thirteenth  century.  Each 
of  these  upheavals  resulted  in  the  overflow  into  Europe  of 
Turkish  tribes,  which  followed  one  another  across  the  southern 
steppes  of  Russia.  In  the  fourth  century  of  our  era  the  Huns 
came  thither  ;  in  the  sixth,  the  Bulgars  and  the  Avars.  The 
Khasars  reigned  there  from  the  seventh  century  to  the  tenth  ;  the 
Petchenegs  between  the  tenth  and  eleventh  ;  and  the  Polovetzes 
from  the  eleventh  to  the  twelfth  century. 


20  MODERN  RUSSIA 

After  the  Turks  appeared  the  Mongols,  whose  representatives 
— the  Tartars — formed  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga  an  independent 
State,  remaining  in  Russia  for  five  hundred  years — from  the  thir- 
teenth century  to  the  eighteenth.  The  Tartars  were  the  last  of 
the  Asiatic  occupants  of  Russia,  but  they  remained  longest  of  all, 
the  preceding  tribes  rapidly  replacing  one  another. 

Formerly  one  flood  of  Asiatic  peoples  had  hardly  poured  into  the 
Russian  steppes  than  another  arrived,  sweeping  all  before  it  and 
drawing  all  after  it.  The  new-comers  had  not  sufficient  time  to 
fix  themselves  permanently  in  the  relatively  narrow  zone  of  the 
steppes  which  winds  along  the  Black  Sea  and  the  Caspian.  As  for 
directing  their  colonizing  movement  towards  the  north,  that  was 
not  to  be  thought  of,  for  there  commenced  the  forest  belt,  whose 
natural  conditions  were  totally  unsuited  to  the  needs  and  the 
economic  customs  of  the  nomads. 

Thus  Asiatic  culture  could  not  take  root  in  Russia,  and  the 
character  of  the  shifting  flood  of  invaders  was  principally  destruc- 
tive. Very  different  was  the  character  of  the  Greek  colonization, 
whose  centres  dotted  the  northern  coast  of  the  Black  Sea. 
According  to  Herodotus,  the  Hellenic  oases,  even  in  the  fifth 
century  before  Christ,  played  a  considerable  part  in  the  life  of  the 
surrounding  populations.  The  Greek  colonizers,  pushing  forward 
from  the  trading  cities,  penetrated  the  country  northward,  settled 
in  the  forest  belt,  and  spread  the  Hellenic  influence  among  the 
inhabitants.  This  tie  between  the  Greeks  and  the  populations 
of  the  Russian  plain,  interrupted  awhile  by  the  Asiatic  influx,  was 
quickly  renewed,  and  the  seventh  century  of  our  era  once  more 
saw  Greek  traders  and  colonists  in  the  south  of  Russia.  But 
these  Greeks,  the  sons  of  Caesarian  Byzantium,  no  longer  of 
the  republics  of  Hellas,  were  missionaries  of  a  culture  already 
different. 

The  road  into  Europe  followed  by  Greek  culture  was  the 
Dnieper,  a  river  utilized  both  by  Hellas  and  Byzantium,  whose 
importance  was  noted  by  Herodotus.  The  ancient  Greeks 
received  by  this  route  the  yellow  amber  of  the  Baltic  shores. 
The  earliest  Russian  chronicles  speak  of  the  Dnieper  as  the  route 


THE  RACES   OF  RUSSIA  21 

leading  "from  the  Scandinavians  to  the  Greeks" — jz  variags  v 
greki.  This  expression  shows  that  not  only  did  the  Greeks  employ 
this  route,  but  that  another  colonizing  current  met  them  from 
the  country  of  the  Variags  (Varingians),  the  name  by  which  the 
chronicler  knew  the  inhabitants  of  the  Baltic  coasts  and  the  Scan- 
dinavian peninsula — Swedes,  Norwegians,  and  Goths.  Moreover, 
in  the  early  centuries  of  our  era  the  hardy  Scandinavian  sailors, 
merchants  at  once  and  pirates,  succeeded  in  pushing  southward 
and  eastward  from  the  Baltic  to  the  Black  Sea,  by  means  of  the 
waterways  which  formed  an  almost  continuous  connection.  The 
river-basins  of  the  western  Russian  plain  were  well  adapted  to 
half-warlike,  half-commercial  expeditions  ;  from  the  Baltic  Sea 
the  Norsemen  sailed  up  the  Neva,  across  Lake  Ladoga,  up  the 
Volkhov,  across  Lake  Ilmen,  and  up  the  Lovat ;  then,  by  way 
of  lesser  streams,  they  reached  the  Dnieper,  and  the  Dnieper  led 
to  the  Black  Sea.  Where  the  waterway  was  broken  they  made 
volokom  or  portage  (from  volotchit^  to  drag),  hauling  their  light, 
long  vessels  from  river   to  river. 

In  the  fourth  century  the  celebrated  leader  of  the  Goths,  Ger- 
manaricus,  at  the  end  of  a  series  of  invasions,  established  a  great 
kingdom  in  the  Russian  plain,  which  according  to  the  historians 
was  "  the  first  historic  kingdom  founded  by  Europeans  within  the 
limits  of  modern  Russia."  Into  the  composition  of  this  kingdom 
entered  certain  Finnish  tribes — the  Esthonians,  the  Merias,  and 
the  Mordvans. 

The  Finns,  long  before  the  Slavs  entered  the  Russian  plain, 
peopled  a  considerable  portion  of  the  forest  zone.  All  Middle 
Russia  was  occupied  by  Finnish  colonies  (the  Governments  of 
Moscow,  Vladimir,  and  Kostroma).  The  Finns,  thanks  to  the 
network  of  rivers  and  lakes,  had  spread  in  all  directions,  covering 
with  their  villages  an  enormous  area,  from  the  middle  course  of 
the  Volga  to  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Finland,  and  from  the 
upper  course  of  the  Dnieper  and  the  affluents  of  the  left  bank 
to  the  basin  of  the  Dvina  to  the  north.  The  Finns  were  the  first 
inhabitants  of  the  forest  zone  of  Eastern  Europe  mentioned  by 
history.     They  were  also  its  earliest  colonists  in  the  true  sense  of 


22  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  word  :  they  blazed  the  first  trails  through  the  dense  woods, 
and  the  Slavs  merely  followed  in   their  footsteps. 


II 


As  for  the  Russian  Slavs,  historians  have  given  much  time  and 
labour  to  determine  where  they  dwelt  before  appearing  on  the 
banks  of  the  numberless  rivers  of  Eastern  Europe. 

Some  asserted  that  they  came  from  the  steppes  of  South 
Russia,  connecting  them  with  the  Roxolans  or  Rossolans  who 
lived  there  at  that  period,  and  even  connoting  a  linguistic 
resemblance  between  the  names  "Russians"  and  "Rossolans," 
for  Ross  was  formerly  often  employed  in  place  of  Rim.  Others 
made  them  inhabitants  of  the  southern  shores  of  the  Baltic. 
7"o-day  we  know  that  the  Slavs  who  colonized  Russia  descended 
from  the  Carpathian  Mountains,  where  they  were  still  living  in 
the  fifth  century  after  Christ,  and  that  they  only  commenced 
their  march  eastward  in  the  sixth  century.  This  march  appears 
to  be  a  decisive  point  in  the  history  of  Russia. 

Let  us  remark  that  the  word  "  Rouss "  was  not  always  the 
name  of  our  people.  A  Latin  writer  of  the  fifth  century  — 
Jordanus — called  them  the  Veneti,  and  the  Byzantine  authors  of 
the  fifth  century  speak  of  the  SicXajSot  or  Slavs.  It  was  only 
after  their  arrival  in  the  plain  of  Eastern  Europe  that  they 
received  the  name  of  "  Russ,"  a  name  borrowed  from  a  Scan- 
dinavian tribe  established  in   Russia  since  the  eighth  century. 

The  colonizing  movement  of  the  Russian  Slavs  commenced 
only  when  the  other  populations  were  distributed  about  the 
Russian  plain  ;  it  continued  during  several  centuries,  and  accord- 
ing to  some  writers  the  movement  of  the  popular  masses  has  not 
completely  subsided  even  to-day. 

The  primitive  Slav  colonists  profited  by  the  natural  con- 
veniences of  the  plain  of  Eastern  Europe — its  level  and  equal 
surface  and  its  great  river  systems. 

Between  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries  the  ancient  inhabitants 


THE  RACES  OF  RUSSIA  23 

of  the  Carpathians,  having  colonized  the  basin  of  the  Dnieper, 
pushed  forward  to  the  north,  north-east,  and  north-west.  At 
first  they  colonized  the  belt  adjoining  the  road  "  from  the  Variags 
to  the  Greeks"  of  which  mention  has  been  made.  At  the  two 
extremities  of  this  belt  rose  Kiev  and  Novgorod,  towns  which 
subsequently  served   as   the  foundation  of  the  Slav  colonization. 

In  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries  we  find  settlers  from  the 
Carpathians  in  the  centre  of  Russia,  in  the  parts  now  occupied 
by  the  Governments  of  Vladimir,  Moscow,  Kostroma,  and 
Yaroslavl. 

In  the  fourteenth  century  the  Slavs  had  reached  the  basin  of  the 
northern  Dvina,  and  in  the  sixteenth  century  were  installed  on 
the  shores  of  the  White  Sea  and  the  Arctic  Ocean  ;  while  in 
the  seventeenth  they  had  crossed  the  Urals  and  were  moving 
eastward  across  Siberia.  How  favourable  were  the  natural  con- 
ditions of  colonization  and  how  energetic  the  colonists  them- 
selves we  may  judge  by  this  remarkable  fact :  in  the  sixteenth 
and  seventeenth  centuries  the  wave  of  Russian  emigration  passed 
from  the  Urals  to  the  north-western  extremities  of  Siberia  in 
the    space  of  seventy  years. 

The  cause  of  this  migration  must  be  sought  in  the  economic 
life  of  the  Slavs.  The  fundamental  characteristic  of  their  life 
resided  in  the  fact  that  their  numbers  were  so  great  as  to  demand 
a  continual  change  of  residence.  The  resources  of  one  locality 
being  exhausted,  the  Slavs  left  it  to  go  farther  afield.  Their 
agriculture  made  similar  demands.  As  for  commerce,  and  their 
trade  was  considerable,  it  required  no  sinking  of  capital  ;  more- 
over, it  was  half  trade  and  half  brigandage.  The  Finnish  tribes 
established  to  the  north  of  the  Volga,  being  peaceable  folk,  readily 
submitted  to  the  Slavs,  who  flowed  towards  the  centre  and  the 
north  of  the  plain  in  two  currents  :  one,  compact  and  principally 
agricultural,  setting  out  from  the  banks  of  Dnieper,  and  the 
other,   commercial  and  rapacious,  from  Novgorod. 

Much  later  the  steppes  of  South  Russia  were  colonized.  The 
country  was  unfamiliar  and  unsympathetic  ;  the  Slavs  were  used 
to    the  forest  and   the   customs  of   forest  life  :    coming  to  the 


24  MODERN  RUSSIA 

steppes  they  had  to  transform  their  way  of  life.     So  long  as  the 
forest  zone  had  an    empty  corner,  there  the  Slavs  settled. 

In  their  march  southward,  moreover,  the  Slav  tribes  encountered 
serious  obstacles  :  the  Asiatic  nomads,  the  Petchenegs  (ninth- 
eleventh  centuries),  the  Polovctzes  (eleventh-thirteenth  centuries), 
and  the  Tartars  (thirteenth-eighteenth  centuries),  who  for  a 
thousand  years  held  Southern  Russia  in  a  state  of  siege.  Inces- 
santly these  Asiatics  attacked  the  Slavs,  killed  and  pillaged, 
ruined  their  villages,  and  carried  off  their  women.  The  period 
of  Russian  history  known  as  the  period  of  Kiev  (ninth-thirteenth 
centuries)  is  full  of  struggles  between  Slavs  and  Asiatics,  and 
the  wars  of  the  Russian  princes  against  the  nomads  form  one 
of  the  saddest  pages  of  the  past  of  Russia.  This  colossal  conflict, 
terminated  by  the  fall  of  the  "  Russia  of  Kiev,"  and  the 
removal  of  the  national  centre  to  Moscow,  is  recorded  in 
Russian  poetry,  and  inspired  one  of  the  greatest  of  Russian 
painters,  Vassnetsov.  Of  two  of  his  most  famous  canvases,  one, 
"The  Knights"  (Bogatyri),  represents  three  Slav  warriors,  on 
horseback,  mounting  guard  and  gazing  across  the  steppes  ;  the 
other  represents  a  group  of  Slav  warriors  lying  slain  on  the  field  of 
battle,  the  birds  of  prey  hovering  above  their  heads. 

After  the  Kiev  period  the  struggle  was  continued  by  Muscovite 
Russia.  Of  the  enemies  of  Russia  the  Tartars  were  those  that 
remained  longest  and  were  the  most  dangerous.  They  invaded 
Russia  in  1237,  and  for  two  hundred  years  were  masters 
of  the  Russian  princes  and  people.  In  1480,  under  Ivan  III, 
Grand  Duke  of  Moscow,  the  Tartar  yoke  was  at  last 
thrown   off. 

The  attacks  of  the  Tartars  were  far  more  terrible  than  those 
of  the  Polovetzes.  With  the  latter  the  struggle  was  on  equal 
terms  ;  and  often,  when  the  princes  of  Kiev  quarrelled  among 
themselves,  they  called  in  the  Polovetz  princes  to  aid  them  in 
warring  upon  their  countrymen.  The  military  technique  or 
the  Polovetzes  was  not  superior  to  that  of  the  Russians.  The 
Tartars,  on  the  contrary,  had  attained  the  highest  degree  of 
military    skill,    and    "  were  to  the  thirteenth  century  what  the 


THE   RACES   OF  RUSSIA  25 

Prussians  were  to  the  eighteenth"  (Pokrovsky,  Russian  History). 
They  were  strong  in  attack,  and  captured  the  best  fortified  of 
the  Russian  towns  ;  the  assault  of  a  town  being  followed  by 
complete  destruction  and  the  slaughter  of  the  inhabitants.  The 
surrounding  populations  they  loaded  with  imposts. 

What  moral  or  social  influence  had  the  nomads  on  the  Slavs  ? 
The  Petchenegs  and  the  Polovetzes  had  scarcely  any,  as  their 
stay  in  Russia  was  short  ;  moreover,  their  relations  with  the 
Russians  were  like  those  of  one  tribe  of  Russians  with  another ; 
they  imported  no  new  element  into  the  manners  of  the  Slavs. 
Defeated  by  the  Tartars,  the  Polovetzes  took  refuge  in  the  south, 
where  they  doubtless  mingled  with  the  Slavs  ;  for  in  the  sixteenth 
century  the  Russian  population  of  a  portion  of  the  district  of  Kiev 
were  known  as  Polovetzes. 

The  influence  of  the  Tartars  was  greater.  They  did  not  con- 
fine their  operations  to  isolated  attacks  :  they  sought  to  make 
the  territory  inhabited  by  the  Russians  their  uluss^  their  domain. 
Chance-won  tribute  being  insufficient,  they  subjected  the  Russians 
to  a  regular  system  of  taxation,  and  established  a  financial  organi- 
zation. This  organization  survived  the  Tartar  rule,  was  retained 
by  the  Muscovite  Tsars  and  princes,  and  became  part  of  the 
financial  system  of  the  Muscovite  kingdom.  We  may  say  that 
the  first  organizers  of  Russian  unitv  were  not  the  High  Princes 
of  Moscow,  but  the  Tartar  Khans,  who  assembled  the  towns 
and  principalities  of  Russia  as  a  State,  and  assisted  the  high 
principality  of  Moscow  to  place  itself  at  the  head  of  all  the 
Russian  principalities.  The  richest  of  the  Russian  princes  bought 
of  the  Khan  the  yarlyk^  the  right  to  call  themselves  "  High 
Princes."  These  High  Princes  of  Moscow  were  the  inter- 
mediaries between  the  Russians  and  the  Tartars,  being  entrusted 
with  the  levying  of  taxes,  which  were  paid  over  to  the  "  Golden 
Horde"  (the  name  of  the  Tartar  Empire  of  South  Russia 
between  the  thirteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries).  By  appro- 
priating a  portion  of  this  wealth  they  became  rich  and  powerful. 

The  influence  of  the  Tartars  on  the  manners  and  the  spiritual 
life  of  the   people  was   negligible,  for  they  held  apart  from  the 


26  MODERN  RUSSIA 

inner  life  of  the  conquered  populations.  The  economic  and 
social  structures  ot  the  two  nations  were  dissimilar,  and  kept 
them  estranged.  The  influence  of  the  Tartars  on  the  manners 
of  the  Russian  princes  and  aristocrats  was  more  marked,  for  the 
latter  were  constantly  in  contact  with  the  Khans,  having  many- 
political  and  financial  affiiirs  to  discuss  with  them.  It  is  un- 
doubtedly the  case  that  an  element  of  Asiatic  despotism  and 
brutality  penetrated  the  manners  and  the  psychology  of  the 
upper  strata  of  Russian  society  at  this  period,  and  that  it  was 
subsequently  reflected  by  the  people  ruled    thereby. 


Ill 

Very  different  were  the  relations  of  the  Russian  Slavs  with 
their  neighbours  of  Finnish  origin,  who  occupied  the  centre 
and  part  of  the  north  of  the  plain  of  Eastern  Europe  long  before 
the  Slavs  appeared  in  these  countries.  These  relations  were 
established  in  a  highly  peaceable  fashion,  thanks  to  the  Finns, 
whom  Tacitus  had  long  before  described  as  a  "  poor  tribe  un- 
acquainted with  houses  or  arms,"  and  whom  Jordanus  regarded 
as  the  most  docile  of  all  the  peoples  of  Northern  Europe.  This 
peaceable  encounter  of  the  two  peoples  was  also  due  in  part 
to  the  character  of  the  Russian  colonization,  the  pioneer  element 
of  which  was  composed  of  agriculturists,  who  advanced  from  the 
south-west  and  gradually  spread  over  the  country.  There  was 
no  conquest  of  the  Finns,  but  a  colonization  of  their  country, 
which  was  not  followed  by  the  expulsion  or  the  enslavement  of 
the  earlier  settlers.  Quarrels  there  might  have  been,  but  history 
relates  no  conquest,  no  defensive  rebellion. 

These  assertions  are  sustained  by  linguistic  data,  and  especially 
by  the  geographical  nomenclature  of  the  region  ;  villages  and 
rivers  bearing  Finnish  or  Russian  names  are  mingled  indis- 
criminately, in  place  of  being  confined  to  separate  zones.  We 
mav.  therefore,  conclude  that  the  Russian  settlers  did  not  advance 
in  a  compact   mass,  but   in  irregular  streams,  establishing  them- 


THE  RACES   OF  RUSSIA  27 

selves  gradually  in  the  wide  spaces  dividing  the  Finnish  villages, 
which  lay  scattered  amid  the  woods  and  the  marshes.  In  one 
of  the  chief  centres  of  Russian  colonization,  Rostov,  not  far 
from  the  Volga,  and  near  Yaroslavl,  part  of  the  town  was  long 
known  as  the  Finnish  quarter,  and  there,  during  the  latter  half 
of  the  eleventh  century,  dwelt  the  Finns  in  perfect  accord  with 
the  Russians.  Such  cohabitation  could  not  have  existed  had 
the  two  peoples  been  in  any  degree  hostile. 

This  admixture  with  the  Finns  had  a  considerable  influence 
on  the  Russian  Slavs,  at  first  of  a  social  nature  only.  The 
Finnish  tribes,  aborigines  of  the  upper  reaches  of  the  Volga, 
were  entirely  rural,  and  were  socially  akin  to  the  Russian 
agriculturists.  As  the  two  populations  were  at  peace,  so  were 
their  gods ;  and  as  the  Slav  current  flowed  over  the  Finnish 
soil  the  two  peoples  were  fused  into  one  ethnographical  and 
social  mass,  and  their  beliefs  and  mythologies  were  similarly 
compacted.  No  insuperable  frontier  ever  divided  the  two 
religions,  which  were  but  different  aspects  of  the  same  fetishism. 
The  fusion  of  the  two  beliefs  resulted  in  the  most  curious  of 
double  religions.  The  simpler  gods  of  the  Finns  took  a  lower 
place  than  those  of  the  Russians,  just  as  the  economy  of  the 
Finns  gave  place  to  the  more  complex  economy  of  the  Russians. 
The  contact  of  this  double  religion  with  Christianity  was  more 
violent,  but  again  assimilation  ensued,  and  a  triple  religion  was 
born,  of  which   we  shall  speak   in  another  chapter. 

We  have  already  seen  that  traces  of  Finnish  influence  are  to  be 
found  in  the  geographical  nomenclature  of  Central  Russia  and  the 
region  of  the  Volga.  In  these  parts  we  encounter  numerous 
rivers  whose  names  end  in  the  syllable  va.  This  va  is  a  corrup- 
tion of  the  Finnish  oua  =  water.  The  names  of  certain  towns 
also  bear  the  Finnish  imprint  ;  even  Moscow  (in  Russian 
Moskva).  Many  articles  of  domestic  use  have  also  Finnish 
names. 

A  more  considerable  phenomenon  is  the  phonetic  modification 
of  the  Russian  language  ;  the  introduction  of  hard  consonants 
and  inharmonious  groups  of  consonants  and  vowels.     The  proof 


28  MODERN  RUSSIA 

that  these  transformations  were  introduced  by  the  Finns  is  that 
they  are  more  and  more  pronounced  as  we  advance  from  the 
South-East  of  Russia  toward  the  North-West. 


IV 


What  is  the  Russian    nation   from  the  racial  point  of  view  ? 
And   firstly,  what  do  we  mean  by  race  ?     Usually  by  the  word 
"  race"  we  denote  a  mass  of  particular  anthropological  peculiarities, 
the  ethnological  indices  proper  to  a  given    people.     If   we   en- 
deavour to  solve  the  question  by  the  aid  of  anthropology  we  are 
forced  to  abandon  the  inquiry,  so  scanty  and  uncertain  are  the 
data.      During    their    long    sojourn    on    the    globe    the    isolated 
portions  of  the  human  race  have  formed  so  complex  a  mixture 
that  it  is  extremely  difficult,  indeed  almost  impossible,  to  elucidate 
the  origin  of  these  different  groups  from  the  racial  point  of  view. 
To  refer  this  or  that  people  positively  to  this  or  that  "  pure  " 
race  is,  as  has  been  said,  as  impossible  as  to  determine  the  race  of 
a  stray  dog.     Moreover,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  Slavs  on  the 
whole  have  appeared  on  the  historical  stage  far   later  than   the 
other  nations  of  Europe,   and  that  the  history   of  the    Russian 
branch  of  the  Slav  people  is  shorter  than   that  of  other  peoples. 
Those  who  desire  something  more  exact  than  the  empty  classifi- 
cation of  the  Slav   as  a  "  tall  fair   man   with   blue  eyes  "  must 
admit  that  the  precise  anthropological   qualification  of  the  Slav 
at  the  present  day   is  impossible.     We    can    define    the    special 
characteristics  of  the  Russian  nation  only  in  a  limited  degree,  for 
the   data  are   limited   to    the    external    differences    between    the 
physical  types  of  various  groups   of   Russian   Slavs  dwelling  in 
European  Russia.     These  may  be  subdivided  into  three  leading 
classes  :  the  Great  Russian  (Vielikoruss),  the   Little  Russian  or 
Ukranian  (Maloruss),  and  the  White  Russian   (Bieloruss)  types. 
Those  who  have  retained  the  most  primitive  and  pronounced  Slav 
type  are  the  Little  Russians  or  inhabitants  of  the  Ukraine.     How- 
ever, some  investigators  maintain   that  their  "  purity  "  is  not  so 


THE  RACES   OF  RUSSIA  29 

pure,  thanks  to  the  Asiatic  tribes  who  formerly  strayed  across  the 
steppes  of  South  Russia.  The  White  Russians  also  have  de- 
parted from  the  Slav  type,  having  mixed  with  Lithuanian  stock. 
As  for  the  Great  Russians,  they  are  least  pure  of  all  the  Slavs,  for 
their  long  cohabitation  with  the  Finns  has  affected  not  only  their 
social  life,  their  religion,  and  their  language,  but  has  effected 
considerable  changes  in  their  anthropological  features.  "The 
Great  Russian  physiognomy  does  not  reveal  the  general  character- 
istics of  the  Slavs.  The  cheek-bones  are  highly  salient,  the  hair 
almost  always  brown.  The  Great  Russian  nose  is  very  peculiar  ; 
resting  on  a  wide  base,  it  alone  certifies  Finnish  influence." 

This  current  division  ot  the  Russian  people  is  confirmed  by 
linguistic  data :  the  Little  Russians  speak  a  dialect  which  is 
almost  the  old  Slav  language. 

Much  more  marked  has  been  the  influence  of  racial  character- 
istics of  secondary  formation  ;  that  is,  those  characteristics  in- 
separable from  the  environment  of  the  nation.  But  in  this  case 
it  would  be  imprudent  to  attribute  too  much  significance  to  the 
natural  environment,  for  humanity  is  gradually  liberating  itself 
therefrom,  substituting  an  artificial  environment,  technical, 
economic,  and  social,  which  stands  between  man  and  nature. 
M.  Paul  Lafargue,  in  his  interesting  work  on  Le  determinisme 
economique  de  Karl  Marx^  points  out  that  just  as  the  environment, 
acting  upon  vegetables  and  animals  and  men,  able  to  resist  by 
means  of  organic  adaptation,  is  sufficient  to  differentiate  even 
such  as  have  a  common  origin,  and  to  create  the  various  races  of 
humanity,  so  the  artificial  environment  which  civilized  man 
erects  has  a  similar  action  ;  and  that  similar  artificial  environ- 
ments will  eventually  cause  a  racial  approximation  in  peoples  ot 
different  racial  origin.  The  artificial  environment  may  therefore 
be  regarded  as  tending  to  unify  the  human  species. 

From  one  point  of  view,  then,  the  origin  of  races  is  a  question 
of  secondary  importance  ;  the  social  and  economic  environment 
is  the  crucial  factor.  The  United  States  of  America  are  a 
striking  case  in  point  ;  the  intensity  of  economic  life  is  there  so 
great  that  the  masses  of  immigrants  which  flow  thither  yearly  are 


30  MODERN  RUSSIA 

fused  in  the  crucible  of  capitalism  and  transformed  into  a  new 
alloy,  which  is  the  American  race.  Even  the  "  negro  question," 
complicated  by  a  profound  divergence  of  physical  type,  is  ac- 
cording to  some  observers  based  more  upon  economic  than  upon 
racial  factors  ;  the  white  man  is  the  representative  of  capitalism 
and  the  black  of  a  less  developed  economy.^ 

The  Russian  national  question,  as  we  shall  presently  demon- 
strate, is  due  not  to  a  conflict  between  different  races,  but  to 
a  conflict  between  opposing  economic  types,  and  the  current 
economic  development  of  the  country,  overruling  the  systems  of 
production  peculiar  to  different  regions,  is  leading  to  new  com- 
binations and  new  relations,  by  force  of  which  the  national 
conflict  is  becoming  a  social  conflict.  But  here  we  have  a 
phenomenon  of  the  capitalist  period  of  Russian  history  :  a  modern 
development.  Formerly,  before  the  growth  of  the  artificial 
environment  had  rendered  man  as  independent  of  the  natural 
environment  as  he  is  to-day,  the  technique  of  production  and 
economic  activities  provoked  local  peculiarities  and  groupings  of  a 
tribal  nature.  These  peculiarities  were  in  many  cases  profoundly 
rooted,  for  the  sections  of  the  nation  were  profoundly  isolated, 
thanks  to  the  lack  of  means  of  communication  ;  so  that  the 
ethnological  features  remaining  from  the  past  are  as  yet  by  no 
means  effaced. 

In  describing  these  features  we  must  avoid  the  snare  of  the 
subjective.  For  example,  in  speaking  of  the  influence  of  nature 
on  the  mentality  of  our  ancestors,  we  must  not  attribute  to  these 
latter  the  impressions  which  we  ourselves  receive  from  the 
mournful  plains,  the  mighty  rivers,  and  the  gloomy  forests  of  our 
country.  Our  ancestors  possessed  a  different  mentality,  and 
probably  saw  things  at  quite  a  different  angle.  The  following 
passage  from  the  pen  of  Klutchevsky,  describing  the  Great 
Russian,  must  therefore  be  accepted  with  a  certain  reserve  : 

"  The  Great  Russia  of  the  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and  fifteenth 
centuries,  a  country  of  marshes,  presented,  at  every  step,  danger 
and  fatigue  and  unforeseen  difficulties  which  necessitated  a  great 
'  Firmin  Roz,  VEnergie  americaine,  p.  310. 


THE  RACES   OF  RUSSIA  31 

presence  of  mind,  a  continual  struggle  against  the  elements. 
This  accustomed  the  Great  Russian  to  scrutinize  nature  ;  to  keep 
his  eyes  always  open  ;  to  go  forward  with  caution,  sounding  the 
track  before  him,  and  never  to  cross  a  stream  without  ascertaining 
the  ford  ;  and  this  developed  a  great  adaptability  in  the  face  of 
petty  difficulties  and  a  notable  patience  in  the  face  of  checks  and 
privation.  In  all  Europe  there  is  no  people  less  spoilt  and 
exacting,  less  accustomed  to  rely  upon  nature  and  the  future,  than 
the  Great  Russians. 

"The  nature  of  the  country  continually  confronted  the 
colonist  with  fresh  economic  enigmas,  and  forced  him  carefully 
to  study  all  the  conditions  of  a  district  before  halting  there  and 
devoting  himself  to  agriculture.  Hence  the  astonishing  power  of 
observation  revealed  by  the  popular  proverbs  of  Great  Russia. 

"  The  proverbs  of  the  Great  Russian  are  capricious,  as  is  the 
nature  of  the  country  which  they  reflect.  Nature  often  mocks 
at  the  most  prudent  calculations  of  the  Great  Russian,  and  upsets 
his  most  modest  experiments.  Accustomed  to  this  treachery,  the 
Great  Russian,  full  of  foresight,  forms  desperate  and  unreasonable 
decisions,  meeting  the  capriciousness  of  nature  by  the  capricious- 
ness  of  his  audacity.  This  inclination  to  tempt  Destiny  is  the 
avos  (perhaps)  of  the  Great  Russian." 

M.  Klutchevsky  goes  on  to  explain  that  a  fine  day  being  a 
rarity,  and  the  summer  short,  the  Great  Russian  must  make  the 
most  of  a  favourable  working-day,  so  that  his  powers  of  rapid  and 
assiduous  labour  are  remarkable  ;  but  he  has  no  capacity  for 
moderate  and  regular  work.  Used  to  the  life  of  villages  isolated 
by  lack  of  roads,  he  is  unused  to  working  in  union  with  others  : 
he  labours  best  alone  with  none  to  watch  him.  He  is  reserved, 
prudent,  timid,  always  on  the  watch  :  not  at  ease  in  company  : 
uncertainty  stimulates  him  :  success  diminishes  his  efforts. 

The  numerical  preponderance  of  the  Great  Russians  over  the 
other  Slav  peoples,  Russian  or  otherwise,  is  considerable. 

In  1897,  the  year  of  the  last  census,  the  total  number  of 
Russian  Slavs  dwelling  in  the  Russian  Empire  amounted  to 
83,933,500,  or  two-thirds  of  the  whole  population,  and  in  some 


32  MODERN  RUSSIA 

departments  the  proportion  was  95  per  cent,  to  99  per  cent.  Of 
these  55,667,500  were  Great  Russians  (66*3  per  cent,  of  the 
Russian  population  of  Russia),  22,380,000  Little  Russians  (26*6  per 
cent.), and  5,885,000  White  Russians  (7  per  cent.).  Next  come 
the  Polish  Slavs,  7,931,000;  the  Bulgars,  172,000;  the  Slovaks 
and  Czechs,  50,000  ;  the  Serbs,  Khorvats  and  Sloventsy, 
1,000.  Then  come  the  representatives  of  an  Indo-European 
group:  the  Letts,  1,435,000;  the  Livonians,  1,210,000;  and 
the  Jmuds,  448,000.  Then  comes  the  Germanic  branch,  com- 
prising 1,790,000  Germans,  together  with  Swedes,  Norwegians, 
English,  Danes,  and  Dutch.  But  these  are  mostly  passing 
visitors.  The  Roman  family  is  represented  by  the  Moldavians 
and  Roumanians,  1,121,500  ;  the  16,500  French  and  4,500 
Italians  are  chance  elements.  Of  Iranians  there  are  850,000 
Tadgiks(in  the  Russian  possessions  of  Central  Asia);  the  Ossetes, 
171,000;  the  Persians,  31,000;  and  a  few  other  peoples.  In 
the  Armenian  group  are  1,173  Armenians.  Then  come  the 
Greeks,  186,000,  and  a  few  other  Indo-European  peoples  : 
Tzigani,  to  the  number  of  44,000,  Albanians,  and  even  Hindoos. 
The  Semitic  race  is  represented  principally  by  the  Jews, 
5,640,000  ;  it  also  includes  the  Syro-Chaldeans  of  the  Caucasus 
and  the  Arabs  of  Central  Asia.  The  Uralo-Altaian  race  is 
represented  (excluding  Finland)  by  two  great  groups  :  3,500,000 
Finns  and  13,601,000  Turko-Tartars.  Each  of  these  races  is 
minutely  subdivided.  The  Finns  number  four  chief  sub- 
divisions :  (i)  the  Baltic  Finns,  akin  to  the  Finlanders, 
1,393,000  (the  most  cultivated  being  Esthonians)  ;  (2)  the  Finns 
of  the  Volga,  1,399,000  (Mordvans,  Tcherimiss)  ;  (3)  the  Finns 
of  the  Urals  and  the  River  Kama,  6,797,600  (Zyrians,  Permiaks, 
Votiaks)  ;  (4)  and  the  Ugro-Finns,  28,000  (Ostiaks,  Voguls). 
The  Turko-Tartaric  group  contains  the  Khirgiz,  4,884,000,  and 
the  Tartars,  3,737,500  ;  the  Psaschkirs,  131,600  ;  the  Tchuvash, 
843,500,  and  a  mass  of  populations  on  the  Volga,  in  Turkestan, 
and  Siberia.  In  the  Caucasus  are  two  groups  entirely  isolated 
from  the  other  races  :  the  first,  of  Kartvelia  and  Iveria,  com- 
prises   the    Georgians,    824,000 ;    the    Imeritinians,    273,000 ; 


THE  RACES   OF  RUSSIA  33 

the  Mingrelians,  239,500;  and  the  Svanetiens,  15,000.  The 
second  group,  known  as  "  the  Mountaineers,"  comprises 
the  Tchetchentzes,  226,000,  the  Lezghins,  600,000,  and  the 
Circassians,  or  Tcherkess.  And  all  these  peoples  are  sub- 
divided into  tribes. 

A  similar  diversity  reigns  in  the  Hyperborean  group,  consisting 
of  semi-extinct  Asiatic  tribes  :  Ostiaks,  Yukagirs,  Tchuktchis, 
Esquimaux,  Aleuts,  Kamtchadals.  If  we  add  the  57,000  Chinese, 
the  26,000  Koreans,  and  other  Eastern  peoples,  the  number  of 
dialects  and  languages  spoken  on  Russian  territory  amounts  to 
150,  not  including  those  of  Finland,  where  dwell  2,362,000 
Finlanders  and  349,500  Swedes,  as  well  as  Russians,  Ger- 
mans, etc. 

The  religions  practised  in  the  immense  Empire  of  Russia  are 
many  :  the  principal  are  the  Orthodox,  69  per  cent. ;  Old 
Believers,  8  per  cent.  ;  Protestants,  2*8  per  cent. ;  Jews,  4-2  per 
cent.  ;  Mahometans,  1 1  per  cent.  ;  the  Buddhist  religion  also  is 
practised,  and  many  lesser  faiths. 

We  shall  now  consider  the  various  forces  that  have  formed 
this  gigantic  anthill  of  such  varied  languages,  religions,  and 
peoples. 


CHAPTER    III 
THE   STATE   AND  ITS   EVOLUTION 

I.  Economic  and  political  forces.  II.  Birth  of  the  State  in  Russia. 
III.  Difference  between  the  development  of  Russia  and  that  of 
Western  Europe — What  is  the  feudal  period  of  Russian  history  ? — 
Boyars  and  princes — The  Church — The  people.  IV.  The  Muscovite 
principality  and   its   struggle  against  the  other  Russian  princes. 

V.  Origin  of  absolute  power — Aggrandizement  of  the  Russian  State, 
its  internal  development,  and  its  transformation  into  an  empire. 

VI.  Territorial  development  of  Russia  down  to  the  latter  half  of 
the  nineteenth  century — Evolution  of  the  forms  of  the  State  based 
upon  the  new  forms  of  economy. 

I 

In  Chapter  VIII  of  the  i8th  Book  of  his  famous  vfoxk.^  De  T Esprit 
des  Lo'is^  Montesquieu  writes : 

"  The  lavi^s  are  very  closely  related  to  the  fashion  in  which  the 
various  peoples  procure  their  subsistence.  A  more  extensive  code 
of  laws  is  needful  for  a  people  addicted  to  commerce  and  the  sea 
than  for  a  people  content  to  cultivate  the  soil ;  and  the  latter 
requires  a  code  more  extensive  than  a  people  which  lives  by  its 
flocks  and  herds.  This  latter  again  requires  a  wider  code  than  a 
people  which  lives  by  the  chase." 

Here  Montesquieu  remarks  the  connection  between  the  juri- 
dical forms  assumed  by  the  life  of  the  organized  collectivity  and 
the  economic  problems  which  beset  man  in  his  struggle  with 
natural  conditions.  Montesquieu  examines  law  and  the  laws 
not    as    the    product    of   the    free    operation    of   the    minds    ot 

34 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         35 

monarchs  and  legislators,  but  as  the  indispensable  result  of  a 
certain  level  of  economic  development.  This  purely  realistic 
point  of  view  is  highly  creditable  to  the  author,  for  it  is  one  of 
the  most  precious  acquisitions  of  the  historic  science  of  our 
times. 

Historic  theory,  while  accepting  this  point  of  view,  has  enlarged 
and  more  firmly  established  the  formula  of  this  conception. 
Montesquieu,  in  his  Esprit  des  Lois^  speaks  only  of  a  connection 
between  political  and  economic  phenomena  ;  he  does  not  whollv 
grasp  the  highly  complex  relation  uniting  economic  forces  and 
political  forms.  He  approaches  the  estimation  of  this  relation 
more  particularly,  so  to  speak,  from  the  quantitative  point  of  view; 
the  qualitative  aspect  of  the  matter  he  ignores.  But  it  is  not 
enough  to  say  that  juridical  and  political  forms  are  "more  ex- 
tensive" or  "wider"  in  one  societv  than  in  another.  We  must 
ascertain  the  qualitative  dissimilarities  of  these  forms,  referring 
these  latter  to  the  corresponding  dissimilarities  to  be  observed  in 
the  methods  of  economic  activity. 

What  is  the  fundamental  impulse  of  this  activity  which 
determines  its  historical  development  ?  Apart  from  the  natural 
environment  in  which  man  labours  and  has  his  being,  it  is  the 
technique  of  his  labours  and  the  mode  of  production.  Trans- 
formations of  these  factors  will  vary  the  methods  of  division  of 
technical  and  social  labour.  The  collaboration  of  individuals 
leads  to  new  social  groupings  and  the  co-ordination  of  new 
social  forces.  Ancient  economy,  based  upon  the  exploitation  of 
slave  labour,  brought  to  the  surface  of  social  life  a  group  of 
citizens  freed  from  the  necessity  of  labour  and  material  need. 
It  was  this  social  group  that  furnished  the  human  material  of 
the  "  free  city  commune  "  of  the  ancient  world,  a  political  form 
representing  not  a  democracy,  but  a  large  oligarchy.  If  we 
examine  the  Middle  Ages  we  find  that  the  political  forms  of  that 
period  also  are  based  upon  a  definite  social  and  economic  founda- 
tion. We  see  that  the  basis  of  the  feudal  system  was  the  great 
landowner  and  the  labour  of  serfs.  The  workshop  of  the  city 
artisan  and  the  enterprise  of  the  merchant  were  the  social  and 


36  MODERN  RUSSIA 

economic  units  which  found  expression  in  the  free  city  commune 
of  the  Middle  Ages.  Approaching  our  own  age,  we  see  the 
development  of  the  same  process:  that  is,  a  fundamental  transfor- 
mation in  the  method  and  the  technique  of  production,  the  decay 
of  the  old  private  workshop,  the  death  of  the  old  commercial 
undertaking  which  had  only  a  limited  market  in  view,  the  advent 
of  manufacture  and  the  factory,  and  finally,  the  universal  character 
of  exchange,  which  creates  the  most  complicated  financial  and 
commercial  relations.  But  as  a  technical  reconstruction  of  the 
means  of  production  provokes  a  change  in  the  grouping  of 
society,  we  may  note  that  the  new  social  material  has  found  a 
new  political  expression  in  Parliamentary  legislation  and  other 
forms  of  the  modern  bourgeois  State. 

So  to  comprehend  the  political  history  of  any  country  we  must 
examine  its  economy.  Russia  is  no  exception  to  the  rule,  and 
to  obtain  a  clear  conception  of  the  development  and  transforma- 
tion of  the  political  forms  of  the  Russian  State  we  must  study 
the  connection  between  these  forms  and  the  economic  forces 
which  they  reflect. 

II 

The  most  primitive  unit  of  the  social  life  of  the  Russian  Slavs 
of  the  historic  epoch  was  the  family  ;  but  not  the  small 
family  consisting  of  husband,  wife,  and  children  which  we  know 
to-day.  The  family  of  the  Slavs  of  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries 
consisted  of  thirty  to  forty  members  of  the  same  blood  practising 
a  collective  economy.  The  origin  of  this  primitive  social  organi- 
zation is  easily  understood ;  it  was  born  of  the  conditions  of 
economic  activity.  The  primitive  culture  of  the  soil  demanded 
the  effort  of  a  considerable  number  of  persons.  For  the  trans- 
formation of  a  dense  tract  of  forest  into  a  cultivable  clearing  the 
labour  of  what  we  know  as  a  family  would  not  have  sufficed. 
It  was  the  "large  family  group"  that  accomplished  it.  The 
group  was  a  unit  common  among  many  peoples  other  than  the 
Russians.    Among    the    Southern    Slavs — Serbs   and  Croats — an 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         37 

analogous  social  form  obtained.  (The  Zadruga  or  l^lelika  Kutcha 
corresponded  exactly  to  the  ancient  Russian  family,  known  in  the 
south-west  as  the  dvorishtche  znA  in  the  north  as  tht  pie'tchishtche.) 
The  social  organization  of  the  ancient  Russian  was  of  a  com- 
munal character.  However,  it  in  no  way  resembled  the  modern 
7nir.  The  communism  of  the  mir  is  confined  to  the  collective 
property^  purely  nominal,  of  the  soil,  and  to  a  common  financial 
and  economic  responsibility  towards  the  power  of  the  State.  The 
communism  of  the  ancient  family  group  was  profoundly 
economic  ;  it  was  a  communism  of  production  and  consumption. 
The  members  of  the  group  not  only  owned  the  soil  destined  for 
agriculture  ;  they  tilled  it  in  company.  Apart  from  agriculture, 
they  carried  on,  collectively,  a  whole  series  of  other  callings  ; 
they  had  meadows,  fisheries,  and  apiaries  in  common.  Working 
collectively,  they  lived  all  together  in  an  enormous  isbah  of 
timber,  examples  of  which  may  be  met  with  in  the  north 
of  Russia,  in  the  provinces  of  Archangel  (Arkhangelsk)  and 
Olonetz. 

Although  in  most  cases  the  communal  group  consisted  of 
kinsfolk,  the  fundamental  basis  of  the  union  was  not  kinship 
but  an  economic  tie. 

"  We  should  be  greatly  mistaken,"  says  a  contemporary 
Russian  writer,  "  were  we  to  attribute  too  prominent  a  place  to 
kinship.  .  .  .  Kinship  was  customary  but  not  indispensable  ;  a 
similar  economy  was  also  organized  by  people  who  were  entirely 
unrelated  to  one  another  and  associated  by  conventions  {sklachtvo). 
These  people  also  created  pietchishtchcs^  but  only  for  a  term,  say 
for  ten  years.  During  these  ten  years  all  was  common  among 
the  members  :  property,  movable  and  otherwise,  gear,  bestial, 
revenue,  and  expenditure.  This  association  was  known  as  'a 
family '  "     (Pokrovsky,  Russian  History^   vol.  I.). 

The  term  fixed  by  the  convention  having  expired,  the 
"  family  "  could  dissolve.  The  common  goods  were  then  shared 
equally  among  its  members.  We  find  such  examples  among  the 
Serbs  and  Croats,  and  in  these  cases  the  economic  tie  predominates 
over  the  tie  of  blood. 


38  MODERN  RUSSIA 

This  ancient  family  was  not  merely  an  economic  organization. 
It  was  also  a  miniature  State,  which  defended  itself,  its  property, 
and  the  product  of  its  labours  against  the  neighbouring  families. 

"  The  truth  was  not  among  them,"  said  a  Slav  chronicler  in 
speaking  of  the  ancient  Russians.  "Their  tribes,  never  agreed 
among  themselves,  were  continually  in  conflict."  Even  under 
the  Prince  of  Kiev,  Yaroslav  the  Wise,  in  the  first  half  of  the 
eleventh  century,  the  "  right  of  vengeance  "  was  officially  extant : 
that  is,  warfare  between  the  different  families  was  authorized. 
The  legal  existence  of  "  private  warfare"  indicates  the  reciprocal 
relations  of  these  families,  which  resembled  the  relations  between 
isolated  political  bodies.  The  absolute  necessity  of  defence 
naturally  demanded  a  certain  amount  of  organization  and  a  con- 
siderable degree  of  discipline.  Thus  the  father  became  the 
military  organizer,  receiving  the  title  "Sovereign  Little  Father," 
and  full  power  over  all  members  of  the  family.  Presently  the 
function  of  priest  was  added  to  that  of  military  chief.  The  father 
defended  his  subordinates  against  the  powers  of  heaven  and  hell. 
It  is  in  the  old  Russian  family  that  we  find  the  germ  of  autocratic 
power.  This  germ  quickly  developed  in  two  directions.  Firstly, 
the  size  of  the  family  increased  ;  and  this  increase,  complicating 
the  economic  problems  of  military  and  religious  life,  gave  greater 
'mportance  to  the  functions  of  the  father.  Becoming  unwieldy, 
the  family  broke  up  into  groups,  which  in  their  turn  became 
independent  units.  A  whole  series  of  villages  was  built,  all 
tending  toward  the  same  centre,  in  which  dwelt  the  elder  genera- 
tion entrusted  with  the  care  of  the  altar.  The  old  term  ognishtche 
(altar),  from  the  word  ogon  (fire),  gave  its  name  to  the  primitive 
patriarchal  aristocracy  or  ognishtchanie.  This  aristocracy,  living 
by  the  sacrifices  oft'ered  by  the  younger  members  of  the  tribe, 
had  soon  no  need  to  carry  on  their  own  economy  ;  thus  arose  the 
differentiation  of  the  economic  and  the  religious  functions  :  the 
fusion  of  these  with  the  military  command  having  been  the  most 
ancient  type  of  political  power.  The  artificial  enlargement  of 
the  old  social  organization  contributed  to  the  extension  of  this 
political   power :    when   one    family    was    forcibly    subjected    to 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         39 

another  the  "  sovereign  father  "  of  the  victorious  family  became 
also  the  father  of  the  vanquished  family,  so  that  his  power  was 
still  further  increased  and  commenced  to  lose  its  patriarchal 
character. 

The  second  important  phase  of  the  development  of  the  life  of 
the  Russian  Slavs  was  the  replacement  of  the  old  patriarchal 
aristocracy  by  another  and  foreign  form.  Under  the  auspices  of 
the  Scandinavian  princes  and  their  boyars  this  entered  Russia 
when  the  country  was  undergoing  changes  in  its  economic  and 
especially  in  its  commercial  life.  At  this  period  commerce  was 
not  content  with  remaining  a  mere  peaceable  exchange  of  pro- 
ducts. The  words  "  merchant  "  and  "  robber  "  were  synonymous. 
The  booty  was  guarded  in  the  towns,  and  in  the  towns  the 
merchants  kept  out  of  the  way  of  "  competitors."  The  word 
gorod^  city,  in  Russian  means  a  place  surrounded  by  walls  ;  and 
tovary  in  the  old  Russian  tongue  means  at  once  merchandise  and 
— an  armed  camp  I  The  population  of  the  towns  was  com- 
posed of  the  most  varied  elements.  In  ancient  Kiev  and  Novgorod 
were  Slavs,  Jews,  Greeks,  and  Scandinavians.  This  population, 
organized  in  a  military  sense,  was  divided  into  "  hundreds  "  and 
"thousands."  It  is  comprehensible  that  these  towns  or  com- 
mercial centres  thus  organized  had  an  enormous  political 
influence  over  the  surrounding  districts,  and  that  these  were 
subject  to  them.  Here  was  another  phase  of  the  development 
of  political  power. 

Then  appeared  the  new  aristocracy :  a  Scandinavian  aris- 
tocracy. The  names  of  the  first  Russian  princes — Rurik,  Igor, 
Princess  Olga — were  not  Russian  but  Scandinavian  (Rorek, 
Ingvar,  Helgi).  According  to  the  legend,  the  first  Scandinavian 
princes  were  called  in  by  the  Russians  themselves,  who,  weary 
of  internal  discord,  proposed  to  them  :  "Our  country  is  wide 
and  fertile,  but  order  is  lacking.  Come  and  govern  us."  In 
reality  the  matter  was  simple  enough.  The  Russian  population, 
fearing  the  attacks  of  the  Scandinavians,  doubtless  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  kunnings  of  these  latter,  and  arranged  to 
pay  them  a  dan  in  exchange  for  protection  against  other  Scandi- 


40  MODERN  RUSSIA 

navians.  Eventually  the  councillors  and  warriors  of  the  "  kun- 
nings"  became  the  first  Russian  kniaxs  or  princes,  forming  a 
new  aristocracy,  which  seized  upon  the  goods  of  the  ognishtchanie. 
This  aristocracy  took  the  name  of  boyarstvo.  Gradually  it  was 
completed  by  native  elements  ;  and  individuals  of  economic  and 
military  prominence  entered  into  its  composition. 

Thus  proceeded  the  social  differentiation  of  ancient  Russia, 
and  thus  the  political  forms  adopted  by  the  life  of  Russian  society 
were  modified  and  developed. 


Ill 

The  change  we  have  described — the  advent  of  a  military  and 
commercial  aristocracy  together  with  the  rise  of  commerce — 
proceeded  rapidly  during  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries.  This 
period  of  Russian  history  is  often  referred  to  as  the  "period 
of  Kiev,"  for  the  city  of  Kiev,  situated  on  the  principal  highway, 
"  from  the  Variags  to  the  Greeks,"  was  then  one  of  the  most 
important  commercial  and  intellectual  centres.  But  while  at 
this  period  it  was  regarded  as  the  first  of  Russian  cities,  it  was 
by  no  means  an  organizing  centre  of  the  political  life  of  all 
the  Russian  Slavs,  nor  did  it  represent  national  interests.  Many 
other  cities,  with  their  surroundings,  constituted  independent 
political  centres.  All  these  cities,  headed  by  their  princes, 
incessantly  warred  among  themselves,  and  the  high  principality 
of  Kiev  was  only  distinguished  from  others  by  its  formidable 
military  power  and  its  wholesale  brigandage.  Even  those  princes 
of  Kiev  whom  the  chroniclers  speak  of  as  "  reformers "  and 
creators  of  order,  such  as  Yaroslav  the  Wise  (first  half  of  the 
eleventh  century)  and  Vladimir  Monomakh  (first  half  of  the 
twelfth  century)  were  far  from  pacific.  In  his  will,  Vladimir 
Monomakh  boasted  of  having  organized  eighty-three  military 
expeditions,  not  counting  affairs  of  lesser  importance.  These 
hostile  relations  between  different  provinces,  cities,  and  princes 
were  immediately  consequent  upon  the  commercial  methods  of 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         41 

the  times.  The  commerce  of  this  period,  as  we  have  stated, 
being  founded  on  brigandage  or  piracy,  not  only  failed  to  unify 
the  population  in  a  single  economic  organism,  but  broke  it  up 
into  hostile  groups.  Commerce,  moreover,  thanks  to  its  voracious 
character,  was  ruinous  in  its  effect  on  the  population,  and  retarded 
the  development  of  the  productive  forces  of  the  country.  The 
Russian  merchants  proceeded  to  Constantinople  or  "  Tsargrad  " 
(the  Tsar  of  all  cities)  to  find  an  outlet  for  their  merchandise, 
which  consisted  of  slaves,  furs,  beeswax,  etc.  These  goods  were 
stolen  or  received  from  the  people  as  dan.  In  settling  the  amount 
of  this  dan  the  Russian  princes  never  considered  the  needs  or  the 
economic  means  of  their  subjects,  often  by  this  fact  provoking 
revolts  and  insurrections.  The  lamentable  results  of  the  exploita- 
tion of  the  population  by  the  commercial  and  military  aristocracy 
and  its  princes  were  not  long  in  appearing.  Even  in  the  middle 
of  the  twelfth  century  the  contradiction  was  striking  between  the 
culture  and  the  brilliant  appearance  of  the  commercial  capitals 
and  the  increasing  poverty  of  the  rural  population.  The  town 
was  the  parasite  of  the  country. 

Presently  the  city,  having  drained  the  village  of  its  life-blood, 
began  to  break  up,  to  die.  The  fall  of  the  principality  of  Kiev 
was  hastened  by  external  misfortunes.  Thus  the  bombardment 
of  Constantinople,  in  1204,  by  French  and  Italian  warships  went 
some  way  to  destroy  the  commercial  importance  of  Kiev,  for  it 
ceased  to  be  a  centre  of  transit  between  West  and  East.  Even 
before  the  ruin  of  Constantinople  the  commercial  communica- 
tions between  Kiev  and  the  Black  Sea  were  greatly  hampered  by 
the  attacks  of  the  nomads  who  for  long  years  terrorized  the  south 
of  Russia. 

Kiev  was  not  finally  destroyed  by  the  Tartars  until  1240  ;  but 
the  taking  of  Kiev  was  only  the  external  symptom  of  the  breaking 
up  of  the  "  period  of  Kiev."  The  internal  process  of  decadence 
was  long  before  complete.  Fleeing  from  the  exploitation  of  princes 
and  hoyarsy  and  the  attacks  of  the  nomads,  the  rural  population 
of  the  Russia  of  Kiev  had  commenced,  as  early  as  the  twelfth 
century,  to  migrate  in  masses  to  the  banks  of  the  Oka  and  the 


42  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Volga,  where  they  quickly  developed  new  forms  of  political  and 
economic  life.  This  translation  of  the  centre  of  economic  and 
political  gravity  from  Kiev  to  the  city  of  Vladimir  in  the  first 
place  and  later  to  Moscow  marked  the  commencement  of  the 
"  Muscovite "  period  of  Russian  history.  This  period  is  one 
of  the  most  important,  for  it  saw  the  rise  of  a  vast  political  unity 
in  place  of  the  old  isolated  provinces  :  the  Muscovite  principality, 
and  the  development  of  the  fundamental  elements  of  the  political 
structure  of  the  Russian  State.  These  elements  assumed  the 
form  of  an  absolute  monarchy  ;  however,  this  was  the  product 
of  a  slow  process  of  evolution,  for  we  do  not  perceive  it  until 
the  sixteenth  century.  The  earlier  portion  of  the  Muscovite 
period  saw  quite  another  political  system. 

What  was  this  system  ?  This  was  long  a  problem,  a  subject 
of  debate  among  Russian  historians,  the  majority  affirming  that 
the  Middle  Ages  of  Russia  could  not  even  be  compared  with  the 
feudal  Middle  Ages  of  Europe.  Eager  to  prove  that  nothing  in 
Russian  history  resembled  the  history  of  other  nations,  they 
denied  the  existence  of  feudalism  in  Russia.  "  They  even  sought 
to  impose  upon  more  than  a  generation  of  readers  a  celebrated 
conception  which  became  classic  :  the  contrast  between  rocky 
Europe,  divided  by  seas,  every  corner  of  which  gave  refuge  to 
some  'feudal  brigand'  who  obstinately  opposed  all  attempts  at 
centralization,  and  Russia,  with  her  level  surface,  innocent  alike 
of  castles,  seas,  and  mountains,  and  destined  by  Nature  to  form 
only  one  great  State." 

This  conception  of  the  patriotic  historian,  based  upon  the 
contrast  between  Russia  and  Europe,  favours  impressionism 
rather  than  scientific  analysis,  and  "  results  less  from  the  obser- 
vation of  social  life  than  from  observation  of  the  landscape  as 
the  latter  appears  when  we  look  out  of  a  carriage  window " 
(Pokrovsky,  Russian  History^  vol.  I.). 

When  an  attentive  examination  was  made  of  the  historic 
material  available,  it  became  obvious  that  the  "contrast"  between 
the  Russian  Middle  Ages  and  the  Middle  Ages  of  Europe  was 
only  relative. 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         43 

A  young  scholar  recently  deceased — M.  Pavlov-Silvansky — 
was  the  first  to  prove  that  the  first  part  of  the  "  Muscovite 
period  "  was  the  age  of  Russian  feudalism,  presenting  a  close 
analogy  with  the  feudal  system  of  Western  Europe,  for  all  the 
characteristic  features  of  the  latter  may  be  traced  in  the  Russian 
life  of  the  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  centuries. 

The  first  of  these  characteristic  features,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
the  supremacy  of  the  great  landowner,  whose  rise  in  Russia  was 
antecedent  to  the  thirteenth  century.  In  the  first  part  of  the 
"  Moscow  period  "  this  fundamental  basis  of  feudalism  was  com- 
pletely consolidated.  Even  in  the  most  ancient  reactions  of  "  the 
Russian  Truth"  (thirteenth  century)  we  find  traces  of  the  cen- 
tralization of  large  domains  in  the  hands  of  the  boyars.  The 
Russian  boyar  was  before  all  a  great  landowner,  comparable  to 
the  great  feudal  lord  of  Western  Europe.  But  the  birth  and 
development  of  Russian  landed  property  was  different  from  the 
same  process  in  the  West,  for  although  in  the  West  the  develop- 
ment was  slow,  and  was  due  merely  to  an  economic  differentiation 
of  the  free  rural  commune,  in  Russia  its  rise  was  immediate 
upon  the  ruins  of  the  "  great  family  "  or  pietch'ishtche^  of  which 
we  have  already  spoken.  Whatever  the  local  circumstances, 
however,  the  results  of  the  process  were  the  same  :  the  feudaliza- 
tion  of  landed  property,  that  is,  its  concentration  between  the 
hands  of  that  aristocracy  which  had  succeeded  in  subjecting, 
politically  and  economically,  all  its  weaker  neighbours.  The 
relations  between  masters  and  their  subjects  constituted  the 
boyartchina^  corresponding  to  the  French  sei^neurie^  the  English 
manor,  and  the  German   Grundherrschaft . 

"The  Russian  boyartchina^^  says  the  writer  already  cited,  "is 
like  the  seigneur'ie  in  the  essential  features  of  its  economic 
structure.  The  large  estates  of  the  Middle  Ages  comprised,  as 
in  the  West  of  Europe,  two  unequal  portions.  One,  the  larger, 
was  cultivated  by  the  peasants,  who  paid  a  due  to  the  seigneur. 
The  other  was  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  latter,  and  was 
only  a  small  part  of  the  whole  estate.  .  .  .  The  administrative 
centre  of  the  whole,  or  Votchina^  was  the  manorial  house,  or  dvor^ 


44  MODERN  RUSSIA 

like  the  German  Hof^  the  Curtis  of  Western  Europe,  Votchina^ 
Hof^  and  Curtis  all  granted  land  or  Curtis-FilUcana  to  the  peasants. 
The  Russian  term  dvor  boyarsky  is  the  exact  translation  of  the 
Latin  Curtis  dominicalis  and  the  German  Fronhof.  The  land 
belonging  to  the  seigneurial  house  and  administered  directly  by 
the  seigneur  was  called  the  Salic  land  [terra  salica^  salland)  in  the 
West,  and  in  Russia  zemlia  boyarskaya — the  .land  of  the  boyar. 
(Pavlov-Silvansicy,  The  Feudalism  of  Ancient  Russia,  St.  Peters- 
burg,  1907.) 

To  this  extraordinary  terminological  analogy  the  facts  corre- 
spond. The  economic  side  of  Russian  life,  in  the  thirteenth- 
fifteenth  centuries,  was  very  like  the  economic  system  of  the 
feudal  period  of  Western  Europe,  for  in  each  case  the  corre- 
sponding period  was  marked  by  the  supremacy  of  agriculture 
over  all  other  forms  of  production.  Moreover,  agricultural  pro- 
duction did  not  exceed  the  narrow  limits  of  natural  economy. 
And  the  natural  economy,  composed  of  isolated  economic  units, 
could  not  furnish  social  material  for  the  construction  of  a  central- 
ized State,  and  therefore  resulted  in  the  fractional  division  of  the 
political  power. 

"Power  was  broken,  at  the  feudal  period,  into  a  thousand 
fragments,  as  a  goblet  of  glass  is  shattered  by  a  fall.  And  these 
fragments  were  very  unequally  divided  among  the  large  and 
small  seigneurial  domains."  As  the  origin  of  feudalism,  according 
to  Guizot,  was  caused  by  the  "  fusion  of  sovereignty  and  property 
in  land,"  and  as  under  the  reign  of  natural  economy  and  primi- 
tive culture  the  dimensions  of  landed  properties  determined  the 
economic  and  political  powers  of  their  possessors,  the  unequal 
distribution  of  the  soil  naturally  produced  a  complicated  system 
of  political  units  whose  representatives  formed  a  hierarchy.  This 
hierarchy  of  sovereigns  and  vassals  may  be  found  in  the  Russia  of 
the  thirteenth-fifteenth  centuries,  as  well  as  in  the  France  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  and  the  kniaxya  and  kniajata  (princes  and  princelets) 
correspond  exactly  to  the  barons,  counts,  dukes,  etc.,  of  France. 
And  as  they  were,  like  their  French  colleagues,  sovereigns  in 
their  own  domains,  they  executed  justice,  coined  money,  levied 


THE  STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         45 

taxes,  and,  in  short,  enjoyed  the  privileges  of  immunity.  Many 
of  the  princes  and  boyars  "might,  like  the  seigneurs  of  the  feudal 
period  at  its  height,  have  set  up  a  gibbet  in  some  corner  of  their 
domain,  as  an  attribute  of  the  high  justice," 

Each  prince  or  boyar^  sovereign  on  his  own  domain,  was  the 
vassal,  that  is,  the  military  servitor,  of  a  larger  landowner.  Beside 
military  service  [servitum)  each  French  vassal  had  to  assist  his 
suzerain  in  council  [consilium)  and  contribute  to  the  formation  of 
a  court.  The  same  arrangement  existed  in  Russia  in  the  form 
of  the  Boyarskaya  Duma  [boyars''  council).  Even  the  symbols 
of  these  relations  were  the  same  in  France  and  in  Russia.  Thus 
the  French  hommage  corresponded  exactly  to  the  Russian  tchelobitii 
(from  tchelom,  bit^  meaning  to  strike  the  ground  with  the  forehead). 
As  homage  was  followed  by  the  oath,  so  the  Tchelobitie  was 
followed  by  the  tzelovanie  kresta^  the  kissing  of  the  Cross. 

To  complete  this  comparison,  we  may  site  the  fact  that  in 
Western  Europe,  when  the  vassal  entered  his  suzerain's  service, 
and  gave  his  promise  of  fidelity  (vow,  aveu)  he  remained  a  free 
man  who  could  always  retract  his  vow  :  that  is,  take  service  under 
another  suzerain.  The  Russian  words  prikaze  and  otkaze  literally 
signify  "  vow  "  or  "  avowal  "  and  "  retractation  "  or  "  disavowal." 
Thus  in  1392,  in  the  principality  of  Nijni-Novgorod,  the  boyars 
resolved  to  abandon  their  prince  Boris  Constantinovitch,  and  to 
enter  the  service  of  his  enemy,  the  prince  of  Moscow.  One  of 
these  boyars^  Vassili  Roumanietz,  declared  openly  to  Prince 
Boris,  in  the  name  of  his  fellows  :  "  Lord  Prince,  count  on  us  no 
longer,  for  we  are  no  longer  thine  nor  with  thee,  but  against 
thee  !  "  By  this  brief  disavowal  the  boyars  of  the  province  of 
Nijni-Novgorod  broke  oflFall  relations  with  their  suzerain. 

In  the  juridic  and  economic  position  of  the  Russian  Church  of 
this  period  we  find  all  the  typical  characteristics  of  the  feudal 
system.  The  representatives  of  the  higher  clergy  and  the 
convents  were  great  landowners,  each  of  whom  occupied  a  certain 
position  on  the  long  scale  of  the  feudal  hierarchy.  The  arch- 
bishop and  metropolitans,  like  the  lay  princes,  had  their  vassals 
and  arriere-vassauxy  and  these  latter  "  took  service  with  the  arch- 


J 


46  MODERN  RUSSIA 

bishop  as  with  a  prince  :  that  is,  vowed  service  in  field  and  in 
court,  receiving  in  return  a  grant  of  land."  Thus,  for  example, 
the  Archbishop  of  Tver  possessed  some  dozens  of  vassals,  and  the 
Metropolitan  of  Moscow  commanded  quite  a  regiment  of  hoyars 
and  "sons  of  /joyvirs,^'  inferior  vassals  corresponding  to  the  arriere- 
vassaux  of  the  French. 

Each  lord,  whether  spiritual  or  temporal,  had  his  own  financial 

system,  like  that  of  a  little  State  ;  granting  land  to  his  peasants 

for  a  certain  term,  receiving  various  services  in  exchange.     Most 

of  the  peasants  of  this  period  (fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries) 

were  already  landless,  and    laboured    on   the  estates  of   princes, 

boyars^  convents,  and   archbishops.     Only  in  the  North   were  a 

ievf  "black  lands"  left  here  and  there  :   that  is,  lands  belonging 

to  peasants.     But  although  they  were  landless  the  peasants  of  this 

period  were  not  yet  serfs  ;  serfdom  did  not  appear  until  towards 

the  sixteenth  century.     The  peasants  were  the  free  servants  of 

their    masters,   and,   like    the    vassals,    could   make  disavowal    of 

service.     Their   loss   of  land    and    the   concentration   of  landed 

propertv  in  the  hands  of  the  spiritual  and  temporal  aristocracy 

resulted   in   their    economic    dependence   on    the    latter,   but    they 

retained  their  personal  freedom.     But  we  must  admit  that  their 

condition,  in  a  sense  peculiar  to  Russia,  facilitated  the  destruction 

of  their  personal   liberty   by  the  seigneurs.     We  have  seen  that 

the  mir  or  obshtina  (the  rural  commune)  of  feudal  Russia  was  far 

less  developed  than  that  of  Western  Europe,  so  that  the  Russian 

hoycir  found  it  easy  to  seize  the  peasant's  lands  and  bring  him  into 

legal  subjection. 

The  feudal  relations  here  described  were  those  that  usually 
prevailed  in  the  Muscovite  Russia  of  the  fifteenth  century.  Only 
the  domains  of  the  "free  cities"  of  Novgorod  and  Pskov  were 
distinguished  from  other  feudal  units  by  their  social  and  political 
character.  As  for  the  rest  of  the  north-eastern  Russian  plain,  it 
was  scattered  with  the  "state-domains"  of  seigneurs  ol  various 
degrees  and  ranks.  The  most  important  of  these  domains  were 
the  principalities  of  Tver,  Riazan,  Suzdal,  Nijni-Novgorod, 
Yaroslavl,  etc.     All  were  subdivided  into  the  smaller  domains  of 


THE  STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         47 

the  lesser  princes,  who  in  turn  had  the  boyars  for  vassals.  Then, 
of  this  motley  mass  of  feudal  lords  and  vassals,  the  strongest  of  all 
became  gradually  predominant :  the  High  Prince  of  Moscow^,  who 
succeeded,  according  to  the  patriotic  historian,  in  "assembling  all 
the  land  of  Russia  into  a  single  unit,"  and  who,  to  speak  more 
prosaically,  conquered  all  the  other  princes  and  founded  the 
Russian  monarchy. 

IV 

The  principality  of  Moscow  was  one  of  the  oldest  principalities 
of  the  north-east  of  Russia.  When  the  chronicles  first  mentioned 
the  existence  of  Moscow  (1147)  ^^  ^^'^  only  a  little  fortress- 
village  belonging  to  the  Princes  of  Vladimir.  Only  in  the 
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  did  Moscow  become  a 
separate  principality,  under  its  first  prince,  Daniel  Alexan- 
drovitch,  who  inherited  Moscow  from  his  father,  the  illustrious 
Alexander  Nevsky.  Under  Daniel  and  his  successor  Yury  the 
principality  of  Moscow  rapidly  expanded,  absorbing  the  cities  ot 
Kolomna,  Mojaisk,  and  Pereiaslavl-Zalessky,  and  it  became  the 
Grand  or  High  Principality  under  the  second  successor  of  Daniel, 
Ivan  Kalita  (1328).  From  that  time  onward  Moscow  continued 
to  strike  at  her  feudal  neighbours,  gradually  absorbing  the  divided 
soil  of  Russia,  and  centralizing  the  political  power. 

At  this  period  the  Tartar  Khan  was  the  sovereign  of  all  Russia. 
He  it  was  whom  the  Russians  named  Tsar,  and  the  title  of  Hish 
Prince  with  the  privileges  thereto  appertaining  was  transmitted  to 
one  or  other  of  the  Russian  princes  according  to  his  will.  The 
Tartars  meddled  little  in  the  inner  life  of  the  Russian  people  : 
they  were  chiefly  concerned  in  obtaining  the  highest  possible 
financial  benefit.  Ivan  Kalita,  like  his  successors,  found  a  way  to 
satisfy  the  Tartar  greed.  The  nickname  kalita  means  purse  or 
bag,  and  tells  us  what  was  the  quality  of  the  "  first  to  knit  the 
soil  of  Russia  together."  The  Russian  princes,  entrusted  by  the 
Tartars  with  the  levying  of  the  dan^  used  to  send  ambassadors  to 
the  "  Golden   Horde,"  or  resorted  thither  themselves  with  rich 


48  MODERN  RUSSIA 

presents,  in  order  to  gain  the  friendship  of  the  Khan  and  his  army 
— a  friendship  which  enabled  them  to  subjugate  their  rivals,  the 
other  Russian  princes. 

But  to  conquer  in  the  political  struggle  Moscow  had  first  to 
triumph  as  an  economic  organism.  This  latter  victory  was  made 
easier  by  the  geographical  position  of  Moscow,  on  the  important 
commercial  highway  connecting  the  commercial  region  of 
Smolensk  with  that  of  the  Volga,  which  crossed  another  high- 
way leading  from  wealthy  Novgorod  to  Nijni-Novgorod.  When, 
after  the  seizure  of  Constantinople  by  the  French  and  Italians 
and  the  reinforcement  of  the  nomads  about  the  mouths  of  the 
Dnieper,  the  famous  route  "from  the  Variags  to  the  Greeks" 
had  to  be  abandoned,  another  trade  route  was  chosen — the  Don — 
and  one  of  the  principal  points  of  this  new  highway  was 
Moscow. 

Later,  in  the  tenth  century,  the  principality  of  Moscow  entered 
into  commercial  relations  with  the  ports  of  the  White  Sea  and 
the  Arctic  Ocean,  and  by  such  means  quickly  induced  a  lively 
current  of  trade  between  England  and  Russia.  Presently  Moscow 
became  the  clearing-house  and  centre  of  all  the  trade  routes 
of  Russia  ;  but  even  by  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century  the 
city  numbered  some  tens  of  thousands  of  inhabitants,  and  in  that 
respect  was  not  inferior  to  the  greatest  cities  of  Europe. 

In  the  centre  of  the  country,  and  therefore  little  disturbed  by 
the  attacks  of  foreign  neighbours,  the  principality  profited 
economically  by  its  geographical  position,  and  gave  asylum  to  a 
compact  mass  of  agriculturists  whose  produce  soon  exceeded  that 
of  the  region  of  Kiev.  Moreover,  the  colonizing  policy  of  the 
Muscovite  princes  contributed  to  the  development  of  the  agricul- 
tural yield  of  the  State  ;  they  employed  certain  of  their  resources 
in  ransoming  Russian  prisoners  of  war  from  the  Tartars,  and 
peopling  their  domains  therewith. 

The  economic  strength  of  the  Muscovite  principality  and  its 
friendship  with  the  Khan  resulted  in  an  influx  of  hoyars.  Many 
vassals  of  the  Princes  of  Tver,  Nijni-Novgorod,  and  others 
abandoned  their  suzerains  and  entered  the  service  of  the  Prince  of 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         49 

Moscow.  Lesser  princes  followed  their  example,  transforming 
themselves  from  independent  seigneurs  into  Muscovite  servitors, 
while  others  were  subjected   by  force. 

Thanks  to  these  facts  Moscow  was  already,  in  the  first  half  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  the  most  powerful  of  the  feudal  States  of 
Russia,  or,  to  speak  more  exactly,  the  most  powerful  of  her  feudal 
associations,  for  the  principalities  of  that  period,  as  we  have  seen, 
were  not  States  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  but  unions  of 
feudal  domains  of  varying  dimensions.  In  the  middle  of  the 
fifteenth  century  only  two  great  principalities  were  still  inde- 
pendent of  that  of  Moscow — those  of  Tver  and  Riazan  :  but 
these  too  were  soon  absorbed. 

The  success  of  the  Princes  of  Moscow  was  partly  due  to  the 
Church,  for  the  interests  of  the  most  important  of  the  feudal 
ecclesiastics,  the  metropolitans  of  Vladimir,  coincided  with  the 
interests  of  the  grand-duchy  of  Moscow.  The  metropolitan  was 
always  in  rivalry  with  the  Archbishop  of  Tver,  just  as  the  Prince 
of  Moscow  was  always  contending  against  the  Prince  of  Tver. 
The  principality  of  Tver,  situated  in  a  corner  of  the  principality 
of  Moscow,  hampered  commercial  exchange  between  Moscow 
and  Novgorod.  The  archbishopric  of  Tver,  cutting  into  the 
religious  domains  of  the  metropolitan,  gave  asylum  to  all  sorts  of 
"  heretical  "  ideas,  and  above  all  to  the  movement  of  ecclesiastical 
reform  directed  against  simony,  that  is,  against  the  sale  of 
religious  appointments,  which  was  so  highly  profitable  to  the 
metropolitan. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  manner  in  which  the  metropolitan 
supported  the  Prince  of  Moscow.  One  of  the  metropolitans, 
St.  Peter,  had  quarrelled  with  the  Prince  of  Tver  (then  High 
Prince),  left  the  capital  some  time  before  his  death  and  "  went  to 
Moscow  to  die.  The  relics  of  St.  Peter  presently  began  to  efi:ect 
miracles.  The  capital  of  the  rival  of  the  Prince  of  Tver  became 
sacred."  Another  means  of  assistance  was  the  excommunication 
and  anathema  to  which  the  metropolitan  treated  such  cities  and 
principalities  as  were  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  Muscovite 
princes. 

4 


50  MODERN  RUSSIA 

At  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  struggle  between  the 
Prince  of  Moscow  and  the  other  princes,  a  sanguinary  conflict 
marked  by  more  than  one  crime,  ended  in  the  victory  of  Moscow 
and  the  unification  of  the  greater  portion  of  North-Eastern 
Russia.  But  this  was  not  as  yet  the  victory  of  the  absolute 
monarchy.  Certainly  the  quantitative  changes  in  the  life  of  the 
Muscovite  principality  and  the  expansion  of  the  latter  were 
accompanied  by  qualitative  changes.  But  the  principle  of  the 
State  remained  the  same,  and  the  Prince  of  Moscow  remained 
not  so  much  the  sovereign  and  political  chief  as  the  owner  of  a 
vast  domain.  The  admixture,  typical  of  feudalism,  of  private 
and  public  law,  still  obtained  in  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Moscow. 
After  his  triumph  over  the  other  principalities  the  High  Prince 
continued  to  own  his  city  of  Moscow  as  he  owned,  say,  his  table 
service.  Both  were  his  private  property,  which  he  dealt  with 
not  as  a  monarch  but  as  a  good  landowner.  Like  other  feudal 
lords,  he  conducted  his  affairs  with  the  aid  ot  his  free  servitors 
or  vassals,  who  formed  the  "  boyar%  Duma."  At  the  head  of 
this  Duma  was  the  most  important  of  all  these  vassals,  a  spiritual 
vassal,  the  metropolitan.  Tiie  vassals  safeguarded  their  rights 
with  the  utmost  jealousy.  When  one  of  the  High  Princes  of 
Moscow  began  to  neglect  the  advice  of  the  Duma  and  to 
settle  affairs  in  his  "bed-chamber,"  in  company  with  a  few 
favourites,  he  provoked  the  keenest  discontent  among  his  feodaries. 
One  of  the  latter,  being  entrusted  with  the  verbal  expression  of 
this  discontent,  had  his  tongue  cut  out.  Similarly,  the  boyars 
defended  their  right  of  "  disavowal,"  and  in  the  celebrated  con- 
flict between  Ivan  the  Terrible  and  his  insubordinate  vassal. 
Prince  Kourbsky,  the  departure  of  the  latter  to  serve  the  Grand- 
Duke  of  Lithuania  was  one  of  the  most  dramatic  episodes. 

Two  incidents  played  an  important  part  in  the  ideological  and 
technical  prelude  to  the  absolute  power.  The  first  of  these  was 
the  shattering  of  the  Tartar  yoke.  The  Prince  of  Moscow  was 
the  representative  ot  the  Russian  people  with  the  Khan,  not  only 
because  the  Khan  granted  him  a  charter  or  yarlyk  which  conferred 
the  title  of  Grand-Duke  of  Moscow,  but   also   because  he  was 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         51 

charged  with  the  collection  of  the  dan.  At  the  end  of  the 
fourteenth  century  Prince  Vasili  Dimitrovitch  paid  the  Khan 
34  percent,  of  all  the  dan  collected  in  Russia.  At  the  end  of 
the  fifteenth  century  the  grandson  of  that  prince  possessed  such  a 
territory  that  he  was  able  to  pay  the  Khan  72  per  cent,  of  the 
total  dan  :  that  is,  the  principality  of  Moscow  represented  three- 
fourths  of  Russia.  When  in  1480  the  High  Prince  of  Moscow, 
Ivan  III,  profiting  by  the  internal  decadence  of  the  Golden  Horde, 
refused  to  recognize  the  Khan  as  sovereign  of  Russia,  he  received 
not  only  the  title  of  national  liberator,  but  great  material  advan- 
tage, for  the  dan  paid  by  the  Russian  people  went  to  swell  the 
treasury  of  the  Muscovite  principality.  Moreover,  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  latter  inherited  from  the  Tartars  an  excellent 
financial  organization,  for  the  Tartar  functionaries  were  the  first 
to  commence  the  census  of  the  Russian  people,  to  divide  them 
into  financial  groups,  and  to  establish  a  regular  levy  of  taxes. 

The  second  of  these  incidents  was  also  connected  with  the 
name  of  Ivan  III,  and  was  marked  by  relations  between  Moscow 
and  Byzantium.  During  the  period  of  Kiev  the  Byzantines 
had  introduced  a  religious  ideology  into  Russia  :  orthodoxy,  to 
wit ;  and  during  the  period  of  Moscow  they  introduced  a  new 
political  ideology.  The  external  sign  of  the  Byzantine  influence 
was  the  marriage  of  Ivan  III  to  the  niece  of  the  Emperor  of 
Byzantium — Sophia  Palaeologus.  This  marriage,  excellent  from 
a  diplomatic  point  of  view,  enabled  Ivan  III  to  adopt  the  arms 
of  the  empire  for  his  own.  The  two-headed  eagle  has  ever  since 
been  the  blazon  of  the  Russian  State.  Later,  in  the  treasury  of 
the  Grand-Duke  of  Moscow,  a  crown  and  other  articles  were 
"  discovered,"  which  constituted  the  so-called  regalia  of  the 
Byzantine  Emperors,  which  were  ceded,  so  it  was  said,  by  the 
latter  to  the  Prince  of  Moscow  in  token  of  the  transference  of  their 
power.  But  this  is  mere  legend.  The  legend  further  states 
that  the  first  of  these  Russian  princes,  Rurik,  was  descended 
from  the  Tsar  of  Rome,  Cssar  Augustus,  and  that  Moscow  was 
the  third  Rome  (the  second  being  Byzantium),  on  which  had 
devolved  the  function  of  eternal   guardian  of  the  "  true  faith." 


52  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  union  of  Florence  (1439)  and  the  taking  of  Constantinople 
by  the  Turks  furnished  material  for  this  legend.  In  147 1  the 
metropolitan  of  Moscow,  Philip,  wrote  in  one  of  his  charters  : 
"  Learn,  O  my  children,  that  the  city  of  Constantinople  and  the 
Church  of  God  were  indestructible,  for,  like  the  sun,  there  shone 
the  true  faith.  But  losing  hold  of  the  truth,  the  Patriarch  of 
Constantinople  joined  himself  to  the  Latins  (Catholics),  swearing 
fealty  to  the  Pope,  for  the  sake  of  gold.  Then  died  prematurely 
the  Patriarch,  and  Tsargrad  (the  Tsar  of  Cities)  fell  into  the  hands 
of  the  impure  Turks." 

Thus  was  laid  the  ideological  basis  which  enabled  the  Muscovite 
princes  to  become  "  heirs  "  of  the  absolute  power  of  the  Byzantine 
Emperors  and  sole  defenders  of  the  Orthodox  faith.  But  this 
ideology  demanded,  for  its  realization,  a  social  environment 
favourable  to  its  development.  The  conditions  necessary  to 
the  birth  of  absolutism  began  to  develop  in  Russia  in  the 
sixteenth  century. 

V 

The  sixteenth  century  was,  for  Russia,  the  period  of  the 
economic  revolution.  Rural  production  remained,  during  the 
whole  of  this  period,  the  most  important  branch  of  production, 
but  its  forces  underwent  profound  modifications  :  from  natural 
economy  arose  monetary  economy,  founded  on  the  circulation  of 
merchandise,  and  the  exchange  of  products  for  currency.  These 
changes  were  closely  connected  with  the  progressive  expansion 
of  the  internal  and  external  trade  of  Russia.  Although  Novgorod 
began  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  commercial  centres,  yet 
others  arose,  in  the  North,  such  as  Kholmogory  and  Archangel, 
which  a  great  commercial  highway  running  through  Yaroslavl 
and  Vologda  connected  with  Moscow.  A  whole  series  of  facts 
testifies  that  the  rapid  development  of  Russia's  internal  trade 
destroyed  the  basis  of  natural  economy. 

At  the  begirming  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  character  ot 
internal  exchange  underwent  a  change  ;  it  became  intenser  and 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         53 

more  extensive.  The  official  documents  of  this  period  speak  of 
numerous  centres  of  trade,  of  fairs,  of  a  close  network  of  high- 
ways, and  of  constant  relations  between  the  various  portions  of 
the  country.  Thus,  according  to  the  statistics  of  a  number 
of  Englishmen  who  visited  Russia  at  this  period,  the  region 
of  Yaroslavl  alone  sent  700  to  800  wagons  of  wine  daily  for 
sale  to  Moscow.  Compare  this  fact  with  the  isolated  life  of  the 
small  economic  groups  of  a  former  age,  which  laboured  exclu- 
sively to  produce  enough  for  their  own  consumption,  and  you  will 
understand  how  the  character  of  the  economic  life  of  Russia  was 
transformed  in  the  sixteenth  century. 

The  celebrated  German  economist,  Karl  Biicher,  states  that 
we  may  distinguish  three  stages  in  the  economic  development 
of  Western  Europe  :  (i)  the  phase  of  natural  economy,  without 
exchange  ;  (2)  that  of  urban  economy,  the  latter  furnishing  a 
limited  market  and  consisting  of  the  city  and  its  surroundings  ; 
(3)  that  of  national  and  finally  universal  economy.  In  Russia 
the  second  phase,  if  it  was  not  entirely  absent,  at  least  existed 
only  in  a  germinal  form,  so  that  the  national  phase  followed 
almost  immediately  upon  the  domestic  phase. 

"  The  uniformity  of  the  surface  of  the  country,  the  abundance 
of  rivers,  and  above  all  the  duration  of  the  snows,  which  per- 
mitted of  relatively  convenient  methods  of  communication,  dimi- 
nished local  difficulties  and  the  economic  isolation  of  the  various 
regions.  According  to  the  English,  merchandise  was  sent 
enormous  distances,  in  winter,  as  from  Archangel  to  Moscow, 
in  a  fortnight.  Thus  the  monetary  econo?ny  of  Russia^  horn  in  the 
second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century^  differed  from  others  in  this 
peculiarity :  it  was  not  urban^  hut  national^  or  at  least  each  of  its 
markets  embraced  a  considerable  radius.  This  is  proved  by  nume- 
rous observations.  .  .  .  According  to  the  testimony  of  Jenkinson, 
the  Russians  sent  to  Astrakhan  wool,  sheepskins,  grain,  and  salt 
pork  ;  the  region  of  Riazan  sent  large  quantities  of  grain  to 
Moscow  ;  Smolensk  sent  live-stock  to  the  centre  of  Russia  and 
received  hemp  from  Viazma,  while  Yaroslavl  provided  Moscow 
with  corn,  and  the  latter  city  resold  it  to  customers  living  at  a 


54  MODERN  RUSSIA 

distance  of  500  leagues"  (V.  Rojkov,   Origin  of  Absolute  Power 
in  Russia^  Moscow,  1 906). 

The  data  in  our  possession  as  to  the  activity  of  the  middlemen 
of  those  days  and  on  the  prices  of  corn  in  various  parts  of  Russia 
prove  that  each  local  market  furnished  enormous  areas.  This 
economic  union  of  the  country  certainly  played  an  important  part  in 
its  political  union  and  in  the  creation  of  the  Russian  State. 

But  the  economic  phenomena  herein  described  had  a  still  more 
notable  influence  on  the  political  development  of  the  country. 
The  development  of  exchange  led  to  an  increase  in  the  amount 
of  currency.  The  proof  of  this  statement  is  the  progressive 
decrease  of  the  value  of  money.  This  latter  fact  may  be  observed 
in  the  Russia  of  the  sixteenth  century.  "While  at  the  end  of 
the  fifteenth  century  and  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  the  value 
of  the  ruble  was  equivalent  to  nearly  94  of  our  modern  rubles, 
towards  the  years  1530-40  its  value  fell  to  75  rubles,  and  early 
in  the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  to  25.  So  rapid  a  fall 
in  the  price  of  money  marks  the  sudden  passage  from  natural  to 
monetary  economy  "  (Rojkov,  op.  cit.). 

The  taxes,  paid  at  first  in  kind  by  the  peasant  in  the  form  ot 
rent,  very  soon  had  to  be  paid  in  money.  Even  at  the  end  of  the 
sixteenth  century  the  peasants  working  on  the  lands  of  the  con- 
vents of  the  Holy  Trinity  and  St.  Sergius  paid  money  to  their 
seigneurs^  and  then  the  State  taxes  also  were  levied  in  currency. 

The  new  method  of  production,  that  is,  production  for  a  large 
market,  was  regulated  by  means  of  money,  and  this  led  to  a 
change  in  the  internal  organization  of  the  rural  economy.  Land- 
owners whose  system  of  economy  had  hitherto  been  a  narrow  one, 
who  had  preferred  to  let  land  to  the  peasants  in  order  to  obtain 
imposts  in  kind,  now  saw  a  vast  market  opening  for  the  outlet  of 
grain,  and  commenced,  little  by  little,  to  diminish  the  area  of 
the  lands  let  to  the  peasants  and  to  cultivate  their  own  land. 
In  some  cases  the  land  exploited  by  and  for  the  master  amounted 
to  30,  40,  or  50  per  cent,  of  the  whole  estate.  It  soon  befell 
that  the  principal  organizers  of  the  new  economy  were  no  longer 
the  great  landowners,  the  boyars,  but  the  small  proprietors,  the 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         55 

dvorianieSy  for  the  former,  accustomed  to  luxury,  troubled 
themselves  very  little  about  the  administration  of  their  property, 
and  were  addicted  to  useless  expenditure.  Moreover,  it  was 
in  general  more  difficult  for  a  great  estate  to  adapt  a  new 
economy  and  new  forms  of  production  than  for  a  small  estate  to 
do  so.  For  this  reason  the  passage  from  one  economic  form 
to  another  affected  the  boyars  principally,  and  caused  the  downfall 
of  their  economic  power.  The  economic  enfeeblement  of  this 
class  was  utilized  by  the  Grand-Duke  of  Moscow,  who  was 
able  to  confirm  the  absolute  autocracy  and  thereby  oppose  the 
oligarchy  of  the  boyars.  Highly  characteristic  was  the  most 
intense  phase  of  the  Terror,  the  policy  which  Ivan  the  Terrible 
adopted  in  order  to  crush  the  boyars  of  the  higher  aristocrac}',  just 
ten  years  after  the  economic  fall  of  that  class  in  the  centre 
of  Russia.  The  sapping  of  the  economic  strength  of  the  boyan 
explains  the  curious  fact  that  they  did  not  rebel  against  the 
persecutions  of  Ivan,  and  even  the  most  energetic  of  them,  Prince 
Andrei  Kourbsky,  contented  himself  with  passively  protesting 
against  the  Tsar  and  by  leaving  his  dominions.  In  order  to 
struggle  against  the  boyars  Ivan  established  a  special  system 
known  as  opritchnina.  It  is  unjust  to  suppose  that  the  opritchnina 
and  the  pitiless  system  of  the  Terror  were  manifestations  of 
personal  hatred,  of  a  Sadie  caprice.  It  is  highly  probable  that 
the  character  of  the  Tsar  gave  his  policy  a  more  gloomy  and 
sanguinary  tone,  but  the  gist  of  that  policy  was  the  struggle 
of  the  developing  autocracy  against  the  aristocratic  oligarchy. 
The  opritchnina  (exceptional  law)  was  preluded  by  two  mani- 
festoes published  by  Ivan.  One  was  a  friendly  appeal  to  the 
whole  people,  with  the  exception  of  the  bovars  ;  the  other, 
steeped  in  hatred,  was  addressed  to  the  boyars  themselves.  The 
opritchnina  consisted  in  this,  that  the  Government  had  the  right 
by  law  to  confiscate  the  estates  of  the  nobles  in  the  regions  where 
the  application  of  the  system  was  announced.  This  policy  was 
directed  against  the  boyars  in  particular,  and  aimed  at  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  flower  of  the  feudal  aristocracy  by  seizing  their 
property    and    the    privileges    thereto    appertaining.      Another 


S6  MODERN  RUSSIA 

manifestation  of  this  policy  was  the  institution  of  a  body  of 
what  we  may  call  military  police,  whose  ranks  furnished  Ivan 
with  his  instruments.  The  lands  confiscated  were  distributed 
to  members  of  the  oprltchnina.  This  body  of  police  was  com- 
posed of  small  landed  proprietors  or  dvorianies^  who  at  this  period, 
as  we  have  seen,  rose  to  the  surface  of  national  life  by  the  action 
of  the  forces  of  economic  evolution.  Every  district  proclaimed 
subject  to  the  opritchnina  was  outside  the  scope  of  the  boyarC 
Douma,  and  that  meant  more  than  half  Russia. 

Thus  the  oprltchnina  may  be  regarded  as  the  first  attempt  of  the 
heads  of  the  Russian  State  to  govern  without  the  aid  of  the  hoyars 
and  to  create  a  new  governmental  system  in  place  of  the  old 
feudal  administration.  The  diminished  political  importance  of  the 
hoyars  appears  even  more  significant  if  we  examine  the  Soudiebnik 
(code)  whose  drafting  in  1558  marked  the  apogee  of  the  boyari 
political  power.  One  of  the  articles  of  this  code  stated  that  all 
new  laws  were  "  to  be  proposed  by  the  Tsar  and  adopted  by  the 
united  boyars^'' 

The  dvorianies  supported  Ivan  in  his  struggle  against  the  boyars. 
The  feudal  privileges  of  the  latter  hampered  the  economic 
development  of  which  the  dvorianies  were  the  propagators.  At 
this  time  the  fundamental  thesis  of  the  boyars  was  the  demand  that 
the  Tsar — Ivan  adopted  the  title  in  1547 — should  govern  with 
them  and  respect  their  rights  of  birth  and  inheritance.  The 
ideologues  of  the  dvorianies  expounded  the  opposite  theory  : 
that  rights  were  conferred  not  by  birth  but  by  the  will  of  the 
Tsar  and  personal  merit,  and  that  the  power  of  the  Tsar  was 
unlimited,  as  it  came  from  God.  Needless  to  say,  this  theory  of 
the  divine  origin  of  the  power  of  the  Tsars  was  greatly  to  Ivan's 
taste,  and  he  was  able  to  maintain  it  by  effectual  arguments — 
the  gibbet    and  the  axe. 

The  policy  of  Ivan  the  Terrible  was  continued  by  Fedor  and 
above  all  bv  Boris  Godunov,  who  endeavoured  to  ruin  the 
aristocracy  of  the  boyars  by  leaning  on  the  dvorianies.  After 
Boris  began  what  is  known  as  "  the  period  of  troubles,"  which 
was  a  period  of  revolutionary  crisis  and  internal  warfare,  which 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         57 

lasted  through  most  of  the  first  ten  years  of  the  seventeenth 
century.  It  was  only  in  161 3  that  the  end  of  the  "period 
of  troubles  "  came,  when  the  first  representative  of  the  present 
dynasty,  Mikhail    Fedorovitch    Romanov,  ascended  the  throne. 

During  this  period  of  disorder,  as  always  happens  in  a  period  of 
revolution,  social  contradictions  were  very  marked.  The  boyan 
made  an  attempt  to  defend  their  privileges.  The  instrument  of 
this  attempt  was  the  notorious  Dimitri  the  Pretender.  Profiting 
by  the  fact  that  the  heir  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  Dimitri,  had  been 
killed  by  order  of  Boris  Godunov,  the  boyars  spread  the  rumour 
that  the  real  Dimitri  was  still  alive,  and,  having  selected  a  young 
adventurer,  they  put  him  forward  as  pretender  to  the  throne. 
But  when  Dimitri  became  Tsar  (he  ruled  for  a  few  months)  he 
also,  relying  on  the  dvorianieSy  attempted  to  practise  an  autocratic 
policy  without  regard  to  the  counsel  of  the  boyan.  The  boyars 
then  took  an  oath  together,  slew  the  Pretender,  and  proclaimed 
as  Tsar  a  man  of  their  own  class,  Prince  Vasili  Chouisky,  who 
promised  to  share  the  power  with  them.  Unsuccessful  in 
obtaining  the  support  either  of  the  dvorianies  or  the  popular 
masses,  Shouisky  was  unable  to  retain  the  supreme  power. 
Then  commenced  a  series  of  insurrections,  and  the  people  broke 
up  into  different  groups,  each  with  its  own  leader  and  its  own 
demands.  Finally  victory  remained  with  the  dvorianies^  who, 
acting  in  concert  with  the  clergy  and  the  traders  in  the  towns, 
managed  to  restore  the  country  to  order,  protecting  it  against 
its  external  enemies,  and  in  161 3  the  power  of  the  Tsar  was 
re-established  by  the  election  of  Mikhail  Romanov. 

The  very  fact  of  election  to  some  extent  limited  the  power  of 
the  first  Tsar  of  the  new  dynasty,  the  more  so  as  the  boyars  were 
able  to  obtain,  during  the  election,  by  means  of  a  compromise 
with  the  dvorianies^  a  few  concessions  to  their  own  advantajie. 
The  "period  of  troubles"  left  behind  it  a  whole  series  of 
problems  affecting  the  internal  life  of  the  country.  To  resolve 
these  problems  the  State  had  recourse  to  the  counsel  and  the 
support  of  the  public.  For  this  reason  the  institution  known  as 
the  zemskii  sobory  attained  a  considerable  development  under  the 


58  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Tsar  Mikhail.  The  -zettiski'i  sohory  were  not  parliaments,  but 
consultative  assemblies,  representing  the  various  districts  and  the 
various  classes  of  society.  The  place  of  honour  was  occupied  by 
the  delegates  of  the  middle  classes,  above  all  those  of  the 
dvorianstvo.  The  zcmskii  sobory  played  a  great  part  in  the 
establishment  of  order  and  the  public  powers.  A  result  of 
their  activity  was  the  code  Vlogmi6  (1649)  in  which  are 
expounded  the  new  civil  and  political  ideals  adopted  after  the 
downfall  of  the  old  natural  economy  and  the  feudal  system. 
When  the  zemskii  sobory  completed  their  work  the  successor  of 
Mikhail  Romanoff,  the  Tsar  Alexei,  suppressed  them,  and  in 
their  place  created  a  council  of  experts  to  which  were  called 
the  most  experienced  persons  of  each  class,  especially  that  of  the 
(horiani^s.  In  1662  the  great  merchants  attempted  to  re-establish 
the  •zemskii  sobory^  but  the  dvorianies  did  not  second  them,  so  the 
Government  refused  their  request.  From  that  moment  we  may 
reijard  Russian  absolutism  as  firmly  established. 

The  reign  of  Peter  the  Great,  which  saw  Russia  transformed 
from  a  tsarstvo  (kingdom)  into  an  empire,  and  which  inaugurated 
the  period  of  St.  Petersburg,  did  not  actually  bring  any  new 
principle  into  Russian  absolutism.  Peter  the  Great  laboured  to 
develop  absolutism  in  two  ways  :  firstly,  he  suppressed  the 
functions  of  the  patriarch  of  Moscow,  and,  having  entrusted  the 
administration  of  the  Church  to  the  Synod,  a  Synod  entirely 
submissive  to  the  Government,  he  freed  the  latter  from  all 
rivalry  on  the  part  of  the  Church.  He  then  introduced  a  military 
reform  :  he  created  a  permanent  army  to  replace  the  old  feudal 
militia  of  the  nobles,  and  thus  gave  absolutism  a  powerful  means 
of  dominating  the  people.  Peter  was  very  well  aware  of  the 
influence  of  the  army  in  establishing  the  power  of  the  absolute 
monarchy,  and  he  introduced  a  declaration  of  absolutism  in  his 
military  statutes  (1716)  :  "  His  Majesty  is  sovereign  and  autocrat. 
He  is  accountable  to  no  one  in  the  world." 

The  confirmation  of  the  absolute  power  contributed  to  the 
territorial  extension  and  the  external  successes  of  Russia.  Under 
Ivan  the  Terrible  were  conquered  the  Tartar  kingdoms  of  Kazan 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION         59 

and  Astrakhan,  which  remained  after  the  destruction  of  the 
Golden  Horde.  Thanks  to  this  conquest  the  basin  of  the  Volga 
and  the  region  to  the  east  thereof  were  opened  up  for  Russian 
colonists.  Then  came  the  conquest  of  Siberia,  thanks  to  the 
famous  expedition  of  the  Cossack  brigand  Yermak  Timophaevitch. 
Then  commenced  the  march  of  the  Russians  toward  the  Far 
East.  In  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  under  the  Tsar 
Alexis,  the  Ukraine,  or  Little  Russia,  was  united  to  the  State, 
having  hitherto  belonged  to  Poland.  (It  was  not  the  whole  of 
the  Ukraine  that  was  absorbed,  but  only  the  banks  of  the 
Dnieper.)  Under  Peter  the  Great  Russia  seized  the  Baltic  shore, 
warring  against  Sweden  and  Livonia.  The  foundation  of  St. 
Petersburg,  and  its  transformation  into  the  capital  city,  showed 
what  value  Peter  set  upon  his  conquest.  According  to  the  great 
Russian  poet,  Pushkine,  St.  Petersburg  was  for  Russia  "a  window 
overlooking  Western  Europe."  At  the  end  of  Peter's  reign  the 
Russian  State  had  increased  from  a  small  princely  domain  to  an 
enormous  political  structure  occupying  an  area  of  2,755,000 
square  miles  and  containing  thirteen  millions  of  inhabitants. 

Naturally  the  geographic  expansion  of  the  power  of  the 
heads  of  the  Russian  State  led  to  its  political  expansion.  The 
autocratic  Emperor,  head  of  the  Church  and  the  army,  soon 
appeared  to  himself,  as  to  others,  a  terrestrial  god. 


VI 

After  Peter  the  Great  the  territorial  expansion  of  Russia 
rapidly  progressed.  Under  Catherine  II  the  State  seized  the 
Crimea  and  a  belt  of  land  contained  between  the  Bug  and  the 
Dniester.  Then,  by  the  conventions  of  1772-3-5  Russia, 
Prussia,  and  Austria  effected  three  partitions  of  Poland,  which 
enriched  Russia  by  White  Russia,  Volhynia,  Podolia,  Courland, 
and  Livonia.  Under  Alexander  I  ten  Polish  provinces  were 
definitely  acquired,  with  Warsaw  and  Lodz,  provinces  which 
to-day  form    the    wealthiest  commercial    region    of  the    whole 


6o  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Russian  Empire.  Under  Alexander  I  also  Bessarabia  and  Finland 
were  absorbed.  Under  Nicolas  I  Russia  advanced  her  frontiers 
along  the  eastern  border  of  the  Black  Sea,  penetrated  Central 
Asia  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Syr-Uaria,  and  in  the  Far  East 
approached  the  west  bank  of  the  Amur.  Under  Alexander  II 
the  Caucasus  was  conquered,  the  region  of  the  Amur  and  the 
Ussuri,  Turkestan  with  Tashkend,  the  regions  about  the 
Zariavstchan,  a  portion  of  Khiva,  the  region  of  Ferghan,  and 
the  Trans-Caspian  country,  with  Akhal-Tekhe,  The  area  of  the 
Russian  Empire,  which  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great 
was  2,755,000  square  miles,  touched  3,055,000  under  Catherine, 
3,395,000  under  Alexander  I,  3,755,000  under  Nicolas  I,  and 
3,890,000  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Alexander  II.  At  the 
end  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  Russian  Empire,  not  counting 
expanses  of  water,  composed  one-twenty-second  of  the  whole 
area  of  the  terrestial  globe,  or  one-sixth  of  the  land  surface  ;  its 
area  was  more  than  two  and  a  half  times  that  of  Europe,  its 
width  from  north  to  south  2,480  miles,  and  from  east  to  west 
4,960   miles. 

The  military  strength  of  the  empire  natvu'ally  increased  with 
its  area.  The  Russian  army,  which  numbered  200,000  men  under 
Peter  the  Great,  was  doubled  by  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Cathe- 
rine II,  had  doubled  again  at  the  time  of  the  war  with  Napoleon 
(18 1 2),  and  at  the  time  of  the  Crimean  campaign  numbered 
1,600,000  men,  while  to-day  its  war  strength  is  2,500,000  men. 

This  enormous  expansion  of  Russian  territory  has  had  a  great 
influence  on  the  social  and  economic  life  of  the  population. 
Continually  providing  fresh  means  of  subsistence,  it  delivered  a 
large  proportion  of  the  population  from  the  necessity  of  adopting 
intensive  forms  of  production.  Although  the  population  of 
Russia  has  rapidly  increased,  being  now  more  than  ten  times  as 
great  as  in  the  days  of  Peter  the  Great  (nearly  150,000,000),  an 
enormous  amount  of  unutilized  land  has  provided  an  asylum  for 
superfluous  labourers.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century  Russia  counted  51*2  men  per  square  mile,  while  in 
France  the  proportion  was  184,  in  Germany  263,  in  Ireland  337, 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION        6i 

and  in  Belgium  512.  Even  six  hundred  years  earlier,  ij;  the 
fourteenth  century,  France  numbered  102  inhabitants  to  the 
square  mile,  while  in  Russia  a  like  density  of  population  is  of  rare 
occurrence  even  in  our  own  days. 

Here  a  question  presents  itself:  How  could  a  country  so  poor 
and  backward  as  Russia  was  durino;  two  and  a  half  centuries 
become  a  vast  invincible  empire  and  assume  universal  importance  ? 
To  reply  to  this  question  we  must  expound  certain  peculiarities 
of  the  internal  organization  of  the  country,  anterior  to  the  eman- 
cipation of  the  peasantry. 

We  know  that  the  autocracy  triumphed  by  leaning  on  the 
lesser  nobility  or  dvorianstvo^  who  naturally  did  not  assist  the 
Princes  and  Tsars  of  Moscow  for  love  of  the  thing,  but  with  a 
view  to  their  own  interests,  economic  and  social  :  production  for 
an  unlimited  market  and  the  rise  of  a  monetary  economy  necessi- 
tated plentiful  labour,  and  the  economic  revolution  of  the  six- 
teenth century  recoiled  upon  the  peasr.nts,  increasing  their  debt 
and  still  further  depriving  them  of  land.  Pressed  by  material 
need,  the  peasants  began  to  flock  to  the  landed  proprietors  in  order 
to  be  transformed  from  the  free  men  they  were  into  serfs.  The 
seigneur  engaged  to  provide  them  with  land  and  material  assist- 
ance in  exchange  for  the  hartchina  (such,  during  the  period  ol 
serfdom,  was  the  term  for  the  obligatory  labour  of  the  peasant  on 
the  master's  land).  Often,  owing  to  his  debt,  the  peasant  became 
a  slave  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  The  peasants  did  not  willingly 
place  themselves  in  economic  and  juridical  dependence  on  the 
nobles,  and  energetically  defended  their  "  right  of  disavowal." 
This,  since  the  revolution  in  production,  was  highly  inconvenient 
to  the  seigneur^  for  it  threatened  to  deprive  him  of  his  labourers. 
The  dvorianstvo  therefore  began  to  appeal  to  the  Government  for 
the  suppression,  by  legislation,  of  the  right  of  disavowal,  and  for 
the  institution  of  general  serfdom.  Except  for  Boris  Godunov 
all  the  Muscovite  Tsars  issued  edicts  to  this  end.  In  the 
first  place  they  permitted  the  right  of  "  disavowal  "  on  one  day 
of  the  year — St.  George's  Day — and  later  the  right  was  with- 
drawn altogether. 


62  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  institution  of  serfdom  was  facilitated  by  the  circumstance 
that  the  economic  movement  of  the  sixteenth  century  was 
followed  by  a  depression  which  ruined  a  whole  mass  of  peasants 
and  forced  them  to  choose  serfdom  rather  than  death  by  starva- 
tion. P'rom  this  point  of  view  we  may  say  that  serfdom  was,  not 
only  for  the  landed  proprietors  but  also  for  the  peasants,  the  in- 
evitable issue  of  unfavourable  economic  conditions,  and,  whatever 
the  moralists  may  say,  a  step  in  advance  in  the  economic  develop- 
ment of  Russia.  It  must  be  noted  that  in  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  centuries  and  the  commencement  of  the  eighteenth 
the  exploitation  of  the  serfs  was  relatively  not  very  extensive.  At 
this  period  the  market  for  the  outlet  of  grain  was  still  limited  ; 
the  proprietor  reserved  for  his  own  use  half  the  estate,  and  only 
required  three  days'  labour  a  week  of  the  peasant.  The  three 
other   days  were  the  peasant's  own. 

At  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  situation  of  the 
peasants  became  still  more  painful,  as  the  grain  produced  by 
Russia  began  to  flow  outward  into  the  international  market. 
The  development  of  the  export  trade  in  Russian  corn  is  shown 
by  the  following  figures  : 

In  1758,  grain  was  exported  to  the  value  of  £\2,ooo. 
1778,  „  „  „  „  £106,400, 

1802,  „  „  „  „  ;^87o,ooo. 

1897,  „  „  „  „         ;^7>530.ooo- 

Towards  1830  Russia  exported  a  fifth  part  of  her  whole  harvest. 
This  development  of  the  export  trade  filled  the  heads  of  the 
landed  proprietors  with  dreams  of  a  golden  future,  I'he  desire 
to  produce  as  much  as  possible,  to  gain  the  greatest  possible 
profit,  impelled  the  landowner  still  further  to  exploit  the  peasants. 
The  private  fields  of  the  master  were  enlarged  and  the  days  ot 
the  bartchina  (the  term  of  labour  per  week  which  the  proprietor 
demanded  of  the  labourer)  were  increased.  This  extreme  ex- 
ploitation of  the  peasants  filled  them  with  indignation,  and  under 
the  reign  of  Nicolas  I,  556  rural  revolts  were  officially  recorded. 

Slavery  was  especially   harsh  in  Russia,  and  was  distinguished 


THE   STATE  AND   ITS  EVOLUTION        63 

by  the  ferocity  of  the  landed  proprietors.  The  Russian  serfs  were 
not  attached  to  the  soil,  to  the  economic  organism,  as  were  the 
serfs  of  Western  Europe,  but  to  the  person  of  the  master.  The 
private  and  therefore  despotic  character  of  Russian  serfdom  may 
be  thus  explained  :  In  Europe,  thanks  to  the  limited  dimensions 
of  the  local  markets,  each  market  had  to  be  provided  with  an 
assured  quantity  of  labour,  whence  the  binding  of  the  peasant  to  a 
particular  locality.  In  Russia,  on  the  contrary,  the  markets  even 
in  the  sixteenth  century  served  enormous  areas,  so  that  the  land- 
owners had  to  be  granted  the  right  to  transport  their  labourers 
from  one  district  to  another,  according  to  the  demands  of  the 
market,  and  to  attach  the  peasants  to  their  own  persons. 

The  institution  of  slavery  was  highly  advantageous  to  the 
Government.  The  dvortanieSy  serving  as  intermediaries  between 
the  central  power  and  the  rural  population,  organized  the  eco- 
nomic activity  and  the  rural  life  of  their  peasants  with  a  view  to 
their  own  material  interests  and  the  financial  and  military  require- 
ments of  the  State.  The  noble  had  to  see  that  his  serfs  accom- 
plished their  military  service,  and  was  responsible  for  the  taxes 
levied  upon  them.  Moreover,  he  had  to  act  as  the  peasants' 
judge,  and  to  settle  their  quarrels  and  disputes.  In  a  word,  to 
quote  the  expression  of  Nicolas  I,  "absolutism  had  150,000 
unpaid  prefects  of  police,"  and  according  to  the  well-known 
Slavophile,  Kochelev,"the  Russian  dvorianstvo  was  the  dough  from 
which  the  Government  kneaded  its  functionaries," 

The  large  number  of  functionaries  thus  provided  by  the  lesser 
nobility  simplified  the  problem  of  administrating  so  populous  a 
country  and  diminished  the  expenses  of  the  State.  In  the  middle 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  for  example,  the  expenses  of  the 
Russian  Government  were  only  19,000,000  roubles,  divided  as 
follows  :  8,500,000  for  the  army,  2,000,000  for  administration 
and  justice,  50,000  for  public  instruction,  and  the  rest  for  the 
upkeep  of  the  Court  or  the  payment  of  high  officials.  For  a  very 
long  time  the  central  administration  was  anything  but  compli- 
cated. It  was  evolved  from  the  private  economy  of  the  Muscovite 
Princes.     The  titles  of  the  highest  dignitaries  of  the  State — cup- 


64  MODERN  RUSSIA 

bearer,  master  of  the  horse,  etc. — show  clearly  that  the  first  admin- 
istrators of  the  Russian  State  were  chiefly  the  private  servants 
of  the  Princes  of  Moscow.  VViien  administrative  affairs  became 
more  complex  there  were  institutions  called  Prikaxes^  at  the 
head  of  which  were  hoyan  who  had  received  from  the  Tsar  the 
prikaze  (order)  to  occupy  this  or  the  other  branch  of  the  ad- 
ministration. Into  the  Provinces  were  sent  the  voevody^  charged 
with  the  higher  administrative  and  judicial  duties.  Under  Peter 
the  Great,  who  lilccd  to  employ  foreign  terms,  the  prikaxes 
were  replaced  by  "  colleges,"  and  under  Alexander  I  the 
*' colleges"  gave  way  to  ministries.  But  these  changes  were 
only  technical  ;  the  principle  of  government  remained  the  same  ; 
the  autocratic  Emperor  held  all  powers  concentrated  in  his  own 
hands,  and  himself  appointed  all  the  higher  agents  of  the 
administration,  who  were  responsible  only  to  him.  It  is  easy 
to  realize  that  in  so  vast  a  country  as  Russia,  where  the  mass  of 
administrative  affairs  was  proportionately  vast,  the  Tsars  exercised 
the  absolute  power  more  in  phrase  than  in  fact  :  the  power 
actually  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  class  from  which  the  Tsar 
chose  his  civil  and  military  administrators.  In  the  seventeenth 
century  State  service  was  compulsory  for  every  landed  proprietor, 
and  the  lesser  nobles  were  really  the  serfs  of  the  Govern- 
ment, as  the  peasants  were  the  serfs  of  the  nobles.  Peter  the 
Great  was  extremely  strict  in  exacting  the  accomplishment  of 
the  functions  of  the  State  by  his  nobles.  He  also  required  of  the 
younger  nobles  a  term  in  some  foreign  college  ;  a  condition  by 
no  means  welcomed  by  these  young  men. 

It  was  only  under  Catherine  II  that  the  compulsory  service 
of  the  nobles  was  abolished  ;  but  at  this  period  the  nobles 
themselves  realized  the  advanta";es  of  concentratino-  the  adminis- 
trative  functions  in  their  own  hands,  and  were  attracted  by  service 
under  the  State  as  a  source  of  income  and  of  power.  At  this 
period  the  dvorianstvo  profited  by  its  political  influence  in  order 
to  increase  its  dominion  over  the  peasants.  In  1747  it  obtained 
the  right  to  sell  serfs.  This  living  merchandise  was  extremely 
dear  in  the  markets,  so  that  the  dvorianstvo  profited  greatly  by  its 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS   EVOLUTION        65 

privilege,  pitilessly  separating  husband  and  wife,  mother  and 
children.  In  1760  the  nobles  were  allowed  to  send  their  serfs  to 
Siberia  as  a  punishment,  and  in  1767  a  ukase  of  the  Tsar  forbade 
the  peasants  to  make  complaints  against  their  masters^  thereby  deliver- 
ing them  completely  to  the  mercies  of  the  latter. 

Thus  a  vast  State  fabric  was  formed,  living  on  the  labour  01 
the  serfs  and  governed  by  an  autocratic  central  power  assisted 
by  the  nobles. 

The  Tsar  proudly  assumed  the  title  of  "first  noble  of  the 
Empire  "  ;  while  the  nobility  resolved  at  all  costs  to  safeguard 
their  privileges.  Moreover,  this  nobility  did  not  demand  any 
constitutional  guarantee,  for  it  possessed  a  better  security  :  it 
occupied  all  the  high  civil  and  military  posts.  The  fate  of  the 
Tsars  Peter  III  and  Paul  I,  husband  and  son  of  Catherine  II, 
both  killed  by  noble  officers  of  the  Imperial  Guard,  shows  clearly 
the  kind  of  "  influence  "  exerted  by  the  dvorianstvo  to  express 
their  discontent  where  this  was  provoked  by  a  representative  or 
the  autocratic  power. 

But    it    must    not    be    supposed  that  the  absolute  monarchy, 
while  supported  by  the  nobles,  was  maintained  merely  by  brute 
force  ;  the  birth  of  the  monarchical  and  aristocratic  State,    and 
its  external  successes,  were  possible  only  because  this  monarchical 
State  had  at  one  time  been  a  progressive  phenomenon  of  the  his- 
toric life  of  the  Russian  people.     The  monarchy  and  the  lesser 
nobility  joined  efforts  to  destroy  the  feudalism  of  the  oligarchy  or 
boyars  which   so  hampered   the  economical  and  political  unity  of 
the  country,  and  the  lesser  nobility  devoted  itself  to  the  military 
organization  of  Russia  and  the  defence  of  the  country  against  its 
external   enemies.     Moreover,   this  same  nobility   played  a  con- 
siderable art  in  the  organization  of  the  principal  factor  of  national 
economy — namely,  agriculture.     We  must  remember  this  if  we 
are  to  judge  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  functions  of  the 
Russian  monarchy  and  the  Russian  nobles.     While  doing  justice 
to  the  historic  activity  of  these  two  principal  elements  in  the  life 
ot   the  Russian   State,  we  must  not  forget  that  this  activity  was 
determined   by   material  class   interests,  and  we  must  impartially 

5 


66  MODERN  RUSSIA 

judge  the  present  situation  of  the  autocracy  and  the  nobility, 
and  understand  why  these  two  forces  have  become  so  retrograde 
and  so  negative. 

The  problems  of  external  politics  and  of  internal  administration, 
and  above  all  the  necessity  of  possessing  an  army  and  a  fleet, 
forced  the  Government,  even  in  the  days  of  Peter  the  Great, 
to  aid  the  development  of  Russian  industry.  Without  that  aid 
Russian  industry  must  have  developed  ;  the  economic  relations 
of  Russia  with  other  States,  the  increase  of  the  needs  of  Russian 
society,  would  have  led  to  its  development.  But  the  intervention 
of  the  autocracy  hastened  this  development  and  eventually  gave 
it  a  wider  expansion.  It  is  a  characteristic  fact  that  under  Peter 
the  Great  the  merchants,  not  the  nobles,  were  the  first  to  organize 
the  nascent  industries.  The  development  of  commercial  exchange 
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  amassed  the  capital 
indispensable  for  the  construction  of  factories  and  workshops. 
But  one  indispensable  element  was  lacking  :  labour.  Then, 
in  1728,  a  law  authorized  the  merchants  to  buy  peasants,  but 
only  by  whole  villages,  and  on  condition  that  each  village  was 
absolutely  attached,  not  to  the  person  of  the  merchant,  but  to 
the  factory  itself.  In  this  way  Russian  industry  was  founded 
on  serfdom.  But  it  soon  became  obvious  that  the  labour  of 
serfs  in  the  factories  and  workshops  would  be  far  from  pro- 
ductive, for  industry  demands  far  more  technical  knowledge  and 
culture  than  husbandry.  In  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century  the  Government  was  obliged  to  conduct  an  inquiry 
into  the  evil  state  of  Russian  industry.  But  the  nobles,  realizing 
what  a  source  of  income  industry  migiit  become,  began  to 
demand  that  the  Government  should  limit  the  activity  of  the 
merchants.  In  1762  a  law  forbade  the  merchants  to  buy  serfs 
in  order  to  make  them  work  in  workshop  or  factory.  Thanks 
to  this  law  and  the  small  numbers  of  free  workmen,  the  nobles 
promptly  possessed  themselves  of  all  the  leading  industries  of 
the  country.  Thus  in  1809  of  108  cloth  factories  which  existed 
in  Russia  only  12  belonged  to  men  of  the  commercial  classes. 
But  while  the  serfs  were  bad  workers  the  nobles  were  deplorable 


THE   STATE  AND  ITS  EVOLUTION        67 

organizers.  Accustomed  to  live  by  the  fruit  of  gratuitous  labour, 
they  had  neither  the  energy  nor  the  initiative  required  by  a 
successful  manufacturer.  However,  profiting  by  their  relations 
with  the  Government,  they  obtained  State  contracts,  and  monopo- 
lized the  production  of  articles  necessary  for  the  equipment  of 
the  fleet,  the  army,  etc.  Having  no  fear  of  competition,  there 
was  no  force  which  could  stimulate  them  to  improve  the 
technique  of  production. 

For  this  reason  the  industry  of  the  country,  which  had  so 
rapidly  developed,  now  gradually  decayed.  The  export  of  the 
foundries,  for  example,  was  four  and  a  half  times  greater  at  the 
end  of  the  eighteenth  century  than  in  the  middle  of  the  nine- 
teenth ;  and  in  the  same  period  the  number  of  clothworks 
making  for  export  fell  to  one-third  of  its  former  figure  ;  for  the 
labour  of  Russian  serfs  could  not  compete  with  the  work  of  the 
free  artisans  of  Europe. 

However,  the  branches  of  industry  which  produced  for  the 
home  market  (for  example,  the  weaving  of  cloth  and  cotton 
goods)  fared  better  than  the  export  trade.  Their  products  quickly 
replaced  the  village-made  article.  But  here  again  industry 
suffered  by  the  action  of  the  Government,  for  the  ever-increasing 
financial  demands  of  the  latter  decreased  the  purchasing  power 
of  the  population.  In  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century 
it  became  evident  that  serfdom  was  checking  the  development 
of  the  national  economy,  and  that  before  it  could  pass  to  higher 
forms  of  economic  activity  the  Russian  people  must  enjoy  different 
social  and  political  conditions  of  life.  But  as  always  happens 
in  such  a  case,  the  ruling  class,  with  the  monarchy  at  its  head, 
was  not  willing  to  relinquish  the  privileges  which  appertained 
exclusively  to  the  old  order  of  things.  In  vain  did  certain 
influential  officials  of  the  day,  like  the  celebrated  Speransky  in 
the  reign  of  Alexander  I,  seek  to  persuade  the  Government 
to  liberal  reforms  ;  in  vain  did  a  group  of  prudent  and  educated 
nobles  attempt,  on  the  14th  of  December,  1825,  to  effect  a 
change  of  regime  (an  attempt  known  as  the  revolt  of  the  "Decem- 
brists").    The  greater  portion  of  the  nobility  was  reactionary. 


68  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Some  of  the  "  Decembrists "   were  executed,  the  rest  deported 
to  Siberia,   and   not   until  a   quarter  of  a  century   had  passed,  a 
time  of  development    and    conflict,    not    until    the    downfall    of 
Russia  during  the  Crimean   War,  did   the  autocracy  consent   to 
grant   the  people  a  few  concessions. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE   EVOLUTION   OF  THE   NATIONAL   MIND 

I.  Influence  of  geographical  and  economic  conditions  upon  the 
psychology  of  the  people.  II.  Influence  of  religion  and  the 
function  of  the  Orthodox  Church.  III.  Influence  of  serfdom 
and  the  autocracy. 


In  the  chapter  dealing  with  racial  factors  we  saw  that  the  social 
and  economic  environment  plays  the  most  important  part  in  the 
formation  of  the  mental  peculiarities  and  the  classes  and  groupings 
of  a  people.  But  as  the  natural  conditions  of  human  life  deter- 
mine the  character  of  human  activity,  so  also  natural  conditions 
are  reflected  in  human  mentality.  Thus  one  of  the  most  salient 
peculiarities  of  the  life  of  the  Russian  people  has  been,  as  we 
know,  the  enormous  area  of  the  territory  which  it  inhabits, 
a  country  devoid  of  the  natural  obstacles  which  might  have 
covered  the  great  plain  of  Europe  with  little  Russias.  The 
result  of  this  geographical  peculiarity  has  been  manifested  in 
the  character  of  the  labour  accomplished  by  the  population. 
For  a  long  time  the  people  felt  no  need  to  alter  the  form  of 
its  economic  activity,  or  to  improve  the  technical  methods  ot 
production.  This  economic  conservatism  naturally  provoked  a 
social  and  mental  conservatism,  which  was,  until  very  recently, 
a  typical  feature  of  the  great  majority  of  the  population.  From 
the  sixteenth  century  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  the  Russian 
peasantry,   who  formed   an  enormous  proportion   of  the  nation, 

lived    under    monotonous    economic    conditions,    a    prey    to    the 

69 


70  MODERN  RUSSIA 

prejudices  and  traditions  of  centuries.  The  collective  experience 
amassed  by  their  ancestors  came  down  to  the  younger  generations 
without  appreciable   change. 

This  circumstance — that  for  centuries  the  economic  basis  of 
the  State  was  the  rural  economy — has  had  a  great  influence  on 
the  political  life  of  Russia.  Agriculture,  absorbing  the  peasant 
entirely,  cut  him  off  from  the  rest  of  the  world  and  confined  his 
interests  to  his  native  village.  For  this  reason  the  Russian 
peasants  have  been  a  more  or  less  passive  element  of  society, 
leaving  others  to  busy  themselves  with  politics.  It  is  a  pheno- 
menon common  to  all  countries  in  which  the  economic  basis 
of  the  State  is  agriculture,  and  the  social  basis  the  peasantry, 
that  a  feudal  aristocracy  or  an  Oriental  absolutism  asserts  itself 
as   predominant.     Russia  was  no    exception   to  the   rule. 

Another  result  of  the  geographical  conditions  of  Russia  has 
been  the  continual  danger  of  nomadic  invasion.  At  the  very 
beginning  of  Russian  history  the  people  and  the  State  had  to 
struggle  persistently  against  the  Asiatic  peril.  The  previous 
history  of  Russia  and  the  incessant  expansion  of  Russian  territory 
stimulated  the  military  activity  of  the  State,  demanded  of  the 
people  an  extreme  exertion  of  its  military  strength,  and  by 
checking  the  intellectual  activity  of  the  masses,  maintained 
it  at  the  lowest  level. 

Moreover,  having  entered  upon  the  historic  stage  at  a  later 
date  than  the  Latin  and  the  Germanic  peoples,  the  Russian 
Slavs  were  deprived  of  the  civilizing  influence  which  the  Roman 
Empire  exerted  over  the  peoples  of  Western  Europe.  When 
the  Slavs  began  to  colonize  the  great  plain  of  Eastern  Europe 
they  encountered  no  learned  and  cultivated  Romans,  but  poor 
and  ignorant  Finnish  tribes  whose  political  life  was  more  than 
rudimentary. 

II 

Another  leading  influence  was  the  linguistic  and  religious 
isolation   of  tiie  Russian  people.     Russia  has  lost  much  by  this 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL  MIND     71 

isolation,  not  only  in  comparison  with  the  Latin  peoples,  but  also 
in  comparison  with  the  Germans,  for  whom  Latin  was  long  the 
language  of  science  and  religion.  The  Poles — the  only  section 
of  the  Russian  Slavs  who  were  subjected  to  the  influence  of  the 
Church  of  Rome — have  by  their  general  culture  been  much 
closer  to  Western  Europe,  and  have  suflFered  less  than  other  Slavs 
from  their  linguistic  isolation. 

Not  only  did  the  Russian  people  receive  no  knowledge  of  the 
Latin  tongue  and  of  Roman  culture  from  the  Orthodox  Church, 
but  that  Church  did  not  even  seek  to  encourage  or  extend  its 
maternal  language.  The  apostles  of  Christianity  in  Russia, 
having  found  no  ready-made  alphabet,  created  one  themselves, 
and  then  composed  a  special  language  in  which  the  religious 
services  were  celebrated.  This  language — "  the  Slav  of  the 
Church  " — has  little  resemblance  to  the  dialects  of  the  Russian 
Slavs  of  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries  :  that  is,  of  the  period 
during  which  Christianity  was  spreading  about  the  country. 
The  social  and  economic  conditions  of  the  life  of  the  ancient 
Russian  Slavs  was  extremely  unfavourable  to  the  spread  of 
Christian  ideology.  Living  among  forests  and  marshes  and  on 
the  banks  of  rivers,  busied  with  the  chase  and  primitive  hus- 
bandry, the  Russian  Slav  of  the  period  had  no  time  to  free 
himself  from  the  influences  of  nature.  He  did  not  envisage  him- 
self in  opposition  to  nature,  and  according  to  a  recent  investigator, 
he  could  not  well  distinguish  "  where  man  left  oflF  and  where 
nature  began  ;  "  he  animated  every  fragment  and  every  pheno- 
menon of  nature.  Animism  was  the  leading  feature  of  the 
ideology  of  the  Russian  Slavs.  The  popular  Russian  tales  are  to 
this  day  full  of  animated  birds,  beasts,  trees,  etc. 

The  economic  weakness  of  the  Slav  peasant,  his  impotence  in 
the  hands  of  wild  nature,  inspired  him  with  a  fear  of  his  sur- 
roundings. The  animals  whose  language  he  could  not  under- 
stand seemed  to  him  more  dangerous  than  human  enemies.  Just 
as  he  formed  treaties  of  peace  with  neighbouring  tribes,  so  he 
entered  into  relations  with  certain  species  of  animals.  The  totem, 
the  animal  which  protected  the  man  in  moments  of  difficulty  and 


72  MODERN  RUSSIA 

danger,  received  offerings  in  exchange  and  became  an  object  of 
worship.  A  relic  of  totemism  and  the  cult  of  animals  among  the 
ancient  Slavs  may  still  be  found  in  the  district  of  Minsk,  in  the 
form  of  a  myth  relating  to  two  dogs.  These  dogs  having  on 
several  occasions  saved  the  prince  their  master  from  the  greatest 
danger,  the  latter,  after  their  death,  ordered  the  evocation  of  their 
memory  on  certain  days  of  the  year.  The  tales  of  the  "Tsar  of 
the  Brass  "  and  the  "Golden  P'ish  "  both  reveal  the  imprint  of 
animal-worship. 

The  individualization  and  personification  of  animals  and  the 
sacred  phenomena  of  nature  transformed  the  totem  into  a  fetich  ; 
that  is,  it  led  to  the  replacement  of  the  worship  of  different 
groups  of  animals  or  natural  phenomena  by  the  worship  of  this  or 
that  particular  object.  As  the  ancient  Slav  found  himself  more 
at  home  in  the  midst  of  nature  he  learned  to  distinguish  certain 
isolated  objects  to  which  he  continued  to  attribute  a  soul.  Very 
often  the  Russian  Slav  realized  his  supremacy  over  these  objects 
and  profited  by  it.  In  a  Russian  legend  an  old  man  took  pity  on 
a  tree  which  implored  him  to  spare  it.  But  the  old  man's  wife 
forced  the  tree  to  work  for  her  and  to  satisfy  her  slightest 
caprices.  These  caprices  ended  badly  :  the  old  woman  and  her 
husband  were  changed  into  bears  by  the  miraculous  tree,  because 
they  had  sought  to  become  gods.  The  adoration  of  nature  and 
of  material  objects  led  to  the  appearance  of  the  cult  of  nature, 
that  is,  of  a  certain  means  of  action  towards  the  subject  adored. 
The  ancient  Russian  Slav,  like  all  savages,  made  offerings  and 
addressed  prayers  and  requests  to  his  god.  As  the  technical 
experience  of  economy  was  transmitted  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion, so  with  the  cult,  whose  guardians  were  the  oldest  and  wisest 
members  of  the  family.  The  V'ledun  and  the  Koldiin^  who  knew 
the  secrets  of  nature,  were  the  first  representatives  of  the  religious 
functions  of  primitive  Slav  society. 

The  succeeding  stage  of  development  of  religious  ideology  was 
the  appearance  of  more  general  conceptions  of  the  forces  ot  nature, 
the  original  anthropomorphism  which  peopled  the  woods  and 
waters  and  the  air  with  various  beings  resembling  man.     In  the 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND    73 

woods  the  Russian  Slav  saw  the  Lechy^  fierce  and  crooked,  com- 
parable to  a  gnarled  and  twisted  tree.  In  the  waters  lived  the 
Vodianoi^  the  divinity  of  the  waters  ;  in  the  house  lurked  the 
Domovoi^  the  little  round-shouldered  old  man  who  must  always  be 
carried  with  one  on  removal,  in  a  few  hot  embers  taken  from  the 
old  hearth.  To  the  Dnieper,  which  played  so  important  a  part  in 
the  economic  life  of  the  Slav  colonizers  of  Russia,  was  attributed  a 
special  divinity  known  by  the  name  of  Dnieper-S lovutitch^  power- 
ful and  majestic  as  the  waves  of  the  great  river  itself.  The 
thunder,  the  wind,  death,  sleep,  happiness  and  misfortune,  all  the 
elements,  all  the  phenomena  of  nature  were  deified,  and  even  to 
this  day  the  Russian  peasant-woman  sings  to  her  child  a  lullaby 
which  was  formerly  addressed  to  the  god  of  slumber,  Ugomon. 

"  Spi,  ditia,  mo'ie,  ttsni, 
Ugomon  tebia  vozmi ! " 

(Sleep,  my  child,  Jail  thou  asleep  ;  may  Ugomon  take  thee  in  his  arms  !) 

In  each  man  also  dwelt  a  god — his  soul.  The  ancient  Slav 
represented  this  soul  under  an  ultra-material  aspect  :  it  was  a  bee, 
a  butterfly,  a  little  mouse  or  bird,  living  in  the  throat,  just  above 
the  collar-bones,  where  lies  the  "salt-cellar."  Before  sleep  or 
death  the  soul  quits  its  dwelling.  After  death  the  soul  without 
asylum  becomes  dangerous  to  the  living.  If  the  eyes  of  the 
corpse  are  not  closed  it  is  a  sign  that  the  soul  seeks  a  victim,  and 
even  in  our  days  a  practice  is  extant  in  Russia  of  placing  pieces  of 
copper  on  the  eyelids  of  the  dead,  in  order  to  close  their  eyes  for 
ever.  During  the  funeral  the  soul  of  the  dead  may  attack  either 
a  sleeping  person  or  a  little  child.  For  this  reason,  in  the  villages 
of  White  Russia  even  to  this  day,  all  the  sleepers  are  waked  when 
a  corpse  is  borne  past  a  house,  and  knives  are  placed  in  the  cradles 
of  infants  in  order  to  frighten  the  souls  of  the  dead.  Sometimes 
the  homeless  soul  visits  the  living  :  the  inhabitant  of  White 
Russia  will  still  tell  you  how  a  dead  woman  will  come  in  the 
nio-ht  to  eive  suck  to  her  child,  or  how  a  dead  usurer  has  stolen 
the  cloak  of  a  peasant  who  had  not  repaid  his  debt.     If  a  youth 


74  MODERN  RUSSIA 

or  maiden  dies  the  body  is  dressed  in  wedding  garments,  so  that 
the  soul  can  marry  after  death.  Food  and  drink  arc  set  out  on 
the  tombs  of  the  dead,  and  on  the  day  before  the  day  of  com- 
memoration great  stones  are  placed  at  the  cross-roads,  so  that  the 
dead  may  sit  thereon  and  rest.  In  White  Russia,  where  many 
old  beliefs  are  preserved,  a  curious  festival  is  celebrated  twice  a 
year,  in  spring  and  in  autumn.  On  this  occasion  the  peasant's 
family  cleans  and  adorns  the  hbah.  A  great  feast  is  prepared,  and 
in  the  evening,  having  lit  a  candle,  the  father  says  :  "  Blessed 
kinsfolk,  we  call  you  ;  blessed  kinsfolk,  come  to  us  :  here  is  all 
that  makes  a  house  rich  ;  blessed  kinsfolk,  hear  our  prayer,  fly 
towards  us  !  "  During  the  meal  each  member  of  the  family  sets 
part  of  his  portion  aside  for  his  ancestors,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
feast  the  father  says  :  "  Blessed  kinsfolk,  you  have  come  hither, 
you  have  eaten  and  drunken,  now  fly  away  home!"  (V.  N. 
Nikolsky,  Primitive  Religious  Beliefs  and  the  Appearance  of 
Christianity  in   Russia). 

Primitive  agriculture  gave  birth  to  cults  peculiarly  closely 
allied  to  the  agricultural  economy.  But  these  cults  were  far  less 
developed  than  other  analogous  cults  among  the  ancient  Greeks 
and  Egyptians.  The  imagination  of  the  Russian  Slav  had  not 
the  leisure  nor  the  ability  to  develop  these  agricultural  cults  until 
Christianity  invaded  the  country.  Even  the  two  chief  divinities 
of  the  old  Slav  mythology,  Dajdbog  (Sun)  and  Mat-Syr a-Zemla 
(Mother-Moist-Earth),  present  wholly  animistic  features.  The 
Earth  is  represented  as  groaning  under  the  weight  she  bears  ;  and 
the  Sun  as  a  material  being.  The  Spring  was  represented  in  a 
very  curious  fashion.  The  Slav  savage,  "  unable  to  resist  his  love 
of  animating  all  things,  sought  to  discover  what  living  creature 
brought  the  Spring.  This  was  not  difficult.  Was  not  the  Spring 
in  one  of  those  migratory  birds  which  come  when  Winter  is 
ready  to  disappear,  and  fill  the  woods  with  their  cries  ?  "  Hence 
legends  respecting  the  lark  and  the  woodcock,  which  bring 
"from  across  the  seas"  nine  locks,  liberate  the  Spring,  and  put 
the  Winter  under  lock  and  key.  Once  the  Spring  had  appeared, 
sacrifices  were  offered   to   it.      Even   to-day   the  peasants  of  the 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL  MIND    75 

province  of  Penza  (near  the  Volga),  when  the  snows  of  winter  begin 
to  thaw,  place  morsels  of  bread  or  cake  on  the  spots  that  arc  the 
first  to  be  delivered  of  their  snowy  covering.  The  birch-tree,  the 
favourite  tree  of  the  Russians,  also  played  the  part  of  a  vernal 
fetich,  to  which  offerings  were  borne,  and  on  festival  days  its 
shadow  fell  upon  games  and  dances.  At  the  season  of  sowing, 
bread  and  eggs  were  placed  on  the  furrows  left  by  the  plough. 
The  divinity  of  grain  also  demanded  offerings. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  harvest  two  festivals  were  celebrated, 
one  of  which  was  in  honour  of  the  divinity  of  the  harvest,  known 
as  Kupala.  The  Russian  Slavs  believed  that  bracken  blossomed  on 
the  night  of  Kupala^  and  that  he  who  should  pluck  it  that  night 
would  be  rich  and  happy.  The  other  festival,  dedicated  to  Tar'ila^ 
contained  a  sexual  element.  It  was  doubtless  sacred  to  the  god  of 
fecundity. 

Above  these  and  analogous  rural  cults,  in  the  midst  of  the 
military  and  commercial  city  of  the  period  of  Kiev,  was  another 
cult  whose  ideology  marked  a  step  in  advance  of  the  religion  of  the 
agriculturists. 

"In  the  city,  or  during  an  expedition,  men  were  not  content 
with  occasional  fetiches.  Totems  became  gradually  unfamiliar  to 
the  merchant-bandit.  The  cities  required  permanent  protectors, 
and  the  expeditions  continual  assistance.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Slav  bandit  and  the  merchant  constantly  came  into  contact  with 
the  Normans  and  Byzantines,  whose  mythology  was  certainly  far 
more  systematically  developed  than  theirs.  Thanks  to  these  con- 
ditions their  religious  beliefs,  in  this  half-military,  half-commercial 
environment,  presently  developed  in  two  directions.  In  the  towns 
permanent  idols  appeared,  not  entirely  deprived  of  their  fetichistic 
character,  but  possessing  invulnerable  power  and  the  sanctity  of 
gods.  Then  came  allusions  to  a  theological  system,  the  desire  to 
determine  the  relations  existing  between  various  gods.  Here  the 
influence  of  Byzantine  beliefs  was  undoubtedly  at  work  "  (V. 
Nikolsky,  op.  cit.). 

Among  the  population  of  the  towns  the  idols  of  Perun  and  of 
Feless  or  yoloss  enjoyed  the  greatest  consideration.     Perun  was  the 


76  MODERN  RUSSIA 

god  of  thunder  and  lightning  and  of  war,  and  the  protector  of  the 
guard  of  the  Prince  of  Kiev.  f^oloss  was  the  god  of  flocks  and 
herds.  Besides  these,  Svarog,  god  of  fire  and  father  of  Dajdbog 
(the  Sun),  and  Stribogy  the  god  and  father  of  the  winds,  were 
greatly  venerated.  The  representation  of  these  divinities  was  full 
of  the  most  ingenuous  fetichism.  For  example,  when  the  Prince 
of  Kiev,  Vladimir  the  Holy,  introduced  Christianity  in  his  city 
in  the  year  998,  he  ordered  that  the  idol  of  Perun  should  be 
thrown  down  and  cast  into  the  Dnieper.  Moreover,  so  that 
the  ancient  god  should  not  meditate  a  return  to  the  city,  the  idol 
was  pushed  away  from  the  banks  until  it  was  swept  away  down 
the  river. 

The  warlike  and  commercial  element  of  ancient  Russia  was 
equally  ingenuous  in  its  conception  of  the  soul.  The  corpse  of 
every  prince  and  knight  was  burned  with  the  arms,  the  horse,  and 
sometimes  even  the  wife  and  slaves  of  the  deceased,  so  that  the 
dead  man  could  live  in  Paradise  as  he  had  lived  on  earth.  The 
conception  of  Paradise  reflected  the  change  produced  by  the  rise 
of  the  military-commercial  clement  :  vulgar  persons  could  not 
enter  Paradise,  it  being  reserved  for  princes  and  boyars.  To 
reach  it  the  dead  must  cross  a  sea  and  then  climb  tola  great  height, 
no  one  knew  whither.  To  facilitate  this  ascent  a  ladder  was 
buried  with  the  body,  and  sometimes  the  clippings  cut  from  the 
fingers  of  the  deceased  during  his  life.  It  was  the  custom  with 
the  Russians  to  keep  nail-clippings,  as  with  their  help  it  was  easier 
to  climb  into  Paradise. i  Once  there  the  aristocratic  soul  would 
lead  a  most  agreeable  life,  always  at  table,  always  making 
merry. 

The  religious  ideology  of  this  warlike  and  commercial  aristocracy 
reposed  upon  a  low  degree  of  development,  and  both  it  and  the 
agricultural  cults  were  presently  replaced  by  Christianity. 

The  reader  will  understand  that  at  the  outset  the  change  can 
have  been  no  more  than  formal,  for  Christianity  was  the  product 

'  The  practice  of  hoarding  nail-  and  hair-clippings  is  very  general, 
but  the  motive  usually  given  is  that  one  may  be  bewitched  if  they  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  ill-disposed. — Tr. 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE   NATIONAL   MIND     77 

of  a  social  environment  and  a  culture  very  different  from  those  of 
Russian  society   during  the   period  of  Kiev.     The    elements  of 
Christian  ideology  which  constituted  its  greatest  attraction  to  the 
slaves  and  the  proletariat  of  the  Roman   Empire  were  quite  un- 
familiar to  the  mind  of  the  Russian  Slav  of  the  tenth  and  eleventh 
centuries.     The  doctrine  of  Christ  suffering  to  redeem  humanity 
could  find  no  echo  in   the  mind  of  the  Slav.     It  was  the  same 
with  the  dogmatic  and  theosophical  side  of  Christianity.     The 
inhabitant  of  the  banks  of  the  Dnieper  could  adapt  himself  only 
to  its  external  phase,  its  system,  sacraments,  and   religious  cere- 
monies.    The  Greek  popes  and  monks  replaced  the  pagan  priests  : 
ikons  and  the  relics  of  saints  took  the  place  of  the  ancient  fetiches, 
and  the   Christian   ceremonies  succeeded   the   ancient  sacrifices. 
But  all  these  external  transformations  were  not  accompanied  by 
any  internal  transformation  of  religion.     The  Russian   Slav,  even 
after  baptism,  remained  a  pagan.     More,  the  Christianity  intro- 
duced among  the  Russian  Slavs  quickly  became  a  semi-pagan  cult. 
For  this  the  Byzantine  priests  entrusted  with  the  introduction  or 
Christianity  into  Russia  were  partly  responsible.   Unable  to  uproot 
the  pagan   ideas   from  the  Russian   mind,  they  sought  simply  to 
adapt  Christianity  to  the  popular  beliefs.     "They  recognized  the 
existence  of  the  innumerable  Slav  gods  by  abasing  them  to  the 
level  of  demons,  and  recognized  the  sanctity  of  pagan  rites  and 
traditional  dates  by  building  temples  on  the  homes  of  the  ancient 
idols  and  establishing  festivals  on  the  days  chosen  by  the  pagans." 
A  similar  "  pasdagogic  process"  led  merely  to  the  complete  con- 
fusion of  the  religious  conceptions  of  the  people.     The  old  gods 
did    not    disappear  ;     they    contented     themselves    with     taking 
Christian  names.     The  functions  of  Perun  were  transferred  to 
St.  Elias,  "  who  drives  in  a  chariot  across  heaven,"  and  those  of 
the  divinity  of  flocks  and  herds,  Voloss,  to  St.  George.     As  for 
the  goddess  of  Spring, she  becomes  the  Holy  Virgin,  "arriving  on 
a  plough  at  the  time  of  the  Annunciation."     All  the  old  beliefs, 
though  dating  from  centuries  and  centuries  back,  are  still  extant 
to-day.     In  certain  parts  of  Russia  tobacco  and  spirits  are  placed 
in  the  coffin,  that  the  dead  man  may  be  able  in   Paradise  to  offer 


78  MODERN  RUSSIA 

them  to  his  friends.  And  the  faith  of  the  peasantry  in  ikons  and 
miracles  is  marked  by  the  same  gross  and  ingenuous  fetichism  that 
we  find  in  the  pagan  beliefs  of  their  ancestors. 

But  although  Byzantine  Christianity  did  not  greatly  influence 
the  psychology  of  the  Russian  Slav,  although  it  was  content  to 
change  merely  the  name  of  a  religion,  it  has,  on  the  contrary, 
played  a  prominent  part  in  the  organization  of  the  country. 
Christianity  in  the  hands  of  the  ruling  classes  was  a  means  of  in- 
fluencing the  masses.  The  mere  fact  that  the  chief  figures  in  the 
society  of  Kiev  were  the  first  disciples  of  Christianity  proves  as 
much.  The  prince  and  his  guard  were  baptized  first  of  all  ;  then 
they  assembled  the  people  to  receive  baptism  on  the  banks  of  the 
Dnieper.  The  people  were  far  from  willing  to  change  their  idol 
Perun  for  the  idol  Christ,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Novgorod,  for 
example,  retained  a  lasting  memory  of  a  certain  baptism  "  by  steel 
and  fire." 

It  is  not  difficult  to  divine  the  reason  of  the  sympathy  which 
the  warlike  aristocracy  felt  for  Byzantine  Christianity.  The 
religious  relations  between  Byzantium  and  Russia  were  preluded 
and  promoted  by  the  political  and  commercial  relations  between 
the  two  countries.  These  relations  confirmed  the  Byzantine 
influence  in  Russia,  and  gave  the  Russians  certain  privileges,  for 
Constantinople  was  at  this  time  the  chief  market  for  the  outlet  of 
Russian  goods.  The  introduction  oi  Byzantine  Christianity  in 
place  of  the  Roman  type  had  a  lasting  effect  upon  the  country  of 
the  Russian  Slavs  :  it  made  it  less  difficult  for  the  lay  power  to 
dominate  the  ecclesiastical  power.  The  Roman  Church,  as  we 
know,  depended  not  at  all  upon  the  Empire,  while  at  Byzantium 
the  head  of  the  Church  was  really  an  official  of  the  Emperor.  So 
it  was  in  Russia.  Even  during  the  period  of  Russian  feudalism 
the  Church  was  unable  to  win  its  independence,  for  the  inde- 
pendence enjoyed  at  this  time  by  the  spiritual  as  by  the  temporal 
feodaries  was  not  the  independence  of  the  Church,  but  of  its 
various  representatives.  Peter  the  Great  easily  concluded  the 
work  commenced  by  his  ancestors.  He  suppressed  the  Patriarch 
and    replaced    him    by    an    administrative    council    termed    the 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND     79 

"  Directing  Holy  Synod,"  at  the  head  of  which  was  placed  a  lay 
official,  the  chief  procurator,  ober-prokuror.  This  dependence  of 
the  Church  upon  the  civil  authorities  still  further  strengthened  the 
hands  of  the  autocracy,  which  added  the  "  spiritual  sword  "  to  its 
already  crowded  arsenal.  In  moments  of  reaction  the  autocracy 
employed  this  weapon  to  oppose  the  development  of  free  thought 
amidst  the  intellectual  strata  of  society.  Although  Russia  has 
not  known  a  militant  clericalism  like  that  of  Rome,  she  has,  on 
the  other  hand,  been  subjected  to  an  official  clericalism,  a  sort  of 
ecclesiastical  police,  which  has  pressed  very  heavily  upon  the 
spiritual  life  of  the  country.  Orthodoxy  was  one  of  the  basic 
elements  of  the  autocratic  system,  and  one  of  the  principal  checks 
upon  social  and  scientific  progress.  The  following  fact  may 
afford  some  idea  of  the  extraordinary  forms  assumed  by  the  yoke 
of  this  clerical  police  :  in  the  first  half  of  the  last  century  the 
professors  of  anatomy  at  the  Russian  universities  were  forced, 
when  explaining  to  students  the  structure  of  the  human  body, 
"  to  call  their  attention  to  the  benefits  of  God,  who  created  this 
body  in  all  its  astonishing  complexity."  An  innumerable  quantity 
of  such  facts  might  be  cited  ;  but  the  civic  functions  of  the 
Russian  Church  have  by  no  means  been  limited  to  supervising 
the  philosophical  and  scientific  thought  of  the  country.  The 
superior  and  the  local  clergy  were  charged  by  the  Government 
with  the  supervision  of  the  social  activity  and  the  private  life  of 
every  inhabitant.  All  the  Orthodox  functionaries  were  obliged 
to  attend  confession  at  fixed  intervals.  A  certificate  of  confession 
was  demanded  yearly  of  all  school-children.  A  civil  marriage 
does  not  exist  in  Russia ;  the  contract  is  valid  only  when  conse- 
crated by  the  Church  and  recorded  in  its  registers.  Similarly 
divorce  can  be  granted  only  by  the  ecclesiastical  authorities.  If 
to  this  we  add  that  the  popes  are  the  registrars  of  births  and 
deaths,  we  see  that  the  Russian  Church  is  still  entrusted  with 
functions  that  in  Western  Europe  have  long  ago  devolved  upon 
the  secular  authorities. 

The  hypertrophy  of  the  administrative  and  magistral  functions 
of  the  clergy    led    to    the  atrophy   of  their  spiritual   functions. 


So  MODERN  RUSSIA 

In  the  sphere  of  culture  the  influence  of  Russian  orthodoxy  was 
infinitely  less  than  that  of  Catholicism.  The  Russian  "  white 
clergy,"  with  very  rare  exceptions,  have  always  been  and  are  still 
extremely  uneducated.  Even  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century  it  was  sufficient  for  the  intending  shepherd  of  souls  to  be 
able  to  read,  to  write  after  a  fashion,  and  to  recite  a  couple 
of  psalms  by  heart.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century 
an  examination  was  imposed  on  the  candidates.  Seminaries  were 
opened  in  all  the  provinces.  However,  the  moral  and  intellectual 
level  of  the  Russian  clergy  still  left  much  to  be  desired.  Even 
to-day  the  education  provided  by  these  seminaries  is  highly 
scholastic,  and  intended  not  to  awaken  and  enlarge  the  philo- 
sophic faculty  of  the  pupils,  but  to  extinguish  it. 

The  low  level  of  culture  prevalent  among  the  clergy  is  further 
explained  by  the  fact  that   the    law    and  ancient  customs  have 
transformed  the  clergy  into  a  closed  caste.     Hitherto  the  religious 
vocation  has  been  transmitted  from  father  to  son  by  inheritance. 
There  are,  therefore,  among  the  clergy  certain  ruling  dynasties, 
each  of  which  has  ruled  some  parish  for  a  hundred  or  two  hundred 
years.     Moreover,    usage    demands    that    "  the    son    shall    never 
occupy   a  grade  superior  to   that  ot  his  father."     "The  son  of 
the  pope  can  only  present  himself  as  candidate  for  the  position 
of  pope  ;  the  son  of  a  vicar  can  only  aspire  to  be  a  vicar.     Castes 
are  thus  formed  within  the  clergy,  and  it  is  very  difficult  tor  men 
of  talent  to  break  through  them  "  (Professor  Znamensky,  History 
of  the  Russian  Church).      We   must  add  that  the  religious  caste 
has  long  been  in  a  position  very  greatly  inferior  to  that  of  the 
nobility,  and  that  down  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  the 
priest,  just  as   the  serf,  might  according  to  the  law  be  subjected 
to  corporal  punishment ;  and  the  lower  clergy  were  so  until  1863. 
The    nobility    had  long   regarded  the   priests  as  a  contemptible 
class.    The  rural  pope  was  often  an  object  of  ridicule  to  the  noble 
landowners  of  the  district.     All  these  facts  went  far  to  diminish 
the  moral  prestige  of  the  clergy.      Moreover,  the  latter  were  less 
concerned    with    their   moral   prestige   than    with    their  material 
interests,    and    this  fact  was   emphasized    in    the    early  years    of 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND     8i 

the  eighteenth  century  by  St.  Dimitri  Rostovslcy,  who  attained 
one  of  the  highest  grades  of  the  Russian  hierarchy.  St,  Dimitri 
stated  that  the  Russian  priests  entered  into  orders  nie  radi  I'isusa  a 
radi  hlieba  kusa  :  "  not  for  Jesus  Christ,  but  for  a  ijoodly  portion 
of  bread," 

The  upkeep  of  the  clergy  weighs  heavily  on  the  budget  of  the 
Russian  peasant,  and  the  journals  are  always  recording  the  un- 
worthy fashion  in  which  the  divine  mercy  is  trafficked  in,  and  how 
ruthless  are  the  clergy  in  extorting  money.  Often  a  Russian 
priest  refuses  to  bury  a  corpse  if  the  relatives  of  the  deceased 
refuse  to  pay  him  the  sum  demanded.  Then  the  body  will 
lie  days  without  burial  until  the  relatives  have  got  together 
the  amount  required.  The  police  are  often  forced  to  intervene 
in  such  a  case  and  to  order  immediate  burial  for  fear  of  contagion. 
Money  plays  so  great  a  part  in  the  relations  between  the  "  shep- 
herds and  their  flock  "  that  a  proverb  has  become  popular  among 
the  peasantry  :  "  Be  born,  get  baptized  and  married,  and  die,  and 
pay  the  pope  for  everything." 

The  material  relations  between  the  Church  and  the  people  are 
complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  Church  holds  some  of  the 
greatest  estates  in  Russia,  and  the  number  of  these  is  continually 
increasing.  In  1877  the  "  white"  and  "  black  "  clergy  together 
— that  is,  the  Church  and  the  monasteries — owned  more  than 
2,000,000  desiatins  of  land,  and  in  1905  more  than  2,500,000. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  ecclesiastical  lands  are  in  the 
most  fertile  regions  of  Russia,  in  the  centre  and  the  south, 
precisely  where  the  dearth  of  land  is  most  sharply  felt  by  the 
peasantry.  Possessing  considerable  landed  property,  the  Russian 
Church  has  failed  to  employ  its  influence  in  the  direction  of 
improving  agriculture.  The  Russian  popes  and  monks  are  in 
this  respect  very  different  from  those  Catholic  priests,  the 
"  Brothers  of  the  Christian  Colleges,"  of  whom  M.  Le  Bon,  in 
his  Psychology  of  Education^  states  that  "the  only  real  agricultural 
education  in  France  is  in  their  hands.  They  have  farms  on 
which  pupils  receive  a  practical  education  and  obtain  all  the 
prizes   offered  for  competition."     The  Russian  clergy  are   con- 

6 


82  MODERN  RUSSIA 

tent  to  exploit  their  landed  property  in  a  parasitical  manner, 
for  they  lease  their  lands  to  the  peasantry,  charging  a  very  high 
rent,  which  still  further  irritates  the  peasants  against  them. 
Similarly,  in  the  sphere  of  public  instruction  the  Russian  clergy 
have  accomplished  nothing  like  the  results  obtained  by  the 
"  Brothers  of  the  Christian  Colleges  "  above  mentioned.  Accord- 
ing to  M.  Le  Bon  once  more :  "  These  Brothers  are  now^  very 
seriously  competing  with  the  University  in  the  matter  of  superior 
secondary  education."  Even  for  primary  instruction  the 
Russian  priest  has  done  very  little.  Although  under  the  rule  of 
Alexander  III  and  Nicolas  II  the  Government,  struggling 
to  extinguish  liberal  and  revolutionary  ideas,  maintained  a  "  con- 
fessional school  "  in  opposition  to  the  lay  schools,  so  that  the 
Holy  Synod  covered  all  Russia  with  "  parish  confessional  schools," 
the  results  of  this  activity  were  negative.  The  instruction  given 
in  these  schools  was  and  is  so  bad  that  the  peasants  prefer  to  send 
their  children  to  the  lay  schools  provided  by  the  State  and  the 
municipalities.  Moreover,  some  of  these  "  confessional  schools  " 
exist  only  on  paper. 

To  sum  up  :  we  may  say  that  historical  conditions  in  Russia 
have  prevented  the  formation  of  a  soil  favourable  to  clericalism 
like  that  to  be  observed  in  France.  The  political  and  intellectual 
power  of  the  Russian  Church  has  been  infinitely  inferior  to  that 
of  the  Roman  Church,  which  continues  to  make  its  influence 
felt  even  in  those  countries  which  are  on  the  way  to  a  purely 
capitalistic  development. 

Ill 

I  proceed  now  to  this  question  :  What  was  the  effect  of 
serfdom  upon  the  mentality  of  the  people  ? 

Three  centuries  of  such  a  system  must  have  left  their  mark. 
Abolished  by  law  only  in  1861,  the  system  still  makes  itself  felt 
both  in  the  manners  and  in  the  mentality  of  the  Russian  people. 
Moreover,  in  the  latter  period  of  its  existence — about  the  end  of 
the  eighteenth  and   the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century — 


EVOLUTION   OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND    83 

serfdom  assumed  particularly  brutal  forms,  for  at  that  period  the 
rich  landowners  had  realized  the  possibility  of  selling  their  products 
for  money  in  the  open  market,  and  thus  of  augmenting  their 
revenues.  But  in  order  to  achieve  this  end  they  by  no  means 
sought  to  improve  the  technique  of  production.  They  mercilessly 
forced  their  serfs  to  labour,  employing  the  same  methods  as  slave- 
owners might  employ  towards  negroes.  Here,  for  example,  are 
some  facts,  certified  by  historic  documents  and  legal  records  : 

In    1852    an   inquiry  was  held   in  respect  of  a  landowner  of 

Kherson,    K ,   who   had    driven  a  young    man    to    suicide. 

The  inquiry   elicited  the  fact   that    K very  often  had  the 

peasants  put  in  chains,  and  so  chained  drove  them  like  cattle 
to  work.  One  peasant-woman  fled.  "  She  was  caught  after  an 
attempt  at  suicide.  She  was  chained  to  a  post  in  the  kitchen 
and  kept  there  for  five  years,  being  liberated  only  when  her 
services  were  required."  "  Another  peasant  was  chained  by  the 
neck  for  four  years.     He  died  thus   chained.*'* 

The  serfs  were  shockingly  fed.     This  was  the  diet  on  the  estate 

of  Mme   S of  the  province  of  Kharkov.     In  the  first  place, 

food  was  cooked  only  once  a  week,  "  First  meal,  hortch  (the 
national  soup  of  Little  Russia),  but  without  salt.  Second  meal, 
rotten  pumpkin  or  elderberries.  For  the  whole  day,  a  scrap  of 
bread.      On  Sunday,  meat  full  of  maggots." 

You  may  judge  what  was  the  effect  on  the  physical,  intellectual, 
and  moral  nature  of  the  serf  of  exhausting  labour  accomplished 
under  such  conditions. 

The  serf  was  always  subject  to  corporal  punishment. 

"  On  one  estate,"  affirms  a  contemporary,  "  forty  to  fifty 
women  were  beaten  every  day,  and  those  with  child  were  not 
spared." 

Between    1840  and    1850    Prince  G "had  as    many  as 

a  thousand  lashes  given  to  offending  peasants,  and  then  applied 
cantharides  to  the  wounded  parts.  Sometimes  he  conceived  the 
whim  to  punish  them  amidst  a  solemn  ceremony.  For  example, 
he  one  day  assembled  all  the  young  girl  serfs,  and  had  one  of 
them  whipped  in  the  presence  of  the  others.     The 'operation ' 


84  MODERN  RUSSIA 

lasted  an  hour,  during  which  the  prince  played  at  billiards.  The 
result  of  the  punishment  was  that  extreme  unction  had  to  be 
administered." 

The  landowner  K "  whipped  his  coachman,  who  had  over- 
turned his  carriage,  till  he  drew  his  last  breath."     Another  killed 

certain  peasants  in  the  same  manner.     A  certain  T "  ordered 

peasants  who  were  suspected  of  theft  to  be  hanged  by  the  fingers 
from  the  rafters  of  the  coach-house." 

In  1846  the  affair  of  Mme  Stotzky  was  made  public.  "The 
inquiry  revealed  that  Mme  Stotzky,  without  any  motive,  used 
to  punish  her  peasants  with  her  own  hands.  She  had  fitted  in 
a  chamber  two  ring-bolts  of  iron,  one  of  which  was  fixed  to 
the  ceiling  :  by  means  of  these  she  had  the  serfs  strung  up  in 
an  erect  position.  She  used  to  bite  her  serfs,  stifle  them,  pour 
boiling  water  down  their  necks,  forced  them  to  eat  their  own 
excrement,  and  would  put  a  bridle  on  the  women  on  the  pretext 
that  they  drank  milk  while  milking  the  cows.  One  girl,  a  farm- 
hand, died  after  having  for  months  received  fifty  to  two  hundred 
blows  of  a  staff  daily." 

Another  landed  proprietress,  the  wife  of  the  marshal  of  the 
nobility,  Mme  de  Svirsky,  committed  such  horrors  that  one  can 
hardly  believe  in  their  possibility  (the  trial  was  in  1853).  "She 
used  to  force  her  serfs  to  eat  their  excrement  or  rotten  eggs. 
She  used  to  strike  them  with  an  arapnik^  or  make  them  sit  naked 
upon  ice.  She  forced  a  little  girl  to  swallow  brick  and  pounded 
glass  ;  the  child  died.  Another  child  she  forced  to  eat  a  plait  or 
hair.  A  wolf-bitch  was  kept  in  her  court-yard,  and  she  often 
set  it  upon  the  peasants.  One  woman  was  nearly  killed  by  it  ; 
another  received  thirty  wounds." 

The  hard  labour  and  the  horrible  treatment  to  which  the 
peasants  were  accustomed  very  often  reduced  them  to  a  state  of 
absolute  insensibility.  They  became  accustomed  to  these  tortures. 
The  well-known  Russian  publicist,  Samarin,  relates  that  a  more 
than  usually  humane  estate  manager  having  forbidden  the  use  of 
torture,  the  result  of  the  experiment  was  that  the  serfs  refused  to 
go  to  work.     "  Threats,  persuasion,  nothing  availed  ;  only  fresh 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND    85 

corporal  punishment  forced  them  to  resume  work."  It  was  only 
in  the  course  of  time  that  the  peasants  became  accustomed  to 
obey  without  the  fear  of  blows. 

Some  landowners  reduced  their  serfs  to  such  a  state  of 
brutalization  that  when  the  manifesto  ordering  the  abolition 
of  serfdom  was  published  (19th  February,  1861)  the  serfs  were 
not  in  a  condition  to  understand  that  they  were  free.     A  certain 

Kh ,  of  the  province  of  Koursk,  who  owned  a  small  estate, 

"  having  seized  all  the  peasants'  land,  forced  the  serfs  to  labour  for 
his  own  profit  without  granting  them  sufficient  food  to  live  on, 
or  sufficient  time  to  repose.  Keeping  no  feast-days,  leaving  the 
master's  estate  only  once  a  year,  in  order  to  attend  church  once 
a  year,  and  forbidden  to  receive  visits,  the  peasants  of  Khar- 
kevitch,  after  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  of  such  treatment, 
lost  all  faculty  of  reason,  and   were  reduced  almost  to  idiocy." 

When  a  commissary  visited  Kh to  read   the  manifesto  of 

liberation,  "  the  peasants  listened  attentively  but  understood 
nothing." 

Serfdom  was  especially  hard  on  the  women.  The  masters 
exploited  not  only  their  labour  but  also  their  bodies. 

In  1857  the  Russian  Senate  dealt  with  the  affair  of  the  landed 
proprietor  Stratshinsky.  The  latter  was  accused  "  of  abducting 
the  wives  of  his  peasants  and  of  the  violation  of  numerous  young 
girls,  often  children  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  of  age,  followed  by 
death."  The  inquiry  confirmed  these  facts.  Nevertheless  the 
Senate  did  not  find  Stratshinsky  guilty,  but  merely  left  him 
"  under  suspicion." 

Another  proprietor,  Vitvitzky,  of  the  province  of  Saratov, 
"enjoying  great  respect  among  the  nobility  of  the  district, 
abducted  an  incalculable  number  of  peasants'  wives,  seduced 
more  than  two  hundred  young  girls,  and  caused  inconvenient 
husbands,  brothers,  or  friends  to  be  enrolled  in  the  army." 
Another  instituted  a  compulsory  "  night  service "  for  all  the 
young  girls  on  his  estate  ;  the  recalcitrant  were  flogged  and 
put  to  labour,  a  collar  of  iron  spikes  round  the  neck.  Some 
possessed    veritable    harems.       One    Jadovsky   was   not    content 


86  MODERN  RUSSIA 

with  violating  young  girls  (Proceedings,  1855),  but  also  insisted 
on  the  JUS  primes  metis  {to  me  the  first  night\  allowing  no  peasants 
to  marry  save  on  the  condition  that  the  "  first  night  belonged  to 
the  harin  {seigneur)."  Certain  proprietors  contrived  even  better  : 
they  demanded  of  the  public  women  of  Moscow  or  St.  Petersburg 
a  portion  of  their  earnings.  One  lady,  an  owner  of  vast  estates, 
went  even  further.  She  used  to  import  into  the  capital  young 
peasant  girls,  whom  she  educated  and  then  placed  in  a  licensed 
house  which  she  herself  managed. 

Thus  the  person  and  the  dignity  of  the  serf  were  continually 
trampled  under  foot  by  the  master.  The  peasant  was  treated 
incomparably  worse  than  a  dog.  But  then  the  price  of  a  good 
hound  was  much  higher  than  that  of  a  peasant.  Sometimes  a 
landowner  would  exchange  a  family  or  even  a  small  village  of 
serfs  for  a  fine  borxo'i.  And  just  as  animals  are  bred  to  obtain  the 
desired  strain,  so  the  peasants  were  coupled  by  the  master.  The 
peasant  was  forbiddeJi  to  think  of  love  :  he  must  marry  according 
to  the  master's  order,  according  to  the  material  interests  of  the 
latter.  What  matter  if  the  bride  did  not  please,  or  if  the  bride- 
groom were  repulsive  to  the  young  bride  ? 

Every  phenomenon  presents  two  sides.  Russian  serfdom  was 
no  exception  to  the  rule.  Although  a  cause  of  the  mental  and 
moral  degradation  of  the  masses,  at  the  same  time  it  liberated  the 
privileged  class  of  society  from  material  care  and  labour,  and  con- 
tributed to  the  formation  of  an  intellectual  cUte^  which  especially 
distinguished  itself  in  polite  literature.  The  Russian  novel  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  with  such  masters  as  Gontcharov, 
Turgenev,  and  Tolstoy,  was  largely  the  fruit  of  "  aristo-serf " 
culture. 

Being  the  culture  only  of  an  insignificant  minority,  it  was  too 
slight  and  superficial  a  stratum  to  cover  the  life  of  a  people.  It 
was  the  beautiful  frontage  of  a  hideous  buildiiig,  with  rotten 
foundations  and  tottering  to  its  fall.  This  contradiction  between 
the  surface  and  the  deeper  life  of  the  country  was  the  cause  of  the 
estrangement  between  the  ilite  and  the  people  ;  an  estrangement 
which  is  responsible  for  the  tragic  note  to  be  heard  in  the  work 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE   NATIONAL   MIND     87 

of  so  many  Russian  writers,  and  which  is  revealed  in  other  ways  : 
for  instance,  in  language  and  methods  of  expressing  thought. 
The  Russian  language,  in  prose  and  verse,  even  in  the  works  of 
the  most  truly  national  of  Russian  writers,  is  far  from  being  the 
language  of  the  people,  and  it  is  still  very  difficult  for  the  people 
to  understand  works  written  in  "  literary  Russian."  During  the 
period  of  serfdom,  when  there  were  no  schools  in  the  country, 
when  all  the  peasants  were  illiterate,  when  all  the  physical  and 
spiritual  forces  of  the  country  were  the  prisoners  of  serfdom,  this 
separation  of  the  "thought  "  and  the  "  word  "  of  the  strict  "  truth 
of  life  "  was  still  more  tragic  and  profound.  The  situation  was 
analogous  to  that  which  existed  in  the  Roman  Empire  during  the 
"  golden  age,"  when  the  refined  culture  of  the  aristocracy 
flourished  on  the  social  foundation  of  slavery. 

This  contradiction,  this  estrangement,  very  shortly  became  a 
danger  to  the  privileged  class,  for  all  the  peasants  were  not  inured 
to  their  situation.  Many  of  them  despaired  of  finding  any 
issue,  and  gave  the  signal  of  sedition. 

The  Government  of  Catherine  II  found  it  a  difficult  task  to 
get  the  better  of  the  notorious  Yemelyan  Pugatchev,  who  suc- 
ceeded in  mustering  a  whole  army  of  peasants  and  fugitive  serfs, 
taking  several  towns  and  fortresses  by  storm,  and  breaking  the 
heads  of  many  popes  and  nobles.  The  Government  had  to  send 
serious  military  expeditions  against  him.  The  "  Pugatchevsht- 
china  "  terminated  with  the  victory  of  the  Government  and  the 
execution  of  Pugatchev.  But  afterwards,  and  until  the  abolition 
of  serfdom,  there  were  incessantly  peasant  revolts  in  all  parts  ot 
Russia.  Under  the  reign  of  Nicolas  I  alone  556  "agitations" 
were  recorded,  or  an  average  of  nineteen  annually.  Their  number 
increased  year  by  year  : — 

Between  1826  and  1829  thei-e  were    41  peasants'  risings. 
1830     „     1834       „        „        46 


» 


1835  "  1839  „  „  59 

1840  „  1844  )'  "  lO'^ 

1845  ;.  1849  „  „  172 

1850  „  1854  „  „  137 


88  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Sometimes  these  revolts  attained  enormous  proportions.  In 
1846,  for  example,  the  revolt  affected  18  provinces  ;  in  1847,  22; 
in  1848,  27.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the  cause  of  the  riot  was 
to  be  found  in  the  persecutions  of  the  serfs  and  their  desire  to 
free  themselves  from  serfdom.  The  collective  state  of  mind  or 
the  masses  was  so  nervous  that  insurrection,  like  a  psychical 
epidemic,  spread  among  the  people  with  extraordinary  rapidity. 
Samarin,  whom  we  have  already  cited,  characterized  the  popular 
state  of  mind  at  this  period  in  the  following  words:  "In  the 
present  condition  of  the  serfs  the  speech  of  a  drunken  deserter 
from  the  army,  an  imperfectly  comprehended  order,  the  appear- 
ance of  an  unusual  malady,  or  the  visit  of  the  Tsar  to  Moscow 
(as  in  1843),  ^"  short,  any  event  that  evokes  the  general  attention, 
may  produce  excitement  and  arouse  the  thought,  always  present, 
of  liberty.  Then  this  excitement  may  turn  to  a  riot,  and  the 
riot  to  a  general  insurrection.  All  this  is  possible  at  any  moment, 
and  a  conscientious  police  force  could  not  guarantee  a  single  day 
of  tranquillity." 

The  peasants  did  not  protest  against  serfdom  only  by  revolting. 
There  were  also  cases  of  personal  vengeance,  murders  of  masters, 
and  cases  of  burning  their  houses.  Between  1835  and  1843, 
416  serfs,  of  whom  118  were  women,  were  transported  to  Siberia 
for  the  murder  of  their  proprietors.  The  germs  of  crime  and 
hatred  had  been  ably  sown  by  centuries  of  serfdom.  The  hatred 
of  the  peasants  soon  embraced  both  proprietors  and  State  officials. 
This  is  not  astonishing,  for  serfdom  was  closely  bound  up  with 
the  political  system.  Serfdom,  the  basis  of  the  life  of  the  State, 
tinged  all  social  relations  and  the  whole  political  fabric.  The 
upper  and  middle  bureaucracy,  furnished  by  the  nobility,  was  ot 
the  very  blood  and  bone  of  serfdom.  As  for  the  petty  officials, 
they  lived  less  by  their  salaries  than  by  the  gifts  of  their  superiors 
and  the  "  profits  "  demanded  of  the  population.  The  Russian 
habit  of  extortion  is  notorious  throughout  the  world,  and  is  the 
direct  offshoot  of  slavery.  A  despotic  will  and  a  contempt  ot 
individual  rights  and  social  interests  develop  rankly  in  the  gross 
and    brutal    atmosphere  of  serfdom.     The    terms  "  proprietor," 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND     89 

"  official,"  became  synonymous,  for  the  peasant,  with  evil  and 
suffering.  In  Little  Russia  every  great  property  vi^as  called 
"human  blood."  In  White  Russia  a  song  is  to  this  day  extant 
which  dates  from  the  time  of  serfdom,  in  which  the  peasant 
implores  of  God  "  the  favour  that  he  may  no  longer  have  to  fear 
the  Pan  {seigneur)  nor  the  Vdit  (chief  of  the  commune),  and 
may  be  able  to  rest  for  a  little  in  his  house  in  peace." 

I  imagine  that  there  is  not  in  the  world  a  country  whose 
population  is  more  distrustful  of  the  directing  element  than 
Russia.  This  suspiciousness  of  the  Russian  peasant  extends  even 
to  persons  who  are  sincerely  resolved  to  devote  their  labour  and 
their  energies  to  the  people.  The  reader  will  have  heard  of  the 
insurrections  provoked  by  the  appearance  of  cholera.  During 
the  epidemic  of  1902  peasants  destroyed  hospitals  and  barracks 
prepared  for  those  stricken  with  the  disease,  beat  and  killed  the 
doctors  and  nurses,  whom  they  accused  of  "  sowing  the  cholera  to 
make  the  people  suffer."  Such  facts  are  to  be  explained  not  only 
by  the  ignorance  of  the  people,  but  also  by  the  profound  distrust 
and  suspicion  inspired  in  the  peasantry  by  the  representatives  of 
authority,  among  whom  they  count  the  doctor.  The  doctor  is 
dressed  otherwise  than  the  ynujik  ;  he  "  speaks  like  a  lord  "  ; 
and  moreover  he  performs  mysterious  experiments.  What  more 
could  be  needed  ?  The  matter  is  plain.:  the  physician  is  the 
agent  of  the  "  masters  "  and  the  "  authorities,"  and  wishes  to 
poison  the  people  by  means  of  cholera.  So,  to-day,  reason  the 
inhabitants  of  a  Russian  village.  And  from  such  logical  reason- 
ing as  this  it  is  only  one  short  step  to  rioting  and  to  pogroms 
of  hospitals  and  medicines. 

There  is  no  country  in  the  world,  I  repeat,  where  the  gospoda 
{seigneurs)  and  the  tchinovniki  (officials  of  State)  are  regarded  by 
the  popular  masses  with  so  distorted  a  vision  as  in  Russia.  Here 
we  must  make  a  remark  which  at  first  sight  may  appear  strange  : 
the  prejudice  and  malevolence  of  the  people  have  never — or  not 
until  quite  lately — extended  to  the  head  of  the  Government,  the 
Tsar.  Even  of  recent  years  the  name  of  the  Tsar  was  sur- 
rounded, as  it    were,   with   a   magical   halo,   beyond    which    the 


90  MODERN  RUSSIA 

indignation  of  the  people  could  not  pass.  Not  only  did  the 
people  disbelieve  that  the  Tsar  was  in  agreement  with  the  nobles 
and  the  officials  :  not  only  did  they  refuse  to  hold  him  responsible 
for  the  actions  of  those  about  him,  but  they  continually  contrasted 
him  with  the  detested  gospoda  and  tchinovniki.  The  Tsar  is  not 
responsible  for  the  sufferings  of  the  people,  for  the  trutii  is  hidden 
from  him — such  is  the  refrain  of  the  peasants  when  they  speak  of 
the  Tsar  ;  a  refrain  wliich  is  enlarged  and  embroidered  in  the 
popular  proverbs  and  songs  and  verses.  In  a  song  of  White 
Russia  two  peasants,  Danilo  and  Stepan,  hold  converse  relating 
the  melancholy  situation  of  the  serfs,  and  dream  of  deliverance. 
Says  one  to  the  other  :  "  The  rumour  goes  that  the  Tsar  wants 
to  free  the  people,  but  the  lords  know  how  to  lie.  They  make 
up  lies  about  the  peasants,  and  the  Tsar  believes  them  :  and  we 
shall  have  to  bear  the  yoke  of  these  liars." 

The  'same  idea  is  expressed  in  this  characteristic  proverb  : 
"Jalouet  Tsar^  da  nie  jalouet  psar  (The  Tsar  means  well,  but  his 
servant  means  ill). 

Hence  the  conclusion  that  the  Tsar  himself  must  be  reached  ; 
he  must  be  told  the  whole  truth  ;  the  sufferings  of  his  people 
must  be  explained  to  him.  And  the  peasants,  hiding  the  matter 
from  their  masters  and  tiie  local  authorities,  used  to  select  khodoks 
(foot-messengers,  from  khod'it^  to  walk)  and  send  them  to 
"Piter"  (the  popular  term  for  St.  Petersburg),  that  they  might 
approach  the  Tsar  and  seek  "  protection  and  the  truth."  With  a 
few  kopecks  in  his  pocket,  the  tnujik  would  set  out  from  his 
native  village  on  a  journey  of  hundreds  or  thousands  of  miles. 
Rarely  did  he  reach  the  capital.  In  most  cases  he  was  arrested 
on  the  way  and  sent  to  prison  or  Siberia,  If  he  succeeded  in 
reaching  St.  Petersburg  he  got  no  farther  than  the  Palace  guard, 
and  was  confronted  by  impregnable  bars.  It  is  not  surprising 
that  the  following  proverb  is  familiar  to  every  peasant  :  Do  'Boga 
vysokoy  do  tsaria  daleko  (It  is  a  great  height  to  God,  a  long  way 
to  the  Tsar). 

Historical  facts  prove  that  the  monarchical  tradition  took  root  a 
long  time  ago  in  the  mentality  of  the  people.     In  the  seventeenth 


EVOLUTION   OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND    91 

century,  when   the  aristocracy  of  the  boyars  wished  to   remove 
Boris  Godunov  from  the  throne,  they  summoned  the  people   to 
revolt  in  the  name  of  the  "  legal  Tsar,"  Dimitri.     In  the  same 
way  Pugatchev,  to  obtain  the  sympathy  of  the  people,  took  the 
name  of  the  Tsar  Piotr  Fedorovitch,  husband  of  Catherine  II, 
who,  as  we   know,  was  killed  by  the  favourites  of  his   wife  in 
order  that  the  latter  might  ascend  the  throne.     The  fundamental 
motive  of  the  popular  movement  of  the  "  Period  of  Unrest "  of 
the  Pugatchevshtchina   was  certainly  to  be  found   in   deep-seated 
social  causes,  but  at  present  I  can  only  speak  of  the  form  assumed 
by   this  movement.     An  insurrection  against    the    Tsar   in   the 
name   of  the    Tsar !     Truly    an    original    rebellion  !     But    the 
succeeding  period   reveals   facts  no  less   interesting.     When  the 
abolition  of  serfdom  was  proclaimed  by  manifesto  in  1861,  a  great 
many    peasants   were    ill    content  with   the   conditions  of    their 
liberation,  on  account  of  the  small   quantity  of  land  allotted   to 
them  by   the  manifesto.     In    some    districts    the   peasants    even 
refused  to  accept  the  manifesto,  declaring  that  "  it  was  not  the 
truth,"  but  a  forgery  composed  by  the  landlords.     The  Govern- 
ment had  to  convince  the  peasants,  by  shooting  them  down  or 
deporting    them,    of   the    authentic    nature    of    the     document. 
Then  arose  tlie  legend  that  a  day  would  come  when  the  Tsar 
would    grant   his    people  "the    true    abolition    of    serfdom"    as 
expounded    in    the  "Golden    Charter,"  which    the    nobles     had 
stolen. 

To  judge  the  force  and  vitality  of  these  monarchical  illusions 
one  must  consider  that  the  revolutionary  propaganda  has  often 
encountered  these  very  illusions  as  an  almost  insuperable  obstacle. 
In  the  years  1870-80,  at  the  time  of  the  "descent  among  the 
people,"  when  the  intellectual  youth  of  Russia  began  to  leave 
their  homes  in  order  to  devote  themselves  to  the  revolutionary 
cause,  and  later,  just  before  the  explosion  of  the  revolution  of 
1905,  the  agitators  who  spread  the  propaganda  in  the  country-side 
often  heard  this  declaration  on  the  part  of  the  mujiks  : 
"  Speaker,  speak  of  what  you  like,  but  leave  our  Little  Father 
alone !  "     Beside  the   peasants,    many   artisans,    having  recently 


92  MODERN  RUSSIA 

quitted  the  rural  districts,  have  retained  this  mentality,  and  at  the 
end  of  1904  and  the  beginning  of  1905  the  majority  of  them 
were  under  the  domination  of  the  same  monarchical  illusions. 
Hence  the  possibility  of  such  incidents  as  those  of  "Bloody 
Sunday"  (January,  1905).  On  that  day  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  working-men,  with  their  wives  and  children,  bearing 
ikons  and  portraits  of  the  Tsar,  with  Father  Gapon  at  their  head, 
marched  in  front  of  the  Winter  Palace  to  implore  the  protection 
of  the  Tsar  against  the  power  of  capital.  Gapon,  the  agent 
provocateur  of  the  Government,  wanted  to  play  the  part  of  a 
Bonapartist  demagogue ;  that  is,  he  sought  to  exploit  the 
monarchical  illusions  of  the  workers.  If  he  failed  it  was  not 
because  these  illusions  were  feeble,  but  because  the  Tsar  and  his 
advisers,  terrified  by  the  "  love  and  confidence  shown  by  the 
people,"  received  the  peaceful  crowd  with  a  murderous  volley 
of  bullets. 

The  Bonapartist  demagogy  of  the  Government  has  certainly 
played  a  prominent  part  in  the  preservation  of  monarchical 
illusions  among  the  Russian  peasants,  and  especially  among  those 
of  Poland  and  the  Western  Ukraine  :  for  there  absolutism,  in 
order  to  shatter  the  opposition  of  the  nobles,  made  certain 
concessions  to  the  people.  But  the  phenomena  of  monarchical 
ideology  cannot  be  explained  exclusively  by  Governmental 
demagogy  ;  we  must  look  for  other  causes.  One  of  these  causes 
may  be  found  in  the  ideas  which  have  survived  from  the  ase  or 
feudalism.  During  the  feudal  period  the  Tsar  was  the  supreme 
sovereign,  the  highest  of  judges  over  the  heads  of  the  seigneurs. 
The  peasants  grew  to  regard  the  Tsar  as  the  superior  of  the 
hoyars  and  their  supreme  defence  against  the  feodaries.  The 
other  cause  may  be  found  in  the  peculiarities  of  the  peasant 
mentality.  The  peasant  of  earlier  days,  isolated  as  he  was, 
neither  saw  nor  comprehended  the  complex  connections  existing 
between  political,  social,  and  economic  phenomena.  This  being 
so,  he  felt  an  irresistible  need  to  personify  the  Tsar  as  monarch 
in  the  social  domain,  just  as  he  personified  God  in  order  to  explain 
the  life  and  order  of  nature.     To  the  peasant  the  'I'sar  appeared 


EVOLUTION  OF   THE  NATIONAL   MIND    93 

as  a  centre  about  which  his  political  experience  was  concentrated 
and  systematized.  The  idea  of  the  Tsar,  like  the  idea  of  God, 
served  him  as  a  compass,  which  saved  him  from  losing  himself  in 
the  gigantic  ocean  of  the  facts  and  phenomena  of  life. 

And  as  the  peasant's  idea  of  God  is'cxtremely  primitive  and 
ingenuous,  so  are  his  monarchical  concepts.  If  you  ask  a  peasant 
what  a  Tsar  is,  he  will  reply  in  the  words  of  Victor  Hugo  : 
"A  king  is  a  man  on  horseback."  And  before  his  eyes  will 
pass  a  vision  of  monuments,  of  pictures  representing  the  Russian 
Tsars,  on  horseback,  in  gorgeous  apparel. 

This  political  fetichism  is  analogous  to  religious  fetichism,  and 
both  have  identical  hopes  and  prospects. 


BOOK   II 
THE    MODERN   PERIOD 


CHAPTER   I 

GENERAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  ECONOMIC  POSITION  OF 
RUSSIA  AS   COMPARED  WITH    OTHER  COUNTRIES 

I.  Foreign  trade.  II. — Russia's  part  in  the  world  of  international 
competition — Russian  capital  and  its  peculiarities — The  im- 
portance of  foreign  capital. 


Some  one  has  said  that  an  inch  of  statistics  is  sometimes  worth 
more  than  a  mile  of  abstract  demonstration.  This  saying  is  very 
true  when  it  refers  to  the  estimation  of  the  economic  resources  of 
a  country  ;  in  this  case  the  bushels  of  grain  exported,  the  mileage 
of  railways,  and  the  tonnage  of  steel  manufactured  in  a  year  tell 
us  more,  in  their  dry  but  exact  language,  than  a  whole  poem 
inspired  by  the  labour  and  the  human  energies  of  this  or 
that  nation. 

This  being  so,  I  hope  the  reader  will  not  be  offended  if  I 
commence  my  exposition  by  statistical  figures.  Let  us  first  of  all 
consider  the  development  of  the  external  trade  of  Russia  in  the 
course  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

In  the  first  quarter  of  the  century  (1800-24)  ^^^  ^^^^^ 
imports  and  exports  attained  an  annual  average  of  ^^  11,700,000  ; 
between  1825  ^i^d  1849  ^^e  average  was  ^^ 22,200,000  ;  between 
1849  ^"<^  1^74)  ;C54>5°°)°°°  5  ^"^  between  1874  and  1899, 
;^^I3j70°)000.  In  other  words,  the  commercial  contribution  of 
Russia  to  the  world-market  increased  by  972  per  cent.,  or  ten 
times,  in   a  century.     And    the    isolation    of    Russia    amid    the 

7  97 


98  MODERN  RUSSIA 

other  Powers  grew  proportionately  less,  while  the  ties  binding  her 
to  other  nations  were  proportionately  strengthened.  At  the  end 
of  the  nineteenth  century  Russia  occupied  the  sixth  place  among 
the  participators  in  the  world-market.  Great  Britain,  whose 
commercial  turnover  is  20  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  was  first ; 
Germany,  with  1 1  per  cent,  of  the  total  turnover,  was  second  ; 
the  United  States,  with  10  per  cent.,  was  third.  Then  came 
France  (8  per  cent.),  Holland  (7  per  cent.),  Russia  (6  per  cent.), 
Austria  (5  per  cent.),  and  Belgium  (5  per  cent.). 

At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  the  commercial 
significance  of  Russia  is  still  increasing.  During  the  first  five 
years  of  the  century  her  commercial  turnover  increased  by 
one-third.  In  1905  it  amounted  in  value  to  ^/^  177,400,000,  and 
in  1906  to  j^ 1 97,400,000,  an  increase  of  ^20,000,000  in  a 
single  year. 

The  rapid  increase  of  Russia's  foreign  trade  is  further  verified 
by  other  data.  Midway  through  the  nineteenth  century  Russia 
possessed  only  6,000  trading-vessels,  representing  1,100,000  tons  ; 
and  by  the  end  of  the  century  she  was  mistress  of  more  than 
11,000  vessels  of  9,100,000  tons  in  all.  Let  us  note  that  the 
exports  by  water  do  not  by  any  means  include  the  whole  of  the 
Russian  exports.  A  large  fraction  of  the  export  trade  crosses  the 
continental  frontiers.  This  branch  of  the  trade  was  developed 
more  especially  during  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
when  the  Russian  railways  and  those  of  other  continental 
countries  were  expanding. 

Between  1802  and  1804  the  exports  by  sea  formed  88  per  cent, 
of  the  total.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  century  the  exports  by 
land  had  risen  from  12  per  cent,  to  17  per  cent.  ;  towards  the 
end  of  the  century  to  27  per  cent.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
nineteenth  century  the  imports  by  sea  formed  78  per  cent,  of  the 
total  imports  ;  while  the  imports  by  land  constituted  only 
22  per  cent,  of  the  total.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  century  the 
imports  by  land  had  reached  37  per  cent.  ;  by  the  end, 
46  per  cent. 

An  enormous  quantity  of  grain,  wood,  coal,  oil,  petroleum,  iron, 


THE  ECONOMIC  POSITION  OF  RUSSIA    99 

stufFs,  etc.,  is  yearly,  monthly,  daily  shipped  from  Russia  to 
Europe,  and  fabulous  sums  of  money  flow  backward  and  forward 
from  the  human  sea  of  Europe  to  that  of  Russia.  European 
capital  leaves  England,  Belgium,  France,  and  Germany  for  the 
great  Eastern  plain.  Between  the  years  1 895-1900  alone 
Russian  industry  absorbed  more  than  500  millions  of  silver 
roubles  of  foreign  money  (^52,800,000).  The  total  current  of 
European  money  which  flows  into  Russia  is  enough  to  turn 
one's  head. 

Take  up  any  French  journal  and  cast  the  eye  down  the 
columns  devoted  to  the  Stock  Exchange.  You  will  find  there 
a  large  number  of  Russian  words  :  Brians k^  Krivoi  Rog,  Donetz, 
Dubova'ia  Balka,  Makeevka^  Ekaterinovka^  Tula^  Mariupol^  and 
others.  These  words  denote  various  cities,  towns,  and  villages  of 
Russia,  which  were,  not  so  long  ago,  quiet  and  desert  places,  but 
which  to-day  are  industrial  centres  connected  with  London,  Paris, 
and  Brussels.  The  mine  opened  by  the  Russian  labourer  some- 
where in  the  southern  steppes  is  turned  into  gold  on  the  Paris 
Bourse.  A  dozen  eggs  laid  in  some  village  lost  in  the  depths 
of  Russia  and  collected  by  a  humble  peasant-woman  are  sent 
right  across  the  continent  of  Europe,  finally  to  reach  the  lamp 
of  the  sorter  at  the  "  Egg  Exchange  "  of  London,  and  thence  to 
pass  into  the  hands  of  the  consumer. 

The  might  of  capital,  the  might  of  gold,  has  drawn  Russia 
into  the  mad  whirlpool  of  universal  production  and  international 
exchange,  and  has  thereby  bound  her  to  the  older  nations  of 
Europe. 

II 

We  have  seen  how  important  the  position  of  Russia  has  been, 
from  the  quantitative  point  of  view,  in  the  international  market. 
Let  us  now  consider  it  from  the  qualitative  point  of  view  :  what 
does  Russia  at  present  give  the  world,  and  what  will  she  give 
it  in  the  future,  when  her  productive  forces  are  fully  developed  ? 

Different    countries    contribute    in    differing    degrees    to    the 


loo  MODERN  RUSSIA 

economic  activity  of  humanity,  fulfilling  various  functions.  Some, 
as  England  and  Germany,  are  especially  active  in  the  sphere 
of.industry,  providing  their  neighbours  with  metals,  machinery, 
rails,  ships,  etc.  Others,  like  Holland  and  France,  play  the  part 
of  international  bankers ;  they  are  the  home  of  the  Stock 
Exchange,  the  Bourse,  and  the  savings-bank.  Others,  like  the 
United  States  and  the  Argentine,  furnish  corn  to  many  countries 
and  are  the  "granaries  of  the  world."  To  this  category  Russia 
belongs.  The  exports  of  Russia  exceed  her  imports.  In  the 
last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  annual  imports  of 
Russia  were  ^51,600,000  and  the  exports  ^62,000,000  ;  and 
the  principal  article  of  export  to-day  is  wheat.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  nineteenth  century  "alimentary  products"  constituted 
only  19-4  per  cent,  of  the  Russian  export  trade.  Between  1896 
and  1898  the  proportion  was  58*2  per  cent.,  and  in  1903  it  had 
swollen  to  62*4  per  cent.  If  we  take  the  exact  figures  we  find 
that  in  1899  the  value  of  the  wheat  exported  was  ^^34,000,000, 
and  in  1903,  ^^64,750,000.  Russian  wheat  is  therefore  one 
of  the  most  important  factors  of  the  alimentation  of  Europe,  and 
certain  countries  of  late  years  consume  practically  no  wheat  but 
that  exported  by  Russia. 

Hence  we  see  the  importance  of  the  economic  development 
of  Russia  and  the  significance  of  her  agriculture  in  respect  of 
international  life. 

The  export  trade  in  grain  developed  more  particularly  about 
the  year  1861,  after  the  abolition  of  serfdom  ;  the  exports  of 
wheat  alone,  after  that  year,  increased  by  400  per  cent.  Between 
1851  and  i860  the  amount  was  10,175,000  bushels;  between 
1 861  and  1870  it  rose  to  36,600,000  bushels.  Russia  supplaiited 
Germany  and  Erance  in  the  cereal  market,  and  was  on  the  way 
to  monopolize  the  provision  of  corn  for  Europe.  But  at  this 
moment  America  appeared  on  the  stage  and  American  wheat 
began  to  compete  with  Russian  grain  (1871).  The  struggle 
resulted  in  lower  prices  and  provoked  an  agrarian  crisis,  which, 
for  more  than  twenty-five  years,  disturbed  the  rural  economy  of 
Europe.     This  crisis  had  painful  results  for  Russia  :  it  produced 


THE  ECONOMIC  POSITION  OF  RUSSIA     loi 

a  set-back  in  the  industry  of  agriculture  and  a  degradation  of 
technical  methods.  As  a  result  the  most  primitive  forms  of 
exploiting  labour  have  been  preserved  in  Russia,  and  a  divorce 
has  arisen  between  industry  and  agriculture,  between  the  town 
and  the  country,  between  the  "  iron  country  "  and  the  "  straw 
country."  And  this  fatal  division  is  reflected  in  the  social  and 
political  development  of  the  country.  Here  is  an  example  of 
the  universal  tie  existing  between  the  various  phenomena  of 
human    life,  however  far    removed   from  one  another. 

Russia,  as  we  have  already  said,  is  one  of  the  "  granaries 
of  the  world."  But  it  would  be  incorrect  to  represent  her  as 
an  exclusively  agricultural  country.  The  nineteenth  century, 
and  especially  the  second  half  of  that  century,  was  for  Russia,  as 
for  other  countries,  an  industrial  century.  This  is  proved  by  the 
data  of  her  foreign  trade.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century  the  largest  Russian  imports  consisted  of  provisions 
(39  per  cent.)  and  manufactured  goods  (35*2  per  cent,  of  the 
total  imports).  As  for  raw  material  and  partially  manufactured 
products,  they  constituted  24  per  cent,  of  the  total  imports.  In 
the  middle  of  the  century  these  latter  had  risen  to  44-3  per  cent., 
and  at  the  end  of  the  century  they  amounted  to  more  than  half 
of  all  the  goods  imported.  On  the  other  hand,  the  importation 
of  alimentary  products  and  of  manufactures  fell  appreciably 
towards  the  end  of  the  century.  The  former  then  constituted 
17*3  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  and  the  latter  29*4  per  cent.  The 
increasing  importation  of  raw  materials  and  partly  manufactured 
goods  demonstrates  the  rise  of  a  national  industry  absorbing  these 
materials  in  order  to  create  manufactured  products. 

The  fact  that  industrialism  is  increasing  in  Russia  is  certified 
by  the  data  relating  to  the  number  of  factories  and  workshops. 
It  is  especially  interesting  to  remark  the  grouping  of  industrial 
undertakings  in  respect  of  the  dates  of  foundation.  The  List  of 
Factories  and  Workshops  published  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in 
1900  facilitates  the  comparison.  We  are  able  to  note  that  the 
application  of  capital  to  Russian  industries  is  increasingly  pro- 
gressive.    Thus,  of  the  14,500  factories  and  workshops  of  which 


MP.RARY 

UNIVEiLSii  1  OF  CALIFORiMA 
SAA  T A  BARi5AilA 


102  MODERN  RUSSIA 

we  have  knowledge,  an  enormous  number  were  established  in 
the  last  quarter  of  the  nijicteenth  century.  Before  i86i,  2,177 
enterprises  were  initiated  ;  between  1861  and  1870,  1,285  '■> 
between  1871  and  1880,2,100;  between  1881  and  1890,  3,030; 
between  1891  and  1900,  5,788.  So  40  per  cent,  of  the  establish- 
ments mentioned  in  the  list  cited  were  founded  during  the  latter 
portion  of  the  nineteenth  century.  In  spite  of  its  youth,  or 
perhaps  for  that  very  reason,  the  industrial  capitalism  of  Russia 
gives  evidence  of  stupendous  energy  and  a  great  faculty  of 
growth. 

To  illustrate  the  development  of  Russian  industry  I  will  cite 
an  example  taken  from  the  sphere  of  the  metallurgical  industry, 
which,  as  we  know,  is  the  backbone  of  modern  economy.  In 
1893,  68,800,000  poods  or  1,050,000  tons  of  castings  were 
founded  in  the  Russian  foundries  ;  in  1902,  2,490,000  tons.  The 
production  of  steel  and  iron  in  1893  ^^^  945)00°  tons;  and 
in  1902,  1,870,000  tons.  In  1893  Russia  occupied  the  sixth 
place  in  the  matter  of  foundry-work  ;  at  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century  she  had  already  attained  the  fourth,  outstripping 
both  Austria  and  France,  and  even  Belgium,  in  the  production  of 
steel  and  iron. 

"  While  the  production  of  cast  metal  increased,  between  1890- 
1900,  by  58  per  cent,  in  France,  13  per  cent,  in  Great  Britain, 
76  per  cent,  in  the  United  States,  and  61  per  cent,  in  Germany, 
in  Russia  it  increased  by  220  per  cent.  The  production  of  iron 
and  steel  during  the  same  ten  years  increased  by  42  per  cent, 
in  France,  50  per  cent,  in  the  United  States,  91  per  cent,  in 
Germany,  and  196  per  cent,  in  Russia.  Thus  the  increase  in 
production  of  Russia  in  this  industrial  sphere  has  sensibly  exceeded  that 
of  the  vjorld^  and  has  enormously  exceeded  that  of  each  capitalist 
country  considered  separately  "  (A.  Finn-Yenotaevsky,  Industrial 
Capitalism  in  Russia  during  the  last  Ten  Tears  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century).  Such  is  the  statement  of  a  Russian  economist.  The 
reader  must  not  forget  that  the  social  and  political  conditions 
beside  which  Russian  capitalism  has  had  to  develop  have  been  far 
from    favourable    to    the    latter.     If   the    juridical    and    political 


THE  ECONOMIC  POSITION  OF  RUSSIA     103 

formation  of  the  life  of  the  Russian  people  could  be  so  reformed 
as  to  give  the  productive  forces  of  the  country  entire  liberty,  vi^e 
might  count  upon  a  still  more  rapid  development  of  Russian 
capitalism.  With  its  abundance  of  natural  wealth,  Russia  would 
become  a  dangerous  rival  even  of  the  most  advanced  nations. 
And  in  this  struggle  of  giants — which  assumes  an  increasingly 
acute  character  in  the  universal  market — Russia  would  play  a 
very  important  part.  The  old  capitalism  of  Western  Europe 
would  be  confronted  by  two  formidable  rivals — Russia  and 
America.  International  history  will  in  the  near  future  be 
complicated  by    stupendous  economic   and    political    conflicts. 

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  Russian  capitalism  is  the  part  which 
foreign  capital  has  played  in  its  development.  Some  branches 
of  Russian  industry — mining  and  metallurgy — exist  very  largely 
by  means  of  foreign  capital.  This  participation  of  European 
money  in  the  economic  life  of  Russia  has  had  two  results.  In 
the  first  place,  it  has  bound  Russian  capitalism  closely  to  Euro- 
pean capitalism.  Everything  that  happens  in  Russia  has  an 
interest  for  the  capitalist  world  of  France,  England,  and  Bel- 
gium which  is  not  only  theoretical,  but  material  ;  for  enormous 
quantities  of  gold  are  invested  by  these  countries  in  the  industrial 
undertakings  of  Russia.  Still  greater  are  the  sums  which  enter 
Russia  from  abroad  in  the  form  of  State  loans.  These  loans, 
concluded  not  at  home  but  abroad,  have  earned  and  do  still  earn 
a  steady  profit,  not  for  the  Russian  middle  classes,  but  for  foreign 
capitalists.  Finally,  we  find  that  the  development  of  foreign 
capital  in  Russia  is  detrimental  to  the  development  of  Russian 
capital.  The  cause  of  this  phenomenon  is  the  political  weakness 
of  the  Russian  middle  classes.  The  autocracy,  with  the  aid  of 
European  capital,  has  not  only  succeeded  in  making  itself  inde- 
pendent of  the  middle  classes,  but  it  refuses  to  allow  the  latter 
to  acquire  political  power. 

Freed  from  the  difficulties  which  a  strong  capitalist  opposition 
within  the  country  would  have  presented,  the  autocracy  has 
nevertheless  profited  by  the  technical  advantages  of  Russian 
capitalism  to  reinforce  its  power.     Thanks  to  modern  technical 


104  MODERN  RUSSIA 

methods,  it  has  fortified  the  mechanism  of  the  State  without 
modifying  the  despotic  character  of  its  authority,  and  has  some- 
times suggested  the  strange  spectacle  of  a  Tamerlane  or  an  Attila 
equipped  with  the  telephone  and  wireless  telegraphy. 

This  peculiar  fusion  of  the  political  forms  of  Asiatic  despotism 
with  the  material  procedures  of  a  capitalist  civilization  is  the 
result  of  the  internal  development  of  Russia,  and  the  relations  of 
the  latter  with  other  capitalist  countries. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE   RUSSIAN    PEOPLE    FROM   THE    ECONOMIC  AND 
SOCIAL    POINT   OF   VIEW 

I.  The  process  of  differentiation.  II.  Professions  and  trades.  III.  The 
various  classes  of  society  and  the  distribution  of  the  national 
revenue. 


The  development  of  capitalism  w^as  accomplished  in  Russia — 
as  in  other  countries — by  the  process  of  differentiation.  This 
process  was  accomplished  in  many  different  ways.  The  whole 
territory  of  Russia  has  assumed  a  new  aspect.  The  ancient 
uniformity  of  the  country  disappeared,  as  well  as  the  old  primi- 
tive scheme  of  economics.  A  territorial  division  of  labour  was 
effected  between  the  different  portions  of  the  country.  This 
division  is  bound  up  with  the  distribution  of  the  natural  wealth 
of  Russia.  Enormous  layers  of  coal,  which  were  found  in  the 
south  of  Russia,  between  the  Dnieper  and  the  Don,  were  the 
foundation  of  the  coal-mining  industry.  All  this  region,  formerly 
desolate,  was  transformed  into  a  mining  district.  Another  mining 
district  was  developed  in  Polish  Dombrova.  There  metallurgy 
attained  a  great  development.  Two  other  and  older  metallurgical 
centres,  the  Moscow  district  and  the  Ural  district  (both  of 
which  regions  were  worked  two  centuries  ago),  were  surpassed 
by  the  districts  of  Donetz  and  Dombrova.  The  petroleum  wells 
beside  the  Caspian  Sea  and  in  the  valleys  of  Terek  and  Kuban 
gave  rise  to  the  oil  industry,  which  to-day  employs  an  enormous 
amount  of  labour.     The  provinces  of  Moscow,  Vladimir,  Kos- 

105 


io6  MODERN  RUSSIA 

troma,  and  Yaroslavl  have  long  been  centres  of  the  textile 
industry,  which  has  found  yet  another  home  in  the  district  of 
Lodz,  in  Poland.  The  province  of  Varsovia  and  the  south-west, 
the  districts  of  Kiev  and  Podolsk,  and  certain  districts  of  Central 
Russia — such  as  the  districts  of  Moscow  and  Tula — have  become 
a  "sugar  kingdom,"  being  covered  with  plantations  of  beet  and 
refineries.  Besides  these  districts,  which  have  their  own  special 
industries,  there  are  other  industrial  centres  in  which  production 
is  both  intense  and  varied,  such  as  the  district  of  St.  Petersburg 
and  its  environs.  There,  side  by  side  with  enormous  foundries 
are  textile  factories,  ship-building  yards,  etc.  These  industrial 
regions  and  centres  are  the  principal  citadels  by  whose  means 
capital  conquers  and  rules  the  great  Eastern  plain  and  its  millions 
of  inhabitants.  Moreover,  capital  has  covered  the  plain  itself 
with  innumerable  lesser  fortresses.  All  over  Russia,  from  the 
Prussian  frontier  to  China  and  from  the  Black  Sea  to  the  White 
Sea,  those  industrial  centres  are  coming  into  being  by  force 
of  which  the  energies  of  capital  penetrate  every  pore  of  the 
national  life. 

The  economic  differentiation  of  territory  and  the  rise  of  indus- 
trial centres  have  had  an  enormous  influence  on  the  population  of 
the  country,  for  they  provoked  a  movement  of  the  masses.  The 
factories  attracted  men  and  the  railways  favoured  their  transpor- 
tation. The  end  of  the  rural  economy,  the  impoverishment  of 
the  village,  sent  sons  and  daughters  of  peasants  away  from  the 
paternal  home  toward  the  seductive  whistle  of  the  factory.  The 
Russian  population,  formerly  inert  and  almost  immobile,  astonishes 
the  investigator  to-day  by  its  mobility.  For  example,  if  we 
consider  those  industrial  provinces  of  Russia,  St.  Petersburg, 
Moscow,  and  Ekaterinoslavl,  and  if  we  calculate  what  propor- 
tion of  the  labour  in  those  provinces  is  constituted  by  the  natives 
of  the  provinces  themselves,  we  obtain  a  very  instructive  result. 
In  the  province  of  St.  Petersburg  24*7  per  cent. — that  is,  less 
than  a  quarter  of  the  working  population — is  composed  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  province  ;  the  other  three-quarters  come  from 
other    parts,    even    from    those    remotest.      In    tiie    provinces  of 


THE  RUSSIAN  PEOPLE  107 

Moscow  and  Ekaterinoslavl  the  native  workers  constitute  less 
than  a  half  of  the  total  of  all  the  labourers  (46'9  per  cent,  and 
45*3  psr  cent.).  Commenting  on  these  data,  an  investigator 
asserts  that  "  the  mobility  of  the  working  population  of  Russia 
finds  no  analogy  in  any  State  of  Western  Europe,  and  can  only 
be  compared  with  the  mobility  of  the  labouring  people  of  the 
United  States." 


II 


The  year  1897  was  the  date  of  a  general  census  of  the  Empire. 
This  was  the  first  census  to  be  statistically  complete.  Previous 
censuses  had  been  special,  and  effected  for  fiscal  objects.  Unhap- 
pily this  first  attempt  was  a  failure  from  the  theoretical  statistical 
point  of  view,  partly  because  of  the  too  bureaucratic  nature  of 
the  organization  of  this  important  and  complicated  undertaking. 
The  Government  did  not  attempt  to  explain  to  the  people  the 
object  of  the  census  ;  and  the  people,  illiterate  and  accustomed 
to  regard  every  move  of  the  Government  with  suspicion,  were 
extremely  hostile.  It  is  true  that  in  1897  the  peasants  no  longer 
believed  that  a  census  was  "the  seal  of  Antichrist,"  as  their 
forbears  had  believed  in  the  time  of  Peter  the  Great,  when  they  fled 
from  the  Government  "  counters "  ;  but  none  the  less  they 
regarded  the  proposal  to  "  count "  them  with  anything  but  good- 
will. Long  before  the  census  commenced  strange  and  sinister 
rumours  were  circulating  as  to  its  object.  In  the  provinces  or 
the  North  the  people  were  persuaded  that  the  aim  of  the  census 
was  to  determine  the  number  of  people  who  owned  no  land,  the 
number  of  men  who  might  profitably  be  recruited.  In  other 
parts  it  was  said  that  the  census  would  be  taken  in  order  to  know 
how  many  kabaks  (Government  drink-shops)  ought  to  be  esta- 
blished. The  census  had  to  do  with  vodka  !  Moreover,  the 
peasants  feared,  and  for  that  matter  so  did  townsmen,  that  the 
census  would  be  the  signal  for  an  increase  of  taxation.  "  In  the 
province  of  Yaroslavl  the  rumour  spread  among  the  women  that 
every  sempstress  or  dressmaker,   every   woman   working  on   her 


loS  MODERN  RUSSIA 

own  account  at  the  makinii:  of  body-linen,  embroidery,  or  any 
other  work  of  the  kind,  would  be  forced  to  pay  a  certain  fiscal 
duty.  Wherefore  every  woman  employed  in  work  of  this  nature 
replied  to  the  question  '  What  calling  do  you  follow  ? '  by  the 
answer,  'None  !'  .  .  .  In  the  towns  of  the  North  the  popula- 
tion was  equally  hostile  to  the  census.  The  large  merchants  and 
the  rich  bourgeois,  to  the  queries  of  the  *  counters,'  would  only 
reply  sulkily,  '  No  good  will  come  of  all  this  ! '  And  when  the 
same  'counters'  begged  them  to  read  the  warning  printed  on 
the  census  paper,  they  declared,  '  That  is  nothing  to  do  with 
us — we've  got  our  business  to  see  to  ! '" 

Under  such  conditions  it  was  difficult  to  obtain  very  precise 
results  ;  and,  indeed,  the  figures  published  do  not  express  the  true 
economic  state  of  the  country,  nor  do  they  give  the  exact  com- 
position of  the  population.  But  bearing  these  reservations  in 
mind,  we  may  consult  the  result  for  a  picture  of  nineteenth- 
century  Russia.  The  census  of  1897  g^^^  '^^  ^°^^^  population, 
in  round  figures,  as  125,500,000.  To-day,  if  we  take  into  con- 
sideration the  normal  increase  of  the  population,  this  figure  must 
be  increased  to  150,000,000.  These  150  millions  of  human 
heads,  these  300  millions  of  human  hands,  present  a  vast 
reservoir  of /)5/^«/m/ economic  energy,  but  their  r^c/ energy  is  not 
comparable  to  their  potential  energy  :  not  all  these  heads  and  hands 
labour,  and  those  who  do  work  do  not  all  work  with  the  same 
intensity,  nor  in  the  same  spheres. 

Which  portion  of  the  Russian  population  works  hardest  ? — or, 
as  the  economists  would  put  it,  how  many  Russians  belong  to  the 
category  of  independent  workers — that  is,  to  the  group  of  active 
workers  who  exercise  some  trade  or  calling  ?  And  how  many 
belong  to  the  dependent  or  passive  category  ? 

The  official  total  of  the  census  of  1897  (see  next  page)  gives 
us  the  answer  to  this  question.  These  figures  refer  to  the  whole 
Empire. 

What  strikes  us  first  in  this  table  is  the  small  percentage  of 
"  independent "  workers.  These  constitute  only  one-fourth  of 
the  population  ;  that  is,  of  four  Russian  people  only  one  exercises 


THE  RUSSIAN  PEOPLE 


109 


a  calling  ;  one  must  feed,  by  his  capital  or  labour,  four  persons 
including  himself.  This  percentage  seems  lower  still  when  we 
compare  it  with   the  corresponding  figures  for  other  countries. ^ 


Number  of  Persons. 

Percentage. 

1897 

Men. 

Women. 

Both  Sexes. 

Men. 

Women. 

Both  Sexes. 

Independent,  exercising 
a  trade  or  calling 

Dependents     (members 
of  families)     

26,240,528 
35,536,820 

6,260,967 
56,201,706 

33,201,495 
92,438,526 

43-1 
569 

99 
901 

264 
73-6 

Total         

61,777,348 

62,463,673 

125,640,021 

100 

100 

100 

In  Great  Britain  and  Wales,  for  example,  according  to  the  census 
of  1891,  there  were  44*5  per  cent,  of  independent  workers,  in 
Germany  (1895),  44*2  per  cent.;  in  France  (1891),  49-5  per 
cent.  Instead  of  the  four  mouths  that  each  pair  of  hands  must 
feed  in  Russia,  in  England  and  Germany  each  "  independent  " 
must  feed  only  2*3  persons,  and  in  France  2  only.  In  other 
words,  a  sensibly  smaller  proportion  of  persons  takes  part  in  the 
economic  activity  of  Russia  than  is  the  case  in  other  countries. 
Consequently,  although  the  forces  of  capital  had  by  the  end  of 
the  nineteenth  century  rooted  themselves  deeply  in  Russia,  and 
although  they  had  destroyed  the  ancient  patriarchal  character  of 
Russian  life,  setting  its  enormous  population  in  movement,  they 
have  not  yet  had  time  fully  to  exploit  the  productive  energy  of 
the  people.  Above  all,  and  very  naturally,  female  labour  has 
been  very  little  employed,  so,  while  the  men  of  Russia  are  divided 
fairly  equally  into  active  and  passive  (43*1  per  cent,  and  56'9 
per  cent.),  of  the  women  there  are  nine  dependent  women  for 
each  independent  worker.    However,  in  the  industrial  districts  this 

'  Some  investigators  regard  this  figure — 26-4  per  cent. — as  lower 
than  the  reality,  and  explain  that  at  the  moment  of  the  census  only 
the  heads  of  families  were  placed  on  the  list  as  "  independent."  But 
even  if  we  count  the  active  members  of  each  family  the  figures  are 
lower  than  those  for  other  countries. 


no 


MODERN  RUSSIA 


proportion  decreases  with  the  intensity  of  labour.  For  example, 
in  the  Government  of  Moscow,  in  1897,  for  100  "active"  men 
there  were  40  "  active  "  women. 

Here    is  a    more    detailed     classification    according    to     trades 
(according  to  the  census  of  1897). 


Trade  or  Profession. 

Men. 

Women. 

Total. 

Percentage. 

Military  service 

1,165,220 

76,520 

1,291,810 

0-99 

State    and  public  ser- 

vices   

523,325 

426,036 

949,361 

075 

Private    and    personal 

service          

2,497,649 

3,291,328 

5,785,977 

4-81 

Drawing    pensions   or 

incomes  from  invest- 

ment or  land 

1,026,858 

1,280,781 

2,307,669 

1-84 

Rural  economy 

45,902,201 

47,799,363 

93,701,564 

75-57 

Mines    

321,963 

232,784 

554,747 

0-44 

Industry     and     manu- 

factures (artisans)  ... 

6,302,693 

5,428,122 

11,730,815 

9-34 

Transport        

1,108,657 

«42,353 

1,951,010 

1-55 

Commerce       

2.316,219 

2,679,168 

4.995,387 

4*02 

Other  professions 

347,721 

460,366 

808,087 

0-64 

62,477,348 

63,162,673 

124,076,427 

100 

The  greater  portion  of  the  population  of  Russia  is  composed 
of  agriculturalists.  Nevertheless,  capitalist  industry  is  the  factor 
that  determines  the  character  and  the  tone  of  Russian  life.  The 
conflict  between  town  and  country,  between  the  roaring 
industrial  centre  and  the  peaceful  fields,  is  resolved  in  Russia  in 
favour  of  the  town.  The  village,  despite  its  quantitative 
superiority,  plays  a  subordinate  part  in  the  social  life  of  the 
country. 

What  is  the  number  of  persons  working  in  Russia  to  satisfy 
the  intellectual  needs  of  the  population  ?  If  we  consider,  as 
belonging  to  this  group,  the  representatives  of  public  education, 
typography,  the  arts,  etc.,  we  at  once  perceive  its  numerical 
insignificance  in  the  light  of  analogous  data  provided  by  other 
European  nations. 


THE  RUSSIAN  PEOPLE 


II I 


Here  is  a  comparison  established  by  a  Russian  investigator  (P. 
Masslov)  between  this  group  in  Russia  and  in  Germany  : 


Persons  employed  in— 

Russia,  1897. 

Germany,  1895. 

Typography 

Bookbinding            

Theatre,  music,  and  other  arts     ... 
Public  instruction 

33,200 

26,000 

38,000 

168,000 

75.500 

61,000 

74,000 

232,000 

Total'        

265,200 

442,500 

As  the  population  of  Germany  in  1895  was  less  than  half  that 
of  Russia,  the  latter  country  should  have  not  265,200  such 
workers,  but  more  than  a  million. 


Ill 


What  is  the  average  standard  of  living  among  the  population 
of  the  Russian  Empire  ?  It  is  not  easy  to  reply  to  this  question, 
for  hitherto  the  national  revenue  of  Russia  has  not  been  statisti- 
cally estimated.  The  Russian  State  lives  largely  by  indirect 
taxation,  the  direct  tax  being  little  employed.  It  is  therefore 
impossible  to  estimate  the  national  income  exactly.  However, 
if  we  wish  merely  to  establish  the  average  standard  of  comfort  in 
Russia,  we  can  safely  say  that  it  is  low.  Certain  investigators 
assert  that  at  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  average 
annual  revenue  of  each  inhabitant  of  Russia  was  only  ^^5  to  £^6. 
This  miserable  figure  appears  even  more  wretched  when  we 
compare  it  with  the  figures  for  North  America,  England,  and 
France.  Even  in  a  country  so  backward  as  Roumania  the 
average  is  higher  than  this.     It  is  the  same  with  all  that  concerns 

'  Only  one  five-hundredth  of  the  population. 


112  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  economic  development  of  Russia.  In  the  accumulation  of 
national  wealth  she  is  far  behind  other  countries,  but  the  ten- 
dencies of  development  are  the  same  in  Russia  as  elsewhere.  The 
concentration  of  capital  and  the  differentiation  of  the  various 
groups  and  classes  according  to  revenue  may  be  observed  in 
Russia. 

Not  long  ago  the  Ministry  of  Finance  attempted  to  draw  up 
a  tabulated  statement  of  the  distribution  of  revenue  among  the 
various  groups  of  the  population.  But  this  table  included  only 
those  annual  incomes  which  were  over  i,ooo  roubles,  that  is, 
^^104.  Incomes  less  than  this,  which  were  of  course  the  more 
numerous,  were  omitted.  Here,  according  to  the  figures  cited 
in  an  article  published  in  1907  by  the  Tovarishtch  (Nos.  318  and 
319),  are  a  few  details  from  this  table  :  Among  the  rural  land- 
owners the  Ministry  of  Finance  counted  59,681  persons  whose 
annual  income  was  more  than  ;^I04.  Forty  per  cent,  of  these 
persons  belonged  to  the  first  category — that  is,  they  possessed 
between  £iOJ^  and  ;^2o8  annually.  The  sum  of  the  revenues 
of  the  landowners  of  this  first  category  constituted  only  9*4 
per  cent,  of  the  sum  of  the  revenues  of  these  59,681 
persons.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sum  of  the  revenues  of  land- 
owners of  the  higher  category  (having  incomes  between  ^2,080 
and  j^5,20o)  constituted  17*3  per  cent,  of  the  sum  of  the 
revenues.  Yet  the  proprietors  of  this  last  class  formed  only  3*5 
per  cent,  of  the  59,681  landowners.  The  members  of  the  highest 
class  of  all,  having  each  an  income  of  more  than  ^5,200,  com- 
posed only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  whole  number  of  rural 
proprietors  (1*2  per  cent.).  But  the  total  of  their  incomes 
amounted  to  24  per  cent,  of  the  sum  of  the  revenues.  In 
other  words,  we  observe  here  a  concentration  of  capital. 

We  observe  the  same  phenomena  among  the  urban  landlords. 
Of  57,684  persons  having  incomes  above  ;^I04  almost  half  (46'6 
per  cent.)  consist  of  small  landlords  of  the  first  category.  They 
receive  only  I4"2  per  cent,  of  the  sum  of  all  the  revenues  dealt 
with.  Landlords  of  the  second  category,  who  form  only  3  per  cent, 
of  the  whole,  enjoy  26*8  per  cent,  of  the  sum  of  these  revenues. 


THE  RUSSIAN  PEOPLE  113 

According  to  Professor  Khodsky,  author  of  the  article  pub- 
lished by  the  Tovarishtch  from  which  we  have  just  quoted,  "  we 
may  affirm  with  certainty  that  a  great  proportion,  if  not  half  of 
the  landlords  of  the  towns  and  the  rural  landowners,  are  in  reality 
interfused.  Many  owners  of  real  estate  own  country  estates  and 
vice  versa."  Here  is  another  proof  of  the  concentration  of  wealth. 
As  for  the  distribution  of  revenues  among  the  industrial  and  com- 
mercial capitalists,  they  disclose  the  same  phenomenon  in  a  less 
emphatic  form :  44*5  per  cent,  of  these  capitalists  are  small  pro- 
prietors of  the  first  category.  In  their  hands  is  only  8*6  per  cent. 
of  the  totality  of  revenues,  while  a  group  of  capitalists,  insignifi- 
cant in  number  (4"5  per  cent,  of  the  total  number  of  industrial 
and  commercial  capitalists),  but  belonging  to  the  higher  category 
of  proprietors,  receive  S^'Z  P^^  cent,  of  the  totality  of  revenues. 

I  hope  these  facts  and  figures  will  fully  demonstrate  that  Russia 
is  far  from  being  an  exception,  as  regards  the  general  economic 
and  social  characteristics  of  her  structure,  among  the  family  of 
capitalist  countries  of  the  modern  world.  The  "patriarchal  customs 
of  the  Slavs" — if  they  ever  existed — have  to-day  disappeared  and 
left  no  traces.  The  economic  differentiations  and  social  conflicts 
are  for  Russia,  as  for  other  countries,  the  source  of  the  most 
important  events,  the  most  urgent  questions  of  popular  life. 


8 


CHAPTER   III 

THE    DEVELOPMENT   AND   FORMS   OF    RUSSIAN   CAPITAL 

I.  Russian  industry  compared  with  German  and  Belgian  industry 
(according  to  the  inquiry  of  1902) — The  conflict  of  large  and 
small  industries.  II.  The  great  capitalists;  their  syndicates  or 
unions  and  their  relations  with  the  Government.  III.  The  great 
industrial  centres — The  modern  Russian  city.  IV.  Evolution  of 
the  proletariat :  its  composition  and  the  conditions  of  its  life. 
V.  The  Trades-Union  movement. 


Young  countries  have  this  advantage  over  their  more  aged  sisters : 
they  can  profit  by  the  experience  of  the  latter,  and  thus  they  need 
not  linger  so  long  at  the  various  stages  of  historic  development. 
But  this  advantage  implies  certain  disadvantages  :  it  gives  the 
social  development  of  the  younger  countries  a  catastrophic 
character,  and  sometimes  results  in  a  tension  of  forces  so  great 
as  to  cause  the  ruin  of  the  popular  organism,  as  this  tension 
naturally  involves  an  inequality  of  development  in  the  various 
portions  of  the  latter.  While  certain  sections  of  the  social  and 
economic  life  of  the  country  undergo  rapid  evolution,  reaching 
a  higher  level,  other  sections  loiter  behind  and  even  become 
retrograde.  Thus  a  turning-bacic  and  a  development  are  pro- 
duced at  one  and  the  same  time  ;  we  have  hyperaemia  in  one 
part  and  anaemia  in  another.  Some  elements  are  hypertrophied  ; 
others  are  atrophied. 

The  economic  and  social  development  of  Russia  exhibited  such 

characteristics  at  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century.     Being  based 

114 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     115 

upon  the  poverty  of  the  State  and  the  retrograde  condition  of  the 
wretched  and  innumerable  Russian  villages,  the  oasis  of  economy 
and  capitalist  culture  attained  a  considerable  development.  We 
may  illustrate  this  by  a  fevi^  facts.  According  to  a  volume  by 
M.  Pogogev,  published  by  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  in  the  year 
1902  there  were  in  Russia  302  large  industrial  enterprises  each  of 
which  employed  more  than  1,000  workers ;  in  all  they  employed 
710,000.  In  Germany,  according  to  the  census  of  1895,  there 
were  296  such  giant  undertakings — Riesenunternehmungen — and 
they  employed  563,000  workers.  "Russia,  therefore,  takes  the 
palm,  both  in  the  number  of  such  businesses  and  in  the  number 
of  hands  employed.  A  comparison  of  Russia  with  Belgium  gives 
us  similar  results.  According  to  the  census  of  1896  Belgium 
possessed  184  large  undertakings  employing  not  less  than  500 
workers  each,  and  employing  160,000  in  all,  while  in  Russia 
the  enterprises  of  this  category  number  726  and  occupy  nearly 
1,000,000  workers."  Comparing  these  figures,  says  the  author, 
we  perceive  the  extraordinary  development  of  the  great  capitalist 
industrial  enterprises  in  Russia.  "  In  Russia,  thanks  to  the  late 
development  of  industry,  the  large  undertakings  predominate." 

I  beg  the  reader  not  to  forget  that  we  are  not  dealing  with  the 
quantitative  results  of  Russian  industry,  but  with  the  form,  the 
type,  the  rhythm  of  development.  If  we  consider  the  general 
totals,  those  relating  to  Germany  and  Belgium  are  very  much 
greater,  but  the  type  of  Russian  capitalism  and  the  rhythm  of  its 
development  are,  so  to  speak,  more  American.^ 

The  exceptional  importance  of  the  great  Russian  factories  and 
workshops  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  these  large  capitalist  enter- 
prises have  attracted  the  greater  proportion  of  the  salaried  artisans 
of  Russia.  In  1879  the  large  undertakings  (employing  more 
than   1,000  hands  each)  had   already  absorbed   more   than  two- 

'  It  is  not  so  easy  to  establish  a  comparison  between  France  and 
Russia.  In  France  the  concentration  of  capital  is  more  evident  in  the 
sphere  of  finance,  the  domain  of  the  Bourse.  In  Russia  financial 
capitalism  is  as  yet  little  developed.  This  explains  the  entry  of  foreign 
capital. 


ii6 


MODERN  RUSSIA 


thirds  of  all  the  industrial  workers  of  Russia  (66*8  per  cent.), 
and  in  1902  more  than  three-quarters  of  the  industrial  proletariat 
(78*5  per  cent.)  were  working  for  them.  This  concentration  of 
production  is  by  no  means  an  accidental  phenomenon.  It  is  a 
permanent  and  fundamental  tendency  ;  we  shall  discover  it  when 
the  productive  forces  of  the  country  are  most  intense  as  well 
as  during  a  crisis.  At  such  moments  the  great  enterprises  are 
always  more  adaptable,  more  active  than  the  small.  We  may 
verify  this  assertion  by  a  study  of  the  first  ten  years  of  the 
twentieth  century,  which  marked  a  slackening  in  the  development 
of  Russian  industry. 

"  How  did  this  abatement  affect  the  internal  structure  of  the 
country  ?"  asks  the  well-known  economist  Tughan-Baranovsky. 
To  reply  to  this  question  we  must  refer  to  the  figures  dealing 
with  the  number  of  labourers  working  in  the  factories  and 
workshops  during  the  years  1901-8,  and  "subject  to  factory 
inspection."  ^     The  tabulated  figures  read  as  follows  : 


Factories  and  Workshops 

Number  of  Workers. 

Increase  or 
Decrease, 

employing 

In  1901. 

In  1908. 

per  cent. 

Up  to  100  workers     

418,700 

352,700 

—  16 

100  to  500         

495,300 

472,100 

-   5 

500  to  1,000      

272,000 

288,300 

+    5 

More  than  1,000         

525,600 

655,200 

+  25 

Total     

1,711,600 

1,768,300 

+    3 

"Thus,"  says  Professor  Tughan-Baranovsky,  "the  stagnation 
of  industry  produced  a  decrease  of  16  per  cent,  in  the  workers 


'  By  no  means  all  the  industrial  undertakings  in  Russia  are  under  the 
control  of  the  "  factory  inspection."  The  following  arc  exempt : 
(i)  enterprises  employing  not  more  than  six  workers;  (2)  State  factories 
or  workshops  ;  (3)  railway  workshops  ;  (4)  mining  enterprises. 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN   CAPITAL     117 

employed  by  small  factories  employing  less  than  100  hands; 
a  less  sensible  decrease  in  the  staffs  of  factories  employing  up 
to  800  workers  :  and,  on  the  contrary,  an  increase  of  one-fourth 
in  the  staffs  of  the  'giant  factories.' 

"Thanks  to  the  considerable  diminution  in  the  number  of 
workers  employed  by  the  small  factories  and  the  still  more 
sensible  increase  in  the  number  of  those  employed  by  the  large 
concerns  both  occurring  during  a  period  of  industrial  stagnation, 
an  increased  concentration  of  labour  resulted.  Far  from  diminish- 
ing the  relative  economic  importance  of  the  heavily  capitalized 
enterprises,  this  industrial  stagnation  has  augmented  it  to  the 
detriment  of  the  small  industrial  undertakings.  These  latter, 
not  being  in  a  condition  to  ride  out  the  crisis,  had  to  wind  up 
their  affairs.  The  great  capitalists,  having  already  led  the  way 
in  our  industrial  life,  assumed  a  greater  importance  than  ever, 
profiting  by  the  ruin  of  smaller  competitors.  Social  contrasts 
thus  became  more  marked  than  ever  at  a  time  when  the  country 
was  generally  impoverished.  Capital  inevitably  proceeds  to 
conquer  fresh  positions." 

II 

The  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  was  marked  in 
Russia  by  fresh  developments  of  the  organizations  created  by  the 
great  capitalists.  These  organizations  are  of  two  kinds  :  on  the 
one  hand  the  Russian  capitalists  unite  upon  a  purely  economic 
basis,  just  as  those  of  Western  Europe ;  on  the  other,  their 
organization  assumed  a  semi-political  and  highly  original  character, 
for  the  Russian  capitalists  decided  to  exert  a  continual  influence 
upon  the  Government  with  a  view  to  their  peculiar  interests. 

In  the  economic  sphere  the  capitalist  organization  is  divided 
according  to  the  branches  of  industry.  Syndicates  and  trusts  are 
the  principal  types  of  economic  union  entered  into  by  the  Russian 
capitalist.  The  difference  between  a  trust  and  a  syndicate  or 
union  may  be  explained  in  a  few  words  :  a  syndicate  or  union  is 
an  understanding  entered  into  by  manufacturers  with  a  view  to 


ii8  MODERN  RUSSIA 

"  regularizing  "  the  market.  The  syndicate  does  not  involve  the 
destruction  of  the  technical  and  administrative  autonomy  of 
isolated  enterprises.  The  trust,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  complete 
fusion  of  enterprises  into  a  single  technical  and  administrative 
unit.  The  trust  is  the  more  advanced  stage  of  the  concentration 
of  capital  and  production.  The  "  syndicalization  "  of  industrial 
enterprises  almost  invariably  precedes  their  amalgamation  into  a 
trust,  but  there  are  forms  intermediary  between  these  two. 

Hitherto  little  has  been  heard  of  trusts  in  Russia.  However, 
a  few  had  been  previously  known  ;  in  1890  a  trust  was  formed  of 
six  pencil  factories,  and  at  the  beginning  of  1908  the  manufac- 
turers' trust  of  Lodz  was  established.  Syndicates  have  been  known 
for  a  much  longer  time.  Thirty  years  ago  some  fire  insurance 
companies  drew  up  a  secret  convention  which  was,  so  to  speak, 
the  ancestor  of  a  syndicate  of  insurance  companies.  In  1886  six 
factories  in  St.  Petersburg,  Moscow,  and  Riga  producing  iron 
wire  and  nails  formed  a  syndicate.  In  1887  the  sugar  refineries 
followed  suit,  and  the  petroleum  companies  did  the  same  in  1892. 
In  1895  a  secret  convention  was  signed  by  the  owners  of 
foundries  and  coal-mines. 

But  these  attempts  were  only  the  few  first  swallows,  which  do 
not  make  a  summer.  The  summer  was  delayed  until  the  opening 
of  the  twentieth  century.  At  this  period  appeared  the  first  signs 
of  the  crisis  of  over-production  which  occurred  in  the  years 
1901-2,  following  the  great  industrial  expansion  which  com- 
menced in  1893.  The  crisis,  the  depression  of  the  market,  and 
the  lessened  outlet  for  products  made  the  Russian  capitalists 
realize  certain  disadvantages  of  free  competition.  This  set  them 
seriously  thinking  of  regulating  the  sale  of  products  by  means  of 
agreements  or  syndicates. 

The  following  facts  will  show  the  progress  effected  by  the 
employers'  unions  in  Russia. 

In  1 90 1,  at  a  congress  of  mine-owners,  the  foundation  of 
certain  unions  was  decided  upon.  In  the  same  year  twelve  jute 
factories  formed  a  syndicate  in  order  to  fix  settled  prices  for  their 
goods.     This  example  was  followed  by  several  paper-mills. 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     119 

In  1902  twelve  foundries,  etc.,  constituted  a  great  syndicate, 
under  the  title  "  The  First  Public  Company  for  the  Sale  of 
Russian  Metallurgical  Products." 

In  1903  syndicates  sprang  up  in  Russia  like  mushrooms  after 
rain.  In  the  region  of  the  Ural  Mountains  a  syndicate  of  coal- 
mine-owners was  formed.  With  these  the  mine-owners  of  the 
Dombrova  district  presently  signed  an  agreement.  In  the  Donetz 
district  a  "public  company  "  was  formed  dealing  with  the  "com- 
bustible minerals  of  Donetz."  At  Kharkov  the  manufacturers 
of  machinery  combined  to  standardize  their  prices.  Twenty-eight 
manufactories  of  iron  wire  and  nails  founded  a  syndicate  in 
Poland,  and  the  lamp  fabrics  in  Warsaw  also  combined.  In  1903 
many  other  syndicates  were  formed  :  of  looking-glass  manufac- 
tories, copper-founders,  etc. 

In  1904  the  manufacturers  of  house-furniture  formed  a  syndi- 
cate in  Poland  ;  in  St.  Petersburg  the  electrical  manufacturers 
and  others  combined. 

In  the  succeeding  years  the  same  process  continued  ;  rubber 
factories,  asphalt  companies,  and  cotton-spinners  combined,  while 
a  syndicate  of  shipowners  monopolized  the  transport  on  the 
Dniester,  the  Bug,  and  the  Dnieper,  and  another  shipowners' 
syndicate  was  formed  on  the  Vistula. 

The  author  who  gives  us  these  data  arrives  at  the  following 
conclusion  :  "  The  greatest  intensity  of  syndicalist  ^  activity  is 
manifested  in  the  coal  and  iron  trades ;  that  is,  the  syndicalization 
of  Russia  resembles,  in  these  general  features,  that  of  Western 
Europe."  But  the  process  has  not  been  confined  to  the  "  heavier  " 
industries.  "  At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  united 
capital  had  obtained  such  a  hold  upon  Russia  that  even  those 
undertakings  whose  conditions  were  entirely  unfavourable  to 
syndicalization  could  not  escape  it." 

Many  Russian  syndicates  promptlj?^  assumed  a  national  character, 
and  monopolized  the  production  and  the  output  of  certain  objects. 
Thus,  for  example,  the  thread-makers'  syndicate  monopolized  the 

'  The  word  is  not  here  used  in  the  special  political  sense  given  to  it 
by  the  French  "  syndicalists." 


]2o  MODERN  RUSSIA 

sale  of  reels  of  thread  on  the  Russian  market.  Organized  in 
1903,  the  syndicate  known  as  "The  Nail"  succeeded,  in  four 
years,  in  monopolizing  87  per  cent,  of  the  production  of  nails  in 
Russia  (3,050,000  cwt.  out  of  3,530,000  cwt.). 

Founded  in  1907,  the  syndicate  known  as  "  The  Roof"  had 
monopolized,  by  the  end  of  a  year,  the  sale  of  the  galvanized  iron 
produced  in  all  the  factories  of  the  Ural  Mountains  and  some  of 
those  of  Moscow.  "  The  Prodamete "  monopolized  the  pro- 
duction and  sale  of  iron  girders.  Since  the  ist  of  January,  1908, 
the  public  company  "  Copper  "  has  controlled  the  entire  produc- 
tion of  copper  in  Russia.  From  its  factories  proceed  every  year 
353,000  cwt.  of  copper.  Founded  in  1907,  the  coal  syndicate 
of  the  Donetz  basin  promptly  monopolized  two-thirds  of  the  coal 
obtained  in  that  region.  Between  the  years  1907  and  1908  two 
Siberian  coal-mining  syndicates  shared  the  principal  market 
between  them  and  monopolized  the  supply  of  coal  to  the 
Siberian  railroads.  The  most  important  of  the  trusts  was  formed 
by  the  fusion  of  two  companies  which  monopolized  84  per  cent, 
of  the  platinum  obtained  in  the  Ural  Mountains.  The  monopo- 
lization of  the  markets  by  these  syndicates  has  made  itself  felt  in 
yet  other  branches  of  industry.  In  1907  the  syndicate  of  match 
factories  resolved  to  sisn  an  agreement  with  the  international 
syndicate  controlling  preparations  of  potassium,  in  order  that 
potassium  might  not  be  obtained  by  outsiders.  The  intention 
of  this  syndicate  was  to  strike  a  mortal  blow  at  independent  pro- 
ducers. In  the  same  year  the  congress  of  bottle-makers  drew  up 
a  scheme  with  a  view  to  monopolizing  the  market. 

The  union  of  great  enterprises  may  have  graver  results  in 
Russia  than  in  any  other  country.  Small  and  moderate  capital 
is  too  weak  in  Russia  to  support  a  struggle  with  great  masses  of 
united  capital.  Hence  the  ruin  of  the  small  industrial  under- 
taking and  the  concentration  of  production  in  the  hands  of  indus- 
trial oligarchs  may  assume  a  very  extreme  form.  We  have 
already  seen  how  rapidly  this  concentration  has  been  effected, 
how  swiftly  the  importance  of  these  great  enterprises  has  grown. 
Moreover,   the  syndicalization    of   the    great    industries  has  still 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     121 

further  increased  the  specific  weight  of  the  latter  in  comparison 
with  the  smaller  industries.  Hence  the  American  character  or 
the  development  of  Russian  capital,  a  character  which  I  have 
already  mentioned. 

As  for  the  consumers,  they  profit  by  this  state  of  things  up  to  a 
certain  point.  The  concentration  of  production  permits  in  the 
^rj^ /i/flt-^  of  an  improved  technique  and  a  diminished  sale-price. 
But  when  this  concentration  proceeds  to  the  monopolization  of 
the  market  by  a  iew  industrial  oligarchs,  the  consumers  are  at 
their  mercy,  for  prices  are  no  longer  the  result  of  free  compe- 
tition. The  ignorance  of  the  consumers  and  their  lack  of 
organization  make  it  very  difficult  for  them  to  struggle  against 
this  evil. 

We  must  add  that  the  Russian  laws  whose  intention  it  is  to 
regulate  commercial  and  industrial  relations  are  extremely 
archaic.  They  were  compiled  before  the  development  of  modern 
forms  of  capitalist  economy,  and  are  far  from  anticipating  such 
phenomena  as  syndicates  and  trusts.  Moreover,  it  is  difficult  for 
the  Russian  Government  to  oppose  the  monopolization  of  the 
market  by  the  larger  capitalists  on  principle,  for  it  has  itself 
created  a  monopoly  of  nearly  all  the  railways,  and  of  one  comestible 
which  yields  a  large  profit — namely,  vodka.  Again,  the  Govern- 
ment, with  an  eye  to  fiscal  interests,  has  considerably  increased 
the  prices  of  the  products  which  it  has  monopolized. 

Once  again,  the  Russian  autocracy  and  bureaucracy  are  so  far 
corrupted  by  the  habit  of  extorting  money  and  exploiting  the 
population  that  it  is  not  difficult  for  the  great  capitalists  to 
purchase  the  ineffectual  execution  of  governmental  measures 
directed  against  their  interests,  or  even  the  assistance  of  such 
measures.  On  the  other  hand,  the  employers'  union  can  assist 
the  Government  in  its  struggle  against  the  popular  movement,  in 
the  van  of  which  are  the  industrial  workers.  Thus  in  the  years 
1905  and  1906  a  lock-out  was  employed  in  order  to  defeat  the 
workers  who  had  risen  against  the  autocracy. 

One  of  the  most  dangerous  measures  (for  the  worker)  which 
has  been  adopted  by  the  unions  of  employers  is  the  use  of  the 


122  MODERN  RUSSIA 

"  black-lists."  These  lists  contain  the  names  of  those  workers 
whose  minds  are  "  badly  disposed,"  and  are  distributed  to  all 
owners  and  managers  of  factories  and  workshops.  The  worker 
who  has  been  dismissed  from  a  factory,  and  whose  name  has  been 
inscribed  on  the  black-list,  cannot  hope  to  obtain  work  from 
another  employer.  And  as  workers'  trades-unions  are  rendered 
almost  impossible  by  repressive  police  measures,  they  can  neither 
defend  nor  materially  support  a  dismissed  worker. 

The  organization  of  accumulated  capital  is  not  confined  to  the 
syndicate.  There  is  yet  another  form  of  employers'  union  which 
is  semi-political.  This  is  the  "  Council  of  the  Congresses  of 
Industry  and  Commerce."  This  organization,  which  was 
founded  recently,  unites  a  whole  series  of  local  organizations, 
such  as  Stock  Exchange  committees,  clubs,  and  societies  of 
manufacturers,  etc.  Nearly  all  the  "  large  capital "  of  the 
country  is  represented  by  this  organization,  which  publishes  an 
organ  of  its  own.  Industry  and  Commerce.  The  article  expounding 
the  programme  of  this  association  tells  us:  "Capitalism,  by  its 
nature,  does  not  recognize  altruism  and  completely  disowns  senti- 
mentalism."  Characteristic  words  !  It  is  no  longer  the  voice  of 
the  patriarchal  Muscovite  merchant  that  we  hear,  but  that  of  an 
American  "  business  man." 

The  organization  of  capital  has  been  of  enormous  social  im- 
portance in  Russia.  Instead  of  the  amorphous  particles  of  old, 
instead  of  a  "  dust  of  humanity,"  we  perceive  the  organization 
of  a  whole  class.  The  social  conflict  is  no  longer  the  struggle  of 
various  small  and  isolated  groups,  but  a  struggle  of  classes,  which 
are  organized  one  against  another.  A  series  of  perspectives  opens 
before  Russian  society  ;  but  these  are  so  far  only  in  the  region 
of  prognostics,  of  what  the  Germans  call   Vjukunftsmusik. 

In  the  meantime  organized  capital  seeks  to  employ  its  forces 
and  its  influence  with  the  Government  in  order  to  derive 
immediate  profits.  Government  subsidies,  State  contracts,  pro- 
tective customs  tariffs,  all  these  are  at  the  service  of  the  large 
capitalists  ;  all  these  contribute  to  an  incredible  degree  to  raising 
the    price  of   products.     The    metallurgical    workshops   of    the 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     123 

south  of  Russia,  even  in  1 901,  at  the  moment  of  the  crisis, 
yielded  lO  per  cent,  to  18  per  cent,  in  dividends.  The  result  is 
that  many  Russian  products  cost  more  in  Russia  than  abroad. 
In  1900  the  Russian  consumer  paid  6  rubles  for  refined  sugar,i 
while  the  same  sugar  sold  for  4*30  rubles  in  Hamburg  and 
2-48  rubles  in  London.  This  strange  phenomenon  is  explained 
by  an  artificial  increase  in  the  price  of  sugar  caused  by  the 
Government's  understanding  vv^ith  the  chief  producers  ;  and  the 
case  cited  is  far  from   being  unique. 


Ill 

The  development  of  capitalism  and  the  concentration  of  pro- 
duction follow  the  increase  and  the  concentration  of  the  pro- 
letarian mass.  The  ever-increasing  "  proletarianization  "  of  the 
population — that  is,  the  transformation  of  a  great  mass  of  in- 
dependent producers,  rural  kustars  and  urban  artisans  into 
a  collectivity  of  wage-slaves  living  by  the  sale  of  their  powers 
of  production — is  in  Russia  an  indisputable  fact. 

According  to  a  Russian  statistician,  M.  Lositsky,  by  the 
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  the  "  proletarianization " 
of  nearly  a  quarter  of  the  population  (22  per  cent.)  had  been 
accomplished.  The  composition  of  the  proletarian  mass  is 
extremely  complex.  We  find  representatives  of  the  rural,  in- 
dustrial, and  intellectual  proletariat,  and  also  of  the  lumpen — 
that  is,  of  the  unclassed  elements  of  society.  We  shall  have 
something  to  say  of  wage-earning  workers,  for  the  moment 
ignoring  the  other  categories  of  the  proletariat. 

The  inquiry  of  1902,  to  which  we  have  several  times  referred, 
proved  that  the  number  of  wage-earning  workers  is  very  great 
in  Russia.  "  It  would  be  an  error  to  conclude,"  says  M. 
Pogogev  in  summarizing  the  data  returned  by  the  inquiry, 
"that  the  wage-earning  population  of  Russia  is  relatively  un- 
important   from    the    quantitative    point  of  view.     Already  we 

'  Six  rubles — about  12s.  9d. — per  pood,  or  36  lb.  ;  or  4id.  pur  lb. 


-'*t*'»i 


124  MODERN  RUSSIA 

have    nearly   seven   millions   of  salaried   workers  of   both   sexes, 
domestics  not  included."     On  the  contrary,  "  the  relative  com- 
parison of  the   number  of   Russian   wage-earners  with  those  of 
Austria,   Germany,  and    other    States  is  far    from  showing   any 
inferiority  on  our  part."     According  to  the  calculations  of  M. 
Pogogev,  Fedorov,   Ilyin,  and  other  authors  dealing  with  these 
questions,  the  totality  of  salaried  workers  in  Russia  at  the  begin- 
ning  of  the    twentieth  century   was    sensibly  superior    to    that 
of  France  (census  of  1 891)  or  that  of  Germany  (census  of  1895). 
One  of  these  authors  even  asserts  that  "  the  industrial  develop- 
ment  of  Russia   approximates,   by    its    number    of  workers,   to 
that  of  the  United  States."     Exact  data  respecting  the  number 
of  salaried    workers   do    not    exist    in    Russia.     The    census  of 
1897  gives  7,042,959,  distributed  over  various  branches  and  fields 
of  industry. 

Including  members  of  the  family,  this  figure  is  increased 
to  some  tens  of  millions  of  persons. 

One  curious  fact  may  be  noted.  Many  Russian  men  of 
science,  politicians,  and  members  of  the  Government  have 
remarked  neither  the  appearance  nor  the  development  of  the 
salaried  proletariat.  We  may  say  of  Russian  society  what 
Turgenev  said  of  an  individual:  "Until  man  lives  he  is  not 
sensible  of  his  own  life  :  like  a  sound,  it  only  becomes  perceptible 
to  him  after  a  certain  time  has  passed." 

Only  four  years  before  the  general  census  of  1897,  the  Russian 
Government  noted  in  its  official  documents  that  "  with  us  the 
contingent  of  industrial  workers  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word, 
that  is,  of  those  who  possess  no  land  and  do  not  return  to  the 
country  to  labour  for  a  portion  of  the  year  is,  at  least  at  present, 
insignificant."  In  1896  a  publication  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance 
had  stated  that  in  Russia  industrial  labour  did  not  constitute 
a  profession,  nor  a  means  of  existence,  but  was  only  a  com- 
plement of  rural  labour. 

The  facts,  however,  do  not  correspond  with  this  assertion. 
According  to  the  data  of  1893,  ^^  ^^  obvious  that  70*8  per  cent, 
of  the  workers  in  shops  and  factories  are  addicted  exclusively  to 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     125 

industry,  while  29*2  per  cent,  periodically  return  to  their  villages  to 
cultivate  the  soil.  In  the  case  of  vi^orkers  permanently  employed 
in  the  more  highly  developed  branches  of  production,  in  the 
textile  and  metallurgical  industries,  this  percentage  is  still  higher 
(83*5  per  cent,  and  88  per  cent.).  Consequently,  the  funda- 
mental condition  necessary  to  the  development  of  capitalism, 
the  existence  of  specialized  workers  alienated  from  the  rural 
economy,  is  present  in  Russia  in  a  sufficiently  advanced  degree. 

What  is  the  general  composition  of  the  industrial  proletariat  ? 
How  is  it  divided  according  to  sex  and  age  ?  The  replies  to 
these  questions  will  furnish  us  with  material  capable  of  demon- 
strating the  strength  of  the  capitalist  tendencies  of  economic  life 
in  modern  Russia.  The  development  of  capital  is  always  accom- 
panied by  the  transformation  of  the  composition  of  the  proletariat. 
The  ever-increasing  technical  division  of  labour  simplifies  the 
forms  of  labour.  Muscular  strength  and  technical  knowledge 
become  more  and  more  useless  to  the  worker,  who  has  only  to 
learn  a  few  automatic  and  uniform  movements.  Hence  the 
necessity  of  a  long  apprenticeship  is  avoided.  Another  result  of 
the  development  of  mechanical  labour  is  the  possibility  that  the 
heaviest  labour  may  be  executed  by  the  most  deficient  popula- 
tions. 

In  considering  the  Summary  of  the  Reports  of  Inspectors  of 
Labour  for  the  first  years  of  the  twentieth  century  we  shall 
remark  the  rapid  development  of  the  exploitation  of  female  and 
child  labour,  and  the  gradual  replacement  of  the  man's  labour 
by  that  of  his  wife  and  children.  Between  the  years  1901  and 
1905  the  number  of  female  workers  increased  in  Russia  from 
22*7  per  cent,  to  24*4  per  cent.,  and  the  number  of  male  workers 
decreased  from  667  per  cent,  to  65-2  per  cent.  The  inspectors' 
reports  for  1903  record  "the  indisputable  fact  of  the  progressive 
replacement  of  the  labour  of  the  man  by  that  of  the  woman  and 
child."  The  report  notes  "  the  certain  preference  accorded  by 
the  manufacturers  to  women,  as  a  more  stable  and  tranquil 
element  of  labour,  and  above  all  one  less  highly  paid."  In  the 
reports  for  1906  the  inspectors  speak  still  more  plainly  :  "The 


126  MODERN  RUSSIA 

relative  increase  in  the  number  of  women  and  the  absolute  decrease 
in  the  number  of  men  are  without  doubt  the  result  of  the  recent 
labour  movement ;  the  manufacturers,  wherever  it  is  in  any  way 
possible,  are  replacing  men  and  even  youths  by  women,  whose 
attendance  in  the  factories  is  far  more  certain  and  whose  work  is 
less  highly  paid.  Jt  the  present  time  women  arc  obtaining  even  those 
posts  that  were  the  exclusive  privilege  of  men. 

After  the  woman,  the  child  :  by  the  end  of  1904  adolescents 
constituted  77  per  cent,  of  the  total  of  the  industrial  workers, 
and  at  the  beginning  of  1908  they  had  increased  to  8*6  per  cent. 

The  social  and  economic  importance  of  this  fact  is  enormous. 
In  the  first  place,  it  entails  the  destruction  of  family  life,  for  at 
present  not  only  the  father  but  often  the  mother  and  her  children 
pass  the  whole  day  in  the  factory.  How  can  the  family  circle 
survive  this  change  ?  Another  result  is  the  fall  of  wages.  The 
possibility  of  procuring  cheap  labour,  the  woman's,  and  the  con- 
sideration that  the  man's  wages,  formerly  destined  to  support 
a  whole  family,  are  to-day  augmented  by  the  money  gained  by 
other  members  of  the  family,  have  enabled  the  employers  to  pay 
relatively  less  to  married  men. 

Moreover,  the  wages  of  a  Russian  working-man  are  seldom 
very  high.  It  is  difficult  to  compare  them  with  English  wages 
or  even  with  P>ench  or  German  wages.i  Thus,  for  example, 
the  pay  of  a  miner  in  the  South  of  Russia  was  in  1904  sensibly 
less  (by  12  per  cent.)  than  that  of  a  French  miner  between  the 
years  i860  and  1870.  Now  the  French  miner  earns  almost  one 
and  a  half  times  as  much  as  his  Russian  comrade. 

According  to  the  data  given  by  the  inspectors'  reports  for  1904, 
the  averao-e  annual  earnings  of  each  Russian  worker  amount  to 
213  rubles — _^22  13s.  7d. ;  or  less  than  £2  per  month.  This 
average  varies  according  to  the  district :  in  the  Government  of 
St.  Petersburg  it  is  ^^34  ;  in  that  of  Moscow,  £21  14s.  ;  in  that 
of   Vladimir,    £1"]    6s.    9d.       In    some    regions    the    wages   are 

'  According  to  the  English  Blue  Book  for  1908  the  average  earnings 
of  a  German  worker  are  83  per  cent.,  and  those  of  a  French  worker 
73  per  cent.,  of  the  earnings  of  an  English  worker. 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     127 

incredibly  low.  In  one  Government  of  the  kingdom  of  Poland 
(that  of  Lomja)  the  worker  makes  69  rubles,  or  ^6  i6s.  per 
annum,  or  los.  6d.  per  month.  But  what  can  we  expect  of  the 
wages  earned  in  private  industries  when  those  of  the  workers  in 
the  service  of  the  municipality  are  as  low  as  they  are  ?  The 
municipality  of  St.  Petersburg  admits  in  one  of  its  reports  that 
"the  present  rate  of  pay  is  often  insufficient  to  satisfy  even  the 
most  urgent  necessities  of  the  workers,  such  as  the  need  of  food, 
shelter,  and  clothing"  (see  The  Messenger  of  the  Municipal 
Council  of  St.  Petersburg,  1905,  No.  18).  It  recognizes  the  fact 
that  a  large  number  of  the  municipal  labourers  of  St.  Petersburg 
receive  wages  "  so  insignificant  that  they  cannot  assure  the 
worker  of  a  lodging  for  the  night  ;  he  is  forced  to  take  refuge  in 
some  damp  corner  or  in  a  night  shelter.  .  .  .  Such  wages,  which 
stand  in  no  relation  to  the  work  performed  or  to  the  cost  of  life 
in  the  capital,  result  in  material  conditions  which  destroy  the 
worker's  health  and  exert  an  evil  influence  upon  his  morality  " 
{ihid.y  p.  1339).  Similar  facts  may  be  noted  in  respect  of 
provincial  cities. 

The  material  relations  existing  between  the  employers  and  the 
employed  of  industrial  Russia  find  no  analogy  in  Western 
Europe.  In  many  parts  of  Russia  payment  of  wages  is  still  made 
in  kind.  The  worker  receives  provisions,  either  directly  from  the 
employer  or  from  the  store  which  is  housed  in  the  factory  itself. 
In  1904,  in  the  Government  of  Moscow,  of  47,000,000  rubles 
(_^5,ooo,ooo)  earned  by  the  workers,  the  latter  touched  only  some 
38,000,000  rubles,  or  ^4,000,000.  The  other  odd  million  was 
paid  in  kind.  Of  seventeen  Governments  lying  round  St.  Peters- 
burg and  Moscow,  there  are  only  three  in  which  the  "  Inspection 
of  Factories  "  has  failed  to  note  cases  of  payment  in  goods.  In 
the  more  "  European ized  "  districts,  as  in  the  kingdom  of  Poland, 
this  antiquated  form  of  payment  has  almost  disappeared. 

Another  fact  worthy  of  attention  is  the  great  number  oi  Jines 
inflicted  upon  the  workers  by  their  employers.  In  1 901,  in  the 
workshops  and  factories  of  European  Russia  (Poland  and  the 
Caucasus  included),  no  less  than  2,300,000  fines  were  paid,  or 


128  MODERN  RUSSIA 

194  fines  for  each  hundred  workers.  Between  the  years  1901 
and  1905  the  annual  average  of  the  fines  extorted  from  the 
workers  in  European  Russia  was  more  than  half  a  million  rubles, 
or  j^ 5 3,200.  The  sums  realized  by  such  fines  serve  to  form  a 
"  fines  capital,"  from  which  aid  is  granted  to  workers  who  have 
suffered  some  accident  incidental  to  their^work.  The  workers 
themselves  have  no  say  in  the  employment  of  this  fund,  which 
is  nearly  always  very  badly  administered.  State  insurance  of 
workers  is  as  yet  unknown  to  Russian  legislation. 

As  for  the  duration  of  the  working  day,  the  law  of  1897  fixed 
the  maximum  at  iij  hours  for  adult  workers.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  regard  this  maximum  as  too  high  from  a  physiological 
standpoint  (see  the  interesting  article  by  Dr.  Rend  Laufer  in 
the  Nouvelle  Revue^  IQO??  ""  ^^^  Organisation  physiologique  du 
Travail).  In  reality  the  employers  of  the  great  industrial  centres 
generally  require  a  much  shorter  day.  Some  exact  1 1  hours' 
work,  others  io|  or  lO  hours,  and  some  only  9  hours.  But 
some,  on  the  other  hand,  work  their  employees  far  longer  than 
the  law  of  1897  allows.  Here  are  some  examples  relating  to 
municipal  enterprises,  examples  of  which  I  have  already  published 
in  the  Annales  de  la  Regie  directe  (Geneva,  1910,  No.  16). 

The  municipal  garden  labourers  in  St.  Petersburg,  according 
to  the  report  of  a  municipal  gardener,  work  on  an  average 
12J  hours  a  day,  but  in  summer  their  daily  work  is  increased  to 
17  hours.  At  Odessa  the  day  of  the  municipal  labourers  is  15^ 
hours.  At  Saratov  the  workers  in  the  municipal  slaughter-house, 
according  to  their  own  evidence,  work  from  4  a.m.  to  8  p.m., 
and  "even  later."  Moreover,  they  have  no  holidays.  At  Poltava 
the  labourers  in  the  municipal  service  work  18  hours  a  day  ! 
This  is  attested  publicly  and  officially  by  a  member  of  the  muni- 
cipality. 

Since  the  material  conditions  of  life  and  labour  in  Russia  are 
such  as  we  have  seen,  there  is  no  room  for  the  "  rights  of  the 
man  and  the  citizen  "  in  the  relations  between  the  capitalists  and 
their  employees.  In  Russia  we  behold  the  complete  dependence 
of  the  workers  on  their  employers  and  the  heads  of  industrial 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     129 

businesses.  How  far  the  forms  of  this  dependence  may  be  called 
"  patriarchal  "  may  be  judged  from  the  following  fact  :  in  each 
annual  account  published  by  the  "  Inspection  of  Factories"  are 
reported  numbers  of  proceedings  brought  against  employers  on 
the  grounds  of  ill-treatment,  sometimes  amounting  even  to  blows. 
The  report  for  1907  cites  9,077  such  cases.  The  employers 
have  retained  a  habit  of  inflicting  corporal  punishment,  which  is  a 
heritage  from  the  ages  of  serfdom. 

I  will  not  here  deal  with  other  defects  of  the  oro;anization 
of  the  life  of  the  Russian  labour  world.  I  will  confine  myself 
to  remarking  that  the  bad  conditions  of  labour  become  hurtful  in 
the  end  not  only  to  the  health  and  the  mentality  of  the  labourer, 
but  to  the  capitalist  himself.  They  sap  the  strength  of  Russian 
capitalism  as  compared  with  that  of  other  countries  where  the 
labourer  is  better  paid  and  therefore  better  nourished  and  healthier 
in  mind  and  body. 

"  The  industrial  rivalry  between  different  nations  becomes 
in  reality  a  struggle  between  the  personal  productive  capacities 
of  the  workers,"  says  Dr.  Laufer,  very  truly.  "All  other  con- 
ditions tend  to  become  equalized.  The  rapidity  and  cheapness  of 
transport  abolish  the  advantages  which  one  country  might  enjoy 
over  another  by  reason  of  the  proximity  of  raw  materials  or  trade 
outlets.  And  as  the  material  agencies  of  competition  become 
equalized  the  supremacy  will  belong  to  that  country  which  can 
extract  the  most  from  its  human  energies  ;  that  in  which  the 
working  class  is  most  vigorous,  intelligent,  and  productive." 

,  In  these  respects  Russian  industry  still  leaves  very  much   to 
be  desired. 


IV 


From  the  preceding  chapters  we  may  judge  of  the  shock 
which  the  invasion  of  capital  has  administered  to  Russian  life. 
Vast  waves  of  humanity,  set  in  motion  thereby,  have  surged  into 
the  industrial  centres.  All  these  centres  have  not  the  same 
external  aspect,  nor  a  similar  internal  structure.     We  may  dis- 

9 


I30  MODERN  RUSSIA 

tinguish  four  principal  types  :  ( i )  cities  in  which  there  is  a  great 
concentration  of  workers,  (2)  the  suburbs  of  important  towns 
which  have  themselves  become  industrial  centres,  (3)  large 
villages  which  contain  works  or  factories  (this  type  is  especially 
widespread  in  the  Governments  of  Moscow,  Vladimir,  and  Kos- 
troma), (4)  the  villages  of  kustars^  inhabited  by  a  number  of 
small  independent  employers  and  workmen.  These  villages  are 
mostly  in  the  centre  and  in   the  Volga  country. 

This  variety  has,  according  to  some,  a  considerable  social 
importance.  "  The  history  of  the  labour  problem  in  Russia  has 
been  evolving  and  becoming  more  complex  for  forty  years.  This 
development  is  closely  allied  to  the  predominance  sometimes  of 
the  more  advanced  proletariat  of  the  cities  and  capitals  and  some- 
times of  the  less  organized  population  which  works  in  the  rural 
factories,"  says  a  competent  specialist. 

We  should  note  that  the  division  of  industrial  tvpes  already 
mentioned  is  more  than  conventional,  and  that  historically  and 
geographically  they  have  intermingled.  Here,  for  instance,  is 
a  page  from  the  description  of  the  district  of  Shuya  (Govern- 
ment of  Vladimir)   published  in    igo8   by  the  local  Zemstvo  : 

"From  the  industrial  point  of  view  the  district  of  Shuya 
occupies  a  very  important  position  among  the  most  highly  indus- 
trialized localities  of  European  Russia.  The  cities  of  Ivanovo- 
Voznessensk  and  Shuya  and  the  villages  of  Teikovo  and  Kohma 
are  known  for  their  cotton-mills;  no  less  than  100,000  persons 
are  employed  therein.  Besides  this  colossal  development  of  the 
larger  industry  there  are  many  small  factories  which  provide 
work  for  more  than  10,000  hands.  In  any  district  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  Vladimir  we  shall  find  all  the  different  types  of  industry^ 
from  the  artisan's  workshop  to  the  factories  equipped  with  English 
machinery  which  send  their  products  abroad.  In  the  district  of 
Shuya  we  find  a  strict  graduation  of  industrial  forms.  The  aspect 
of  the  city  of  Ivanovo-Voznessensk  cannot,  perhaps,  be  compared 
with  that  of  the  manufacturing  towns  of  Poland  or  Western 
Europe.  About  this  city  the  country  is  thinly  sprinkled  with 
villages  like  all  Russian  villages,  with  their  roofs  of  thatch,  their 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     131 

sokhas^  and  their  three-crop  system.  But  although  the  outward 
aspect  of  these  villages  has  not  yet  changed,  the  appearance  of  the 
factory  chimneys  among  the  ishas  of  the  mujiks  has  produced 
an   internal  change  in  the  life  of  the  country." 

"Nevertheless,"  we  read  further  on,  "industrial  interests 
predominate  over  agricultural  interests  ;  the  workers  live  by 
industry  more  than  bv  agriculture.  The  profits  of  his  trade 
form  the  foundation  of  the  peasant's  budget." 

And  here  is  explained  the  development  of  Ivanovo-Voznessensk 
and  the  industrial  villages  adjacent  : 

"The  town  of  Ivanovo-Voznessensk  has  attained  a  genuine  in- 
dustrial development  only  during  the  last  forty  or  fifty  years.  Only 
in  1 89 1  were  the  selo  of  Ivanovo  and  the  possad  of  Voznessensk 
united  to  form  a  '  city.'  The  suburbs  of  the  town,  the  slobodki^ 
which  belonged  to  the  last  moment  to  the  district  of  Shuya,  and 
were  under  its  jurisdiction,  finally  expanded, and  were  peopled  by  the 
flood  of  proletarians  working  in  the  factories,  landless  peasants,  small 
merchants,  and  petty  industrial  employers.  All  these  people  settled 
in  the  suburbs  of  Ivanovo-Voznessensk,  some  as  owners  of  "  real 
estate  "  and  others  as  factorv  hands.  These  latter  settled  in  miserable 
lodgings,  having  left  their  families  in  their  native  villages.  Thus 
arose  the  slobodki^  noisy,  motley,  gaudily  coloured  quarters  outside 
the  protection  of  the  administration  of  the  cities,  outside  the 
archaic  power  of  the  rural  mir.  Only  the  police  had  access  at 
every  hour  of  the  day  and  night  to  these  muddv  haunts.  The 
shbodki^  with  their  miserable  dolls'  houses  and  their  narrow 
streets,  remind  one  of  a  gipsy  encampment,  the  ephemeral  home 
of  circus-folk,  where  all  is  changing  and  impermanent.  There 
is  a  constant  coming  and  going  ;  like  so  many  mushrooms  the 
little  yellow  houses  rise  singly  in  the  midst  of  fields  covered  with 
rubbish.  Then  they  begin  to  appear  in  rows  ;  finally  they  can 
no  longer  contain  their  inhabitants.  Then  fresh  dolls'  houses 
begin  to  rise  beside  the  court-yards  of  the  others  ;  not  a  birch- 
tree,  not  a  bush  to  be  seen  ;  nothing  but  dust  and  mud  and 
rubbish  in  the  streets,  soot  and  smoke  and  the  rumble  of  factories 
in  the  air."    This  external  transformation  is  indissolubly  bound  up 


132  MODERN  RUSSIA 

with  an  internal  change.  The  peaceful  life  of  the  peasant  has 
made  way  for  the  fever  of  capitalism.  "The  extreme  mobility 
of  all  relations,  their  purely  speculative  character,  the  perpetual 
chase  for  profit,  and  the  sole  motive  of  the  life  of  the  whole 
place,  are  felt  at  every  step,  in  every  incident." 

The  most  interesting  phase  of  the  evolution  of  these  industrial 
centres,  from  the  economic  and  social  point  of  view,  was  un- 
doubtedly the  transformation  of  the  "  village  of  kustnrs  "  into  a 
"village  of  factories."  The  villages  of  kustnrs  (village  artisans) 
began  to  spring  up  a  long  time  ago,  at  the  time  when  monetary 
economv  made  its  appearance,  together  with  the  social  division 
of  labour.  For  centuries  " /fz/i^^/r  industries" — village  industries 
— supported  millions  of  Russian  families.  But  then  capital  came 
upon  the  scene  and  in  a  itw  years  destroyed  the  old  forms  of 
petty  industry  that  had  endured  for  hundreds  of  years.  This 
destruction  was  accomplished  in  two  ways  :  capital  entered  into 
direct  competition  with  the  kustarsy  or  it  became  the  interme- 
diary between  these  and  the  market.  In  the  first  case,  having 
new  technical  methods  and  the  force  of  organization  at  its  dis- 
posal, it  quickly  vanquished  the  independent  artisan  and  the 
small  employer,  and  transformed  them  into  wage-slaves.  In  the 
second  case  it  left  the  kustars  only  the  illusion  of  independence 
by  opening  what  was  called  a  "  bureau  of  distribution."  This 
bureau  distributed  raw  material  to  the  kustars^  and  bought  from 
them  the  articles  which  they  manufactured,  in  order  to  resell 
them  to  the  consumer.  The  labour  of  the  kustars  thus  became 
strictly  what  is  known  to  Europe  as  a  "  home  industry."  This 
form  of  production  is  very  widespread  in  Russia,  especially  as 
regards  the  textile  industry.  In  1907  the  official  statistics 
certified   the  existence  of  405  such  "  bureaus  of  distribution." 

One  of  the  most  characteristic  peculiarities  of  the  economic 
life  of  the  Russian  Empire  is  that  the  largest  enterprises  are  often 
established  away  from  the  cities.  This  is  true  of  more  than 
30  per  cent,  of  the  large  factories  and  workshops,  and  nearly 
70  per  cent,  of  the  labourers  employed  in  "large  industries." 
This  tendency  is  explained   by  several  factors.     Firstly,  by  "the 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     133 

desire  of  capitalists  to  obtain  living  tools  that  are  cheap  and  not 
exacting."  Secondly,  by  the  fact  that  an  industrial  business  can 
be  established  in  the  country  with  less  formality  and  expense  ; 
the  land  is  cheap  in  the  country,  water  and  wood  are  nearer  at 
hand,  and  very  often  the  raw  material  required  is  to  be  procured 
in  the  neighbourhood.  However,  these  advantages  are  accom- 
panied by  certain  disadvantages  ;  a  situation  some  distance  from 
a  town  renders  circulation  more  difficult  and  is  a  strain  upon 
economic  relations.  "The  predominance  of  industrial  centres 
removed  from  towns,"  says  M.  Pogogev,  "is  in  Russia  more 
than  elsewhere  a  cause  of  disequilibrium  between  national  and 
international  commercial  competition.  This  predominance 
increases  wages  in  some  districts  and  lowers  them  in  others. 
Moreover,  it  aggravates  the  insanitary  conditions  of  labour."  This 
predominance  of  non-urban  industrial  centres  has  had,  according 
to  the  author  cited,  an  enormous  influence  upon  the  social, 
economic,  and  hygienic  life  of  the  country.  This  assertion  is 
often  contradicted,  there  being  a  very  general  idea  in  Russia  that 
the  generality  of  factories  are  isolated  from  the  mass  of  the 
peasants  and  can  affect  them  very  little.  Actually,  Russian 
capitalism  goes  from  town  to  the  countrv,  and  there  builds  its 
palatial  factories  beside  the  humble  isba  of  the  muj'ik. 

But  although  the  population  of  Russia  has  profited  by  capitalist 
culture,  it  has  been  deprived  of  urban  culture,  properly  so  called. 
It  is  difficult  to  establish  a  complete  comparison,  for  in  Russia 
the  city  is  not  what  it  is  in  Western  Europe.  In  Russia  it  is 
before  all  an  administrative,  not  an  economic  unit.  Sometimes 
a  Russian  "  village,"  with  thousands  upon  thousands  of  inhabi- 
tants, is  only  a  village  because  the  bureaucracy  has  forgotten  to 
raise  it  to  the  rank  of  a  town.  This  restriction  apart,  we  must 
nevertheless  admit  that  urban  life  in  Russia  is  far  less  highly 
developed  than  it  is  in  Western  Europe.  According  to  the 
census  of  1B97  only  13  per  cent,  of  the  Russian  population  is 
urban.  But  the  tendency  of  development  is  the  same  in  Russia 
as  elsewhere  in  Europe.  It  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  urban 
population  increases  sensibly  faster  than  that  of  the  country. 


134 


MODERN  RUSSIA 


"Between  1727  and  1897  ^^^  ^^^^  multiplied  itself  51  times; 
the  second  onlv  8  times."  If  we  observe  the  cities  separately, 
some  of  them  show  an  extraordinary  power  of  growth.  Here 
are  a  few  examples  : 


Inhabitants. 

Increase  of 

i^\\\r"i. 

Population, 
per  cent. 

V^lllCOt 

1867. 

1897. 

St.  Petersburg      

539,471 

1,267,023 

1367 

Moscow 

35i,^'09 

1,035.664 

194-8 

Warsaw 

180,657 

638,208 

253-0 

Kig'-i           

77468 

282,943 

264-6 

Kiev           

68.429 

247.432 

2617 

Rostov       

29,261 

119,889 

310-0 

Ekalcrinoshivl 

19,908 

121,216 

508-0 

Baku          

13.992 

112,253 

702-0 

Lodz          

32,347 

315,209 

872-0 

Vladikavkaz 

3,358 

43.843 

1,205-0 

Blagovcshtchcnsk 

2,050 

32,606 

1,490-5 

Ivanovo-Voznessensk 

1,350 

53,945 

3,896-2 

The  example    of   Ivanovo-Voznessensk    is    especially  remark- 
able ;  in   thirty  years  its  population    has   multiplied   nearly  forty 


times  ! 


This  rapid  growth  of  urban  populations  is  explained  by  the 
attraction  which  the  capitalist  city  has  for  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  country.  The  Russian  industrial  towns  are  like  the 
"tentacular  cities"  of  Belgium  sung  by  the  poet  Verhaeren  ; 
like  those  of  England,  Germany,  and  France.  In  Russia  the 
attractive  force  of  the  industrial  town  is  manifested  in  its  tendency 
even  more  than  in  other  States  whose  development  has  been 
more  gradual.  While  the  general  composition  of  the  whole 
population  of  Russia  shows  that  only  13  per  cent,  is  urban, 
the  number  of  "  independent  "  workers  among  the  urban  in- 
habitants had  risen  in  1897  to  25  per  cent.  In  Germany,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  census  of  1895  shows  an  almost  equal 
distribution  of  the  population  and  of  independent  workers  between 
town  and  country  (49"97   per  cent,  of  the  independent   workers 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     135 

and  49'83  per  cent,  of  the  whole  population  was  urban).  In 
other  words,  the  Russian  city,  still  more  than  the  German  city, 
is  greedy  for  flesh  and  blood,  for  human  health  and  strength  ; 
for  it  absorbs  more  particularly  the  independent  workers,  that 
is,  the  productive  forces  of  the  nation.  Daily  the  Russian  city 
confirms  its  supremacy  over  the  village  ;  for  the  supremacy  of 
modern  culture  over  the  ancient  forms  of  life,  the  victory  of  the 
new  mentality  over  the  old  forms  of  consciousness,  becomes  daily 
more  evident. 


Among  the  workers  of  Russia  the  trades-union  movement — or, 
as  it  is  called  by  the  Russians,  the  professional  movement — had  its 
rise  a  long  time  ago  ;  but  until  the  workers  commenced  the 
political  struggle  of  1905  the  syndicates  or  unions  of  the  Russian 
proletariat  were  feeble  and  of  insignificant  dimensions.  When  the 
political  and  revolutionary  movement  was  an  accomplished  fact, 
Tsarism  attempted  to  oppose  it  by  a  purely  economic  move- 
ment, a  "pacific"  and  "legal"  movement  placed  under  the 
protection  of  the  police.  The  notorious  chief  of  the  Detective 
Bureau  of  Moscow,  M.  Zubatov,  expended  infinite  pains  in 
founding  his  "  yellow,"  or  rather  "  black,"  organizations,  and  in 
arranging  for  their  direction  by  the  agents  of  his  bureau.  But  this 
attempt  met  with  no  success ;  while  the  Social  Democratic 
organizations,  in  spite  of  prosecution,  had  at  their  disposal  many 
devoted  and  militant  members.  These  militants  turned  up  at 
all  the  workers'  meetings  convoked  by  the  agents  of  Zubatov, 
and  there,  often  at  the  risk  of  their  liberty,  they  opposed  the 
Governmental  propaganda  with  complete  success.  Thanks  to 
this  action  of  the  Social  Democrats,  many  of  the  members  of  the 
*'  black "  unions  were  converted  and  absorbed  by  the  Social 
Democratic  party. 

At  last  the  Government  realized  that  the  money  spent  on  the 
organization  of"  black  "  syndicates  was  being  wasted,  and  resumed 
its    former   tactics    of  permanent  repression.     But  the    political 


136  MODERN  RUSSIA 

movement  of  the  workers  increased  with  the  speed  of  an  ava- 
lanche, and  after  a  time  it  began  to  manifest  itself  by  means 
of  processions  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  workers  in  St.  Peters- 
burg (in  January,  1905)  and  the  general  strike  of  October,  1905. 

The  Government  was  forced  to  give  way,  and  the  workers 
obtained  the  right  of  establishing  legal  organizations.  The 
Socialists,  wlio  were  always  in  the  van  of  the  Russian  prole- 
tariat, made  use  of  this  "  period  of  liberties"  (which  unfortunately 
was  not  of  long  duration)  by  developing  all  the  proletarian  organi- 
zations— party  organizations  as  well  as  trades  unions.  A  large 
number  of  unions  was  created,  unions  of  all  trades  and  professions. 
Their  committees  and  bureaux  began  to  publish  journals,  pamph- 
lets, and  books,  and  to  make  inquiries  into  the  present  situation 
of  the  workers  in   all  parts  of  Russia. 

According  to  the  officiiil  figures  given  by  a  Governmental 
journal  [Torgovo-Proni\chlennaija  Gazeta — the  "Gazette  of  In- 
dustry and  Commerce"),  on  the  ist  of  January,  1907,  there  were 
in  Russia  246,000  workers  organized  upon  an  economic  basis, 
while  on  the  1st  of  January,  1905,  their  number  was  certainly 
limited  to  a  few  thousands. 

But  the  more  plainly  the  Russian  workers  manifested  their 
desire  to  organize  themselves,  the  more  strongly  did  the  fears 
of  the  bourgeoisie  infect  the  Government  and  the  great  capitalists, 
who  were  soon  agreed  upon  taking  measures  to  suppress  and 
disperse  the  labour  organizations  of  the  country.  The  Govern- 
ment arrested  the  leaders  of  the  Socialist  and  syndicalist  '  move- 
ment, and  deported  them.  The  capitalists  resorted  to  "  lock-outs," 
and  turned  their  more  active  employees  adrift. 

On  the  ist  of  January,  1908,  the  trades  union  organizations 
of  the  Russian  workers  counted  only  130,000  members  in  place 
of  the  246,000  of  the  preceding  year.  But  prosecutions  con- 
tinued, and  grew  more  numerous  daily.  At  the  beginning  of 
April,   1908,  the  Social  Democratic  section  of  the  third  Duma 

'  "S3'ndicalisf  "  movement  here  means  the  trades  union  movement; 
the  special  kind  of  syndicalism  which  has  lately  been  evolved  in  France 
has  no  followers  in  Russia. 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RUSSIAN  CAPITAL     1^7 

presented  an  interpellation  on  the  subject  of  these  prosecutions, 
but  the  Chamber  refused  to  hear  it.  In  this  interpellation  we 
find  much  information  respecting  the  conflict  between  the  Govern- 
ment and  the  unions. 

Between  the  ist  of  June,  1907,  and  the  beginning  of  April, 
1908,  the  police  dissolved  81  workers' unions — 3  in  St.  Peters- 
burg, 12  in  Odessa,  4  in  Simferopol,  3  in  Vitebsk,  3  in  Minsk, 
6  in  Ekaterinoslavl,  8  in  Nijni-Novgorod,  7  in  Kazan,  i  in 
Kharkov,  i  in  Kiev,  i  in  Voroneje,  i  in  Dvinsk,  i  in  Borissov, 
and  25  in  Moscow  and  the  surrounding  districts.  We  must 
add  that  this  list  is  incomplete,  and  that  every  day  has  added 
to  it. 

The  organs  of  the  syndicalist  press  suffered  the  same  fate. 
During  the  same  brief  period  the  Government  suppressed  27 
syndicalist  journals  in  St.  Petersburg,  4  in  Moscow,  3  in  Odessa, 
2  in  Kharkov,  2  in  Warsaw,  i  in  Ekaterinoslavl,  and  i  in  Revel, 
or  in  all  41;  but  still  the  police  were  not  content,  and  prosecu- 
tions still  continued. 

At  the  present  moment  there  are  very  few  trades  unions  and 
syndicalist  journals  which  have  been  spared  by  Tsarism.  Those 
organizations  which  do  still  exist  are  exposed  to  the  violence  of 
Governmental  despotism.  The  police  conduct  searches  almost 
daily  in  the  offices  of  such  unions  or  journals  ;  they  arrest  their 
leaders,  presidents,  and  secretaries,  and  imprison  them  at  will. 
They  suppress  their  strike  funds  and  confiscate  them.  The  police 
department  has  ordered  the  local  authorities  to  authorize  the 
foundation  of  a  syndicate  only  on  the  condition  that  it  has  no 
relations  with  the  Socialist  party.  The  Government  also  forbids 
the  trades  unions  of  Russia  to  proceed  to  mutual  or  national 
federation  or  unification. 

Such  are  the  conditions  with  which  the  working-class  organi- 
zations of  Russia  have  now  to  contend. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  many  Russian  Socialists  believe  that  it 
would  be  better  once  more  to  abandon  legal  organization,  and 
to  give  all  their  attention  to  secret  and  "  subterranean  "  clubs  and 
societies. 


CHAPTER   IV 

RURAL    ECONOMY   AND   THE   AGRARIAN   QUESTION 

I.  Abolition  of  serfdom  in  Russia  (1861).  II.  Mobilization  of  landed 
property  and  its  present  distribution  (according  to  the  data  for 
1905).  III.  Economic  and  social  life  of  the  Russian  peasants. 
IV.  The  rural  commune  and  its  decay. 


Let  us  now  leave  the  noisy  town,  the  industrial  centres,  the  new 
world  of  Russian  capitalism,  where  we  find  fragments  ot  Europe 
and  even  of  America,  and  take  a  glance  at  the  Russian  country- 
side, the  true  Russia  of  the  bygone  days,  which  lives,  or  rather  is 
dying,  side  by  side  with  the  new  and  ever  growing  Russia. 

To  comprehend  the  life  of  the  Russian  country-side,  and  the 
agrarian  question,  the  principal  centre  of  that  life,  we  must  go 
back  to  the  abolition  of  serfdom  (19th  February,  1861). 

Three  weeks  before  the  publication  of  the  "  manifesto  of  the 
19th  of  February,"  its  signatory,  Alexander  II,  declared  during 
a  session  of  the  Council  of  Empire  (25th  January,  1861)  : 

"  Serfdom  was  instituted  by  absolute  power.  Only  absolute 
power  can  destroy  it  ;  and  to  do  so  is  my  will." 

The  Liberals  of  this  period  were  also  claiming  the  honour 
of  delivering  the  peasants,  affirming  that  the  ideas  of  Liberalism 
which  had  taken  root  in  the  midst  of  Russian  society  had  led  the 
latter  to  recognize  the  suppression  of  serfdom  as  indispensable. 

This  is  an  example  which  shows  us  how  the  historic  reality  is 

distorted  in  passing  through  the  prism  of  human  ideology.     The 

138 


RURAL  ECONOMY  139 

absolute  monarch  represented  this  reality  as  a  manifestation  of  his 
supreme  power  and  his  free-will,  and  the  Liberal  ideologues 
regarded  it  as  a  manifestation  of  another  absolutism,  that  of  the 
ideas  which  were  supposed  to  determine  the  course  of  humanity. 
But  we  know  now  that  neither  was  right ;  serfdom,  far  from 
being  the  "  product  "  of  a  "  will  "  or  an  "  idea,"  was  the  result  of 
the  necessities  of  the  economic  evolution  of  the  period,  and  its 
fall  was  due  to  profound  transformations  of  the  material  and 
economic  basis  of  the  life  of  the  Russian  people,  on  which  the 
juridical  and  legislative  forms  of  serfdom  itself  had   been  built. 

The  progress  and  the  results  of  the  reform  of  1861  were 
assuredly  determined  by  their  co-ordination  with  the  social  forces 
of  the  moment.  The  Crimean  War  contributed  to  the  realiza- 
tion of  the  reform  by  showing  that  it  was  impossible  for  a  State 
reposing  on  serfdom  to  resist  more  civilized  and  freer  nations. 
"  The  fear  with  which  the  Government  and  the  nobles  regarded 
the  proclamation  of  liberty,  once  the  enemy  was  in  Russia, 
hastened  the  abolition  of  serfdom,"  said  one  of  the  authors  of 
the  reform.  But  when  the  danger  had  passed  the  bureaucracy 
and  the  nobles  sought  to  frustrate  the  reform,  to  give  it  an 
illusory  character.  The  peasants,  too  ignorant  to  oppose  a 
systematic  political  activity,  were  only  capable  of  instinctive 
revolts,  revolts  without  influence  on  the  course  of  the  reform, 
which  was  promulgated  without  their  assistance.  The  elabora- 
tion of  the  reform  was  effected  entirely  in  the  "  Governmental 
committees "  and  the  "  drafting  commissions,"  on  which  sat 
none  but  bureaucrats  and  nobles.  The  reform  of  186 1  was 
drafted  with  an  eye  to  the  interests  of  the  nobility,  not  those 
of  the  peasantry. 

The  interest  of  the  noble  and  landowner  demanded  that  the 
liberated  serfs  should  be  forced  to  labour  on  the  seigneurial  estate. 
Formerly  the  law  forced  them  to  provide  the  master  with  the 
labour  required  ;  now  some  other  means  had  to  be  sought  of 
obtaining  the  same  thing.  A  way  was  found.  At  the  moment 
of  "  liberation  "  each  peasant  was  deprived  of  a  large  part  of  the 
land  which   he  had  enjoyed   previous  to  the    19th  of  February, 


I40  MODERN  RUSSIA 

1861.  Of  the  7,873,200  acres  of  peasant  lands  1,420,740  acres 
were  "detached,"  or  18  per  cent.  In  certain  provinces  the 
percentage  of  these  "detachments"  was  much  higher  than  this 
average  :  in  the  Government  of  Samara  it  was  44  per  cent,  ; 
in  that  of  Saratov,  41  per  cent.  ;  in  those  of  Poltava  and 
Ekaterinoslavl,  40  per  cent.  ;  in  that  of  Kazan,  32  per  cent.  ; 
in  the  Governments  of  Kharkov  and  Simbirsk  it  was  31  per 
cent.  ;  in  that  of  Penza,  28  per  cent.  ;  in  that  of  Tauris, 
27  percent.;  in  those  of  Tchernigov  and  Veronejc,  25  percent.; 
in  that  of  Tambov,  24  per  cent.,  etc. 

This  partial  deprivation  forced  the  peasant  to  rent  fields  belong- 
ing to  some  landowner,  usually  his  former  master.  Too  poor  to 
pay  the  rent  in  moni\\  he  paid  it  in  k'lnd^  in  bartchina^  that  is  to 
say,  in  labour^  as  during  the  age  of  serfdom.  The  system  of 
otrabotki  [corvies\  which  is  still  extant  in  the  Russian  country- 
side, is  a  direct  reminiscence  of  serfdom.  A  book  written  by  an 
official  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  contains  a  description  of 
the  economic  relations  based  upon  the  otriezki  and  the  otrabotki 
(the  volume  was  published  by  the  State  in  1892). 

"In  the  south  of  the  district  of  Yeletz  (Government  of  Orel)," 
writes  M.  Korolenko,  "  the  large  estates  are  cultivated  to  a 
small  extent  by  labourers  engaged  bv  the  year,  and  to  a  very 
large  extent  by  peasants  who  thereby  pay  their  rent.  The 
ex-serfs  still  cultivate  the  soil  for  their  former  masters,  and  their 
villages  are  still  the  bartchiny  of  this  or  that  estate." 

In  another  volume,  published  in  1898,  and  signed  by  a  num- 
ber of  prominent  economists,  we  read  that  the  bartchina  and 
the  system  based  upon  it  belong  partly  to  the  economy  of  the 
period  of  serfdom,  and  that  they  are  preponderant  in  Central 
Russia  and  the  region  of  the  Volga — namely,  in  seventeen 
Governments. 

This  being  so,  the  liberation  of  the  peasants  was  not  followed 
by  an  actual  brcaking-up  of  feudal  properties,  of  rural  feudalism, 
and  the  course  of  agrarian  evolution  assumed  a  character  quite 
unlike  its  course  in  Germany  when  the  serfs  of  the  latter 
country  were  liberated.     (Readers  who  wish  to  compare  the  two 


RURAL   ECONOMY  141 

cases  should  read  M.  Henri  Lichtenberger's  U Allemagne  moderne^ 
ch.  iii.,  pp.  41-2.) 

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  reform    of    1861,  which  was 
anything  but  favourable  to  the  economic  progress  of  the  country, 
was  the    system  of   "  redemption "   organized    by  the    Govern- 
ment.    The    State    assumed  the  duty  of  paying  for    the  lands 
alienated  in  favour  of  the   peasants,  on  condition  that  the  latter 
returned  the  sum  expended   in  several   instalments  or   vykoupnie 
plateji.     According   to   the  declarations  of  the  Government,  the 
peasant  was  to  redeem  only  land  ;   the  rights  of   the  seigneur  over 
the  serf  and  the  right  o{  corvee  ihonXA  have  been  liquidated  without 
the  payment  of  ransom.     But  in  reality  the  peasant  had  to  redeem 
both  his  person  and  his  labour,  although  the  process  was  a  masked 
one.     The  valuation   of  the   land  was  artificial.     The  lands  in 
question  were  worth  no  more  than  ^^68, 900,000  ;  but  ^92,230,000 
was  demanded   for  them,   or  a  sum  ^^23,330, 000   in   excess   of 
their  market  value.     This  ^^23,330,000  was  not  destined,  as  was 
pretended,  to  compensate  the  landowners  :  it  served  to  redeem  the 
labour  and  the  person  of  the  peasant.     A  contemporary  economist 
(V.   A.  Lossitzky,    The   Operation  of  Redemptioti^  St.  Petersburg, 
1906),  having  analysed   the    operation  of  redemption  in    detail, 
categorically  declared  :  "  The  peasant   population  was  forced   to 
redeem  not  only  the  soil,  but  also  its  own  personality  ;   it  had  to 
pay   the   price  of  its    '  souls '  "  (in    Russia  serfs  were  known   as 
"souls").       This  extra  ^23,330,000   weighed   heavily  on    the 
budget  of  the  "liberated  "  peasantry  and  hampered  the  organiza- 
tion of  their  economy. 

And  if  the  nobles  gained  by  this  process,  so  did  the  Treasury. 
The  Government  made  the  peasants  bear  the  working  expenses  of 
the  "  redemption"  scheme.  Moreover,  having  arranged  for  the 
expiration  of  the  repayments  within  fifty  years,  the  State  received 
from  the  mujlk  a  considerable  sum  in  interest  and  fines  for  delayed 
payments.  By  the  3rd  of  November,  1905,  when  the  payments 
ceased,  the  peasants  had  paid  more  than  £  1 39,000,000  instead  of  the 
nominal  ^^92, 230,000.  Thus  an  enormous  financial  burden  was 
laid  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  peasant  immediately  after  his  libera- 
tion, destroying  his  economic  independence. 


142  MODERN  RUSSIA 

His  social  independence  was  no  less  compromised.  The  mani- 
festo of  1 86 1  forbade  landowners  to  treat  their  peasants  as  cattle, 
and  permitted  peasants  to  marry  without  the  authorization  of  the 
baritie^  to  acquire  real  or  personal  estate,  to  plead  before  the  Courts, 
and  to  present  petitions  to  the  administrative  institutions.  (Pre- 
viously all  these  things  had  been  rigorously  prohibited.)  But  the 
peasants,  even  after  the  edict  of  "liberation,"  were  still  partly 
dependent  on  the  nobles  and  could  not  attain  civic  equality. 
The  peasant  commune  was  still  subject  to  the  "  arbiter  of  peace  " 
chosen  by  the  nobility,  and  the  marshal  of  the  nobility  had  as  much 
influence  as  ever  with  the  local  administration.  Thus  the 
feudal  relations  of  peasant  and  landowner  were  not  entirely 
dissolved,  even  at  the  moment  of  abolition.  The  reaction  and 
the  counter-reforms  of  Alexander  III  presently  restored  in  part 
those  bonds  which  the  abolition  of  serfdom  had  loosened  or 
destroyed. 

II 

During  the  fifty  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  liberation  of 
the  serfs,  the  Russian  has  sensibly  evolved.  If  we  observe  the 
changes  that  have  come  about  during  this  period,  we  are  first  of 
all  struck  by  the  extreme  mobility  of  landed  property,  above  all 
of  that  of  the  nobility. 

Before  the  reform  of  1861  the  debt  attached  to  the  real  estate 
of  the  nobility  was  very  considerable — j^ 34,000,000.  The  mani- 
festo of  1861  which  "liberated  "  the  serfs  also  liberated  the  nobles 
from  this  debt,  which  was  transferred  to  the  peasants,  who  can- 
celled it  by  "redemptive  payments"  in  addition  to  the  ^60,000,000 
paid  to  the  nobles  for  the  land.  In  spite  of  this  the  nobles  were 
unable  to  organize  a  new  economic  system,  and  each  year  marked 
an  increasing  loss  of  their  wealth  in  land. 

For  ten  years  after  the  liberation  of  the  peasants  the  nobles  lost 
annually  more  than  1,620,000  acres  of  land,  and  during  the  last 
ten  years  of  the  nineteenth  century  this  annual  loss  had  increased 
to  2,160,000  acres.      Between  1863  and  1892  the  nobles  sold  land 


RURAL   ECONOMY  I43 

to  the  value  of  more  than  ^100,000,000.  Yet  the  Russian 
Government  employed  every  effort  to  maintain  the  estates  of  the 
nobles.  With  this  object  it  organized  the  "  Nobles'  Land  Bank" 
and  granted  the  nobles  numerous  subsidies,  etc. 

This  prolonged  crisis,  affecting  the  real  estate  of  the  nobles,  v^^as 
perceptibly  related  to  American  competition  and  the  depression  of 
the  corn  market  provoked  by  that  competition.  But  the  decline 
of  the  territorial  v^^ealth  of  the  nobility  is  to  be  explained  more 
particularly  by  the  economic  incapacity  of  the  latter.  The  system 
of  "free  enterprise"  which  replaced  the  old  forms  of  economy  was 
completely  alien  to  the  feudal  mentality  of  the  noble  landlord. 
Then  the  noble  seignur  commenced  to  "eat"  the  "redemption 
payments,"  and  finally  attacked  the  estate  itself  ^  Only  in  the 
provinces  of  the  West,  where  the  rural  economy  had  long  assumed 
a  capitalistic  character,  and  where  the  feudal  baron  had  succeeded 
in  transforming  himself  into  an  agriculturalist,  was  the  territorial 
wealth  of  the  nobility  entirely  preserved  ;  in  other  regions  it 
was  rapidly  split  up.  The  principal  heirs  of  the  noble  were 
on  the  one  hand  the  merchant  and  capitalist,  and  on  the  other 
the  wealthy  peasant,  of  the  type  the  Germans  know  as  the  Gross- 
bauer. 

The  rich  peasants  constituted  and  constitute  only  a  very  small 
minority  of  the  rural  population  of  Russia.  The  majority  of 
Russian  peasants  live  in  miserable  poverty.  Their  pauperism  is 
becoming  more  and  more  acute,  thanks  to  the  rapid  increase 
of  the  population.  In  1861  the  number  of  peasants  was  50 
millions,  and  in  1897  it  was  85  millions,  an  increase  of  70 
per  cent.  But  this  increase  of  the  peasant  population  was  not 
balanced  by  an  extension  of  its  lands.    For  this  reason  the  average 

•  Between  the  years  1867  and  1897  the  nobles  threw  76,950,000 
acres  upon  the  market,  and  between  1897  and  1907  anotlier  19,000,000, 
At  the  end  of  1903,  181,000  nobles'  estates  were  mortgaged,  com- 
prising 136,350,000  acres  of  land.  The  amount  of  the  mortgages  was 
;£235,ooo,ooo,  of  which  only  ^^22 1,000,000  was  discharged.  This  in- 
debtedness was  especially  observable  in  the  regions  of  humus  forming 
the  granary  of  Russia. 


144  MODERN  RUSSIA 

dimensions  of  the  peasants'  holdings,  o\  nadyels^  had  considerably 
diminished  since  the  year  i860. 

In  i860  for  each  "soul"  of  masculine  sex  the  average  area 
of  land  was  4*83  desiatins,  or  13  acres;  in  1880  3*82  desiatins^ 
or  iO"3  acres  ;  in  1900  only  3*05  desiatins^  or  8*i  acres,  a 
decrease  of  37   per  cent. 

The  "land-famine"  of  the  Russian  peasant  appears  in  par- 
ticularly glaring  colours  if  we  contrast  it  with  the  landed  wealth 
of  other  classes.  For  this  comparison  we  shall  utilize  the  official 
figures  for  the  year  1905,  published  by  the  Central  Statistical 
Committee  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.  These  figures  apply 
to  50  provinces  of  European  Russia  (excluding  Finland,  Poland, 
and  the  Caucasus). 

The  territorial  wealth  of  the  State  amounts  to  373  million 
acres.  Eighteen  million  acres  constitute  the  udyeh  of  the  Imperial 
Family.  To  the  churches  belong  5,130,000  acres;  to  the 
monasteries,  2,160,000  ;  to  the  cities,  5,670,000  ;  to  various 
institutions,   11,070,000. 

To  private  persons  (excepting  peasants)  belong  234.,590,000 
acres,  of  which  42,660,000  are  the  property  of  companies  and 
societies,  while  the  remaining  191,930,000  are  divided  as  follows 
among  individual  proprietors  :  7,640,000  are  held  in  small 
properties  of  less  than  54  acres  each  ;  8,910,000  in  holdings 
of  54  to  135  acres;  and  2,151,800  is  in  large  estates  of  more 
than  135  acres  each.  This  last  category  comprises  138,000 
owners,  of  whom  the  majority  are  nobles.  Each  landowner  of 
this  category  therefore  possesses  an  average  of  79,400,000  -7- 
138,000  =  575  des'iatinSj  or   1,552  acres. 

In  the  possession  of  peasants  are  483,950,000  acres,  which  are 
divided  into  12,200,000  dvors  [dvor  meaning  court);  each  of 
these  dvors  forms  not  only  one  family,  but  constitutes  an  economic 
unit  consisting  often  of  several  related  families.  Each  dvor  should 
therefore  own  30*5  acres,  but  in  reality  it  often  possesses  a  much 
smaller  nadyel:  ^  2,8oo,COO  dvors  own  on  an  average  5*4  acres  ; 

'  From  nadyelaf,  to  allot.     The  nadyel  is  the  parcel  of  land  granted 
to  the  dvor  upon  the  abolition  of  serfdom. 


RURAL   ECONOMY  145 

3,300,000,  1 6-2  acres  ;  4,800,000,  35  acres  ;  1,100,000,  89  acres  ; 
200,000,  197  acres.  Thus  the  majority  of  the  dvors  possess 
less  than  the  normal  30*5  acres.  This  majority  includes  6,100,000 
owners  of '^  dwarf"  holdings,  which  form  a  striking  contrast  to 
the  estates  of  the  large  proprietors,  each  of  whom  possesses,  on 
an  average,  1,552  acres.  It  is  not  astonishing  that  the  idea  of 
increasing  the  peasants'  holdings  at  the  expense  of  the  estates 
of  the  nobles  should  under  one  shape  or  another  have  impressed 
itself,  throughout  the  greater  portion  of  Russian  society,  upon 
the  theorists  and  the  politicians  of  the  country. 

The  reader  may  ask  :  Whv  increase  the  peasants'  holdings  at 
the  expense  of  the  landowners  instead  of  the  State,  which  owns 
373  million  acres  ?  The  answer  is  that  of  these  373  million 
acres  only  19,710,000  are  suitable  for  agriculture  :  the  rest 
consists  of  wooded  areas,  unsuited  to  cultivation,  stretching  more 
especially  to  the  extreme  north,  in  the  Governments  of 
Archangel,  Olonetz,  and  Vologda. 

The  reader  may  again  demand  :   What  is  the  scheme  of  terri- 
torial  aggrandizement  demanded   in  favour   of  the   peasant,  and 
how    far    would    it    remedv    his    lack    of  land  ?      We    may    say 
approximately  that  if  the  214  million  acres  of  the  133,000  large 
landowners    were    taken,    leaving    to    each    135    acres,    and    the 
rest    were  distributed  among   the  peasants,    the  propertv    of  the 
latter    would    be    increased    by   194    million  acres.       If  we  add 
the   19,710,000  acres  of  cultivable  soil   belonging  to  the  State, 
the    21,330,000    acres    of    ndyeh^    and    the    7,290,000    acres    in 
possession   of   the  churches  and    monasteries,  we  should   obtain 
almost   243  million  acres.     The   division   of   these    243    million 
acres  among  the  peasants  would  enable  us  to  increase  the  holdings 
of  the  poorest  so  as  to  obtain  a  minimum  of  43*2  acres  per  dvQ7'. 
Such  a  measure  would  at  one  blow  extricate  the  peasant  from  his 
condition  of  poverty  and  ignorance,  improve  his  economy,  and 
increase  his  powers  of  production  and   consumption.     It  would 
create  a  solid  internal  market  and  afford  a  durable  foundation  for 
the  development  not  only  of  rural  economy,  but  also  of  industry. 
We  must  remark  that  the  transference  to  the  peasants  of  the 

10 


146  MODERN  RUSSIA 

lands  of  the  large  landowners  would  in  no  wise  menace  Russian 
agriculture.  If  the  estates  of  these  proprietors  were  now  ex- 
ploited bv  a  rational  economy  of  a  capitalistic  tvpc,  then  the 
cutting-up  of  these  estates  would  hamper  the  development  of 
technical  methods  and  lower  the  level  of  agriculture.  But  the 
present  system  adopted  by  the  majority  of  proprietors  is  parasitic 
in  form,  and  the  property  of  the  noble,  having  retained  a  semi- 
feudal  character,  appears  in  the  light  of  an  obstacle  to  the 
transition  from  the  old  forms  of  economic  activity  to  others  more 
highly  perfected  and  more  modern.  The  clearing  up  of  the 
remains  of  feudalism  would  destroy  the  "famine  rents,"  the 
system  of  corvees  {otrabotki\  and  would  give  an  impulse  to  the 
initiative  and  energy  of  the  peasant. 

Ill 

In  our  days  the  economic  and  social  life  of  the  Russian  village 
is  more  than  melancholy.  It  is  not  life  :  it  is  the  slow  death 
of  creatures  incessantly  hungry,  whose  starvation  can  only  be 
compared  with  that  of  the  more  poverty-stricken  masses  of  the 
East — of  Persia,   India,  and   China. 

We  obtain  an  idea  of  the  low  degree  of  intensiveness  of  Russian 
agriculture  by  comparing  the  Russian  wheat  crop  with  that  of 
other  countries.  An  acre  sown  with  wheat  yields  on  an 
average  : 

Bushels. 

In  Great  Britain  ...         ...  ...         ...         ...  30"8 

In  Ciermany          i9'3 

In  France...         ...         ...  ...         ...         ...  i7"o 

In  Russia  ...         ...         ...  ...         ...         ...  7*7 

Moreover,  the  harvest  in  Russia  is  subject  to  variations  unknown 
in  other  European  countries.  Thanks  to  the  faulty  system  of 
manuring  the  fields,  the  absence  of  artificial  irrigation,  and  the 
primitive  implements  employed,  the  peasant's  economy  is  com- 
pletely dependent  upon  atmospheric  conditions.  Every  unex- 
pected natural  phenomenoji  destroys  the  labour  of  an  enormous 
number  of  workers,  distributed  over  a  vast  area.     We  may  say 


RURAL  ECONOMY  147 

that  that  portion  of  the  human  species  which  is  formed  by  the 
Russian  peasants  is  even  to-day  absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  the 
forces  of  nature,  and  that  far  from  being  the  master  of  these 
forces  it  is  their  pitiable  slave. 

This  slavery  costs  the  peasants  dear  ;  its  price  is  paid  in  vast 
numbers  of  human  lives.  The  mortality  in  Russia  is  twice  as 
high  as  in  Norway  and  Sweden,  nearly  twice  as  high  as  in  the 
British  Isles,  and  50  per  cent,  higher  than  in  France. 

"The  Fijian  Archipelago  alone,"  writes  a  Russian  economist, 
"surpasses  Russia  in  its  mortality."  Moreover,  the  death-rate 
in  Russia,  instead  of  diminishing,  is  continually  increasing.  At 
the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  it  was  20  per  1,000.  At 
the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  this  figure  had  risen  to  35, 
and  in  some  parts  to  50.  The  years  of  dearth  or  famine  kill 
off  almost  incredible  numbers.  Between  1891  and  1892  a  large 
number  of  entire  villages  were  literally  extinguished. 

The  death-rate  is  especially  high  among  children.  In  1890, 
in  a  canton  of  the  Government  of  Pskov  (where  the  cholera  had 
not  been  severe),  in  one  year,  a  year  not  remarkable  for  any 
natural  disaster,  of  each  thousand  of  newly-born  children  aged 
less  than  one  year  829  (82'9  per  cent.)  died.  More,  we  learn 
that  "  every  group  of  four  of  these  little  corpses  contained  one 
which  had  been  eaten  by  worms  and  insects  while  still  living.''^ 
(See  Appeal  of  the  Union  for  the  Organization  of  the  Struggle  against 
Infant  Mortality  in  Russia.) 

This  great  mortality  is  indissolubly  connected  with  the  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  peasants'  holdings.  This  may  be  judged  from  these 
figures : 

At  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century,  in  the  districts  of 
Korotoyaksk,  Zadonsk,  and  Nijnedievitzk,  in  the  Government 
of  Voroneje,  the  average  mortality  was  as  follows  : 

Per  1,003. 

Among  peasants  without  land         25 "o 

Among  those  owning  up  to  I3"5  acres       33*0 

„  „  „        from  13-5  to  40-5  acres      ...  29*8 

„  „  „        from  40-5  to  67-5  acres      ...  26"6 

„  „     _     „        more  than  67-5  acres         ...  23-8 


148  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  author  from  whom  we  borrow  these  figures  remarks: 
"  The  peasants  without  land  break  the  harmony  of  the  decreasing 
scries  of  figures.  7  his  phenomenon  is  explained  thus  :  these 
peasants  have  more  leisure  to  devote  to  some  calling  whose 
profits  lessen   mortality." 

The  peasants  are  worse  than  ill  nourished.  Here  is  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  diet  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Government  of  Kieltzy  : 

"  Potatoes  are  their  customary  food.  Sometimes  they  add  to 
this  a  little  thin  soup  or  gruel  of  black  rye  boiled  in  water,  or  a 
little  cabbage.  Meat  is  eaten  only  on  the  greater  festivals.  As 
for  bread,  it  is  an  adjunct  of  the  above  victuals,  but  neither  a  daily 
nor  a  plentiful  adjunct.  In  early  spring,  when  the  store  of 
potatoes  and  of  money  is  exhausted,  the  poorest  of  the  peasants 
dig  up  the  potatoes  of  the  previous  year.  Almost  rotten,  having 
been  left  all  winter  in  the  earth,  they  are  dried,  crushed,  and 
made  into  a  tasteless  '  bread  '  which  hardens  very  rapidly."  (See 
M.  Bernatzky,  About  the  Agrarian  Question^  St.  Petersburg, 
1906.) 

Thus  millions  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Russian  country-side  arc 
kept  alive.  Even  in  the  wealthier  regions  the  material  conditions 
ot  the  peasant's  life  are  extremely  bad.  For  example,  here 
is  a  description  of  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  villages  of  the 
Government  of  Yaroslavl,  whose  inhabitants  are  "  far  wealthier 
and  more  cultivated  than  their  neighbours."  First,  let  us  con- 
sider the  dimensions  of  the  Ishas  of  these  peasants.  A  large 
hba^  belonging  to  one  of  the  wealthier  peasants,  measures 
79  to  94  cubic  arshins  or  950  to  1,150  cubic  feet  :  one  of 
average  size  contains  from  500  to  580  cubic  feet,  and  a  poor 
isba  only  300  to  380  cubic  feet.  "  The  smaller  isbas  are 
distinguished  especially  by  their  narrowness."  Ventilation  is 
unknown  :  the  air  is  made  even  more  impure  by  the  admission 
of  a  calf  or  a  lamb  or  fowls.  "  In  the  isba  twilight  usually 
reigns.  The  floor  is  swept  only  on  great  ecclesiastical  feast-days. 
There  are  no  beds,  no  bed-linen.  The  family  lie  on  benches,  on 
the  stove,  or  in  a  loft,  covering  themselves  with  their  cloaks." 

The  food  of  the  peasant  in  the  Government  of  Yaroslavl  has 


RURAL  ECONOMY  149 

grown  worse  than  ever  during  the  last  few  years.  "  While 
formerly  he  ate  meat  almost  every  Sunday,  to-day  he  sees  it  on 
the  table  only  a  few  times  a  year.  .  .  .  Even  the  more  comfort- 
ably situated  live  chiefly  on  ^  poklebka  of  potatoes  (a  kind  of  soup) 
or  a  cabbage  soup  without  meat,  known  as  shtchi." 

Tea,  which  has  become  an  article  "  of  the  first  necessity,"  is 
nothing  but  "  boiled  water  slightly  coloured."  In  general  "the 
food  of  the  peasant  constitutes  an  absolute  minimum.  Bad 
seasons,  years  of  dearth,  still  further  reduce  this  minimum,  so  that 
the  peasant's  body,  deteriorated  by  starvation,  is  a  most  favourable 
soil  for  epidemics." 

Permanent  poverty  always  means  physical  degeneration.  This 
is  clear  when  we  consider  the  statistics  of  the  young  men  not 
admitted  to  military  service.  In  fifty  Governments  of  European 
Russia  the  following  numbers  were  discharged  annually  on 
account  of  physical  defects  :  between  1874  and  1883,  407,000, 
or  6*4  per  cent.  ;  between  1884  and  1893,  534,000,  or  7*7  per 
cent.  ;  between  1894  and  1901,  702,000,  or  I0'3  per  cent. 

To  this,  add  the  ravages  of  alcoholism.  In  1904,  according  to 
the  data  of  the  Ministry  of  Finances,  the  State,  which  holds  the 
monopoly  of  alcohol,  sold  more  than  70  millions  of  vedros  of  this 
product  of  "prime  necessity"  (a  vedy-o  ■=.  11  pints).  In  191 1 
these  70  million  vedros  had  increased  to  192  millions.  The  spread 
of  alcoholism  among  a  people  so  miserably  poor,  in  a  social 
atmosphere  so  degraded,  will  reduce  the  population  to  a  state  of 
psychical  degeneration.  At  the  Congress  of  Russian  Physicians 
(1910),  Dr.  Petrovsky,  basing  his  observations  upon  published 
statistics,  proved  that  neurasthenia  is  more  prevalent  among  the 
masses  of  the  people  than  in  any  other  country. 

Moreover,  neurasthenics  are  far  more  numerous  in  the  villages 
than  in  the  towns.  Thus,  rural  "  tranquillity  "  and  "  peace  " 
do  not  save  the  Russian  peasant  from  physical  and  mental 
degeneration. 

The  condition  of  the  village  becomes  worse  every  year. 
According  to  a  member  of  the  Council  of  Empire,  M.  Rotvand, 
"  in  1909  work  was  lacking  in  the  country  districts  for  7  millions 


ISO  MODERN  RUSSIA 

of  workers  of  both  sexes,  who   had   to   support    17    millions  of 
members  of  their  families." 


IV 


At  one  time,  not  yet  remote,  many  publicists,  economists, 
and  politicians  believed  that  the  existence  of  the  rural  commune 
(the  w/r)  was  a  peculiarity  of  Russian  life,  and  that  this  commune 
was  destined  to  give  the  economic  and  social  development  of 
Russia  a  different  direction  to  that  adopted  by  bourgeois  Europe. 
The  communistic  spirit  of  the  Russian  rmijik  would,  they 
thought,  save  Russia  from  the  social  conflicts  of  the  capitalist 
system,  from  the  "plague  of  the  proletariat." 

Not  only  the  Russians  were  of  this  opinion.  A  Belgian, 
M.  de  Lavelaye,  having  studied  the  question,  expressed  the 
following  opinion  :  "This  rural  communism  prevents  the 
inequality  of  conditions  from  becoming  extreme  and  offers  serious 
guarantees  of  social  tranquillity.  So  long  as  the  land  is  in  the 
possession  of  the  commune  it  cannot  be  seized  by  a  few  powerful 
families.  On  the  other  hand,  the  periodical  allotment  of  the  soil 
prevents  the  formation  of  a  proletariat,  since  it  assures  every  one 
of  an  inalienable  portion  of  the  common  fund  "  (M.  de  Lavelaye, 
De  la  propriete  et  de  ses  formes  primitives^  cited  from  M.  Kovalev- 
slcy's  Regif?ie  economique  de  la  Russie^  Paris,  1898). 

Opinions  generally  held  are  often  false  ;  and  this  opinion  con- 
cerning the  rural  commune  of  Russia  is  certainly  false. 

It  is  true  that  the  communal  system  is  still  in  vogue  in  Russia. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  80  per  cent,  of  the 
peasants'  land  belonged  to  the  communes.  But  the  communal 
system  is  far  from  being  an  exceptional  privilege  peculiar  to 
Russia,  so  that  those  ingenuous  and  romantic  persons  who  contrast 
the  "holy  communism"  of  the  Russian  ?nujik  with  the  "pagan 
individualism"  of  the  European  bourgeois  ^  are  absurdly  mistaken. 

'  Such  an  antithesis  was  first  suggested  by  the  works  of  the  so-called 
Slavophiles  (about  1850).  The  Slavophiles  transformed  the  ideas  of 
the  German  romantic  philosophy  into  a  patriotic  Russian  romanticism 


RURAL   ECONOMY  151 

The  commune  existed  in  Western  Europe  when  that  form  of 
landed  property  corresponded  with  the  level  of  economic  develop- 
ment. I  cannot  linger  here  over  so  general  an  aspect  of  the 
economic  theory  as  the  problem  of  the  correlation  between  the 
communal  form  of  landowning  and  the  system  of  agriculture. 
But,  I  repeat,  the  national,  racial,  psychic  element  plays  no 
part  in  this  question  of  communism.  If  you  open  M.  Henri 
Lichtenberger's  Allemagne  jiioderne  you  will  there  find  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  communal  relations  of  the  German  country-side,  a 
description  which  is  perfectly  appropriate  to  the  Russian  system. 
One  has  only  to  alter  the  dates  and  the  terminology.  As  matters 
were  formerly  in  Germany,  so  they  are  in  Russia  to-day  :  "  The 
peasant  village  still  constitutes  a  sort  of  collectivity.  To  each 
peasant  or  member  of  the  collectivity  is  allotted  a  nadyel  (in 
Germany  eine  Hufe\  or  right  of  participation  in  the  general 
possessions  of  the  village,  cultivated  lands,  rivers  and  lakes,  roads, 
pastures,  and  forests.  In  virtue  of  this  principle  every  member  of 
the  association  should  find  himself  in  possession  of  a  holding 
sufficient  in  size  to  afford  him  employment  and  to  yield  the 
products  necessary  to  the  subsistence  of  himself  and  his  family. 
The  nadyel  comprises:  a  farm  with  its  dependencies,  which  is  the 
private  property  of  the  peasant  ;  a  right  of  using  the  unshared 
portion  of  the  communal  domain  ;  and  lastly,  a  certain  portion  of 
cultivable  land.  But  this  cultivable  land  is  never  held  by  a  single 
tenant  ;  the  total  cultivable  area  is  divided  into  a  certain  number 
of  sections — say  30  to  40 — of  land  whose  quality  is  more  or  less 
equivalent,  and  in  each  of  these  sections  each  family  receives  a 
polossa  (in  Germany,  Morgen  or  jfoch).  Under  these  conditions, 
notwithstanding  such   modifications  as  have  been  introduced,  the 

of  a  highly  original  kind.  The  leader  of  this  school,  Constantin 
Axakov,  wrote  :  "  In  Europe  the  principle  of  personality  is  supreme  ; 
with  us,  the  communal  principle.  Europe  is  a  pagan,  Russia  a  holy 
Christian.  In  the  West  reigns  apparent  liberty,  a  liberty  like  that  of  a 
wild  animal  in  the  desert.  The  true  liberty  is  found  among  us,  in  the 
East." 

These  words  were  written  during  the  period  of  serfdom,  under  the 
reactionary  reign  of  Nicolas  I. 


152  MODERN  RUSSIA 

village  land  is  still  divided  into  hundreds  and  sometimes  thousands 
ot  parcels,  and  each  peasant  ov\^ns  a  large  number  of  such  parcels, 
scattered  over  the  face  of  the  village  domain.  This  method  of 
division  [tcherezpolossitza^  or  in  Germany,  Gemenge/age)  necessarily 
leads  to  collective  exploitation.  As  all  these  parcels  are  adjacent 
and  there  are  no  paths  leading  to  them  which  would  enable  the 
owner  to  reach  them  without  passing  over  his  neighbours'  fields, 
the  whole  area  is  cultivated  according  to  a  plan  laid  down  by  the 
elders  of  the  village.  By  virtue  of  the  prinuditelny  sevooborot 
(literally  "  obligatory  rotation,"  German  Flurxwang)  each  peasant 
is  required  to  cultivate  a  given  crop  on  a  given  parcel  of  land,  and 
to  proceed,  from  sowing  to  harvest,  according  to  fixed  dates.  In 
a  word,  his  rights  as  owner  of  the  soil  he  cultivates  are  limited  by 
a  series  of  strict  obligations,  which  prevent  him  from  arranging 
the  exploitation  of  his  property  as  he  likes,  and  force  him  on 
many  points  to  obey  the  decisions  of  the  collectivity." 

I  cite  this  whole  page  from  M.  Lichtenberger's  volume, 
for  despite  the  fact  that  his  description  refers  to  the  German 
commune  of  1800,  it  is  perfectly  applicable  to  the  territorial 
ownership  of  land  bv  the  Russian  peasants  of  to-day.  We  have 
only  to  alter  the  terms.  That  the  rural  w/V,  as  a  form 
of  property,  is  far  from  being  the  product  of  the  "  national 
spirit"  is  confirmed  by  another  interesting  fact  :  these  same 
Germans,  whose  ancestors,  in  Germany,  dissolved  the  rural 
commune  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when 
they  had  arrived  in  Russia,  in  the  Government  of  Saratov, 
installed  in  surroundings  favourable  to  the  development  of  the 
communal  system,  put  the  latter  into  practice  in  order  to  be 
in  harmony  with  the  economic  conditions  of  the  period. 

Thus  the  attribution  of  a  purely  national  character  to  the 
Russian  rural  commune  is  merely  a  legend,  one  of  those  "  social 
myths"  which  affect  not  only  the  profane  mind,  but  even 
science. 

The  representation  of  the  Russian  commune  as  a  system  that 
will  save  the  population  from  proletarianization  is  equally  false. 
According  to  the  preceding  chapters,  we  know  that  the  progress 


RURAL   ECONOMY  153 

of  proletarianization  in  Russia  has  been  extremely  rapid,  despite 
the  existence  of  the  commune.  Economic  and  social  differentia- 
tion is  as  common  among  the  peasants  of  the  "  holy  mir  "  as 
amid  the  industrial  population  of  the  city.  In  vain  did  the 
Government,  seeing  in  the  commune  a  safeguard  against  "  the 
Revolution"  and  a  guarantee  of  "order,"  endeavour  to  hinder 
the  process  of  proletarianization,  by  forbidding  the  "division  of 
families"  (law  of  1886)  and  rendering  departure  from  the 
commune  difficult :  in  short,  by  giving  the  commune  the 
character  of  a  compulsory  and  not  a  voluntary  union.  Economic 
development  obtained  the  upper  hand,  shattering  the  old  juridical 
forms  which  attempted  to  confine  it.  Commercial  exchanp-e 
having  led  the  peasant  to  produce  cereals  for  the  market,  and 
being  bound  up  with  the  capitalist  system,  destroyed  the  social 
myth  of  the  "holy  w/V"  and  of  rural  fraternity  and  equality. 

Here  is  an  interesting  fact :  the  same  Government  which,  in 
the  name  of  the  old  traditions,  preserved  the  commune  and 
isolated  it  from  the  rest  of  society,  also  impelled  it  towards 
its  dissolution.  Having  need  of  money,  the  Government 
heavily  taxed  the  peasants.  To  pay  these  taxes  the  mujiks  had 
to  supply  wheat  for  the  market,  to  enter  the  arena  of  competition 
and  immerse  themselves  in  the  spirit  of  enterprise.  The  con- 
ception of  the  commune  as  a  safeguard,  a  guarantee  of  "  social 
peace "  (see  the  words  of  M.  de  Lavelaye),  was  a  vain  and 
ingenuous  dream.  If  there  did  seem  to  be  a  certain  manifestation 
of  "equality  "  in  the  commune,  it  was  of  no  equality  of  high 
culture  and  well-being,  but  of  the  equality  of  poverty  and 
ignorance.  This  because  the  system  of  communal  property 
annihilated  individual  energy,  wrapped  the  economic  activity  of 
the  country  in  a  network  of  tiresome  regulations,  and  ended 
in  extreme  subdivision  of  the  land.  Thus  the  material  situation 
of  the  peasants  and  their  level  of  culture  are  most  satisfactory 
in  those  parts  of  Russia  where  individual  ownership  was  first 
introduced,  for  example,  in  the  Baltic  provinces. 

I   do  not  say  the  commune   is  to  be  blamed  for  the  ignorance 
and  the  poverty  of  the  Russian   peasantry  ;  these  are  the  result 


154  MODERN  RUSSIA 

of  the  abolition  of  serfdom,  of  the  fuujik^s  lack  of  land,  and  the 
yoke  imposed  by  the  aristocracy  and  autocracy.  But  I  do  say 
that  the  communal  system  aggravated  the  crisis  of  rural  economy 
and  complicated  the  social  and  economic  relations  of  the 
village. 


CHAPTER   V 

THE   FAMILY   AND  THE   POSITION    OF   WOMEN 

I.  Evolution  of  the  family — Prostitution.      II.  The  intellectual  woman 

in  Russia. 

I 

The  family,  like  all  other  phenomena  of  social  life,  is  far  from 
being  immutable.  It  develops  and  changes  its  forms,  and  at 
different  periods,  among  different  peoples,  we  observe  various 
types  of  family  and  of  family  ties  and  relations.  The  data  of 
modern  historic  science  permit  us  to  assert  that  the  evolution 
of  the  family  is  not  due  to  chance,  and  that  it  is  closely  bound  up 
with  the  evolution  of  economic  life. 

In  the  first  part  of  this  book  an  example  of  this  relation  was 
cited  :  the  "  great  family "  of  the  Russian  Slav,  formed  under 
the  immediate  influence  of  the  economic  activity  of  the  old-time 
agriculture.  We  know  how  slowly  the  forms  of  agricultural 
economy  have  changed  with  the  Russian  peasant.  The  forms  of 
family  relations  evolved  as  slowly  in  the  Russian  village,  and 
are  as  backward,  as  those  of  the  modern  agricultural  economy. 
To  this  day  the  "great  family"  has  not  entirely  disappeared  in 
Russia.  It  is  often  encountered  slightly  transformed.  The 
rural  dvors  composing  the  m'lr  are  not  rarely  veritable  "  great 
families,"  that  is,  assemblies  of  several  related  families,  living 
under  one  roof,  under  the  direction  of  a  single  doniokho%ia'in 
(master    of    the   house)    and    in    economic    unity.      The    domo- 

tS5 


156  MODERN  RUSSIA 

khozin'in^  that  is,  the  most  aged  man  of  the  family,  represents  the 
(Ivor  at  the  rural  ikhod  (assembly  of  the  domokhoxiaim  of  the 
villages),  disposes  or  the  goods  of  the  family  and  the  labour  of  its 
members,  and  the  latter  must  submit  to  him.  The  foundation 
of  this  form  of  the  family  was  certainly  economic  interest.  The 
following  fact  proves  as  much  :  into  the  composition  of  a  "  great 
family  "  the  married  sons  of  the  house-master  entered  first,  but 
if  there  was  a  lack  of  workers  the  sons-in-law  were  also 
called  in. 

The  Government,  after  the  abolition  of  serfdom,  took  measures 
to  preserve  this  type  of  rural  family.  In  1886  Alexander  III 
issued  an  edict  which  forbade  the  division  of  land  between 
the  various  members  of  a  family.  But  no  measure  could  prevent 
such  division,  and  from  t86i  onwards  to  our  own  days  there  have 
been  more  than  two  and  a  half  million  cases  of  division  of 
families.  This  phenomenon  shows  plainly  that  the  old  family 
lorms  do  not  at  all  correspond  with  the  new  economic  develop- 
ments. When  the  dvor  commenced  to  produce  wheat  not  only 
tor  its  own  consumption  but  also  for  the  market,  the  individualist 
middle-class  tendencies  suddenly  penetrated  the  pseudo-com- 
munistic atmosphere  of  the  dvor  and  resulted  in  the  dissolution  of 
the  old  family  relations. 

This  dissolution  was  greatly  augmented  by  the  development 
of  industry  and  the  migration  to  the  cities  ;  both  factors  drove 
to  the  towns  and  industrial  centres  millions  of  young  people  of 
both  sexes.  This  isolation  of  "children"  from  the  "fathers" 
does  not  as  a  rule  take  place  suddenly.  At  first,  after  leaving 
for  the  cities,  the  young  country-folk  keep  up  relations  with 
their  parents.  These  relations  are  manifested  more  particularly 
in  the  "community  of  the  purse"  ;  the  member  of  the  family 
who  has  left  for  the  city  sends  part  of  his  or  her  earnings  to  the 
"  house,"  and  will  often  return  to  the  village  to  help  in  the 
field-work.  These  relations  with  the  "  house  "  grow  less 
frequent  ;  the  child  founds  a  family  in  the  city  and  finally 
breaks  off  all  relations  with  the  native  village. 

The  old-fashioned  rural  party  and  the  True-Russian  Conser- 


THE  FAMILY  AND  POSITION  OF   WOMEN    157 

vative  publicists  complain  bitterly  of  the  disgust  exhibited  by 
the  young  people  for  the  quiet  rural  life  and  their  love  of 
the  "debauched"  cities.  But  these  lamentations  often  contain 
a  proportion  of  hypocrisy  which  is  sometimes  unconscious,  but 
more  often  premeditated.  The  village — as  we  have  stated  in 
preceding  chapters — is  far  from  being  such  a  Paradise  as  to 
retain  the  young  :  especially  as  neither  custom  nor  the  law 
protects  their  labour.  The  position  of  the  woman  is  especially 
painful. 

The  woman  in  the  village  is  completely  defenceless  before 
her  husband  and  elders  of  the  family  in  general.  Blows  are 
the  means  employed  by  the  Russian  peasant  to  make  his  wife 
respect  him.  When  the  inuj'ik  thrashes  his  wife  the  neighbours 
say:  "He  is  teaching  her."  This  "he  is  teaching  her  "  is  in 
its  way  a  technical  term  ;  it  refers  to  a  common  incident  of 
village  life. 

The  power  of  the  "  house-master  "  is  sometimes  exhibited  in 
a  repugnant  fashion  where  the  women  of  the  family  are  con- 
cerned. In  the  Russian  country-side  the  snokhatchestvoy  or  con- 
cubinage of  the  house-master  with  his  snokha  or  daughter-in-law, 
is  still  extant.  This  practice  is  often  observed  in  village  life. 
When  the  young  husband  leaves  to  perform  his  military  service, 
or  when  he  goes  to  the  city  to  work  there,  his  father  uses  his 
authority  to  satisfy  his  sexual  needs  by  means  of  the  snokha^  who 
is  left  behind.  Many  deeds  of  violence,  many  dramas,  are  caused 
by  this  exercise  of  "  paternal  "  authority. 

To  believe  that  on  the  whole  "  pure  and  patriarchal "  manners 
reign  in  the  Russian  country-side  is  to  be  cruelly  deceived  ;  it  is 
to  wear  rose-coloured  glasses.  The  Russian  peasants  are  too 
wretched  and  ignorant  to  be  the  guardians  of  a  high  morality. 
Moreover,  the  nobles,  regarding  the  village  as  part  of  their  own 
premises,  are  far  from  being  models  of  virtue.  The  position  of 
young  peasant  girls  and  women  working  on  the  great  estates,  in  the 
refineries,  or  the  beet-root  or  tobacco  fields,  is  lamentable.  The 
body  of  a  peasant-woman  is  bought  like  a  pound  of  meat,  and 
prostitution   is  a  general   practice.     The  following  fact  will  give 


IS8  MODERN  RUSSIA 

some  idea  of  this  prostitution  :  according  to  the  report  of  the 
secretary  of  the  Council  of  the  Charity  House  of  St.  Peters- 
burg, "  every  winter  numbers  of  peasant-women  come  to  St. 
Petersburg  from  the  neighbouring  provinces.  All  the  winter 
they  practise  prostitution.  In  summer  they  return  to  their 
native  district  to  help  in  the  field-work."  From  the  Govern- 
ment of  Tula  peasant-women  bring  to  the  city  their  innocent 
daughters,  at  sixteen  years  of  age,  and  place  them  in  licensed 
houses.  These  women  excuse  themselves  thus  :  "  I  do  not  wish 
my  daughter  to  be  the  wife  of  some  quarrelsome  drunkard. 
Better  for  her  to  live  like  this  until  she  is  eighteen.  Then  she 
can  work  in  some  factory."  The  young  girl  thus  placed  often 
sends  her  mother  part  of  her  earnings. 

As  a  rule  the  peasant-women  form  the  largest  percentage  of 
prostitutes.  In  St.  Petersburg  65  per  cent,  of  all  the  prostitutes 
are  peasant- women.  At  the  fair  of  Nijni-Novgorod,  which  the 
Russian  merchants  visit  annually,  not  only  to  do  business  but  to 
"amuse  themselves,"  74  per  cent,  of  all  the  prostitutes  are 
peasant- women.  St.  Petersburg  numbers  50,000  women  who 
live  by  prostitution,  either  permanent  or  occasional.  At  the 
Congress  of  the  "  Defence  of  Woman  "  (April,  19 10)  the  fright- 
ful development  of  child  prostitution  was  mentioned  : 

"  Child  prostitutes  are  now  met  in  St.  Petersburg  at  every 
step.  The  sale  of  their  bodies  by  these  children  is  effected 
openly,  without  the  slightest  concealment.  In  the  streets  where 
the  prostitutes  habitually  assemble  one  may  sec  whole  groups  of 
girls  of  ten  or  twelve  years,i  who  accost  men  and  exchange 
obscene  phrases.  There  are  '  hotels  for  new-comers '  which 
make  a  speciality  of  child  prostitution.  .  .  .  Intermediaries 
organize  this  traffic  in  the  body  of  the  child."  (Cited  from 
the  journal  Klevskayia  Mysl,  19 10,  No.  76). 

The  inquiries  prosecuted  by  the  first  Russian  Congress  con- 
cerning the  white  slave  trade  have  thrown  light  on  the  following 
question  :  Why  has  prostitution  attained  so  great  a  development  ? 

'  In  tlie    report   of    the   Council   of   tlie   Charity    House    cases   of 
prostitutes  of  eight  and  nine  years  are  noted. 


THE  FAMILY  AND  POSITION  OF   WOMEN    159 

The  first  cause  of  this  development  is  hunger  and  wretchedness. 
The  ruin  of  the  productive  forces  of  the  population — a  result  of 
the  profound  contradictions  of  the  social  life  of  the  Russian 
people — has  been  extremely  favourable  to  this  monstrous  growth 
of  prostitution.  The  bad  conditions  of  labour  and  insufficient 
salaries  push  the  peasant-woman  and  the  factory  hand  into  this 
calling.  In  Russia  domestic  servants  earn  3  to  8  rubles 
monthly — 6s.  4^d  to  17s. — and  the  wages  of  the  factory  girl 
are  slightly  higher.  .  .  .  Add  to  this  the  absolute  lack  of  laws 
protecting  the  woman  of  the  people  and  her  extreme  ignorance. 
According  to  the  data  for  1897,  90  per  cent,  of  the  women  of 
Russia  were  completely  illiterate.  Even  to-day  this  maxim  is 
general  in  rural  Russia  :  "  Knowledge  is  no  good  to  girls." 
The  mujik^  instead  of  sending  his  daughter  to  school,  employs 
her  as  a  servant  or  a  herd. 

The  position  of  the  woman  is  equally  painful  in  the  household 
of  the  merchant  or  ecclesiastic.  The  young  girl  is  not  allowed 
to  marry  for  love.  Material  conditions  are  the  basis  of  every 
marriage.  Among  the  clergy  it  is  usual,  in  some  cases,  to  place 
the  son-in-law  of  the  former  priest  in  charge  of  the  parish.  The 
seminarist,  having  completed  his  training,  proceeds  to  look  for  a 
"  fiancee  with  a  parish."  A  marriage  is  often  concluded  between 
absolute  strangers. 

II 

Modern  society  forces  the  woman  to  use  more  than  her  mus- 
cular strength.  She  is  forced  to  employ  her  mental  energies  also. 
Hence  the  appearance  on  the  stage  of  history  of  the  intellectual 
woman,  the  woman  doctor,  the  schoolmistress,  etc.  The  rise  of 
the  intellectual  woman  in  Russia  must  be  referred  to  the  "  period 
of  the  great  reforms."  To  realize  these  reforms,  to  improve 
public  instruction  and  the  hygienic  conditions  of  the  life  of  the 
people,  a  vast  number  of  intellectual  workers  was  required.  In 
this  manner  woman  was  able  to  apply  her  faculties.  Thus  is 
explained  the  invasion  of  the  high-schools   by   women,  and  the 


i6o  MODERN  RUSSIA 

attitude  assumed  by  them  in  respect  of  social  reform  towards  the 
year  i860.  Moreover,  the  social  and  economic  development  of 
the  nation  contributed  to  the  formation  of  an  army  of  intel- 
lectual women.  At  first  the  nobility  furnished  the  elements  of 
this  army  :  the  fall  of  the  economic  system  of  the  nobility  and 
the  brealcing-up  of  families  forced  a  large  number  of  young  girls 
to  earn  their  living.  To  obtain  their  object  they  devoted  them- 
selves to  the  liberal  professions.  These  young  women  of  noble 
birth  were  joined  by  the  daughters  of  officials,  of  popes,  of  small 
middle-class  townsfolk.  In  many  professions,  and  especially  as 
teachers  and  physicians,  the  Russian  women  are  inferior  to  men 
neither  in  numbers  nor  in  quality.  Lately  Russian  women  have 
commenced  to  study  agronomy,  technical  methods  of  produc- 
tion, etc. 

But  the  intellectual  Russian  woman  is  not  content  to  embrace 
a  liberal  career.  She  also  takes  an  active  part  in  the  social 
struggle,  in  politics.  In  this  respect  she  has  far  outstripped  her 
European  sisters.  Perhaps  only  the  great  French  Revolution, 
with  its  "  women  of  the  Halles,"  can  afford  a  similar  picture 
of  the  collective  participation  of  women  in  the  political 
conflict.  But  while  the  "women  of  the  Halles"  were  only 
unconscious  partisans  of  an  instinctive  movement,  in  Russia 
the  revolutionary  woman  represents  a  conscious  and  organized 
activity. 

Like  the  intellectual  man,  the  intellectual  woman  in  Russia 
has  been  influenced  by  Socialistic  ideas.  Terrorism,  which — as 
we  shall  presently  explain — so  fully  corresponds  with  the  men- 
tality of  the  intellectuals,  has  found  many  disciples  among  the 
revolutionary  women  of  Russia.  Many  acts  of  terrorism  in  Russia 
have  been  performed  by  the  "feeble"  hand  of  a  woman,  and  how 
many  young  girls  have  died  for  the  Revolution  ! 

We  may  affirm  without  any  exaggeration  that  the  Russian 
intellectuelle  regards  her  social  functions  with  far  greater  seriousness 
than  her  European  sisters. 

The  social  and  political  activity  of  the  Russian  woman  would 
be  still  more  effectual  if  it  were  not  hampered  by  legislation.     The 


THE  FAMILY  AND  POSITION  OF  WOMEN    i6i 

law  forbids  women  to  take  part  in  elections,  whether  parlia- 
mentary or  local.  However,  in  the  local  administrations  women 
can  work  as  salaried  employees — as  physicians,  school-teachers, 
etc.  In  the  country  the  conditions  of  intellectual  work  are 
extremely  painful,  and  especially  so  for  a  woman. 


II 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE    INTELLECTUAL   CLASSES— NIHILISM 

I.  The   origins  of   Nihilism.      II.  The   intellectual   youth   of    Russia. 
III.  The  intellectual  classes  and  Socialism — Terrorism. 


The  Russian  "intellectuals"  form  a  social  group  so  peculiar  and 
so  unlike  anything  to  be  observed  in  Western  Europe  that  I  must 
necessarily  speak  of  their  principal  characteristics. 

"A  Russian  Nihilist!"     Who  has  not  heard  the  phrase?     Yet 
in  spite  of  the  widespread  use  of  the  term  it  does  not,  in  most 
cases,  evoke  any  clear  or  truthful  image  of  the  real  "  Nihilist." 
The  majority  of  the  public  forms  an  idea  of  the  Nihilist  from 
sensational   articles  in   the   gutter  Press,   from  plays   and   novels 
written  by  persons  almost  wholly  ignorant  of  Russia,  and  from 
cinematograph  films.     For  this  section  of  the  public  the  Nihilist 
is  a  young  man  in  a  blouse,  with  "  blazing  eyes,"  a  bomb  in  his 
hand :  the  female  Nihilist  is  a  young  girl  with  her  hair  cut  short, 
full  of  cold   resolution.     The  inhabitants  of  certain  quarters  of 
those  European  cities  in  which  Russian  students  seek  asylum  have 
a  less  nebulous  conception  of  the  term.     In  the  Latin  Quarter  of 
Paris  the    Nihilist   is  a  familiar  figure,  but  is  only  superficially 
understood. 

Let  us  at  the  outset  understand  the  word  itself.  Its  origin  is 
by  no  means  recent.  In  Europe  it  was  applied  to  the  heretical 
doctrine  of  Peter  of  Lombardy.     In  the  early  part  of  the  nine- 


THE  INTELLECTUAL  CLASSES— NIHILISM    163 

teenth  century  we  find  the  word  in  the  works  of  a  Russian 
literary  critic,  but  it  was  not  then  used  in  the  sense  which  it 
assumed  in  the  latter  part  of  the  century.  The  modern  sense 
of  the  term  was  formulated  by  the  representatives  of  "Nihilism" 
themselves  ;  not  by  living  representatives,  but  by  literary  figures ; 
by  two  heroes  of  Turgenev's  celebrated  novel,  Fathers  and  Sons. 

"  The  '  Nihilist,'  "  say  Turgenev's  heroes,  "  is  a  man  who 
bows  to  no  authority,  who  accepts  no  principle  on  hearsay,  how- 
ever generally  it  may  be  esteemed." 

"  We  act  in  the  name  of  that  which  we  consider  useful.  In 
our  days  what  is  most  useful  ?      Negation.     We  deny." 

But  Turgenev's  heroes  do  not  deny  for  the  sake  of  denial. 
According  to  them  negation  is  indispensable  to  "  clearing  the 
way,"  to  "  cleaning  up."  Their  negation  is  the  negation  of  all 
the  old  fetiches  and  prejudices  which  during  the  period  of  serfdom 
served  as  the  foundation  of  the  life  and  mentality  of  Russian 
society. 

One  of  the  principal  supports  of  this  society  was  a  gross  re- 
ligious fetichism.  Upon  this  the  Nihilists  at  once  showered  their 
blows.  The  talented  publicist  Pissarev,  who  unhappily  died 
young,  and  the  writers  Dobrolubov  and  Tchernychevsky  were 
prominent  in  this  struggle.  To  religious  fetichism  they  opposed 
a  new  conception  of  the  world  and  man,  based  upon  a  naturalistic 
positivism.  They  led  Russian  youth  to  the  study  of  Karl  Vogt, 
Biichner,  Moleschott,  Comte,  Mill,  etc. 

"  Only  the  natural  and  mathematical  sciences  have  the  right  to 
be  called  sciences.  .  .  .  Only  the  natural  sciences  can  develop  the 
understanding,"  says  Pissarev.  Then,  generalizing  these  ideas, 
he  continues  :  "  Words  and  illusions  perish,  but  facts  remain." 
The  knowledge  of  facts,  pure  empiricism — this  is  what  is  most 
useful  to  the  "  conscientious  critical  personality."  It  is  the 
analysis  of  phenomena,  not  philosophic  speculation,  that  forms 
the  intelligence. 

Such  were  the  fundamental  theses  of  the  Nihilism  of  the  second 
half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  reader  will  see  that  there 
was  no  question   of  a  "  bare  negation,"  but  of  the  replacement 


1 64  MODERN  RUSSIA 

of  the  old  fetiches  and  authorities  by  the  scientific  study  of 
nature.  These  ideas  reflected  the  social  transformations  which 
were  then  talcing  place.  At  this  moment  the  feudal  system  was 
beginning  to  crumble  ;  new  middle-class  elements  were  replacing 
the  old  aristocracy ;  the  type  of  educated  noble,  an  aesthete  and 
philosopher,  had  to  make  way  for  the  intellectual  Iwurgeois  who 
protested  against  the  ancient  doctrines.  This  phenomenon  is 
analogous  to  that  which  was  observed  in  France  before  the 
Revolution,  when  the  new  bourgeois  ideas  overthrew  the  ancien 
regime  and  delivered  humanity  from  its  age-long  yoke.  Russian 
Nihilism  was  the  declaration  of  war  of  the  middle-class  individual 
against  all  that  fettered  individual  liberty.  It  was  also  the  ideo- 
logical reflection  of  the  new  system  of  free  competition,  which 
victoriously  entered  into  Russian  life  under  the  influence  of 
capitalistic  development. 

"  We  consider  nothing  before  the  human  being,"  says  Tcherny- 
chevsky,  and  Pissarev,  describing  the  theory  of  individualism  as 
"  egoism,"  writes  :  "Egoism — if  properly  understood — is  an  entire 
liberty  of  the  person,  the  ruin  o{  obligatory  virtue  and  labour,  and 
not  an  uprooting  of  all  worthy  tendencies  and  generous  impulses." 

The  advent  of  Nihilism  was  closely  related  to  the  demands 
of  the  new  economic  forms.  The  original  point  of  view  of 
the  Nihilists  regarding  life  and  the  function  of  man  is  a  proof 
of  this.  "  Life  is  a  workshop  and  man  a  worker  who  labours 
there,"  says  one  of  Turgenev's  heroes,  Basarov  ;  and  his  living 
prototype,  Pissarev,  adds  :  "  A  good  chemist  is  twenty  times 
more  useful  than  a  poet."  This  point  of  view  was  an  instinctive 
protest  against  the  indolent  aesthetics  in  which  the  nobles  of 
the  period  of  serfdom  were  steeped,  and  which  served  as  an 
agreeable  screen  against  abuses,  ignorance,  and  filth.  The 
productive  worker  was  the  type  to  which  the  Nihilists  called 
the  attention  of  their  contemporaries,  and  in  so  doing  they 
betrayed  the  most  urgent  needs  of  the  country.  The  Crimean 
War  opened  the  eyes  of  the  people  to  their  backward  state 
and  their  poverty,  and  the  period  of  the  "great  reforms" 
called   for  abundant  hard   work,  so  that  men  had  no  leisure  to 


THE  INTELLECTUAL  CLASSES— NIHILISM     165 

consider  aesthetics.  As  for  the  negligence  of  dress,  grooming, 
and  manners  which  were  observable  in  the  Nihilists,  and  so 
greatly  astonished  the  "  cultured  "  man,  it  was  only  an  outward 
manifestation,  very  often  exaggerated,  of  this  protest  against 
"  acstheticism  "   and  aesthetic  aristocracy. 

II 

This  democracy  of  dress  and  aspect,  which  was  one  of  the 
characteristic  features  of  Russian  Nihilism,  may  also  be  explained 
by  the  composition  and  origin  of  this  intellectual  youth  which 
formed  the  principal  nucleus  of  "  Nihilism."  Up  to  the  middle 
of  the  nineteenth  century  the  children  of  nobles  were  predominant 
among  the  intellectuals.  The  most  prominent  leaders  of  the 
revolutionary  movement  which  broke  out  under  Alexander  I 
were  young  aristocrats,  brilliant  officers,  most  of  whom  died 
under  the  blows  of  Governmental  reaction,  after  the  attempted 
revolution  of  the   14th   December,    1825. 

During  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  social 
composition  of  the  intellectual  youth  of  Russia  underwent  a 
change.  The  development  of  capitalism  opposed  to  the  noble 
element  a  new  social  class  and  led  to  the  breakdown  of  castes. 
The  families  of  priests,  bureaucrats,  small  merchants,  even  of 
peasants,  provided  "intellectuals."  Thousands  of  these  young 
people  flocked  to  the  cities  to  attend  the  Universities  or  other 
secondary  colleges. 

This  exodus  of  youth  from  the  paternal  hearth  toward  the 
temples  of  knowledge  symbolized,  so  to  speak,  the  awakening 
of  Russia  from  her  age-long  sleep  at  the  disastrous  close  of  the 
Crimean  War  ;  the  Russian  boy  and  girl  student  symbolized  the 
pursuit  of  science  and  liberty. 

The  report  of  the  Commission  of  the  University  Professors 
who  were  directed  to  conduct  an  inquiry  into  the  University 
disturbances  of  1861  gave  the  following  account  of  the  peculiar 
situation  of  the  Russian  student  : 

"  Russian  society  has  inspired  the  student  with  such  an  idea 
of  his  dignity  that  the  same  phenomenon  is  not  to  be  observed 


i66  MODERN  RUSSIA 

in  any  other  country.  In  those  States  in  which  education  is 
extensive  and  popular,  in  which  it  has  firmly  taken  root,  those 
who  study  have  their  social  rank  already  determined  for  them. 
In  Russia  the  representatives  of  intellectual  culture,  the  students, 
and  in  our  days  all  Russians,  feel  profoundly  the  necessity  of 
culture,  regarding  it  alone  as  capable  of  remedying  the  social  evils 
which  oppress  them.  The  habit  of  inactivity  and  the  custom 
of  relying  upon  others  for  the  accomplishment  of  our  duties,  both 
implanted  in  our  nature,  make  it  inevitable  that  youth  should 
constitute  the  active  element,  while  the  riper  generations  are 
commencing  to  enjoy  life  in  tranquillity.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  our  young  people  are  so  conscious  of  their  predestined  part. 
The  student,  in  Russia,  is  no  longer  a  pupil,  but  a  teacher  of 
society.  Society  regards  him  with  pride  and  respect.  In  the 
eyes  of  many  the  student  is  the  incarnation  of  the  future  and  the 
hope  of  Russia." 

The  famous  teacher  and  surgeon,  Nicolas  Pirogov,  stated  that 
the  University  and  the  students  were  "  the  barometer  of  society." 
In  this  connection  we  may  affirm  that  the  incessant  disturbances 
among  the  students  in  the  second  half  of  nineteenth  century 
and  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  were  only  the  reflection  of 
the  unsatisfied  need  of  the  Russian  people. 

The  Government  sought  to  annihilate  the  democratic  tenden- 
cies of  the  time  among  the  University  element.  To  achieve  this 
end  it  took  the  following  measures  :  it  made  entrance  to  the 
University  difficult  to  free  students ;  the  fees  were  greatly 
increased,  and  young  people  desirous  of  frequenting  the  Uni- 
versity were  required  to  produce  a  "  diploma  of  maturity,"  that 
is,  the  classic  baccalaureate  ;  even  entrance  to  the  gymnasia  was 
rendered  difficult,  especially  after  the  circular  of  the  i8th  June, 
1887.  This,  known  in  the  history  of  Russian  education  as  the 
"circular  on  the  subject  of  the  cook's  children,"  ordered  the 
directors  of  secondary  schools  to  accept  only  a  limited  number 
of  pupils  belonging  to  a  democratic  environment.  "  It  is  neces- 
sary," said  the  Ministry,  "  to  rid  the  gymnasia  and  the  pro- 
gymnasia  of  the  children  of  coachmen,  cooks,  washerwomen,  and 


THE  INTELLECTUAL  CLASSES— NIHILISM    167 

little  shopkeepers.     These  children,  unless  exceptionally  gifted, 
must  not  depart  from  their  station." 

"Education  only  leads  them  to  contempt  of  their  parents, 
discontent  with  their  lot,  and  resentment  of  the  inevitable  and 
natural  inequality  prevailing  in  respect  of  the  division  of 
property." 

But  all  these  measures  were  ineffectual.  Waves  of  democracy 
gradually  invaded  the  schools,  and  the  youth  of  the  upper  social 
classes  had  to  make  way  for  the  democratic  youth.  Thus,  for 
example,  between  1899  and  1900,  among  the  students  of  the 
University  of  Moscow,  the  sons  of  functionaries  constituted 
32*5  per  cent,  of  the  total  number  of  students.  Between  1900 
and  1909  this  decreased  to  23*7  per  cent.  In  these  ten  years, 
among  the  students,  the  number  of  the  sons  of  nobles  fell  from 
17*4  to  13*8  per  cent.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sons  of  peasants 
increased  from  5*2  to  8*4  per  cent.,  the  sons  of  merchants 
from  14*7  to  1 6*9  per  cent.,  and  the  sons  of  meshtchanie  (small 
city  landlords)  from  i5'9  to  21 '2  per  cent.  This  phenomenon 
acquires  still  greater  significance  if  we  consider,  not  the  relations 
between  the  different  groups,  but  the  increase  of  each  group 
separately.  Between  1899  and  1909  the  number  of  children 
of  nobles  and  functionaries  among  the  students  had  increased  by 
50  per  cent.  ;  that  of  the  children  of  merchants  by  150  per  cent.; 
that  of  the  children  of  meshtchanie  by  200  per  cent.  ;  that  of 
the  children  of  priests  by  200  per  cent. ;  that  of  the  children  of 
peasants  by  250  per  cent. ;  and  the  number  of  persons  exercising 
liberal  professions  had  increased  by  350  per  cent.  ! 


Ill 


With  the  composition  of  the  youth  of  the  Universities  such  as 
it  is,  we  must  not  be  surprised  that  a  tendency  toward  the  "Left" 
is  everywhere  apparent  among  the  students,  and  that  the  majority 
of  them  are  under  the  influence  of  various  revolutionary  organiz- 
ations.    However,  to  represent  a  revolutionary  Russian  student 


i68  MODERN  RUSSIA 

as  an  anarchist  is  absolutely  false.  Anarchism,  in  the  true  sense 
of  the  word,  has  had  very  little  vogue  in  Russia,  and  the  basic 
principle  of  anarchism — antiparliamentarism — has  not  obtained 
and  could  not  obtain  the  approval  of  a  people  that  has  so  long 
struggled  for  the  establishment  of  a  parliamentary  system.  As 
for  Socialism,  it  has  certainly  been  a  powerful  influence  with  the 
intellectual  youth  of  Russia.  This  fact  may  be  explained  in 
many  ways. 

In  the  first  place,  by  their  composition  and  their  material  cir- 
cumstances, the  greater  number  of  young  Russians  frequenting 
the  Universities  belong  to  the  intellectual  proletariat.  I  imagine 
one  could  nowhere  in  the  world  find  a  poorer  and  hungrier 
body  than  the  Russian  students.  Fifty  shillings  a  month  is 
above  their  average  income.  The  inquiry  into  the  conditions 
of  the  life  of  the  students  of  Kiev  (in  the  year  1872)  established 
the  fact  that  many  students  "try  to  do  without  the  indispensable." 
In  these  latter  times  the  number  of  such  students  has  multiplied. 
It  is  not  rare  for  poverty  and  hunger  to  drive  some  student 
to  suicide.  With  such  a  condition  of  affairs  it  is  not  surprising 
that  the  students  fall  under  the  influence  of  the  Socialist  parties. 

Another  cause  of  the  success  of  Socialist  ideas  among  the 
Russian  "intellectuals"  has  been  expressed  by  the  German 
author — Karl  Kautsky — who  connects  this  phenomenon  with 
the  part  which  foreign  capital  plays  in  the  economic  life  of 
Russia. 

"  In  a  country  of  capitalist  industries  in  which  capital  is 
furnished  to  industry  more  especially  by  foreigners,  we  remark 
in  the  first  place  the  absence  of  a  considerable  quantity  of  workers 
who  are  not  producers — domestics  or  intellectuals — depending  on 
capital.  The  absolute  number  of  non-productive  workers  may 
be  very  considerable,  but  the  influence  exercised  by  them  upon 
capital  will  not  be  great.  In  such  a  country  the  non-productive 
workers  and  their  services  depend  on  other  social  classes — the 
landed  proprietors,  for  instance.  If  they  are  intellectuals  their 
existence  will  be  the  poorer,  but  will  depend  less  on  the  capitalist 
mentality. 


THE  INTELLECTUAL  CLASSES— NIHILISM     169 

"Capital  has  a  harmful  influence  on  these  workers  solely  in 
places  where  it  consumes  the  profits. 

"The  French  financier  has  boldly  acquired  Russian  obligations, 
has  placed  his  money  in  Russian  industrial  enterprises,  holds 
shares  issued  by  the  State  for  the  construction  of  Russian 
railways.  However,  this  financier  has  his  service,  not  of  Russian 
domestics,  but  of  French  domestics  ;  he  passes  his  time  with 
French  actresses  ;  is  the  Maecenas  of  French  musicians,  painters, 
and  poets  ;  receives  in  his  salons  French  artists,  politicians,  and 
scientists,  and — if  he  is  a  believer  or  wishes  to  maintain  religion 
among  the  masses — he  supports  French  and  not  Russian 
monasteries.  He  buys  not  Russian  but  French  journalists. 
The  surplus  earnings  of  industry  confirm  the  influence  of 
capitalism,  not  in  Russia,  but  in  France. 

"And  this  phenomenon  is  one  of  the  serious  causes  of  the 
fact  that  in  Russia  the  Mntellectuals,'  as  a  general  thing,  lead 
a  more  than  modest  existence.  For  in  no  other  State  are  the 
'  intellectuals '  less  dependent  on  capital  than  in  Russia,  or  more 
violently  opposed  to  it,  and  nowhere  do  they  better  understand 
the  proletariat  or  are  more  closely  attached  thereto. 

"  In  no  country  is  the  number  of  Socialist  agitators  and  highly 
trained  theorists  so  high  as  in  Russia,  the  country  of  illiterates." 

We  can  offer  yet  another  explanation  of  the  leanings  of  the 
Russian  intellectuals  toward  Socialism  :  the  "  intellectuals "  are 
themselves  interested  in  the  downfall  of  the  present  system,  but 
being  too  weak  to  solve  the  problem,  they  seek  other  forces  to 
aid  them.  As  the  democratic  middle-class  is  one  of  the  most 
insignificant  classes  in  Russia,  only  the  proletariat  can  prove  a 
serious  ally  in  the  struggle  against  absolutism.  To  get  nearer 
to  this  ally  the  "intellectuals"  adopt  the  Socialist  ideology. 

We  ought  to  make  one  reservation  :  by  no  means  all  the 
Russian  "intellectuals"  are  Socialists.  The  disciples  of  Socialism 
form  the  most  democratic  sphere  of  the  intellectual  classes,  and 
the  highest  sphere  (professors,  advocates,  engineers,  etc.)  is  in 
sympathy  with  the  bourgeois  Liberals  and  Radicals. 

Combining  with  the  proletariat  and  taking  part  in  the  Socialist 


170  MODERN  RUSSIA 

movement,  the  "  intellectuals  "  bring  to  this  movement  a  certain 
atmosphere  of  their  own.  This  is  visible  more  especially  in 
revolutionary  tactics  and  in  the  forms  of  Terrorism.  The 
individual  policy  of  terror,  as  a  system  of  political  action,  has 
been  in  Russia  a  product  of  the  ideology  of  the  "intellectuals." 
The  latter,  who  do  not  participate  directly  in  production,  being 
independent  of  the  economic  mechanism  and  unconscious  of  any 
bond  between  themselves  and  the  social  mass,  are  inclined  to 
oppose  their  personality  to  Society,  to  consider  the  phenomena 
of  social  life  less  as  results  of  the  material  forces  of  nature  than 
as  manifestations  of  personality.  On  this  account  it  seems  to  the 
"intellectuals"  possible  to  transform  a  social  or  political  system 
by  causing  a  personage,  or  series  of  personages,  to  disappear.  In 
such  a  system  they  do  not  see  the  reflection  of  the  grouping  or 
the  social  classes,  but  a  combination  of  individuals  and  persons. 
Hence  "individual  terror"  as  a  method  ot  political  action. 
Another  source  of  this  policy  may  sometimes  be  found  in  the 
desire  of  self-sacrifice,  a  desire  almost  mystical. 

As  to  the  Russian  workers,  their  sympathies  are  all  for  the 
organized  action  of  the  masses.  This  is  very  comprehensible, 
for  the  technical  and  economic  environment  which  surrounds 
the  worker  engaged  in  great  industrial  undertakings  reminds 
him  at  every  moment  that  he  is  only  a  part  of  an  enormous 
social  whole. 


BOOK   III 

THE    ABSOLUTE     POWER,    ITS     ORGANIZA- 
TION  AND   RESOURCES 


CHAPTER    I 

THE   ORGANIZATION   OF  THE   CENTRAL   POWER 

I.  The  Imperial  House — The  autocracy.     II.  The  Ministry  and  the 

Council  of  Empire. 


The  reader  knows  how  the  absolute  centralized  monarchy  was 
formed  in  Russia,  what  were  its  social  roots  and  its  historical 
development,  and  what  forms  it  assumed  when  this  development 
was  complete.  We  must  now  consider  more  closely  the  political 
structure  of  the  Russian  State  and  the  internal  organization 
of  its  different  parts. 

The  first  and  principal  of  these  parts  is  naturally  the  power 
of  the  Tsar.  The  Tsar  and  his  family  constitute  Rosdysk'ii  itnpera- 
tork'ii  Dom^  the  Imperial  House  of  Russia.  As  the  Tsars  and 
Grand-Dukes  are  distinguished  by  a  very  considerable  fecundity,  the 
present  strength  of  the  House  is  fairly  respectable  :  more  than 
threescore  members.  The  Imperial  Family,  considered  collec- 
tively, is  the  largest  and  richest  landowner  in  all  Russia.  The 
private  wealth  of  each  of  its  members  is  very  great.  In  Siberia 
alone  the  Tsar  possesses  42^  million  desiatins,  or  ii^  million  acres, 
of  land.  Many  vast  properties  in  the  Caucasus,  the  Crimea,  etc., 
belong  to  the  Tsar  and  the  Grand-Dukes.  Without  counting 
its  private  possessions,  the  Imperial  Family  enjoys  what  is  known 
as  the  ndyels^  which  consist  both  of  land  and  capital.  These 
udyeU  were  established  in   1797  by  Paul  I,  "to  assure  for  ever 

173 


174  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  existence  of  the  Imperial  Family."  These  udyeh  include 
7,900,000  desiatins^  or  21,330,000  acres,  of  land,  1,500  mills, 
850  commercial  undertakings,  lOO  workshops,  the  finest  vine- 
yards in  Russia,  etc.  (In  1896,  for  example,  the  administrators 
of  the  udyeh  sold  wine  to  the  value  of  ^^  160,000,  and  the 
total  revenue  of  the  udyeh  in  the  same  year  amounted  to 
j^2, 120,000.)  In  a  hundred  years  (1797-1897)  the  udyeh  pro- 
vided more  than  ^^60,000,000  for  the  support  of  members  of 
the  Royal  Family.  This  sum  does  not  include  money  from 
the  "Imperial  capital,"  which  is  stupendous.  Merely  for  the 
liberation  of  the  serfs  belonging  to  the  Imperial  House,  the 
latter  received  j^50,ooo,ooo,  which  went  to  swell  the  afore- 
said capital. 

But  this  does  not  exhaust  all  the  sources  on  which  the  house 
of  the  Romanov  can  draw.  In  addition  to  private  properties 
and  the  Imperial  capital,  it  enjoys  certain  State  sums  known  as 
the  "Subsidy  of  the  State  Treasury.''  In  1904  this  subsidy 
amounted  to  _^  1,360,000,  and  in   1906  to  ^/^  1,640,000. 

Moreover,  many  members  of  the  Imperial  Family  occupy  very 
highly  paid  posts  in  the  upper  strata  of  the  administrative 
services  and  in  the  army,  and  are  far  from  showing  their  sub- 
ordinates an  example  of  disinterestedness.  The  reader  may  now 
judge  how  dearly  the  Russian  monarchy  costs  the  people. 

But  we  must  not  consider  only  the  material  side  of  the  case. 
From  the  juridical  point  of  view  the  supreme  centralized  power 
of  the  Russian  State  is  "unlimited  autocracy."  The  original 
sense  of  the  word  "autocrat"  is  not  that  attributed  to  it  during 
the  "  period  of  St.  Petersburg."  When  a  Muscovite  Tsar 
adopted  the  title  of  "  autocrat,"  he  meant  that  he  depended  on 
no  foreign  sovereign.  But  when  the  monarchy  was  firmly  settled 
in  Russia  the  conception  of  the  term  was  modified,  and  the 
absolute  sovereignty  of  the  Tsar  over  the  whole  population  of  the 
country  became  the  chief  element  of  that  conception. 

Thanks  to  the  historical  glimpse  which  we  have  taken  of 
the  development  of  the  Russian  State,  we  know  that  Russian 
absolutism  has  not  been  a  real  absolutism  ;  that  the  monarchy  has 


ORGANIZATION   OF  CENTRAL   POWER     175 

always  been  dependent  on  the  nobility,  and  that  its  actions 
have  merely  expressed  the  interests  of  the  latter.  Presently  we 
shall  see  that  the  whole  bureaucratic  machine  of  Russia  is  closely 
related  to  the  nobility,  and  that  in  its  composition  the  bureau- 
cracy reflects  the  advantageous  situation  of  the  aristocratic 
landowners. 

II 

As  for  all  that  concerns  the  organization  of  the  higher  institu- 
tions of  the  State,  for  a  long  time  now  these  institutions  have 
been  apparently  similar  to  those  of  Europe.  The  chief  agent 
of  the  autocracy,  charged  with  executing  the  will  of  the  latter, 
was  during  the  whole  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  minister. 
The  formation  of  the  cabinet  of  ministers  depends  entirely 
on  the  Tsar,  and  all  are  responsible  solely  to  the  Tsar.  To-day, 
in  Russia,  far  from  being  members  of  the  Government,  the 
ministers  are  the  private  servants  of  the  monarch  ;  they  are 
his  private  agents.  The  national  representation  granted  in  1906 
under  the  form  of  the  Gosudarstvennaya  Duma — the  Imperial 
Duma — has  not  modified  the  position  of  the  minister,  for 
according  to  law  the  latter  is  in  no  wise  dependent  upon  the 
national  representation.  The  Duma  often  expressed  its  distrust 
and  suspicion  of  a  minister,  but  the  latter  did  not  resign. 

The    dependence   of  the    ministers    upon    the  Tsar   has    this 
result :  the  ministers  do  not  form  a  self-contained  unity. 

The  Prime  Minister  is  always  a  man  who  enjoys  the  personal 
confidence  of  the  Tsar  ;  and  he  must  act,  not  according  to 
his  opinion  and  that  of  his  colleagues,  but  according  to  the 
"  prevailing  atmosphere "  at  Court.  In  Russia  there  are  really 
two  Governments  :  one  official,  consisting  of  the  cabinet :  the 
other  non-official,  consisting  of  the  Court  camarilla.  This 
camarilla  holds  all  the  threads  of  foreign  as  well  as  home 
politics.  There  are  many  proofs  that  this  camarilla  is  a  fact  ; 
the  foreign  politics  of  Russia  furnish  a  startling  proof  of  its 
reality.    The  admissions  of  the  Russian  and  foreign  Press  establish 


176  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  fact  that  the  Russo-Japanese  dispute  was  transformed  into 
an  armed  struggle  in  spite  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs 
and  the  War  Office,  and  that  this  development  was  entirely 
due  to  the  Tsar  and  his  suite,  both  acting  with  a  view  to 
their  private  material  interests.  In  home  politics  also  the 
courtiers  force  the  Ministry  to  adopt  that  line  of  conduct  which 
is  most  advantageous  to  themselves.  The  activity  of  this 
camarilla  is  based  on  the  interests  of  the  aristocracy,  for  it 
consists  of  the  representatives  of  the  aristocracy. 

The  functions  of  this  backstairs  Government  are  not  very 
arduous.  Enormous  sums  burden  the  Budget  yearly,  being 
intended  "  for  employment  known  to  His  Majesty  the  Emperor." 
These  funds  are  utilized  as  a  principal  resource  for  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  forces  of  reaction.  The  admissions  of  the  Press 
have  betrayed  the  fact  that  every  reactionary  Governmental 
action,  as,  for  example,  the  dissolution  of  the  first  and  the  second 
Duma,  is  always  preceded  by  important  assignations,  the 
expenses  of  which  are  covered  by  this  fund.  The  same  funds 
purchase  the  journals  of  the  "Right"  and  meet  the  expenses 
of  the  other  weapons  employed  in  the  struggle  against  the 
Russian  people. 

In  this  manner  the  organization  of  the  high  executive  power 
of  Russia  still  bears  the  marks  of  feudal  law,  the  traces  of  those 
periods  when  the  interests  of  the  State  coincided  with  the  private 
interests  of  the  Sovereign  and  his  Court, 

The  organization  of  the  legislative  power  is  no  more  satis- 
factory. Even  as  lately  as  1906,  at  the  moment  when  the 
first  Duma  was  opened,  the  "  Council  of  Empire "  served 
as  a  laboratory  of  legislation.  The  members  of  this  Council  were 
not  elected,  but  appointed  by  the  Tsar.  Moreover,  the  Tsar 
was  able  to  veto  their  decisions.  Russian  history  is  full  of 
instances  in  which  the  Tsar,  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen,  annihil- 
ated the  laws  proposed  by  those  he  had  appointed.  Moreover, 
many  reforms  were  effected  before  1906  of  which  the 
"Council  of  Empire"  had  no  cognizance.  These  reforms  were 
promulgated  by  manifesto  or  ukase. 


ORGANIZATION   OF  CENTRAL  POWER     177 

In  1906  the  organization  of  the  legislative  power  was  some- 
what modified.  The  Council  of  Empire  was  reformed.  To 
the  members  appointed  by  the  Tsar  were  added  the  representa- 
tives of  the  zemstvos  and  the  municipalities,  the  merchant 
corporations,  the  nobles,  the  clergy,  and  the  universities.  This 
half  bureaucratic,  half  parliamentary  body  was  supposed  to  exercise 
the  mission  of  "  restraining "  the  other  chamber,  the  Duma. 
Six  years  proved  that  the  Council  of  Empire  was  not  content 
with  being  "  conservative "  after  the  fashion  of  the  English 
House  of  Lords,  and  that  it  had  a  purely  reactionary  plan  of 
campaign.  The  Council  of  Empire  rarely  presents  a  prospective 
law,  but  it  limits  the  performances  of  the  Duma,  and  in  its 
zeal  is  more  reactionary  than  the  Government  itself. 

As  for  the  activity  of  the  Duma,  it  is  closely  bound  up 
with  the  events  of  the  Revolution,  to  which  we  shall  presently 
return.  At  the  moment  we  will  proceed  to  consider  the  remain- 
ing portions  of  the  mechanism  of  the  State. 


12 


CHAPTER    II 

THE    RUSSIAN    BUREAUCRACY 

I,  The  bureaucracy  and  landed  property.     II.  The  character   of   the 

Russian  bureaucracy. 


Russia  is  the  true  home  of  bureaucracy.  Compared  with 
Western  Europe,  the  development  of  her  social  and  political 
life  has  been  extremely  slow,  but  the  bureaucracy  has  progressed 
with  incredible  celerity.  According  to  the  well-known  publicist 
Rubaicin,  "  nowhere  in  the  course  of  the  nineteenth  century 
was  so  rapid  a  growth  of  the  bureaucracy  observed  as  that  which 
took  place  under  our  eyes  in  Russia.  In  a  space  of  some 
forty  years  (1855-97),  in  Belgium,  for  example,  the  number  of 
bureaucrats  increased  by  two  and  a  half  times.  Even  in  bureau- 
cratic Austria  the  increase  between  1828  and  1879  was  only  one 
of  50  per  cent.,  and  in  the  last  thirty-four  years  the  increase  has 
again  been  about  the  same.  In  Russia  the  mobilization  of  the 
bureaucratic  forces  has  proceeded  three  or  four  times  as  quickly." 

According  to  the  general  census  of  1897,  there  were  435,000 
persons  employed  in  the  various  institutions  of  the  public 
authorities.  Of  these  397,000  were  men  and  38,000  women. 
Let  us  note  that  this  number  represents  a  minimum  of  the 
actual  mass  of  bureaucrats,  for  by  no  means  all  the  categories 
of  bureaucrat   are  here  included.     Compare  this  minimum   first 

with  the  population  :    one  official  to  292    inhabitants.     Taking 

178 


THE  RUSSIAN  BUREAUCRACY  179 

the  male  inhabitants  between  eighteen  and  eighty-eight  years  of 
age,  we  find  one  bureaucrat  to  89  men. 

The  composition  of  the  bureaucracy  is  artificially  qualified  by 
the  Government.  Entry  into  the  bureaucratic  army  is  absolutely 
forbidden  to  Jews.  Poles  and  other  "  foreigners  "  can  only  with 
great  difficulty  become  officials.  Exception  is  made  in  favour 
of  members  of  the  German  nobility  of  the  Baltic  provinces, 
who,  being  solidly  in  favour  of  the  autocracy,  have  provided 
Russia  with  numerous  officials. 

Thus  in  a  large  part  of  Russia  the  bureaucracy  appears  as  a 
foreign  element,  playing  the  part  of  conqueror  in  a  vanquished 
country  and  provoking  the  hatred  of  the  population. 

The  composition  of  the  Russian  bureaucracy  from  the  social 
point  of  view  is  highly  characteristic.  A  study  of  the  subject 
enables  us  to  reply  to  the  question  :  What  is  the  Russian 
bureaucracy  as  a  social  group  ?  Among  the  historians,  sociologists, 
and  publicists  of  Russia  this  subject  is  still  under  discussion. 
Some  say  the  bureaucracy  is  a  group  outside  all  social  classes, 
denuded  of  social  interests,  whose  members  are  united  only  by 
private  and  professional  interests.  Others  expound  the  contrary 
suggestion,  seeking  to  regard  the  bureaucracy  as  a  definite  class. 
Here  is  an  analysis  of  the  composition  of  the  Russian  bureaucracy 
which  will  contribute  to  the  solution  of  this  vexed  question  : 

According  to  certain  statistics,  the  whole  or  the  higher  and 
part  of  the  middle  bureaucracy  are  recruited  from  the  landowning 
nobility.  All  the  superior  institutions  of  officialdom — Council  of 
Empire,  Senate,  Council  of  Ministers — are  filled  with  scions  of 
the  nobility,  and  all  important  Government  berths,  whether  in- 
ternal or  representative,  such  as  the  post  of  Governor-General, 
Governor,  Procurator,  ambassador,  etc.,  are  filled  by  noble  land- 
owners. 

If  we  consult  the  register  of  the  members  of  the  Council 
of  Empire,  we  see  that  the  high  dignitaries  sitting  thereon — 
ex-ministers,  generals,  admirals,  and  others — are  the  holders  of 
the  greatest  estates  in  Russia.  Twenty-two  members  of  the 
Council  of  Empire,  "  true  secret  Councillors  of  State  "  (the  highest 


i8o  MODERN  RUSSIA 

civil  title  in  Russia),  possess  176,000  desiatins^  not  including 
forest  lands  :  that  is,  each  owns  on  an  average  8,000  des'tatins. 
We  must  not  forget  that  the  official  figures  are  sensibly  below  the 
facts  ;  in  reality  the  territorial  wealth  of  these  nobles  is  twice  as 
great  as  the  Government  cares  to  admit.  The  eight  "  secret 
Councillors  of  State"  own  some  115,000  desiatins^  or  some 
14,000  desiatins^  or  38,000  acres,  apiece. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  senators  and  other  high  officials.  The 
mere  fact  of  noble  origin  and  the  possession  of  land  constitutes  a 
right  to  participate  in  the  government  of  the  country.  This  state 
of  affairs  is  a  remnant  of  feudalism,  the  fusion  of  public  power  and 
territorial  wealth  being  characteristic  of  the  feudal  system.  Other 
facts  also  prove  the  existence  of  the  feudal  imprint  on  the  Russian 
bureaucracy  :  among  the  higher  dignitaries  of  the  Empire  are  men 
of  no  training  whatever,  or  only  the  most  elementary,  who  are 
nevertheless  entrusted  with  the  direction  of  affairs  of  State.  Their 
title  and  origin  has  made  them  statesmen.  Some  of  these  digni- 
taries have  received  their  education  in  special  establishments, 
such  as  the  Corps  of  Pages  or  the  College  of  Jurisprudence, 
to  which  are  admitted  only  the  sons  of  the  greatest  nobles. 

The  gravity  of  the  present  condition  of  affairs  is  increased 
by  the  fact  that  the  aristocracy  turned  bureaucracy,  far  from 
forgetting  its  old  feudal  customs,  has  retained  them  in  its  ad- 
ministration of  the  State.  The  bureaucratic  nobility  behaves  in 
the  administrative  domain  just  as  a  feudal  lord  might  behave  in 
his  stronghold.  These  officials  exact  a  slavish  obedience  from 
their  subordinates.  In  the  statutes  dcalins;  with  civil  functionaries 
is  a  paragraph,  long  familiar  to  every  official,  by  virtue  of  which 
any  employee  may  be  dismissed  by  the  administration  "without 
explanation  of  motives."  It  is  easy  to  understand  that  under 
these  conditions  the  Russian  functionaries  form  a  far  from 
admirable  body. 

II 

A  juridical  analysis  of  the  situation  of  the  Russian  bureaucracy 
reveals  many  peculiarities  which   prove  that   the   national  life  is 


THE  RUSSIAN  BUREAUCRACY  i8i 

riddled  with  feudal  prejudices.  The  typical  mark  of  the  feudal 
system  is,  as  we  know,  the  fusion  of  the  private  interests  of  the 
landowners  with  the  interests  of  the  State.  These  interests  used 
to  coincide  naturally,  and  every  estate  was  a  State  in  little,  with 
its  justice,  its  army,  and  its  police.  In  Europe,  with  the  develop- 
ment of  the  modern  centralized  State,  public  and  private  law  were 
separated.  An  analogous  process  set  in  even  in  Russia,  but  the 
reaction  of  the  last  quarter-century  has  provoked  a  return  to  the 
old  traditions.  Formerly  there  were  administrative  agents  who 
were  agents  at  once  of  the  public  authorities  and  of  the  great 
private  landowners.  And  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth 
century  there  appeared  in  Russia  a  police  especially  attached  to 
the  factories,  in  the  shape  of  sergents  de  ville  and  commissaries,  who, 
being  leased  to  factories  and  workshops,  are  paid  by  private  in- 
dividuals but  are  counted  as  State  officials.  By  a  decree  of  the 
Council  of  Ministers,  approved  by  the  Emperor,  of  the  6th 
December,  1905,  the  governors  and  heads  of  districts  are  authorized 
to  satisfy  the  demands  of  rural  landowners  on  the  subject  of 
creating  police  officials  in  the  villages  and  forming  detachments  of 
mounted  police.  These  officials  and  detachments  "are  obliged  to 
execute  all  orders  of  the  proprietors  with  a  view  to  safeguarding 
their  domains."  These  police  are  at  the  service  of  the  State 
and  at  the  charge  of  individuals.  Many  nobles  and  great  rural 
landowners  have  these  semi-State,  semi-private  police  on  their 
estates.  Their  creation  is  the  most  typical  action  of  the  aristo- 
cratic restoration.  So  frank  a  fusion,  and  one,  which  is  more 
characteristic,  juridically  formulated  and  sanctioned,  of  the  ele- 
ments of  public  power  and  private  rights  in  a  single  administrative 
organ  will  certainly  not  be  encountered  in  any  modern  State. 

An  analogous  feature  is  revealed  in  the  conduct  of  the 
Russian  Government  towards  the  public  Treasury.  The  aristo- 
cratic landowner,  knowing  nothing  of  organizing  his  estate  upon  a 
rational  basis,  and  having  squeezed  his  farmers  and  peasants  like 
lemons,  by  a  savage  exploitation,  seeks  an  advantageous  position  in 
some  post  under  the  State,  as  a  means  of  procuring  money  for  the 
continuation  of  "  his  noble  existence." 


1 82  MODERN  RUSSIA 

In  the  Middle  Ages,  when  a  boyar  h&czmc^voe-voda^  ox  govtrnox 
of  some  province,  it  was  said  of  him  that  he  took  the  post  in  order 
to  "feed  himself,"  to  "eat  well."  Later  the  bureaucrats  judged 
a  post  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  "consumer."  The 
following  figures  taken  from  the  official  data  give  some  idea  of 
the  enormous  sums  spent  on  this  "feeding"  process. 

According  to  the  official  figures  for  1903,  eighty  members 
of  the  Council  of  Empire  received  each  year  salaries  of  which  the 
total  amounted  to  some  ^^  160,000.  In  ten  years  (i  894-1904)  the 
cost  of  the  higher  bureaucracy  increased  by  more  than  100  per 
cent.  Here  are  the  figures  for  1905,  indicating  the  salaries  of 
officials  and  the  number  of  functionaries  benefiting  thereby  : 

Annual  Salary.  Number  of  Officials. 

From  ;^53o  to  ;^i,o6o        ...        1,981 

From  ;^i,o6o  to  ;^2,i2o     282 

From  ;^2,i20  to  ;^5,320      ...         40 

Over  ;^5,32o ...    10 

So  the  upkeep  of  these  2,313  high  officials  costs  the  people  more 
than  ^2,000,000  annually. 

In  other  cases  the  payments  made  to  bureaucrats  are  incredible. 
For  example,  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Russian  army 
received,  during  the  Russo-Japanese  war,  more  than  _^  10,000 
annually. 

But  the  lion's  share  is  reserved  by  the  higher  officialdom  for 
itself.  The  small  officials  receive  very  poor  pay.  According  to 
official  data,  of  the  435,000  officials  only  91,000  receive  more 
than  _£io6  a  year.  The  other  344,000  receive  less  than  this; 
and  the  salaries  of  certain  smaller  functionaries  (schoolmasters, 
postal  and  telegraph  employees,  etc.)  are  wretchedly  small,  many 
receiving  only  _^i    i6s.  to  ^2  a  month. 

Among  the  petty  officialdom  of  Russia  are  cases  of  extreme 
poverty,  death  by  inanition,  and  suicide  on  account  of  starvation. 
Such  a  position  explains  the  participation  of  the  lesser  officials  in 
the  general  strike  (1905)  of  the  proletariat.  But  it  is  even  more 
characteristic  that  those  strata  of  the  bureaucracv  whose  services 


THE  RUSSIAN  BUREAUCRACY  183 

are  most  highly  paid  are  yet  unsatisfied  with  their  position,  and 
seek  for  "private,  complementary"  gains.  Every  one  knows  the 
vast  development  attained  by  extortion  in  Russia,  for  it  has  become 
a  familiar  fact,  playing  a  perceptible  part  in  the  life  of  the  country. 
Of  recent  years  the  most  scandalous  instances  of  this  practice 
have  been  revealed.  Often  the  proofs  were  so  obvious  that  the 
Government  was  forced,  much  against  its  will,  to  place  its 
highest  officials  upon  the  "  prisoner's  bench."  Among  others 
who  found  their  way  thither  were  the  Under-Secretary  of  State, 
Gurko,  the  Governor  of  Nijni-Novgorod,  Baron  Frederiks,  and 
the  Moscow  Prefect  of  Police,  Reinbot.  Extortion  as  intro- 
duced into  the  system  of  government  reveals  the  manner  in 
which  the  aristocratic  bureaucracy  regards  service  under  the 
State.  It  considers  such  service  merely  as  a  means  of  personal 
enrichment.  The  middle  and  inferior  bureaucracy — the  police 
especially — follows  its  example.  The  police  literally  force  the 
population  to  ransom  themselves  from  persecution  and  abuses  of 
power.  Every  Russian  is  familiar  with  the  sight  of  petty  police 
officials  visiting  the  various  quarters  of  the  cities  before  all  feast- 
days  and  holidays.  These  functionaries  go  from  house  to  house, 
from  shop  to  shop,  from  cabaret  to  cabaret,  demanding  tips  from 
the  owners.  Higher  placed  officials  do  not,  of  course,  take  so 
much  trouble ;  the  money  extorted  by  them  is  sent  to  their 
houses.  While  skilfully  developing  every  possible  means  of 
exploitation  and  enrichment,  the  Russian  bureaucracy  seeks  at 
the  same  time  to  render  the  "  administrative  burden "  as  li^ht 
as  possible,  and  to  furnish  the  least  possible  amount  of  physical 
and  intellectual  labour.  The  working  day  of  the  higher  and 
middle  officials  lasts  only  four  or  five,  or  at  most  six  hours,  and  is 
thus  notably  shorter  than  that  of  their  foreign  colleagues.  But 
idleness  and  inaction  are  not  the  only  qualities  of  the  Russian 
bureaucrat.  More  dangerous  still  is  the  "administrative  ecstasy" 
of  certain  officials,  by  which  their  administrations  can  only  suffer. 
Remote  from  life  and  the  actual  needs  of  the  people,  these  officials 
are  incessantly  inventing  useless  and  inapplicable  laws  and  regula- 
tions and  mutilating  the  life  of  the  people.     Perhaps  it  could  not 


1 84  MODERN  RUSSIA 

be  otherwise.  The  social  origin  of  the  Russian  bureaucracy  must 
inevitably  have  such  a  result.  Being  of  the  very  blood  and  bone 
of  the  dying  nobility,  the  aristocratic  bureaucracy  could  hardly 
organize  new  relations  and  new  forms  of  the  life  of  the  people  ; 
still  less,  perhaps,  could  it  incarnate  in  the  governmental  policy 
the  problems  of  national  progress  and  economic  development,  for 
progress  brings  with  it  the  loss  of  that  caste  whose  representatives 
the  Russian  bureaucrats  are. 


CHAPTER   III 

THE  POLICE— THE  LAW 

I.  Police  a  concomitant  of  absolutism — "  Secret "  police — Azeff  and 
his  crimes.  II.  Russian  justice — Its  feudal  nature — Feudal  ele- 
ments of  the  reformed  justice — Victims  of  the  courts-martial — The 
Senate. 


In  all  countries  the  appearance  of  police  as  a  special  institution 
has  been  coincident  with  the  triumph  of  absolutism.  In  France 
this  institution  was  created  under  Louis  XIV,  in  Prussia  under 
Frederick  the  Great,  and  in  Russia  during  the  reign  of  Peter 
the  Great.  Before  the  latter  period  the  functions  of  police 
were  shared  between  the  feudal  seigneurs  and  elected  officials. 
Peter  made  the  police  force  independent  of  the  population  and 
centralized  the  functions  of  police,  placing  them  in  the  hands 
of  the  autocracy  and  the  bureaucracy.  Since  then  the  number 
of  policemen  has  multiplied  at  a  bewildering  rate,  until  it 
sensibly  exceeds  the  number  of  officials  belonging  to  other 
departments  of  the  Government. 

The  census  of  1897  tells  us  that  in  that  year  Russia  boasted 
of  104,500  police,  not  including  the  sots^y  (levied  upon  each 
hundred  households)  and  the  diessiatsky  (levied  upon  each  ten 
households),  rural  officials  whose  number  amounted  to  several 
thousands.  Since  1897  ^^^'=>  figure  has  incessantly  increased  ; 
indeed,  competent  persons  assert  that  it  has  doubled  in  the  space 
often  years  (1897-1907). 

185 


1 86  MODERN  RUSSIA 

This  increase  in  the  numhcr  of  poh'ce  officials  has  involved 
an  increase  of  expenditure.  In  1909  the  upkeep  of  the  "ordin- 
ary "  police  cost  more  than  ^6,000,000  yearly.  This  amount, 
which  is  furnished  by  the  State  Treasury,  does  not  include  the 
sums  contributed  by  municipalities  and  private  persons  (manu- 
facturers and  landowners)  towards  the  upkeep  of  the  "ordinary" 
police. 

Besides  the  "  ordinary "  police,  who  fulfil  the  same  functions 
as  the  police  of  Western  Europe,  there  is  another  special  police 
force  :  the  political  police.  To  this  force  belong  the  Ossobyi 
korpuss  gendarmov  (Special  Corps  of  Gendarmes).  To-day  this 
corps  comprises  800  officers  and  50,000  men  of  lower  grades. 
Founded  in  1827,  after  the  insurrection  of  the  Decembrists,  by 
the  Emperor  Nicolas  I,  it  costs  the  Government  more  than 
_^8oo,ooo  per  annum.  A  legend  has  it  that  when  Nicolas  I 
appointed  the  first  commander  of  this  corps  he  gave  him  a  white 
handkerchief  as  the  emblem  of  his  duties,  saying,  "Your  task  is 
to  dry  the  tears  of  the  unfortunate."  But  the  legend  by  no 
means  corresponds  with  the  historic  truth.  The  history  of  the 
corps  of  gendarmes  is  the  history  of  a  gloomy  reaction,  of  a 
political  Inquisition.  Not  for  nothing  has  the  "  blue  coat " 
(that  of  the  Russian  gendarmes)  become  a  synonym  for  violence 
and  injustice  in  the  eyes  of  all  society.  The  activities  of  the 
Russian  gendarmerie  are  directed  not  merely  against  all  anti- 
Governmental  organizations,  but  against  every  liberal  idea.  To 
extirpate  the  "evil  tendencies"  of  the  mind — this  is  the  problem 
to  be  faced.  Nearly  all  the  notable  minds  of  Russia,  from 
Pushkin  to  Tolstoy,  have  come  into  violent  collision  with  the 
gendarmes.  Much  literary  and  scientific  talent  has  been  de- 
stroyed by  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  "  dry  the  tears  of  the 
unfortunate." 

Simultaneously  with  the  gendarmerie  was  organized  the 
Third  Section  of  the  private  Chancellery  of  the  Tsar,  which  was 
afterwards  transformed  into  the  Department  of  Police  of  the 
Ministry  of  the  Interior.  The  "  Third  Section  "  had  no  reason 
to    be   jealous  of   the    korpuss  gendarmov  :   its   fame   was  equally 


THE  POLICE— THE  LAW  187 

sinister.  Suppressed  for  a  time,  it  was  revived  under  Alexander 
III  as  the  notorious  Okhrana^  in  which  form  it  still  exists. 

The  Okhrana  is  a  vast  organization  of  secret  political  police. 
In  the  first  place  the  okhrannoie  otdieleniie  (detective  bureaux)  were 
established  only  in  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  but  after  a  time 
they  appeared  in  all  the  great  cities  of  Russia.  The  Okhrana 
does  not  exist  merely  to  supervise  "  suspects  "  ;  its  officials  have 
other  duties,  and  are  entrusted  with  powers  of  examination  and 
inquiry  into  political  "  crimes."  The  officials  of  the  detective 
bureaux,  who  are  almost  invariably  selected  from  among  the 
officers  of  the  gendarmerie,  or  the  ranks  of  mere  spies  and 
informers,  enjoy  the  power  of  conducting  inquiries  and  of 
arresting  any  one  they  please.  The  abuses  committed  in  respect 
of  this  power  are  beyond  all  belief.  During  interrogation  torture 
is  frequently  employed. 

In  order  to  gain  a  stronger  hold  upon  the  Government  and 
the  Tsar,  the  Okhrana  has  adopted  a  system  of  provocation.  It 
instructs  its  agents  to  join  the  secret  revolutionary  organizations, 
so  that  they  may  take  part  in  their  proceedings  and  then  betray 
their  comrades.  "  These  agents  provocateurs  are  not  content  with 
observing  the  organizations  to  which  they  are  attached  "  by  way 
of  obtaining  inside  information  :  they  also  "  co-operate  with  the 
revolutionists,  provoke  violent  manifestations  of  revolutionary 
activity,  organize  attempts  at  assassination,  and  so  forth."  The 
Okhrana  terrorizes  the  Tsar  and  the  ministers  by  acts  of  pro- 
vocation, and  receives  subsidies  of  ever-increasing  value  for  the 
prosecution  of  the  "  struggle  against  the  revolutionists." 

We  have  a  classic  example  of  provocation  in  the  case  of  Azev. 
This  affair  will  be  familiar  to  all  my  readers,  so  that  I  need  not 
enter  into  details.  I  will  cite  one  document  only  :  a  declaration 
made  by  M.  Bourtzev,  and  communicated  some  years  ago  to  the 
Minister  of  Justice  and  the  Procuratot  of  the  Court  of  Appeal 
in  St.  Petersburg. 

"  It  is  already  more  than  two  years,"  writes  M.  Bourtzev, 
"since  I  publicly  accused    the  engineer  Azev   of  crimes  which 


1 88  MODERN  RUSSIA 

from  every  point  of  view  were  terrible  ;  from  that  of  the  most 
elementary  conceptions  of  justice  as  well  as  from  that  of  modern 
Russian  legislation. 

"  However,  no  judicial  proceedings  were  able  to  touch  Azev. 
A  free  man,  he  is  still  a  member  of  our  police  force. 

"  Azev,  according  to  the  assertion  made  in  the  Duma  by 
the  President  of  the  Council  of  Ministers,  Stolypin,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  year  1909,  has  belonged  to  the  secret  police 
since  the  year  1892,  and  his  most  fruitful  years  (as  a  detective) 
were  those  between  1903  and  1908. 

"Until  the  beginning  of  1909  Azev  was,  in  the  eyes  of  the 
revolutionary  Socialists,  one  of  the  most  prominent  members  of 
the  party.  Having  been  nominally  a  member  of  the  party  for 
ten  years,  Azev  became  a  member  of  the  Central  Committee, 
the  true  head  of  the  '  fighting  organization  '  of  the  revolutionary 
Socialists.  And  in  these  years,  between  1903  and  1908,  while 
Azev  was  at  the  head  of  his  party,  a  whole  series  of  acts  of 
terrorism  was  committed. 

"  Azev  betrayed  his  comrades  for  money  and  in  the  pursuit 
of  his  career.  He  organized  the  execution  of  Plehve  and  the 
Grand-Duke  Sergius,  firstly  in  order  to  secure  an  important 
position  in  the  party  and  to  inspire  his  comrades  with  a  con- 
fidence in  him  that  no  accusations  touching  him  could  destroy, 
and  secondly  in  order  that  his  collaboration  might  have .  a  greater 
value  in  the  eyes  of  the  police. 

"With  equal  indifference,  impelled  solely  by  the  desire 
of  gain,  Azev  sent  dozens  of  revolutionists  to  death,  planned 
the  assassination  of  Plehve  and  the  Grand-Duke  Sergius,  and  even 
wished  to  proceed  to  regicide. 

"  When  I  accused  Azev,  the  revolutionary  Socialists,  anxious 
to  defend  him  against  my  accusation,  revealed  the  whole  of 
his  activities,  and  enabled  me  to  establish  the  following  facts  : 

"In  the  summer  of  1904,  having  insisted  that  the  *  fighting 
organization '  should  undertake  the  execution  of  the  Minister  of 
the  Interior,  Plehve,  Azev  conceived  the  plan  of  an  attempted 
assassination   and   incited  Sazonov,  Kalaiev,  Savinkov  and  others 


THE  POLICE— THE  LAW  189 

to  accomplish  it.  Three  weeks  before  the  execution  of  his 
scheme,  Azev  went  to  St.  Petersburg,  established  himself  in  the 
dwelling  of  the  conspirators  Savinkov  and  Sazonov,  remained 
there  for  ten  days  without  going  out,  and  directed  thence 
the  whole  of  the  operations.  On  the  eve  of  the  first  attempt  on 
the  life  of  Plehve  (8th  July),  Azev  left  for  Vilna,  and  sent  for 
Sazonov  that  he  might  give  him  further  instructions.  On  the 
15th  July  Plehve  was  killed.  Azev,  having  received  at  Warsaw 
a  telegram  despatched  by  Savinkov,  acquainting  him  with 
the  results  of  the  attempt,  immediately  left  for  Vienna  (i6th 
July).  From  Vienna  he  sent  a  telegram  to  the  chief  of  the 
secret  political  police,  in  order  to  establish  an  alibi  in  case  of 
emergency. 

"  In  the  autumn  Azev  was  in  Switzerland,  organizing  the 
murder  of  the  Grand-Duke  Sergius,  the  Grand-Duke  Vladimir, 
and  Kleigels.  In  accordance  with  his  plan  he  sent  to  Russia 
three  detachments  of  Terrorists,  and  provided  them  with  the 
dynamite  which  was  used  to  prepare  the  bomb  that  killed  the 
Grand-Duke  Sergius. 

"On  the  23rd  April,  1906,  Azev  was  at  Moscow,  and  there 
he  himself  placed  Terrorists  armed  with  bombs  along  the  route 
of  the  Governor-General  Dubassov.  The  latter  was  wounded, 
and  his  adjutant,  Prince  Konovnitzin,  was  killed. 

"One  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  'fighting  organiza- 
tion,' the  well-known  revolutionist  Boris  Savinkov,  who  had 
worked  with  Azev  uninterruptedly,  published  not  long  ago 
the  narrative  of  the  murder  of  the  Grand-Duke  Sergius,  clearly 
indicating  the  part  played  by  Azev  and  himself  in  this 
affair. 

"  In  this  narrative  Savinkov  makes  the  following  declaration 
in  respect  of  Azev's  position  in  the  party. 

" '  A  member  of  the  party  since  its  foundation,  Azev  had 
knowledge  of  the  plan  drawn  up  against  the  Governor  of 
Kharkov,  Prince  Obolensky  (1902)  and  took  part  in  the  plot 
which  cost  the  life  of  Bogdanovitch,  Governor  of  Ufa  (1903). 
In    the   autumn    of    the   same    year    he    became    chief    of    the 


IQO  MODERN  RUSSIA 

'  fighting  organization,'  and  took  part  in  the  following  Terrorist 
actions  :  the  assassination  of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
Plehve  ;  the  assassination  of  the  Grand-Duke  Sergius  ;  the 
attempted  assassination  of  the  Grand-Duke  Vladimir  ;  of  the 
Governor-General  of  St.  Petersburg,  Trepov  ;  of  the  Governor- 
General  of  Kiev,  Kleyguels  ;  of  Admiral  Dubassov  ;  of  Durnov, 
Minister  of  the  Interior ;  of  General  Minn  and  Colonel 
Riman,  both  officers  of  the  Semenovsky  Regiment,  and 
of  Ratchkovsky,  chief  detective  ;  the  assassination  of  Georg 
Gapon  ;  the  attempted  assassination  of  Tchuknin,  commander 
of  the  Black  Sea  Fleet,  and  of  the  Prime  Minister,  Stolypin  ; 
and  three  attempts  upon  the  life  of  the  Tsar.  Moreover,  he 
knew  of  the  preparations  made  in  respect  of  the  assassinations 
of  Tatarov,  agent  of  the  Okhrana  ;  of  General  Saharov  ;  of  Von 
der  Launitz,  chief  of  police  ;  and  of  General  Pavlov,  military 
procurator,  and  in  respect  of  the  attempted  assassinations  of  the 
Grand-Duke  Nicolas,  of  the  Governor-General  of  Moscow, 
of  Hershclmann,  and  so  forth. 

"'A  member  of  the  Central  Committee,  he  took  part  in 
the  discussion  of  every  scheme.  The  plan  of  the  insurrection 
of  Moscow  and  the  mutiny  at  Kronstadt  were  also  discussed 
by  him.' 

"  However,  the  list  drawn  up  by  Savinkov  is  far  from 
complete. 

"  For  example,  Azev  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the 
attempted  assassination  of  Kourlov,  was  accessory  to  the  kill- 
ing of  Sleptzov,  the  Governor  of  Tver,  etc.  He  also 
established  laboratories  where  engines  of  destruction  were 
manufactured  which  did  not  fail  in  their  object  (assassinations 
of  Plehve,  Grand-Duke  Sergius,  Dubassov,  Hershelmann,  etc.). 
Moreover,  Azev  facilitated  the  escape  of  some  or  the  most 
prominent  Terrorists. 

"  Even  in  those  Terrorist  acts  in  which  Azev  was  unable 
to  share  his  influence  was  enormous.  For  a  long  time,  for 
years  on  end,  Terrorists  were  preparing  themselves,  as  workers 
in  dynamite  factories,  under  his  direct  orders. 


THE  POLICE— THE  LAW  191 

"  The  President  of  the  Council  of  Ministers,  Stolypin,  has 
stated  that  Azev  could  not  warn  him  of  the  plot  against  Von  der 
Launitz,  for  being  abroad  he  did  not  know  of  it.  No  !  Azev 
knew  of  the  attempt  beforehand.  What  he  did  not  know  was 
the  complete  plan  of  the  intended  execution.  Moreover,  the 
members  entrusted  with  this  mission  were  well  known  to  Azev, 
and  until  then  had  acted  only  under  his  direction.  Suliatitzky 
and  '  The  Admiral '  went  together  to  the  church,  where  the 
latter  killed  Von  der  Launitz,  '  while  the  first  of  these,  directed 
to  execute  Stolypin,  was  unable  to  fulfil  his  mission,  for  a  mere 
chance  prevented  Stolypin  from  going  to  the  church  with  Von  der 
Launitz.' 

"  Thanks  to  the  secret  documents  of  the  revolutionary 
Socialists  and  the  testimony  of  dozens  of  persons  who  had  taken 
part  with  Azev  in  Terrorist  acts,  I  was  able  to  probe  to  the 
bottom  his  personality  and  his  activities,  and  to-day  I  categorically 
declare  that  Azev,  having  for  seven  or  eight  years  been  a 
member  of  the  *  fighting  organization,'  has  personally  con- 
tributed to  a  whole  series  of  Terrorist  attempts  and  has 
directed  their  execution.  His  activity  was  not  political  but 
criminal^  for  his  sole  object  was  essentially  private  and  personal. 

"  While  insisting  that  Azev  shall  be  immediately  brought 
to  justice,  I  am  certain  that  a  number  of  Russian  statesmen, 
having  of  late  years  deliberately  concealed  his  criminal  activity,  will 
for  their  own  sakes  prevent  any  legal  proceedings  against  him. 

"  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Department  of  Police  was  until  the 
year  1905  ignorant  of  Azev's  double  activity.  As  to  whether 
certain  members  of  the  superior  police  knew  at  that  time  of 
Azev's  membership  in  the  '  fighting  organization,'  I  cannot 
at  present  be  certain.  In  1905  the  activity  of  Azev  as  a 
Terrorist  ceased  to  be  a  secret  to  several  high  officials  of  the 
Detective  Bureau.  But  Azev  was  amnestied  by  them  in  the 
name  of  services  rendered  and  to  come.  In  1908  he  began  to 
be  publicly  accused  of  Terrorist  actions.  But  still  he  was  by  no 
means  anxious  or  disturbed. 

At  the  beginning  of  the    year   1906    Azev  was    arrested — 


u 


192  MODERN  RUSSIA 

without  the  knowledge  of  the  revolutionists — by  the  chief  of  the 
Detective  Bureau  of  St.  Petersburg,  General  Gerasimov.  In 
prison  a  contract  was  signed.  Azev  was  absolved  from  partici- 
pation in  the  assassination  of  Plehve  and  the  Grand-Duke 
Sergius,  and  in  return  he  undertook  to  continue  to  serve 
the  police. 

"  But  even  after  the  signing  of  this  contract  Azev  organized 
the  attempts  against  Dubassov,  General  Hershelmann,  Slept- 
zov,  etc. 

"In  1908,  when  I  unmasked  him,  Azev  was  planning  regi- 
cide. That  he  did  not  succeed  was  no  fault  of  Azev's,  for  he 
did  the  utmost  he  could  to  ensure  success.  As  for  Gerasimov,  he 
did  all  he  could  to  save  Azev. 

"  In  1909,  in  the  month  of  February,  there  was  an  interpella- 
tion in  the  Duma  on  the  subject  of  Azev.  The  President  of 
the  Committee  of  Ministers,  Stolypin,  represented  the  activities 
of  Azev  under  an  aspect  absolutely  contradictory  to  all  the  estab- 
lished facts.  Azev,  said  Stolypin,  had  confined  himself  to  warning 
the  police  of  intended  Terrorist  attempts. 

"And  since  February,  1909,  Stolypin  has  done  nothing  to 
throw  light  upon  the  double  activity  of  Azev.  Thanks  to  this 
fact,  to  the  aspect  of  Azev's  proceedings  presented  by  M.  Stolypin, 
Azev  has  escaped  justice. 

"All  that  is  contained  in  this  declaration  I  can  prove  in  detail 
before  the  Court,  and  I  can  also  produce  witnesses  who  will 
support  my  accusation. 

(Signed)  "W.  Bourtzev." 

The  death  of  Stolypin,  killed  by  an  agent  of  the  secret  police, 
shows  that  the  existence  of  the  Okhrana  sometimes  threatens 
the  Government  itself. 

II 

The  modern  history  of  Russian  justice  is  closely  connected 
with   the   general  history  of  the   country.     Until   the   abolition 


THE  POLICE— THE  LAW  193 

of  serfdom,  which  marked  the  commencement  of  the  "  period  of 
great  reforms,"  there  was  in  Russia  no  middle-class  justice,  how- 
ever irregular.  The  peasant  masses  were  judged  by  the  landed 
proprietors,  the  owners  of  "  serf  souls."  As  for  the  nobles,  they 
were,  practically,  not  subject  to  justice,  and  were  very  rarely 
brought  to  book.  As  a  rule  all  trials,  and  especially  civil  trials, 
dragged  on  for  years.  Not  in  vain  did  the  people  in  those  days 
call  a  judicial  procedure  voloklta  (from  the  verb  volotchite^  to 
drag,  to  linger). 

On  the  20th  November,  1864,  the  Sudebny'ie-Ustavy  (judicial 
statutes)  were  published.  These  have  been  the  basis  of  "  Euro- 
pean justice  "  in  Russia  :  a  justice  of  juries,  open  doors,  etc. 

The  new  justice  was  evoked  by  new  economic  necessities  ;  the 
development  of  capitalist  production  and  exchange  called  for  the 
protection  of  the  person  and  the  material  property  of  every 
Russian,  a  protection  which  the  old  juridical  system  could  no 
longer  extend. 

But  even  in  the  new  juridical  system  there  were  anti-democratic 
reservations.  To  be  elected  a  juror,  a  man  must  be  a  landowner. 
The  composition  of  the  jury  was  subject  to  the  control  of  the 
bureaucracy.  The  nobles  continued  to  elect  the  justices  of  the 
peace.  Preliminary  examinations  fell  almost  exclusively  to 
the  charge  of  the  police.  The  jury  was  deprived  of  the  right 
to  deal  with  political  offences,  a  right  which  was  conceded  to 
"chambers  of  justice,"  "assisted  by  the  representatives  of  all  the 
castes  of  society."  The  Voloistnoi  Sud  (rural  tribunal),  organized 
in  archaic  fashion,  continued  to  judge  the  material  and  personal 
disputes  of  the  peasants. 

These  imperfections  of  the  new  juridical  system  were  rendered 
still  more  sensible  by  the  aristocratic  restoration  which  followed. 
The  irremovability  of  the  judges,  which  was  maintained  de  jure^ 
was  abolished  ^^ycr/o,  and  the  judges  became  mere  officials  anxious 
to  content  the  authorities.  At  this  time  a  whole  series  of  laws 
was  promulgated  relating  to  ofFences  of  the  Press.  These  were 
declared  beyond  the  competence  of  the  jury.  As  for  political 
crimes,  the  examination  of  prisoners  passed  from  the  examining 

13 


194  MODERN  RUSSIA 

magistrates  into  the  hands  of  the  gendarmes  and  the  Okhrann. 
Many  Press  offences,  and  many  political  offences,  began  to  be 
tried  outside  the  courts  by  the  administration.  Moreover,  a 
"  Special  Commission "  was  established  in  the  Ministry  of  the 
Interior,  whose  mission  was  to  deport  to  Siberia,  without  trial, 
thousands  of  persons  annually.  In  1889  a  new  measure  was 
enacted  which  confounded  the  departments  of  police  and  adminis- 
tration. This  was  the  creation  of  the  zetnsky  natchalmk.  This 
amounted  to  the  restoration  of  the  old  administrative  and  judicial 
powers  which  the  feudal  seigneurs  exercised  over  the  country 
population. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  the  reaction  in  the 
domain  of  justice  became  more  acute.  The  courts-martial  tried 
political  cases,  and  the  death  penalty  became  a  phenomenon  of 
everyday  life  in  Russia.  The  application  of  the  death  penalty  has 
been  terribly  frequent  during  the  last  few  years.  M.  Gruzcnberg, 
the  well-known  jurist  of  St.  Petersburg,  has  published  the  fol- 
lowing figures  in  an  article  in  the  juridical  review  Pravo 
[The  Law)  : 

"In  1908,  during  the  intensely  critical  period  of  the  third 
Duma,  the  period  of  pacification  proclaimed  by  the  Government, 
7,016  civilians  were  delivered  over  to  the  military  tribunals  by 
virtue  of  emergency  laws.  Of  these,  1,340  were  condemned  to 
death.  In  one  single  year  more  men  were  executed  than  during 
the  preceding  thirty-three  years  of  the  history  of  these  courts,  and 
one  and  a  half  times  more  than  during  the  so-called  revolutionary 
period  (1905-7)." 

Do  not  forget  that  these  figures  relate  only  to  capital  punish- 
ment sanctioned  by  "justice."  A  greater  number  of  victims 
of  the  reaction  perished  without  trial :  in  two  years  (1905-6), 
during  the  "stifling  of  the  revolutionary  movement,"  26,000 
persons  were  killed  by  the  army  and  the  police,  while  31,000 
were  wounded.  But  these  figures  do  not  include  the  victims 
of  the  notorious  "  punitive  detachments."  These,  in  the  Baltic 
provinces  alone,  killed  1,500  to  2,000  of  the  inhabitants.  Add 
to  these  37,000  victims  of  the  pogroms  (1905-10)  and  you  will 


THE  POLICE— THE  LAW  195 

realize  what  horrible  sacrifices  the  Russian  people  has  offered  upon 
the  altar  of  liberty  ! 

The  number  of  those  detained  in  prison  has  increased  in- 
credibly: in  1897  it  was  77,000;  in  1909  it  was  181,000. 
These  unfortunates  consist  principally  of  political  "  criminals." 
As  for  the  number  of  those  deported  to  the  north  of  European 
Russia  or  Siberia,  it  is  so  great  that  it  cannot  be  established. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  expenses  involved  by  the  "  adminis- 
tration of  the  prisons  "  should  be  extremelv  burdensome. 

I  will  spare  my  readers  a  description  of  the  horrors  committed 
in  the  depths  of  the  Russian  prisons  and  in  Siberia.  The  prison 
administration  treats  those  detained  on  political  grounds  with  the 
utmost  brutality,  employing  the  worst  forms  of  torture  and  cor- 
poral punishment,  and  the  walls  of  prisons  often  witness  frightful 
tragedies  and  wholesale  suicides,  since  suicide  is  the  sole  means  of 
protest  left  to  the  prisoner. 

In  conclusion,  I  will  speak  a  word  respecting  the  highest  juri- 
dical institution  of  the  Empire — the  Senate.  The  mission  of  the 
Russian  Senate  is  to  watch  over  the  laws  and  to  safeguard  justice. 
But  the  Senate  is  not  composed  of  jurists  ;  for  the  most  part  it  is 
filled  with  retired  administrators  or  even  ex-police  officials.  The 
members  of  the  Senate,  being  accustomed  to  the  employment  of 
brute  force  and  illegal  expedients,  cannot  act  as  the  guardians  of 
the  law.  So  the  Senate,  rather  than  a  supreme  court  of  justice 
and  appeal,  capable  of  correcting  the  errors  of  the  courts  which 
are  subordinated  thereto,  is  really  a  focus  of  the  abuse  of  power. 
As  it  can  both  discuss  and  "elucidate  "  the  laws,  the  remnants  of 
the  judicial  legislation  of  the  "period  of  great  reforms"  have  at 
length  disappeared  under  the  repeated  stress  of  senatorial  "eluci- 
dations." 


CHAPTER   IV 

LOCAL  SELF-GOVERNMENT— THE  ZEMSTVO 

I.  Local   self-government    and   its  elements.     IL    Municipalities   and 

zemstvos. 


Local  administration  in  Russia  forms  a  somewhat  confused  and 
complicated  system,  composed  of  various  institutions  founded 
upon  different  principles,  and  very  often  opposing  one  another. 

On  the  one  hand  we  see  a  bureaucratic  organization  whose 
highest  representatives  are  the  gubernatoryy  or  Governors,  placed 
at  the  head  of  each  gubernlia^  or  Government.  The  administra- 
tive power  of  the  Governor  is  very  great.  But  in  districts 
situated  at  the  extremities  and  on  the  frontiers  of  the  Empire 
(in  Siberia,  Central  Asia,  the  Caucasus,  Poland,  and  the 
Baltic  provinces — that  is,  wherever  the  inhabitants  are  truly 
non-Russian)  the  power  of  the  local  administrators  is  still 
greater,  indeed  almost  unlimited,  on  account  of  the  union 
of  the  civil  and  military  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  military 
Governors. 

The  Governments  are  divided  into  nyezdsy  or  cantons,  which 
are  administered  by  police  officers,  ispravtiiki^  that  is  to  say, 
executants  who  are  completely  dependent  on  the  Governors. 

Besides  this  bureaucratic  organization,  there  is  also  in  Russia  a 
corporative  organization.     The  nobility,  the  clergy,  the  artisans, 

the  meshtchanie^  or  small  urban  proprietors — each  of  these  classes 

196 


LOCAL    SELF-GOVERNMENT  197 

has  its  own  corporative  institution.  The  difference  between  the 
historical  evolution  of  Russia  and  that  of  Western  Europe  is 
plainly  revealed  bv  the  history  of  these  institutions.  While  in 
Western  Europe  the  organization  of  the  urban  elements — the 
merchants  and  craftsmen — has  reached  a  high  degree  of  develop- 
ment and  attained  a  social  and  political  preponderance  over  the 
organizations  of  the  nobilitv  and  peasantry,  in  Russia  the  urban 
corporations  have  remained  in  an  embryonic  condition.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  corporative  institutions  of  the  nobility  and 
peasantry  are  distinguished  bv  marked  and  original  features. 

The  relations  between  the  organic  parts  of  the  corporative 
administrations  of  the  nobility  and  peasantry  correspond  to  the 
economic  and  social  relations  of  these  two  classes,  and  the  com- 
munal institutions  of  the  peasants  are  in  reality  absolutely 
dependent  upon  the  seigneurs.  The  reaction  of  the  period  of 
Alexander  III  and  Nicolas  II  has  greatly  contributed  to  this 
state  of  things.  In  1889  the  Government  created  the  institution 
of  the  zemskie  natchalnlki  (literally,  "  chiefs  of  the  earth  "),  which 
is  recruited  among  the  nobles  and  holds  in  its  hands  the  entire 
administrative  and  judicial  powers  in  the  country  districts.  The 
zemskii  natchalnik  may,  if  he  wishes,  sentence  the  peasants  to  be 
fined  or  imprisoned  by  a  simple  administrative  order  ;  and  he  can 
dismiss  the  mayor  and  the  whole  rural  commune.  In  the 
person  of  the  natchalnik  was  restored,  to  a  certain  extent,  the 
ancient  feudal  powers  of  a  seigneur  over  his  serfs. 

Besides  the  bureaucratic  and  corporative  organizations  there 
are  also  in  Russia  the  organs  of  local  self-government — the  origins 
of  which  go  back  to  the  great  "reform  period."  In  1864  the 
zemstvo  was  created  ;  that  is,  the  self-government  of  the  popula- 
tion dwelling  outside  the  towns.  The  affairs  of  the  zemstvo  are 
administered  by  the  assembly  of  the  canton,  or  uye%d,  and  the 
assembly  of  the  Government  or  province.  The  first  is  composed 
of  the  representatives  of  the  population  of  the  uye-zd^  but  not  all 
the  inhabitants  enjoy  the  right  of  suffrage.  Only  persons  own- 
ing a  large  estate  (125  to  800  desiatins — 337  to  2,160  acres — of 
land)  have  the  direct  and  entire  electoral  right,  and  persons  own- 


198  MODERN  RUSSIA 

ing  real  estate  in  the  shape  of  houses,  factories,  etc.,  to  the  value 
of  ^i,6oo.  As  for  the  small  landowners,  they  form  electoral 
colleges  and  elect  delegates  in  proportion  to  the  sum  of  all  their 
properties.  The  peasants  also  form  a  special  ward  or  curia  with 
a  verv  limited  representation. 

The  provincial  assemblies  are   composed   of  delegates  elected 
from  among  the  members  of  the  cantonal  assembh"es. 

The  assemblies  of  the  zcmstvo  hold  one  session  annually  for 
the  expedition  of  current  affairs,  and  elect  their  executive,  the 
zemskiia  upravy^  composed  of  a  president  and  certain  assistants. 
Six  years  after  the  zemstvo  was  created  (in  1870)  self-govern- 
ment was  instituted  also  in  the  cities.  This  also  was  based  on 
the  property  suff'rage,  which  has  given  the  municipal  administra- 
tion into  the  hands  of  the  rich  merchants  and  proprietors  of  real 
estate.  The  municipal  council — known  in  Russia  as  the 
gorodskaya  duma — elects  as  its  executive  the  gorodskaya  uprava. 

Into  the  scope  of  the  zcmstvos  and  municipalities  enter,  by 
law,  all  matters  relating  to  local  requirements  :  namely,  questions 
of  public  education,  public  health,  mutual  public  fire  insurance, 
public  highways,  agronomy,  etc.  The  laws  of  1864  and  1870 
(jive  the  Governors  and  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  the  right  to 
amend  the  resolutions  of  the  local  assemblies  only  with  a  view  to 
their  conformity  with  existing  legislation.  But  the  reaction  of 
the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  the  beginning  of 
the  twentieth  has  diminished  this  comparative  independence,  as  the 
laws  of  1890  and  1892  (relating  to  the  reform  of  the  zemstvos 
and  municipalities)  and  administrative  practice  also  permit  the 
Governors  and  the  Minister  to  judge  the  activity  of  the  zemstvos 
and  the  gorodskiya  dumy  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  utility. 
At  present  the  Governor  can  "disapprove"  and  annul  any 
decision  of  the  local  assembly,  so  that  a  great  portion  of  the  work 
of  self-government  remains  unproductive. 

The  law  of  1890  relating  to  the  reform  of  the  zemstvo  made 
the  latter  even  less  democratic  than  it  was  before  ;  the  peasants 
were  deprived  of  the  right  of  directly  electing  representatives  to 
the  zemstvo  assemblies,  and  can  now  only  vote  for  such  candidates 


LOCAL    SELF-GOVERNMENT  199 

as  the  Governor  himself  selects.  At  the  same  time  the  number 
of  the  peasants'  representatives  was  limited. ^ 

The  predominance  of  the  nobility  in  the  zemstvo  is  revealed  in 
the  fact  that  the  assembly  cannot  even  elect  its  president  ;  it  is 
the  "  marshal  of  the  nobility  "  w^ho  accomplishes  this  function 
ex  officio.  Finally,  under  Nicolas  II  yet  another  restrictive  rule 
vi^as  established.  The  budget  of  the  zemstvos  w^as  fixed  ;  the  latter 
bodies  were  deprived  of  the  possibility  of  enlarging  their  activities 
as  they  might  consider  necessary. 

There  is  still  an  obstacle  in  the  development  of  the  positive 
labours  of  the  zemstvos  :  the  law  obliges  them  to  present  for  the 
approbation  of  the  Governor  all  functionaries  and  employees 
whom  they  appoint  in  their  service — doctors,  agricultural  experts, 
schoolmasters,  statisticians,  etc.  Each  candidate  for  such  a  post  is 
obliged  to  prove  his  political  "solidity,"  and  the  Governor  has 
full  liberty  to  refuse  his  approval  without  explanation.  This 
greatly  hinders  the  recruiting  of  officials  for  the  public  services, 
as  many  experienced  workers  appear  "  suspect  "  to  the  bureaucracy 
and  are  eliminated  from  the  governmental  body.  Even  presidents 
and  members  of  the  upravy  cannot  exercise  their  functions  with- 
out the  approbation  and  authorization  of  the  Government,  which 
often  replaces  the  candidates  whom  the  zemstvos  have  elected 
by  its  own  official  candidates. 

But  in  spite  of  all  these  unfavourable  conditions  the  Russian 
self-government  has  succeeded  in  accomplishing  something  during 
its  half-century  of  existence.  This  is  true  more  especially  of  the 
zemstvos,  for  the  urban  municipalities  directed  by  ignorant  mer- 
chants have,  with  few  exceptions,  done  practically  nothing  to 
better  the  conditions  of  life.  According  to  the  inquiry  instituted 
in  J911  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  of  the  1,078  Russian 
towns  only  545  are  provided  with  a  "  more  or  less  satisfactory  " 
water  supply  ;  as  for  all  the  others,  they  consume  bad  and  impure 

'  Being  in  a  minority  in  the  assemblies  of  the  zemstvo,  the  peasants 
cannot  defend  their  material  interests,  and  the  seigneurs,  who  direct  the 
affairs  of  the  zemstvo,  burden  the  peasants'  land  with  taxes  far  heavier 
than  those  on  their  own. 


200  MODERN  RUSSIA 

water.  CJnly  17  per  cent,  of  the  towns  have  a  more  or  less 
regular  system  of  drainage,  and  only  3  per  cent,  have  centralized 
sewers  ;  even  St.  Petersburg  and  Baku  do  not  possess  the  latter. 
Of  these  towns  40  per  cent,  possess  other  but  extremely  primitive 
methods  ot  sanitation,  and  60  per  cent,  have  absolutely  nothing 
of  the  kind.  Matters  are  as  bad  in  respect  of  lighting,  transport, 
public  assistance,  etc.  Only  18  per  cent,  of  the  towns  possess 
telephones  and  5I  per  cent,  tramways. 

It  is  true  that  the  average  mortality  is  lower  in  the  cities  than 
in  the  country,  the  figures  being  27*9  and  31-4  per  thousand 
respectively.  This  difference  is  not  due  to  the  more  perfect 
organization  of  the  public  services  in  the  towns,  but  to  the  fact 
that  the  towns  attract  more  robust  elements  from  the  country, 
leaving  in  the  country  the  aged  and  the  children,  who  are  less 
fitted  for  the  struggle  for  life. 

Here  are  some  figures  relating  to  the  condition  of  public  health 
in  Russia,  cited  from  an  official  report  and  referring  to  the  year 
1909. 

The  average  mortality  in  1909  was  28*9  per  thousand.  It  was 
higher  in  1909  than  in  1908  and  1907.  The  average  birth-rate, 
43'8  per  thousand,  was  lower  in  1909  than  in  the  twenty  preceding 
years.  The  natural  increase  of  the  population  was  14*9  per 
thousand.  The  mortality  was  especially  great  among  young 
children.  The  death-rate  of  children  under  the  age  of  one  year 
was  :  in  Moscow,  34"6  per  cent  ;  in  St.  Petersburg,  24*2  per 
cent.  ;  in  Warsaw,  17*5  per  cent.  ;  in  Odessa,  i']'6  per  cent.  ; 
while  in  London  it  is  I0"8  percent.  ;  in  Paris,  9*7  per  cent.  ;  and 
in  Amsterdam,  8*2  per  cent.  The  medical  staff  returned  the 
number  of  sick  persons  in  1909  as  81,746,000,  or  82*4  per  cent, 
of  the  population.  But  even  this  alarming  figure  is  below  the 
truth,  as  owing  to  an  imperfect  system  of  medical  aid  many  cases 
of  sickness  remain  absolutely  unknown  to  official  statistics  ;  they 
suffer  and  die  in  silence  and  solitude,  like  a  dog  deserted  by  its 
master.  Of  these  sick  persons  i8  per  cent,  suffered  from  conta- 
gious maladies  :  malaria  accounted  for  3^  millions  ;  the  various 
forms  of  typhoid  for  820,000  ;    diphtheria  for  462,000  ;    scarlet 


LOCAL    SELF-GOVERNMENT  201 

fever  for  417,000  ;  smallpox  for  144,000;  cholera  for  24,000,  etc. 
The  proportion  of  sick  persons  attacked  by  smallpox  amounts  to 
54  per  thousand,  or  5"4  per  cent.;  while  in  England  and  Prussia 
it  is  equal  to  o*i  per  thousand,  or  0"0i  per  cent.,  and  in  France  to 
0*2  per  thousand.  The  victims  of  typhoid  diseases  in  Russia 
number  lOO  per  thousand,  while  in  Prussia  the  figures  are  4*9  per 
thousand,  in  England  6  per  thousand,  and  in  Norway  3*4  per 
thousand. 

These  figures  would  have  been  still  more  overwhelming  but  for 
the  medical  organization  created  by  the  institution  of  self-govern- 
ment. If  the  germ  of  public  medicine  and  hygiene  does  exist  in 
Russia,  it  is  solely  due  to  the  action  of  the  zemstvos  ;  the  central 
Government  has  done  nothing  in  this  respect.  Unhappily  the 
non-democratic  structure  of  the  zemstvos  and  the  political  and 
social  conditions  of  Russian  life  limit  the  activity  of  the  public 
services.  According  to  the  just  remark  of  Professor  Virchov,  the 
famous  German  physician,  "  medicine  is  in  no  condition  to  fight 
against  sickness  and  death  where  the  whole  policy  of  the  Govern- 
ment keeps  the  people  under  the  yoke  of  poverty,  ignorance,  and 
oppression." 

The  work  of  the  zemstvos  in  the  sphere  of  public  instruction  is 
by  no  means  negligible.  Primary  education  in  Russia  is  extremely 
backward  in  comparison  with  that  of  other  European  countries. 
According  to  inquiries  referring  back  to  the  beginning  of  the 
twentieth  century,  the  number  of  illiterates  in  each  thousand  of 
young  men  called  upon  or  presenting  themselves  for  military  ser- 
vice is  in  Germany  i  ;  in  England,  37  ;  in  France,  52;  and  in 
Russia,  617  ! 

According  to  the  census  of  1897  ^^^  proportion  of  illiterates  in 
Russia  is  79  per  cent.,  or  69  per  cent,  in  the  case  of  males  and 
87  per  cent,  in  the  case  of  females.  The  inhabitants  of  the  towns 
are  less  illiterate  than  the  peasantry  ;  among  the  former  the 
proportion  is  55  per  cent.,  and  among  the  latter — 82  per  cent.  ! 

In  1880  European  Russia  contained  22,770  primary  schools  ; 
in  191 1  there  were  already  80,377.  In  European  and  Asiatic 
Russia  taken  together  there  were,  in  191 1,  100,295  primary  schools. 


202  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  pupils  were  estimated  at  6^  millions — 4  per  cent,  of  the  whole 
population,  or  33  per  cent,  of  the  children  between  8  and  ii 
years.  Specialists  assert  that  to  give  primary  instruction  to  every 
Russian  child  300,000  primary  schools  would  be  required.  As 
for  the  teaching  staff  of  the  primary  schools,  in  191 1  its  strength 
was  154,000 — 71,000  male  and  83,000  female  teachers.  The 
total  expenditure  upon  primary  instruction  in  19 10  was 
_^9,553,000,  or  an  average  of  j/^  21  1 6s.  per  school  and  £^1  lis.  3d. 
per  scholar.  The  greater  portion  of  these  expenses  is  paid  by  the 
municipalities  and  the  zemstvos  and  the  rural  communes  ;  at  the 
close  of  the  nineteenth  century  these  bodies  were  already  paying 
two-thirds  of  the  annual  cost  of  primary  instruction,  while  the 
State  met  onlv  14  per  cent,  of  the  expenditure,  and  the  churches 
and  convents  2  per  cent.  The  zemstvos  and  rural  communes  can 
apportion  13*6  per  cent,  of  their  budget  for  purposes  of  primary 
instruction,  and  the  urban  municipalities  8*3  per  cent.  ;  but  the 
State  pays  only  0*4  per  cent,  of  its  budget.  We  must  not,  how- 
ever, forget  that  the  budget  of  the  zemstvos  is  composed  princi- 
pally of  payments  made  by  the  peasants  themselves,  so  that  the 
latter  bear  nearly  the  whole  of  the  cost  of  primary  instruction. 

A  few  months  ago  the  special  commission  appointed  by  the 
third  Duma  discussed  the  state  of  primary  education  in  Russia 
and  arrived  at  the  melancholy  deduction  that  the  results  of 
instruction  are  extremely  slight  both  in  quantity  and  in  quality. 
Few  pupils  (especially  among  the  girls)  remain  at  school  for 
the  whole  of  the  three  years  which  in  Russia  constitutes  the 
"complete  course"  of  primary  education;  the  majority  leave 
before  the  examinations.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
poverty  of  the  peasants  compels  them  to  regard  their  children 
at  a  very  early  age  as  workers  and  wage-earners  ;  they  take  their 
sons  from  school  so  that  they  may  help  their  fathers  in  agricul- 
tural pursuits  or  in  trades  of  various  kinds,  while  the  daughters 
look  after  their  younger  brothers  and  sisters  or  help  their  mothers 
in  their  domestic  labours.  It  is  not  surprising  that  among  the 
ex-pupils  of  the  primary  schools  we  find  a  considerable  number 
of  illiterate    persons;    this  "recidivism"  of  complete  ignorance 


LOCAL   SELF-GOVERNMENT  203 

is  unhappily  a  plienomenon  only  too  familiar  in  Russia.  As  for 
the  moral  and  educative  influence  of  the  primary  school,  it  is, 
according  to  the  commission,  insignificant. 

This  mournful  picture  will  not  astonish  us  if  we  consider  the 
general  conditions  of  popular  life  in  Russia.  A  free  school  can 
exist  only  in  a  free  State.  The  Russian  Government  will  not 
permit  experienced  teachers  to  exercise  their  profession  unless 
they  are  "  safe "  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  police.  The 
schoolbooks  are  for  the  most  part  highly  unsatisfactory,  because 
the  administration  requires  not  that  their  authors  should  be  good 
scholars  and  teachers,  but  "  patriots  and  believers."  Extra- 
primary  classes  (night  schools,  adult  classes,  etc.)  may  be  instituted 
only  by  virtue  of  the  special  authorization  of  the  bureaucracy,  and 
the  teachers  must  be  previously  "approved"  by  the  adminis- 
tration. 

The  "  School  Inspection  "  treats  the  teachers — especially  in 
the  country — as  the  seigneurs  used  to  treat  their  serfs  ;  even  the 
private  and  family  life  of  the  teachers  is  under  the  control  of  their 
superiors.  Quite  recently  the  Russian  journals  related  the 
following  fact,  which  will  perhaps  seem  anecdotic,  but  which 
is  nevertheless  true  :  In  the  Government  of  Viatica  the  superior 
of  a  certain  teacher  was  displeased  with  the  latter  for  wearing  his 
hair  "too  long" — long  hair  being  in  Russia  regarded  as  a  sign 
of  "  Nihilism."  When  the  teacher  came  to  draw  his  monthly 
salary  the  official  declared  :  "  First  cut  your  hair  ;  after  that  you 
shall  have  your  money."  And  here  is  another  curious  fact  :  in 
Moscow  there  is  a  society  for  the  organization  of  excursions  and 
holidays  for  the  benefit  of  school-teachers  during  vacations.  In 
1909  it  wished  to  arrange  a  few  trips  abroad  ;  the  administration 
authorized  it  to  do  so,  provided  the  school-teachers  avoided  Paris 
as  a  republican  city  and  "  unsafe  "  from  the  viewpoint  of  the 
Russian  police  ! 

In  concluding  this  brief  account  of  a  few  aspects  of  the  prac- 
tical work  of  Russian  self-government,  I  must  say  a  few  words 
respecting  another  remarkable  institution  created  by  the  zemstvos. 
I  refer  to  the  bureaux  of  local  statistics  established  by  the  zemstvos, 


204  MODERN  RUSSIA 

which  undertake  the  study  and  the  description  of  the  economic 
life  of  the  people.  As  a  result  of  the  labours  of  these  bureaux 
we  have  a  great  mass  of  reports  and  publications  relating  to  the 
economy  of  various  provinces  of  Russia.  These  publications 
provide  an  inexhaustible  source  of  information  and  material  for 
the  scientific  study  of  Russian  economy,  and  may  be  recommended 
to  all  foreigners  who  wish  to  undertake  such  researches. 

Unhappily,  here  again  the  reaction  has  accomplished  its 
destructive  work.  The  results  of  statistical  inquiries  revealed 
the  melancholy  situation  of  the  mass  of  the  people,  their  poverty 
and  ignorance  ;  hence  the  Government  declared  them  to  be 
"  dangerous."  So,  to  combat  the  "  danger  "  of  statistical  truths, 
the  Government  undertook  a  veritable  crusade  against  the 
statistical  bureaux  ;  the  officials  employed  in  several  of  the 
bureaux  were  arrested  and  deported  and  the  bureaux  were 
closed.  On  this  account  many  of  the  zemstvos  have  been 
unable  to  complete  this  remarkable  task.  Moreover,  with  a  few 
exceptions  the  zemstvos  themselves  have  learned  to  regard 
statistics  with  a  grudging  eye.  The  agrarian  movement  of  the 
peasantry  inspired  the  nobles  who  direct  the  affairs  of  the 
zemstvos  with  such  terror  that  they  have  said  farewell  to  their 
ancient  liberalism,  and  to-day  the  zemstvos  are  centres  of  political 
reaction.  Hence  the  question  of  democratizing  the  zemstvos 
has  become  more  acute  than  ever.  The  democratization  of  the 
urban  municipalities  is  no  less  necessary  and   urgent. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE   FINANCES  OF  THE   STATE 

I.  The   Budget   of  the   Russian  Empire.     II.  The   Public   Debt  and 

budgetary  equilibrium. 


If  we  are  fully  to  understand  the  mechanism  of  the  Russian  State 
we  must  carefully  consider  its  finances. 

"  In  the  financial  history  of  Russia  three  facts  are  salient  :  the 
extraordinary  growth  of  the  State  Budget,  the  enormous  accumu- 
lation of  the  public  debt,  and  the  incessant  increase  of  indirect 
taxation.  These  three  things,  closely  related  to  one  another, 
are  the  results  of  the  general  political  and  economic  history  of 
Russia." 

In  these  words  Professor  Bogolepov,  a  prominent  Russian 
economist,  has  defined  the  most  characteristic  features  of  the 
Russian  financial  system  (Professor  Bogolepov,  State  Finances 
and  Social  Inter est^  St.   Petersburg,    1906). 

Of  the  rapid  increase  of  the  Russian  Budget,  the  following 
figures  give  us  some  idea. 

At  the  end  of  the  first  twenty-five  years  of  the  nineteenth 
century  the  total  sum  of  annual  budgetary  expenses  was 
j^  1 5,900,000.  By  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  this 
figure  had  already  doubled  ;  by  the  end  of  the  third  quarter  it 
had  quadrupled  ;  a  little  before  the  Russo-Japanese  War  it  had 
risen  to  nearlv  j^ 21 2,000,000  ;  in  1903  it  was  ^^200,000,000; 
in    1904,    ^^203,000,000  ;    in    1905,    ^^205,000,000  ;    in    1906, 


205 


206 


MODERN  RUSSIA 


/^220,90O,ooo ;  in  1907,  ^^233,600,000 ;  in  1908,^246,250,000; 
and  in  1909,  _^263,ooo,ooo.i 

These  figures  deal  only  with  the  "ordinary  Budget."  As  for 
"  extraordinary "  expenses,  they  form,  despite  their  name,  a 
permanent  and  inevitable  element  of  the  Russian  Budget  :  in 
1909  they  amounted  to  ^16,000,000  ;  in  1910  they  were  less, 
but  added  to  the  ordinary  expenses  they  increased  the  total  to 
^^266,000,000.      Two  years  later  the  total  was  ^319,000,000. 

According  to  an  official  report  on  the  Budget  of  1909,  made 
by  the  Minister  of  P'inances,  M.  Kokovtzev,  the  _^ 263,000,000 
of  the  Budget  was  divided  among  the  various  branches  of  the 
administration  as  follows  : 


1.  Payment  of  the  Public  Debt 

2.  Army  and  Navy       

3.  State  industries  (alcohol  monopoly,  railways,  etc 

4.  Expenses  of  administration 

5.  Salaries  of  State  officials     ... 

6.  Public  education,  line  arts 

7.  Posts,  telegraphs,  telephones 

8.  Agrarian  measures  ... 

9.  Commerce  and  industry     ... 

10.  Subsidies  for  railway  companies 

11.  Public  highways,  ports,  etc. 

12.  Reserve  fund  


Per 

£  cent. 

42,200,000  =  l6"0 
57,000,000  =  217 
)      83,400,000  =  317 
41,000,000=  157 

11,000,000=   4*2 

8,300,000=  3-2 

5,650,000=:     2"  I 

4,200,000=    1-6 

530,000=:     0"2 
4,370,000=     17 

3,660,000  =   I  "4 
1,350,000=  0-5 


This  table  suffices  to  reveal  the  backward  condition  of  Russia. 
In  Russia,  an  agricultural  country,  where  120  millions  of  inhabi- 
tants (four-fifths  of  the  people)  are  absolutely  illiterate,  the  State 
spends  on  education  only  3-2  per  cent,  of  its  Budget,  and  1-6  per 
cent,  on  agriculture. 

Even  by  these  insignificant  sums  the  great  masses  of  the  people 
profit  very  little. 

In  1908  the  sum  assigned  for  the  primary  schools  was 
^2,230,000,  and  in  1909  ^3,000,000,  or  4d.  to  5d.  per 
inhabitant. 

From  these  figures   we  see  that  the  chief  expenditure  is   in 

'  From  an  official  report  of  the  Minister  of  Finances. 


THE  FINANCES   OF   THE   STATE  207 

connection  with  unproductive  objects.  The  expenses  of  adminis- 
tration and  the  salaries  of  officials  (by  which  the  higher  officials 
are  the  chief  beneficiaries)  are  even  more  eloquent ;  these  expenses 
absorb  ^52,000,000,  or  a  fifth  of  the  whole  Budget. 

Moreover,  on  account  of  the  custom,  of  many  centuries'  stand- 
ing, of  confounding  the  interests  of  the  State  and  their  own 
private  interests,  a  great  deal  of  money  is  diverted,  and  there  is 
a  waste  of  fiscal  dues.  At  the  moment  of  the  Russo-Japanese 
War  both  superior  and  subordinate  officers  entered  into  negotia- 
tions with  the  army  sutlers,  and  authorized  them,  in  consideration 
of  certain  bribes,  to  supply  damaged  goods.  At  the  present  time 
such  affairs  are  common,  and  lead  many  brilliant  officers  to  the 
prisoner's  bench. 

II 

The  payments  made  in  respect  of  the  Public  Debt  are  a  heavy 
burden  on  the  Russian  Budget.  Political  loans  originated  in  the 
reign  of  Catherine  II,  when,  on  the  occasion  of  the  war  with 
Turkey,  certain  internal  and  external  loans  were  contracted.  At 
the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  State  owed  some 
;^7,550,ooo.  Between  1800  and  1861  (the  year  of  the  abolition 
of  serfdom)  the  debt  increased  by  ^160,000,000 ;  between  1862 
and  1876,  by  another  _^ 1 60,000,000  ;  between  1877  and  1886, 
by  ^212,000,000  ;  between  1887  and  1892,  by  ^240,000,000  ; 
between  1893  ^^^  ^9^2>i  ^7  ;^400,ooo,ooo  ;  between  1904  and 
1906,  by  ^^266,000,000  ;  and  in  1909,  by  ^53,000,000. 

If  to  these  figures  we  add  those  of  lesser  debts,  we  shall  see  that 
since  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  Russian  State  has 
borrowed  ^1,740,000,000.  But  of  this  nominal  figure  only 
^T  1,323,000,000  was  realized,  or  76*6  per  cent,  of  the  sum 
borrowed.  The  remaining  ^400,000,000  was  employed  to  meet 
the  expenses  of  operation — more  particularly  to  fill  the  pockets 
of  creditors  and  intern,  ^diaries. 

Of  the  ^1,740,000,000  borrowed  between  1800  and  1906, 
^828,000,000    was    repaid.      In     1906    the    State    still     owed 


2oS  MODERN  RUSSIA 

/^9 1 2,000,000,  but  a  new  loan  of  ^^56,000,000  increased  the 
Public  Debt  to  ^968,000,000.  But  the  debts  of  the  State 
exceed  this  figure,  for  the  State  railways  have  contracted 
individual  loans.  In  1904  the  total  of  the  loans  contracted  by 
the  railways  amounted  to  _^ 230,700,000.  Moreover,  the  State 
having  guaranteed  the  loans  of  the  private  railway  companies, 
the  debts  of  the  latter  are  transferred  to  the  Treasury,  and  in 
1909  they  constituted  a  sum  of  j^  12 1,500,000.  It  is  therefore 
hardly  possible  to  say  that  the  indebtedness  of  the  State  amounts 
to  ^968,000,000.  The  real  debt  is  much  greater,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  determine  it.^ 

In  1906,  in  respect  of  the  Public  Debt,  Russia  occupied  the 
second  place  among  the  nations  of  the  world,  the  first  place  being 
occupied  by  France.  But  by  the  amount  of  her  annual  payments 
Russia  takes  the  first  place.  This  latter  circumstance  makes  the 
situation  of  Russia  peculiarly  unfavourable,  as  she  does  not  possess 
a  great  mass  of  comparatively  wealthy  people,  but  by  the  average 
revenue  of  each  inhabitant  occupies  one  of  the  lowest  places  in 
Europe. 

"  The  most  unfavourable  aspect  of  the  public  debt  of  Russia," 
says  Professor  Migulin,  "  is  that  more  than  half  of  this  debt  was 
contracted  abroad.  The  Russian  people  is  forced  to  pay  a  vast 
annual  tribute  to  foreign  countries,  in  repayment  of  a  loan  which 
did  not  even  reach  the  heart  of  the  country,  having  served  to 
maintain  the  price  of  Russian  values  and  to  pay  the  interest 
of  old  debts." 

This  opinion  is  supported  by  a  French  author,  who,  under  the 
pseudonym  of  "Lysis,"  wrote  a  series  of  remarkable  articles  on 
Russian  finances  in  La  Revue  of  1906  and  La  Grande  Revue  of 
1 9 10.  This  gentleman  states  that  Russia  is  for  ever  raising  fresh 
loans  in  order  to  pay  the  interest  on  her  old  debts.  He  adds  that 
the  unproductive  character  of  the  Russian  loans  injures  not  only 
the  interests  of  the  Russians  themselves,  but  also  the  saving 
powers  of  foreign  countries,  and  especially  of  France. 

'  The  figures  here  cited  are  those  of  Professor  Migulin,  author  of 
an  important  work  on  the  credit  of  the  Russian  State. 


THE  FINANCES   OF   THE   STATE  209 

"  What  do  we  lose  by  the  Russian  funds  ?  "  asks  "  Lysis,"  and 
he  replies  that  "we  can  readily  calculate  the  loss.  It  is  enough 
to  compare  current  prices  ^  with  the  prices  of  issue.  The 
4  per  cent,  stock  of  i88g,  issued  at  86*45,  now  stands  at  75. 
The  4  per  cent,  stock  of  1893  (the  5th),  issued  at  97'25,  stands 
at  75.  The  4  per  cent.  Consolidated  Loan  (the  3i'd),  issued  at 
97-15,  stands  at  76.  The  4  per  cent,  stock  of  1901,  issued  at 
98*50,  stands  at  75.  The  3^  per  cent,  stock  of  1894,  issued 
at  9475,  stands  at  68"50.  The  3  per  cent,  stock  of  1890,  issued 
at  92*30,  stands  at  61*80,  etc.  On  the  six  Russian  stocks  that 
we  have  cited,  the  average  loss  is  thus  about  24  per  cent.,  or 
nearly  one-fourth  ;  but  many  French  capitalists  were  not  able  to 
buy  at  the  price  of  issue.  After  issue  the  Russian  funds  were 
quoted  at  very  high  rates.  Calculated  on  these  rates,  the  loss  of 
the  public  is  considerably  greater.  If  I  reckon  the  Russian  funds 
placed  in  France  at  ^560,000,000,  the  loss  in  saved  capital  is 
already  ^120,000,000  to  ^160,000,000.  (See  Contre  Pol'tgarchie 
finanaere  en  France^  by  "Lysis,"  5th  ed.,  Paris,   1908.) 

The  losses  of  the  Russian  people  are  still  more  stupendous,  the 
loans  being  almost  invariably  employed  to  unproductive  ends. 
We  will  not  speak  of  the  Army  loans,  whose  balance-sheet  at  the 
time  of  the  Russo-Japanese  War  was  truly  lamentable.  As  for 
the  loans  effected  for  building  railways,  they  have  hitherto  pro- 
duced only  deficits;  the  Government,  in  laying  down  the  rails, 
never  dreamt  of  economic  considerations,  but  was  entirely  guided 
bv  reasons  of  strategy,  or  by  motives  known  to  itself  alone.  For 
this  reasons  the  State  railways,  far  from  being  a  source  of  profit, 
are  a  great  expense.^ 

The  foreign  public,  and  above  all  the  French  public,  is  naturally 
interested  in  the  budgetary  equilibrium  of  Russia,  and  many 
foreign  authors  have  studied  the  question. 

Some  years  ago,  in  his  book  on  Russian  finances,  the  German 

'  Written  towards  the  end  of  1906. 

'  Between  1900  and  1905  the  State  railways  occasioned  a  loss  of 
_;^ 1 7, 200,000,  or  ;^3,640,ooo  per  annum.  In  1906  the  loss  was 
£3,320,000  ;  in  1908,   /:4,255,ooo, 

14 


210  MODERN  RUSSIA 

author,  RudoU  Martin,  predicted  that  Russia  would  presently  be 
bankrupt.  "Lysis,"  already  cited,  asserts  that  "Russia  will 
become  bankrupt"  if  her  internal  system  is  not  radically  reformed. 
Professor  Migulin — a  man  of  the  most  moderate  political  views 
— declares  that  "all  discussion  of  the  inextricable  situation  of 
Russian  finances  is  without  meaning; ''  and  he  adds  :  "Credit 
is  certainly  exhausted.  However,  it  is  not  Russia  that  has  exhausted 
her  credit,  but  her  present  Government — MM.  Kokovtzcv  and 
Co. — whose  actions  will  not  bear  the  slightest  looking  into." 
Professor  Bogolepov  does  not  deny  the  probable  financial  bank- 
ruptcy of  Russia,  and  regards  the  situation  of  the  country  with 
the  greatest  pessimism. 

But  one  thing  is  certain  :  that  the  present  Russian  Government 
cannot  dispense  with  loans  contracted  abroad,  for  only  such  loans 
enable  it  to  supply  the  void  left  by  annual  deficits.  In  his  report 
on  the  Budget  of  1909  the  Minister  of  Finance  himself  recognizes 
that  the  Government  cannot  "suppress  the  absolute  need  of 
annual  loans." 

"The  equilibrium  of  the  Budget  can  only  be  attained  in 
Russia,"  he  states,  "  by  the  increase  of  taxation  and  the  diminu- 
tion of  expenditure.  But  as  our  popular  masses  are  too  poor 
to  support  a  larger  measure  of  taxation,  it  would  be  necessary 
to  increase  the  taxation  of  the  wealthy.  And  this  would  be 
possible  only  in  a  very  small  degree  ...  for  a  radical  change 
of  our  system  of  taxation  in  this  direction  is  impossible." 
As  for  the  "  limitation  of  expenditure,"  this  "  could  hardly 
give  any  positive  results,  for  nearly  all  the  requirements  of 
national  life  are  already  without  sufficient  means  at  their 
disposal." 

Thus  there  is  only  one  thing  to  be  done  :  to  extend  the  policy 
of  loans  so  long  as  there  are  people  left  who  will  provide  the 
money. 

A  word  as  to  the  revenues  of  the  State.  Not  counting  the 
revenue  furnished  by  loans,  we  may  say  that  the  budget  of 
receipts  is  constituted  principally  of  indirect  taxes.  As  for 
direct  taxes,  they  are  not  regarded  with  favour  by  "enlightened 


THE  FINANCES   OF  THE   STATE  211 

absolutism,"  which  much  prefers  a  concealed  attack  upon  the 
pockets  of  its  subjects.  In  Russia  the  direct  taxes,  thanks  to 
the  poverty  of  the  popular  masses  and  the  unwillingness  of  the 
upper  classes  to  make  the  slightest  sacrifice  for  the  State,  produce 
only  insignificant  returns.  Despite  the  "  system  of  execution  " 
adopted  in  the  country — a  system  which  consists  of  demanding 
taxes  from  the  mujiks  by  the  aid  of  the  knout — the  mujiks  are 
often  absolutely  unable  to  pay,  and  the  village  is  incessantly 
falling  into  arrears.     According  to  the  official  data  : 

Between  1871-75  arrears  equalled  22''/o  of  annual  total  of  direct  taxes. 
„        1876-80        „             „        22%  „  „  „ 

1881-85       ..  ..        3o°/o 

„       1886-90       „  „        42%  „  ,,  ,, 

„       1891-95       „  „        45°/,  „  „  „ 

The  arrears  still  continue  to  pile  up,  and  in  certain  districts 
constitute  100,  200,  300,  600,  700,  and  even  900  per  cent,  of  the 
annual  total  of  direct  taxation.  The  nobles,  although  strangely 
less  burdened  than  the  peasants,  are  by  no  means  behind  the 
latter  in  the  matter  of  arrears  ;  for  if  the  peasants  cannot  pay, 
the  landowners  often  will  not  pay. 

Thus  the  Government  is  forced  to  resort  to  indirect  taxation. 
It  taxes  tobacco,  matches,  cigarette  tubes,  sugar,  etc.  In  1904 
the  indirect  taxes  yielded  _^ 44,520,000,  and  in  1908  _^56, 000,000. 
In  addition  to  these  sums  the  customs  duties  yielded  ^^23,300,000 
in  1904  and  ^29,700,000  in  1908.  Comparing  the  value  of 
all  the  imports  for  1908  with  the  total  yield  of  the  customs,  we 
shall  see  that  every  ruble's  worth  of  merchandise  pays  an  average 
duty  of  R.0*3i.  Consequently  the  price  of  all  imports  is  increased 
by  31  per  cent. 

But  the  Government's  principal  source  of  revenue  is  the 
indirect  tax  upon  vodka.  Thirty  thousand  fiscal  drink-shops  are 
engaged  in  the  sale  of  vodka.  In  1904  nearly  70  million  vedros^ 
or  189  million  gallons,  of  vodka  were  sold,  and  in  19 10  nearly 
80  million  vedros^  or  216  million  gallons.  Thus  in  1904  the 
consumption  was  equal   to    1-35   gallons  per  inhabitant,  and   in 


212  MODERN  RUSSIA 

1 9 10,  I  "62  gallons.  The  gross  profit  yielded  by  the  sale  oi  vodka 
was  ill  1 910  j/^  74,470,000,  while  the  net  profit  amounted  to 
^58,510,000.  Thus  nearly  one-third  of  the  total  revenue  of  the 
Russian  State  is  due  to  the  sale  of  vodka^  to  alcoholism,  which 
is  in  process  of  ruining  the  moral  and  physical  stamina  of  the 
Russian  masses. ^  Not  in  vain  has  the  Russian  BudG;et  been  called 
the  "drunkard's  budget."  Until  this  state  of  affairs  is  completely 
remedied  it  is  useless  to  think  of  the  regeneration  of  Russian 
national  life. 

'  Vodka  contains  40  per  cent,  of  alcohol. 


CHAPTER   VI 

FOREIGN    POLITICS  AND   THE   ARMY 

I.  The  internal  policy  and  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Russian  autocracy. 
II.  The  Franco- Russian  alliance  and  the  Anglo-Russian  entente 
— Tsarism  and  the  Eastern  question — The  military  weakness  of 
the  Russian  monarchy  as  compared  with  Germany.  III.  The 
armed  forces  of  the  Russian  Empire — The  social  structure  of  the 
Russian  army  and  tlie  conditions  of  the  soldier's  life — Why 
Tsarism  dare  not  risk  a  war. 

I 

States  have  two  methods  of  internal  expansion.  One  we  may 
call  the  feudal  method  :  its  character  is  purely  military  and 
territorial.  When  the  feudal  sovereigns  and  seigneurs  undertook 
a  war  they  aimed  at  territorial  conquest  and  profit.  They  made 
the  inhabitants  of  the  conquered  territory  their  serfs,  and  over- 
whelmed them  with  corvees  and  taxes  in  kind.  In  the  event 
of  conquering  a  wealthy  city  they  sacked  it. 

The  external  policy  of  the  modern  State  is  of  another  kind. 
It  is  a  colonial  and  imperialist  policy.  It  regards  conquered 
territory  and  the  population  thereof  as  a  permanent  market  for 
the  outlet  of  products  and  an  object  of  exploitation,  industrial 
and  commercial.  The  principal  aim  of  the  external  policv  of 
any  modern  bourgeois  State  is  the  economic  "  valorisation  "  of 
territorv  for  the  benefit  of  the  great  capitalist.  This  does  not 
mean  that  the  militarv  element  is  eliminated  from  current 
international  relations.     As  the  extent  of  markets  and  colonies 

213 


214  MODERN  RUSSIA 

is  limited  and  appetites  are  unlimited,  competition  and  conflict 
between  the  manufacturers  and  financiers  of  different  countries 
are  inevitable.  This  competition  contains  the  seed  of  armed 
conflict. 

We  have  seen  that  modern  life  in  Russia  has  retained  many 
of  the  features  of  feudalism  ;  and  we  can  detect  the  same 
characteristics  in  the  foreign  policy  of  Tsardom. 

During  the  last  two  centuries  Russia  has  known  72  years 
of  peace  and  128  years  of  war.  During  these  128  years  the 
Russian  Government  waged  35  wars,  of  which  33  were  waged 
abroad  and  2  at  home.  Among  the  33  foreign  wars  22  were 
devoted  to  the  extension  of  the  frontiers  of  the  State,  that  is 
to  say,  to  territorial  conquest.  All  these  wars  were  purely 
offensive.  As  a  result  of  these  two  centuries  of  warfare  the 
Russian  Empire  is  bounded  by  17,000  miles  of  frontier  and  is  the 
neighbour  of  eight  States.  One  thousand  miles  of  frontier  divide 
Russia  from  Sweden  ;  738  miles  from  German v  ;  694  from 
Austria  ;  466  from  Turkey  ;  1,333  ^om  Persia  ;  1,258  from 
Afghanistan  ;  and  more  than  6,000  miles  of  frontier  divide  Russia 
from  China. 

According  to  the  official  figures,  Russia  lost  nearly  3  millions 
of  men  in  the  wars  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries. 
As  for  the  political  balance-sheet  of  these  wars,  it  is  expressed 
in  the  extreme  complexity  of  the  problems  relating  to  the  life 
of  the  Russian  State.  "The  extension  of  the  frontiers  of  Russia 
in  all  directions  led  Russia  to  occupy  territories  inhabited  by 
various  foreign  and  hostile  nationalities.  To-day  the  frontiers 
of  the  inner  Russia  are  surrounded  by  populations  which  are 
only  distantly  allied  to  the  Russian  people  ;  and  in  this  sense 
the  frontiers  of  Russia  were  in  1900  less  favourable  from  a  military 
point  of  view  than  they  were  in  1 700."  Such  is  the  opinion 
of  M.  Kuropatkin,  ex-Minister  of  War,  as  expressed  in  a 
report  presented  to  the  Tsar  in  1900,  extracts  from  which  have 
been  published  in  his  Memoirs  of  the  Russo-Japanese  War. 

But  although  the  policy  of  conquest  has  involved  the  State 
in   many   diflRculties,  it   has   greatly   profited   the  aristocracy  and 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    215 

nobility,  as  conquered  territory  has  been  distributed  by  the 
monarchy  among  the  nobles,  high  officials,  and  members  of  the 
Imperial  suite.  The  Government  has  also  appointed  aristocrats 
to  administrative  posts  in  the  conquered  territories.  But  I  need 
not  deal  further  here  with  the  share  of  the  nobility  in  the  foreign 
policy  of  Russia.  In  the  chapter  dealing  with  the  Russo- 
Japanese  War  I  shall  cite  some  examples  of  the  part  which  it 
has  played. 

Essentially  a  reactionary  class,  the  nobility  pursues,  in  matters 
of  foreign  relations,  the  same  reactionary  policy  as  at  home. 
During  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  Russian  Tsarism 
played  the  part  of  an  "  international  policeman "  by  opposing 
revolutionary  and  republican  ideas  and  aspirations  in  all  parts 
of  Europe.  Alexander  I  dreamed  of  crushing  "  the  hydra  head 
of  the  French  Revolution,"  while  the  "  Holy  Alliance  "  and  the 
treaty  of  181 5  were  to  him  the  means  of  realizing  this  object 
and  of  more  firmly  establishing  monarchical  principles  throughout 
Europe.  Nicolas  I  sent  troops  to  suppress  the  Hungarian 
revolution  of  1849  ;  and  under  Alexander  III,  when  circum- 
stances had  compelled  Tsarism  to  conclude  a  treaty  of  alliance 
with  "  atheistical  and  republican  France,"  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment endeavoured  to  influence  the  French  Government  even  in 
the  internal  affairs  of  France.  In  one  case  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment even  informed  the  French  Government  through  its  ambas- 
sador that  a  certain  politician  was  not,  from  the  Russian  point 
of  view,  desirable  as  the  chief  of  the  French  Cabinet,  his  opinions 
being  too  radical  and  too  advanced. 

Considerations  of  internal  politics  have  always  weighed  very 
perceptibly  on  the  external  activity  of  the  Russian  monarchy. 
The  latter  has  always  regarded  the  rumour  of  victory  as  a  means 
of  impressing  the  imagination  of  its  subjects,  and  of  justifying 
the  enslavement  of  the  people  by  the  exclusive  power  of  the 
State  in  international  relations.  Whenever  Russian  Tsarism  has 
had  reason  to  fear  a  revolutionary  movement,  it  has  thrown 
itself  into  some  warlike  adventure.  For  example,  the  insurrec- 
tion   of  the    Decembrists    (1825)    hastened    the    fourth    Russo- 


2i6  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Turkish  War  (1828-9)  '■>  ^^^  Crimean  War  was  hastened  by 
the  signs  of  the  revolutionary  movement  of  the  preceding  years  ; 
and  the  same  was  true  of  the  Oriental  campaign  (1877-8)  and 
the  Russo-Japanese  War.  But  after  this  last  campaign  and  the 
revolution  of  1905  the  process  became  useless  and  the  autoo-acy 
abandoned  it. 


II 


Let  us  now  briefly  review  the  present  situation  of  Russia  in 
the  "  concert  of  the  Powers." 

And  first  a  few  words  as  to  the  Franco-Russian  alliance. 
What  was  the  origin  of  this  strange  union  between  a  despotic 
and  barbarous  Power  and  a  republican  democracy  ?  Those  who 
explain  this  union  by  referring  it  exclusively  to  the  "  Germano- 
phobia"  ot  the  French  are  mistaken.  There  is  another  explana- 
tion, more  natural  and  more  correct.  The  commencement  of 
the  Franco-Russian  friendship  coincides  with  the  downfall  of 
French  imperialism  in  Tonkin. 

Almost  immediately  after  the  war  of  1 870-1  the  great 
capitalists  of  France  sougiit  to  repay  themselves  for  the  crisis 
and  the  ruin  caused  by  the  war  by  undertaking  a  great  colonial 
and  imperial  policy,  of  which  the  most  widely  known  manifesta- 
tion was  the  Tonkinese  adventure.  The  unhappy  termination 
of  this  latter  led  to  the  fall  of  Ferry's  ministry  and  forced  the 
French  capitalists  to  seek  less  exotic  markets.  Hence  the  new 
orientation  of  French  capital  and  its  outflow  into  Russia. 
Shares  in  Russian  foundries  and  mines,  Russian  loans  quoted 
on  the  Bourse  of  Paris — -such  were  the  bases  of  the  Franco- 
Russian  alliance. 

Thus  is  explained  the  curious  fact  that  the  Russian  monarchy 
and  republican  France  have  conceived  a  mutual  affection.  The 
Russian  monarchy  needs  the  aid  of  the  French  Bourse,  and  the 
latter  is  anxious  that  a  "strong  authority  "  should  exist  in  Russia, 
in  order  to  assure  it  of  the  payment  of  interest,  the  creation  of 
sinking  funds,  etc.     The  financial  support  of  France  has  always 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    217 

been  of  extreme  value  to  the  Russian  monarchy.  For  example, 
in  1906,  when  the  Tsar's  Government  was  at  its  last  gasp  and 
its  energies  were  exhausted,  the  loan  concluded  in  the  Paris 
market  saved  it  and  supplied  it  with  means  to  continue  its  work 
of  reaction.  It  may  be  asserted  without  any  exaggeration  that 
the  cost  of  two  successive  coups  d'etat — the  dissolution  of  the  first 
Duma  in  1906  and  that  of  the  second  Duma  in  1907 — was 
paid  by  the  Bourse  of  Paris. 

In  saying  that  the  Franco-Russian  alliance  is  based  on  the 
financial  relations  between  the  two  countries,  I  do  not  mean  that 
military  and  diplomatic  considerations  played  no  part  in  the 
matter.  I  recognize  also  that  the  political  rivalry  between 
France  and  Germany  has  played  its  part  in  the  alliance.  But  I 
consider  such  elements  as  of  secondary  importance  compared 
with  the  financial  and  economic  situation. 

As  for  the  understanding  between  England  and  Russia,  which 
is  certainly  one  of  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  of  contem- 
porary international  politics,  it  is  to  be  explained  by  causes  of  a 
different  order.  Russia  and  England  have  no  common  economic 
interests.  One  may  even  assert  that  the  interests  of  British 
imperialism  are  opposed  to  those  of  Russian  imperialism  wherever 
the  two  come  into  contact,  more  particularly  in  Asia.  The 
Russian  penetration  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  march  of  Russia 
toward  the  Persian  Gulf  threatened  British  influence  in  Asia, 
and  even  the  British  territorial  possessions.  In  1885  the  rela- 
tions between  England  and  Russia  were  so  strained  that  at  one 
moment  war  seemed  inevitable.  But  during  the  closing  years  of 
the  nineteenth  century  and  the  opening  years  of  the  twentieth 
a  change  was  perceptible  in  the  relations  of  the  two  Powers. 
Two  facts  were  responsible  for  this  change.  In  the  first  place, 
the  awakening  of  the  populations  of  Asia  threatened  the 
supremacy  of  Europe  in  Asia.  Ten  years  ago  General  Kuro- 
patkin  stated,  in  this  connection  :  "  The  twentieth  century  must 
bring  with  it  a  serious  conflict  between  the  Christian  and  the 
non-Christian  peoples  in  Asia.  It  is  necessary  for  the  salvation 
of  humanity  that  we  Russians  should   in   this  struggle  be  at  one 


2i8  MODERN  RUSSIA 

with  Christian  England  in  opposing  the  non-Christian  tribes  or 
Asia."  If  we  disregard  his  religious  terminology,  General 
Kuropatkin's  remarks  need  no  comment.  The  same  idea  is 
expressed   by  him  in  another  passage  of  his  report  : 

"  The  interests  of  Russia  and  those  of  England  are  identical 
in  Asia  ;  we,  as  well  as  the  English,  have  to  reckon  with  the 
aspirations  of  conquered  peoples  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the 
conqueror.  It  would  therefore  be  far  more  natural  for  our  troops 
to  lend  their  aid  to  England  in  her  struggle  against  local  popu- 
lations than  to  march  upon  India  in  an  attempt  to  raise  these 
populations  against  England."  "  Profoundly  convinced  that  the 
occupation  of  India  by  Russia  in  the  twentieth  century  would 
bring  us  misfortune  and  an  excessive  burden,  at  the  same  time 
I  think  it  is  natural  and  desirable  that  our  relations  with  England 
should  become  so  friendly  that  in  case  of  popular  risings  against 
England  in  India  we  should  be  on  the  side  of  the  English." 

This  proposal  of  Anglo- Russian  co-operation  against  the 
oppressed  populations  of  Asia  is  to-day  realized.  The  Persian 
revolution  hastened  its  advent,  and  the  Anglo-Russian  treaty 
concerning  the  division  of  spheres  of  influence  in  Persia  is 
an   important  sign   of  the  times. 

The  awakening  of  Asia  is  in  reality  highly  inconvenient  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  Russian  autocracy.  To  be  surrounded 
by  constitutional  States — a  reformed  Persia,  a  reformed  China, 
a  reformed  Turkey — is  by  no  means  agreeable  to  Tsarism. 
Formerly  it  might  have  posed  as  the  representative  of  European 
"civilization  "  before  the  peoples  of  Asia,  but  to-day  these  peoples 
are  everywhere  initiating  themselves  into  modern  ideas  and  more 
advanced  forms  of  human  life  ;  so  that  the  monarchy  of  the 
Tsar  must  bid  good-bye  to  all  its  hopes  of  Russian  domination 
over  the  tribes  of  Asia.  Union  with  Eno;land  in  Asia  is  the 
last  refuge  of  its  dying  hopes. 

There  is  yet  another  factor  which  has  inclined  England 
toward  an  Anglo-Russian  friendship.  This  is  German  com- 
petition. The  appearance  of  German  trade  and  industry  upon 
the  international    market  is  to  the  prejudice  of  British  interests. 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    219 

Statistics  prove  that  the  increase  of  German  exports  during  the 
last  twenty-five  years  has  been  followed  by  a  relative  decrease  of 
English  exports.  The  German  advance  Eastwards,  the  "  Gcr- 
manization"  of  the  network  of  the  railways  of  Asia  Minor, 
the  colossal  project  of  the  Bagdad  railway — such  matters  could 
not  leave  England  calm  and  indifFerent.  Commercial,  indus- 
trial and  financial  competition  was  soon  transformed  into  naval 
and  military  rivalry,  and  this  ri\'alry  appears  to  be  the  axis  of 
European  world-politics. 

When  we  meet  a  more  dangerous  enemy  we  evade  the  weaker 
adversary  or  even  unite  with  him  against  the  former.  Such  is  the 
meaning  of  the  Anglo-Russian  entente.  It  is  German  competition 
that  has  made  it  possible. 

The  present  situation  is  greatly  to  the  advantage  of  the  Russian 
autocracv.  The  latter  can  exploit  the  rivalry  of  England  and 
Germany  to  its  own  profit,  and  understands  perfectly  how  to  do 
so.  It  seeks  to  recover  its  ancient  prestige,  shattered  by  the  war 
with  Japan.  One  might  say  that  the  part  at  present  played  by 
the  Russian  monarchy  in  respect  of  international  combinations  is 
in  no  way  proportionate  to  its  real  strength  ;  it  is  rather  equivalent 
to  the  importance  of  a  small  weight  in  the  presence  of  two  heavy 
weights  which  are  nearly  in  equilibrium.  The  international  force 
of  Tsarism  to-day  resides  exclusively  in  the  uncertainty  of  European 
equilibrium. 

Russian  Tsarism  has  entered  into  certain  engagements  in  respect 
of  France  and  England.  Can  it  fulfil  them  ?  A  French  author, 
well  informed  as  to  Russian  affairs  and  extremely  moderate  in  his 
assertions,  replies  to  this  question  in  the  negative.  In  speaking  of 
the  Russian  loans  taken  up  in  Paris,  "  Lysis  "  remarks  : 

"  If  it  is  impossible  to  justify  the  Russian  loans  upon  financial 
grounds  properly  so  called,  an  attempt  is  made  to  defend  them  by 
withdrawal  behind  a  barricade  of  sentiment  infinitely  more  diffi- 
cult to  demolish  than  the  false  reputation  of  Russian  paper.  An 
appeal  is  made  to  patriotic  sentiment.  Russia,  it  is  said,  is  the 
defender  of  France,  her  rampart  against  Germany.  We  must 
lend  our   millions  indefinitely  to  Russia  so  that  she  may  preserve 


220  MODERN  RUSSIA 

us  from  the  Prussian  invasion.  We  have  to  choose  between  two 
evils  ;  we  would  rather  be  ruined  than  invaded  and  conquered. 
The  Russian  loans  are  perhaps  bad  business  from  a  financial  point 
of  view,  but  they  are  good  from  a  patriotic  point  of  view.  Actually 
we  pay  j^40,ooo,ooo  a  year  to  Russia  to  avoid  war.  .  .  . 

"But  a  policy  involving  these  reserves  is  indefensible,  not  only 
on  account  of  its  immorality,  but  because  it  will  have  its  to-morrow. 
On  the  other  hand  the  following  point  of  view  insists  upon  pre- 
senting itself :  in  ordinary  social  life,  when  we  assure  against  a  great 
risk  by  paying  a  high  premium,  we  like  to  be  certain  that  if  an 
accident  should  take  place  payment  will  really  be  made.  Here 
the  annual  premium  is  some  ^40,000,000,  and  the  risk  that  of  an 
eventual  declaration  of  war  from  Germany.  If  such  a  declaration 
were  presented,  would  Russia  keep  her  engagements?  In  the 
first  place  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  she  would  wish  to.  Popular 
opinion  goes  for  nothing  in  Russia  ;  everything  depends  upon 
the  Tsar,  who,  together  with  his  Court,  is  Germanophile  and 
cordially  detests  the  French  Republic.  The  French  are  antipathetic 
to  him  for  two  reasons :  they  are  democrats  and  usurers,  or  at  least 
that  is  how  he  sees  them.  But  let  us  suppose  that  the  Tsar  would 
side  with  the  French  out  of  respect  for  his  given  word.  What  is 
his  army  worth  ?  Very  little,  according  to  the  experts  ;  it  is 
deficient  in  organization,  material,  and  leaders,  and  incapable  of 
coping  with  an  enemy  scientifically  equipped.  The  Manchurian 
war  enabled  us  to  perceive  what  the  bureaucracy  has  made  of  the 
Russian  army.  Moreover,  it  is  not  long  since  we  saw  Russia, 
conscious  of  her  military  impotence,  dishonourably  recoiling 
before  Austria. 

"  However,  one  fact  comes  before  all  :  Russia  has  no  money. 
She  has  not  enough  money  for  peace,  so  how  should  she  have 
enough  for  war  ?  From  this  results  the  following  situation  : 
Firstly,  for  Russia  to  help  France,  France  would  have  first  of  all 
to  advance  her  the  expenses  of  her  campaign  at  the  very  moment 
when  she  would  have  to  make  a  very  considerable  financial  effort 
on  her  own  account.  Secondly,  as  Russia  would  not  be  able  to 
pay  interest  on  the  war-loan,  France  would  have  to  do  so  in  her 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    221 

place  ;  she  would  have  to  support  two  national  debts,  the  Russian 
and  her  own  ;  she  would  have  to  pay  interest  on  /"  1,600,000,000. 
Thirdly,  what  at  such  a  moment  would  be  the  value  of  the 
640,900,000  of  Russian  shares  held  in  France  r  They  would  be 
unrealizable,  so  much  buried  capital  ;  it  would  be  just  as  thouo;h 
they  did  not  exist  ;  for  English,  German,  Italian,  Spanish,  Austrian 
and  otlier  securities  are  negotiated  in  all  the  money-markets, 
but  Russian  bonds  have  no  market  save  in  France.  The  Russian 
shares  held  in  France,  finding  no  buyers  and  being  no  longer  main- 
tained by  the  banks,  would  fall  to  ridiculous  prices,  PVench 
stock  would  suffer  in  the  crisis,  and  the  credit  of  France  would  be 
destroyed.  Is  this  too  black  a  picture  ?  By  no  means.  Matters 
could  not  happen  otherwise  :  if  there  were  war  between  France 
and  Germany  these  consequences  would  naturally  ensue. 

"  To  conclude  :  France  is  paying  a  formidable  premium  of 
;^ 40,000,000  for  insurance  against  the  eventual  danger  of  a 
German  invasion,  and  the  fact  remains  that  were  the  Franco- 
Russian  alliance  ever  to  render  France  the  service  for  which 
she  is  paying,  she  would  have  to  find  such  a  stupendous  sum  of 
money  that  she  would  be  financially  drained  dry  before  hostilities 
had  even  commenced."  (Abridged  from  La  Grande  Revue, 
1910,  No.  7,  pp.  473-6.) 

To  these  considerations  I  may  add  a  moral  argument.  The 
Russian  Government,  which  has  on  several  occasions  deceived 
its  own  people,  which  has  broken  all  its  constitutional  promises 
and  violated  every  civic  guarantee,  is  hardly  likely  to  prove 
faithful  to  international  alliances  and  keep  to  its  engagements 
with  its  friends  and  allies.  This  is  not  merely  a  personal  opinion. 
Some  years  ago  the  English  Press  was  of  the  same  opinion  :  the 
Economist  for  July,  1906,  asserted  that  it  was  impossible  to  believe 
in  the  honesty  of  the  Russian  autocracy,  and  that  its  perfidious- 
ness  should  be  regarded  with  a  wary  eye. 

The  interviews  which  took  place  at  Racconigi  and  at  Potsdam 
were  very  characteristic  from  this  point  of  view.  The  ally  of 
France,  Nicolas  II  repaired  to  Racconigi  in  order  to  conclude  a 
secret  treaty  with  Italy.     There  is  reason  to  believe  that  by  the 


222  MODERN  RUSSIA 

terms  of  this  treaty  Russia  left  Italy  perfectly  free  to  occupy 
Tripoli  and  to  extend  Italian  influence  in  those  portions  of 
North  Africa  which  are  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  French 
possessions.  At  Potsdam,  Nicolas  II  gave  Germany  a  free  hand 
in  the  matter  of  the  Bagdad  railway,  and  opened  the  door  for 
the  Germans  to  march  upon  the  Persian  Gulf. 

Then  the  Russian  Government  began  to  spread  its  nets  in  the 
Balkans,  attracted  thither  by  financial  and  economic  interests. 
Russia  has  only  one  resource  which  might  enable  her  to  pay  her 
foreign  debt  (nearly  j/^32,000,000  annually)  ;  namely,  the  forced 
exportation  of  wheat,  on  which  her  commercial  balance  depends. 
The  principal  outlet  for  this  product  is  the  Black  Sea  and  the 
Dardanelles.  The  idea  of  the  possession  of  Constantinople  was 
once  more  haunting  the  heads  of  the  chief  personages  of  the 
Russian  Government.  Profiting  by  the  instability  and  lack  of 
equilibrium  in  the  relations  of  the  European  Powers,  the  auto- 
cracy attempted  to  settle  the  "Eastern  question  "  in  its  own 
favour  by  pushing  the  Balkan  States  against  Turkey  on  the  one 
hand  and  Austria  on  the  other. 

"  Since  the  great  dream  of  M.  Witte,  of  the  economic  con- 
quest of  China,  has  piteously  miscarried  in  the  blood-soaked  mire 
of  Manchuria,  Russia  has  re-diverted  her  ambitions  to  Europe, 
and  the  focus  of  her  policy  is  removed  from  the  Yellow  Sea  to 
the  Black  Sea.  With  the  aid  of  French,  Belgian,  English,  and 
German  capital  great  foundries  and  looms  have  been  established 
in  the  rich  coal  and  iron  districts  of  the  Donetz.  Odessa  and 
Nicolayev  find  themselves  cramped  by  the  Black  Sea  and  covet 
the  Mediterranean  markets.  Like  Servia,  Bulgaria,  and  Austria, 
Russia,  confined  to  the  cul-de-sac  of  the  Black  Sea,  has  dreams  of 
a  free  ocean  outlet. 

"This  she  can  obtain  in  three  ways  :  Firstly,  a  railway  run- 
ning down  from  the  Caucasus  towards  the  Gulf  of  Alexandria, 
which  would  clash  with  the  plans  of  Germany,  the  owner  of 
the  Konia-Bagdad  line  :  and  secondly,  the  waterway  of  the 
Bosphorus  and  the  Dardanelles  ;  but  England  will  always  oppose 
the  descent  of  the  Russian  fleet  into  the  i^gean  Sea,    and  the 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    223 

route  through  Suez  to  India.  Thirdly,  it  remains  for  Russia  to 
resume,  in  a  modern  spirit,  the  policy  of  San  Stefano,  and  in 
the  name  of  orthodox  Pan-Slavism  to  unite  the  Serbs,  Bulgars, 
and  Montenegrins  by  means  of  a  railway  and  a  customs  union 
which  would  open  the  markets  of  the  Balkans  to  the  factories 
of  Poland  and  the  Donetz. 

"  This  is  why  Russian  diplomacy  so  strenuously  supports  the 
Danube-Adriatic  railway.  It  was  Russia,  so  to  speak,  that  in- 
vented this  project.  M.  Izvolski,  in  1907,  first  opposed  Count 
Aerenthal's  project  of  the  Sanjak  railway  ;  M.  Tcharykov,  who 
in  May  of  last  year  realized  the  secret  union  of  the  four  Balkan 
allies,  inducing  the  Christian  States  to  forget  their  old  racial  and 
religious  feuds,  succeeded  in  uniting  them  and  obtaining  their 
approval  of  a  policy  of  railway  expansion.  The  matter  leaked 
out  and  Nicolas  II  had  to  recall  his  representative  ;  but  the 
secret  union  survived.  It  was  Russia  who,  in  the  first  days  of 
the  war,  by  forcing  the  Turks  to  relinquish  the  blockade  of 
Varna  and  Burgas,  facilitated  the  revictualling  of  the  Bulgar 
army  and  their  triumphant  march  upon  Constantinople. 

"  In  short,  the  present  war  is  the  work  of  Russia  ;  and  the 
Danube-Adriatic  railway  is  a  Russian  project.  If  it  succeeds  a 
continuous  barrier  of  Slav  peoples  will  bar  the  way  to  the 
Mediterranean,  the  path  of  Austro-German  expansion,  from 
the  Black  Sea  to  the  Adriatic. 

"  But  here  again  the  Romanovs  oppose  the  Hapsburgs.  The 
Austro-Serb  conflict  becomes  an  Austro-Russian  conflict.  Two 
Great  Powers  are  at  grips,  and  the  Balkan  conflict  becomes  a 
European  conflict."  ^ 

The  French  author  we  have  just  cited  believes  that  the 
Austro-Russian  quarrel  may  develop  into  a  European  war.  We 
are  not  of  the  same  opinion,  and  we  will  cite  the  remarks  of 
General  Kuropatkin,  who  in  his  report  for  the  year  1900  has 
described  the  attitude  of  Russia  towards  Austria  and  Germany 
in  a  tone  which  is  far  from  encouraging.  "  We  must  cherish 
no   illusions  as   to    the  possibility  of  an    easy   victory  over    the 

'  Francis  Delaisi,  De  la  Guerre  dii  Balkans  a  la  Guerre  curopeennc. 


224  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Austrian  army,"  he  says,  and  he  demonstrates  the  superiority  of 
Austria  from  a  military  point  of  view.  The  Austrians  have 
eight  railways  to  transport  their  troops  to  the  Russian  frontier, 
while  Russia  has  onlv  four  lines  at  her  disposal.  The  situation 
of  Germany  is  still  more  greatly  superior  :  Germany  has  seventeen 
lines  of  railway  running  in  the  direction  of  the  Russian  frontier, 
while  Russia  has  only  five  lines  leading  towards  Germany. 
"  The  difference  is  too  enormous  and  leaves  our  neighbours 
a  superiority  which  cannot  be  overcome  by  the  numbers  of  our 
troops  nor  their  courage."  ^ 

Austria  and  Germany  can  despatch  760  military  trains  per 
diem  !  Germany,  says  General  Kuropatlcin,  has  in  general 
better  technical  resources  at  her  disposal  than  Russia.  "  Com- 
paring the  Russian  and  German  forces,  the  invasion  of  Russia 
by  German  troops  is  more  probable  than  the  invasion  of  Germany 
by  Russian  troops." 

"  Our  western  frontier,  in  the  event  of  a  European  war,  would 
be  in  such  danger  as  has  never  been  known  in  all  the  history 
of  Russia," 

General  Kuropatlcin  arrived  at  the  conclusion  cited  twelve 
years  ago  (in  1900).  But  during  the  last  twelve  years  the 
German  and  Austrian  forces  have  been  continually  increasing, 
while  the  Russian  forces  were  enfeebled  by  the  unhappy  war 
with  Japan.  The  situation  on  the  western  frontier  of  Russia 
is  worse  to-day  than  in  1900.  The  Russian  Government  eventu- 
ally decided,  some  years  ago,  to  disarm  the  frontier  completely, 
and  to  withdraw  the  point  of  concentration  of  its  troops  to  a 
position  some  hundreds  of  miles  within  the  country.  This  action 
evoked  a  protest  from  the  French,  who  considered  it  a  viola- 
tion of  engagements  on  the  part  of  Russia. 

Ill 

Although  economic  and  financial  interests  are  at  the  bottom 
of   the    foreign    policies   of  the   present  time,  the   army  and   the 

'  See  Memoirs  of  General  Kuropalkin,  vol.  i.,  p.  49,  Rubsiau  edition. 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    225 

fleet  are  the  supreme  argument.  But  the  army  and  the  navy 
are  themselves  to-day  a  vast  and  comphcated  technical  enterprise. 
It  is  by  no  means  astonishing  that  the  semi-feudal  Russian 
monarchy,  finding  itself  in  permanent  conflict  with  the  trend 
of  economic  and  social  development,  should  be  unable  to  organize 
its  military  forces  as  the  industrial  and  bourgeois  States  organize 
theirs. 

General  Kuropatkin  relates  in  his  Memoirs  that  when  he 
entered  the  War  Office  in  1898  he  found  the  Russian  army 
and  navy  in  a  state  of  chaos. 

"  The  Ministry  of  War  was  without  any  programme  of  action, 
and  there  was  no  systematic  connection  between  that  Ministry 
and  the  Ministries  of  Finances,  of  the  Interior,  and  of  Foreign 
Affairs.  Neither  was  there  any  community  of  action  between 
the  Ministry  of  War  and  that  of  the  Navy." 

"  After  the  victorious  wars  of  the  nineteenth  century  our 
army  did  not  progress "  in  the  matter  of  technical  training 
and  armaments,  but  rather  moved   backward. 

"  The  general  staff  was  especially  weak.  .  .  .  The  promotion 
of  officers  depended  on  favouritism.  Soldiers  were  cruelly 
treated.  Their  food  was  bad.  Waste  and  thefts  and  embezzle- 
ment of  all  sorts  were  common  phenomena  in  the  army.  The 
command  of  regiments  was  entrusted  to  aristocrats  who  had 
squandered  their  personal  fortunes  and  were  seeking  means  of 
re-establishing  their  affairs  by  military  service.  The  Imperial 
Guard  enjoyed  oppressive  privileges.  ...  As  a  result  the 
Russian  army  had  not  improved  from  a  moral  point  of  view, 
and  from  a  material  point  of  view  it  was  inferior  to  other 
European  armies." 

So  much  for  the  army.  Now  for  the  navy.  "  The  back- 
ward state  of  our  navy  in  comparison  with  the  other  navies 
of  Europe  was  still  more  marked." 

This  verdict  from  the  pen  of  an  official  personage  is  not  out 
of  date  to-day,  although  it  refers  to  the  Russian  navy  of  the 
end  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  Russo-Japanese  War,  of 
which  we  shall  speak  in  a  succeeding  chapter,  revealed  the  fact 

15 


226  MODERN  RUSSIA 

that  all  the  defects  and  vices  of  the  internal  organization  of  the 
military  forces  of  Russia  were  still  to  the  front  in  1904.  And 
so  long  as  the  present  Government  remains  in  power  no 
reorganization  of  the  army  or  navy  is  possible.  Why  ?  Because 
the  present  structure  of  the  Russian  army  reflects  the  general 
conditions  of  the  social  and  economic  life  of  Russia. 

Compulsory  military  service  was  established  in  Russia  in  187 1. 
Nominally  service  is  universal,  but  in  practice  only  the  poorer 
classes  feel  its  full  weight.  Rich  people  can  easily  escape  service 
by  the  payment  of  bribes. 

The  command  of  the  army  is  entrusted  to  the  sons  of  nobles 
or  bureaucrats,  while  the  sons  of  the  small  middle-class  folk, 
artisans,  peasants,  etc.,  cannot,  with  very  rare  exceptions,  attain 
officer's  rank.  The  officers  form  a  caste  in  Russia.  The  high 
commands  are  filled  by  aristocrats.  The  higher  military  colleges, 
and  even  the  cadets'  schools — the  secondary  military  colleges — 
admit  for  the  most  part  only  the  sons  of  nobles  or  officers. 
Thus  the  officers  as  a  class  are  a  purely  anti-democratic  body, 
and  democracy  regards  them  as  enemies  of  the  people.  The 
Russian  officer  is  always  striving  to  manifest  his  disdain  for 
civilians,  and  readily  uses  his  sword  against  peaceful  citizens. 
Any  day  you  may  read  in  the  Russian  Press  accounts  of 
collisions  between  officers  and  civilians,  or  of  the  murder  of 
civilians  by  drunken  officers,  or  by  officers  who  would  claim 
that  they  were  legitimately  defending  their  "  honour." 

The  relations  between  the  officers  and  their  men  are  revolting. 
Sons  of  nobles  and  wealthy  folk  on  becoming  officers  retain 
all  their  original  insolence  toward  the  peasant  or  artisan  turned 
soldier  ;  the  officers  strike  their  soldiers  and  treat  them  like  beasts 
of  burden. 

The  material  conditions  of  the  soldier's  life  are  shocking:. 
Here  are  a  few  examples,  drawn  from  official  documents  and 
from  articles  by  a  military  surgeon  published  in  the  Russian 
Press. 

The  clothing  of  the  Russian  soldier  is  thin  and  inconvenient. 


FOREIGN  POLITICS  AND    THE  ARMY    227 

It  is  handed  from  one  soldier  to  another  until  it  becomes  worn 
and    filthy.     "  The    soldier's    clothes    retain    and    propagate    the 
germs  of  disease:  of  syphilis  and  other  specific  maladies,  trachoma, 
typhus,  etc."     Such  is  the  confession  of  an  army  surgeon.     The 
footgear  is  no  better  :  the  soldiers  are  obliged  to  sell  the  boots 
served  out  to  them  and  to  buy  more  comfortable  boots  at  their 
own  expense.     The  sites  of  the  barracks  are  unhealthy.     Even 
in  the  military  division  of  St.  Petersburg,  where  the  Tsar  retains 
his    most    faithful    troops — his    guards — "the    barracks   are    for 
the  most  part  injurious  to  the    health  "  (cited  from  the  official 
report    of  the    medical    inspector   of  the  army).     The  food  of 
the  soldiers  is  a  source  of  profit   to  the   officers  and   non-com- 
missioned   officers.     They  do    not   give  the  soldiers   their  legal 
rations,    but    retain    for    themselves    a    considerable    proportion 
of  the   bread,  meat,  and  other  provisions.     "  The  food  is  often 
of  bad  quality  and   decayed,  and   its  consumption   often  causes 
sickness  among  the  troops."  ^ 

Scurvy  is  regarded  by  doctors  as  the  most  undeniable  sign  of 
deficient  nourishment,  of  famine.  Now,  during  the  years  1897- 
1907,  the  number  of  soldiers  attacked  by  scurvy  increased  by 
50  per  cent.  The  increase  of  sick  in  the  army  was  22  per  cent, 
in  the  case  of  typhus,  315  per  cent,  in  the  case  of  hernia,  39  per 
cent,  in  the  case  of  aflfections  of  the  respiratory  organs,  13  per 
cent,  in  the  case  of  syphilis,  29  percent,  in  the  case  of  gonorrhoea, 
and  32  per  cent,  in  the  case  of  diseases  of  the  circulatory  organs. 
Thus,  instead  of  improving,  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  Russian 
army  is  always  deteriorating.  Special  inquiries  have  demonstrated 
that  the  mortality  from  typhus  in  St.  Petersburg  is  7  per  thou- 
sand sick  persons  among  the  civil  population  and  16  per  thousand 
in  the  army. 

To  this  we  must  add  that  suicides  are  very  common  in  the 
Russian  army. 

'  In  1906,  according  to  official  documents,  in  the  Tsaritsynsky 
regiment  (at  Krasnoi'e  Selo,  near  St.  Petersburg)  161  soldiers  fell  ill 
in  three  days ;  in  the  Finlandsky  regiment,  536  in  two  days  ;  and  in 
the  5th  Strelkovoy,  233  in  four  days.  In  all  these  cases  the  spread  of 
sickness  was  due  to  bad  food. 


228  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Here  again  is  a  fact  characteristic  of  the  situation  of  the 
Russian  soldier  and  the  relations  between  officers  and  men  :  the 
number  of  denshtchiki  or  orderlies  performing  domestic  duties  in 
officers' quarters  or  houses  is  53,000.  Fifty-three  thousand  unpaid 
slaves  exploited  by  Russian  officers  ! 

If  the  reader  will  consider  all  these  facts,  he  will  not  be  sur- 
prised to  learn  that  the  Russian  soldiery  are  extremely  discon- 
tented with  their  situation  and  that  the  revolutionary  spirit  is 
not  unknown  in  the  army.  The  Government  knows  this  and 
fears  a  military  revolt.  This  fear  will  not  allow  the  Russian 
autocracy  to  risk  a  war  in  order  to  stifle  the  revolutionary  move- 
ment by  the  report  of  victories,  as  it  has  done  before  now. 
Tsarism  had  considerable  experience  of  this  kind  during  and 
after  the  Russo-Japanese  War.  It  saw  revolutionary  manifesta- 
tions in  the  army,  and  more  especially  in  the  navy  :  it  has  seen 
cruisers  flying  the  red  flag  and  fortresses  in  the  hands  of 
insurgents,  and  does  not  wish  to  repeat  the  experience.  This  is 
why  it  avoids,  and  will  avoid  so  long  as  it  is  possible  to  do  so, 
any  armed  conflict  with  a  European  Power.  That  the  Russian 
Government,  during  the  crisis  provoked  by  the  annexation  of 
Herzegovina  and  Bosnia  in  1909,  yielded  to  the  threats  of 
Germany  and  Austria,  was  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  already  none 
too  sure  of  the  fidelity  of  the  army  and  navy.  We  have  the 
right  to  assert  that  the  revolutionary  movement  of  the  popular 
masses,  the  working  classes,  the  peasants,  the  army,  and  the  navy 
is  the  best  and  principal  guarantee  of  a  pacific  attitude  on  the 
part  of  the  Russian  monarchy. 


BOOK    IV 
THE   POLITICAL   CONFLICT 


CHAPTER  I 

THE    RUSSO-JAPANESE   WAR   AND   THE   REVOLUTIONARY 

CRISIS 

I.  Can  we  regard  the  Russo-Japanese  War  as  the  cause  of  the  Russian 
revolution  ? — What  is  meant  by  a  "  revolution  "  ?  II.  Relations 
between  Japan  and  Russia — The  inevitable  nature  of  the  conflict 
between  them.  III.  What  does  the  defeat  of  Russia  show  ? — The 
influence  of  the  war  upon  the  revolutionary  crisis. 


We  very  often  hear  the  opinion  that  the  cause  of  the  Russian 
revolution  was  no  other  than  the  disastrous  war  with  Japan.  Is 
this  opinion  justified  ?  Yes  and  no  :  according  to  the  aspect  of 
the  question  envisaged.  If  by  the  cause  ot  the  revolution  we 
mean  the  mere  fact  of  the  shock  which  uncovered  the  forces  of 
the  revolution,  we  may  say  that  the  revolutionary  movement  was 
assuredly  the  result  of  the  war.  But  if  we  study  the  question 
more  deeply  we  shall  see  that  the  Russo-Japanese  War  merely 
determined  the  moment  of  the  revolutionary  outbreak,  and,  if 
you  like,  its  rhythm,  or  the  rapidity  of  its  development.  As  for 
the  manner  in  which  the  motive  forces  of  the  revolution  w^ere 
compounded  and  the  forms  assumed  by  the  encounter  of  these 
different  forces,  they  were  determined  by  the  most  important  and 
fundamental  phenomena  of  Russian  history.  Moreover,  we  may 
even  affirm  that  the  Russo-Japanese  War  and  its  disastrous  results 
were  prepared  by  the  previous  development  of  the  Russian 
Empire,  and  were  merely  the  inevitable  consequences  of  certain 


231 


232  MODERN  RUSSIA 

peculiarities  of  this  development.  War  and  revolution  both  were 
a  result  :  but  they  were  not  a  cause,  not  an  antecedent.  So, 
although  we  cannot  regard  the  war  as  the  cause  of  the  revolu- 
tion, although  the  scientific  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the 
revolutionary  crisis  is  not  to  be  found  exclusively  in  the  victory 
of  the  Japanese  armies,  it  would  be  still  more  unscientific  to 
explain  the  crisis  as  an  affair  organized  by  the  revolutionists — 
Socialists,  Terrorists,  and  other  restless  folk.  To  imagine  that 
the  revolutionists  caused  the  revolution  is  to  take  the  appearances 
of  facts  for  causes  ;  to  judge  matters  like  a  policeman.  Neither 
risings  nor  bloodshed  nor  bombs  are  the  essence  of  a  revolution  : 
they  are  merely  outward  accessories,  the  grim  setting  of  a  pro- 
found historic  drama. 

Such  external  phenomena  are  often  inevitably  historic  ;  the 
progressive  embitterment  of  the  class  conflict  leads  almost  always 
to  the  immediate  and  physical  encounter  of  the  hostile  forces,  and 
the  transformation  of  the  arm  of  criticism  into  the  criticism  of 
arms.  However,  this  external  manifestation  is  not  absolutely 
indispensable  to  revolution,  and  history  relates  acts  of  the  most 
revolutionary  nature  which  had  no  revolutionary  appearance  :  as 
the  declaration  of  the  delegates  of  the  Third  Estate  in  Paris 
that  they  constituted  a  National  Assembly  (June  17,  17B9). 
Here  was  no  violent  manifestation  :  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
actions  whose  aspect  is  revolutionary,  far  from  overturning  the 
political  and  social  life  of  the  country,  will  sometimes  even 
consolidate  the  established  system.  This  is  true  of  all  the  "palace 
revolutions  "  which  we  shall  encounter  in  the  history  of  almost 
any  State,  and  in  that  of  Russia  particularly.  In  order  to 
illustrate  this  idea,  let  us  mention  that  palace  conspiracy  which 
at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  placed  Catherine  II 
on  a  throne  spattered  with  the  blood  of  the  murdered  Peter  III. 
The  autocracy,  after  this  upheaval,  was  more  firmly  established 
than  ever. 

So  the  essential  fact  resides  neither  in  the  speeches  nor  the 
deeds  of  revolutionists,  nor  in  rivers  of  blood,  nor  in  the  explosion 
of  bombs.     We    must    therefore    seek    elsewhere    than    in    the 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  233 

external  signs  of  the  political  conflict  for  the  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion :  What  is  to  be  understood  by  a  "  revolution  "  ? 

To  understand  and  define  the  significance  of  a  revolution,  let 
us  take  yet  another  example.  In  i860,  after  the  Crimean  War,  a 
whole  series  of  important  changes  took  place  in  the  social  and 
political  life  of  the  country.  Slavery  was  abolished,  new  tribunals 
were  created,  with  a  local  self-government  (the  zemstvo),  etc. 
But  no  one  called  these  changes  a  revolution.  The  years  in 
which  they  were  accomplished  are  known  in  Russian  literature 
as  "the  period  of  great  reforms."  The  year  1905,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  known  as  "  the  year  of  the  Revolution."  Nevertheless, 
apart  from  the  creation  of  a  somewhat  impotent  Duma,  it 
brought  with  it  no  real  or  important  change  in  the  political 
system  of  Russia. 

And  in  what  does  the  distinction  between  these  two  historical 
moments  consist  ?  Why  is  one  spoken  of  as  a  time  of  reformation 
and  the  other  as  a  time  of  revolution  ? 

Because  the  changes  that  followed  the  Crimean  War  were  due 
to  the  monarchy  and  the  bureaucratic  nobility,  while  in  1905  the 
initiative  was  assumed  by  the  people.  We  do  not  by  that  mean  that 
the  reforms  eflFected  by  the  Government  were  effected  voluntarily. 
They  were  demanded  both  by  the  external  political  situation  and 
by  the  internal  agitation  of  the  masses.  But  after  all  the  applica- 
tion of  the  reforms  of  i860  was  due  to  the  old  social  elements, 
to  the  nobles  who  formed  the  support  of  the  monarchy,  while  in 
1905  the  transformation  of  the  Russian  Government  was  demanded 
by  a  new  element,  by  the  working  classes  allied  with  the  revolu- 
tionary middle  classes  and  the  peasantry. 

If  we  seek  a  similar  instance  in  the  history  of  the  French 
Revolution,  dissimilar  as  it  was  to  the  Russian  movement,  we 
shall  not  be  disappointed.  The  commencement  of  the  Revolution 
of  1789  was  marked  by  the  day  when  the  deputies  of  the  Third 
Estate,  declaring  themselves  a  National  Assembly,  seized  the  reins 
of  power  in  order  to  transform  the  political  system  of  France.  A 
few  years  earlier  the  French  Government  had  attempted  to  intro- 
duce reforms  similar  to  those  which  were  realized  by  the  Third 


234  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Estate.  Such  was  the  aim  of  Turgot.  Yet  this  activity  did  not 
bear  the  name  of  revolution  ;  because  Turgot's  day  and  the 
year  1789  were  differentiated  by  a  conquest  of  political  power, 
by  a  new  class,  and  by  the  transference  of  power  from  the  nobles 
to  the  bourgeoisie. 

The  difference  between  a  "  revolution  "  and  a  "  reform  "  resides  in 
the  transference  of  public  authority  from  one  class  to  another  class  that 
has  as  yet  enjoyed  no  authority. 

If  the  reader  is  in  agreement  with  our  point  of  view  he  will 
seek  for  the  causes  of  revolutions  neither  in  the  ardent  propaganda 
of  the  revolutionists  nor  in  their  heroism  and  abnegation,  nor  in 
the  bad  qualities  of  monarchs  and  their  advisers,  but  in  the  deep 
and  silent  operation  of  certain  forces,  which  lead  new  social  classes 
upon  the  stage  of  history. 

II 

The  Russo-Japanese  War  was  the  natural  and  logical  result  of 
Russia's  offensive  tactics  in  the  Far  East. 

The  hostility  between  Russia  and  Japan  dates  back  to  the 
eighteenth  century.  In  1790  Russian  vessels  first  appeared  in 
Japanese  waters.  In  1798  the  Russians  attempted  to  seize  the 
Kurile  Isles,  but  were  defeated  by  the  Japanese.  Even  so,  the 
appearance  of  the  Russians  aroused  a  keen  anxiety  in  the  minds 
of  Japanese  patriots,  and  one  of  the  latter,  a  celebrated  writer, 
Sh.  Hayashi,  appealed  to  the  people  to  defend  their  country 
against  the  "great  Empire  of  the  North."  In  1804  the  Russian 
Government  sent  a  diplomatic  mission  to  Japan  in  charge  of 
Riazanov,  which  ended  its  "diplomatic  "  negotiation  by  attack- 
ing several  Japanese  villages.  Two  years  later  the  northern  por- 
tion of  the  island  of  Saghalien  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Russia. 
Continuous  contact  was  established  between  the  Japanese  and 
the  Russians,  and  as  a  result  thereof  the  Russian  admiral  Golovin 
was  three  years  a  prisoner  in  Japan.  In  the  end  these  relations 
were  interrupted  while  Japan  underwent  a  great  crisis  in  her 
domestic  life  j  her  ancient  natural  economy  died  a  sudden  death, 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  235 

the  feudal  system  fell  to  pieces,  the  trade  and  industry  of  the 
country  increased,  and  public  instruction  was  developed.  Japanese 
scholars  profited  by  the  times  to  call  the  younger  generation  to 
the  schools,  in  order  to  consolidate  the  forces  of  the  country  and 
to  save  it  from  foreign  invasion.  But  the  foreign  ships  returned. 
A  proof  of  the  justice  of  the  advice  given  by  Japanese  patriots, 
they  stimulated  the  internal  development  of  the  country.  In 
1862  and  1867  there  v^^ere  fresh  negotiations  in  respect  of  Sag- 
halien,  but  this  was  the  last  time  Russia  had  to  deal  with  "  Old 
Japan."  In  1868  the  revolution  broke  out  in  Japan,  leading  to 
the  final  ruin  of  feudalism  and  the  reformation  of  the  institutions 
of  the  State.  The  most  prominent  leaders  of  this  movement 
were  Marquis  Ito,  Marshal  Oyama,  and  General  Kuroki,  under 
whose  leadership  Russia  was  one  day  to  be  defeated. 

The  revolution  and  the  reforms  realized  by  Japan  in  various 
departments  of  life  required  of  the  country  a  considerable  internal 
effort  and  prevented  it,  as  may  easily  be  understood,  from  follow- 
ing an  aggressive  foreign  policy  during  the  first  two  years  after 
the  revolution.  For  this  reason  Japan  at  first  adopted  a  policy 
of  concessions,  and  by  the  treaty  of  1874  ceded  to  Russia  the 
entire  island  of  Saghalien,  full  of  enormous  natural  wealth,  in 
exchange  for  the  poor  and  sparsely  peopled  Kuriles.  This 
arrangement  aroused  the  keenest  discontent  among  the  Japanese 
people,  and  a  cold  hatred  of  "  the  wild  eagle  of  the  North  "  (the 
name  given  to  Russia  by  the  Japanese  poets  of  the  time)  invaded 
the  hearts  of  the  citizens  of  the  Land  of  the  Rising  Sun. 

The  cession  of  Saghalien  did  not  check  the  Russian  Empire 
in  its  march  toward  the  Far  East.  After  the  disastrous  war  in 
the  Crimea  Russia  wished  to  take  her  revenge,  at  least  in  Asia. 
She  occupied  with  her  troops  the  left  bank  of  the  River  Amur, 
to  which,  two  years  later,  was  added  the  region  of  Ussuri.  The 
eastern  limits  of  the  Russian  Empire  drew  still  nearer  to  the 
Pacific  Ocean.  During  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century 
the  policy  of  invasion  was  continually  at  work  in  Asia,  for  the 
domination  of  Saghalien  had  merely  whetted  the  stupendous 
appetite  of  the  Russian  Government.     During  these  twenty-five 


236  MODERN  RUSSIA 

years  the  Russian  bureaucracy  was  busy  solely  with  plans  of 
campaign  with  a  view  to  the  conquest  of  the  Far  East.  Its 
less  obvious  aim  was  to  turn  the  attention  of  the  people  from 
the  defects  of  the  internal  organization  of  Russia  by  reports  of 
external  victories.  The  coincidence  between  the  extremely  re- 
actionary policies  of  the  reigns  of  Alexander  III  and  Nicolas  II 
and  the  insane  pranks  of  the  armies  in  the  Far  East  was  not 
accidental.  In  1885  the  Government  of  Alexander  III  made  an 
attempt  to  seize  Port  Lazarev.  As  in  1861,  England  intervened, 
and  once  more  the  Russian  autocracy  was  forced  to  draw  back. 
But  this  recoil  was  only  momentary.  Russia  quickly  commenced 
to  prepare  herself  for  other  conquests.  In  1891  she  built  the 
Trans-Siberian  railway,  and  her  squadrons  effected  a  reconnais- 
sance near  the  Japanese  coasts.  The  irritation  of  the  Japanese 
reached  its  maximum  and  was  manifested  by  the  attempt  on 
the  life  of  the  heir  of  the  Russian  throne,  the  Nicolas  II  of 
to-day,  who  was  then  travelling  in  Japan.  The  author  of  the 
attempt  justified  his  act  in  the  following  words,  which  were 
published  in  a  native  journal  :  "The  Russian  prince  was  studying 
Japan  from  a  strategical  point  of  view,  simply  in  order  to  be  able 
to  invade  it  with  his  armies  later.  Then  I  resolved  to  prevent  the 
war  and  save  the  country."  (See  the  work  by  M.  Volontaire  on 
The  Rus so-Japanese  War^  St.  Petersburg,  1 904.) 

Three  years  later  Japan  tested  the  strength  of  her  army  and 
her  fleet,  both  of  which  had  been  reorganized,  in  a  war  with 
China.  Japan  was  victorious.  The  treaty  of  April  27,  1895, 
stipulated  that  China  should  cede  to  Japan  the  peninsula  of 
Liao-Tung,  with  Port  Arthur  and  Talienvan  (Dalny),  and  pay 
a  large  indemnity.  Russia,  in  agreement  with  France  and 
England,  protested  against  the  occupation  of  Liao-Tung. 
Japan  had  to  renounce  her  conquest,  which  fell  to — Russia  I 
During  the  negotiations  between  the  Great  Powers  and  little 
Japan,  Russia  sought  to  provoke  a  war  with  the  latter,  enfeebled 
as  she  was  by  her  war  with  China.  The  matter  went  so  far 
that  the  commander  of  the  Russian  squadron.  Admiral  Tyrtov, 
on    several    occasions  proposed   to   his  French   colleague   to   fall 


THE   RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  237 

unexpectedly  upon  the  Japanese  fleet,  without  waiting  for  the 
close  of  negotiations ;  thus  seeking  to  involve  France  in  the 
treacherous  policy  of  the  Russian  autocracy.  The  Conservative 
Press  supported  this  policy,  and  eagerly  exclaimed  that  the  "  wings 
of  the  Russian  Eagle  should  cover  the  whole  East."  The  pro- 
gressive and  independent  Press  being  muzzled  by  the  censorship, 
there  was  no  one  in  Russia  to  protest  against  the  gross  jingoism 
and  the  foolish  adventurousness  of  the  Imperial  bureaucracy. 
The  latter  even  considered  it  advantageous  that  Russia  should 
assist  China  to  pay  the  war  indemnity  to  Japan.  The  Russian 
money  paid  for  the  building  of  Japanese  warships,  for  the 
construction  of  that  fleet  which  struck  such  terrible  blows  at 
Russia's  influence  in  Asia.  As  a  historian  of  the  Russo-Japanese 
War  has  remarked,  "  the  autocracy  precipitated  its  own  fall." 

Naturally  Russia  did  not  assist  China  for  nothing.  Towards 
1896  she  began  to  invade  Manchuria,  and  by  the  treaty  of 
May  15,  1897,  China  gave  her  "for  twenty-five  years"  Port 
Arthur  and  Talienvan,  which  had  only  just  been  resumed  from 
Japan.  Then,  through  the  medium  of  a  "  private  "  shareholding 
company,  the  Russian  Government  commenced  the  construction 
of  the  Manchurian  railway.  The  creation  of  the  Russo-Chinese 
Bank,  also  "private,"  followed.  In  order  to  protect  these 
private  undertakings  the  Russian  troops  penetrated  farther  and 
farther  into  foreign  territory.  The  danger  to  Japan  became 
obvious.  The  last  act  of  the  policy  of  Russian  Tsarism  in 
the  Far  East  was  to  procure  the  famous  concession  of  the 
banks  of  the  Yalu,  with  a  view  to  the  exploitation  of  the  forest 
wealth  of  the  country.  This  action,  the  work  of  the  camarilla 
of  courtiers  who  thought  of  nothing  but  their  personal  interests, 
rendered  the  beating  of  the  wings  of  the  Northern  Eagle  more 
wild  and  insolent  than  ever. 

As  for  Japan,  with  the  help  of  Russian  gold  she  had  in  twelve 
years  built  a  powerful  fleet  (of  67  large  and  100  small  vessels), 
had  increased  her  army,  and  had  obtained  the  diplomatic  support 
of  Great  Britain  and  of  the  United  States.  Suddenly  she  passed 
from  the  defensive  to  the  offensive,  and  demanded  that  Russia 


238  MODERN  RUSSIA 

should  evacuate  Manchuria,  which,  according  to  the  declaration 
of  the  Russian  Government  itself,  was  only  "  momentarily " 
occupied. 

The  Russian  autocracy  repeatedly  promised  to  withdraw  its 
troops,  but  failed  to  do  so.  A  date  was  fixed,  the  8th  of 
October,  1903.  Once  more  the  Tsar  broke  his  promise.  On 
the  8th  of  February,  1904,  the  Japanese  attacked  the  Russian 
squadron.  One  of  the  greatest  wars  in  the  history  of  the  world 
was  about  to  begin. 

The  question  arises  which  party  was  in  the  right  in  this  long 
quarrel,  which  was  settled  amid  the  horrors  of  fire  and  bloodshed. 
I  do  not  ask  which  was  juridically  justified,  for  juridical  principles, 
once  they  appear  inimical  to  the  material  interests  of  a  State,  are 
often  reversed  or  rejected.  On  the  contrary,  I  am  considering 
only  the  positive  interests  of  the  two  combatants.  Of  the  two 
Great  Powers,  whose  interests  were  the  more  real  and  whose  needs 
the  greater  ? 

If  we  compare  Japan  with  Russia,  we  find  that  on  Japanese 
territory,    one-sixtieth     only     the     size    of    Russia,    dwell     45 
millions  of   inhabitants.     In   Korea   the  economic    influence   of 
Japan  is  predominant.     In   1 900  the  total  value  of  the  foreign 
trade  of  Korea  was  ^1,600,000,  and  of  this  over  ^^  1,000,000 
was  due  to  Japan.     It  is  easy  to  prove  that  in  Manchuria  and 
other  parts  of  China  the  influence  and  the  colonizing  policy  of 
Japan  have  an  economic  basis,  which  Russia's  role  is  exclusively 
military.     The  military  tone  of  Russian  "  culture "  in  the  Far 
East    is    perceptible   even    in    those    portions    which    have   been 
Russian  for  more  than  fifty  years.    Ten  years  before  the  outbreak 
of  the  war  the  expenditure  upon  the  army,  the  fleet,  and  the 
administration  in  the  region  of  the  Prtmorska'ia  Oblast  amounted 
to    90    per    cent,    of    the    total    expenditure.      Thus,    for    each 
inhabitant    of    this    country    the    expenses    were    estimated    as 
34   rubles  for  the  army,   11    rubles  for  the  fleet,  and  76  kopeks 
for  public  instruction.     In  the  region  of  the  Amur  the  cost  of 
the  army  amounted  to  10  roubles  per  inhabitant,  while  the  sum 
spent  on  public  education  amounted  to  82  kopeks.     Before  the 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  239 

war  these  expenses  were  increasing  with  bewildering  speed. 
New  forts  were  built,  and  the  number  of  soldiers  increased. 
But  nothing  was  attempted  towards  the  economic  conquest  of 
the  country  or  the  development  of  rural  economy  or  industry, 
and  according  to  the  admissions  of  numerous  Russian  specialists, 
"  even  the  Chinese  and  the  Koreans  were  better  colonists  in  the 
region  of  the  Amur  than  were  the  Russians." 

Still  less  productive  and  still  more  essentially  military  was  the 
policy  of  the  Russian  Government  in  Manchuria  and  the  Liao- 
Tung.  In  January,  1903,  that  is,  a  year  before  the  war,  the 
Russian  population  of  Port  Arthur  was  only  17,709,  of  whom 
14,573  were  military  and  3,136  civil  inhabitants!  And  these 
"civil"  inhabitants  included  1,171  functionaries  and  aristocratic 
adventurers,  but  only  73  traders  !  The  population  of  Harbin, 
before  the  war,  consisted  entirely  of  soldiers  and  servants  of  the 
State  railways.  The  "oasis  of  Russian  culture"  in  Asia  could 
not  boast  of  a  single  school,  nor  of  a  commercial  undertaking, 
nor  of  a  factory,  but  it  did  contain  a  barracks  and  a  maison 
publique.  According  to  Russian  investigators,  the  Chinese  made 
far  better  masters  of  Manchuria  than  did  the  Russian  bureaucrats. 

"  We  shall  encounter  astonishing  phenomena  in  the  Chinese 
colonization  of  Manchuria  :  the  Chinese  immigrants,  far  from 
representing  the  clenched  fist  or  the  policeman,  while  leaving  the 
military  and  administrative  functions  to  the  natives  of  the  country, 
make  themselves  the  true  maf*"prs  of  their  conquest ;  subjugating 
it  entirely  and  irrevocably  by  theu  culture,  for  the  higher  culture 
always  in  the  end  dominates  the  lower,  without  artificial  means, 
without  repressive  tactics "  (V.  P.  Golovatchev,  Russia  in  the 
Far  East  J  St.  Petersburg,  1904.) 

Inferior  to  the  Chinese  in  the  domain  of  ag-riculture,  the 
Russian  "colonists"  are  also  their  inferiors  in  the  matter  of 
commercial  competition.  Before  the  Russians  penetrated  the 
Liao-Tung  (1894),  the  sum  total  of  trade  between  China  and 
Russia  was  equivalent  to  ^4,570,000,  of  which  ^^4, 100,000  was 
due  to  the  exportation  of  goods  from  China  to  Russia,  and  only 
j^470,ooo  to  the  export  of  Russian   goods  to  China ;  that  is, 


240 


MODERN  RUSSIA 


Russia  imports  nine  times  as  much  as  she  exports.  In  the 
matter  of  trade  with  China,  Russia  stands  below  many  other 
States. 

In   1896   the  number  of   foreign  vessels  visiting  the    Chinese 
ports  was  as  follows  : 


Number  of 
Vessels. 

Tonnage. 

Great  Britain 

19,711 

21,847,082 

Germany 

... 

2,OQO 

7,251,292 

Norway  and  Sweden 

1,126 

870,173 

Japan 

546 

565,992 

France 

427 

434415 

Denmark 

333 

171,826 

United  States 

143 

165,578 

Russia 

66 

1 13,656 

While  Japan  is  in  the  fourth  rank,  Russia  occupies  the  eighth 
and  last  place  in  this  list.  The  feeble  development  of  trade 
relations  between  Russia  and  China  is  still  farther  betrayed  by 
the  insignificant  quantity  of  Russian  trade-marks  in  China.  In 
1894  there  were  350  English  trade-marks  in  China,  85  German, 
50  Japanese,  31  American,  and  12  Russian.  At  the  beginning 
of  1904,  in  that  "  paradise  of  traders,"  Shanghai,  there  was  scarcely 
a  Russian  merchant.  All  the  articles  of  export  which  Russia 
might  have  furnished  were  sent  thither  by  Japan  :  fish,  fishing- 
gear,  coal,  and  wood.  Trepang  was  supplied  by  Korea.  As  for 
the  trade  in  cotton-thread,  Japan  was  the  successful  rival  even  01 
England,  while  Russia  lingered  far  behind.  According  to  the 
testimony  or  a  local  Russian  journal,  "  the  influence  of  Russian 
trade  in  the  Far  East  is  almost  entirely  stifled  by  the  greatly 
superior  organization  of  the  Europeans.  Three-quarters  of  the 
exports  consist  of  foreign  goods,  and  the  local  trade  is  gradually 
falling  into  the  hands  of  our  neighbours,  the  Japanese  and 
Chinese."  Thus,  if  even  in  her  own  possessions  Russia  has  been 
unable  to  develop  her  trade,  it  is  not  surprising  that  in  matters 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  241 

of  commerce  she  should  be  entirely  powerless  in  China  and 
Manchuria.  This  commercial  importance  is  recognized  even 
by  those  who  inspired  the  advance  toward  the  Far  East.  Thus 
a  well-known  Russian  financier,  Professor  Migulin,  stated  in 
a  book  published  two  years  before  the  war  that  industrial  com- 
petition between  Russia  and  Japan  was  impossible.  The  Novy 
Kray^  a  semi-official  journal  published  in  Port  Arthur,  stated  in 
1903  :  "Our  manufacturing  trade  has  no  solid  ground  beneath  it. 
It  is  checked  by  two  important  factors,  the  competition  of  Japan 
and  the  inertia  of  our  merchants.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to 
contend  against  Japan,  which  has  occupied  all  the  markets  here, 
and  is  so  near  to  China  and  Manchuria.  The  distance  of  our 
factories  from  the  place  of  outlet  greatly  increases  the  price  of 
our  products,  so  that  those  of  the  Japanese  are  sold  much  more 
cheaply.  Moreover,  we  cannot  organize  a  credit  trade  as  the 
Japanese  have  done,  as  to  do  so  we  should  need  to  have  enormous 
depots  in  Manchuria,  which  would  still  further  increase  factitious 
prices." 

It  is  true  that  it  costs  far  less  to  transport  merchandise  from 
Japan  into  China  than  from  Russia.  The  cost  of  transport 
from  Odessa  to  Vladivostok  is  from  35  kopeks  to  2j  rubles  per 
pood  (36  lb.  to  40  lb.  Russian),  while  from  any  Japanese  port 
the  freight  is  only  8  kopeks.  Even  from  the  German  ports  the 
freight  is  only  one-fourth  of  the  freight  from  Odessa. 

As  for  transport  by  rail,  it  is  extremely  costly.  The  Siberian 
railroad,  with  its  continuation  into  Manchuria,  consists  only  of 
a  single  track.  A  competent  author  states  positively  that  "  the 
Manchurian  railroad  can  never  pay  ;  as  a  commercial  undertaking 
it  must  be  counted  a  useless  failure,  and  the  pacific  conquest  of 
Manchuria,  with  the  object  of  creating  a  new  market  for  Russian 
industry,  has  for  the  present  become  impossible."  For  if  this 
railroad  is  of  profit  to  any  one  it  is  to  Japan  and  the  United 
States,  who,  having  cheap  and  convenient  means  of  communica- 
tion with  the  ports  of  Manchuria,  make  use  of  this  railway  as 
of  a  pump  "to  pour  their  products  into  Manchuria  and  Siberia." 
As  for  Russia,  it  is  evident  that  she  has  not  as  yet  a  sufficient 

16 


242  MODERN  RUSSIA 

economic  basis  to  enable  her  to  pursue  an  offensive  policy  in 
Asia,  and  even  before  the  war  certain  patriotic  journals  of  the 
Right  had  begun  to  advise  the  Russian  Government  to  close  as 
quickly  as  possible  the  enormous  hole  which  has  been  dug  in 
Asia,  in  which,  were  matters  to  go  wrong,  tens  and  hundreds  of 
millions  of  Russian  rubles  would  be  lost  as  in  a  bottomless  pit. 

"  We  have  made  a  stupendous  mistake  in  installing  ourselves  in 
this  Oriental  abyss,  and  we  should  make  every  effort  to  extricate 
ourselves  therefrom,"  stated  an  influential  Conservative  journal 
(the  Kievlianin)  in  the  early  days  of  1904.  But  it  was  too  late  ; 
the  atmosphere  was  heavy  with  menaces  and  the  denouement 
was  approaching 


'g- 


III 


I  shall  not  relate  in  detail  the  facts  of  the  Russo-Japanese  War ; 
they  will  be  familiar  to  my  readers.  I  will  not  reopen  still 
smarting  wounds,  nor  disturb  the  weary  and  shattered  bones  of 
the  peasants  and  artisans,  Japanese  and  Russian,  who  sleep  amid 
the  hills  and  valleys  of  Manchuria  or  in  the  depths  of  the  Pacific 
Ocean.  I  will  confine  myself  to  noting  the  more  important  dates 
of  the  war. 

On  the  8th  February,  1904,  a  Japanese  torpedo  squadron 
entered  Port  Arthur,  attacked  the  Russian  squadron,  and  disabled 
the  three  best  vessels — the  Tsesarevitch^  the  Retvizan^  and  the 
Pallada. 

On  the  1 2th  April  the  Russian  squadron  steamed  out  of 
Port  Arthur.  The  ironclad  Petropavlovsk  was  blown  up  as  the 
result  of  a  Japanese  mine  exploding.  With  her  perished  the 
commander  of  the  fleet.  Admiral  MakarofF.  The  cruiser  Pobieda 
was  damaged. 

On  the  1 8th  April  a  battle  near  the  Yalu  River.  After 
seven  hours  of  attack.  General  Kuroki  routed  the  Russian  army, 
whicii  left  behind  it  30  guns  and  600  prisoners. 

On  the  28th  May,  a  battle  near  Kin-chu.  The  Russians  beat 
a  retreat,  losing  72  guns. 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  243 

At  the  beginning  of  June  a  Russian  army  of  35,000  men 
arrived  under  the  command  of  Stakelberg  to  relieve  Port  Arthur. 
It  was  attacked  by  the  Japanese  at  Vafangu.  Fifteen  minutes 
of  Japanese  fire  disabled  all  the  Russian  guns  and  forced  the 
Russian  troops  to  fly. 

After  Vafangu  came  a  whole  series  of  Russian  defeats — 
Motien-Ling,  Tatchikao,  Yu-chun-ling,  Kung-Tsu-ling,  etc. 

On  the  lOth  August  the  Port  Arthur  squadron,  according  to 
orders  from  St.  Petersburg,  attempted  to  fight  its  way  to  Vladi- 
vostok. It  lost  nine  of  its  vessels,  and  the  remnant  had  perforce 
to  return  to  Port  Arthur. 

On  the  14th  August  the  Vladivostok  squadron  came  upon  the 
scene.  Its  best  cruiser,  the  Ruriky  perished.  Two  other  vessels, 
the  Gromvoboi  and  the  Rossiya^  retired  much  damaged. 

On  the  1 6th  August  the  Japanese  were  approaching  Liao- 
yang,  where  the  Russian  troops  were  concentrated.  After  losing 
13,000  men  the  Russian  army,  under  the  command  of  Kuro- 
patkin,  retired,  leaving  behind  it  quantities  of  provisions  and 
ammunition. 

Kuropatkin  reassembled  his  troops,  strengthened  his  army, 
and  declared  in  a  manifesto  to  his  soldiers  that  "the  moment  had 
come  to  bend  the  Japanese  to  our  will  ;  the  strength  of  our 
army   is  great  enough   to  permit   us   to   take   the   offensive." 

The  offensive  was  assumed.  Kuropatkin  lost  50,000  men 
and  43  cannon. 

In  January  Port  Arthur  was  reduced  ;  546  cannon,  4  ironclads, 
2  cruisers,  34  torpedo-boats  and  destroyers,  35,000  rifles,  82,000 
shells,  and  2,000,000  cartridges  fell  into  the  hands  of  Japan.  The 
entire  garrison  was  taken  prisoner. 

On  the  24th  January,  1905,  General  Gripenberg  attacked  a 
greatly  inferior  force  of  Japanese  near  Sandepu.  He  was  defeated 
and  lost  13,000  men. 

On  the  14th  February  Marshal  Oyama  fell  unexpectedly  upon 
the  Russians  near  Mukden,  the  chief  stronghold  and  centre  of  the 
Russian  forces  in  Manchuria,  and  delivered  battle  against  Kuro- 
patkin.    The  Russian  army,  despite  the  desperate  resistance  of 


244  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  soldiers,  who  fought  for  fifteen  days,  was  forced  to  retire,  only 
to  be  attacked  and  defeated  anew  at  Teling,  six  days  later. 
Thenceforth  the  continental  campaign  was  irrecoverably  lost. 

Three  months  later  perished  the  last  hopes  of  a  naval  victory. 
On  the  14th  May  the  united  squadrons  of  Rojdestvensky  and 
Nebogatov  were  entirely  destroyed  in  the  stupendous  battle  of 
Tsushima. 

Thanks  to  the  intervention  of  Roosevelt,  negotiations  were 
commenced  with  a  view  to  peace,  and  by  the  treaty  of  Ports- 
mouth, ratified  the  14th  October,  Russia  ceded  to  Japan  the 
Liao-tung  peninsula,  with  Port  Arthur  and  Dalny  and  745 
miles  of  the  Chinese  railway,  renouncing  all  pretension  to  Man- 
churia and  the  shores  of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

A  Conservative  journal,  the  Novoie  f^refnya,  spoke  of  the  treaty 
thus  :  "  A  terrible  blow  has  been  struck  at  our  position  in  Asia  ; 
a  blow  which  reduces  our  political  role  in  the  Far  East  almost  to 
a  negative  quantity"  (V.  M.  Pavlovitch,  The  Foreign  Policy  and 
the  Russo-Japanese  JVar). 

The  Russo-Japanese  War  was  a  decisive  landmark  not  only  in 
the  external  policy  of  Russia,  but  also  in  her  inner  life,  for  the 
result  of  the  war  was  singularly  to  embitter  the  revolutionary 
conflict  between  the  tendencies  of  the  economic  and  social 
development  of  the  country  and  its  political  system,  and  to 
awaken  the  somnolent  forces  of  the  revolution. 

The  shock  was  tremendous.  The  immediate  losses  were 
stupendous  :  400,000  men  killed  and  wounded  and  ^530,000,000 
of  the  people's  money  lost  :  such  are  the  monstrous  figures  of  the 
blood-stained  balance-sheet  of  this  war.  Moreover,  beside  the 
immediate  cost  in  men  and  money  the  war  struck  a  blow  at  the 
already  feeble  economic  situation  of  Russia.  The  mobilization 
of  the  troops  led  to  an  ebbing  of  the  working  forces  of  the  rural 
economy,  and  in  some  departments  of  Siberia  the  wheat  harvest 
could  not  be  gathered  for  lack  of  labour.  The  disorganization 
of  the  foreign  trade  of  Russia,  the  suppression  of  foreign  credit, 
the  check  to  the  construction  of  railways,  all  aggravated 
the  crisis   in   the   iron    trade  and   in   other  domains   of  capitalist 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  245 

enterprise,  provoking  terrible  strikes  in  the  cities  and  industrial 
centres.  The  number  of  bankruptcies  attained  an  incredible 
figure  during  the  war.  The  price  of  Russian  paper  fell  to  one  of 
the  lowest  figures  known,  and  in  the  home  markets  the  price  of 
the  ruble  fell.  Many  bank-notes  were  put  into  circulation,  but 
the  circulation  of  gold  diminished.  The  necessity  of  loans  had 
to  be  faced. 

A  loan  contracted  in  Russia  itself  (1904)  had  already,  by 
withdrawing  some  ^16,000,000  from  internal  circulation,  in- 
creased the  depression  of  the  Russian  market,  and  the  shadow  of 
the  economic  crisis  covered  the  whole  country,  weighing  most 
heavily  upon  the  poorest  strata  of  the  people.  Morally  tortured 
by  the  shameful  defeat  of  the  Russian  armies  and  broken  by 
poverty,  the  popular  masses  were  quickly  aroused  to  the  need 
of  disentangling  the  causes  of  the  terrible  national  misery  and  of 
seeking  the  authors  of  the  disaster. 

The  awakening  of  the  people,  it  is  true,  was  not  immediate. 
At  first  there  was  a  general  faith  in  an  easy  victory  over  the 
Japanese,  for  the  bureaucracy,  hiding  the  terrible  truth,  had 
blinded  the  people  with  patriotic  lies.  The  first  Russian  defeat 
was  treated  by  patriotic  officialdom  as  a  "  flea-bite,"  and  the 
Conservative  journals  boasted  that  Japan  would  disappear  did  each 
Russian  but  throw  his  cap  into  the  air.  Governmental  procla- 
mations and  pamphlets  breathing  the  lowest  jingoism  were 
distributed,  after  this  defeat,  among  the  peasants  and  workers. 
Humorous  sketches  illustrated  these  pamphlets.  The  most 
popular  of  these  "  works  of  art  "  represented  a  huge  Cossack,  with 
a  ferocious  expression,  either  swallowing  tiny  Japanese  by  the 
dozen  or  lashing  them  with  his  nagdika.  Tsarism  thought  at 
first  to  utilize  the  war  in  order  to  stifle  the  revolutionary 
movement.  According  to  the  declaration  of  a  high  official 
(Prince  Urussoff,  ex-Governor  of  Bessarabia,  vide  Memoirs  of  a 
Governor)^  "  the  members  of  the  Government  expressed  a  hope, 
after  the  first  battle,  that  the  war  would  evoke  a  wave  of  patriot- 
ism, and  that  it  would  thus  arrest  the  anti-Governmental  propa- 
ganda, and  render  it  easier  for  the  local  authorities  to  preserve 


246  MODERN  RUSSIA 

order  and  public  tranquillity,"  But  events  shattered  these  ill- 
founded  hopes,  and  lent  a  grim  irony  to  the  image  of  the 
Cossack  flogging  the  Japanese — an  image  full  of  unconscious 
humour,  symbolic  of  the  non-existent  victories  of  despotic 
Tsardom  over  constitutional  Japan.  Nevertheless,  unwilling  to 
admit  the  inevitable,  the  Russian  Government  continued  its 
former  policy.  After  the  capture  of  Kin-chu  a  Council  of  War 
assembled  at  Tsarskoie  Selo,  under  the  presidency  of  the  Tsar 
himself,  which  gave  Kuropatkin  the  insane  orders  to  deliver 
Port  Arthur  and  to  revive  the  faith  of  the  people  in  the  auto- 
cracy by  "  the  thunders  of  victory."  The  defeat  of  Stakelberg 
near  Vafangu  was  the  only  result  of  this  order,  which  was 
decided  upon  at  an  enormous  distance  from  the  seat  of  the  war 
by  persons  knowing  nothing  of  Russia's  situation  in  Manchuria. 
This  order  was  based  essentially  upon  the  calculations  of  internal 
politics. 

A  historian  of  the  Russo-Japanese  War  (M.  Volontaire)  com- 
pares the  action  of  the  Russian  Government  with  a  similar  action 
on  the  part  of  the  French  Government  during  the  Second 
Empire.  "  There  is  an  astonishing  analogy  between  the  motives 
for  the  order  given  by  Nicolas  II,  to  the  effect  that  Russia  was 
to  take  the  offensive,  although  such  tactics  were  simple  suicide 
from  a  military  point  of  view,  and  the  motives  of  the  order  given 
by  Napoleon  III  during  the  war  of  1870  after  Bazaine  had  been 
beaten  back  toward  Metz,  as  Strousel  was  beaten  back  from 
Kin-chu  toward  Port  Arthur.  Napoleon,  perceiving  the  numerical 
superiority  of  the  German  army,  wished  to  retire  upon  Paris  to 
join  other  forces,  as  Stakelberg  retired  toward  Liao-yung.  But 
the  Emperor  and  the  minister  Palikao,  who  had  succeeded 
Ollivier,  persuaded  Napoleon  III  that  to  retire  might  be  to 
cause  an  outbreak  of  revolution.  The  French  army  went 
forward,  and  the  result  was  the  catastrophe  of  Sedan." 

Similar  considerations  of  internal  policy  forced  the  Tsar  and  the 
Russian  Government  to  send  the  Baltic  fleet  towards  an  inevit- 
able peril,  and,  in  the  words  of  the  same  historian,  "  Rojdest- 
vensky's  squadron  went  to  fight  not  the  Japanese,  but  the  partisans 


THE  RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  247 

of  popular  representation,  who  were  beginning  to  speak  of 
the  necessity  of  a  constitution."  But  the  plan  for  restoring  the 
people's  love  for  the  autocracy  by  means  of  foreign  victories 
miscarried.  Defeat  rapidly  following  on  defeat  forced  the  Govern- 
ment to  make  some  few  concessions  in  order  to  calm  the 
malcontents.  On  August  24, 1904,  it  suppressed  corporal  punish- 
ment for  peasants  and  soldiers,  which  until  then  existed  as  a  legal 
institution^  and  released  the  peasantry  from  paying  their  arrears  to 
the  public  Treasury,  the  total  sum  of  which  was  ^^  13,5 10,000. 
The  utter  poverty  of  the  peasantry  had  made  such  payment 
impossible.  An  Imperial  ukase  added  to  the  localities  reserved 
for  Jews.  Although  the  chains  binding  the  Russian  people  were 
not  destroyed,  they  were  at  least  made  lighter.  The  26th 
August  of  the  same  year  marked  the  reopening  of  the  Finnish 
Diet,  which  some  time  before  had  been  dissolved  illegally  and 
by  force.  In  the  beginning  of  September  Plehve,  killed  by  the 
Terrorists  in  July,  was  replaced  at  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior 
by  the  "  Liberal  "  Prince  Sviatopolk  Mirsky,  and  the  Government 
assured  society  of  its  "  confidence."  On  March  ist  was  pub- 
lished an  Imperial  ukase  summoning  the  representatives  of  the 
people  to  take  part  in  the  legislation  of  the  country.  It  was 
intended  that  the  people  should  be  given  only  a  deliberative  voice 
in  affairs.  But,  after  all,  these  concessions  were  merely  so  many 
bones  thrown  to  a  dog,  to  divert  his  attention  for  the  moment, 
and  the  Government  quickly  resolved  to  terminate  its  conflict 
with  Japan,  in  order  to  have  its  hands  free  to  "make  war  "  upon 
the  people.  January,  a  month  before  the  convocation  of  the  nation's 
elected  representatives  was  issued,  saw  the  horrible  fusillade  of 
the  workmen  of  St.  Petersburg,  who  had  peacetuUy  mustered, 
with  their  wives  and  children,  beneath  the  windows  of  the  Winter 
Palace,  to  pray  the  Tsar  to  grant  them  his  aid  and  protection. 
Arrests,  deportations,  and  repression  by  means  of  the  censorship 
followed. 

On  August  19th  the  Russian  Government  reiterated  its  promise 
to  convoke  the  delegates  of  the  people,  but  at  the  same  time 
it    mobilized    the    forces   of  reaction     and    prepared   to    restore 


248  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  ancient  yoke.  .  .  .  Too  late  !  The  Russian  masses  were 
already  awakened  ;  the  war  had  opened  their  eyes  to  the 
miserable  condition  of  the  country. 

What  is  proved  by  the  Russo-Japanese  War  ?  In  the  first  place 
it  revealed  the  indubitable  fact  that  to  conquer  in  a  modern  cam- 
paign it  is  not  enough  to  possess  mechanical  forces  ;  an  efficient 
social  and  economic  organization  is  also  necessary.  The  Russian 
country-side,  at  the  lowest  level  of  economic  ineptitude  and  hope- 
less ignorance,  could  not  furnish  the  army  with  a  healthy  social 
element,  and  the  passive  heroism  of  the  Russian  soldier  could  not 
resist  the  active  energy  of  the  Japanese  fighting-man.  The 
difference  between  the  social  systems  of  Russia  and  Japan  was 
reflected  by  the  difference  to  be  observed  in  their  officers.  The 
Japanese  leaders,  sons  of  the  Revolution  of  1868,  were  by  their 
knowledge,  their  energy,  and  their  sense  ot  duty  far  superior  to 
the  Russian  generals,  who  came  from  an  idle  aristocratic  en- 
vironment, and  were  used  to  breathe  the  heavy  atmosphere  of 
despotism. 

Japan  merely  confirmed  the  lesson  taught  by  France  in  1789, 
when,  having  won  their  liberty,  the  people,  fighting  for  their 
real  interests,  produced  marvellous  leaders  and  conquered  despite 
a  thousand  obstacles.  Japan  was  fighting  for  something  close  at 
hand  and  comprehensible.  As  for  the  Russian  peasants,  they 
were  going  to  be  killed  without  knowing  why,  without  under- 
standing what  "  high  interests"  were  forcing  the  Government  to 
send  them  far  away  to  Manchuria. 

The  war  compromised  the  military  power  of  the  autocracy.  It 
also  compromised  its  diplomatic  abilities,  for  the  Russian  diplo- 
matists could  foresee  nothing,  could  avert  nothing.  On  the  con- 
trary, by  their  blunders  they  had  forever  covered  the  Russian 
bureaucracy  with  dishonour ;  both  before  and  during  the  war  its 
complete  incapacity  to  organize  anything  whatever  was  only  too 
clearly  revealed.  Its  bankruptcy  was  indisputable.  The  ancient 
mirage  faded  like  smoke,  and  Russian  society  began,  with  in- 
credible celerity,  to  discard  the  old  values.  The  mind  of  the 
people  was  awake  and  a  new  ideal  arose. 


THE   RUSSO-JAPANESE    WAR  249 

But  although  the  war  exercised  a  beneficent  action  in  awaken- 
ing the  conscience  of  the  people,  on  the  other  hand  it  complicated 
the  problem  of  enfranchising  the  masses.  War,  according  to  the 
German  sociologist  Kautsky,  hinders  revolution  if  it  coincides 
with  it  in  time,  or  if  revolution  breaks  out  under  the  influence 
of  war.  "  War  brings  with  it  such  terrible  devastation,  makes  such 
stupendous  demands,  that  the  revolution  finds  itself  overburdened 
with  problems  that  are  unfamiliar,  and  which  for  the  moment 
absorb  all  its  strength  and  all  its  time."  Moreover,  a  revolution 
ensuing  from  a  war  is  a  proof  of  the  weakness  of  the  revolutionary 
class,  and  sometimes  a  cause  ot  further  weakness.  This  weakness 
is,  then,  merely  a  result  of  the  moral  and  intellectual  degradation 
which  almost  always  follows  upon  war.  So,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
problems  of  the  revolutionary  government  are  complicated  ;  on 
the  other  hand,  its  forces  are  enfeebled.  For  this  reason  a  revo- 
lution provoked  by  a  war  is  either  destroyed  or  it  expends  its 
vital  energy  too  soon.  See  what  an  extreme  difference  exists 
between  the  middle-class  revolution  in  France,  which  was  the 
result  of  a  popular  insurrection,  and  the  revolution  in  Germany, 
which  was,  so  to  say,  imported  by  a  series  of  wars." 

The  justice  of  these  words  is  confirmed  by  the  experiment 
attempted  by  Russia.  The  Russo-Japanese  War  gave  an  impulse 
to  the  Russian  revolution,  but  it  hampered  its  activities  by  a 
shower  of  difficulties,  placing  a  double  load  upon  the  wearied 
shoulders  of  the  people.  Historians  will  in  time  establish  the  tie 
between  the  defects  and  failures  of  the  revolution  and  the  military 
tempest  from  which  the  movement  of  liberation  was  evolved. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY— THEIR  ROLE 
IN  THE  REVOLUTION  AND  THEIR  POLITICAL 
IDEOLOGY 

L  Political  ideology  a  reflection  of  class  interests.  II.  Position  of  the 
various  social  classes  during  the  revolution  and  their  general 
political  grouping — The  moderate  bourgeoisie — The  rural  democracy 
(the  "Labourites").  III.  Socialists — The  two  chief  currents  of 
Russian  Socialism.  IV.  The  general  strike  of  1905 — The  insur- 
rection. 


We  have  already  stated  that  the  w^ar  contributed  to  awaken  the 
mind  of  Russian  society.  But  it  would  be  an  error  to  regard 
the  war  as  responsible  for  the  forms  and  the  tendencies  of  the 
ideas  at  this  time  prevalent,  these  ideas  having  been  shaped  by 
the  previous  course  of  social  and  economic  evolution. 

Political  ideology — that  is,  the  mass  of  ideas,  catchwords, 
programmes,  opinions,  and  proclamations  by  which  the  thought 
of  the  society  is  expressed — is  in  itself  an  organizing  and  creative 
form  of  the  collective  experience,  like  morality,  religion,  science, 
art,  and  other  departments  of  human  ideology.  However, 
political  ideology  differs  from  these,  being  more  closely  bound 
up  with  the  economic  and  social  life  of  the  people  and  more 
immediately  reflecting  the  grouping  of  classes  and  their  actual 
interests. 

We  see  in  modern  society  three  principal  divisions  of  classes. 

The  economic   basis  of  these  divisions  is  simply  their   different 

250 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    251 

methods  of  exploiting  property.  The  first  of  these  classes  is  that 
of  the  landed  proprietors,  who  live  by  rent  derived  from  land. 
The  second  class,  that  of  the  capitalists,  have  a  more  specific 
source  of  profit,  namely,  industrial  capital.  The  third  class  is 
that  of  the  proletariat,  which  lives  by  its  wages. 

To  these  three  classes  correspond,  in  the  domain  of  political 
theory  and  practice,  three  types  of  ideology  :  feudal  Conservatism, 
bourgeois  Liberalism,  and  proletarian  Socialism. 

The  reader  will  understand  that  this  classification  of  class 
ideology  is  merely  theoretical.  In  real  life  this  abstract  division 
is  often  violated  ;  in  the  United  States,  for  example,  feudal 
Conservatism  does  not  exist,  and  in  Russia,  besides  these  three 
types,  we  observe  yet  a  fourth,  that  of  the  small  peasant  bourgeoisie^ 
quasi-communist,  an  inevitable  product  of  the  backward  condition 
of  the  economics  of  the  Russian  village.  Moreover,  we  observe 
in  every  society  mixtures  of  various  ideological  types,  or  momentary 
and  transitory  types.  These  few  reservations  apart,  the  above 
classification  is  a  valuable  and  reliable  sociological  deduction. 

Political  ideology  not  only  reflects  the  separation  of  the  social 
classes  and  centralizes  their  political  experience,  but  it  is  also  in 
itself  an  influential  weapon  to  be  used  in  the  modification  ot 
society.  Politics  is  full  of  subjectivity  ;  it  also  contains  an  element 
of  propagandism,  and  often  a  touch  of  demagogy.  However,  this 
subjectivity  once  more  reflects  class  interest  and  class  conflict, 
and  in  conceptions  which  at  first  sight  appear  completely  Utopian, 
and  in  all  plans  and  programmes,  we  find  the  most  valuable 
material  for  the  characterization  of  the  period  and  its  social 
relations. 

II 

From  the  preceding  chapters  the  reader  will  have  learned  the 
character  of  the  economic  and  social  development  of  Russia  at 
the  end  of  the  nineteenth  and  beginning  of  the  twentieth  cen- 
tury. The  reader  knows  that  the  new  forms  of  economic 
activity  have  led  the  Russian  people  into  a  revolutionary  conflict 


252  MODERN  RUSSIA 

with  the  old  forms  of  its  political  life.  We  may  even  without 
exaggeration  assert  that  nearly  all  classes  of  society  were  interested 
in.  the  termination  of  this  conflict  by  the  downfall  of  the  old 
system.  But  an  insignificant  number  of  nobles,  bureaucrats,  and 
knights  of  industry,  whose  existence  is  closely  bound  up  with  the 
existence  of  the  autocracy,  had  from  the  beginning  regarded  the 
awaking  of  the  people  with  hostility.  Consequently  a  general 
popular  rising  occurred  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  revolution, 
which  was  recruited  even  by  the  purely  bourgeois  element,  this 
having  adopted  the  revolutionary  method  of  the  Socialist  prole- 
tariat. The  History  of  the  Council  of  Labour  Delegates  of  the  City 
of  St.  Petersburg  has  thus  described  the  rallying  of  the  Liberal 
bourgeoisie  to  the  proletarian  side  of  the  conflict  : 

"The  means  of  combat  peculiar  to  the  proletariat — the  strike 
— became  a  national  weapon  against  absolutism.  Officials, 
engineers,  jurists,  bank  clerks,  professors,  all  turned  strikers,  all 
marched  in  company  behind  the  proletariat,  borrowing  from  the 
latter  not  only  its  method  of  conflict,  but  also  its  form  of  organi- 


zation." 


Moreover,  the  "Liberal  Constitutional  Democrat"  party 
publicly  identified  itself,  at  the  first  of  its  congresses  (October, 
1905),  with  the  general  labour  strike  which  was  then  disorganiz- 
ing the  whole  of  Russia.  However,  the  revolution  did  not  long 
retain  the  character  of  a  general  popular  rising,  on  account  of  the 
intestine  conflicts  which  broke  out  between  the  different  classes 
opposing  the  old  order  of  government,  and  the  forces  of  the 
opposition  were  presently  divided   into  several  hostile  camps. 

The  reader  will  doubtless  realize  how  these  camps  were 
formed.  Russia,  entering  upon  the  task  of  abolishing  absolut- 
ism, had  capitalist  relations  more  highly  organized  than  those  of 
France  in  1789  or  Germany  in  1848.  The  growth  of  whole- 
sale industry  had  provoked  a  hopeless  discrepancy  between 
the  economic  interests  of  the  middle  classes  and  the  working 
classes.  The  pressure  exercised  by  the  bureaucratic  system  pre- 
vented any  free  expression  of  this  discrepancy.  Then  came  the 
revolution.     The   pressure  from  above  diminished  ;  the  struggle 


THE   ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    253 

between  capital  and  labour  came  to  a  violent  head.  Although 
the  labour  movement  of  1905  had  a  strongly  marked  political 
character,  economic  motives  played  an  important  part  therein. 
According  to  the  statistical  data  published  by  the  Ministry  of 
Commerce  and  Industry  relating  to  the  strikes  of  1905,  we  see 
that  the  strikes  of  an  economic  nature  involved  a  greater  number 
of  w^orkers  than  did  the  political  strikes.  If,  how^ever,  we  con- 
sider not  the  number  of  workers  participating  in  a  strike,  but 
the  number  of  strikes  merely,  we  shall  find  that  political  motives 
came  first. ^  As  these  data  show,  in  1905  an  enormous  number 
of  workers  were  fighting  not  only  to  conquer  the  political 
independence  of  the  whole  people,  but  also  to  effect  an  imme- 
diate amelioration  of  the  economic  situation,  involving  higher 
wages,  shorter  hours  of  work,  and  better  sanitary  and  legal 
conditions  of  work.  The  introduction  of  the  economic  element 
into  the  struggle  naturally  embittered  the  relations  between  the 
middle  classes  and  the  proletariat.  But  what  more  especially 
embittered  these  relations  was  the  demand  for  the  eight-hour 
day,  which  was  presented  by  the  Council  of  Labour  Delegates 
at  the  end  of  1905  ;  a  demand  which  the  workers  vainly 
attempted  to  realize  by  "revolutionary  means."  This  demand 
not  only  met  with  the  opposition  of  the  Government  and  the 
employers,  who  retaliated  by  a  vast  lock-out,  but  evoked  a  pro- 
test from  the  middle-class  Press,  and  even  from  the  Liberal  camp. 
The  middle-class  Press  accused  the  Council  of  Labour  Delegates 
and  the  socialist  organizations  which  supported  them  of  wish- 
ing to  ruin  the  nation's  industries,  of  marching  towards  "the 
anarchy  of  production."  The  Labour  press,  on  the  other  hand, 
accused  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie  of  treason  against  liberty,  and  the 
struggle  between  the  Liberals  and  the  Socialists  assumed  a  violent 
character. 

This  economic  discord  was  augmented  by  political  differences. 
The    Socialists    were    unwilling    to    make    any  concessions    to 

•  See  the  official  publication  of  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and 
Industry  :  Statistics  of  the  Labour  Strikes  in  Factories  and  Workshops 
in   1905. 


254  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Tsarism,  and  wished,  in  their  own  words,  "  to  pursue  the 
revolution  to  the  end,"  meaning  the  absolute  destruction  of 
monarchical  despotism.  But  these  republican  tendencies  met 
with  no  support  from  the  Liberal  middle  classes.  One  section 
of  the  latter  feared  that  the  proletariat  would  profit  by  them 
to  realize  their  economic  demands,  while  another  declared 
itself  incredulous  of  the  possibility  of  applying  a  republican 
Constitution  to  Russia,  and  that  it  would  allow  no  useless 
sacrifices.  In  opposition  to  the  republican  propaganda  of  the 
Socialists,  the  Liberals  adopted  the  watchword  of  "  Constitu- 
tional Monarchy." 

Different  aims  resulted  in  the  use  of  different  means.  The 
Socialists  openly  confessed  themselves  advocates  of  revolutionary 
tactics,  and  declared  that  the  reorganization  of  Russia  was  only 
possible  at  the  price  oi  an  armed  struggle  against  the  Govern- 
ment, the  fall  of  the  latter,  and  the  convocation  of  a  Constituent 
Assembly.  The  middle-class  Liberals  replied  by  proposing 
*'  peaceful "  reforms,  an  agreement  between  the  people  and  the 
monarchy,  and  the  partition  of  power  between  its  former  pos- 
sessors and  the  representatives  of  the  people. 

''  We  abide  by  the  revolution,"  said  the  Socialists.  "  And 
we,"  said  the  Liberals,  "by  law  and  order." 

Many  reproaches  and  accusations  were  exchanged  between 
the  two  parties,  above  all  when  the  revolutionary  impulse  com- 
menced to  die  out  and  repression  to  triumph.  The  Liberals 
accused  the  Socialists  of  having  provoked  repression  by  their 
"  lack  of  moderation."  The  Socialists  demonstrated  that  the 
Liberals,  by  "betraying"  the  cause  of  the  people,  were  respon- 
sible for  the  revolutionary  defeat.  But,  ignoring  these  mutual 
accusations,  we  may  perceive  that  from  the  historical  point  of  view 
the  rupture  between  the  workers  and  the  bourgeoisie  was  inevit- 
able, and  that  each  step  that  labour  took  to  the  left  must 
necessarily  have  led  the  bourgeoisie  to  move  another  step  to  the 
right.  It  has  always  been  so  in  Europe  during  the  course  of 
previous  revolutions.  Such  is  the  instinctive  logic  of  the  war 
of  classes    in    m.odern    society,   with   all    due    deference    to    the 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    255 
apostles  of  "  the  social  peace  "  and  "  the  harmony  of  economic 


interests." 


Quite  as  inevitable  was  the  rupture  between  Liberalism  and  the 
peasant  democracy.  The  peasants  had  originated  a  radical  de- 
mocracy which  was  supported  and  stiffened  by  neither  the  lower 
nor  the  middle  bourgeoisie  of  the  Russian  cities.  In  the  years 
1905-6  the  peasantry  formed  organizations  which  in  respect  of  the 
numbers  of  their  members  were  of  great  importance.  At  the 
head  of  these  were  "  The  Union  of  the  Peasants  of  All  Russia  " 
and  the  "  Labour  Group."  The  programmes  of  these  two 
organizations  were  very  similar.  However,  while  the  "  Union  " 
concentrated  its  forces  on  the  organization  of  the  masses  outside 
Parliament,  by  the  "  direct  action  "  of  expropriating  the  lands  of 
the  nobles  and  transferring  them  to  the  peasantry,  the  "  Group" 
aimed  at  the  parliamentary  representation  of  the  rural  democracy, 
and  after  the  election  of  the  first  Duma  it  raised  the  standard, 
so  to  speak,  of  the  "  Union,"  this  latter  having  been  broken  by 
the  Governmental  repression  which  followed  the  outbreak  of  the 
revolution. 

The  political  ideology  or  this  rural  democracy  reflects  the 
conditions  of  the  social  and  economic  life  of  the  Russian  peasants. 
An  instinctive  protest,  and  the  hatred  of  the  nobility  and  bureau- 
cracy, fostered  by  poverty,  hunger,  and  humiliation,  are  combined, 
in  this  ideology,  with  an  unconscious  policy  and  an  inorganic 
ideal  :  an  ideal  as  narrow  and  primitive  as  the  primitive  economy 
ot  the  peasant,  isolated  in  his  little  holding,  unable  to  rise  to  an 
understanding  of  all  the  complications  of  economic  phenomena 
and  social  relations.  The  present  democracy,  in  all  countries, 
commonly  marches  behind  the  other  elements  of  society,  being 
itself  unable  to  give  definite  shape  to  its  political  demands.  In 
the  Russian  revolution  it  marched  behind  the  "  intellectual 
Populists."  These  Populists  were  not  distinguished  by  the 
lucidity  nor  the  logical  quality  of  their  political  ideals,  for  which 
reason  they  hesitated,  in  leading  the  peasant  movement,  before 
this  question  :  By  what  means,  by  what  tactics,  should  the 
claims  of  the  peasants  be  realized  ?     At  times  they  inclined  to  a 


256  MODERN  RUSSIA 

semi-anarchist  policy,  involving  the  adoption  of  the  agrarian 
Terror  (burning  of  country  seats,  expropriations  of  lands  belonging 
to  the  seigneurs^  individual  murders,  etc.)  ;  at  times,  on  the  contrary, 
they  concentrated  their  attention  upon  a  purely  parliamentary 
activity  in  the  Duma  ;  and  there  again  the  deputies  elected  by 
the  peasants  hesitated  bctvi^een  the  Liberalism  of  the  ''  Cadets  "  and 
the  revolutionary  opposition  of  Social  Democracy,  and  could  decide 
upon  nothing. 

The  basis  of  all  the  programmes  of  the  rural  democratic  parties 
in  Russia  is  "  the  declaration  of  the  right  of  all  citizens  to  the 
soil,  a  declaration  which  should  be  realized  by  the  suppression 
of  private  property  in  land  and  the  creation  of  a  national  stock 
of  land."  All  those  who  wished  to  work  the  land  were  to 
receive,  from  this  stock,  holdings  not  surpassing  the  dimensions 
of  the  norm  of  labour  :  that  is,  an  amount  of  land  which  the  holder 
could  cultivate  merely  by  the  labour  of  himself  and  his  family, 
without  the  help  of /)fl;V/ /ai'OMr.  These  holdings  would  be  given 
for  use,  but  not  as  property. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  prove  that  the  removal  of  land  from  the 
general  system  of  exchange  and  capitalist  competition,  the  pro- 
posal of  an  "agrarian  equality,"  and  the  suppression  of  salaried 
labour  in  the  rural  districts  exclusively,  is  the  merest  Utopia. 
The  Russian  village,  despite  its  backward  condition,  is  already 
involved  in  the  vicissitudes  of  the  capitalist  market  and  economic 
competition,  in  which  the  strongest  and  best  adapted  win. 
Moreover,  even  if  it  were  possible  to  introduce  such  an  agrarian 
equality,  and  to  divide  the  soil  into  such  allotments,  this  would 
not  establish  a  true  economic  equality,  for  there  would  still  be 
differences  of  capital,  differences  of  technical  methods,  differences 
of  energy  and  initiative.  With  different  degrees  of  capital  and 
different  instruments  of  production  there  might  result,  even  with 
equal  allotments,  very  different  quantities  of  products.  Conse- 
quently the  competition  between  more  and  less  productive 
economic  units  would  continue  as  in  the  past,  and  the  Utopian 
character  of  the  proposed  agrarian  equality  would  be  promptly 
revealed. 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN   SOCIETY    257 

But  the  agrarian  programme  of  the  rural  "intellectual  Popu- 
lists "  is  by  no  means  a  simple  Utopia.  It  is  a  maleficent  and 
reactionary  Utopia  from  the  standpoint  of  economic  progress. 
If  this  programme  could  be  realized  it  would  bring  the  develop- 
ment of  agricultural  production  to  a  standstill;  it  would  render 
the  organization  of  large  undertakings  employing  machinery 
and  salaried  labour  almost  impossible,  and  would  establish  not  an 
equality  of  wealth,  but  an  equality  of  poverty. 

That  the  peasant  masses  of  Russia  none  the  less  eagerly  sup- 
ported the  Utopian  and  reactionary  programme  of  these  "  intel- 
lectuals "  was  due  partly  to  the  limited  mentality  of  the  small 
rural  landowner,  to  whom  it  seems  that  if  the  soil  were  shared 
equally^  the  whole  social  problem  would  be  solved.  Here,  of 
course,  we  have  the  play  of  historic  prejudices,  originating  in  the 
life  of  the  commune  during  the  period  of  natural  economy,  when 
the  land  belonged  to  the  whole  mir  (to  all  the  members  of  the 
commune).  On  the  other  hand  we  may  regard  this  programme 
as  a  piece  of  unconscious  ideological  hypocrisy,  such  as  one  often 
encounters  in  the  history  of  the  political  and  social  ideologies  of 
the  different  classes.  When  one  class  expresses  its  needs  it  does 
not  express  them  as  its  own  ideal  only,  but  as  every  one's  ideal. 
Thus,  for  example,  in  struggling  for  the  "Liberty,  Equality,  and 
Fraternity  "  of  all,  the  Yxcnch.  bourgeoisie  oi  tho.  Revolution  clothed 
their  class  protest  against  absolutism  and  aristocratic  privilege  in 
forms  of  universal  ideology.  In  the  same  way  the  ideologues 
of  the  Russian  peasants  of  to-day  give  a  universal  character  to 
their  struggle  against  the  landed  proprietors,  and  hold  forth 
prospects  of  universal  equality,  when  in  reality  the  question  is 
merely  one  of  the  transference  of  landed  property  from  one  class 
to  another. 

Numbers  of  Liberals  did  not  at  the  outset  protest  against  the 
principle  of  this  idea,  but  when  the  question  of  its  practical 
realization  arose  the  opinions  of  the  Liberals  and  the  rural 
democracy  diverged.  The  peasant  masses,  as  we  may  well 
believe,  desired  to  receive  the  land  gratis^  without  any  obligation 
to    pay  for   it.     The    Liberals,   on    the   other   hand,    demanded 

17 


258  MODERN  RUSSIA 

"ransom,"  it  being  to  their  interest  that  a  pecuniary  compensation 
should  be  offered  to  them  in  place  of  the  land  ceded  to  the 
peasantry,  and  foreseeing  what  frantic  opposition  the  proposal  of 
rural  democracies  would  encounter  from  the  autocracy.  They 
sought  to  create  an  "  understanding  "  between  the  revolution  and 
the  reaction,  by  establishing  an  agreement  between  landowners 
and  peasants  by  means  of  a  system  of  "  redemption."  As  the 
peasant  movement  developed,  the  tendency  of  the  peasants  to 
excite  an  agrarian  revolution  "  from  below  "  became  emphasized, 
while  the  Liberals  became  more  resolved  to  accomplish  reforms 
"  from  above."  There  was  a  clash  between  the  revolutionary 
ideas  of  the  peasants  and  the  Liberal  ideas  of  "order"  and  "firm 
authority."  At  the  beginning  of  1906,  during  the  session  of  the 
first  Duma,  there  was  a  definite  break  between  the  peasants 
and  the  middle-class  Liberals.  The  peasants  joined  the  ranks  of 
the  Socialist  proletariat  and  the  Liberals  formed  a  distinct  and 
separate  camp. 

Ill 

The  reader  is  already  acquainted  with  the  programme  of  the 
Labour  party,  and  will  therefore  readily  comprehend  the  ideology 
of  Russian  Socialism,  one  branch  of  which,  the  Revolutionary 
Socialist  party,  presents  many  points  of  contact  with  the  Labour 
party.  The  programme  of  the  Revolutionary  Socialists  asserts  : 
"  Li  the  domain  of  changing  agrarian  relations  the  Revolutionary 
Socialist  party  attempts  to  base  itself  upon  the  interests  of 
Socialism,  and  in  the  domain  of  the  conflict  with  middle-class 
principles  of  property  upon  the  communist  and  '  Labourite ' 
conception  of  property,  on  the  forms  and  traditions  of  the  life  of 
the  Russian  peasantry,  and  on  the  opinion,  very  general  among 
the  latter,  that  the  soil  belongs  to  no  one,  and  that  the  right 
to  enjoy  it  is  acquired  by  labour.  This  conception  of  the 
problems  of  the  rural  revolution  impels  the  Revolutionary  Socialist 
party  to  fight  for  the  socialization  of  the  soil,  for  the  exclusion  of 
the  land  from  commercial  free-trade,  and  for  the  transformation 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    259 

of  the  land  from  private  property,  as  it  is  now,  into  the  property 
of  the  whole  people."  Among  the  Revolutionary  Socialists,  as 
among  the  Labour  party,  we  find  the  same  Utopian  faith  in  the 
realization  of  agrarian  Socialism  and  in  the  liberation  of  the  land 
from  the  laws  of  capitalistic  revolution.  The  antithesis,  ex- 
pressed by  the  Revolutionary  Socialist  programme,  between  the 
bourgeois  principles  of  capitalist  society  and  the  communistic 
traditions  of  the  Russian  peasants  reveals  the  reactionary 
character  of  this  socialist  Utopia.  The  economic  "  traditions 
and  forms  "  of  the  Russian  rural  commune  are  merely  a  survival 
of  the  past,  constituting  not  a  higher  but  a  lower  stage  in 
comparison  with  the  forms  of  capitalist  economy,  and  it  is  strange 
to  regard  them  as  the  basis  of  the  realization  of  an  ideal  future. 

This  last  objection  is  always  raised  against  the  Revolutionary 
Socialists  by  the  other  section  of  Russian  Socialism,  the  Social 
Democratic  party.  Russian  Social  Democracy,  based  upon 
Marxism,  supposes  that  Russia  can  only  reach  socialism  through 
capitalism,  that  is,  by  the  path  followed  by  every  other  country 
in  Europe.  The  belief  that  Russia  can  avoid  capitalism,  thanks 
to  her  agricultural  development,  and  without  it  realize  a  social 
revolution,  is  extremely  ingenuous.  The  socialization  of  the 
means  and  implements  of  production  in  the  domain  of  rural 
economy  would  be  possible  only  if  the  conditions  were  as 
favourable  for  the  socialization  of  all  the  other  departments  of 
the  popular  economy  ;  if  production  were  highly  concentrated, 
the  differentiation  of  the  classes  strongly  marked,  and  labour 
liberated  from  capital.  As  for  any  attempt  to  establish  a  partial 
socialism  in  the  rural  districts,  without  awaiting  the  complete 
disappearance  of  the  capitalist  system  from  all  other  spheres  of 
the  economic  life  of  the  country,  it  would  inevitably  lead  to 
nothing  :  the  partial  destruction  of  the  contradictions  dividing 
the  various  classes  and  the  establishment  of  social  equality  in  a 
corner,  so  to  speak,  of  a  capitalist  society,  is  impossible.  Such  an 
attempt  would  at  most  prolong  the  use  of  antiquated  methods 
in  agriculture  at  the  cost  of  industrial  development.  Regarding 
such  "agrarian  socialism"  as  a  harmful  and  reactionary  Utopia, 


26o  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Russian  Social  Democracy  conducts  an  active  propaganda  against 
the  plans  of  the  Revolutionary  Socialists. 

The  better  to  explain  the  differences  which  obtain  between 
the  Revolutionary  Socialists  and  the  Social  Democrats,  I  will 
cite  a  passage  from  the  programme  of  the  Revolutionary  Socialists  : 

"  For  the  realization  of  its  task  the  Revolutionary  Socialist 
party  aspires  to  utilize  also  all  the  positive  aspects  of  economic 
development,  which  have  assumed  various  capitalistic  forms,  as 
well  as  the  independent  creative  capacities  of  the  labouring 
masses,  proletarianized  or  otherwise." 

This  thesis  is  eagerly  attacked  by  the  Social  Democratic  party, 
which  claims  that  from  the  socialistic  point  of  view  the  union  of 
proletarian  and  non-proletarian  elements  is  profoundly  erroneous. 
Indeed,  although  in  the  modern  bourgeois  struggle  for  the 
democratic  system  the  interests  of  salaried  workers,  that  is, 
the  interests  of  the  proletariat  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word, 
coincide  with  those  of  the  non-proletarian  strata  or  the  lesser 
bourgeoisie  and  the  peasantry,  and  although  the  fall  of  absolutism  is 
indispensable  to  both,  it  is  only  by  reason  of  a  temporary  coinci- 
dence of  interests.  As  soon  as  the  democratic  revolution  is  over 
the  proletariat  will  enter  upon  its  "  final  struggle "  to  effect 
the  social  revolution,  while  the  non-proletarian  elements,  con- 
tented with  a  democratic  constitution,  will  become  supporters  or 
the  bourgeoisie.  Moreover,  the  Social  Democrats  regard  as  unjust 
and  unscientific  the  opposition  of  the  Revolutionary  Socialists 
to  "  independent  creation  "  and  "  economic  development  "  ;  an 
opposition  connected  with  the  old  dualistic  theory,  according 
to  which  human  ideas  and  "creative  force"  are  "independent" 
of  economic  development.  (This  dualist  theory,  mutatis  mu- 
tandis^  is  to  be  found  in  the  latest  philosophic  inventions  of 
M.  Bergson,  in  his  "vital  impulse"  and  "creative  forces.") 
The  Social  Democrats,  on  the  other  hand,  affirm  that  the  creative 
capacities  of  men  are  determined  by  the  material  evolution  of  the 
external  environment  and  by  social  conditions,  and  that  the  mani- 
festation of  the  creative  capacities  of  man  can  only  be  possible 
and   productive   when  such    manifestation   corresponds  with  the 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    261 

general  evolution  of  technical  methods  and  economic  life.  These 
various  points  of  view  are  connected  vv^ith  the  various  conceptions 
of  the  role  of  personality  in  history.  While  the  Revolutionary 
Socialists  attribute  an  enormous  significance  to  the  individual,  the 
Social  Democrats  consider  the  individual  as  a  drop  lost  amid 
the  ocean.  The  individualist  idealism  of  the  Revolutionary 
Socialists  is  totally  opposed  to  the  determinist  materialism  of 
the  Social  Democrats. 

The  conflict  which  divides  the  two  Socialist  parties  began 
long  ago,  and  there  was  a  time  when  it  divided  the  whole 
intellectual  youth  of  Russia  into  two  hostile  camps.  Even 
to-dav,  far  from  beino;  abstract,  it  is  an  actual  collision  between 
two  methods  or  practical  activity,  between  two  political  tactics. 
The  Revolutionary  Socialists  attribute  a  great  significance  to 
individuality  in  history,  to  individual  acts.  Hence  their  leaning 
toward  Terrorism.  The  Social  Democrats,  on  the  contrary,  are 
the  enemies  of  Terrorism,  preferring  the  organization  of  the 
masses.  As  for  the  practical  demands  of  the  programmes  of 
the  two  parties,  they  present  many  points  in  common  :  both  have 
for  their  watchword  "  The  Democratic  Republic "  or  "  The 
Sovereignty  of  the  People  "  ;  both  demand  universal  suffrage  for 
both  sexes,  the  replacement  of  the  permanent  army  by  the 
general  arming  of  the  people,  the  institution  of  elected  tribunals, 
the  suppression  of  indirect  taxation,  the  introduction  of  a  progres- 
sive tax  on  income,  and  an  eight-hour  day.  But  their  respective 
conceptions  of  the  agrarian  question  are  entirely  different. 

The  influence  of  the  Revolutionary  Socialists  is  felt  more 
especially  among  the  peasants,  and  in  many  groups  of  the  lesser 
bourgeoisie  ;  that  is,  among  the  "  intellectuals,"  schoolmasters, 
small  officials,  etc.  The  Social  Democrats  have  most  influence 
upon  the  salaried  workers  of  the  industrial  centres.  Moreover, 
the  two  parties  conduct  an  active  propaganda  among  the  soldiery. 
Down  to  1905  the  two  parties  existed  illegally,  printing  their 
propagandist  literature  either  abroad  or  in  clandestine  printing- 
presses.  In  1905,  when  the  revolution  broke  the  close-drawn 
ranks  of  the  police  system,   they  legalized   themselves,  without 


262  MODERN  RUSSIA 

demanding  any  authorization  from  the  Government.  Besides 
many  journals  openly  published  in  St.  Petersburg,  Moscow,  and 
other  cities,  the  two  parties  issued  many  books  and  pamphlets. 
According  to  the  calculations  of  a  competent  bibliographist, 
between  1905  and  1907  no  less  than  twenty-six  million  copies  of 
books  or  pamphlets  of  Social  Democratic  tendencies  were  issued, 
and  twenty-four  millions  of  Revolutionary  Socialist  tendencies. 
As  for  the  predominance  of  one  or  the  other  party,  we  may  judge 
by  consulting  the  results  of  the  elections.  The  second  Duma 
contained  35  Revolutionary  Socialist  deputies  and  65  Social 
Democratic  deputies  ;  moreover,  the  Labour  wards  elected  only 
Social  Democrats  as  their  representatives.  But  it  is  outside  the 
Duma  that  the  influence  of  the  two  parties  is  more  especially 
felt.  The  years  1905  and  1906  proved  the  force  of  this  double 
influence. 

IV 

People  often  speak  of  the  general  strike  of  1905,  but  the 
expression  is  incorrect,  for  in  1905  there  were  several  general 
strikes  in  Russia.  The  first  tentative  insurrection  and  general 
strike  was  connected  with  the  fusillade  of  January,  1905.  This 
massacre  of  a  peaceable  crowd  was  nevertheless  an  advance  on 
what  befell  of  old.  Under  Catherine  II  the  workers  sent  to  the 
Imperial  Court  three  delegates,  instructed  to  implore  the  Imperial 
protection  against  the  abuses  of  the  employers.  These  delegates 
"received  each  one  hundred  blows  with  the  knout,  had  their 
nostrils  burned  with  red-hot  irons,  and  were  deported  for  life  to 
Siberia."  In  January,  1905,  St.  Petersburg  saw  its  first  barricade, 
and  on  the  following  days  the  first  wave  of  strikes  swept  across 
St.  Petersburg  and  the  great  industrial  centres  of  the  province. 

The  Government  attempted,  immediately  after  these  attempts 
at  insurrection,  a  reconciliation  with  the  workers.  To  this  effect 
the  Governor-General  of  St.  Petersburg,  Trepov,  assembled  a 
delegation  of  "  safe  "  working  men  and  led  them  before  the  Tsar, 
after  giving  them  the  following  advice  : 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    263 

"  Russian  men  must  salute  in  Russian  fashion,  by  bending  in 
two,  not  by  a  sign  of  the  head.  You  will  salute,  then  you  will 
listen  to  what  the  Emperor  will  say  to  you.  Let  none  of  you 
take  it  into  his  head  to  take  part  in  the  conversation,  for  talkers 
will  be  sent  to  Siberia." 

Naturally  this  attempt  miscarried  ;  it  could  not  stay  the  river 
of  blood  which,  since  the  massacre  of  January,  divided  the 
monarchy  from  the  workers.  (On  the  9th  of  January  five 
hundred  workers  were  killed  and  three  thousand  wounded,  and 
among  the  dead  and  wounded  were  many  women  and  children.) 
Then  the  Government  resorted  to  another  means  of  "  reconcilia- 
tion." It  instructed  a  Commission,  presided  over  by  a  censor 
and  composed  of  delegates  of  the  workers,  to  make  an  inquiry 
into  the  condition  of  the  workers  of  St.  Petersburg.  The  dele- 
gates of  the  workers  exacted  inviolability  and  liberty  to  discuss 
with  their  electors  the  question  touched  upon  by  the  Commission. 
These  conditions  were  not  granted.  Then  the  delegates  refused 
to  sit  upon  the  Commission.  Thereupon  they  were  imprisoned, 
and  this  imprisonment  provoked  numerous  strikes  of  protest  in 
St.  Petersburg  and  in  the  provinces. 

Then  the  labour  movement  appeared  to  quiet  down  somewhat, 
and  the  agitation  left  the  city  but  spread  through  the  country. 
The  spring  of  1905  saw  14  per  cent,  of  the  cantons  of  Central 
Russia  a  prey  to  agrarian  disturbances.  Many  farms  belonging 
to  rich  proprietors  were  attacked  by  peasants  eager  to  seize 
wheat  for  food  and  wood  for  fuel.  Some  properties  were  burned 
by  the  more  embittered,  but  general  slaughter  and  terrible  corporal 
punishment  finally  stifled  the  peasant  movement. 

The  month  of  June  brought  more  strikes,  which  involved  the 
district  of  Ivanovo-Voznessensk  with  its  tens  of  thousands  of 
workers  and  brought  the  inhabitants  of  Lodz  and  Warsaw  into 
the  streets,  there  to  build  barricades. 

In  June  also  appeared  on  the  revolutionary  stage  a  new  and 
extremely  important  element.  The  sailors  of  the  ironclad 
Potemkin  raised  the  standard  of  revolt.  But  not  being  supported 
by  the   rest  of  their  comrades,  and  abandoned   by  the  workers, 


264  MODERN  RUSSIA 

they  were  forced  to  fly  to  Roumania.  This  lack  of  support  is 
explained  by  the  suddenness  of  the  Potemkin  mutiny,  which 
stupefied  all  Russia  "  like  a  flash  of  lightning  from  a  blue  sky." 
When  the  Potemkin  approached  Odessa  with  the  intention  of 
entering  into  communication  with  the  labour  organizations  of 
that  city,  the  police,  in  order  to  crush  the  incipient  rising,  had 
recourse  to  the  "  Black  Band."  These  latter  proceeded  to 
organize  pogroms  and  to  pillage  the  port  in  order  to  compromise 
the  revolutionary  movement  in  the  eyes  of  the  population. ^ 

Then  once  more  a  calm  ensued.  But,  invisible  yet  fruitful, 
the  propaganda  continued  its  work  amidst  the  proletariat  and  the 
army.  The  workers,  unable  to  organize  themselves  openly,  met 
secretly  away  from  the  towns,  in  the  woods,  despite  the  pursuit  of 
spies  and  Cossacks. 

The  "autumn  season  "  opened  with  an  attempt  on  the  part  of 
the  Government  to  divert  the  popular  attention  from  the  revolu- 
tionary movement  by  turning  it  upon  the  national  discord.  In 
Baku,  where  the  revolutionary  element  consisted  of  Armenians, 
the  police  excited  the  gloomy  and  ignorant  Tartar  population 
against  the  latter,  and  horrible  butcheries  filled  the  streets  of 
Baku  with  blood.  But  this  "  diversion "  did  not  succeed,  and 
the  revolutionary  movement  continued  to  increase.  In  September 
the  compositors  of  Moscow  struck,  and  their  action  was  a  prelude 
to  the  general  strike  of  October,  which  for  the  first  time  brought 
the  inhabitants  of  Moscow  into  contact  with  the  armed  forces  of 
the  Government  and  resulted  in  the  creation  of  a  "  Council  of 
Delegates  of  the  Printers  of  Moscow,"  on  the  model  of  which 
the  famous  "  Council  of  Labour  Delegates  of  St.  Petersburcr " 
was  afterwards  constituted.  The  printers'  strike  was  followed  by 
the  strike  of  ironworkers  and  of  the  workers  in  other  Muscovite 
industries.  "The  strike  epidemic  assumed  an  intermittent 
character.  Strikes,  like  will-o'-the-wisps,  flared  up  rapidly  and 
as  soon  flickered  out." 

'  The  Potemkin,  deserted  by  its  crew,  was  returned  by  the  Roumanian 
Government.  A  few  months  later  its  new  crew  followed  the  example 
of  their  predecessors  and  in  llieir  turn  entered  the  struggle  against  the 
monarchy. 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    265 

On  the  5/1 8th  i  October  the  strike  of  the  industrial  workers  of 
Moscow  was  officially  terminated,  and  on  the  7/20th  October  the 
railway  strike  began,  the  result  of  the  sessions  of  the  Congress  of 
Railway  Employees  convoked  by  the  Government  to  draft  a  new 
statute  relating  to  pensions  funds,  and  to  appease  the  railway 
workers,  who  had  "  gone  on  strike "  after  "  Bloody  Sunday," 
This  Congress,  although  composed  of  superior  employees,  en- 
gineers, etc.,  had  not  escaped  the  influence  of  the  revolutionary 
atmosphere,  and  from  the  discussion  of  pensions  funds  it  passed 
to  questions  of  political  liberty  and  excited  the  population  without 
calling  upon  it  to  strike.  On  the  7/20th  October  the  railway 
workers  did  strike,  and  on  the  same  day  the  Moscow-Kazan  rail- 
way ceased  to  run.  On  the  8th  October  the  employees  of  the 
Moscow-Archangel,  Moscow-Kursk,  and  Moscow-Nijni-Nov- 
gorod  lines  ceased  work  ;  on  the  9th  the  Moscow-Kiev-Voroneje 
line,  and  on  the  loth  the  Kharkov-Nicolaev,  Kharkov-Kursk,  and 
Kharkov-Sebastopol  lines  also  ceased,  while  on  the  12th  the  lines 
leading  to  St.  Petersburg  struck,  with  the  exception  of  the  Finland 
railway,  which  ran  for  four  days  longer  ;  on  the  14th  the  strike 
invaded  Poland  and  the  Baltic  provinces  and  stopped  the  traffic 
on  the  railways  of  the  Caucasus,  Central  Asia,  and  Russian 
Siberia. 

Ten  days  after  its  commencement  the  railway  strike  had 
invaded  all  the  Russian  lines  with  their  25,000  miles  of  rails  and 
their  750,000  employees. 

The  interruption  of  means  of  transport  by  rail  led  to  a  general 
strike  in  the  cities  of  Moscow,  St.  Petersburg,  Kharkov,  Ekate- 
rinoslavl,  Kursk,  Samara,  Revel,  Lodz,  etc.  The  employees  of 
the  municipalities,  zemstvos,  banks,  and  law  courts  joined  the 
strikers,  who  were  already  supported  by  the  school-teachers  of 
both  sexes.  The  students  also  went  out  on  strike  and  opened 
the  doors  of  their  lecture-room  to  the  "revolutionary  people,"  to 
the  organizers  of  political  meetings  and  the  apostles  of  liberty. 
There  were  bloody  encounters  between  the  strikers  and  the 
armed  forces  of  the  Government. 

'  Old  and  new  style. 


266  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  Prime  Minister,  Count  Witte,  then  attempted  to 
influence  the  strikers  in  a  very  curious  manner.  "  Remember," 
he  said  to  a  delegation  from  the  Congress  of  Railway  Employees, 
"  that  in  such  circumstances  the  Government  may  fall,  but 
not  vi^ithout  dragging  you  down  with  it ;  you  are  the  best  forces 
of  the  people,  and  thus  you  will  have  laboured  for  the  profit  of 
that  very  bourgeoisie  against  which  you  are  to-day  struggling." 
But  this  attempt  at  demagogy,  which  thought  to  utilize  the 
hatred  of  the  proletariat  for  the  bourgeoisie^  completely  failed,  the 
workers  understanding  that  the  struggle  which  had  commenced 
could  only  lead  to  a  bourgeois  system  of  government.  When  on 
the  14th  October  the  delegation  of  the  Council  of  Labour 
Delegates  of  St.  Petersburg  met  the  Municipal  Council,  composed 
of  representatives  of  the  great  landlords,  the  delegates  of  the 
workers  declared  to  the  members  of  the  Council  :  "  We  know 
perfectly  well  that  you  will  never  fight  for  our  watchword. 
It  is  not  for  that  that  we  are  here.  The  revolution  that  is  now 
shaking  Russia  is  a  bourgeois  revolution,  created  in  the  interests 
of  the  bourgeoisie.  It  is  in  your  own  interests  that  this  revolution 
should  be  accomplished  and  completed  as  quickly  as  possible. 
And  if  you  are  at  all  clairvoyant,  if  you  really  understand  the 
interests  of  your  class,  you  will  assist  the  people  with  all  your 
might  in  their  struggle  against  absolutism."  Thus  the  Russian 
worker  was  far  from  believing,  in  1905,  in  the  near  triumph 
of  Socialism,  and  he  was  perfectly  conscientious  in  fighting 
for  the  bourgeois  revolution,  in  which  he  saw  an  inevitable  phase 
of  the  social  development  of  the  country. 

On  the  i7/30th  October  the  Government  had  to  yield. 
A  manifesto  was  issued,  which  marked  the  first  capitula- 
tion of  the  autocracy,  after  which  the  general  strike  was  ter- 
minated. But  this  moral  victory  of  the  revolution  was  not 
a  real  victory  :  the  real  power,  even  after  this  surrender,  still 
resided  in  the  hands  of  the  autocracy  and  bureaucracy.  On  the 
morrow  of  the  publication  of  this  manifesto  the  Department 
of  the  Police,  directed  by  the  aristocratic  camarilla^  organized 
pogroms  of  the  Jews  and  "  intellectuals,"  in  the  course  of  which 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    267 

3,000  persons  were  killed  and  10,000  wounded,  while  10 1  towns 
were  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  "  Black  Bands "  and  the 
"  police  terror "  (from  the  i8th  to  the  24th  October),  a  policy- 
intended  to  destroy  some  portion  of  the  revolutionary  element, 
to  intimidate  the  rest,  and  to  demonstrate  that  so-called  "  liberty  " 
could  only  lead  the  country  to  anarchy,  and  that  the  "  simple  " 
people  desired  no  liberty  and  hated  revolution. 

Nevertheless  the  revolutionary  movement  continued  to  spread. 
In  many  cities  "  Committees  of  Public  Safety "  sprang  up, 
charged  with  the  defence  of  the  population  against  the  pogroms  ; 
militia  were  created  also,  composed  of  workers  and  students, 
and  often  subventioned  by  the  municipalities.  Part  of  the  army 
once  again  went  over  to  the  revolutionaries ;  on  the  8/2 ist 
November,  at  Kronstadt,  there  was  a  mutiny  among  the  artillery- 
men and  the  sailors,  which  miscarried  by  reason  of  their  inde- 
cision. A  host  of  these  unfortunates  were  arrested  and 
threatened  with  the  death  penalty.  Then  the  "St.  Petersburg 
Council  of  Labour  Delegates,"  anxious  to  snatch  its  "  soldier 
brothers"  from  the  jaws  of  death,  announced  a  new  general 
strike,  while  demanding  amnesty  for  the  Kronstadt  mutineers 
and  the  suspension  of  the  state  of  siege  declared  a  few  days 
earlier  in  Poland. 

This  strike  was  less  general  than  that  of  October.  The 
workers  in  the  factories  and  workshops  joined  in,  but  the 
transport  workers  responded  but  coldly  to  the  appeal  of  the 
Council  of  Labour  Delegates,"  while  the  bourgeois  elements 
did  not  respond  at  all.  However,  the  strike  produced  the  effect 
desired.  Count  Witte  hastened  to  address  the  workers  of  St. 
Petersburg  as  follows  :  "  Little  brothers,  workers !  Return 
to  your  work  ;  have  pity  on  your  wives  and  children.  .  .  . 
Give  us  time  to  do  for  you  all  that  is  possible.  Listen  to  the 
advice   of  a  man   who   bears  you  nothing  but  good-will.  .  .  ." 

In  reply  to  Count  Witte,  the  Council  drew  up  the  following 
resolution  : 

"  Count  Witte  has  told  us  to  have  pity  on  our  wives  and 
children.     The   Council    of  Labour  Delegates    recommends   all 


(( 


268  MODERN  RUSSIA 

working  men  to  estimate  how  far  the  number  of  widows  and 
orphans  has  increased  in  the  ranks  of  the  proletariat  since  Count 
Witte  came  into  power.  .  .  .  Count  Witte  states  that  he  is 
full  of  good-will  towards  us.  .  .  .  The  Council  declares  that 
the  working  class  has  no  need  of  the  good-will  of  favourites 
of  the  Tsar,  and  demands  the  direct  and  universal  suffrage.  .  .  . 
Moreover,  the  Council  is  profoundly  astonished  by  the  familiarity 
of  the  Imperial  favourite,  which  permits  him  to  address  the 
St.  Petersburg  workers  as  Mittle  brothers.'  The  proletariat  is 
united  by  no  tie  of  kinship  to  Count  Witte." 

The  strike  lasted  five  days,  and  as  a  result  the  Kronstadt 
mutineers  were  tried  by  the  ordinary  military  courts,  and  not 
by  the  courts-martial,  and  the  state  of  siege  in  Poland  was 
raised. 

At  the  same  time  agrarian  disturbances,  more  tumultuous  than 
ever,  invaded  37  per  cent,  of  the  cantons  of  Central  Russia. 
(In  the  spring  these  disturbances  were  felt  in  only  14  per  cent, 
of  the  cantons.)  During  these  disturbances  2,000  manors  were 
burned,  and  the  losses  thus  occasioned  in  19  governments 
amounted,  according  to  the  official  figures,  to  ^"3,085,000. 
The  Government  resorted  to  its  customary  measures  to  isolate 
this  movement :  it  diminished  the  sums  which  the  peasants  had 
to  pay  periodically  for  the  lands  granted  them  in  1861,  promised 
to  facilitate  fresh  acquisitions  of  land  by  means  of  loans  advanced 
by  the  Treasury,  and  at  the  same  time  to  each  of  the  more 
disturbed  districts  the  Tsar  sent  a  general  of  the  Imperial  suite, 
instructed  to  calm  the  peasants  by  means  of  shooting  them  down 
en  masse.  "  Arrest  as  few  as  possible,  and  above  all  shoot.  .  .  ." 
"  Leave  persuasion  alone,  use  gunpowder."  Such  were  the 
instructions  given  by  the  authorities  to  those  who  were  to  pacify 
the  peasants. 

"  Around  us  blood  is  flowing,  all  is  in  flames.  As  for  us, 
we  hack,  we  slash,  we  fire."  Thus  wrote  one  of  the  officers  sent 
to  suppress  the  agrarian  troubles,  describing  the  method  of  sup- 
pression. (See  The  Peasants  and  the  Revolution  in  Russia^ 
Moscow,    1907.) 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    269 

Four  days  after  the  political  strike  at  St.  Petersburg  had 
terminated,  on  the  24th  November,  the  warships  Potemkin^ 
Otchakov^  and  Dniester^  forming  part  of  the  Black  Sea  squadron, 
raised  the  standard  of  revolt  at  Sebastopol.  A  naval  officer, 
Lieutenant  Schmidt,  commanded  the  mutinied  fleet.  But  once 
again  isolated,  the  insurrection  was  quickly  suppressed  by  the 
Government,  after  claiming  numerous  victims  among  the 
insurgents.  A  week  later  there  were  fresh  military  disturbances 
— the  revolt  of  the  battalion  of  engineers  at  Kiev — which  ended 
with  the  imprisonment  and  execution  of  the  rebels.  Then,  on 
the  28th  November,  came  the  strike  of  the  Post  and  Telegraph 
employees. 

The  Government  was  quickly  on  the  offensive.  On  the 
8th  December  the  President  of  the  "  St.  Petersburg  Council  of 
Labour  Delegates  "  was  imprisoned.  In  response  to  this  action 
the  Council  drafted  the  following  resolution  :  "  The  Council 
of  Labour  Delegates  elects  a  new  president  and  continues  to 
prepare  itself  for  armed  insurrection."  The  watchword  "  strike  " 
gives  way  to  the  watchword  "  insurrection." 

The  history  of  the  insurrection  was  very  like  that  of  the 
strike. 

The  rising  was  especially  obstinate  in  the  Baltic  provinces. 
Commencing  in  the  middle  of  December,  it  led  to  the  seizure 
of  vast  estates  by  the  Lithuanian  peasants  and  workers,  who 
drove  away  the  Government  officials  and  themselves  formed 
their  administrative  organs.  The  insurrection  of  the  Georgians 
in  the  Caucasus  was  of  a  similar  character. 

And  just  when  the  Government  had  commenced  to  stifle  the 
insurrection  of  the  Baltic  provinces,  on  the  22nd  December  the 
insurrection  of  Moscow  broke  out.  The  Bo'ievyia  drujiny 
(insurrectionary  groups)  of  the  Socialist  parties  and  of  certain 
trade  organizations  (the  guild  or  syndicate  of  printers,  the  railway 
workers'  union),  as  well  as  the  drujiny  of  students,  were  for 
some  days  the  masters  of  Moscow.  The  soldiers  of  the  garrison, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Cossacks,  were  by  no  means  "safe," 
and    the    Government    could    only   suppress    the    revolution    by 


270  MODERN  RUSSIA 

bringing  from  St.  Petersburg  a  regiment  of  the  Imperial  Guard, 
and  by  employing  artillery,  the  insurgents  being  armed  only 
with  a  few  hundreds  of  Browning  and  Mauser  pistols  and  a  few 
score  rifles. 

The  insurrection  of  Moscow  nevertheless  lasted  a  week,  thanks 
in  the  first  place  to  the  topographical  conditions  of  the  city  and  to 
the  system  of  partisan  warfare  adopted  by  the  insurgents,  who 
raised  barricades,  not  in  order  to  defend  them,  but  so  that  they 
might,  while  sheltered  behind  them,  fatigue  the  regular  army  by 
unexpected  attacks  ;  and  in  the  second  place  to  the  good-will 
which  the  population  bore  the  insurgents. 

The  Baltic  provinces,  the  Caucasus,  and  Moscow  were  the 
chief  centres  of  the  insurrection,  but  rebellion  revealed  itself  in 
many  other  places  :  in  Kharkov,  in  the  district  of  Donetz,  and 
along  the  Siberian  railway.  In  these  regions  a  state  of  siege  was 
declared,  and  repressive  expeditions  were  despatched  thither,  and 
armoured  wagons  filled  with  soldiers.  The  insurrection  was 
stifled  in  a  sea  of  blood. 

The  chief  cause  of  the  failure  of  the  insurrection  resided  in  the 
fact  that  the  greater  part  of  the  army  remained  faithful  to  the 
Government.  The  forces  which  joined  the  revolution  were 
more  especially  the  artillery,  the  engineers,  and  the  sailors  of 
the  navy  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  more  intelligent  bodies  in  which 
the  artisan  element  prevailed.  As  for  the  infantry,  consisting 
chiefly  of  peasants,  it  gave  no  assistance  to  the  revolutionary 
movement ;  and  with  the  technical  methods  of  modern  warfare 
rebellion  cannot  succeed  without  the  help  of  a  great  part  of  the 
army.  Moreover,  one  of  the  causes  of  failure  was  the  lack  of 
centralization  in  the  revolutionary  movement,  the  isolation  of  the 
various  foci  of  insurrection  while  the  actions  of  the  Government 
were  centralized.  Again,  we  must  note  the  defensive  character 
of  the  insurrection.  Very  often,  after  seizing  this  or  that  strategic 
point,  the  insurgents  contented  themselves  with  "waiting," 
instead  of  seeking  to  enlarge  the  base  of  their  operations  and 
taking  the  offensive,  and  thus  they  facilitated  the  task  of  the 
regular    army,    which,    after    having   surrounded    them,    rapidly 


THE  ELEMENTS   OF  RUSSIAN  SOCIETY    271 

disposed  of  them.  This  lack  of  active  will-power  and  practical 
sense  of  which  the  insurgents  gave  proof  was  one  of  the  con- 
sequences of  age-long  life  beneath  the  political  yoke.  I  have 
already  cited  the  public  resolution  of  the  "  Council  of  Labour 
Delegates,"  which  declared  that  the  latter  body  was  preparing 
for  "  armed  insurrection."  This  resolution  sufficed  to  demon- 
strate the  unpractical  nature  of  the  leaders  of  the  insurrection. 
The  insurrection,  before  all,  should  have  been  unexpected  by  the 
Government.  The  events  which,  quite  recently,  overwhelmed 
Turkey  and  Portugal  will  testify  to  the  justice  of  this  assertion. 
As  for  declaring  a  month  in  advance  that  the  insurrection  was 
preparing,  this  was  to  invite  failure. 

In  January,  1906,  the  insurrection  was  completely  stifled.  In 
vain  did  the  Labour  party  seek  to  rouse  the  people  by  advising 
them  to  boycott  the  elections  to  the  Duma,  which  was  to  open 
in  1906.  The  boycotting  failed,  and  Russia  swiftly  entered  upon 
a  fresh  period  of  political  conflict.  Hiding  behind  a  screen  of 
Parliamentarianism,  the  reaction   became  supreme. 


CHAPTER   III 

AFTER  THE   REVOLUTION 

The  three  Dumas.  II.  The  activity  of  the  Government — Agrarian 
reform  (destruction  of  the  rural  commune).  III.  Russian  society 
after  the  revolution — Fatigue  and  despair — Epidemic  of  suicides — 


Signs  of  a  renaissance. 


I 


We  shall  find  the  embryo  of  national  representation  in  the  history 
of  ancient  Russia.  In  the  "ffreat  cities"  of  Nov2;orod  and  Pskov, 
in  the  twelfth  century,  there  vi^ere  already  Fietches,  or  assemblies  of 
citizens  participating  in  the  government  of  each  of  the  republics. 
During  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  the  Muscovite 
Tsar  convoked,  at  times,  the  Zemsky  Sobor^  a  council  formed  of 
the  representatives  of  the  various  States.  But  from  the  eighteenth 
century  down  to  1905  the  Empire  permitted  no  national  represen- 
tation, unless  we  count  an  attempt  of  Catherine  IPs.  In  1767 
Catherine  instituted  a  "  commission  instructed  to  elaborate  a 
project  for  a  new  code."  This  commission,  created,  as  its  name 
indicates,  for  a  special  end,  played  a  more  important  part — that  of 
a  commission  of  inquiry.  But  its  conclusions  as  to  the  general 
situation  in  Russia,  being  far  too  unflattering  to  the  Government, 
caused  Catherine  II  to  suppress  it. 

In  the  nineteenth  century  certain  sections  01  society  attempted, 
on  several  occasions,  to  realize  the  ideal  of  national  representa- 
tion :   the  Decembrists  by  means  of  an  armed  insurrection  (1725); 

certain  zemstvos  by  presenting  a  petition  to  Nicolas  II,  at  the  time 

272 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  273 

of  his  accession  ;  and  the  Terrorists  by  throwing  bombs.  But  all 
these  attempts  failed,  and  only  in  1905  did  a  revolutionary  move- 
ment of  the  people  itself  force  the  monarchy  to  give  vi'ay.  The 
manifestation  of  the  workers  of  St.  Petersburg  in  January,  1905, 
and  the  threat  of  innumerable  political  strikes,  impelled  the  Tsar 
to  express,  in  the  "rescript"  of  i8th  February  (3rd  March),  his 
intention  to  invite  "  the  worthiest  persons,  and  those  enjoying  the 
confidence  of  the  people,"  to  contribute  to  "  the  preliminary 
elaboration  and  the  discussion  of  projected  legislation,"  A 
commission  was  instructed  to  supervise  the  details  of  this  deci- 
sion. It  confined  itself  to  the  project  of  the  institution  of  a 
"State  Duma,"  and  on  the  6/i9th  August  this  proposal  was 
approved  by  the  Tsar  and  became  law.  According  to  this  first 
law  the  Duma  was  to  be  merely  consultative,  and  would 
represent  only  the  wealthier  classes  of  society.  In  response  to 
this  law  was  organized  a  new  political  strike,  which  dragged  from 
the  monarchy  the  "manifesto  of  October  17th."  This  manifesto 
accorded  the  Duma  legislative  powers  and  enlarged  the  electorate. 
Then,  on  the  20th  February  (5th  March),  1906,  was  published  a 
new  law  which  recognized  the  electoral  right,  active  and  passive, 
of  every  man  aged  at  least  twenty-five  years  who  could  give 
proof  of  a  fixed  domicile  and  the  required  property  qualification. 
In  the  country  districts  those  peasants  who  were  fathers  ot 
families  became  electors,  also  rural  landowners,  nobles,  mer- 
chants, and  members  of  the  clergy  :  in  the  urban  districts  the 
proprietors  of  real  and  movable  estate,  the  State  officials,  members 
of  the  public  services,  and  men  who  had  occupied  a  lodging  for  at 
least  a  year.  As  to  industrial  workers,  only  those  having  worked 
continuously  for  six  months  in  an  enterprise  employing  at  least 
fifty  hands  received  the  elector's  ticket. 

The  "  national  representation "  instituted  in  Russia  by  the 
manifesto  of  17th  October  was  not  direct.  It  was  representation 
by  two  degrees  for  certain  classes  of  electors,  and  by  three  degrees 
for  others.  The  Government  hoped  no  doubt  to  obtain  the 
support  of  the  peasants  and  landed  proprietors,  for  it  was  to  them 
that    they    confided    the    majority    of  the   "  electoral    colleges." 

18 


274  MODERN  RUSSIA 

According  to  the  law  of  1906,  of  the  6,164  members  of  these 
colleges  there  were  2,654  peasants  (43  per  cent.),  1,965  land- 
owners (31  per  cent.),  1,368  "citizens"  (22  per  cent.),  and  177 
working  men  (4  per  cent.).  But  the  hopes  of  the  monarchists 
were  disappointed  ;  the  majority  of  the  peasant  "  wards  "  elected 
deputies  to  the  "  Left,"  who  promptly  formed  the  "  Labour  group  " 
of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  and  which  numbered  no  less 
than  TOO  members.  As  for  the  rest  of  the  Duma,  it  was 
constituted  by  40  "moderates"  and  "Rights,"  180  "Cadets," 
32  Polish  Nationalists,  14  Social  Democrats,  etc.  The  first 
Duma  was  not  rich  in  Socialists,  for  the  Social-Democratic  party 
and  the  Revolutionary  Socialist  party,  with  a  few  rare  exceptions, 
boycotted  the  first  elections.  The  "  Cadets  "  were  predominant, 
and  they  endeavoured,  by  means  of  the  greatest  restraint,  to  cross 
the  Government  in  nothing.  However,  the  conflict  between  the 
Duma  and  the  Government  was  inevitable  :  the  existence  of 
embittered  questions,  which  could  not  possibly  be  eliminated — as  the 
question  of  an  amnesty  for  political  prisoners,  the  existence  of  courts- 
martial,  of  the  death  penalty,  of  pogroms^  etc.,  and  the  question 
of  ministerial  responsibility  to  the  Duma — rendered  agreement 
impossible.  The  appearance  of  these  questions  on  the  "order  of 
the  day  "  provoked  a  violent  disturbance,  not  only  in  the  Duma, 
but  also  beyond  its  walls.  The  attitude  of  bravado  adopted  by 
the  Government  only  increased  the  agitation.  The  following 
episodes  will  give  some  idea  of  the  conduct  of  the  Government 
towards  the  first  Duma;  on  the  i2/25th  May  an  inter- 
pellation in  respect  of  the  death  sentence  upon  eight  young 
working  men  of  Riga  was  approved  by  the  Duma.  The  same 
day  these  eight  prisoners  were  shot.  Four  days  later  the  Govern- 
ment informed  the  Duma  that  its  interpellation  had  been 
referred,  "as  pertained  thereto,"  to  the  Ministry  of  War.  In 
reply  to  a  law  voted  by  the  Duma  suppressing  the  capital 
sentence,  the  Government  proceeded  to  multiply  the  executions 
of  political  prisoners.  Finally  the  members  of  the  Duma, 
indignant,  began  to  hiss  the  representatives  of  the  Government 
and  to  call  them  assassins  and  butchers. 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  275 

The  impotence  of  the  Duma  was  obvious.  Then  some  of 
its  members  expressed  the  idea  of  approaching  the  people  by 
means  of  local  committees  elected  by  the  inhabitants  of  this 
and  that  district,  which  might  serve  as  a  laboratory  for  the 
preliminary  elaboration  of  public  opinion  and  as  a  support  to 
the  Duma  itself.  But  the  "Cadets,"  who  constituted  the 
majority  in  the  Duma,  protested  against  these  methods  as 
"  unparliamentary  "  and  "  too  revolutionary  "  for  their  liking  ; 
and  the  first  Duma  decided  to  keep  within  the  limits  of  the 
Constitution  and  the  parliamentary  system. 

But  in  reality  neither  Constitution  nor  parliamentary  system 
existed,  for  four  days  before  the  opening  of  the  Duma  the 
Government  hastily  promulgated  new  "  organic  laws "  which 
reduced  the  activity  of  the  Duma  almost  to  a  negative  quantity. 
"  The  Tsar  possesses  supreme  and  autocratic  power,  and  no  new 
law  can  enter  into  force  without  his  approval " — such  was  the 
essential  meaning  of  these  hastily  executed  laws.  Moreover,  the 
Government  reserved  the  right  of  promulgating  laws  "  in  excep- 
tional instances  "  during  the  vacations  of  the  Duma,  and  greatly 
limited  the  power  of  the  latter  body.  The  Duma,  in  short, 
was  forbidden  to  discuss  the  institution  of  military  courts  or  to 
raise  the  question  of  revising  the  "  organic  laws."  The  pre- 
rogative of  modifying  the  laws  was  reserved  by  the  Tsar.  By 
March,  igo6,  six  weeks  before  the  opening  of  the  Duma,  the 
Government  produced  "  budgetary  regulations,"  which  resulted 
in  the  Budget  being  "  iron-clad  "  and  proof  against  any  attempts 
on  the  part  of  the  Duma  to  amend  it.  According  to  the 
opinion  of  the  French  jurist,  M.  Pierre  Chasles,  the  budgetary 
rights  of  the  Duma  are  practically  null,  all  such  rights  being 
eliminated  by  "  exceptions,"  for  the  Russian  autocracy  withdrew 
with  one  hand  what  it  had  given  with  the  other.  M.  Chasles 
adds  that  there  is  no  Parliament  in  the  world  whose  financial 
rights  are  limited  as  are  those  of  the  Duma.  (See  Pierre 
Chasles,  Le  Parlement  Russe^  Paris,  1 9 10.) 

Possessing  no  real  power,  the  first  Duma  was  doomed  to  fall 
as   soon   as   the    Government   thought   fit  to    oppose  it    openly. 


276  MODERN  RUSSIA 

And,  indeed,  seventy-two  days  after  the  opening  of  the  Duma 
it  was  dissolved  by  the  Tsar,  at  the  moment  when  it  was  about 
to  present  to  the  Government  a  project  of  agrarian  reform  and 
to  address  the  people  for  the  first  time  on  the  subject  of  the 
agrarian  troubles  which  were  disturbing  certain  provinces.  A 
party  of  deputies,  headed  by  all  the  leaders,  resolved  to  protest 
against  this  dissolution,  and  repaired  to  Viborg,  in  Finland, 
whence  they  addressed  a  manifesto  to  the  people.  This  mani- 
festo counselled  the  people  not  to  pay  a  penny  of  their  taxes 
and  not  to  supply  the  army  with  a  single  soldier  until  the 
day  on  which  the  Government  should  convoke  a  new  Duma. 
The  deputies  who  signed  the  "  Proclamation  of  Viborg "  were 
sentenced  to  three  months'  imprisonment  and  deprived  of  the 
electoral  right  ;  but  no  one  thought  fit  to  refuse  the  payment 
of  taxes  or  to  boycott  the  army.  The  Duma  was  too  little 
in  touch  with  the  people  for  its  proclamation  to  produce  the 
desired  eflfect.  The  "  Cadets "  who  initiated  the  journey  to 
Viborg  declared  during  their  trial  that  their  proclamation  was 
intended  solely  to  divert  the  people  from  the  revolutionary  con- 
flict by  indicating  a  method  of  passive  opposition.  As  to  the 
Left  side  of  the  Duma,  constituted  by  the  Labour  men  and 
Social  Democrats,  not  content  with  urging  the  people  to  passive 
opposition,  it  issued  two  further  proclamations — one  addressed  to 
the  peasants  and  workers,  the  other  to  the  army  and  the  navy — 
both  recommending  an  armed  struggle  against  the  Government. 
A  few  strikes  responded  to  these  proclamations  and  then  a  few 
military  insurrections  :  Poltava  (28th  of  July),  the  fortress  of 
Siraborg  (30th  of  July  and  ist  of  August)  and  Kronstadt  (ist 
and  2nd  of  August)  ;  badly  organized,  these  strikes  and  insurrec- 
tions ended  in  the  complete  defeat  of  the  revolutionists  and  the 
victory  of  the  Government. 

Six  months  after  the  dissolution  of  the  first  Duma  the 
second  was  convoked.  The  Government  resolved  once  more 
to  assemble  a  so-called  Parliament,  fearing  internal  discontent 
and  more  especially  the  public  opinion  of  Europe.  Moreover, 
the  dissolution   of  the  Duma   had    provoked    a    heavy  slump  of 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  277 

Russian  securities  on  the  exchanges  of  Europe.  The  electoral 
law  was  left  in  the  same  condition  as  before  ;  but  thanks  to  the 
"commentaries  and  elucidations  "  of  the  Senate,  the  number  of 
the  electors  was  still  further  diminished.  Moreover,  a  number 
of  decrees  limited  the  liberties  of  the  electoral  assemblies.  Here 
is  the  tenor  of  one  of  these  decrees :  "  The  commissary  of 
police  who  is  present  at  these  meetings  may  dissolve  them  if 
he  observes  incitement  to  hatred  or  remarks  the  presence  of 
unqualified  persons  or  considers  that  the  meeting  is  wandering  from 
the  '■order  of  the  day''  "  [sic  !).  These  decrees  were  followed  by 
the  accompanying  circular,  addressed  to  the  Governors  by  the 
Minister  of  the  Interior  :  "  The  deportation  of  possible  candi- 
dates of  the  parties  of  the  Left  constitutes  a  measure  which  is 
contemplated  by  the  Government  not  only  in  the  interests  of 
public  authority  and  security,  but  because  the  Minister  desired 
to  see  in  the  new  Duma  men  who  correspond  to  the  verit- 
able (?)  aspirations  of  the  population." 

Despite  all  these  measures  the  Government  received  a  check 
at  the  new  election,  and   the  second    Duma  was  more  revolu- 
tionary than  the  first.     The  Left  of  the  second  Parliament  con- 
sisted of  two    hundred    members  (sixty-five    Social    Democrats, 
thirty-five  Revolutionary   Socialists,   and  a  hundred  Labourites), 
while  the  Right  obtained  only  sixty  seats  and  the  Liberal  Centre 
(Cadets)  lost    more   than   40    per    cent,   of  its   strength    in    the 
previous    Duma.       Thus    the    second     Duma    expressed    even 
more  violently  than   the  first  the  revolutionary  conflict  between 
the  forces  of  reaction   and   the  forces  of  the   people.     \n  vain 
did  the  Cadets  essay  to  "spare"  the  Duma,  by  carefully  avoid- 
ing any  conflict  with  the  Government  or  by  sometimes  uniting 
themselves  with  the  Right  in  order  to  prevent  the  Left,  directed 
by  the  Social  Democrats,  from  passing  revolutionary  resolutions. 
The  Government   was  not   long  willing  to  support  the  pitiless 
criticism  of  its  actions  which  proceeded  from  the  orators  of  the 
Left,  and  in  June,  1907,  103  days  after  its  opening,  the  Second 
Duma    also  was    dissolved.      This  dissolution   was   preceded  by 
a  demand  on  the  part  of  the  Government  that  the  deputies  of 


278  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  Social  Democratic  party  should  be  handed  over  to  it,  on  the 
pretext  that  they  had  been  involved  in  the  organization  of  a 
military  plot  directed  against  the  monarchy.  In  reality  the 
only  crime  of  the  deputies  of  the  Social  Democratic  group  con- 
sisted in  their  having  received  the  nakazes  [cahiers)  in  which 
the  people  had  expressed  its  necessities  and  claims  and  the 
soldiers  the  causes  of  their  discontent.  As  it  proved  later,  the 
staging  of  this  imaginary  "  plot "  was  effected  by  a  method 
habitual  with  the  Government — provocation.  A  repentant  agent 
of  the  Okhrana  (the  detective  police),  Brodsky,  had  recently 
revealed  all  the  machinations  employed  by  the  Okhrana  to 
establish  overwhelming  proofs  of  guilt  of  the  Social  Democratic 
deputies.  However,  with  the  exception  of  a  i^vf  deputies  who 
had  time  to  escape  abroad,  they  were  brought  to  trial,  and  thirty- 
seven  representatives  of  the  Russian  proletariat  were  condemned 
to  hard  labour  and  banished  to  Siberia. 

Having  dispersed  the  second  Duma,  the  Tsar  in  a  manifesto 
stated  that  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  reform  the 
electoral  law,  "  for  he  recognized  that  the  composition  of  the 
Duma  was  not  satisfactory.  .  .  .  Only  that  power  which  con- 
ceded the  first  electoral  law,  the  historic  power  of  the  Tsar, 
possesses  the  right  to  abrogate  that  law  and  to  replace  it  by 
a  new  law,  and  as  it  was  God  zuho  bestowed  upon  us  our  power  as 
autocrat^  it  is  before  His  altar  that  we  shall  answer  for  the 
destinies  of  the  Russian  State.^^ 

The  transformation  of  the  electoral  law  accomplished  according 
to  the  "  indications  of  God  "  by  the  Tsar  of  All  the  Russias 
consisted  in  reducing  the  members  of  the  Duma  to  442  ;  they 
had  formerly  been  524.  This  diminution  was  effected  at  the 
expense  of  Russian  subjects  of  "  foreign "  race.  Poland  has 
to-day  14  deputies  instead  of  37,  the  Caucasus  lO  instead  of  29, 
Asiatic  Russia  15  instead  of  46,  while  Turkestan  no  longer 
has  one.  The  system  of  "wards,"  of  which  the  germ  existed 
in  the  previous  law,  now  obtained  its  full  development,  the  great 
landowners  being  isolated  in  one  particular  ward,  the  first,  to 
which  was  promised  the  majority  both  in   the  electoral  colleges 


AFTER    THE   REVOLUTION  279 

and  the  Duma.  Now,  of  the  5,252  members  of  the  electoral 
colleges,  the  great  landowners  constitute  more  than  one-half. 
They  returned  to  their  colleges  2,647  ^^  their  own  representatives 
(56*6  per  cent.).  The  peasants  returned  1,160  (22  per  cent.), 
the  townsfolk  1,333  (25*3  per  cent.),  and  the  workers  112 
(2*1  per  cent.).  In  other  words,  the  Government  has  transformed 
the  Duma  into  the  organ  of  the  landowners  and  great  capital- 
ists. The  third  Duma,  whose  first  session  opened  on  November 
14,  1907,  was  composed  largely  of  Octobrists  and  members 
of  the  Right.  The  Cadets  numbered  30  deputies,  the  Labour 
group  about  20,  the  Social  Democrats  16,  and  the  Revolutionary 
Socialists  none — they  had  boycotted  the  elections. 

The  third  Duma  was  regarded  as  "  satisfactory "  by  the 
Government.  Treading  faithfully  in  the  path  of  reaction,  it 
still  exists.  In  the  rare  cases  when  the  opinion  of  this  Duma 
has  been  opposed  to  that  of  the  Government,  either  the  Council 
of  Empire  or  the  Tsar  himself  has  vetoed  its  decisions.  One 
day,  when  the  Government  wished  to  pass  a  law  affecting  the 
self-government  of  the  Western  region,  whose  character  was 
distinctly  chauvinistic,  the  Duma  and  the  Council  of  Empire 
opposed  it.  The  Government  then  resorted  to  a  very  simple 
and  original  measure,  which  is  doubtless  unknown  to  European 
parliamentary  life  :  it  dissolved  the  Duma  and  the  Council 
of  Empire  for  three  days^  promulgated  the  desired  law  during 
that  interval  in  the  name  of  the  Tsar,  and  then  ordered  the 
reopening  of  the  two  Chambers,  which  had  to  face  an  ac- 
complished fact.  The  Duma  and  the  Council  of  Empire 
submitted  with  perfect  docility  to  this  test  of  their  "  loyalty." 

As  for  the  popular  masses,  they  appear  to  be  ignorant  of 
the  existence  of  the  third  Duma.  Although  the  peasants,  work- 
ing men,  and  townsfolk  followed  the  doings  of  the  first  and 
second  Dumas  with  interest,  they  are  completely  indifferent 
to  the  actions  of  the  third.  For  the  people  the  third  Duma, 
far  from  being  a  popular  institution,  is  a  purely  Governmental 
organ,  one  of  its  countless  bureaucratic  devices.  This  con- 
ception can  only  be  shared  by  the  Russian  deputy  of  to-day. 


28o  MODERN  RUSSIA 


II 


"First  pacification,  then  reforms!"  Thus  did  Stolypin,  after 
the  revolution,  express  the  intentions  of  the  Government. 

Of  the  manner  in  which  the  "pacification"  was  effected 
we  shall  not  say  much,  A  social  conflict  is  always  more 
violent  than  an  international  conflict,  and  the  victors  in  an 
intestine  struggle  always  treat  the  vanquished  far  more  brutally 
than  the  victors  in  an  external  war.  The  Russian  reaction 
could  be  no  exception  to  this  rule,  for  the  intellectual  level 
of  its  leaders  is  of  the  lowest,  and  these  leaders,  thanks  to 
the  historical  conditions  of  their  education  and  their  fear  of 
losing  their  property  and  perhaps  their  lives  in  the  revolu- 
tionary tempest,  are  always  ready  to  inflict  pitiless  punish- 
ment. After  the  victory  of  the  Government  these  leaders 
proposed  to  root  out  the  revolution  by  exterminating  all  those 
who  had  taken  part  in  the  events  of  the  revolution  and  all 
those  who  were  suspect  of  having  done  so.  So,  despite  the 
existence  of  numerous  Draconian  penalties  in  the  Russian  code, 
the  reaction  demanded  the  adoption  of  exceptional  and  illegal 
measures.  The  Russian  courts-martial  enjoyed  the  right  to  finish 
any  trial  whatever  within  twenty-four  hours.  Nevertheless, 
the  reaction  executed  political  prisoners  en  ynasse^  without  any 
judicial  proceedings.  Interpellations  in  the  Duma  established 
the  fact  that  the  Governor-General  of  Warsaw  ordered  more 
than  one  illegal  capital  execution  hy  administrative  process^  and 
it  was  also  oflScially  proved  in  the  Duma  that  torture  was 
employed  as  a  means  of  preliminary  inquiry  in  political  trials. 
It  is  a  fact  that  there  existed  in  Riga,  in  the  years  1906-7, 
and  even  later,  a  "museum  of  tortures,"  in  which  the  police, 
with  the  approval  of  the  magistrates,  tortured  political  prisoners, 
in  order  to  wring  admissions  from  them  and  to  extract  the 
names  of  their  comrades.  The  tortures  were  directed  by  a 
special  "  commission,"  composed  of  officials  to  whom  the  Governor 
— according  to  the  declaration  of  the  commission — had  granted 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  281 

the  right  to  kill  political  prisoners  without  trial  and  without 
inquest. 

Here  are  some  facts,  cited  from  an  interpellation  made  in  April, 
1907,  upon  this  subject,  and  approved  by  an  enormous  majority 
of  the  second   Duma  : 

"On  the  night  of  January  13,  1906,  a  young  prisoner  of 
eighteen  years,  from  whom  no  admission  could  be  obtained,  had 
the  thorax  and  the  flanks  bruised  and  ground  under  the  feet  of  a 
sub-commissary  of  police.  The  same  night  another  '  detained  ' 
was  so  violently  struck  on  the  calves  that  the  flesh  of  his  legs 
hung  in  strips,  showing  the  naked  bone. 

"On  March  14,  1906,  three  revolutionaries  were  arrested, 
and  for  eight  days  they  were  subjected  to  the  most  refined 
tortures.  .  .  .  Their  nails  and  hair  were  torn  out,  they  were 
struck  upon  the  genital  organs,  their  bones  were  broken.  .  .  . 

"On  the  1 8th  August  a  youth  of  sixteen  was  arrested,  a 
secondary  school  boy,  being  accused  of  lending  a  comrade  a 
copy  of  the  '  Proclamation  of  Viborg.'  He  was  struck  on  the 
arms,  the  back,  the  head,  and  the  genital  organs,  so  that  at  last 
his  whole  body  was  merely  one  horrible  wound. 

"Another  young  prisoner  of  twenty-two,  arrested  the  30th  ot 
November,  1906,  was  transformed,  in  a  detective  police  bureau, 
into  a  hairless  and  mutilated  old  man." 

The  report  of  the  session  of  the  Duma  of  the  loth  ot  April, 
1907  (see  the  shorthand  report  of  the  second  session  of  the  second 
Duma,  St.  Petersburg,  1907,  published  by  the  State  Printing 
Press,  pp.  1880-97),  mentions  many  other  facts  similar  to 
these,  and  states  how  the  police  "  used  to  extinguish  cigarettes  on 
the  bodies  they  had  already  tortured,  kicked  the  prisoners,  tore 
out  their  eyes,  filled  painful  wounds  with  salt,  scorched  the  feet 
of  prisoners  at  the  fire,"  and  how,  to  destroy  all  trace  of  torture, 
they  then  used  to  kill  their  victims,  naturally  without  trial. 

Similar  deeds  were  committed  in  other  parts  of  the  Baltic 
provinces  and  in  Poland.  In  reply  to  the  interpellation  of  the 
Duma  the  Government,  being  unable  to  deny  the  evidence, 
contented  itself  with  attempting  to  excuse  its  agents  by  declaring 


282  MODERN  RUSSIA 

that  they  had  been  excited  against  the  revolutionists  by  numerous 
Terrorist  attempts. 

I  will  stop  here  in  the  enumeration  of  facts  characteristic  of 
the  cruelty  of  the  Governmental  system  of  repression,  for  I  prefer 
to  spare  my  readers'  nerves.  Yet  it  is  my  great  wish  to  make 
Europeans  understand  vi'hat  can  happen  in  Russia.  But  w^hile 
Russians  are  almost  accustomed  to  certain  phenomena,  because 
these  are  known  to  them  all  and  recur  in  their  country  from  time 
to  time,  Europeans  find  it  difficult  even  to  realize  the  existence  of 
such  phenomena. 

Without  reckoning  a  ^zvj  unimportant  practical  measures,  the 
reforms  granted  between  1903  and  1910  fall  into  two  categories  ; 
one  of  these  appearing  as  the  direct  result  of  the  revolutionary 
movement  and  the  other  as  the  fruit  of  Governmental  initiative. 

To  the  first  of  these  categories  belong  those  measures  affecting 
the  extension  of  civic  rights,  Press  rights,  rights  of  association, 
the  right  to  strike,  etc.  Until  1905  there  was  in  Russia  a  pre- 
ventive censorship,  which  subjected  to  its  decisions  all  journals, 
books,  and  reviews.  Its  proceedings  against  "  liberal "  ideas  often 
assumed  a  purely  academic  form.  Everybody  knows  how  a 
censor,  instructed  to  revise  a  cookery-book,  discovered  therein  a 
"revolutionary"  phrase,  which  he  suppressed.  This  phrase 
advised  the  cook  to  cook  certain  meats  by  means  of  "  free  heat." 
Another  censor,  in  Odessa,  recently  reading  a  criticism  of 
Hamlet^  Prince  of  Demnark^  blacked  out  the  second  portion  of  the 
title  of  the  piece,  explaining  that  one  could  not  speak  of  Danish 
princes  without  an  authorization  from  the  Ministry  of  the 
Imperial  Court,  as  the  Empress-mother,  Maria  Fedorovna,  was 
allied  to  the  royal  house  of  Denmark.  But  although  such 
fantastic  feats  were  sometimes  comic,  the  majority  were  truly 
tragic  ;  they  hampered  the  development  of  the  Press  and  of 
science  by  forbidding  them  even  to  touch  upon  a  host  of  theories 
and  problems. 

In  1905  the  censorship,  although  not  officially  suppressed, 
ceased  for  a  moment  to  exist.     The  political  organizations  having 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  283 

commenced  to  publish  books  and  journals  "by  the  wish  of  the 
people  "  without  getting  them  revised  by  the  censors,  the  private 
publishers  were  not  long  in  following  suit,  and  the  Government, 
in  the  face  of  the  accomplished  fact,  suppressed  the  preliminary 
censorship,  while  reserving  the  right  to  fine  publishers,  imprison 
editors  without  trial,  and  suppress  journals.  After  1905  the 
Government  began  to  profit  so  largely  by  the  latter  right  that 
to-day  freedom  of  the  Press  is  practically  unknown  in  Russia. 
Just  as  before  the  revolution,  the  democratic  parties  are  forced 
to  get  their  pamphlets  printed  abroad  or  in  secret  printing-offices. 

Only  in  1905  did  Russia  enjoy  the  right  of  assembly.  At  the 
beginning  of  1906  the  Government  promulgated  a  "provisional 
decree  "  ordering  all  organizers  of  public  meetings  to  warn  the 
local  police  at  least  three  days  in  advance  of  the  place,  date,  and 
object  of  the  intended  meeting.  This  same  decree  authorized 
the  local  administrations  to  prohibit  all  such  meetings  as  it  seemed 
good  to  them  to  prohibit.  Now  the  right  of  public  assembly 
only  exists  as  a  formula,  for  the  local  administrations,  anxious  to 
avoid  all  disturbances,  prohibit  practically  all  meetings. 

As  for  the  right  of  association  and  the  right  to  strike,  these 
also  date  from  the  year  1905.  In  that  year  a  Government 
circular  ordered  the  agents  of  the  Government  no  longer  to  apply 
the  laws  directed  against  workmen  "on  strike."  But  administra- 
tive practice  soon  returned  to  the  old  ways  :  imprisonment  and 
deportation  of  strikers.  Associations  or  unions  may  still  be 
constituted,  but  they  may  be  dissolved  at  any  moment  by  a  simple 
administrative  order.  Moreover,  nearly  all  the  professional, 
philanthropic,  and  civilizing  organizations  which  were  the  hope 
of  the  active  portion  of  society  have  one  by  one  been  forced  to 
disappear. 

Another  conquest  of  the  revolutionary  movement,  "  academic 
autonomy,"  suffered  the  same  fate  as  the  unions.  Before  1905 
the  assemblies  of  the  Russian  university  professors  were  absolutely 
dependent  upon  the  pedagogic  bureaucracy  ;  in  other  words,  the 
Minister  of  Public  Instruction  and  the  "  curators  of  the  educa- 
tional districts."     This  dependence  was  felt  even  in  the  region  or 


284  MODERN  RUSSIA 

pure  science.  Thus,  the  Minister  appointed  and  dismissed  the 
professors,  without  taking  their  professional  merits  into  considera- 
tion. As  I  have  already  stated,  during  the  first  half  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  the  professors  of  anatomy  were  forced  not  merely 
to  teach  their  students  the  structure  of  the  human  body,  but  also 
to  "  direct  the  spirits  of  the  hearers  towards  the  All-Clement 
Deity,  creator  of  the  human  body  in  all  its  marvellous  com- 
plexity." 

In  a  provincial  university  the  chair  of  philosophy  was  occupied 
by  a  commissary  of  police  (^?V),  who  was  instructed  to  render  the 
science  of  philosophy  more  "safe."  As  for  being  a  materialist  or 
a  disciple  of  the  Darwinian  theory,  that  was  regarded  as  a  terrible 
crime.  The  result  was  that  many  talented  teachers  were 
eventually  either  dismissed  on  account  of  their  "  atheism  "  and 
"  lack  of  safety,"  or  had  to  take  refuge  in  foreign  universities, 
where  their  work  was  better  appreciated  than  in  Russia. 

In  1905  the  Russian  universities  obtained  autonomy  and  the 
right  to  select  the  occupants  of  their  professional  chairs  by  means 
of  competition.  But  the  universities  did  not  long  enjoy  their 
autonomy,  for  in  1908  they  were  already  invaded  by  the  waves 
of  reaction.  The  high-schools  were  ransacked ;  dozens  of  pro- 
fessors of  various  faculties  at  odds  with  the  Government  were 
dismissed.  To  fill  the  empty  chairs  the  Russian  Government 
appoints  persons  who  are  not  selected  by  the  faculties,  despite  the 
opposition  of  the  latter. 

The  aggressive  policy  adopted  by  the  Government  in  respect 
of  the  professors  of  the  high-schools  is  not  particularly  reasonable 
even  from  the  Governmental  point  of  view.  The  Russian  pro- 
fessors, like  the  majority  of  "  men  of  science,"  belong  to  the 
category  of  "  peaceable  citizens,"  and  their  political  opinions, 
with  very  rare  exceptions,  are  excessively  moderate.  Thus,  at 
the  moment  of  the  revolution  they  were  employing  all  their 
efforts  to  restrain  the  students  from  taking  part  in  revolutionary 
movements.  For  this  very  reason  there  were  many  quarrels 
between  professors  and  students.  And  even  these  professors 
seemed,  to  the  Russian  reaction,  "  insupportable." 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  285 

Passing  to  the  reforms  due  to  the  initiative  of  the  Government, 
I  vi^ill  say  nothing  of  national  legislation,  for  I  shall  refer  to  that 
in  another  chapter.  I  will  speak  here  of  the  new  agrarian  reform. 
This  reform,  known  as  the  "law  of  the  9th  November,  1906,"  is 
of  the  greatest  importance,  for  it  is  by  itself  indicative  of  the  com- 
plete downfall  of  the  old  Governmental  policy  in  respect  of  the 
rural  commune  and  the  revision  of  all  previous  legislation. 

In  speaking  of  rural  economy  I  have  already  stated  that  the 
Government  attempted  artificially  to  retain  the  obshtchina  (rural 
commune).  All  the  eminent  servants  of  the  Russian  autocracy 
(such  as  the  celebrated  Plehve,  killed  by  Terrorists,  and  the  no 
less  celebrated  Pobiedonostzev)  were  persuaded  that  the  existence 
of  the  rural  commune  and  its  social  and  economic  isolation  were 
the  best  foundations  of  the  monarchy.  In  January,  1904,  the 
Government  once  more  expressed  its  wish  to  contribute  to  the 
preservation  of  the  commune.  And  suddenly,  two  years  later, 
the  contrary  principle  was  proclaimed.  In  March,  1906,  the 
Government  declared  in  a  ukase  that  it  was  "the  present  system 
of  property  and  exploitation  of  the  soil  that  had  led  the  peasants 
to  poverty  and  the  ruin  of  the  rural  economy."  On  the  gjiind 
November  of  the  same  year  was  promulgated  a  law  authorizing 
any  member  of  a  commune  to  require  of  the  latter  the  transfor- 
mation into  private  property  of  the  land  cultivated  by  him,  and 
to  resort  to  the  aid  of  the  Governmental  administration  in  case  of 
refusal  on  the  part  of  the  commune.  Thus,  in  opposition  to  the 
old  system  of  keeping  the  property  of  the  commune  undivided 
and  indivisible,  the  "  law  of  the  9th  November  "  introduced  the 
system  of  sharing  the  soil  among  private  owners. 

The  principle  of  this  agrarian  reform  is  indisputable.  The  rural 
commune  was  a  most  antiquated  institution,  which  had  more 
than  once  hampered  the  economic  evolution  of  the  village,  and 
private  property  was  far  more  appropriate  to  a  capitalistic  system, 
as  it  stimulates  personal  initiative  and  free  competition.  Count 
Witte,  father  of  this  reform,  understood  better  than  any  other 
Minister  the  problems  of  the  bourgeois  development  of  Russia. 
But    principles   and    hard    reality    are    different    things.     In    re- 


286  MODERN  RUSSIA 

forming  the  communal  system  the  Government,  regarding  the 
reform  as  a  panacea  capable  of  calming  the  agrarian  troubles,  was 
pursuing  a  political  rather  than  an  economic  aim.  In  the  years 
1905  and  1906  the  agrarian  disturbances  invaded  enormous  areas, 
and  the  peasants,  whole  fnirs  at  a  time,  had  attacked  the  homes 
of  the  rich  landowners.  After  this  effervescence  the  Government 
and  the  nobles  persuaded  themselves  that  the  w/r,  by  giving  the 
peasants  a  certain  solidarity  in  their  attacks  on  the  great  land- 
owners, was  the  principal  cause  of  the  agrarian  troubles.  It  was 
to  shatter  this  solidarity  of  the  mir  that  the  law  of  the  9th  of 
November  was  promulgated. 

To    put    this   law    into    execution    special    commissions    were 
formed   in  each  uyezd  (canton)  and  in  each  guherniya  (Govern- 
ment).    These  commissions  were  composed  of  representatives  of 
the  Government,  of  the  nobles,  and  of  the  peasants.     But  as  the 
representatives    of  the  peasants  were  present  only  in    the    most 
insignificant   proportions,  the   task  of  realizing   the  new  reform 
was  really  incumbent  on  the  nobility  and  the  bureaucracy.     The 
ancient  distrust  which  the  peasants  felt  for  the  bureaucrats  caused 
the  former  to  embody  their  suspicions  in  "agrarian  commissions," 
entrusted  with  the  protection  of  the  rights  of  the  members  "put 
out  "  of  the  communes.     There  were  bloody  encounters  between 
the  peasants  and  the  administrative  authorities.     Moreover,  in  the 
interior  of  the  commune  itself  a  quarrel  broke  out  between  the 
advocates  and   the  opponents  of  the  policy  of  sharing  the  land. 
This  struggle   led   to  murders,   to   premeditated    cases    of  arson. 
The  opponents  of  the  reform  asserted  that  the  secret  aim  of  the 
Government,  in  granting  this  reform,  was  to  sow  discord  within 
the  commune,  and  thus  to  divert  the  peasants  from  their  attacks 
upon  the  great  landowners.     The  reform  reckoned   confidently 
upon    the    peasant's   aspiration    towards    property,   an    aspiration 
which  had  long  existed  in  the  mind  of  the  Russian  mujik^  disguised 
by  an  archaic   pseudo-communism.     But  in  arousing  these  indi- 
vidualist aspirations  the  agrarian  reform  too  often  resulted  in  the 
conflict  of  these  desires  with  the  interests  of  the  great  majority  of 
the  members  of  the  commune.     It  has  often  happened  that  the 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  287 

peasant  who  by  chance  enjoys  the  use  of  an  important  allotment 
of  land  belonging  to  the  commune  is  anxious  to  depart  from  the 
commune.  His  departure  still  further  diminishes  the  possessions 
of  the  commune,  still  further  increasing  the  general  poverty 
caused  by  the  deficiency  of  land.  Sometimes  also  some  peasant 
who  has  long  ago  broken  all  ties  with  the  commune,  living  in 
the  city  but  nominally  still  a  member  of  the  commune,  returns  to 
the  village  and  demands  his  allotment,  and  immediately  on  receiv- 
ing it  hastens  to  sell  it.  For  that  matter,  the  majority  of  the 
peasants  "  emerge "  from  the  commune  in  order  to  sell  their 
property.  Thus  the  agrarian  reform,  instead  of  forming  a 
"class  of  solid  landowners,"  serves  still  further  to  hasten  the 
proletarianization  of  the  village.  Many  peasants  who  have 
"  emerged "  from  the  commune  and  are  anxious  to  continue 
to  cultivate  the  land  cannot  lead  an  independent  existence  for 
want  of  money,  live-stock,  and  implements  ;  the  next  thing  is 
that  they  also  promptly  swell  the  ranks  of  the  proletariat. 

According  to  the  official  data,  here  are  the  results  of  the 
agrarian  reform  during  the  first  four  years  of  its  operation  : 
in  1907,  240,143  acres  were  converted  into  private  properties; 
in  1908,  1,178,609  acres;  in  1909,  3,300,598  acres;  in  1910, 
3,940,350  ;  and  in  all,  during  these  four  years,  8,659,700  acres. 
These  8,659,700  acres  were  divided  among  319,148  dvors  or 
families.  If  we  take  into  consideration  that  the  total  number  of 
peasant  dvors  in  Russia  amounts  to  twelve  millions,  we  shall  see 
that  hitherto  the  results  of  the  reform  are  somewhat  insignificant. 
If  we  compare  the  number  of  dvors  which  have  "emerged"  from 
the  commune  with  the  amounts  of  land  allotted  to  each,  we  shall 
see  that  the  new  reform  profits  more  particularly  the  more  wealthy 
dvors^  that  is  to  say,  those  which  possess  at  least  27  acres. 

While  it  authorized  "emergence"  from  the  commune,  the 
Government  also  realized  another  measure,  the  "distribution" 
of  the  peasants,  the  object  of  which  was  to  break  up  the  large 
villages  into  hamlets,  into  isolated  khutors  (a  khutor  is  a  mctairie). 
The  organization  of  these  khutors  was  facilitated  both  bv  the 
allotments  which  had  emerged  from  the  communes  and  by  the 


288  MODERN  RUSSIA 

land  acquired  by  the  peasants  with  the  help  of  the  Peasant  Bank. 
The  creation  of  these  khutors  is  regarded  by  the  Government  as 
one  of  the  most  important  of  questions.  However,  the  results 
hitherto  obtained  by  this  measure  are  negligible  both  in  quality  and 
in  quantity.  Instead  of  becoming  "solid  economics"  the  khutors 
are  promptly  sold  by  their  possessors  to  the  large  buyers  of  land. 
Inquiries  made  by  agronomists  in  various  provinces  of  Russia — 
in  Pskov,  Samara,  Kiev,  Tula,  etc. — prove  that  the  individual 
peasant  propertv  can  to-day  look  for  no  further  development 
in  Russia,  for  the  political  and  juridical  conditions  of  the  life 
of  the  peasants  as  well  as  their  extreme  poverty  render  such 
development  impossible.  Moreover,  it  is  obvious  that  in  order 
to  work  an  independent  property  the  small  Russian  holder 
must  own  at  least  27  acres.  Thus  the  agrarian  question  is  no 
more  solved  to-day  than  it  was  before  the  9th  of  November, 
1906,  and  the  Government  is  mistaken  in  believing  that  the 
agrarian  reform  can  prevent  the  expropriation  of  the  lands  of 
the  nobles  to  the  profit  of  those  whose  needs  are  the  most 
important  problem  of  the  Russian  revolution — the  mujiks. 

The  situation  has  been  still  further  complicated  by  the  fact 
that  the  proletarianization  of  the  rural  population,  accelerated 
by  the  agrarian  reform,  is  daily  increasing  the  number  of  the 
unemployed,  Russian  industry  being  far  too  poorly  developed  to 
employ  so  many  hands.  Finally,  to  all  these  circumstances  was 
added  the  horrible  dearth  of  191 1,  which  spread  famine  through 
more  than  twenty  provinces.  By  the  end  of  the  year  the  number 
of  starving  persons  had  risen  to  twenty-five  millions !  And,  after 
the  promulgation  of  the  law  of  19th  November,  scurvy  and 
typhoid,  the  inseparable  companions  of  famine,  continued  to 
empty  the  Russian  villages  as  effectually  as  ever,  if  not  more  so. 


Ill 

The  pictures  which  pass  before  our  eyes,  when  we  think  what 
was  the  life  of  Russian  society  after  the  revolution,  are  tragic  in 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  289 

the  extreme,  and  would  supply  material  for  many  psychologists, 
sociologists,  and  novelists. 

Revolutionary  disturbances,  while  awakening  the  consciousness 
of  a  people,  always  exhaust  its  physical  and  moral  sources  as 
greatly  as  does  an  external  conflict,  and  it  was  after  an  external 
war  that  Russia  was  subjected  to  violent  internal  perturbation. 
Thus  the  Russian  people  was  obliged  to  make  a  double  effort, 
which  was  inevitably  followed  by  an  immense  fatigue.  It  was 
this  fatigue  which  finally  became  despair  before  the  certainty  that 
the  painful  struggle  had  terminated  in  no  practical  or  satisfactory 
result.  The  Russian  people  is  a  young  people,  without  great 
historical  experience,  liable  to  exaggerate  its  own  strength  and 
to  undervalue  that  of  the  monarchy.  Victory  seemed  so  easy, 
liberty  so  near  !  And  when,  in  place  of  victory,  it  met  defeat, 
and  in  place  of  liberty  the  triumph  of  a  bloody  repression,  its 
disillusion  was  terrible. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  repression  the  revolutionary  cause 
was  abandoned  by  a  vast  number  of  those  who  had  quite  recently 
sworn  eternal  fidelity  thereto.  And  many  of  those  who  thus 
abandoned  it  were  not  contented  with  a  passive  contemplation. 
Some  were  prompt  to  condemn  and  attack  the  liberative  move- 
ment. There  were  even  those  who  did  not  recoil  before  treason. 
And  then  commenced  a  period  which  in  all  truth  saw  "  brother 
turned  against  brother,"  when  the  breath  of  treachery  poisoned 
the  atmosphere  of  the  revolutionary  organizations,  and  provocation 
acquired  so  extraordinary  a  power  that  a  mutual  distrust  eventually 
seized  upon  all  their  members.  The  dismemberment  of  the 
organizations  followed. 

The  dismemberment  of  the  revolutionary  organizations  and 
the  decay  of  discipline  led  many  revolutionists,  who  could  not 
reconcile  themselves  with  the  defeat  of  the  movement  of 
liberation,  to  enter  into  the  struggle  on  their  own  account,  to 
declare  an  irregular  war  upon  the  monarchy,  in  the  shape  of 
an  individual  terrorism  or  of  "expropriations."  The  "expro- 
priators" were  numerous,  and  their  exploits  took  place  in 
banks,  post-offices,  and  fiscal  wine-shops.     Strange  legends  were 

19 


290  MODERN  RUSSIA 

circulated  relating  to  the  "  expropriators,"  especially  one  Stepan 
Lbov,  who  for  some  months  succeeded  in  terrorizing  the  police 
of  the  Urals,  and  was  at  last  hanged.  Unfortunately  the 
political  element  in  the  composition  of  the  groups  of  "expro- 
priators" was  largely  reinforced  by  criminals,  offenders  against 
the  common  law,  sometimes  even  police  provocateurs^  and  many 
"expropriations"  were  effected  by  genuine  bandits,  who,  under 
the  style  of  "  revolutionaries,"  attacked  fiscal  and  private 
institutions  indifferently.  In  some  districts  the  "expropriations" 
became  veritable  epidemics.  But  we  must  admit  that  this 
development  was  largely  aggravated  by  the  economic  crisis,  which 
threw  into  the  streets  a  multitude  of  the  unemployed,  starving 
and  embittered. 

While  in  the  lower  depths  of  society  the  dismemberment  of 
the  revolutionary  organiz,ations  was  followed  merely  by  an 
epidemic  of  expropriation  and  a  few  unimportant  acts  of 
terrorism,  in  the  intellectual  class  a  spiritual  crisis  was  evoked, 
and  the  "  intellectuals,"  in  the  words  of  the  poet,  began  to  burn 
what  they  had  adored,  and  to  adore  what  they  had  burned.  The 
cult  of  the  welfare  of  the  people  gave  way  to  the  cult  of  private 
welfare,  and  the  ardour  inspired  of  old  by  the  social  struggle 
died  down,  to  give  way  to  the  pursuit  of  pleasure.  Carpe  diem 
became  the  law  of  life.  In  literature  and  poetry  these  changes 
were  manifested  by  a  sudden  interest  in  the  "sexual  problem." 
Many  writers,  some  of  them  highly  talented,  commenced  to 
make  physical  love  the  object  of  a  special  cult,  and  a  wave 
of  pornography  swept  across  Russian  literature.  In  the  midst 
of  the  bloody  Governmental  repression  this  resembled  a  banquet 
in  time  of  pestilence,  or  a  dance  executed  upon  the  scaftold. 

Psychologists  and  alienists  often  speak  of  the  tie  between  the 
sexual  element  and  the  mystic  element.  This  observation  may 
very  appropriately  be  applied  to  the  spiritual  crisis  suffered  by  the 
Russian  intellectuals  after  the  revolution.  While  surrendering 
themselves  to  a  bacchanal  of  sexual  emotions,  one  section  ot 
Russian  society  plunged  into  mysticism.  Therein  some  sought 
new  sensations  ;  others,  a  simplification  and  repose  of  the  soul. 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  291 

Others,  again,  wished  to  associate  religious  aspirations  and  social 
ideals  by  giving  both  a  religious  basis.  Two  religious  movements 
appeared  after  the  revolution,  the  first  being  known  as  "The 
Search  for  God,"  the  second  as  "The  Construction  of  God."  The 
"  Seekers  "  declared  that  the  divine  principle  was  contained  in 
the  existing  order,  and  that  it  was  only  needful  to  "  discover  " 
it  :  the  "  Constructors,"  some  of  whom  were  Socialists,  declared 
that  the  divine  principle  could  be  incarnated  in  life  only  after  the 
destruction  of  present  conditions  of  life  and  the  organization  of 
a  new  order.  The  adepts  of  these  two  new  cults  sought,  in  a 
resurrection  of  archaic  forms  of  ideology,  a  means  of  galvanizing 
the  chilly  corpse  of  their  ideas  and  feelings. 

The  war,  the  revolution,  and  the  reaction,  in  addition  to  the 
moral  crisis  among   the  intellectuals,  provoked   a  crisis   in    the 
popular  health.     Already  enfeebled  by  the  yoke  of  the  autocracy, 
by  hunger,  and  by  previous  alcoholism,  the  physical  and  psychical 
health  of  the  people  could  not  resist  these  three  terrible  shocks. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  year  19 10,  at  the  Congress  of  Russian 
Physicians,  a  report  was  read  relating  to  the  numerous  cases  of 
neurasthenia  observable  among  the  masses.     This  report,  founded 
upon  precise  facts  and   figures,  demonstrated  the    falsity  of  the 
common    opinion     that    neurasthenia    was    practically    confined 
to    the    upper  classes.      In    Russia,    stated    the    report,  there    is 
an    extreme    development    of   neurasthenia    among    the   workers 
and   the   peasants.      Having  compared   the  data  for  Russia  with 
those  for  other  countries,  the  author  of  the  report  concluded  that 
Russia,  by  the  number  of  its  workers  and  peasants  attacked  by 
neurasthenia,  occupies,  if  not  the  first  place,  at  least  one  ot  the 
first  places  in  Europe.     "  The  propagation  of  this  neurasthenia  is 
explained  by  the  political  yoke,  by  famine,  and  by  a  superfluity  of 
population.  ...  At  present  it  is  indispensable  to  let  the  people 
breathe  a  little,  at  least  for  a  time." 

As  a  proof  of  the  disorganization  of  popular  life  we  have 
suicide,  which  assumes  the  character  of  an  epidemic.  At  the 
Congress  above  mentioned  it  was  demonstrated  that  between 
1905  and  1909  there  were  in  Russia  more  than  45,000  suicides^ 


292  MODERN  RUSSIA 

and  that  the  years  when  the  reaction  was  at  its  apogee,  the  years 
1908  and  1909,  were  the  most  fatal.  In  St.  Petersburg,  in  1904, 
427  suicides  were  reported;  in  1905,  354;  in  1906,  532;  in 
1907,  716;  in  1908,  1,408;  in  1909,  1,438.  "  These  figures," 
writes  a  publicist,  "tell  us  that  during  the  tumultuous  years  0/ 
1905  and  1906  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Petersburg  were  living  three 
or  four  times  better  than  during  the  years  that  followed,  for  the 
idea  of  suicide  came  to  them  three  or  four  times  less  often  than 
it  did  later."  A  melancholy  profusion  of  suicides  was  also  observed 
in  Odessa  and  in  Moscow.  In  Odessa  there  were  256  suicides  in 
1905  and  642  in  1908  ;  in  Moscow,  174  in  1906  and  614  in  1908. 

Suicides  caused  by  hunger  and  poverty  were  the  most 
numerous.  However,  there  were  great  numbers  of  suicides 
which  were  due  to  moral  motives.  Here  is  an  extract  from  a 
letter  written  before  death  by  a  young  student  of  twenty  years 
in  Odessa  : 

"To  live  as  I  would,  now,  is  impossible,  and  live  as  it  is 
possible  I  cannot.  ...  I  cannot  witness  atrocities  and  suffering, 
cannot  hear  the  complaints  and  the  sobs  of  the  oppressed,  and  at 
the  same  time  feel  my  impotence  to  solace,  however  little,  this 
horror  that  is  life.  And  I  am  going  out  of  life,  for  there  is 
nothing  to  live  for." 

Such  human  documents  abound.  It  is  strange,  but  it  is 
especially  the  very  young  who  kill  themselves  in  Russia.  Of  one 
thousand  suicides  in  Moscow  during  the  years  1908  and  1909 
there  were — 


45  of  persons  aged  from  8  to  14  years 

381 

15  ..  20   „ 

179 

21  „  25   „ 

134 

26  „  30   „ 

117 

31  ..  40   ,> 

73 

41  »  50  „ 

and  7 1  were  of  persons  aged  more  than  50  years. 

Suicide  has  become  the  "  malady  of  youth  "  in  Russia.  At 
one  time  a  special  Commission  was  instructed  by  the  Ministry 
of  Public  Instruction  to  inquire  into  the  causes  of  suicide  among 


AFTER    THE  REVOLUTION  293 

the  pupils  of  the  public  schools,  and  a  number  of  societies  were 
formed  with  a  view  to  preventing  these  suicides  of  children. 

A  little  boy  of  eight  years,  a  little  girl  of  ten,  killed  themselves 
because  "  it  was  difficult  to  live,"  because  "  there  was  nothing 
to  live  for."  .  .  .  The  Angel  of  Death  seems  to  hover  above 
Russia  and  to  cut  down  with  his  mortal  breath  the  freshest  of 
our  flowers.  .  .  . 

"The  true  reaction  is  over.  And,  distant  as  yet,  already  foams 
the  crest  of  that  wave  which  will  sweep  us  away  anew.  The 
aspect  of  Russia  is  melancholy,  her  business  affairs  are  insignificant 
or  unfavourable,  but  something  already  begins  to  quiver,  to  come 
to  life.  It  is  a  joyful  call  towards  a  fresh  and  a  sore  revolutionary 
labour." 

So,  in  October,  191 1,  the  actual  situation  of  Russia  was 
described  by  Maxim  Gorky.  It  was  the  truth.  The  year  1909 
was  the  culmination  of  the  social  and  psychical  reaction,  and  to- 
day we  may  observe  the  proofs  of  a  fresh  rebirth.  It  could  not 
be  otherwise.  If  the  phenomena  of  1908  and  1909  had  continued 
it  would  have  meant  that  the  Russian  people  was  in  a  state  of 
decadence,  ready  to  expire.  And  the  Russian  people,  or  rather 
the  peoples  of  Russia,  possess  too  great  a  reserve  of  strength  to 
die  thus.  Moral  and  intellectual  decomposition  cannot  con- 
taminate all  the  sources  of  the  psychical  life  of  the  people,  and 
the  material  blows  of  the  reaction,  while  they  wounded  and 
tortured  '"  atrociously,  could  not  batter  the  mind  of  the  people 
into  insensibility.  Suddenly,  after  a  slight  abatement  of  the 
economic  crisis  (in  19 10)  the  proletariat — which,  thanks  to 
historic  conditions,  is  in  Russia  the  advance-guard  of  those  who 
fight  for  liberty — was  once  more  astir.  Then  the  old  economic 
and  political  organizations  reappeared,  and  there  was  a  sudden 
volte-face  of  the  intellectual  middle  classes  ;  the  wave  of  sexuality 
and  mysticism  swept  on  and  away,  leaving  the  mind  to  turn 
to  economic,  social,  and  political  questions.  Then,  as  often 
happens,  a  chance  shock  helped  to  reveal  the  instability  of  the 
situation  and  the  imminent  need  of  radical  reforms. 


294  MODERN  RUSSIA 

This  shock  was  the  death  of  Tolstoy.  The  death  of  him  who 
had  always  preached  "  non-resistance  to  evil "  produced  a  pro- 
found impression  upon  Russian  society,  and  was  the  pretext  for 
manifestations  directed  against  the  death  penalty  and  an  auto- 
cratic system  sustained  only  by  the  gallows.  Then,  despite  the 
police,  over  and  over  again  numerous  meetings  were  organized 
of  St.  Petersburg  students  and  artisans  and  others.  At  these 
meetings  all  was  as  before  the  reaction  ;  the  same  faith  in  victory 
was  there,  the  same  aspirations  toward  liberty. 

The  revolution,  if  it  gave  Russia  practically  nothing  in  the 
way  of  a  tangible  conquest,  did  at  least  cause  an  intellectual 
upheaval.  In  1905  the  poor  stricken  illiterate  people  ceased 
to  regard  itself  as  a  herd  of  cattle.  The  millions  of  books  and 
pamphlets  scattered  throughout  Russia  during  the  revolution 
were  not  without  fruit.  They  drew  the  Russian  people,  at  least 
in  thought,  a  little  closer  to  the  great  family  of  enlightened 
European  peoples.  And  in  one  day  this  thought  was  transformed 
into  reality. 

"  One  can  do  anything  with  bayonets  except  sit  down  on 
them,"  said  Talleyrand.  And  as  the  Russian  despotism  is  no 
longer  supported  by  anything  better  than  bayonets,  we  may  say 
that  the  liberation  of  Russia  is  not,  as  one  of  our  proverbs  has 
it,  "behind  the  mountains." ^ 

'  This  volume  was  already  completed  when  the  news  came  to  hand 
of  the  shooting  down  of  the  workers  in  tiic  gold-mines  of  Lena  (Siberia), 
of  the  numerous  strikes  of  protest  provoked  by  this  massacre,  of  the 
mutiny  of  the  engineer  battalions  at  Tashkcnd,  and  the  disturbance 
among  the  sailors  of  the  BUick  Sea  and  Baltic  fleets.  All  this  demon- 
strates the  instability  of  the  present  regime  in  Russia  and  the  approach 
of  a  new  revolutionarv  storm. 


BOOK  V 


THE     NATIONAL     QUESTION     AND     THE 
RELIGIOUS  QUESTION 


CHAPTER   I 

THE    NATIONAL    CONFLICT    AND    THE    UNITY    OF    THE 

STATE 

I.  Poland  and  Russia.     II.  The  Finnish  question.    III.  The  nationalist 
policy  and  the  unity  of  the  State. 


In  the  chapter  dealing  with  the  "  Races  "  of  Russia  I  remarked 
more  than  once  that  the  idea  of  "race"  or  "nation,"  far  from 
possessing  any  absolute  or  metaphysical  meaning,  is  the  imprint 
of  a  conventional  and  historical  character.  The  same  may  be 
said  of  the  national  question.  The  history  of  the  national 
problem,  or  problems,  in  Russia  confirms  this  statement  in 
a  striking  manner. 

Let  us,  for  instance,  take  the  Polish  question,  which  not  so 
long  ago  disturbed  all  Europe  by  its  international  significance, 
and  is  to-day  reviving  under  a  new  aspect. 

Let  us  take  the  facts.  When,  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  after  the  tragedy  of  the  partition  of  ancient  Poland,  the 
Russian  Empire  appropriated  a  great  part  of  the  latter,  Poland 
was  a  feudal  oligarchy  with  an  almost  natural  economy.  In  the 
thirteenth  century,  it  is  true,  the  production  of  artisans  had 
seemed  likely  to  serve  as  the  basis  of  an  industrial  development, 
but  in  the  seventeenth  century  no  trace  of  this  attempt  was  left, 
and  all  Poland  was  given  over  to  agriculture.     The  attempts  on 

the  part  of  the    Polish  magnates,  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth 

297 


298  MODERN  RUSSIA 

century,  to  introduce  the  arts  of  manufacture  into  Poland  were 
a  complete  fiasco  ;  the  anarchical  feudalism  of  ancient  Poland 
was  far  too  unfavourable  to  capitalist  industry,  which  requires 
a  centralized  system  of  government. 

Industry  did  not  exist  in  Poland,  and  the  rural  economy  was 
decadent.  In  the  fifteenth  century  there  was  a  great  demand  for 
Polish  wheat  on  the  markets  of  Europe,  and  this  provoked  an 
extensive  economy  in  the  latlfundia^  followed  by  the  exhaustion 
of  the  soil  and  an  extreme  exploitation  of  the  serfs.  External 
complications — war  and  the  "Continental  system  "of  Napoleon 
— led  to  a  fall  of  the  exports  of  Polish  wheat  and  a  diminution 
of  the  returns  of  the  rural  economy.  The  suppression  of  serfdom 
(1807)  finally  ruined  the  economic  power  of  the  Polish  shiiakhta 
(the  nobility),  and  decreased  their  political  importance.  The 
Russian  Government  profited  by  this  process  to  oppose  new 
social  elements  to  the  moribund  shiiakhta.  By  a  series  of  ukases 
published  between  18 15  and  1830  it  contributed  to  the  industrial 
development  of  Poland.  As  the  result  of  the  development  of 
capitalism  a  new  social  class,  the  bouj-geoisie^  rapidly  filled  the 
place  of  the  old  nobility,  and  there  was  a  corresponding  change 
of  political  ideology. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  Russia  was  con- 
suming two-thirds  of  all  the  produce  of  Poland. 

In  pouring  its  merchandise  into  the  Russian  markets  Poland, 
or  rather  the  Polish  bourgeoisie^  Jiad  to  abandon  the  old  dreams 
of  political  independence.  The  appearance  on  the  Russian 
market  of  Polish  fabrics,  of  Polish  coal  and  iron,  was  a  veri- 
table Finis  Polonice^  for  it  served  as  the  unshakeable  foundation 
material  of  political  unity  with  Russia.  Even  in  1831,  during 
a  Polish  insurrection,  Nicolas  I  remarked  :  "  Having  won  their 
independence,  the  Poles  would  be  in  a  difficult  position.  What 
can  they  do  without  seaports  ?  Where  can  they  get  rid  of  the 
products  of  their  industry  once  Russian  markets  are  closed  to 
them  ?  " 

The  profound  revolution  to  which  the  political  ideology  of 
Polish  "society"  was    subjected  under  the  stress  of  the  econo- 


THE   NATIONAL   CONFLICT  299 

mic  development  which  fused  Poland  and  Russia  into  one  was 
brilliantly  demonstrated  by  the  welcome  proffered  to  Nicolas 
II  in  1896,  at  the  time  of  his  visit  to  Warsaw,  The  indus- 
trial and  intellectual  bourgeoisie  of  Warsaw  organized  demon- 
strations in  honour  of  the  Tsar.  The  children  of  those  who 
died  in  1863  fighting  for  the  independence  of  their  country 
promised  fidelity  to  the  Russian  monarchy. 

How  the  Polish  bourgeoisie  regards  the  national  problem  we 
may  discover  by  considering  the  position  of  the  Polish  h/o  (circle) 
in  the  Duma.  In  1907  forty-six  Polish  deputies  presented  to 
the  Duma  a  project  of  autonomy  for  Poland.  In  this  project 
was  the  phrase  :  "The  kingdom  of  Poland  constitutes  an  insepar- 
able part  of  the  Russian  Empire."  (See  Project  of  Jutono?ny  for 
the  Kingdom  of  Poland,  Article  II,  St.  Petersburg,  1907,  State 
Press. ) 

While  they  regard  the  existence  of  a  Polish  Diet  as  indispensable, 
the  Polish  deputies  claim  for  this  Diet  only  limited  legislative 
powers,  and  are  ready  to  declare  as  beyond  its  competence  all 
questions  relating  to  foreign  politics.  State  loans.  State  defence, 
customs  tariffs,  post  and  telegraphs,  etc.  Far  from  being  revolu- 
tionary, in  their  project  of  autonomy  they  lay  great  stress  on  the 
prerogatives  of  the  Imperial  power. 

It  is  a  characteristic  fact  that  this  project  was  signed  as  readily 
by  representatives,  of  the  nobility  as  by  those  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
The  Polish  nobles,  who  have  themselves  become  bourgeois,  seem  to 
have  forgotten  their  dreams  of  independence. 

But  here  is  a  still  more  interesting  fact :  the  class-conscious 
Polish  proletariat,  the  most  revolutionary  element  of  modern  Polish 
society,  is  equally  opposed  to  Polish  independence.  However,  in 
opposition  to  the  bourgeoisie,  it  strives  not  for  a  constitutional 
monarchy,  but  for  a  republic,  and  in  this  struggle  it  stands  with 
the  proletariat  ot  the  other  nations  of  Russia.  (Polish  Social 
Democracy,  like  Lettish  Social  Democracy  and  Jewish  Social 
Democracy,  forms  part  of  the  Social  Democratic  party  of  Russia.) 
Theorists  of  the  Polish  Social-Democratic  party,  such  as  Rosa 
Luxembourg,  for  example,  demonstrate  that  independence  is  not 


300  MODERN  RUSSIA 

to  be  desired  for  Poland,  as  it  would  be  injurious  to  the  interests 
of  the  Polish  proletariat.  In  general  the  Polish  Social-Democrats 
evoke  the  idea  of  class  at  the  expense  of  the  national  idea.  Only 
one  relatively  insignificant  group  of  Polish  Socialists,  the  Utopian 
Socialists,  resembling  by  their  Terrorist  programme  and  theory 
the  Russian  Revolutionary  Socialist  party,  aspire  to  the  nationalist 
ideal  of  an  independent  Poland. 


II 

There  is  another  example  illustrating  the  historic  evolution  of 
the  nationalist  conflict.  It  is  that  of  Finland,  and  we  must  con- 
sider the  inner  reasons  vi'hich  led  the  Russian  monarchy  to  change 
its  policy  in  respect  of  the  Finnish  question. 

The  annexation  of  Finland  to  Russia  in  1808  w^as  the  result  of 
an  understanding  between  the  Russian  Government  and  a  portion 
of  the  Finnish  nobility.  Russia,  in  order  to  render  her  northern 
frontier  more  secure,  ejected  the  Swedes  from  Finland.  Upon 
this  the  Finnish  nobles  replied  by  demanding  a  Russian  pro- 
tectorate. Russia  established  the  protectorate,  but  left  Finland 
an  almost  complete  political  independence,  with  a  Parliament. 
Under  Alexander  II,  Finland  even  had  her  own  army  and 
could  mint  money.  More  than  once  Alexander  I  and  Alexander 
11  swore  fidelity  to  the  Finnish  Constitution. 

From  an  economic  point  of  view,  during  the  first  part  of 
the  nineteenth  century  Finland  was  a  market  for  Russian  corn, 
for  the  poverty  of  the  soil  of  Finland  makes  it  impossible  for 
that  country  to  provide  sufficient  grain  for  her  population. 
Thanks  to  geographical  proximity  and  convenience  of  commu- 
nication, the  producers  of  Russian  wheat  had  no  competition 
to  fear  in  the  Finnish  market.  The  fact  of  this  outlet  for 
Russian  wheat  explains  to  a  certain  degree  the  "  liberal "  con- 
duct of  the  Russian  Government  of  this  period  in  respect  of 
the  Finnish  Constitution. 

During  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  relations 


THE   NATIONAL   CONFLICT  301 

between  Finland  and  Russia  changed.  During  this  period 
Russia,  from  the  agricultural  country  which  she  was,  began 
to  transform  herself  into  an  industrial  country  and  to  seek 
markets  for  her  products.  Naturally  her  glance  quickly  fell  on 
Finland.  But  Finland  also  was  developing  a  national  industry 
and  was  exporting  every  year  more  than  ^1,400,000  worth  of 
manufactured  articles,  and  it  was  impossible  for  Russian  products 
to  resist  foreign  competition  on  the  Finnish  market,  for,  possessing 
fiscal  independence,  Finland  would  hear  nothing  of  protectionism. 
Moreover,  thanks  to  the  absence  of  custom-houses  between  Russia 
and  Finland,  products  imported  from  Europe  finally  appeared  on 
the  Russian  markets. 

Being  technically  extremely  backward,  Russian  capitalism, 
incapable  of  competing  with  Finnish  and  foreign  products  in  a 
free-trade  market,  promptly  demanded  special  measures  of 
defence  from  the  Russian  Government. 

In  1885  a  rigorous  customs  frontier  was  established  between 
Russia  and  Finland,  and  the  merchants  of  Finland  were  bur- 
dened with  customs  duties.  But  all  these  measures  led  to 
nothing  ;  after  a  momentary  fall  the  Finnish  exports  reappeared 
triumphantly  in  the  Russian  markets  (in  1896  Finland  ex- 
ported to  Russia  more  than  ^1,120,000  of  merchandise),  while 
Russian  capital  experienced  nothing  but  loss  in  Finland  (between 
1876  and  i8g6  the  Russian  exports  to  Finland  fell  from 
j^3,ooo,ooo  to  ^2,200,000  annually),  a  loss  which  was  highly 
profitable  to  Germany  and  England. 

The  Russian  capitalists  and  the  Russian  Government  then 
decided  to  conquer  the  markets  of  Finland  by  force.  To  achieve 
this  object  it  was  resolved  to  transform  independent  Finland, 
united  federally  to  Russia,  into  a  province  of  Russia.  The  Tsar, 
after  swearing  fidelity  to  the  Constitution  of  Finland,  suppressed 
the  Finnish  army  and  authorized  a  number  of  measures  tending 
toward  the  Russification   of  the  country. 

After  a  hundred  years  of  peace  between  the  two  countries, 
suddenly  arose  the  "  P  innish  question,"  which  to-day  occupies  the 
attention  of  all   the    civilized  world. 


302  MODERN  RUSSIA 


III 


A  comparison  of  the  respective  situations  of  Poland  and  Finland 
enables  us  to  grasp  the  material  and  economic  basis  of  the  national 
and  historical  connections  of  the  national  question.  In  Poland 
we  observe  a  preponderance  of  centripetal  forces  connecting 
Polish  production  with  the  Russian  markets.  In  Finland  the 
centrifugal  forces  balance  the  centripetal  and  sometimes  overcome 
them.  While  in  Poland  the  ruling  classes  and  the  proletariat  have 
abandoned  the  ideal  of  independence,  in  Finland  that  ideal  animates 
all  classes  of  society.  As  for  the  other  regions  of  the  Empire,  we 
may  assert  that  wherever  capitalism  has  already  penetrated  it  is 
creating  similar  solid  foundations  for  the  elaboration  of  the  political 
unity  of  the  State.  The  Letts  of  the  Baltic  provinces  and  the 
Georgians  of  the  Caucasus — two  nations  playing  an  important 
part  in  the  political  life  of  the  Empire — are  equally  anti-separatist. 

The  great  centres  of  industry  and  commerce  are  organs  of 
denationalization,  great  cauldrons  which  transform  a  mixture  of 
varied  tribes  and  races  into  a  uniform  mass,  comprising  the 
bourgeoisie  on  the  one  hand  and  the  proletariat  on  the  other.  But 
although  the  internal  composition  of  the  capitalist  culture  of  to- 
day is  cosmopolitan,  that  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  it  is  obliged, 
in  its  own  development,  to  make  use  of  certain  national  forces,  of 
which  the  most  important  is  the  national  tongue.  The  school, 
the  library,  the  bookseller's,  the  Press,  the  theatre,  public  meetings 
— all  these  indispensable  elements  of  modern  life  must  develop 
in  a  national  environment,  under  conditions  of  historical  succession. 
In  this  way  the  national  question  could  not  be  abolished  by  capi- 
talism. Capitalism  has  merely  changed  the  problem  of  political 
independence  into  the  problem  of  autonomous  national  culture. 
But  the  question  of  autonomous  culture,  although  imbued  with  local 
characteristics,  but  based  upon  universal  capitalism^  is  far  from 
opposing  the  unity  of  the  Russian  State,  and  even  guarantees  the 
latter  more  securely  than  any  mechanical  and  artificial  denational- 
ization which  depends  upon  police  measures. 


THE  NATIONAL   CONFLICT  303 

The  Russian  Government  in  this  case  also  would  not  listen  to 
the  demands  of  reason.  Instead  of  seeking  to  render  all  the  various 
peoples  inhabiting  Russia  collaborators  in  one  free  task,  it  so  feared 
"  separatism  "  that  it  thought  only  of  stifling  all  national  aspira- 
tions. When  in  1864  and  1870  it  promulgated  the  laws  relating 
to  the  zemstvos  and  municipalities,  the  Poles,  Livonians,  White 
Russians,  a  large  proportion  of  the  Ukranians,  the  Georgians,  the 
Armenians,  and  the  whole  population  of  Siberia  and  Central  Asia, 
were  deprived  of  the  right  of  local  self-government.  In  this 
manner  to  this  day  the  local  life  of  the  "  foreign  "  provinces  is 
subjected  to  the  exclusive  rule  of  the  bureaucracy.  With  the 
object  of  "  Russification  "  the  Government  attempted  to  establish 
Russian  landowners  in  Poland,  in  the  Caucasus,  and  in  other 
extremities  of  the  Empire.  By  this  attempt  the  bureaucrats  and 
the  nobles  profited  considerably,  as  they  received  for  nothing, 
or  next  to  nothina;,  laro-e  tracts  of  land  taken  from  the  local 
populations.  But  they  introduced  into  these  regions  no  rational 
system  of  economy,  contenting  themselves  with  employing  the 
land  thus  acquired  as  the  basis  of  speculation.  In  this  way 
enormous  quantities  of  real  estate  fell  into  the  hands  of  adventurers. 
As  for  "non-Russian"  subjects,  they  were  in  many  districts 
forbidden  to  buy  land. 

Always  with  a  view  to  the  "  Russification  "  of  the  Empire,  the 
Government  took  energetic  measures  in  the  domain  of  public 
education.  The  Ukranians,  the  White  Russians,  the  Livonians, 
the  Poles,  etc.,  were  deprived  of  the  right  of  teaching  their 
children  their  own  mother-tongue.  In  all  schools  of  the  Empire 
teaching  in  the  Russian  language  is  compulsory,  that  is,  in  the 
most  literary  form  of  the  Great  Russian  dialect.  The  study  ot 
this  literary  language  presents  great  difficulties  even  to  the  peasants 
of  Great  Russia,  so  greatly  does  it  differ  from  the  current  language 
of  the  people.  The  publication  of  schoolbooks  in  the  mother- 
tongue  is  strictly  prohibited.  The  Press,  the  theatre,  and  other 
manifestations  of  national  culture  are  constantly  the  objects  of 
Governmental  prosecutions.  In  Poland  not  even  the  signs  of 
shops  may  be  written  in  Polish. 


304  MODERN  RUSSIA 

But  the  Jews  are  the  worst  sufferers  from  Governmental  repres- 
sion. In  the  eighteenth  century  and  early  in  the  nineteenth  the 
Russian  Government  regarded  the  Jews  as  the  most  useful  element 
of  the  nation,  and  invited  Jewish  merchants  and  artisans  to 
migrate  into  Russia.  The  economic  culture  of  South-western 
and  Western  Russia  is  largely  due  to  the  Russian  Jews.  Then 
the  Governmental  policy  in  respect  of  the  Jews  gradually  began 
to  change  and  to  assume  a  reactionary  character,  until  the  Jewish 
question  finally  became  a  hideous  bleeding  wound.  As  in  the 
time  of  the  Inquisition  the  Ghetto  still  exists  in  Russia,  the 
"  boundaries  of  demarcation  "  which  mark  the  quarters  in  which 
the  Jews  may  inhabit.  Considerable  obstacles  confront  the  Jew 
desirous  of  obtaining  education,  for  there  is  a  limit  to  the  number 
of  Jewish  pupils  which  may  be  accepted  either  by  a  secondary 
school  or  a  faculty.  In  the  Universities  of  Moscow  and  St. 
Petersburg,  for  instance,  students  of  the  "  Judaic  religion " 
may  not  constitute  more  than  3  per  cent,  of  the  total  number 
of  students.  A  host  of  other  no  less  burdensome  regulations 
cripple  the  Russian  Jew. 

In  spite  of  everything,  the  Jews  have  given  Russia  much. 
Among  the  most  talented  representatives  of  Russian  poetry, 
music,  art,  and  politics  it  is  by  no  means  rare  to  encounter 
Jewish  names. 

Like  the  Jewish  race,  all  the  other  "  nations  "  of  Russia  give 
proof,  despite  Governmental  repression,  of  a  great  reserve  of  vital 
forces.  The  national  literatures — Polish,  Ukranian,  Armenian, 
Lettish — so  little  known  to  the  European  reader,  have  attained 
a  high  degree  of  development,  and  are  so  many  pearls  of  price 
amid  the  wealth  of  the  world's  human  genius. 

To-day  the  national  problem  is  becoming  more  and  more 
acute.  The  revolutionary  outbreaks  of  1905  and  1906  con- 
tributed to  awaken  the  sentiment  of  nationality  among  the 
various  peoples  of  the  Empire,  and  the  policy  of  the  Government 
merely  stimulates  this  sentiment. 

To  the  ideal  of  a  democratic  revolution  sustained  by  the  revo- 
lutionary elements  of  the  various  nations  the  Government  opposes 


THE   NATIONAL   CONFLICT  305 

that  of  a  conservative  nationalism  incarnated  in  such  pompous 
formulae  as  "  Great  Russia,"  the  "  Russia  of  Russias,"  etc.  In 
reality  this  conservative  nationalism  diminishes  Great  Russia,  by 
limiting  it  to  a  small  group  of  nobles  of  Great  Russian  origin. 
The  "  Russia  of  Russias  "  is  a  foolish  watchword,  for  those  whom 
the  Government  regards  as  Russians — the  original  inhabitants  of 
Great  Russia — constitute  only  one-third  of  the  whole  population 
of  the  Empire.  Moreover,  of  this  third  even  the  Government 
neglects  the  great  proportion  composed  of  peasants  and  workers, 
to  consider  only  the  interests  of  the  nobles  and  the  bureaucracy, 
and  sometimes  those  of  capital.  Erected  upon  so  narrow  a  basis, 
the  Governmental  nationalism  of  to-day  merely  clashes  with  the 
vital  elements  of  society,  and  is  of  a  fundamentally  negative 
character.  Thus  our  modern  nationalists  have  recently  expounded 
a  proposal  with  a  view  to  "  nationalizing  the  wheat-trade,"  that 
is  to  say  of  centralizing  it,  or  concentrating  it,  by  legislative  means, 
in  the  hands  of  purely  Russian  merchants.  Naturally,  this  project 
has  merely  disturbed  the  wheat-market — not  only  in  Russia  but 
abroad,  the  foreign  houses  being  in  touch  with  our  exporters — 
and  could  not  be  realized.  However,  the  experimenters  in 
nationalism  continued  their  dreams,  and  many  other  projects  of 
a  similar  kind  are  already  realized,  or  are  on  the  point  of  being 
so.  Thus,  for  example,  not  long  ago  a  law  was  promulgated 
relating  to  the  introduction  of  the  zemstvo  in  the  Governments 
of  South-western  Russia — Governments  whose  population  is 
composed  of  Ukranians,  Great  Russians,  Poles,  Czechs,  and 
Jews.  This  law,  not  content  with  artificially  protecting  the 
interests  of  "  Russians "  to  the  detriment  of  those  of  "  non- 
Russians,"  also  introduced  into  the  local  self-governments  the 
system  of  national  "  wards,"  or  curice^  thus  augmenting  the 
differences  dividing  the  divers  nations  instead  of  seeking  to  lessen 
them.  Still  more  strange  were  the  projected  laws  which  the 
Government  presented  to  the  third  Duma,  which  related  to 
Poland  and  Finland.  These  projects  reveal  the  Government's 
desire  totally  to  deprive  Finland  of  her  Constitution,  to  "separate" 
from  Finland,  with  a  view  to  its  "  Russification,"  a  portion  of 

20 


3o6  MODERN  RUSSIA 

the  province  of  Viborg  in  order  to  add  it  to  the  Government 
of  St.  Petersburg  ;  the  Government  also  wished  to  perform  a 
similar  surgical  operation  upon  Poland,  by  removing  from  it  one 
canton,  that  of  Khelm,  in  the  Government  of  lyublin. 

What  would  you  say,  reader,  were  the  French  Government, 
considering  the  interests  of  "  true  Frenchmen "  as  "  insuffi- 
ciently defended  "  in  Brittany,  to  request  the  chamber  of  deputies 
to  remove  two  cantons  from  Brittany  in  order  to  unite  them 
to  the  department  of  the  Seine  ?  Yet  sucli  a  proposal  would 
be  quite  as  reasonable  as  those  which  delight  the  minds  of  our 
"nationalists."  But  while  in  France  such  a  project  would 
merely  rouse  anxious  doubts  as  to  the  mental  condition  of  its 
authors,  in  Russia  it  is  seriously  discussed  and  supported  by  a 
great  majority  of  the  nationalists  of  the  third  Duma. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE   RELIGIOUS  QUESTION 

I.  The  Religious  Problem  in  Russia.     II.  Schism.     III.  The  Sects. 


In  Russia  the  national  problem  is  complicated  by  the  religious 
question.  The  division  of  the  population  corresponds  to  a  certain 
point  with  the  national  divisions  :  the  Jevi^s  profess  the  Judaic 
faith,  the  Poles  and  the  Lithuanians  are  Catholics,  the  Armenians 
belong  to  the  Graeco-Armenian  Church,  the  Letts  are  Protestant, 
while  the  Great  Russians,  Ukranians,  and  a  large  portion  of  the 
White  Russians  are  Orthodox.  But  while  the  majority  of  those 
belonsina:  to  the  Orthodox  faith  are  members  of  the  "  domi- 
nant"  Church,  that  is,  of  the  official  Church,  the  minority  are 
adherents  of  the  "  Old  Orthodox "  religion,  or  one  of  the 
"schisms."     Besides  these  there  are  various  other  sects. 

The  official  data  of  the  religious  divisions  of  Russia  are  very 
far  from  the  reality.  Before  the  year  1905,  when  the  revolu- 
tion wrung  from  the  Government  the  first  laws  relating  to 
religious  tolerance,  there  was  no  religious  liberty  known  in 
Russia.  Any  departure  from  the  Orthodox  Church  was  re- 
garded as  a  grave  offence,  and  many  persons  were  rorced  to 
hide  their  true  religious  opinions  and  to  pass  for  good  Orthodox 
Christians.  In  reality,  by  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  a 
large  proportion  of  the  intellectuals  and  industrial  workers  were 
either  atheists  or  indifferent,  and  many  of  those  who   belonged 

307 


308  MODERN  RUSSIA 

formally  to  the  Orthodox  Church  practised  other  religions.  The 
Orthodox  Church  has  always  given  proof  of  a  great  missionary 
zeal ;  but  the  intellectual  level  of  its  priests  being  of  the  lowest, 
it  was  able  to  "  convert  "  infidels  only  by  means  of  external 
measures  based  upon  brute  force.  At  the  moment  when 
Christianity  was  introduced  into  Russia  a  certain  refrain  became 
popular  among  the  Russian  Slavs  :  "They  baptized  with  steel 
and  fire."  As  the  Russian  State  grew  greater  and  greater,  the 
zeal  of  the  Orthodox  Church  was  able  to  assert  itself  upon  fresh 
subjects  :  the  Tartars  of  the  Volga  and  the  Crimea,  the  Finns 
of  the  Volga,  the  mountaineers  of  the  Caucasus,  the  Buriats, 
Yakuts,  and  other  peoples  of  Siberia.  Among  all  these  peoples 
the  Orthodox  Church  has  succeeded  in  "  making "  numerous 
"Christians."  But  very  often  the  "Christianity"  of  these 
"  recent  converts "  is  merely  fictitious  :  thus,  the  Yakuts  of 
Siberia  are  all  "  Orthodox,"  yet  they  are  all  still  addicted  to 
pagan  Shamanism,  while  many  other  "  converted "  peoples 
have  never  ceased  to  observe  the  rites  of  paganism,  Buddhism, 
Mohammedanism,  etc. 

Still  less  fruitful  has  been  the  missionary  activity  of  the 
Orthodox  Church  in  the  West  of  Russia,  where  it  comes  into 
conflict  with  Catholicism,  The  principal  field  of  conflict 
between  the  two  Churches  is  the  regions  inhabited  by  the 
Lithuanians,  the  White  Russians,  and  the  Little  Russians.  So 
long  as  Catholic  Poland  was  an  independent  kingdom  the 
Orthodox  Church  was  utterly  powerless  there,  for  even  in  the 
sixteenth  century  the  Orthodox  population  of  Western  Russia, 
including  the  clergy,  was  wholly  subject  to  the  intellectual 
influence  of  Catholicism.  \n  this  manner  arose  the  uniattvo^ 
a  religion  half-way  between  the  Orthodox  and  the  Catholic 
(from  ««/)»«  =  union),  a  religion  which  recognizes  both  the  rites 
and  dogmas  of  the  Orthodox  faith  and  the  authority  of  the 
Pope. 

These  hybrid  religions  caused  a  desperate  struggle  between 
the  two  Churches.  As  soon  as  the  political  conditions  allowed, 
the    Orthodox    Church    began    to   convert    by  brute  force    the 


THE  RELIGIOUS   QUESTION  309 

uniatSy  and  even  the  Catholics,  setting  about  this  "  delicate " 
spiritual  operation  in  the  most  material  manner.  The  police 
forbade  the  peasants  to  enter  the  Catholic  churches  and  "  re- 
duced "  them  to  entering  the  Orthodox  churches.  For  any 
Catholic  propaganda  the  punishment  was  pitiless  banishment 
from  the  West  of  Russia.  Catholic  or  uniat  parents  saw  their 
children  rescued  [sic)  from  them,  so  that  the  Government  might 
bring  them  up  in  the  principles  of  the  Orthodox  religion. 

Despite  all  these  measures,  when  in  April,  1905,  the  Govern- 
ment promulgated  a  decree  establishing  religious  toleration  in 
Russia,  all  the  fictitious  Orthodox  Christians  returned  to  their 
old  religions.  Very  interesting  in  this  connection  is  the  con- 
fession contained  in  a  report  by  the  chief  procurator  of  the 
Holy  Synod,  dated  1910  : 

"  Since  religious  tolerance  has  existed  in  Russia  the  Orthodox 
Church  has  lost  many  disciples.  .  .  .  According  to  the  informa- 
tion of  the  central  management  of  the  Holy  Synod,  the  majority 
of  those  who  abandon  the  Orthodox  Church  promptly  embrace 
either  the  Catholic  faith,  or  the  Mohammedan,  or  the  Protestant 
religion."  Between  the  17th  of  April,  1905,  and  December, 
1907,  in  9  dioceses  of  the  South-west,  170,936  persons  left  the 
Orthodox  Church  for  the  Catholic  ;  in  14  dioceses  of  the  Volga, 
the  Urals,  and  Siberia,  36,299  persons  embraced  Mohammedanism, 
and  in  4  dioceses  of  the  Baltic  provinces  and  Olonetz,  10,964 
persons  adopted  the  Protestant  faith.  Thus,  in  two  and  a  half 
years  218,209  persons  abandoned  the  Orthodox  faith.  For  lack 
of  parishioners,  numerous  parishes  had  to  be  suppressed.  This 
is  how  the  chief  procurator  of  the  Holy  Synod  explains  these 
numerous  defections  : 

"The  principal  and  usual  reason  for  this  apostasy  of  the 
masses  consists  in  the  fact  that  even  before  the  17th  of  April, 
1905,  the  majority  of  those  masses  belonged  to  the  Orthodox 
Church  only  nominally,  continuing  to  put  their  faith  in  some 
other  religion,  often  in  that  of  their  fathers." 


,io  MODERN  RUSSIA 


II 


Tlie  raskol — that  is  to  say,  the  schism — and  other  sects  which 
have  issued  from  Orthodoxy  itself,  are  still  more  important  rivals 
of  the  Orthodox  Church. 

The    raskol  appeared    in    Russia    in    the    second    half  of   the 
seventeenth  century,  when,  under  tiie  initiative  of  the  patriarch 
Nikon,   the    task    was    commenced    of   correcting    the    religious 
books,  which  were  much  corrupted  by  almost  illiterate  copyists. 
A  great   proportion    of   the    population   saw    in    this    correction 
of   the    "old"    books    an    abjuration  of  the   true   faith  and    an 
unpardonable  "  innovation."     The  conflict  raised  by  the  disciples 
of  the  "old"  books  and  the  "new"  was  complicated  by  other 
disagreements    over    matters    of     ritual  :     the     official    Church 
demanded  that  the  sign  of  the  cross  should  be  made  with  three 
fingers,    and    the    raskolniki   or    schismatics    wished    to   make   it 
with   two  ;  the  official   clergy  led   processions  round  the  church 
"against  the  sun"  and  the  ro^XW^///  "  according  to  the  sun"; 
the  Russian  Church   wrote  the  word  lisus  (Jesus)  with  two  i\ 
and  the  "Old  Believers"  with  a  single  /,  etc.     These  questions, 
insignificant  in  themselves,   were    enormously  important   to    the 
believers  of  the  time  :    Russian   Orthodoxy   being    in    reality   a 
transformation    of   the    old    paganism,    in    which    the     external 
element  played  a  preponderant  part,  so  that   a   change  of  rites, 
formulae,  and  words  must  have  seemed  a  violation  of  the  majric 
power  of  religion  and  "  the  work  of  Antichrist." 

But  the  raskol  was  not  a  purely  religious  phenomenon.  Its 
scholastic  envelope  merely  served  to  mask  a  profound  social 
and  political  conflict.  The  second  half  of  the  seventeenth 
century  was  a  period  which  saw  Russia  enter  into  close  contact 
with  Europe,  while  the  administration  of  the  State  was  reformed, 
military  and  financial  changes  were  effected,  and  the  way  was 
prepared  for  the  reforms  of  Peter  the  Great.  Having  need  of 
money  for  external  warfare  and  internal  administration,  the 
Government  of  this  period  greatly  increased  the  taxes,  transformed 


THE  RELIGIOUS   QUESTION  311 

the  financial  system,  and  effected  a  fiscal  census  of  the  population. 
Loaded  with  taxes,  the  people  promptly  regarded  the  authors 
of  the  new  measures  with  distrust,  saw  in  the  census  the  sign 
manual  of  Antichrist,  and  regarded  such  foreigners  as  appeared 
at  the  Court  of  Moscow  as  the  servants  and  precursors  of  Anti- 
christ. The  religious  ideology  of  the  raskol — the  defence 
of  the  old  belief — could  not  fail  to  please  the  conserva- 
tive strata  of  society,  the  merchants  and  the  peasants,  the 
most  heavily  taxed  of  all.  The  struggle  of  these  latter  for 
the  "Old  Belief"  was  the  reflection  of  their  political  dis- 
content, a  struggle  against  a  Government  that  protected  the 
"  new  "  orthodoxy. 

With  short  intervals  of  toleration,  the  conflict  between  the 
schismatics  and  the  Government  lasted  for  two  centuries. 

But  all  these  measures,  based  upon  brute  force,  brought  the 
Orthodox  Church  neither  glory  or  profit.  To-day,  despite 
all  the  repression  it  has  endured,  the  raskol  is  endowed  with 
remarkable  vitality,  while  the  ofliicial  Russian  Church  is  merely 
a  dead  and  bureaucratic  and  moribund  institution. 

The  internal  organization  of  the  raskol  has  undergone  a  process 
of  evolution,  like  other  Christian  organisms.  The  democratic 
strata  gradually  lost  their  influence  over  the  life  of  the  organism, 
and  the  management  of  all  the  affairs  of  the  commune  of  the 
raskolniki  finally  fell  into  the  hands  of  rich  merchant  families. 
At  present  it  is  the  old  commercial  houses  of  Moscow  and 
Nijni-Novgorod  that  form  the  vital  centre  of  the  raskol. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  raskol  more  or  less  extreme  and 
more  or  less  moderate  tendencies  were  observable.  For  many 
of  the  raskolniki  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  and  the 
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  were  the  periods  when  the  "  death 
of  the  world  "  was  expected.  They  made  themselves  biers  and 
lay  upon  them,  singing  religious  chants.  Exalted  disciples,  seeing 
that  the  end  of  the  world  delayed,  resolved  voluntarily  to  escape 
from  the  "  reign  of  Antichrist."  There  was  an  epidemic  or 
suicides  by  fire.  By  scores,  by  hundreds,  the  raskolniki  shut 
themselves    in    wooden    coffins    and    burned    themselves.     "  Fire 


312  MODERN  RUSSIA 

clcaiiseth  all  sins.  Useless  to  labour,  to  fast  ;  by  fire  one  enters 
straight  into  Paradise."  "  How  joyful  it  would  be  if  all  the 
city  were  to  burn  !  Children  and  old  men  all  would  escape 
the  imprint  of  the  Antichrist."  Thus  reasoned  the  apostles 
of  death  by  fire,  and  the  figures  show  that  their  arguments  were 
not  always  confined  to  tlie  domain  of  pure  theory  :  for  between 
the  origin  of  the  raskol  in  1567  and  the  end  of  the  seventeenth 
century  no  less   than   20,000  persons   burned  themselves. 

To  the  sect  of  the  "Burners"  we  may  compare  the  sect  01 
the  Beguny^  or  "  Runners,"  known  also  as  the  Stranniki^  or 
"  Travellers."  The  disciples  of  this  sect  also  departed  from 
the  reign  of  the  Antichrist,  escaping  not  into  the  fire  but  into 
the  "  desert  "^ — that  is,  the  marshes  and  forests  of  Northern 
and  North-eastern  Russia.  The  "Runners,"  like  the  "Burners," 
absolutely  denied  the  State  and  the  Church,  and  escaped  from 
them  as  far  as  possible.  The  ideology  of  the  "  Runners  "  was 
the  ideology  of  a  class  which  had  suffered  greatly  from  economic 
poverty  and  the  political  yoke,  but  could  not  bring  itself  to 
face  an  active  struggle.  For  the  "  Runners"  voluntary  escape  to 
a  distance  was  the  sole  issue.  The  sect  of  "  Burners  "  has  been 
extinct  since  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century.  As 
for  the  "  Runners,"  their  sect  still  boasts  of  disciples,  though 
these  are  not  numerous.  But  now  that  economic  and  social 
conditions  are  other  than  they  were  when  the  sect  originated, 
all  that  is  left  of  the  primitive  meaning  of  the  sect  is  purely 
symbolic.  The  "Runners"  run  no  longer,  being  contented 
with  dying  outside  their  own  houses.  At  the  approach  of  death 
a  "  Runner  "  of  our  days  must  repair  to  a  neighbour's  house,  to 
die  there. 

But  all  Russian  sects  do  not  aim  at  such  pessimistic  and 
negative  ideals.  For  many  the  waiting  for  the  end  of  the  world 
became  inseparable  from  the  hope  of  a  second  coming  of  Christ, 
and  this  Messianism  became  embodied  in  three  important  sects, 
the  Chlystovstvo^  the  Dukhoborstvo^  and  the  Molokamtvo. 

The  Chlystovstvo^  or  the  Khristovstvo  (from  the  word  KristoSy 
Christ),  originated  at  a  very  early  date,  and  was,  perhaps,  even 


THE  RELIGIOUS   QUESTION  313 

contemporary  with  the  raskol.  Legend  relates  that  its  founder, 
Danila  Philippovitch,  having  meditated  upon  the  discord  between 
the  Old  Believers  and  the  official  Church,  which  arose  from  the 
question  of  the  "  holy  books,"  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that 
neither  the  old  books  nor  the  new  were  necessary  to  the  salvation 
of  the  soul.  "  One  book  only  is  necessary  and  that  is  the  golden 
book,  the  book  of  life,  the  book  of  the  dove.  .  .  .  This  book  is 
the  Holy  Spirit."  And  Danila  threw  all  the  books  into  the 
waves  of  the  Volga.  Then  "  God  Himself  descended  from  the 
clouds  in  a  chariot  of  fire  and  entered  into  the  flesh  of  Danila 
Philippovitch." 

As  you  see,  the  Chlystovstvo^  having  denied  the  point  of  view 
upon  which  the  "  old  "  and  "  new  "  orthodoxy  were  based,  finally 
arrived  at  a  gross  anthropomorphical  mysticism.  The  hierarchy 
of  the  Chlystovstvo  is  composed  of  Jesus  Christ,  incarnated  in  a 
member  of  the  sect,  the  Holy  Virgin,  and  the  Apostles,  all  equally 
living  persons.  Before  special  assemblies  called  radenies  the  Holy 
Spirit  descends  upon  the  Chlystovtzy.  While  waiting  for  its 
descent,  the  sectaries,  clothed  in  long  white  gowns,  taper  in  hand, 
sing  and  dance  while  falling  into  a  profound  ecstasy,  which  is 
manifested  by  semi-hysterical  accesses,  during  which  he  who  feels 
himself  touched  by  the  Holy  Spirit  prophesies.  This  religious 
ecstasy  is  followed  by  a  sexual  ecstasy,  and  many  radenies 
terminate  in  a  general  orijv. 

The  introduction  of  the  sexual  element  into  the  life  of  the 
Khristovstvo  resulted  in  the  fact  that  one  group,  discontented  with 
this  introduction,  left  the  Khristovstvo  in  order  to  form  the  sect 
of  the  Skoptzy  (from  the  verb  oskoplat^  meaning  to  deprive  of  the 
sexual  capacities).  Regarding  the  sexual  life  as  the  greatest  of 
sins,  they  strive  against  it  by  a  radical  means  :  castration.  But 
the  Skopt-zy  are  not  real  ascetics,  for,  while  renouncing  sexual 
appetite,  far  from  "  forsaking  the  world,"  they  are  extremely 
active  in  the  economic  sphere  of  material  life.  Skopetz  is  often 
synonymous  with  an  eminent  man  of  business,  an  able  merchant, 
sometimes  a  usurer.  Under  Alexander  I  several  Skoptzy  even 
formed  part  of  the  Imperial  suite. 


314  MODERN  RUSSIA 

The  Dukhoborstvo  [Dukhobor  means  "  striving  spirit  ")  and  the 
Molokamtvo  originated  at  the  end  or  the  eighteenth  and  the 
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

"  There  is  no  need  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  for  each  may  wash  his 
sins  away  in  his  own  house " — such  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
Dukhohors  a  doctrine  protesting  against  the  official  conception 
of  religion,  against  its  excessive  externalization,  and  partly  due 
to  the  sermons  of  those  "  Spiritual  Christians  "  who  penetrated 
Russia.  But  as  the  Russian  peasants  arc  incapable  of  adopting  a 
purely  spiritual  religion,  this  doctrine  is  enshrined  in  a  fetichism 
comparable  to  that  of  the  Chlystovstvo.  One  of  the  members  of 
the  Dukhobor  commune  of  the  Government  of  Tobolsk  is 
declared  the  "  Son  of  God "  and  is  surrounded  by  a  dozen 
"archangels."  As  for  the  ritual  side  of  the  sect,  it  consists  of  a 
somewhat  complicated  symbolism. 

The  Dukhoborstvo  is  far  from  being  as  widespread  as  the 
Molokanisvo  (from  the  word  Moloko  =  milk  :  because  its  disciples 
drink  milk  during  their  fasts).  The  Molokamtvo  left  the 
Dukhoborstvo  and  is  distinguished  from  the  latter  by  the  fact 
that  it  recognizes  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  well  as  direct  religious 
intuition,  while  the  Dukhobors  place  the  Scriptures  far  below 
intuition.  This  toleration  of  the  traditions  of  the  official  Church 
is  reflected  in  the  Molokan  dogmas.  While  the  Dukhobors 
interpret  the  Holy  Trinity  in  a  purely  allegorical  manner,  the 
Molokans  leave  it  its  official  meaning.  The  Molokanstvo  is  a  kind 
of  compromise  between  Orthodoxy  and  "  Spiritual  Christianity  "  ; 
but  it  is  also  impregnated  with  fetichism.  The  first  action  of 
its  founder  was  to  surround  himself  with  seventy  apostles  and  in 
their  company  to  make  a  triumphant  entry  into  the  city  of 
Tambov.  But  there,  instead  of  sitting  on  the  celestial  throne, 
at  the  right  hand  of  "  God  the  Father,"  the  poor  founder  fell  into 
the  city  jail. 

The  Government  treats  the  sectaries  with  the  utmost  rigour, 
not  only  with  an  eye  to  the  interests  of  the  Church,  but  also 
with  a  view  to  political  interests.  The  Christovstvo^  Dukhoborstvo 
and   Molokamtvo  have    furnished   a  social   and   political  element 


THE  RELIGIOUS   QUESTION  315 

which  must  be  taken  into  consideration,  and  the  Mcssianism  of 
these  three  great  sects  is,  after  all,  the  translation  into  religious 
language  of  the  social  aspirations  of  the  peasantry.  Under 
Nicolas  I,  a  little  before  the  emancipation  of  the  peasants,  when 
their  position  was  extremely  grievous,  the  sectaries  denied  the 
authority  of  the  Tsar,  refusing  military  service  and  the  payment 
of  taxes,  while  waiting  for  the  Saviour,  who  would  lead  all  the 
"  good  "  to  the  "  land  of  milk  and  honey."  And  as,  according  to 
the  legend,  this  country  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount 
Ararat,  a  number  of  sectaries  passed  over  the  Caucasus,  between 
1830  and  1840,  to  be  nearer  the  Promised  Land  !  In  1833  a 
"  Molokan  "  declared  that  he  was  the  Prophet  Elias,  and  even 
fixed  the  day  of  his  assumption.  But  no  miracle  occurred,  and 
the  prophet  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Government.  Just  before 
the  abolition  of  serfdom,  a  peasant  of  the  sect  of  the  Khlysty  gave 
an  extremely  brutal  manifestation  of  Messianism  :  he  burned  his 
house  and  set  out  for  the  mountains  with  his  wife  and  two  quite 
young  children.  Once  there,  he  offered  his  children  as  "  a 
sacrifice  to  God,"  cutting  their  throats  with  his  own  hands  while 
his  wife  read  the  prayers.  Deported  to  Siberia,  he  raised  a  cross 
in  the  woods,  near  a  little  chapel,  and  crucified  himself. 

"  This  story,"  says  an  author  who  has  studied  the  religious 
movement  in  Russia — N.  Nikolsky — "  constitutes  the  epilogue  of 
the  Messianism  of  the  Christvostvo^  the  Molokamivo^  and  the 
Dukhoborstvo.  The  Messiah  expected  by  these  sects  has  not 
come.  In  his  place,  ignorant  and  obscure,  in  the  Siberian  desert 
appears  a  Messiah  bearing  upon  him  all  the  sins  of  the  world  ;  a 
Messiah  symbolizing  the  peasants  disenchanted  by  their  vain  effxjrts 
to  create  a  better  world  upon  earth  in  the  shape  of  Dukhobor  or 
Molokan  communes." 

The  fall  of  serfdom  and  the  invasion  of  village  life  by  capitalism 
contributed  to  give  the  ideology  of  the  peasants  a  more  rationalistic 
character  and  to  evoke  a  new  sect  :   Chtundism  or  Stundism. 

The  word  Chtundism^  or  chtunday  comes  from  the  German 
Sttmde^  which  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  employed  in 
Germany    to    denote    the   evangelical    circles   of    that    country. 


3i6  MODERN  RUSSIA 

German  colonists  introduced  into  Russia  both  the  term  and  the 
evangelical  meetings  themselves,  and  these  latter  rapidly  extended, 
having  undergone  changes  which  rendered  them  more  in  con- 
formity with  the  mentality  of  the  Russian  peasants. 

By  its  religious  doctrine  Stundism  is  akin  to  the  Molokanstvo. 
Stundism,  like  the  Molokanstvo^  recognizes  a  double  source  of 
taith  :  direct  religious  intuition  and  the  Holy  Scripture  explained 
in  an  allegorical  and  rationalistic  manner.  As  for  external 
worship,  it  is  denied  by  the  Stundists.  Stundists  recognize 
baptism,  but,  like  the  German  Baptists,  they  receive  it  only 
when  they  have  reached  the  "age  of  reason." 

The  social  doctrine  of  the  Stundists  is  a  Utopian  communism. 
God,  it  states,  created  all  men  equal  and  allowed  them  to  enjoy 
in  common  the  earth,  the  harvest,  the  waters,  etc.  But  men 
began  to  buy  and  sell  the  gifts  of  God,  to  exchange  their  labour 
and  their  conscience  for  money.  Then,  as  the  Egyptian 
Pharaohs  enslaved  the  Jews,  the  wicked  enslaved  the  unhappy 
people.  To  stop  the  "Egyptian  sufferings"  of  the  latter  (epi- 
demics, famines,  wars,  etc.),  the  will  of  God  must  be  established 
upon  earth.  And  God  wills  that  the  earth  and  its  fruits,  the 
waters,  and  every  useful  article  should  belong  in  common  to  all, 
that  each  should  cultivate  the  scrap  of  earth  needful  for  his 
support,  that  commercial  exchange  and  the  use  of  money  should 
be  suppressed  and  the  exchange  of  products  against  products 
established,  and  that  the  existing  Government  should  give  way 
to  free  communes  of  workers. 

The  "  agrarian  communism  "  of  the  Stundists  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  Utopian  programmes  of  the  peasants'  political  parties. 

The  influence  of  tiic  Stundists  is  very  perceptible,  above  all  in 
South  Russia,  but  it  is  also  noticeable  in  Central  Russia.  Since 
the  manifesto  of  April  17th  Stundism  is  beginning  to  gain  the 
upper  hand  of  Orthodoxy  among  the  peasantry. 

Before  terminating  this  sketch  of  the  religious  sects  of  Russia 
I  should  like  to  say  a  icvf  words  as  to  these  curious  phenomena  : 
during  the  last  few  years  there  have  arisen  in  St.  Petersburg  and 
in  Moscow,  among  the  outcast  element  of  the  population  and  the 


THE  RELIGIOUS   QUESTION  317 

lesser  bourgeoisie^  highly  interesting  religious  organizations  directed 
by  Bratzy  (little  brothers).  These  Bratzy  preach  upon  different 
moral  themes  relating  to  daily  life  and  "console"  those  who, 
wounded  by  the  struggle  for  life,  apply  to  them. 

The  upper  strata  of  society  are  subject  to  the  influence  of 
other  free  preachers,  the  Startzy  (the  "aged"),  who,  mostly 
young  and  hearty,  achieve  an  enormous  success  among  the 
aristocracy,  especially  among  the  women.  And  we  must  add 
that  the  sexual  element  contributes  not  a  little  to  their  success. 
One  of  them,  Grigori  Raspontin,  has  even  succeeded  in  slipping 
into  Court,  and  to-day  his  influence  is  felt  even  over  the  destinies 
of  the  Russian  Empire. 

Thus,  while  the  Bratzy  console  the  spirit  the  Startzy  console 
the  flesh. 


BOOK    VI 
RUSSIAN   LITERATURE   AND   POETRY 


CHAPTER   I 

GENERAL  CHARACTER  OF   RUSSIAN   LITERATURE 

I.  The  peculiarities  of  Russian  literature.     II.  Russian  lyrical  poetry 

and  its  social  tendencies. 


A  FAVOURITE  Russian  poet  has  said  : 

"  The  writer — if  he  is  a  wave 
Of  that  ocean  which  men  call  Russia 
Can  but  awake  to  rebellion 
When  the  ocean  itself  rebels. 
The  writer — if  he  is  a  nerve 
Of  that  great  body  which  is  the  people 
Can  but  feel  the  wound 
When  Liberty  is  stricken." 

These  verses  never  fail  to  occur  to  me  when  I  ask  myself, 
In  what  does  Russian  literature  differ  from  other  European 
literatures  ?  What  is  its  national  peculiarity  ?  For  these  verses 
answer  the  question  as  justly  and  completely  as  one  could  wish. 
They  tell  me  that  Russian  literature  is  far  more  social  than  the 
other  literatures  of  Europe. 

This  general  characteristic  of  Russian  prose  and  poetry  is  a 
perfectly  natural  and  inevitable  phenomenon.  As  absolutism 
forbids  political  activity  to  thousands  of  citizens,  the  intellectual 
members  of  the  progressive  stratum  of  society  have  only  one 
resource — literature — if  they  would  share,  at   least  to  a  certain 

21  321 


322  MODERN  RUSSIA 

degree,  in  the  social  activity  of  the  country.  For  the  majority  or 
Russian  writers  literary  work  replaces  political  work,  the  latter 
being  almost  impossible,  and  the  conflict  of  the  various  literary 
currents  acquires  in  Russia  the  character  of  a  political  struggle, 
a  character  unknown  to  Western  literature. 

Thanks  to  this,  literature  in  Russia  occupies  a  very  special 
position  :  Russian  society,  unused  to  seeing  in  literature  only  a 
source  of  distraction,  as  is  the  case  with  European  readers,  looks 
to  it  for  social  programmes,  for  the  solutions  of  the  "  accursed 
problems  of  life."  A  beacon  shining  amid  the  darkness  of  the 
social  night — such  is  literature  to  Russian  society. 


II 


Even  in  lyric  poetry  that  which  especially  enchants  the  Russian 
reader  is  neither  harmonious  form  nor  beauty  of  phrase  or  line, 
nor  the  sublime  manifestations  of  the  intimate  feelings  of  the 
poet,  but  rather  the  social  sense  of  the  work,  the  humanistic  ideas, 
the  civic  sympathies  of  the  author.  A  Russian  poet  is  almost 
always  a  social  poet^  and  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  other  country 
in  which  poetry  has  to  such  a  degree  been  a  weapon  of  social  and 
political  warfare.  During  the  whole  of  the  nineteenth  century 
social  and  political  motives  prevailed  in  Russian  poetry.  There 
is  Pushkin,  uncrowned  Tsar  of  Russian  poetry,  who  writes  an 
"  Ode  to  Liberty."  It  is  naive,  perhaps,  but  full  of  ardour,  this 
ode  which  interpellates  the  Tsars,  counselling  them  "to  bow  the 
head  before  the  Law  and  to  appoint  Liberty  the  guard  of  their 
throne."  Another  great  poet,  Lermontov,  after  the  tragic  duel 
in  which  Pushkin  fell,  wrote  verses  full  of  fire  dedicated  to  the 
"  noble  blood  "  of  the  dead  poet  and  cursing  "  the  greedy  crowd 
that  surrounds  the  thrones  of  the  butchers  of  liberty  and  genius." 
Another  contemporary,  Ryleev,  evokes  in  his  "  Thoughts  "  the 
combatants  who  have  died  for  liberty.  "My  destiny  is  equally 
to  detest  tyrants  and  slaves,"  says  Ryliev  in  one  of  his  poems. 
Ogariov,  friend  of  Hcrzen,  salutes  the  onset  of  the  revolutionary 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  323 

storm  in  1848,  a  tempest  which  "drew  man  from  his  repose" 
and  "  raised  the  Right  above  cupidity,  bright  as  pure  reason." 
Then,  in  the  course  of  the  year  1849,  ^  lament  escapes  the  lips  of 
the  poet,  wounded  by  the  sight  of  the  revolution  crushed  and 
despotism  triumphant.  "In  Europe  there  is  not  a  single  spot 
where  we  might  end  our  lives  in  a  bright  and  peaceful  manner," 
writes  Ogariov  in  1849.  But  ten  years  go  by,  and  despair  with 
them.     Then  Osariov  once  a2:ain  addresses  Herzen  : 

"  When  I  was  a  tender,  docile  child, 
When  I  was  a  rebellious  and  passionate  youth, 
When  old  age  was  my  neighbour, 
Always,  in  short,  one  word  echoed  in  my  ear: 
In  my  ear  sounded  one  word,  ever  the  same — 
Liberty  !    Liberty  !  " 

and  the  poet  begs  his  friend  "  not  to  let  him  grow  cold  upon  his 
death-bed  without  whispering  to  him  that  last  and  holy  word  : 
liberty,  liberty  ! " 

The  Russian  poets  of  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century 
had  only  a  very  vague  conception  of  liberty.  It  remained  for 
the  lyrical  poetry  of  the  years  1 860-80  to  render  this  conception 
less  indefinite. 

Those  years  saw  the  rise  of  a  whole  Pleiade  of  "  civic  poets," 
who  played  an  important  part  in  the  social  movement  of  the  time. 
One  of  its  members,  Plechtchiev,  described  this  part  in  the 
following  lines  : 

"  Forward,  friend,  without  fear  or  doubt  : 
The  exploit  valorous  awaits  us. 
The  bright  dawn  of  expiation 
Already  is  announced  in  the  heavens. 
Clasp  hands  firmly,  friends, 
And  with  a  bold  step,  forward  ! 
Under  the  standard  of  Knowledge 
May  our  union  swell  and  swell.  .  .  ." 

To  this  day  this  poem  is  very  popular  among  Russian  youth, 
and  is  often  recited  at  concerts. 


324  MODERN  RUSSIA 

Ajiother  poet  of  the  same  period,  Minaev,  the  author  of 
numerous  satirical  poems  ridiculing  traditional  beliefs  and  prin- 
ciples, was  a  pioneer  in  expressing  the  ideals  of  the  emancipation 
of  the  people  and  of  woman. 

In  general  the  lyrical  poets  of  this  period  are  inspired  less  by 
the  misfortunes  of  the  people^  the  people  of  all  countries,  than 
by  individual  sufferings.  Let  us  consider  the  poetess  Barylcov. 
Her  feminine  lyre  sings  neither  of  love  nor  of  moonlit  nights,  but 
of  the  poor  people  drowning  its  misery  in  alcohol,  perishing  in 
poverty  and  ignorance,  succumbing  to  sickness.  Barykov  speaks 
ironically  of  the  "priests  of  aesthetics  "  who  consider  the  "national 
suffering"  as  "prose  unworthy  of  pure  art."  She  threatens  with 
"the  judgment  of  the  country"  those  poets  who  "sing  for  the 
delight  of  the  mind,"  and  transform  their  talent,  "  marvellous  gift 
of  nature,"  into  a  "  plaything  for  man." 

"The  poet  is  the  buckler,  the  sword  of  the  country.  .  .  .  He 
is  the  source  of  ideas.  .  .  .  He  is  the  voice,  the  tongue  of  the 
poor  mute  people.  .  .  .  He  is  the  first  ray  of  the  dawn  of  the 
bright  days." 

This  poetess  ridiculed  the  conception  of  women  as  "  bird- 
headed  creatures,"  seeking  "  with  their  males  "  an  "  earthworm's 
love"  on  "the  lukewarm  dunghill  of  conjugal  happiness." 

Personal  happiness  is  to  the  poets  of  this  period  a  very  negligible 
quantity  compared  with  the  struggle  "  for  the  happiness  of  all." 

"  Leave  father  and  mother " — so  one  of  these  poets  advises 
youth — "  build  no  nest,  be  alone,  .  .  .  Once  and  for  all  extin- 
guish the  human  passions  in  thy  soul  !  Be  obdurate  to  the 
seductions  of  love,  of  wealth,  of  glory.  Be  holy.  ...  In  thy 
breast  keep  thy  heart  intact  and  pure,  then  give  it  wholly  to  thy 
unhappy  brothers  :  where  thou  hearest  a  lament,  thither  must 
thou  go.  .  .  .  Suffer  more  than  all.  ,  .  .  Remain  poor  and  naked. 
And  thou  wilt  be  great  and  the  world  will  be  troubled  by  thy 
reproach  !  " 

Here  we  have  no  Christian  asceticism,  but  a  revolutionary 
asceticism  ;  the  gift  of  self  for  the  sake  of  strije.  Many  poems 
of   this  period  are  really  revolutionary  proclamations,   and  were 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  325 

regarded  as  such  by  the  reader.  These  verses  by  Dobrolubov, 
literary  critic  and  poet,  will  give  some  idea  of  the  mental 
condition  of  these  lyrical  poets  : 

"  Dear  friend,  I  die. 
Why  ?     Because  I  have  been  honest. 
But  I  believe  my  native  land 
Will  not  forget  me. 
Dear  friend,  I  die. 
But  my  soul  is  calm. 
I  bless  thee  and  hope 
Thou  wilt  follow  the  same  path.  .  .  ." 

Short,  lucid,  and  simple  !  This  tranquil  simplicity  perfectly 
expresses  the  psychology  of  the  intellectual  youth  of  Russia 
during  this  period  ;  a  psychology  very  remote  from  the  refined 
complexity  of  the  modern  bourgeois  mentality. 

The  "civic  poetry"  of  Russia  attained  its  highest  development 
vv^ith  Nekrasov  (1821-77).  The  works  of  Nekrasov  belong  to 
the  category  of  those  works  which  cannot  please  all  tastes  alike. 
Even  over  his  tomb  the  discussions  that  were  raised  in  his  lifetime 
are  still  continued  :  discussions  on  the  subject  of  his  poetic  talent. 
Some  deny  Nekrasov  even  the  name  of  poet,  calling  his  verses 
"chopped-up  prose";  others  regard  him  as  the  greatest  of  the 
Russian  poets.  These  discussions  are  explained  in  part  by  the 
fact  that  the  imagery  of  his  poetry  is  extremely  realistic  ;  but 
those  who  wish  to  become  acquainted,  not  with  the  "  poetized  " 
Russia  of  literature,  but  the  real  Russia  of  the  age  of  serfdom  and 
the  first  fifteen  years  after  its  abolition,  must  go  to  Nekrasov. 
He  will  depict  for  you  the  damp,  chilly  city  of  St.  Petersburg, 
with  its  innumerable  bureaucrats  and  "men  of  business,"  its 
poverty  and  prostitution,  its  litterateurs  and  its  newsvendors. 
Then  from  St.  Petersburg  he  will  take  you  into  the  open  country, 
where  men  labour  for  a  crust  of  bread,  and  without  sentimentality, 
without  idealization,  he  will  lay  open  before  you  the  mind  of  the 
Russian  peasant. 

We  must  admit  that  his  versification  is  sometimes  at  fault, 
but  its  slight  defects,  purely  external,  are   far  from  veiling  the 


326  MODERN  RUSSIA 

profound  thought  of  the  poet  and  the  beauty  of  his  images.  To 
Nekrasov  also  we  owe  the  simplification  of  the  language  of 
Russian  poetry.  Thanks  to  this  fact  his  books  are  accessible  to 
all  readers.  Some  of  his  poems,  set  to  music,  have  become 
popular  songs  in  many  parts  of  Russia. 

The  influence  of  Nekrasov  was  enormous  even  during  his 
lifetime.  Thousands  and  thousands  of  mourners  followed  his 
coffin,  and  the  burial  of  a  poet  became  a  vast  demonstration. 
Many  generations  of  readers,  including  our  own,  have  found 
in  Nekrasov's  works  a  school  of  humanism  ;  a  primary  school, 
but  marked  by  absolute  sincerity.  Moreover,  Nekrasov  foresaw 
that  his  verses  would  find  their  way  to  the  reader's  heart  :  "  He 
is  no  Russian,"  he  wrote  in  one  of  his  poems,  "who  can  regard 
without  love  this  poor  pallid  Muse,  bleeding  from  the  knout." 
"  Pallid  Muse,  bleeding  from  the  knout  ! "  It  is  no  idle  phrase  : 
it  describes  the  characteristics  of  Russian  poetry  and  literature  at 
the  culminating  point  of  their  development. 

The  society  of  those  days  regarded  its  poets  and  writers 
as  "  teachers  of  life,"  as  prophets  and  leaders.  But  the  latter 
paid  dearly  for  the  title.  Pushkin,  after  a  period  of  banish- 
ment, was  under  police  supervision  to  the  end  of  his  life. 
Lermontov,  an  officer,  was  degraded  and  also  deported.  Ryliev 
was  hanged  for  having  taken  part  in  the  "  revolt  of  the 
Decembrists."  Ogariov  was  forced  to  emigrate.  The  well- 
known  literary  critic — Pissarev — passed  tour  years  in  prison. 
Another  critic,  and  the  author  or  an  extremely  popular  novel 
[IVhat's  to  be  Done  ?\  Tchernychevsky  (see  his  biography  in 
Portraits  d'hier^  by  Mme  Vera  Starkov,  Paris,  1910),  was 
deported  to  Siberia.  To  the  convict  prisons  of  Siberia  also  were 
deported  Dostoyevsky  and  a  celebrated  poet  of  a  later  period 
than  that  of  Nekrasov,  namely  Yakubovitch.  Till  his  latest 
moments  Tolstoy  was  spied  upon  by  the  secret  police.  Gorky 
is  obliged  to  live  abroad,  that  he  may  not  be  deported  or  sent 
to  the  mines. 

These  are  the  best-known  victims  immolated  on  the  altar  or 
Russian    literature.      But    how    many    more    have    there    been  ? 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  327 

More — apart  from  the  authors  themselves,  how  many  readers 
have  been  disturbed  and  persecuted,  how^  many  books  confiscated  ? 
This  is  why  the  Russian  Muse  is  so  weary,  so  enfeebled;  why  she 
is  a  "  Muse  of  vengeance  and  sadness  "  ;  why  the  great  Russian 
writers  die  so  young.  Tuberculosis  and  insanity  are  "  writers' 
maladies "  in  Russia.  Mournfully  true  are  these  lines  or 
Nekrasov  : 


"  Brother  writers !  over  your  destiny 
Hovers  who  knows  what  fatalities  !" 


And  again  : 


"  The  Russian  genius  has  always  crowned 
Those  who  do  not  live  long, 
Those  of  whom  the  people  say : 
*0f  a  happy  man  the  enemies  die, 
Of  an  unfortunate  man  dies  the  last  friend.'" 

After  Nekrasov  the  development  or  Russian  poetry  was 
twofold.  One  branch  of  this  development  was  the  continuation 
of  the  old  civic  poetry,  and,  faithful  to  its  trust,  it  sought 
inspiration  in  social  life.  Jemtchujnikov  and  Yakubovitch 
were  the  most  eminent  writers  of  this  school.  (The  latter, 
by  the  way,  made  an  excellent  translation  of  the  works  of 
Baudelaire.)  The  other  branch  was  concerned  only  with  "  pure 
art,"  "art  for  art's  sake,"  and  gave  birth  to  some  beautiful 
examples  of  pure  lyric  poetry.  Of  this  school  were  Tuttchev, 
Fete,  Ma'ikov,  Alexis  Tolstoy,  etc. 

Such  works  of  "  pure  art "  are  isolated  phenomena,  and  merely 
emphasize  the  social  tone  of  the  bulk  of  Russian  poetry,  and  in 
vain  did  certain  supporters  of  the  pure  lyric  attempt  to  transform 
the  weapon  of  attack  that  Russian  verse  had  become  into  a  means 
of  evading  the  vulgar  reality,  of  attaining  the  "seventh  heaven  of 
absolute  art "  ;  but  to  these  attempts  the  adversaries  of  art  an 
und  fiir  sich^  as  the  Germans  say,  replied  as  follows  : 

"  Changeable,  incredulous,  fashion  tells  us : 
'  The  sufferings  of  the  people  are  a  very  old  story, 
A  story  that  poetry  should  forget  forever  ! 
Youth,  do  not  believe  it !     It  is  a  subject  that  can  never  grow  old.'  " 


328  MODERN  RUSSIA 

And  youth  has  ranged  itself  on  the  side  of  the  "civic  poets." 
Nevertheless,  lyrical  poetry  is  still  a  living  art. 

The  development  of  capitalism  and  the  bourgeois  economic 
system  inevitably  results  in  the  transformation  of  literature 
primarily  into  a  source  of  enjoyment.  This  tendency  was 
observable  in  Russia  during  the  last  ten  years  of  the  nineteenth 
century  and  the  opening  years  of  the  tv^^entieth. 

Several  periods  might  be  established  in  the  development  of  this 
tendency  ;  at  the  outset  the  representatives  of  this  literary  move- 
ment did  not  break  w^ith  the  old  traditions  ;  they  sang  the 
"  conflict,"  the  "  sufferings  of  our  brethren,"  and  expressed 
humanitarian  ideas,  borrowing  their  forms  from  the  "  civic " 
school.  However,  the  talented  poet  Nadson  (died  of  tuberculosis 
in  1887)  already  revealed  an  individualistic  and  lyrical  note,  and 
with  a  few  other  poets  of  the  same  period  he  transformed  the 
"conflict"  into  the  internal  conflict  which  rages  in  the  soul 
of  each  of  us.  His  successors — Apukhtin,  Golenichtchev- 
Kutusov,  Minsky — advanced  a  step  further,  proclaiming  that 
the  sentiments  and  aspirations  of  the  individual  are  of  greater 
significance  than  the  feelings  and  "aspirations"  of  the  "crowd," 
and  began  to  regard  the  latter  with  an  offensive  pity,  sometimes 
even  with  distrust  and  malevolence.  The  last  five  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century  saw  the  rise  of  a  new  group  of  poets,  known 
by  the  general  appellation  of  "  Decadents,"  of  whom  the  majority 
are  "  neo-romantics."  One  of  these — Balmont,  the  translator 
of  Shelley — deserted  Russian  realism  for  exoticism ;  another, 
Brussov,  writes  of  the  ancient  world  of  classic  life  ;  a  third, 
A.  Blok,  lives  in  the  mystic  atmosphere  of  aspiration  toward 
"the  unknown." 

This  rupture  with  actual  life  and  the  people  has  injured  the 
poets  themselves,  as  they  have  deprived  themselves  of  an  inex- 
haustible source  of  inspiration,  and  must  henceforth  laboriously 
search  for  subjects.  In  1905,  when  the  revolution  burst  forth, 
many  Decadents  could  not  resist  their  "solitude,"  and  eagerly 
threw  themselves  upon  the  material  provided  by  the  incidents  of 
the  revolution.     Some  of  them  even   wrote  verses  in  which  they 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  329 

swore  fidelity  to  the  people  and  declared  themselves  the  cham- 
pions of  the  proletariat  and  of  Socialism.  But  this  curious 
phenomenon  was  of  short  duration.  The  reaction  came,  and  the 
Decadents  again  steeped  themselves  in  mysticism  or  frank 
sexuality.  The  Decadents  could  not  fail  to  feel  their  false 
position.  Blok,  one  of  the  most  talented  of  them,  recently 
published  an  open  letter,  in  which  he  avowed  that  the  public  is 
far  from  regarding  the  Decadents  as  it  regarded,  and  does  still 
regard,  the  representatives  of  "  civic  poetry."  When  the  aged 
Plechtchiev  stretched  forth  his  trembling  hand,  counselling  men 
to  "  go  forward  without  fear  or  doubt  towards  the  valorous 
exploit,"  all  his  hearers  heard  him  with  respect.  In  the  repre- 
sentatives of  "  pure  art  "  the  same  audience  see  only  so  many 
comedians  or  clowns.  This  complaint,  cited  from  Blok's  letter, 
is  not  without  foundation  :  the  majority  of  Russian  readers 
continue  to  regard  "  social  "  poetry  as  a  noble  manifestation  of 
the  poetic  genius. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE  IN  THE  NINETEENTH 
AND   TWENTIETH    CENTURIES 

I.  The  Russian  novel.  II.  The  literature  of  the  Raznotchintzy — 
Narodnitchestvo,  III.  The  literature  of  the  "grey  days" — Tchek- 
hov.  IV.  Modernists  and  Decadents.  V.  Two  opposite  poles — 
Tolstoy  and  Gorky. 


The  specific  character  of  Russian  literature — its  closeness  to  real 
life  and  its  social  character — both  facilitates  and  hampers  the 
study  of  its  evolution.  It  facilitates  it  because  the  dates  and 
phases  of  literary  evolution  coincide  with  those  of  social  and 
political  evolution  ;  it  hampers  it  because,  Russian  literature 
being  merely  the  direct  reflection  of  the  life  of  Russia,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  understand  the  peculiarities  of  that  life  before  one  can 
grasp  the  evolution  of  Russian  letters. 

This  closeness  to  life  has  provoked  one  very  curious  phenome- 
non :  the  heredity  of  literary  types.  In  real  life  the  generations 
are  connected  by  ties  of  psychic  parentage  and  inherit  one  from 
another.  In  the  same  wav  the  works  of  Russian  literature, 
studied  in  chronological  order,  enable  us  to  establish  a  genealogy 
of  types.  This  genealogy  is  divided  into  literary  families,  whose 
members  present  common  characteristics,  and  each  of  these 
families  is  inseparable  from  a  given  social  stratum. 

From  this  point  of  view  the  literary  evolution  of  the  first  halt 
of  the  nineteenth   century  is  particularly   interesting.       At   this 

330 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        331 

period  the  nobility,  freed  by  the  system  of  serfdom  from  all  labour 
and  material  care,  might  have  devoted  itself  to  the  acquisition 
of  a  wide  and  generous  culture.  It  did  nothing  of  the  kind. 
Only  a  small  group  of  nobles  devoted  themselves  to  the  study  of 
foreign  literature,  the  perfection  of  intellectual  culture,  and  the 
creation  of  modern  Russian  literature.  This  intellectual  move- 
ment developed  under  the  influence  of  the  French  Revolution 
and  of  foreign   philosophy. 

The  position  of  this  "enlightened  elite''''  was  sufficiently  tragic. 
Their  spirits  soared  high  ;  their  ideas  were  astonishingly  radical 
for  the  period  ;  but  physically  they  were  compelled  to  live  in 
an  atmosphere  saturated  with  the  ignorance  of  the  people  and 
the  arbitrary  brutality  of  the  Government.  This  contradiction 
between  the  ideal  and  the  real,  between  what  ought  to  be  and 
what  isy  could  but  provoke  an  embittered  melancholy  in  the  mind 
of  tile  "  intellectual."  This  melancholy  was  the  more  gloomy 
in  that  even  the  hopes  of  a  better  future  were  feeble  ;  the  masses 
were  sunk  in  so  profound  a  slumber,  were  so  remote  from  the 
environment  of  the  thinkers,  that  the  latter  could  not  even 
dream  of  any  practical  application  of  their  ideas.  Moreover,  the 
Government  rigorously  repressed  any  attempt  of  the  kind.  The 
sentiment  of  solitude,  scepticism,  and  despair  invaded  the  mind 
of  the  cultured  thinker.  Many  of  these  intimate  dramas 
ended  disastrously ;  society  finally  "  ate  up "  all  the  good 
impulses,  the  radical  aspirations  or  the  Russian  "  Voltairians," 
who,  as  they  grew  older,  changed  into  hypocritical  bigots  and 
conservators.  There  is  one  typical  instance  of  such  a  transfor- 
mation. At  first  a  passionate  admirer  of  Voltaire,  then  alarmed 
by  his  "  revolutionary "  ideas,  Catherine  II  finally  persecuted 
the  Russian  Fo/tairianetz  and  sent  a  bust  of  Voltaire,  which 
adorned  her  worktable,  to  the  lumber-room.  If  an  "  intellec- 
tual "  resented  and  opposed  the  process  of  "  assimilation,"  he 
took  refuge  in  a  moral  and  spiritual  solitude,  veiled  in  a  gloomy 
cloud  of  scepticism  and  despair. 

This  impossibility  of  realizing  the  dreamed-of  ideal,  of  giving 
oneself  to  some  practical  task,  led  the  elite  of  the  time  to  develop 


332  MODERN  RUSSIA 

themselves  on  one  side  only^  at  the  cost  of  stultifying  the  will. 
This  mixture  of  culture  and  deficient  will-power  is  characteristic 
of  the  Russian  "  intellectual."  The  type  of  "  intellectual " 
without  a  will  fills  the  literature  of  the  first  half  of  the  nine- 
teenth century.  As  the  novel  occupied  the  place  of  honour  in 
this  literature,  the  heroes  of  the  most  remarkable  novels  of  this 
period  are  merely  so  many  variants  of  the  same  type. 

This  type  appears  first  in  Pushkin's  Eugene  Oniegin.  The 
hero  of  this  romance  in  verse — Oniegin — while  at  some  points 
resembling  the  heroes  of  Byron,  is  before  all  an  essentially 
national  figure.  "  The  universal  sadness,"  the  scepticism  and 
irony  of  the  heroes  of  Byron  are  steeped,  at  the  touch  of  Pushkin, 
with  a  flood  of  local  colour.  Oniegin  is  certainly  by  far  the 
superior  of  those  who  surround  him,  but  the  consciousness  of 
his  intellectual  superiority,  which  is  due  to  the  education  he  has 
received  and  the  conditions  of  his  life,  leads  him  to  despise  other 
men.  He  becomes  so  accustomed  to  pay  no  attention  to  those 
about  him  that  he  fails  to  perceive  the  profound  feeling  with 
which  he  has  inspired  a  young  girl,  and  does  not  understand 
the  soul,  so  full  of  life,  that  surrenders  to  him.  Yet  this  soul 
is  the  manifestation  of  the  feminine  ideal  which  was  thenceforth 
to  haunt  the  Russian  novel.  This  superiority  over  others  is  in 
Oniegin's  case  quickly  transformed  into  malediction.  Not  only 
do  men  fail  to  understand  him,  but  he  ceases  to  understand 
them.  His  education  and  the  habit  of  worldly  life  prevent  him 
from  breaking  with  a  society  which  is  totally  alien  to  him,  and 
he  continues  to  waste  his  existence.  The  melancholy  of  the 
Russian  meadows  and  the  cold  of  foggy  St.  Petersburg — the 
background  of  the  romance — still  further  emphasize  the  A'i/- 
wo///^ of  despair  which  sounds  in  the  pages  oi  Eugene  Oniegin. 

In  the  Heroes  of  our  Ti/nes,  by  Lermontov,  we  find  another 
Oniegin  in  the  person  of  Petchorin,  but  he  is  more  profound 
and  more  of  a  thinker  than  his  precursor.  Like  Oniegin, 
Petchorin  makes  no  use  of  his  brilliant  aptitudes  ;  like  Oniegin, 
he  wastes  the  energies  of  his  soul  in  amorous  adventures,  duels, 
etc.     The  same  type  meets  us  again  in  the  Demon  of  Lermontov, 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE       333 

a  fallen  angel,  descended  upon  earth  to  bring  desolation  and 
misery. 

The  social  and  psychological  roots  or  the  "  negative "  and 
"  destructive "  types  of  Pushkin  and  Lermontov  are  easily  dis- 
covered if  w^e  compare  the  Oniegins  of  Russian  fiction  vi^ith  the 
intellectual  type  depicted  by  Griboiedov  in  his  immortal  comedy 
Intelligence  brings  Misfortune.  The  hero  of  this  comedy  (con- 
temporary vi'ith  the  works  of  Pushkin)  is  a  veritable  enthusi- 
ast compared  with  the  "  cold "  Oniegin  and  the  "  gloomy " 
Petchorin. 

Equally  discontented  with  his  environment,  he  does  not  con- 
fine himself  to  adopting  an  abstract  scepticism  like  Oniegin, 
but  dreams  of  arousing  his  country.  However,  his  generous 
ideas,  his  fiery  speeches  simply  beat  against  the  stupid  passivity 
of  society,  and  he  is  presently  convinced  that  he  is  a  useless, 
a  superfluous  person.  His  enthusiasm  lapses  into  despair  and 
the  comedy  ends  in  tragedy. 

The  transformation  of  comedy  into  tragedy  is  one  of  the  most 
frequent  phenomena  in  Russian  literature.  From  this  point  of 
view  the  evolution  of  Gogol  is  particularly  interesting.  Gogol 
(1809—52)  began  by  humorous  tales  of  the  popular  customs 
of  the  Ukraine,  tales  sparkling  with  genuine  youthful  gaiety. 
Then  he  wrote  The  Inspector^  a  comedy  drawn  from  the  life  of 
the  provincial  bureaucracy,  at  the  end  of  which  he  asks  the 
public,  shaking  with  laughter,  the  unexpected  question  :  "  What 
are  you  laughing  at  ?  You  are  laughing  at  yourselves  !  "  And 
suddenly  tragedy  pierces  the  gusts  of  laughter  ;  the  various 
episodes  which  seemed  so  delightful  considered  separately  become 
mournful  and  disastrous.  Then  appeared  a  poem  in  prose, 
Dead  Souls,  describing  the  laughable  sides  of  Russian  life  :  and 
this  time  the  reader  hears  "  a  laugh  behind  the  sobs." 

This  "  comedy "  of  Russian  life  ends  in  complaint  and 
horror.  Attacked  by  neurosis,  the  laugh  died  forever  on  his 
lips  :  presently  they  gave  utterance  only  to  groans  and  words 
of  horror  stammered  in  the  face  of  death. 

Another  example  :  Tchekhov,  a  writer  who  died   but  a  few 


334  MODERN  RUSSIA 

years  ago,  gained  his  first  reputation  by  light  humorous  sketches, 
in  which  all  was  gay  and  inoffensive.  Years  passed  :  the  lyric 
and  dramatic  notes  were  at  first  rare,  but  presently  they  were 
more  and  more  frequent  in  his  humorous  tales.  Soon  the  sound 
of  the  little  jester's  bells  was  drowned  by  the  heavy  knocking 
of  nails  into  the  immense  coffin  in  which  the  living  are  buried 
— Russia. 

But  let  us  return  to  the  Russian  novel.  It  was  in  the  works 
of  Gontcharov  and  Turgenev  and  Tolstoy  that  it  attained  its 
highest  development.  As  I  shall  have  to  speak  specially  of 
Tolstoy,  I  will  set  his  work  aside  for  the  moment.  As  for 
Gontcharov  and  Turgenev,  their  principal  works  are,  to  my 
mind,  variants  of  the  same  old  theme  :  the  intelligent  man  in 
Russia  is  useless  and  incapable  of  practical  activity. 

Gontcharov's  novel  Oblomov  (published  in  1859)  depicts  the 
economic  and  social  surroundings  in  which  the  "  thinking  but 
not  active"  type  of  "intellectual"  is  formed.  Oblomov  is  a 
noble  who  has  lived  from  childhood  in  the  atmosphere  of  a 
"natural  economy";  he  is  not  a  producer,  but  a  consumer. 
The  serfs  do  everything  for  him,  and  according  to  his  own 
admission  "  he  had  never  even  drawn  his  own  stockings  on." 
Oblomov  frequents  the  University  ;  he  has  a  pretty  wit  and  an 
understanding  of  art. 

"The  delight  of  high  ideals  was  within  his  reach,  and  often, 
in  the  deep  silence  of  his  soul,  he  wept  bitterly  over  the  sorrows 
of  humanity,  experiencing  a  vague  suffering,  a  restlessness,  a 
straining  of  the  soul  towards  some  unknown  distance."  "  Some- 
times a  thought  would  shine  into  his  mind,  wandering  through 
his  brain  as  a  wave  of  the  sea,  and  then,  growing  greater,  it 
would  fire  all  his  blood.  Then  his  muscles  quivered,  his  veins 
would  swell,  and  his  intentions  were  transformed  into  aspirations. 
Now,  now,  his  aspirations  were  about  to  be  realized,  to  give 
place  to  action  .  .  ,  and  then  !    .   .  ." 

But  instead  of  action  there  comes  only  a  mournful  question  : 
"To  what  end  ?"  And  Oblomov,  wearied  by  a  spiritual  conflict, 
stretches  himself  upon  his  bed,  where  he  passes  almost  the  whole 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        335 

day.  Even  love,  the  heroic  love  of  Olga,  which  strives  to 
save  Oblomov  from  being  engulfed,  is  powerless  in  the  face  of 
habit  and  social  conditions.  Even  while  loving  Olga,  Oblomov 
renounces  his  love  as  being  too  "  unquiet  "  for  him,  and  threaten- 
ing to  break  through  his  profound  somnolence. 

Sometimes  Oblomov  is  powerless  not  only  to  transform  his 
ideas  into  action,  but  even  to  translate  them  into  words.  .  .  . 
Rudin,  Turgenev's  hero,  on  the  contrary,  has  the  faculty  of 
enveloping  his  ideas  in  a  form  that  fires  the  hearts  of  his  hearers, 
but  after  this  transformation  of  energy,  he  stops  short.  Rudin's 
words  remain  pretty  phrases  ;  they  are  unable  to  translate  them- 
selves into  vital  and  practical  action. 

Rudin  is  far  more  profound  and  interesting  than  the  heroes 
of  Pushkin  and  Lermontov.  He  does  not  drape  himself,  as 
do  these  latter,  in  the  worn  mantle  of  a  somewhat  superficial 
Byronism;  he  does  not  suffer  from  that  almost  Oriental  indolence 
which  destroys  Oblomov,  and  far  from  despising  the  populace, 
he  loves  it  warmly.  But  sincere  though  they  are,  Rudin  does 
not  go  farther  than  his  phrases.  Rudin's  energy  is  subjected 
by  Turgenev  to  many  tests.  One  of  these  tests  consists  in 
his  meeting  with  a  young  girl,  Natalie,  who,  filled  with  enthusiasm 
by  his  speeches,  determines  to  follow  him  in  his  pursuit  of 
the  ideal.  But  Rudin  does  not  accept  Natalie  as  his  com- 
panion ;  he  himself  feels  incapable  of  undertaking  this  pursuit, 
full  of  difficulties  as  it  is.  After  all,  behind  Rudin's  fine  phrases 
there  is  nothing  but  a  lack  of  will  and  a  powerlessness  to  devote 
himself  to  practical  activity.  As  with  all  the  heroes  of  the  Russian 
novel  of  this  period,  his  moral  courage  is  inferior  to  his  intellec- 
tual force. 

Gontcharov  and  Turgenev  attempted  to  find  the  hero  whose 
soul  shall  be  a  balanced  harmony  of  intelligence  and  will ;  but 
the  Russian  society  of  their  day  did  not  enable  them  to  conceive 
such  a  type.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  both  these  writers  found 
it  necessary  to  import  a  positive  type  from  abroad.  To  the 
idle  Oblomov  Gontcharov  opposed  Stolz,  a  semi-German,  a  dry 
personage,  the  prototype  of  the  "  business  man  "  rather  than  the 


336  MODERN  RUSSIA 

"  social  man."  As  for  Tourgenev,  the  hero  of  his  novel  On  the 
Eve  is  a  Bulgar  patriot,  who,  unlike  Rudin,  can  not  only  speak 
but  act,  and  who  does  not  fear  to  allow  the  woman  he  loved  to 
follow  him.  The  expression  "  to  follow  him  "  is  hardly  exact, 
for  the  heroine  of  the  Russian  novel,  far  from  following  her  man, 
marches  at  his  side  or  even  precedes  him.  She  suffers  from 
no  lack  of  will,  and  with  her  the  thought  and  the  word  are 
always  ready  for  transformation  into  action.  She  seeks  in  the 
man  not  external  attractions  but  spiritual  beauty,  elevation  of 
ideas.  For  her,  the  man  is  neither  a  male  nor  an  adorer,  but 
a  friend  at  whose  side  she  strives  for  the  ideal. 


II 

The  commencement  of  the  second  half  ot  the  nineteenth 
century  marked  a  change  in  the  aspect  of  Russian  literature. 
While  the  literature  of  the  previous  fifty  years  had  been  almost 
exclusively  aristocratic,  and  the  ideology  of  its  authors  similar 
to  that  of  the  elite  of  the  nobility,  the  second  half  of  the  century 
saw  the  rise  of  the  raznotchintzy  (men  of  various  ranks),  and 
of  a  literature  which  was  the  work  of  the  middle  and  lower 
classes  of  society,  and  a  living  protest  against  the  aristocracy 
and  serfdom. 

With  its  advent  into  life  and  letters,  the  "  Nihilism  "  of  the 
raznotchintzy  attacked  with  hatred  the  "aesthetics"  of  the  old 
aristocratic  Liberalism,  and  laughed  at  the  latter's  love  of  fine 
phrases  never  followed  by  practical  action.  Under  the  influence 
of  the  raznotchintzy  even  the  external  aspect  of  Russian  literature 
was  modified,  for  new  literary  methods  were  employed  and  a 
new  style  was  formed.  But  the  raznotchintzy  writers  remained 
faithful  to  the  flag  of  realism — in  whose  shadow  the  Russian 
novel  had  achieved  so  powerful  a  growth — and  continued  to 
employ  the  "inductive  method  of  creation,"  which  had  endowed 
Russian  literature  with  an  extraordinary  vitality  and  an  attractive 
simplicity.     The   realism  of   the  new   writers  presently  became 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        337 

naturalism,   but    a    naturalism    very    remote    from    the    "  sexual 
naturalism  "  of  Western  Europe  and  of  France.     The  naturalism 
of   the   backstairs    and    boudoir    has    never    had    its    disciples    in 
Russian  letters, and  it  is  only  the  "Modernists"  and  "  Decadents" 
of  the  present  day  who  are  beginning  to  treat  of  sexual  themes. 
The    naturalism    of    the    raxnotchintzy    was    merely    a    pitilessly 
truthful  but  chaste  and  pure  description  of  life,  of  the  sufferings 
of  the  people.     The  novelists  of  the  old  school  had  sympathized 
with  the  people,  but  their  works  reflected  only  a  calm  compassion. 
The    new  men  wrote  with   "  the  sap  or  their  nerves,  the  blood 
of  their  hearts."     Their  style  was  restless,  impetuous,  unpolished  ; 
their   works    gave    the   impression    that  their    authors    found    it 
materially  and  morally  impossible  to  polish  every  chapter,  every 
phrase,    as    Gontcharov,  for    example,  had    done.      Gontcharov 
devoted   to  each  of  his  novels  ten  to  twenty  years  of  assiduous 
labour.     The  material    conditions  of   the  majority    of  the  new 
writers  were    lamentable.     Moreover,   they  deliberately    avoided 
giving    their    work    an    "  aesthetic "    aspect,    and     hastened    to 
throw  it,  like  an  accusation,  in  the  face  of  society.     For   this 
reason    their  work  seems  a  chaos    if   we   compare    it    with  the 
novels  of  Tourgenev  and  Gontcharov,  with  their  sure  and  grace- 
ful architecture.      But   this  chaos   has  its  dreadful  beauty. 

The  most  remarkable  representatives  of  the  literature  of  the 
period  of  "Nihilism"  were  Pomialovsky  and  Reshetnikov. 

Pomialovsky  (1835-63)  acquired  fame  by  his  Tales  of  the 
BursOy  in  which  we  find  a  rigorously  exact  picture  of  the 
education  received  by  the  children  in  the  ecclesiastical  schools 
or  Bursy.  Drunkenness  in  masters  and  pupils,  mutual  hatred, 
corporal  punishment  pushed  to  the  degree  of  torture — such  was 
the  moral  and  pedagogical  hell  described  by  Pomialovsky. 

He  was  also  the  author  of  two  long  novels,  Molotov  and  The 
Happiness  of  a  Middle-class  Many  whose  hero  is  the  same,  and 
which  read  like  two  parts  of  one  work.  In  these  books  the 
question  of  private  happiness  and  public  welfare  is  considered 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  raznotchintzy.  Molotov,  the  hero 
of  the  two  novels,  is  an  "  intellectual "  who  has  issued  from  the 

22 


338  MODERN  RUSSIA 

great  masses,  as  is  his  friend  Tcherevanin.  Molotov  and  Tchere- 
vanin  both  suffer  from  social  inequalities,  but,  like  Rudin, 
Molotov  is  incapable  of  struggling  against  evil,  doubts  himself, 
and  is  tormented  by  pessimism.  In  the  end  he  halts  on  the 
threshold  of  "  bourgeois  happiness,"  w^hile  understanding  that  the 
"domestic  idyll"  is  not  a  solution  of  the  social  and  philosophic 
problem  of  the  aims  of  life,  but  a  flight  before  this  problem. 
Tcherevanin  is  even  more  severely  bitten  by  the  serpents  or 
doubt  and  scepticism.  He  elaborates  a  "  philosophy  of  the  grave- 
yard," which  declares  that  men  are  too  evil  to  deserve  to  be 
loved,  and  his  gloomy  pessimism  ends  in  the  negation  of  all 
ideals.     The  logical  conclusion  of  his  philosophy  is  solitude. 

In  the  works  of  Reshctnikov  (1841-71)  the  naturalistic 
literature  of  the  period  of  "Nihilism"  attained  its  most  ardent 
expression.  The  novel  Podlipovtzy  (the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  of  Podlipnaia),  a  novel  which  brought  fame  to  Reshct- 
nikov, was  the  first  purely  realistic  description  of  the  life  of  our 
peasants.  In  this  work  we  see  the  mujik^  not  through  the  prism 
of  compassion  or  with  the  pity  of  the  "enlightened  seigneur" 
but  as  he  is,  and  we  see  him  amid  a  desolate  territorv,  inhabited 
by  a  half-pagan  tribe,  the  Permiaks.  The  better  educated  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Podlipnaia  can  hardly  count  up  to  five,  and  the 
majority  of  them  have  not  enough  to  eat.  When  they  do 
manage  to  eat,  their  nourishment  consists  of  a  mixture  of  potato 
flour  and  the  bark  of  trees  reduced  to  a  powder.  The  horizon 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Podlipnaia  is  confined  to  the  boundaries  ot 
their  village,  and  only  the  question  of  the  stomach  is  accessible  to 
their  minds. 

Thanks  to  his  artistic  penetration,  Reshetnikov  was  not  con- 
tented to  paint  the  gloomy  life  of  the  Russian  peasants:  he  also 
understood  their  minds. 

His  works  formed  a  kind  of  transition  between  the  period  or 
"  Nihilism  "  and  that  of  the  narodnitchestvo.  This  latter  period 
lasted  from  1870  to  1 880. 

The  expression  narodnitchestvo  is  derived  from  the  word  narod^ 
people.     Populism  would  be  the  best  translation  of  the  term. 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        339 

The  narodnitchestvo  was  at  once  a  literary  phenomenon  and  a 
vast  philosophic,  sociological,  and  political  movement.  It  repre- 
sented an  impulse  which  led  the  "  intellectuals "  toward  the 
people,  or  rather  toward  the  peasants,  for  the  industrial  prole- 
tariat of  those  days  was  very  small.  The  "  intellectuals  "  hoped 
to  find  in  the  people  an  aid  to  the  realization  of  projected  reforms, 
the  source  of  that  hope  and  activity  whose  absence  made  their 
own  lives  so  wretched  and  despairing.  The  narodniki^  that  is, 
the  disciples  of  the  new  populism,  entertained  a  romantic  hope  of 
finding  in  the  rural  commune  the  embryo  of  the  reign  of  justice 
and  equality. 

The  ideologists  or  the  new  school  were  not  raznotchintzy 
"Nihilists,"  for  these  latter  were  far  from  desiring  to  idealize 
the  popular  life.  The  nucleus  of  the  narodnitchestvo  consisted  ot 
a  group  of  "  repentant  seigneurs"  an  ironical  nickname  which 
fairly  well  defined  the  tone  and  the  psychological  origin  of  the 
new  writers.  When,  after  the  abolition  of  serfdom,  the  "  intel- 
lectuals "  succeeded  in  becoming  acquainted  with  the  life  of 
the  Russian  peasants,  they  were  horrified.  Many  of  them  then 
grasped  the  fact  that  they  were  living  on  the  labour  of  the 
people,  that  they  were  its  "  debtors,"  and  they  resolved  to  "  repay 
the  debt." 

Moreover,  the  narodniki  hoped  to  find  in  the  life  of  the  people 
the  moral  "  foundations  "  necessary  to  heal  their  lack  of  will  and 
their  scepticism,  and  the  "superfluous"  man  hoped  to  change 
himself  bv  contact  with  the  great  masses,  as  Antsus  was  restored 
by  contact  with  the  earth. 

The  literature  of  the  narodnitchestvo  was  coloured  by  this 
tendency.  It  did  not  break  with  the  realist  tradition,  but  the 
semi-ethnographical  naturalism  of  Pomialovsky  and  Reshetnikov 
could  not  satisfy  them,  for  they  were  not  content  to  describe 
facts,  but  sought  to  discover  the  truth  concealed  in  the  depths 
of  peasant  life.  Impelled  by  this  tendency,  numerous  narodniki 
writers  idealized  the  mujik^  and  presented  him  as  a  somewhat 
superficial  type.  Such  was  the  case  with  Zlatovratsky,  who — 
accordino;  to  the  remark    of  a   Russian  critic — transformed   the 


340  MODERN  RUSSIA 

"  drab  little  moujik  into  an  epic  hero,  expressing  himself  like  a 
poet,"  Zasodimsky,  another  well-known  writer,  painted  the 
Russian  peasants  as  "  village  Titans." 

The  literature  of  the  narodn'iki  was  crossed  by  yet  another 
current,  which  was  manifested  in  the  profoundly  vital  works 
of  the  writer  Uspensky  (1842-1902).  This  does  not  mean 
that  Uspensky  was  a  stranger  to  subjective  art.  Reading  his 
novels,  drawn  from  the  life  of  the  peasants  and  the  pet'its  bourgeois^ 
one  always  knows  on  which  side  the  sympathies  of  the  writer  are 
to  be  found.  However,  Uspensky  never  distorted  the  truth  for 
the  sake  of  his  sympathies,  however  hard  this  reality  may  have 
been  to  his  narodnik's  heart.  It  was  with  anguish  that  he  related 
his  scrupulous  observations,  and  with  anguish  he  discovered  how 
remote  was  the  reality  from  the  assertions  of  the  narodniki.  He 
does  not  paint  the  rural  commune  as  a  paradise  of  social  equality  : 
he  shows  it  as  the  theatre  of  an  economic  struggle,  the  merciless 
warfare  of  the  strong  upon  the  weak.  The  psychical  and  moral 
"bases"  of  the  peasant  appear  in  Uspensky's  novels  not  idealized, 
but  as  they  are.  Cupidity  and  rapacity  are  so  strongly  implanted 
in  the  peasant's  nature,  says  Uspensky,  that  the  "  communism  " 
of  the  mir  is  merely  a  pleasing  mask,  behind  which  lurk  exploita- 
tion, competition,  injustice  and  violence.  A  gloomy  pessimism 
tinges  all  his  works.  Uspensky  could  not  endure  the  contrast 
between  his  ideal  and  the  reality,  and  finally  contracted  a  mental 
malady.  Having  passed  long  years  in  an  asylum,  Uspensky 
died  in    1902. 

Ill 

The  pessimism  which  claimed  the  most  talented  and  sincere  of 
the  narodn'iki^  Uspensky,  seized  upon  a  host  of  others. 

After  the  year  1880  almost  the  whole  of  Russian  literature  was 
tinged  with  a  gloomy  pessimism,  and  the  period  of  "  analysis  "  set 
in,  a  period  which  marked  the  death  of  recent  enthusiasms  and 
ardent  feeling.  This  change  in  the  general  state  of  mind  was 
due  in  part  to  the  political  reaction  and  the  cruel  Governmental 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        341 

repression,  and  in  part  to  the  disillusions  of  the  intellectuals,  who 
had  not  found  in  the  people  what  they  had  hoped.  Tiie  intel- 
lectual elite  and  the  people  had  not  been  able  to  draw  very  near 
to  one  another.  A  writer  of  the  period,  young  Osipovitch- 
Novodvorsky  (died  of  tuberculosis  in  1882)  waxed  ironical  over 
this  "march  toward  the  people"  on  the  part  of  the  intellectuals, 
of  whom  he  said  :  "  Neither  jays  nor  peacocks,  they  are  as  far 
from  the  ruling  classes  as  from  the  mass  of  the  people." 

To  this  uncertain  position  of  the  "intellectuals,"  who  seem  as 
though  suspended  in  a  void,  corresponds  a  psychical  and  moral 
degeneration.  Social  questions,  questions  of  the  concrete  life  of 
the  people,  disappear  no  one  knows  whither,  to  give  place  to 
psychological  problems,  analyses  of  sensations  and  ideas,  and 
literature  assumes  a  psychological  character,  a  development  which 
the  *'  psychological  novel "  of  Dostoyevsky  had  foretold. 

I  have  not  yet  had  occasion  to  speak  of  Dostoyevsky,  for  it  is 
difficult  to  refer  this  remarkable  writer  to  his  place  in  current 
literature.      Dostoyevsky   began   in   his   famous   Memories   of  the 
Dead-house^  a  realistic  description  of  the  convict   prison  and  its 
manners,  but  this  novel  did  not  place  him  in  the  camp  of  the 
realists,  whose  leaders  were  Pomialovsky  and  Reshetnikov.     On 
the  contrary,  he  was  violently  opposed  to  "  Nihilistic  "  tendencies 
and  wrote  a  novel  entitled   The  Evil  Spirits^  which  was  directed 
against  "Nihilism"  and  the  revolutionary  movement.     Having 
condemned  the  "pride"  of  the  intellectuals,  Dostoyevsky  con- 
trasted with  this  pride  the  "simplicity"  of  the  popular  mind  and 
lauded    the    "moral    bases"   of   the    Russian    people.      But    the 
mystical  affection  which  he  felt  for  the  people  had  nothing  in 
common  with   the    populism   of   Uspensky.      The    populism  of 
Dostoyevsky  was   of  the    "  Right,"   akin    to    Slavism   and    the 
official  patriotism  ;  that  of  Uspensky  was  of  the  "  Left."      As 
for   the   literary  side   of  Dostoyevsky's  work,  it   may   be   called 
realistic,  but  it  is  the  realism  of  psychology,  almost  of  psychiatry. 
Dostoyevsky's    power    of    reading    the    soul    was    extraordinary. 
Better  than  any  one  he  knew  the  ins  and  outs  of  the  mind  of 
the    Russian    "intellectual,"    that    mind    so    eager    to    "scourge 


342  MODERN  RUSSIA 

itself,"  to  turn  upon  itself — a  mind  without  will,  (His  Under- 
ground Memoirs  are  a  valuable  document  from  this  point  of  view.) 
Neither  Christianity  nor  Satanism  could  save  the  heroes  of 
Dostoyevslcy  from  their  fall,  from  internal  discord,  and  in  vain 
did  his  heroes  call  Christ  and  the  Devil  to  their  aid. 

Between  1880  and  1890  the  tragedy  which  was  proceeding  in 
the  mind  of  the  Russian  "intellectual"  was  depicted  by  many 
authors,  prominent  among  whom  was  Garshin,  who  died  in 
1888.  Garshin  could  not  give  us  the  full  measure  of  his  talent ; 
a  mental  malady  led  him  while  yet  young  to  suicide.  His  Red 
Flower^  which  symbolizes  "all  the  evil  of  the  world,"  recalls  some 
of  the  symbols  of  Dostoyevsky,  although  Garshin's  point  of  view 
was  very  different  from  the  latter's.  Another  of  Garshin's 
novels.  The  Painters^  raises  the  problem  of  the  artistic  vocation 
and  altruistic  duty,  a  question  which  had  already  tormented  the 
"  repentant  seigneurs  "  of  the  populist  period. 

The  revolutionary  fire  of  the  years  1860-80  died  down,  and  in 
literature  the  chronicling  of  "grey,  ordinary  days"  replaced  the 
interpretation  of  tumultuous  impulses.  As  the  poet  of  the  "  grey 
days "  appeared  Tcheichov.  We  have  already  mentioned  this 
writer  in  a  preceding  chapter,  in  which  we  noted  how  readily  the 
comedy  of  the  great  Russian  writers  turns  to  tragedy. 

Tchekhov  (1800-1904),  a  writer  of  most  original  talent, 
resembles  other  Russian  authors  neither  in  form  nor  in  style. 
He  created  and  perfected  the  sketch  and  the  short  story — forms 
comparable  to  those  of  the  French  writers. 

Tchekhov  habitually  seized  upon  one  fact,  one  personage,  one 
moment  in  the  life  of  a  man,  and  therein  reflected,  as  in  a 
microcosm,  the  essence  of  the  life,  the  soul  of  the  person  selected. 
From  the  outset  of  his  literary  career  Tchekhov  concentrated  his 
attention  on  the  comic  sides  of  life,  and  his  laughter  rang  like  the 
joyful  song  of  a  young  bird.  Then  he  devoted  himself  to  depict- 
ing the  sorrows  of  life,  attaining  in  this  province  the  same  perfec- 
tion as  before.  The  trivial  facts  of  the  lives  of  common  folk  were 
described  by  him,  and  for  these  descriptions  he  employed  the 
method  of  artistic  induction  so  dear  to  the  old  Russian  realism, 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        343 

and  at  the  same  time,  like  the  best  ot  the  impressionists,  he  created 
with  a  ^^w  simple  touches  the  desired  mental  attitude. 

All  Russian  society — peasants,  lower  middle-class  folic,  mer- 
chants, nobles,  popes,  bureaucrats,  and  others — passes  through 
Tchekhov's  work  ;  all  are  clothed  in  their  appropriate  manners, 
sometimes  laughable,  but  assuredly  profoundly  sad.  But  Tchekhov 
has  devoted  himself  more  especially  to  the  portrayal  of  the  life 
of  the  "  intellectuals "  ;  to  the  portrayal,  rather,  of  their  dying 
agonies  ;  the  "  intellectuals  "  of  Tchekhov  do  not  live  :  they  die 
slowly.  The  "intellectual"  of  Tchekhov  is  by  no  means  a 
Rudin,  thirsty — at  least  according  to  himself — for  conflict. 
Neither  is  he  a  raznotchinet-z.-nihilisty  believing  in  the  power  of 
positive  knowledge  and  "  the  thinking  personality."  Still  less  is 
he  comparable  to  the  narodnik^  who  thirsts  to  drink  the  "living 
water"  from  the  well  of  "popular  truth."  The  "intellectual" 
of  Tchekhov  possesses  only  one  thing  :  the  past.  For  him  the 
present  and  the  future  are  only  an  interminable  sequence  of 
"grey  days,"  a  waste  of  vulgar  existence,  the  shadow  of  the 
tomb.  .  .  . 

JVhat's  to  be  done?  asks  the  heroine  of  one  of  Tchekhov's 
dramas.  "We  shall  live  ....  We  shall  live  a  long,  long  pro- 
cession of  nights  and  days.  .  .  .  And  then,  obediently,  we  shall 
surrender  ourselves  to  death.  .  .  .  And  we  shall  rest  in  the 
tomb." 

A  tranquil  despair — this  is  the  peculiar  tone  of  Tchekhov's 
intellectuals. 

IV 

"The  flowers  are  faded,  the  fires  are  dead, 
Night  is  impenetrable,  black  as  the  tomb." 

In  these  words  a  Russian  poet  has  characterized  the  mental 
condition  of  Tchekhov's  period,  the  atmosphere  of  the  "  grey 
days."  In  vain  did  many  writers  attempt  to  revive  the  better 
traditions  of  Russian  letters.  In  vain  the  brilliant  novelist, 
Korolenko,  continued  the  work  of  Turgenev,  giving  to  Russian 


344  MODERN  RUSSIA 

society  his  beautiful  studies  of  popular  life,  studies  illumined  by 
the  rays  of  a  genuine  humanism.  In  vain  did  Leo  Tolstoy — 
that  mighty  lion  of  Russian  literature — preach  his  indefatigable 
sermons.  Russian  society  seemed  to  have  forgotten  the  gods  it 
had  adored  but  a  little  while  before.  .  .  .  The  flowers  are  faded^ 
the  fires  arc  dead.  .  .  .  Yes,  but  paper  flowers  have  sprouted  in 
the  place  of  the  living  blossom  ;  in  place  of  the  true  fire  we  have 
fireworks.  To-day  the  foreground  of  Russian  literature  is 
occupied  by  a  host  of  writers  who  regard  literature  as  a  noisy 
trade,  an  advertisement.  At  every  moment  we  have  "  new 
currents,"  each  claiming  to  be  "the  very  latest  thing."  Wc 
have  "  mystic  writers,"  "  anarchist-mystics,"  "  symbolists,"  "  im- 
pressionists," and  plenty  more.  The  public  and  the  critics  do 
not  make  much  efl:brt  to  distinguish  between  all  these  titles  and 
are  content  to  lump  them  together  under  the  style  of  "  Modern- 
ists "  or  "  Decadents." 

Although  in  verse  the  "Modernists"  have  contributed  to 
perfect  the  technique  of  poetry,  on  the  other  hand  they  threaten 
to  destroy  the  noble  simplicity  of  Russian  prose  by  introducing, 
out  of  a  love  of  "  originality,"  artificial  and  affected  terms  and 
phrases.  As  for  the  ideas  of  the  "  Modernists,"  they  are  negative. 
With  much  sound  and  fury,  they  claim  to  have  endowed  Russia 
with  a  "  new  word  "  ;  but  a  study  of  their  works  shows  that  this 
"  new  word  "  is  merely  a  clumsy  falsification  of  the  most  ordinary 
bourgeois  individualisms  borrowed  from  Europe.  Thus  the 
"  Modernists "  are  like  the  cook  who,  having  stolen  from  her 
mistress  a  cast-off  old-fashioned  hat,  ingenuously  imagined  that 
she  was  wearing  the  very  latest  creation.  Modernist  literature 
has  introduced  only  one  novelty  to  the  Russian  reader  :  with 
efforts  worthy  of  a  better  cause,  the  "  Modernists "  have  con- 
centrated their  attention  upon  sexual  subjects.  Here  again  our 
"  Modernists "  are  imitating  models,  especially  French  models. 
But  in  place  of  the  light  and  joyous  Gallic  touch  they  often  give 
us  merely  a  gross  and  naked  pornography. 

It   is  very  regrettable    that   "  Modernism,"   which   has    many 
insignificant  disciples,  should  have  influenced  so  great  a  talent  as 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE       345 

that  of  Leonid  Andreyev,  the  novelist  and  dramatist.  Andreyev 
made  his  literary  clibut  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century 
with  short  stories  in  which  the  methods  of  Russian  realism  were 
mingled  with  impressionist  and  symbolist  elements,  and  which 
revealed  the  influence  of  Edgar  Allen  Poe.  He  then  broke  with 
realism,  and  instead  of  resorting  to  the  inductive  method,  so 
typical  of  Russian  realism,  or  the  purely  deductive  method, 
Andreyev  chooses  no  matter  what  abstract  philosophical  or  moral 
thesis  and  incarnates  it  in  the  semi-abstract  characters  of  his 
books.  It  was  thus  that  he  wrote  two  of  his  longer  novels — 
Thoughts  and  The  Life  of  Fas  si  li  Phiveisky.  The  hero  of  Thoughts 
incarnates  the  question  of  the  relative  value  of  reason  and  insanity, 
and  the  absence  of  a  precise  boundary  between  these  two  states 
of  mind.  The  Life  of  Vassili  Phiveisky  is  a  transcription  or  the 
Biblical  narrative  of  Job,  in  which  the  part  of  Job  is  sustained  by 
a  poor  country  priest,  Vassili  Phiveisky.  A  host  of  misfortunes 
fall  upon  Vassili,  who  is  assured  that  God  has  sent  them  to 
"  mark  him "  with  "  His  ring,"  and  thereby  to  make  him  a 
prophet  and  miracle-worker.  But  the  expected  miracle  is  not 
performed,  and  Vassili  curses  God. 

Andreyev  also  raises  the  question  or  miracles  in  his  drama 
Savva.  The  hero  of  Savva  is  an  atheist,  an  anarchist,  who 
detests  culture  and  dreams  of  destroying  it  in  order  to  see  "  man 
left  naked  on  the  earth."  Particularly,  Savva  hates  religion. 
Anxious  to  uproot  religious  prejudice,  he  tries  to  break  a 
miraculous  ikon  which  is  kept  in  a  country  monastery.  The 
attempt  fails,  owing  to  the  treachery  of  a  young  monk,  Savva's 
confidant,  and  the  crowd,  with  greater  fervour  than  ever,  con- 
tinues to  believe  in  the  "  miraculous  power "  of  the  holy  ikon. 
As  for  Savva,  he  is  killed  by  those  whom  he  sought  to  deliver 
from  their  prejudices. 

The  victory  of  "  the  shadows  "  over  "  the  light,"  of  natural 
forces  over  conscious  forces,  of  "  folly  "  over  "  reason,"  of  death 
over  life,  has  become  the  favourite  theme  of  Andreyev's  work. 
In  his  tale  The  Shadow  a  revolutionary  encounters  a  prostitute, 
the  incarnation  of  human  degradation,  and  arrives  at  the  conclu- 


346  MODERN  RUSSIA 

sion  that  it  is  impossible  to  struggle  with  evil.  Having  denied 
evil  previouslv,  he  finally  recognizes  it  and  approves  of  it  :  "  You 
who  see  !  Let  us  put  out  our  eyes,  for  it  is  shameful  for  us  to 
look  at  those  who  are  born  blind.  If,  thanks  to  our  tiny  lanterns, 
we  cannot  light  all  the  darkness,  then  out  with  the  flame  and 
let  us  all  crawl  in  the  dark.  If  Paradise  is  not  for  all,  I  will  none 
of  it  !  .   .  .   Let  us  drink  in  order  that  all  fires  may  go  out !  " 

In  My  Notes  Andreyev  gives  us  a  defence  of  prisons  and  proves 
the  insignificance  of  liberty.  In  yudas  we  have  the  apologia  of 
treason.  Judas  delivered  Christ  only  to  glorify  Him,  and  his 
treachery  appears  as  the  sublimest  proof  of  love.  In  his  drama 
Anatheyna  he  demonstrates  the  uselessness  of  goodness  and  of 
good  actions,  which  according  to  the  author  are  invariably 
transformed  into  evil.  Finally,  in  the  Life  of  Man  Andreyev 
represents  the  tragedy  of  life  in  general  and  the  absolute  inevit- 
ability of  unhappiness. 

The  pessimism  of  Andreyev  cannot  be  compared  to  the 
pessimism  of  a  Tchekhov,  which  looks  sadly  upon  Russian  life, 
but  not  on  life  in  general.  In  reality,  all  Andreyev's  work  is 
merely  the  apology  of  death,  an  apology  in  which  the  Russian 
intellectual,  from  his  militant  rationalism  and  his  social  ideas  of 
the  mid-century,  has  passed  on  to  a  negation  of  all  ideals,  to  the 
symbolical  glorification  of  darkness  and  the  prison. 

But  while  the  Decadents  belonging  to  the  intellectual  Russian 
bourgeoisie  have  sunk  into  pessimism,  certain  young  voices  have 
arisen  among  the  people — voices  full  of  hope  and  vigour.  Maxim 
Gorky  was  the  first  and  the  best  of  these  heralds  of  the  new  forces 
of  the  people. 

V 

To  understand  and  judge  Maxim  Gorky,  we  should  compare 
him  with  Leo  Tolstoy.  This  comparison  will  enable  us  to  note 
the  individual  peculiarities  of  the  two  great  writers  and  the  path 
which  Russian  literary  genius  has  followed  during  the  last  fifty 
years. 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        347 

Maxim  Gorky  and  Leo  Tolstoy  are  the  two  poles  of  con- 
temporary Russian  literature.  They  belong  to  two  different, 
entirely  different  worlds.  Leo  Tolstoy  was  a  Count,  a  member 
of  one  of  the  oldest  aristocratic  families  of  Russia,  a  rich 
landowner  who  passed  half  his  life  isolated  upon  his  family 
estate.  Gorky,  the  son  of  a  house-painter,  had  to  struggle  for 
life  during  his  whole  youth,  wandering  across  the  steppes  and 
along  the  roads  of  Russia. 

The  development  of  Tolstoy's  literary  talent  commenced 
during  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  that  is  to  say, 
when  the  economic  and  social  conditions  of  Russia  were  very 
different  to  what  they  are  to-day.  The  bourgeoisie  and  the 
industrial  proletariat  of  our  days  did  not  as  yet  exist.  Land- 
owners and  peasants,  military  and  civil  bureaucrats,  made  up  the 
whole  of  society.  The  education  received  in  this  precapitalist 
environment  left  its  mark  upon  Tolstoy.  The  country,  the  life 
of  the  rural  landowners  and  the  peasants,  were  to  the  end  of  his 
days  the  principal  if  not  the  only  theme  of  Tolstoy's  work.  The 
new  social  classes,  especially  the  proletariat,  remained  always 
unknown  to  him,  always  incomprehensible.  He  despised  them, 
recognizing  no  labour  as  "  real  "  and  useful,  except  labour  per- 
formed upon  the  soil,  and  regarding  the  life  of  cities  as  negative 
and  destructive. 

Having  concentrated  all  his  attention  on  the  country  and  the 
life  of  rural  landowners  and  peasants,  Tolstoy  passed  through 
several  stages  in  the  comprehension  and  representation  of  that 
life.  The  first  of  these  phases  was  marked  by  the  immortal 
romance  War  and  Peace.  This  work  contains  the  whole  pre- 
capitalist period  of  Russian  life,  the  nobles  living  still  under  con- 
ditions of  natural  economy,  without  anxiety,  untroubled  by 
doubts,  accepting  life  as  it  came,  profoundly  persuaded  that  this 
life  was  as  it  should  be.  The  "  millions  of  torments  "  which  so 
cruelly  wounded  the  minds  of  the  heroes  of  other  Russian  novels 
of  the  mid-century  had  scarcely  touched  the  heroes  of  ff^ar  and 
Peace.  Only  two  of  them  seem  already  infected  by  the  spirit  of 
inquietude  ;  only    two   seem    to  muse  upon   the  problem  of  the 


34B  MODERN  RUSSIA 

meaning  of  life.      The  heroes  of  TP'ar  and  Peace  are  contented 
to    /ive. 

Anna  Karenin  marks  the  second  phase  in  the  literary  evolution 
of  Tolstoy,  and  in  this  novel  the  Russian  nobility  are  seen  under 
another  aspect.  The  abolition  of  serfdom  has  resulted  in  the 
disappearance  of  the  natural  economy  and  the  advent  of  the  reign 
of  enterprise,  and  the  nobles  have  been  forced  to  awaken  from 
their  slumber  to  choose  between  two  alternatives  :  either  they 
must  waste  their  lives  or  from  being  consumers  turn  producers. 
Levin  chooses  the  latter  issue.  In  him  are  to  be  found  certain 
autobiographical  features.  However,  the  road  he  follows  does 
not  satisfy  the  critical  mind  of  'Folstoy  ;  for  Tolstoy  the  system 
of  bourgeois  economy  was  merely  a  manifestation  of  the  "  false 
culture "  of  cities,  and  he  continued  to  seek  a  solution  to  the 
problem  of  life  outside  the  capitalist  world,  deep  in  the  country. 
Unable  to  find  this  solution  among  the  nobles,  he  applies  to  the 
muj'iks.  And  he  declares  "  the  truth  of  the  mujiks  "  to  be  "  the 
sole  truth  of  God  and  humanity." 

The  germ  of  this  "  truth  of  the  mujiks  "  is  to  be  found  in 
Anna  Karenin  in  the  peasant  Karatayev.  He  is  distinguished  by 
his  perfect  submission  to  fate,  to  the  "  supreme  will  "- — a  submis- 
sion explained  by  the  long  centuries  of  subjection. 

io  the  "  vanity  "  of  the  intellectual  elite  Tolstoy  opposes  the 
"  simplicity "  of  the  life  of  those  who  till  the  soil,  and  in  his 
works  this  submission  takes  shape  in  the  well-known  idea  "  not  to 
resist  evil  by  violence."  This  idea,  joined  to  that  of  "  simplifica- 
tion," constitutes  the  /eit-motif  oi  the  literary  work  of  Tolstoy. 

The  material  and  intellectual  level  of  the  great  mass  of  the 
Russian  people  being  of  the  very  lowest,  Tolstoy  could  not  go  to 
them  with  his  principle  of  "simplification."  It  was  the  upper 
stratum  of  society,  the  class  of  which  he  formed  a  part,  that  he 
called  upon  to  "  simplify  "  themselves. 

The  invitation  to  "  simplify  "  and  "  repent "  seems  to  relate 
Tolstoy  to  the  narodnitchestvo^  whose  representatives  called  them- 
selves "  repentant  seigneur  s^''  and  of  whom  we  have  already 
spoken.      But   while  the  narodniki  of  the   Left  summoned   men 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE       349 

to  collective  battle  and  revolution,  Tolstoy  did  not  believe  in 
revolution,  judging  it  to  be  as  dangerous  as  autocracy,  and  in 
principle  did  not  distinguish  between  Governmental  violence  and 
revolutionary  violence.  In  this  negation  of  organized  conflict 
expressed  by  Tolstoy  we  find  the  essential  features  of  the  peasant's 
character  :  social  amorphousness,  the  tendency  toward  isolation, 
and  the  incapacity  of  organizing  themselves.  By  this  negation 
of  organized  conflict  Tolstoy  also  emphasized  the  necessity  of  the 
individual  struggle  against  evil,  of  a  struggle  which  was  nothing 
more  than  a  passive  resistance  to  evil.  This  individual  struggle 
would  consist  in  not  participating  in  evil,  in  not  accepting  adminis- 
trative duties,  in  refusing  to  sit  as  a  magistrate,  in  refusing  mili- 
tary service,  etc.  It  was  by  these  means  that  Tolstoy  hoped  to 
destroy  the  modern  State  and  to  lead  men  toward  a  free  life  upon 
free  soil.  This  preaching  of  personal  abnegation  was  in  reality 
but  little  dangerous  to  the  Government ;  such  non-organized 
individual  activity  was  too  insignificant  to  harm  the  powerful 
and  complicated  system  of  the  modern  State.  But  little  dan- 
gerous, and  Utopian  also,  was  the  last  ideal  of  Tolstoy,  for  the 
return  to  the  life  of  a  "  free  labourer  "  and  artisan,  accompanied 
by  the  renunciation  of  modern  technical  methods,  of  industry, 
and  of  science,  is  impossible  to  humanity  ;  one  cannot  reverse  the 
wheels  of  history.  But  another  side  of  Tolstoy's  literary  work 
excited  the  resentment  of  the  Russian  reaction.  It  was  his 
criticism  of  the  State  and  of  modern  society,  his  criticism  of  all 
prejudices  in  general,  and  religious  prejudices  in  particular. 
Thanks  to  the  piercing  insight  of  his  mind  and  the  delicate 
hearing  of  his  heart,  Tolstoy  was  able  to  penetrate  beneath  the 
depths  of  modern  social  relations,  relieve  the  sufferings  of  those 
who  were  dear  to  him,  and  depict  them  with  extraordinary  power. 
In  the  darkest  hours  of  a  despotic  reaction,  only  the  fearless, 
indignant  voice  of  the  grand  old  man  echoed  across  the  land. 
All  Tolstoy's  talent  was  devoted  to  the  denunciation  and 
criticism  of  evil.  Tolstoy  considered  art  and  literature  only  as 
means  of  struggling  against  evil  and  to  propagate  humanitarian 
ideas.     Tolstoy's  work   entitled    What  is  Art  f  has  exercised  a 


350  MODERN  RUSSIA 

considerable  influence  upon  foreign  art  criticism.  One  of  the 
most  interesting  representatives  of  the  French  art  criticism  of  our 
days,  M,  Elie  Faure,  has  remarked  in  this  connection  :  "In  tell- 
ing us  of  the  man,  art  teaches  us  of  ourselves.  The  strange 
thing  is  that  it  should  need  to  do  so.  Tolstoy's  book  means 
nothing  else.  It  has  come  in  an  unhappy  hour,  when,  strongly 
equipped  for  our  inquiry,  but  confused  before  the  horizons  vi^hich 
it  opens,  and  perceiving  that  our  efforts  are  dissipated,  we  seek  to 
confront  the  results  acquired,  to  unite  ourselves  to  others  in  a 
common  faith  and  march  forward.  .  .  .  Tolstoy  has  said  what 
needed  to  be  said  at  the  moment  of  his  utterance  "  (Elie  Faure, 
History  of  Art ^  Paris,  1909). 

Gorky  and  Tolstoy  have  one  point  or  contact  :  both  regard 
the  function  of  literature  in  the  same  manner,  feeling  the  same 
contempt  for  "  pure  art."  One  other  feature  they  have  in  common  : 
their  complete  negation  of  the  existing  social  and  political  system. 
Apart  from  this,  Gorky's  talent  seems  to  have  come  from  a 
different  planet  to  that  of  Tolstoy. 

Unlike  Tolstoy,  who  knew  and  loved  only  the  country,  Gorky 
is  a  true  son  of  the  city.  Far  from  regarding  the  peasant's  mind 
as  a  "  well  of  wisdom  and  goodness,"  Gorky  declares  that  it  is 
mean  and  narrow,  and  is  indignant  at  the  greed  of  the  little  rural 
landowner  and  his  narrowness  of  mind.  To  this  greed  and 
narrowness  Gorky  prefers  the  generosity,  the  audacity  of  the 
lumpen-proLctariat^  the  vagabonds  and  thieves,  the  heroes  ot  his 
first  tales.  Submission  to  fate  is  unknown  to  these  latter,  whose 
souls  are  thirsty  for  startling  feats  of  violence  in  which  they  can 
give  proof  of  pride  and  audacity  :  "  Must  we  reduce  the  whole 
earth  to  powder  ?  Or  had  we  better  gather  the  comrades  and  kill 
all  the  Jews  ...  to  the  very  last  man  ?  How  good  it  would 
be,  as  a  rule,  to  accomplish  an  act  which  would  set  you  above 
other  men,  and,  from  your  height,  to  permit  yourself  to  spit 
upon  them  .  .  .  and  say  to  them,  'Ah,  reptiles!  why  do  you 
live  ?  You  are  nothing  but  a  heap  or  liars  and  hypocrites, 
nothing  more  ! '  " 

Such  are  the  dreams  or  Grishka  Orlov,  one  of  the  heroes  or  the 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  LITERATURE        351 

novel,  The  Orlov  Couple ;  dreams  like  those  of  other  heroes  or 
Gorky's.  But  this  anarchistical  Nietzschian  protest  so  soon 
revealed  its  emptiness  that  Gorky  was  prompt  to  abandon  it. 
The  appearance  of  The  Lower  Depths  marks  another  step  in  the 
development  of  Gorky's  talent.  The  bossiakl  (so  in  Russian  are 
called  the  vagabonds  and  representatives  of  the  lumpen-proletariat)^ 
heroes  of  this  work,  no  longer  drape  themselves  in  the  picturesque 
mantle  of  a  superhuman  pride,  but  are  unhappy  creatures  worthy 
of  pity. 

After  this  impulse  toward  anarchistic  individualism  Gorky 
turned  toward  the  collectivism  of  the  Socialists  and  lumpen- 
proletariat^  and  his  sympathies  passed  to  the  organized  proletariat. 
Humble  Folk  is  the  result  of  this  transformation.  In  this  work, 
for  the  first  time  Gorky  depicts  a  "conscientious  workman." 
In  the  person  or  the  mechanician  Nil,  this  "conscientious 
workman "  thinks  and  feels  in  a  manner  quite  foreign  to  the 
writer's  previous  heroes.  Nil  does  not  dream  of  destroying  the 
world.  He  has  only  one  desire  :  "  To  mingle  in  the  whirlwind 
of  life  and  to  help  to  rebuild  it."  In  The  Enemies^  and  particu- 
larly in  his  novel  The  Mother^  Gorky  devotes  his  talents  to 
depicting  the  life  and  the  struggles  of  the  industrial  proletariat. 
Naturally  it  was  difficult  for  Gorky  immediately  to  renounce  his 
anarchistic  point  of  view.  This  point  of  view  we  shall  occasionally 
recover  in  those  works  of  Gorky's  which  are  the  most  animated 
by  the  idea  of  proletarian  collectivism.  In  his  novel  The  Mother^ 
the  hero  of  the  proletarian  movement  is  not  the  mob  itself  but  an 
individual,  so  that  this  novel  is  not  purely  realistic  in  character. 
This  is  easily  comprehensible.  It  is  only  recently  that  the 
Russian  working  class  has  appeared  in  the  social  and  political 
arena,  and  its  ideology  has  not  yet  had  time  to  crystallize.  Every 
class  at  the  dawn  of  its  development  realizes  its  problems  and  its 
future  only  in  a  vague  and  romantic  fashion.  It  is  this  roman- 
ticism which  has  set  its  imprint  upon  Gorky's  work.  But 
although  Gorky  has  not  yet  attained  perfect  power  and  simplicity 
in  the  representation  of  the  life  and  impulses  of  the  proletariat,  he 
is  nevertheless  the  first  and  only  great  Russian  writer  to  paint  the 


352  MODERN  RUSSIA 

proletariat.  In  Gorky's  works  we  see  for  the  first  time  the  noble, 
the  merchant,  the  rciznotchinetz  and  the  mujik  make  way  for  the 
workino;  man.  This  fact  marks  the  commencement  of  a  new  era 
in  the  social  and  literary  development  of  Russia.  What  this  new 
era  will  bring,  this  only  the  future  will  show. 


CONCLUSION 

And  now,  our  review  of  the  material  and  intellectual  life  of 
Russia  being  terminated,  let  us  try  to  obtain  therefrom  a  final 
deduction. 

What  is  the  feature  that  most  strikes  the  observer  of  Russian 
life  ?  It  is  undoubtedly  its  extreme  complexity,  for  Russian  life 
is  a  curious  compound  of  violently  contrasted  elements,  of 
mutually  contradictory  principles. 

Contradictions  abound  in  all  spheres  of  Russian  life.  In  the 
economic  domain  we  see  modern  capitalism  developing  itself  with 
American  celerity,  beside  mediaeval  villages  whose  economy  is  still 
almost  natural.  In  the  social  domain  the  proletariat,  conscious 
and  organized,  eager  to  procure  the  triumph  of  the  ideal  of 
universal  happiness,  and  trained  in  the  ideas  of  a  theoretical 
socialism,  lives  side  by  side  with  feudal  seigneurs  who  do  not 
recognize  even  the  most  elementary  demands  of  justice.  In  the 
political  domain  the  most  sincere  and  ardent  aspirations  towards 
liberty  contend  against  the  worst  possible  methods  of  repression. 
And  in  the  literary  and  artistic  domain,  while  many  Russians  are 
known  far  beyond  the  frontiers  of  their  country  for  the  noble 
simplicity  and  profundity  of  their  thought,  one  hundred  million 
inhabitants  of  Russian  soil  are  absolutely  illiterate.  The  youth 
of  the  intellectual  and  working  classes  are  materialistic  atheists, 
but  the  most  barbarous  prejudices,  the  most  primitive  of  fetichisms, 
constitute  the  mentality  of  the  Russian  peasantry.  On  the  one 
hand  is  an  arrogant  aristocracy  incessantly  feasting  in  stone-built 
capitals  ;    on   the  other  are  millions  of  human   beings  sheltered 

23  ^" 


354  MODERN  RUSSIA 

under  roofs  of  straw  and  nourished  by  a  stony  bread  composed 
of  the  pounded   bark  of  a  tree. 

"And  poor 
And  abundant 
And  mighty 
And  impotent 
Art  thou,  O  our  mother,  Russia  ! " 

writes  a  Russian  poet,  saddened  by  the  contrasts  of  Russian  life. 
These  contrasts  demonstrate  not  only  the  backward  state  of  the 
country  and  its  isolation  from  the  great  nations  of  Europe,  but 
also  its  material  and  spiritual  dependence  upon  these  nations. 
The  contrasts  of  Russia  are  formed  by  the  clash  of  modern, 
European,  and,  if  you  will,  universal  ideas,  and  the  remains  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  the  heritage  of  that  period  when  Russia  still  lived 
her  own  life,  and  was  not  yet  drawn  into  that  mill  of  the  world 
which  crushes  between  its  mighty  stones  the  grain  of  old  humanity 
to  make  the  bread  of  the  Future.  And  however  mournful  the 
present  situation  of  Russia,  however  hard  to-day  the  fate  of 
her  people,  we  may  affirm  that  the  new  life  will  triumph,  and 
may  say  with  Napoleon  :  "There  are  two  systems,  the  past  and 
the  future.  The  present  is  only  a  painful  transition.  Which  will 
triumph  ?     Is  it  not  the  future  ? " 


INDEX 


Abduction  of  peasant  girls,  85 

Absolutism,  see  Autocracy 

Administration  in  the  eighteenth 
century,  63-4 

Administrations,  budget  of  the,  206 

Agents  provocateurs,  187 

Agrarian  problems,  138-54 ;  re- 
forms of  1906,  285-7 

Alcoholism,  see  Vodka 

Alexander  I,  59,  60,  67,  215 

Alexander  II,  138 

Alexander  III,  215,  236 

Alexander  Nevsky,  47 

Alexei  Romanov,  58 

Ancestor  worship,  73-4 

Animism,  71-6 

"  Aristo-serf  "  culture,  86 

Army,  expansion  of,  60 ;  rejec- 
tions on  account  of  physical 
deficiency,  149 ;  loans,  209  ; 
bad  conditions  in,  224-8  ; 
Kuropatkin  on,  225  ;  com- 
pulsory service,  226  ;  officers 
of,  226  ;  insanitary  conditions 
in,  226-7  '>  ^<^^  Russo-Japanese 
War 

Aryan  invasion,  19 

Asia,  awakening  of,  218 

Asiatic  immigration,  14 

Austria,  military  power  of,  235 

Austro-Russian  conflict,  223 

Autocracy,  origin  and  resources 
of,  173-228 


355 


Avowal,  feudal  right  of,  45,  50 
Azov,    Terrorist    and     police-spy, 
187-92 

Bagdad  Railway,  219 

Balkans,   Russian   policy  in    the, 

222 
Baltic  Sea,  15 

Baltic,  shores  of,  conquered,  59 
Barshtchina,  the,  61-2 
"  Black  Bands,"  the,  264-7 
Black  Sea,  15;  mutiny  in  squadron, 

269 
"  Bloody  Sunday,"  92 
Boris  Godunov,  56-7,  60 
Burtzev,  quoted,  167 
Boyars,  the,  39,  45,  50,  55  ;  dimin- 
ished powers  of,  56  ;  64 
Boyars'  Duma,  45,  50 
Boyarshtchina,  division  of  land,  43 
Bratzy,  "consolers,"  317 
Budget,    eighteenth    century,  63, 

176  ;   rapid  increase  in,  205- 

12 
Bureaucracy  (178-84),  composition 

of,    179-80  ;     cost     of,    182  ; 

poverty  of  lower  grades,  182- 

3  ;  corruption  of,  183 
Byzantine  ideology,  51,  77-8 
Byzantium,  51 

Cabinet,  the,  175 
Camarilla,  the,  175-6 


156 


INDEX 


Capital,   action    of,    99  ;    foreign, 

103-6  ;       development      and 

forms     of     Russian,    114-37; 

organization  of,  122-3 

Capitalists,  revenue  of,  113 

Catherine  II,  59,  64-5,  87,  91,  277, 

331 
Caucasus,  conquest  of,  60 
Census,  the  first,  107  ;  of  workers, 

109-11,  123-6 
Central    power,    organization    of, 

173-7 
Chasles,  M.,  quoted,  275 
China,    war    with    Japan,    236-7 ; 

trade  with,  239-40 
Chinese  as  colonists,  239 
Cholera  riots,  89 
Christianity,  early,  77 
Church,    feudalism    of     the,    45  ; 

wealth  of,  81-2 
Cities,  growth  of,  134  ;  migration 

into,  156  ;  shocking  condition 

of,  199-200 
Clergy,  ignorance  of,  80  ;  heredi- 
tary nature  of,  81 
Climate  of  Russia,  15 
Coal,  105 
Commerce,  see  Capital,   Industry, 

Trade,  etc. 
Commercial  journals,  122,  136 
Communal  organization  of  society, 

37 

Commune,  the  village,  150-4 

Communistic  spirit  among 
peasants,  150-2 

Concert  of  Powers,  the,  216-18 

Constantinople,  61  ;  siege  of,  in 
1204,  41,  48 

"  Cook's  children,  circular  con- 
cerning the,"  166 

Council  of  Empire,  182 

Courts-martial,  194 


Crimea,  conquest  of  the,  59,  233 
Crimean  War,  68,  139,  216 
Customs,  24 

Dan,  Tartar  tribute,  50 

Daniel  Alexandrovitch,  47 

Danube-Adriatic  Railway,  223 

Death  penalty,  frequency  of,  194 

Decadents,  328-9,  344 

"  Decembrist,"  revolt  of  the,  67-8, 

215 
"  Descent  among  the  people,"  91 

Dimitri,   the   real   and    the   false, 

57-91 
"  Disavowal,"  feudal  riglit  of,  45, 

50,  61 
Divinities,  natural,  72-3 
Dostoyevsky,  novelist,  324,  340-1 
Dukhobors,  the,  314 
Duma,  the,  175,  194,  272-9 
Dvorianie,  the,  56-7,  63 
Dvorianstvo,  the,  61,  63-5 
Dwellings,     peasant,     deplorable 

condition  of,  148 

Eagle,  the  two-headed,  51 
Economic  organization  of  Russia, 

97-104 
Education,  106-7  ;  primary,  201-3 
Electoral  law,  the,  278 
Empire,  foundation  of  the,  58 
Employers,  union  of,  121 
Exports,  see  Trade 

Family,  the,  155-61 
Family  group,  the,  36-7,  155-6 
Famine,  288 
Fanatical  sects,  312-13 
Fctichism,  75,  163 
Feudal  hierarchy,  42-6 
Feudalism,    destroyed,    65  ;    sur- 
vivals of,  92 
Finances  of  State,  205-12 


INDEX 


357 


Financial  crisis  after  war,  245 

Fines  in  factories,  128 

Finland,  absorption  of,  60  ;  prob- 
lem of,  300-1 

Finnish  settlers,  21,  26-7 

Folk-tales  and  lore,  71-7 

Foreign  politics,  213-24 

Forests,  16 

Franco-Russian  alliance,  216-21 

French  finance,  harmful  results  of, 
168-9 

French  Revolution,  232-3 

Functionaries,  provided  by 
dvorianslvo,  63 

Funds,  Russian,  loss  on,  209 

Gapon,  Father,  agent  provocateur, 

92 
Garshiii,  novelist,  342 
Germany,  military  superiority  of, 

224  ^ 

Glacial  action,  15 
Gogol,  novelist,  333 
Golden  Charter,  91 
Golden  Horde,  47  ;  downfall  of,  51 
Gontcharev,  novelist,  335,  337 
Governments,  the  provincial,  196 ; 

assemblies  of,  197 
Governors,  provincial,  196 
Greek  colonization,  20 
Guerasimov,    attempts     to     save 

Azev,   192 

Health,   public,   200-1  ;   of   army, 

226-7 
Herodotus,  13 

Imperial  family,  land  owned  by. 

144-5-  173-4 
Imports,  see  Trade 
Income,  average,  of  workers,  112 
Industrial  centres,  130-4 
Industries,  village,  or  ^Hs/ar,  130-2 


Industry,   development    of,   66-7, 
101-3,    105,    106 ;    abatement 
of,   1 16-17;   higher  organiza- 
tion of,  1 1 7- 1 8 
Insurrection  of  peasants,  87-9 
Intellectual  classes,  162-70 
Ivan  Kalita,  67 
Ivan  the  Terrible,  50,  55-6 
Ivan  III  refuses  to  recognize  the 
Khan,  51 

Japan,  revolution  in,  235 ;  her  Heet 
built  with  Russian  money,  237; 
ultimatum  of,  to  Russia,  238 ; 
war  breaks  out,  238;  see  Russo- 
Japanese  War 

Jews,  massacre  of,  266,  304 

Judges,  mere  officials,  143 

"Judicial  statutes,"  193 

Judicial  system,  192-5 

Juries,  193 

Kautsky,  quoted,  249 
Khan,  the  Tartar,  25,  47  ;  grants 
titles  to  Russian  Grand  Dukes, 

50 
"  Kiev,  period  of,"  24,  40,  41 
KhUchevsky,  quoted,  15,  30,  31 
Korea,  trade  of,  238 
Kourbsky,  Prince,  50 
Kronstadt,  mutiny  at,  267 
Kuropatkin,  quoted,  217-18,  233-5 
Kustar  industries,  130-2 

Labour,  hours  of,  128 

"  Labour   Delegates,  Council  of," 

264,  267 
Labour  party,  253-5 
Land,  tenure  of,  42-3  ;  by  serfs  at 

time    of    liberation,    139-40 ; 

how    divided    among    State, 

landlords,  and  peasants,  144-5, 


358 


INDEX 


150-2 ;    after    the   reform  of 

igo6,  287 
Landowners,  revenue  of,  112 
Laufer,  Dr.,  quoted,  128-g 
Le  Bon,  quoted,  81-2 
Legislative  power,  the,  I'jfy-'j 
Lcnnonlov,  poet,  332-3 
Liberal  party,  252-63 
Literature,  fruit  of  serfdom,  86-7, 

321-9;  evolution  of,  330-52 
Local  self-government,  196,  209 
Lositsky,  quoted,  123 
"Lysis,"  quoted,  208-9,  219,  225 

Manchuria,  222  ;  see  Russo-Japan- 
ese War 
Mancliurian  Railway,  237 
Marriage,  39 
Materialism,  333 
Merchants  as  manufacturers,  66 
Metallurgical  industries,  102,  105  ; 

combination  of,  119-20 
Metropolitan,  the,  49 
Middle  Ages,  in  Russia,  42 
Migulin,  Professor,  qnoied,  208,  241 
Mine-owners,     1  combination      of, 

118-19 
Ministers,     dependent     on    Tsar, 

175 
Mirsky,  Prince,  247 
Modernism,  344 
Mongol  invasion,  20 
Montesquieu,  quoted,  34-5 
Mortality,  in  villages,  146-7 
Moscow,   rise   of,   48-9 ;    triumph 

of,  50  ;  "the  third  Rome,"  51  ; 

insurrection  of,  269-70 
Moscow,  High  Princes  of,  25,  47, 

Moscow,  principality  of,  47  ;   be- 
comes a  Grand  Duchy,  50 
"  Moscow,  period  of,"  24,  42 


Nadson,  poet,  328 

Nationalist  problem,  the,  297-306 

Navy,  in  the  Russo-Japanese  War, 

242-3 
Nekrasov,  poet,  325-6 
Neurasthenia,  prevalence  of,  149, 

291 
Nicolas  I,  60,  63  ;  peasant  revolts 

under,  87 
Nicolas  II,  attempt  on  life  of,  236  ; 

273 
Nihilism,    162-70 ;     in    literature, 

336-7 

Nihilist,  the,  defined,  162-3 

Nijni-Novgorod,  48 

Nobles  as  judges  and  police,  63  ; 
compulsory  service  of,  abol- 
ished, 64  ;  scramble  for  posts, 
64-5 ;  failure  of,  to  erect  a 
new  economic  system,  142-3 

Novgorod,  46,  48 

Ogariov,  poet,  322,  326 
Okhrana,  the,  secret  police,  187 
OpnlcJiuina,  the,  55-6 
Orthodox  Church,  79 ;   loses  dis- 
ciples, 309 

PaliEologus,  Sophia,  marries  Ivan 

111,51 
Pan-Slavism,  227 
Patriarch  of  Moscow,  the,  58 
Paul  I,  killed  by  Imperial  Guard, 

65 

Pavlov-Silvansky ,  quoted,  43 

Peasants,  under  feudal  system,  46  ; 
under  serfdom,  61  ;  in  the 
eighteenth  century,  62  ;  revolts 
of,  87-8  ;  wealthy  peasants, 
143  ;  diet  of,  148-9 ;  degenera- 
tion among,  149 ;  indifference 
of,  to  the  Duma,  274 


INDEX 


359 


People,  the  Russian,  105-13 

"  Period  of  troubles,"  57 

Persian  Gulf,  Russia  on  the,  217 

Petchenegs,  25 

Peter  the  Great,  58  ;   reforms  of, 

58-9;  78 
Peter    III,     killed     by    Imperial 

Guard,  65,  91 
Peter,  Saint,  of  Tver,  49 
Pisogov,  166 
Pissarev,  critic,  326 
Pleshtchiev,  poet,  323 
Plehve,  assassination  of,  188,  247 
Poetry,  see  Literature 
Pogogev,  quoted,  115,  123,  124,  153 
Pogroms,  264,  274 
Pokrovsky,  quoted,  37,  42 
Poland,  partition  of,  59,  247 
Police,  "  yellow  "  and  "  black,"  135  ; 
village   police,   181  ;   persecu- 
tion and  extortion   by,    183  ; 
census  of,  185  ;  cost  of,  186  ; 
political  police,  186;  as  agents 
provocateurs,  187-92 
Polish  problem,  296,  300 
Political  ideology,  250-62 
Political  parties,  250-62,  273-4, 279 
Polovetzes,  24 
Poniialovsky,  novelist,  337-8 
Popes,  the  Orthodox,  venality  of, 

80-1 
Population,  density  of,  60-1,  107-9  '< 
active    and   dependent,    109 ; 
standard  of  life,  iii 
Port  Arthur,  236-7  ;  population  of, 

239  ;  reduction  of,  243 
Potemkin,  mutiny  on  the,  263-4 
Press,  muzzling  of  the,  282 
Prices,  inflated  by  tariffs,  122,  211 
Prikazes,  64 

Prime  Minister,  the,  175 
Professional  census,  iio-ii 


Proletarianization   of  the  people, 

123 
Prostitution,  86,  157-8 
Pskov,  46 
Psychology  affected    by  serfdom, 

82 
Public  Debt,  the,  207-8 
Public  health,  146-7  ;  injured  by 

army,  227 
Pugatchev,  pretender,  87,  91 
Pushkin,  poet,  39,  322,  332 

Races  of   Russia,   18-33  »*   'i^^  of, 

32-3  ;  297-306 
Raskol,  the,  310-11 
Reaction,   number   of    victims   of 

the,  194-5 
Reshetnikov,  novelist,  338 
Religions  of  Russia,  33  ;  primitive, 

71-6;  307-17 
Revolution,  the  Russian  :  "  stifling" 

the,  194-5  ;  231-4,  262-3,  276, 

289-94 
Revolutionary      Socialist       party, 

258-9 
Riga,  prisoners  shot  in,  274  ;  tor- 
tures employed,  281 
Rivers  of  Russia,  13 
Rojkov,  quoted,  53-4 
Romanov,    Mikhail    Fedovoritch, 

57 
Rural  courts,  193 
Rural  economy,  basis  of  the  State, 

70 ;    break   up   of    the,    106 ; 

138-54 
Rurik,  51 
Russia,   area   of,    13  ;    geography 

of,    13-17 ;    coastline  of,   14 ; 

geology  of,  14  ;  expansion  of, 

S9»6o 
Russo-Japanese    War,     cost     of, 

209-10,     216,    228    (231-49); 


36o 


INDEX 


causes  of,  234  ;    incidents  of, 
242-8 
Ryleev,  poet,  322 

Saghalicn,  cession  of,  235 

St.  Petersburg,  founded,  59 

"  St.  Petersburg,  period  of,"  58 

Sand,  plague  of,  16 

Sarmatians,  the,  19 

School-teachers,  conditions  of, 
202-3 

Scythians,  the,  19 

Senate,  the,  195 

Serfdom,  instituted,  61-2  ;  aboH- 
tion  and  results  of,  138-42 

Serfs,  conditions  of  the,  62-3  ; 
right  to  sell  conceded,  64 ; 
in  industries,  66-7  ;  tortured, 
83-5 ;  land  owned  by  at 
liberation,  139-40  ;  liuge  ran- 
som paid  by,  141 

Sergius,  Grand  Duke,  assassi- 
nated, 188-9 

Shouisky,  Prince,  elected  Tsar,  57 

Siberia,  conquest  of,  59  ;  serfs  sent 
to  by  masters,  65  ;  recent 
exiles  to,  195 

Siberian  Railway,  241 

Slavs,  the,  22-4,  28-9 ;  primitive 
society  of,  36-7  ;  primitive 
religion,  71-6 

Smolensk,  48 

Social  Democracy,  259-62 

Socialism,  168-9 

Society,  structure  of,  251 

Soul,  theory  of  the,  73-6 

Spring,  legend  of,  74 

State,  the,  evolution  of,  34-68  ; 
basis  of,  70  ;  military  activity 
of,  70  ;  institutions  of,  175 

Strikes  :  the  general  strike,  262  ; 
strikes  of  1905,  263-9 


Sugar,  106,  123 
Syndicalism,  135-6 
Syndicates,  1 17-19 
Synod,  the  Holy,  58,  79 

Talienvan,  236-7 

Tariffs,  prices  inflated  by,  122,  211 

Tartar  Khan,  the,  sovereign  of 
Russia,  47 

Tartars,  invasion  of,  24-5  ;  tribute 
paid  to,  50  ;  yoke  of,  thrown 
off,  50 

Taxation,  iii  ;  arrears  of,  211  ; 
indirect,  211 

Tchekhov,  novelist,  etc.,  333-4 

Tchernyshevsky,  poet,  326 

Tchinovniki,  the,  89 

Temperature,  15 

"Third  Section,"  the  (police),  186 

Tolstoy,  novelist,  347-50 

Torture,  of  serfs,  84-6  ;  of  political 
prisoners,  280-2 

Totemism,  75 

Tughan-Baranovsky ,  quoted,  ri6 

Trade,  development  of,  66  ;  ex- 
ports and  imports,  97-9 ;  ex- 
cess of  exports,  100 ;  with 
Finland,  301 

Trade  journals,  suppressed,  121 

Trades,  census  of,  iio-ii 

Trades  unions,  135-6 ;  dissolved 
by  police,  137 

Trans-Siberian  Railway,  236 

Treasury,  the,  181 

Trepov,  General,  262 

Trusts,  1 17-18 

Tsar,   the    Russian,   65  ;    popular 
conception  of,  90,  93  ;  wealth 
of,    173  ;   Azev  plans  to    kill 
192  ;  see  Duma 

Tsar,  the  Tartar,  47 

Turgenev,  novelist,  124, 163-4,323-4 


INDEX 


361 


Tver,  Archbishop  of,  49  ;  city  of, 
49 

Ukraine,  59 
Vloginu,  legal  code,  58 
Unity,  Russian,  47 
Universities,  166-7,  283-4 
Urban  culture,  lack  of,  129-30 
Uspensky,  novelist,  346 

Variags,  the  (Varingians),  21 
Vassili  Dimitrovitch,  51 
Viborg,  Proclamation  of,  276,  281 
Villages,  condition  of,  115,  146-7  ; 

life  in,  157 
Virchow,  quoted,  201 
Vladimir,  capital,  42,  47 
Vladimir  Monomakh,  40 
Vodka,     Government     monopoly, 

121  ;  ravages  of,  149  ;  profits 

on,  211-12 
Voevody,  the,  64 
Volga,  basin  of  the,  13  ;  conquest 

of,  59 


Volontaire,  quoted,  236, '246 
Voltaire,  333 
VoUairiajieiz,  331 

Wage-earners,  census  of,  123-6 
Wages,  125-8 
Wars,  losses  by,  214 
Warsaw,  59 

Witte,  Count,  222,  266-8,  285 
Women,  position  of, J 126,  155-61 
Workers,  census  of,   124  ;  female 
and  child,  125-6 

Yakubovitch,  poet,  326 
Yalu  River,  battle  of,  242 
Yaroslav  the  Wise,  40 
Yermak  conquers  Siberia,  59 

Zemskii  natchalniki,  197 

Zemskii  sobory,  57-8 

Zemstvos,  the  (196-204),  budget  of, 

fixed,    199  ;     in    South  -  west 

Russia,  305 
Zubatov,   chief   of    secret    police, 

135 


24 


Ubc  (Bccabam  fitcss, 

U^fWIN  BROTHERS,  LIMITED, 
WOKING  AND  LONDON. 


fc6 


THE  LIBRARY 
INIVFRSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Santa  Barbara 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DTK  ON  THF  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW. 


lOOM  11/86  Scries  9482 


3  1205  01126  5806 


UC  SOUTHERN  RFGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA    000  499  458 


i! 


tliii 


i 


WMt 


mmm 


lAiiti 


