<9 


a SBRMY IHSTITUTE  FOR  HDVHHCED  RUSSIAN 

AND 


BIST  BJROPERN  STUDIES 


'$5te£El5jJ§!?: 


STUDENT  RESEARCH  REPORT 


”r.  Pi  chard  A.  Hotherrcl 
THE  SOVIET  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  NETWORK 
IN 

TIT  AGE  or  n\THXlAP 


DDC 


QARMISCH,  GERMANY 


APO  NEW  YORK  09053 


“DISTHUJUTION  STATE  IA£lTT  A 

Approved  lot  public  r»\»a«*5 
IdBtriijutiou  Unlixalfd 


MAY  18  lflTTT 


THE  SOVIET  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  NETWORK 

IN 


THE  AGE  OF  OVERLOAD  . 


Mr.  'Richard  A.  Rothermel  ! 
U.S.  Army  Russian  Institute 
March  11,  1976 


l i 


FOREWORD 

This  research  project  represents  fulfillment  of  a 
student  requirement  for  successful  completion  of  the 
overseas  phase  of  training  of  the  Department  of  the  Army's 
Foreign  Area  Officer  Program  (Russian) . 

Only  unclassified  sources  are  used  in  producing 
the  research  paper.  The  opinions,  value  judgments  and 
conclusions  expressed  are  those  of  the  author  and  in  no 
way  reflect  official  policy  of  the  United  States  Govern- 
ment; Department  of  Defense;  Department  of  the  Army; 
Department  of  the  Army,  Office  of  the  Assistant  Chief 
of  Staff  of  Intelligence;  or  the  United  States  Army 
Institute  for  Advanced  Russian  and  East  European  Studies. 

Interested  readers  are  invited  to  send  their  comments 
to  the  Commander  of  the  Institute. 


SUMMARY 


This  study  is  an  attempt  >>to  determine  the  overall  condi- 
tion of  the  intercity  (long-distance)  telephone  system  of 

I -I s v cc  a N 

the  Soviet  Union.  /<  The  focus  of  the  paper  is  on  the  telephone 
system  of  the  USSR  Ministry  of  Communications,  with  its 
nationwide  network  of  intercity  telephone  stations;  it  touches 
only  briefly  on  "departmental"  telephone  service  (not  a part 
of  the  Ministry  of  Communications) , and  it  deals  not  at  all 
with  military  communications.  Local  (city  and  rural)  tele- 
phone facilities  are  discussed  only  to  the  extent  that  they 
relate  to  the  intercity  system. 

Prefaced  by  an  introductory  survey  of  some  of  the  tech- 
nical features  of  telephone  service  pertinent  to  this  study, 
the  paper  goes  on  to  provide  a lengthy  discussion  of  speci- 
fic problems  in  the  Soviet  intercity  telephone  system,  presents 
detailed  descriptions  of  operational  procedures  at  the  inter- 
city stations,  and  describes  some  of  the  Soviet  plans  for 
the  future.  Nearly  all  of  the  foregoing  is  based  on  original 
research  of  Soviet  literature  on  the  subject  (textbooks,  pro- 
fessional journals,  and  numerous  local  and  national  Soviet 
newspapers) . 

fr-  \ 

Some  of  the  findings  of  this  study  are  as  follows:  the 

Soviets  find  their  intercity  telephone  system  to  be  inadequate 
in  a number  of  ways;  they  are  occupied  with  modernization 
and  expansion  on  a broad  scale,  gradually  replacing  outmoded 
equipment. with  more  reliable  modern  gear,  expanding  and 


increasing  the  channel  capacity  on  their  cable  and  radio- 
relay  mainline  systems,  and  are  gradually  changing  over  to 
a unified  automated  system  designed  to  handle  the  huge 
volume  of  digital  information  generated  by  the  introduction 
of  electronic  computers  in  the  management  of  the  national 
economy. y As  a result  of  obsolete  and  heavily  overloaded 
systems  prevalent  in  the  network  as  a whole,  the  Soviets  are 
forced  to  rely  to  a great  extent  on  manual  operations  just 
to  cope  with  the  current  workload,  while  the  system  in 
general  will  require  "radical"  improvement  before  it  is  able 
to  cope  with  the  demands  placed  on  it  by  the  computeriza- 
tion of  the  economy.  In  all  probability,  the  modernization 
campaign  will  go  on  for  a long  time. 

(In  treating  this  rather  complex  subject,  the  paper 
attempts — with  varying  degrees  of  success — to  satisfy  both 
the  layman  and  the  communications  expert  by  limiting  as  much 
as  possible  technical  details  and  jargon  in  the  report 
proper  and  including  such  detailed  descriptions  in  the  appen- 
dices, where  they  might  be  helpful  to  those  who  possess 
detailed  knowledge,  or  to  those  who  aspire  to  such  knowledge, 
or  who  are  just  naturally  curious.) 

★ * * 

Special  thanks  are  due  to  Captain  John  C.  Reppert,  U.S. 
Army  Signal  Corps,  for  his  encouragement,  his  counsel  and 
support,  and  his  careful  criticism  of  this  project. 


IV 


THE  SOVIET 

INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  SYSTEM 
IN  THE  AGE  OF  OVERBAD 


■ 

S I 

'Mr  vjPW 
mjS 

H 1 

4 • 

I — 

m 

SCO 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Foreward  ii 

Summary  iii 

Table  of  Contents  v 

Introduction  viii 

PREFACE  - The  Age  of  Overload  xii 

The  18-digit  Number  xiv 

Manual  Servicing  xv 

Automatic  Servicing  xv 

Establishing  Connections:  Switching  xvi 

Common  Control  Systems  xvii 

The  Crossbar  Exchange  xviii 

Direct  Dialing  and  Automatic  Recording 

of  Billing  Data  xxii 

Concept  of  Long-distance  Telephone  Operations  xxiv 

PART  I - PROBLEMS  IN  THE  SOVIET  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE 
SYSTEM 

General  1 

Methods  of  Operation:  Manual  and  Semi- 
automatic Operations  ^ 

The  Advance-Booking  System — Prime  Symptom 
of  Overload  2 

Routing  Through-Calls  Via  Intermediate 

Switching  Points  ^ 

Scheduled  and  Semi-Permanent  Through  Trunks  ^ 

Obstacles  to  Automatization  ^ 

Reliable,  Modern,  High-Speed  Equipment 

is  Needed  ^ 


v 


PART  II  - ORGANIZATION  FOR  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  SERVICE 
IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


General  9 

Methods  of  Establishing  Connections  9 

Systems  of  Operation  in  Intercity  Telephone 
Communications  11 

The  Advance  Booking  System  12 

The  Immediate  System  13 

The  Rapid  System  13 

Organization  of  the  Intercity  Telephone 

Network  and  the  Method  of  Assigning  Numbers  15 

The  Intercity  Telephone  Network  of  the 

Soviet  Union  17 

The  Numbering  System  18 

Services  Provided — Categories  of  Service  20 

Categories  of  Conversations  22 

Calculating  Costs  for  Intercity  Telephone 
Communications  23 

PART  III  - PROBLEMS  AND  PROSPECTS  ON  THE  ROAD  TO  MODERNI- 
ZATION 

Modernization:  Planned  and  In-progress  25 

Upgrading  Station  and  Line  Facilities  28 

Crossbar  Automatic  Telephone  Stations  28 

Cable/Radio  Relay  Lines  and  Multiplexing  Systems  30 

Satellite  Communications  35 

Foreign  Assistance  36 

New  Directions  39 

The  United  Automatized  Telecommunications 

System  (EASS)  A3 

New  Types  of  Telephone  Exchanges  A 5 


vi 


EASS:  Relationship  to  the  Zonal  Network  46 

The  Soviet  Intercity  Telephone  System  in 
Operation  48 

Quality  of  Service  48 

Attempts  to  Spur  Productivity  50 

Continuing  Problems  53 

Some  Conclusions  58 

APPENDICES 

A Growth  in  the  Soviet  Telephone  System  63 

B Operational  Process  of  Establishing  Intercity 

Connections  by  the  Semiautomatic  Method  65 

C Organization  for  Advance  Booking  and  Immediate 

Systems  of  Operation  69 

D Principles  of  Organization  of  a Soviet 

Telephone  Network  76 

E System  of  Assigning  Telephone  Numbers  on  the 

Soviet  Intercity  Telephone  Network  79 

F Principles  of  Organization  of  the  EASS  85 

G Abbreviations  89 

H Map  of  the  Soviet  Union  91 

I Satellite  Communications  92 

J "Oblako"  Crossbar  Intercity  Telephone  Station  107 

Footnotes  ^ 7 

Bibliography  127 


vii 


INTRODUCTION 


The  XXIVth  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of 
the  Soviet  Union,  which  was  held  between  30  March  and  9 April 
1971,  called  for  a significant  improvement  in  the  tele- 
communications system  of  the  USSR  during  the  1971-1975  Ninth 
Five  Year  Plan.  In  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s,  in  the 
nation  as  a whole,  an  extensive  project  was  already  under 
way  for  complete  automatization  of  its  telephone  facilities. 
Obsolete,  unreliable  switchboards,  and  outmoded  electro- 
mechanical switching  equipment  were  to  be  dismantled  and 
replaced  with  the  more  reliable  electromagnetic  switching 
frames  of  the  "crossbar"  system.  Presently,  when  the  Soviets 
speak  of  modernization  of  their  telephone  stations,  for  the 
most  part  they  are  referring  to  the  introduction  of  the 
crossbar  system,  which  uses  electromagnetic  contacts  of 
precious  metal  to  perform  its  switching  and  line-finding 
functions,  is  faster,  more  reliable,  and  requires  less 
maintenance  than  the  equipment  it  is  intended  to  replace. 

In  1970,  the  Soviets  reported  that  approximately  15  percent 
of  the  districts  (raions)  of  the  nation  were  equipped  with 
crossbar  equipment.  The  telephone  industries  of  Sweden  and 
Hungary  are  deeply  involved  in  the  manufacture  and  installa- 
tion of  crossbar  telephone  stations  in  the  USSR. 

But  introduction  of  modern  switching  equipment  is  only 
part  of  the  Soviet  telecommunication  problems. 


viii 


» 

[' 

t 

i « 


i 


It  is  also 


necessary  to  "force" /to  use  the  Soviet  term,  the  construc- 
tion of  "mighty"  intercity  cable  and  radio-relay  lines  using 
the  "most  modern  methods"  of  multiplexing.  One  Soviet 
answer  to  this  problem  is  a 1,920-channel  system  (developed 
in  cooperation  with  the  Hungarians) , which  provides  a 
theoretical  capacity  of  over  11,000  channels  for  a planned 
7,000  miles  of  long-haul  circuits.  This  system  reportedly 
completed  its  trial  period  in  1973;  however,  by  1975  its 
capabilities  were  not  being  realized,  partly  owing  to 
bottlenecks  and  lack  of  coordination  in  procurement  and 
installation  of  the  necessary  peripheral  equipment  (antennas, 
cable-matching  gear),  and  partly  owing  to  noise  problems 
(the  system  operates  on  vacuum  tubes).  A 3,600-channel 
basic  capacity  system,  said  to  be  "automatized  and  more 
reliable"  was  also  being  "developed." 

As  of  the  early  1970s,  the  USSR  Ministry  of  Communi- 
cations did  not  have  a reliable,  high-speed  data  transmission 
system.  Yet  there  is  an  urgent  requirement  for  improving 
reliability,  speed,  and  flexibility  in  their  telecommunica- 
tions system  as  a whole.  At  the  same  time,  the  Soviets 
were  discussing  a "secondary"  telephone  and  telegraph  net- 
work, which  was  to  use  pulse-code  modulation  for  transmission 
of  "all  types"  of  information  (but  which  is  particularly 
advantageous  for  sending  digital  information) . 

Fearlessly  disregarding  the  GIGO  concept  (Garbage  In  - 
Garbage  Out) , the  Party  has  decreed  that  massive  computeriza- 
tion will  be  the  salvation  of  the  Planned  Economy  (A 


IX 


■ ■ ■ : 


■■i 


prominent  Soviet  economist  estimated  that,  otherwise,  every 
adult  in  the  nation  would  be  involved  in  the  planning  process 
by  the  1980s). 

The  XXIV  Party  Congress  called  for  significant  growth 
in  the  production  of  electronic  computers  during  the  Ninth 
Five  Year  Plan.  A prerequisite  for  the  development  of  a 
nationwide  network  of  computer  centers,  however,  was  a 
"radical  improvement"  in  communications  facilities.  The 
Soviet  answer  was  the  EASS  (Edinaia  Avtomatizirovannaia 
Sistema  Sviazi  - United  Automatized  Telecommunications  System) , 
a unified  network  of  central  exchanges,  stations,  and  lines 
of  communications  to  be  erected  all  across  the  USSR,  for 
transmission  of  "all  types"  of  information,  and  which  is  to 
be  controlled  by  electronic  computers. 

That  the  Soviets  intend  to  improve  and  expand  their 
telecommunications  system  is  no  doubt  true.  The  scope  of 
their  planning  clearly  indicates  that  Soviet  planners  have 
been  neglecting  their  telephone  system  for  many  years,  so 
that  it  is  a potentially  serious  bottleneck  in  their  system 
of  directing  the  economy.  (In  the  Planned  Economy,  nothing 
is  supposed  to  happen  without  the  Plan.)  For  many  years,  the 
Soviets  relegated  their  telephone  system  to  the  group  given 
secondary  attention  in  their  economy  (the  first  group  being 
heavy  industry  and  defense-related  industries) ; now  they 
appear  to  be  paying  the  price  for  that  neglect. 

Analysis  of  operational  processes  (methods  of  establishing 


x 


connections,  organization  for  intercity  telephone  service) 
reflected  in  current  Soviet  literature  reveals  a significant 
degree  of  manual  operation,  partly  owing  to  the  predominance 
of  obsolete  control  and  switching  equipment,  and  partly  to  a 
significant  lack  of  channel  capacity,  characterized  by  the 
extensive  use  of  an  advance-booking  system  via  manual  switch- 
boards for  placing  intercity  calls — all  of  which  testifies 
to  a heavily-overloaded  system  that  it  may  take  years  to 
modernize  and  replace,  other  things  being  equal. 

Thus,  in  spite  of  official  Soviet  optimism,  the  future 
may  not  be  as  rosy  as  their  rhetoric  suggests.  They  are 
faced  with  an  enormous  project,  and  the  sophisticated  equip- 
ment their  planning  calls  for  is  of  the  type  which  requires 
very  high  standards  of  uniformity  and  quality — an  area  in 
which  the  Soviet  (non-defense)  industry  has  inherently  per- 
formed poorly.  Therefore,  the  Soviets  will  be  depending  to 
a great  degree  on  foreign  assistance  in  order  to  complete 
their  modernization  campaign. 

In  spite  of  the  difficulties,  the  Soviet  system  will,  of 
course,  ensure  that  their  most  important  functions  receive 
first  priority  in  the  use  of  the  telecommunications  system  at 
the  expense  of  all  the  rest,  and  the  Party,  the  key  industries, 
and  the  military  who  use  the  facilities  will  not  suffer  as 
much — yet  from  all  indications  the  Soviets  will  be  a long 
way  from  optimum  service  for  some  time  to  come,  and  without 
optimum  transmission  facilities,  the  "computerization"  of  the 
economy  cannot  be  fully  realized. 


PREFACE 


The  Age  of  Overload 

An  American  journalist  writing  in  Newsweek  describes  a 
crisis  in  the  American  telephone  system,  in  which  "circuits 
are  overloaded  beyond  anybody's  wildest  dreams."  We  are 
living,  the  author  declares,  in  "The  Age  of  Overload,"  but 
we  are  experiencing  a revolution  in  telephone  service  at  the 
same  time.  One  means  for  coping  with  the  problem  of  over- 
loaded circuits  is  to  design  switching  and  control  systems 
which  operate  at  extremely  high  speed.  "The  transistor," 
the  Newsweek  article  continues,  "...makes  the  modern  tele- 
phone office  identical  with  the  modern  computer...  The  new 
switchboards  can  be  altered  now  like  a computer,  by  repro- 
gramming . " 

The  Chief  of  the  Soviet  Central  Scientific  Research 

Institute  of  Telecommunications,  writing  in  Vestnik  Sviazi 

. 2 

(Herald  of  Communications ) , flatly  stated  that  existing 
Soviet  switching  and  control  systems  are  not  suitable  for 
computer  control,  partially  because  of  the  relatively  low 
speeds  at  which  the  switching  gear  operates,  and  partially 
because  of  the  unreliability  of  Soviet  computers.  (More 
than  likely  the  unreliability  factor  is  deciding;  after  all, 
as  long  as  the  computer  is  faster  than  the  switchboard,  one 
should  be  able  to  interface;  it  is  possible  that  peripheral 
gear  for  interfacing  is  lacking  also.)  Electromechanical 
switching  devices  were  the  mainstay  of  the  Soviet  intercity 


telephone  network  at  that  time  (1970) ; this  equipment  performs 
mechanical  operations  "with  clanking  regularity"  at  speeds 
measured  in  seconds.  Relatively  newer  equipment,  which  began 
to  be  introduced  in  the  USSR  in  the  mid-1960s  (Crossbar 
system),  operates  on  electromagnetic  principles,  and  performs 
its  switching  and  line-finding  functions  at  speeds  measured 
in  milliseconds.  Electronic  computers,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  capable  of  executing  millions  of  operations  per  second. 

In  the  early  1970s,  electronic  switching  devices  of  Soviet 
manufacture  were  present  only  in  the  experimental  stages.3 

There  is  considerable  evidence  in  Soviet  literature  to 
indicate  that  the  Soviet  Union  is  also  feeling  the  effects 
of  the  Age  of  Overload.  In  this  paper,  some  of  the  features 
of  the  Soviet  telephone  system  which  create  difficulties  for 
them,  and  some  of  their  plans  for  modernization  will  be  dis- 
cussed. Additionally,  the  paper  discloses  some  of  the  ways 
in  which  they  are  attempting  to  cope  with  the  situation  in 
the  meantime. 

A Soviet  engineer-scientist,  writing  for  a journal  of 

the  Novosibirsk  division  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences, 

Economics  and  the  Organization  of  Industrial  Production 

(No.  1-1975),  has  a few  interesting  thoughts  to  share  on 

4 

contemporary  use  of  the  telephone: 

A scientific  investigation  completed  in  the  late  1960s 
revealed  that,  while  such  persons  as  dispatchers 
spend  up  to  70  percent  of  their  time  on  the  tele- 
phone, and  workers  in  the  service  industries — up  to 
50  percent,  the  average  specialist  spends  an  insigni- 
ficant amount  of  his  or  her  working  hours  on  the 

xiii 


telephone;  which,  it  would  seem,  does  not  have  a 
great  effect  on  the  accomplishment  of  other  duties. 

It  turns  out  to  the  contrary:  people  are  spending 

more  and  more  time  on  the  phone,  and  the  number  of 
times  one  turns  to  the  phone  per  day  is  growing 
steadily.  A few  years  ago,  the  average  length  of 
telephone  conversations  was  110  seconds.  Today  it 
is  more  than  twice  that  amount.  At  the  same  time, 
the  total  number  of  telephones  in  the  world  has 
doubled  in  the  last  ten  years. 

(The  growth  rate  was  even  greater  in  the  USSR.  Please  see 
Appendix  A,  the  table  showing  the  number  of  phones.) 

The  Soviets  are  planning  and  building  a "United  Auto- 
matized Telecommunications  System"  as  the  overall  solution 
to  their  problems.  The  same  Soviet  engineer-scientist 
relates  an  incident  which  reveals  some  of  the  frustrations 
in  the  interim  period: 

Now  we  are  actively  enjoying  the  use  of  automatic 
intercity  telephone  communications,  which  is  a part 
of  the  EASS  being  built  in  our  country.  When  using 
this  type  of  communications  (however] , we  frequently 
forget  about  the  fact  that  we  no  longer  have  an 
operator  to  advise  us  as  we  are  accustomed:  "Is  this 

25-30?  Novosibirsk  is  calling.  Go  ahead,  please." 

The  party  in  Moscow,  hearing  your  voice  and  thinking 
it  is  just  a local  call  (not  really  listening  to  what 
you  said — your  call  interrupted  his  train  of  thought  ) 
says,  "No,  Petrov  isn't  here;  he's  in  the  next  office," 
and  hangs  up  on  you! 

Now  you  have  to  start  all  over  again  and  dial  that 
eighteen  digit  number  again  and  again.  As  it  turns 
out  it  is  already  busy,  and  the  automatic  system 
hasn't  helped  you  a bit! 

8-801-0621242-2712979 

It  will  be  explained  later  just  how  the  Soviets  arrived 
at  a system  that  requires  dialing  eighteen  numbers  in  order 
to  "direct  dial"  from  Novosibirsk  to  Moscow,  and  also  why. 
(By  the  way,  this  is  about  the  same  distance  as  from  Chicago 
to  Los  Angeles.)  But  first,  iy  be  helpful  to  examine  the 


xiv 


r 


i 


i* 

•; 


■ 

•» 


T1 


workings  of  a telephone  station  in  some  detail,  and  gain 
some  appreciation  of  what  goes  on  there.  This  will  provide 
a basis  for  evaluating  the  Soviet  System. 

Manual  Servicing 

A brief  outline  of  the  major  operations  occurring 
in  making  a call  through  a manual  office  (this  is 
an  office  in  which  the  connections  are  made  by  the 
telephone  operator  rather  than  automatically  as  in 
a machine  switching  office)  will  illustrate  the  prin- 
ciples . 

Removing  the  receiver  from  the  hook,  or,  for  hand 
sets,  the  removing  of  the  hand  set  from  the  cradle, 
closes  switch  contacts  connecting  the  instrument 
across  the  line  to  the  central,  where  a signal  lamp 
associated  with  this  particular  phone  lights  up  on 
the  switchboard.  The  operator  responds  by  plugging 
into  the  corresponding  answering  jack  on  the  board, 
asking  for  the  number,  and  then  completing  the  con- 
nection by  means  of  another  plug  cord.  Ringing  is 
then  usually  done  automatically  until  the  called 
party  answers  or  the  calling  party  hangs  up.  When 
the  call  is  over  and  the  parties  hang  up,  other 
supervisory  lamps  on  the  board  light  and  indicate 
to  the  operator  that  the  connection  should  be  re- 
moved . 

When  a community  has  more  phones  than  it  can  handle, 
more  offices  must  be  provided  to  handle  them.  The 
various  offices  serving  a community  constitute  an 
exchange  or  exchange  area.  Calls  from  one  office 
to  another  can  be  handled  by  an  extension  of  the 
simple  process  given  above,  the  calling  party's 
operator  passing  the  call  on  to  an  operator  in  the 
called  office  who  completes  the  connection.  Sep- 
arate switchboards  are  used  for  taking  calls,  i.e., 
answering  the  calling  party  and  requesting  the 
number,  and  for  connecting  to  the  called  line.^ 

Automatic  Tervicina 


i 

I 


. 


Dial,  or  more  accurately,  machine  switching  per- 
forms the  connecting  functions  automatically  under 
the  direction  of  the  dial  of  the  calling  telephone. 

Dialing  the  number  sends  pulses  to  the  central  office, 
these  pulses  being  used  to  control  the  necessary 
switching.  The  simplest  dial  system  [Emphasis  mine-RR] 
is  the  rotary  selector  or  step-by-step  system,  L 


1 


xv 


_ 


which  will  be  outlined  to  illustrate  the  principles 
involved . 

When  the  calling  party  removes  his  receiver  from  the 
hook,  the  line  circuit  is  closed  through  the  dial  con- 
tacts. Instead  of  a lamp  lighting  on  a board  as  in 
the  manual  system,  a line  finder  starts  searching  for 
the  calling  line.  This  searching  is  initiated  by  the 
closing  of  the  hook  switch  contacts  at  the  calling 
subscriber's  phone  and  is  terminated  when  the  finder 
locates  the  line.  The  subscriber  then  hears  the  dial 
tone  indicating  that  the  office  circuits  are  ready  to 
receive  the  call.  The  subscriber  then  dials  the  number, 
one  digit  at  a time.  For  each  digit  a number  of 
pulses  are  sent  over  the  line,  the  number  corresponding 
to  the  number  being  dialed.  These  pass  through  the 
line  finder  connections  to  a switching  device  called  a 
selector.  This  is  a notching  relay  mechanism,  which 
will  be  notched  up  one  step  for  each  pulse,  there 
being  ten  steps  to  handle  the  range  of  possible  values 
for  each  digit.  When  the  sequence  of  pulses  stops 
(this  happens  when  the  subscriber  rotates  the  dial  for 
the  second  digit) , the  selector  automatically  rotates 
by  steps  until  it  connects  to  a second  selector  which 
is  not  busy.  This  second  selector  responds  to  the 
second  digit  pulses  in  the  similar  manner,  and  so  on. 

When  all  the  digits  have  been  dialed,  if  the  line  is 
not  busy,  the  connection  is  completed  automatically 
and  the  called  phone  is  rung.  Upon  completion  [Emphasis 
mine — RR)  of  the  conversation,  the  parties  hang  up 
and  all  switches  return  to  normal. 

The  first  commercial  automatic  exchange  went  into  opera- 
tion in  La  Porte,  Indiana,  in  1892.  It  employed  the  step- 
by-step  principle,  much  like  that  described  above.  (Ori- 
ginally the  customer  operated  a push-button  to  generate  the 
pulses.  The  dial  system  was  not  invented  until  1896.) ' 
Establishing  Connections:  Switching 

Establishing  a connection  between  any  two  phones  out  of 
a large  group  is  a complicated  process,  even  in  the  simplest 
situation,  where  both  phones  are  served  by  the  same  switch- 
board. It  is  necessary  to: 

(1)  observe  that  a customer  wishes  to  make  a call; 

(2)  connect  the  switching  mechanism  to  his  line; 

xv  i 


1 


(3)  determine  what  telephone  he  wishes  to  be  connected 
with 

(4)  select  a speech  path  between  them  which  is  not 
already  in  use; 

(5)  determine  whether  the  wanted  telephone  is  idle  or 
busy; 

(6)  if  idle,  ring  the  bell,  or,  if  busy,  inform  the 
calling  customer; 

(7)  determine  when  the  call  has  ended;  and 

(8)  restore  all  equipment  to  its  original  state,  in 
readiness  for  other  calls. 

If  the  phones  are  served  by  different  switchboards, 

perhaps  in  widely  separated  cities,  it  is  also  necessary  to 

determine  what  switchboard  serves  the  wanted  telephone  and 

8 

how  it  may  be  reached. 

Common  Control  Systems 

Thus  far  we  have  considered  only  one  automatic  switching 
system,  the  step-by-step  system.  Several  other  switching 
systems  have  been  invented  (in  the  United  States  and  Sweden) . 
For  example,  an  automatic  switching  system  which  operates  on 
the  principle  of  "common  control,"  stores  the  dialed  pulses 
for  a short  time  in  a device  which  then  controls  the  switches 
either  directly  or  through  some  intermediate  mechanism. 

The  distinguishing  feature  of  such  systems  is  that  the 
common  control  mechanisms  (known  as  registers,  senders,  trans- 
lators, directors,  markers,  etc.)  are  not  assigned  to  the 
customer  for  the  duration  of  his  call  but  are  used  only  as 
long  as  they  are  needed  and  are  then  free  to  serve  other 


xvii 


ac 


• 'IV'.Tr 


customers.  Thus,  each  serves  many  calls  per  hour,  and  few  are 

required.  Systems  using  common  control  have  great  flexibility 

and  efficiency  in  the  use  of  channel  groups  and  are  esnecially 

advantageous  for  large  exchanges  and  for  automatic  routing 

9 

of  long  distance  calls. 

The  earliest  "common  control"  systems  were  developed  by 
Western  Electric  in  1906;  a "panel"  system  was  in  operation 
in  Newark,  New  Jersey,  in  1915.  The  most  recent  common 
control  systems  have  been  crossbar  systems  (which  are  manu- 
factured by  Bell,  ITT,  and  the  L.M.  Ericsson  Co.  of  Sweden.) 
(The  Soviets  are  doing  a lot  of  business  with  the  latter.)'*'® 

It  is  important  to  go  into  the  crossbar  system  in  more 
detail,  since  it  involves  a number  of  very  important  concepts 
in  the  modernization  of  a telephone  system.  (Each  of  the 
concepts  represents  a problem  area  to  the  Soviets  with  their 
existing — largely  obsolete — control  and  switching  equipment.) 
The  Crossbar  Exchange  (Please  see.  Appendix  J paqe  107.) 

The  most  important  concepts  in  the  evolution  of  the 
modern  types  of  crossbar  exchanges  were  probably  translation, 
the  sender,  the  marker,  the  crossbar  switch,  and  the  prin- 
ciple of  call-back  operation: 

Translation  - 1906  - makes  it  possible  to  convert  in- 
coming dial  pulses  from  decimal  to  nondecimal  form  and,  thus, 
affords  flexibility  and  efficiency  in  the  use  of  trunk 
groups ; 

The  Sender  is  essentially  an  automatic  mechanism  which 

generates  new  dialing  signals,  either  in  the  code  given  by 

xviii 


the  translator  or  in  other  appropriate  codes; 

The  Marker  - its  basic  function  is  to  make  a prelim- 
inary test  of  several  alternative  paths  to  a wanted  desti- 
nation through  an  array  of  switches,  before  any  of  the  switches 
are  closed,  so  as  to  void  the  possibility  of  encountering  a 
busy  switch  after  part  of  the  switching  operation  has  been 
performed.  It  was  invented  in  Sweden  in  1912.  As  used  in 
the  crossbar  systems  of  the  Bell  System,  the  marker  has  been 
developed  into  a complex  assemblage  which  serves  as  the  basic 
control  element  for  the  entire  switching  operation.  Among 
other  things,  it  tests  the  circuits  before  connections  are 
established;  seeks  out  alternate  paths  when  needed;  and  reports 
trouble  conditions,  which  may  be  encountered  in  its  prelim- 
inary tests.  Since  it  can  examine  a large  number  of  circuits 

practically  simultaneously,  it  uses  them  with  great  ef f i- 
11 

ciency . 

(The  management  in  the  Soviet  Ministry  of  Communications 
is  constantly  exhorting  its  intercity  telephone  operators  to 
'increase  the  effectiveness  of  their  productivity"  through 
more  efficient  utilization  of  their  channel  groups — a clear 
indication  of  their  limitations  in  this  regard — one  need  not 
exhort  a machine!) 

The  Crossbar  Switch  - is  essentially  a multiple  relay 
structure  affording  fast  operation  and  reliable  contacts  of 
precious  metal.  The  first  satisfactory  design  was  worked 
out  in  Sweden  in  1919,  and  was  put  into  operation  in  1926. 


Most  of  the  crossbar  switches  used  in  America  and  other 


countries  follow  the  Swedish  design. 


12 


Call-Back  - a principle  of  operation  invented  in  1938, 


which  has  been  effectively  used  in  crossbar  systems.  When 


a customer  originates  a call,  the  register  stores  not  only 
the  wanted  number  but  also  the  identity  of  the  calling  tele- 
phone, which  is  determined  automatically.  The  connection 
with  the  calling  subscriber  is  then  disconnected,  and  an 
entirely  new  connection  established,  from  a favorable  point 

within  the  exchange,  to  both  the  calling  and  wanted  tele- 

, 13 

phone . 

(In  the  Soviet  telephone  system,  until  quite  recently, 
the  above  operations  were  either  performed  manually,  semi- 
automatically , or  automatically  in  a rather  clumsy  way — by 
dialing  18  digits.) 

* * * 

All  of  the  automatic  switching  systems  described  were 
built  around  the  electro-magnetic  relay  and  other  electro- 
magnetic devices.  The  relay  employs  magnetic  attraction 
produced  by  an  electric  current  to  move  a magnetic  armature 
and,  thus,  open  or  close  electrical  contacts  so  as  to  perform 

switching  or  other  operations.  (The  device  dates  to  the 

14 

early  19th  century.) 

Modern  switching  systems  require  approximately  1,000 
relay  operations  to  establish  a single  telephone  connection, 
and  some  systems  have  as  many  as  10  relays  per  subscriber. 


• 4 

.1 


y 


XX 


Reliability  is  extremely  important.  Less  than  one  failure 
in  40  years  is  a normal  criterion  for  satisfactory  operation. 

(In  contrast  with  these  requirements  for  reliability,  it 
was  reported  in  1973  that  the  telephone  system  of  Tbilisi, 
the  capital  city  of  the  Georgian  SSR,  experienced  nearly 
35,000  failures  in  the  previous  year.  At  times,  every 
second  telephone  in  the  city  was  not  working.  It  was  fre- 
quently impossible  to  contact  someone  located  on  the  other 
side  of  town,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  )^ 

Crossbar  Tandem  Equipment  - the  modern  version  of  the 
tandem  principle  developed  originally  for  manual  systems, 
handles  traffic  between  opposite  sides  of  a large  metro- 
politan area  through  one  or  more  intermediate  (tandem) 
offices  which  act  as  clearing  houses  for  these  relatively 
small  amounts  of  traffic,  handling  them  more  efficiently 
than  if  direct  paths  were  provided  and,  thus,  reducing  the 
number  of  trunk  circuits  required. 

Another  type  of  crossbar  system  is  especially  adapted 

to  the  automatic  switching  of  long  distance  circuits.  The 

first  crossbar  switching  system  in  the  long-distance  field 

(introduced  in  Philadelphia  in  1943)  enabled  operators, 

17 

but  not  customers,  to  dial  long  distance  calls. 

(Operator-dialed  long  distance  calls  are  quite  common 
in  the  Soviet  Union.  This  will  be  discussed  later  under 
"semiautomatic  system.") 


xxi 


1 


Direct  Dialing  and  Automatic  Recording  of  Billing  Data 

The  US  advance  which  permitted  operator-dialed  long  dis- 
tance calls  was  followed  by  another  which  permitted  direct 
dialing  by  customers  without  the  aid  of  an  operator.  The 
switching  mechanism  selects  the  route  to  the  distant  phone. 
Should  it  find  all  circuits  busy,  it  explores  in  succes- 
sion as  many  as  five  alternate  routes,  and  establishes  the 
connection  along  the  least  circuitous  one  available.  All 
this  is  done  automatically.  Necessary  information  regarding 
direct  and  alternate  routes  to  the  destination  is  perma- 
nently available  in  a translator,  which  supplies  it  to  the 
control  circuits  as  required. 

Closely  related  to  automatic  switching  is  the  automatic 
recording  of  data  for  preparing  the  customer's  bill.  The 
simplest  means  for  this  purpose,  used  in  either  manual  or 
automatic  offices,  is  an  electromechanical  counter,  known  as 
a message  register,  which  records  the  number  of  calls  made 
by  a customer.  In  a more  elaborate  arrangement,  the  register 
can  be  operated  more  than  once  in  a single  call,  the  number 
of  operations  depending  upon  the  distance  and  duration  of  the 
call.  Each  customer  is  billed  on  a bulk  basis  for  all  of 
the  "message  units"  totaled  on  his  register.  This  plan  is 
widely  used  in  America  and  almost  universally  elsewhere. 
Another  method  of  charging  is  automatic  ticketing  first 
introduced  in  Belgium,  where  automatic  equipment  prints  for 
each  call  a ticket  similar  to  one  that  might  be  prepared  by 
an  operator.18 


i 


xxi  1 


In  America,  where  distances  are  great  and  the  tariff 
structure  complicated,  a highly  versatile  type  of  message 
registration  system,  called  Automatic  Message  Accounting  (AMA) 
was  developed  in  the  mid-1950s.  In  this  system  the  informa- 
tion needed  for  billing  calls  is  recorded  in  the  form  of 
coded  holes  in  paper  tape.  Automatic  processing  of  the  tapes 
in  an  accounting  center  yields  bills  with  any  desired  amount 

of  detail.  The  AMA  system  is  extensively  used  in  association 

19 

with  direct  distance  dialing. 

(In  the  Soviet  Union,  the  above  functions  are  performed 
for  the  most  part  by  hand,  where  the  operator  monitors  the 
duration  of  the  call  using  a stop  watch.  Herald  of  Communi- 
cations , moreover,  reported  the  astounding  news  that  an 
exemplary  central  accounting  center  had  begun  using  adding 
machines  to  aid  in  computing  customers'  bills. )2^ 

In  the  U.S.  most  long-distance  calls  can  be  dialed 
directly  to  the  distant  point  (either  by  the  operator,  or 
by  the  subscriber) . This  requires  a system  of  control- 
switching points;  regional  centers  (for  large  geographic 
areas) ; sectional  centers  (for  part  of  a region) ; primary 

centers  (for  part  of  a section)  ,*  and  toll  centers  (serving  a 

21 

cluster  of  local  offices).  For  direct-distance  dialing  a 
special  tape  records  in  code  the  details  of  the  call — the 
telephone  number  called,  the  number  of  the  caller,  the  time 
the  phone  is  answered,  and  the  time  the  call  is  disconnected. 
The  tape  is  processed  by  a special  accounting  machine,  which 

, p p 

details  the  charges  for  the  customer. 

xxiii 


1 1 

I.  PROBLEMS  IN  THE  SOVIET  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  NETWORK 
General . Now  that  a number  of  operating  principles 
pertinent  to  the  study  have  been  covered,  attention  may  be 
returned  to  the  Soviets.  Current  Soviet  literature  reveals 
a great  many  problems  in  their  telephone  system:  their 

physical  plant  is  aging,  and  is  in  some  cases  clearly  obso- 
lete; manual  operations  are  maintained  "to  a great  extent," 
and  delays  in  service  are  not  uncommon;  intermediate  switching 
for  through-calls  is  not  fully  exploited  because  certain 
essential  equipment  is  lacking;  "a  very  large  number"  of 
stations  are  equipped  with  obsolescent  switching  gear;  auto- 
matic number  identification  and  cost  accounting  equipment  is 
largely  lacking,  which  presents  a serious  obstacle  to  fully 

H 

automatic  direct  distance  dialing.  To  these  problems,  we  may 
add  some  rather  serious  personnel  problems  (owing  largely 
to  poor  working  conditions) — a high  rate  of  staff  turnover, 
and  a continuing  lack  of  well-trained  technicians.  Finally, 
the  low  efficiency  of  the  Soviet  socialist  system  is  reflected 
in  frequent  complaints  of  shortages,  delays  and  shoddy  work- 
manship in  construction,  and  in  indifference  on  the  part  of 
the  workers  (reflected  in  the  constant  exhortations  to 
work  harder,  to  "increase  the  effectiveness  of  productivity."*) 

[‘NOTE:  "Productivity,"  in  Soviet  terms  is  defined  by  the 

income  received  for  various  types  of  services  performed  by 
the  communications  enterprises.] 


The  Soviets  recognize  the  need  for  modernization,  and  a 
program  has  been  underway  for  several  years;  nevertheless, 
the  problem  areas  cited  are  current  enough  to  provide  a 
general  impression  of  the  situation  in  the  USSR  over  the  past 
10  years.  Now  some  of  the  problem  areas  will  be  taken  up  in 
detail . 

Methods  of  Operation:  Manual  and  Semiautomatic  Operations 

An  inter-regional  exchange  designed  for  manual  operation 

was  introduced  on  the  intercity  telephone  network  in  the  USSR 

in  1950.  These  stations  were  subsequently  equipped  with  1960- 

model  switchboards,  and  are  now  capable  of  both  manual  and 

semi-automatic  operations,  although  "certain  switchboards  of 

obsolete  types  are  also  found."  At  the  present  time,  "a  very 

large  number"  of  intercity  telephone  exchanges  equipped  with 

• 2 3 

the  1960-model  switchboards  are  in  operation  in  the  USSR. 

(See  photo  montage  at  beginning  of  paper.) 

Manual  Switching  To  Be  Phased  Out:  In  practice,  one 

encounters  situations  when  both  methods  of  establishing  long- 
distance connections — manual  and  semiautomatic — are  combined. 
But  the  Soviets  predict,  that  for  the  large-capacity  inter- 
city telephone  stations,  the  purely  manual  method  of  servicing 
connections  "will  practically  cease  to  exist."  The  manual 
method  of  establishing  connections  "is  steadily  decreasing 
everywhere  (on  a percentage  basis),  and  the  time  is  not  far 
off  when  it  will  be  used  only  in  exceptional  cases  or  in 
general  will  not  be  used  at  all.  In  the  near  future , manual 


2 


r 

s 


i! 

H 

4 


switching  will  cease  to  be  used  in  local  telephone  stations 

24 

as  well."  [Emphasis  mine-RR]  (In  order  to  be  able  to  use 
the  "semi-automatic"  method  of  making  the  long  distance  con- 
nection, where  the  intercity  operator  dials  the  number,  the 
destination  telephone  station  must  have  automatic  switching.) 

The  Advance  Booking  System — Prime  Symptom  of  Overload — A 
ffanual  Operation 

In  order  to  permit  better  utilization  of  the  long  distance 
channels,  an  advance  booking  system  is  used--which  means,  th<=t 

a customer  has  to  wait  a relatively  long  time  for  his  call 
to  be  completed.  (A  discussion  of  this,  and  the  "immediate," 
and  the  "rapid"  systems  of  operation  is  found  in  Part  II.) 

Advance  bookings  are  made  by  telephone  operators  at 
so-called  booking  switchboards,  while  the  connections 
are  made  by  operators  at  the  intercity  switchboard. 

Servicing  the  booking  consists  of  two  stages:  re-  ) 

cording  the  pertinent  information  with  the  booking 
operator,  and  making  the  connection  (in  order  of  re- 
ceipt of  the  booking)  by  the  long-distance  operator. 

At  the  present  time,  the  greater  part  of  the  book- 
ings  made  are  serviced  with  a certain  amount  of 
delay,  and,  without  employing  call-back,  it  is  not 
possible  to  complete  the  connection  at  all.  Call- 
back is  often  necessary  in  any  event  to  verify  the 
number  given  by  the  person  who  booked  the  call. 

[Emphasis  mine-RR]  |1 

One  of  the  shortcomings  of  the  advance  booking  J 

system  arises  from  the  practice  of  assigning  a , 

number  of  channels  to  a given  switchboard,  which  S 

creates  difficulties  when  calls  come  in  from  a 
number  of  channels  simultaneously.  ^ 


Routing  Through-Calls  Via  Intermediate  Switching  Points — 
A 5ore  Spot 


The  capabilities  for  semi-automatic  and  automatic  me- 
thods of  establishing  connections  are  not  yet  sufficient  for 


3 


H 


. 


widespread  utilization  of  connection  by  means  of  intermediate 

(transit)  switching  stations,  without  using  what  the  Soviets 

call  "straightened"  channels.  ("Straightened"  channels  are 

those  which  are  joined  in  advance  by  technicians  in  the  line- 

2 6 

equipment  room  of  the  telephone  station.) 

Delays . Actually,  if  the  connection  passes  through 

"transit"  stations,  delays  may  occur.  Under  the  manual 

method  of  establishing  one-time  intermediate  switchings,  the 

time  required  for  servicing  connections  increases: 

The  problem  is,  that  for  a long  time  now,  the 
advance-booking  system  of  operation  and  the  manual 
method  of  establishing  contact  has  been  used  on  the 
intercity  network  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  on  many 
communications  routes.  Because  of  this,  connections 
between  the  intercity  telephone  stations  on  the 
mainline  network  have  been  accomplished  for  the  most 
part  without  using  intermediate  switching  points, 

or  through  a single  switching  point.  7 l 

Single  "Transits".  The  Soviets  report,  that  at  the 
present  time,  in  practice,  connections  are  very  frequently 
made  through  only  one  transit  station.  When  making  inter- 
mediate switchings,  differences  in  attenuation  on  the  channels 
sometimes  causes  great  difficulties.  In  "rare  cases','  the 

quality  of  the  speech  channel  is  especially  poor  because  of 

2 8 s 

the  switching  equipment  used  at  the  transit  stations. 

I 

Scheduled  and  Semi-Permanent  Through  Channels 

On  certain  lines,  and  especially  during  peak  traffic  , 

hours,  intermediate  switchings  are  made  in  the  line-equip- 
ment room  of  the  station,  either  on  a semi-permanent  basis, 
or  according  to  a daily  schedule,  to  provide  through- 

I 


4 


communications  between  major  population  centers.  But,  the 
Soviets  report  that: 

Scheduled  intermediate  switchings  will  gradually 
be  phased  out  as  automatic  switching  is  introduced 
and  the  number  of  channels  is  increased.  Now,  when 
the  semiautomatic  and  automatic  methods  of  estab- 
lishing intercity  connections  have  found  widespread 
use  on  the  network  of  the  Soviet  Union,  and  a num- 
ber of  transit  stations  have  appeared,  the  need  for 
register-retranslator  equipment  at  those  stations 
through  which  automatic  through-routing  is  established 
becomes  exceptionally  critical.  For  a long  time 
automatic  transit  was  used  in  a very  few  cases  in  the 
Soviet  Union,  and,  therefore,  register-retranslator 
equipment  was  not  used.  Where  these  registers  are 
not  installed,  whenever  a connection  passes  through 
a transit  point,  the  telephone  operator  at  the 
calling  station  has  to  dial  a large  number  of  digits 
and  wait  for  the  readiness  signal  at  each  transit 
point.  " 

(This  is  why  Herald  of  Communications  lavishly  praised 
a certain  operator  as  an  example  to  her  fellow  workers,  for 
her  willingness  to  "cheerfully"  make  transit  connections! 

She  probably  deserved  the  award,  what  with  having  to  fulfill 
her  daily  norms  (servicing  a given  number  of  calls),  and  then 
having  to  service  time-consuming  transit  connections  as 
well . ) 

Lack  of  Equipment  Hinders  Intermediate  Switching . The 
Soviets  admit  that  their  intermediate  switching  capabilities 
have  been  "insufficiently  exploited,"  and  recognize  that 
all  transit  stations  must  be  "gradually  equipped  with  regi- 
ster-retranslator equipment."  (Also  see  Appendix  E 
and  Preface,  page  xxi,  regarding  translation,  call  back.) 

Maintaining  to  a great  extent  the  manual  method 
of  establishing  connections  does  not  permit  exploi- 
tation of  intermediate  switching  capabilities, 


since  the  establishing  of  intermediate  connections 
by  manual  means  through  several  central  exchanges 
causes  great  difficulties  and  significantly  slows 
down  the  process  of  establishing  connections.3® 

Obstacles  to  Automatization.  Manufacture  and  supply  of 
certain  peripheral  equipment  for  automatic  cost-accounting 
is  a prerequisite.  "Automatic  intercity  telephone  communi- 
cations cannot  be  introduced  without  rather  complicated 
auxiliary  equipment  for  automatically  accounting  for  the 
cost  of  the  long  distance  call,"  says  the  author  of  "Intercity 
Telephone  Stations." 

The  original  solution  to  the  problem  of  calculating 
costs — which  at  the  present  time  continues  to  be 
used  everywhere — is  the  registration  by  the  tele- 
phone operator  of  the  basic  information  (date,  time, 
city,  number  calling,  number  called,  duration  of  call). 

Some  switchboards  are  equipped  with  a manually- 
operated  counter  [but]  in  practice,  the  switchboards 
are  often  not  equipped  with  counters,  and  the  telephone 
operators  use  watches  to  determine  the  costs  of  conver- 
sations . 31 

Lack  of  automatic  number  identification  equipment  is 
another  obstacle,  which  is  the  reason  a customer  has  to 
dial  18  numbers  in  some  cases: 

To  establish  number  identification  equipment  at 
all  local  dial  offices  in  a short  period  is  prac- 
tically impossible.  Such  equipment  will  not  exist 
in  the  majority  of  city  dial  offices  for  a long 
time.  As  a temporary  measure,  where  number  identi- 
fication equipment  is  lacking,  the  customer  will 
dial  his  own  number  (which  will  be  recorded  by  an 
automatic  accounting  apparatus  at  the  intercity 
telephone  station)  immediately  after  dialing  the 
number  of  the  party  being  called . 3^ [Emphasis  mine-RR] 

Reliable,  Modern,  High-Speed  Equipment  Is  Needed. 

Nearly  all  the  shortcomings  are  associated  with  their  equip- 
ment, most  of  which  requires  modernization  or  replacement, 


6 


to  say  nothing  of  expansion  to  meet  their  growing  needs. 

As  the  Soviets  delicately  put  it,  "in  spite  of  a number 
of  good  qualities,  the  intercity  telephone  stations  which 
are  currently  in  operation  in  the  Soviet  Union  do  not  com- 
pletely satisfy  the  requirements  of  a modern  automatized 

33 

intercity  telephone  system." 

The  impetus  for  the  modernization  campaign,  one  can  be 
sure,  was  not  the  fact  that  Ivan  Ivanovich  has  to  wait  five 
hours  to  place  a long-distance  call.  Modernization  of  the 
telephone  network  is  an  integral  part  of  the  "computeriza- 
tion" of  the  Soviet  economy.  The  Soviets  declare  that  the 
existing  network  cannot  meet  the  need  for  transmitting  the 
digital  information  generated  by  the  "extensive  introduction 
of  computer  technology"  into  the  management  of  the  economy. 
The  author  of  "Intercity  Telephone  Stations"  states: 

Up  to  the  present,  reliable  high-speed  methods  of 
transmitting  signals  and  digital  information  prac- 
tically do  not  exist  on  the  intercity  telephone 
network  of  the  Soviet  Union. 

Now  we  have  begun  to  understand  some  of  the  reasons 
for  the  Soviets'  "Overload"--an  increase  in  the  number  of 
telephones  (Appendix  A) , and  an  increase  in  the  average 
amount  of  time  spent  on  the  phone,  together  with  a lack  of 
modern  switching  and  control  equipment,  the  supply  of  which 
Soviet  industry  has  evidently  failed  to  provide  in  suffi- 
cient amounts  and  fitting  types.  The  mandatory  requirement 
for  modernized  equipment  to  provide  quality  suitable  for 
data  transfer  has  merely  brought  the  situation  to  a head. 


7 


We  may  now  turn  to  a discussion  of  how  the  Soviets  have  or- 
ganized their  intercity  telephone  network,  of  their  systems 
of  operation,  methods  of  establishing  connections,  and  types 
of  services  offered. 


NOTE:  When  discussing  the  Soviet  situation  vis-a-vis  the 

telephone,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  suggestion  that 
these  generalizations  apply  universally  across  the  vast 
Soviet  telephone  network.  The  fact  is,  that  we  do 
not  really  know  to  what  degree  these  shortcomings 
prevail.  The  Soviets  themselves  are  fond  of  generali- 
zations ("to  a great  extent,"  or  "a  very  large  number") 
But,  just  as  one  learns  not  to  completely  trust  Soviet 
statistics  displaying  their  successes,  one  tends  to 
suspect  that  there  is  more  than  meets  the  eye  in  the 
problems  discussed  in  the  Soviet  press,  which  does  not 
as  a rule  report  isolated  instances,  where  problems 
are  concerned.  Furthermore,  the  fact  that  one  of  the 
major  sources  for  this  report  is  a textbook  intended 
for  students  in  a technical  school  for  long  distance 
telephone  operations,  and  not  the  average  propaganda 
sheet,  lends  credence  to  the  statements. 


One  can  probably  be  sure,  that  certain  sectors  at  key 
points  receive  priority  in  installation  of  modern  equipment 
(this  is  only  logical) — the  mainline  network,  lines  serving 
key  industries,  the  defense  establishment,  high  party  organs 
and  major  tourist  areas  (i.e.  the  Black  Sea  area),  no  doubt 
receive  special  attention.  Nevertheless,  taking  Soviet 
statements  at  face  value,  it  seems  clear  that  the  bulk  of 
the  Soviet  economy  must  depend  on  the  system  as  it  is  des- 
cribed here,  and  must  accept  services  which  are  more  typi- 
cally "average." 


xxai 


II.  ORGANIZATION  FOR  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  SERVICE  IN 
THE  SOVIET  UNION. 

General . In  order  to  make  a study  of  the  basic  design  and 
operating  principles  of  the  existing  Soviet  intercity  tele- 
phone network,  one  has  to  consider  a number  of  subjects: 
for  example,  the  methods  of  making  connections  between 
cities;  the  system  of  operation  employed  at  the  station;  the 
design  of  the  networks  and  the  numbering  system;  the  rules 
of  operation;  the  types  of  services  offered  to  the  clients; 
and  so  on. 

Methods  of  Establishing  Connections.  (Also  see  Appendix  B) 
Intercity  telephone  connections  can  be  established  by  one  of 
three  methods:  manual,  semiautomatic,  and  automatic.  The 

use  of  one  or  another  method  depends  on  the  degree  of  auto- 
matization of  the  local  telephone  networks  in  the  communi- 
ties between  which  the  contact  is  being  made;  on  the  capacity 
of  the  channel  groups  between  the  intercity  telephone  stations 
(MTS — Mezhdugorodnaia  Telefonnaia  Stantsiia)  participating 

in  the  connection;  on  the  type  of  switching  gear  used  at 

35 

the  MTS;  and  on  the  system  of  operation. 

Manual  Method.  Under  this  method  all  connections  are 
made  by  telephone  operators,  one  at  each  station  through 
which  the  connection  is  to  be  made.  If  the  local  telephone 


! i 

t: 


* 


1 


9 


network  on  either  the  calling  end  or  on  the  other  end  is  not 
automatic,  then,  of  course,  the  number  of  operators  required 
to  make  the  connection  increases,  which  significantly  in- 
creases the  time  required  for  completing  the  call. 

Semiautomatic  Method.  In  contrast  to  the  manual  method, 
the  semiautomatic  method  is  characterized  by  the  fact  that 
in  all  cases  the  call  is  completed  through  only  one  tele- 
phone operator — the  operator  at  the  originating  MTS.  At 
the  destination  MTS  and  at  any  intermediate  switching  points, 
the  connections  are  established  automatically  with  the  aid 
of  automatic  switching  gear. 

Automatic  Method.  With  this  method,  the  caller  com- 
pletes the  call  without  the  aid  of  an  operator  on  either 
end,  by  dialing  the  appropriate  sequences  of  digits. 

H 

Combined  Methods . In  practice,  one  may  find  situations 

where  both  manual  and  semi-automatic  methods  are  combined. 

On  one  and  the  same  connection,  at  some  sectors,  or  in  one 

direction,  the  contact  may  be  made  by  the  semiautomatic 

method,  and  at  others  manually. The  Soviets  declare  that 

"there  is  very  extensive  use  of  one-way  channels  in  intercity 

telephone  networks,  i.e.,  separate  channels  are  used  for 

incoming  and  outgoing  communications  [at  the  intercity 
. 3 7 

telephone  stations]." 

The  manual  method  is  obviously  the  least  desirable;  in 
the  long  run  it  is  the  most  expensive,  not  only  in  terms  of 


the  customer's  time,  but  in  terms  of  large  expenditures  for 

10 


wages  as  well.  At  the  same  time,  the  quality  is  relatively 
poor,  and  decreases  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  cords  and 
contacts  used  in  making  the  connection.  With  semiautomatic 
and  automatic  methods,  the  process  is  speeded  up  signifi- 
cantly, although  the  initial  expense  for  installation  of 
equipment  is  very  great. (It  is  fair  to  ask,  whether  the 
Soviet  Union  was  unwilling  or  unable  to  abandon  the  manual 

I 

method  of  operation  for  a long  time.) 

Systems  of  Operation  in  Intercity  Telephone  Communications 
(Appendix  C) 

General . Depending  on  the  level  of  sophistication  of 
an  intercity  telephone  network,  three  systems  of  operation 
may  be  employed:  the  advance-booking  system,  the  immediate 

system,  and  the  rapid  system.  Combinations  may  be  used,  in 
which  one  part  of  a channel*  is  serviced  by  the  advance- 
booking  system,  and  the  other  by  the  immediate  system. 


[*NOTE:  A "channel"  is  defined,  in  the  Soviet  concep- 

tion, as  "the  combination  of  line  and  station  equipment 
which  provides  the  possibility  for  holding  a single 
two-way  telephone  conversation."  A channel  may  be 
physical,  that  is,  with  a separate  wire  line  for  every 
channel,  or  it  may  be  multiplexed,  where  a single 
physical  wire  can  be  used  to  organize  a number  of 
channels  by  means  of  an  apparatus  of  high-frequency 
multiplexing  (as  in  carrier  telephony) . These  prin- 
ciples (i.e.,  multiplexing)  also  apply  to  radio  relay 
systems,  extensively  employed  in  the  Soviet  telephone 
system . ] 


Various  systems  may  be  used  at  the  same  MTS,  depending  upon 


11 


the  time  of  day  and  the  workload  (i.e.,  the  relationship 

between  the  number  of  calls  to  be  placed  and  the  number  of 

39 

channels  available  to  handle  these  calls)  . 

The  Advance  Booking  System.  Under  the  advance  booking  system, 
various  operators  at  different  working  positions  are  in- 
volved in  completing  a call.  A station  which  employs  this 
system  must  be  organized  to  include  the  following:  a booking 

desk,  a control  and  distribution  desk,  an  information  desk, 
intercity  switchboards,  production  control  switchboards,  and 
an  accounting  desk.  Depending  upon  the  workload,  a number  of 

booking  desks  may  be  set  up  at  a station,  or  in  the  case  of 

40 

a small  station,  some  of  these  functions  may  be  combined. 

Advance  bookings  are  made  by  the  operators  at  the  booking 
switchboard  (desk) , and  the  connection  by  the  operator  at  the 
intercity  switchboard.  Among  the  functions  of  the  control 
and  distribution  desk  (from  which  the  bookings  are  distri- 
buted to  the  appropriate  intercity  switchboard)  is  the  veri- 
fication of  the  right  of  the  customer  to  book  a call,  since 

"certain  customers"  do  not  have  the  right  to  place  a call 

J • 41 

on  credit. 

One  of  the  main  features  of  the  advance-booking  system 
is  that  the  customer  has  to  wait  a relatively  long  time  for 
his  booking  to  be  completed;  on  the  other  hand,  where  the 
station's  workload  exceeds  the  capacity  of  its  channels,  this 
system  is  the  most  efficient  means  of  channel-utilization. 

As  a rule,  the  operators  call  their  next  customers  before 


] 


12 


the  conversation  in  progress  is  completed;  then,  immediately 

upon  the  completion  of  that  conversation,  the  next  customers 

42 

are  connected  with  the  just-vacated  channel. 

The  Immediate  System.  There  is  also  a waiting  period  under 
the  "immediate"  system  of  operation,  but  not  so  great  as 
under  the  "booking"  system,  and  a large  percentage  of  the 
connections  requested  are  completed  in  not  more  than  10  minutes 
from  the  receipt  of  the  request — a certain  portion  are 

43 

completed  either  right  away  or  within  one  or  two  minutes. 

Here  the  booking  desk  and  the  control  and  distribution  desk 
are  not  required,  since  the  operator  who  receives  the  custo- 
mer's call  requesting  the  connection  is  the  same  as  that 
which  makes  the  connection.  (The  "booking"  or  paperwork  is 
completed  by  the  operator  who  services  the  connection.) 

While  under  the  advance  booking  system,  the  booking  is 
carried  out  via  one  line  and  the  connection  via  another, 

under  the  "immediate"  system,  only  one  line  is  used,  a so- 

44 

called  "booking-connecting  line." 

The  "immediate"  system  should  be  used  when  and  where 

45 

the  traffic  load  does  not  exceed  the  channel  capacity. 

The  Rapid  System.  This  system  is  used  for  making  connections 
by  automatic  means  in  local  networks.  Each  request  for  making 
a call  and  ringing  the  required  party  is  carried  out  imme- 
diately. If  it  is  not  possible  to  complete  the  call  (the 
party  doesn't  answer),  the  customer  must  repeat  his  request 
later.  The  introduction  of  the  "rapid"  system  of  operation 


13 


is  directly  associated  with  the  automatization  of  inter- 

46 

city  telephone  communications. 

Assessment : the  "booking  system  is  a manual  operation, 

and  indicates  overloaded  channels — it  is  known  to  be  used 
in  spite  of  automatization. 

Under  the  advance  booking  system,  as  a rule,  the  manual 
method  of  establishing  connections  is  much  more  acceptable. 
The  semiautomatic  method  is  also  permitted;  however,  with 
this  there  is  no  possibility  to  employ  the  technique  of 
preparing  both  parties  in  advance  without  using  the  channel 
(advance  preparation  was  designed  to  alert  both  parties  while 
the  channel  was  still  in  use).  Thus,  coribining  the  "booking" 

system  with  the  semiautomatic  method  might  actually  increase 

4 7 

the  time  the  channel  is  in  use  for  one  conversation. 

The  semiautomatic  method  is  much  more  appropriate  with 

the  'immediate"  system  of  operation:  the  number  of  operators 

participating  is  reduced,  the  process  of  establishing  the 

connection  is  speeded  up,  and  the  channels  are  used  more 

efficiently.  Of  course,  it  would  be  rather  pointless  to 

4 8 

use  the  manual  method  with  the  "rapid"  system. 

A vicious  circle:  with  the  increase  in  the  number  of 

channels  on  a link*  and  growth  in  intercity  traffic,  the 
difference  in  the  degree  of  efficient  channel  utilization 
under  the  "booking"  and  the  "immediate"  systems  of  operation 
becomes  insignificant.  [*NOTE:a  "link"  may  be  defined  as 


any  system  of  telecommunications  between  two  terminals.] 


At  the  same  time,  using  the  immediate  and  rapid  systems — 

which  are  more  convenient  to  the  customer — increases  tele- 
49 

phone  traffic  I 

Organization  of  the  Intercity  Telephone  Network  and  the 
Method  of  Assigning  Numbers. 

General . Several  years  ago,  the  Soviets  embarked  on  a 
long-term  project  for  changing  over  to  a "zonal"  concept 
of  operation.  (See  Part  III,  page  4 3 for  a discussion  of  the 
planned,  modernized  networ'-  . ) The  completion  of  the  change- 
over is  predicated  on  modernization  of  the  stations,  or 
"exchanges"  in  the  intercity  network.  (See  Appendix  D for 
a general  discussion  of  principles  of  organization  of  a 
telephone  network.)  When  we  speak  of  an  intercity  "network," 
we  are  describing  the  system  by  which  the  MTSs  are  organized 
to  make  connections  between  widely  separated  points.  The 
plan  for  communications  between  the  stations  is  based  on  the 
size  and  shape  of  the  territory,  the  customers  who  are  to  be 
served,  the  volume  of  traffic  between  different  cities,  and 
the  degree  of  sophistication  of  the  MTSs  involved.50 

The  Intercity  Telephone  Network  of  the  Soviet  Union . 

(See  Appendix  D) . The  intercity  telephone  network  of  the 
Ministry  of  Communications  of  the  Soviet  Union,  as  it  exis- 
ted in  the  early  1970s,  was  organized  on  the  " radial- tandem 

central  exchange"  principle  (Appendix  D)  and  was  designed  to 

, . ^ 51 

include  five  classes  of  central  exchanges: 

1.  The  central  exchange  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  Moscow, 

the  "Central  Intercity  Telephone  Station"  (TsMTS--Tsentra ] ' naya 


15 


Mezhdugorodnaya  Telefonnaya  Stantsiya) ; 

2.  Main  central  exchanges  (GU — Glavnye  Uzly) , situ- 
ated in  the  capitals  of  the  15  union  republics; 

3.  Oblast'  central  exchanges  (OU — Oblastnye  Uzly), 
situated  in  the  oblast'  centers*;  [ *NOTE : Oblasts  and  Raions 
(or  Provinces  and  their  Districts)  are  administrative- 
territorial  subdivisions  of  the  republics  (the  'SSRs")  of 

the  USSR.] 

4 . Inter-raion  central  exchanges  (MRU — Mezhduraionnye 

Uzly) : These  central  exchanges  were  introduced  in  order 

that  ail  the  MTSs  on  the  territory  of  a given  oblast'  not 
be  directly  connected  with  the  MTS  of  the  oblast'  exchanges. 
(In  a number  of  situations,  it  is  more  convenient  to  connect 
the  MTS  of  different  raions  with  the  MTS  of  the  oblast' 
center  through  an  intermediate  switching  point,  rather  than 
directly . ) 

5.  Raion*  central  exchanges  (RU — Raionnye  Uzly),  which 
are  the  terminal  intercity  stations,  which  provide  intercity 
telephone  communications  between  customers  of  the  various 
local  telephone  networks  of  that  raion  and  between  customers 
of  the  local  networks  of  the  raion  and  the  customers  of  dif- 
ferent raions,  oblasts,  and  republics,  by  intermediate  swit- 
ching through  central  exchanges  of  ascending  classes. 

[*NOTE:  The  "raion"  is  roughly  the  equivalent  of  a 

U.S.  county;  there  is  no  equivalent  to  the  "oblast'" 
in  the  USA.  There  are  approximately  125  oblasts  and 
3,100  raions  in  the  USSR;  more  than  500  raions  are 
within  the  limits  of  larger  cities. 53^ 


Intercity  telephone  network  organized  along  political- 

administrative  lines:  As  the  schematic  of  the  intercity 

telephone  network  of  the  Soviet  Union  as  it  existed  in  the 

early  1970s  shows,  all  the  main  central  exchanges  (GU)  are 

connected  to  the  TsMTS,  which  serves  as  the  intermediate 

switching  station  for  intercity  calls  between  customers  of 

different  union  republics,  and  for  a number  of  the  oblasts 

of  the  USSR.  (Certain  of  the  other  central  exchanges  are 

directly  connected  where  the  "mutual  attraction"  requires.) 

According  to  this  principle  of  organization,  the  intercity 

telephone  network  of  the  Soviet  Union  was  divided  into  a 

mainline  intercity  network  and  into  intra-oblast1  intercity 
54 

networks . 


Pcin-iples  of  ortf.ini  I Ion  of  the  inter-  it  v network 
of  the  USSH  ( 15*72). 


17 


"V" 


The  Numbering  System.  (Appendix  E and  J)  The  system 
of  numbering  is  one  of  the  most  important  problems  in  auto- 
matizing the  intercity  telephone  network.  In  the  step-by- 
step,  non-register  systems,  adding  to  the  number  of  digits 
requires,  as  a rule,  installation  of  yet  another  stage  of 
selectors  for  each  additional  number.  In  the  register  system, 
increasing  the  number  of  digits  leads  to  an  increase  in  the 
makeup  of  the  registers,  which  in  turn  in  some  cases  in- 
creases the  time  required  to  dial,  and  may  make  switching 

more  difficult  in  the  event  of  overloads  at  different  sectors 
55 

of  the  network. 

A system  of  numbering  which  assures  selection  of  a re- 
quired populated  area  or  a certain  territory  (zone)  with  the 
minimum  and  constant  number  of  digits  is  by  far  the  most 

rational  one  for  organizing  automatic  and  semiautomatic 

56 

intercity  telephone  communications. 

In  the  early  1970s,  the  Soviets  were  engaged  in  changing 
over  their  numbering  system  to  a zonal  concept,  a process, 
which  in  the  words  of  a Soviet  expert  "will... in  all  prob- 
ability ...  turn  out  to  be  lengthy."  During  the  changeover 
period , which  coincides  with  the  automatization  of  the  inter- 
city telephone  network,  an  interim  numbering  system  is  being 
used.  This  numbering  system  provides  the  possibility  for 
gradual  changeover  to  the  planned  zonal  system  of  numbering, 
but  involves  separate  numbering  for  the  mainline  and  the  oblast' 

networks,  while  retaining  the  numbering  for  customers  in  the 
57 

local  networks. 


18 


Access  to  the  AMTS — Dialing  Outside  the  Local  Network: 


Under  automatic  intercity  telephone  communications,  access 
to  the  automatic  MTS  (AMTS)  is  provided  by  dialing  a prepar- 
atory suffix  (the  "intercity  suffix"),  which  is  not  a part 
of  the  intercity  code  and  is  intended  for  dialing  outside  of 
the  local  network.  A three-digit  code  is  assigned  to  each 
provincial  center  and  to  each  intra-province  telephone  net- 
work. Separately  designated  cities  on  the  mainline  network 

(which  are  not  provinces)  are  also  assigned  an  independent 

5 8 

three-digit  code. 

Unified  Numbering.  The  numbering  is  unified  for  both 
automatic  and  semiautomatic  intercity  telephone  communica- 
tions. Customers  and  telephone  operators  use  one  and  the  same 
intercity  code  regardless  of  the  possible  routes  through 
which  the  connections  are  made,  either  by  means  of  or  with- 
out bypass  routes.  The  intercity  suffix  dialed  by  the 
customer  differs  for  automatic  and  for  semiautomatic  inter- 
city calls,  however,  since  in  the  one  case  the  customer  must 
gain  direct  access  to  the  automatic  equipment,  and  in  the 
other  only  to  the  telephone  operator,  who  dials  the  inter- 
city code  and  the  number  of  the  party  being  called  for  the 

4.  59 

customer . 

The  Intercity  Number:  Not  counting  the  intercity  suffix, 
an  intercity  number  has  3 0 digits . Of  these  10  digits,  three 
make  up  the  intercity  code  and  seven  the  number  of  the  cus- 
tomer in  the  local  network.6^ 


Services  Provided — Categories  of  Service 


General . Intercity  telephone  stations  provide  their 
clients  with  connections  either  through  an  advance-booking 
system,  or  in  the  case  of  automatic  communications,  offer 
the  possibility  of  dialing  their  own  number.* 

Direct  Subscribers.*^  As  the  Soviets  rather  delicately 
put  it,  "subscribers  who  use  intercity  communications  regu- 
larly" may  be  hooked  up  directly  to  the  MTS,  bypassing  the 
local  dial  office — which  obviously  reduces  the  time  required 
for  comoleting  a call. 

Since  direct  subscribers  are  connected  with  the  MTS 
bypassing  the  switchboard  apparatus  of  the  local  dial  office, 
neither  booking  lines  nor  booking-connecting  lines,  nor 
connecting  lines  are  required  to  service  their  incoming  and 
outgoing  calls. 

The  complex  of  lines  of  the  direct  subscriber  provides 
the  possibility  for  the  subscriber  to  call  the  operator  at 


[*NOTE:  However,  since  the  earliest  days  of  the 

Stalin  Era,  the  telephone  was  used  primarily  as 
an  instrument  of  centralized  control.  Use  of  the 
telephone  in  the  form  of  "official"  communications 
emanating  from  the  Kremlin  by  direct  wire — auto- 
matically considered  secret,  and  administrative- 
ministerial  communications,  where  each  ministry 
had  its  own  (radio)  telephone  network,  has  been  at 
the  expense  of  the  general  public.  The  "clients" 
offered  the  advance-booking  system  would  naturally 
include  the  general  public  in  its  order  of  priority 
(last) .621 


the  MTS  (for  booking  a call),  and  for  the  operator  to  call 
the  subscriber  for  an  incoming  call  on  that  same  line. 

Intercity  telephone  stations  which  have  automatic  or 
semiautomatic  capabilities  may  maintain  a small  automatic 
telephone  station  for  intra-station  communications;  the  direct 
subscribers  are  hooked  up  to  these  substations  in  such  cases, 
and,  thus,  have  the  capability  of  establishing  outgoing  and 
incoming  connections  through  them. 

Connections  and  conversations  are  divided  into  three 

• , f 3 

categories,  outgoing,  incoming,  and  intermediate  switching. 

"Outgoing"  applies  to  connections,  the  bookings  for  which 
were  received  at  a given  MTS  from  a subscriber  of  the  local 
network,  public  phone  stations,  or  direct  subscribers. 

"Incoming"  applies  to  connections  established  with 
customers  in  a given  location  by  subscribers  from  other  popu- 
lated areas. 

"Intermediate  switchings"  provide  connections  between 
the  clients  of  the  MTSs  of  two  different  cities  not  having 
direct  contact  with  one  another,  and  are  accomplished  either 
by  a telephone  operator  or  by  automatic  equipment  at  an 
intermediate  (transit)  station. 

Because  of  the  wide  variation  in  traffic  load  at  dif- 
ferent hours  of  the  day,  intermediate  switchings  may  be 
established  on  a schedule  tn  handle  the  anticipated  traffic 
flow  between  two  points,  in  which  case  the  channels  between 
those  two  points  would  in  effect  be  direct  channels,  at 
least  temporarily. 


21 


Allocations  of  channels  for  working  according  to  sche- 
dule are  made  by  the  Chief  Directorate  of  Intercity  Tele- 
phone Communications  of  the  Ministry  of  Communications  of  the 
USSR,  for  inter-republic  communications,  and  for  inter-oblast' 
communications  within  the  RSFSR.  Republic-level  ministries 
of  communications,  and  Oblast'  or  Krai*  directorates  of 
communications  handle  allocation  of  channels  at  their  res- 
pective levels.  [ *NOTE : A "krai"  is  a very  large  admin- 

istrative division  oi  the  USSR,  generally  an  undeveloped, 
remote  area,  such  as  the  Maritime  Region  of  the  Soviet  Far 
East . ] 

Categories  of  Conversations. 

For  intercity  telephone  conversations,  three  categories 


have  been  established:  Highest  Government  Category,  Govern- 

64 


ment,  and  Routine. 

Special  Cases.  When  the  scheduled  time  for  (transit) 
operations  arrives,  two  intercity  telephone  stations  make 
their  direct  hookup  regardless  of  whether  there  are  calls 
booked  or  not.  Only  in  special  cases  do  the  stations  have 
the  right  to  a channel  allocated  at  that  time  for  work  with 
another  MTS.  These  include: 

- Natural  disasters,  emergencies,  and  accidents; 

- Connections  established  upon  use  of  a special  "pass- 
word " ; * 

- Connections  granted  under  Highest  Government  Cate- 
gory. (Calls  booked  at  Highest  Government  Category  are 
serviced  on  an  equal  basis  with  "special  password"  calls.) 


. 


i 


22 


[ *NOTE : A bold  Soviet  dissident  named  Dremlyuga 

tells  a tale  of  his  prison  camp  days:  when  assigned 

cleanup  detail  in  the  camp  commandant's  office. 
Citizen  Dremlyuga  (in  the  absence  of  the  guard) 
permitted  himself  the  use  of  the  commandant's  phone 
and  official  password  to  hold  a lengthy  long-dis- 
tance conversation  with  a friend  living  in  Moscow — 
at  the  expense  of  the  Chief  Administration  of 
Corrective  Labor  Camps.  The  incident  occurred  in 
1970. 65] 


Calculating  Costs  for  Intercity  Telephone  Conversations 

General . The  costs  for  intercity  phone  calls  recovered 
from  the  clients  on  the  network  are  based  on  the  duration 
of  the  conversations  and  the  distance  between  the  terminal 
intercity  stations  through  which  the  call  is  placed. 

The  rates  established  by  the  Ministry  of  Communications* 
are  determined  not  by  the  path  by  which  the  call  is  routed, 
but  by  the  direct  distance  shown  on  a geographical  map. 

Rates  are  quite  reasonable;  whether  the  connection  is  made 
by  manual  or  semiautomatic  means,  the  minimum  charge  is  for 
a three-minute  conversation,  after  which  the  charge  is 
computed  by  the  minute. 

Typical  rates  (depending  on  distance)  range  from  a min- 
imum of  six  kopeks  for  three  minutes  up  to  25  kilometers, 
to  84  kopeks  for  three  minutes  between  1201  and  2000  kilo- 
meters, after  which  three  kopeks  are  added  for  each  in- 

7 

crease  of  200  kilometers. 

Determination  of  rates  is  the  easy  part.  Accounting 
for  the  costs  of  conversations,  however,  is  a significant 


bottleneck  today  to  automatization  of  service:  accounting 


is  accomplished  by  the  telephone  operator  in  most  cases. 

Centralized  accounting  equipment  is  being  installed 
at  intercity  telephone  stations,  where  data  is  recorded 
for  subsequent  detailed  preparation  of  the  customer's  bill. 
(Standard  metering  equipment  does  not  distinguish  between 
local  and  long-distance  calls.)  In  order  to  permit  fully 
automatic  operation,  the  local  dial  office  must  be  able  to 
automatically  submit  to  the  intercity  station  the  number  of 
the  calling  party.  Automatic  number  identification  equipment 
also  can  determine  and  send  to  the  MTS  the  category  of  the 
calling  customer  (See  Part  II,  page  22),  which  is  extremely 
important , since  it  permits  determination  of  the  right  of 
subscriber  to  specific  types  of  connections  and  service,  to 
apply  specific  limitations  for  certain  groups  of  subscribers, 

fi  ft 

and  offer  privileges  to  others.  [Emphasis  mine-RR] 

With  centralized  accounting,  the  basic  task  is  to 
determine  and  record  the  number  of  the  party  placing  the 
call.  It  has  not  yet  been  possible  to  install  number  identi- 
fication equipment  at  all  local  dial  offices;  "this  will  take 
a long  time,"  says  a Soviet  expert.  Since  it  is  so  important 
to  providing  good  service  that  automatic  capabilities  be 

exploited,  the  practice  of  the  customer  dialing  his  own  num- 
6 9 

ber  was  adopted. 

The  calling  customer  dials  the  intercity  suffix,  which 
connects  his  subscriber  line  with  the  intercity  station;  he 
then  dials  the  intercity  number  of  the  party  he  is  calling 
(the  three-digit  code  plus  the  seven-digit  subscriber  number) 


and  immediately  afterward  dials  his  own  seven-digit  number— 
for  a total  of  1+3+7+7,  equalling  18. 


Dialing  so  many  numbers  reportedly  often  leads  to  mis- 
takes. If  the  subscriber  either  by  mistake,  or  intentionally 
dials  a number  other  than  his  own,  a special  test  circuit 
detects  the  mistake,  and  the  call  cannot  be  put  through. 

Automatic  number  identification  equipment  is  gradually 
being  installed  at  the  local  dial  offices,  and  the  requirement 
for  the  calling  party  to  dial  his  own  number  "will  also 
gradually  fade  away,"  say  the  Soviets.  As  this  occurs,  the 
basic  method  for  accounting  will  be  for  the  automatic  cost 
accounting  apparatus  (at  the  MTS)  to  send  an  interrogation 
command  to  the  number  identification  device  (at  the  local 
dial  office) , and  then  recording  the  number  along  with  the 
other  data  for  accounting  costs. 7(^ 

***** 

III.  PROBLEMS  AND  PROSPECTS  ON  THE  ROAD  TO  MODERNIZATION 
Modernization:  Planned  and  In-Progress. 

General . There  is  no  need  to  remind  anyone  that  the 
telephone  plays  can  important  part  in  the  life  of  a nation. 

Ibis  part  is  especially  important  in  a country  with  a planned 
economy  (where  a little  over  a decade  ago,  overhead  wires 
were  the  primary  means  for  carrying  telephone  traffic).7^- 

With  the  continuing  growth  of  the  volume  of  information 
being  exchanged  among  Soviet  enterprises  in  the  directing 
of  the  economy,  there  is  at  the  same  time  a "huge  and  unin- 
terrupted" growth  in  the  demand  for  reliable  and  rapid 


1 


25 


communications  facilities.  (The  growth  rate  of  the  volume  of 

information  is  said  to  equal  the  square  of  the  growth  of  the 

72 

production  of  these  enterprises.) 

As  the  flow  of  various  types  of  information  increases, 
the  need  for  corresponding  growth  in  the  capacity  of  lines 
and  equipment  grows  as  well.  The  Soviets  have  high  hopes 
that  the  introduction  of  new  multiplexing  equipment  for  300 
channels  and  then  (according  to  the  five-year  plan)  for  1,920 

channels,  will  solve  their  problems  in  operational  communi- 

. • • 73 

cations  between  cities. 

"We  have  to  hold  our  course  on  automatization,"  writes 

a Soviet  engineer  from  Uzbekistan,  "We  have  to  introduce 

crossbar  stations  on  a wide  scale,  since  they  are  more 

sophisticated  and  more  reliable .. .Automatic  stations  will 

appear  in  all  large  cities  of  the  republic,"  he  predicts; 

"But,"  he  warns , "without  a sufficient  number  of  channels, 

they  will  not  produce  the  desired  results.  Therefore,  it 

will  [also]  be  necessary  to  force  the  construction  of 

mighty  intercity  cable  and  radio  relay  lines  on  the  mainline 

74 

trunks,  using  the  most  modern  methods  of  multiplexing." 

The  Soviet  press  reports  that,  between  1971  and  1974, 
the  enterprises  and  populace  of  more  than  81  cities  had 
been  provided  with  automatic  intercity  telephone  communica- 
tions. As  a result  of  the  introduction  of  new  mainline 
cable  and  radio-relay  lines,  telephone  and  telegraph  commu- 
nications with  the  industrial  centers  of  the  Urals,  Western 
and  Eastern  Siberia,  the  Far  East,  and  the  Transcaucuses  has 


! 


‘ 


,1 


1 


1 


1 


26 


grown. 7^  The  Minister  of  Communications  of  the  USSR  declared 
in  an  interview  given  in  1970,  that  the  government  planned 
to  spend  40  percent  more  on  the  development  of  communications 
during  the  Ninth  Five  Year  Plan  (1971-1975)  than  in  the  pre- 
vious one.76 

In  the  nation  as  a whole,  an  "extensive"  project  is 
under  way  for  complete  automatization  of  the  telephone 
facilities  of  the  raions.  "The  obsolete  switchboards,  and 
the  relay  and  the  10-step  automatic  telephone  stations-- 
which  do  not  function  smoothly  owing  to  shortcomings  in 
their  design  and  circuitry — are  being  dismantled,"  writes 
another  Soviet  specialist.  Crossbar  equipment  has  been 
used  in  the  Soviet  Union  since  1963,  and  by  1970,  480 
districts  in  the  USSR  could  boast  being  "completely  automatized" 
i.e.,  where  both  the  district  center  and  the  territory  of 
that  district  have  only  automatic  telephone  stations.77 
The  number  represents  about  15  percent  of  the  total  of  nearly 
3,100  districts  in  the  USSR. 

The  Soviets  also  have  plans  for  using  electronic  com- 
puters to  control  the  operations  of  their  automatized  tele- 
phone stations.  Creating  such  a system  along  with  future 
construction  of  multichannel  intercity  lines  requires 
extensive  automatizing  of  operation  of  the  stations  themselves, 
and  the  processes  of  switching,  calling,  calculating  charges, 
and  other  complex  fechnical  operations  must  all  be  accomplished 
automatically.  One  such  station  (which  is  equipped  with 


27 


"unique"  equipment)  was  to  be  put  into  operation  at  the  end 

of  1971  in  Alma-Ata,  the  capital  of  the  Kazakh  SSR.  In  the 

course  of  the  Ninth  Five  Year  Plan,  the  Soviets  planned  for 

almost  all  of  the  oblast'  centers  in  the  Kazakh  SSR  to  be 

connected  to  an  automatized  system  of  intercity  telephone 
7 ft 

communications.  (Here,  "unique"  means  "crossbar.") 

Upgrading  Station  and  Line  Facilities. 

A certain  unevenness  in  the  introduction  of  new  systems 
is  to  be  expected;  to  be  sure,  inequities  in  the  course  of 
modernization  are  felt  in  the  USSR.  Certain  "inequities" 
are  no  doubt  created  according  to  plan.  For  instance  we 
can  logically  assume  that  the  more  important  centers,  begin- 
ning with  Moscow,  would  be  among  the  first  to  undergo  moderni- 
zation. For  this  reason,  it  would  seem  more  instructive  to 
examine  the  pace  if  modernization  in  the  outlying  areas  of  the 
Soviet  Union,  and  thus  obtain  a more  balanced  indication  of 
progress.  A number  of  the  examples  cited  below  concern  the 
areas  of  the  Trans  Caucusus  and  the  Central  Asian  republics 
(the  huge  Kazakh  SSR,  the  Uzbek  SSR,  Kirghiz  SSR,  and  the 
Georgian  SSR,  for  instance) : 

Crossbar  Automatic  Telephone  Stations. 

In  general,  when  the  Soviets  speak  of  modernizing  their 
automatic  telephone  stations,  they  are  referring  to  the 
crossbar  system.  (See  Appendix  J) . 

Although  "two-thirds  of  the  mainline  intercity  telephone 
communications  [in  the  Uzbek  SSR]  operate  on  automatic  and 
semiautomatic  systems,"  writes  a Soviet  correspondent  in 


l 

1 


1 

\ 


■ 


4 


28 


1971,  "much  remains  to  be  done... New  equipment  will  be 

extensively  introduced  into  all  branches  of  communications . . . 

This  means ...  crossbar  automatic  city  and  rural  telephone 
79 

stations ..." 

In  1972,  the  Ministry  of  Communications  of  the  Georgian 
SSR  was  severely  criticized,  the  minister  was  sacked,  for 

O f) 

having  "one  of  the  worst  telephone  systems  in  the  country. "ou 

But  in  mid-1973,  the  First  Deputy  Minister  of  Communications 

of  the  Georgian  SSR  declared  that  "so  far"  the  republic  still 

had  no  automatic  intercity  telephone  stations;  the  first 

was  to  go  into  operation  in  the  first  half  of  1974,  followed 

81 

by  a "very  large"  station  to  be  put  into  operation  in  1976. 
"The  equipment  in  the  telephone  stations  which  are  operating 
right  now,"  writes  another  Soviet  correspondent,  "is,  from 
a modern  point  of  view,  rather  cumbersome  and  unsophisticated. 

Also  in  1972,  the  Chief  of  the  Tashkent  MTS  reported 
that,  his  station  had  received  the  first  automatic  intercity 
telephone  station  in  Central  Asia,  which  was  a 
crossbar  station.  He  proudly  described  the  capabilities  of 
his  station  as  follows: 

The  majority  of  ATS  (Automatic  Telephone  Stations)  in 
Tashkent  have  had  special  equipment  for  automatic  num- 
ber identification  installed.  Thus,  the  majority  of 
subscribers  on  the  intercity  network  will  dial  not  17 
or  18,  but  11  or  12  digits.  I'll  give  you  an  example: 

In  order  to  make  a connection  with  Moscow  from 
Tashkent  [about  1700  miles,  or  the  same  as  New  York 
to  Denver],  you  have  to  dial  the  number  "9".  When 
you  get  the  steady  tone  (the  answer  of  the  AMTS) , you 
dial  the  code  "095"  and  the  seven-digit  number  of  the 
Moscow  phone,  that  is,  12  |sic]  digits  in  all.  If  the 
number  is  not  busy,  the  connection  will  be  made  in 
30-40  seconds . [Emphasis  mine-RR] . 


To  call  another  party  in  the  Tashkent  Oblast',  one 
has  to  dial  only  10  digits.  Thus,  in  order  to  call 
Almalyk  [A  city  of  over  10,000,  about  50  miles  south 
of  Tashkent],  one  dials  the  "9",  and  after  the  AMTS 
answers,  the  code  "2140"  and  the  four-digit  number  in 
Almalyk.®3  [Author  evidently  assumes  additional  digit-RR] 

The  Soviets  are  producing  a large-capacity  AMTS  for  auto- 
matic intercity  communications  with  the  capability  of  hooking 
up  from  2,500  to  3,000  intercity  lines,  and  a medium  capacity 
AMTS  with  up  to  1,500  intercity  lines;  both  stations  are  of 
the  crossbar  type.  For  local  telephone  communications,  the 
basic  types  of  crossbar  stations  are  the  ATSK50/200  and  the 
ATSK100/2000  (for  rural  communications) ; there  are  also  ATSK 
for  city  communications,  designed  both  for  medium  capacity 
networks  (above  2,000-4,000  numbers),  and  for  capacities  in 

O A 

tens  and  hundreds  of  thousands. 

Cable/Radio-Relay  Lines  and  Multiplexing  Systems 

Party  Directives  from  the  Ninth  Five  Year  Plan  (1971- 

1975)  call  for  increasing  the  total  distance  (in  channel- 

kilometers)  of  intercity  telephone  lines  by  nearly  two 

times.  In  order  to  fulfill  this  ambitious  plan,  thousands 

of  kilometers  of  new  cable  and  radio-relay  lines  must  be 
7 5 8 5 

installed.  ' Work  toward  these  ends  is  proceeding  simul- 
taneously in  intra-oblast'  networks  and  on  the  mainline 
network.  Pravda  Vostoka  (Pravda  of  the  East)  told  of  pro- 
gress in  these  areas  as  of  early  1972: 

During  the  current  five-year  plan,  the  number  of 
channels  at  the  Tashkent  intercity  telephone  station 
has  increased  by  two  and  one-half  times.  On  the 
basis  of  cable  and  radio-relay  systems,  and  multi- 
channel systems,  there  has  been  a significant  increase 


V 


S 


1 J 


30 


in  the  number  of  channel-groups  between  Tashkent  and 
the  oblast'  centers,  and  between  Tashkent  and  the 
capitals  of  the  neighboring  [Central  Asian]  republics.. 

The  construction  of  a mainline  cable  from  Moscow  to 
Tashkent  has  exceptional  significance:  it  is  equipped 

with  a multichannel  system  which  permits  formation  of 
hundreds  of  telephone  channels...  ® 

Cable . The  basic  types  of  cable  for  the  mainline  inter- 
city network  are  high  frequency  symmetrical  and  coaxial  cables. 
The  Soviets  planned  to  commence  serial  production  of  a 
single  coaxial  cable,  which  was  to  accommodate  a 120- 
channel  system  in  1970.  Then,  "in  the  near  future,"  develop- 
ment of  combined  coaxial  cables  was  to  be  completed.  Two 
types  were  to  be  produced — one  accommodating  up  to  3,600 
channels  and  another  up  to  1,300  channels.  When  used  in 
combination,  many  thousands  of  channels  (nearly  20,000) 
may  be  organized  on  these  cables.  For  short-haul  circuits, 

a 30-channel  system  is  being  used  for  connecting  lines  to 

8 7 

the  city  telephone  stations. 

Radio  Relay.  In  the  early  years  of  the  Ninth  Five  Year 

Plan,  the  Soviets  were  discussing  radio-relay  systems  of 

60,  120,  300,  600,  and  1,920-channel  basic  capacity  (but 

with  the  provision  for  creating  greater  or  lesser  capacities, 

depending  upon  the  number  of  channel  groups  employed,  and 

whether  or  not  television  channels  were  to  be  transmitted; 

the  latter  occupy  a comparatively  great  deal  more  "space"  in 

8 R 

the  spectrum  than  telephone  channels) . 

The  R60/120:  This  system  operates  in  the  frequency 

band  of  1600-2000  MHz,  and  has  three  "trunks,"  two  of  which 
are  intended  for  telephone  channels  (from  60  to  120  channels), 


31 


while  the  third  "trunk"  is  for  sending  TV  programs  (up  to 
600  miles).  In  late  1970,  the  Soviets  were  continuing  to 

construct  radio  relay  lines  equipped  with  this  and  "other" 

8 9 

unspecified  multichannel  equipment. 

The  R300 : "In  the  future,"  say  the  Soviets,  "lines 

equipped  at  the  present  time  with  the  R60/120 . . .will  be 

equipped  with  the  R300."  The  radio-relay  device  of  the  R300 

type  is  produced  by  the  industries  of  the  Hungarian  Peoples' 

Republic  and  the  German  Democratic  Republic.  Both  systems 

operate  on  the  principle  of  direct  radio  wave  propagation 

with  an  average  of  25  miles  between  towers.  The  Hungarian 

and  German  models  differ  in  that  the  former  operates  in  the 

range  of  7900  to  8400  MHz,  and  the  latter  from  10700  to 

11700  MHz.  Both  are  intended  for  transmitting  either  TV 

(maximum  350  miles)  or  telephone  conversations  (up  to  1,500 
90 

miles) . These  systems  reflect  the  trend  for  the  gradual 
change  of  radio  relay  lines  to  shorter  wavelengths . ^ 1 

The  R600  and  similar  high-capacity  radio  relay  systems: 
More  sophisticated,  more  powerful,  and  more  stable  systems 
have  been  designed  as  replacements  for  the  extensively 
deployed  R60/120  and  K600  systems.  These  systems  employ 
different  frequency  bands.  The  R600-2M  and  R600-2MB,  which 
will  have  900  (sic)  channels  in  a supergroup,  will  use  the 
3.4  to  3.9  GHz  band.  (The  "Voskhod"  system  will  also  use 
the  3.4  - 3.9  GHz  band.)92 

"Druzhba"  (Friendship) : In  1973  the  Soviets  reported 

that  the"experimental  sector"  of  a new  radio-relay  system 


32 


called  "Druzhba"  had  successfully  completed  its  trial  period. 
This  device,  which  was  jointly  developed  by  Hungarian  and 
Soviet  specialists,  permits  the  construction  of  radio-relay 
lines  up  to  7,000  miles  in  length,  which  is  "two  and  one- 
half  times  longer  than  the  present  ones."  Each  of  the  six 
trunk  groups  of  "Druzhba"  has  1,920  channels,  which  permits 
holding  about  12,000  telephone  conversations  at  the  same 
time,  or  transmitting  six  TV  programs.  (Druzhba  uses  the  5.67 
to  6.17  GHz  band.)^ 

Multiplexing  Systems;  A number  of  multiplexing  systems 
which  permit  organizing  from  six  to  3,600  channels  on  a 

94 

single  cable  or  wavelength,  are  in  use  in  the  Soviet  Union. 

For  multiplexing  symmetrical  cables  on  the  intercity 
network,  a 60-channel  apparatus  of  the  type  K60P  will  be 
used.  The  K60P  operates  entirely  with  semiconductor  compo- 
nents. Owing  to  the  use  of  transistors,  the  K60P  not  only 
permits  the  use  of  unmanned  amplification  stations  at  inter- 
vals of  up  to  180  miles,  its  operational  reliability  is  10 

95 

times  greater  than  the  old  (vacuum  tube)  K60. 

The  first  device  of  Soviet  manuiacture  for  transmission 
on  coaxial  cable  was  the  K-1920,  which  was  put  into  operation 
in  1959-1960.  The  K-1920  system,  which  employs  a spectrum 
of  300  kilohertz  to  8.5  megahertz  can  provide  either  a 
television  channel  plus  300  telephone  channels,  or  1,920 
telephone  channels.  A system  called  K1920U,  a more  refined 
system  was  "recently"  developed  for  operation  on  combined 
cables.  This  system  employs  "tubes  with  a very  long 


lifetime"  which  significantly  increases  the  operational 

9 6 

reliability  of  the  system.  (In  1975,  it  was  reported  that 

the  K1920  was  used  for  multiplexing  radio-relay  lines  on 

many  lines  of  communications,  but  that  it  was  not  being  used 

effectively,  and  its  traffic  load  is  "far  below"  the  designed 

capacity.  It  seems  there  are  noise  problems  as  well,  and 

the  system  requires  not  only  continued  preventive  maintenance, 

9 7 

but  also  regular  replacement  of  bad  tubes.) 

The  K300  device  is  designed  for  multiplexing  small- 

diameter  coaxial  cables.  It  is  completely  transistorized, 

and  provides  for  the  organization  of  600  telephone  channels. 

Herald  of  Communications  No.  7 for  1970  reported  that  the 

mainline  cable  using  a small-diameter  coaxial  and  the  K-300 

device  completed  in  the  Bashkir  ASSR  (southern  Urals)  was 

the  first  in  the  Soviet  Union.  (Besides  the  above  mentioned 

K-60P  and  K300,  a K60P  has  been  developed  for  use  with 

symmetrical  one-quarter  cable,  and  a K-120  for  a single 

coaxial  cable,  for  use  where  not  more  than  120  channels  are 
9 R 

required. ) 

For  rural  communications,  a Czech-made  six-channel  multi- 

99 

plexer  is  widely  used. 

Two  systems,  the  K3600  and  the  K10800  are  being  developed 
for  coaxial  cables  with  larger  diameters . 1 ^ The  K3600, 
designed  for  combined  coaxial  cable,  can  handle  two  TV 
channels,  or  one  TV  channel  and  1,800  telephone  channels,  or 
3,600  telephone  channels.  The  K3600,  which  will  be  entirely 


transistorized,  will  be  used  for  sending  data  for  long  dis- 
tances. Repeater  stations  will  be  installed  every  900  miles. 
Along  with  the  K3600  system,  a complex  of  "modular"  terminal 
equipment  has  been  developed  (for  cable  and  radio-relay 
lines).  When  used  with  a combined  eight-coaxial  cable,  the 
K3600  will  permit  organizing  nearly  17,000  channels  (4x3600 
and  2x1300) . The  cost  in  channel-kilometers  will  be  less 
than  for  the  K1920;  furthermore,  owing  to  the  high  degree 

of  reliability,  and  automatization,  maintenance  costs  will 

, . . . 101 
decline  also. 

Satellite  Communications.  The  Soviets  have  been  using 
the  Molniia  series  of  satellites  for  "relay  of  central 
television  programs"  to  isolated  areas  for  more  than  10  years. 
The  spacecraft  are  known  to  be  used  for  the  relay  of  tele- 
phone calls  as  well;  however,  curiously,  this  role  is  usually 
played  down  in  the  Soviet  press.  In  1970,  the  Minister  of 


Communications  of  the  USSR  answered  a question  regarding 
"future  developments  of  cosmic  communications"  in  a rather 
evasive  manner.  He  modestly  acknowledged  that,  "Soviet 
achievements  in  the  realm  of  cosmic  communications  are  enor- 


mous," and  that  "communications  via  satellites  means  not 

only  telephone  conversations  but  also  relay  of  central  TV 

programs,"  and  went  on  to  speak  only  of  television . In 

another  article,  the  Molniia  satellite  is  called  a "cosmic 

10  3 

television  system,"  which  suggests  that  the  telephone 


capability  to  which  the  minister  referred  is  either  not  fully 
exploited  or  is  not  iust  for  plain  old  Ivan  Ivanovich. 


(For  details  on  the  Molniia  and  Raduga/Statsionar  communi- 
cations satellites,  please  see  Appendix  I,  page  92) 

Foreign  Assistance.  The  Soviet  Union  enjoys  the 
assistance  of  both  Bloc  countries  and  Western  firms  in  securing 


and  installing  equipment  in  its  telephone  network.  Bloc 
support  is  principally  provided  by  the  Hungarian  Peoples 
Republic,  with  a somewhat  lesser  role  played  by  the  East 
Germans  and  the  Czechs.  Although  the  Soviets  have  displayed 
an  interest  in  an  electronic  switchboard  produced  by  the 
Matsushita  Co.  of  Japan,  clearly  their  foremost  Western 
supplier  (and  no  doubt  the  most  significant  to  their  future 


development)  is  the  L.  M.  Ericsson  Co., 


Sweden. 


104 


of  Stockholm, 


Hungarian  Support.  A Hungarian  engineer  writing  for  the 
Soviet  press  in  1973  modestly  acknowledged  the  "enormous" 
success  his  country  enjoys  in  development  of  communications 
equipment:  telephones  of  various  types,  city  and  intercity 

telephone  stations,  multichannel  equipment  for  carrier 
telephony,  multichannel  radio-relay  equipment  for  mainline 
and  intercity  lines,  etc.  In  fact,  he  pointed  out,  a crossbar 
telephone  substation  of  the  type  CA-41  won  a gold  medal  at 
the  annual  Leipzig  fair,  and  an  automatic  telephone  station 


with  electronic  control  received  a gold  medal  at  an  exposi- 
tion in  Brno.  ^5  Hungarian  projects  in  the  USSR  include  the 
following : 

Between  1961-1970,  automatic  telephone  stations  with  a 
total  capacity  of  more  than  half  a million  subscribers  were 


36 


set  up  in  the  USSR,  and  a large  amount  of  multiplexing  gear 

,,  ^ 106 
was  installed. 

A "brilliant-  example"  of  the  cooperation  of  the  Soviet 

and  Hungarian  specialists  is  the  "joint  development  of  the 

10  7 

wideband  radio  relay  apparatus,  ' Druzhba'." 

Another  joint  project  was  the  "modernization"  of  auto- 
matic telephone  stations,  in  which  the  Riga  State  Electro- 
technical Factory  (VEF) , the  Leningrad  plant  "Krasnaia 
Zaria"  (Red  Dawn),  the  Belgorod  plant,  and  the  Leningrad 
Scientific  Research  Institute  of  City  and  Rural  Telephone 
Communications  (NUTS)  took  part;  on  the  Hungarian  side,  the 
Beloyanis  Plant  of  Communications  Equipment  participated . 
(The  Hungarian  was  "pleased  to  hear  that  Hungarian  equipment 

works  well  even  in  sunny  Uzbekistan — this  means  our  rural 

108 

automatic  telephone  stations.") 

In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  "rural"  automatic 

telephone  stations,  the  Hungarians  also  developed  a new 

"locking  relay"  automatic  telephone  station  (ATS  10/40)  and 

a "rural  crossbar"  station  (ATSK  100/2000) , on  the  basis  of 

working  documentation  received  from  the  USSR.  Stations  cf 

109 

the  latter  type  have  been  installed  in  the  Georgian  SSR. 
Swedish  Support. 

The  L.M.  Ericsson  Co. , a pioneer  in  the  telephone  in- 
dustry, is  to  a great  extent  also  responsible  for  the  growth 
of  the  telephone  network  in  Russia.  An  Ericsson  plant  had 
been  engaged  in  the  production  of  automatic  telephone  equip- 
ment and  switchboards  in  Russia  since  at  least  1913.  Just 
prior  to  the  revolution  Ericsson  employed  3,500  people  in 


37 


Russia.  There  then  developed  a rather  curious  relationship 
(based  primarily  on  necessity)  between  the  bolsheviks  and 
Ericsson.  While  the  latter  was  being  roundly  excoriated  as 
a wicked  capitalist  in  Soviet  literature,  Ericsson  was 
busily  producing  nearly  all  types  of  telephone  equipment  in 
the  Soviet  Union — output  rose  to  117,000  telephones  in 
1929/30,  and  from  1923  to  at  least  1930,  Ericsson  was  the  sole 
producer  of  telephones  in  the  USSR.  (Later,  small  groups  of 
Russian  engineers  were  trained  in  the  Ericsson  Stockholm 
plant  and  then  returned  to  Leningrad,  ultimately  to  take  over 
production  control.)'*-'10  More  recent  contributions  of  the  L. 

M.  Ericsson  Co.  are  as  follows: 

The" first  automatic  intercity  telephone  station  in 
Central  Asia"  was  installed  by  Ericsson.  Besides  Tashkent, 
the  Ericsson  firm  was  installing  similar  stations  in  Kiev, 
Rostov-on-the-Don , Alma-Ata,  and  "other  cities  of  the  Soviet 
Union,"  in  1970. 111  (In  1971,  a new  automatic  intercity 
telephone  station  of  the  crossbar  type,  called  ARM-20  was 
installed  in  Kiev,  "the  mightiest  in  the  land.")  ^ 

In  1970,  the  Ericsson  firm  took  part  in  an  international 
symposium  on  communications  technology  held  in  Kiev.  "The 
aim  of  the  symposium,"  the  Soviet  writer  blandly  states, 

"was  to  acquaint  Soviet  electrical  communications  specialists 
with  the  equipment  put  out  by  the  firm  of  L.  M.  Ericsson, 
and  with  the  methods  of  its  technical  operation."  Promi- 
nently featured  at  the  symposium  was  an  automatic  telephone 
station  of  the  "system  AKE-13,  with  centrally  programmed 


3 8 


control,  and  with  coded  selector  switches  in  the  switching 
circuitry  for  speech  channels..."  [Emphasis  mine-RR]  Also 
featured  were  terminal  equipment  for  pulse-code  modulation 

(ZAK  30/32),  cable  equipment,  etc.^^ 

* * * 

New  Directions 

Electronic  and  Quasi-Electronic  Systems.  "Those  who 
frequently  use  the  telephone,"  a Soviet  journalist  writes 
in  1974,  "know  quite  well  that  one  does  not  always  succeed 
in  getting  the  number  one  wants."  There  is  an  urgent  re- 
quirement for  increasing  the  reliability,  speed,  and  flexi- 

. . • 114 

bility  in  the  operations  at  the  telephone  stations. 

Primarily,  this  means  introduction  of  electronic  systems. 

In  1970,  a Soviet  specialist  disclosed  plans  for  setting 
up  qua si- electronic  automatic  telephone  stations  in  rural 
areas  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  United  Automatized 
Telecommunications  System:  "In  the  future,"  he  writes,  "it 

is  planned  to  introduce .. .modernized  automatic  telephone 
stations  of  the  ATSK  50/200  and  ATSK  100/2000  [crossbar] 
types  and  set  up  quasi-electronic  ATSs,  which  are  distinguished 
by  their  compactness,  their  reliability  in  operation,  and 
high-speed  establishing  of  connections.  A mockup  of  such 
a quasi-electronic  ATS,  which  operates  on  hercons  [hermeti- 
cally sealed  contacts] , has  been  fabricated  by  our  industry 
in  the  variant  of  a city  substation  of  1,000  numbers,  and 
has  been  checked  out  under  operating  conditions  in  the  Moscow 
city  telephone  network ..." ^ ^ [Emphasis  mine-RR] 


39 


Writing  on  'The  Equipment  of  Tomorrow"  in  1974,  a 

Soviet  journalist  reports  that,  "They've  already  built  models 

of  the  first  electronic  ATS  at  the  State  Electrotechnical 

Factory  in  Riga.  At  these  stations,  all  controlling  is 

accomplished  by  electronic  circuits , while  the  switching 

frame  itself  is  constructed  using  hermetically-sealed  contacts 

— 'hercons'."  The  author  predicts  that  mass  production  of 

electronic  switching  systems  would  commence  in  the  USSR  "in 

the  next  two  or  three  years,"  and  states  that,  "in  the  future, 

116 

the  basic  system  of  switching  will  be  electronic." 

Pulse-Code  Modulation  (PCM) . In  order  to  satisfy  the 
needs  of  all  government  agencies  in  the  transmission  of 
various  types  of  information  which  might  be  expressed  as 
electrical  signals,  including  digital  information  from  elec- 
tronic computers,  the  Soviets  are  designing  a special  net- 
work (a  "secondary  telephone  and  telegraph  network"),  which 
provides  the  possibility  of  transmitting  all  the  types  of 
information,  for  which  there  is  a requirement  today,  via 
standard  channels. 

The  multiplexing  and  transmission  systems  discussed 
previously  (R60/120,  R300,  R600,  R1920)  are  FM  systems, 
that  is  they  are  "multiplexed"  by  dividing  the  channels  by 
frequency,  in  which  the  so-called  "analogue"  method  of  trans- 
mission is  used  (that  is,  the  signal  is  in  the  same  form  on 
the  receiving  end  as  it  was  on  the  transmitting  end) . Another 
method  of  transmission  is  achieved  by  converting  the  signal 
into  a sequence  of  impulses.  Such  a method  of  transmission 


40 


is  called  "discrete."  Systems  with  pulse-code  modulation 

(PCM)  are  based  on  this  system  of  transmission.  In  these 

systems,  after  separation  of  the  signal  into  impulses,  the 

latter  are  "encoded,"  that  is,  each  impulse  is  changed  into 

a code  group  consisting  of  several  impulses  with  identical 

amplitude.  Sequences  of  impulses  (code  groups)  enter  the 

line,  and  the  information  is  contained  in  the  code  of  each 
118 

code  group. 

With  the  analogue  method  of  transmission,  all  the  inter- 
ference and  noise  which  arises  at  each  amplifying  station 
along  the  line  of  communications  accumulates,  which  limits 
the  distance  of  transmission,  and  decreases  the  quality  of 
transmission.  With  the  discrete  method  of  transmission  the 
signal  is  restored  at  each  amplifying  station,  that  is,  it  is 
regenerated  and  static  does  not  accumulate.  This  is  the 
great  advantage  of  systems  using  PCM.  Thus,  PCM  is  particu- 
larly advantageous  for  transmitting  digital  information, 
where  tolerances  for  error  owing  to  static  or  interference 
are  very  low.  There  is  a significant  drawback  to  PCM  sys- 
tems, in  that  for  the  transmission  of  speech  they  require  a 

band  of  frequencies  15  times  as  large  as  with  the  analogue 

119 

method  o f transmission. 

Systems  with  PCM  were  first  used  in  city  and  rural  net- 
works. At  the  present  time,  a svstem  called  IKM-32  [IKM=PCM] 
is  being  developed  for  city  telephone  networks,  and  in  the 
next  few  years  such  equipment  will  become  standard  for 
creating  connecting  lines  between  the  automatic  telephone 


stations.  The  IKM-32  device  can  be  installed  on  existing 
telephone  cables.120 

Along  with  development  of  multichannel  systems  with 
PCM,  work  has  begun  on  a system  for  encoding  60-channel  trunk 
groups,  which  will  permit  solving  the  problem  of  compatibility 

of  PCM  systems  with  FM  systems  without  changing  over  to  lower 

* 121 
frequencies . 

Wave  Guide  or  Wave  Duct  Lines.  "Several  years  ago"  the 
Central  Telecommunications  Scientific  Research  Institute  de- 
signed an  experimental  sector  of  a wave-guide  line  several 
kilometers  in  length.  "At  the  present  time"  (1970),  a 14 
kilometer  experimental  wave-guide  line  is  being  built.  Wave 
guide  or  wave  duct  lines  are  based  on  the  phenomenon  of 

propagation  of  waves  in  the  SHF  (millimeter)  band  in  hollow 
122 

tubes . 

Laser  Communications.  In  1966,  the  Central  Telecommuni- 
cations Scientific  Research  Institute,  investigating  the 
possibility  of  using  lasers  in  communications,  built  an 
experimental  optical  line  between  two  ATS  in  Moscow.  Then 
several  others  were  built  in  various  locations.  However, 
it  was  found  that,  under  conditions  of  heavy  precipitation, 
along  with  urban  pollution,  breaks  can  occur  in  optical 
lines  in  the  open  air.  It  was  tentatively  concluded  that 

using  optical  lines  for  short  distances  for  creating  auxil- 

, , 121 
iary  trunk  groups  might  be  economically  feasible.  More 

recently,  experiments  have  been  conducted  at  high  altitudes 


Kirghizia,  which  the  Soviets  consider  a "magnificent  natural 

laboratory  for  the  study  of  radiometeorology  and  the  dis- 

12  4 

persion  of  laser  beams."  Wave  ducts  and  optical  lines  of 

communications  permit  the  creation  of  super-powerful 

trunk  groups  of  100,000  telephone  channels  or  100  television 

channels,  which  would  permit  a significant  reduction  in 

„ , 125 

costs-per-channel . 

The  United  Automatized  Telecommunications  System  (EASS) . 

General . The  Directives  of  the  XXIV  Party  Congress 
called  for  significant  growth  in  the  production  of  com- 
puters during  the  1971-1975  Ninth  Five  Year  Plan.  Premier 
Kosygin  stressed  the  need  for  a statewide  network  of 
computer  centers,  which  would  comprise  a network  of  auto- 
mated information  collecting  and  processing  systems  for 
accounting,  planning,  and  management  of  the  national  economy. 
Such  a system  would  require,  first  of  all,  a "united  automa- 
tized telecommunications  network"  for  the  country.  The 
President  of  the  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  M.  V.  Keldysh, 
allowed  that  "the  use  of  computer  units  in  controlling  tech- 
nological processes  is  a powerful  lever  for  increasing  labor 
productivity."  But  a prerequisite  for  the  development  of 

the  five-year  plan  is  "a  radical  improvement  in  the  develop- 

126 

ment  of  communications  facilities."  [Emphasis  mire-RR] 
Requirements  and  Capabilities  in  the  EASS . The  EASS 
will  consist  of  a unified  network  of  central  exchanges, 
stations,  and  lines  of  communication,  to  be  erected  all 


4 3 


across  the  USSR,  and  will  be  designed  for  transmission  of  ail 
types  of  information . The  EASS  must  unite  in  both  oryuri- 
zational  and  technical  respects  all  nationwide  and  "depart- 
mental" transmission  facilities  in  the  country  (with  the 
exception  of  the  communications  within  a single  industry) . 
Departmental  transmission  facilities,  as  a rule,  must  be 

linked  up  with  the  EASS  and  must  satisfy  its  unified  tech- 

127 

meal  standards  and  requirements. 

The  requirement  for  such  a unified  system  was  created, 
on  the  one  hand,  by  the  ever-increasing  flow  of  an  enor- 
mous amount  of  information  required  by  government  organiza- 
tions for  their  work  in  directing  the  nation’s  economy — 
industrial  enterprises,  state  farms  and  collective  farms, 
societies,  organizations,  etc. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  extensive  introduction  of  compu- 
ter technology  into  the  national  economy  has  generated  a 
requirement  for  the  transmission  of  a great  deal  of  digital 
information  across  the  communications  lines,  information 
which  either  serves  as  the  basis  for  calculation  by  elec- 
tronic computers  or  which  is  the  result  of  such  calculation. 

In  order  to  transmit  the  entire  flow  of  information  on 
a timely  basis,  the  Soviets  must  not  only  expand  their  net- 
work of  cables,  radio  relay  lines,  and  satellites  which  they 
already  have,  they  must  also  take  the  important  qualitative 
forward  step  of  uniting  all  the  separate  means  of  communica- 
tion into  a unified  system  which  operates  automatically. 


44 


3 


Automatization  and  control  on  the  EASS  will  be  accomp- 
lished via  electronic  computers,  which  will  be  continually 
receiving  information  about  the  density  of  traffic,  about 
its  degree  of  importance  and  urgency,  about  the  condition 
of  the  equipment,  and  the  workload  of  specific  channels  and 
routes;  the  computer  will  choose  the  optimum  route  for  the 
information,  or,  if  necessary,  store  the  information  for 
transmission  when  the  lines  are  not  busy.  Calculating  and 
processing  of  billing  documents  will  also  be  automatized  at 
the  terminal  intercity  telephone  stations.  From  these  sta- 
tions, the  documents  will  be  sent  to  a central  processing 

. 128 
center . 

New  Types  of  Telephone  Exchanges. 

The  Soviets  plan  to  put  into  operation  "within  the  next 
few  years"  a new  type  automatic  intercity  telephone  station 
cal  Led  the  AMTS-4  (which  will  employ  hereon  relays,  inte- 
grated circuits,  and  programmed  control)  and  automatic 
switching  centers  (UAK  - Uzly  Avtomaticheskoi  Kommutatsi i ) . 
AMTS-4  and  the  UAK  are  being  developed  with  the  new  require- 
ments in  mind.  The  newest  AMTS  will  be  able  to  provide  the 

129 

following  types  of  connections: 

Outgoing  semiautomatic  and  automatic  connections  both 
within  the  zonal  network,  and  between  zonal  networks  (inter- 
city) from: 

- subscribers  to  the  city  telephone  systems  (providing 
that  automatic  number  identification  is  installed  at  the 
city  dial  office) ; 

45 


■’CTTS'i 


- from  customers  in  the  rural  network; 

- from  computer  centers; 

- from  governmental  departments  on  special  connecting 
lines ; 

- and  from  intercity  telephone  booths. 

Outgoing  semiautomatic  connections  will  be  provided  via 
the  channels  of  the  intrazonal  network,  or  on  a line  to 
another  zone  from: 

- the  intercity  switchboard  at  the  MTS  of  district 
(raion)  centers; 

- from  central  and  district  public  telephone  booths; 

- from  the  intercity  switchboards  at  another  AMTS. 

Incoming  automatic  connections  will  be  provided  to  the 

subscribers  to  the  zonal  network,  computer  centers,  subscribers 
of  the  departmental  (government)  networks,  and  to  public 
telephone  booths,  from: 

- an  AMTS  of  the  new  type,  on  the  incoming  channel  (by 
automatic  and  semiautomatic  methods); 

- from  automatic  switching  centers  (i.e.,  UAKs  equipped 
with  the  same  equipment  as  the  new  type  AMTS) ; 

- from  the  existing  MTSs; 

- and  from  international  stations 

BASS:  Relationship  to  the  Zonal  Network 

The  PASS  will  encompass  both  the  zonal  and  the  mainline 
communications  networks,  and  will  permit  direct-dialing, 
between  any  two  subscribers  to  any  point  in  the  nation. 

This  means  the  entire  country  will  be  divided  into  zones, 


46 


_ y 


which  will  take  in  all  the  cities  and  villages.  A customer 

in  any  zone  will  have  access  to  the  central  exchange  in  his 

zone,  and  with  the  intercity  stations.  In  order  to  place  a 

call  within  a given  zone,  one  must  dial  as  a rule  seven 

digits.  In  order  to  call  someone  in  another  zone,  one  will 

have  to  dial  11  digits:  one  for  access  to  the  intercity 

network,  three — the  number  of  the  appropriate  zone;  and  seven-- 

130 

the  number  of  the  party  being  called. 

The  zonal  network  consists  of  a unified  intrazonal  (intra- 


oblast') and  local  (city  and  rural)  telephone  network  under 
a single  seven-digit  numbering  system.  In  certain  situations, 
depending  upon  the  number  of  subscribers  and  the  size  of  the 
zone,  several  small  oblast's  may  be  combined  into  one  zone, 

or  on  the  other  hand,  a large  oblast'  (or  Krai)  may  have 

, 131 

several  zones. 

The  basic  equipment  of  the  zonal  network  will  be  the 
AMTS- 3,  a medium-capacity  crossbar  station  (up  to  1,400 
channels) . There  will  be  no  intercity  telephone  stations  in 
the  district  centers,  and  all  subscribers  of  the  rural 


networks  (rural  soviets,  collective  and  state  farms)  on  its 
territory  will  belong  to  the  same  numbering  scheme  and  will 
receive  access  to  the  appropriate  AMTS-3  of  the  zonal  net- 
work via  a booking-connecting  line.  An  AMTS-3  will  be  located 

132 

in  each  provincial  (oblast  ) center. 


(For  the  communications  plan  of  the  EASS,  please  see 


Appendix  F . ) 


47 


In  the  transitional  period,  that  is,  until  the  required 
number  of  AMTS-3  stations  are  received  from  the  manufacturer, 
and  until  automatic  number  identification  equipment  is  in- 
stalled in  the  local  offices,  the  automatization  of  the  zonal 

network  is  envisaged  with  retention  of  the  subscriber  dialing 

133 

his  own  number  too  (18  digits) . 

The  Soviet  Intercity  Telephone  System  in  Operation 

Quality  of  Service.  For  routine  intercity  telephone 
communications,  the  quality  of  service  has  improved  in  those 
sectors  where  equipment  has  been  upgraded,  where  operational 
organization  has  been  rationalized,  and  especially  where  a 
sufficient  number  of  channels  are  available  to  handle  the 
workload.  The  introduction  of  the  immediate  system  of 
operation  has  had  a profound  effect  on  the  quality.  In  1969 
the  immediate  system  of  operation  was  extensively  introduced 
in  a number  of  oblast's  for  intraoblast'  communications 
(between  the  oblast'  and  raion  centers),  where  the  number  of 
channels  permits.  For  example,  at  the  Cherkassk  MTS,  where 
19  intraoblast'  lines  of  communication  were  changed  over  to 
the  immediate  system,  the  average  waiting  time  for  a conver- 
sation on  these  lines  was  reduced  from  23.2  to  6.2  minutes; 
at  the  Vinnitsa  MTS  (23  lines),  from  36.9  to  5.5  minutes;  at 

134 

the  Ivano-Frankovsk  MTS  (15  lines),  from  30.5  to  4.3  minutes. 
From  Central  Asia,  there  is  a similarly  favorable  report, 

"Not  long  ago,"  the  author  declares,  "if  you  wanted  to  phone 

from  Tashkent  to  Dushanbe  [i.e.,  from  the  capital  of  Uzbek 
SSR  to  the  capital  of  Tadzhik  SSR]  it  would  take  quite  a 


48 


while. 


But  today  you  can  do  it  without  hanging  up  the 
receiver ^ The  Soviets  obviously  consider  extensive 
introduction  of  the  immediate  system  of  operation  a funda- 
mental improvement  in  the  quality  of  operations  at  an  MTS. 

Work  norms  and  standards  vary  according  to  the  size  of 
the  station,  the  system  of  operation,  and  the  method  of 
establishing  contact.  For  instance,  at  the  Rostov-on-the- 
Don  MTS  (which  was  still  using  the  advance-booking  system  of 
operation  with  the  manual  method  of  making  connections  in 
1974  despite  a claim  that  a crossbar  station  was  being  in- 
stalled there  in  1970;  see  page  38) , there  are  34  switch- 
boards just  for  receiving  bookings,  and  120  intercity  switch- 

136 

boards  for  making  the  connections.  (Switchboards  may 

• 13  7 

have  five  or  six  manual  outgoing  channels.) 

There  is  a plan  for  everything:  a plan  for  the  station, 

a plan  for  the  shift  on  duty,  and  a plan  for  the  individual 
operator  (according  to  skill  level) . In  the  advance-booking 
system  with  the  manual  method  of  operation,  the  average 
time  for  each  operation  for  an  intercity  operator  is  as 
follows : 


Preparing  the  subscriber 

40.7 

seconds 

Connecting  the  subscriber 

85.6 

Checking  a second  time 

3.4 

Sending  and  Receiving  the  booking 

3.8 

Disconnecting  the  subscriber 

2.8 

Peripheral  tasks 

4.8 

In  all 

141 . 1 

seconds 

For  the  average  operator,  the  norms  are  to  make  154  connections 
per  six-hour  shift.  For  the  Hero  of  Socialist  Labor  or  the 


49 


Shock  Worker  of  Communist  Labor , the  number  may  be  as  high 
as  250  calls  per  shift.  (Advance  booking,  manual  methods.)188 
Attempts  to  Spur  Productivity 

"Socialist  Competition"  is  steadfastly  fostered  by  the 
Party  in  its  relentless  efforts  to  get  the  people  to  work 
harder  and  produce  more.  The  spirit  of  socialist  competition 
is  to  set  the  standards  to  which  each  loyal  citizen  should 
aspire.  In  a certain  sense,  the  examples  cited  (i.e., 

Heroes  of  Socialist  Labor)  reflect  the  need  for  improvement; 
in  another  sense,  they  indicate  the  best  they  can  do.  The 
two  passages  cited  below  are  richly  illustrative  of  these 
factors;  the  reader  is  invited  to  draw  his  own  conclusions: 

In  1970,  Zinaida  Ivanovna  Lototskaia,  an  operator  at 
the  Vladivostok  intercity  telephone  station,  was  honored  for 
her  productive  work.  The  central  committee  of  her  trade 
union  recommends  that  all  of  the  workers'  collectives  take 
note  of  her  experience  and  introduce  her  techniques  at  their 
agencies : 

As  a result  of  her  initiative  and  hard  work,  Zinaida 
Ivanovna  was  assigned  to  a responsible  sector — commu- 
nications with  Moscow.  When  the  immediate  system 
of  operation  was  introduced  at  the  station  (using  the 
semiautomatic  method  of  making  connections),  Zinaida 
quickly  mastered  the  techniques  and  achieved  a high 
decree  of  quality  in  the  service  she  offers  her  sub- 
scribers. Her  technique?  Combining  operations,  to 
reduce  the  time  spent  in  making  the  connection. 

Answering  the  call  from  the  booking  line,  she  gives 
her  personal  number  (Operator  05]  and  starts  to  take 
down  the  bookinq  information  from  tie  subscriber.  If 
the  channel  on  the  required  line  is  busy,  she  asks 
the  subscriber  to  wait;  if  not,  she  informs  the  sub- 
scriber, "I'm  making  the  connection."  She  inserts  a 
plug  into  the  channel,  and  dials  the  number  of  the 


50 


party  in  the  other  city  with  her  right  hand.  At 
the  same  time,  her  left  hand  is  inserting  the  cord 
circuit  into  an  unoccupied  connecting  line,  and,  if 
she  hears  the  phone  ringing,  she  dials  the  number  of 
her  subscriber.  When  the  party  in  the  other  city 
answers,  she  switches  her  subscriber  from  the  booking 
line  to  the  connecting  line,  inviting  them  to  begin 
the  conversation.  (Or,  if  the  number  is  busy,  she 
politely  informs  the  subscriber  and  promises  to  call 
back . ) 

Changing  the  sequence  of  her  operations  while 
making  a connection  allows  Lototskaia  to  save  from 
14-16  seconds  for  each  connection.  She  knows  the  num- 
ber for  getting  an  estimate  on  the  charges  by  heart; 
she  knows  the  passwords  for  many  subscribers,  and 
their  names;  she  knows  the  numbers  in  the  city  and  the 
direct  subscribers.  And  she  uses,  as  a rule,  one  and 
the  same  connecting  line,  which  saves  wasted  motion 
looking  for  a line.  During  the  peak  hours,  she  finds 
out  in  advance  the  suffixes  for  intermediate  switching 
stations  through  which  one  gains  access  to  the  cities 
in  Western  Russia;  she  has  memorized  a number  of  suf- 
fixes, which  permits  her  to  save  a significant  amount 
of  time  when  completing  calls  which  have  been  booked 
on  lines  leading  to  the  West. 

By  using  advanced  working  habits,  Lototskaia  finds 
it  possible  to'  reduce  the  time  required  for  making 
a single  connection  to  (j~$  seconds  (this  is  while 
other  operators  require  85  seconds  or  more  for  the 
same  operation) . [Emphasis  mine-RR]  And  this  permits 
her  to  offer  more  intercity  conversations  and  to 
utilize  the  communications  channels  more  effectively. 

Zinaida  was  among  the  first  to  be  given  the  title 
Shock  Worker  of  Communist  Labor.  The  title  Master 
of  Communications,  and  an  honorary  awa^d  from  the 
Ministry  of  Communications  of  the  USSR  and  the  Central 
Committee  of  the  trade  union  were  bestowed  upon  her.^9 

Telephone  Operator  First  Class  at  the  Ivanovo  MTS, 

Zh.  Kazarina  tells  how  she  was  able  to  service  7,000  con- 
versations above  that  which  her  plan  required  in  1975, 
namely:  economizing  every  second  of  work  time  by  means  of 

combining  several  operations  (of  course,  while  maintaining 
excellent  quality). 

While  awaiting  the  answer  from  the  other  city,  I 
register  the  booking,  I remove  the  cord  circuit  from 
the  just  finished  conversation  right  away,  and  I 

51 


write  down  the  length  of  the  conversation.  I do 
all  this  precisely  and  calmly,  and  I never  forget 
to  check  on  the  audibility  of  the  channel  for  the 
subscriber.  While  dialing  the  number  of  the  party 
being  called,  I check  the  data  on  the  booking,  which 
also  promotes  the  quality  of  operations  on  the  line. 

As  a result  of  combining  operations,  I've  managed  to 
confine  the  time  required  for  making  one  connection 
to  79.5  seconds.  This  time  is  divided  up  as  follows: 
answering  the  call — 1.5  seconds;  taking  down  the 
booking — 15  seconds;  finding  an  unoccupied  line  and 
channel — 6 seconds;  dialing  the  number  of  the  party 
placing  the  call — 12  seconds;  dialing  the  number  of  the 
party  being  called — 17  seconds;  sending  the  ringing 
signal  to  the  subscriber  in  the  other  city — 6 seconds; 
informing  the  party  placing  the  call  that  the  phone 
is  ringing — 8 seconds;  awaiting  the  answer  from  the 
party  being  called — 9 seconds;  and  checking  on  the  begin- 
ing  of  the  conversation — 5 seconds. 

I reduce  the  time  spent  for  one  connection  to  the 
minimum.  This  economical  method  of  using  my  time 
permits  me  to  not  only  achieve  a high  degree  of  pro- 
ductivity (i  overfulfill  my  norms  by  130  percent  each 
month) , and  to  successfully  service  communications  by 
the  immediate  system  of  operations  without  making  a 
mistake,  but  also,  I believe,  I make  people  happy  by 
just  doing  my  job.  I'*0 


Although  similar  articles  appear  in  nearly  every  issue 


of  Vestnik  Sviazi  (Herald  of  Communications) , the  figures 
cited  for  the  specific  operations  vary  little,  which  suggests 


either,  that  they  are  approaching  the  outer  limits  of 
possibilities,  or  that  similar  results  are  attainable  only 
by  the  super  heroes.  One  is  entitled  to  doubt,  of  course, 
that  such  paragons  of  socialist  virtue  actually  exist. 

(As  the  old  Soviet  joke  puts  it,  "Yes,  the  plan  was  fulfilled, 
but  only  in  the  newspaper.")  That  the  Soviets  seem  to  feel 
the  need  to  repeat  such  hortatory  articles  without  letup 


suggests  that  the  actual  time  spent  on  the  operations  des- 
cribed is  much  greater  than  they  desire,  but  that  any 
resulting  improvement  is  better  than  nothing.  At  any  rate, 


52 


it  is  clear  from  "testimonials"  such  as  the  above,  that  what 
the  Soviets  lack  in  automatization  they  are  trying  to  make 
up  for  by  putting  pressure  on  the  operators  to  work  harder 
and  produce  more — which  is  typical  Soviet  practice. 

Continuing  Problems 

If  Socialist  competition  is  a device  for  pointing  the 
way  to  the  True  Believers,  Criticism  and  Self-Criticism  is 
a virtue  made  of  necessity.  A great  deal  of  breast-beating 
occurs  in  print  in  the  Soviet  Union  (after  a decent  interval — 
usually  preceded  by  recitation  of  enormous  successes) . 

Some  of  the  situations  revealed  in  this  manner  are  merely 
interesting;  others  are  astounding.  Taken  as  a whole,  they 
tend  to  present  a fairly  comprehensive  picture  of  Soviet  con- 
ditions. The  problems,  as  a whole,  tend  to  fall  into  two 
interrelated  and  often  overlapping  categories:  economic, 

and  social  or  human  problems. 

Economics,  defined  as  the  science  of  satisfying  un- 
limited wants  with  finite  resources,  would  seem  to  be  an 
area  in  which  the  Soviets  excel:  they  have  a Plan.  Yet 

recent  reports  indicate  that  more  and  more  they  must  face 
the  problem  of  shrinking  resources,  especially  in  personnel. 
The  evidence  cited  in  this  paper  thus  far  reveals  a signi- 
ficant amount  of  manual  operations  in  carrying  cut  the  func- 
tions of  the  telephone  station.  But  the  days  of  adding  more 
and  more  bodies  to  cope  with  the  increasing  workload  are 
over . 


53 


Jmtmk 


A declaration  of  the  December,  1969  Plenum  of  the  CC 


CPSU  reveals  the  seriousness  of  the  problem: 

Increasing  the  effectiveness  of  social  productivity 
has  become  the  key  problem,  primarily  because  of  the 
fact  that  the  main  factors  of  [Soviet]  economic 
growth  have  been  changed.  If  in  the  past  the  economy 
was  developed  by  means  of  increasing  the  number  of 
workers  and  increasing  capital  investments,  at  the 
present  the  situation  is  not  the  same.  Nine  out  of 
ten  people  in  the  country  who  are  capable  of  working 
are  either  already  at  work~ or  are  in  school. 

[Emphasis  mine-RR]  There  aren't  enough  workers  to 
meet  the  demands.  Automatization  is  the  only  answer. 

Stated  another  way — at  an  automatized  telephone  station,  the 

productivity  of  labor  is  said  to  be  six  times  as  great  as 

that  of  a manual  station,  measured  in  rubles  (wages  v. 

. . . 142 
receipts) . 

Introduction  of  crossbar  stations  in  place  of  the  10 

step  variety  reduces  the  operating  staff  by  three  persons 

14  3 

for  every  1,000  numbers  of  capacity. 

The  Chief  of  the  Tashkent  Intercity  Telephone  Station 
puts  it  this  way: 

The  significance  of  automatization  can  be  expressed 
as  follows:  In  order  to  provide  the  number  of  con- 

versations which  are  now  offered  by  means  of  the 
automatic  and  semiautomatic  systems,  we  would  have  to 
have  an  additional  300  telephone  operators  on  the  staff, 
which  amounts  to  320,000  rubles  in  annual  wages. 

At  the  same  time  we  have  a lot  of  problems.  Offering 
intercity  conversations  at  the  present  time  is  con- 
nected with  the  expenditure  of  a large  amount  of  time 
and  manual  labor.  Under  these  conditions,  a lot 
depends  on  the  telephone  operator.  ^ 

In  1973,  the  Minister  of  Communications  of  the  Georgian 
SSR  stated,  that  "with  us,  problem  number  one  is  the  per- 
sonnel problem... We  felt  this  very  severely  not  long  ago  in 
the  lack  of  operators  at  the  intercity  station ...  there  is 


54 


also  a severe  lack  of  repairmen  and  technicians..."  The 

latter  are  also  not  trained  in  maintaining  automatic  equip- 

^ 145 
ment . 

If  some  of  the  Soviets'  problems  are  because  of  the 
inexorable  laws  of  economics,  others  appear  to  be  endemic  to 
the  Soviet  system,  or  simply  a result  of  bad  management. 

There  are  some  astounding  examples  of  neglect  or  inepti- 
tude on  the  part  of  management  revealed  in  articles  on 
Scientific  Organization  of  Labor  or  in  investigations  con- 
ducted by  the  Committee  for  the  Peoples'  Inspection  (KNK-Komitet 
Narodnogo  Kontrolia) . 

For  example,  a study  was  made  of  the  causes  for  the 
large  number  of  uncompleted  bookings  at  the  Kishinev 
(Moldavian  SSR)  MTS.  A complex  plan  was  made  to  study  the 
organization  of  labor  in  the  switchboard  room.  Analysis  of  • 
the  incoming  workload  was  begun  according  to  the  type  of 
operation,  the  line  of  communication,  etc.  Each  booking  re- 
ceived was  recorded,  and  the  time  of  receipt  and  time  of 
execution  were  noted.  The  following  problems  were  revealed: 

Part  of  the  telephone  operators  were  poorly  qualified; 

The  bookings  were  allocated  among  the  various 
working  positions  without  considering  the  size  of  the  work- 
load in  the  peak  hours; 

Incorrect  manning  at  certain  hours  of  the  day:  one 

of  the  primary  causes  was  an  insufficient  number  of  telephone 
operators  to  handle  the  workload  at  certain  hours. 


■I 


As  a result  of  the  analysis,  channels  were  distributed 
and  assigned  to  the  various  switchboards  to  correspond  with 
the  incoming  workload  during  the  peak  hours  (0900-1700)  . The 
number  of  switchboards  required  was  based  on  a chart  showing 

h 

the  workload  at  certain  hours  of  the  day.  As  a result,  it  was 
determined  that  a portion  of  the  bookings  for  calls  within 

the  republic  could  be  placed  using  the  immediate  system  of 

. 14 

operations . 

In  the  Ukrainian  SSR,  the  KNK  found  in  1969  that  channels 
were  being  used  exceptionally  poorly  on  many  lines  of  communi- 
cations. An  analysis  was  conducted;  the  personnel  level  was 
brought  up  to  strength,  the  traffic  load  of  overloaded  working 
positions  was  decreased,  and  the  positions  with  the  heaviest 
workload  were  assigned  to  the  best-qualified  operators.  In 
addition,  specialized  training  was  given  to  thousands  of 
operators  in  advanced  working  procedure  and  rules  of  inter- 
city operations. 

It  is  truly  hard  to  believe  that  they  are  just  getting 
around  to  analyzing  the  productive  processes  in  the  Year  of 
our  Lord,  1970.  This  says  a lot  about  the  type  of  management 
they  have.  But  these  examples  appeared  in  the  trade  journal 
of  the  communications  workers  of  the  USSR.  The  message  is 
clear:  "Go  and  do  thou  likewise." 

Working  conditions  are  indeed  grim  in  many  of  the  com- 
munications organizations  in  the  USSR.  One  could  cite  liter- 
ally dozens  of  instances  reported  in  Herald  of  Communicat ions . 
The  work  of  the  telephone  operator  is  described  as  "exhausting," 


56 


"nerve-wracking."  The  buildings  lack  the  elementary  amenities 
which  a Western  worker  would  not  do  without.  The  furniture 
is  crude;  many  operators  work  their  entire  shift  in  a straight- 
backed  wooden  chair.  Heating,  lighting,  ventilation  are 
frequently  cited  as  either  lacking  or  inadequate.  Sanitary 
facilities  are  often  lacking,  as  are  dining  facilities  in 
some  cases.  And  then  the  Soviets  suggested  it  was  time  to 
make  a study  on  the  reasons  for  the  high  turnover  in  per- 
sonnel . 

The  indifference  of  the  average  Soviet  worker  is  certainly 
understandable  in  the  light  of  their  working  conditions-- 
all  this,  and  then  overloaded  circuits  to  boot.  A new  Soviet 
proverb  is  said  to  be  making  the  rounds  these  days:  "They 

pretend  they're  paying  us,  and  we  pretend  we're  working."^7 
(Average  wages  vary  from  80-115  rubles  per  month,  where  one 
ruble  is  about  $1.33.)^8 

Finally,  two  perennial  problems  are  noted  in  the  Soviet 
Union:  the  problems  of  construction  and  supply.  It  is  said 

that  ii  all  the  years  of  Soviet  pov/er,  not  a single  construc- 
tion project  was  completed  on  time.  This  is  partly  a result 
of  the  supply  problem,  and  is  one  of  the  favorite  whipping 
boys  m the  Soviet  press: 

Wo  have  reacned  the  stage,  where  the  rate  of 
growth  of  rural  telephone  communications  is  limited 
only  by  the  capabilities  of  industry  to  supply  the 
required  amount  of  equipment  (carrier  multiplexing 
equipment,  power  supplies,  and  cables),"  writes  a 
Soviet  specialist  in  Herald  of  Communications.  4 " 


57 


Finally,  an  assessment  of  reasons  for  delays  in  plan- 
fulfillment,  in  the  last  year  of  the  Ninth  Five  Year  Plan: 

Frequently  the  assimilation  of  the  planned  cap- 
ability of  newly-built  mainline  facilities  is  delayed, 
partly  because  of  disproportions  in  the  building  of 
cable  and  radio  relay  lines  and  in  the  building  of 
intercity  telephone  stations.  Radio  centers  are  occa- 
sionally put  into  operation  without  the  necessary 
antenna  installations.  For  this  reason,  the  traffic 
on  the  cable  and  radio  relay  lines  is  greater... 

[Finally]  the  Ministry  of  Communications  Facilities 
Industry  is  delaying  the  preparation  of  a number  of 
different  devices  and  other  equipment,  and  the  Ministry 
of  Electrical  Technical  Industry  is  holding  up  the 
supply  of  cable  equipment,  which  slows  dt^g  the  de- 
velopment of  the  communications  network. 


CONCLUSIONS 

That  the  Soviets  intend,  as  was  announced  at  the  XXIV 
Party  Congress,  to  introduce  computers  on  a wide  scale  to 
rescue  their  faltering  economy  is  no  doubt  true.  That  "a 
radical  improvement  in  the  development  of  communications 
facilities,"  is  a prerequisite  is  also  no  doubt  true. 

There  are  two  important  considerations  to  bear  in  mind 
as  one  approaches  the  end  of  this  study.  One  is  that  a 
number  of  disproportions  in  the  Soviet  economy  are  directly 
related  to  the  Soviet  decision  to  militarize  their  economy. 
Those  enterprises  in  the  defense  industry  or  which  are  fun- 
damental to  industrial  development  reportedly  receive  all 
the  goods  they  require  to  fulfill  their  plan.  Thus,  there 
is  actually  a second  economy  which  operates  behind  the 
scenes,  which  is  not  discussed  so  openly  in  the  press.  And 
the  enterprises  belonging  to  the  other  category  get  "what's 
left."  It  would  seem  then,  that  this  study  has  been 


examining  a portion  of  the  Soviet  telecommunication  system 
that  is  most  in  need  of  upgrading. 

The  second  is,  that  the  telecommunications  system  of 
the  Ministry  of  Communications  is  indeed  important  to  the 
functioning  of  the  national  economy.  If  the  "computerization" 
of  the  Soviet  economy,  based  on  the  creation  of  EASS,  be- 
comes the  darling  of  the  Party  leadership,  as  was  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Virgin  Lands  in  the  1960s,  then  one  might  expect 
to  see  some  improvements . 

Yet,  the  expense  involved  in  upgrading  the  entire  system 
is  no  doubt  enormous.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the 
Soviets  will  be  able  to  find  the  resources  to  complete  such 
a project. 

Commenting  on  the  various  nationwide  systems  mandated 
by  the  XXIV  Party  Congress,  Academician  Viktor  M.  Glushkov 
(Vice-President  of  the  Ukrainian  SSR  Academy  of  Sciences  and 
Director  of  the  Kiev  Institute  of  Cybernetics)  said,  "The 
main  problem — the  design  of  a nationwide  automated  control 
system — cannot  be  solved  in  the  absence  of  a control  system 

151 

industry ...  (where ] maximum  standardization  is  presupposed." 

If  the  modern  telephone  office  is  "identical  with  the 

ICO 

computer,"  then  the  technology  required  is  also  identical, 
or  nearly  so.  And  Western  experts  have  serious  doubts  that 
the  Soviets  will  ever  be  able  to  create  a viable  computer 
industry:  standardization,  and  the  high  quality  this  tech- 

nology demands  are  precisely  the  areas  in  which  Soviet 


(non-def ense)  industry  has  inherently  produced  poorly. ^ ^ 

The  remarks  of  the  editor  of  Soviet  Cybernetics  Review 
address  the  point  very  well: 

Most  of  the  considerable  effort  devoted  so  far  to 
management  and  process  control  systems  in  [Soviet] 
industry  has  been  characterized  by  fragmentation, 
inefficiency,  poor  planning,  and  lack  of  standardi- 
zation. The  Ninth  Five  Year  plan... takes  note  of  these 
problems ...  But  the  pressure  to  implement,  to  get 
anything  at  all  up  and  running,  could  result  in  more 
of  the  same.  The  outlook  here  is  not  as  bright  as 
the  Soviets  would  hope. . .The  recent  history  of  un- 
successful and  inefficient  attempts  to  implement  the 
needed  systems  [reflects  the  severe  problems  of] 
bureaucratic  resistance,  not  to  speak  of  political 
and  ideological  problems ...  One  has  the  feeling  that 
[certain  Soviet  authors]  have  a considerable  appre- 
ciation for  the  importance  of  the  subject  and  for 
its  context  within  the  total  economic  picture. 

[However]  what  the  Party  Directives  propose  may  be 
much  too  ambitious  within  the  constraints  of  the 
political  and  economic  system,  especially  for  just  the 
next  five-year  plan.  We  must  reserve  judgement  on 
the  ultimate  potentials  for  success  ...  1 54 

Of  course,  a great  deal  of  additional  research  could 

(and  no  doubt  needs  to)  be  done  on  this  problem.  There 

certainly  is  abundant  literature  with  which  to  work.  Yet, 

typical  Soviet  practice  tends  to  support  the  conclusions 

presented  here.  That  is,  so  long  as  the  Party  refuses  to 

relax  its  rigid  , highly  centralized  control  from  above,  one 

ought  to  enteitain  "serious  doubts"  about  the  technological 

potential  of  the  Soviet  Union.  With  some  of  the  finest 

scientists  and  ennineers  in  the  world,  the  Soviets  nevertheless 

"enjoy"  one  of  the  world's  lowest  levels  of  productivity, 

for  an  industrialized  nation.  According  to  Messrs.  May  and 
, 155 

Friendly  , "the  problem  seems  to  be  that  foreign  technology, 
like  the  domestically  generated  variety,  is  no  match  for  the 


bureaucratic  and  overcentralized  Soviet  planning  structure... 
Reforming  the  Soviet  economic  system  would  appear  to  be  a 
solution,  but  that  is  precisely  what  technology  transfer  was 
intended  to  avoid  in  the  first  place." 

Therefore,  one  ought  to  pay  closer  attention  to  what  the 
Soviets  are  doing  and  have  already  done,  than  to  what  they've 
planned"  to  do — at  least  in  the  short  run.  In  the  past,  the 
Party  has  forced  their  system  to  operate  through  extensive 
capital  investment  and  introduction  of  additional  labor 
into  the  process  (rather  than  trying  to  modernize  or  make 
more  efficient  that  which  already  exists).  Now,  however,  the 
Soviets  appear  to  be  running  out  of  resources,  certainly 
human  resources. 

Whether  the  Soviets  will  be  able  to  satisfy  today's 
demands  on  their  telecommunications  facilities  and  still  cope 
with  the  problems  of  tomorrow  using  yesterday's  methods-- 
making  vast  plans  and  then  issuing  orders,  will  be  the 
subject  of  continuing  research. 

As  the  old  Russian  proverb  puts  it,  "We'll  live  a bit 
longer,  and  then  we'll  see." 


APPENDICES 

to 

THE  SOVIET  INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  NETWORK 

IN 

THE  AGE  OF  OVERLOAD 


r 


APPENDIX  A Growth  in  the  Soviet  Telephone  System 

156 


Part  One  - Overall  Growth  Statistics' 


YEAR 

Total  in- 
tercity 
calls 
completed 

Nr  of  Of  these  Total  nr  of  phones! 

phones  Nr  "auto-  of  all  governmental! 

(Ministry  matic"  departments  (ex- 

of  Comm)  phones  eluding  military) 

1913 

0 . 3 million  + 

+■ 

+ 

1940 

9 3 " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1955 

135  " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1956 

14  3 " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1957 

152  " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1958 

16  3 " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1959 

172  " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1960 

18  5 " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1961 

197  " 

+ 

+• 

+ 

1962 

210  " 

+ 

+ 

+ 

1963 

219  " 

3,550,000 

2,174,000 

6,800,000 

1964 

227  " 

4 ,000,000 

2,500,000 

6 ,600,000 (ap) 

1965 

2 56  " 

4 , 300,000 

3,400,000 

+ 

1966 

285  " 

5,000,000 

3,900,000 

7,900,000 

1967 

314  " 

5,729,000 

4 , 590,000 

+ 

1968 

34  3 " 

6,600,000 

5,500,000 

+ 

1969 

386  " 

7,500,000 

6,300,000 

+ 

1970 

431  " 

8,400,000 

7,500,000 

+ 

1971 

4 80  " 

12,200,000  n, 000, 000 

+ 

1972 

5 35  " 

13,200,000 

11,800,000 

+ 

1973 

(the  "+" 

59  3 " 
indicates 

14,500,000  13, 200, 000 
f igures  were  not  shown.) 

+ 

Part  Two  - "Departmental11  Telephone  CommurTica- 
tionsl^  (Not  a part  of  the  system  of  the  Minis- 


* Estimate  based  on  comparison  of  figures  in  Part 
One  in  the  years  1963-64  and  1966,  which  provides 
| art  av<  u . . ei  st.it  ion I 


1 


try  Of 

Com,  unications) 

NUMBER 

OF  'i  ELEPHONE  STATIONS 

Estimated* 

Of  These, Nr 

Nr  of  Tele- 

Year 

Overall 

"Automatic" 

phones 

1 
[ 1 

1940 

6,837 

146 

1,709,250 

1950 

13,852 

943 

3,463,000 

* 1 

1959 

24,335 

4 , 542 

6,083,750 

1962 

27,861 

8 ,104 

6,965,250 

1965 

27,554 

11,187 

6,888,500 

1 

1967 

30 , 579 

15,040 

7,644,750 

A 

1969 

31,181 

17,803 

7,795,250 

6 3 


Estimates  on  the  number  of  Soviet  telephones  vary 

widely.  A prominent  Western  journalist  estimated  that,  "In 

1970,  the  Soviet  Union  had  11  million  phones,  compared  to 

158 

120  million  in  America."  According  to  our  figures,  the 

combined  total  of  Ministry  of  Communication  and  Departmental 
phones  for  that  year  would  likely  be  closer  to  17  million. 
When  you  consider  the  number  of  military  phones  (a  state 
secret)  as  well,  the  total  may  approach  20  million  or  more 
for  the  entire  nation. 


APPENDIX  B 


* 


Operational  Process  of  Establishing  Intercity 
Connections  by  the  Semiautomatic  Method159 

To  establish  an  intercity  connection  using  the  semi- 
automatic method  (i.e.,  where  the  operator  dials  the  number 
for  the  subscriber) , the  telephone  operator  at  the  inter- 
city switchboard  plugs  one  end  of  a cord  circuit  into  the 
jack  of  the  line  which  connects  to  the  city  telephone  station 
(the  "local  dial  office"),  and  dials  the  number  of  the  sub- 
scriber who  booked  the  call.  The  other  end  of  this  cord  is 
plugged  into  the  jack  of  an  available  channel  on  the  re- 
quired line  of  communications,  thus  occupying  that  channel. 

(A  light  on  the  switchboard  indicates  which  channel  is 
available . ) 

When  the  operator  inserts  the  plug  into  the  jack  for 
the  desired  channel,  a sequence  of  events  occurs  automati- 
cally to  prepare  the  equipment  at  the  incoming  intercity 
telephone  station  (MTS)  to  receive  the  numerical  information 
(the  code  of  the  required  MTS).  If  register-retranslatcr 
equipment  is  installed  at  the  incoming  MTS,  then,  under  the 
influence  of  the  initial  signal,  the  equipment  for  incoming 
voice-frequency  dialing*  is  hooked  up  to  the  incoming  code 
register . 

[*NO'fE:  The  Soviets  use  a dual-f requency  generator 

and  a dual-frequency  receiver  of  voice-frequency  dialing 
for  sending  and  receiving  control  and  dialing  signals 
on  the  telephone  channels.  (The  frequency  1200  and 
1600  Hz  were  selected  to  permit  the  use  of  narrow- 
band  "divided"  channels.)  By  addinq  to  the  standard 
dual-frequency  semiautomatic  system  an  apparatus  for 
automatically  determinina  the  cost  of  the  conversation, 
and  by  joining  the  connectinq  gear  with  register- 
retranslator  equipment , the  semiautomatic  method  can 


6 5 


. i 


' 


be  replaced  with  automatic  "direct  distance  dialing". 

(The  "dual-frequency  semiautomatic  system"  began  to 
be  mass-produced  in  the  USSR  between  1950  and  1953) 1^0 

After  the  equipment  at  the  incoming  MTS  is  ready  to  re- 
ceive the  numerical  information,  an  answering  signal  is 
sent  to  the  originating  MTS.  A lamp  blinks  on  the  intercity 
switchboard  next  to  the  cord  circuit  the  operator  has  made. 
Next,  the  operator  hears  a steady  tone,  and  proceeds  to 
dial  the  code  of  the  required  MTS. 

Semiautomatic  Working  Without  Register-Retranslator 
Equipment . When  dealing  with  alternating  frequency  semi- 
automatic signaling  without  register-retranslator  equip- 
ment, in  order  to  employ  intermediate  (transit)  switching, 
the  intercity  operator  at  the  originating  MTS  has  to  dial-- 
digit  by  digit--and  irust  await  the  readiness  signal  from  each 
transit  MTS  before  dialing  the  next  digit.  The  readiness 
signal  ceases  each  time  when  the  first  dialing  impulse  is 


sent . 

The  last  digit  of  the  number  of  the  required  location  is 
the  number  "1",  which  is  characteristic  of  a terminal  connec- 
tion (and  gives  access  to  the  local  dial  office  at  the  re- 
quired location).  Upon  completion  of  dialing  of  the  number 
of  the  required  MTS,  the  terminal  incoming  MTS  sends  a 


short  control  signal  (through  all  of  the  intermediate  MTS) 
to  the  originating  MTS,  indicating  readiness  to  receive  the 


customer's  number.  This  signaling  also  causes  the  lamp  to 
blink  at  the  cord  circuit  the  operator  made.  The  incoming 


MTS  either  sends  a recorded  announcement  ("Patch  Kascrne, 


- - — h 


dial  your  number.")*,  or  a dial  tone.  [*NOTE:  i.e.,  for 

those  familiar  with  the  military  phone  system  in  Europe.] 

The  operator  at  the  originating  MTS  then  dials  the  num- 
ber of  the  party  being  called,  which  is  relayed  through  all 
of  the  intermediate  (transit)  MTSs. 

Where  register-retranslator  equipment  is  installed,  the 
intercity  operator  at  the  originating  MTS  simply  dials  the 
three-digit  code  of  the  required  MTS. 

This  three-digit  code  is  recorded  by  the  incoming  voice- 
frequency  dialing  equipment,  to  which  a translator  is  con- 
nected. The  translator  converts  this  code  into  digits  which 
determine  the  required  line  of  communications,  and  sends 
these  digits  to  the  mainline  selector.  The  latter,  under 
the  influence  of  the  pulses  it  receives,  establishes  a 
connection  with  the  outgoing  voice-frequency  dialing  equip- 
ment of  the  required  line  of  communications  from  a given 
transit  MTS.  (If  the  latter  equipment  is  occupied,  a busy 
signal  is  sent.)  The  outgoing  code  register,  when  it  re- 
ceives a readiness  signal,  sends  the  information  it  had 
recorded  to  the  next  MTS. 

The  process  of  sendinq  the  three-digit  code  from  one 
MTS  to  another  continues  until  the  connection  is  established 
with  the  required  terminal  MTS,  to  which  (instead  of  a three- 
digit  code) , the  digit  "1"  is  sent,  which  gives  access  to 
the  city  automatic  telephone  station. 

After  contact  has  been  made  with  the  city  telephone 
station,  a brief  signal  is  relayed  to  the  originating  MTS, 


67 


indicating  readiness  to  receive  the  number  of  the  party 
being  called.  (Once  again,  a light  blinks  on  the  originating 
intercity  switchboard.)  The  operator  hears  a recording  of 
"dial  your  number,"  or  a dial  tone,  and  proceeds  to  dial  the 
number  of  the  party  being  called.  (The  dial  impulses  are 
corrected  at  each  transit  MTS  and  at  the  terminal  incoming 
MTS.  ) 

If  the  operator  hears  a busy  signal,  and  the  party  being 
called  is  already  occupied  with  an  intercity  connection,  she 
must  pull  the  cord  circuit,  and  try  to  make  the  connection 
at  a later  time.  But,  if  the  called  party  is  engaged  with 
a local  call,  the  long-distance  operator  will  hear  the  con- 
versation, and  may  interrupt  to  inform  of  the  long-distance 
call  (she  does  not  hear  a busy  signal),  and  with  the  sub- 
scriber's consent  she  may  break  the  local  connection  in 
favor  of  the  long-distance  call. 

(NOTE:  In  this  description  we  have  been  considering  cases 

in  which  the  operator,  having  dialed  the  number  of  the  MTS, 
receives  the  readiness  signal  for  dialing  the  number  of  the 
called  party.  Actually,  if  the  connection  passes  through 
intermediate  MTSs,  this  does  not  always  occur  without  delays.) 


APPENDIX  C Organization  for  Advance  Booking  and  Immediate 
Systems  of  Operation  . ^61 

Tho  advance-booking  system  of  operation  is  employed 
by  the  Soviets  to  make  maximum  effective  use  of  telephone 
channels  where  the  traffic  workload  at  a given  station  exceeds 
the  capacity*  of  a group  of  channels  on  a given  line  of 
communications.  (Where  the  traffic  does  not  exceed  the 
capacity,  the  "immediate"  system  is  used.)  Connections  are 
generally  made  by  the  manual  method,  to  permit  the  intercity 
operators  to  alert  the  subscribers  next  in  line  of  their 
impending  connection  (before  the  channel  they  have  booked  is 
actually  vacant) . 

( *NOTE : "Capacity"  of  a channel  or  a group  of  channels 

refers  to  the  number  of  conversations  which  may  be  held  in 
a given  length  of  time  (for  example,  in  one  hour).  The 
"workload"  is  the  sum  of  all  the  advance  bookings  made  at 
the  MTS  for  that  period  of  time.  Capacity  depends  on  how 
many  channels  there  are  in  the  group,  the  average  duration 
of  the  conversations,  and  the  time  spent  in  establishing 
the  connection:  that  is,  depending  upon  the  time  of  effec- 

tive and  ineffective  use  of  each  channel.  Of  course,  the 
shorter  the  duration  of  ineffective  use  of  the  channel,  the 
greater  is  its  capacity.] 

The  receipt  of  bookings  and  the  process  of  completing 
these  orders  is  carried  cut  by  various  telephone  operators 
at  different  working  positions  as  shown  on  the  following 


I 


I 


r1 


ORGANIZATION  FOR  ADVANCE  BOOKING  SYSTEM  AT  INTERCITY 
TELEPHONE  STATION 


PC  Production  Control  Switchboard 
C&D  Control  & Distribution 
Switchboard 

BSB  Booking  Switchboard 
ISB  Intercity  Switchboard 
INFO  Information  Switchboard 
ACC  Accounting  Desk 


Depending  upon  the  workload,  an  appropriate  number  of 
booking  desks  are  established  at  the  intercity  telephone  sta 
tion  (MTS) . The  booking  lines  are  connected  in  multiple  to 
the  booking  desks  (switchboards) , which  permits  any  free 
operator  to  make  a connection  with  any  of  the  booking  lines 
on  which  the  booking  call  is  received.  Receipt  of  the  be  ki 
involves  completing  of  a special  form  or  ticket  with  d.>  • 
required  for  making  the  connection,  and  accounting  * 
costs.  After  completing  the  form,  the  operator  bt*  »• 
connection  with  the  customer  and  the  lint  is  ft* 
next  bookina. 


The  booking  ticket  is  then  s« 


MICROCOPY  RESOLUTION  TLSl  CHARI 

NAJlONAl  BURLALI  Of  SI ANDARDS  l%<  A 


1 

I 

’! 


\ 


$ 


distribution  desk  (switchboard).  Among  the  functions  of  this 

position  are:  verifying  the  right  of  the  subscriber  to  place 

a call  via  the  booking  system*;  checking  the  ticket  for 

correctness  and  completeness;  and  distributing  the  tickets 

to  the  appropriate  intercity  switchboard  (based  on  the  channels 

assigned  to  a given  switchboard  and  the  workload) . 

[ *NOTE : "Certain"  subscribers  do  not  have  the  right 

to  place  a call  on  credit.  The  CS.D  desk  has  the  "nec- 
essary materials"  for  verification.  When  the  call- 
back system  is  employed,  the  problem  of  checking  the 
veracity  of  the  calling  subscribers'  numbers  does  not 
arise.  Since  if  he  does  not  give  his  own  number,  he 
cannot  be  called  via  the  connecting  line,  and  the 
call  cannot  be  completed.  Under  the  "immediate" 
system,  if  the  booking  is  received  on  the  booking- 
connecting line  and  the  connection  is  made  right 
away-and  the  subscriber  gives  a false  number,  someone 
else  will  get  the  bill!  In  the  "newest"  telephone 
stations,  automatic  number  identification  equipment 
will  prevent  cheating.] 

Telephone  operators  at  the  booking  switchboards  and 
the  intercity  switchboards  are  connected  with  the  information 
desk,  which  furnishes  the  subscribers  and  the  operators  in- 
formation on  problems  of  using  long-distance  telephone  ser- 
vices . 

The  operator  at  the  intercity  switchboard  completes  the 
connections  in  order  of  receipt  of  the  booking  tickets. 

When  the  time  comes  for  completing  the  next  order,  the  opera- 
tor calls  the  subscriber  who  booked  the  call,  and  proceeds 
to  make  the  connection. 

The  tickets  from  completed  calls  are  then  sent  to  the 
accounting  desk,  where  the  charges  are  computed. 

Each  stage  of  the  process  is  subject  to  control 


1 


! 


i 


i' 


71 


■■ 


(inspection),  which  is  the  function  of  the  production  control 

switchboard.  The  inspection  may  be  carried  out  without  an 

operator's  knowledge.  The  length  of  time  a subscriber  has 

to  wait*,  the  time  spent  in  making  the  connection,  the 

degree  to  which  the  channels  are  exploited,  the  quality  of 

transmission,  etc.,  is  subject  to  control.  [*NOTE:  In  1970, 

the  Soviets  proudly  announced  that,  owing  to  the  installation 

of  automatic  switching  equipment  at  the  Ufa  switching  center, 

the  waiting  time  for  customers  was  "significantly  reduced." 

Now  bookings  for  calls  "to  any  point  in  the  republic  are 

162 

filled  within  an  hour  of  their  placement..."  ] 

The  Immediate  System  of  Operation.  In  contrast  to  the 
advance  booking  system,  here  the  booking  desk  and  the  control 
and  distribution  desk  are  not  required,  since  receipt  of  the 
booking  and  completion  of  the  call  are  performed  by  one  and 
the  same  operator.  The  procedure  varies  for  incoming  and 
outgoing  calls.  For  incoming  intercity  calls,  an  incoming 
intercity  switchboard  is  equipped  with  a patch  panel  with 
multiple  connections  to  intercity  channels.  (As  a rule,  the 
channels  are  connected  for  one-way  utilization;  that  is, 
separate  channels  are  used  for  outgoing  and  incoming  calls) 
Outgoing  intercity  switchboards  are  divided  into  groups,  and 
each  is  assigned  channels  from  a specific  line  of  communi- 
cations (i.e.  Moscow-Leningrad) . 

Outgoing.  Under  the  grouping  system  any  of  the  operators 
in  a group  can  occupy  any  channel  assigned  to  the  group, 
which  is  not  in  use.  Advance  preparation  of  the  customer 


; 


. ‘ 


i 


s 

i 

, 


72 


is  not  required,  and  the  semiautomatic  method  "is  preferred." 
The  process  of  servicing  a call  is  as  follows: 

Upon  receipt  of  a call  on  the  booking  line,  a call- 
lamp  lights  up  on  each  working  position  in  the  group  of 
intercity  switchboards  on  this  booking  line.  (In  the  local 
telephone  network,  booking  lines  must  be  divided  into 
corresponding  groups,  each  with  its  own  number.) 

Any  of  the  unoccupied  operators  of  the  group  may 
answer  an  incoming  call,  receive  the  booking  information, 
and  establish  the  connection.  If  there  is  at  least  one 
unoccupied  channel  on  the  required  line,  the  call  can  be 
made  immediately.  In  order  to  do  this,  the  operator  contacts 
the  calling  subscriber  by  dialing  his  number  on  one  of  the 
lines  which  connect  to  the  local  network,  and  then  releases 
the  line  by  which  the  booking  was  received. 

If  there  is  no  vacant  channel  on  the  required  line,  the 
operator  requests  the  subscriber  to  hang  up  and  wait  for  a 
call  from  her,  and  breaks  the  connection  on  the  booking  line. 
When  a channel  becomes  available,  the  operator  calls  the 
subscriber  who  made  the  booking  via  a connecting  line,  and 
proceeds  to  make  the  long-distance  connection. 

At  the  incoming  MTS,  when  a call  is  received,  call-lamps 
light  up  at  all  working  positions  which  serve  incoming  calls 
on  a given  line  of  communications.  One  of  the  unoccupied 
operators  connects  her  position  with  the  channel  on  which  the 
call  is  coming  in,  establishes  a cord  circuit  to  the  line 
which  leads  to  the  local  network,  and  then  dials 


the  number  of  the  subscriber  being  called. 

As  a rule,  booking  lines  and  connecting  lines  are  not 
compatible,  since  the  attenuation  is  greater  on  the  booking 
lines  (which  are  not  intended  for  holding  long-distance 
conversations  and  may  be  constructed  more  cheaply).  Since, 
under  the  booking  system,  bookings  are  received  and  connec- 
tions are  established  at  different  positions,  in  general  it 
is  not  possible  to  combine  both  types  of  lines  to  the  local 
network  into  one. 

With  the  newer  types  of  telephone  stations,  which  employ 
the  crossbar  system,  it  is  possible  to  make  the  long-dis- 
tance call  over  the  same  line  on  which  the  booking  is  made, 
through  a so-called  booking-connecting  line.  In  this  case, 
the  operator  at  the  intercity  switchboard,  having  received 
a booking,  does  not  have  to  call  the  subscriber  back  by 
means  of  dialing  his  number  on  a connecting  line,  but  can 
immediately  connect  the  booking-connecting  line  with  a 
channel  on  the  desired  line  of  communications,  provided 
there  is  an  unoccupied  channel  at  that  moment. 

The  availability  of  booking-connecting  lines  does  not 
exclude  employing  connecting  lines,  since  at  the  present 
time  the  greater  part  of  the  bookings  are  serviced  with  a 
certain  amount  delay,  and  without  call-back  it  is  not 
possible  to  make  the  connection. 

If,  after  several  attempts,  the  intercity  operator  is 
not  able  to  make  the  connection,  the  booking  ticket  is  passed 


74 


to  the  outgoing  switchboard  for  delayed  connections.  (The 
organization  at  an  MTS  employing  the  immediate  system  of 
operations  includes,  besides  outgoing  and  incoming  inter- 
city switchboards:  information  desks,  a production  control 

desk,  and  an  outgoing  switchboard  for  delayed  connections.) 

In  practice,  all  throe  systems  of  operation  (advance 
booking,  immediate,  and  rapid)  may  be  employed  at  a given 
station,  on  different  lines  of  communication.  Selection  of 
one  or  the  other  depends  upon  which  provides  better  utiliza- 
tion of  channels:  where  a heavy  workload  exists,  advance 

preparation  of  subscribers  next  in  line  can  provide  uninter- 
rupted loading  of  the  channels;  the  advance-booking  system 
best  meets  this  requirement  at  present.  Use  of  the  booking 
system  is  continually  decreasing,  while  the  percentage  of 
connections  made  by  the  immediate  and  the  rapid  system  is 
growing,  along  with  the  rapid  increase  in  the  number  of 
channels  available  through  introduction  of  multi-channel 
systems  of  multiplexing  and  the  automatization  of  intercity 
telephone  communications. 

NOTE:  The  "rapid"  system  of  operation  does  not  differ  in 

principle  from  that  of  the  "immediate"  system,  except  the 
bookings  may  be  received  only  on  a booking-connecting  line. 
The  rapid  system  requires  that  the  connection  be  made  right 
away;  if  this  is  not  possible,  the  subscriber  is  sent  a busy 
signal,  and  must  try  again  later. 


APPENDIX  D Principles  of  Organization  of  a Soviet  Telephone 
Network. 

Intercity  telephone  networks  are  designed  and  built  to 
assure  maximum  utilization  of  channels  by  increasing  acces- 
sibility  to  them.  With  this  in  mind,  one  might  con- 
ceivably organize  the  network  in  one  of  three  ways:  (1) 

by  the  everyone-with-everyone  principle,  where  each  telephone 
station  has  direct  contact  with  all  the  other  telephone 
stations  (which  is  physically  impossible  and  prohibitively 
expensive);  (2)  by  the  radial  method,  where  each  individual 
station  is  connected  to  one  great  central  station  (which,  if 
out-of-order,  would  paralyze  the  whole  network);  and  (3) 
by  the  tandem-central  exchange  method. 

Under  the  tandem-central  exchange  method,  a number  of 
central  exchanges  are  built  on  a given  territory;  these 
exchanges  are  connected  with  one  another  under  the  "every- 
one-with-everyone"  method.  Each  of  these  exchanges  serves  as 
the  central  station  for  a group  of  terminal  intercity  tele- 
phone stations  in  different  locations.  Within  the  confines 
of  its  group,  each  terminal  MTS  is  connected  with  its  tan- 
dem central  exchange  by  the  radial  method.  (See  diagrams  on 
following  pages). 

In  actual  Soviet  practice,  a radial-tandem  central 
exchange  system  is  used.  By  this  method,  the  central 
exchange  themselves  are  connected  with  one  another  through  a 
radial  method,  with  some  in  direct  contact  with  one  another. 
Central  exchanges  are  divided  into  several  classes:  main 


76 


exchanges,  first-class  central  exchanges,  and  so  on.  Second- 
class  exchanges,  which  come  under  first-class  exchanges,  are 
connected  to  the  latter  by  the  radial  method;  third-class 
exchanges  are  connected  to  their  second-class  exchanges  in 
the  same  manner,  and  so  on. 

Considering  the  entire  national  telephone  network,  the 
first-class  exchanges  are  the  intermediate  switching  centers 
for  the  entire  country;  second-class  exchanges  the  intermediate 
switching  centers  within  a portion  of  the  country;  third- 
class  within  the  territory  of  the  second  class  in  the  same 
manner,  down  to  the  terminal  MTS  in  the  network  (which  may  in 
fact  be  a second-class  or  third-class  exchange) . (See 
diagram. ) 


p 


r 


Appendix  D - Dlap»— s of  Metwork  Organisation 


Figure  D-1. 

*r«7on*-wlth- 

Everyone 


Figure  D-2. 
Redial  Method 


O— Central  Exchange 
O — Terminal  MTS 


Figure  D-3.  Tandem 
Central  Exchange  Method 


o— Terminal  MTS 


Figure  D-4.  Radial-Tandem  Central  Exchange  Systi 
shoving  First  (I),  Second  (II),  and  Third  (III) 
Class  central  exchanges. 


4 


APPENDIX  E System  of  Assigning  Telephone  Numbers  on  the 
Soviet  Intercity  Telephone  Network^®^ 

The  Intercity  Code 

In  the  numbering  system  for  intercity  telephone  communi- 
cations, the  number  which  is  assigned  to  a definite  point  is 
called  the  intercity  code.  Where  the  national  network  is 
divided  into  zonal  networks,  the  intercity  code  characterizes 
the  zone  being  called.  The  Soviet  Union,  along  with  the 
gradual  automatization  of  its  intercity  telephone  network, 
has  adopted  a system  of  numbering  which  will  allow  gradual 
changeover  to  the  planned  zonal  system  of  numbering.  (The 
process  is  expected  to  be  a lengthy  one.) 

Gradual  Change  to  Zonal  Concept. 

The  system  of  numbering  for  the  changeover  period,  in 
accordance  with  the  existing  system  of  mainline  networks  and 
intra-oblast'  networks,  envisages  separate  numbering  for  the 
mainline,  and  for  the  oblast'  networks,  while  retaining  the 
numbering  for  subscribers  in  the  local  networks.  A three- 
digit  intercity  code  has  been  adopted  for  the  mainline 
telephone  network. 

A three-digit  code  is  assigned  to  each  oblast'  center 
and  to  each  intraoblast'  telephone  network.  (Separately 
designated  cities  on  the  mainline  network  which  are  not 
oblast's,  are  also  assigned  a unique  three-digit  code.) 

This  numbering  is  the  same  for  both  automatic  and 
semiautomatic  intercity  communications.  Subscribers  and 
telephone  operators  use  one  and  the  same  intercity  code  for 

k 


I 


79 


establishing  connections,  regardless  of  the  possible  routes 
through  which  the  connections  are  made,  either  by  means  of 
or  without  bypass  routes. 

Access  to  the  Automatic  Intercity  Telephone  Station  (AMTS) 

Under  automatic  intercity  telephone  communications, 
access  to  the  automatic  intercity  telephone  station  is 
accomplished  by  dialing  a preliminary  suffix  (the  intercity 
suffix) , which  is  not  a part  of  the  intercity  code,  and  is 
designed  for  dialing  outside  of  the  local  network. 

The  intercity  suffix  dialed  by  the  subscriber  differs 
for  automatic  and  semiautomatic  communications,  since  in  the 
one  case  the  subscriber  must  gain  direct  access  to  the  auto- 
matic equipment  for  establishing  the  connection  and  in  the 
other  only  to  the  telephone  operator  who  dials  the  intercity 
code  and  the  number  of  the  party  being  called.  (The  inter- 
city code  together  with  the  party's  number  is  called  the 
"intercity  number.") 

Abbreviated  Code.  When  making  a connection  by  semi- 
automatic means  (with  the  aid  of  an  operator)  on  a direct 
line  between  two  points  (no  intermediate  switching  involved) , 
instead  of  the  three-digit  intercity  code,  the  abbreviated 
code  "1"  is  dialed.  For  this  reason,  intercity  codes  can- 
not start  with  "1". 

The  Intercity  Suffix  "8"  In  the  Soviet  Union,  the  num- 
ber "8"  has  been  selected  as  the  intercity  suffix,  which  is 
not  part  of  the  intercity  code. 


80 


The  intercity  codes  of  the  oblast'  centers  and  the 
intercity  codes  for  accessing  the  network  of  this  oblast' 
differ  only  by  the  first  number.  If  the  oblast'  center  is 
assigned,  for  example,  the  code  8XX , where  X is  any  number, 
then  the  code  for  the  network  of  this  oblast'  might  be  7XX 
or  5XX . 

Constant  Number  of  Digits.  An  intercity  number  without 
accounting  for  the  intercity  suffix  has  10  digits.  Of  these 
10  digits,  three  make  up  the  intercity  code  and  seven  the 
number  of  the  subscriber  in  the  local  network.  A seven-digit 
subscriber  number  is  the  maximum  number  of  digits.  When  the 
subscriber  numbering  consists  of  five  or  six  digits,  an 
equalizing  number  of  zeroes  are  dialed  prior  to  the  actual 
subscriber  number,  to  total  seven. 

Complete  intercity  subscriber  numbers,  thus,  will  appear 
as  follows  (where  M is  the  number  8 or  0,  and  X is  any  num- 
ber) : 

For  Cities  with  seven-digit  customer  numbering* 

MXX  XXXXXXX ; 

For  cities  with  six-digit  numbering, 

MXX  OXXXXXX;  and 

For  cities  with  five-digit  numbers, 

MXX  00XXXXX. 

With  the  two  first  digits  8 and  0 there  can  be  200 
three-digit  intercity  codes  for  oblast'  centers.  If  this 
number  of  codes  turns  out  to  be  insufficient,  then  the  num- 
ber 9 can  also  be  used  in  the  first  position. 

81 


The  numbers  5 and  7 may  be  used  as  the  first  number  of 
the  intercity  codes  within  the  oblast*  networks,  and  the 
number  6 may  be  added  to  these  if  required. 

The  numbers  3 and  4 have  been  set  aside  for  the  first 
digit  in  assigning  numbers  for  cities  on  the  mainline  net- 
work (cities  included  in  the  mainline  network  like  the 
oblast'  centers,  but  without  the  internal  network  of  the 
latter) . 

Purpose  of  System. 

This  system  of  numbering  was  worked  out  for  the  transi- 
tional period,  in  the  anticipation  of  installation  of  register 
and  retranslator  equipment  at  all  intermediate  switching 
centers  on  the  mainline  network.  The  translators  are  de- 
signed for  translating  the  numbers  of  the  three-digit  code 
into  the  sequence  required  for  selecting  a trunk  on  the 
required  line  of  communication  (direct  or  bypass) . After 
selecting  the  trunk,  the  intercity  code  which  has  been  recorded 
in  the  register  is  transmitted  to  the  register  of  the  next 
station.  If  the  next  station  is  a terminal  intercity  station, 
then  the  abbreviated  code  "1"  is  sent.  (Also  see  Appendix  J 
and  the  numbering  used  with  the  "Oblako"  system.) 

The  Number  ”2";  Access  to  One's  Own  Network 

In  order  to  assure  the  possibility  of  establishing 
intra-oblast'  connections  by  means  of  dialing  an  abbreviated 
code  (that  is,  for  access  to  one's  own  intra-oblast'  network 
without  dialing  its  complete  intercity  code) , the  number  "2" 


82 


has  been  reserved;  therefore,  this  number  and  the  number  "1" 
are  not  permitted  as  the  first  number  of  a three-digit  inter- 
city code. 

In  this  manner,  with  automatic  intercity  telephone 
communications,  customers  obtain  access  to  their  own  intra- 
oblast'  network  by  dialing  the  suffix  "8"  (access  to  the 
AMTS)  and  "2"  (access  to  the  intra-oblast'  network),  that 
is,  "82".  After  dialing  "82",  the  seven-digit  number  of 
the  subscriber  may  be  dialed. 

Zonal  Organization  of  the  Network. 

Under  the  zonal  organization  of  the  network,  the  unique 
intercity  three-digit  codes  (ABC)  will  be  assigned  not  to 
the  oblast's,  but  to  the  zones.  Subscribers  will  have  a 
seven -digit  number  for  communications  within  their  zone,  and 
a 10  digit  number  for  intercity  communications  (between  sub- 
scribers of  different  zones.) 

The  seven-digit  zonal  number  of  the  subscriber  will 
consist  of  a two-digit  code  representing  a group  of  100,000 
subscribers  (ab) , and  a five-digit  number  for  the  subscriber 
in  this  group. 

The  complete  intercity  subscriber  number  will  consist 
of  ten  digits — a three-digit  zone  code,  and  the  seven-digit 
number  of  the  subscriber  in  that  zone. 

With  semiautomatic  and  automatic  intercity  communications, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  dial:  8XX  ABC  ab  XXXXX,  where  X 

represents  any  number;  A any  number  except  1 and  2;  and  B,  C, 
and  b,  any  numbers;  and  a,  any  numbers  except  8 and  0. 


t 


Under  automatic  telephone  communications  between  sut  - 
scribers  in  the  same  zone,  when  this  contact  is  established 
through  the  AMTS,  the  subscriber  must  dial  82  abXXXXX. 

Thus,  in  general,  the  difference  between  zonal  num- 
bering, and  the  numbering  in  the  changeover  period  is,  that 
subscribers  in  the  zone  will  always  have  a seven  digit  num- 
ber, while  the  first  two  digits  ab  will  stand  for  a group 
of  100,000  subscribers. 


! 


i 

5 


* 


it 

i ' 


' 


i 

♦ 


t, 


84 


TV.’.’T 


3T- 


APPENDIX  F.  Principles  of  Organization  of  the  United 
Automatized  Telecommunications  System 
(EASS) .l65 

The  "EASS,"  which  comprises  a nationwide  automatically- 
switched  telephone  network,  is  intended  for  the  transmission 
of  speech,  of  facsimile  and  photographic  information,  and 
for  transmission  of  digital  information  at  medium  speed. 

It  will  be  divided  into  an. intercity  network  and  zonal 
networks,  that  is,  it  will  provide  interzonal  communications. 
The  intercity  network  includes  the  AMTS,  automatic  switching 
centers  (UAK) , and  channel  groups  which  connect  the  dif- 
ferent AMTS  (AMTS-AMTS) , an  AMTS  and  a UAK  (AMTS-UAK) , and 
one  UAK  with  another  (UAK-UAK) . This  system  envisages  using 
the  UAK  only  for  intermediate  switching  and  for  distribu- 
tion of  the  traffic  load  along  the  lines  of  communication. 

The  principles  of  organization  of  an  intercity  telephone 
network  which  unites  the  zonal  networks  are  depicted  in 
Figure  F-l.  This  network  uses  two  classes  of  automatic 
switching  centers:  first  class  (UAK-I),  and  second  class 

(UAK-II) . 

All  first  class  automatic  switching  centers  will  be 
connected  with  one  another  according  to  the  principle 
"everyone  with  everyone."  Each  UAK  serves  a definite  ter- 
ritorial district.  Each  UAK-I  is  the  center  of  a network 
of  the  radial-central  exchange  design  and  connects  a group 
of  UAK-II  and  the  AMTSs.  The  AMTSs  are  connected  to  a 
UAK-II  or  directly  to  a UAK-I.  The  UAK-II  provides  a shorter 


85 


A 


L 


t 


path  for  the  traffic  load  between  separate  groups  of  AMTSs 
which  are  far  away  from  a UAK-I;  they  assure  access  to  the 
UAK-I  and  the  neighboring  territories.  The  role  of  the  UAK-II 
might  in  an  emergency  be  carried  out  by  an  AMTS. 

The  diagram  shows  a variety  of  possible  connections 
between  the  AMTS,  the  UAK-I  and  the  UAK-II.  Connections 
shown  as  solid  lines  are  called  the  "path  of  last  resort." 

The  high-utilization  path  is  the  basic  path  by  which  the 
connections  will  be  established.  This  path,  during  peak 
hours,  will  have  fewer  channels  than  that  required  for  sat- 
isfactory handling  of  the  load.  The  paths  of  last  resort 
will  carry  the  excess  load  from  the  high-utilization  paths; 
in  principle,  the  paths  of  last  resort  are  bypass  routes. 

Where  there  is  sufficient  "attraction"  between  any  two 
AMTSs,  direct  paths  of  high  utilization  (the  dotted  lines) 
are  organized.  The  surplus  load  which  is  "lost"  on  these 
direct  paths  is  sent  through  the  automatic  switching  centers. 
If  the  "attraction"  between  separate  MTSs  is  very  small, 
then  the  latter  will  be  connected  only  with  the  UAK,  through 
which  the  entire  load  will  be  routed.  Such  a network  design 
assures  good  utilization  of  channels  by  passing  the  greater 
part  of  the  traffic  via  the  shortest  possible  route  with  the 
least  amount  of  intermediate  switching.  The  path  of  last 
resort  will  be  used  only  if  all  other  possible  channels  are 
occupied . 

The  intrazonal  network  is  organized  according  to  the 
radial-central  exchange  principle.  (See  figure  F-2.) 


t 

{ 

i 

i 


* 


j 

i 


j 


86 


The  role  of  the  first-class  central  exchange  is  played  by 
the  AMTS  which  at  that  time  represents  a terminal  station 
on  the  intercity  network. 


1 


/ 


The  Central  Stations  (TsS — Tsentral'nye  Stantsii)  of 
the  rural  network  are  directly  connected  with  the  AMTS,  as 
are  the  district  (raion)  ATS  (RATS) , and  central  switching 
centers  for  outgoing  and  incoming  communications  (UIS,  Uzel 
Iskhodiashchei  Sviazi;  UVS,  Uzel  Vkhodiashchei  Sviazi)  of 
the  city  telephone  network. 

Tandem  central  exchanges  of  the  rural  network  (US, 
Uzlovie  Sel'skie  Stantsii)  are  hooked  up  to  the  central 
rural  stations,  while  terminal  rural  stations  (OS,  Okonechnie 
Stantsii)  are  connected  to  the  former.  Separate  terminal 
stations  may  be  hooked  up  to  the  central  station,  bypassing 
the  US  (as  depicted) . 


j 


I 

I 


s 


k 


3 

3 


87 


II 


APPENDIX  G Abbreviations 

In  order  to  avoid  confusing  abbreviations  for  Soviet 
titles,  etc.,  with  those  which  might  be  used  by  Western 
telephone  experts  (and  which  might  represent  an  entirely 
different  concept) , this  paper  uses  the  Soviet  abbreviations 
throughout,  rather  than  attempt  to  create  "original"  abbre- 
viations . 


Abbre- 

viation 

AMTS 


ATS 


ATSK 


EASS 


Expansion 


Translation 


GU 


I KM 


MRU 


MTS 


NUTS 


[*NOTE: 


Avtomaticheskaia  Mezhdugorod-  Automatic  Intercity 


naia  Telefonnaia  Stantsiia 

Avtomaticheskaia  Telefonnaia 
Stantsiia 

Avtomaticheskaia  Telefonnaia 
Stantsiia,  Koordinatnaia 


Edinnaia  Avtomatizirovannaia 
Sistema  Sviazi 


Glavnyi  Uzel 


Telephone  Station 

Automatic  (city) 
Telephone  Station 

Automatic  Telephone 
Station,  Crossbar 
System 

United  Automatized 
Telecommunications 
System* 

Main  Central  Ex- 
change (in  each  SSR) 


Impul ' sno-kodovaia  Moduliatsiia  Pulse-code  Modu- 
lation* 


Mezhduraionnyi  Uzel 


Mezhdugorodnaia  Telefonnaia 
Stantsiia 

Nauchno-issledovatel 'skii 


Inter-District 

Exchange 

Intercity  Telephone 
Station 

Scientific  Research 


Institut  Gorodskoi  i Sel'skoi  Institute  of  City 


Telefonnoi  Sviazi 


and  Rural  Telephone 
Communications* 


Zalucki,  Dictionary  of  Russian  Technical  and  Scien- 
tific Abbreviations,  Warsaw,  1968.) 


89 


Abbre- 


viations 

Expansion 

Translation 

OU 

Oblastnoi  Uzel 

Oblast'  Central 
Exchange  (in  each 
oblast ' ) 

OS 

Okonechnaia  Stantsiia 

Terminal  Station 
(lowest  echelon  in 
network) 

RATS 

Raionnaia  ATS 

The  ATS  of  a Dis- 
trict (raion) 

RSFSR 

Rossiiskaia  Sovetskaia 
Federativnaia  Sotsialistiches- 
kaia  Respublika 

The  Russian  Soviet 
Federated  Socialist 
Republic 

RU 

Raionnyi  Uzel 

District  Central 
Exchange 

SSR 

Sovetskaia  Sotsialisti- 
cheskaia  Respublika 

Soviet  Socialist 
Republic  (One  of 
15-Russian,  Ukra- 
nian,  etc. ) 

TSMTS 

Tsentral ' naia  Mezhdugorodnaia 
Telefonnaia  Stantsiia 

The  Central  Inter- 
city Telephone  Sta- 
tion, Moscow 

TsS 

Tsentral ' naia  Stantsiia 

Central  Station 
(Rural  network) 

UAK 

Uzel  Avtomaticheskoi 
Kommutatsii 

Automatic  Switching 
Center  (transit 
station) 

US 

Uzlovaia  Sel'skaia 
Stantsiia 

t 

Rural  Central 
Exchange 

90 


VI700N: 


APPENDIX  I.  Soviet  Satellite  Communications 


General . The  Soviet  (non-military)  communications  satellite 
program  is  administer,  d by  the  Chief  Cosmic  Directorate  of 
the  USSR  Ministry  of  Communications.  The  Soviets  currently 
utilize  two  types  of  communications  satellites:  those 

launched  into  highly  elliptical  orbits;  and  those  launched 
into  circular,  stationary  orbits.  This  appendix  gives  the 
general  characteristics  of  the  spacecraft  and  the  ground 
stations  used  with  them,  as  described  in  original  Soviet 
sources.  (Note:  Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology,  July  8, 

1974,  announced  that:  "The  Soviet  Union  is  accelerating 

deployment  of  a tactical  military  communications  satellite 
network  of  dozens  of  small  satellites  in  low-altitude  near- 
circular random  orbit."  No  indications  of  such  spacecraft 
were  noted  in  sources  available  for  this  paper,  however.) 

(See  Figure  1-1 . ) 

Beginnings  of  the  Soviet  Communications  Satellite  Program. 

The  development  of  satellite  communications  was  begun  in 
the  Soviet  Union  with  the  launch  of  the  first  "Molniia" 
(Lightening)  in  1965,  and  the  creation  of  an  experimental 
system  of  long-distance  radio  communications.  The  basic 
task  of  this  system  was  to  work  out  the  principles  of 
designing  a network  of  telephone  and  telegraph  radio  com- 
munications, plus  relay  of  programs  from  the  central 
television  studios,  with  the  aim  of  subsequently  constructing 
an  operational  communications  satellite  system. 

92 


L 


A transmitting  station  near  Moscow,  and  a network  of 
ground  stations  (called  "Orbita")  for  receiving  signals 
from  the  Molniia  spacecraft,  were  put  into  operation  in 
1967.  The  network,  which  consisted  of  20  stations  by  the 
end  of  this  first  year,  provided  for  "transmission  of 
central  television  to  20  million  people  living  in  the  Far 
North,  Siberia,  and  the  Far  East." 167  The  number  of  ground 
stations  has  since  more  than  doubled.  Orbita  stations  use 
a relatively  simple  antenna  system  with  a parabolic  re- 
flector about  40  feet  in  diameter,  but  employ  highly 

1 fj  R 

sensitive  low-noise  amplifiers. 

The  Molniia  Program.  The  Soviets  currently  employ  three 

series  of  communications  satellites  designated  "Molniia." 

"Molniia- 1 " is  a satellite  "designed  to  provide 

operational  systems  of  long-distance  telephone  and  telegraph 

communications,  radio  communications , and  transmission  of 

programs  from  the  central  television  studios  to  points  on 

the  'Orbita*  network  (situated  in  the  regions  of  the  Far 

North,  Siberia,  the  Far  East,  and  Central  Asia),"  according 

16  9 

to  Aviation  and  Cosmonautics. 

Soviet  communications  satellites  in  the  Molniia-1 
series  are  launched  into  a highly  elliptical  orbit  at  an 
inclination  of  65°  from  the  Equator.  (See  figures  1-1  and 
1-6).  In  a single  24-hour  period,  the  satellite  makes 
only  two  orbits.  The  greater  part  of  the  orbit  of  the 
satellite,  which  becomes  "slower"  in  the  area  of  the 

93 


apogee,  over  the  northern  hemisphere,  "illuminates"  the 
entire  USSR.^®  The  spacecraft  are  orbited  in  such  a manner 
that,  as  one  falls  below  the  horizon  for  a given  ground 
station,  another  satellite  is  there  to  take  the  place  of 
the  former.  Thus,  multiple  satellites  are  required  for 
the  ’Molniia"  system. 

The  parameters  for  Molniia-1  are  as  follows  (on  the 
average);  apogee,  24,400  miles;  perigee,  305  miles;  period 
of  orbit,  12  hours;  inclination  of  orbit,  65°.  The  system 
operates  in  the  800-1,000  MHz  range,  using  two  nominal 
frequencies  for  two-way  communications  on  each  "sector" 
(earth-to-space  and  space-to-earth) , and  frequency  modu- 
lation for  retransmission  of  the  signals.  The  power  of 
the  on-board  transmitter  reaches  about  40  watts. 

The  system  of  communications  used  with  the  Molniia-1 
series  permits  organizing  either  duplex  multichannel 
telephone  communications  (with  the  possibility  of  sub- 
multiplexing the  telephone  channels  with  voice  frequency 
telegraphy  or  phototelegraphy) , or  relay  of  television 
programs . *72 


i 


94 


Molniia-2 . Although  orbital  parameters  are  nearly  identical 

to  those  of  the  Molniia-1  series,  the  Molniia-2  operates 

in  a different  frequency  band,  and  is  referred  to  as  a 

more  "advanced"  system  than  its  predecessor  series  (which 

continues  in  use).  The  first  satellite  of  the  Molniia-2 

series,  whose  on-board  relay  equipment  operates  in  the 

4-6  GHz  band,  was  launched  25  September  1971.  New  receiving 

equipment  called  "Orbita-2"  was  developed  for  use  with  the 
173 

Molniia-2 . 

According  to  the  Soviets,  the  system  was  designed  for 
"providing  telephone  and  telegraph  communications,  as  well 
as  TV,  newsprint,  and  radio  broadcasting,  to  the  'Orbita' 
network,  as  well  as  to  points  established  within  the  frame- 


work of  international  cooperation. 


,,174 


[Note:  The  latter  statement  evidently  refers  to  the 

use  of  a Molniia-2  satellite  in  the  Moscow-Washington 
"hotline"  system.  According  to  Aviation  Week  and  Space 
Technology  of  August  21,  1972,  "a  duplex  voice-bandwidth 
channel  on  the  Molniia-2  system  will  go  from  a Molniia 
station  at  Vladimir,  USSR,  to  a Molniia  Station  at  Ft. 
Dietrich,  Md . " U.S.  News  and  World  Report  of  April  8,  1974 
adds  that,  owing  to  the  highly  elliptical  or'  it,  "the 
Molniia-2' s period  of  mutual  visibility  to  Moscow  and 
Washington  is  8 hours.  To  fill  the  16  hour  gap,  Russia 
will  have  to  orbit  two  more  satellites  along  the  same 
track  at  precise  intervals."] 


96 


r 


« 


i 


Molniia-3 . The  Molniia-3  satellites  operate  according  to 
the  same  principles  as  the  Molniia-2,  but  have  "greater 
capabilities  and  higher  quality  characteristics."  The 
first  of  the  Molniia-3  series  was  launched  into  an  ellip- 
tical orbit  on  November  21,  1974.  Its  equipment  operates 
in  the  "centimeter"  band.  The  Soviets  have  applied  to  the 
International  Telecommunications  Union  to  register  the 
Molniia-3,  and  in  1976,  the  "international"  organization 
of  cosmic  communications  called  "Intersputnik,"  will  rent 
out  channels  on  the  Molniia-3  for  telephone  communications, 
as  well  as  exchange  of  TV  programs,  among  the  countries 
which  belong  to  that  organization:  Mongolia,  Czechoslovakia 

Poland,  East  Germany,  the  Soviet  Union,  and  Cuba.  "Using 
the  Molniia-3  in  a highly  elliptical  orbit,"  the  Soviets 
state,  "will  permit  communications  between  all  of  these 
stations .. .which  will  present  new  possibilities  for  ex- 
panding international  cooperation."^^ 

"Qrbita-2"  and  "Mars" . New  receiving  equipment  developed  by 
the  Soviets  called  "Orbita-2,"  reportedly  "completely 
satisfies  the  requirements  of  international  standards," 
and  permits  transmission  of  color  television.  Orbita-2 
stations  have  been  in  use  since  the  end  of  1971,  when  the 
first  satellite  in  the  Molniia-2  series  was  launched. 
According  to  the  Soviets: 

Orbita-2  not  only  provides  for  relay  of  television 
programs,  but  also  for  multichannel  telephone  com- 
munications between  the  center  of  the  country  and 


i 

i 


■ 


97 


the  Far  East  and  Eastern  Siberia.  Several  types 
of  equipment  were  created  for  relaying  telephone 
calls,  in  which  (together  with  the  widely-used  methods 
employed  in  the  conventional  ground  systems)  prin- 
ciples are  used  which  conform  to  the  spacecraft 
system.  For  example,  frequency  division  multiplexing 
of  the  supergroup  in  the  on-board  transmitter,  and 
frequency  modulation  of  the  signals,  allows  multi- 
station access  to  the  system. [Emphasis  mlne-RR] 

Along  with  the  stationary  ground  stations  of  the 

Orbita-2  type,  the  Soviets  have  designed  and  built  a 

transportable  station  called  "Mars.”  The  station  reportedly 

successfully  completed  its  testing  in  1974,  having  organized 

direct  television  transmission  from  India,  Cuba,  Bulgaria, 

and  Mongolia,  on  the  arrival  there  of  a Party-governmental 

delegation  headed  by  Brezhnev. 

A comparatively  simple,  compact,  and  mobile  trans- 

mi  tting-receiving  station,  "Mars"  operates  through  the 

Molniia-2  communications  satellite.  The  Mars  station  I 

‘1 

operates  in  the  frequency  band  reserved  for  space  communi- 
cations (4-6  GHZ),  and  services  the  transmission  of  the 
picture  and  sound  (on  separate  channels) , as  well  as 
telephone  and  telegraph  service  communications  (for  which  one 
supergroup  of  the  spacecraft  transceiver  is  used)  . "Fre-  ;< 

quency  modulation  is  used  for  sending  the  images ...  [whi le ) 
the  sound,  as  well  as  the  service  communications  (tele- 

' 

phone  and  telegraph)  are  sent  by  appropriate  methods  of 
time  and  frequency  multiplexing,"  the  Soviets  report.177 

The  antenna  of  the  Mars  station  consists  of  a completely 
rotatable  quasi-paraboloid  reflector  7 meters  in  diameter 


.J 


with  a quasihyperboloid  counter-ref lector  1.1  meters  in 

diameter.  "In  spite  of  its  small  dimensions,"  the  Soviets 

say,  "signal  quality  received  from  the  spacecraft  Molniia-2 

is  satisfactory."  All  radiotechnical  equipment  (except 

the  output  stage  of  the  transmitter)  in  the  Mars  station  is 

178 

based  on  the  transistor  with  integrated  circuits. 

The  total  weight  of  the  Mars  station  is  said  to  be 
about  30  tons,  and  it  can  be  transported  by  rail,  truck, 
sea,  or  air  transport  in  three  large  crates.  These  three 
crates,  when  joined  together,  form  the  sides  of  the  station. 
The  joining  together  of  the  three  containers,  however,  the 
assembly  and  installation  of  the  antenna  system  on  the  roof, 
mechanical  installation,  and  tuning  up  the  station  requires 
two  to  three  days.  The  station  is  said  to  be  capable  of 
operating  in  "any  climatic  conditions,"  even  in  high  winds. 
(See  figures  1-3  through  1-5) 


99 


IS  19^ 


Figures  1-3#  1-4  and  1-5.  New  Soviet  Transportable  Satellite 
Communications  Station  called  "Mars". 


This  receiving-transmitting  station  can  be  sent  to  Just 
about  any  point  on  the  globe,  set  up,  and  put  into  operation 
in  Just  a few  days. 


1 

1 

t 

E \i  i 

fr'J  * 

i 

• H 

i 

I < 

Wtm 

rWf  fi**AW 

! il 

t *» 

f 

( ’1 

1 1 

~~  ~ 

Stationary  Satellites.  A stationary  orbit  is  very  convenient: 


a satellite  launched  into  a circular  orbit  at  a distance 
of  about  22,000  miles,  in  lino  with  the  equator,  makes  one 
orbit  every  24  hours  along  with  the  earth.  In  this  case, 
it  is  easier  to  track  the  satellite  with  the  ground  station 
antennas,  and  there  are  no  breaks  in  communication  owing  to 
regular  transfers  from  one  satellite  to  another,  as  in  the 
Molniia  system.  (However,  stationary  satellites  do  not 
provide  good  coverage  for  the  polar  regions.)  (See  figure 
1-6)  . 

The  Soviets  are  developing  a system  called  "Statsionar-T . " 
This  system  operates  in  the  "decimeter"  frequency  band, 
where  TV  signals  are  sent  to  the  satellite  at  frequencies 
on  the  order  of  4-6  GHz,  while  the  space-to-earth  link 
operates  in  the  702-726  MHz  band.  The  transmitter  on  the 
spacecraft  has  a large  output  (in  the  order  of  300  watts) , 
while  the  antenna  has  "high-standard  transmitting  character- 
istics," which  reportedly  permit  reception  from  the  satel- 
lite by  simpler  and  less  expensive  systems  than  are  employed 
with  the  "Orbita-2"  stations . ^ 79 

The  "Statsionar"  satellites  will  be  so  arranged  in 
geostationary  orbit  that  two  or  three  will  provide  "TV 
coverage"  all  across  the  territory  of  the  USSR.  "The 
territory,"  say  the  Soviets,  "on  which  reception  of... 
signals  from  the  'Statsionar-T'  system  is  possible,  covers 
about  10  million  square  kilometers,  and  extends  from  the 
southern  borders  of  the  Soviet  Union  up  to  75  degrees  North 


101 


latitude"  (which  is  roughly  in  the  area  of  Cape  Cheliuskin, 

180 

or  just  to  the  south  of  Severnaia  Zemlia) . 

Thus  far,  the  Soviets  have  successfully  launched  at 
least  three  satellites  into  geostationary  orbit:  Molniia-lS, 

"a  communications  satellite  with  equipment  for  experimen- 
tal transmission  of  TV  and  long-distance  radio  communica- 
tions," was  launched  on  29  July  1974,  and  achieved  a circu- 
lar orbit  of  21,870  miles  with  a period  of  23  hours  and  59 
minutes.  The  satellite  called  "Raduga"  was  launched  on 
22  December  1975  into  a circular  orbit  of  about  21,840  miles, 
with  a period  of  23  hours  and  54  minutes. The  Soviets 
had  the  following  to  say  about  their  "Raduga"  satellite: 

"Raduga"  (the  international  registration  suffix  is 
Statsionar-1 ) is  a communications  satellite  with  on- 
board relay  equipment  designed  for  providing  unin- 
terrupted, round-the-clock  telephone-telegraph  radio 
communications  and  simultaneous  transmission  of 
color  and  black  and  white  programs  of  central  tel- 
evision to  the  network  of  "Orbita"  stations. 

Launched  into  a nearly  stationary  circular  orbit, 
the  satellite  has  a constant  position  with  respect 
to  the  earth's  surface. 182 

In  addition,  the  Soviet  journal  Aviation  and  Cosmo- 
nautics reported  the  launch  of  "Kosmos  775"  on  October  8, 

1975  into  an  orbit  very  similar  to  that  of  "Raduga."  The 
satellite  was  not  further  identified  in  that  journal, 

1 o -> 

however. 


102 


Figure  1-6 


Positioning  of  space  vehicles  in  geostationary  orbit. 
Three  satellites,  whose  orbital  period  Batches  the 
Earth's  own  rotation,  provide  communication  between 
any  two  points  on  the  Earth's  surface. 


Positioning  of  satellites  in  an  orbit  such  as  that  of 
"Nolniia."  Relieving  one  another,  these  satellites 
can  support  continuous  radio  contact  across  the  entire 
Northern  Hemisphere. 


* 


»"JL  - 111 11  11  1 


Some  Applications  of  Soviet  Sate 1 1 ite  Communications . In 
addition  to  their  obvious  advantages  in  providing  a ylobal 
communications  capability,  the  participation  in  a system  of 
satellite  communications  of  a network  of  stations  (such  as 
the  Orbita  network),  makes  possible  operational  redistri- 
bution of  telephone  channels,  that  is,  switching  unloaded 
channels  over  to  those  lines  where  there  are  not  sufficient 
channels  at  the  time,  via  satellite  relay. 

The  Soviets  envision  such  a possibility,  because: 

The  transmitting  and  receiving  circuitry  at  satel- 
lite stations  have  a lot  in  common  with  the  equip- 
ment employed  on  conventional  radio  relay  lines. 
Satellite  lines,  just  as  radio  relay  lines,  employ 
frequency  modulation  (with  one  important  difference, 
in  that  the  satellite  lines  strive  to  realize  maximum 
results  in  noise  suppression).  Nevertheless,  the 
telephone  circuits  use  the  very  same  methods  of  for- 
mation of  the  combined  spectrum  of  telephone  channels 
and  their  submultiplexing  as  are  used  in  the  com- 
munications systems  on  Earth.  84 

At  the  same  time,  the  Soviets  report,  that  "at  the 

present  time,"  because  the  communications  satellites  and 

radio  relay  systems  often  transmit  in  the  same  frequency 

band,  "they  tend  to  interfere  with  one  another ...  [which J 

185 

places  limitations  on  their  transmitting  power."  The 

Soviets  reportedly  plan  to  raise  the  frequencies  used  for 
satellite  communications  to  the  relatively  free  spectrum 
above  10,000  MHz,  which  wjII  also  permit  increasing  the 
capacity  of  the  satellite  systems.  (As  a general  rule, 
the  higher  the  carrier  frequency,  the  yreater  the  volume  of 
information  that  can  be  sent  at  the  same  time.) 


104 


L 


•L. 


Telephone  conununical ions  organized  for  satellite  systems 
can  be  designed  on  the  basis  of  using  either  fixed  or  non- 
fixed  channels  between  stations,  the  latter  being  offered 
the  subscriber  on  demand.  In  the  latter  case,  the  system 
can  be  very  flexible,  permitting  concentration  of  channels 
on  the  required  lines  of  communications  at  any  time,  in  order 

1 O £ 

to  remove  the  peak  workload. 

"Qualitative  indicators"  of  the  communications  channels 
aboard  Soviet  communications  satellites  reportedly  "cor- 
respond to  international  standards  for  all  types  of  infor- 
mation." The  Soviets  plan  to  reserve  certain  channels  for 
"international"  usage  under  the  "Intersputnik"  system,  and 
declare  that: 

For  this  purpose,  receiving-transmi tting  stations 
have  already  been  built  on  the  territory  of  Cuba, 
the  Czechoslovak  SSR,  and  the  Polish  Peoples'  Re- 
public. A receiving  station  is  in  operation  in  the 
Mongolian  Peoples'  Republic,  and  a receiving-trans- 
mitting  station  is  being  built  in  the  GDR.  Stations 
are  planned  for  other  countries  as  well. 187 

Summary . Over  the  recent  five-year  period,  the  Soviets  have 

continued  to  launch  satellites  in  the  Molniia  series  at 

(on  the  average)  four-month  intervals  within  each  series. 

Thus,  between  July  28,  1971  and  January  22,  1976,  fourteen 

satellites  in  the  Molniia-1  series  were  launched;  between 

November  24,  1971  and  December  17,  1975,  thirteen  of  the 

Molniia-2  series  were  launched;  and  satellites  in  the 

Molniia-3  series  were  orbited  on  November  21,  1974  and  on 

April  14  and  November  14,  1975.^®®  (See  chart  on  following 

page.) 

105 


SUMMARY  OF  MOLNIIA  ACTIVITY,  1971-1975:  (launches) 


APPENDIX  J.  The  "Cordless"  Intercity  Telephone  Station 
"Oblako"  (AMTS-2 ) 

The  AMTS-2,  also  known  as  "Oblako"  (cloud),  is  a high- 
capacity  (1,500-3,000  channels)  intercity  telephone  station 
which  incorporates  "cordless"  switchboards  (See  Figure  J-l) 
and  automatic  switching  equipment  for  making  all  types  of 
connections,  including  automatic  transit  connections,  even 
on  channels  where  the  opposite  terminal  is  equipped  with 
manual  switching  equipment.  The  switching  equipment  used 
at  the  AMTS-2  is  the  relatively  more  sophisticated  crossbar 
system.  (See  Figure  J-2  and  J-3) 

An  article  which  appeared  in  the  Soviet  journal 
Science  and  Life  entitled  "Oblako,  The  Automatized  Tele- 
phone Station"  in  April  1970  is  quoted  extensively  below: 

Up  to  now,  only  manual  stations  were  in  use  in 
our  country  for  servicing  intercity  telephone  calls. 
Such  stations  are  serviced  by  telephone  operators, 
whose  work  is  tense  and  exhausting. 

The  Riga  State  Electrotechnical  Factory  (VEF) 
has  produced  an  intercity  telephone  station  of 
the  cordless  type,  which  will  make  it  easier  to 
carry  on  intercity  conversations.  Such  stations 
have  been  named  "Oblako."  The  first  "Oblako"  is 
already  installed  in  Moscow.  Similar  stations 
are  being  installed  in  Minsk  and  Riga. 

An  MTS  of  the  cordless  variety  makes  possible 
extensive  automatization  of  the  processes  of 
making  connections,  as  well  as  a number  of  tech- 
nical operating  processes,  such  as  figuring  up 
a subscriber's  bill  for  making  a long-distance 
call . 

(The  Moscow  "Oblako"  station  is  in  a 10-story 
building  next  to  the  Metro  station  on  Taganskaia 
Square;  the  building  was  especially  designed  to 
house  a modern  telephone  station.) 

The  following  paragraphs  compare  and  contrast  the 

manner  in  which  an  intercity  conversation  is  "normally" 


107 


” — ' — 


I 


conducted,  and  how  one  is  made  using  the"Oblako"  system: 

How  is  an  intercity  telephone  conversation  nor- 
mally conducted: 

"Intercity,"  answers  the  telephone  operator,  after 
the  subscriber  dials  the  appropriate  number  for 
"Intercity  calls"  (for  most  cities  in  the  USSR 
this  is  "07");  the  operator  inquires  with  which 
city  the  subscriber  wishes  to  be  connected,  under 
which  category  (routine  or  urgent),  the  name  and 
number  of  the  party  being  called,  and,  of  course, 
the  name  and  number  of  the  party  placing  the  call. 

All  or  these  questions  are  asked  by  a telephone 
operator,  whose  job  is  only  to  take  down  the  booking 
and  fill  in  the  booking  ticket.  Besides  this,  she 
doesn't  do  a thing,  and  cannot  do  anything  else — 
only  a single  line  is  connected  to  her  switchboard, 
the  so-called  "booking  line."  This  line  is  not 
connected  with  any  other  city. 

The  completed  booking  ticket  is  passed  on  to  the 
"connection  service,"  where  yet  another  telephone 
operator  dials  the  number  of  the  party  who  wishes  to 
place  the  call,  from  her  switchboard,  at  the  same 
time  checking  on  the  correctness  of  the  subscriber 
number  and  the  accuracy  of  the  booking  ticket. 

Following  this  operation,  the  connection  can  be 
made  with  the  party  being  called:  the  telephone 

operator  selects  an  unoccupied  channel,  inserts  the 
plug  of  a connecting  cord  into  the  jack  of  a chan- 
nel for  the  appropriate  city,  and  sends  a signal. 

Well,  if  she  doesn't  have  a direct  channel  to 
that  city  on  her  panel,  then  she  has  to  make  a 
connection  with  a telephone  operator  at  the  switch- 
board where  there  is  access  to  the  required  chan- 
nel. And  such  a chain  of  telephone  operators 
might  be  extremely  long.  [Emphasis  mine-RR] 

With  the  "cordless"  MTS,  as  the  name  implies,  there  are 
no  cords  at  the  connecting  switchboards.  (Where  the  auto- 
matic system  is  used,  there  are  no  operators  either.) 

Following  is  a very  detailed  description  of  the  pro- 
cess of  establ ishing  an  intercity  connection  using  the 
newer  "Oblako"  system:  (See  figure  J-4) 

When  the  subscriber  lifts  the  receiver  of  his 
telephone,  a certain  number  of  devices  at  the 


! 


g 


t 

’ i 


1 OR 


scriber  calls  among  working  positions,  establishes  order  of  priority  of  incoming  calls  (if  no  operator 
is  available)  and  services  delayed  calls  in  order  of  appearance.  Operators  indicate  readiness  to  re- 
ceive calls  by  pressing  a key.  Kight  digital  lights  have  been  installed  on  the  front  panel,  on  which 
r.uffber  of  subscriber  Baking  call,  and  his  category,  are  automatically  di -played.  Note  •’touch  tore" 
hu’tors  (arrow)  rather  than  dial.  (Photo:  Nauka  1 Zhlin1  No.  i*-1970) 


X 


station  are  activated;  these  devices  hook  up  the 
subscriber  with  an  electronic  device,  which  "re- 
members" the  number  which  was  dialed  by  the  sub- 
scriber . 

The  dial  on  the  subscriber's  telephone,  rotating, 
closes  and  opens  contacts  which  send  impulses  of 
electrical  current  to  the  automatic  telephone  sta- 
tion (ATS).  One  impulse  is  equal  to  the  number  "1", 
two  impulses — the  number  "2",  and  so  on.  The  re- 
gistering equipment  at  the  station  receives  these 
impulses  and  stores  them  in  its  "memory"  lor  trans- 
mission to  the  switching  equipment. 

In  order  to  understand  the  subsequent  activity 
of  the  automatic  equipment,  one  needs  to  know  just 
what  the  number  of  the  party  being  called  represents 
this  number  is  nothing  other  than  an  indicator  of 
the  direction  of  the  connection. 

The  Intercity  Numbe r 

The  first  three  digits  at  the  intercity  station 
represents  the  city  code.  Many  such  codes  begin 
with  the  number  "8".  Let's  say  the  code  of  the 
city  being  called  is  801.  After  the  code  comes 
the  subscriber's  number.  Let's  say  the  subscriber's 
number  is  621242.  The  first  two  digits  are  the 
code  of  the  ATS — the  district  (raionnoi)  switching 
station,  to  which  the  subscriber's  telephone  is 
connected.  The  remaining  four  digits  are  the  num- 
ber of  the  subscriber's  line  at  that  station. 

The  registering  equipment,  having  received  the 
impulses  "8",  "10",  and  "1",  which  corresponds 
to  the  code  "801,"  converts  them  and  transmits 
this  information  to  the  relay  equipment,  called 
the  "marker . " The  marker,  with  the  aid  of  its 
relays,  seeks  out  a free  line-channel  to  the  city 
being  called.  To  do  this,  it  first  of  all  seeks  out 
an  unoccupied  MKS  (Mnogokratnii  Koordinatnyi 
Soedinitel ' - Multiple  Crossbar  Switch). 

The  Multiple  Crossbar  Switch  (MKS ) 

The  MKS  is  the  basic  switching  mechanism  of  the 
crossbar  automatic  telephone  station.  The  opera- 
tion of  the  MKS  is  based  on  the  operations  of  a 
group  of  relay  contacts. 

The  simplest  type  of  MKS  has  100  groups  of  con- 
tacts, in  the  form  of  relay-type  springs  and 
stationary  bars.  The  groups  of  contacts  are 
arranged  in  a rectangular  frame  (figure  J-3)  in 
such  a manner,  that  a field  of  contacts  is  created, 


110 


Retaining  Electromagnet 

Armature  of  Retaining  Electromagnet 

Operating  "..trip" 

Contact  Springs 
Operating  Spring 
Contact  bars 
Selector  nlect njncignc-t 
Selector  Spring 
Selector  bar 


Figure  J- 

Switch. 

1970) 


I 


with  10  vertical,  and  10  horizontal  rows.  There  are 
electromagnets  situated  along  both  sides  of  the 
frame.  These  are  called  "selectors,"  since  with 
their  aid  the  required  horizontal  group  of  contacts 
is  selected,  in  which  the  required  connection  is 
situated. 

Upon  operation  of  one  of  the  selector  electro- 
magnets, the  selector  bar  moves,  and  the  selector 
pin  of  this  bar  is  placed  opposite  the  bend  (chamber) 
of  the  operating  contacts  of  all  groups  of  contacts 
on  the  given  horizontal  row,  that  is,  in  all  10  of 
the  vertical  rows.  In  the  vertical  rows  are  located 
so-called  "retaining  electromagnets."  If  at  this 
time  one  of  the  retaining  electromagnets  of  the 
vertical  row  has  been  activated,  then  the  operating 
bar  (strip)  of  this  vertical  row,  having  moved  in  the 
direction  of  the  contact  groups,  meets  a selector 
pin,  sticks  to  it  and  presses  on  the  operating  spring. 
This  forces  the  contact  spring  of  the  selected  contact 
group  to  lock  with  the  stationary  contact  bars. 

As  soon  as  the  retaining  electromagnet  has  com- 
pleted its  operation,  the  selector  electromagnet  loses 
its  electric  current  and  releases  its  armature.  The 
selector  bar,  under  the  influence  of  the  return 
spring,  takes  up  a neutral  position,  while  only  the 
selector  pin  remains  stuck  to  its  contact.  Although 
it  remains  stuck  for  the  entire  time  of  the  con- 
versation, it  does  not  prevent  the  bar  from  moving 
and  making  other  connections. 

Upon  completion  of  the  connection,  the  retaining 
electromagnet  releases  its  "anchor"  (armature) , and 
the  selector  pin  returns  to  the  neutral  position. 

All  of  the  above  operations  occur  in  a fraction  of 
a second,  therefore,  one  may  say  that  by  means  of 
an  MKS  having  10  vertical  bars,  10  connections  can 
be  made  one  after  the  other  almost  instantly. 

If  the  required  line  is  unoccupied,  the  ringer 
contact  closes,  and  the  phone  of  the  party  being 
called  begins  to  ring.  If,  however,  the  line  is 
busy,  all  the  systems  are  disconnected,  and  the 
busy  signal  is  connected.) 

As  is  well  known,  once  access  to  the  calling  com- 
plex has  been  achieved,  the  marker  must  receive 
the  information  about  the  required  connection.  Since 
the  marker  reacts  to  the  signals  instantly,  the  in- 
formation it  requires  must  arrive  as  rapidly  as 
possible.  Therefore  a special  high-speed  transmitting 
device  is  used,  by  means  of  which  the  information 
is  transmitted  from  the  ATS  to  the  MTS  at  a speed 
of  10  digits  per  second. 

112 


k 


» I 


Automatic  Number  Identification  and  Subscriber  Billing. 

When  the  party  being  called  picks  up  the  receiver, 
still  another  group  of  complex  systems  are  connected 
at  the  MTS,  the  task  of  which  is  to  carry  out  the 
calculating  of  charges  for  the  calling  party. 

The  automatic  number  ident i f icat ion  equipment 
(AAON  - Apparatura  Avtomaticheskogo  Opredeleniia 
Nomera)  determines  the  line  from  which  the  call 
came  in — and  once  you've  found  the  line,  you've 
found  the  number.  In  fact,  the  AAON  determines 
the  number  and  the  category  instantly,  at  the  time 
the  booking  is  made:  automatic  devices  must  "know" 

from  which  telephone  the  other  city  is  being  called- 
whether  it  is  a phone  in  an  apartment,  in  a govern- 
ment office,  in  a hotel,  or  from  an  ordinary  public 
phone  booth.  (If  the  call  originates  at  a public 
phone  booth, the  AAON  "forbids"  automatic  connection 
with  the  other  city.) 

The  AAON  makes  its  decisions  in  the  register 
stages : 

From  the  moment  the  party  being  called  picks  up 
the  receiver,  a device  starts  to  operate,  which  sends 
an  electronic  impulse  every  six  seconds.  (Ten 
impulses  equals  one  minute.)  At  the  conclusion 
of  the  conversation,  the  calculation  of  impulses 
ceases.  If,  however,  the  number  of  impulses  totals 
300,  the  automatic  equipment  cuts  off  the  conver- 
sation [Emphasis  mine-RR] — conversations  of  over 
30  minutes  are  frowned  upon— one  also  ouqht  to  think 
of  other  subscribers  who  may  wish  to  speak  with 
that  same  city. 

The  registering  equipment,  having  received  the 
number  of  the  calling  party  and  the  party  being 
called  in  its  electronic  brain,  as  well  as  the 
every-six-seconds  impulses,  "inquires"  of  special 
clocks  about  the  time  of  day  (in  order  to  establish 
the  tariff  category--as  you  know,  its  cheaper  to  call 
after  six) . Based  on  the  code  category  of  the  sub- 
scriber being  called,  the  electronic  memory  receives 
the  costs  for  one  minute  of  conversation.  These 
costs  are  also  stored  in  the  computer. 

On  the  basis  of  all  these  data,  the  calculating 
equipment  determines  the  cost  of  the  conversation, 
and  the  computer  sends  the  data  to  the  card  per- 
forator, having  already  determined  the  priority 
for  printing  the  billing  cards.  If  the  conversa- 
tion originated  at  a hotel,  for  instance,  then  the 
card  must  be  prepared  out-of-sequence,  so  the 
caller  can  pay  his  charges  before  checking  out 
of  the  hotel. 

113 


J 


Figure  J-4 


ChSSSBA.i  INT.viCiTY  Tr.li.PhSN. 
STATION  "ObLAKO" 


8019621242 


Intermedia  te  itegi  at.er  IR 
Register  of  Intercity 
Number  of  Called  Party 

llloll  il  feJzJl  J2 14  2 J^i2  )7|  I [2:9/ 1 


inti  I 


punch 


Stage*  of 


E iuip.  for  autc 
inatic  cost 
account] nr 

8014621242 

27^979 


Ihelay  L 
Ifbmnlex 


mm\ 


h<)  i«621  242 


Stage  of 
Intercity 
Connect 1 nr 


il 


C*ll*r  diala  "8"  to  got  MTS.  In  the  number  801-0621242,  the  801  la  tha 
coda  of  city  called;  following  ia  7-dlgit  number  of  called  party.  (If 
city  numbering  system  is  5-  or  6-digit,  one  must  dial  ssro(s)  first.) 

In  schematic,  the  "6"  directs  ssleetors  for  sccsss  to  MTS,  connacta 
initial  rsgiater  (II)  to  "reamsber"  number  of  called  party  and  info 
from  All.  Marker  of  series  sslector  controls  crossbar  stage;  it  has 
receivsd  digits  83  from  the  IR,  where  8 is  first  digit  of  cods  and  3 ia 
category  of  calling  party.  System  for  calculating  bill  receives  all  tbs 
data  concerning  call.  The  seleotor  systems  and  line  equipment  assure 
the  connection  is  made.  Each  series  device,  having  completed  its  func- 
tion, disconnects  itself,  and  does  not  taks  further  part  in  connection. 


•CITY  R K I N 0 CALLED 


INTERCITY  TELEPHONE  STA . 
(CCifL  TYPE)  with  SEMI- 

AUTOi-'.TIC 

systj-: 

Constant 

Lrei#  r' 
Converter 

Series  Sel- 
ector, Inter- 

lutorc-ity 
series  Sel- 
ector 

FEE 


"Oblako"  at  the  Introductory  Stage 

"Oblako"  is  an  extremely  complicated  system.  At 
this  time,  as  was  stated  previously,  only  the  first 
stage  has  been  put  into  operation;  therefore,  not 
all  connections  [Emphasis  mine-RR]  are  conducted 
via  automatic  lines.  There  are  also  still  communi- 
cations serviced  by  telephone  operators.  But  even 
some  of  these  telephone  operators  are  already  working 
at  cordless  switchboards . 

Operator  Servicing  at  Cordless  Switchboards 

In  the  switchboard  room,  there  is  a control  panel 
for  the  "immediate  system"  (See  Appendix  C-RR]  for 
each  telephone  operator.  After  the  booking  is  re- 
ceived, the  same  operator  who  fills  out  the  ticket 
immediately--using  a touch-tone  device--a  push  button 
system,  "dials"  the  required  number  and  turns  on  the 
timing  device.  A single  telephone  operator  can  make 
up  to  six  connections  [Emphasis  mine-RR]  on  any  link 
within  the  Soviet  Union . 

The  senior  telephone  operator  on  the  shift  con- 
trols the  work  of  the  entire  switchboard  room  from 
her  control  panel.  There  are  instruments  at  her 
panel  which  display  the  number  of  channels  active, 
the  intensiveness  of  the  workload,  and  even  the  time 
the  telephone  operator  required  to  answer  the  call 
of  a subscriber. 

Trouble  Indicator  Lamps 

There  is  also  a special  signal  system  for  pro- 
blems on  the  line.  Illuminated  display  lights 
are  arranged  along  a number  of  equipment  racks. 

When  a blue  ]<imp  lights  up,  it  means  the  fuse 
blew  on  that  rack;  a white  lamp  also  indicates 
a blown  fuse,  but  a less  important  one;  if,  however, 
a red  lamp  lights  up,  you  need  a maintenance  man 
right  away. 

In  the  future,  the  automatic  equipment  will  not 
have  to  wait  until  the  maintenance  man  comes.  In 
order  that  a telephone  conversation  not  be  inter- 
rupted, a special  relay  instantly  connects  one  to 
an  unoccupied  line  in  good  working  order,  and  the 
conversation  is  shifted  to  that  line.  At  this 
time,  the  maintenance  man  is  guided  to  the  faulty 
equipment  with  his  test  gear  and  eliminates  the 
problem. 


r 


Conclusion ■ At  such  a complex  station  as  "Oblako,"  which 
has  up  to  3,000  communications  channels,  it  is  of 
course  not  possible  to  check  the  condition  of  the 
lines  by  the  old,  manual  method.  For  this  purpose, 
a whole  complex  of  automatic  control  and  testiny 
equipment  has  been  created. 

An  so,  with  this  we  will  complete  the  excursion 
through  an  intercity  telephone  station  of  the 
"Oblako"  type.  It  goes  without  saying,  that  it 
was  not  exhaustive:  such  a description  would  take 

up  hundreds  of  thick  tomes,  and  many  of  them  would 
be  comprehensible  only  to  a professional.  [The 
author  is  in  complete  agreement  with  these  senti- 
ments-RR] 

In  conclusion,  one  may  emphasize  that,  today's 
station  known  as  "Oblako"  was  intended  for  up  to 
200  lines  of  communications,  and  in  each  of  these 
around  200  communications  channels. 

* * * 


FOOTNOTES 


1.  "The  Age  of  Overload,"  Newsweek , September  29,  1969, 
pp.  36-37. 

2.  Adzhemov,  C.  A.,  "The  Chief  Directions  of  the  Develop- 
ment of  Technology  of  Wire  Communications,"  Vestnik 
Sviazi  No.  4-1970,  p.  25. 

3.  Vinogradov,  P . N.,  "To  the  Workers  of  the  Villages," 
Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  5-1970,  pp.  29-30. 

4.  Vlasov,  L.  V.,  "Do  We  Know  How  to  Speak  on  the  Tele- 
phone?", Economics  and  the  Organization  of  Industrial 
Production , No.  1-1975,  pp.  198-208. 

5.  "Telephony,"  Van  Norstrand  Scientific  Encyclop_edia , 
1958,  p.  1654. 

6.  Ibid . , p.  1655. 

7.  "Telephone,"  Encyclopedia  Brittanica,  1964,  Volume  22, 
p.  901. 

8 . Ibid . 

9.  Ibid. 

10.  Ibid. 

11.  Ibid. 

12.  Ibid. , p.  902. 

1 3 . Ibid. 

14 . Ibid. 

15.  Ibid. 

16.  "Coramunications--Yesterday , Today,  and  Tomorrow," 

7, aria  Vosloka,  April  14,  1973,  p.  3. 

17.  Brittanica,  op.  cit. 

18.  Ibid. 

19.  Ibid. 

20.  "Information:  Machines  Do  the  Calculating,"  Vestn i k 

Sviazi  No.  6-1970,  p.  28. 


117 


r 

\ 


1 


21.  "Telephony,"  Collides  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  22,  p.  129. 

22.  Ibid. 

23.  Solov'ev,  Sh.  G.,  Intercity  Telephone  Stations, 

Sviaz'  Publishing  House,  Moscow7l9T2,  p. 


24. 

Ibid.  , 

P* 

13. 

25. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

21. 

26. 

Ibid. , 

P- 

38 

27. 

Ibid . 

28. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

68  . 

29. 

Ibid.  , 

P* 

188 

30. 

Ibid . , 

P- 

38. 

31. 

Ibid.  , 

P. 

134 

32. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

141 

33. 

Ibid . , 

P- 

301 

34. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

302 

35. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

13. 

36. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

16. 

37. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

33. 

38. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

18  . 

39. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

20 

40. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

21. 

41. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

24  . 

42. 

Ibid.  , 

P* 

23. 

43. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

21 . 

44. 

Ibid.  , 

P- 

27. 

45. 

Ibid. , 

P* 

29. 

1 

'1 


\ 

; 

u 

J 

i 

j 

[ 

I 

I 

I 


118 


46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56 . 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60 . 
61 . 
62. 


63. 

64  . 
65. 


66. 


67. 


Ibid . , p.  28. 
Ibid . , p.  29. 
Ibid. , p . 31 . 
Ibid. , p.  29 
Ibid. , p.  32 
Ibid. , p.  36 
Ibid . , p . 37 . 


Yearbook,  The  Croat  Soviet  Encyclopedia,  1975,  p.  10. 
Solov'ev,  op,_cit.,  p.  38. 

Ibid. , p.  43. 


Ibid . 


Ibid. 

Ibid. 

Ibid . 

Ibid. , p.  44. 
Ibid. , p.  46. 


Lecture  by  Prof.  Konstantin  Arkad'evich  Krylov,  "Com- 
munications Facilities  in  the  Soviet  Union,"  U.S.  Army 
Russian  Institute,  February  27,  1976. 


Solov'ev,  op.  cit. , p.  46 
Ibid . , p.  49. 

Lecture  by  Mr.  Vladimir  Aleksandrovich  Dremluga 
"Treatment  of  Dissidents  in  the  Soviet  Union,"  U.S. 
Army  Russian  Institute,  March  21,  1976. 

"Listing  of  Subscribers  to  the  Moscow  City  Telephone 
Network,"  Sviaz1  Publ  ishTng  House,  Moscow,  11)66, 
pp.  XXI  and 

Solov'ev,  op.  cit.  , p.  133. 

Solov'ev.,  op  cit. 


119 


68. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72  . 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 


Ibid . , p.  141. 

Ibid. 

Ibid . , p.  142 . 

Korol',  V.  I.,  "The  Working  Habits  of  the  Communicators 
of  the  Ukraine,"  Vestnik  Sviazi,  No.  4-1970,  p.  34. 

Adzhemov,  op.  cit. 

Elibaev,  A.,  "On  to  a New  Phase,"  Kazakhstanskaia 
Pravda , May  6,  1971,  p.  3. 

Kudinov,  A. , "Communications  at  the  Service  of  the 
Economy  and  the  Culture,"  Pravda  Vostoka,  November  22, 
1970,  p.  2. 

"Communications  in  the  Final  Year  of  the  Five  Year 
Plan,"  Ekonomicheskaia  Gazeta  No.  19,  May  1975,  p.  1. 

Timofeev,  A.,  "The  Intercity  Telephone,"  Pravda 
Vostoka , March  22,  1972,  p.  2. 

Vinogradov,  op.  cit. 

Elibaev,  op.  cit. 

Kazimov,  V.,  "Problems  of  the  Five  Year  Plan:  Communi- 

cations and  the  National  Economy,"  Pravda  Vostoka, 
October  23,  1971.,  p.  2. 


'1 


"On  Serious  Deficiencies  in  the  Activities  of  the 
Ministry  cf  Comi. unications  of  the  Georgian  SSR," 

Zaria  Vostoka,  November  30,  1972,  p.  1. 

"Winning  the  Battle  with  Time  and  Distance,"  Zaria 
Vostoka , May  6,  1973,  p.  3. 

Tsiskaridze,  A.,  "I'd  Like  You  To  Meet  the  Electronic 
Automatic  Telephone  Station,"  Zaria  Vostoka,  March  31, 
1974,  p.  3. 

Timofeev,  op.  cit. 

Adzhemov,  op.  cit. 

Ka  z imov , op . cit . 


Timofeev,  op . cit . 


120 


87.  Adzhemov,  op.  cit. 

88.  Petrushin,  I.  P.,  "The  Technology  of  Communications  in 
the  Intrazonal  Networks,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  9-1970, 
pp.  16-17. 

89.  Ibid. 

90.  Ibid. 

91.  Amanov,  S.,  "Television — Across  the  Mountain  Ranges," 
Sovetskaia  Kirgizhiia,  November  26,  1974. 

92.  Blokhin,  A.,  "Transmission  Systems  with  Frequency 

Division  of  Channels:  Their  Growth,  and  Their  Pros- 

pects for  the  Future,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  4-1975, 

p . 28 . 

93.  Karbelashvili , A.,  "Born  in  Hungary,"  Zaria  Vostoka, 
February  6,  1973. 

94.  Adzhemov,  op.  cit, 

95.  Ibid. 

96.  Ibid. 

97.  Piskacheva,  L.,  "Proper  Organization  of  Production-- 
the  Guarantee  of  Raising  the  Quality  of  Communications, 
Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1975,  p.  33. 

98.  Adzhemov,  op.  cit. 

99.  Ibid. 

100.  Ibid. 

101.  Blokhin,  op.  cit. 

102.  Timofeev,  op.  cit. 

10  3.  Sadykov,  E.,  "From  'Morse'  to  'Orfrita',"  Sovetskaia 
Kirgizhiia , October  10,  1974,  p.  2. 

104.  Posysaev,  N.  S.  "Communications  Technology  from  Abroad: 
The  Electronic  Switchboard,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1969 

p.  22. 

105.  Karbelashvili,  op.  cit, 

106.  Ambrush,  Y.,  " ' Budavox ' in  Tashkent,"  Pravda  Vostoka, 
September  14,  1971. 


107.  Ibid. 

108.  Ibid. 

109.  Ibid. 

110.  Sutton,  Antony  C.,  Western  Technology  and  Soviet  Econo- 
mic  Development  191 7- 1930,  ("Stanford , Cal iforn ia : 
Stanford  University,  Hoover  Institute,  1968),  pp.  185- 
196. 

111.  "Information — They  are  Installing  'Ericsson',"  Vestnik 
Sviaz i No.  5-1970,  p.  33. 

112.  "The  Energetic  Relay  Race  for  Socialist  Competition 
Goes  On,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1974,  pp.  12-13 

113.  "Information--International  Symposium  on  Communications 
Technology,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  8-1970,  p.  23. 

114.  Tsiskaridze,  op.  cit. 

115.  Vinogradov,  op.  cit. 

116.  Tsiskaridze,  op.  cit. 

117.  Adzhemov,  op.  cit. 

118.  Ibid. 

119.  Ibid. 

120.  Ibid. 

121.  Ibid. 

122.  Ibid. 

123.  Amanov,  op.  cit. 

124.  Adzhemov,  op.  cit. 

125.  Amanov,  op.  cit. 

126.  Holland,  Wade  B.,  "Party  Congress  Emphasizes  Computer 
Technology,"  Soviet  Cybernetics  Review  (The  Rand 
Corp.),  July  1971,  p.  7. 

127.  Blokhin,  op.  cit. 

128.  The  Great  Soviet  Encyclopedia,  1974,  Vol.  9,  p.  63. 


12  9.  Solov'ev,  op.  cit . , p.  302. 


130.  The  Great  Soviet  Encyclopedia,  op.  cit. 

131  Petrushin,  op . cit. 

132.  Ibid. 

133.  Ibid. 

134.  Gerchikov,  E.  Ia.,  "Effectiveness  Is  the  Most  Important 
Thing,"  Vestn ik  Sviaz i , No.  7-1970,  p.  29. 

135.  Timofeev,  op.  cit. 

136.  Neelov,  N.  & Skorcnko,  Zh.,  "The  Effects  of  Mechaniza- 
tion of  the  Distribution  of  Booking  Tickets,"  Vestnik 
Sviazi  No.  4-1974,  p.  38. 

137.  Zhelezina,  T. , "Raising  Production  Standards  Means 
Improving  Service,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  1-1975,  p.  10. 

138.  Beliaeva,  N.  & Semenova,  E. , "The  Supervisor  of  a 
Young  Shift,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  3-1975,  pp.  20-28. 

139.  "The  Progressive  Workers  Share  Their  Experience," 
Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  3-1970,  p.  44. 

140.  "The  Rhythm  of  the  Decisive  Year  of  the  Five  Year  Plan, 
Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1975,  p.  8. 

141.  Ivchenko,  A.  E.,  "How  the  Ruble  Works,"  Vestnik  Sviazi 
No.  7-1970,  p.  23. 

142.  Ibid. 

143.  Svistel 1 nikov , G.  A.,  "Reserves  for  Increasing  the  Pro- 
ductivity of  Labor  in  the  Management  of  the  Communica- 
tions of  Latvia,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  6-1970,  p.  25. 

144.  Timofeev,  op.  cit. 

145.  Zaria  Vostoka,  April  14,  1973,  op.  cit. 

146.  Rekhlina  k,  Stoliarova,  "A  New  Road  Has  Been  Opened: 
Scientific  Organization  of  Labor  at  Communications 
Enterprises,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  10-1970,  PP* 38-41. 

14  7.  May  t.  Friendly,  "Russia — The  Technology  Gap,"  Newsweek , 
February  9,  1976. 

148.  Beliaeva  & Semenova,  op . cit. 


123 


149. 

150. 

151. 

152. 

153. 

154. 

155. 

156. 

157. 

158. 

159. 

160. 
16'  . 

162. 

163. 

164  . 

165. 

166. 


Vinogradov,  op.  cit. 

Ekonomicheskaia  Gazeta  No . 19-1975,  op.  cit . 

Holland,  op . cit. 

"The  Age  of  Overload,"  Newsweek , op.  cit. 

Interview  with  representative  of  UNIVAC  Corp. , Marketing 
Manager  for  Eastern  Europe,  at  U.S.  Army  Russian 
Institute,  February  19,  1976. 

Holland,  op.  cit . 

May  & Friendly,  op.  cit. 

Bol'shaia  Sovetskaia  Entsiklopedia  (The  Great  Soviet 
Encyclopedia)  , wSviaz ' , " EzhegodnTk i (Yearbooks),  1964- 

1974  . 


Transportation  and  Communications  of  the  USSR,  Central 
Statisticaf  Dlrectorate~of  the  Council  of  Ministers 
of  the  USSR,  Moscow,  1972,  p.  288. 


Smith,  Hedrick,  The  Russians,  Quadrangle--The  New  York 
Times  Book  Co.,  1976,  p.  209. 


Appendix  B is  based  on  translation  of  selected  portions 
of  Solov’ev,  op . cit . , Chapter  12,  pp.  182-192. 

Solov'ev,  op . cit . , p.  10. 


Appendix  C is  based  on  translation  of  selected  portions 
of  Solov'ev,  op . cit . , Chapter  2,  pp.  20-29. 


Volkov,  S.  C. , "With  the  Communications  Workers  of 
Bashkiriia,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  7-1970,  p.  27. 

Appendix  D is  based  on  translation  of  selected  portions 
of  Solov'ev,  op.  cit . , Chapter  3,  pp.  32-36  . 


Appendix  E is  based  on  translation  of  selected  portions 
of  Solov'ev,  op.  cit . , Chapter  3,  pp.  42-45  . 


Appendix  F is  based  on  translation  of  selected  portions 
of  Solov'ev,  op.  cit . , Chapter  3,  pp . 39-42. 


Dudkin,  V.,  "The  Broad  Horizons  of 
tions,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  4-1975, 


Satellite  Communica- 
p.  33. 


124 


'T 


167.  Dudkin,  V.  & Fomantsov,  V.  P.,  "Several  Directions  in 
the  Growth  of  Satellite  Communications , " Vestnik 
Sviazi  No.  1-1976,  p.  14. 

168.  Dudkin,  op.  cit. 

169.  "Table  of  Launches  of  Space  Devices,"  Aviatsiia  i 
Kosmonavt ika  No.  4-1974,  p.  41. 

170.  Kantor,  L. , "Successes  and  Problems  in  Satellite  Com- 
munications Systems,"  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  5-1969,  p.  5. 

171.  Dudkin,  op.  cit. 

172.  Ibid. 

1 7 3 . Ibid. 

174.  Aviatsiia  I Kosmonavtika , op.  cit. 

175.  Dudkin  & Fomantsov,  op.  cit. 

176.  Dudkin,  op.  cit. 

177.  Privalov ;,  N.,  "The  First  Transportable  Communications 
Satellite  Station  of  Soviet  Manufacture,"  Vestnik 
Sviaz i No.  5-1975,  p.  19. 

178.  Ibid. , 

179.  Dudkin  & Fomantsov,  op.  cit. 

180.  Ibid. 

181.  Aviatsiia  i Kosmonavtika,  op.  cit. 

182.  Ibid. 

1 8 3 . Ibid. 

184.  Dudkin,  op.  cit. 

185.  Kantor,  op,  cit. 

186.  Dudkin,  op.  cit. 

187.  Ibid. 

188.  "Table  of  Launches  of  Space  Devices,"  appears  in  the 
April  issue  of  Aviatsiia  i Kosmonavtika  each  year. 

The  sources  for  the  chart  summer i zing  Molniia  activities 
were  the  April  issues  for  1972  through  1976. 


12  5 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1.  Adzhemov,  C.  A.,  "The  Chief  Directions  of  Technology 

of  Wire  Communications"  (Glavnye  Napravleniia  Razvitiia 
Tekhniki  Provodnoi  Sviazi),  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  4-1970, 
pp.  23-25. 

2.  "Administrative-Territorial  Composition  of  the  USSR  and 
Union  Republics"  (Administrativno-Territor ial ' noe 
Sostavlenie  SSSR  i Soiuznykh  Respublik),  The  Great 
Soviet  Encyclopedia,  Yearbook  (Bol'shaia  Sovetskaia 
Ents ik loped i ia , Ezhegodnik)  , T 975,  p . 10. 

3.  Amanov,  S.,  "Television — Across  the  Mountain  Ranges" 
(Televidenie — Cherez  Gornye  Khrebty) , Sovetskaia 
Kirgizhiia , November  26,  1974,  p.  3. 

4.  Ambrush,  Yanosh,  "'Budavox'  in  Tashkent"  ('Budavox1 

v Tashkente),  Pravda  Vostoka,  September  14,  1971,  p.  3. 

5.  Beliaeva,  N.  & Semenov,  E. , "The  Supervisor  of  a Young 
Shift"  (Brigadir  Molodykh) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  3-1975, 

pp.  20-28. 

6.  Birkenfel'd,  V.,  "'Oblako' — The  Automatized  Telephone 
Station"  ('Oblako' — Avtomatizirovannaia  Telefonnaia 
Stantsiia) , Nauka  i Zhizn'  No.  4-1970,  p.  60. 

7.  Blokhin,  A.,  "Transmission  Systems  with  Frequency 

Division  of  Channels:  Their  Growth,  and  Their  Prospects 

for  the  Future"  (Sistemy  Peredachi  s Chastotnym 
Razdeleniem  Kanalov:  Razvitie  i Perspektivy) , Vestnik 

Sviazi  No.  4-1975,  p.  28. 

8.  Central  Statistical  Directorate  of  the  Council  of 
Ministers  of  the  USSR,  Transportation  and  Communica- 
tions  of  the  USSj*  (Transport  i Sviaz'  SSSR) , Moscow 
1972,  p.  288. 

9.  "Communications  and  the  Final  Year  of  the  Five  Year 
Plan"  (Piatiletka,  God  Zavershaiushchii , Sviaz'), 
Ekonomicheskaia  Gazeta  No . 19,  May , 1975,  p . 1 . 

10.  "Communications — Yesterday,  Today,  and  Tomorrow" 

(Sviaz ' --Vchora , Segodniia,  i Zavtra),  Zaria  Vostoka 
April  14,  1973,  p.  3. 


127 


» 

'd 


• ! 


11.  Dremluga,  Vladimir  Aleksandrovich,  U.S.  Army  Russian 

Institute,  Lecture:  "Treatment  of  Dissidents  in  the 

Soviet  Union,"  March  21,  1975. 

12.  Dudkin,  V.,  "The  Broad  Horizons  of  Satellite  Communi- 
cations" (Bol'shie  Gorizonty  Sputnikovoi  Sviazi), 

Vestnik  Sviazi  No.,  4-1975,  p.  33. 

13.  Dudkin,  V.,  & Fomantsov,  V.  P.,  "Several  Directions  in 
the  Growth  of  Satellite  Communications"  (Nekotorye 
Napravlenie  v Razvitii  Sputnikovoi  Sviazi),  Vestnik 
Sviazi  No.  1-1976,  p.  14. 

14.  Elibaev,  A.,  "On  to  a New  Phase1'  (Na  Novuiu  Stupen'), 
Kazakhstanska ia  Pravda,  May  6,  1971,  p.  3. 

15.  Gerchikov,  E.  Ia.,  "Effectiveness  Is  the  Most  Important 
Thing"  (Glavnoe — I'f fektivnost'  ) , Vestnik  Sviazi 

No.  7-1970,  p.  29. 

16.  Griaznov,  Iu.  M.  t»  Sagapovich,  L.  I.,  City  Telephone 
Stations  (Gorodskie  Telefonnye  Stantsii),  Moscow, 

Vyshaia  Shkola,  1972. 

17.  Holland,  Wade  B.,  "Party  Congress  Emphasises  Computer 
Technology,"  Soviet  Cybernetics  Review  (The  Rand  Corp.), 
July  1971,  p.  7. 

18.  "Information:  International  Symposium  on  Communications 

Technology"  ( Informats iia : Mezhdunarodny i Simpozium 

po  Tekhnike  Sviazi),  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  8-1970,  p.  23. 

19.  "Information:  Machines  Do  the  Calculating"  ( Informatsi ia : 

Schitaiut  Mashiny) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  6-1970,  p.  28. 

20.  "Information:  They  are  Installing  'Ericsson'"  (Infor- 

matsiia:  Montiruet  Erikson) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  5-1970, 

p.  33. 

21.  Interview  with  U.S.  Army  Officers,  recent  travelers  to 

the  USSR,  who  used  Soviet  telephones:  U.S.  Army 

Russian  Institute,  December,  1975. 

22.  Interview  with  representative  of  UNIVAC  Corp.,  Mar- 
keting Manager  for  Eastern  European  Sales:  U.S.  Army 

Russian  Institute,  February  19,  1976. 

23.  Ivchenko,  A.  E.,  "How  the  Ruble  Works"  (Kak  Rabotaet 
Rubl ' ) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  7-1970,  p.  23. 


128 


I 


24.  Kantor,  L.,  "Successes  and  Problems  in  Satellite 
Communications  Systems"  (Uspekhi  i Problemy  Sistem 
Sputnikovoi  Sviazi),  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  5-1969,  p.  5. 

25.  Karbelashvili , A.,  "Dorn  in  Hungary"  (Rozhdeno  V 
Vengrii) , Zaria  Vostoka,  February  6,  1973,  p.  3. 

26.  Kazimov,  V.  , "Problems  of  the  Five-Year  Plan:  Communi- 

cations and  the  National  Economy"  (Problemy  Piatiletki" 
Sviaz'  i Narodnoe  Khoziastvo) , Pravda  Vostoka,  October  23, 

1971,  p.  2. 

27.  Korol',  V.  I.,  "The  Working  Habits  of  the  Communicators 
of  the  Ukraine"  (Trudovaia  Postup'  Ukrainskikh 
Sviazistov) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  4-1970,  p.  34. 

28.  Krylov,  Konstantin  Arkad'evich,  U.  S.  Army  Russian 

Institute,  Lecture:  "Communications  Facilities  in  the 

Soviet  Union,"  February  27,  1976. 

29.  Kudinov,  A.,  "Communications  at  the  Service  of  the 
Economy  and  the  Culture"  (Sviaz'  Na  Sluzhbe  Ekonimiki 
i Kul'tury),  Pravda  Vostoka,  November  22,  1970,  p.  3. 

30.  May,  Clifford  D.  and  Friendly,  Alfred  , Jr.,  "Russia — 
the  Technology  Gap,"  Newsweek , February  9,  1976,  pp. 

11-17. 

31.  Moscow  Telephone  Directory,  "List  of  Subscribers  to  the 
Moscow  City  Telephone  Network"  (Spisok  Ab°nentov 
Moskovskoi  Gorodskoi  Telefonnoi  Seti),  Pait  I,  Moscow, 
1958. 

32.  Moscow  Telephone  Directory,  "List  of  Subscribers  to  the 
Moscow  City  Telephone  Network"  (Spisok  Abonentov 
Moskovskoi  Gorodskoi  Telefonnoi  Seti),  Part  I,  Moscow, 

1966 , p.  xxi . 

33.  Neelov,  N.  & Skorenko,  Zh.  , "The  Effects  of  Mechaniza- 
tion of  the  Distribution  of  Booking  Tickets"  (Chto 
Dala  Mekhanizatsiia  na  Raznoske  Blankov  Zakazov) , 

Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  4-1974,  p.  38. 

34.  "On  Serious  Deficiencies  in  the  Activities  of  the 
Ministry  of  Communications  of  the  Georgian  SSR"  (O 
Ser'eznykh  Nedostotkakh  v Deistviiakh  Ministerstva 
Sviazi  Gruzinskoi  SSR),  Zaria  Vostoka,  November  30, 

1972,  p.  1. 


I ; 

i 

1 

j 

' 


j 


< 


|i 


120 


i 

jj 

1 


! 

I 


» 


35.  Petrushin,  I.  P.,  "The  Technology  of  Conununications 
in  the  Intrazonal  Networks"  (Tekhnika  Sviazi  Vnutri- 
zonovykh  Setei)  , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  9-1970,  pp.  16-17. 


36.  Piskacheva,  L. , "Proper  Organizations  of  Production — 
The  Guarantee  of  Raising  the  Quality  of  Communications" 
(Pravil'naia  Organizatsiia  Proizvodstva — Zalog 
Povysheniia  Kachestva  Sviazi) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12- 
1975,  p.  33. 

37.  Posysaev,  N.  S.,  "Communications  Technology  from  Abroad: 
The  Electronic  Switchboard" (Tekhnika  Sviazi  za  Rubezhom: 
Elektronnyi  Kommutator)  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1969, 

p.  22. 

38.  Privalova,  N.,  "The  First  Transportable  Communications 
Satellite  Station  of  Soviet  Manufacture"  (Pervaia 
Otechestvennaia  Perevozimaia  Stantsiia  Sputnikovoi 
Sviazi),  Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  5-1975,  p.  19. 

39.  Rekhlina,  S.  C.  & Stoliarova,  R.  V.,  "A  New  Road  Has 

Been  Opened:  Scientific  Organization  of  Labor  at 

Communications  Enterprises"  (Novoe  Prokladyvaet  Dorogu: 
Nauchnaia  Organizatsiia  Truda  na  Predpriiatiia  Sviazi) , 
Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  10-1970,  pp.  38-41. 

40.  Sadykov,  E. , "From  'Morse'  to  'Orbita'"  (Ot  'Morze'  do 
'Orbity'),  Sovetskaia  Kirgizhiia,  October  10,  1974, 

p.  2 . 

41.  Smith,  Hedrick,  The  Russians.  New  York:  Quadrangle- 

The  New  York  Times  Book  Co.,  1976. 


42.  Solov'ev,  Sh.  G.,  Intercity  Telephone  Stations 

(Mezhdugorodnye  Telefonnye  Stantsii) . Moscow : "Sviaz'" 

Publishing  House,  1972. 

43.  Sutton,  Antony  C.,  Western  Technology  and  Soviet  Econo- 
mic Development,  1917-1930.  (Stanford:  Stanford 

University,  Hoover  Institute) , 1968,  pp.  185-191. 

44.  Svistel ' nikov , G.  A.,  "Reserves  for  Increasing  the  Pro- 
ductivity of  Labor  in  the  Management  of  the  Communica- 
tions of  Latvia"  (Rezervy  Povysheniia  Proizvoditel ' nosti 
Truda  v Khoziaistve  Sviazi  Litvy) , Vestnik  Sviazi 

No.  6-1970,  p.  26. 


"Sviaz'" , 
(Bol ' shaia 
1964-1974) 


TheGreat  Soviet  Encyclopedia , Yearbooks 
So ve t s'k a i a En t si k 1 oped  1 1 a , Ezhegodniki ) , 


1 30 


' 


45. 


"Table  of  Launches  of  Space  Devices"  (Tablitsa 
Zapuskov  Kosmicheskikh  Apparatov  v SSSR) , Aviatsiia  I 
KosmaupVtika  No.  4-1974,  p.  41 

"Telefon,"  The  Great  Soviet  Encyclopedia  (Bol'shaia 
Sovetskaia  Entfsiklopediia)  , Vol.  42  (19  55)  , pp.  166- 
180. 

"Telephone,"  Encyclopedia  Brittanica,  Vol -22  (1964), 
pp.  892-903. 

"Telephony,"  Collier's  Encyclopedia , Vol.  22  (1963), 
pp.  125-132. 

"Telephony,"  Van  Norstrand  Scientific  Encyclopedia 
(1958) , pp.  1654-1655. 

"The  Age  of  Overload,"  Newsweek , September  29,  1969, 
pp.  36-37. 

"The  Energetic  Relay  Race  for  Socialist  Competition 
Goes  On"  (Boevaia  Estafeta  Sorevnovaniia  Prodolzhaetsia) , 
Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1974,  pp.  12-13. 

"The  Progressive  Workers  Share  Their  Experience" 
(Peredoviki  Deliatsia  Opytom) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  3-1970, 

p.  44  . 

"The  Rhythm  of  the  Decisive  Year  of  the  Five  Year  Plan" 
(Ritm  Zavershayushchego) , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  12-1975, 
p.  8 . 

"There's  Information,  and  There's  a Story"  (I  Spravka , 

I Skazka) , (Interview  with  the  Chief  of  the  Moscow 
City  Telephone  Network),  Ogonek  No.  3-1974,  Pravda, 
Moscow,  pp.  30-33. 

"The  United  Automatized  Telecommunications  System" 
(Edinaia  Avtomatizirovannaia  Sistema  Sviazi),  The 
Great  Soviet  Encyclopedia  (Bol'shaia  Sovetskaia 
Entslklopedia) , Vol . 9 Tl974),  p.  63. 

Timofeev,  A. , "The  Intercity  Telephone"  (Mezhdugorodnyi 
Telefon),  Pravda  Vostoka,  March  22,  1972,  p.  2. 

Tsiskaridze,  A.,  "I'd  Like  You  To  Meet  the  Electronic 
Automatic  Telephone  Station"  (Poznakomtes ' , EhATS) , 

Zaria  Vostoka,  March  31,  1974. 


59.  Vinogradov,  P.  N.,  "To  the  Workers  of  the  Villages" 
(Truzhennikam  Sela)  , Vestnik  Sviazi  No.  5-1970, 

pp.  29-30. 

60.  Vlasov,  L.  V.,  "Do  We  Know  How  to  Speak  on  the  Tele- 
phone?" (Umeem-li  My  Govorit'  po  Telefonu?),  Economics 
and  the  Organization  of  Industrial  Production  (Ekonomika 
i Organizatsiia  Promyshlennogo  Proizvodstva)  No.  1-1975, 
pp.  198-208. 

61.  Volkov,  S.  G.,  "With  the  Communications  Workers  of 
Bashkiriia"  (U  Sviazistov  Bashkirii)  , Vestnik  Sviazi 
No.  7-1970,  p.  27. 

62.  "Winning  the  Battle  with  Time  and  Distance"  (Pobezhdaia 
Vremia  i Rasstoianie) , Zaria  Vostoka,  May  6,  1973,  p.  3. 

63.  Zhelezina,  T. , "Raising  the  Standards  of  Production 
Means  Improving  Service"  (Povyshat'  Kul'turu  Proizvodstva 
Znachit  Uluchshat'  Obsluzhivanie) , Vestnik  Sviazi 

No.  1-1975,  p.  10. 


The  following  were  extremely  helpful  in  translating 

technical  articles: 

Macura,  Paul,  Russian-Knglish  Dictionary  of  Electrotechnology 
and  Applied  Sciences,  John  ^Viley  & Sons')  Inc.,  New  York, 
1971. 

M.H.T.  and  V.L.  Alford  (Alford  & Alford),  Russian-English 
Scientific  and  Technical  Dictionary  (two  volumes) , 
Pergamon  Press,  Oxford , 1970 . 

Zalucki,  H.,  Dictionary  of  Russian  Technical  and  Scientific 
Abbreviations , Elsevier"  Publishing  Co.  , Amsterdam, 

1968. 


132 


