JPRS-UFE-86-003 
18  JUNE  1986 


USSR  Report 


< 

sf 

lU  QC 

3 

^  0-  < 

Qh\ 

fcx)  j 

S  0.1 

E^c 

a< 

Q 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  FAR  EAST 

No  4.  OCT-DEC  1985 


Reproduced  From 
Best  Available  Copy 


19990930  063 


SRC  QD&UTT  raSFEraES  4 


FBIS 


FOREIGN  BROADCAST  INFORMATION  SERVICE 


REPRODUCED  BY 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 
SPRINGFIELD,  VA,  22161 


NOTE 


JPRS  publications  contain  information  primarily  from  foreign  newspapers, 
periodicals  and  books,  but  also  from  news  agency  transmissions  and  broad¬ 
casts,  Materials  from  foreign- language  sources  are  translated;  those 
from  English-language  sources  are  transcribed  or  reprinted,  with  the 
original  phrasing  and  other  characteristics  retained. 

Headlines,  editorial  reports,  and  material  enclosed  in  brackets  []  are 
supplied  by  JPRS.  Processing  indicators  such  as  [Text]  or  [Excerpt]  in 
the  first  line  of  each  item,  or  following  the  last  line  of  a  brief, 
indicate  how  the  original  information  was  processed.  Where  no  processing 
indicator  is  given,  the  information  was  summarized  or  extracted. 

Unfamiliar  names  rendered  phonetically  or  transliterated  are  enclosed  in 
parentheses.  Words  or  names  preceded  by  a  question  mark  and  enclosed  in 
parentheses  were  not  clear  in  the  original  but  have  been  supplied  as 
appropriate  in  context.  Other  unattributed  parenthetical  notes  within  the 
body  of  an  item  originate  with  the  source.  Times  within  items  are  as 
given  by  sourceo 

The  contents  of  this  publication  in  no  way  represent  the  policies,  views 
or  attitudes  of  the  U. S.  Government. 


PROCUREMENT  OF  PUBLICATIONS 

JPRS  publications  may  be  ordered  from  the  National  Technical  Information 
Service  (NTIS),  Springfield,  Virginia  22161.  In  ordering,  it  is  recom¬ 
mended  that  the  JPRS  number,  title,  date  and  author,  if  applicable,  of 
publication  be  cited. 

Current  JPRS  publications  are  announced  in  Government  Reports  Announcements 
issued  semimonthly  by  the  NTIS,  and  are  listed  in  the  Monthly  Catalog  of 
U. S.  Government  Publications  issued  by  the  Superintendent  of  Documents,  U. S. 
Government  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.C,  20402. 

Correspondence  pertaining  to  matters  other  than  procurement  may  be  addressed 
to  Joint  Publications  Research  Service,  1000  North  Glebe  Road,  Arlington, 
Virginia  22201o 


Soviet  books  and  journal  articles  displaying  a  copyright 
notice  are  reproduced  and  sold  by  NTIS  with  permission  of 
the  copyright  agency  of  the  Soviet  Union.  Permission  for 
further  reproduction  must  be  obtained  from  copyright  owner© 


JPRS-UFE-86-003 
18  JUNE  1986 

USSR  REPORT 

Problems  of  the  Far  East 

No  4,  OCT  -  DEC  198-5 

Except  where  indicated  otherwise  in  the  table  of  contents  the 
following  is  a  complete  translation  of  the  Ihissian-^language 
journal  PROBLEMY  DAL’'NEGO  'VOSTOKA  published  quarterly  in  Moscow  by 
the  Par  East  Institute,  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Contents 

M.  S.  Gorbachev's  Message  to  International  Conference  on  ’The  40th 
Anniversary  of  the  Victory  Over  Japanese  Militarism  and  the  Objec¬ 
tives  of  the  Movement  for  Peace  in  the  Aslan  and  Pacific 
Countries'  (pp  3-4) 

(not  translated) 

*  27th  Congress  Occasion  To  Review  Leninist  Peace  Policy  (pp  3-15) .  1 

*  USSR's  Role  in  Aiding  Chinese  Revolution  in  Manchuria  Noted  (pp  16-25) 

(0.  Ye.  Vladimirov) .  14 

*  Japan's  Defeat  Seen  as  Factor  in  Aslan  Popular  Revolutions  (pp  26-36) 

(M.  L.  Tltarenko)  . . . . . .  24 

*  Scientific  Conferences  on  40th  Anniversary  of  End  of  World  War  II 

(pp  37-50) 

(M.  Zeynalov,  F.  Lappo) .  35 

Appeal  on  Creating  'Zone  of  Peace'  in  Asia-Pacific  Region  (p  51) .  49 

*  USSR's  Cooperation  with  Aslan  Socialist  Nations,  Kampuchea  (pp  51-63) 

(M.  S.  Ukraintsev) .  51 

*  Nonaligned  Movement — A  Major  Factor  in  World  Politics  (pp  64-80) 

(I.  I.  Kovalenko) .  64 

*  New  Stage  of  'Militarism'  in  Japan  Criticized  (pp  81-89) 

(A.  P.  Markov) . 81 

*  Some  Trends  in  Seoul's  Foreign  Policy  (pp  90-101) 

(0.  V.  Davydov,  V.  V.  Mikheyev). . . .  90 

*  Translation  taken  from  English-language  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86. 

’-a  - 


CONTENTS  (Continued) 


*  Certain  Problems  of  the  Chinese  Countryside  Today  (pp  102-110) 

(L.  A.  Volkova) . 102 

*  A  Patent  System  Set  Up  in  China  (pp  111-118) 

(V.  P.  Polyakov) .  Ill 

*  Socialist  Laos  Marks  10th  Anniversary  (pp  119-122) 

(A.  M.  Matveyev) . 119 

American  Concepts  of  Chinese  Political  Culture  Criticized  (pp  123-130) 

(Ye.  V.  Yakimova) .  123 

*  U.S.  Decisionmaking,  Policy  on  China  Examined  (pp  123-126) 

(Yu.  M.  Ryakin) . . 136 

*  Events  in  China  in  1945  Recalled  (pp  127-139) 

(M.  F.  Yuryev) . . . . . . . .  1^0 


50th  Anniversary  of  the  Death  of  Qu  Qiubo  (pp  148-159) 
(K.  V.  Shevelev)  (not  translated) 

Explorer  Vasiliy  Yeroshenko  (pp  160-170) 

(R.  S.  Belousov)  (not  translated) 


Book  Reviews 

*  Three  Books  on  Japan  Reviewed  (pp  157-168), . . . .  153 

Growing  Ambitions  (pp  157-161) 

(G .  G .  Morozov) .  153 

Japan's  Past,  Present  Military  (pp  161-165) 

(V.N.  Khlynov) . 158 

Role  of  Shinto  (pp  165-168) 

(V.A.  Vasilyev) . 162 

Survey  of  New  Sinological  Studies  (pp  182-184) 

(I.L.  Karmanovskaya)  (not  translated) 

Far  East  Institute  1985  Scientific  Conferences  (pp  185-186) 

(V.  F.  Mikunov) .  166 

In  Memory  of  Mikhail  Iosifovich  Sladkovskiy  (pp  187-188) 

(not  translated) 

Contents  of  Journal  for  1985  (pp  189-191) . . .  169 


*  Translation  taken  from  English-language  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86. 


-  b  - 


English  title 


Russian  title 


Author  (s) 


Editor  (s) 


Publishing  House 


Place  of  publication 


Date  of  publication 


Signed  to  press 


Copies 


COPYRIGHT 


PUBLICATION  DATA 


:  PROBLEMS  OF  THE  FAR  EAST 
No  4,  1985 

:  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA 


:  M.  I.  Siadkovskiy 


;  Izdatelstvo  Progress 


;  Moscow 


:  Oct-Dec  1985 


;  25  November  1985 


:  10,675 


:  "Problemy  Dalnego  Vostoka” 


-  c  - 


1985 


27TH  CONGRESS  OCCASION  TO  REVIEW  LENINIST  PEACE  POLICY 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  3-15 

I  nternational  developments  in  the  present  exceedingly  complicated  and 
•  responsible  period  in  world  affairs  show  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  Com¬ 
munist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  Soviet  Government  firmly  and 
consistently  follow  the  Leninist  foreign  policy  worked  out  at  the  26th  Cong¬ 
ress  of  the  CPSU  and  the  subsequent  plenums  of  its  Central  Committee. 
Its  aim  is  to  create  conditions  for  the  peaceful  and  free  development  of 
all  nations,  to  eliminate  the  threat  of  a  thermonuclear  cataclysm,  and 
move  on  from  the  confrontation  of  the  two  social  systems  to  peaceful  com¬ 
petition. 

For  the  Soviet  people  to  carry  out  their  big  constructive  plans,  they 
need  a  tranquil  world,  continued  relaxation  of  international  tensions,  and 
elimination  of  any  and  all  threats  of  an  armed  conflict  erupting  between 
the  opposite  social  systems.  That  is  why  the  inventions  about  a  “Soviet 
threat”  circulated  by  certain  political  quarters  and  ideologists  in  capitalist 
countries  are  really  ludicrous  and  senseless.  As  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  Ge¬ 
neral  Secretary  of  the  CC  CPSU,  pointed  out  in  his  interview  to  Time 
magazine,  war  will  not  come  from  the  USSR  which  will  never  begin 
It.  Soviet  foreign  policy  is  directed  towards  broad,  fruitful  international 
cooperation  free  from  diktat  and  interference  in  the  affairs  of  other  count¬ 
ries,  to  their  mutual  benefit  and  for  the  good  of  all  humanity.  The  Soviet 
Union  will  do  everything  it  can  to  secure  a  peaceful  future  for  the  pre¬ 
sent  and  the  rising  generations.  That  is  the  goal  of  our  policy. 

Intensive  and  varied  work  is  under  way  in  the  Party  and  country  in 
preparation  for  the  27th  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet 
Union  which  is  going  to  be  held  on  February  25,  1986.  The  congresses  of 
our  Party — and  this  is  conclusively  borne  out  by  past  experience — are 
events  of  tremendous  international  political  significance.  Their  special 
liistorical  mission  transcends  the  borders  of  our  country,  for  they  exercise 
a  profound  and  far-reaching  influence  on  developments  and  prospects 
across  the  world. 

The  importance  of  the  congresses  of  the  CPSU  may  be  traced  to  the 
fact  that  they  tackle  problems  of  truly  worldwide  significance,  and  to  the 
role  played  by  the  Soviet  Union  in  world  affairs.  The  congresses  of  the 
Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union  define  and  chart  the  cardinal  as¬ 
pects  of  the  foreign  policy  of  the  CPSU  and  the  USSR  in  the  period  to 
come  in  conformity  with  the  Party’s  fundamental  guidelines,  and  advance 
a  clear  and  concrete  programme  for  resolving  burning  international 
problems,  above  all,  those  related  to  the  curbing  of  the  nuclear  arms  race. 


One  of  the  key  objectives  of  the  CPSU  in  the  theoretical  field  is  to 
scientifically  substantiate  and  work  out  the  crucial  problems  of  so¬ 
cialist  foreign  policy,  to  produce  a  Marxist-Leninist  analysis  and  sum  up 
the  experience  of  the  CPSU  and  the  Soviet  government  in  foreign  rela- 


1 


tions,  and  secure  a  synthesis  of  theory  and  practice  in  socialism’s  conduct 
of  foreign  policy.  It  is  natural,  therefore,  that  these  issues  will  occupy  a  spe¬ 
cial  place  in  the  work  of  the  coming  27th  Congress  of  the  CPSU,  which  is  to 
adopt  a  new  edition  of  the  Party  Programme.  A  quarter  of  a  century, 
which  is  no  short  period,  has  elapsed  since  the  present  edition  of  this 
highly  important  document  was  adopted.  During  this  tirne  our  country 
gained  the  capacity  for  accelerating  its  social  and  economic  development; 
changes  have  occurred  in  the  world  socialist  system— it  has  made  head¬ 
way  and  grown  stronger;  the  world  has  witnessed  qualitative  changes  in 
the  correlation  of  forces  on  a  global  scale.  It  is  self-evident  that  so  event¬ 
ful  a  period  in  history  offers  expanses  for  conclusions  and  generalisations 

of  a  profoundly  fundamental  and  long-term  significance.  ^ 

In  October  1985,  the  CPSU  Central  Committee’s  Plenum  discussed 
the  draft  of  the  new  edition  of  the  Programme  of  the  CPSU,  which  was 
drawn  up  by  decision  of  the  26th  Congress  of  the  CPSU.  The  draft 
reflects  the  main  trends  in  the  country’s  domestic  life  and  in  intepational 
affairs,  along  with  the  experience  the  Party  has  accumulated  since  the 
adoption  of  the  present  Programme,  and  is  based  on  the  guidelines  of  the 
April  1985  Plenum  of  the  CC  CPSU  and  the  conference  on  questions  re¬ 
lated  to  the  acceleration  of  scientific  and  technical  progress. 

A  distinctive  feature  of  the  Draft  project  is  the  continuity  of  the  basic 
theoretical  and  political  provisions  underlying  the  Party  work.  The  conti¬ 
nuity  implies  an  undeviating  and  consistent  adherence  to  the  theory  and 
policies  pursued  by  the  Party  and  its  loyalty  to  Marxism-Leninism.  At 
the  same  time,  consistency  and  continuity  aim  at  creative  development  of 
the  theory,  strategy  arid'  tactics  of  the  Party  and  at  innovative  quest 
along  the  key  directions  of  its  activity. 

The  draft  of  the  new  edition  of  the  CPSU  Programme  rests  on  the 
firm  foundation  of  Marxism-Leninism  and  on  the  realistic  analysis  of  the 
country’s  domestic  and  international  situation.  It  contains  specific,  broad 
characteristics  of  strategies  followed  by  the  Party,  the  Soviet  state  and 
the  entire  people. 

The  radical  change  in  the  correlation  of  world  forces  clearly  visible 
within  this  particular  period  resulted  in  a  steady  growth  of  socialism’s 
role  and,  as  one  of  its  effects,  in  the  growing  impact  of  socialist  foreign 
policy,  above  all  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Soviet  Union,  on  present  and 
future  international  relations.  The  qualitative  changes  in  world  affairs, 
in  the  contention  between  the  two  social  systems,  have  greatly  extended 
the  potentialities  of  socialist  foreign  policy  and  increased  its  active  and 
positive  influence  on  the  course  and  outcome  of  crucial  eyents  in  the  world 
of  today.  By  virtue  of  the  objective  conditions,  socialist  foreign  policy 
has  become  a  key  factor  in  the  struggle  for  lasting  world  peace  and 
against  the  global  imperialist  policy  of  aggression  and  diktat. 

Soviet  foreign  policy  has  a  reliable  foundation  in  the  country’s  econo¬ 
mic  power,  the  successful  fulfilment  of  its  imposing  plans  of  social  and 
economic  development. 

The  concept  of  the  acceleration  of  the  country’s  socio-economic  deve¬ 
lopment  is  central  to  the  policy  the  Party  pursues  at  the  present  stage. 
It  is  this  concept  that  the  Party  puts  across  to  the  people  on  the  way  to¬ 
wards  the  forthcoming  27th  CPSU  Congress.  This  concept  underlies  the 
provisions  specifying  goals  and  tasks  facing  the  Communist  Party 
and  Soviet  people  in  aii  spheres  of  iife.  Through  the  acceleration  of  the 
country’s  socio-economic  development  towards  the  achievement  of  a  qua¬ 
litatively  new  state  of  society — such  is  the  backbone  of  the  new  draft 
edition  of  the  CPSU  Programme. 

The  CPSU  Central  Committee’s  Plenary  Meeting  (October  1985)  has 
discussed  the  draft  of  the  Basic  Guidelines  for  the  Economic  and  Social 
Development  of  the  USSR  for  1986-1990  and  in  the  Period  up  to  the  Year 


2 


2000.  The  draft,  which  was  approved  by  the  Plenum,  centres  on  a  steady 
rise  in  the  people’s  well-being  impelled  by  heightened  rates  of  the  count¬ 
ry’s  socio-economic  development,  a  decisive  switchover  of  the  economy 
to  intensive  methods,  and  acceleration  of  scientific  and  technical  progress. 
It  envisages  extensive  technical  modernisation  of  all  economic  fields,  more 
effective  use  of  the  existing  productive  potential,  a  steadily  rising  pro¬ 
ductivity  of  labour,  and  a  sweeping  improvement  of  the  system  of  mana¬ 
gement.  Achievement  of  the  targets  set  in  the  draft  Basic  Guidelines,  the 
Plenum  noted,  will  ensure  a  qualitatively  new  level  of  economic  develop¬ 
ment,  will  meet  the  material  and  cultural  needs  of  the  Soviet  people  more 
fully  than  before,  and  secure  the  further  strengthening  of  the  Country  s 
d6f6nC6S. 

The  effectiveness  of  Soviet  foreign  policy  depends  on  the  state  of  the 
country’s  economy.  Lenin’s  well-known  postulate  about  the  organic  con¬ 
nection  and  interdependence  between  domestic  and  foreign  policies  is 
still  entirely  valid.  Our  Party’s  economic  strategy  is  aimed  at  making 
the  fullest  possible  use  of  the  advantages  of  the  socialist  economic  system. 
That  is  why  it  is  determined  to  eliminate  shortcomings  in  industry  and 
transport,  agriculture,  and  all  other  areas. 

The  influence  of  the  socialist  world  on  international  events  depends 
on  the  strength  of  the  fraternal  alliance  of  the  states  building  the  new 
society.  People  all  over  the  globe  associate  their  hopes  of  general  peace, 
of  averting  another  world  war,  with  the  efforts  of  the  socialist  community. 
And  the  socialist  countries  are,  indeed,  doing  everything  they  can  to  live 
up  to  the  hopes  and  aspirations  of  the  mass  of  the  people  across  the 


WUIIU.  ^  ^  J  J 

The  community  of  socialist  countries  is  making  good  headway  as  it 
asserts  an  entirely  new  type  of  international  relations  that  repose  on 
ideological  unity,  common  aims,  and  comradely  cooperation,  displaying 
profound  respect  for  the  interests,  specificity,  and  traditions  of  every 
country.  Their  mutual  relations  are  based  on  the  principle  of  socialist  inter¬ 
nationalism,  whose  content  is  continuously  enriched  with  the  passage  of 
time  in  the  process  of  building  the  new  society,  in  the  joint  struggle 
against  imperialism.  The  socialist  community  today  is  a^  powerful 
sound  organism  that  plays  a  tremendous  and  benign  role  in  the  modern 


WV/llU.  f  ii  1  J  •  i-U 

The  mechanism  of  fraternal  cooperation  extends  to  diverse  fields  m  the 
life  of  our  countries,  to  diverse  areas  of  joint  socialist  construction.  Our 
joint  efforts  help  us  find  ever  more  effective  ways  of  combining  the  common 
interests  of  the  community  with  the  interests  of  each  of  its  members.  As 
recorded  in  the  Statement  of  the  Economic  Conference  held  in  Moscow  in 
June  1984  on  the  Basic  Directions  of  Further  Development  and  Closer 
Economic,  Scientific  and  Technical  Cooperation  among  CMEA  Member- 
Countries,  ‘‘the  greater  economic  power  of  CMEA  member-countries  has 
become  the  material  foundation  for  their  policy  of  peace,  detente,  and  mu¬ 
tually  beneficial  cooperation  with  other  countries.  The  internationar  pre¬ 
stige  of  socialism,  that  determining  factor  of  humanity’s  social  progress,, 
has  risen  considerably.  Its  influence  on  world  developments  has  increas¬ 
ed.”  An  effective  means  of  coordinating  foreign  policies  of  the  socia¬ 
list  countries  is  the  Warsaw  Treaty.  Conferences  of  the  Political  Consul¬ 
tative  Committee  and  sittings  of  the  WTO  Foreign  Ministers  Comniittee 
work  out  collective  measures  to  attain  the  peaceful  political  aims  of  the 


Warsaw  Treaty  Organisation.  .  i.  +. 

Strengthening  and  development  of  relations  with  other  socialist  count¬ 
ries  have  always  been  and  still  are  at  the  centre  of  the  attention  of  the 
Central  Committee  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  its 
Politburo.  “Under  prevailing  conditions,  while  tackling  the  tasks  of  butt¬ 
ressing  world  peace”,  Mikhail  Gorbachev  has  said,  “we  must  devote 


3 


ourselves  first  of  all  to  strengthening  the  positions  of  the  socialist  count¬ 
ries  on  the  world  scene,  to  furthering  their  allround  cooperation.  That  is 
exactly  what  we  are  doing.” 

The  prolongation  for  the  next  20  years  of  the  Warsaw  Treaty,  the  po¬ 
litical  and  defensive  basis  of  the  alliance  of  the  fraternal  socialist  count¬ 
ries,  was  an  event  of  tremendous  international  political  importance.  It 
is  hard  to  overrate  the  historical  significance  of  the  Warsaw  Treaty.  It 
has  been,  and  still  is,  a  dependable  shield  protecting  the  interests  of  the 
socialist  community  countries.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  a  reliable  instrument 
for  consolidating  world  peace. 

Accelerating  scientific  and  technical  progress,  heightening  economic 
efficiency,  improving  economic  mechanisms,  working  on  the  further  deve¬ 
lopment  and  improvement  of  all  aspects  of  life— these  are  the  areas  whe¬ 
re  socialist  countries  pool  their  efforts,  and  success  will  depend  in  many 
ways  on  still  closer  economic  cooperation,  on  the  economic  integration  of 
the  fraternal  socialist  countries  within  the  CMEA  framework.  The  CPSU 
and  the  Soviet  government  consider  these  objectives  vitally  important 
for  the  advancement  of  socialism  and  for  the  consolidation  of  its  posi¬ 
tions  in  the  economic  competition  with  capitalism. 

They  are  also  highly  important  for  frustrating  attempts  of  the  im- 
.  perialist  powers  to  exert  economic  and  other  pressure  on  the  socialist 
states.  Imperialist  quarters  do  not  confine  themselves  to  ideological  fabri¬ 
cations  and  acts  of  subversion.  They  try  to  use  economic  levers  to  combat 
socialism  by  boycotts  and  sanctions,  and  even  direct  economic  blackmail. 
The  US  ruling  quarters  are  especially  eager  to  do  so  in  a  bid  to  use  eco¬ 
nomic  relations  with  socialist  countries  for  their  political  ends  and,  in  so 
doing,  seek  to  exert  undisguised  pressure  on  the  allies  and  rivals 
of  the  USA  in  order  to  secure  their  support  for  such  unlawful 
actions.  But  their  policy  has  no  future.  It  is  puerile  to  think  that  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  socialist  countries  to  the  summits  of  social  progress  can  be 
stopped  by  pressure  and  blackmail,  unless,  of  course,  one  chooses  to  turn 
a  blind  eye  to  their  true  economic  power,  their  colossal  material  resour¬ 
ces,  and  their  highly  dynamic  economy.  What  is  more,  such  a  policy  is 
damaging  first  of  all  to  the  initiators  of  these  sanctions. 

The  policy  of  aggressive  US  and  NATO  quarters,  aimed  at  scrapping 
detente  and  at  intensifying  the  arms  race  and  military  confrontation,  is 
opposed  by  the  Warsaw  Treaty  Organisation’s  strong  efforts  to  consoli¬ 
date  peace,  further  international  cooperation,  secure  arms  reduction,  and 
promote  closer  relations  and  mutual  understanding  among  nations.  This 
is  the  policy  that  governs  all  the  collective  resolutions  and  actions  of  the 
Warsaw  Treaty  countries.  In  the  1980s,  it  was  vividly  reflected  in  the 
documents  of  the  WTO  Political  Consultative  Committee’s  conference  in 
Prague  on  January  4-5,  1983,  the  meeting  of  top  Party  leaders  and  sta¬ 
tesmen  of  seven  socialist  countries  in  Moscow  on  June  28,  1983  and  the 
Economic  Conference  of  CMEA  Countries  in  Moscow  on  June  12-14,  1984. 
In  October  1985,  the  WTO  Political  Consultative  Committee’s  conference 
in  Sofia  reaffirmed  the  common,  jointly  charted  policy  of  the  WTO  mem¬ 
bers,  defined  concrete  measures  for  improving  the  international  situation 
and  furthering  international  cooperation  and  unanimously  adopted  the 
resolution  “For  the  Elimination  of  Nuclear  Threat  and  the  Turn  for  the 
Better  in  European  and  World  Affairs”. 

Special  note  should  be  taken  of  Soviet  efforts  to  promote  relations  with 
the  People’s  Republic  of  China.  The  Soviet  Union  wants  a  serious  impro¬ 
vement  of  relations  with  the  PRC,  and  holds  that,  given  reciprocity,  this 
is  quite  possible.  Important  for  the  development  of  bilateral  ties  were  the 
recent  visit  to  the  PRC  and  taiks  with  Chinese  leaders  of  the  First  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  USSR  Council  of  Ministers  I.  Arkhipov,  and  the  visit 
to  the  USSR  and  talks  with  Soviet  leaders  of  Yao  Yiling,  Deputy  Premier 


4 


f  XU  nni-  ctofxx  rminf’il  and  also  the  agreements  on  trade,  econornic 
Mlcal  cooperation 

r:~igTfri5pSyi--Ssa2 

lfS,„rw^h?Slar:nSlal:^  ■»„":?  o-  ¥lrtr/ aniU™- 

““toVuITr  wuf  «?mljl5low  the  Leninist  policy  of  peaceful  coexistence, 
a  pJuiy  set  on«  and  for  all  by  our  socialist  system  and  anchored  m  our 

%’“raSd'"soctaUsmi‘re  indissolubly  related  conceptions.  It  was  Ite 
UnitmM  of  socwS  the  consolidation  of  socialism’s  international  po- 
sSmns  Vat  Se  U  possTbte  to  place  on  the  order  of  the  day  the  ques  ion 
ol  SudinuTaVs  from  the  life  of  society.  The  obfective  procpsp  that 
iL  laEJo  ^nllce  in  the  world  necessitate  further  improvements  in  the 
opSSn'of  sodallsf  community  conntn«  in  ^^nfottCpS 

’’'“Asteto  te  mos'ttapmtant  area  in  the  foreign  policy  of  the  CPSU 
and  the  Soviet  government  is  solidarity  with  the  forces  of  anjJ 

deLcracy  wk  th^  and  peoples  that  are  working  to  safe¬ 

guard  thdr  freedom  and  ‘^dependence  agamst  reactionary  impingein  , 

to  eliminate  the  remnants  of  colonialism  and  neocolonialism,  and  ‘O  asse 
Mn“™attonal  rdatlons  their  inalienable  right  to  mesters  »  then 
own  destiny  The  contention  in  this  particular  area  of  a' ^  ® 

tSSs  is  becoming  increasingly  acute  with  the  passage  of  hme,  confirming 
lS’s  Shecy  that  “during  the  past  few  years  it  s  this  niajority  [of 
the  populaUon]^that  has  been  drawn  into  the  struple 
wim  extraordinary  rapidity,  so  that  in  this  respect  there  cannot  be  ^ the 
slightest  doubt  what  the  final  ^‘‘tcome  of  the  world  struggle  will  ^ 

^the  soecific  feature  of  the  present  situation  is  that  the  role  oi 
newly-free  countries  in  world  politics  is  growing.  They  are  f 
Snd  Influential  force  that  is  working  for  peace  and 
nn  the  world  scene  whose  weight  in  world  politics  depends  not  only 
their  nur^ber  but  aCe  all  on  the  fact  that,  by  and  large,  they  follow  a 

1  V.  1.  Lenin,  Collected  Works,  Vol.  33,  p.  500. 


5 


peaceable  policy  and  are  vitally  interested  in  relaxing  tensions  and  extend¬ 
ing  mutually  beneficial  cooperation. 

The  position  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  other  socialist  countries  in  mat¬ 
ters  of.  war  and  peace,  of  averting  a  nuclear  war,  is  in  many  ways  conso¬ 
nant  with  that  of  the  newly-free  states,  which,  indeed,  is  the  objective  ba¬ 
sis  for  their  broad  joint  actions  for  peace.  The  Soviet  Union  and  the  so¬ 
cialist  community  as  a  whole  consider  the  young  states  their  friends  and 
equal  partners  in  the  fight  for  peace  and  social  progress,  and  support  their 
efforts  to:  consolidate  sovereignty  and  safeguard  freedom  and  indepen¬ 
dence.  For  objective  reasons,  the  national  liberation  movement  is  be¬ 
coming  more  and  more  distinctly  anti*lmperialist,  because  imperialism  with 
its  reluctance  to  acknowledge  the  right  of  all  countries  to  choose  their  way 
independently,  with  its  attempts  to'retailor  and  alter  the  modern  world  to 
suit  its  own  ends,  is  a  source  of  danger  for  all  nations,  the  biggest  threat 
to  world  peace.  > 

We. in  the  Soviet  Union  have  a' high  regard  for  the  nonaligrted  move¬ 
ment  which  embraces  the  majority  of  the  newly-free  countries  of  Asia, 
Africa  and  Latin  America.  We  invariably  support  the  Initiatives  of  that 
broad  international  movement 'expressing  the  wishes  of  the  newly-free 
peoples  fori  equal  cooperation, ; recognition  of  their  lawful  rights  and  inte¬ 
rests,  for  d  new  international  economic  order,  and  removal  from  interna¬ 
tional  life  of  all  domination  and  diktat,  and  the  claims  to  hegemony  which 
imperialism  and  neocolonialism  are  so  reluctant  to  renounce. 


For  forty  years  the  world  has  lived  in  the  shadow  of  the  nuclear  bomb, 
the  most  destructive  and  deadly  of  all  weapons  ever  devised.  Kearly 
a  quartef  'of  a  million  of  civilians  in 'Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  died  within 
a  few  seconds  when  atomic  wdappVis  \frere  first  put  to  use  by  the  United 
States  in  August  1945,  with  the  atomic  radiation  still  taking  the  lives 
of  those  who  had  been  exposed  to  its  effect  in  those  tragic  days. 

The  development  of  military  tecihnology  has  attained  a  stage  where  war 
becomes  totally  inadmissible  lit  terhis  of  its  consequences  for  human  civi¬ 
lisation.  ‘  7  ' ' 

Yet  nuclear  arms  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the  imperialist  policy  fol¬ 
lowed  by  the  United  States  and  its  closest  allies  after  World  War  II. 
From  the  outset,  the  United  States'  and  the  politico-military  NATO  bloc 
which  it  heads  had  -rounted  on  cowirig  into  submission  the  socialist  count¬ 
ries  and  the  national  liberation  movements  through  their  military  strategic 
superiority,  and  on  subordinating  them  to  diktat  and,  in  the  final  analysis, 
establishing  America’s  world  supremacy; 

In  face  of  the  nuclear  arms  race  spurred  by  imperialism’s  aggressive 
forces,  above  all  those  of  US  imperialism,  in  face  of  their  drive  for  mili¬ 
tary  superiority  over  socialism,  'one  can  hardly  count  on  the  good  will  of 
those  who  have  picked  up  the  baton  in  the  relay  of  the  “godfathers”  of 
the  atoinic  bomb.  Other,  more  tangible  factors  of  containment  are  needed. 
The  military-strategic  parity  with  the  United  States  achieved  by  the  So¬ 
viet  Union  deprived  militaristic  Quarters  across  the  ocean  of  the  chance 
to  blackmail  us  with  the  nuclear  threat.  But  at  the  junction  of 
the  1970s  and  1980s,  this  adventuristic  militaristic  policy  of  imperia¬ 
list  “hawks”  has  again  been  given  impetus,  pregnant  with  dire  conse¬ 
quences.  With  the  coming  to  power  of  the  present  US  administration,  the 
so-called  Strategic  Defence  Initiative  (SDI)  announced  by  the  US  Presi¬ 
dent  in  March  1983,  has  become  part  of  this  dangerous  policy  that  is 


6 


pushing  the  world  towards  nuclear  catastrophe.  The  press  described  SDI 

as  the  Star  Wars  programme.  ;i'.  .  /  , 

One  of  the  most  hypocritical  ploys  in  advertising  SDI  is  to  portray 
it  as  a  logical  continuation  of  the  “humane”  policy  of  the  US  which  al¬ 
legedly  “had  an  absolute  monopoly,  on  nuclear  weapons  for  many  years, 
but  took  no  advantage  of  this”,.  That  was  the  “justification”  of  the  new  US 
doctrine  put  forward,  among  others,  by  US  Defence  Secretary  Caspar 
Weinberger,^ 

Pronouncements  of  this  sort  are  clearly  a  falsification  of  the  actual 
state  of  affairs.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  direct  and  organic  link  beween  the  pre¬ 
sent  and  previous  phases  of  US  politico^military  strategy,  the  strategy 
“from  positions  of  strength”  laying  the  ground  for  another  world  war. 
This  applies  not  only  to  the  United  States  having  used  atomic  weapons 
twice  already— in  Hiroshima  and' Nagasaki— not  as  a  .means  of  quickly 
ending  World  War  II  but  much  more'  as  a  claim  to  military  hegemony 
and  diktat  in  the  postwar  world.  Even  since  nuclear  weapons  appeared 
they  have  been  the  ominous  sword  raised  by  US  imperialism  above  the 
socialist  world— at  present  also  from  outer  space— and  all  humanity. 

The  unbridled  arms  race  which  Washington  has  imposed  on  the  nations  is 
causing  growing  alarm  and  concern  everywhere  in  the  world,  the  USA 
included.  Large  segments  of  the: public; in  the  United  States  are  ever  more 
clearly  aware  that  military  power,  no:  matter  hoW  much  it  is  increased, 
does  not  buttress  the  country’s  security,  as  the  politologists  in  the  White 
House  and  Pentagon  would  have  the  world  believe. 

As  before,  the  US  administration  is  counting  on  force  in  its  interna¬ 
tional  policy.  It  opposes  force  to  any  search  for  constructive  solutions  of 
pressing  international  problems  through  serious  and  equal  negotiations 
aimed  at  achieving  mutually  acceptable  agreements  rather  than  camoufla¬ 
ging  militarist  ambitions  and  mollifying  the  public  with  talk  about  the 
“humane”  aims  of  the  SDI  and  exploration  of  outer  space  with  allegedly 
purely  scientific  aims.  US.  Secretary  of  State  Shultz  has  spoken  out  quite 
unambiguously  on  this  score.  He  said  the  United  States  must  be  strong 
and  what  is  more,  must  be  prepared  to  use  its  strength.  Americans,  he 
said  are  inclined  to  think  that  strength  and  diplomacy  are  alternatives. 
In  factj  however,  he  declared  strength  and  diplomacy  must  always  go  to¬ 
gether,  for  otherwise  the  United  .States,  is  not  likely  to  achieve  much  in 
Ihis  world.®  Behind  these  pronouncements  one  can  distinctly  see  Washing¬ 
ton’s  ambition  to  win  world  supremacy. .  ; 

The  Soviet  decision  to  unilaterally  stop  all  nuclear  explosions  as  from 
August  6,  1985,  works  in  the  vital  security  interests  of  all  nations.  The 
moratorium  on  nuclear  tests  is  welcomed  and  backed  by  the  genial 
public  across  the  world,  because  it  meets  the  desires  .|  . 

broad  response  of  the  public  from  all  corners  of  the  world  holds  that  it  is 
now  up  to  the  United  States  and  the  other  nuclear  powers  to  follow  suit 
and  halt  nuclear  explosions.  This  would  be  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of 
the  victims  of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki,  and,  indeed,  a  tangible  contri¬ 
bution  to  strategic  stability  and  peace. 

If  Washington  is  really  interested  dh  stopping  the  arms  race,  as  the  US 
administration  tried  to  persuade  the  world  public  on  so  many  occ^ions, 
it  should  prove  this  by  deeds:  the  United.  States  should  have  used  the  op¬ 
portunity  and  also  cease  nuclear  explosions.  But  when  it  comes  to  deeds, 
Washington  begins  feverishly  to  inveht  all  sorts  of  excuses  trying  to  avoid 
accepting  the  Soviet  proposals.  The  White  House  set  up  a  kind  of; peri¬ 
meter  defence  to  “repulse”:  the  pressing  demands  :for  a  moratorium  on 
nuclear  explosions.  It  invokes  even.'incnedi'ble  “arguments”,  such  as  alleg-, 


*  The  Washington  Post,  April  3,''1985.  '  ' 

*  See  fore/^:n'A//a(Vs,  Spring  1985,  p.  Tia. 


7 


ing  that  the  Soviet  Union  has  outstripped  the  United  States  in  weapons 
and  that  a  moratorium  on  testing  would  “perpetuate  the  lag’’.  The  absur¬ 
dity  of  these  allegations  was  admitted  by  the  New  York  Times,  which  cited 
highly  persuasive  data  on  this  score.  Since  the  atomic  bombings  of  Hiroshi¬ 
ma  and  Nagasaki,  it  said,  the  Pentagon  has  spent  more  than  $750  billion  on 
new  nuclear  weapons  systems,  whose  stockpile  of  more  than  25,000  war¬ 
heads  has  a  destructive  power  that  exceeds  the  bomb  which  destroyed 
Hiroshima  by  something  like  a  million  times.  For  Washington,  however, 
this  is  not  enough.  The  fact  of  the  matter,  the  New  York  Times  pointed 
out,  is  that  the  strategists  in  Reagan’s  administration  do  not  want  to  stop. 
This  way  to  an  agreement  on  halting  nuclear  tests  and  moving  ahead 
to  the  elimination  of  nuclear  weapons  in  general,  Mikhail  Gorbachev  has 
said  in  his  replies  to  a  TASS  correspondent,  “does  not  suit  only  those  who 
count  on  forcible  pressure,  who  nurse  plans  of  developing  more  and  more 
new  types  of  nuclear  weapons  on  the  Earth,  and  who  have  set  their 
sights  on  starting  an  arms  race  in  outer  space.” 


The  decision  to  halt  all  nuclear  exploisions  on  a  unilateral  basis  has  a  spe¬ 
cial  bearing  on  the  Asian  and  Pacific  Ocean  region,  for  that  was  where 
the  two  US  atomic  bombs  were  dropped.  Throughout  the  postwar  years, 
Asia  has  seen  no  more  or  less  lengthy  period  of  peace  and  stability. 
Peopled  by  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  world  population,  it  saw  seats  of  ten¬ 
sion  spring  up  one  after  another,  leading  to  acute  conflicts  that  brought 
innumerable  calamities  and  suffering  to  its  peoples,  diverting  them  from 

their  daily  vital  tasks.  ...  .. 

Today,  too,  through  the  fault  of  the  imperialist  powers,  above  all  the 
United  States,  the  situation  in  many  parts  of  Asia  remains  tense.  In  a  bid 
to  turn  the  continent  into  an  arena  of  confrontation  with  the  Soviet  Union 
and  other  socialist  countries,  with  the  forces  of  national  liberation,  the 
White  House  is  trying  to  enlist  the  Asian  states  as  accomplices  in  its  mi¬ 


litary  ventures.  .  „  t- 

Hundreds  of  US  military  installations  are  scattered  all  over  the  Far 
East.  The  second  largest  US  overseas  armed  force  is  stationed  there. 
Japan,  whose  government  has  expressed  readiness  to  contribute  to  the 
US  Star  Wars  programme,  is  being  hitched  more  and  more  tightly  to 
Washington’s  war  chariot.  This  is  adding  considerably  to  the  instability 


All  UlC  4  1  1-1  • 

In  recent  time,  Washington  has  been  trying  to  establish  a  new  politi- 
co-military  structure  in  that  large  region,  with  Japan  being  assigned,  a 
prominent  role  in  it.  A  Washington-Tokyo-Seoul  triangle  is  being  plan¬ 
ned  on  the  basis  of  already  existing  bilateral  agreements,  with  the  part¬ 
ners  of  the  USA  playing  the  role  of  American  nuclear  missile  bases.  This 
is  accompanied  by  attempts  to  create  a  still  broader  politlco-mititary  alli¬ 
ance  in  the  shape  of  a  so-called  Pacific  Community  that  would  include 
all  the  ASEAN  countries  along  with  the  states  that  are  already  tied  to 


the  USA  by  military  commitments. 

A  thorough  exchange  of  opinions  on  how  to  secure  peace  and  stabtlity 
in  Asia  and  the  Pacific  Ocean  occurred  when  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  General 
Secretary  of  the  CC  CPSU,  received  a  delegation  of  the  Socialist  Party 
of  Japan  in  September  1985.  Mikhail  Gorbachev  and  Chairman  of  the 
SPJ  Executive  M.  Ishibashi  noted  that  it  was  desirable  to  pool  the  efforts 
of  the  countries  of  that  vast  region  regardless  of  their  social  systems  and 
turn  it  into  a  zone  of  peace  and  equal  cooperation.  Gorbachev  emphasised 
that  people  in  the  Soviet  Union  respect  Japan  and  its  people.  Japan  s  role 
jn  world  affairs  would  increase  if  it  contributed  to  a  peaceful  solution  of 


8 


burnine  international  problems  and  helped  to  arrange  peaceful  coopera- 
tibn  with  all  countries  and  peoples  rather  than  embarking  on  militansa-' 
tioS  Tnd  committing  itself  more  and  more  to  back  ng  the  US  military 
olans  Mikhail  Gorbachev  stressed  that  the  concrete  Soviet  proposals  to 
Japan  aimed  at  improving  the  political  climate  betweeri  the  two  countries, 
we^e  still  valid.  He  noted  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  if  the  fruitful 
experience  in  trade  and  economic  relations  between  the  Soviet  Union  arid 
a  number  of  West  European  countries  based  on  long-term  economic  coo- 
peSn  agreements  and^elevant  long-term  cooperation  programmes  were 

the  contemporary  worid 

Kry  °;rr  "dmarSSS/'ui  t 

in  its  littoral  states.  It  is  an  active  zone  of  national  liberation.  Despite 
the  variety  of  political,  socio-economic  and  religious  features,  most  of  the 

peoples  living  there  have  a  common  historical  past  and  a  common  desire 

to  become  true  masters  of  their  present  and  future,  and  thus  play  the 

^^”^mper?aHsmTusUy°^Svelop^  strategically”  the  TJf 

number  of  warships  of  the  US  navy  a^^^/he  navies  o  other  NATO  co^^^ 
ries  cruising  in  its  waters  is  growing  steadily.  Existing  military  bas^ 
and  strongholds  are  being  expanded  and  new  ones  are  hemg  built.  Their 
number  is  already  approaching  thirty.  Furthermore,  the  Peritagon  is  plan- 
S  to  deploy  medium-range  Pershing-2  nuclear  missiles  in  some  of  the 
littoral  states  and  arm  its  ships  with  cruise  missiles.  , a  j 

The  Indian  Ocean  is  being  inscribed  into  the  Star  Wars  °*’*’**- 
satellite  tracking  station  designed  to  knock  out  artificial  earth  satel¬ 
lites  is  being  installed  on  Diego  Garcia,  while 

will  have  vertical  launch  systems  for  nuclear  missiles  and  whose 

energy  is  convertible  into  laser  beams  to  destroy  enemy  nyssdes  directly 
on  launching  pads.  Reports  have  come  to  hand  of  the  intentiM  to  develop 
elements  of  Star  Wars  systems  in  other  parts  of  the  Indian  Ocean. 

The  “zone  of  responsibility"  of  Pentagon’s  Central  Command 
(CENTCOM)  set  up  in  January  1983  extends  to 

Like  the  sword  of  Damocles,  the  Asian  countries  are  threatened  by  the 
Rapid  Deployment  Force,  which  has  been  activated  by  the  United  States 
to  dictate  its  will  to  other  countries  by  force  of  arms.  This  policy  of  th 
US  administration  is  tending  to  stoke  up  ® 

Sion  and  to  create  new  situations  .of  conflict.  And  most  of  the  flashpoint 
w^situated  on  the  Asian  continent.  The  imperialist  Wession  against 
the  Democratic  Republic  of  Afghanistan  is  being  escalated,  ajmed  forays 
against  the  People’s  Republic  of  Kampuchea  continue,  bloodshed  does  not 
“fop  to  Itow  to  long-Uering  Lebanon,  and  the  war  between  Ira,  and 

‘'“Tlil  S  important  aspect  in  the  Asian  poiicy  oi  the 

ist  states  is  that  neocolonialist  exploitation  and  plunder  of  newly-free 
Asian  countries  continues,  is  even  being  escalated,  ^ansnation- 

als  and  non-equivalent  commodity  exchange.  The  debt  burden  and  other 
methods  of  pressure  are  used  to  influence  the  policy  o*  these  counte, 
making  theni  serve  the  gigantic  military  programmes  of  Washington  and 

It^I  becoiStlg  moTe'^obvi^^^  to  fight  tor  their  ‘oterests  a|®^st 

outside  encroachments,  the  Asian  countries  must  deal  in  a  most  serious 
manner  with  the  fundamental  problems  of  peace  and  security  in  the  re¬ 
gion  because  success  in  resolving  the  intricate  problems  ot  th®*r  socio- 
economic  development  requires  peace  and  stability.  It  would  be  dange- 
rous  and  short-sighted  for  them  to  permit  any  rise  of  tension  in  Asia 
and  the  Pacific  Ocean.  Asia  must,  and  can,  become  a  continent  of  peace 


9 


and  goodneighbourly  relations.  Speaking  on  August  29, 1985,  in  the  Krem¬ 
lin,  Mikhail  Gorbachev  recalled  the  recent  Soviet  proposal  for  working 
out  a  general,  comprehensive  approach  to  Asian  security.  Its  substance 
is  to  pool  the  efforts  of  all  Asian  states,  regardless  of  their  social  system, 
to  ensure  peace  and  stability  on  the  basis  of  the  peaceful  coexistence 
principles.  In  this  major  undertaking,  it  is  important  to  have  a  broad 
basic  approach  to  securing  greater  strategic  stability  consistent  with  the 
interests  of  all  countries  in  the  region  without  exception.  It  could  include 
the  five  principles  of  peaceful  coexistence  worked  out  by  Asian  countries 
years  ago,  the  ten  Bandung  principles,  and  some  of  the  initiatives  re¬ 
lating  to  Asian  security  made  by  the  Soviet  Union,  tlic  Mongolian 
People’s  Republic,  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  the  coun¬ 
tries  of  Indochina,  the  Republic  of  India,  and  other  states  in  the  region. 

The.  Soviet  Union  has  no  intention,  of  imposing  a  ready  formula  of 
Asian  security  on  the  other  states  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific.  It  is  calling 
on  them  to  work  together  in  producing  such  a  formula  by  means  of  bila¬ 
teral  and  multilateral  contacts.  The  Soviet  Union  has  proposed  that  an 
Asian  forum  should  be  held  to  exchange  opinions  and  find  constructive 
solutions  to  this  important  problem.  ,  ,  r- 

While. proposing  to  make  the  most  of  the  good  experience  of  the  Euro¬ 
pean  Conference,  the  Soviet  Union  does  not  expect,  of  course,  that  the 
Helsinki  scheme  would  be  mechanically  transplanted  to  Asian  soil.  But 
many  elements  of  the  European  experience  in  detente  can  be  applied  in 
Asia  as  well.  Take,  for  example,  the  principles  of  respect  for  sovereignty 
and  non-intervention  in  internal  affairs;  non-use  of  forc^;  peaceful  settle¬ 
ment  of  disputes;  the  right  of  nations  to  decide  their  own  future,  and 
equal,  mutually  beneficial  cooperation. 

In  recent  years,  the  socialist  countries  have  come  forward  with  a  large 
number  of  initiatives  concerning  various  aspects  of  Asian  security. 
The  Soviet  Union  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  the  two  nuclear 
powers  on  the  continent,  have  pledged  no-first-use  of  nuclear  weapons. 
The  Mongolian  People’s  Republic  has  proposed  concluding  a  convention 
on  mutual  non-aggression  and  renunciation  of  force  by  the  countries  of 
Asia  and  the  Pacific.  The  three  countries  of  Indochina  have  come  for¬ 
ward  with  realistic  proposals  for  normalising  the  situation  in  Southeast 
Asia.  A  number  of  constructive  proposals  aimed  at  settling  inter-govern¬ 
mental  issues  with  Pakistan  and  Iran  have  been  made  by  the  leadership 
of  the  Democratic:  Republic  of  Afghanistan.  Peace  in  the  Far  East  would 
be  greatly  enhanced,  if  the  proposals  .of  the  Democratic  People’s  Re¬ 
public  of  Korea  for  withdrawing  US  troops  from  South  Korea  and  uni¬ 
fying  the  country  i  on  peaceful,  democratic  principles  without  outside  inter¬ 
ference,  were  adopted.  '  ,  .  f 

The  unilateral  Soviet  decision  to  cease  all  nuclear  explosions  as  of 
August  6,  1985,  like  its  new  major  proposal  on  international  cooperation 
in  the  ‘peaceful  exploration  of  outer  space  in  conditions  of  its  non-rn^ili- 
tarisation,  submitted  to  the  40th. session  of  the  UN  General  Assembly, 
work  in  the  vital  interests  of  alb:  nations.  The  concept  of  Asian '  security 
could  well  include  the  demand  for  all  nuclear  powers  to  completely  re¬ 
nounce  nuclear  weapons  tests  'in:  Asia,  the  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans, 
and  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  for  the  states  of  the  region  to  renounce 
participating  in  space  militarisation  programmes. 

A  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  future  and  for  the  survival  of  all 
peoples  on  our  planet  is  taking  robt  in  the  countries  of  Asia  and  the  Pacific 
and  Indian  Oceans,  and,  for  that  matter,  in  the  entire  developing  wotld. 
Compliance  with  the  principles  on  which  the  Soviet  proposal  is  based, 
writes  the  Indian  Express,  may'gradually  pave  the  way  to  an  Asian  secu¬ 
rity  conference  on  the  lines  of  the’ Helsinki  Conference. 

The  constructive  peace  initiatives  of  Asian  countries  addressed  to  va- 


rious  aspects  of  security  on  the  continent  as  a  whole  or  its  separate  re¬ 
gions,  are  appreciated  and  supported  in  the  USSR.  In  a  message  of 
greetings  to  the  international  conference,  “Fortieth  Anniversary  of  the 
Victory  over  Japanese  Militarism  and  the  Tasks  of  the  Peace  Movement 
in  the  Countries  of  Asia  and  the  Pacific”,  Mikhail  Gorbachev  said:  “We 
hope  that  the  Asian  countries  will  concert  their  efforts  and  jointly  pro¬ 
duce  a  common,  comprehensive  approach  to  the  problem  of  security  in 
Asia  and  the  adjoining  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans.” 


O  eople  all  over  the  world  are  aware  more  and  more  clearly  that  huma- 
r  nity  faces  a  serious  choice:  either  concrete  steps  bridling  the  arms  race 
or  a  continued  drift  towards  the  nuclear  abyss.  That  is  why  the  large-scale 
Soviet  peace  initiatives— the  unilateral  moratorium  on  nuclear  tests,  and 
the  proposal  to  put  into  the  agenda  of  the  40th  UN  General  Assembly  on 
international  cooperation  in  the  peaceful  exploration  of  outer  space  in 
conditions  of  its  non-militarisation— are  so  warmly  welcomed  everywhere. 
The  press  response  on  various  continents,  notably  in  the  United  States, 
expresses  fears  that  the  militarisation  of  outer  space'  would  greatly  in¬ 
crease  the  nuclear  threat  and  deprive  the  peoples  of  all  hope  that  nuclear 
weapons  would  one  day  disappear  from  the  face  of  the  earth..  What  is 
worse,  the  arms  race  would  gain  a  qualitatively  new,  still  more  dange¬ 
rous,  dimension.  It  would  grow  in  all  directions  and  colossal,  resources, 
in  addition  to  those  that  are  already  being  spent,  would  be  flung  into  it 
instead  of  serving  the  progress  of  humanity  and  helping  to  resolve  many 

of  its  vital  problems.  .  .  r  i- 

Many  prominent  statesmen  and  political  leaders,  heads  of  anti-war 
organisations,  and  public  spokesmen  support  the  Soviet  peace  initiatives, 
saying  that  they  would  put  up  a  reliable  barrier  to  the  arms  race.  Stra¬ 
tegic  stability  would  be  considerably  greater  all  over  the  world.  A  pal¬ 
pable  contribution  would  thus  be  made  to  the  final  elimination  of  nuclear 
arms  everywhere. 

Taking  account  of  the  existing  realities,  the  Soviet  Union  has  never 
thought,  nor  does  it  think  now,  that  progress  in  disarmament  can  be 
achieved  easily.  But  we  are  convinced  that  no  difficulties  are  reason 
enough  for  pessimistic  conclusions  as  to.  the  fight  for  stopping  the  arms 
race,  and  much  less  for  conclusions  that  the  struggle  to  resolve, this  key  pro¬ 
blem  of  our  time  is  hopeless.  On  the  contrary,  the  significance  and  topi¬ 
cality  of  that  task  compels  us  to  continuously  escalate  the  effort' to  win 
that  struggle  so  that  all  nations  would  jointly  frustrate  the  man-hating 
plans  of  imperialism’s  aggressive  quarters. 

The  Soviet  Union  attaches  great  importance  to  its  relations  with  the 
United  States,  which  it  regards  as  a  most  important  factor:  of.  interna¬ 
tional  politics.  We  hold,  in  principle,  that  there  is  no  preordained  inevita¬ 
bility  of  confrontation  between  the  two  countries.  This  is  borne  out  by 
the  history  of  Soviet-American  relations,  both  negative  and  positive. 

The  position  the  Soviet  Union  adopted  at  the  summit  talks  in  Geneva 
is  all  but  too  clear:  to  prevent  the  arms  race  in  outer  space  and  to  reach 
an  agreement  with  the  US  on  mutual  reduction  of  relevant  nuclear  arma¬ 
ments  based  on  the  principle  of  equality  and  equal  security. 

“Our  countries,”  Mikhail  Gorbachev  stressed  in  a  talk  with  US  jour¬ 
nalists,  “simply  cannot  afford  to  take  matters  to  the  point  of  confronta¬ 
tion.  That  is  in  the  true  interests  of  both  the  Soviet  and  American  peoples. 
And  it  must  be  translated  into  the  language  of  real  politics.  It  is  essen¬ 
tial  to  stop  the  arms  race,  to  work  on  disarmement,  and  to  normalise 
Soviet-American  relations.  Honestly,  it  is  high  time  ^to  make  the  relations 


11 


our  two  ereat  nations  worthy  of  their  historic  role.  After  all,  the 
future  of  peace,  the  future  of  world  civilisation^,  really  depends  on  our  re¬ 
lations  We  are  prepared  to  act  m  that  direction.  .  -i.-  Ao 

A  hiph  place  among  the  Soviet  Union’s  foreign  policy  priorities  is  de¬ 
voted  to^poUtical  dialolue  and  interaction  with  capitalist  pountrie 

to  expanding  mutually  beneficial  cooperation  with  them  on  a  term 
basis  in  Sm^cial,  economic,  sclenlUc,  tehnlca ,  cultural  and  other 
Inheres"  The  Soviet  Union  holds  that  these  countries  can  contribute  sub- 
luSiv  to  the  improvement  oi  the  political  climate  and  help  I"  reMW- 
fnrnSeSs  that  are  facing  humankind.  History  shows  ^yon  d  a  doubt 
hit  they  Xv  an  active  positive  role  in  international  relations  when  to 
noHciM  are  t?ulv  Independent,  based  on  national  interests  and  when  they 
5o  no?  foUow  b^llndly  in  the  wake  of  the  militaristic  policy  imposed  on 

“TeKl? '’h  fi°no  secret  that  US  ruling  quarters  exert  powerful  pres- 

tfc  making  steady  headway  in 

ever  mwe  fnsistently  for  a  more  independent,  more  self-sufficient  pol  cy 
international  scene  above  all  in  such  areas  as  security,  reduction 

aSd  IlmitauSn  OM  “I'i  also  the  further  to  hfh^'^lnJv’oi 

latinns  with  socialist  countries.  They  are  clearly  aware  that  the  policy  of 
limiting  contacts  with  the  socialist  states  which  Washington  is  seeking 
n  hupfsHs  contrary  to  their  true  national  interests.  A  mass  movement 
is  gafning  momentum  in  Europe  to  improve  East-West  relations  and  to 
revfve  defente,  which  has  already  struck  deep  roots  on  the  European  con¬ 
tinent. 


The  peaceful  nature  of  Soviet  loreiCT  "PjTmTmh'co'nurS; 

I  fsf  fVio  Qnrifllist  svstem.  Looking  forward  to  the  ^7th  L.ongress 

of  the  CPSU  Soviet  people  are  motivated  by  peaceful  aspirations  and 
?L;Vl?fo  fu’lfil  the  faV  reaching  plans  of  accelerated  socio-economic  pro- 
=c  wotLd  out  bv^  Party  has  formulated  a  policy  to 

atfain  a  new  qualitative  dimension  in  the  state  of  our  society,  envis^mg 
Scientific  and  technical  renovation  and  achievement  of  the  world  s  high¬ 
est  standards  in  productivity  of  labour,  perfection  of  social  and  econo 
mic  relattons  deep^-going  changes  in  the  sphere  of  labour  and  in  the  ma¬ 
terial  and  spiritual  conditions  of  life,  a  vitalisation  of  the  system  of  poll- 

to  .nd  social  institutions,  and  a  Sicics 

The  interconnection  and  interdependence  of  home  and  foreign  policies 
are  also  aSuiring  a  new  dimension.  The  greater  economic  power  of  the 
Soviet  Union  the^ dynamic  development  of  its  economy,  is  making  its  fo- 
re°rn  pS  of  peacl  ^re  effective  in  a  most  direct  and  immediate  wajj 
So?tof  foreign  policy  works  in  the  rock  bottom  interests  of  the  Soviet 
npnnle  and  is  based^ on  the  labour  of  millions  of  people  in  our  country. 

^  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  Geneva  summit  failed  to  solve  .con^ete 
problems  relating  to  limitation  and  reduction  of  armaments,  the  co^obo- 
?ation  ^f  the  January  1985  Soviet-American  agreement  on  the  need  to 
sfarch  for  ways  to  prevent  the  arms  race  in  space  and  to  put  an  end  to 

it  on  Earth  is  of  tremendous  importance. ,  _  ,  ,  ,  ^  ^  Ionova 

Primary  significance  is  attached  to  the  final  document  ^ 
talkV  in  which  it  is  jointly  stated  that  the  nuclear  war  is  totally  unac¬ 
ceptable  ^nd  that  neither  side  will  seek  military  superiority. 


12 


The  summit  meeting  in  Geneva  has  also  paved  the  way  to  the  dia¬ 
logue  which  is  aimed  at  improving  the  Soviet- American  relations  and 

the  world  situation  on  the  whole.  ,  ^  .  u  -j 

Addressing  the  parliamentarians  of  France,  Mikhail  Gorbachev  said; 
“On  the  threshold  of  the  third  millennium  we  must  burn  the  evil  book  of 
‘nuclear  alchemy’.  May  the  21st  century  become  the  first  century  of  life 
without  the  fear  of  universal  destruction.  We  will  achieve  this  mission 
if  we  join  our  efforts.  The  Soviet  Union  is  prepared  to  make  its  contribu¬ 
tion  to  a  peaceful,  free,  prosperous  future  in  Europe  and  all  other  con¬ 
tinents.  We  will  spare  nothing  for  this  end.”  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,. 

The  CPSU  declares,  it  is  stated  in  the  draft  of  the  new  edition  of  the 
CPSU  Programme,  that  there  is  no  weapon  on  Earth  that  the  Soviet  Union 
would  be  against  limiting  or  banning  on  a  mutual  basis  and  with  the 
use  of  efficient  means  of  control. 

Everything  done  by  the  CPSU  and  the  Soviet  government  bears  out 
their  goodwill  and  their  readiness  to  deliver  humanity  from  the  threat 
of  nuclear  catastrophe,  to  make  our  world  a  better  world,  a  world  with¬ 
out  fear  of  war.  Since  the  Great  October  Socialist  Revolution  the  social¬ 
ist  state  has  been  carrying  high  the  banner  of  peace  and  friendship 
among  nations.  The  CPSU  will  forever  remain  faithful  to  this  Leninist 
banner. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


CSO:  1812/94 


USSR’S  ROLE  IN  AIDING  CHINESE  REVOLUTION  IN  MANCHURIA  NOTED 
Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  In  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  16-25 
[Article  by  0.  Ye.  Vladimirov] 


Forty  years  have  passed  since  the  defeat  of  Japanese  militarism  and  the 
victorious  end  of  World  War  II,  an  epoch-making  event  in  human 
history.  The  Soviet  Union,  the  Mongolian  People’s  Republic,  and  also 
the  revolutionary  forces  of  China,  Korea  and  Vietnam  made  an  immense 
contribution  to  the  common  victory  which  created  the  prerequisites  for 
the  rapid  advance  of  China  and  other  Asian  countries  along  the  path  of 
social  progress. 

The  history  of  the  Chinese  Revolution  is  a  record  of  the  hard  and  he¬ 
roic  struggle  of  the  Chinese  people  and  the  country’s  finest  representa¬ 
tives  for  the  national  and  social  liberation.  The  revolution  abounds  in 
examples  of  mass  heroism,  especially  on  the  part  of  Communists.  The  re¬ 
volution  in  China  was  a  continuation  of  the  Great  October  Socialist  Re¬ 
volution  in  Russia. 

The  Great  October  Revolution  caused  a  gigantic  breach  in  the  capi¬ 
talist  system,  thus  weakening  the  imperialist  powers’  pressure  on  China 
and  facilitating  the  national  liberation  movement  there.  As  a  result  of 
the  October  Revolution,  Russia  ceased  to  be  among  the  major  imperia¬ 
list  states  threatening  China’s  national  independence.  Moreover,  it  be¬ 
came  a  country  which  firmly  supported  the  Chinese  people  in  their  natio¬ 
nal  liberation  struggle. 

China’s  development  after  the  October  Revolution,  its  relations  with 
the  USSR  played  a  crucial  role,  being  an  intrinsic  component  of  the  radi¬ 
cal  social  changes  in  the  country.  The  Chinese  Revolution  is  a  convincing 
proof  that  the  success  of  a  revolutionary  movement  in  any  country,  espe¬ 
cially  where  the  proletariat  is  relatively  weak,  depends  largely  on  assi¬ 
stance  and  support  from  countries  where  socialism  has  already  triumphed, 
on  the  role  played  by  those  countries  in  international  affairs  and  on 
their  position  in  the  alignment  of  world  forces.  Without  such  assistance 
and  support,  it  is  difficult  for  the  revolution  to  succeed  and  for  the 
people  to  begin  building  socialism. 

Viewing  the  Chinese  Revolution  from  this  angle,  it  is  worth  emphasi¬ 
sing  that  the  victory  of  the  progressive  forces  of  peace  over  German  na- 
zism  and  Japanese  militarism  in  World  War  II,  to  which  the  Soviet 
Union  made  a  decisive  contribution,  was  a  factor  of  crucial  importance 
for  its  success. 

The  triumphant  development  of  the  Chinese  Revolution  was  not  an 
isolated  socio-political  process.  The  liberation  movement  in  China  deve¬ 
loped  in  conformity  with  Lenin’s  teaching  on  revolutions  in  colonial  and 
dependent  countries.  The  international  factor  was  important  for  the  final 


14 


4 


A 


Ji 


victory  of  the  revolution  and  played  a  decisive  role  at  certain  stages  in 

its  development.  .  .u  c  •  *  i  + 

The  varied  support  and  assistance  rendered  by  the  Soviet  people  to 

the  Chinese  revolutionary  forces  was  a  practical  realisation  of  Lenin’s 
idea  of  the  assistance  provided  by  the  triumphant  proletariat  to  libera¬ 
tion  movements.  This  policy  was  especially  explicit  during  the  Japanese* 
Chinese  war  of  1937-1945,  which  put  the  Chinese  people  in  a  precarious 
position.  If  the  Soviet  Union  had  not  entered  the  war  in  the  Far  East  m 
August  1945  and  had  not  decisively  defeated  Japanese  militarism,  the  war 
might  have  been  harsher  and  more  prolonged  for  China.  In  an  article 
entitled  “The  Soviet  Red  Army  on  the  Far  Eastern  Theatre  of  War 
Jitigji  fibcLO  wrote  on  3  August  1985:  “It  must  be  specifically  emphasised 
that  the  Soviet  Red  Army,  having  launched  an  offensive  on  the  North- 
East  of  our  country,  destroyed  the  main  forces  of  the  Japanese  Kwantung 
Army,  precipitated  the  total  defeat  of  Japanese  fascism,  and  in  this  way 
speeded  up  China’s  victory  in  the  resistance  war  against  Japan.  The 
Chinese  people  will  never  forget  this  act  of  revolutionary  internationa¬ 
lism.’’  ,  _  c  lU 

Chinese  Communists,  workers  and  peasants  made  effective  use  ot  the 

fruits  of  the  Soviet  victories  over  Japanese  militarism  and  the  results 
of  fierce  and  bloody  class  battles  in  the  country  and  scored  a  victory 


This  victory  convincingly  bore  out  Lenin’s  idea  that  the  “revolu¬ 
tionary  movement  of  the  peoples  of  the  East  can...  develop  effectively, 
can  reach  a  successful  issue,  only  in  direct  association  With  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  struggle  of  our  Soviet  Republic  against  international  imperia- 
iism.**  ^ 

Following  the  establishment  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  the 
tasks  of  rehabilitating  and  developing  the  economy  and  culture  were  also 
tackled  with  extensive  economic,  technical  and  cultural  assistance  from 
the  Soviet  Union  and  other  countries  of  the  socialist  community  during 
the  imperialist  blockade  of  the  PRC. 

More  recently,  Soviet  assistance  and  support  have  also  been  crucial 
for  the  national  liberation  and  revolutionary  struggle  of  the  Chinese 
working  people  at  major  stages  in  China’s  historical  development.  Every 
time  that  Soviet-Chinese  relations  have  grown  stronger,  China’s  revolu¬ 
tionary  forces  have  consolidated  their  position,  the  progressive  movement 
has  received  a  fresh  impulse,  and  reactionary  forces  have  had  to  take  up 
defensive  positions.  And  conversely,  the  weakening  of  China’s  ties  witn 
the  Soviet  Union  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  political  climate  in  the 
country,  decreased  revolutionary  activities  and  facilitated  the  growth  of 
nationalist  tendencies.  It  is  appropriate  to  recall  here  the  words  of  the 
lireat  son  of  the  Chinese  people.  Sun  Yatsen,  who  said  in  his  farewell 
message  shortly  before  his  death  that  he  was  confident  that  the  day 
would  come  when  the  Soviet  Union  would  welcome  a  powerful  and  free 
China  as  a  friend  and  ally,  and  that  the  two  allies  would  march  hand  in 
hand  towards  victory  in  the  great  struggle  for  the  liberation  of  oppressed 
peoples. 


Faithful  to  its  allied  obligations  undertaken  at  the  Yalta  Conference  of 
the  three  powers,  the  Soviet  Union  entered  the  war  against  militari¬ 
stic  Japan.  At  the  talks  in  the  Crimea,  the  Soviet  government  secured 
the  political  terms  for  entering  the  war  against  Japan  which  would  not 
only  best  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  USSR  (primarily,  .strengthening 

‘  V.  I.  Lenin,  Collected  Works,  Vol.  30,  p.  151. 


15 


the  security  of  its  borders  in  the  Far  East),  but  also  ensure  success  for 
the  mission  of  the  Soviet  Army  to  liberate  the  peoples  of  China,  Korea 

^"^The'^o^d^Union'was  loyal  to  its  internationalist  duty  to  the  Chin¬ 
ese  pe^pirwho  had  been  in  a  state  of  war  with  Japanese  militarism  for 
many  years.  Although  the  Soyiet  people  sustained  immense  material 
Shuman  losses  in  the  Great  Patriotic  War  of  1941-1945,  they  made 
new  sacrifices  in  the  name  of  the  freedom  and  independence  of  Asian 

‘"““u'^uld  be  noted  that  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  had  rea- 
.snns  for  wantine  the  Soyiet  Union  to  enter  the  war  against  Japan.  They 
realised  full  well  that  surrender  was  inconceivable  without  the  Soviet 
Union’s  entry  into  the  war  and  without  the  defeat  of  the  Kwantung  Army. 
It  was  not  for  nothing  that  the  Western  powers  drew  up  their  plans  on 
the  assumption  that  the  war  with  Japan  would  be  protracted. 

The  defeat  of  German  fascism  notwithstanding,  Japanese  imperialism 
refused  to  lay  down  arms  and  pursued  the  policy  of  dragging  out  the 
war.  In  May  1945,  the  Supreme  Military  Council  of  Japan  advanced  the 
slogan  of  a^“hundred  years’  war  for  the  empire”.  The  Japanese  govern¬ 
ment  turned  down  the  Potsdam  Declaration  forwarded  to  Japan  on  behalf 
S  "he  goVrnments  of  the  USA,  Britain,  and  China  on  26  July  1945.  The 
Declara^tion  demanded  that  the  Japanese  armed  surrender  uncon- 

ditionallv  The  content  of  this  Declaration  was  fully  in  [i^e  with  the 
interests^of  the  Soviet  Union,  which  gave  its  backing  to  the  Declaration 

B^  deciding  to  prolong  the'  war,  the  Japanese  militarists  sought  to 
briiS^aSt  the  collapse  of  the  anti-fascist  coalition,  thus  avoiding  uncim- 
ditional  surrender.  Tneir  calculations  were  not  entirely  groundless.  By 
August  1945,  the  Japanese  armed  forces  had  reached 
The  Japanese  High  Command  pinned  great,  hopes  on  the  well-trained  and 

plans  to  prolong  the  war  =1*0  ‘ook  Into 
account  the  calculations  of  the  US  military  command  and  the  combat 
potential  of  the  Chinese  armed  forces.  In  the  spring  of  US  mtelli 
gence  believed  that  if  the  USSR  did  not  enter  Jbe  war  the  Japnese 
would  be  able  to  continue  fighting  on  the  mainland  till  the  end  of  1946, 
1947  or  1948  (even  after  the  occupation  of  the  major  Japanese  islands).^ 
TtiP  IIS  and  British  Command  was  planning  to  engage  in  decisive  ope- 
Snnf /gainst  Jana  1946-1947.2.  Churchill  stated  that  no  one 

Srid  say  how  ijnl  it  would  taka  to  conduct  those  "dKisive"  operations. 

On  tL  eve  of  the  USSR’s  entering  the  war  against  ^l^eJJS 

government  dropped  the  atomic  bombs  on  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki. 
tK  Saric  actions  were  nothing  less  than  a  crime  against  humanity. 
The  United  States  condemned  the  population  of  these 
.trfmVr  Heath  at  a  time  when  the  aggressor’s  fate  had  already  been  prede- 
te?mme?by  the  very  course  of  Worft  War  11  and  imminent  operations  by 
the  Soviet  Armed  Forces.  It  was  already  clear  by  then  that  there  was  no 
milltflrv  need  for  the  use  of  Atomic  wespons. 

The^death  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  ®°ber  the  Japa- 

The  American  military  historian  L.  Morton  asserts  that 
the  bolubine  of  Hiroshiiua  caused  a  certain  amount  of  confusion  among 

51  JaTanese  leadk  but  did  not  in  the  "f*  ‘"SSsR^tta: 

Thp  Chinese  people  wholeheartedly  welcomed  th®  UbbK  s  aeciara 
tion  of  war  on  jSpan,  realising  that  tlm  Precjpi^^ate  the  dde^t  o 

Japanese  militarism  and  ensure  the  liberation  of  China.  This  is  wha 

”7^^.  History  of  China  from  Ancient  Times  to  Our  Days,  Moscow.  1974, 
D  402  (in  Russian) . 


16 


Mao  Zedong  wrote  on  this  score:  “On  the  8th  of  August  the  Government 
of  the  Soviet  Union  declared  war  on  Japan;  the  Chinese  people  ardently 
welcome  this.  Thanks  to  this  step  made  by  the  Soviet  Union,  the  dura¬ 
tion  of  war  with  Japan  will  be  considerably  shortened.  The  war  against 
Japan  is  already  in  its  final  stage  and  the  hour  of  ^‘ctory  over 

the  Japanese  invaders  and  all  their  hirelings  has  struck.  Mao  Zedong 
and  Zhu  De  solemnly  declared  that  they  would  fully  coordinate  their  \var 
effort  with  the  “Red  Army  and  the  armies  of  the  allied  nations  in  the 
cause  of  defeating  the  hated  Japanese  invaders.”  ^ 

The  Japanese  High  Command  and  administration  stepped  up  tneir 
anti-Soviet  propaganda  among  the  local  population  following  the  advan¬ 
ce  of  Soviet  troVs  on  to  the  territory  of  Manchuria.  T^h^y  intimidated  the 
Chinese,  Manchurians,  Mongols  and  Koreans,  saying  that  the  Red  Army 
would  allegedly  “engage  in  wide-scale  massacres,  lifting  and  violence. 
This  malicious  slander  was  backed  up  by  the  White-Guard  Chief  Directo¬ 
rate  of  Russian  Emigration  at  Harbin  and  its  local  bureaus.  Authorities 
urged  the  population  to  engage  in  guerrilla  operations  against  the 
advancing  Red  Army.  In  some  areas  political  prisoners  were  executed. 
Retreating  from  towns  the  occupationists  set  on  fire  industrial  enterpri-. 
ses,  railway  terminals  and  river  ports,  depots  with  fuel,  munition  and 

food,  and  also  dwelling  houses.  ’ 

The  population  of  Manchuria  did  not,  however,  succumb  to  these  pro¬ 
vocations.  They  met  the  Soviet  liberation  army  enthusiastically  and  assis¬ 
ted  it  vigorously  in  its  further  advance.  People  repaired  roads  and  rail¬ 
ways  on  their  own  initiative,  mended  blown-up  bridps,  set  up  civil  de¬ 
fence  detachments,  engaged  in  anti-crime  activities,  etc.  „ 

The  USSR’s  engagement  in  the  war  and  the  successful  actions  of  So¬ 
viet  troops  and  the  Mongolian  People’s  Revolutionary  Army  in  Manchuria 
caused  the  rapid  retreat  of  the  Japanese  from  Inner  Mongolia  and  North 
China  and  served  as  a  signal  for  the  CPC-led  Chinese  revolutionary 
arniv  which  on  Auffust  11»  1945  iQunchcd  3n  offensive. 

However,'  Soviet  troops  advanced  so  rapidly  that  the  Japanese  were 
defeated  before  the  8th  Chinese  Army  could  engage  in  large-scale  combat 

°^%Vthe  time  the  Soviet  Union  entered  the  war  with  Japan,  the  Chinese 
revolutionary  army  in  Manchuria  was  in  extremely  difficult  conditions. 
In  early  August,  the  Japanese  military  command  had  concentrated  large 
forces  and  encircled  the  Chinese  units  under  General  Zhao  Wenjin  at 
Pinquan.  Their  liquidation  was  only  prevented  by  the  swift  advance  of 

Soviet  troops,  namely  units  of  the  17th  j 

The  Red  Army  Command  effectively  assisted  the  Chinese  8th  and 
New  4th  armies.  Captured  enemy  weapons,  including  artillery  and  light 
tanks,  were  transferred  to  the  personnel  of  those  arrnies  on  the  move, 
while  their  commanding  officers  and  soldiers  were  helped  to  master  the 
weapons  and  equipment.  The  soldiers  and  officers  of  the  Chinese  revolu¬ 
tionary  armies  expressed  their  heartfelt  gratitude  to  the  Soviet  troops 
for  their  assistance,  because  it  was  thanks  to  this  assistance  that  the 
lives  of  thousands  of  Chinese  soldiers  and  officers  were  saved. 

The  quick  defeat  of  the  Kwantung  Army  in  Manchuria  and  Korea, 
the  liquidation  of  Japanese  units  on  South  Sakhalin  and  the  Kuril  Islands 
frustrated  all  Tokyo’s  hopes  for  prolonging  the  war.  t  •  a 

On  18  August  1945,  the  Commander  of  the  Kwantung  Army,  in 
keeping  with  the  Emperor’s  rescript,  ordered  that  all  combat  action  be 


^abins'^f  The^ Liberation  Mission  of  the  Soviet  Union  in 
Frontiers,  Moscow,  1975  (in  Russian), 


17 


ceased.  Nevertheless,  Japanese  troops  continued  fighting  in  rtiost  areas. 
Only  on  23  August  was  resistance  stopped.  This  made  it  possible  to  sign 
the  act  of  Japan’s  surrender  on  2  September  1945  aboard  the  US  battle¬ 
ship  Aftssoan  anchored  in  Tokyo  Bay.  ,  .E  J  lU  J  t 

The  victory  over  Japan— Germany’s  main  ally— signified  the  end  ot 
World  War  II,  the  fiercest  and  most  bloody  war  in  human  history. 

The  Soviet  Union,  its  heroic  people  and  its  Armed  Forces  made  a  deci¬ 
sive  contribution  to  the  defeat  of  Japanese  militarism.  This  fact  is  of 
lasting  historic  significance.  .  _  ,Tocn 

Chinese  leaders  repeatedly  emphasised  the  importance  of  the  UbSK 
and  its  struggle  for  the  cause  of  the  Chinese  Revolution.  Mao  Zedong 
said;  "No  state  denounced  its  extraterritorial  rights  in  China.  The 
Soviet  Union  alone  did  so.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  resistance, 
no  government  of  any  imperialist  country  has  rendered  uS  real  assistance. 
The  Soviet  Union  alone  has  provided  large-scale  assistance 

with  its  people,  material  and  financial  resources.’’® 

Liu  Shaoqi  referred  to  the  great  importance  of  the  Soviet  Unions 
victory  in  the  Far  East:  "Following  its  victory  on  the  European  front, 
the  Soviet  Union,  despite  the  immense  damage  done  by  the  war,  quickly 
entered  the  war  with  Japan,  liquidated  the  Japanese  Kwantung  Army  and 
helped  China  liberate  its  North-Eastern  region.  And  no>v,  during  the 
course  of  the  present-day  people’s  liberation  war,  the  Soviet  Union  has 
continued  its  trade,  so  vital  for  us,  with  the  liberated  regions  of  the 
North-East.  The  fact  that  the  existence  of  the  mighty  Soviet  Union  and 
the  presence  of  growing  popular-democratic  forces  in  the  world  firmly 
restrain  the  major  forces  of  imperialism  is  of  particular  significance. 
Hence,  it  became  possible  to  achieve  a  swift  victory  in  the  people’s  libe¬ 
ration  war  in  China.”  ^  ,  u. 

The  Soviet  Union’s  victory  in  the  Far  East  was  not  only  a  crushing 
blow  for  Japanese  militarism,  but  also  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of 
the  peoples  of  East  and  Southeast  Asia.  The  national  liberation  movement 
began  to  develop  rapidly  in  the  region.  . 

This  victory  played  a  decisive  role  in  the  further  upsurge  of  the  Chi¬ 
nese  revolutionary  struggle.  With  the  active  support  and  assistance  of 
the  USSR,  Manchuria,  liberated  by  Soviet  troops,  turned  into  the  main 
military  and  strategic  bridgehead  of  China’s  revolutionary  forces,  into  a 
new  political' centre  of  the  Chinese  Revolution. 


F  ollowing  the  surrender  of  Japan,  China  remained  divided  into  two 
camps.  Three  quarters  of  its  territory  and  practically  all  of  its  towns 
were  controlled  by  Chiang  Kaishek  backed  up  by  a  multimillion  army. 

Like  the  rest  of  China,  Manchuria  was  also  divided  into  two  camps. 
People’s  power  headed  by  the  Communist  Party  of  China  was  actually 
established  west  of  Changchun  and  north  of  Jilin,  and  also  on  the  Liao- 
'  dong  peninsula  where  Soviet  troops  were  stationed.  People’s  democratic 
bodies  of  authority  were  set  up  on  this  vast  territory  by  the  people’s  free 
will.  These  bodies  began  preparations  for  radical  socio-economic  changes. 
The  rest  of  Manchuria  Was  controlled  by  Guomindang  forces. 

Using  as  a  pretext  the  acceptance  of  Japan’s  surrender  and  US  assi¬ 
stance  to  the  “lawful”  regime  of  Chiang  Kaishek,  the  United  States  did 


'Mao  Zedong,  “Stalin,  the  Friend  of  the  Chinese  People".  The  article  was  written 
in  1939  and  reprinted  on  20  December  1949  by  all  Chinese  newspapers. 

’  Quoted  from  the  speech  by  Liu  Shaoqi  at  the  inauguration  conference  of  the 
Sino-Soviet  Friendship  Society  on  5  October  1949  in. Peking. 


18 


everything  possible  to  prevent  the  peaceful  democratic  development  of 
China  * 

In  1945-1946,  Chiang  Kaishek’s  strategic  plan  was  to  consolidate  his 
positions  in  South  and  Central  China,  to  establish  control  over  North 
China  and  enter  Manchuria,  The  plan  counted  heavily  on  active  US 
support. 

As  early  as  October-December  1945,  Chiang  Kaishek’s  forces,  suppor¬ 
ted  by  US  army,  air  and  naval  units,  launched  an  offensive  in  Manchuria. 

The  Communist  Party  of  China  attempted  to  settle  the  question  of 
Manchuria  peacefully,  but  all  these  attempts  proved  futile  because  the 
Chiang  Kaishek  clique  stubbornly  sought  to  spread  their  dictatorship  by 
force  of  arms  to  the  North-East.  In  this  situation,  the  revolutionary  for¬ 
ces  were  compelled  to  rebuff  the  aggressive  actions  of  the  Quomindang. 

Talks  between  the  CPC  and  Quomindang  were  interspersed  with  flare- 
ups  of  civil  war.  The  Communist  Party  of  China  supported  by  the  Soviet 
Communist  Party  and  world  progressive  forces,  strove  to  create  condi¬ 
tions  for  a  democratic  reshaping  of  society  in  the  interests  of  the  Chinese 
national  liberation  movement. 

The  US-Guomindang  reactionary  forces  tried  to  slow  down  and  frust¬ 
rate  the  revolutionary  process,  to  subordinate  national  interests  to  those 
of  foreign  and  comprador  monopolies,  and  to  turn  China  into  a  bridge¬ 
head  for  the  cold  war  and  aggression. 

The  struggle  between  these  two  trends  in  China  and  in  the  interna¬ 
tional  arena  was  the  main  aspect  of  the  period  between  1945  and  1949. 
Of  course,  the  complex  diplomatic  and  political  confrontation  involved 
Manchuria  as  well.  The  issue  at  stake  was  this:  either  the  region  borde¬ 
ring  on  the  Soviet  Union  would  turn  into  a  bridgehead  of  the  Chinese 
Revolution  or  it  would  become  a  base  for  counterrevolution  and  aggres¬ 
sion. 

The  USSR  insisted  that  the  allied  commitments  towards  China  be 
fulfilled.  But  the  Western  countries  did  everything  to  evade  their  fulfil¬ 
ment. 

By  this  time  democratic  bodies  of  power  had  been  established  in  Man¬ 
churia.  In  the  later  period,  when  the  Quomindang  forces  launched  an 
offensive,  the  CPC  and  other  democratic  parties  and  organisations  repea¬ 
tedly  proposed  a  peaceful  settlement  of  the  question  of  Manchuria  based 
on  the  establishment  of  a  local  democratic  coalition  government,  but 
these  proposals  were  invariably  bluntly  declined  by  Chiang  Kaishek  who 
refused  to  enter  any  negotiations  on  the  subject. 

Addressing  the  National  Political  Council  on  1  April  1946,  Chiang 
Kaishek  declared  the  democratic  government  in  Manchuria  “unconstitu¬ 
tional".  On  9  April,  in  a  conversation  with  an  American  correspondent, 
he  said  that  he  was  resolved  to  “liquidate  the  Communist  Party”.  i< 

Relying  on  their  overwhelming  military  superiority,  the  Quomindang 
leaders  planned  swiftly  to  crush  the  resistance  of  CPC  forces  in  Manchu¬ 
ria  and  take  over  its  major  towns  and  railways.  Faced  with  the  threat 
of  the  Quomindang  reactionary  government  coming  to  power  again,  the 
Manchurian  population  liberated  by  the  Soviet  Army,  the  elected  democ¬ 
ratic  government  bodies  and  the  armed  forces  led  by  the  Communists 
rose  up  in  arms  and  resisted  stubbornly. 

The  Quomindang  attacks  were  countered  with  the  dependable  defences 
of  the  Manchurian  group  of  CPC  forces  which  by  then  had  been  regrou¬ 
ped  and  rearmed.  Very  soon,  Chiang  Kaishek’s  large-scale  offensive  in 

*  For  more  details  see:  The  Modern  History  of  China,  Moscow,  1972;  The  History 
of  Foreign  Countries  After  World  War  II,  Moscow,  1964;  The  History  of  Diplomacy, 
Vol.  V.  Book  }  Moscow,  1974;  G.  V.  Astafiev,  The  US  Intervention  in  China  and  Its 
Defeat  (1945-1949),  Moscow,  1958;  V.  I.  Glunin,  The  Third  Civil  Revolutionary  War 
in  China  (1946-1949).  An  Essay  of  Political  History,  Moscow,  1958;  A.  M.  Dubinsky, 
Op.  cit.‘,  A.  M.  Dubinsky,  Soviet -Chinese  Relations  During  the  lapanese-Chinese  War. 
1937-1945,  Moscow,  1980  (all  in  Russian). 


19 


the  liberated  regions,  including  Manchuria,  got  bogged  down.  As  soon  as 
Chiang  Kaishek  realised  that  the  onslaught  of  his  forces  in  Manchuria 
would  definitely  be  crushed,  he  declared  on  3  June,  1946  that  talks  through 
the  mediation  of  the  representative  of  the  US  administration,  George 
Marshall,  were  a  matter  of  top  priority.  Following  two  days  of  contacts 
between  Zhou  Enlai  and  George  Marshall,  on  6  June  1946  Chiang  Kai- 
shek  signed  an  order  to  cease  military  operations  in  Manchuria  for  15 
days  (from  7  to  22  June)  and  agreed  to  resume  negotiations  with  CPC 
representatives  on  all  disputed  questions. 

The  Soviet  Army’s  presence  in  Manchuria  contributed  immensely  to 
the  consolidation  of  the  Chinese  revolutionary  forces.  The  People’s  Libe¬ 
ration  Army  was  ensured  a  secure  rear  there. 

CPC-controlled  troops  underwent  rigorous  military  training,  the  peo¬ 
ple’s  volunteer  corps  was  expanded  and  equipped  with  new  weapons.  The 
transfer  of  captured  Japanese  weapons  to  the  revolutionary  forces  greatly 
increased  their  combat  potential.  Also  of  great  importance  was  the  fact 
that  Soviet  troops  were  stationed  in  major  strategic  centres,  such  as 
Port  Arthur  and  Dalny,  which  were  inaccessible  for  the  Guomindang  and 

US  forces.  .  c  . 

Faced  with  the  failure  of  its  policies  and  realising  that  the  time  factor 
was  against  Guomindang-US  domination  in  China,  the  Chiang  Kaishek 
regime  launched  a  campaign  of  anti-Soviet  hysteria  in  1946. 

Encouraged  by  Washington,  the  Guomindang  authorities  went  so  far 
in  their  hatred  for  the  Soviet  Union  as  openly  to  declare  a  “crusade 
against  the  USSR”.  They  whipped  up  war  hysteria  and  clamoured  about 
the  “Red  aggression  in  China”,  the  “threat  to  America”,  etc. 


US  policy  in  China  was  determined  by  the  general  political,  economic 
and  military-strategic  objectives  pursued  by  the  US  imperialist  circles 
in  the  Far  East  in  the  postwar  period.  This  policy  was  aimed  at  further 
strengthening  US  positions  in  China  and  at  turning  it  into  a  strongpoint 
and  a  vehicle  for  American  expansion  in  the  Far  East. 

US  intervention  in  China  pursued  the  following  objectives:  ^ 

— to  change  the  alignment  of  forces  and  rapidly  train  the  Chinese 
reactionary  forces  for  civil  war  in  order  to  crush  the  popular  democratic 
movement  in  the  country  and  restore  the  Guomindang  regime  throughout 

China;  ‘  , 

—to  turn  China  into  a  US  military  bridgehead  for  preparing  an  attack 
on  the  Soviet  Union  and  for  suppressing  the  national  liberation  move¬ 
ment  in  Asia.  ..  .  .  ^ 

In  the  first  months  after  the  end  of  World  War  II,  when  a  consider¬ 
able  number  of  Japanese  still  remained  on  Chinese  territory,  the  US  mili¬ 
tary  command  explained  the  presence  of  American  troops  in  China  by 
the  alleged  need  to  repatriate  the  remaining  Japanese.  Later,  however, 
in  August-September  1946,  the  Americans  began  to  claim  that  they  stayed 
in  China  to  “help  establish  law  and  order  in  the  country”.  Jn  other  words, 
they  openly  acknowledged  their  interference  in  China’s  internal  affairs, 
by  siding  with  the  Guomindang  regime.  _ 

Having  actually  launched  an  intervention  in  North  China,  the  US  mili¬ 
tary  command  declared  that  it  acted  with  the  agreement  of  the  Guomin¬ 
dang  government.®  ,  t  «.  • 

The  American  government  wanted  to  have  China  as  its  loyal  junior 
partner”.  President  Truman  condemned  Roosevelt,  saying  that  his  prede- 


•  See  Xinhua  ribao,  Oct.  1,  1945. 


20 


cessor  had  allowed  Stalin  too  much,  promised  him  too  much  and  helped 
him  too  much.*®  At  the  same  time  the  US  leaders  realised  that  they  could 
not  openly  break  with  the  USSR,  renounce  the  Yalta  decisions  and  declare 
that  the  ending  of  the  war  against  Japan  concerned  the  United  States 
alone.  This  was  why  Truman  began  to  look  for  another  way  of  “curbing 
Russia’s  communist  plans  as  regards  Asia”.**  He  believed  that  it  Would 
be  most  dangerous  for  the  USA  if  the  forces  of  the  USSR  and  those  of 
the  people’s  liberation  armies  joined  in  a  common  offensive  under  the 
guidance  of  Communists.  The  US  government  strove  to  consolidate  its 
ground  in  Manchuria  whatever  the  cost.  To  achieve  this  goal  they  not 
only  provided  massive  military  assistance  to  the  Guoniindang  regime, 
but  also  openly  interfered  militarily  in  North  China.  This,  of  course,  hin¬ 
dered  the  advance  of  the  Chinese  Revolution. 

In  his  memoirs,  Truman  recalls  that  seeking  to  prevent  the  surrender 
of  Japanese  troops  to  the  CPC  forces,  the  US  Ambassador  to  China, 

Patrick  Hurley,  sent  a  cable  to  Washington  proposing  that  the  Japanese 

military  command  and  their  Chinese  puppets  be  instructed  to  pass 

their  arms  exclusively  to  Chiang  Kaishek’s  government  and  to  punish  all 

those  who  gave  up  their  arms  to  Chiang  Kaishek’s  rivals.  Hurley  advised 

that  the  State  Department  include  in  the  terms  of  Japan’s  capitulation  a 

provision  saying  that  no  Japanese  arms  should  be  passed  to  the  armed  \ 

party  of  Chinese  Communists. 

On  26  September  1945,  US  news  agencies  carried  a  report  on  the 
launching  from  Ryukyu  Islands  of  a  landing  mission  comprising  two  Ame¬ 
rican  Marines  divisions.  It  was  announced  that  the  mission’s  objective 
was  to  protect  the  Tianjin  area  during  the  acceptance  of  the  Japanese 
surrender  which  was  allegedly  planned  by  the  Guomindang  command  on 
30  September  1945.*^ 

The  landing  of  the  18,000-strong  US  1st  Marines  Division  began  on 
30  September  1945  at  Tanggu,  a  sea-port  near  Tianjin.  The  same  day  its 
1,200-strong  forward  group  entered  Tianjin.  By  8  October,  American 
troops  were  landing  at  three  ports  in  North  China,  namely,  Dagu,  Tanggu 
and  Qinhuangdao,  with  over  200  naval  and  transport  vessels  concentra¬ 
ted  in  the  area.  The  US  contingent  did  not  confine  itself  to  seizing  these 

f>orts  and  Tianjin,  a  major  economic  centre  in  North  China,  but  pushed 
orward,  establishing  its  control  over  the  adjacent  '  railways 
Tianjin-Qinhuangdao-Shanghaiguan  and  Tianj in-Peking.  *® 

On  10  October  1945,  a  big  landing  force  of  US  Marines  occupied  the 
port  and  town  of  Qingdao.  Simultaneously,  a  US  airborne  force  was  drop¬ 
ped  at  Peking.** 

On  7  October  1945,  the  Commander  of  the  8th  CPC  Army,  Zhu  De, 
delivered  a  letter  to  the  US  Command  protesting  against  preparations  by 
the  USA  to  land  its  Marines  at  the  ports  of  Yingkou,  Chifu  and  Weihai- 
wei,  “in  view  of  the  fact  that  there  are  no  Japanese  troops  there  and  they 
are  entirely  controlled  by  the  forces  of  our  army”.*® 

Despite  the  protest,  US  naval  units  appeared  at  Yantai  (Chifu).  Zhu 
De  sent  a  cable  to  the  US  Command,  which  read:  “The  town  of  Yantai 
(Chifu)  was  liberated  by  our  troops  on  24  August  1945.  The  Japanese 
and  puppet  troops  there  were  disarmed.  Order  has  been  restored  in  the 
town.  There  is  absolutely  no  need  for  American  troops  to  land  in  that 
town...  In  view  of  the  above,  I  request  the  US  Command  to  order  that 


See  Modern  Studies  and  Information,  May  1945,  p.  32  (in  Japanese). 

»  Ibidem. 

“  See  Xinhua  ribao.  Sept.  28,  1945. 

»»  See  Ibid.,  9  Oct.  1945. 

“  See  Liao  Gailong,  A  Short  History  of  the  Liberation  War  of  the  Chinese  People, 
Peking,  1953,  pp.  19,  80  (in  Chinese). 

“>  See /6W.,  p.  19. 


21 


ain?an  lla^prS™  adion";  This  amounted  to  dlracl  Interterence  m 
ding  up  SS  off-airc  Thf'  US  Secretary  of  State,  Dean  Acheson,  said 

S2;f.KT;.-e'."..7i”.M 

rotor  Tato  pfltil  altegWg  that  Chlang  Kalahek-s  “laurW  pourer 
'""The’solta'l  gov°rSSl“a"d  Soviet, Command  in 

SKSiS.MMSdi'iKsrt;!;  K* 

The  U^lmperi^lists  ^wlro  acted  in  close  alliance  with  the  Chiang  Kai- 

sliss|SSS“,£HSf: 

sJE'£Sr|rf^S;l3^§SSgj 

If  ?h?  UsIr  “Saf  r  °n  their  congrafuiatory  m<«- 

Sdsii.r=ffi  s  si5 

landmark  in  world  history.  '* 


I  [fortie' 

“^Si^!.‘fti;fnrSeSAh^tote?Ui‘^rnd^^^^^^ 

Ml  in  China  and  the  peopie's  welfare  was  raised,  with  to  Soviet  Union 
and  other  socialist  countries  actively  assisting.  _  world' sin- 

cere^fre^iSaS'auSiiro7tW’llp?S..^^^^^ 

‘‘‘"fhe  sodaUst  community  countries  still  believe  that  the  vital  interests 
of  China  and  those  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  other  socialist  countries 

Quoted  from  The  History  of  China  from  Ancient  Times  to  Our  DaySi  p.i  404.  • 

See  Pravda,  Nov.  30,  1945.  .  . 

Pravda,  Oct.  1,  1985. 


22 


do  not  conflict.  On  the  contrary,  mutual  relations  of  friendship  and  com¬ 
radely:  cooperation  would  meet  such  interests  most  fully.  This  would  also  t 
correspond  to  the  vital  interests  Of  World  socialism,  and  would  consol i-  | 
date  international  security.  ,  . 

The  Soviet  Union’s  approach  to  the  PRC  is  clearly  and  precisely 
spelled  out  in  the  decisions  of  CPSU  Congresses,  Plenary  Meetings  of 
Central  Committee  and  in  speeches  by  the  General  Secretary  of  the  CC 
CPSU  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  and  other  Soviet  leaders.' All  these  documents  ' 
and,  indeed,  life  itself  show  that  the  USSR  has  done  everything  possible 
to  engage  in  constructive  dialogue.  In  his  speech  at  the  Dnepropetrovsk 
Iron-and-Steel  Works  in  June  1985,  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  General  Secretary 
of  the  CPSU  Central  Committee,  said:  “I  think  that  time  has  shown  both 
sides  that  neither  one  benefits  by  alienation,  to  say  nothing  of  unfriend¬ 
liness  and  suspicion.  But  goodneighbourly  cooperation  is  quite  possmle 
and  desirable.  As  for  us,  we  intend  actively  to  work  towards  cornpletely 
overcoming  the  negative  phase  in  Soviet-Chinese  relations,  which  has 
resulted  in  many  artificial  difficulties.  1  am  confident  that  ultimately  this 

will  happen.” :  ;■  .  _  . 

Certain  positive  shifts  have  occurred  in  Soviet-Chinese  relations  over 
recent  years.  Trade  has  expanded  and  contacts  in  sports,  science,  techno¬ 
logy  and  public  relations  have  been  growing.-  Political  consultations  ori 
bilateral  relations  are  held  and  views  are  exchanged  on  international 
problems;  All  this  corresponds  to  the  long-term  interests  of  the  struggle 
to  consolidate  the  unity  of  the  World  socialist  system,  the  internatipnal 
communist  movement  and  anti-imperialist  forces  in  various  regions,  inclu- 
dirig  Asia.  In  his  message  to  the  international  conference,  ‘‘Forty  Years 
Since  the  Victory  Over  Japanese  Militarism  and  the  Tasks  of  the  Peace 
Movement  in -Asian  and  Pacific  Countries”,  Mikhail  Gorbachev,'  General 
Secretary  of  the  CPSU  Central  Corhmittee,  stressed:  ‘‘Now  that  the  dan¬ 
ger  of  a  worldwide  nuclear-missile  catastrophe  overshadows  the  planet, 
there  is  no  more  important  and  urgent  task  than  protecting  peace  on 
earth,  the  militaristic  circles  of  imperialism  are  pursuing  an  aggressive 
policy  in  this  vast  region  of  the  globe,  hatch  up  plans  to  turn' it  into  an 
arena  of 'military  and  political  confrontation  with  the  socialist  and  many 
nonaligned  countries,  and  are  bent  on  remilitarising  Japan  and  creating 

an  aggressive  grouping  of  Washington— Tokyo— Seoul.”  “  _  _ 

*7  The  attempts  to  exacerbate  relations  between  the  USSR  and  the  PRC 
play  an  important  part  in  those  scherhes.  The  CPSU  educates  the  Soviet 
people  in  the  spirit  of  friendship  and  profound  respect  for  the  Chinese 
people,  for  their  history  and  culture,  for  their  heroic  exploits  in  the  strug¬ 
gle  for  liberation  from  foreign  oppressors,  for  revolutionary  changes^  in 
their  country.  In  their  congratulatory  message  on  the  occasion  of  the 
36th  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  PRC,  the  Presidium  of  the 
Supreme  Soviet  of  the  USSR  and  the  USSR  Council  of  Ministers  said: 
“Loyal  to  its  internationalist  duty,  the  Soviet  Union  has  constantly  sup¬ 
ported  the  j  list  cause  of  the  Chinese  working  people  and  has  always  been 
oh  their  side.”  The  defeat  by  the  Soviet  Army  of  the  milHori-strpng 
Kwantung  Army  was  the  greatest  Soviet  internationalist  contribution  to 
the  cause  of  the  Chinese  Revolution.  This  defeat  made  possible  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  a  powerful  military-revolutionary  base  of  Chinese  Coinmunists  on 
■the  territory  of  Manchuria:  The  history  of  the  struggle  for  Manchuria  m 
the  1940s  shows  clearly  who  was  and  has  remained  a  true  friend  of  the 
Chinese  people  and  who  was  and  has  remained  their  enemy. 


Prayda,  June  27»  1985. 
Pravda,  Sept.  5,  1985. 
Ibid.,  Oct.  1,  1985. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO:  1812/94  23 


JAPAN'S  DEFEAT  SEEN  AS  FACTOR  IN  ASIAN  POPULAR  REVOLUTIONS 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  26-36 

[Article  by  M.  L.  Tltarenko,  doctor  of  philosophy:  "The  Significance  of  the 
Defeat  of  Japanese  Militarism  in  the  Victories  of  the  Popular  Revolutions  in 
China,  Korea  and  Vietnam"] 

The  Soviet  people  and  all  progressive  and  peaceloving  forces  through¬ 
out  the  world  have  widely  celebrated  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  rout 
of  Japanese  militarism  and  the  victorious  end  of  World  War  Two. 

The  Central  Committee  of  the  CPSU  passed  a  resolution  “On  the  40th 
Anniversary  of  the  Victory  of  the  Soviet  People  in  the  Great  Patriotic 
War  of  1941-1945”,  which  states  that  “past  decades  have  brought  out 
even  more  vividly  and  more  fully  the  historic  significance  of  the  Soviet 
people’s  victory  in  the  Great  Patriotic  War.  The  rout  of  German  fascism 
and  then  of  Japanese  militarism  had  a  most  profound  effect  on  the  entire 
course  of  world  development.  Favourable  conditions  were  created  for  the 
struggle  of  the  working  masses  for  their  social  and  national  liberation. 

The  positions  of  progressive,  democratic,  and  peaceloving  forces  were 
strengthened  and  the  influence  of  Communist  and  Workers’  Parties  en¬ 
hanced.  The  world  socialist  system  emerged  and  has  been  developing  suc¬ 
cessfully.  The  process  of  the  disintegration  of  the  colonial  system  of  im-  • 
perialism  was  accelerated  and  ended  in  its  collapse.” ' 

The  significance  of  the  Soviet  people’s  victory  in  terms  of  its  political, 
social,  economic,  and  ideological  impact  was  described  graphically  and 
profoundly  by  the  General  Secretary  of  the  CPSU  Central  Committee, 
Mikhail  Gorbachev,  in  his  report  at  the  ceremonial  meeting  held  in  the 
Kremlin  to  mark  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  Victory,  and  in  speeches  by 
other  Soviet  leaders. 

The  Soviet  Union’s  liberating  mission  was  of  great  historic  significance 
for  the  success  of  the  popular-democratic  and  national  liberation  revo¬ 
lutions  in  China,  Korea,  and  Vietnam.  Attempts  are  being  made  by  bour¬ 
geois  and  nationalistic  historiographers  to  belittle  the  Soviet  Union’s 
role  in  the  Second  World  War,  specifically  in  its  final  stage,  and  also  the 
USSR’s  contribution  to  the  liberation  of  Asian  nations  from  the  yoke  of 
the  aggressors  and  colonialists.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more  obvious, 
however,  that  those  attempts  are  utterly  inconsistent. 

The  rout  of  nazi  Germany  and  militaristic  Japan,  which  cultivated 
chauvinism  and  racism,  made  it  possible  not  only  to  expose  and  denounce 
the  inhuman  nature  of  the  fascist  and  militaristic  ideologies,  but  also  to 
ensure  political  isolation  of  their  advocates  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  America. 

In  terms  of  political  impact,  the  rout  of  fascism  and  militarism  substan¬ 
tially  weakened  and  disorganised  counterrevolutionary  and  colonialist  for¬ 
ces  and  provided  the  prerequisites  for  successful  national  liberation  revo¬ 
lutions  in  former  colonies.  Ideologically,  the  utter  collapse  of  the  reactio¬ 
nary  and  racist  myths  of  the  fascist  and  militarist  ideologists  broadened 
the  scope  of  revolutionary  nationalism  and  brought  it  closer  to  Marxism- 

'  Kommunist,  No.  9,  1984,  p.  36  (in  Russian). 

24 


Leninism  and  the  principles  of  internationalism,  so  patriotism  and  na¬ 
tionalism  were  combined  in  national  liberation  movements.  Later,  all  this 
created  the  essential  prerequisites  for  a  gradual  transition  by  major  social 
groups,  above  all  progressive  patriotic  elements,  from  progressive  nationa¬ 
lism  and  revolutionary  democratic  principles  to  Marxism-Leninism  and 
proletarian  internationalism. 

At  the  same  time,  the  war  efforts  of  the  anti-Hitler  coalition,  plus  the 
experience  of  anti-fascist  and  anti-militaristic  resistance  in  European  and 
Asian  countries,  demonstrated  the  ever-lasting  political  significance  of 
the  unity  of  anti-imperialist  forces  for  success  in  the  liberation  struggle 
and  for  preservation  of  peace  in  future. 


The  Soviet  Union’s  decision  to  enter  the  war  against  Japan  was  com¬ 
manded  by  a  number  of  objective  factors.  The  primary  one  was  the  need 
to  bring  the  Second  World  War  to  an  end  as  soon  as  possible  and  thus 
to  save  nations  from  further  suffering.  The  Soviet  Union  was  also  guided 
by  its  sense  of  internationalist  duty  and  commitment  to  its  allies,  to  which 
it  was  always  faithful.  Another  factor  was  that  the  USSR  had  to  ensure 
the  safety  of  its  Far  Eastern  border,  and  finally,  there  was  the  need  to 
restore  historical  justice,  which  had  been  trampled  under  foot. 

The  most  graphic  and  comprehensive  proof  of  the  great  influence  exerted 
by  the  Soviet  Army’s  liberating  mission  was  the  victorious  outcome  of  the 
national  liberation  and  revolutionary  struggle  of  the  peoples  of  China, 
Korea,  and  Vietnam,  and  also  other  peoples  that  cast  off  the  yoke  of  co¬ 
lonial  oppression  in  Asia  and,  later,  on  other  continents. 

The  leadership  of  the  Communist  Party  of  China  welcomed  the  Soviet 
Union’s  entering  the  war  against  Japan.  This  is  how  the  outstanding 
Chinese  military  leader  Zhu  De  described  the  contribution  made  by  the 
Soviet  armed  forces  to  the  liberation  of  North-Eastern  China  (Manchu¬ 
ria),  “The  Soviet  Army  came  into  Manchuria,  completely  defeated  and 
destroyed  the  Kwantung  Army— the  bulwark  of  the  Japanese  militarists, 
and  thus  forced  Japanese  imperialism  to  surrender.’’ ^  The  following  com¬ 
ment  once  appeared  in  a  Chinese  newspaper,  “When  the  Soviet  Union 
moved  in  its  troops  and  Japan  Kwantung  Army  suffered  a  crushing  de¬ 
feat,  that  was  the  end  of  the  Japanese  invaders’  hopes  of  turning  Man¬ 
churia  into  a  den  in  which  to  fight  the  final  battle.  No  way  out,  except  un¬ 
conditional  surrender,  was  left.’’  ® 

It  is  now  acknowledged  in  China  that  the  bulk  of  the  CPC’s  forces 
entered  Manchuria  only  after  the  Soviet  Army  had  liberated  the  territory 
from  the  Japanese  invaders.  A  collection  of  memoirs  by  participants  in 
the  Chinese  revolution  was  published  in  1983.  The  book  cites  facts  show¬ 
ing  that  it  was  the  initiative  of  the  Soviet  military  Command  to  invigorate 
the  activities  of  the  CPC  toward  consolidating  the  popular  masses  in  Man¬ 
churia,  and  to  use  the  North-Eastern  industrial  base  to  build  up  the 
CPC's  armed  forces,  in  the  interests  of  the  Chinese  revolution. 

The  Soviet  proposals  were  examined  by  the  Politburo  of  the  CPC  CC 
on  September  16,  1945,  and  used  as  a  basis  for  a  special  resolution  adopted 
by  the  CPC  Central  Committee.  As  Liu  Shaoqi  said  at  that  meeting  the 
Central  Committee  "has  definitely  decided  to  build  a  stronghold  in  North- 
Eastern  China  and  to  do  everything  to  control  that  part  of  China...  [My 
italics.— Af.  T.]  With  revolutionary  forces  deployed  in  North-Eastern  Chi¬ 
na,  we  now  can  render  support  to  the  whole  country  and  speed  up  the 
course  of  the  Chinese  revolution.’’ 

»  Pravda,  July  21,  1949. 

•  Guangming  ribao,  Sept.  3,  1951. 


25 


With  direct  contacts  established  between  the  Soviet  Afmy  Command 
and  the  CPC  Central  Committee,  the  party’s  leadership  made  the  deci¬ 
sion  to  “strengthen  its  forces  that  hold  important  strategic  points  in 
North-Eastern  China”.  Almost  60,000  regulars  were  moved  to  Manchuria 
from  various  revolutionary  bases  and  unit  after  unit  was  urgently  sent 
there  from  the  main  body  of  the  New  4th  Corps  and  the  8th  Army,  those 
troops  exceeding  a  total  of  100,000.  More  than  half  of  the  CPC  top  lea- 
ders  came  to  Manchuria  in  those  days  for  varying  periods  of  time,  among 
them  Liu  Shaoqi,  Chen  Yun,  Gao  Gang,  Rao  Shushi,  Peng  Zhen,  Luo 
Ronghuan,  Li  Fuchun,  Zhang  Wentian,  Huang  Kecheng,  Li  Lisan,  and 

Lin  Biao.  _ 

Democratic  self-government  bodies  were  established.  They  were  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  Soviet  Command,  and  their  work  promoted  in  every  way. 
Due  to  all  this.  Communists  and  their  supporters  now  obtained  favourable 
conditions  for  their  work,  whereas  previously  many  had  been  in  prison 
and  others  had  had  to  work  underground.  Party  locals  in  Manchuria  were 
returning  to  active  work,  and  their  numbers  grew  rapidly.  The  CPC’s  ar¬ 
my  grew  notably,  and,  most  importantly,  the  new  recruits  were  mainly 
from  factory  workers. 

After  Japan’s  surrender,  the  main  task  was  to  democratise  China  and 
do  away  with  its  semi-colonial  condition.  This  work  was  greatly  impeded 
by  international  imperialism  and  imperialist-supported  reactionary  forces 
in  China.  Owing  to  that,  the  Guomindang  troops  were  able  to  regain 
control  over  three-quarters  of  Chinese  territory  and  maintain  a  several- 
million-strong  army.  With  air  and  naval  support  provided  by  US  units 
at  the  end  of  1945  the  Chiang  Kaishek  clique  attempted  to  capture  Man¬ 
churia.  The  efforts  made  by  the  CPC  to  reach  a  peaceful  settlement  of  the 
problem  were  blocked  by  the  Chiang  Kaishek  clique’s  stubborn  persistence 
in  extending  its  reactionary  and  anti-popular  dictatorship  to  North-Eas¬ 
tern  China. 

In  this  situation,  the  revolutionary  forces  had  to  start  a  rapid  concen¬ 
tration  of  reserves  in  order  to  rebuff  the  reactionary  forces.  The  Soviet 
Union  invariably  provided  moral,  political,  and  material  support  for  all 
the  forces  that  worked  to  create  the  conditions  for  a  democratic  transfor¬ 
mation  of  Chinese  society  in  the  interests  of  the  overwhelming  majority 
of  the  working  people. 

Soviet  assistance  was  of  great  importance  in  consolidating  the  revo¬ 
lutionary  forces  in  Manchuria  and  enhancing  the  role  of  the  Manchurian 
revolutionary  base  in  those  days.  This  is  graphically  proved  by  state¬ 
ments  cited  in  a  selection  of  works  by  Chen  Yun,  a  prominent  figure  in 
the  Communist  Party  of  China.  This  is  what  he  wrote  in  November  1945, 
“The  existence  of  the  Soviet  Union  undoubtedly  plays  a  decisive  role  in 
outlining  my  work  in  Manchuria...  The  primary  goal  of  Soviet  policy  is 
to  maintain  peace  in  the  Far  East  and  throughout  the  world.”  ® 

In  that  situation,  it  was  crucial  to  strengthen  the  Manchurian  revolu¬ 
tionary  base.^  The  efforts  of  the  Chinese  Communists  to  this  effect  recei¬ 
ved  material,  military,  and  political  support  from  the  Soviet  Union;  the 
USSR  also  defended  the  interests  of  the  Chinese  revolution  against  inter¬ 
national  imperialism  on  the  diplomatic  front.  As  for  the  US — Guomindang 
reactionary  forces,  they  tried  to  hold  back  and  disrupt  the  revolutionary 
processes,  to  place  China  under  the  control  of  the  Guomindang  and  fo¬ 
reign  monopolies,  and  to  make  it  a  bridgehead  for  cold  war  and  aggres¬ 
sion  not  only  against  national  liberation  revolutions  in  Asia,  but  also 
against  the  Soviet  Union. 

*  The  Spark,  Seventh  Issue,  1983,  p.  31  (in  Chinese). 

’  Chen  Yun,  Selected  Works  (1926-1949),  Peking,  1984,  p.  221  (in  Chinese). 

*  See  O.  Borisov,  The  Soviet  Union  and  the  Manchurian  Revolutionary  Base  (1945- 
1949),  I  Moscow,  1985  (in  Russian). 


26 


From  1945-1949,  Manchuria  was  a  major  object  of  complicated  interna¬ 
tional  diplomatic  and  political  struggle.  It  was  essential  to  make  Manchu¬ 
ria,  which  bordered  on  the  USSR,  a  powerful  base  for  the  Chinese  revo¬ 
lution.  Otherwise  it  would  have  turned  once  again  into  a  stronghold  of 
counterrevolutionary  and  aggressive  forces,  as  was  the  case  during  the 
rule  of  the  White  Chinese  militarists,  and  especially  the  Japanese  milita-v 
rists,  who  set  up  the  puppet  state  of  Manchukuo.  This  is  why  the  Soviet 
Union  insisted  that  the  United  States  fulfil  its  commitments  concerning 
China.  The  western  powers  and  the  Guomindang  government  made  every 
effort,  however,  to  stop  those  commitments  from  being  fulfilled. 

In  the  years  that  followed,  the  Soviet  Union  did  much  to  defend  Chi¬ 
na’s  positions  in  the  international  arena  and,  above  all,  to  prevent  US 
occupation  of  Chinese  territory.  In  September  1946,  on  behalf  of  the  So¬ 
viet  government  Andrei  Gromyko  proposed  that  the  UN  Security  Council 
discuss  the  withdrawal  of  the  United  Nations  troops  from  non-hostile 
states.  Gromyko  then  made  a  direct  reference  to  China,  saying,  “The  cur¬ 
rently  unjustified  presence  of  American  troops  in  China  and  their  inter¬ 
ference  in  China’s  internal  affairs  have  caused  a  tide  of  protest.  Protests 
are  being  expressed  by  most  diverse  strata  of  the  Chinese  public...  All 
these  voices  should  be  heeded  to;  they  cannot  be  ignored.  They  touch  upon 
an  issue  that  affects  not  only  China  and  the  United  States.’’  ^ 

To  promote  consolidation  of  China’s  positions  in  the  world  arena  and 
its  sovereignty  over  the  territories  that  the  USSR  had  fought  to  liberate 
from  the  Kwantung  Army,  the  Soviet  Union  signed  a  treaty  of  friendship 
and  alliance  with  China,  in  keeping  with  the  spirit  of  the  Yalta  Confe¬ 
rence.  The  treaty  was  concluded  as  early  as  August  14,  1945,  and  it  play¬ 
ed  a  positive  role,  restraining  the  anti-Commuriist  and  anti-Soviet  policy 
of  the  Guomindang  government  and  encouraging  the  effort  of  China’s 
democratic  and  progressive  forces.  On  August  27,  1945,  the  paper  Jiefang 
ribao,  an  organ  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee,  described  the  Soviet-Chi- 
nese  treaty  as  "an  expression  of  the  policy  of  equality  that  the  Soviet 
Union  has  always  pursued  with  regard  to  us’’.  Speaking  about  the  treaty 
and  the  bi-lateral  agreements  signed  at  that  time,  Zhou  Enlai  pointed  out 
that  they  were  fully  in  line  with  “the  interests  of  the  Chinese  people’s 
revolution".  * 

In  the  complicated  international  situation,  given  the  cold  war  policy 
launched  by  aggressive  imperialist  forces  against  the  socialist  countries, 
the  Soviet  Union  worked  to  promote  a  process  in  which  the  democratic 
and  progressive  forces  of  China  led  by  the  CPC  might  consolidate,  close 
their  ranks,  and  unite  all  possible  allies. 

In  view  of  the  acute  contradictions  within  the  Guomindang  and  of  the 
people’s  powerful  action  for  a  peaceful  democratic  renovation  of  Chiria, 
the  CPSU  backed  the  line  towards  negotiations  between  the  Communist 
Party  of  China  and  the  Guomindang,  and  termination  of  the  civil  war. 
This  enabled  the  CPC  to  win  the  support  of  the  vast  popular  masses, 
regroup  its  ranks,  and  strengthen  its  forces. 

The  United  States  pursued  a  different  course.  It  provided  massive  mi¬ 
litary  aid  to  the  Guomindang,  encouraging  it  to  escalate  the  civil  war 
and,  at  the  same  time,  sought  ways  to  increase  its  own  military  presence 
in  China,  to  occupy  it,  actually,  with  the  complicity  of  the  Chiang  K^ishek 
clique. 

The  United  States  and  its  Guomindang  henchmen  started  a  wild  cam¬ 
paign  of  slander  and  provocations  in  China  concerning  the  presence  of 
Soviet  troops  in  Manchuria.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  Soviet  units 

1  The  USSR’s  Foreign  Policy.  A  Collection  of  Documents,  Vol.  VI  (Sept.  1945— 
Feb.  1947),  Moscow,  1947,  p.  657  (in  Russian). 

•  Cao  Xizhen,  History  of  Diplomatic  Relations  Between  China  and  the  USSRt 
Shanghai,  1951,  p.  79  (in  Chinese). 


27 


stayed  on  there  at  the  insistence  of  the  CPG  leadership  and  had  to  carry 
out  a  complex  and  arduous  mission.  Their  presence  prevented  the  Ame¬ 
ricans  and  the  Guomindang  from  turning  the  region  into  their  base.  The 
Soviet  troops  actually  provided  strong  shield  for  the  Chinese  People’s  Li¬ 
beration  Army,  which  protected  the  CPC  liberated  areas  and  the  new 
democratic  processes  started  in  those  areas. 

The  significance  of  the  Soviet  assistance  in  strengthening  the  demo¬ 
cratic  revolutionary  forces  in  Manchuria  was  highly  appraised  by  Mao 
Zedong.  In  his  letter  to  Peng  Zhen,  who  was  the  CPC  CC  commissioner 
in  Manchuria  at  that  time,  Mao  Zedong  wrote,  “In  view  of  the  support 
from  our  elder  brother  [the  USSR.— Af.  T.]  and  the  development  of  our 
struggle  in  Manchuria,  Chiang  Kaishek’s  troops  have  failed  to  advance 
in  Manchuria  or  to  make  efforts  to  assume  power  there.”® 

By  the  end  of  1945,  the  CPC  forces  in  the  region  totaled  300,000.  They 
were  reorganised  into  a  United  Democratic  Army  (UDA),  which  included 
former  guerrilla  detachments  and  units  of  the  8th  Army.  When  the  Soviet 
troops  withdrew  from  Manchuria  in  1946,  the  UDA  had  well-trained  units, 
a  certain  experience,  and  modern  weapons.  By  that  time,  millions  of 
people  in  North-Eastern  China  and  all  over  ,  the  country  were  involved  in 
the  revolutionary  struggle. 

In  their  liberation  struggle,  the  people’s  army  and  the  progressive 
forces  of  China  derived  major  political  benefits  from  the  presence  of  So¬ 
viet  personnel  on  the  Chinese  Changchon  Railway  and,  after  Soviet  troops 
had  been  pulled  out  of  Manchuria,  the  presence  of  Soviet  armed  forces 
at  Port  Arthur  and  Dalny.  These  were  two  critical  strategic  points  along 
the  route  of  the  Guomindang  and  US  troops’  penetration  into  Manchuria. 
Besides,  training  was  provided  there  for  officers  of  the  revolutionary  for¬ 
ces  of  the  CPC.  US  Admiral  F.  Sherman  said  in  August  1945  that  if  Dal¬ 
ny  and  Port  Arthur  were  open  to  the  Americans  and  Chiang  Kaishek,  this 
would  totally  change  the  situation  that  emerged  in  China  after  the  war.  ‘® 
The  Guomindang  military  command  then  intended  to  conduct  a  landing 
operation  there  and  attack  the  revolutionary  forces  in  Southern  Manchu¬ 
ria  from  the  rear. 

These  factors  were  of  primary  significance,  at  that  time  and  later,  for 
the  victory  of  China’s  democratic  forces  and  the  establishment  of  the  Peo¬ 
ple’s  Republic  of  China.  Shortly  before  the  victory  of  the  people’s  revo¬ 
lution  in  China,  Mao  Zedong  pointed  out  that  the  USSR  had  come  to  the 
Chinese  Changchon  Railway  and  Port  Arthur  “not  as  an  Imperialist,  but  as 
a  socialist  force,  to  defend  common  interests”.  American  imperialism,  he 
said,  “s'tays  in  China  to  oppress,  while  the  Soviet  Union  is  at  Port  Arthur 
to  furnish  protection  against  Japanese  militarism”.  “ 

The  Soviet  Union  contributed  greatly  to  Manchuria’s  economic  resto¬ 
ration,  to  the  revival  of  its  industrial  and  transport  facilities  and  power 
stations.  The  Soviet  government  sent  a  team  of  specialists  to  Manchuria 
to  help  restore  the  railways  and  other  transport  facilities  and  to  put  them 
back  into  operation. 

The  Manchurian  revolutionary  base  was  established  and  developed  at 
a  difficult  time,  when  the  US-Guomindang  reactionary  forces,  through  po¬ 
litical  manoeuvring  and  blatant  military  threats,  raised  major  obstacles 
to  impede  the  development  of  the  revolution. 

Despite  some  military  set-backs  suffered  in  the  beginning,  the  Man¬ 
churian  United  Democratic  Army  successfully  defended  the 'liberated  ter¬ 
ritory  and  the  people’s  revolutionary  gains.  It  should  be  noted  that  for 


®  A.  M.  Oubinsky,  The  Soviet  Union’s  Mission  of  Liberation  in  the  Far  East, 
Moscow,  11966,  p.  571  (in  Russian). 

Quoted  from  O.  Borisov,  The  Soviet  Union  and  the  Manchurian...  p.  82. 

"  Quoted  from  O.  Borisov,  From  the  History  of  Soviet-Chinese  Relations  in  the 
1950s,  Moscow,  1981,  pp.  74-75  (in  Russian). 


28 


a  number  of  reasons,  the  role  of  the  Manchurian  revolutionary  base  in  the 
successful  outcome  of  the  Chinese  revolution  was,  for  a  long  time,  disre¬ 
garded  by  Soviet  and  foreign  historians.  So  we  should  be  grateful  to  our 
prominent  military  commanders  and  political  workers  who  wrote  memoirs 
about  the  Soviet  Union’s  liberating  mission  in  the  Far  East  and  pointed 
for  the  first  time  to  the  significance  of  Soviet  assistance  to  the  Chinese 
people  in  their  struggle  for  national  and  social  liberation  and,  specifically, 
to  the  historic  role  of  the  CPC  Manchurian  base.  >  o  •  i  i.-  i 

This  subject  has  been  examined  in  detail  by  a  number  of  Soviet  histo¬ 
rians.  '3  Recently  the  important  role  of  the  Manchurian  base  has  begun  to 
be  acknowledged  in  China,  too.  Indeed,  its  contribution  to  the  final  vic¬ 
tory  of  the  Chinese  people’s  struggle  in  1949  can  hardly  be  exaggerated. 

It  was  a  base  with  the  support  of  which  the  reorganised,  well-trained, 
and  reequipped  People’s  Liberation  Army,  led  by  the  CPC,  drove  away 
the  Guomindang  reactionary  forces.  A  well-substantiated  assessment  of 
the  Manchurian  base’s  role  is  now  needed  in  order  to  restore  the  histo¬ 
rical  truth  and  to  disprove  all  sorts  of  false  concepts  that  seek  to  mini¬ 
mise  the  significance  of  the  international  factor,  particularly  the  Soviet 
Union’s  role,  for  the  victory  of  the  Chinese  revolution.  The  political,  eco¬ 
nomic,  and  military  assistance  rendered  by  the  USSR  at  the  time  of  the 
establishment  and  development  of  the  Manchurian  revolutionary  base  pro¬ 
vides  more  proof  of  the  CPSU’s  and  Soviet  people’s  loyalty  to  their  in¬ 
ternationalist  duty. 

The  faise  interpretations,  widespread  in  bourgeois  historiography  con¬ 
cerning  the  Soviet  Union’s  role  in  the  rout  of  militarist  Japan  have  been 
convincingly  refuted  by  Soviet  scholars,  including  war  historians.  In 
contrast  to  those  false  concepts,  however,  a  number  of  serious  works  by 
prominent  foreign  scholars  contain  basically  objective  evaluations  of  the 
effect  produced  by  the  world  factor  on  the  development  of  the  revolution 
in  China  from  1946  to  1949.  Those  works  more  than  just  acknowledge  the 
significance  of  Soviet  assistance  to  the  Chinese  revolution;  they  also  des¬ 
cribe  it  in  sufficient  detail.Thewell-known  American  sinologist  A.  D.  Bar¬ 
nett  wrote:  “When  the  Russians  occupied  northeast  China — Manchuria— 
at  the  end  of  the  war,  the  Chinese  Communists  moved  major  elements 
of  their  forces  there,  and  the  Russians  gave  substaiitial  aid,  turning  over 
to  them  large  amounts  of  Japanese  military  materiel.  This  timely  (^sis- 
tance  was  of  critical  importance  to  the  Chinese  Communists.  [My  italics.— 
M.  T.].  It  helped  them  to  defeat  the  Nationalists  in  Manchuria,  which 
then  became  a  primary  base  for  their  nationwide  military  challenge  to  the 
Nanking  regime’’.*®  A  similar  evaluation  is  given  by  another  American^ 
sinologist,  R.  Thornton,  in  his  book  titled  China:  The  Struggle  for  Power. 
1917-1972. 

The  Chinese  revolution  proved  the  correctness  of  Lenin’s  prediction 
that  in  the  modern  age  the  success  of  a  revolutionary  movement  in  any 
country,  and  especially  in  a  country  where  the  proletariat  is  relatively 
weak,  largely  depends  on  the  assistance  and  support  the  movement  re¬ 
ceives  from  victorious  socialism,  on  the  role  socialism  is  playing  in  inter- 


'»  See  The  Finale.  2nd  edition,  Moscow,  1969;  I.  A.  Pliyev,  Across  the  Gobi  and 
the  Khingan,  Moscow,  1965;  I.  I.  Lyudnikov,  Across  the  Greater  Khingan,  Moscow,  1967. 

**  See  0.  Borisov,  The  Soviet  Union  and  the  Manchurian...  (1st  edition,  1975); 
O.  Ye.  Vladimirov,  The  Unforgettable  Pages  of  History  and  Maoist  FcUsifiers.  Moscow, 
1971;  S.  L.  Tikhvinsky,  The  History  of  China  and  Contemporaneity,  Moscow,  1976; 
A.  M.  Dubinsky,  The  Soviet  Union's  Mission...-,  A.  M.  Dubinsky,  Soviet-Chinese  Rela¬ 
tions,  1937-1945,'  Moscow,  1980;  B.  G.  Sapozhnikov,  The  People’s  Liberation  War  in 
China  (1^6-1950),  Moscow,  1984  (all  in  Russian). 

“  See  Zhu  Jianhua,  Zhao  Yinglan,  On  the  Historical  Role  of  the  Revolutionary 
Base  in  North-Eastern  China  at  the  Time  of  the  Liberation  War,  Jilin,  1984,  No.  1, 


pp.  62-68  (in  Chinese).  .  , 

See  A.  D.  Barnett,  China  and  the  Major  Powers  in  East  Asia,  Washington,  1977, 


p.  24. 


29 


national  affairs,  on  the  place  it  occupies  in  the  arrangement  of  forces  in 
the  world  arena,  and  on  the  development  of  the  universal  revolutionwy 
process  in  general.  Without  that  assistance  and  support,  a  successful  de¬ 
velopment  of  a  revolution  and  transition  to  building  socialism  is  extre¬ 
mely  difficult  if  not  impossible.  This  is  how  Mao  Zedong  put  it.  If  the 
Soviet  Union  had  not  existed,  if  victory  had  not  been  won  in  the  Second 
World  War  against  fascism,  if  Japanese  militarism  had  not  been  routed... 
then  the  international  reactionary  forces  hanging  over  our  heads  would 
surely  have  been  immeasurably  greater  than  now.  Could  we  have  won 
under  such  circumstances?  Of  course,  not.” .  i  • 
The  victorious  development  of  the  Chinese  revolution  is  not  an  iso¬ 
lated  socio-political  process.  The  liberation  movement  in  China  developed 
in  accordance  with  the  Marxist-Leninist  teaching  on  the  universal 
lutionary  process,  on  revolutions  in  colonial  and  dependent  countries.  1  he 
international  factor  has  always  been  of  major  importance  for  the  final 
victory  of  a  revolution,  and  at  certain  stages  of  it  its  significance  may  even 
predominate. 


The  operations  in  which  Korea  was  liberated  constituted  an  important 
part  of  the  successful  campaign  carried  out  by  the  Soviet  Army  in  the 

Far  East  in  August  1945.  .  .  lu  • 

The  Japanese  imperialists  gave  Korea  a  prominent  place  in  their  ex¬ 
pansionist  plans,  turning  it  into  a  springboard  for  aggressiori  against  the 
USSR  and  a  firm  centre  of  defence  So  the  Soviet  troops  that  moved  into 
Korea  met  with  a  strong  and  well-prepared  enemy. 

The  Soviet  armed  forces  successfully  carried  out  their  liberating  niis- 
sion  in  Korea.  They  stayed  there  till  the  end  of  1948,  and  showed  genuine 
internationalism,  providing  the  Communist-led  progressive  forces  with  ex- 
tensive  disinterested  assistance  in  creating  the  conditions  lavouraDife  lor 
the  establishment  of  Korea’s  state  independence  and  for  democratic  trans- 
formatidns.  In  an  address  to  the  newly-liberated  people  of  Korea,  is^ed 
on  August  15,  1945,  the  Command  of  the  25th  Army  of  the  First  Far- 
Eastern  Front,  said,  “Citizens  of  Korea!  Remember  that  your  happiness 
is  in  your  own  hands.  You  have  gained  freedom  and  independence,  and 
now  your  fate  depends  on  no  one  but  yourselves.  The  Soviet  Army  has 
created  all  the  conditions  for  the  Korean  people’s  free  constructive  work. 
The  Korean  people  should  become  the  maker  of  its  own  happiness. 

As  early  as  November  1945,  the  Soviet  Cornmand  in  Korea 
working  to  commission  the  first  industrial  facilities  there.  In  August  1946, 
it  placed  all  factories,  hydro-electric  power  stations,  banks,  and  other  fa¬ 
cilities  formerly  owned  by  Japan,  as  well  as  property  abandoned  by  the 
colonialists,  at  the  disposal  of  the  Provisional  People’s  Committee  of  North 

Korea.  .  .  ^  . 

“The  glorious  feats  accomplished  by  the  Soviet  Army  in  the  name  oi 
the  liberation  and  revival  of  our  country  will  be  remembered  forever... 
The  Korean  people  will  never  forget  the  Soviet  soldiers’  heroic  exploits. 
These  are  words  from  the  Korean  people’s  latter  to  the  Soviet  governnient 
on  the  occasion  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  Soviet  troops  from  Korea.  The 
Koreans  expressed  their  gratitude  to  their  liberators  in  monuments  and 
obelisks  put  up  in  Korea  to  honour  the  Soviet  soldiers.  ‘  .  o  i  i 

Speaking  about  the  significance  of  Korea’s  liberation  by  the  Soviet 
Army,  Kim  II  Sung  said  “Even  in  the  grimmest  days  of  Japanese  rule, 

Mao  Zedong,  On  New  Democracy,  Moscow,  1960,  p.  100  (iu  Russian). 

Relations  Between  the  Soviet  union  and  People's  Korea.  1945-1980,  Documents 
and  Materials,  Moscow,  1981,  pp.  6-7,  63-64  (in  Russian). 


30 


the  true  patriots  of  Korea  found  a  source  of  strength  in  the  growing  might 
of  the  great  Soviet  Union  and,  seeing  in  it  its  liberator,  fought  with  un¬ 
bending  fortitude  and  persistence. 

“Korea’s  liberation  by  the  Soviet  Army  initiated  a  new  era  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  our  country.  A  broad  road  of  national  independence  and  demo¬ 
cratic  development  opened  up  before  the  Korean  people.”  ** 


The  Soviet  Union’s  victory  over  militaristic  Japan  was  of  tremendous 
significance  for  the  Vietnamese  revolution,  though  the  Red  Army  did 
not  move  into  Vietnam  as  it  had  into  China  and  Korea.  The  first  President 
of  independent  Vietnam,  Ho  Chi  Minh,  pointed  out,  “The  rout  of  Hitler’s 
fascists  and  the  Japanese  militarists  by  the  Soviet  Army  was  the  factor 
that  helped  our  victory  in  August  1945  more  than  anything  else.” 

In  early  August  1945,  a  revolutionary  situation  emerged  in  Vietnam, 
where  a  Japanese  occupation  regime  had  actually  been  established  since 
March  1945.  The  Communists  controlled  a  rather  vast  area  and  were  pre¬ 
paring  the  working  people  for  a  general  uprising  to  gain  national  inde¬ 
pendence.  When  the  Soviet  Union  entered  the  war  against  Japan,  this  ins¬ 
pired  the  revolutionary  masses  in  Vietnam  to  a  liberation  struggle  and 
undermined  the  morale  of  the  Japanese  troops  in  Indochina,  which  began 
to  surrender. 

On  August  13,  the  Politburo  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Commu¬ 
nist  Party  of  Indochina,  headed  by  Ho  Chi  Minh,  convened  a  party  con¬ 
ference.  The  conference  thoroughly  analysed  the  international  situation 
and  the  situation  in  Vietnam  itself  and  decided  to  start  a  general  uprising 
to  seize  political  power.  The  conference  also  formed  a  committee  to  lead 
the  nation  in  the  uprising  and,  on  the  same  day,  the  committee  issued  an 
order  that  said:  “Our  main  enemy  is  defeated.  The  hour  has  struck  for 
a  general  uprising.”  On  August  16,  a  National  People’s  Congress  opened 
in  a  liberation  area.  It  formed  a  National  Liberation  Committee,  headed 
by  Ho  Chi  Minh.  By  that  time  the  Japanese  authorities  in  Hanoi  had  of¬ 
ficially  announced  Japan’s  surrender  and  the  transfer  of  “all  power”  to 
the  North  Vietnamese  vice-regent  of  the  Emperor  of  Vietnam.  So  the 
Japanese  military  who  constituted  the  only  force  at  that  time  that  could 
keep  the  Vietnamese  Communists  from  assuming  political  power,  laid 
down  their  arms.  The  revolutionary  movement  spread  from  the  liberated 
area  all  over  the  country.  On  August  19,  a  people’s  government  was  es¬ 
tablished  in  Hanoi,  on  August  23,  in  the  Emperor’s  capital  of  Hue,  and 
on  August  25,  in  Saigon.  It  took  twelve  days  to  establish  a  people’s  go¬ 
vernment  almost  throughout  Vietnam.  At  a  mass  rally  in  Hanoi  on  Sep¬ 
tember  2,  Ho  Chi  Minh  announced  the  establishment  of  the  Democratic 
Republic  of  Vietnam.  “After  the  Soviet  Union  routed  the  Japanese  fas¬ 
cists”,  Le  Duan  pointed  out,  “the  party  opportunely  led  the  people  in  a 
revolt  to  seize  power  on  the  national  scale.”  2° 

In  those  days,  the  Vietnamese  Communists  showed  a  genuinely  Leni¬ 
nist  attitude  to  armed  uprising  as  an  art.  They  chose  a  good  time  for  it, 
when  the  Soviet  Army  had  crushed  the  number-one  enemy  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion,  united  the  bulk  of  the  Vietnamese  population  under  the  slogan  of 
national  independerice,  and  established  a  sovereign  Democratic  Republic 
of  Vietnam,  That  victory  was  quite  easy;  in  many  provinces  the  new  go¬ 
vernments  were  formed  and  proclaimed  at  rallies.  This  was  made  possible, 

**  Kim  II  Sung.  Selected  Articles  and  Speeches.  Moscow,  1962,  p.  326  (in  Russian). 
'  Ho  Chi  Minh,  On  Lenin,  Leninism  and  the  Inviolable  Soviet-Vietnamese  Friend¬ 
ship,  Selected  Articles  and  Speeches,  Moscow,  1970,  pp.  114-115  (in  Russian). 

Le  Duan,  Selected  Articles  and  Speeches,  Moscow,  1975,  p.  176  (in  Russian). 


31 


above  all,  by  the  Soviet  forces’  victories  in  the  Far  East.  Modern  histo¬ 
rians  in  Vietnam  point  out  that  following  the  Japanese  surrender  “there 
emerged  a  very  rare  opportunity  for  the  fast  and  almost  bloodless  victory 
of  the  August  revolution’’. 

In  his  speech  at  the  ceremonial  meeting  on  the  40th  anniversary  of 
the  Soviet  people’s  victory  in  the  Great  Patriotic  War,  Mikhail  Gorbachev 
pointed  out,  “Our  Victory  has  not  receded  into  the  past.  It  is  a  living 
Victory,  related  to  the  present  and  the  future.’’ 

The  lessons  taught  and  learned  in  the  course  of  the  rout  of  militaristic 
Japan  may  be  summed  up  as  follows: 

1.  Militaristic  Japan’s  aggression  against  China  and  other  Asian  na¬ 
tions  was  a  result  of  acute  imperialist  contradictions;  it  stemmed  from  the 
policy  of  utter  connivance,  pursued  by  the  ruling  quarters  of  the  United 
States,  Britain,  and  France  in  collaboration  with  Germany— something 
similar  to  the  Munich  deal  in  Europe.  In  the  East,  as  earlier  in  the  West, 
the  imperialist  powers  were  at  work  to  guide  the  aggressor  into  war 
against  progressive  revolutionary  forces.  In  Europe,  the  governments  of 
Britain,  France,  and  the  United  States  had  pushed  Germany  primarily  east¬ 
wards,  into  war  against  the  USSR.  Later,  in  Asia,  they  adopted  an  atti¬ 
tude  of  connivance,  thereby  encouraging  Japan  in  its  aggressive  aspira¬ 
tions,  and  made  efforts  to  guide  its  expansionist  policy  against  the  USSR 
and  national  liberation  movements  in  Asia,  above  all  in  China. 

2.  Just  like  nazism  in  Europe,  Japan’s  fascist  and  militaristic  doctrine 
grew  on  the  ideological  soil  of  anti-communism  and  anti-Sovietism. 

3.  The  Soviet  Union  has  always  demonstrated  a  class-conscious  and 
internationalist  approach  to  the  analysis  of  world  developments  and  to 
the  war  danger.  So  it  has  never  identified  the  reactionary  ruling  quarters 
of  countries,  even  the  culprits  of  aggression,  with  the  working  masses  of 
those  countries.  Never  has  it  linked  the  treacherous  policies  of  the  corrupt 
ruling  circles  of  the  countries  which  were  subject  to  aggression  but  took 
an  anti-Soviet  stand  just  the  same,  with  the  working  people  in  those  coun¬ 
tries,  who  fought  justly  for  liberation.  That  was  the  approach  taken  by 
the  Soviet  Union  in  the  1930s-1940s  with  regard  to  China  and  Japan. 
That  was  why  the  USSR’s  hero  Richard  Sorge  enjoyed  the  support  of  pat¬ 
riotic  and  progressive  forces  in  Japan,  who  sympathised  with  the  USSR 
and  realised  that  militarist  and  aggressive  line  threatened  their  country. 
That  approach  was  also  evident  when  the  Soviet  people  carried  out  its 
internationalist  mission  of  helping  China  against  Japanese  aggression. 
Hundreds  of  Soviet  pilots  flew  combat  missions  in  China,  defending  its 
towns  and 'Villages,  its  civilians  against  Japanese  air  attacks.  Prominent 
Soviet  commanders  trained  Chinese  military  personnel  to  fight  against 
the  aggressors. 

4.  The  Soviet  Union’s  revolutionary  solidarity  with  the  Asian  nations’ 
liberation  struggle,  as  well  as  its  moral,  political,  and  material  support 
for  that  struggle  laid  solid  foundations  for  friendship  and  cooperation 
between  those  nations  and  the  USSR.  We  are  certain  that  no  zigzags  of 
history,  no  subjectivistic  misinterpretations  or  falsifications,  and  no  one’s 
attempts  to  besmirch  the  genuinely  internationalist  liberating  mission  of 
the  Soviet  Union  and  the  deep  roots  of  its  friendship  with  the  peoples  of 
China,  Korea,  Vietnam,  and  other  Asian  countries,  can  ever  make  the 
world  forget  what  the  great  Soviet  people  did  to  promote  the  rise  of  the 
liberation  movement  and  the  victorious  outcome  of  the  revolutions  in 
Asian  states, 

The  Soviet  Union’s  liberating  mission  in  the  Far  East  served  to  pro¬ 
vide  the  prerequisites  favourable  for  a  people’s  revolution  in  China 

The  History  of  the  August  Revolution,  Hanoi,  1973,  p.  161. 

M.  S.  Gorbachev,  The  Immortal  Feat  of  the  Soviet  People,  Moscow,  1985,  p.  3 
(in  Russian). 


32 


»pearheaded  against  feudalism,  the  comprador  system,  and  the  Guomin- 
dang  reaction.  Following  that  revolution,  the  People’s  Republic  of  China 
was  established,  and  the  revolution  itself  started  evolving  into  a  socialist 
one.  Similar  processes  took  place  in  Korea  and  Indochina,  where  new  states 
appeared:  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  the  Democratic 
Republic  of  Vietnam  (now  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Vietnam),  the  Lao 
People’s  Democratic  Republic,  and  later,  the  People’s  Republic  of  Kam¬ 
puchea. 

5.  The  rout  of  militaristic  Japan  in  Asia  and  the  victory  over  nazi 
Germany  in  Europe  substantially  altered  the  political  map  and  changed 
the  alignment  of  forces  in  favour  of  peace,  progress,  and  socialism. 

Observing  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  rout  of  Japanese  militarism  and 
holding  sacred  the  memory  of  those  killed  in  the  fighting  for  justice,  we 
are  analysing  the  lessons  of  history  in  order  to  warn  nations  of  the  need 
to  redouble  their  vigilance  against  new  intrigues  contrived  by  aggressive 
imperialist  forces  in  the  Far  East  and  Asia-Pacific  region. 

In  the  imperialist  world,  certain  forces  still  remain  and  are  at  work 
that  have  not  only  buried  the  lessons  of  World  War  Two  in  oblivion  but 
also  want  to  reverse  the  course  of  history  to  their  own  benefit  and  to  take 
class  revenge. 

The  most  negative  factor  in  the  current  developments  in  the  region  is 
the  escalation  of  the  efforts  of  the  United  States  and  its  allies  to  gain 
military  superiority  over  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  socialist  community, 
and  to  restrict  their  influence  in  Asia.  Moreover,  a  trend  is  emerging  to 
disregard  the  USSR  as  an  Asia-Pacific  power  and  to  isolate  it.  Washing¬ 
ton  is  pushing  a  plan  to  build  a  US  “security  belt”  in  the  Far  East  and  the 
Pacific  region.  Under  this  plan,  not  only  Japan  and  South  Korea,  but  also 
Australia,  New  Zealand,  the  ASEAN  nations,  and  Taiwan  are  expected  to 
engage  in  foreign-policy  and  military  cooperation  with  the  United  States 
as  allies. 

Recently,  the  US  and  Japan,  and  also  Australia,  Canada,  and  some 
ASEAN  countries  have  been  actively  discussing  the  establishment  of  what 
is  termed  a  “Pacific  community”,  a  sort  of  Common  Market  for  Asia. 
Washington  has  been  trying  to  link  these  plans  to  its  global  strategy  of 
struggle  against  socialism  and  national  liberation  processes. 

The  world  situation  is  now  tense,  and  the  CPSU,  in  close  cooperation 
with  other  fraternal  parties  and  countries,  is  working  hard  to  unite  all 
peaceloving  forces  to  oppose  the  policy  of  the  arms  race  and  aggression 
pursued  by  the  warlike  forces  of  American  imperialism  and  its  allies. 

The  situation  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  could  be  improved  and  tension 
eased  by  putting  into  effect  Mikhail  Gorbachev’s  call  to  the  Asian  nations 
and  the  peaceloving  public  of  the  continent  to  show  a  comprehensive  ap¬ 
proach  to  the  problems  of  security  in  Asia  and  to  seek  specific  ways  of 
pooling  efforts  to  that  end.  The  Soviet  Union  wants  good  relations  with 
all  states,  and  certainly  with  its  Asian  neighbours,  including  Japan  and 
China. 

Two  major  events  that  have  promoted  the  consolidation  of  peace  and 
stability  in  Asia  were  the  recent  visits  to  the  USSR  by  Prime  Minister 
Rajiv  Gandhi  of  India  and  a  party  and  government-  delegation  of  the  So¬ 
cialist  Republic  of  Vietnam,  led  by  Le  Duan. 

The  USSR  proceeds  from  the  assumption  that  normalisation  of  Soviet- 
Chinese  relations  would  be  a  major  factor  for  improving  the  world  si¬ 
tuation  in  general.  We  believe  that  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  could 
play  an  important  role  in  making  the  climate  in  Asia  healthier. 

The  Soviet  Union,  true  to  its  highly-principled  internationalist  course, 
has  been  making  persistent  efforts  towards  genuine  normalisation  of  re¬ 
lations  with  the  PRC.  This  course  was  reaffirmed  at  the  plenary  meetings 
of  the  CPSU  Central  Committee  held  in  March  and  April  1985,  and  during' 


33 


the  Soviet-Chinese  talks  conducted  m  Moscow  from  July  9  ^  1985.  In 

his  speech  on  June  26,  1985,  the  General  Secretary  o!  the  CPSU  Central 
Committee,  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  pointed  out  that  time  had  shown  both 
sides— China  and  the  Soviet  Union— that  “dissociation  and,  moreover,  un¬ 
friendliness  and  suspiciousness  benefit  neither  of  them,  and  goodneigh- 
bourly  cooperation  is  quite  possible  and  advisable.  We,  for  our  part,  are 
determined  to  work  actively  to  completely  overcome  the  negative  stretch 
in  Soviet-Chinese  relations,  which  engendered  a  great  deal  of  artificial 
difficulties.  I  am  certain  that,  in  the  end,  this  is  how  it  will  be  . 

The  Soviet  Union’s  constructive  peace  initiatives  open  up  opportunities 
for  solving  the  complex  international  problems  in  the  Far  East,  as  well 
as  in  other  regions,  not  through  confrontation  but  through  equal  negotia¬ 
tions  and  mutual  inderstanding.  At  the  same  time,  they  mobilise  nations 
for  a  strong  rebuff  to  the  aggressive  aspirations  of  imperialism  and  to 
any  encroachments  on  the  security  and  independence  of  the  nations  in  the 


Explaining  the  essence  of  the  Soviet  initiatives  concerning  a  compre¬ 
hensive  approach  to  the  problems  of  security  in  Asia,  Mikhail  Gorbachev 
said,  “It  is  especially  appropriate  to  stress  the  necessity  of  struggle 
against  the  intrigues  of  imperialism  and  reaction  in  Asia,  now  that  the 
peoples  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  along  with  all  progressive  humanity, 
are  observing  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  victory  over  Japanese  militarism. 
The  growing  activity  of  the  anti-war  forces  in  this  region  is  a  convincing 
indicator  of  the  ever  growing  concern  of  the  public  in  the  countries  of 
Asia  over  the  fate  of  the  world.”®'* 

When  observing  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  victory  over  Japanese 
militarism,  we  turn  again  and  again  to  the  lessons  and  experience  of  the 
last  war.  The  main  conclusion  here  is  that  we  must  act  against  a  new 
war  before  it  breaks  out.  The  Soviet  people,  engaged  in  peaceful  construc¬ 
tion,  in  view  of  the  27th  CPSU  Congress,  have  focused  all  their  thoughts 
on  fulfilling  the  Party’s  plans,  on  coping  with  the  key  priorities  In 
speeding  up  the  country’s  economic  development.  At  the  same  time,  the 
Soviet  people  are  vigilantly  following  the  development  of  the  complex 
and  contradictory  international  situation  and  doing  everything  possible 
to  consolidate  the  defence  potential  of  the  USSR. 

Taking  into  account  the  lessons  of  World  War  Two,  the  CPSU  and 
the  Soviet  government  are  doing  everything  they  can  to  safeguard  and 
strengthen  peace  and  to  save  humanity  from  the  danger  of  a  nuclear  holo¬ 
caust.  The  Soviet  people’s  selfless  work,  and  the  economic,  scientific,  tech¬ 
nological,  and  military  might  of  the  USSR  are  the  primary  factor  in  safe¬ 
guarding  peace  and  restraining  the  aggressors. 


M.  S.  Gorbachev,  To  Act  Vigorously,  Not  to  Lose  Time,  Moscow,  1985,  p.  23 
(in  Russian). 

»  Praoda,  Aug.  30,  1985. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


CSO:  1812/94 


34 


SCIENTIFIC  CONFERENCES  ON  40TH  ANNIVERSARY  OF  END  OF  WORLD  WAR  II 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  In  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  37-50 

[Reports  by  M.  M.  Ze3malov  and  F.  Lappo  on  conferences  commemorating  World 
War  II  victory  and  stipulating  current  objectives  of  Asia-PacifiC  peace 
movement] 


The  international  conference  devoted  to  the  40th  anniversary  of  the 
victory  over  militarist  Japan  and  the  tasks  facing  the  peace  movement 
in  Asian  and  Pacific  countries  had  become  a  major  forum  marking  the 
jubilee  of  the  great  victory.  It  was  convened  on  the  initiative  of  the  So¬ 
viet  Afro-Asian  Solidarity  Committee,  the  Soviet  Peace  Committee,  other 
public  organisations  and  academic  institutions  of  the  Soviet  Union.  The 
conference  aroused  lively  interest  among  broad  strata  of  the  public 
abroad.  Along  with  Soviet  war  veterans,  prominent  party  functionaries 
and  statesmen,  scholars  and  writers,  it  was  attended  by  representatives 
of  political  parties,  anti-war  movements,  scientific  and  religious  centres 
from  dozens  of  countries,  as  well  as  delegations  of  international  democ¬ 
ratic  organisations.  The  Conference  examined,  logically  and  consistently, 
the  developments  of  the  concluding  stage  of  World  War  II,  i.  e.,  the  rout 
of  Japanese  militarism,  the  postwar  development  of  the  former  colonial 
and  dependent  countries  of  Asia,  and  the  present-day  situation  on  the 
continent  and  in  the  Pacific. 

The  participants  ■  in  the  Conference  warmly  welcomed  the  wise  and 
encouraging  message  by  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  General  Secretary  of  the 
CPSU  Central  Committee.  This  political  document  reaffirmed  the  clear 
and  unshakable  line  of  the  Communist  Party  and  the  Soviet  government 
aimed  at  curbing  the  arms  race  and  averting  a  nuclear  war.  It  also  don- 
tained  major  initiatives  and  proposals  by  the  Soviet  Union  geared  to 
establish  peace  and  an  atmosphere  of  confidence  and  cooperation  among 
the  countries  of  Asia  and  the  Pacific.  o 

V.  Orlov,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Presidium  of  the  USSR  Supreme 
Soviet  delivered  a  report  at  the  conference.  He  pointed  out  that  1985  was 
marked  by  many  important  events  for  every  country  and  nation.  How¬ 
ever,  to  the  whole  of  peaceful  mankind  it  was  primarily,  notable  as  the 
40th  anniversary  of  the  defeat  of  Hitlerite  fascism  and  Japanese  milita¬ 
rism  and  the  end  of  World  War  II. 

When  the  Japanese  brasshats  began  implementing  their  aggressive 
designs  several  years  before  the  beginning  of  World  War  II,  the  Soviet 
Union,  firmly  following  Lenin’s  behests,  consistently  favoured  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  an  efficient  system  of  collective  security  both  in  Europe  and 
in  Asia,  and  firmly  proposed  blocking  the  aggressive  ambitions  of  Japa- 


35 


nese  militarism.  The  USA,  Britain  and  France  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the 
warnings  given  by  the  Soviet  government  and  refused  to  take  part  in 
jointly  rebuffing  the  aggressor.  On  December  7,  1941,  the  USA  became 
victim  of  a  Japanese  attack.  Subsequently,  Japanese  troops  occupied  a 
large  part  of  China  and  approached  the  border  with  India.  The  Japanese 
militarists  were  waiting  for  the  right  moment  to  launch  an  attack 
against  the  USSR. 

It  took  considerable  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  countries  of  the  anti- 
Hitler  coalition  to  repulse  the  Japanese  aggression.  Patriots  of  China, 
Korea,  Vietnam,  Indonesia,  the  Philippines  and  other  countries  of  the 
Asian-Pacific  region  fought  courageously  against  the  Japanese  invaders, 
thereby  bringing  their  liberation  day  closer.  The  Communists  and  prog¬ 
ressive  forces  of  Japan  made  their  contribution  to  the  struggle  against 
the  fascist-militaristic  regime.  The  Soviet  Union,  loyal  to  its  allied  com¬ 
mitments,  declared  war  on  Japan  to  accelerate  the  rout  of  Japanese  mili¬ 
tarism.' The  USSR,  its  heroic  people  and  its  valiant  armed  forces  bore  the 
brunt  of  the  Second  World  War,  played  a  decisive  part  in  the  defeat  of 
Hitler’s  Germany,  and  later  of  militaristic  Japan,  the  speaker  stressed. 
It  was  precisely  the  Soviet  Army,  in  combat  cooperation  with  the  Mongo¬ 
lian  People’s  Revolutionary  Army,  that  delivered  a  crushing  blow  to  the 
Kwantung  Army  and  forced  Tokyo  to  surrender.  The  collapse  of  Japanese 
militarism  saved  the  Asian  peoples  from  untold  sufferings.' 

The  rout  of  militaristic  Japan  by  the  Soviet  Army,  the  liberation  of. 
Northeast  China  and  North  Korea,  and  the  victorious  end  to  the  war 
were  epoch-making  events  with  an  extremely  profound  impact  on  the 
destinies  of  mankind,  and  on  subsequent  socio-political  processes  in  the 
world. 

A  new  chapter  opened  up  for  the  peoples  of  Asia  who  were  given 
the  real  opportunity  to  radically  change  their  destinies.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  but  for  the  victory  won  by  the  Soviet  Union,  colonial  domination  in 
Asia  would  have  ended  much  later,  demanded  more  privations  and 
claimed  many  more  victims.  Moreover,  the  moral,  political  and  material 
assistance  given  by  the  world’s  first  socialist  country  largely  predetermi¬ 
ned  the  outcome  of  the  courageous  struggle  waged  by  the  Asian  peoples, 
making  it  irreversible.  One  after  another,  independent  national  states 
began  to  sprout  up  on  the  ruins  of  colonial  empires.  The  peoples  of  China, 
North  Korea  and  Vietnam  embarked  upon  the  path  of  socialism. 

Touching  upon  the  current  situation  on  the  continent,  V.  Orlov  empha¬ 
sised  that,  at  present,  the  policies  of  the  imperialist  forces  are  spearhea¬ 
ded  at  destabilising  and  aggravating  the  situation  in  Asia.  Under  false 
pretexts  of  “ensuring  the  security”  of  Asian  countries,  the  USA  has  been 
grossly  interfering  in  their  internal  affairs,  whipping  up  hotbeds  of  ten¬ 
sion,  declaring  whole  regions  to  be  spheres  of  its  vital  interests  and 
establishing  a  network  of  military  bases  and  strongholds  throughout 
Asia.  The  revival  of  militaristic  trends  in  Japan’s  policy,  and  the  expan¬ 
sion  of  its  military  and  political  cooperation  with  the  USA  and  NATO 
cause  deep  concern.  An  analysis  of  the  contemporary  political  situation 
in  Asia  warrants  the  conclusion  that  the  world’s  biggest  continent,  in 
which  over  50  per  cent  of  mankind  lives  is  seriously  threatened  by  impe¬ 
rialist  forces  headed  by  the  United  States.  These  forces  are  openly  out 
to  turn  Asia,  after  Europe,  into  a  theatre  of  nuclear-missile  confrontation 
with  the  countries  of  the  socialist  community.  The  threat  hanging  over 
Asia  dictates  the  urgent  need  for  efficient  measures  to  rebuff  the  self- 
styled  claimants  to  world  domination  and  ensure  stability  and  peace  on 
the  continent. 

The  constructive  initiatives  of  Mongolia,  the  Democratic  People’s  Re¬ 
public  of  Korea,  Vietnam,  Laos,  Kampuchea  and  Afghanistan  serve  the 
noble  goal  of  ridding  Asia  from  wars  and  conflicts.  The  peaceloving 


36 


foreign  policy  of  India,  the  leader  of  the  nonaligned  movement,  is  a  major 

'“The°nlwSt"propMals  put  forward  by  Mikhail  Qorbachev,  General 
Secretary  of  the  C&U  Central  Committee,  durin^g  his  talks  ^nm 

AsT‘lTd%he  wioie  world  remember  the  terrible  events 

cal  climate  in  the  Asian-Pacific  regiom  stressed  the  decisive  part 

plard‘by'thrsSjS  uS  In  defeating  Hi«'"‘!L, ‘“o^^UmSs  oi’rmany 

lilisissssssiis. 

Arrny.  ,>rtnfprpnre  P  Zhilin,  Corresponding  Member  of 

the  USSR  toderrry  of  Science^  noted  that  when  UniOg"  e“?: 

ensure  the  security  of  the  rar  Southeast  Asia  in  their  struggle 

der  assistance  to  the  peoples  of  Ea  nntinnal  independence  and 

for  liberation  from  fore  gn  red  new  m  on  the 

freedom.  The  war  in  /he  Far  East  required  new  m^j^ 
part  of  the  Soviet  Pfople,  the  Communist  Pa  ty  tn  a 

W  Central  Committee  of  the  CPSU  ^rriount  of  work 

the  General  Headquarters  from  the  West  to 

aimed  at  a  strategic  regrouping  history  The  entry  of  the  Soviet 

the  East  on  a  scope  unknown  Sr’s  surren^  were  major 

Union  into  the  war  against  Japan  and  the  1  ^^u 

events  which  were  of  decisive  g  rlefeat  of  the  million-strong 

World  War  in  the  Far  East  J^^.^irild  Ind  equipped  group  of 

Kwantung  Army,  which  was  \he J>esUrain^  means  of  further  waging 
Tokyo’s  land  forces  deprived  Japan  oi  its  m  stressed  that  without 

t 

“^n‘hls  sjSiraUhrcinteen  Professor  M.  Titarenko,  Director  of 


37 


the  Institute  of  Far  Eastern  Studies  of  the  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences, 
spoke  of  the  importance  of  the  defeat  of  Japanese  militarism  for  the 
triumph  of  popular  revolutions  in  China,  Korea,  Vietnam  and  other  Asian 
countries.  M.  Titarenko  pointed  out  that  the  Soviet  Union’s  revolutionary 
solidarity  with  the  liberation  struggle  of  the  Asian  peoples,  the  moral, 
political  and  material  assistance  given  to  this  struggle  by  the  Soviet 
Union  laid  firm  foundations  for  the  Soviet  Union’s  friendship  and  coope¬ 
ration  with  the  peoples  of  those  countries.  (See  Professor  M.  Titarenko’s 
report  on  pp.  23-36  of  this  issue). 

Addressing  the  meeting  in  Moscow  on  May  8,  1985,  devoted  to  the 
40th  anniversary  of  the  Soviet  people’s  victory  in  the  Great  Patriotic 
War,  Mikhail  Gorbachev  emphasised:- “Our  Victory  has  not  receded  into 
the  past.  This  is  a  living  victory  belonging  to  the  present  and  to 
the  future.”  The  international  conference  in  Khabarovsk  and  its  results 
graphically  confirmed  the  correctness  of  these  words.  Turning  to  the  tra¬ 
gic  lessons  of  the  Second  World  War  Li  Sang  Ho,  a  public  figure  from 
the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  Belikten,  Editor-in-Chief  of 
the  Party  Life  magazine  from  Mongolia,  Lieutenant-General  K.  Kalashni¬ 
kov,  a  veteran  of  the  Great  Patriotic  War,  A.  Gilbert  of  Great  Britain,  a 
veteran  of  the  anti-fascist  struggle  in  Spain,  and  many  others  touched 
upon  the  present-day  fears  harboured  by  the  peoples,  resolutely  condem¬ 
ned  the  imperialist  nuclear  madmen  who  are  pushing  mankind  towards 
holocaust,  and  passionately  called  for  the  unity  of  all  forces  of  peace  in 
the  confrontation  against  that  terrible  threat. 

Many  participants  in  the  Conference  did  not  conceal  their  concern 
while  talking  of  the  rebirth  of  Japanese  militarism  which,  as  was  the  case 
40  years  ago,  may  threaten  the  peaceful  life  of  the  peoples  of  East 
Asia.  Public  representatives  from  the  Philippines,  the  Democratic  Peo¬ 
ple’s  Republic  of  Korea,  Vietnam,  Bangladesh  and  other  countries  pointed 
to  the  growing  military  partnership  between  the  USA  and  Japan,  and  the 
attempts  to  set  up  a  militaristic  Washington — Tokyo — Seoul  alliance.  The 
speeches  made  by  representatives  of  the  democratic,  peaceloving  forces 
of  Japan,  who  took  part  in  the  Khabarovsk  Conference,  were  listened  to 
with  great  attention.  Kumao  Terada,  Deputy  of  the  Chamber  of  Council¬ 
lors  of  tl^e  Japanese  Diet  from  the  Socialist  Party^  told  the  audience  of 
the  struggle  waged  by  the  progressive  forces  of  his  country  for  the  comp¬ 
lete  observance  of  the  peaceful  constitution  and  the  latter’s  three  non¬ 
nuclear  principles.  He  also  pointed  to  the  direct  involvement  of  the  USA 
in  the  remilitarisation  of  Japan  and  in  pushing  the  latter  onto  the  dange¬ 
rous  path  of  confrontation  with  the  Soviet  Union.  Kumao  Terada  stress¬ 
ed  that  the  progressives  deem  it  their  main  task  to  prevent  the  rebirth  of 
Japanese  militarism,  thus  making  their  contribution  to  the  cause  of  defen¬ 
ding  peace  throughout  the  world.  Koji  Sugimori,  General  Secretary  of 
the  Japanese  Association  of  Cultural  Ties,  speaking  of  the  reasons  for  the 
unprecedented  international  tension,  pointed  to  the  “invariable  lead  of 
the  USA — from  Truman  to  Reagan — in  the  nuclear  arms  race”.  He  highly 
appreciated  the  decision  of  the  Soviet  Union  to  end  all  nuclear  tests  as 
from  August  6,  1985.  At  the  same  time,  Japanese  representative,  appa¬ 
rently  reflecting  the  views  of  a  certain  section  of  the  Japanese  public, 
stated  that  the  Soviet  Union  should  unilaterally  declare  a  broad  prog¬ 
ramme  of  arms  reduction.  In  the  opinion  of  Sugimori,  such  unilateral 
measures  would  allegedly  fetter  the  US  military-industrial  complex.  Such 
a  simplified  and  naive  view  on  the  most  complex  issue  of  our  day  and 
age  is  not  supported  among  those  who  seriously  contemplate  the  problems 
of  disarmament  and  military  detente.  It  has  been  generally  recognised 
that  it  is  the  principle  of  equality  and  the  equal  security  of  the  sides  that 
serves  as  a  firm  basis  and  a  time-tested  criterion  for  possible  measures 
in  the  field  of  disarmament  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  USA,  the 


38 


Warsaw  Treaty  and  the  NATO  bloc.  Any  violation  of  this  principle,  the 
more  so  when  Washington  openly  declares  its  line  towards  achieving 
’  military  superiority  over  the  USSR,  would  be  fatal  to  the  destiny  of  man¬ 
kind.  This  is  also  seen  from  the  lessons  of  the  Second  World  War. 

In  his  speech  G.  Kim,  Corresponding  Member  of  the  USSR  Academy 
of  Sciences,  dealt  with  the  results  of  the  Second  World  War  and  the  buro- 
ing  issues  of  peace  and  security  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific.  Unleashed  as  a 
result  of  the  crisis  of  imperialism,  the  Second  World  War  brought  about 
the  collapse  of  the  shock  forces  of  imperialist  reaction  and  the  emergence 
of  the  socialist  states’  community.  Among  the  other  most  important  re¬ 
sults  of  the  war,  G.  Kim  mentioned  the  disintegration  of  colonial  empires, 
the  liberation  from  colonial  dependence  of  the  majority  of  Asian,  African 
and  Latin  American  countries,  and  their  embarking  upon  the  path  of 
independent  development.  In  touching  upon  the  problems  of  the  Asia-Pa¬ 
cific  region,  the  scholar  noted  that  the  main  destabilising  factors  here 
include  the  conceptual  provisions  of  US  Pacific  policy  and  the  practical 
activities  of  US  administration  in  that  area.  The  US  Pacific  policy  is  part 
and  parcel  of  its  global  anti-Soviet  strategy.  After  the  concepts  of  “mass 
retaliation’’  (1950s),  “flexible  response’’  (1960s),  “realistic  deterrence 
(1970s),  Washington,  in  the  first  half  of  the  1980s  resorted  to  the  strate¬ 
gy  of  global  and  regional  “direct  confrontation”  with  the  USSR.  It  pro-, 
vided  for  drawing  the  Soviet  Union  into  the  arms  race,  “the  encirclement 
of  the  USSR”  and  the  possibility  of  local  nuclear  wars.  East  Asia  and 
the  Pacific  are  regarded  as  the  ‘‘second  front  ,  after  Europe,  of  confron- 
tation  with  the  Soviet  Union.  The  strategic  propositions  and  practical 
measures  by  the  US  administration  in  that  region  are  directed  at  under¬ 
mining  the  existing  balance  of  forces,  at  creating  a  nuclear  bridgehead 
in  the  close  vicinity  of  the  Soviet  Far  Eastern  borders  to  exert  constant 
pressure  on  the  USSR.  An  important  part  in  these  dangerous  schemes  is 
assigned  primarily  to  Japan  and  South  Korea,  with  which  the  USA  has 
been  so  closely  coordinating  its  military  activities  that  this  warrants  the 
conclusion  that  a  tripartite  military-political  alliance  is  being  formed.  In 
recent  years,  the  USA  has  been  giving  close  attention  to  the  activities 
of  ANZUS  military  bloc,  seeking  more  actively  to  draw  it  into  its  milita¬ 
ristic  orbit.  The  attempts  of  the  US  government  to  make  the  _ASEAN 
a  militarised  regional  grouping,  the  desire  to  counterpose  it  to  other 
countries  of  Southeast  Asia,  and  to  foil  detente  in  that  area  cannot 
but  cause  apprehension.  Postwar  history  shows  that  the  relaxation  of 
tension  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  largely  depends  on  the  realistic  and 
well-thought-out  policy  of  all  states  of  the  region,  G.  Kim  went  on.  That 
is  why  the  USSR  proposes  holding  negotiations  on  confidence-building 
measures  in  the  Far  East,  which  would  embrace  both  the  political  and 
military  spheres.  The  Soviet  Union  came  out  with  initiatives  such  as  the 
non-first-use  of  nuclear  weapons,  including  their  non-use  against  non¬ 
nuclear  states,  negotiations  aimed  at  reducing  the  level  of  naval  activi¬ 
ties  in  the  Pacific  and  the  Indian  Oceans,  and  so  on. 

Professor  M.  Zuberi,  member  of  the  Executive  Council  of  the  All-India 
Organisation  for  Peace  and  Solidarity,  Head  of  the  Department  of  Prob¬ 
lems  of  Disarmament  in  Jawaharlal  Nehri^  New  Delhi  University,  delive¬ 
red  an  interesting  report  on  the  subject,  “The  Danger  of  Nuclear  War  and 
the  Nonaligned  States”.  He  talked  of  the  broad  support  given  by  India 
and  many  other  nonaligned  states  to  the  Soviet  Union’s  unilateral  com¬ 
mitments  not  to  be  the  first  to  use  nuclear  weapons  and  to  halt  nuclear 
explosions  from  August  6,  1985.  World  public  pressure  must  be  stepped 
up  to  make  the  United  States  of  America,  Great  Britain  and  France 
undertake  similar  pledges.  The  Indian  scholar  emphasised  that  the  non- 
aligned  movement  had  contributed  a  great  deal  in  that  direction  to  the 
struggle  of  the  peaceloving  forces  for  curbing  the  nuclear  arms  race  and 
averting  the  nuclear  war  danger.  He  drew  the  audience’s  attention  to  the 


39 


danger  of  the  American  plans  of  militarising  outer  space,  and  stressed 
the  topicality  of  the  Soviet  proposals  on  the  peaceful  exploration  of  outer 
space  in  the  conditions  of  the  latter’s  non-militarisation. 

Professor  D.  Petrov  (the  Institute  of  Far  Eastern  Studies,  USSR  Aca¬ 
demy  of  Sciences)  noted  that  the  US  ruling  circles  regard  the  setting  up, 
under  their  aegis,  of  different  types  of  military-political  alliances  and 
blocs  as  a  major  means  for  bolstering  up  their  positions  and  preventing 
the  growth  and  influence  of  socialism  in  Asian  countries.  This  iine,  inva¬ 
riably  followed  during  all  postwar  years,  has  been  further  developed  in 
the  policy  of  the  Reagan  administration  which  has  been  pursuing  an  overt 
policy  of  confrontation  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  other  socialist 
countries,  seeking  to  foil  detente  and  ensure  strategic  superiority  over  the 
world  of  socialism  by  unleashing  an  unbridled  arms  race.  The  US  mili¬ 
tary-bloc  policy,  alongside  the  line  towards  undermining  strategic  parity 
by  launching  new  types  and  systems  of  armaments,  has  been  the  chief 
destabilising  factor  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  as  well.  Under  these  con¬ 
ditions,  of  paramount  importance  are  the  Soviet  initiatives  aimed  at 
ensuring  a  lasting  peace  and  security  in  that  region  of  the  world. 

V.  Kjilynov,  Dr.  Sc.  (Econ.),  of  the  Institute  of  World  Economy  and 
International  Relations,  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  pointed  out  that  the 
development  of  broad  mutually  beneficial  economic  cooperation  between 
the  Pacific  countries  themselves,  as  well  as  global  economic  ties,  are  a 
real  path  towards  attaining  that  goal.  The  centrifugal  and  centripetal 
forces,  and  also  various  levels  of  economic  development  and  rapproche¬ 
ment  are  closely  interwoven  in  the  complicated  and  contradictory  process 
of  the  internationalisation  of  economic  activities  in  the  Pacific.  However, 
the  very  fact  of  the  development  of  that  process  attests  to  the  mutually 
advantageous  character  of  economic  cooperation  for  all  countries  of  the 
region  without  exception.  The  Soviet  Union,  a  state  with  powerfui  econo¬ 
my  and  extensive  commercial  ties,  makes  a  tangible  contribution  to  the. 
development  of  that  cooperation. 

V.  Chichkanov,  Corresponding  Member  of  the  USSR  Academy  of 
Sciences,  Director  of  the  Khabarovsk  Institute  of  Economic  Research, 
Far  Eastern  Scientific  Centre  of  the  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  spoke 
about  the  great  role  played  by  Siberia  and  the  Far  East  in  the  interna¬ 
tional  division  of  iabour. 

For  three  days  the  participants  in  the  international  Conference  in 
Khabarovsk  had  the  opportunity  to  make  a  frank  and  interesting  compa¬ 
rison  of  their  viewpoints  and  exchange  opinions  on  the  ways  and  means 
of  consolidating  peace,  strengthening  confidence  and  mutual  understand¬ 
ing  among  the  peoples  and  countries  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region  and 
averting  the  nuclear  danger  hanging  over  the  world.  Their  common 
views,  reflecting  the  stand  of  broad  circles  of  the  world  public  were 
expressed  in  the  conference’s  unanimously  approved  final  document — 
An  Appeal  to  the  Peoples  of  the  Asia-Pacific  Region. 

A.  Dzassokhov,  First  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Soviet  Afro-Asian  Soli¬ 
darity  Committee,  summed  up  the  results  of  the  fruitful  discussion.  Speak¬ 
ing  at  the  closure  of  the  Conference,  he  stated  among  other  things: 
“Participants  in  the  Conference,  representatives  of  different  ideological, 
political  and  religious  views  unanimously  assessed  and  analysed  the  cau¬ 
ses  of  the  present-day  alarming  situation  in  the  world,  including  the 
Asia-Pacific  region.  The  Conference  clearly  pointed  to  the  source  of  the 
nuclear  threat  to  mankind.  It  is  the  purposeful  hegemonistic  policy  pur¬ 
sued  by  thQ  militaristic  circles  of  imperialism,  US  imperialism  above  all, 
that  is  the  source  of  the  danger.  It  is  precisely  through  their  fault  that 
many  so-called  small  or  local  wars  have  been  unleashed  in  different  areas 
of  Asia,  and  Asian  peoples  have  to  pay  a  high  price  for  them.  Against 
the  background  of  the  war  psychosis  whipped  up  by  the  aggressive  circles 


40 


of  imperialism,  these  wars  and  conflicts  threaten  to  set  off  a  worldwide 
nuclear  conflagration.  Grave  concern  was  voiced  from  the  rostrum  of  the 
Conference  in  connection  with  the  obvious  attempts  by  the  US  administ¬ 
ration  to  turn  the  Asia-Pacific  region  into  yet  another  arena  of  a  global 
nuclear  missile  catastrophe,  and  to  turn  the  countries  and  peoples  of  the 
region  into  hostages  of  its  military  strategy.  In  expressing  the  wjll  pf 
the  peaceloving  forces  of  Asia-Pacific  countries  and  of  the  broad  world 
public,  the  Conference  stated  the  need  for  building  up  efforts  and  actions 
aimed  at  frustrating  these  dangerous  schemes  and  fighting  to  make  Asia 
a  zone  of  peace  and  confidence — and  the  Pacific  Ocean — a  nuclear-free 
zone. 

“The  conference  actively  supported  the  peaceful  initiatives  and  propo¬ 
sals  made  by  socialist  and  nonaligned  Asian  countries,  paving  the  way 
towards  attaining  this  noble  goal.  The  peoples  of  Asia  have  long  histori¬ 
cal  traditions  and  a  wealth  of  experience  in  creating  peace  and  confidence. 
Mikhail  Gorbachev,  General  Secretary  of  the  CPSU  Central  Commit¬ 
tee,  in  his  message  to  our  Conference  stressed  the  eternal  significance  of 
the  pancha  shila  principles  and  the  spirit  of  Bandung.  The  responsibility 
for  the  destinies  of  mankind,  the  striving  and  readiness  to  do  everything 
possible  to  preserve  life,  solidarity  with  the  struggle  waged  by  the  Asian 
peoples  for  security  and  goodneighbourliness  brought  representatives  of 
anti-war  forces  and  organisations  from  America,  Europe,  Australia,  and 
Africa  to  our  Conference.  Their  speeches  forcefully  expressed  the  thoughts 
of  hundreds  of  millions  of  people,  gave  voice  to  their  consciousness  and 
reason,  and  their  belief  in  a  peaceful  future  for  humankind.  And  aniong 
those  favouring  peace,  the  voices  of  those  in  Japan  who  have  not  forgot¬ 
ten,  and  will  never  forget  the  tragedy  of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  and 
who  are  struggling  insistently  for  peace  rang  out  loud  and  clear.”  . 

The  International  Conference  in  Khabarovsk  reflected  the  dynamic  role 
of  the  Soviet  Far  East  in  the  socio-political  life  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region. 
The  forum’s  foreign  guests  had  the  chance  to  see  the  Soviet  people’s  sin¬ 
cere  adherence  to  the  cause  of  peace  and  the  fraternity  of  nations.  Having 
visited  labour  collectives  and  families  of  the  working  people,  and  having 
participated  in  the  mass  anti-war  demonstration  by  the  citizens  of  Kha¬ 
barovsk,  delegations  from  foreign  countries  fully  felt  the  Soviet  people’s 
deep-seated  hatred  for  war  and  its  instigators,  their  determination  to 
defend  peace  and  life  on  Earth. 


M.  Zeynalov, 

Secretary  of  the  Soviet  Afro-Asian 
Solidarity  Committee 


41 


1 


The  Moscow  Scientific  Conference,  like  the  International  Conference 
held  in  Khabarovsk  a’month  later,  was  devoted  to  all  four  main  aspects 
of  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  rout  of  Japanese  militarism  and  the  cor¬ 
responding  results  of  the  victorious  end  to  the  Second  World  War;  1)  the 
USSR’s  role  and  importance  in  the  victory  over  militarist  Japan  and  in 
determining  the  final  outcome  of  the  Second  World  War,  particularly 
in  Asia;  2)  the  significance  of  the  rout  of  Japanese  militarism  for  the 
victory  of  the  people’s  revolutions  in  Vietnam,  Korea  and  China;  3)  the 
defeat  of  Japan  and  the  development  of  the  national  liberation  movement 
in  Asia;  4)  the  40th  anniversary  of  victory  over  Japanese  militarism  and 
the  tasks  of  the  movement  for  peace  and  security  in  Asian  and  Pacific 
countries.  In  the  range  of  problems  studied,  the  diversity  of  the  analysis 
and  level  of  representation  the  Conference  was  unique,  this  correspon¬ 
ding  to  the  level  of  cognition  of  the  problems  of  social  development  and 
the  fate  of  mankind  attained  by  the  mid-1980s  and  the  degree  of  aware¬ 
ness  of  the  responsibility  for  the  fate  of  peace  and  mankind.  The  Confe¬ 
rence  demonstrated  that  both  this  level  of  knowledge  and  this  degree  of 
responsibility  are  determined  primarily  by  the  accomplishments  of  Mar- 
xist-Leninist  social  thought,  the  peaceloving  and  scientifically  substan¬ 
tiated  policy  of  the  CPSU  and  the  Soviet  state,  the  achievements  of  the 
socialist  community,  and  the  progressive  social  movements  of  our  time. 
The  Conference  demonstrated  the  unfading  and  perpetual  importance  of 
the  victory  scored  by  the  Soviet  people  and  its  armed  forces,  guided  by 
their  Leninist  Party.  The  Conference  reminded  with  new  force  about  the 
lessons  of  the  Second  World  War  that  was  unleashed  by  imperialism  and 

terminated  by  socialism.  ,  u-  i  •  i 

Every  aspect  was  studied  comprehensively  in  terms  of  its  historical 
and  current  importance;  there  was  exhaustive  criticism  of  bourgeois  fal¬ 
sifications  and  nationalistic  distortions  concerning  history  and  roles  in 
history;  and  revanchist  chimeras  and  new  militaristic  ambitions  were  re¬ 
solutely  repulsed.  ...... 

The  scope  of  the  Conference  was  also  characterised  by  its  represen¬ 
tative  nature.  It  was  attended  by  prominent  Soviet  commanders  and 
representatives  of  the  Main  Political  Administration,  veterans  of  the  bat¬ 
tles  against  the  Japanese  militarists— living  witnesses  of  history,  top 
officials  from  the  CPSU  Central  Committee  and  scientists  from  the  Aca¬ 
demy  of  Sciences  of  the  USSR,  military  historians  and  ref^esentatiyes 
of  the  Diplomatic  Academy  of  the  Ministry  for  Foreign  Affairs  of  the 
USSR,  Moscow  State  University  and  the  Far  Eastern  Scientific  Centre. 
It  was  attended  by  guests  from  socialist  countries,  progressive  scientists 
and  public  figures  from  India,  Japan  and  Britain,  their  presence  reflecting 
the  extensive  international  ties  of  our  science  and  public  life.^^ 

The  forum  “40  Years  Since  Victory  Over  Militarist  Japan  was  ope¬ 
ned  by  Academician  P.  Fedoseyev,  Vice  President  of  the  Academy  of 
Sciences  of  the  USSR.  In  his  opening  statement,  he  stressed  that  the 
40th  anniversary  of  victory  is  a  great  event  of  our  time.  There  are  those 
in  Japan  who  are  now  trying  to  portray  the  Japanese  militarism  of 
1945  almost  as  a  “victim  of  attack”  and,  for  this  reason,  Academician 


42 


Fedoseyev  clearly  formulated  the  reasons  for  the  USSR’s  entry  into  the 
war  against  Japan— fulfilment  of  its  allied  and  internationalist  duty,  a 
striving  to  ensure  the  speediest  possible  end  to  the  war  and  the  security 
of  its  borders  in  the  Far  East,  and  to  restore  the  historical  justice  flouted 
by  Japanese  militarism. 

Concerning  the  consequences  of  the  rout  of  militarist  Japan,  Acade¬ 
mician  Fedoseyev  noted  that  the  fate  of  every  single  country  in  the 
East,  Southeast  and  South  Asia  and  in  the  Pacific  was  positively  affec¬ 
ted  by  our  victory,  which  ensured  the  conditions  for  a  mighty  upsurge  of 
the  national  liberation  movement  and  disintegration  of  the  disgraceful 
colonial  system.  The  prominent  Soviet  scholar  stressed  that  the  Con¬ 
ference’s  task  was  to  make  an  indepth  and  allround  analysis  of  the  mili¬ 
tary  and  political  importance  of  the  victory  in  the  East,  to  demonstrate 
the  decisive  contribution  made  by  the  Soviet  people  and  its  arrned  for¬ 
ces  to  the  conclusion  of  the  Second  World  War,  the  unbreakable  link  bet¬ 
ween  the  successes  of  the  popular  revolutions  and  the  national  libera¬ 
tion  movements  in  the  countries  of  the  region  and  the  Soviet  Army’s 
liberation  mission,  and  also  to  show  the  results  and  significance  of  the 
victory  for  the  present  day,  for  the  struggle  to  prevent  a  new  world  war, 
because  some  politicians  and  historians  in  'the  United  States,  Japan  and 
other  countries  are  trying,  for  anti-Soviet  purposes,  to  distort  the  events 
of  August  1945  and  conceal  the  criminal  nature  and  the  true  essence  of 
the  barbarous  American  atomic  bombings. 

Preparing  for  the  27th  Congress  and  in  connection  with  the  40th  an¬ 
niversary  of  victory,  the  CPSU  and  the  Soviet  state  reaffirm  their  striv¬ 
ing  for  goodneighbourly  relations  with  Japan  and  other  Asian  countries, 
for  turning  the  Asia-Pacific  region  into  a  zone  of  peace.  The  speaker 
expressed  confidence  that  the  Conference  would  not  only  be  a  milestone 
in  scientific  studies,  but  also  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  strug¬ 
gle  for  peace,  become  an  integral  part  df  the  powerful  upsurge  of  the 
anti  war  movement  that  encompassed  the  entire  world  in  1985,  includ¬ 
ing  the  Asian  countries. 

The  USSR’s  decisive  role  in  the  rout  of  Japanese  militarism  was 
shown  in  the  report  made  by  Admiral  N.  Amelko,  Deputy  Chief  of  the 
General  Staff  of  the  Soviet  Armed  Forces,  entitled  “The  Military-Politic¬ 
al  Importance  of  the  Rout  of  Militarist  Japan’’  and  during  the  work  of 
the  Conference’s  1st  Section,  headed  by  General  of  the  Ariny  Professor 
S.  Ivanov  and  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the 
USSR  P.  Zhilin.  In  the  East,  as  in  Europe,  the  Soviet  Union  also  played 
the  decisive  role  in  routing  the  aggressor;  in  the  East,  as  in  Europe,  the 
Soviet  Union  set  its  allies  an  example  of  how  to  fulfil  one’s  allied  duty 
in  the  struggle  to  end  the  war.  It  is  relevant  to  remember  the  USSR’s 
reliability  in  honouring  its  commitments,  today,  when  fulfilment  of  ag¬ 
reements  reached  and  the  organisation  of  international  cooperation  are 
so  needed,  the  speaker  stressed.  There  are  forces  in  the  world  capable 
of  reminding  us  all  of  this  example  and  of  the  lessons  of  1945  in  gener¬ 
al.  Even  the  fact  that  attempts  to  distort  the  role  of  the  USSR  in  the  war 
and  its  conclusion  have  now  become  more  vigorous  is  indirect  evidence 
of  the  topicality  of  our  victory,  its  fruitful  impact  on  the  present  and  the 
future,  noted  General  Secretary  of  the  CPSU  Central  Committee  Mikhail 
Gorbachev. 

The  first  question  invented  by  the  falsifiers  of  history  is  that  of  the 
nature  of  Japanese-Soviet  relations  in  connection  with  the  USSR’s  entry 
into  the  war  in  the  Far  East.  The  fate  of  the  Japanese  aggressor  was 
sealed  when  the  Soviet  Union  routed  nazi  Germany,  but  Japan’s  milita¬ 
ristic  leadership  hoped  still  to  wage  the  war  for  years  to  come  (4-8  years) 
and  counted  on  an,  “honourable  peace’’.  There  were  strategic  military 
and  economic  grounds  for  these  hopes.  As  for  relations  with  the  USSR, 


43 


all  attempts  at  speculations  on  this  score  are  dashed  by  the  facts:  the 
existence  and  steady  strengthening  of  the  Kwantung  Army  were  for  the 
sole  aim  of  waging  war  against  the  USSR.  Admiral  Amelko  clearly 
explained  the  reasons  why  the  Kwantung  Army  did  not  attack  the  USSR, 
even  though  the  “Northern  problem”  was  the  core  of  Japanese  milita¬ 
rism’s  strategy  (by  means  of  an  offensive  in  the  South,  it  wanted  to  pro¬ 
vide  itself  with  resources  for  the  war  against  the  USSR;  it  waited  for 
the  outcome  of  Hitler’s  war  against  the  USSR;  and  it  was  deterred  by 
the  Soviet  Army’s  successes  in  the  West,  etc.)  Yet  even  under  these  con¬ 
ditions,  Japan  continued  to  take  part  in  the  struggle  against  the  USSR 
by  creating,  as  we  now  call  it,  a  regime  of  terror  and  provocations  on 
our  borders  and  ocean  lanes  and  by  tying  down  up  to  30  per  cent  of  the 
Soviet  Army’s  forces  and  armaments  in  the  East  from  1941  to  1945.  Here 
is  an  illustration  of  this  “neutrality”:  3,259  violations  of  the  border  from 
1941  to  1944;  or  ten  a  day!  The  second  question  invented  by  the  falsifiers 
is  the  question  of  the  moment  of  ending  the  war.  It  took  Soviet  soldiers 
virtually  only  ten  days  to  rout  a  Japanese  force  that  was  comparable 
(and  in  iome  elements  superior)  to  the  Japanese  forces  stationed  in  the 
Pacific  or  in  China  and  which  had  demonstrated  its  ability  to  wage  war 
for  years.  In  manpower  terms,  the  Kwantung  Army  accounted  for  a  fifth 
of  the  entire  Japanese  armed  forces  [according  to  the  highest  estimate, 
it  had  1,5  million  men. — Ed.].  It  had  a  third  of  all  the  guns  and  combat 
planes  and  almost  half  the  tanks  of  the  Japanese  armed  forces.  The 
Kwantung  Army  had  powerful  fortifications  and  the  Japanese  generals 
thought  they  could  hold  out  behind  them  for  a  year  in  the  event  of  the 
USSR’s  entry  into  the  war  and  a  generally  unfavourable  situation.  Last 
but  not  least,  the  top  command  of  the  Kwantung  Army  was  the  leading 
political  clique  in  Japan. 

Despite  their  initiative  and  successes  in  the  Pacific  and  Burma,  the 
allies  lacked  the  strength  to  land  in  Japan.  Had  the  war  dragged  on,  it 
would  have  claimed  millions  more  lives.  The  two  atomic  bombs  that  kill¬ 
ed  or  maimed  over  half  a  million  Japanese  civilians  did  not  hurt  the 
imperial  army  in  any  way.  It  was  only  the  USSR’s  entry  into  the  war 
that  saved  mankind  from  countless  further  losses  and  suffering.  The  So¬ 
viet  forces  were  fully  aware  of  this.  Within  a  matter  of  days,  they  smash¬ 
ed  the  Kwantung  Army  not  only  because  of  their  superior  weaponry, 
but  also  the  heroism,  combat  skills,  and  high  morale  of  the  Soviet  soldiers 
and  officers  who  had  the  experience  of  the  Great  Patriotic  War. 

Such  was  the  USSR’s  decisive  contribution  to  the  ending  of  the  war. 
The  speaker  analysed  in  detail  the  sources  of  and  reasons  for  the  Soviet 
victory  in  the  Far  East  and  stressed  that  the  preparation  and  execution  of  the 
Far  Eastern  Campaign  were  carried  out  under  the  guidance  of  our  Lenin¬ 
ist  Communist  Party,  which  ensured  the  highest  level  of  organisation 
in  the  actions  of  the  Soviet  troops. 

General  of  the  Army  Professor  S.  Ivanov  was  in  charge  of  the  delibe¬ 
rations  of  the  1st  Section  of  the  Conference.  In  1945,  he  was  Chief  of 
Staff  of  the  Soviet  High  Command  in  the  Far  East  (he  was  38  years  old 
at  the  time).  He  presented,  in  a  well-argued  manner,  a  number  of  theo¬ 
retical  solutions  of  problems  relating  to  the  history  of  the  Far  Eastern 
Campaign,  above  all  a  fundamental  proposition  that  was  received  with 
great  satisfaction  by  the  participants  in  the  Conference — that  the  Man¬ 
churian  offensive  was  a  unique  general  engagement  that  sealed  the 
outcome  of  the  concluding  stage  of  the  Second  World  War.  Whoever,  for 
whatever  reason,  tried  to  stand  out  against  the  background  of  the  grim 
events  of  those  years,  he  would  never  succeed  in  belittling  the  importance 
of  the  Soviet  soldiers’  feat.  Our  people’s  efforts  and  sacrifices  are  irrepla¬ 
ceable  and  do  not  lend  themselves  to  comparative  appraisal,  because  their 
price  was  the  future  of  mankind.  As  for  the  role  of  the  United  States, 


44 


General  S.  Ivanov  stressed,  even  at  the  time  when  the  war  was  _  still 
going  on,  it  was  increasingly  acquiring  the  nature  of  a  Strategy  oj  tep 
for  and  intimidation.  As  in  the  case  of  Dresden  and  Jena  in  the  West 
the  United  States  used  the  tactics  of  massive  bombing  of  the  peaceful 
Dopulation,  completely  destroying  about  a  hundred  Japanese  towns  and 
ports,  killing  or  maiming  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people,  in  fact  on|y 
slichtly  fewer  than  in  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki.  This  Strategy  culminated 
In  the  two  atomic  strikes  that  were  to  put  mankind  in  a  state  of  fear  and 

submissiVembers  Section  described  the  actions  of  the  various  arms 

of  the  services  in  the  Far  Eastern  Campaign,  the  specifics  of  party  and 
political  work  in  the  army  and  navy,  spoke  about  tlie  mass  heroism  of 
our  troops,  the  exploits  of  the  working  people  of  Siberia  and  the  Far 
East  who  provided  the  Soviet  Army  with  men  and  arinaments  within  the 
shortest  possible  time,  about  the  internationalism  of  the  Soviet  Armys 
mission  of  liberation  and  about  the  c6mradeship-in-arms  with  the  men  of 

the  Mongolian  People’s  Revolutionary  Army.  ,  _  ^ 

The  participants  in  the  Conference  noted  the  outstanding  role  of  So¬ 
viet  commanders,  these  masters  of  military  art.  Of  the  three  possmle  va¬ 
riants  for  entry  into  the  war  (a  strike  at  Japan,  assistance  to  Chinese 
troops  and  the  Manchurian  Operation)  they  chose,  brilliantly  prepared 
and  carried  out  the  most  effective  one  (achieving  even  more  than  was 

^  The  second  aspect  of  our  victory  in  the  East  was  studied  in  the  report 
“The  Importance  of  the  Rout  of  Militarist  Japan  for  the  Victory  of  Peop¬ 
le’s  Revolutions  in  Countries  of  East  and  Southeast  Asia  presented  by 
Prof.  M.  Titarenko,  Dr.  Sc.  (Philos  ),  Director  of  the  Institute  of  the  Far 
East  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  USSR.  One  of  the  most  important 
consequences  of  the  rout  of  Japanese  militarism  was  the  creation  of 
favourable  conditions  for  invigoration  of  the  region  s  revolutionary  forces, 
for  the  wars  and  revolutions  of  liberation  to  develop  into  people  s,  popular- 
democratic  ones.  This  brought  about  the  appearance  of  states  of  a  new  type 
in  Asia— People‘s  China,  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Vietnam,  the  Democra¬ 
tic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  etc.  In  addition  to  the  Mongolian  Peoples 
Republic,  the  world  system  of  socialism  was  joined  by  new  Asian 
countries. 

The  USSR’s  victory  and  the  Soviet  Army’s  liberation  mission,  and  the 
internationalist  assistance  rendered  by  the  Soviet  people  brought  about 
profound  historic  changes  in  the  lives  of  many  peoples  and  a  restruc- 
turing  of  the  entire  system  of  international  relations  in  the  Far  East.  These 
processes  were  reflected  in  the  reports  by  F.  Solovyov,  L  Kutakov, 
G.  Sakharchuk  and  others.  B.  Pospelov’s  paper  dealt  with  the  very 
important  question  of  the  influence  exerted  on  Japans  development  by 
the  defeat  of  militarism.  B.  Sapozhnikov  devoted  his  report  to  the  stra¬ 
tegy  and  tactics  of  the  region’s  progressive  forces  in  those  years.  Profes¬ 
sor  M.  Titarenko  announced  plans  to  put  out  a  book,  jointly  with  foreign 
colleagues,  about  the  comradeship-in-arms  of  our  peoples  in  the  struggle 
against  Japanese  militarism.  . 

All  the  speakers  stressed  the  profound  connection  between  the  histo¬ 
rical  study  of  the  problems  under  discussion  and  an  analysis  of  present- 
day  situations,  a  study  of  the  present  role  of  the  USSR  and  the  Asian 
socialist  countries  in  the  struggle  for  peace  and  security,  for  social  prog¬ 
ress  and  the  development  of  culture  in  Asia,  and  also  the  need  to  expose 
the  efforts  of  US  imperialism  to  destabilise  the  situation  in  the  Far 
East,  Southeast  Asia  and  the  Pacific  region.  Alarm  was  expressed  about 
the  militaristic  and  revanchist  tendencies  in  the  policy  pursued  by  Japan  s 

^^*P?ofessorVan  Trong  (Institute  of  Asian  ahd  Pacific  Studies  under  the 


45 


Committee  for  Social  Sciences  of  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Vietnam)  gave 
an  analysis  and  critique  of  the  reactionary  allegations  concerning  a 
“Soviet  threat”  to  Japan,  which  serve  the  needs  of  the  forces  and  senti¬ 
ments  speculating  on  the  problem  of  “northern  territories  ’  and  obstruct 
the  development  of  the  country’s  relations  with  the  USSR.  The  Vietna¬ 
mese  scholar  also  critically  analysed  some  PRC  publications  that  try  to 
start  invented  discussions,  for  instance,  on  the  day  when  the  Second 
World  War  broke  out  or  on  the  subject  of  whether  China  helped  the 
USSR  during  that  war  or  vice  versa.  Professor  Van  Trong  rightly  noted 
that  recognition  of  the  decisive  role  of  the  Soviet  people’s  victory  in  no 
way  detracts  from  the  accomplishments  of  the  other  participants  in  the 
anti-fascist,  anti-militarist  struggle.  The  Vietnamese  scientist  also  stress¬ 
ed  that  Mikhail  Gorbachev’s  call  to  protect  peace  has  evoked  an  ardent 
response  among  the  peoples  of  the  world,  especially  those  of  Asia,  where 
wars  and  conflicts  have  flared  up  repeatedly  in  post-war  years  and  where 
a  high  sense  of  responsibility  on  the  part  of  the  peoples  and  a  broad 

anti-war  front  are  needed.  ,  „  »  .  t  c  •  t 

Kan  Un  Pin,  director  of  an  institute  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of 
the  DPRK,  convincingly  and  clearly  demonstrated  the  organic  link  bet¬ 
ween  the  military  and  political  manoeuvres  of  the  United  States  at  the 
close  of  the  Second  World  War  and  its  current  imperialist  strategy  in  the 
region,  as  well  as  the  unseemly  role  played  in  complicating  the  situation 
in  Asia  by  Japan’s  reactionary  circles,  which  obediently  toe  Washington  s 
line  and,  at  the  same  time,  “covet  indigenous  Soviet  territory”.  The  pro¬ 
minent  Korean  scholar  spoke  very  warmly  about  the  exploits  of  Soviet 
soldiers  and  stressed  that  every  effort  should  be  made  to  preserve  and 
develop  the  fruits  of  the  great  victory.  This  aim,  he  went  on,  is  served 
by  the  policy  of  the  Workers’  Party  of  Korea,  which  expresses  the  nation  s 
common  desire  to  see  the  homeland  reunited  and  to  safeguard  peace  in 

Asia  and  throughout  the  world.  . 

The  Cuban  representative  M.  Nogales  exposed  the  slanderous,  hypo¬ 
critical  and  basically  neofascist  nature  of  “descriptions”  of  the  events  of 
the  Second  World  War  offered  by  subversive  imperialist  propaganda. 
Quoting  from  Raul  Castro’s  speech  at  a  celebration  meeting  devoted  to 
the  40th  anniversary  of  victory,  she  said:  “The  need  to  revere  the  rnemory 
of  what  the  Second  World  War  meant  increases  still  further  as  we  observe, 
with  alarm,  the  deployment  of  new  American  nuclear  missiles  in 
Western  Europe,  the  growth  of  US  military  preparations  in  the  Far  East 
and  th^  growing  militarisation  of  Japan.”  Nogales  sharply  condemned  the 
us  attempts  to  turn  the  PRC  into  its  military  and  political  ally.  i 

Academician  S.  Tikhvinsky  delivered  a  report  entitled  “The  Defeat  of 
Japan  in  the  Second  World  War  and  the  Development  of  the  National 
Liberation  Movement  in  Asia”,  which  dealt  profoundly  and  comprehensi¬ 
vely  with  the  third  aspect  of  the  Conference’s  subject-matter.  The  light¬ 
ning  defeat  of  militarist  Japan  and  the  increased  military  might  of  the 
land  of  socialism  in  the  Far  East  in  many  ways  determined  the  fact  that 
the  collapse  of  imperialism’s  colonial  empire — an  event  second  in  histo¬ 
ric  importance  only  to  the  Great  October  Socialist  Revolution  and  the 
formation  of  the  world  socialist  system — began  precisely  in  Asia.  It  was 
on  that  ancient  continent  that  the  mighty  wave  of  socio-political  change 
rose  and  then  swept  the  countries  of  Africa  and  Latin  America.  The 
first  to  collapse  was  the  Japanese  “empire” — a  result  of  extensive  con¬ 
quests  over  a  span  of  fifteen  years,  based  on  cruelty  and  ruthless  plunder 
and  encompassing  a  territory  of  ten  million  square  kilometres  with  a 
population  of  400  million.  In  Asia,  millions  of  people  lost  fheir  lives  at 
the  hands  of  Japanese  militarism.  In  one  way  or  another,  however,  mil¬ 
lions  of  people  also  joined  the  struggle  against  it,  learned  to  handle  both 
military  and  political  weapons,  this  making  inevitable  the  growth  of  revo- 


46 


lutionary-liberation  processes  against  their  “own"  colonialists.  The  Repub¬ 
lic  of  Indonesia  was  proclaimed  on  August  17,  1945  and  the  Democratic 
Republic  of  Vietnam  on  September  2  of  that  year.  First  of  all,  Commu¬ 
nists  formed  partisan  armies  in  Malaya  and  the  Philippines.  Burma’s  na¬ 
tional  army  turned  its  weapons  against  the  occupationists. 

The  speaker  stressed  that,  both  in  the  first  years  of  its  existence  and  . 
also  during  and  after  the  Second  World  War,  the  USSR  invariably  gave 
tremendous  moral,  political  and  diplomatic  support  to  the  fighters  for 
independence.  Wherever  the  Soviet  Army  was  present,  it  unfettered  prog¬ 
ressive  forces  and  helped  the  peoples  against  the  export  of  counterrevolu¬ 
tion.  The  USSR  gave  the  peoples  allround  assistance.  Wherever  this  fac¬ 
tor  was  absent,  however,  grave  trials  fell  toithe  lot  of  the  struggling 
peoples  before  they  acquired  independence  (most  often  with  the  coming 
to  power  of  bourgeois  circles)  or  completed  their  liberation  late  in  the 
1940s  or  1950s.  S.  L.  Tikhvinsky  described  comprehensively  the  USSR’s 
assistance  to  the  newly-independent  countries  in  the  post-war  period  and 
currently,  in  their  struggle  for  political  and  economic  independence, 
against  imperialism’s  unceasing  subversive  activities  and  against  neoco¬ 
lonialism.  The  speaker  took  a  Marxist-Leninist  approach  in  examining 
the  Reagan  Administration  policy  with  respect  to  the  developing  count¬ 
ries,  its  attempts  to  turn  them  into  a  frontline  of  struggle  against  socia¬ 
lism  and  progressive  forces,  above  all  in  Asia,  where  it  views  Japan  as 
its  closest  associate  in  this  venture.  In  contrast  to  the  United  States,  the 
Soviet  Union  offers  a  broad  programme  for  constructive,  peaceful  and 
goodneighbourly  cooperation. 

The  People’s  Republic  of  China  can  play  an  important  role  in  impro¬ 
ving  the  situation  in  Asia.  The  further  normalisation  of  Soviet-Chinese 
relations  on  the  basis  of  mutual  respect  and  mutual  advantage  is  extre¬ 
mely  useful  in  this  respect.  Other  socialist  countries  are  also  coming  out 
with  valuable  proposals  on  how  to  strengthen  peace  and  security  in  Asia, 
the  speaker  noted. 

Half  of  the  population  of  the  world  were  born  after  the  war,  but  the 
lessons  of  the  Second  World  War  urge  all  peoples  to  engage  in  anti-war 
activities,  and  oppose  American  imperialism’s  aggressive  plans.  The  peop¬ 
les  of  Asia  face  the  urgent  task  of  preserving  and  consolidating  the  gains 
attained  as  a  result  of  victory  in  the  Second  World  War  and  in  the  post¬ 
war  years. 

The  3rd  Section  of  the  Conference,  headed  by  Corresponding  Member 
of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  USSR  G.  F.  Kim,  concentrated  on  three 
issues;  the  causes  and  consequences  of  the  formation  of  the  hotbed  of 
war  in  the  Far  East,  the  nature  of  the  Japanese  colonial  policy  in  East 
and  Southeast  Asia  and  its  impact  on  the  national  liberation  movement 
in  the  region,  and  current  trends  in  imperialism’s  policy  in  the  Far  East. 
On  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  the  policy  pursued  by  the  United  States 
and  Japan  in  the  1930s  and  1940s,  A.  I.  Utkin  showed  convincingly  how 
right  Lenin  was  in  predicting  an  American- Japanese  conflict  on  the  ba¬ 
sis  of  “common”  imperialist  ambitions.  He  also  showed  the  mechanism 
of  connivance  with  respect  to  Japanese  aggression  evolved  by  the  United 
States  with  the  aim  of  directing  that  aggression  in  a  northeasterly  direc¬ 
tion.  V.  Solovyov  devoted  his  report  to  aspects  of  the  ideological  brain¬ 
washing  to  which  the  Japanese  population  and  armed  forces  are  being 
subjected.  Using  a  wealth  of  historical  material,  Y.  Pevzner,  A.  Savin, 
and  G.  Levinson  presented  a  striking  picture  of  Japanese  colonial  policy 
and  of  the  political  tactics  employed  by  the  occupationists  in  the  colo¬ 
nies.  The  Conference  focused  considerable  attention  on  questions  of  the 
Indian  people’s  anti-Japanese  struggle,  the  specifics  and  lessons  of  the 
struggle  waged  by  communist  parties  in  East  and  Southeast  Asian  count¬ 
ries.  D.  Petrov  and  V.  Bunin  concentrated  on  questions  of  the  struggle 


A. 


47 


against  US  imperialism’s  Far  Eastern  policy  and  against  the  revival  of 
Japanese  militarism. 

At  the  concluding  meeting,  the  participants  in  the  Conference  were 
addressed  by  Professor  Van  Trong  on  behalf  of  the  delegations  of  socia¬ 
list  countries.  He  expressed  deep  gratitude  to  the  heroic  Soviet  people 
for  its  exploits  during  the  Second  World  War  and  expressed  a  firm  belief 
in  the  future  triumph  of  the  cause  of  peace  and  socialism  in  Asia. 

Admiral  N.  Amelko,  the  Lenin  Prize  Winner,  summed  up  the  results 
of  the  Conference,  thanked  its  participants  and  singled  out  the  main 
problems  studied:  the  sources  of  the  victory  of  the  Soviet  armed  forces 
over  Japanese  militarism,  the  USSR’s  decisive  role  in  ending  the  Second 
World  War,  the  superiority  of  the  Soviet  art  of  warfare,  and  the  influence 
of  our  victory  on  world  events,  this  being  especially  topical  today,  when 
the  world  is  threatened  by  a  terrible  catastrophe  and  when  the  forces  of 
peace  and  progress  have  never  been  stronger.  He  also  dwelt  on  the 
tasks  facing  Soviet  scientists  in  the  struggle  against  the  militaristic 
plans  of  imperialism  and  revanchist  forces,  against  bourgeois  and  other 
anti-Soviet  falsifications  of  history,  in  military,  patriotic  and  internatio¬ 
nalist  education. 

The  Conference  called  on  the  Soviet  people  for  working  selflessly  to' 
preserve  the  peace  that  was  won  40  years  ago,  to  strengthen  the  anti-war, 
anti-imperialist  forces  in  Asia  and  throughout  the  world. 

F.  LAPPO 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  Into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO:  1812/94 


48 


APPEAL  ON  CREATING  'ZONE  OF  PEACE'  IN  ASIA-PACIFIC  REGION  5' 

Moscow  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA  in  Russian  No  4,  Oct-Dec  85  (signed  to  press 
25  Nov  85)  p  51 

[Appeal  to  people  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region  from  participants  in  international 
conference  commemorating  40th  anniversary  of  World  War  II  victory,  in 
Khabarovsk  on  7  September  1985] 

[Text]  We  representatives  of  the  Asian  and  Pacific  public,  delegates  from 
national  and  international  organizations,  have  gathered  at  the  conference  in 
Khabarovsk  to  commemorate  an  event  of  worldwide  historic  significance — the 
40th  anniversary  of  the  victory  o^er  Japanese  militarism  and  the  end  of  World 
War  II — and  to  discuss  the  current  problems  of  safeguarding  peace  and  security 
in  the  Asia-Pacific  region. 

After  looking  back  at  the  tragic  lessons  of  the  last  war,  we  and  all  other 
people  of  goodwill  must  pay  a  tribute  of  the  deepest  respect  to  the  eternal 
memory  and  glory  of  the  millions  of  sons  and  daughters  of  the  earth  who 
defended  the  liberty  of  people  against  barbarous  enslavement  40  years  ago  at 
the  cost  of  colossal  sacrifices  and  deprivations,  at  the  cost  of  their  most 
precious  possession — their  lives. 

Here,  on  Soviet  land,  we  gratefully  acknowledge  the  Soviet  Union's  decisive 
contribution  to  the  defeat  of  Hitler's  fascism  and  Japan's  militarism. 

Today  people  are  well  aware  that  there  is  no  task  more  important  than  saving 
the  world  from  a  new  holocaust.  The  nuclear  threat  hanging  over  mankind 
demands  collective  efforts  from  all  people.  We  are  calling  upon  the  public  in 
the  Asian  and  Pacific  countries  to  augment  their  contribution  to  the  worldwide 
movement  to  curb  the  arms  race  and  eliminate  the  threat  of  thermonuclear  war. 

The  alarm  bell  of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  can  be  heard  all  over  the  planet 
today.  It  commands  people  to  do  everything  within  their  power  to  prevent  a 
repetition  of  the  nuclear  tragedy  in  any  place  and  at  any  time  and  to  put  an 
end  to  nuclear  weapons  completely  and  forever!  The  achievement  of  lasting 
peace  in  the  Asia— Pacific  region  is  a  difficult  but  noble  objective.  We  are 
firmly  convinced  that  the  countries  and  people  of  the  region,  moving  step  by 
step  toward  this  cherished  goal,  will  certainly  make  it  a  reality  through 
their  combined  efforts. 


A 


49 


The  public  of  the  Asian  and  Pacific  countries  has  rich  experience  in  the 
struggle  for  peace.  It  was  the  countries  of  this  region  that  performed  the 
historic  service  of  arousing  international  Interest  in  concepts  of  peaceful 
coexistence  which  won  worldwide  acknowledgement,  such  as  the  "Pant j a  Sila" 
and  the  Ten  Principles  of  Bandung. 

We  applaud  the  initiatives  on  the  creation  of  zones  of  peace  and  nuclear-free 
zones  in  various  parts  of  Asia  and  the  Pacific  region,  on  the  institutldn  of 
confidence-building  measures  in  the  Far  East,  on  the  conclusion  of  npn- 
aggression  pacts  and  agreements  not  to  use  force  in  relations  between  Asian 
and  Pacific  states,  on  the  limitation  of  naval  arms  and  naval  activity  in  the 
Pacific  and  Indian  oceans  and  on  a  comprehensive  approach  to  the  problems  of 
guaranteeing  peace  and  security  in  Asia. 

We  heartily  support  the  Soviet  Initiative  on  the  unilateral  suspension  of  all 
nuclear  tests  on  6  August  as  hew  evidence  of  the  constructive,  peaceful  policy 
line  of  the  USSR.  It  is  obvious  that  the  inclusion  of  the  United  States  in 
this  moratorium  would  be  of  great  significance  in  curbing  and  stopping  the 
nuclear  arms  race  and  would  have  a  restraining  effect  oh  other  countries.  The 
new  Soviet  initiative  must  not  be  ignored! 

We  express  solidarity  with  the  peoples  and  countries  advocating  the  creation 
of  nuclear-free  zones.  We  sincerely  S5nnpathlze  with  the  efforts  of  millions  of 
common  people  in  different  countries  to  win  nuclear-free  status  for  their 
cities,  towns,  rural  communities  and  entire  regions  and  territories. 

We  support  the  struggle  of  democratic  antiwar  forces  and  organizations  oppos¬ 
ing  the  establishment  of  imperialist  military  bases  and  Installations  on  their 
territory,  the  entry  of  their  ports  by  ships  carrying  nuclear  weapons,  the 
inclusion  of  their  countries  in  militarist  blocs  and  groups  and,  in  particu¬ 
lar,  the  U.S.- Japan-South  Korea  military  alliance. 

We  believe  that  bilateral  and  multilateral  contacts  and  dialogue  on  the 
official  and  sociopolitical  levels  should  be  used  to  seek  and  find  realistic 
ways  of  solving  urgent  problems  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  on  the  basis  of  the 
principles  of  peaceful  coexistence.  We  are  well  aware  that  there  is  no  alter¬ 
native  to  extensive  political  dialogue,  collective  efforts  and  a  comprehensive 
approach  in  the  struggle  to  achieve  lasting  peace  and  security.  We  are  called 
upon  to  do  this  by  the  lessons  of  the  last  war,  the  end  of  which  we  are  cele¬ 
brating  now,  40  years  later. 

The  flames  of  a  new  war  must  never  blaze  on  Aslan  land!  Asia  must  be  a  con¬ 
tinent  of  lasting  peace,  cooperation  and  prosperity!  The  Pacific  and  Indian 
oceans  must  be  zones  of  peace! 

COPYRIGHT:  "Problemy  Dalnego  Vostoka",  1985 

8588 

CSO:  1805/4 


50 


USSR'S  COOPERATION  WITH  ASIAN  SOCIALIST  COUNTRIES,  KAMPUCHEA 
Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  iii  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  51-63 
[Article  by  M.  S.  Ukraintsev] 

The  first  half  of  the  1980s  saw  a  further  growth  and  consolidation  of 
the  Soviet  Union’s  cooperation  with  the  Mongolian  People’s  Republic, 
the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  the  Socialist  Republic  of 
Vietnam,  and  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic.  Since  1982,  certain 

Gositive  changes  have  occurred  in  the  relations  between  the  USSR  and 
lie  People’s  Republic  of  China,  especially  in  trade  and  economic  links. 
The  Soviet  Union  has  helped  the  People’s  Republic  of  Kampuchea  recover 
from  the  devastation  caused  by  Pol  Pot’s  rule,  and  is  still  assisting  the 
Republic  in  protecting  its  revolutionary  gains  and  independence.  |P' 
These  processes  acquire  special  importance  in  the  context  of  United 
States*  growing  military  preparations  in  the  Pacific,  the  militarisation 
of  Japan,  the  building  of  an  aggressive  bloc  consisting  of  the  United 
States,  Japan,  and  South  Korea,  and  the  efforts  to  form  a  Pacific  com¬ 
munity  modelled  on  NATO.  So,  the  more  closely  the  Asian  socialist  na¬ 
tions  cooperate,  the  greater  the  positive  role  they  will  play  in  improving 
the  political  situation  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific  and  in  consolidating  Asian 
security. 


SOVIET-MONOOLIAN  COOPERATION 

The  years  1981-1985  were  marked  by  new  achievements  in  building  so¬ 
cialism  in  Mongolia,  while  its  long-standing  friendship  with  the  Soviet 
Union  became  further  consolidated,  and  comprehensive  cooperation  bet¬ 
ween  the  two  countries  developed  in  every  way.  A  fundamental  factor 
promoting  that  cooperation  is  the  ever  deepening  links  between  the  Soviet 
Communist  Party  and  the  Mongolian  People’s  Revolutionary  Party,  which 
are  based  on  the  ideological  and  political,  unity  of  the  two  parties  and 
the  two  nations,  and  on  the  community  of  their  tasks  in  building  socialism 
and  communism. 

Cooperation  between  the  two  fraternal  parties  and  nations  is  promo¬ 
ted,  above  all,  by,  traditional  regular  meetings  between  top-level  Soviet 
and  Mongolian  party  and  government  leaders. 

In  October  1984,  the  General  Secretary  of  the  Central  Committee  of 
the  Mongolian  People’s  Revolutionary  Party,  Jambyn  Batmiinh,  made  a 
working  visit  to  the  USSR.  In  August  1985,  when  he  was  here  on  vaca¬ 
tion  at  the  invitation  of  the  Soviet  Communist  Party  Central  Committee, 
Jambyn  Batmiinh  met  with  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  General  Secretary  of  the 
Soviet  Communist  Party  Central  Committee.  On  August  29,  1985,  in  the 
Kremlin,  tfie  two  leaders  signed  a  long-term  programme  for  economic, 
scientific,  and  technological  cooperation  between  the  Soviet  Union  and 
Mongolia  up  to  the  year  2000.  Mikhail  Gorbachev  described  that  programme 
as  “a  document  of  great  political  significance.  Its  implementation", 
he  said,  “will  make  it  possible  to  make  fuller  use  of  capabilities  and 
reserves  of  Soviet-Mongolian  mutual  links,  to  pool  our  efforts  and  expe¬ 
rience,  resources  and  knowledge  more  efficiently  for  increasing  opr  eco- 


51 


nomic  potential  and  raising  the  well-being  of  the  working  people.  * 
Between  1981  and  1985,  several  other  Mongolian  leaders  visited  the  Soviet 

Union.  '  .  ,  ^  j  i 

During  the  five  years,  several  Soviet  party  and  government  delega¬ 
tions  visited  Mongolia,  including  ones  led  by  Mikhail  Gorbachev  (in  1981) 
and  other  party  and  government  leaders  of  the  USSR.  ^ 

Summit  talks  were  held  on  topical  matters  of  the  two  nations  politic¬ 
al  and  economic  cooperation.  Meetings  of  Soviet  and  Mongolian  leaders 
have  a  favourable  effect  on  the  entire  complex  of  Soviet-Mongolian  rela¬ 
tions,  which  are  becoming  increasingly  dynamic  and  more  profound  with 

every  passing  year,  .  ... 

Between  1981  and  1985,  the  Soviet  Union  and  Mongolia  concluded  a 
number  of  agreements  on  economic,  scientific,  technological,  and  cultural 
cooperation,  on  training  specialists  and  skilled  personnel  for  Mongolia, 
and  on  many  other  matters.  Of  special  importance  is  the  Soviet-Mongo¬ 
lian  intergovernmental  agreement  on  economic  and  technological  coope¬ 
ration.  It  was  signed  on  June  13,  1980  and,  under  it,  Soviet  economic 
assistance  is  being  channeled  into  building  up  the  material  and  technical 
basis  of  Mongolian  agriculture  and  ensuring  priority  development  in 
mining,  fuels  and  energy,  construction,  transport,  and  other  branches  of 
Mongolia’s  economy,  and  also  into  improving  its  people’s  well-being. 

When  signing  the  Soyiet-Mongolian  long-term  programme  for  econo¬ 
mic,  scientific,  and  technological  cooperation  up  to  the  year  2000  in  Mos¬ 
cow  on  August  29,  1985,  Jambyn  Batmiinh  said  it  "opens  broad  prospects 
and  sets  the  basic  guidelines  for  furthering  our  countries’  diverse  coope¬ 
ration.  Successful  implementation  of  this  programme  will  lead  to  a  new 
advance  of  our  country’s  economic  potential,  to  improvement  of  the 
material  well-being  of  the  working  people.’’*  .  .  e  .  i 

More  than  thirty  major  economic  projects  built  for  Mongolia  by  Soviet 
agencies  were  commissioned  in  the  1981-1985  period.  They  include  a  min¬ 
ing  complex  at  the  Baganur  coal  seam  producing  one  million  tons  of 
coal  a  year,  a  railway  line  connecting  Bagahangai  and  Baganur,  the 
Borundur-2  fluorspar  prospecting  and  mining  facility,  with  an  annual  out¬ 
put  of  100,000  tons  of  ore,  a  bakery,  a  spinning  mill,  and  some  other 
projects.  Heat  and  Power  Plant-4  has  been  commissioned  in  Ulan  Bator. 
A  considerable  contribution  to  Mongolia’s  economic  development  is  made 
by  Soviet-Mongolian  joint  enterpri^s  like  the  Erdenet  ore-dressing 
plant,  the  Mongolsovtsvetmet  non-ferrous  metals  agency,  and  the  Ulan 
Bator  Railway  joint-stock  company.  «  .  , 

Mongolia’s  work  in'  the  Council  for  Mutual  Economic  Assistance 
(GMEA)  is  gaining  importance,  and  its  contribution  to  the  implementa¬ 
tion  of  the  comprehensive  programme  for  socialist  economic  integration 
has  been  growing.  Mongolia  is  opening  up  new  fields  of  cooperation  with 
fraternal  socialist  nations,  and  this  ensures  more  efficient  use  of  the 
republic’s  own  resources  and  leads  the  nation  to  great  achievements  in 
economic,  scientific,  and  cultural  development.  The  economic  sumrnit  held 
by  the  Council  for  Mutual  Economic  Assistance  in  Moscow  in  1984 
produced  decisions  that  are  extremely  important  for  further  consolidating 

Mongolia’s  economic,  scientific,  and  technological  potential. 

Mongolia’s  international  prestige  is  growing  by  the  year,  largely 
owing  to  its  close  cooperation  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  other  fraternal 
nations.  Mongolia  maintains  diplomatic  relations  with  94  states.  It  is  a 
member  of  22  governmental  and  60  non-governmental  international  orga¬ 
nisations  and  signatory  to  more  than  40  international  treaties  and  agree¬ 
ments. 

*  Pravda,  August  30,  1985. 

«  Ibidem. 


52 


The  Soviet  people  and  progressive  public  throughout  the  world  appre¬ 
ciate  and  highly  value  Mongolia’s  consistent  peace-loving  foreign  policy, 
Ita  highly-principled  approach  to  handling  international  problems,  and 
({lifeless  search  for  ways  to  improve  the  political  climate  in  Asia  and 
Mtablish  trust,  goodneighbourly  relations,  and  mutually  rewarding  coope- 
fallon  among  Asian  nations.  .  ■ 

.  At  its  18th  Congress,  held  in  May  1981,  the  Mongolian  Peoples  Revo¬ 
lutionary  Party  moved  a  proposal  to  work  out  and  sign  a  convention  on 
Oiutual  non-aggression  and  the  non-use  of  force  in  relations  among  Asian 
and  Pacific  states.  The  proposal  was  strohgly  supported  by  the  Soviet 
Union  and  other  fraternal  countries.  On  Mongolia’s  iriitiative,  the  39th 
Session  of  the  UN  General  Assembly  adopted  a  declaration.  On  the  Right 
of  Peoples  to  Peace.  Mongolia’s  peace  proposals  are  in  line  with  those 
moved  by  the  Soviet  Union  and  other  socialist  states. 

Mongolia  has  resolutely  supported  Soviet  peaceloving  policy  which, 
among  other  things,  was  reflected  in  the  stand  taken  by  the  Soviet  dele¬ 
gation  at  the  Geneva  summit  talks. 

THE  SOVIET  UNION  AND  THE  DEMOCRATIC  PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC  OF  KOREA 

In  the  first  half  of  the  1980s,  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea 
was  subject  to  increasing  military  and  political  pressure  from  the 
United  States,  Japan,  and  the  South  Korean  regime.  That  pressure  was 
b^t  illustrated  by  the  Team  Spirit  military  exercises — the  world’s  biggest 
peace-time  exercises  which  US  and  South-Korean  forces  conduct  every 
year,  to  show  their  readiness  to  deliver  a  strike  on  the  Democratic 
People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  including  a  “preemptive”  nuclear  strike. 

In  response  to  the  growing  military  preparations  of  the  United  States 
and  its  allies,  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea  made  efforts  to 
consolidate  cooperation  with  socialist  nations.  The  republic’s  growing 
cohesion  with  socialist  states  was  illustrated  by  the  1984  European- tour 
by  its  top-level  party  and  government  delegation,  led  by  Kim  II  Sung, 
General  Secretary  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Workers’  Party  of 
Korea  and  President  of  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea.  The 
delegation  made  official  visits  of  friendship  to  the  Soviet  Union  (May 
23-25),  Poland  (May  27-29),  the  German  Democratic  Republic  (May 
29-June  2),  Czechoslovakia  (June  4-6),  Hungary  (June  7-9),  Yugoslavia 
(June  9-11),  Bulgaria  (June  15-17),  and  Romania  (June  18-21).  The  dele¬ 
gation’s  talks  with  the  leaders  of  the  socialist  nations  demonstrated  the 
unity  of  their  views  on  the  fundamental  problems  of  modern  world  deve¬ 
lopment  and  a  common  desire  to  promote  and  consolidate  friendship  and 
cooperation  between  their  respective  parties  and  peoples.  The  leaders  of 
the  socialist  states  reaffirmed  their  unflagging  support  for  the  efforts 
made  by  the  Workers’  Party  of  Korea,  the  government  of  the  Democratic 
People’s  Republic  of  Korea,  and  the  entire  Korean  people  towards  a 

Sieaceful  democratic  reunification  of  Korea,  without  any  external  inter- 
Brence. 

Relations  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  Democratic  People’s 
Republic  of  Korea  received  great  impetus  from  the  top-level  agreements 
concluded  during  Kim  II  Sung’s  visit  to  Moscow  in  May  1984.  The  two 
countries’  efforts  to  put  those  agreements  into  effect  deepened  their 
foreign-policy  cooperation;  exchanges  of  party  delegations  became  more 
active,  and  so  did  delegation  exchanges  in  the  fields  of  culture,  science, 
technical  education,  health-care,  literature,  the  arts,  the  news  media  and 
information,  communications,  cinematography,  sports,  tourism,  etc.  Con¬ 
tacts  were  also  expanded  in  trade,  economic,  scientific,  and  technological 
cooperation.  A  major  contribution  to  further  promoting  bilateral  relations 


53 


was  made  by  the  official  friendly  visit  by  Kini  Yong  Narh, 
member  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Workers’  Party  o^  ^orea,  P  Y 
Premier’  of  the  Administration  Council  and  Foreign  Minister  * 
Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea.  He  was  in  the  Soviet  Union  from 
Aoril  16  to  23  1985,  and  the  results  of  his  visit  were  summed  up  in  a 
Sa  comrnuniq^:  In  the  course  of  that  visit,  the  two  countries  signed 
a  treaty  oTthdr  common  frontier,  and  also  a  consular  conyen  on.  The 
two  sides  discussed  topical  problems  of  the  current  world  situation,  and 
the  talks  showed  a  common  understanding  of  all  the 
The  importaTce  was  stressed  of  joint  efforts  to  counteract  the  Un^^ 
States’  militaristic  policy  in  the  Asian-Pacific  and  its  knocking 

together  a  mHllary  |nd^Politeal  bloc  wesVem^^^^ 

attempts^ to  perpetuate  the  ’division  of  Korea  by  bilking  the  peace  initiati¬ 
ves  moved  by  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea.  ^ 

On  August  15,  1985,  the  Democratic  People  s  Republic  of  Korea  cele 
brated  the  40th  anniversary  of  its  liberation  from  Japanese  colonial 
dornmaSn.  The  celebration  was  a  vivid  manifestation  of  Sovf-Ko^f" 
friendship  and  diverse  cooperation.  The  festivities  were^  attended  by  ^a 
Soviet  pLty  and  government  delegation,  led  by  Geidar  Alley,  a  *ntlita  y 
delegation,  a  group  of  Soviet  war  veterans  who  had  fought  to  liberate 
S  and  also  by  representatives  of  Soviet  public  organisations,  and 
Ministries  and  Departments  that  maintain  close  links  with  partners  in 

the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea.  _  .  pronomic 

Soviet-Korean  relations  are  quite  active  in  the  field  of  trade,  economic, 
scientific  and  technological  cooperation.  The  Soviet  Union  is  republics 
Number ’one'pSSer  invade,  providing  it  with  industria  equ  pment  and 
scarce  raw  materials  such  as  oil,  petroleum  products,  and  coke  in  ex 
change  for  magnesite  clinkers,  ferrous  and  non-ferrous  metals^  rolled 
stock!  some  types  of  engineering  output,  and  consumer  good^^ 
their  bilateral  trade  grew  by  21  per  cent  to  reach  712  8  million  rubles 
TSoviet  exports  totalled  347.2  million  rubles,  '"iports— 365.6  mimon 
rSiles)!  The  estimated  growth  of  bilateral  trade  for  1985  was  to  be  about 

Over^"*ixty  major  industrial  facilities  have  been  built  or  restored  in 
the  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Korea  with  Soviet  material  and  tech¬ 
nological  assistance.  Among  them  are  the  Suphung 
station,  a  metallurgical  works  in  Chongjin,  a  non-ferrous 
Namp’o,.a  heat  and  power  plant  in  Pyongyang,  a  thermal  stat  on 

in  Puckchang,  and  an  oil-refinery  in  Unggi.  At  present,  the  Sovi®t  Union 
is  heloing  build  8  major  projects  ill  the  republic:  plants  to  produce  bear 
Sngs!'7uliinum,  micri-ele'ctrlc  motors  a  heat 

jin,  coal  mines  in  Anju;  moreover,  the  Kim  Chak  metallurgical  Wo  ks 
anH  thp  Puckchang  thermal  power  station  are  being  expanded.  - 

After  Kim  II  Sung’s  visit  to  the  Soviet  Union,  bilateral  economic  links 
started  growing  rapidly  in  both  scale  and  variety.  Preparations  are  m 

progress^to  build  a  nuclear  power  station,  to  wSJ 

land  and  offshore,  and  to  build  more  industrial  projects— all  this  with 

Soviet  assistance. 


SOVIET- VIETNAMESE  RELATIONS 

consolidation  of  relations  with  the  Sovmt. Union 
C  socialist  states  is  a  priority  foreign  policy  line  pui^ued  by  tbe  Socia^l- 
ist  Republic  of  Vietnam  and  its  Communist  Party.  The  nation  regards 
the  persistent  implementation  of  this  course  as  a 

coping  with  the  tasks  facing  Vietnam:  to  build  the  material  and  technical 


54 


of  socialism  and  safeguard  the  republic’s  sovereignty  and  indepen- 
teice.  Speaking  at  the  5th  Corigress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  Vietnam 
to  IM2,  the  General  Secretary  of  the  Party’s  Central  Committee,  Le  Duan, 
Mid  that  ‘‘cohesion  and  comprehensive  cooperation  with  the  Soviet  Union 
kme  been  and  remain  the  cornerstone  of  the  foreign  policy  of  our  party 
•nd  state...  We  regard  this  as  a  guarantee  of  our  people’s  success  in  de- 
fmdihg  our  country  and  in  building  socialism,  and  also  in  consolidating 
ljUltional  independence  and  the  positions  of  socialism  in  Indochina...”® 
Soviet-Vietnamese  relations  entered  an  essentially  new  phase  when  the 
two  countries  concluded  a  Treaty  of  Friendship  and  Cooperation  (on  No¬ 
vember  3,  1978)  and  signed  a  long-term  programme  for  economic,  scien- 
liic,  and  technological  cooperation  (in  1983). 

Ideologically  and  politically,  Soviet-Vietnamese  cooperation  in  all  fields 
Is  based  on  the  close  unity  of  the  two  nations’  communist  parties,  which 
rests  on  the  principles  of  Marxism-Leninism  and  socialist  international¬ 
ism.  The  Soviet-Vietnarhese  Declaration  of  June  1985  states  that  the  two 
aides “will  tirelessly  continue  to  strengthen  the  ties  of  close  friendship 
and  cohesion  between  the  Soviet  Communist  Party  and  the  Communist 
Party  of  Vietnam.  Such  is  the  principled  and  Immutable  course  of  the  So¬ 
viet  Comrhunist  Party  and  the  Communist  Party  of  Vietnam,  and  of  the 
Soviet  Union  and  Vietnam,  reflecting  the  will  and  aspirations  of  the  two 
nations.”'* 

Trade  and  economic  links  are  how  a  major  component  of  Soviet-Viet- 
nainese  cooperation.  Economic,  scientific,  and  technological  links  are 
ateadily  growing  in  scale  and  variety,  spreading  to  more  and  more  fields 
and  branches.  The  Soviet  Union  provides  Vietnam  with  technical  assis¬ 
tance  in  building  and  modernising  economic  projects,  assistance  that 
grows  by  the  year.  In  all,  the  USSR  has  helped  Vietnam  build,  restore, 
or  modernise  more  than  200  projects. 

In  the  course  of  the  Soviet-Vietnamese  talks  between  party  and  go¬ 
vernmental  delegations  in  June  1985,  the  two  sides  pointed  to  the  great 

Ctentialities  for  steady  expansion  of  bilateral  economic,  scientific,  and 
:hnological  cooperation.  It  is  now  essential  for  that  cooperation  to  be 
made  more  effective,  for  the  entire  complex  Of  bilateral  economic  links  to 
be  further  improved  on  the  basis  of  long-term  planning,  specialised  pro¬ 
duction  to  be  promoted,  and  mutually  beneficial  special-purpose  pro¬ 
gramme  to  be  implemented. 

Cultural  and  scientific  links  have  been  quite  successful,  too.  A  great 
number  of  Vietnamese  people  study  at  Soviet  educational  establishments; 
besides,  there  is  a  special  intergovernmental  agreement  under  which 
many  Vietnamese  people  come  to  the  USSR  for  job  training,  and  some 
come  here  to  work. 

The  Soviet  Union  and  Vietnam  are  actively  cooperating  in  the  world 
arena.  Close  coordination  of  the  two  countries’  foreign-policy  efforts  is 
effected  through  regular  consultations  at  various  levels.  This  coordination 
is  based  On  the  identity  of  positions  of  the  two  states  as  regards  all 
major  international  issues.  Vietnam  has  actively  supported  the  Soviet 
constructive  stand  at  the  Geneva  summit  in  November  1985.  Consultations 
between  the  two  countries’  Foreign  Ministries  are  now  conducted  on  a 
regular  basis,  as  are  top-level  talks.  Coordination  of  the  two  nations’  fo¬ 
reign  policies  was  given  fresh  impetus  when  Mikhail  Gorbachev  met  with 
Le  Duan  in  June-July  1985.  The  Soviet-Vietnamese  declaration  that  fol¬ 
lowed  from  the  meeting  stated  that  “the  talks  and  conversations  were  con¬ 
ducted  in  a  friendly  and  cordial  atmosphere  reflecting  the  fraternal  cha- 


•  The  Fifth  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  Vietnam,  Moscow,  1983,  pp.  96-97 
(in  Russian); 

*  Pravda,  June  30,  1985. 


55 


racter  of  Soviet-Vietnamese  relations,  and  reaffirmed  the  complete  unity 
of  two  sides’  positions  on  all  matters  discussed.”  ® 


THE  SOVIET  UNIOH  AND  LAOS 

The  foreign  policy  of  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic  and  its 
attitude  towards  topical  world  problems  are  determined  mainly  by  the 
nation’s  affiliation  with  the  socialist  community  and  also  by  its  special 
position  in  the  world  arena.  The  General  Secretary  of  the  Central  Com¬ 
mittee  of  the  Lao  People’s  Revolutionary  Party,  Prime  Minister  Kaysone 
Phomvihane,  has  described  Laos  as  an  outpost  of  socialism  in  Southeast 
Asia,  situated  at  the  forefront  of  confrontation  between  socialist  and 
capitalist  systems  in  the  region.  The  Lao  foreign  policy,  he  said,  is  de¬ 
signed  to  provide  external  conditions  of  peace  that  would  promote  so¬ 
cialist  construction.  ® 

The  main  directions  of  the  nation’s  foreign  policy  outlined  in  the  Lao 
government’s  programme  of  action  in  1975  were  confirmed  and  developed 
at  the  3rd  Congress  of  the  Lao  People’s  Revolutionary  Party  in  April 
1982.  The  Congress  said  that  all-out  consolidation  of  cohesion  and  ex¬ 
pansion  of  cooperation  with  Vietnam,  Kampuchea,  the  Soviet  Union,  and 
other  socialist  nations  was  a  consistent  and  principled  long-term  policy 
of  the  Lao  People’s  Revolutionary  Party  and  government The  nation’s 
strong  alliance  with  Vietnam  and  Kampuchea  is  of  special  significance 
for  its  position  in  the  world  arena,  particularly  for  providing  favourable 
conditions  under  which  the  basis  of  socialism  might  be  built. 

Cooperation  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  Laos  shows  dynamic  de¬ 
velopment.  The  two  nations’  leaders  meet  regularly,  and  the  top-level 
contacts  are  of  fundamental  significance  for  consolidation  of  friendship 
and  cooperation  between  the  Soviet  Communist  Party,  and  the  Lao  Peop¬ 
le’s  Revolutionary  Party,  and  between  the  two  nations.  In  August  1985, 
Kaysone  Phomvihane  came  to  the  USSR  on  a  working  visit  of  friendship. 
When  he  met  with  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  the  two  leaders  noted  the  steady 
development 'and  deepening  of  Soviet-Lao  relations,  centred  on  comradely 
collaboration  between  the  Soviet  Communist  Party  and  the  Lao  People’s 
Revolutionary  Party,  and  expressed  their  intent  to  continue  raising  the 
level  of  coordination  of  the  two  countries’  foreign-policy  activities  for  the 
sake  of  peace  and  socialism.® 

Soviet-Lao  links  in  the  economic  field  have  been  quite  successful  and 
are  improving.  A  protocol  on  coordination  of  the  two  nations’  economic 
plans  for  1981-1985  was  signed  in  Moscow  in  September  1980,  this  mark¬ 
ing  a  new  phase  in  Soviet-Lao  cooperation. 

In  December  1980,  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic  celebrated 
the  5th  anniversary  of  its  establishment.  The  festivities  in  Laos  were 
attended  by  a  Soviet  party  and  government  delegation,  which  also  took 
part  in  the  second  meeting  of  the  intergovernmental  commission  On  eco¬ 
nomic,  scientific,  and  technological  cooperation.  The  commission  discus¬ 
sed  the  promotion  of  bilateral  trade  and  economic  cooperation  for  1981- 
1985,  setting  the  basic  guidelines  for  cooperation  for  the  subsequent  five 
years  and  the,  longer  term.  Agreements  were  signed  on  trade  and  pay¬ 
ments  for  1981-1985,  and  also  on  bilateral  economic  and  technological 
cooperation  during  that  period.  The  plan  was  to  increase  trade  by  about 
250  per  cent  over  the  five  years.  The  USSR  provides  Laos  with  machinery 


®  Ibidem. 

*  See  World  Marxist  Review,  No.  9,  1981. 

The  Third  Congress  of  the  Lao  People* s  Revolutionary  Party,  Moscow,  1983, 
pp.  46-47  (in  Russian). 

*  Pravda,  August  29,  1985. 


56 


and  equipment,  petroleum  products  and  consumer  goods,  in  exchange  for 
Ughl-industry  output  and  agricultural  produce. 

Economic  cooperation  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  Laos  is  structu- 
ffid  primarily  to  promote  the  public  sector  of  the  Lao  economy.  From 
W76  to  1985,  the  USSR  helped  Laos  with  a  number  of  important  econo¬ 
mic  projects — road  bridges  across  the  rivers  Nen  and  Ngym,  a  hospital, 
in  oil  reservoir,  motor  vehicle  and  farm-machinery  repair  stations,  an  In- 
tioraputnik  satellite  communications  ground  station,  the  first  section  for 
ihe  Latseng  state  farm,  and  some  others. 

At  present,  the  Soviet  Union  is  helping  Laos  build  Highway  9,  a  po- 
lytcchnical  school,  a  medium-wave  broadcasting  radio  station,  a  150-bed 
hospital,  and  two  long  bridges  on  highway  13.  Besides,  a  building  and 
•  transport  agency  are  being  established  with  Soviet  assistance. 

The  two  countries’  interaction  in  foreign  policy  is  growing  in  depth. 
The  Lao  leadership  consistently  supports  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Soviet 
Communist  Party  and  state,  including  the  Soviet  peace  initiatives  in¬ 
tended  to  prevent  a  nuclear  war,  to  curb  the  arms  race,  and  to  safeguard 

•nd  consolidate  peace.  . 

The  Soviet-Lao  statement  that  followed  Kaysone  Phomvihanes  visit  to 
the  USSR  in  August  1985  stated  that  the  Soviet  Union  and  Laos  were 
working  steadily  to  make  Asia  a  continent  of  peace,  stability,  goodneigh¬ 
bourliness,  and  cooperation,  and  came  out  in  favour  of  pooling  the  efforts 
of  Asian  states  in  the  search  for  mutually  acceptable  constructive  deci- 
ilions  for  settling  existing  problems  through  bilateral  and  multi-lateral 
consultations,  and,  in  the  future,  of  holding  an  all-Asia  forum  to  examine 
the  entire  range  of  issues  concerning  the  maintenance  of  security  and 
Mual  cooperation  of  Asian  states. 

October  1981  saw  another  major  event  in  the  history  of  Soviet-Lao 
cooperation  in  the  world  arena.  The  Lao  Foreign  Minister,  Phoune  Sipa- 
•euth,  came  to  the  USSR  on  a  friendly  visit  and  had  talks  with  Andrei 
Gromyko.  The  talks  featured  complete  unanimity  of  views  on  all  the 
matters  discussed. 

More  recently,  the  comprehensive  links  between  the  USSR  and  Laos 
were  substantially  strengthened  when  a  delegation  of  the  Soviet  Parlia¬ 
ment  (the  USSR  Supreme  Soviet),  led  by  Vladimir  Dolgikh,  made  an 
(rfficial  visit  of  friendship  to  Laos  in  November  1984.  The  delegation  also 
visited  Vietnam  and  Kampuchea  and,  on  its  return,  the  results  of  the  tour 
were  discussed  by  the  Politbureau  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Soviet 
Communist  Party.  The  Politbureau  then  pointed  out  that  “the  Soviet 
Communist  Party  and  state  will  continue  their  consistent  support  for  the 
peoples  of  the  Indochina  countries  in  their  struggle  for  social  progress, 
U)  defence  of  their  national  sovereignty,  for  peace  and  security  in  South¬ 
east  Asia.”  9  The  Soviet  Union  expresses  whole-hearted  solidarity  with 
Laos  in  its  demand  for  a  complete  withdrawal  of  Thai  troops  from  the 
territory  in  Sayabouri  province  that  they  occupied  in  June  1984.  Laos  de¬ 
mands  respect  for  its  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity. 


THE  SOVIET  UNION  AND  THE  PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC  OF  KAMPUCHEA 

The  tragedy  of  Kampuchea  shocked  the  whole  world.  With  Vietnam  s 
support,  people’s  Kampuchea  got  rid  of  the  Pol  Pot  regime  and  is  now 
fc^viving. 

In  accordance  with  the  guidelines  set  by  the  4th  Congress  of  the 
People’s  Revolutionary  Party  of  Kampuchea  in  May  1981,  the  republic 
favours  promotion  of  relations  with  all  states  on  the  principles  of  peace- 


•  Pravda,  Nov.  30,  1984. 


57 


ful  coexistence,  and  strengthening  of  solidarity  with  socialist  and  newly- 
free  states  and  with  national  liberation  movements. 

The  core  of  Kampuchea’s  foreign-policy  course  is  promotion  of  friend¬ 
ship  and  cooperation  with  the  Soviet  Union,  Vietnam,  and  other  socialist 
states. 'The  republic  gives  special  attention  to  fraternal  friendship  and 
close  cooperation  with  Vietnam  and  Laos.  The  basic  guidelines  for  that 
cooperation  were  set  by  the  Indochina  nations’  summit,  held  in  Vientiane 
in  February  1983.  In  accordance  with  the  treaty  of  peace,  friendship,  and 
cooperation  signed  by  Vietnam  and  Kampuchea  in  February  1979,  there 
are  Vietnamese  volunteer  troops  on  Kampuchean  territory  providing  in¬ 
ternationalist  assistance  to  the  republic  in  defending  its  sovereignty  and 
independence.  As  more  and  more  Khmer  counterrevoiutionary  bands  that 
have  been  making  raids  into  Kampuchea  from  Thai  territory  are  destroy¬ 
ed,  the  Vietnamese  volunteers  are  gradually  being  pulled  out.  The  first 
troop  pullout  was  in  1982. 

February  1980  saw  an  event  of  great  importance  for  Soviet-Kampuchean 
rciations— the  first  official  friendly  visit  by  a  Kampuchean  top-level 
delegation  to  the  Soviet  Union.  The  talks  in  Moscow  produced  a  number 
of  documents  providing  a  solid  basis  for  bilateral  cooperation  in  the  eco¬ 
nomic,  technological,  cultural,  scientific,  and  other  fields.  Bilateral  rela¬ 
tions  were  further  promoted  by  the  official  visits  of  friendship  paid  to 
the  USSR  by  a  delegation  of  Kampuchea’s  National  Assembly  (in  May 
1982)  and  its  Prime  Minister  (in  July  1984),  and  also  by  the  visit  of  a 
delegation  of  the  USSR  Supreme  Soviet  to  Kampuchea  in  November 
1984  and  by  several  meetings  between  the  two  countries’  leaders. 

The  Soviet  Union  is  helping  Kampuchea  build  or  restore  a  large  num¬ 
ber  of  industrial  and  agricultural  facilities,  power  stations,  ports,  roads, 
irrigation  canals,  etc.  By  the  start  of  1984,  Soviet  economic  and  techni¬ 
cal  assistance  to  Kampuchea  totalled  58  million  rubles.  In  1982,  Soviet- 
Kampuchean  economic  cooperation  was  put  on  a  long-term  basis. 

In  February  1983,  the  two  countries  signed  a  trade  agreement  for 
1983-1985,  under  which  the  Soviet  Union’s  supplies  of  goods  to  Kam¬ 
puchea  exceeded  seventy  million  rubles  in  1984.  Also  in  that  year  the 
two  countries  formed  an  intergovernmental  commission  on  trade,  economic, 
scientific  and  technological  cooperation.  The  commission  met  for  the  first 
time  in  January  1985,  and  it  is  doing  much  to  promote  bilateral  coope¬ 
ration. 

Some  1,500  Kampucheans  were  studying  in  the  Soviet  Union  in  1984. 
The  two  nations  now  have  contacts  in  the  fields  of  health  care,  education, 
science,  culture,  and  sports,  and  public  organisations  exchange  delega¬ 
tions  and  promote  other  links. 

In  his  speech  at  the  session  to  mark  the  Soviet  Union’s  60th  Anni¬ 
versary  the  General  Secretary  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  People’s 
Revolutionary  Party  of  Kampuchea  and  Chairman  of  the  republic’s  State 
Council,  Heng  Samrin  said,  “The  People’s  Revolutionary  Party  and  the 
people  of  Kampuchea  express  their  unfailing  gratitude  to  the  country  of 
Lenin  for  the  aid  and  support  rendered  to  us,  and  pledge  to  do  their  ut¬ 
most  to  consolidate  Kampuchean-Soviet  fraternal  friendship  further.” 

The  Soviet  Union  has  shown  profound  understanding  of  the  tragedy 
through  which  the  Kampuchean  people  had  to  pull  during  the  rule  of  the 
Pol  Pot  terrorists,  so  the  USSR  supports  Kampuchea  in  its  defence  of 
independence  and  revolutionary  gains  against  the  Pol  Pot  gangs  that 
found  shelter  in  Thailand  and  are  warring  against  people’s  Kampuchea, 
with  aid  coming  from  imperialist  and  reactionary  forces.  The  Soviet 
Union  maintains  that  confrontation  between  the  ASEAN  nations  and  the 
states  of  Indochina  should  be  eliminated  and  that  joint  efforts  should 
be  made  to  make  Southeast  Asia  a  zone  of  peace  and  cooperation. 

Pravda,  Dec.  23,  1982. 


58 


The  ASEAN  states  pursue  a  line  that  actually  leads  to  confrontation 
with  the  Indochina  nations,  thus  enabling  various  external  forces  to 
interfere  in  Southeast  Asian  affairs.  Kampuchea  and  the  other  nations  of 
Indochina  find  themselves  under  pressure  exerted  for  the  purpose  of  forc« 
Ing  them  to  agree  to  a  settlement  of  the  alleged  “Kampuchean  problem" 
on  conditions  that  suit  the  ASEAN  best.  The  countries  of  the  ASEAN, 
particularly  some  of  them  and  their  “patrons”,  try  to  make  the  “Karnpu- 
chean  problem”  international.  Year  in,  year  out  they  impose  discussions 
of  the  so-called  “Kampuchean  issue”  on  the  United  Nations’  General  As¬ 
sembly  and  push  through  resolutions  calling  for  what  is  termed  “a  poli¬ 
tical  settlement  of  the  conflict  on  the  basis  of  a  withdrawal  of  foreign 
troops  from  Kampuchea”.  In  July  1981,  they  even  formally  set  up  a  so- 
called  “International  Conference  on  Kampuchea”. 

The  ASEAN  nations  differ,  however,  on  the  issue  of  relations  with 
Kampuchea.  The  differences  currently  taking  shape  in  the  ASEAN  na¬ 
tions’  regional  policies  are  due,  in  part,  to  disagreement  over  the  causes 
of  instability  in  Southeast  Asia.  Time  is  on  Kampuchea’s  side. 


SOVIET-CHINESE  RELATIONS 

In  its  relations  with  China,  the  Soviet  Union  has  been  strictly  follow¬ 
ing  the  course  chartered  by  the  24th  and  25th  Congresses  of  the  So¬ 
viet  Communist  Party  and  reaffirmed  by  its  26th  Congress,  steadily  work¬ 
ing  to  restore  and  promote  links  with  that  country  on  a  goodneighbourly 
basis.  The  26th  Party  Congress  reiterated  that  the  Soviet  Union’s  propo¬ 
sals  aimed  at  a  normalisation  of  its  relations  with  China  remained  in 
force,  just  as  the  Soviet  people’s  feelings  of  respect  and  friendship  to¬ 
wards  the  Chinese  people  remained  unchanged. 

The  Soviet  Union’s  principled  and  consistent  course  has  been  re¬ 
peatedly  expressed  by  the  Soviet  Communist  Party  leaders.  Speaking  in 
Tashkent  back  in  March  1982,  Leonid  Brezhnev  said,  “We  remember  well 
the  times  when  the  Soviet  Union  and  People’s  China  were  united  by 
bonds  of  friendship  and  comradely  cooperation.  We  have  never  considered 
the  state  of  hostility  and  estrangement  between  our  countries  as  normal. 
We  are  ready  to  negotiate,  without  any  prior  conditions,  on  measures 
acceptable  to  both  sides  to  improve  Soviet-Chinese  relations  on  the  basis 
of  mutual  respect  for  each  other’s  interests,  non-interference  in  each 
other’s  affairs,  and  mutual  benefit — and  certainly  not  to  the  detriinent  of 
third  countries.”  It  was  indicated  that  this  applied  to  econornic,  scientific, 
and  cultural  links,  as  well  as  political  relations,  as  the  sides  became 
ready  for  specific  steps  in  any  of  those  fields.  In  answering  questions 
from  the  Soviet  daily  Pravda  in  August  1983,  Yuri  Andropov  said  that 
certain  positive  trends  had  begun  to  take  shape  in  Soviet-Chinese  rela¬ 
tions.  “However”,  he  went  on  to  say,  “the  present  level  of  bilateral  rela¬ 
tions  is,  we  are  convinced,  far  from  what  it  should  be  between  such 
major  and,  moreover,  neighbouring  powers  as  the  Soviet  Union  and  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China.”  Yuri  Andropov  indicated  that  “much  can 
be  done  in  the  area  of  further  expanding  trade,  promoting  economic, 
scientific,  and  technological  cooperation,  and  in  the  field  of  cultural,  athle¬ 
tic,  and  other  links.”  Then  he  stressed  that,  “Placing  the  relations  be¬ 
tween  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  on  a  heal¬ 
thier  basis  becomes  especially  important  and  topical  under  the  conditions 
of  the  present  aggravation  of  the  international  situation.  We  are  certain 
that,  objectively,  the  interests  of  the  Soviet  and  the  Chinese  peoples  do 


"  Pravda,  March  25,  1982. 
'»  Pravda,  Aug.  27,  1983. 


59 


not  diverge  wherever  it  comes  to  eliminating  the  danger  of  war  and  con¬ 
solidating  peace.” 

In  the  early  1980s,  the  Soviet  Union  also  moved  a  number  of  propos¬ 
als  on  resuming  negotiations  between  the  two  countries  and  on  taking 
practical  measures  to  help  restore  links  in  various  fields,  but  there  were 
no  positive  changes  in  1980  or  in  1981.  At  that  time,  the  Chinese  leader¬ 
ship  pursued  a  course  unfriendly  to  the  Soviet  Union,  and  this  produced 
a  clearly  negative  effect  on  Soviet-Chinese  relations.  Peking  then  conti¬ 
nued  to  follow  a  line  towards  a  bloc  with  American  imperialism,  and  call¬ 
ed  for  building  “a  structure  of  joint  resistance  to  the  Soviet  Union”. 

A  leading  role  in  that  "structure”  was  reserved  for  the  United  States,  and 
apart  from  China  it  was  to  consist  of  the  NATO  countries,  Japan,  and  any 
other  states  that  could  be  dragged  into  it.  Complete  support  was  ex¬ 
pressed  f(ir  the  new  round  of  the  arms  race  started  by  the  United  States’ 
ruling  quarters,  and  approval  was  given  to  NATO’s  decision  to  deploy 
American  first-strike  nuclear  missiles  in  Western  Europe.  The  idea  of 
Chinese-American  “strategic  coordination”  featured  during  Defense  Sec¬ 
retary  Brown’s  visit  to  China  in  January  1980.  On  January  20,  1980 
China  unilaterally  suspended  the  inter-state  relations  talks  with  the 
Soviet  Union  which  had  begun  in  1979.  On  April  11,  1980,  owing  to  a 
previous  decision  taken  by  the  Standing  Committee  of  the  National  Peop¬ 
le’s  Congress,  the  Soviet-Chinese  Treaty  of  Friendship,  Alliance,  and 
Mutual  Assistance  became  invalid.  That  treaty,  concluded  back  in  1950, 
had  for  many  years  provided  the  basis  for  Soviet-Chinese  relations. 

In  practical  cooperation,  bilateral  links  of  the  early  1980s  were  few, 
too.  Under  the  protocol  on  trade  and  payments  for  1981,  trade  totaled 
about  170  million  rubles,  a  major  set-back  from  the  1980  volume  exceed¬ 
ing  300  million. 

Certain  positive  changes  in  Soviet-Chinese  relations  were  first  noted  in 
1982.  This  was  undoubtedly  due  to  the  growing  awareness,  even  among 
the  Chinese  leadership,  that  the  state  of  hostility  and  estrangement  in  the 
relations  between  the  two  neighbouring  socialist  countries  was  strikingly 
anomalous.  Besides,  it  was  becoming  increasingly  evident  that  the  one¬ 
sided  stake  on  partnership  with  the  United  States  and  other  western 
powers  was  irrational  from  the  viewpoint  of  China’s  own  interests,  since 
China  actually  found  itself  in  the  position  of  a  "junior  partner”  of  impe¬ 
rialism. 

In  outlining  China’s  foreign-policy  course,  the  12th  Congress  of  the 
Communist  Party  of  China  stressed  its  “independence  and  self-suffici¬ 
ency”  and  said  it  was  necessary  to  “struggle  against  imperialism,  hege- 
monism,  and  colonialism”,  “in  defence  of  world  peace”.  It  was  also  indi¬ 
cated  that  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  was  ready  to  promote  relations 
with  any  countries  on  the  principles  of  peaceful  coexistence.  So,  even 
though  the  basic  orientations  of  China’s  foreign-policy  course  remained 
the  same,  including  a  trend  towards  political  cooperation  with  western 
powers,  there  was  a  certain  shift  of  emphasis:  formerly,  Peking  had  open¬ 
ly  emphasised  one-sided  political  cooperation  with  the  United  States  and_ 
other  western  powers,  and  hostility  towards  the  USSR;  now  it  proclaimed 
the  course  of  Opposing  two  “super-powers”.  The  slogan  of  a  “united 
front  of  struggle  against  hegemonism”,  which  was  spearheaded  against 
the  Soviet  Union,  is  going  out  of  use. 

Starting  in  1982,  Soviet-Chinese  links  and  contacts  in  various  fields 
gradually  began  to  be  restored,  a  development  that  the  Soviet  side  had 
repeatedly  called  for  ever  many  years. 

October  1982  saw  the  start  of  Soviet-Chinese  political  consultations, 
conducted  by  special  representatives  of  the  two  governments — the  Soviet 


Ibidem. 


60 


Deputy  Foreign  Minister  Leonid  llyichov  and  the  Chinese  Deputy  Foreign 
Minister  Qian  Quchen.  The  consultations  are  held  in  Moscow  and  Peking 
in  turn.  Seven  rdunds  have  now  been  held,  during  which  the  two  sides 
have  been  exchanging  views  on  matters  of  normalisation  of  relations 
between  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China.  In  view 
of  differences  on  important  international  problems  and  of  different  ap¬ 
proaches  to  relations  with  some  countries,  so  far  the  consultations  have 
not  yielded  major  positive  results. 

The  lack  of  success  is  mainly  due  to  what  are  termed  “the  three  ob¬ 
stacles’’,  the  three  prior  conditions  set  by  the  Chinese  side:  the  USSR 
should  stop  supporting  Vietnam  and  impel  that  country  to  pull  its  troops 
out  of  Kampuchea;  it  should  also  withdraw  its  troops  from  Afgha¬ 
nistan  and  reduce  its  troops  in  the  Far  East,  as  well  as  remove  Soviet 
military  units  from  Mongolia.  The  Soviet  side  has  expressed  its  readiness 
to  discuss  confidence-building  measures  along  the  border,  but  rejects  the 
demands  that  go  beyond  the  sphere  of  bilateral  relations  and/or  con¬ 
cerning  third  countries.  The  USSR  favours  improvement  of  relations  with 
China,  but  this  should  not  be  to  the  detriment  of  its  friends,  nor  at  the 
expense  of  third  countries.  The  Chinese  side  alleged  that  normalisation 
of  relations  must  begin  with  removal  of  the  “obstacles”  and  declined  the 
Soviet  proposals  on  concluding  a  treaty  of  non-aggression  and  non-use 
of  force  and  a  convention  on  the  principles  of  mutual  relations. 

The  two  sides’  coordinated  reports  on  the  results  of  particular  rounds 
of  consultations  show,  however,  their  interest  in  pursuing  efforts  aimed 
at  improving  relations  and  a  readiness  to  expand  links  and  contacts  in 
the  political,  economic,  trade,  scientific,  technological,  and  other  fields, 
in  this  connection,  they  consider  the  consultations  and  dialogue  useful 
and  intend  to  continue  them. 

Since  1983,  the  Soviet  and  Chinese  Foreiga  Ministries  have  been  con¬ 
ducting  annual  consultations  on  international  matters  between  Deputy 
Foreign  Ministers,  in  Moscow  and  Peking  in  turn,  exchanging  infor¬ 
mation. 

In  September  1984,  the  Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Andrei  Gromyko  and 
the  Chinese  Foreign  Minister  Wu  Xueqian  met  twice;  in  September  1985 
in  New  York  a  conversation  took  place  between  Eduard  Shevardnadze 
and  the  Chinese  Foreign  Minister.  The  two  sides  spoke  in  favour 
of  pursuing  the  political  dialogue  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  China 
at  various  levels.  ‘® 

In  December  1984,  the  First  Deputy  Prime  Minister  of  the  USSR, 
Ivan  Arkhipov,  visited  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  and  in  July  1985, 
the  Deputy  Premier  of  China’s  State  Council,  Yao  Yilin,  paid  a  return 
visit  to  the  Soviet  Union.  This  exchange  of  visits  was  of  major  import¬ 
ance  for  bilateral  relations,  especially  for  promoting  trade,  economic, 
scientific,  and  technological  links. 

Indeed,  it  is  due  to  both  sides’  efforts  that  bilateral  trade  has  grown 
markedly  since  1982,  its  volume  rising  from  170  million  rubles  in  1981 
to  1.6  billion  rubles  in  1985.  In  the  field  of  scientific  and  technological 
cooperation,  the  two  countries  have  started  exchanging  groups  of  special¬ 
ists,  who  familiarise  themselves  with  the  subjects  agreed  upon. 

The  talks  conducted  by  Ivan  Arkhipov  and  Yao  Yilin  in  the  Soviet 
Union  and  China  made  possible  major  steps  towards  the  long-term  plan¬ 
ning  of  bilateral  trade,  economic,  scientific,  and  technological  coopera- 


Pravda,  April  23,  1985,  Oct.  21,  1985 
Pravda,  Sept.  16.  1983,  July  1,  3,  5,  1984 
Pravda,  Sept.  23,  1984. 

Pravda,  Dec.  21-24,  29,  1984;  July  9-12,  1985, 


61 


’tion,  and  also  providing  a  legal  foundation  for  these  types  of  coope¬ 
ration. 

In  the  course  of  Ivan  Arkhipov’s  visit  to  Peking,  threee  agreements 
were  signed.  One  was  between  the  Soviet  and  Chinese  governments  on 
economic  and  technical  cooperation.  The  second  was  on  scientific  and 
technological  cooperation,  and  the  third  was  on  the  establishment  of  a 
Soviet-Chinese  commission  on  economic,  trade,  scientific,  and  technologic¬ 
al  cooperation. 

The  two  sides  also  gave  favourable  consideration  to  matters  involved 
in  signing  a  cultural  cooperation  plan,  broadening  the  areas  of  scientific 
and  technological  exchanges,  and  promoting  exchanges  of  college  students 
and  persons  sent  for  advanced  studies,  as  well  as  certain  other  fields  of 
intcr^ststs  rdsitions^ 

In  July  1985,  the  Deputy  Premier  of  the  Chinese  State  Council,  Yao 
Yilin,  made  an  official  visit  to  the  USSR,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Soviet 
Government.  At  the  end  of  their  talks  in  Moscow  on  July  10,  Ivan  Arkhi¬ 
pov  and  Yao  Yilin  signed  agreements  on  trade  and  payments  for  1986- 
1990  and  on  economic  and  technical  cooperation  in  the  construction  and 
modernisation  of  industrial  facilities  in  China.  Under  the  trade  agree¬ 
ment,  Soviet-Chinese  trade  is  to  continue  growing  over  the  next  five  years 
to  reach  a  total  of  12  billion  rubles,  while  the  figure  for  1990  is  fixed  at 
3  billion  rubles,  almost  double  the  1985  figure.  Under  the  cooperation 
agreement,  seven  new  projects  are  to  be  built  in  China  and  17  are  to  be 
rebuilt  with  Soviet  participation  and  assistance. 

Another  important  development  in  Soviet-Chinese  relations  was  the 
establishment  of  contacts  between  the  two  countries’  supreme  legisla¬ 
tures — the  National  People’s  Congress  of  China  and  the  USSR  Supreme 
Soviet.  In  March  1985,  a  delegation  of  the  National  People’s  Congress 
led  by  a  member  of  its  Standing  Committee  Zhang  Chenxian,  made  an 
official  visit  to  the  USSR  at  the  invitation  of  the  USSR  Supreme  Soviet. 
The  delegation  familiarised  itself  with  the  work  of  the  USSR  Supreme 
Soviet^  and  its  standing  commissions.  The  delegates  were  provided  with 
information  about  the  Supreme  Soviet’s  relations  with  local  Soviets  and 
about  ways  to  supervise  the  activities  of  people’s  deputies. 

In  October  1985  a  delegation  of  the  USSR  Supreme  Soviet  headed  by 
Chairman  of  the  Soviet  of  the  Union,  USSR  Supreme  Soviet,  paid  a  re¬ 
turn  visit  to  China.  During  the  meetings  and  conversations  with  Chinese 
MPs,  including  Peng  Chen,  member  of  the  CC  CPC  Political  Bureau, 
Chairman  of  the  Standing  Committee,  China’s  National  People’s  Con¬ 
gress,  mutual  satisfaction  was  expressed  with  the  positive  changes  in 
Soviet-Chinese  relations,  the  development  of  contacts  between  the  USSR 
Supreme  Soviet  and  the  National  People’s  Congress,  and  mutual  desire 
was  expressed  to  build  parliamentary  ties  on  a  regular  basis. 

The  USSR  and  China  have  identical  stands  on  some  international  is¬ 
sues  (the  need  to  prevent  militarisation  of  space  and  to  make  the  Indian 
Ocean  a  zone  of  peace,  and  a  settlement  in  Namibia).  The  Chinese  side 
displays  no  readiness,  however,  to  cooperate  with  the  USSR  and  other 
socialist  nations  in  efforts  to  prevent  a  nuclear  holocaust,  to  promote 
reductions  of  weapons,  above  all  nuclear  weapons,  to  restore  detente  and 
consolidate  peace.  China’s  appraisals  of  the  causes  of  international  ten¬ 
sion  and  of  the  situation  in  and  around  Kampuchea  and  Afghanistan 
differ  from  those  given  by  the  other  socialist  countries.  During  his  visit 
to  the  United  States  in  July  1985,  Chairman  Li  Xiannian  said  that  China 
would  not  permit  its  relations  with  other  countries  “to  be  determined  by 


**  Pravda,  Dec.  30,  1984. 

Pravda,  July  11,  1985. 
so  Pravda,  March  12,  1985, 
2'  Pravda,  Oct.  12,  1985. 


62 


likeness  or  difference  of  social  systems  or  ideologies’’.  Earlier  in  London, 
a  statement  to  the  same  effect  was  made  by  the  Premier  of  the  Chinese 
State  Council,  Zhao  Ziyang. 

The  Chinese  leadership  is  putting  certain  limits  on  the  development 
of  Soviet-Chinese  relations,  too.  China,  they  maintain,  “will  not  come 
back  to  the  big  family’’,  “will  not  return  to  the  relations  of  the  1950s’’. 
Chairman  Li  Xiannian  said  in  the  United  States  that,  even  if  “the  three 
obstacles”  were  overcome  and  relations  with  the  USSR  improved,  they 
“would  not  return  to  the  alliance  of  the  1950s”. 

As  for  the  Soviet  Union,  it  has  been  making  efforts,  and  will  continue 
to  do  so,  to  bring  Soviet-Chinese  relations  back  on  to  the  path  of  good- 
neighbourliness.  The  continuity  of  the  Soviet  Communist  Party’s  course 
with  regard  to  China  was  stressed  at  the  Plenums  of  the  Party’s  Central 
Committee  in  March  and  April  1985  and  in  a  number  of  speeches  deli¬ 
vered  by  Mikhail  Gorbachev,  General  Secretary  of  the  CPSU  Central 
Committee.  In  his  speech  in  Dnepropetrovsk  on  June  26,  1985,  Mikhail 
Gorbachev  said,  “I  have  already  had  an  opportunity  to  speak  about  rela¬ 
tions  with  the  People’s  Republic  of  China.  I  believe  time  has  shown  both 
sides  that  dissociation  and,  moreover,  unfriendliness  and  suspiciousness 
benefit  neither  of  them,  and  goodneighbourly  cooperation  is  quite  possible 
and  advisable.  We,  for  our  part,  are  determined  to  work  actively  to  com¬ 
pletely  overcome  the  negative  stretch  in  Soviet-Chinese  relations,  which 
engendered  a  great  deal  of  artificial  difficulties.  I  am  certain  that,  in  the 
end,  this  is  how  it  will  be.” 


The  general  aggravation  of  the  world  situation,  brought  about  by  the 
imperialist  forces’  attempts  to  upset  the  parity  of  strength  existing 
between  NATO  and  the  Warsaw  Treaty  Organisation,  the  arms  buildup 
and  extensive  war  preparations  may,  in  the  future,  make  the  Asian-Pacific 
region  a  zone  of  extreme  tension.  It  is  up  to  all  states  of  the  region  to 
prevent  such  a  development,  and  this  would  be  greatly  helped  by  imple¬ 
mentation  of  Mikhail  Gorbachev’s  initiative  of  May  21,  1985.  Mikhail  Gor¬ 
bachev  said  it  was  necessary  to  show  a  comprehensive  approach  to  the 
problem  of  Asian  security  and,  in  the  future,  to  hold  an  all-Asia  forum  to 
ejjcchange  views  and  search  jointly  for  constructive  solutions.  The  peace 
and  security  proposals  moved  by  Mongolia,  the  Democratic  People’s 
Republic  of  Korea,  the  Indochina  nations,  and  India  could  be  of  great 
help,  too.  Promotion  of  the  Soviet  Union’s  relations  with  the  socialist 
countries  and  other  states  of  the  region  will  help  unite  Asian  nations’ 
ejforts  to  this  end. 


•*  Rentnin  ribao,  July  27,  1985.  '  f 

••  Pravda,  June  27,  1985. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  Into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO:  1812/94  63 


NONALIGNED  MOVEMENT — A  MAJOR  FACTOR  IN  WORLD  POLITICS 


Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  In  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  64-80 

[Article  by  Professor  I.  I.  Kovalenko] 

The  emergence  of  the  nonaligned  movement  was  a  major  consequence 
of  the  collapse  of  the  colonial  system  of  imperialism.  Against  the 
favourable  background  of  the  postwar  weakening  of  the  positions  of 
imperialism,  the  growing  prestige  of  world  socialism  and  the  successes 
of  the  national  liberation  struggle,  the  movement  increasingly  gathered 
momentum  and  became  a  powerful  factor  in  world  politics.  Over  the  two 
decades  since  the  first  meeting  of  the  nonaligned  countries  in  1961,  the 
ranks  of  the  movement  have  grown  fivefold  and  now  it  comprises  more 
than  100  countries.  A  new  progressive  factor  has  emerged  in  interna¬ 
tional  relations  which  has  been  exerting  a  positive  influence  on  every 
aspect  of  world  politics.  .n  . 

The  nonaligned  movement  arose  as  a  manifestation  of  the  will  and 
striving  of  young  states  for  consolidating  their  political  and  economic 
independence  and  gaining  the  opportunity  to  take  part,  on  an  equal  foot¬ 
ing,  in  the  solution  of  international  issues. 

Having  emerged  on  the  ruins  of  the  imperialist  colonial  system,  the 
nonaligned  movement  became,  as  it  were,  the  continuation  of  the  peoples’ 
national  liberation  struggle  under  new,  changed  circumstances  in  which 
imperialism  was  no  longer  able  to  dominate  using  the  old  colonialist 
methods  and  to  keep  them  within  the  sphere  of  its  political  and  economic 
influence  by  outright  gross  military  force.  The  nonaligned  movement 
was  a  form  for  young  nation  states  to  express  themselves  politically 
and  an  instrument  for  bolstering  their  national,  political  and  economic 
independence.  It  has  become  a  powerful  weapon  in  the  struggle  for 
consolidating  their  independence,  for  joining  the  world  community  of 
nations  .and  active  participation  in  the  solution  of  global  problems. 

The  Soviet  Union  welcomed  the  emergence  of  the  movement  from  the 
very  outset  and  from  its  formation  into  organisation.  Today,  too,  the 
socialist  community  regards  the  nonaligned  movement  as  a  powerful 
factor  in  the  struggle  against  imperialism,  colonialism  and  neocolonialism, 
against  the  forces  of  war  and  aggression.  The  socialist  states  are  at  one 
with  the  decisions  adopted  at  various  forums  of  the  movement,  inasmuch 
as  these  decisions  are  aimed  at  promoting  universal  peace  and  interna¬ 
tional  security,  curbing  the  nuclear  arms  race,  and  attaining  general 
and  complete  disarmament. 

By  contrast,  the  forces  of  imperialism  and  reaction  view  the  nonalign¬ 
ed  movement  as  a  formidable  obstacle  on  the  path  towards  establishing 
their  world  hegemony.  They  seek,  in  every  possible  way,  to  undermine 
and  weaken  the  movement,  resorting  to  the  most  villainous  and  inhuman 
means. 


Just  like  every  socio-political  movement,  the  nonaligned  movement  was 
predetermined  by  the  preceding  course  of  history,  a  series  of  major 


64 


developments  of  world  significance^  and  primarily,  by  tbc  Great  October 
Socialist  Revolution  which  ushered  in  a  new  era^  in  the  evolution  of 
humankind.  It  was  precisely  the  October  Revolution  that  delivered  a 
smashing  blow  at  imperialism  and  paved  the  way  towards  the  national 
and  social  emancipation  of  the  oppressed  peoples.  Lenin  predicted  that 
the  revolutionary  experience  in  a  country  such  as  Russia  ...will  show 
them  [the  peoples  of  the  East]  that,  weak  as  they  may  be,  and  invincible 
as  may  seem  the  power  of  the  European  oppressors,  who  in  the 
struggle  employ  all  the  marvels  of  technology  and  of  the  military 
nevertheless,  a  revolutionary  war  waged  by  oppressed  peoples,  if  it 
really  succeeds  in  arousing  the  millions  of  working  and  exploited  people, 
harbours  such  potentialities,  such  miracles,  that  the  emancipation  of  the 
peoples  of  the  East  is  now  practicable.” '  .  ..  t 

The  triumph  of  the  October  Revolution  resulted  in  the  combination  of 
socialist  and  national  liberation  revolutions,  and  opened  up  for  the  op¬ 
pressed  peoples  the  prospect  of  national  liberation  and  the  creation  of 
independent  and  equal  states  on  the  ruins  of  colonial  empires. 

The  formation  of  the  world  socialist  community  was  another  event 
which  exerted  a  tremendous  ideological  and  political  influence  on  the 
progress  of  the  world  today.  The  elimination  of  the  shock  forces  of  world 
reaction— Hitler’s  Germany  and  imperialist  Japan— brought  about  a 
radical  change  in  the  alignment  of  forces  on  the  world  scene.  A  number 
of  states  in  East  Europe  and  Asia,  in  which  people’s  democratic  revolu¬ 
tions  triumphed,  broke  away  from  the  world  capitalist  systerp.  A  world 
socialist  system  has  come  into  being  and  begun  exerting  a  decisive 
influence  on  the  course  of  world  developments.  It  gave  a  powerful  impetus 
to  the  further  growth  of  the  national  liberation  movement.  It  was  the 
formation  of  the  world  socialist  system  that  blocked  the  imperialist 
powers’  colonial  brigandage  and  forced  them  to  reckon  with  the  demands 
of  colonial  and  dependent  nations  fighting  for  freedom  and  independence. 

The  disintegration  of  the  colonial  system  of  imperialism  was  the  third, 
no  less  significant  factor,  which  was  closely  connected  with  the  first  two. 
The  great  national  liberation  movement  of  colonial  and  dependent 
countries  led  to  a  radical  change  in  the  alignment  of  forces  on  the  world 
scene  in  favour  of  peace,  democracy  and  social  progress.  Dozens  of 
countries,  which  imperialists  previously  kept  out  of  world  politics,  became 
Active  participants  in  it.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  about  75  per  cent  of  seats 
in  the  UN  and  its  specialised  agencies  are  held  today  by  Asian,  African 
and  Latin  American  countries.  As  Lenin  foresaw  it,  a  new  period  of 
world  history  set  in,  “a  period  in  which  all  the  Eastern  peoples  will 
participate  in  deciding  the  destiny  of  the  whole  world”.  ^ 

The  imperialists,  however,  could  not  reconcile  themselves  with  the  loss 
of  their  colonial  possessions  and  withdraw  peacefully.  They  have  been 
doing  their  utmost  to  preserve  the  old  order  in  their  former  coloriies  and 
to  seize  new  positions  there.  Under  the  cover  of  struggle  against  the 
“communist  menace”,  imperialist  powers  are  seeking  to  make  a  come¬ 
back  in  the  newly-free  countries  as  “guardians”  of  their  sovereignty  and 
to  place  their  puppets  in  power  there. 

With  these  aims  in  view  they  began  forging  aggressive  military  blocs 
and  bilateral  military  alliances:  the  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organisation 

iSEATO),  or  the  “Manila  Pact”;  the  Central  Treaty  Organisation 
CENTO),  the  former  “Baghdad  Pact”;  the  Asian  Pacific  Council 
ASPAC);  the  Organisation  of  American  States  (OAS);  and  the  ANZUS 
grouping  in  the  Pacific.  Gamal  Abdel  Nasser  gave  a  highly  eloquent  as¬ 
sessment  to  the  imperialist  blocs.  Coming  out  against  the  “Baghdad 


*  V.  I.  Lenin,  Collected  Works,  Vol.  30,  pp.  153-154. 

*  Ibid,,  Vol.  30,  p.  160. 


65 


Pact”  he  stated:  “Arabs  are  reluctant  to  have  anything  in  common  with 
the  big  prison  built  by  imperialist  powers  in  conformity  with  their  goals. 
At  first,  this  imperialist  prison  took  the  form  of  the  domination  of  the 
imperialist  powers  themselves;  then  the  imperialist  prison  acquired  a 
new  form  of  treaties  and  alliances.  The  ‘Baghdad  Pact’  is  the  latest  form 
of  imperialist  prison.  Arabs  realised  that  the  new  pact  was  a  big  prison, 
and  it  is  only  natural  that  they  did  not  want  to  enter  it  voluntarily.”  ^ 

US  imperialism  assumed  the  function  of  world  policeman.  During  the 
postwar  years  Washington  openly  interfered  in  the  internal  affairs  of 
sovereign  states  and  made  use  of  its  armed  forces  more  than  215  times. 
For  three  years,  under  the  UN  flag,  American  imperialism  waged  a  bloody 
war  against  the  Korean  people  in  the  bid  to  rout  the  Democratic  People’s 
Republic  of  Korea  and  establish  a  puppet  regime  there  that  would  bend 
to  Washington’s  will.  The  USA  waged  a  long  and  cruel  war  against  the 
heroic  Vietnamese  people,  and  committed  numerous  acts  of  armed  ag¬ 
gression  against  revolutionary  Cuba.  It  has  been  waging  an  undeclared 
war  against  Nicaragua  and  El  Salvador.  Washington  has  committed 
an  overt  aggression  against  Grenada  and  restored  the  colonial  order  there. 
More  than  once,  US  aggressors  have  struck  with  their  fist  against  the 
patriots  of  Mexico,  Panama,  Venezuela,  Chile,  and  Guatemala,  and 
rendered  substantial  aid  to  Britain  in  capturing  the  Falkland  Islands 
belonging  to  Argentina.  These  facts  show  that  US  imperialism  does  not 
intend  to  abandon  its  schemes  for  establishing  its  domination  over  many 
newly-free  countries  and  peoples,  and  is  ready  to  go  to  any  extremes  to 
block  the  road  to  freedom  and  independence  for  the  peoples  who  are  still 
languishing  under  the  colonial  yoke. 

In  order  to  repulse  the  onslaught  of  imperialism,  to  preserve  and 
consolidate  the  freedom  and  independence  they  have  won,  the  riewly-free 
countries  began  looking  for  new  forms  of  resistance  to  imperialism,  to 
colonialism  and  neocolonialism.  The  young  nation  states  were  well  aware 
that  they  could  not  withstand  imperialists’  military  and  political  blackmail 
on  their  own  and  tried  to  find  collective  forms  of  rebuffing  the  imperialist 
encroachments  and  neocolonial  aspirations  of  Western  powers. 

Back  at  the  stage  of  the  struggle  for  independence,  representatives 
of  colonial  and  dependent  countries  proposed  various  forms  of  coordinat¬ 
ing  their  efforts  on  the  world  scene.  For  example,  in  1945,  President  Ho 
Chi  Minh  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam,  an  outstanding  leader 
of  the  international  communist  and  national  liberation  movement,  propos¬ 
ed  to  the  government  of  Indonesia  to  adopt  a  joint  declaration  on  united 
efforts  in  the  struggle  against  colonialism.  General  Aung  San,  the  founder 
of  the  Burmese  state  and  prominent  leader  of  the  national  liberation 
movement  in  Burma,  favoured  the  creation  of  a  single  Asian  front  to 
oppose  imperialist  domination.  In  January  1947,  he  set  forth  the  idea  of 
creating  an  Asian  community  aimed  at  protecting  young  nation  states’ 
independence.  He  also  favoured  the  formation  of  an  economic  alliance 
of  countries  of  Southeast  Asia. 

Jawaharlal  Nehru,  the  great  son  of  the  Indian  people,  made  an  im¬ 
mense  contribution  to  the  solidarity  of  Asian  states.  On  his  initiative, 
the  1st  Asian  Conference  was  held  in  Delhi  in  March-April  1947.^  It  was 
attended  by  representatives  of  27  Asian  countries,  among  them  public 
figures  from  the  Soviet  Central  Asian  and  Transcaucasian  republics,  the 
Mongolian  People’s  Republic,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam, 
observers  from  other  states,  including  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  USA, 


*  Pravda,  Sept.  29,  1956. 

‘  See  Asian  Relations  Report  of  the  Proceedings  and  Documentation  of  the  First 
Asian  Relations  Conference,  Delhi,  1949,  p.  8. 


66 


and  from  some  international  organisations  (the  United  Nations,  the  Arab 

The  ^Conference  participants  made  an  attempt  to  draw  the  principles 
for  uniting  Asian  states  in  the  struggle  against  colonialism  and 
imperialism,  and  to  map  out  ways  towards  ensuring  security  by  collective 
efforts.  For  example,  the  delegate  of  Malaya  proposed  to  conduct  coopera¬ 
tion  between  Asian  peoples  on  the  organised  basis  by  setting  up  a  neutral 
bloc  of  Asian  states.  The  proposal  provided  for  rendering  assistance  to 
the  peoples  struggling  for  their  national  liberation.  It  contained  an  ap¬ 
peal  to  prevent  the  forces  of  imperialism  from  using  the  economic 
resources  of  Asian  countries  for  military  purposes,  and  to  elimina  e 
military  bases  on  their  territories.  The  Indonesian  delegate  stressed  that 
peace  in  Asia  could  not  be  separated  from  universal  peace.  Asian  co¬ 
operation,  he  went  on,  should  be  directed  towards  reducing  and  finally:;, 
eliminating  conflicts  by  cutting  short  the  activities  of  the  reachonary 
Imperialist  powers  in  Asia,  rather  than  towards  expanding  the  sphere  of 
conflicts.  ^ 

At  the  Conference  the  idea  was  put  forward  of  setting  up  an  organisa¬ 
tion  on  Asian  relations  which  would  play  the  part  of  a  secretariat  with 
broad  executive  functions.  Branches  of  the  secretariat  were  op^ened  in 
Burma,  Ceylon,  Malaya  and  Nepal.  However,  due  to  the  effort  by 
Guomindang  China  which  opposed  the  convocation  of  the  conference 
in  Delhi  and  worked  for  the  2nd  conference  to  be  held  in  Nankin,  the 
Organisation  on  Asian  Relations  set  up  at  the  Delhi  Conference,  as  well 
as  its  national  branches,  did  not  develop  on  a  broad  scale.  ^  ^ 

The  colonial  powers  which  feared  that  Asian  countries  joint  efforts 
might  turn  into  a  real  force  capable  of  opposing  W^tern  interests  in 
Asia  also  blocked  the  organisational  establishment  of  Asian  unity  and 

A^conference  of  Asian  states  at  the  foreign  ministers*  level  was  held 
in  New  Delhi  in  January  1949  in  connection  with  the  intensified  aggres¬ 
sion  unleashed  by  the  Netherlands  against  the  Republic  of  Indonesia.  It 
stated  the  need  for  the  UN  Security  Council  to  take  the  necessary  steps 
to  halt  the  Dutch  aggression  and  implement  effective  measures  to  make 
the  Netherlands  carry  out  its  recommendations,  should  it  fail  to  do  so. 
The  conference  raised  the  question  of  setting  up  a  permanent  regional 
organisation  of  Asian  countries  to  protect  their  security.  In  his  opening 
speech  Jawaharlal  Nehru  said  that  it  would  be  only  natural  for  the  free 
countries  of  Asia  to  start  thinking  of  an  organisation  niore  permanent 
than  the  conference  in  question,  for  effective  mutual  consultations  and 

lor  joint  efforts  in  attaining  common  goals.®  . 

One  resolution  adopted  by  that  conference  pointed  out  that  the 
participating  countries  should  consult  each  other  in  order  to  study  ways 
and  means  of  setting  up  the  respective  regions*  corresponding  mechanism, 
to  expand  consultations  and  cooperation  within  the  fran^work  oi  the 
United  Nations.  ^  The  adoption  of  that  resolution  marked  the  creation  of 
the  Afro-Asian  group,  an  organisational  form  of  the  young  states  anti- 
Imperialist  and  anti-colonial  unity  in  the  UN. 

^  In  connection  with  the  quest  for  organisational  forms  of  solidarity 
of  the  young  states  the  problem  loomed  large  of  elaborating  the  basic 

Srlnciples  of  struggle  for  peaceful  cooperation  on  the  continent,  and  for 
lie  building  of  a  new  Asia  free  from  imperialist  domination  and  the  op¬ 
pression  by  foreign  capital.  Those  should  have  been  such  principles  and 
norms  of  relationships  on  which  the  newly-free  countries  could  rely  in 


•  The  Coiif^ence  on  Indonesia  (1949),  Delhi,  1949,  pp.  21-22. 
»  Ibid.,  p.  37. 


67 


forming  peaceful  and  sound  contacts  between  the  peoples  of  the  continent 
and  on  a  global  scale. 

The  five  principles  of  peaceful  coexistence  (pancha  shila)  were 
proclaimed  by  the  Republic  of  India  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China 
in  April  1954.  The  preamble  of  the  agreement  on  trade  and  contacts 
between  the  Tibetan  region  of  China  and  India  contains  these  principles. 
They  are; 

—mutual  respect  for  territorial  integrity  and  sovereignty; 

—mutual  non-aggression; 

-non-interference  in  each  other’s  internal  affairs; 

—equality  and  mutual  benefit; 

— peaceful  coexistence. 

These  principles  mirrored  Lenin’s  idea  of  peaceful  coexistence  and  co¬ 
operation  between  countries  belonging  to  different  socio-ecOnomic 
systems.  The  20th  Congress  of  the  CPSU  (1956)  declared  that  “under  the 
present  conditions  these  principles  are  the  best  formula  of  relations 
between  states  with  different  social  systems  and  they  could  be  a  basis  for 
stable  peaceful  relations  between  countries  throughout  the  world’’.® 

Gradually  the  pancha  shila  principles  became  part  and  parcel  of  the 
everyday  practice  in  international  relations.  The  historic  Bandung 
Conference  (April  1955)  expanded  and  developed  them  into  a  regular 
system  representing  a  political  and  legal  foundation  for  mutual  relations 
between  states  with  different  social  systems  not  only  in  Asia  and  Africa', 
but  throughout  the  world.  The  declaration  on  promoting  universal  peace 
and  cooperation  adopted  at  the  Conference  reaffirmed  the  well-known 
provisions  of  the  UN  Charter  that  all  countries  should  display  tolerance, 
live  in  peace  with  each  other  as  good  neighbours  and  develop  friendly 
cooperation.  The  following  principles  were  set  forth  as  the  basis  for  that: 

1.  respect  for  the  basic  human  rights,  and  also  for  the  alms  and 
principles  of  the  UN  Charter; 

2.  respect  for  the  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity  of  all  countries; 

3.  recognition  of  the  equal  rights  of  all  races  and  nations,  big  and 
small; 

4.  refraining  from  intervention  and  interference  in  the  internal  affairs 
of  other  countries; 

5.  respect  for  the  right  of  each  country  to  individual  and  collective 
defence  in  accordance  with  the  UN  Charter; 

.  6.  (a)  refraining  from  using  agreements  on  collective  defence  in  the 
private  interests  of  one  of  the  great  powers; 

(b)  no  country  must  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  other  countries; 

7.  refraining  from  acts  or  threat  of  aggression  or  the;  use  of  force 
against  the  territorial  integrity  or  political  independence  of  any  country; 

8.  the  settlement  of  all  international  disputes  by  peaceful  means  in 
accordance  with  the  parties’  choice  and  in  conformity  with  the  UN 
Charter; 

9.  promotion  of  mutual  interests  and  cooperation; 

10.  respect  for  justice  and  international  obligations.® 

The  extension  and  concretisation  of  the  pancha  shila  principles  and 
their  being  rnade  into  ten  principles  at  the  Bandung  Conference  promoted 
the  codification  of  the  legal  basis  of  the  peaceloving  foreign  policy 
pursued  by  the  newly-free  countries.  This  also  promoted  their  unification 
on  an  anti-imperialist  and  anti-colonial  basis. 

The  Bandung  Conference  was  an  instrument  for  protecting  the  fights 
of  Afro-Asian  peoples,  and  an  important  tool  in  their  struggle  against 


*  The  20th  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Moscow,  1956, 
p.  412  (in  Russian). 

9  See  Pravda,  April  25,  1955. 


68 


imperialist  oppression,  and  for  free  and  independent  development.  It 
contributed  to  the  Asian,  African  and  Latin  American  peoples  emergence 
onto  the  international  scene  as  a  well-organised  force  in  the  struggle 
against  colonialism  and  imperialism.  It  is  not  fortuitous  that  every  tirne 
the  imperialist  powers  committed  acts  of  aggression  the  world  democratic 
public  proposed  convening  a  regular  session  of  the  Bandung  Conference., 

The  specific  feature  inherent  in  international  cooperation  of  Afro- 
Asian  states  consists  in  the  fact  that  they  never  sought  to  create  their 
own  bloc  which,  in  their  opinion,  could  only  aggravate  international 
tension  and  whip  up  the  cold  war.  Afro-Asian  leaders  sought  to  unite 
independent  countries  on  the  broad  basis  of  struggle  against  imperialism 
and  colonialism,  for  consolidating  political  and  achieving  complete 
economic  independence,  for  creating  favourable  conditions  for  their 
development  along  the  road  of  peace,  democracy  and  social  progress. 

The  movement  of  Afro-Asian  peoples  in  the  Bandung  spirit  did  not 
develop  further  due  to  the  obstructionist  policy  of  the  then  PRC  leadership 
pursued  during  the  preparations  for  the  second  intergovernmental 
conference  of  Asian  and  African  countries  (the  Second  Bandung)  which 
was  to  be  held  in  Algeria.  The  Chinese  delegation  worked  to  expel  the 
USSR  from  the  general  anti-imperialist  front  and  push  through  a  nati¬ 
onalistic  concept  on  the  specific  “community  of  the  historical  destinies 
of  the  peoples  of  Asia  and  Africa  with  China.  Peking’s  actions  were 
resolutely  rebuffed  by  the  overwhelming  majority  of  Afro-Asian  countries,- 
and  its  attempts  to  expel  the  USSR  from  the  Afro-Asian  movement  ended 
in  failure.  However,  the  PRC  which  began  to  openly  oppose  the  conven¬ 
ing  of  the  Second  Bandung  succeeded  in  frustrating  the  conference.  That 
greatly  damaged  the  spirit  of  Bandung  and  the  interests  of  the  national 
liberation  movement  of  Asian  and  African  peoples.  Nevertheless,  the  ideals 
and  principles  of  defending  the  freedom  and  independence  of  Afro-Asian 
peoples,  which  were  elaborated  collectively,  proved  to  be  viable. 

For  example,  some  countries  declared  their  nonalignment  with  blocs. 
The  nonalignment  doctrine  was  formed  in  the  complex  conditions  of  the 
cold  war  when  NATO  was  set  up,  followed  as  a  counterbalance  to  it  by 
the  countries  of  the  socialist  community  which  created  their  own  defensive 
grouping,  the  Warsaw  Treaty  Organisation.  But,  unlike  the  imperialist 
powers,  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  other  socialist  countries  never  had,  nor 
do  they  have  now  any  military-political  blocs  in  Asia,  Africa,  or  Latin 
America.  Consequently,  when  the  newly-free  countries  faced  the  problem 
of  acceding  to  the  existing  blocs  or  not  it  was  only  the  matter  of  the 
imperialist  blocs.  That  is  why,  from  the  very  beginning,  nonalignment 
signified  nonalignment  with  the  imperialist  blocs. 

This  warrants  the  conclusion  that  the  riewly-free  countries’  refusal  to 
accede  to  the  imperialist  blocs  meant  their  departure  in  foreign  policy 
from  global  anti-Sovietism  and  anti-communism,  and  from  the  bloc  policy 
of  the  imperialist  states. 

Chronologically,  India  was  the  first  nonaligned  country,  and  Jawa- 
harla)  Nehru,  its  leader,  was  the  first  to  formulate  the  essence  of  the 
nonalignment  doctrine.  Addressing  in  December  1947  the  Constituent 
Assembly  and  expounding  independent  India’s  foreign  policy  Prime 
Minister  Jawaharlal  Nehru  stated  that  the  essence  of  foreign  policy  at 
the  time  was  reduced  to  the  general  question:  what  grouping  do  you 
belong  to?  This  was  an  extreme  simplification  of  the  matter.  India,  he  ad¬ 
ded,  was  striving  not  to  be  tied  up  in  its  foreign  policy  activity  and  there¬ 
fore  it  did  not  accede  to  any  bloc. 

Having  analysed  the  situation,  Nehru  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that 
the  young  nation  states  could  consolidate  their  freedom  and  independence 
If  they  take  an  independent  stand  in  the  world,  i.  e.,  would  not  accede 
to  imperialist  blocs  and  would  not  follow  the  foreign  policy  course  pursued 


69 


by  their  former  mother  countries,  a  course  which  was  openly  anti- 
Soviet  and  anti-Communist  in  essence. 

As  Nehru  saw  it,  nonalignment  in  no  way  meant  that  the  nonaligned 
countries  should  keep  “equidistant”  from  the  opposing  military  political 
camps.  According  to  him,  it  meant  nonalignment  with  blocs  in  the  sense 
of  nonalignment  with  the  bloc  policy  which  ran  counter  to  the  interests 
of  the  newly-free  countries.  As  Indira  Gandhi  later  put  it,  “It  is  untenable 
to  interpret  nonalignment”  only  as  a  passive  policy  of  “equidistance  from 
the  superpowers”.  She  stressed:  “On  the  contrary,  nonalignment  is 
something  very  positive.  It  means  taking  every  chance  to  improve  the 
outlook  of  peace  and  to  adopt  a  clear  stand  on  matters  on  which  we  have 
strong  convictions.  Take  racialism  and  colonialism.  Did  not  the  so- 
called  democratic  West  take  obstructive  positions  on  decolonisation  and 
apartheid?  Even  now,  looking  at  the  support  given  to  South  Africa  and 
Israel,  its  record  does  not  shine.  The  Soviet  Union’s  consistent  stand  on 
such  matters  has  brought  us  closer  together.” 

In  nonalignment,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  saw  an  efficient  means  at  the 
disposal  of  the  newly-free  countries  to  allow  them  to  pursue  an  independ¬ 
ent  foreign  policy.  Such  a  policy  enabled  the  nonaligned  countries  to  opt 
freely  for  their  positions  as  regards  key  international  issues.  This  option, 
however,  was  made  with  due  account  of  the  fact  that  the  interests  of  the 
struggle  for  independence,  peace  and  progress  objectively  brought  the 
newly-free  countries  closer  to  world  socialism  which  worked  to  attain  the 
same  goals.  On  the  other  hand,  the  foreign  policy  aims  of  the  young 
nation  states  were  at  loggerheads  with  the  interests  of  the  imperialist 
powers  which  tried  to  put  the  fetters  of  new  colonial  dependence  on  the 
newly-free  countries  instead  of  old  colonialism. 

Speaking  in  the  Indian  Parliament,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  condemned  the 
SEATO  bloc,  set  up  in  1954,  and  warned  Western  countries  that  they 
were  pushing  the  world  in  the  wrong  direction.  India’s  mere  participation 
in  the  Manila  Conference,  Nehru  believed,  would  mean  that  it  was 
abandoning  its  basic  policy  of  nonalignment.’ ‘ 

Nehru  did  not  confine  himself  to  his  own  country.  Moreover,  he  actively 
influenced  international  processes,  working  for  the  unification  of  all 
newly-free  countries  and  consolidating  their  efforts  in  the  struggle  against 
imperialism  and  neocolonialism.  He  was  seeking  to  ensure  peace, 
disarmament,  and  avert  war  on  the  basis  of  unity  and  solidarity  with 
all  progressive  world  forces  and  movements.  In  his  Autobiography  he 
wrote  that  it  was  becoming  increasingly  clear  that  the  struggle  for 
freedom  was  a  common  struggle  against  a  common  enemy — imperialism — 
and  it  was  desirable,  for  this  purpose,  jointly  to  elaborate  a  programme 
of  action  and  take  joint  action  as  much  as  possible. 

It  is  to  Jawaharlal  Nehru’s  credit  that,  in  elaborating  the  nonalign¬ 
ment  doctrine,  he  took  care  not  only  of  the  interests  of  India,  but  also 
of  those  of  the  whole  newly-free  world.  In  setting  out  the  nonalignment 
concept,  Nehru  regarded  it  as  a  means  for  the  cohesion  of  the  newly- 
free  countries  and  creation  of  a  united  front  of  struggle  against 
imperialism  and  neocolonialism. 

One  should  bear  in  mind  in  this  connection  that  in  foreign  and  some¬ 
times  even  in  Soviet  writings  neutrality  and  nonalignment  are  often 
placed  on  the  same  footing.  Such  an  approach  has  no  scientific  substantia¬ 
tion.  Neutrality  is  a  passiye,  rather  than  active  attitude  to  international 
developments,  while  nonalignment  is  an  active  and  militant  political 
factor  influencing  the  course  of  world  politics.  Indian  Prime  Minister 


New  Times,  1983,  No.  9,  p.  7. 

“  See  J.  Nehru,  Indian  Foreign  Policy,  Delhi,  1961,  p.  85. 

‘i*  Jawaharlal  Nehru— His  Life  and  Activities,  Moscow,  1965,  p.  12  (in  Russian). 


70 


1.  Gandhi  emphasised  that  the  nonalignment  principle  was  not  a  declara¬ 
tion  of  indifference  stemming  from  neutrality,  but  the  expression  of  inde¬ 
pendent  reasoning. 

To  attach  a  more  efficient  nature  to  their  policy  of  neutrality,  some 
neutral  countries  started  calling  their  foreign  policy  “positive”  or  “active” 
neutrality.  However,  these  attempts  to  invigorate  the  concept  of 
neutralism  and  make  it  more  militant  also  could  no  longer  satisfy  the 
demands  and  requirements  of  the  developing  countries.  Their  foreign 
policies  began  to  be  transformed  into  a  policy  of  active  confrontation 
with  the  system  of  imperialist  blocs,  into  a  policy  of  active  struggle 
against  imperialism,  colonialism,  neocolonialism,  and  for  consolidating 
peace  and  international  security. 

For  some  reasons,  the  young  sovereign  states  were  not  able  to  win 
political  freedom  and  economic  independence  simultaneously.  The 
overwhelming  majority  of  them  remained  within  the  orbit  of  the  capitalist 
economy.  This  fact  aggravated  even  more  the  contradictions  between 
young  states  and  capitalist  powers. 

The  solution  of  the  problems  of  newly-free  countries’  economic 
rehabilitation  demanded  close  interaction  between  their  foreign  policy- 
course  and  domestic  economic  policies.  To  successfully  solve  their  socio¬ 
economic  problems,  the  emergent  countries  needed  a  fresh  approach  to 
the  solution  of  international  problems,  and  a  new  foreign  policy 
orientation. 

In  the  majority  of  the  developing  countries,  the  national  bourgeoisie, 
the  progressive  intelligentsia  and  the  patriotically-minded  section  of  the 
militarymen  were  most  active  social  groups.  In  many  countries,  the 
liberation  struggle  was  headed  by  national-bourgeois  circles  with  a  vest¬ 
ed  interest  in  eliminating  the  domination  of  foreign  capital  arid  the 
economy’s  colonial  structure.  They  sought  to  replace  the  domination  of 
Western  monopolies  by  their  own.  With  this  aim  in  view,  the  national 
bourgeoisie  and  petty-bourgeois  elements  needed  not  only  socio-economic 
reforms  inside  the  country,  but  also  had  a  vested  interest  in  a  new 
foreign-policy  line. 

Being  dependent  on  foreign  capital,  the  national-patriotic  forces  in  a 
number  of  newly-free  countries  were  afraid  of  being  drawn  into  the 
struggle  between  the  world’s  socialist  system  and  the  capitalist  countries. 
They  were  looking  for  a  middle  road  in  their  foreign  policies.  Since  the 
former  mother  countries  tried  to  keep  the  young  states  within  the  sphere 
of  their  domination,  the  latter  sought  cooperation  and  assistance  of  the 
socialist  states.  This  forced  Western  powers  to  make  concessions  arid 
to  look  for  new,  more  camouflaged  forms  of  exploiting  the  emergent 
countries. 

The  existence  of  the  world  soeialist  community  was,  as  it  were,  a 
piarantor  of  the  newly-free  states’  political  independence  enabling  them 
to  oppose  imperialist  powers’  attempts  to  make  a  comeback  to  their 
former  colonies  under  the  banner  of  protecting  them  from  the  “communist 
menace”.  Addressing  the  25th  Congress  of  the  CPSU,  Fidel  Castro  stres¬ 
sed  forcefully;  “Had  it  not  been  for  the  Soviet  Union,  in  conditions  of  a 
shortage  of  raw  material  resources  and  of  an  energy  crisis  the  capitalist 

flowers  would  have  unhesitatingly  launched  a  partition  of  the  world.  Had 
t  not  been  for  the  Soviet  Union,  it  would  have  been  impossible  even  to 
conceive  of  the  measure  of  independence  now  enjoyed  by  small  states, 
the  successful  struggle  of  the  peoples  for  the  return  of  their  natural 
riches  under  their  control.” 


••  See  Pravda,  Nov.  27,  1973. 

“  Our  Friends  Speak.  Greetings  to  the  25th  CPSU  Congress,  Nov.osti .  Press  Agency 
Publishing  House,  Moscow,  1976,  p.  34. 


71 


Although  the  extra-block  doctrine  and  the  nonaligned  policy  met 
primarily  the  interests  of  the  ruling  classes,  it  was  spearheaded  against 
imperialism,  colonialism  and  neocolonialism  and  aimed  at  defending 
national  interests  and  supporting  peace.  Therefore  it  met  with  a  positive 
response  among  broad  sections  of  the  population  in  the  newly-free 
countries  and  won  vigorous  support  from  the  world  progressive  public. 

The  active  part  played  by  the  nonaligned  movement  and  its  influence 
on  world  politics  did  not  manifest  themselves  immediately.  First,  the 
movement’s  positive  significance  was  expressed  in  weak  but  independent 
opposition  to  colonialists’  intrigues  in  the  UN  and  in  the  establishment, 
in  spite  of  the  pressure  brought  to  bear  by  imperialist  powers,  of 
contacts  with  the  socialist  countries,  and  then  in  a  more  consistent  rebuff 
to  the  policy  of  aggression  and  colonial  enslavement. 

The  universal  character  of  the  nonaligned  movement’s  principles  and 
goals  which  were  formulated  by  Jawaharlal  Nehru  consisted  in  the  fact 
that  they  began  to  win  the  support  of  an  increasing  number  of  develop¬ 
ing  countries  in  Asia  and  Africa,  and  then  in  Latin  America. 

Some  other  prominent  leaders  of  Asian,  African  and  Latin  American 
states  shared  Jawaharlal  Nehru’s  views,  and  together  with  him  made 
great  efforts  to  unite  the  emergent  countries  on  the  basis  of  nonalign¬ 
ment.  They  also  contributed  to  the  nonaligned  movement.  Among  them 
were  Ho  Chi  Minh,  Pham  Van  Dong,  Josip  Broz  Tito,  Gamal  Abdel 
Nasser,  Ahmed  Sukarno,  Kwame  Nkrumah,  Solomon  Bandaranaike, 
Osvaldo  Dorticos,  Makarios,  U  Nu,  Modiba  Keita  and  other  outstanding 
leaders  of  the  national  liberation  movement.  Later  on,  Indira  and  Rajiv 
Gandhi,  Fidel  Castro,  Le  Duan,  Kim  II  Sung,  Mengistu  Haile  Mariam, 
Houari  Boumediene,  Sekou  Toure,  and  many  other  well-known  leaders 
from  Asian,  African  and  Latin  American  countries  came  to  play  an  active 
part  in  the  nonaligned  movement. 

Josip  Broz  Tito  paid  much  attention  to  the  nonaligned  movement  and 
its  doctrine.  Like  Jawaharlal  Nehru  and  some  other  leaders  of  the  newly- 
free  countries,  he  maintained  that  the  nonaligned  movement  should  not 
be  confined  to  a  narrow  group  of  states.  It  would  become  an  influential 
force  in  the  modern  world,  Tito  believed,  provided  as  many  countries  as 
possible,  which  adhere  to  its  principles  and  pursue  its  aims,  join  the 
movement.  “It  was  necessary  to  work  to  ensure  our  joint  efforts  in  order 
to  defend  the  fundamental  rights  more  successfully  and  to  influence 
international  events,’’  Tito  recollected.  “Despite  all  differences,  Nehru, 
Nasser  and  I,  and  later  Sukarno,  Nkrumah  and  others  thought  along  the 
same  lines  and  had  one  and  the  same  goal;  we  took  speedy  steps  aimed 
at  setting  up  the  nonaligned  movement.’’ 

In  a  bid  to  expand  the  nonaligned  movement,  Tito  visited  various 
countries  of  Asia  and  Africa  to  discuss  the  convocation  of  an  enlarged 
conference  of  heads  of  state  or  government. 

A  preparatory  meeting  of  representatives  of  Asian,  African,  European 
and  Latin  American  countries  took  place  in  Cairo  in  June  1961  on  the 
initiative  of  Nehru,  Nasser,  Tito,  Sukarno  and  Nkrumah.  Its  aim  was  to 
prepare  a  conference  of  heads  of  state  or  government  of  the  nonaligned 
countries,  which  was  convened  in  Belgrade  early  in  September  1961  in 
conformity  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Cairo  meeting.  The  confe¬ 
rence  laid  the  foundations  for  the  further  development  of  the  movement, 
and  started  a  new  important  chapter  in  the  history  of  international  rela¬ 
tions.  The  6th  Conference  of  the  Nonaligned  States  (Havana,  1979)  cal¬ 
led  for  marking  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  1st  Conference  as  an 
“historic  anniversary  of  the  movement’s  emergence”.  The  foreign 


”  See  History  of  Diplomacy,  Moscow,  1974,  p.  362  (in  Russian), 

's  International  Affairs,  Belgrade,  Nos.  704-705,  Aug.  20,  1979,  p.  15, 


72 


ministers’  meeting  at  which  preparations  for  a  conference  of  heads  of 
state  or  government  of  the  nonaligned  countries  (New  Delhi,  1981) 
were  made,  declared  September  1,  the  opening  day  of  the  Belgrade 
Conference,  Nonalignment  Day,  and  recommended  to  observe  it  annually. 

The  historic  significance  of  the  1st  Conference  also  consists  in  that 
the  preparatory  meeting  in  Cairo  elaborated  the  criteria  for  the  countries 
willing  to  take  part  in  the  movement.  These  are  as  follows: 

— a  country  should  pursue  an  independent  policy  based  on  the 
principles  of  peaceful  coexistence  of  states  with  different  political  and 
social  systems,  and  a  policy  of  nonalignment  or  display  an  inclination 
towards  pursuing  such  a  policy; 

— consistently  support  national  liberation  movements; 

—refrain  from  joining  multilateral  military  alliances  concluded  within 
the  context  of  confrontation  between  the  great  powers; 

—if  a  state  has  a  bilateral  military  agreement  with  one  of  the  great 
powers  or  is  member  of  a  regional  defensive  alliance,  such  an  agreement 
or  alliance  should  not  be  concluded  exclusively  within  the  context  of 
confrontation  between  the  great  powers;  .  .. 

— if  a  country  agreed  that  a  foreign  military  base  be  set  up  on  its 
territory,  such  a  concession  should  not  be  granted  within  the  contexj  of 
confrontation  between  the  great  powers. 

These  criteria  for  participation  in  the  nonaligned  movement  have 
remained  practically  unchanged  up  until  this  day.  Their  strict  nature 
resulted  in  the  fact  that  many  countries  which  took  part  in  the  Bandung 
Conference  were  not  admitted  to  the  1st  Conference  of  the  Heads  of 
State  or  Government,  and  this  lent  a  graphic  anti-imperialist  thrust  to 
the  movement  from  the  very  beginning. 

Later  on,  countries  with  conservative  regimes,  succumbing  to  pressure 
from  the  West,  sought  more  than  once  to  “liberalise”  or,  to  be  more 
precise,  to  erode  these  criteria  so  as  to  thrust  the  door  open  for  any 
country  willing  to  join  the  movement.  This  would  have  provided  access, 
to  the  movement  even  to  those  countries  which  have  direct  links  with 
imperialist  blocs  or  have  US  and  other  Western  countries’  military  bases 
on  their  territories. 

On  the  whole,  the  above  criteria  are  rather  flexible.  Nevertheless,  they 
ensure  the  movement’s  internal  cohesion,  definite  political  homogeneity, 
which  creates  sufficiently  solid  foundations  for  the  struggle  to  attain  the 
goals  and  follow  the  principles  of  the  movement. 

It  should  be  admitted,  however,  that  despite  these  criteria,  the  move¬ 
ment  was  joined  by  some  states  which  do  not  share  completely  its 
objectives  and  principles.  This  resulted  in  a  certain  polarisation  among 
the  movement’s  participants:  alongside  the  progressive  anti-imperialist 
nucleus  there  is  also  a  consolidating  antipode,  i.  e.,  a  group  of  countries' 
refraining  from  vigorous  action  against  imperialism  and  neocolonialism. 
It  is  trying  to  impose  opportunist  catchwords  and  objectives  on  the 
movement,  this  runui,ng  counter  to  the  very  essence  of  nonalignment. 

Many  members  of  the  movement  are  faced  with  the  following  question: 
can  countries  which  have  US  military  bases  on  their  territories  or  those 
which  are  pursuing  a  pro-imperialist  policy  be  members  of  the  movement? 
On  the  other  hand,  attempts  are  being  made  to  isolate  socialist  countries 
in  the  nonaligned  movement  under  the  pretext  that  they  are  connected 
with  the  socialist  community  and  allegedly  belong  to  the  Warsaw  Treaty. 

Thus,  the  struggle  around  the  nonalignment  criteria  sometimes  grows 
into  an  acute  political  struggle  for  changing  the  very  essence  of  the 
movement,  as  well  as  of  its  goals  and  principles.  It  takes  much  effort 
on  the  part  of  the  movement’s  progressive  nucleus  to  repulse  the  attacks 
of  the  subversive  elements  and  consolidate  the  movement  on  the  anti- 


73 


imperialist  basis,  on  the  basis  of  the  struggle  for  peace  and  social 
progress. 

The  nonaligned  movement’s  goals  and  tasks  were  initially  formulated 
back  at  the  Belgrade  Conference  in  1961.  The  documents  adopted  by 
the  Conference — the  Declaration  of  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government 
of  the  Nonaligned  Countries  and  the  Statement  on  the  Threat  of  War 
and  the  Call  for  Peace — proclaimed  war  among  the  peoples  to  be  an 
anachronism  and  a  crime  against  humanity,  the  world  community  to  be 
capable  of  organising  its  life  without  wars.  The  documents  also  said  that 
relations  between  countries  with  different  social  systems  should  be  based 
on  the  principle  of  peaceful  coexistence  as  an  alternative  to  the  cold  war 
and  a  possible  world  nuclear  catastrophe.  The  Declaration  stated  that  a 
lasting  peace  could  be  ensured  only  if  colonialism,  imperialism  and 
neocolonialism  in  all  their  manifestations  were  destroyed  completely. 

Other  important  tasks  were:  opposition  to  colonialism,  neocolonialism, 
racial  discrimination  and  apartheid;  support  for  national  liberation  move¬ 
ments;  dismantlement  of  foreign  military  bases  on  other  countries’  ter¬ 
ritories;  a  struggle  for  general  and  complete  disarmament  and  for  a  ban 
on  nuclear  weapon  tests;  vigorous  action  to  achieve  economic  equality  and 
efficient  economic  and  trade  cooperation  among  developing  countries. 

As  the  movement  grew,  these  objectives  and  principles  were  specified 
and  augmented  with  new  provisions  in  conformity  with  the  international 
situation. 

A  major  result  of  the  Belgrade  Conference  was  that,  on  behalf  of 
the  nonaligned  countries,  it  officially  renounced  the  bloc  policy  and 
proclaimed  “nonalignment  to  blocs’’.  The  Declaration  also  stated  that  the 
nonaligned  countries  represented  at  the  Conference  had  no  intention  of 
setting  up  a  new  block.  They  sincerely  wished  to  cooperate  with  any 
government  which  strove  to  promote  confidence  and  peace  throughout 
the  world. 

Thus,  the  historic  significance  of  the  Belgrade  Conference  was  that 
it  defined  the  criteria  of  nonalignment,  formulated  the  essence  of  the 
nonaligned  movement  concept,  its  basic  goals  and  principles. 

Forty-seven  states  attended  the  Second  Conference  of  the  Heads  of 
State  or  Government  of  the  Nonaligned  Countries  held  in  Cairo  in 
October  1964,  i.  e.,  almost  50  per  cent  of  all  independent  countries  in 
the  world  at  that  time.  The  Programme  of  Peace  and  International  Co¬ 
operation,  adopted  in  Cairo,  particularly  emphasised  that  peaceful 
coexistence  of  states  with  different  social  systems  was  the  only  possible 
ineans  of  consolidating  peace.  That  major  document  reaffirmed  that  the 
right  to  complete  independence  and  self-determination  should  belong  to 
all  people,  that  the  sovereign  right  of  states  should  be  recognised  and 
strictly  observed,  and  that  states  should  refrain  from  any  threat  or  use 
of  force  spearheaded  against  territorial  integrity  and  political  indepen¬ 
dence  of  other  states.  The  Conference  demanded  that  each  state  should 
refrain  from  interfering  in  the  internal  affairs  of  other  countries. 

The  policy-making  document  of  the  Cairo  Conference  declared  that 
"if  the  colonial  powers  stubbornly  resist  the  people’s  striving  to  imple¬ 
ment  their  right  to  self-determination  and  independence,  then  the  colonial 
people  legitimately  have  every  ground  to  resort  to  arms,  defending  their 
national  interests”.  It  also  said  that  the  participants  in  the  Conference 
recognised  the  national  movements  as  “the  sole  representatives  of  their 
peoples”. This  highly  important  provision  served  as  a  great  stimulus 

I _ 

See  Two  Decades  of  Non-alienment,  New  Delhi,  1983,  p.  5. 

Ibid.,  p.  6. 

**'  Nonaligned  Movement  in  Documents  and  Materials,  Moscow,  1979,  p.  74  (in  Rus-' 
Sian). 


74 


for  intensifying  the  struggle  waged  by  colonial  and  dependent  peoples 
for  their  national  liberation.  ,  ,  ,,  ,  . 

The  participants  in  the  Conference  also  agreed  that  all  countries 
should  contribute  to  the  accelerated  creation  of  a  new,  more  just  world 
system  of  economic  relations. 

The  next  forum  of  the  nonaligned  states  was  held  in  Lusaka  in  1970. 
Representatives  of  national  liberation  movements  attended  it  for  the  first 
time.  The  forum  stated  its  full  support  for  the  peoples  of  Indochina 
fighting  against  the  US  piratical  aggression. 

The  Third  Conference  gave  a  broader  definition  of  the  nonalignment 
concept.  “The  policy  of  nonalignment  came  into  being  as  a  result  of 
independent  countries’  resolve  to  defend  their  national  independence  and 
the  legitimate  rights  of  their  peoples.  That  the  nonaligned  movement  has 
turned  into  a  broad  international  movement  surpassing  the  bounds  of 
racial,  regional  and  other  barriers  is  a  component  part  of  the  considerable 
changes  within  the  entire  structure  of  the  world  community...  These 
changes  are  based  on  the  even  more  ardent  desire  of  nations  for  freedom, 
independence  and  equality  as  well  as  their  determination  to  put  up 
resistance  against  any  form  of  oppression  and  exploitation.  That  was  the 
essence  and  meaning  of  our  struggle...  At  a  time  when  the  polarisation 
of  the  world  community  on  the  bloc  basis  was  regarded  as  a. permanent 
feature  of  international  relations,  and  the  threat  of  a  nuclear  conflict 
between  the  great  powers  haunted  humanity,  the  nonaligned  countries 
opened  up  new  vistas  to  the  contemporary  world  and  paved  the  way 
towards  detente".^® 

The  Fourth  Summit  Meeting  of  the  Nonaligned  Countries  took  place 
in  Algiers  in  1973.  It  played  an  important  part  in  consolidating  the  ranks 
of  the  movement,  and  emphasised  the  importance  of  cooperation  between 
nonaligned  countries  and  socialist  states  and  other  peaceloving  and 
democratic  forces.  The  Conference  in  Algiers  decided  to  set  up  a  Coordi¬ 
nation  Bureau,  whose  functions,  apart  from  carrying  out  the  necessary 
preparatory  work  for  regular  conferences,  included  the  coordination  of 
action  and  the  elaboration  of  the  concerted  standpoints  the  nonaligned 
countries  adhere  to  at  major  international  forums,  the  United  Nations 
above  all. 

The  Fifth  Conference  of  the  Nonaligned  Countries  took  place  in 
Colombo  in  1976.  Eighty  four  delegations  from  nonaligned  countries, 
eight  observers  and  seven  guests  attended  it.  The  Conference  proceeded 
at  a  time  when  detente  became  the  leading  trend  in  international  affairs. 

The  delegates  declared  that  “nonalignment  symbolises  humankind’s 
desire  for  peace  and  security  in  relations  among  peoples,  the  resolve  to 
create  a  new  just  international  economic,  social  and  political  order’’. 
The  Conference  devoted  much  attention  to  elaborating  a  programme  on 
security  and  disarmament  problems.  It  also  stressed  the  direct  connection 
between  the  struggle  for  peace  and  detente,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
struggle  against  imperialism,  neocolonialism,  racism  and  apartheid,  on 
the  other. 

The  decision  to  set  up  a  pool  of  information  agencies  of  the  nonalign¬ 
ed  countries  was  a  major  result  of  the  Colombo  Conference.  Such  decision 
was  aimed  at  limiting  Western  powers’  freedom  of  action  in  spreading: 
information  in  the  emergent  countries,  as  well  as  at  consolidating  the 
national  masp  media. 

The  Sixth  Summit  Conference  held  in  Havana  in  1979  in  a  complex 
international  situation  holds  a  special  place.  The  forces  of  imperialist 
reaction  went  out  of  their  way  to  torpedo  the  conference  in  revolutionary 


»•  Ibid.,  p.  106. 
Ibid.,  p.  302. 


75 


Cuba,  seeking  to  split  the  nonaligned  movement  and  sow  confusion  in  ib 
ranks  even  before  the  Conference  was  convened.  However,  the  mtnpes 
of  the  imperialist  circles  and  their  henchmen  were  a  complete  [ailum 
The  movement  not  only  managed  to  preserve  the  unity  of  its  ranks,  h’j 
also  consolidated  it  on  the  anti-imperialist  basis.  The  Conference  forceful¬ 
ly  emphasised  that  peaceful  coexistence  was  the  only  alternahve  to  the 
danger  of  a  military  clash,  that  detente  in  Europe  enhanced  the  security 
of  all  states,  in  particular,  those  which  were  not  members  of  military  al¬ 
liances.  The  Conference  in  Havana  examined  profoundly  and  comprehen¬ 
sively  the  situation  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  _  voiced  its 
complete  solidarity  with  the  struggle  waged  by  the  peoples  of  the  region, 
and  favoured  the  settlement  of  conflicts  exclusively  by  oeaceful  means. 

The  results  of  the  Havana  Conference  reaffirmed  the  strength  and 
vitality  of  the  nonaligned  movement,  its  ability,  despite  imperialist 
Interference,  to  solve  the  most  complicated  problems  of  the  present  day 
in  the  interests  of  peace  and  international  security  and  on  the  basis  oi 
consensus  among  all  participants  in  the  movement.  u  7  ii  loRq 

The  Seventh  Conference,  held  in  New  Delhi  from  March  7  to  11,  1983 
was  the  most  representative  one.  It  demonstrated  that  the  struggle  tor 
peace  and  security,  the  halting  of  the  arms  race  and  for  disarmament, 
economic  decolonisation  and  the  ultimate  elimination  of  colonialism  and 
racism  is  the  general  line  of  the  nonaligned  mov^ent.  1  t  j 

Despite  its  enemies’  predictions  the  Delhi  Conference  demonstrated 
the  movement’s  unity,  its  ability  to  look  for  and  find  solutions  mutually 
acceptable  for  all  the  participants  on  the  basis  of  their  1°'”* 
against  imperialism  and  reaction.  Fidel  Castro  stated  at  me  Delhi 
Conference:  “In  the  face  of  the  nuclear  tragedy  threatening  us,  the  drarna 
of  underdevelopment  and  exploitation  and  the  economic  and  social  crisis, 
there  is  no  place  for  resignation  or  compromise.  The  only  worthy  choice 
*  to  li  lit** 

**  A  very  brief  analysis  of  the  documents  of  the  seven  conferences  of 
the  heads  of  state  or  government,  held  between  1961  and  1983,  clearly 
shows  that  the  fundamental  principles  and  objectives  of  nonalignment 
have  not  undergone  any  essential  changes.  They  include:  '  .  , 

—the  struggle  against  imperialism,  colonialism,  neocolonialism  ana 

all  forms  of  racial  discrimination:  .  .  ,  r  t  1 

—the  struggle  for  establishing  the  principles  of  peaceful  coexistence 
in  relations  between  countries  with  different  social  systems,  for  consolidat¬ 
ing  peace  and  international  security,  for  halting  the  nuclear  arms  race, 

and  for  general  and  complete  disarmament;  ,  ,  „.,uoK1o 

—the  struggle  for  restructuring  international  relations  on  an  equitable 
democratic  basis  and  for  introducing  a  new  international  econornic  order; 
— the  struggle  against  information  imperialism,  for  a  new  information 

_ ’the  struggle  against  imperialist  or  any  other  interference  in  the 

nonaligned  movement,  for  consolidating  its  ranks  on  an  anti-imperialist 

*^^^The  desire  of  the  member-countries  to  extricate  themselves  from  the 
centuries-old  backwardness  is  the  force  which  unites  the  movement. 
Consciously  or  unconsciously,  the  majority  of  the  movements  members 
realise  that  overcoming  backwardness  and  strengthening  their  national 
independence  lie  in  the  consolidation  of  their  ranks,  in  pooling  their 
efforts  and  means  in  the  fight  against  imperialism  and  neocolonialism 
which  are  mainly  responsible  for  their  social  and  economic  backwardness. 

A  no  less  important,  uniting  factor  of  nonalignment  is  the  desire  for 
peace,  for  establishing  the  principles  of  peaceful  coexistence  as  the  norm 

22  New  Times,  No.  12,  1983,  p.  43. 


76 


Table 


Statu.s  of 

Participants  1 

Observers  | 

Quests 

representation 

Conferences 

.States 

national 

liberation 

movements 

States 

national 

liberation 

movements 

States 

national 

liberation 

movements 

First  Conference,  Bel¬ 
grade,  1-6  Sept.,  1961 

25 

■ 

3 

■ 

■ 

_ 

Second  Conference,  . 
Cairo,  5-10  Oct,  1964 

46+ 

■ 

10 

■ 

■ 

' — 

Third  Conference,  Lu¬ 
saka,  8-10  Sept..  1970 
Fourth  Conference,  Al¬ 
giers,  6-9  Sept.,  1973 
Fifth  Conference,  Co¬ 
lombo,  16-19  Aug., 
1976 

54 

■ 

9 

■ 

■ 

8 

75 

■ 

8  1 

12 

3 

— 

84++ 

1 

8 

8 

7 

Sixth  Conference,  Ha¬ 
vana,  3-9  S^t.,  1979 
Seventh  Conference, 
Delhi,  7-11  March,  1983 

89++ 

3 

12 

5 

8 

1 

97+++ 

2 

10 

1 

10 

— 

Notes:  The  Table  is  drawn  up  on  the  basis  of  the  conferences’ 
final  documents.  The  United  Nations  and  its  agencies, 
as  well  as  regional  and  other  organisations,  are  not  ca¬ 
tegorised  as  guests  and  observers. 

+  Without  representatives  of  the  revolutionary  govern¬ 
ment  of  Angola  in  emigration. 

++  With  the  except  ion  of  the  Belize  which  was  granted 
special  status. 

*♦■+■**  Representatives  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  Kam¬ 
puchea,  Saint  Lucia  and  Chile  did  not  attend. 


of  relations  between  countries  with  different  social  systems,  and  as  the 
sole  basis  for  international  relations  in  general.  The  participating 
countries  regard  the  preservation  and  consolidation  of  peace,  deeper 
detente,  the  relaxation  of  international  tension  and  the  struggle  against 
the  arms  race  as  a  sine  qua  non  of  their  social  and  economic  development 
and  the  successful  struggle  against  imperialism  and  colonialism.  _ 

The  nonaligned  countries  come  out  more  and  more  resolutely  for  the 
democratisation  of  international  relations  and  equal  participation  _  in 
elaborating  and  adopting  major  decisions  as  regards  the  developing 
countries’  vital  interests.  They  demand  the  establishment  of  a  new  inter¬ 
national  order,  the  enhanced  role  of  the  UN  and  other  international 
organisations  in  solving  political,  economic  and  other  problems  facing  the 
developing  world.  ,  .  .  . 

The  popular  character  of  the  objectives  and  principles  of  the  nonalign¬ 
ed  movement  and  their  great  attraction  enhance  the  movement’s  authority 
in  the  eyes  of  the  entire  newly-free  world  and  the  progressive  world 
public,  drawing  into  its  ranks  more  and  more  countries,  national  libera¬ 
tion  and  other  socio-political  movements. 

No  wonder,  therefore,  that  from  the  First  Conference  (1961)  to  the 
Seventh  Conference  (1983)  the  number  of  member-countries  increased 
fourfold.  Almost  all  African  countries,  27  Asian  states  and  25  per  cent  of 

American  countries  were  represented  at  the  Delhi  Conference. 

The  Table  above  shows  the  growth  dynamics  of  the  nonaligned  move¬ 
ment;  an  increase  in  the  number  of  member-countries,  observers  (states 
and  national  liberation  movements)  and  guests  (states  and  national 
liberation  movements)  which  attended  the  nofialigned  summits.  • 


77 


The  rapid  growth  in  the  number  of  the  movement’s  member-countries 
shows  that  its  objectives  and  principles  have  withstood  the  test  of  time, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  just  and  democratic,  and  express  the  vital  interests 
of  the  newly-free  countries  and  peoples,  as  well  as  of  those  which  are 
still  fighting  for  their  freedom  and  independence. 

It  would  be  wrong  to  maintain  that  the  nonaligned  movement  has 
always  been  on  the  rise  and  never  experienced  any  difficulties.  As  the 
movement  extends,  the  number  of  problems  it  faces  also  increases.  These 
problems  are  not  always  easy  to  solve,  sharp  internal  contradictions 
emerge  now  and  then  between  countries  with  different  social  systems 
and  regimes,  forces  are  polarized,  and  centrifugal  trends  come  into  being. 
One  country  even  left  the  movement  voluntarily  (Burma  in  1979). 

The  situation  inside  the  movement  is  complicated  by  the  departure  of 
some  leaders  from  the  anti-imperialist  positions.  The  setting  forth  of 
eclectic  and  opportunistic  concepts  exerts  a  certain  negative  influence  on 
the  content  and  orientation  of  the  movement’s  foreign  policy. 

Indira  Gandhi,  one  of  the  outstanding  leaders  of  nonalignment,  point¬ 
ed  to  the  existence  of  negative  trends  in  the  movement  more  than  once. 
In  her  opinion,  the  movement  had  grown  too  broad,  and  some  who  did 
not  adhere  to  its  principles  as  firmly  as  they  should  had  joined  it. 

However,  the  difficulties  which  the  movement  faces  are  quite 
understandable  because  of  its  extremely  broad  character  and  the  fact  that 
it  is  open  to  all  newly-free  countries  and  national  liberation  movements, 
and  they  introduce  into  it  their  own  specific  sentiments  and  complicated 
problems,  insisting  on  their  immediate  solution.  All  countries,  including 
newly-free  ones  and  those  which  became  independent  prior  to  World 
War  II,  irrespective  of  their  social  system,  the  level  of  their  productive 
forces,  the  size  of  the  state  and  its  geographic  location  can  take  part  in 
the  movement.  The  only  criterium  is  not  to  join  any  multilateral  or  bilate¬ 
ral  military  alliance  to  which  this  or  that  great  power  is  a  party. 

The  intensification  of  opposing  trends  in  the  nonaligned  movement  is 
also  due  to  the  fact  that  new  people  have  stood  at  the  head  of  the  move¬ 
ment,  replacing  the  first  generation  of  leaders  who  founded  it.  Whereas 
the  first  generation  (Jawaharlal  Nehru,  Josip  Broz  Tito,  Gamal  Abdel 
Nasser,  Ahmed  Sukarno,  Kwame  Nkrumah)  saw  the  beginning  of  the 
national  liberation  struggle  in  their  respective  countries  and  led  it,  the 
present-day  leaders  formed  their  world  outlook  in  the  postwar  period. 
They  have  naturally  been  introducing  into  the  movement  their  own  ideas 
and  concepts  which,  as  experience  shows,,  are  not  always  in  line  with  the 
spirit  of  'the  times  and  the  present-day  reality.  Certain  leaders  of  the 
movement  sornetlmes  set  forth  purely  pragmatic  demands  and  are  ready 
to  make  a  compromise  with  imperialism  for  the  sake  of  short-term 
benefits. 

It  goes  ,  without  saying  that  ever  greater  efforts  are  required  in  such 
conditions  to  preserve  and  develop  positively  the  movement’s  basic 
objectives  and  principles. 

The  situation  in  the  world  in  recent  years  and  its  deterioration  through 
the  fault  of  the  imperialists  necessitate  that  the  movement’s  members  be 
consistent  in  implementing  the  above  objectives  and  principles  and  in 
consolidating  the  movement  on  an  anti-imperialist  basis.  The  US  administr 
ration’s  policy  aimed  at  exacerbating  the  international  situation  shatters 
the  foundations  of  the  movement.  The  US  aggressive  measures  against 
the  staunchest  adherents  to  the  movement’s  objectives  and  prirtciples 
are  a  component  part  of  that  policy.  They  can  be  seen  most  graphically 
in  the  recent  policy  of  the  USA  and  other  imperialist  powers  vis-a-vis 


See  Washington  Post,  Dec.  7,  1980. 


78 


Cuba  which  chaired  the  movement  from  1979  to  1983,  and  India,  which 

curr^ntlYtren _th  and  international  prestige  of  the  movement  have 
Invariably  depended  on  the  consistency  with  which  ‘ts  participants 
the  principles^  they  have  themselves  repeatedly  d^lared  in  the  final  docu¬ 
ments  of  their  conferences,  including  the  1983  Delhi  Conference.  There, 
they  wrote  down  in  their  political  declaration  that  the  struggle  against 
imperialism,  colonialism,  neocolonialism,  apartheid,  racisrn,  including 
Zionism  and  against  all  forms  of  foreign  aggression,  occupation,  domina¬ 
tion,  interference  or  hegemony,  against  the  great  power 
policy  of  blocs,  through  which  the  division  of  the  world  mto^  blocs  is  to 
be  perpetuated,  has  always  been  the  core  of  their  policies.  ^They  a  ^ 

reaffirmed  their  invariable  loyalty  to  the  o^f  Se 

aligned  movement.  Moreover,  they  declared  that  the  violation  ot  tnese 
principles  by  any  country  is  absolutely  unacceptable  and  no  circumstances 

‘^“"iHs^tUerfor  granted  that  the  nonaligned  movement,  which  arose 
under  certain  historical  conditions,  will  evolve  along  with 
world  situation  and  the  alignment  of  class  and  political  forces  on  the 
hSernational  scene.  In  this  sense,  it  is  transient,  but  it  will  op®rate  as 
an  active  socio-political  force  until  the  causes  and  circumstances  which 

have  brought  it  into  being  are  eliminated.  ...  ..  .. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  doubt  that  imperialism,  being  the  mmn 
force  opposing  the  nonaligned  movement,  does  not  give  up 
It  will  continue  to  do  everything  within  its  power  to  split  the  movement, 
tear  the  capitalist-oriented  countries  away  from  it,  ‘^^olude  the  lattw  in 
its  military^olitical  strategy,  isolate  and  expel  from  the  movement 
countries  with  progressive  regimes  which  lean  towards  world  socialism, 
erode  the  anti-imperialist  and  anti-war  basis  of  the  ^ 

it  at  the  service  of  imperialisms  aims  and  interests.  The 
are  doing  this  in  a  more  refined  way  and,  if  the  situation  allows,  are 

Th^t^is^ why  *one  should,  not  turn  a  blind  eye  to  the  fact  that  the 
movement  has  many  vulnerable  spots  and  weak  points.  There  are  quite 
a  few  reasons  for  this.  These  include  substantial  differences  among  the 
movement’s  members  as  to  the  level  of  their  socio-economic  and  political 
development  and,  consequently,  the  heterogeneous  nature  o.^Jheir  goals, 
different  approaches  to  the  solution  of  urgent  international  issues, 
divergence  in  views  on  the  very  nature  of  the  movement,  and  so  fort  • 
It  shwld  be  also  pointed  out  that  the  contradictory  trends  and  even 
clashes  of  interests  between  separate  groups  of  "lember-countr  es  are 
largely  determined  by  their  relations  with  the  two  social  systems,  i.  e^,  by 
the  extent  of  the  political  and  economic  dependence  of  one  group  ot 
countries  on  imperialism,  and  the  firmness  of  another  group  s  relatmns 
with  world  socialism.  The  conflict  between  the  contradictory  forces  can- 
not  but  tell  on  the  nature  of  the  adopted  policy-making  documents  which 
are  frequently  marked  by  compromises  and  mutual  concessions.  _  _ 

Nevertheless,  the  nonaligned  movement  has  succeeded  in  working  out 
rather  flexible  and  effective  forms  for  coordinating  actions  of  the  member- 
countries  and  in  creating  a  smoothly  functioning  system  ff.  agencies.  The 
principle  of  consensus  has  proved  to  be  the  only  acceptable  means  Tor 
overcoming  differences  and  finding  mutually  acceptable  decisions. 
Inasmuch  as  the  nonaligned  movement,  like  any  other  international 
movement  of  a  socio-political  character,  does  not  possess  the  necessary 


Kommunisf^  1983,  No.  7,  p.  106  (in  Russian). 
Ibidem, 


79 


sanctions  or  material  means  in  implementing  its  goals  and  principles. 

Regardless  of  their  socio-economic  systems,  the  level  of  their  produc¬ 
tive  forces,  their  size  and  geographic  location  the  movement  member- 
countries,  on  the  whole,  are  well  aware  that  to  achieve  real  successes  in 
the  struggle  against  imperialism  and  neocolonialism,  secure  their  politic¬ 
al  and  economic  independence,  they  should  act  as  a  single  organised 
force  observing  the  fundamental  principles  and  objectives  of  the  non- 
aligned  movement.  And  this  is  an  earnest  of  the  movement’s  further 
gains.  Second,  the  movement’s  strength  lies  in  the  unity  of  its  actions 
with  those  of  all  the  anti-imperialist,  peaceloving  forces  and  progressive 
movements.  Out  to  attain  general  democratic  goals,  the  nonaligned  move- 
(ment  objectively  sides  with  world  socialism  and  together  with  it 
delivers  blows  at  the  political,  economic  and  ideological  positions  of 
imperialism  because  the  latter  is  not  only  a  force  hostile  to  socialism, 
but  also  an  implacable  enemy  of  the  freedom  and  independence  of  the 
peoples  which  have  embarked  upon  the  path  of  independent  development. 
History  convincingly  shows  that  any  departure  from  the  basic  goals  of 
nonalignment,  as  weil  as  a  retreat  from  its  chief  allies,  weakens  the 
movement,  slows  down  its  development  rates,  and  causes  political 
stagnation.  Fidel  Castro  stated:  “Any  attempt  to  stage  a  clash  between 
nonaligned  countries  and  the  socialist  community  is  profoundly  counter¬ 
revolutionary  and  serves  exclusively  the  interests  of  imperialism.’’*® 

The  Soviet  Union  and  other  socialist  countries  regard  nonalignment 
as  part  of  the  world  anti-imperialist  front  of  struggle,  and  an  important 
factor  working  for  peace,  social  progress  and  healthier  international 
climate. 

The  policy  of  cooperation  and  interaction  of  the  world’s  two  major 
political  forces  of  our  day — the  socialist  community  and  the  nonaligned 
movement — acting  at  one  with  the  worid  national  liberation  and  workers’ 
movements  is  an  historicaliy  correct  thrust  of  the  struggle  against 
imperialism  and  reaction,  and  for  peace  and  international  security. 

In  his  speech  at  a  dinner  in  honour  of  Rajiv  Gandhi,  Prime  Minister 
of  the  Repubiic  of  India,  heid  in  the  Kremlin  on  May  21,  1985,  Mikhail 
Gorbachev,  General  Secretary  of  the  CPSU  Central  Committee,  highly 
assessed  the  role  and  activities  of  the  nonaligned  movement  in  the 
worl^  today.  He  said:  “The  emergence  on  the  world  scene  of  scores  of 
Asian,  African  and  Latin  American  countries,  striving  to  overcome  the 
pernicious  consequences  of  colonialism,  is  one  of  the  realities  of  the 
contemporary  world.  The  overwhelming  majority  of  these  countries  fol¬ 
low- the  policy,  of  nonalignment.  The  emergence  of  the  nonaligned  move¬ 
ment  and  its  becoming  a  major  factor  of  world  politics  are  law-governed 
phenomena  of  our  day  and  age.’’  ** 


«  El  Moudjahid,  Sept.  8,  1973. 
Pravda,  May  22,  1985. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO:  1812/94  80 


NEW  STAGE  OF  'MILITARISM'  IN  JAPAN  CRITICIZED 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  81-89 

[Article  by  A.  P.  Markov,  doctor  of  historical  sciences:  "A  New  Phase  of 
Japanese  Militarization"] 

Over  the  entire  postwar  period,  Japan’s  rearmament  and  the  revival 
of  Japanese  militarism  have  been  issues  attracting  the  close  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  world  public.  Beginning  in  1950  with  the  creation  of  a  reserve 

folice  corps  (which  was  reorganised  into  Japan’s  “self-defence  force”  in 
954),  the  process  of  militarisation  reached  a  very  high  level  by  the  early 
1980s.  Over  these  thirty  years,  the  country’s  military  expenditure-  grew 
from  $86,000,000  in  1951  to  $12,027,000,000  in  1984,  while  the  “self- 
defence”  force  was  transformed  into  a,  modern  army  equipped  with  all 
the  latest  types  of  weapons  except  nuclear  ones.  In  1985,  Japan’s  military 
expenditure  has  been  raised  again  by  6.9  per  cent  running  into  3.14  tril¬ 
lion  yen  ($13.4  billion  dollars).*  In  September  1985,  the  government 
approved  the  new  five-year  plan  for  military  spending  for  1986-1990  which 
earmarked  $76  billion  for  military  needs.  Thereby,  for  the  first  time  in 
postwar  history  the  Diet-adopted  principle  stating  that  the  military 
.Mpenditures  should  not  exceed  1  per  cent  of  the  GNP,  will  be  violated.. 

Japan’s  “creeping  militarisation”,  which  its  ruling  circles,  despite 
obvious  facts,  are  seeking  to  deny,  has  been  developing  at  an  increasingly 
rapid  pace.  But  at  the  turn  of  the  1970s,  and  particularly  with  the  coming 
to  power,  in  November  1982,  of  the  Nakasone  cabinet,  this  process  has 
acquired  qualitatively  new  dimensions.  While  on  an  official  visit  to 
Washington  in  January  1983,  the  Japanese  Prirne  Minister  said  he  would 
like  to  turn  Japan  into  an  “unsinkable  aircraft-carrier”  ^  and  would 
spare  no  effort  to  achieve  this  aim. 

Washington  is,  without  doubt,  pushing  for  the  accelerated  militarisa¬ 
tion  of  Japan,  Pursuing  a  policy  of  “total  militarisation”,  the  Reagan 
administration  has  been  bringing  wide-ranging  pressure  on  the  Japanese 
government  in  a  bid  to  make  them  play  a  more  active  part  in  implement¬ 
ing  this  dangerous  policy.  Pressure  from  Washington,  which  has  assumed 
harsh  and  sometimes  insulting  forms,  meets  with  practically  no  resist¬ 
ance  on  the  part  of  the  Japanese  leaders.  Yet  it  is  not  American  pressure 
alone  that  prompts  Tokyo  to  adopt  militarist  decisions.  Rather,  the  en¬ 
couragement  coming  from  Washington  acts  as  a  powerful  booster  for  the 
activities  of  the  most  reactionary  militarist  forces  within  Japan  itself,  for- 
which  have  long  been  waiting  to  launch  an  offensive. 

These  forces  have  never  reconciled  themselves  to  Japan’s  defeat  in 
World  War  II.  In  marking  the  40th  anniversary  of  victory  over  militarist 
Japan,  it  is  worthwhile  recalling  some  facts  from  those  far-off  days,  which 
show  how  the  forces  which  plunged  Japan  into  a  bloody  war  and  which 
are  now  vigorously  working  for  the  revival  of  the  country’s  military 
might  accepted  the  defeat.  Immediately  after  the  capitulation  in  August 


*  A  Handbook  on  Defence^  Tokyo,  1984,  p.  186  (in  Japanese);  Pravda^  Dec.  30, 1984. 
■  Far  Eastern  Economic  Review^  Feb.  3,  1983. 


81 


1945  and  on  the  eve  of  the  Allied  landing  in  Japan,  numerous  brightly 
coloured  posters  appeared  in  Tokyo  and  other  cities,  stating  that  the 
capitulation  was  merely  an  unpleasant  episode  in  the  country’s  history; 
it  would  be  followed  by  a  revival  of  the  Japanese  war  potential,  Japan 
would  win  back  its  former  glory  and  power,  and  so  bn.  On  August  15, 
1945,  after  reading  out  Emperor  Hirohito’s  order  for  the  capitulation  of 
the  Japanese  Army,  a  radio  announcer  went  on  to  make  the  following 
statement:  We  have  lost,  but  it  is  only  a  temporary  defeat.  Japan’s  mis¬ 
take  was  that  it  had  inadequate  material  force,  scientific  knowledge  and 
arms.  We  shall  correct  this  mistake.  3 

In  those  days  this  passed  almost  unnoticed,  for  the  future  of  Japanese 
militarism  seemed  to  have  been  determined.  But  subsequent  developments 
have  shown  that  this  was  not  so.  Now  that  we  are  witnessing  the  revival 
of  Japanese  militarism,  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  it  is  becoming  in¬ 
creasingly  dangerous,  something  that  is  influenced  to  a  decisive  degree 
by  the  fact  that  Japan  has  remained  a  typical  imperialist  country  with 
all  the  hallmarks  of  imperial  policy  and  methods  of  its  implementation. 
It  is  ruled  by  a  conservative  bureaucracy  and  big  monopoly  capital,  and 
the  imperial  striving  to  exploit  and  dominate  other  nations  is,  as  before, 
at  the  very  core  of  the  policy  they  are  pursuing  via  the  ruling  Liberal 
Democratic  Party  (LDP).  It  is  this  desire  for  exploitation  and  dominance 
that,  to  quote  Lenin,  “is,  to  put  it  briefly,  the  substance  of  imperialist 
policy’’.'*  Militarisation,  which  is  a  logical  consequence  of  this  desire,  is 
naturally  inherent  in  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  and  war  is  the 
inevitable  end  which  the  expansion  of  its  foundations  leads  to.®  The  main 
content  of  Japanese  imperialist  policy  has  not  changed  since  the  war, 
though  there  have  been  some  temporary  changes  in  the  methods  used  and 
in  the  time  taken  to  achieve  its  expansionist  aims.  , 

At  the  turn  of  the  1970s,  militarists  and  adherents  of  “decisive  action” 
among  the  ruling  elite  and  big  business  came  to  the  fore  again,  with  the 
“hawks”  ruling  the  roost  in  the  country’s  leadership.  The  USA,  which  had 
long  insisted  on  the  militarisation  of  Japan,  was  the  force  that  made  it 
easier  for  them  to  come  to  power.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  differences 
between  Tokyo  and  Washington  concerning  militarisation  and  Japan’s 
involvement  in  US  global  strategy  had  to  do,  as  |n  the  past,  with  the 
scale  and  periods  of  implementing  the  objectives  set,  rather  than  with 
principles  of  the  approach  to  the  problem.  Today  these  differences  have 
been  removed,  and  Japan  is  embarking  on  intense  militarisation. 


T  he  qualitative  changes  in  the  political  course  of  Japan  at  the  turn  of 
the  1980s  were  expressed  in  new  decisions  and  practical  steps  taken  by 
the  government  and  parliament,  and  in  their  approach  to  the  most  import¬ 
ant  foreign  and  domestic  policy  issues,  something  that  gave  the  country’s 
political  course  a  more  overtly  reactionary  and  militarist  slant.  These 
changes,  which  have  marked  Japan’s  slide  into  undisguised  militarism, 
were  introduced  unobtrusively  in  the  form  of  various  accords  and  agree¬ 
ments,  mostly  between  the  defence  departments  of  the  USA  and  Japan, 
on  individual,  but  not  insignificant,  issues  “representing  mutual  interest”. 
Reached  without  much  publicity,  these  agreernents  and  accords  reflected 
very  definite  trends  and  aspirations  of  both  countries.  But  their  existence 
did  not  yet  mean  that  Japan’s  new  military  policy  had  taken  final  shape 
or  been  accepted  by  its  leaders. 


®  W.  Price,  Key  to  Japan,  He-w  York,  1946,  pp.  80-89. 
‘  V.  I.  Lenin,  Collected  Works,  Vol.  23,  p.  35. 

5  Ibid.,  Vol.  26. 


82 


This  came  about  in  May  1981  as  a  result  of  talks  between  Prime 
Minister  Zenko  Suzuki  of  Japan  and  US  President  Ronald  Reagan®, 
with  the  two  sides  working  out  a  common  stand  on  a  number  of  funda¬ 
mental  issues  related  to  the  future  military  policies  of  Japan,  a  stand 
that  reflected  the  interests  of  the  most  reactionary  and  bellicose  sections 
of  US  and  Japanese  societies.  For  the  first  time  the  Japanese-American 
‘'security  treaty”  was  recognised  as  a  "military  alliance  similar  to  that 
existing  between  NATO  member  countries.  ^ 

On  his  return  to  Tokyo,  however,  Suzuki  sought  to  deny  any  change 
in  Japan’s  policy,  claiming  that  its  alliance  with  the  United  States,  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  communique,  published  after  his  talks  with  Ronald  Reagan, 
did  not  mean  an  increase  in  military  cooperation  and  placed  no  new  obli¬ 
gations  on  Japan.  But  when  asked  to  give  an  official  explanation  in  par¬ 
liament  as  to  what  he  meant  by  “alliance”  he  refused  to  do  so.® 

It  should  be  said  that  in  the  postwar  years  the  Japanese  governments 
stand  on  military  policy  matters  has  always  been  contradictory.  On  the 
one  hand,  it  has  taken  vigorous  steps  to  build  up  the  military  potential, 
while  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  sought  to  deny  the  obvious  facts,  insisting 
that  Japan  has  renounced  militarisation  once  and  for  all  and  that  its  policy 
is  aimed  at  promoting  a  stable  peace  and  detente  in  Asia  and  the  world 
over.  This  contradiction  was  revealed  in  a  particularly  graphic  way  dur¬ 
ing  Suzuki’s  visit  to  Washington.  j.  .  . 

There  are  definite  reasons  for  the  inconsistency  and  contradictoriness 
inherent  in  the  Japanese  government’s  stand  on  military  policy.  One  of 
these  is  the  extreme  unpopularity  of  militarisation  and  the  strengthening 
of  the  miiitary  alliance  with  the  USA  among  the  Japanese  and  in  the 
country’s  socio-political  circles.  Opinion  polls  conducted  in  May  1983 
showed  that  nearly  70  per  cent  of  those  asked  opposed  the  policy  of  mili¬ 
tarisation  and  denounced  Nakasone’s  statement  concerning  the  “common 
destiny”  of  Japan  and  America  as  far  as  military  strategy  was  concern¬ 
ed,  50  per  cent  were  against  revising  the  Constitution,  and  30  per  cent 
were  in  favour  of  discussing  it.®  The  April  1984  poll  revealed  that  only 
10  per  cent  of  those  asked  supported  Yasuhiro  Nakasone’s  policy.  This 
policy  is  causing  anxiety  and  concern  in  Asian  countries  and  is  the  butt 
of  justified  criticism  by  the  Soviet  Union  and  other  socialist  and  develop¬ 
ing  countries.  . 

Aware  of  Washington’s  extreme  preoccupation  with  strengthening  its 
military' and  political  alliance  with  Japan,  its  leaders  have  shown  con¬ 
siderable  deftness  recently  in  using  this  circumstance  to  help  the  country 
cope  with  its  economic  problems  and  assert  its  positions  on  world  mark¬ 
ets,  including  the  American  and  Western  European  ones,  without  binding 
themselves  by  obligations  to  be  directly  involved  in  aggressive  US  poli¬ 
cies.  For  a  time,  this  stand  brought  certain  rewards,  since  Washington, 
although  openly  displeased  with  the  intractability  of  its  partner  whom  it 
called  a  “stowaway”,  nevertheless  thought  it  worthwhile  to  tolerate  this 
situation,  reluctant  as  it  was  to  complicate  the  already  difficult  relations 
with  Japan. 

Yet,  compelled  by  its  unchanging  goal,  that  of  the  “total  militarisa¬ 
tion”  of  Japan  and  its  transformation  into  an  armed  “agent”  of  the  USA 
in  Asia,  Washington  moved  towards  gradually  supplementing  the  Japa¬ 
nese-American  “security  treaty”  with  new  bilateral  agreements,  documents, 
and  accords.  Taken  together,  they  were,  in  fact,  aimed  at  boosting  military 
and  political  relations  between  the  two  countries  to  a  higher  allied  level, 
forcing  Japan  to  speed  up  its  armament,  gaining  access  for  the  USA  to 

•  Zenko  Suzuki’s  visit  to  the  USA  took  place  between  May  4  and  8,  1981. 

.  ’  Asahl  shimbun.  May  5,  1981. 

•  Pravda,  Nov.  16,  1981. 

•  Christian  Science  Monitor,  April  4,  1983. 


83 


Japan’s  advances  in  high-technology  that  could  have  military  application;  , 
and  removing  any  obstacles  to  the  coordination  of  joint  combat  op/  '  n- 
tions  in  case  of  war.  In  other  words,  they  were  aimed  at  subordir 
Japan  to  the  interests  of  American  global  strategy. 

The  US  administration’s  course  towards  the  militarisation  of  Japan 
and  its  involvement  in  US  military  strategy  met  with  full  understanding 
and  support  from  the  Japanese  “hawks”  and  reactionaries  who  wished 
to  see  the  country  become  a  military  power.  It  was  no  longer  a  problem 
to  put  the  “coinciding  interests”  of  both  sides  into  the  form  of  appropriate 
agreements  and  accords.  In  June  1976,  the  USA  and  Japan  set  up  a  bila¬ 
teral  consultative  committee  (at  the  level  of  heads  of  military  depart¬ 
ments)  to  coordinate  both  countries’  military  and  political  steps  in  the 
context  of  joint  military  strategy.  “The  Committee  is  entrusted  to  work 
out  principles  for  joint  operations  by  the  two  countries’  armed  forces,  to 
maintain  contacts  between  military  bodies,  to  differentiate  the  functions 
of  the  armed  forces  and  produce  recommendations  for  the  Security  Com¬ 
mittee”  set  up  in  1957. 

Two  years  later,  in  1978,  the  consultative  committee  worked  out  and 
submitted  to  the  Security  Committee  the  Guiding  Principles  of  Japanese- 
American  Cooperation  on  Defence  Issues  which  envisaged  the  accelerated 
development  of  the  Japanese  armed  forces  as  well  as  the  opportunity  for 
US  troops  deployed  in  Japan  to  take  up  combat  positions  at  any  mo¬ 
ment,  should  serious  complications  arise  in  the  region.  It  was  also 
stipulated  that  the  sides  should  develop  plans  of  joint  combat  operations 
and  exchange  intelligence  information  about  the  forces  of  the  "potential 
enemy”.  In  case  of  need,  the  military  bases  on  Japanese  territory  would 
be  available  for  joint  use  by  the  armed  forces  of  both  countries."  Like¬ 
wise,  the  Principles  envisaged  the  creation  in  the  future  of  a  Joint  Com¬ 
mand  Headquarters  in  Japan  and  suggested  devising  offensive  tactics 
matched  with  US  strategy  in  case  a  crisis  situation  should  arise  in  the 
region. 

A  special  group  was  set  up  in  the  same  year  to  work  out  Japan’s 
emergency  legislation  to  back  up  legally  operations  by  the  “self-defence” 
force  in  case  of  an  “unexpected  attack  from  without”.  The  Japanese- 
American  Council  on  Arms  and  Technology  concerned  with  the  standar¬ 
disation  of  both  countries’  armaments  and  exchanges  of  military  techno¬ 
logy  and  licences  was  inaugurated  in  1979.  Pointing  out  the  importance 
of  involving  Japan  in  US  military  strategy,  the  Washington-published 
booklet  Japan's  Contribution  to  Military  Stability  in  Northeast  Asia 
demonstrated  the  country’s  exceptionally  convenient  geographical  position 
for  use  in  military  ventures  against  neighbouring  countries.  Japan  lies 
in  the  centre  of  the  region  at  the  intersection  of  the  main  trade  and  milit¬ 
ary  routes,  the  booklet  says.  Therefore,  it  can  provide  a  base  for  the 
naval  forces,  which  will  thence  control  military  ships,  and  for  the  air 
force,  which  will  find  itself  in  favorable  conditions  for  an  air  strike  at 
targets  in  the  Soviet  Union,  China,  and  North  Korea. 

At  the  same  time,  a  shift  is  taking  place  towards  the  accelerated  rear¬ 
mament  of  the  country.  In  October  1976,  the  General  National  Defence 
Programme  was  adopted,  which  stressed  the  need  for  a  further  build-up 
of  Japan’s  military  might.  Simultaneously,  Japan  negotiated  the  purchases 
of  100  US  F  15  fighter-bombers  and  other  military  hardware  worth  a 
total  of  nearly  one  trillion  yen.  In  1978,  a  contract  was  signed  which 
provided  for  the  beginning  of  arms  supplies  to  Japan.  >3 

Japan.  Yearbook,  Moscow,  1981,  p.  352. 

“  Kokusai  mondai  shiryo,  1979,  No.  1,  pp.  32-33. 

Japan’s  Contribution  to  Military  Stability  in  Northeast  Asia,  Washington,  1980, 

p.  26. 

See  Pravda,  .April  9,  1978. 


84 


In  keeping  with  the  General  National  Defence  Programme,  more 
were  inveM  in  the  late  1970s  into  military-related  research  and  deve¬ 
lopment  The  overall  sum  added  up  to  154  billion  yen, 
allocations  of  private  firms.  Japanese  industry  is  increasingly  shifting 
to  the  production  of  military  hardware  developed  m  Japan  itself.  The 
B,i  teh  wotl  tn  this 

miiiiarv  PYTif^nditure  mav  reach  20  per  cent  of  the  budget. ms  is  sujni 
dint  tr  make  iSht’ary  production  attractive.  A  more  difftcu  t  question 
?l  wheLrthe  3d  is  prepared  to  welcome  the  revival  o  Japanese 
military  industrial  potential.  At  some  stage  in  the  not  ^so  distant  future 
Japan  will  have  to  remove  its  mask  of  complete  pacif^m.  •  j  „ 

^Thus  by  May  1981,  when  Prime  Minister  Zenko  Suzuki  paid  am  official 
visit  to  Washington  where  an  agreement  was  reached  on  raising  the 
level  of  Jaranesl-Arliedcan  military  and  political  relations  to  the  sta  us 
of  a  military  alliance  with  all  the  ensuing  consequences,  many 
?elde^  issues  had  already  been  dealt  with  in  practical  terms  at  lower 
levels.  It  merely  remained  to  dot  the  i’s  and  admit  what  was,  in  effect, 

on  his  return  Iron.  Washington  Zenko ,  Suzuki  showed 
what  the  US  administration  and  the  Japanese  hawks 
“hesitation”  failing  to  fulfil  the  obligations  he  had  undertaker!  m.  his 
talks  with  Ronald  Reagan  with  the  required  energy.  His  indecisiveness^ 
wafto  a  great  extent  attributable  to  the  public  indignation  aroused  by 
the  results^  of  his  talks  in  Washington  and  to  protests  from  even  the 
•hSoStes”  in  the  ruling  elite,  to  say  nothing  of  the  opposition  parties, 
trade  unions,  and  democratic  organisations.  , 

The  Suzuki  cabinet  came  under  severe  criticism  both 
and  the  left  and  resigned  in  November  1982.  However,  the,  results  of  the 
Prime  Minister’s  talks,  which  conformed  fully  to  the  demands  of  the  reac¬ 
tionaries  and  the  military  both  in  Japan  and  the  USA,  remained  m  force. 
Thev  made  things  easier  for  the  cabinet  headed  by  Yasuhiro  Nakasone, 
who^ has  been  vigorously  pursuing  the  policy  of  building  up  the  Japanese 
armed  forces.  He  began  his  term  in  office  by  claiming  that  he  was  rnerely 
continuing  with  the  policy  of  the  Suzuki  cabinet  ^as^wrym^  out 
Japan’s  commitments  exclusively  for  the  purposes  of  defence  . 


•*“  he  ruling  circles  in  Japan,  which  sanctioned  the  extremely  unpopular 
I  policy  of  intense  militarisation,  believed  that,  in  order  to  implement  it, 
they  needed  a  politician  who  was  prepared  unhesitatingly  to  use  decisive 
and  even  harsh  measures  against  the  policy  s  opponents.  This  politician 
was  also  to  possess  the  necessary  flexibility  and  a  knack  for  demagoguery. 
Yasuhiro  Nakasone  was  the  most  suitable  candidate. 

Besides  this,  Nakasone  proved  that  he  could  And  a  common  language 
both  with  the  heads  of  the  rival  factions  and  groups  within  the  ruling 
Liberal  Democratic  Party  and  the  influential  business  circles  and  with  the 
US  administration  whose  favour  is  of  exceptional  importance  for  a  poli¬ 
tician  in  Japan  today.  Speaking  at  a  press  conference  on  the  day  ol  his 
inauguration  as  Prime  Minister,  Yasuhiro  Nakasone  niade  a  statemen 
entitled  “My  Political  Belief”  which  reiterated  his  firm  adherence  to  the 
idea  of  a  “strong  Japan”,  pursuing  an  active  military  policy  m  alliance 
with  the  USA,  and  his  loyalty  to  the  Japanese- American  security  treaty  . 

“  >4  Yearbook  on  Armaments  of  the  Self-Defence  Force,  ,  Tokyo,  1980,  p.  500 
(in  Japanese). 

“  finoncin/ Times,  March  5,  1981. 

'•  Far  Eastern  Economic  Review,  May  5,  1983,  p.  39. 


85 


His  statement  gained  approval  in  the  US  capital.  Speaking  to  one 
of  Japanese  businessmen,  Secretary  of  State  George  Shultz^  expressed 
support  for  Nakasone’s  nomination  to  the  post  of  Prime  Ministe^ 

While  preparing  for  the  top  post  in  the  country’s  leadership,  Yasuhiro 
Nakasone  sought  to  gain  the  confidence  of  the  US  administration,  Ameri¬ 
can  big  business,  the  military  and  bureaucracy,  in  an  effort  to  be  accep¬ 
table  to  Washin^on.  When  on  visit  there  as  head  of  the  National  Defence 
Agency  at  the  invitation  of  the  then  Defence  Secretary  Laird  and,  again 
in  the  early  1970s  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Trade  and  Industry  in  the 
Tanaka  Cabinet,  he  made  a  secret  offer  to  import  nuclear  weapons  to 
Japan,  something  utterly  at  variance  with  the  official  position  of  the 
government  which  kept  to  the  “three  non-nuclear  principles”.  For  this 
he  came  in  for  sharp  criticism  both  in  parliament  and  in  the  press. 

Encouraged  by  his  Japanese  counterpart,  Laird  came  to  Tokyo  in  July 
1971  to  put  forward  the  “total  force”  concept  providing  for  US  artned 
forces  as  well  as  the  armed  forces  of  Japan,  South  Korea  and  a  number 
of  other  Asian  countries  forming  a  “single  whole”  under  overall  US  com¬ 
mand.  It  was  suggested  that  Japan  should  concentrate  on  strengthening 
its  conventional  arms,  while  the  USA  would  devote  itself  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  nuclear  and  strategic  weapons.  Laird  also  proposed  that  the 
Japanese  Navy  should  take  over  some  of  the  functions  of  the  US  7th 
Fleet.  2°  Laird’s  proposal  met  with  a  negative  reaction  in  Japan,  China, 
and  the  ASEAN  countries  (Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  Singapore,  and 
the  Philippines).  Notably,  in  a  report  about  Laird’s  talks  in  Tokyo  China’s 
Xinhua  Agency  pointed  to  the  anti-Chinese  aspect  of  the  “total  force 
concept,  justly  noting  that  the  USA  was  “scheming  to  push  Japanese 
militarism  forward  to  the  front-line  of  aggressive  policies  in  Asia”.  “This 
is  the  gist  of  .the  ‘total  force’  concept,  this  is  the  gist  of  the  ‘Nixon  doc¬ 
trine’ ”,  the  agency  said. 

The  “total  force”  concept  was  rejected  by  Japan  whose  government  at 
that  time  preferred  not  to  bind  itself  to  the  USA  by  specific  military  com¬ 
mitments.  Tokyo’s  stand  caused  extreme  disappointment  in  Washington; 
“Nixon  hoped  that  Japan  would  become  the  cornerstone  of  collective 
security  in  Asia”,  wrote  the  Japanese  historian  Yiriye  in  this  connection. 
“In  view  of  Japan’s  opposition  this  idea  was  not  to  be  implemented”. 
M.  Yiriye  holds  that  Japan’s  refusal  to  help  create  a  “total  force”  promp¬ 
ted  Washington,  in  1972,  to  change  its  policy  in  relation  to  China  and 
give  up  its  containment  and  isolation.*®  Today,  in  putting  into  practice 
what,  in  effect,  is  the  same  idea  of  creating  in  Asia  a  so-called  total 
force  involving  the  Japanese  armed  forces  under  US  leadership,  the 
Reagan  administration  has  the  support  of  the  government  headed  by  its 
“best  friend”  Yasuhiro  Nakasone.  Nakasone,  wrote  the  paper  Asahi, 
has  sharply,  distanced  himself  from  traditionally  “restrained”  Japanese 
diplomacy  and  sided  with  the  most  bellicose  politicians  forming  the 
extreme  right  wing  of  NATO  by  openly  backing  practically  all  the  foreign 
policy  concepts  of  the  Reagan  administration.  *^Nakasone  is  in  favoiir  of 
strengthening  military  and  political  ties  and  contacts  between  Japan  ;and 
NATO.  He  is  advocating  broader  military  cooperation  with  South  Korea 


Dec.  26,  198^  .  i 

'•  Akahata,  Dec.  10,  1982. 

'»  Washington  Post,  July  10,  1971. 

fuening  Yews,  July  9,  1971. 

News  Bulletin  of  the  Xinhua  Agency,  July  31,  1971,  pp.  19-22. 
s*  M.  Yiriye,  Japanese-Chinese  Relations  After  Nixon's  Visit  to  China,  Tokyo,  1973, 
pp.  16-17  (in  Japanese). 

**  Ibidem. 

«  Asahi,  Jan.  20,  1984. 


86 


and  believes  it  is  possible  to  set  up  a  triple  alliance  between  the  USA, 

Japan  and  South  Korea.  *  xr  i  > 

At  the  same  time,  there  are  some  important  aspects  both  of  Nakasone  s 
life  and  convictions,  expressed  at  various  times  that  make  American  poli¬ 
tical  observers  wary.  In  his  hook  Japan  States  published  in  1977,  N^kar 
sone,  while  arguing  for  the  build-up  of  Japanese  military  might,  called 
lor  a  subsequent  “withdrawal  of  American  troops”  from  Japan  and  for 
an  ‘‘alliance  with  the  USA  on  an  equal  and  reasonable  basis  Some¬ 
what  earlier,  in  1967,  he  said:  “With  few  natural  resources  and  a  small 
area,  our  country  must  have  a  reliable  guarantee — the  armed  forces.^ 
Considering  the  constantly  changing  international  situation,  we  should 
use  the  JapanesejAmerican  “security  treaty”  with  flexibility  and  relinquish 

it  altogether  in  the  future”,  1.1. 

Nakasone’s  motto  is  “the  winner  is  always  right,  but  it  is  he  who  has 
strength  that  wins”,  wrote  the  Akahata.^^  By  giving  in  to  Washingtons 
demands  for  strengthening  Japan’s  military  potential  and  making  it  play 
a  more  active  military  role  in  Asia  in  alliance  with  the  USA,  Yasuhiro 
Nakasone  hopes  to  transform  Japan  into  a  strong  military  power,  capable 
not  only  of  treating  Washington  as  an  equal,  but  also  of  enjoying  a  special 
position  in  Asia,  where  Japan  has  always  claimed  leadership.  After  all, 
it  was  rivalry  over  domination  in  the  region  that  sparked  off  the  Japanese- 
American  war  in  the  early  1940s.  Referring  to  Nakasone’s  nationalisin 
and  his  statements  concerning  Japan’s  “special  role”  in  Asia  the  Wa// 
Street  Journal  wrote  that  he  was  the  Japanese  Konrad  Adenauer,  the  man 
who  had  paved  the  way  to  West  Germany’s  rearmament  in  the  1950s.  But 
if  Nakasone  was  the  Japanese  Konrad  Adenauer,  he  was  also  very  likely 
the  Japanese  Charles  de  Gaulle.  Previously  Japanese  policies  had  been 
made  in  Washington.  Nakasone  wanted  them  to  come  from  Tokyo.  He  is, 
in  the  words  of  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  a  long-distance  runner...  “ 

Well  aware  of  Nakasone’s  sentiments,  the  American  administration 
demands  his  obedience  and  hopes  to  use  his  militarist  aspirations  and 
his  popularity  among  reactionary  bourgeois  circles  in  order  to  secure  the 
latter’s  active  support  in  enhancing,  under  US  control,  Japan’s  military 
role  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region. 

A  fundamentally  new  feature  of  the  Nakasone  cabinet’s  policy  is  its 
desire  to  act  as  an  “independent  participant”  in  tackling  the  military  and 
political  problems  existing  in  its  relations  with  the  USA  and  West  Euro¬ 
pean  countries.  It  wants  to  be  regarded  as  a  “representative  of  Asia”  who 
knows  its  problems  better  than  the  USA  and  the  NATO  countries.  The 
Chuo  Koron  magazine  wrote  in  this  connection:  “Japan  belonging  to  a 
system,  the  leadership  of  which,  in  keeping  with  the  “security  treaty”,  was 
exercised  by  the  USA,  followed  from  its  status  as  a  peripheral  power  with 
a  low  level  of  civilisation.  This  alignment  of  forces  has  ceased  to  corres¬ 
pond  to  the  development  level  of  present-day  Japan”.  “The  USA  regards 
Japan  as  its  military  protectorate,  rather  than  an  ally”,  another  Japanese 
magazine  wrote. 

In  helping  to  militarise  Japan,  Washington  sees  its  objective  in 
“channeling”  its  growing  military  might  against  the  USSR  and  other 
socialist  countries,  and  in  making  its  military  potential  primarily  serve 
the  aims  of  its  own  hegemonistic  policy  in  this  region.  The  essence  of 
Reagan’s  policy  in  Asia  is  determined  by  the  desire  to  set  up  an  anti- 


Yasuhiro  Nakasone,  Nippon  va  sangan,  Tokyo,  1977,  p.  32. 
/Comet' s/w'mftttn,  Feb.  24,  1982. 

Akahata,  Nov.  25,  1982. 

*•  Wall  Street  Journal,  Sept.  1,  1983,  pp.  1,  14. 

Chuo  Koron,  1985,  No.  1,  p.  108. 

**  Asian  Perspective,  Spring,  Summer,  1983,  p.  57. 


87 


Soviet  coalition  within  the  framework  of  a  doctrine  aimed  at  restoring 
US  leadership  in  Asia,  U.  S.  News  &  World  Report  wrote. 

Meanwhile,  the  policy  of  the  Nakasone  government  pursues  its  own, 
quite  definite  aims:  an  economically  strong  and  armed  Japan  rather  than 
being  merely  a  bridgehead  in  Washington’s  strategy,  should  be  one  of 
the  political  leaders  of  the  capitalist  world,  exerting  an  influence  on  the 
mapping  out  of  the  Western  bloc’s  general  strategy  which  is  conceived  as 
the  joint  encirclement  and  exhaustion  of  the  Soviet  Union.  At  the  same 
time,  appeals  for  “solidarity  with  the  West’’  conceal  Tokyo’s  wish  to 
neutralise  and  weaken  protectionist  trends  in  the  USA  and  the  EEC  coun¬ 
tries  and  to  keep  open  to  Japanese  goods  the  markets  of  these  countries 
as  well  as  those  of  the  developing  countries  which  are  in  the  sphere  of 
influence  of  the  imperialist  Western  states. 

♦  ♦  ♦ 

Though  starting  his  career  as  Prime  Minister  with  the  statement  of 
his  wish  to  turn  Japan  into  an  “unsinkable  aircraft-carrier’’,  Yasuhiro 
Nakasone  had  soon  to  tone  down  his  pronouncements  and  make  increas¬ 
ingly  frequent  use  of  peaceloving  phraseology.  This  became  obvious  after 
the  early  elections  to  the  lower  house  of  Parliament  in  December  1983 
when  his  Liberal  Democratic  Party  suffered  a  defeat  and  lost  its  par¬ 
liamentary  majority.  .  i.  j 

However,  the  essence  of  the  LDP’s  military  policy  has  not  changed. 
Notably,  while  claiming  that  it  would  abide  by  the  “three  non-nuclear 
principles’’,  the  government  did  not  prevent  nuclear-carrying  American 
ships  from  calling  or  stopping  at  Japanese  ports  and  staying  there;  pre¬ 
parations  went  on  unimpeded  for  the  deployment  on  the  Misawa  base 
airfield  of  50  nuclear-capable  US  F-16  fighter-bombers  (their  deployment 
has  already  begun;  at  the  same  time,  stores  for  nuclear  bombs  are  being 
built  at  Misawa);  consent  was  given  for  the  landing  in  Japan  of  US  air¬ 
craft  with  nuclear  weapons  on  board,  based  in  South  Korea.  Irl  other 
words,  the  government  has  clearly  violated  the  “three  non-nuclear  prin¬ 
ciples”.  The  Akahata  wrote  in  this  connection:  “The  Japanese-American 
military  alliance  has  grown  into  a  nuclear  one,  entering  one  of  the  most 
dangerous  stages  in  its  history”.®*  The  Nakasone  government  gave 
'  orders  for  practical  preparations  to  be  begun  for  the  Japanese  Navy  to 
patrol  the  sea-lanes  and  block  the  straits.  Moreover,  from  the  summer  of 
1983  onwards,  Japanese  ships  have  been  sent  to  the  straits  to  monitor 
the  movements  of  Soviet  vessels. 

In  early  January,  1985,  Yasuhiro  Nakasone  paid  a  visit  to  Washington 
where  he  gave  his  backing  to  the  US  Strategic  Defence  Initiative  and 
expressed  his  full  approval  of  the  militarist  policy  pursued  by  the  Reagan 
administration.  In  December  1984,  prior  to  the  Prime  Minister’s  depar¬ 
ture  to  Washington,  General  Watanabe,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  i  Staffs 
Committee  of  the  Japanese  Armed  Forces,  and  General  Tixier,  US  Armed 
Forces  Commander,  signed  a  protocol  on  joint  combat  operations  by  the 
two  states  in  an  “emergency  situation”.  Moreover,  this  document  provi¬ 
ded  for  joint  American  and  Japanese  armed  action  both  in  Japans  and 
elsewhere.  Apart  from  the  staffs  jointly  working  on  relevant  plans,  the 
protocol  envisaged  the  setting  up  of  specialised  bodies  to  coordinate  their 
implementation.  It  also  provided  for  the  US  Armed  Forces  using,  in  ad¬ 
dition  to  their  own  bases,  Japanese  airfields,  ports,  stores  and  roads  which 
might  be  needed  for  the  logistic  support  of  combat  operations  in  the  Far 
East.  3® 


31  V.S.  News  &  World  Report,  Aug.  10,  1981,  p.  36. 
*2  Akahata,  May  23,  1982. 
pravda,  Dec.  29,  1984. 


88 


All  this  is  accompanied  by  assurances  from  the  Japanese  leaders  that 
nothing  is  the  matter  and  that  Japan  supports  peace  in  Asia  and  all  over 
the  world.  This  demagoguery  provokes  sharp  censure  in  the  Japanese 
press  and  in  the  press  of  Asian  countries.  The  Asahi  newspaper  stated 
that  speaking  in  parliament  Yasuhiro  Nakasone  paid  lip  service  to  a 
peace  policy,  but  that  the  question  arises  as  to  how  this  can  be  squared 
with  the  cabinet’s  military  build-up?  3'* 

Japan’s  transformation  into  a  “military  power’’  and  a  bridgehead  for 
American  imperialist  action  against  the  USSR  and  other  socialist  count¬ 
ries  has  been  undergoing  a  qualitative  change  in  the  1980s.  Japan  has 
eschewed  its  former  restraint  in  carrying  out  Washington’s  demands.  It 
has  agreed  to  supply  US  nuclear  submarines  and  other  military  vessels 
with  intelligence  information  about  Soviet  defence  measures  in  the  Far 
East.  The  Japanese  Navy  has  been  systematically  monitoring  the  move¬ 
ments  of  Soviet  ships  and  submarines  and  passing  the  data  obtained  to 
the  US  Command.  The  possibility  is  being  debated  of  Japanese  combat 
ships  escorting  US  nuclear-carrying  vessels.  K.  Tanikawa,  head  of  Japan’s 
National  Defence  Agency,  stated:  “Japanese  warships  may  defend  Ame¬ 
rican  vessels,  irrespective  of  whether  these  have  nuclear  weapons  on 
board  or  not.’’ 

In  1983,  the  United  States  and  Japan  were  engaged  in  a  total  of  320 
joint  projects  for  the  production  of  military  hardware,  including  F-15 
fighters,  R  3C  anti-submarine  planes,  etc.  Japan  bought  US  E  2C  Hawk- 
^ye  radar  planes,  and  ship-to-ship  Harpoon  missiles.  Japan  was  produc¬ 
ing  under  US  licences  heavy-duty  helicopters  and  Patriot  rockets.  A  total 
of  2,75  trillion  yen  was  spent  that  year  on  the  production  of  military 
hardware  under  US  licences.  The  “recommendations”  of  a  working  group 
of  NATO  countries  and  Japan,  set  up  in  1980,  say  that  Japan  and  the 
USA  ought  to  standardise  their  reconnaissance  equipment,  means  of  com¬ 
munication,  logistical  services,  and  transport  systems  in  order  for  joint 
action  to  be  possible  in  a  complicated  war  situation. 

In  1980,  the  two  countries  signed  an  agreement  on  military  hardware 

j  this  agreement  did  not  satisfy  the  Pentagon,  since 

It  did  not  place  Japan  under  the  direct  obligation  to  pass  on  to  the  US 
‘  technology.  A  new  agreement  was  initialled  in  January  1983 

at  Washington’s  insistence,  which  was  signed  during  Ronald  Reagan’s 
visit  to  Japan  in  November  1983.  The  agreement  defined  both  the  nature 
of  military  hardware  and  technology  which  the  USA  desired  to  obtain 
from  Japan,  and  the  procedure  of  their  transfer.  A  bilateral  commission 
was  set  up,  to  consider  individual  transfer  issues.  Advanced  Japanese 
hardware  and  technology  can  be  supplied  to  the  USA  both  by  govern- 
mentaj  enterprises  and  research  institutions  and  by  private  companies. 

Militarist  trends  in  Japan  are  growing.  Ignoring  the  lessons  of  World 
War  II,  certain  circles  in  Tokyo  and  Washington  want  to  bring  Japan’s 
military  might  in  line  with  its  considerable  economic  and  technological 
turn  it  into  a  “major  military  power’*  and  a  well-ar- 
med  bridgehead  of  American  and  Japanese  imperialist  aggression  in  the 
Asia-Pacific  region.  The  aim  of  Japanese  progressive  forces,  which  reflects 
tne  basic  interests  of  the  Japanese  people  and  the  peoples  of  other  coun- 
tries  in  this  region,  is  to  stop  the  implementation  of  these  plans  and  to 
put  an  end  to  the  policy  of  military  build-up. 


I 


Asafil,  Aug.  9,  1983. 

**  Japan  Times,  March  9,  1983. 

Asahi  shimbun,  March  5,  1983. 

”  NATO  Review,  1981,  No.  2,  pp.  12-16. 


COPYRIGHT;  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


CSO:  1812/94 


89 


SOME  TRENDS  IN  SEOUL'S  FOREIGN  POLICY 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  90-101 

[Article  by  0.  V.  Davydov  and  V.  V.  Mikheyev] 

I  n  the  early  1980s  the  US  intensified  its  policies  in  Asia.  Considering 
■  the  Asia-Pacific  region  of  great  importance  to  US  global  strategic  in¬ 
terests,  Washington  wants  to  create  there,  just  as  in  Western  Europe,  a 
new  front  to  counterbalance  the  Soviet  Union,  the  other  socialist  countries 
and  to  fight  against  the  national  liberation  movement.  It  has  set  itself 
the  task  of  changing  the  military-political  balance  of  forces  in  the  region 
in  favour  of  the  US  by  setting  up  a  new  nuclear  missile  staging  area  in 
the  Far  East  as  close  as  possible  to  Soviet  borders,  tying  up  the  military 
and  economic  resources  of  some  Asian  countries  with  the  US  military  po¬ 
tential  and  establishing  eventually  a  comprehensive  military-political 
structure  similar  to  NATO. 

.  A  policy  like  that  cannot  but  evoke  a  negative  reaction  among  most 
of  the  countries  in  the  region.  Under  the  circumstances  the  US  has  to 
look  for  new  methods  of  enhancing  its  influence  in  Asia.  It  openly  pins 
hopes  on  searches  for  and  strengthening  of  Washington’s  strongholds  in 
those  Asian  states  whose  rulers  side  with  US  policy.  Drawn  into  the  sphe¬ 
re  of  US  influence,  those  regimes  in  their  turn  seek  to  use  the  situation  in 
their  own  Interests. 

This  is  largely  true  of  South  Korea,  whose  economic  potential,  strate¬ 
gic  position  marked  by  proximity  to  the  borders  of  the  USSR  and  other 
Asian  socialist  countries  and  growing  military-political  options  arouse 
constant  interest  on  the  part  of  the  US  which  is  out  to  involve  Seoul 
ever  more  actively  in  its  hegemonistic  course  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific. 
The  South  Korean  rulers  see  close  contacts  with  Washington  as  an  im¬ 
portant  guarantee  of  the  existence  of  their  regime  and,  in  recent  times, 
as  a  favourable  opportunity  to  try  and  extend  its  clout  in  regional  affairs. 


A  product  of  the  “cold  war”,  the  South  Korean  regime,  whose  emergence 
and  existence  were  determined  by  the  needs  of  Washington’s  imperial 
policy  in  Asia,  has  since  the  very  outset  been  an  obedient  instrument  of 
the  imperialist  forces.  The  foreign  policy  actions  of  the  regime,  which  for 
many  years  has  been  parasitising  on  international  tensions,  are  characte¬ 
rised  by  rabid  anti-Communism  and  aggressiveness.  Seoul’s  appeals  to 
build  up  forces  to  “vanquish  Communism”  are  attuned  to  the  policy  of 
rigid  confrontation  with  the  forces  of  socialism  and  progress  pursued  by 
imperialism,  first  and  foremost  American  imperialism.  , 

At  the  same  time  the  mechanism  of  Seoul’s  cooperation  with  its  im¬ 
perialist  partners,  which  had  for  a  fairly  long  period  been  functioning 
unfailingly,  began  to  flounder  as  political  climate  changed  in  Asia  in  the 
mid-1970s.  Seoul  grew  suspicious  towards  the  restructuring  of  the  impe¬ 
rialist  military-political  system  in  the  Far  East  on  the  basis  of  the  con¬ 
cept  of  the  “regional  balance  of  forces”  and  also  towards  Washington’s 
and  Tokyo’s  manoeuvres  with  respect  to  Peking.  It  feared  lest  Washing¬ 
ton’s  “withdrawal”  from  Asia  should  inevitably  shatter  the  American  gua¬ 
rantees  of  the  existence  of  the  anti-popular  regime  in  South  Korea. 


90 


Under  the  circumstances  the  South  Korean  rulers  undertook  to  work 
out  some  long-term  foreign  policy  steps  to  compensate  for  the  setbacks 
caused  by  the  changes  in  the  international  situation  unfavourable  for 
Seoul  and  to  ensure  the  regime’s  adaptation  to  the  new  situation  in  the 
region.  The  new  strategy,  in  particular,  boiled  down  to  the  idea  to  pre¬ 
serve  the  political  and  ideological  principles  of  the  regime  intact  and  to 
ensure  its  survival  by  introducing  certain  changes  in  South  Korean  fo¬ 
reign  policy.  The  strategy  aimed  at  alleviating  its  isolation  from  the  out¬ 
side  world  and  diversifying  the  foreign  political  contacts  of  the  regime. 
The  so-called  “economic  diplomacy’’  was  to  become  the  main  instrument 
of  Seoul’s  foreign  policy,  which  in  the  opinion  of  South  Korean  leaders, 
should  in  fact  work  towards  ensuring  South  Korea’s  preponderance  in  the 
countries,  with  which  it  has  no  diplomatic  relations  and  towards  streng¬ 
thening  its  position  on  the  international  scene.  *  tt  j  •  s 

Shifts  in  the  foreign  policy  pursued  by  the  Park  Chung  Hee  admini¬ 
stration  in  the  first  half  of  the  1970s  and  also  some  discomfiture  in  Seoul  s 
relations  with  its  imperialist  partners  were  also  closely  linked  whh  chan¬ 
ges  in  the  South  Korean  socio-economic  structure  in  the  late  1960s-the 
early  1970s.  Massive  US  economic  “aid"  was  used  by  the  Park  Chung 
Hee  regime  to  consolidate  the  economic  and  political  bedrock  of  the  go¬ 
vernment  and  to  carry  through  the  South  Korean  version  of  “white  revo¬ 
lution”,  the  bourgeois  bureaucratic  interpretation  of  the  real  needs  of  so¬ 
cio-economic  development.  As  a  consequence,  political  initiative  was  gra¬ 
dually  taken  over  by  the  bourgeois  bureaucratic  circles,  which  set  its 
sights  on  facilitating  the  capitalist  modernisation  of  South  Korea.  Chan¬ 
ges  in  the  basis  induced  by  rapid  economic  growth  and  industrialisation 
led  to  the  emergence  in  South  Korea  of  components  of  state-monopoly 
structures,  to  the  development  of  the  export-oriented  economy  and,  as  a 
consequence,  to  its  active  .involvement  in  the  world  capitalist  economy. 

All  these  socio-economic  processes  were  influencing  Seoul’s  foreign 
policy.  The  need  to  enter  worldwide  economic  relations  and  a  search  for 
new  markets  made  it  necessary  to  diversify  international  contacts  and  to 
pursue  a  foreign  policy  which  would  energetically  satisfy  the  require¬ 
ments  of  economic  growth.  As  the  specific  interests  of  South  Korean  mo¬ 
nopolies  and  big  bourgeoisie  were  shaping  up,  its  foreign  policy  evblved 
towards  autonomy  with  external  trappings  of  self-assertion  and  even  with 
some  ambitions  towards  imperialist  allies,  ^ 

These  shifts,  naturally,  could  not  affect  Seoul’s  pro-imperiahst  course 
on  the  international  scene.  What  was  becoming  more  and  more  obvious, 
however,  was  the  desire  of  the  Seoul  authorities  to  use  the  increased  ec(^ 
nomic,  political  and  military  potentialities  of  the  country  to  accomplish 
certain  foreign-policy  objectives,  namely,  to  enhance  South  Korea  s  pre¬ 
stige  on  the  world  scene,  to  secure  better  external  conditions  for  the  sur¬ 
vival  of  the  anti-popular  regime,  consistently  to  pursue  a  course  towards 
isolating  the  DPRK,  to  counter  more  vigorously  the  forces  of  socialism 
and  progress  on  the  international  scene  and  to  gain  more  advantage 
within  the  US-South  Korean  alliance  and  in  relations  with  Japan. 

After  a  new  leader,  Chun  Doo  Hwan,  had  come  to  power  in  October 
1979,  South  Korea’s  international  course  had  not  been  radically  changed. 
Generally  speaking,  the  foreign  policy  strategy  of  the  new  administration 
was  geared  to  accomplish  the  tasks  inherited  from  the  late  dictator  Park 

Chung  Hee.  '  ^  ^  xi.  « 

However,  recently  emphasis  shifted  to  military  means  and  the  use  ot 
force  in  pursuit  of  foreign  policy  and  attempts  to  use  the  growing  milita¬ 
ry  potential  as  the  main  tool  of  “invigorating”  foreign  policy  became  more 
obvious.  At  the  same  time  Seoul’s  diplomacy  is  relying  heavily  on  out¬ 
right  demagogy  in  its  foreign  policy  propaganda,  on  “peaceable”  rhetoric 

*  Korea  Herald,  Nov.  26,  1977. 


91 


and  even  on  sdme  “anti-imperialist”  slogans  to  offset  a  patently  milita¬ 
ristic  tilt  in.  the  foreign  policy  of  the  regime  and  to  mask  its  true  goals 

and  methods.  .  .....  i  j  • 

The  Seoul  leaders  are  constantly  trying  to  exploit  the  present-day  in¬ 
ternational  ;  situation  and  world  tensions  to  bolster  their  positions  in 
the  imperialist  camp.  They  make  no  secret  of  the  fact  that  their  growing 
war  preparations  are  a  part  of  the  overall  military  efforts  of_  the  West 
claiming  that  any  military  weakness  displayed  by  the  countries  of  the 
Western  alliance  will  have  a  negative  effect  on  the  cause  of  world 
peace.®  Advocating  and  supporting  Washington’s  hard  line  towards  the 
USSR,  the  DPRK  and  other  socialist  countries,  South  Korean  leaders  are 
holding  up  their  own  possibilities  in  pursuing  a  policy  of  containment  of 
communism  and  struggle  against  “Soviet  military  expansion  on  the  re- 


Seoul  believes  that  South  Korea  can  be  made  into  a  regional  force 
through  strengthening  its  alliance  with  the  United  States,  The  US  strate- 
gy  of  coordinating  the  actions  of  its  closest  allies  in  Asia  in  a  _  crusade 
against  the  forces  of  progress  is  fully  shared  by  Seoul,  which  believes  that 
South  Korea’s  energetic  participation  in  a  multilateral  military  and  poli¬ 
tical  alliance  that  is  being  cobbled  together  by  Washington  in  the  Far 
East  will  become  a  major  practical  step  in  invigorating  South  Korea  s 
foreign  policy  and  in  bolstering  its  relations  with  the  West  and  with  con¬ 
servative  regimes  in  Asia.  J  ■  .  1  !•  I 

Right  after  its  installation,  the  Chun  Doo  Hwan  administration  set 
out  to  smooth  over  certain  differences  in  relations  with  Washington, 
which  had  emerged  in  the  late  1970s  in  particular,  because  of  President 
Carter’s  decision  to  withdraw  US  land  troops  from  South  Korea.  It  was 
with  evident  pleasure  that  Seoul  reacted  to  statements  made  by  senior  US 
officials  about  the  growing  importance  of  the  South  Korean  regime  in  Wa¬ 
shington’s  strategy  in  Asia  and  the  renunciation  of  the  US  plans  to  with¬ 
draw  troops  from  South  Korea,  Chun  Doo  Hwan,  for  his  part,  stressed 
in  one  of  his  first  speeches  as  the  head  of  the  regime,  that  contacts  be¬ 
tween  South  Korea  and  the  USA  had  overgrown  the  framework  of  a 
mere  military  alliance  and  stated  his  regime’s  desire  to  have  relations 
of  mature  and  close  partnership  with  the  United  States.  ^ . 

The  pompous  celebrations  of  the  centenary  of  the  First  American-Ko- 
rean  treaty  and  Chun  Doo  Hwan’s  visit  to  the  USA  in  1981  were  called 
upon  to  signal  the  end  of  the  “crisis”  period  in  relations  between  Wa¬ 
shington  and  Seoul  and  their  transformation  into  “mature  partnership  . 
Reagan’s  visit  to  South  Korea  in  November  1983,  during  which  South 
Korea’s  importance  to  the  USA  both  on  a  regional  and  on  a  global  scale, 
became  obvious,  marked  a  new  stage  in  strengthening  strategic  coopera¬ 
tion  between  Washington  and  Seoul.  The  joint  communique  on  the  results 
of  the  visit  stressed,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  bilateral  relations, 
that  South  Korea  was  vital  to  US  security  interests.  *  ^  .  ,. 

The  growing  importance  of  South  Korea  in  Washingtons  Asian  policy 
is  explamed  by  the  plans  of  the  Reagan  Administration  to  set  the  stage  in 
the  Korean  Peninsula  for  tough  confrontation  with  the  USSR  and  the 
Asian  socialist  states  and  by  the  attempts  to  involve  Seoul  even  more 
in  its  plans  to  build  up  an  ^‘Eastern  Front”  of  imperialism.  The  USA  to¬ 
day  tends  to  reckon  to  a  greater  extent  both  with  the  increased  economic, 
scientific,  technical  and  military  potential  of  South  Korea  and  with  the 
ambitions  its  leaders  display  wishing  to  play  the  role  of  a  new  regional 
force”  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific, 


2  Korea  Herald,  Aug.  20,  1983. 

3  See  Korea  Annual,  Seoul,  1982,  p.  401. 
*  Korea  Newsreview,  Nov.  19,  1983,  p.  8. 


92 


The  significance  and  functions  of  US  troops  in  South  Korea  have  been 
revised  accordingly  and  they  are  viewed  today  as  “a  factor  indispensable 
for  maintaining  peace  not  only  in  the  Korean  Peninsula  but  in  Northeast 
Asia  as  a  whole”.  The  decision  was  taken  to  increase  the  troop  contin¬ 
gent  by  2,500.  Under  the  resolutions  of  the  16th  US-South  Korean  Con¬ 
sultative  Meeting  on  Security  in  May  1984,  the  US  airforce  in  South 
Korea  was  reinforced  by  a  wing  of  advanced  F-16  fighter  bombers  (72 
planes),  a  squadron  of  A-10  attack  planes  (24  planes),  and  new  Cobra 

and  Blackhawk  helicopters.  ®  .  i 

The  peaceloving  public  is  worried  by  the  Pentagon  s  plans  to  deploy 
in  the  Korean  Peninsula  new  forward-based  nuclear  systems  in  addition 
to  hundreds  of  tactical  nuclear  weapons  which  have  been  stationed  in 
South  Korea  since  the  late  1950s.  According  to  press  reports,  the  USA 
is  studying  the  possibility  to  introduce  neutron  weapons  and  Pershing-2 
medium-range  nuclear  missiles  in  South  Korea.  Plans  have  been  drawn  up 
to  increase  the  US  military  potential  in  the  region  with  ground-based 
Tomahawk  cruise  missiles  to  “protect”  international  straits.® 

Present-day  US  strategy  towards  the  Korean  Peninsula  implies  not 
only  fortification  of  the  South  Korean  staging  area  militarily  by  modernis- 
ing  the  Seoul  army  and  increasing  US  military  presence.  Another  objec¬ 
tive  is  to  encourage  military  cooperation  between  South  Korea  and  Japan 
and  to  organise  close  tripartite  coordination  in  that  field  so  as  to  lay  the 
basis,  as  American  strategists  hope,  for  building  up  a  "“regional  security 
system”. 


The  “harmonisation”  of  Japanese-South  Korean  relations,  in  Washing¬ 
ton's  view,  should  become  a  landmark  on  this  road.  One  of  the  cau¬ 
ses  of  instability  in  South  Korean-Japanese  relations  was  mistrust  the 
South  Korean  people  and  even  some  politicians  showed  in  relation  to  the 
Japanese  leaders.  It  had  its  roots  in  the  ruthless  colonial  policy  pursued 
by  the  Japanese  military  in  Korea  in  the  period  up  to  1945.  Many  South 
Koreans  believe  that  the  economic  expansion  of  Japanese  monopolies, 
which  swamped  South  Korea  after  the  establishment  of  diplomatic 
tions  between  Seoul  and  Tokyo,  could  lead  to  Japan’s  “second  invasion  , 
The  approval  by  the  Japanese  authorities  in  July  1982  of  new  history 
textbooks,  which  grossly  misrepresented  the  history  of  Japanese-Korean 
relations  and  falsified  Japan’s  colonial  policy  in  Korea,  caused  mass  out¬ 
rage  in  South  Korea.  1  ^ 

However,  in  recent  time  the  efforts  of  Japanese  and  South  Korean 
diplomacy  to  dampen  contradictions  between  Seoul  and  Tokyo  or  at  l^^st 
to  push  them  aside  in  favour  of  “strategic  partnership”  between  Wa¬ 
shington’s  two  chief  allies  in  the  Far  East,  have  been  more  and  more  ob¬ 
vious.  Clearly,  these  efforts  are  being  directed  from  the  other  side  of  the 

A  session  of  the  Japanese-South  Korean  parliamentary  union  stated 
in  Tokyo  in  December  1982,  that  the  early  settlement  of  the  problerns 
existing  between  the  two  countries  would  meet  the  interests  of  both 
sides.  ^  The  visit  of  Japanese  Premier  Nakasone  to  South  Korea  in 
January  1983,  was  an  attempt  drastically  to  improve  relations  between 
Seoul  and  Tokyo.  His  talks  with  South  Korean  leaders  centred  on  the  in- 
vigoration  of  military  and  political  cooperation  between  Japan  and  South 
Korea.  According  to  the  press,  Nakasone  made  his  militarist  statements 


»  Korea  Herald,  May  13,  1984. 
•  Ibidem.,  Jan.  20,  1983. 

»  Ibidem.,  Dec.  23.  1982. 


93 


about  his  readiness  to  make  Japan  an  “unsinkable  aircraft-carrier”  of  the 
USA  and  vigorously  to  contribute  to  a  blockade  of  internationaUstraits 
right  after  his  consultations  with  South  Korean  leaders.  A  four-billion- 
dollar  loan  officially  meant  to  finance  South  Korea’s  next  five-year  eco¬ 
nomic  development  plan,  is  bound  to  lay  material  foundations  for  the 
emergent  cooperation  between  Seoul  and  Tokyo  in  matters  of^  security. 

The  shift  of  gravity  to  military  and  political  cooperatioii  m  Japanese- 
South  Korean  relations  became  apparent  after  the  first  visit  of  the  head 
of  the  Seoul  regime  to  Japan  in  September  1984.  The  results  of  the  visit 
were  touted  in  Seoul  as  a  major  success  of  South  Korean  diplomacy,  which 
had  ushered  in  a  “new  age”  in  relations  with  Japan  on  the  basis  of  the 
“common  ideals  of  peace,  freedom  and  democracy”.  South  Ko’rean  pro¬ 
paganda  had  a  field  day  extolling  among  other  things  the  fact  th^  the 
Japanese  Emperor  had  said  during  his  meeting  with_  Chun  Doo  Hwan 
he  “regretted”  the  “unhappy  period”  in  bilateral  relations  and  expressed 
the  hope  that  the  past  would  never  return.  _  _  “ 

The  main  goal  of  the  visit  of  the  Seoul  leader  discussions  ort  secu¬ 
rity  problems”— well  fitted  in  the  “new  chapter”  of  Japanese-South  Kore¬ 
an  relations.  It  was  stressed  by  the  South  Korean  side  that,  given  the  es¬ 
calation  of  “the  Soviet  military  potential  and  the  North  Korean  threat 
in  the  Far  East,  “Japanese-South  Korean  relations  are  the  key  to  peace 
and  security  in  the  region”.  The  Japanese  Premier,  for’  his  part,  spoke 
highly  of  Seoul’s  war  preparations  as  “a  contribution  to  maintaining 
peace  in  the  peninsula”.  According  to  press  reports,  as  the  chiefs  of  staff 
of  the  Japanese  and  South  Korean  armed  forces  held  talks  on  problems 
of  military  cooperation,  they  extensively  discussed  possible  cooperation 
between  Seoul  and  Tokyo  in  patrolling  sea-lanes  within  a  1,000-mile  zone 
around  the  Japanese  Isles  and  in  blockading  international  straits. 


Relations  of  “mature  partnership”  between  the  South  Korean  ruling 
elite  and  imperialism  presuppose  not  only  a  more  concrete  role  and 
functions  of  Seoul  in  Washington’s  military-political  strategy  but  also  the 
former’s  active  involvement  in  the  implementation  of  major  social  and 
class-motivated  tasks  in  the  zone  of  the  national  liberation  rnovement. 
Using  the  Seoul  regime  as  its  “agent”  in  the  developing  world,  Washing¬ 
ton  is  seeking  to  consolidate  the  pro-American  orientation  of  a  number 
of  developing  countries,  to  impose  on  them  neocolonialist  methods  of  solv¬ 
ing  the  problems  facing  them  and  thus  to  shore  up  the  positions  of  capi¬ 
talism  in  the  “Third  World.’*  t  *  1 

Pursuing  these  objectives,  the  USA  is  goading  Seoul  into  a  more  ener¬ 
getic  and  outwardly  better  balanced  line  in  international  affairs.  Washing¬ 
ton  is  even  prepared  to  recognise,  within  certain  limits,  the  “autonomy 
of  the  South  Korean  regime’s  foreign  policy,  naturally,  guaranteed  by 
imperialism,  and  to  give  its  partner  a  free  hand,  again  within  specified 
bounds,  in  pursuing  its  own  expansionist  policy.  The  US  strategists  con¬ 
sider  this  approach  promising  also  because  Seoul  diplomacy  has  lately 
stepped  up  its  own  efforts  vis-a-vis  the  newly-independent  countries.  At¬ 
tempts  are  being  made  to  prove  that  South  Korea  is  a  part  of  the  deve¬ 
loping  world,  shares  its  interests  and  concerns  and  supports  its  efforts 
in  the  struggle  for  a  new  international  economic  order.  Seoul  is  even 
stating  its  readiness  to  join  the  nonaligned  movement. 

Contacts  with  the  developing  world  are  viewed  by  Seoul  not  only  as 
a  factor  of  strengthening  its  international  positions  and  increasing  its 
“political  weight”  but  also  as  a  possible  way  of  resolving  its  own  eco¬ 
nomic  problems.  The  intensified  activity  of  South  Korean  companies  on  the 
markets  of  a  number  of  Western  states  has  dramatically  aggravated  n- 


94 


valry  between  them  and  the  monopolies  of  those  countries.  Tough  pro¬ 
tectionist  measures  recently  introduced  to  check  South  Korean  exports 
have  been  blocking  access  to  those  markets  for  South  Korean  goods 
and  worsening  the  terms  of  Seoul’s  trade  with  its  leading  partners  in  the 
developed  capitalist  world.  For  instance,  in  the  first  half  of  1984,  about 
43.8  per  cent  of  the  total  South  Korean  exports  to  Western  countries, 
worth  about  $4,234  million,  were  subjected  to  restrictions,  with  basic 
export  items  hit  particularly  hard  (63.8  per  cent  of  textiles,  62.7  per  cent 
of  steel  and  85.6  per  cent  of  footwear).  Protectionist  measures  introduced 
by  the  USA  affected  almost  one  half  of  the  total  South  Korean  exports 
(42.5  per  cent  in  1983).  The  damage  was  tangible  because  the  United 
States,  Seoul’s  major  trade  partner,  absorbs  about  37  per  cent  of  South 
Korean  exports.  ® 

South  Korea  is  particularly  worried  by  its  trade  relations  with  Japan. 
Seoul  voiced  its  displeasure  with  the  “closed  Japanese  market”  and  with 
Japan’s  obvious  unwillingness  to  share  advanced  technology  and  know¬ 
how  with  its  partner.  The  chronic  imbalance  of  bilateral  trade  remains 
an  acute  problem.  In  1984,  South  Korea  ran  up  a  deficit  of  $2.8  billion 
in  trade  with  Japan,  which  is  more  than  its  surplus  in  trade  with  all  the 
other  couritries.  Seoul’s  total  deficit  in  trade  with  Japan  between  1965 
and  1983  reached  $30  billion.  ® 

Economic  contradictions  have  caused  frictions  between  the  Seoul  re¬ 
gime  and  Western  countries,  threatening  the  strategic  partnership  be¬ 
tween  the  USA,  Japan  and  South  Korea. 

In  this  situation  Seopl  diplomacy  is  seeking  to  diversify  the  country’s 
economic  contacts  and  to  expand  the  operations  of  South  Korean  com¬ 
panies  primarily  in  the  markets  of  the  developing  countries.  The  expan¬ 
sion  of  South  Korean  monopolies  into  those  countries  is  being  carried 
out  through  joint  ventures  in  the  development  of  natural  resources  of 
the  developing  countries  and  also  through  the  construction  of  projects  in 
infrastructure  and  industries  by  South  Korean  companies.  Between  1973 
and  1983,  the  annual  value  of  contracts  secured  by  those  companies  to 
build  projects  abroad  grew  from  $174.3  million  to  $10,400  million.  By 
the  end  of  1984,  they  had  concluded  contracts  for  construction  projects  in 
the  developing  countries  to  the  total  value  of  $73,300  million. 

This  new  trend  in  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Seoul  regime  made  itself 
felt  particularly  strongly  in  the  results  of  Chun  Doo  Hwan’s  visit  to 
ASEAN  countries  in  the  summer  of  1981  and  to  several  African  countries 
in  August  1982;  according  to  South  Korean  propaganda  those  visits  laid 
the  foundations  of  a  “new  age”  of  Seoul’s  extensive  cooperation  with  the 
“Third  World”  countries.  "  Banking  on  the  struggle  waged  by  the  develop¬ 
ing  countries  against  neocolonialism  and  their  efforts  to  overcome  their 
economic  backwardness,  the  leader  of  the  Seoul  regime  stated  the  need 
to  build  “a  multi-lateral  system  of  South-South  cooperation”  on  the  basis 
of  the  principle  of  “collective  self-reliance”:  that  system  is  meant  to  in¬ 
corporate  South  Korea.  Seoul  diplomacy  also  touted  the  South  Korean 
“experience”  of  the  capitalist  modernisation  of  the  economy  and  the  re¬ 
gime’s  ability  to  render  “broad  assistance”  to  developing  countries  in 
their  national  construction  programmes. 

These  statements  of  the  Seoul  leaders  were  backed  with  a  number  of 
practical  steps,  intended'  to  demonstrate  Seoul’s  “sincerity”  with  regard 
to  newly-free  countries.  South  Korea  has  been  rendering  “free  economic 
^id”  to  a  number  of  countries  since  1975.  Altogether,  $7  million  were  set 


•  *  Korea  Herald,  Nov.  10,  1984. 

•  Ibidem.,  Dec.  19,  1984. 

Ibid.,  Dec.  18,  1984. 

"  Korea  Newsreview,  Sept.  4,  1982,  p.  6. 
'^Ibidem.  ^ 


95 


aside  for  aid  programmes  in  1984  while  the  figure  for  1985  is  to  reach 
$10  million.'®  In  1984,  South  Korea  enrolled  865  specialists  from  deve¬ 
loping  countries  for  education  and  production  training.  ,  c  lu 

A  special  programme  was  drawn  up  in  1982  and  a  number  of  South 
Korean  organisations  are  carrying  out  agroengineering,  irrigation  and 
regional  development  programmes  in  other  countries,  organising  prepara¬ 
tory  courses  for  students  from  the  developing  world  and  practising  tech¬ 
nology  transfer  to  developing  countries.  At  present  South  Korea  has 
come  up  with  a  long-term  comprehensive  programme  for  “economic  aid 
to  developing  countries.  ...  .  . 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  Seoul’s  flirting  with  these  countries  is  meant  to 
secure  support  for  the  latest  foreign-policy  actions  of  the  Seoul  regime 
and  also  to  set  the  stage  in  the  developing  world  for  the  extensive  opera¬ 
tions  of  South  Korean  monopolies.  Moreover,  rhetoric  about  the  need  to 
broaden  cooperation  among  developing  countries  and  to  establish  a 
“front  of  development”  belies  the  attempts  of  Seoul  and  its  imperialist 
partners  to  prepare  the  ground  for  putting  together  a  grouping  of  deve¬ 
loping  countries  that  would  be  dominated  by  South  Korea  and  other 
tries  with  conservative  pro-Western  regimes.  That  grouping,  oriented^  to 
“capitalist  values”  and  close  contacts  with  imperialism,  could,  in  the  view 
of  its  architects,  become  an  alternative  to  the  nonaligned  movement  atid 
counter  the  national  liberation  movement. 


A  t  present  the  South  Korean  leaders  are  increasingly  inclined  jo  view 
^the  Asia-Pacific  region  as  the  main  area  of  their  economic  and  diplo¬ 
matic  activities.  Thev  believe  that  the  consolidation  of  the  regime  s  posi¬ 
tions  in  the  Pacific  will  help  raise  the  international  status  of  South  Korea 
and  increase  its  economic  potential. 

The  countries  of  the  region  today  account  for  more  than  50  per  cent 
of  South  Korea’s  foreign  trade,  they  supply  95  per  cent  of  Seoul  s  rub¬ 
ber  imports,  90  per  cent  of  its  tin  imports  and  80  per  cent  of  its  timber 
imports.  In  the  early  1980s,  South  Korean  companies  were  engaged  in 
50  joint  projects  with  firms  of  Pacific  countries,  and  showed  particular 
interest  in  the  joint  development  of  natural  resources  in  those  countries. 
States  of  that  region  are  becoming  targets  for  South  Korean  building 
companies.  In  1983  they  accounted  for  8.7  per  cent  ($905  million)  of  the 
total  volume  of  international  building  contracts.  Now  that  fewer  build¬ 
ing  contracts  are  offered  by  the  Middle  and  Near  East  countries,  the  re¬ 
gion  is  being  viewed  by  Seoul  as  the  second  largest  potential  market  oi 

building  contracts. '®  .  .  ..  e  tu  v 

Ever  more  persistent  attempts  have  been  made  by  the  South  Korean 
leaders  in  the  recent  period  to  expand  their  contacts  with  a  number  of 
Asian  countries  through  involving  them  in  military-political  cooperation. 
They  are  trying  to  prove  a  “dependence”  between  the  security  of  the  non¬ 
socialist  Southeast  Asian  countries  and  the  stabilisation  of  the  undemoc¬ 
ratic  South  Korean  regime,  and  the  “community”  of  the  strategic  inte¬ 
rests  of  Seoul  and  the  ASEAN  countries.  Seoul  diplomacy  is  trying  to 
assert  this  interpretation  of  the  character  of  relations  with  those  coun¬ 
tries  on  an  intergovernmental  level  and  is  taking  practical  steps  to  fur¬ 
ther  military  cooperation  with  ASEAN  countries. 


'3  Korea  Herald,  Jan.  9,  1985. 

Ibidem.,  Jan,  11,  1985. 

See  A.  B.  Parkansky,  US  Economic  Interests  tn 
1983,  p.  184  (in  Russian);  see  Korea  Herald,  Dec.  2,  1982. 
'*  Korea  Herald,  July  15,  1984. 


Asia  and  the  Pacific,  Moscow, 


96 


The  Chun  Doo  Hwan  administration  believes  it  to  be  possible  to  in¬ 
crease  its  involvement  in  regional  affairs  by  way  of  broader  partici¬ 
pation  in  the  processes  of  regional  integration  and  by  facilitating  econo¬ 
mic  and  political  cooperation  with  capitalist  and  developing  countries  in 
the  Pacific  on  a  multilateral  as  well  as  on  a  bilateral  basis. 

Seoul  enthusiastically  responded  to  Tokyo’s  proposal  to  establish  a 
Pacific  Community,  by  which  Tokyo  tried  to  reinforce  its  hegemonistic 
ambitions  in  the  region.  Without  rejecting  the  Japanese  initiatives,  the 
South  Korean  leaders  came  up  with  their  own  doctrine.  Since  the  early 
1980s,  the  formulation  of  the  regime’s  Pacific  strategy  has  been  a  matter 
of  special  concern  for  the  South  Korean  foreign  policy  agencies,  while 
ideas  which  emerged  in  this  context  were  tested  in  a  series  of  contacts 
between  governments.  The  communique  on  the  results  of  the  meeting  of 
Chun  Doo  Hwan  with  Ronald  Reagan  in  February  1981  stressed  the  de¬ 
sire  of  the  sides  to  take  joint  efforts  to  broaden  international  cooperation 
in  the  Pacific.  ' 

Chun  Doo  Hwan  also  offered  the  South  Korean  interpretation  of  the 
nature  and  characteristics  of  the  “Pacific  Age”.  In  May  1982,  the  head 
of  the  Seoul  regime  came  up  with  the  idea  to  convene  a  Pacific  summit 
conference,  and  in  July  formulated  principles  of  cooperation  in  the  region 
in  the  following  way:  the  establishment  of  a  permanent  consultative  body’ 
of  the  heads  of  state  in  the  region;  promotion  of  exchanges  in  trade,  the 
economy  and  culture  and  exploration  of  the  potentialities  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  of  the  region;  broader  cooperation  between  the  developed  and  deve¬ 
loping  countries  of  the  region,  and  also  among  its  developing  countries. 
It  was  also  stated  that  the  hegemony  of  any  country  or  group  of  coun¬ 
tries  was  inadmissible  and  that  the  Pacific  Community  should  not  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  become  a  political  bloc. Proceeding  from  these  recommenda¬ 
tions  it  is  planned  to  develop  exchanges  of  information  on  long-term  eco¬ 
nomic  planning  and  personnel  training,  to  practise  joint  financing  and 
investment,  to  exchange  knowhow,  to  launch  economic  development  pro¬ 
jects  through  the  international  division  of  labour  and  to  expand  mutual¬ 
ly  beneficial  trade  in  the  community. 

Seoul  obviously  hopes  that  its  political  initiative  will  evoke  more  sym¬ 
pathy  than  proposals  made  by  Western  countries.  Trying  to  reassure  the 
countries  of  the  region,  which  are  growing  suspicious  and  sceptical  to¬ 
wards  the  South  Korean  concept  of  the  Pacific  Community,  the  Seoul  lead¬ 
ers  say  that  South  Korea  is  not  big  enough  to  be  mistrusted  by  Asian 
countries.  They  are  trying  to  prove  that  the  Community  set  up  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  South  Korean  scenario  could  help  work  out  “a  single  approach 
of  the  South”  to  the  developed  countries  of  the  region  and  that  one  of 
Its  tasks  should  be  to  build  up  the  possibilities  of  the  region’s  small  coun¬ 
tries  in  trading  with  big  ones.  ** 

Seeking  ASEAN  countries’  support  for  its  proposals,  Seoul  stresses 
that  the  Association  would  be  a  kind  of  “nucleus”  of  a  broader  regional 
grouping  in  the  Pacific.  For  this  reason  relations  between  South  Korea 
and  ASEAN  are  characterised  as  the  central  axis  of  the  Pacific  Commu¬ 
nity  and  a  model  of  mutually  complementary  economic  cooperation. 

Seoul’s  attempts  to  prepare  the  ground  for  a  further  rapprochement 
with  non-socialist  countries  of  Asia,  especially  with  the  ASEAN  states, 
-derives  not  only  from  purely  economic  considerations  but  also  from  the 
.  regime’s  ambitions  to  assert  itself  as  the  leader  of  the  grouping  oF  coun¬ 
tries  and  territories  which  are  outstripping  the  bulk  of  the  Asian  coun- 


”  Korea  Annual,  1981,  p.  419. 

*•  Korea  Newsreview,  Jan.  1,  1983,  p.  8. 
»»  Korea  Herald,  Dec.  22,  1982. 

Ibidem. 


97 


tries  in  economic  development.  Seoul’s  claims  to  the  “decisive  role”  in 
reshaping  the  Pacific  situation  are  justified  by  the  concept  that  South 
Korea  as  a  “newly  industrialised  country”  occupies  intermediate  position 
between  the  developed  and  developing  countries  of  the  region  and  is  the¬ 
refore  destined  to  cement  relations  between  them. 

Trying  to  implement  these  ideas  in  practice,  Seoul  is  seeking  a  vigo¬ 
rous  role  in  the  system  of  “regional  cooperation”  in  the  Pacific,  in  parti¬ 
cular,  through  private  international  economic  organisations.  The  South 
Korean  leaders  hope  that  their  active  participation  in  creating  the 
routine  machinery  of  regional  cooperation  will  secure  them  the  role  of 
“coordinators”  of  the  system  of  the  Pacific  Community.  At  present  South 
Korea  is  a  member  of  the  Conference  for  Economic  Cooperation  in  the 
Pacific,  the  Economic  Council  of  the  Pacific  Countries,  the  Confederation 
of  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific,  and  ma¬ 
intains  close  contacts  with  the  Pacific  Council  for  Trade  and  Development. 

Although  the  South  Korean  leaders  are  touting  the  “independence” 
of  their  concept  of  the  Pacific  Community  and  even  distance  themselves 
from  certain  proposals  made  by  the  USA  and  Japan,  it  is  beyond  doubt 
that  Seoul’s  initiatives  are,  on  the  whole,  levelled  with  the  efforts  of  Wa¬ 
shington  and  Tokyo  in  that  field  and  dovetailed  with  the  militarist  stra¬ 
tegy  of  imperialism  in  the  region.  The  imperialist  forces  clearly  would 
like  to  intensify  Seoul’s  economic  and  military-strategic  cooperation  with 
the  ASEAN  countries  and  other  developing  states  in  the  region  so  as  to 
create  additional  means  of  pressure  on  those  countries,  involving  them 
in  the  arms  race  and  eventually  incorporating  them  into  the  imperialist 

strategy  of  military  blocs.  ,  .  ..  i 

It  is  symptomatic  that  the  Seoul  leaders  are  constantly  claiming  that 
South  Korea  and  non-socialist  countries  of  the  region  are  being  brought 
together  not  only  by  the  need  to  usher  in  the  great  Pacific  Age  but  also 
by  their  common  interest  in  protecting  their  countries  from  the  “commun- 
ist  thrcst'* 

Exposing  the  true  goals  the  Seoul  regime  and  its  imperialist  partners 
in  Asia  and  the  Pacific  pursue,  Nodon  Sinmun  wrote:  “The  United  States 
is  aiming  at  bringing  closer  together  its  allies  in  the  region,  including 
Japan  and  the  puppet  South  Korean  regime,  so  as  to  accomplish  the  fol¬ 
lowing  tasks:  in  politics— to  establish  a  military  bloc  as  a  counterweight 
to  the  progressive  countries  of  the  region;  in  the  economy — to  put  toge¬ 
ther  a  Pacific  Economic  Community  based  on  the  EEC  model  to  impose 
an  economic  blockade  on  independent  countries  of  the  region;  and  in  the 
military  field  to  cobble  together  a  military  bloc  similar  to  NATO  to  stran¬ 
gle  by  collective  military  intervention  the  struggle  waged  by  the  peoples 
of  the  region  for  independence.” 


• 

The  Seoul  leaders  claim  that  their  course  of  participating  in  the  set¬ 
ting  up  of  a  system  of  regional  cooperation  among  the  Pacific  coun¬ 
tries  reflects  the  regime’s  commitment  to  “multipolar  diplomacy”,  which 
presumably  underlies  the  foreign  policy  strategy  of  the  Chun  Doo  Hwan 
administration.  Another  important  component  of  this  strategy,  according 
to  official  statements,  is  an  “open-door  policy”  towards  those  countries 
with  which  Seoul  has  no  diplomatic  relations.  Trying  to  camouflage  the 


’’  Korea  Herald,  Dec.  22,  1982. 

Korea  Herald,  Oct.  5,  1982. 

’’  Nodon  Sinmun,  Jan.  28,  1983. 


98 


blatantly  dictatorial  regime  with  discourses  on  ^South  Korea’s  contribu¬ 
tion  to  “the  cause  of  prosperity,  development  and  friendship  all  over  the 
world’’,  Seoul  is  demagogically  stating  its  readiness  to  develop  rejajons 
on  this  basis  and  to  trade  with  communist  countries  regardless  of  diffe¬ 
rences  between  ideologies  and  political  systems. 

In  the  context  of  the  “open-door  policy”  emphasis  has  lately  shifted 
on  attempts  to  establish  contacts  with  the  PRC.  This  task  is  gradually 
becoming  a  priority  in  South  Korean  foreign  policy.  Seoul  has  decided 
that  the  possible  involvement  of  South  Korean  diplomacy  in  the  strategic 
manoeuvres  of  the  USA  and  Japan  with  regard  to  China  promises 
political  and  economic  benefits  .  for  the  regime  and  may  contribute 
to  “the  advancement  of  South  Korea  into  the  focus  of  the  international 

South  Korea  has  lately  toned  down  or  even  dropped  altogether  its 
criticism  of  the  foreign  and  domestic  policies  of  the  Chinese  leadership. 
Moreover,  it  even  claims  that  China  can  contribute  to  regional  stability 
bv  improving  relations  with  South  Korea.  Seoul  also  takes  account  of 
certain  developments  in  the  PRC’s  stand  on  the  Korean  proWem  in  par¬ 
ticular,  the  softening  of  its  former  hard  line  with  regard  to  the  Chun  Doo 

^'^The''firsT  official  contacts  between  China  and  South  Korea  took  place 
in  May  1983  following  the  hijacking  of  a  Chinese  civilian^ plane.  A  re¬ 
presentative  delegation  led  by  Shen  Tu,  head  of  th^e  Mam  Civil  Aviation 
Administration  of  the  PRC,  paid  a  visit  to  Seoul.  The 
on  the  results  of  the  talks  noted  that  both  sides  expressed  the  hope  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  spirit  of  cooperation  in  case  of  emergency  cir¬ 
cumstances  in  the  future  which  may  concern  the  interests  of  both  sides. 
Seoul  characterised  the  fact  of  these  contacts  and  their  results  as  an  event 
of  immense  importance  and  a  precedent  for  further  contacts  with  China 
on  the  governmental  level. 

South  Korean  diplomacy  hopes  to  consolidate  these  developments, 
through  sports  contacts.  South  Korean  athletes  take  part  in  international 
competitions  in  China  and  a  pointedly  cordial  welcorne  is  extended  to 
Chinese  sports  teams,  which  have  lately  become  frequent  visitors  to  Seou  . 
The  South  Korean  regime  is  even  prepared  to  sacrifice  its  traditional  al¬ 
lies  for  the  sake  of  “big  politics.”  For  instance,  a  Taiwan  team  walked 
out  of  an  international  junior  basketball  tournament  in  Seoul  in  ./^nl 
1984  in  protest  against  the  participation  of  a  tearn  from  th^e  PRC  ims 
fact,  however,  did  not  dishearten  South  Korean  leaders  in  the 
announced  with  pride  that  thanks  to  a  series  of  sports  contacts,  , 

of  mistrust  in  bilateral  relations  has  been  broken  and  exchanges  through 
the  “bamboo  curtain”  initiated.  There  are  signs,  according  to  the  We¬ 
stern  press,  that  unofficial  contacts  between  Chinese  and  South  Korean 
representatives  will  be  expanded  and  spread  into  other  . 

Los  Angeles  Times  says,  for  instance,  that  China  is  prepared  for  broad 
contacts  with  South  Korea  in  the  style  of  “people  s  diplomacy  .  . 

The  South  Koreans  believe  that  good  opportunities  for  me  develop 
inent  of  relations  with  China  are  offered  by  the  expansion  of  ^ 

tacts  with  the  USA  and  Japan  and  by  the  Chinese  leaders  interest  in 
speeding  up  the  economic  modernisation  of  the  country.  A  special  survey 
made  by  the  South  Korean  Institute  of  Industry  and  technology  drav  s 
the  conclusion  that  the  expansion  of  China’s  trade  contacts  with  those 


«*  Korea  Herald,  Feb.  23,  1983. 

»*  Korea  Herald,  Nov.  3.  1984. 

*•  Korea  Newsreview,  May  14,  1983,  p.  7. 

Korea  Herald,  May  1,  1984. 

*•  Los  Angeles  Times,  April  17,  1984. 


99 


countries  will  also  boost  trade  between  the  PRC  and  South  Korea.  ,  The 
South  Korean  companies  hope  to  make  inroads  into  the  Chinese  market 
through  joint  ventures  with  Japan  or  as  subcontractors  of  Japanese  and 
American  firms  which  are  trading  with  the  PRC  or  investing  in  its  eco¬ 
nomy.  29  Seoul  is  holding  up  for  China  seemingly  tempting  offers  of 
“mutually  complementary  cooperation”  in  trade,  capital  investment,  tech¬ 
nology  and  construction.  ,  ,  i  r.  11.  TT  J 

The  trend  towards  expanding  indirect  trade  between  South  Korea  ana 
China  has  been  strengthening  since  the  late  1970s.  South  Korean  busi¬ 
nessmen  see  China  as  the  potentially  third  largest  market  for  their  goods 
after, the  USA  and  Japan.  The  well-informed  Newsweek  has  estimated 
that  trade  between  the  two  countries  has  reached  the  value  of  |800  milli¬ 
on  a  year.  3°  South  Korean  trade  companies  would  like  to  import  more 
mineral  raw  materials,  especially  oil  and  coal,  and  also  grain,  fabrics  and 
food,  from  China  and  are  willing  to  expand  industrial  exports  to  it. 

The  PRC  is  conducting  about  80  per  cent  of  its  commercial  operations 
with  Seoul  through  Hong  Kong,  where  75  offices  and  branches  of  major 
South  Korean  trade  and  manufacturing  companies  and  banks  are  situa¬ 
ted  at  present.®'  Direct  contacts  between  Chinese  economic  officials  and 
South  Korean  businessmen  have  become  more  extensive  as  well.  For 
instance,  the  head  of  the  influential  South  Korean  manufacturing  and 
trade  company  Taewoo  paid  a  visit  to  the  PRC  in  early  January  1985.  All 
this  is  giving  the  South  Korean  businessmen  the  hope  that  bilateral  trade 
will  keep  growing  and  may  become  open  at  some  point  in  the  future. 

It  is  beyond  doubt  that  the  growing  activity  of  South  Korean  business 
in  regard  to  the  PRC  is  being  directed  and  encouraged  by  the  Seoul  lea¬ 
ders,  who  want  to  put  any  contacts  between  South  Korean  juridical  or 
private  persons  and  China  in  the  context  of  not  only  commercial  benefit 
out  of  primarily  political  interests,  namely,  the  consolidation  of  the  do¬ 
mestic  and  international  positions  of  the  regime.  Characterising  the  impor¬ 
tance  of  growing  contacts  with  China  in  “non-political”areas,  Chun  Doo 
Hwan  claimed  that  change  in  Peking’s  attitude  to  South  Korea  was  con¬ 
ducive  to  the  stabilisation  of  the  situation  in  the  Korean  Peninsula  and 
around  it.  ®2 

The  Seoul  administration  would  like  to  establish  centralised  control 
over  growing  contacts  with  China  and  is  now  considering  the  setting  up 
of  a  special  coordinating  body  to  oversee  all  contacts  with  China,  inclu¬ 
ding  trade,  cooperation  in  technology  and  knowhow,  joint  construction 
projects  and  cultural,  sports  and  scientific  exchanges.®®  The  policy  of  the 
Seoul  authorities  towards  China  at  the  present  stage  therefore  aims  at 
developing  a  set  of  practical  ties  and  establishing  a  mechanism  of  coope¬ 
ration  between  South  Korea  and  China  so  as  to  lay  the  foundations  for 
the  future  expansion  of  bilateral  relations  and  their  transfer  into  the  sphe¬ 
re  of  politics. 

The  efforts  of  South  Korean  leaders  to  develop  relations  with  China 
are  being  made  in  close  cooperation  with  their  senior  partners  and  with 
their  vigorous  support.  Washington  and  Tokyo  miss  no  opportunity  to^sta- 
te  their  readiness  to  mediate  in  this  relationship.  Exploiting  China’s  inte¬ 
rest  in  achieving  understanding  with  the  West  on  the  Korean  problem, 
Washington  is  trying  to  open,  with  Seoul’s  participation,  another  -area  of 
strategic  partnership  with  the  PRC  and  to  involve  it  in  joint  attiohs  in 
the  region.  Senior  officials  of  the  US  administration  hint  that  “the  defen- 


Korea  Herald,  Nov.  6,  1984. 
50  Newsweek,  Jan.  14,  1985. 
Izvestia,  Jan.  29,  1985. 
Korea  Herald,  Oct.  6,  1984. 
Korea  Herald,  Dec.  9,  1984. 


100 


ce  efforts  of  Japan,  China,  and  South  Korea  have  the  pptential  to  affect 
the  global  balance  of  power  more  profoundly  perhaps  than  those  of  any 
other  countries...” 


South  Korea’s  foreign  policy,  aimed  at  teaming  up  and  cooperating 
with  US  imperialism,  is  an  additional  factor  that  aggravates  political 
tensions  in  the  Far  East  as  a  whole  and  in  the  Korean  Peninsula  in  parti¬ 
cular.  The  war  preparations  of  the  Seoul  authorities  are  posing  an  imme¬ 
diate  threat  to  the  peaceful  development  of  the  DPRK  and  blocking  the 
reunification  of  Korea  on  a  peaceful  and  democratic  basis  without  outside 
interference,  through  the  withdrawal  of  US  troops  from  South  Korea. 

Attaching  much  importance  to  the  relaxation  of  tension  iri  the  Kore¬ 
an  Peninsula  and  in  the  Far  East  as  a  whole,  the  Soviet  Union  is  pursuing 
a  consistent  policy  of  ensuring  peace  and  security  in  that  region.  The 
USSR  views  the  DPRK’s  foreign-policy  line  towards  the  reunification  of 
the  country  as  an  important  factor  furthering  peace,  and  is  seel^ing  to 
broaden  political  cooperation  with  the  DPRK  in  the  interests  of  opr  com¬ 
mon  security.  The  Soviet  Union  supports  the  DPRK’s  initiatives  aimed  at 
the  reunification  of  two  Koreas,  at  the  establishment  of  a  nuclear-free  zone 
in  the  Peninsula,  and  its  other  foreign-policy  actions  aimed  at  containing 
Seoul’s  aggressive  ambitions  and  preventing  the  emergence  of  a  new, 
military  and  political  bloc  in  the  Far  East. 


( 


Far  Eastern  Economic  Review,  No.  2,  Jan.  12,  1984. 


COPYRIGHT;  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


CSO:  1812/94 


101 


CERTAIN  PROBLEMS  OF  THE  CHINESE  COUNTRYSIDE  TODAY 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  102-110 

[Article  by  L.  A.  Volkova,  candidate  of  economic  sciences] 

The  rural  economic  reform,  which  started  in  the  late  1970s,  has  gone 
through  several  stages  of  development.  In  1979-1980,  measures  were 
taken  to  give  production  teams  some  economic  independence  and  to  res¬ 
tore  to  a  certain  extent  the  principle  of  material  interest  among  the  peas¬ 
ants.  Introduced  were  such  forms  of  production  responsibility  as  fixed 
tasks  for  groups  formed  within  teams  and  contracts  to  do  certain  types 
of  work  with  remuneration  according  to  the  accepted  quotas.  In  1981- 
1982,  this  was  replaced  by  the  fixing  of  work  tasks  for  peasant  households 
and  then  their  complete  responsibility  for  production,  referred  to  as  house¬ 
hold  or  family  contract.  ,  „  . 

Addressing  a  conference  of  the  secretaries  of  rural  Party  organisa- 
tions  in  November  1982,  Deputy  Premier  of  the  PRC  State  Council,  Wan 
Li,  explained  the  essence  of  the  above-mentioned  changes  in  the  follow- 
ing  way: 

“...From  payment  for  work  with  no  account  for  the  results  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  payment  on  the  basis  of  such  an  account;  from  fixing  tasks  in  ini- 
dividual  types  of  work  to  fixing  production  tasks  and  further  on  to  mak¬ 
ing  peasants  completely  responsible  for  production;  from  the  former  ban 
on  the  fixing  oi  production  tasks  for  households  to  a  subsequent  accept¬ 
ance  of  this  organisational  and  economic  form  and  to  its  development 
to  the  stage  when  households  are  made  fully  responsible  for  production. 
This  practice  is  established  as  the  main  form  of  production  responsibility 
in  most  of  the  country’s  regions." '  „  , 

The  directive  of  the  12th  CPC  Congress  (September  1982)  to  use 
different  forms  of  economic  management  was  implemented  in  the  coun¬ 
tryside  through  expanding  the  scale  of  using  family  contracts  on  the  basis 
of  the  collective  ownership  of  land  and  also  through  the  legalisation  and 
development  of  individual  peasant  farmsteads. 

The  family  or  household  contract  as  a  form  of  production  responsi¬ 
bility  tying  remuneration  with  the  result  of  production  became  established 
in  the  Chinese  rural  economic  structure  in  1983,  as  a  result  of  which  the 
economic  functions  of  the  people’s  communes  were  cancelled. 

The  period  from  1983  saw  growing  economic  independence  of  the 
peasant  household.  This  development  trend  was  sanctioned  in  directives 
adopted  in  1983-1984.  The  CPC  Central  Committee’s  document  No.  1  is¬ 
sued  in  1983,  “Some  Problems  of  Economic  Policy  in  the  Countryside 
Today’’,®  envisioned  to  allow  peasants:  1.  to  sell  and  purchase  farm  pro¬ 
duce  freely  after  meeting  the  planned  targets  for  supplies  and  obligatory 
purchases;  2.  to  undertake  transportation  of  farm  produce  at  big  distan¬ 
ces  and  also  engage  in  small-scale  trade;  3.  to  buy  agricultural  machin- 


^  Renmin  ribaOt  Dec.  23,  1982. 

*  Renmin  rlbao,  April  10,  1983. 


102 


ery,  implements  and  means  of  transportation;  4.  to  employ  various  forms 
of  using  money,  machinery  and  workforce.  In  fact  it  was  allowed  to  hire 
workforce  in  the  form  of  “enlisting  specialists”,  _  “giving  aid”,  taking  in 
relatives  and  so  on.  Domestic  and  small-scale  industrial  enterprises  in 
the  countryside  were  allowed  to  have  from  7  to  11  apprentices. 

The  “Notification  on  the  Work  in  the  Countryside  in  1984”  passed  by 
the  CPC  Central  Committee  in  January  1984,  the  Chinese  press  inform¬ 
ed,  ®  reiterated  the  basic  directives  of  the  previous  document  and  deepened 
them  in  some  aspects.  This  primarily  refers  to  the  extension  of  the  termi 
of  contracting  larid  allocated  by  the  production  team  to  a  peasant  family.- 
It  was  extended  from  3-5  years  to  15  or  more  years.  In  regions  with 
unfavourable  climatic  conditions  and  in  remote  and  mountainous  areas 
plots  of  land  are  given  for  longer  periods,  up  to  30  years.  For  afforesta¬ 
tion,  plots  of  land  can  be  contracted  for  50  years  and  can  be  even  in¬ 
herited.^  .  .  i 

Document  No.  1  passed  by  the  CPC  Central  Committee  in  1984  stres¬ 
sed  the  need  to  “encourage  the  gradual  concentration  of  land  in  the  hands 
of  experienced  farmers”.®  The  document  allowed  the  commune  members 
whose  families  were  short  of  hands  to  till  the  plots  of  land  received  on 
contract,  and  also  those  who  did  not  want  to  engage  in  farming  nor  took 
land  on  contract  or  else  who  took  but  a  small  plot  of  land  to  transfer 
their  plots  to  teams  for  further  redistribution  in  a  unified  way.  Peasants 
were  also  allowed  to  find  on  their  own,  with  the  agreement  of  the  team, 
anybody  willing  to  contract  land  allocated  to  them  and  to  come  to  terms 
on  the  transfer  of  contract.  •  ^ 

The  main  reasons  for  transferring  contracts  are  shortages  of  work¬ 
force  and  finances  to  engage  in  farming,  the  impossibility  to  meet  con¬ 
tract  conditions  for  other  reasons,  and  switching  over  to  other  agricultural 
sectors,  subsidiary  trades  or  urban  jobs.  For  example,  40  yuan  a  year 
had  to  be  paid  for  1  mu  (1/15  hectare)  of  land  received  on  contract  in 
the  Hubei  province,®  and  27  yuan  in  the  Jiangsu  province,’'  which  many 
peasants  found  beyond  their  means.  According  to  a  survey  of  the  Putuan 
commune  in  the  suburb  of  Ezhou,  the  Hubei  province,  56.6  per  cent  of 
the  total  number  of  households  renounced  contracts  for  lack  of  workforce 
and  finances  to  run  their  farms,  many  were  unable  to  fulfil  their  com¬ 
mitments  in  delivery  and  selling  farm  produce  specified  in  the  team  con¬ 
tact,  while  43.4  per  cent  of  households  moved  to  other  agricultural  sec¬ 
tors  or  subsidiary  trades  or  else  sought  urban  employment.  ® 

Document  No.  1  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee  of  1984  as  well  as  the 
Chinese  press  stressed  the  need  to  give  a  certain  compensation  to  peas¬ 
ants,  who  had  invested  in  land,  in  case  of  the  surrender  of  land  contract. 

The  scale  of  the  transfer  of  land  contracts  from  some  households  to 
others  was  insignificant  in  the  country  as  a  whole.  The  process  of  con¬ 
centrating  land  in  the  hands  of  “skilled  farmers”  specialising  for  the 
most  part  in  plant-growing  was  unevenly  distributed  in  the  individual  re¬ 
gions  of  the  country  and  on  the  whole  not  very  intensive.  It  was  observed 
above  all  in  densely  populated  and  economically  developed  regions  where 
)lots  of  land  given  on  contract  were  approximately  half  the  medium  size, 
:n  particular  the  Jiangsu,  Hubei,  Zhejiang  and  Shandong  provinces.  For 
nstance,  in  the  Muping  district  (Shandong  province)  250  households 
specialising  in  grain-growing  cultivated  21,000  mu  of  arable  land  in  1984, 


»  See  Ibid.,  June  12,  1984. 

•  Ibid.,  June  15,  1984. 

»  Ibid.,  June  12,  1984. 

•  Ibid.,  April  5.  1985. 

’  See  Nongmin  ribao,  Jan.  5,  1985. 

•  Calculated  from  Hongqi,  No.  8,  1984,  p.  24. 


103 


that  is,  each  household  had,  on -average,  84  m«  of  land. »  This  is  apro- 
ximately  10  times  the  mean  :^ize  of 'an  arable  plot  per  family  (household) 
throughout  the  country.  The '  Chinese-  press  also  pointed  out  that  there 
appeared  specialised  households ;  in  farming  which  took  on  contract  plots 
of  66  hectares 'arid  plots  of  similar  area  for  afforestation.  Nevertheless, 
the  share  of  sdch  households  in  the  total  number  is  soi  far  modest,  as  is 
attested  by  the  data  cited  by  the  ■Chinese  press  for  individual  regions. 

In  suburban  areas  ■  where  peas;arits,  as  a  rule,  have  stable  and  con¬ 
siderable  earnings  from  hon-agricultural  economic  sectors,  land  contracts 
are  transferred  more  frequently  and  on  this  basis  land  plots  are  concen¬ 
trated  faster  than  in  other  regions  of  the  country.  Thus,  approximately  20 
per  cent  of  peasant  households  renounce  land  cultivation  in  the  suburbs 
of  some!  major  cities  in  the  economically  better  developed  coastab  regions 
of  China.*'  In  the  Jiangmen' suburbs  (Guangdong  province)  20,000  fami¬ 
lies  cultivated  about  5  per  cent  of  ploughed  land  in  1984,  with  every 
family  having  on  average  a  big  plot  of  20-30  mu.  *®  Households  with  big 
contracted  plots  come  into  being  quicker  in  the  regions  where  there  is 
much  land,  the  mechanisation  Ifeveb  of '  ploughing  is  comparatively  high 
and  contracted  plots  are,  as  a  rule,  situated  in  the  same  area.  This  pri¬ 
marily  refers  to  provinces  of  Northeastern  China.  In  the  Yingkou  county 
(Liaoning  province),  for  instance,  five  per  cent  of  the  peasant  households 
increased  the  size  of  contracted  plots  in  1984. ^  .  r  ,  u  j 

In  regions  which  are  economically  less  developed,  short  of  ploughed 
areas  and  which  have  plant-growing  as  a  predominant  branch  in  the  pro- 
duction  structure,  peasants  do  not  refuse  to  contract  land  but,  on  the 
contrary,  seek  to  expand  the  area  of  their  plots.  In  the  villages  where  di¬ 
versified  agriculture  is  comparatively  well  developed  peasants  are  nor¬ 
mally  unwilling  to  till  more  land  than  they  contracted  nor  do  they  want 
to  move  to  town.  In  such  regions,  they  find  it  difficult  to  set  up  big  farrns 
and  to*  concentrate  contracted  land.  In  some  places  they  even  resorted  to 
the  forced  transfer  of  contracts’  ivom  some  households  to  others  but  it 
should  be  pointed  out  that  .such;  measures  were  criticised  by  the  Chinese 
piress. 

Growing  independence  of  peasant  households  was  promoted  by  the  re¬ 
solution  to  allow  peasants  to  buy  machinery  and  means  of  transportation 
(including  lorries).  At  the  same  time  farm  machinery,  first  and  foremost 
tractors,  which  formerly  formed  the- collective  property  of  teams  is  trans; 
ferred  on  contract  or  sold  to  peasants.  For  example,  more  than  a  half  of 
the  1,470,000  tractors  formerly  in  collective  property  were  transferred  on 
contract  to  peasant  families  in  late  1983. 

In  the  period  from  1981  to  1984  peasants  purchased  or  received  the 
main  types  of  farm  machinery  fairly  vigorously.  By  late  1984,  already  68 
per  cent  of  all  types  of  tractors  were  at  the  disposal  of  peasants,  includ¬ 
ing  280,000  or  32.7  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  large  and  medium  trac¬ 
tors  and  2.5  million  or  75  per  bent  of  small-size  and  manually  operated 
tractors. '®  As  is  seen,  a  bigger  portion  of  the  tractor  fleet  was  owned  and 
used  by  peasant  families,  including  three  quarters  of  the  entire  number  of 
small-size  and  manually  operated  tractors.  The  number  of  lorries  bought 
primarily ’by  the  peasant 'nouseholds  specialising  in  transportation  also 
grew  fairly;  quickly.  In  1983,  the  peasant  households  owned  and  used 

«  See  Nongmin  ribao,  Jan.  21,  1985. 

*0  See  Jingji  ribao,  Dec.  19,  1984. 

"  See  Nongye  jingji  wenil.  No.  1,  1985,  p.  50. 

*2  Ibid,,  p.  16.  - 

Ibidem. 

'*  See,  for  example,  Nongye  jingji  wenti,  No.  1,  1985,  p.  50. 

'*  See  Zhongguo 'jingji  nianjian,  Beijing,  ,1984,  pp.  .V-7. 

••  Nongmin  ribao,  Jan.  I,  1985. 


104 


89,600  lorries,  that  is  about  33  per  cerit  of  the  total  274,750  lorries  used 
in  farming.*^  In  1984,  the  number  pf  lorries  in  the  hands  of,  above  all, 
specialised  transportation  households  grew  to  120  000 out  of  the  total  of 
345,000  employed  in  farming,  which  amounted  to  approximately  35  per 

Statistics  shows  that  in  the  countryside  demand  is  primarily  growing 
for  farm  machinery,  means  of  transportation,  equipment  for  processing 
branches  and  so  on,  in  keeping  with  the  scale  of  fainily  farming.  _  i 

Economic  relations  between  a  team  and  peasant  households  are  re¬ 
gulated  by  a  contract  signed  between  them  (and  sometimes  by,  an  oral 
agreement).  It  defines  the  commitments  made  by  both  sides,  though  these 
are  fairly  frequently  broken  by  them.*®  In  some  areas  teams  exercise 
minimal  economic  management  of  households,  while  in  other  regions,  on- 
the  contrary,  it  turns  into  petty  tutelage  by  cadre  workers.  The  Chinese 
press  raised  the  question  of  the  need  for  formalising  the  status  of  differ¬ 
ent  forms  of  economic  organisation  in  the  countryside.  Great  attention  is 
also  attached  to  contracts,  which  are  to  become  ‘a  legislative  form  ot- 
contract  relations  in  agricultural  production,  to  have  the  power  of  law 

compulsory  for  the  participating  sides  ”21  :  ■  .  ^ 

An  important  line  of  the  rural  economic  reform  is  the  transformation 
of  the  structure  of  agricultural  production  towards,  reducing  the  share  oi 
plant-growing  and  increasing  that  of  stock-raising,  subsidiary  crafts  and 
the  products  of  rural  industries  in  gross  agricultural  output.  ^t. 

the  national  conference  on  work  in  the  countryside  ^ecember  1984),  Ue- 
puty  Premier  of  the  PRC  State  Council  Wan  Li  listed  the  reforni  of  the 
structure  of  agricultural  production,  the  development  of  rural  industries 
and  the  improvement  of  trade  and  finances  ^as  the  key  tasks  m  agnculti^e. 
Great  attention  was  paid  to  these  Problems  m  CPC  Central  Com¬ 
mittee  Document  No.  1  of  1985,  “Ten  Directives  of  the  CPC  CC  and  the. 
PRC  State  Council  on  Further  Boosting  the  Rural  Economy  .^3  It  was 
pointed  put  in  the  press  that  in  1984  the  share  of  plant-^growing  in  gross 
agricultural  output  fell  by  approximately  3  per  cent  as  compared  with 
1983  24 

Specialised  households  are  to  play  sigriificant  role  in  changing  the: 
structure  of  agricultural  production  and  raising  its  marketabuity.  The 
latter  on  average  amount  to  70  per.  cent  as  compared  with  25-30  per  cent 
of  the  branch  in  general.  25  The  households  specialising  in  growing  techni¬ 
cal  crops,  stock-rearing,  fishing,  subsidiary  trades  and  other  branches 
have  higher  marketability  than  those  specialising  in  grain-g^wing.  Speci¬ 
fically,  according  to  the  data  provided  by  the  Statistical  Bureau  of  the 
Puling  region  (Sichuan  province)  marketability  in  pig-breeding  stood  at 
56.7  per  cent,  overall  marketability  of  stock-rearing  exceeded  70  per  cent 
and  that  of  sugar  cane,  tobacco  and  tung-oil  exceeded  90  per  cent. 

The  share  of  specialised  households  supplying  the  market  with  stock- 
rearing  and  agricultural  produce  is  much  higher  than  their  share  in  the 
total  number  of  the  households.  For  example,  seven  households  specialis¬ 
ing  in  .  poultry  farming  (the  Dahe  commune,  the  city  of  Shaoxing, 
Zhejiang  province)  accounted  for  two-thirds  of  the  urban  market  demand 


-  Zhongguo  jingji  nianjiarit  1984....,  p.  V-?.  '  ' 

•*  J^ongmin  ribao,  Jan.  23,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao^  March  10,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao,  June  17,  1985. 

**  Wenzhal  bao^  Jan.  3,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao,  March  1,  1985. 

«  Ibid.,  March  25,  1985. 

Nongmin  ribao,  Jan.  4,  1985.  . 

Hongqi,  No.  8,  1984,  p.  20;  Guangming  ribao,  Feb.  12,  1984. 
Nongye  jingji  wenti,  No.  11,  1984,  p.  17. 


105 


for  ducks  and  duck  eggs.^^  Forty  per  cent  of  the  households  in  the  Hu- 
guan  county  (Shanxi  province)  engaged  in  pig-breeding  met  the  county 
target  figures  in  live  pig  output  by  60.5  per  cent,  the  households  specialis¬ 
ing  in  rabbit-breeding  (3.57  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  households) 
accounted  for  95.6  per  cent  of  the  sales  planned  for  the  county.  ^8 

The  Chinese  leaders  take  certain  measures  to  raise  the  number  of  spe¬ 
cialised  households  and  still  their  number  grew  insignificantly  in  1983- 

1984,  reaching  25  million  by  the  end  of  1984,  while  their  share  in  the 
total  number  of  peasant  households  was  about  14  per  cent. 

Certain  regions  saw  the  appearance  of  the  so-called  specialised  vil¬ 
lages  where  the  majority  of  the  population  is  engaged  for  the  most  part 
in  one  production  sector,  i.  e.,  is  specialising  in,  say,  vegetable-growing 
or  transportation.  Reports  about  such  villages  came  from  the  Henan, 
Liaoning,  and  Shanxi  provinces.®"  These  villages  are  not  numerous  in 
the  country  as  a  whole  and  come  into  being  primarily  in  densely  popula¬ 
ted  suburban  areas.  Specialised  households  were  set  up  both  in  different 
agricultural  branches,  such  as  farming  and  stock-rearing,  and  in  con¬ 
struction,  transportation,  industry,  commerce  and  the  services.  By  early 

1985,  specialised  households  in  farming  accounted  for  35.9  per  cent  of  the 
total  number  of  specialised  households,  reaching  almost  9  million.  Their 
share  in  the  plant-growing  sphere  is  much  higher.  Specifically,  in  the 
Shanxi  province  310,000  peasant  households  (6  per  cent  of  their  total 
number  in  the  province)  specialising  in  grain-growing  cultivated  10.8  per 
cent  of  the  ploughed  area  and  produced  16.1  per  cent  of  the  total  grain 
harvest  in  the  province  in  1983.  These  households  accounted  for  37  per 
cent  of  state  purchases  of  grain  planned  for  the  entire  province. 

A  total  of  over  6  million  households  specialised  in  stock-rearing  and 
fishing,  accounting  for  24.6  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  specialised 
households.®® 

Beginning  with  the  early  1980s  economic  associations  involving  above 
all  specialised  households  were  set  up  in  the  countryside  mostly  on  the 
basis  of  specialised  production.  As  far  as  the  methods  of  their  formation 
and  operation  are  concerned,  the  Chinese  press  singles  out  two  types  of 
such  associations:  “horizontal”  and  “vertical”.  The  former  are  represented 
by  small-size  associations  of  several  ordinary  contracted  or  specialised' 
households.  As  a  rule,  they  come  into  being  spontaneously,  have  weak 
economic  relations  between  each  other  and  often  unite  relatives.  These 
types  of  associations  are  in  the  form  of  mutual  labour  assistance,  coope¬ 
ration  on  the  basis  of  the  joint  use  of  machines,  pooling  the  finances,  etc. 

Economic  associations  of  the  “vertical”  type  are  formed  around  state 
or  cooperative  enterprises,  in  particular,  around  supjjly-and-marketing 
cooperatives  and  encompass  a  comparatively  broad  range  of  specialised 
households.  They  can  be  exemplified  by  different  types  of  specialised  com¬ 
panies  and  servicing  stations.  They  often  include  enterprises  of  process¬ 
ing  industries,  transportation,  and  supply-and-sales  agencies. 

Specialised  households  join  similar  associations  to  improve  the  con- 
•ditions  of  processing  and  selling  their  output,  to  obtain  scientific  and 
technical  information,  market  news,  credits,  to  purchase  the  necessary 
means  of  production  and  so  on.  That  was  how  associations  were  formed 
between  specialised  households  and  a  supply-and-marketing  cooperative 
undertaking  to  sell  poultry  and  eggs  produced  by  those  hbuseholds  and 


Hongqi,  No.  8,  1984,  p.  20. 

Zhongguo  jingji  nlanjlan,  1984...,  p.  V-5. 
2®  Nongtnin  ribao,  Jan.  4,  1985. 

Zhongguo  jingji  nianjian,  p.  'V-6. 

Jingji  ribao,  Jan.  26,  1985. 

«  Hongqi,  No.  8,  1984,  p.  20. 

Jingji  ribao.  Jan.  26,  1985. 


106 


to  supply  them  with  fodder,  as  well  as  associations  for  joint  ploughing, 
crop  cultivation,  combatting  crop  diseases  and  pests.  Sometimes  several 
households  pool  their  financial  resources  to  organise  some  enterprise  or 
a  workshop.  By  early  1985,  the  number  of  such  joint  ventures  exceeded 
500,000  and  involved  2  million  peasants.  The  revenues  from  their  opera¬ 
tion  are  distributed  in  keeping  with  the  degree  of  work  inputs  and  their 
cash  contribution.  A  share-holder  in  a  cooperative  enterprise  may  not  be 
directly  involved  in  its  work  but  limit  himself  to  contributing  money  or 
some  production  means.  In  this  case  the  share-holder’s  profit  would  de¬ 
pend  on  his  investment  in  the  cooperative. 

A  new  form  of  cooperative  economic  management,  economic  associa¬ 
tions,  have  so  far  failed  to  become  widespread  in  the  countryside.  In  late 
1984,  they  involved  4.5  million  households,  which  accounted  for  18  per 
cent  of  the  total  number  of  specialised  households.  or  2.43  per  cent  of 
the  overall  number  of  peasant  households.  Well-known  Chinese  economist 
Du  Runsheng  pointed  out  that  as  far  as  economic  associations  were  con¬ 
cerned,  it  was  necessary  first  to  go  through  the  experimental  stage  and 
“there  was  no  need  to  issue  a  call  and  immediately  set  up  a  lot  of 
them." 

The  growth  of  the  individual  sector  became  one  of  the  aspects  of. putt¬ 
ing  into  effect  the  course  towards  the  coexistence  of  different  economic 
forms  in  the  countryside.  It  also  became  a  consequence  of  organisational 
and  economic  restructuring.  The  development  of  the  individual  and  the 
collective  sectors  is  viewed  as  a  “long-term  strategic  policy’’.”  Some  in¬ 
dividual  peasant  farms  engage  in  small-scale  crafts,  trade  and  haulage 
and  are,  as  a  rule,  considered  specialised  in  these  fields.  By  early  1985, 
they  accounted  for  33.6  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  the  specialised 
households,  with  19.2  per  cent  of  them  engaged  in  transportation,  trade, 
construction  and  the  services,  and  14.4  per  cent  in  small-size  industries, 
cottage  production  and  crafts.®*  The  Chinese  press  refers  to  them  as  the 
households  dealing  in  industry  and  trade. 

In  1983-1985,  the  peasants  were  encouraged  to  open  workshops  and 
shops  in  small  administrative  units  and  villages  and  were  granted  cer¬ 
tain  easy  terms  in  crediting  and  taxation.  The  number  of  the  households 
involved  in  small-scale  industry  and  trade  was  growing  especially  rapid¬ 
ly.  In  early  1983,  they  numbered  1,270,000  and  by  the  end  of  the  year  the 
figure  nearly  trebled.*®  In  late  September  1984,  such  households  had  al¬ 
ready  numbered  6,125,000,  with  the  total  number  of  those  working  in  them 
exceeding  8.4  million  people.^®  This  accounted  for  77  per  cent  of  the 
overall  number  employed  in  Chinese  private  industry  and  trade. 

In  some  regions  the  share  of  peasants  with  individual  farmsteads 
was  fairly  high.  In  one  of  the  production  teams  in  the  Dangxian  county 
(Shanxi  province)  one-third  of  all  the  specialised  households  (17.5  per 
cent  of  the  total  number  of  the  households  within  the  team)  operated  on 
the  individual  basis  in  1983. 

In  some  provinces,  such  as  Jiangsu  and  Henan,  peasants  formed  con¬ 
struction  teams.  They  built  housing,  shops,  enterprises  and  workshops  not 
only  in  villages  and  counties  in  their  own  province  but  in  other  provinces 
as  well.  In  1983,  more  than  1,000,000  peasants  in  the  Henan  province 
were  engaged  in  construction,  which  accounted  for  about  8  per  cent  of 


**  Renmin  ribao,  March  18,  1984. 

Jingji  ribao,  Jan.  26,  1985. 

Hongji,  No.  8,  1985,  p.  19. 

Jingji  cankao,  Feb.  1,  1985. 

^  Jingji  ribao,  Jan.  26,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao,  Feb.  23,  1983;  Feb.  18,  1984. 
Zhongguo  nongmin  ribao,  Nov.  13,  1984. 

**  HongqU  No.  4,  1984,  p.  28. 


107 


the  province’s  workforce,  with  a  half  of  them  working  outside  their  com¬ 
munes.  More  than  200,000  were  involved  in  contract  construction  work  in 
16  provinces,  cities  and  autonomous  regions  throughout  the  country. 

Changes  in  the  rural  economic  structure  also  affected  the  structure  of 
those  employed  in  different  production  branches. 

Approximately  one-third  of  workfofce  left  farming  for  other  agricul¬ 
tural  branches,  subsidiary  trades,  transportation  and  rural  industry.  There 
appeared  entire  provinces  and  counties  where  more  than  a  half  of  the 
workforce  abandoned  farming.  For  instance,  in  the  past  3  years  (1982-^ 
1984)  the  share  of  the  rural  population  in  the  Yangtze  delta  dropped 
from  70  to  20  per  cent.  A  similar  situation  is  also  observed  in  the  Zhuji- 
ang  delta;  In  1984,  from  60  to  80  per  cent  of  rural  workforce  in  the 
Guangdong  ^province  and  the  southern  regions  of  the  Jiangsu  province 
found  employment  in  rural  industry,  subsidiary  trades,  construction,  trade 
and  the  services.  In  Guangzhou’s  suburban  regions  every  third  peasant 
“abandoned  land”  **  and  28  per  cent  of  workforce  in  the  Peking  suburbs 
were  engaged  in  rural  industry.  In.  the  Chuhai  village  of  the  Moping 
county  ,  (Shandong  province)  93  per  cent  of  workforce  abandoned  far¬ 
ming.^® 

In  this  connection  the  Chinese  leaders  attach  great  importance  to  the 
further  development  of  rural  industry  which  could  absorb  surplus  labour 
in  the  countryside.  At  present  the  enterprises  of  villages  and  communities 
alone  employ  60; million. '*7  The  report  Of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Ani¬ 
mal  Husbandry  and  Fishing,  “On  the  New  Situation  in  Setting  Up  Enter¬ 
prises  in  .Villages  and  .  Communities’’;  made  public  by  the  CPC  Central 
Committee  and  the  PRC  State  Council,  said,  that  by  the  end  of  this  cen¬ 
tury  rural  lindiJstry,  construction,  transport  and  the  services  should  absorb 
100-180  million  people. : 

At  the  same  time  the  swift  outflow  of  workforce  from  farming,  first 
and  foremost  from  grain-growing,  breeds  certain  concern  among  the  local 
Chinese  leaders,  as  was  eloquently  demonstrated  by  speeches  made  by 
deputies  to  the  3rd  Session  of  the  Sixth  National  People’s  Congress. 

*  r  y.  »  ;  .  •  ^  ^  V  •  .  * 

The  organisational  and  economic  restructuring  of  the  Chinese  country¬ 
side  played  a  certain  positive  role  in  stimulating  the  agricultural  eco¬ 
nomy  and  raising  production  and  the  peasants’  incomes!  Sample  studies 
show  that,'On  average,  per  capita  income  in  the  countryside  went  up  from 
191.33  yuan  lim,  1980  to  355.3  yuan  in  1984,  that  is  by  85.7  per  cent.®® 
Nevertheless  the  Chinese  press  pointed  out  that  the  “life  of  peasants  im¬ 
proved  to  an  unequal  extent”,  while  the  share  of  peasants  barely  earning 
their  food  and  clothes,  as  before,  exceeded  80  per  cent.®' 

Chinese  authors  consider  households  with  an  average  per  capita  in¬ 
come  of  500  yuan  and  more  as  well-to-do  peasant  households;  households 
with  an  income  of  200-500  yuan  are  considered  self-sufficient  in  food  and 
clothes,  That  is,  are  at  a  subsistence  level;  households  with  an  average 

**  Renmin  ribao,  April  3,  1984.  ' 

«  Ibid.,  Peb.  13,  1985. 

“  Ibid.,  Sept.  15,  1984. 

“  Ibid.,  Sept.  3,  1984. 

**  Nongmin  ribao,  Jan.  21,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao.  Sept.  27,  1985. 

« March  18,  1984. 

*»  /6trf.,  April  5,  1985. 

">  Zhongguo  nongye  di  guanghui  chengji  1949-1984,  Peking,  1984,  p.  145;  Renmin 
ribao,  March  10,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao,  Aug.  17,  1985.  ,  , 


108 


per  capita  income  of  less  than  200  yuan  form  the  group  of  poor  peasants. 
Lcording  to  the  Chinese  press,  well-to-do  households  accounted  for  ap¬ 
proximately  12  per  cent  of  the  total  number  in  1983,  those  with  subsisten¬ 
ce  income^  for  67.4  per  cent,  and  the  poor  (with  an  income  under  200 

yuan y  for  20.7  per  cent  of  the  households.  “ 

There  is  no  doubt  that  to  raise  the  well-being  of  the  Chinese  peasants, 
which  form  so  big  a  group  of  the  Population,  is  a  difficult  pr^bl^^^ 
quiring  time.  The  Chinese  press  remarked  that  it  would  take  more  than 
10  years  of  strenuous  work  or  even  a  still  longer  period  for  the  peasants 

to  attain  a  level  of  relative  prosperity.®*  i  r«P+, 

Beginning  with  mid-1985,  the  Chinese  press  has  been^ making  pract^i- 
cally  no  mention  of  the  households,  which  “were  the  first  to  go  nch  ,  and 
which  were  widely  publicised  in  1983-1984.  With  their  income  of  10,000 
yuan  and  more,  these  households,  Renmin  ribao  adrnits,  are  but  a  drop 

in  the  ocean  of  nearly  200  million  peasant  households.  ., 

In  1984y  the  peasants  spent  on  consumption  273  yuan  in  per  capita 
terms,  that  is,  10  per  cent  more  as  against  1983,  with  the  share  of  their 
spending  on  housing  construction,  durables  and  fuel  growihg  espepial- 
Iv.  ®®  Housing  construction  in  the  countryside  grew  by  20  per  cent  in 
1984,  as  compared  with  1980,  with  the  volume  of  housing  construction 
amounting  to  600  million  square  metres,  which  is  by  14.3  per  cent  less 

than  the  fig  ami^s  qJ  ^'jjg  structure  of  peasant  family  spending  provides 
indirect  evidence  that  in  the  past  few  years  incomes  grew  predominantly 
in  the  families  with  a  relatively  high  mean  income  in  per  capita  terms. 
In  1984  spending  on  cultural  needs  and  the  services  m  per  capita  terms 
increased  by  20  per  cent,  as  compared  with  1983,  and  by  approximately 
as  much  on  durables,  whereas  spending  on  foodstuffs  went  down.  ^  Those 
were  first  and  foremost  families  with  a  higher  income  that  could  afford 
to  spend  more  on  the  former  two  items,  whereas  those  in  the  low-income 
bracW  which  are  half-starving  raised  above  all  their  spending  on  food, 
if  they  had  a  chance.  The  living  conditions  of  the  peasants  m  distant  and 
mountainous  areas,  in  the  regions  inhabited  by  some  national  minonties, 
in  border  regions  and  those  of  the  former  revolutionary  bases  remain;  as 
before,  hard.  In  1984,  the  country  had  14  million  poor  households  with 
the  population  of  70  million,  among  whom  approxirnately  22  million  had 
incomes  below  the  100-yuan  mark  a  year,  that  is,  below  the  official  po- 
vGrtv  level 

The  gravity  of  the  condition  of  the  poorest  peasants  was  confirmed  by 
“The  Notification  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee  and  the  PRC  State  Coun¬ 
cil  on  Aid  to  the  Poor  Regions  to  Speedily  Change  Their  Condition 
passed  in  1984.  **  The  Notification  stated  that,  to  change  their  condition, 
the  poor  and  backward  regions  should  above  all  rely  on  their  own  forces 
and  proceed  from  local  peculiarities.  The  peasants  in  those  regions  were 
given  greater  economic  independence,  namely,  the  term  of  land  contract 
was  extended  to  30  years,  they  were  given  the  right  to  develop  stock- 
rearing  with  no  restriction  on  the  number  of  live-stock  and  to  sell  their 
output  on  their  own.  It  was  envisaged  to  relieve  the  poorest  households 
from  agricultural  tax  for  a  period  of  5  years  beginning  with  1985  and  to 
levy  it  from  the  less  poor  families  on  easier  terms  during  a  period  oi  1-3 

52  Zhongguo  tongU  nianjiati  1984,  Peking,  1984,  p.  473. 

53  Renmin  ribao^  Aug.  17,  1985. 

54  Feb.  22,  1985. 

55  Nongmin  ribao^  March  11,  1985. 

53  Ibidem. 

5’  Renmin  ribao,  June  24,  1984.  '  ^ 

58  Beijing  Review^  Vol.  28,  No.  4,  1985,  p.  9. 

53  Renmin  ribao,  Sept.  30,  1984. 


109 


years.  Centralised  purchases  of  all  farm  produce,  including  grain  and 
timber,  were  cancelled  in  those  regions.  The  agricultural  enterprises  set 
up  in  those  regions  were  exempted  from  income  tax  for  5  years. 

The  calls  for  the  enrichment  of  part  of  peasants:  “let  some  peasants 
go  rich  first,  let  some  regions  go  rich  first”,®®  widely  publicised  in  the 
Chinese  press  in  the  past  three  years  or  so,  and  rural  policy  enforcing 
these  calls  have  led  to  a  growing  gap  in  the  incomes  of  the  peasant  hou¬ 
seholds.  In  1984,  most  of  the  peasants  and  part  of  the  cadre  workers 
persisted  in  their  negative  attitude  to  the  specialised  households  that 
were  the  first  to  boost  their  incomes.  This  is  borne  out  by  numerous  ar¬ 
ticles  published  in  the  central  press,  which  called  “to  protect  the  legiti- 
mate  interests  of  the  specialised  households”,  and  also  reports  of  their 
property  being  spoiled  and  plundered  by  peasants  as  well  as  of  measu- 
res  taken  by  local  public  security  bodies  to  defend  the  rights  of  the  spe¬ 
cialised  households.®'  As  a  result  certain  social  tensions  Occurred  in  the 
Chinese  countryside.  This  found  reflection  in  speeches  made  by  some 
deputies  to  the  3rd  Session  of  the  Sixth  National  People’s  Assenibly,  who, 
on  the  whole,  raised  objections  against  stepped  up  propaganda  of  the 

high  income  households.  ,  .  ,  .  i  i 

The  basic  directives  concerning  the  economic  and  social  development 
of  the  countryside,  including  the  results  of  the  economic  reform,  were  ap¬ 
proved  at  the  All-China  Conference  of  the  CPC  held  in  September  1985. 
They  were  reflected  in  the  “Proposals  of  the  CPC  CC  on  the  Compiling 
of  the  7th  Five-Year  Plan  for  Economic  and  Social  Development  of  the 


Country.”  .  .  ,  , 

The  problem  of  streamlining  the  production  structure  of  the  country¬ 
side  still  remains  a  major  issue.  Apart  from  the  positive  changes  as  re¬ 
gards  the  growing  share  of  non-agricultural  branches  in  the  gross  agri¬ 
cultural  output  in  the  past  years,  there  are  also  unfavourable  moments. 

Too  much  attention  given  in  a  number  of  regions  to  the  development 
of  agricultural  industry,  trade,  and  transport  adversely  affected  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  grain.  Apprehension  on  this  score  was  voiced  by  one  of  the 
CPC  veteran  members,  Chen  Yun,  in  his  speech  at  the  CPC  Conference. 
“The  provision  of  the  one-billion-strong  population  with  food  and  clothes 
is  a  big  economic  and  also  a  big  political  problem  for  our  country”,  he 
noted.  “Chaos  will  set  in  without  grain,  and  this  should  not  be  underesti- 


For  the  next,  7th,  five-year-plan  period  the  following  tasks  have  been 
put  -forward,  as  far  as  agriculture  is  concerned:  to  secure  streamlining  of 
the  production  structure,  gradually  to  achieve  specialisation  of  production, 
enhance  its  marketability  and  technical  equipment.  ®® 

In  the  field  of  social  policy  in  the  countryside  the  former  provisions 
have  been  preserved  on  the  whole.  It  is  planned  to  continue  the  line  to¬ 
wards  “enrichment  of,  initially,  a  part  of  regions,  enterprises  and  people”, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  recommended  to  prevent  “too  great  differences 
in  the  level  of  incomes”.  ®*  ..... 

This  means  that  certain  elements  of  social  tension  in  the  countryside 
remain  because  the  share  of  peasants  “who  provide  themselves  only  with 
food  and  clothes  and  the  poor  peasants  experiencing  difficulties,  exceeds 
80  per  cent”.®® 


Renmin  blrao^  Nov.  7,  1982;  April  16,  1984. 

Ibid,,  June  20;  Sept.  10,  1984;  Guangming  ribao^  Sept.  22. 
Feb.  11,  1985. 

Renmin  ribao.  Sept.  24,  1985. 

Ibid,,  Sept.  26,  1985. 

Ibid.,  Sept.  26,  1985. 

«  Ibid.,  Aug.  17,  1985. 


1984;  Jingji  ribao. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  Into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO:  1812/94  110 


A. 


i 


A  PATENT  SYSTEM  SET  UP  IN  CHINA 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  111-118 
[Article  by  V.  P.  Polyakov,  candidate  of  economic  sciences] 


The  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  went  into  force  on  April  1,  1985.  It  was 
adopted  on  March  12,  1984  at  the  4th  Session  of  the  Standing  Com¬ 
mittee  of  the  National  People’s  Congress.  This  law  is  the  legal  basis  of 
the  patent  system  that  is  being  set  up  in  the  PRC.  ‘ 

Along  with  the  adoption  of  legislative  and  other  acts  concerning 
invention  and  patenting,  the  patent  system  that  is  being  created  within 
the  framework  of  the  overall  economic  reform  in  the  PRC,  provides  for 
the  setting  up  of  a  network  of  patent  organisations  and  a  patent  agent 
service,  for  supplying  enterprises,  organisations  and  individuals  with 
patent  literature,  for  trading  in  licenses,  for  training  patent  specialists, 

for  exchanging  scientific  and  technical  literature,  etc. 

As  it  was  stressed  in  the  Chinese  press,  the  creation  of  the  patent 
system  will  help  Chinese  enterprises  and  organisations  to  acquire  the 
latest  and  most  systematised  information  on  scientific  and  technological 
achievements  in  the  world.  ^ 

The  patent  system  can  enhance  the  import  of  advanced  equipment 
and  technology  to  the  PRC,  especially  considering  the  PRC’s  striving  in 
recent  years  to  make  an  ever  greater  emphasis  not  .  on  the  import  of 
machinery  and  equipment  but  on  the  purchase  of  licenses  with  the  aim 
of  starting  its  own  production  of  the  latest  machinery  and  equipment. 

Starting  with  the  early  1980s  the  PRC  has  sharply  increased 
purchases  of  licenses.  Whereas  in  1973-1978  the  PRC  concluded  only  16 
licensing  agreements,  the  figure  for  1979-1981  was  already  116.  The  PRC 
has  purchased  licenses  for  the  manufacture  of  power  equipment 
(22  licenses),  electrical  machines  and  equipment  (16),  metal-cutting 
machine-tools  (2),  Instruments  (2),  electronic  devices  (10)  and  other 
equipment.® 

By  1982  already  pilot  samples  had  been  prepared  and  batch  produc¬ 
tion  had  been  started  of  products  under  a  third  of  the  132  licenses 
purchased  in  1973-1981.  Work  to  master  and  start  the  output  of  products 
has  been  started  under  the  other  licenses.  The  output  of  power  sets  with 
a  unit  capacity  of  300  and  600  mWt,  equipment  for  500  kWt  power4rans- 
mission  lines,  continuous  steel  teeming  installations  harvesters,  slow-speed 
ship  engines,  coal  cutters-and-loaders,  scraper  conveyors  and  other  equip¬ 
ment  has  been  mastered  or  is  being  mastered  in  the  PRC  under  foreign 
licenses  in  recent  years. 

It  was  stressed  in  the  Chinese  press  in  connection  with  the  adoption 
of  the  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  that  the  new  law  creates  a  legal  basis 
for  the  transfer  to  the  PRC  of  advanced  technology  by  foreign  firms. 
They  will  no  longer  fear  that  the  latest  technical  achievements  contained 
in  the  imported  equipment  will  be  used  free  of  charge  in  the  PRC. 


'  Published  in  Reninin  ribao,  March  14,  1984. 

»  About  1  million  patent  descriptions  are  published  annually  m  the  world, 

>  Zhongguo  lingji  nianjian,  Peking.  1982,  p.  V-285.  Of  the  I32  licensing  agreemeiits 
concluded  by  the  PRC  in  the  period  from  1973  to  1981,  35  were  signed  with  the  FRG, 
26  with  the  United  States,  20  with  Japan,  20  with  Britain,  13  with  France,  6  with 
Switzerland,  2  with  Belgium,  2  with  Sweden,  2  with  Denmark,  2  with  Austria,  2  with 
Australia,  1  with  Canada,  and  1  with  Italy.  The  FRG,  the  USA,  France,  Japan  and 
Britain  account  for  86  per  cent  of  all  these  agreements. 


Ill 


Earlier  such  fears  compelled  foreign  sellers  to  include  in  the  price  the 
possible  losses  caused  by  the  free  use  by  a  third  party  of  the  latest 
scientific-technical  achievements  received  by  the  Chinese  purchaser 
together  with  the  imported  equipment  that  had  no  patent  protection  in 
ihe  PRC.  As  a  result,  prices  of  equipment  imported  by  the  PRC  were 
jacked  up.  * 

The  patent  system  will  help  ensure  the  legal  protection  in  other 
countries  of  exported  Chinese  goods  thanks  to  the  timely  patenting  in 
those  countries  of  Chinese  inventions,  useful  models,  industrial  designs 
and  trademarks. 

When  the  draft  patent  law  was  discussed  apprehensions  were  voiced 
that  the  patent  system  would  create  obstacles  to  copying  foreign  products 
in  the  PRC.  But,  it  was  noted  in  the  Chinese  press,  such  fears  are 
groundless  for  the  following  reasons:  first  of  all,  when  a  patent  is  issued 
this  does  not  yet  mean  a  simultaneous  introduction  of  the  patented 
invention  into  mass  production,  this  sometimes  requiring  a  rather 
lengthy  period  of  time.  So,  after  a  patent  is  issued,  the  problem  of  copy¬ 
ing  does  not  exist.  What  does  exist  is  the  problem  of  signing  a  licensing 
agreement  with  the  patent  owner  to  organise  the  introduction  of  the 
patented  invention  into  production.  Secondly,  the  duration  of  a  patent 
often  expires  before  the  invention  is  introduced  in  production  and  for 
this  reason  there  is  no  longer  any  obstacles  to  copying  the  product 
containing  the  invention  that  had  previously  been  protected  by  the 
patent.  ® 

In  the  PRC  the  results  of  an  inventor’s  endeavour  are  viewed  as  a 
commodity  possessing  value  and  consumer  value,  and  this  is  regarded 
as  the  theoretical  basis  of  the  new  patent  system.  “A  technical  invention,” 
the  newspaper  Renmin  ribao  wrote  on  March  15,  1984,  “is  a  product  of 
labour.  It  embodies  the  creative  work  by  brain  of  the  inventor  and  in 
many  instances  also  materialised  labour  in  the  form  of  instruments  used 
for  experiments  and  research,  equipment  and  experimental  materials,  and 
a  certain  auxiliary  physical  labour.  But  the  decisive  role  is  played  by 
creative  work  by  brain.  When  used  in  production,  a  technical ‘invention 
can  ultimately  turn  into  a  productive  force  and  yield  an  economic, 
technical  and  social  effect.  For  this  reason  it  has  value  and  consumer 
value  and  should  be  protected  as  a  valuable.  Since  commodity  production 
still  exists  in  conditions  of  socialism,  the  production  and  exchange  of 
this  commodity — the  technical  invention — should  be  developed  in  every 
way  for  the  needs  of  socialist  modernisation.  This  is  the  main  theoretical 
basis  of  the  patent  system  that  is  being  created  in  China.” 

Earlier,  Chinese  laws  dealing  with  inventions  professed  the  principle 
that  “inventions  are  property  of  the  state”  and  for  this  reason  are  not 
a  commodity.  In  accordance  with  this  principle,  outlined,  for  instance,  in 
the  Rules  of  Remunerating  Inventions  adopted  in  the  PRC  in  1978,  any 
enterprise  or  organisation  could  use  an  invention  free  of  charge.  But 
now  it  is  held  in  the  PRC  that  the  principle  according  to  which  inven¬ 
tions  belong  to  the  state  obstructs  the  inventor  or  the  enterprise  that 
employs  him  from  getting  an  economic  advantage  from .  the  invention, 
does  not  promote  the  development  of  creative  inventiveness  on  the  part 
of  the  broad  masses  and  individual  enterprises,  generates  reticence'  in 
respect  of  inventions,  and  often  is  the  cause  of  conflicting  claims  to 
ownership  of  inventions.”  ® 

The  transfer  of  the  right  of  ownership  of  inventions  and  other  results 


‘For  instance,  an  industrial  turbine  manufactured  by  the  West  German,  firm 
Siemens  was  sold  to  the  PRC  for  4.8  mifiion  doiiars  while  Japan,  which  has  a, patent 
system,  bought  a  similar  turbine  forl.2  miilion  dollars. 

‘  Renmin  ribao.  Sept.  7,  1983.  ■  ' 

'  Renmin  ribao,  March  15,  1984. 


112 


of  inventive  endeavour  from  the  state  as  a  whole  to  individual  enterprises, 
organisations  and  persons  means  the  spreading  of  relations  of  ownership 
to^a  new  extensive  field  where  not  only  Chinese  but  also  foreign  juridical 
oersons  and  subjects  of  law  can  be  holders  of  patent  rights. 

^  In  China  the  first  legislative  act  bearing  features  a  patent  law  was 

published  by  the  Ministry  of  Industry  and  ^ 

was  called  “Temporary  Rules  to  Encourage  Handicrafts  .  A  Patent  Law 
was  officially  published  in  May  1944  and  established  three  ° 

natents-  on  inventions,  useful  models  and  industrial  designs.  After  the 
forming  of  the  PRC  the  State  Administrative  Council  issued  Temporary 
Rules  ^r  Protecting  Inventorship  and  Patent  Rights  providing  for  6  typ 

Remunerating  Inventions.  They  were  effective  till  December  1978  when  the 
PRC  State  Council  adopted  ,  new  revised  Rules  of  Remunerating  Inven¬ 
tions  ®  The  State  Committee  for  Science  and  Technology  was  charged 
wmi  overall  supervision  of  the  entire  work  to  remunerate  inventions. 
Ministries  as  well  as  the  provincial  committees  for  science  and  technology, 
fs  well  as  committees  of  autonomous  regions  and  cit  es  directly  under 
the  Central  Government  were  instructed  to  accept  applications  for 
inventions  and  to  conduct  their  examination  within  the  brief  of  the'. given 
mSdes  and  regions.  The  Rules  regulated  the  procedure  of  submitting 
inventions  to  receive  material  and  moral  rewards,  the  size  of.  the 
rewards,  their  distribution  in  the  team  of  authors  of  a  given  invention, 
the  procedure  of  publishing  the  essence  of  the  invention,  determining 

the  extent^ofjts^secrecy^d  jjoj.  j-egulate  many  other  questions  connected 
with  the  development  of  the  movement  of  inventors  in  the  country,  the 
orotection  of-  the  rights  of  Chinese  citizens  and  foreigners,  and  the  use 
Sf  fore  gn  fiveritionl  This  gap  in  Chinese  legislation  %nce^mng  inven¬ 
tions  became  increasingly  felt  in  recent  years  when  the  PRC,  within  the 
framework  of  the  economic  reform  implemented  in  the  country,  actively 
began  to  develop  economic,  scientific  and  technical  ties  with  other 

^^^The^PRC  began  creating  its  patent  systeni  in  1978  and  already  in 
March  1979  work  was  started  on  the  draft  of  the  patent  law.  In  January 
1980  the  PRC  State  Council  approved  a  report  of  the  State  Committee 
for  Science  and  Technology  on  the  creation  of  a  patent  system  in  the 
country  and  formed  the  Patent  Agency  of  Cmna. 

The  adoption  of  the  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  was  preceded  by  e^en- 
sive  preparatory  work  in  the  course  of  which  the  patent  law  of  more 

than  30  countries  was  studied.  .  .  j  x  j 

In  September  1982  the  PRC  State  Council  again  adopted  a  resolution 

on  the  creation  of  a  patent  system  in  the  country.  In  his  Report  on  the  6th 
Five-Year  Plan,  delivered  at  the  5th  Session 

Congress  of  the  5th  Convocation,  the  Premier  of  the  PRC  State  Council 
Zhao  Ziyang  noted  the  need  “to  draw  up  and  adopt  »  Patent  law  . 
A  national  conference  on  questions  related  to  Patents  was  held  at  about 
the  same  time.  After  discussing  the  matter  for  the  second  .time  the 
Standing  Committee  of  the  National  Peoples  Congress  adopted  the 
Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  in  March  1984  and  in  November  o  the  same 
year  decided  that  the  PRC  should  accede  to  the  Pans  convention  on  the 
protection  of  industrial  property.  China  officially  ^  Pf = 

on  March  10,  1985.  The  Chinese  Society  of  Inventors »  was  formed  m 

October  ,1984  to  encourage  inventors  in  the  country. 

‘  »  Renmin  ribao,  Dec.  4,  1983.  The  .Temporary  Rules  were  abolished  in  1963. 

^  Renmin  ribao/Jan.  25,  1979.  i  m  iqqr 

?  Jienmlh  tlbao,  Nov.  11,  14;  Oct.  14,  1984;  March  19,  1985. 


113 


The  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  provides  for  the  paterit  protection  of 
three  types  of  inventive  endeavour;  inventions,  useful  models  arid 
industrial  designs.  As  different  from  inventions,  which  are  the  highest 
form  of  inventive  endeavour,  useful  models  (sorrietimes  they  are  called 
“minor  inventions”),  suggest  new  forms  and  design  oL  m^ 
equipment  and  other  products.  The  creative  level  involved  is  lower  than 
in  the  case  of  an  invention,  but  useful  models  have  a  cpidparatively  high 
value  from  the  viewpoint  of  their  applicatiorl. 

A  patent  for  an  industrial  design  can  be  issued  for‘ new  aesthetical 
solutions  applicable  in  industry  and  concerning  the  form,  structure  arid 
colouring  of  the  product  or  a  combination  of  these  features.  The  patent 
protection  of  this  type  of  inventive  creativity  stimulates  the  creation  of 
new  attractive  designs  of  various  products. 

Patents  for  inventions  and  useful  models  can  be  issued  only  if  they 
meet  the  following  three  qualifications:  novelty,  level  of  Inventiveness 
and  practical  applicability.  They  possess  “novelty”  if  prior  to  the  date 
of  submission  of  the  application  ho  identical  invehtiOn  or  useful  model 
had  been  openly  published  in  the  PRC  or  abroad,  if  they  had  not  been 
used  openly  in  the  PRC,  if  no  other  person  had  applied  earlier  to  the 
Chinese  Patent  Agency  describing  an  identical  invention  or  useful 
model. 

“Level  of  inventiveness”  means  that  as  compared  to  the  technology 
existing  as  of  the  date  the  application  was  made  the  invention  possesses 
outstanding  substantial  specificities  and  constitutes  rioticeable  progress, 
while  the  useful  rriodel  has.  substantial  specificities  and  is  progressive. 

“Practical  applicability”  means  that  the  invention  or  useful  rhodel  can 
be  manufactured,  used  and  yield  a  certain  effect. 

To  get  a  patent  for  an  industrial  design  it  is  necessary  for  it  not  to 
be  identical  to  or  resemble  any  industrial  design  which  was  openly 
published  in  the  PRC  or  abroad  prior  to  the  date  the  application  was 
made  or  was  openly  Used  in  the  PRC. 

The  invention,  useful  model  or  industrial  design  for  which  a  patent 
is  requested  do  not  lose  their  novelty  in  the  course  of  six  months  prior 
to  the  filing  of  the  application  in  each  of  the  following  cases:  if  they  are 
displayed  for  the  first  time  at  an  international  exhibition  organised  or 
recognised  by  the  Chinese  government,  if  they  are  made  public  for  the 
first  time  at  a  definite  scientific  or  technical  conference,  or  if  they  were 
disclosed  by  some  person  without  the  applicant’s  consent. 

The  duration  of  patents  for  inventions  is  15  years  and  for  Useful 
models  and  industrial  designs— 5  years,  counting  from  the  day  the  ap¬ 
plication  was  made.  On  the  request  of  the  patent  holder  the  duration  of 
patents  for  useful  models  and  industrial  designs  can  be  extended  by 
three  years.  If  the  patent  holder  exercises  the  right  of  priority,  the  dura¬ 
tion  of  the  patent  is  estimated  also  from  the  date  the  application  was 
made  in  the  PRC.  The  patent  holder  is  obliged  tO  pay  annual  duties 
starting  with  the  year  the  patent  was  issued.  The  patent  is  terrhinated  in 
the  event  Of  failure  to  pay  the  annual  duties  or  on  a  written  application 
from  the  patent  holder. 

The  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  distinguishes  between  inventions,  useful 
models  and  industrial  designs  that  are  created  by  people  when  fulfilling 
assignments  of  enterprises  or  organisations  to  which  they  belong  or 
a're  created  by  them  using  mainly  the  material  means  of  these  enterprises 
or  organisations,  and  those  made  in  “off-work  time”.  In  the  former  case 
it  is  these  enterprises  or  organisations  that  have  the  right  to  apply  for 
a  patent.  In  the  laitter,  that  is  when  inventions,  useful  models  and 
industrial  designs  are  created  in  “off-work  time’',  it  is  the  inventors 
themselves  who  have  the  right  to  apply  for  and  get  a  patent. 

Acquisition  of  a  patent  right  to  an  invention  or  useful  .model  means 


114 


that  not  one  enterprise,  organisation  or  individual  can  use  the  patent 
without  the  patent  holder’s  sanction,  that  is  manufacture,  use  or  sell  the 
patented  product  or  use  the  patented  process  in  production  or  business. 
When  a  patent  for  an  industrial  design  is  issued,  not  a  single  enterprise, 
organisation  or  individual  can  manufacture  or  sell  a  product  presenting 
an  industrial  design  for  production  or  business  purposes.  So,  as  different 
from  patents  for  inventions  or  useful  models,  patents  for  an  industrial 
design  allow  the  use  of  a  product  containing  the  patented  technical 
design. 

But  the  right  to  the  patent  granted  by  law  is  not  absolute.  The  relevant 
competent  bodies  of  the  PRC  State  Council  and  the  people’s  governments 
of  provinces,  autonomous  regions  and  cities  directly  under  the  Central 
Government  can,  in  pursuance  of  the  state  plan,  order  any  enterprise 
belonging  to  their  system  or  a  directly  subordinated  state  enterprise 
that  possesses  a  patent  for  an  important  invention,  useful  model  or 
industrial  design  to  allow  certain  enterprises  to  use  the  patented  inven¬ 
tion,  useful  model  or  industrial  design.  In  this  case  these  enterprises  pay 
a  certain  reimbursement  to  the  patent  holder  for  using  the  patent. 

Much  attention  in,  the  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  is  given  to  the  question 
of  issuing  forced  licenses.  The  law  obliges  the  patent  holder  to  manufacture 
the  patented  product  or  to  use  the  patented  method,  or  to  authorise  'others 
to  do  this.  It  the  patent  holder  fails  for  any  valid  reason  to  fulfil  this 
duty  in  the  course  of  three  years  from  the  date  the  patent  was  issued,  the 
Patent  Agency,  acting  on  request  of  an  enterprise  that  is  ready  to  use  the 
invention  or  useful  model,  grants  a  forced  license  for  the  use  of  the 
patent.  This  Agency  grants  a  forced  license  also  when  the  given  invention 
or  useful  model  cannot  be  used  without  preceding  or  subsequent  inven¬ 
tions  and  useful  models. 

Forced  licenses  are  issued  to  enterprises,  organisations  or  individuals 
if  they  prove  the  impossibility  of  concluding  a  licensing  agreement  with 
the  patent  holder  on  reasonable  terms.  On  getting  a  forced  license  they 
do  not  acquire  an  exclusive  right  to  using  the  patent  and  cannot  transfer 
this  right  to  others.  When  a  forced  license  is  issued,  the  patent  holder 
is  to  be  paid  a  certain  reward.  The  patent  holder  has  three  months  dur¬ 
ing  which  he  can  appeal  to  a  people’s  court  against  the  Patent  Agency’s 
decision  to  issue  a  forced  license  for  his  patent. 

The  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  provides  for  the  protection  of  thfe  patent 
holder’s  rights  also  in  the  event  of  an  unauthorised  use  of  his  invention, 
useful  model  or  industrial  design.  In  this  case  the  patentee  can  apply 
to  the  Patent  Agency  or  directly  to  a  people’s  court  with  a  request  that 
the  violator  stop  infringing  on  the  patentee’s  rights  and  pay  compensa¬ 
tion  for  the  inflicted  damage. 

In  preparation  for  the  introduction  of  the  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC  the 
Patent  Agency  published  on  January  19,  1985  Rules  of  Application  of 
the  Patent  Law  of  the  PRC,  that  were  approved  by  the  PRC  State  Council. 
These  rules  specify  in  detail  the  general  provisions  of  the  patent  law, 
the  procedure  of  applying  for  a  patent  and  of  the  application’s  examina¬ 
tion,  Questions  of  issuing  the  patent,  granting  of  licenses,  payment  of 
rewards  for  inventions  made  in  the  course  of  fulfilment  of  one’s  official 
duties,  etc.,  and  also  the  order  and  size  of  the  payment  of  the  patent 
duty." 

A  system  of  patent  bodies  is  being  created  in  the  PRC  to  deal  with 
patents.  It  was  already  in  1979  that  the  state  officially  undertook  to 
conduct  examinations  of  applications  for  inventions  and  to  remunerate 


Instructions  of  the  Supreme  People’s  Court  of  the  PRC  on  the  Court  Procedure 
of  Patent  Cases  were  published  In  March  1985.  See  Renmiti  ribao,  March  2,  1985. 
Beijing  Review,  January  1985,  p.  7-8. 


115 


the  inventions.  In  1980  the  State  Council  of  the  PRC  approved  the 
establishment  of  the  Patent  Agency  which  initially  had  a  staff  of  only 
200,  including  experts,  researchers,  patent  agents  and  administrators. 

The  Patent  Agency  of  the  PRC  includes  departments  of  experts  to 
study  applications  for  patents  in  the  field  of  machine-building,  electronics, 
power  generation  and  the  chemical  industry;  an  administrative  depart¬ 
ment,  a  patent  search  department  which,  on  the  request  of  experts  and 
other  individuals,  searches  for  patent  literature;  a  department  of  publica¬ 
tions,  a  technical  exchanges  department;  a  legal  department  that  drafts 
legislation  and  regulations  concerning  inventions  and  patenting;  and  an 
external  relations  department  that  in  its  time  had  sent  more  than  50 
experts  to  foreign  countries  to  study  patenting. 

China’s  Patent  Agency  develops  cooperation  with  other  countries 
in  this  field.  An  agreement  between  the  PRC  and  the  FRG  entered  into 
force  on  August  22,  1983.  Under  it  the  FRG  undertook  to  give  the  PRC 
financial  assistance  to  the  sum  of  12  million  West  German  marks  in  1983- 
1985  to  pay  for  the  import  of  office  equipment  and  the  training  of  person¬ 
nel.  In  September  1983  a  delegation  of  West  German  patent  experts 
visited  China  on  the  invitation  of  the  Patent  Agency.  The  sides  discussed 
a  plan  of  cooperation  in  the  field  of  patents  in  the  coming  five  years. 

In  1984  the  PRC  State  Council  entrusted  the  Chinese  Committee  for 
the  Promotion  of  International  Trade,  which  is  a  non-governmental 
organisation,  to  perform  functions  of  China’s  Patent  Agency.  In  June 
1984  this  Committee  set  up  a  department  of  patent  agents  charged, 
among  other  tasks,  with  giving  consultations  to  persons  filing  afiplica- 
tions  for  patents,  with  the  preliminary  examination  of  applica¬ 
tions,  with  acting  as  intermediaries  between  the  applicants  and  China’s 
Patent  Agency,  with  trade  in  licenses  and  procedural  questions  involving 
the  filing  of  applications  in  the  PRC  on  authorisation  of  foreign  'citizens 
and  enterprises  and  in  foreign  countries  on  authorisation  of  Chinese 
enterprises  and  individuals.  \ 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  Chinese  Committee  for  the  Promotion  of 
International  Trade  was  charged  with  the  duty  or  registering  trademarks 
already  way  back  in  1957.  In  the  course  of  fulfilling  this  work  th^  Com¬ 
mittee  established  business  ties  with  agencies  and  agents  in  many 
countries  engaged  in  the  registration  of  trademarks.  The  preparatory 
work  for  the  registration  of  trademarks  is  performed  in  the  PRC  by  a 
law  office  that  was  opened  in  Peking  in  July  1984  and  specialises  in 
legal  matters  pertaining  to  external  economic  and  scientific  and  technical 
cooperation. 

There  have  also  been  reports  about  the  establishment  of  a  patent 
agent  firm  in  Xiang  Gang  (Hong  Kong).  Its  task  is  to  distribute  Chinese 
patents  abroad  and  to  help  Chinese  residents  of  Xiang  Gang  and  Aomen 
(Macao)  and  also  foreign  citizeiis  and  enterprises  in  applying  for 
patents  in  the  PRC. 

China’s  Patent  Agency  and  local  bodies  are  conducting  extensive 
work  inside  the  country  to  set  up  patent  bureaus  assigned  to  give  pirafctical 
assistance  in  the  observance  of  the  patent  law  and  in  protecting  the 
rights  and  interests  of  inventors  and  patentees.  Thus,  a  bureau  of  inven¬ 
tions  and  patents  was  formed  at  the  Ministry  of  Railways  in  1980.  It 


China  Business  Review,  1981,  vol.  8,  No.  3. 

”  China  Economic  News,  September  19,  1983. 

Renmin  ribao,  July  14,  1984. 

More  than  84,000  trademarks,  including  13,000  foreign  trademarks,  were  registered 
in  China  by  the  end  of  1982.  The  new  Law  on  Trademarks  went  into  force .  in  the 
PRC  on  March  1,  1983  (Renmin  ribao,  Jan.  23,  1983).  -  '  i  . 

'“  Even  before  the  patent  law  enterfed  into  force,  this  office  got  800 'applications 
(Renmin  ribao,  April  2,  1985). 


116 


conducts  patent  studies  with  the  aim  of  establishing  the  expediency  of 
patenting  inventions  in  the  PRC  and  abroad,  determining  the  extent  of 
novelty  of  foreign  equipment  and  the  expediency  of  importing  it  and 
also  looking  into  the  possibility  of  exporting  products  or  displaying 
them  at  exhibitions. To  conduct  patenting  work  and  supervise  it, 
49  organisations  were  formed  in  provinces,  autonomous  districts,  cities 
directly  under  the  Central  Government  and  also  in  a  number  of  branches 
of  the  country’s  economy.  The  creation  of  patent  organisations  has 
already  been  completed  in  many  of  the  biggest  administrative  centres.  ® 

Also  being  formed  is  a  service  of  patent  agents  who,  in  accordance 
with  requirements  of  China’s  Patent  Agency,  must  have  a  higher  educa¬ 
tion,  not  less  than  three  years  of  practical  work,  and  know  at  least  one 
foreign  language.  In  addition  to  this,  they  must  know  .  Chinese  and 
foreign  patent  legislation,  private  and  procedural  law  and  international 
patenting.  All  patent  agents  must  be  registered  with  patent  bureaus  and 
have  to  sit  for  qualification  exams.  More  than  600  patent  agents  were 
trained  in  China  by  early  1985.  The  Committee  has  also  started  to 
organise  patent  search.  When  scientific  and  technical  workers  are  certified, 
more  attention  is  now  being  given  to  whether  they  are  capable  of  using 
patent  literature  in  their  work.  ^ 

Patent  information  is  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of  the  patent 
system  now  being  created  in  the  PRC.  It  is  the  main  source  of  informa¬ 
tion  on  new  inventions,  useful  models  or  industrial  designs.  As  is  known, 
only  5-10  per  cent  of  information  about  inventions  in  the  world  can_be 
found  in  various  scientific  and  technical  publications,  the  remaining 
90  per  cent  being  contained  in  patent  literature. 

To  provide  enterprises,  research  organisations  and  individuals  with 
information  on  patents  a  centre  to  supply  patent  literature  was  set  up 
in  Peking  late  in  1981.  It  is  subordinated  to  the  national  Patent  Agency. 
The  Centre’s  patent  library  has  20  million  units  of  patent  literature 
published  in  15  countries  and  by  two  international  organisations  (70  per 
cent  of  the  entire  patent  literature  in  the  world).  The  Centre’s  service 
bureau  searches  for  and  copies  patent  literature  on  requests  of  enterprises 
and  organisations.  The  Centre  also  has  a  department  of  patent  classifica¬ 
tion  that  processes  and  stores  patent  literature  to  service  the  Patent 
Agency’s  experts.  To  search  for  patents  the  Centre  has  an  electronic  data 
bank  that  speedily  provides  the  necessary  patent  material. 

Also  under  the  Patent  Agency  is  the  Patent  Literature  publishing 
house  (Zhuanli  wenxian  chubanshe)  that  publishes  patent  literature,  aids 
on  patenting,  references  and  also  magazines  and  other  materials  concern¬ 
ing  the  patent  system,  patent  legislation  and  other  matters  related  to 
patents. 

China’s  Patent  Agency  puts  out  a  monthly  magazine  China’s  Patents 
(Zhongguo  zhuanli)  that  publishes  materials  on  the  theory  and  practice 
of  patenting  (application  for  patents,  license  trade,  the  use  of  patent 
literature,  the  state  of  patenting  in  the  world,  etc).  Another  monthly 
magazine  Inventions  of  the  World  (Shijie  faming)  presents  articles  on 
the  state  of  patenting  in  various  countries  and  the  theory  of  inventing, 
reports  on  inventions  in  the  PRC  that  won  prizes,  and  materials  on  new 
industrial  designs. 

A  reference  magazine  called  Information  Bulletin  on  Patent  Literature 
(Zhuanli  wenxian  tongbao)  is  published  to  conduct  research  in  the  field 
of  patent  search.  It  publishes  summaries  and  abstracts  of  patents  and 
applications  which  were  filed  in  ten  countries  (USA,.  Britain,  France, 


Renmin  ribao,  Dec.  4,  1983. 

Ibid,,  Feb.  9,  1985. 

China  Aktuell,  August  1983;  Renmin  ribao,  Feb.  9,  1985. 


117 


Japan,  USSR,  Czechoslovakia,  Austria,  Switzerland,  the  FRG  and  the 
GDR)  and  by  two  international  organisations— the  European  Patent 
Organisation  and  the  “Treaty  on  Patent  Cooperation”  organisaition. 
Thirteen  issues  of  this  bulletin  containing  abstracts  and  surnmaries  of 
patents  in  various  fields  of  the  economy  and  technology  were  published 
in  1984. 

The  adoption  of  the  patent  law  and  the  creation  of  the  basis  of  a 
patent  system  are  important  events  in  China’s  modern  life  that  will 
exert  a  definite  influence  on  the  country’s  economic  development. 
Objectively  they  will  promote  China’s  scientific  and  technological  progress 
and' an  expansion  of  its  scientific  and  technical  exchange  with  industrially 
developed  countries.  It  is  quite  probable  that  they  will  play  a  rather 
substantial  role  also  in  the  expansion  of  China’s  external  economic  ties, 
in  providing  patent  protection  of  its  export  and  in  raising  the  quality 
of  exported  products,  especially  machinery  and  equipment.  At  the  same 
time  they  enable  China’s  foreign  trade  partners  to  protect  more  effectively 
the  goods  they  export  to  China’s  domestic  market  and  create^  more 
favourable  conditions  for  them  to  offer  China  the  use  of  their  scientific 
and  technical  achievements  on  a  commercial  basis. 


COPYRIGHT;  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO;  1812/94 


118 


SOCIALIST  LAOS  MARKS  lOTH  ANNIVERSARY 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jah-Mar  86  pp  119-122 

[Article  by  A.  M.  fetveyev:  "Glorious  Anniversary  6f  Socialist  Laos"] 

O  n  December  2,  1985,  the  Lao  people  celebrated  a  significant  event,  the 
10th  anniversary  of  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic,  formed 
after  50  odd  years  of  struggle  for  independence  against  the  forces  of  dm- 
perialistn,  neocolonialisrii  and  expansion.  The  Lao  people  won  freedom 
and  independence  for  their  country,  and  today  they  devote  all  their^  ener¬ 
gy  to  laying  the  foundations  of  socialist  society,  work  to  facilitate  the 
country’s  compirehehsive  development  and  to  ensure  the  working  people  s 
well-being.  Shoulder  to  shoulder  with  the  other  peoples  of  Indochina,  they 
contribute  to  the  struggle  for  peace,  national  independence,  democracy  and 

social  progress.  ^  .  .  ’  u  t. 

Laos  lies  in  the  heart  of  Indochina.  It  is  rich  in  mineral  resources,  but 
they  are  not  yet  explored  sufficiently.  There  are  considerable  reserves  of 
iron  ore  (the  metal  content  is  60  to  65  per  cent),  tin,  manganese,  copper, 
lead,  potash,  coal,  antimony,  zink,  gold,  silver,  platinum  and  other  mine¬ 
rals  Nearly  half  its  territory  is  covered  by  forests,  a  source  of  valuable 
timber  and  resins  which  Laos  exports  to  other  countries.  As  for  hydro- 
power  resources,  it  is  one  of  the  richest  countries  in  Southeast  Asia. 

Laos  is  a  multinational  country  inhabited  by  some  70  nationalities 
and  tribes.  Seventy  per  cent  of  the  population  belong  to  the  Lao-Thai 
ethnic  group.  Most  of  the  nationalities  are  rather  close  in  terms  of  their 
language,  socio-economic  structure  and  culture.  Some  of  them  are  at 
different  stages  of  social  and  economic  development.  According  to  the 
1985  census,  the  country’s  population  is  estimated  at  3.6  million. 

Since  ancient  times  Laos  has  attracted  the  attention  of  aggressors. 
For  many  years  it  was  under  the  domination  of  the  French  colonialists. 
But  the  heroic  Lao  people  refused  to  tolerate  the  colonial  rule  and  waged 
a  ceaseless  struggle  for  their  independence. 

The  national  liberation  movement  in  Indochina  developed  under  the 
great  influence  of  the  October  1917  Socialist  Revotution  in  Russia.  The 
Communist  Party  of  Indochina  (CPIC)  was  founded  in  1930  under  the 
leadership  of  Ho  Chi  Minh.  Its  Lao  section  was  formed  in  1936.  It  led 
the  people  of  Laos  first  against  the  French  colonialists  and  later,  during 
World  War  II,  against  the  Japanese  invaders.  The  defeat  of  nazi  Ger¬ 
many  and  militaristic  Japan,  in  which  the  Soviet  Union  played  the  cru¬ 
cial  role,  created  favourable  conditions  for  the  foreign  invaders  to  be 
ousted  from  the  country.  A  provisional  government  was  formed  in  Vien¬ 
tiane,  the  capital  of  Laos,  on  October  12,  1945,  which  proclaimed  an  in¬ 
dependent  and  united  Laos — Pathet  Lao. 

However,  in  1946,  the  French  colonialists  launched  an  armed  inter¬ 
vention  into  the  country.  The  Lao  people’s  liberation  struggle  brought 
them  victory.  The  Geneva  1954  Accords  recognised  the  unity  and  inde¬ 
pendence  of  Laos.  The  road  of  peaceful  development  was  opened  up  to 
it.  Soon,  however,  the  right-wing  forces,  actively  supported  by  the  US 
imperialists,  gained  the  upper  hand  in  Vientiane,  and  a  civil  war  broke 
out 

At  that  time  the  People’s  Party  of  Laos  (since  1972,  the  People’s  Re¬ 
volutionary  Party  of  Laos)  directed  the  Lao  people’s  struggle  against 


119 


the  new  enemy — US  imperialists.  It  was  set  up  in  1955  by  former  mem* 
bers  of  the  Lao  section  of  the  CPIC.  In  1956,  all  the  patriotic  forces  of 
the  country  united,  on  the  basis  of  the  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  Laos, 
into  the  Patriotic  Front  of  Laos,  Neo  Lao  Haksat,  which  had  as  its  foun¬ 
dation  the  alliance  between  workers  and  the  peasantry. 

The  armed  struggle  waged  by  Neo  Lao  Haksat  gained  scope,  and  by 
mid-1961,  only  a  third  of  Lao  territory  was  controlled  by  right-wing  forces. 
This  impelled  Washington  to  agree  to  talks  on  the  Lao  question. 
The  Geneva  1962  Conference  decisions  once  again  recognised  the  status 
of  united  and  independent  Laos  and  provided  the  necessary  international 
conditions  for  its  development  as  a  peaceful  sovereign  state.  Yet,  these 
decisions  were  violated  by  a  right-wing  grouping  strongly  backed  by  the 
US.  In  May  1964,  US  aircraft  started  barbaric  bombings  of  the  liberated 
area  of  Laos,  using  toxic  agents,  napalm  and  phosphor  bombs  against 

civilians.  ,  r  u 

The  Second  Congress  of  the  PRPL  (February  1972)  was  of  much 
importance  for  the  Lao  people’s  victory  over  the  foreign  invaders.  It  also; 
mapped  out  the  country’s  political  line  aimed  at  completing  a  national- 
democratic  revolution  and  gradually  switching  over  to  socialist  constr^- 
tion,  bypassing  capitalism.  By  early  1973,  some  three-quarters  of  the 
country’s  territory,  and  nearly  a  half  of  the  entire  population  had  been 
liberated.  A  new  political  system  was  formed  in  this  zone,  the  economy 
was  developed  and  the  People’s  Liberation  Army  strengthened. 

1973  was  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of  the  heroic  Lao  people,  as 
it  determined  their  further  destiny.  An  agreement  was  signed  in  Vien¬ 
tiane  on  the  restoration  of  peace  and  national  concord.  It  laid  the  ground¬ 
work  for  the  formation  of  the  appropriate  bodies  of  power.  The  Vientiane 
agreement  marked  the  end  of  the  armed  struggle  in  Laos. 

The  situation  in  the  country  had  its  specific  features.  There  were  three 
zones  and  three  types  of  power  in  them;  the  liberated  zone  with  a  revo¬ 
lutionary  government;  the  zone  with  a  retained  feudal  order,  ruled  by  the 
former  Vientiane  administration;  and  the  neutral  zone  of  Vientiane  and 
Luang  Prabang  with  a  coalition  government.  . 

The  victories  the  Vietnamese  and  the  Kampuchean  peoples  scored  m 
early  1975  created  conditions  for  the  completion  of  the  revolution  in  La¬ 
os.  A  revolutionary  situation  arose  in  the  zone  of  the  former  Vientiane 
administration.  The  Party  immediately  took  the  decision  to  launch  a  gen¬ 
eral  offensive  and  seize  power  as  soon  as  possible.  A  large-scale  cam¬ 
paign  was  started  in  Laos  to  eliminate  the  former  administrative,  police 
and  military  institutions,  and  reorganise  them  along  democratic  lines. 
In  August  1975,  people’s  revolutionary  bodies  of  local  power  were  created 
throughout  Laos.  As  a  result  of  the  November  1975  elections  people’s 
power  was  established  in  the  country. 

On  December  2,  1975,  the  National  Congress  of  People’s  Representa¬ 
tives  was  convened  on  the  decision  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  PFL. 
It  announced  the  overthrow  of  the  monarchy  and  proclaimed  the  Lao 
People’s  Democratic  Republic  (LPDR).  This  event  was  the  crowning 
point  of  the  stubborn  and  consistent  struggle  waged  by  the  Lao  people, 
and  a  new  epoch  set  in,  that  of  independence,  freedom  and  socialism. 

The  young  republic  inherited  from  the  past  regime  a  backward  eco¬ 
nomy.  Agriculture,  in  which  nearly  85  per  cent,  of  the  population  was 
employed,  was  dominated  by  small-scale  production  with  natural  eco- 
nomy  elements.  It  failed  to  provide  enough  food  to  meet  the  population  s 
requirements.  Feudal  forms  of  land  tenure  remained  in  a  number  of  re¬ 
gions.  Cottage  craft  industry  prevailed.  There  were  small  factories  pro¬ 
ducing  cigarettes,  soft  drinks,  footwear  and  matches.  The  war  inflicted 
great  damage  upon  Laos.  US  aircraft  dropped  as  many  as  three  million 
tons  of  bombs  on  Lao  soil  and  sprayed  it  with  poisons.  As  a  result, 


120 


nearly  40  per  cent  of  all  arable  land  was  not  cultivated.  War  turned 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  families  out  of  their  homes,  making  them  re¬ 
fugees. 

The  young  republic  had  to  rehabilitate  its  war-ravaged  economy,  pri¬ 
marily  transport  communications,  and  revive  its  trade,  all  this  against  a 
background  of  incessant  intrigues  by  the  enemies  of  the  revolution  who, 
supported  by  their  foreign  patrons,  above  all  the  USA,  sought  to  regain 
their  lost  positions. 

The  PRPL  managed  to  assess  realistically  the  situation.  It  set  two 
main  and  interconriected  strategic  tasks — the  defence  of  the  revolution 
and  the  building  of  socialism.  Popular  power  embarked  upon  radical  so¬ 
cio-economic  changes  in  the  country.  It  nationalised  land,  minerals,  banks, 
some  industrial  enterprises,  finances,  transport,  the  mass  media  and 
means  of  communication.  The  state  and  the  state-private  sectors  were  set 
up,  and  cooperatives  were  formed  in  agriculture,  commerce  and  handicraft 
production.  These  steps  were  aimed  at  ensuring  higher  living  standards 
for,  the  people  and  at  forming  a  new  kind  of  production  relations,  based 
upon  the  socialist  form  of  property. 

An  important  event  for  the  country  was  the  3rd  Congress  of  the  PRPL, 
held  in  April  1982,  the  first  legal  congress  of  the  Lao  Communists.  It  de¬ 
fined  the  political  course  in  the  period  of  transition  to  socialism.  One  of 
the  main  tasks  it  set  forth  was  “to  consolidate  constantly  the  dictatorship 
of  the  proletariat,  ensure  the  monolithic  cohesion  of  the  working  people  of 
all  nationalities”,  “simultaneously  to  carry  out  three  revolutions:  a  revo¬ 
lution  in  the  sphere  of  production  relations,  a  scientific  and  technological 
revolution,  and  a  revolution  in  the  sphere  of  culture  and  ideology”.  The 
congress  pointed  out  that  “industrialisation  was  the  central  task  of  the 
transition  period,  the  basis  for  the  development  of  productive  forces”.  But 
to  develop  industry,  agriculture  and  forestry  had  to  be  promoted.  Along 
with  strengthening  defences  and  state  security,  safeguarding  the  sove¬ 
reignty,  national  independence  and  the  new  system,  the  task  was  set,  “to 
defend  reliably,  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  the  people  of  Vietnam  and  Kam¬ 
puchea,  the  outpost  of  the  world  socialist  system  in  the  region,  and  to 
contribute  effectively  to  the  cause  of  peace,  national  independence,  demo¬ 
cracy  and  socialism  throughout  the  world”. 

In  celebrating  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  LPDR,  the  people  of  Laos 
i-take  legitimate  pride  in  the  achievements  they  have  scored  in  building  the 
new  society.  In  1980,  the  country  produced  enough  foodstuffs  to  satisfy,  in 
the  main,  the  population’s  requirements.  There  was  a  bumper  rice  crop  in 
1984—1.3  million  tons,  that  is:  approximately  354  kilograms  per  capita, 
which,  meets  the  targets  of  the  1981-1985  national  development  plan  (the 
corrpponding  figure  for  1976  was  700  thousand  tons).  The  number  of 
cattle  went  up,  reaching  1.5  million  as  against  900  thousand  in  1976. 

,  As  many  as  2,546  cooperatives  were  set  up  in  the  country  by  1985, 
which  unite  41  per  cent  of  farmsteads,  and  cultivate  47  per  cent  of  all 
arable  land.  The,  PRPL  pursues  the  policy  of  organising  peasant  coope- 
rativqs  on  strictly  voluntary  principles.  Cooperatives  are  given  financial 
and  technical  assistance,  fertilizer  and  seeds. 

Much  attention  is  given  to  the  development  of  forestry.  There  are  25 
timber  felling  farms  in  Laos  which  produce  more  than  200  thousand  cubic 
metres  of  timber  annually.  At  the  same  time,  they  are  carryinsf  out  work 
on  restoring  forests  of  valuable  trees . 

Also  built  during  the  past  decade  were  repair  works  for  automobiles 
ana  farm  machinery,  a  mixed  fodder  plant,  brick-yards,  a  cannery,  a  large 
oil  rpervoire,  and  a  vaccine-producing  enterprise.  The  capacity  of  the 

country  s  biggest  power  station  in  Nam  Ngym  is  estimated  at  ISO  thou¬ 
sand  kw. 

The  government  gives  due  consideration  to  the  development  of  commu- 


121 


nications.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  Laos  has  no  railways,  automobiles  are 
the  chief  means  of  transportation  of  goods  between  regions,  and  of  com- 
modities  delivery  from  Vietnam’s  sea  ports.  The  reconstruction  of  the  old 
roads  and  building  of  new  ones,  linking  key  centres  and  regions,  is  yet 
another  task  facing  Laos.  Priority  is  given  to  road  No.  9,  leading  to  Viet¬ 
nam,  and  to  road  No.  13,  crossing  the  country  from  north  to  south.  Roads 
are  under  construction  to  make  it  possible  to  transport  farm  produce  from 
remote  areas  and  supplying  the  population  with  necessities  there. 

Particularly  impressive  are  the  achievements  scored  by  Laos  in  the 
sphere  of  education  and  public  health.  Prior  to  independence,  more  than 
90  per  cent  of  the  population  could  neither  read  nor  write.  The  literacy 
campaign  was  launched  in  liberated  areas  as  soon  as  the  invaders  had 
been  driven  out  of  the  country.  General  and  vocational  schools  were  set 
up  there,  and  by  late  1983  illiteracy  had  been  done  away  with  in  the  main. 

The  number  of  medical  institutions  grew  from  406  in  1976  to  837  in  1984, 
of  beds  from  6,178  to  8,970  and  of  medical  personnel— from  5,022  to  8,414. 
Free  medical  care  was  introduced  in  Laos  in  1976.  These  measures  led  to 
a  considerable  decline  in  sickness  and  death  rates. 

The  Lao  leadership  pointed  out  that  the  achievements  could  have  been 
much  more  significant  but  for  the  need  to  preserve  the  country’s  security. 
The  forces  of  counterrevolution  which  have  taken  refuge  in  neighbouring 
Thailand  keep  up  their  subversive  activities  against  democratic  Laos  and 
are  supported  by  the  imperialist  powers.  There  is  also  much  room  for 
improvement  in  relations  with  Thailand.  In  1984,  the  Thai  military  staged 
an  armed  provocation  against  Laos  and  seized  three  villages.  Haying 
received  a  rebuff,  the  invaders  had  to  retreat.  Yet,  part  of  Lao  territory 
remains  under  their  control. 

The  PRPL  and  the  LPDR  government  work  to  secure  the  national 
sovereignty  and  security  of  Laos,  relying  primarily  on  the  unity  and  soli¬ 
darity  of  the  three  Indochina  states — Laos,  Vietnam  and  Kanipuchea.  The 
experience  of  the  joint  struggle  against  the  common  enemy  vividly  shows 
that  revolutionary  unity  is  a  sine  qua  non  of  all  the  successes  attained 
by  the  three  nations  in  the  cause  of  building  socialism,  in  defence  of  their 
revolutionary  gains.  Their  unity  is  an  important  factor  for  ensuring  and 
promoting  peace  in  Southeast  Asia. 

Along  with  fraternal  Vietnam  and  Kampuchea,  the  Lao  People’s  De¬ 
mocratic  Republic  works  to  improve  the  climate  in  Southeast  Asia,  to 
turn  the  area  into  a  zone  of  peace,  stability,  goodneighbourliness  and 
cooperation.  Thus,  at  their  11th  conference  held  in  Pnompenh  last  August, 
the  foreign  ministers  of  the  three  states  put  forward  new  initiatives  which 
could  provide  a  basis  for  a  dialogue  between  the  Indochina  countries  and 
ASEAN. 

Laos  enjoys  high  prestige  among  peaceloving  forces.  It  actively  parti¬ 
cipates  in  discussions  of  pressing  problems  of  the  day,  held  at  the  UN, 
within  the  nonaligned  movement  and  at  other  international  forums.  These 
problems  include  the  struggle  for  peace  and  international  security,  pre¬ 
vention  of  a  nuclear  holocaust,  and  the  restructuring  of  international 
economic  relations  on  a  just  basis.  Fraternal  Laos  invariably  gives  its 
backing  to  the  Soviet  Union’s  initiatives  which  are  aimed  at  halting  the 
arms  race,  at  preventing  its  spreading  to  outer  space  and  averting  a  nuc¬ 
lear  war. 

Last  year,  the  Soviet  Union  and  Laos  marked  the  25th  anniversary 
of  the  establishment  of  diplomatic  relations  between  them.  At  all  stages 
of  the  heroic  struggle  for  national  and  social  liberation,  the  Lao  people 
have  enjoyed  the  comprehensive  support  and  assistance  of  the  Soviet 
Union  and  the  fraternal  solidarity  of  the  Soviet  people. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


CSO:  1812/94 


122 


AMERICAN  CONCEPTS  OF  CHINESE  POLITICAL  CULTURE  CRITICIZED 


Moscow  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA  in  Russian  No  4,  Oct-Dec  85  (signed  to  press 
25  Nov  85)  pp  123-130 

[Article  by  Ye.  V.  Yaklmova,  candidate  of  philosophy:  "Lucian  Pye*s  Interpre¬ 
tation  of  the  Chinese  Political  Culture  (Procedural  Questions)"] 

[Text]  The  unique  history  of  China’s  sociopolitical  development  and  the  need 
to  predict  contemporary  political  processes  in  the  country  have  aroused  the 
interest  of  a  number  of  American  Sinologists  in  the  specific  features  of  the 
Chinese  political  culture  for  at  least  two  decades.  "Political  culture"  is  a 
relatively  new  term  in  the  bourgeois  social  sciences.  The  history  of  its 
establishment  is  associated  with  the  names  of  American  political  scientists 
G.  Almond  and  S.  Verba,  who  began  elaborating  the  theory  and  methodology  of 
comparative  political  studies  at  the  end  of  the  1950’ s.l 

The  development  of  comparative  political  studies  focused  the  interest  of 
bourgeois  social  scientists  on  the  differing  effects  of  the  same  political 
institutions  and  standards  under  the  conditions  of  different  cultures  and 
social  systems.  The  thorough  study  of  this  topic,  according  to  bourgeois 
researchers  themselves,  was  Impeded  by  the  prevalence  of  descriptive  and 
empirical  studies  in  American  political  science  in  the  1950’ s.  The  need  arose 
to  eliminate  the  existing  gap  between  micro-  and  macro-levels  in  political 
studies — that  is,  to  find  the  link  between  political  psychology  and  cultural 
anthropology,  which  were  concerned  with  the  political  behavior  and  thinking  of 
the  individual,  on  the  one  hand,  and  political  sociology,  with  its  analysis  of 
social  processes,  institutions  and  structures,  on  the  other.  The  concept  of 
the  political  culture — a  lasting  set  of  specific  cultural  attitudes  toward 
political  objects — ^was  supposed  to  be  this  connecting  link,  according  to  the 
supporters  of  the  new  theory. ^  Behaviorism  and  structural-functional  analysis 
became  the  procedural  basis  of  the  theory  of  political  culture,  and  there  was 
a  unique  "synthesis"  of  sociological  surveys  with  the  techniques  and  methods 
of  psychoanalysis  on  the  "technical"  level. 

It  is  interesting  that  one  of  the  first  theorists  and  propagandists  of  the 
political  culture  theory  was  the  prominent  U.S.  expert  on  Southeast  and 
Chinese  affairs,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Professor  Lucian  Pye.^ 
He  was  a  member  and  then  the  chairman  of  the  Comparative  Political  Studies 
Committee  of  the  Research  Council  on  the  Social  Sciences  (1954-1963) ,  a 


123 


iTGsearch  associate  in  the  MIT  School  of  Comparative  Political  Studies  and  an 
active  researcher  of  the  Chinese  political  culture.  The  works  of  L.  Pye  are  a 
good  illustration  of  contemporary  American  Sinology's  characteristic  expansion 
of  its  traditional  framework  with  the  aid  of  the  procedural  and  ideological 
instruments  of  the  bourgeois  social  sciences,  including  the  techniques  of 
interdisciplinary  analysis.^  Soviet  Sinology,  which  uses  the  scientific  pro¬ 
cedures  of  Marxism-Leninism,  is  distinguished  today  by  the  use  of  the  achieve¬ 
ments  of  materialistic  philosophy,  sociology  and,  in  particular,  social 
pscyhology.  Aspects  of  the  PRC  political  culture  and  the  distinctive  features 
of  the  contemporary  functioning  of  traditional  forms  of  political  administra¬ 
tion  and  power  mechanisms  have  recently  been  topics  of  constant  interest  to 
Soviet  Sinologists. 5  Discerning  analyses  of  the  interdisciplinary  studies  of 
bourgeois  Sinologists,  including  L.  Pye's  works  on  the  PRC  political  culture, 
seem  relevant  in  this  connection.  Marxist  analyses  of  these  studies  are  all 
the  more  necessary  now  that  the  political  realities  of  present-day  China  with 
its  relatively  stable  sociocultural  traditions  are  providing  some  grounds  for 
superficial  analogies  and  historical  parallels  that  often  contain  a  tendentious 
approach  to  PRC  history  and  anticoiranunism  in  various  disguises . 

Pye  defines  the  political  culture  as  the  "set  of  relations,  beliefs  and  feel¬ 
ings  which  give  the  political  process  order  and  significance  and  the 

basis  of  the  assumptions  and  standards  governing  political  behavior. "o  The 
political  culture,  in  his  opinion,  is  an  Important  link  in  the  chain  of  rela¬ 
tions  between  political  events  and  the  reactions  of  individuals  to  these 
events.  "We  are  not  concerned  with  what  happens  in  the  objective  world  of 
politics,"  explains  S.  Verba,  a  colleague  of  L.  Pye's,  "but  with  what  people 
believe  about  politics,  how  they  perceive  current  political  events  and  how 
they  interpret  political  realities."^  In  other  words,  in  the  interpretation 
of  L.  Pye,  G.  Almond,  S.  Verba,  J.  Coleman  and  C.  Bier,  the  political  culture 
is  a  "subjective  dimension"  of  politics,  a  constant  set  of  models  of  political 
perception,  behavior  and  thinking,  which  express  the  meaning  and  significance 
of  political  processes  to  their  adherents  and  define  the  content  and  limits  of 
the  political  existence  of  these  adherents. 

The  theories  of  American  social  scientists  about  the  political  culture  have 
been  analyzed  quite  thoroughly  in  Soviet  philosophical  literature,  and  all 
researchers  have  unanimously  underscored  the  extremely  subjective  and  exces-^ 
sively  psychological  interpretation  of  this  concept  by  Western  science.  This 
indisputably  justified  appraisal  of  the  bourgeois  theory  of  the  political 
culture  applies  completely  to  the  works  of  L.  Pye,  where  the  term  political 
culture"  not  only  defines  the  subject  matter  of  specific  research  projects, 
but  also  defines  the  research  method,  thereby  turning  into  a  definite  theory 
of  PRC  political  history. 

Pye's  definition  of  the  political  culture  includes  primarily  non- 
instltutionalized  aspects  of  the  political  process  and  is  more  likely  to 
focus  the  researcher's  attention  on  models  of  political  behavior  and  thinking 
than  on  actual  processes.  Furthermore,  in  works  on  PRC  history,  the  author 
deliberately  separates  his  analysis  from  actual  political  institutions  and 
ideological  structures  in  an  attempt  to  recreate  the  "spirit"  of  Chinese 
politics  and  construct  an  ideal  model.  Is  this  kind  of  abstraction  justifiable 
from  the  procedural  standpoint? 


124 


In  Marxist  literature  there  is  still  no  unanimous  view  on  the  issue  of  the 
political  culture,  and  the  meaning  of  this  phenomenon  and  approaches  to  its 
investigation  are  still  being  debated.  Furthermore,  some  researchers  view  the 
political  culture  as  Institutionalized  political  forms  (Institutions,  struc¬ 
tures,  establishments  and  legal  standards)  and  non- institutionalized  forms 
(political  behavior,  knowledge,  values  and  sociopsychological  attitudes) 

Others  view  the  political  culture  as  a  set  of  stereotypes  rather  than  as  the 
actual  set  of  behavior,  attitudes  and  emotional  reactions,  but  they  acknow¬ 
ledge  the  need  to  adjust  theories  with  the  aid  of  analyses  of  political  reality. 
The  supporters  of  the  last  point  of  view  see  the  political  culture  as  "a  unique 
sociopsychological  sphere  of  the  political  system"  and  a  "means  of  political 
existence  and  a  form  of  political  organization. "10 

Without  going  into  the  details  of  these  debates,  we  can  presume  the  validity 
of  studies  of  politico-cultural  phenomena  from  the  standpoint  of  their  inter¬ 
nal,  primarily  sociopsychological  content  and  the  subjective  "meaning"  of 
politics  for  participants  in  this  kind  of  activity.  Obviously,  this  aspect  of 
research  must  be  included  in  the  general  theory  of  the  political  culture. 
Agreement  must  also  be  reached  on  the  objective  basis  of  the  sociopsyqhologi- 
cal  sphere  of  politics  and  on  its  relationship  to  political  ideology — that  is, 
on  the  factors  determining  the  modification  and  development  of  the  society's 
political  culture.  Here  we  find  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  views  of 
bourgeois  and  Marxist  social  scientists. 

Soviet  researchers  of  the  political  culture  underscore  the  indirect  connection 
between  this  superstructural  element  of  the  social  system  and  its  socioeconomic 
basis  and  explain  the  class-related  nature  of  cultural-political  phenomena  and 
their  differing  dependence  on  the  prevailing  ideology.  In  the  works  of  L.  Pye 
and  other  bourgeois  political  scientists,  however,  there  is  only  the  mention 
of  the  correspondence  of  features  of  the  political  culture  to  the  reversals  of 
social  history  and  the  personal-psychological  "baggage"  of  its  contemporary 
subjects.  Furthermore,  the  national  historical  experience  is  Isolated  from 
socioeconomic  dynamics^  and  the  personal  aspect  is  reduced  (in  the  spirit  of 
behaviorism,  seasoned  with  the  "psychology  of  the  subconscious")  to  uncon¬ 
scious  reactions  to  political  stimuli.  As  for  the  influence  of  ideology, 
according  to  L.  Pye  and  S.  Verba,  it  is  significant  only  if  the  society  has  no 
"distinct  primitive  beliefs. "^2  xn  L.  Pye's  definitions,  therefore,  priority 
in  the  formation  of  the  political  culture  belongs  to  unconscious  impulses  and 
elements  of  ordinary  thinking,  to  the  detriment  of  ideological  and  scientific 
factors.  In  line  with  this  approach,  the  American  political  scientist  ignores 
the  social-class  aspect  of  the  political  culture,  subordinating  class-related 
differences  in  political  attitudes  to  their  national  "distinction."  The 
historical  aspect  of  politico-cultural  phenomena  is  reduced  in  his  works  to 
the  problem  of  transmitting  the  culture  to  different  generations  within  the 
framework  of  general  or  political  socialization.  Furthermore,  the  historlco- 
cultural  experience  is  interpreted  as  the  strict  predetermination  of  timeless 
stereotypes  of  political  behavior,  setting  Inevitable  limits  on  the  prospects 
and  parameters  of  historical  development.  "In  some  societies,"  L.  Pye 
stresses,  "the  traditional  political  culture  represents  a  perfect  foundation 
for  democratic  evolution,  while  in  others  the  prevailing  tendencies  are  more 
compatible  with  authoritarian  patterns. 


125 


An  analysis  of  L.  Pye’s  beliefs  about  the  political  culture  indicates  their 
considerable  theoretical  limitations.  The  American  political  scientist 
ignores  an  aspect  of  the  political  culture  as  important  as  the  influence  of 
the  changing  social  system  on  current  politico-cultural  and  sociopsychological 
stereotypes.  As  a  result,  the  sociopsychological  aspect  of  the  political  cul¬ 
ture,  divested  of  objective  assessment  criteria,  becomes  a  self-contained, 
"fatal"  factor  of  social  development.  This  approach  leads  to  the  extremely 
arbitrary  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  social  history  and  to  the  substi¬ 
tution  of  artificial,  formal  schemes  for  its  objective  laws.  This  tendency 
was  also  quite  distinct  in  Pye’s  analysis  of  the  PRC  political  culture. 

The  American  Sinologist's  works  on  this  topic  reveal  two  levels  of  research 
which  are  far  from  equal  from  the  scientific  standpoint.  The  first  is  the 
group  of  Pye's  hypotheses  intended  to  rearrange  the  facts  of  contemporary 
Chinese  history  to  conform  to  his  analytical  premises.  These  hypotheses  con¬ 
stitute  a  "theory"  of  the  Chinese  political  culture,  the  abstract  and  specu¬ 
lative  nature  of  which  is  acknowledged  repeatedly  even  by  the  author. 

Specific  facts  about  the  country's  history  and  culture  (among  which  Pye 
includes  his  own  memories  of  his  childhood  in  China,  the  testimony  of  emi¬ 
grants  in  Hong  Kong,  reports  in  the  Chinese  press  and  studies  by  American 
Sinologists)  are  assigned  an  illustrative  role.^^  The  main  function  of  his 
"theory"  consists  in  presenting  the  events  and  prospects  of  PRC  political 
history  as  the  set  of  "national  and  personal  features  which  formed  and 
inspired  the  Chinese  political  culture  since  the  time  of  the  Manchurians  to 
our  day."^^ 

In  addition  to  this  "theory,"  which  arranges  political  processes  in  the 
country  to  fit  the  author's  a  priori  hypotheses,  several  observations  and 
remarks  can  be  found  in  Pye's  books  and  articles  about  the  distinctive 
features  and  permanent  characteristics  of  political  practices  in  the  PRC — 
that  is,  real  elements  of  the  Chinese  political  culture.  This  fragmented, 
and  not  always  Indisputable  from  the  Marxist  standpoint,  but  unquestionably 
interesting  "portrait"  of  the  Chinese  political  culture  exists  apart  from  the 
American  political  scientist's  "theory"  and  sometimes  even  contradicts  some 
of  its  premises. 

The  lack  of  correspondence  between  the  "theory"  and  the  "portrait"  in  Pye's 
works  is  the  result  of  the  Inaccurate  beliefs  of  bourgeois  social  scientists 
about  the  political  culture  and  the  laws  of  social  development.  The  ldeologi~ 
cal  aims  of  the  American  political  scientist  and  his  attempt  to  prove  the 
impossibility  of  establishing  an  "orthodox-Marxist"  social  order  in  China  also 
played  an  important  role  here.  These  are  the  main  reasons  for  the  shifting 
emphasis  in  Pye's  works  from  "central  hypotheses"  to  the  periphery  of  isolated 
remarks  about  facts. 

The  "theory"  of  the  Chinese  political  culture  is  explained  primarily  in  two 
of  Pye's  works,  related  by  a  common  intention  and  common  procedural  princip¬ 
les. The  first  book  is  a  study  of  the  "spirit"  of  Chinese  politics  after 
the  Xinghai  revolution  (in  isolation  from  specific  political  institutions  and 
ideological  systems) — that  is,  primarily  the  mass  political  culture i  The 
second  work  concentrates  on  the  political  culture  of  the  elite,  the  dynamics 


126 


of  Chinese  politics.  In  contrast  to  the  first  work,  in  which  Pye  mentions 
historical  facts  only  in  passing,  in  the  second  book  his  theorizing  is  based 
on  an  analysis  of  the  political  situation  in  the  PRC  after  Mao  Zedong.  Even 
here,  however,  the  sociopolitical  context  is  only  a  supplement  to  his 
speculations. 

The  inaccuracy  of  the  absolute  isolation  of  models  of  the  political  culture, 
whether  "elite"  or  mass,  from  their  actual  functioning  in  political  practices 
was  already  mentioned  above;  it  is  precisely  in  establishments  and  structures 
that  the  changing  social  content  of  traditional  behavioral  stereotypes  is 
"manifested."  Declining  to  engage  in  an  integral  and  concrete-historical 
study  of  the  Chinese  political  culture,  Pye  advances  a  number  of  a  priori 
hypotheses  about  the  content  and  "driving  forces"  of  politics  in  the  PRC. 

The  reversals  in  contemporary  Chinese  history,  the  American  political  scien¬ 
tist  suggests,  revolve  around  the  central  problem  of  suppressing  the  "aggres¬ 
sive  mental  impulses  of  the  masses"  and  finding  a  strong  and  authoritarian 
leader.  The  traditional  Chinese  culture,  Pye  stresses,  imposed  an  absolute 
ban  on  any  display  of  the  "aggressive"  impulses  of  the  individual,  subordinat¬ 
ing  the  individual's  desires  to  the  needs  of  the  social  group.  The  Confucian 
ethic  with  its  strict  regulation  of  sociopolitical  and  family  relations, 
glorification  of  the  supreme  authority  and  imperative  of  filial  respect,  the 
author  continues,  was  a  strong  social  precept  restraining  these  aggressive 
impulses.  The  fear  of  "unleashed  aggression"  and  "social  chaos"  compelled 
the  Chinese  who  had  been  raised  in  the  traditional  spirit  of  Confucianism  to 
submit  completely  to  a  strong  authority,  and  this  was  regarded  as  a  guarantee 
of  their  personal  well-being  and  national  grandeur.  This  was  the  origin,  in 
the  opinion  of  the  American  political  scientist,  of  the  main  feature  of  the 
Chinese  political  culture — the  assumption  of  political  dependence. 

The  events  of  the  early  20th  century  (the  fall  of  the  Qing  empire,  the 
internal  strife  between  militarists,  the  struggle  against  Japanese  aggression 
and  the  civil  wars) ,  Pye  continues,  led  to  extreme  political  instability  in 
the  country  and  to  the  decline  of  China’s  international  prestige.  The  conse¬ 
quent  lack  of  a  strong  and  permanent  authority,  or  what  Pye  terms  the  socio- 
psychological  "authoritarian  vacuum,"  had  to  be  corrected  as  quickly  as 
possible,  especially  since  the  traditional  institutions  of  socialization  were 
still  cultivating  the  spirit  of  nationalism  and  the  "authoritarian  ideal"  in 
the  Chinese  mind.  Diverging  from  bourgeois  Sinology’s  common  interpretation 
of  the  Chinese  revolution  as  a  "revolt  of  the  weak  against  the  strong,"  the 
American  political  scientist  sees  the  goal  of  the  revolutionary  actions  of  the 
Chinese  masses  as  the  establishment  of  a  strict  totalitarian  regime  and  the 
acquisition  of  the  desired  political  dependence.  The  1949  revolution,  he 
writes,  was  a  "collective  confirmation  by  the  people  of  their  need  for  a 
stronger  authority" — a  need  which  could  not  be  satisfied  by  the  militarists 
or  the  Kuomintang.  This  kind  of  authority  was  exercised,  in  Pye’s  opinion, 
by  the  Chinese  communists  led  by  Mao  Zedong.  Concluding  his  remarks  on  this 
subject,  the  author  stresses  that  the  Chinese  had  no  other  historical  alter¬ 
native  but  "communism,"  to  which  they  were  "predisposed"  by  virtue  of  their 
’*national  authoritarian  crisis." 


127 


This  is  a  general  review  of  Pye*s  line  of  reasoning.  It  must  be  said  that  his 
ideological  tendentiousness  clearly  prevails  over  his  academic  interest  in  the 
subject.  This  is  specifically  attested  to  by  the  author's  selective  approach 
to  the  explanation  of  politico-cultural  phenomena.  In  essence,  Pye  asks 
relevant  questions  about  the  influence  of  the  traditional  cultural  heritage 
on  political  behavior  and  thinking  in  present-day  China.  As  Soviet  Sinologists 
have  pointed  out,  the  relative  autonomy  of  politics  and  the  history  of  Chinese 
political  affairs  necessitate  the  analysis  and  consideration  of  the  system  of 
traditions,  which  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  the  country's  political  culture. 

The  American  political  scientist,  however,  deliberately  confines  the  issue  of 
politico-cultural  continuity  to  the  "fundamental"  conformity  and  passivity  of 
the  Chinese  people.  "Whether  the  Chinese  act  as  reactionary-traditionalists 
or  revolutionary— ref ormists ,  they  are  always  primarily  conformists,  Pye 
asserts.  In  this  way,  the  author  strives  to  substantiate  the  natural  politico- 
cultural  tendency  toward  the  "authoritarian"  form  of  political  rule  in  contem¬ 
porary  China.  Here  he  ignores  all  of  the  elements  of  the  cultural-political 
heritage  (the  traditions  of  the  peasant  rebellions  and  national  liberation 
struggle  or  the  non-Confucian  aspects  of  the  mass  consciousness,  etc.)  which 
contradict  his  thesis  about  the  correspondence  of  the  "totalitarian  communist 
regime"  to  the  centuries-old  traditions  of  the  Chinese  people. 

The  anti-Marxist  thrust  of  Pye's  theory  even  extended  to  an  apology  for  Mao 
Zedong's  socioeconomic  "experiments."  The  author  saw  one  of  the  Chinese  polit¬ 
ical  culture's  characteristic  features  in  the  desire  to  avoid  situations  of 
choice  and  responsibility  (as  possible  sources  of  conflict)  by  adhering  to  the 
canons  of  social  behavior  "sanctified"  by  Confucius  or  Mao  Zedong.  For  this 
reason,  Pye  believes  that  the  "excesses  of  the  system,"  such  as  the  Cultural 
Revolution,"  should  be  ascribed  less  to  the  country's  leadership  than  to  the 
Chinese  society's  allegedly  characteristic,  "almost  instinctive"  submissive 
reaction  to  socially  assigned  programs  of  behavior.!^  In  other  words,  tra¬ 
ditional  Chinese  psychological  stereotypes  are  responsible  for  what  the 
author  terms  Mao  Zedong's  "fanatical"  political  style. 

V 

In  addition  to  displaying  obvious  political  tendentiousness,  these  quotations 
from  the  American  Sinologist's  works  attest  to  serious  defects  in  his  set  of 
methods.  The  author  equates  the  political  and  interpersonal  levels  of  social 
Interaction,  confining  the  essence  of  politico-cultural  phenomena  to  the 
imperatives  of  familial  ethics .  It  is  true  that  the  Confucian  regulation  of 
roles  played  a  significant  part  in  the  conflict-free  regulation  of  interpersonal 
relations  by  helping  the  Individual  "foresee"  his  partner's  accepted  reaction 
in  any  given  situation  and  facilitated  the  choice  of  "assigned"  forms  of 
behavior.  It  is  probably  accurate  to  discern  signs  of  traditional  behavioral 
stereotypes  (actually  maintained  by  the  contemporary  political  system)  in  some 
features  of  the  PRC  mass  political  culture,  but  it  would  be  absolutely  wrong  to 
confuse  the  cultural  peculiarities  of  political  behavior  with  deep-seated 
sociohlstorical  causes  (as  Pye  does) ,  which  are  connected  with  the  class  nature 
of  society  and  its  political  system. 

In  Pye's  works,  psychoanalysis  is  substituted  for  a  social— class  analysis  of 
political  relations  and  the  political  culture,  and  it  is  from  psychoanalysis 


128 


that  the  author  derives  the  main  arguments  for  his  "hypotheses Analyzing, 
for  example,  such  features  of  the  Chinese  political  culture  as  the  developed 
sense  of  ethnic  pride,  the  identification  of  personal  immortality  with 
national  grandeur,  the  heightened  sense  of  national  humiliation  and  so  forth, 
Pye  talks  about  the  "narcissism"  of  the  Chinese  national  character,  the  dis^ 
tlnctive  nature  of  the  Chinese  people’s  "Oedipus  complex"  and  other  indispen¬ 
sable  attributes  of  Freudian  theory. 

Obviously,  the  portrait  he  paints  of  Chinese  civilization,  based  on  "aggres¬ 
sion,"  is  just  as  far  removed  from  real  history  as  the  classical  Freudian 
arguments  about  Western  Europe’s  pan-sexuality.  But  the  reasons  for  the 
inaccuracy  of  Pye’s  arguments  and  hypotheses  are  not  confined  to  his  fascina¬ 
tion  with  Freudian  myths.  The  main  role  here  is  played  by  the  obvious  exag¬ 
geration  of  the  importance  of  the  sociopsychological  factor  in  social 
development,  and  this  is  what  turns  Pye’s  theory  of  political  culture  into  a 
variety  of  philosophical  idealism.  The  American  political  scientist  reduces 
the  entire  group  of  causes  of  the  popular  revolution  in  China  exclusively  to 
sociopsychological  problems.  He  ignores  the  class  and  ideological  content  of 
the  revolutionary  process  in  the  country  and  the  authority  and  influence  of 
Marxist-Leninist  ideas  among  the  masses  and  proclaims  the  "people’s  released 
emotional  energy"  to  be  the  generator  of  Chinese  history.  Here  Pye  substan¬ 
tially  distorts  not  only  the  emotional  content  but  also  the  social  thrust  of 
progressive  democratic  movements  in  the  country  at  the  beginning  of  the  century 
by  comparing  them  to  the  unconscious  "Oedlpal  rebellion"  of  youth  against 
parental  authority.  Since,  in  Pye’s  opinion,  the  Confucian  requirement  of 
filial  respect  excluded  the  possibility  of  the  resolution  of  the  "Oedlpal 
conflict"  within  the  family,  its  psychological  Import  was  transferred  to 
"abstractions"  such  as  national  Independence,  democracy  and  freedom.  "The 
rigid,  self-assured  and  naively  moralistic  style  distinguishes  the  Chinese 
revolutionary  spirit,"  the  author  concludes,  "is  probably  directly  related  to 
the  psychology  of  youthful  rebellion. The  main  purpose  of  this  theory, 
just  as  others  like  it,  is  the  misrepresentation  of  the  actual  content  and 
purpose  of  the  popular  movement  and  its  explanation  in  terms  of  irrational 
psychological  factors  rather  than  social  causes.  Pye’s  "explanations,"  there¬ 
fore,  are  intended  to  confirm  his  main  thesis  about  the  fundamentally  undemo¬ 
cratic  nature  of  the  political  culture  in  China. 

Pye’s  theory  of  political  culture,  in  the  form  it  had  taken  by  the  end  of  the 
1960’s,  was  based  primarily  on  the  traditional  principles  of  intrafamilial 
socialization  in  old  China,  which,  in  the  author’s  opinion,  formed  the  politi¬ 
cal  culture  of  the  participants  in  the  Chinese  revolution  and  of  its  leaders. 
Even  then,  however,  the  American  political  scientist  already  foresaw  definite 
changes  in  the  sociopsychological  atmosphere  of  the  PRC  and  the  inevitable 
reorientation  of  social  aims  and  attitudes  under  the  conditions  of  the  Maoist 
(and  post-Maoist)  political  system.  Nevertheless,  when  he  returned  to  this 
topic  13  years  later,  Pye  continued  to  employ  his  earlier  "hypotheses,"  this 
time  to  explain  the  accepted  political  standards  of  the  Chinese  elite. 

The  central  idea  in  Pye’s  new  work  was  that  the  eternal  conflict  between  the 
need  for  universal  conformity,  dictated  by  the  Confucian  ideal  of  social 
harmony,  and  the  desire  of  people  for  reliable  interpersonal  relations,  which 
gradually  lead  to  the  formation  of  social  groups  or  factions,  violating  the 


129 


principle  of  consensus  with  their  private  interests,  lies  at  the  basis  of^ 
domestic  political  processes  in  China.  This  conflict,  in  Pye^s  opinion,  is 
seen  on  all  rungs  of  the  social  ladder  in  the  PRC,  from  the  CCP  Central 
Committee  leadership  to  low-ranking  personnel  on  the  local  level,  giving  rise 
to  the  "factional  style"  of  the  elite  political  culture. 

The  American  political  scientist  singles  out  the  established  Confucian  prin¬ 
ciples  of  age  and  clan  community  among  the  factors  influencing  the  formation 
of  factions  in  China.  In  his  opinion,  bureaucratic  and  regional  interests  are 
less  important  because  institutional  or  "geographic"  privileges  are  too 
obviously  in  conflict  with  the  traditional  ideal  of  consensus. 

As  for  political  motives,  in  Pye^s  opinion,  they  do  not  play  the  leading  role 
in  the  creation  of  factions  in  China,  although  they  are  important.  Obviously, 
groups  within  the  PRC  usually  have  differing  political  leanings,  the  author 
remarks,  but  it  would  be  wrong  to  conclude  from  this  that  factions  in  China 
arise  as  a  result  of  the  political  attitudes  of  their  members. 

According  to  Confucian  tradition,  Pye  stresses,  politics  should  reflect  the 
moral  perfection  of  the  ruler.  This  is  not  the  place  for  considerations  of 
greed  and  ambition,  which  are  precisely  what  lie  at  the  basis  of  factional 
rivalry.  The  separation  of  "politics"  from  "power"  in  the  national  mind  (on 
the  level  of  social  psychology)  was  promoted,  in  Pye’s  opinion,  by  the  tra-^ 
ditional  principles  of  socialization:  Ideas  about  wisdom  and  moral  perfection 
were  associated  with  the  former,  and  guarantees  of  public  and  personal  safety 
were  associated  with  the  latter  (under  the  conditions  of  "suppressed  aggres¬ 
sion")  .  In  turn,  power  relationships  were  regarded  exclusively  as  the  personal 
relationships  between  the  subordinate  and  the  superior.  These  peculiarities 
of  traditional  political  perception  gave  rise,  according  to  the  American 
political  scientist,  to  a  feature  as  typical  of  PRC  social  reality  as  the 
elite ^s  pretense  of  politico-ideological  consensus,  concealing  the  personal 
disagreements  of  leaders  and  the  fierce  battles  of  factions,  which  were  repre¬ 
hensible  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Confucian  political  culture. 

Pye*s  line  of  reasoning  is  the  following:  The  factional  struggle  in  China  is 
a  struggle  for  power  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  non— political  struggle;  factions 
in  China  are  based  not  on  political  leanings  but  on  personal  ties,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  soclopsychological  compatibility  and  the  search  for  reliable  inter¬ 
personal  relations  between  the  leader  and  the  subordinate. 

Pye^s  paradoxical  thesis  about  the  "apolitical"  nature  of  factional  conflicts 
in  China  is  refuted  by  the  content  of  his  own  study.  As  soon  as  the  author 
begins  a  specific  analysis  of  groups  in  the  upper  echelons  of  the  PRC  leader¬ 
ship,  the  politician  in  him  triumphs  over  the  theorist,  and,  contrary  to  his 
own  theory,  the  author  examines  precisely  the  political  and  ideological  content 
of  factional  arguments,  ignoring  the  "psychological  compatibility  of  the 
members. 

An  analysis  of  the  events  of  the  past  decade  in  China  shows  that  the  situation 
there  is  still  unstable  and  contradictory  and  that  rivalry,  sometimes  covert 
and  sometimes  overt,  between  groups  is  continuing.  This  is  even  acknowledged 


130 


by  the  official  PRC  press,  which  is  now  sounding  appeals  for  the  "complete 
elimination  of  factional  interests  among  cadres,  especially  among  those  of 
administrative  rank,"  and  for  "decisive  measures  to  eliminate  the  remaining 
traces  of  exclusive  group  interests."  Reports  in  the  Chinese  press  on  the 
current  "regulation  of  party  ranks"  constantly  stress  the  need  for  struggle 
against  various  deviations  in  the  CCP  and  the  importance  of  "securing  the 
Ideological  and  political  unity  of  the  entire  party  with  the  Central  Commit-- 
tee. "23  Publications  in  the  Chinese  press,  therefore,  leave  no  doubt  that 
factional  disagreements  in  the  CCP  are  political  and  ideological. 

At  the  same  time,  there  are  some  actual  features  in  contemporary  Chinese  poli¬ 
tics  which  are  transformed  in  the  American  political  scientist's  false  inter¬ 
pretation  into  the  extravagant  "hypothesis"  about  the  non-political  nature  of 
the  driving  forces  of  Chinese  politics.  These  are,  first  of  all,  a  certain 
lack  of  principles  in  the  factional  struggle  and,  secondly,  the  historically 
engendered  level  of  perception  of  political  relations,  characteristic  of  a 
number  of  countries,  which  are  reflected  in  ordinary  terms  as  primarily  inter¬ 
personal  relations.  Furthermore,  the  objective  political  views  of  the  members 
can  be  of  secondary  Importance. 

To  some  extent,  these  features  are  apparent  in  the  PRC  today,  but  this  does 
not  justify  any  reference  to  the  politico-cultural  Inevitability  of  the  fac¬ 
tional  style  in  China.  The  phenomenon  in  questiohis  more  sociohistorical 
than  regional  or  specific.  The  conflict  between  the  social  ideal  of  politico- 
ideological  consensus  and  the  actual  experience  of  the  constant  factional 
struggle  in  China  stems  from  completely  definite  and  specific  historical  causes 
and  is  therefore  temporary. References  to  "suppressed  aggression"  and  other 
"psychogenic"  aspects  of  the  Confucian  culture  essentially  raise  political 
instability  to  the  level  of  a  permanent  characteristic  of  PRC  social 
development . 

"The  factional  nature  of  Chinese  politics,"  Pye  asserts,  "stems  from  certain 
fundamental  features  of  the  Chinese  culture  and  personality ."25  in  other 
words,  according  to  the  author* s  line  of  reasoning,  traditional  Confucian 
stereotypes  have  doomed  the  Chinese  society  to  the  eternal  reproduction  of 
this  conflict,  regardless  of  the  social-class  nature  of  the  existing  state. 

The  **hypo theses"  presented  above  are  essentially  all  there  is  to  Pye *s  analy¬ 
tical  Interpretation  of  the  Chinese  political  culture.  Several  of  the  author* s 
remarks  about  the  distinctive  features  of  political  reality  in  the  PRC,  how¬ 
ever,  remain  outside  the  framework  of  his  rigid  a  priori  scheme.  These 
remarks  about  the  ’’nuances**  of  the  Chinese  political  culture,  the  interpreta¬ 
tions  of  which  are  sometimes  more  original  than  profound,  make  up  the  politico- 
cultural  "portrait"  of  contemporary  China  in  Pye*s  works.  The  American 
Sinologist’s  remarks  about  the  role  of  ideology  and  the  mass  media  in  the  PRC 
are  of  the  greatest  interest.  The  author  stresses  the  extremely  pragmatic 
nature  of  ideology  in  present-day  China  and  sees  its  main  function  in  disguis¬ 
ing  the  continuous  factional  struggle.  Ideological  campaigns,  according  to 
Pye,  are  primarily  of  a  symbolic  nature  in  the  PRC.  They  are  supposed  to 
reveal  the  potential  adversaries  of  a  given  group  and  simultaneously  conceal 
the  trivial  struggle  for  power  behind  a  struggle  between  slogans  proclaiming 


131 


the  latest  variety  of  politico-ideological  "consensus In  the  opinion  of 
the  American  political  scientist,  the  ideological  maneuvers  of  the  PRC  leaders 
are  connected  to  some  degree  with  their  political  programs,  but  it  is  quite 
difficult  to  determine  where  personal  conflicts  end  and  political  considera-  , 
tions  take  over. 

The  ideological  camouflage  of  the  factional  struggle,  Pye  says,  is  the  job  of 
the  official  press  in  the  PRC,  functioning  less  to  inform  the  masses  than  to 
mobilize  them  in  support  of  competing  groups.  This  mobilization  is  accomp¬ 
lished  with  the  aid  of  ideological  symbols,  code  names,  allegories  and  so 
forth.  As  a  result,  Chinese  sociopolitical  rhetoric  acquires  the  appearance 
of  fantastic  hyperbole:  The  more  incredible  the  current  slogan  sounds  from 
the  standpoint  of  common  sense,  the  more  easily  the  loyalty  of  leaders  and 
their  factions  can  be  verified  with  its  help.  In  this  way,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  American  political  scientist,  a  "symbolic  political  dimension"  is  being 
constructed  in  the  PRC— that  is,  a  special  illusory  world  of  symbols  and  alle¬ 
gories,  sometimes  quite  far  removed  from  political  reality.  ' 

The  author  seeks  the  reasons  for  this  in  the  specific  nature  of  the  Chinese 
political  culture,  in  the  "inevitable"  struggle  bfetween  elite  groups.  Although 
this  interpretation  is  not  entirely  unjustified,  it  is  nevertheless  quite 
superficial.  Attempts  to  symbolize  political  ideology  are  quite  typical  of 
China  and  of  some  other  countries.  This  is  partly  the  result  of  the  need  to 
adapt  abstract  ideological  doctrines  to  the  actual  level  of  mass  consciousness . 
To  this  end,  the  cause-and-effect  relationships  between  complex  ideological 
terms  are  replaced  with  symbols  and  metaphors  to  create  a  specific  emotional 
mood,  "cancelling"  the  need  for  theoretical  explanations  (for  example,  "American 
imperialism  is  a  paper  tiger"  or  "The  east  wind  will  conquer  the  west  wind") . 
Furthermore,  the  effectiveness  of  these  Ideological  symbols  does  not  depend  on 
their  correspondence  to  the  real  state  of  affairs  for  some  time.  Of  course, 
this  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  the  manipulation  of  ideological  sym¬ 
bols  in  the  interests  of  the  power  struggle,  referred  to  by  Pye. 

Analyzing  the  distinctive  features  of  the  mass  media  in  the  PRC,  the  American 
political  scientist  mentions  the  pervasive  and  quite  unique  use  of  allegories 
and  "code  names,"  usually  understandable  to  the  broad  masses  before  things 
can  be  called  by  their  own  names.  In  Pye's  opinion,  this  game  with  the 
audience,  which  easily  comprehends  the  underlying  meaning  of  press  and  radio 
reports,  is  employed  to  produce  the  "effect  of  mass  participation"  in  the 
current  political  campaign  and  accomplish  "shared  responsibility"  for  its 
results.  The  author  also  points  out  another  characteristic  feature  of  PRC 
politics— the  predominance  of  moral  criticism  of  disgraced  politicians  Instead 
of  references  to  their  political  mistakes.  He  sees  the  reason  for  this  in  the 
tenacity  of  the  Confucian  idea  of  the  indissoluble  connection  between  politics 
and  morality.  In  present-day  China,  Pye  believes,  this  tradition  is  reinforced 
by  the  strong  taboo  against  the  acknowledgement  of  objective  political  dis¬ 
agreements,  which  turns  political  arguments  into  a  "moral— ideological"  conflict. 

Therefore,  in  the  PRC  political  culture,  Pye  stresses,  the  bankruptcy  of  a 
policy  line  is  associated  primarily  with  the  personal  shortcomings  of  the 
policymakers.  For  this  reason,  moral  exposure  simultaneously  signifies  a 


132 


discredited  political  platform.  The  tendency  to  equate  political  and  moral 
characteristics  is  also  used  by  Pye  to  explain  the  arbitrary  use  of  social- 
class  labels  in  Chinese  political  criticism,  which  lose  their  objective  mean¬ 
ing  and  become  a  means  of  political  reprisal, 28  As  for  the  public  castigation 
of  politicians,  the  author  associates  this  practice  with  the  traditional 
methods  of  socialization  in  China,  particularly  the  educative  role  of  shame 
and  public  censure. 

Concluding  this  critical  survey  of  L.  Pye's  studies  of  the  Chinese  political 
culture,  we  must  underscore  the  fact  that,  in  his  interpretation,  the  phenom¬ 
ena  of  the  Chinese  political  culture  exist  not  only  outside  the  specific 
socioeconomic  situation,  but  also  essentially  outside  current  political  events. 
The  American  Sinologist  views  the  Confucian  stereotypes  of  social  psychology 
as  specifically  national  constants  of  Chinese  politics.  This  extra-historical 
interpretation  of  soclopsychological  phenomena  obviously  cannot  serve  as  a 
valid  methodological  basis  for  the  scientific  sociopolitical  analysis  of  the 
PRC’s  present  and  future. 

FOOTNOTES 

1.  G.  A.  Almond,  "Comparative  Political  Systems,"  THE  JOURNAL  OF  POLITICS, 
1956,  vol  18,  No  3;  G.  A.  Almond  and  S.  Verba,  "The  Civic  Culture: 

Political  Attitudes  and  Democracy  in  Five  Nations,"  Boston-Toronto,  1963. 

2.  "Political  Culture  and  Political  Development,"  Princeton  (N.Y.),  1965. 

3.  L.  W.  Pye,  "Political  Culture,"  in  "International  Encyclopedia  of  the 
Social  Sciences,"  N.Y.,  1968,  vol  12,  pp  218-224;  "Communications  and 
Political  Development,"  Princeton,  1963;  L.  W.  Pye,  "Southeast  Asia's 
Political  Systems,"  Englewood  Cliffs,  1974;  idem,  "The  Spirit  of  Chinese 
Politics,"  Cambridge  (Mass.) -London,  1968;  idem,  "Mass  Participation  in 
Communist  China,"  in  "China:  Management  of  a  Revolutionary  Society," 
London,  1972;  idem,  "Communications  and  Chinese  Political  Culture," 

ASIAN  SURVEY,  1978,  vol  18,  No  3;  idem,  "The  Dynamics  of  Chinese  Politics," 
Cambridge  (Mass.),  1981;  L.  W.  Pye  and  N.  Leltes,  "Nuances  of  the  Chinese 
Political  Culture,"  ASIAN  SURVEY,  1982,  vol  22,  No  12. 

4.  L.  A.  Bereznyy,  "The  Theory  of  'Political  Culture'  and  Some  Questions 
About  Chinese  Studies,"  NARODY  AZII  I  AFRIKI,  1971,  No  4;  H.  Harding, 

"The  Study  of  Chinese  Politics:  Toward  a  Third  Generation  of  Scholarship," 
WORLD  POLITICS,  1981,  vol  XXXVI,  No  2. 

5.  L.  S.  Perelomov,  P.  M.  Kozhin  and  G.  F.  Saltykov,  "The  Traditions  of 
Administration  in  the  PRC  Political  Culture,"  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA, 
1984,  No  2,  p  111. 

6.  L.  W.  Pye,  "Political  Culture,"  p  218. 

7.  S,  Verba,  "Comparative  Political  Culture,"  in  "Political  Culture  and 
Political  Development,"  Princeton  (N.J.),  1965,  pp  515-516. 


133 


8.  V.  G.  Grafskiy,  "Criticism  of  the  Functionalist  Approach  to  the  Study  of 
the  'Political  Culture,"'  in  "Mirnoye  sosushchestvovaniye  i  sotsialno- 
politicheskoye  razvitiye"  [Peaceful  Coexistence  and  Sociopolitical 
Development],  Moscow,  1977,  pp  59-64;  V.  V.  Smirnov,  "The  Concept  of 
the  'Political  Culture'  in  U.S.  Political  Science,"  ibid,,  pp  66-74; 

S.  A.  Yegorov,  "The  Contemporary  Methodological  Evolution  of  U.S.  Politi¬ 
cal  Science,"  in  "Politika  mira  i  razvitiye  polltichesklkh  sistem"  [The 
Policy  of  Peace  and  the  Development  of  Political  Systems],  Moscow,  1979, 
pp  247-256;  V.  Yu.  Smorgunova,  "Political  Culture  as  a  Factor  of  Social 
Awareness.  Author's  Precis,"  Leningrad,  1981. 

9.  F.  M.  Burlatskly  and  A.  A.  Galkin,  "Sotslologiya.  Politika. 
Mezhdunarodnyye  otnoshenlya"  [Sociology,  Politics  and  International 
Relations],  Ifoscow,  1974;  Ye.  Vyatr,  "Sotslologiya  polltichesklkh 
otnosheniy"  [The  Sociology  of  Political  Relations],  Moscow,  1978. 

10.  "Aktualnyye  problemy  sovremennogo  polltlcheskogo  razvitiya"  [Current 
Issues  in  Contemporary  Political  Development],  Moscow,  1982,  p  110; 

V.  Yu.  Smorgunova,  Op.  cit.,  p  10. 

11.  This  significant  shortcoming  in  the  interpretation  of  the  concept  of 
political  culture  was  also  pointed  out  by  the  Western  critics  of  L.  Pye 
(S.  van  der  Sprenkel,  "The  Spirit  of  Chinese  Politics,"  CHINA  QUARTERLY, 
1969,  No  37). 

12.  "Political  Culture  and  Political  Development,"  p  546. 

13.  Ibid.,  p  11. 

14.  L.  W.  Pye,  "The  Spirit  of  Chinese  Politics,"  pp  VIII-IX;  idem,  "The 
Dynamics  of  Chinese  Politics,"  pp  XIII,  4-5. 

15.  We  must  agree  with  bourgeois  Sinologists  that  Pye's  methodological  para¬ 
doxes  cast  suspicion  on  his  research  findings  from  the  very  beginning 

(S.  van  der  Sprenkel,  Op,  cit.,  p  143;  David  S.  Goodman,  "The  Dynamics  of 
Faction  and  Consensus  in  Chinese  Politics,"  CHINA  QUARTERLY,  1981,  No  86, 
p  350)  . 

16.  L.  W.  Pye,  "The  Spirit  of  Chinese  Politics,"  p  VII. 

17.  Ibid,;  idem,  "The  Dynamics  of  Chinese  Politics." 

18.  L.  W.  Pye,  "The  Spirit  of  Chinese  Politics,"  pp  32-33,  10,  96,  233. 
Although  this  work  by  L.  Pye  did  not  have  great  repercussions  in  bourgeois 
Sinology,  many  of  his  ideas,  particularly  the  thesis  of  the  political 
passivity  of  the  individual  in  China  and  the  organic  status  of  the 
"Thought  of  Mao  Zedong"  in  the  Chinese  culture,  are  quite  popular  today 
among  Western  Sinologist-social  psychologists.  Pye's  conclusions  are 
reflected  to  the  fullest  extent  in  an  extremely  popular  work  by  R.  Solomon, 
his  student  and  follower  (R.  Solomon,  "Mao's  Revolution  and  the  Chinese 
Political  Culture,"  Berkeley,  1971). 


134 


19.  L.  W.  Pye,  "The  Spirit  of  Chinese  Politics,"  pp  159-160. 

20.  Ibid.,  pp  34,  71-76,  98-99,  123-124. 

21.  L.  W.  Pye,  "The  Dynamics  of  Chinese  Politics,"  pp  4-5,  7. 

22.  Ibid.,  pp  137-138,  186-189. 

23.  RENMIN  RIBAO,  28  February  1984;  1  July  1984. 

24.  The  dubious  nature  of  Pye's  assertions  about  the  "eternal"  factional 
collisions  in  the  Chinese  elite  was  also  underscored  by  some  of  his 
critics  in  the  West  (H.  Harding,  Op.  cit.,  p  303). 

25.  L.  W.  Pye,  "The  Dynamics  of  Chinese  Politics,"  p  239. 

26.  Ibid.,  pp  12-15,  162-168. 

27.  Ibid.,  pp  9-11,  17-21,  167-170;  idem,  "Communications  and  Chinese 
Political  Culture,"  p  237. 

28.  L.  W.  Pye,  "Communications  and  Chinese  Political  Culture,  pp  229-230, 
233-235,  241. 

COPYRIGHT:  "Problemy  Dalnego  Vostoka",  1985 

8588 

CSO:  1805/4 


135 


U.S.  DECISIONMAKING,  POLICY  ON  CHINA  EXAMINED 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  S6  pp  123-126 
[Article  by  Yu.  M,  Ryakln;  "Who  Determines  U.S.  'China'  Policy  and  How"] 


The  problem  of  Sino-American  relations  is  still  one  of  the  most  actively 
and  fiercely  debated  in  Washington.  In  spite  of  the  explicit  top-level 
consensus  concerning  the  general  approach  to  US  China  policy,  manifest¬ 
ing  itself  primarily  in  an  endeavour  to  secure  for  Washington  dominant 
positions,  there  are  differences  over  the  choice  of  specific  ways  to,  imple¬ 
ment  it.  These  differences,  determined  by  certain  subjective  and  objective 
factors,  are  not  a  matter  of  principle,  yet  they  leave  a  clear  mark  on 
Washington’s  political  actions  and  the  tactics  of  conducting  its  strate¬ 
gy— the  pursuit  of  American  hegemony  in  world  affairs.  Of  undoubted 
interest  in  this  connection  is  the  book  by  American  Sinologist  R.  Sutter, 
which  is  reviewed  here. 

Sutter’s  study  examines  the  positions  taken  by  various  influential 
groups  in  official  Washington  over  US  China  policy.  It  is  characteristic 
that,  having  focused  on  the  elucidation  of  this  problem,  the  author  virtu¬ 
ally  ignores  the  position  taken  on  this  issue  by  US  academic  circles 
(which  is  not  generally  typical  of  American  Sinology),  thus  giving  prio¬ 
rity  not  to  politologists  but  to  politicians.  It  is  also  significant  that,  from 
1968  to  1977,  R.  Sutter  was  himself  a  CIA  consultant  on  the  PRC’s  fo¬ 
reign  policy  and  is  today  on  the  staff  of  the  US  Library  of  Congress  Re¬ 
search  Service.  This,  of  course,  allows  him  to  take  his  bearings  in  the 
“corridors  of  power’’  and  possess  reliable  information.  , 

Sutter  proceeds  from  the  conviction,  which  sets  the  tone  of  his  whole 
book,  that  “In  broad  terms,  each  American  administration,  from  Richard 
Nixon’s  to  Ronald  Reagan’s,  has  sought  to  use  better  relations  with  China 
as  a  means  to  position  the  United  States  favourably  in  the  US-Soviet- 
PRC  triangular  relationship;  to  stabilise  Asian  affairs,  secure  a  balance 
of  forces  in  the  region  favourable  to  the  United  States  and  its  allies  and 
friends,  and  foster  a  peaceful  and  prosperous  future  for  Taiwan;  to  build 
beneficial  economic,  cultural,  and  other  bilateral  ties;  and  to  work  more 
closely  with  the  PRC  on  issues  of  global  importance..,’’  (p.  IX).  Thus, 
the  author  admits  that  the  US  China  policy  meant,  by  drawing  China 
into  US  anti-Soviet  combinations,  to  place  the  Soviet  Union  in  a  difficult 
military-political  situation.  At  the  same  time,  Washington  intended  to 
guarantee  some  kind  of  “future”  for  Taiwan.  These  plans  were  not,  of 
course,  only  anti-Soviet  in  their  essence;  they  also  conflicted  with  China’s 
real  interests. 

One  cannot  but  agree  with  the  author’s  premise  regarding  the  strate¬ 
gic  continuity  of  Washington’s  China  policy,  especially  those  hegemonic 


*  Robert  G.  Sutter,  The  China  Quandary:  Domestic  Determinants  of  US  China 
Policy,  1972-1982,  Boulder,  Colorado,  IWS,  194  pp. 


136 


/ 


goals,  -which  -were  set  eather,  and  v^hich  are  today  being  pneswed  hv 
American  diplomacy.  ,  . 

Still,  Sutter  notes  that  there  were  “contradictions  and  controversy  in 
the  United  States  that  have  adversely  affected  Sino-American  relations” 
(p.  IX).  Worried  by  this  circumstance  he  even  says  that  “divisions  of  opi¬ 
nion  in  the  United  States  over  Taiwan  policy,  US-Soviet-PRC  relations, 
US-PRC  economic  relations,  and  the  management  of  US  China  policy 
have  threatened  at  times  to  upset  the  ongoing  Sino-American  reconcilia¬ 
tion”  (p.  X).  This  is  of  course,  a  major  exaggeration,  because  all  the 
differences  in  the  approach  to  the  problem  of  Sino-American  relations 
come  down  to  the  choice  of  specific  political  tactics  and  do  not  .affect 
Washington’s  basic  political  principles.  It  is  another  matter  that  differen¬ 
ces  of  opinion  on  the  “Chinese  problem”  somewhat  reduce  the  effective¬ 
ness  of  Washington’s  foreign  policy  course,  hampering,  in  particular,  its 
freedom  of  manoeuvre  in  the  international  arena. 

Incidentally,  R.  Sutter  himself  states  that  the  “bipartisan”  support 
for  “reconciliation”,  started  by  R.  Nixon,  remains  on  the  whole  jntact 
today.  At  the  same  time,  he  underlines  that  Richard  Nixon  and  Gerald 
Ford  “were  generally  sensitive”  to  the  definite  mistrust  towards  their 
China  policy,  the  turn  about  in  which  was  rather  abrupt,  and  took  care 
not  to  “substantially  exacerbate  those  tensions”  (p.  1).  There  was  also 
disagreement  in  the  administration  and  Congress  over  James  Carter’s 
policy  of  alliance  with  the  PRC.  Under  Ronald  Reagan,  the  polemics  over 
Taiwan  have  intensified.  Let  us  note,  in  passing,  that  the  author’s  analy¬ 
sis  of  the  Reagan  administration’s  position,  its  supporters  and  opponents, 
is  presented  less  convincingly,  there  is  a  much  greater  focus  on  examin¬ 
ing  US  relations  with  China  under  the  Carter  administration. 

Sutter  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  in  their  policy  towards  China, 
Nixon  and  Ford  “...emphasised  common  US-PRC  strategic  interests  in 
opposing  international  ‘hegemony’  and  encouraged  closer  US  contacts 
with  the  PRC”,  but  for  reasons  of  domestic  politics  “they  did  not  signi¬ 
ficantly  alter  formal  US  diplomatic  and  defence  ties  with  Taiwan” 
(pp.  19-20). 

Carter,  according  to  Sutter,  played  a  major  part  in  the  development 
of  Sino-American  relations,  since  “his  historic  decision  to  normalise  dip¬ 
lomatic  relations  with  the  PRC  opened  the  way  to  extensive  Sino-Ameri¬ 
can  cooperation  in  economic,  strategic,  and  cultural  relations”,  up  to 
establishing  a  “strategic  ‘alliance’”  (p.  1). 

Carter  was  obviously  successful  in  pushing  Sino-American  relations 
in  ,a  certain  strategic  direction:  suffice  it  to  say  that  it  was  under  him 
that  the  notorious  “Chinese  card”  became,  in  Washington’s  thinking,  one 
of  the  most  important  trumps  of  US  global  policy.  At  the  same  time,  the. 
line  of  rapidly  activising  Sino-American  relations  encountered  some  op¬ 
position  from  influential  political  forces  of  the  USA.  Sutter  singles  out 
four  “opposition”  groups. 

The  first,  headed  by  Senator  John  Glenn,  consisted  of  politicians  who 
stood  for  the  “value”  of  old  allies  and  the  strength  of  alliances  made  by 
the  US.  This  group  especially  strongly  denounced  Carter’s  Taiwan  policy. 
The  second  group  was  made  up  of  politicians  who  objected  to  Carter’s 
line  of  bringing  pressure  to  bear  on  the  Soviet  Union  by  establishing 
“strategic”  ties  with  the  PRC  and  therefore  opposed  closer  military  links 
with  China.  The  most  authoritative  member  of  this  group  was  Secretary 
of  State  Cyrus  Vance.  The  third  group  of  Carter’s  critics  included  politi¬ 
cal  figures  who  had  traditionally  been  suspicious  of  China’s  communist 
system  and  her  goals  in  East  Asia  and  world-wide.  This  group  was  head¬ 
ed  by  Senators  Barry  Goldwater,  S.  Hayakawa  and  Jesse  Helms.  Finally, 
one  more  group  opposed  to  Carter’s  policy  Included  politicians  who 
demanded  that  the  American  people  be  better  informed  and  opposed  the 


137 


administration’s  “secret  approach”  in  the  development  of  Sino-American 
relations.  The,  most  active  in  advocating  an  “open”  approach  towards 
China  was  Congressman  Lester  Wolff. 

The  author  admits  that  “the  objectives  of  Carters  China  policy  were 
in  broad  terms  continuous”  in  respect  to  those  of  the  two  previous  admi¬ 
nistrations  and  were  as  follows:  “1)  to  position  itself  favourably  in  the 
US-Soviet-PRC  triangular  relationship;  2)  to  use  improved  relations  with 
Peking  to  help  stabilise  Asian  affairs,  secure  a  balance  of  forces  in  the 
region  favourable  to  the  United  States  and  China,  and  foster  a  peaceful, 
prosperous  future  for  Taiwan;  3)  to  build  mutually  beneficial  economic, 
cultural  and  other  ties  with  the  PRC;  and  4)  to  Work  more  closely  with 
the  PRC  on  internationally  important  issues  such  as  world  food  supply, 
population  control,  and  arms  limitation”  (p.  71).  Thus,  a  desire  to  give 
Washington  a  decisive  military-political  edge  was  at  the  root  of  the  US 
China  policy. 

So  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that  the  author  dwells  all  the  time  on  the 
point  that,  after  the  establishment  of  diplomatic  relations  between  the 
US  and  the  PRC  and  the  adoption  of  the  Taiwan  Relations  Act  “Ameri¬ 
can  leaders  began  to  turn  their  attention  to  the  implications  of  imP|royed 
Sino-American  relations  for  broader  US  foreign  policy  interests,  especial¬ 
ly  vis-a-vis  the  Soviet  Union”  (p.  10).  As  a  result,  a  debate  started  in 
Washington  regarding  the  possible  consequences  of  the  administration’s 
policy  for  American  interests  in  the  US-USSR-PRC  triangle.  According 
to  Sutter,  these  arguments  finally  came  down  to  the  problem  of  US  mili¬ 
tary  supplies  to  China.  The  author  presents  the  following  alignment  of 
forces:  the  administration’s  spokesmen  came  out  for  “improved  relations 
with  China  to  gain  greater  leverage  in  America’s  continuing  competition 
with  the  USSR.  They  have  urged  the  United  States  to  'play  the  Chinese 
card’ — a  loosely  defined  concept  referring  to  building  closer  US  political, 
economic,  technical,  or  military  ties  with  the  PRC  to  gain  greater  US 
advantage  over  the  Soviet  Union”  (p.  11). 

It  was  primarily  a  question  of  the  United  States  gaining  decisive  ad¬ 
vantages  of  a  military-political  nature.  Simultaneously,  plans  were  work¬ 
ed  out  to  play  “the  Chinese  card”  in  the  sphere  of  the  economy,  in  order 
to  make  the  Soviet  Union  more  complaisant,  for  example,  in  its  domestic 
policy.  The  author  gives  the  following  example  of  the  Carter  administra¬ 
tion’s  plans  to  use  “the  Chinese  card”:  “Some  officials  claimed  that  by 
moving  ahead  in  economic  cooperation  with  China,  the  United  States 
would  prompt  the  Soviet  Union  to  rethink  its  past  position  on  the  emigra¬ 
tion  issue  and  other  controversies  blocking  US-Soviet  economic  coopera¬ 
tion  and  to  adopt  more  forthcoming  policies”  (pp.  13-14). 

Opposing  this  line  were  those  whom  Sutter  calls  “sceptics”,  arguing 
that  China  was  still  an  “unpredictable  power”  and  challenging  the  admi- . 
nistration’s  premise  that  close  ties  with  China  in  all  spheres,  including 
the  military,  was  the  best  way  of  dealing  with  the  USSR. 

Another  group  of  American  politicians  who  disagreed  with  the  admi¬ 
nistration,  believed  that  priority  should  be  given  to  “talks  with  Moscow” 
or  to  greater  defence  efforts  by  the  US,  but  not  to  the  development  of 
relations  with  China,  which  did  not  rank  uppermost  in  the  .  system  of 
Washington’s  foreign  policy  priorities. 

Lastly,  one  more  influential  political  group,  distinct  from  the  Carter 
administration,  came  out  for  a  “balanced”  US  approach  to  both  China 
and  the  Soviet  Union. 

In  the  final  analysis,  a  somewhat  simplified  political  picture  of  Wash¬ 
ington,  without  excessive  detail  (which  we  believe  to  be  justified  in  this 
case)  looked  as  follows.  President  Carter’s  supporters,  among  whom  the 
staunchest  were  Senator  Henry  Jackson  and  the  President’s  National 
Security  Adviser  Zbigniew  Brzezinski,  advocated  the  use  of  “the  Chinese 


138 


card”  to  pressure  the  Soviet  Union.  Their  opponents,  headed  by  Secretary 
of  State  Cyrus  Vance  and  Congressman  Lester  Wolff,  apprehensive  of  the 
possible  consequences  of  this  policy,  came  out  against  it  [though  not  too 
vigorously.— y.  R.]  and  advocated  a  more  balanced  course. 

As  already  stated,  Sutter  focuses  less  on  analysing  Washington’s 
China  policy  under  the  Reagan  administration  than  under  the  three  pre¬ 
vious  administrations.  He  virtually  confines  himself  to  citing  what  he 
considers  to  be  a  sad  fact:  that  Ronald  Reagan  “had  pledged  in  the  cam¬ 
paign  to  improve  relations  with  Taipei,  even  though  it  might  risk  under¬ 
mining  the  new  US  relationship  with  Peking”  (p.  142). 

Having  come  under  pressure  from  the  PRC  seeking  to  prevent  a  revi¬ 
sion  of  the  agreements  with  Washington  on  the  Taiwan  issue,  and  facing 
the  prospect  of  deteriorating  relations  with  China,  however,  Sutter  notes, 
the  Reagan  administration  adopted  a  more  cautious  line  over  Taiwan 
(iJ.  142). 

Indeed,  for  almost  eight  years  Sino-American  relations  were  on  the 
ascent,  reaching  their  peak  under  the  Carter  administration,  but  during 
Ronald  Reagan’s  first  term  the  climb  slowed  down  somewhat.  The  reason 
was  not  so  much  the  extent  of  the  President’s  “pro-Taiwan”  sentiments 
(by  the  way,  time  has  not  diminished  them,  it  has  only  made  them  more 
reserved  and  less  demonstrative). 

A  whole  complex  of  factors  came  into  play,  above  all  the  Soviet 
Union’s  foreign  policy  initiatives  to  improve  the  world  situation.  Also 
of  certain  significance  were  some  changes  in  the  PRC’s  foreign  policy. 
The  pause  in  Sino-American  relations  caused  concern  in  Washington. 
On  the  whole,  this  concern  is  reflected  in  Robert  Sutter’s  book.  The  Rea¬ 
gan  administration,  fearful  of  losing  the  foreign  policy  initiative,  is  once 
again  trying  to  activate  Sino-American  relations  along  all  lines,  aiming 
to  draw  China  into  its  manipulations  in  the  International  arena.  Herein 
lie  the  “continuity”  and  “consistency”  of  Washington’s  policy  towards 
China. 

In  general,  US  policy  towards  the  PRC  has  been  invariably  determi¬ 
ned  by  American  hegemonic  aspirations.  In  this  sense  it  has  been  fully 
continuous  under  the  four  US  administrations,  from  Nixon  to  Reagan. 
In  fact,  this  is  admitted  by  Sutter  himself.  As  for  the  certain  divergence 
of  positions  and  opinions,  or  rather  the  existence  of  shades  and  nuances 
in  them,  which  put  the  author  on  the  alert,  they  arise  from  the  desire  of 
the  US  ruling  circles  to  improve  their  tactics,  without  changing  the  basics 
of  the  strategy,  on  which  no  one  casts  doubt.  Proof  of  this  is  provided  by 
Robert  Sutter’s  analysis,  irrespective  of  his  subjective  motives. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO:  1812/94 


139 


EVENTS  IN  CHINA  IN  1945  RECALLED 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  127-139 
[Article  by  Professor  M.  F.  Yuryev] 

E  arly  1945...  World  War  II  was  drawing  to  a  close,  its  outcome  increa¬ 
singly  predetermined  by  developments  on  the  Soviet-German  front. 
The  victorious  offensive  of  the  Soviet  army  promoted  the  success  of  the 
Crimean  (Yalta)  Conference  of  heads  of  state  or  government  of  the  USSR, 
the  USA  and  Great  Britain  (February  4-11,  1945),  which  adopted  impor¬ 
tant  decisions  concerning  the  Far  East,  made  public  in  1946.  In  order  to 
bring  World  War  II  to  a  faster  end  and  ensure  greater  security  br  the 
USSR,  the  Soviet  Union  had  undertaken  to  enter  the  war  against  Japan 
two  to  three  months  after  Germany’s  surrender,  on  the  following  condi¬ 
tions: 

1.  “Maintenance  of  the  status  quo  in  Outer  Mongolia  (the  Mongolian 
People’s  Republic);  2.  Restoration  of  Russia’s  rights,  treacherously  vio¬ 
lated  by  the  Japanese  attack  in  1904,  namely:  a)  return  to  the  Soviet  Uni¬ 
on  of  the  southern  part  of  Sakhalin  Island  and  all  the  isles  adjacent  to 
it;  b)  internationalisation  of  the  commercial  seaport  of  Dairen  ensuring 
the  priority  interests  of  the  Soviet  Union  at  this  port  and  restoration  of 
the  lease  of  Port  Arthur  as  a  Soviet  military  and  naval  base  and  c)  joint 
exploitation  of  the  China  Far  Eastern  Railway  and  the  South  Manchurian 
Railway,  with  an  outlet  to  Dairen,  through  a  joint-stock  Soviet-Chinese 
company  providing  for  the  priority  of  Soviet  interests  in  this  company 
and  for  the  retention  by  China  of  full  sovereignty  over  Manchuria;  and 
3.  The  transfer  of  the  Kuril  Islands  to  the  Soviet  Union.”  This  decision 
envisaged  the  coordination  with  the  Chinese  Government,  through  the 
good  offices  of  US  President  F.  Roosevelt,  over  the  points  concerning  Mon¬ 
golia,  the  aforesaid  ports  and  railways.  The  Soviet  Union  expressed  its 
readiness  to  conclude  “a  Soviet-Chinese  pact  of  friendship  and  alliance 
to  assist  China  with  armed  forces  in  order  to  liberate  it  from  the  Japanese 
yoke”.' 

Of  late,  reactionary  Western  leaders,  including  US  President  Reagan, 
and  West  German  and  Japanese  revenge-seekers  have  been  trying  to 
question  the  decisions  of  the  Yalta  Conference.  Chiang  Kaishek’s  immediate 
reaction  to  the  terms  of  the  Soviet  Union’s  entry  into  the  war  against 
Japan  was  negative,  which  might  be  explained  by  his  class  position.  The 
Japanese  edition  of  the  book  Secret  Notes  of  President  Jiang,  reprinted 
in  Taiwan,  claims  that  “the  seizure  of  mainland  China  by  Communists 
and  the  wars  in  Korea  and  Vietnam  are  fruits  of  the  Yalta  Conference”." 
It  is  surprising  that  a  similar  attitude  is  shown  in  some  publications 
printed  in  the  People’s  Republic  of  China.  For  example,  Zhang  Hongyi, 
the  author  of  the  article  entitled  “The  Secret  Yalta  Agreement  and  the 
Soviet  and  US  Policies  Towards  China”  alleges  that  the  terms  of  Soviet 
entry  into  the  war  against  Japan  have  affected  China’s  sovereign  rights 
and  national  interests,®  whereas  the  compiler  of  the  book  Anti-Japanese 
War  History,  though  he  admits  that  “The  Yalta  Conference  played  an 


'  Pravda,  Feb.  13,  1946. 

*  Secret  Notes  of  President  Jiang,  Vol.  1,  Taipei,  1974,  pp.  30-31  (in  Chinese). 

’  Ste  The  State  of  Affairs  in  World  History  Studies,  1981,  No.  10  (In  Chinese). 


140 


imnnrtflnt  Daft  in  winning  victory  in  the  anti-fascist  war  ,  ^  reiterates 
ChLng  Kaishek’s  allegations  that  its  decisions  “affected  Chinas  sove¬ 
reignty”.  ■’  Such  claims  are  made  even  though  it  is  well  ^ 

Pemile^  Republic  of  China  that  the  establishment  of  a  joint  naval  base 
in  Port  Arthur,  which  the  Soviet  Union  was  entrusted  to  defend,  as  well 
as  other  Soviet  assistance  to  China  in  liberating  a  large  part  of  its  ter¬ 
ritory  and  population  from  the  Japanese,  constituted 
to  the  building  of  the  Communist  Party  of  China  s  military  and  revoluho 
narv  bas^n  Manchuria,  which  ensured  the  victory  of  the  Chinese  democ¬ 
ratic  forces  and  the  formation  of  the  People’s  Republic  °5,£na^’stJesIed 
eve  of  the  victory  of  people’s  revolution  in  China,  Mao  Zedong  stressed 
that  the  Soviet  Union  had  come  to  the  China  Far  Eastern  Railway  and 
Port  Arthur  “not  as  an  imperialist,  but  as  a  socialist  force  to  defend  com¬ 
mon  interests”.  “US  imperialists”,  he  continued,  “sit  in  China  to  oppress 
whereas  the  Soviet  Union  is  in  Port  Arthur  to  provide  defence  against  the 

■’’''’Two'slSil.UaneousN^^^^^^  historical  process^  were  underway 

in  China  in  the  winter  and  spring  of  1945,  i.e.,  the  anti-Japanese  struggle 
and  a  democratic  movement  led  by  the  CPC’s  slogan  to  dismantle  the 
one-party  Guomindang  dictatorship  and  form  ^ f  TJ® 

slogan  was  a  catchword  at  mass  meetings  and  manifestations,  the 
January  Declaration  of  the  Democratic  League  and  even  in  the  February 
issues  of  Huaqiao  ribao,  the  newspaper  of  Chinese  emigrants  in  the  USA. 
In  early  1945,  64  members  of  the  National  Political  Council  (a  consultati¬ 
ve  agency  of  representatives  of  various  parties 

set  up  in  1938)  called  on  the  government  to  change  its  Pohcy  In  Februa¬ 
ry  over  300  workers  of  culture  in  Chongqing  published  a  statement  in 
support  of  the  CPC’s  appeal  to  convene  a  national 

coalHion  government.  Similar  declarations  were  Kunmin 

(March)  and  Chengdu  (April)  by  340  and  over  100  pubhc  figures  respec¬ 
tively.  The  26th  anniversary  of  The  4th  of  May, 

imperialism  was  marked  by  a  10,000-strong  demonstration  J  .scents 
in  ^Kunmin,  demanding  an  immediate  end  to.  the  one-party  dmtatorship 
and  the  Guomindang  secret  services,  the  abolition  of  censorship,  the  con¬ 
vocation  of  a  national  conference  and  the  formation  of  a  coalition  gover  - 

"’“xhe  foreign  press  and  some  US  and  British  leaders  asSMiated  the 
Guomindang^  defeats  in  the  war  with  its  reachonary  policies  and.  the 
corruption  of  its  civil  and  military  leadership.  On  Novernbw  25,  1944 
Huaqiao  ribao  wrote  that  the  chief  occupation  of  many 
ficers  and  generals  was  contraband  and  speculation  If  .’ Jladv 
said  angrily  “top-ranking  officials  are  indeed  involved  m  these  shady 
deals  and  do  not  conceal  it,  how  can  they  forbid  the  fighting  generals  to 
capitalise  on  the  country’s  plight.”  News  Chronicle 

that  soldiers  were  poorly  supplied  with  ammunitions  and  foodstuffs.  At  a 
press  coTferen^  on  February  1,  1945  at  the  US  Army  headquartm  in 
Chongqing,  even  general  Wedemeyer  had  to  admit  that  there  ai^e  enough 
foodstuffs  in  China  for  good  upkeep  of  the  army.  Food  collectiqn  storag 
and  distribution  between  army  units  is  the  weak  YS 

stolen  and  never  reached  the  troops.  On  'January  16,  1945. on  his  return 
from  China,  US  Congressman  M.  Mansfield  said  the  tollowing  of  giina  s 
ruling  party:  “The  Guomindang’s  popularity  decreases  day  by  day  hecduse 
of  the  fear  instilled  by  its  army  and  the  behaviour  of  its  tax  collectors. 


‘  History  of  the  Anti-Japanese  War,  compiled  by  Ma  Zhonglian,  Peking,  1983,  p.  207 

(in  Q  Borisov.  From  the  History  of  Soviet-Chinese  Relations  in  thf  .1950s 

(Discussion  of  Mao  Zedong  in  the  PRC),  Moscow,  1981,  pp.  74-75. 


141 


The  Guomindang  pays  lip  service  to  democracy,  but  acts  as  a  dictator- 
sh.p,”  111  a  communique  on  war  developments  in  China  of  January  5, 
1945,  the  London  China  Relief  Committee  pointed  out  that  the  Chinese 
police  used  “Gestapo  methods”,  disapproved  by  Guomindang  left-wing 
liberals. 

Broad  sections  of  the  public  in  China  demanded  the  following  pro¬ 
gramme  of  action:  a  lift  of  the  blockade  of  the  special  Shenxi-Hansu- 
Ningxia  area  and  the  sending  of  the  released  troops  to  the  front;  recog¬ 
nition  of  all  anti-Japanese  military  units  and  the  authorities  of  liberated 
areas;  abolition  of  concentration  camps  and  fascist  organisations;  the 
release  of  political  prisoners;  annulment  of  laws  designed  to  suppress 
popular  rights;  legalisation  of  political  parties,  an  increase  in  pay  in  the 
army  and  provision  of  relief  for  the  population  in  areas  where  natural 
calamities  had  occurred.  ® 

Among  the  active  supporters  of  a  more  democratic  China  was  the 
all-China  association  of  writers  and  men  of  arts.  ^ 

Opposition  to  the  great-power  nationalistic  oppression  in  Xinjian  was 
intensifying.  As  a  result  of  an  uprising  in  Kuldja,  a  provisional  .  revo¬ 
lutionary  government  of  the  East  Turkestan  Republic  was  formed,  which 
started  to  confiscate  the  capital  of  Chinese  trading  companies  and  the  pro¬ 
perty  of  Chinese  government  officials,  landlords,  livestock-owners,  mer¬ 
chants,  and  usurers.  It  lifted  restrictions  on  trade  with  the  Soviet  Union, 
repudiated  debts,  introduced  an  8-hour  working  day  and  carried  out  other 
democratic  reforms.  For  a  long  time,  however,  there  had  been  no  relations 
between  ETR  and  CPC  leaders  and  neither  side  seemed  interested.  The 
leader  of  the  movement’s  progressive  wing,  Ahmatdjan  Kasymi,  was  oppo¬ 
sed  to  the  hostile  policy  towards  non-Moslems  supported  by  feudal  cleri¬ 
cal  elements  in  the  ETR  leadership.  At  the  government  sitting  on  Decem¬ 
ber  20,  1944  he  said:  “Is  it  right  to  regard  non-Moslems  as  our  enemies? 
No!  All  those  who  have  taken  part  in  the  revolution,  irrespective  of  the 
religion  they  profess,  are  our  true  friends...  Some  people  suggest  that  we 
should  declare  our  state  a  Moslem  one;  this  is  absolutely  wrong  and  harm¬ 
ful.  We  must  avoid  discord  in  our  ranks;  instead,  we  must  join  hands 
and  hearts  in  destroying  our  common  enemy.”  On  February  3,  1945  the 
ETR  Government  resolved  to  set  up  a  regular  army  to  liberate  the  whole 
of  Xinjian.  Towards  the  end  of  World  War  II,  the  ETR  Provisional  Govern¬ 
ment’s  national  democratic  rule  had  extended  to  the  northeastern  provinces 
of  Xinjian.  The  strength  of  its  National  Army  had  increased  to  30,000  men; 
it  continued  to  advance  to  the  East  and  the  South.  A  guerrilla  movement 
was  unfolding  in  the  areas  still  under  the  Guomindang  rule.  The  Guomin¬ 
dang  authorities  had  to  sit  down  at  the  negotiation  table  with  ETR  rep¬ 
resentatives;  the  negotiations  lasted  for  several  months  and  resulted  in 
the  signing  of  a  peace  agreement  on  January  2,  1946.® 

There  was  no  formal  relationships  between  the  national  struggle  by 
the  peoples  of  Xinjian  and  the  overall  Chinese  democratic  movement,  but 
this  struggle  objectively  weakened  the  Guomindang  dictatorship  in  China 
thereby  deepening  the  crisis  of  Chiang  Kaishek’s  regime.  The  crisis  was 
used  to  the  utmost  by  the  CPC  to  expose  the  anti-democratic  nature  of 
the  Chongqing  government  and  its  inability  to  defend  the  national  inte¬ 
rests  of  the  Chinese  people  against  the  Japanese  aggressor.  The  CPC 
sought  to  isolate  the  anti-democratic  forces.  In  November,  1944  and 


*  ^®>  1945,  General  History  of  the  New  Democratic  Revolution  in 

China,  Vol.  3,  Peking,  1961,  p.  340  (in  Chinese). 

I  fee  O.  Bolotina,  Lao  She.  War  Years’  Writings,  1937-1949,  Moscow,  1983,  p.  53 
‘  See  Z.  Taipov,  In  the  Struggle  for  Freedom,  Moscow,  1974,  pp.  74-111;  V.  Bogo- 
slovsky,  A.  Moskalev,  Nationality  Problem  in  China  (1911-1949),  Moscow,  1984, 
pp.  180-181;  Chinas  Contemporary  History,  1928-1949,  Moscow,  1984,  pp.  234-236, 
General  History...,  p.  342.  >  ee 


142 


January,  1945  Zhou  Enlai  left  Yanan  for  Chongqing  for  talks  with  the 
Guomindang  leadership.  As  a  preparatory  step  towards  the  formation  of 
a  coalition  government,  the  CPC  suggested  that  a  conference  be  called  of 
representatives  of  the  Guomindang,  the  CPC,  the  Democratic  League 
and  non-party  leaders.  Chiang  Kaishek  turned  this  proposition  down.  In 
his  1945  New  Year  message,  Chiang  Kaishek  insisted  on  summoning  the 
•'national  assembly”  elected  under  the  Guomindang's  control  in  1936. 
True,  he  also  had  to  admit  that  “the  military  setbacks  we  suffered  in  the 
latter  part  of  the  past  year  have  revealed  our  political  drawbacks  and 
mistakes.  All  party  and  government  members  ought  to  give  it  a  thought... 
We  must  admit  that  our  administration  is  inefficient;  it  lacks  organisation 
and  flexibility  which  falls  to  conform  to  wartime  requirements”.  He  was 
unwilling,  however,  to  draw  corresponding  conclusions  from  this  admis¬ 
sion.  Chiang’s  New  Year  message  was  sharply  criticised  by  the  CPC 
whose  representative  said  that  it  would  be  a  “national  assembly  of  Chiang 
Kaishek’s  family”.  On  March  1,  1945  Chiang  Kaishek  demanded  that  the 
CPC’s  troops. and. agencies  of  democratic  power,  set  up  on  territories  pre¬ 
viously  occupied  by  the  Japanese,  be  placed  under  his  control..  As  a  return 
gesture,  he  promised  to  legalise  the  CPC  and  to  “admit”  its  representati¬ 
ves  to  the  government. 

The  CPC  would  not,  of  course,  accept  this  proposal  and  let  the  Com¬ 
munists  be  disarmed  and  defeated.  Through  the  Xinhua  news  agency  and 
the  Jiefang  ribao  paper,  the  CPC  explained  its  position  and  criticised  that 
of  Chiang  Kaishek.®  Late  in  April,  1945  Zhou  Enlai  described  the  stances 
of  the  CPC  and  the  Guomindang  as  follows:  “Chiang’s  policy  and  ours 
are  poles  apart.  It  may  be  said  that  today  we  are  unanimous  only  in  re¬ 
cognising  the  need  for  a  war  of  resistance,  but  we  cannot  find  a  common 
language  with  him  as  to  how  it  should  be  waged.  We  insist  on  victory,  but 
only  complete  victory,  on  democracy,  but  only  a  new  democracy,  on  cohe¬ 
sion,  but  only  cohesion  based  on  democratic  principles,  both  domestically 
and  internationally.  The  Guomindang,  however,  seeks  compromise  and 
capitulation  instead  of  complete  victory,  so  as  to  use  Japanese  money  and 
arms  in  the  future  and  reorganise  the  puppet  troops  for  a  civil  war;  it 
seeks  dictatorship  instead  of  democracy,  and  a  split  instead  of  cohesion. 
On  the  international  scene,  it  engineers  intrigues  in  the  hope  that  Britain 
and  , the  USA  will  send  another  Skobl  to  China  [In  the  autumn  of  1944, 
British  troops  under  Skobi’s  command  drowned  the  Greek  resistance 
movement  in  blood  and  restored  the  fascist  monarchy  in  Greece. — M.  Y.]. 
Such  is  the  policy  of  the  Guomindang”. '® 

This  statement  reflected  concern  about  possible  US  intervention  in 
China.  The  anxiety  grew  stronger  as  the  CPC’s  attempts  to  win  the  USA 
over' to  its  side  proved  futile.  Mao  Zedong  pinned  serious  hopes  on  the 
project,  as  he  believed  that,  after  Germany’s  defeat,  it  would  take  China 
and  the  allies  some  two  years  to  defeat  Japan  and  free  China.  In  February 
1945,  Yanan  requested  General  Wedemeyer,  Commander  of  the  US  Troops 
in  China,  for  a  loan  of  $20  million  to  buy  arms  for  the  CPC  troops.  The 
request  was  turned  down.  On  February  28,  1945  a  group  of  US  diplomats 
and  political,  advisers,  connected  with  general  J.  Stilwell,  former  com¬ 
mander  of  the  US  troops  in  the  Chinese-Burmese-Indian  theatre,  for- 
I  warded  a  memorandum  to  Washington  proposing  that  unreserved  support 
to  Chiang  Kaishek  should  be  refused,  in  favour  of  support  for  all  parties, 
including  the  CPC,  as  “the  rout  of  Japan,  as  quick  as  possible,  with  the 
least  American  casualties,  was  the  urgent  objective  of  the  US  Far 


®  See  Izve’stla,  Feb.  l8,  1945;  Materials  on  the  History  of  the  Chinese  Revolution, 
■Vol.  4,  Peking,  1959,  pp.  364-371  (in  Chinese);  Zhou  Enlai,  Selected  Works,  Vol.  1, 
Peking,  1981,  p.  264  (in  Chinese). 

Zhou  Enlai,  Op.  n7.,  p.  265. 


143 


Eastern  policy”.  The  memorandum  was  rejected  by  the  US  admi¬ 
nistration.  President  F.  Roosevelt  ordered  its  authors  to  be  recalled  from^ 
China.  In  March  1945,  a  decision  was  made  to  recall  from  Yanan  the 
group  of  US  observers— diplomats,  officers  and  intelligence  agents  (“the 
Dixie  mission”)  who  favoured  closer  relations  with  the  CPC  “  and,  on- 
April  2,  US  Ambassador  to  China  Patrick  Hurley  announced  in 
Washington  his  government’s  intention  to  cooperate  only  with 
the  Guomindang.  Inspired  by  this  decision,  the  Guomindang  leadership 
tried  to  step  up  its  military  and  political  pressure  on  the  CPC. 

The  “Skobi  version”  was  impossible  in  China  because,  in  the  first 
place,  its  international  role  had  increased  immeasurably  as  a  result  of 
the  historic  victories  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  the  war  against  fascism, 
which  applied  to  the  Far  East  in  general. 

The  CPC’s  expanding  national  influence,  its  growing  prestige  among 
various  sections  of  the  population  and  Soviet  support  for  China’s  demo¬ 
cratic  forces  were  also  mirrored  in  the  fact  that  the  Chinese  delegation 
to  the  constituent  conference  of  the  United  Nations  Organisation  (April 
1945,  San  Francisco)  included  a  representative  from  the  liberated  areas, 
CPC  Politburo  member  Dong  Biwu.  i 

On  the  days  when  nazi  Germany  was  about  to  collapse,  the  offensive 
action  of  CPC  troops  on  Japanese-occupied  territory  intensified.  In  the 
first  part  of  1945,  the  8th  Army  delivered  a  series  of  strikes  on  the  puppet 
troops  and  Japanese  strong  points  in  Eastern  Henan,  set  up  another 
stronghold  and  established  liaison  with  the  New  4th  Army.  In  East  China, 
the  1st  division  of  the  New  4th  Army  crossed  to  the  southern  bank  of  the 
Yangtze  and  waged  a  guerrilla  war  in  the  Jiangsu-Zhejiang  frontier  area. 
An  anti-Japanese  stronghold  with  a  more  than  one-million-strong  popula¬ 
tion  was  also  established  in  Western  Zhejiang.  Guerrilla  actions  were  car¬ 
ried  out  by  the  local  CPC  branch  in  Fujiang,  after  the  Japanese  seized 
the  city  of  Fuzhow  and  the  sea  coast.  Several  guerrilla  detachments  were 
organised  in  Guangdong.  Simultaneously,  both  in  Henan  and  Zhejiang, 
CPC  troops  had  to  engage  with  Guomindang  formations. 

In  March  1945,  Guomindang  troops,  supported  by  British,  Indian  and 
US  units,  captured  the  Yunan-Burma  highway  and  were  engaged  in 
offensives  in  Yunan  and  Western  Hunan.  The  Japanese  were  retreating 
from  there  to  Vietnam. 

After  Germany’s  surrender,  the  Emperor’s  General  Headquarters  or¬ 
dered  on  May  28,  1945  the  withdrawal  of  Japanese  troops  from  Hunan, 
Guangxi  and  Jiangxi,  and  from  the  Hunan-Guangxi  and  Guangzhou-Han- 
kou  railways,  northwards  to  back  up  Japanese  positions  in  Central  and 
North  China  in  case  the  Soviet  Union  entered  the  war  in  the  Far  East. 
Guomindang  armies  moved  into  the  vacated  areas  and  in  the  summer  of 
1945,  occupied  the  cities  of  Nanning  and  Liuzhou,  Fuzhou  and  Wenzhou 
(a  port  in  Zhejiang),  as  well  as  South  Jiangxi.’*  Almost  all  US  airfields 
the  Japanese  had  captured  in  the  1944  offensive,  again  came  under  thC' 
control  of  US  troops. 

It  was  in  this  context  that  the  two  major  parties  of  China — the  CPC 
and  the  Guomindang — held  their  congresses  (Seventh  and  Sixth,  respec¬ 
tively)  in  the  spring  of  1945.  The  Seventh  CPC  congress  was  preceded 
by  the  Seventh  Plenum  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee,  convened  five  and 
a  half  years  after  the  Sixth  Plenum,  which  was  in  session  for  whole  ele¬ 
ven  months— from  May  21,  1944  to  April  20,  1945.  The  Seventh  Plenum 

"  A.  Ledovsky,  The  USSR,  the  USA  and  the  Popular  Revolution  in  China,  Moscow, 
1979,  pp.  30-34.  Before  their  departure  for  Chongqing,  representatives  of  the  US 
observers'  group  met  -with  Mao  Zedong,  Zhu  De  and  Ye  Jianying  (June  9-11,  1945); 
See  P.  Vladimirov,  China’s  Special  Area,  1942-1945,  Moscow,  1973,  pp.  497,  610. 

See  History  of  the  Anti-Japanese  War,  pp.  191-204. 

”  See  Pacific  War  History  (translated  from  Japanese),  Vol.  4,  Moscow,  1958,  p.  77, 


144 


adopted  a  directive  on  Party  activities  in  towns  and  cities.  The  task  set 
by  the  directive  was  to  drive  the  Japanese  invaders  out  of  China  “by  win¬ 
ning  over  [to  its  side.— M.  Y.]  the  multi-million  masses,  puppet  troops 
and  the  police,  preparing  armed  uprisings  and  capturing  cities  and  im¬ 
portant  communications”.  The  directive  indicated  that  the  conditions  for 
this  were  favourable  as  “the  world  war  against  fascism  and,  equally  (!) 
China’s  war  against  Japan  are  nearing  complete  victory;  the  Guomindang 
is  utterly  corrupt  and  is  suffering  defeats,  whereas  our  Party  and  our 
army  are  winning  victories  and  holding  their  own  over  vast  battle  areas 
in  the  enemy’s  rear;  the  people  of  the  whole  country  are  becoming  in¬ 
creasingly  disappointed  with  the  Guomindang  and  pin  infinite  hopes  on 
our  Party  and  our  army”.  The  directive  laid  down  that  as  much  im¬ 
portance  should  be  attached  to  Party  work  in  towns  and  cities  as  to  its 
activities  in  the  strongholds  of  the  liberated  areas  in  the  enemy’s  rear. 
In  practice,  however,  no  uprisings  of  workers  or  other  sections  of  the 
urban  population  were  organised  either  in  1945  or  later;  the  stake  was 
made  exclusively  on  the  army. 

The  Seventh  Congress  of  the  CPC  was  held  17  years  after  its  Sixth 
•Congress.  Over  this  period,  the  revolution  in  China  went  through  two 
major  phases — a  civil  war  between  the  CPC  and  the  Guomindang  and  a 
national  liberation  war  of  the  Chinese  people,  against  the  Japanese  in¬ 
vaders.  Important  changes  took  place  in  the  CPC,  in  its  position  in  the 
country,  its  numerical  strength,  social  composition,  leadership,  ideology, 
military  strength  and  foreign  policy  orientation.  The  congress  was  post¬ 
poned  several  times  because  Mao  Zedong  and  other  leaders  who  support¬ 
ed  him  felt  it  “had  not  been  adequately  prepared”.  It  was  called  only 
after  the  termination  of  the  “campaign  to  improve  the  style”. The  con¬ 
gress  sat  from  April  23  to  June  11,  1945  in  Yanan.  By  this  time,  there 
were  19  liberated  areas  in  China,  with  a  total  population  of  95.5  million, 
including  the  frontier  area  of  Shenxi-Gansu-Ningxia  where  the  CPC  Cen¬ 
tral  Committee  had  its  headquarters;  6  areas  in  North  China;  10  areas  in 
Central  China;  and  2  areas  in  South  China.  The  CPC  regular  troops  to¬ 
talled  910,000  men  and  its  popular  volunteer  corps  equalled  2.2  million. '® 
Thus,  over  the  eight  years  of  the  anti-Japanese  war,  the  CPC  army  had 
grown  more  than  20-fold,  whereas  the  population  of  the  CPC  strongholds 
had  increased  more  than  40-50  times  which  meant  that,  by  the  opening 
of  its  Seventh  Congress,  the  CPC,  with  its  more  than  1.2  million  member¬ 
ship,  was  a  considerable  national  force. 

The  congress  opened  in  an  international  atmosphere  greatly  influenced 
by  the  decisive  victories  of  the  Soviet  Union  over  nazi  Germany,  and  this 
was  reflected,  though  not  always  fully,  in  the  speeches  given  by  Mao  Ze¬ 
dong  and  many  other  delegates.  In  his  report  to  the  congress,  Mao  Ze¬ 
dong' said  that  “the  Soviet  people,  who  have  become  a  powerful  force, 
ha've  played  the  main  role  in  defeating  fascism”.*^  In  his  notes,  P.  Vla¬ 
dimirov  cites  Mao  going  on  as  follows:  “Political  reality  and  practice  pro¬ 
ve  that,  in  the  international  arena,  the  Soviet  Union  is  our  only  and  best 
friend:  all  the  rest  are  so-called  allies.”  Li  Fuchun  said:  “And  we  are  not 
isolated;  the  Soviet  Union  supports  us!  The  USSR  has  grown  strong, 
more  powerful;  during  the  war  it  has  gained  many  allies.  The  capture  of 


'*  Major  Conferences  in  the  History  of  the  CPC,  part  I,  Shanghai,  1982,  pp.  229-233 
(in  Chinese). 

Contemporary  historical  party  literature  of  the  PRC  points  out  that,  in  the 
course  of  the  “cadre  check-up  campaign”  (or  “emergency  salvation”)  which  was  parr 
of  the  “movement  to  improve  the  style”,  “left  errors”  were  made.  See  Lectures  on  the 
CPC  History,  part  I,  Hubei,  1981,  pp.  173-174  (in  Chinese). 

'*  Zhu  De,  Concerning  the  Liberated  Areas’  Front,  Peking,  1983,  p.  135  (in  Chi- 
ncsc^  ^ 

ir  Mao  Zedong,  Selected  Works,  'Vol.  4,  Moscow,  1953,  p.  462. 


145 


Berlin  is  a  fact  of  immense  significance.  It  is  impossible  to  defeat  the 
fascists  without  the  Soviet  Union.”  P.  Vladimirov  points  out  that,  at  the 
Seventh  CPC  Congress,  ‘‘all  the  speakers  displayed  a  clearly  dual  atti¬ 
tude  towards  the  Soviet  Union...  It  was  a  mirror-like  reflection  of  the  dual 
position  taken  by  Chairman  Mao  himself”.  On  the  one  hand,  there  was 
a  desire  to  lean  on  the  power  of  the  Soviet  Union;  on  the  other,  there  was 
a  drift  away  from  friendship  with  the  CPSU  on  the  pretext  of  fighting 
“dogmatism”.  Mao  Zedong  criticised  those  “one-sided”  speeches  that  ex¬ 
pressed  the  hope  that “the  Soviet  Union  is  sure  to  come  out  and  is  sure 
to  help  us”.  This  stand  was  based  not  so  much  on  an  attempt  to  play 
down  reliance  on  Soviet  support,  as  to  underestimate  the  role  of  the  So¬ 
viet  Union.  Mao  Zedong  made  the  same  mistake  that  many  American 
and  British  politicians  made;  they  thought  the  Soviet  Union  ^was  unable 
to  influence  world  developments  because  of  the  huge  losses  it  had  sustain¬ 
ed  in  its  self-sacrificing  struggle  against  nazi  Germany.  -  ^  ^ 

Also  indicative  of  Mad  Zedong’s  attitude  towards  the  Soviet  Union 
was  the  fact  that,  in  his  closing  speech  at  the  congress  (June  11,  1945), 
he  made  no  mention  whatsoever  of  Germany’s  surrender  and  the  victory 
of  the  Soviet  people  and  its  Red  Army,  which  was  all  the  more  strange 
next  to  the  congratulations  sent  by  Chiang  Kaishek  to  the  Soviet  Govern¬ 
ment:  “May  we  offer  our  most  heartfelt  and  sincere  congratulations  on 
this  happy  occasion  for  all  of  us- — the  capitulation  of  the  nazis.i.  We  feel 
it  our  duty  to  do  justice  to  the  boundless  fortitude  of  the  peoples  of  the 
Soviet  Union,  who  have  been  waging  a  hard  struggle  against  the  enemy 
for  four  years,  notwithstanding  fearful  odds  and  sacrifices.  ’  On  his  arri¬ 
val  in  Moscow  on  June  30,  1945  for  talks  with  the  Soviet  Government, 
Song  Ziwen,  Chairman  of  the  Executive  Yuan  and  Chinese  Foreign  Minis¬ 
ter,  said:  “I  am  especially  happy  to  enjoy  this  opportunity  otcongratulat- 
ing  here  the  Army,  the  people  and  the  Government  of  the  Soviet  Union 
upon  the  brilliant  victory  over  fascist  Germany.”  ^  _ 

Despite  the  obvious  protocol  rhetoric,  these  statements  were  indicative 
of  the  leaders  of  the  Guomindang  government  being  rnindful  of  the  im¬ 
portance  of  relations  with  the  Soviet  Union.  The  Sixth  Guomindang 
Congress  (May  1945)  openly  declared  it  necessary  to  establish  lasting 
friendly  relations  with  the  USSR.  1 

The  collapse  of  fascist  Germany  presaged  the  coming  defeat  oi  the 
Japanese  imperialists.  On  April  5,  1945  the  Soviet  Government  denounced 
the  Soviet- Japanese  neutrality  pact  of  April  13,  1941.  Its  statement  said 
that  since  the  signing  of  the  pact  “the  situation  has  changed  fadica  y. 
Germany  has  attacked  the  Soviet  Union,  and  Japan,  as  Germany  s  ally, 
has  been  helping  it  in  the  war  against  the  Soviet  Union.  Moreove^  Japan 
is  at  war  with  the  USA  and  Britain,  which  are  Soviet  allies.  In  this  con¬ 
text,  the  Soviet-Japanese  neutrality  pact  has  lost  any  meanirig  and  can 
no  longer  be  extended”.  The  denunciation  was  one  of  the  first  results 
of  the  Yalta  accords.  It  was  interpreted  in  China  as  an  omen  of  Soviet 
entry  into  the  war  against  Japan.  P.  Vladimirov’s  comments  _on  this 
event  are  as  follows:  “Yanan  is  jubilant.  All  these  days  Mao  Zedong  is 
happily  excited.  The  decision  of  the  Soviet  Government  at  once  raises  the 
prestige  of  the  CPC.”  In  his  report  to  the  Seventh  CPC  Congress  Mao 
Zedong  said:  “The  USSR  has  already  denounced  the  Soviet-Japanese  neu¬ 
trality  pact.  This  step  has  inspired  the  Chinese  people  and  tl^  peoples 
of  the  Pacific  region.”  *'  On  April  8,  1945,  the  CPC  Central  Committee 


See  P.  Vladimirov,  Op,  cii.,  pp.  515,  563,  565,  601. 

^0  S^ovM’^reign' Policy ’in^the  Years  of  the  Great  Patriotic  War,  Vol.  3.  Moscow, 
Vladimirov.  Op.  cit.,  p.  501;  Mao  Zedong,  Selected  Works,  Harbin.  1948,  p.29I. 


newspaper  Jiefdng  ribao  wrote  that  this  initiative  of  the  Soviet  -Govern¬ 
ment  “is  the  most  important  event  in  the  present-day  international  situa¬ 
tion”  and  that  “for  the  Chinese  people,  as  well  as  for  the  allied  powers— 
the  USA  and  Britain— it  is  a  cause  of  inspiration  and  greater  hope  for  a 
closer  victory”. 

This  is  how  the  population  of  Shanghai,  accordirtg  to  Chinese  histo¬ 
rian  Peng  Ming,  reacted  to  the  decision  of  the  Soviet  Government;  “On 
learning  about  the  denunciation  of  the  pact,  the  population  of  Shanghai,’ 
languishing  under  the  enemy’s  yoke,  has  been  overcome  with  tremendous 
joy.  On  April  6  the  streets  of  the  city  were  gay  with  slogans.  Many  thous¬ 
ands  thronged  the  square  in  front  of  the  editorial  office  of  the  Soviet 
newspaper  New  Life  to  read  the  Soviet  Government  declaration.  The  Words 
‘the  dawn  will  soon  come’  went  into  every  man’s  heart.”*® 

In  anticipation  of  Japan’s  defeat,  the  two  major  military  and  political 
forces  in  China  sought  to  strengthen  their  positions  in  case  a  civil  war, 
flares  up  again.  The  attention  of  the  Seventh  CPC  Congress  was,  there¬ 
fore,  focused  more  on  preparations  for  an  imminent  war  with  the  Guo- 
mindang  than  on  the  problems  of  the  continuing  war  with  Japan.  Mao  Ze¬ 
dong’s  report  stressed  the  rallying  of  all  forces  opposed  to  Chiang  Kai- 
shek’s  dictatorship  around  the  CPC.  Hence  the  slogan  of  a  coalition  go¬ 
vernment  “that  would  lead  the  liberated  nation  in  building  an  Indepen-; 
dent,  free,  democratic,  united,  rich  and  powerful  new  China”. 

In  his  report  on  military  matters,  Zhu  De  pointed  to  the,  need  to 
^switch  over  from  predominant  guerrilla  tactics  to  mobile  and  trench  war-; 
fare  by  regular  CPC  troops. 

In  the  introduction  to  his  report  oh  changes  in  the  Party  Rules,  Liu 
Shaoqi  said:  “From  now  on,  the  Communist  Party  of  China  ought  to  be 
referred  to  as  a  new  party!”*®  He  meant  not  only  the  increased  member¬ 
ship  of  the  CPC  (1,210,000  members  as  of  that  date).  The  chief  new,  fea¬ 
ture,  announced  Liu  Shaoqi,  was  that  the  CPC  had  “its  leader” — Chair¬ 
man  Mao,  who  “has  adapted  Marxism  to  Chinese  conditions”,  that  it  had 
developed  “the  system  of  Mao  Zedong’s  thought”,  which  represented 
“Chinese  Communism”,  “Chinese  Marxism”. 

In  his  notable  contribution  “Concerning  the  United  Front”,  Zhou 
Enlai  told  the  congress  of  the  history  of  CPC— Guomindang  relationships 
,|!  and  gave  the  CPC  leadership’s  assessment  of  the  experience  and  lessons 
of  the  united  front  policy.  While  in  general  supporting  Mao  Zedong’s  ap-. 
proach,  Zhou  Enlai  was  inclined  to  be  more  flexible  with  regard  to  intel- 
_  ligentsia,  as  can  be  seen,  for  example,  from  his  cable  of  January  18,  1945 
to  the  Southern  Bureau  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee,  in  which  he  did 
not  approve  of  extending  the  “movement  to  improve  the  style”  to  non- 
Party  workers  of  culture  close  to  the  CPC  in  the  Guomindang-controlled 
areas  in  the  “big  rear”  (West  China). *^ 

The  Seventh  CPC  Congress  legalised  the  ideological  and  organisa- 
;  tional  changes  that  had  taken  place  in  the  CPC  over  the  previous  decade 
'  and  formulated  the  tasks  of  fighting  against  the  Guomindang  dictatorship. 

The  Sixth  Congress  of  the  Guomindang  was  held  in  parallel  with  the 
Seventh  CPC  Congress  (May  5-21,  1945)  in  Chongqing.  In  the  political 
field,  the  Guomindang  congress  rejected  the  urge  for  a  coalition  govern¬ 
ment,  expressed  by  the  CPC,  the  Democratic  League  and  the  broad  pub¬ 
lic.  To  avoid  charges  of  totalitarianism  and  despotism,  Guomindang 
leaders  headed  by  Chiang  Kaishek  told  the  congress  that  in  November 
1945  they  planned  to  convene  a  national  assembly  which,  they  claimed. 


Peng  Ming,  The  History  of  Sino-Soviet  Friendship^  Moscow,  1959,  p.  226.  The 
New  Life  paper  was  published  by  the  Society  of  Soviet  Citizens  in  Shanghai. 

P.  Vladimirov,  Op.  cit.,  p.  566. 

See  Zhou  Enlai,  Op.  cit.y  pp.  242-282. 


147 


would  put  an  end  to  “political  trusteeship”  and  “transfer  the  power  to 
the  people”.  In  reality,  this  was  a  mere  stratagem.  In  his  opening  speech 
at  the  congress,  Chiang  Kaishek  declared  that,  after  the  transition  to  con¬ 
stitutional  rule,  the  Guomindang’s  responsibility  would  increase  rather 
than  decrease.  At  a  press  conference  on  May  17,  1945,  Minister  of  In¬ 
formation  Wang  Shijie  pointed  out  that  the  right  to  decide  on  the  terms 
of  reference  and  composition  of  the  national  assembly  would  rest  with 
the  Guomindang  Central  Executive  or  Standing  Committee,  which  meant 
that  the  Guomindang  leadership  wanted  to  use  the  national  assembly  as 
a  screen  for  its  continued  dictatorship.  Xin  Zhongguo  ribao,  the  Democra¬ 
tic  League’s  paper,  objected  to  this:  “May  we  ask  what  was  the  most 
characteristic  feature  of  the  period  when  elections  to  the  national  assem¬ 
bly  were  underway  ten  years  back?  It  was  a  period  when  the  power  of 
the  one-party  dictatorship  had  reached  its  climax,  when  fascism  was 
spreading  throughout  the  world,  when  the  voice  of  democracy  in  our 
country  was  muzzled  and  all  opposition  parties  were  outlawed.”*^  The 
Guomfndang’s  refusal  to  set  up  a  coalition  government  was  resented  by 
various  sections  of  China’s  population.  Seeking  to  put  down  the  wave  of 
protest,  the  congress  leaders  declared  they  intended  to  solve  the  “com¬ 
munist  problem”  by  political  means.  The  economic  platform  approved  by 
the  congress  was  outlined  in  the  “Programme  for  Industrial  Reconstruc¬ 
tion”.  It  provided  for  the  Guomindang  state  to  monopolise  key  economic 
sectors,  which  antagonised  the  Guomindang  not  only  to  the  working  peo¬ 
ple,  but  also  to  non-monopolistic  groups  of  the  Chinese  bourgeoisie. 

A  comparison  of  the  political  and  economic  programmes  of  the  two 
congresses  was  clearly  not  in  favour  of  the  Guomindang.  The  Commu¬ 
nists  were  quite  obviously  gaining  the  upper  hand  in  their  struggle  to 
win  over  the  masses  and  the  right  to  be  considered  China’s  major  pat¬ 
riotic  force,  and  lead  the  country  in  its  postwar  development.  The  Guo¬ 
mindang  government  sought  to  counterbalance  the  growing  influence  of 
the  CPC  by  using  its  superiority  in  troops  and  ammunitions.  After  Germa¬ 
ny’s  surrender,  it  undertook  a  series  of  military  operations  to  weaken  the 
anti-Japanese  strongholds  of  the  8th  and  the  New  4th  Armies.  On  May  23, 
two  4ays  after  the  closure  of  the  Sixth  Guomindang  Congress,  Chiang 
Kaishek  ordered  ten  divisions,  including  US-trained  elite  troops,  to  attack 
the  Jiangsu-Zhejiang  frontier  area.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  task 
force  was  Shangguan  Yunxiang,  a  leader  of  the  treacherous  attack  on 
the  mobile  headquarters  of  the  New  4th  Army.  At  first,  the  CPC  troops 
retreated,  avoiding  an  engagement,  as  this  would  play  into  the  hands 
of  the  Japanese,  but  on  June  19,  when  the  Guomindang  units  had  advan¬ 
ced  50. km  into  the  territory  of  the  base,  the  New  4th  Army  launched  a 
counter-attack,  which  routed  the  invading  divisions  within  five  days. 

In  June-July  1945,  the  Guomindang  troops,  sometimes  separately,  some- 
time^  jointly  with  Japanese  units,  initiated  many  large-scale  operations 
against  the  popular  armed  forces.  28 

The  declaration  of  war  on  Japan  by  the  Soviet  Union  radically  chang¬ 
ed  the  situation  both  in  the  Chinese  theatre  of  operations -and  in  China 
itself.  The  Soviet  Union  entered  into  the  war  in  the  Far  East  “to  speed 
up  peace  and  spare  the  peoples  further  sacrifices  and  suffering”,  29  to  en¬ 
sure  the  security  of  the  Soviet  Far-Eastern  borders,  which  had  been  re¬ 
peatedly  encroached  upon  and  constantly  threatened  by  Japanese  imperia- 


See  The  General  History, Vol.  3,  p,  360. 

June  3,  1945. 

”  The  General  History,..  Vol.  3,  pp.  361-362. 

See  The  History  of  World  War  77,  Vol.  11,  Moscow,  1980,  p.  105. 

The  Declaration  of  the  Soviet  Government  to  the  Government  of  Japan  of 
August  8,  1945,  Izvestia^  Aug  9,  1945. 


148 


lists,  to  fulfil  its  Yalta  commitments,  to  restore  and  safeguard  the  "histo¬ 
ric  rights  of  the  Soviet  State  on  the  territories  annexed  by  Japan  from 
Russia,  and  to  assist  the  peoples  of  East  and  Southeast  Asia  in  their  libe¬ 
ration  struggle.  • 

The  Chinese  Communists  highly  appreciated  the  historic  importance 
of  the  Soviet  Union’s  entry  into  the  war  against  Japan.  In  a  cable  mes¬ 
sage  to  the  Soviet  Government  on  August  8,  1945  Mao  Zedong  and  Zhu 
De  heartily  welcomed  the  declaration  of  war  against  Japan  by  the  Soviet 
Union.  In  his  article  “The  Last  Battle  against  Japanese  Invaders”  Mao 
Zedong  wrote:  “Thanks  to  this  step  by  the  Soviet  Union,  the  war  against 
Japan  will  end  much  sooner.  This  war  is  already  in  its  final  stage:  the 
hour  of  ultimate  victory  over  the  Japanese  invaders  and  their  myrmidons 
has  struck.”®' 

On  August  14,  1945  a  Soviet-Chinese  Treaty  of  Friendship  and  Allian¬ 
ce  was  signed.  It  envisaged  joint  action  with  other  United  Nations  in  the 
war  against  Japan,  till  final  victory.  The  Soviet  Union  and  China  pledged 
to  make  every  effort  after  the  war  to  prevent  Japan  from  being  aggressive 
and  violating  peace;  they  agreed  not  to  enter  into  alliances  against  the 
other  contracting  party  and  in  their  relations  to  follow  the  principles  of 
mutual  respect,  sovereignty,  territorial  integrity  and  non-interference  in 
each  other’s  internal  affairs.  Concurrently,  in  pursuance  of  the  Yalta'  Con¬ 
ference  decisions  the  two  countries  signed  agreements  (for  a  term  of 
30  years)  on  the  Chinese  Changchon  railway,  Port  Arthur  and  port  Dalni; 
also,  “an  Agreement  on  relations  between  the  Soviet  Commander-in-Chief 
and  the  Chinese  Administration,  after  the  entry  of  Soviet  troops  into  the 
territories  of  all  the  Eastern  Provinces  of  China  in  connection  with  the 
current  joint  war  against  Japan”.  There  was  also  an  exchange  of  notes 
between  the  Chinese  and  Soviet  Foreign  Ministers  on  the  independence 
of  the  Mongolian  People’s  Republic.  *2 

On  August  9,  1945  the  Soviet  Armed  Forces  in  the  Far  East  started 
an  offensive  against  the  Kwantung  army.  On  August  10,  the  Chinese 
Commander-in-Chief  of  CPC  Troops  Zhu  De  ordered  the  popular  units 
to  accept  the  surrender  of  the  Japanese  and  puppet  troops,  to  disarm 
them  and,  in  the  event  of  resistance,  to  destroy  them;  he  also  ordered 
them  to  take  over  all  towns,  cities  and  fortified  populated  areas  and 
communications  from  the  Japanese  and  puppet  forces,  to  suppress 
attempts  to  resist  or  inflict  damage.  The  next  day,  August  11,  Zhu  De  or¬ 
dered  the  former  Dongbei  army  to  advance  towards  Chahar,  Rehe,  Liaon¬ 
ing  and  Jilin  “to  meet  and  join  the  Red  Army  of  the  Soviet  Union...  and 
also  to  make  ready  to  accept  the  surrender  of  Japanese  and  ‘Manchurian’ 
puppet  troops”.  He  Long’s  troops  in  Suiyuan  and  Ne  Rongzhen’s  troops 
in  Chahar  and  Rehe  were  ordered  to  advance  northwards  in  order  to 
meeti  and  join  forces  with  the  Mongolian  troops  and  to  make  ready  to 
accept  the  surrender  of  Japanese  and  “Mongolian”  puppet  troops.  The 
Chanxi  liberation  army  was  ordered  to  mop  up  the  whole  of  the  Datong- 
Puzhow  railway  line  and  the  Fenghe  river  valley  and  to  be  prepared  for 
the  capitulation  of  Japanese  and  puppet  troops,  as  well  as  for  entry  into 
Taiyuan.  The  same  day,  Zhu  De  ordered  all  CPC  troops  to  launch  a  gene¬ 
ral  offensive  in  order  to  establish  control  over  all  Chinese  railways  along 
which  Japanese  and  puppet  troops  were  deployed. 

On  August  14,  Zhu  De  sent  an  ultimatum  to  General  Okamura;  the 
Commander  of  Japanese  Troops  in  China  demanding  the  surrender  of 


See  A.  Savin,  "Failure  of  Japan’s  Aggressive  Plans  Against  the  Soviet  Union 
in  1942-1943’’,  Military  History  Journal,  1983,  No.  I.  In  three  years  alone  (1936-1938) 
Japan  violated  the  Soviet-Manchukuo  border  231  times,  including  35  large  armed 
clashes  {World  War  II.  A  Short  History,  Moscow,  1985,  p.  17). 

*'  Mao  Zedong,  Selected  Works,  Vol.  4,  .p  617. 

»»  See  Soviet-Chinese  Relations,  1917-1957,  Moscow,  1959,  pp.  196-206. 


149 


his  troops  to  Ne  Rongzhen  in  North  China,  Chen  Yi  in  East  China,  Li 
Xiannian  in  Hubei  and  Hanan,  and  to  Zeng  Sheng  in  Guangdong.  Chiang 
Kaishek  tried  to  interfere  with  the  CPC  troops’  right  to  accept  the  surren¬ 
der  and  even  incorporated  240,000  soldiers  and  officers  of  the  puppet  ar¬ 
mies  in  the  Guomindang  armed  forces,  ss 

Not  all  the  objectives  set  in  Zhu  De’s  orders  were  achieved.  For  instan¬ 
ce,  the  troops  failed  to  capture  the  city  of  Taiyuan,  the  administrative 
centre  of  Shanxi  province,  though  a  larger  part  of  it  had  been  turned 
into  CPC  anti-Japanese  stronghold  throughout  the  war.  US  action  pre¬ 
vented  them  from  taking  the  main  railways. 

In  the  areas  of  the  Soviet  and  Mongolian  troops’  advance,  however, 
the  8th  Army’s  positions  were  considerably  improved.  Thus,  superior 
Japanese  forces  had  surrounded  units  of  the  8th  Army  commanded  by 
Zhao  Wenjin  in  Pingquan  country  (Hebei-Rehe-Liaoning  area).  “Our  posi¬ 
tion  was  extremely  difficult’’,  wrote  Zhao  Wenjin  to  the  commander  of  the 
17th  Soviet  Army.  “The  enemy  had  concentrated  far  superior  forces 
against  us...  The  Soviet  entry  into  Manchuria  on  August  9  radically 
changed  the  balance  of  forces.  We  were  able  to  switch  from  the  defensive 
to  the  offensive.  Thus,  the  Soviet  troops  saved  us  from  destruction  and 
we  were  especially  thankful  to  them’’. 

Late  in  August  1945,  units  of  the  8th  Army  in  Shanhaiguang  joined 
with  Soviet  troops  to  move  northwards  into  Manchuria  with  their  sup¬ 
port.  The  fast  rout  of  the  one-million-strong  Kwantung  army,  the  major 
Japanese  force  in  China,  resulted  in  the  liberation  of  North-East  China, 
Inner  Mongolia  and  neighbouring  Korea.  With  Soviet  support,  the  CPC 
troops  became  entrenched  in  Manchuria.  Soviet  successes  in  Manchuria 
created  favourable  conditions  for  successful  operations  by  the  8th  and 
the  New  4th  Armies  to  liberate  a  large  part  of  North  and  Central  China. 
Within  a  month  (from  August  15  to  September  15),  they  liberated  158 
counties,  many  important  centres,  including  Zhangjiakow  (Kalgan),  Qing- 
huangdao,  Weihaiwei,  Yantai  (Chifu)  and  Hualyn — ail  in  all  over  190 
cities  and  towns.  Later,  however,  the  Guomindang  troops  recaptured  a 
number  of  cities  liberated  by  the  CPC  forces.  On  August  23,  on  behalf 
of  the  Guomindang  government.  General  He  Yinggin  ordered  the  Japa¬ 
nese  command  to  defend  to  occupied  territory  from  “illegal  armed  orga¬ 
nisations’’,  as  he  called  the  8th  and  the  New  4th  Armies.®®  Growing  clash¬ 
es  threatened  to  develop  into  a  civil  war. 

Chiang  Kaishek  and  Mao  Zedong  met  in  Chongqing  late  in  August 
1945  to  interfere  with  this  course  of  developments  and  discuss  China’s 
future.  Their  negotiations  resulted  in  the  signing  of  an  agreement  on 
October  10,  1945  to  cease  hostilities  and  call  a  political  consultative  coun¬ 
cil  composed  of  representatives  of  various  political  forces.  Aware  of  the 
unpopularity  of  a  new  civil  war,  the  growing  CPC  influence  and  an  essen¬ 
tially  changed  international  situation  in  the  Far  East,  the  Guomindang 
leaders  had  to  accept  this  compromise. 

On  September  2,  1945  Japan  capitulated.  World  War  II  was  over,  the 
victory  won  by  the  anti-fascist  coalition.  Not  oniy  the  popular  ma'sses  in 
all  countries,  but  bourgeois  statesmen  in  capitalist  countries  acknowled¬ 
ged  the  decisive  role  played  by  the  Soviet  Union  in  defeating  the  alliance 
of  fascist  aggressors. 

The  Soviet  Union  does  justice  to  China’s  contribution  to  the  struggle 
against  imperialist  Japan.  In  his  report  “The  Immortal  Feat  of  the  Soviet 
People’’,  CPSU  General  Secretary  Mikhail  Gorbachev  said,  on  behalf  of 


Referewe  Materials  on  the  History  of  the  New  Democratic  Revolution  in  China, 
Peking,  1951,  pp.  401-402  (in  Chinese). 

World  War  II...,  p.  554. 

”  See  The  History  of  Worid  War 
pp.  369-374;  Reference  Materials...,  pp.' 


//,  pp.' 259,  384;  The  General  History...,  Vol.  3, 
401-402. 


150 


all  Soviet  people:  “Completely  loyal  to  its  allied  commitments  m  World 
War  II,  our  country  played  a  tremendous  role  in  the  defeat  of  imperialist 
Japan  We  acted  in  close  combat  cooperation  with  the  great  Chinese 
people.  Soldiers  of  the  Mongolian  People’s  Republic  were  actively  invol¬ 
ved  in  the  battle  against  the  common  enemy.  A  stubborn  struggle  against 
the  Japanese  invaders  was  waged  by  patriots  in  Vietnam,  Korea  and 
other  Asian  countries.”  The  Japanese  militarists  who  had  launched 
their  aggression  against  China  as  far  back  as  the  1930s,  failed  to  i^tnple- 
ment  their  predatory  plans  (to  occupy  China  was  not  their  only  and  hnul 
aim;  they  were  building  a  springboard  there  for  an  attack  on  the  Soviet 
Union).  China  had  not  surrendered  and,  by  virtue  of  its  resistance,  had 
diverted  and  contained  large  Japanese  forces.  The  strength  of  these  forces 
varied  from  year  to  year,  the  available  relevant  data  being  controversial. 
Nonetheless,  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Japanese  officers  and  men  were 
involved  in  military  operations.  Before  the  war,  Japan  had  17  divisions 
of  land  troops  (22,000  officers  and  men  per  division),  i.  e.,  almost  380,000 
servicemen,  plus  4  secretly-formed  divisions  and  a  large  well-trained 
reserve  corps.  Several  million  conscripts  from  17  to  40  years  of  age,  had 
served  in  the  army  before  the  war.  A  400,000-strOng  Japanese  army  inva¬ 
ded  China  in  1937.  The  chief  of  the  8th  Army  staff  Ye  Jianying,  announ¬ 
ced  at  a  press  conference  for  Chinese  and  foreign  correspondents  on 
June  22,  1944  that,  by  March  1944,  there  were  34.5  Japanese  divisions 
in  China,  i.  e.,  560,000  men. 

.  The  invaders  were  opposed  by  the  armed  forces  of  the  Guotnindang 
and  the  CPC,  The  Guomindang  armies  amounted  to  3.5-4.2  million  and 
the  strength  of  the  8th,  the  New  4th  Armies  and  the  anti-Japanese  column 
of  South  China  increased  towards  the  end  of  the  war  to  1,270,000  men; 
they  were  supported  by  a  people’s  volunteer  corps  of  2.6  million. 

The  Chinese  contribution  to  the  struggle  of  the  anti-fascist  coalition 
against  imperialist  Japan  might  have  been  much  more  effective  if  two 
major  political  and  military  forces  of  the  country  had  coordinated  their 
efforts,  but,  as  a  rule,  each  of  them  acted  on  its  own.  Unlike  the  Guomin¬ 
dang,  the  CPC  strove  to  encourage  as  many  patriots  as  possible  from 
among  different  sections  of  the  population  to  help  the  army. 

i An  important  role  in  China’s  sustained  struggle  against  the  Japanese 
aggressors  was  played  by  Soviet  assistance  and  support — moral,  politi¬ 
cal,  diplomatic,  financial  and  economic,  military  and  technical,  including 
deliveries  of  aircraft  and  other  armaments,  and  the  dispatch  of  volunteer 
pilots,  military  advisers  and  other  experts.  These  factors  paralysed  the 
capitulatory  sentiments  of  Guomindang  reactionaries  and  helped  retain 
China  within  the  orbit  of  the  anti-fascist  coalition  until  the  victorious  end 
of  World  War  II. 

China’s  toll  of  human  lives  in  the  anti-Japanese  war  was  heavy.  Its 
casualties  in  World  War  II  exceeded  5  million  men.  According  to  modern 
Chinese  writers  the  Japanese  killed  and  wounded  18  million  Chinese  over 
the  eight  years  of  war,  though  many  of  these  died  of  diseases  and  under¬ 
nourishment. 

From  September  1938  to  March  1945,  the  CPC  troops  killed  and  woun¬ 
ded  over  960,000  of  Japanese  and  puppet  officers  and  men,  and  took  over 


M.  S.  Gorbachev,  The  Immortal  Feat  of  the  Soviet  People^  Moscow,  1985,  p.  14. 
^  Ste  The  History  of  the  Sino- Japanese  War,  Vol.  I,  Taipei,  1968,  p.  166  (in  Chi- 
nese);  World  War  II,  Report  on  the  General  Military  Situation  of  the  Chinese 

Communist  Party  in  the  War  of  Resistance,  By  Yeh  Chiang-ying  (s.  1.),  1944,  pp.  1-7; 
P.  Vladimirov,  Op.  cit.,  pp.  245,  272;  Proceedings  of  the  8th  All-Chinese  Congress  of 
the  CPC,  Moscow,  1956,  p.  198  (Peng  Dehuai’s  speech);  History  of  the  Anti-Japanese 
War,  p.  221.  World  Marxist  Review  esiimsiies  the  total  strength  of  China’s  armed 
forces  in  World  War  II  at  2.4  to  5.7  million  {World  Marxist  Review,  1985,  No.  5) 


151 


280,000  prisoners.  More  than  100,000  servicemen  surrendered  and  went 
over  to  the  side  of  the  8th  and  the  New  4tb  Armies,.  All,  in  all,  according 
to  this  source,  the  enemy’s  casualties  at  the  hand  of  the  CPC  troops  ap¬ 
proximated  1,360,000;  if  account  is  also  taken  of  those  put. out  of  com¬ 
mission  and  those  who  surrendered  ait  the  end  of  the  war,  the  figure  is 
claimed  to  equal -1,700,000  officers  and  men.  According  to  the  statistics 
in  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  Japanese  casualties  alone  on  all  Chin¬ 
ese  fronts  where  the  Guomindang  and  CPC  troops  operated  (excluding 
Manchuria)  amounted  to  1,330,000  killed  and  wounded.®® 

Prominent  CPC  military  leader  Ne  Rongzhen  wrote  in  1951;  “Of  course, 
the  successful  outcome  of  the  anti-Japanese  war  was  inalienable  from 
Soviet  assistance.  After  the  events  of  September  18,  1931  [when  the  Japa¬ 
nese  imperialists  occupied  North-West  China. — Af.  y.]  the  Soviet  Union 
was  alone  in  the  international  arena  in  defending  justice  and  condemning 
the  Japanese  aggressor.  From  1937  to  1941,  the  hardest  years  in  China’s 
war  of  resistance,  US  and  British  imperialists  supplied  Japan  with  stra¬ 
tegic  materials  to  be  used  for  butchering  Chinese;  they  pushed  the  Guo¬ 
mindang  government  towards  reconciliation  with  Japan  and  were  plot¬ 
ting  a  Munich  deal  in  the  Far  East.  The  Soviet  Union,  besides  expressing 
boundless  sympathy  with  the  war  of  resistance  in  China,  also  rendered 
it  all-round,  effective  assistance.  Soviet  pilots  volunteered  to  help  China 
in  its  war  against  Japan.  How  many  heroic  sons  of  the  Soviet  Union  shed 
their  blood  in  the  skies  over  China!  For  8  years  of  the  resistance  war  in 
China,  the  Soviet  Union  stood  vigilant  and  staunch  guard  over  its  Far 
Eastern  border,  containing  the  million-strong  Kwantung  army,  the 
“flower”  of  the  Emperor’s  armed  forces,  thereby  easing  the  burden  of 
China’s  war  of  resistance.  In  1945,  as  soon  as  the  Soviet  Union  had 
finished  with  the  German  monster  by  winning  a  decisive  victory  in  the 
anti-fascist  world  war,  it  immediately  declared  war  on  Japan  in  order 
to  help  liberate  China,  to  rout  the  Kwantung  army  and  make  it  surren¬ 
der,  and  to  assist  China  in  winning  a  war  of  resistance  against  Japan”.  ®® 
The  experience  of  World  War  II  indicates  how  important  it  is  for 
both  the  Soviet  Union  and  China,  for  their  interests  and  peoples  to  coope¬ 
rate  in  the  struggle  against  the  imperialist  aggressive  forces.  As  for  the 
Soviet  position,  the  April  (1985)  Plenum  of  the  CPSU  Central  Commit¬ 
tee  emphasised:  “The  Soviet  Union  will  steadfastly  and  persistently  con¬ 
solidate  its  relations  and  cooperation  with  other  socialist  countries,  in¬ 
cluding  the  Chinese  People’s  Republic”. 


”  See  World  War  II,  p.  5;  The  History  of  the  Anti-Japanese  War,  p.  221;  P  Vla- 
dimirov.  Op.  cit.,  p.  245;  Zhu  De,  Op.  cit.,  pp.  147-148;  The  History  of  World  War  II, 
Peking,  1982,  p.  718  (in  Chinese). 

Xinfianshe,  1951,  Vol.  IV,  No.  4,  p.  8. 

c  iL  Plenum  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Communist  Party 

of  the  Soviet  Union,  April  23,  1985,  Moscow,  1985,  p.  25. 


COPYRIGHT;  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


CSO;  1812/94 


152 


THREE  BOOKS  ON  JAPAN  REVIEWED 


Growing  Ambitions 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  157-161 

[Review  by  G.  G.  Morozov  of  book  ”Sozoteki  gaiko-o  mezashite"  [Constructive 
Diplomacy]  by  Shintaro  Abe,  Tokyo,  1984,  320  pages] 


In  recent  years,  Japan,  the  capitalist 
world’s  second  economic  giant,  is  loom¬ 
ing  large  more  and  more  frequently  on 
the  international  scene.  Japan's  economic, 
scientific  and  technological  breakthroughs 
are  beyond  doubt.  Its  original  culture  is 
gaining  increasing  popularity  the  world 
over.  But  what  strikes  the  eye  are  the  conti¬ 
nuous,  regular  attempts  of  its  ruling  circles 
to  step  up  Japan’s  political  influence  on  the 
international  community  to  match,  as  they 
say,  the  country’s  increased  postwar  econo¬ 
mic  potential.  The  objective  has  been  made 
official  policy,  with  increasing  priority 
being  assigned  to  active  foreign  policy 
action  as  a  means  of  achieving  it. 

The  world  community  would  welcome 
effective  Japanese  initiatives  in  favour  of 
international  peace  and  cooperation  between 
states  .with  different  social  and  political 
systems,  especially  since  Japan  was  the  first 
victim  of  an  atomic  bombing  and  shortly 
after  World  War  II.  constitutionally  renoun¬ 


ced  possession  of  armed  forces  and  warfare. 
Yet  the  present  leadership,  as  the  facts  show, 
sees  its  goal  as  the  “final  summing  up’’  of 
World  War  II’s  results  and  is  not  at  all 
anxious  to  contribute  in  any  way  to  impro¬ 
ving  the  international  situation. 

The  publication  of  a  book  dealing  with 
Japan’s  foreign  policy  in  the  1980s  and  the 
•country’s  present-day  and  longer-term  diplo¬ 
matic  aims  and  tasks  is  undoubtedly  of 
great  interest,  especially  since  its  author  is 
the  current  Japanese  Foreign  Minister  — 
;Shintaro  Abe. 

Strictly  speaking,  the  book  under  review 
is  not  structured  as  a  scientific  work.  It  has 
.a  “question  and  answer’’  pattern.  The  ques¬ 
tions  are  asked  by  N.  Nagano,  a  correspon¬ 
dent  of  the  Tokyo  shimbun  paper  and  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  influential  Kasumi  club  of  jour¬ 
nalists  accredited  with  the  Japanese  Fo¬ 
reign  Office.  The  questions  and  answers  are 
grouped  in  specific  problem-based  chapters 
and  cover  the  whole  range  of  Japanese 


153 


diplomacy  —  from  global  to  regional  prob¬ 
lems  with  which  Tokyo  has  to  deal  in  the 
conduct  of  its  foreign  policy.  The  status  and 
role  of  the  Foreign  Ministry  in  Japan’s 
administrative  machinery  and  higher  efficien¬ 
cy  of  its  operation  are  also  highlighted. 

The  narration  is  free  and  easy,  in  the 
form  of  a  lively  dialogue,  interspersed  with 
occasional  stories  and  episodes  from  S. 
Abe’s  diplomatic  experiences,  to  step  up  the 
reader’s  “presence”  effect  and  provide  a  hu¬ 
man  touch  to  this  important  political  figure 
in  present-day  Japan,  which  is  essential  to 
his  obvious  future  career. 

S.  Abe’s  career  has  been  swift  (his  life 
story  is  given  in  detail  in  the  book).  Born 
in  1924,  in  the  Yamaguchi  prefecture  (the 
southern  part  of  the  Honshu  Island)  he  ser¬ 
ved  some  time  in  the  Emperor’s  army;  after 
graduating  from  the  prestigious  department 
of  law  of  Tokyo  university  in  1949,  for  se¬ 
ven  years  he  was  on  the  staff  of  the  politi¬ 
cal  section  of  Japan’s  largest  newspaper 
Mainichi  shlmbun.  In  1956  he  was  appointed 
personal  secretary  to  the  Foreign  Minister; 
the  following  year,  S.  Abe  was  assigned  as 
personal  aide  to  the  then  Prime  Minister  N. 
Kishi,  whose  elder  daughter  he  married. 
S.  Abe  started  on  an  independent  political 
career  in  1958,  when  elected  to  the  House 
of  Representatives  on  an  LDP  ticket.  In  sub¬ 
sequent  years,  he  held  top  posts  in  the  par 
ty  and  government,  specifically,  minister  of 
agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries,  general 
secretary  to  the  cabinet  of  ministers  and  mi¬ 
nister,  of  foreign  commerce  and  industry. 
As  a  prominent  member  of  the  Fukuda  facti¬ 
on  of  the  LDP  and  one  of  the  “new  leaders”, 
S.  Abe  ran  for  chairmanship  but  lost  to  Ya. 
Nakasone.  In  1982  Premier  Nakasone  appoin¬ 
ted  S.  Abe  foreign  minister. 

From  the  very  outset,  Nakasone’s  Cabinet 
has  headed  for  Japan’s  military  buildup  and 
more  extensive  military  and  political  coope¬ 
ration  with  the  USA  and  NATO.  S.  Abe’s 
essential  role  as  a  key  figure  in  the  cabi¬ 
net  formulating  these  obviously  anti-Soviet 
plans  cannot  be  denied,  as  the  book  under 
review  shows  amply  and  convincingly. 

Neither  is  the  time  chosen  for  its  publi¬ 
cation  accidental.  By  the  autumn  of  1984, 
Abe-steered  Japanese  diplomacy  had  made 
enough  “breakthroughs”  to  cause  severe 
criticism  of  Nakasone’s  Cabinet  at  home  and 
abroad.  The  book  was  intended  as  a  broad¬ 
side  in  the  propaganda  war  against  oppo¬ 
nents  of  Japanese  foreign  policy  and,  at  the 
same  time,  as  easily  available  information 
“for  consideration”  by  those  who  Had  not 
yet  taken  a  clearcut  stand  on  this  point. 


S.  Abe’s  main  purpose  is  to  make  poten¬ 
tial  readers  believe  that  Japanese  foreign 
policy  is  “good  and  right”,  just,  democratic 
and  independent. 

To  produce  this  impression,  Abe  assures 
the  reader  that  the  “major  goal”  of  Japane¬ 
se  diplomacy  in  the  1980s  is  “peace  and  dis¬ 
armament;  then,  settlement  of  regional 
conflicts;  and,  finally,  improved  relations 
between  North  and  South”. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Foreign  Minis¬ 
ter  is  very  reticent  about  Japan’s  role  in 
the  important  sphere  of  disarmament. 
Saying  that  “war  may  break  out  acciden¬ 
tally”  (p.  23)  he  actually  absolves  Japan  of 
any  liability  for  its  unqualified  support  of 
the  US  aggressive  policies  with  respect  to  a 
world  nuclear  cohflict. 

Abe’s  anti-Soviet  leanings  are  more  pro¬ 
nounced  in  his  answers  to  tendentious  ques¬ 
tions  (of  which  there  are  many  in  the 
book).  He  speaks  profusely  about  the  threat 
to  Japan  stemming  from  the  “growing  So¬ 
viet  might”  and  seeks  to  intimidate  the  rea¬ 
der  with  the  deployment  of  SS-20  medium- 
range  missiles  in  Soviet  Asia  in  the  event 
that  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  USA  agree 
to  reduce  them  in  Europe  (p,  31).  He  com¬ 
pletely  disregards  the  declaration  of  the  So¬ 
viet  Government,  made  in  1983,  to  the  effect 
that  any  missiles  reduced  would  be  dismant¬ 
led,  instead  of  being  shipped  to  the  Soviet 
Far  East”*. 

S.  Abe  claims  that  an  alternative  to  the 
“threat”  (of  his  own  invention)  is  accep¬ 
tance  by  the  Soviet  Union  of  Reagan’s  “zero 
option”  (which  is  notorious  for  its  full  ne¬ 
gation  of  the  principle  of  equal  security  of 
both  parties).  Enlarging  on  the 
alleged  threat  of  Soviet  medium-range 
missiles  to  Japan,  S.  Abe  suggests,  in  pas¬ 
sing,  that  China  is  also  “jeopardised”. 

He  keeps  mum,  however,  about  the  So¬ 
viet  Union's  unilateral  pledge  not  to  use 
nuclear  weapons  first. 

S.  Abe  misses  no  chance  to  put  the  bla¬ 
me  on  the  Soviet  Union  for  the  tragic  crash 
of  the  South  Korean  spy  plane  in  Soviet 
air  space.  He  makes  no  mention,  of  course, 
of  Japan’s  unseemly  complicity  in  the  inci¬ 
dent. 

Abe  makes  countless  references  to  the 
hackneyed  “increased  Soviet  threat”  in  an 
attempt  to  justify  Japan’s  rapid  arms  build¬ 
up.  According  to  him,  the  postwar  peace 
and  security  of  Japan  were  achieved  mainly 


*  See  Pravda,  Aug.  27,  1983. 


154 


by  the  “deterrent  force*',  composed  of  ^the 
Japanese  “self-defence  forces’*  and  the  US 
nuclear  potential.  He  is  sure,  he  says  “this 
is  the  only  way  to  ensure  Japan’s  peace  and 
security  in  the  future**  (p.  82).  To  sweeten 
the  pill,  he  maked  reassurances  that 
this  does  not  mean  that  Japan  “will  make 
war**. 

The  future  will  show  whether  this  is  so  or 
not.  Meanwhile,  large-scale  war  preparations 
in  Japan  are  characterised,  specifically,  by 
major  increases  in  the  country’s  military  bud¬ 
get.  Last  year’s  decisions  by  the  Nakasone 
Cabinet  may  shortly  result  in  the  symbolic 
one  per-cent  GNP  ceiling  for  military  spen¬ 
ding,  set  by  the  Japanese  government  in 
1976,  being  exceeded,  which  is  obviously  the 
reason  for  S.  Abe’s  deliberate  evasiveness  on 
this  point:  he  wants  room  for  manoeuvre  in 
the  future. 

He  takes  a  similar  stand  on  Japan’s  com¬ 
pliance  with  the  “three  non-nuclear  princip¬ 
les’*.  S.  Abe  denies  imports  of  US  nuclear 
arms  to  Japan  in  violation  of  these  princip¬ 
les,  though  the  facts  are  common  knowledge. 
He  alleges  that  the  US*Japanese  “security 
treaty”  system  and  the  “three  non-nuclear 
principles”  “do  not  conflict  with  each  other” 
(p.  88).  He  urges  the  Japanese  people  “to 
put  right  their  misconceptions”  about  the 
unlawful  presence  of  US  nuclear  facilities  in 
Japan.  The  hypocrisy  of  these  appeals  is 
especially  striking  now,  in  the  context  of 
the  40th  anniversary  of  the  atomic  bombing 
of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki. 

Abe  evades  a  straightforward  answer  to 
the  “hot”  home  and  international  issue  of 
the  Japanese  navy’s  potrolling  of  sealanes 
at  a  distance  of  one  thousand  miles 
off  the  coasts  of  Japan.  All  he  says  is:  “this 
is  natural  for  an  independent  country  such 
as  Japan”  (p.  91). 

Japan’s  intention  to  blockade,  “in  the 
event  of  an  emergency”,  three  international 
Straits  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Japanese  islands 
the  Minister  Justifies  by  the  right  of  the 
country  to  self-defence.  In  fact,  it  is  an  at¬ 
tempt  by  the  Japanese  government  to  re¬ 
serve  the  “privilege”  of  violating,  at  its  own 
discretion,  international  law,  to  which  it 
willingly  resorts  when  it  suits  its  interests. 

These  plans  are  openly  hostile  to  the 
Soviet  Union,  with  which  Japan  maintains 
diplomatic  relations.  Discussing  Soviet-Ja- 
panese  relations,  S.  Abe  gives  a  biased  ana¬ 
lysis  of  the  causes  of  their  present  unsatis¬ 
factory  condition.  Paying  lip-service  to  Ja¬ 
pan’s  desire  “to  extend  friendly  relations 


with  the  Soviet  Union”  (p.  149),  he  seeks 
to  prove  that  their  improvement  is  “hampe¬ 
red”  by  a  “unilateral  Soviet  arms  buildup” 
in  the  Far  East,  and  the  sending  of  a  limited 
contingent  of  Soviet  troops  to  Afghanistan 
at  the  request  of  its  lawful  government.  The 
justified  concern  of  the  Soviet  people  over 
the  rebirth  of  Japanese  militarism,  in 
S.  Abe’s  opinion,  is  “sheer  propaganda”. 
The  main  obstacle  to  better  Soviet-Japanese 
relations,  according  to  Abe,  is  the  “terri¬ 
torial  problem”  (?)  to  which,  he  opines, 
increasing  international  attention  should  be 
drawn.  The  Minister  makes  no  miention  of 
either  the  Soviet  initiatives  on  confidence¬ 
building  measures  in  the  Far  East  or  the 
proposal  of  the  Soviet  Union  for  a  treaty 
of  goodneighbourly  relations  and  cooperati¬ 
on  with  Japan.  The  problem,  he  claims,  is 
that  the  “USSR  seriously  errs  concerning 
Japan’s  stance”  (p.  78). 

Despite  his  openly  unfriendly  thrusts 
against  the  Soviet  Union,  S.  Abe  holds 
that  Japan  should  not  reject  a  dialogue  with 
its  great  Northern  neighbour. 

S.  Abe  qualifies  “economic  frictions” 
with  the  USA  and  Western  Europe  as  “the 
major  problem  facing  Japan”  (p.  233).  He 
leaves  no  doubt,  however,  that  Tokyo  is  not 
going  to  make  voluntary  concessions  to  its 
competitors  in  the  “economic  war”.  He  sug¬ 
gests  that  efforts  should  be  made  by 
“both  sides”.  Counselling  these  countries  on 
what  should  be  done  to  improve  their  ad¬ 
verse  balances  of  trade  with  Japan,  he 
half-jokingly  advises  them  “to  make  a  bet¬ 
ter  study  of  the  Japanese  language” 
(p.  235). 

In  spite  of  these  differences,  S.  Abe  never 
tires  to  re-emphasise  that  alliance  with 
Washington  is  the  backbone  of  Japanese 
diplomacy.  He  believes,  however,  that  in¬ 
ternational  cooperation  with  the  USA  in 
different  areas  must  be  effected  “from  inde¬ 
pendent  positions”,  so  that  the  actions  of 
both  countries  are  not  identified  in  the  eyes 
of  the  world  public. 

He  considers,  for  example,  that  a  diffe¬ 
rent  approach  by  the  two  countries  to  the 
rendering  of  economic  “aid”  to  developing 
countries  rnakes  it  more  efficient,  adding  up 
to  the  respective  efforts  of  Tokyo  and  Wa¬ 
shington.  He  points  out  that  Japan  is  beco¬ 
ming  more  and  more  important  for  the  USA 
and  explicitly  warns  that  “should  the  USA 
lose  a  partner  like  Japan,  its  relative  weight 
in  the  world  will  plummet”  (p.  105). 

Iq  an  attempt  to  demonstrate  that  Ja- 


155 


pan’s  “aid"  is  selfless  and  is  rendered  not 
only  to  those  countries  in  which  Japan  is 
most  interested  because  of  their  rich  mi? 
neral  resources,  Abe  mentions  Paraguay  -r- 
‘•an  agrarian  country  with  poor  resources’W 
which  gets  more  economic  aid  from  Japan 
than  fron^  any  other  country  in  the  worjd 
(p.  195).  The  example  could  not  be  more 
“unhappy",  as  the  motives  behind  this  pid 
are  to  bolster  the  fascist  dictatorship  of  Ge¬ 
neral  Stressner,  notorious  among  other  things 
for  concealing  nazi  war  criminpls  from 
justice.  The  example  cited  by  the  Foreign 
Minister  clearly  illustrates  both  the  politi¬ 
cal  colouring  of  the  Japanese  “aid"  and  the 
extending  geography  of  Japanese  interests 
to  a  global  scale. 

Tokyo’s  interest  in  areas  of  traditional 
influence,  such  as  Southeast  Asia,  has  not 
waned  either.  Touching  on  the  Tokyp-spppor^ 
ted  undeclared  war  waged  by  the  Pol  Pot 
bands  against  the  People’s  Republic  of  Kam¬ 
puchea,  S.  Abe  commends  Japan  for  being 
second  to  none  in  the  world  in  providing 
“aid"  to  Kampuchean  “refugees"  who 
have  found  shelter  in  neighbouring  Thailand 
(p.  52). 

S.  Abe  stands  for  overthrowing  Kampu¬ 
chea’s  lawful  government,  which  is  supported 
by  an  absolute  majority  of  the  Khmer  peo¬ 
ple,  exercises  control  over  the  country, 
and  is  offlcially  recognised  by  many  states. 
Judging  by  everything,  he  is  UUle  concer¬ 
ned  about  what  would  happen  tO  the  long- 
suffering  people  of  Kampuchea  in  the  event 
of  a  comeback  by  the  Pol  Pot  murderer^-  He 
says,  in  passing,  that  the  Pol  Pot  clique’s 
genocide  of  the  Khmer  people,  though  to  be 
condemned,  “is  their  own  headache"  (p.  53). 
He  is  much  more  vexed  by  Vietnam’s  In¬ 
ternationalist  assistance  to  the  Khmer  people 
|n  creating  conditions  for  Kampuchea's 
peaceful  development.  To  give  weight  to 
japan’s  position,  3.  Abe  says  that  "the  With^ 
drawal  of  Vietnamese  tropps"  is  alap  de* 
manded  by  A3EAN  countries  and  ChinSi 

At  the  same  time,  Abe  asserts  that 
pan  will  continue  to  use  its  earlier  establlshT 
ed  diplomatic  relations  with  Vietnam,  to 
continue  a  dialogue  with  this  country,  )t 
must  be  noted  that  a  dialogue  of  this  kirid 
is  of  no  value  to  peace  |n  Southeast  Asia, 
as  Tokyo  actively  supports  the  self-styled 
^’coalition  government  of  democratic  Kam¬ 
puchea"  composed  of  Pol  Pot's  bloody  but¬ 
chers.  U  is  an  open  secret,  however,  that  laeH 
of  progress  in  relations  between  the  ASEAN 
and  Indochina  suits  Japan’s  interests  per-? 


fectly,  as  it  enables  Tokyo,  first,  to  exert 
pressure  on  the  forces  of  existing  socialism 
in  Indochina  with  the  aim  of  harrassing  and 
weakening  them;  second,  to  enhance  its  poli¬ 
tical  role  in  Indochina’s  affairs;  and,  third, 
to  distract  ASEAN  countries  from  the  ur¬ 
gent  problems  of  their  development,  inclu¬ 
ding  those  stemming  from  the  non-equiva¬ 
lent  economic  exchange  with  Japan. 

That  this  is  so  can  be  judged  from 
S.  Abe’s  equivocal  reply  to  the  question  con¬ 
cerning  Japan’s  reaction  to  the  ASEAN 
countries’  “expectations".  Japan,  he  feels, 

;  ought  to  go  on  developing  “cooperation", 
“dialogue”  and  “humanitarian  .  exchanges" 
with  them.  Brushing  specifics  aside,  he  puts 
it  plainly:  “The  ASEAN  countries  pin  great 
hopes  on  Japan’s  political  role  in  the  Asian- 
Pacific  region"  (p.  137).  Wishful  thinking, 
indeed,  as  these  countries  take  advantage 
of  every  convenient  opportunity  to  remind 
Japan  that  the  existing  relations  of  inequali¬ 
ty  must  be  changed. 

Not  only  the  .Soviet  Union  voices  con¬ 
cern  about  Japan’s  military  buildup.  S.  Abe 
js  specifically  sensitive  to  criticisms  from 
ASEAN  countries,  which  Japan  considers  as 
the  main  base  for  spreading  its  influence  in^ 
Asia.  Yet,  except  for  a  general  statement 
carrying  little  conviction,  to  the  effect  that 
“Japan  will  not  follow  the  prewar  pattern  of 
becoming  a  strong  military  power"  (p.  94), 
the  Minister  has  nothing  to  say  to  refute  the 
facts  that  belie  his  words  and  the  actual 
state  of  affairs. 

Good  relations  with  ASEAN  countries 
are  also  important  to  Japan  in  the  light  of 
its  ruling  circles’  new  plan  for  a  “Pacific 
Community"  as,  “at  the  turn  of  a  new  cen¬ 
tury,  the  Pacific  Ocean  is  assuming  much 
greater  significance"  (p.  144),  points  out  the 
Japanese  Foreign  Minister.  It  follows  from 
what  he  says  that  the  “Pacific  concept"  is 
a  basic  principle  of  Japanese  foreign  policy 
today.  It  is  important,  adds  S.  Abe,  that  the 
plan  enjoys  President  Reagan’s  personal 
support  and  ought  to  be  further  elaborated 
by  Japan,  the  USA,  Canada,  Australia,  New 
Zealand  and  ASEAN  countries.  The  Minis¬ 
ter  is  pleased  with  the  certain  progress  ach¬ 
ieved  of  late  in  the  “Pacific  economic  coo¬ 
peration"  imposed  on  ASEAN  countries. 
American  and  Japanese  strategists  view  it  as 
the  first  phase  in  realising  their  imperialist 
designs  of  knocking  togetheif  a  new  military 
and  political  bloc  in  the  Pa4fic,  spearheaded 
against  the  Soviet  Union  and  its  allies. 
If  and  when  it  emerges,  the  character  of  the 


156 


US-Japanese  partnership  may  undergo  a 
radical  change.  Without  accentuating  this 
point,  S.  Abe  nonetheless  remarks  that  “in 
the  distant  future,  Japan  should  speak  with 
the  USA  as  an  equaT  (p.  110). 

In  pursuit  of  official  recognition  of  Ja¬ 
pan  as  a  “great  political  power**,  the  Ja¬ 
panese  government  pays  special  attention  to 
its  diplomacy  in  the  UN.  In  his  book,  S.Abe 
claims  permanent  membership  for  Japan  on 
the  Security  Council.  Japan  meets  all  the 
standards  and  requirements  for  this,,  he  as¬ 
serts,  omitting,  however,  any  reference  to 
Japan*s  pro-American  posture  towards 
UNESCO  which  is  detrimental,  to  the  func¬ 
tioning  of  this  major  United  Nations  spe¬ 
cialised  agency  or,  to  be  more  accurate,  is 
aimed  at  its  abolition.  Aware  that  getting  a 
permanent  seat  in  the  Security  Council  may 
pose  a  few  difficulties,  S.  Abe  admits  with 
regret  that  “it  is  a  matter  of  the  more  dis¬ 
tant  future*’  (p.  205). 

Meanwhile,  every  effort  should  be  made 
now  ‘‘to  strengthen  Japanese  diplomacy”. 
For  this  purpose  Abe  suggests  an  increase 
in  the  Foreign  Office’s  budget  (which  is 
dwarfed  not  only  by  that  of  the.  USA,  but 
also  by  West  Germany,  Britain  and  Fran¬ 
ce)  and  staff  (from  3,795  to  5,000  diplo¬ 
mats)  ^ 

More  active  foreign  policy  propaganda 
is  another  means  for  achieving  greater  effici¬ 
ency  of  Japanese  diplomacy,  S.  Abe  belie¬ 
ves  Japan’s  funds  for  these  purposes  are 
also  less  than  those  .in  the  above-mentioned 
countries.  More  emphasis  in  this  work, 
he  says,  will  be  laid  on  “explaining**  to  oth¬ 
er  countries  the  “economic  frictions”  with 
industrial  Western  nations,  the  “economic 
cooperation”  with  developing  countries  and 
Japan’s  defence  buildup. 

Abe  sums  up  what  he  wrote  earlier  in 
the  book  by  formulating  a  sort  of.  foreign 
policy  platform  of  his  own.r  He  thinks  that 
the  far-reaching  plans  of  the  Japanese  lea¬ 
dership  can  be  helped  along  and ; accelerated 
through  a  “constructive  diplomacy**^,  based 
on  the  following  principles: 

First,  “to  keep  on  building  relations  of 
confidence  and  cooperation”  with  Western 
countries,  specifically  the  USA. 


2  For  comparison,  the  author  cites  the 
following  diplomatic  staff  figures  for  indivi¬ 
dual  countries:  USA,  14,944;  Britain,  9,261; 
France,  7,  228;  West  Germany,  6,  743;  and 
Italy,  5,  156.  See  S.  Abe,  Op,  cit.,  pp.  263- 


Second,  “to  develop  relations  of  friend¬ 
ship  and  cooperation”  with  the  neighbouring 
countriei  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region.  “The 
stability  and  prosperity  of  this  region**,  says 
S.  Abe,  “is  of  vital  importance  for  the  well¬ 
being  and  peaceful  progress  of  Japan*** 

Third,  “to  form  relations  of  mutual 
trust  with  Eastern  countries  by  means  ■  of 
dialogue”  [S.  Abe  means  the  Soviet  Union 
and  other  socialist  countries.  —  G,  M.]. 

Fourth,  “to  promote  the  growth  of  de¬ 
veloping  countries  through  economic  ex¬ 
change  with  them”. 

Fifth,  “to  intensify  diplomatic  efforts 
towards  disarmament  and  detente**,  inclu¬ 
ding  preventing  the  spread  of  regional  con¬ 
flicts. 

Like  the  whole  book,  of  course,  these 
propositions  have  a  heavy  touch  of  propa¬ 
ganda  rhetoric,  as  can  easily  be  seen  if  we 
compare  the  words  and  the  actual  deeds  of 
the  Tokyo  strategists.  Nonetheless,  analysis 

of  this  foreign  policy  platform  indicates 
that  Japanese  governing  circles  are  rid  of 
the  “syndrome  of  World  War  II”  instiga¬ 
ted,  among  others,  by  Tokyo  and,  being 
confident  of  their  increased  potential,  have 
decided  to  stake  on  revenge  for  the  inglo¬ 
rious  defeat  forty  years  back.  The  idea 
whets  imperialist  Japan’s  insatiable  appetite 
and  nourishes  its  Gargantuan  ambitions, 
which  today  constitute  a  serious  threat  to 
world  peace. 

In  conclusion,  S.  Abe  voices  the  idea 
that  pursuance  of  these  minute,  narrow  prac¬ 
tical  ends  cannot  but  injure  Japan’s 
true  national  interests.  There  is  no  de¬ 
nying  this  inference.  Yet,  while  Japan,  in 
conjunction  with  the  USA,  continues  to  pur¬ 
sue  a  policy  hostile  to  peace,  goodneighbour- 
ly  relations  and  just  international  cbopera- 
tion,  ways  to  win  real  prestige  amongst  the 
world  community  will  be  blocked  to  it. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


157 


Japan's  Past,  Present  Military 

Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  161-165 

[Review  by  V.  N.  Khlynov  of  book  "Vooruzhennyye  slly  Yaponii.  Istoriya  1 
sovremennost  (k  40-letiyu  razgrotna  militaristskoy  Yaponii  vo  vtoroy  mirovoy 
voyne)"  [Japanese  Armed  Forces.  Past  and  Present  (On  the  40th  Anniversary  of 
the  Defeat  of  Militarist  Japan  in  World  War  II) ] ,  Glavnaya  redaktslya 
vostochnoy  literatury  izdatelstva  "Nauka,"  1985,  326  pages,  maps, 
illustrations] 


The  signing  40  years  ago,  on  Septem¬ 
ber  2,  1945,  of  the  Act  on  Militaristic  Ja¬ 
pan’s  Unconditional  Surrender  finally 
brought  the  Second  World  War- — the  most 
devastating  and  blood-letting  war  in  the 
history  of  mankind  —  to  an  end.  Unleas¬ 
hed  by  nazi  Germany,  the  war  brought 
tremendous  disaster  and  suffering ,  for  the 
people  of  the  world,  especially  the  Soviet 
people,  who  bore  the  brunt  of  that  most 
horrible  tragedy  of  our  time.  The  Soviet 
Union  lost  20  million  lives  and  a  third  of 
its  national  wealth  in  that  war.  Even  the 
most  zealous  falsifiers  of  history  are  power¬ 
less  to  refute  this. 

The  Soviet  people  regarded  the  war  as 
a  Great  Patriotic  War.  It  ended  in  a  his¬ 
toric  victory  over  German  fascisin  and  Ja¬ 
panese  militarism,  a  victory  won  by  the 
most  advanced  social  system,  socialism,  by 
the  forces  of  peace  and  progress,  which 
overcame  those  of  reaction  and  war, 


Japan  entered  tlie  Second  World  War  as 
nazi  Germany's  ally  when  it  made  a  surp¬ 
rise  piratical  attack,  oh  December  7,  1941, 
on  Pearl  Harbour,  a  US  Pacific  naval  ba¬ 
se.  Japanese  naval  and  air  forces  attacked 
it  unexpectedly,  even  before  war  had  been 
declared  on  the  United  States,  and  thus  in¬ 
flicted  a  serious  moral  and  military  damage 
•  to  the  country.  Washington  decided  to  “pu- 
;  nish"  Japan  for  this.  At  the  very  end  of  the 
'war  in  the  Pacific,  when  its  outcome  had 
already  been  determined  as  the  Kwantung 
Army,  Japan’s  basic  force,  had,  in  effect, 
been  routed  by  Soviet  troops,  the  United 
States  committed  an  even  more  ruthless  and 
unjustified  act  of  modern  vandalism.  By  nee¬ 
dlessly  using  a  terrible  new  weapon  of  mass 
destruction,  the  atomic  bomb,  which  was  un¬ 
known  to  the  world  at  the  time,  the  United 
States  wiped  two  peaceful  Japanese  cities  — 

^  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  —  from  the  face  of 
the  Earth,  and  deliberately  doomed  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  their  inhabitants  to  death 
and  to  physical  and  moral  suffering  that 
continues  to  this  day. 

These  lessons  from  the  history  of  the 
Second  World  War,  like  the  war  itself,  can¬ 
not  help  but  arouse  deep  reflection  and  appre¬ 
hension  today.  They  come  to  mind  unwittingly. 
Under  current  conditions,  when  huge  stockpi¬ 
les  of  nuclear  weapons  have  been  accumu¬ 
lated  in  the  world,  the  present  US  admi- 


158 


nistration  is  out  to  whip  up  international 
tension  and  nurtures  insane  plans  for  so- 
called  “star  wars”.  With  the  active  support 
of  Japan,  the  world’s  second  biggest  capi¬ 
talist  country  in  terms  of  its  economic, 
scientific  and  technological  potential,  Wa¬ 
shington  is  seeking  to  turn  the  Pacific  Ocean 
basin  into  an  eastern  front  of  struggle 
against  world  socialism  and  the  national 
liberation  movement. 

In  this  context,  far  from  idle  questions 
arise:  Have  the  lessons  of  recent  history 
been  forgotten?  Do  the  present-day  leaders 
of  Japan  remember  them? 

The  answers  to  these  questions,  which 
are  the  reason  for  deep  concern  of  people 
all  over  the  world  today,  can  be  found  in 
the  collective  monograph  under 
review,  which  features  the  history  and 
present-day  development  of  Japan  as  a  mi¬ 
litary  power.  Among  its  authors  are  leading 
experts  of  the  Institute  for  Military  His¬ 
tory  Studies  under  the  USSR  Ministry  of 
Defence  and  of  a  number  of  research  cent¬ 
res  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences. 

The  aufhors  examine  the  formation  and 
development  of  the  Japanese  armed  forces 
against  the  broad  historical  background  and 
with  due  account  of  the  social,  economic, 
and  political  problems  of  the  evolution  of 
Japanese  capitalism.  The  in-depth  and  comp¬ 
rehensive  analysis  of  numerous  historical 
facts  and  documents,  some  of  which  have 
been  made  public  in  this  country  for  the 
first  time,  enables  the  authors  to  trace  the 
formation  and  buildup  of  the  Japanese  ar¬ 
med  forces  step-by-step,  from  the  period  of 
the  incomplete  bourgeois  Meiji  revolution 
(1867-1868)  and  to  the  present  day.  The 
study  is  marked  by  unquestionable  topica¬ 
lity,  not  only  because  the  subject  is  impor¬ 
tant  in  itself,  but  also  because  the 
analysis  is  made  from  the  position  of  our 
time,  from  the  constructive  position  of 
the  need  to  ensure  peace  and  security  on 
Earth  and  avert  threat  of  nuclear  war  that 
looms  large  over  humanity  today. 

The  first  part  of  the  .  monograph  deals 
with  the  history  of  the  Japanese  armed  for¬ 
ces.  In  it,  the  authors  feature  a  rather  long 
and  eventful  period  in  the  history  of  Japan 
and  international  relations,  from  the  Meiji 
revolution  up  to  the  end  of  World  War  II. 
They  prove  convincingly  that  the  period  was 
characterised  by  a  purposeful  policy  pur¬ 
sued  by  the  Japanese  militarists  with  the 
aim  to  create,  constantly  strengthen  and  use 
the  armed  forces  for  aggression  against 


other  lands  proclaimed  “vitally  impor¬ 
tant”  to  Japan  and  .for  capturing  them. 
It  goes  to  the  authors*  credit  that  they  suc¬ 
ceeded  not  to  repeat  known  truths,  but 
view  historical  facts  thoroughly  studied  by 
Soviet  historians  and  experts  from  a  new 
and  unconventional  angle.  These  include  the 
Japanese  aggression  against  China  (1884- 
1885),  the  Russo-Japanese  war  of  1904-1905, 
Japan’s  participation  in  World  War  I,  the 
Japanese  intervention  against  Soviet  Rus¬ 
sia  (1918-1922),  aggressive  actions  by  the 
Japanese  militarists  against  the  Soviet  Union 
and  countries  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region 
(1927-1939),  that  is,  all  the  main  events  in 
the  history  of  international  relations  in  the 
years  preceding  the  Second  World  War.  Of 
major  interest  to  readers,  including  milita¬ 
ry  experts,  will  be  the*  short,  but  very  com¬ 
petent,  analysis  of  the  military  preparations 
and  operations  (of  a  tactical  and  strategic 
nature)  of  the  Japanese  armed  forces  short¬ 
ly  before  and  during  the  events  mentioned 
above.  Instructive  is  a  brief  section  of  the 
research  devoted  to  the  military  and  ideo¬ 
logical  brainwashing  of  the  population  and 
the  armed  forces,  which  was  systematically 
practised  by  Japanese  militarist  circles  .to 
achieve  “unity  of  the  nation  against  the 
common  enemy”  and  Justify  the  “legality” 
of  acts  of  aggression  against  neighbouring 
countries  and  nations. 

The  authors  analysed  Japan’s  home  and 
foreign  policies  prior  to  World  War  II.  parti¬ 
cularly  its  ruling  quarters’  deliberate  efforts 
to  create  and  constantly  reinforce  the  Japa¬ 
nese  armed  forces  as  an  instrument  of  ag¬ 
gression  and  suppression  of  their  own  people. 
This  enabled  the  authors  to  arrive  at  the 
following  conclusion:  “By  subjecting  the  po¬ 
pulation  to  heavy  ideological  brainwashing 
and  by  pursuing  a  policy  of  terror  on  a 
broad  scale,  the  Japanese  ruling  elite  succe¬ 
eded  in  making  the  people  obedient  to  the 
will  of  the  exploiting  classes  and  of  the  mi-^ 
Htary-fascist  regime.  The  armed  forces  were  ( 
subjected  to  a  particular  pressure  by  the  mi¬ 
litarist  propaganda,  which  turned  them  into 
an  obedient  instrument ‘6f  the  policy  of  ag¬ 
gression  pursued  by  the  Japanese  military...” 
(p.  48). 

A  special  chapter  in  the  first  part  of  the 
study  features  the  performance  of  the  Japa¬ 
nese  armed  forces  during  the  Second  World' 
War.  The  authors  have  supplied  it  amply 
with  documentary  evidence  and  facts  thro¬ 
wing  light  on  the  strategic  plans  entertained 
by  Japan’s  leadership  at  the  time,  on  mili- 


159 


tary  operations  carried  out  by  the  Japanese 
army,  specific  features  of  ground  operations, 
the  preparations  for  and  conducting  of  ope¬ 
rations  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  the  defeat 
by  Soviet  troops  of  the  Kwantung  Army— 
the  main  military  grouping  of  Japanese  mi¬ 
litarism.  The  chapter  logically  ends  with  an 
analysis  of  Japan's  unconditional  surrender, 
which'  marked  the  end  of  World  War  11. 

In  analysing  the  causes  of  the  defeat  of 
Japanese  militarism,  the  authors  prove  unfo¬ 
unded  the  proposition  intensely  advocated  of 
late  by  some  bourgeois ’scholars  and  military 
experts  seeking  to  falsify  the  history  of  the 
Second  World  War.  They  assert  that  the  US 
atomic  hombing  of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki 
played  a  “crucial  role"  in  Japan's  defeat  and 
that  the  United  States  was  “forced'*  to  use 
nuclear  arms.  “The  use  of  the  atomic  bombs'*, 
the  authors  write,  “did  not,  the  facts  indicate, 
make  Japanese  ruling  quarters  decide  imme¬ 
diately  on  the  surrender.  They  continued  ma¬ 
noeuvring,  as  before...  In  short,  the  atomic 
bombs  were  no  substitute  for  massive  armies, 
nor  did  they  bring  Japan  to  its  knees  im¬ 
mediately.  With  the  still  strong  land  forces 
at  their  disposal,  the  Japanese  military  con¬ 
tinued  putting  up  resistance.  But  when  the 
Soviet  troops  dealt  a  smashing  blow  to  the 
Kwantung  grouping,  even  the  most  enthu¬ 
siastic  advocates,  among  the  Japanese  ruling 
quarters,  of  the  war  to  be  continued,  at  once 
spoke  out  unanimously...  in  favour  of  ending 
it.  There  was  no  other  way  out"  (p.  92). 

Stressing  how  important  the  rout  of 
Japanese  militarism  was  for  the  further 
march  of  world  history,  the  authors  of  the 
monograph  note:  “The  rout  of  the  major 
Japanese  army  grouping  by  Soviet  troops 
was  of  historic  importance  because  it  bro¬ 
ught  to  a  logical  end  the  almost  50  years 
of  predatory  wars  that  the  Japanese  mili¬ 
tarists  had  been  waging  against  their  neigh¬ 
bours — China,  Russia,  and  then  the  Soviet 
Union,  and  against  Southeast  Asian  countri¬ 
es"  (p.  93-94). 

That,  in  turn,  radically  changed  the  si¬ 
tuation  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region.  The  na¬ 
tional  liberation  movement  of  the  peoples 
in  East  and  Southeast  Asia,  who  had  them¬ 
selves  experienced  the  horrors  of  Japanese 
militarists*  occupation,  became  unpreceden¬ 
ted  in  scope.  The  defeat  of  militaristic  Japan 
initiated  the  downfall  of  colonialism  in  Asia 
and  created  conditions  favourable  for  the 
appearance  of  the  first  socialist  states  in  that 
part  of  the  world,  including  the  People's 
Republic  of  China,  the  Democratic  People's 


Republic  of  ^nd  the  Socialist  Republic 

of  Vietnam.  Later,  the  Lao  People's  Democra¬ 
tic  Republic  and  the  People's  Republic  of 
Kampuchea  embarked  on  a  road  of  building 
socialism.  All  this  sharply  tipped  the  balance 
of  political  forces  in  Asia  in  favour  of  peace 
and  socialism. 

Finally,  the  rout  of  Japanese  militarism, 
as  the  authors  of  the  book  underline,  exerted 
a  tremendous  influence  on  political  develop¬ 
ments  within  Japan  itself.  Japan  had  to 
accept  the  Potsdam  declaration,  which  provi¬ 
ded  for  the  eradication  of  militarism,  removal 
from  power  of  those  responsible  for  the  ag¬ 
gression,  and  harsh  punishment  for  war 
criminals.  It  also  called  for  the  establishment 
of  a  democratic  order  in  Japan  and  for  the 
proclamation  of  basic  democratic  rights  and 
freedoms.  The  adoption  in  1947,  under  pres¬ 
sure  from  democratic  sections  of  society,  of  a 
new  Japanese  peacetime  Constitution  was  a 
matter  of  exceptional  significance  for  Japan's 
subsequent  development.  Article  9  of  the 
Constitution  forbids  Japan  to  have  armed 
forces  and  resort  to  war  as  a  means  for 
solving  international  disputes.  In  short,  the 
defeat  of  Japanese  militarism  opened  up  for 
the  Japanese  people  favourable  conditions 
for  a  peaceful  and  democratic  development. 

The  second,  main  part  of  the  monograph, 
covers  the  entire  postwar  period  up  to  the 
present  day.  It  contains  an  analysis  of  the 
state  of  Japanese  armed  forces  today.  As  in 
the  first  part,  the  authors  do  not  confine 
their  analysis  to  specific  military  questions, 
but  give  it  against  the  broad  background  of 
social,  economic  and  political  problems  fa¬ 
cing  Japan  today.  The  authors  consider  such 
cardinal  and  important  issues  as  the  revival 
and  development  of  the  Japanese  armed  for¬ 
ces;  supreme  military  command  bodies;  the 
system  of  recruiting  and  training  of  military 
personnel;  the  current  state  of  the  Japanese 
armed  forces;  arms  production;  ideological 
brainwashing  of  the  “self-defence"  service¬ 
men  and  the  Japanese  population;  and,  final¬ 
ly,  the  main  traits  and  stages  in  the  deve¬ 
lopment  of  Japan’s  modern  military  doctrine. 

Together,  these  chapters  give  an  objecti¬ 
ve  picture  of  the  current  state  of  affairs  in 
Japan  and  the  prospects  for  the  country's 
evolution  not  only  as  a  military  and  politi¬ 
cal  power,  but  as  a  centre  of  inter-imperia¬ 
list  rivalry,  as  the  world's  second  biggest 
capitalist  state  as  regards  its  economic,  sci¬ 
entific  and  technological  potential. 

The  authors  stress,  among  other  things, 
an  extremely  important  historical  fact—the 


160 


3olemn  pledge  given  by  the  US  administrati¬ 
on,  the  mairi  occupying  power,  several  days 
after  the  signing  of  the  act  of  Japan’s  un¬ 
conditional  surrender.  That  pledge  said  that 
the  disarmament  and  demilitarisation  of 
Jap^an  were  the  primary  tasks  of  the  military 
occupation  and  were  to  be  carried  through 
quickly  and  resolutely.  Japan  would  have  no 
army,  navy,  air  force  or  secret  police 
(p.  98). 

Yet,  even,  at  that  time,  the  American  ad¬ 
ministration,  while  verbally  pledging  its 
"loyalty”  to  the  principles  of  the  Potsdam 
declaration,  was,  in  fact,  pursuing  quite 
different  aims.  Analysis  of  documents  and  the 
US  administration’s  practical  steps  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  Japan,  that  have  been  made  public 
of  late,  the  authors  write,  prompt  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  the  purpose  of  the  changes  in¬ 
troduced  in  the  first  postwar  years  w'as  just 
to  intimidate  conservative  military  and  po¬ 
litical  circles  of  the  country  by  repressive 
measures,  by  the  constant  threat  of  pu¬ 
nishment  for  the  crimes  committed  and  then 
to  make  them  more  compliant  and  easy  to 
deal  with  by  “pardoning”  them  and  even 
inviting  them  to  enter  an  “alliance”.  The  de¬ 
mand  for  Japan’s  total  disarmament,  coup¬ 
led  with  the  artificially  provoked  talk  about 
“a  communist  threat”,  was  used  by  the  Ame¬ 
rican  administration  as  a  pretext  for  posing 
as  the  only  “guarantor”  of  the  security  of  the 
country  that  was  to  disarm  itself,  and  as 
its  “defender”  against  “aggressive  commu¬ 
nism”  (p.  99). 

In  this  context,  it  is  obvious  that  the  US 
was  already  hatching  secret  plans  to  preser¬ 
ve  Japan’s  military  potential  and  quickly  re- 
stpre  it  under  American  control,  and  thus 
make  Japan  serve  the  interests  of  the  US 
global  strategy. 

By  the  beginning  of  1948,  the  American 
ruling  quarters  had  finally  discarded  the 
mask  of  “peace-makers”  and  embarked  oft  a 
programme  for  the  overt  remilitarisation  of 
Japan,  viewing  it  as  the  main  stronghold  of 
anti-communism  in  the  Far  East  and  as  the 
main  jumping-off  ground  for  their  aggressi¬ 
ve  actions  in  Asia.  Such  a  radical  turn  in 
US  policy  known  as  the  “reverse  course”, 
coincided  in  time  with  the  failure  of  Washin¬ 
gton’s  efforts  to  slow  down  the  revolutionary 
process  in  China  and  with  the  launching  of 
the  cold  war  policy  against  the  Soviet  Uni¬ 
on  and  other  socialist  countries. 

From  that  time  on,  a  steady,  comprehen¬ 
sive  remilitarisation  of  Japan  got  under 
way,  in  defiance  of  its  Constitution. 


The  Japanesfe-Amefitah  “security  treaty”, 
signed  in  1951  and  revised  for  the  worse  in 
1960,  markedly  intensified  this  process.  Con¬ 
sequently,  Japan  has  built  up  one  of  the 
strongest  armies  in  Asia  in  terms  of  its 
fire  power.  Revived  in  the  guise  of  “self-de¬ 
fence  forces”,  this  army  has  ground,  naval 
and  air  forces  equipped  with  the  most 
sophisticated  weaponry.  Japan’s  outlays  for 
military  purposes  increase  by  the  year,  their 
growth  rates  being  the  highest  in  the  world. 
It  has  become  ordinary  practice  for  the 
Japanese  armed  forces  to  conduct  military 
exercises,  including  bilateral  and  multilateral 
ones. 

In  recent  years  the  Japanese  ruling  qu¬ 
arters  have  intensified  the  ideological  brain- 
washing  of  the  population.  They  are  fanning 
military  frenzy  in  every  possible  way,  foste¬ 
ring  anti-Soviet  sentiments  in  the  Japanese 
and  intimidating  them  with  the  supposed 
“threat  from  the  North”.  They  are  also  trying 
to  revive  a  spirit  of  nationalism  and  revenge 
in  the  masses.  With  the  same  purpose  in 
mind,  vigorous  attempts  are  being  made  to 
introduce  special  legislation  for  the  case  of 
“emergency”.  The  manufacture  of  arms  is 
steadily  increasing  in  Japan.  All  this  serves 
to  prove,  the  authors  say,  that  Japan  is  being 
drawn,  step  by  step,  into  the  aggressive 
plans  of  the  US  regional  and  global  strate¬ 
gy.  The  profound  analysis  of  the  basic  tra¬ 
its  and  stages  of  Japan’s  modern  military 
doctrine  will,  therefore,  be  of  special  interest 
to  the  reader. 

Summing  up  their  study,  the  authors 
stress  that  the  Japanese  armed  forces,  like 
those  of  other  capitalist  countries,  “are  the 
basic  component  of  militarism,  that  is,  of 
the  system  of  political,  economic  and  ideolo¬ 
gical  methods  used  by  the  country’s  ruling 
quarters  to  build  up  its  military  might  and 
meet  the  vital  objectives  of  their  home  and 
foreign  policies”  (p.  270). 

The  authors  point  out,  in  this  connection, 
that  the  rout  of  militaristic  Japan  in  August 
1945,  to  which  the  Soviet  people  and  its  ar¬ 
med  forces  made  a  decisive  contribution,  pa¬ 
ved  the  way  for  the  peaceful  and  democratic 
development  of  Japan.  Yet  the  facts  indicate 
that  Japanese  militarism  was  not  totally 
rooted  up.  In  the  late  1940s  and  early 
1950s,  Japanese  rulers  embarked  onto  the 
dangerous  road  of  remilitarisation.  Regarding 
Japan  as  its  chief  ally  in  the  struggle  aga¬ 
inst  socialism  and  the  national  liberation  mo¬ 
vement  in  the  Far  East,  Washington  is  sup- 


161 


porting  Tokyo  in  this  effort  in  every  possible 
way. 

Such  a  short-sighted  and  dangerous  poli¬ 
cy  suggests  that,  ignoring  the  people’s  inte¬ 
rests,  the  current  leaders  of  Japan  intend  to 
bury  the  lessons  of  recent  history  in  obliviv 
on.  They  intend  to  do  so  despite  the  fact 
that  Japan’s  militarisation,  as  these  lessons 
testify,  runs  counter  not  only  to  the  interests 
of  its  neighbours,  but  also  to  the  vital  inte¬ 
rests  of  the  Japanese  themselves,  and  the 
interests  of  world  peace. 


These  are  the  main  conclusions  drawn  by 
the  authors  which  make  a  big  contribution 
to  Japanese  studies  in  the  Soviet  Union. 
Written  from  the  constructive  standpoint  of 
the  need  to  uphold  peace  and  remove  the 
threat  of  a  nuclear  war  confronting  mankind 
at  present,  the  monograph  contains  extensi¬ 
ve  statistical  data,  diagrams  and  carto¬ 
graphical  supplements.  It  will  undoubtedly 
be  met  with  great  interest  by  the  broadest 
sections  of  the  Soviet  reading  public. 


COPYRIGHT:  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 


Role  of  Shinto 


Moscow  FAR  EASTERN  AFFAIRS  in  English  No  1,  Jan-Mar  86  pp  165-168 


[Review  by  V.  A.  Vasilyev  of  book  "Put  bogov  (sinto  v  istorii  Yaponii)"  [Path 
of  the  Gods  (Shinto  in  Japanese  History)]  by  G.  Ye.  Svetlov,  Moscow,  Mysl, 
1985,  240  pages,  illustrated] 


The  book  under  review  is  devoted  to 
Shinto,  the  Japanese  national  religion,  and 
its  role  in  the  social  and  political  life  of 
Japan  at  different  stages  of  the  country’s 
history.  This  is  the  first  detailed  analysis 
of  Shinto,  ever  undertaken  in  Soviet  acade¬ 
mic  literature.  It  owes  its  topicality  above 
all  to  the  fact  that  for  many  decades  prior 
to  Japan’s  defeat  in  World  War  II,  Shinto, 
then  the  state  religion  obligatory  for  all  the 
Japanese  without  exception,  was  used  to 
ideologically  enslave  the  people,  to  inculcate 
the  concepts  of  the  “uniqueness”  and  “spe¬ 
cial”  destiny  of  the  Japanese  nation.  In  effect, 
Shinto  was  turned  into  a  tool  of  the  pre¬ 
datory  policy  of  Japanese  imperialism.  Today, 
reactionary  forces  are  seeking  “in  some 
form  or  other  to  revive  Shinto  as  the  state 
religion,  and  to  use  Shintoist  ideology  to 
substantiate  the  need  for  a  ‘class  peace’ 
in  the  country  and  to  revive  the  concepts  of 
the  ‘special*  nature  of  the  Japanese*  nation 
and  the  ‘uniqueness*  of  Japan’s  history,  and 
to  give  substance  to  the  clainis  made  by  the 
Japanese  monopoly  bourgeoisie  on  the  inter¬ 
national  scene.  Moreover,  the  dissemination 
of  Shintoist  spiritual  ‘values*  is  part  of  the 
policy  towards  a  resurgence  of  militarist 
trends  in  the  country,  being  currently  con¬ 
ducted  by  the  reactionaries”  (p.  4). 

G.  Svetlov’s  book  is  based  on  a  conside¬ 
rable  number  of  sources.  Not  only  does  it 
bring  together  information  about  Shinto  con¬ 
tained  in  works  by  Soviet  and  foreign,  most¬ 
ly  Japanese,  authors,  but  it  also  ‘uses  data 
scattered  through  little-known  and  often  ba¬ 


rely  accessible  Japanese  publications.  It  pre¬ 
sents  a  wealth  of  facts  which  are  the  result 
iof  the  author’s  personal  observations  and  his 
talks  with  Japanese,  members  of  the  clergy 
and  laymen,  believers  and  non-believers.  This 
vast  and  diverse  material  is  analysed  on  the 
methodological  basis  of  the  Marxist-Leninist 
teaching  on  religion  and  its  role  in  society. 

The  author  traces  the  ancient  history  of 
Shinto  from  its  emergence  to  the  present 
day.  One  of  the  initial  chapters  outlines  the 
genesis  of  Shinto  which  became  more  or 
less  fully  formed  as  a  codified  religion  only 
in  the  7th  and  8th  centuries  A.  D.,  but  which 
subsequently  continued  to  develop.  It  shows 
how  Shinto  incorporated  various  tribal  cults, 
as  well  as  Tao  and  other  concepts  and  ritu¬ 
als.  The  book  contains  quite  a  detailed  sum¬ 
mary  of  the  Shintoist  mythology.  A  separa¬ 
te  chapter  is  devoted  to  the  spread  of  Bud¬ 
dhism  in  Japan  and  the  emergence  of  the 
^  ^  specifically  Japanese  phenomenon  of  Shinto- 
Buddhist  synchretism  and  “religious  dua¬ 
lism”.  The  author  repeatedly  stresses  that  at 
.  all  stages  of  its  evolution,  including  the 
earliest,  Shinto  absorbed  both  local  and  fo¬ 
reign  beliefs  and  traditions.  This  point  is  of 
great  significance  since  it  shows  the  unte- 
nability  of  the  attempts  to  substantiate  the 
“uniqueness”  of  the  Japanese  national  religi¬ 
on,  Japanese  national  ideology  and  Japanese 
social  relations  as  a  whole. 

The  book  reviews  the  attempts  to  elabo¬ 
rate  the  tenets  of  Shinto  proper,  which  were 


162 


taken  throughout  the  13th,  14th  and  15th 
centuries  by  the  priests  of  the  Ishe  shrine,  by 
Kitabatake  Tikafusa  (1293-1354),  one  of  the 
earliest  theoreticians  of  the  “special  path  of 
Japan”,  and  Shintoist  theologian  Yoshida  Ka- 
netomo  (1435-1511).  In  considering  the  re¬ 
ligious  situation  during  the  rule  of  the  To- 
kugawa  Dynasty  (1603-1867),  the  author 
pays  much  attention,  on  the  one  hand,  to 
various  forms  of  Shinto-Confucian  synchre- 
tisiili  and  the  concept  of  the  revival  of  ancient 
Shinto,  which  were  later  made  use  of  by  the 
opponents  of  the  dynasty,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  the  emergence  on  the  basis  on  Shin¬ 
to  of  new  religious  movements  which  refle¬ 
cted  in  a  specific  form  the  popular  opposition 
to  the  ruling  regime. 

In  showing  the  evolution  of  Shinto  aga¬ 
inst  the  background  of  historical  develop¬ 
ments,  the  author  constantly  keeps  the  rela¬ 
tions  between  religion  and  politics  within 
his  sights.  At  the  early  stages  of  Japanese 
statehood,  the  country’s  rulers  used  Shinto, 
and  its  mythology  in  particular,  to  substan¬ 
tiate  their  own  political  “rights”.  The  oldest 
Japanese  written  relics,  the  collections  of 
chronicles  and  myths  Kojiki  (712)  and  Ni- 
honshoki  (720),  compiled  on  the  orders  of 
the  rulers  of  that  time,  presented  the  myths 
not  in  the  form  they  had  been  recorded  by 
the  compilers,  but  in  a  tendentious  manner 
designed  to  prove  the  sacred  origins  of  the 
ruling  dynasty  and  its  descent  from  Amatera- 
su,  the  supreme  deity  of  Shintoism,  The  fur¬ 
ther  elaboration  of  this  trend  in  the  work^ 
of  medieval  Shintoist  theologians  resulted  in 
the  concept  of  the  “divine”  nature  of  both 
the  reigning  dynasty  and  of  Japan  as  a  who¬ 
le.  Shinto’s  connection  with  the  policy  of  the 
ruling  classes  “goes  many  centuries  back  to 
the  epoch  that  saw  the  formation  of  a  sin¬ 
gle  Japanese  state”,  the  author  points  out. 
“Since  then,  at  various  stages  in  the  history 
of  Japan,  its  rulers  have  sought  to  use  Shin¬ 
to  to  substantiate  their  political  ambitions 
that  had  nothing  in  common  either  with  the 
religious  feelings  of  the  majority  of  the  Ja¬ 
panese,  nor,  moreover,  with  its  vital  inte¬ 
rests”  (p.  10). 

This  point  is  particularly  characteristic  of 
the  period  between  the  “Meiji  restoration” 
(the  incomplete  bourgeois  revolution  of 
1867-1868)  and  Japan’s  defeat  in  World  War 
II.  The  section  devoted  to  this  period  is,  in 
essence,  central  to  the  book.  The  author  pro¬ 
vides  a  wealth  of  facts  to  show  the  gradual 
emergence  of  Shinto  as  a  state  religion,  and 
a  religious  and  political  system  created  by 


the  ruling  classes  of  the  bourgeois  and  land¬ 
lord  monarchy  which  was  what  Japan  be¬ 
came  after  the  “Meiji  restoration”,  Shinto 
was  set  apart  from  other  religions  as  the 
state  cult  revolving  around  the  person  of 
the  deified  Emperor.  The  Emperor’s  1890 
decree  on  education  which  proclaimed  loyalty 
to  the  Emperor  to  be  the  highest  virtue  of 
the  subjects  of  the  Japanese  Empire  was  ac¬ 
cepted  as  the  canon  of  state  Shinto.  The  ri¬ 
tuals  of  state  Shinto  were  geared  to  the 
task  of  exalting  the  monarchy  and  inculca¬ 
ting  unquestioned  reverence  for  the  Emperor 
and  his  “divine”  ancestors.  The  national  edu¬ 
cational  system  was  based  on  myths  about 
the*  “divine”  origin  of  the  Emperor’s  house. 
The  concept  of  the  “uniqueness”  of  the  Japa¬ 
nese  nation  and  Japan’s  glorification  as  the 
“country  of  Gods”  ultimately  produced  the 
“theoretical”  justification  of  Japan’s  “right” 
to  rule  over  other  nations.  In  this  way  the 
dogmas  of  state  Shinto  became  tools  to 
justify  Japan’s  imperialist  plundering  and 
aggressive  wars. 

The  author  describes  state  Shinto  as  a 
specific  religion  whose  dogmas  were  “ba^ 
sed  on  a  political  doctrine  expressing  the  in¬ 
terests  of  the  ruling  classes  and  ideological¬ 
ly  substantiating  their  political  supremacy” 
(p.  176).  The  rulers  of  prewar  Japan  deftly 
adapted  the  specific  features  of  the  Japan¬ 
ese  national  religion  and  traditional  popular 
ideas  to  their  political  needs.  The  prevalence 
of  rituals  over  the  poorly  developed  system 
of  dogmas  and  of  moral  and  ethical  views 
of  Shinto  made  it  possible  for  the  ideologists 
of  the  bourgeois  and  landlord  monarchy  to 
imbue  Shintoist  rituals  with  the  required  con¬ 
tent.  The  cult  of  Emperor  was  largely  based 
on  the  concept  of  filial  respect  which  had 
been  traditionally  held  up  as  the  chief  virtue 
of  the  Japanese.  The  entire  Japanese  peo¬ 
ple  was  proclaimed  to  be  one  big  family 
headed  by  the  Emperor,  The  idea  of  the  in¬ 
dissoluble  link  between  the  Shintoist  deities 
and  the  Japanese  served  as  a  good  ground 
for  the  emergence  of  the  idea  of  the  “uni¬ 
queness  of  the  Japanese  nation”  which  for¬ 
med  the  core  of  the  dogmas  of  state  Shinto. 

Apart  from  analysing  these  dogmas,  the 
author  dwells  in  detail  on  Shinto’s  rituals, 
cult  institutions,  and  methods  of  dissemina¬ 
tion,  including  such  important  secular  chan-' 
nels  as  schools,  the  mass  media,  etc.  The 
reader  learns  many  interesting  facts  about 
the  origins  of  many  Shinto  festivals  observed 
in  prewar  Japan.  The  author  gives  a  detailed 
account  of  the  building  of  a  number  of  new 


163 


shrines,  which  became  privileged  slate  reli¬ 
gious  institutions  whose  rituals  expressed  the 
main  trends  in  the  propaganda  campaign 
conducted  by  the  authorities.  The  Yasukuni 
Temple  in  Tokyo,  which  deifies  the  officers 
and  men,  who  died  in  wars  waged  by  impe¬ 
rialist  Japan,  is  one  of  these  shrines.  The 
description  of  the  Yasukuni  cult  makes  it 
possible  to  understand  why,  today,  this  shri¬ 
ne  remains  the  centre  of  chauvinist  and  mi¬ 
litarist  propaganda.  Also  of  interest  is  in¬ 
formation  dealing  with  the  spread  of  state 
Shinto  in  the  countries  captured  by  Japan. 
Shintoist  shrines  were  erected  in  all  the 
territories  that  came  under  the  control 
of  the  Japanese  colonialists  and  the 
military,  they  became  ideological  pillars  of 
colonial  domination  and  aggression. 

The  defeat  of  Japanese  militarism  in 
World  War  II  spelled  the  end  for  state 
Shinto.  In  1946,  the  Emperor  publicly  re¬ 
nounced  his  “divine**  essence.  The  1947  Con¬ 
stitution  proclaimed  the  separation  of  the 
religion  from  the  state.  The  Shintoist  shrines 
lost  the  privileges  which  they  had  enjoyed 
as  compared  with  the  temples  of  other  reli¬ 
gions.  But,  beginning  in  the  early  1950s, 
reactionary  forces  launched  a  movement  for 
the  restoration,  in  some  form  or  other,  of 
state  Shinto.  Moreover,  these  activities  are 
becoming  more  vigorous  as  the  militarist 
trends  in  the  policies  of  the  country’s  rulers 
become  more  pronounced  and  chauvinist  sen¬ 
timents  among  the  population,  utterly  en¬ 
couraged  from  above,  grow  in  strength.  The 
rulers  take  steps,  in  circumvention  of  the 
Constitution,  to  maintain  the  image  of  the 
Emperor  as  the  head  of  the  Shintoist  cult. 
They  have  restored  (though  under  a  different 
name)  the  main  festival  of  militarist  Japan, 
Kigensetsu,  based  on  the  myth  about  the 
“great  Japanese  empire"  having  been  foun¬ 
ded  in  the  7th  century  B.  C.  by  the  “direct 
descendant  of  the  Gods",  the  legendary  Em¬ 
peror  Jimmu.  The  Shintoist  clergy,  who  work 
hand-in-glove  with  the  extreme  right-wing 
elements  in  the  ruling  Liberal  Democratic 
Party,  are  becoming  more  active  politically. 
Attempts  are  being  made  to  introduce  Shin¬ 
toist  myths  into  national  school  curricula, 
and  in  recent  years  right-wing  forces  have 
been  campaigning  to  place  the  Yasukuni  Tem¬ 
ple  under  government  protection,  something 
that  would  amount  to  a  breach  of  the  cur¬ 
rent  Constitution  and  give  a  new  impetus  to 
the  campaign  of  indoctrination  in  the  spirit 
of  chauvinism  and  militarism. 

These  actions,  the  author  says,  “are  all 


the  more  dangerous  as  a  considerable  por¬ 
tion  of  the  Japanese  population  today  re¬ 
mains  susceptible  to  the  ideas  ipreached  by  the 
present-day  exponents  of  Shinto"  (p.  217). 
Shintoist  rituals  still  loom  large  in  everyday 
Japanese  life,  accompanying  as  they  do,  the 
most  significant  events  in  the  life  of  even 
those  who  do  not  consider  themselves  belie¬ 
vers,  Hence  the  sympathy  that  most  Japa¬ 
nese  feel  for  Shinto.  Therefore,  the  author 
is  quite  justified  in  focusing  on  popular  at¬ 
titudes  to  Shinto  and  its  rituals,  and  the  na¬ 
ture  of  Shintoist  rites  themselves.  This  in¬ 
formation  is  of  considerable  interest,  being 
as  it  is  based  on  the  author’s  personal  obser¬ 
vations. 

The  specific  nature  of  attitudes  to  Shinto 
determines  the  tenor  of  actions  by  democratic 
forces  on  issues  connected  with  this  national 
religion.  They  “lay  emphasis  not  so  much 
on  opposing  religious  ideology  as  such,  but 
on  exposing  the  reactionary  aspects  of  the 
activities  of  religious  organisations, 
which  threaten  the  democratic  gains 
of  the  people...  As  for  Shinto,  pro¬ 
tests  by  progressive  forces  are  aimed 
primarily  against  the  attempts  to  force  on 
the  people,  in  some  form  or  other,  the  Shin^ 
toist  ‘supra-religion*,  rather  than  against  the 
beliefs  and  traditions  which  form  the  basis 
of  rituals  at  the  Shintoist  shrines"  (p.  218). 
The  book  illustrates  this  point  with  a  number 
of  specific  examples  which  demonstrate  the 
forms  and.  methods  adopted  by  the  democra¬ 
tic  forces  in  their  campaign  against  the  revi¬ 
val  of  state  Shinto.  This  campaign  is  clo¬ 
sely  linked  with  the  tasks  of  general  de¬ 
mocratic  and  anti-war  movements. 

Thus,  after  tracing  Shinto’s  complex  evo¬ 
lution  from  its  inception  in  the  period  of 
early  feudalism  through  the  subsequent 
epochs,  each  of  which  influenced  it  in  a  spe¬ 
cific  way,  the  author  reaches  the  events  of 
modern  and  contemporary  history.  He  recrea¬ 
tes  the  grim  picture  of  the  recent  past,  when 
Shinto  became  one  of  the  most  important 
elements  in  the  reactionary  ideology  of  Japa¬ 
nese  imperialism,  and  describes  the  present- 
day  situation,  marked  by  the  activities  of 
the  groups  which  have  a  stake  in  Japan’s 
remilitarisation  and,  therefore,  pin  certain 
hopes  on  this  religion.  The  integral  and  com¬ 
prehensive  work  by  G.  Svetlov  gives  the  rea¬ 
ders  a  sufficiently  clear  idea  of  what  Shin¬ 
to— this  complicated  and  important  element 
of  Japanese  history— is  all  about,  and  sub¬ 
jects  it  to  profound  Marxist  historical  analy¬ 
sis. 


164 


Although,  on  the  whole,  this  work  merits  and  rituals  continue  to  be  practised  today,  and 

high  praise,  it  does  contain  a  number  of  about  the  role  they  play  in  the  life  of  the 

shortcomings  that  invite  criticism.  One  of  population,  particularly  in  rural  areas, 

these  is  that  the  author,  though  speaking  The  book  abounds  in  quotations  from  the 
about  the  emergence  of  state  Shinto  and  most  diverse  sources.  This  makes  it  more 

subdividing  it  into  several  strata  (pp.  152—  vivid  and  enhances  its  documentary  value, 

153),  does  not  draw  sufficiently  clear-cut  although  one  does  feel  that  in  some  places 

divisions  between  them  and  devotes  too  lit-  the  quotations  are  in  excess.  The  author 

tie  space  to  the  matter.  He  should  have  gi-  makes  wide  use  of  Japanese  sources,  but,  in 

ven  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  structure  some  cases,  white  quoting  Shintoist  books  of 

of  prewar  Shinto  which  incorporates  both  canons  end  pronouheements  by  Shintoist 

state  and  non-state  varieties.  In  this  frame-  theologians,  he  proceeds  from  the  English 

work,  it  would  have  been  expedient  to  single  translation,  rather  than  the  Japanese  ori- 

out  Emperor’s  personal  Shinto,  palace  Shin-  ginal.  A  consistent  use  of  the  Japanese  origi- 

to,  the  Shinto  of’  shrines  (which  other  works  nal  would  have  increased  the  documentary 

often  call  temple  Shinto),  household  Shinto,  value  of  the  citations, 

popular  or  vulgar  Shinto,  and,  finally,  secta-  the  above  remarks  are  of  minor  na- 
rian  Shinto.  The  book  analyses  practically  all  ture  and  do  not  detract  from  the  general  high 

these  categories,  and  many  of  them  in  much  assessment  of  the  book.  G.  Svetlov’s  book 

detail,  but  the  reader  unfamiliar  with  every-  treats  this  extensive  topic,  of  which  only 

day  Japanese  life  may  find  it  difficult  to  individual  aspects  have  been  explored  until 

establish  the  system  of  connections  between  now  by  Soviet  specialists  on  Japan,  in  a 

them.  A  graph  might  be  of  help  here  that  sufficiently  comprehensive  way.  The  mate- 

would  show  individual  component  types  and  rials  and  analysis  contained  in  the  book, 

the  directions  of  connections  between  them,  apart  from  helping  to  elucidate  a  number 

with  a  relevant  commentary.  These  graphs  of  aspects  of  Japanese  social  hiMory,  throw 

are  quite  a  common  feature  of  works  on  re-  a  new  light  on  the  ideological  processes 

ligipn  and  it  is  a  pity  this  book  has  not  underway  in  present-day  Japan.  For  this 

found  plate  for  them.  reason  G.  Svetlov’s  book  is  not  only  of 

As  far  as  popular  Shinto  is  concerned,  the  historical,  but  also  of  considerable  practical 
author  deals  with  this  mostly  while  describing  and  political  significance, 
the  ancient  sources  of  the  cult,  but  says  too  lit¬ 
tle  about  the  great  extent  to  which  these  beliefs 

COPYRIGHT;  Translation  into  English,  Progress  Publishers,  1986 
CSO;  1812/94 


165 


FAR  EAST  INSTITUTE  .1985  SCIENTIFIC  CONFERENCES 

Moscow  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA  in  Russian  No  4,  Oct-Dec  85  (signed  to  press 
25  Nov  85)  pp  185-186 

[Report  by  V.  F.  Mikunov  on  scientific  contacts  of  Far  East  Institute,  USSR 
Academy  of  Sciences,  in  1985] 

[Text]  The  Far  East  Institute  of  the  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences  maintains 
active  scientific  contacts  with  overseas  research  establishments,  which  are 
used  by  institute  personnel  for  the  exchange  of  opinions  with  foreign  col¬ 
leagues  and  the  enhancement  of  the  effectiveness  of  scientific  Iwork. 

The  IDV  [Far  East  Institute,  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences]  Board  of  Directors 
devotes  constant  attention  to  the  establishment  and  development  of  mutually 
beneficial  contacts  with  scientific  centers  in  the  PRC,  especially  the 
institutes  of  China's  Academy  of  Social  Sciences.  In  June  of  this  year,  6 
institute  researchers  returned  from  a  year's  assignment  in  the  PRC,  and  in 
September  a  new  group  of  20  IDV  personnel  went  to  China  to  work  on  scientific 
and  linguistic  assignments.  All  of  this  is  helping  to  establish  direct  scien¬ 
tific  contacts  between  the  IDV  and  Chinese  scientific  institutes.  Officials 
from  the  PRC  embassy  in  Moscow  visited  the  IDV  in  August  1985.  j 

The  IDV  has  established  close  friendly  relations  with  the  Asia  and  Pacific 
Institute  of  the  SRV  Committee  on  the  Social  Sciences.  Its  director.  Wan 
Chong,  who  came  to  Moscow  as  the  guest  of  the  IDV  in  1985,  and  the 
Vietnamese  researchers  accompanying  him  had  numerous  conversations  with  IDV 
scholars  on  the  political  situation  in  the  Far  East  and  the  Pacific  region 
and  on  the  methods  and  organization  of  fundamental  research  projects.  The 
IDV  is  giving  the  Asia  and  Pacific  Institute  practical  assistance  in  the 
training  of  scientific  personnel,  especially  in  the  field  of  Sinology. 

Scholars  in  the  DPRK  are  interested  in  the  work  of  IDV  researchers  on  Korean 
affairs.  In  September  and  October  1985  the  institute  was  visited  by  Director 
Kang  Ung-ping  of  the  Chuche  Sasang  Institute  of  the  DPRK  Academy  of  Social 
Sciences  and  Vice-President  of  the  DPRK  Academy  of  Social  Sciences, 

Academician  Kim  Ul-hik.  They  commended  the  work  of  the  IDV  scientific 
collective  and  expressed  a  wish  to  establish  closer  contacts  between  scientific 
institutes  in  the  DPRK  and  the  IDV. 


166 


The  institute’s  already  strong  and  diversified  contacts  with  scientific 
research  centers  in  the  European  socialist  countries,  Mongolia  and  the 
Republic  of  Cuba  continued  to  be  developed  in  1985.  The  exchange  of  guest 
conference  speakers,  the  presentation  of  lectures  and  work  with  scientific 
materials  gave  scholars  in  the  socialist  countries  a  deeper  understanding 
of  the  complex  political,  economic  and  social  processes  in  various  countries 
of  the  Far  East  and  the  Asia-Pacific  region  as  a  whole.  In  1985  the  IDV  con¬ 
tinued  to  assist  scientific  establishments  in  fraternal  countries  in  the 
training  of  highly  skilled  scientific  personnel.  For  example,  scholars  from 
Bulgaria,  Mongolia  and  Czechoslovakia  worked  at  the  IDV  while  they  were 
completing  their  doctoral  dissertations.  The  international  scientific  con¬ 
ference  commemorating  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  defeat  of  Japanese  mili¬ 
tarism  in  World  War  II,  organized  by  the  IDV  in  conjunction  with  the  Military 
History  Institute  of  the  USSR  Ministry  of  Defense,  was  an  important  scientific 
event  in  1985.  Guests  of  the  IDV,  experts  from  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  Vietnam, 
the  GDR,  Cuba,  Mongolia  and  Czechoslovakia,  took  an  active  part  in  the 
conference.  Young  scholars  from  socialist  countries — post-graduate  students 
from  Bulgaria,  Vifetnam  and  Mongolia — continued  their  post-graduate  studies  in 
the  IDV  in  1985.  ' 

Increasing  importiince  is  being  attached  iii  the  IDV  to  the  study  of  the  polit¬ 
ical  situation  ih  Japan  and  its  role  in  international  affairs  in  the  Far  East 
and  the  Pacific  zone.  Institute  researchers,  doctors  of  historical  sciences 
V.  F.  Myasnikov  and  V.  V.  PospeloV,  went  to  Japan  on  scientific  assignments, 
learned  about  the  work  of  a  numbeit'  of  Japanese  research  establishments  and 
the  scientific  projects  of  these  Establishments  and  exchanged  views  with  a 
broad  range  of  Japanese  specialists.  In  turn,  members  of  the  Japanese  scien¬ 
tific,  political  and  business  communities  represented  a  significant  percentage 
of  the  IDV’ s  foreign  guests  in  1985.  The  scientific  objectivity  and  sound 
arguments  of  the  works  of  IDV  researchers  appeal  to  Japanese  specialists,  as 
Professor  MineoNakajlma  from  the  Tokyo  Foreign  Language  Institute,  renowned 
Japanese  Sinologist,  commented. 

Scientific  contacts  between  the  IDV  and  the  leading  centers  of  Oriental 
studies  and  political  science  in  Western  countries  were  maintained.  Scien¬ 
tific  debates  With  their  representatives  are  focusing  more  and  more  not  on  the 
state  of  affairs  in  individual  countries  but  on  key  Issues  in  international 
politics — such  as  the  Soviet  proposals  on  security  in  Asia,  confidence- 
building  measures  in  the  Far  East,  possible  ways  of  achieving  detente  in  the 
Pacific  region  and  the  issues  of  disarmament  and  the  mainte'iiance  of  the  stra¬ 
tegic  balance  of  power  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region.  This  was  the  nature  of 
conversations  With  people  who  visited  the  institute  as  guests  of  the  USSR 
Academy  of  Sciences:  G.  Sigur  (the  U.S.  President’s  special  adviser  on  Aslan 
politics  and  director  of  the  George  Washington  University  Sino-SoViet  Studies 
Institute),  J.  Lewis  (director  of  the  Stanford  University  Center  for  Inter¬ 
national  Security  and  Arms  Control),  R.  Solomon  (heEd  of  the  Department  of 
the  Social  Sciences  of  the  RAND  research  corporation) ,  and  other  prominent 
American  scholars,  as  well  as  with  other  institute  guests — officials  from  the 
State  Department ,  National  Security  Council  and  Congress  of  the  United  States 
H.  Else,  M.  Abramowitz,  S.  Sestanovich  and  S.  Solarz. 


167 


Scholars  from  the  capitalist  and  developing  countries  who  visited  the  IDV  in 
1985  to  exchange  opinions  with  Soviet  colleagues  and  to  learn  about  institute 
research  projects  included  V.  Harle  (Finland),  M.  Dassu  and  F,  Cocci  (Italy), 
R.  Quested  (England)  and  many  others. 

The  IDV  was  visited  by  members  of  the  diplomatic  corps  in  Moscow.  During 
conversations  with  them,  institute  researchers  expressed  their  views  on  the 
situation  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  and  told  them  of  the  foreign  policy 
initiatives  of  the  USSR  and  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  CPSU  and  Soviet 
Government  to  normalize  Soviet-Chinese  relations. 

In  addition  to  maintaining  personal  contacts  with  foreign  scientists,  the 
IDV  engages  in  extensive  scientific  correspondence  with  overseas  research 
establishments.  The  institute  sends  the  works  of  its  research  associates, 
other  scientific  literature  and  the  journal  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA  in 
Russian-,  English-,  Spanish-  and  Japanese-language  editions  to  150  addresses 
(in  England,  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  Holland,  Hong  Kong,  Denmark,  Singapore,  the 
United  States,  the  FRG,  Sweden,  Japan  and  other  countries) . 

The  IDV  collective  maintains  active  contacts  with  overseas  colleagues  on  the 
assumption  that  these  contacts  are  not  only  of  scientific  value  but  are  also 
contributing  to  the  mutual  understanding  of  peoples  and  are  of  great  impor¬ 
tance  in  promoting  the  cause  of  peace  and  security. 

COPYRIGHT:  "Problemy  Dalnego  Vostoka",  1985 

8588 

CSO:  1805/4 


168 


CONTENTS  OF  JOURNAL  FOR  1985 

Moscow  PROBLEMY  DALNEGO  VOSTOKA  in  Russian  No  4,  Oct-Dec  85  (signed  to  press 
25  Nov  85)  pp  189-191 

[Text]  Articles 

"Two  Lines  in  World  Politics,"  No  3  (55) 

"The  Key  Task  of  Our  Time,"  No  2  (54) 

"Leninist  Policy  of  Peace,"  No  4  (56) 

Commemorating  the  40th  Anniversary  of  the  Great  Victory 

Babin,  A.  I.,  "The  USSR’s  Decisive  Contribution  to  the  Defeat  of  the  Fascist- 
Militarist  Bloc,"  No  2  (54) 

Bunin,  V.  I.,  "The  Defeat  of  Japanese  Militarism:  Lessons  and  the  Present 
Day,"  No  2  (54) 

Vladimirov,  0.  Ye.,  "The  Soviet  Union's  Role  in  the  Creation  of  the 
Manchurian  Bridgehead  of  the  Chinese  Revolutionary  Forces,"  No  4  (56) 
Zhelokhovtsev,  A.  N.,  "Chinese  Interpretation  of  the  Events  of  World  War  II," 
No  1  (53) 

Kovalenko,  I.  I.,  "The  Soviet  People's  Great  Victory  and  the  National 
Liberation  Movement,"  No  3  (55) 

"Scientific  Conferences  on  40th  Anniversary  of  the  Defeat  of  Militarist  Japan 
and  the  End  of  World  War  II,"  No  4  (56) 

Petukhov,  V.  I.,  "The  USSR — Korea's  Liberator  and  Reliable  Ally,"  No  2  (54) 
Purevdorj,  C.,  "USSR-MPR  Cooperation  in  World  War  II,"  No  3  (55^ 

Titarenko,  M.  L.,  "The  Importance  of  the  Defeat  of  Japanese  Militarism  in  the 
Victory  of  Popular  Revolutions  in  China,  Korea  and  Vietnam,"  No  4  (56) 
Tolubko,  V.  F.,  "The  Lessons  of  History  and  the  Present  Day,"  No  1  (53) 

Politics  and  Economics 

Andreyev,  V.  I.  and  Osipov,  V.  I.,  "The  DPRK:  Years  of  Struggle  and 
Construction,"  No  3  (55) 

Andreyev,  V.  I.  and  Osipov,  V.  I.,  "Problem  of  Regulation  in  Korea  Today," 

No  1  (53) 

Vasilyev,  V.  A,,  "On  the  30th  Anniversary  of  the  Bandung  Conference,"  No  2 
(54) 

Vasilyev,  N.  V.  and  Mironenkov,  Ye.  G.,  "The  Taiwan  Factor  in  American- 
Chinese  Relations,"  No  2  (54) 


169 


Vasilyev,  0.  V.,  "Japan:  Behind  the  Screen  of  ’Economic  Aid,'"  No  3  (55) 
Vasyugov,  A.  P.  and  Galichev,  I.  S.,  "The  ASEAN  Approach  to  the  Creation  of 
Zones  of  Peace  in  Southeast  Asia:  Illusions  and  Reality,"  No  1  (53) 

Volodin,  A.  S.,  "A  , Staunch  Detachment  of  the  International  Communist  Movement," 
No  1  (53)  i 

Davydov,  0.  V.  and  ^ikheyev,  V.  V.,  "Some  Trends  in  Seoul’s  Foreign  Policy," 

No  4  (56)  ■ 

Kovalenko,  I.  I.,  "the  Nonaligned  Movement — A  Major  Factor  in  World  Politics," 
No  4  (56) 

Krupyanko,  M.  I;V' "Japan’s  Economic  Relations  with  China,"  No  1  (53) 

Markov,  A.  P. ,  "New  Phase  of  Japanese  Militarism,"  No  4  (56) 

Mun,  D.,  "Japan’s  Economic  Penetration  of  South  Korea,"  No  2  (54) 

Muromtseva,  Z.  A.,  "The  Modernization  of  PRC  Agriculture:  Questions  of 
Capital  Investment,"  No  1  (53) 

Nikolayev,  N.  N.  and  Arsenyev,  V.  N.,  "On  the  60th  Anniversary  of  the 
Establishment  of  Soviet  Diplomatic  Relations  with  Japan,"  No  1  (53) 
Pashchenko,  Ye.  G.,  "The  Legal  Aspects  of  the  ’Open  Door’  Policy  in  the  PRC," 

No  1  (53) 

Ukraintsev,  M.  S.,  "USSR  Cooperation  with  Socialist  Countries  of  Asia  and 
Cambodia,"  No  4  (56) 

PRC  Economic  Reform 

Volkova,  L.  A.,  "Certain  Problems  of  the  Chinese  Countryside  Today,"  No  4  (56) 
Novoselova,  L.  V.,  "Reform  in  Capital  Construction,"  No  3  (55) 

Polyakov,  V.  P.,  "A  Patent  System  Set  Up  in  China,"  No  4  (56) 

Stepanov,  S.  V.  and  Portyakov,  V.  Ya.y  "Current  Problems  in  Chinese  Economic 
Development,"  No  2  (54) 

Chizhov,  B.  K. ,  "New  Trends  in  the  Development  of  Domestic  Trade,"  No  3  (55) 
Shevel,  I.  B.,  "New  Tendencies  in  Credit  and  Banking  System,"  No  2  (54) 

Ideology 

Belousov,  S,  R.,  "Bourgeois  Liberalism  in  China:  The  Political  History  and 
Ideology  of  the  ’Third  Road’  of  Development  (1930’s-1940’s) ,"  No  2  (54) 
Zhuravlev,  V.  Ya.,  "Chinese  Social  Scientists’  Views  on  Some  Aspects  of 
Socialist  Construction,"  No  1  (53) 

Criticism  of  Bourgeois  Sinology 

Koval,  M.  V.,  "On  the  U.S.  ’Friendship’  with  the  PRC,"  No  2  (54) 

Olesln,  S.  M. ,  "Views  of  U.S.  Political  Scientists  on  Sino-Amerlcan  Relations," 
No  1  (53) 

Ryakin,  Yu.  M. ,  "The  Future  of  Amerlcan-Chinese  Relations:  The  U.S.  View," 

No  2  (54) 

Ryakin,  Yu.  M. ,  "Who  Determines  U.S.  ’China’  Policy  and  How,"  No  4  (56) 

Ryakin,  Yu.  M.,  "What  Lies  Behind  the  Discussions  of  the  ’End  of  Isolationism’ 
in  China?"  No  3  (55) 

Yaklmova,  Ye.  V.,  "Lucian  Pye’s  Interpretation  of  the  Chinese  Political 
Culture,"  No  4  (56) 


170 


History 

Akatova,  T.  N.  and  Alekseyeva,  0.  B.,  "The  Revolutionary  Traditions  of  the 
Chinese  Labor  Movement,"  No  2  (54)  ’  . 

Gorodovlkova,  0.  B.,  "The  First  Profintern  and  AUCCTU  Delegation  in  China," 

No  2  (54) 

Zabarko,  B.  M. ,  "International  Workers'  Relief  and  the  Chinese  Revolution  in 
the  1920's,"  No  2  (54) 

Ipatova,  A.  S.,  Ovchinnikov,  Yu.  M.,  Usov,  V.  N.  and  Shevelev,  K.  V., 

"Chinese  Scholars  on  CCP  History  After  the  Founding  of  the  PRC,"  No  3  (55) 
"Sun  Yatsen — Great  Chinese  Revolutionary  Democrat  and  Friend  of  the  Soviet 
People,"  No  2  (54) 

Yurkevich,  A.  G.,  "The  Huangpu  Military  School  and  the  Chinese  Revolution," 

No  3  (55) 

Yuryev,  M.  F.,  "China:  1945,"  No  4  (56) 

Development  of  Chinese  Social  Thought 

Aslanova,  M.  A.,  "The  Establishment  of  the  Sociopolitical  Platform  of  the 
Journal  XIN  QINGNIAN,"  No  3  (55) 

Struggle  for  a  Just  Cause 

"Prominent  Mongolian  Party  and  Government  Leader,"  No  2  (54) 

Shevelev,  K.  V.,  "50th  Anniversary  of  Qu  Qiubo's  Death,"  No  4  (56) 

From  the  History  of  Domestic  Oriental  Studies 

Myasnikov,  V.  S.  and  Tarasov,  V.  N. ,  "The  Life  and  Works  of  Nikolay  Spafariy," 
No  2  (54) 

Myasnikov,  V.  S.  and  Tarasov,  V.  N.,  "The  Life  and  Works  of  Nikolay  Spafariy," 
No  3  (55) 

Commentary 

Alekseyev,  G.  A.,  "The  Results  Of  the  Third  Session  of  the  Sixth  NPC,"  No  3 
(55) 

Grebenshchikov,  E.  S.,  "ANZUS:  Mazes  and  Deadlocks  of  Bloc  Policy,"  No  1  (53) 
Matveyev,  A.  M. ,  "Socialist  Laos'  Glorious  Anniversary,"  No  4  (56) 

Tripolskly,  N.  A.,  "The  Plans  for  the  Creation  of  the  'Pacific  Community' — A 
New  Threat  to  Peace,"  No  1  (53) 

Journalism 

Fedorenko,  N.  T.,  "Tokyo  Dialogues,"  No  3  (55) 

Culture 

Liao  Jingwen,  "Pages  from  the  Life  of  Xu  Beihong,"  No  1  (53) 

Moskalev,  A.  A,,  "Minority  Language  Problems  in  the  PRC  (1980—1984),"  No  3 
(55) 


171 


Serebryakov,  Ye.  A.,  "The  Inspiring  Example  of  the  Great  Feat,"  No  3  (55) 
Toroptsev,  S.  A.,  "Xia  Yan  and  Chinese  Film,"  No  3  (55) 

Eastern  Art 

Zhukova,  I.  V.,  "Shingeki  Theater,"  No  2  (54) 

Kuzmenko,  L.  I.,  "Exhibits  in  State  Museum  of  Oriental  Art,  No  2  (54) 

From  the  History  of  Chinese  Sociopolitical  Thought 

Voskresenskiy,  D.  N,,  "Ethical-Philosophical  Theories  of  Li  Yu,"  No  1  (53) 
Surveys,  Reports,  Essays 
Ai  Qing,  "My  Life,"  No  3  (55) 

Belousov,  R.  S.,  "Explorer  Vasiliy  Yeroshenko,"  No  4  (56) 

Denisov,  S.  N.  and  Kostyayev,  B.  T.,  "Brunei— New  Independent  State  on  the 
Political  Map  of  the  World,"  No  2  (54) 

Yegorov,  K.  A.,  "PRC  Government  Reform,"  No  1  (53) 

Morozov,  G.  G.,  "Japan  and  Singapore:  Some  Trends  in  the  Development  of 
Relations,"  No  2  (54) 

Portyakov,  V.  Ya.,  "Scientific  Investigations  of  a  Prominent  Chinese 
Economist,"  No  1  (53) 

Stoletov,  A.  Yu.,  "Soka  Gakkai:  From  Religious  Actions  to  Vigorous 
International  Activity,"  No  3  (55) 

Filatov,  L.  V.,  "Cooperation  in  the  Interests  of  Two  Great  Peoples,  No  1  (53) 
Publications 

"Materials  on  Li  Daozhao-s  Visit  to  the  USSR,"  No  1  (53) 

Scanning  the  PRC  Press 

Zhdanov,  S.  A.,  "An  Interesting  Study  by  a  Chinese  Scholar,"  No  3  (55) 

Book  Reviews 

Arkhipov,  V.  A.,  "On  the  Road  of  Peace,  Friendship  and  Cooperation,"  No  2  (54) 

Astafyev,  G.  V.,  "U.S.  Expansion  in  the  Indian  Ocean,"  No  2  (54) 

Bandura,  D.  Yu.,  "Caught  in  the;  Trap  of  Contradictions,"  No  3  (55) 

Basin,  V.  Ya.,  "The  Qing  Empire  and  the  Sayano-Altay  People,"  No  1  (53) 

Vasilyev,  V.  A.,  "Malaysia  Yesterday  and  Today,"  No  1  (53)^ 

Vasilyev,  V.  A.,  "Shinto -s  Role  in  Sociopolitical  Affairs  in  Japan,"  No  4  (56) 
Yevgenyev,  Yu.  Ye.,  "What  the  'Japan'  Almanac  Tells  Us,"  No  2  (54) 

Yermakova,  L.  N,,  "A  Look  at  a  Japanese  Epic,"  No  1  (53) 

Imamov,  E.  Z.,  "Contemporary  Chinese  Legislation,"  No  1  (53) 

Karmanovskaya,  I.  L.,  "New  Items  in  Sinological  Bibliography  of  the  PRC, 

No  4  (56) 

Komissarov,  S.  A.,  "New  Book  on  Ancient  Japan,"  No  1  (53) 

Kondrashov,  L.  G.,  "The  Pacific  Region:  New  Developments  in  Economics  and 
Politics,"  No  1  (53) 


172 


Morozov,  G.  G.,  "Trapped  by  Growing  Ambitions,"  No  4  (56) 

Nikolayeva,  N.  S.,  "Brilliant  Facet  of  Russo-Japanese  Cultural  Relations," 

No  2  (54) 

Peyros,  I.  I.,  "Yu.  N.  Rerikh's  Tibetan  Dictionary,"  No  1  (53) 

Portyakov,  V.  Ya.,  "Reform  of  PRC  Economic  Mechanism,"  No  3  (55) 

Radnayev,  V.  E.,  "China  and  Mongolia  in  the  13th  and  14th  Centuries,"  No  1  (53) 
Romanenko,  I.  V.,  "Exposure  of  the  Myth  of  the  'Soviet  Threat'  to  Japan," 

No  3  (55) 

Semenov,  V.  V.,  "An  Important  Factor  in  the  Victory  of  the  Chinese  Revolution," 
No  3  (55) 

Snegirtsev,  A.  N.,  "PRC;  Meetings,  Impressions,  Thoughts,"  No  1  (53) 

Khlynov,  V.  N.,  "Japan  as  a  Military  Power:  Yesterday  and  Today,"  No  4  (56) 
Chizhov,  B.  K.,  "Study  of  the  PRC  Economic  Structure,"  No  2  (54) 

Shifrin,  I.  A.,  "For  the  Sake  of  Historical  Accuracy,"  No  2  (54) 

Scientific  Affairs 

"Conference  in  Ulan-Ude,"  No  2  (54) 

Lutsenko,  N.  I.,  "International  Seminar  in  Nakhodka:  For  a  "Pacific  Forum  of 
Trust, '"  No  1  (53) 

Mikunov,  V.  F.,  "International  Scientific  Contacts  of  Far  East  Institute, 

USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  in  1985,"  No  4  (56) 

COPYRIGHT:  "Problemy  Dalnego  Vostoka",  1985 

8588 

CSO:  1805/4  -  END  - 


173 


