DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 087 027 



CS 201 010 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Man and His Gods^ English^ World Literature: 
5114.58. 

Dade County Public Schools^ Miami^ Fla. 

72 

46p. ; Authorized course of instruction for the 
Quinmester Program 

MF-$0.65 HC-$3.29 

Biblical Literature ; Classical Literature ; Curriculum 
Guides ; *Elec tive Subjects ; *English Instruction; 
Ethics; Humanism; Individualism ; Literature Programs; 
Multimedia Instruction ; * Philosophy; *Religion ; 
Renaissance Literature; Russian Literature; Secondary 
Education;- Thematic Approach; *World Literature 
Minicour ses; *Quinmester Program 



ABSTRACT 

This curriculum guide examines man ' s relation to his 
gods--his fear^ love^ obedience^ worship^ and imitation of God — as 
demonstrated in print and nonprint sources. Classical^ 
Judaeo--christian y and other outlooks are considered. Reading includes 
such works as "Oedipus ReXr" "The Odyssey^" selections from the Nev 
Testamentr "King Lear^" "Don Quixote/' "Paradise Lost^" "Faust/' "War 
and Peacer" and "The Brothers Karamazov." Works by Montaigne^ Kant^ 
Locke, St. Augustine, Aquinas, Gibbon, and Tillich are suggested for 
further exploration. Performance objectives, course cont-ent, teaching 
strategies, student resources, and teacher resources are included. 



ERIC 



o 

CO 

o 



US Dt PAWTME ST Ot= HE At-TH 
EDUCATION it VsEUFAHE 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
EDUCATION 

i.r- • > .\\ • . 1 .-o n . I n • 



7. 



■If 0« 



AUTHORiZED COURSE OF INSTRUCTION FOR THE 




LANGUAGE ARTS 

Man and His. Gods 

5114, 5S 
5115. 58 
5116.58 
5 MS. 04 



DO 

nz 

CO 
CO 



CO 



DIVISION OF INSTRUCTIQN«197] 



MAN AND HIS GODS 



5114. 58 
5115.58 
511G, 58 
5148. 04 

English, World Literature 



Written 
for the 

DIVISION OF INSTRUCTION 
Dade County Riblic Schools 
Miami, Florida 
1072 



DADE COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD 



Mr. William Lebjnan, Chairman 
Mr. G. Holmes Braddocki Vice-Chairman 
Mrs. Ethel Beckham 
Mrs. Crutcher Harrison 
Mrs. Anna Brenner Meyers 
Dr. Ben Sheppard 
Mr. William H. Turner 



Dr. E. L. Whlgham, Superintendent of Schools 
Dade County Public Schools 
Miami, Florida 33132 



Published by the Dade County School Board 



COURSIv COURSli: 'I'lTLE: MAN AND HIS GODS 

NUMRKK 

511.^58 COUIISK DKSCKIPTION: An examination of man's relalion to 

fjilf). r>H his ^ofls. . :his Tear, doriancc, love, obedience to worship, and 

r>nn. n.S imitation ofClod. Clnssieal, Judaeo-Christian and other outlooks 

r)i4S.04 arc considered. Reading includes such works as Oedipus Rex , 

Odyssey , selections from the New Testament, King Lear , Don . 
Quixote , Paradise Lost , Faust , War and Peace, The [Brothers 
Karamazov . Works by Montaigne, Kant, Locke, St. Augustine, 
: Aquinas, Gibbon, and Tillich are other sources for possible 
exploration. (This coui^se requires considerable reading ol* diffi- 
cult material. ) 

L PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES 

A. Presented with printed and multimedia resources, the student 
will examine the elements of spiritual pursuit, emotional 
conflict, and concrete reality which characterize man in his 
multileveled quest for identification of a supernatural authority 
either as iin end of philosophical conjecture or as a divine being. 

13. Presented with printed and multimedia resources, the student 
will translate his experience in examination of the concept of 
supreme authority to consideration of tenets of faith and worship 
in Judaeo-Christian and non-Judaeo-Christian doctrines. 

C. Presented with printed and nuiltimedia resources, the student 

will analyze the spurious deification of man's self-manufactured 
contrivances and preoccupations, physical and spiritual, which 
are nonsectarian and nondenominational. 

IL COURSE CONTENT 

A. Piationale 

In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ says, "Ye cannot serve God 
and Mammon." In Paradise Lost, Milton writes: 

. . . Mammon led them on, 
Mammon, the least erected Spirit thnt fell 
From Heaven; for even in Heaven his looks and thoughts 
Were always downward bent, admiring nu)rc 
The riches of Heaven's pavement, trodden gold, 



ERIC 



Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed 

In vision beatific; by him first 

Men also, mid by his su*;t>'estion taii*>'ht, 

Ransacked the Centre, and with impious hands 

Rilled the bowels (^i' their mother Earth 

For treasures better hid. 

Koaetin*;' with Trustraiod impulses of oulj-a;;c imd love, worship 
iind deriancc, man searches for his Cod or ^ods. Out of this 
spiritual odyssoy, organized religion evolved. Contemporary 
man, beset by hedonism and materialism, has created new "gods." 
Man and Mis Gods is an interdisciplinary survey of everyman 
and his sojourn on "the mind's road to God. " The world's major 
religions and dominant religious philosophers are reviewed. The 
greatest emphasis, however, lies in analysis of modern man's 
preoccupation with the masks of mammon: power, wealth, sex, 
consumerism, fads, war, technology, violence, and personal 
accouterments and satanism. 

B. Range of subject matter 

1. Man^s identification of a supernatural deity 

a. Multimedia survey of mrm and his quest for God or 
"gods" 

b. Comparisons and contrasts of selected authors' 
r»pi ritual searches from state-adopted texts and 
non-state-adopted material 

c. Readings in The Great Hooks of the Western World 
on man's philosophical quest for spiritual authority 

2. Man's foi^malization of worship into organized religions 

a. Tenets of non-Judaeo-Chritian doctrines 

b. Tenets of Judaeo-Christian doctrines 

c. hiterdisciplinary analysis of religious motifs in 
art iind music 

3. Man's preoccupation with nondenominational "gods" 

a. Physical and materialistic diversions 

b. Spiritual and ethical diversions 



-2- 



TKACHINC STRA'rECJII^:S 



A. IM'(jst'ntc(l Willi printed und imilLinicdiii resources, the student will 
cxamirH' IIh; (dcMiuints of spi r'il.u;d pursuit, ernotionjd conriiel, :uid 
eoner'ete reidity whicli t:har:KM.eri/e man in his nudtilevcled fjuest 
f()]' identirieation of n supernatural authority either as an end of 
philosophical conjecture or as a divine being'. 

1. Have stiidents listen and view the sound-slide survey, Man 
and His Gods: An Inquiry into the Nature of Religion, which 
surveys man's attempts to identify and worship his God or 
gods: "The program is, foremost, a study of the relation- 
ships between man ajid his God or gods— man's place in the 
infinite— rather than a survey of specific religions." Have 
them read and study a dittoed list of the script and names 

of accompanying slides in the two-part program. Have them 
write a one-sentence reaction to each of the slides as it per- 
tains to the theme, Man and His Gods. Have the students 
write a short reaction paper to each of the two parts in the 
sound-slide survey. 

2. Project via an overhead the following words: authority, 
ceremony, fertility, death, hell, liturgy, immorttility, 
symbol, rite, sacrifice, sex, omnipotent, pui'itan, atheist, 
faith, deism, cosmic order, heresy, pantheism, agnostic, 
heretic, demigod, pagan, voodoo, Jew, sorcery, Hindu, 
monk, Muslim, nun, religious persecution, pope, Olympus, 
mass, predestination, i^ower, war, dogma, Jesus I'reak, 
violence, love, religion, status, confession, values, coriaiption, 
false gocis, God. Have students respond orally and in writing 

to each word as it is projected on the screen. Some students 
niay choose to illustrate their personal response. 

3. Instnict students to list adjectives and nouns which convey their 
internalized conception of a higher, intangible spiritual authority. 

4. Have students read "'IYj a Waterfowl" by VViHiam CuUen Bryant 
in the stale-adopted text. The United States in Literature . Have 
them discuss Bryant's conception of a divine authority. 

f). Have students read"Each and AH" by Kmerson in The United 
States Ln Literature . Have them discuss how this poem and 
the selection by Bryant are related. 



(). II.'ivc students read the Ibllowing poems by Wnlt Whitman in 

'Vhc United States in Literature :"!'^ rom S()n[>' of MyseH\ " "Beat! 
P,(?at ! Drums ! " "As Toilst^ine I W.andcM'M Vii'i^inia's Woods," 
"VVh(.tn l-ilaes Last in thc^ Dooryard IUoohkmI," ".Joy, Shipmate, 
'loy!" Wiw'v. students (Hseuss and explain their inlcvrpretation 
of Whitman's attitude toward his rellovv man, war, nature, and 
a divine authority. Nave them eonipare and eontrast his attitudes 
with similar ideas in the seleetions read by Bryant and Emcirson. 

7. Have students read Nathtuiiel Hawthorne's "The Maypole of Merry 
Mount" in The United States in Literature . Have them explore, 
orally and in writint^^;, the differences between the revelers and 
the Puritans. Have them also read in Kdith Hamilton's Mythology , 
"The Two Great Gods of Earth," pp. •17-()2, Have them write u 
reaction paper whieh contrasts and compares the Elcusinian 
Mysteries with "The Maypole of Merry Mount" rites. 

8. Have students read "Earth" by Oliver Herford iukI "Earth" by 
John Hall Wlieelock in llcflcctions on a Gift of WalciTi-iolon Pickle. 
Have them compare the contrasting viewpoints. Have them write 
their own short pocni entitled "Earth," 

0. Have students read "Fueled" by Marcie Hans in Watermelon Pickle , 
Hnve them discuss this poem in relation to "To a Waterfowl." 

10. Have students read the biographical sketches and notes on Jonatiian 
Edwards aJKl Edward 'I'aylor in The United States in Literature . 
Have them road"Ei-om Personal Narrative " and"From Sinners 

in the Hands of an Angry God " by Edwards and "The Joy of Church 
I'ellowship Rightly Attended" by Edward Taylor. Have them, orally 
and in writing, examine the backgrounrl and religious thought of the 
two colonial American church fathers. Have them conjecture why 
the two men express different religious views. Have students make 
two lists: one which might reHect attributes iuid eharaetcristics 
of a Supreme Being as seeii: by Edwards and another list I'eflecting 
Taylor's thought. 

11. Have students read in staie-adopted Engltmd in Literature , Scott, 
Foresmmi and Company, "from Meditation 17" by John TJonnc. 
Have theni discuss innagcry, language, theme in the selection, 

also in relation to Donne's "Death Be Not Proud," and Shakcsfjcai'c's 
"Sonnet 14G" on p. 110 in England in Liter:iture . 



12. Have students read Act I, Scene I oi Hamlet , pp. 11G~11S, in 

I-Zng'land in Literature. Have tliem explore, orally aiid in writi'^ig, 
the atmosphere of the setting-, the function of the dcus ex niaehin a, 
and HamlotVs j)sychological reaction to the apparition. 

i:;. Have students Vend the selections from The King James lUble in 
Enghmd in Literature , i)p. 188-191. 

14. flave students read "from Pilgrim's Progress " by John iJunyan 
and the excerpts from Paradise Lost by Milton in England in 
Literature. Have them distmgiiish between Bunyan's and Milton's 
scholarly attitude toward man and his God, each author's use of 
classical references, and each man's contribution to the Puritan 
cause. 

15. Have students read Wordsworth's "Ode on Intimations of InimortaUty" 
in England in Literature . (lave them, using quotes from the poem 
and relevant quotes from one secondary source, write an essay/ 
reaction paper entitled "Platonism in Wordsworth's 'Intimations 
Ode. ' " 

1(), Have students read the Romantic masterpiece, "Kubla Khan" by 
Coleridge in England in Literature . Iiav6 them compare iuk\ 
contrast this vision of I^aradisc with that penned by Milton in the 
selections read from Paradise Lost. 

17. Have students read "Heaven-Haven," "Pied Beauty," and "God's 
Grandeur" by Gerard Manlcy Hopkins in EnglaJid in Literature. 
Have them write a short reaction paper, after class discussion, 
entitled "Hopkins' Vision of God." 

18. Have students road Eli/.al)cth Barrett I^.i'owning's "Sonnet 20" 

and "Sonnet 43, "the notes on the' P-iX^H-Hif^haelite Brotherhood, 

and the poems by tlic Rossottis in England in Literature. Have 
them critically discuss Browning's celebration of earthly love 
and the liossettis' treatment of love symbolically as the worship 
of God. 

19. Have students read the selections by 'i\ S. iOliot in England in 
Literature. Have tliem discuss, compare iind contrast, orally 
and in writing, Eliot's consideration of the condition of man in 
relation to that of Wlutman. Have them support their interpretation 
and opinions with direct quotations from works read. 



-5- 



20. Ifavc students read in the state-adopted text, Insight: The 
iCxperienee of Lileratin^e , "Hymn of Love to God," by 
Ilahindranath 'I\igore, "Son^ of Praise to the Creator," 
from the Sotho , and "Chapter V.V from i Corinthians, Have 
them distinguish I^etween the three statements as deelarations 
of spiritual and temporal love. 

21. Have students read the works in "The Seeker, " Man in Literature : 
Comparative World Studies in Translation, pp. 5213-550: "Forever- 
more" by the Israeli author, S. Y. Agiion; "The Circular Ruins" 

by the Argentinian author, Jorge Luis Borges; and "Autumn 
Mountain" by the Japanese author, Akutagawa Ryunosuke. Have 
them complete the "Development" activities headed "Interpretation,'' 
"Technique," and "Extensions." Have them also answer, orally 
and in writing, the questions in the section at the end of the chapter, 
"Compai'ison. " Have them consider the authors' use of irony, cul- 
tural traditions affecting the writers, illusion and reality in the 
stories, and narrative techniques, 

22. Have students read imd discuss the related selections in the listed 
soft-cover books which are companion texts to the hard-I^ound Man 

in Literature. The additional selections are to be read in conjunction 
with "The Seekers," (See 1^eacher\? Resource Book ,) 

a. Bhick African VGiecs 

(1) "Men of All Continents" by Dadie 

(2) ^'Africa" by Dioi^ . 

b. Russian and Eastern Europecm Literature 

(1) "Tevye Wins a Fortune" by Aleichem 

(2) "Where Love Is, God Is" I)y Tolstoy 

(3) "A Summer in the South" l^y Andric 

(4) "The Island" by Capek 

c. Literature from Greek and Roman Antiquity 

(1) From The History l)y Herodotus 

(2) Oedipus the King by Sophocles 

(o) "The Story of Daedalus and Icarus" I)y Ovid 



p 



From Spain and the Americas 



< 1 ) Poet vy by A i menez 

' Pilj^nmajije'' by Arria/.a 

(0) " rhe Secret of the Burning Stars" by Cuadra 

e. Litei-aturc of the Eastern World 

(1) *'On Hearing Chiin the Buddhist Monk from Shu 
Play His Lute" by LiPo 

(2) "A Drawing of a Horse by General Ts'ao at 
Secretary Wei Feng's House" by Tu Fu 

<3) The Cold Mountain Poems by Hanshan 

(4) "Prelude to Glory" by Win Pe 

(5) "Seibei's Gourds" by Shiga 

f. Teutonic Literature in English Translation 

(1) "A Tale of Death and a Strange Postscript Thereto" 
by Rilke 

(2) 'A Story Told to the Dark" V^y Rilke 

g. Italian Literature in translation: "The Ruby" by Alvaro 

h. Tnuislations from the French 

(1) 'The Legend of St. Julian the Hospitaller" by 
Flaubert 

(2) The Apollo of Be Hue by Giraudoux 

{Ih " rhe House Surrounded" by Supervielle 

2r». Hnvc students, as the topic applies to the selections listed in 

TS #24, examine critically the following: peace, ardent nationalism, 
man's quest for God, man and natum, man's search for earthly 
happiness, man's search for truth, man's preoccupation with 
material goods and the mystique of power, man's search for beauty, 
and the moral dilemmas imposed by ethical decision-making. 

21. Have students, as further concomitant reacting, explore imd analyze 
the following works as they apply to man's search for temporal and 
spiritual worth: Jean Coeteau's The Infernal Machine , Marlowe's 
Dr. Faustus , Byron's Manfred, and Goethe's Faust. 



ERIC 



-1- 



flavcr students view tlic Film Devi (rental from AUD). Have 
them discuss critically and analyze the movie as it ()!xuscnts 
pai'allcls to "The Circulai' iluins" and as a metaphysical 
statement oi' religion and fantasy. 

Have students listen critically to the recordings, Albert 
Herring (London,- 1378) and L'Enfant Prodigiie (London, ()538) 
by Benjamin Britten and Serge Prokofiev, respectively. Have 
them explore the themes of youth in quest of meaning in life 
with its paradoxical overtones of joy iind despair. 

Have students view and stvidy the fine art reproductions listed 
with paragraph descriptions in the 'I'eacher^s Resource Book , 
p. ISO; Agnostic Symbol by Dali; The Persistence of Memory 
by Dali; The Paintei''s Studio: Real Allegory by Coui'bert; 
Ti^iveling in the Mountains in Autumn by Yiian Yao; and The 
Long (Landscape) Scroll by vSesshu, Have them: 

a, propose reasons why these works should be included 
in the chapter, "The Seeker" 

b, list adjectives describing each reproduction 

e. write a short reaction paragraph to each selection 

d. explore the symbols in each work 

e. eonjectiirc how the theme of each work is related to 
themes of written selections read in "The Seeker" 

Have students collect, orgnni/.e, and present via multimedia 
techniques (slide-tape, 8 mm, movie, photo coriage/montagc, 
slide lecture., photoessay, etc.) a visual survey of contemporary 
man as "The Seeker" after the elusive moi*al abstracts: truth, 
beauty, justice, peace, the good life, :ind God, Have them also 
ecjually Juxtapose the quests for power, wcialth, status, sexual 
pi'owess, materialistic gains, hedonistic indulgences and" other 
expenditures of body and spirit which peso as questionable rites 
demanded by modern "gods," 

Ikive sbjdents read, discuss, and analyze the chapiei*, "The 
Human Condition" in the state-adopted text. Western Literature: 
Themes and Writers , McGraw-Hill, Inc. Have them, in each 
listed section of the chapter, relate the material to other selections 
read. "What Is Man?" "Birth and Childhood," "Mortality," "Doubt 
and Despair," " I^iu'poselessness or Purpose." Have the students 
examine critically the "Gallery" section, "Images of Man: The 



Human Ima<;e in Sculpture." Have them compare and contrast 
iha scul[)tured imat»*es with selected protajijonists' characteristics 
crcatfid in wM'ilinj^. 

'M). Have students consult :ind I'cad in tiie -'Outline; of Topics^' of 
A Syntopicon H in tlie G rcat Hooks the sections of the outline 
on Chapter 51, "A'Um": "Comparisons of man with God or the 
<»ods, or witli angels or spii-itual sul^stanccs"; "God's special 
creation of man"; "Man's uncle rstmiding of his relation to the 
gods or God"; and "Mjui as made in the image of God." Have 
students read and discuss selected reference works in the 
Great Books as the sections of the outline indicate. Have them, 
in writing, explore individual author's interpretation of the 
topics of the outline: Aquinas in Sunima Theologica on Man 
and the Angels; Freud on God*s Creation of Man; Dostoevskj' 
in Brothers Karamazov on Mcin mul Mis Understanding of the 
Gods; and Goethe in Faust on Man as the Image of God. 

31i Have students read and study pp. 2^13-258, "Chapter 29: God," 
in A Syntopicon I in the Great Books collection. Have them 
consult the "Outline of Topics," pp. 558~5G0, and read selected 
works in the Great Books under the following outline topics: 

a. "The nature rmd existence of the gods" 

"/i'he postulation of God: practical grounds for belief" 
e. "Man's relation to God or the gods" 

(1) "The fear of God or the gods*' 

(2) "The reproach ov defiance of God or tlie gods" 

(3) "The love of God. or the gods" 

(4) "Obedience to God or the gods" 

(5) "The imitation of God or the gods" 

d. "The divine nature in itself: tlie divine attributes" 

(1) "The identity of essence and existence in God: 
the necessity of a being wliose essence involves 
its existence" 

(2) "The unity imO simplicity of tlie divine nature" 

(3) "The immateriality of God" 



-9- 



e. "Mtm's kno\vlecIf»;e of God" 



(1) "'I'hc names ol Gocl: the mclaphorjc.'il and 
syn)l)olic rcpi'oscntation of C^od; the itnthropo- 
inorphic conception of God" 

(2) ".Natural knowledge: the use of anal()*>ics; the 
evidences of nature; the light of retison" 

. f. "The denial of God or the gods, or a supcrnatiirai" order: 
the position of the atheist" 

Have the students, orally imd in writing, analyze, compare 
and contrast the various authors' interpretation of a section 
of the outline on the nian--God-gods relationship. Have them 
choose a topic in the outline mid write a paper using several 
of the selections in the Great Books , suggested in the outline, 
as resource material. 

Presented with printed and multimedin resources, the student will 
translate his experience in examination of the concept of supreme 
authority to consideration of tenets of faith and worship in Judaeo- 
Christian and non-Judaeo-Christian doctrines. 



I. Have students view tlie l.ife, Epic of Man fihnstrip, "The 
Dawn of Religion, " 

'2, Wiwc students rend in 1 h i m i Ito n ' s i\ 1 y t h o 1 ( )gy : "Int i-oduction, " 
"The Gods, the Creation, ^nd the F^nrliest Heroes." and "The 
Heroes of the Troj:in War." 

.3. Have st^idents contrast and compare in wi^'ting the Old Testament 
ex|:)huiation of the Creation with the HamiHon interpretation in 
Mythology , 

4, Have students view the film strips, Greek and Roman Mythology, 
Myths i}nc\ Legends , Our Heritage from the Old World, The Gods 
of Mt. Olympus , Mythology Is AHve and WeH, Our Heritage from 
Ancient Rome . 

5. Have staidcnts view the films, Major Religions of the Woi'ld , and 
/Vneient Kgypt . 



-10- 



G. . Have students read pp. 7-37 in K, M. Sen^s Minduism , "The 

iNaturc and IM'inciples oi* Hinduism, " Have them discuss the 
material in light of the film, Major Religions of the World. 

7. Have students read the listed chapters in II. A. H. (Jibh's 

Mohammedanism: "The Expansion of Islam," "Mohammed," 
"The Koran," "Doctrine mul Ritual in the Koran," "The 
Tradition of the Prophet, " "Orthodoxy and Schism," "Islam 
in the Modern World. " 

H. Have students read pp, 14-89, "Hinduism, " in The Religions 
of Mim by Huston Smith. Have students also read pp, 217-253, 
"Islam, " in The Religions of Man, 

9. Have students read further in The Religions of Man , pp. 90-210: 
"Buddhism," "Confucianism," "Taoism," 

10. Have students prepare a multimedia presentation on Hinduism, 
Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism, In small group modes, 
the students may choose to explore one of the non-Judaeo- 
Christian faiths in depth, or they may choose to compare and 
contrast the separate religions in close detail. Encourage 

emphasis on investigation of art, music, dance, rites, im6 

dogma, 

11. . Have students view the listed films (&n The Odyssey: The Central 

Themes , The Re t urn of Odysseus , Structure of the Epic . 

12. Have students read in Ernst Cassirer's An Essay on Man, "The 
Definition of Man in Terms of Human Culture" and "Myth and 
Religion, " pp. G3-108, 

13. Have students document an investigative paper based on readinji; 
in Cassirer, Hamilton, and references in the G reat Books based 
on outline topics in the Syntopieon I and H, "Man" and "Cod": 
"Man's Knowledge of Himself," "Man in the Cosmic Order, ""The 
Ways of Cod and the Ways of Men," "Divine Omnipotence. " 

14. Have students read the works in the Great Hooks suggested in the 
"Outline oT Topics," 7-9 on .Judaco-Christian doctrines: 



-11- 



a. "Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohammedan, and 
Chi'istian concc[)tions of God and His relation to the 
world and man: ('reation^ Providence, Divine *>overnmeiit 
and h'lw, (;rac(i, Miracdes, 'i'he iiook of [.iTe, the rcsurreclion 
of body, the Last .jud^'ment and the end of the worUI" 

1). "Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God and 11 is 

people: The Chosen People: Jew and gentile; God's Covenant 
with Israel; The Law: its observance as a condition of 
righteousness ium\ blessedness; The Temple: the Ark of the 
Torah; the messianic hope" 

e. "Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature 
and human destiny: The Trinity; the Incarnation: the God- 
man; Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doctrines of 
original sin and salvation; the Church: tfe mystical l^ody 
of Christ; the Aposto.late; the sacraments; the second coming 
of Christ" 

15. Have students listen to recorchngs, with dittoed copies of the 
lil3retto,of Haydn's Tha Creation . Allied study may include 
a slide-tape lecture, student-prepared, of the ceiling of the - 
Sistine Chapel. 

10, Have students read The Evidence of God in an Expanding Universe: 
Forty American Scientists Declare Their Affirmative Views on 
Religion. In small grouf) modes, have students prepare a panel 
discussion, supported with visual aids, which explores related 
essays in the texts. Each group should submit a written synopsis 
of their f)rcsentation and list the relevant concepts they wish to 
enumerate in the panel discussion/media report. Encourage 
vigorous support and refutation of the scientists' theses. 

17. Have students read and discuss the chapters in Huston Smith's 
The Religions of Man , "Judaism," pp. 2134-300 and "Christianity," 
pp. 301-340. 

18, Have students read and discuss the listed chapters from Hertrand 
Russell's A History of Western Philosophy: 

a. "Ancient Philosophy after Aristotle" 

b, "The Fathers" 

(1) "The iieligious Development of the Jews" 



ERIC 



-12- 



(2) "Christianity during the First Four Centuries" 

(II) ''Three Doctors ol' the Church" 

(4) "Saint Augustine's Philosophy and Theology" 

(H) "The Fifth mid Sixth Centuries" 

(G) "Saint Benedict and Gregory the Ci^eat" 

c. "The Schoolmen" 

(I) "The Papacy in the Dark Ages" 

(2) "John the Scot" 

(3) "Fcclcsiastical Reform in the Eleventh Century" 

(4) "Mohanimcdan Culture and Philosophy" 

(5) "The Twelfth Century" 
(G) "The Thirteenth Century" 

(7) "Saint Thomas Aquinas" 

(8) "Franciscan Schoolman" 

(9) "The Eclipse of the Papacy" 

Show the listed films: 

a. Medieval Times: The Hole of the Church , 1-10111 

b. The Vatican, Part I , 1-31737 

c. The Vatican, Part II, 1-31738 

Discuss the content of the films in light of the material read 
in the Russell text. 

Have students read in The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell , 
Volume I , Edgar Brightman*s essay, "Russell's Philosophy 
of Religion, " pp. 537-55G. Instruct students to write a 
thoughtful essay in which they support or refute Russell as 
interpreted by Brightman. 

Have students read The Book of God by Bai^uch Spinoza. 
Have them critique a selected number of the short essays. 

Have students read in Immanuel Kant: His Life tuul Doctrine 
by Friedrich Paulsen, "The Theory of Religion and the Church, 
pp. 3G2-371. 



Have students read A Syntopicon H, to the Great Books , Chapte 
79, "Religion, " pp. 588-597. 



2^1 • II;iv(' studunts read ifi the Time- Life I)Ook, Aj^'e of Faith , 
I roMi l.hc Ag'tis ol" Man nerie*^, the lol lowing t()|)ics: 

''*rh(t Kisc of l-'eudalisnr' 
I), *'*riKi Li^ht of the Church" 

c, "Conc[uest by Crusade" 

d, "A New Urban Class" 

e, "Adventures of the Intellect" 
L "Art Inspired by Faith" 

25. Have students read in the Time- Life book, The Reformation , 
the listed chapters; 



a. 


"The Troubled Time" 


b. 


"The Reformer" 


c. 


"Leaders of the Protest" 


d. 


"Lurope Aroused" 


u. 


"The 'Counter Reformation* " 


f. 


"A I^cvolution in Letters" 




"Lean Days for Art" 


h. 


"The Power of Protestantism" 



2(). Have students investigate and present an informed study on 

the religion-bible-school controversy. Have students consult 
The Bible and the Schools by William O. Douglas, The Freedo m 
o f Religion in America, and God in Our I>ublic Schools by The 
National Reform Association, 

27, Have groups of interested students contrast and compare books 
from the King Jiimes Version of the New Testament with Good 
News for Modern Man by the Americim Bible Society Translation. 

28, Have students with the aid of maps, murals, slides, and other 
AV materials, prepare an extensive tmd informative travelogue 
leased on The Geography of the Bil)le l)y Denis I^ialy, 

29, Have students investigate imd pi^cscnt, objectively via multimcch'a 
techniques, the contemporary denominational phenomenon of the 
Jesus Revolution and offshoots such as the Process and the Way, 

30, Have students investigate the spiritual similarities between 
transcendental meditation and prayer, (Sec Saturday Review , 
''X'isions of a New Religion," 12/l9''7L) 



-14- 



31. Have students investigate the spiritual phenomena of ''getting 
happy'* and faith healing. 

32. Have students investigate and evaluate the divinity of the 
figure of Christ in light of Potter's treatment compared 
to The Crown and the Cross; The Life of Christ by Frank 
G. Slaughter. 

*VA. Have students read fictional biographies such as Taylor 

Caklwcirs Dear and Glorious Physician and The Great Lion 
of God, juid Judas, My Brother by Frank Ycrl)y. 

31. Have students read A Different Drummer by William Melvin 
Kelley and complete the following: 

a. Prepare a service in Bennet Bradshaw's church 
1). Evaluate the statement, "Jesus is Black" 
c. Analyze the final scene of the novel as a Golgotha 
parody 

35, Have students road, study, imd discuss in Sociology of 
Religion by Joachim Wach: 

a. "The Method" 

b. ^'Religious Experience imd Its Expression" 

c. "Sociological Consequences" 

d. "Religion and Society and Religion and Natural Groups" 

e. "Specifically Religious Orgimization of Society" 

f. "Religion and the State" 

g. "TJ13GS of Religious Authority" 

Have them write a 3-5 page paper which compares mid 
contrasts two or three chapters in Wach with the background 
information presented in the Time-Life l^ooks. 

3(). Have students read the chapters listed from Thomas K. O'Dca's 
The Sociology of Religion from the Foundations of Modern 
Sociology Series; 

a. "Religion and Society: the Functionalist Approach" 

b. "The Religious Experience" 

c. "The Institutionalization of Religion" 



-15- 



(J, "lieliKion and Society" 



'57. H.'ivc sludt^nts pr()/);in' :i inullinxMlin icclurc on icjli^ioiis 
ho!'itn|;c of the ethnic f^roups in "Part IV: Special Asi)eets 
of Religion in America" in ilistorical Atlas of Religion in 
America: 

a. Indians 

b. Jews 

c. Blacks 

d. Alaskans 

e. Havvaiians 

38. Hav^e students give an extensive, in-depth class lecture on 
the evolution of Black music in the U. S. originating with 
spirituals. Invite guests for class demonstrations. 

39. Have students investigate and present a detailed and informative 
study of Zionism in the U. S. and the treatment of Jews in the 
U.S. S. R. (See Time , 1/25/71, "The Harsh Plight of Soviet 
Jews. ") Have interested students investigate the religious 
significance and import of the reformed Judaic interpretation 

of Christ i\s an inspired prophet as opposed to a messianic 
interpretation. 

40. Have students, in small gi'oup modes, read Israel: A History 
of the Jewish People by Rufus Loarsi. For each of the six 
chapters, have student groups prepare a study of Jewish history 
in relation (o the texts already perused in activities Kn- 
courage an AY style class presentation. 

41. Hav^e interested students read and study: 

a. Basic Judaism by Milton Steinberg 

b. Eight Lights; the Story of Chanukah by Rosenbluni 

42. Have students read: 

a. "The Great Catholic Upheav^al" by Gordon Zaim in 
Satxrday Review , 9/11/71. 

b. Pope John XXHI's Peace on Earth, Addressed to All 
I^Iankind. 



ERIC 



-1G~ 



Have students investigate the evolution of the 20th century 
ecumenical movement culminating in the Vatican councils. 
Include the role and function of youth in exchange student 
programs, etc. 

43. Have students read Norman Cousins^ article in Satu rday 
Review , "The Improbable Triumvirate.*' Have students 
research further for information on the ecumenical relation- 
ship of Pope John XXIH, John Kennedy, and Krushchev. 

44. Have students read, discuss, contrast, compare, and 
analyze, orally imd in writing, individual persons explored 
in The Great Religious Leaders by Charles Francis Potter. 

45. Have students read St. Augustine's Of True Reli^on and 
Saint Bonaventura's The Mind's Road to God . Have students 
discuss the relevance of the two small texts to orthodox 
Catholicism. 

4G. Have students, using the Syntopicon outline references in the 
sections on "Religion*' and "God," read and study Dante's 
Diylne Comedy. Instinct students to explore the function of 
man's free will, the condescension of Christ, the function of 
an adjudicatory God, the nature of sin, and the structure of 
a mystical Paradise. 

•17„ Have students explore the man-God relationship in Milton's 
Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained . Have students, using 
the Syntopicon II, "References," in Chapter 79, "Religion," 
as a guide, investigate the following topics: 

a. The sources of faith 

h. Revelation and miracles 

c. Prayer, worship, sacrifice 

d. Religious communities 

e. Preaching 

f. Sacred and secular learning 

48. Have interested students explore rmd analyze the theology' 
of the following musical works: 

a. Cantata -14, "Christ lag in Todcsbiuidcn, '* by J.S. i>ach 



-17- 



I). Cnntata //53, "Schlagc doch, gewoinschte Stunde' 

<\ ('nnlMta "VVnc^hcl Auf ! byJ,S, [^ach 

(L Haeh's Magniticat in f) 

c. Handel's Israel in L'gypt 

f, Mozart's Coronation Mass 

j;'. Mass K, 427 by Handel 

h, Berlio?/ L^Enfance du Christ 



49. Have students listen critically, with the visual aid of a 
dittoed Hbretto to the following masses: 

a. Verdi *s Requiem Mass 

Ij. PhiHips' recording of ^he Missa Luba 

c, Phillips* recording of the Missa Criolla 

Have students study and listen to the lyrics and music of 
Leonard Bernstein's Mass, Have them analyze and evaluate 
Bernstein's degree of departure from the traditional mass 
motif. 



50, Have students listen to^ compare and contrast, analyze, and 
evaluate the Christ musicaHy treated in Handel's The Messiah 
with the Christ in fJesus Christ Superstar. 

51, Have students compai*c and contrast the religious moods in the 
music and lyrics of the recoixHngs of the plays Salvation and 
C?od spell. 

52, Have students investigate and present a class lecture on the 
religious imd theological relevance of the following paintings: 
(See bibliography for slide listing*) 

a. Chagall's The Rabbi 

b. Dali's The Crucifixion 

c. Kl Greco's Agony in the Garden 

d. Exckias' Dionysus Returning Home 

e. Grotto's The Lamentation 

f. Michelangelo's The Last Judgment 

g. Titian's Christ Crowned with Thoms 

h. Wander Weyden's Descent from the Cross 



ERIC 



-18- 



firi. lUivv students, after some art history research, prepare a 
i \:tss hu'iuvi' with nitiltinu^flia aids <hi th(^ listecl religious 
;iMhHeflijri-: 

a, rorlmsier's Ste> Marie-du-Haut , Honehanip, Kranee 

I). Laha(lie*s Sacn? Coeur 

c. Matisse *s Chapel of Rosany 

(I. Police Chapel of Charlemagne 

e. Parthenon, Athens 

f. Yamasaki's Synagogue in Chicago 

54. Have students read contemporary religious philosophers such 
as Buber, Tillich, deChardin, Kirkegaard, Bonhoeffen Have 
interested students in^ike an in-depth study into the works of 
one of the men. Have them pre^^ent their findings In relation 
to classical theology already investigated. 

55. Have students read selected chapters from the Prentice-Hall 
Foundations of Philosophy Series, Philosophy of Religion , l>y 
John Hick: "What is philosophy of religion"; "The Judaic- 
Christian Concept of God"; "Grounds for Belief in God"; 
"Grounds for Disbelief in God"; "Human Destiny"; "Revelation 
and Faith"; "Problems of Religious Language"; "The Problem 
of Verification." Have them propose reasons for developing 

a personal philosophy of religion, its relevance and value, and 
the function of religion for contemporary American youth. Have 
the students write an exploratory paper which supports or refutes 
a rationale, based on reading already completed, for the develop- 
ment of a practical religious philosophy in today's world. 

C. Presented with printed and multimedia resources, the student will 

analyze the spurious deification of man's self-manufactured contrivances 
and preoccupations, physical and spiritual, which are nonseetarian and 
nondenominational. 

1. Have students read in selected volumes of the Great Books , works 
listed in the outline, r^l 4,on "The Worship of False Gods: l>eifieation 
and Idolatry/' pp. fiOO-(i01, A Syntopicon [, Have students list, 
discuss, compare and contrast a grouping of false deities explored 
in the Great Book selections with a student-compiled listing of 
modern *'gods" to which man pays undue homage. 



-19- 



2. Have students generate through class discussion all the ways 
|)eoplcj, |)articuhirly American consunvers, are fascinated iind 
absorhec] with the mystique of buying power. Have them consider 
all the ways the modern Amiiriean spends his money. Have tliem 
investigate the classical significance of Mammon. Have them, 
orally iind in writing, consider the preoccupation of adults and 
youth with cars, clothes, sports, stereo equipment, and sex. 

;i. Have students read selected articles on a ditto reprint of the 

following title list of current periodical readings on automobiles 
and the American driver; 

a. "I Rode a I^riverless Car!" by Bacon in Mechanics 
Illustrated, November, 1971. 

b. "Ne.Nt I'en Years" by K. Ludvigsen in Motor Trend, 
January, 1970. 

e. "i;)ash Computer 'I'ells When to Change Oil" by \'\ 
Lindsley in Popular Science, August, 1970. 

d. "How to Troubleshoot Some of Those New Fangled 
Gadgets" by M. Schult/ in Popular Mechanics , May, 
1970. 

e, "Stay-Awake Alarm" by R. M. Marston in Radio - 
Electronic s, September, 1970. 

f, "When Birds and Beasts Went Motoring: Radiator 
Mascots and Hood Ornaments" by M. Lamm in 
Audubon , January, 1970. 

g. "Where Are They Now?: the Edsel Lives" in Newswe ek, 
October 13, 1970. 

lu "iMrd 'I'hat Hoots If I3rivers Doze" in Business World , 
July 4, 1970. 

i. "i^ishbuttons v. Drunks: Physiological Tests to Judge 
a IDriver's Condition" in Time , June 1, 1970. 

j, "Cars of the Future: Safety First" in U. S. News, March 
30, 1970. 

k. "Drive to Make Autos Safer: Wliat the Government Wants" * 
in U. S. News, August 31, 1970. 



Have students make a multimedia presentation on the dominating 
role played by the American automol)ile in contemporary society. 



Ujivo students read selected articles on a ditto reprint of the 
lollowin^; title list of current periodical readin^^s on sports in 
An»erica: 

a. "Sham liattle: Iloeky Maroiano-iVluhammad Ali Computerized 
right" in Newsweek, February 2, 1970. 

b. '"rime for All Good Men. . . Help Defend American Sports 
Cliches" by F. Deford in Sports Illustrated, Noveml)er 
22, 1971. 

c. "At Age 9, They're Bowl Game Veterans: Junior Pee-Wee 
League" in Life, December 17, 1971. 

d. "Goodbye to the Alka-Seltzer and Aspirin Bowl" by T. 
Maule in Sports Illustrated, February 1, 1971. 

e. "Wishbone of Contention: Pro-Football Draff' by J. 
Marshall in Sports Illustrated, February 14, 1972. 

f. "Black Football Players in the White South" by L. J. 
Banks in Ebony , December, 1970* 

g. "Most Deadly Games" by J. H. Plumb in Horizon, 
August, 1909. 

h. "Are Sports Good for the Soul?" in Newsweek , 
January ll, 1971. 

i. "Brief Search for America: Observations on Sports 
and Life in Four Small Towns" by J. Undei^wood in 
Sports Illustrated, May 4, 1970. 

Have students prepare a multimedia essay on the American 
male mystique and sports activities. 

Have students read selected articles on a ditto reprint of the 
following title list of current periodical readings on clothes 
and the "well-dressed" image: 

a. "Fashion Game: Winners and Losers" in Ladies Home 
Journal , March, 1972. 

b. "Dear Miss North; Why Do Teachers Have to l)e Dressed 
So F'ormally" by C. E. Cockerxdlle in Educational Digest , 
Febi-uary, 1972. 

c. "Sleazy Rider: Drive-In Movie Pants" in Newsweek, 
February 28, 1972. 

d. "Hot Pants: Legs Are Back" in Time, February 1, 1971. 

e. "Pants Outfits in I^ublic?** Amy Vanderbilt in Ladies 
Home Journal , January, 1971. 



J. "What Well-Kiiit Men Will Wear" in Business World , 

Junuiiry 2:], 1971. 
j^i. "Pick the Co/icjsl Sleepvvoar for the Whole Family" 

in CiQod IJousekeeping , Kel)ruary, 1971. 
;h. "Instiint Wedding Dress" in Life, Deeember 3, 1971. 
i. "Big Mamma Goes Couture" by M. Smith in MeCalls , 

November, 1971. 
j. "Big Business: N. Austin's Custom-Designed Fat 

Lady Clothes" in Time, November 29, 1971. 
k. "Athlete as Peaeoek" in Time, January 4, 1971. 
1. "What You Should Know About the New Rainwear" in 

Good Housekeeping, April, 1970. 
m. "Ringing Sueeess: Garments of Aluminum Rings 

from Pop-Top Cans" in Time, 1970. 
n. "Male Plumage: with Editorial Comment" in Life, 

September 25, 1970. 

Have students present a multimedia study of trends in fashion 
fads and the youth revolt of style eonsciousness. 



6. Have students read seleeted artieles on a ditto reprint of the 

following title list of eurrent periodieal readings on eontemporary 
sexual mores: 

a. "Faeing Our Sexoiality" in Ameriea, Deeeml^er 26, 1970. 

b. "Sex Power and the Revolution" by V. EUer in Christian 
Century , Deeember 30, 1970. 

e. "Sexual Confliets: Questions and Answers" by David 
Reuben in MeCalls, July, 1970. 

d. "Famil}'^ Size and Sex-Role Stereotypes" by F. E. Clarkson, 
in Seienee, January 23, 1970. 

e. "Early Christiiuis on Sex" by J. J. Magee in Catholic 
World , August, 1070. 

f. "Boy or Girl? A New Pre-Birth Test Can Tell," interview 
by M.M. Gnambaeh in Good Housekeeping , January, 1970. 

g. "Sexes: Getting It All Together" by F. Bowers in Saturday 
Review, January 0, 1971. 

h. "You Are More Cupcakeal)le for Being a Cosmopolitan Girl" 
by W. F. Buekley, Jr. , in National Review , September 22, 
1970. 

i. "Dirty Movies: Hard Core-Soft" by D. Donby in Atlantie , 
August, 1970. 



-22- 



"Mow Skin Flicks Hit IMblc-Belt Waterloo, Iowa" in 

Newsweek , Deoomhei' 21, 1970. 
k. ''Movies and the Sexual Revolution; Should the Ralinj^ 

Be Revised?*' hy G. N. Boyd in Christian Century , 

Sejuember 23, 1970. 
1. "Obscenity in Films" by R. Schni.ekel in Lite , April 

10, 1970. ,v 
m. "They Shoot Dirty Movies, Don* t They" by Botto 

in Look , November 3, 1970. 
n. "What the Bible Says about Sex" by Billy Graham in 

Reader^s Digest , May, 1970. 
o. "I!ow Mothers Answer: V/here Do Babies Come From?" 

by L. M. Higdon in Tod ay ^s Health, October, 1970. 
p. "Why ril Give My Daughter the Pill" by P. H. Wade in 

Redbook, June, 1970. 
q. "Sex Gam.es People Play, " excerpts from Sex in Human 

Loving by E. Berne in Ladies Home Journal , October, 

1970. 

r. "Sex, Guilt, and the Double Standard" by W. iL Masters 

and V.E; Johnson in Redbook, October, 1970. 
s. "Wliat^s Happening* to Sexual Privacy?" by F. Trippett, 

in Look, October 20, 1970. 
t. "Sex in Human Loving" by R. Berne, review in Life, 

December 18, 1970. 
u. "Young LiWng: Must Sex Be All or Nothing at All?" by 

A. Wood, in Seventeen , June, 1970. 
v. "What's Happening to American Morals: Symposium," 

in U.S. News, Jimuary 25, 1971. 
w'. "American Way of Swinging" in Time , February 8, 1971. 
x. "Radical Family" by J. Poppy in Look, January 26, 1971. 
y. "Sex Differences in I. Q. Patterns of Children with Congenital 

Heart Defects" by M. P. Honzik in Science , December :3, 1971. 
z. "Myths that Keep Women Down" by C. Bird in Ladies Home 

Journal, November, 1971. 

Have students read selected articles from a cHtlo reprint oi' the 
foHowing title Hst of current periodical readings and texts on 
the power oi money and wealth and consumer eonseiousness: 



a. "Money Matters!" by G. Grimes in Harper's Bazaar , 
Aug\ist, 1970. 



1). "What Spending M(jney llcveaKs about You" by T. L. 
Rubin in l. adies Hom e: >l(nirnal , OctobtM*, 1070. 

c. "AburKlancti Isn't the I''ull Answer: ('onsumor T^uyinf:' 
indicators Kindinf^s" by h. L. Masse in America , 
March 21, 1970. 

d. ''Man and His Environment," adaptation of an address 
by A.J. Coale in Science , October 9, 1970, 

e. ^'NonbuyinK Mood" in Time, June 22, 1970. 

f. "Playing It Tight: Decline in Luxuxy Spending" in 
Newsweek , April 20, 1970. 

g. "Why People Aren^t Spending" in U. S. News, September 
28, 1970. 

h. "Let the Buyer Be Aware: Untested New Products" in 
Today's Health, March, 1970. 

i. "Nader's Biggest Raid: Summer Projects" in Newsweek , 
June 29, 1970. 

j. "Nader's Raiders: Consumer Crusade Against Major 
Corporations" in America^ May 9, 1970. 

k, "Nader's Raiders on the FDA: Science :mc\ Scientists 
Misused" by P. M. Bo f fey in Science, April 17, 1970. 

1. "Nader's Raiders Strike Again" in Time, March 30, 1970. 
m. "Nothing Works Anymore" in New Republic , February 14, 
1970. 

n. "Consumer Power Grows in Congress" in Business World , 
July 11, 1970. 

o. "Defending Consumer; Proposed Independent Consumer 
Agency Act" by S. Lazainis in New Republic , September 
2(3, 1970. 

p. "Let There Be I.umens: FTC Regulation on Life Ratings" 
in Newsweek , August 3, 1970. 

'*U. S. Toughest Customer: Ralph Nader and Raiders" 
in Readcr^s Digest, March, 1970. 
r. "More Unions Cut Their Raises" in U. S. News, December 
13, 1971. 

s. "Case of the Jitters: Monetary System Unstable" in Newsweek , 

Febioiary 14, 1972. 
t, "World Monetary Refonn: Rethinl^ing the System: Questions 

and Answers" by L. A. Mayer in Fortune, December, 1971. 
u. "Why the Big Deficits Fail to Stimulate" in Business World , 

March 4, 1972. 

V, "Consumer Battle at the Grass Roots: States and Communities 
Setting Up Own Agencies" in Business World , February 20, 
1072. 

w. Money and Emotional Conflicts by PJdmund Bergler. 

-24- 

ERIC 



X. ynv i/jve n\ Money; Human behavior and Money by 

JnincfS A. Knight, 
y. Mo n(!y in the Conijrtitct Age hy l\ P. Thomson. 
/. Keonomics of ('risis; War, Polities anil the l)ollar 

hy Kliot Janeway. 
an. Gos|jcl of Wealth and Other Timely Kssays by Andrew 

Carnegie. 

bb. Affluent Soeiety by John K. Calbraith. 

ec. Man's Worldly Goods by Leo Huberman. 

dd. Rich; Are They Different by George Kirstein. 

ee. Wealth and Power in America; An Analysis of Social 

Class and Income Distribution by Gabriel Kolko. 
ff. Moneymakers; The Great Big New Rich in America 

by Kenneth Lamott. 
gg. Your Infinite Power to Be Rich by Joseph Murphy, 
hh. Affluence and the Christian by ffendrik van Oyen. 

Have the students prepare a multimedia class lecture entitled, 
''Modern Mammon: Greenback and Company.'' 

Have students read selected articles on a ditto reprint of the 
following title list of current periodical readings and texts on 
the history and sociology of war: 

a. ''Modern Man Is Obsolete" in Saturday Review, August 1, 
1970. 

b. "100 Wars and Other Conflicts since World War 11" in 
UNESCO Courier , November, 1970. 

c. "Patterns in Intei-national Warfare: 181(5-1965" by M. 
Small and J. D. Singer in Annals of the American Academy 
of Political and Social Science , September, 1970. 

d. "Case for War/' Time , March 9, 1970. 

e. "Pinstripes for Peace" in Newsweek , May 11, 1970. 

f. "Political Rationality in Ending War" by P. Kecskemcjte 
in Annals of the American Academy of Political iirnl Social 
Science , November, 1970. 

g. "How Nations Take Defeat" in Horizon, Summer, 1970. 

h. "New Nuclear Strategy for America?" in U.S. News, 
April 13, 1970. 

i. "Scandal of Silence: U. S. Catholic Conference Memor;mdum" 
by G. C. Zahn in Commonweal , Fel>iuary 4, 1972. 

), "Need for a War-Power P>iH" by A. M. PJekel in New 
Repul)lic . January 22, 1972. 



-25- 



k. Right to Make War'' by E. G. Wendchy in New Republic , 

January 29, 1972. 
1. **VVar Profiteers'* book review by R. F. Kaufman in Nation, 

November 22, 1971. 
m. liockc on War and Peace by Richard H. Cox* 
n. From Arrow to Atom Bomb by Stanton A. Coblentz. 
o. War; The Anthropology of Armed Conflict and Aggression 

by Marvin Harris, 
p. Men at War by Krnest Hemingway. 
c|. Man and Warfare: Thematic Readings for Composition 

by William F. Irmscher. 
r. Peace and the War Industry by Kenneth E. Boulding. 
s. Economics of Crisis; War, Politics and the DoHar by 

Eliot Janeway. 

t. Sanity and Survival: Psychological Aspects of War and 

Peace by Jerome Frank, 
u. War and Peace in the Global Village by Marshall McLuhan 

and Quentin Fiore. 
v. Morality and Modem War by John C. Murray, 
w. Christian Conscience and War by John Nelson. 
X. War and Moral Discourse by Ralph Potter, 
y. War in Modern Society; An Introduction by Alastair 

Buchan. 

Have the students make a multimedia class presentation, **War: 
Man's Ultimate Inhumanity to Man.'' 

Have students read selected articles chosen from a ditto reprint 
of the following list of current periodical readings on space age 
technology and computers: 

a. "Zen Buddhism and Westeiii Alienation from Nature" by 
W. R. Hoyt in Christian Century . October 7. 1970. 

b. "Who's in Charge of History?^' in Christian Century , 
December 2, 1970. 

c. "Super Technology; WiH It End the Good Life?" in Field 
and Stream I June, 1970. 

d* "Mythos of the Electronic Revolution" by J. W. Casey 

and J. J. Quirk in American Scholar , Spring-Summer, 1970. 

e. "Ecology of Weaponry'' by W. C. Clemens in Current , 
November, 1970. 

L Lewis Mumford's Pentagon of Power , reviewed in National 
Review by H. Caton, January 12, 1971* 



-26- 



"All anil rc?c hiii>li>j'v: Kxliihilion in U. S. Pavilion at 
i:x\itt '71}" l#v M, l uchrnan in Art in America , March, 

lUHK 

li. '•|iii(;iv>l>afiU? MariJ.-inc;*' hy I), Davi.s in Newsweek , 

April liO, 1070. 
!• ''(icneva Conference on Technology ami the Future*' 

by .1. K. T. Hough in Christian Century , Au(^st 5, 1970. 
j. "Task Force Probes Future in Technological World" 

in Christian Century . December 23, 1970, 
k. "Evangelical initiative: Fingertip Facts" in Christian 

Today , March 13, 1970. 
1. "Science: the Endless Search" by J. Lear in Saturday 

Review , March 7 :md March 14, 1970. 
m. "Reviewing Space Priorities" in Science News , August 

1, 1970. 

n. "Testing Man's Values in Space: Skylab" by E. Driscoll 

in Science News , October 10, 1970. 
o. "Spin-Off: the Fruit of Space Research" by C. Gregory 

in UNESCO Courier , March, 1970. 
p. "How to Stop Woriying and Love the Computer" in Newsweek, 

July 27, 1970. 

q. "Heboid the Computer Revolution" by P. T. White in National 

Geographic , November, 1970. 
r. "Computers Can Be Fun" in Science Digest t December. 1970. 
s. "Problem Solver, Problem Maker" in Business World , 

October 17, 1970. 
t. ''Now! A Computer for Your Car" by D. Demshe in Mechan- 
ics Illustrated. February, 1970. 
u. "Will the Computer Kill Education?" by B. L. Hicks in 

Educational Digest, September, 1970. 
V. "One Big Push-Button Market for All V" by C. Morgello 

in Newsweek , November 30, 1970. 
w. "Computer Makes Fertile Parents" in Husiness World , 

November 28, 1970. 
X. "Dialing for the Groceries: The Mart System" in Business 

World, March 28, 1970. 
y. "My Machine IjOvcs Me" by B. Ford in Science Digest , 

September, 1970. 
z. "Handy Uses of a Home Computer" by M. Shamberg in Life. 

January 30, 1970. 
aa. "Image Analysis: Application to Automated Medic^d Diagnosis" 

by A. L. Hammond in Science , December 3, 1971. 

Have the students give a multimedia class presentation entitled, 
''Space- .Age Deities: Electronic Salvation?" 



ERIC 



•27- 



11. 



Flave students read and investigate the chapters in A Treasury 
of Witchcrall by Harry E. Wedeck: 



a. 'Xloneral Introduction — Black and White Ma];ic, 
Effects on Individuals ;uid Communities'' 

b. "Magic Techniques* Spells, Conjurations, 
Incantations, Periapts, Formulas'' 

c. Goetic Diversions — Divination — Astrology— 
Levitations — Alchemy" 

d. "Witchcraft versus the State" 

12. Have students read and study: 

a. A Syntopicon , Volume I, pp. 605-613, "Good and 
Evil" 

b. A Syntopicon, II, pp. 753-760, "Sin" 

13. Have students write short character sketches suitable for 
expansion into skits and short stories adaptable for classroom 
performance on a contemporary interpretation of the Seven 
Deadly Sins. 

14. Have students read in Man and His Gods by Homer W, Smith, 
"The Rise and Fall of His Satanic Majesty's Empire." 

15. Have students read further in A Treasury of Witchcraft ; 

a. "Operations of Magic, Sympathetic Magic. . ." 

b. "Raising the Devil. . . " 

c. ' Black Mass, Sabbat" 

16. Have students read selected articles and loxts chosen from a 
ditto reprint of the following title list of current periodical 
readings and liooks under the general heading, conduct of life: 

a. 'Ilang-Ups That Haunt Us" by N. V. Peale in Reader's 
Digest, June, 1970. 

b. ^Liiing High on Wit, Wisdom, and Love'' by C. Binger 
in Saturday Re\ie\v, July 25, 1970. 

c. 'Taming of Individuals and the State'' by Norman Cousins 
in Saturday Review. January 17, 1970. 



ERIC 



-28- 



cl. Visions ol the llumsui Revolution" by lledgepeth 

in Look. January 1970. 
<?. Sn ving the Apiwta ranees: A Study in Idolatry by 

Owen l\;irliehl. 
I. I ruth and Power: Kssays of a Decade by Hans I. 

Morgenthau. 

g. Psychology of Power by Ronald V. Sampson. 

h. Love, Power, and Justice by Paul Tillich. 

i. Political Systems aiid Distribution of Power by 
Michael Banton. 

j. Power, Law, Right and Love: A Study in Political 

Values by Edgar H. Brookes, 
k. P ower. Participation and Ideology; Readings in the 

Sociology of American Political Life by Larson and 

Wasbum. 

I. Men at the Top: A Study in Community Power by 
Robert Presthus. 
m. Authority and the Individual by Bert rand Russell. 

Have students, using material from reading in TS #1G, the 
following titles, and works selected after additional research, 
investigate im6 present an imaginative, unbiased multimedia 
analysis of the contemporary American youth counter-culture, 
its values, and "gods": 

a. "Faith, Rebirth, and Renewal" by P.P. Price in PTA 
Magazine, April, 1970. 

b. "When the Young Teach and the Old Learn" in Time, 
August 17, 1970. 

c. "Making of a Counter Culture, " excerpts by T. Roszak 
in Horizon, Spring, 1970. 

d. "Visions of a New Religion" by M. Covell in Saturday 
Review, December 19, 1970. 

e. "After the Fall: What This Country Needs Is a Good 
Counter Counterculture Culture" by D. French in 
New York Times Magazine , October .'5, 1971. 

Have students read The Art of Loving by Erich Fromm. Have 
them discuss, analyze, and evaluate his philosophic thought as iui 
antithesis of the absence of charity and :i.s sax ecumenical challenge 
for improving the human spiritual condition. 



-29- 



19. Have the students read the trilogy, Radical Theology and the 
Death of God , The Secular City , and Situation Ethics * 

20« Have the students listen and view the sound*slide survey, 
Man ond His Values; An Inquiry into Good and Evil > Have 
them, orally and in writing, relate concepts presented in 
the survey to the class, multimedia presentations on the 
masks of Mammon. 

21. Have students propose, based on their reading, viewing, 
listening, and speaking experiences in this quin, non- 
clenominational guidelines for achieving and maintaining 
spi ritual health in the chaotic society of technological 
change such as ours» 

IV, STUDKN T rtESOURCKS 

A. State*adopted texts 

The United States in Literature , Ilarcourt, Brace and World. 

England in Literature, Harcourt, Brace and World. 

Reflections op a Gift of Watermelon Pickle.^ , And Other Modem 
Verse. Scott, Foresman and Co. 

Insight; The Experience of Literature , Noble tmd Noble, Publishers, 
Inc. 

Western Literature; Themes and Writers , Webster Division, McGraw- 
Hill Rook Co. 

B. Non- state-adopted supplementary materials 

1, Textbooks 

Man in Literature; Comparative World Studies in Translation, 
Scott, Foresman and Co. 

Literature from Greek and Roman Antiquity 
Russian and Eastern European Literature 
Translation from the French 
Italian Literature in Translation 
Black African Voices 



ERLC 



30- 



Literature of the Eastern World 

From Spain and the Amerieas; Literature in Translation 
'I'eut onic Literature: In Knglish Translation 

Ihitcliiiis, HdlKMl Maynarcl, ed. Great lkK»ks of the Western 
World, The Great Ideas, A Syntopieon of Great Ilooks 
of the Western World , Volume L Chicago: Kncyclopaedia 
Rritannica, Ine. , 1952. 

Hutchins, Robert Masmard, ed. Great Books of the Western 
World , The Great Ideas, A Syntopieon of Great Books 
of the Western World , Volume IL Chieago: Encyelopaedia 
Britannica, Ine. , 1952. 

Reference materials 

Aesehylus. The Orestes Plays; Agamemnon, The Libation 
Bearers, The Eumenides> New York: Mentor-NAL, 
1963. 

• Prometheus Bound. New York: Mentor-NAL, n,d. 



Agnon, S. Y. Days of Awe: A Treasury of Traditions. Legemis 
and Learned Commentaries Concerning RoshhaShanah , 
Yom Kippur and The Days Between. New York: Schocken, 
n.d. 

Alti/er, rhomas tL and William Hamilton. Radical Theology 

and the Death o{ God . lndiana|M)lis: I'ohhs-Mcrvill Co. ,n.d. 

American Bible Society Translation, Good News for Modem Man. 
New York: Pocket Books, 1969. 

Aiiouilh. Jean. Becket. New York: Signct-NAL, 1964. 

Augustine, St. City of God . New York: IXiuhleday Image Books, n 

Baker, Liva. World Faiths: A Story of Religions. New York: 
Abelard-Schumtui, 1966. 

Baly, Denis. The Geography of the Bible, A Study in Historical 
Geography . New York: Harper and Brothers, 1957. 



-31- 



B^inton, Michael, ed. Political Systems and Distribution 
of l^wor . New York: Rames and Noble, 1968. 



P»arneld, <Kven. Saving the Appearances; A Study i n 

Idolatry , New York: llarcourt, Hracc, Jovanovich. n.d. 

Hergler, Edmund. Money i\nd Emotional Conflicts, New 
York: International University Press, 1970. 

Berry, Gerald L. Religions of the World: from Primitive 
Times to the 20th Century > New York: Barnes and Noble, 
1947. 

Blacker, Irwin R. and Ethel H. Blacker, eds. The Book of 
Books . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, lOfifi. 

Bolt, Robert. A Man for All Seasons. Literary Cavalcade 
Magazine , Volume 16, No. 1. 

Boulding, Kenneth E. , ed. Peace and the War Industry . 
Chicago: Aldine, 1970. 

Bouquet, Alan Coates. Comparative Religion: A Short Outline. 
London: Cassell, 1961. 

Brookes, Edgar H. Power, Law, Right and Love; A Study 
in Political Values. Durham, North Carolina: Duke, 19G3. 

Brown, Joe D. and Time Magazine Editors, eds. Sex in the 
Sixties . New York: Time-Life, 1968. 

Buber, Martin. Eclipse of God . New York: Torchbooks, 1957. 

. 1 and Thou. New York: Scribner's, 1958. 



Buchan, Alastnir. War in Modem Society; An Introduction , 
New York: Harper and Row, 1968. 

Bunyan, John. Pilgrim^s Progress. Now York: Airmont, n. d. 

Burleigh, J. U.S., trans. St. Augustine of True Religion. 
Chicago: Henry Regnery Co. , Uhit. 



Friincis of Assist, St. Little Tlowers of St. Francis. 
New York: Mentor-NAL, n.cl. 



rr:iiik, U?rome. S;uHty ia\i\ Survival; Psychological Asjiocas 
oi War and jJeace . New York: Itsmdom, 19GH. 

I razor, Sir James Gcoi*ge. The Golden Bough; A Study in 
Magic and Religion . New York: The Macmillan Co. , 1940. 

Fremantle, Anne. Age of Faith . New York: Time Inc. , 1965. 

Fromm, Erich. The Art of Loving . New York: Bantam 
Books, Inc., 1963. 

Galbraith» John K. Affluent Society . New York: New Amcricjm 
Library, n.d. 

Gardner, W. H. » ed. Poems and Selectc<l Prose of Gerard 
Manley Hopkins . Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1953. 
(For such poems as "God's Grandeur, " "Heaven-Haven, 
'The Habit of Perfection," "Pied Beauty, " or "The 
Starlight Night") 

Gaustad, Edwin Scott. Historical Atlas of Religion in America . 
New York: Harper and Row, Publishers, 1962. 

Gclfond, Rnvena. The I'rcedom of Religion in America . 
Minneapolis: Lerner Publications Co. , 1969. 

Goethe, J. W. von. Faust , 2 volumes. Baltimore: Penguin 
Books, 1949. 

Gordh, George. Christian Faith and Its Cultural Expression . 
Knglewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hsll, Inc. , 1964. 

Hamilton, Edith. Mythology: Timeless Talcs of Gods and 
Heroes. New York: The New American Library, 1942. 

Harris, Marvin, ct al. , eds. War; The Anthropology of Armed 
Conflict and Aggression. New York: Natural History, 196S. 

Hart, Herbert L. Law, Liberty and Morality . Now York: 
Random, n,d. 



ilcmin^vay, Ernest, eel. Men at War , New York: Berkley 
Publishing Co, , n.tl. 



Hill, (*an>line, ed. The WorlcPs Great Iteligious Poetiy. 
New York: Macniillan Co. , n. cl. (For poems such as 
Clou^h^s *'The Latest Decalogue'* or Carl Sandburg*s 
"To a Contemporary Hunkshooter**) 

lluberinan, Leo. Man's Worldly Goods . New York: Monthly 
Review, 1S)52. 

Huxley, Aldous. The l>evils of Loudun . New York: Harper 
and Brothers, 1953. 

Irinscher, William F. , ed. Man and Warfare; Thematic 
Readings for Composition . Boston: Little, n.d. 

James, E. O. The Ancient Gods. New York: Putnam's 
Sons, I960. 

Janeway, Eliot. Economics of Crisis: War, Politics and 
the l>)llar . New York: Weybright, n.d. 

Keller, VVemcr. The Bible as History . New York: William 
Morrow and Co. , 1957. 

Keynes, Geoffrey, ed. The Complete Poetry and Selected 

Prose of John Donne . New York: Modern Library, 1941. 
(For such poems as ''Death Be Not Proud," "A Hytnm to 
God the Father, " and selections from the Holy Sonnets | 

. The Complete PoetiT of William Blake. 

New York: Modern Library, 1941. (For selections from 
"Songs of Innocence and of Experience") 

Kirstein, George G. Rich: Arc They Different . New York: 
Tower, 1970. 

Knight, James A. For the I^vc of Money: Human Behavior 
and Money . New York: Lippincott, 19fi8. 

Knoepflniacher, U. C. Religious Humanism imd the Vietori:m 
Novel: George Eliot, Walter Pater^ and Samuel Butier . 
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1965. 



ERIC 



-35- 



Koiko, (;:il)r i(*]. Wealth tmd Power in America; Aii Analysis 
ot SiM;ial (Mass ;m(l Income nislributio n^ New York: 



La moll, Kennellu Moneymakers; The Cireat Big New Rich 
in America , New York: Bantam, 1970. 

Larson, Calvin J. and Philo C. Wasbum, eds. Power, 
Participation and Ideology; Readings in the Sociology 
of American Political Life, New York; McKay, 1969. 

Learsi, Rufus. Israel; A History of the Jewish People , 
New York: The World Publishing Co. , 1950. 

Lecomte du Moiry, Pierre. Human Destiny . New York; 
Longmans, 1947. 

Lewis, Sinclair. Elmer Gantry. New York; Signel-NAL, 1967. 

Mac I^ish, Archibald. J. B. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co. , 
1958. 

Marlowe, rhrislopher. The Tragedy of Doctor Faustus . 
New York; vVa^^hington Square Press, 1959. 

McLuhmi, Marshall and Quenlin Fioixj. War and Peace in 
the Global village . New York: McCraw, 1968. 

Milton, John. Paradise Lost :md Pa nidi so Regained. New 
York: Collier Books, 1962. 

. Samson Agonistes . New York: Collier Books, 

- 1962. 

Monema, John Clover. Science and Religion . New York; 
Putnam, 1963. 

Morgenthau. Hans J. Truth and Power: Essays of a Decade . 
New York: Praeger, 1970. 

Murphy, Joseph. Your Infinite Power to !-.e Rich. Knglewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey; Prentice- Hull, 1968. 



ERIC 



-36- 



Murray, -John C, Morality and Modern War , New York: 
C ouncil on Religion and International Affairs, n.d. 

Nelson, JoiuiO, Christian Conscience and War , Seottdale, 
Ph.: Herald Press, 1903. 

Nietsche, Friedrich. Nietsche: An Anthology ol His Works > 
New York: Washington Square Press» 1904. (For "The 
Anti -Christ'' or ''The (iay Science") 

I'hus Spake Zarathustra, Baltimore: 

F^engxiin Books, 19<>1. 

O'Dea, Thomas F. The Sociology of Reli|^ion . Englewood 
CHffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 19(5(j. 

Parrinder, Edward Geoffrey. Comparative Religion . 
London: Allen and Unwin, 1902. 

Paulsen, Friedrich. Immanuel Kant> His Life and Doctrine , 
New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co. , 1963. 

Pittenger, William N. God in Process. Napcrville, Illinois: 
Allenson, 1967. 

Plato. The Last Days of Socrates. Baltimore: Penguin 
Books, n.d. 

Pope John XXIII. Peace on Earth, Lkiston, Massachusetts: 
Daughters of St. Paul, 1962. 

Potok, C. The Chosen . New York: Crest Fawcett World, n. 

Potter, Charles Francis. The Great Religious Leaders . New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1958. 

Potter, Italph P. War and Moral Discourse . Richmond, Va. 
John Knox, 1969. 

Presthus, Robert. Men at the Top: A Study in Community 
Power . New York: Oxford University Press, 1961. 

Robinson, John A. But That I Can't Believe . New York: 
World PubUshing, 1970. 



-37- 



Hussoll, I'.rrlrarwI. Auilio rity and the ImlivuluaU New York: 
AMS iM'-s;;. nil!).' 

• ul Wc!.slc*ni l^^nl<>!^<>i>t|y, A. N<:\v 

York: Simon and Sohiistoi*. UMH, 

Saint Uonaventura. The Mind^s Road to God . New York: 
The Bohbs-Merrill Co. , Inc., 195:1. 

Sampson, Ronald V. Psychology of Power. New York: 
Pantheon, 1966. 

Schlipp, Paul Arthur, ed. The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell , 
Volume 1. New York: Harper and Row, 1963. 

. I1ie Philosophy of Bertrand Russell , Volume 

11. New York: Harper and Row, 1963. 

Schweit/or, Albert. Out of My Life and Thouaht, An Autobiography . 
New York: Henry Holt and Co. , 1949. 

Segal. Ilonaltl. An^iish of India, The. New York: Sifjnct Books, 
1966. 

Shaw, (}eorge Pernard. Androcles and the Lion . Baltimore: 
Penguin Books, n.d. 

. Saint Joan , rallimore: Penguin Books, 1951. 



Simon, Kdith. Reformation, rhe > New York: Time Inc. , 1966. 

Singer, Isaac I^aslievis. Family Moskat, The. Ncw^ York: 
Noonday-I\ S. &C., n.d. 

. Stain in Coray . New Yoj-k: Pani-Avon, n.d. 

Singer, I. J. P.rothors A>shkena/i, The. New York: Banl-Avon, n. d. 

Slaughter, Frank CI. Crown and the Cross, The Life of Christ, Tho. 
New York: The World Publishing C<i. , U)5D. 

Smith,. Homer W. Man and His Gods . Toslon: Little, Brown 
and Co. , 1953. 



Smith, Huston. Religions of Mrm, The , New York: Harper 
& Row, l>iibUshers, 19G5. 



Sophocles. Antigone in The Oedipus Phiys. New York: 
Mentor-NAL, 19r,s. 

. Oedipus at Colonus in The Oedipus Plays. New 

York: IMentor-NAL, 1958. 

. Oedipus Rex in The Oedipus Plays> New York: 

New York: Mentor-NAL, 1958. 

Spiogelborg, Frederic. Living Religions of the World . 
F^^nglewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.. 
1950. 

Spinoza, Baruch. Book of God, The. New York: Philosophical 
Lil)rary, Inc. , 1958. 

Steinberg*, IMilton. Basic Judaism . New York: Harcourt, 
Brace and World, Inc. , 1947. 

Thomson, F. P. Money in the Computer Age. Elmsford, 
New York: Pergamon, n. d. 

Tillich, Paul. Courage to Be, The. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1952. 

. Love, Power and Justice . Now York: Oxford 

University Press, 19(K). 

Wach, -loachim. Sociology of Religion . Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press, 1951. 

Ward, William 11. Pjcliefs That Live. IHchmond, \'a. : John 
Knox, 1955. 

Weber, Max. Religion of China, Confucianism iim\ Taoism , 

The. Glencoe, California: The Free Press of Glencoo, i951. 

Wedeck, Harry F. Treasury of Wilchc'ral't . New York: 
Philosophical Library, 19G1. 



Winslow, O. , ed, Jonathan Edwards; Dasic Writings. 
Xe\v York: Mafner, n.d. 



V. TEACHER RKSOURCt:S 

A. Textbooks (See Student Resources) 

B. Professional books and materials 

Teacher manuals for state-adopted texts. 

Teacher's Resource Book , Man in Literature Series. 

C. Recordings 

Albert Herrin^y London, 1378. 
L^ Enfant Prodigue , London, 05:58. 
Requiem Mass by V^erdi, Columbia. 
Mass by Bernstein. 
Missa Luba , Phillips. 
Missa Criolla, iPhilHps. 
Jewish Religiou.q Songs, Artia, 108, 
Jewish Worship on Sabbath , Mace, 5-10032. 
Russian Qrt^iodox Requiem , Westminster, XWN-182G3. 
Cantata ^'Christ lag in Todesbanden , Deutsche Grammophon, 
Arc-1984G5. 

Cantata ^^^>3: "Schlage doch, gewunschie Stunde, " Bach Guild, 70070. 
Cantata ^-140: Wachet Auf ! Bach Guild, 502G. 
Magnificat in D, Bach Guild, 5005. 
Gregorian Chimts, Period Records, SPL-HCJO. 
The Play of Daniel: A Twelfth Century Musical Drama, Deeca^ 
DL-4902. 

Verdi, G. ; Requiem. Angel, COLII 108-100. 

Bcrlio/., n. : L^FJnfance du Christ , Victor, LM-GO.W. 

Messiah , 2- Columbia, M2S-G07. 

Israel in Egypt , 2- Decca, DXS-7178. 

Coronation IVIass , Vox. 

Mass K. 427 , Vox. PL10.270. 

Spirituals: Marian Anderson . \*ictor, LM-20:^2. 



-40- 



D. Films 



y\v:iilahle from Audio- Visual Services: 





1. 
I 


-047KCI 


Art :infl Architf»eturG* Chart res CathcrirsiK 








I 


•> 1. i 
















1 . 










min« ) 


1. 


■«» I 1 


iVInior np1i<rionG of thr> World PRPr* 






Ofi tviim 


1' 










L.oronei* i*! miiu i>&w* 


1 , 


.mil 1 










1 




i^xiyssey, ine; i nt? i^enirai incnicb* 








I' 


-•It OA*? 


ixiysscyf i nc?: i nt? i\t?ium oi v/uysot^us* 








1. 




i.iciyss6y9 1 nt?: i ne oiiiicmrc oi ine 






t^pic. h u r»c • ^ « m in* t c • 


!• 


'•J I^fN) 








•>ir min* , V • 




-•lOOl 9 


^'Wirlimic f)ov« ^lio AfVA of Conti/\/*lAO 

vfuniX'Uo ixUai 1 nu tit oupnuL'it^B* 






PliPr* *IA min C* 


1 




i.>K^ciijjus i\ux: 1 i^nuriietcr oi i./uuipus»* 






EBEC. 30 min. , C. 


1- 


•30908 


Oedipus Rex: The Recovery of Oedipus. 






EniiC. 30 min. , C. 


1- 


•20*)l(i 


Vatican, The, Pt. 1. McGraw-Hill. 






26 min. , C. 


1- 


■:ji7:{7 


\ atican. The, Pt. 2. McGraw-Hill. 






29 min. , C. 


1- 


■317:{8 



Available from Ideal Pictures Co., Miami, Florida, for a rental fee: 

The Cardinal , 175 min. 

The Lilies of the Field. 94 min. 

Murder in the Cathedral. 140 min. 



ERLC 



-41- 



E. Slides which can be purchased from American Library Color 
Slide Co, , hic, , 305 E. 45 Street, New York, New York, 10017. 

Kelij^ious painting 

Chagall: Thejlabbi. 
Dali; The Cinicifixion * 
El Greco: Agoriy in the Garden , 
Exekias; Dionysus Retuming Home * 
Ci rotto: The Lamentation ^ 
Michehuigelo: The Last Judgment . 
Titian: Christ Crowned with Thorns, 
Vander Weyden: Descent from the Cross , 

Religious sculpture 

Ghil)erti: Gates of Paradise , (Baptistry doors, Florence) 
Greek: Zeus , 

Michelarsgelo: I^ondanini Pieta , 
Phidias: Athena Lemnia, 
School of Phidias: P ediment of Parthenon. 
Rodin: The Gate of I^ell , 

Religious architecture 

Chartres Cathedral. 

Corbusier: Ste, Marie-du-Haut, Ronchamp, France. 

Labadie: Sacre Coeur . 

Matisse: Chapel of Rosany 

Police chapel of Charlemagne, 

Parthenon, Athens. 

Yamasaki: Synagogue, Chicago, 

K, PcMnodicals 

Saturday Review 

Time 

Lite 

Newsweek 
Business World 
L'. S. News 
Science News 



ERIC 



-42- 



l;NK8C() Courier 
National Ocouraphic 
Scic' iici* l)iy,cst 
Mi^'chanics lll ii st rated 
K( lu(*ati()n;tl Hij^cst 
!>o{)ular Science 
Radio Electronics 
Audubon 



Sports Illustrated 

Kbony 

Horizon 

Ladies^ Home Journal 
McCalls 

Good Housekeeping 
Christian Century 
National Review 
Atlantic 
Seventeen 
Todays s Health 
Harper's Bazaar 
America 
New Republic 
Fortune 

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 

Commonweal 

Nation 

Field and Stream 



Art in America 



G. Sound-slides, audio-visual programs for humanities, English, and art 

Man and His Gods: In Harmony and Conflict 

Man and His Values: An Inquiry into Good and Evil 

Center for Humanities, Inc. , Holland Avenue, Wliite Plains, New York, 

H. Filn'istrips 

The DawTi of Religion . Time and Life Building. New York, New 
York; 10020. 



-43- 



