DOCUMENT HESUBE 



ED 051 016 



SO 001 197 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



Husubi, Carol 

Syllabus for Use in Imperial Russian History. 

Toledo Public Schools, Ohio. 

Office of Education (DHEW) , Washington, D.C. 

69 

24p. ; A project of the Chinese Russian Study Center 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



EDRS Price MF-J0.65 HC-53.29 

Affective Objectives, Area Studies, *Cross Cultural 
Studies, Cultural Awareness, ^curriculum Guides, 
Geography, Government (Administrative Body), History 
Instruction, Humanities, Imperialism, 
Interdisciplinary Approach, *Non Western 
Civilization, Russian Literature, Secondary Grades, 
Social Change, Social Structure, ♦Social Studies 
Units, Social Systems, *World History 
ESEA Title 3, Marxism, Political History, 

Revolution, ^Russian History, Soviet Union, Tsars 



ABSTRACT 

This syllabus is an outline of a one semester course 
in Imperial Russia designed to emphasize the relationship between 
Russia's past and her present. Course content begins with the 
founding of the first Russian state and continues to the tall of the 
Romanovs in 1917. In addition, seme topics are suggested for 
investigation of Russian history in relation to geographic factors. 
Major periods are: 1) Origins of Russia — Kievan Rus (862-1243); 2) 

Mongol Invasions (1240-1480); 3) The Rise of the Princes of Moscow; 

4) Reign of Ivan IV (The Terrible); 5) The Time of Troubles; and, 6) 
The Romanovs. Significant events and leaders are discussed in each 
period. Also suggested for study are four topics of an 
interdisciplinary nature: 1) Religious Art and Architecture; 2) 
Literature, especially the 19th Century Protest Literature of 
Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, Turgenev, Gogol, and Gorky; 3) Marxism and the 
Revolutionary Tradition in Russia; and, 4) The Cossacks and Russian 
Folk Music. Two basic texts are: AN INTRODUCTION TO RUSSIAN HISTORY 
AND CULTURE by Ivar Spector, and EVOLUTION OF RUSSIA by Otto 
Hoetzsch. Basic historical understandings to be developed are stated 
and objectives are defined. A list of supplementary texts, as well as 
audio visual materials, is included. SO 001 196 describes a related 
Soviet Russian History course. (Author/JSB) 



r 



sO 







U S DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, 
EDUCATION & WELFARE 
OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REFRO 
OUCED EXACTLY AS RECEIVED FROM 
THE PERSON OR ORGANIZATION ORIG 
INATING IT POINTS OF VIEW OR OPIN 
IONS STATED DO NOT NECESSARH Y 
REPRESENT OFFICIAL OFFICE OF EOU 
CA7ION POSITION OR POLICY 



I 



LU 




CHINES E-ROSSIAN STOUT CENTER 
Toledo Public Schools 
Toledo, Ohio 



Syllabus for use in Imperial Russian History 
as prepared by Carol Husum, 1969-1970 




i 



\ 



Edo 5 1 o 16 



INTRODUCTION 

So much has been written of the power and influence of the Soviet 
Union in the world today and the implications which this has for the United 
States that it is particularly important to understand the historical 
development of the Russian people and to recognize and distinguish those 
qualities which are common to all mankind* those which are particularly 
"Russian" in nature* and those which are "Communist." Therefore* this 
one semester course in Imperial Russian history is designed to emphasize 
the relationship between Russia^ past and her present and to parallel 
the evolution of Russian society with that of the United States, The 
course begins with the founding of the first Russian state and continues 
to the fall of the Romanovs in 1917. It is hoped that by studying this 
period in Russian history* the student will have a better understanding 
of a country which takes up one sixth of the earths surface and have a 
better perspective in dealing with conditions which exist in the world 
today. 



O 

ERIC 



2 



- 2 - 



OBJECTIVES 

The basic historical objectives of this course of study are: 

1 . To understand the idea of multiple causation in history* 

2. To understand the geographical factors which influenced Russian development. 

3. To realize that in spite of the great diversity of the Russian peoples 
there is considerable homogenity. 

1». To understand the influence of "East" and "West" in Russia's development. 

5. To realize that Russian culture has been shaped by powerful personalities 
whose influence has been long lasting. 

6. To develop an awareness of Russian attitudes and culture in the areas 
of religion, music, art, literature, and science. 

7. To develop an understanding of the Russians as people whose background 
may be different, but who have many of the same hopes and aspirations 
as we do. 

8. To develop insight into the views that the Russiar, have had and do 
have regarding the West. 



ERIC 




- 3 - 



MBTHOPOLOGY 

Methods and teaching techniques used in this course are designed 
so that students will take an active part in the learning situation and 
develop ability in critical thinking necessary to interpretation of historical 
events o Lecture and student discussion are combined with student activities 
and projects which are designed so that the student will "absorb" an understanding 
of Russian culture rather than merely learn about it. Visual aids, guest 
lecturers, and individual research are used to provide greater depth and 
individualized instruction. Activities such as the planning of Russian 
dinners, participation in international festivals, and learning Russian 
songs and dances contribute to knowledge of the subject matter 0 Whenever 
possible, original sources and the literature of the country are used to 
stimulate learning. 




4 



MATERIALS 



TEXTS : 

1. AN INTRODUCTION TO RUSSIAN HISTORI AND CULTURE by Ivar Spcctor ; D. 

Van Nostrand Company 

2. EVOLUTION OF RUSSIA by Otto Hoetzsch; Harcourt, Brace and World 
SUFFLEMMTARI READING MATERIALS : 

1 . RUSSIA: SELECTED READINGS by Hyman Kublin ; Houghton Mifflin Company 

2. THE TSARS, 1 £33-1 91 7 by Ronald Hingley; Macmillan Company 

3. TREASURY OF RUSSIAN LITERATURE edited by B. G. Guerney; Vanguard ^ 
Press 

AUDIO-VISUAL MATERIALS 
Films - 1 6 mm. - sound 

1. RELIGION IN RUSSIA; International Film Foundation, color, 20 min. 

2. THE RUSSIAN PEASANT (Russian Agriculture); International Film Foundation, 
color, 20 min. 

3. THE RED Mm #1 - MARXISM AND THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO; NET Film Service, 
Bf 

Filmr’— ips 

1 . COMMUNISM: WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT IT AND WHY; McGraw-Hill, set 
of 8, color, guide 

a. Why Study Communism? 

b. What Communism is 

c. History of Communism from Marx to Lenin 

d. Communism as practiced in the U. S. S. R. 

2. PETER ILICH TCHAIKOWSKY; Brunswick Productions, color, no guide 

3. RIMSKT-KQRSAKOFF; Brunswick Productions, color, no guide 



6 



ho GREAT RUSSIAN NOVELS; Brunswick Productions, color, no guide 

a. Fathers and Sons 

b. Crime and Punishment 

c. War and Peace 

d. The Brothers Karamozov 

e. Anna Karenina 

f . The Idiot 

3. HISTORY OF RUSSIA: Common Ground Filmstrips, BW, guide 

a. The foundations to 1700 - 36 frames 
b 0 The age of St. Petersburg, 1700-1836 - 2>h frames 
c. The end of Tsarism, 1837-1917 - 33 frames 
Sound Filmstrips 

1 . GREAT WRITERS SERIES - DOSTOEVSKI; Filmstrip House, color, guide 

a. His life 

b . His times 

c. His works 
do His style 

Slides - 33 mm. 

1, MOSOCW; Roloc, color, 83 slides 
Overhead Transparencies 

1. WORLD GEOGRAPHY SERIES - RUSSIA; General Aniline, set of 2 
Disc Recordings 

1 . PLAY BALLALAIKA PLAY; Monitor 

2. YULIA SINGS RUSSIA GYPSY SONGS; Monitor 

3. RUSSIAN FOLK SONGS; Monitor 
1*. RUSSIAN ART SONGS; Monitor 

3. TCHAIKOVSKY: CONCERTO NO, 1, in B-FLAT MINOR, OP. 23; RCA Victor, 

Moscow Radio Symphony with Van Cliburn 

1 

O , MOUSSORGSKY/RAVEL : PICTURES AT AN EXHIBITION; RCA Victor, Chicago \ 

ERJC 

k l " i ' ll ' M ' ;i ' B ' |i | 1 Symphony Orchestra, Filmstrip & record set 






- 6 - 



7. TCHAIKOVSKI: THE NUTCRACKER and SWAN LAKE; Columbia, The Riiladelphia 

Orchestra, Filmstrip & record set 

8. TCHAIKOVSKI: SLEEPING BEAUTI and ROMEO AND JULIET; Columbia, The 

Philadelphia Orchestra 

9. TCHAIKOVSKI: 1812 OVERTURE, OP. b9 , MARCHE SLAVE, OP. 3h and CAPRICCIO 

IT ALIEN, OP. l|5j Columbia New lork Philharmonic 

10. THE LIGHT MUSIC OF SHOSTAKOVICH; Columbia, Andre Kostelanetz 

11. BALALAIKA FAVORITES; Mercury Records 



O 

ERJC 



7 



-7- 



The following course outline is offered as a suggestion. The teacher 
can have considerable latitude in selecting those topics which he chooses 
to emphasize* Obviously, there is a great deal which cannot be treated 
in depth, so the opportunity is present to select that which is interesting 
and meaningful to the particular class* Accordingly, this guide will be 
revised in the light of classroom experience. 

Much has been made of the origins of the Russian people and the strategic 
location of the Russian state* Located on the European and Asian continents, 
Russia has been called a "half-way house" between Europe and Asia* Historians 
do not agree on the relative influence of "East" and fr West." Both have 
exerted considerable influence on Russia’s development. This geographical 
location has made Russia unique as a bridge between East and West. 

GEOGRAPHY 

1* Russia 1 s tremendous size 

2* The vast Eurasian plain which is the largest single plain in the 
world 

3. Lack of natural barriers inside Russia which could limit trade and 
c ommuni cations 

ho Absence of natural boundary on the West and the influence which this 
has had on Russia 

5« Great differences in climate in Russia influence the way of life of 

the people. (Explore the idea that extremes in climate are responsible 
for extremes in the Russian character.) 

6. The importance that soil and vegetation have on Russian development — 
lack of arable land although Russia is larger than United States and 
Canada. Seven natural regions of Soviet Union ares tundra, the taiga, 
the leafy forest, the fertile steppe, the dry steppe, the desert, 
and the subtropical forest* 



8 



- 8 - 



7. Importance of Russia's rivers and ports which tend to unify the country. 
Many of Russia's rivers flow northward into the frozen Arctic rather 
than eastwest. Although Russia's coastline is large 3 it is far from 
centers of population and is not accessible to sea trade. Russia's 
attempts to obtain warm water ports have been an important part of 

her history. Hampered in her attempts to expand by sea* her expansion 
has been more on land. 

8. Russia is wealthy in natural and mineral resources. Many of these 
resources are far from population centers and are difficult to obtain 
because of harsh climatic conditions* These handicaps have influenced 
Russia's industrialization — a situation that the Soviets have tried 

to overcome. 

9. As might be expected in such a large country, Russia is a multi-national 
country, although Slavic peoples make up 78$ of the population. This 
diversity in tribal groups resulted in a groat variety of cultures and 
dialects in Russia. 

10. Russia's remoteness as a border country influenced her development and 
contact with the West. 




9 



-9- 



ORIGINS OF RUSSIA - KIEVAN RUS (862-12h3) 

Little is known about the origins of the Russian people. Thore are 
chronicles or mythological takes ascribed to a Friar Nestor which tell the 
story of the settlement of Kiev e Probably the work of several generations, 
these Ghronicles state that Russia began in 862 when the Slavonic tribes 
asked Rurik Sineus, and Truvor to come and rule. The origins of these 
new rulers is also unclear; however, the first of the two Russian dynasties 
has bee?* called the Rurik dynasty. Two of the most important events of this 
period were the adoption of Christianity and the Mongol invasion. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS 

1 „ The Dnieper River was an important link in the Kievan state. Kiev, 
because of its location on the Dnieper and proximity to Byzantium, 
became the capital and cultural center of this state. 

2* The early Kievan state had elements of autocracy, nobility, and democracy. 
Kiev never had a strong central government, but the prince of Kiev 
was the most influential. 

3. The Kievan state was prosperous, and trade and handicrafts flourished. 
Peasants could own their own land. There was an urban class who formed 
town councils for representation . 

U. The introduction of Greek Orthodox Christianity was to have a long 
lasting influence on Russia and pull her toward the East. 

£. The Russian alphabet was introduced during this period in order to 
spread Christianity. 

6. Byzantine influence was present in painting, sculpture, and architecture. 

7. Although Kievan Rus was wealthy, the princes of the state began to 
qqarrel among themselves and also to seek new lands. 

8. Kievan Rus also began to suffer from nomad invasions which ruined 
trade. 

0 




10 



- 10 - 



9. The First Crusade also affected Kievan trade, and the Kievan population 
migrated north. 

10. The Mongols from the East conquered the Kievan state in the 13th century. 



O 

ERJC 



11 



- 11 - 



MDNGOL INVASIONS (l2lt0-lh60) 

The effects of the Mongol invasions of Russia are still present in 
Russia today. Kievan Rus had been divided into three segments--Central, 
northern, and Southeast, Russia was under the control of the Golden Horde, 
while the Dnieper area came under the control of the Polish-Lithuanians « 
Novgorod in the northwest retained her independence and became a trading 
center with Europe. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS 

1 e The Mongol invasions had tremendous effects on the physical and mental 
characteristics of the Russians. 

2. Oriental customs, left their mark even on the Christian religion in 
Russia • 

3o The Mongol rule brought about a division among the peoples of Russia. 

ho The town councils of the Kievan state lost their power. 

Many skills and crafts were lost during this period. 

6o Russia became more agricultural, and the power of landlords increased. 

There was no middle class, and the influence of city populations lessened. 

7m Although they were initially destructive, the Mongols later taxed the 
Russians heavily, but did not destroy the country. 



O 

ERIC 



12 



- 12 - 



• THE RISE OF THE PRINCES OF MOSCOW 
Russia during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries was oppressed 
lay both the Lithuanians and the Mongols. The Princes of Moscow, because 
of their position as tax collectors for the Mongols and their longevity, 
freed Russia from the foreign yoke. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS 

1 . The first attempt to defeat the Mongols was the Battle of Kulikovo 
Meadow by Dmitri Donskoi. It was a psychological victory for the 
Russians . 

2. Vasily, son of Qnitri, succeeded in defeating the Lithuanians in 1399. 

3. Ivan HI (the Great) finally removed the Tartar domination of Russia 
in 11*80. 

U. Ivan Hi's success brought about the rise of the city of Moscow. 

5. Ivan ITT regarded himself as the successor to the Byzantine Qnperors 
and began to call himself "Tzar." 

6. Ivan HI began contact with the West, but the unification of Orthodox 
and Raman Catholic faiths did not take place. 

7. Ivan III brought skilled craftsmen and artisans to Moscow to rebuild 
Russian buildings which had been destroyed under the Mongols. 

8. Ivan III showed an interest in developing trade with the West and was 
interested in the Baltic. 

9. Ivan HI reorganized the system of land tenure and contributed to the 
centralization of authority. The Church contributed to this centralization 
and became an instrument of the Tsar. 

10. To improve communication, Ivan HI built a series of post roads. 

1 1 . Russian rulers during this time began to regard themselves as absolute 
monarchs . 




13 



-13- 



REIGN OF IVAN 17 (THE TStRTRT,fl) 

Grandson of Ivan the Great, Ivan 17, came to the throne in 1533. 

He was a strong, autocratic ruler who brought about great changes in the 
Russian state. Called the "Terrible" because of his cruelty, Ivan 17 was 

one of the most important Muscovite princes and the subject of much psychological 
study. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS 

1 . Ivan 17 felt it necessary to crush the hostile foreign forces which 
surrounded Russia and demanded absolute control of the population in 
order to do it. 

2. Perhaps because of his cruel treatment at the hands of the boyars 
as a child, Ivan 17 sought to crush the nobility. 

3. Rights of peasants and church were reduced, and everyone was required 
to serve the state. Serfdom became characteristic of Russian society. 

lw Siberia was explored and Eastward expansion began. 

5 . Attempts to expand Westward to the Baltic were a drain on the Russian 
state and were not wholly successful. 

6. Lack of technology was evident in Ivan 17 's campaigns in West. 



-iu- 



THE TIME OF TROUBLES 

Ivan I V had brought about great changes in the population. These and 
natural conditions caused hardship to the Russian people, and the period 
following the death of Ivan IV is therefore known as the "Time of Troubles." 
SIGNIFICANT FACTS 

1. Ivan's son, Feodor, was feeble-minded. A boyar, Boris Godunov, assumed 
regency and later became Tzar. 

2. Boris Godunov made enemies among other boyars and among peasants by 
his harsh decrees. 

3. Famines increased the suffering of the Russian people, and many revolted 
against the government including the Cossacks. 

iu At the death of Boris Godunov, many pretenders tried to assume the throne. 
Foreigners, especially Swedes and Poles, saw an opportunity to control 
Russia. 

J>. Russia was seriously weakened by the efforts to drive the foreigners 
out of Russia. 

6. The chaos resulting from the series of "False Dmitri's" and the actions 
of Boris Godunov caused the boyars to try to reduce the powers of 
the Tzar. 



0 




15 



THE ROMANOVS 



The struggle for power in Russia at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century brought the first of the Romanovs to power. The boyars thought that 
he was a weakling and would be easily controlled. Events proved otherwise. 
SIGNIFICANT FACTS - MICHAEL ROMANOV 

1 . Michael Romanov's father, Philaret, proved to be a capable adviser and 
was responsible for restoring internal stability. 

2. Trade was resumed with the West, and many foreigners came to Russia. 
Russians adopted many European customs during tills time. 

3. Peasants were more firmly bound to the land during the time of Michael 
Romanov. 

U. Spirit of nationalism increased during the time of Michael. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - TZAR AT.KTF.I 

1. The most important event during the reign of Michael's son, Alexei, 

was the Schism, or the split between the Old Believers (fundamentalists ) 
and the Reformers (modernists). 

2. Nikon, Patriarch of Moscow, wanted changes and persecuted dissenters 
from his policies. 

3. Traditionalists felt that Moscow was the "Third Rome" and wanted no 
changes. 

U. The religious controversy brought about disagreement in social areas — 
also these groups later became known as the Westernizers and Slavophiles. 

3. Resentment against foreigners living in Russia increased. 

6. Codification of law took place restricting clergy, foreigners, and 
binding peasants more closely to the land. 

7. Unemployment increased, class struggle intensified, and economic problems 
grew worse. 

9. General discontent led to the Stenka Razin uprising. 



9 . Russia took offensive in acquiring Ukraine from Poland and Lithuania. 

10. Expansion into Siberia continued. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - TSAR FYODOR AT.RYKTWTTOH 

1 . Fyodor was a weakling and died six years after his father . At his 

death a bitter feud broke out among his brothers and sister for control 
of the throne. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - TSARVMA SOPHIA 

1 . Sophia gained control in the name of the throne in the name of her 

two younger brothers. Ivan was an incompetant* and Sophia feared Peter 
and sought to remove him. 

2. Sophia signed the Treaty of Nertchinsk designating the frontier between 
Russia and China keeping Russia from the Amur River and li mi ting Russian 
expansion in the area until the nineteenth century. 

3. Peter j with the cooperation of the Streltsy* discovered Sophia* s plot 
to remove him and had her sent to a convent. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - PETER I (THE GREAT) 

1 • Peter I was a very intelligent man who had a strong inclination towards 
the military. 

2. Peter I was very much influenced by the German Suburb and the Western 
ideas he learned there. 

3. Peter realized the changes that the Mongol invasions had brought in 
Russia and sought to remove them forcefully. 

U* Peter wanted to make Russia a European rather than an Asian nation. 

Many of Peter's reforms took placo at the expense of the Orthodox 
Church. 

6. Peter sought to limit the influence of the boyars. 

7. He instituted a "table of ranks" in which he created a new aristocracy. 

8. Peter wanted to develop Russian industry. 

9. Factory- serfdom was initiated because there was no middle class for 

17 



Indus trializ ation 



-17- 



10. Peter instituted programs to develop educational and scientific advancement. 

1 1 . Peter built a capital on the Baltic . 

12. Russia developed as a military power during the lif etime of Peter the 
Great . 

13. Russia suffered reverses in the South in a battle against Turkey. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - PETER'S SUCCESSORS 

1. Peter I died without naming an heir. He had killed his son, Alexei, 
and another son died while very young. 

2. Peter's second wife, Catherine I, succeeded him. This had not been 
done before in Russia, aroused opposition. 

3. Peter I's grandson, Peter II, gained the throne at the age of twelve 
and lived for only three years. He moved the court back to Moscow and 
gave more power to the Church. 

U. Anna of Courland, daughter of Ivan, Peter I's brother, came to power 
upon Peter II' s death. German advisers were very influential during 
this period. 

£. Elizabeth, daughter of Peter the Great, became Empress at Anna's death. 

She removed the "German yoke" and substituted French influence. 

6. Russia during the reign of Elizabeth I became influenced by the "Age 
of Enlightenment . " The University of Moscow was founded and many 
scholars gained international acclaim including Lomonosov, the famous 
physicist, artist, and poet. 

7. Agricultural, industrial, and economic reforms took place during Elizabeth's 
reign. 

8. Russia gained much territory during the reign of Elizabeth, but lost 
it under her successor, Peter HI. 

9. Peter III restored German influence. 

^in. Peter III freed the nobles from compulsory service to the state. 



19 



-18- 

11. Peter Ill's behavior made him unpopular with his subjects and aroused 
sympathy for his wife. 

12. Peter III was forced to abdicate by his wife who became Catherine II. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - THE RiJGN OF CATHERINE THE GREAT 

1 . Catherine the Great considered herself a product of the enlightenment — 
she is considered one of the enlightened despots. 

2. Catherine was interested in extending the power and influence of Russia. 

3. She increased the burdens on the serfs and bought the support of the 
nobility. 

U. Pugatchev led a rebellion protesting her land and peasant policy. 

5>. Catherine limited the power of the Church, but maintained a policy 

of toleration towards religion unless she suspected political intrigue. 

6. Catherine was an admirer of Voltaire and encouraged French influence 
in Russia. 

7. Catherine was responsible for the building of many structures in the 
Classical style. 

8. She established schools and educational academies. 

9. Catherine issued her "Nakaz" or statement for political and social reform, 
but she did not act upon her recommendation . 

10. Russia's prestige was increased as a result of Catherine's enlightened 
ideas and foreign affairs. 

11. Her reign of thirty-four years gave Russia a period of continuity and 
stability. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - PAUL I 

1 . Paul felt that Catherine II, his mother, had deprived him of his rightful 
position on the throne. 

2. Paul had grown up separated from his mother and disagreed with her 
in many areas. 

3. Many historians believed that Paul was insane; however, he brought 

cKjC 

about many changes during his five year reign. 



-19- 



1*. Paul believed in autocracy. 

5. Paul established himself as the head of the Church. 

6. Paul disliked French customs and preferred those of Prussia. 

7. Paul issued the "Okaz" limiting the service of the serfs. 

8. Paul's reverses in foreign policy led to his assassination. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - ALEXANDER I 

1. Alexander I was reared by his grandmother, Catherine the Great, in 
the principles of the Bil ightenment . 

2. Al exander I considered himself a republican. 

3. Alexander, during the first part of his reign, was liberal in his attitude, 
but he later became very reactionary. 

ll. Russia suffered much from the invasion of Russia in 1812. 

Alexander was regarded as the Savior of Europe for his efforts in defeating 
Napoleon. 

6 After the Napoleonic Wars, Alexander's growing conservatism led to the 
formation of societies which brought about the Decembrist uprising. 

7. Alexander tried and failed to develop unity in Europe, but these countries 
felt that Russia was growing too powerful. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - NICHOLAS I 

1. Confusion over the succession of Alexander I and the conservative and 
autocra+vic personality of Nicholas I led to the first Russian revolution — 
the Decembrist uprising. 

2. Nif-bnlaa i followed the principles of "Autocracy, Orthodoxy, and Nationalism" 
to maintain control cf Russia. 

3. Nicholas regime was militaristic and bureaucratic. 

lw Hi a ” established the Third Division, a political police to be used 
to combat subversion. 

f>. Nicholas I did not act to lessen the evils of serfdom. 

Literature flourished during the reign of Nicholas— known as the Golden 




Age of Russian Literature. 



20 



- 20 - 



7. Nicholas I involved Russia in military defeat in the Crimean War. 

8. Nicholas I died realizing that he had not unified Russia. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - ALEXANDER U 

1. Alexander recognized Russia’s backwardness and took steps to improve 
industr ializ ation . 

2. He realized that Russia had to free the serfs to prevent widespread 
rebellion. 

3. Land was given to the peasants in the form of communal property. 

Alexander issued reforms in the government, press, judicial system, 
and army. 

3. Alexander initiated the last great wave of Russian expansion. 

6. There was much opposition to Alexander's policies. 

7 . The Populists plotted revolution and assassinated the Tzar. 

SIGNIFICANT FACTS - ALEXANDER HI 

1 . In spite of the assassination of Alexander II, the throne passed smoothly 
to Alexander TIT . 

2. Influenced by the death of his father, Alexander III crushed any revolutionary 
groups and tried to reverse the policies of his father. 

3. Industry was developing on a large scale, and many peasants began to 
move to the cities. Russia developed a small middle class. 

1;. No attempt was made by the government to solve the problems of the masses 
of people. 

5>. The intelligentsia of Russia supported revolution. 

6. Marxism came to Russia. 

7. Franco-Russian alliance of 1891 brought about an end to Russia's isolation 
from Europe and paved the way for World War I. 

8. Trans-Siberian Railway is begun. 



0 




21 



- 21 - 



SIGNIFICANT FACTS - NICHOLAS II 

1. Nicholas was not equipped by temperment or training to be the uutuurui,! • 
ruler that he attempted to be. 

2. His wife, Alexandra, was believed to have great influence upon him. 

As she was a foreigner, she was disliked in Russia. 

3# Nicholas became involved in disasterous wars which contributed to social 
disorders « 

Nicholas was very interested in the Far East and laid a foundation for 
peaceful economic penetration of China. 

Russia suffered defeat in the war with Japan, 190lj-05. 

6* Since the closing years of Alexander II, political parties went undergro ; 
or went abroad to operate# 

7# There were many revolutionary parties including the Social Democrats, 
later split into the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks ; the Social Revolutionary 
Party, later separated into "Right” and "Left" wings j the Constitutional 
Democrats or Kadets. 

8. The Revolution began when Father Gapon led peasants and workers in a 
petition to the Tzar (19o5). The guards fired on the people on the day 
thereafter known as Bloody Sunday# 

9. The government instituted limited reforms after the disaster of the worke 
strike and military reverses. 

10. The October Manifesto provided the forms of Western democracy after 
the Revolution of 1905 was crushed. 

11. The Tzar would not work with the First and Second Dumas because they 
pushed for land reform. 

12. The Third Duma accomplished some reforms although not representative 




of the people as a whole* 

Rasputin was instrumental in directing the election of the Fourth 
Duma. This Duma paved the way for the revolution. 

22 



- 22 - 



lll. Believing their national interest at stake, the Russians became involved 
in another losing war, this time with Germany. 

15. Although at first the way effort had the support of the people, military 

defeats and economic hardships led to the almost spontaneous demonstrations 
and riots which signified the fall of the monarchy. 




23 



-23- 



S FECIAL TOPICS 

1 . RELIGIOUS ART AND ARCHITECTURE 

2. LITERATURE: ESPECIALLY THE 19th CENTURY IROTEST LITERATURE OF TOLSTOY, 

DOSTOYEVSH, TURGENEV, GOGOL, and GORKY. Because of the censorship 

in Russia, those who opposed the social system in Russia had to resort 
to literary expression as an outlet for their opinions. 

3. MA RXIS M AND THE REVOLUTIONARY TRADITION IN RUSSIA 

A. Peasant Discontent 

B. The Intellectuals 

C. Minorities 

h. THE COSSACKS AND RUSSIAN FOLK MUSIC 



O 

ERIC 



24 



