


nOCl’HFNT 



B F. S II H E 



FL 000 944 



ED 025 169 

By* Edoertorv William B- • a i 

Recent Anthologies of Eighteenth Century Russian Literature A Review Article- 

American Association of Teachers of Slavic and East European Languages. 

Pub Date Mar 68 

Journal Of The Slavic and East European Journal: vl2 nl p59-78 Spring 1968 

DeSip^Ts-'lAn^^or.Co^^^^ Analysis. -Content Analysis. Literary Conventions. Literary Criticises 

•Literature. Literature Reviews. -Russian. Translation p, ,eci=n 

Harold Segels recently -published anthology of 
literature m Enghsh is compared with the Soviet anthologies °/ ° ^ 

(in Russian), the Polish anthology of Jakubowski (in Russian 

early nineteenth-century Wiener anthology (m English). t~r.rp 'rtf translation 

described in some detail and are compared in terms of competence o 

selection of authors and works, and quality of notes. (Ah ) 



A 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



Volume XII, Number 1 
Spring 1968 



ED025169 



CO 

H 

1/D 

(M 

O 

Q 

UJ 



ic 

0 

o 

0 

2: 



Editor: /. Thomas Shaw, University of Wisconsin, Madtson 

Managing Editors: Robert W. Simmons, Jr., University of Wisconsin; Valdis J. Zsps, 
U^ivtrsity of Wisconsin 

wicz. University of Chicago 

Review Editor: Victor Terras, University of Wisconsin. Madison 

Rene Wellek, Thomas G. Winner, Helen Yakobson 

literature, and to pe^gogy, is ^ affiliate of the Modem ^?“age ^o- 

and East European Languages, AATSEEL oi Uie . ciiviQt*; and East European Specialists. The 

For individuals, libraries, and ^^^duate^ an^ ^ 

of $5.00 per year has ^d^S4 17 of the $5.00, goes for printing The Sl^tc 

three years. (Of these fees, $8.33 of the $10.00, not available without AATSEEL member- 

gfp^s^gu”® S”te’p«SSTr I.r misPto ..mbm .m b. h..o«i P» t. 

jour months after publicaUon. 

Correspondence t°.the Editor wd mlSn°53706. Ewks 

Ini 

fof Urf SS?’ of wffsin'”p?^ |o3“Defar’tm^^^^^^^ Ta?” 

Madison, \^consin 53701. 

Second-class postage paid at Madison, Wisconsin and additional offices. 

Printed by The Heffeman Press, Inc., Worcester, Massachusetts 01605. 

"PERMISSlOH TO REPRODUCE THIS 
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED 



lU wit ARU UKURRILRliunj wrLivHiinw 

UNDER AGREEMENTS WITH THE U.S. OFFICE OF 
EDUCATION. FURTHER REPRODUCTION OUTSIDE 
THE ERIC SYSTEM REQUIRES PERMISSION OF 
THE COPYRIGHT OWNER." 



i 



o 

ERje 



ft 



FL 006 



f 



William B. Edgerton, Indiana University 



Recent Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Russian Literature: 
A Review Article 



U S. DEPARlHEHl Of HEMIH. EDUCAllOH & WEIEARE 
OfflCE Of EDUCAllOH 

IHIS DOCUHEHl HAS BEEH REPRODUCED 

PERSOH OR ORGAHIZAIIOH ORIGIHAHHG ll. POIHIS „,,r.„nu 
SIAIED DO HOI HECESSARllY REPRESEHl OfflClAl OEflCE Of EDUCAllOH 

POSlllOH OR POllCY. 

The appeara™:e of a two-volume anthology of “Shleenth-c^«Uf 
to EnSah uanalation, brought out by attSkrite pur- 

development of Russian studies m Amen , , oreoared by Professor Harold 
pose of this article is to evaluate t s new an » collections generally 

B. Segel of Columbia University, Russ^ literature of the eighteenth 

available for use in American university courses on Russian literature 

century 1 . r nineteenth century, Rus- 

Overshadowed by the achievements been the stepchild of Russian 

Sian literature of the preceding age has as 1933 G. A. 

literary studies, not only abroad but i eighteenth-century Russian literary 

Gukovskij, the brilliant young founder eighteenth century attracted the 

scholarship, complained that the literature -ntiouarian items, bibliophiles, or 

attention of only “a few odd types, lovers of oW, offered 

else inveterate bibliographers for whom Jf nuzzles ”2 By the time of 
abundant opportunities for the solving pu • J ^^y-eight, 

his arrest in 1949 and his tragic dcaA on 2 I, school of 

a victim of the final period of Stalinist terror, perhaps 

eighteenth-century specialists whose ac ,evemen specialist today on eighteenth- 

the most solid tribute to his « recent 

century Russian literature, outstanding researcher, a remarkable 

literary scholarship said that ; lecturer was the central figure in 

official Soviet t'ot^n 19^^ '^as filled by the first edition of a new 

literature out of circulation.^ In 19o j tnis gap Professor A. V. Kokorev 

anthology of more than eight ^ *=d ^ges edh^ 
n 883-1965') of Moscow University, which has since been reprm cu 

m four editions were printed in a total of a result of the 

Until Kokorev’s anthology became easdy „toy two 

partial restoration of normal cultural ^^f^e «"e 

"r/ U”! 



SEEJ, Vol. XII, No. 1 (1968) 



59 




60 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



first volume of Wiener’s anthology contained more than two hundred pages of trans- 
lations from tliirty-four eighteenth-century Russian authors. Since this work has 
just been reissued, it is appropriate to discuss it here in some detail and particularly 
to compare Wiener’s translations with those now available in the Segel anthology."^ 

The usefulness of the Wiener collection is seriously limited by two things. The 
first is the enormous variation in the quality of its translations. Wiener did some of 
them himself and took others from a wide rariety of sources, including Sir John 
Bowring’s Specimens of the Russian Poets (2 vols., 1821—1823). The second Aing 
that limits its value is Wiener’s tendency to follow the assumption of old-fashioned 
anthologists that a literary work is like a cake, all the qualities of which can be 
appreciated in even the thinnest slice. Working on this erroneous assumption, Wiener 
provides us with slices from one to four pages in thickness of Sumarokov s five-act 
tragedy The False Demetrius (Dimitrij Samosvanec) ; Vasilij Majkov’s mock-epic 
Elisej; Catherine the Great’s comedy 0 Tempora (0 vremja!) ; XeraskoVs Rossiad; 
Knjaznin’s tragedy Vadim of Novgorod and his comedy Odd People (Cudaki) ; 
Ablesimov’s comic opera The Miller {Mel'nik — koldun, ohmanscik i svat) ; Bogda- 
novics Psyche (Dusen'ka), and ICapnis^s comedy The Pettifogger (Jabeda). He 
does little better with Fonvizin’s comedy The Minor {NedorosV), of which he gives 
only the first act and leaves the reader to wonder how many more there were and 
what happened in them. All three extracts are so short that they would be worthless 
no matter how well they were translated. Consequently, I shall say no more about them. 

Wiener makes no mention of several writers of comedies and comic operas, notably 
Lukin, Popov, Matinskij, and Plavil'scikov, nor of the prose fiction of femin and 
Culkov. His section on the eighteenth century takes no account of Kiylov and 
Karamzin. On the other hand, he includes short extracts from a number of eighteenth- 
century writers who belong more properly to cultural history than to literature, and 
whose works are not found in most of the literary anthologies. Among them are Ivan 
Pososkov; the historian V. N. Tatiscev; Metropolitan Platon (Petr Egorovic Ley- 
sin) ; the memoirists Princess Natal'ja Borisovna Dolgorukova, Adrian Moiseevic 
Gribovskij, and Mixail Vasil'evic- Danilov ; the learned Princess Ekaterina Romanovna 
Daskova; the historian Mixail Mixajlovic geerbatov; and the almost forgotten 
diarist Semen Andreevic Porosin. Wiener also prints selections by several poets ^bo 
are not usually included in eighteenth-century anthologies, among them Ermil Ivanovic 
Kostrov, Jurij Aleksandrovic Neledinskij-Meleckij, Mixail Nikitic Murav'ev, and 
two poets who belong rather more to the nineteenth than the eighteenth century— 
(Savriil Petrovic Kamenev and Ivan Mixajlovic Dolgorukij. He likewise gives a 
worthlessly short excerpt from Vladislav Aleksandrovic Ozerov’s tragedy Dmitrij 
Donskoj, also from the nineteenth century. 

Let us now compare the translations of those complete works which appear jn 
the anthologies of both Wiener and Segel. Each translation of Feofan Prokopovic’s 
funeral sermon on Peter the Great is superior in places to the other, and they both 
can be useful aids to students in reading the original text, but neither translation 
quite succeeds in conveying the tone of Feofan’s oratorical style. In order to achieve 
the same effect in English the translator would have to lean heavily on the rhythms, 
the turns of phrase, and the vocabulary of the King James Version of the Bible, which 
provides the English-speaking world with its closest equivalents to the Church 
Slavic element in Russian. In general, Wiener’s vocabulary tends to echo more of 
the tone of the original than Segel’s. For example, Feofan’s “i kol' razdrazili dolgo- 
terpenie tvoe !” is translated by Wiener as “and how long we have tempted Thy long- 
suffering!” Segel’s version is “And how we have exasperated Thine long-suffering!” 
“Exasperated” is closer than “tempted” to the literal meaning of razdrazili, but it is 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 



61 



foreign to the tone of the sermon, and the unidiomatic use of “thine” before a conso- 
nant provides a modem counterpart to the confusion of the jers in medieval Slavic 
manuscripts after their disappearance from natural speech. On the other hand, almost 
every example of a more appropriate word in "Wiener can be matched by a more 
appropriate one in Segel, such as “your womanly flesh” instead of your sex for 
tvoja zenskaja plof and especially Segel’s “ranks” for ciny instead of Wiener s ludi- 
crous (though annotated) “chins.” Two sentences from the sermon will serve to 
illustrate the problems presented by Feofan’s rhetoric and the differences between 
Wiener’s and Segel’s attempts to solve them: 

1. Koro 6o MH, H KaKOBOro, h KoanKoro JHnmaHca? 

(Wiener) What a great and what a good man we have lostl 
(Segel) Whom, what kind of man, how great a man have we lost? 

2. Ho, 0 Focceo, BHsa kto h KaKOBHH Te6e ociaBHi, BHaJSi; h KaKOsy ocxaBHx xeSe. 
(Wiener) O Russia, seeing what a great man has left you, see also how great 

he has left you. 

(Segel) But, O Russia, seeing who and what manner of man has left you, see 
also how he has left you. 

Except for Segel’s hopelessly ambiguous “how” as a translation of kakovu in the 
second passage, his versions are closer to the literal meaning of the original than 
Wiener’s but convey less of Feofen’s rhetorical power. 

For Kantemir’s First Satire, “K umu moemu,” it is not hard to choose between 
Wiener’s prose translation and Segel’s translation into heroic couplets. However 
alien Kantemir’s syllabic verse may be to our present-day taste, we must assume 
that his thirteen-syllable riming couplets did produce an esthetic effect on his con- 
temporaries. Wiener provides us with no esthetic equivalent, though he does give us 
a fmthful translation. Segel provides us with heroic couplets as an esthetic equivalent 
of ICantemir’s verse pattern, though at the cost of some accuracy (and without quite 
consistently achieving five-foot lines— a few are hexameters— or complete rimes). 

Wiener and Segel both translate Trediakovskij’s “Ode on the Surrender of 
Danzig.” But Segel translates Trediakovskij’s first version, written in ^llabic verse; 
Wiener translates Trediakovskij’s later version, written in accentual -syllabic verse— 
and both of them translate the two versions into prose. 

Lomonosov’s “Ode on the Capture of Xotin” is presented by Wiener in an old 
prose translation first published by F. R. Grahame. Segel’s version is done in stanzas 
shorn of the rime but preserving the line length of the original. One stanza picked at 
random (the fourth) will provide a basis for comparison of the two English versions : 

(Wiener) The love of their country nerves the souls and arms of Russia’s sons; 

eager are all to shed their blood; the raging tumult but inspires them with 
fresh courage; as the lion, by the fearful glare of his eyes, drives before 
him whole herds of wolves, their sharp teeth vainly showing; the woods 
and shores tremble at his roar ; with his tail he lashes the sand and dust ; 
with his strength he beats down every opposing force. 

(Segel) The love of country fortifies 

The sons of Russia’s arms and spirit. 

Each one desires to shed his blood 

And from the dreadful sound takes courage. 

Like some fierce lion, eyes ablaze. 

Drives off in fear a flock of wolves 



V 



62 The Slav \ and East European Journal 



Which ^o\v their sharp fangs’ poisonous venom. 
Its roar^akes tremble woods and shores; 

And Sana and dust stirs with its tail 
Which when all coiled strong blows delivers. 



Even though Wiener gives us a prose translation, here as elsewhere he somehow 
captures more of the poetic spirit of the original than Segel — and in the passage 
above he avoids the ambiguity of Segel’s second line and the jarring effect of Segel’s 
use of “like” as a conjunction in the fifth. 

Lomonosov’s “Morning Meditations” and “Evening Meditations” are given by 
Wiener in Bowring’s verse translations, published eighty years earlier. Bowring 
maintained the rime scheme of the original (except for using only masculine rimes), 
but he added an extra iambic foot to Lomonosov’s tetrameters and so changed the 
content that there was little left of Lomonosov except the general idea. Segel pub- 
lishes the “Evening Meditation” in a version that foregoes Lomonosov’s rime 
(a-b-a-b-c-c) but resolutely maintains the meter. Thus the two translations oblige 
the reader to choose between a poetic version that is Bowring rather than Lomonosov, 
and Segel’s version, which is faithful to the meaning but is not poetic. The dilemma 
can be illustrated with the opening stanza : 



(Wiener) The day retires, the mists of night are spread 
Slowly o’er nature, darkening as they rise; 

The gloomy clouds are gathering round our heads. 
And twilight’s latest glimmering gently dies: 

The stars awake in heaven’s abyss of blue; 

Say, who can count them? — ^Who can sound it? — ^Who? 



(Segel) The day conceals its countenance. 

Dark night has covered over fields; 

Black shade has climbed the mountains’ heights; 
The sun’s rays have inclined from us; 

A star-filled vault has opened up ; 

No number is there to the stars. 

No bottom is there to the vault. 



Wiener’s translations from Sumarokov’s poetry are all in prose and are almost 
worthless. In contrast, Segel’s translations are much more representative, and some 
of them are very well done. He presents the whole of Dimitrij Samozvanec (Dimitrii 
tke Imposter) in an excellent verse translation done by Ra3onond and Richard 
Fortune. While foregoing the riming couplets, they achieve a genuinely poetic 
rhythm and tone within the iambic hexameters of the original. Segel’s selections also 
include a verse translation of Sumarokov’s fable “Pir u I'va” by Barbara Cohen, 
which contains some very clever lines along with some that limp ; a verse translation 
by William E. Harkins of Sumarokov’s song “Ne grusti, moj svet,” which does not 
follow the original quite as closely as Segel’s various prose translations but does 
convey very well the poetic effect of the Russian; and prose versions of “Dve 
epistoly,” “Xor ko prevratnomu svetu,” and “Nastavlenie synu” (also given complete 
in Wiener). 

Xemnicer’s fables provide an interesting basis for comparing the two anthologies. 
Wiener gives only a prose version of “Metafizik” and Sir John Bowring’s clever but 
rather free translation into verse of “Lev, ucredivsij sovet” (The Lion’s Council of 
State). Segel presents a full dozen fables done in verse by Barbara Cohen. Here, too. 



1 



i 



I 






/ 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 



63 



as in her translation from Sumarokov, her work is very uneven in quality. Her version 
of “Muzik i korova” is a little masterpiece. Elsewhere, though, rimes like a thing — 
pulling, student — uistrument, and mistake — earthquake, and occasional lapses in lan- 
guage and rhythm produce such a bad effect that one is almost startled to find them 
standing in the midst of lines that are a delight. Barbara Cohen obviously has real 
promise as a translator of at least one genre of verse, the fable; and it will be 
interesting to see how she develops her gift. 

Wiener’s section on Derzavin contains six poems that are translated — all but two 
of them into verse — by six different persons. Among these is a version of Derzavin’s 
ode to God, done by somebody named J. K. Stallybrass and first published in London 
in 1870, which is so good that one wonders why Segel did not simply take it over 
from the public domain rather than hammering out his own line-for-line translation. 
For the sake of comparison here is the fourth stanza : 

(Wiener) All existence thou containest 

In Thee, quick’nest with Thy breath; 

End to the beginning chainest; 

And Thou givest life through death. 

Like^ as sparks spring from the fire. 

Suns are born from Thee, great sire: 

As, in cold clear wintry day, 

Spangles of the frost shine, sparkling, 

Turning, wavering, glittering, darkling, 

Shine the stars beneath Thy ray. 

(Segel) The chain of being dwells within Thee — 

’Tis by Thee given breath, sustained. 

The end Thou joinest to beginning 
And givest life along with death. 

As sparks are scattered and surge onward, 

’Tis thus that suns are born of Thee; 

As on a clear cold wintry day 
Small particles of hoarfrost glisten, 

’Tis thus in the abyss beneath Thee 
The stars, revolving, brightly glint, 

Stallybrass’ version is old-fashioned, to be sure (so is Derzavin’s 1), but it is also 
poetic. And even while maintaining the complete metrical pattern of the original, 
including the alternation of masculine and feminine rimes, it is also remarkably 
faithful to Derzavin’s meaning. 

From what has already been said, it is no doubt clear that the best translations 
in the eighteenth-century section of Wiener’s anthology are those not done by Wiener 
himself. Indeed, the inescapable conclusion one must draw from a comparison of the 
verse translations in Wiener and Segel is that there is only one way to produce a 
readable anthology today of eighteenth-century Russian poetry in English, and that 
is to go back and collect the best verse translations that were published during the 
first two thirds of the nineteenth century, Wiener’s anthology would provide a good 
starting point for the compiling of such an anthology, for among the most useful 
parts of the little introductions he gives to the life and works of each author are 
his bibliographical notes on English translations, .. . _ 

The second American anthology, and the first one with the texts in Russian, was 
published in two volumes in 1951 and 1953 by Professor Clarence A. Manning, then 



64 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



of Columbia University .9 With the study of Russian expanding rapidly and with few 
copies of Gukovskij’s anthologies available outside of the leading university libraries. 
Manning’s two volumes at least had the virtue of making some 250 pages of Russian 
texts easily accessible. The work was brought out by the King’s Crown Press, estab- 
lished by Columbia University Press to make specialized scholarly material available 
at minimum cost. In the Manm'ng collection, however, economy was achieved only by 
sacrificing a good deal of convenience to the reader: the use of photo-offset printing 
deprived the book of the variety of type faces and sizes that would have made for 
easier reading, and the table of contents was limited to the bare names of the authors 
represented. The work contains no index, and so it is impossible to discover what 
selections the two volumes contain without thumbing all the way through them. The 
first volume opens with a scant seven pages of introductory material, and short 
introductions are provided to each author. One of the most serious deficiencies in 
the work, particularly in view of the fact that it is obviously intended for future 
scholars, is its complete lack of any bibliographical information whatever (even about 
the sources from which the texts are drawn). As a result, the student can go through 
the whole of Manning’s anthology without getting even a hint of the textologiral 
problems involved in what he has read. Manning offers him the original, syllabic, 
version of Trediakovskij’s “Stixi poxval'nye Rossii” (dating it 1^0 without indicating 
that this is the date of its first publication rather than of its composition), but 
Manning nowhere reveals that Trediakovskij later rewrote a number of his early 
poems, including this one, chan^ng the meter from pure syllabic to accentual-syllabic. 
Manning provides his reader with the full text of Fonvizin’s comedy NedorosV, but 
he makes no mention of the existence of an early version, which was first published 
in 1933 in Literafurnoe nasledstvo. Manning prints a complete text of Radiscev’s 
ode “Vol'nost',” but he does not tell his reader which text he chose to print, or even 
let his reader know that a highly controversial textologica! problem exists here. In 
an anthology of English literature for high school students, or even for college 
undergraduates, such a popularized treatment might be all right ; but the only ^^er- 
ican students who read anthologies of eighteenth-century Russian literature in the 
original are our future scholars, and any anthology published for them should conform 
to the scholarly standards they themselves are expected to acquire. 

The confining limits of 250 pages naturally prevented Manning from compiling 
an anthology comparable in usefulness to Kokorev s 800-page Soviet edition. The 
only complete dramatic works in his whole collection are Fonvizin’s NedorosV and 
Sumarokov’s tragedy Sinav i Truvor. The inclusion of this latter work is undoubtedly 
the most valuable single contribution Manning makes in his anthology, for the full 
text of Sinav i Truvor is not easily available anywhere else. He also gives short 
excerpts from five other plsys, which are partially saved from futility by Manning’s 
brief paragraphs giving the reader some notion of what goes before and after. The 
same procedure is used with Majkov’s Elisej and Bogdanovic’s Dusen'ka, but in both 
cases Manning presents his fragments v/ithout adequately informing his reader about 

their structural relation to the total works. 

Among the prose works, Manning’s most useful contributions are Feofan Proko- 
povic’s funeral oration on Peter the Great, which is found in none of the Soviet 
anthologies of eighteenth-century literature; and the complete text of Catherine the 
Great’s “Skazka o Carevice Xlore,” which is important for its relation to Derzavin’s 
famous ode “Felica.” (A complete translation of this tale, under the title “Prince 
Khlor,’’ is found in Wiener’s anthology.) Manning also gives a thin slice of Cather- 
ine’s comedy O vretnjal and a few excerpts from her journal Vsjakaja vsjacinor- 
all of which adds up to little but gives Catherine more space than she normally gets 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 65 



in Soviet anthologies. It is surprising that Manning failed to include a prose work as 
important and as short as Karamzin’s “Bednaja Liza.” £m.in is represented only by 
a few unsatisfactory fragments of Pis'ma Ernesta i Dorcwry, and Culkov only by the 
complete text of “Gor'kaja ucast'.” 

Apart from Lomonosov and Derzavin, who are reasonably well represented within 
these space limitations, Manning’s treatment or poetry leaves a good deal to be 
desired. The inclusion of only two short works in addition to his tragedy Simv i Truvor 
gives a one-sided impression of Sumarokov’s position in Russian Classicism; and 
Manning contributes nothing to a more just appreciation of the unduly scorned 
Xeraskov by giving thirteen long pages of his interminable epic Rossijada — and noth- 
ing else. 

For all its deficiencies, Manning’s anthology can still play a useful supplementary 
role in American universities because of the works it contains that are not readily 
available in other editions — ^Feofan Prokopovic’s funeral sermon on Peter the Great, 
Derzavin’s ode to God, Sumarokov’s Sinav i Truvor, and the selections from Catherine 
the Great. But even its usefulness as a supplement would be eliminated by the 
appearance of these works in well-edited Soviet editions. 

By the time the third edition of Kokorev’s anthology appeared in 1961, importers 
of Soviet books were able to assure American universities of a steady supply, and 
this work is now well established as the basic text for most American graduate 
courses on eighteenth-century Russian literature. Kokorev’s introductions to the 
various authors are skimpy, and his explanatory notes are so inadequate that the 
selections must bristle with difficulties even for native Russians. Nevertheless, his 
anthology provides more than enough material for the usual one-semester course in 
eighteenth-century literature, and it leaves remarkably few gaps that are serious 
enough to require filling in from other sources. Perhaps the most striking omission is 
Derzavin’s ode to God, which within relatively few years was translated at least 
eight times into German, ten into Polish, and fifteen into French, as well as into 
Croatian, Czech, English, Modern Greek, Italian, Japanese, Latin, Lusatian, Serbian, 
Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish, and Swedish.^® Another noticeable omission in Kokorev 
is Catherine the Great, whose comedy 0 vremjal was included at least in abridged 
form in the anthologies of Gukovskij as well as Wiener and Manning. 

Kokorev presents his material chronologically and follows the usual Soviet 
periodization. The first of his three sections, covering the first thirty years of the 
century, contains the complete text of “Gistorija o rossijskom matrose Vasilii”; 
extracts from “Istorija o Aleksandre, rossijskom dvorjanine”; examples of both the 
prose and verse of Feofan Prokopovic, including his “tragedokomedija” Vladimir, 
his poem addressed to ICantemir, and his well-known “Placet pastusok v dolgom 
nenastii,” but not his sermon on the death of Peter the Great; a selection of poetry 
of the Petrine Age, both literary and popular; excerpts from a “school drama,” 
Slava rossijskaja ; three comic intermedii ; and a short extract from the first Russian 
newspaper, Vedomosti, founded by Peter. 

Kokorev’s second section, entitled “Literature of the 1730’s to 1750’s,” is devoted 
entirely to the works of Kantemir, Trediakovskij, Lomonosov, and Sumarokov. The 
inclusion of the First, Second, and Seventh Satires provides ample material for 
acquainting the reader with Kantemir ; but here, as elsewhere in his anthology, Koko- 
rev’s editorial work leaves much to be desired. Even when he does occasionally 
provide an explanatory footnote, his explanations are not always correct. For ■ xample, 
in lines 114-115 of ICantemir’s First Satire “Vot dija cego ja, ume, nemee byt' 
klusi / Sovetuju . . .” Kokorev misses the point of the whole image and interprets 
klusa here to mean galka ‘jackdaw’ instead of the correct nascdka ‘setting hen’ — than 



66 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



which, as every farmer knows, nothing can be nemee. Kokorev then goes on to derive 
kltisa in this sense from some Polish word that was evidently unknown to the editors 
of the H — K volume of the Polish Academy of Sciences’ new Sloivnik jesyka polskiego 
(Warszawa, 1961). 

Even more puzzling, however, is the question why Kokorev allowed his book 
to go through four editions without correcting a whole series of glaring misprints 
that distort both the metric pattern and the meaning of Kantemir’s Seventh Satire. 
Each edition carefully reproduced the following errors.^! Kokorev has an extra 
comma in line 102, and completely botches line 103: “Put' i beglost', i togo, skol' 
velika sila, / Put' i beglost', v tvari vsemu znat' istu pricinu,” for “Put' i beglost' i 
togo, skol' velika sila / Nad drugim; v tvari vsemu znat' istu pricinu — .’’ The same 
sort of accidental repetition occurs again in lines 132-133: “I ostavil by ja s zlym 
serdcem razum ostryj. / I ostavil by ja vse dobro tomu, kto s cuzogo,” for “. . . 
Vveril by ja vse dobro tomu, kto s cuzogo.’’ “Dobrodetel' potomu nad vsem ne- 
otmenno / Nuzno mladencem vnusat'” should be “. . . mladencam . . .” (11. 125-126). 
“P'janica byl srodnik, / Koj vskormil” should be “. . . Cto vskormil” (11. 197-198). 
And “I vred” (1. 200) should be “I vret.’’ A similar example of careless editing 
carefully reprinted is to be found in the next to last line of the excerpts from 
Trediakovskij’s Tilemaxida (4th ed. ; p. 104), where pokoliku is changed to poskoVku. 

Lomonosov is represented by fifty pages of well-chosen selections. The only 
addition this reviewer would particularly like to see is Lomonosov’s short introduc- 
tion to his collected works, “O pol'ze knig cerkovnyx v rossijskom jazyke,” which 
would make available in his own words the ideas about style that every student of 
eighteenth-century Russian literature must get acquainted with in any case. The 
curious way in which Lomonosov’s “Gimn borode” is printed here, as in various 
other Soviet editions, calls for a special comment. Admittedly, classroom analysis 
and discussion of the entire poem would present ceitain problems because of the 
scabrous nature of its second stanza and the four-line refrain that follows each of its 
ten stanzas. By printing it in bowdlerized form, however, with the second stanza and 
the refrain omitted completely, Soviet editors give their readers a seriously distorted 
version of what Lomonosov actually wrote. Better nc “Hymn to the Beard” at all in 
textbooks than a “Beard” hacked up to fit somebody’s notions of classroom puritanism. 
The classics of eighteenth-century Russian literature also need protection against the 
“varnishers of reality.” 

The more than seventy pages of selections from Suriiarokov provide ample ma- 
terial for an appreciation of his role in Russian Classicism. His tragedy Dimitri] 
Samozvanec is given in full, his comedy Opekun is only slightly abridged, and a few 
scenes are given from his comedy Rogonosec po voobrazeniju. Also included are se- 
lections from Sumarokov’s fables, love songs, epigrams, and prose writings, as well as 
his “Nastavlenie xotjascim byti pisateljami,” his satire “O blagorodstve,” and his 
controversial “Xor ko prevratnomu svetu.” 

Almost three fourths of Kokorev’s anthology is devoted, understandably, to the 
literature of llie last forty years of the eighteenth century. More than two hundred 
pages are assigned to drama. Two comedies, Lukin’s Scepetil'nik and Fonvizin’s 
Brigadir, and two comic operas, Popov’s Anjuta and Ablesimov’s MeVnik — koldun, 
obmanscik i svat, are p^'inted in complete form. Substantial portions are given of 
Kapnist’s comedy Jabeda and Kiijaznin’s tragedy Vadim Novgorodskij; and excerpts 
— in most cases unsatisfactorily short — are presented from two further comedies, 
Knjaznin’s Xvastun and Plavil'scikov’s Sidelec; three more comic operas, Matinskij’s 
Sanktpeterburgskij gostinyj dvor, Nikolev’s Rozana i Ljubim, and Knjaznin’s Ne- 
scast'e ot karety ; and Nikolev’s tragedy Sorena i Zamir. 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 



67 



The two famous Russian mock epics of the eighteenth century, V. I. - aj o s 
Elisej and Bogdanovic’s Dusetifka, are represented by excerpts substantial enough to 
give the student a reasonably good idea of them both. Here too, however, it ^ im- 
fortunate that a whole series of typographical errors have been reprinted m eaA new 
edition of Kokorev— even the fourth, which was not merely printed froin the old 
plates but was reset in type. Here are the ones I have noticed in Majkoy-s Elisej: 
line 140, for Us read Use; 1. 190, Grjaduscaja . . . kasm—Grjadusctja, 1.^ 277, 
Avijalii—Omjalii; 1. 357, eto—cto-p 1. 414, Podscisja ty . . . pomoP—Potscisja. 
There are some repeated typographical errors also in Bogdanoyic’s 
vnym for Spesivym (p. 541, 1. 11) ; Kregtja for Krjaxtja (p. 544, 1. 11) ; 
s kern isveki for . . . naveki (p. 553, 1. 39) ; soedinjajuci for s"edmjajuct (p. 559, 1. 42). 

Except for the entirely unjustifiable omission of “Bog,” the work of Derzavm is 
adequately represented (42 pp.). Nine fables from Xemnicer and several from Fon- 
vizin, Majkov, and Dmitriev help the student to follow the development of this typi- 
cally eighteenth-century genre from Sumarokov to the later Krylov. Xeraskov's 
Rossijada is amply represented by his own summary of it along with the four-page 
sample given by Kokorev, but this sample alone gives a distorted view of the range 
of Xeraskov’s activity in poetry. 

The prose of the Age of Catherine is less satisfactorily represented m Kokorev 
than the poetry and drama. The excerpts from Novikov’s satirical journals would 
have gained in value for the student if Novikov’s side of his lively controversy with 
Catherine had been completed with the appropriate passages from her Vsjakaja 
vsiaUna. Kokore’/s six pages from Emin’s PWma Emesta i Doravry are scarcely 
enough to give the reader an adequate notion of that 800-page novel and yet one may 
wonder whether its artistic value is worth more than a six-pap sample. Culkoi^s 
lively picaresque novel Prigozaja povarixa, on the other hand, is well represented: 
Kokorev prints intact almost the first two thirds of the only surviving frapient of 
that work. He gives a little more than one third of Radiscev’s Putesestvie ts Peter- 
burga v Moskvu, but it is impossible to get an adequate impression of the whole work 
from his selection— which omits, for example, “Torzok,” Radiscey’s important 
chapter attacking censorship. For the American student, however, the inadequacy of 
Kokorev's selections from Radiscev is of minor importance. Since Kadiscevs 
Journey is more significant as a social document than as a wpk of art, and since 
Leo Wiener’s fairly adequate English translation is now in print,!^ most American 
teachers of eighteenth-century Russian literature would probably rather have their 
students read the whole of the Jonriiey in English translation than read Kokorevs 

skimpy selections in the original Russian. ^ , 

Krylov's “Poxval'naja rec* v pamjat* moemu deduske" can appeal to the reader 
as a work of art even in Kokorev’s somewhat abridged version; but the three odd 
letters from Pocta duxov, unsupported by any real introductory material in Kokorev’s 
anthology, can give the student no inkling of the real nature of Krylov’s satire in 

that short-lived publication. , , „ • u u, 

Kokorev’s selections for the 41 pages that he allots to Karamzin are probably 

as adequate as any 41 pages could be. Since no anthology could do justice to the five 
hundred pages of the Pis'ma rtisskogo putesestvennika, Kokorev can scarcely be 
censured for devoting only ten pages to it. What is open to criticism is not Kokorev’s 
choice of materials but his treatment of them. In contrast to his practice in the rest 
of the book, where abridged selections are fairly consistently labeled “v sokrascenii” 
or “otryvki,” he gives the reader not the slightest warning that the four most impor- 
tant Karamzin selections— half of the total— contain sizable omissions. The ten pages 
of letters selected from the Pis'ma rtisskogo putesestvennika contain 26 pages of 



68 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



omissions— each omission indicated in the text by suspension points (...) which the 
reader cannot possibly distinguish from Karamzin’s frequent use of three periods as 
a stylistic device. Under the title “Marfa Posadnica, ili pokorenie Novgoroda (Istori- 
ccskaja povest'), Kniga pervaja,” Kokorev presents tjiree and a half pag^ of text in 
which suspension points are used seven times by ICaramzin as a stylistic dev^e, seven 
times by Kokorev to indicate omissions totaling seven pages— and once by ^rampn 
and Kokorev together to indicate both things at once 1 Apart from the cryptic Kniga 
pervaja,” the reader has no way of finding out from Kokorev that these are mere 
excerpts from the first of three “books” of a story running to fifty pages in length. 
Publishing this kind of selection in an anthology is an utter waste of space. 

According to the statement on the title page, Kokorev’s anthology is authorized 
for use in universities and pedagogical institutes, and yet some Soviet guardian angel 
—I can’t believe it was Kokorev— has taken it upon himself to protect the tender 
minds of Soviet university students against the perils lurking in Kara^m’s Bednaja 
Liza. On page 787 (4th ed.), just a^ter Liza “threw herself into his arms, three 
blushing sets of suspension points mark the omission of passages totaling nearly a pa^. 

Karamzin’s early poem “Poezija” is undoubtedly the worst-edited selection in the 
book. Suspension points ambiguously mark the omission of five passages totaling over 
76 lines— but three other passages totaling 23 lines are omitted v/ithout giving the 
reader any hint of the fact In addition to these sins of omission each edition of Ae 
anthology has carefully repeated two typographical errors in the poem, one of which 
distorts the rhythm and the other distorts the sense. Kokorev’s omission of the word 
mira changes the seventh line from a hexameter to a pentameter. On page 802 the 
meaning of four lines is confused by errors in one letter and one punctuation mark : 

HecHCii Ha npHsai npeEHCnpennHi opaoB [Hecaca] 

EoTOpne iieBqOB OoacecxBeHUHa caaBH 

Mnai B BBinmne bhph, sa TeHy no^epiiuyT 

jTrf ff iHMHa cBoero. neaeq HsOpaHHHH KjonmTOK [CBoero, neseq] 

Bosnecca Bsinie Bcex... 

But then the meaning of the text has already been so ^eatly distorted by all the 
deliberate omissions that these ^ographical errors make little additional difference. 

Karamzin’s friend Dmitriev fares little better in Kokorev’s anthology. His famous 
satire “Cuzoj tolk” is cut down by half, with two lines of dots marking the excisions ; 
and the reader is left to guess at what the ori^nal structure of the poem may have 
been. The editorial treatment of his clever, cymical “Modnaja zena” prompts us to 
suspect here too the heavy Victorian hand of that same Guardian Angel we caught 
molesting Poor Liza. In this bowdlerized version the story ends abruptly with the 
departure of the one-eyed old husband on a shopping tour in town and the unexpected 
entry into his young wife’s cosy boudoir of the well known ladies’ man Milovzor. The 
Guardian Angel’s three ambiguous dots must make uninformed Soviet students wonder 
whether this was the best Dmitriev could do — and must make the rest of them wonder 
Yvliy socialist property is wasted on the printing of a poem so mangled that it makes 
no sense. In my own unenlightened bourgeois way I wonder too. 

Aleksandr Vasil'evic Kokorev was nearly seventy years old when the first edition 
of his anthology appeared in 1952 ; and he died on 26 October 1965, only a few 
months after the publication of the fourth edition. Such circumstances as age and 
health may very well account for some of the defects pointed out here which have 
been repeated in each successive printing. I have called attention to these defects 
precisely because I think Kokorev’s anthology is so useful that it deserves to be cor- 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 69 



rected and improved.^ If some responsible Soviet scholar %vill undertake the tok of 
preparing a revised and corrected fifth edition, he wdl perform a usrfd service not 
only to teachers and students at home but also to a growing number of his co.Ieagues 

and their students in other countries. - - , 

Apart from unwarranted omissions and outright errors, the pnncipal weaknesses 

of Kokorev’s anthology are its sketchy introductions and its whoHy inadequate ex- 
planatory notes on the difficulties presented by eighteenth-century Russian. *ese 
have been largely overcome in a remarkable anthology based, in the mam, on o 
that ^vas published in Poland during the 1950’s by Professor Wiktor Jakubowsla, the 
head of the Russian Department at the University of Cracow.16 His anffiolo© con- 
tains three volumes of introductory material in Polish and texts in Russian, tota mg 
565 pages (which correspond to about 405 pages in the format W Kokorev’s bwk), 
and three additional volumes, totaling 284 pages, that are devoted to detailed and 
excellent notes in Polish explaining linguistic difficulties and obscure litera^ and 
historical allusions. With less than half as much space available for texts, Jakubowsla 
naturally does not provide nearly so broad a coverage as Kokorev; and yet even 'Vithm 
his more limited space he includes a number of significant works that Kokorev passed 
over, among them Feofan Prokopovic’s funeral sermon on Peter the Great, the second 
as well as the first of Fonvizin’s comedies (in not wholly intolerable abridgment), 
Lomonosov’s “Utrennee razmyslenie” as well as his “Vecernee razmysleme,’’ Derzavm s 
'''Jog,” and the complete text of Dmitriev’s “Modnaja zena,” thus letting Pol«sh stu- 
dents in on what happened when the one-eyed old husband got back home. The texte 
are carefully edited, and I recall encountering only five typographical errors not already 
listed in the printed errata slips: {Teksly, H, p. 100, 1. 4), omission of ef° ne 

sateret,” before "nikaxta z nim ne sasporit,” and (Przypisy, II, p. 53, n. 154) of the 
corresponding “nikogda ego ne zaderet,” before “nikogda s mrn ne zasp^it The word 
velika is omitted in “Kol* sila velika Rossijskogo jazykal (Teksiy, HI, p. 7, 1 dU) , 
“Kotorye v zavisti socli” (Teksiy, HI, p. 69, 1. 20) should read "Kotory . ; and 

“ftiasca ego svitu” (Przypisy, I, p. 25, 1. 28) should be “ajasca svoju svitu. 

Concise essays introduce not only each author but also each individual work, 
exact bibliographical information is ^ven about the source from which each selection 
is taken In these little essays Jakubowski does not limit himself to the usual recitel 
of dates' and facts commonly found in anthologies. He may discuss histori^l material 
essential to an understanding of the work (e.g., I, 24-25, on Feofan ProKopovics 
“Placet pastusok v dolgom nenastii’’) ; he may deal with the influence of the work 
on the fate of its author (e.g., II, 13&-140, on Vadim 

on later Russian writers (numerous examples mention Puskin, Gopl , Batjuskov, 
Baratynskij, Ryleev, Krylov, and others) ; or he may provide a running commenta^ 
showing the relation of one work to another (e.g., Przyptsy, I^ 

Elisej as a parody of Petrov’s translation of the Aeneid). Jalmbowski discloses each 
work not only \vithin its historical setting but also in connection with possible native 
and foreign influences upon it. He considers Kantemir’s satires in relation to both 
Horace and Boileau (I, 31-32) ; Derzavin’s poetry in relation to an od^f Frederick 
the Great (HI, 50), Young’s Night Thoughts (IH, 51, and Przyptsy, IH, 4lL Hal- 
ler’s Die Ewigkeit (twelve lines of which are quoted in German in Przyptsy, ^. 40), 
an?f»al (who ia quoted in .he original Gr«k in ffl 98-99 ; Fontanre^ rn- 
liuence on Xemnicer (HI, 115) and Dmitriev (IH. 2o0) ; Sterne a influence on Ra*- 
scev (HI 140) ; and the relation of Moll Flanders to Culkov’s Prtgozaja povanxa 
(HI 120). In his three-page discussion of Derzavin’s “Pamjatnik’^ he gives ffie Latin 
text' of Horace’s ode, the Polish text of Ludwik Morstin’s translation of it, eight li^ 
of Lomonosov’s version, six lines of Kapnist’s, and several lines from Puskin s ( , 




70 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



93-95). For all his attention to the historical, cultural, and social significance of each 
work he by no means neglects its esthetic significance. Both in his introductory essays 
and in his voluminous notes he keeps constantly in the foreground those esthetic ele- 
ments which are the distinguishing marks that set off literature from non-literature. 
If the Polish (and Ukrainian) influences on early eighteenth-century literature seem 
to get somewhat less attention than they deserve, still Jakubowski does keep constantly 
in mind for his Polish readers various points of reference between the Russian works 
and Poland. His section on Derzavin is particularly strong in this regard, containing 
numerous references to Polish translations of Derzavin’s poetry, several actual quo- 
tations from them, and a long commentary by Mickiewicz on Derzavin’s ode to God. 

Taken together, Jakubowski’s introductory essays and his hundreds upon hun- 
dreds of explanatory notes form a mosaic-like history of eighteenth-century Russian 
literature that is remarkably complete. But they are even more than that : by the time 
the student has gone through all the wealth of material in these essays and notes, he 
has also learned a certain amount about problems of literary scholarship. For example, 
he will be acquainted with the Soviet controversies over the authorship of “Xor ko 
prevratnomu svetu” (I, 101-102), “Otryvok putesestvija v I*** T***’’ (H, 24), 
and “Pis'ma k Falaleju” (II, 30) ; he will be familiar with the question raised in 1954 
by K Pigarev about the real authorship of the early version of Fonvizin’s Nedorosi' 
(H, 72) ; he will be aware of the conflicting interpretations of Knjaznin’s Vadim 
Novgorodskij (II, 141-142) ; and he will know something of Soviet controversies over 
the text of ^discev’s “Vol'nost'” and over the interpretation of Radiscev’s political 
outlook in his Journey from Petersburg to Moscow (HI, 135-145, 202-203). 

In connection with this latter question Jakubowski’s essay on Radiscev contains 
an error that apparently reflects a last-minute change in the size of his selections from 
Radiscev’s Journey. In his discussion of the Journey Jakubowski takes issue with the 
Soviet scholar G. P. Makogonenko over his explanation of what appears to them both 
to be a contradiction between “liberal reformism” in the chapter entitled “Xotilov” and 
a “call to revolution” in the chapter entitled “Gorodnja” ; and in a footnote (HI, 144) 
Jakubowski promises further details in his notes on “Xotilov.” But when we turn to 
the appropriate place in his selections from Radiscev’s Journey (HI, 181), we find 
that Jakubowski has omitted “Xotilov” entirely! 

But this is a minor blemish that can easil}' be corrected in a second edition. Alto- 
gether, his work is a model of careful scholarship and effective pedagogy. This is not 
to say, of course, that all his interpretations can be accepted without question. In regard 
to Radiscev, for example, I am not convinced that either Jakubowski or Makogonenko 
has fully succeeded in explaining Radiscev’s attitude toward revolution— although they 
are both undoubtedly closer to the truth than D. S. Mirsky was in the incredible state- 
ment he made about Radiscev’s Journey in his famous little handbook on Russian 
literature. “It would seem,” said Mirslqr, “that he wrote it merely out of literary 
ambition and that it is no more than a rhetorical exercise on a subject suggested and 
familiarized by Raynal.”!’^ One is almost driven to conclude that Mirsky was so 
offended by the clumsy style of the Journey that he refused to believe Radiscev could 
be sincere. 

The first volume of Jakubowski’s anthology clearly suffers from the fact that it 
was printed in 1954. In a bibliographical note on the last page of Volume I he lists 
three anthologies that range in date of publication from 1812 to 1952 — ^but he says 
not one word about the five editions of G. A. Gukovskij’s Xrestomaiija po russkoj 
literature XVIII veka that were published in Kiev and Moscow between 1935 and 
1938 or about the anthology Gukovskij published in Leningrad in 1937, all of which 
were landmarks in the study of eighteenth-century Russian literature. But then we 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 71 



maj’- question whether Jakubowski was reallj’- responsible for this glaring onussion : in 
1354 the Soviet Union had not yet had its Twentieth Party Congress, Poland had not 
yet had its own October, and the martyred Gukovsldj was still officially classified as 
an “unperson.” Unlike other leading Soviet specialists on the eighteenth century, par- 
ticularly Berkov, Makogonenko, and Blagoj, whose names appear frequently in Jaku- 
bowski’s anthology, the name of Gukovskij is apparently mentioned only once, on page 
234 of Volume III, which was published in 1959. 

Another thing one misses in Jalmbowski’s essays on the writers of the early part 
of the century, particularly Trediakovskij and Lomonosov, is any discussion of their 
relation to the whole Baroque movement in European literature. This subject, in which 
Poland itself occupies a by no means insignificant place, has long interested scholars in 
Central and Western Europe and in recent years has attracted the attention of Soviet 

scholars as well. , 

All these criticisms together, however, do not weigh very heavily against all the 
merits of Jakubowski’s book. I share the hopes expressed in a highly favorable Polish 
review of it that Jakubowski will soon bring out a second, enlarged edition, and that 
the publisher will make provision for an index and will issue the volumes in a perma- 
nent binding.i8 A new edition would make a contribution to Russian studies extending 
far beyond tlie borders of Poland. In the United States its usefulness has already be- 
come apparent to a few graduate students whose choice of Polish as their second 
Slavic language has made the book accessible to them; and a new edition might even 
have a certain influence on the decision our graduate students make when they select 
their second Slavic language. 

Much of the material in Jakubowski’s introductions and explanatory notes has 
been made available to readers of English in the two-volume history and anthology of 
eighteenth-century Russian literature in English that has just been issued by Professor 
Segel. The following passages on Xemnicer from Jakubowski’s third volume of texts, 
pp. 113-114, and Segel’s second volume, pp. 239-241, will serve as an illustration: 



Iwan Chemnicer, urodzony w guberni 
astrachanskiej, byl synem lekarza 
wojskowego, wychodzcy z Saksonii. 
Majqc lat trzynascie wbrew vvoH 
ojca wstapil do wojska, Po dwunastu 
latach sluzby podal sig do dymisji i 
otrzymal skromne stanowisko w zarzq- 
dzie gomictwa: tlumaczyl dziela z 
zakresu mineralogii, bral udzial w re- 
dagowaniu stownika gorniczego. Okolo 
r. 1770 zaprzyjaznil sig z Mikolajem 
Lwowem, w t 3 un tez czasie zaczyna pi- 
sac. 



W latach 1776-1777 Chemnicer 
razem z M. Lwowem podrozowal po 
Niemczech, Francji i Holandii. Za- 
chowal sig jego dziennik podrozy 



Generally regarded as the best fable writer 
before Krylov, Ivan Ivanovich Ediemnitser 
was born in the district of Astrakhan, the 
son of an army doctor who had emigrated 
to Russia from his native Saxony. Vhen he 
was thirteen years old, the young Khemnitser 
joined the army against his father’s wishes. 
He remained in military service for a period 
of some twelve years and then put in for 
retirement, accepting a relatively modest 
position as a translator of books on mineral- 
ogy and as a member of a committee con- 
vened to edit a dictionary of mining terms. 

His literary career began about 1770, 
when he became acquainted with Ivan [sic] 
Aleksandrovich L’vov (1751-1803), an archi- 
tect, scientific writer, and poet of some 
talent. 

In 1776 Khemnitser and L’vov set out 
together for over a year’s travel through 
Germany, France, and Holland. Khemnitser ’s 
diary of the journey, which has been pre- 



72 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



swiadczgQT o niezwykle szerokim za- 
siggu zainteresowan kulturalnych. 

W 1782 r. Giemnicer zostai mia- 
nowany konsulem generalnym w Smyr- 
nie, gdzie tez zmarl po cigzkiej i 
dtugotrw^ej chorobie. . . . 

Pienvsza prob? literack^ Chemni- 
cera byia napisana w stylu Lomono- 
sowa bardzo siaba “O^a Ha nobe^y npa 
ffiypse” (1770). Nie ukazaiy si§ w 
druku za zycia poety satyry wymier- 
zone przedwko przekupslwu s§dzi6w 
i urzgdnikow: “Ha ly^Hi cysen” i 
“Ha lyAoe cocTOSHHe ciysba” oraz 
“Ofla Ha H0AM5HI.” Zacliowafo si? 
kilka jego epigramatow. 

Wybitne stanowisko w literaturze 
rosyjskiej zaj^l Chemnicer dzi?ki 
swym bajkom, ktorych napisat 104. 
Pierwsze ich wydanie, zawieraj^ce 27 
utworow, ukazaio si? anonimowo w r. 
1779 pod tytuiem “BacHH h CKasKH 
NN” (bez wskazania roku wyda- 
dania). W roku 1782 pojawifo si?, 
rowniez anonimowe, drugie wydanie, 
uzupebiione 36 nowymi bajkami. 

Po smierci Giemnicera jego przy- 
jaciele Lwow i Kapnist przygotowali 
do druku trzecie trzjdomowe wydanie 
jego bajek z pi?knymi drzeworytami 
Olenina pod t 3 rtulem : “BaCHH H CKasKH 
H. H. XeMHHAcpa. B ipei racial.” C.- 
Heiepbypr 1799. Wydanie to zawiera 
liczne poprawki maj^ce na celu b^dz 
zlagodzenie ostrosci wymowy spo- 
leczno-politycznej poszczegolnych ust?- 
p6w, badz usuni?cie idiomatow uwa- 
zanych przez wydawcow za gminne, 
niektore bajki zostaty nawet calkowi- 
cie przeredagowane. Pierwotny tekst 
autorski zostal przywrocony dopiero w 
^vydaniu krjdycznym dziel Chemnicera, 
przygotowanjrm przez J. Grota, ktore 
si? ukazalo w 1873 r. 

Po ukazaniu si? wydania 1799 
bajki Chemnicera zdobywaj? popu- 
larnosc, ktora szybko rosnie i przej- 



served, is still interesting reading, particu- 
larly in the light of his wide range of cul- 
tural interests. 

In 1782 Khemnitser was given the posi- 
tion of Russian consul general in Smyrna 
(the present-day Turkish city of Izmir), 
where he died two years later after a pro- 
tracted illness. 

Khemnitser’s first literary flight was the 
weak Ode on the Victory at Giurgiu (Oda 
na pobedu pri Zhurzhe, 1770), composed in 
the style of Lomonosov’s panegyrics. This 
was followed by such pimgent satires on 
corrupt judges and officials as On Bad Judges 
(Na khudykh sudei). On the Bad Situation 
of the Service (Na khudoe sostoianie 
sluzhby), and the Ode to Clerks (Oda na 
pod’iachikh), which for obvious reasons were 
not printed in the author’s lifetime. Apart 
from these works and several epigrams, 
(Themnitser is remembered almost exclusively 
now for his fables, of which he wrote some 
104. 

The first edition of Khemnitser’s fables 
included twenty-seven works and \vas pub- 
lished anonymously in 1779 under the title 
The Fables and Tales of N. N. (Basni i 
skazki N. N.). A second edition, augmented 
by thirty-six new fables, appeared, also 
anonymously, in 1782. 

After Khemnitser’s death his friends 
L’vov and Kapnist prepared for publication 
a third edition of his fables, in three vol- 
umes. This bore the title Fables and Tales 
of I. I. Khemnitser, in Three Parts (Baiki 
i skazki I. I. Khemnitsera. V trekh chastiakh, 
1799), and included woodcuts by the artist 
Olenin. 

The L’vov-Kapnist edition of 1794 car- 
ried a number of textual emendations; these 
served two purposes in the main — the blunt- 
ing of Khemnitser’s sometimes bitingly sharp 
social satire and the elimination of words 
and phrases the editors considered offensive 
to good taste. The ori^nal versions of Khem- 
nitser were restored only in the critical edi- 
tion of his works published under the 
editorship of I. Grot in 1873. 

When the first volume of Khemnitser’s 
fables appeared in 1799 it received a quite 
favorable reception, and soon proved im- 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 



73 



sciowo dorownuje niemal slawie ICry- 
to\va (w 1855 r. ukazato si? 36 \vy- 
dan). Od drugiej potowy XIX w. po- 
pularnosc ta zacz 3 ma si? zmniejszac. 

• • • 

W bajkach Chemnicera \vyst?- 
puje tematyka charakterystyczna dla 
satyry rosyj skiej XV 111 \v. : walka z 
samowola i korupcja aparatu admini- 
stra<yjnego i sadowego, pych^ szla- 
checka, wyzyskiem siabszych przez 
moznych itp. 

Fod \vzgl?dem formalnym cechuj^ 
je — \v odroznieniu od suchej z\vi?zto- 
sci bajek-przypowiesci Sumarokowa 
— obfitosc szczegotow obyczajowych 
i przewaga dialogu nad narracj^ 
Oryginaln^ wtasciwosci^ bajek Chem- 
nicera jest brak tradycyjnego dla 
tego gatunku literackiego moratu 
koncowego: wysnuci^ wiuosku moral- 
nego pozostawione jest czytelnikowi. 

Styl Chemnicera odznacza si? pro- 
stot^ i lekkosci^. Wprowadzajac po- 
toczne, a nawet gminne zv/roty idio- 
matyczne, starannie unika wulgamosci 
wiasciwej Sumarokowowi. 

Bajld Chemnicera pisane s^ trady- 
cyjn 3 rm dla tego gatunku znuenno- 
miarowym wierszem jambicznym. 



mensely popular. This popularity so increased 
with time that Khemnitser’s reputation as a 
fable writer seriously rivaled that of Krylov. 
In fact, it was only after the middle of the 
nineteenth century that Khemnitser’s popu- 
larity began to decline. 

The subject matter of Khemnitser’s fa- 
bles differs little from that of the eighteenth- 
century Russian satire; however, in com- 
parison with Sumarokov’s fables they are 
much richer in social details, and reveal the 
author’s greater preference for dialogue tlui 
for narratioa In a significant departure from 
previous Russian fable writing, Khemmtser 
also usually avoids the concluding moral, 
which was virtually a convention of the 
genre. His style is light and simple and his 
language colloquial, although he is rarely 
guilty of the vulgarity we meet often in the 
fables of Sumarokov. 



As with Sumarokov, and later Krylov, 
Khemnitser uses iambic lines of varying 
length. 



Other materials from Jakubowski that are made avmlable to readers of English by 
Segel can be found on the following pages (unless otherwise noted, the Roman nu- 
merals after Jakubowski’s name refer to the volumes of texts rather than notes) ; 

Segel, I, 84-85 (Jakubowski, HI, 137-138) ; 85 (Jakubowski, II, 135-137) ; 86- 
88 (Jakubowski, II, 138-141) ; 97 (Jakubowski, HI, 25) ; 119 (Jakubowski, I, 9-10) ; 
165 (Jakubowski, I, 49) ; 193 (Jakubowski, I, 68-67) ; 202 (Jakubowski, I, 73-74) ; 
209-210 (Jakubowski, I, 77) ; 242-243 (Jakubowski, I, 101-102) ; 255-256 (Jaku- 
bowski, n, 6-8) ; 352-357 (Jakubowski, HI, 139-145) ; 393, 395 (Jakubowski, HI, 
224-225). 

Segel, n, 76, 78 (Jakubowski, HI, 233-234) ; 108 (Jakubowski, HI, 37) ; 123-127 
(Jakubowski, IH, 6-9) ; 128-143, footnotes (Jakubowski, Prsypisy, HI, 5-17) ; 
180-182 (Jakubowski, IE, 24r-26) ; 183-184, footnotes (Jakubowski, Prsypisy, HI, 
18-19) ; 254-257 (Jakubowski, 49-51) ; 264 (Jakubowski, HI, 55) ; 267 (Jaku- 
bowski,’ IE, 64r-65); 271-279, footnotes, (Jakubowski, Prsypisy, IE, 27-35); 280 
(Jakubowski, IE, 71) ; 281 (Jakubowski, Prsypisy, IE, 40) ; 305, 307 (Jakubowski, 
Prsypisy, IE, 49-50) ; 308 (Jakubowski, El, 95) ; 318, 320 (Jakubowski, E, 50-52) ; 
395-396 (Jakubowski, I, 8^9). 

Lest there be any misunderstanding I hasten to emphasize that Segel’s introduc- 
tions are in no sense mere translations. In practically every case the material drawn 



74 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



from Jakubowski is worked into longer essays that also reflect Segel’s own years of 

experience in dealing with the eighteenth century. 

In contrast to the other anthologies discussed here, Segel s is not organized a.ong 
wholly chronological lines. He makes the usual three-part periodization of -he cen- 
tury, fixing his boundaries according to political events: “Part 1: T e 
the Great (1689-1725)”; “Part 2: Peter’s Successors to the Ascension of Cathwine 
n (1725-1762)”; and “Part 3: The Reigns of Catherine H (1762-1796) and Paul 
I (1796-1801).” The first two of these periods are organized by authors, and the 
third is organized by genres. There is a real question whether this arrangement wid 
solve as many problems as it creates. Sumarokov, for example, is listed in Part U 
along with Kantemir, Trediakovskij, and Lomonosov; but at least three, and possibly 
four of the five works by Sumarokov presented in Part H were actually written 
during the period covered in Part HI, the reign of Catherine. Indeed near the end of 
Segel’s second volume, which is devoted entirely to the Age of Catherine, the reader 
comes upon Sumarokov again under the heading of “The Drama: Tragedy, which 
is represented by his Dimitrii the Imposter. This arrangement of the material by genres 
leads to a similar splintering of other writers in the Age of Catherine. Under The 
Literature of Travel,” a subdivision of the larger section on nonfictional prose m 
the Age of Catherine which Segel places at the end of his first vohme, we find Fon- 
vizin with a selection of letters from his two journeys abroad; Radiscev, with ex- 
cerpte from his Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow; ^nd Karamzin, with a few 
pages from his Letters of a Russian Traveler. Then Fonvizin turns up again in Volume 
n under “The Drama: Comedy,” with The Brigadier; Karamzin reappears with seven 
literary essays under another subdivision of nonfictional prose and again m Volume 
n with “Poor Liza” and “The Island of Bornholm,” under prose fiction; and Radiscev 
returns at the end of Volume H with his poem “The Eighteenth Century’ -which is 
not placed, however, in the section on lyric poetry (represented here only by Derzavm), 
but is given a position by itself in a special section entitled The End of an Age and 
listed Is Part 4 of the whole anthology. This classification by genres even at the 
expense of splitting up the work of individual authors reflects 

fronting all literary historians and Segel’s way of solving it. Obviously the studem 
of literary history needs to see both the development of genres and the development 
of individual writers. Concentrating attention upon one at the expense of the other 
is like closing one eye when we look at a landscape: we avoid the problem of 
bringing both eyes into focus, but we also forego the advantage of perspective. The 
real question for the teacher of literary history is whether to attempt both approaches 
simultaneously, or whether to choose one for his basic organizing principle and then 
encourage his students to make the other approach for themselves, perhaps m prep- 
aration for their final examination. o , . c u- u 

In contrast to all the other anthologists discussed here, Segel sets for himself 

the modern and highly commendable principle of consistently presenting works in 
their entirety, making an exception in his Preface only for Radiscev s Journey from 
St Petersburg to Moscow and Karamzin’s Letters of a Russian Traveler on the 
grounds that “respectable English translations already exist” (I, 18) (Urfortunately, 
this statement is open to serious question in the case of Florence Jonas translation 
of the Letters of a Russian Traveler [New York, 1957], which was strongly criti- 
cized for her abridgment of Karamzin’s text) In actual fact Segel’s exceptions to 
his own principle are not limited to Radiscev and Karamzin: he not only makes his 
own selections from Fonvizin’s letters from abroad, omitting many that are highly 
interesting but also makes his own excisions (duly noted, I should add) m seven of 
the eleven ’letters he does print Two other unmentioned-though perfectly understand- 






Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 75 



Jrf 

if 







I 

* 




able and justifiable — exceptions to his own rule are fimin’s Letters of Ernest and 
Doravra, which is represented here by a translation of Kokorev’s brief selections ; and 
Xeraskov’s Rossiad, of which Segel gives an excerpt from Canto I that is only 
slightly longer than the one in Kokorev. On the other hand, Segel’s complete English 
versions of such works as Culkov’s novel Prigosaja povarixa, Majkov’s Elisej, and 
Bogdanovic’.s Dusen'ka, not to mention numerous shorter pieces, will prove to be a 
welcome and useful contribution to the resources available to American graduate 
students for the study of eighteenth-century Russian literature. 

Inevitably the question Vifill arise about what audience Segel’s anthology can be 
expected to reach and just how it will probably be used. Obviously, its appeal will be 
restricted largely to the universities, and within the universities largely to graduate 
students in Russian and perhaps a few others in comparative literature. Can it be 
used as the basic textbook for graduate courses in eighteenth-century Russian litera- 
ture? In my opinion it cannot. The reason for this lies both in the nature of the 
literature of that period and the nature of Segel’s translations. Apart from most of 
its comedies and most of the production of Novikov, Radiscev, and Karamzin, the 
works of the greatest significance in eighteenth-century Russian literature were writ- 
ten in verse. Moreover, Russian literary developments in that century were so closely 
bound up with metrical problems and with the creation of the Russian literary language 
that no translations, however faithful, can serve in university courses as a satisfactory 
substitute for the original texts. 

In addition to the general problem confronting all translations of Russian verse 
literature from the eighteenth century, Segel’s translations raise once more the long- 
debated question about how much a translation should convey of the original form 
of poetry. One answer might be given in terms of an analogy: translations of verse 
that are limited to conveying the “content” can be compared to black-and-white repro- 
ductions of paintings. The person who is insensitive to rime and rhythm in his own 
language would miss nothing in such translations, just as the completely color-blind 
person would sense no loss in black-and-white reproductions of Monet. For those who 
are not so handicapped, the loss is enormous. With the exception of a very few poems 
translated mainly by others, the poetry in Segel’s anthology is turned either into 
English prose (Feofan Prokopovic, Trediakovskij’s “Solemn Ode on the Surrender 
of the City of Danzig,” Lomonosov’s “Letter on the Use of Glass,” Sumarokov’s 
“Two Epistles” and “Instruction to a Son,” Majkov’s Elisej and Bogdanovic’s 
Dusen/ka) or into line-for-line versions that sometimes preserve the meter of the 
original, sometimes preserve the same number of syllables in each line without the 
meter, and sometimes do neither. The adequacy of this procedure can perhaps be best 
suggested with a few specific examples. As I have already mentioned, the rimed 
couplets in syllabic verse of thirteen syllables that Kantemir used for his First 
Satire have been transformed by Segel into fairly regular heroic couplets — the only 
example in his anthology, I believe, of an effort to preserve the rime of the original 
in his own translations. (No attempt is made anywhere in this book to reproduce 
syllabic verse in English.) Trediakovskij’s “Song on the Coronation of the Empress 
Anna,” which is written in syllabic verse in six-line stanzas with a rime scheme of 
a-a-b-c-c-b and a syllabic length of 11-9-13-9-9-7, has been translated by Segel into 
a simple line-for-line prose version that fairly accurately conveys the literal meaning 
of the words but nothing else. The translations of Lomonosov and Derzavin some- 
times preserve the meter of the original but never the rime scheme. The translation 
of the fragment from Xeraskov’s Rossiad consistently preserves the thirteen-syllable 
line of the original, but the translator has only rarely succeeded in his announced 
attempt to preserve its six-foot iambic meter. The result of all this is that the 




76 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



reader who has gone through all the selections in both volumes of Segel’s anthology 
still has no first-hand impression of the nature of eighteenth-century Russian poetry. 

If Segel’s anthology cannot serve as the basic textbook for courses in eighteenth- 
centuiy Russian literature, it can still serve a highly useful purpose in three ways 
as an auxiliary tool. In the first place, his introductory article of nearly a hundred 
pages and his bibliography offer the student a convenient means of orienting himself 
in the subject. In the second place, his translations of certain prose writers such as 
femin and Culkov, and of prose works like Fonvizin’s letters and Karamzin’s essays, 
may well be given a basic place in eighteenth-century courses so as to make more time 
available for reading works of greater significance in the original Russian. Finally, 
Segel’s anthology can serve above all as a legitimate ‘^pon^’ for the serious student 
who will use it properly as a means of achieving a more complete understanding of 
the Russian originals. 

What we really need even more than Segel’s anthology is a huge volume of 
explanatory notes to accompany Kokorev’s anthology which would be comparable in 
thoroughness to the three volumes of Jakubowski’s Przypisy. But no American pub- 
lisher, even a university press, would even consider such a quixotic undertaking. 
Consequently, even though Segel’s anthology will not take the place of detailed 
Jakubowskian notes explaining all the difficulties lurking in the eight hundred pages of 
Kokorev, it will still go far toward disentangling the syntax of Kantemir’s First 
Satire, interpreting the colorful language of Elisej, and in general narrowing the gap 
of understanding between eighteenth-century Russian and the Russian that is spoken 
today. 

As in any book of this scope, it is not surprising that a few misprints and other 
minor errors should have slipped past the proofreaders of .Segel’s anthology. For 
the sake of future editions I will note the following: (I, 35) “to administer their 
spiritual needs” (“to minister to . . .”) ; (i; 39) “Although written in the traditional 
Polish-derived syllabic system of versification, Prokopovich introduced . . .”; (I, 71) 
“From 1789-1794”; (I, 84) “had recourse to an expediency”; (I, 87) “It was not 
to be reprinted, and then tvith certain ‘inflammatory* lines omitted, until 1871” (bet- 
ter: “It was not to be reprinted until 1871, and even then only with certain . . .”) ; 
(I, 90) “woven into the texture of the writing that filled out the shells of the newly 
introduced forms of European classicism”; (I, 97) “free verse” is used here in the 
sense of the Russian vol'nye stixi, which is not the same thing at all; (I, 105) the 
date of Xeraskov*s Plamena is not 1786, since it was already in print in 1765; (I, 
114) “Venevetinov” (for “Venevitinov”); (I, 173) “But if the voice of my lyre 
would equal” (for “should equal” or “equaled”) ; (I, 183) ; “They fall headlong, 
soulless” {hez dusi here means “unconscious”) ; (I, 258) “Not undaunted, Novikov 
issued a new journal” (“Undaunted . . .”) ; (II, 247) “alright” ; (II, 283) “[Thou] 
Who filleth all with Thine own Person, Embraceth, moldeth, and preserveth” (for 
“fillest . . . Embracest, moldest, and preservest”) ; (II, 317) “All that remained of 
[Derzavin’s] On Mortality was the fragment beginning ‘Time’s River in Its Cease- 
less Coursing. . . .’ ” Nearly ten years ago Morris Halle demonstrated that this last 
poem from Derzavin’s hand not only is not a fragment but actually is an acrostic, 
spelling out “RUINA CTI.”i9 

Presumably Professor Segel will also take advantage of the opportunity in the 
next edition to correct the most serious error in his entire anthology: his failure to 
include any mention of Wiktor Jakubowski’s Antologia literatury rosyjskiej XVIII 
wieku dther in his eight-page bibliography of works in six languages, or among his 
acknowledgments in the Preface, or an)rwhere else. 



Anthologies of Eighteenth-Century Literature 77 






NOTES 

1 The Literature of Eighteenth-Century Russia, ed. and tr., and with an Intr. and 
Notes, by Harold B. Segel, 2 vols. (N.Y.: E. P. Dutton, 1967). 472, 448 pp. 
($2.95 ea.. Paperback). 

2 r. PyKOBCKEH, “3a HBy^eEHe BOceMHaji^aToro BCKa,” cJInrepaTypHoe DaciescTBO,^ 
n/X (1933), 294. 

3 n. H. BepKOB, cBBCfieme b HBygerae hctophh pyccKofi JHTepaTypH XVin BCKa, 
^acTB 1: O^pK aHTepaTypHOH HCTopEorpa$HH XVIII BBKa> (X, 1964), 216. 

4 Baarofi, cHcTopna pyccKofi iHrepaTypH XVHI BBKa» (M., 1945), 16; D. 

Cizevskyj, (reviev/) “G. A. Gukovskij, Pusskaja literatura XVTH veka, M., 1939,” 
Zeitschrift fur slavische Philologie, XVII (1941), 469-474. Berkov in the book 
mentioned above, p. 209, wrote as follows about Gukovskij s textbooks : B 

CBflBH CO CBoefi npenojaBaToiBCKOH jeaTOiBHOCTBio P. A. PyKOBCKHH nojroTOBH.’i 
cXpecTOMaTHK) no pyccKOi lETeparype XV ill B0Ka,» BBisepacaBmyio b 1935-1938 rr. 
5 EBsaEEE (3 — ^B Mockbo, 2— b Keobo). Hm He fiBiaa EBsaEa OoiBrnaa aETOaorES 
cPyccKaa raiepaTypa XVIH BeKa> (X, 1937) c oOieepeoe BCTyuBTeiBEofi CTaTBofi 
H npEMenaEEEME, naciB kotopbii HMeex BCcaejOBaTeaBCKEB xapaKTcp. HaKOBCi^, 6hj 
HanenaTaB yEeOBBK PyKOBCKoro aje bbiceibi yBeOnBii BaBCjeEBE iPyccKaa aHTcpa- 
Typa XVm B6Ka> (M-, 1939), b BBaEBTOiBBO doaBmefi CToneEH caMOCToaTeaBEHii 
HayEBBIB TpyAj ^OH y^edBBK B o6bIEHOM HOBBMaBBB BTOrO CIOBa.” 

5 Gukovskij ’s arrest also led to the disappearance of every reference to him in the 
second edition of Blagoj’s history of eighteenth-century Russian literature. A 
detailed comparison of Blagoj’s first edition (1945) with his revision of 1951 
has been published by Gleb Struve in “Russian Eighteenth-Century Literature 
Through Party-Colored Spectacles,” SEEJ, XV (1957), 22-33. Gukovskij re- 
mained unmentioned in the third edition (1955), but his name finally reappeared in 
the fourth (1960). Professor Wiktor Jakubowski (see note 16, below) has edited 
an excellent Polish version of this work (Dymitr Blagoj, Historia literatury 
rosyjskiej XVIII wieku [Warszawa, 1955]), which contains a number of fea- 
tures that make it more useful than the Russian original, notably Jakubowski s 
index of persons and works, his citation of foreign titles in the original language 
as well as in translation, and his additional annotation of items less familiar to 
the foreign reader than Blagoj evidently assumed them to be for Russians, not 
to mention the convenience of the running heads supplied at the top of every 
page. Unfortunately, the Polish version is translated from Blagoj’s politically 
bowdlerized second edition of 1951 rather t-jan the superior first edition of 1945. 

6 A. B. KoKopes, coct., «XpecTOHaTEE no pyccKOB jEiepaType XVIII B 0 Ka» (M., 1952; 
2-e BBA., 1956; 3-e bba., 1961; 4-e bba., 1965). 

7 Leo Wiener, Anthology of Russian Literature from the Earliest Period to the 
Present Time, 2 vols. (N.Y., 1902-1903). Reprinted by Benjamin Blom, N.Y., 
1966; 2 vols., 980 pp. $25.00 [sic]. 

8 A misprint in Wiener’s text gives this line the meaningless reading: “Life as 
sparks spring from the fire.” The correct form here is taken from Wiener’s source, 
“Russian Ode to the Deity,” tr. J. K. Stallybrass, Leisure Hour, 2 May 1870, 
pp. 316-317. 

9 Qarence A. Manning, Anthology of Eighteenth Century Russian Literature, 2 
vols. (N.Y., 1951-1953). 

10 B. A. $paBi^eB, cSepnaBBE y caaBEB: Hb bctopbb pyccKO-c;iaBflBCKBi jiBiepaTypEBii 



78 



The Slavic and East European Journal 



BBansiooTnoinennfi b XIX ct.» (Ilpara, 1924), 80 cip. ; and Jakubowski (see Note 
16, below), m, 71. 

11 The correct forms are cited from : Anraoi KanTesinp, «Coepanne craxOTBopenafi^ 
(Bn6x no9Ta; JI., 1956), 157-172. 

12 The editor of B. H. MafiKOB, «H86pannHe npoH 3 Beflenna» (Bn6i. noaia; M., JI., 
1966), who prints the literary form ^to, and Kokorev, who prints the dialect form 
eto, both base their text of Elisej on the same separate edition of 1771. One of 
them has to be wrong. 

13 If this irregular spelling is really found in the edition (not accessible to me at 
the moment) upon which Kokorev based his text of Dusen'ka, then Kokorev’s 
failure to standardize it violates his own spelling principles as enunciated in his 
Preface. 

14 Thaler’s well-annotated edition of Wiener’s translation (Aleksandr Nikolaevich 

Radishchev, A Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow, tr. Leo Wiener, ed. with 
an Intr. and Notes by Roderick Page Thaler [Cambridge, Mass., 1966], 286 pp.) 
is a welcome contribution to English-language sources for the study of eighteenth- 
century Russia ; but even after Thaler’s revision the translation is not free of 
misinterpretations and ambiguities. In “ICrestsy” (p. 108), for example, Radiscevs 
phrase synok tvoj, znatnyj bojarin ‘your son, a high-born nobleman’ is translated 
as “your son, a famous man.” An even more serious mistake occurs at the end 
of “Mednoe,” when the narrator meets “a foreigner, a friend of mine,” on the 
staircase and says to him, in the Wiener— Thaler translation : ... You once 

cursed the barbarous custom of selling black slaves in the distant colonies of your 
country. . . .” Their misleading choice of “colonies” rather than “settlements” 
or “plantations” as a translation of selenija completely obscures the fact that 
Radiscev obviously refers here to an American. Indeed, one prominent Soviet 
specialist on the eighteenth century has privately conjectured — ^though not, I 
believe, in print— that the prototype of the American in “Mednoe” may very well 
have been Francis Dana, who served as a diplomatic representative of the United 
States in Petersbu»*g from 1781 to 1783. 

15 Further examples of Kokorev’s careless editing and inconsistent textological 
principles, especially in his selections from Feofan Prokopovic, are pointed out 
in a review by Jacob Hursky [Jakov Gurskij] in Novyj Surnal, No. 85 (1966), 
293-296. Professor Hursky calls particular attention to the way in which 
Kokorev’s anthology, especially in its later editions, misrepresents the Ukrainian 
element in Russia literature of the early eighteenth century. 

16 Wiktor Jakubowski, ed., Antologia literatury rosyjskiej XVIII wieku, 6 vols. 
(Warszawa, 1954-1959), Czgsc pierwsza, 1700-1760: Teksty, 113 pp., Przypisy, 
76 pp. (1954); Czgsc druga, 1760-1800: Teksty, 194 pp., Przypisy, 100 pp. 
(1957) ; Czgsc trzecia, 1760-1800: Teksty, 258 pp., Przypisy, 108 pp. (1959). 

17 D. S. Mirsky, A History of Russian Literature, ed. and abridged by Francis J. 
Whitfield (N.Y., 1949), 58. In the relatively short period between his return to 
Russia from England in 1932 and his arrest in 1935, Mirsky expressed consid- 
erably more interest in Radiscev. In his article on eighteenth-century Russian 
literature in Literaturnoe nasledstvo, IX/X, 507, he wrote: “JlHiepaiypa 6ypacy- 
a 8 HO-fleMOKpaT 0 qecKog onnoBHipH npeflCTaBaaei fljia nac nepBOCienennBiH Hirrepec, 
a B HCH ^pea^;^e Bcero Pa;^HI^eB, HBy^enne Koioporo y^HBHie.’iBHO Ma.io nopnnyjiocB 
B^epe;^ co BpeiiCHH peBOJIK)^HH.” 

18 Review by Tadeusz Kolakowski, Slavia Orientalis, IX (1960), 193-199. 

19 Morris Halle, ”0 HesaMeqeHHOM aKpocraxe J[epacaBHna,” IJSLP, I/II (1959), 
232-236. 



