DOCORBBT BESOHB 



ED 051 014 



SO 001 195 



AOTHOE 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



Cernonok, Jevgenij 

Syllabus for Use in Russian Literature. 

Toledo Public Schools, Ohio. 

Office of Education (DHEH) , Washington, D. C. 

69 

22p. ; A project of the Chinese-Bussian Study Center 
of the Toledo Public Schools 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



EDRS Price MP-$0.65 HC-$3.29 
^Authors, Bibliographies, Critical Beading, 
^Curriculum Guides, Drama, Humanities, Literary 
Analysis, Literary Genres, ^Literary History, 
Literary Influences, Literature Appreciation, 
Literature Guides, Norels, Poetry, ^Russian 
Literature, Secondary Grades, Social Studies, 
Thematic Approach, *Rorld Literature 
ESEA Title 3, Project Pace, ^Russian History 



ABSTRACT 

This syllabus outlines a tuo semester course to 
accompany the basic textbook: THE EPIC OF RUSSIAN LITERATURE by Hare 
Slonim. An introduction to the guide gives a brief summary of the 
history of Russian literature and objectives of the course are 
stated, defining concepts and understandings to be developed. In 
addition, teaching techniques are described, suggesting activities 
such as group discussions, reports, comparative studies, and 
utilizing Russian history, geography, and culture, especially films 
and music. Course content is divided into chronological periods, 
emphasizing literary movements, major authors, historical themes, and 
literary genres. First semester units of study are: 1) The 
Beginnings: 2) Poets, Playwrights and Satirists of the Eighteenth 
Century; 3) The New Bra; 4) From Napoleonic Invasion to the 
Decembrists; 5) The Golden Age (A. S. Pushkin) ; 6) Hinor Poets 
Beginning 19tb Century; 7) N. Gogol; and, 8) H. Lermontov. Topics foe 
the second semester are: 1) Dreamers and Philosophers; 2) Westerners 
and Slavophiles; 3) The Critics and the Nihilists; 4) Literary Trends 
of the Sixties; 5) I. S. Turgenev; 6) F. Dostoevsky: 7) Russian 
Playwrites; 8) Leo Tolstoy; 9) Maxim Gorky; 10) N. Sholokhov; and, 

11) B. Pasternak. (Author/JSB) 



0*1 ifs~ ED051014 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, 
education & WELFARE 
OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REPRO 
OUCEO EXACTLY AS RECEIVED FROM 
THE PERSON OR ORGANIZATION ORIG 
INATING IT POINTS OF VIEW OR OPIN 
lONS STATED DO NOT NECESSARILY 

represent official office of edu 

CATION POSITION OR POLICY 



CHINBSB-RUSSIAM STUDY CENTER 
Toledo Public Schools 
Toledo > (^0 



Syllabus for use in Russian Idteratye 
as prepared by Jei^enij Cemonok, 196Ur‘'969 



Frank Dick« Superintendent of Schools 
Moman ELee, IVoject Director 



A PAOF RMHGT nistAblishtd under Title III E. S. E. A. 
^ S. Office of Education 



O 

ERIC 

MMfflffTlTLiU 




I 



ED051014 



L-mtoDUcnow 




Russian literature was discovered by the l/estem world only in 
the second iulf of the nineteenth century, li^xiy liropeans and Americans 
continue to compare the great Russian novelists and poets to giant 
trees that have niraculottsly sprung full grown in a desert. Unfortunately, 
this theory Is totally unfounded. Students should be shown that Russian 
literature Is over a thousand years old and only became international 
In fame and influence In the nineteenth century, i^o study of the main 
trends of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries can be profitable 
without at least a short survey of the primary currents of the past. 

Vfrltten literature began In Russia limediately after the Introduction 
of Christianity from Constantinople. This fact was responsible for 
the great Influence of Eyzantluiii church upon Russian culture. Ryzantine 
church theocracy also was transplanted to Russia, where the Church was 
called upon to assist and strengthen the State. Students should be 
able to understand the lmpa.ct of Ryzantine influence In* social life, 
arts, and first literature. 

The Tartar yoke was responsible for Russian cultural backwardness. 

The Renaissance was unknown in Russia, and only the rise of lioscow 
brought to Russia some signs of literary awakening. 

Students should be InfozTMd that the reforms of Bster the Great 
Included every aspect of Russian civilization and his reign marks the 
end of the church's control over learning and literature. This period 
is very Important in creation of the modern (16th and 19th century) 

Russian literature. 

During the course period moat of the tlas will be devoted to 

the study of 19th century or so called "Golden Age" in Russian literature 

and arts in general. In treating the pre and post Revolutlonaxy period, 

the works of Kasdn Qorigr will be enqihaslzed. 

P 



3 



Following ths Revolution, etrlct CaniBunlet Party control was inpoeed 
upon authors and poets. Under dictatorial censorship, it le alaost 
Ijnpoealble for writers to produce great works. For Mlchall Sholohov'a 
"The Silent Don" many revisions were necessary to meet >dth Soviet 
OovezTiment specifications. 

Russian literature covers an extremely vide era, more than can 
be treated in one year, it is vital that the best and most important 
works of Russian writers be selected for reading. 

During the second senester only those authors have been chosen 
whose contributions are of national and universal significance and 
only limited number of carefully selected titles has been Included. 



O 

ERIC 



3 



u 



OBJECTIVES TO BE REL\CHED 

1 . The chronological thread of the period between the Introduction 
of Christianity into Russia and the present time. 

2. An appreciation of the literary achievements of the Russian "Oolden 
Age." 

3. To present the subject of Russian literature to the American 
students as a natural outgrowth and development of Russian environment. 

U. The immortality of the characters present in Russian literature 
trill be strongly stressed. 

$, To understand the difference between the Russian people and the 
present dictatorial government. 

6. To understand the Russian peoples outlook on life. 

7. To stimulate further stu(^y and interest in Russian literature. 



4 



5 



MEANS 07 ACHIETTro THE OBJECTIVES 



1 . There will be diacuaelons about the literary works and characters 
in class, 

2 , Written reports will be done on different subjects j characters, 
events, or critics of the literary works . Written reports will 
be done at home. 

3* Oral reports will be given by the students in class. 

Ii. Reading of Russian novels will be an undertaking by the students 
at home so that one hour classrocgn period may be utilized for 
discussion of the works. 

5. Literary "trials” will be performed in class, where literary characters 
vrlU be defended and accused by the students. As a result of 
literary court, the students will decide the "sentence.” 

6. Russian literary works will be coi;:pared with American's and other 
nations' literature. For exaaqjle — Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard 
to Margaret Mitchell's Gone With the Wind . 

7. Familiarity trlth Russian History and Geography 

It is difficult for American students of Russian literature 
to cong)leteIy understand some of the events in Russian novels 
without sane knowledge of the history and geography of Russia. 

It is advisable that students take a course in Russian history 
before taking Russian literature. The students of Russian literature 
are given sons infonaatlon about Russian history as much as time 
penults. They also will be given a short survey in Russiati geography. 

8. Textbook to be used: "The Ejpic of Russian Litarature" by Marc 



O 

ERIC 



5 



Slonlm 



6 



9. C laaslcs read ; 

Besides textbooks^ students have to read as many short stories^ 
novels, poems, and dr anas as possible. All reading should be 
done at hone, 

10. FUms - Russian classic films on local T. V. stations and movie 
theaters will be followed closely. 

n , Movies and fllBStrlpe will be shown In class . 

12. Russian music will be played in class like operas j "Boris Oodunov," 
"Eugene Onegin." 



7 



THE riRST semester 

The Beginnings (Approxln^tel/ 23 hours) 

1. Introduction of Chriatlanlty Prince Vladimir. 

2. Byzantine Orthodoigr and a written language. 

3. Hethodua and Cyril. Cyrillic alphabet. 

U, Byzantine theocracy and P.ussian church. 

Byzantine Influence. 

6. Translation of the books. 

7. Church— Slavonic and colloquial Russian. 

8. "Daniil's PUlgrimlge to the Holy Land." 

9. "The Russian Truth" of Jaroslav the Wise. 

10. The Chronicles of F. Nestor (1120). 

11. Byliny— epic songs of the Slavonic men of might (8-1 J centuries). 

12. Ilya of Murom symbol of Russian might. 

13* Dobryna Nikitich. 

ill. The rise of Hoscow. 

15. "The Lay of the Host of Igor" (17th century). 

16. "The Third Rone." 

17. Ivan Fedorov— beginning of printing. 

Id. Domostroy 

19. Old Believers 

ro. Peter the Great "Create a winder into Europe." 

21. Nesr alphabet. 

22. Kantemir-Neo— classical school. 

23. Hikhall Lomonosson (1711-65) 

2li. The Oldes. 

25, Suna'okov (1718-77) Theater. Europeanized intelligentsia. 

O 

ERIC 



7 



Poets, n.aywrlghta and Satirists of the Eighteen Century 
(Approximately 5 hours) 



8 



1 . Catherine the Great 

a ) Voltaire 

b) Mouteequleu 

c) Orlov Potemkin 

2. Pugachev Rebellion (1773-75) 

3. french Revolution 
Ii. Devshavin 

a) "felicia" 

b) Theater 

5. fonvizin (17b5-1792)—"The Hobbledehoy" 



9 



The New ESr^ (Approximately 10 hours) 

1. Nicholae Karamzin (1766-I836) 

a) Letter of a Russian Traveler 

b) "Poor Liza" 

c) Court Historian (History of the Russian State 12 volumes) 
Old and neu styles of the Russian language. 

3. Vassily Zukovsky 

Contemporary European poetry and Zukovsky' s translation. 
U. Zukovsky and Pushkin 
5. Ivan Krylov (1769-18UU) 

a) Krylov and La Fontaine 

b) The Symbolism of the animals 

c) Novelist and philosophy and coranon sense. 

d) Polk proverbs 



O 




9 



n 



Prom Napoleonic Invasion to the Decembrists (Approy<n»fttely 10 hours) 

1. Paul's reactionary region. 

2. Liberal era by Aleksander I and effect on literature. 

3. "The Forum of the Lovers of the Russian Word" (right wing of 
Russian aristocracy and bureaucracy). 

U. "A Diary of Partisan Operations" by D. Davydon. 

5. Arakcheyev- -hangman of freedom. 

6. Griboyedov "Tis Folly to be VJlse," conflict between the two generations. 

7. The Decembrists, December 1625, — Intellectual elite: Alexander 

Pushkin, Griboyedov, poet Ryleyev, H. Turgenev. 

Nikita Muraviev— moderate Decmbrlst. 

Pavel Pestel— radical wing of Decembrists— for a democratic, 
republic, emancipation of the serfs, distribution of land. 

8. "The Russian Truth" hy Pestel, "The Project of Constitution" 
by N. Muraviev. 

"Russia and the Russians" by N. Turgenev. 




10 



The Golden Ace ( Approximately 20 hours) 



A, S, Pushkin 

1 . Pushkin Is a key figure of Russian nineteenth century literature 

2. Pushkin's poems •-perfect marriage of sound and meaning. 

3. Pushkin and the Russian modern literary style. 

h, Pushkin's first work, "Russian and Lundmila," — beginning of a 
new way of writing. 

5. "Eugene Onegin" (1823-31 )--realistic novel, 

6. Ryron and Pushkin. 

7. "The Caucasian Captive," "The Qsrpsiea" 

8. Peter the Great and Pushkin. 

9. "Poltava" 

10. "The Captain's Daughter " 



O 




12 



Minor Poets Beginning 19th Century (Approxlnately $ hours) 

1. Ivan Koslov ( 1 779-1 8U0)— motional and sentimental poems. 

2. Kond. Ryleyev — Decembrist. Belongs to political more than to 
literary history. 

3. Baratynsky— romantic poems. 

U. If. Yazykov— was influenced by the Pushkin— young idealist. 

$, Koltsov's folk songs. 

6. ?. I^tchev— Romantic lyric. 




12 



' 13 

M, Gogol 1j?9-52 (ApTJroxljn^tely 15 hours) 

1 , Gogol— Russian Mark Twalne . 

2, "The Revisor" — national comedy of Russia, 

3, "Evenings of a Oroft near Dilcanka," Sketches of Ukrainian life, 
li, "Taras Bulba" 

5 . "Dead Souls"— Russia in miniature, 

a) The problem of serfdom, 

b) Russian serfs and American Negroes. 

c) Tchitchlkov, Raskolnikov, and Nekhludov. 

d) Unfinished masterpiece. 




13 



!I, Lermontov lClU-1 ’Ul (Approxinately 5 hours) 



1U 



1 . Lemontov — Representative of Russian Romantlsm. 

2. "The Hero of our Tine"— prose. 

3. Poem on the death of a poet. 

h, Lemontov *s opposition to the institution of serfdom. 

5. Lemontov 's drana, "The Ilasquerade." 

6. Lemontov and Pushkin. 

7. French Revolution and Lemontov. 



O 

ERIC 



14 



15 



SECOUD SaiSSTfB 

Dreamers and Philosophers (ApproxlJnately 5 hours) 

1, H, Glinka— "Ivan Sussanin" 

2, A, Verstovsty— "Askolds Grave," 

3, Theatrical Activity— Griboyedov 
U. V, Belinsky — Russian liberalism, 

5 , Polevoy — "History of the Russian People," 

6 , Salvation not in nysticlsmi but in the successes of civilization, 

1-^esterners and Slavophiles 

1, Belinsky— Westerner, 

a) National literature, 

b) Russian's past and present, 

2, Slavophiles and Peter the Great, 

Tlie salvation of Russia in the preservation of her originality, 

3 , Aks alcov- - Slavophile , 

li, Herzen— Westerner, "Hie Polar Star," 



The Critics and the ilihlllats (Approxlm-~tely $ hours) 



16 



1 . Crlme.in Uar 

Tales of Sevastopol" by Tolstoy, 

2, Serfdom— "The Plage of Russian Like" was attacked by 

a) Turgenev's "Hunting Sketches," 

b) Giigorovich's "Tales of peasants Life," 

c) Ivan Aksakov's poems, 

d) Herzen — addressed the open letter to Aleksander I, 

3. Chernyshevsky — 'The Contemporary," 

U, Gorky, Dobrolubova critics, 

5. Nihilism — Pisarev, 

Literary Trends of the "Sixties" 

1, Pomialowsky— "Bursary School Sketches," 

2, Pisemsky — Russian Realist, 

3, Nekrasov — "ITio Finds Life Good in Russia?" 

h, Tiuchev — "Slave Poetry and My Country , , , ," 




16 



17 



I. S. Turgenev 1818-G3 ( Approx±mately 1$ hours) 

1 . Biography sketch of Turgenev. 

a) Iladame Viordo 

b) Life abroad (37> ye.''T8). 

T. I-verse, Il-short sketches, Ill-the novel. 

2. "Memoirs of a Sportsman" and "Uncle Tom's Cabin" 

3. Turgenev and serfdom. 

h, "P-udin" and "A Nest of Gentlefolk" if time not permits could 
be only discussed. 

5. Turgenev's chai'acters: Liza, LavretslQr, Rudin, Helena. 

6. "Fathers and Sons." Persons: Basarov. 

7. Turgenev: an idle aristocrat, a Nihilist, a dreamer, rational 

atheist, or a practical man? 



O 

ERiC \ 

i 

1 



17 



16 



F, PostoevL!::’' 1.^21- ~1 (ApproxLmr,te.ly 1$ hours) 

1. Dostoevsky life: gloot^y childhood, imprisonments, hard labor, 

military service. 

Three periods of Dostoevsl^'s literary career. 

2. a) "Poor 7olk" his short novel, and "The Double" was p>ublished after 

his arrest. 

b) The second from 1059 the date of his pardon where his 
lost wife and his brother, 

c) lC6U-l83l Dostoevsky delivered his famous speech of Pushkin 
and his four major novels: 

"Crime and Punishment" 

"The Idiot" 

"The Possessed" 

"The Brothers Karamazov" 

3. Dostoevslcy the Slavophile. 

U. Dostoevsky deeply religious man. 

5. Heart over the mind, 

6, Outcome of suffering. 

7, Political issue in "Crime and Punishment" 

8. Dostoevsl^'s prophecy that Russia coiild become the savior of 
Christi-.in civilization. 

9* Dostoevsky democratization of Marxism socialism— baaed on materialism. 

10, Soviet Government and Dostoevsky, 

11. Dostoevsky the patriot. 



er|c 



18 



r.ucclan Plny^’Tites (,.pproxiinr.teIy 10 hours) 



1 / 



1 . Ostrovsky 

a) "The Poor Btide" 

b) "In Poverty Is llo Crime" 

c) "The Thunderstorm" 

2. A. P. Chekhov 1060-19:>U 
"The Three Sisters” 

"The Cherry Orchard" 

r) The clash between sentimentalism on the one hand and materialism 
on the other. 

b) "Tlie Cherry Orchard" and "Gone with the I'^ind" by M. itltchell, 
iirs. Kanevskaya and Scarlett. 

3. Russian "Twilight Period" — transition between the dovnifall of 
the "House of Gentlefolk" and the advent of the peasant. 




1P 



2J 




Leo Tolsto2>^ 1o2S-1910 ( Approximately 20 hours) 

1, Tolstoy's biography, 

2, Tolstoy's linguist. 

3, Tolstoy's officer, 

U. First manuscript, "Childhood." 

5. Tolstoy in foreign countries, 

6. Educational Journal, "Tasnaya y Polyana," 

7. Tolstcy and theology and ritualism of the Russian Orthodox 
Church, 

6, Tolstoy leaves his luxurious hone at 32. 

9, Three periods of Tolstoy's literary career, 

a) l8g2-62 
"Childhood" 

"Boyhood" 

"Youth" 

"The Cossacks" 

b) 1362-79 

■I'ar and Peace" 

"Anna Karenina" 

c) 1679-1910 

"The Death of Ivan Ilyitch" 

"The Ereutzer's Sonata" 

"Resurrection" 

">Iy P.eliglon" 

"The ICingdon of Qod is l/lthln You" 

10, Tolstpy, projAet and teacher of his generation, 

11, Tolstoy and hlr< mission, 

12, Tolstoy Westernizer and Slavophile and teaching of his own, 

13, Tolfftoyism, 



on 



I 



I 

1U, Tolstoy and world's leadlnjj religions. 

I 15 , God is the moral law inside man, 

I 16, Tolstoy ’'estern world sharply differentiative beW 



1 

( 

1 



O 

hiutingtifniiaaij 



21 



2 



ItejcLm Gorky 1866-1936 (.\pproxiraately 21 hours) 

1, Gorty's life, before and after revolution. 

2, "Tlie Lower Depth" — moot popular play. 

3, "Childhood" 

li. Future of Ruasia in induetrialization. 

5. !I. Gorky as the classic Interpreter of Russian proletarian 
culture . 

6. Gorky as a talent but not a genius. 

7. Gorky's "!Iother"— a political document. 

M. Sholokhov 1^3$ 

1. Tradition of the classical Russian novel. 

2. The stark realism of the language. 

3. "The Silent Don"--the most popular work produced in Soviet 
Russia. 

ii. Literary robots. 

The author has revised the manuscripts many times. 

B. Pasternak 

1. Pasternak's poetry. 

2. "Doctor Zhivago" 

3. Publication of "Doctor Zhivago." 



ERIC 



22 



